A review of recent developments in rechargeable lithium–sulfur batteries  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6NR04923K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6NR04923K
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16541-16588A review of recent developments in rechargeable lithium–sulfur batteries

        
          
            Weimin 
            Kang†
a, 
      
        
          
            Nanping 
            Deng†
a, 
      
        
          
            Jingge 
            Ju
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Quanxiang 
            Li
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Dayong 
            Wu
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Xiaomin 
            Ma
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Minoo 
            Naebe
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Bowen 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of Separation Membranes and Membrane Processes, Tianjin Polytechnic University, Tianjin 300387, China. E-mail: bowen15@tjpu.edu.cn;  Fax: +22-83955016;   Tel: +22-83955016
bDeakin University, Geelong, Australia, Carbon Nexus, Institute for Frontier Materials, Victoria 3216, Australia. E-mail: minoo.naebe@deakin.edu.au;  Fax: +61 403007362;   Tel: +61 352271410
cTechnical institute of physics and chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100190, China
Received 
      19th June 2016
    , Accepted 26th August 2016First published on 26th August 2016AbstractThe research and development of advanced energy-storage systems must meet a large number of requirements, including high energy density, natural abundance of the raw material, low cost and environmental friendliness, and particularly reasonable safety. As the demands of high-performance batteries are continuously increasing, with large-scale energy storage systems and electric mobility equipment, lithium–sulfur batteries have become an attractive candidate for the new generation of high-performance batteries due to their high theoretical capacity (1675 mA h g−1) and energy density (2600 Wh kg−1). However, rapid capacity attenuation with poor cycle and rate performances make the batteries far from ideal with respect to real commercial applications. Outstanding breakthroughs and achievements have been made to alleviate these problems in the past ten years. This paper presents an overview of recent advances in lithium–sulfur battery research. We cover the research and development to date on various components of lithium–sulfur batteries, including cathodes, binders, separators, electrolytes, anodes, collectors, and some novel cell configurations. The current trends in materials selection for batteries are reviewed and various choices of cathode, binder, electrolyte, separator, anode, and collector materials are discussed. The current challenges associated with the use of batteries and their materials selection are listed and future perspectives for this class of battery are also discussed.Weimin KangWeimin Kang obtained his PhD in textile chemical engineering from China Tianjin Polytechnic University in 2012. His research topic for his PhD was Electrostatic Spinning Nanofibers. Meanwhile, he was regarded as a teacher from 2007–2012 at Tianjin Polytechnic University. He was appointed Associate Professor of Textile Engineering at Tianjin Polytechnic University in 2012. His scientific interests are porous carbon materials, the preparation of novel nano fibers, and their application in the field of energy materials, catalytic materials, and filtration materials.Nanping DengNanping Deng obtained his Master's Degree in Textile Engineering, Wuhan Textile University, China in 2012. Now, he is a doctoral student and studies at Tianjin Polytechnic University, China. His research interests are fundamental energy science and the commercial application of porous carbon materials, electrostatic spinning of nanofibers, and lithium–sulfur batteries.Quanxiang LiQuanxiang Li received his B.S. from Shandong University in 2007 and his M.S. degrees at Tianjin Polytechnic University in 2010. He obtained his PhD in Material Engineering from Deakin University in 2016. His PhD focused on hierarchical composites from carbon fibres modified with carbon nanotubes. He is currently working as an Associate Research Fellow of the Institute for Frontier Materials at Deakin University, and his research interests focus on hybrid composites for various applications in lightweight materials, water remediation, and energy storage systems.Dayong WuProfessor Dayong Wu received his PhD degree at the Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2002, majoring in organic chemistry. From 2002–2005, he undertook postdoctoral study in the field of catalysis at the Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, the University of Tübingen, Germany. In October 2005, he started his work at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS, in the areas of functional polymers, membrane technology, and nanocomposite materials.Minoo NaebeMinoo Naebe received her BSc (Hons.) and M.S. degrees from the Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran, and her PhD degree from Deakin University, Australia (2008). She is a Senior Research Fellow and the Theme Leader for High Performance Materials with Carbon Nexus, Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University. Her research interests include advanced polymer composites and fibres, and their applications in various industries, including aerospace, automotive, oil, and gas.Bowen ChengBowen Cheng graduated from the Department of Textile Chemical Engineering, Tianjin Polytechnic University, China, where he continued doing research on the mass production of environmentally friendly flame-retardant cellulose nanofibers. He obtained his PhD in Chemical Engineering in 2003, and studied in Germany at the Hochschule Niederrhein as a doctoral exchange student in 2001. He was appointed a Professor of Textile Engineering at Tianjin Polytechnic University in 2003. After a short visiting and studying, he was appointed as a research associate at the University of Leeds. His current research interests are nanocarbon, new fiber materials, advanced functional nonwovens, battery conversion, and storage materials.
1. Introduction
The increasing use of fossil fuels has inevitably generated environmental pollution issues, and therefore alternative sustainable and clean energy options need to be researched and developed. Recently, much attention has been paid to solar and wind energy; however, these are both intermittent and uncontrollable. In this context, and with the continuous development of science and technology and improvements in people's living standards, higher demands are being made with respect to the performances of batteries. Among various types of batteries, lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries have received particular attention because of their fairly low cost, and high theoretical specific capacity (1675 mA h g−1) and energy density (2600 Wh kg−1).1,2
An Li–S battery generally comprises a cathode, binder, separator, electrolyte, anode, and collector. Elemental sulfur is the main cathode material of batteries, and this is closely related to its structure and electrochemical properties. Elemental sulfur has a crown-like structure comprising eight sulfur atoms and possesses outstanding thermodynamic stability.3,4 The high capacity and charge–discharge performances of elemental sulfur are achieved through S–S bond electrochemical fracture and linkage in the S8 molecule.5 In the discharge process, every sulfur atom transfers two electrons, which is a greater quantity compared to a metal ion (one or less than one electron per atom). Furthermore, sulfur has many other advantages, such as abundance in nature, non-toxicity, and low cost. Hence, elemental sulfur is considered to be one of the optimal cathode materials for a rechargeable battery.
Lithium is a metal in nature and is considered to be a suitable battery material candidate due to its low standard potential (−3.04 V vs. SHE), density (0.53 g cm−3), and electrochemical equivalent (0.26 g A−1 h−1), and high theoretical specific capacity (3861 mA h g−1). A conventional Li–S battery is mainly composed of a sulfur composite cathode, a lithium metal anode, an organic liquid electrolyte and a polyolefin separator. A schematic diagram of the structure and the charge–discharge process involved in an Li–S battery is shown in Fig. 1(a).6
 Fig. 1  (a) The schematic diagram of structure and charge–discharge process involved in Li–S cell6 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; (b) summary of the effects of PS dissolution, shuttle phenomenon, effect on the cathode, insoluble substance during charge and discharge18 Copyright 2015 Springer; (c) summary of capacity degradation mechanisms of Li–S batteries11 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) first discharge curves of Li/TEGDME/S batteries using Al current collectors with storage time at 25 °C (ref. 22) Copyright 2006 Elsevier; (e, f) schematic representation of reduction pathways for polysulfide anions. (e) Lithium polysulfides (f) in Li–S systems, proposed based on the computed free energies of various reactions and reduction potentials. (e) Each row represents the mechanism of formation of small polysulfides (Sn, n ≤ 3) from longer chain sulfides (Sn, 4 ≤ n ≤ 8). In each row, adjacent yellow cells represent electrochemical processes; cells with Rn (green colored cells) represent chemical transformations, and cells with blue color (with 2Li+) represent addition of two lithium ions. (f) Each row represents mechanism of formation of small chain lithium sulfides (Li2Sn, n ≤ 3) (last column) from lithium polysulfides (Li2Sn, n ≤ 8). In each row, adjacent yellow cells represent electrochemical (two electron reduction) reactions. In each row, the green cell represents reaction with 2Li+ ions and subsequent fragmentation to give the species shown in the red cell (second last column). The species in the red cell undergoes further reaction sequences including reduction, addition of lithium ion, and subsequent fragmentation to form the species in the final column, which are shown in the subsequent rows17 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Although an Li–S battery has a very high specific capacity and energy density in theory, capacity attenuation is extraordinarily quick during the cycle process. This makes Li–S battery commercialization a real challenge. The issues causing capacity attenuation in Li–S batteries include the low electrical and ionic conductivity of elemental sulfur and the discharge product, Li2S, the “shuttle effect” caused by the dissolved polysulfide species (PS), lithium anode deterioration due to surface passivation, an unstable solid-electrolyte interphase, and the huge volume change in the conversion reaction and associated safety concerns. Because of these limitations and challenges, further development is needed to improve the electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries.7–9 In recent years, significant progress has been made through the development of strategies for the material selection of the cathode, binder, separator, electrolyte anode and collector, the structural design and modification, and configuration innovation for Li–S batteries. Nanomaterials are considered to be ideal materials in Li–S battery applications due to their unique structural features and high surface area, superior electric and thermal conductivity, excellent chemical stability, and short path lengths for electronic or Li+ transport, possessing especially suitable exposed active sites and fast reaction kinetics, which facilitate electrochemical energy storage, enhance energy and power density, and improve cycle life and rate capability. Nazar's group is best known for their 2009 Nature Materials paper, presenting the feasibility of an Li–S battery using nanomaterials. They applied a nanostructured carbon–sulfur cathode,10 bimodal mesoporous carbon nanofibers,11 magneli-phase nanoparticles (Ti4O7),12 nanosheets of manganese dioxide (MnO2),13 and other nanomaterials for Li–S batteries. These batteries demonstrated an ultra-low capacity decay rate and a stable cycling performance. Especially in addressing the “shuttle effect” of PS, nanomaterials could be directly applied in the cathode, binder, and electrolyte, or indirectly used in the separator, anode, and collector by methods such as coating, doping, and magnetron sputtering. And these nanostructures could buffer against volume changes, reduce the strain on the material and store more active substances. Recently, the flexibility of nanomaterials has also attracted widespread attention and was applied in an Li–S battery. For example, when a flexible and robust paper electrode, consisting of carbon nanotubes (CNT) and activated carbon nanofibers (ACNF), loaded with MnO2 nanosheets, served as an efficient sulfur host for an Li–S battery,14 the battery exhibited a high rate capacity of 780 mA h g−1 at a rate of 2C and a high capacity retention of 64% over 300 cycles. Meanwhile, this will significantly enhance the practical applications of flexible Li–S batteries.
In this review, the principles and characterization of charge–discharge processes for Li–S batteries are presented and discussed. Particular attention is paid to the selection of cathode materials, as well as the other components, and the structural designs for Li–S batteries. Various strategies for structural design and modification, as well as configurational innovations of Li–S batteries, are presented and introduced. Finally, some future developmental directions in the area of Li–S batteries are discussed. In these discussions and presentations, besides the latest progress in the common contents of Li–S batteries, significant and novel attention is paid to the polysulfide cathode and the structural designs of the cathode, multifunctional and free battery binders, safer electrolytes, pre-lithiated anodes, and other novel anodes and collectors, especially the large number of nanomaterials applied to improve the electrochemical performances of the batteries due to the above-mentioned advantages.
2. The principle and characterization of lithium–sulfur batteries
Because sulfur is in a charged condition during the operation of a battery, and a potential difference exists between the electrodes, the batteries start to work in a discharged state. In the battery system, the lithium ions diffuse from the anode to the cathode and react with cathode materials during the discharge process. Meanwhile, the flowing electrons deliver power through the external circuit. During the charge process, lithium ions and electrons return to the anodes in the opposite direction, and they store chemical energy through the transformation of electrical energy. The overall reaction and different reactions during the charge–discharge states are shown in the equations below.
The overall reaction in the discharged condition: S8 + 16Li → 8Li2S(1)
The cathode reaction including reduction and electron gain:
Stage 1  (2)
Stage 2 (3)
Stage 3 S32− + 2e− → S22− + S−2(4) Stage 4 S22− + 2e− → S2− + S−2(5)
The anode reaction including oxidation and electron loss: 2Li → 2e− + 2Li+(6)
The discharge curves of the battery usually have two plateaus. The first plateau lies in the range 2.4–2.1 V, and corresponds to the transformation of elemental sulfur to the soluble high-valence state of PS ions Sn−2 (4 < n < 8). The second plateau lies in the range 2.1–1.5 V, and corresponds to the transformation of the high-valence state of PS ions to the low valence state of PS ions, Li2S2 and Li2S. The charge curve usually has one plateau. On the CV curves, the reduction process shows two peaks, but the oxidation process corresponds to one peak. Based on the multi-step reaction mechanism of sulfur, the concrete discharge processes can be divided into four stages: ① the double phase of the solid/liquid reduction process represents elemental sulfur S8 shifting towards Li2S8; ② the single phase of the liquid/liquid reduction process represents Li2S8 shifting towards Li2Sn (4 ≤ n ≤ 8); ③ the double phase of the solid/liquid reduction process represents Li2Sn shifting towards Li2S2 or Li2S; ④ the single phase of the solid/solid reduction process represents Li2S2 shifting towards Li2S. Table 1 shows the representative reaction mechanism for the discharge of an Li–S cell.15 Meanwhile, as seen in Table 2, the third phase of the solid/solid reduction process plays a major role in terms of the discharge specific capacity contribution. The depths of discharge of the four phases, corresponding to the discharge specific capacity of the sulfur electrode (Table 2) are significantly different.16Fig. 1(e and f) presents, respectively, a schematic representation of reduction pathways for polysulfide anions (Fig. 1(e)) and lithium polysulfides (Fig. 1(f)) in Li–S systems, proposed based on the computed free energies of various reactions and reduction potentials.17
Table 1 Representative reaction mechanism for the discharge of an Li–S cell15




The product of discharge
Transferred electron number (mol mol−1 S)
The depth of discharge (%)
The specific capacity of discharge (mA h g−1)




S8 → S82−
0.25
12.5
210


S82− → S62−
0.33
16.7
280


S62− → S42−
0.5
25
420


S42− → Li2S2
1
25
840


Li2S2 → Li2S
2
100
1680




Table 2 The depths of discharge of the four phases corresponding to the discharge specific capacity of the sulfur electrode16




High plateau
Low plateau
Inaccessible capacity




First cycle, dissolution and 2 step reduction
Chemical equilibrium
Equilibrium conc. of unreacted intermediates


S8 + 2e− + 2Li+ → Li2S8
Li2S6 ↔ LiS3 (radical)
Li2Sn + Li2S


Reductive dissociation
Dominating low plateau electrochemical reaction
Irreversible capacity loss


Li2S8 + 2e− + 2Li+ → Li2S8 + Li2S2
LiS3 + e− + Li + → Li2S3
PS oxidation


Or
Association and precipitation
Lithium solvent/salt reactions


Li2S8 + 2e− + 2Li+ → 2Li2S4
Li2S3 + Li2S4 → Li2S6 + Li2S
SEI formation and re-formation




And many other reactions
Loss of active surface area






Electrically isolated precipitation






And many other reactions




Meanwhile, the mechanism of the shuttle effect and the self-discharge of the Li–S battery have also attracted widespread attention. The intermediate redox products (Li2Sx (6 < x ≤ 8)) are easily soluble in most liquid electrolytes. The PS shuttle phenomenon is defined by a variety of PS anions freely migrating between the cathode and anode. The shuttle mechanism is illustrated in Fig. 1(b). Soluble PS ions in a high-valence state migrate toward the battery anode and react with the lithium metal. This greatly reduces the active material, leading to a reduction in the coulombic efficiency. In the end, the battery only keeps an infinite recharging and low charge efficiency because of the severe “shuttle effect”.18 Mikhaylik et al. studied the detailed shuttle mechanism of Li–S batteries. If the rate of reduction of high-order PS on the Li anode surface was directly proportional to its concentration [SH], the total high-plateau PS dynamic was expressed by the following differential equation, eqn (7).19 (7)where [SH] is a high PS amount or concentration normalized to a certain cell volume or surface; t is the time, I is the charge or discharge current normalized to a certain surface or volume, qH is the sulfur specific capacity related to the high voltage plateau, and ks is the heterogeneous reaction constant or shuttle constant. As a result, the higher the shuttle constant of a battery system, the more severe the shuttle effect.
A rigorous numerical model of the PS shuttling effect for various nanostructured cathodes in Li–S batteries was also researched. Behzadirad et al. studied the relationships between the concentration of sulfur dissolved in the electrolyte, the solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) layer, the equivalent porosity, and the battery capacity.20 To effectively trap PS (Li2Sx) species on host materials to suppress the shuttle effect, the adsorption and diffusion of various Li2Sx clusters on a phosphorene monolayer were explored. The results showed that phosphorene was a promising anchoring material for a high-efficiency Li–S battery cathode.21
The self-discharge of Li–S batteries is a common phenomenon while they are not in use. The main reason is that the irreversible reaction occurring during cycling of the battery reduces the active material due to the concentration gradient and reaction with lithium metal followed by high-order PS. Fig. 1(c) shows a summary of the capacity fade resulting from the degradation of cell components in the harsh environment of an Li–S cell containing organic electrolytes, lithium metal anodes, and reactive intermediates.11 All these factors together cause a serious loss of battery capacity. Fig. 1(d) exhibits the initial discharge voltage plateaus of pristine sulfur cathodes with different resting times. With a longer resting time of over a month, the upper discharge plateau disappears and only the lower discharge plateau can be observed, as shown in Fig. 1(d).22
At the same time, the open-circuit voltage of an Li–S battery also decreases as the resting time increases. Furthermore, the capacity fading is permanent. Mikhaylik et al. also devised a mathematical equation to express the relationship between the upper plateau capacity, resting time, and shuttle constant, expressed as eqn (8).19 (8)where Qupper is the upper plateau capacity, which depends on the concentration of high-order PS and the specific capacity, tR is the resting time and ks is the heterogeneous reaction constant or shuttle constant. The equation indicates that the self-discharge behavior is closely related to the PS shuttle effect. And these are associated with both the dissolution of high-order PS and the loss of active materials. Various approaches have been devoted to reducing the shuttle effect and self-discharge in order to improve the retention of active material. The following introductions will give some representative examples to explain the efforts of researchers. The models of the shuttle mechanism and self-discharge issues are also extremely vital to further research.
3. Cathode materials of lithium–sulfur batteries
Sulfur is one of the main cathode materials in Li–S batteries, because it has an excellent theoretical specific capacity (1675 mA h g−1) and energy density (2600 Wh kg−1). Although sulfur is a suitable cathode material, it is an insulator of electrons and ions, which makes the cathode conductivity poor. Furthermore, the charge-transfer resistance of sulfur is quite large, and a serious “shuttle effect” of PS still exists in the utilization of Li–S batteries. As a result, suitable conductive materials are necessary to enhance the electronic conduction of battery electrodes.23
3.1 Sulfur/carbon composites
Since early research, carbon materials have been regarded as conductive agents. Various types of carbon have received wide attention. To date, the types of carbon in Li–S battery research mainly include conductive carbon black, aerogel carbon, graphene, carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers, and hybrid carbon (e.g. graphene-carbon nanotube (CNT) conductive composites,24–28 graphene/CNT carbon composites,29–32 and combined graphene sheets, as well as micro/mesoporous carbon (SCNMM) composites33). Some porous carbon, including microporous, mesoporous, hierarchical porous, and hollow-structured carbon composites, have also been utilized.34,35 Firstly, researchers applied the mixing method to prepare the cathode, including carbon material and sulfur. Jozwiuk et al.36 compared the performances of different carbon blacks in cathodes. They focused on raw material selection of carbon blacks, including Printex-A, Super C65, Printex-XE2, and Ketjen black EC-600JD and standard (Super C65 and Printex-XE2 in a ratio of 1:1), mixed with sulfur. The microscope images of the electrodes are shown in Fig. 2(a). The carbon surface area of Ketjen black EC-600JD (d) is the highest in these materials, and the standard electrode (e) shows much fewer cracks than pure Printex-XE2 (c). The battery specific capacities of (a), (b), (c), (d), and (e) are <600 mA h g−1, 600–700 mA h g−1, 800–900 mA h g−1, >1000 mA h g−1, and 800–900 mA h g−1, respectively. From this study, the surface area of the materials would be helpful in understanding the preparation mechanism of a cathode with a better performance and higher stability. Zhang and co-workers37 prepared a straight-pore structured composite cathode of aligned CNTs/sulfur. The aligned CNTs were open and ordered, which was advantageous in uniformly distributing the fine sulfur, and the CNTs could be used as rapid pathways for electron transfer, due to the robust sp2 carbon frameworks. Meanwhile, the ordered packing of individual CNTs with a large aspect ratio was beneficial in reducing the dissolution of PS. A much improved battery energy density could be obtained. Zhang's group38 also synthesized an unstacked double-layer templated graphene via template-directed chemical vapour deposition, and a graphene/sulfur nanocomposite was prepared by a melt-diffusion strategy for use in batteries. The obtained graphene comprised two unstacked graphene layers separated by a large quantity of meso-sized protuberances, which helped in suppressing the PS “shuttle effect”. At the same time, the double-layer templated graphene could accommodate the huge volume changes of the cathode and reduce the loss of active material. Shi and his co-workers39 prepared a graphene–sulfur composite for the battery cathode. The graphene layer consisted of a compact graphene oxide (rGO) skin and an atomic-layer-deposited oxide coating. The rGO skin with oxide coating could be regarded as a barrier to constrain PS within the cathode region. And the compact rGO skin could improve the conductivity of the cathode. Thus, a battery with this cathode presented an initial discharge capacity of 796 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of 81% after 250 cycles at a current density of 1C.
 Fig. 2  (a) Column 1–2: Top view SEM images of sulfur cathodes containing different carbon blacks. Scale bar indicates 100 nm (left) and 100 mm (right). Column 3: Optical microscope images of 13 mm diameter disc electrodes. Top to bottom (a, b, c, d, e): Printex-A, Super C65, Printex-XE2, Ketjenblack EC-600JD and standard (Super C65 and Printex-XE2 in a ratio of 1:1)36 Copyright 2012 Elsevier; (b–c) SEM observation for the formation of the hCNC and schematic construction and characterizations of S@hCNC composite50a Copyright 2015 Elsevier; (d–e) schematic illustration of preparing S@NG nano-composite and these soluble Li2Sx can be trapped by the reconstituted N functional groups52a Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and mixed functional groups with N- and S-52b Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons. 
It is understood that the mixing method could not effectively improve the stability of the cathode or prevent the rapid capacity decay, and also may not accommodate the volume changes. There is considerable interest in using sulfur–carbon composites. In early 2009, in a study by Nazar et al., a high-performance Li–S battery was demonstrated. The applied conductive mesoporous CMK-3 carbon framework, modified by polyethylene glycol (PEG), was used to precisely constrain sulfur nanofiller growth within its channels and generate essential electrical contact to sulfur. In the cathode, the mixed CMK-3/sulfur structure provided an access to Li+ ingress/egress, the carbon aided in trapping PS, and the modified conductive polymer provided a chemical gradient, which maintained the diffusion of these large anions out of the electrode. The capacity of the battery reported here reached 1320 mA h g−1.10 This research demonstrated an effective method for the application of nanomaterials in the cathode for the development of high-performance batteries.
Based on the above research, the structural designs of sulfur/carbon composite cathodes have also been a research focus, besides the various carbon materials. Several porous carbon materials with a large surface area and pore volume for PS species accommodation have been the latest hot topic in the preparation of battery cathodes. Wang and his co-workers40 used microporous carbon to encapsulate and confine short-chain sulfur species for an Li–S battery. A new type of thiocarbonate-like SEI could be formed in the C/S cathode, which improved the sequestration of sulfur. The most outstanding electrochemical reversibility could be obtained at almost 100% coulombic efficiency, even over 4020 cycles. Huang and his co-workers41 prepared a sulfur cathode with ordered microporous carbon for an Li–S battery. The microporous carbon, with a small enough pore size, could prevent penetration of the solvent molecules and interaction between PS and carbonates, so the “shuttle effect” could be effectively suppressed. Thus, a battery with the cathode developed in this study presented excellent rate capability and cycling stability. Xiong and his co-workers42 prepared a microporous–mesoporous carbonaceous nanotubes/sulfur cathode for an Li–S battery. The hierarchical structure not only promoted electron and ion transfer during the charge/discharge process, but also efficiently suppressed PS dissolution. More importantly, the inner hollow cavity could hold even more sulfur, thus buffering the large volume changes in discharge–charge processes. Even at a high current density of 1600 mA g−1, capacity decay was only ∼0.13% per cycle after 150 discharge/charge cycles. In another study, porous nitrogen and phosphorous dual-doped graphene was prepared using a thermal annealing and subsequent hydrothermal reaction route, and the graphene/sulfur composite was used as the cathode.43 The porous and dual-doped (nitrogen and phosphorous) structure could accommodate the volume expansion and suppress the PS “shuttling effect” in an Li–S battery. Meanwhile, a higher cathode conductivity compared to single N or P doped was achieved. The battery could deliver a high initial capacity (1158.3 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1C), excellent cycling stability (ca. 0.09% capacity decay per cycle), and superior rate capability (633.7 mA h g−1 at 2C). Zhang and his co-workers44 prepared a dual-spatially-confined reservoir within micro@meso-porous dense graphene for a sulfur cathode. The outer part was a mesoporous structure, which could act as a reservoir to stabilize the over-flowed PS and enhance the Li+ transportation. The microporous inner structure was helpful in enhancing the electrical/ionic conductivity, improving the utilization of sulfur, and suppressing PS dissolution, because of strong interactions with the pore structure.
Recently, Zhang and his co-workers45 prepared hierarchical porous graphene for a sulfur cathode by a CaO-templated CVD growth method. The graphene presented a large number of macro-sized strutted cavities, meso-sized wrinkled pores, and micro-sized in-plane vacancies. This offered several advantages, including short ion-diffusion channels, low interfacial resistance, strong surface entrapping for PS, and a stable structure.
Due to being ultra-lightweight, and having a high specific surface area and a stable and open framework, leading to intimate contact between the sulfur and highly porous base material, porous three-dimensional carbon–sulfur cathodes are the focus of many studies in battery research. Jiang et al.46a synthesized three-dimensional porous graphene aerogels/sulfur nanocrystals. The size of the sulfur crystals in the synthesis process was on the nanoscale, and the framework of the graphene aerogel was stable and open, leading to intimate contact between the sulfur and graphene conductive matrix. Thus the strong adsorption ability of functional groups of graphene was demonstrated. A battery with this cathode presented an excellent rate capability and outstanding cycle performance. Xu et al.46b and Jia et al.46c loaded sulfur into porous three-dimensional (3D) graphene by a metal-ion-assisted hydrothermal method and a drying strategy. The 3D graphene has a highly porous structure, and the pathway of rapid electron and ion transportation was stable and continuous. The highly porous inner space restrained soluble PS and accommodated the volume changes. As a result, a significant improvement in the electrochemical performance was obtained. However, the battery developed by Jia's group had better electrochemical properties than that developed by Xu's group due to controllable characteristics. Recently, porous three-dimensional carbon was applied to encapsulate sulfur, and the wrapped layers were used to encapsulate the electrode.47a Xi et al.47b prepared a hierarchical porous three-dimensional sulphur/few-layer graphene foam cathode for an Li–S battery. The few-layered graphene had an interconnected 3-D network and a suitable hierarchical pore structure, which facilitated rapid electron/ion transportation, and effectively retained the electro-active sulphur. At the same time, the cathode material was free of binder and conductive additives, thus enhanced electrical conductivity could be obtained for the cathode. Even at a high current density of 3200 mA g−1, the capacity decay was only ∼0.064% per cycle after 400 discharge/charge cycles.
Combining the aforementioned advantages of a porous structure and carbon hybrids, a large number of porous carbon-based composite materials are also extensively applied in the development of cathodes for Li–S batteries. Chen and his co-workers48a prepared a three-dimensional carbon nanotubes/graphene–sulfur (3DCGS) sponge for an Li–S battery. The structure of the cathode allowed a sulfur loading as high as 80.1%. The 3DCG was composed of two-dimensional graphene nanosheets and one-dimensional (1D) highly conductive carbon nanotubes (CNT). The cathode structure, especially the one-dimensional (1D) highly conductive CNTs, not only improved the conductivity, but also appropriately tuned the mesoporous structure, which could achieve bimodal mesopores with sizes of 3.5 and 32.1 nm. Meanwhile, the mesopores could provide a large number of reaction sites, store abundant sulfur and facilitate the migration of electrolyte and charge. The battery reported here could supply up to 1217 mA h g−1, and the capacity still reached 653.4 mA h g−1, even at 4C. Dong et al.48b prepared graphene-backboned mesoporous carbon nanosheets with a polypyrrole (PPy) coating for a sulfur cathode. Firstly, the graphene backbone could provide a platform for the growth of the mesoporous carbon nanosheet and act as a current collector. Secondly, the mesoporous carbon nanosheets had a large surface area, which could store abundant sulfur and facilitate the permeation of electrolyte and Li+ ions. Lastly, the outermost nanocoating of elastic conducting polymer could stop PS from escaping to the anode and strengthen the entire sheet. The most outstanding performance of the battery was that an ultra-slow decay rate of 0.05% per cycle could be obtained after 400 cycles at a high rate. Yang and his co-workers prepared a sheet-like carbon sandwich for a sulfur cathode.48c The sandwich comprised a graphene layer and two N-doped porous carbon layers. The designed sandwich cathode could store a substantial amount of sulfur and capture PS by chemical adsorption onto the N-doped carbon layers. Meanwhile, the carbon sandwich had a high specific surface area (∼2677 m2 g−1) and a large pore volume (∼1.8 cm3 g−1), which was advantageous in retaining PS and facilitating charge transfer at the electrode, and especially in accommodating the changes in volume.
Recently, Lu and his co-workers48d prepared a chloride-reinforced carbon nanofiber host for a battery cathode. The conductive carbon nanofiber could increase the conductivity of the cathode. Meanwhile, theoretical and experimental results showed that when a moderate binding energy between chlorides and PS existed, it could not only effectively adsorb PS, but also smoothly carry out the next electrochemical reaction by avoiding excessive binding forces, which inhibit PS diffusion to the surface of the carbon fiber. The cell was able to cycle stably over 650 cycles with only 0.019% capacity decay per cycle from the 5th to the 650th cycle. Wu et al.48e fabricated a hollow carbon spheres/sulfur composite coated by polyelectrolyte multilayers (PEMs) and graphene sheets through a flexible LBL self-assembly method. The ion-permselective LBL film could be regarded as a basic physical barrier blocking the PS shuttle by Coulombic repulsion. Meanwhile, the graphene sheets helped to stabilize the polyelectrolyte film and greatly reduced the inner resistance of the electrode by changing the transport of the electrons from a “point-to-point” mode to a “plane-to-point” mode. The battery exhibited excellent cycling stability for over 200 cycles at 1 A g−1, along with a high average Coulombic efficiency of 99%. Li and his co-workers48f prepared an all-graphene cathode structure for reliable Li–S batteries, which was made up of three layers, including a highly conductive graphene layer (as the current collector), a highly porous graphene layer (as the sulfur host), and a partially oxygenated graphene layer (as a PS-adsorption layer). The highly conductive graphene layer could provide the convenience of electronic channels and avoid corrosion or dissolution of the metal collector. The highly porous graphene, with a high pore volume of 3.51 cm3 g−1, was regarded as a sulfur host, enabling a high sulfur content of 80 wt%. The partially oxygenated graphene, with a moderate number of oxygen-containing functional groups, was used as a PS-adsorption layer, which could effectively suppress the “shuttle effect”. Therefore, the battery with the all-graphene cathode structure could obtain a high initial specific capacity of 1500 mA h g−1 and excellent cycling stability, with a high areal capacity of 4.2 mA h cm−2 after 400 cycles.
In order to further improve the content of sulfur in the cathode for Li–S batteries and simultaneously lower the weight of the battery cathode, researchers have been investigating sulfur nanospheres with a concave structure. Liu et al.49 firstly synthesized sulfur nanospheres with a diameter of 400–500 nm, and conductive sheets of graphene uniformly warped the sulfur nanospheres. This design provided a flexible conductive graphene coating with void space to accommodate the volume expansion of the cathode and minimize the PS dissolution. The measurement results showed a reversible initial capacity of 970 mA h g−1 and an average columbic efficiency >96% over more than 100 cycles at a rate of 0.2C. Since the large specific surface area, good mesoporosity, regular structure, and large accommodated volume are also responsible for the excellent capacitance, a large number of special cathode materials were also researched. Lyu et al.50a applied a magnesium-oxide (MgO) template method to produce carbon nanocages. The morphological character of the basic magnesium carbonate precursor was transferred to the MgO template, leading to the formation of 3D hierarchical carbon nanocages. Then, sulfur was infused into the hollow carbon nanocages (hCNC) by a simple melt-diffusion strategy. Fig. 2(b) and (c) shows SEM images of the formation of the hCNC and schematic construction processes. The well-confined mesostructure enhanced the electron conduction and suppressed PS dissolution. Through an electrochemical performance test of the battery, the discharge capacity reached 1214 mA h g−1. The unique architecture, together with a convenient constructing strategy, showed a new and alternative method for the development of an advanced cathode for Li–S batteries. Actually, some convenient preparation methods of cathodes with high specific surface areas proved to be more practical for Li–S battery application. Xie et al.50b synthesized carbon nanocages (CNCs) with a high specific surface area (up to 2053 m2 g−1), a regular framework and high purity by a convenient in situ MgO template method. The capacity decay was as low as 10% after 10000 cycles of rapid charge–discharge at 10 A g−1. Detailed introductions to structural designs will be presented in “3.5 The electrode structure designs of cathodes”.
Besides the structural designs of sulfur/carbon composite cathodes, a large number of theoretical calculations and related experiments showed that substituting heteroatoms can also significantly enhance their electronic conductivity, and the doped atoms can effectively trap PS through employing functional groups (e.g. O-, B-, N-, S-, Se-, Co-, Si- and C3N4-), even various synthetic peptides.51a Cai and his co-workers51b used porous nitrogen-doped carbon derived from silk fibroin protein to confine sulfur in the battery cathode. The cathode material had a mesoporous structure and a high specific surface area, which constrained the PS anions to the cathode side and improved the conductivity of the electrode. Meanwhile, the abundantly doped nitrogen could chemically adsorb PS. Thus the capacity retention of the battery could reach 98%, even at 1C after 200 cycles. Li et al.51c synthesized a nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes (N-CNTs)-based cathode by applying an injection chemical vapor deposition method, and sulfur was vaporized to cover the surface of the N-CNTs. Through these synthetic methods, more defects were shown in the N-CNTs, leading to better dispersion of sulfur particles on the N-CNTs. Excellent electrochemical performances were mainly shown with respect to the retention of specific discharge capacity. This could be maintained at 625 mA h g−1 and 513 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.2C and 0.5C, respectively, which was about twice that obtained from raw CNTs. Manthiram and his co-workers51d prepared three-dimensional nitrogen/sulfur co-doped graphene sponge electrodes; Xiao et al.51e prepared nitrogen-doped porous carbon (NPC) from polyurethane foam (PUF) waste and applied it as a reservoir to impregnate sulfur for batteries; Yu and his co-workers51f fabricated highly nitrogen-doped CNT-graphene 3D nanostructures to impregnate sulfur. These results showed that a battery with a cathode material that included nitrogen-doped carbon had a good cycling performance and excellent high-rate capabilities, because the nitrogen functional groups could enable the effective trapping of lithium PS on electroactive sites within the battery cathode. Meanwhile, g-C3N4-coated carbon electrodes, even a lightweight nanoporous graphitic carbon nitride cathode, could also provide effective anchoring sites for PS in practical Li–S batteries.51g A new type of metal–organic-framework-derived sulfur host containing cobalt and N-doped graphitic carbon (Co–N-GC) was also synthesized for improving the battery performance.51h,i
To fully understand the interaction between heteroatoms and PS, Qiu et al.52a and Pang et al.52b further studied the chemical nature of surfaces with doped nitrogen graphene and prepared a hierarchical pore structure from the pyrolysis of self-assembled CNC films, with doped nitrogen and sulfur as the cathode. Fig. 2(d and e) shows a schematic illustration of the preparation of a S@NG nano-composite and the trapping of soluble PS by reconstituted N- or mixed functional groups with N- and S-. Zhou et al.52c employed an oxygen-containing group in their graphene/sulfur hybrid materials to prevent the dissolution of PS into the electrolyte. The battery delivered a capacity of 1160 mA h g−1 at 0.3 A g−1, and the overall capacity of the cathode was 731 mA h g−1, and this displayed stable cyclability over 100 cycles. Later, Wang and his co-workers52d prepared crumpled N-doped graphene sheets with an ultrahigh pore volume for a sulfur cathode. The interwoven graphene sheets contained a large amount of nitrogen, which was extremely advantageous in strongly adsorbing PS and reducing the loss of active material. The areal capacity of the sulfur cathodes could reach 5 mA h cm−2, which was favourable for practical applications.
Nitrogen-doped graphene was used as a carbon matrix for sulfur impregnation to prepare cathodes with deposited TiO2 atomic layers. On-site TiO2 absorption for PS retention, as well as charge-transfer enhancement, was achieved. TiO2 also exhibited strong binding energy for PS species. The results showed that surface-modified electrodes displayed high capacity, good rate capability and enhanced cyclability compared to the bare electrode.52e Yin and his co-workers52f applied reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/C–Co–S polyhedrons as the cathode. The metal–organic frameworks, which endowed cobalt-doped porous carbon polyhedrons with abundant mesopores and micropores, were wrapped by rGO.52g The porous structure of the cathode homogeneously distributed Co nanoparticles by chemical interactions between Co and sulfur/PS,52h and rGO nanosheets simultaneously contributed to the greatly immobilized PS. Especially, the rGO nanosheets acted as barrier layers to prevent PS from diffusing, and the porous structure could also effectively alleviate the volume change of the cathode.52i,j
3.2 Sulfur/conductive polymer composites
Because conductive polymer composites have a non-localized π-electronic conjugate system, the conductivity of the material can be enhanced through mixing methods. The reasons why composites of sulfur and conductive polymer can improve the electrochemical performance could be: (i) the composite can improve the electrical conductivity of the electrode compared to pure sulfur; (ii) because the composites have special structures, such as dendritic or porous shapes, they can alleviate the aggregation of sulfur species, make the electrode structurally stable, and improve the cycle performance; (iii) the special structures can effectively inhibit the PS from dissolving and improve the utilization rate of the active material. Furthermore, conductive polymers can be regarded as a part of the active material to provide additional capacity. Common conductive polymer composites include polypyrrole (PPy), polyaniline (PANi), polythiophene (PTh), polyacrylonitrile (PAN), poly(2,2-dithiodianiline) (PDTDA), poly(styrene sulfonate) (PSS), polyaniline nanotubes (PANI-NT), poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), and polyimide (PI).
Yuan et al.53a and Zhang et al.53b synthesized a core–shell and branched sulfur/PPy nanocomposite, respectively, as a cathode. Because the surface of sulfur is coated by PPy, the following advantages were observed: (i) the cathode could provide an effective electron conduction path; (ii) the cathode could restrain the solubility of PS and minimize the loss of active material during cycling. Thus the electrochemical performances of batteries can be greatly improved. Zhou et al.53c produced a “egg yolk”–shell structure of S/PANi composite materials by heat treatment based on the core–shell structure. This structure not only has the characteristics of the above-mentioned sulfur/PPy nanocomposite, but also delivers much improved cyclability owing to the presence of internal void space inside the polymer shell. Meanwhile, the core–shell structure also accommodated the volume expansion of the cathode during lithiation. Wu et al.53d and Wei et al.53e synthesized sulfur/polythiophene and sulfur/polyacrylonitrile composites, respectively, as cathodes. The former synthesized novel sulfur/polythiophene composites with a core/shell structure. Fig. 3(a) presents the synthesis processes of the S-PTh composites. The S-PTh composites had a core/shell structure and a porous surface, which meant that the liquid electrolytes could easily access the core of the electrochemically active sulfur. These also provided convenient electron and ion channels. All of these factors together improved the electrochemical performance of the battery. The latter built a successful strategy for a battery cathode through physical confinement and chemical sequestration in order to improve the electrochemical activity of the cathode. Fig. 3(b) shows the synthesis route for the preparation of a sulfur-polyacrylonitrile (S-PAN) nanocomposite cathode. These materials were shown to completely eliminate PS dissolution and the “shuttle effect” between a lithium anode and sulfur cathode. This was because these smaller molecular sulfur species were entrapped in the cathode, and some covalent bonds and physical confinements existed in the conductive host.
 Fig. 3  (a) The synthesis processes of the S-PTh composites53d Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society; (b) the synthesis route for creating sulfur-polyacrylonitrile (SPAN) nanocomposite cathode materials53e Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society; (c) scheme of PEDOT:PSS-coated CMK-3/sulfur composite for improving the cathode performance53g Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Lee et al.53f utilized high-molecular-weight PDTDA/sulfur as a cathode. Because there was no small molecular sulfide generation during the discharge, the conjugated structural skeleton could increase the conductivity of the cathode. However, the battery showed no significant improvement in the discharge capacity and cycle performance. Yang et al.53g applied a PEDOT/PSS-based conductive composite polymer as a coating layer on a CMK-3 mesoporous carbon–sulfur material. As seen in Fig. 3(c), the ionic and electronical conductivity were greatly improved by the rigid and stable polymer structure. Meanwhile, the porous structure prevented the dissolution of PS into the electrolyte during discharge. With the assistance of a conductive composite polymer coating, a discharge capacity of 1140 mA h g−1 was delivered, and the capacity retention of the cathode was enhanced from 70% to 80% after 100 cycles. Chen et al.53h applied the conductive PEDOT as a coating layer on S nanoparticles to fabricate an S/PEDOT core/shell structure. The diameter of the prepared nanoparticles was 20–30 nm, thus it was advantageous to enhance the electrical conduction and improve the sulfur utilization. The encapsulation by the conducting polymer PEDOT shell could also restrict the PS diffusion, alleviate self-discharging, and thus enhance the cycling stability. A discharge capacity of 1117 mA h g−1 was delivered and a stable capacity of 930 mA h g−1 after more than 50 cycles was obtained. Liu and his co-workers53i synthesized self-assembled polyaniline nanotubes (PANI-NT) for sulfur encapsulation. This SPANI-NT polymer molecular framework provided strong physical and chemical restriction to elemental sulfur and the resident PS. Furthermore, the conducting soft polymer matrices with nanostructures helped to deposit the intermediate PS species and accommodate the volume change during the discharge. The battery cathode retained a discharge capacity of 837 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a 0.1C rate. The electrode showed very stable cycling capacity after 500 cycles, even at a high discharge rate of 1C.
Recently, Li et al.53j compared the electrochemical performances of batteries using different conductive composite polymers, including PPy, PANI, and PEDOT, as coating materials on sulfur nanospheres. The results showed that the discharge capacity and long-term cycling stability after coating with PEDOT were better than those of PANI and PPy. Employing polyimide particles as hosting matrices could also reduce the “shuttle effect” by the formation of chemical bonds between the polymers and PS or sulfur.53k Meanwhile, the rational combination of a carbon/polymer/sulfur cathode has further improved the electrochemical properties of batteries due to the integration of the advantages of these materials. Moon et al.53l and Dong et al.53m prepared a graphene oxide-sulfur composite with a thin crosslinked polyaniline (PANI) layer and two- dimensional hybrid nanosheets fabricated by the infiltration of nanosized sulfur into graphene-backboned mesoporous carbon with a PPy nanocoating for the battery cathode, respectively. Besides the advantages of graphene oxide nanosheets or mesoporous carbon, such as a large surface area and high conductivity, the crosslinked PANI layer and elastic conducting PPy nanocoating could both efficiently prevent PS dissolution and act as a buffer layer against the volume changes of the cathode.
The structure of the carbon/polymer/sulfur composite cathode is also an important part of the cathode. Huang et al.53n and Wang et al.53o synthesized a novel core–shell sulfur quantum dot/polymer poly(N-vinylcarbazole) (SQD/PVK) nanocomposite and a multi-core–shell with a conductive network structured C-PANI–S@PANI composite for the cathode, respectively. These electroactive polymer shells could not only act as a conductive matrix, forming effective transportation pathways for both electrons and ions and a sulfur reservoir, but could also accommodate the volume change and restrain the diffusion of PS in the battery.
3.3 Sulfur/metal oxide or metal sulfur composites
Because nano-sized metal oxides have many advantages, such as a high specific surface area and strong adsorption performance, they are regarded as additives for battery cathodes. Not only can these materials increase the contact area between the electrode and electrolyte, but they can also inhibit the discharge product from dissolving in the electrolyte. The common nano-sized metal oxides include V2O5,54a SnO2,54b TiO2,54c LiFePO4,54d Mg0.8Cu0.2O,54e Mxene nanosheets (Ti2C),54f MnO2,54g and metal organic frameworks (MOFs).54h Furthermore, these metal oxide additives and intercalated compounds could take part in a discharge–charge reaction within a particular voltage range, and can be regarded as secondary active sites in a hybrid cathode.
Gorkovenko et al.55 researched different metal materials, including vanadium oxides, silicates, aluminum oxides, and transition-metal chalcogenides, and regarded them as the battery cathode content. The discharge capacity was enhanced because of the high conductivity of the cathode, but the improvement in the electrochemical properties as a result of only using metal material mixing was still limited. Zhang et al.54a synthesized a sulfur/novel V2O5 composite as a cathode by a simple mechanical mixing method. Although the additive increased the specific surface area and the porosity of the cathode material, promoted the diffusion and transport of ions, and greatly reduced the electrode polarization and electrochemical impedance, the initial discharge capacity was relatively low due to the serious “shuttle effect” of PS. Some novel methods need to be developed for the preparation of cathodes. Huang and his co-workers prepared hierarchical porous carbon modified with SnO2 nano-particles/sulfur (HPC@SnO2/S) as a cathode for an Li–S battery.54b The adsorption effect from the chemical bonding between SnO2 and PS could effectively suppress the PS “shuttle effect”. At the same time, the SnO2 could reduce the electrode impedance and the loss of active material. The discharge capacity reached 832 mA h g−1 at the 100th discharge at 0.5C, with a fading rate of only 0.19% per cycle.
Considering the effect of structure, Xie et al.54c fabricated a novel structured cathode with sulfur encapsulated in a TiO2 nanotube host. The TiO2 nanotubes prevented the PS from dissolving in the electrolyte and minimized the “shuttle effect”. Meanwhile, because of an electrostatic attraction (S–Ti–O), the surface adsorption of PS on the TiO2 surfaces was greatly improved. The reversible capacity remained as high as 851 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Recently, Wang and his co-workers researched the effect of the surface acidity of the host material on the chemisorption of PS for Li–S batteries.54i Through tailoring the surface acidity of TiO2 by heteroatom doping to a certain extent, the acidulated TiO2 could further effectively suppress the PS “shuttle effect”.
Soon afterwards, some metal oxide composites, such as LiFePO4, Mg0.8Cu0.2O, and Mg0.6Ni0.4O, were synthesized for use as cathode materials. Kim et al.54d synthesized LiFePO4-coated sulfur particles by a dry mechanofusion method. The technique was applied to confine the sulfur particles inside a stable outer layer, and was easily scalable for volume changes without a solvent drying step. But sulfur was not completely packed by the simple mixing, leading to the loss of active substances. Zhang et al.54e and Song et al.56 firstly synthesized nano-sized Mg0.8Cu0.2O powders and Mg0.6Ni0.4O, respectively, by sol–gel methods. These materials were added into the cathode as crystalline additives. Because of the catalytic effect of chemical bond dissociation, the PS adsorbing effect of the crystal structure, and nano-sized manganese nickel oxide particles (30–50 nm) added into the sulfur cathodes as an absorbing material, the electrochemical performances were greatly improved. The initial charge–discharge capacity was increased from 741 to 1185 mA h gsulfur−1 after the addition of nano-sized Mg0.6Ni0.4O additives. Following this research, Chen and his co-workers57 prepared a sulfur/PAN/Mg0.6Ni0.4O composite via wet ball milling. The conductivity and structural stability of this cathode were greatly improved, and soluble Li2Sx could be trapped by the reconstituted N groups. The cell exhibited enhanced reversibility, resulting in a discharge capacity of about 1223 mA h g−1 at the second cycle, and retained about 100% of this value over 100 cycles.
Although metal–sulfur-based cathodes are rarely mentioned, some recent reports gradually appeared on compounds such as CoS2,58a,b FeS2,58c and Co9S8.58d CoS2 and hierarchically porous CoS2 were used for battery cathodes by Yuan et al.58a and Ma et al.58b The interfaces between CoS2 and the electrolyte provided more active sites for the redox reactions of PS, which could effectively reduce polarization and enhance the energy efficiency. Meanwhile, polar Co–S bonds could interact chemically with the Li–S bonds of PS, and effectively encapsulate PS in the cathode. Both the batteries showed an ultra-low capacity decay rate and a stable cycling performance.
Recent advances in non-conductive oxides, such as CeO2,59a La2O3,59b Al2O3,59c and CaO,59d for Li–S battery design have also attracted widespread attention. Ma et al.59a produced CeO2 nanocrystals with a particle size less than 10 nm by thermal decomposition. The nano-CeO2 crystals with abundant -OH and -NO2 and high specific surface area were added into the cathode material, which was beneficial to enhance the wettability between electrolyte and sulfur cathode and improve the utilization rate of active material. Thus, this would effectively adsorb sulfur and PS, which inhibited the dissolution of PS in the electrolyte. By this preparation method, the surfaces of the CeO2 nanocrystals were mainly compacted. Meanwhile, this also improved the contact conditions between the electrode and electrolyte and increased the utilization of active material. Cui and his co-workers59d prepared various non-conductive metal oxide (Al2O3, CeO2, La2O3, MgO, and CaO) nanoparticle-decorated carbon flakes by a facile and generic biotemplating method, using Kapok tree fibres as the template and a carbon source for the battery cathodes. Fig. 4 shows a schematic illustration of the synthesis of oxides/carbon using kapok tree fibres (KF) as both template and carbon sources, and SEM with the corresponding TEM images of Al2O3/C, CeO2/C, La2O3/C, MgO/C, and CaO/C. In these images, these composites retain the macromorphology of the original Kapok tree fibers, which have a unique hollow structure with a large lumen and a thin fibre wall. Meanwhile, they also suggest that abundant rod-shaped nanoparticles are uniformly distributed in the carbon matrix. Fig. 4 presents the lithium diffusion mechanism on the surface of various metal oxides. Because the most favourable binding site of sulfides is two Li atoms bonding with metal oxide, the calculated Li ion diffusion can also indicate the diffusivity of sulfide species on the surface of the oxide. And the adsorption experiments and theoretical calculations reveal that PS capture by the oxides is via monolayer chemisorption. The cathodes with magnesium oxide, cerium oxide, and lanthanum oxide show an enhanced and stable cycling performance. Recently, Li et al.59e fabricated a bimetal–organic-framework synthesis of Co0.4Zn0.19S@N, and an S co-doped carbon dodecahedron is shown with a rooted carbon nanotube (Co–Zn–S@N–S–C–CNT) composite for the cathode of an Li–S battery. At first, the synergistic effect of two metal sulfide species improved the conductivity of the cathode and retained more active materials in the cathode. The mesoporous dodecahedral structure and CNT network helped to constrain the PS anions to the cathode side, improve the conductivity of the electrode and provide more channels for Li+ diffusion. Meanwhile, the abundantly doped nitrogen and sulfur could chemically adsorb PS. An excellent capacity of 941 mA h g−1 after 250 cycles at 100 mA g−1 and an excellent high rate capability (734, 591, and 505 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at large current densities of 1, 2, and 5 A g−1, respectively) for the battery could be obtained.
 Fig. 4  (a) Fabrication and microstructures of oxides/carbon nanostructures. (1) Schematic illustration of synthesis of oxides/carbon using the kapok tree fibres (KF) as both template and carbon sources. ((2–1)–(6–1)) SEM images of Al2O3/C, CeO2/C, La2O3/C, MgO/C and CaO/C composites, respectively (scale bar = 50 mm). ((2–2)–(6–2)) The corresponding TEM images of Al2O3/C, CeO2/C, La2O3/C, MgO/C and CaO/C, respectively (scale bar = 300 nm). ((2–3)–(6–3)) The corresponding HRTEM images of Al2O3/C, CeO2/C, La2O3/C, MgO/C and CaO/C, respectively (scale bar = 3 nm); (b) lithium diffusion mechanism on the surface of various metal oxides. (1–5) Minimum energy path for lithium ion diffusion on Al2O3 (110), CeO2 (111), La2O3 (001), MgO (100) and CaO (100) surfaces, respectively. (6) Potential energy profiles for Li+ diffusion along different adsorption sites on the oxide surface59d Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
3.4 Polysulfide cathode
In early 1979, the polysulfide/lithium cell was researched by Rauh's group.60 Although the number of transferred electrons for every sulfur molecule was 1.6, which gave the battery a high initial discharge capacity, the battery capacity still decayed rapidly. To date, the novel design of the Li/polysulfide battery has received significant research attention due to the sophisticated and advanced technologies aiming to trap PS and protect the anode.61 Zhang et al.62a researched the effect of LiNO3 on the performance of an Li anode and cathode by using an Li/Li symmetric cell and a liquid Li/Li2S9 cell to reduce the cathode reactions, which still occurred at the “liquid–solid” interface. They also discussed the functions of LiNO3 in the rechargeable battery. They found that the passivation film formed with LiNO3 on the Li anode effectively suppressed the redox shuttle of the dissolved lithium PS. And through limiting the irreversible reduction of LiNO3 on the cathode, a stable capacity of about 500 mA h g−1 was obtained. Manthiram and his co-workers62b prepared a binder-free CNF paper electrode with large interspaces between two fiber films for polysulfide-lithium cells. The 3D interwoven structure of the CNF paper electrode allowed transitions between high-order PS and lithium sulfide. And crystalline Li2S was found within the large interspaces of the 3D electrode framework after the first discharge, which avoided the formation of dense passivation layers on the cathode. Furthermore, the cathode loaded more PS, and the conductivity of the cathode was enhanced by directly using the polysulfide in the battery cathode. More importantly, the cost of manufacturing the raw material was extremely low. Through these methods, a reversible capacity of 1094 mA h g−1 after 80 cycles at a 0.2C rate, and coulombic efficiencies above 98% with a sulfur loading of 1.7 mg cm−2 were achieved. Wang and his co-workers62c added soluble lithium polysulfide (Li2Sx, x ≥ 6) into an ether-based electrolyte as a co-salt additive for Li–S batteries. The different voltage and cycling performance at a C/3 rate for electrolytes with different average polysulfide chain lengths and sulfur concentrations were discussed in their reports. And they found that the absence of Li2S in the cathode framework in the presence of PS resulted in an excellent performance. Furthermore, through optimizing the concentration of the PS species and the amount of electrolyte in the Li–S battery, the battery showed a high and stable discharge capacity, an outstanding rate capability and an excellent cycling performance.
Tarascon and his co-workers63a used PS as an active material, aiming to suppress the formation of Li2S at the porous carbon matrix. The Li2S8-bearing cell greatly reduced the polarization and provided better kinetics due to reducing irreversible and concentration polarization reactions. And the conductivity of the cathode was enhanced by using polysulfides as active materials instead of elemental sulfur. Furthermore, they found that these performances were further enhanced when sulfur was directly deposited on the Li negative electrode. The electrochemical performances of batteries could also be improved through the above modified methods. Wang and his co-workers63b prepared a novel organic sulfide, named carbyne polysulfide, by co-heating a carbyne analogue and elemental sulfur as the cathode. Through some related tests, it was proved that the carbyne polysulfide had a unique and stable structure of a conducting sp2 hybrid carbon skeleton connected to energy-storing sulfur side-chains. Furthermore, in terms of morphology, it had a well-developed porous structure with an uneven pore size. The percentage of sulfur in the organic sulfide cathode reached over 54%. The battery with the carbyne polysulfide displayed a high reversible capacity of 960 mA h gsulfur−1 after 200 cycles at 0.1C. Manthiram and his co-workers designed free-standing carbonized sucrose-coated eggshell membranes (CSEMs) with high porosity, a high surface area, and a long-range coalescing fibrous network. They used two CSEMs to act a reservoir for the dissolved Li2S6 polysulfide catholyte by forming a natural microporous architecture.63c The CSEMs possessed many merits, such as abundant micropore arrays and a continuous macroporous network structure. All of these effectively suppressed the redox shuttle of the dissolved lithium PS, provided a continuous electron channel in the cathode, and improved the electrolyte immersion. The sandwiched CSEM electrodes allowed the dissolved PS to be localized, and the electrochemical reactions were stabilized in the cathode region. An initial specific capacity of 1327 mA h g−1, with a decay rate as low as 0.25% per cycle over 100 cycles, was obtained. Their group63d also used low-cost carbon nanofibers (CNFs) with diameters of ∼100 nm and dissolved PS solution (1 M Li2S6 in blank electrolyte) as a starting active material. The cross-linked and conductive 3D carbon nanofiber network contained unhindered electron pathways with insulating discharge and charge products. Meanwhile, the large interspaces were regarded as reservoirs to store electrolyte and thus ensured good electrolyte immersion. And CNFs with a high specific surface area and pore volume enhanced the porosity, which promoted the immobilization of the sulfur species during the discharge–charge processes. The areal sulfur loading in the cathode was easily increased up to 18.1 mg cm−2, which led to an ultrahigh areal capacity of ∼20 mA h cm−2. Furthermore, they found that serious lithium-metal corrosion and electrolyte decomposition and depletion were the main reasons for the failure of the high energy Li–S batteries. Some other novel sulfide materials were also applied in the battery. Pyrite FeS2 chemically combined with lithium polysulfides (Li2Sn) to form active Li2FeS2+n complexes. The compound was regarded as the cathode and substantially reduced the out-diffusion of dissolved Li2Sn from cathodes. The battery cycling performance was improved greatly. The same function was also applicable to other transition-metal sulfides, which provided new possibilities and directions for the research and development of high-energy-density Li–S batteries with long-term stability.63e Gao et al.64a synthesized a new cathode material (Cu3BiS3) with a unique flower structure by a solvothermal method for high-performance Li–S batteries. A high initial capacity of 1343 mA h g−1 at 0.2C was obtained. Recently, Wu et al.64b prepared free-standing flexible electrodes based on porous carbon filled with uniform ≈50 nm nanospheres of Li2S for an Li–S battery. Due to the high conductivity and connectivity of the porous sheet, the electrodes had excellent conductivity and could provide fast electronic channels and play an important role in the inhibition of the PS “shuttle effect”. Meanwhile, the outstanding mechanical stability of carbon rendered significant mechanical integrity to the produced electrode. At the same time, the capacity loadings could be increased if the multiple electrode sheets were stacked together. Electrodes of variable active material (Li2S) mass loadings, ranging from 1.3 to 3.2 mg cm−2, demonstrated minimal degradation after 200 cycles.
3.5 The electrode structure designs of cathodes
Although the above-mentioned cathode materials in general have been used in cathode designs, a detailed introduction to electrode designs was not given. Here, we will give a detailed introduction. Generally, the electrode designs for battery cathodes are divided into two types, according to the material composition: carbonaceous materials and non-carbonaceous materials; and divided into three types according to the structure of the material: nanostructure (nanocubes, nanocages, nanosheets, nanoshells, nanospheres, nanotubes, nanofibers, nanowires), porous structure (microporous, micro/mesoporous, disordered mesoporous, activated bamboo-derived porous, hierarchical porous, tunable porous, core–shell tubular porous and cylindrical and gyroidal mesoporous), and some structures of natural biological shapes (core–shell, yolk–shell, shrimp shell, coralloid-shaped, cauliflower, honeycomb, coaxial-cable structure, sponge, Aspergillus flavus, split-half-tubular, layered structure, paper, foam, pie, and nest-like structures) for improvement of the sulfur cathode.
Carbonaceous materials or metal oxides are included in a selection of embedded sulfur-based materials and conductive agents used as cathode materials. And electrode designs of carbonaceous materials with metal oxides usually included nanostructured materials. Nanostructured designs, which are capable of trapping sulfur and PS in a battery cathode by applying physical/kinetic and chemical/thermodynamic sequestration, have played a role in enhancing the performance of batteries. Fig. 5 shows SEM observations or schematic models and cell performances of different nanostructured sulfur-based composite electrodes. These nanostructured sulfur-based composites were designed to improve the performance of the sulfur cathode. Wang and his co-workers65a prepared homogenous PEDOT-coated multi-chambered micro/mesoporous carbon nanocube-encapsulated sulfur composites. Because the structure could play a role in physical confinement and multilayered reservoirs for soluble lithium polysulfide, and the polymer could chemically bond with soluble lithium PS, the battery delivered a high capacity of 1086 mA h g−1 at a rate of 1C, extending to 1000 cycles. Lu et al.65b designed a sheet-like structure, used as a conductive carbon matrix, from organic waste shaddock peel. Their battery could obtain a high reversible capacity of 722.5 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 100 cycles with a capacity recoverability of more than 90%. Based on the sheet structure research on cathodes, Lu et al. also prepared a sheet-like carbon matrix from organic waste shaddock peel, hosting sulfur as the cathode. The environmentally friendly sheet-like carbon cathode material is available for Li–S batteries. But, the commercialization of batteries is still far away.
 Fig. 5  SEM observation or schematic model and cell performance of various nanostructure sulfur-based composite cathode electrodes: (a) nanocubes65a Copyright 2015 Elsevier; (b) nanosheets65b Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group; (c) nanosphere65c Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group; (d) nanotube65d Copyright 2015 Elsevier; (e) nanocages65h Copyright 2015 Elsevier and (f) nanoshell65i Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Yang et al.65c prepared hierarchical TiO2 micron-spheres consisting of nano-plates. Because the electronic properties could be improved by increasing the oxygen-vacancy density and the hydrogen reduction (H-TiO2), and H-TiO2 spheres with a polar surface serving as surface-bound intermediates could trap the PS, a high reversible capacity of 928.1 mA h g−1 after 50 charge–discharge cycles at a current density of 200 mA g−1 was obtained. Zhang and co-workers65d prepared interconnected carbon nanotube/graphene nanosphere scaffolds as a cathode. The graphene walls of the nano-sized hollow graphene spheres (GSs) and the super-long highly conductive carbon nanotubes synergistically constructed hierarchical short-/long-range electron/ion pathways.65e,f Meanwhile, the structure helped to sustain the volume fluctuation and relieved the shuttle effect.65g A high sulfur utilization of 81% (corresponding to 1346 mA h g−1) at a current density of 170 mA g−1 was obtained. Hu and his co-workers designed a nanocage-like S@hCNC composite with a high sulfur loading (79.8 wt%). This showed a large capacity, a high rate capability, and a long cycle life due to the carbon nanocages, which alleviated PS dissolution and improved the electron conduction and Li+ diffusion. This shortened the charging time for mobile devices from hours to minutes due to the encapsulation of high-loading sulfur inside the cathode structure.65h Zhang and co-workers65i also designed delicate graphene shells with well-defined small cavities, in which the graphene nanoshells had a diameter of 10–30 nm and a pore volume of 1.98 cm3 g−1. The nanostructures afforded a large surface area, accommodated the sulfur for high-rate batteries, provided fully active sites to help mass transportation, and endowed a tunable surface permeability of the cathode. A discharge capacity of 1520 mA h g−1 was delivered and a fairly low decay rate of 0.06% per cycle after 1000 cycles was obtained. One-dimensional (1D) oriented cross-linking hierarchical porous carbon fibers (CHPCF) were also applied in a battery cathode by Yang et al.65j The CHPCFs, with large microporous surfaces, exhibited a large length/diameter ratio, a cross-linked structure, and a reasonable hierarchical porous distribution, which provided convenient routes for both e− and Li+ transportation. Meanwhile, the coating method of inorganic nanoparticles, such as with TiO2, SnO2, MgO, ZnO, Al2O3, and SiO2, on the surface of carbon fibers has attracted huge research attention. A silica-coated sulfur/vapor-grown carbon fiber composite (S/VGCF@SiO2) was prepared as a cathode material. The as-prepared S/VGCF@SiO2 composite exhibited better cycle stability and a higher rate performance than the S/VGCF composite, because the introduction of SiO2 effectively inhibited the “shuttle effect” of PS.65k A novel barrier layer material, nonstoichiometric W18O49 nanowires, was also reported to alleviate the undesirable “shuttle effect”.65l Based on high loading (70%) of micro-sized sulfur, the battery delivered a respectable initial discharge capacity of 1142 mA h g−1 and retained a specific capacity of about 809 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles.
At present, the porous structural design of cathodes is of high interest among researchers. Fig. 6 shows SEM observations, or schematic models and cell performances of different porous sulfur-based composite cathodes. Kim and his co-workers66a prepared disordered mesoporous carbon as a PS reservoir. The result demonstrated that the mesoporous carbon-containing sulfur cathode greatly improved the cycle performance of a battery. Meanwhile, the pore volume was a more important factor than pore size with respect to PS absorption. Na–X zeolite-templated porous carbon (ZPC) filled with sulfur was also prepared as a cathode.66b And the surface of ZPC was modified by amphiphilic PVP, making ZPC amphiphilic (denoted as A-ZPC) and reducing the “shuttle effect”. The results showed excellent performances for the battery. Cheng et al.66c prepared activated bamboo-derived carbon material with abundant micropores and mesopores, with a large surface area as high as 1565.4 m2 g−1 and a pore volume of 0.95 cm3 g−1, as the battery cathode content. A battery with this cathode showed a high sulfur loading (86 wt%) and a high rate capability and cycling stability, with an initial discharge capacity of 1160 mA h g−1 at 0.1C. Zhang and his co-workers66d prepared a nanocomposite with sulfur entrapped in hierarchical porous graphene. Firstly, the nanocarbon framework not only acted as an electronic channel for the encapsulated active materials, but was also regarded as a mini electrochemical reaction chamber. Secondly, the mesoporous structures provided more space to contain sulfur and PS in the reaction process. And the micropores were beneficial with respect to the diffusion of lithium ions and the inhibition of the PS shuttle effect. Finally, graphene was decorated with epoxy and hydroxyl groups, which enhanced the binding of S to the C–C bonds due to the ripples induced by the functional groups. The battery exhibited a high discharging capacitance of 1068 and 543 mA h g−1 at current densities of 0.5 and 10C, respectively.
 Fig. 6  SEM observation or schematic model and cell performance of various porous structure sulfur-based composite cathode electrodes: (a) disordered mesoporous carbon66a Copyright 2014 Elsevier, (b) bamboo-derived carbon owning abundant micropores and mesopores66c Copyright 2015 King Saud University, (c) tunable porous carbon66d Copyright 2015 Elsevier, (d, g) ordered meso-microporous core–shell carbon66e Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society, (e) the cylindrical and gyroidal mesoporous carbon66f Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, (f) hierarchical porous graphene66g Copyright 2013 Elsevier. 
Besides the above porous designs, some tunable and special shapes of porous structures have been produced with the aim of further restraining the “shuttle effect” of PS. Chen and his co-workers66e prepared tunable porous N-doped carbon material for a cathode by changing the amount of KOH. The structure provided a highly electron-conductive network, a high surface area and uniform micropores, which ensured high interaction with sulfur. The battery exhibited a high discharge capability (636 mA h g−1 at 2.0C) and good high-rate cycling stability (893 mA h g−1 (0.5C) and 608 mA h g−1 (2.0C) over 100 and 300 cycles). Huang and his co-workers presented an ordered meso-microporous core–shell carbon (MMCS) as a sulfur container. Due to the large pore volume and highly ordered porous structure, the core provided enough sulfur loading and high utilization of the active material. And the shell, including microporous carbon and smaller sulfur, acted as a physical barrier and stabilized the cycle capability of the composite cathode.66f The battery exhibited a capacity as high as 837 mA h g−1 at 0.5C after 200 cycles. Wiesner and his co-workers66g prepared cylindrical and gyroidal mesoporous carbons with tunable properties for cathodes. These structures allowed the introduction of pore volumes up to 0.8 cm3 g−1 and pore sizes smaller than 4 nm, in addition to the block copolymer-derived larger mesopores, without collapse of the gyroidal mesostructure. The total pore volume of the cathode was over 2 cm3 g−1 and the surface area was over 2000 m2 g−1. These factors were beneficial for the immobilization of PS. The battery showed good cyclability and rate capability with discharge capacities after 100 cycles of 831 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 730 mA h g−1 at 1C. Huang and his co-workers66h proposed a dual coaxial nanocable sulfur cathode with ternary composites (multi-walled nanotubes (MWCNT), nitrogen-doped porous carbon (NPC) and polyethylene glycol (PEG)). The ternary composites had two roles: (1) the outer PEG and inner MWCNT could provide fast electronic channels and play an important role in the inhibition of the PS “shuttle effect”; (2) the middle NPC could store sulfur and reduce the loss of active material. The battery showed high and stable discharge capacity and an excellent cycling performance, and the most outstanding feature was that the high-rate capability could reach 400 mA h g−1 at 5C.
Nature always gives us inspiration for electrode designs. Some structures of natural biological shapes were applied in the electrode designs. Fig. 7 shows some different structures of natural biological shapes of sulfur-based composite cathodes as SEM observations or schematic models and cell performances. Zhou et al.67a prepared novel S-PANI core–shell and yolk–shell nanocomposites. The yolk–shell nanocomposite was obtained through heat treatment of the core–shell composites. In the cathode, the core provided enough sulfur loading and a high utilization of the active material, and the shell, including microporous carbon and smaller sulfur particles, also acted as a physical barrier and stabilized the cycle capability of the cathode composite. Meanwhile, the yolk–shell structure contained an internal void space to accommodate the volumetric expansion of the cathode during lithiation. The structural integrity of the cathode was thus preserved and the cycling performance was also improved. This proved that developing favorable structures and high-performance sulfur-conductive polymer nanocomposites was feasible. Wu et al.67b synthesized 3D coral-like, nitrogen and sulfur co-doped mesoporous carbon material. The coral-like interconnected mesoporous carbon network facilitated the rapid transport of both electrons and lithium ions and inhibited the PS shuttle effect. Ma et al. prepared a novel cauliflower-like hierarchical porous C/S material. The structure provided a large quantity of interconnected pores on a sub-micrometer scale. Meanwhile, enormous meso- and micro-pores also existed in the structure of the cathode, which provided a large surface area and pore volume for PS species accommodation. And the structure increased the sulfur loading in each cathode to over 6 mg cm−2 and formed a cauliflower-like structure, which was well preserved in the cathode. The electrode structure was advantageous for ultimately testing the practical performance of the designed cauliflower-like cathodes.67c Zhang and his co-workers67d prepared a hierarchical honeycomb-like carbon material. The structure showed a high pore volume (1.55 cm3 g−1) and a high specific surface area of N-MHC (1033 m2 g−1). And the electrode possessed more compact pores and displayed a highly developed porous structure in the electrode framework. The novel features of the cathode provided important insights into developing porous sulfur-based cathode material. Li et al.67e prepared a coaxial-cable structured composite cathode material for a battery. In the novel coaxial-cable structure, the linear hollow carbon nanofiber (HCNF) core provided an electronic conduction channel and was regarded as a mechanical support. And the nitrogen-doped porous carbon (NPC) shell trapped sulfur/PS and provided Li+ conductive pathways. The battery exhibited a high initial discharge capacity of 982 mA h g−1 and a high capacity retention rate of 63% after 200 cycles at a high current density of 837.5 mA g−1. Lu et al.67f prepared three-dimensional sulfur/graphene multifunctional hybrid sponges. The cathode with porous graphene sponges had a large areal mass loading of sulfur (12 mg cm−2), approximately 6–12 times larger than that quoted in most reports. The three-dimensional multifunctional hybrid sponge framework provided a better electronic conductive network, absorbed more PS intermediate, and offered more mechanical support to accommodate the volumetric expansion during charge–discharge processes. An extremely high areal specific capacity of 6 mA h cm−2 at the eleventh cycle of charge–discharge and a capacity of 4.2 mA h cm−2 after 300 cycles at a high rate of 0.1C were obtained. Xu et al.67g prepared porous carbon materials by applying Aspergillus flavus conidia as precursors. As a result of the uniform and tortuous morphology of Aspergillus flavus conidia, the surface area of the cathode reached an extremely high value of 2459.6 m2 g−1. And the structure of the cathode comprised networks and semi-closed architecture. This afforded mechanical support, provided an electronic conduction channel, and effectively retarded the PS dissolution. Wang and his co-workers67h prepared a split-half-tubular polypyrrole@sulfur@polypyrrole composite with a novel three-layer 3D structure. The unique split-half-tube structure had a high surface area, which improved the amount of sulfur loading, and a thin and uniform coating layer of sulfur. Meanwhile, the unique three-layer structure of the entire cathode also played an important role in the inhibition of the PS shuttle effect. An excellently high areal specific capacity and cycling stability were obtained. Chen et al.67i prepared a freestanding composite film assembled from S nanoparticles, rGO, and a multifunctional additive, poly(anthraquinonyl sulfide) (PAQS). In the structure of the cathode, the layered structure of porous rGO provided electron and ion-transport paths and restricted PS shuttling. Meanwhile, not only did PAQS efficiently trap the sulfide; it was also an excellent Li+ conductor, which improved the battery reaction kinetics at a high rate. A high initial specific capacity of 1255 mA h g−1, with a decay rate as low as 0.046% per cycle over 1200 cycles was obtained. Based on research on films, a hydrothermally treated graphite film sandwiched between the separator and the sulfur cathode also showed an increased capacity, an enhanced cycling stability, and an improved coulombic efficiency. And the nanogranular film also showed improved performances in a battery.67j,k
 Fig. 7  SEM observation or schematic model and cell performance of various bionic structures of natural biological shapes for sulfur-based composite cathode electrodes: (a) core–shell and yolk–shell nanocomposite67a Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, (b) 3D coral-like nitrogen and sulfur co-doped mesoporous carbon67b Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group, (c, d) a novel cauliflower-like hierarchical porous C/S material67c Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group, (e) a hierarchically honeycomb-like carbon67d Copyright 2014 Elsevier, (f) coaxial-cable structure composite cathode material67e Copyright 2015 Elsevier, (g) three-dimensional sulfur/graphene multifunctional hybrid sponges67f Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group, (h) Aspergillus flavus conidia67g Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group, (i) a graphene foam68a Copyright 2015 Elsevier, (j) split-half-tubular67h Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, (k) a freestanding composite film67i Copyright 2015 Elsevier, (l) pie-like structured electrode68b Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
Zhou et al.68a prepared a graphene foam electrode with high sulfur loading. The graphene foam structure provided a highly electrically conductive network frame, a robust mechanical support skeleton, and sufficient space for high sulfur loading from 3.3 to 10.1 mg cm−2. The highest sulfur loading in this report delivered an extremely high areal capacity of 13.4 mA h cm−2. Li et al.68b designed a pie-like electrode for a battery. The “pie” structured electrode provided an excellent balance between gravimetric and areal energy densities. Meanwhile, lotus root-like multichannel carbon nanofiber “fillings” with an average diameter of 60 nm provided a large void space for sulfur accommodation, ensured close contact between carbon and sulfur/PS and reduced the resistance to electron and ion transportation. At the same time, an amino-functionalized graphene “crust” greatly improved the conductivity of the electrode and effectively suppressed the diffusion of PS. A high specific capacity of 1314 mA hg−1 (4.7 mA h cm−2) at 0.1C (0.6 mA cm−2), accompanied by good cycling stability, was obtained. Mango-stone-derived activated carbons with a tunable pore structure were synthesized for the cathode, for which a maximum specific surface area of 3334 m2 g−1 and a pore volume of 2.17 cm3 g−1 were obtained. A high sulfur loading of up to 71 wt% was also achieved. The battery exhibited 64% capacity retention over 500 cycles at 800 mA g−1 and 45% capacity retention over 1000 cycles at 1600 mA g−1.68c A nanostructured cathode with a truffle-like architecture was prepared, which comprised sulfur embedded with hollow carbon nanospheres and encapsulated with an ion-selective, flexible LBL nano-membrane decorated with conductive carbon. A high loading of 65% sulfur and nearly 100% coulombic efficiency of over 500 cycles at a high rate of 2C was obtained.68d Wang et al.68e prepared a nested pore-structured carbon with spherical quad-modal pores and used it as a sulfur host material in an Li–S battery. An orderly distribution of 2.5, 15, 24, and 100 nm pores and a high pore volume of 4.15 cm3 g−1 were obtained. The novel nested pore structure allowed a uniform distribution of sulfur and rapid access of the electrolyte across the carbon. It led to an excellent C rate performance and cycle stability.68f
Recently, Chen and his co-workers applied manganese dioxide nanosheet-decorated hollow sulfur spheres to efficiently entrap PS for an Li–S battery. As seen in Fig. 8, the hollow structure with inner void space spatially encapsulates PS within the spheres. Furthermore, the manganese dioxide nanosheets with a large surface area were able to trap PS by forming chemical bonds based on density functional theory calculations. The excellent capacity retention, with only 0.028% capacity decay per cycle over 1500 cycles at a 0.5C rate, was obtained through the effect of structural restriction and chemical encapsulation.69 The cathodes were prepared by an in situ redox reaction between sulfur and KMnO4 under ambient conditions. The battery showed similar performances to the manganese dioxide nanosheet-decorated hollow sulfur spheres.70 The intrinsic MgO nanoparticles also showed an improved performance with respect to the conductivity of the cathode.71 In addition to the single novel structural design, huge interest in multi-composite structures has been stimulated by their extraordinary intrinsic properties. A cathode with a dual-confined configuration designed by Hou's group for an Li–S battery was produced.72 The structure confined sulfur in 2D carbon nanosheets with an abundant porous structure, followed by 3D graphene aerogel wrapping. The porous carbon nanosheets acted as a sulfur host to suppress the diffusion of PS. Meanwhile, the graphene conductive networks also anchored the sulfur-adsorbed carbon nanosheets, which enhanced the conductivity, provided a channel for rapid electron/ion transport, and prevented PS dissolution. The sulfur content of the composites was tuned to a high level due to the three-dimensional porous graphitic carbon structure.73 The hybrid electrode exhibited a superior electrochemical performance and outstanding rate capabilities.
 Fig. 8  Schematic model of cathode including manganese dioxide nanosheets-decorated hollow sulfur spheres69 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The recent advanced research on the use of cathodes with high areal sulfur loading through electrode design also attracted huge interest. The high surface area of sulfur-based cathodes has demonstrated significant improvements in their practical application. Manthiram and his co-workers74a designed a three-dimensional nitrogen/sulfur co-doped graphene sponge electrode. The active materials reached 4.6 mg cm−2. This structure and the sulfur or nitrogen doping provided enough space to improve the sulfur loading, which facilitated fast electron and ion transfer and remarkable immobilization of PS. A high specific capacity of 1200 mA h g−1 at a 0.2C rate, a high rate capacity of 430 mA h g−1 at a 2C rate, and an excellent cycling stability over 500 cycles with nearly 100% coulombic efficiency were obtained. Wang and his co-workers designed a novel functional carbon composite (carbon-nanotube-interpenetrated mesoporous nitrogen-doped carbon spheres, MNCS/CNT) for an Li–S battery.74b The MNCS/CNT framework with a high sulfur loading of approximately 5 mg cm−2 acted as a sulfur host to strongly adsorb PS. Furthermore, the nitrogen functional groups of this composite enabled the effective trapping of PS. A much improved electrochemical performance (1200 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles) was achieved. Cheng and his co-workers74c prepared flexible Li–S battery electrodes with high energy density, high power density and long cycle life by adopting graphene foam-based electrodes with 10.1 mg cm−2 sulfur loading. The graphene foam provided a network with excellent electrical conductivity, stable mechanical support and adequate space for a high sulfur loading. An extremely high areal capacity of 13.4 mA h cm−2 was achieved, and a stable cycling performance with ∼0.07% capacity decay per cycle over 1000 cycles was preserved. Huang and his co-workers74d designed a hierarchical free-standing CNT-S paper electrode with an ultrahigh sulfur-loading of 17.3 mg cm−2. Firstly, the applied short multi-walled CNTs with a diameter of 50 nm and a length of 1000–2000 μm improved the short-range electrical conductive framework for sulfur accommodation. And the structure of the cathode comprised an intercrossed mechanical scaffold to preserve its structural integrity. Meanwhile, the sulfur-loading capability was increased by the facile stacking of these electrodes into a layer-by-layer lasagna-like structure. An initial discharge capacity of 6.2 mA h cm−2 and a slow cyclic fading rate of 0.20%/cycle within the initial 150 cycles at a low current density of 0.05C were achieved.
Finally, a 3D integrated hollow carbon fiber foam (HCFF)-based sulfur electrode with a high sulfur loading of 21.2 mg cm−2 was prepared.74e The electrolyte-absorbing ability, conductivity and sulfur utilization were multiply enhanced because of the 3D hollow carbon fiber foam. The hollow carbon fiber foam also facilitated well-localized PS because of the high electrolyte absorption ability. A high areal capacity of 23.32 mA h cm−2 was achieved, which manifested great promise in commercially viable Li–S batteries.
All in all, the design principles of battery cathodes include the following aspects: firstly, in nanostructured carbon materials, the high surface area, superior electric and thermal conductivity, excellent chemical stability, and short path lengths for electronic or Li+ transport of nanomaterial, can provide high electrode conductivity, adequate exposed active sites, and fast reaction kinetics in a battery. Recently, many nanomaterials, such as nanocubes, nanocages, nanosheets, nanoshells, nanospheres, nanotubes, nanofibers, and nanowires, have attracted widespread attention, as illustrated in Fig. 5. And the design of nanostructured materials for cathodes needs to take the following aspects into account: (1) the control of morphology, particle size, and dimension distribution is extremely critical for enhancing energy and power density, and improving cycle life and rate capability. The high strength and flexibility of these nanostructured materials are also needed to ensure the morphology of nanomaterials and integrity of the cathode material, and adapt to the changes in battery volume; (2) because the nanomaterials usually have a low top density, the dense nanostructured materials need to be improved to a certain extent; (3) besides the synthesis or preparation processes focused on nanoscale storage materials being feasible, a large number of theoretical calculations associated with nanostructured materials remain an important factor. This is because the physical and chemical properties of nanomaterials greatly affect the electrochemical performance of the electrode.
Secondly, in porous cathode structures, porous material can provide a high surface area, porosity, and pore volume, thus they can store adequate sulfur, achieve high utilization of the active material, and facilitate the diffusion of lithium ions and electrolyte penetration. And attention also needs to be paid to the design of porous structured materials for cathodes. (1) In consideration of the high specific surface area and pore volume, the strength and flexibility also need to be balanced; (2) a reasonable pore distribution, especially in tunable pore or core–shell tubular porous and cylindrical porous materials, should also be considered in the design and preparation of cathodes; (3) because the pores in some nanomaterials are unfavourable for fast electron transfer, some nanomaterials, such as carbon nanotubes or carbon nanosheets, can be added into the cathode materials. And a rational proportion between sulfur and the porous materials is significant in making full use of the performance of porous materials.
Thirdly, in some structures of natural biological shapes, because the biological shapes of cathode materials usually have the above features of nanostructured materials or porous materials, these design principles are suitable. Meanwhile, the novel shape designs of cathode materials aim to better suppress the shuttle of PS through the synergistic effect of structures or a convenient modification treatment.
Finally, besides the physical structure for restricting the “shuttle effect” of PS, the chemical interaction between doped or co-doped atoms and sulfur/polysulfides is also a feasible method to trap PS. By combining the physical and chemical adsorption of PS in battery cathodes, the doping or special chemical properties (forming chemical bonds between structural materials and PS) of materials, such as doping inorganic nanoparticles and metal salts in battery cathodes, have attracted huge attention by researchers.
4. Binders of lithium–sulfur batteries
The binder also plays an important role in the electrochemical performances of Li–S batteries. The applied binder must be securely attached to the electrode and must build a network structure between the sulfur and conductive carbon. Moreover, the integrity of the electrode must also be maintained by applying binder or by another method. During reactions, binders can become inactive sites, leading to the deterioration of battery performances. So, a selective and functional binder, even a free binder, is also extremely important in batteries.
4.1 Novel battery binders
The early research on binders was greatly focused on polymers, such as poly(vinylidene difluoride) (PVDF), poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE), and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO).75a–c However, these cannot all effectively solve the problem of PS dissolution, and these binders seriously affect the conductivity of the cathode. Meanwhile, PVDF usually needs 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (NMP) to dissolve, but NMP is poisonous and difficult in volatilization because of its high melting point and poor bonding with PVDF. Thus, many other materials have been explored as binders to achieve more functionality for battery cathodes, such as poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP),76a gelatin,76b styrene–butadiene rubbers (SBR),76c carboxyl methyl cellulose (CMC),76d and functional water-soluble binders.79b
Li et al.77 prepared a multi-functional binder by SiO2-impregnated polymer blending of Li+-Nafion with PVP to improve the capacity, cyclability, and rate performances of batteries. The electrochemical performances of batteries were significantly improved due to the strong interaction between PVP and lithium PS through functional groups and the synergistic reaction of these additives. The research found that the sulfur lithiation capacity reached 1373 mA h g−1 at 0.2C (0.335 A g−1 of sulfur) and the capacity degradation rate was much lower than that of general Li–S batteries with a pure sulfur cathode and PVDF binder.
To date, environmentally friendly binders have also attracted great interest and attention among researchers. Gelatin, a natural biological material, has entered people's vision. Sun et al.78a and Wang et al.78b used water-soluble gelatin macromolecules as binders for batteries. This binder was not only a highly adhesive agent with PS ions, and a strong dispersion agent, but was also a stable electrochemical adhesive. The gelatin binder-sulfur cathode achieved a high initial capacity of 1235 mA h g−1 and retained a reversible capacity as high as 626 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. Micro-gelation via free-radical polymerization of commercial poly(ethylene glycol) dimethacrylate in a solution of sulfur-terminated poly(3-oligo (ethylene oxide)4-thiophene) enhanced the battery performance over the sulfur-terminated polymer.78c
Although gelatin is a good binder from the point of view of being an environmentally friendly material, according to present reports, the retention of specific discharge capacity is relatively low and has the potential to be improved. A large number of novel composite materials have been used together as binders for batteries. Godoi et al.79a compared the oxygen-containing binder, sodium alginate (NaAlg), and sodium carboxymethyl cellulose (NaCMC) with the conventional binder, PVDF. They found that the depressed swelling of two water-soluble polymers (NaAlg and NaCMC) in the organic electrolyte greatly reduced the high-volume expansion and shrinkage in the sulfur cathode. And NaAlg and NaCMC binders acted as a chemical trap, which was able to retard the leakage of PS out of the cathode. Furthermore, some research showed that LiNO3 decomposition was an effective way to alleviate the “shuttle effect”. But with the further consumption of LiNO3 during cycling, the passivated film grew endlessly and caused capacity fading.79b And the two water-soluble binders with NaAlg and NaCMC were able to facilitate the LiNO3 decomposition due to a higher starting potential and a larger capacity. The first cycle discharge capacities for the NaAlg (1436 mA h g−1) and NaCMC (1148 mA h g−1)-based cathodes were much higher than that of the PVDF-based cathode (841 mA h g−1). After 100 cycles, the capacities of the NaAlg and NaCMC-based cathodes were still much higher. Zhang et al.80 used water as a solvent and PAA as a binder with a special structure. The PAA sulfur cathode had a porous surface morphology, which favored the absorption of electrolyte and afforded more reaction sites, which also helped to improve the electrochemical reversibility. At the same time, a lower charge plateau potential and a higher discharge plateau potential were found in a battery performance test with a poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)-sulfur cathode, which led to smaller resistance, better kinetics and cyclic stability, using PAA as a binder. In addition, PAA exhibited excellent binding strength, which helped to stabilize the electrode structure and restrain the diffusion of PS and the desquamation of electrode particles.
A novel binder, which was based on a mixture of PAA, PEDOT, and PSS, was prepared to improve the specific capacity and cycling stability of Li–S batteries via the synergistic effects of different functional groups. The perfectly conductive binder facilitated the electron and lithium-ion transfer and prevented PS dissolution.81 Bhattacharya and his co-workers prepared polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers as a functional binder for high-performance Li–S batteries. A high sulfur loading (>4 mg cm−2) was easily achieved through this simple method.
As the spherical dendrimer molecules were strongly wetted with electrolyte, the interfacial interaction between the dendrimers and the cathode materials was greatly improved. This greatly improved the conductivity and activity of the cathode materials. A battery with the novel binder showed a high and stable discharge capacity, an outstanding rate capability, and an excellent cycling performance.82
With the continuous improvement in battery safety requirements, including the binder, aqueous binders have attracted much attention because of their low cost, reduced safety concerns, and environmental benignity. To further improve the reversible battery capacity and binder, Wang et al.83 synthesized carbonyl-β-cyclodextrin (C-β-CD) as a water-soluble binder for Li–S batteries. The high solubility and strong bonding of C-β-CD resulted in the formation of a gel film for tightly wrapping the surface of the sulfur-based composite after drying the cathode, which was able to wrap the sulfur composite and suppress its aggregation. The measurement results showed a high reversible capacity (1543 mA h g−1), with a sulfur utilization approaching 92.2%, and the discharge capacity remained at 1456 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles. Because single functional binders cannot meet the requirements of high-performance batteries, multi-functional binders have been applied to fabricate cathode materials due to the advantages of these associated binders.
4.2 Multifunctional and free battery binders
Based on the above research on binders, some researchers started to pay attention to multi-functional binders. Yang and his co-workers84 prepared a new multi-functional aqueous polycation binder (β-CDp-N+) for the cathode by introducing a quaternary ammonium cation into β-cyclodextrin polymer. Because this has multi-dimensional noncovalent interactions, and these introduced cations enabled the effective trapping of PS, the special hyperbranched network structure of the new binder β-CDp-N+ exhibited a sulfur-electrode-stabilizing ability, and accommodated the volume change. With a high sulfur loading of 5.5 mg cm−2, a cathode with β-CDp-N+ still delivered an areal capacity of 4.4 mA h cm−2 at 50 mA g−1 after 45 cycles, which was much higher than that of the conventional binder (0.9 mA h cm−2). Li and his co-workers prepared a multi-functional binder with a lithium-ion conductive polymer and PS absorbents for a battery.85 The binder was composed of Li+-Nafion, polyvinylpyrrolidone, and nano silica. Because the Li+-Nafion was a cation-permeable polymer, which suppressed PS via blocking PS (anion) transport (PS repellency), and the nano silica was employed to enhance PS adsorption and Li+ conduction, the multi-functional binder regulated lithium PS movement in macroporous carbon pores during battery lithiation and delithiation. The battery capacity reached 1373 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and maintained a capacity of 470 mA h g−1 at 5C. A rate capacity as high as 809 mA h g−1 was achieved after 300 cycles at a 1C charge–discharge rate. Fig. 9 shows the effect of different binders on the battery capacity. The capacity of a battery with the multi-functional binder, including the outstanding conductive polymer and excellent PS absorbents, was better than that of an SiO2-impregnated polymer blend and PVDF.
 Fig. 9  The different binder effect on the battery capacity85 Copyright 2015 Elsevier. 
However, the conductivity and areal capacity of the cathode are also affected by the existence of a binder. At present, some researchers have started to show an interest in binder-free composite cathodes to optimize battery electrodes. Furthermore, eliminating the binder from the cathode not only increases the active material content and the conductivity of the cathode, but also achieves better capacity. Elazari et al.86a and Dörfler et al.86b fabricated a sulfur-impregnated activated carbon fiber cloth and vertically aligned carbon nanotubes, which were grown on a metal foil as a binder-free cathode. The greatly improved electrochemical performances of the binder-free batteries were attributed to the elimination of the binder's insulativity. High discharge capacities for both the batteries were realized, with 1050 mA h g−1 and 1300 mA h g−1, respectively. Bai and his co-workers87 prepared a novel sulfur/graphene/carbon nanotube (S/GN/CNT) composite. The GN and CNT as a flexible conductive matrix facilitated ion and electrolyte transfer, and the open channels of the cathode structure were helpful in effectively confining the soluble PS. At rates of 0.1C, 0.2C, 0.4C, 0.8C, and 1.6C, the S/GN/CNT cathode showed high initial discharge capacities of 1468, 1078, 950, 831, and 759 mA h g−1, respectively. But the binder-free cathode still had some drawbacks with respect to its practical application, such as a difficult synthetic step and less connection between the conductive agent and sulfur, besides the special structural designs. Much work still needs to be done.
Sörgel and his co-workers88 prepared a novel, binder-free and conducting carbon-free sulfur battery cathode with a copper metal matrix for Li–S batteries. The sulfur particles were wrapped by the intrinsically conducting polymer, polythiophene, in the composite electroformation process. At the same time, a specific surface structure combined with a suitable metal or alloy was obtained, and the overpotential effect occurring during battery cycling was avoided. The most important contribution was that the internal resistance was greatly reduced. A discharge capacity of over 400 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.5C over 100 cycles was maintained. Wang and his co-workers89 prepared a binder-free polymer-encapsulated nano sulfur/super-aligned CNT (PVP@S-SACNT) composite electrode for a battery. The PVP in the cathode material not only facilitated better dispersion of SACNT bundles into a 3D continuous network with high conductivity, but also trapped the sulfur nanoparticles into the SACNT network to ensure their tight electrical connection and prevented PS dissolution. A high initial capacity of 1303 mA h g−1 with a capacity of 856 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at a rate of 1C were obtained. The capacity maintained 590 mA h g−1 even at a 20C rate, and excellent long-term capacity stability with a capacity decay of 0.052% per cycle during 1000 charge/discharge cycles at 2C was achieved. Based on research on cathode structures, a binder-free Li2S–carbon composite cathode was also widely applied in Li–S batteries because of its binder-free feature and the prevention of PS dissolution. Wang and his co-workers90 prepared a binder-free Li2S–C composite cathode for Li–S batteries. During the preparation, Li2S–C composites were deposited in three-dimensional multi-layered Ni foam from a dioxolane-containing mixture to fabricate a binder-free Li2S–C cathode. This 3D interconnected metallic network had a large surface area with high electrical conductivity. Thus, it accommodated a large amount of active material. Furthermore, a single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) free-standing layer with a woven-like structure was inserted in between the cathode and separator to improve the initial capacity and capacity retention. The initial capacity of the Li2S-single-walled carbon nanotube composite reached 1146 mA h g−1/Li2S. Moreover, excellent long-term capacity stability was obtained.
5. Electrolytes of lithium–sulfur batteries
Electrolytes play an important role as ion-transport pathways. An ideal electrolyte for an Li–S battery needs to have some essential electrochemical characteristics, such as high ionic conductivity, a wide electrochemical window, outstandingly stable chemical reactivity, and a powerful affinity with the cathode and anode. And it also needs to have low solubility for PS and be able to effectively inhibit the “shuttle effect”. The major function of an electrolyte in a cell is to efficiently transport ions between the electrodes. Fig. 10 shows a schematic of the components of a fabricated battery with an electrolyte.91a
 Fig. 10  Schematic of the components of a state of the art Li/S battery with an electrolyte consisting of LiTFSI and LiNO3 in a 1:1 mixture of DME and DIOX91 Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
To date, electrolytes include liquid electrolytes, solid-state electrolytes, gel polymer electrolytes, ionic electrolytes, and safe electrolytes. Developing new electrolytes and their additives, in particular the safe electrolyte, is extremely important and desirable for improving electrochemical properties and realizing commercialization for Li–S batteries. The most common liquid electrolytes have been presented in reports elsewhere91b,c and the current article will not cover this.
5.1 Common electrolytes
The common electrolytes mainly include solid-state electrolytes and gel polymer electrolytes. For reducing the solubility of PS in a liquid electrolyte, inhibiting the “shuttle effect” and improving the safety of Li–S batteries, solid-state electrolytes have attracted wide attention as alternative electrolytes. The requirements for solid-state electrolytes are that they are favorable to the conductivity of lithium ions, stable in the anode, and have good contact with electrodes. So far, the main hurdle for the application of solid-state electrolytes is their low ionic conductivity. However, solid-state electrolytes with solid media and all-solid-state electrolyte cells have still attracted the attention of some researchers. Matsuyama et al.92 produced a garnet-type Li7La3Zr2O12 (LLZ) and LLZ solid material, with Li3BO3 as the electrolyte, by a pulsed laser deposition method. They found that no capacity fading was observed during 15 cycles in cells using both LLZ and LLZ–Li3BO3 pellets as solid electrolytes. This was because the LLZ–Li3BO3 pellet had a high conductivity of 1.0 × 10−4 S cm−1, and the sulfur-rich TiS4 in the LLZ–Li3BO3 electrolytes could form films with higher capacity than the TiS2 crystal. This charge–discharge reaction was affected by the presence of additional sulfur atoms in the thin-film electrode. The reversible capacity of the former was 500 mA h g−1 per gram of a-TiS4 at 0.010 mA cm−2 current density and the capacity of the latter was about 480 mA h g−1 per gram of a-TiS4 at a current density of 0.020 mA cm−2. Xiong et al.93a–c researched the SEI effects on lithium electrode cycling in an ether-based electrolyte, an ionic liquid electrolyte and an LiTFSI electrolyte. It was found that the chemical composition of the SEI-film was different in various electrolytes, and the decomposition of the lithium salt (LiTFSI) on the lithium electrode was prevented by a surface film formed with PS. This difference was directly linked to the difference in the electrochemical behavior of the lithium electrodes cycling with different electrolytes. This provided favorable guidance for the design of solid-state electrolytes, such as the preparation of a thin film coating on their surface. Tatsumisago et al.94 discussed the recent development of inorganic sulfide solid electrolytes and their interfacial modification for all-solid-state rechargeable Li–S batteries. These solid materials as battery electrolytes included a large variety of materials, such as organic polymer, organic–inorganic hybrids, and inorganic materials. The inorganic materials included crystalline electrolyte, glass electrolyte, and glass-ceramic electrolyte. It is noteworthy that sulfide crystalline electrolytes with higher lithium-ion conductivity compared with a liquid electrolyte were successfully prepared. The glass electrolytes showed high conductivity, and the glass-ceramic electrolyte was favorable for the Li+ conduction path, which was close to the Li–Li chains. Unemoto et al.95 prepared a high-capacity all-solid-state lithium battery using a quasi-solid-state electrolyte containing tetraglyme–Li-TFSA equimolar complexes. It was found that the quasi-solid-state electrolyte consisting of the equimolar complex of [Li (G4)1] TFSA and fumed silica nanoparticles allowed the assembly of a high-capacity lithium battery with an all-solid-state cell configuration. And the coulombic efficiency was nearly 100%. Nagao et al.96 used thio-LISICON (Li3.25Ge0.25P0.75S4) as a solid electrolyte, which exhibited a high ionic conductivity. It was found that the battery showed a high electrode capacity and charge–discharge reversibility, with a reversible capacity of over 1300 mA h g−1 after 20 cycles. As a preferred electrolyte for batteries, Lin et al.97 prepared a solid polymer electrolyte (SPE) with starch as a host. This electrolyte provided exceptional lithium-ion transportability, with an ionic conductivity of 3.39 × 10−4 S cm−1 and a lithium-ion transference number of 0.80 at 25 °C. The battery with the SPE presented an initial discharge capacity of 1442 mA h g−1 and an average discharge capacity of 864 ± 16 mA h g−1 at 0.1C for 100 cycles. This opens a new route towards realizing energy power and safety with low cost and high sustainability.
Nagao et al.98,99 succeeded in producing bulk-type solid-state lithium metal batteries and all-solid-state Li–S batteries by using mechanical milling at 155 °C with an Li2S–P2S5 solid electrolyte. By an in situ method, the former showed visually that a slight expansion and contraction in the space of the interface between the electrolyte and current collector took place reversibly as a result of lithium deposition and dissolution. It was favorable to inhibit the dendritic growth along the grain boundaries inside the solid electrolyte. All of these factors together improved the stability of the electrolyte/anode interface and the electrochemical properties of the batteries. By testing the performances of the batteries, the results showed that the latter had an excellent recycling performance (1050 mA h g−1 for 50 cycles) and a good rate capability. To date, some superionic conductors, such as a solid polymer electrolyte with nano-sized ZrO2 additive100a and Li10GeP2S12,100b are promising solid-state electrolytes for batteries.
Recently, some advanced analysis of solid-state electrolyte interfaces has entered people's vision. The SEI is a protecting layer formed on the electrodes of an Li–S battery, mainly during the first few discharge–charge cycles. The electrochemical properties of batteries are influenced by the quality of the SEI.101a,b And because Li-salt additives are most likely to affect the SEI, there is a need for a controlled amount in order to analyse the unique role of each choice of Li-salt with respect to the Li–S battery performances and other specific behaviours. Zhang and his co-workers101c prepared an Li2S5-based ternary-salt (LiTFSI–LiNO3–Li2S5) electrolyte for an Li–S battery. The LiTFSI could provide a high Li+ conductivity for the electrolyte in the discharge–charge cycles. The reactions between LiNO3 and Li2S5 induced Li2SO3 formation, which produced a protective SEI layer. The enhanced stability of the protective SEI layer improved the battery performances.
Hu and his co-workers101d introduced a new class of ‘solvent-in-salt’ electrolyte with an ultrahigh salt concentration and a high lithium-ion transference number (0.73) for Li–S batteries, in which salt held a dominant position in the Li+ transport system. The lithium dendrite growth and shape change in the metallic lithium anode could be suppressed effectively due to the SEI formed on the surface of lithium electrodes. Li2S8–LiNO3 and Li2S6–LiNO3 were, respectively, regarded as additives in the electrolyte by Li et al.101e and Xiong et al.101f A stable and uniform solid electrolyte interphase layer was formed due to these additives in the electrolyte, which prevented dendrite growth and minimized electrolyte decomposition. Meanwhile, this was effective in suppressing the shuttle of PS. The Coulombic efficiency, cycle life and the safety of these cells using electrolytes containing these additives were enhanced significantly by reducing the escape of gases.101g
Gel polymer electrolyte (GPE) is usually a mixed electrolyte, including solid matrices and liquid electrolytes. Solid matrices are impermeable to PS and can suppress dendrite formation. However, it is found that the solid electrolyte interface can be damaged by PS.102 The liquid electrolytes have good conductivity, but the serious “shuttle effect” cannot be ignored. Therefore, gel polymer electrolytes attract widespread interest by combining the properties of solid and liquid electrolytes. Zhang et al.103a produced a composite gel polymer electrolyte (CGPE), including a gel PEO–SiO2 composite membrane with a 1:1 (wt) ethylene glycol dimethyl ether; 1,2-dimethoxyethane (DME)/1,3-dioxolane (DOL) mixed solvent. The composite greatly enhanced the wettability of liquid electrolyte on the separator and the resultant CGPE tightly glued the separator and electrode together. This made the battery safer and improved the interface with the electrode. But the composite gel polymer electrolytes still had a drawback: the electrolyte reduced the utilization of active sulfur because the PEO–SiO2 composite membrane inevitably trapped some PS species. Rohan et al.103b synthesized a gel polymer electrolyte membrane comprising PVDF and poly(4-styrene sulfonyl (phenylsulfonyl) imide) (PSSPSI). The ionic conductivity of this battery was about 1.1 × 10−3 S cm−1 at room temperature. This was due to the strong electron withdrawing capability of the bisulfonylimide groups near the active sites and the large molecular weight of PSSPSI. And the thermal and mechanical stability of the electrolyte membranes enabled the available material to be used over a wide temperature range and prevented dendrite formation, making the battery safer. With regard to mechanical and other properties, such as the operating safety of practical GPE applications, Wang et al.103c synthesized a composite by incorporating a poly(ethylene oxide)-co-poly(propylene oxide) (P(EO-co-PO)) copolymer with a commercially available ternary membrane to form a framework for the GPE. The composite GPE with Celgard-P(EO-co-PO) had a high ionic conductivity and excellent mechanical integrity with only 1.2% capacity decay after 150 charge–discharge cycles.
Rencently, Lu et al.104a synthesized an advanced semi-interpenetrating polymer network gel electrolyte for rechargeable lithium batteries, including a GPE membrane, cross-linked poly n(ethylene glycol), diacrylate-co-poly(vinylene carbonate), P(EGDA-co-VC), and poly(vinylidene fluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF-HFP). The cross-linked P(EGDA-co-VC) accommodated much liquid electrolyte inside the non-porous membrane through its strong interaction with Li+ and the solvents, which avoided liquid electrolyte leakage. Moreover, due to the oxidative decomposition of the PEO chains of cross-linked P(EGDA-co-VC), a stability window up to 4.2 V for the GPE was sufficient for application in rechargeable batteries. Kang and his co-workers designed a novel gel polymer electrolyte with pentaerythritol tetraacrylate (PETEA)-based GPE for high-performance Li–S batteries. The electrolyte showed an extremely high ionic conductivity (1.13 × 10−2 S cm−1). Due to the strong immobilization of PS by the PETEA-based GPE, the formation of a stable passivation layer on the cathode surface and a strong interaction between PS and the oxygen donor atoms in ester (CO) groups of polymerized PETEA were obtained. The “shuttle effect” caused by the dissolved PS species was effectively suppressed through these influencing factors.104b
5.2 Ionic liquid electrolytes
Ionic liquid electrolytes are composed entirely of ions. Compared with the above electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes have recently attracted wide interest by researchers because they are not easy to volatilize and burn, improving the safety of batteries. Moreover, they have a large number of merits, such as high lithium-ion conductivity, wide electrochemical stability and good solubility. Yan et al.105a applied a room-temperature ionic liquid, N-methyl-N-allylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethane-sulfonyl)imide (RTIL P1A3TFSI) as the electrolyte of the battery. Because the electrolyte had various merits, including non-flammability, negligible vapor pressure, high lithium-ion conductivity, and a wide electrochemical window, as well as the ability to prevent the formation of Li dendrites, a very safe Li–S battery was achieved, and the battery delivered a high discharge specific capacity of 1457 mA h g−1 at 0.1C. Park et al.105b prepared two different ionic liquid electrolytes: Li[bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide]/[N,N-diethyl-N-methyl-N-(2-methoxyethyl)ammonium] [bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)amide]Li[TFSA]/[DEME][TFSA] and Li[TFSA]/tetraethylene glycol dimethyl ether(TEGDME) for an Li–S battery. Fig. 11(a) shows the solubility of S8 and Li2Sm in the two liquids. The solubility of Li2Sm in 0.98 M Li [TFSA]/TEGDME solution was higher than that in Li [TFSA]/[DEME] [TFSA] in every case, due to the alkalescence of TFSA−. This showed that the “shuttle effect” inhibition of Li [TFSA]/[DEME] [TFSA] solution as electrolyte was better than that of Li [TFSA]/TEGDME solution. This was attributed to the Li [TFSA]/[DEME] [TFSA] solution having low donor ability with the weak Lewis basicity of a [TFSA]− anion, resulting in very low solubility of Li2Sm. Ueno et al.106a compared a series of equimolar mixtures of Li salts (LiX), glymes (triglyme (G3) and tetraglyme (G4)), and [Li(glyme)]X with different anions (X: [N(SO2C2F5)2] = [BETI];[N(SO2CF3)2] = [TFSA]; [CF3SO3] = [OTf]; BF4; NO3), with regard to electrolytes. From Fig. 11(b), it was found that the dissolution of lithium PS was reduced in solvated electrolytes, which stabilized the cycling performance. But it was also found that NO3 anions were irreversibly reduced at the composite cathode during discharge, and BF4 anions formed by-products through a chemical reaction, so that it was unfavorable to use Li (OTf) as an electrolyte in batteries. Recently, Wu et al.106b designed new ionic liquid electrolytes containing N-methoxyethyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium-bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)-imide (Pyr1,201 TFSI) and tri(-ethylene glycol) dimethyl ether (TEGDME), with additives of LiTFSI/lithium oxalyldifluoroborate (LiODFB) binary lithium salts as the electrolytes. The highly flexible alkoxy chains in the ether-functionalized ions of the Pyr1,201TFSI/TEGDME electrolyte provided convenient transport for the adjacent molecules and hindered crystallization,106c which increased the conductivity and the solubility of Li2S in the ionic liquid. And the SEI-forming ability of LiODFB could also protect the Li anode from forming lithium dendrites and alleviate the shuttle phenomenon. The initial discharge capacity of the battery was 1264.4 mA h g−1, and it retained 911.4 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles with more than 95% Coulombic efficiency. Unemoto et al.106d used quasi-solid-state electrolytes (QSEs) consisting of the ionic liquid, (RTIL)-lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) amide and (Li-TFSA)-fumed silica nanoparticles for a battery. The electrolytes exhibited liquid-like, apparently high conductivity, regardless of their solid-like appearance. Meanwhile, the sulfur utilization was enhanced using conductive fumed silica nanoparticle additives with high specific surface areas. The results showed that the initial discharge capacity was 1100 mA h g−1 at 0.05C and the discharge capacity was 690 mA h g−1 after 45 charge–discharge cycles. Wang et al.106e and Barghamadi et al.106f also designed a new room-temperature ionic liquid (RTIL)-based organic electrolyte and organic solvent–ionic liquid mixtures, which were based on the 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium (C4mpyr) cation, with a range of anions for the batteries, respectively. In the former, the electrolyte provided a trade-off between the solubility and diffusion rate of PS by mixing very different physicochemical properties of two solvents. Besides, the anode surface in the latter formed an effective SEI layer for suppressing PS solubility, due to the electrolyte. The results showed that both electrolytes exhibited a great improvement in the electrochemical capacity and cycling stability. Additives, such as LiNO3, for the ionic liquid electrolytes helped to improve the performance of batteries through their roles in greatly protecting the lithium anode and beneficially interacting with the PS shuttle.107 It is possible that other lithium salts, such as lithium bis(oxalate)borate (LiBOB), lithium difluoro(oxalate)borate (LiODFB), and lithium fluoride (LiF), will have a similar effect with LiNO3.
 Fig. 11  (a) Solubility of S8 and Li2Sm in [DEME] [TFSA], 0.64 M Li [TFSA]/[DEME][TFSA] and 0.98 M Li [TFSA]/TEGDME. The solubility is presented as the atomic concentration of S105b Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; (b) anionic effects on solvated ionic liquids in suppressing the dissolution of PS for lithium–sulfur batteries106a Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
5.3 Safer electrolytes
Besides the performances of electrolytes, which affected the electrochemical properties of batteries, the development of a safe electrolyte for Li–S batteries was also regarded as an important factor in the practical application of batteries. Yang and his co-workers108a prepared a novel dual-salts electrolyte solution composed of Li[N(SO2F)2] and Li[N(SO2CF3)2] for batteries. The electrolyte formed a unique protective SEI film and obtained great improvement in the Li crystal growth pattern due to the dendrite-free lithium-metal. Fig. 12 shows the cycle performance of a lithium electrode with the novel dual-salts electrolyte at high current density, and a schematic illustration of the interfacial competitive reaction of the FSI anion with lithium metal. The F ion dividing from the S–F bond cleavage formed stable LiF, and then the S–N bond in the fragment F(SO2)2N was broken under the strong attraction of oxygen atoms to the lithium surface, leading to the formation of SO2, which escaped from the surface. And the fluorine percentage on the surface of the anode cycled in the dual-salts electrolyte was rather low. Thus the dual-salts electrolyte also formed a very thin and dense inorganic layer containing LiF. This special surface protective layer suppressed Li dendrite formation and helped to deposit new morphology to compact the deposition of uniform lithium grains. Furthermore, a high ionic conductivity (10.22 mS cm−1) and favorable interfacial properties (interfacial resistance of 88.6 Ω cm2 in LiFSI–LiTFSI electrolyte, against 152.7 Ω cm2 in LiTFSI electrolyte) were obtained for the dual-salts electrolyte. All of these factors improved the electrochemical properties, especially the safety of the electrolyte. Chen and his co-workers108b prepared an ionic liquid-based electrolyte with binary lithium salts for high-performance Li–S batteries. The SEI-forming ability of LiODFB protected the Li anode from forming lithium dendrites and prevented the shuttle phenomenon. The sizes of LiTFSI and LiODFB in the lithium salts were 0.84 nm and 0.60 nm, respectively. But TEGDME possessed a size of 1.48 nm along the longest length. The larger components improved the “shuttle” suppression by slowing the diffusion of Li2Sx. Furthermore, all the electrolyte samples with binary lithium salts had an ionic conductivity above 3.5 mS cm−1. Overall, LiODFB promoted SEI layer formation through the reduction reactions, and the SEI layer relieved the shuttle of PS and protected the Li anode.
 Fig. 12  The cycle performance of lithium electrode at high current density: (a, b) galvanostatic voltageetime curves for Li/electrolyte/Li symmetric cells respectively in LiF-SI-LiTFSI/DOL-DME solution and LiTFSI/DOL-DME solution with current density of 10 mA cm−2 and 54 C cm−2 per process; (c) SEM micrograph of lithium deposit after 51 cycles in LiFSI-LiTFSI/DOL-DME solution with current density of 10 mA cm−2 and 54 C cm−2 per process; (d) schematic illustration of interfacial competitive reaction of FSI anion with lithium metal108a Copyright 2014 Elsevier. 
Wang et al.108c built a safe and highly efficient Li–S battery with a flame-inhibiting electrolyte and a sulfur-based composite cathode, which derived from the addition of tris(2,2,2-trifluoroethyl) phosphate (TTFP), and a pPAN@S composite cathode with unique non-flammable properties. The added amount of TTFP was reduced during the first discharge to form a stable interfacial film on the cathode, which prevented the reaction between ethylene carbonate (EC) and PS, enhanced lithium-ion transfer, and accelerated the electrochemical reactions. The changes in the interfacial film also conferred several merits, including low lithium diffusion resistance, accelerated electrochemical reactions, and partial accommodation of the volume change during cycling. The film was associated with CF3 derived from TTFP, and the good wettability of TTFP provided intimate contact between the cathode and the electrolyte. Overall, the addition of 10 wt% TTFP to the electrolyte not only significantly enhanced the cycle capacity at different current rates, but also suppressed the voltage polarization. The battery showed extremely stable electrochemical activity over 750 cycles and maintained a discharge capacity greater than 800 mA h g−1 (sulfur) at a high rate of 10C in the flame-inhibiting electrolyte. At the same time, some electrolytes, such as ionic liquid-based electrolytes with lithium salt, for enhancing the safety of batteries, have also become a hot topic because of the actual use of Li–S batteries.108d–f
6. Separators of lithium–sulfur batteries
At present, many research reports focus mainly on the cathode and electrolytes. However, the separator is also an important part of batteries, as it affects their electrochemical performance and safety. Separators mainly have two functions: (1) a separator should have a microporous functional polymeric membrane, which plays an important role in avoiding a short circuit between the positive and negative electrodes. (2) Separators must have excellent strength, flexible bending or shrinkage, suitable ionic conductivity, proper porosity, and wettability. As a result, they can inhibit PS migration and protect the electrodes from being destroyed or losing functionality. Traditional separators are mainly polyolefin separators, such as polypropylene microporous membranes, polyethylene microporous membranes, and multi-layer composite membranes. Although there are some advantages, such as low cost, appropriate mechanical strength, good chemical and electrochemical stability, and controllable porosity, some disadvantages are significant: (1) the charge–discharge performance is poor at high temperatures or high currents, leading to short-circuiting and serious safety hazards; (2) it is easy to restrain intermediate PS diffusion in the batteries. Therefore, developing new separators with higher quality and multifunctionality has become one of the most important directions for improving battery performances.
6.1 Surface-coated battery separators
In view of some drawbacks of the traditional polyolefin separators, such as poor electrolyte affinity and lack of ionic conductivity, researchers have paid particular attention to the modification of polyolefin separators. Zhang et al.109a,b synthesized two types of separators: a porous Al2O3-coated separator and a functional carbon layer-coated separator on a polypropylene (PP)/polyethylene (PE)/PP separator. The specific capacity of the former (593.4 mA h g−1) was enhanced compared with the cell using a routine separator, with a specific capacity of 498.6 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 0.2C. This was mainly attributed to the oxide absorbent layer coating on the routine separator, which acted as a physical obstacle to block PS migration. The electrochemical performance of the latter was also obviously improved, with a high capacity retention ratio, with a capacity of 778 mA h g−1 compared with the cell using a routine separator, and a specific capacity of 450 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.5C. This was because the carbon-coated separator provided a large conductive surface for the transformation of PS to solid Li2S/Li2S2, and thus enhanced the active material utilization in the electrolyte. Xu et al.109c produced a trilayer carbon nanotube/Al2O3/PP separator. The carbon nanotubes could capture PS and suppress the accumulation of Li sulfides deposited on the Li anode, and Al2O3 prevented CNT from forming a membrane. The two factors together improved the electrochemical performances of batteries, with a highest specific capacity of 1287 mA h g−1 compared to the cells with PP (1030 mA h g−1) and Al2O3/PP separators (1130 mA h g−1) at 0.2C. Zhang et al.110 used a mixture of nitrogen-doped porous hollow carbon spheres (NHCs) and polyvinylidene fluoride (PDVF) (8:1 by weight), mixed with N-methyl pyrrolidinone to form a slurry, which was coated onto one side of a Celgard 2400 separator. Due to the chemical and physical adsorption properties of porous and nitrogen-doped NHCs, an initial discharge capacity of 1656 mA h g−1 (0.2C) and a low fading rate of 0.11% per cycle within 500 cycles (1C) were achieved. Gu et al.111 applied weak polyelectrolytes, such as poly(allylamine hydrochloride) (PAH) and poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) to assemble a PE separator through using an LBL assembly method. The separators allowed the cationic permselectivity to be tuned with respect to the number of bilayers and external pH. And the wetting properties of the LBL-treated separator were improved. The coating functioned as a cation-selective membrane, which allowed the free transportation of Li+ cations and blocked the shuttling of PS by coulombic interactions. All of these factors together produced a high initial reversible capacity of 1418 mA h g−1 and a significantly improved coulombic efficiency, almost 100% over 50 cycles. Zhu et al.112 researched an extremely thin conductive carbon coating separator (the particle size ranged from 30–50 nm in the coating). The separator not only reduced the cell resistance, but also blocked the diffusion of soluble PS, avoiding the shuttle effect during cycling. A high capacity of 956 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles and an outstanding high-rate response, up to 4C, were obtained. Cui and his co-workers applied a series of thin conductive coatings on the separator to prevent the formation of inactive S-related layers.113 They coated Ketjen black carbon, multi-wall carbon nanotubes, TiO2 nanoparticle-super P, and Al2O3 nanoparticle-super P on the separator. These coated separators accommodated a large amount of PS, which then precipitated as inactive S-related thick layers. The specific capacity and cycling stability of batteries with these special separators were significantly improved when compared to a battery with a pristine separator. For example, an initial specific capacity of 1350 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, with a cycle decay as low as 0.09% per cycle, was obtained when using the thin conductive coating separator with Al2O3 nanoparticle-super P.
Besides ceramic-coated separators being applied in Li–S batteries, other coating materials also attracted widespread attention, including carbon-coated separators, special functional polymer-coated separators, and their combination in multi-coating separators. Zhang et al.114a coated nitrogen-doped porous hollow carbon spheres (NHC) onto a separator. Because the NHCs had a high surface area and large pore volume, which facilitate the physical adsorption of PS, and nitrogen-doped conductive carbons had high electronic conductivity and powerful chemical adsorption for trapping PS, a high initial discharge capacity of 1656 mA h g−1 and a discharge capacity of 542 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at a 1C discharge current in an Li–S battery with the NHC-decorated separator were obtained. Even with a high discharge current of 5C, the battery still retained a capacity of 720 mA h g−1. Chang et al.114b prepared a single-wall carbon nanotube (SWCNT)-coated separator by a vacuum-filtration method for an Li–S battery. The high microporosity of SWCNTs, their small micropores, and high surface area allowed an excellent PS-trapping capability and reduced the Li-metal anode degradation. The electrochemical reversibility and the redox accessibility of the battery were greatly improved. The battery performances with a “Janus Separator” with a polypropylene-supported cellular graphene framework were remarkably improved.114c This was because the “Janus Separator” possessed a high electrical conductivity of 100 S cm−1, a large mesopore volume of 3.1 cm3 g−1, and a huge surface area of 2120 m2 g−1, which reactivated the shuttling-back PS and preserved the ion channels. Moreover, the porous PP layer was regarded as an insulating material in contact with the lithium anode. Recently, a functional mesoporous carbon-coated separator was also applied in Li–S batteries.114d Because the functional mesoporous carbon layers could offer physical sites to localize the dissolved PS and retain them as active material within the cathode side, the electrochemical properties of a battery with the straightforward carbon layer modification of a PP separator were enhanced.
Besides carbon-coated separators, special functional polymer-coated separators can also significantly improve the performance of a battery. Althues and his co-workers114e prepared a Nafion-coated polypropylene separator as a cation-selective membrane. The thickness of the coated thin film on a porous polypropylene backbone was only about 1–5 μm, which improved the current density. The coated film suppressed the PS shuttle without lowering the ionic conductivity of the separator.
Furthermore, the membrane itself had an ion-selective barrier that was impermeable for PS but permeable for lithium ions, to suppress the shuttle effect. The charge efficiency of the battery after 10 cycles increased from about 70% to nearly 90% at a rate of 0.05C. Zhou et al.114f designed a flexible composite material including sulfur-graphene-polypropylene separator and intergrated electrode for Li-S batteries. The internal graphene can be regared as a current collector without an additional metal for Li–S batteries as well. The separator offered a continuous electron transport pathway and served as an excellent barrier to retard polysulfide diffusion, and an effective reservoir for dissolved PS. Furthermore, the lightweight, mechanically robust and flexible structure gave the separator high mechanical strength, excellent flexibility, high wetting ability, and low interfacial contact resistance because of the graphene conductive layer. This separator design could be applied in the future in flexible Li–S battery systems. Wen and his co-workers114g prepared a thin coating layer composed of a mixture of electronically conductive carbon and lithium-ion conductive inorganic solid electrolyte for the Celgard separator. The highly electronically conductive carbon helped to localize the PS on the cathode side and acted as an upper current collector for further utilization of the sulfur. At the same time, the highly ionic conductor possibly catalyzed the conversion of PS and enhanced the active material utilization of the cathode. A battery with this separator could obtain an initial discharge capacity of 1247 mA h g−1 and a reversible capacity of 830 mA h g−1 after 150 extended cycles at a rate of 0.5C.
6.2 New novel battery separators
In recent years, some other novel separators, such as graphene oxide membrane, PEO membrane, PVDF membrane, modified polyolefin separators, and some blended polymer membranes, have been researched. Zhang and his co-workers115 prepared an ultrathin permselective GO membrane. In the separator, the electronegative oxygen atoms modified GO into a polar plane, and the carboxyl groups acted as the ion-hopping sites of positively charged species (Li+) and rejected the transportation of negatively charged species (Sn2−) due to electrostatic interactions. Both factors allowed the highly tunable functional membrane to greatly reduce the diffusion of PS and suppress its migration to the Li anode. The result showed that the battery afforded an improved coulombic efficiency from 67%–75% to over 95%–98% at 0.1C, and the cyclic capacity decay rate was also reduced from 0.49 to 0.23 per cycle. Zhang and his co-workers116a prepared an ion-selective membrane with sulfonate-terminated perfluoroalkyl ether groups. The ionic separators were connected by pores or channels, which were several nanometers in size. These SO3− group-coated channels allowed the ion hopping of positively charged species (Li+) but rejected the hopping of negative ions, i.e. polysulfide anions (Sn2−), due to coulombic interactions. The membrane blocked the sulfur species in the cathode side; moreover, the PS “shuttle effect” in this cell architecture was almost eliminated. Agostini et al.116b produced a PS-doped PEO-based gel membrane. The polymer membrane, with high ionic conductivity (10−3–10−4 S cm−1), was doped with various PS compositions to inhibit PS from dissolving. As the dissolution of active material could be mitigated due to the buffer action ensured by adding PS to the polymer electrolyte, coupled with a lithium sulfur-C nanostructured alloy anode for the battery, the electrochemical performance was obviously improved, with a stable capacity of 1500 mA h g−1 at 0.05C and 500 mA h g−1 at 0.2C. Li et al.116c applied six-membered cyclic sodium trimetaphosphate and chelating metal cations as additive agents in a PVDF-based gel polymer electrolyte membrane. The PVDF has many advantages, such as stable chemical properties, good mechanical performance and quick gelatinization with electrolyte-forming film. Meanwhile, the trimetaphosphate molecule in PVDF has a stable structure, with strong electronegativity, and a high electron-cloud density. And the structure gave the trimetaphosphate molecule the ability to chelate metal cations and reject anions, which promoted electrolyte salt dissociation. All of these factors together improved the electrochemical performance of the battery, with a high ionic conductivity of 2–4 mS cm−1 between 17 and 76 °C. Furthermore, some blend polymer membranes emerged during the research on battery separators. Zhang and his co-workers116d–f recently synthesized three different blended polymer membranes, PVDF-HFP/poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) polymer matrix, PVDF-HFP/PMMA/SiO2, and PVDF-HFP/PMMA/montmorillonite nanoclay (MMT) membranes as battery separators. The electrochemical performances of the three separators were all improved compared to the pristine membrane. The polymer matrix crystallinity of the first separator was rather low, which enhanced the ionic conductivity of the polymer electrolyte. And it was found that the polymer matrix had a porous structure, which acted as a physical barrier between the cathode and anode, suppressing the shuttle effect. Due to the SiO2 and MMT additives in the first group of separators, the electrolyte absorption, the size stability and the machinery strength of the battery were enhanced.
With the development of electrospinning technology, electrospun mats/membranes increasingly found application as battery separators. Rao et al.117a prepared a GPE from an electrospun PAN/PMMA membrane. Because the electrospun membrane can provide excellent porosity and a network-like structure which was extremely important for the GPE formation and the enhanced conducitivity, a gel polymer electroyte with outatanding thermostability and high electrolyte absorption and preserving ability was obtained for the Li–S battery. Zhang and his co-workers117b prepared a highly porous polyacrylonitrile/graphene oxide membrane separator, using electrospinning technology, for an Li–S battery. The structure of the membrane gave the nanofiber separator excellent electrolyte wettability. At the same time, chemical forces existed within the composition of the membrane material, such as relatively high-energy binding between –CN and Li2 S/PS and electrostatic interactions between GO and negatively charged species (Sn2−). The chemical forces suppressed the diffusion of PS. A battery with this separator had a high specific capacity, an excellent rate capability, and an enhanced anti-self-discharge capability.
A number of research groups have focused on the development of separators using novel, abundant and renewable resources. Jin et al.117c used a novel perfluorinated ionomer electrolyte with lithium sulfonyl dicyanomethide functional groups as the separator of a battery. And Celgard, P (VDF-HFP), Li-Nafion, and lithium perfluorinated sulfonyl dicyanomethide (Li-PFSD) separators are compared in Table 3. Table 3 shows the properties of Celgard, P (VDF-HFP), Li-Nafion and Li-PFSD membranes in the liquid electrolyte. It was found that the order of the elemental S concentration in the anode reservoir was: Li-Nafion > Li-PFSD > P (VDF-HFP) > Celgard, which showed that the ionomer membrane in the battery was lower than that observed in the anode reservoir, using the Celgard membrane along with the discharging process. This also meant that PS could not easily pass through the ionomer membrane. Furthermore, the battery with the Li-PFSD ionomer electrolyte attained 71.5% retention of its initial specific capacity after 100 cycles, which was the best cycle performance of all the prepared separators.
Table 3 Properties of Celgard, Li-Nafion, and Li-PFSD membranes in the liquid electrolyte117c




Membranes
SD (%)

s (S cm−1)

t
Li
+





SD: swelling degree; s: ionic conductivity; tLi+: Li-ion transference number.




Celgard
82.5 ± 0.4
7.6 ± 0.15 × 10−4
0.298 ± 0.007


P(VDF-HFP)
90.3 ± 0.5
2.6 ± 0.04 × 10−4
0.310 ± 0.007


Li-Nafion
24.6 ± 0.2
2.1 ± 0.04 × 10−5
0.986 ± 0.012


Li-PFSD
31.7 ± 0.2
1.2 ± 0.02 × 10−4
0.958 ± 0.011




Li et al.118 fabricated membranes with size-selective and ion-selective transport using polymers with intrinsic microporosity (PIMs). Through molecular dynamics simulations of the solvated structures of LiTFSI,119 it was found that the pore size of the PIM-1 membrane (0.8 nm) was dramatically smaller than that of Celgard® separators (17 nm). As a result, the battery performance was significantly improved, even in the absence of LiNO3 additives, sustaining 50 Wh L−1 at the end of 50 cycles. Although many studies have focused on separators, they still have drawbacks, mainly associated with the materials and strict environmental requirements. Huge interest in some inorganic high-temperature-resistant membranes has been stimulated by their extraordinary intrinsic properties, such as those of a sustainable, heat-resistant and flame-retardant cellulose-based composite nonwoven120 ceramic-based separator for secondary batteries,121 so this provides some guidance for the development of high-temperature-resistant separators in the future, taking safety into consideration.
Recently, Shaibani et al.122a fabricated a high-flux graphene oxide membrane coated directly onto the sulfur cathode by a blade-coating technique. Firstly, the GO membrane could increase the conductivity of the electrode; secondly, the permselective GO membrane on the sulfur cathode was in direct contact with an electrically conducting carbon-coated separator to form a cathodic “subcell” for capturing and reducing PS species; finally, the extremely ordered structure of the thin (∼0.75 μm) membrane and its inherent surface could suppress the majority of PS in the cathode. An electrode capacity of 835 mA h gelectrode−1 after 100 cycles at 0.5C with a high sulfur content of 80% could be achieved. Zhou and his coworkers122b prepared a metal–organic framework (MOF)-based battery separator for an Li–S cell. The separator selectively sieved Li+ ions but significantly suppressed the polysulfide “shuttle effect” and reduced the contact resistance and charge-transfer resistance due to the MOF. A low capacity decay rate (0.019% per cycle over 1500 cycles) and almost no capacity fading after the initial 100 cycles could be obtained for the battery.
We have reported the fabrication of an electrospun poly(vinylidene-fluoride)/polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) nanofiber membrane,123a electrospun SiO2/poly-m-phenyleneisophthalamide(PMIA) nanofiber membrane, electrospun pro liquid type membrane of F-co-doped PMIA, polyvinylidene fluoride tree-like nanofiber membrane via one-step electrospinning (Fig. 13(a)),123b activated carbon nanofiber,123c,d and silicon carbide porous nanofiber membrane,123e and membranes modified by a solution blowing method for various batteries.123f–iFig. 13(b) shows the synthesis of battery separators by electrospinning and electro-blown spinning. It is considered that the porous nanofiber membrane with an excellent pore structure and gelation characteristics will provide a new perspective for the separator development of Li–S batteries.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagrams illustrating the electrospinning process, possible mechanism for the formation of tree-like nanofibers and Typical FE-SEM image of PVDF/tetrabutyl ammonium chloride (TBAC) tree-like nanofibers and the inset is the optical image of tree branches123b Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (b) Synthesis process of batteries separators by electrostatic spinning and electro-blown spinning. 
7. Anodes of lithium–sulfur batteries
The anode is also a vital constituent of Li–S batteries. If the anode is unstable, the cycle stability of the battery will be negatively affected with fast capacity fading. The theoretical capacity of metallic lithium as the anode is about 3860 mA h g−1, giving the battery a high energy density. But Han et al. found that cells with the highest sulfur loading of 99.5% showed fast capacity fading, in accordance with the corrosion behavior. So, some useful methods need to be considered to protect the lithium anode in Li–S batteries.124
7.1 The protective layer for anodes
The main issues that need to be overcome to make a battery feasible are the formation of a passivating layer and corrosion associated with dendrite formation, which can damage the structure of the lithium cathode during the charge–discharge of batteries, or even hamper the safety of rechargeable batteries based on metallic lithium. Zhang et al.125a and Kim et al.125b used amorphous carbon by a magnetron sputtering method, and multilayer graphene by coating on the surface of metallic lithium, respectively. Because the compact carbon film and graphene coating inhibited the growth of dendritic lithium in the charge–discharge process, the electrochemical performances of batteries with both of these novel coatings were significantly improved. The coulomb efficiency of the former was maintained above 80%, while the coulomb efficiency of the pure Li electrode was reduced to 40% after 50 cycles. The electrochemical performance of the latter was also obviously improved, with 81.0% capacity retention after 200 cycles. But the thick coating led to a larger impedance for Li+ delivery. So, a moderate coating thickness was very important in the sputtering process. Xiong and his coworkers126a,b applied the additives LiNO3 and LiBOB in electrolyte solution to modify the electrode/electrolyte interfaces in lithium batteries. A smooth and compact surface film was formed on lithium metal, which effectively prevented the penetration of solvents and PS into the lithium anode. This maintained the stability of the lithium anode and improved the cycle life of Li–S batteries. A fluorinated ether electrolyte with neither cathode confinement nor additives was also beneficial for both the efficient use of electrolytes and the safe operation of the battery. An SEI layer with a hierarchical chemical composition of LiF and sulfate/sulfite/sulfide was identified on lithium anodes, which suppressed parasitic reactions and helped to preserve the anode quality.127
Soon afterwards, some research groups focused on researching a protective layer for the lithium anode. Wen and his co-workers128 prepared a conductive polymer layer on the surface of the anode as a protective layer. With the protection of the conductive polymer layer, a stable and less resistive SEI was formed between the ether-based electrolyte and the Li anode. The obtained battery not only effectively suppressed corrosion between the lithium anode and lithium PS, but also inhibited the growth of Li dendrites. The discharge capacity of the battery remained at 815 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 0.5C, with an average coulombic efficiency of 91.3%. They also prepared an Li3N protective layer on the surface of an Li anode by an in situ method to suppress the “shuttle effect” on the basis of anode protection.129 The battery discharge capacity with the Li3N protective layer was retained at 773 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles. Through introducing lanthanum nitrate into the electrolyte, a composite passivation film of lanthanum/lithium sulfides was formed to protect the metallic lithium anode. The cycle stability of the cell was improved by introducing lanthanum nitrate into the electrolyte.130 Lee131 and Zheng132 produced a protective layer by a UV cured polymerization method, stacking a plasticized polymer electrolyte based on P (VdF-co-HFP), and a magnetron sputtering method of Pt, respectively. The protective layers reduced the growth of the SEI layer, suppressed the reaction between PS and the anode, and inhibited overcharging of the battery. Although the above methods of coating or forming protective layers have some advantages, they may also simultaneously suppress the delivery of Li+. Sulfur atoms covalently bond to graphene and efficiently bridge the few layers between MoS2 and graphene.133 An MoS2/sulfur/graphene composite had an excellent Li+ storage capacity and excellent cycling stability due to the strong chemical force, making the anode highly robust, and greatly improving the safety of the battery. Guo and his co-workers prepared a 3D Cu foil current collector with a submicron skeleton and a highly electroactive surface area to protect the Li anode.134a The Li grew on the submicron-sized Cu skeleton and filled the pores of the 3D current collector. The growth of Li dendrites was effectively suppressed and the lifespan of the Li-metal anodes was enhanced. Recently, Zhang and his co-workers134b prepared conductive nanostructured lithium metal anode scaffolds, employing an unstacked graphene “drum” and a dual-salt electrolyte, which could render low local current density to suppress lithium dendrite growth for Li–S batteries. The graphene framework had an ultrahigh specific surface area, which provided an ultralow local current density that prevented the growth of lithium dendrites. Meanwhile, a compact stable solid electrolyte interphase layer, induced by a dual-salt electrolyte, protected the deposited lithium layers.
Some researchers also produced composite materials as anodes. At least three different composite materials have been reported. For example, Brückner et al.135a and Yan et al.135b both synthesized ternary silicon–carbon–lithium as anodes. Because the Si/C microsphere anodes preserved sufficient lithium ions and transported them to the S/C cathode during discharge of the battery, the former as-assembled battery delivered a specific capacity of up to 1470 mA h g−1 after more than 1000 cycles and the latter also gained a high specific capacity of 1457 mA h g−1 (based on the sulfur cathode) at 0.1C. Some pre-lithiated anodes will be introduced in the next section.
7.2 Pre-lithiated anode and other anodes
Focusing on the safety aspects of Li metal anodes, Hagen et al.136a used pre-lithiated Si to replace Li metal as the anode. A battery with the pre-lithiated Si anode showed a large gravimetric capacity, a high areal capacity, extraordinary mechanical stability, and a long cycle life. A high coulomb efficiency of up to 99.8% with carbonate-based electrolytes was obtained after SEI creation. Zhang and his co-workers136b prepared a distinctive graphene framework structure, which was coated by an in situ formed SEI, with Li depositing in the pores as the anode. The unblocked ion pathways and high electron conductivity of the frameworks in the modified metal anode led to the rapid transfer of Li ions through the SEI and provided the anode framework with an ion conductivity of 7.81 × 10−2 mS cm−1. The stable and efficient Li deposition was still maintained after 2000 cycles. The graphene-modified Li anode, with an SEI induced by the PS-containing electrolyte, improved the Coulombic efficiency to ∼97% even after more than 100 cycles. In order to promote the use of Li–S batteries, a satisfactory protective layer between the lithium metal and the electrolyte is an important factor, which needs to be controlled.
Another route of the research on anodes is using Li2S as the cathode and applying lithium ion-embedded materials, such as carbon, Si-based, or Sn-based material as the anode in Li–S batteries. Yang et al.137a produced a new nanostructured Li2S/silicon rechargeable battery with high specific energy. The cathode of the battery was a composite material with Li2S and CMK-3, and its anode was silicon nanowires. Wang and his co-workers employed an Li–B alloy anode. The Li–B alloy had a unique structure with abundant free Li embedded in a stable Li7B6 loofah sponge-like framework in the anode, which helped to eliminate the orientational crystallization of free lithium, reduce the effective current density, promote the formation of an SEI layer and protect bulk alloy materials from deformation, volume expansion or collapse when the battery was cycling.137b The cycle performance and security were greatly enhanced due to the above factors.
Meanwhile, novel structural designs for anodes have also attracted widespread attention. Zhang and his co-workers prepared a novel 3D nanostructured anode with metallic Li contained in the fibrous Li7B6 matrix to prevent dendrite growth, as shown in Fig. 14(a).138 The nanostructured anode had a large specific area, which reduced the current density to suppress the dendrite growth. The nanostructured anode not only decreased the growth velocity of Li deposits, but also limited the final size of deposited Li on the nanostructured matrix, which led to a dendrite-free morphology. Furthermore, the 3D fibrous structure of Li7B6 provided free space to accommodate electrolyte and to reduce the concentration gradient of Li ions, and improved the interface stability and transfer properties.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustrations of Li dendrite growth on the plate Li metal and Li deposits on nano-structure anode with metallic Li contained in the fibrous Li7B6 matrix and the related performances138 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Related performance tests of Si/SiOx nanosphere materials139 Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons. 
The method of prelithiating the anode is also useful for lithium batteries. Sun and his co-workers applied a highly reversible dual-type sulfur cathode (solid sulfur electrode and PS catholyte) and a lithiated Si/SiOx nanosphere anode. Fig. 14(b) shows the properties of Si–SiOx nanosphere materials prepared by pyrolysis of hydrogen silsesquioxane nanospheres obtained by a sol–gel reaction of triethoxysilane. Fig. 14(b) shows that a well-defined spherical morphology with a size of about 200 nm, mainly consisting of amorphous nonstoichiometric silicon oxide (SiOx), was formed. The surface of the Si/SiOx nanospheres showed crystals of about 5 nm in size. Furthermore, the fully lithiated Si/SiOx nanospheres were in direct contact with the lithium metal foil in the electrolyte, so these could be regarded as the lithium source in a lithiated Si–SiOx/S full cell. The amorphous SiOx matrix phase (∼200 nm), together with the nanoscale Si (∼5 nm), accommodated the huge volume changes of silicon occurring during lithium alloying and dealloying. A cell adopting this couple showed a capacity of 750 mA h g−1 at a 1C rate and maintained more than 85% of its initial capacity after 500 cycles.139
In general, the pre-lithiated anode or other novel anode is also a feasible way to promote the development of battery commercialization. Besides the pre-lithiated anode method for the safe usage of a lithium anode with negligible Li dendrite formation, electrolyte additives are also able to meet the demand. Xu and his co-workers used a dual-salt electrolyte of lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl) imide (LiTFSI) and lithium bis(oxalato) borate (LiBOB) in a carbonate solvent mixture.140 A good film of the electrolyte on the Li metal anode could be formed and the conductivity of the sulfur-rich interphase layer was high due to the LiTFSI–LiBOB dual-salt electrolyte. The battery obtained a high discharge capacity and capacity retention.
A novel SiO2 hollow nanosphere-based composite solid electrolyte (SiSE) was prepared for Li metal batteries by Kang and his co-workers.141a This hierarchical electrolyte was fabricated by in situ polymerizing the tripropylene gycol diacrylate (TPGDA) monomer in the presence of liquid electrolyte, which was absorbed in an SiO2 hollow nanosphere layer. The SiO2 layer could provide high room-temperature ionic conductivity and large liquid electrolyte uptake of SiO2 hollow nanospheres. At the same time, the stable electrolyte and electrode interface and remarkable suppression of Li dendrite growth by the SiSE greatly reduces the risk of electrolyte leakage. Safe and effective operation of the protective Li anode could be applied in an Li–S battery. Zhang and his co-workers141b used lithium bistrifluoromethanesulfonimide (LiTFSI)-based and lithium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (LiFSI)-based electrolytes for Li–S batteries. The stability of Li metal using the LiTFSI was higher than that of LiFSI. The fundamental difference was derived from the different bond strengths in the salt anions and PS. The lithium metal anode tended to react with PS to form lithium sulfide (LiSx) in the LiTFSI-based electrolyte of the battery. This was more reversible than the LiSOx formed in the LiFSI-based electrolyte. It could be concluded that anion selection in an electrolyte additive is one of the key parameters for the safe use of lithium anodes with negligible Li dendrite formation. Gao and his co-workers141c used lanthanum nitrate as an electrolyte additive to stabilize the surface morphology of lithium anodes for Li–S batteries. A composite passivation film of lanthanum/lithium sulfides was formed on the surface of the metallic lithium anode, which lowered the reducibility of metallic lithium and the electrochemical dissolution/deposition reaction on lithium anode. Therefore, a stable surface morphology for the metallic Li anode in the battery could be obtained. Some problems associated with the solid electrolyte interphase and electrolyte additive for the protection of the lithium anode still need to be addressed, such as the electrolyte content and the temperature affecting the degree of SEI formation, imperfect solubility between the electrolyte and its additive, and unsatisfactory ionic conductivity affected by additives, hence further research needs to be carried out for better protection of the lithium anode.
Recently, Krause et al.141d prepared a pre-lithiated Si nanowires (SiNWs)/3D carbon mesh composite as the anode for an Li–S battery. At first, Si and its SEI exhibited lower reactivity compared to Li metal, so the lower self-reduction of polysulfides in the (SiNWs)/3D carbon electrode resulted in reduced degradation; secondly, dense growth was guaranteed by developing a novel versatile gold ‘Pechini’ precursor, giving homogenous and very dense seed-particle coverage. Finally, the anode could overcome battery failure because of typical Li dendrite formation resulting from the state-of-the-art metallic Li anode. A high specific capacity of 1.6 mA h cm−2 (714 mA h gsulfur−1) after 200 cycles and excellent capacity retention of 80% after 150 cycles (capacity loss lower than 0.4% per cycle) could be obtained. Zhou et al. prepared a polymer/ceramic/polymer sandwich electrolyte (PCPSE) to plate a dendrite-free lithium anode for an Li–S battery.141e This structure could synergistically combine the effects of the ceramic and polymer. In the sandwich architecture, the double-layer electric field at the Li/polymer interface was reduced because of the blocked salt anion transfer. The polymer layer adhered to/wetted the lithium metal surface and homogenized the Li-ion flux at the interface. A notably high Coulombic efficiency of 99.8%–100% over 640 cycles could be obtained.
8. Collectors
The collector is also an important part of Li–S batteries. Primarily, it is regarded as the active material carrier of the cathode, and collects electrons, transferring them to the active material through the external circuit. Moreover, the collector can easily contact and react with the electrolyte solution. So, the electrolyte stability and the compatibility of the collectors can also affect the performance of a battery.142a When the battery is overcharged, a variety of complex side effects will occur, such as the decomposition of the electrolyte, structural destruction, transformation of the electrode material, and the electrochemical corrosion of the metal collector. When the collector is corroded or dissolved, the contact between the active substance of the electrode and the collector will be reduced, which can cause the active material to fall off, the voltage of formation to be delayed, and the resistance to increase. Furthermore, the metal ions will pollute the electrolyte solution, and the presence of impurity ions will reduce the reactivity of the ions. All of these factors will cause the performance of the battery to drop sharply. Collectors are mainly composed of aluminum foil, stainless steel mesh, foam nickel, or copper foil. But the performances of the collectors can be improved to some extent to adapt them to high-performance Li–S batteries. Previously, some researchers only paid attention to the micro-network substrate and microporous current collector for various rechargeable battery systems.142b,c
In terms of Li–S batteries, the collector not only needs to have excellent conductivity, but also needs a large space to store the active material mixtures. The design of the collector is vital for improving the electrochemical performance and the stability of the cathode. The novel structure of collectors has also attracted huge attention. A honeycomb-patterned Al current collector was prepared and successfully sealed using triple-layered graphene. Graphene layers on the sulfur cathode successfully confined the dissolved PS within it. This significantly enhanced the electrochemical properties, including the cycle retention and Coulombic efficiency.143
Sakai and his co-workers144a prepared a foam-type three-dimensional current collector. The 3D substrate had a highly flexible structure with appropriate thickness, porosity, and pore size. Furthermore, the collector also improved the power output of the positive electrodes of lithium ion batteries due to the high electric potential of the cell. They also prepared a three-dimensional porous current collector. They found that the collector improved the power output properties in an electric double-layer capacitor, based on a pitch-based activated carbon. The 3D porous current collector produced a low cell internal resistance, which maintained a high discharge capacity at a high current density during discharging. The electrodes were able to withstand thousands of cycles as a result of applying the 3D porous current collector.144b Manthiram and his co-workers145a employed porous current collectors. Because 3D sulfur–nickel foam cathodes had porous, electrically conductive Ni foam substrates as the bifunctional collectors, the porous architecture of the Ni foam could accommodate the volume change of the active material and trap PS in the cathode region. This effectively reduced the loss of active material and capacity. In addition, it also provided an excellent internal electron transport network by ensuring intimate contact between the active material and Ni foam. A low internal impedance and improved capacity retention rate were obtained. And the self-discharge of the battery was also reduced. A low-cost, simply produced, porous carbon current collector was also researched by Manthiram's group.145b A high sulfur loading of 2.3 mg cm−2 was achieved by a simple one-step paste absorption method. Because the compacted contact between the elemental sulfur and the embedded conductive matrix allowed a high active material loading, high electrolyte absorptivity, and efficient retention of soluble PS, the discharge capacities of the cells were 1080, 961, and 767 mA h g−1 at, 0.1C, 0.2C, and 0.5C rates, respectively, for over 80 cycles. They also145c applied electrically conductive nano-cellular carbon plates as current collectors. Because the nano-cellular carbon plate had a porous network structure, it could improve the conductivity of the cathode, accommodate more active material and retain more polysulfides in the cathode region during the charge–discharge process. Fig. 15(A) illustrates the synthesis process for the Ni foam matrix and the fabrication of the nano-cellular carbon collector.
 Fig. 15  (A) Flowcharts showing the porous cathode preparation process: (a) image of the NC current collector, (b) schematic model of the NC current collector, (c) flowchart of step 1, (d) flowchart of step 2, (e) image of the S–NC cathode, and (f) schematic model of the S–NC cathode145c Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (B) Left: surface area effects on electrochemical properties, Right: schematic representation of conventional carbon cathode based Li/S battery configuration and novel metal/PS/metal battery configuration with majority of PS shuttling mechanism confined on the surface of three dimensional current collectors149a Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
He and his co-workers146 prepared a graphene-coated plastic polyethylene terephthalate (PET) film as a current collector. The PET film had a good balance of properties, which allowed larger operating windows for temperature and tension controls, outstanding high-tension conversion processes, excellent durability, and enhanced self-extinguishing flammability, which greatly improved the performance of the Li–S battery. And it featured low cost and weight, reduced metal consumption, and excellent chemical stability; the prepared current collector is thus acceptable in practical applications. The energy density of the battery with the collector was improved due to the density of G-PET film (1.37 g cm−3), which was much less than one sixth of that of copper (8.94 g cm−3). The energy density of the battery was obtained as 452 Wh kg−1. Furthermore, an average capacity degradation rate of 0.11% per cycle and 0.8% self-discharge after 30 days storage at 30 °C were obtained.
Some other carbon-based materials also attracted wide interest, such as a vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (VACNTs) current collector,147a a large porous carbon current collector (PCCC),145b and graphene-coated polyethylene terephthalate (G-PET) film.147b The batteries with these collectors all exhibited a low weight, and high energy density and capacity retention. Furthermore, the 3D structures of these materials provided higher interfacial interaction, compared with the 2D collectors. And the abundant pores conferred many advantages: (i) the current collectors helped to store the active material with a higher sulfur content (80%) than our previous porous cathode systems; (ii) the current collectors made more intimate contact between the insulating sulfur and the wrapping carbon nanotube framework or carbon nano-particles; (iii) the current collectors decreased the charge-transfer resistance and gained excellent electrolyte absorptivity. So they improved the discharge capacity as well as the cyclability, with specific capacities of up to about 700 mA h g−1 at an ultra-high current density of 3.3 A g−1, including an average capacity of about 400 mA h g−1 and stable performance for over 150 cycles; and 1080 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.1C for over 50 cycles. Zhang et al.148a applied three-dimensional carbon fiber as a current collector. Because the resultant carbon fiber current collector had a three-dimensional network structure, which provided an effective electron conduction path and minimized the loss of electrical contact within the deposited cathode material during cycling, it was found that the battery delivered a high initial capacity and reversible discharge capacity, compared to the Ni foam counterpart, with a highly reversible discharge capacity of 397 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at 0.5C. Chen and his coworker prepared 3D current collectors, including Ni foam and carbon fiber cloth. The carbon fiber had a high specific surface area of 42.29 m2 g−1, with a large pore volume of 0.35 cm3 g−1. The collector further improved the conductivity, compared to the pristine three-dimensional carbon fiber. A high initial capacity of 1278 mA h g−1 was obtained and a high discharge capacity was maintained at 810 mA h g−1 after 40 cycles.148b Zhang and his co-workers148c prepared three-dimensional aluminum foam-carbon nanotube scaffolds as a collector. The structure provided long- and short-range electron pathways and provided enough space for a high sulfur loading of 12.5 mg cm−2. Furthermore, the combination of 3D long-range current collectors and a short-range CNT conductive scaffold provided an effective route to make full use of the active materials. A high initial discharge capacity of 6.02 mA h cm−2 was obtained for an electrode with an improved sulfur loading of 7.0 mg cm−2.
Recently, Babu et al.149a designed a novel structure of metallic current collectors as a cathode by using an electrocatalysis method. Fig. 15(B) shows the SEM images of different collectors for 2D planar Ni thin film, 3D Ni deposited on the roughened stainless steel substrate, and commercially available Ni foam in the Li–S battery. As seen in Fig. 15(B), the 3D Ni deposited on the roughened stainless steel substrate had the highest active surface area for the electrode, due to its compacted microporous structure, and the collector adsorbed intermediate PS due to its hydrophilic nature and the “metal/polysulfides/metal” battery configuration. Furthermore, the porous structure provided fast electron transfer and hosted the insulating solid precipitates at the end of each discharge cycle, and the polarization was reduced due to the coated metal. All of these factors led to an increase in the specific capacity of the battery. An enhancement in the capacity of up to 900 mA h g−1 was realized with the 3D Ni deposited on the roughened stainless steel collector, compared to 2D planar Ni current collectors (900 mA h g−1). Recently, Zhang and his co-workers149b fabricated a 3D carbonaceous macroporous current collector with high sulfur-loading for an Li–S battery. The novel macroporous structure of the collector improved the cycling stability of the battery and inhibited electrochemical corrosion and passivation. At the same time, Zielke et al.149c researched the degradation of Li–S battery electrodes on 3D current collectors through X-ray Phase Contrast Tomography. A large decrease in sulfur loading after the first cycle was found, and the three-dimensional structure facilitated sulfur nucleation/growth during battery charging and provided a better contact with the conductive network in the battery cathode. At the same time, the electrode morphology changed drastically after the first cycle and slowly reached an equilibrium condition with continued cycling. Above all, the degradation mechanisms and changes in electrode morphology upon cycling provided useful guidance with respect to high-performance batteries. Potentially, the electrocatalyst idea and the 3D porous structure concept for collectors in the emerging Li–S batteries can open new routes to developing efficient energy storage technologies.
9. Battery structure design and modification of lithium–sulfur batteries
The overall performances of Li–S batteries fundamentally depend on the features of the cathode, binder, separator, electrolyte, anode, and collector. Meanwhile, the structure of the electrodes also has a significant influence on the electrochemical properties of the battery. Because the reaction system of the battery is different from that of traditional secondary lithium batteries, the common structure and assembly process of traditional secondary lithium batteries do not adapt to the new battery systems. In addition to structural design and modification by various chemical or physical methods, building a new battery structure is also attractive for research and exploration.
9.1 The interlayers of lithium–sulfur batteries
Because some separators are perfect permeable membranes in Li–S batteries, these function well with convenient diffusion of lithium ions and the prevention of short circuits inside batteries. However, some PS still moves from the cathode to the anode. To tackle this problem, some researchers inserted interlayers as inhibitors for PS. These not only prevent and localize the migration of the dissolved PS, but also store the active material and avoid sedimentation of the surface of the battery electrode, which leads to electrode passivation and an increase in impedance.
To date, interlayers are mainly divided into two kinds: carbon-based and non-carbon-based. Manthiram and his co-workers utilized a single-wall carbon nanotube-modulated separator/interlayer system in an Li–S battery by a vacuum-filtration method. The lightweight design of the separator/interlayer system ensured that a high active-material content (78 wt% sulfur) and increased sulfur loading (up to 6.3 mg cm−2) were achieved. At the same time, the long-range, electrically conductive single-wall carbon nanotube-modulated network, providing electron pathways and electrolyte channels, reduced the PS migration and improved the electrochemical utilization of the active materials. Furthermore, a high surface area of 527 m2 g−1, with a total pore volume of up to 1.30 cm3 g−1, and an average pore size of 9.84 nm, provided enough space for a high sulfur loading, which facilitated fast charge transfer and good immobilization for PS ions. The cell with the SWCNT-modulated separator exhibited a high discharge capacity of 1132 mA h g−1, with a low-capacity fade rate of 0.18% per cycle after 300 cycles. Thus, the SWCNT-modulated separator facilitated the use of cells with high-loading sulfur cathodes at low cost.150a Su et al.150b inserted an MWCNT interlayer between the cathode and separator. Fig. 16 shows a schematic illustration of this design of the Li–S cell configuration. The carbon nanotubes acted as a matrix to effectively capture and retain the PS species by electrochemical deposition at the end of charge–discharge and worked as secondary redox reaction sites. But the synthesis process was complicated. So, some novel and simple methods appeared soon afterwards.
 Fig. 16  A schematic cell configuration of rechargeable Li–S batteries: (a) traditional configuration with severe “shuttle effect” and Li2S poison problems and (b) New configuration with the MWCNT interlayer150b Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Pan et al.150c prepared a hydrothermally treated sandwiched graphite film as interlayers for an Li–S battery. The graphite film significantly retained the active material by suppressing the PS shuttling problem and provided extra reaction sites for sulfur species. Improved electrochemical performances of the battery were obtained. Kim and his co-workers prepared porous graphene oxide/carbon nanotube hybrid films by vacuum filtration of a hybrid dispersion as an interlayer for an Li–S battery.150d The porous structure improved ion transportation and electrolyte penetration, and the carbon nanotubes provided convenient channels for electron/ion transfer. Meanwhile, the oxygenated functional groups in graphene oxide could entrap active materials and prevent the shuttle of PS. An excellent reversible capacity of 671 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles, with a low degradation rate of 0.33 mA h g−1 or 0.043% per cycle at 0.2C could be obtained. Lai and his co-workers151 prepared a nitrogen and sulfur-co-doped (N, S-co-doped) sponge-like graphene interlayer for the battery. The porous sponge-like nanoporous structure was able to optimally accommodate the electrolyte and the volume change of the cathode. The superconductivity of rGO improved the sulfur utilization and rate capability of the sulfur cathode, and offered more active sites for faster electron transfer. Furthermore, the carbon surface was enriched in oxygen, nitrogen, and sulfur by doping, and the N and S co-doping also significantly enhanced the binding of lithium PS. An energy density of 418.5 Wh Kg−1 was achieved at a power density of 4.55 kW kg−1. Zhang et al.152a Balach et al.152b and Su et al.152c synthesized porous, mesoporous, and microporous carbon paper as an interlayer by simple pyrolysis of filter paper, respectively. The conductive interlayer effectively reduced interfacial resistance and provided a large number of reaction sites, leading to rapid electrochemical reactions in these batteries. For cyclability at a rate of 1C, the mesoporous and microporous carbon paper as interlayers were better than porous carbon paper. Moreover, the effect of thickness on the interception ability and stable cyclability was analyzed by Chung et al.153 If the interlayers were too thick, lithium-ion transport was unfavorable, and the weight was also high. So a suitable thickness needs to be determined. To further improve the capacity retention after a large number of cycles, Wang et al.154 applied carbon nanofiber with additive Fe3C as interlayers. The meso-microporous carbon nanofiber interlayer, with a high surface area, not only reduced the electrochemical resistance but also localized and trapped the migrating PS. Thereby, an improved discharge capacity as well as cyclability, with a high initial discharge capacity of 1549 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.2C, was obtained. Manthiram and his co-workers155 prepared an activated carbon nanofiber (ACNF) filter layer with a high strength-to-weight ratio for an Li–S battery. The porous, conductive ACNF network provided access to the electrons and Li+ ions to reactivate the immobilized active material upon cycling for subsequent reutilization. The filter layer had an abundance of micropores with small micropore sizes, which intercepted and trapped migrating PS. The cell with the interlayer exhibited a high discharge capacity of 1270 mA h g−1, with a low-capacity fade rate of 0.13% per cycle after 200 cycles at 0.2C.
Huang et al.156 synthesized a 3D carbonized ultralight bacterial cellulose (CBC) interlayer with an interconnected nanofibrous structure. This interlayer not only provided a conductive framework to adsorb migrating PS, but also acted as a collector for sulfur. The battery exhibited an initial capacity of 976 mA h g−1 and finally stabilized at around 620 mA h g−1 over 300 cycles. Some inorganic doped/modified interlayers have also attracted the interest of scholars due to the synergistic reaction of the inorganic materials in suppressing the “shuttle effect” of PS. Huang et al.157 produced an interlayer between a separator and a sulfur cathode, using a mixture of polymer and Fe precursors, by a facile and simple one-pot electrospinning method. Because the nanofiber web had a large number of macropores and high electrical conductivity, it facilitated ion transport and electrolyte penetration, and enhanced electron/ion transfer. At the same time, it was demonstrated that the highly porous web structure of CNFs containing Fe3C nanoparticles (Fe3C/CNFs) effectively immobilized active materials, and that the functional groups in Fe3C could entrap soluble PS by strong interatomic attraction. Table 4 shows a comparison of the electrochemical performances of different interlayers of batteries. This will help to develop better designs for the interlayers of batteries. Huang and his co-workers158 prepared an integrated, selective lightweight TiO2/graphene interlayer. The porous graphene afforded an additional electrically conductive network, and physically trapped sulfur and PS. And the mesoporous TiO2 used in the coating layers promoted the interaction between TiO2 and sulfur due to an electrostatic attraction (S–Ti–O), which improved the surface adsorption of PS on the TiO2. Furthermore, the graphene/TiO2 coating film also reduced the resistance of the cathode because of enhanced interactions at the TiO2/electrolyte/carbon junction. The battery showed a distinct improvement in capacity and cyclability.
Table 4 Comparison of electrochemical performance of different interlayers




Interlayer materials
Discharge current rate (mA g−1)
Initial discharge capacity (mA h g−1)
Cycle number
Residual reversible capacity (mA h g−1)
Retention (%)
Degradation rate per cycle (%)




MWCNT
838
1446
100
855
59.1
0.41


Microporous carbon
1675
1176
100
1000
85.0
0.15


Carbonized egg membrane
168
1327
100
1000
75.4
0.25


Carbonized leaf
336
1320
100
850
64.4
0.36


Acetylene black
168
1491
50
1062
71.2
0.58


Graphene/carbon black
168
1260
100
894
71.0
0.29


Fe3C/CNF
200
1177
100
893
75.9
0.24




However, the capacity fading is still extremely rapid because of damage to the carbon coating layer during battery cycling. Some novel carbon-based materials and interlayer structures were also studied. Wang et al.159a and Chai et al.159b applied graphene oxide film and porous carbonized graphene-embedded fungus film as interlayers, respectively. The oxygen functional groups and structural defects provided strong anchoring points, and the binding of sulfur-containing species at the N-sites was more stable than that on a carbon site. These factors together made preferable interlayers with stronger absorption to the sulfur and PS, thus these were chosen and applied in an Li–S battery. Some non-carbon-based materials were also studied for application in batteries. Ma et al.160a,b synthesized a PPy functional interlayer and a polypyrrole nanotube film to apply in batteries. Because the PPy functionalized interlayer (PFIL) had H-bonding, a large specific area and a low mass, the novel configuration was more suitable to be applied in batteries. Zhang et al.161 synthesized a porous, electronically conductive nickel foam foil (NFF) as an interlayer. Because the prepared nickel foam foil had a 3D network structure and a stable architecture to accommodate the migrating PS, it significantly enhanced the specific capacities, maintained good cycling stability of cells and reduced the shuttling phenomenon during the discharge–charge process.
Through the imitation of structure and the direct application of biomass carbon-based materials, various types of new structural designs and special doped functions have attracted extensive attention. Manthiram and his co-workers prepared free-standing carbonized sucrose-coated eggshell membrane (CSEM) as an interlayer for a battery. The membrane had obvious macroporous channels and micropores, which provided electrolyte pathways for multi-electron electrochemical reaction sites and gained excellent electrolyte absorptivity. Thus, a very high sulfur loading of 3.2 mg cm−2 was obtained, due to the interlayer structure and continuous 3D electron channels. It was found that the battery delivered a high initial capacity (1327 mA h g−1) and reversible discharge capacity (over 100 cycles with high capacity retention of 75%).162 Yan et al.163 prepared a nano-Li+-channel interlayer with poly(vinylidene fluoride) selected as its backbone. The interlayer could separate PS particles by size exclusion, and obtain inter-connected ion-transport pathways among the 3D molecular chains when the poly(vinylidene fluoride) dense membrane swelled in organic electrolyte. The interlayer adsorbed intermediate PS and gave a better Li ion storage performance than the cell without the interlayer.
In summary, the introduction of an interlayer has provided a novel and remarkable configuration for high-performance batteries. The multi-functional interlayer with a lightweight, highly conductive network, hierarchical pores, flexible structures, and even some doped atoms, through employing functional groups (e.g. O-, B-, N-, S-, Se-, Co-, Si-, I- and C3N4-), would provide a facile battery production method.
9.2 New type structures of lithium–sulfur batteries
With the constant research on Li–S batteries, some researchers began to explore novel battery structures that were different from traditional ones. The new-type structures included the above introduction of interlayers and others, such as a compound-sandwiched, lithium-dissolved PS cell. Zhou et al.164 synthesized a sandwich-type functionalized graphene–sulfur nanocomposite for rechargeable lithium batteries. The sandwich-type architecture had a higher sulfur loading and provided good contact among sulfur, graphene and the current collector. This favored fast electron transport during the redox process of sulfur. And the electrode preparation process was simple. All these factors together meant that the sulfur electrode design could be scaled for industrial manufacture. Fu et al.165 also synthesized an Li2S–CNT sandwiched electrode. Because the Li2S cathode was in a fully lithiated state, it allowed the use of lithium-free anodes, such as metal oxides, Sn, Sb, or Si, and it could also inhibit PS deposition on the anode to improve the safety of the battery. With further improvement in the distribution of Li2S powder within the sandwiched electrode, this method could also attract wide attention and interest. Sun et al. reported a novel cell design by sandwiching sp3 boron through a single-ion conducting polymer electrolyte film between two carbon films, to prepare a composite separator.166 Conceivably, many more elaborate designs will be used for Li–S batteries in the future.
10. Summary and future directions
A comprehensive review of the current state of research and development in Li–S batteries is presented and discussed. The Li–S batteries are believed to be the most promising candidates for high-performance energy storage materials. Ideally, if a complete reaction between sulfur and lithium occurs, the theoretical specific capacity of an Li–S battery could be as high as 1675 mA h g−1 and the energy density could reach 2600 Wh kg−1. There are several challenges and limitations for Li–S technology with respect to cell materials and configuration. Firstly, the resistance of sulfur is as high as 5 × 10−30 S cm−1, and the structure and morphology changes of the intermediate products (lithium polysulfide Li2Sx) during cycling lead to unstable electrochemical contact within the electrode. Rapid fading of the capacity is another challenge that occurs as a result of the “shuttle effect”, where dissolved polysulfide causes loss of active materials. The volume expansion occurring in the cathode can reach about 80%, leading to pulverization of the cathode with severe reduction in capacity and contact between collectors and electrodes. Also, dendrite formation in the lithium metal anode leads to short circuits or fire, which causes safety concerns. Last but not least, the insulated Li2S forming on the surface of the cathode increases the impedance of the electrode, which leads to the loss of capacity and poor cyclability.
The material choice of the cathode plays an important role in the electrochemical performances of Li–S batteries. To date, sulfur/carbon composites, sulfur/conductive polymer composites, sulfur/metal oxide composites, sulfur/multiple sulfur-based compound materials, and even various non-conductive metal–oxide nanoparticle-decorated carbon flakes, have been trialled to replace conventional pure sulfur. The main forms of carbon in the cathodes of batteries include conductive carbon black, aerogel carbon, carbon nanotubes, carbon nanofibers, and hybrid carbon, especially graphite-based materials (e.g. graphene-CNT conductive composites, graphene/CNT-porous carbon composites or combined graphene sheets and micro/mesoporous carbon (SCNMM) composites). The combinations of these materials have great potential to significantly improve the performance of batteries. There are a large number of theoretical calculations and related experiments, showing that many functional groups (e.g. O-, B-, N-, S-, Se-, Co-, Si-, I- and C3N4-) can significantly enhance their electronic conductivity and effectively trap polysulfide by chemical interactions between doped or co-doped atoms and sulfur/PS. The novel structures simultaneously contribute to greatly immobilizing migrating PS. Some other conductive polymers can also be considered in the cathode research of Li–S batteries. Moreover, polysulfide cathode materials, including Li2S, FeS2, and Cu3BiS3, could potentially attract wide concern with respect to lithium dendrites.
At the same time, the design of cathode structures is important in maximizing the sulfur loading, by increasing the surface area to hold more PS, providing convenient channels for electron transport, reducing the irreversible loss of active material, and improving the capacity retention of Li–S batteries. Generally, cathode designs can be divided into two types, given the material composition: carbonaceous materials and non-carbonaceous materials; they can also be divided into three forms, including nanostructures (nanocubes, nanocages, nanosheets, nanoshells, nanospheres, nanotubes, nanofibers, and nanowires); porous structures (microporous, micro/mesoporous, disordered mesoporous, activated bamboo-derived porous, hierarchical porous, tunable porous, core–shell tubular porous, and cylindrical and gyroidal mesoporous) and structures of natural biological shapes (e.g. core–shell, yolk–shell, shrimp shell, coralloid shape, cauliflower, honeycomb, coaxial-cable structure, sponge, Aspergillus flavus, split-half-tubular, layered structure, paper, foam, pie, and nest-like structures) for the improvement of sulfur cathodes. In the future, more composite structures should be explored for cathode designs to realize multi-functionality. In practical Li–S cells, the use of cathodes with high areal sulfur loading is of high importance, and is the ultimate goal of cathode design. Meanwhile, the percent of the cathode, especially sulfur, in the whole battery, such as the optimized electrolyte/sulfur ratio, should also be considered.
As to the reaction, binders can become inactive sites, leading to the deterioration of cell performances. Therefore, the development of novel and appropriate binders is extremely important in Li–S batteries. Multi-functional and free battery binders should also be considered. But the binder-free cathode still has some drawbacks, including difficult synthetic steps, and low connectivity between the conductive agent and sulfur, except for certain designs. The binder percentage still needs to be further researched for the development of high-performance Li–S batteries.
Making the optimal choice of electrolyte in Li–S batteries is not easy. Liquid electrolytes are widely used in Li–S batteries because they have high ionic conductivity. But liquid-state electrolytes still have some drawbacks, such as lithium dendrite formation, PS dissolution and shuttle effects. In order to solve these drawbacks, solid-state electrolytes can be good candidate materials. However, these also have disadvantages, such as low ionic conductivity and an unstable interface, which can be damaged by some polysulfide ions. Complex hydride-type or conducting polymer-type solid electrolytes will provide some guidance due to their improved conductivity and comparatively stable interface. Gel polymer electrolytes can integrate the advantages of the above electrolytes, but the electrolytes still have a negative impact on battery capacity and self-discharge, due to their high viscosity. In addition to the above three types of electrolytes, ionic liquid electrolytes are promising solvents for Li–S batteries. Although ionic liquid electrolytes have many merits, such as non-flammability, high ionic conductivity, a wide electrochemical window, and the ability to protect lithium metal anodes, some disadvantages still exist, such as irreversible reducibility in anodes and unexpected byproducts with polysulfide anions. Therefore, the choice of functional electrolyte is also vital in conjunction with the choice of cathode materials. Meanwhile, safe composite polymer electrolytes must be realized so that Li–S batteries can be commercialized.
Separators are as vital as the cathodes and electrolytes. Their main functions are to separate the anode and cathode and to permit the free flow of lithium ions. Furthermore, a large amount of research shows that the microporous structure and thermal dimensional stability of separators considerably affect the battery performances. To date, the separators include modified polyolefins, PEO matrix, PVDF matrix, lithiated Nafion ionomers, and some blend polymer membranes. There are some drawbacks associated with these separators. The former three kinds of separators cannot effectively restrain PS ions passing through them, which leads to a significant reduction in the content of active substances. As a result, a sharp drop in the capacitance and cycle performance can take place. Although lithiated Nafion ionomer separators can mitigate the above disadvantages, their low strength cannot resist the formation of dendrite on the lithium electrode. At the same time, their electrolyte absorption is considerably low, and they embody high internal resistance. Using blended polymer membranes can address these problems to some extent. But the present research lacks systematic investigation. In developing separators for batteries, some nanofiber membranes made by the electrospinning method, the solution injection method, and electro-blown spinning have been used by our groups. The design of the cathode and separator structure is as follows: in the co-doped hierarchical porous carbon nanofiber-sulfur cathode, PVA was used as the carbon precursor, PTFE was used as the surficial polymer, and some tree-like polymer separators were used in the Li–S battery. The co-doped hierarchical porous carbon nanofiber-sulfur cathode can achieve an increased sulfur loading and effectively suppress the “shuttle effect” with the synergistic role of chemical interactions between doped or co-doped atoms and sulfur/polysulfides. Meanwhile, the tree-like polymer separators can provide a large number of sites to trap the PS. Furthermore, the thickness of the separator should be reduced due to the requirement for denser cathodes. In addition, the anode materials cannot be ignored. The development of a stabilized lithium metal anode that is compatible with the cathode needs to be further investigated. To date, some novel cell configurations have been developed through the application of interlayers, collectors and even new Li–S battery structures.
Nanomaterials are an exceedingly important constituent of Li–S batteries due to their unique structural features and performances. Advances in nanoscience and nanotechnology have provided great opportunities to design and fabricate new energy storage materials for the development of high-performance Li–S batteries. For cathodes, one-dimensional nanorods, nanobelts, nanowires and nano-dots; two dimensional nanosheets, nanoplates, nanoplates, nanowebs, nanodiscs, and nanoflakes; and three dimensional hollow spheres, nanotubes, nanocages, nanoparticles, nano-sized grains, nanorods, nanofibers and other hierarchical nanostructured composites have been successfully applied in the fabrication of batteries. Meanwhile the popularity of nanoscaled sulfur as a cathode material is rising among researchers, and nanosized binders, such as helical dendrimers, have been used. PEO-based crystalline nanocomposite polymer electrolytes have been prepared and applied in batteries. The major feature of nanostructured electrolytes is high stability towards the lithium metal electrode. Meanwhile, this unique property makes the electrolyte quite promising for the development of rechargeable Li–S batteries. With regard to separators, nanofiber membranes produced by the electrospinning method, the solution injection method, and electro-blown spinning have played an important role in improving the electrochemical performance of batteries. Nano-scale coatings of polymer nanocomposite, oxide, and inorganic nanoparticles are also successfully used in battery separators. For the anode, a nanostructured aluminum alloy is a good choice. Otherwise, the nano-sized metallic clusters as lithium hosts permit and enhance Li+ reversibility, which can compensate for the limitations inherent within one material alone. At the same time, various electrodeposited nanostructures as current collectors (e.g.: copper, nickel) have also been used in Li–S batteries.
Further research into nanodimensional materials is still needed for further improvement in the electrochemical performance of batteries. There are some challenges in this area that need to be addressed: firstly, compared with bulk materials, the synthesis or preparation processes focusing on nanoscale storage materials are complex. Therefore, the development of low cost, large-scale, and environmentally benign synthesis techniques for nanocomposites are of significant concern and need to be developed, and it is imperative to spread awareness in society in order to boost the commercial application of batteries. Secondly, work needs to be done in refining some of the processing techniques used, such as high-energy ball milling, solid-phase synthesis, and other imprecise machining methods. The control of morphology, particle size and dimensional distribution by these methods is not easy. Meanwhile, the structures and morphology of nanomaterials and their effect on the lithium storage performance need to be further discussed. Finally, extremely scarce theoretical calculations associated with nanomaterials, which affect the capacity retention, stability, and cycling performance of the batteries, still remain an important challenge. And the lithium insertion mechanism into these nanomaterials also needs to be investigated.
Although the significant development of Li–S batteries has given some hope for advanced rechargeable batteries with high energy storage, most research is focused on experimental efforts, while a small amount of theoretical research is considered. Therefore, further establishment of theoretical studies on Li–S batteries has become more and more important. For example, building a mathematical model is advantageous for theoretical research and convenient for exploring the relationships between the initial specific capacity, the retention of specific discharge capacity and the percent of sulfur, the conductivity of the cathode, the conductivity of the electrolyte, the porosity, the breaking strength, and the elongation of separators or the properties of surface films on lithium anodes. In another instance, further understanding of mechanisms involved in batteries, such as the shuttle effect and self-discharge issues, will provide more opportunities in research in this field, such as the volume ratio of sulfur and the liquid electrolyte, which has a significant effect on the charge–discharge performance. Although the commercialization of batteries is still far away, high-energy storage systems are very likely to be realized through the application of Li–S batteries in the future.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51673148), the National Basic Research Program of China (2014CB660813), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51102178), the National Key Technology Support Program (2015BAE01B03), the Innovation Fund for Technology of China (14C26211200298), the Innovation Fund for Technology of Tianjin (14ZXCXGX00776, 14TXGCCX00014), Chang-jiang Scholars, and the Innovative Research Team in the University of the Ministry of Education of China (IRT13084) for their financial support.
References
R. Noorden, Nature, 2013, 498, 416 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Zheng, X. R. Zhang, J. K. Wang, D. Y. Qu, X. Q. Yang and D. Y. Qu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 301, 312–316 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Choi and Y. D. Chung, J. Power Sources, 2008, 184, 548–552 CrossRef CAS .
P. G. Bruce, S. A. Freunberger, L. J. Hardwick and J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 19–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gaillard and E. Levillain, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1995, 398, 77–87 CrossRef .
A. Manthiram, Y. Z. Fu and Y. S. Su, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1125–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bresser, S. Passerini and B. Scrosati, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10545–10562 RSC .
J. J. Hu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, J. Inorg. Mater., 2013, 28, 1181–1186 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, Y. Z. Fu and S. H. Chung, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. He, B. Mandlmeier, J. Schuster, L. F. Nazar and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 3879–3886 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, D. Kundu, M. Cuisinier and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2015, 5, 4759 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liang, C. Hart, Q. Pang, A. Garsuch, T. Weiss and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 5682 CrossRef PubMed .
H. H. Xu, L. Qie and A. Manthiram, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Diao, K. Xie and X. B. Hong, Acta Chim. Sin., 2013, 71, 508–518 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wild, L. O'Neill, T. Zhang, R. Purkayastha, G. Minton, M. Marinescu and G. J. Offer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3477 CAS .
R. S. Assary, L. A. Curtiss and S. Moore, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 11545–11558 CAS .
M. N. Liu, F. M. Ye, W. F. Li, H. F. Li and Y. G. Zhang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 94–116 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Mikhaylik and J. R. Akridge, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 151, A1969–A1976 CrossRef .
M. Behzadirad, O. Lavrova and T. Busani, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7830–7840 CAS .
J. X. Zhao, Y. G. Yang, R. S. Katiyard and Z. F. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6124–6130 CAS .
H. S. Ryu, H. J. Ahn, K. W. Kim, J. H. Ahn, K. K. Cho and T. H. Nam, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 52, 1563–1566 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wei, M. Q. Fan and H. C. Chen, Renewable Energy, 2015, 86, 148–153 CrossRef .
M. Q. Zhao, X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, G. L. Tian, J. Q. Huang, W. C. Zhu and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 10759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. M. Zhou, S. F. Pei, L. Li, D. W. Wang, S. G. Wang, K. Huang, L. C. Yin, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6100 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Sun, W. B. Kong, Y. Jiang, H. C. Wu, K. L. Jiang, J. P. Wang and S. S. Fan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5305–5312 CAS .
S. Z. Niu, W. Lv, C. Zhang, Y. T. Shi, J. F. Zhao, B. H. Li, Q. H. Yang and F. Y. Kang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 295, 182–189 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Ding, P. Kopold, H. Kersten, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhen, J. Yan, L. X. Yuan, Z. Q. Yi, C. Wu, Y. Liu, P. Strasser and Y. H. Huang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9295–9303 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, M. Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, X. B. Cheng, X. Y. Liu, W. Z. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2772–2781 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. L. Wu, J. X. Li, Z. C. Xu and L. H. Guan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5113–5118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, L. Zhang, F. Zhang, Y. Huang and Y. S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5208–5215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. A. Chen, Z. Xiao, X. Ning, Z. Liu, Z. Yang and C. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301988 CrossRef .
Z. Li, Y. M. Huang, L. X. Yuan, Z. X. Hao and Y. H. Huang, Carbon, 2015, 92, 41–63 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Wang, K. Y. Xie and B. Q. Wei, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 413–444 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jozwiuk, H. Sommer and J. Janek, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 454–461 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Cheng, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, H. J. Peng, M. Q. Zhao and F. Wei, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang, G. L. Tian, J. Q. Nie, H. J. Peng and F. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3410 Search PubMed .
M. P. Yu, A. J. Wang, F. Y. Tian, H. Q. Song, Y. S. Wang, C. Li, J. D. Hong and G. Q. Shi, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 5292–5298 RSC .
Y. H. Xu, Y. Wen, Y. J. Zhu, K. Gaskell, K. A. Cychosz, B. Eichhorn, X. Kang and C. S. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4312–4320 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. X. Yuan, Z. Q. Yi, Y. M. Sun, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, Y. Shen, Y. Xin, Z. L. Zhang and Y. H. Huang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301473 CrossRef .
K. Mi, Y. Jiang, J. K. Feng, Y. T. Qian and S. L. Xiong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1571–1579 CrossRef CAS .
X. X. Gu, C. J. Tong, C. Lai, J. X. Qiu, X. X. Huang, W. L. Yang, B. Wen, L. M. Liu, Y. L. Hou and S. Q. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16670 CAS .
H. F. Li, X. W. Yang, X. M. Wang, Y. S. He, F. M. Ye, M. N. Liu and Y. G. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2395–2402 RSC .
C. Tang, B. Q. Li, Q. Zhang, L. Zhu, H. F. Wang, J. L. Shi and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 577–585 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Jiang, M. Lu and X. T. Ling, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 645, 509–516 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. M. Xu, Y. S. Wu and X. Y. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2015, 275, 22–25 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. L. Jia, C. Zhang, J. J. Liu, W. Lv, D. W. Wang, Y. Tao, Z. J. Li, X. Y. Zheng, J. S. Yu and Q. H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4447–4451 RSC .

  (a) Y. Hou, J. Y. Li, X. F. Gao, Z. H. Wen, C. Yuan and J. H. Che, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8228–8235 RSC ; 
  (b) K. Xi, P. R. Kidambi, R. J. Chen, C. L. Gao, X. Y. Peng, C. Ducati, S. Hofmann and R. V. Kumar, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5746 RSC .

  (a) J. R. He, Y. F. Chen, P. J. Li, F. Fu, Z. G. Wang and W. L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18605–18610 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. F. Dong, S. H. Liu, Z. Y. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. B. Zhao and J. S. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7569 RSC ; 
  (c) S. Z. Niu, W. Lv, C. Zhang, F. F. Li, L. K. Tang, Y. B. He, B. H. Li, Q. H. Yang and F. Y. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20218–20224 RSC ; 
  (d) L. Fan, H. L. Zhuang, K. H. Zhang, V. R. Copper, Q. Li and Y. Y. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/advs.201600175 ; 
  (e) F. Wu, J. Li, Y. Su, J. Wang, W. Yang, N. Li, L. Chen, S. Chen, R. Chen and L. Bao, Nano Lett., 2016 DOI:10.1021/acs.nanolett.6b01981 ; 
  (f) R. P. Fang, S. Y. Zhao, S. F. Pei, X. T. Qian, P. X. Hou, H. M. Cheng, C. Liu and F. Li, ACS Nano, 2016 DOI:10.1021/acsnano.6b04019 .
Y. Liu, J. X. Guo and J. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 324, 399–404 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. Y. Lyu, D. Xu and L. J. Yang, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 657–665 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Xie, X. T. Qin and X. Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 347–352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Jewel, K. Yoo, J. Liu and P. Dutta, J. Nanopart. Res., 2016, 18, 54 CrossRef ; 
  (b) J. W. Zhang, Y. R. Cai, Q. W. Zhong, D. Z. Lai and J. M. Yao, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 17791–17797 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. C. Li, R. Mi and S. M. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 39, 16073–16080 CrossRef ; 
  (d) G. M. Zhou, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7760 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) S. Xiao, S. H. Liu, J. Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 293, 119–126 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) Y. L. Ding, P. Kopold, K. Hahn, P. A. van Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1112–1119 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) K. M. Liao, P. Mao, N. Li, M. Han, J. Yi, P. He, Y. Sun and H. S. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5406–5409 RSC ; 
  (h) Y. J. Li, J. M. Fan, M. S. Zheng and Q. F. Dong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1998–2004 RSC ; 
  (i) Q. Pang and L. F. Nazar, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4111–4118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. C. Qiu, W. F. Li, W. Zhao, G. Z. Li, Y. Hou, M. N. Liu, L. S. Zhou, F. M. Ye, H. F. Li and Z. H. Wei, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4821–4827 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Q. Pang, J. T. Tang, H. Huang, X. Liang, C. Hart, K. C. Tam and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6021–6028 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) G. M. Zhou, L. C. Yin, D. W. Wang, L. Li, S. F. Pei, I. R. Gentle, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5367–5375 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. X. Song, Z. X. Yu, M. L. Gordin and D. H. Wang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 864–870 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) M. P. Yu, J. S. Ma, H. Q. Song, A. J. Wang, F. Y. Tian, Y. S. Wang, H. Qiu and R. M. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1495–1503 RSC ; 
  (f) Z. Q. Li, C. X. Li, X. L. Ge, J. Y. Ma, Z. W. Zhang, Q. Li, C. X. Wang and L. W. Yin, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 15–26 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) E. P. Kamphaus and P. B. Balbuena, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4296–4305 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) L. Zeng, F. Pan, W. Li, Y. Jiang, X. Zhong and Y. Yu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9579–9587 RSC ; 
  (i) J. Moon, J. Park, C. Jeon, J. Lee, I. Jo, S. H. Yu, S. P. Cho, Y. E. Sung and B. H. Hong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 13249–13255 RSC ; 
  (j) Y. Liu, J. W. Wang, Y. H. Xu, Y. J. Zhu, D. Bigiob and C. S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12201–12207 RSC .

  (a) G. H. Yuan and H. D. Wang, J. Nat. Gas Chem., 2014, 23, 657–661 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. G. Zhang, Z. Bakenov and Y. Zhao, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 1–8 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) W. D. Zhou, Y. C. Yu and H. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16736–16743 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) F. Wu, J. Z. Chen and R. J. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6057–6063 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. Y. Wei, L. Ma and K. E. Hendrickson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12143–12152 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) Y. G. Lee, K. S. Ryu and S. H. Chang, J. Power Sources, 2003, 2013, 237–242 Search PubMed ; 
  (g) Y. Yang, G. H. Yu, J. J. Cha, H. Wu, M. Vosgueritchian, Y. Yao, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9187–9193 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) H. Chen, W. Dong, J. Ge, C. H. Wang, X. D. Wu, W. Lu and L. W. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1910 Search PubMed ; 
  (i) L. F. Xiao, Y. L. Cao, J. Xiao, B. Schwenzer, M. H. Engelhard, L. V. Saraf, Z. M. Nie, G. J. Exarhos and J. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1176–1181 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) W. Li, G. Zheng, Y. Yang, Z. W. Seh, N. Liu and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 7148 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (k) P. Y. Gu, Y. Zhao, J. Xie, N. B. Ali, L. N. Nie, Z. J. Xu and Q. C. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7464–7470 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (l) S. Moon, Y. H. Jung and D. K. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 386–392 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (m) Y. F. Dong, S. H. Liu, Z. Y. Wang, Y. Liu, Z. B. Zhao and J. S. Qiu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7569 RSC ; 
  (n) L. Huang, J. L. Cheng, X. D. Li, D. M. Yuan, W. Ni, G. X. Qu, Q. Guan, Y. Zhang and B. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4049 RSC ; 
  (o) M. J. Wang, W. K. Wang, A. B. Wang, K. G. Yuan, L. X. Miao, X. L. Zhang, Y. Q. Huang, Z. B. Yu and J. Y. Qiu, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10263 RSC .

  (a) Y. Zhang, L. Z. Wang and A. Q. Zhang, Solid State Ionics, 2010, 181, 835–838 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Liu, L. X. Yuan, K. Yuan, Z. Li, Z. X. Hao, J. W. Xiang and Y. H. Huang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 13638 RSC ; 
  (c) K. Y. Xie, Y. Z. Han, W. F. Wei, H. R. Yu, C. B. Zhang, J. G. Wang, W. Lu and B. Q. Wei, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 77348–77353 RSC ; 
  (d) C. S. Kim, A. Guerfi and P. Hovington, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 32, 35–38 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y. Zhang, X. B. Wu and H. Feng, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2009, 34, 1556–1559 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) H. B. Wu, S. Wei, L. Zhang, R. Xu, H. H. Hng and X. W. Lou, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 10804–10808 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) Z. X. Hao, L. X. Yuan, Z. Li, J. Liu, J. W. Xiang, C. Wu, R. Zeng and Y. H. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 200, 197–203 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) Z. Li, J. Zhang and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12886–12890 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (i) X. W. Wang, T. Gao, X. L. Fan, F. D. Han, Y. Q. Wu, Z. A. Zhang, J. Li and C. S. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201602264 .

          A. Gorkovenko, T. A. Skotheim, Z. S. Xu, L. I. Boguslavsky, Z. Deng and S. P. Mukherjee, Cathodes Comprising Electroactive Sulfur Materials and Secondary Batteries using Same, U.S. Patent, 6210831, April 3,  2001 Search PubMed .
M. S. Song, S. C. Han and H. S. Kim, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2004, 151, 791–795 CrossRef .
Y. G. Zhang, Y. Zhao, A. Yermukhambetova, Z. Bakenov and P. J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 295 CAS .

  (a) Z. Yuan, H. J. Peng, T. Z. Hou, J. Q. Huang, C. M. Chen, D. W. Wang, X. B. Cheng, Fei Wei and Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 519–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. L. Ma, Z. Li, K. Hu, D. D. Liu, J. Huo and S. Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 71–78 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. S. Zhang and D. T. Tran, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4371 RSC ; 
  (d) Q. Pang, D. Kundu and L. F. Nazar, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 130–136 RSC .

  (a) G. Q. Ma, Z. Y. Wen and Q. S. Wang, J. Inorg. Mater., 2015, 30, 913–918 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. G. Sun, J. T. Wang, D. H. Long, W. M. Qiao, L. C. Ling, C. X. Lv and R. Cai, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13283–13289 RSC ; 
  (c) K. Dong, S. P. Wang, H. Y. Zhang and J. P. Wu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2013, 48, 2079–2083 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) X. Y. Tao, J. G. Wang, C. Liu, H. T. Wang, H. B. Yao, G. Y. Zheng, Z. W. Seh, Q. X. Cai, W. Y. Li, G. M. Zhou, C. X. Zu and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11203 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) H. Li, Y. Su, W. W. Sun and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201601631 .
R. D. Rauh, K. M. Abraham, G. F. Pearson, J. K. Surprenant and S. B. Brummer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126, 523 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Liu, N. Dietzrago and L. L. Shaw, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18071–18080 RSC .

  (a) S. S. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 70, 344–348 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. X. Zu, Y. Z. Fu and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 10362 RSC ; 
  (c) S. R. Chen, F. Dai, M. L. Gordina and D. H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 3540–3543 RSC .

  (a) R. Demircakan, M. Morcrette, A. Gangulibabu, A. Guéguen, R. Dedryvère and J. M. Tarascon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 176–182 RSC ; 
  (b) B. C. Duan, W. K. Wang, A. B. Wang, K. G. Yuan, Z. B. Yu, H. L. Zhao, J. Y. Qiu and Y. S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13261–13267 RSC ; 
  (c) S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1360–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) L. Qie, C. X. Zu and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502459 CrossRef ; 
  (e) S. S. Zhang and D. T. Trana, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4371–4374 RSC .

  (a) X. Gao, Y. Wang, Z. S. Ma, W. J. Jiang, Y. L. Zou and C. S. Lu, J. Mater. Sci., 2016, 51, 5139–5145 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. X. Wu, E. B. Zhao, D. Gordon, Y. R. Xiao, C. C. Hu and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6365–6371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Q. Chen, B. Sun, X. Q. Xie, A. K. Mondal, X. D. Huang and G. X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 268–280 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. T. Lu, Y. Chen, J. Zhou, Z. D. Wang, X. H. Wu, J. Gu, X. P. Zhang, A. M. Pang, Z. L. Jiao and L. X. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20445 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Z. Z. Yang, H. Y. Wang, L. Lu, C. Wang, X. B. Zhong, J. G. Wang and Q. C. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22990 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) L. Zhu, H. J. Peng, J. Y. Liang, J. Q. Huang, C. M. Chen, X. F. Guo, W. C. Zhu, P. Li and Q. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 746–755 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8228–8235 RSC ; 
  (f) X. Zhang, C. Zhang, J. Liu, W. Lv, D. W. Wang, Y. Tao, Z. Li, X. Zheng, J. S. Yu and Q. H. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 4447–4451 RSC ; 
  (g) L. Zhu, H. J. Peng, J. Y. Liang, J. Q. Huang, C. M. Chen, X. F. Guo, W. C. Zhu, P. Li and Q. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 746–755 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) Z. Lyu, D. Xu, L. J. Yang, R. C. Che, R. Feng, J. Zhao, Y. Li, Q. Wu, X. Z. Wang and Z. Hu, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 657–665 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) H. J. Peng, J. Y. Liang, L. Zhu, J. Q. Huang, X. B. Cheng, X. F. Guo, W. P. Ding, W. C. Zhu and Q. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11280–11289 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) X. F. Yang, Y. Yu, N. Yan, H. Z. Zhang, X. F. Li and H. M. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 5965–5972 RSC ; 
  (k) J. Li, J. Q. Guo, L. Zeng, Y. H. Huang and R. F. Peng, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 26630–26636 RSC ; 
  (l) W. K. Zhang, C. Lin, S. Cong, J. Y. Hou, B. Liu, F. X. Geng, J. Jin, M. H. Wu and Z. G. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 15234–15239 RSC .

  (a) M. S. Park, B. O. Jeong, T. J. Kim, S. Kim, K. J. Kim, J. S. Yu, Y. J. Jung and Y. J. Kim, Carbon, 2014, 68, 265–272 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. H. Cui, J. Chen, K. Huang, C. Q. Du, J. W. Wu, A. P. Baker and X. H. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 9117–9123 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. M. Cheng, S. M. Ji, Y. H. Liu and J. Liu, Arabian J. Chem., 2015 DOI:10.1016/j.arabjc.2015.10.001 ; 
  (d) J. Q. Huang, X. F. Liu, Q. Zhang, C. M. Chen, M. Q. Zhao, S. M. Zhang, W. C. Zhu, W. Z. Qian and F. Wei, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 314–321 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) S. Wang, Z. X. Zhao, H. Xu, Y. F. Deng, Z. Li and G. H. Chen, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 173, 282–289 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) Z. Li, Y. Jiang, L. Yuan, Z. Yi, C. Wu, Y. Liu, P. Strasser and Y. H. Huang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9295–9303 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) J. G. Werner, S. S. Johnson, V. Vijay and U. Wiesner, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3349–3357 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (h) Z. Li, L. X. Yuan, Z. Q. Yi, Y. Liu, Y. Xin, Z. L. Zhang and Y. H. Huang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1653–1660 RSC .

  (a) W. Zhou, Y. Yu, H. Chen, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16736 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) F. Wu, J. Li, Y. F. Tian, Y. F. Su, J. Wang, W. Yang, N. Li, S. Chen and L. Y. Bao, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13340 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. W. Ma, H. Z. Zhang, B. S. Wu, M. R. Wang, X. F. Li and H. M. Zhang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 14949 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. Li, Y. N. Zhang, W. Zhou, H. J. Nie and H. M. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 262, 29–35 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Q. Li, Z. A. Zhang, Z. P. Guo, K. Zhang, Y. Q. Lai and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 274, 338–344 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) S. T. Lu, Y. Chen, X. H. Wu, Z. D. Wang and Y. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4629 Search PubMed ; 
  (g) M. W. Xu, M. Jia, C. P. Mao, S. G. Liu, S. J. Bao, J. Jiang, Y. Liu and Z. S. Lu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 18739 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) X. Liang, M. G. Zhang, M. R. Kaiser, X. W. Gao, K. Konstantinov, R. Tandiono, Z. X. Wang, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and J. Z. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 587–599 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (i) H. W. Chen, C. H. Wang, Y. F. Dai, S. Q. Qiu, J. L. Yang, W. Lu and L. W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5443–5448 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (j) Y. D. Pan, S. L. Chou, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 34131–34136 RSC ; 
  (k) W. Ahn, M. H. Seo, Y. S. Jun, D. U. Lee, F. M. Hassan, X. L. Wang, A. P. Yu and Z. W. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1984–1991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. M. Zhou, L. Li, C. Q. Ma, S. G. Wang, Y. Shi, N. Koratkar, W. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 356–365 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Li, J. T. Zhang, Y. M. Chen, J. Li and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8850 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) S. T. Zhang, M. B. Zheng, Z. X. Lin, R. Zang, Q. L. Huang, H. G. Xue, J. M. Cao and H. Pang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 39918–39925 RSC ; 
  (d) C. B. Bucur, J. Muldoon and A. Lita, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 992–998 RSC ; 
  (e) M. R. Wang, H. Z. Zhang, W. Zhou, X. F. Yang, X. F. Li and H. M. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1653–1662 RSC ; 
  (f) H. Li, L. P. Sun and G. C. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6061–6071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Wang, G. Li, J. D. Li, Y. N. Zhang, W. Ahn, A. P. Yu and Z. W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2533–2538 CAS .
X. Liang and L. F. Nazar, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4192–4198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ponraj, A. G. Kannan, J. H. Ahn and D. W. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4000–4006 CAS .
Y. Hou, J. Y. Li, X. F. Gao, Z. H. Wen, C. Yuan and J. H. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 8228–8235 RSC .
G. X. Li, J. H. Sun, W. P. Hou, S. D. Jiang, Y. Huang and J. X. Geng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) G. M. Zhou, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7760 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. X. Song, M. L. Gordin, T. Xu, S. R. Chen, Z. X. Yu, H. Sohn, J. Lu, Y. Ren, Y. H. Duan and D. H. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4325–4329 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) G. M. Zhou, L. Li, C. Q. Ma, S. G. Wang, Y. Shi, N. Koratkar, W. C. Ren, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 356 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) Z. Yuan, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, X. Y. Liu, D. W. Wang, X. B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6105–6112 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) R. P. Fang, S. Y. Zhao, P. X. Hou, M. Cheng, S. G. Wang, H. M. Cheng, C. Liu and F. Li, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3374–3382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) L. Chen and L. L. Shaw, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 770–783 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Lin and C. Liang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 936–958 RSC ; 
  (c) M. J. Lacey, F. Jeschull and K. Edström, RSC Adv., 2013, 49, 8531–8533 CAS .

  (a) Z. W. Seh, Q. Zhang, W. Li, G. Zheng, H. Yao and Y. Cui, Chem. Sci., 2013, 4, 3673–3677 RSC ; 
  (b) Y. Wang, Y. Huang and W. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4062–4066 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. K. Song, Y. Zhang and E. J. Cairns, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5891–5899 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) M. He, L. X. Yuan and W. X. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem., 2011, 115, 15703–15709 CAS .
G. R. Li, W. L. Cai and B. H. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Sun, Y. Q. Huang and W. K. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 7084–7088 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. Wang, Y. Q. Huang and W. K. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 4062–4066 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. P. Chang, Q. S. Wu, X. Du, S. M. Chen, J. Shen, Q. Y. Song, J. D. Xie and W. T. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 4525–4528 RSC .

  (a) F. C. D. Godoi, D. W. Wang and Q. C. Zeng, J. Power Sources, 2015, 288, 13–19 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. S. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2013, 231, 153–162 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Zhang, W. Z. Bao and H. Lu, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2012, 1, A34–A37 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, G. Y. Xu, B. Ding, Z. Chang, A. X. Wang, H. Dou and X. G. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 40650–40655 RSC .
P. Bhattacharya, M. I. Nandasiri, D. P. Lv, A. M. Schwarz, J. T. Darsell, W. A. Henderson, D. A. Tomalia, J. Liu, J. G. Zhang and J. Xiao, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 176–186 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Wang, Z. D. Yao and C. W. Monroe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1194 CrossRef CAS .
F. L. Zeng, W. K. Wang, A. B. Wang, K. G. Yuan, Z. Q. Jin and Y. S. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26257–26265 CAS .
G. R. Li, W. L. Cai, B. H. Liu and Z. P. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 294, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. Elazari, G. Salitra and A. Garsuch, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5641–5644 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Dörfler, M. Hagen and H. Althues, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 4097–4099 RSC .
G. H. Yuan, G. Wang, H. Wang and J. T. Bai, J. Nanopart. Res., 2015, 17, 36 CrossRef .
C. Erhardt, Sörgel Şeniz, S. Meinhard and T. Sörgel, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Kong, L. Sun, Y. Wu, K. L. Jiang, Q. Q. Li, J. P. Wang and S. S. Fan, Carbon, 2016, 96, 1053–1059 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Kaiser, X. Liang, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and J. Z. Wang, Carbon, 2016, 103, 163–171 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Scheers, S. Fantini and P. Johansson, J. Power Sources, 2014, 255, 204–218 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. M. Li, H. Zhang, L. Otaegui, G. Singh, M. Armand and L. M. Rodriguez-Martinez, J. Power Sources, 2016, 326, 1–5 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. Gao, M. A. Lowe, Y. Kiya and H. D. Abruña, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25132–25137 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsuyama, R. Takano and K. Tadanaga, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 5, 25 Search PubMed .

  (a) S. Z. Xiong, Y. Diao and X. B. Hong, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 719, 122–126 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Z. Xiong, K. Xie and E. Blomberg, J. Power Sources, 2014, 252, 150–155 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Z. Xiong, K. Xie and Y. Diao, J. Power Sources, 2013, 236, 181–187 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tatsumisago, M. Nagao and A. Hayashi, J. Aust. Ceram. Soc., 2013, 1, 17–25 CrossRef .
A. Unemoto, Y. Gambe and D. Komatsu, Solid State Ionics, 2014, 262, 765–768 CrossRef CAS .
M. Nagao, Y. Imade and H. Narisawa, J. Power Sources, 2013, 222, 237–242 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, J. Li, K. Liu, Y. X. Liu, J. Liu and X. M. Wang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3796–3803 RSC .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 18600 RSC .
M. Nagao, A. Hayashi and M. Tatsumisago, Energy Technol., 2013, 1, 186–192 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Hassoun and B. Scrosati, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5198–5201 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) N. Kamaya, K. Homma and Y. Yamakawa, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Q. Li, J. Chen, L. Fan, X. Q. Kong and Y. Y. Lu, Green Energy Environ., 2016 DOI:10.1016/j.gee.2016.04.006 ; 
  (b) R. Younesi, G. M. Veith, P. Johansson, K. Edström and T. Vegge, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1905 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Z. Zhao, X. B. Cheng, R. Zhang, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, R. Ran, Z. H. Huang, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2016, 3, 77–84 CrossRef ; 
  (d) L. M. Suo, Y. S. Hu, H. Li, M. Armand and L. Q. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1481 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (e) W. Y. Li, H. B. Yao, K. Yan, G. Y. Zheng, Z. Liang, Y. M. Chiang and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7436 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (f) S. Z. Xiong, K. Xie, Y. Diao and X. B. Hong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 246, 840–845 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (g) A. Jozwiuk, B. B. Berkes, T. Weiß, H. Sommer, J. Janekac and T. Brezesinski, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2603–2608 RSC .
D. Zheng, X. Q. Yang and D. Y. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10360–10366 CAS .

  (a) S. S. Zhang and D. T. Tran, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 114, 296–302 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Rohan, Y. B. Sun, W. W. Cai, Y. F. Zhang, K. Pareek, G. D. Xua and H. S. Cheng, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 268, 294–299 CrossRef ; 
  (c) S. H. Wang, S. S. Hou and P. L. Kuo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 8477–8485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Q. W. Lu, J. Yang and W. Lu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 152, 489–495 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Liu, D. Zhou, Y. B. He, Y. Z. Fu, X. Y. Qin, C. Miao, H. D. Du, B. H. Li, Q. H. Yang, Z. Q. Lin, T. S. Zhao and F. Y. Kang, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 278–289 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. Yan, Y. X. Yin and S. Xin, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 58–61 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. W. Park, K. Yamauchi and E. Takashima, Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4431–4440 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Ueno, J. W. Park and A. Yamazaki, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 20509–20516 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Wu, Q. Z. Zhu and R. J. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 10–17 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. C. Zheng, X. Tong and M. L. Jong, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10564–10574 RSC ; 
  (d) A. Unemoto, H. Ogawa and Y. Gambe, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 125, 386–394 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) L. Wang and H. R. Byon, J. Power Sources, 2013, 236, 207–214 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) M. Barghamadi, A. S. Best and A. I. Bhatt, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 180, 636–644 CrossRef CAS .
M. Barghamadi, A. S. Best and A. I. Bhatt, J. Power Sources, 2015, 295, 212–220 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) R. R. Miao, J. Yang, X. J. Feng, H. Jia, J. L. Wang and Y. N. Nuli, J. Power Sources, 2014, 271, 291–297 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Wu, Q. Z. Zhu, R. J. Chen, N. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. S. Ye, J. Qiao and L. Li, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 10–17 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) J. L. Wang, F. J. Lin, H. Jia, J. Yang, C. W. Monroe and Y. NuLi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10099–10104 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) J. S. Kim, D. J. Yoo, J. Min, R. A. Shakoor, R. Kahraman and J. W. Choi, ChemNanoMat, 2015, 1, 240–245 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) C. Yan, X. B. Cheng, C. Z. Zhao, J. Q. Huang, S. T. Yang and Q. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 327, 212–220 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) S. Liu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7783–7789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Z. Y. Zhang, Y. Q. Lai and Z. A. Zhang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 129, 55–61 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Y. Zhang, Y. Q. Lai and Z. A. Zhang, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 278, 166–171 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Q. Xu, G. C. Hu and H. L. Bi, Ionics, 2015, 21, 981–986 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Zhang, G. C. Wang and Y. Q. Lai, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 157–163 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Gu, J. Lee and Y. Kim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 46940–46946 RSC .
J. D. Zhu, Y. Q. Ge, D. Kim, Y. Lu, C. Chen, M. J. Jiang and X. W. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 176–184 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Yao, K. Yan, W. Y. Li, G. Y. Zheng, D. S. Kong, Z. W. Seh, V. K. Narasimhan, Z. Liang and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3381–3390 CAS .

  (a) Z. A. Zhang, G. C. Wang, Y. Q. Lai, J. Li, Z. Y. Zhang and W. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 157–163 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. H. Chang, S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Small, 2016, 12, 174–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) H. J. Peng, D. W. Wang, J. Q. Huang, X. B. Cheng, Z. Yuan, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500268 CrossRef ; 
  (d) J. Balach, T. Jaumann, M. Klose, S. Oswald, J. Eckert and L. Giebeler, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5285–5291 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) I. Bauer, S. Thieme, J. Brückner, H. Althues and S. Kaskel, J. Power Sources, 2014, 251, 417–422 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) G. M. Zhou, L. Li, D. W. Wang, X. Y. Shan, S. F. Pei, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 641–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (g) Q. S. Wang, Z. Y. Wen, J. H. Yang, J. Jin, X. Huang, X. W. Wu and J. D. Han, J. Power Sources, 2016, 306, 347–353 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Huang, T. Z. Zhuang, Q. Zhang, H. J. Peng, C. M. Chen and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, H. J. Peng, X. Y. Liu, W. Z. Qian and F. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 347 RSC ; 
  (b) M. Agostini and J. Hassoun, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7591 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) L. Y. Li, Y. X. Chen and X. D. Guo, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 1619–1626 RSC ; 
  (d) Y. Zhao, Y. G. Zhang and Z. Bakenov, Solid State Ionics, 2013, 234, 40–45 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y. G. Zhang, Y. Zhao and Z. Bakenov, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 137 CrossRef PubMed ; 
  (f) Y. G. Zhang, Y. Zhao and Z. Bakenov, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 1111–1116 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. M. Rao, X. Y. Geng and X. P. Li, J. Power Sources, 2012, 212, 179–185 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. D. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Lu, J. Zang, M. J. Jiang, D. Kim and X. W. Zhang, Carbon, 2016, 101, 272–280 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) Z. Q. Jin, K. Xie and X. B. Hong, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8889–8898 RSC .
C. Y. Li, A. L. Ward and S. E. Doris, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5724–5729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Du, M. M. Dal-Cin, I. Pinnau, A. Nicalek, G. P. Robertson and M. D. Guiver, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2011, 32, 631–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Zhang, L. P. Yue and Q. S. Kong, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .

          T. Nestler, R. Schmid and W. Münchgesang, American Institute of Physics Conference Series, AIP Publishing,  2014, vol. 1597, pp. 155–184 Search PubMed .

  (a) M. Shaibani, A. Akbari, P. Sheath, C. D. Easton, P. C. Banerjee, K. Konstas, A. Fakhfouri, M. Barghamadi, M. M. Musameh, A. S. Best, T. Rüther, P. J. Mahon, M. R. Hill, A. F. Hollenkamp and M. Majumder, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7768–7779 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Y. Bai, X. Z. Liu, K. Zhu, S. C. Wu and H. S. Zhou, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16094 CrossRef .

  (a) X. Y. Song, W. Q. Ding and B. W. Cheng, Polym. Compos., 2015 DOI:10.1002/pc.23621 ; 
  (b) Z. J. Li, Y. Z. Xu, L. L. Fan, W. M. Kang and B. W. Cheng, Mater. Des., 2016, 92, 95–101 CAS ; 
  (c) S. J. Shi, X. P. Zhuang and B. W. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 13779–13788 RSC ; 
  (d) B. Zhang, X. P. Zhuang and B. W. Cheng, Mater. Lett., 2014, 115, 248–251 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) Y. X. Zhao, W. W. Kang, L. Li, G. L. Yan, X. Q. Wang, X. P. Zhuang and B. W. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 207, 257–265 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) H. Y. Wang and D. Y. Wu, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3601 RSC ; 
  (g) D. H. Tang and D. Y. Wu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2009, 15, 10352–10355 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (h) X. P. Zhuang, K. F. Jia and B. W. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2013, 1, 13779–13788 RSC ; 
  (i) H. Wang, X. P. Zhuang and B. W. Cheng, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 168 Search PubMed .
Y. M. Han, X. B. Duan and Y. B. Li, Mater. Res. Bull., 2015, 68, 160–165 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. J. Zhang, X. Y. Liu and W. Q. Bai, J. Power Sources, 2014, 266, 43–50 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. S. Kim, D. W. Kim and H. T. Jung, Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 27, 2780–2787 Search PubMed .

  (a) S. Z. Xiong, K. Xie and Y. Diao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 83, 78–86 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. Z. Xiong, X. Kai and X. Hong, Ionics, 2012, 18, 249–254 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Zu, N. Azimi, Z. C. Zhang and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14864–14870 CAS .
G. Q. Ma, Z. Y. Wen, Q. S. Wang, C. Shen, J. Jin and X. W. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19355–19359 CAS .
G. Q. Ma, Z. Y. Wen, M. F. Wu, C. Shen, Q. S. Wang, J. Jina and X. W. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14209–14212 RSC .
S. Liu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7783–7789 CAS .
Y. M. Lee, N. S. Choi and J. H. Park, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 964–972 CrossRef .
M. S. Zheng, J. J. Chen and Q. F. Dong, Adv. Mater. Res., 2012, 478, 676–680 Search PubMed .
X. L. Wang, G. Li, M. H. Seo, F. M. Hassan, M. A. Hoque and Z. W. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1501106 CrossRef .

  (a) C. P. Yang, Y. X. Yin, S. F. Zhang, N. W. Li and Y. G. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8058 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) R. Zhang, X. B. Cheng, C. Z. Zhao, H. J. Peng, J. L. Shi, J. Q. Huang, J. F. Wang, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2155–2162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) J. Brückner, S. Thieme and F. B. Hiller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 1284–1289 CrossRef ; 
  (b) Y. Yan, Y. X. Yin and S. Xin, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 91, 58–61 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) M. Hagen, E. Quiroga-González, S. Dörfler, G. Fahrer, J. Tübke, M. J. Hoffmann, H. Althues, R. Speck, M. Krampfert, S. Kaskel and H. Föll, J. Power Sources, 2014, 248, 1058–1066 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. B. Cheng, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, R. Zhang, C. Z. Zhao and Q. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) Y. Yang, M. T. McDowell and A. Jackson, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1486–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) X. L. Zhang, W. K. Wang, A. B. Wang, Y. Q. Huang, K. G. Yuan, Z. B. Yu, J. Y. Qiu and Y. S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11660–11665 RSC .
X. B. Cheng, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 4257–4263 CAS .
S. K. Lee, S. M. Oh, E. Park, B. Scrosati, J. Hassoun, M. S. Park, Y. J. Kim, H. Kim, I. Belharouak and Y. K. Sun, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2863–2868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. F. Xiang, P. C. Shi, P. Bhattacharya, X. L. Chen, D. H. Mei, M. E. Bowden, J. M. Zheng, J. G. Zhang and W. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 318, 170–177 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) D. Zhou, R. L. Liu, Y. B. He, F. Y. Li, M. Liu, B. H. Li, Q. H. Yang, Q. Cai and F. Y. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502214 CrossRef ; 
  (b) R. G. Cao, J. Z. Chen, K. S. Han, W. Xu, D. H. Mei, P. Bhattacharya, M. H. Engelhard, K. T. Mueller, J. Liu and J. G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3059–3066 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. Liu, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7783–7789 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (d) A. Krause, S. Dörfler, M. Piwko, Florian M. Wisser, Tony Jaumann, E. Ahrens, L. Giebeler, H. Althues, S. Schädlich, J. Grothe, A. Jeffery, M. Grube, J. Brückner, J. Martin, J. Eckert, S. Kaskel, T. Mikolajick and W. M. Weber, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 27982 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) W. D. Zhou, S. F. Wang, Y. T. Li, S. Xin, A. Manthiram and J. B. Goodenough, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 9385–9388 CrossRef PubMed .

  (a) P. Arora, R. E. White and M. Doyle, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3647–3667 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Yao, K. Okuno, T. Iwaki, S. Tanase, K. Harada, M. Kato, K. Emura and T. Sakai, J. Power Sources, 2007, 171, 1033–1039 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) M. Yao, K. Okuno, T. Iwaki, M. Kato, S. Tanase, K. Emura and T. Sakai, J. Power Sources, 2007, 173, 545–549 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yu, B. Lee, S. Choi, S. Park, B. H. Hong and Y. E. Sung, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3203–3206 RSC .

  (a) M. Yao, K. Okuno, T. Iwaki, T. Awazu and T. Sakai, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 2077–2081 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) K. Kuratani, K. Okuno, T. Iwaki, M. Kato, N. Takeichi, T. Miyuki, T. Awazu, M. Majima and T. Sakai, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 10788–10790 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 569–576 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Electrochem. Commun., 2014, 38, 91–95 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9590–9596 RSC .
L. Wang, X. M. He, J. J. Li, J. Gao, M. Fang, G. Y. Tian, J. L. Wang and S. S. Fan, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 623–627 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Kim, J. T. Lee and G. Yushin, J. Power Sources, 2013, 226, 256–265 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Wang, X. M. He and J. J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2013, 239, 623–627 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Y. G. Zhang, Z. Bakenov and Y. Zhao, Ionics, 2014, 20, 803–808 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y. G. Zhang, Z. Bakenov, Y. Zhao, A. Konarov, Q. Wang and P. Chen, Ionics, 2014, 20, 803–808 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) X. B. Cheng, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, L. Zhu, S. H. Yang, Y. Liu, H. W. Zhang, W. C. Zhu, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2014, 261, 264–270 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Babu, K. Ababtain, K. Y. S. Ng and L. M. R. Arava, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8763 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) H. J. Peng, W. T. Xu, L. Zhu, D. W. Wang, J. Q. Huang, X. B. Cheng, Z. Yuan, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201602071 ; 
  (c) L. Zielke, C. Barchasz, S. Waluś, F. Alloin, J. C. Leprêtre, A. Spettl, V. Schmidt, A. Hilger, I. Manke, J. Banhart, R. Zengerle and S. Thiele, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. H. Chang, S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Small, 2016, 12, 174–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. S. Su and A. Manthiram, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 8817–8819 RSC ; 
  (c) Y. D. Pan, S. L. Chou, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 34131 RSC ; 
  (d) J. Q. Huang, Z. L. Xu, S. Abouali, M. A. Garakani and J. K. Kim, Carbon, 2016, 99, 624–632 CrossRef CAS .
L. B. Xing, K. Xi, Q. Y. Li, Z. Su, C. Lai, X. H. Zhao and R. V. Kumar, J. Power Sources, 2016, 303, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) K. Zhang, Q. Li and L. Y. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2014, 121, 198–201 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Balach, T. Jaumann and M. Klose, J. Phys. Chem., 2015, 119, 4580–4587 CAS ; 
  (c) Y. S. Su and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1166 CrossRef PubMed .
S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4184–4187 RSC .
J. G. Wang, Y. Yang and Y. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 168, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Chung, P. Han, R. Singhal, V. Kalra and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500738 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, M. B. Zheng and Z. X. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 10910–10918 CAS .
J. Q. Huang, B. Zhang and Z. L. Xu, J. Power Sources, 2015, 285, 43–50 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Xiao, Z. Yang, L. Wang, H. G. Nie, M. Zhong, Q. Q. Lai, X. J. Xu, L. J. Zhang and S. M. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2891–2898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) X. F. Wang, Z. X. Wang and L. Q. Chen, J. Power Sources, 2013, 242, 65–69 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. Y. Chai, J. X. Wang and H. Y. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 224–232 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. Q. Ma, Z. Y. Wen and J. Jin, J. Power Sources, 2014, 267, 542–546 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. Q. Ma, Z. Y. Wen and Q. S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 273, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, F. R. Qin and J. Fang, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 1025–1029 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1360–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yan, X. Yang, W. Zhou, H. Zhang, X. Li and H. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 26273–26280 RSC .
G. M. Zhou, S. F. Pei and L. Li, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 625–631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Fu, Y. S. Su and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 4, 82–94 Search PubMed .
Y. B. Sun, G. Li, Y. C. Lai, D. L. Zeng and H. S. Cheng, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 22048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally and mainly to this study. Nanping Deng should be regarded as first joint authors.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Weimin Kang	Weimin Kang obtained his PhD in textile chemical engineering from China Tianjin Polytechnic University in 2012. His research topic for his PhD was Electrostatic Spinning Nanofibers. Meanwhile, he was regarded as a teacher from 2007–2012 at Tianjin Polytechnic University. He was appointed Associate Professor of Textile Engineering at Tianjin Polytechnic University in 2012. His scientific interests are porous carbon materials, the preparation of novel nano fibers, and their application in the field of energy materials, catalytic materials, and filtration materials.
Nanping Deng	Nanping Deng obtained his Master's Degree in Textile Engineering, Wuhan Textile University, China in 2012. Now, he is a doctoral student and studies at Tianjin Polytechnic University, China. His research interests are fundamental energy science and the commercial application of porous carbon materials, electrostatic spinning of nanofibers, and lithium–sulfur batteries.
Quanxiang Li	Quanxiang Li received his B.S. from Shandong University in 2007 and his M.S. degrees at Tianjin Polytechnic University in 2010. He obtained his PhD in Material Engineering from Deakin University in 2016. His PhD focused on hierarchical composites from carbon fibres modified with carbon nanotubes. He is currently working as an Associate Research Fellow of the Institute for Frontier Materials at Deakin University, and his research interests focus on hybrid composites for various applications in lightweight materials, water remediation, and energy storage systems.
Dayong Wu	Professor Dayong Wu received his PhD degree at the Graduate School of the Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2002, majoring in organic chemistry. From 2002–2005, he undertook postdoctoral study in the field of catalysis at the Institute of Inorganic Chemistry, the University of Tübingen, Germany. In October 2005, he started his work at the Technical Institute of Physics and Chemistry, CAS, in the areas of functional polymers, membrane technology, and nanocomposite materials.
Minoo Naebe	Minoo Naebe received her BSc (Hons.) and M.S. degrees from the Isfahan University of Technology (IUT), Isfahan, Iran, and her PhD degree from Deakin University, Australia (2008). She is a Senior Research Fellow and the Theme Leader for High Performance Materials with Carbon Nexus, Institute for Frontier Materials, Deakin University. Her research interests include advanced polymer composites and fibres, and their applications in various industries, including aerospace, automotive, oil, and gas.
Bowen Cheng	Bowen Cheng graduated from the Department of Textile Chemical Engineering, Tianjin Polytechnic University, China, where he continued doing research on the mass production of environmentally friendly flame-retardant cellulose nanofibers. He obtained his PhD in Chemical Engineering in 2003, and studied in Germany at the Hochschule Niederrhein as a doctoral exchange student in 2001. He was appointed a Professor of Textile Engineering at Tianjin Polytechnic University in 2003. After a short visiting and studying, he was appointed as a research associate at the University of Leeds. His current research interests are nanocarbon, new fiber materials, advanced functional nonwovens, battery conversion, and storage materials.

 	Fig. 1  (a) The schematic diagram of structure and charge–discharge process involved in Li–S cell6 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; (b) summary of the effects of PS dissolution, shuttle phenomenon, effect on the cathode, insoluble substance during charge and discharge18 Copyright 2015 Springer; (c) summary of capacity degradation mechanisms of Li–S batteries11 Copyright 2015 Royal Society of Chemistry; (d) first discharge curves of Li/TEGDME/S batteries using Al current collectors with storage time at 25 °C (ref. 22) Copyright 2006 Elsevier; (e, f) schematic representation of reduction pathways for polysulfide anions. (e) Lithium polysulfides (f) in Li–S systems, proposed based on the computed free energies of various reactions and reduction potentials. (e) Each row represents the mechanism of formation of small polysulfides (Sn, n ≤ 3) from longer chain sulfides (Sn, 4 ≤ n ≤ 8). In each row, adjacent yellow cells represent electrochemical processes; cells with Rn (green colored cells) represent chemical transformations, and cells with blue color (with 2Li+) represent addition of two lithium ions. (f) Each row represents mechanism of formation of small chain lithium sulfides (Li2Sn, n ≤ 3) (last column) from lithium polysulfides (Li2Sn, n ≤ 8). In each row, adjacent yellow cells represent electrochemical (two electron reduction) reactions. In each row, the green cell represents reaction with 2Li+ ions and subsequent fragmentation to give the species shown in the red cell (second last column). The species in the red cell undergoes further reaction sequences including reduction, addition of lithium ion, and subsequent fragmentation to form the species in the final column, which are shown in the subsequent rows17 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 
S8 + 16Li → 8Li2S	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
S32− + 2e− → S22− + S−2	(4)
S22− + 2e− → S2− + S−2	(5)
2Li → 2e− + 2Li+	(6)

S8 → S82−	0.25	12.5	210
S82− → S62−	0.33	16.7	280
S62− → S42−	0.5	25	420
S42− → Li2S2	1	25	840
Li2S2 → Li2S	2	100	1680

First cycle, dissolution and 2 step reduction	Chemical equilibrium	Equilibrium conc. of unreacted intermediates
S8 + 2e− + 2Li+ → Li2S8	Li2S6 ↔ LiS3 (radical)	Li2Sn + Li2S
Reductive dissociation	Dominating low plateau electrochemical reaction	Irreversible capacity loss
Li2S8 + 2e− + 2Li+ → Li2S8 + Li2S2	LiS3 + e− + Li + → Li2S3	PS oxidation
Or	Association and precipitation	Lithium solvent/salt reactions
Li2S8 + 2e− + 2Li+ → 2Li2S4	Li2S3 + Li2S4 → Li2S6 + Li2S	SEI formation and re-formation

	And many other reactions	Loss of active surface area

	
	Electrically isolated precipitation

	
	And many other reactions
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Column 1–2: Top view SEM images of sulfur cathodes containing different carbon blacks. Scale bar indicates 100 nm (left) and 100 mm (right). Column 3: Optical microscope images of 13 mm diameter disc electrodes. Top to bottom (a, b, c, d, e): Printex-A, Super C65, Printex-XE2, Ketjenblack EC-600JD and standard (Super C65 and Printex-XE2 in a ratio of 1:1)36 Copyright 2012 Elsevier; (b–c) SEM observation for the formation of the hCNC and schematic construction and characterizations of S@hCNC composite50a Copyright 2015 Elsevier; (d–e) schematic illustration of preparing S@NG nano-composite and these soluble Li2Sx can be trapped by the reconstituted N functional groups52a Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and mixed functional groups with N- and S-52b Copyright 2015 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The synthesis processes of the S-PTh composites53d Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society; (b) the synthesis route for creating sulfur-polyacrylonitrile (SPAN) nanocomposite cathode materials53e Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society; (c) scheme of PEDOT:PSS-coated CMK-3/sulfur composite for improving the cathode performance53g Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Fabrication and microstructures of oxides/carbon nanostructures. (1) Schematic illustration of synthesis of oxides/carbon using the kapok tree fibres (KF) as both template and carbon sources. ((2–1)–(6–1)) SEM images of Al2O3/C, CeO2/C, La2O3/C, MgO/C and CaO/C composites, respectively (scale bar = 50 mm). ((2–2)–(6–2)) The corresponding TEM images of Al2O3/C, CeO2/C, La2O3/C, MgO/C and CaO/C, respectively (scale bar = 300 nm). ((2–3)–(6–3)) The corresponding HRTEM images of Al2O3/C, CeO2/C, La2O3/C, MgO/C and CaO/C, respectively (scale bar = 3 nm); (b) lithium diffusion mechanism on the surface of various metal oxides. (1–5) Minimum energy path for lithium ion diffusion on Al2O3 (110), CeO2 (111), La2O3 (001), MgO (100) and CaO (100) surfaces, respectively. (6) Potential energy profiles for Li+ diffusion along different adsorption sites on the oxide surface59d Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 5  SEM observation or schematic model and cell performance of various nanostructure sulfur-based composite cathode electrodes: (a) nanocubes65a Copyright 2015 Elsevier; (b) nanosheets65b Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group; (c) nanosphere65c Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group; (d) nanotube65d Copyright 2015 Elsevier; (e) nanocages65h Copyright 2015 Elsevier and (f) nanoshell65i Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM observation or schematic model and cell performance of various porous structure sulfur-based composite cathode electrodes: (a) disordered mesoporous carbon66a Copyright 2014 Elsevier, (b) bamboo-derived carbon owning abundant micropores and mesopores66c Copyright 2015 King Saud University, (c) tunable porous carbon66d Copyright 2015 Elsevier, (d, g) ordered meso-microporous core–shell carbon66e Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society, (e) the cylindrical and gyroidal mesoporous carbon66f Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, (f) hierarchical porous graphene66g Copyright 2013 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  SEM observation or schematic model and cell performance of various bionic structures of natural biological shapes for sulfur-based composite cathode electrodes: (a) core–shell and yolk–shell nanocomposite67a Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society, (b) 3D coral-like nitrogen and sulfur co-doped mesoporous carbon67b Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group, (c, d) a novel cauliflower-like hierarchical porous C/S material67c Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group, (e) a hierarchically honeycomb-like carbon67d Copyright 2014 Elsevier, (f) coaxial-cable structure composite cathode material67e Copyright 2015 Elsevier, (g) three-dimensional sulfur/graphene multifunctional hybrid sponges67f Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group, (h) Aspergillus flavus conidia67g Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group, (i) a graphene foam68a Copyright 2015 Elsevier, (j) split-half-tubular67h Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, (k) a freestanding composite film67i Copyright 2015 Elsevier, (l) pie-like structured electrode68b Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic model of cathode including manganese dioxide nanosheets-decorated hollow sulfur spheres69 Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  The different binder effect on the battery capacity85 Copyright 2015 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of the components of a state of the art Li/S battery with an electrolyte consisting of LiTFSI and LiNO3 in a 1:1 mixture of DME and DIOX91 Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Solubility of S8 and Li2Sm in [DEME] [TFSA], 0.64 M Li [TFSA]/[DEME][TFSA] and 0.98 M Li [TFSA]/TEGDME. The solubility is presented as the atomic concentration of S105b Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society; (b) anionic effects on solvated ionic liquids in suppressing the dissolution of PS for lithium–sulfur batteries106a Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  The cycle performance of lithium electrode at high current density: (a, b) galvanostatic voltageetime curves for Li/electrolyte/Li symmetric cells respectively in LiF-SI-LiTFSI/DOL-DME solution and LiTFSI/DOL-DME solution with current density of 10 mA cm−2 and 54 C cm−2 per process; (c) SEM micrograph of lithium deposit after 51 cycles in LiFSI-LiTFSI/DOL-DME solution with current density of 10 mA cm−2 and 54 C cm−2 per process; (d) schematic illustration of interfacial competitive reaction of FSI anion with lithium metal108a Copyright 2014 Elsevier.	 


Celgard	82.5 ± 0.4	7.6 ± 0.15 × 10−4	0.298 ± 0.007
P(VDF-HFP)	90.3 ± 0.5	2.6 ± 0.04 × 10−4	0.310 ± 0.007
Li-Nafion	24.6 ± 0.2	2.1 ± 0.04 × 10−5	0.986 ± 0.012
Li-PFSD	31.7 ± 0.2	1.2 ± 0.02 × 10−4	0.958 ± 0.011

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic diagrams illustrating the electrospinning process, possible mechanism for the formation of tree-like nanofibers and Typical FE-SEM image of PVDF/tetrabutyl ammonium chloride (TBAC) tree-like nanofibers and the inset is the optical image of tree branches123b Copyright 2016 Elsevier. (b) Synthesis process of batteries separators by electrostatic spinning and electro-blown spinning.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustrations of Li dendrite growth on the plate Li metal and Li deposits on nano-structure anode with metallic Li contained in the fibrous Li7B6 matrix and the related performances138 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (b) Related performance tests of Si/SiOx nanosphere materials139 Copyright 2014 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Flowcharts showing the porous cathode preparation process: (a) image of the NC current collector, (b) schematic model of the NC current collector, (c) flowchart of step 1, (d) flowchart of step 2, (e) image of the S–NC cathode, and (f) schematic model of the S–NC cathode145c Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. (B) Left: surface area effects on electrochemical properties, Right: schematic representation of conventional carbon cathode based Li/S battery configuration and novel metal/PS/metal battery configuration with majority of PS shuttling mechanism confined on the surface of three dimensional current collectors149a Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 16  A schematic cell configuration of rechargeable Li–S batteries: (a) traditional configuration with severe “shuttle effect” and Li2S poison problems and (b) New configuration with the MWCNT interlayer150b Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

MWCNT	838	1446	100	855	59.1	0.41
Microporous carbon	1675	1176	100	1000	85.0	0.15
Carbonized egg membrane	168	1327	100	1000	75.4	0.25
Carbonized leaf	336	1320	100	850	64.4	0.36
Acetylene black	168	1491	50	1062	71.2	0.58
Graphene/carbon black	168	1260	100	894	71.0	0.29
Fe3C/CNF	200	1177	100	893	75.9	0.24
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally and mainly to this study. Nanping Deng should be regarded as first joint authors.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
