Inorganic ferroelectric thin films and their composites for flexible electronic and energy device applications: current progress and perspectives  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC04424B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC04424B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, 11, 827-858Inorganic ferroelectric thin films and their composites for flexible electronic and energy device applications: current progress and perspectives

        
          
            Ampattu R. 
            Jayakrishnan
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Anuj 
            Kumar
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sahana 
            Druvakumar
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rosmin 
            John
          
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Meera 
            Sudeesh
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Venkata Sreenivas 
            Puli
          
          
        
      *e, 
      
        
          
            José P. B. 
            Silva
          
          
        
      *fg, 
      
        
          
            Maria J. M. 
            Gomes
          
          
        
      fg and 

        
          
            Koppole C. 
            Sekhar
          
          
        
      *d
aDepartment of Physics, Sree Narayana Guru College of Advanced Studies, Nangiarkulangara, Alappuzha, Kerala 690513, India. E-mail: ajayakrishna@iisc.ac.in
bCenter for Nanoscience and Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore, Karnataka 560012, India
cDepartment of Physics, St. Aloysius College, Edathua, Alappuzha, Kerala 689573, India
dDepartment of Physics, School of Basic and Applied Sciences, Central University of Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur, 610 005, India. E-mail: koppolechandrasekhar@cutn.ac.in
eMaterials and Manufacturing Directorate, Air Force Research Laboratory, 3005 Hobson Way, Wright Patterson Air Force Base, OH 45433, USA. E-mail: venkata.puli.ctr@afresearchlab.com
fPhysics Center of Minho and Porto Universities (CF-UM-UP), University of Minho, Campus de Gualtar, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal. E-mail: josesilva@fisica.uminho.pt
gLaboratory of Physics for Materials and Emergent Technologies, LapMET, University of Minho, 4710-057 Braga, Portugal
Received 
      18th October 2022
    , Accepted 28th November 2022First published on 29th November 2022AbstractScientific research is involved in the inception of flexible energy devices, and ferroelectric (FE) materials are making their mark on the process. In particular, devices based on inorganic FE (IFE) materials are finding a remarkable role in flexible energy devices, such as energy harvesters, infrared (IR) sensors, and energy storage capacitors because the latest technologies are particularly concentrating on self-powered flexible sensors and energy harvesters for a sustainable world. Moreover, the combination of IFEs with organic/inorganic polymers in flexible devices seems to satisfy the requirements of high mechanical strength, piezoelectric coefficient, pyroelectric coefficient, and energy storage properties essential for harvesting, sensing, and storage applications, respectively. In this review article, a systematic analysis of flexible IFE-based energy materials is presented. Starting with a brief introduction about energy generation in dielectric materials, the importance of IFEs, and the current state-of-the-art of IFE-based flexible materials in harvesting energy, IR sensing, and storing energy capacity are discussed. Further, the existing challenges and future perspectives in facilitating high-quality flexible IFE devices for real-world applications are envisaged.
Ampattu R. Jayakrishnan
Jayakrishnan A. R. is working as an Assistant Professor in Physics at Sree Narayana Guru College of Advanced Studies, Nangiarkulangara, Alappuzha, Kerala, India. He received his PhD degree in Physics from Central University of Tamil Nadu, India in 2021. He was a post-doctoral fellow in the Centre for Nanoscience and Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, India. His research interests are ferroelectric energy storage and ferroelectric energy harvesting materials.
Rosmin John
Rosmin John is working as an Assistant Professor in Physics at St. Aloysius College, Edathua, Kerala, India. She is a PhD candidate in Physics at Mahatma Gandhi University, Kerala. Her research interests include semiconductor photovoltaics and piezoelectric energy harvesters.
Venkata Sreenivas Puli
Dr Venkata Sreenivas Puli is working as a materials researcher at Smart Nanomaterials Solutions, Orlando, Florida, USA. He obtained his PhD in Chemical Physics in 2012 from the University of Puerto Rico. He has contributed more than 60 journal articles in international peer reviewed journals and is serving as a peer reviewer for more than 25 international journals. His research interests focus on ferroelectric energy storage and multiferroic magneto electric ceramics and thin films.
José P. B. Silva
José P. B. Silva is a junior researcher at Centre of Physics of University of Minho and Porto (CF-UM-UP). He graduated in Physics and Chemistry in 2008 and received his PhD in 2013 from the University of Minho (Portugal). Between 2014 and 2019, he was a Post-doctoral Fellow at the Materials Physics Institute of the University of Porto (IFIMUP) and at CF-UM-UP, both in Portugal. His current research interests focus on understanding the relationship between structure and functionality of ferroelectric oxide thin films for memory and energy storage applications.
Maria J. M. Gomes
Maria J. M. Gomes is Professor at the Physics Department of the University of Minho. She obtained her PhD from the University of Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France in 1990. She worked for more than 25 years on thin films technology, namely in the ferroelectric and semiconductor materials. Her current research interests include the fabrication and physical properties of lead-free ferroelectric thin films.
Koppole C. Sekhar
Koppole Chandra Sekhar has been working as UGC-Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics, Central University of Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur since July 2015. He has contributed around 80 journal articles and his current h-index is 19. His research interests focus on ferroelectric-semiconductor heterostructures for memory, energy, environmental and photovoltaic applications.
1. Introduction
Humans have always been intimidated by darkness, and electrical energy is the prime source that saves the world from darkness. Nowadays, the depletion of non-renewable energy sources and expansion of the global population have caused a surge in hunger for sustainable energy.1,2 Therefore, the research community is looking at all possible ways of providing electrical energy to satisfy the human world, from consumer electronics to ultramodern space technology, and this is rooted in the development of energy devices. Introducing flexibility to these devices can dramatically enhance their applications for the emerging Internet of Things (IoT). IoT, which is considered one of the most important advances in technology, uses batteries as a key source of energy. However, batteries require a huge amount of money for maintenance in terms of replacement and power construction.2 Additionally, the current IoT uses sensors that are directly connected to power sources. Thus, failure or periodic replacement of the power source interrupts the smooth operation. An amicable solution to this problem is the development of long-term energy storage devices and self-powered energy harvesters.2
In fact, recently, dielectric materials have been receiving a great deal of attention in the areas of energy harvesting, sensing, and energy storage applications.3–13Fig. 1 shows the domains where dielectric materials make their mark. But there are several intrinsic parameters that determine the performance of a dielectric material as an energy harvester, an infra-red (IR) sensor, or an energy storage capacitor.3–13 For example, energy harvesting applications require dielectric materials that can convert energy from mechanical vibrations and heat fluctuations into electrical energy.1–4 On the other hand, IR sensing applications demand dielectric materials with a large spontaneous polarization change w.r.t. thermal deformation.14 While energy storage demands dielectric materials that can store electrical energy in terms of electrostatic displacement.11–13 Therefore, a dielectric material that can perform the functions of energy harvester, infrared sensing, and energy storage will be a very good option for future energy technology.
 Fig. 1  Various applications of dielectric materials in the field of energy and electronic devices. 
Flexible energy-storage technologies are becoming more and more popular as a result of their distinctive and promising benefits, such as flexibility, malleability, and light weight. These features allow for the development of portable, flexible, and even wearable electronic equipment, such as soft electronic goods, roll-up screens, and wearable technology. Because of this, great efforts have been made in recent years to meet the needs of upcoming flexible energy-storage devices, and substantial development has been witnessed.6 Organic polymer materials, such as polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF) and its copolymer poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoro ethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE)), have become pioneering materials in the development of flexible electronic devices owing to their excellent piezoelectric properties, chemical stability, mechanical strength, and biocompatibility.15–18 PVDF and P(VDF-TrFE) are easy to synthesize and combine with functional materials, which make them more appropriate for flexible sensing and energy harvesting domains.16,17 It is reported that pure PVDF and P(VDF-TrFE) have the best d33 of 30–40 pC N−1 compared to other polymers owing to the presence of a high β-content responsible for superior piezoelectric current generation.16 For instance, Lv et al., in 2022, developed a wireless sensor using a highly piezoelectric P(VDF-TrFE), whose d33 is nearly 33.7 pC N−1.16 Further Watanabe et al., enhanced the sensitivity of P(VDF-TrFE) by altering the molecular weight of P(VDF-TrFE) using a novel solution processing method.17 Even though these polymer materials are very good when it comes to their sensing and mechanical compatibility, their electrical properties such as ferroelectric and piezoelectric properties are comparatively very much less than those of inorganic piezoelectric materials.17 In this regard, ceramic–polymer composites are attractive for flexible devices due to the superior functional properties of ceramics and the flexibility of polymers. For instance, adding appropriate additives to these organic polymers or the formation of composites with polymers can improve the piezoelectric coefficient.17 For example, a composite between an IFE and an organic polymer satisfies the need for high mechanical strength, high thermal stability, piezoelectricity, pyroelectricity, and energy storage properties compared to a pure organic polymer, which opens a new window for energy harvesting, IR sensing, and energy storage devices.1,7–9 Additionally, organic polymers lack thermal stability, undergo degradation, produce toxic smoke upon burning, and, last but not least, are derived from a natural source such as petroleum.1,7 As a remedial solution, researchers are trying to develop IFE-based flexible devices on inorganic polymers (including polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)) and plastic substrates (including mica).7 Therefore, it is important to summarize recent developments in the field of IFEs and the possible promising combination of these materials with organic polymers.
This review article targets recent developments of IFEs in flexible energy harvesting, infrared sensing, and energy storage applications. Ferroelectric materials (FEs) and their advancement are becoming a vast area of research interest.9–13 Sensors are crucial in IoT since electrical impulses can be recognised and processed right away. Due to their asymmetric crystal structure, ferroelectric materials are the best choice for creating sensors since they are extremely sensitive to external stimuli, including mechanical energy, thermal energy, electrical energy, and light energy. As an illustration, a ferroelectric sensor has the capacity to directly convert mechanical, thermal, and light energy into electrical energy in the absence of any external input. Thus, FEs are suitable for self-powered sensors in real-time applications. Fig. 2 shows the yearly development of FEs and flexible FEs in terms of publications. However, the science community is curious about self-powered flexible energy harvesting combined with energy storage devices that can be used as power sensors and in electronics for IoT applications. Recent developments in flexible device fabrication show that IFEs play a crucial role in the device fabrication process. Therefore, we include a concise briefing of the ideas adopted by researchers to improve the quality of flexible energy devices using IFEs. This literature review portrays the developments in IFE-based flexible materials in the areas of energy harvesting, sensing, and energy storage properties in a systematic way. To the best of our knowledge, there are no reviews focusing on an investigation of IFE-based flexible devices for energy harvesting, IR sensing, and energy storage applications.4–9,11–13,19–28 We are certain that the concepts presented here can encompass the outlook for IFE-based flexible devices and that is the sole aim of this review article.
 Fig. 2  Yearly publications on FEs and flexible FEs up to May 2022 (source: web of science data base (https://apps.webofknowledge.com/)) keyword search: topic = (ferroelectrics). 
2. Dielectric materials and output generation
Before we move onto a more detailed investigation of different IFEs used for energy harvesting, sensing, and energy storage applications, a basic understanding of the properties of dielectric materials and their importance in these applications is indispensable.
2.1. Electric displacement and output current generation
The electric displacement in a dielectric material is given by: D = ε0E + P(1)where E, ε0, and P represent the applied electric field, permittivity of free space, and polarization, respectively.24 However, Maxwell's equations portray the displacement current (JD) in terms of E and P, which is given by:29 (2)Thus, JD is a complete function of polarization vector P when there is no electric field and, if the surface charge density of the dielectric material is σp, then: (3)This gives the output current generated by the dielectric material. Hence, the output current is entirely a function of polarization. Therefore, a material with a very high polarization can generate a superior output current.29
Generally, the polarization in a dielectric material is governed by the dipole orientation. Based on the dipole orientation, dielectric materials are classified into linear dielectrics (LDs), paraelectric materials (PEs), ferroelectrics (FEs), and anti-ferroelectrics (AFEs).12 Hence, ferroelectric materials can be considered the optimum option for generating a high output current owing to their exceptional polarization due to high dipole orientation, resulting in an enhanced surface charge density with supreme output performance.
2.2. Dielectric materials and energy harvesting
Energy harvesters involve the conversion of wasted energy in the form of light, heat, mechanical energy, etc. into electrical energy.1 Therefore, a material with the best energy scavenging skill to capture wasted energy and transform it into useful electrical energy can be explored for energy harvesting applications. Generally, a dielectric material can generate electrical energy using the squandered energy.22 A more detailed explanation on energy conversion by a dielectric material is portrayed in this section.

2.2.1. Piezoelectric current generation. 
A great deal of energy is lost as mechanical and thermal energy from different sources, such as sun, human motion, and wind.1 Consider the possibility of converting this lost energy into meaningful electricity. This would be revolutionary and provide a new path to self-sustaining technology. Nanogenerators (NGs) are energy-conversion devices that transform unused energy into usable electric power. Piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs) are NGs that use piezoelectric materials to transform mechanical energy into electrical energy.1 A piezoelectric material is a non-centrosymmetric material that uses mechanical energy to generate electrical energy. A ferroelectric material is highly piezoelectric due to its non-centrosymmetric nature and can be explored for piezoelectric applications.30 A mechanical force on a ferroelectric material creates stress in the crystal structure, subsequently inducing polarization through dipole deformation. This in turn forms surface charges (say electrons), which can be released from the material as piezoelectric potential through an external circuit, as shown in Fig. 3.31 The output voltage generated with mechanical deformation in the z-direction without an applied electric field in a piezoelectric material is given by: (4)where d is the thickness of the piezoelectric material under an applied strain and ε is the dielectric permittivity of the piezoelectric material.30
 Fig. 3  Ferroelectric PENG under (a) no applied force and (b) applied force in the z-direction. 
There are different methods to generate electrical energy in a piezoelectric NG. The introduction of piezoelectricity in a material necessitates a non-centrosymmetric structure. In such materials, it is possible to separate the centers of positive and negative charges with the help of mechanical deformation by different environmental effects, such as movement of the human body, thermal change, and wind.1 For instance, the piezoelectric current can be generated through thermal deformation. The temperature change hinders compression and expansion through a constant stress k on the non-centrosymmetric material. Consequently, a forced charge imbalance develops on the material surface and is termed a secondary piezoelectric effect. Thus, the charges at the surface can be driven through the external circuit by an induced piezoelectric potential.1 However, the ability of a piezoelectric material to induce piezoelectric potential depends on the piezoelectric coefficient denoted by d and is different for different materials.


2.2.2. Pyroelectric current generation. 
As we have already discussed in the previous section, dielectric materials with a non-centrosymmetric crystal structure possess a polarization capability. On the other hand, pyroelectric materials are dielectric materials with polarization change w.r.t. temperature change, which generate a pyroelectric current. When a pyroelectric material is subjected to a temperature change (heating or cooling), the thermal deformation develops a change in net saturation polarization Ps. This arises from the separation of the bound charges due to a change in the net dipole moment. As a consequence, surface charges (electrons and ions) will be created and, thereby, the production of an electric current or potential called the pyroelectric effect or pyroelectricity. A pyroelectric nanogenerator (PyNG) fulfils the function of electrical energy generation using the thermal changes. A schematic illustration of the generation of pyroelectric current in a PyNG is shown in Fig. 4.1
 Fig. 4  Pyroelectric material under (a) constant temperature, (b) heating, and (c) cooling.1 
The temperature-dependent pyroelectric current is given by:32,33 (5) Qnet = pAΔT (open circuit)(6)where i is the generated current, Qnet is the net charge, A is the surface area of the pyroelectric material,  is the temperature change in the short-circuit case, and ΔT is the temperature change in the open-circuit case. Furthermore, the pyroelectric coefficient (p) is a function of polarization change, electric field (E), and stress (k), which is given by:1 (7)Therefore, it is possible to induce a pyroelectric current by two means, as shown in the schematic representation in Fig. 5. In the first case, the pyroelectric potential generated will be a function of constant E and thermal change. This is known as a primary pyroelectric effect. In the second case, the pyroelectric material exposed to a thermal change is clamped by a constant stress (κ) to hinder expansion and compression. This in turn induces an electric displacement via a piezoelectric effect in the material. As a result, a primary piezoelectric effect will be signified with the help of a piezo response via thermal deformation. This is known as a secondary pyroelectric effect.14
 Fig. 5  Primary and secondary pyroelectric effects.1 
In both cases, a material with a very good pyroelectric coefficient could be a suitable candidate for pyroelectric current generation. Furthermore, the pyroelectric materials are dielectric in nature. Therefore, the capacitance (C), voltage (V), applied electric field (E), and total energy (U) are given by:25 (8) (9) (10) (11)where ε is the permittivity (under constant stress) and d is the thickness of the material. Fig. 6 shows a comparison of the different properties of the most commonly used materials for energy harvesting applications.
 Fig. 6  Comparison of electrical properties of commonly used materials: (a) ferroelectric polymer and semiconductor materials; (b) IFEs.8 

2.3. Dielectric materials and infrared (IR) sensing
Sensors are crucial in futuristic military applications, robotics, e-skin, etc. High-end applications, such as military uses and robotics, demand sensing capabilities with high resolution, sensitivity, and a quick response time.34,35 For instance, threat identification in defense or military applications entails sensors for applications such as tracking, night vision, guidance systems, and rifle sights.34 This can be accomplished with the help of a sensor that can detect IR radiation. Generally, IR sensors are categorized into two types, namely photon-based and thermal-based, depending on the operating mechanism. In photon detectors, the incoming photon is absorbed by a semiconducting material that develops a photocurrent at the p–n junction, thereby generating an electrical signal to operate the detector. Usually, group III–V and II–VI semiconductor materials, such as gallium arsenide and mercury cadmium telluride, are preferred for the fabrication of photon detectors.35 However, the processing of these materials is challenging due to their low growth rate and the necessity for cooling (usually to 77 K) to reduce thermal noise for smooth functioning in the IR spectrum at longer wavelength. As a consequence, device fabrication becomes bulkier and more expensive. In contrast, thermal detectors work on the principle of absorbing IR radiation to create thermal fluctuations, thereby generating the required electrical energy for the smooth operation of the detector. Besides, these thermal-based IR detectors no longer require separate cooling and consume little power for the functioning of the detector. This makes them ideal candidates for self-powered, low-cost, compact, and lightweight applications from basic consumer electronics to ultramodern defense technology.35,36
The performance of a thermal-based IR detector depends on the ability of a material to induce a temperature change under the influence of incident IR radiation.14 For example, every heat-emitting body is a source of IR radiation and a material that can generate thermal change as a function of incident IR radiation will be a suitable option for the fabrication of an IR detector. However, a pyroelectric material is capable of generating a current response to thermal changes (as previously mentioned in Section 2.2.2) and can be used as a sensing element for IR detectors. A pyroelectric IR (PIR) detector has advantages such as sensitivity over the entire electromagnetic spectrum (depending on the materials), low operating power, fast response (picosecond range), and cost effectiveness. Moreover, the pyroelectric materials used in PIR respond to thermal changes at ambient temperatures and in the frequency range 20–60 Hz.14 Such an ability of a PIR is explored in applications, such as image detection, burglar alarms, fire detection, and pollution monitoring.14,35 For instance, a schematic representation of a pyroelectric material as a sensing element for detecting images is shown in Fig. 7. A pyroelectric IR (PIR) imaging detector consists of a pyroelectric material, a multiplexer chip, a Fresnel lens usually made of germanium, and an infrared source.14 The germanium lens concentrates the IR radiation towards the pyroelectric material. The IR causes a temperature change in the pyroelectric material and generates an electrical signal in the material. This electrical signal is transferred to the multiplexer, which is soldered to the pyroelectric material. Finally, a video synthesizer creates a pattern or image of the source of IR radiation. Here, a germanium lens is used because it is transparent to IR radiation and opaque to visible light. Furthermore, a stationary object produces constant IR radiation, which will not lead to a temperature change. Therefore, a light chopper is introduced between the germanium lens and the pyroelectric material to induce a thermal change to detect a stationary object.14
 Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the working of a thermal detector. 
As previously discussed in Section 2.2.2, the superior performance of a pyroelectric material is a function of the pyroelectric coefficient and a huge spontaneous polarization change with temperature. In another words, the pyroelectric material as an IR sensor strongly relies on its pyroelectric coefficient and spontaneous polarization change. Subsequently, the output performance of an IR detector is solely determined by its material properties. Thus, material selection is assessed using the figures of merit (FOMs) of the pyroelectric material. FOMs confer the sensing capability of a pyroelectric material as a function of current, voltage, and thermal changes. FOMs are derived from the material's pyroelectric coefficient and are expressed as:8,36 (12) (13) (14)where ε0, εrCv and tanδ correspond to the permittivity of free space, relative permittivity, volume specific heat and dielectric loss, respectively. They may be used as criteria for selecting pyroelectric materials for IR imaging based on their manufacturing and processing techniques. Hence, a superior pyroelectric responsivity demands high p, low Cv, low εr, and low tanδ. Furthermore, real-time applications demand materials with very good figures of merit (FOMs).1 More importantly, a thermal imaging application demands a very good detection capability as the detectivity (D) of a PIR sensor is proportional to FD and is given by:36,37 (15)Here A corresponds to the effective area of the electrode used as the IR absorber and VN is the total electrical noise in the detector circuit. However, the sources of noise in a PIR detector are Johnson/dielectric noise, thermal noise, and amplifier noise. Johnson noise is predominant, while the other two are negligible.36–38 In fact, frequencies above 20 Hz increase Johnson noise effect and affect the detectivity. The Johnson noise (ΔVJ) is inversely proportional to the IR radiation modulation frequency (ω) and is represented as:38 (16)where k is the Boltzmann constant and T corresponds to the absolute temperature of the detector. It can be concluded that the Johnson noise relies on the pyroelectric material (used as a capacitor element) in the detector. Therefore, the detectivity of an IR sensor depends on the dielectric parameters and the pyroelectric coefficient of the ferroelectric material.38Fig. 8 shows a comparison of the FD of different materials.
 Fig. 8  Comparison of FD of different materials.8 
2.4. Dielectric materials and energy storage
Energy storage devices have become an unavoidable factor in modern technology to reduce global pollution and fossil fuel depletion. This has paved the way for the introduction of different energy storage technologies like batteries, supercapacitors, and dielectric capacitors.11–13 However, high-power applications, such as oil drilling and aircraft engines, require high energy density, superior power density, and excellent thermal stability. Energy storage devices like batteries and supercapacitors are unable to fulfil the criteria for high-power applications owing to their slow charge/discharge rate, low power density, low operating voltages, and low temperature stability.11 Batteries and supercapacitors require a chemical reaction to convert chemical energy into electrical energy. This reaction causes a delay in the movement of charges and, therefore, low power density. Additionally, batteries and supercapacitors both work on the principle of electrochemical reaction. Therefore, the smooth operation of these devices necessitates low operating voltages, as high voltages electrochemically break down the electrolyte. In contrast, a dielectric capacitor is characterized by ultrafast charge/discharge speed, high power density, excellent thermal stability, and, ultimately, very high operating voltages.11 This is due to the fact that dielectric capacitors store energy directly on the capacitor plates. Thus, the discharge speed is directly related to the conduction capability of the capacitor plates. Consequently, there is a faster charge/discharge rate in dielectric capacitors. This in turn generates a huge power density in dielectric capacitors. As a result, dielectric capacitors can play a significant role in advanced applications, as shown in Fig. 9.11,12
 Fig. 9  Dielectric capacitors and energy applications. 
However, the energy stored by a dielectric capacitor relies strongly on the applied electric field (E) and the dielectric polarization (P). The recoverable energy storage density of a dielectric capacitor is given by , where Pr and Pmax represent remanent polarization and maximum polarization, respectively. Along with ESD, the energy storage efficiency (η) of a dielectric capacitor is another important parameter to determine energy storage performance. It is nothing but the ratio between ESD and the total stored energy density (), as given by the equation .39,40 Therefore, for a dielectric material to perform as an energy storage capacitor, it needs high Pmax, low Pr, low coercive field (Ec), high breakdown strength (Eb), and superior non-volatility.
Generally, dielectric materials are classified into linear dielectric (LD), paraelectric (FE), ferroelectric (FE), and anti-ferroelectric (AFE). Commonly used dielectric materials for ESD studies are LDs, AFEs, and FEs. LDs have a constant dielectric permittivity, and P follows a linear relationship with respect to E, due to the absence of a permanent dipole moment. Despite their reduced energy loss, LDs are unsuitable for energy storage capacitors due to their low polarization value. An AFE consists of dipoles in opposite directions and, therefore, anti-ferroelectric–ferroelectric phase transitions produce a large energy loss and, therefore, a lower ESD. Furthermore, the majority of AFEs are made from toxic lead (Pb). This restrains their practical application.12 FEs, on the other hand, have a net dipole moment even when no electric field is supplied.11 Therefore, FEs have higher polarization values than LDs or AFEs, making them suitable for the fabrication of energy storage dielectric capacitors.
3. Flexible ferroelectric materials and recent developments
Ferroelectric materials could emerge as potential candidates for energy harvesting, IR sensing, and energy storage applications. From Sections 2.1–2.3, it is clear that a material with a very high degree of spontaneous polarization could contribute exceptional piezoelectric and pyroelectric currents. For instance, IFEs show a very large spontaneous polarization change near the phase transition temperature, leading to a large pyroelectric current.1 Near the phase transition temperature, dipoles lose their orientation ability with a tremendous decrease in the spontaneous polarization level. Consequently, there is a decrease in the number of free charges bound to the material surface. In order to compensate for the charge equilibrium, a redistribution of free charges takes place and, therefore, a larger current flow takes place in IFEs than in other dielectric materials.1 For example, an inorganic PMN–PT possesses a very high piezoelectric coefficient and pyroelectric coefficient (Fig. 6), which can be utilized for the fabrication of piezoelectric/pyroelectric energy harvesters. This elucidates the statement that IFEs can be optimal options for energy harvesting and sensing applications. However, their brittle nature limits their use in flexible device applications and is the case for all IFEs. Strategies should be implemented for the synthesis, design, and fabrication of flexible IFEs for energy applications. Furthermore, investigations on Pb- and Pb-free flexible FEs can provide insight into different applications, such as self-powered devices, wearable electronics, robotics, e-skin, and power circuits for hybrid electric vehicles.1–11 In this section, we will discuss different flexible IFEs and their importance in the fabrication of flexible devices. The section deals particularly with advances in IFEs for flexible energy harvesting, IR sensing, and energy storage domains.
3.1. IFEs and flexible energy harvesters
The conversion of mechanical vibrations by a material into useful electricity relies heavily on the piezoelectric property. However, most investigations on PENGs have concentrated on zinc oxide (ZnO) nanowires (NWs).41–45 However, piezoelectric ZnO NWs suffer with drawbacks such as low piezoelectric coefficient, low output voltage, and low power generation. Furthermore, single-crystal ZnO NWs with diameters less than 100 nm and lengths greater than 50 μm are difficult to fabricate. So, the preparation of semiconductor ZnO NWs was restricted to certain shorter lengths.41–45 On the other hand, IFEs such as lead zirconate titanate (PZT) and Pb(Mg1/3Nb2/3)O3–xPbTiO3 (PMN–PT) are highly piezoelectric ceramic systems with exceptional dielectric constants and superior piezoelectric voltages.45–50 Consequently, these materials can generate a higher output voltage as well as output power (Po) than semiconductor-based piezoelectric materials, by converting mechanical energy.45–50 In 2010, Chen et al. developed a PENG consisting of PZT nanofibres coated on a preprepared Si substrate with interdigitated platinum electrodes (IDT).45 PZT nanofibres produced using an electrospinning procedure exhibited superior piezoelectric voltage constant, excellent flexibility, and exceptional mechanical strength compared to bulk and thin films. They successfully fabricated PZT nanofibres with dimensions of 500 μm in length and 60 nm in diameter. Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) covers the PZT nanofibres to avoid damage attributable to the application of pressure (Fig. 10(a)). Here the perovskite PZT nanofibres are arranged on the Si substrate in such a way that the PDMS covers the PZT nanofibres completely. The corresponding high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image is shown in Fig. 10(b). The working of NG has been demonstrated via two methods, as shown in Fig. 10(c) and (d). First, the NG was tested with an impulsive load formed from a Teflon stack (Fig. 10(b)). The impact of the load induced a piezoelectric potential followed by a momentary flow of electrons. A higher impact on the PENG by periodic knocking of the load generated an output voltage of 600 mV. The negative voltage corresponds to the reverse flow of charge carriers at the time of releasing the load during its periodic motion. Secondly, finger pressure is used to induce a piezoelectric potential (Fig. 10(c)). Fingers as load generated a maximum output voltage of 1.63 V. The PENG was also explored as a prospective power supply by altering the dynamic load frequencies and load resistance. The expression for the generated power by the PENG is represented by:45 (17)where Vo(t) is the output voltage, RL is the load resistance, and T is the time period of the applied load. The highest Po estimated using a PENG with a load resistance of 6 MΩ at 40 Hz excitation was around 0.03 μW.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic image of PZT nanofibre nanogenerator; (b) PZT nanofibre in the PDMS matrix as seen in a cross-sectional SEM image; output voltage generation using (c) a Teflon stack and (d) finger pressure45©2010 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl100812k]. 
Another study on a substrate-free wearable PZT NW-based PENG was reported by Wu et al. for the first time in 2012.46 First, PZT nanowires were aligned parallel in the form of a textile using an electrospinning method. The PZT NW-based parallel textile synthesized using this technique exhibited a polycrystalline perovskite structure with a (101) plane and the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) elucidated the presence of a (101) plane, indicating a highly crystallized polycrystalline phase (Fig. 11(a) and (b)). Furthermore, the NW-based textile is incredibly soft, flexible, and wearable, which is advantageous for flexible NGs. Then, the flexible PZT textile was deposited onto a photoresist (AZ P1350) coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate via a spin-coating technique. Then, the combinations were immersed in alcohol to remove the photoresist. As a result, the flexible PZT PENG detached from the PET substrate. With poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS), the substrate-free flexible PENG was securely linked to carbon fabric. Finally, silver (Ag) as top and bottom electrodes was sputtered on PZT PENG to understand the device's energy harvesting performance. Fig. 11(c) and (d) shows a schematic representation of the output energy generated by the PZT PENG using stress and release conditions. When the carbon fabric is subjected to periodic stress and release, a piezoelectric current is induced due to a continuous flow of electrons. Subsequently, the wearable PENG produced an output voltage of 2.5 nA. In addition, the PZT textile on the PET substrate generated a very high output voltage (6 V) and output current (Io) (45 nA). This voltage is more than enough to power an LCD display. Moreover, the device generated a power density of 200 μW cm−3 at a load resistance of 100 MΩ.
 Fig. 11  (a) XRD and (b) SAED patterns of PZT nanowires; (c) generated output voltage; (d) generated output current by the PENG46©2012 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nn3016585]. 
The next year, Gu et al. fabricated a PENG by stacking layers of ultralong PZT NW arrays.47 PZT NWs of length 420 μm were obtained using an electrospinning method. The electrospun PZT nanofibres were cut into films of the same dimensions and the layers were piled on top of one other to produce a multilayered structure. The multilayered structure was covered with PDMS in such a way that the ultralong NW arrays were vertically aligned. To finish the flexible PENG, the PDMS-covered PZT multilayer was coated with Ag as top and bottom electrodes. The entire fabrication of the PENG is shown in Fig. 12(a). Gu et al. tested the device in two different applications. Initially, the device was exposed to a periodic impact using a heavy object, as shown in Fig. 12(b). The force offered by the weight induces a compressive strain on the PENG and thus generates a piezoelectric potential. As a result, the external circuit receives a current. The larger impact on the PENG generated a current density of 23.5 μA cm−2, an output voltage (Vo) of 209 V, and an output current density of 8.13 μA cm−2. This voltage is enough to light a commercial 1.9 V LED. Secondly, the device was successfully tested for biological applications. The PENG was used to biologically repair a frog's sciatic nerve, as shown in Fig. 12(c). It is reported that the threshold voltage required to excite the sciatic nerve is nearly equal to 50 mV at 1 Hz. Therefore, an input voltage above the threshold voltage stimulates the sciatic nerve. However, the output voltage generated by the PENG is sufficient to contract the gastrocnemius of the frog. To experimentally prove this hypothesis, Gu et al. used a frog's hind leg and coupled the positive and negative terminals of the NG to the sciatic nerve (Fig. 12(c)). To maintain the bioactivity, the limb was placed in Ringer's solution (commonly used for amphibians). A single finger tapping on the PENG generated an electric pulse that stimulated the sciatic nerve and thereby contracted the gastrocnemius muscle (Fig. 12(c)). In this way, the vertically aligned ultralong PZT NW PENG could be a roadway for self-powered flexible applications, such as wearable electronics, medical applications, and IoT. Very recently in 2022, Zeng et al. fabricated a PENG using a composite film composed of core–shell-structured Ga-PZT@GaOx nanorods and P(VDF-TrFE) polymer.48 Initially, the PZT nanorods were prepared using electrospun PZT nanowires. Afterwards, mechanical mixing was employed to form core–shell-structured Ga-PZT@GaOx nanorods. Finally, a composite film comprising Ga-PZT@GaOx nanorods and P(VDF-TrFE) [Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE)] was formed by mixing the Ga-PZT@GaOx nanorod solution with P(VDF-TrFE) solution, followed by annealing at 145 °C. The Ga-PZT@GaOx nanorod solution was prepared by mixing it with N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) solvent. The introduction of PZT@GaOx nanofillers enhanced the β-phase of P(VDF-TrFE) and was confirmed using XRD and FT-IR studies (Fig. 12(d) and (e)). Furthermore, an amorphous shell layer structure with Ga encapsulating PZT nanorod powder suggesting a core–shell structure was established using the HR-TEM image (Fig. 12(f)). This is due to the fact that Ga oxidises to GaOx and adheres to the PZT nanorod surfaces, forming a unique Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE) core–shell structure. The core–shell Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE) exhibited a very good d3 of 29.6 pC N−1, which is higher than that of the pure P(VDF-TrFE) polymer. Such a high d33 arises from the high polarizability offered by the Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE) core–shell structure. The core–shell PZT@GaOx nanofillers amplify the local electric field and thereby boost the Coulomb force between Ga and the P(VDF-TrFE) chains. This in turn favours the enhancement of highly polarizable polar β-phased P(VDF-TrFE) by tailoring the VDF and TrFE chains. In addition, the poling orients the dipoles of the PZT nanorods in the electric field direction. As a result, the d33 and polarization of the Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE) composite film are higher than those of pure P(VDF-TrFE) film. Compared to pure P(VDF-TrFE)-based PENGs, the PENG developed using core–shell Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE) film yielded output voltage, current, and power measurements of 98.6 V, 0.3 μA, and 9.8 μW, respectively. These values are four times higher than those of pure P(VDF-TrFE) film. In fact, the Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE) PENG showed a stable output voltage of nearly 80 V even after 6000 cycles. This is ascribed to the fact that the Ga/GaOx layer prevents fatigue or interface cracking caused by the mechanical vibration of the PENG.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of nanofibre-based PZT PENG; (b) working and output generation under periodic pressure; (c) demonstration of nanofibre PZT PENG to stimulate the nerve of a frog and driving an LED47©2012 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl303539c]. (d) XRD; (e) FT-IR, and (f) HR-TEM of Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE)48©2022 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c22877]. 
Similar to PZT, PMN–PT is another IFE ceramic with an excellent piezoelectric coupling coefficient (d33 ≈ 2500 pm V−1).49 Xu et al. synthesised highly ordered PMN–PT NWs with d33 ≈ 371 pm V−1 using a hydrothermal process.50 Such a high value in the nanostructures theoretically predicted exceptional output power generation. Therefore, Xu et al. introduced a novel PMN–PT NW based piezoelectric composite for flexible self-powered sensing applications. To make an N-polymer composite slurry, hydrothermally treated structured PMN–PT NWs were combined with PDMS. It was then cast onto a flexible polyimide substrate with a Ti/Au coating. Finally, the flexible PENG was painted with silver paste as the two metal electrodes (Fig. 13(a)). Before studying the PENG performance, it was poled at 50 kV cm−1. A hierarchical three-dimensional NW structure of PMN–PT with individual nanowires oriented in various directions was observed using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Fig. 13(b) and (c)). X-ray diffraction (XRD) analysis confirmed the formation of perovskite PMN–PT NWs with a monoclinic structure. A high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HR-TEM) image of randomly selected NWs exhibited a single crystalline structure with an incessant bright contrast revealing no noticeable defects in the NW (Fig. 13(d) and (e)). More importantly, the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern along the (110) direction suggested the formation of a uniformly structured single crystalline oriented PMN–PT NW (Fig. 13(f)). The energy generation capability of the device was tested by causing stress via mechanical tapping. The tapping-induced stress develops a piezoelectric current that flows through the external circuit. The NW–polymer composite based PENG produced a maximum Vo = 7.8 V and Io = 2.29 μA.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of a PMN–PT NW PENG device. (b) Cross-section and (c) individual SEM images of PMN–PT NW in a PDMS matrix. (d) Dark-field and (e) bright-field TEM images and (f) SAED pattern50©2013 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl400169t]. 
However, the key problem with most PENGs is electrostatic noise or the triboelectric effect related to contact between the measuring equipment and the NG due to compressive forces. Recently, Lee et al. fabricated an electrostatic noise-free PZT nanofibre-based PENG.51 The flexible PENG was fabricated by combining an electrospun PZT nanofibre textile and a PDMS matrix. Structural analysis of the PZT nanowire confirmed a well-crystallized highly textured (101)-oriented polycrystalline perovskite phase of PZT (Fig. 14(a)). In this work, a PZT nanofibre/PDMS composite layer of equal thickness was formed by spreading PDMS on the PZT textile. The PENG formed in this way eliminates the electrostatic noise associated with the triboelectric effect due to mechanical friction. To prove output generation is purely piezoelectric dependent, Lee et al. fabricated a PDMS sample alone and tested it under bending motion. But the electric impulse in the PDMS sample was inconsequential (Fig. 14(b) and (c)). This implies that the voltage output of the PDMS/PZT composite nanogenerator was solely derived from the electrons caused by piezoelectric potential under mechanical deformation. The statement was again substantiated by measuring the output voltage and current of the PDMS/PZT composite PENG as a function of PZT film thickness (Fig. 14(d)). The PENG was exposed to periodic bending and unbending for different thicknesses. The results revealed a linear dependency of the generated output current on the film thickness, originating directly from the piezoelectric effect. During bending, the mechanical force transfers a strain to the PENG through the PDMS matrix and thus accumulates the generated charges induced by the piezoelectric potential of the PZT at the electrode ends. During unbending, these accumulated charge carriers move in the opposite direction. In effect, the net piezoelectric potential vanishes and there is no triboelectric effect. Thus, all the output parameters generated are based purely on the piezoelectric effect, not the triboelectric effect. A flexible device with a PZT thickness of 0.80 μm and area of 0.8 cm2 generated a Vo equal to 1.1 V and Io equal to 1.4 μA.
 Fig. 14  (a) XRD of PZT nanowires. (b) Output voltage and (c) current generation in PDMS alone. (d) Output current generation as a function of thickness51©2019 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.8b03325]. 
Even though Pb-based systems are highly recommended for flexible energy harvesting applications, the presence of highly toxic Pb is a serious concern when it comes to safeguarding human beings as well as the environment.39 The research community is searching for alternatives to Pb-based systems, so that this problem can be eradicated. This led to the introduction of different Pb-free perovskite IFEs into flexible energy harvesting technology. In 2010, Park et al. introduced a BTO thin film-based PENG on a plastic substrate. Initially, the BTO was radio frequency (rf) sputtered onto a Pt/Ti/SiO2/Si substrate and subsequently annealed at 700 °C to form a BTO crystalline phase from the amorphous film.52 Secondly, a metal–insulator–metal (MIM) structure with a gold (Au) top electrode and Pt as the bottom electrode was etched using an inductively coupled plasma-reactive ion etcher (ICP-RIE). The ICP-RIE etching was carried out using aluminium (Al) and SiO2 masks. Then, the MIM structure ribbon was separated by removing the Si layer using tetramethylammonium hydroxide via anisotropic wet etching. Afterwards, the freestanding MIM structure was transferred onto the PDMS. The MIM-inked PDMS elastomer slab was placed on a polyurethane (PU)-coated Kapton film (plastic film). Once the MIM structure was fully settled on the plastic substrate, the PDMS was removed. The top of the BTO/PU/plastic substrate with the metal electrodes was spin-coated with a diluted UV-sensitive epoxy. Finally, the metal contact area was photolithographically opened to form a flexible PENG. The entire fabrication is schematically illustrated in Fig. 15(a). BTO film showed a tetragonal phase with excellent crystallinity and was confirmed using XRD and Raman spectroscopy. Furthermore, the tetragonal phase suggested a ferroelectric BTO. Before measuring the energy harvesting properties, the PENG was poled at 200 kV cm−1 for 15 h at a temperature of 150 °C. As illustrated in Fig. 15(b) and (c), the output performance of the PENG was investigated under periodic bending and unbending modes. The repeated bending/unbending motions using a finger induced piezoelectricity and generated a maximum Vo of 1.0 V and Io of 26 nA. In addition, the PENG produced a current density of 0.19 μA cm−2 and a power density of 7 mW cm−3. This showed the possibilities of BTO-based perovskite oxide films for the fabrication of a flexible energy harvesting device. However, the high piezoelectric coefficient in BTO is attributed to the relatively smaller size and large charge of Ti4+.53 This constitutes a higher displacement of Ti atoms along the field direction during poling and therefore superior piezoelectricity. Different structures of BTO, such as microplatelets, nanofibres, nanotubes, and nanoparticles, have been studied for energy harvesting, and nanofibres caught researchers’ attention owing to their high mechanical strength and high-power generation even with small mechanical changes.53 Yan et al. demonstrated that a BTO nanofibre/PDMS composite has very good energy harvesting potential.53 In this work, the energy harvesting performance of the BTO nanofibre-based PENG was studied by aligning BTO nanofibres in different orientations, such as vertically, horizontally, and randomly on the PDMS matrix: namely BTNF-V, BTNF-H, and BTNF-R, respectively. The PDMS was mixed with aligned electrospun BTO nanofibres, as shown in Fig. 15(d). A schematic representation of the three different alignments for testing piezoelectricity is shown in Fig. 15(e). These aligned BTO/PDMS composites were transferred to a PET polymer plastic film covered (top surface) with indium tin oxide (ITO). Here, the bottom and top electrodes were ITO and silver, respectively. A weak mechanical force of 0.002 MPa produced optimum output performance in BTNF-V and generated Vo = 2.67 V, Io = 261.47 nA, and Po = 0.1841 μW. This electric power lit a commercial LED and charged 1 μF, 2.2 μF, and 3.3 μF capacitors to a voltage of 0.46 V in just 34 s, 58 s, and 85 s, respectively. The remarkable energy harvesting performance in BTNF-V arises from the high orientation of domains in the field direction during the poling process. Furthermore, the BTO density in the applied field direction is greater in BTNF-V than in the other two structures.
 Fig. 15  (a) Structure of BTO PENG. (b) Representation of BTO PENG on plastic substrate. (c) Output current and voltage generation in PENG52©2010 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl102959k]. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation and alignment of BTO nanofibres in three different ways. (e) Output voltage generation in BTNF-V, BTNF-H, and BTNF-R53©2016 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b02177]. 
Recently in 2020, Guan et al. developed a flexible polydopamine (P) doped BTO–polyvinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene nanocomposite (P-BTO@P(VDF-TrFE)) to study its piezoelectric energy generation and its performance as a self-powered device.54 The co-polymer P(VDF-TrFE) was chosen over PVDF due to the formation of more β-phase. The β-phase in PVDF is considered to be the most electrically active phase due to its highly sensitive orientation response to external stimuli. However, TrFE not only favours the formation of β-phase P(VDF-TrFE), but also enhances mechanical strength and thereby improved piezoelectric property and flexibility.55,56 In this work, P-BTO@P(VDF-TrFE) was prepared using an electrospinning process, followed by ultrasonic treatment. The XRD patterns show the formation of a composite structure with BTO in a P(VDF-TrFE) polymer matrix (Fig. 16(a)). The additional peak near 45° confirms the tetragonal phase of BTO in the composite. In addition, the absence of P-dopant peaks indicates complete doping in the BTO lattice. Here, the Pdop-BTO nanoparticles enhanced the β-phase and the crystallinity of the P(VDF-TrFE) polymer. This is ascribed to the increased interfacial interaction between the Pdop-BTO nanoparticles and the P(VDF-TrFE) matrix, forming a hierarchical P-BTO@P(VDF-TrFE) architecture. The as-prepared nanocomposite was sandwiched between flexible conducting Cu–Ni electrodes, and the entire structure was covered with polyamide for protection from pollutants and moisture. Finally, the device was tested under periodic impact by maintaining a constant force (700 N) and frequency (2 Hz). The device generated a Vo of 6 V and an Io of 1.52 μA at a force of 700 N. A comparison study with pristine P(VDF-TrFE) materials revealed a significant enhancement in output generation, which is ascribed to the enhanced piezoelectricity (Fig. 16(b)). P doping enhances the effective dipole moment of the BTO@P(VDF-TrFE) matrix by inducing a localized field owing to its large dielectric constant and high surface area. In addition, P doping forms a hierarchical structure including fewer defects with enhanced interface density of BTO@P(VDF-TrFE). Consequently, there was a very good energy harvesting performance. The performance of the device was tested under different working cycles and human motions, showing excellent self-powering capability (Fig. 16(c)–(h)).
 Fig. 16  (a) XRD patterns of P-BT@P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite; (b) output voltage generated in different polymer composites at 700 N; (c) endurance test of P-BT@P(VDF-TrFE); (d) demonstration of charging capacitor under stretching/releasing motion; (e) real-time integration of P-BT@P(VDF-TrFE) into a shoe; output voltage generated from human motions, such as (f) squatting; (g) walking; and (h) running54©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.104516]. 
Another study by Zhou et al. reported a very high piezoelectric energy harvesting performance with Vo of 17 V and Po of 14.3 μW, under bending/unbending modes using carbon-modified BTO-P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposites (BT@C/P(VDF-TrFE)).57 The high energy harvesting performance is attributed to enhanced piezoelectricity and is attributed to a core–shell-structured nanocomposite. Here, the core–shell corresponds to BTO acting as the core and carbon acting as the shell and was confirmed using HR-TEM images (Fig. 17(a)–(c)). Such a core–shell structure favours homogeneity in the polymer matrix and also promotes the formation of more β-phase. The real-time energy harvesting performance of the nanogenerator was tested using bicycle spokes and generated a voltage of 16 V, which lit 12 white LEDs (Fig. 17(d) and (e)). Guo et al. reported a flexible BTO-based organic–inorganic polymer composite (Fig. 17(f)) for piezoelectric energy harvesting applications.58 The group used organic phosphonic acid to enhance the effective surface area and homogenous distribution of BTO nanofillers in a P(VDF-TrFE) matrix (MBT/P(VDF-TrFE)). The nanogenerator produced a superior Vo of 45 V (Fig. 17(g)) and Pw of 0.76 μW cm−2, and remained almost constant even after 10000 cycles. Such high output generation arises from suppressed defects and enhanced stress transmission efficiency due to phosphonic acid incorporation compared to the unmodified counterpart. Phosphonic acid favours the homogenous distribution of BTO in the polymer matrix, as the reactive group in phosphonic acid acts as a strong bond between BTO and P(VDF-TrFE). This in turn annihilates the charge loss and promotes the charge transfer between inorganic nanofiller and organic polymer. Such a surface-modified organic–inorganic PENG lit 16 LEDs, as shown in Fig. 17(h). Shi et al. in 2021 achieved an output voltage of 12.6 V, an output current of 1.30 μA, and a power density of 4.25 μW in a BTO/P(VDF-TrFE) PENG composed of polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) coated BTO as the nanofiller and a P(VDF-TrFE) polymer matrix.59 The PENG achieved a stable piezoelectric output even after 6000 cycles. The stable output generation is attributed to the improved β-phase of P(VDF-TrFE) due to the inclusion of PMMA-modified BTO nanoparticles, which provide a dense fibre mat effect with periodic tensile stretching.
 Fig. 17  (a) Illustration of the formation of a core–shell structure of BTO; (b) normal view and (c) high-resolution enlarged view of the TEM image of the BTO core–shell structure; (d) image of BT@C/P(VDF-TrFE) nanogenerator placed on a bicycle; (e) rectified output from the BT@C/P(VDF-TrFE) nanogenerator lighting 12 LEDs57©2019 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b18780]. (f) Image showing the flexibility of an MBT/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite; (g) magnified view of output voltage of MBT/P(VDF-TrFE); (h) live demonstration of powering LEDs under force condition58©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtener.2020.100489]. 
Lead-free Ba0.85Ca0.15Zr0.1Ti0.9O3 (BCZT) is an excellent FE material whose piezoelectric properties are comparable to PZT materials.39 Liu et al. fabricated a flexible PENG comprising a BCZT nanofiller and P(VDF-TrFE) polymer (BCZT/P(VDF-TrFE)).60Fig. 18(a) shows a diagrammatic representation of the preparation of a BCZT/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite. The XRD pattern confirms the formation of a composite BCZT/P(VDF-TrFE) film with an improved β-phase (Fig. 18(b)). The presence of the (002) plane confirms a tetragonal-structured BCZT nanofiller inclusion in the P(VDF-TrFE) matrix. Thus, the co-existence of both BCZT and P(VDF-TrFE) indicates a BCZT/P(VDF-TrFE) composite film. The 40% BCZT content BCZT/P(VDF-TrFE) exhibited optimum performance with an output voltage of 13 V at a force of 6 N and 10 Hz frequency. The energy harvesting performance of the device was evaluated using different human hand motions, as shown in Fig. 18(c). Another study by Liu et al. in 2021 on BCZT film deposited on a flexible fluorophlogopite mica (F-mica) substrate reported a very high piezoelectric coefficient of 150 pC N−1 comparable with the values of film deposited on various single-crystal substrates.61 A BCZT film of thickness 500 nm was deposited on F-mica using a rf sputtering technique. Interdigitated electrode (IDE) pattern using platinum was used and the piezoelectric coefficient was extracted using a laser Doppler vibrometer. The device performance was tested using a bending/bending test under different applied forces and finger tapping experiments. A tapping force of 1 N generated an output power density (Pw) of 450 μm cm−2, which was used to charge a 4.7 μF capacitor. Such high power demonstrated by the device can be used to power microscale devices such as capacitors, batteries, and watches. Shin et al. reported a Vo of 20.61 V, Io of 2 μA and Pw of 3450 μW cm−3 in a Cu-doped BCZT/PVDF composite film-based PENG.62 XRD studies confirmed that BCZT has a tetragonal perovskite structure, while the presence of peaks corresponding to the planes (020) [α-phase], (110) [β-phase], (200) [β-phase] confirmed the existence of both α- and β-phases in the Cu-doped BCZT/PVDF. The introduction of Cu-doped BCZT nanofillers in the PVDF matrix enhanced the β-phase, contributing to the excellent power density. The PENG developed by Shin et al. charged a 1 μF capacitor and lit three red LEDs. Hanani et al. in 2021 developed a bio-flexible PENG using core–shell-structured BCZT-polydopamine (BCZT@PDA) nanofillers in a polylactic acid (PLA) matrix to form a composite film.63 The PENG produced a Vo of 14.4 V, Io of 0.55 μA and Pw of 760 μW cm−2, and the BCZT@PDA/PLA PENG was able to store an energy of 3.92 μJ within 115 s in a 1 μF capacitor using finger tapping.
 Fig. 18  (a) Fabrication steps of BCZT/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite PENG; (b) XRD patterns of BCZT/P(VDF-TrFE) composite film; (c) output voltage generated by the PENG using different human hand motions60©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2019.111796]. 
Other than BTO, Pb-free ferroelectric materials, such as BiFeO3 (BFO) and (K0.5Na0.5)NbO3 (KNN), were explored in the piezoelectric energy harvesting domains.64,65 Ren et al. synthesized a flexible inorganic-polymer nanocomposite using BFO and polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) for piezoelectric output generation.64 The BFO nanoparticles were synthesised using the sol–gel method and then dispersed in different concentration of PDMS to form composite films. The synthesized BFO nanoparticles possesses a rhombohedral structure with R3c space group (Fig. 19(a)). The fabrication process of the PENG is schematically shown in Fig. 19(b). The PENG generated an output voltage of 3 V and a current of 0.25 μA. Confirmation of the enhancement in output voltage of the BFO/PDMS nanocomposites was undertaken using a pressing/releasing test with pure PDMS and is shown in Fig. 19(c) and (d). Gupta et al. reported an output voltage of 48 V in KNN-based ferroelectric flexible devices.65 The group fabricated a PENG with K0.47Na0.47Li0.06NbO3 (KNLN) microcubes and PDMS on a flexible polyethylene terephthalate (PET) substrate. SEM revealed a microcube structure indicating the typical grain morphology of KNN material (Fig. 19(e)). This was further elucidated using XRD results. XRD patterns confirmed the highly crystalline perovskite phase of KNN with no impurity peaks indicating the doping of lithium in the KNN lattice (Fig. 19(f)). Lattice parameter calculation suggested a tetragonal structure of KNLN cubes (inset in Fig. 19(f)). The KNLN piezoelectric cubes showed a very high piezoelectric coefficient of 460 pC N−1 and a well-defined polarization–electric field loop. The piezoelectric voltage generation of KNLN/PDMS PENG was executed using a force simulator under pressing/releasing mode, as shown in Fig. 19(e) and (f). Very recently, Hanani et al. introduced a novel inorganic ferroelectric–polymer composite composed of H2(Zr0.1Ti0.9)3O7 nanowires (HZTO-NW) and polylactic acid (PLA) biopolymer (HZTO-nw@PDA/PLA).66 The d33 value of HZTO-NW was found to be 26 pm V−1. A solution casting technique was used to prepare an HZTO-NW@PDA/PLA composite film. HZTO-NW has monoclinic symmetry, as established using XRD and SAED patterns. Moreover, a homogenous distribution of O, Ti, and Zr existed in HZTO-NW. The stress-induced polarization caused by HZTO-NW aligns the CO dipoles in the PLA matrix in the direction of the applied force. This resulted in an increased β-phase and thereby improved piezoelectric properties. The HZTO-NW@PDA/PLA composite film-based PENG produced a Vo of 5.41 V, Io of 0.26 μA and Pw of 463.5 μW cm−3. Another study by the same group reported a composite thin-film-based PENG composed of HZTO-NW and BCZT as the fillers and PLA as the polymer matrix.67 A finger touch on the PENG produced an output voltage of 11.5 V, output current of 0.6 μA, and a power density of 9200 μW cm−3.
 Fig. 19  (a) XRD patterns of BFO nanoparticles; (b) schematic illustration of the preparation of BFO/PDMS nanocomposite; output generation by (c) pure PDMS and (d) BFO/PDMS nanocomposite PENG64©2016 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b04497]. (e) SEM image of KNLN microcubes; (f) XRD pattern of KNLN microcubes; output voltage (g) and (h) current generated by KNLN/PDMS PENG under pressing/releasing forces65©2016 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.5b09485]. 
However, IFEs exhibit very good pyroelectric properties owing to their excellent spontaneous polarization change w.r.t. thermal change. Yang et al., in 2012, developed a ferroelectric lead zirconate titanate (PZT) based PyNG with an astonishingly high pyroelectric coefficient and it could run a liquid crystal display (LCD) for up to 60 seconds.68 The PZT film had a thickness of 175 nm and a size of 21 mm × 12 mm. As electrodes, a nickel (Ni) layer was placed on the top and bottom surfaces of the PZT sheet. The electrical measurements were done after the Ni-coated PZT film was exposed to electric poling at a high voltage of 4 kV. The PyNG device showed a pyroelectric coefficient of 80 nC cm−2 K−1. At a temperature change of 0.2 K s−1, the PyNG generated a Vo of 2.8 V and an Io of 42 nA. Furthermore, a faster rate of temperature change resulted in a Vo of 2.8 V and Io of 42 nA. The PyNG device also achieved a maximum Pw of 0.2 mW cm−3. The invention charged a lithium-ion battery from 650 to 810 mV in roughly 3 hours and lit a green LED with this power. Additionally, the device may function as a wireless temperature sensor. As shown in Fig. 20(a), the circuit comprises a temperature sensor, a signal processing unit, and a flexible antenna. A 2.8 V lithium-ion battery was used to power the sensor. When the sensor was turned on, the temperature sensor's received data showed a temperature of 23.2 °C. The wireless temperature sensor also had a 1 K accuracy and a 50 meter operating range. Hence, the IFE PZT-based PyNG is a good option for energy harvesting and temperature monitoring in the environment.
 Fig. 20  (a) Photograph and working of a PZT nanogenerator as a wireless sensor68©2012 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl303755m]. (b) Pyroelectric and piezoelectric output generation by hybrid PZT nanogenerator69©2016 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b00054]. 
Yang et al. developed a self-powered PyNG to detect a temperature change for the first time in the same year.69 The device was made up of PZT micro NWs connected to a glass substrate and the two ends were glued with silver paste. PDMS shields the PZT from corrosion and contamination from the harsh environment. The device was mounted on a metallic body to sense the temperature. The room temperature was kept at 296 K for the duration of the experiment. A contact was created with a heater to provide thermal change in the sensor connected to the metallic body. It was found that the output voltage increased linearly with increased temperature change and the sensor was permitted to touch the heat sources at various escalating temperatures at alternate intervals. In this way, its performance as an excellent temperature sensor was validated. It is worth noting that the device responds even to a fingertip contact to detect temperature as well as the pace at which the temperature changes. Moreover, the sensor had a fast reaction time (0.9 s) and a quick reset time (3 s). The sensor had a minimum detection capability of 0.4 K at room temperature. The PN produced a maximum output voltage of 3 V as the heat source hit 473 K. This voltage was used to power an LCD display. Ko et al. demonstrated a flexible PZT film-based NG scavenging both mechanical and thermal (hybrid) fluctuations grown on a flexible Ni–Cr metal foil substrate with LaNiO3 (LNO) as the bottom electrode.70 This flexible NG achieved strong remanent electric polarisation of 28 C cm−2, d33 of 140 pC N−1, and good p of 50 nC cm−2 K−1. The research group effectively generated pyroelectricity from diverse sources like human finger contact and cold/hot winds in an ambient environment, demonstrating the NG's energy harvesting potential. The bending and unbending of the device were controlled using finger touch in the presence of thermal deformation (Fig. 20(b)). As a result, a strain-induced piezoelectric effect as well as a temperature-induced pyroelectric effect emerged with temperature variation, indicating a simultaneous effect or hybrid effect. The hybrid PN achieved a peak output voltage of 0.34 V and a current of 0.34 μA cm−2 in this manner. In addition, the inorganic materials are usually tougher than biological materials and the flexible PZT-based PN are excellent energy harvesters for a harsh environment such as strong base conditions or humidity. Zhang et al. in 2016 developed an adaptable PZT-based PN working on pyroelectric, piezoelectric, and triboelectric properties.71 The device comprised a PZT thin film as the pyroelectric and piezoelectric active material, a flexible polyamide film with fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) as the triboelectric active material, thin ITO film mixed with Ag NWs/PDMS film as top electrode, and Ag as the bottom electrode under the PZT. Initially, the electric dipoles are in equilibrium state at room temperature due to zero spontaneous polarisation change. As the temperature is varied (heating or cooling), a spontaneous polarisation develops, and there is electron flow through the external circuit. Consequently, a pyroelectric potential is produced across the electrodes. Simultaneously, the ferroelectric PZT PyNG exhibits a significant response to visible light indicating the photoelectric effect, which might be used for solar cell applications. Furthermore, there is a compressive force on the FEP-initiated triboelectric action in the polyamide film. However, the electrostatic equilibrium prevents the electron flow whenever the FEP comes into contact with the polyamide layer. Furthermore, the compressive strain creates a positive piezoelectric potential between the top and bottom electrodes. This in turn creates an electron flow from Ag to the ITO. As the polyamide layer separates or moves away from the FEP, triboelectrification begins. This charges the FEP charge and thereby induces charges on the ITO. Thus, the electrons are propelled by this electric potential from the ITO to Ag. As a result, the gadget is capable of scavenging various energy sources, such as thermal, solar, and mechanical energy. This single hybrid NG generated an Io of 5 A and Vo of 80 V. Furthermore, the ferroelectric PZT energy harvester charged a 10 F capacitor to 5.1 V within a short timespan (90 s).
Despite the fact that PZTs are excellent materials for energy harvesters, the presence of toxic lead as well as its high cost impede their use to a certain limit at the present time. Alternative low-cost eco-friendly ferroelectric materials with comparable properties to PZT need to be investigated to solve the problem. Yang et al. fabricated a Pb-free KNbO3-based flexible PyNG in 2012.72 A composite film comprising KNbO3 NWs with a single crystalline structure and PDMS was tested for energy harvesting studies. The top and bottom electrodes were made of Ag and ITO films, respectively. The dipoles in the KNbO3 NWs rotate when the device is exposed to a heat change because KNbO3 is a multidomain material. The dipoles experience higher lattice thermal vibration with increased amplitude as the temperature rises. This causes a net change in Ps by strengthening the internal electric dipole interactions. Subsequently, a charge flow took place, resulting in a peak voltage of 10 mV and a peak current of 120 pA. Recently, Zhao et al. fabricated a flexible BTO-based hybrid nanogenerator capable of harvesting mechanical, thermal, and light energy.73 A BTO ceramic disc with Ag top and bottom electrodes was installed on a PDMS layer, as shown in Fig. 21(a). The outputs generated by the device from different sources, such as light energy change via light illumination, mechanical motion via pressure, and thermal change via different temperatures, are shown in Fig. 21(b). Furthermore, Pb-free BFO thin films have proved to be an excellent candidate for photodetector (PD) applications owing to their exceptional residual polarization (100 μC cm−2) and a narrow optical bandgap, which play a crucial role for efficient photovoltaic performance.74,75 More importantly, a self-polarized polycrystalline BFO film with an LNO buffer layer exhibited a stable photovoltaic effect under a zero-bias voltage. Very recently, in 2022, Li et al. fabricated a flexible self-powered UV-visible PD using BFO/XTiO3 (X = Sr, Zn, Pb) multilayer films.75 The BFO/XTiO3 (X = Sr, Zn, Pb) multilayer films were deposited on Ni foil using the sol–gel technique. The multilayer-based BFO flexible PD showed fast response speed and high sensitivity. The BFO/ZnTiO3 reported a very good current responsivity of 7.4 mA W−1 at zero bias under 365 nm illumination. This shows a vision of Pb-free materials in multiple-energy harvesting by scavenging different forms of wasted energies. Table 1 shows a comparison of output generated by different flexible nanogenerators.
 Fig. 21  (a) Image of BTO–PDMS NG and (b) output generated by the BTO–PDMS NG using different sources73©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.104632]. 
Table 1 Summarized table of flexible IFEs and their performance in different areas (ME – mechanical energy, HE – heat energy, LE – light energy)




Nanogenerator
Source
Poling condition

R
L (MΩ)

V
o (V)

I
o (μA)

P
w

Ref.




PZT/PDMS
ME
75 kV cm−1, 12 h, 100 °C
6
1.1
1.4
—

51



PZT/PET
ME
40 kV cm−1, 15 min, 130 °C
100
6
0.045
200 μW cm−3

46



PZT/PDMS
ME
50 kV cm−1, 15 min, 130 °C
100
209
53
—

47



Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE)
ME
30 kV cm−1, 6 min, 130 °C
20
98
0.3
9.8 μW

48



PMN–PT/PDMS
ME
50 kV cm−1, 1 h, 150 °C
—
7.8
2.9
—

50



BTO/PDMS
ME
200 kV cm−1, 15 h, 150 °C
—
1
0.026
0.007 μW cm−3

52



BTO/PDMS
ME
50 kV cm−1, 12 h, 120 °C
10
2.67
0.261
0.187 μW

53



P-BTO/P(VDF-TrFE)
ME
50 kV cm−1, 12 h, RT
5
6
1.52
—

54



BTO/P(VDF-TrFE)
ME
12 h, 80 °C
19.8
17
—
14.3 μW

57



BTO/P(VDF-TrFE)
ME
40 kV cm−1, 3 h, 40 °C
80
45
2
0.76 μW cm−2

58



PMMA@BTO/P(VDF-TrFE)
ME
No poling
7.2
12.6
1.3
4.25 μW

59



BCZT/F-mica
ME
No poling
3.7
4.9
0.46
450 μW cm−3

61



BCZT/PVDF
ME
35 kV cm−1, 10 h, 130 °C
—
20.61
2
3450 μW cm−3

62



BCZT@PDA/PLA
ME
No poling
3.5
14.4
0.55
7540 μW cm−3

63



BFO/PDMS
ME
200 kV cm−1, 10 h, 150 °C
—
3
0.25
—

64



HZTO/PLA
ME
No poling
2.5
5.41
0.26
463.5 μW cm−3

66



HZTO + BCZT/PLA
ME
No poling
4
11.5
0.6
9200 μW cm−3

67



PZT/PDMS
ME + HE + LE
No poling
200
80
5
31 μW

71



BTO/PDMS
LE
400 kV cm−1, 3 h, 40 °C
4
—
0.021
83200 μW cm−2

73





3.2. IFEs and flexible pyroelectric infrared sensor
Flexible inorganic pyroelectric infrared detectors have advantages over traditional pyroelectric infrared detectors due to their high flexibility, robustness, mechanical strength, etc.76–81 Evidently, as discussed in the previous section, the pyroelectric coefficients of the IFEs are very much higher compared to polymer materials and, thus, the combination of inorganic-polymer materials augments the pyroelectric coefficient.77,78 The best way to enhance the pyroelectric coefficient of flexible inorganic-polymer detectors is to form a 0–3 type composite. A 0–3 type composite is a composite structure formed with ceramic material (especially nanoparticles) also termed nanofillers embedded in the polymer matrix.80 In such a system, it is possible to tailor the volume fraction in order to control the pyroelectric properties. In fact, suitable poling and composition can significantly reduce the dielectric properties and thereby improve the FOM of the detector.80 However, there are only a limited number of investigations on flexible pyroelectric sensors as it is an emerging field. Yang et al. prepared a 0–3 type composite flexible film comprising PbTiO3 (PT) and P(VDF-TrFE) via a solution casting technique.80 In this method, the composite film was formed by the dispersion of PT NW in the P(VDF-TrFE) matrix followed by a stirring procedure for almost 3 hours at 70 °C. Afterwards, the residue was drop casted onto a quartz substrate for densification to form the 0–3 type PT/P(VDF-TrFE) composite film. The 50 wt% PT/P(VDF-TrFE) reported a very good pyroelectric coefficient (72.78 μC m−2 K−1) compared to the P(VDF-TrFE) polymer (52.74 μC m−2 K−1). Furthermore, the work reported a very good FOM with FD > 18 × 10−6 Pa−1/2 and FV > 0.26 m2 C−1. Jayalakshmy et al. reported a flexible Pb-free pyroelectric LiNbO3/PVDF (LN/PVDF) 0–3 type composite structure synthesised via a solvent-cast technique by varying the LN nanofillers in the PVDF matrix.77 The capability of the LN/PVDF composite film as a sensing element was determined in terms of its pyroelectric coefficient and FOM. The composite film exhibited a very good pyroelectric coefficient (127 μC m−2 K−1) and FOM (FD = 143.27 × 10−3 μC m J−1), suggesting that they are very good for sensor applications. Luo et al. reported another Pb-free 0–3 type composite film composed of K0.5Na0.5NbO3 (KNN) nanofillers and P(VDF-TrFE).81 The work reported a pyroelectric coefficient of 63 μC m−2 K−1 and an FD of 4.94 × 10−6 Pa−1/2. The enhanced FOM in KNN/P(VDF-TrFE) composite film is attributed to the decreased dielectric permittivity and dielectric loss, which in turn enhances the sensitivity. Li et al. prepared BTO-based 0–3 type composite film and studied the FOM for sensing applications. Instead of BTO nanoparticles as nanofillers, the group used dopamine (DM)-modified BTO nanoparticles (DM-BTO) in the PVDF matrix for the formation of the 0–3 type composite film. The incorporation of DM improves the compatibility between BTO and the polymer matrix. Furthermore, the DM favours the transformation of the PVDF α-phase into the β-phase, beneficial for the suppression of dielectric permittivity as well as dielectric loss and thereby promoting the FOM of the film. More importantly, the DM-BTO/PVDF augments the breakdown strength of the composite film, which is attributed to the reduced negative dielectric effect (NDE) caused by voids, deficiencies, gaps, boundaries, etc. However, high dielectric loss followed by breakdown of the film are possible in the case of BTO nanoparticles alone. This will increase the probability of breakdown of the composite film in the case of BTO-nanoparticle-embedded PVDF.
DM modification allows enhancement of the junction between BTO and PVDF, subsequently reducing the deficiency and thus augmenting the breakdown of the film by depleting the NDE. As shown in Fig. 22(a) and (b), it is evident that the pyroelectric performance of the composite film increased with the dispersion of DM-BTO. The composite film revealed a pyroelectric coefficient of 42 μC m−2 K−1, which is almost 75% higher than that of the PVDF polymer (Fig. 22(a)). Consequently, a very good detection capability (FD = 96.6 pC m J−1) is evidenced in Fig. 22(b). However, a real-time investigation of the sensing ability of a flexible pyroelectric sensor is essential. Wu et al. fabricated an infrared device using Pb(Zr0.52Ti0.48)O3 (PZT) and P(VDF-TrFE) composite material.82 In this study, a dual capacitor structure (DCS) was formed, as shown in Fig. 22(c), in order to reduce the noise in the signal arising from the surrounding temperature changes. The composite film was synthesised using the solution cast technique. First, a suspension containing PZT and P(VDF-TrFE) was cast onto a glass plate to remove the organic solvents. Then, the mixture on a glass plate was annealed for almost 4 hours at 120 °C to form a flexible composite film. The top and bottom electrodes were Fe/Ni electrodes. After that, the composite film was polarized and then the opposite polarities were serially connected to form the DCS sensor. The DCS was connected to a pre-amplifier and finally the packaging process released the device. The entire processing of the IR detector is shown in Fig. 22(d). A comparative study between the performance of the new device and a conventional device was made to understand its real-time application capability. Similar to detection capability, another important parameter that determines the performance of an IR sensor is the signal to noise ratio (SNR) which is given by: (18)where Vpp is the peak–peak output voltage and Vn is the broadband noise. Here, the new device showed an SNR of 19.202 db compared to a conventional device (16.677 db) indicating the longer detection range. Such a high value is attributed to the large Vpp and low Vn. The detectivity (D*) of the two devices for incident IR radiation is shown in Fig. 22(e). The new device has very good detectivity compared to a conventional device, which is attributed to the large Vpp as D* is directly proportional to Vpp. The PZT/P(VDF-TrFE) based IR sensor produced a D* of 1.52 × 108 cm Hz1/2 W−1, almost 57.8% higher than for a conventional device. This will create a new window for FE-based flexible IR sensors in the near future.
 Fig. 22  (a) Pyroelectric coefficient and (b) FOM as a function of DM-BT concentration78©2018 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2018.07.150]. (c) Diagram of a conventional dual capacitor pyroelectric sensor; (d) schematic representation of the fabrication process for a PZT/P(VDF-TrFE) based IR sensor; (e) comparison of the detectivity of a conventional device and a PZT/P(VDF-TrFE) device as a function of frequency82©2018 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2018.09.039]. 
3.3. IFEs and flexible energy storage
Even though IFE ceramic systems are receiving significant attention, the low dielectric breakdown strength (less than MV) limits their application in high-power applications, such as hybrid electric vehicles, military technology, space technology, and pulsed power technologies.11 Moreover, the possibilities of miniaturizing the electronic devices suppresses the demand for bulk ceramics. Thin-film-based IFEs, on the other hand, are an excellent choice for the fabrication of energy storage capacitors due to their outstanding dielectric breakdown strength (in the MV range) and miniaturised size, which can be explored for real-time applications. The high dielectric breakdown strength enhances the ESD, as the energy storage density is controlled by the thickness to volume ratio. At lower thickness, the dielectric breakdown strength become an intrinsic property of the material (below a critical value) and therefore turns out to be independent of dimension. This in turn results in a very high energy storage density. In addition, the large dielectric breakdown strength of the thin-film capacitor provides safety over a wide range of voltages and reduces the possibility of irreversible failure.12
Recently, IFE-based thin films have found a path in flexible energy storage capacitor fabrication owing to the brittle nature of substrates such as Pt-coated Si, strontium titanate, and lanthanum aluminate. Moreover, the difficultly in integrating these rigid substrate-based materials onto flexible substrates is a challenge. Furthermore, IFE-based thin films exhibit excellent dielectric constants as well as superior thermal stability compared to biaxially oriented polypropylene (BOPP) and polyvinylidene fluoride (PVDF), which are considered pivotal factors determining the performance of a dielectric energy storage capacitor.11–13 Therefore, the fabrication of flexible IFE-based thin films will be a suitable option to yield high energy storage properties.
Recent investigation showed that relaxor FEs (RFEs) have excellent energy storage properties compared to FEs, owing to their slim P–E loop and excellent dielectric permittivity.83 Shen et al. in 2019 fabricated a flexible Pb-based IFE ceramic film energy storage dielectric capacitor. The group fabricated RFE Pb0.91La0.09(Zr0.65Ti0.35)0.9775O3 (PLZT 9/65/35) thick film on a flexible LNO/fluorophlogopite (F)-mica substrate via an rf magnetron sputtering technique.84 F-mica has advantages, such as high mechanical flexibility, good thermal stability, a smooth surface, and excellent chemical stability, which make it a suitable flexible substrate for the fabrication of IFE film capacitors. In this work, LNO is the bottom electrode and Au is the top electrode. Here, LNO enhances the epitaxial growth of PLZT 9/65/35 thick films due to the fact that both PLZT and LNO possess a perovskite structure. The relaxor behaviour in PLZT 9/65/35 thick film was evaluated using the modified Curie–Wiess law and the measured value of the degree of diffuseness (γ) was 1.99. According to the modified Curie–Wiess law, a typical RFE is expected to have a γ value equal to 2. Hence, the PLZT 9/65/35 thick film exhibits a high degree of diffuseness. The PLZT/F-mica RFE capacitor displayed a very good breakdown strength of 1998 kV cm−1, which is ascribed to the dense microstructure and low leakage current (Fig. 23(a)). At 1998 kV cm−1, the thick film capacitor showed an ESD of 40.2 J cm−3 and an η of 62% (Fig. 23(b)). The energy storage performance as a function of bending radius and bending cycle is illustrated in Fig. 23(c) and (d). The flexible thick film capacitor exhibited a negligible variation in the energy storage performance w.r.t. bending radius and bending cycle. In fact, the bending cycle test performed at 4.5 mm bending radius demonstrated a stable energy storage performance up to 2000 cycles, indicating the application of PLZT 9/65/35 thick film in flexible electronics as it is the normal bending radius of wearable devices. In the same year, Nguyen et al. reported high energy storage performance in Pb0.9La0.1Zr0.52Ti0.48O3 (PLZT) RFE thin films grown on flexible Ti foil using pulsed laser deposition (PLD).85 The relaxor behavior in PLZT flexible thin film was confirmed using the broad dielectric maximum, which is a characteristic of RFEs. PLZT flexible thin film showed a slim P–E loop with an ESD of 40.9 J cm−3 and an η of 80.2% at 3000 kV cm−1. Moreover, the PLZT flexible thin film exhibited fatigue-free behavior (up to 1010 cycles) and superior thermal stability (room temperature to 200 °C) required for pulsed power applications.
 Fig. 23  (a) Weibull distribution plot of a PLZT 9/65/35 thick film IFE dielectric capacitor; ESD as a function of (b) applied electric field, (c) bending radius, and (d) bending cycles84©2019 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b12353]. 
However, the presence of Pb causes environmental and human health issues, so the scientific community started digging out Pb-free materials for the fabrication of energy storage capacitors. In 2019, Liag et al. reported an RFE-based flexible dielectric capacitor based on Pb-free BaZr0.35Ti0.65O3 (BZT) on an F-mica substrate with Sn-doped In2O3 as the bottom electrode and Pt as the top electrode.86 The BZT dielectric layer was deposited on Sn-doped In2O3/F-mica using rf magnetron sputtering. The BZT flexible thin film displayed a broad dielectric maximum with a γ of 1.96, indicating that BZT is an RFE. In addition, the very dynamic character of PNRs in RFEs is responsible for the exceptional stability of the polarisation switching (106 cycles) in BZT flexible thin film. As a result, the work reported a discharge energy density of 40.6 J cm−3 with an efficiency of 68.9% at an electric field of 4.23 MV cm−1. The high dielectric breakdown strength in a BZT flexible capacitor arises from the low concentration of oxygen vacancies. The presence of oxygen vacancies degrades the dielectric properties and thereby affects the dielectric breakdown strength. The low oxygen vacancies in BZT film are attributed to the high annealing temperature (850 °C) and the suppression of electron hopping contributed by Zr4+ ions. This in turn enhances the insulation nature and, consequently, produces an improved dielectric breakdown strength. The fatigue test at 4.23 MV cm−1 near room temperature showed fatigue-free behaviour up to 106 cycles, suggesting the superior stability of BZT film capacitors. Such high stability occurs due to the inhibition of charge defects that has the capability of encouraging domain wall mobility. Furthermore, the BZT film energy storage capacitor was studied for different bending radii and bending cycles (Fig. 24(a)). No significant changes in the energy storage performance were observed w.r.t. bending states and bending cycles. Moreover, the work reported a very good discharge time (τ0.9) = 10.7 μs with a power density of 5.2 × 108 W kg−1, which makes them potential candidates for high-pulsed power energy storage applications compared to other energy storage devices (Fig. 24(b) and (c)).
 Fig. 24  (a) Weibull statistical distribution analysis of breakdown strength of BZT; (b) fatigue test of BZT flexible IFE dielectric capacitor; energy storage performance as a function of bending cycles; (c) ESD and power density calculated using charge–discharge experiment; comparison of flexible BZT dielectric capacitor with other energy devices86©2019 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b18429]. 
Yang et al. fabricated a flexible thin film capacitor using a BiFe0.93Mn0.07O3/Ba2Bi4Ti5O18 (BFMO/BBT) heterostructure on an LNO/F-mica substrate via a chemical solution method (CSD).87 Weibull distribution studies exhibited a breakdown strength of 2.5 MV cm−1 for BFMO/BBT flexible thin film capacitors. It is reported that the dielectric breakdown in multilayer capacitors arises from the formation of electric trees that penetrate through all the multilayers constituting the electric breakdown.88 However, in the case of BFMO/BBT flexible thin film capacitors, the interface between BFMO and BBT not only hinders the formation of electric trees but also favours interface polarization. Consequently, a very large ferroelectric polarization followed by excellent energy storage performance (ESD of 52.6 J cm−3 and an η of 75.9% at 2.5 MV cm−1). The energy storage properties of flexible BFMO/BBT film were studied w.r.t. the bending cycle at a bending radius of 6.9 mm. After 100 bending cycles, the ESD decreased from 52.6 to 50.1 J cm−3 with a decrease in η from 75.9 to 74.1%. The slight deviation in the energy storage properties as a function of bending cycle provides a platform for heterostructure thin films in the world of flexible energy storage. Liang et al. reported an ESD of 65.1 J cm−3 and η of 81.9% in a relaxor BZT-based thin film capacitor at 6.5 MV cm−1 grown on an F-mica substrate using the technique of pulsed power deposition (PLD).89 The bottom electrode was La0.67Sr0.33MnO3/SrTiO3 (LSMO/STO) and Pt was the top electrode. Furthermore, the work reported a τ0.9 of 26.9 μs with a discharge power density of 6.7 mW cm−3 at a load resistance (RL) of 100 kΩ. However, this value is very much higher than that of the currently used BOPP, whose power density is only 0.164 mW cm−3. In addition, bending cycle studies at 4 mm bending radius showed only a slight variation in the ESD and η even after 104 cycles at room temperature (Fig. 25(a)). In the same year, Yang et al. fabricated an Mn-doped 0.97(0.93Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3–0.07BaTiO3)–0.03BiFeO3 (NBT–BT–BFO) Pb-free thin film capacitor with an excellent ESD of 81.9 J cm−3 and η of 64.4% at 2.285 MV cm−1via a chemical solution method with Au and Pt as top and bottom electrodes, respectively.90 The NBT–BT–BFO was grown on a mica substrate using a chemical solution method followed by a rapid annealing technique. The relaxor behavior in this flexible film was confirmed using broad dielectric dispersion with a γ value equal to 1.85. The work reported a very good stable energy storage performance w.r.t. bending cycles up to 109 cycles at a bending radius of 2 mm. Yang et al. in 2020 studied the energy storage performance of 0.65(0.94Na0.5Bi0.5TiO3–0.6BaTiO3)–0.35SrTiO3 (NBBST) based RFE films prepared via a chemical solution method.91 The film was coated on a TiO2/F-mica substrate with Pt as the bottom electrode and Au as the top electrode. The Au/NBBST/Pt/TiO2/F-mica flexible film reported a discharge energy density of 56 J cm−3 and an η of 66% at 2.738 MV cm−1 (Fig. 25(b) and (c)). The high energy storage performance is attributed to the enhanced relaxor behavior, which contributes to the formation of micro-domains or polar nano-regions. This in turn results in the formation of slim P–E loops due to the fast dipole re-orientation owing to their small size and therefore low energy loss with high energy storage density. In 2020, Quian et al. fabricated a multilayer Pb-free RFE flexible ceramic capacitor by arranging layers of (Na0.8K0.2)0.5Bi0.5TiO3 and 0.6(Na0.8K0.2)0.5–Bi0.5TiO3–0.4SrTiO3 (NKBT/NKBT-ST)N (N = 2, 3, 6, 8) into different periodic stacks (Fig. 25(d)) for energy storage characterization studies.92 The multilayered flexible thin film with N = 6 (NKBT/NKBT-ST) showed optimum energy storage performance with an ESD of 73.7 J cm−3 and an η of 68.1% at 3.072 MV cm−1. The high dielectric breakdown strength in N = 6 is attributed to the interface blocking effect created by the multilayer arrangement in the structure inhibiting the infiltration of electric trees compared to other stacking arrangements. The discharge speed of NKBT/NKBT-ST was found to be 64.5 μs in the flattened state. Moreover, the multilayered energy storage capacitor revealed a stable energy storage performance w.r.t. bending radius and bending cycles, as shown in Fig. 25(e)–(h).
 Fig. 25  (a) Energy storage performance of flexible BZT film as a function of electric field89©2018 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.12.056]. (b) P–E loop, (c) ESD and η as a function of electric field90©2020 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21105]. (d) Schematic representation of multilayer stacking arrangement of NKBT and (NKBT-ST)N (N = 2, 3, 6, 8); (e)–(h) energy storage performance of (NKBT/NKBT-ST)N (N = 6) w.r.t. bending radius and bending cycle92©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.104862]. 
In the same year Lv et al. fabricated another multilayered RFE thin film energy storage capacitor with a periodic arrangement of the dielectric layers comprising Pb-free (Na0.8K0.2)0.5Bi0.5TiO3 and Ba0.5Sr0.5(Ti0.97Mn0.03)O3 (NKBT/BSMT).93 This work reported a very high ESD of 91 J cm−3 with an η of 68% at 3.035 MV cm−1. Furthermore, NKBT/BSMT exhibited a discharge speed of 47.6 μs with an RL of 100 kΩ. Very recently, in 2021 Sun et al. used a sol–gel technique to fabricate a relaxor Mn-doped Bi0.5Na0.5TiO3–BiNi0.5Zr0.5O3 (BNT–BNZ) FE capacitor on flexible nickel (Ni) with LNO as the bottom electrode and Au as the top electrode.94 Ni foil was chosen instead of mica due to its ductility because like paper it can attain any form. The work achieved an ESD of 60.4 J cm−3 and an η of 63.2% at 800 kV cm−1. A stable ESD and η under mechanical deformation were observed up to 104 bending cycles, as presented in Fig. 26(a)–(d). Moreover, the flexible ceramic capacitor transforming into different shapes provided an almost constant ESD, w.r.t. the unbent state, suggesting superior ductility (Fig. 26(e)–(i)), indicating the superior ductility of the device. Last but not least, the flexible energy storage dielectric capacitors remained unaffected in air for more than 1 year without even changes in their energy storage characteristics, making them potential candidates for long-term energy storage applications. Recently, in 2022, Bin et al. fabricated a novel RFE-based flexible energy storage capacitor using Pb-free BiMg0.5Ti0.5O3–xSrTiO3 (BMT–xSTO, x = 0.1, 0.2, 0.3 and 0.4) thin film capacitors with F-mica as the flexible substrate via a magnetron sputtering system.95 In addition to the Curie–Wiess law, the relaxor behavior in this work was validated using piezo-response force microscopy (PFM). The γ-value of BMT–0.3STO flexible film equalled 1.81, demonstrating very good relaxor behavior. This was corroborated with the help of PFM. For this Bin et al. made a comparative study on the piezoelectric response on both BMT film and BMT–0.3STO film, as shown in Fig. 27. Fig. 27(a) shows a clear distinction between the external and internal regions. This indicates the presence of a macrodomain causing ferroelectricity obstructing back switching. While the BMT–0.3STO film shown in Fig. 27(b) exhibited a very opaque box-in-box switching pattern, suggesting the polarized domains swiftly re-orient to their initial state. Thus, the increase in STO content favoured the formation of PNRs that enhances the slim nature of BMT films without affecting their energy storage performance. The flexible RFE BMT–0.3STO film capacitor displayed an ESD of 109.7 J cm−3 and an η of 80.6% at 3393 kV cm−1. Another study by Bin et al. in 2022 reported superior energy storage performance in RFE thin film capacitors based on PB-free xMn–BiMg0.5Ti0.7O3(xMn–BMT0.7).96 A sol–gel method was used to prepare xMn–BMT0.7 thin films on a Pt/mica substrate with Pt as the top electrode. The flexible 1.5% Mn–BMT0.7 thin film exhibited an ESD of 124 J cm−3, η of 77%, and a fast discharge time of 4.6 μs at 3.292 MV cm−1. Table 2 shows a comparison of the energy storage performance of different flexible IFE-based energy storage thin film capacitors.
 Fig. 26  (a) Images of BNT–BNZ thin film and the corresponding (b) P–E loop as a function of electric field; (c) polarization as a function of bending cycle, and (d) energy storage performance as a function of bending cycle; (e)–(h) BNT–BNZ dielectric capacitor folded into different shapes and the corresponding P–E loops; (i) energy storage performance of flexible BNT–BNZ in different folded states94©2021 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2021.160506]. 
 Fig. 27  PFM images at various time periods of (a) BMT film and (b) BMT–STO film.95©2022 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2022.136728]. 
Table 2 Comparison of the energy storage performance of flexible energy storage capacitors




Type
Material
Substrate
Method of deposition
ESD (J cm−3)

η (%)
Breakdown voltage (MV cm−1)

τ
0.9 (μs)
Ref.




RFE
PLZT
LNO/F-mica
Magnetron sputtering
40.2
62
1.99
—

84



RFE
PLZT
Pt/Ti-foil
PLD
40.9
80.2
3.00
—

85



RFE
BZT
ITO/F-mica
Magnetron sputtering
40.6
68.9
4.23
10.7

86



FE
BFMO/BBT
LNO/F-mica
CSD
52.6
75.9
2.50
—

88



RFE
BZT
LSMO/STO/F-mica
Magnetron sputtering
65.1
81.9
6.50
—

89



RFE
NBT–BT–BFO
Pt/F-mica
CSD
81.9
64.4
2.28
—

90



RFE
NBBST
Pt/TiO2/F-Mica
CSD
56
66
2.73
—

91



RFE
NKBT/NKBT-ST
Pt/F-mica
Metal organic deposition
73.7
68.1
3.07
64.5

92



RFE
NKBT/BSMT
Pt/F-mica
CSD
91
68
3.03
47.6

93



RFE
Mn–BNT–BNZ
LNO/Ni-foil
Sol–gel
60.4
63.7
0.8
—

94



RFE
BMT–0.3STO
Pt/F-mica
Sol–gel









95



RFE
Mn–BMT
Pt/F-mica
CSD
124
77
3.29
4.6

96





4. Perspectives and concluding remarks
Flexible energy devices can revolutionize the integration and miniaturization of the electronic industry. This review article is a vision of recent advances of flexible IFEs in the area of energy harvesting, infrared sensing, and energy storage devices. There are reasonable grounds for focusing on these areas in particular. For instance, a lot of energy is wasted in the form of mechanical and heat energy. Energy harvesters perform the function of converting this wasted energy into electrical energy and can play a crucial role in electrical energy generation. Another enormous source of heat energy is IR radiation. This is not only light: every living body emits IR radiation and it is possible to convert IR power into electrical energy for sensing applications. IR sensors are important in applications such as thermal imaging and gas detection. Also, electrical energy storage is an inevitable part of human life, from basic consumer electronics to ultramodern pulsed power technology. Therefore, a material that can fulfil all these functions will be the best alternative and IFEs could be good contenders. Large piezoelectric and pyroelectric coefficient of IFEs can be explored in energy harvesting and IR sensing applications. On the other hand, the large spontaneous polarization, excellent breakdown strength, and fast charge–discharge speed of IFEs can be utilized for energy storage dielectric capacitor applications. For example, batteries alone cannot meet the requirements of high power and high temperature applications, such as HEVs and high-temperature oil well drilling due to the failure of the power system. An IFE can withstand high fields, high temperatures, and can discharge enormous power for the smooth operation of a power system.97 In this way, IFEs could be a powerful material for the future energy world.
Compared to polymers, IFEs exhibit exceptional piezoelectric, pyroelectric, and energy storage properties. Though IFEs show exceptional electrical properties, their brittle nature inhibits their application in flexible devices. Furthermore, IFEs show disadvantages such as low breakdown strength due to their large hysteresis loss and large dielectric loss compared to polymers. These drawbacks prevent flexible electronic applications of IFEs, emphasising the relevance of IFE–polymer combinations, IFE–flexible substrate combinations, etc. Therefore, it is necessary to make a detailed investigation of the performance of flexible IFE materials as an emerging domain of science. In this review article, various IFE materials and their recent developments in flexible energy harvesting, IR sensing, and energy storage were briefly revised. Different approaches, such as IFE thin film fabrications on a polymer substrate, 0–3 type IFE–polymer composite films, and IFE on flexible substrate using various preparation techniques were introduced to improve the piezoelectric, pyroelectric, mechanical strength, and energy storage performance of flexible devices. For instance, there are a lot of investigations of flexible NGs formed from IFE film–polymer substrates in the area of energy harvesting and sensing applications, while 0–3 type flexible IFE-composite films are investigated for IR sensing applications and IFEs on flexible substrates (F-mica, Ni foil, etc.) for energy storage capacitor applications. From Tables 1 and 2, it is clear that IFEs plays a significant role in the fabrication of flexible energy harvesting and energy storage devices.
Even though IFEs possess very good piezoelectric, pyroelectric, and energy storage properties compared to polymer FEs, there are limitations that prevent these materials achieving exceptional performance. For instance, the high crystallization temperature and mechanically brittle nature of these IFE oxides are key problems that obstruct the formation of flexible energy harvesters. Usually, the crystallization temperature of an IFE oxide is much greater than the degradation temperature of most polymer substrate.98,99 One possible way to overcome this issue is by transferring the IFE oxide from a rigid substrate using a lift-off process with water-soluble Sr3Al2O6 as a sacrificial layer, which is compatible with epitaxial functional IFE oxide.98,99 Furthermore, low-temperature chemical solution deposition (CSD) techniques, such as spin coating and spray pyrolysis, must be explored effectively to develop high-quality IFE oxide thin films compatible with plastic as well as organic polymer substrates.100–103 In most cases, the CSD involves organic solvents with carbon residues, whose decomposition temperature (>500 °C) is greater than the degradation temperatures of plastic and polymer substrates (<350 °C).101,102 Instead, the strategy of using aqueous solvents with covalent bonds in CSD resolves this problem due to covalent bond breakage at low temperatures. This causes enhanced nucleation and crystallization of the functional IFE film even at low temperatures. This in turns reduces energy consumption during the fabrication process and allows direct integration with flexible plastic/polymer substrates.102,103 Secondly, it is necessary to maintain the mechanical stability between the IFE and the polymer matrix of the IFE–polymer nanocomposite.104 The higher thickness of the IFE films (greater than 100 nm) causes mechanical instability between the IFE film and the polymer matrix, which creates delamination or a crack in the films.105 This can be improved only by playing with the interfacial energy between the IFE and the polymer.105 One possible method has been to functionalize the IFE surface with a low interfacial energy polymer matrix.104,106,107 This in turn eliminates the defects associated with agglomeration and elevates the dispersibility.104 Thus, the formation of nanoceramic–polymer composites has become a popular method for transforming an IFE bulk dielectric ceramic into the printable inks required for high productivity and industrial applications.107 To create epoxy-based inks for screen printing nanocomposite dielectric films, functionalized IFE nanoparticles and the polymer are combined. By using a conductive elastomer and an insulating elastomeric spring element (as a substitute for a liquid metal electrode), these IFE–polymer composite films are then combined into reliable mechanical energy harvesting devices to enable maximum electrostatic transduction.107 Moreover, nanoscale ferroelectric HfO2, HfxZr1−xO2 (HZO) (with x ranging from 0 to 1), and ZrO2 are suitable candidates for large-area, cost-effective energy storage.108–114 Given the possibility of achieving robust ferroelectric polarization in sub-10 nm thick HZO films, flexible HZO thin films deposited on PET substrates did not show obvious deterioration in ferroelectric properties during spalling and transfer.115 However, flexible HZO films have not being investigated for energy harvesting, while FE HfO2 thin films deposited on an Si substrate demonstrated excellent current responsivity with an ultrafast response time (in the μs range) utilizing the ferro-pyro-phototronic effect will be useful for applications such as security alert systems, memory storage, and vision sensors.115 Therefore, we anticipate that IFE-based polymer composites and flexible HZO thin films will play a crucial role in energy harvesting.
Most investigations on the energy harvesting performance of these flexible NGs concentrated on low-frequency (≤60 Hz) microscale applications, such powering devices like LEDs and watches, and charging capacitors.116,117 The necessity of scaling up these devices to macroscale power at high frequency could bring up self-sustained energy areas such as structural health monitoring (SHM) and self-sustaining clean room research facilities.116 For instance, energy harvesters could play a crucial role in the aviation industry to detect damage in flight, and a schematic illustration is shown in Fig. 28. Furthermore, clean rooms in research institutes operate almost 24 hours.117 There will be 24 × 7 operating instruments, such as roughing pumps and electrodynamic shakers, whose frequency of operation is greater than 60 Hz.115 Therefore, an investigation into the energy harvesting performance of these flexible IFEs at high frequency could pave the way for a self-sustaining energy based clean room in the future. Additionally, self-powered PD applications necessitate materials that can harvest light energy in the UV-visible region. Some recent investigations have revealed the possible use of IFE-based ceramics and films, such as BFO, BTO, BCZT, and BNT, as PDs due to the ferro-pyro-phototronic effect. Even so, there have been limited studies on flexible devices.74,118
 Fig. 28  Concept of SHM in flights.86 
To summarize, we strongly believe that flexible IFEs have a significant role to play in energy harvesting, IR sensing, and energy storage applications. We anticipate that this article will help the journey of future work on flexible IFEs to fabricate long-lasting reliable electronic devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study has been partially supported by (i) DST-SERB, Govt. of India through Grant ECR/2017/000068 (KCS), (ii) UGC through grant no. F.4-5(59-FRP)/2014(BSR), (ii) Portuguese Foundation for Science and Technology (FCT) in the framework of the Strategic Funding UIDB/FIS/04650/2020 (JPBS) and (iii) M-ERA.NET NanOx4EStor Contract no. M-ERA-NET3/0003/2021 (JPBS). The author A. R. Jayakrishnan is thankful to Indian Institute of Science, India for the post-doctoral fellowship.
References

          A. R. Jayakrishnan, J. P. B. Silva, S. Sathish, K. Kamakshi and K. C. Sekhar, Pyroelectric Nanogenerators in Energy Technology, Nanogenerators, CRC Press,  2022, pp. 161–184 Search PubMed .
H. Ryu and S. W. Kim, Small, 2021, 17, 1903469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, Z. Zheng, J. Liu, H. Xiao, G. Huangfu and Y. Guo, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 1–12 CrossRef .
H. Wei, H. Wang, Y. Xia, D. Cui, Y. Shi, M. Dong, C. Liu, T. Ding, J. Zhang, Y. Ma and N. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 12446–12467 RSC .
L. Lu, W. Ding, J. Liu and B. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105251 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. Tong and G. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763–4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Pitcher, Y. Arslan, P. Edinc, M. Kartal, M. Masjedi, O. Metin, F. Şen, O. Tuerkarslan and B. Yiğitsoy, Phosphorus, Sulfur Silicon Relat. Elem., 2007, 182, 2861–2880 CrossRef CAS .
H. He, X. Lu, E. Hanc, C. Chen, H. Zhang and L. Lu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 1494–1516 RSC .
R. A. Surmenev, R. V. Chernozem, I. O. Pariy and M. A. Surmeneva, Nano Energy, 2021, 79, 105442 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Palneedi, M. Peddigari, A. Upadhyay, J. P. B. Silva, G. T. Hwang and J. Ryu, Lead-based and lead-free ferroelectric ceramic capacitors for electrical energy storage, Ferroelectric materials for energy harvesting and storage, Woodhead Publishing,  2021, pp. 279–356 Search PubMed .
V. S. Puli, A. R. Jayakrishnan, D. K. Pradhan, K. Madgula, S. N. Babu, D. B. Chrisey, R. S. Katiyar, A. Reed, M. McConney, T. Back and R. M. V. Ginhoven, Energy Storage, 2022, 359,  DOI:10.1002/est2.359 .
H. Palneedi, M. Peddigari, G. T. Hwang, D. Y. Jeong and J. Ryu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803665 CrossRef .
J. P. B. Silva, K. C. Sekhar, H. Pan, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and M. Pereira, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2208–2217 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Lang, Pyroelectricity: from ancient curiosity to modern imaging tool, Phys. Today, 2005, 58, 31 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pan, C. Yuan, X. Liang, J. Zou, Y. Zhang and C. Bowen, iScience, 2020, 23, 101682 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Lv, J. Lin, Z. Zhou, Z. Hong, Y. Wu, Z. Ren, Q. Zhang, S. Dong, J. Luo, J. Shi, R. Chen, B. Liu, Y. Su and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2022, 100, 107507 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Watanabe, T. Sekine, R. Miura, M. Abe, Y. Shouji, K. Ito, Y. F. Wang, J. Hong, Y. Takeda, D. Kumaki and F. D. D. Santos, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32, 2107434 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bagchi, N. A. Hoque, N. Janowicz, S. Das and M. K. Tiwari, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ding, M.-C. Wong and J. Hao, EcoMat, 2020, 2(4), e12057 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Bowen, H. A. Kim, P. M. Weaver and S. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 25–44 RSC .
J. Briscoe and S. Dunn, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 15–29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, C. R. Bowen, S. K. Ghosh, D. Mandal, H. Khanbareh, M. Arafa and C. Wan, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 118–140 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ryu and S. W. Kim, Small, 2021, 17, 1903469 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 477–483 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Bowen, J. Taylor, E. LeBoulbar, D. Zabek, A. Chauhan and R. Vaish, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3836–3856 RSC .
M. Peddigari, H. Palneedi, G. T. Hwang and J. Ryu, J. Korean Ceram. Soc., 2018, 56, 1–23 Search PubMed .
Z. Sun, Z. Wang, Y. Tian, G. Wang, W. Wang, M. Yang, X. Wang, F. Zhang and Y. Pu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 6, 1900698 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yao, Z. Song, H. Hao, Z. Yu, M. Cao, S. Zhang, M. T. Lanagan and H. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601727 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Yang, X. Kong, F. Li, H. Hao, Z. Cheng, H. Liu, J. F. Li and S. Zhang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 102, 72–108 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 74–82 CrossRef .
C. R. Bowen, H. A. Kim, P. M. Weaver and S. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 25–44 RSC .
P. Mane, X. Jingsi, K. L. Kam and M. Karla, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Eng., 2011, 58, 10–17 Search PubMed .
A. C. Tomas, M. G. Forner and V. Ferrari, Thermal energy harvesting through pyroelectricity, Sens. Actuators, A, 2010, 158, 132–139 CrossRef .
M. Xie, K. Hisano, M. Zhu, T. Toyoshi, M. Pan, S. Okada, O. Tsutsumi, S. Kawamura and C. Bowen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800626 CrossRef .
J. A. Sobrino, F. D. Frate, M. Drusch, J. C. Jiménez-Muñoz, P. Manunta and A. Regan, IEEE Trans. Geosci. Remote Sens., 2016, 54, 2963–2972 Search PubMed .

          M. Ivill, E. Ngo and M. W. Cole, Method and characterization of pyroelectric coefficients for determining material figures of merit for infrared (IR) detectors, Army Research Lab, Aberdeen Proving Ground, MD, Weapons and Materials Research Directorate,  2013 Search PubMed .
W. Liu, L. L. Sun, W. Zhu and O. K. Tan, Microelectron. Eng., 2003, 66, 785–791 CrossRef CAS .
E. H. Putley, R. Watton and J. H. Ludlow, Ferroelectrics, 1972, 3, 263–268 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Jayakrishnan, K. V. Alex, A. Thomas, J. P. B. Silva, K. Kamakshi, N. Dabra, K. C. Sekhar, J. A. Moreira and M. J. M. Gomes, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45, 5808–5818 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Jayakrishnan, K. V. Alex, K. Kamakshi, J. P. B. Silva, K. C. Sekhar and M. J. M. Gomes, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 19374–19382 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Song, J. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 102–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, X. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2008, 451, 809–813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhu, D. Wang, S. Xiang, Z. Zhou and X. Ye, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 285712 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Xu, N. Yao and Y. Shi, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2133–2137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, S. Bai, M. Yuan, Y. Qin, Z. L. Wang and T. Jing, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6231–6235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gu, N. Cui, L. Cheng, Q. Xu, S. Bai, M. Yuan, W. Wu, J. Liu, Y. Zhao, F. Ma and Y. Qin, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 91–94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zeng, M. Zhang, L. Jiang, Z. Wang, H. Gu, J. Xiong, Y. Du and L. Ren, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 7990–8000 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fu and R. E. Cohen, Nature, 2000, 403, 281–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. W. Yeh, G. Poirier, M. C. McAlpine, R. A. Register and N. Yao, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2393–2398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lee, H. Kim, D. Y. Kim and Y. Seo, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 2610–2617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. I. Park, S. Xu, Y. Liu, G. T. Hwang, S. J. L. Kang, Z. L. Wang and K. J. Lee, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4939–4943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan and Y. G. Jeong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15700–15709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Guan, B. Xu and J. Gong, Nano Energy, 2020, 70, 104516 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li and Q. Wang, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217, 1228–1244 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wan and C. R. Bowen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3091–3128 RSC .
Z. Zhou, Z. Zhang, Q. Zhang, H. Yang, Y. Zhu, Y. Wang and L. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 1567–1576 CrossRef .
H. Guo, Q. Wu, H. Sun, X. Liu and H. Sui, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 17, 100489 CrossRef .
K. Shi, B. Chai, H. Zou, P. Shen, B. Sun, P. Jiang, Z. Shi and X. Huang, Nano Energy, 2021, 80, 105515 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, B. Yang, L. Lu, X. Wang, X. Li, X. Chen and J. Liu, Sens. Actuators, A, 2020, 303, 111796 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, Z. Zhang, Y. Shan, Y. Hong, F. Farooqui, F. S. Lam, W. H. Liao, Z. Wang and Z. Yang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 4682–4689 RSC .
D. J. Shin, J. H. Ji, J. Kim, G. H. Jo, S. J. Jeong and J. H. Koh, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 802, 562–572 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hanani, I. Izanzar, M. B. Amjoud, D. Mezzane, M. Lahcini, H. Uršič, U. Prah, I. Saadoune, M. El Marssi, I. A. Luk’yanchuk and Z. Kutnjak, Nano Energy, 2021, 81, 105661 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ren, H. Fan, Y. Zhao and Z. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26190–26197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Gupta, S. W. Kim and B. Kumar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1766–1773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hanani, I. Izanzar, S. Merselmiz, T. El Assimi, D. Mezzane, H. Uršič, U. Prah, J. Ghanbaja, I. Saadoune, M. Lahcini and M. Spreitzer, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2022, 6, 1983–1991 RSC .
Z. Hanani, I. Izanzar, S. Merselmiz, M. Amjoud, D. Mezzane, J. Ghanbaja, I. Saadoune, M. Lahcini, M. Spreitzer, D. Vengust, M. El Marssi, Z. Kutnjak, I. A. Luk'yanchuk and M. Goune, Nanoscale Adv., 2022, 4, 4658 RSC .
Y. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6408–6413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Y. Zhou, J. M. Wu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8456–8461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Ko, D. Y. Kim, S. S. Won, C. W. Ahn, I. W. Kim, A. I. Kingon, S. H. Kim, J. H. Ko and J. H. Jung, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6504–6511 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, S. Wang and Y. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601852 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, J. H. Jung, B. K. Yun, F. Zhang, K. C. Pradel, W. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5357–5362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhao, B. Ouyang, C. R. Bowen, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 71, 104632 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Zhao, W. Li, Y. Peng, W. Zhao, Z. Wang, L. Shi and W. Fei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 8772 RSC .
L. Wu and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 9, 2201415 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chopra, S. Sharma, T. C. Goel, R. Chatterjee and R. G. Mendiratta, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2006, 37, 134–140 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Jayalakshmy and J. Philip, J. Polym. Res., 2005, 22, 1–11 Search PubMed .
H. Z. Li, W. Z. Li, Y. J. Yang, H. L. Tai, X. S. Du, R. Y. Gao and S. Y. Li, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 19254–19261 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dietze, J. Krause, C. H. Solterbeck and M. Es-Souni, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 054113 CrossRef .
Q. Yang, Z. Shi, D. Ma, Y. He and J. Wang, Ceram. Int., 2018, 44, 14850–14856 CrossRef CAS .
W. B. Luo, Y. C. Yu, Y. Shuai, X. Q. Pan, Q. Q. Wu, C. G. Wu and W. L. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2016, 27, 2288–2292 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, X. Li, X. Yang, B. Xu and Y. Wang, Sens. Actuators, A, 2018, 282, 192–196 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Nguyen, Y. A. Birkhölzer, E. P. Houwman, G. Koster and G. Rijnders, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2200517 CrossRef CAS .
B. Z. Shen, Y. Li and Y. X. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 34117–34127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. T. Nguyen, H. N. Vu and M. D. Nguyen, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 802, 422–429 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, M. Liu, L. Shen, L. Lu, C. Ma, X. Lu, X. Lou and C. L. Jia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5247–5255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. B. Yang, M. Y. Guo, C. H. Li, D. P. Song, X. W. Tang, R. H. Wei, L. Hu, X. J. Lou, X. B. Zhu and Y. P. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 243901 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, C. Ma, M. Liu, J. Cui, L. Lu, J. Lu, X. Lou, L. Jin, H. Wang and C. L. Jia, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604427 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liang, C. Ma, L. Shen, L. Lu, X. Lu, X. Lou, M. Liu and C. L. Jia, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 519–527 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, P. Lv, J. Qian, Y. Han, J. Ouyang, X. Lin, S. Huang and Z. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803949 CrossRef .
C. Yang, Y. Han, C. Feng, X. Lin, S. Huang, X. Cheng and Z. Cheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6082–6089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qian, Y. Han, C. Yang, P. Lv, X. Zhang, C. Feng, X. Lin, S. Huang, X. Cheng and Z. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104862 CrossRef CAS .
P. Lv, C. Yang, J. Qian, H. Wu, S. Huang, X. Cheng and Z. Cheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1904229 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, Y. Li and X. Hao, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 879, 60506 Search PubMed .
C. Bin, X. Hou, H. Yang, L. Liao, Y. Xie, H. Wei, Y. Liu, X. Chen and J. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 445, 136728 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bin, X. Hou, Y. Xie, J. Zhang, H. Yang, L. Xu, H. Wei and J. Wang, Small, 2022, 18, 2106209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. B. Silva, J. M. Silva, M. J. Oliveira, T. Weingärtner, K. C. Sekhar, M. Pereira and M. J. M. Gomes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807196 CrossRef .
Z. D. Luo, J. J. Peters, A. M. Sanchez and M. Alexe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 23313–23319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ambriz-Vargas, G. Kolhatkar, M. Broyer, A. Hadj-Youssef, R. Nouar, A. Sarkissian, R. Thomas, C. Gomez-Yanez, M. A. Gauthier and A. A. Ruediger, Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13262–13268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, K. H. Kim, J. W. Jo, S. Sung, K. T. Kim, W. J. Lee, J. Kim, H. J. Kim, G. R. Yi, Y. H. Kim and M. H. Yoon, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2807–2815 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Park, B. H. Kang and H. J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(20), 1904632 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bretos, R. Jiménez, J. Ricote, R. Sirera and M. L. Calzada, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001897 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bretos, R. Jiménez, J. Ricote and M. L. Calzada, Low-temperature solution approaches for the potential integration of ferroelectric oxide films in flexible electronics, IEEE Trans. Ultrason. Ferroelectr. Freq. Control, 2020, 67, 1967–1979 Search PubMed .
H. S. Leese, M. Tejkl, L. Vilar, L. Georgi, H. C. Yau, N. Rubio, E. Reixach, J. Buk, Q. Jiang, A. Bismarck and R. Hahn, Mater. Adv., 2022, 3, 1780–1790 RSC .
Z. Hu, B. Ma, M. Li, R. E. Koritala and U. Balachandran, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 75, 167–171 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Puli, M. Ejaz, R. Elupula, M. Kothakonda, S. Adireddy, R. S. Katiyar, S. M. Grayson and D. B. Chrisey, Polymer, 2016, 105, 35–42 CrossRef CAS .
K. Brandt, C. Neusel, S. Behr and G. A. Schneider, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3129–3137 RSC .
B. Wang, W. Huang, L. Chi, M. Al-Hashimi, T. J. Marks and A. Facchetti, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 5690–5754 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kol and A. Y. Oral, Acta Phys. Pol., 2019, 136, 873–881 CrossRef CAS .
W. Banerjee, A. Kashir and S. Kamba, Small, 2022, 2107575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zeng, C. Liu, S. Dai, P. Zhou, K. Bao, S. Zheng, Q. Peng, J. Xiang, J. Gao, J. Zhao, M. Liao and Y. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2011077 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Kim and J. S. Lee, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Y. Yang, P. Yuan, P. Jiang, Y. Xu, S. Lv, Y. Ding, Z. Dang, T. Gong, Y. Wang and Q. Luo, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2022, 43, 930–933 CAS .
A. R. Jayakrishnan, J. P. B. Silva, K. Kamakshi, D. Dastan, V. Annapureddy, M. Pereira and K. C. Sekhar, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2022, 132, 101046,  DOI:10.1016/j.pmatsci.2022.101046 .
M. Kumar and H. Seo, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34, 2106881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Priya, H. C. Song, Y. Zhou, R. Varghese, A. Chopra, S. G. Kim, I. Kanno, L. Wu, D. S. Ha, J. Ryu and R. G. Polcawich, Energy Harvest. Syst., 2017, 4, 3–39 CrossRef .
S. Zelenika, Z. Hadas, S. Bader, T. Becker, P. Gljušćić, J. Hlinka, L. Janak, E. Kamenar, F. Ksica, T. Kyratsi, L. Louca, M. Mrlik, A. Osmanovic, V. Pakrashi, O. Rubes, O. Ševecek, J. P. B. Silva, P. Tofel, B. Trkulja, R. Unnthorsson, J. Velagic and Ž. Vrcan, Sensors, 2020, 20, 6685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. B. Silva, K. Gwozdz, L. S. Marques, M. Pereira, M. J. M. Gomes, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll and R. L. Z. Hoye, Carbon Energy, 2022 DOI:10.1002/cey2.297 .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Ampattu R. Jayakrishnan
	Jayakrishnan A. R. is working as an Assistant Professor in Physics at Sree Narayana Guru College of Advanced Studies, Nangiarkulangara, Alappuzha, Kerala, India. He received his PhD degree in Physics from Central University of Tamil Nadu, India in 2021. He was a post-doctoral fellow in the Centre for Nanoscience and Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, India. His research interests are ferroelectric energy storage and ferroelectric energy harvesting materials.

Rosmin John
	Rosmin John is working as an Assistant Professor in Physics at St. Aloysius College, Edathua, Kerala, India. She is a PhD candidate in Physics at Mahatma Gandhi University, Kerala. Her research interests include semiconductor photovoltaics and piezoelectric energy harvesters.

Venkata Sreenivas Puli
	Dr Venkata Sreenivas Puli is working as a materials researcher at Smart Nanomaterials Solutions, Orlando, Florida, USA. He obtained his PhD in Chemical Physics in 2012 from the University of Puerto Rico. He has contributed more than 60 journal articles in international peer reviewed journals and is serving as a peer reviewer for more than 25 international journals. His research interests focus on ferroelectric energy storage and multiferroic magneto electric ceramics and thin films.

José P. B. Silva
	José P. B. Silva is a junior researcher at Centre of Physics of University of Minho and Porto (CF-UM-UP). He graduated in Physics and Chemistry in 2008 and received his PhD in 2013 from the University of Minho (Portugal). Between 2014 and 2019, he was a Post-doctoral Fellow at the Materials Physics Institute of the University of Porto (IFIMUP) and at CF-UM-UP, both in Portugal. His current research interests focus on understanding the relationship between structure and functionality of ferroelectric oxide thin films for memory and energy storage applications.

Maria J. M. Gomes
	Maria J. M. Gomes is Professor at the Physics Department of the University of Minho. She obtained her PhD from the University of Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France in 1990. She worked for more than 25 years on thin films technology, namely in the ferroelectric and semiconductor materials. Her current research interests include the fabrication and physical properties of lead-free ferroelectric thin films.

Koppole C. Sekhar
	Koppole Chandra Sekhar has been working as UGC-Assistant Professor in the Department of Physics, Central University of Tamil Nadu, Thiruvarur since July 2015. He has contributed around 80 journal articles and his current h-index is 19. His research interests focus on ferroelectric-semiconductor heterostructures for memory, energy, environmental and photovoltaic applications.

 	Fig. 1  Various applications of dielectric materials in the field of energy and electronic devices.	 

 	Fig. 2  Yearly publications on FEs and flexible FEs up to May 2022 (source: web of science data base (https://apps.webofknowledge.com/)) keyword search: topic = (ferroelectrics).	 
D = ε0E + P	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Ferroelectric PENG under (a) no applied force and (b) applied force in the z-direction.	 

 	Fig. 4  Pyroelectric material under (a) constant temperature, (b) heating, and (c) cooling.1	 
	(5)
Qnet = pAΔT (open circuit)	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 5  Primary and secondary pyroelectric effects.1	 
	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 6  Comparison of electrical properties of commonly used materials: (a) ferroelectric polymer and semiconductor materials; (b) IFEs.8	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic illustration of the working of a thermal detector.	 
	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)

 	Fig. 8  Comparison of FD of different materials.8	 

 	Fig. 9  Dielectric capacitors and energy applications.	 
	(17)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic image of PZT nanofibre nanogenerator; (b) PZT nanofibre in the PDMS matrix as seen in a cross-sectional SEM image; output voltage generation using (c) a Teflon stack and (d) finger pressure45©2010 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl100812k].	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) XRD and (b) SAED patterns of PZT nanowires; (c) generated output voltage; (d) generated output current by the PENG46©2012 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nn3016585].	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic representation of nanofibre-based PZT PENG; (b) working and output generation under periodic pressure; (c) demonstration of nanofibre PZT PENG to stimulate the nerve of a frog and driving an LED47©2012 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl303539c]. (d) XRD; (e) FT-IR, and (f) HR-TEM of Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE)48©2022 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.1c22877].	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of a PMN–PT NW PENG device. (b) Cross-section and (c) individual SEM images of PMN–PT NW in a PDMS matrix. (d) Dark-field and (e) bright-field TEM images and (f) SAED pattern50©2013 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl400169t].	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) XRD of PZT nanowires. (b) Output voltage and (c) current generation in PDMS alone. (d) Output current generation as a function of thickness51©2019 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsomega.8b03325].	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Structure of BTO PENG. (b) Representation of BTO PENG on plastic substrate. (c) Output current and voltage generation in PENG52©2010 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl102959k]. (d) Schematic illustration of the preparation and alignment of BTO nanofibres in three different ways. (e) Output voltage generation in BTNF-V, BTNF-H, and BTNF-R53©2016 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b02177].	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) XRD patterns of P-BT@P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite; (b) output voltage generated in different polymer composites at 700 N; (c) endurance test of P-BT@P(VDF-TrFE); (d) demonstration of charging capacitor under stretching/releasing motion; (e) real-time integration of P-BT@P(VDF-TrFE) into a shoe; output voltage generated from human motions, such as (f) squatting; (g) walking; and (h) running54©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.104516].	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Illustration of the formation of a core–shell structure of BTO; (b) normal view and (c) high-resolution enlarged view of the TEM image of the BTO core–shell structure; (d) image of BT@C/P(VDF-TrFE) nanogenerator placed on a bicycle; (e) rectified output from the BT@C/P(VDF-TrFE) nanogenerator lighting 12 LEDs57©2019 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b18780]. (f) Image showing the flexibility of an MBT/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite; (g) magnified view of output voltage of MBT/P(VDF-TrFE); (h) live demonstration of powering LEDs under force condition58©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtener.2020.100489].	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Fabrication steps of BCZT/P(VDF-TrFE) nanocomposite PENG; (b) XRD patterns of BCZT/P(VDF-TrFE) composite film; (c) output voltage generated by the PENG using different human hand motions60©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2019.111796].	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) XRD patterns of BFO nanoparticles; (b) schematic illustration of the preparation of BFO/PDMS nanocomposite; output generation by (c) pure PDMS and (d) BFO/PDMS nanocomposite PENG64©2016 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b04497]. (e) SEM image of KNLN microcubes; (f) XRD pattern of KNLN microcubes; output voltage (g) and (h) current generated by KNLN/PDMS PENG under pressing/releasing forces65©2016 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.5b09485].	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Photograph and working of a PZT nanogenerator as a wireless sensor68©2012 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/nl303755m]. (b) Pyroelectric and piezoelectric output generation by hybrid PZT nanogenerator69©2016 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.6b00054].	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Image of BTO–PDMS NG and (b) output generated by the BTO–PDMS NG using different sources73©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.104632].	 

PZT/PDMS	ME	75 kV cm−1, 12 h, 100 °C	6	1.1	1.4	—	
51

PZT/PET	ME	40 kV cm−1, 15 min, 130 °C	100	6	0.045	200 μW cm−3	
46

PZT/PDMS	ME	50 kV cm−1, 15 min, 130 °C	100	209	53	—	
47

Ga-PZT@GaOx/P(VDF-TrFE)	ME	30 kV cm−1, 6 min, 130 °C	20	98	0.3	9.8 μW	
48

PMN–PT/PDMS	ME	50 kV cm−1, 1 h, 150 °C	—	7.8	2.9	—	
50

BTO/PDMS	ME	200 kV cm−1, 15 h, 150 °C	—	1	0.026	0.007 μW cm−3	
52

BTO/PDMS	ME	50 kV cm−1, 12 h, 120 °C	10	2.67	0.261	0.187 μW	
53

P-BTO/P(VDF-TrFE)	ME	50 kV cm−1, 12 h, RT	5	6	1.52	—	
54

BTO/P(VDF-TrFE)	ME	12 h, 80 °C	19.8	17	—	14.3 μW	
57

BTO/P(VDF-TrFE)	ME	40 kV cm−1, 3 h, 40 °C	80	45	2	0.76 μW cm−2	
58

PMMA@BTO/P(VDF-TrFE)	ME	No poling	7.2	12.6	1.3	4.25 μW	
59

BCZT/F-mica	ME	No poling	3.7	4.9	0.46	450 μW cm−3	
61

BCZT/PVDF	ME	35 kV cm−1, 10 h, 130 °C	—	20.61	2	3450 μW cm−3	
62

BCZT@PDA/PLA	ME	No poling	3.5	14.4	0.55	7540 μW cm−3	
63

BFO/PDMS	ME	200 kV cm−1, 10 h, 150 °C	—	3	0.25	—	
64

HZTO/PLA	ME	No poling	2.5	5.41	0.26	463.5 μW cm−3	
66

HZTO + BCZT/PLA	ME	No poling	4	11.5	0.6	9200 μW cm−3	
67

PZT/PDMS	ME + HE + LE	No poling	200	80	5	31 μW	
71

BTO/PDMS	LE	400 kV cm−1, 3 h, 40 °C	4	—	0.021	83200 μW cm−2	
73

	(18)

 	Fig. 22  (a) Pyroelectric coefficient and (b) FOM as a function of DM-BT concentration78©2018 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ceramint.2018.07.150]. (c) Diagram of a conventional dual capacitor pyroelectric sensor; (d) schematic representation of the fabrication process for a PZT/P(VDF-TrFE) based IR sensor; (e) comparison of the detectivity of a conventional device and a PZT/P(VDF-TrFE) device as a function of frequency82©2018 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sna.2018.09.039].	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Weibull distribution plot of a PLZT 9/65/35 thick film IFE dielectric capacitor; ESD as a function of (b) applied electric field, (c) bending radius, and (d) bending cycles84©2019 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b12353].	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Weibull statistical distribution analysis of breakdown strength of BZT; (b) fatigue test of BZT flexible IFE dielectric capacitor; energy storage performance as a function of bending cycles; (c) ESD and power density calculated using charge–discharge experiment; comparison of flexible BZT dielectric capacitor with other energy devices86©2019 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.8b18429].	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Energy storage performance of flexible BZT film as a function of electric field89©2018 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.12.056]. (b) P–E loop, (c) ESD and η as a function of electric field90©2020 American Chemical Society [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b21105]. (d) Schematic representation of multilayer stacking arrangement of NKBT and (NKBT-ST)N (N = 2, 3, 6, 8); (e)–(h) energy storage performance of (NKBT/NKBT-ST)N (N = 6) w.r.t. bending radius and bending cycle92©2020 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nanoen.2020.104862].	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Images of BNT–BNZ thin film and the corresponding (b) P–E loop as a function of electric field; (c) polarization as a function of bending cycle, and (d) energy storage performance as a function of bending cycle; (e)–(h) BNT–BNZ dielectric capacitor folded into different shapes and the corresponding P–E loops; (i) energy storage performance of flexible BNT–BNZ in different folded states94©2021 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jallcom.2021.160506].	 

 	Fig. 27  PFM images at various time periods of (a) BMT film and (b) BMT–STO film.95©2022 Elsevier Ltd [DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2022.136728].	 

RFE	PLZT	LNO/F-mica	Magnetron sputtering	40.2	62	1.99	—	
84

RFE	PLZT	Pt/Ti-foil	PLD	40.9	80.2	3.00	—	
85

RFE	BZT	ITO/F-mica	Magnetron sputtering	40.6	68.9	4.23	10.7	
86

FE	BFMO/BBT	LNO/F-mica	CSD	52.6	75.9	2.50	—	
88

RFE	BZT	LSMO/STO/F-mica	Magnetron sputtering	65.1	81.9	6.50	—	
89

RFE	NBT–BT–BFO	Pt/F-mica	CSD	81.9	64.4	2.28	—	
90

RFE	NBBST	Pt/TiO2/F-Mica	CSD	56	66	2.73	—	
91

RFE	NKBT/NKBT-ST	Pt/F-mica	Metal organic deposition	73.7	68.1	3.07	64.5	
92

RFE	NKBT/BSMT	Pt/F-mica	CSD	91	68	3.03	47.6	
93

RFE	Mn–BNT–BNZ	LNO/Ni-foil	Sol–gel	60.4	63.7	0.8	—	
94

RFE	BMT–0.3STO	Pt/F-mica	Sol–gel	
	
	
	
	
95

RFE	Mn–BMT	Pt/F-mica	CSD	124	77	3.29	4.6	
96


 	Fig. 28  Concept of SHM in flights.86	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
