Mesoporous thin films: properties and applications   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3CS35377J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3CS35377J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4198-4216Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsMesoporous thin films: properties and applications†

        
          
            Plinio 
            Innocenzi
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Luca 
            Malfatti
          
        
      
Laboratorio di Scienza dei Materiali e Nanotecnologie (LMNT), D.A.D.U., CR-INSTM, Università di Sassari, Palazzo Pou Salid, Piazza Duomo 6, 07041 Alghero (SS), Italy. E-mail: plinio@uniss.it
Received 
      10th September 2012
    First published on 11th February 2013AbstractIn this review we present a short overview of the main fields of application of mesoporous ordered films obtained via templating self-assembly. These materials, because of their very special properties such as high surface area, ordered porosity, versatile functionalization of the pore surface, have been widely used for developing advanced functional applications. Mesoporous ordered films have also shown a high capability of integration in current material processing technologies also taking advantage of the high flexibility of the synthesis. A surprisingly large variety of devices and applications have been developed so far which ranges from sensors to supercapacitors and biodevices. All these applications have in common the exploitation of ordered porosity on the mesoscale and in general a strong dependence on pore topology, the nature of the pore surface and pore accessibility has been demonstrated for most of the cases. Even if a high number of examples of applications have been reported still many more are expected to come in the near future.
Introduction
Organization of porosity at the mesoscale through self-assembly templating1,2 represents an important breakthrough in nanochemistry and offers a new tool for several applications of nano-engineered materials.3,4 Mesostructured oxide and hybrid organic–inorganic films occupy within the family of mesoporous materials a special position not only for the large number of technological applications that can be envisaged but also for the challenges hidden behind the synthesis. During the deposition of a film from a liquid phase the fast evaporation of the solvent makes self-assembly dependent on the kinetics of the different chemical–physical processes which are simultaneously involved. Organization arises through the evaporation of the solvent which drives the formation and organization of the templating micelles while a hybrid organic–inorganic interface is formed by the polycondensation reaction of building blocks (inorganic or hybrid oligomeric species) at the micelle surface.5 Only if the right kinetics of the different processes is respected self-assembly, especially in fast evaporating systems such as thin films, is finally realized. The intense research in the field in the last ten years has allowed elucidation of most of the secrets behind self-assembly of mesoporous thin films and the synthesis of several types of oxides and hybrids is now well-established and reproducible. We can say that after the very pioneering work of understanding self-assembly and achieving ordered materials of different composition we are now at the beginning of a second research stage in the field which is the development of applications and the establishment of a property–structure relationship chart. In this second phase it is also clear that an important research trend is the integration of mesoporous films into established material processing and the evolution to complex structures, such as hierarchical porous materials.
If we look at the type of order that is possible to achieve within the films a quite large variety of organized mesophases have been obtained so far.6 The most widely studied system is silica, which can be used as the reference for understanding the different types of organized structures which could be obtained by self-assembly. When the organization is poor, which in general is observed if the condensation of the silica backbone is too high or the amount of surfactant is too low, a mesopore wormlike structure is observed, otherwise different types of 2D or 3D organization can be obtained. The different types of applications that can be developed starting from mesoporous films rely very much on the structure–property relationship which is basically dictated by the type of meso-organization. In general, 2D mesophases are less chemically and mechanically stable and access to the pores is more difficult, but in other cases obtaining oriented 2D mesopores allows development of very specific applications based for instance on anisotropy of the material. Up to now lamellar and 2D-hexagonal (2D-Hex) mesophases in films have been obtained such as the 2D-Hex porous phase with hexagonal plane group p6mm and the planar rectangular c2mm mesophase. Several cubic structures have also been obtained for silica such as the 3D hexagonal (3D-Hex) phase, in the P63/mmc space group, the primitive cubic phase, in Pm3n the space group, the bicontinuous cubic phase, Pn3m, the body centered cubic phase, Im3m, the body centered tetragonal phase, I4/mmm, the face-centered cubic phase, Fm3m and a double-gyroid cubic phase with space group Ia3d; the different mesophases obtained in silica films are shown in Fig. 1. Not all these phases have been obtained for all the oxide compositions and also it should be underlined that the final mesophase is often the result of an allowed transition between the ordered structure obtained immediately after deposition and that at the end of film processing. As we have previously underlined during the design of the material for a specific application which type of organization of the pores is the best one and how to get it should be always taken into account.7 Dimensions and accessibility of the pores represent another critical issue, in fact within the mesoscale the pores can be somehow changed within some limits by the type of surfactant; in several cases hierarchical porosity in the films, in the meso and micro range, has appeared as a good solution for several applications. Chemical and mechanical8 stability of mesoporous films is somehow one of the most overlooked properties but represents a quite critical point for applications. In general silica mesoporous films have some limited chemical durability and mechanical stability under hydrolytic conditions which limits the possible fields of applications; transition metal oxides and hybrid organic–inorganic materials have instead a much higher stability and represent a good alternative in several cases. In this review we will not enter into the details of synthesis and structure of mesoporous films for which the reader can refer to several comprehensive reviews5,9 and other articles in this special issue.
 Fig. 1  Pore structures obtained via self-assembly templating in mesoporous films: 2D (Lam = lamellar, p6m, and c2mm), 3D (Rm, I4/mmm, Fmm, Imm, P63/mmc, and Pmn) and bicontinuous (Iad and Pnm) (reproduced with permission from ref. 6). 
The applications based on mesoporous ordered films take advantage of the very peculiar properties of this material which are high surface area, controlled porosity and high flexibility in composition and surface design. The type of application dictates the synthesis, in one case the material plays only a passive role and all the properties which are necessary to play the function are embedded in the composition and in the pore organization. Examples of such a type are the films with low k, for photocatalysis and for thermal insulation. In the second case, instead, the mesoporous film should have an active interaction with the external environment and other molecules or nanostructures should be incorporated into the material; this includes films for photonics, such as lasing waveguides, sensors and solar cells. These materials have in general a higher degree of complexity because there is a need to control the properties of the doping species and design of the interface.
In this review we have described some of the main applications of mesoporous ordered films in the different fields; we have grouped the applications within specific subjects that have been selected as the most peculiar and well studied to our judgement. In general we have limited our description to ordered films obtained via deposition from a liquid phase even if disordered mesoporous films and films obtained from other routes, such as assembly of mesoporous particles, have been sometimes described to give a wider view of the subject.
Film processing
One of the main advantages of the mesoporous film processing is the large flexibility of the synthesis route and the possibility of using different types of deposition methods. In general, spin-coating and dip-coating are the most widely employed techniques, but other methods such as spray-coating, casting and convective self-assembly have also been applied to produce mesoporous ordered films. It is important that whatever is the deposition technique chosen to obtain the film, this should allow self-assembly through organization of the template. This means that a very precise control of the deposition parameters is mandatory together with a careful monitoring of the external environmental conditions, such as temperature and relative humidity.
Dip-coating processing of thin films is based on immersion and withdrawal at a controlled rate of the substrate;10 lower withdrawal speeds allow production of films of smaller thickness.11 At very low withdrawal rates a capillary regime of deposition rises which is suitable for the deposition from aqueous and/or highly diluted solutions.12 Deposition by spin-coating is also a common technique for mesoporous films,13 and is based on the spreading by rotation of a droplet cast on the substrate. The advantage with respect to dip-coating is that only a limited amount of solution has to be employed and one-side coating is achieved in a single deposition.
Spray-drying has also been demonstrated to be a feasible route for deposition of thin films on different types of substrates besides allowing also the production of mesoporous particles.14,15 Ordered mesoporous films have also been obtained using convective self-assembly,16 electrophoretic deposition17 while controlled growth of a membrane at an interface has been used to obtain self-supporting layers. Free standing mesoporous films have been obtained by nucleation at the water–air interface18 or at the oil–water interface in the case of CTAB templated silica films.19
In general, most of the techniques available for deposition of films from a liquid phase have been proven to be feasible for self-assembly of mesoporous films, this is one clear advantage of the material processing which, however, requires on the other hand a careful control of the environment and conditions of deposition.
Mesoporous films for photocatalysis
Photocatalysis20 is one of the most promising fields of application of mesoporous materials because the high surface area gives significant advantages in producing effective photodegradation of several organic pollutants. Mesoporous powders and thin films21 have been tested for water and air purification or decomposition of acetone,22 water and dyes. Photocatalytic activity has been demonstrated for different mesoporous oxides such as Ta2O5,23 MgTa2O624,25 and TiO226,27 the latter being by far the most studied one, especially for developing devices or surface modification. Titania is a large bandgap semiconductor (ΔE > 3.2 eV) and by UV light irradiation (λ < 385 nm) produces excited electrons and holes due to the reduction of Ti4+ and the oxidation of O2−; this excitation process gives reactive oxidizing OH− and O− radical species which are responsible for the decomposition of organic species. The large surface in mesoporous films increases the photocatalytic active area and the efficiency of the layer while at the same time favours the production of active oxygen species. The material processing of mesoporous films for photocatalysis represents a critical issue and has to be carefully controlled. Titania has three different polymorphs, anatase, rutile and brookite; the metastable anatase and brookite transform into the thermodynamically stable rutile upon calcination at around 600 °C. Anatase shows the highest photocatalytic activity which in turn depends on the dimension of crystallites and surface properties such as oxygen defects. The crystallinity of the mesoporous titania films28 needs, therefore, to be carefully controlled such as the pore accessibility of the mesostructure. The thermal treatment should allow the formation of pure anatase crystallites without however excessive reduction of mesoporosity and loss of order. This is also complicated by the chemistry of mesostructured titania films which is quite difficult to handle because of the high reactivity of titanium alkoxides and chlorides which are common precursors for producing titania via sol–gel reactions.29 In any case highly ordered mesoporous titania films with different types of structural order such as 2D hexagonal (in the p6mm space group),30,31 3D hexagonal (P63/mmc)32 and cubic (Im3m)33 have been obtained via evaporation induced self-assembly. The use of titania for photocatalysis is not limited to ordered porous films and several examples of mesoporous coatings without an organization in the porous structures have also been reported.34–37 The organization of the porosity plays an important role in modulating the photocatalytic efficiency of the titania mesostructured films. In general, 3D titania phases exhibit a slightly higher decomposition rate of organic compounds;38 a comparative study of the photocatalytic activity in 2D hex and cubic anatase films using methylene blue as a molecular probe has shown that cubic structures have a larger accessible surface area but a lower adsorption surface affinity in comparison to 2D hex films.39 In the same work it has been reported that the best photocatalytic performance is observed in cubic samples treated at 450 °C;39 in other studies, however, the optimized temperature has been reported to be 500 °C22 or 600 °C.21 Such discrepancies are due to different films processing, in terms of chemistry and thermal treatment and show one time more how much the final properties are affected by even small changes in the preparation protocol;40–42 differences in experimental conditions make also quite difficult direct comparison of the photocatalytic properties because of the lack of a standard test of control. Thickness of the films is also critical and multilayers have shown to perform better than thinner coatings.43,44
A general strategy for improving the photocatalytic performance of titania is the modification of the material in different ways such as nanoparticles loading, anion doping, doping with metal ions and incorporation of carbon nanotubes or graphene which act as electron-accepting species. Several examples have been reported in the case of mesostructured titania films modified by different routes for improving the photocatalytic activity. Enhanced photocatalysis has been reported for cerium doped mesostructured titania films,45 cubic mesoporous ordered WO3–TiO2 films46 and mesoporous titania films containing gold nanoparticles.47
The photocatalytic activity of anatase titania is limited by its bandgap in the UV range (λ < 385 nm) but the extension into the visible wavelengths, where titania absorbs no more than 5% of the light, represents a key technological issue. The modification of titania through doping anions such as nitrogen,48 sulphur or carbon is one of the most common methods to decrease the bandgap of anatase. In particular doping with nitrogen has been achieved in titania mesostructured films prepared via nitriding reactions by annealing mesostructured nanocrystalline titania films under ammonia flow49 or by one-pot chemical synthesis using thiourea as the nitrogen source;43 thiourea has also been used in a similar synthesis to prepare sulphur doped photocatalytic titania films.50
In general the strategies that have been employed to enhance the performances have been focused on modification of the titania bandgap and increasing the pore accessibility;51 improvements which are between 2 and 5 times the standard titania mesoporous film have been recorded. A better accessibility of the pore interface is given by hierarchical meso–macroporous structures52 which have interconnected mesopores and macropores;53 hierarchically porous titania films have been fabricated by dual templating using Pluronic F127 as a triblock copolymer and polystyrene (PS) beads and showed an accelerated photodegradation of methylene blue. A significant better performance has been recently reported in the case of hierarchically ordered macro–mesoporous TiO2–graphene films54 (Fig. 2); the interest of this system, besides the higher accessibility given by the hierarchical porous structure, is given by graphene which acts as an acceptor of the photogenerated electrons from titania anatase and suppresses the charge recombination.55 The presence of a higher number of photogenerated holes gives rise to more reactive species and enhances the photodegradation; a significant improvement in photocatalytic performance has been reported. A deeper insight into the mechanism of photodegradation has been obtained by spectroscopic ellipsometry which has allowed observing the distance dependence of organic species with respect to the titania surface.56
 Fig. 2  Preparation of macro–mesoporous titania–graphene films. A polystyrene opal template film is impregnated with a precursor sol containing graphene oxide (GO), the surfactant Pluronic P123, TiCl4 and titanium isopropoxide (TTIP). After aging to allow the sol gelation the film has been exposed to hydrazine vapour to reduce the graphene oxide to graphene. In the final step the film has been annealed with a specific thermal treatment in a controlled atmosphere (reproduced with permission from ref. 41). 
Titania mesostructured films, besides the application for DSSCs, have also been tested for developing all solid state solar cells57 which are fabricated by impregnation of a hole carrier semiconducting organic polymer within the mesopores.58 These devices have a smaller efficiency in comparison with the DSSCs but represents an alternative material which needs to be optimized in terms of pore accessibility and total volume of the pores filled with the semiconducting organic polymer.59,60 Another interesting alternative is also represented by mesoporous ZnS films that have been produced from an exo-templating method.61
Mesoporous titania films have also been integrated in different ways in functional coatings for self-cleaning62,63 and hydrophobic, antireflective63 applications. An interesting case is the fabrication of a multifunctional coating with antireflection, self-cleaning and antifogging properties. This material has been obtained through fabrication of a multilayer system which contains an ultrathin crystalline TiO2 nanoperforated layer prepared via self-assembly under controlled conditions. The film (around 12 nm thick) is deposited on the top of a silica antireflective coating and works as a protecting barrier toward mechanical aggressions and gives high water wetting (antifogging) and photocatalytic (self-cleaning) properties to the surface. Mesoporous titania films have also been tested for water splitting64 and air purification65 in both cases taking advantage of the higher surface area and accessibility of the porous structures.
Solar cells
Dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs)66,67 combine the high light absorption of specifically designed organic dyes with the electronic conductivity of a nanocrystalline anatase network into which electrons are injected after excitation of the sensitizer dye. The most common DSSCs processing technique is screen-printing (or doctor-bladed) of colloidal solutions68,69 which gives thick nanocrystalline anatase electrodes is in the 1–10 μm range. Mesoporous ordered titania films have the potential advantage that ordered pores with high surface area would provide better accessibility to both the dye and the hole-transporter but on the other hand because the incident-photon-to-current-efficiency (IPCE) of the cell is directly connected to the film thickness70 they have the drawback of the limited thickness per single layer (typically 300–400 nm). Different strategies can be applied to overcome this limitation, the first one is using multilayer titania anatase mesoporous coatings by which at least 1 μm film can be obtained for DSSCs;71,72 the second one is a careful design of porous structure, in terms of pore dimension, topology and accessibility.73 The pore morphology, such as in the photocatalytic applications, is very important because it affects the accessibility of the doping dye and the conductivity. Morphologies such as hexagonally ordered cylinders are continuous in only one dimension whilst a fully symmetrical 3D continuous interconnected mesostructure is given by a bicontinuous gyroid. Examples of such structures applied for solar cells are the electrochemical replication of titania of gyroid-forming di-block copolymer templates74 and a mesostructured SnO2 with a 3D bicontinuous cubic mesophase75 (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  Gyroid network replica using a block copolymer as templates and assembly of hybrid solar cells. (a) PFS-b-PLA gyroid block copolymer morphology. A film of the block copolymer is deposited on a transparent conducting oxide coating (FTO glass). (b) The selective removal of the PLA networks leaves a PFS gyroid template; an electrochemical replica of the voided network is then realized. (c) Freestanding gyroid after removal of the supporting PFS template. (d) A bicontinuous bulk heterojunction solar cell architecture is obtained via back-filling of the array with a solid state hole transporting material and capping with a suitable counter electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 56). 
As we have previously underlined a very critical issue on application of mesostructured titania films to DSSCs is the thickness of a single layer. To overcome this problem basically two routes have been followed, multilayer coatings by layer-by-layer deposition71,76 or preparation of thick layers by the doctor blade method employing a paste containing preformed titania mesoporous nanoparticles.77 Both methods have some limitations, in the first case the number of layers that can be deposited is limited to three-fours, in the second case the pore accessibility and morphology are not always fully controlled. Mesoporous titania layers of 2 μm have been reported to reach efficiencies as high as 5% which is a quite high value for such thickness,78–80 while employing a modified layer-per-layer spin coating deposition a solar cell efficiency of around 6–7% with a 5–6 μm thick film has been obtained.81 The increase in the film thickness via multideposition does not produce, however, a linear increase in surface area and pore volume because the first layers upon multiple thermal treatments experience a progressive deterioration. Some alternative methods to obtain thicker mesoporous titania layer for DSSCs have been explored with some success.82 Employing a single film of mesoporous titania beads a power efficiency conversion over 10% has been achieved for a 12 μm film deposited by the screen printing technique.83 Other methods have been proposed such as a multilayer “brick and mortar” technique84,85 which employs preformed titania nanoparticles, the bricks, which assemble around the surfactant and are bonded using a sol–gel mortar; an efficiency of over 7% with a 4 μm thick film86 has been reported.
The application of mesoporous ordered films to DSSCs is one of the most promising and the high accessibility of the porous structure and control of the mesophase represent a high attractiveness for increasing the light harvesting capability of the material.
Low-k
Mesoporous films have attracted much attention from the very beginning as ultralow k dielectric material and several studies have been published on the subject;87,88 later on some limitations have appeared, such as the low chemical stability of silica mesoporous films especially under hydrolytic conditions,89 and the research has moved on to hybrid mesoporous films that have an increased durability and improved functional properties. Porosity in low k dielectric materials is very important but is only one of the many properties that have to be controlled;90 several strict requirements of elastic modulus, hardness and residual stress in the film, thermal stability, etching capability for chemical mechanical planarisation (removal of the excess of copper produced by the fabrication of interconnected structures), hydrophobicity, the adhesion and thermal expansion coefficient have to be fulfilled.91 The compatibility of the material with the damascene processing (the wires are inlaid in preformed trenches and vias in the dielectric material) which is the standard in the semiconductor production is also mandatory.
To increase the durability of the films and avoid the water absorption which increases the k value mesoporous films with a hydrophobic surface have been developed and in general methyl groups have been employed to obtain hydrophobic hybrid mesoporous films.92–96 Removal of the hydrophilic silanol groups has to be included in any processing of low k mesoporous films; several methods have been employed such as reaction of the silanols in thermally calcined silica films with hexamethyldisilazane (HMDS) or trimethylchlorosilazane (TMCS) in a post-synthesis treatment. In particular vapour-phase reaction with HMDS appears very effective in removing the silanols and lowering the dielectric constant.92 Other routes are the derivatisation of the precursor solution with TMCS,93 self-assembly with di-block copolymers and MTES to obtain pore isolation,94,95 co-hydrolysis and self-assembly of methyltriethoxysilane (MTES)–tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) mixtures (one-pot EISA) and MTES vapour infiltration techniques.96 An alternative method which has been proposed is reversing the process, which means before producing ordered methyl groups and then exposing them to vapours of TEOS.97 Such an approach has allowed hybrid films with low k (1.85) and high stability in a humid environment to be obtained.
The compatibility of mesoporous hybrid films with the technology of integrated circuits has also been demonstrated; in particular, the method proposed by Watkins et al.,98 which is based on film preparation by infusion and selective condensation of silicon alkoxides within microphase-separated block copolymer templates that are dilated by supercritical CO2, has shown to be compatible with damascene processing. Detemplating is done in H2–N2 plasma while the residual silanols are capped by reaction with hexamethyldisilazane; the mesoporous films exhibited k = 2.2 and the overall process a high integration with the integrated circuits technologies. Balkenende et al.99,100 developed a direct route, based on co-hydrolysis and self-assembly of a MTES–TEOS mixture which has the advantage of producing hydrophobic surfaces in one step. A self-hydrophobizing technique based on bridging to terminal transformation of methene groups of the silsesquioxane precursors into methyl groups has also been developed.101 The dielectric constant of the hybrid ordered mesoporous films has been observed to decrease with the organic content and to reach k = 1.8; the chemical durability in a humid environment of methene hybrid silica films treated at 500 °C does not change upon exposure for 5 days to 80% RH.
More recently several different strategies have been proposed to fabricate mesostructured silica based films for low k applications,102 one of these is the deposition of mesoporous films via vacuum assisted aerosol.103 The aerosol is obtained by atomization of a precursor sol which contains the surfactant, the catalyst, water and the alkoxide (1,2-bis(triethoxysilyl)ethane); the aerosol is then forced through a nozzle on a spinning substrate to form a mesostructured hybrid film. The dielectric constant of these films is lower than 2 with a Young’s modulus higher than 4 GPa. An alternative route to increase the porosity of the mesoporous films is creating additional small pores also in the pore walls104 (Fig. 4). If the film is self-assembled using a polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxane (POSS) precursor, which has a nanocage with a pore of around 0.3 nm, the overall porosity of the film results increased in a significant way. This is in turn reflected on a lower k, which has been reported to be as low as 1.73 in comparison to a pure POSS film which has a k = 2.03.
 Fig. 4  Preparation of organized mesoporous silica films containing polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes within the pore walls for low-k applications (reproduced with permission from ref. 86). 
An alternative synthesis of ultra-low-k cyclic carbon-bridged hybrid mesostructured films with a high chemical resistance has been developed using 1,1,3,3,5,5-hexaethoxy-1,3,5-trisilacyclohexane, hydrochloric acid, water and ethanol mixture and polyoxyethylene(10)stearyl ether as the porogen template.105 The spin coated films are hydrophobic, crack-free, resistant to alkaline solutions and have a k of 1.8.
It should be underlined in any case that an important requirement for mesoporous films to be applied in integrated circuit technology is the control of residual stress that can induce adhesion failure and cracking. The residual stress should be maintained below 50–100 MPa to avoid the curvature of the wafer; the nature of the residual stress in the films is tensile and originates through film shrinkage during drying and annealing. In general hybrid mesostructured films, such as MTES–TEOS, have a lower residual stress because the presence of methyl groups decreases the connectivity of the silica matrix lowering the elastic modulus and the residual stress.100
Low refractive index and thermal insulating films
Applications of mesoporous ordered films as low or ultralow refractive index layers and thermal insulator coatings are, such as the case of low k materials, also directly dependent on porosity and composition. Ultralow refractive index mesoporous silica films have been obtained through nano-etching and subsequent surface modification by fluoroalkylsilane.106 This treatment allows a very low refractive index to be reached, 1.03 at λ = 800 nm and a ultralow dielectric constant 1.30 (100 KHz), while the film shows a hydrolytic resistance. Another strategy for producing low refractive index materials is using hierarchical porous films,107 with pores in the meso and macro range108 (Fig. 5). The first order of porosity is obtained through a self-assembly process using organic block copolymers as templates for mesopores; the mesophase in hybrid MTES–TEOS films is well-ordered and has a tetragonal symmetry whilst fluorinated organic nanoparticles of around 70 nm have been instead used as a template of the second order of porosity. The hierarchical porous thin films have a refractive index as low as 1.14 at 633 nm, lower than the 1.17 value measured for monomodal mesoporous films. In general in mesoporous films the refractive index decreases with the removal of the organic template and increases with the densification, this means that a careful control of thermal processing is a key step.109
 Fig. 5  Dark-field TEM image of a hierarchical porous thin film treated at 350 °C (a) and a representative picture of the hierarchical structure (b) (reproduced with permission from ref. 90). 
The mesoporosity in the films can also be used for producing thermal insulating materials which can be applied to increase the efficiency of infrared sensors such as microbolometers.110 Mesoporous ordered TiO2 thin films do not absorb infrared light in the 833–1250 cm−1 range and have been applied as upper and lower layers on the a-Si:H layer and under the TiN absorber layer. The infrared absorption of such a bolometer was calculated to be about 84% in the 8–12 μm region while the microbolometer system obtained using mesoporous titania layers exhibits an excellent heat conservation effect due to the low thermal conductivity of the mesoporous films.111 The thermal insulation of silica mesoporous films has also been tested and it has been found that ordered cubic films calcined at 700 K have a very low thermal conductivity of 0.18 W m−1 K−1, which however increases during thermal treatments at higher temperatures with a corresponding increase in mechanical stability.112 A detailed study of thermal conductivity of mesoporous ordered titania films at room temperature and in the 30 to 320 K range has elucidated its dependence on crystalline structure, on porosity and working temperature.113,114
Electrochromic mesoporous films
The reversible change of colour in a film upon application of an external voltage is defined as electrochromism and has been widely applied to develop several applications such as functional windows115 and electronic displays.116 Tungsten oxide, which achieves colouration under charge insertion, is the most widely studied material for electrochromic (EC) applications; mesoporous WO3 films for EC devices have been therefore developed to take advantage of the higher charge mobility which is expected as a result of the large surface area. The first example of electrochromic response in mesoporous tungsten oxide films has been shown by Zink et al. which reported a higher rate for coloration and bleaching in these layers with respect to sol–gel films;117 enhanced EC response has also been observed in worm-like and lamellar mesoporous WO3 films prepared via electrochemical deposition using a surfactant template118,119 or in disordered porous films obtained by different types of templates.120,121 In general, however, ordered WO3 mesophases122,123 exhibit better responses and increased stability over long term electrochromic cycles124 (Fig. 6). The EC response in mesoporous film is also strongly dependent on the crystallinity of the pore walls which can be controlled via the thermal processing. If the annealing process is carefully designed the porosity results for a large extent not affected and a degree of crystallinity in the WO3 pore walls from amorphous to fully crystalline can be reached.124,125 Interestingly it has been found that only mesoporous highly crystalline WO3 films have long-term cycling capability while amorphous mesoporous films show degradation of the EC response because of structural modifications; electrochemical response at high operating temperatures (up to 70 °C) is observed only in films with an extended degree of crystallinity.124 On the other hand it has also been shown that the advantage of ordered porosity is mainly given by the presence of well defined pore walls and crystallite sizes and not by the higher porosity.126 In the same work it has also been demonstrated that the replacement of the indium tin oxide (ITO), which is the most commonly used electrode in EC devices, with a thin metal layer as a quasi-transparent electrode, enhances and accelerates the EC response. Otherwise there is an electronic activation barrier at the interface between WO3 and the ITO electrode, which limits a fast electron transfer.
 Fig. 6  Scheme of working principles of electrochromism in a mesoporous WO3 thin films; the insertion/extraction of lithium during reduction/oxidation and the associated coloration/bleaching of the inorganic matrix is shown (reproduced with permission from ref. 106). 
In the synthesis of mesoporous tungsten oxide films WCl6 has been generally used, but an alternative route based on tungstic acid has also been proposed.127–129 This route besides the advantage of employing a potentially cheaper precursor has allowed bimodal mesoporous–mesoporous structures to be obtained, which represent an interesting material of high potentiality for application as an EC layer.130 Besides the tungsten oxide mesoporous films other oxides have been tested as electrochromic mesoporous layers. EC response higher than that of the corresponding dense films has been observed in titania anatase viologen modified mesoporous films,131,132 in titania mesoporous multilayered coatings79 and in Nb2xV2−2xO5 mesoporous films.133
Photochromic applications
The recent report of multicolor photochromism in nanoporous titania films containing silver nanoparticles134 (Ag NPs) has inspired the synthesis of mesoporous titania films doped with Ag NPs with such properties.135–138 The formation of silver nanoparticles in the titania matrix is obtained upon illumination under UV light with a photon energy higher than the titania band-gap (3.2 eV); the positively charged Ag(I) species is reduced by the titania photoelectrons which migrate towards. This process allows forming Ag NPs with grey-brown coloration given by inhomogeneous broadening of their surface plasmon resonance, which in turn depends on the nanoparticle size, shape and chemical environment. If the material instead is exposed to visible light bleaching or color change is observed and the initial color of the film changes upon exposure to visible light to almost the same color of the incident radiation. This type of response has also been demonstrated in titania mesoporous ordered films and reversible and irreversible laser microinscription on Ag NPs mesoporous ordered titania films has been used to obtain a writable or rewritable data carrier. Monochromatic UV laser light induces the formation of Ag NPs in the irradiated area and is used for writing while the visible laser light erases the illuminated area and is used to cancel.138 If the films are exposed to a high intensity CW-laser the titania irradiated area crystallizes producing local depressions on the film surface. The reduction processes of the Ag NPs in mesoporous titania films influence the colour and photochromic response giving nanoparticles of different size and distribution.137
Photochromism in silica mesoporous films has also been obtained using photoresponsive organic molecules by impregnation into the pores; after dispersion of spirooxaxine into the mesoporous matrix, optimization of a fast photochromic response has been achieved in films whose pore surface has been covered by protective methyl groups.139 Spyropyrans in silica mesostructured films have also produced a reversible thermo-photochromic response which is induced by external stimuli.140 The spiropyran-doped films are transparent before the external stimuli are applied, a change in temperature produces a change in the colour to yellow whilst a light induced change to red is in turn observed. Both the colour changes are reversible under room temperature or visible light exposure; the colour transitions are due to different equilibria among the various forms of merocyanine of spiropyrans.
Supercapacitors for energy storage
An emerging application of mesoporous films with ordered porosity arises from the energy storage field, more in particular pseudo-capacitors. Compared to traditional electrochemical energy storage, capacitive-storage offers many advantages which are particularly suitable for last-generation devices; charging within a few seconds, long-term lifetime and ability to deliver up to 10 times more power than batteries.141 The ordered porous nanocrystalline framework provides the materials specific properties which allow for an efficient electrochemical capacitance; first of all the porous and crystalline architecture is a 3D pathway for ions and electrons with a minimized diffusion path length due to the mesoscopic dimension of the pore walls, (2) the porous structure can be used as a host matrix for other electroactive species and (3) the high surface area of the films strongly boosts the capability of charge storage from faradaic processes occurring at the surface.142 The last aspect has been extensively studied by Brezesinski et al. which, in recent publications, has explored the potential of MoO3, Nb2O5, Ta2O5, TaNbO5 and Li4Ti5O12 mesoporous ordered thin films as a candidate material for lithium intercalation batteries.142–145 The authors synthesized different types of oxides with layered crystalline structure and compared the electrochemical performances as a function of the porosity and crystallinity. As a general trend, they observed that both porous structure and degree of crystallization enhance the electrochemical lithium intercalation both in terms of capacity and rate.
By studying the CeO2 system with cyclic voltammetry experiments another interesting correlation between thin film morphology and capacitive properties has been revealed.146 The porous structure of the crystalline thin films, normally strained in the in-plane direction as a consequence of firing treatment, partially relieves the stress as a consequence of lithium ion intercalation. These results have shown that the pore flexing allows the enhancement of energy storage by facilitating the intercalation of lithium ions even in materials with relatively poor pseudo-capacitive charge storage, such as the case of CeO2.
The electrochemical deposition of noble and transition metal oxides in the presence of templating structuring agents dissolved in the electrolyte solution has been successfully applied to synthesize several types of mesoporous oxides and hydroxides such as MnO2,147 NiO2,148 RuO2149 and Co(OH)2.150 In all cases the enhanced electrochemical capacitive behaviour has been attributed to the spatially ordered porous nanostructure. Reiman et al. have prepared nanostructured titanium dioxide films made using the surfactant template method and have compared the properties of these materials with the films prepared without surfactants.151 They observed that the templated films, unlike the non-porous films, were reduced when cathodically polarized in aqueous lithium hydroxide. Moreover, they measured a self-discharge slower than expected, with half-life of a few minutes under oxygen-free conditions.
The organization of the porous structure also allowed an enhancement of proton conduction, as shown by Nishiyama and co-authors in zirconium phosphate films.152 The enhancement of these properties has been explained with the high concentration of OH– groups on the pores surface; an increase in the organization of the pore structure, in fact, creates more efficient and short pathways for proton diffusion. Not only the mesoporous, but also the pore walls structure is actually affecting the energy storage properties. The first insertion of Li ions into mesoporous titania has been reported by Fatthakhova-Rohlfing et al.153 while Brezesinski et al. have studied the lithium insertion/extraction into/from nanocrystalline anatase titania films prepared from aggregation of preformed nanocrystals or by sol–gel precursors with the KLE block copolymer templating agent.142 Interestingly, they discovered that the porous walls derived from the aggregation of anatase nanocrystals strongly contribute to the capacitive charge storage allowing better performances than mesoporous titania with dense pore walls. The authors have deduced that this enhancement of the properties is due to the surface of the individual nanocrystals building blocks which remain accessible to the electrolyte even after sintering in the porous film.
Bio and nanobio applications
Mesoporous films have recently attracted much attention for obtaining advanced biodevices of different types; this field appears one of the most promising for applications of mesoporous films. The possibility of building a proper biointerface within an ordered porous structure, in fact, should allow in principle obtaining a high selectivity towards harvesting and diffusion of biomolecules.154 Mesoporous ordered films have been tested as a matrix or a selective capturing platform for proteins, enzymes and cells or for developing biosensors and biocatalysts.
The main advantage of film configuration is the possibility of fabricating devices with advanced functionalities, one of the first examples of biodevices based on mesoporous films is the bio-photoelectrode which has been developed from mesoporous WO3–TiO2 films with wormlike and 2D-hex mesophases.155 The films have been employed as matrices for entrapping bacteria photosynthetic reaction centre proteins; protein immobilization has been achieved by absorption from a buffer solution. Enhanced photoelectric response has been measured in the red to near infrared region and explained with photoinduced electron injection from the reaction centres to the conduction band of WO3–TiO2. Another example of biodevice is the protein microarray which has been developed employing multilayered mesoporous not-ordered titania films156 (Fig. 7). The proteins have been immobilized in the films via covalently grafting with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane (APTES) which has been previously used to modify the pore surface; a protein loading up to four times larger than on planar non-porous substrates has been obtained. A protein microarray has been fabricated by producing on the surface of titania films microstructures of poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) hydrogel via photolithography. Because the proteins do not adhere on the region covered by the hydrogel they result selectively immobilized onto the surface modified titania areas creating a protein microarray. This array has shown higher fluorescence signals and lower detection limits in comparison to microarrays based on planar glass slides and a specific binding assay between streptavidin and biotin and between prostate specific antigen (PSA) and anti-PSA.
 Fig. 7  Scheme of preparing protein-immobilized mesoporous TiO2 film micropatterned with PEG hydrogels (reproduced with permission from ref. 137). 
A systematic testing of different types of silica mesoporous films for harvesting of low molecular weight proteins has been done by Ferrari et al.157–159 The low molecular region of the proteome has shown recently to be of paramount importance for early detection of diseases with diagnostic biomarkers. Silica mesoporous films, therefore, have been employed for selective capturing of peptides and low molecular weight proteins from human serum. These studies have enlightened the importance of pore dimension and texture for selective capturing of proteins; 3D porous structures, in general, have shown a better performance in selectively enriching low molecular weight peptides with respect to 2D Hex mesophases.
The importance of pore architecture in loading and releasing of organic molecules into mesoporous silica films has been studied using a fluorescent molecule, fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC).160 Three different methods, physical adsorption (AD), entrapment (EN), and cleavable binding (CB), have been used to load FITC into three-dimensional hexagonal (3D Hex) mesoporous silica thin films. Different release mechanisms have been found, a diffusion-controlled release (first-order release) for the AD case, a dissolution-controlled release (zero-order release) for the EN case, and a stimuli-responsive release for the CB case.
Hierarchical mesoporous disordered titania films161 have also been used to demonstrate the possibility to perform PCR amplification of DNA using a mesoporous platform.162 Interestingly the technique that has been developed is compatible with PCR and allows development of integrated sensors and microfluidic chips. A very nice bioapplication which demonstrates the wide possibilities offered by mesoporous films in terms of pore morphologies and architecture design has been shown by Brinker et al. who have used a mesoporous silica film with kink structure to reduce the translocation speed of DNA during its detection.163 In comparison with straight through porous structures of similar dimensions, the kinked mesopores have exhibited up to fivefold reduction in translation velocity of DNA, which is one of the critical issues in DNA sequencing.
Another bioapplication where mesoporous films have been used is encapsulation of cells; sol–gel systems have been widely used for encapsulating cells even if some problems arise because of some by-products of sol–gel reactions can be cytotoxic, such as ethanol, and mechanical compressive stress that arises with gel syneresis.164 Self-assembly of mesoporous silica layers has shown to be a viable route to encapsulate cells using a silica host which relieves the drying stress.165,166 Mesoporous layers could even be used for a cell-directed integration into 3D solid state nanostructures;167 a weakly condensed silica film templated by lipids has shown to be able to reconstruct, through a self-catalyzed silica condensation process, the surface of yeast cells forming a 3D bio-nano interface, which is formed by localized lipid bilayers enveloped by a lipid-silica mesophase.168
Mesoporous silica materials also appear to be promising hosts for immobilization of enzymes and several studies have been dedicated to entrapping enzymes in bulk and powders;154,169 few studies in comparison have been instead focused on enzymes in mesoporous films. A biosensor based on the immobilization of cytochrome c into a silica mesoporous film with Im3m organization has been developed for detection of hydrogen peroxide and ascorbic acid.170 Another example is the entrapping of lipase into a mesoporous silica film which served as an efficient catalyst support layer.171 Lipase has been also immobilized in mesoporous silica films that have been incorporated within a borosilicate tube microreactor for enantioselective transesterification of vinyl acetate with (±)-1-phenylethanol.172 Biocatalytic stripes based on immobilization of α-amylase into mesoporous silica thin films have been developed for starch degradation; the catalyst films have shown a high activity and enhanced stability with respect to free enzyme under extreme conditions of pH and temperature.173
Mesoporous titania ordered films have also been used as a platform to bond pentapeptides, the H–Val-Gln-Asp-Leu-Phe–COOH peptide has been successfully bonded to the titania surface modified by APTES using an impregnation process. The bonding capability has been found to depend on solubility and steric hindrance of the peptides.174
Sensors
Mesoporous films have attracted much interest in sensing applications because of the enhancement of sensing signal which is expected by the increased surface. Several factors affect the sensibility and selectivity of mesoporous films for sensing, the pore accessibility, the chemical nature of the pore surface and the pore size and topology with respect to the sensing species,175,176 and all of them should be taken into account during the design of the device. Sensors with mesoporous films have been prepared using a variety of detection methods, such as electrochemical, optical, acoustic or Surface Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS) for detection of different molecules in the liquid and in the gas phase.
Electrochemical sensors are generally used to fabricate simple, cheap and reliable devices for measuring humidity and detecting specific molecules such as alcohols, ammonia and nitrogen oxide in the gas phase.177 Mesoporous silica films have been used as the sensing layers for realizing humidity178–180 and alcohol detectors179a,181–183 which use the silanol surface of the pore walls as the path for the ionic current. The first mesoporous electrochemical humidity sensors have been fabricated by depositing the film on a substrate with an interdigitated electrode which is able to detect the current change as a function of the relative humidity in the measuring room. The same principle is applied for detecting alcohol species and different responses have been observed for detection of ethanol, methanol, 2-propanol, butanol-1 and hexane at room temperature. The current variation is generated by protonated water ions that following the Grotthus model use the “ice-like” layer formed on the pore surface as a conductive site. Clearly controlling the amount and type of silanols on the pore surface184 is very important for the sensing response and optimization of thermal processing is necessary to leave a sufficient amount of surface silanols for water molecules adsorption.185 A comparison between mesoporous silica and sol–gel silica layers has shown that the porosity plays a primary role because the films prepared without the template have exhibited only a very limited response to humidity changes. Thick films of 500 μm for humidity sensors have been prepared using a screen printing method employing SBA mesoporous particles.180 These films show an excellent stability of the electrochemical response with aging time of the sample, which is a very important requirement for market applications.
Other electrochemical devices which use mesoporous sensing layers include surface photovoltage systems (SPV) which have been applied as gas and humidity sensors.186 The SPV technique is based on the semiconductor surface voltage properties of a metal–insulator–semiconductor sandwich structure; the physical absorption of the target molecule induces a change in semiconductor photocurrent, incorporation of mesoporous films into such structure enhances the sensor performances.187 Devices for detection of NO187,188 and NO2 gas at very low concentrations189 have been developed using silica ordered mesoporous layers, and W and V modified mesoporous silica thin films for improving NO2 sensing capability,190 while enhanced selectivity on detecting benzene has been demonstrated by incorporating phenylene groups into the silica wall network.191
Highly sensitive SPV sensors have also been prepared by doping the mesoporous silica film with a small amount of tin oxide (0.5–3%);192,193 a detection capability of NO2 gas concentration as low as 300 ppb at room temperature has been reported, the sensing mechanism is based on the variation in dielectric constant and charge change. An increased performance is, however, observed only if the amount of tin oxide is optimised because its addition causes a decrease in overall surface area. An advanced sensing device based on resonant technology using capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducers (CMUTs) has been fabricated for relative humidity (SBA-15 mesoporous silica films) and CO2 (APTES functionalized mesoporous silica film) detection194 (Fig. 8). Both 2D Hex (p6mm), with preferential orientation of the pores parallel to the substrate, and cubic (P63/mmc) have been tested but no difference in sensitivity has been measured so far. The sensor has shown a high volume sensitivity and volume resolution both for relative humidity and CO2 sensing. Yet another example of integration of mesoporous films into sensing devices is the fabrication of resonant cantilever sensors for detection of trace chemical vapours195 (Fig. 9). The inner walls of the silica films have been modified by grafting benzene-ring-linked hexafluoro-2-propanol on the pore walls as a specific group for detection of trinitrotoluene. Different pore functionalizations have been employed to detect various volatile organic compounds with an ultrafine detection limit of tens of ppb for ammonia–amine gases. Amine functionalized mesoporous silica films have also been mounted on a microcantilever array for assessing the kinetics of CO2 absorption and desorption which has been found to be diffusion controlled.196 Mesoporous silica films have been demonstrated in general a good capability to be integrated into different sensing technologies, not only as a sensing layer but also for instance as a diffusion barrier in single walled carbon nanotube based vapour sensors.197
 Fig. 8  (a) Mesoporous silica thin film. (b) Optical picture of a single die, showing an array of multiple elements. (c) Scanning electron microscope image of the cross-section of a single capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducers resonator. (reprinted with permission from ref. 175). 
 Fig. 9  Scheme of benzene ring-linked hexafluoro-2-propanol sensing group modification on the inner wall of mesoporous silica and the specific capturing mechanism for TNT molecules (reprinted with permission from ref. 176). 
Quartz crystal microbalances with mesoporous films have also been tested for sensing, the first examples have used mesoporous disordered silica films functionalized with β-cyclodextrin to detect benzene and ethanol vapours,198 relative humidity sensors have also been fabricated using silica 2D hex ordered films.199 The method has also been tested in a liquid environment by investigating the absorption of different types of polymeric dendrimers; an enhanced signal-to-noise ratio has been observed which is dependent on film composition, silica or titania, size and morphology of the pores.200
An interesting example of amperometric sensor for H2O2 which is based on titania mesoporous highly ordered films has been reported by Gaitán et al.;201 the pore surface has been modified with a bifunctional ligand to allow the introduction of Fe(II) cations that in turn are used for binding Prussian blue molecules. Up to four layers of Prussian blue have been grown on the pore surface without disruption of the mesophase, which produces an enhanced response of the sensor. Grafting of sensing molecules has also been used to produce oxygen sensors from silica mesoporous films whose pore surface has been modified with a RuII complex.202
Permselective membranes based on mesoporous films are other systems of interest for sensing applications; the membranes are formed by hybrid organic–inorganic mesoporous thin films which are modified with specific molecular species and polymers.203 They form interfaces which are able to discriminate the transport of ionic species increasing the efficiency and the selectivity of the sensor.
Sensors based on optical detection are generally the main alternative to electrochemical sensors, besides the higher cost they have in several cases a higher sensitivity and a faster detection rate. Several examples have been reported starting from pH sensors that used dyes, such as fluorescein derivatives, covalently bonded to the film surface204 and patterned pH sensitive fluidic systems.205 Mesoporous thin films functionalized with silylated β-diketone compounds have also been developed as fast uranyl species sensors with high selectivity and sensitivity.206 An advantage of this type of sensor, besides their relative simplicity, is the possibility to be designed for sensing very specific molecules by modifying the surface of the mesopores with molecules which are able to bind the molecule to be sensed; in general this produces a change of the optical response such as fluorescence quenching. Sensors based on dibenzoylmethane grafted on the silica walls of a mesoporous film to detect BF3 or BCl3 gases207via quenching of fluorescence have been prepared. Porphyrin-doped silica mesoporous films have been used as sensors of explosive compounds such as 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT),208 2,4-dinitrotoluene (DNT), and nitrobenzene (NB); the films have shown a high fluorescence quenching sensitivity to the vapours of TNT, DNT, and NB. The sensing response appears dependent on mesopore structure with cubic pores which shows the highest quenching efficiency in comparison to 2D mesoporosity. Another sensor has been developed using the correlation of luminescence intensity of Eu(III) doped mesoporous disordered silica films with humidity levels.209 Fluorescent disordered mesoporous La–Ce phosphate films have been obtained by a pore-confined synthesis with in situ growth of La0.5Ce0.5PO4 nanocrystals inside the pores of a mesoporous silica thin film which has been used as a sacrificial template. The fluorescence intensity is quenched by a water solution containing organo-phosphate bearing nitrophenyl groups and this allows the detection of pesticides in water.210
Multilayer structures composed of mesoporous titania and silica films form a so called Bragg stack which is able to change the colour as a function of the external chemical environment.211 The presence of the analyte in the mesopores causes a change of refractive index which has been used for detecting a series of alcohols and alkanes. Mesoporous films have also been applied for developing clay Bragg stack optical sensors which are formed by alternating layers of clay and mesoporous films.212 1D photonic crystals formed by alternate mesoporous films have shown that selective functionalization of a given mesoporous layer is able to select the response of the Bragg reflector towards vapours, coupling optics with molecular interactions.213 In addition, a mesoporous layer can be designed as an optical defect in a multilayer Bragg reflector for the size-selective detection of volatile molecules.214 A multilayer film that presents controlled porosity only at the middle-layer level has shown a spectral resonance associated with this porous layer which is strongly sensitive to the presence of vapours adsorbed or condensed within the void network.
An advanced example of sensor with high sensitivity and capability of integration in planar photonic devices is the polarimetric interferometric gas sensor designed by Qi et al.215,216 The adsorption of gas induces a change (Δn) in the refractive index of the mesoporous thin film which produces a shift in the phase difference between the fundamental transverse electric and magnetic modes simultaneously excited in the glass waveguide via single beam incidence. When the mesoporous film is exposed to NH3 in gas at concentrations as low as 100 ppb, the sensor exhibits a reversible change in the phase difference.
Another example of the versatility of mesoporous films to develop sensors of different types is a biosensor to detect E. coli O157:H7 which is based on titania films treated with APTES and glutaraldehyde functionalized with specific antibodies.217 The E. coli absorption has been monitored by FTIR spectroscopy and the biosensor has shown a detection limit for E. coli of 1 × 102 CFU mL−1; this gives a simple and selective method for screening water samples.
SERS sensors are based on the enhancement of the sensitivity of Raman scattering by using the plasmon surface properties of metallic nano- and microparticle arrays. SERS response is generally observed in colloidal suspensions of metal nanoparticles, but development of lab-on-chip systems with nano-engineered surfaces is the actual technological perspective.218 Mesoporous films for SERS have the advantage that a selective absorption of specific organic molecules and simultaneous detection by SERS allow making an advanced and high sensitive–selective sensor; the system can also be integrated into top-down processes to obtain a porous SERS platform in a few steps. 2D-Hex silica mesostructured films containing silver nanoparticles with a sharp size distribution around 5 nm has been patterned by hard X-rays that induces at the same time removal of the surfactant and growth of Ag NPs.219 An enhanced Raman scattering of rhodamine 6G through surface plasmon resonance of the silver nanoparticles has been observed.
As we have seen a large variety of sensors based on different sensing techniques have been developed using mesoporous ordered films; these sensors are characterized in general by an excellent response and sensitivity, however some main issues still remain largely unexplored such as cross-sensitivity, capability of selective absorption of the sensing species, chemical stability in the sensing environment and stability of the response with the aging time.
Photonics
Examples of mesoporous ordered films in the field of photonics include a large variety of devices and systems which try to exploit the potentialities of an organized porosity in a thin layer. Fluorescent and photoluminescent mesoporous films have been obtained by doping with fluorescent dyes,220,221 zinc oxide nanoparticles,222 zinc complexes,223 rare earths molecules224,225 or germanium;226 they have shown besides the fluorescence, interesting properties such as modulation of refractive index226 and lasing capability.227–230 Another group of photonic mesoporous materials has been obtained by incorporating into the mesoporous metallic231,232 or semiconducting233 nanoparticles which give non-linear optical response. Interestingly it has been shown that by controlling the processing conditions of the films it is possible to obtain optical layers which exhibit birefringence234 or advanced devices such as photonic crystals.213
Incorporation of fluorescent dyes can be done via impregnation or one-pot synthesis, in any case the dyes exhibit a high stability with limited or no leaching from the host matrix; the state of dyes and the chemical environment within the pore directly affect the optical response of the material, in the case of rhodamine 6G, for instance, at high dye concentrations, nonfluorescent sandwich H-type dimers are formed, whose amount decreases in mesostructured films with formation of fluorescent J-type dimers.221 Within the mesopores the presence of the surfactant favours the formation of fluorescent dimers (J-type) at the expense of the nonfluorescent sandwich H-type. The strict correlation between processing conditions and the state of the dye is confirmed by formation of ribbon-like J-aggregates of porphyrins with anisotropic optical properties in silica mesostructured films.220 Lasing applications have been well demonstrated in mesostructured films with rhodamine 6G, amplified spontaneous emission has been obtained upon laser pumping230 and different types of waveguides have been obtained that have been used for fabricating distributed feedback lasers.227
Silica–germania mesostructured films because of the presence of photoactive oxygen-deficient Ge2+ centers also have interesting photonic properties and upon irradiation with high-power density UV light shows a change in refractive index. Non-linear optical response has also been demonstrated for mesostructured silica films doped with PbS nanoparticles and gold nanoparticles. In particular, the possibility of dispersing gold nanoparticles with uniform size, high loading and dispersion produces an ultrafast non-linear optical response and enhanced third order non-linear optical susceptibility;231,232 a high third order non-linearity has also been reported for PbS doped films that show a quantum confinement effect of the semiconductor nanoparticles as indicated by the blue shift of the optical absorption edge with respect to bulk PbS.233 Important properties of mesoporous films for photonic applications are the integration capability on planar devices, the possibility of lithography with the highest number of techniques and the chemical durability. Multilayer stacks with mesoporous films have been used, as previously seen, for obtaining Bragg stacks but also 1D photonic crystals of high quality can be produced, as demonstrated by Fuertes et al.213 The flexibility of mesoporous film processing has been fully exploited to produce titania–silica mesoporous films with a noticeable birefringence. For this purpose a titania film has been deposited on a pretreated surface to align the pores, in a second step a silica layer has been grown on the surface of a titania mesostructured film to prevent the collapse of the titania pores during calcination; the film has shown a birefringence with a Δn of 0.06 (Fig. 10).
 Fig. 10  Birefringence in a titania–silica film with an aligned mesoporous structure; the surface of titania pores is covered with a thin silica layer (reprinted with permission from ref. 212). 
Incorporation of doping molecule which gives an active optical functionality to mesoporous films can be achieved, as seen, by impregnation post synthesis or introducing the molecules in the precursor sol (one-pot route). Another possibility is to functionalize the active molecule to increase the solubility in the solvents used in film processing and obtain a covalent grafting with the matrix. An example is given by fullerene derivatives that have been used to obtain silica mesoporous films containing dispersed and covalently bonded C60 molecules;235 the films have shown a high loading of fullerenes and luminescence that could be used for optically encoded information storage for read only materials.
A final outlook
We have seen that a large variety of films for the different applications have been developed so far; what for sure is impressive is the number of solutions that have been proposed for the different case studies, which confirms one of the selling points of mesoporous materials which is the versatility of the synthesis and processing. Different issues however remain still open and a clear understanding of the structure–property relationship which is at the ground of any successful realization of working devices yet relies very much on a case by case study. As we have underlined several times in this review, the structure of the mesoporous materials affects the material response with a high level of correlation; the material structure should be understood in a wider sense, because the composition of the material, its amorphous or crystalline nature, the surface and the topological organization of the pores are all different parts that concur to the final properties. Another critical issue is the integration with the current technologies in the different fields of application; the material has largely shown a good processing capability and flexibility, but specific fabrication engineering has to be accomplished and, in particular, integration with top-down techniques remains a key point. The current trends in the field, however, are not limited to mesoporous films with new compositions and mesophases or sophisticated nano-devices integrating mesoporous films; an important trend is the evolution through complexity. This point is worth strongly underlining as self-assembly appears to be a process that allows ordered and increasing complexity to be obtained via self-organization through non-equilibrium states. Hierarchical materials are just one example, but we should not restrict our imagination and move to the next step ahead.
References
C. J. Brinker, Y. Lu, A. Sellinger and H. Fan, Adv. Mater., 1999, 11, 579 CrossRef CAS .
The self-assembly process of mesoporous films has been defined as Evaporation Induced Self-Assembly (EISA) and this acronym has been widely used in the pertinent literature.
G. A. Ozin, K. Hou, B. V. Lotsch, L. Cademartiri, D. P. Puzzo, F. Scotognella, A. Ghadimi and J. Thomson, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 12 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) C. T. Kresge, M. E. Leonowicz, W. J. Roth, J. C. Vartuli and J. S. Beck, Nature, 1992, 359, 710 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. S. Beck, J. C. Vartuli, W. J. Roth, M. E. Leonowicz, C. T. Kresge, K. D. Schmitt, C. T. W. Chu, D. H. Olson, E. W. Sheppard, S. B. McCullen, J. B. Higgins and J. L. Schlenker, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10834 CrossRef CAS .
G. Soler-Illia and P. Innocenzi, Chem.–Eur. J., 2006, 12, 4478 CrossRef CAS .
P. Innocenzi, L. Malfatti, T. Kidchob and P. Falcaro, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2555 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Brinker and D. R. Dunphy, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2004, 11, 126 CrossRef .
H. Fan, C. Hartshorn, T. Buchheit, D. Tallant, R. Assink, R. Simpson, D. J. Kisse, D. J. Lacks, S. Torquato and C. J. Brinker, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 418 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1107 RSC ; 
  (b) L. Nicole, C. Boissière, D. Grosso, A. Quach and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 3598 RSC ; 
  (c) C. Sanchez, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, C. Laberty and L. Nicole, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 682 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, C. Sanchez, B. Lebeau and J. Patarin, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 4093 CrossRef ; 
  (e) G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, E. L. Crepaldi, D. Grosso and C. Sanchez, Curr. Opin. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 8, 109 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (f) C. J. Brinker, MRS Bull., 2004, 29, 631 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grosso, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17033 RSC .

          P. R. Schunk, A. J. Hurd and C. J. Brinker, Liquid film coating, Chapman & Hall, London,  1997 Search PubMed .
M. Faustini, B. Louis, P. A. Albouy, M. Kuemmel and D. Grosso, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7637 CAS .
K. J. Edler and S. J. Roser, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2001, 20, 387 CAS .
S. Sokolov, B. Paul, E. Ortel, A. Fischer and R. Kraehnert, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 1972 CrossRef CAS .
C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, A. Chaumonnot, L. Nicole and C. Sanchez, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 599 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, D. B. Burckel, P. Atanassov and H. Y. Fan, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 4637 RSC .
H. Negishi, A. Endo, T. Ohmori and K. Sadaki, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 7236 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) H. Yang, N. Coombs, I. Sokolov and G. Ozin, Nature, 1996, 381, 589 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Yang, N. Coombs, I. Sokolov and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1755 RSC ; 
  (c) S. J. Roser, H. M. Patel, M. R. Lovell, J. E. Muir and S. Mann, Chem. Commun., 1998, 829 RSC .
K. J. Edler, T. Brennan and S. J. Roser, Thin Solid Films, 2006, 495, 2 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pelaez, N. T. Nolan, S. C. Pillai, M. K. Seery, P. Falaras, A. G. Kontos, P. S. M. Dunlop, J. W. J. Hamilton, J. A. Byrne, K. O'Shea, M. H. Entezari and D. D. Dionysiou, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 125, 331 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sakatani, D. Grosso, L. Nicole, C. Boissiere, G. J. de A. A. Soler-Illia and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 77 RSC .
J. C. Yu, X. Wang and X. Fu, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 1523 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takahara, J. N. Kondo, T. Takata, D. Lu and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1194 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uchida, J. N. Kondo, D. Lu and K. Domen, Chem. Lett., 2002, 498 CrossRef CAS .
D. Grosso, C. Boissiere, B. Smarsly, T. Brezesinski, N. Pinna, P. A. Albouy, H. Amenitsch, M. Antonietti and C. Sanchez, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 787 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Y. Wu, E. W. McFarland and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1670 RSC .
H. Wang, J. J. Miao, J. M. Zhu, H. M. Ma, J. J. Zhu and H. Y. Chen, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 11738 CrossRef CAS .
P. Innocenzi, L. Malfatti, T. Kidchob, S. Enzo, G. Della Ventura, U. Schade and A. Marcelli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22385 CAS .
G. Soler-Illia, P. C. Angelomè, M. C. Fuertes, D. Grosso and C. Boissiere, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2549 RSC .
D. Grosso, G. Soler-Illia, F. Babonneau, C. Sanchez, P. A. Albouy, A. Brunet-Bruneau and A. R. Balkenende, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1085 CrossRef CAS .
B. Z. Tian, H. F. Yang, X. Y. Liu, S. H. Xie, C. Z. Yu, J. Fan, B. Tu and D. Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1824 RSC .
S. Y. Choi, B. Lee, D. B. Carew, M. Mamak, F. C. Peiris, S. Speakman, N. Chopra and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1731 CrossRef CAS .
E. L. Crepaldi, G. Soler-Illia, D. Grosso, F. Cagnol, F. Ribot and C. Sanchez, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 9770 CrossRef CAS .
E. Stathatos, T. Petrova and P. Lianos, Langmuir, 2001, 17, 5025 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wark, J. Tschirch, O. Bartels, D. Bahnemann and J. Rathousky, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2005, 84, 247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. C. Yu, W. Ho and Z. Jiang, New J. Chem., 2002, 26, 607 RSC .
M. Rawolle, M. A. Niedermeier, G. Kaune, J. Perlich, P. Lellig, M. Memesa, Y.-J. Cheng, J. S. Gutmann and P. Mueller-Buschbaum, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5131 RSC .
J. H. Pan, S. Y. Chai and W. I. Lee, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2006, 510–511, 58 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Carreon, S. Y. Choi, M. Mamak, N. Chopra and G. A. Ozin, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 82 RSC .
M. N. Ghazzal, H. Kebaili, M. Joseph, D. P. Debecker, P. Eloy, J. De Coninck and E. M. Gaigneaux, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 115–116, 276 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, J. Li and J. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 2917 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schwenzer, L. Wang, J. S. Swensen, A. B. Padmaperuma, G. Silverman, R. Korotkov and D. J. Gaspar, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 10072 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Soni, M. J. Henderson, J.-F. Bardeau and A. Gibaud, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1493 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mills, C. O'Rourke, V. Kalousek and J. Rathousky, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211–212, 182 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, A. H. Yuwono, J. Wang and J. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 21406 CAS .
J. H. Pan and W. I. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 847 CrossRef CAS .
I. Bannat, K. Wessels, T. Oekermann, J. Rathousky, D. Bahnemann and M. Wark, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1645 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sato, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1986, 123, 126 CrossRef CAS .
E. Martinez-Ferrero, Y. Sakatani, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, A. Fuertes, J. Fraxedas and C. Sanchez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 3348 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Wang, S. Yin and T. Sato, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2010, 36, 27 CrossRef CAS .
I. L. Violi, D. M. Perez, M. C. Fuertes and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4320 CAS .
P. Innocenzi, L. Malfatti and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2501 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kimura, N. Miyamoto, X. Meng, T. Ohji and K. Kato, Chem.–Asian J., 2009, 4, 1486 CrossRef CAS .
J. Du, X. Lai, N. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Kisailus, F. Su, D. Wang and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 590 CrossRef CAS .
N. L. Yang, J. Zhai, D. Wang, Y. S. Chen and L. Jiang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 887 CrossRef CAS .
A. Carretero-Genevrier, C. Boissiere, L. Nicole and D. Grosso, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10761 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. McGehee, MRS Bull., 2009, 34, 95 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley, Y. Liu, M. D. McGehee, K. L. Frindell and G. D. Stucky, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 301 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 3380 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Coakley and M. D. McGehee, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4533 CrossRef CAS .
A. Fischereder, M. L. Martinez-Ricci, A. Wolosiuk, W. Haas, F. Hofer, G. Trimmel and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1837 CrossRef CAS .
R. Fateh, A. A. Ismail, R. Dillert and D. W. Bahnemann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 10405 CAS .
M. Faustini, L. Nicole, C. Boissière, P. Innocenzi, C. Sanchez and D. Grosso, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4406 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hartmann, D.-K. Lee, B. M. Smarsly and J. Janek, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3147 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kalousek, J. Tschirch, D. Bahnemann and J. Rathousky, Superlattices Microstruct., 2008, 44, 506 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gratzel and B. O'Regan, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef .
G. J. Meyer, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4337 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barbè, F. Arendse, P. Comte, M. Jirousek, F. Lenzmann, V. Shklover and M. Gratzel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 80, 3157 CrossRef .
S. Burnside, V. Shklover, C. J. Barbè, P. Comte, F. Arendse, K. Brooks and M. Gratzel, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2419 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Bignozzi, R. Argazzi and C. J. Kleverlaan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2000, 29, 87 RSC .
L. Malfatti, P. Falcaro, H. Amenitsch, S. Caramori, R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, S. Enzo, M. Maggini and P. Innocenzi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2006, 88, 304 CrossRef CAS .
E. Lancelle-Beltran, P. Prené, C. Boscher, P. Belleville, P. Buvat, S. Lambert, F. Guillet, C. Boissière, D. Grosso and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 6152 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Orilall and U. Wiesner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 520 RSC .
E. J. W. Crossland, M. Kamperman, M. Nedelcu, C. Ducati, U. Wiesner, D.-M. Smilgies, G. E. S. Toombes, M. A. Hillmyer, S. Ludwigs, U. Steiner and H. J. Snaith, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2807 CrossRef CAS .
E. Ramasamy and J. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22032 CAS .
Y. Zhang, Z. Xie and J. Wang, Thin Solid films, 2010, 518, e34 CrossRef .
S. Agarwala, M. Kevin, A. S. W. Wong, C. K. N. Peh, V. Thavasi and G. W. Ho, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1844 CAS .
M. Zukalova, A. Zukal, L. Kavan, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Liska and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
J. Prochazka, L. Kavan, M. Zukalova, O. Frank, M. Kalbac, A. Zukal, M. Klementova, D. Carbone and M. Grätzel, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1457 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hou, B. Tian, F. Li, Z. Bian, D. Zhao and C. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15, 2414 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Z. Xie and J. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2009, 1, 2789 CAS .
W. Chen, X. Sun, Q. Cai, D. Weng and H. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 382 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sauvage, D. Chen, P. Comte, F. Huang, L.-P. Heiniger, Y.-B. Cheng, R. A. Caruso and M. Graetzel, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 420 CrossRef .
J. M. Szeifert, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, D. Georgiadou, V. Kalousek, J. Rathousky, D. Kuang, S. Wenger, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Grätzel and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1260 CrossRef CAS .
D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, J. M. Szeifert, Q. Yu, V. Kalousek, J. Rathousky and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2410 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Szeifert, D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, J. Rathouský and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 659 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maruo, S. Tanaka, H. W. Hugh, N. Nishiyama, Y. Egashira and K. Ueyama, Thin Solid Films, 2008, 516, 4771 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Hatton, K. Landskron, W. J. Hunks, M. R. Bennett, D. Shukaris, D. D. Perovic and G. A. Ozin, Mater. Today, 2006, 9, 22 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Bass, D. Grosso, C. Boissiere, E. Belamie, T. Coradin and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4349 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Kohl, Annu. Rev. Chem. Biomol. Eng., 2011, 2, 17-1 CrossRef .
W. Volksen, R. D. Miller and G. Dubois, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 56 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baskaran, J. Liu, K. Domansky, N. Kohler, X. Li, C. Coyle, G. E. Fryxell, T. Suntharampillai and R. E. Williford, Adv. Mater., 2000, 12, 291 CrossRef CAS .
C.-M. Yang, A.-T. Cho, F.-M. Pan, T.-G. Tsai and K.-J. Chao, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1099 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yu, X. Wu, C. J. Brinker and J. Ripmeester, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 7282 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, K. Yu, C. J. Brinker and J. Ripmeester, Langmuir, 2003, 19, 7289 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tanaka, J. Kaihara, N. Nishiyama, Y. Oku, Y. Egashira and K. Ueyama, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 3780 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yuan, J. Xu and L. Xie, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 129, 1195 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Pai, R. Humayun, T. Schulber, A. Sengupta, J.-N. Sun and J. J. Watkins, Science, 2004, 303, 507 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Balkenende, F. K. de Theije and J. C. Kriege, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 139 CrossRef CAS .
F. K. De Theije, A. R. Balkenende, M. A. Verheijen, M. R. Baklanov, K. P. Mogilnikov and Y. Furukawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 4280 CrossRef CAS .
B. D. Hatton, K. Landskron, W. Whitnall, D. D. Perovic and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 823 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jin, J. Tang, Ju. Hu, X. Han, Y. Shang and H. Liu, Colloids Surf., A, 2011, 392, 178 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, D. Grozea, A. Kim, D. D. Perovic and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 99 CrossRef CAS .
M. Seino, W. Wang, J. E. Lofgreen, D. P. Puzzo, T. Manabe and G. A. Ozin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18082 CrossRef CAS .
G. Frederik, C. Ivan, M. Oreste, K. Vanstreels, M. R. Baklanov, C. Detavernier, P. Van der Voort and I. Van Driessche, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 8281 RSC .
F. Chi, L. Yan, H. Yan, B. Jiang, H. Lv and X. Yuan, Opt. Lett., 2012, 37, 1406 CrossRef CAS .
P. Innocenzi, L. Malfatti and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2501 CrossRef CAS .
P. Falcaro, L. Malfatti, T. Kidchob, G. Giannini, A. Falqui, M. F. Casula, H. Amenitsch, B. Marmiroli, G. Grenci and P. Innocenzi, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2055 CrossRef CAS .
P. Falcaro, D. Grosso, H. Amenitsch and P. Innocenzi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10942 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Choi, T.-J. Ha, B.-G. Yu, S. Shin, H. Hee Cho and H.-H. Park, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 516, 212 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Choi, T.-J. Ha, H.-H. Park, S. Shin, H. H. Cho, K.-H. Kwon and M. Hong, Sens. Actuators, A, 2009, 155, 131 CrossRef .
T.-J. Ha, H.-H. Park, H. W. Jang, S.-J. Yoon, S. Shin and H. H. Cho, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 158, 123 CrossRef CAS .
T. Coquil, C. Reitz, T. Brezesinski, E. J. Nemanick, S. H. Tolbert and L. Pilon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 12451 CAS .
J. Fang, C. Reitz, T. Brezesinski, E. J. Nemanick, C. B. Kang, S. H. Tolbert and L. Pilon, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 14606 CAS .
G. A. Niklasson and C. Granqvist, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 127 RSC .
C. Hilsum, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2011, 368, 1027 CrossRef .
W. Cheng, E. Baudrin, B. Dunn and J. I. Zink, J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 92 RSC .
S.-H. Baeck, K.-S. Choi, T. F. Jaramillo, G. D. Stucky and E. W. McFarland, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15, 1269 CrossRef CAS .
M. Deepa, A. K. Srivastava, S. N. Sharma and G. S. M. Shivaprasad, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2008, 254, 2342 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lai, J. Shieh, L. G. Teoh, I. M. Hung, C. S. Liao and M. H. Hon, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 396, 295 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuan, Y. Zhang, J. Le, L. Song and X. Hu, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1114 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Frindell, J. Tang, J. H. Harreld and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3524 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, D. F. Rohlfing, S. Sallard, M. Antonietti and B. M. Smarsly, Small, 2006, 2, 1203 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sallard, T. Brezesinski and B. M. Smarsly, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7200 CAS .
M. Deepa, A. K. Srivastava, K. N. Sood and S. A. Agnihotry, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 2625 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ostermann and B. Smarsly, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 266 RSC .
W. Wang, Y. Pang and S. N. B. Hodgson, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2010, 54, 19 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Pang and S. N. B. Hodgson, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 121, 121 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Pang and S. N. B. Hodgson, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2011, 58, 135 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Pang and S. N. B. Hodgson, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 8591 RSC .
S. Y. Choi, M. Mamak, N. Coombs, N. Chopra and G. A. Ozin, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1231 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Jheong, Y. J. Kim, J. H. Pan, T.-Y. Won and W. I. Lee, J. Electroceram., 2006, 17, 929 CrossRef CAS .
N. Krins, L. Lepot, R. Cloots and B. Vertruyen, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180, 848 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohko, T. Tatsuma, T. Fujii, K. Naoi, C. Niwa and Y. Kubota, Nat. Mater., 2003, 2, 29 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nadar, R. Sayah, F. Vocanson, N. Crespo-Monteiro, A. Boukenter, S. Sao Joao and N. Destouches, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10, 1810 CAS .
N. Crespo-Monteiro, N. Destouches, L. Nadar, S. Reynaud, F. Vocanson and J. Y. Michalon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 173106 CrossRef .
N. Crespo-Monteiro, N. Destouches, L. Bois, F. Chassagneux, S. Reynaud and T. Fournel, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3166 CrossRef CAS .
L. Bois, F. Chassagneux, Y. Battie, F. Bessueille, L. Mollet, S. Parola, N. Destouches, N. Toulhoat and N. Moncoffre, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 1199 CrossRef CAS .
L. Raboin, M. Matheron, J. Biteau, T. Gacoin and J.-P. Boilot, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 3242 RSC .
L. Malfatti, S. Costacurta, T. Kidchob, P. Innocenzi, M. Casula, H. Amenitsch, D. Dattilo and M. Maggini, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 120, 375 CrossRef CAS .
M. Winter and R. J. Brodd, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4245 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, J. Polleux, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1802 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, S. H. Tolbert and B. Dunn, Nat. Mater., 2009, 9, 146 CrossRef .
K. Brezesinski, J. Wang, J. Haetge, C. Reitz, S. O. Steinmueller, S. H. Tolbert, B. M. Smarsly, B. Dunn and T. Brezesinski, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6982 CrossRef CAS .
J. Haetge, P. Hartmann, K. Brezesinski, J. Janek and T. Brezesinski, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4384 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brezesinski, J. Wang, R. Senter, K. Brezesinski, B. Dunn and S. H. Tolbert, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 967 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Zhou, M. W. Xu, D. D. Zhao, C. L. Xu and H. L. Li, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2009, 117, 55 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Zhao, M. W. Xu, W. J. Zhou, J. Zhang and H. L. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2699 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Kim, K. S. Kim, G. P. Kim and S. H. Baeck, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, 36 CrossRef .
W. J. Zhou, J. Zhang, T. Xue, D. D. Zhao and H. L. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 905 RSC .
K. H. Reiman, K. M. Brace, T. J. Gordon-Smith, I. Nandhakumar, G. S. Attard and J. R. Owen, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 517 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Nishiyama, S. Tanaka, H. W. Hillhouse, N. Nishiyama, Y. Egashira and K. Ueyama, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 9469 CrossRef CAS .
Fatthakhova-Rohlfing, M. Wark, T. Brezesinski, B. Smarsly and J. Rathouský, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 123 CrossRef .
M. Hartmann, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4577 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, M. Yuan, Y. Liu, B. Tu, C. Xu, B. Liu, D. Zhao and J. Kong, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 4071 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Son, S. H. Ahn, J. H. Kim and W.-G. Koh, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 573 CAS .
Y. Hu, A. Bouamrani, E. Tasciotti, L. Li, X. Liu and M. Ferrari, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 439 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, Y. Peng, K. Lin, H. Shen, L. C. Brousseau, J. Sakamoto, T. Sun and M. Ferrari, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 421 RSC .
A. Bouamrani, Y. Hu, E. Tasciotti, L. Li, C. Chiappini, X. Liu and M. Ferrari, Proteomics, 2010, 10, 496 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Lian, Y.-H. Liang, Y. Yamauchi and K. C.-W. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 6581 CAS .
L. Malfatti, M. G. Bellino, P. Innocenzi and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2763 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Bellino, I. Tropper, H. Duran, A. E. Regazzoni and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Small, 2010, 6, 1221 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, Y. Jiang, D. R. Dunphy, Y. Jiang, D. R. Dunphy, D. P. Adams, C. Hodges, N. Liu, N. Zhang, G. Xomeritakis, X. Jin, N. R. Aluru, S. J. Gaik, H. W. Hillhouse and C. J. Brinker, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 667 CrossRef CAS .
V. B. Kandimalla, V. S. Tripathi and H. Ju, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2006, 36, 73 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Baca, C. Ashley, E. Carnes, D. Lopez, J. Flemming, D. Dunphy, S. Singh, Z. Chen, N. G. Liu, H. Y. Fan, G. P. Lopez, S. M. Brozik, M. Werner-Washburne and C. J. Brinker, Science, 2006, 313, 337 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Baca, E. Carnes, S. Singh, C. E. Ashley, D. M. Lopez and C. J. Brinker, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 836 CrossRef CAS .
H. K. Baca, E. Carnes, C. E. Ashley, D. M. Lopez, C. Douthit, S. Karlin and C. J. Brinker, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2011, 1810, 259 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Harper, C. Y. Khirpin, E. C. Carnes, C. E. Ashley, D. M. Lopez, T. Savage, H. D. T. Jones, R. W. Davis, D. E. Nunez, L. M. Brinker, B. Kaehr, S. M. Brozik and C. J. Brinker, ACS Nano, 2010, 10, 5539 CrossRef .
C. H. Lee, T. S. Lin and C. -Y. Mou, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 165 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Wu, S. Qian and Y. Man, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2098 CrossRef .
S. Kataoka, A. Endo, M. Oyama and T. Ohmori, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 359, 108 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kataoka, Y. Takeuchi, A. Harada, M. Yamada and A. Endo, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 331 RSC .
M. G. Bellino, A. E. Regazzoni and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 360 CAS .
S. Mura, G. Greppi, A. M. Roggio, L. Malfatti and P. Innocenzi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2011, 142, 1 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Melde, B. J. Johnson and P. T. Charles, Sensors, 2008, 8, 5202 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Melde and B. J. Johnson, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2010, 398, 1565 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shimizu, T. Hyodo and M. Egashira, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 24, 1389 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domansky, J. Liu, L. Q. Wang, M. H. Engelhard and S. Baskaran, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 2810 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Bearzotti, J. M. Bertolo, P. Innocenzi, P. Falcaro and E. Traversa, Sens. Actuators, B, 2003, 95, 107 CrossRef ; 
  (b) A. Bearzotti, J. M. Bertolo, P. Innocenzi, P. Falcaro and E. Traversa, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2004, 24, 1969 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) P. Falcaro, J. M. Bertolo and P. Innocenzi, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2004, 32, 107 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (d) P. Innocenzi, P. Falcaro, J. M. Bertolo, A. Bearzotti and H. Amenitsch, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2005, 351, 1980 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (e) J. M. Bertolo, A. Bearzotti, A. Generosi, L. Palummo and V. R. Albertini, Sens. Actuators, B, 2005, 111–112, 145 CrossRef ; 
  (f) P. Innocenzi, A. Martucci, M. Guglielmi, A. Bearzotti and E. Traversa, Sens. Actuators, B, 2001, 76, 299 CrossRef .
J. Tu, N. Li, W. Geng, R. Wang, X. Lai, Y. Cao, T. Zhang, X. Li and S. Qiu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 166–167, 658 CrossRef CAS .
P. Innocenzi, A. Martucci, M. Guglielmi, A. Bearzotti, E. Traversa and J. C. Pivin, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2001, 21, 1985 CrossRef CAS .
Y. D. Wang, C. L. Ma, X. H. Wu, X. D. Sun and H. D. Li, Talanta, 2002, 57, 875 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. H. Wu, Y. F. Li and Z. L. Zhou, Solid-State Electron., 2004, 48, 627 CrossRef CAS .
L. Malfatti, T. Kidchob, P. Falcaro, S. Costacurta, M. Piccinini, M. Cestelli Guidi, A. Marcelli, A. Corrias, M. F. Casula, H. Amenitsch and P. Innocenzi, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 103, 113 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mio Bertolo, A. Bearzotti, P. Falcaro, E. Traversa and P. Innocenzi, Sens. Lett., 2003, 1, 64 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, H. Uchida, T. Katsube, T. Nakatsubo and Y. Nishioka, Sens. Actuators, B, 1998, 49, 58 CrossRef .
T. Yamada, H. S. Zhou, H. Uchida, M. Tomita, Y. Ueno, I. Honma, K. Asai and T. Katsube, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2002, 54, 269 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Zhou, T. Yamada, K. Asai, I. Honma, H. Uchida and T. Katsube, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys, 2001, 40, 7098 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamada, H. Zhou, H. Uchida, I. Honma and T. Katsube, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 13341 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yuliarto, I. Honma, Y. Katsumura and H. Zhou, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 114, 109 CrossRef .
B. Yuliarto, Y. Kumai, S. Inagaki and H. Zhou, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 138, 417 CrossRef .
B. Yuliarto, H. S. Zhou, T. Yamada, I. Honma and K. Asai, ChemPhysChem, 2004, 5, 261 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yuliarto, H. S. Zhou, T. Yamada, I. Honma, Y. Katsumura and M. Ichihara, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 6719 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Lee, K. K. Park, M. Kupnik, N. A. Melosh and B. T. Khuri-Yakub, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 3063 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, H. Yu and Z. Li, Anal. Chem., 2011, 83, 3448 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lee, Y. Jin, N. Jung, J. Lee, J. Lee, Y. S. Jeong and S. Jeon, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 5704 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Battie, O. Ducloux, L. Patout, P. Thobois and A. Loiseau, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 163, 121 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) A. Palaniappan, X. Li, F. E. H. Tay, J. Li and X. Su, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 119, 220 CrossRef ; 
  (b) A. Palaniappan, X. Su and F. E. H. Tay, IEEE Sens. J., 2006, 6, 1676 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (c) A. Palaniappan, X. Su and F. E. H. Tay, J. Electroceram., 2006, 16, 501 CrossRef .
Y. Zhu, H. Yuan, J. Xua, P. Xu and Q. Pan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2010, 144, 164 CrossRef .
M. Claesson, A. Ahmadi, H. M. Fathali and M. Andersson, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 166–167, 526 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gaitán, V. R. Gonçales, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, L. M. Baraldo and S. I. Córdoba de Torresi, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 26, 890 CrossRef .
B. Lei, B. Li, H. Zhang, S. Lu, Z. Zheng, W. Li and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1883 CrossRef CAS .
A. Calvo, B. Yameen, F. J. Williams, G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia and O. Azzaroni, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10866 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wirnsberger, B. J. Scott and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Commun., 2001, 119 RSC .
H. Fan, S. Reed, T. Baer, R. Schunk, G. P. Lopez and C. J. Brinker, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2001, 44–45, 625 CrossRef CAS .
L. Nicole, C. Boissière, D. Grosso, P. Hesemann, J. Moreau and C. Sanchez, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2312 RSC .
P. Banet, L. Legagneux, P. Hesemann, J. Moreau, L. Nicole, A. Quach, C. Sanchez and T.-H. Tran-Thi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2008, 130, 1 CrossRef .
S. Tao, G. Li and H. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 4521 RSC .
S. Tao and G. Li, Colloid Polym. Sci., 2007, 285, 721 CAS .
D. Marongiu, D. Carboni, L. Malfatti and P. Innocenzi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 20498 RSC .
S. Y. Choi, M. Mamak, G. von Freymann, N. Chopra and G. A. Ozin, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 2456 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Lotsch and G. A. Ozin, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4079 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Fuertes, F. J. López-Alcaraz, M. C. Marchi, H. E. Troiani, V. Luca, H. Míguez and G. J. A. A. Soler-Illia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1247 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hidalgo, M. E. Calvo, M. G. Bellino, G. J. a. A. Soler-Illia and H. Miguez, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2534 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qi, I. Honma and H. Zhou, Anal. Chem., 2006, 78, 1034 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qi, I. Honma and H. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10590 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mura, G. Greppi, M. L. Marongiu, P. P. Roggero, S. P. Ravindranath, L. J. Mauer, N. Schibeci, F. Perria, M. Piccinini, P. Innocenzi and J. Irudayaraj, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2012, 3, 485 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hering, D. Cialla, K. Ackermann, T. Dörfer, R. Möller, H. Schneidewind, R. Mattheis, W. Fritzsche, P. Rösch and J. Popp, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2008, 309, 113 CrossRef .
L. Malfatti, P. Falcaro, B. Marmiroli, H. Amenitsch, M. Piccinini, A. Falqui and P. Innocenzi, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3760 RSC .
C. A. Steinbeck, M. Ernst, B. H. Meier and B. F. Chmelka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 2565 CAS .
L. Malfatti, T. Kidchob, D. Aiello, R. Aiello, F. Testa and P. Innocenzi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 16225 CAS .
N. Krins, J. D. Bass, J.-L. Beatrice, P. Evrar, C. Boissiere, L. Nicole, C. Sanchez, H. Amenitsch and D. Grosso, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1139 RSC .

  (a) D. Aiello, F. Testa, R. Aiello, L. Malfatti, T. Kidchob, P. Innocenzi, I. Aiello, T. Martino, M. Ghedini and M. La Deda, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2009, 12, 237 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) D. Aiello, L. Malfatti, T. Kidchob, R. Aiello, F. Testa, I. Aiello, M. Ghedini, M. La Deda, T. Martino, M. Casula and P. Innocenzi, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2008, 47, 283 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, Z. Wang, P. Wang and J. Li, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2010, 5, 761 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Frindell, M. H. Bartl, M. R. Robinson, G. C. Bazan, A. Popitsch and G. D. Stucky, J. Solid State Chem., 2003, 172, 81 CrossRef CAS .
S. Costacurta, L. Malfatti, T. Kidchob, M. Takahashi, G. Mattei, V. Bello, C. Maurizio and P. Innocenzi, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3259 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Scott, G. Wirnsberger, M. D. McGehee, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Adv. Mater., 2001, 13, 1231 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wirnsberger, P. Yang, H. C. Huang, B. Scott, T. Deng, G. M. Whitesides, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 6307 CrossRef CAS .
R. Vogel, P. Meredith, I. Kartini, M. Harvey, J. D. Riches, A. Bishop, N. Heckenberg, M. Trau and H. Rubinsztein-Dunlop, ChemPhysChem, 2003, 4, 595 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, G. Wirnsberger, H. C. Huang, S. R. Cordero, M. D. McGehee, B. Scott, T. Deng, G. M. Whitesides, B. F. Chmelka, S. K. Buratto and G. D. Stucky, Science, 2000, 287, 465 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cui, Z. Hua, X. Cui, L. Guo, C. Wei, W. Bu and J. Shi, Dalton Trans., 2009, 2679 RSC .
J.-L. Gu, J.-L. shi, G.-J. You, L.-M. Xiong, S. X. Qian, Z.-L. Hua and H.-R. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 557 CrossRef CAS .
D. Buso, P. Falcaro, S. Costacurta, M. Guglielmi, A. Martucci, P. Innocenzi, L. Malfatti, V. Bello, G. Mattei, C. Sada, H. Amenitsch, I. Gerdova and A. Hachè, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 4965 CrossRef CAS .
H. Miyata, Y. Fukushima, K. Okamoto, M. Takahashi, M. Watanabe, W. Kubo, A. Komoto, S. Kitamura, Y. Kanno and K. Kuroda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13539 CrossRef CAS .
P. Innocenzi, P. Falcaro, S. Schergna, M. Maggini, E. Menna, H. Amenitsch, J. A. A. Soler-Illia, D. Grosso and C. Sanchez, J. Mater. Chem., 2004, 14, 1838 RSC .

Footnote† Part of the mesoporous materials themed issue.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Pore structures obtained via self-assembly templating in mesoporous films: 2D (Lam = lamellar, p6m, and c2mm), 3D (Rm, I4/mmm, Fmm, Imm, P63/mmc, and Pmn) and bicontinuous (Iad and Pnm) (reproduced with permission from ref. 6).	 

 	Fig. 2  Preparation of macro–mesoporous titania–graphene films. A polystyrene opal template film is impregnated with a precursor sol containing graphene oxide (GO), the surfactant Pluronic P123, TiCl4 and titanium isopropoxide (TTIP). After aging to allow the sol gelation the film has been exposed to hydrazine vapour to reduce the graphene oxide to graphene. In the final step the film has been annealed with a specific thermal treatment in a controlled atmosphere (reproduced with permission from ref. 41).	 

 	Fig. 3  Gyroid network replica using a block copolymer as templates and assembly of hybrid solar cells. (a) PFS-b-PLA gyroid block copolymer morphology. A film of the block copolymer is deposited on a transparent conducting oxide coating (FTO glass). (b) The selective removal of the PLA networks leaves a PFS gyroid template; an electrochemical replica of the voided network is then realized. (c) Freestanding gyroid after removal of the supporting PFS template. (d) A bicontinuous bulk heterojunction solar cell architecture is obtained via back-filling of the array with a solid state hole transporting material and capping with a suitable counter electrode (reproduced with permission from ref. 56).	 

 	Fig. 4  Preparation of organized mesoporous silica films containing polyhedral oligomeric silsesquioxanes within the pore walls for low-k applications (reproduced with permission from ref. 86).	 

 	Fig. 5  Dark-field TEM image of a hierarchical porous thin film treated at 350 °C (a) and a representative picture of the hierarchical structure (b) (reproduced with permission from ref. 90).	 

 	Fig. 6  Scheme of working principles of electrochromism in a mesoporous WO3 thin films; the insertion/extraction of lithium during reduction/oxidation and the associated coloration/bleaching of the inorganic matrix is shown (reproduced with permission from ref. 106).	 

 	Fig. 7  Scheme of preparing protein-immobilized mesoporous TiO2 film micropatterned with PEG hydrogels (reproduced with permission from ref. 137).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Mesoporous silica thin film. (b) Optical picture of a single die, showing an array of multiple elements. (c) Scanning electron microscope image of the cross-section of a single capacitive micromachined ultrasonic transducers resonator. (reprinted with permission from ref. 175).	 

 	Fig. 9  Scheme of benzene ring-linked hexafluoro-2-propanol sensing group modification on the inner wall of mesoporous silica and the specific capturing mechanism for TNT molecules (reprinted with permission from ref. 176).	 

 	Fig. 10  Birefringence in a titania–silica film with an aligned mesoporous structure; the surface of titania pores is covered with a thin silica layer (reprinted with permission from ref. 212).	 
Footnote
† Part of the mesoporous materials themed issue.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
