Probing Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer and Hole Transfer in Organic Solar Cells Using a Tandem Structure  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D3TC02042H View PDF Version  DOI: 10.1039/D3TC02042H
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2023, Accepted ManuscriptProbing Fluorescence Resonance Energy Transfer and Hole Transfer in Organic Solar Cells Using a Tandem Structure(Note: The full text of this document is currently only available in the PDF Version )

        
          
            Zhenmin 
            Zhao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shenglong 
            Chu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Lv
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qianqian 
            Chen
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhengguo 
            Xiao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Shirong 
            Lu
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Zhipeng 
            Kan
          
        
      
Received 
      12th June 2023
    , Accepted 19th July 2023First published on 
      
      
      
      19th July 2023
    AbstractWith the emergence of nonfullerene acceptors (NFAs), single junction organic solar cells (OSCs) have achieved power conversion efficiency (PCE) of over 19%. Due to the intrinsic efficiency limits in low-bandgap NFA OSCs, the donor-to-acceptor energy transfer and acceptor-to-donor hole transfer have considerable impacts on the performance of the OSCs. However, time-resolved ultrafast spectroscopy is often used to prove the energy transfer and hole transfer processes. Herein, we designed thin films and active layers with a tandem structure composed of donor/electron blocking layer/acceptor to demonstrate the presence of donor-to-acceptor fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET) and acceptor-to-donor hole transfer. By analyzing the steady state photoluminescence peak position and intensity with varied substrate temperatures, FRET from PTO2 to IDTT-IC or IDTT-4FIC and hole transfer from IDTT-IC or IDTT-4FIC to PTO2 were demonstrated. In addition, we monitored the devices with the tandem structure active layer using short/long pass filters to excite the donor or acceptor selectively and further confirmed the presence of FRET and hole transfer in device operations. Our results proved the effect of FRET and hole transfer directly in thin films and devices, providing a feasible yet practical approach with easily accessible measurements other than ultrafast spectroscopy.
Table Content:
