Manganese oxide-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for water oxidation  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE00815J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE00815J
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2310-2340Manganese oxide-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for water oxidation

        
          
            Sunghak 
            Park†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Yoon Ho 
            Lee†
a, 
      
        
          
            Seungwoo 
            Choi†
a, 
      
        
          
            Hongmin 
            Seo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Moo Young 
            Lee
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mani 
            Balamurugan
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Ki Tae 
            Nam
          
          
        
      *ab
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea. E-mail: nkitae@snu.ac.kr
bNano Systems Institute, Seoul National University, Seoul 08826, Korea
Received 
      13th March 2020
    , Accepted 26th May 2020First published on 26th May 2020AbstractWater oxidation is considered an important reaction to attain sustainable energy systems. Inspired by the biological Mn4CaO5 cluster, considerable effort has been devoted to developing efficient manganese-based heterogeneous catalysts for the water oxidation reaction. This review first describes the structural characteristics of the Mn4CaO5 cluster and synthetic manganese oxides. Important features related to the electrocatalytic activity of manganese-based heterogeneous catalysts as well as recent in situ spectroscopic results for intermediate characterization are then summarized. Current understanding of the reaction mechanism at the atomic level and the rate-determining step is highlighted. Finally, future perspectives for the development of highly active and stable manganese-based water-oxidizing catalysts are proposed.
Sunghak Park
Sunghak Park is currently a postdoctoral researcher in Prof. Ki Tae Nam's group at Seoul National University. He received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University under the supervision of Prof. Ki Tae Nam in 2019. His research interest is (photo)electrochemical energy conversion using nanomaterials.
Yoon Ho Lee
Yoon Ho Lee is a PhD candidate in Materials Science & Engineering at Seoul National University under the supervision of Professor Ki Tae Nam. He received his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University in 2018. His main research interest is water oxidation catalysts and in situ spectroscopic analysis.
Seungwoo Choi
Seungwoo Choi is a PhD candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University under the supervision of Professor Ki Tae Nam. He received his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea University in 2015. His main research interest is electrochemical organic synthesis and industrial-scale production.
Ki Tae Nam
Ki Tae Nam has been a professor at Seoul National University since 2010. He received his PhD from Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 2007 and then conducted postdoctoral research at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. His main research interest is in bio-inspired approaches for designing and synthesizing functional materials for energy and optical applications. Recently, his research group has focused on the mechanistic understanding of electrochemical water oxidation and the synthesis of chiral nanoparticles by using biomolecules.

Broader context
Solar-to-fuel conversion is an appealing strategy to produce environmentally friendly fuels and attain sustainable energy systems. The water oxidation reaction plays a central role in the conversion of water/carbon dioxide molecules into hydrogen/hydrocarbon fuels by providing electrons and protons. However, this reaction, which involves multiple proton-coupled electron transfer steps and the O–O bond formation step, currently limits solar-to-fuel conversion because of its sluggish kinetics. In nature, the water-oxidizing complex in photosystem II efficiently catalyzes the water oxidation reaction under mild conditions despite containing only manganese, calcium, and oxygen. The unique capabilities of biological systems have inspired researchers to design manganese-based heterogeneous artificial catalysts for water oxidation. However, current man-made manganese-based catalysts exhibit limited catalytic performance and their reaction mechanism is not well understood. The diverse chemical and structural properties of manganese-based compounds provide numerous degrees of freedom to design efficient catalysts, but also complicate the pathways to attaining this goal. Here, we briefly introduce the fundamental properties of manganese and the characteristics of the biological water-oxidizing complex. Based on previous results, we present the important features of highly active manganese-based heterogeneous water oxidation catalysts and current understanding of their underlying reaction mechanism to guide future research.

1. Introduction
The water oxidation reaction is an imperative half-reaction of electrochemical conversion processes in an aqueous system for reductive valorization reactions such as the hydrogen (H2) evolution reaction, carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction, and nitrogen (N2) reduction.1–3 The electrons required for reduction reactions at the cathode are delivered from the anode, where two water (H2O) molecules are oxidized to a dioxygen molecule (O2) with the release of protons (H+) and electrons (e−), that is, 2H2O → O2 + 4H+ + 4e−, E0 = 1.23 V vs. normal hydrogen electrode (NHE).4,5 However, the water oxidation reaction is currently considered a major bottleneck in the development of electrochemical energy conversion and storage systems because of its sluggish kinetics and complex reaction pathways that involve water oxidative activation, O–O bond formation, intermediate peroxide activation, and O2 liberation.6,7 Therefore, tremendous effort has been devoted to understanding the mechanism of this challenging reaction and enhance the catalytic activity over the past few decades.5,8,9 Recently, marked improvements have been made in the synthesis of scalable heterogeneous water oxidation catalysts for practical applications.10–12
The catalytic activities of various materials have been studied according to the pH of the electrolyte solution. Precious metal-based oxides such as ruthenium oxide (RuO2) and iridium oxide (IrO2) are the state-of-the-art electrocatalysts, exhibiting high catalytic activity in both acidic and alkaline conditions.13–16 In addition, a dimensionally stable anode consisting of RuO2-based mixed metal oxides has been successfully commercialized in the chlor-alkali industry.17,18 Although these catalysts exhibit good performance, developing earth-abundant transition metal-based heterogeneous catalysts for the water oxidation reaction is a primary research goal considering the scarcity and expense of precious metals.19 Pourbaix diagrams could provide candidate materials for thermodynamically stable earth-abundant transition metal oxides or hydroxides under an anodic potential; for example, manganese-based materials are stable under limited potential conditions over the entire pH range, while iron, cobalt, nickel, and copper-based materials are corrosion stable under neutral and basic conditions. Among them, electrodeposited cobalt oxide20 and iron-doped nickel (oxy)hydroxides21,22 are representative transition metal-based catalysts that exhibit high catalytic activity for the water oxidation reaction under neutral and alkaline conditions, respectively. In addition, manganese-based oxides have also been extensively studied as promising candidate catalysts for efficient water oxidation, inspired by the biological photosystem II (PS II).23
In nature, water oxidation is accomplished by the water oxidizing complex (WOC) in PS II. The WOC consists of an inorganic manganese–calcium–oxo cluster (Mn4CaO5), which is stabilized by the surrounding amino acid residues. The Mn4CaO5 core and surrounding amino acid side chains from the protein cooperatively perform the water oxidation reaction in a highly efficient manner without any side reactions (Fig. 1a).24 As a result, the WOC exhibits more efficient and selective water oxidation catalytic activity than any current artificial catalysts, achieving a turnover frequency of 100 s−1 and a required overpotential for water oxidation of only 150–300 mV.23,25–27 From the several unique characteristics of the WOC, we can infer the origin of its high catalytic activity. An important feature of the Mn4CaO5 complex is its unique structure, which consists of a highly distorted Mn3Ca–oxo cubane motif with one dangling Mn moiety (Fig. 1b).24 This highly distorted structure might facilitate its atomic rearrangement during the water oxidation reaction when the redox state changes between MnIII and MnV. Moreover, it has been found that the CaII ion is essential for the high activity of the WOC, although the exact role of CaII is still ambiguous; it may be only structural or have a direct role in water oxidation.28 The surrounding amino acid residues provide well-defined channels for the transfer of substrate water molecules and products such as H+ and O2 between the Mn4CaO5 core and outside of the WOC. Chemical transfer manipulation and the delicate hydrogen bond network of the WOC enable the entropic control of the incoming water molecules and optimize the kinetics of the proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) steps for water oxidation.29
 Fig. 1  Characteristics of the biological Mn4CaO5 cluster and synthetic manganese oxides. (a) Crystal structure of the Mn4CaO5 cluster and its ligand environment. (b) Bond length differences (in Å) between metal atoms and oxo bridges or water molecules. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Kok cycle: the five intermediate states Si (i = 0–4). Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Crystal structures of various MnO2 polymorphs. The purple and yellow spheres and surrounding octahedra denote spin-up and spin-down Mn atoms and MnO6 octahedra. The black spheres and gray polyhedra denote potential intercalation sites. The red spheres denote the O atoms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Calculated Pourbaix diagram of Mn–O–H phases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group. 
In the water oxidation reaction, the WOC cycles through the five intermediate states (Si, where i is the number of accumulated oxidizing equivalents) of the Kok cycle to accumulate the oxidizing power to generate O2 and spontaneously restore the original state (Fig. 1c).30,31 During the Kok cycle, each Mn atom in the tetrameric cluster is successively oxidized from MnIII to MnIV with simultaneous deprotonation of water. An O–O bond is formed in the S3–S4 step and then O2 is released in the S4–S0 step. Recently, the structural changes of Mn4CaO5 during the Kok cycle were gradually identified at atomic resolution using a femtosecond X-ray free-electron laser technique.32,33 Indeed, the atomic arrangements and oxidation state in every Si state except the S4 state have been experimentally revealed. Based on these recent results, it is strongly believed that one oxygen atom in O2 originates from the O5 atom of the Mn4CaO5 cluster and the other is from the incoming water molecule that enters via the surrounding water channel.34
Interestingly, nature has chosen only manganese as the redox-active element for all the existing biological enzymes for water oxidation, whereas other biological enzymes such as hydrogenases (Fe and Ni),35 oxygen reductases (Fe and Cu),36 and nitrogenases (V, Fe, and Mo)37 have diverse redox-active elements in their active sites. These natural evolutionary results suggest that the inherent characteristics of manganese are more suitable for oxidizing water molecules and forming the O–O bond than those of other earth-abundant transition metal elements. Manganese is the third most abundant transition metal in the Earth's crust and is present in seawater in the form of MnII at a concentration of approximately 10−4 ppm. Dissolved MnII has a high ligand exchange rate and thus is quickly mobilized, which makes manganese a plentiful and available resource for biological systems.38 Furthermore, manganese has the highest accessible oxidation state (MnVII) among the first-row transition metals and exists in a variety of oxidation states (from MnII to MnVII). The ability of taking various oxidation states of manganese leads to its involvement in a range of redox reactions, including charge rearrangements (charge disproportionation or comproportionation reactions) between two or more Mn ions.39 For example, MnIII is unstable in acidic aqueous solution and undergoes a simple charge disproportionation reaction from 2MnIII into MnII and MnIV.40 In addition, manganese hydroxo- and oxo-species also have enough oxidizing power for the water oxidation reaction when their oxidation state is MnIII or higher.41 All these unique properties of manganese make it an ideal choice for the WOC.
Considering the unique chemistry of manganese and its role in biological water oxidation, manganese oxide is an attractive choice for developing heterogeneous water oxidation catalysts. In addition, several features of manganese oxide make this material even more interesting. First, manganese oxides in nature exhibit remarkably diverse Mn–O moieties with more than thirty crystalline structure phases.42,43 MnO, Mn3O4, Mn2O3, Mn5O8, and MnO2 are the stoichiometric chemical formulas of manganese oxides with various oxidation states from MnII to MnIV. For example, Mn3O4 is a mixed-valence manganese oxide that consists of MnIIO4 tetrahedra and Jahn–Teller distorted MnIIIO6 octahedra, while Mn2O3 consists of five symmetry-inequivalent MnIIIO6 octahedra which are connected through corner- and edge-sharing (Fig. 2). Even for materials with the same chemical formula, there are polymorphs with various structures, especially for MnO2 (Fig. 1d).44 The basic building block of all the polymorphs is the MnO6 octahedron, and each MnO6 octahedron is connected to others in a corner- and/or edge-sharing manner. Based on their different connections, MnO2 polymorphs can be divided into three categories: tunnel structures surrounded by a one-dimensional MnO6 octahedra chain (e.g., α-, β-, γ-, and R-MnO2), layered structures of laminated two-dimensional sheets of MnO6 octahedra (e.g., δ-MnO2), and three-dimensional structures (e.g., λ-MnO2). Second, manganese oxides and hydroxides have thermodynamically stable domains over a wide pH range.45,46 In particular, the β-MnO2 structure exhibits thermodynamic stability over the entire pH range under the anodic potential for the water oxidation reaction (red line in Fig. 1e). According to a recent calculation of the metastable energy landscapes of Pourbaix diagrams, several kinds of manganese oxide phases could exist under water oxidation reaction conditions by subtle variations of the pH and redox potential.47 Moreover, distinct electrochemical properties are experimentally observed for oxides with different structures.48 As shown in Fig. 2, a cubane structural motif similar to that of the biological WOC has been observed in the crystalline structure of manganese oxides with different Mn–O bond distances and angles. These flexible Mn–O moieties of manganese oxides would be beneficial to mimic the dynamically optimized structures of the biological WOC if we can understand and manipulate them properly. In this context, much effort has been expended investigating various phases of manganese oxides as heterogeneous catalysts for the water oxidation reaction. With the development of nanotechnology in recent decades, several manganese-based materials, from a bulk powder with a particle size of tens of micrometers to well-defined monodisperse nanoparticles and even atomic-scale dispersions, have been synthesized and used as catalysts.49–55 A recent article highlighted broader content for manganese-based complexes and oxides, focusing on lessons from the biological WOC.23
 Fig. 2  Crystal structures of the biological Mn4CaO5 cluster and various manganese oxides. Purple, brown, black, red, and yellow spheres are MnII, MnIII, MnIV, O, and Ca ions, respectively. 
Rather than cover all manganese-based water oxidizing catalysts, we focus on the recent progress of manganese-based materials for the electrochemical water oxidation reaction. This review highlights studies on the catalytic activity of various manganese-based heterogeneous water oxidation electrocatalysts and describes the detailed reaction mechanisms of recently reported highly active electrocatalysts. Initially, we introduce various manganese-based electrocatalysts and their features related to the catalytic activity for the water oxidation reaction. Then, based on the results of various in situ/ex situ spectroscopic analyses, information about the crucial reaction intermediates and characteristics of catalytic materials in the reaction environment are presented. Next, current understanding of the reaction mechanism cycle of heterogeneous water oxidation catalysts is summarized along with electrochemical kinetic analysis results. Finally, the challenges and perspectives of manganese-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for the water oxidation reaction are proposed.
2. Various manganese-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts
Finding an appropriate descriptor is one important direction for the rational design of efficient catalysts and various types of descriptors based on experiments or computational calculations have been proposed along with the development of various water oxidation electrocatalysts.56 A representative descriptor is the adsorption energy of catalytic intermediates based on the Sabatier principle, which states that the best-performing catalyst must bind reaction intermediates neither too strongly nor too weakly. When the reaction steps of water oxidation are simplified based on the electron transfer, four surface intermediate species could be considered (*OH2, *OH, *O, and *OOH). The adsorption energies of these reaction intermediates are linked by linear scaling relations because all the reaction intermediates bind with the heterogeneous catalyst surface through the O atom. Based on linear scaling relations, the catalytic activities could be expressed by a volcano-shaped relation using a single adsorption energy as a descriptor. This volcano approach has received extensive attention since it was recently supported by the computational calculation by Rossmeisl et al.57
The computationally predicted activity trend was in good agreement with the experimentally measured activities of many reported metal oxides operating under alkaline conditions.1 However, this adsorption-energy based volcano approach is not well suited for predicting the catalytic activity of manganese-based materials. For example, computational predictions suggest that manganese oxides should have a catalytic activity similar to that of IrO2,58,59 which is one of the currently best performing in neutral and acidic conditions, but the experimentally measured overpotential of MnO2 in neutral conditions is 300 mV larger than that of IrO2.60,61 This discrepancy between the computational prediction and experimental results suggests that sole consideration of the adsorption energy-based approach is not sufficient to understand the origin of the activity of manganese-based catalysts. Rather, several other factors, which are overlooked in the simplified mechanistic model and might limit the catalytic activity, should also be considered, such as the stability of intermediate species and charge rearrangement in catalyst materials. Therefore, experimentally characterizing the exact structural properties and chemical states of catalyst materials and correlating them with the catalytic activity are necessary to understand the activity origin of manganese-based materials. In the following section, we will introduce several empirical results that successfully enhanced the electrocatalytic activity of various manganese-based materials.
2.1 Manganese-based electrocatalysts with crystalline structures
Research into the use of manganese-based materials as electrochemical water oxidation catalysts has received a lot of attention since high catalytic activity under alkaline conditions was observed in 2010. Jaramillo's group prepared thin films of nanostructured manganese oxide in the +3 oxidation state, which exhibited high catalytic activity towards both water oxidation and oxygen reduction in alkaline media, similar to that of precious metal nanoparticles such as Pt, Ru, and Ir.62 Manganese-based anodes have been prepared by various methods such as electrodeposition,63 dispersion on carbon nanotubes,64 and screen-printing.65 These anodes exhibited good performance under basic conditions and relatively low activity at neutral pH. These scattered early reports suggested the high potential of manganese-based heterogeneous catalysts for the water oxidation reaction but did not provide detailed understanding of the origin of their activity. Here, we will introduce recent reports which suggest the prevailing correlation between MnIII species and the electrocatalytic activity for the water oxidation reaction.
To clearly reveal the active structural motif, various crystalline manganese oxide materials were also synthesized and compared as a model system. For example, Suib's group prepared manganese oxides with various structures (α-, β-, δ-MnO2, and amorphous manganese oxides) and systematically studied their samples to identify the origin of their catalytic activity at high current density (10 mA cm−2) under alkaline conditions.66 Notably, the measured electrocatalytic activities strongly depended on the crystallographic structures in alkaline media and exhibited the following order: α-MnO2 > amorphous manganese oxides > β-MnO2 > δ-MnO2. Interestingly, α-MnO2, which possessed a well-ordered pore structure with a mixed valence state (MnIII and MnIV), exhibited higher activity (490 mV overpotential at 10 mA cm−2, 0.1 M KOH electrolyte) than that of amorphous manganese oxides. They suggested that the higher activity of α-MnO2 was caused by the mixed oxidation state (average oxidation state: 3.7) and its controlled tunnel structure and abundant di-μ-O(H) bridges, which acted as protonation sites. These findings indicate that the pore structure of the material could be an important factor for the catalytic activity at high current density because ion transport becomes more important at higher current density. Furthermore, they synthesized mesoporous Mn2O3 to investigate the effect of MnIII species for the catalytic activity.53 They synthesized the catalysts through a sol–gel process involving a nonionic surfactant as a soft template and calcination. As the calcination temperature increased, the amount of MnIII species (Mn2O3 crystal phase) in the manganese oxide also increased. The samples with a larger amount of MnIII species, which were annealed at higher temperatures, show higher electrocatalytic activity for the water oxidation reaction. The best performing catalyst has a 150 m2 g−1 specific surface area consisting of a nanocrystalline Mn2O3 crystal structure with a 11.5 nm domain size and showed a 507 mV overpotential for 10 mA cm−2 in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte. Therefore, they suggested that manganese oxides containing rich MnIII species and possessing high surface area would be an important design guideline for highly active manganese oxide electrocatalysts for the water oxidation reaction under alkaline conditions.
The importance of the MnIII species for the catalytic activity of the water oxidation reaction is supported by considering its electronic structure. The high spin electronic configuration of the MnIII octahedron (t32ge1g) in manganese oxides usually undergoes Jahn–Teller distortion, resulting in two long Mn–O bonds. The flexible Mn–O bonds favor the formation of surface Mn–OH2 species and cleavage of Mn–O2 bonds, which facilitates the catalytic turnover of the water oxidation reaction.67 Besides, the eg orbital in the transition metal octahedron forms a σ-bond with anion adsorbates and it was suggested that the occupancy of one electron in the antibonding eg orbital provides the appropriate adsorption energy for oxygen intermediate species.68,69 The influence of the electronic configuration change from MnIV to MnIII on the electrocatalytic activity was further investigated by Cady et al.70 Ternary spinel oxides with the general formula AB2O4 were derived from LiMn2O4 and used as a model system with finely tuned electronic properties of Mn by substituting both A and B sites. In particular, substituting the A site from Li+ to Mg2+ or Zn2+ converts B site MnIV to MnIII with a flexible structure, which results in enhanced electrocatalytic activity.
The direct relationship between the amount of MnIII in manganese-based catalysts and their electrocatalytic activity for the water oxidation reaction was supported by our group.71 We selected the pyrophosphate-based Mn compound Li2MnP2O7 as a model system and investigated the role of the Mn valence in the catalytic activity (Fig. 3a). The monophasic behavior of Li2MnP2O7 enabled the precise control of the Mn valence in the material with negligible structural changes by controlling the Li content. Mn K-edge XANES spectra revealed the increase in the average oxidation state of the compound (amount of MnIII species) as the Li content was decreased (Fig. 3b). As shown in Fig. 3c, the catalytic current density and the exchange current density increased proportionally with the amount of MnIII species, while the Tafel slopes were similar. This result clearly shows that the number of active sites of the manganese-based heterogeneous catalyst is directly related to the MnIII species. Furthermore, the possible role of the Mn valence was also revealed by calculating the Baur distortion index, which represents the degree of asymmetry in local Mn octahedra. Interestingly, the catalytic activity and the Baur distortion index showed similar linear dependences on the amount of MnIII species (Fig. 3d), which indicates that the amount of MnIII species and asymmetric local coordination of Mn are directly related to the activity of manganese-based heterogeneous catalysts in electrochemical water oxidation.
 Fig. 3  Direct correlation between the electrocatalytic activity and MnIII species which are stabilized in a distorted crystal structure. (a) Crystal structure of Li2MnP2O7. The inset shows the locally distorted Mn octahedra in the structure. (b) Mn K-edge XANES spectra of Li2−xMnP2O7 (x = 0, 0.3, 0.5, 1) powder. The inset clearly shows that the average oxidation state is gradually changed upon delithiation. (c) Polarization-corrected cyclic voltammetry curves of Li2−xMnP2O7 (x = 0, 0.3, 0.5, 1) in phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). (d) Current density at a fixed potential (680 mV overpotential) and derived distortion index value as a function of the delithiation amount (x) in Li2−xMnP2O7. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Dismukes’ group also investigated the geometrical effects of MnIIIO6 octahedra on the electrocatalytic water oxidation activity by comparing binary manganese oxides with various phases.72 Crystalline manganese oxides containing MnIII (γ-MnOOH and Mn2O3), MnIV (β-MnO2 and δ-MnO2), and multiple monophasic mixed-valence manganese oxide (Mn3O4) were investigated. While pure β-MnO2 showed poor catalytic activity, γ-MnOOH (tetragonally distorted MnIIIO6 with D4h symmetry) displayed moderate activity, and Mn2O3 (trigonal antiprismatic MnIIIO6 with D3d symmetry) exhibited high activity for the water oxidation reaction (Fig. 4a). The hexagonal polymorph of δ-MnO2 (HexBir), containing few out-of-layer corner-sharing MnIIIO6, showed catalytic activity over ten times higher than that of the triclinic polymorph of δ-MnO2 (TriBir) containing in-plane edge-sharing MnIIIO6. They further perceived the importance of the corner-sharing MnIII content in δ-MnO2, instead of the total content of MnIII, through correlation with the high catalytic activity of γ-MnOOH. As illustrated in Fig. 4b, corner-sharing MnIIIO6 on the catalyst surface could promote active MnIII species by interconverting nearby MnIIaq and MnO2 to form γ-MnOOH. Also, the similarity between the corner-sharing MnIII species in synthetic catalysts and dangling MnIII of the biological WOC was explored (Fig. 4b). In the entire catalytic cycle of the WOC, the MnIII species only contains Mn-bound water and this unique ligand environment was predicted to favor MnIII and MnV species instead of MnIV species. In other words, oxidation is centered on the oxido ligands rather than Mn in the catalytic cycle. They proposed that the similar active site structure and electronic structure to those of the biological WOC are the origins of the high catalytic activity of these two synthetic manganese oxide catalysts.
 Fig. 4  Detailed investigation about the geometrical effects of MnIIIO6 octahedra in synthetic manganese oxide catalysts for the electrochemical water oxidation reaction. (a) Catalytic activities of various polymorphs of manganese oxides. (b) Description of corner-shared MnIII octahedra in δ-MnO2 (top) and the biological Mn4CaOx cluster (bottom). Structural rearrangement forms active species (corner-sharing MnIII octahedra) on the surface of δ-MnO2. (c) Demonstration of the crystal structure and d-orbital electronic configuration of Mn2O3 and γ-MnOOH. The water binding sites, binding affinity, and kinetic exchange rate depend on the types of symmetry of the MnIII octahedral unit. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
The geometry of MnIII octahedra was studied in greater detail by comparing γ-MnOOH and Mn2O3, which contain only MnIII species. As shown in Fig. 4c, γ-MnOOH contains only the MnIIIO6-type structure of MnIII in its unit cell, which is the tetragonally elongated (D4h-type) octahedron affected by Jahn–Teller distortion. This distortion results in four short and two long Mn–O bonds per D4h-type octahedron, and individual D4h units are connected to three other MnIIIO6 octahedra by corner-sharing bridges, which are located above a rhombohedral vacancy. In contrast, Mn2O3 contains five symmetry-inequivalent MnIIIO6 sites in its unit cell. In three of the five sites, all Mn–O bond lengths are different because of the distortion of the D4h symmetry with two long and four shorter bonds. In the other two sites, all bond lengths are very similar, which indicates trigonal antiprismatic D3d symmetry. The sites are connected to two or three other MnIIIO6 by corner-sharing bridges, and thus these sites can be compared with the typical γ-MnOOH. The surface of MnIIIO6 lies above a three-fold axis and maintains the D3d symmetry formed by the three oxo bridges, resulting in an e1g electronic configuration. Because the trigonal ligand field of the fixed oxo bridges restrains the tetragonal Jahn–Teller distortion, the lengths of Mn–O bonds are anticipated to be nearly equivalent. The three surface water-binding oxo sites are expected to be relatively flexible, which could be beneficial for catalytic activity if O2 release from this site is rate-limiting.
2.2 Manganese-based electrocatalysts with disordered structures
Disordering the crystal structure of manganese oxides has been considered as one of the effective strategies to enhance the electrocatalytic water oxidation activity.52,73–76 Interestingly, several reported amorphous catalyst materials with high catalytic activity under neutral solution possessed a common structure consisting of layers of edge-sharing MnIVO6 octahedra with MnIII species. The group headed by Dau and Zaharieva prepared an amorphous manganese oxide catalyst by the potential cycling treatment of electrodeposited δ-MnO2.73 This catalyst exhibited high electrocatalytic activity even at neutral pH. Almost no catalytic current was observed from a regular δ-MnO2 sample up to 1.4 V (vs. NHE) in phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). In contrast, the active amorphous sample exhibited a clear anodic current from the water oxidation reaction (1 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 590 mV). Thus, the cubane-like structural motif of δ-MnO2 with di-μ-oxo bridged Mn ions could not guarantee the electrochemical water oxidation activity under neutral conditions. The average oxidation states of active and inactive samples were elucidated from XANES analysis. Interestingly, the active sample showed a lower oxidation state (3.8) than that of the inactive sample (4.0) with regular δ-MnO2 structure. EXAFS analysis confirmed that the structure of the active sample consisted of comparable proportions of di-μ-oxo bridged Mn ions and mono-μ-oxo bridged Mn ions (corner-sharing MnO6 octahedra with an Mn–Mn distance of about 3.4 Å). They also suggested that the abundant (de)protonatable μ2-O(H) groups and terminal water coordination sites in the disordered structure contributed to its catalytic activity. As a result, the mixed valence of Mn (MnIII and MnIV) with a large number of mono-μ-oxo bridged structures and plenty of water/proton exchange sites was suggested as a crucial characteristic for the high catalytic activity of amorphous manganese oxides under neutral conditions.
Similar atomic-level structural characteristics were suggested by comparing two different nanostructured MnOx catalysts that were prepared by chemical symproportionation (s-MnOx) and impregnation (i-MnOx) methods.74 Of the two samples, i-MnOx showed higher catalytic activity (lower Tafel slope) and smaller electrochemical active surface area under neutral conditions (pH 7.0) than was the case for s-MnOx, which possessed a similar structure to that of regular δ-MnO2. For both catalysts, the average oxidation states increased from 3 (i-MnOx) and 3.5 (s-MnOx) to 4 after electrolysis. The crystal structure of i-MnOx contained a mixture of β-MnO2 and γ-MnO2 phases, which also contained dangling out-of-layer Mn ions linked via mono-μ-oxo bridges (corner-sharing MnOx octahedra with coordinatively unsaturated sites). In addition, the defective structure implied that the sample contained a high number of Mn vacancy sites, which prevented the formation of di-μ3-oxo moieties and resulted in more di-μ2-O(H) bridges between Mn ions as well as terminal water coordination sites. Thus, they suggested that the coordinatively unsaturated out-of-layer Mn species might behave as an adsorption site and nearby (de)protonatable sites facilitated the water oxidation reaction. Furthermore, Driess, Dau, and co-workers prepared amorphous MnOx containing mixed valence states by oxidizing inactive MnO nanoparticles with a chemical oxidant.75 The prepared amorphous MnOx showed high catalytic activity towards photochemical as well as electrochemical water oxidation under neutral conditions. The structure model derived from EXAFS analysis showed that the sample contained layers of di-μ-oxo bridged MnIV ions, similar to those of the δ-MnO2 parent structure, along with MnII/MnIII species occupying the interlayer oxide space. These findings indicate that a structure consisting of out-of-layer MnII/MnIII species with layered δ-MnO2 would be an important structural feature for the enhanced electrocatalytic activity of amorphous MnOx.
Nocera and colleagues conducted extensive studies on a disordered δ-MnO2 catalyst system (Fig. 5).52,77 They first elucidated the optimum electrodeposition conditions to enhance the catalytic activity of disordered δ-MnO252 and then performed detailed spectroscopic studies on disordered δ-MnO2.77 The catalytic activity of the prepared δ-MnO2 sample was greatly increased after potential cycling. The Tafel slope decreased from 120 to 70 mV dec−1 under neutral conditions and 650 to 90 mV dec−1 under acidic conditions. They found that the catalytic activity enhancement began with a structural phase transformation through the charge comproportionation of the original δ-MnO2 film with cathodically generated Mn(OH)2 to produce a Mn3O4-like intermediate structure (δ-MnIVO2 + 2MnII(OH)2 → MnII,III3O4 + 2H2O). A consecutive anodic potential further oxidized the Mn3O4-like intermediate structure to disordered δ-MnO2. Chemically introduced MnIII species in disordered δ-MnO2 contributed to the enhanced catalytic activity without charge disproportionation. Furthermore, in situ XAS measurements showed that the MnIII species still existed in the catalyst during the water oxidation reaction but with a lower coordination number. The decrease of the Mn–O coordination number to four and the relatively constant bond length suggested that the MnIII species might be coordinated with a tetrahedral ligand field. The tetrahedral ligand field of the MnIII species constricted further oxidation and the valence state was trapped at 3+ even at a high anodic applied potential. The researchers proposed a unique structural motif of MnIII intermediate species consisting of tetrahedral MnIII species located next to the MnIVO6 octahedra in disordered δ-MnO2. An electronic structure calculation of this unique local coordination structure motif indicated the reconstruction of Mn d and O 2p states in a manner that facilitated oxygen hole formation (Fig. 5). That is, trapped MnIII species in the tetrahedral ligand field induced local strain and distorted nearby Mn–O coordination bonds, resulting in a narrower gap between the highest occupied and lowest unoccupied molecular orbitals and an oxygen-based highest occupied molecular orbital. As a result, they suggested this unique local structure in disordered MnO2 enabled the facile generation of highly reactive Mn-oxyl radical species, resulting in the enhanced electrochemical catalytic activity.
 Fig. 5  Calculated electronic structure of disordered δ-MnO2. (a) Crystal structures of Mn3O4 and δ-MnO2. (b) Oxidation state of Mn and O as electrons are removed from the model system. (c) Band structure of the activated disordered δ-MnO2 and δ-MnO2. (d) Calculated average valence state of Mn and O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018 National Academy of Sciences. 
2.3 Manganese-based electrocatalysts with heteroatom incorporation
Introducing heteroatoms into manganese oxide has been one of the prevailing strategies to enhance the electrocatalytic activity, though it is difficult to understand each element's exact role completely. Ca incorporation into manganese oxide inspired by the composition of the biological WOC was effective to attain decent activity.78–81 For example, Dau and colleagues studied the redox properties and the electrocatalytic activities of calcium–manganese oxides to elucidate the role of Ca.80 The calcium–manganese oxides were prepared through electrodeposition and annealed at 210 °C. The stoichiometry of Ca/Mn in the sample was controlled through the variation of the Ca concentration in the deposition solution. The samples with Ca/Mn ratios up to 0.08 increased the catalytic activity and it decreased again for further increasing Ca content. They suggested that the Ca ions are not essential for the water oxidation reaction but could tune the electrocatalytic activity by preventing the oxidation of some MnIII species to MnIV species under the catalysis conditions.
Controlling the morphology and 2-dimensional architecture of layered type manganese oxide is an appealing strategy because it could maximize the surface area exposed to the electrolyte. However, the low intrinsic activity of crystalline δ-MnO2 is a major bottleneck for utilizing this material as a highly efficient electrocatalyst. In addition to the strategy for enhancing the catalytic activity by introducing MnIII species into δ-MnO2 presented in the previous section, several reports have tried to engineer the thickness of δ-MnO2 and incorporate heteroatoms into δ-MnO2.82,83 Heteroatoms could be incorporated into layered manganese oxide in two ways: doped into the manganese oxide sheet and intercalated into the interlayer of δ-MnO2. In the case of doping into the manganese oxide sheet, enhanced electrical conductivity and electronic structure modification have been suggested as the origin of the increased electrocatalytic activity.84 On the other hand, it has been suggested that intercalation of transition metal ions increases the electrocatalytic activity through two effects: they participate directly in the water oxidation reaction as an active center and provide a unique aligned water environment that could facilitate electron transfer.85,86 Recently, the group led by Zdilla and Strongin improved the electrocatalytic activity of δ-MnO2 under alkaline conditions from a 750 mV to 375 mV overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 by systematic control of the incorporation of Fe and Co ions.87
Significant enhancement of the electrocatalytic activity under alkaline conditions had been reported when manganese oxides interacted with a noble metal such as Au.88–91 To clarify the interactions, Jaramillo's group prepared three types of samples to evaluate the activity in alkaline conditions: manganese oxide deposited on glassy carbon (MnOx-GC), manganese oxide on top of Au nanoparticles evaporated onto glassy carbon (MnOx/Au-GC), and Au evaporated on top of MnOx-GC (Au/MnOx-GC).89 As shown in Fig. 6a, an order of magnitude higher current density was attained when the manganese oxide is located with Au nanoparticles. Interestingly, they confirmed that only a trace amount of Au decoration by adding AuIII ions to the electrolyte could drive an increased current density. In order to examine the change of the manganese oxide catalysts by Au, ex situ total electron yield (TEY) Mn L-edge XAS spectra were measured after operating the catalysts under 1.65 V (vs. reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE)) in 0.1 M KOH solution (Fig. 6b). The spectrum of MnOx-GC was similar to that of MnO2, whereas the spectra of MnOx/Au-GC and Au/MnOx-GC were similar to that of Mn2O3. In contrast to the clear difference in the surface-sensitive TEY Mn L-edge XAS data, the Mn K-edge spectrum, which gives the entire information of the material, exhibits a similar shape with or without the Au (Fig. 6c). Therefore, they suggested that the interactions between the manganese oxide and Au occur locally and only a trace amount of Au is sufficient to activate the manganese oxide. DFT calculation of the thermodynamic energy of the intermediates suggested that the Au nanoparticles near the manganese oxide or Au–O–Mn interface could serve as hydrogen accepting sites, which stabilize the *OOH intermediate species and lower the potential needed for the water oxidation reaction.92
 Fig. 6  Electrocatalytic activity improvement by interfacial engineering between manganese oxides and heteroatoms such as Au and Co. Comparison of MnOx-GC, MnOx/Au-GC, and Au/MnOx-GC through (a) cyclic voltammetry and (b) Mn L-edge XAS measurements. (c) Mn K-edge XAS spectra of MnO-GC and MnO/Au-GC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) XPS O 1s spectra of CoO/hi-Mn3O4, CoO/Mn3O4 and hi-Mn3O4. (e) NEXAFS of CoO/hi-Mn3O4 and hi-Mn3O4. (f) Polarization curves of CoO/hi-Mn3O4 and other catalysts as a comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
The group led by He and Suib further suggested that the synergetic effect between manganese oxides and Au is strongly dependent on the initial valence state of the manganese oxides.91 They synthesized five different manganese oxides (α-MnO2, δ-MnO2, amorphous MnO2, Co doped α-MnO2, and Mn2O3) and tested the catalytic activity after Au decoration. Samples containing the MnIV species showed increased catalytic activity after Au decoration, while Mn2O3 showed the same activity after Au decoration. Specifically, the overpotential of α-MnO2 for 10 mA cm−2 was decreased from 630 mV to 390 mV after Au decoration (0.1 M KOH). XRD and Raman analysis results confirmed that the overall crystal structure was preserved after the Au decoration, which also supports that the interaction occurs locally. Mn K-edge XANES analysis confirmed that the average oxidation state of α-MnO2 was slightly reduced from 3.91 to 3.84 after Au decoration. Therefore, they suggested that the role of Au nanoparticles was promoting the change of the surrounding MnIV species to MnIII species in MnO2.
Interfacial structure engineering has been attempted between manganese oxides and other transition metal oxides. In particular, interfacial structuring using Mn3O4 and cobalt oxides showed outstanding electrocatalytic activity for the water oxidation reaction under alkaline conditions.93–95 Qiao's group decorated CoO nanoclusters on (110) faceted Mn3O4 nano-octahedra (CoO/hi-Mn3O4) through a wet chemistry route.94 They confirmed the interfacial Mn–O–Co species using XPS and suggested a higher binding energy of interfacial Mn–O–Co species when high-index (110) faceted Mn3O4 nanoparticles were used compared to the case of spherical Mn3O4 nanoparticles (Fig. 6d). Interestingly, the peak around 642.5 eV in the Mn L-edge spectrum, which could be assigned as short MnIII–O bonds, was negatively shifted after coupling with CoO (Fig. 6e). As shown in Fig. 6f, this interfacial engineering using cobalt oxide enabled the drastic enhancement of the electrocatalytic activity: a 378 mV overpotential at a 10 mA cm−2 current density (1 M KOH). Gong's group further enhanced the electrocatalytic activity by preparing CoxMn3−xO4 nanoparticles with abundant surface edge sites.95 (111) high index facets were developed with cobalt incorporation into initial cubic Mn3O4 nanoparticles. A 10 mA cm−2 current density was attained with only a 246 mV overpotential in 1.0 M KOH solution. They suggested that the heterojunction would definitely contribute to the enhanced activity, though detailed analysis on the active sites was not provided.
3. 
        In situ characterization of the intermediates of manganese-based electrocatalysts
As introduced in Section 2, many results have suggested that the MnIII species in the initial state are related to the activity for the electrochemical water oxidation reaction of manganese-based materials. Recent advances in in situ spectroscopic techniques provide information on intermediate states of the catalyst, which enables a deeper understanding of the underlying mechanism in water oxidation. The following section emphasizes the results for the intermediate states obtained from various in situ spectroscopic experiments rather than introducing the specific details of in situ spectroscopic experiments.
3.1 Evidence for crystal structural changes during catalysis
Verifying the crystal structural changes of the catalytic material during the electrochemical water oxidation reaction is essential for understanding the overall mechanistic cycle and evaluating the catalyst's stability. The Najafpour group reported that some manganese oxides (Mn3O4, α-Mn2O3, Ca2Mn3O8, CaMn3O6, and CaMn4O8) convert to a disordered layered δ-MnO2 structure after electrolysis in neutral pH solution.96 They found that the morphology of the catalysts changed to a layered structure with poor crystallinity after electrolysis using SEM and TEM. Among the crystalline manganese oxide samples presented in the previous Section 2.1, several papers reported structural stability through a catalytic material analysis after electrolysis. In the Mn3O497 and γ-MnOOH72 phases, the crystal structure did not remain stable after electrolysis. On the other hand, the crystal structures of α-Mn2O3, α-MnO2, and δ-MnO2 remained stable after electrolysis under each condition (Table 1).53,66,74 However, there is still a gap in understanding the exact structural changes during electrolysis only based on analyzing the catalytic material after electrolysis.
Table 1 Summary of the crystal structural changes of manganese oxide electrocatalysts




Initial structure
After electrolysis
Electrolysis condition
Characterization tool
During electrolysis
Electrolysis condition
Characterization tool




Mn3O4
Disordered δ-MnO296
0.1 M LiClO4 pH 6.3
SEM, TEM – morphology change
δ-MnO2100
0.1 M KOH

In situ XAS


γ-MnOOH
Disordered structure72
1 M NaOH
XRD, Raman – decreased intensity
—
—
—


HRTEM – disordered surface


α-Mn2O3
(1) α-Mn2O353
(1) 0.1 M KOH
(1) XRD, TEM – no obvious changes
α-Mn2O3105
0.1 M KOH

In situ Raman


(2) Disordered δ-MnO296
(2) 0.1 M LiClO4 pH 6.3
(2) SEM, TEM – morphology change


α-MnO2
α-MnO266
0.1 M KOH
TEM – no obvious changes
—
—
—


δ-MnO2 (triclinic)
δ-MnO2 (triclinic)74
0.1 M phosphate pH 7
EXAFS – no obvious changes
δ-MnO2 (hexagonal)105
0.1 M KOH

In situ Raman




Advances in in situ spectroscopy analysis have made it possible to directly observe structural changes depending on the applied anodic potential, which enabled a deep understanding of the overall structural changes of manganese oxides under reaction conditions. In situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) and Raman spectroscopy results clearly show that the overall structure transforms to layered-like manganese oxide (δ-MnO2-like) under an applied anodic potential. In situ XANES analysis has been utilized to monitor the change of the average Mn oxidation state and in situ EXAFS analysis has been used to probe the coordination number and Mn–O bond length of the catalysts during water oxidation. In situ Raman spectroscopy is another spectroscopic tool that can sensitively characterize short-range metal–oxygen arrangements and is especially advantageous for manganese oxide phase analysis because many manganese oxide phases exhibit characteristic Raman spectra.97,98
The thermodynamically stable surface structures of manganese oxides (MnO(001), β-MnO2(110), Mn3O4(100), and α-Mn2O3(110)) were calculated and a surface Pourbaix diagram was constructed using density functional theory (DFT).99 The results suggested that β-MnO2 covered with adsorbed oxygen (O*) was the stable surface structure under water oxidation reaction conditions. Jaramillo and colleagues obtained direct experimental results about the structure of MnOx using in situ XAS.100 Valence and structural changes of electrodeposited MnOx on an Au–Si3N4 catalyst were investigated during the catalysis of water oxidation in alkaline electrolyte. The MnOx catalyst clearly outperformed the bare Au support in the water oxidation reaction (Fig. 7a). The in situ XANES spectrum of the MnOx catalyst at an applied potential of 1.8 V (vs. RHE) was positively shifted to higher energy compared with that of its as-prepared state (Fig. 7b). The average Mn oxidation state of the catalyst was estimated by comparison with manganese oxide standards such as MnO, Mn3O4, MnOOH, α-Mn2O3, β-MnO2, and δ-MnO2. The observed Mn valence was around 3.6 and its XANES spectrum was similar to that of the δ-MnO2 phase. When the applied potential was reduced to 0.7 V (vs. RHE), the XANES spectrum was negatively shifted and exhibited almost the same shape as that of a crystalline Mn3O4 sample. Additionally, the in situ EXAFS analysis indicated the structural rearrangement of the MnOx catalyst depending on the applied potential. The in situ EXAFS data also contained similar peak positions to those of δ-MnO2 and Mn3O4 reference samples under an applied potential of 1.8 V and 0.7 V (vs. RHE), respectively (Fig. 7c). Thus, both in situ XANES and EXAFS analyses consistently indicated that the structure of the MnOx catalyst changed from Mn3O4 to the layered δ-MnO2 like phase, which contains both MnIII and MnIV species, depending on the applied potential.
 Fig. 7  Structure of the manganese oxide catalysts during the water oxidation reaction. (a) Cyclic voltammetry of as-prepared MnOx/Au–Si3N4 and Au–Si3N4. (b and c) Potential dependent in situ XANES and in situ EXAFS spectra of as-prepared MnOx/Au–Si3N4. The red and blue lines are obtained using an applied potential of 0.7 V and 1.8 V (vs. RHE), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Contrary to the results obtained by DFT calculation, it has been suggested that the active MnOx catalyst structure is similar to that of layered δ-MnO2 and not β-MnO2 during the water oxidation reaction under alkaline conditions. The overall structure of electrodeposited manganese oxide also changed to a less-ordered layered δ-MnO2-like structure, which contains distorted MnO6 octahedra, under the applied anodic potential in neutral pH conditions. In situ Mn L-edge XAS and Mn K-edge EXAFS analyses revealed that both the electronic structure and geometric arrangement of the catalyst were similar to those of disordered δ-MnO2 during catalysis.101 Interestingly, the overall atomic arrangement of manganese oxides converted to the layered δ-MnO2-like structure during catalysis regardless of the electrolyte pH. The recently reported structural change between Mn3O4 and δ-MnO2 also supports the structural transformation to a layered δ-MnO2-like structure under an applied anodic potential in aqueous electrolyte.102,103
Further insight into the structural changes of δ-MnO2 during water oxidation was obtained using in situ Raman spectroscopic analysis. The Raman spectral features of δ-MnO2 are sensitive to structural changes such as the interlayer distance and distortion of the MnO6 octahedra.104 Li's group analyzed electrodeposited δ-MnO2 (Bir), α-Mn2O3 (Bix), and mixed-phase δ-MnO2 and α-Mn2O3 (Bir/Bix) via in situ Raman spectroscopy to understand the structure change–activity relationship of these manganese oxides.105 As shown in Fig. 8a, δ-MnO2 exhibited the lowest catalytic current density and α-Mn2O3 showed the lowest onset potential. Interestingly, the mixed-phase sample had a significantly lower Tafel slope (48 mV dec−1) compared to pure δ-MnO2 and α-Mn2O3, which indicates the steepest current increase above the onset potential (Fig. 8b). The potential dependent Raman spectra of layered δ-MnO2 indicated that the structure reversibly changed from the initial triclinic δ-MnO2 to hexagonal δ-MnO2 and point defects formed, which were characterized by the merging of peaks at 483 and 515 cm−1 and the shift of the shoulder at 630 cm−1 to 650 cm−1 (Fig. 8c). Comparison of the catalytic activity at each applied potential revealed that this activation process with structural changes is essential for the catalytic activity of layered-type manganese oxides. On the other hand, the α-Mn2O3 sample gave the same Raman spectra throughout the whole potential region, which indicates that the crystal structure of α-Mn2O3 is preserved during the electrochemical water oxidation reaction. Similar structural changes in the triclinic-to-hexagonal transformation occurred at lower potential for the mixed-phase sample.
 Fig. 8  Structural changes of manganese oxides during water oxidation studied through in situ Raman spectroscopy. (a and b) LSV curves and Tafel plots of Bir (purple), Bix (blue) and Bir/Bix (red). (c) In situ Raman spectra under the anodic potential. The right panel shows the Gaussian peak fitting of spectra collected from the open circuit condition and above the water oxidation onset, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 

Table 1 summarizes the crystal structural changes of various manganese oxides. From the in situ XAS spectroscopic results, the crystal structural transformation between Mn3O4 and δ-MnO2 is directly verified according to the applied potential. In situ Raman clearly shows the crystal structural stability of α-Mn2O3 under catalysis conditions, which corresponds well to the previous report based on the XRD and TEM analysis of the catalyst sample after electrolysis. Furthermore, detailed structural transformation of layered type δ-MnO2 obtained by in situ Raman analysis might enhance the understanding of the catalytic activities of layered type manganese oxides.
3.2 Evidence for the electrocatalytic activity–MnIII species relationship
Nakamura's group revealed that MnIII species are precursors of active sites of manganese oxides.61 They examined the involvement of MnIII during water oxidation catalyzed by δ-MnO2 in 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution by in situ ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectroscopy measurements. The position of absorption maxima in UV-vis spectra strongly depends on the electron transition in the d orbitals of transition metals. To detect the signal from active intermediate species more clearly, they used the difference of UV-vis spectra based on the spectrum obtained at 1.1 V (vs. SHE). Thereby, a clear increase in the intensity of the absorption peak at 510 nm (A510) was observed with increasing applied potential (Fig. 9a). The A510 peak was assigned to MnIII intermediate species formed on the electrode surface during water oxidation through the analysis of control experiments. A plot of current density against the intensity of the A510 band showed a clear relation between the water oxidation activity and content of MnIII intermediate species (Fig. 9b). The intensity of the A510 peak started to increase when the potential was below that needed for water oxidation and then became saturated as the potential increased, which indicated that the MnIII intermediate species are precursors in the water oxidation reaction.
 Fig. 9  
In situ UV-vis analysis of a δ-MnO2 film in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution and its pH dependent behavior. (a) Difference in the UV-vis spectra of a δ-MnO2 film electrode based on the applied potential. (b) Absorbance at 510 nm (filled circles) and 800 nm (open circles) depending on the potential. The j–U curve is shown as a solid line. (c) pH dependence of the onset potential for absorbance at 510 nm (blue) and current density (red) from pH 4 to pH 13. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. 
As shown in Fig. 9c, they also found that the onset potentials of the current density (Uon,j) and A510 (Uon, A510) strongly depended on pH. Interestingly, the pH dependence of Uon,j and Uon, A510 remained constant until pH 8 and then gradually decreased when the pH was higher than 9. These data also support that MnIII species act as a precursor for the water oxidation reaction and the stability of MnIII intermediate species in δ-MnO2 and, thus, the catalytic activity are very sensitive to the pH of the electrolyte solution. Nakamura and co-workers proposed that the pH dependence and stability of intermediate MnIII are related to the charge disproportionation and comproportionation reactions of manganese oxides. At acidic and neutral pH, MnIII ions tend to undergo disproportionation to form MnII and MnIV, resulting in the requirement of a high anodic potential (above 1.4 V) to generate MnIII species. At alkaline pH, MnIII ions are stabilized by the comproportionation reaction, so only a small overpotential is needed to generate and accumulate the MnIII species. The stability of MnIII in δ-MnO2 was also examined via EXAFS and XRD measurements, which showed that MnIII rapidly disproportionated in the pH range of 2–5, whereas disproportionation was suppressed at pH ≥ 9.106 Therefore, effective production and stabilization of MnIII species are necessary for efficient water oxidation by manganese-based electrocatalysts.
To improve the catalytic activity of manganese oxides, especially under acidic and neutral conditions, a number of strategies have been used to stabilize MnIII species under the reaction conditions, which can be categorized as follows. (1) Generation of asymmetry in the coordination environment of Mn either by inducing Mn–N bonding107 or distortion in the crystal structure.51,71 (2) Inducing structural disorder, for example, disordered δ-MnO2.52,73,108 (3) Facet control of manganese oxide.109 (4) Formation of an MnIII-rich phase (γ-MnOOH and Mn2O3).72,110
As an extension of strategies to stabilize MnIII species, we reported nanosized manganese oxide as a highly active water oxidation catalyst at neutral pH.54 Various sizes of monodisperse manganese oxide nanoparticles from 10 to 80 nm were synthesized via a modified thermal decomposition method (Fig. 10a). Interestingly, remarkable improvement in the catalytic activity was observed when the size of the manganese oxide nanoparticles was less than 20 nm (Fig. 10b). The 10 nm-sized nanoparticles exhibited high activity with an overpotential of 530 mV at a current density of 5 mA cm−2 at pH 7.8 in 300 mM phosphate buffer electrolyte. A clear water oxidation activity improvement was also observed when the current was divided by the surface area of each catalyst, which implied that the activity enhancement was not caused by the surface area increase but by the nano-size effect. It was suggested that upon decreasing the particle size to the 10-nm level, their surface properties were modified, probably because of the distortion of the structure.
 Fig. 10  High catalytic activity of manganese oxide nanoparticles with stabilized MnIII species during water oxidation. (a) TEM image of various sizes of nanoparticles (10 nm, 15 nm, 20 nm, ∼60–80 nm). Scale bar: 50 nm. (b) Comparison of electrokinetic analysis between nanoparticles and bulk manganese oxide in 0.3 M phosphate buffer at pH 7.8. (Left: cyclic voltammetry curves, right: Tafel plots near the onset potential). (c) Monomeric Mn species observed through parallel mode X-band EPR spectra (inset: perpendicular mode EPR) in the resting state and under electrolysis at 1.3 V (vs. NHE). Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group. 
To reveal the origin of the unique nano-size effect, freeze–quench electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR) spectroscopy was performed. Through EPR analysis, a monomeric Mn signal was observed, which suggested that the surface monomeric Mn species were important reaction intermediates (Fig. 10c). An MnII signal (spin number S = 5/2) at g ∼ 2 with six hyperfine splitting was detected in a perpendicular-mode X-band EPR spectrum of the manganese oxide nanoparticles, as shown in the inset of Fig. 10c. To detect MnIII EPR signals, parallel mode was used because the signal was not clearly observed in perpendicular mode due to its large zero-field splitting resulting from its S of 2. In the resting state, the manganese oxide nanoparticles clearly showed both MnII and MnIII signals, whereas bulk manganese oxides only showed MnII signals. When the anodic potential was applied, the manganese oxide nanoparticles showed clear MnIII signals without MnII signals. In contrast, MnIII species were not detected in bulk manganese oxide; only MnII signals were present. The EPR analysis indicated that the activity improvement caused by the nano-size effect originated from the stabilization of surface-generated monomeric MnIII intermediate species on the particle surface, which indicates that a nanoparticle-based approach is another promising strategy for the development of highly active manganese-based water oxidation catalysts.
3.3 Evidence for the active intermediate species
Further studies revealed that the stabilized MnIII intermediate species in specific structures facilitate the storage of the oxidative power necessary for the O–O bond formation step by charge accumulation on Mn or surrounding O sites. The group led by Dau and Zaharieva proposed that MnIII containing disordered structures enable efficient redox-state changes of Mn through nearby structural modification and charge-compensating deprotonation.111 Active disordered δ-MnO2 and inactive δ-MnO2 samples were prepared by controlling the electrodeposition conditions: a potential-cycling protocol and a constant potential protocol. The average oxidation state was 3.9 at 1.45 V (vs. NHE) for an active disordered δ-MnO2 sample in phosphate buffer (pH 7) (Fig. 11a), whereas the average oxidation state of inactive δ-MnO2 reached 4 at potentials above 1.2 V (vs. NHE) (Fig. 11c). As the applied potential increased, the intensities of the first peaks in the EXAFS spectra from all samples increased because of the homogeneous distribution of Mn–O distances (Fig. 11b and d). Both potential dependent freeze–quench XANES and EXAFS results indicate the oxidation of a significant amount of Jahn–Teller elongated MnIII species to MnIV species in layered structure manganese oxides. Interestingly, a fraction of MnIII species is stably present in the active disordered δ-MnO2 sample, even at a potential above 1.25 V (vs. NHE) as shown in Fig. 11e. The increase of the second EXAFS peak in the active disordered δ-MnO2 sample originated from the deprotonation of hydroxo bridges. The compositional and structural characteristics imply that specific local structures near these trapped MnIII might be crucial for active water oxidation catalysts in layered type manganese oxide.
 Fig. 11  Comparison of active manganese oxide (MnCat) and inactive manganese oxide (Inactive) in their structure and oxidation state change rates. (a) XANES and (b) EXAFS of active disordered δ-MnO2. (c) XANES and (d) EXAFS of inactive δ-MnO2. (e) Average Mn oxidation state at different applied potentials analyzed by freeze–quench XAS. (f) Time-resolved UV-vis absorbance of disordered δ-MnO2 (red) and inactive δ-MnO2 (blue) upon a potential transition either from OCP to 1.4 V (vs. NHE) or 1.4 V to OCP. (g) Mn oxidation state change observed through the X-ray fluorescence intensity by excitation at 6553.3 eV during a potential jump from 1.4 V to 0.6 V. The transient for absorbance at 470 nm is detected. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The rate of redox-state changes of Mn is experimentally measured by time-resolved UV-vis and XAS analyses. Interestingly, time-resolved tracking of redox-state changes showed totally different pictures for the two samples. The intensity changes of UV-vis spectra were roughly two orders of magnitude faster for active disordered δ-MnO2 compared with those for inactive δ-MnO2 for both oxidation and reduction transitions (Fig. 11f). Immediate changes in the intensity of the X-ray fluorescence signal at 6553.3 eV further supported that the fast redox change detected in the UV-vis spectra could be assigned to Mn-centered redox chemistry (Fig. 11g). They proposed that the facile deprotonation of bridging or terminal water ligands would be possible from the specific local structure with trapped MnIII in disordered δ-MnO2, which promoted the fast kinetics of charge accumulation of oxidizing equivalents (MnIII to MnIV oxidation).
Time-resolved spectroscopy results proved facile accumulation of the oxidizing power in the catalysts, but further information on the active site responsible for the O–O bond formation step is still elusive. Recently reported in situ soft XAS and resonant inelastic X-ray scattering (RIXS) suggested the generation of highly active MnIV-oxyl species through O-centered oxidation. The group led by Simonov and Jones investigated the electronic properties and degree of orbital hybridization on the surface of electrodeposited MnOx in borate buffer electrolyte (pH 9.2) using in situ soft XAS and RIXS analyses.112 The in situ spectra at the Mn L2,3 edge elucidated that species with valence above MnIV were not generated with small amounts of MnIII species and a δ-MnO2-like structure was identified on the surface of MnOx during catalysis (Fig. 12a). This observation agreed with the results of a hard XAS experiment that revealed a δ-MnO2-like structural transformation during the catalysis conditions.100 The in situ RIXS spectra for MnOx exhibited two peaks originating from d–d excitation and charge transfer transitions (Fig. 12b). The d–d transition peak was independent of the applied potential, whereas the intensity of charge transfer peaks notably enhanced with increasing potential in the low-energy region of the Mn L3-edge (640.8 and 641.6 eV). The simulation results indicated that the spectral changes originated from the increase of the degree of orbital hybridization between O 2p and Mn 3d orbitals with rising potential, thereby facilitating O–Mn charge transfer. As shown in the in situ O K-edge spectra in Fig. 12c, the peak intensity around 529 eV increased with the applied potential, which indicated the increase of locally unoccupied O 2p states hybridized with the lowest-energy Mn 3d states. Both in situ RIXS and O K-edge XAS results suggested the increased O 2p hole character (O-centered oxidation) of MnOx during catalysis.
 Fig. 12  Electronic states of the manganese oxides catalysts during the water oxidation reaction. (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves for MnOx (red) and the Au/Si3N4 support (gray) in borate buffer (pH 9.2). Vertical dashed lines show the potentials used for in situ spectroscopic analysis. Bars with oxidation states exhibit the evolution of the Mn valence state changes derived from the spectroscopic data. (b) In situ energy loss spectra of scattered photons (RIXS) under various applied potential conditions (black: no applied potential, gray: 0.75 V, red: 1.25 V, light green: 1.45 V, dark green: 1.75 V, dark blue: 1.85 V, and turquoise: 2.25 V vs. RHE). The origins of the spectra are highlighted with background colors. (c) O K-edge in situ XAS of the manganese oxide with a Nafion membrane impregnated with phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) at various potentials. Inset shows the intensity change at 529 and 532 eV as a function of potential. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Used with permission from ref. 112. 
Various in situ spectroscopy analyses provide an in-depth understanding of how manganese oxide catalysts operate for the water oxidation reaction. MnIII species not only act directly as precursors of active sites, but also some trapped MnIII species stabilized by specific local structures maintain their oxidation state even in water oxidation conditions. The O-centered oxidation of the MnOx catalyst supports the participation of highly active Mn-oxyl radical species proposed by Nocera's group.77 However, fundamental differences in the experimental conditions used for each experiment should be considered for integrated understanding because the catalytic activity and its mechanism are sensitive to these conditions, such as the sample preparation method and pH of the electrolyte solution.
4. Mechanism of manganese-based electrocatalysts in water oxidation
In addition to the knowledge of intermediate states discussed in Section 3, it is very important to understand the overall mechanistic cycle and identify the slowest step of the mechanistic cycle to further improve the catalytic performance of manganese oxides in water oxidation. Electrochemical kinetic analysis such as Tafel slope analysis and reaction-order analysis provide information about the number of transferred electrons and the effects of reactants in the important elementary steps. Here, we first describe the various elementary steps during the electrochemical water oxidation reaction and explain the concept of the rate-determining step (RDS) in multistep reactions. Next, we summarize the suggested atomic-scale reaction mechanisms of manganese-based catalysts including the RDS.
4.1 Electrochemical background of the water oxidation reaction
Electrochemical water oxidation to O2 is a multistep reaction involving transfer of four electrons and four protons in four or more consecutive elementary steps. At least four of the elementary steps are electrochemical steps, whereas others are chemical steps, including O–O bond formation, O2 liberation, and the charge rearrangement of the catalyst material. The oxidizing power accumulates on the catalyst material to produce high-valent active intermediate species in the sequential electrochemical oxidation steps before the O–O bond formation step.
In general, electrochemical oxidation steps involve PCET, which includes both electron transfer (ET) and proton transfer (PT).113 As shown in Fig. 13a,114 the PCET process could be carried out in two ways: stepwise sequential electron and proton transfer (PT–ET or ET–PT) or concerted proton and electron transfer. During the electrochemical oxidation processes by PCET, various kinds of intermediate species could be formed and each intermediate species has different stability. Some unstable intermediate species undergo charge rearrangement, which might interfere with the accumulation of oxidizing power by lowering the concentration of active intermediate species. The charge disproportionation of MnIII in δ-MnO2 is a representative example of a charge rearrangement process.61 This charge rearrangement process strongly depends on not only the reaction conditions such as pH, but also the surface structure of the catalyst material. For example, the surface concentration of MnIII species is 11-fold higher on (101) surfaces compared with on (110) surfaces in β-MnO2, which is because MnIII species are favorably generated through interlayer charge comproportionation of MnII and MnIV on the (101) facet (Fig. 13b).109 Thus, understanding and manipulating charge accumulation and rearrangement are necessary to ensure efficient water oxidation.
 Fig. 13  Various kinds of elementary steps during the water oxidation reaction. (a) Different oxidation pathways coupled with proton transfer. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of MnIII species generation on the (101) surface of β-MnO2 through a charge rearrangement process. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Used with permission from ref. 109. (c) Possible routes for the O–O bond formation step in Ca inserted δ-MnO2 (green: Ca, purple: Mn, red: O, and light gray: H). Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The O–O bond formation step is necessary in the water oxidation reaction to generate O2, but the detailed chemistry of this step still remains elusive even for the biological WOC. Two general classifications of suggested pathways are water nucleophilic attack (WNA) and intramolecular oxygen coupling (IMOC) of two metal–oxo/oxyl species.115 In the case of WNA, a substrate water molecule or hydroxide ion nucleophilically attacks the high-valent metal–oxo/oxyl species and is deprotonated to generate a hydroperoxo intermediate. The substrate might originate directly from the solution or could be bound by nearby Lewis acidic sites (divalent cations)/open coordination sites of nearby metal sites. In IMOC, two high-valent metal–oxo/oxyl species directly couple together to form a bridging peroxo intermediate. For example, Fig. 13c shows various proposed O–O bond formation pathways on a Ca decorated δ-MnO2 catalyst, including both WNA and IMOC.116 The preferred pathway of the O–O bond formation step and its rate strongly depend on both the reaction conditions and the structural/chemical properties of the catalyst.
The overall reaction rate is usually determined by the elementary step with the slowest rate because the overall multistep reaction is a sequence of consecutive elementary steps in series. This slowest kinetic step is known as the RDS. In the water oxidation reaction, there is usually a RDS with a rate that is at least one order of magnitude lower than that of other elementary steps. Note that both electrochemical and chemical steps could be RDSs depending on the type of catalyst material and reaction conditions. The Tafel slope observed from electrochemical kinetic experiments provides information about both the catalytic activity and RDS. The Tafel slope and generalized transfer coefficient (α) can be derived from the following equation based on the assumption that the elementary steps preceding the RDS are at equilibrium:  where E, j, R, T, and F are the applied potential, current density, gas constant, temperature, and Faraday constant, respectively. In addition, nb is the number of electrons transferred to the electrode preceding the RDS, ν is the number of times that the RDS occurs to complete the overall reaction, nr is the number of electrons involved in the RDS, and β is the symmetry factor for the RDS.117,118 For example, when the first ET step is the RDS, α is calculated to be 0.5 and the corresponding Tafel slope is 120 mV dec−1 (nb = 0, nr = 1, and β = 0.5). When the chemical step after one ET is the RDS, the determined α and Tafel slope are 1 and 60 mV dec−1, respectively (nb = 1, ν = 1, and nr = 0). Sometimes, multiple pathways and non-ideal defect states of oxides complicate the situation, resulting in the deviation of the Tafel slope value from the above-mentioned value. Nevertheless, this simple equation is still powerful for predicting the RDS of water oxidation. Besides, reaction-order analysis, such as pH or concentration dependence, can help to identify the RDS by suggesting whether any protons or the electrolyte participate in the RDS. This detailed information about the RDS obtained from electrochemical kinetic analysis can give a complete understanding of the reaction mechanism when combined with the knowledge of active intermediate species determined from in situ spectroscopic analysis.
4.2 Current understanding of the mechanistic cycle and rate-determining step of water oxidation
The schematic illustration in Fig. 14 summarizes the overall reaction mechanistic cycle for some representative catalytic systems. The suggested mechanisms can be classified into two types according to the number of manganese atoms that constitute the active sites: monomeric or multimeric active sites. In the case of monomeric active sites, manganese undergoes sequential oxidation steps to form the high-valent Mn–oxo species119 before O–O bond formation via the WNA pathway. For catalysts with multimeric active sites, it is particularly important to understand the charge rearrangement processes between the manganese atoms such as charge disproportionation and charge comproportionation. Highly active Mn-oxyl species are formed through oxygen-centered oxidation and O–O bond formation proceeds via the IMOC pathway. In particular, the RDS varies depending on the type of catalyst and reaction conditions. Each case is described in detail below.
 Fig. 14  Summary of the current atomic-scale mechanistic understanding of manganese-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts. The RDS is depicted by a thick dashed line for each of the proposed mechanistic pathways. (a) Mechanistic pathways with monomeric active sites. The RDS of most crystalline manganese oxides is the charge accumulation step from MnII to MnIII. (b) Mechanistic pathways with multimeric active sites. Charge rearrangement through the charge disproportionation process is important for understanding the underlying reaction mechanism. 

Fig. 15 shows the reported Tafel slopes of manganese-based heterogeneous catalysts. While most catalysts exhibit high Tafel slopes near 120 mV dec−1, activated MnOx (disordered δ-MnO2) and manganese oxide nanoparticles show much lower values of 70 mV dec−1, especially at neutral pH. A Tafel slope of 120 mV dec−1 with no pH dependence means that the first ET step is the RDS, which indicates that the overall rate of most manganese oxide catalysts is limited by a slow charge accumulation step. In other words, charge disproportionation of MnIII species limits the overall reaction rate. Many crystalline manganese oxides (MnO, Mn3O4, α-Mn2O3, β-MnO2, and δ-MnO2) exhibit a Tafel slope of 120 mV dec−1 under neutral and acidic conditions,54,61 which indicates that the charge accumulation step from MnII to MnIII is the prevailing RDS of crystalline manganese oxides (Fig. 14). Disordered δ-MnO2 and manganese oxide nanoparticles are representative material platforms that exhibit distinct electrochemical kinetic behavior, which implies that they possess different RDSs and reaction mechanisms to those of most crystalline manganese oxides. Considering the superior catalytic activity of manganese oxide nanoparticles, it is valuable to compare the detailed electrochemical kinetic analysis and RDS results for this highly active catalyst platform with those of other manganese oxide catalysts.
 Fig. 15  Tafel slopes of reported manganese-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for the water oxidation reaction.52,55,65,71,73–75,80,88,108,120–128 
As mentioned earlier, nanoparticle catalysts provide not only a unique nano-size effect but also uniform surface structure over a large area with a high surface area-to-volume ratio, which makes them an ideal platform for detailed electrochemical kinetics evaluation and in situ spectroscopic analysis.127 The measured Tafel slope, pH dependence, and proton reaction order against current density for manganese oxide nanoparticles were 70.1 mV dec−1, −71.8 mV dec−1, and −1.02, respectively (Fig. 16a). α deduced from the Tafel slope was 1, which indicates that the RDS was the chemical step after a single ET pre-equilibrium step. To elucidate the redox-state changes on the surfaces of the nanoparticles, freeze–quench EPR spectroscopic analysis was performed at various anodic potentials. As shown in Fig. 16b, the intensity change of monomeric MnII/MnIII EPR signals clearly illustrated that the active site was sequentially oxidized from MnII to MnIII and further as the applied potential was increased. Interestingly, a small amount of MnIII species still existed on the surface of the catalyst even under the active water oxidation conditions, which was consistent with the previously suggested “trapped MnIII species” detected by in situ spectroscopic analysis.77,111 The average oxidation state of the Mn species during catalysis was derived from in situ XANES spectroscopic results. The average oxidation state gradually changed from 2.7 to 3.46 as the applied anodic potential was raised from open-circuit potential to 1.4 V (vs. NHE), as illustrated in Fig. 16c. The average oxidation state change clearly indicates that the prepared manganese oxide nanoparticles transformed from an Mn3O4-like structure to a state containing species with higher Mn valence such as MnIV or MnV as the anodic potential increased. To identify the generated reaction intermediates, in situ UV-vis spectroscopy analysis was performed. As shown in Fig. 16d, two distinct absorption bands in the regions of 400 and 600 nm developed with increasing applied potential, which were assigned to MnIV-related species. Based on both electrochemical kinetic analysis and various spectroscopic results, an overall water oxidation mechanistic scheme was constructed for Mn species on the nanoparticle surface. We proposed that monomeric MnIVO species were responsible for the slowest O–O bond formation step through the WNA pathway after generation through the PCET of MnII–OH2 and MnIII–OH species (Fig. 16e). The RDS change from a charge accumulation step to the O–O bond formation step also corresponds well with the experimental results reported by Dau's group,111 which verified the stable charge accumulation of oxidizing power through the fast Mn-centered redox-state change (MnIII→IV) in catalytically active manganese oxides. This unique mechanism of sub-10 nm-sized manganese oxide nanoparticles might be the cause of their high catalytic activity in the water oxidation reaction even under neutral conditions.
 Fig. 16  Unique mechanistic pathway of sub 10 nm-sized manganese oxide nanoparticles with electrochemical kinetic analysis (a) and potential dependent in situ spectroscopic results (b, c, and d). (b) EPR peak intensity change with the cyclic voltammetry curve. (c) Mn K-edge in situ XANES spectra and estimated average oxidation state change. (d) In situ UV-vis spectra change. Differential spectra at each potential are obtained by subtracting the spectrum obtained at 0.8 V (vs. NHE). (e) Suggested mechanism of manganese oxide nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. 
Further important kinetic parameters, such as the reaction rate constant and transport parameters across the catalyst film, were derived for this nanoparticle platform by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) study.129 We successfully fitted the EIS data acquired from an assembled nanoparticle film using a new transmission line model including a Havriliak–Negami capacitor and Warburg element. Interestingly, different transport parameters were derived from H2O and D2O electrolytes, which implies that the electrons are not conducted through the inner part of the nanoparticles but transported across their surfaces and coupled with protons during the catalysis. The reaction rate constant at 1.35 V (vs. NHE) calculated from the derived kinetic parameters was 22.1 s−1, and the turnover frequency at 1.35 V (vs. NHE) determined from the measured current density with the assumption that all Mn sites on the surface participated in catalysis was 0.052 s−1. Comparing the derived reaction rate constant and turnover frequency indicated that only a small portion (∼0.0016) of Mn sites on the nanoparticle surface participated in catalysis.
The suggested pathway in which monomeric Mn species behave as active sites is also supported by the recent results obtained for a single Mn atom catalyst, although the RDS is different. Li's group reported a mononuclear manganese catalyst (denoted as MnN4-G) that efficiently catalyzes the water oxidation reaction by the WNA pathway under alkaline conditions.55 They synthesized the MnN4-G catalyst, in which a mononuclear manganese site is stabilized by four N coordination with nitrogen-doped graphene, using a calcination and leaching strategy. By comparing the electrochemical catalytic activity and Tafel slope of two kinds of manganese samples with/without nitrogen coordination, they found that mononuclear manganese with nitrogen coordination showed high performance (an overpotential of 337 mV at 10 mA cm−2 and a Tafel slope of 55 mV dec−1) and stability under alkaline conditions (1.0 M KOH). These experimental results were supported by the DFT calculation results for mononuclear manganese catalysts with various coordination configurations such as MnN4-G, Mn3N7-G, MnN3-G, and MnO3-G. Nitrogen coordination facilitated the formation of Mn–oxo species, so MnN4-G with four coordinated N atoms exhibited the lowest calculated overpotential of the mononuclear manganese catalysts. Based on the DFT calculation results and cyclic voltammetry data, they proposed that MnIVO generated from MnIII–OH undergoes O–O bond formation through the nucleophilic attack of another water molecule. The RDS of this proposed mechanism was the electrochemical oxidation step from MnIII–OH to MnIVO, which is clearly different from the RDS of manganese oxide nanoparticles. This study implies that mononuclear manganese sites could actively catalyze the water oxidation reaction through the WNA pathway when the manganese site is in an appropriate nitrogen coordination environment.
Nocera's group also performed a precise electrochemical kinetic analysis of layered manganese oxide (δ-MnO2) over the entire pH range.130 They prepared δ-MnO2 by electrodeposition under a constant potential and optimized the measurement conditions by conducting elaborate control experiments to determine the exact electrochemical kinetic parameters from the water oxidation reaction. Under the optimized conditions, Tafel and reaction order analyses were performed by measuring the current–voltage, phosphate concentration-dependent current density, and pH-dependent current density characteristics of the catalyst. The electrochemical kinetic parameters were derived at each pH condition. The measured Tafel slope was about 60 mV dec−1 with zeroth-order dependence on the phosphate concentration and inverse first-order dependence on the proton concentration under alkaline conditions (pH 11.35 to 13.30). A Tafel slope close to 59 mV dec−1 was consistent with a single ET pre-equilibrium step followed by the chemical RDS. Considering the in situ XANES results and point of zero charge of δ-MnO2, they suggested that the surface of the catalyst consisted of a mixture of MnIII and MnIV valence states with terminal hydroxo and oxo ligands. Based on these results, they proposed that MnIII–OH is converted to MnIVO via a PCET pre-equilibrium step before the O–O bond formation through IMOC as the RDS. Under acidic conditions (pH 1.0 to 3.5), the Tafel slope was 653 mV dec−1 with zeroth-order dependence on both the phosphate concentration and pH. Tafel slopes greater than 120 mV dec−1 are considered approximately quasi-infinite, indicating that the initial chemical step is the RDS in this case. They assigned the initial chemical RDS as cross-site proton-coupled charge disproportionation of MnIII based on the previous observation of unstable MnIII species on the surface of δ-MnO2 below pH 9.0.61 Four MnIII–OH species disproportionated to give two MnII–OH2 and two MnIVO and the adjacent MnIVO then coupled to form the O–O bond. The low catalytic activity of δ-MnO2 under acidic conditions originated from the small proportion of four contiguous MnIII–OH species on the catalyst surface. At near-neutral pH (pH 5.5 to 8.5), the Tafel slope varied with pH from 153 mV dec−1 at pH 5.5 to 105 mV dec−1 at pH 8.5, and the proton concentration dependence was about −0.5, which resulted from the combination of the first-order reaction under alkaline conditions and zeroth-order under acidic conditions. Therefore, they proposed that the reaction mechanism of δ-MnO2 under near-neutral conditions was a mixture of the two competing pathways presented above rather than one specific mechanism.
The mechanisms introduced so far could be interpreted from a generally accepted point of view because of their similarities to those of other metal oxide-based water oxidation catalysts. The water oxidation pathway in which tetravalent active metal–oxo/oxyl species are formed to generate O–O bonds is a widely accepted picture supported by many previous results for Fe- and Co-based catalysts.131,132 Several recent reports proposed interesting hypothetical water oxidation pathways that involve high-valent Mn species, although various experiments are needed to further confirm these pathways. For example, the group headed by Naruta and Zahran suggested that MnVO is a highly active species of the α-Mn2O3 catalyst and found that the RDS changed from ET to the O–O bond formation chemical step when the electrolyte was changed from aqueous phosphate buffer to a non-aqueous solution.110 From the results of electrochemical kinetic analysis and kinetic isotope effect experiments, they suggested that MnVO is generated via the sequential oxidation steps of MnII–OH2 → MnIII–OH → MnIVO → MnVO and is the active species for the RDS of O–O bond formation by the WNA pathway in non-aqueous electrolyte solution. Meanwhile, Sun and co-workers prepared c-disordered δ-MnO2 by annealing electrodeposited manganese oxides and then measured their electrochemical kinetic parameters. The Tafel slope, pH dependence, and derived α of their catalyst were 92 mV dec−1, −67 mV pH−1, and about 1.5, respectively.108 However, the RDS remained unclear because of the difficulty of interpreting the derived α originating from the strong interactions between various redox sites. To address this, they performed ex situ infrared spectroscopy and found a new infrared signal at around 912 cm−1, which was assigned to MnVIIO intermediate species.133 They proposed that at least four Mn sites participated in the water oxidation reaction and generated MnVIIO intermediate species through charge rearrangement (4MnIV → 3MnIII + MnVII). The generated MnVIIO intermediate species are in a resting state and undergo further oxidation to form the MnIV–O–MnVIIO species, which is highly reactive for O–O bond formation.
4.3 Stability and degradation mechanism during water oxidation
Apart from the catalytic activity and mechanistic cycle, the stability of a catalyst is another significant parameter for practical application. The electrochemical stability of a catalyst is generally measured through bulk electrolysis, chronopotentiometry holds with a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2, or cyclic voltammetry tests in the catalysis potential range.10 However, this long-term activity measurement is not proof of the stability of the catalyst material because the continuous leaching of metal ions from the catalyst material might lead to the change of the surface and the newly exposed surface could be involved in catalysis.134 Therefore, an in-depth experimental and theoretical study on the degradation of the catalyst material is needed to establish the structure–stability relationship.
There are several pathways of catalyst deactivation, such as structural degradation, leaching of metal ions, and surface passivation. The recent development of nanomaterial technology has enabled structurally stable electrocatalysts for several electrochemical reactions.135–137 However, it is still challenging to distinguish each pathway and understand the overall degradation mechanism. In the case of a water oxidation reaction using manganese-based materials, it is particularly important to check the stability of the catalyst through the leaching of metal ions. Considering the Pourbaix diagram, soluble MnVII (MnO4−) species are the most thermodynamically stable when a high anodic potential is applied to manganese oxides. While there are several reports on electrochemical stability data of manganese-based catalysts, only a few investigations have been made regarding the leaching of Mn during catalysis, particularly using in situ inductively coupled plasma-mass spectrometry (ICP-MS). Herein, we introduce some results related to the dissolution of manganese catalysts and some interesting concepts that circumvent leaching problems to improve the electrochemical stability.
Speck and colleagues investigated the stability of the four crystalline manganese oxides (α-Mn2O3, α-MnO2, β-MnO2 and δ-MnO2) by measuring the dissolution rates during electrochemical operation in alkaline electrolyte.138 The dissolution rate of Mn was measured using on-line ICP-MS during the LSV from 1 V (vs. RHE) to a potential for a 1 mA cm−2 current density. They suggested that the major origin of dissolution is the MnVII species generated from the oxidation of MnO2, that is, MnO2 + 4OH− → MnO4− + 2H2O + 3e−, E0 = 1.692 − 0.0788 × pH + 0.0197 log(MnO4−) V (vs. NHE). While the four types of manganese oxides exhibit similar onset potentials for water oxidation, the extent of the dissolution rate varied depending on the crystal structure. The β-MnO2 and δ-MnO2 samples exhibited a larger dissolution rate than the α-Mn2O3 and α-MnO2 samples. Different dissolution rates indicate that the local structure at the surface greatly affects the dissolution kinetics of Mn through the MnVII species.
Developing an acid-stable water oxidizing catalyst is more challenging because surface protonation in acidic solution could weaken the Mn–O bond and facilitate dissolution.139 Though this intrinsic instability, Nocera's group reported a kinetically stable MnOx catalyst by introducing a self-healing mechanism as part of the water oxidation catalytic cycle (Fig. 17a).140 The catalyst is generally degraded to an inactive form during the turnover between the active form and precatalyst and additional activation is needed to regenerate the inactive catalyst. On the other hand, a self-healing catalyst could self-assemble during operation, which allows infinite turnover numbers in principle. To confirm the concept of self-healing in manganese oxide catalysts, the kinetic stability of electrodeposited MnOx film at low pH was evaluated by measuring the amount of MnII ions in the presence of phosphate anions in the solution (Fig. 17b).130 They found that a higher amount of MnII ions dissolved into the electrolyte solution at the open circuit potential, compared to the anodic potential applied. In particular, the net dissolution rate of MnII ions is zero when the MnOx catalysts operated at a low current density (10 μA cm−2) in phosphate solution of pH 2.0, which indicates the validity of the self-healing process during water oxidation catalysis.
 Fig. 17  Stability and degradation mechanism proposed for manganese oxides during water oxidation. (a) Proposed self-healing mechanism. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017 National Academy of Sciences. (b) Percent of dissolved MnII ions from MnOx film as a function of time at a specific current density. Blue and red represent 0 and 10 μA cm−2 respectively. Dissolution with different electrolytes was analyzed. (left) 0.10 M Pi with 1.90 M KNO3 solution, pH 2.0, (middle) 4 M phosphoric acid, pH 0.1, (right) 4 M HCl with 0.10 M Pi, pH −0.5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis spectrum of the electrolyte after electrolysis at the indicated potentials for 1 h. (d) Potential dependence of absorption at 480 nm (MnIII species) and 545 nm (MnO4−). The black line represents the oxygen evolution current. (e) Time dependent potential spectra at a constant current density of 100 mA cm−2 (red) and 10 mA cm−2 (black). Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Used with permission from ref. 125. 
Recently, Nakamura's group reported stable electrochemical activity of a manganese oxide catalyst even after 8000 h continuous electrolysis in pH 2.0 solution at a 10 mA cm−2 current density (Fig. 17e).125 They utilized γ-MnO2, which is well known for inherent chemical stability in an acidic environment. Furthermore, the operating potential condition is carefully determined to prevent dissolution through MnO4−. As shown in Fig. 17c, the in situ UV-vis spectrum of the electrode confirmed the accumulation of surface MnIII species (480 nm absorption) before the onset of the water oxidation reaction. On the contrary, the in situ UV-vis spectrum of the electrolyte exhibited different potential dependency. When the applied potential was increased above 1.8 V (vs. RHE), absorption at 525 and 545 nm was developed, which could be assigned as MnO4− species. In other words, they suggest a stable potential window from 1.6 to 1.75 V (vs. RHE) where the water oxidation reaction occurs without dissolution through MnO4− (Fig. 17d). The experimentally determined potential limit (1.75 V vs. RHE) is 220 mV higher than the thermodynamically calculated potential from the Pourbaix diagram. They suggested that identification of a stable potential window using the in situ spectroelectrochemical technique would be a rational starting point for developing highly stable manganese-based electrocatalysts.
Through decades of continuous research, the performance of manganese-based heterogeneous catalysts has been continuously improved under all pH conditions, as summarized in Table 2. In particular, several reported catalytic performances are promising for industrial application of manganese-based materials for the electrochemical water oxidation reaction. Under acidic conditions, γ-MnO2 catalysts display high catalytic activity and excellent stability,125 by suppressing MnO4− dissolution through the consideration of the stable potential window. At neutral pH, 4 nm-sized Mn3O4 nanoparticles achieved the highest catalytic activity among transition-metal-based catalysts of 395 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, through maximizing the number of surface stabilized MnIII species.145 Under basic conditions, CoxMn3−xO4 nanoparticles with a diameter of 13.5 nm showed a very low overpotential of 246 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2, although detailed mechanistic study is needed to understand the exact origin of the activity enhancement.95
Table 2 Summary of the catalytic performances of reported manganese-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts




Catalysts
Substrate
Electrolyte (pH)

η (mV)

I (mA cm−2)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)
Stability (condition)
Ref.





a Sulfuric acid electrolytes containing 0.5 M Na2SO4 as a supporting electrolyte at pH 2 was used.
b The surface area of the catalyst on the substrate was calculated by multiplying the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) value of the catalyst and the weight of the catalyst on the substrate. CFP = carbon fiber paper, FTO = fluorine doped tin oxide, ITO = indium doped tin oxide, Pi = phosphate.




Activated MnOx
FTO
0.1 M Pi (2.5)
600
1
∼90
8 h (0.1 mA cm−2)

52



Mn0.67Sb0.33Oz
FTO
1 M H2SO4 (0.13)
580
>50
∼75
45 cycles

141



γ-MnO2
FTO
1 M H2SO4
489 ± 5
10
∼80
>8000 h (10 mA cm−2)a

125



MnCat
ITO
0.1 M KPi (7)
624
1
—
—

78



LiMnP2O7
FTO
0.5 M NaPi (7)
∼605
0.1b
∼120
100 cycles

71



γ-MnOOH
Glassy carbon
1 M Pi (7)
680
10
—
—

72



δ-MnO2
FTO
0.5 M Na2SO4 (8)
700
∼0.04
—
—

61



Mn3(PO4)2·3H2O
FTO
0.5 M NaPi (7)
680
0.316b
∼120
100 cycles

51



MnOx-300
FTO
1 M KPi (7)
330
1
92
—

108



Sub-10 nm manganese oxide nanoparticles
FTO
0.3 M NaPi (7.8)
530
5
∼73
—

54



Mn5O8 nanoparticles
FTO
0.3 M NaPi (7.8)
580
5
78.7
—

142



Manganese(II) phosphate nanosheets
Glassy carbon
0.05 M NaPi (7)
563
1
237.2
20 h (∼10 mA cm−2)

143



Heated MnOx
ITO
0.1 M KPi (7)
700
1
∼100
—

144



4 nm Mn3O4 nanoparticles
Ni foam
0.5 M NaPi (7)
395
10
74.5
>12 h (1 mA cm−2)

145



α-Mn2O3
FTO
1 M KPi
520
10
—
—

146



CaMnxOy
FTO
66 mM Pi (7)
550
∼1.5
—
2 h (∼0.5 mA cm−2)

81



Calcium–manganese oxides
ITO
0.1 M KPi (7)
450
∼0.026
101.1
—

80



MnOx/CFP
CFP
1 M KPi (7)
445
1
110
—

124



MnOx/CFP
CFP
1 M KPi (12)
360
1
55
—

124



Mn2O3
FTO
1 M NaOH
387
10
∼70
5 h (8 mA cm−2)

72



Au–MnOx thin films
Glassy carbon
1 M KOH
400
10
—
—

147



MnOx/Au–Si3N4
Au–Si3N4
0.1 M KOH
530
10
—
—

89



Cs+ intercalated δ-MnO2 nanosheets
FTO
1 M KOH
450
1
101
>3500 s (1 mA cm−2)

82



Ni-intercalated MnO2 nanosheets
Carbon paper
1 M KOH
330
10
23.7
3.5 h (10 mA cm−2)

148



Cs-MnOx-450
Pyrolytic graphite
0.1 M KOH
420
10
100
15 h

149



α-MnO2
Glassy carbon
1 M KOH
394
10
49
24 h (10 mA cm−2)

150



α-Mn2O3
FTO
1 M KOH
440
10
—
—

146



Mn 10 (350 °C)
Ti
1 M NaOH
300
32 ± 1.6
65
—

151



α-MnO2
Glassy carbon
1 M KOH
450
10
73.1
—

152



Mn3O4@CoMn2O4–CoxOy
Glassy carbon
0.1 M KOH
450
10
81
—

153



γ-MnOOH
Glassy carbon
1 M NaOH
530
10
—
—

154



CoO/hi-Mn3O4
Glassy carbon
1 M KOH
378
10
61
—

94



CoxMn3−xO4 nanoparticles
Ni foam
1 M KOH
246
10
46
10 h

95



CaMn7O12
Glassy carbon
0.1 M KOH
270
0.01
101
—

155



LaMn7O12
Glassy carbon
0.1 M KOH
300
0.01
98
—

155



Metal-ion doped MnO2 ultrathin nanosheets
Carbon fiber paper
1 M KOH
390
10
104.4
>27.8 h (20 mA cm−2)

83



3D nanoarchitectured turbostratic δ-MnOx
CNT-modified Ni foam
1 M KOH
270
10
78
1 h (19 mA cm−2)

156



MnOx-10
FTO
1 M KOH
393
1
84
—

157



Mn-NG
Graphite plate
1 M KOH
337
10
55
120 h (∼10 mA cm−2)

55



Fe–Mn–O NS
Carbon cloth
1 M KOH
273
10
63.9
2500 cycles

84



Mn3N2
Ni foam
1 M KOH
270
10
97
180 h (10 mA cm−2)

158



α/NN2-MnO2
Carbon paper
1 M NaOH
550
10
125
10 h

159



Nanocrystalline Mn2O3
Graphite carbon
0.1 M KOH
507
10
—
>10 h (5 mA cm−2)

53



α-MnO2
Graphite carbon
0.1 M KOH
490
10
77.5
7.9 h (5 mA cm−2)

66



MnOx/Au-GC
Glassy carbon
0.1 M KOH
400
0.23
—
—

89



a-MnO2/AuNP-4.4
Pyrolytic graphite carbon
0.1 M KOH
390
10
—
—

91



Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid
Glassy carbon
0.1 M KOH
∼450
10
49
1200 cycles

93



Ni2+ incorporated δ-MnO2
Glassy carbon
1 M KOH
400
10
60
15000 s (5 mA cm−2)

85



KxFe[Co0.16Mn0.84O2]
FTO
1 M KOH
375
10
56
—

87



Co2+ incorporated δ-MnO2
Glassy carbon
1 M KOH
360
10
∼46
24 h (20 mA cm−2 using CFP)

86





5. Future perspectives
The reason why manganese-based heterogeneous catalysts are scientifically and technologically interesting is mainly due to the fact that biological photosystems use only four Mn atoms to achieve the highest turnover frequency. However, the stability of the biological WOC is relatively low. Therefore, we can envision that the advantages of the high stability and scalability of heterogeneous catalysts can be synergistically combined with biological principles to realize high-efficiency water oxidation. However, despite pioneering efforts to develop manganese-based heterogeneous catalysts by many groups, there are still huge gaps between synthetic catalysts and biological photosystems in terms of both performance and atomic-level understanding. To address this, we thought that it is necessary to summarize what has been done and proved, and clarify what is still elusive. We intended to cover all recent results for synthetic manganese oxide-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for the water oxidation reaction and include possible hypotheses, some of which are still under debate.
Numerous exciting new findings about biological Mn4CaO5 clusters were still reported in 2019,34 so we anticipate that our knowledge of this ideal system will continue to be added to. It may be impossible to replicate the functions and structures of biological systems in heterogeneous systems. Our strategy involves defining the important principles of the biological WOC and translating them into synthetic systems. However, it is ironic that we still do not have any direct experimental evidence for the O–O bond formation step in the biological system, even though it is the most important and the RDS. In this regard, the investigation of heterogeneous catalysts can provide useful information to understand the mechanism by capturing intermediates and decoupling kinetic parameters.129 Because the potential energy of electrons can be precisely tuned in heterogeneous systems, new opportunities can exist in novel characterization which cannot be possible in homogeneous or biological systems.
To better understand water oxidation, the reaction rate constant of each step during water oxidation at a single catalytically active site should be measured. However, as suggested in the case of cobalt oxide by Frei's group,160 the hopping of metal oxo by virtue of exchange with metal hydroxyl on the surface can make the situation difficult. Furthermore, the fact that electrons need to be conducted presumably through the catalyst surface to the underlying electrode should always be considered.161 Considerable knowledge has been obtained from analyses of thermodynamically stable crystals of manganese oxides, as discussed in this review, but there is still much room to make metastable phases, especially on the catalyst surface. Redox-inactive elements or other electronic modifiers can strongly affect the mechanism and thus enhance the activity of manganese oxide-based catalysts.162,163 Additionally, we would like to bring attention to the effect of entropy during water oxidation, as proposed recently.164 Adding to the enthalpy-based approaches in controlling the binding of each intermediate on the catalyst surface, the significant contribution of entropy mainly involving water molecules needs to be considered.
For practical implementation, catalyst stability is very important. To interface manganese oxide catalysts with Nafion, their stability under proton-rich-acidic conditions is necessary. When deposited on the widely used Ti-based electrodes, the electronic contact and film quality of manganese oxide catalysts are important. Because most manganese oxides form Schottky barriers with Ti substrates, interlayers might be necessary to guarantee efficient ET.165 Additionally, accelerated testing and a corresponding model should be investigated to estimate the lifetime of manganese-based heterogeneous catalysts.166
We hope that this review provides useful guidance for future research directions of manganese oxide catalysts for water oxidation. With the development of new characterization methods and synthetic breakthroughs, we expect that more exciting science that builds on the approaches discussed here will be revealed.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Creative Materials Discovery Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (NRF-2017M3D1A1039377), the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (NRF-2017R1A2B3012003), the Industrial Strategic Technology Development Program (10062218, Transition metal-based flexible electrode for hydrogen production using super-saturated alloy) funded By the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy (MOTIE, Korea), and the KIST-SNU Joint Research Lab project (2V06170) under the KIST Institutional Program funded by the Korea government (Ministry of Science, ICT & Future Planning). K. T. N. appreciates the support from the Institute of Engineering Research, Research Institute of Advanced Materials (RIAM) and Soft Foundry at Seoul National University. S. P. appreciates the support from the POSCO Science Fellowship of POSCO TJ Park Foundation.
References
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
J. John, D.-K. Lee and U. Sim, Nano Convergence, 2019, 6, 15 CrossRef PubMed .
C. W. Lee, C. Kim and B. K. Min, Nano Convergence, 2019, 6, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. T. Suen, S. F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y. J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
H. Dau, C. Limberg, T. Reier, M. Risch, S. Roggan and P. Strasser, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 724–761 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Hong, M. Risch, K. A. Stoerzinger, A. Grimaud, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1404–1427 RSC .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018–1027 RSC .
R. Matheu, P. Garrido-Barros, M. Gil-Sepulcre, M. Z. Ertem, X. Sala, C. Gimbert-Suriñach and A. Llobet, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 331–341 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. McCrory, S. Jung, J. C. Peters and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16977–16987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia, B. Zhao and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17587–17603 RSC .
M. Tahir, L. Pan, F. Idrees, X. Zhang, L. Wang, J.-J. Zou and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 136–157 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lee, J. Suntivich, K. J. May, E. E. Perry and Y. Shao-Horn, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 399–404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Reier, M. Oezaslan and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1765–1772 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. L. Smith, B. Sporinova, R. D. Fagan, S. Trudel and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 1654–1659 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shan, Y. Zheng, B. Shi, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2719–2730 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 2000, 45, 2377–2385 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Karlsson and A. Cornell, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 2982–3028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, Y. Li, H. Wang, Y. Liang, J. Z. Wu, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier, F. Wei and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8452–8455 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Zheng, Z. Wang, Z. Lu, A. Vasileff and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 463–466 RSC .
M. M. Najafpour, G. Renger, M. Holynska, A. N. Moghaddam, E. M. Aro, R. Carpentier, H. Nishihara, J. J. Eaton-Rye, J. R. Shen and S. I. Allakhverdiev, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 2886–2936 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J. R. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–60 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vass and S. Styring, Biochemistry, 1991, 30, 830–839 CrossRef CAS .
P. Geijer, F. Morvaridi and S. Styring, Biochemistry, 2001, 40, 10881–10891 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Vinyard, G. M. Ananyev and G. C. Dismukes, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2013, 82, 577–606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Yocum, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2008, 252, 296–305 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rappaport, N. Ishida, M. Sugiura and A. Boussac, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2520–2524 RSC .
B. Kok, B. Forbush and M. McGloin, Photochem. Photobiol., 1970, 11, 457–475 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Pantazis, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 9477–9507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Suga, F. Akita, M. Sugahara, M. Kubo, Y. Nakajima, T. Nakane, K. Yamashita, Y. Umena, M. Nakabayashi, T. Yamane, T. Nakano, M. Suzuki, T. Masuda, S. Inoue, T. Kimura, T. Nomura, S. Yonekura, L.-J. Yu, T. Sakamoto, T. Motomura, J.-H. Chen, Y. Kato, T. Noguchi, K. Tono, Y. Joti, T. Kameshima, T. Hatsui, E. Nango, R. Tanaka, H. Naitow, Y. Matsuura, A. Yamashita, M. Yamamoto, O. Nureki, M. Yabashi, T. Ishikawa, S. Iwata and J. R. Shen, Nature, 2017, 543, 131–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kern, R. Chatterjee, I. D. Young, F. D. Fuller, L. Lassalle, M. Ibrahim, S. Gul, T. Fransson, A. S. Brewster, R. Alonso-Mori, R. Hussein, M. Zhang, L. Douthit, C. d. Lichtenberg, M. H. Cheah, D. Shevela, J. Wersig, I. Seuffert, D. Sokaras, E. Pastor, C. Weninger, T. Kroll, R. G. Sierra, P. Aller, A. Butryn, A. M. Orville, M. Liang, A. Batyuk, J. E. Koglin, S. Carbajo, S. Boutet, N. W. Moriarty, J. M. Holton, H. Dobbek, P. D. Adams, U. Bergmann, N. K. Sauter, A. Zouni, J. Messinger, J. Yano and V. K. Yachandra, Nature, 2018, 563, 421–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Suga, F. Akita, K. Yamashita, Y. Nakajima, G. Ueno, H. Li, T. Yamane, K. Hirata, Y. Umena, S. Yonekura, L.-J. Yu, H. Murakami, T. Nomura, T. Kimura, M. Kubo, S. Baba, T. Kumasaka, K. Tono, M. Yabashi, H. Isobe, K. Yamaguchi, M. Yamamoto, H. Ago and J.-R. Shen, Science, 2019, 366, 334–338 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Shafaat, O. Rüdiger, H. Ogata and W. Lubitz, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2013, 1827, 986–1002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. Sousa, R. J. Alves, M. A. Ribeiro, J. B. Pereira-Leal, M. Teixeira and M. M. Pereira, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 2012, 1817, 629–637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Eady, Chem. Rev., 1996, 96, 3013–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. A. Armstrong, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, Ser. B, 2008, 363, 1263–1270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang and L. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47, 14381–14387 RSC .
G. Davies, Coord. Chem. Rev., 1969, 4, 199–224 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Pace, R. Stranger and S. Petrie, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 7179–7189 RSC .
J. E. Post, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1999, 96, 3447–3454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Suib, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 479–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Kitchaev, S. T. Dacek, W. Sun and G. Ceder, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2672–2681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Pourbaix, Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, National Association of Corrosion Engineers, Houston, TX, 2nd English edn,  1974 Search PubMed .
B. M. Hunter, H. B. Gray and A. M. Muller, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14120–14136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sun, D. A. Kitchaev, D. Kramer and G. Ceder, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Devaraj and N. Munichandraiah, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 4406–4417 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cho, Y. Park, Y.-K. Hong and D.-H. Ha, Nano Convergence, 2019, 6, 17 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Najafpour, T. Ehrenberg, M. Wiechen and P. Kurz, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2233–2237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jin, J. Park, J. Lee, K. D. Yang, G. K. Pradhan, U. Sim, D. Jeong, H. L. Jang, S. Park, D. Kim, N. E. Sung, S. H. Kim, S. Han and K. T. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 7435–7443 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Huynh, C. Shi, S. J. Billinge and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14887–14904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Kuo, I. M. Mosa, A. S. Poyraz, S. Biswas, A. M. El-Sawy, W. Song, Z. Luo, S.-Y. Chen, J. F. Rusling, J. He and S. L. Suib, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 1693–1699 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jin, A. Chu, J. Park, D. Jeong, S. E. Jerng, U. Sim, H. Y. Jeong, C. W. Lee, Y. S. Park, K. D. Yang, G. Kumar Pradhan, D. Kim, N. E. Sung, S. Hee Kim and K. T. Nam, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10279 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Guan, Z. Duan, F. Zhang, S. D. Kelly, R. Si, M. Dupuis, Q. Huang, J. Q. Chen, C. Tang and C. Li, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 870–877 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pittkowski, P. Krtil and J. Rossmeisl, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2018, 12, 218–224 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. Zhu, G. J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
I. C. Man, H. Y. Su, F. Calle-Vallejo, H. A. Hansen, J. I. Martinez, N. G. Inoglu, J. Kitchin, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2011, 3, 1159–1165 CrossRef CAS .
M. Busch, E. Ahlberg and I. Panas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 288–292 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, N. M. Vargas-Barbosa, E. A. Hernandez-Pagan and T. E. Mallouk, Small, 2011, 7, 2087–2093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Takashima, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1519–1527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gorlin and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13612–13614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhou, A. Izgorodin, R. K. Hocking, L. Spiccia and D. R. MacFarlane, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1013–1021 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mette, A. Bergmann, J.-P. Tessonnier, M. Hävecker, L. Yao, T. Ressler, R. Schlögl, P. Strasser and M. Behrens, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 851–862 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fekete, R. K. Hocking, S. L. Y. Chang, C. Italiano, A. F. Patti, F. Arena and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2222–2232 RSC .
Y. Meng, W. Song, H. Huang, Z. Ren, S. Y. Chen and S. L. Suib, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 11452–11464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Robinson, Y. B. Go, M. Mui, G. Gardner, Z. Zhang, D. Mastrogiovanni, E. Garfunkel, J. Li, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 3494–3501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Suntivich, K. J. May, H. A. Gasteiger, J. B. Goodenough and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2011, 334, 1383–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Maitra, B. Naidu, A. Govindaraj and C. N. R. Rao, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 11704–11707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Cady, G. Gardner, Z. O. Maron, M. Retuerto, Y. B. Go, S. Segan, M. Greenblatt and G. C. Dismukes, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 3403–3410 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, H. Kim, K. Jin, B. J. Lee, Y. S. Park, H. Kim, I. Park, K. D. Yang, H. Y. Jeong, J. Kim, K. T. Hong, H. W. Jang, K. Kang and K. T. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4201–4211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. F. Smith, B. J. Deibert, S. Kaushik, G. Gardner, S. Hwang, H. Wang, J. F. Al-Sharab, E. Garfunkel, L. Fabris, J. Li and G. C. Dismukes, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2089–2099 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zaharieva, P. Chernev, M. Risch, K. Klingan, M. Kohlhoff, A. Fischer and H. Dau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7081–7089 RSC .
A. Bergmann, I. Zaharieva, H. Dau and P. Strasser, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2745–2755 RSC .
A. Indra, P. W. Menezes, I. Zaharieva, E. Baktash, J. Pfrommer, M. Schwarze, H. Dau and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13206–13210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jin, M. Park, S. J. Shin, Y. Jo, M. G. Kim, H. Kim, Y. M. Kang and S. J. Hwang, Small, 2020, 16, 1903265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Morgan Chan, D. A. Kitchaev, J. Nelson Weker, C. Schnedermann, K. Lim, G. Ceder, W. Tumas, M. F. Toney and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 5261–5268 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Zaharieva, M. M. Najafpour, M. Wiechen, M. Haumann, P. Kurz and H. Dau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2400–2408 RSC .
A. Ramírez, P. Bogdanoff, D. Friedrich and S. Fiechter, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 282–289 CrossRef .
D. Gonzalez-Flores, I. Zaharieva, J. Heidkamp, P. Chernev, E. Martinez-Moreno, C. Pasquini, M. R. Mohammadi, K. Klingan, U. Gernet, A. Fischer and H. Dau, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 379–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Simchi, K. A. Cooley, J. Ohms, L. Huang, P. Kurz and S. E. Mohney, Inorg. Chem., 2018, 57, 785–792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kang, L. Vernisse, R. C. Remsing, A. C. Thenuwara, S. L. Shumlas, I. G. McKendry, M. L. Klein, E. Borguet, M. J. Zdilla and D. R. Strongin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1863–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ye, T. Li, G. Ma, Y. Dong and X. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704083 CrossRef .
Y. Teng, X.-D. Wang, J.-F. Liao, W.-G. Li, H.-Y. Chen, Y.-J. Dong and D.-B. Kuang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802463 CrossRef .
A. C. Thenuwara, E. B. Cerkez, S. L. Shumlas, N. H. Attanayake, I. G. McKendry, L. Frazer, E. Borguet, Q. Kang, R. C. Remsing, M. L. Klein, M. J. Zdilla and D. R. Strongin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 10381–10385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Thenuwara, S. L. Shumlas, N. H. Attanayake, Y. V. Aulin, I. G. McKendry, Q. Qiao, Y. Zhu, E. Borguet, M. J. Zdilla and D. R. Strongin, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7739–7743 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. McKendry, L. J. Mohamad, A. C. Thenuwara, T. Marshall, E. Borguet, D. R. Strongin and M. J. Zdilla, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2280–2285 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Mohammad, M. I. Awad, M. S. El-Deab, T. Okajima and T. Ohsaka, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 4351–4358 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gorlin, C. J. Chung, J. D. Benck, D. Nordlund, L. Seitz, T. C. Weng, D. Sokaras, B. M. Clemens and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4920–4926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Seitz, T. J. Hersbach, D. Nordlund and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4178–4183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Kuo, W. Li, L. Pahalagedara, A. M. El-Sawy, D. Kriz, N. Genz, C. Guild, T. Ressler, S. L. Suib and J. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2345–2350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Frydendal, M. Busch, N. B. Halck, E. A. Paoli, P. Krtil, I. Chorkendorff and J. Rossmeisl, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 149–154 CrossRef CAS .
M.-R. Gao, Y.-F. Xu, J. Jiang, Y.-R. Zheng and S.-H. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2930–2933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Guo, Y. Zheng, J. Ran, F. Xie, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 8539–8543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao, J. Luo, J. Shi, Z. Huang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701820 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M. Najafpour, B. Haghighi, D. J. Sedigh and M. Z. Ghobadi, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 16683–16686 RSC .
B. J. Deibert, J. Zhang, P. F. Smith, K. W. Chapman, S. Rangan, D. Banerjee, K. Tan, H. Wang, N. Pasquale, F. Chen, K. B. Lee, G. C. Dismukes, Y. J. Chabal and J. Li, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 14218–14228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bernardini, F. Bellatreccia, A. Casanova Municchia, G. Della Ventura and A. Sodo, J. Raman Spectrosc., 2019, 50, 873–888 CAS .
H. Y. Su, Y. Gorlin, I. C. Man, F. Calle-Vallejo, J. K. Norskov, T. F. Jaramillo and J. Rossmeisl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14010–14022 RSC .
Y. Gorlin, B. Lassalle-Kaiser, J. D. Benck, S. Gul, S. M. Webb, V. K. Yachandra, J. Yano and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 8525–8534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xi, C. Schwanke, J. Xiao, F. F. Abdi, I. Zaharieva and K. M. Lange, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 12003–12009 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, S. Lee, K. W. Nam, J. Shin, S. Y. Lim, W. Cho, K. Suzuki, Y. Oshima, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno and J. W. Choi, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 5488–5494 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-F. Li and Z.-P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 1783–1792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, D. Ding, X. Li, G. H. Waller, X. Xiong, M. A. El-Sayed and M. Liu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 6608–6619 CrossRef CAS .
H. An, Z. Chen, J. Yang, Z. Feng, X. Wang, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Catal., 2018, 367, 53–61 CrossRef CAS .
E. Silvester, A. Manceau and V. A. Drits, Am. Mineral., 1997, 82, 962–978 CAS .
T. Takashima, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 18153–18156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, H. Chen, Q. Daniel, B. Philippe, F. Yu, M. Valvo, Y. Li, R. B. Ambre, P. Zhang, F. Li, H. Rensmo and L. Sun, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 6311–6322 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kakizaki, H. Ooka, T. Hayashi, A. Yamaguchi, N. Bonnet-Mercier, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706319 CrossRef .
Z. N. Zahran, E. A. Mohamed and Y. Naruta, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4470–4476 CrossRef CAS .
I. Zaharieva, D. González-Flores, B. Asfari, C. Pasquini, M. R. Mohammadi, K. Klingan, I. Zizak, S. Loos, P. Chernev and H. Dau, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2433–2443 RSC .
M. F. Tesch, S. A. Bonke, T. E. Jones, M. N. Shaker, J. Xiao, K. Skorupska, R. Mom, J. Melder, P. Kurz, A. Knop-Gericke, R. Schlogl, R. K. Hocking and A. N. Simonov, Angew. Chem., 2019, 58, 3426–3432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Warren, T. A. Tronic and J. M. Mayer, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6961–7001 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ooka, T. Takashima, A. Yamaguchi, T. Hayashi and R. Nakamura, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 7149–7161 RSC .
D. W. Shaffer, Y. Xie and J. J. Concepcion, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6170–6193 RSC .
M. Wiechen, M. M. Najafpour, S. I. Allakhverdiev and L. Spiccia, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2203–2212 RSC .
R. Parsons, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1951, 47, 1332–1344 RSC .

          S. Trasatti, Handbook of Fuel Cells,  2010 Search PubMed .
M. Balamurugan, N. Saravanan, H. Ha, Y. H. Lee and K. T. Nam, Nano Convergence, 2018, 5, 18 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Mráz, S. Václav and S. Tichý, Electrochim. Acta, 1973, 18, 551–554 CrossRef .
M. Morita, C. Iwakura and H. Tamura, Electrochim. Acta, 1977, 22, 325–328 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morita, C. Iwakura and H. Tamura, Electrochim. Acta, 1979, 24, 357–362 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kishi and K. Shiota, Surf. Coat. Technol., 1988, 34, 287–293 CrossRef CAS .
J. Melder, S. Mebs, P. A. Heizmann, R. Lang, H. Dau and P. Kurz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 25333–25346 RSC .
A. Li, H. Ooka, N. Bonnet, T. Hayashi, Y. Sun, Q. Jiang, C. Li, H. Han and R. Nakamura, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5054–5058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hayashi, A. Yamaguchi, K. Hashimoto and R. Nakamura, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 13760–13763 RSC .
K. Jin, H. Seo, T. Hayashi, M. Balamurugan, D. Jeong, Y. K. Go, J. S. Hong, K. H. Cho, H. Kakizaki, N. Bonnet-Mercier, M. G. Kim, S. H. Kim, R. Nakamura and K. T. Nam, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2277–2285 CrossRef CAS .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Seo, K. Jin, S. Park, K. H. Cho, H. Ha, K.-G. Lee, Y. H. Lee, D. T. Nguyen, H. Randriamahazaka, J.-S. Lee and K. T. Nam, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10595–10604 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huynh, D. K. Bediako and D. G. Nocera, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6002–6010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Zandi and T. W. Hamann, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 778–783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, M. de Respinis and H. Frei, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 362–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, Q. Daniel, L. Fan, T. Liu, Q. Meng and L. Sun, iScience, 2018, 4, 144–152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kibsgaard and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 430–433 CrossRef .
H. Jin, X. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12761–12769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ling, P. Da, X. Zheng, B. Ge, Z. Hu, M. Wu, X.-W. Du, W.-B. Hu, M. Jaroniec and S.-Z. Qiao, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaau6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yao, S. Hu, W. Chen, Z.-Q. Huang, W. Wei, T. Yao, R. Liu, K. Zang, X. Wang, G. Wu, W. Yuan, T. Yuan, B. Zhu, W. Liu, Z. Li, D. He, Z. Xue, Y. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Dong, C.-R. Chang, Y. Chen, X. Hong, J. Luo, S. Wei, W.-X. Li, P. Strasser, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
F. D. Speck, P. G. Santori, F. Jaouen and S. Cherevko, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 25267–25277 CrossRef CAS .
W. Stumm, Colloids Surf., A, 1997, 120, 143–166 CrossRef CAS .
C. Costentin and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 13380–13384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, A. Shinde, J. H. Montoya, A. Singh, S. Gul, J. Yano, Y. Ye, E. J. Crumlin, M. H. Richter, J. K. Cooper, H. S. Stein, J. A. Haber, K. A. Persson and J. M. Gregoire, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10938–10948 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jeong, K. Jin, S. E. Jerng, H. Seo, D. Kim, S. H. Nahm, S. H. Kim and K. T. Nam, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4624–4628 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, X. Gao, X. Yao, M. Chen, G. Zhou, J. Qi, X. Zhao, W. Wang, W. Zhang and R. Cao, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 191–197 RSC .
M. V. Abrashev, P. Chernev, P. Kubella, M. R. Mohammadi, C. Pasquini, H. Dau and I. Zaharieva, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17022–17036 RSC .
K. H. Cho, H. Seo, S. Park, Y. H. Lee, M. Y. Lee, N. H. Cho and K. T. Nam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910424 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramírez, P. Hillebrand, D. Stellmach, M. M. May, P. Bogdanoff and S. Fiechter, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14073–14081 CrossRef .
R. Frydendal, L. C. Seitz, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng, D. Nordlund, I. Chorkendorff, I. E. L. Stephens and T. F. Jaramillo, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 230, 22–28 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, X. Su, L. Zhang, P. Kerns, L. Achola, V. Hayes, R. Quardokus, S. L. Suib and J. He, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 1689–1700 CrossRef CAS .
I. M. Mosa, S. Biswas, A. M. El-Sawy, V. Botu, C. Guild, W. Song, R. Ramprasad, J. F. Rusling and S. L. Suib, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 620–631 RSC .
G. Yan, Y. Lian, Y. Gu, C. Yang, H. Sun, Q. Mu, Q. Li, W. Zhu, X. Zheng, M. Chen, J. Zhu, Z. Deng and Y. Peng, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 10137–10147 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Browne, H. Nolan, G. S. Duesberg, P. E. Colavita and M. E. G. Lyons, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2408–2415 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Q. Han, Y.-R. Liu, W.-H. Hu, B. Dong, X. Li, X. Shang, Y.-M. Chai, Y.-Q. Liu and C.-G. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 163, H67–H73 CrossRef .
Z. Luo, E. Irtem, M. Ibanez, R. Nafria, S. Marti-Sanchez, A. Genc, M. de la Mata, Y. Liu, D. Cadavid, J. Llorca, J. Arbiol, T. Andreu, J. R. Morante and A. Cabot, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 17435–17444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Jeon, S. J. Ahn, M. S. Jee, S. S. Yoon, Y. J. Hwang and B. K. Min, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, F3113–F3118 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yamada, H. Fujii, A. Takamatsu, H. Ikeno, K. Wada, H. Tsukasaki, S. Kawaguchi, S. Mori and S. Yagi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603004 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhang, Y. Li, M. Valvo, L. Fan, Q. Daniel, P. Zhang, L. Wang and L. Sun, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 4472–4478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Walter, P. W. Menezes, S. Loos, H. Dau and M. Driess, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 2554–2561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Walter, P. W. Menezes, S. Orthmann, J. Schuch, P. Connor, B. Kaiser, M. Lerch and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 698–702 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Gupta, A. Bhandari, S. Saha, J. Bhattacharya and R. G. S. Pala, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 22345–22357 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Pham, M.-J. Cheng, H. Frei and L.-W. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5610–5617 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, I. R. Choe, Y. O. Kim, S. D. Namgung, K. Jin, H. Y. Ahn, T. Sung, J. Y. Kwon, Y. S. Lee and K. T. Nam, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702185 CrossRef .
S. Y. Lim, S. Park, S. W. Im, H. Ha, H. Seo and K. T. Nam, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 235–244 CrossRef .
J. S. Hong, H. Seo, Y. H. Lee, K. H. Cho, C. Ko, S. Park and K. T. Nam, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1900733 CrossRef CAS .
K.-G. Lee, M. Balamurugan, S. Park, H. Ha, K. Jin, H. Seo and K. T. Nam, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1918–1929 CrossRef CAS .
M. Y. Lee, H. Ha, K. H. Cho, H. Seo, S. Park, Y. H. Lee, S.-J. Kwon, T.-W. Lee and K. T. Nam, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1237–1245 CrossRef CAS .
C. Spoeri, J. T. H. Kwan, A. Bonakdarpour, D. P. Wilkinson and P. Strasser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 5994–6021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Sunghak Park
	Sunghak Park is currently a postdoctoral researcher in Prof. Ki Tae Nam's group at Seoul National University. He received his PhD in Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University under the supervision of Prof. Ki Tae Nam in 2019. His research interest is (photo)electrochemical energy conversion using nanomaterials.

Yoon Ho Lee
	Yoon Ho Lee is a PhD candidate in Materials Science & Engineering at Seoul National University under the supervision of Professor Ki Tae Nam. He received his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Seoul National University in 2018. His main research interest is water oxidation catalysts and in situ spectroscopic analysis.

Seungwoo Choi
	Seungwoo Choi is a PhD candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at Seoul National University under the supervision of Professor Ki Tae Nam. He received his BS in Materials Science and Engineering from Korea University in 2015. His main research interest is electrochemical organic synthesis and industrial-scale production.

Ki Tae Nam
	Ki Tae Nam has been a professor at Seoul National University since 2010. He received his PhD from Massachusetts Institute of Technology in 2007 and then conducted postdoctoral research at Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory. His main research interest is in bio-inspired approaches for designing and synthesizing functional materials for energy and optical applications. Recently, his research group has focused on the mechanistic understanding of electrochemical water oxidation and the synthesis of chiral nanoparticles by using biomolecules.

Broader context
Solar-to-fuel conversion is an appealing strategy to produce environmentally friendly fuels and attain sustainable energy systems. The water oxidation reaction plays a central role in the conversion of water/carbon dioxide molecules into hydrogen/hydrocarbon fuels by providing electrons and protons. However, this reaction, which involves multiple proton-coupled electron transfer steps and the O–O bond formation step, currently limits solar-to-fuel conversion because of its sluggish kinetics. In nature, the water-oxidizing complex in photosystem II efficiently catalyzes the water oxidation reaction under mild conditions despite containing only manganese, calcium, and oxygen. The unique capabilities of biological systems have inspired researchers to design manganese-based heterogeneous artificial catalysts for water oxidation. However, current man-made manganese-based catalysts exhibit limited catalytic performance and their reaction mechanism is not well understood. The diverse chemical and structural properties of manganese-based compounds provide numerous degrees of freedom to design efficient catalysts, but also complicate the pathways to attaining this goal. Here, we briefly introduce the fundamental properties of manganese and the characteristics of the biological water-oxidizing complex. Based on previous results, we present the important features of highly active manganese-based heterogeneous water oxidation catalysts and current understanding of their underlying reaction mechanism to guide future research.


 	Fig. 1  Characteristics of the biological Mn4CaO5 cluster and synthetic manganese oxides. (a) Crystal structure of the Mn4CaO5 cluster and its ligand environment. (b) Bond length differences (in Å) between metal atoms and oxo bridges or water molecules. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2011 Nature Publishing Group. (c) Kok cycle: the five intermediate states Si (i = 0–4). Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. (d) Crystal structures of various MnO2 polymorphs. The purple and yellow spheres and surrounding octahedra denote spin-up and spin-down Mn atoms and MnO6 octahedra. The black spheres and gray polyhedra denote potential intercalation sites. The red spheres denote the O atoms. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society. (e) Calculated Pourbaix diagram of Mn–O–H phases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2019 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 2  Crystal structures of the biological Mn4CaO5 cluster and various manganese oxides. Purple, brown, black, red, and yellow spheres are MnII, MnIII, MnIV, O, and Ca ions, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Direct correlation between the electrocatalytic activity and MnIII species which are stabilized in a distorted crystal structure. (a) Crystal structure of Li2MnP2O7. The inset shows the locally distorted Mn octahedra in the structure. (b) Mn K-edge XANES spectra of Li2−xMnP2O7 (x = 0, 0.3, 0.5, 1) powder. The inset clearly shows that the average oxidation state is gradually changed upon delithiation. (c) Polarization-corrected cyclic voltammetry curves of Li2−xMnP2O7 (x = 0, 0.3, 0.5, 1) in phosphate buffer (pH 7.0). (d) Current density at a fixed potential (680 mV overpotential) and derived distortion index value as a function of the delithiation amount (x) in Li2−xMnP2O7. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Detailed investigation about the geometrical effects of MnIIIO6 octahedra in synthetic manganese oxide catalysts for the electrochemical water oxidation reaction. (a) Catalytic activities of various polymorphs of manganese oxides. (b) Description of corner-shared MnIII octahedra in δ-MnO2 (top) and the biological Mn4CaOx cluster (bottom). Structural rearrangement forms active species (corner-sharing MnIII octahedra) on the surface of δ-MnO2. (c) Demonstration of the crystal structure and d-orbital electronic configuration of Mn2O3 and γ-MnOOH. The water binding sites, binding affinity, and kinetic exchange rate depend on the types of symmetry of the MnIII octahedral unit. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Calculated electronic structure of disordered δ-MnO2. (a) Crystal structures of Mn3O4 and δ-MnO2. (b) Oxidation state of Mn and O as electrons are removed from the model system. (c) Band structure of the activated disordered δ-MnO2 and δ-MnO2. (d) Calculated average valence state of Mn and O. Reprinted with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2018 National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrocatalytic activity improvement by interfacial engineering between manganese oxides and heteroatoms such as Au and Co. Comparison of MnOx-GC, MnOx/Au-GC, and Au/MnOx-GC through (a) cyclic voltammetry and (b) Mn L-edge XAS measurements. (c) Mn K-edge XAS spectra of MnO-GC and MnO/Au-GC. Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (d) XPS O 1s spectra of CoO/hi-Mn3O4, CoO/Mn3O4 and hi-Mn3O4. (e) NEXAFS of CoO/hi-Mn3O4 and hi-Mn3O4. (f) Polarization curves of CoO/hi-Mn3O4 and other catalysts as a comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Mn3O4	Disordered δ-MnO296	0.1 M LiClO4 pH 6.3	SEM, TEM – morphology change	δ-MnO2100	0.1 M KOH	
In situ XAS
γ-MnOOH	Disordered structure72	1 M NaOH	XRD, Raman – decreased intensity	—	—	—
HRTEM – disordered surface
α-Mn2O3	(1) α-Mn2O353	(1) 0.1 M KOH	(1) XRD, TEM – no obvious changes	α-Mn2O3105	0.1 M KOH	
In situ Raman
(2) Disordered δ-MnO296	(2) 0.1 M LiClO4 pH 6.3	(2) SEM, TEM – morphology change
α-MnO2	α-MnO266	0.1 M KOH	TEM – no obvious changes	—	—	—
δ-MnO2 (triclinic)	δ-MnO2 (triclinic)74	0.1 M phosphate pH 7	EXAFS – no obvious changes	δ-MnO2 (hexagonal)105	0.1 M KOH	
In situ Raman

 	Fig. 7  Structure of the manganese oxide catalysts during the water oxidation reaction. (a) Cyclic voltammetry of as-prepared MnOx/Au–Si3N4 and Au–Si3N4. (b and c) Potential dependent in situ XANES and in situ EXAFS spectra of as-prepared MnOx/Au–Si3N4. The red and blue lines are obtained using an applied potential of 0.7 V and 1.8 V (vs. RHE), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Structural changes of manganese oxides during water oxidation studied through in situ Raman spectroscopy. (a and b) LSV curves and Tafel plots of Bir (purple), Bix (blue) and Bir/Bix (red). (c) In situ Raman spectra under the anodic potential. The right panel shows the Gaussian peak fitting of spectra collected from the open circuit condition and above the water oxidation onset, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  
In situ UV-vis analysis of a δ-MnO2 film in a 0.5 M Na2SO4 aqueous solution and its pH dependent behavior. (a) Difference in the UV-vis spectra of a δ-MnO2 film electrode based on the applied potential. (b) Absorbance at 510 nm (filled circles) and 800 nm (open circles) depending on the potential. The j–U curve is shown as a solid line. (c) pH dependence of the onset potential for absorbance at 510 nm (blue) and current density (red) from pH 4 to pH 13. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  High catalytic activity of manganese oxide nanoparticles with stabilized MnIII species during water oxidation. (a) TEM image of various sizes of nanoparticles (10 nm, 15 nm, 20 nm, ∼60–80 nm). Scale bar: 50 nm. (b) Comparison of electrokinetic analysis between nanoparticles and bulk manganese oxide in 0.3 M phosphate buffer at pH 7.8. (Left: cyclic voltammetry curves, right: Tafel plots near the onset potential). (c) Monomeric Mn species observed through parallel mode X-band EPR spectra (inset: perpendicular mode EPR) in the resting state and under electrolysis at 1.3 V (vs. NHE). Reprinted with permission from ref. 54. Copyright 2015 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 11  Comparison of active manganese oxide (MnCat) and inactive manganese oxide (Inactive) in their structure and oxidation state change rates. (a) XANES and (b) EXAFS of active disordered δ-MnO2. (c) XANES and (d) EXAFS of inactive δ-MnO2. (e) Average Mn oxidation state at different applied potentials analyzed by freeze–quench XAS. (f) Time-resolved UV-vis absorbance of disordered δ-MnO2 (red) and inactive δ-MnO2 (blue) upon a potential transition either from OCP to 1.4 V (vs. NHE) or 1.4 V to OCP. (g) Mn oxidation state change observed through the X-ray fluorescence intensity by excitation at 6553.3 eV during a potential jump from 1.4 V to 0.6 V. The transient for absorbance at 470 nm is detected. Reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2016 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Electronic states of the manganese oxides catalysts during the water oxidation reaction. (a) Cyclic voltammetry curves for MnOx (red) and the Au/Si3N4 support (gray) in borate buffer (pH 9.2). Vertical dashed lines show the potentials used for in situ spectroscopic analysis. Bars with oxidation states exhibit the evolution of the Mn valence state changes derived from the spectroscopic data. (b) In situ energy loss spectra of scattered photons (RIXS) under various applied potential conditions (black: no applied potential, gray: 0.75 V, red: 1.25 V, light green: 1.45 V, dark green: 1.75 V, dark blue: 1.85 V, and turquoise: 2.25 V vs. RHE). The origins of the spectra are highlighted with background colors. (c) O K-edge in situ XAS of the manganese oxide with a Nafion membrane impregnated with phosphate buffer (pH 7.0) at various potentials. Inset shows the intensity change at 529 and 532 eV as a function of potential. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Used with permission from ref. 112.	 

 	Fig. 13  Various kinds of elementary steps during the water oxidation reaction. (a) Different oxidation pathways coupled with proton transfer. Reproduced from ref. 114 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of MnIII species generation on the (101) surface of β-MnO2 through a charge rearrangement process. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Used with permission from ref. 109. (c) Possible routes for the O–O bond formation step in Ca inserted δ-MnO2 (green: Ca, purple: Mn, red: O, and light gray: H). Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from The Royal Society of Chemistry. Copyright 2014 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 14  Summary of the current atomic-scale mechanistic understanding of manganese-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts. The RDS is depicted by a thick dashed line for each of the proposed mechanistic pathways. (a) Mechanistic pathways with monomeric active sites. The RDS of most crystalline manganese oxides is the charge accumulation step from MnII to MnIII. (b) Mechanistic pathways with multimeric active sites. Charge rearrangement through the charge disproportionation process is important for understanding the underlying reaction mechanism.	 

 	Fig. 15  Tafel slopes of reported manganese-based heterogeneous electrocatalysts for the water oxidation reaction.52,55,65,71,73–75,80,88,108,120–128	 

 	Fig. 16  Unique mechanistic pathway of sub 10 nm-sized manganese oxide nanoparticles with electrochemical kinetic analysis (a) and potential dependent in situ spectroscopic results (b, c, and d). (b) EPR peak intensity change with the cyclic voltammetry curve. (c) Mn K-edge in situ XANES spectra and estimated average oxidation state change. (d) In situ UV-vis spectra change. Differential spectra at each potential are obtained by subtracting the spectrum obtained at 0.8 V (vs. NHE). (e) Suggested mechanism of manganese oxide nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  Stability and degradation mechanism proposed for manganese oxides during water oxidation. (a) Proposed self-healing mechanism. Reprinted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017 National Academy of Sciences. (b) Percent of dissolved MnII ions from MnOx film as a function of time at a specific current density. Blue and red represent 0 and 10 μA cm−2 respectively. Dissolution with different electrolytes was analyzed. (left) 0.10 M Pi with 1.90 M KNO3 solution, pH 2.0, (middle) 4 M phosphoric acid, pH 0.1, (right) 4 M HCl with 0.10 M Pi, pH −0.5. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) UV-vis spectrum of the electrolyte after electrolysis at the indicated potentials for 1 h. (d) Potential dependence of absorption at 480 nm (MnIII species) and 545 nm (MnO4−). The black line represents the oxygen evolution current. (e) Time dependent potential spectra at a constant current density of 100 mA cm−2 (red) and 10 mA cm−2 (black). Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Used with permission from ref. 125.	 


Activated MnOx	FTO	0.1 M Pi (2.5)	600	1	∼90	8 h (0.1 mA cm−2)	
52

Mn0.67Sb0.33Oz	FTO	1 M H2SO4 (0.13)	580	>50	∼75	45 cycles	
141

γ-MnO2	FTO	1 M H2SO4	489 ± 5	10	∼80	>8000 h (10 mA cm−2)a	
125

MnCat	ITO	0.1 M KPi (7)	624	1	—	—	
78

LiMnP2O7	FTO	0.5 M NaPi (7)	∼605	0.1b	∼120	100 cycles	
71

γ-MnOOH	Glassy carbon	1 M Pi (7)	680	10	—	—	
72

δ-MnO2	FTO	0.5 M Na2SO4 (8)	700	∼0.04	—	—	
61

Mn3(PO4)2·3H2O	FTO	0.5 M NaPi (7)	680	0.316b	∼120	100 cycles	
51

MnOx-300	FTO	1 M KPi (7)	330	1	92	—	
108

Sub-10 nm manganese oxide nanoparticles	FTO	0.3 M NaPi (7.8)	530	5	∼73	—	
54

Mn5O8 nanoparticles	FTO	0.3 M NaPi (7.8)	580	5	78.7	—	
142

Manganese(II) phosphate nanosheets	Glassy carbon	0.05 M NaPi (7)	563	1	237.2	20 h (∼10 mA cm−2)	
143

Heated MnOx	ITO	0.1 M KPi (7)	700	1	∼100	—	
144

4 nm Mn3O4 nanoparticles	Ni foam	0.5 M NaPi (7)	395	10	74.5	>12 h (1 mA cm−2)	
145

α-Mn2O3	FTO	1 M KPi	520	10	—	—	
146

CaMnxOy	FTO	66 mM Pi (7)	550	∼1.5	—	2 h (∼0.5 mA cm−2)	
81

Calcium–manganese oxides	ITO	0.1 M KPi (7)	450	∼0.026	101.1	—	
80

MnOx/CFP	CFP	1 M KPi (7)	445	1	110	—	
124

MnOx/CFP	CFP	1 M KPi (12)	360	1	55	—	
124

Mn2O3	FTO	1 M NaOH	387	10	∼70	5 h (8 mA cm−2)	
72

Au–MnOx thin films	Glassy carbon	1 M KOH	400	10	—	—	
147

MnOx/Au–Si3N4	Au–Si3N4	0.1 M KOH	530	10	—	—	
89

Cs+ intercalated δ-MnO2 nanosheets	FTO	1 M KOH	450	1	101	>3500 s (1 mA cm−2)	
82

Ni-intercalated MnO2 nanosheets	Carbon paper	1 M KOH	330	10	23.7	3.5 h (10 mA cm−2)	
148

Cs-MnOx-450	Pyrolytic graphite	0.1 M KOH	420	10	100	15 h	
149

α-MnO2	Glassy carbon	1 M KOH	394	10	49	24 h (10 mA cm−2)	
150

α-Mn2O3	FTO	1 M KOH	440	10	—	—	
146

Mn 10 (350 °C)	Ti	1 M NaOH	300	32 ± 1.6	65	—	
151

α-MnO2	Glassy carbon	1 M KOH	450	10	73.1	—	
152

Mn3O4@CoMn2O4–CoxOy	Glassy carbon	0.1 M KOH	450	10	81	—	
153

γ-MnOOH	Glassy carbon	1 M NaOH	530	10	—	—	
154

CoO/hi-Mn3O4	Glassy carbon	1 M KOH	378	10	61	—	
94

CoxMn3−xO4 nanoparticles	Ni foam	1 M KOH	246	10	46	10 h	
95

CaMn7O12	Glassy carbon	0.1 M KOH	270	0.01	101	—	
155

LaMn7O12	Glassy carbon	0.1 M KOH	300	0.01	98	—	
155

Metal-ion doped MnO2 ultrathin nanosheets	Carbon fiber paper	1 M KOH	390	10	104.4	>27.8 h (20 mA cm−2)	
83

3D nanoarchitectured turbostratic δ-MnOx	CNT-modified Ni foam	1 M KOH	270	10	78	1 h (19 mA cm−2)	
156

MnOx-10	FTO	1 M KOH	393	1	84	—	
157

Mn-NG	Graphite plate	1 M KOH	337	10	55	120 h (∼10 mA cm−2)	
55

Fe–Mn–O NS	Carbon cloth	1 M KOH	273	10	63.9	2500 cycles	
84

Mn3N2	Ni foam	1 M KOH	270	10	97	180 h (10 mA cm−2)	
158

α/NN2-MnO2	Carbon paper	1 M NaOH	550	10	125	10 h	
159

Nanocrystalline Mn2O3	Graphite carbon	0.1 M KOH	507	10	—	>10 h (5 mA cm−2)	
53

α-MnO2	Graphite carbon	0.1 M KOH	490	10	77.5	7.9 h (5 mA cm−2)	
66

MnOx/Au-GC	Glassy carbon	0.1 M KOH	400	0.23	—	—	
89

a-MnO2/AuNP-4.4	Pyrolytic graphite carbon	0.1 M KOH	390	10	—	—	
91

Mn3O4/CoSe2 hybrid	Glassy carbon	0.1 M KOH	∼450	10	49	1200 cycles	
93

Ni2+ incorporated δ-MnO2	Glassy carbon	1 M KOH	400	10	60	15000 s (5 mA cm−2)	
85

KxFe[Co0.16Mn0.84O2]	FTO	1 M KOH	375	10	56	—	
87

Co2+ incorporated δ-MnO2	Glassy carbon	1 M KOH	360	10	∼46	24 h (20 mA cm−2 using CFP)	
86

Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
