New approaches in component design for dye-sensitized solar cells  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0SE00596G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0SE00596G
(Perspective)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 367-383New approaches in component design for dye-sensitized solar cells

        
          
            Nick 
            Vlachopoulos
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Anders 
            Hagfeldt
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Iacopo 
            Benesperi
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Marina 
            Freitag
          
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Ghufran 
            Hashmi
          
          
        
      de, 
      
        
          
            Guobin 
            Jia
          
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Ruri Agung 
            Wahyuono
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Jonathan 
            Plentz
          
          
        
      f and 

        
          
            Benjamin 
            Dietzek
          
        
      f
aLaboratory of Photonics and Interfaces, Institute of Chemical Science and Engineering, Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL), LSPM-ISIC-EPFL, Chemin des Alambics, Station 6, CH-1015 Lausanne, Switzerland. E-mail: nikolaos.vlachopoulos@epfl.ch; anders.hagfeldt@epfl.ch
bDepartment of Chemistry, Ångström Laboratory, Uppsala University, P. O. Box 523, SE-75120 Uppsala, Sweden
cSchool of Natural and Environmental Science, Newcastle University, Bedson Building, NE1 7RU Newcastle upon Tyne, UK
dMicroelectronics Research Unit, Faculty of Information Technology & Electrical Engineering, University of Oulu, P. O. Box 8000, FI-90014, Finland
eDepartment of Applied Physics, Aalto University, Puumiehenkuja 2, 02150 Espoo, P. O. Box 15100, FI-00076 Aalto, Finland
fLeibniz Institute of Photonic Technology (IPHT), Albert-Einstein-Str. 9, 07745 Jena, Germany
Received 
      16th April 2020
    , Accepted 15th November 2020First published on 16th November 2020AbstractThe present perspective presents a number of issues related to the current direction of DSSC research, with emphasis on the transition from iodide-containing electrolyte to charge-transport media (CTMs), electrolytes or solid-state conductors based on inorganic coordination complexes, aiming to attain a better light-to-electricity conversion efficiency, associated with larger photovoltage, and long-term stability. Such a change necessitates the concomitant introduction of novel dyes and counter electrodes. The first part of the perspective introduces an overview of the DSSC field and a number of considerations related to the transition from the triiodide/iodide-based CTM to CTMs based on alternative systems. Subsequently, the recent developments of CTM based on Cu coordination complexes are discussed, from the inorganic physical chemistry point of view, including some highlights about novel dyes associated to these CTMs. Finally, several preparation methods and applications of different types of novel carbonaceous counter electrode substrates, related to the application of the aforementioned novel CTMs, are presented.Anders HagfeldtAnders Hagfeldt is Professor of Physical Chemistry at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL). He obtained his PhD degree from Uppsala University in 1993 and was a postdoctoral fellow with Professor Michael Gratzel (1993–1994) at EPFL. His research focuses on the fields of dye-sensitized solar cells, perovskite solar cells, and solar fuels. According to Web of Science, July 2019, he has published more than 510 scientific papers that have received over 60000 citations (h index of 117). From 2014 to 2018, he was on the list of Thomson Reuter's Highly Cited Researchers. He is a member of, for example, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, Stockholm, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences. He is Doctor Honoris Causa at Paris Diderot University, France.Iacopo BenesperiIacopo Benesperi obtained his PhD in Chemistry from Monash University in 2017 for his work on hole conductors for perovskite solar cells. Since January 2018 he has been working as a postdoctoral fellow at Uppsala University, focusing on the synthesis of copper complexes and their application in dye-sensitised solar cells.Marina FreitagDr Marina Freitag is presently a Royal Society University Research Fellow at Newcastle University, UK, continuing her work in coordination chemistry and solar cells. Previously, she held a post-doc positions at EPFL, Switzerland and Uppsala University, Sweden (Prof. Anders Hagfeldt). She received her PhD degree with Prof. Galoppini from Rutgers University, USA, and her BSc, in Chemistry from Freie Universität Berlin, Germany. She is the inventor of the so-called Zombie-cell and she contributed to recent breakthroughs in dye-sensitized solar cells for low-power IoT applications.Ghufran HashmiDr Ghufran Hashmi has recently joined as Tenure Track Assistant Professor the Microelectronics Research Unit of Oulu University – Finland. He has been actively involved in developing next generation photovoltaic devices, in particularly photovoltaic technologies based on dye-sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells. He is one of the researchers from Pakistan who was awarded the Academy of Finland's prestigious post-doctoral fellowship (2015–2018). He received his DSc Degree in Engineering Physics from Aalto University – Finland in 2014. Before that, he received his MSc Degree in Micro- and Nanotechnology from Helsinki University of Technology – Finland in 2009 and BS Degree in Biomedical Engineering from Sir Syed University of Engineering and Technology – Pakistan in 2002. He has authored nearly 30 scientific publications, which have received 720+ citations.Guobin JiaGuobin Jia was born in 1971. He studied Metal Physics at Lanzhou University (China), and obtained his PhD at Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus-Senftenberg (Germany) in 2009, under the supervision of Prof. Martin Kittler in the field of Semiconductor Physics. He joined the Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technology in Jena in 2010. He has worked on different materials for almost 30 years, ranging from metals, semiconductors, polymers, biomaterials, nanomaterials (including 1D, 2D) in the preparation, characterization and processing for the applications in energy harvesting and storage, light emitting diodes, sensing, quantum detection, photonics, smart textiles etc.Jonathan PlentzJonathan Plentz was born in 1982 and studied engineering physics at the University of Technology Ilmenau (Germany), where he received his PhD in laser-crystallized silicon thin-film solar cells in 2013. In 2005 he joined the Department Photovoltaic Systems at Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technology (IPHT) in Jena (Germany) and since 2019 he is head of the work group Photonic Thin Film Systems. His research is in the field of functional thin film systems mainly based on silicon and nanostructures for photovoltaics, sensors and smart textiles. He is (co-)author of more than 60 written publications and has 5 patents pending.
1. General overview
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) can be foreseen as cost-efficient candidates for photovoltaic (PV) applications with multifarious manufacturing possibilities and short energy-payback times. Variable colour options with superior optical aesthetics, sustainable processability on a variety of substrates and high performance of this technology under diffuse light conditions could be used for building integrated photovoltaic cells and to power portable electronics. Our recent development of DSSCs based on organic dye sensitizers and Cu-complex redox systems has led to outstandingly high performance under ambient light, reaching a 32% power conversion efficiency under 1000 lux fluorescent light source: this efficiency calculated with respect to the indoor light source not to the standard solar spectrum AM 1.5.1 This corresponds to a power output of 101 μA cm−2 at 1000 lux and outperforms all other types of PV cells made of silicon, lead halide perovskites, organic PV cells and even gallium arsenide (GaAs) cells. Details on the DSSC development in the last 35 years are described in a number of reviews2–23 and in an edited book.24
In a conventional DSSC, the photoelectrode consists of dye molecules anchored to a wide band gap semiconductor oxide, mostly titanium dioxide (TiO2), forming a high surface area mesoporous photoelectrode.25 Either n-type or p-type oxide substrates can be used in DSSCs, with different types of dye in each case. However, the most efficient DSSCs, of interest to practical applications, are based on n-type oxide substrates. Therefore, only this type of DSSC will be discussed in the present review. Following light absorption, the dye molecules inject electrons to the conduction band of the oxide, and the oxidized dye molecules are regenerated by a species contained in the charge-transport medium (CTM) interposed between the dye-coated oxide layer and a dark counter electrode CE. The species effective in the regeneration reaction can be either a redox mediator in solution (e.g. iodide/tri-iodide, I3−/I−, a CuII/CuI coordination complex) or a solid hole conductor (HC). The cycle is completed at a counter electrode CE coated with a thin electrocatalytic layer of e.g. platinum, carbon, or electronically conducting polymer. The mesoporous oxide is usually deposited on a transparent conducting oxide (TCO) substrate, frequently F-doped tin oxide (FTO), with the incident light directed from the FTO side not covered by dye/oxide layer. In the case of some DSSCs of industrial interest, the oxide is deposited on a flexible metal substrate, e.g. stainless steel. In this case, the light is directed from the CE side of the DSSC, with the CE and CTM being sufficiently transparent so that the intensity of light reaching the oxide-supported dye layer is not substantially diminished.
The direction for materials development of DSSC has drastically changed in the last years, with the main emphasis in replacing the I3−/I− redox mediator by CoIII/II and CuII/I coordination complexes. The main motivation has been to reduce the driving force, the Gibbs free energy corresponding to the difference between the redox potential of the mediator and that of the ground state of the dye, for regenerating the oxidized dye by the reduced form of the redox couple.
The highest efficiency systems today for DSSCs are being achieved using organic dyes, mesoporous TiO2 and CoIII/II or CuII/I complex systems. The highest DSSC (not certified) solar-to-electric conversion efficiencies (PCE) exceeding 14% have been achieved by Kakiage et al. (14.3%, illuminated area Σ = 0.10 cm2)26 and by Ji et al. (14.1%, CoIII/II mediator)27 (14.1%, Σ = 0.14 cm2), both with a CoIII/II mediator. The highest certified efficiency of 12.1% for DSSCs has been obtained in EPFL (Σ = 0.14 cm2) with the CuII/I mediator, which is slightly higher than the previous certified record of 11.9% (Σ = 1.0 cm2) with the I3−/I− mediator.28 The breakthroughs for the introduction of Co- and Cu-based system in DSSCs were initially announced by the group of Anders Hagfeldt, Gerrit Boschloo and Marina Freitag in Uppsala, Sweden and their collaborators, the groups of Lars Kloo and Licheng Sun in Stockholm, Sweden.29,30 These approaches has been further developed at EPFL Switzerland.1,31–33 For Cu redox mediators in liquid electrolytes, the highest (not certified) PCE is 12.7%.34 In addition, a solid-state variant of the Cu-complex systems, generated by drying of the electrolyte, exhibited a PCEs of 11%,35,36 which is the highest reported up-to-date for a solid-state DSSC.
TiO2 is by far the most popular wide band gap semiconductor and state-of-the art and it still is. The first studies of dye-sensitized porous TiO2 electrode were performed during the 1980s by the Grätzel group in EPFL-Switzerland. These electrodes were prepared by the thermal decomposition of a solution of a Ti metalloorganic compound and needed the deposition of several thin oxide layers in order to achieve the desired thickness.37,38 Soon thereafter an alternative type of porous TiO2, based on a mesoporous 5–10 μm thick layer made of colloidal nanoparticles with diameters of 15–40 nm, was proposed in the seminal Nature paper by O'Regan and Grätzel.39 The size of the TiO2 particles and the film thickness have, however, to be optimized with respect to the specific dyes and CTMs used. The properties of the mesoporous colloidal electrode have been discussed by Barbé et al.25 In the earlier studies, the CTM was a liquid electrolyte containing a redox mediator, mostly triiodide-iodide (I−3/I−). Larger particles give less surface area and larger pores. The former is a disadvantage for light harvesting and the film thickness need to be adjusted in relation to the light absorption properties of the dyes. For more viscous electrolytes, ionic liquids and solid-state systems larger pores may be needed to avoid mass transport limitations. For organic dyes and Cu/complex electrolytes typically 30 nm sized nanoparticles are used with a film thickness of 5–10 μm. In this respect, it should be noted that the optimization of the TiO2 nanomaterials has been an important part of the international DSSC research.
For a substantial improvement of the DSSC efficiency, of particular importance has been the fact that the largest internal potential drop in DSSCs with organic dyes and CuII/I-complex redox systems occurs in the electron injection process from the excited state of the dye to the conduction band of TiO2. The position of the conduction band, EC, of TiO2 and also oxides in general can be tuned by varying the surface charge. For example, positive cations such as H+ and Li+ shifts EC to higher potentials (or lower energies), reducing the possible open circuit photovoltage, UOC, and molecules with negative charge, such as the nitrogen lone pair on 4-tert-butyl pyridine, shifts EC higher in energy possibly resulting to larger UOC. This approach can be used for fine tuning, but for a more substantial increase of UOC alternative oxides with higher energy EC need to be developed.
The upper limit of the DSSC open-circuit voltage for a given redox mediator UOC(LIM) is determined by the difference between the conduction band edge EC and the redox Fermi level of the redox mediator EF(Ox/Red), both measured with respect to a suitable reference electrode. In general, a shift of EF(Ox/Red) to a negative direction, corresponding to the shift of the equilibrium electrode potential E(Ox/Red) to the positive direction, is expected to lead to an increase of UOC(LIM).
Alternatively, from the semiconductor point of view, a strategy to develop semiconductors with higher EC will result to higher open-circuit voltages. From studies in single crystal materials, it is known that for several oxide semiconductors in aqueous solutions, notably zinc stannate (Zn2SnO4), strontium and barium titanates (SrTiO3, BaTiO3), and niobium oxide, (Nb2O5), EC lies higher than for TiO2. If the same trend is followed for these oxides in nonaqueous solvents and for polycrystalline materials, then it would be advantageous to replace mesoporous TiO2 by one of the aforementioned alternative semiconductors in mesoporous form. However, other electrode substrate factors determining the DSSC, notably the roughness factor (real to geometric area) should not be detrimental to the DSSC performance.
Apart from liquid-based electrolytes, substantial advances have been achieved with solid-state DSSCs (sDSSCs) based on solid CTMs, also termed hole conductors (HCs),21,40,41 in addition to the aforementioned one based on CuII/I.·In the case of organic, metal-free small-molecule HCs, the best attained efficiency has been 8% (ref. 42) in a DSSC based on an organic sensitizer and spiro-OMeTAD as HC. As regards conducting polymer-based HCs in DSSCs an effective approach in achieving effective penetration of the HC into the TiO2 pores is in situ photoelectrochemical polymerization, initiated at the irradiated dye-coated electrode itself. With PEDOT as HC generated from bis-EDOT monomers, a completely solid DSSC showed a top PCE of 7%.43
sDSSCs present some advantages as compared to DSSCs with liquid electrolytes. At first, the problems of evaporation and leaking of the electrolyte, requiring rigorous sealing, are avoided in sDSSCs. Another advantage is the lower changes in the solid CTM volume with temperature in sDSSCs as compared to these for liquid CTM. Finally, the photooxidized dye regeneration for several organic HC molecules is faster than for several redox mediators commonly used in liquid electrolyte-based DSSCs. On the other hand, the back reductive electron transfer reaction between oxidized HC and electrons in the mesoporous oxide or the TCO substrate is also faster for solid HCs. In over to overcome this drawback, the presence of a thin TiO2 blocking layer or underlayer interposed between the porous dye-supporting oxide and the transparent TCO oxide is necessary. An underlayer is also beneficial to the performance of a liquid CTM-based DSSC, both for reducing the dark current and improving the adhesion of the mesoporous oxide layer to the TCO substrate. However, the requirements for the blocking behaviour of an underlayer are more stringent in the case of sDSSCs.
A DSSC configuration intermediate to the liquid-electrolyte DSSC and the solid-state DSSC (sDSSC) is achieved by the immobilization of the electrolyte into a solid matrix. This phase can be either inorganic, e.g. based on aluminosilicates, or organic, e.g. polymeric. Such DSSCs are termed quasi-solid DSSCs. However, in this case the drawbacks associated with the liquid electrolyte are not eliminated but just decreased.
Besides redox couples and hole conductors the key material components in DSSC are the dye and the semiconductor oxide. Some useful insights concerning the choice of DSSC dyes are presented in Section 3.
Organic sensitizers based on the donor–π–acceptor (D–π–A) motif have been widely explored in solar energy conversion applications. The high molar extinction coefficients, rare-metal-free structures, and most importantly the facile molecular tailoring resulting to tunable PV performances are the main reasons for the development of D–π–A sensitizers.44–54 Compared to classic ruthenium sensitizers, pure organic sensitizers are very promising candidates with comparable high-power conversion efficiency (PCE) and long-term stability, especially for future commercial and practical applications.
In general, most organic sensitizers are synthesized with the D–π–A configuration, due to the efficient intramolecular charge transfer (ICT) properties.55,56 An additional group of electron-withdrawing conjugated components has been recently introduced into the π-bridge of the D–π–A framework to function as an auxiliary electron acceptor. The additional acceptor in the D–A–π–A motif not only contributes to modulate the energy levels, absorption spectra, and PV performances, but also significantly improves the photostability of sensitizers.57–59
TiO2 is still by far the most popular wide band gap, state-of-the art, semiconductor since the seminal Nature paper by O'Regan and Grätzel,39 in which the use of a colloidal mesoporous layer in DSSCs was proposed. However, a huge number of publications on different nanostructures such as nano-rods and tubes and alternative binary and ternary oxides have created a vast library that can be used to choose optimal morphological, optical and electrical properties for the demand at hand. A comprehensive overview of the various oxide semiconductors used in DSSC can be found in the review by Aumaitre et al.60 Some oxides with potentially higher conduction band energy than TiO2 are zinc stannate (Zn2SnO4), strontium and barium titanates (SrTiO3, BaTiO3) and niobium pentoxide (Nb2O5). The motivation is that the quasi-Fermi level of the semiconductor under illumination can then be higher in energy (lower work function or more negative electrochemical potential) and thus lead to a higher open-circuit cell voltage (UOC).
As regards the dark, in the sense of not needing light for its operation, counter electrode, the first generation of dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) was mainly produced by employing counter electrodes (CEs) based on platinum (Pt) as an electrocatalyst material, mostly deposited in microdispersed form on non-transparent TCO substrate.61,62 Platinum is the electrocatalyst of choice for a wide range of electrochemical energy conversion devices. Some of the advantages of Pt are their high catalytic activity, conductivity and high chemical stability against iodine species.
Furthermore, Pt it is less expensive than other noble metals with similar properties (e.g. Ir, Rh). Due to its high catalytic activity and chemical stability in the DSSCs, as well as its high transparency for DSSC applications requiring it, e.g. in the case of cells based on dye/TiO2 deposited on a metal substrate, or in DSSC used as windows in BIPV applications, Pt/TCO remained for a long time as the foremost choice for designing high efficiency solar cells.63–65 By combining iodide/triiodide redox shuttle-based electrolytes with an efficient Pt-based CEs, the DSSCs have exhibited an impressive (11%) certified solar-to-electrical conversion efficiency.66
However, platinum is a precious metal, and the Pt-based CEs may result in a high cost, especially if large-area solar harvesting is desired. Moreover, alternative CEs with even lower transparency may be needed for some applications. Additionally, as a result of the advancements in materials research for DSSCs, the traditional Pt-based CEs were not found compatible for electrolytes containing novel redox shuttles (i.e. cobalt or copper-based).67,68 Therefore, efforts have been made to investigate and develop alternative CE catalytic counter electrodes, such as carbonaceous materials, discussed in following sections of this review, to achieve not only high solar-to-electrical conversion efficiency but also reproducible and long-term PV performance stability.69–72 The field of DSSC CEs has been recently reviewed in the two-volume book by Yun and Hagfeldt.73 In addition to carbons, several other CE materials have been tested. In addition to carbons, three additional categories of electrocatalyst materials are electronically conducting polymers, e.g. polypyrrole, polyaniline, and PEDOT, transition metal inorganic compounds, for example carbides, nitrides, oxides and sulfides, and organic thiolates. A frequently, easy to prepare conducting polymer CE is PEDOT electrodeposited on TCO from an aqueous colloidal EDOT solution with n-dodecyl sulfate (SDS) as supporting electrolyte, as proposed by Ellis et al.74 Additionally, hybrid materials combining several of components in the aforementioned categories have been considered, e.g. Pt/carbon or conducting polymer/carbon.
2. Novel copper redox mediators
Advancements in consumer technologies, with new findings in the field of dye sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), have opened up market niches in which DSSCs can thrive by taking full advantage of their peculiarities. The advantages of DSSCs for indoor applications over other solar cell technologies are threefold.75 First, different dyes can be developed to exactly match the illumination spectrum of the photon source present in the environment in which they should operate, harvesting their light with high efficiency. Since light bulbs emit in the visible range, the poor efficiency of organic and metalorganic light absorbers in the UV and IR regions over their inorganic counterparts is irrelevant here. Second, DSSCs can be completely made from non-toxic materials. Given the indoor environment, there is a higher chance that these solar cells might get in contact with people during operation. Therefore, in case of failures or breaks, it is important that any leaked or exposed chemical is not harmful to humans. Third, the setbacks of DSSCs, which limit their use at full sun illumination, such as stability and efficiency in full sun conditions, do not play a prominent role in low light conditions. Indeed, DSSCs are currently the highest-performing solar cell technology in a low illumination setup, with efficiencies up to 34% and generated power up to 100 μW cm−2 at 1000 lux for a relatively large 3.2 cm2 device, outclassing all of their competitors.76
In the world of IT and electronics Artificial Intelligence, Machine Learning, and the Internet of Things are setting a shift in paradigm for how data is acquired and processed; the concepts of smart homes and smart buildings are entering general public daily conversations and news. Networks of sensors coupled with processing units capable of autonomous decisions promise to optimize the use of heating, cooling and lighting in buildings, thus reducing energy consumption. However, there is a concern that the power required to run this optimization network might nullify the energy savings that said network provides. Recently, Freitag and coworkers have demonstrated that DSSCs, when coupled with a supercapacitor as an energy buffer, are capable of powering a completely autonomous sensing and processing network, without the need of batteries or mains power.76 By taking advantage of light that is already present inside a building, DSSCs ensure that the optimization performed by the intelligent network fully translates to energy savings.
Redox mediators based on copper complexes, some of which are shown in Fig. 1, play a crucial role in the outstanding performance of DSSCs in ambient lighting. This class of materials is capable of efficiently regenerating a dye with just 100 mV of driving force,77 thus maximizing the voltage output of the solar cell. Moreover, they can retain this high voltage (close to 1 V) even in low lighting conditions, which is very important to properly power electronic devices with a small number of solar cells connected in series. In addition to yielding a high photovoltage, copper complexes show a reduced recombination rate and a higher diffusion length compared to other popular redox mediators, such as cobalt complexes, providing higher photocurrents and better fill factors in similar systems.78 Regarding the long-term operational stability of DSSCs, copper complexes have a clear advantage over the most used redox mediator – iodine/iodide – as they are not corrosive. However, liquid DSSCs are not regarded as stable devices in general, due to electrolyte solution leakages over time related to the difficulty of perfectly sealing the device. Furthermore, the presence of liquid in the device is unwelcomed regardless of leakages, because an accidental device breakage would lead to a spillage of chemicals in liquid form. For commercial applications, solid-state DSSCs are considered the most viable option. Solid-state DSSCs have historically lagged behind their liquid counterparts, but this is no longer true thanks to copper complex redox mediators and their ability to give life to “zombie” devices.35,79 In short, a “zombie” device is a liquid DSSC in which the electrolyte solvent is completely evaporated, leaving behind a dried-out electrolyte solution. Such a device should be non-functional (dead). However, if the redox mediator is comprised of a copper complex (or, with lesser results, a cobalt complex80), the device still works very efficiently (a living dead). The most efficient solid-state DSSC fabricated to date features a “zombified” copper complex hole transporting material (Cu(tmby)2) and is even higher performing than its liquid counterpart.36 Copper complexes have reduced energy losses during their transition from a reduced to an oxidized state compared to iodine/iodide (which undergoes a complicated two-electron oxidation process) and cobalt complexes (which transition from high spin to low spin upon oxidation),43 but are not completely free from them. In particular, Cu(I) employs a tetrahedral geometrical configuration, while Cu(II) ideal geometry is tetragonal or square planar. The most widely used copper complexes in DSSC are comprised of two bidentate ligands, which try to suppress this geometrical transformation by employing bulky moieties in key positions, which hinder the rotation of the two ligands upon oxidation/reduction. A better approach to further reduce this energy loss is to use tetradentate ligands, which have a much more rigid structure and block both complex's oxidation states in the same geometry. Recently, Michaels et al. have demonstrated that the use of a tetradentate ligand (Cu(oxabpy)) indeed reduces voltage losses compared to a bidentate one.81 The finding of a copper complex with a tetradentate ligand and an ideal redox potential could lead to a new efficiency record for both liquid and solid-state DSSCs in the future. Zerk et al. have conducted experimental work on a tridentate copper complex with a hydroxide counter-ion in the fourth coordination position (LCuOH) to evaluate its reorganization energy. The rate constant for electron self-exchange determined using the Marcus cross relation was k11 = 3 × 104 M−1 s−1 at −88 °C, leading to an estimated value of 9 × 106 M−1 s−1 at 25 °C, which is one of the highest values known for copper-based redox couples. With further Marcus analysis, they also determined a low reorganization energy, λ = 0.95 ± 0.17 eV, attributed to minimal structural variation between the redox partners.82 In an interesting study Imahori and coworkers showed copper complexes with several 1,10-phenanthroline-based ligands with substitutions in the 2,9 positions (Cu(dmp)2, Cu(bp)2, Cu(emp)2, Cu(dep)2 and Cu(dpp)2), for which they attained moderate to high power conversion efficiencies (6–11%) with a high UOC over 1.0 V. The difference in performance was rationalized by different electron collection efficiencies.83
 Fig. 1  Structures of metal complex electrolytes/hole transporting materials used for the fabrication of liquid/solid state DSSCs discussed in this perspective. 
Three copper-based redox shuttles [Cu(1), Cu(2), and Cu(3)] featuring tetradentate neutral polyaromatic ligands were synthesized and evaluated computationally, electrochemically, and in DSSC devices using a benchmark organic dye – Y123 – by Roberta Rodrigues et al. They calculated that the inner-sphere electron transfer reorganization energies (λ = 0.34–0.53 eV) for copper complexes were significantly lower than that evaluated for the Co(bpy)3 (λ = 0.61 eV) redox shuttle. Their rigid tetradentate ligand design promotes more efficient electron transfer reactions leading to an improved JSC (14.1 mA cm−2), higher stability due to the chelate effect, and a decrease the loss in UOC for one of the copper redox shuttle-based devices.84 A different strategy to increase the performance of copper-based solar cells and to decrease recombination processes was used by Glinka et al. The PV performance of solar cells sensitized with the D205 indoline dye and its new derivative comprising an alkoxysilyl anchoring unit (D205Si) was enhanced in the presence of Cucurbit[7]uril (see Fig. 2) as molecular multi-capper, thanks to a reduced electron recombination between titania and electrolyte. Indoline dyes were also found to be regenerated outstandingly fast by the Cu-based mediator (time constant shorter than 100 ns).85 Composition and cell parameters of DSSCs fabricated with the discussed metal complex electrolytes are listed in Table 1.
 Fig. 2  Structures of dyes used with copper complex electrolytes and of NIR dyes discussed in this perspective. 
Table 1 Electrolyte/dye composition and photovoltaic parameters of DSSCs based on referenced metal complexes




Electrolyte
Dye

U
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Reference




Co(bpyPY4)
Y123
0.768
12.1
62
5.68

44



Cu(tmby)2
WS-72
1.07
13.8
79
11.7

9



Cu(oxabpy)
Y123
0.92
9.75
69
6.2

45



Cu(bp)2
LEG4
0.842
10.6
66.4
5.90

47



Cu(dmp)2
LEG4
1.03
10.0
60.9
6.29

47



Cu(emp)2
LEG4
0.823
7.52
52.6
3.25

47



Cu(dep)2
LEG4
0.813
6.77
46.4
2.56

47



Cu(dpp)2
LEG4
0.848
4.18
62.4
2.21

47



Cu(1)
Y123
689
5.7
77
3.1

48



Cu(2)
Y123
693
10.2
72
4.7

48



Cu(3)
Y123
792
7.9
75
4.3

48



Co(bpy)3
Y123
818
14.6
73
8.9

48



Cu(tmby)2
D205
0.92
6.12
82
4.60

49



Cu(tmby)2
D205Si
0.95
6.40
78
4.75

49





3. (Near) infra-red dyes for building-integrated photovoltaics
Apart from indoor PV cells, the other potential key application for DSSCs is that of BIPV cells. For a long time, it was believed that nice-looking, colored, electricity-generating windows based on DSSCs would enter the market and generate high revenues. However, while small, artistic windows could definitely have a niche market, from a bulk energy production point of view colored windows do not make sense. In a scenario where DSSCs replace plain glass in large windows, or even full-glass buildings, these cells have to be (almost) colorless, because nobody wants to live behind a colored filter for several hours per day. Fortunately, the emission spectrum of our Sun is very broad, and visible light is only a part (albeit a consistent one) of it. The fabrication of a DSSC absorbing light only in the UV (ultra-violet) and IR (infra-red) regions, especially one the size of a window, would still generate a significant amount of electricity. In recent years, research efforts have focused on the synthesis of efficient near-IR (NIR) and IR dyes exactly for this purpose. Completely colorless dyes have not been discovered yet, but this goal is getting closer and closer.
Extending dye absorption to the NIR region translates to reducing the energy gap between the dye's HOMO and LUMO. In a DSSC, the energy level of significance that is almost always fixed is that of titania's conduction band. With that in mind, reducing the dye bandgap involves stabilizing the dye's excited state – to lower the LUMO to an energy level just high enough to properly inject electrons into the mesoporous TiO2 layer – and, more importantly, destabilizing the dye's ground state – to raise the HOMO energy level and reduce the gap to the LUMO. Not many functional groups have low energy transitions that allow absorption in the NIR region; the most studied ones to date are boron-dipyrromethenes (BODIPY) and squaraines. Dyes based on each of the functional groups have absorption peaks with very high molar extinction coefficients in the order of 105 M−1 cm−1 in the far-red/NIR region of the spectrum, with peak maxima between 650 and 800 nm. They usually also feature a secondary, less intense absorption peak in the violet/blue region up to 450 nm, with a significant lack of absorption between 450 and 600 nm. The most NIR-shifted dye reported to date for the BODIPY class of materials has been prepared by Kubota et al. and features a peak maximum close to 800 nm both in solution and on titania (dye 6).86 A DSSC fabricated with such dye has an efficiency of 1.1%, which is only slightly lower than that of a similar but less red-shifted dye (1.4%, dye 5). For what concerns squaraines, Haishima et al. report on seven different dyes with NIR absorption (SQ1–SQ7).87 The most red-shifted dye has a peak maximum of 820 nm in solution (SQ6, cell efficiency of 0.25%), while the best performing dye leads to a cell efficiency of 1.3% (SQ3, its peak maximum is 796 nm in solution). The structures of the aforementioned dyes are depicted in Fig. 2, while cell parameters of DSSCs fabricated with them are listed in Table 2, together with their maximum absorption wavelength. The quest to colorless DSSCs is not limited to the finding of suitable, efficient dyes. Such devices will also need colorless redox mediators and/or hole transporting materials with suitable energy levels for NIR dye regeneration.88
Table 2 Dye/electrolyte composition (with dye's maximum absorption wavelength) and photovoltaic parameters of DSSCs based on referenced NIR dyes




Dye

λ
max (nm)
Electrolyte

U
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Reference




Dye 5
783
Iodine
0.431
4.98
65
1.40

50



Dye 6
812
Iodine
0.435
3.96
65
1.12

50



SQ1
771
Iodine
0.300
4.39
56
0.74

51



SQ2
784
Iodine
0.300
6.22
47
0.89

51



SQ3
796
Iodine
0.315
9.20
45
1.31

51



SQ4
806
Iodine
0.266
3.81
56
0.56

51



SQ5
818
Iodine
0.276
1.77
59
0.29

51



SQ6
820
Iodine
0.289
1.45
60
0.25

51



SQ7
815
Iodine
0.279
2.05
52
0.30

51





4. Carbonaceous materials-based catalyst layers as alternative counter electrodes for novel electrolytes
Carbon based nanomaterials such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs) and graphene are based on an earth-abundant element, and the availability is unlimited. The price drops significantly below that of the platinum for large scale production. Moreover, these carbon-based nanomaterials have high chemical inertness against corrosive chemicals and surroundings, and are very well suited to be used for the counter electrodes (CEs) in DSSCs. Recent investigations with graphene, single- and multi-walled CNTs (MWCNTs) based CEs have demonstrated comparable catalytic activity, chemical stability, and conversion efficiency, and they potentially have much better conductivity than these based on Pt/TCO.67,89–92 Therefore, they will be the most promising candidates for a sustainable development of the DSSCs replacing the Pt for large scale production.90
4.1 Counter electrodes for cobalt electrolytes
A thick and porous carbon-based CE as potential alternative catalyst material for DSSCs was first reported by A. Kay and co-workers for efficient triiodide reduction.93 As a result of realizing the salient features i.e. low cost, high surface area, and promising catalytic activity, this pioneer work has been remained a great motivation for the researchers worldwide to develop other novel carbonaceous catalysts layers, which have also been frequently tested with the novel redox shuttles in the DSSCs.68,69
From the electrolyte progress perspective, iodine electrolytes have been surpassed by cobalt electrolytes due to the flexibility in the alteration of their redox potential, which provides an opportunity to achieve a higher open circuit voltage in the DSSCs. Therefore, efforts have also been made to develop novel carbonaceous catalysts for testing with these novel cobalt electrolytes.93
In this regard, Kavan et al. reported graphene nanoplatelets (GNP) as alternative CE material for DSSC, which revealed striking (9.4%) solar-to-electrical conversion efficiency along with notable (878 mV) open circuit voltage (UOC) as a result of observing smaller charge transfer resistance (RCT) compared to traditional Pt CEs.93
Similarly, Stefik et al. developed carbon–graphene nano-composite catalyst materials and investigated the photovoltaic performances of the fabricated DSSCs employing cobalt electrolytes. They also achieved similar conversion efficiencies (>9%) by varying the amount of graphene in their developed carbon–graphene composites. They reported low RCT (1 Ω cm2) with a 20% weight content of graphene adjusted in formulating the composite, which caused an improved fill factor in the fabricated DSSC compared to Pt CEs (CE)-based DSSCs.94
Moreover, Liu et al. demonstrated a comparison to prove the superior catalytic activity of carbon black in nanoparticle form as low-cost CE electrocatalytic material for cobalt based electrolytes in DSSCs.69 The electrochemical behavior of both the carbon black catalyst and traditional Pt/TCO CEs was analyzed by performing cyclic voltammetry (CV) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements, which suggested lower (0.39 Ω cm2) RCT values for carbon black CEs than these of Pt nanoparticle-based CEs (1.19 Ω cm2). Consequently, the DSSCs fabricated with these catalytic carbon black CEs employing Co mediators and Y123 dye exhibited an impressive (8.81%) solar-to-electrical conversion efficiency, indicating the potential of carbon black as one of the potential CEs for these novel electrolytes.69
Currently, the highest solar-to-electrical conversion efficiency (14.3%, not certified) reported for a DSSC employed a carbonaceous catalyst (i.e. graphene nanoplatelets) based CE, in conjunction with a cobalt electrolyte and the combination of co-adsorbed ADEKA-1 (alkoxysilyl-anchor dye) and LEG4 (carboxy-anchor organic dye).26 These preliminary reports about carbonaceous materials not only suggest that carbon-based catalyst materials could not only be categorized as the leading CEs but also point to the potential of overcoming the mass transport limitation for these bulky cobalt electrolytes by providing a large CE surface are, with a positive effect to the overall photovoltaic performance.26,69
Nevertheless, none of the above-mentioned studies reported long-term stability tests of the fabricated devices, which raises the concern about the chemical stability of these carbonaceous materials during the long-term photovoltaic performance of the fabricated DSSCs. Moreover, most of the electrolytes fabricated to produce these high efficiency devices were prepared with acetonitrile as solvent,26,95,96 which has not been recognized as a reliable organic solvent due to its possible leakage from the cell channels under stressful conditions.97–99 Therefore, a combination of high boiling point solvent-based cobalt electrolytes (i.e. γ-butyrolactone or sulfolane) with these catalytic carbonaceous CEs seems an obvious and optimum strategy to handle the aforementioned challenge.100,101
4.2 Counter electrodes for copper electrolytes
The pioneer research work reported by Freitag, Hagfeldt, Boschloo and co-workers regarding novel copper (Cu) redox mediators suggested new opportunities for both liquid and solid state DSSCs.29 As a result of providing numerous possibilities such as achieving high (>1 V) open circuit voltage (UOC) and rapid regeneration of adsorbed dye on semiconducting oxide layers (such as TiO2),31 as well as contributing for an impressive power generation under low light intensities.1,75 These novel Cu redox shuttles give great motivation to develop the next class of DSSCs which could be used to generate electricity under both outdoors and indoor light intensity conditions.
The initial attempt in testing Cu redox based electrolytes in the DSSCs utilized Pt as the traditional catalyst material, which yielded 1.4% solar-to-electrical energy conversion efficiency.102 Interestingly, a composite of Pt/Carbon black was incorporated by Bai et al. in DSSCs based on copper electrolytes, which exhibited an impressive (7%) solar to electrical power conversion efficiency (ηPCE); the authors reported lower electron transfer rates for several noble metals, conducting oxides, and carbon black alone as CE substrates, which consequently resulted low fill factors compared to the Pt/carbon black composite catalyst.103
Since these aforementioned reports, the electropolymerized PEDOT catalyst layer has been established as the alternative and standard catalyst material in producing high ηPCE DSSCs employing Cu electrolytes.1,31,75 In this regard, Freitag et al. and Saygili et al. reported DSSCs with very high (>8–10%) ηPCE, which also exhibited an impressive (>1 V) open circuit voltage (UOC) under full sun light intensities.31,77 Cao et al., have to-date reported the highest (13%) ηPCE for a copper mediator-based liquid electrolyte with a slight modification in the traditional DSSC embodiment, i.e. direct contacting of charge extracting layers, which surprisingly does not exhibit short circuiting when assembled with the type of electropolymerized PEDOT catalyst layers1 discussed earlier.
On the other hand, a surprising serendipitous discovery was the transformation of copper-based liquid electrolyte into a solid-state hole conductor by evaporation of the solvent acetonitrile during storage, with the DSSC remaining functional in DSSCWV. This conversion of a traditional DSSC into a solid DSSC opens several interesting opportunities for similar solid state DSSCs embodiments based on solid-state coordination complexes. A DSSC based on a solidified Cu hole conductor exhibited more than 11% ηPCE with promising preliminary stability.35 These preliminary results offer great motivation to develop the technology further by performing intensely further long-term photovoltaic and chemical stability tests of DSSCs with copper redox systems and various novel CE materials under established standardized stressful conditions.104,105
In this respect, for progressing with carbonaceous catalysts-based CEs, Kavan et al. investigated the electrochemical behavior of graphene-based CEs in DSSCs with Cu mediator-based liquid electrolytes and demonstrated comparable catalytic activity to that of these based on the electropolymerized PEDOT catalyst and superior to the Pt catalyst92 Moreover, the same co-workers reported a highly catalytic composite catalyst, which was developed by integrating Pt, platinum oxide (PtOx), graphene oxide, and graphene nanoplatelets, and was tested as CE in DSSCs with Cu electrolytes.106 The fabricated composite outperformed the stand-alone catalyst materials (i.e. Pt, PEDOT and pure graphene) by showing high catalytic performance which led to very high (9.5–11.3%) ηPCE compared to stand-alone catalyst layers when measured in various light intensities.106
Very recently, Hashmi et al. demonstrated printed single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) as another potential alternative carbonaceous material, which was investigated as CE substrate and was compared with the Pt counter electrode based DSSCs employing Cu electrolytes.68 The printed SWCNTs outperformed Pt/TCO with superior catalytic activity i.e. exhibiting very low charge transfer resistance (RCT = 2–2.9 Ω cm2) when tested with Cu electrolytes in both the complete DSSCs and in symmetrical CE–CE configurations. As a result, the fabricated DSSCs exhibited an impressive 7% ± 0.4% ηPCE with a cell achieving 7.5% and 8.3% conversion efficiencies under full and half sun illumination respectively.68
Hence, all these results not only provide preliminary evidence regarding the potential of carbonaceous materials for producing high performance DSSCs with Cu electrolytes but also suggest the need to develop and investigate both stand alone as well as composite carbon-based catalysts, which could also provide high chemical stability along with long term stability that has not yet been established with these novel redox shuttles.
4.3 Novel research directions with alternative redox shuttles and carbonaceous materials
By observing the progress being made with both the cobalt and copper redox based electrolyte systems, futuristic research and further developments employing carbonaceous materials as CEs materials can be forecasted.
For instance, the new device designs of DSSCs such as DSSC produced with direct contacting of charge extracting layers or solid-state DSSCs employing Cu redox shuttles as hole conductors offer new opportunities, with printed SWCNT as one of the novel carbonaceous materials which could be used as an alternative catalyst and could contribute for performance improvement by providing high conductivity and high porosity together with high specific surface area to achieve better catalytic performance along with better diffusion for the recently investigated bulky redox shuttles.107,108
On the other hand, the carbon black/graphite composite catalysts of the type used with the traditional iodine electrolytes93,109,110 also provide opportunities to produce more affordable and cost-efficient CEs, which can also be printed via established scalable methods such as screen printing or inkjet printing. Although electropolymerized PEDOT catalyst layers has been standardized and demonstrated with cobalt and copper redox electrolytes, the scalability of such layers has not yet been established by any research group. Contrary to this, fabrication of the printable carbonaceous pastes has not only been demonstrated in several reports but also been available commercially from a number of material providers. Hence, the integration of these cost-efficient carbon black/graphite composites is expected to be integrated in the novel device designs of DSSCs discussed above.
Moreover, similar to the Pt/Graphene composites reported by Kavan et al.,106 the development of more blends of carbonaceous materials and PEDOT may also be forecasted, of the type which has already been reported for both rigid and flexible DSSCs employing iodine electrolytes.111,112 More interestingly, dry transferable SWCNT films,113 which have been successfully demonstrated in DSSCs and Perovskite solar cells114,115 can also be opted for as electrocatalysts CEs of these advanced and futuristic DSSCs, with the additional advantage of contributing to the lowering of the CE resistance.
Nevertheless, keeping the current trend in mind with efforts mostly dedicated to improve the solar-to-electrical conversion efficiencies with advanced materials, it may also be forecasted that the futuristic research work for these next generation DSSCs will focus more towards developing more robust devices, for which the long-term device stability corresponding to every combination of materials could be reported, with certified stability tests performed by independent sources. In this regard, several interesting long-term stability studies under standardized stress conditions could be predicted, such as observing the degradation of novel Cu redox mediator-based advanced electrolytes in the DSSCs with both glass photoelectrode (PE) and CE substrates, or, additionally, their corrosive behavior when either the PE or the CE are metal supported. This way, the best combination of electrolyte and counter electrode materials contributing to robust stability could be established.
4.4 Recently developed processes in preparing carbonaceous counter electrodes
In general, the processing of carbon based nanomaterials is difficult, and previous researches with graphene and CNTs based counter electrodes have used spin and dip coating,116 inkjet printing,117 or drop casting118,119 of graphene containing suspension or composites, these processes are able to prepare conductive graphene thin layer. However, these processes can be hardly controlled to prepare well-ordered graphene thin films, since usually a large amount of such carbon nanomaterials have to be used to achieve the desired catalytic activity. Consequently, the counter electrodes have poor optical transparency or even completely opaque, resulting to the loss of one of the striking features of the DSSCs, i.e. the aesthetic aspect for building integrated photovoltaic cell (BIPV) applications.
Emerging technologies such as the double self-assembly (DSA) process120–123 enables the manipulation of low-cost graphene flakes and CNTs to form a well-ordered uniform large-area monolayer at the water/air interface, since it attempts to minimize the system energy. These flakes form a strict monolayer floating on the water surface; however, they are seldom connected to each other due to electrostatic repulsion between the flakes, and a lateral electrical conductivity is not expected if this loose monolayer is deposited on the substrate. In order to force the graphene flakes to connect to each other for achieving the necessary electrical conductivity, the conventional Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) process uses two mechanical barriers moving against each other to compress the floating monolayer of graphene flakes (MGFs), and the deposition of the densified MGFs can be done by dip coating of substrate. However, for the conventional LB process this approach works only on flat hydrophilic surfaces.
The DSA process works without using the mechanical barriers. Instead, surfactant molecules are used to compress the graphene flakes to form a dense monolayer, and the densified multilayer graphene flakes (MGFs) can be easily deposited onto substrates placed beneath it either by pumping out of the water or by dip coating.121,122 Especially, the DSA process does not require the substrate surface to be hydrophilic, and the resulted dense MGFs can be deposited almost on any substrates, including rigid, flexible, and even on 3D surfaces, attributed to the synergetic interaction of the MGFs and the SDS surfactant molecules. Moreover, the DSA process can be used to deposit other nanomaterials such as CNTs,123 and it can be repeated to deposit layer stacks or sandwich with well-controlled morphology.123
As shown in Fig. 3, SEM image shows such MGFs connected with each other at the edge for the electrical conductivity, and the optical transmission of the MGFs can be as high as ∼90% over a broad wavelength range. The adhesion of the thin film is quite satisfied due to the strong van der Waals force on the flat surface.122
 Fig. 3  (a) SEM image showing multilayer graphene flakes with them connected to each other at their edges; (b) the transmission spectrum of the MGFs (corrected spectrum neglecting the contribution of the glass substrate). 
Recently the catalytic activity of various graphene or/and MWCNTs layer or bilayer consisting of a MGFs and a monolayer of MWCNTs in a I3−/I− redox shuttle has been successfully tested,123 which shows enhanced catalytic activities and chemical stability compared with Pt based counter electrode (CE) in ZnO-based DSSCs, resulting in open circuit voltage up to 702 mV, current density of 13.7 mA cm−2, and conversion efficiency of 4.1%, and the conversion efficiency exceeded that of the reference cells with Pt based CE.123 Despite the non-ideal system with the ZnO-based DSSCs still under developing, the key information from this work is that the carbon-based nanomaterials are able to replace the precious Pt metal for the CE application, and perform even better than Pt-based CEs. It is therefore of great interest how such high-performance carbon nanomaterials based transparent conductive CEs behave in optimized systems, where already efficiencies higher than 10% have been demonstrated.28
Nevertheless, we believe that the demonstrated properties of the carbon nanomaterials-based transparent conductive CEs meet the requirements for the high performance DSSCs in many aspects, and it is expected that such CEs may contribute greatly to the high performance DSSCs in the following cases:
(1) Low-cost, earth-abundant and environmental-friendly carbon nanomaterials replacing Pt for a sustainable development of DSSCs, and lower the cost of the DSSCs.
(2) Highly transparent conductive electrodes, already applied in bifacial silicon solar cells,124 could be applied for bifacial DSSCs. The concept of bifacial DSSC is explained by Wu et al.125 These cells have a much great potential for increasing power output per unit area (equivalent to effective efficiency). A 20–50% (with different back side contribution) increase of the equivalent effective efficiency has been demonstrated in silicon based thin film solar cells.124 That means, for a monofacial DSSC with conversion efficiency of 10%, an equivalent effective efficiency will be at around 12–15%.
(3) The broadband transmission allow tandem DSSCs, and co-sensitized dyes working at different wavelengths for highly efficient DSSCs, in order to better harvest the energy from the solar spectrum.
(4) Low temperature processing allow the DSSCs be fabricated on low-cost, flexible substrates such as plastics, textiles, this will reduce not only the material cost of the DSSCs, but also the thermal budget for the calcination of the Pt precursor. Furthermore, this feature allows the development of wearable and flexible DSSCs as the alternative avenue of smart e-textile research.126
(5) Potentially the carbon nanomaterials-based counter electrodes could reach an ultralow sheet resistance by proper engineering such as thermal annealing, doping, surface functionalization, and chemical reduction127,128 of the thin film, which is critical for large-area DSSCs.
In summary, we have demonstrated the perspective of using carbon-based nanomaterials for the CEs in DSSCs. Especially, we have focused on the reproducible development of the carbon nanomaterial-based high transparency and conductivity CEs prepared by DSA process. It is noted that the performance of the commercial graphene and CNT source materials varies greatly with different production methods; as a result, there will be a lot of work to do to select the proper materials. Furthermore, there is considerable room left for the pre- and post-deposition treatments of the source materials to improve the performance of the final DSSC devices.
5. Conclusions
Until around 2010, the most efficient DSSC configurations were based on Ru coordination complex sensitizers with the triiodide/iodide redox system in a non-aqueous electrolyte and a Pt-coated counter electrode. More recently, the situation drastically changed with the introduction of other redox mediators, mainly coordination complexes of cobalt and ruthenium, in conjunction with the replacement of the Ru dye with metal-free organic dyes. This change has been necessitated due to the fact that the deleterious recombination reaction between oxide electrons and oxidized mediator, more pronounced for the one-electron, kinetically simple, new mediators than for the two-electron, kinetically complex, triiodide/iodide system, is lower. Furthermore, the platinum-based counter electrodes were less performant that alternative counter electrodes, including carbon-based counter electrodes, including recently developed varieties, like graphene and carbon nanotubes. Carbonaceous counter electrodes, based on an inexpensive earth-abundant element, would be obviously preferable to these based on noble metals for large-scale applications. In this respect, several novel forms of carbonaceous materials introduced to several fields of technology should be also of benefit to dye-sensitized solar cells. Novel materials in DSSCs offer the possibility to adapt them under variable illumination, outdoor or indoor illumination, to a wide range of applications, several of which, at the speculation stage at present, are expected to emerge in the foreseeable future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Ghufran Hashmi is grateful to Jane and Aatos Erkko Foundation and Technology Industries of Finland for the CAPRINT project funding (Decision# 243035481) and Dean's funding for highly ranked applicant at the Department of Applied Physics at Aalto University (Decision# 164/2018). Guobin Jia, Ruri Agung Wahyuono, Jonathan Plentz and Benjamin Dietzek gratefully acknowledge the provision of funding for parts of this work by the German Free State of Thuringia (TAB), co-financed by the European Social Fund (ESF) and European Regional Development Fund (ERDF) within the projects “ESTI” (2019 FGR 0080) and “FEST” (2016 FE 9028). They are also thankful to Dr Martin Lohe from Sixonia Tech GmbH for providing the graphene flakes suspension, to Dr Andrea Dellith (IPHT) for the SEM image, and to Ms Barbara Geisenhainer (IPHT) for the optical measurements.
References
Y. Cao, Y. Liu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Direct Contact of Selective Charge Extraction Layers Enables High-Efficiency Molecular Photovoltaics, Joule, 2018, 2, 1108–1117 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ardo and G. J. Meyer, Photodriven heterogeneous charge transfer with transition-metal compounds anchored to TiO2 semiconductor surfaces, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 115–164 RSC .
I. Benesperi, H. Michaels and M. Freitag, The researcher's guide to solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11903–11942 RSC .
J. Bisquert, D. Cahen, G. Hodes, A. Zaban and S. Rühle, 
            et al., Physical Chemical Principles of Photovoltaic Conversion with Nanoparticulate, Mesoporous Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 8106–8118 CrossRef CAS .
E. Figgemeier and A. Hagfeldt, Are dye-sensitized nano-structured solar cells stable? An overview of device testing and component analyses, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2004, 6, 127–140 CrossRef CAS .
M. Freitag and G. Boschloo, The revival of dye-sensitized solar cells, Curr. Opin. Electrochem., 2017, 2, 111–119 CrossRef CAS .
M. Grätzel, Photoelectrochemical cells. 414, Nature, 2001, 1, 338–344 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Solar energy conversion by dye-sensitized photovoltaic cells, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6841–6851 CrossRef .
M. Grätzel, Recent Advances in Sensitized Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1788–1798 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Light-Induced Redox Reactions in Nanocrystalline Systems, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 49–68 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Molecular photovoltaics, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 269–277 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS .
J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, K. Miettunen and P. Lund, Device physics of dye solar cells, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E210–E234 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. McEvoy and M. Grätzel, Sensitisation in photochemistry and photovoltaics, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1994, 32, 221–227 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Meyer, The 2010 millennium technology grand prize: dye-sensitized solar cells, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4337–4343 CrossRef CAS .
O. Mohiuddin, M. Obaidullah and C. Sabah, Improvement in dye sensitized solar cells from past to present, Opt. Quant. Electron., 2018, 50, 377 CrossRef .
B. C. O'Regan, J. R. Durrant, B. C. O'Regan, J. R. Durrant, B. C. O'Regan and J. R. Durrant, Kinetic and energetic paradigms for dye-sensitized solar cells: moving from the ideal to the real, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1799–1808 CrossRef .
L. Peter, Characterization and Modeling of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, ECS Trans., 2007, 6, 555–565 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. L. M. Peter, Dye-sensitized nanocrystalline solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 2630–2642 RSC .
V. Rondán-Gómez, I. Montoya De Los Santos, D. Seuret-Jiménez, F. Ayala-Mató, A. Zamudio-Lara and T. Robles-Bonilla, 
            et al., Recent advances in dye-sensitized solar cells vol. 125, Appl. Phys. A, 2019, 125, 836 CrossRef .
N. Vlachopoulosa, J. Zhang and A. Hagfeldta, Dye-sensitized solar cells: new approaches with organic solid-state hole conductors, Chimia, 2015, 69, 41–51 CrossRef .
N. Vlachopoulos and A. Hagfeldt, Photoelectrochemical cells based on dye sensitization for electricity and fuel production, Chimia, 2019, 73, 894–905 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Watson and G. J. Meyer, Electron injection at dye-sensitized semiconductor electrodes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2005, 56, 119–156 CrossRef CAS .

          K. Kalyanasundaram, Dye-sensitized solar cells, EPFL Press, Lausanne,  1990 Search PubMed .
C. J. Barbé, F. Arendse, P. Comte, M. Jirousek, F. Lenzmann and V. Shklover, 
            et al., Nanocrystalline titanium oxide electrodes for photovoltaic applications, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 80, 3157–3171 CrossRef .
K. Kakiage, Y. Aoyama, T. Yano, K. Oya, J.-I. J. Fujisawa and M. Hanaya, Highly-efficient dye-sensitized solar cells with collaborative sensitization by silyl-anchor and carboxy-anchor dyes, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 15894–15897 RSC .
J. Ji, H. Zhou, Y. K. Eom, C. H. Kim and H. K. Kim, 14.2% Efficiency Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells by Co-Sensitizing Novel Thieno[3,2-b]indole-Based Organic Dyes with a Promising Porphyrin Sensitizer, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000124 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Green, E. D. Dunlop, J. Hohl-Ebinger, M. Yoshita, N. Kopidakis and X. Hao, Solar cell efficiency tables (version 56), Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2020, 28, 629–638 CrossRef .
M. Freitag, Q. Daniel, M. Pazoki, K. Sveinbjörnsson, J. Zhang and L. Sun, 
            et al., High-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells with molecular copper phenanthroline as solid hole conductor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 5, 2634–2637 RSC .
J. Cong, D. Kinschel, Q. Daniel, M. Safdari, E. Gabrielsson and H. Chen, 
            et al., Bis(1,1-bis(2-pyridyl)ethane)copper(I/II) as an efficient redox couple for liquid dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 14550–14554 RSC .
Y. Saygili, M. Söderberg, N. Pellet, F. Giordano, Y. Cao and A. B. Munoz-García, 
            et al., Copper Bipyridyl Redox Mediators for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells with High Photovoltage, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15087–15096 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Cao, W. Zhang, M. Stojanovic, M. I. Dar and P. Péchy, 
            et al., Electron-Affinity-Triggered Variations on the Optical and Electrical Properties of Dye Molecules Enabling Highly Efficient Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14125–14128 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saygili, M. Stojanovic, H. Michaels, J. Tiepelt, J. Teuscher and A. Massaro, 
            et al., Effect of Coordination Sphere Geometry of Copper Redox Mediators on Regeneration and Recombination Behavior in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell Applications, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 4950–4962 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ren, N. Flores-Díaz, D. Zhang, Y. Cao, J. D. Decoppet and G. C. Fish, 
            et al., Blue Photosensitizer with Copper(II/I) Redox Mediator for Efficient and Stable Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2004804 CrossRef .
Y. Cao, Y. Saygili, A. Ummadisingu, J. Teuscher, J. Luo and N. Pellet, 
            et al., 11% Efficiency Solid-State Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells with Copper(II/I) Hole Transport Materials, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15390 CrossRef .
W. Zhang, Y. Wu, H. W. Bahng, Y. Cao, C. Yi and Y. Saygili, 
            et al., Comprehensive control of voltage loss enables 11.7% efficient solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1779–1787 RSC .
J. Desilvestro, M. Grätzel, L. Kavan, J. Moser and J. Augustynski, Highly Efficient Sensitization of Titanium Dioxide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1985, 107, 2988–2990 CrossRef CAS  ‏.
N. Vlachopoulos, P. Liska, J. Augustynski and M. Grätzel, Very Efficient Visible Light Energy Harvesting and Conversion by Spectral Sensitization of High Surface Area Polycrystalline Titanium Dioxide Films, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 1216–1220 CrossRef CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, A low-cost, high-efficiency solar cell based on dye-sensitized colloidal
TiO2 films, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .

          J. Zhang, M. Freitag, A. Hagfeldt and G. Boschloo, Solid-State Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, in Molecular Devices for Solar Energy Conversion and Storage, ed. H. Tian, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Springer-Nature, Singapore,  2018, pp. 151–185 Search PubMed .

          H. J. Snaith, Solid-state dye sensitized solar cells incorporating molecular hole-transporters, in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, ed. K. Kalyanasundaram, EPFL Press, Lausanne, Switzerland,  2010, pp. 163–206 Search PubMed .
B. Xu, E. Gabrielsson, M. Safdari, M. Cheng, Y. Hua and H. Tian, 
            et al., 1,1,2,2-Tetrachloroethane (TeCA) as a solvent additive for organic hole transport materials and its application in highly efficient solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402340 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, N. Vlachopoulos, M. Jouini, M. B. M. B. Johansson, X. Zhang and M. K. Nazeeruddin, 
            et al., Efficient solid-state dye sensitized solar cells: the influence of dye molecular structures for the in situ photoelectrochemically polymerized PEDOT as hole transporting material, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 455–470 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Feldt, E. A. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Design of Organic Dyes and Cobalt Polypyridine Redox Mediators for High-Efficiency Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Li and E. W. G. Diau, Porphyrin-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 291–304 RSC .
M. Liang and J. Chen, Arylamine organic dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3453–3488 RSC .
D. P. Hagberg, T. Edvinsson, T. Marinado, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, A novel organic chromophore for dye-sensitized nanostructured solar cells, Chem. Commun., 2006, 21, 2245–2247 RSC .
S. Rühle, M. Greenshtein, S. G. Chen, A. Merson, H. Pizem and C. S. Sukenik, 
            et al., Molecular adjustment of the electronic properties of nanoporous electrodes in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 18907–18913 CrossRef .
J. Mao, N. He, Z. Ning, Q. Zhang, F. Guo and L. Chen, 
            et al., Stable Dyes Containing Double Acceptors without COOH as Anchors for Highly Efficient Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9873–9876 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, B. Wang, R. Wang, L. Gao, S. Huo and Q. Liu, 
            et al., Influence of conjugated π-linker in D-D-π-A indoline dyes: towards long-term stable and efficient dye-sensitized solar cells with high photovoltage, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 804–812 RSC .
Y. Mizuno, Y. Yisilamu, T. Yamaguchi and M. Tomura, (Dibenzoylmethanato) boron Difluoride Derivatives Containing Triphenylamine Moieties: A New Type of Electron-Donor/p-Acceptor System for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20, 13286–13295 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Liu, W. L. Ding, K. L. Zhu, Z. Y. Geng, D. M. Wang and X. L. Zhao, The master factors influencing the efficiency of D-A-π-A configurated organic sensitizers in dye-sensitized solar cell via theoretically characterization: design and verification, Dyes Pigments, 2014, 105, 192–201 CrossRef CAS .
R. Grisorio, L. De Marco, R. Agosta, R. Iacobellis, R. Giannuzzi and M. Manca, 
            et al., Enhancing Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell Performances by Molecular Engineering: Highly Efficient π-Extended Organic Sensitizers, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2659–2669 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, B. Chen, W. Wu, X. Li, W. Zhu and H. Tian, 
            et al., Efficient Solar Cells Sensitized by Porphyrins with an Extended Conjugation Framework and a Carbazole Donor: From Molecular Design to Cosensitization, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10779–10883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, J. Y. Liao, D. Cao, X. Zang, D. B. Kuang and L. Wang, 
            et al., Organic dye bearing asymmetric double donor-π-Acceptor chains for dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Org. Chem., 2011, 76, 8015–8021 CrossRef CAS .
S. Haid, M. Marszalek, A. Mishra, M. Wielopolski, J. Teuscher and J.-E. J.-E. Moser, 
            et al., Significant Improvement of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cell Performance by Small Structural Modification in π-Conjugated Donor-Acceptor Dyes, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1291–1302 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Holcombe, J.-H. Yum, Y. Kim, K. Rakstys and M. Grätzel, Diketopyrrolopyrrole-based sensitizers for dye-sensitized solar cell applications: anchor engineering, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 13978–13983 RSC .
J.-H. J.-H. Yum, T. W. T. W. Holcombe, Y. Kim, J. Yoon, K. Rakstys and M. K. M. K. Nazeeruddin, 
            et al., Towards high-performance DPP-based sensitizers for DSC applications, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10727–10729 RSC .
K. Pei, Y. Wu, W. Wu, Q. Zhang, B. Chen and H. Tian, 
            et al., Constructing Organic D-A-π-A-Featured Sensitizers with a Quinoxaline Unit for High-Efficiency Solar Cells: The Effect of an Auxiliary Acceptor on the Absorption and the Energy Level Alignment, Chem. -Eur J., 2012, 18, 8190–8200 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Aumaitre, D. Joly, D. Aldakov and R. Demadrille, Alternative Binary and Ternary Metal Oxides for Dye- and Quantum Dot-Sensitized Solar Cells, in The Future of Semiconductor Oxides in Next-Generation Solar Cells, ed. M. Lira-Cantú, Elsevier,  2018, pp. 85–115 Search PubMed .
N. Papageorgiou, Counter-electrode function in nanocrystalline photoelectrochemical cell configurations, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1421–1446 CrossRef CAS .
M. Özkan, S. G. Hashmi, J. Halme, A. Karakoç, T. Sarikka and J. Paltakari, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed platinum counter electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells, Org. Electron., 2017, 44, 159–167 CrossRef .
S. G. Hashmi, M. Özkan, J. Halme, K. D. Misic, S. M. Zakeeruddin and J. Paltakari, 
            et al., High performance dye-sensitized solar cells with inkjet printed ionic liquid electrolyte, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 206–215 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hashmi, K. Miettunen, T. Peltola, J. Halme, I. Asghar and K. Aitola, 
            et al., Review of materials and manufacturing options for large area flexible dye solar cells, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 3717–3732 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H. W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran and M. K. Nazeeruddin, 
            et al., Porphyrin-sensitized solar cells with cobalt (II/III)-based redox electrolyte exceed 12 percent efficiency, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chiba, A. Islam, R. Komiya, N. Koide and L. Han, Conversion efficiency of 10.8% by a dye-sensitized solar cell using a TiO2 electrode with high haze, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 223505 CrossRef .
S. Yun, A. Hagfeldt and T. Ma, Pt-Free Counter Electrode for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells with High Efficiency, Adv. Mater., 2014, 36, 6210–6237 CrossRef .
S. G. Hashmi, G. G. Sonai, H. Iftikhar, P. D. Lund and A. F. Nogueira, Printed single-walled carbon-nanotubes-based counter electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells with copper-based redox mediators, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2019, 34, 105001 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Liu, Y. C. Hou, C. W. Li and Y. L. Lee, Highly electrocatalytic counter electrodes based on carbon black for cobalt(iii)/(ii)-mediated dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 240–249 RSC .
M. Wu, M. Sun, H. Zhou, J. Y. Ma and T. Ma, Carbon Counter Electrodes in Dye-Sensitized and Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1906451 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li and X. Gao, Low-Cost Counter-Electrode Materials for Dye-Sensitized and Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1806478 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Iqbal and S. Khan, Progress in the performance of dye sensitized solar cells by incorporating cost effective counter electrodes, Sol. Energy, 2018, 160, 130–152 CrossRef CAS .

Counter Electrodes for Dye-sensitized and Perovskite Solar Cells, ed. S. Yun and A. Hagfeldt, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2018, vol. 1–2 Search PubMed .
H. Ellis, N. Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, C. Perruchot, M. Jouini and G. Boschloo, 
            et al., PEDOT counter electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells prepared by aqueous micellar electrodeposition, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 107, 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. Freitag, J. Teuscher, Y. Saygili, X. Zhang, F. Giordano and P. Liska, 
            et al., Dye-sensitized solar cells for efficient power generation under ambient lighting, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
H. Michaels, M. Rinderle, R. Freitag, I. Benesperi, T. Edvinsson and R. Socher, 
            et al., Dye-sensitized solar cells under ambient light powering machine learning: towards autonomous smart sensors for the internet of things, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 2895–2906 RSC .
M. Freitag, F. Giordano, W. Yang, M. Pazoki, Y. Hao and B. Zietz, 
            et al., Copper phenanthroline as a fast and high-performance redox mediator for dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 9595–9603 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Pradhan, A. Hagfeldt and S. Soman, Resurgence of DSCs with copper electrolyte: a detailed investigation of interfacial charge dynamics with cobalt and iodine based electrolytes, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22204–22214 RSC .
M. Freitag, Q. Daniel, M. Pazoki, K. Sveinbjornsson, J. Zhang and L. Sun, 
            et al., High-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells with molecular copper phenanthroline as solid hole conductor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2634–2637 RSC .
M. K. Kashif, R. A. Milhuisen, M. Nippe, J. Hellerstedt, D. Z. Zee and N. W. Duffy, 
            et al., Cobalt Polypyridyl Complexes as Transparent Solution-Processable Solid-State Charge Transport Materials, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600874 CrossRef .
H. Michaels, I. Benesperi, T. Edvinsson, A. B. Muñoz-Garcia, M. Pavone and G. Boschloo, 
            et al., Copper Complexes with Tetradentate Ligands for Enhanced Charge Transport in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Inorganics, 2018, 6, 130 CrossRef .
T. J. Zerk, C. T. Saouma, J. M. Mayer and W. B. Tolman, Low Reorganization Energy for Electron Self-Exchange by a Formally Copper(III,II) Redox Couple, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 14151–14158 CrossRef CAS .
T. Higashino, H. Iiyama, S. Nimura, Y. Kurumisawa and H. Imahori, Effect of Ligand Structures of Copper Redox Shuttles on Photovoltaic Performance of Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Inorg. Chem., 2020, 59, 452–459 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Rodrigues, J. M. Lee, N. S. Taylor, H. Cheema, L. Chen and R. C. Fortenberry, 
            et al., Copper-based redox shuttles supported by preorganized tetradentate ligands for dye-sensitized solar cells, Dalton Trans., 2020, 49, 343–355 RSC .
A. Glinka, M. Gierszewski, B. Gierczyk, G. Burdziński, H. Michaels and M. Freitag, 
            et al., Interface Modification and Exceptionally Fast Regeneration in Copper Mediated Solar Cells Sensitized with Indoline Dyes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 2895–2906 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kubota, K. Kimura, J. Jin, K. Manseki, K. Funabiki and M. Matsui, Synthesis of near-infrared absorbing and fluorescing thiophene-fused BODIPY dyes with strong electron-donating groups and their application in dye-sensitised solar cells, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 1156–1165 RSC .
Y. Haishima, Y. Kubota, K. Manseki, J. Jin, Y. Sawada and T. Inuzuka, 
            et al., Wide-Range Near-Infrared Sensitizing 1H-Benzo[c,d]indol-2-ylidene-Based Squaraine Dyes for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, J. Org. Chem., 2018, 83, 4389–4401 CrossRef CAS .
N. Barbero, C. Magistris, J. Park, D. Saccone, P. Quagliotto and R. Buscaino, 
            et al., Microwave-Assisted Synthesis of Near-Infrared Fluorescent Indole-Based Squaraines, Org. Lett., 2015, 17, 3306–3309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Lan, J. Lin, M. Huang, Y. Huang and L. Fan, 
            et al., Counter electrodes in dye-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5975–6023 RSC .
J. Velten, A. J. Mozer, D. Li, D. Officer, G. Wallace and R. Baughman, 
            et al., Carbon nanotube/graphene nanocomposite as efficient counter electrodes in dye-sensitized solar cells, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 085201 CrossRef .
Z. Yang, M. Liu, C. Zhang, W. W. Tjiu, T. Liu and H. Peng, Carbon nanotubes bridged with graphene nanoribbons and their use in high-efficiency dye-sensitized solar cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3996–3999 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kavan, Y. Saygili, M. Freitag, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Electrochemical Properties of Cu(II/I)-Based Redox Mediators for Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 227, 194–202 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kay and M. Grätzel, Low cost photovoltaic modules based on dye sensitized nanocrystalline titanium dioxide and carbon powder, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1996, 44, 99–117 CrossRef CAS .
M. Stefik, J. H. Yum, Y. Hu and M. Grätzel, Carbon-graphene nanocomposite cathodes for improved Co(ii/iii) mediated dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4982–4987 RSC .
A. Yella, H.-W. H.-W. W. Lee, H. N. H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. A. K. Chandiran and M. K. K. Nazeeruddin, 
            et al., Porphyrin-sensitized solar cells with cobalt (II/III)-based redox electrolyte exceed 12 percent efficiency, Science, 2011, 334, 629–634 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod and N. Ashari-Astani, 
            et al., Dye-sensitized solar cells with 13% efficiency achieved through the molecular engineering of porphyrin sensitizers, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sauvage, A Review on Current Status of Stability and Knowledge on Liquid Electrolyte-Based Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, Adv. Chem., 2014, 2014, 1–23 CrossRef .
M. I. Asghar, K. Miettunen, J. Halme, P. Vahermaa, M. Toivola and K. Aitola, 
            et al., Review of stability for advanced dye solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 418–426 RSC .
H. Iftikhar, G. G. Sonai, S. G. Hashmi, A. F. Nogueira and P. D. Lund, Progress on electrolytes development in dye-sensitized solar cells, Materials, 2019, 12, 1998 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. S. G. Hashmi, M. Ozkan, J. Halme, K. D. K. D. Misic, S. M. S. M. Zakeeruddin and J. Paltakari, 
            et al., High performance dye-sensitized solar cells with inkjet printed ionic liquid electrolyte, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 206–215 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kato, K. Higuchi, H. Tanaka, J. Nakajima, T. Sano and T. Toyoda, Improvement in long-term stability of dye-sensitized solar cell for outdoor use, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 301–305 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hattori, Y. Wada, S. Yanagida and S. Fukuzumi, Blue copper model complexes with distorted tetragonal geometry acting as effective electron-transfer mediators in dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9648–9654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, Q. Yu, N. Cai, Y. Wang, M. Zhang and P. Wang, High-efficiency organic dye-sensitized mesoscopic solar cells with a copper redox shuttle, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4376–4378 RSC .
M. O. Reese, S. A. Gevorgyan, M. Jørgensen, E. Bundgaard, S. R. Kurtz and D. S. Ginley, 
            et al., Consensus stability testing protocols for organic photovoltaic materials and devices, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1253–1267 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Khenkin, E. A. Katz, A. Abate, G. Bardizza, J. J. Berry and C. Brabec, 
            et al., Consensus statement for stability assessment and reporting for perovskite photovoltaics based on ISOS procedures, Nat. Energy, 2020, 5, 35–49 CrossRef .
L. Kavan, H. Krysova, P. Janda, H. Tarabkova, Y. Saygili and M. Freitag, 
            et al., Novel highly active Pt/graphene catalyst for cathodes of Cu(II/I)-mediated dye-sensitized solar cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 251, 167–175 CrossRef CAS .
R. García-Rodríguez, R. Jiang, E. J. Canto-Aguilar, G. Oskam and G. Boschloo, Improving the mass transport of copper-complex redox mediators in dye-sensitized solar cells by reducing the inter-electrode distance, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 32132–32142 RSC .
A. Yella, S. Mathew, S. Aghazada, P. Comte, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Dye-sensitized solar cells using cobalt electrolytes: the influence of porosity and pore size to achieve high-efficiency, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 2833–2843 RSC .
H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, L.-H. Johansson and P. Johander, Manufacturing method for monolithic dye-sensitised solar cells permitting long-term stable low-power modules, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2003, 77, 405–413 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pettersson, T. Gruszecki, R. Bernhard, L. Häggman, M. Gorlov and G. Boschloo, 
            et al., The monolithic multicell: a tool for testing material components in dye-sensitized solar cells, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2007, 15, 113–121 CrossRef CAS .
S. G. Hashmi, J. Halme, T. Saukkonen, E.-L. Rautama and P. Lund, High performance low temperature carbon composite catalysts for flexible dye sensitized solar cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 17689–17695 RSC .
G. T. Yue, J. H. Wu, Y. M. Xiao, J. M. Lin, M. L. Huang and L. Q. Fan, 
            et al., A dye-sensitized solar cell based on PEDOT: PSS counter electrode, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2013, 58, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kaskela, A. G. Nasibulin, M. Y. Timmermans, B. Aitchison, A. Papadimitratos and Y. Tian, 
            et al., Aerosol-synthesized SWCNT networks with tunable conductivity and transparency by a dry transfer technique, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4349–4355 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aitola, A. Kaskela, J. Halme, V. Ruiz, A. G. Nasibulin and E. I. Kauppinen, 
            et al., Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Thin-Film Counter Electrodes for Indium Tin Oxide-Free Plastic Dye Solar Cells, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, B1831–B1837 CrossRef CAS .
K. Aitola, K. Sveinbjörnsson, J. P. Correa-Baena, A. Kaskela, A. Abate and Y. Tian, 
            et al., Carbon nanotube-based hybrid hole-transporting material and selective contact for high efficiency perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 9, 461–466 RSC .
X. Wang, L. Zhi and K. Müllen, Transparent, conductive graphene electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 323–327 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dodoo-Arhin, R. C. T. Howe, G. Hu, Y. Zhang, P. Hiralal and A. Bello, 
            et al., Inkjet-printed graphene electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells, Carbon, 2016, 105, 33–41 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pang, L. Dong, S. Ma, H. Dong and L. Yu, Performance of FTO-free conductive graphene-based counter electrodes for dye-sensitized solar cells, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 41287–41293 RSC .
Z. Chu, Y. Wang, L. Jiao and X. Zhang, Laser-scribed reduced graphene oxide as counter electrode for dye-sensitized solar cell, Fullerenes, Nanotub. Carbon Nanostruct., 2019, 27, 914–919 CrossRef CAS .

          G. Jia, J. Plentz and G. Andrä, Verfahren zur Beschichtung eines Substrats mit Graphen,  2017, Patent DE 1020171068074 .
G. Jia, J. Plentz, M. Presselt, J. Dellith, A. Dellith and S. Patze, 
            et al., A Double Self-Assembly Process for Versatile Reduced-Graphene-Oxide Layer Deposition and Conformal Coating on 3D Structures, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700758 CrossRef .
G. Jia, J. Plentz, J. Dellith, A. Dellith, R. A. Wahyuono and G. Andrä, Large area graphene deposition on hydrophobic surfaces, flexible textiles, glass fibers and 3D structures, Coatings, 2019, 9, 183 CrossRef .
R. A. Wahyuono, G. Jia, J. Plentz, A. Dellith, J. Dellith and F. Herrmann-Westendorf, 
            et al., Self Assembled Graphene/MWCNT Bilayers as Platinum-Free Counter Electrode in Dye-Sensitized Solar Cells, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 3336–3345 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jia, A. Gawlik, J. Plentz and G. Andrä, Bifacial multicrystalline silicon thin film solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 167, 102–108 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Y. Li, Q. Tang, G. Yue, J. Lin and M. Huang, 
            et al., Bifacial dye-sensitized solar cells: a strategy to enhance overall efficiency based on transparent polyaniline electrode, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. A. Hashemi, S. Ramakrishna and A. G. Aberle, Recent progress in flexible–wearable solar cells for self-powered electronic devices, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 685–743 RSC .
R. Arat, G. Jia and J. Plentz, Low temperature chemical treatment of graphene films made by double self-assembly process to improve sheet resistance, Diamond and Related Materials, to be published., Diamond Relat. Mater. Search PubMed  , to be published.
I. K. Moon, J. Lee, R. S. Ruoff and H. Lee, Reduced graphene oxide by chemical graphitization, Nat. Commun., 1, 1–6 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Anders Hagfeldt	Anders Hagfeldt is Professor of Physical Chemistry at the Swiss Federal Institute of Technology in Lausanne (EPFL). He obtained his PhD degree from Uppsala University in 1993 and was a postdoctoral fellow with Professor Michael Gratzel (1993–1994) at EPFL. His research focuses on the fields of dye-sensitized solar cells, perovskite solar cells, and solar fuels. According to Web of Science, July 2019, he has published more than 510 scientific papers that have received over 60000 citations (h index of 117). From 2014 to 2018, he was on the list of Thomson Reuter's Highly Cited Researchers. He is a member of, for example, the Royal Swedish Academy of Sciences, Stockholm, and the Royal Swedish Academy of Engineering Sciences. He is Doctor Honoris Causa at Paris Diderot University, France.
Iacopo Benesperi	Iacopo Benesperi obtained his PhD in Chemistry from Monash University in 2017 for his work on hole conductors for perovskite solar cells. Since January 2018 he has been working as a postdoctoral fellow at Uppsala University, focusing on the synthesis of copper complexes and their application in dye-sensitised solar cells.
Marina Freitag	Dr Marina Freitag is presently a Royal Society University Research Fellow at Newcastle University, UK, continuing her work in coordination chemistry and solar cells. Previously, she held a post-doc positions at EPFL, Switzerland and Uppsala University, Sweden (Prof. Anders Hagfeldt). She received her PhD degree with Prof. Galoppini from Rutgers University, USA, and her BSc, in Chemistry from Freie Universität Berlin, Germany. She is the inventor of the so-called Zombie-cell and she contributed to recent breakthroughs in dye-sensitized solar cells for low-power IoT applications.
Ghufran Hashmi	Dr Ghufran Hashmi has recently joined as Tenure Track Assistant Professor the Microelectronics Research Unit of Oulu University – Finland. He has been actively involved in developing next generation photovoltaic devices, in particularly photovoltaic technologies based on dye-sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells. He is one of the researchers from Pakistan who was awarded the Academy of Finland's prestigious post-doctoral fellowship (2015–2018). He received his DSc Degree in Engineering Physics from Aalto University – Finland in 2014. Before that, he received his MSc Degree in Micro- and Nanotechnology from Helsinki University of Technology – Finland in 2009 and BS Degree in Biomedical Engineering from Sir Syed University of Engineering and Technology – Pakistan in 2002. He has authored nearly 30 scientific publications, which have received 720+ citations.
Guobin Jia	Guobin Jia was born in 1971. He studied Metal Physics at Lanzhou University (China), and obtained his PhD at Brandenburg University of Technology Cottbus-Senftenberg (Germany) in 2009, under the supervision of Prof. Martin Kittler in the field of Semiconductor Physics. He joined the Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technology in Jena in 2010. He has worked on different materials for almost 30 years, ranging from metals, semiconductors, polymers, biomaterials, nanomaterials (including 1D, 2D) in the preparation, characterization and processing for the applications in energy harvesting and storage, light emitting diodes, sensing, quantum detection, photonics, smart textiles etc.
Jonathan Plentz	Jonathan Plentz was born in 1982 and studied engineering physics at the University of Technology Ilmenau (Germany), where he received his PhD in laser-crystallized silicon thin-film solar cells in 2013. In 2005 he joined the Department Photovoltaic Systems at Leibniz Institute of Photonic Technology (IPHT) in Jena (Germany) and since 2019 he is head of the work group Photonic Thin Film Systems. His research is in the field of functional thin film systems mainly based on silicon and nanostructures for photovoltaics, sensors and smart textiles. He is (co-)author of more than 60 written publications and has 5 patents pending.

 	Fig. 1  Structures of metal complex electrolytes/hole transporting materials used for the fabrication of liquid/solid state DSSCs discussed in this perspective.	 

 	Fig. 2  Structures of dyes used with copper complex electrolytes and of NIR dyes discussed in this perspective.	 

Co(bpyPY4)	Y123	0.768	12.1	62	5.68	
44

Cu(tmby)2	WS-72	1.07	13.8	79	11.7	
9

Cu(oxabpy)	Y123	0.92	9.75	69	6.2	
45

Cu(bp)2	LEG4	0.842	10.6	66.4	5.90	
47

Cu(dmp)2	LEG4	1.03	10.0	60.9	6.29	
47

Cu(emp)2	LEG4	0.823	7.52	52.6	3.25	
47

Cu(dep)2	LEG4	0.813	6.77	46.4	2.56	
47

Cu(dpp)2	LEG4	0.848	4.18	62.4	2.21	
47

Cu(1)	Y123	689	5.7	77	3.1	
48

Cu(2)	Y123	693	10.2	72	4.7	
48

Cu(3)	Y123	792	7.9	75	4.3	
48

Co(bpy)3	Y123	818	14.6	73	8.9	
48

Cu(tmby)2	D205	0.92	6.12	82	4.60	
49

Cu(tmby)2	D205Si	0.95	6.40	78	4.75	
49


Dye 5	783	Iodine	0.431	4.98	65	1.40	
50

Dye 6	812	Iodine	0.435	3.96	65	1.12	
50

SQ1	771	Iodine	0.300	4.39	56	0.74	
51

SQ2	784	Iodine	0.300	6.22	47	0.89	
51

SQ3	796	Iodine	0.315	9.20	45	1.31	
51

SQ4	806	Iodine	0.266	3.81	56	0.56	
51

SQ5	818	Iodine	0.276	1.77	59	0.29	
51

SQ6	820	Iodine	0.289	1.45	60	0.25	
51

SQ7	815	Iodine	0.279	2.05	52	0.30	
51


 	Fig. 3  (a) SEM image showing multilayer graphene flakes with them connected to each other at their edges; (b) the transmission spectrum of the MGFs (corrected spectrum neglecting the contribution of the glass substrate).	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
