Atomic-scale analysis of the physical strength and phonon transport mechanisms of monolayer β-bismuthene   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CP04785F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CP04785F
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 28238-28255Atomic-scale analysis of the physical strength and phonon transport mechanisms of monolayer β-bismuthene†

        
          
            Emdadul Haque 
            Chowdhury
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Md. Habibur 
            Rahman
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pritom 
            Bose
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Rahul 
            Jayan
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Md Mahbubul 
            Islam
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Bangladesh University of Engineering and Technology, Dhaka 1000, Bangladesh
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Wayne State University, Detroit, MI 48202, USA. E-mail: mahbub.islam@wayne.edu
Received 
      10th September 2020
    , Accepted 20th November 2020First published on 9th December 2020AbstractBismuthene has opened up a new avenue in the field of nanotechnology because of its spectacular electronic and thermoelectric features. The strong spin–orbit-coupling enables its operation as the largest nontrivial bandgap topological insulator and quantum spin hall material at room temperature, which is unlikely for any other 2D material. It is also known to be the most promising thermoelectric material due to its remarkable thermoelectric properties, including a substantially high power factor. However, an in-depth understanding of the mechanical and thermal transport properties of bismuthene is crucial for its practical implementation and efficient operation. Employing the Stillinger–Weber potential, we utilized molecular dynamics simulations to inspect the mechanical strength and thermal conductivity of the monolayer β-bismuthene for the first time. We analyzed the effect of temperature on the tensile mechanical properties along the armchair and zigzag directions of bismuthene nanosheets and found that increasing temperature causes a significant deterioration in these properties. The material shows superior fracture resistance with zigzag loading, whereas the armchair direction exhibits an improved elasticity. Next, we showed that increasing vacancy concentration and crack length notably reduce the fracture stress and strain of β-bismuthene. Under all these conditions, β-bismuthene showed a strong chirality effect under tensile loading. We also explored the fracture phenomena of a pre-cracked β-bismuthene, which reveal that the armchair-directed crack possesses a higher fracture resistance than the zigzag-directed crack. Interestingly, branching phenomena occurred during crack propagation for the armchair crack; meanwhile, the crack propagates perpendicular to loading for the zigzag crack. Afterward, we investigated the effect of loading rate on the fracture properties of bismuthene along the armchair and zigzag directions. Finally, we calculated the thermal conductivity of bismuthene under the influence of temperature and vacancy and recorded a substantial decrement in thermal conductivity with increasing temperature and vacancy. The obtained results are comprehensively discussed in the light of phonon density of states, phonon dispersion spectrum, and phonon group velocities. It is also disclosed that the thermal conductivity of β-bismuthene is considerably lower than that of other analogous honeycomb structures. This study can add a new dimension to the successful realization of bismuthene in future (opto)electronic, spintronic, and thermoelectric devices.
1. Introduction
Two-dimensional (2D) nanostructures have triggered a great deal of attention both in academia and industry owing to their astounding dimension-tunable thermophysical1 and chemical2 properties, rendering them an excellent harbinger for high-performance nanoelectromechanical systems (NEMSs), (opto)electronics, catalysis, and energy storage devices.3 The fairly large variation in intra- and interlayer bonding enables 2D nanomaterials to exhibit extremely anisotropic mechanical and thermo-electrical behaviors including high optical and UV adsorption, mechanical flexibility, superior strength, superconductivity as well as high carrier mobility.2,4
The successful synthesis and the phenomenal mechanical,5 optical,6 electrocatalytic,7 and extraordinary electronic8 characteristics of the first discovered honeycomb graphene render it an outstanding contender as a building block for future nanotechnology. However, despite having extremely high electronic transport features owing to their massless Dirac fermions as charge carriers, excellent noise immunity, and many other exotic physical properties, its semi-metallic characteristics obstruct its implementation in several high-performance electronic devices. In particular, graphene has a poor on/off-current ratio (below 10 near room temperature) and a low Seebeck coefficient resulting from its null bandgap, which is not suitable for logic circuit operations.9,10 Moreover, graphene-based devices have low energy conversion efficiency due to its tremendously high thermal conductivity.11 Thus, the integration of graphene in digital applications leads to high power consumption, preventing its successful realization in several semiconductor and thermoelectric applications, which has stimulated the quest for an appropriate alternative 2D honeycomb from group IV or group V. Nevertheless, several fascinating properties of the group-V compounds regarded commonly as pnictogens, allow them to be more appropriate for functional applications relative to the group-IV materials. In contrast to the semi-metallic nature of the group-IV elements, the 2D monolayers of pnictogens are insulators or semiconductors covering a broad range of electronic bandgaps,12,13 and their band topology can be effectively tuned by applying external electric fields, lattice strain,14,15 and chemical adsorption,16 which are ideal for broadband photo-response applications.17
The recent extraction of phosphorene from black phosphorous,18 its successful realization in field-effect transistors (FETs),19 as well as its outstanding properties such as a tunable bandgap (200 meV), large on/off ratios (>105), high carrier mobility (103–104 cm2 V−1 s−1), and strong in-plane anisotropy4,17,20 have sparked curiosity in discovering 2D allotropes of the following pnictogens. Owing to their superior chemical, electronic and thermophysical characteristics,4,12 novel 2D pnictogens are expected to be a suitable competitor of graphene. Among all pnictogens, the 2D monolayer bismuthenes are of special importance due to their extremely versatile electronic properties arising from a greater atomic number (Z = 83) and a highly buckled topology of 1.74 Å.21 By the virtue of a strong spin–orbit-coupling (SOC), the buckled honeycomb bismuthene is reported to be the highest nontrivial bandgap (>600 meV) 2D topological insulator (TI) in its natural state,22,23 as compared to other pnictogens that are traditional semiconductors (nitrogen is an insulator).13 The electronic bandgap of bismuthene can be tuned within a wide range of 0–900 meV by configuring its structural and chemical properties like thickness and phase.12,24 Most interestingly, by engineering the SOC strength and lattice strain, the topological phases of the single-layer bismuthene can be transformed over a large region in the phase diagram including a zero bandgap metal, a topological semimetal, a null-gap Dirac semimetal, TI, direct and indirect bandgap semiconductors, and conventional insulators.21 In fact, bismuthene and its alloys such as Bi2Se3, Bi2Te3, BixSb1−x, Bi1.1Sb0.9Te2S, etc. possess the most promising topological insulator properties,25,26 due to their considerably high SOC which scales as the fourth order of the atomic number.25 The large bandgap of 900 meV12,24 of bismuthene resulting in a strong SOC, ultimately enables them to be a quantum spin hall material at the practical operating conditions,25 which is a big challenge for the group-IV elements as their predicted bandgaps are smaller than 100 meV25 due to substantially weaker SOC, thus limiting their room temperature operation as FETs.
Although recently 2D single-layer bismuthene was experimentally synthesized over various substrates including NbSe2,27 SiC25 and graphene,28 free-standing stable bismuthene has not been realized so far. However, there are several predictions and theoretical studies available exploring its electronic, structural, and thermoelectric properties. Bismuthene possesses a large number of other fascinating characteristics such as highly anisotropic transport properties,29 the highest resistivity and Hall coefficient among all materials,29–31 sizeable SOC, a semimetal band structure,32 high stability at room temperature,33 broadband optical response, topological nontriviality,34 a high carrier mobility ranging between 5.7 × 106 (in the bulk) to 300 cm2 V−1 s−1 (monolayer),35 a moderate bandgap, metal–semiconductor transition under strain,36 easy transferability from the parent to another substrate without altering its optical, electrical, and structural properties,35 and robust TI states under strain and electric field.37 All these fascinating properties render bismuthene a remarkable candidate for all-optical switchers,38 light modulation and photodetectors, light-emitting devices, solar cells,26 electrochemical sensing,39 cooling and power generation, spintronics, optronics, and many other electronic applications.40,41
Meanwhile, intensive research has been focused on increasing the efficiency of thermoelectric materials in recent years, as such materials can convert waste heat to electricity through the Seebeck effect, thereby mitigating issues associated with global warming and the scarcity of natural energy resources. Materials having a low thermal conductivity and/or a high power factor, that is the product of electrical conductivity and Seebeck coefficient, are desired for achieving an increased thermoelectric figure of merit (ZT),36 which is a non-dimensional quantity for evaluating the conversion efficiency of thermoelectric materials. Bismuth-based compounds, for instance, Bi2Te2X (X = S, Se, Te), (Bi2Te3),42 and (BiSb) alloys41 are known to be the most promising materials for thermoelectric applications near room temperature43,44 due to a number of interesting features including low thermal conductivity because of its large atomic mass causing increased anharmonic phonon scattering and small group velocity of phonons,42 highly anisotropic Fermi surface,29 long carrier mean free path,45 high carrier mobility, low carrier density,29 long electron wavelength and negligible carrier effective mass.32 In addition, the ZT value of bismuthene monolayers is 2.4 at 300 K, which is substantially higher than that of bulk Bi-based compounds. More interestingly, upon increasing the temperature to 500 K, this value can be increased up to 4.1,41 rendering bismuthene a promising candidate for thermoelectric operations.
Although a lot of endeavors have been devoted towards analyzing the structural and electronic properties of 2D monolayer bismuthene, its mechanical properties, thermal transport and failure mechanisms remain unexplored. There are very few investigations in the literature reporting the mechanical properties and almost no studies are available regarding the thermal conductivity of monolayer bismuthene nanosheets. Utilizing first-principles calculations, Akturk et al.46 confirmed the stability of an asymmetric washboard bismuthene monolayer at high temperature and showed that by transforming from the 3D crystal to the monolayer honeycomb structure, the semimetal nature of bulk bismuth can be converted into that of a semiconductor. They also evaluated the response of Poisson's ratio and in-plane stiffness under strain. Aghdasi et al.47 investigated the effects of introducing H, F, Cl, and Br atoms as adsorbents on the elastic and bulk moduli of a bismuthene nanosheet subjected to uniaxial and biaxial loading, and reported a notable decrease of the elastic and bulk moduli of the adsorbed nanosheet compared to its pristine state.
It is crucial to investigate physical properties such as stress–strain response, Young's modulus, ultimate tensile strength, thermal conductivity, effects of various defects, and fracture mechanism of β-bismuthene both in theory and in experiments for ensuring better performance, life-time, efficient heat dissipation, and thermal management in bismuthene-based (opto)electronic, thermoelectric, and spintronic devices. To shed some light on the above discussed facts, the current work, therefore, aims to investigate the mechanical, thermal transport, and fracture characteristics of monolayer β-bismuthene nanosheets both in the armchair and zigzag loading directions. The effects of temperature, mono-vacancy, crack length, and loading rate on the stress–strain behavior, UTS, fracture strain, Young's modulus, and thermal conductivity of β-bismuthene have been thoroughly investigated. Finally, the fracture phenomenon of pre-cracked β-bismuthene has been explored as well. Although there is another stable phase of bismuthene that is the asymmetric washboard (α-bismuthene),26 our investigation is limited to the β-phase (hexagonally buckled honeycomb phase) only. Note that β-bismuthene would be denoted as bismuthene in the following sections (Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  (a) Magnified top view of the initial coordinates of a 40 nm × 40 nm bismuthene nanosheet displaying both the armchair and the zigzag directions, and the bond length between Bi–Bi has been considered to be 0.304 nm (b) front view of the bismuthene with a buckling height of 0.173 nm. 
2. Computational methods
To calculate the mechanical and thermal properties of bismuthene, we conducted molecular dynamics (MD) simulations using the Large Scale Atomic/Molecular Massively Parallel Simulator (LAMMPS) package.48 We have utilized the potential of Stillinger–Weber (SW)49 to describe the interatomic interactions. The parameters of the SW potential for bismuthene are provided in the ESI.†
In both mechanical and thermal analyses, a 40 nm × 40 nm monolayer bismuthene nanosheet (BiNS) is used. The influence of the size of the BiNS on the tensile properties has been provided in the ESI.† To predict the tensile properties, first, the structure is minimized using the conjugate gradient scheme, followed by constant energy (NVE) simulations for 50 ps with a time step of 1 fs. After that, NPT (constant pressure, temperature) simulations are conducted at atmospheric pressure for 50 ps to ensure that no residual stress remains in the system. The temperature and pressure damping parameters are considered to be 0.5 ps. Canonical NVT (constant volume, temperature) simulations are then conducted for 20 ps. Eventually, uniaxial tensile strain is imposed along with the armchair and zigzag paths at various strain rates such as 108 s−1, 5 × 108 s−1, 109 s−1, 5 × 109 s−1, 1010 s−1 under NVT ensembles. A periodic boundary condition is applied along the loading direction, and during the simulation process, a 5 nm gap is maintained in the simulation box along the z-axis to avoid any interaction across the periodic boundary. This implemented strain rate is much higher than that of actual situations; nevertheless, such high strain rates are very frequent in MD simulations in order to overcome the limitations associated with computational power and simulation time.50–52 Atomistic inspections of the generated data are done using OVITO.53 Note that we report the stress and the Young's modulus in terms of force per unit length (GPa nm or N m−1) instead of force per unit area. The atomic stress is determined using the virial stress theorem50,51 (ESI†). The results corresponding to the temperature dependent tensile strength, defects, and crack length on the tensile properties of BiNS are provided for a strain rate of 109 (s−1).
To establish the accuracy of our computational code and the interatomic potential function, the Young's modulus of the monolayer bismuthene at 300 K is compared with the existing literature.47 The predicted Young's moduli of bismuthene along the armchair and zigzag directions are ∼26.1 N m−1 and ∼25.46 N m−1, respectively, which are quite close to those reported in the literature47 (26.25 N m−1 along the armchair and 26.25 N m−1 along the zigzag direction). From comparison, we could conclusively claim that the potential used to govern the interatomic interactions in this analysis is capable enough to correctly reflect the mechanical properties of the system.
In this investigation, non-equilibrium molecular dynamics (NEMD) simulations are conducted for studying the phonon transport mechanism of monolayer BiNS.54,55 The thermal conductivity is calculated using Fourier's law,  Here, j represents the heat flux and can be expressed as  where  corresponds to the resulting heat current in a particular direction; A is the area of cross-section of the nanosheet and K represents the thermal conductivity. In order to minimize the residual stresses as well as for stabilizing the pressure and temperature of the system, using canonical simulations with the NPT and NVT ensemble were performed for 200 ps each. When the system reached equilibrium, employing the NVE integration technique for 500 ps, a small quantity of thermal energy is extracted from the sink while a similar amount of energy is supplied to the source. For establishing heat transfer between the heat source and the heat sink as well as for achieving the equilibrium state, the Nose–Hoover thermal bath algorithm is introduced in addition to the NVE ensemble.55 Afterwards, the simulation was continued for a further 1000 ps to obtain the temperature gradient from the time-averaged temperature profiles.55 The entire thermal conductivity analysis is performed following the heat flux control method.55
The phonon transport mechanism is the key to thermal transport in materials like monolayer bismuthene. In this study, we calculate the phonon density of states (PDOS) and dispersion curves at different temperatures to discover the underlying phonon mechanisms responsible for conductivity variation with temperature. We also calculated PDOS with defect percentage. Fully anharmonic phonon calculations are performed using the Fix Phonon code developed by Kong et al.56–58 Within its accommodation, molecular dynamics trajectories are used to calculate the Green Function coefficients in the reciprocal space, from which dynamical matrix and dispersion relations are derived. In our simulations, we relaxed the system for 2 ns, and then the final trajectory was used to calculate the Green's function coefficient according to the following equation:  Here  is the Green's function coefficient in the reciprocal space, k, k′ are basis atom indices, α, β are axis notations, q is the wave vector and 〈kα(q)〉 is the Fourier transformation of the mean positions of the wave vector q. Acoustic summation is forced in 100 iteration steps. Using Green's function coefficient, force constants,  and dynamical matrix, D is calculated using the following relations:kα,k′β(q) = KBT[−1(q)]kα,k′β  The dispersion relation is calculated from the eigenvectors of the dynamical matrix, D, and phonon density of states is calculated by integrating the dispersion relation along the frequency axis. We calculated phonon group velocity by differentiating dispersion relation from the associated wave vectors.59
2.1 Heat flux control method
In this method, a constant heat flux is established throughout the simulation domain in a particular direction and the corresponding temperature gradient  is calculated after attaining the steady-state equilibrium conditions.55 For this reason, a system consisting of one heat source and two heat sinks are considered.55 As shown in Fig. 2, the 2 nm thick heat source is situated in the middle, and two heat sinks of the same thickness are positioned at both ends of the simulation domain. A consistent heat flux was established until a constant temperature profile with time was achieved, representing an equilibrium condition throughout the computational domain. To calculate the thermal conductivity with high spatial and temporal precision, temperature samples each averaging over 2 nm wide segments along the x-direction are used to set sample data,55 and thus, a statistically reasonable temperature profile (Fig. 2) was obtained to quantify the thermal conductivity of the BiNS.
 Fig. 2  Snapshot of initial coordinates of 40 nm × 40 nm β-bismuthene with a magnified view. It is evident that heat is flowing along the armchair direction from the source to the sink. Temperature gradients are calculated using the linear segments of the temperature profile. 
It is worth mentioning that the second heat sink is located outside the simulation domain, due to the fact that periodic boundary condition is applied along the flow direction. The simulation domain is divided into 20 bins, and consequently, the temperature of the second heat sink (21st bin) is the same as that of the first heat sink (1st bin). As the temperature of the 21st bin is not present in the temperature profile, an asymmetric nature can be observed in the profile. In the calculation of thermal conductivity, both sides of the temperature profile have been considered by taking the average of slopes computed from both sides, marked by a solid black line in the temperature profile of BiNS shown in Fig. 2. Therefore, the final slope can be described as = (slope of the left side + slope of the right side)/2. Because of the presence of non-linear regions in the proximity of the hot and cold bins, stemming from the strong inelastic scattering in the respective bins, we considered only the linear segments of the profile in the calculations of temperature gradients. Such an approach has been widely used in previous literature studies as well.60–64 Note that contrasting procedures are also found in the literature. Hu et al.65 obtained the temperature gradient directly dividing the temperature difference by the length. However, such an approach may introduce inaccuracies in the gradient due to the non-linearity in the profile.
It is important to note that the thickness of the monolayer BiNS considered for calculating the thermal conductivity was 0.65 nm, as reported by Yang et al.66 As mentioned earlier, no data are available for the thermal conductivity of BiNS therefore, we could not make a comparison of the data with any reference. However, the SW potential and its optimized versions are successfully used for predicting the thermal conductivity of other 2D materials such as silicene,10 polycrystalline silicene,67 MoS2,68 WSe269 and phosphorene.70 Besides, we found that our predicted thermal conductivity is reasonably consistent with that of other 2D materials (Table 1). For each data point, three independent samples are prepared with different velocity distributions (i.e., velocity seeds), and the corresponding errors are provided in all the plots.
Table 1 Comparison of lattice thermal conductivity of bismuthene nanosheet with analogous 2D materials at 300 K




Material
Bond length (Ang)
Buckling height (Ang)
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)




Graphene
∼1.42
Perfect planar
∼3000–500011


h-BN
∼1.45
Perfect planar
∼550125


SiC
∼1.79
Perfect planar
∼313126


Silicene
∼2.28
∼0.44
∼2081,127


Germanene
∼2.43
∼0.73
∼10.5128


Stanene
∼2.86
∼0.86
∼11.6129


Bismuthene
∼3.04
∼1.73
∼1.3 [Present study]


Bismuthene (1% vacancy)
∼3.04
∼1.73
∼0.75 [Present study]




3. Results and discussions
3.1 Effect of temperature on the tensile mechanical properties of β-bismuthene
We investigated the effects of temperature on the uniaxial tensile-mechanical properties such as ultimate tensile stress (UTS), fracture strain, and YM of the BiNS both in the armchair and zigzag loading directions. Fig. 3(a and b) illustrates the stress–strain response of the BiNS in both directions for a temperature range of 100–500 K. From the stress–strain response, it is apparent that, when the applied strain is very small (less than 4%), stress increases linearly with increasing strain, thereby, exhibiting an elastic nature of the nanosheet within this limit.50,51,71,72 Further increase in strain causes a non-linear rise of stress up to the UTS point, and then immediately decreases with a slight increase in strain, representing a brittle-type failure of the monolayer BiNS. Such a brittle-type failure is also reported for other analogous 2D honeycomb lattice structures such as graphene,73 h-BN,73 silicene,73 germanene74 and stanene.75
 Fig. 3  Effect of increasing temperature on the characteristic stress–strain profile of β-bismuthene subjected to tension along (a) armchair and (b) zigzag directions. Prediction of (c) fracture stress and (d) fracture strain with increasing temperature in the cases of tension along armchair and zigzag edges. 
We note that no plastic deformation region, and hence, no brittle to ductile transition temperature is recorded for the BiNS under uniaxial tensile loading conditions in the entire temperature region, which is again in agreement with the aforementioned elemental analogous structures. It can also be observed that with an increase in temperature, the region under the stress–strain curves shows a gradual reduction. Consequently, the total energy absorbed by the material up to the fracture, i.e. the fracture toughness reduces monotonically with the increasing temperature. These findings are translated further into Fig. 3(c and d), representing variations in the UTS and fracture strain as a function of temperature. Both the UTS and fracture strain demonstrate a linear inverse relationship with temperature. Increasing temperature from 100 K to 500 K causes a significant decrease in the UTS (28.13% in the armchair, 20.30% in the zigzag) and fracture strain (36.17% in the armchair, 10.20% in the zigzag).
This reduction in the mechanical properties can be attributed to the fact that as the temperature rises, the chemical bonds between Bi–Bi atoms are subjected to larger atomic mobility and vibration, which weakens the chemical bonds and eventually, increases instability in the structure.50,51 Therefore, the atomic bonds can attain their critical bond length at a lower strain, causing material failure much earlier. Another important observation is that the zigzag direction is more resilient to deformation than the armchair direction as reported earlier.73,75,76Fig. 3(d) shows that the failure strain in the zigzag direction has a gentle dependence on temperature while it is much more sensitive in the armchair direction. This could be due to the influence of bond alignment along the direction of loading. There are six atomic bonds per unit cell carrying the load in the armchair direction, and two of them are parallel while the remaining four render a relative angle of 60° along the armchair direction.73 On the other hand, there are four bonds per unit cell carrying the load in the zigzag direction, which are aligned at an angle of 30° and the remaining two bonds are perpendicular to the loading direction. Therefore, when tension is applied in the zigzag direction, these inclined bonds allow the structure to stretch more before reaching critical bond length thus, experiencing much lower local stress. Nevertheless, in the case of armchair loading, the existence of the two additional bonds parallel to the direction of loading leads to greater local stress under loading conditions. This enables the zigzag direction to tolerate larger global strain until failure in the entire temperature regime. This kind of behavior is also evident in the case of other analogous 2D materials like graphene, silicene, stanene, germanene, and h-BN which also possess the honeycomb lattice structure.73–76 Note that, although zigzag loading is always supposed to show higher fracture stress and strain, at low temperature from 100–200 K, Fig. 3(c) manifests slightly improved fracture stress for armchair loading compared to the zigzag one, thus giving rise to an anomaly though the difference is insignificant. This could be induced from temperature fluctuation during MD simulations and high strain rates. This kind of anomaly is reported for stanene as well.75 When temperature increases beyond 200 K, zigzag directed bismuthene starts to show higher fracture stress as expected, and the difference becomes notable at 500 K.
We further analyze the failure behavior of bismuthene and found that the failure properties at 100 K is quite similar to those of silicene and stanene. For the armchair direction, silicene fails at a strain of 25%77 whereas, for stanene, the failure strain is 18%.75 The present study shows that at 100 K temperature, the predicted fracture strain of the BiNS is ∼23.58%. Among these three 2D materials, silicene is more flexible to deform and harder to break. Therefore, it can be said that in terms of mechanical properties, bismuthene is relatively weaker as compared to silicene but stronger than stanene. Moreover, YM is defined by the gradient of the linear portion of the uniaxial stress–strain diagram which represents elastic deformation. In the present investigation, the YM was calculated by evaluating the slope on the initial linear portion (strain value less than 4%) of the stress–strain curve.75Fig. 4 manifests a strong inverse relationship of YM with temperature. As the temperature increases, larger atomic vibrations are experienced by the bonds which in turn increases chemical instability and also the mean distance between atoms increases owing to high atomic mobility which causes the Bi–Bi bonds to become weaker. A lower value of stress is, therefore, required in order to cause the same amount of deformation which is responsible for lowering the value of YM at higher temperatures, as reported earlier.50,51,73,75 Another observation is that the mechanical properties of bismuthene show strong directional dependency under uniaxial tension. Likewise, other 2D materials, the properties in the armchair and zigzag directions are considerably different and the difference continuously increases with temperature. At all temperature regimes, bismuthene shows higher elasticity when a tensile load is applied along the armchair direction compared to the zigzag counterparts, which is consistent with other analogous materials such as stanene75 and germanene.74 The underlying reason can be explained again from the effect of the bond angle with the loading direction. For armchair loading, the major portion of the applied load is carried by the two bonds parallel to loading, as described earlier. A slight tension thus increases the local stress tremendously whereas for zigzag loading, the bond angles are at either 30° or 90° to the loading direction. Therefore, a much larger global strain is needed to induce the same stress, resulting in a comparatively lower YM.73,75 It is worth mentioning that bismuthene demonstrates a strong chirality effect at the entire temperature regime in the case of YM, which is evident from Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Evolution of the in-plane Young's modulus of β-bismuthene with temperature under tensile loading along the armchair and zigzag directions. 
3.2 Effect of vacancy defect on the stress–strain behavior of β-bismuthene
It is well known from Griffith's theory that compared to the bonding strength, the type, size, and shape of defects more significantly dictate the fracture strength of materials.78 Nevertheless, vacancy defects are the most frequent and have a marked impact among various defects in governing the mechanical behaviors,79,80 as they are often generated in functional materials during fabrication and processing as well as by various physical phenomena including irradiation, sublimation, and stress.81 In fact, a ∼40% reduction in the UTS of graphene is reported by introducing just 2% of monovacancy defects.82 Therefore, in the present investigation, the mechanical properties of the BiNS are studied under the consideration of randomly dispersed monovacancy defects. Fig. 5 displays the defected state of the BiNS with 1% of random monovacancy concentration.
 Fig. 5  Initial coordinates of 1% defected β-bismuthene with a magnified view. Bismuth (Bi) atoms are removed randomly from the nanosheet. 
The effects of randomly removed Bi atoms from the nanosheet on its tensile mechanical properties as a function of vacancy concentration are illustrated in Fig. 6. Fig. 6(a and b) clearly indicates that vacancy defects greatly deteriorate the mechanical properties of the BiNS both in the armchair and zigzag directions. The fracture toughness is reduced to a large extent just by eliminating 0.2% of Bi atoms. These variations are more profoundly explained in Fig. 6(c and d) in terms of UTS and fracture strain. As the concentration of vacancy is increased, both UTS and fracture strain decline exponentially and furthermore, the elimination of just 1% of atoms cause a significant reduction in the UTS (41.81% in the armchair, 36.01% in zigzag), and fracture strain (45.8% in the armchair, 42.44% in zigzag). These deteriorations of mechanical properties in the presence of vacancies can be attributed to the localized stress concentration that breaks the integrity of the stress field in the structure. When an atom and the corresponding chemical bonds are eliminated from the structure, some dangling bonds and temporary weak bonds are formed by the under-coordinated atoms around the void.83 When a load is applied, these weak and dangling bonds experience a large local vibration, giving rise to an accumulation of stress and chemical instability in the structure.84 Also, the mechanical equilibrium state of the structure degenerates greatly owing to the large local fluctuation of mass and strain, which promotes the destruction of chemical linkages of the neighboring atoms, and hence, the formation of cracks.80 Therefore, as the concentration of vacancies increases, UTS and fracture strain of the material drastically reduces as the bonds in the void region can break a lot earlier.
 Fig. 6  Effect of monovacancy concentration on the typical stress–strain response of β-bismuthene for loading along (a) armchair and (b) zigzag orientations. Effect of the vacancy concentrations on (c) fracture stress and (d) fracture strain for the loading along the armchair and zigzag orientations. Defects are created by randomly eliminating bismuth atoms from the nanosheet. All the simulations are performed at 300 K. 
It can be seen from Fig. 6(c and d) that as the percentage of defects increases from 0.4% to 0.6%, both fracture stress and strain slightly increase in the zigzag loading thus rise to an anomaly. As mentioned earlier, Bi atoms are removed randomly. Thus, when vacancy concentration becomes 0.6%, there is a possibility of the creation of a large void due to the removal of more than one atom from the same region, and it is reported earlier that an increased radius of voids delays the fracture of materials.85 This kind of anomaly is also found for stanene.85 As mentioned earlier, even in the presence of defects, the zigzag direction manifests more resilience to deformation compared to the armchair direction. For a 1% defect concentration, the fracture occurs at about ∼12.5% of strain for the zigzag direction and ∼10.56% strain for the armchair direction. Also, it is important to note that the fracture strength and strain present a sharp decrease at a relatively low concentration of defects. As the concentration increases further, the failure stress and strain values become independent of the defect concentration. This might be attributed to the vacancy defects primarily facilitating only the initial crack formation.86 Fracturing mainly starts from the location where the initial crack is nucleated due to the maximum stress concentration near the vacancy. So, after forming a crack, the introduction of more vacancies does not play any significant role in further reduction of the material strength.
3.3 Effect of crack length on the tensile mechanical properties of β-bismuthene
In this section, we simulated the uniaxial tensile properties of a pre-cracked BiNS considering different crack lengths. The pre-cracks are generated by deleting a line of atoms in the armchair and zigzag directions and, in each case, loads are applied perpendicular to the crack extent direction. Crack lengths are varied from 1 nm to 3 nm. Fig. 7 manifests a magnified view of the BiNS with a 3 nm pre-crack. The variation of fracture stress and strain resulting from increasing crack lengths are depicted in Fig. 8. It is apparent from the figure that for both the armchair and zigzag loading conditions, the UTS decreases with larger crack lengths and the material fails at relatively lower strain values. This phenomenon is quite anticipated since a longer crack generates more stress concentration around the tip of the crack.87,88 In fact, increasing the crack length up to 3 nm causes a significant reduction in the fracture strength (54.4% in the armchair, 55.7% in the zigzag) and fracture strain (59.7% in the armchair, 70.55% in the zigzag) compared to the pristine state. Similar decreasing phenomena were also reported for graphene, silicene, h-BN, and single-layer MoS2.73,76 It suggests that a quicker bond breaking takes place with larger cracks by creating a plastic region at the tip of the crack. This plastic region encounters irreversible deformation because of tremendous stress concentration at the tip and thus facilitates the breaking of bonds, thereby, the crack propagation.73,75 Since bismuthene is brittle in nature, a catastrophic failure of the structure occurs after a bond is broken. The decrease in failure strength with a larger crack might also be related to the reduction in a large number of atomic bonds during the pre-crack formation, resulting in a larger deterioration in the mechanical equilibrium of the structure. It is also worth mentioning that the nonlinear behavior of the stress–strain diagram of the BiNS stays unaffected even in the presence of large cracks. Besides, as expected, the fracture stress and strain in the armchair directed crack (loading in the zigzag direction) is always slightly higher than those in the zigzag directed crack (loading in the armchair direction), as shown in Fig. 8(c and d).
 Fig. 7  Initial coordinates of 3 nm (a) armchair and (b) zigzag directed pre-cracked β-bismuthene with a magnified view. The crack is introduced by removing a line of atoms from the nanosheet. 
 Fig. 8  Effect of crack length on the typical stress–strain response of β-bismuthene at 300 K for loading along (a) armchair and (b) zigzag orientations. Effect of crack length on (c) fracture stress and (d) fracture strain for loading along the armchair and zigzag directions. 
3.4 Fracture mechanisms of a 3 nm pre-cracked β-bismuthene
The fracture phenomena of a 3 nm pre-cracked BiNS for various strain levels are depicted in Fig. 9(a and b) which includes both armchair and zigzag directed cracks. In both cases, loading is applied perpendicular to the extent of the crack. Color coding is employed to explore the fracture phenomenon with better understanding. The red color represents the atoms that have already reached their critical bond lengths due to high localized stress, and upon further stretching these bonds are supposed to be broken. For in-depth insights into the fracture nucleation and propagation processes of the armchair and zigzag directed cracks, readers are referred to the (ES1) and (ES2), (ESI†), respectively.
 Fig. 9  Fracture phenomenon of 3 nm pre-cracked β-bismuthene for (a) armchair (b) zigzag directed cracks at various strain levels. Color bar shows the stress in N m−1. 
A fracture is always supposed to start from the cracked ends, as reported by the classical theory of stress concentration,89 and our simulation results well agree with that. The development of the red dumb-bell shaped regions at both ends of the cracks results from the highly localized stress concentration where irreversible deformation occurs. Applying further load increases the area of these zones and thus, initiates the crack propagation.73 It is found that for both the armchair and zigzag oriented cracks, once the fracture is initiated, upon further stretching the nanosheet catastrophically fails, thus exhibiting the brittle nature of BiNS. Also, it is manifested in Fig. 9 that as expected, the fracture initiated much early in the zigzag directed crack (loading along the armchair direction) at about 7.2% strain whereas the failure strain is 7.8% for the armchair directed crack (loading along the zigzag direction). It can be seen from Fig. 7(a) that there are four (two at each side) symmetrically inclined atomic linkages situated at the crack tips for the armchair crack suggesting two possible routes for crack propagation (±30° along the armchair direction). As these bonds are not parallel to the loading direction, only a small portion of the applied load contributes to the breaking of these inclined bonds. Therefore, a larger load and strain are required for the bonds to reach their critical bond lengths. Also, the branching phenomena can be observed during crack propagation, that is the crack propagates at an angle owing to these inclined atomic bonds (Fig. 9(a)), which can be more clearly understood from the ES1 (ESI†). On the contrary, in the case of a zigzag-directed crack, two bonds (one on each side) are situated at the crack ends which are perpendicular to the extent of the crack (Fig. 7(b)). As a consequence, the applied load can fully contribute to the bond-breaking process, promoting bond breaking at relatively lower stress and strain values. Also, no branching phenomenon takes place as the crack propagation direction is only an extension of the original crack length,76,90,91 which can be profoundly visualized from ES2 (ESI†). This is the reason for the bonds along the armchair direction (zigzag loading) becoming more resilient to crack propagation compared to the bonds along the zigzag direction (armchair loading).
3.5 Effect of loading rate on the tensile strength of β-bismuthene
The kinetic theory of solid fracture suggests that the loading rate can significantly impact the mechanical properties of materials. The stress–strain response of the β-bismuthene at different strain rates are portrayed in Fig. 10(a) and 10(b), respectively, for the armchair and zigzag loading conditions. It is evident from these figures that until fracture, all the curves almost overlap with each other indicating an insignificant effect of the strain rate on the Young's modulus along both directions. Nevertheless, after reaching the UTS point, some apparent changes are observed in these figures. Both along the armchair and zigzag paths, the fracture strain increases with increasing strain rate. This can be derived from the fact that relatively slower strain rates increase the probability of atoms to undergo atomic vibrations for a prolonged period; thus, facilitating overcoming the energy barrier necessary to break bonds. On the contrary, at higher strain rates, atoms do not get adequate time for experiencing large atomic vibrations for a prolonged time and, consequently, for crack nucleation and propagation, which results in a greater UTS and fracture strain. Another important observation is that, when the strain rate is substantially high, the material does not show a catastrophic failure after reaching the UTS point, but rather it takes some more strain steps for complete fracture, indicating that the material starts to deviate from its brittle nature. These results are in excellent conformity with the existing literature.71,77 Note that a substantially high strain rate arises instability in the material due to the massive fluctuation of atomic bonds, and hence, some distortions in the stress–strain curve corresponding to the strain rate 1010 (s−1) are observed.50,51
 Fig. 10  Demonstration of the stress–strain curve of β-bismuthene at 300 K for various loading rate (a) armchair, (b) zigzag directions. 
3.6 Thermal transport phenomenon of β-bismuthene
In this study, the consequences of temperature and vacancy on the thermal conductivity (TC) of monolayer BiNS are studied and found that both increasing temperature and vacancy concentrations have detrimental effects on the thermal transport of the BiNS which have been depicted in Fig. 11(a and b). In fact, Fig. 11(a) exhibits a great reduction in TC by ∼57% for the pristine bismuthene, while the temperature is increased from 100 K to 600 K. Similar decreasing behaviors in TC were observed for graphene, silicene, bismuth nanowire, bismuth telluride (Bi2Te3) thin films, stanene nanoribbons, graphene/stanene hetero-bilayer nanoribbons, hBN nanoribbons, defective graphene nanoribbons, stanene/silicene hetero-bilayer nanoribbons, MoS2 nanoribbons and carbon and silicon doped stanene nanoribbons.92–103 For the SW potential, the thermal conductivities for defect free bismuthene nanosheets obtained in the present investigation at 100 K and 600 K temperatures are ∼2.00 W m−1 K−1 and ∼0.88 W m−1 K−1, respectively.
 Fig. 11  Variations of thermal conductivity of β-bismuthene with (a) temperature and (b) vacancy concentration at 300 K. 
The TC of crystals, in general, decreases with increasing temperature owing to the increased phonon–phonon and phonon–electron scattering that hinders the energy transfer.104 At high temperatures, due to the anharmonic nature of interatomic potentials, inelastic three-phonon scattering viz., the normal (N-process) and Umklapp (U-process) scattering processes become significant, which results in frequency modification and phonon–phonon anharmonic interactions.105 In particular, the Umklapp scattering (U-process) is mainly responsible for acceleration of the thermal resistivity at elevated temperatures. As the temperature increases, the frequency of phonons increases as well, and the dominance of the U-process increases proportionally to the square of the phonon frequency resulting in a strong phonon–phonon scattering, thereby greatly suppressing the phonon momentum and heat transfer.92,106,107 Below room temperature, the TC of bismuthene exhibits a much higher value than that of high temperature, as the U-process is almost insignificant at low temperatures.108
Again, it is reported that the acoustic phonons play a greater significance in carrying the thermal energy compared to the optical phonons.1 Of all the acoustic phonons, however, the in-plane phonons, viz., the longitudinal acoustic (LA) and the transverse acoustic (TA) phonons primarily dictate the TC of 2D structures.106 When the temperature is relatively low, LA phonons carry the major portion of heat.55 However, the relative contribution of TA phonons in transporting heat becomes more prominent at elevated temperatures as compared to the LA phonons, which again results in the decrease in TC. It can also be observed from Fig. 11(a) that as temperature increases, the rate of reduction in TC continuously declines due to the excitation of more and more high-frequency phonons that aid in the conduction of thermal energy.54 In addition, introducing various point defects is known to be a novel strategy for tuning lattice thermal conductivity by localizing the phonon vibrations without hindering the electrical conductivity as the mean free path of electrons is much lower than that of phonons.94 Numerous studies also disclosed that the anisotropic behavior and the magnitude of TC in graphene and silicon nanomaterials can be successfully manipulated by engineering the boundary shape, concentration, position, size, and shape of such vacancies.109–112 To be more specific, it is reported that it is possible for the TC to reduce by ∼80% by introducing only 3% of monovacancy defects in the In2Te3 lattice,113 whereas, up to a thousand-fold reduction can be achieved with only 8.25% of such vacancies in graphene.110 These reports pave the route for a similar investigation in BiNS, which can reveal a general outline for regulating the TC of bismuthene, and thereby, increasing the energy conversion efficiency of thermoelectric devices.
The consequence of randomly induced monovacancy defects on the TC of monolayer BiNS at 300 K temperature is manifested in Fig. 11(b) and the result suggests that vacancy defects can also play a prominent role in dictating the thermal transport phenomena in bismuthene. It has been found that TC of BiNS can be reduced up to ∼43% by introducing only 1% vacancy defects. The reduction of TC with increased vacancy concentration can be attributed to the localization of energy carriers and phonon scattering around the defected regions. In a homogenous lattice, the thermal energy is transported in a harmonic manner through the atomic vibration from one atom to the next atom. Nevertheless, removing an atom from the chain impedes the energy transport process between the nearby members which leads to a reduction in the phonon thermal conductivity. The removal of an atom gives rise to a large local fluctuation in mass and strain between the atomic linkages near the void, which causes the scattering of an energy carrier while traversing the interface.114 This interfacial mismatch gives rise to the effect called thermal-boundary resistance or kapitza resistance.115 Because of this phenomenon, the group velocity and the mean free path (MFP) of phonons get dramatically suppressed,94,116 which eventually leads to the localization of some phonons around the vacancy. Besides, Klemens theory117 and the Tamura model118 well agree with this decrease in TC with growing vacancy concentration, which also indicates that the point disorders created by mass contrast in a crystal can stimulate phonon scattering, which increases the thermal resistance and this anharmonic interaction in the phonon transport maximizes when the induced imperfection is a vacancy.119
It can be also observed from Fig. 11(b) at high vacancy concentration, say 0.8–1%, the TC of bismuthene endows a relatively low reduction rate as compared to the low vacancy concentration. At a low concentration of vacancies, the voids and thereby, the localized zones remain far apart from one another. Therefore, the number of localized zones increases as more voids are created, which can effectively hinder the phonon transport. Contrarily, voids are fairly close to each other at a high vacancy concentration, and multiple voids altogether form a combined localized center. Consequently, increasing vacancy concentration further can no longer effectively contribute to the TC reduction.116 The key finding of the present study is that the TC of bismuthene is considerably lower than almost all analogous 2D materials, which can be seen from the comparison presented in Table 1. This substantially low TC of bismuthene can be attributed to its heavier mass, larger interatomic bond length, larger buckling heights, lower in-plane stiffness, increased phonon–phonon scattering effect, lowering of phonon group velocity and MFP with increasing atomic radius.12,68,120,121 This considerably low TC of BiNS can enable its applications as a high-efficiency thermoelectric material, as the energy conversion efficiency of thermoelectric devices is inversely related to their TC and could be predicted by the following equation where σ, S, K and T denote the electrical conductivity, Seebeck coefficient, thermal conductivity of the material at room temperature in Kelvin.42  With a view to gain a better insight into the droop characteristics of PTC (phonon thermal conductivity) with increasing temperature and vacancy, the phonon density of states (PDOS) is computed by integrating the dispersion relation along the frequency axis, and the obtained results are plotted in Fig. 12, which demonstrate intriguing results with our observations mentioned above. As manifested in Fig. 12, the phonon spectrum of β-bismuthene can be characterized by main peaks existing between 1 to 2 THz (acoustic phonons) and 4.5 to 6 THz (optical phonons). It is clear from Fig. 12(a) that with increasing temperature, although the intensity of low-frequency acoustic phonons remains almost unaffected, the high-frequency phonon modes around 5 THz continuously experience a noticeable depression and red shift (phonon softening). This indicates a significant decrease in the population of available high-frequency energy carriers due to increased Umklapp scattering at elevated temperatures. As can be pointed out from Fig. 12(b) that a little increase in vacancy concentration results in a remarkable drop in the intensity of high-frequency energy carriers, which further justifies our aforementioned results. Interestingly, for degraded structure, we also observe a broadening of optical phonon modes. High frequency peak broadening emerges from scattering of optical phonons into a wider distribution which also signifies a decreased phonon lifetime and thus a smaller mean free path.122–124 Both softening and broadening of peaks justifies our aforementioned results. This damping out of the density of phonons is attributed to the phonon vacancy scattering and localization of phonons at and around the vacancy center, which reduces the MFP and group velocity of phonons and, ultimately, the thermal conductivity.
 Fig. 12  Phonon density of states of β-bismuthene with (a) various temperature (b) concentration of defects. 
The Table 1 demonstrates that lattice TC of materials induced from anisotropic random lattice vibration above absolute zero temperature (0 Kelvin) deteriorates in a monotonic fashion with increasing interatomic bond length between atoms and buckling height which establishes the reliability of our predicted value of TC of bismuthene. Moreover, this TC of bismuthene is also significantly smaller than that of its bulk counterpart bismuth, which is reported to be ∼11 W m−1 K−1 at 280 K.130 This reduction in TC of BiNS compared to bulk Bi can be attributed to the large surface/volume ratio, which is responsible for promoting boundary scattering and decreasing the MFP of phonons. In addition, the variation of phonon dispersion and acoustic phonon density of states (PDOS),131 bipolar diffusion caused by thickness reduction and nanoscale crystal grains95,132 can also lead to the decrease in phonon MFP and eventually, the thermal conductivity of BiNS compared to its bulk sample.
With a view to confirming the dynamic stability of the monolayer β-bismuthene, phonon dispersion curves (PDCs) are calculated along high symmetric direction ΓKMΓ of the first Brillouin zone (BZ), as portrayed in Fig. 13. The clear absence of imaginary or negative frequencies in the entire BZ ensures the thermodynamic stability of the structure.133 It is apparent that the acoustic modes are well separated from the optical branches, and all the phonon modes experience a frequency softening upon increasing temperature. Unlike the flexural acoustic (ZA) mode, which displays a quadratic relationship with the wave vector k in the vicinity of the zone center (Γ-point), a linear dependency is followed by the two in-plane acoustic modes, i.e., longitudinal acoustic (LA) and transverse acoustic (TA). The LA and TA modes also possess higher energy compared to the ZA branch near the zone center, which is expected for similar 2D materials.134,135 The PDCs obtained by us are in excellent conformity with the previous reports for β-bismuthene.136–138
 Fig. 13  Phonon dispersion curves of β-bismuthene at 50 K, 300 K, and 600 K temperatures along the high symmetry directions of the first Brillouin zone. 

Fig. 14 portrays the calculated group velocities of β-bismuthene along the highly symmetric lines ΓKMΓ of the BZ at 50 K and 300 K, from where the underlying mechanism of reducing TC with increasing temperature can be more profoundly realized. As can be seen from Fig. 14 that for the LA and TA branches, the group velocity is the maximum at the zone center (Γ-point) and dramatically decreases to zero at the edge of BZ (M-point). On the other hand, the group velocity of the ZA mode demonstrates a dome-shaped behavior, i.e., maximum at the midway of the Γ–M line and drop to zero at the zone boundary. This behavior of the acoustic phonon group velocities is consistent with prior studies.139–141 As the temperature is increased from 50 K to 300 K, the group velocity at the Γ-point decreases from 5.90 to 5.55 km s−1 for the LA mode, 5.00 to 4.95 km s−1 for the TA mode, and 2.55 to 1.85 km s−1 for the ZA mode, which is another crucial reason for the reduction in TC at elevated temperatures.141 Furthermore, the obtained group velocity of ∼5550 m s−1 at 300 K in the LA mode is substantially smaller than many other similar analogs like graphene (∼22000 m s−1142), silicene (∼9520 m s−1143), phosphorene (∼8640 m s−1144).
 Fig. 14  Acoustic phonon group velocities of β-bismuthene along the high symmetry directions at (a) 50 K and (b) 300 K temperatures. 
4. Conclusions
In summary, we have investigated the mechanical and thermal transport properties of monolayer β-bismuthene nanosheet utilizing MD simulations. We employed the SW potential to define the interatomic interactions. Tensile properties such as fracture strength, fracture strain, and the Young's modulus are calculated for both the armchair and the zigzag orientations. Temperature studies suggest that increasing temperature facilitates the failure at a relatively lower fracture stress and strain. The obtained room temperature fracture stress and fracture strain are ∼4.21 N m−1 and ∼19.50%, respectively, along the armchair direction, and ∼4.22 N m−1 and ∼25.5% along the zigzag path. At all temperatures, the zigzag direction is found to be more resilient to fracture and less vulnerable to temperature change than the armchair direction. The Young's modulus along both directions demonstrate a strong negative dependence on temperature, and armchair direction provides slightly superior elasticity compared to its zigzag counterpart. At 300 K, the Young's moduli are reported to be ∼26.1 N m−1 and ∼25.5 N m−1, respectively, along the armchair and zigzag directions. It is also found that increasing vacancy defects and crack length have a marked impact in deteriorating the mechanical properties of the β-bismuthene. Fracture study of pre-cracked bismuthene reveals that armchair directed crack is more resilient to fracture than the zigzag directed crack. Besides, a branching phenomenon occurs during crack propagation for the armchair crack, whereas crack propagation along the zigzag direction is found to be an extension of the original crack length. Both along the armchair and zigzag directions, the fracture stress and strain increase with increasing strain rates. Finally, we have calculated the thermal conductivity (majority carrier is the phonon) of the bismuthene nanosheet under the influence of temperature and monovacancy defects. We observe a decrease in thermal conductivity with increasing temperature and vacancy concentrations. Notably, introducing only 1% of randomly dispersed mono vacancy is seen to reduce the thermal conductivity by ∼43%. Also, the predicted thermal conductivity of ∼1.3 W m−1 K−1 at 300 K is considerably lower than other analogous 2D honeycombs and could be engineered to ∼0.75 W m−1 K−1 by removing only ∼1% bismuth atom from the domain, thus, rendering β-bismuthene a promising material for high-performance thermoelectric operations. To support the explanation for reduced thermal conductivity with increasing temperature and vacancy, phonon properties such as phonon density of states, phonon dispersion spectrum, and phonon group velocities are also analyzed, which exhibit excellent conformity with the obtained results. This investigation of the mechanical properties and thermal conductivity analysis unravel a new horizon in the practical utilization of β-bismuthene, a material with spectacular electronic and thermoelectric properties which also demonstrates topological insulator properties and quantum spin Hall effect at room temperature.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
MMI acknowledges start-up funds from Wayne State University.
References
A. A. Balandin, 
            et al., Superior thermal conductivity of single-layer graphene, Nano Lett., 2008, 8(3), 902–907 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, Y. Shi, X. Bai, X. Wang and T. Ma, Atomically thin MoSe 2/graphene and WSe 2/graphene nanosheets for the highly efficient oxygen reduction reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(48), 24397–24404 RSC .
K. S. Novoselov, 
            et al., A roadmap for graphene, Nature, 2012, 490(7419), 192–200 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi and M. Pumera, 2D-Pnictogens: alloy-based anode battery materials with ultrahigh cycling stability, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47(18), 6964–6989 RSC .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Measurement of the elastic properties and intrinsic strength of monolayer graphene, Science, 2008, 321(5887), 385–388 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bao and K. P. Loh, Graphene photonics, plasmonics, and broadband optoelectronic devices, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(5), 3677–3694 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim, Graphene: status and prospects, Science, 2009, 324(5934), 1530–1534 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Castro Neto, F. Guinea, N. M. R. Peres, K. S. Novoselov and A. K. Geim, The electronic properties of graphene, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2009, 81(1), 109–162 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shim, 
            et al., Extremely large gate modulation in vertical graphene/WSe2 heterojunction barristor based on a novel transport mechanism, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(26), 5293–5299 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, 
            et al., Thermal conductivity of silicene calculated using an optimized Stillinger-Weber potential, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89(5), 054310 CrossRef .
S. Ghosh, 
            et al., Dimensional crossover of thermal transport in few-layer graphene, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9(7), 555–558 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, 
            et al., Recent progress in 2D group-VA semiconductors: from theory to experiment, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47(3), 982–1021 RSC .
M.-Y. Liu, Y. Huang, Q.-Y. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, C. Cao and Y. He, Strain and electric field tunable electronic structure of buckled bismuthene, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(63), 39546–39555 RSC .
C. Kamal and M. Ezawa, Arsenene: Two-dimensional buckled and puckered honeycomb arsenic systems, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91(8), 085423 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Atomically thin arsenene and antimonene: semimetal–semiconductor and indirect–direct band-gap transitions, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127(10), 3155–3158 CrossRef .
Z. Song, 
            et al., Quantum spin Hall insulators and quantum valley Hall insulators of BiX/SbX (X= H, F, Cl and Br) monolayers with a record bulk band gap, NPG Asia Mater., 2014, 6(12), e147–e147 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, 
            et al., Semiconducting group 15 monolayers: a broad range of band gaps and high carrier mobilities, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(5), 1666–1669 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, 
            et al., Phosphorene: an unexplored 2D semiconductor with a high hole mobility, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(4), 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, 
            et al., Black phosphorus field-effect transistors, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9(5), 372 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and D. Y. Peide, Semiconducting black phosphorus: synthesis, transport properties and electronic applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44(9), 2732–2743 RSC .
X. Wang, 
            et al., Topological phase stability and transformation of bismuthene, EPL, 2017, 119(2), 27002 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, C.-X. Liu, Y.-S. Wu, W.-H. Duan, F. Liu and J. Wu, Stable nontrivial Z 2 topology in ultrathin Bi (111) films: a first-principles study, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107(13), 136805 CrossRef .
S. Murakami, Quantum spin Hall effect and enhanced magnetic response by spin-orbit
coupling, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97(23), 236805 CrossRef .
L. Lu, 
            et al., All-optical switching of two continuous waves in few layer bismuthene based on spatial cross-phase modulation, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4(11), 2852–2861 CrossRef CAS .
F. Reis, 
            et al., Bismuthene on a SiC substrate: A candidate for a high-temperature quantum spin Hall material, Science, 2017, 357(6348), 287–290 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kecik, V. O. Özçelik, E. Durgun and S. Ciraci, Structure dependent optoelectronic properties of monolayer antimonene, bismuthene and their binary compound, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21(15), 7907–7917 RSC .
A. Fang, 
            et al., Bursting at the seams: Rippled monolayer bismuth on NbSe2, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4(4), eaaq0330 CrossRef .
H.-H. Chen, 
            et al., Tailoring low-dimensional structures of bismuth on monolayer epitaxial graphene, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5(1), 1–8 CAS .
C. F. Gallo, B. S. Chandrasekhar and P. H. Sutter, Transport properties of bismuth single crystals, J. Appl. Phys., 1963, 34(1), 144–152 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shim, J. Ham, J. Kim and W. Lee, Shubnikov–de Haas oscillations in an individual single-crystalline bismuth nanowire grown by on-film formation of nanowires, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95(23), 232107 CrossRef .
C. R. Ast and H. Höchst, Fermi surface of Bi (111) measured by photoemission spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87(17), 177602 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Lin, X. Sun and M. S. Dresselhaus, Theoretical investigation of thermoelectric transport properties of cylindrical Bi nanowires, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62(7), 4610 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nagao, 
            et al., Nanofilm Allotrope and Phase Transformation of Ultrathin Bi Film on S i (111)- 7$\times$ 7, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93(10), 105501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, 
            et al., Monolayer bismuthene-metal contacts: a theoretical study, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(27), 23128–23140 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Walker, 
            et al., Large-area dry transfer of single-crystalline epitaxial bismuth thin films, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(11), 6931–6938 CrossRef CAS .

          R. N. Somaiya, Y. Sonvane and S. K. Gupta, Dependence of Strain on the Electronic and Thermoelectric Properties of Hexagonal Bismuthene, Advances in Spectroscopy: Molecules to Materials, Springer,  2019, pp. 397–403 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, Z. F. Wang and F. Liu, Robustness of two-dimensional topological insulator states in bilayer bismuth against strain and electrical field, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87(23), 235420 CrossRef .
L. Lu, 
            et al., Few-layer bismuthene: sonochemical exfoliation, nonlinear optics and applications for ultrafast photonics with enhanced stability, Laser Photonics Rev., 2018, 12(1), 1700221 CrossRef .
A. C. Lazanas, K. Tsirka, A. S. Paipetis and M. I. Prodromidis, 2D bismuthene/graphene modified electrodes for the ultra-sensitive stripping voltammetric determination of lead and cadmium, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 336, 135726 CrossRef CAS .
S.-D. Guo, J. Dong and J.-T. Liu, Nonmonotonic strain dependence of lattice thermal conductivity in monolayer SiC: a first-principles study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20(34), 22038–22046 RSC .
L. Cheng, 
            et al., Thermoelectric properties of a monolayer bismuth, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118(2), 904–910 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Rashid, A. S. Nissimagoudar and W. Li, Phonon transport and thermoelectric properties of semiconducting Bi 2 Te 2 X (X= S, Se, Te) monolayers, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21(10), 5679–5688 RSC .
F. J. DiSalvo, Thermoelectric cooling and power generation, Science, 1999, 285(5428), 703–706 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Yang, T. Aizawa, A. Yamamoto and T. Ohta, Thermoelectric properties of n-type (Bi2Se3) x (Bi2Te3) 1- x prepared by bulk mechanical alloying and hot pressing, J. Alloys Compd., 2000, 312(1–2), 326–330 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hartman, Temperature dependence of the low-field galvanomagnetic coefficients of bismuth, Phys. Rev., 1969, 181(3), 1070 CrossRef CAS .
E. Aktürk, O. Ü. Aktürk and S. Ciraci, Single and bilayer bismuthene: Stability at high temperature and mechanical and electronic properties, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94(1), 014115 CrossRef .
P. Aghdasi, R. Ansari, S. Rouhi and M. Goli, On the elastic and plastic properties of the bismuthene adsorbed by H, F, Cl and Br atoms, Superlattices Microstruct., 2019, 135, 106242 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Plimpton, Fast parallel algorithms for short-range molecular dynamics, Sandia National Labs, Albuquerque, NM (United States),  1993 Search PubMed .
“sw-709875572-Jin-Wu Jiang.” http://jiangjinwu.org/sw (accessed Jul. 15, 2020).
M. A. M. Munshi, S. Majumder, M. Motalab and S. Saha, Insights into the mechanical properties and fracture mechanism of Cadmium Telluride nanowire, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6(10), 105083 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Pial, T. Rakib, S. Mojumder, M. Motalab and M. S. Akanda, Atomistic investigations on the mechanical properties and fracture mechanisms of indium phosphide nanowires, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20(13), 8647–8657 RSC .
W. D. Wang, C. Yi and K. Fan, Molecular dynamics study on temperature and strain rate dependences of mechanical tensile properties of ultrathin nickel nanowires, Trans. Nonferrous Met. Soc. China, 2013, 23(11), 3353–3361 CrossRef CAS .
A. Stukowski, Visualization and analysis of atomistic simulation data with OVITO–the Open Visualization Tool, Modell. Simul. Mater. Sci. Eng., 2009, 18(1), 015012 CrossRef .
A. J. Islam, M. S. Islam, N. Ferdous, J. Park, A. G. Bhuiyan and A. Hashimoto, Anomalous temperature dependent thermal conductivity of two-dimensional silicon carbide, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30(44), 445707 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. B. Shahadat and A. Morshed, A molecular dynamics study of thermal transportation of graphene sheet with various temperature, AIP Conf. Proc., 1980, 2018, 050008 Search PubMed .
L. T. Kong, G. Bartels, C. Campañá, C. Denniston and M. H. Müser, Implementation of Green's function molecular dynamics: An extension to LAMMPS, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2009, 180(6), 1004–1010 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Kong, C. Denniston and M. H. Müser, An improved version of the Green's function molecular dynamics method, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2011, 182(2), 540–541 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Kong, Phonon dispersion measured directly from molecular dynamics simulations, Comput. Phys. Commun., 2011, 182(10), 2201–2207 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Q. Ye, B.-Y. Cao, W.-J. Yao, T. Feng and X. Ruan, Spectral phonon thermal properties in graphene nanoribbons, Carbon, 2015, 93, 915–923 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dunn, E. Antillon, J. Maassen, M. Lundstrom and A. Strachan, Role of energy distribution in contacts on thermal transport in Si: A molecular dynamics study, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120(22), 225112 CrossRef .
A. J. Islam, M. S. Islam, N. Ferdous, J. Park, A. G. Bhuiyan and A. Hashimoto, Anomalous temperature dependent thermal conductivity of two-dimensional silicon carbide, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30(44), 445707 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Islam, M. S. Islam, N. Ferdous, J. Park and A. Hashimoto, Vacancy induced thermal transport in two-dimensional silicon carbide: a reverse non-equilibrium molecular dynamics study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 13592–13602 RSC .
S. Ahammed, M. S. Islam, I. Mia and J. Park, Lateral and flexural thermal transport in stanene/2D-SiC van der Waals heterostructure, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31(50), 505702 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tripathi, M. M. Islam and A. Strachan, Phonon thermal transport in encapsulated copper hybrids, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 125(4), 045106 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, 
            et al., Unification of nonequilibrium molecular dynamics and the mode-resolved phonon Boltzmann equation for thermal transport simulations, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 101(15), 155308 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yang, 
            et al., Bismuthene for highly efficient carbon dioxide electroreduction reaction, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Y. Zhou, X. Zhang and M. Hu, Extremely low thermal conductivity of polycrystalline silicene, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(16), 9220–9228 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peng, H. Zhang, H. Shao, Y. Xu, X. Zhang and H. Zhu, Thermal conductivity of monolayer MoS2, MoSe2, and WS2: interplay of mass effect, interatomic bonding and anharmonicity, RSC Adv., 2016, 6(7), 5767–5773 RSC .
P. Norouzzadeh and D. J. Singh, Thermal conductivity of single-layer WSe2 by a Stillinger–Weber potential, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28(7), 075708 CrossRef .
Y.-Y. Zhang, Q.-X. Pei, J.-W. Jiang, N. Wei and Y.-W. Zhang, Thermal conductivities of single-and multi-layer phosphorene: a molecular dynamics study, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(1), 483–491 RSC .
E. H. Chowdhury, Md. H. Rahman, R. Jayan and M. M. Islam, Atomistic investigation on the mechanical properties and failure behavior of zinc blende cadmium selenide (CdSe) nanowire, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2021, 186, 110001,  DOI:10.1016/j.commatsci.2020.110001 .
Md. H. Rahman, E. H. Chowdhury and M. M. Islam, Understanding mechanical properties and failure mechanism of germanium-silicon alloy at nanoscale, J. Nanopart. Res., 2020, 22(11), 311,  DOI:10.1007/s11051-020-05040-0 .
T. Rakib, S. Mojumder, S. Das, S. Saha and M. Motalab, Graphene and its elemental analogue: A molecular dynamics view of fracture phenomenon, Phys. B, 2017, 515, 67–74 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Arshee, S. Adnan, M. Motalab and P. Bose, Inherent mechanical properties of bilayer germanene coupled by covalent bonding, RSC Adv., 2019, 9(59), 34437–34450 RSC .
S. Mojumder, A. A. Amin and M. M. Islam, Mechanical properties of stanene under uniaxial and biaxial loading: A molecular dynamics study, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 118(12), 124305 CrossRef .

          R. A. Subad, T. S. Akash, P. Bose and M. M. Islam, Engineered Defects to Modulate Fracture Strength of Single Layer MoS2: An Atomistic Study, ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv200103796, 2020.
Q.-X. Pei, Z.-D. Sha, Y.-Y. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Effects of temperature and strain rate on the mechanical properties of silicene, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115(2), 023519 CrossRef .
E. Z. Lajtai, A theoretical and experimental evaluation of the Griffith theory of brittle fracture, Tectonophysics, 1971, 11(2), 129–156 CrossRef .
D. Q. Fang and R. Q. Zhang, Size effects on formation energies and electronic structures of oxygen and zinc vacancies in ZnO nanowires: A first-principles study, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 109(4), 044306 CrossRef .
X. Sun, Z. Fu, M. Xia and Y. Xu, Effects of vacancy defect on the tensile behavior of graphene, Theor. Appl. Mech. Lett., 2014, 4(5), 051002 CrossRef .
H. Li and R. Zhang, Vacancy-defect–induced diminution of thermal conductivity in silicene, EPL, 2012, 99(3), 36001,  DOI:10.1209/0295-5075/99/36001 .
Z.-D. Sha, Q.-X. Pei, Y.-Y. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Atomic vacancies significantly degrade the mechanical properties of phosphorene, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27(31), 315704 CrossRef .
X. Shi-Feng, C. Shang-Da and S. Ai-Kah, The effect of atomic vacancies and grain boundaries on mechanical properties of gan nanowires, Chin. Phys. Lett., 2011, 28(6), 066201 CrossRef .
N. Jing, 
            et al., Effect of defects on Young's modulus of graphene sheets: a molecular dynamics simulation, RSC Adv., 2012, 2(24), 9124–9129 RSC .
S. Das, S. Mojumder, T. Rakib, M. M. Islam and M. Motalab, Atomistic insights into mechanical and thermal properties of
stanene with defects, Phys. B, 2019, 553, 127–136 CrossRef CAS .
P.-H. Huang, T.-H. Fang and C.-S. Chou, The coupled effects of size, shape, and location of vacancy clusters on the structural deformation and mechanical strength of defective nanowires, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11(3), 878–887 CrossRef .

          T. L. Anderson, Fracture mechanics: fundamentals and applications, CRC Press,  2017 Search PubMed .

          G. Pluvinage and L. Milovic, Fracture at all Scales, Springer,  2017 Search PubMed .
T. Rakib, S. Saha, M. Motalab, S. Mojumder and M. M. Islam, Atomistic representation of anomalies in the failure behaviour of nanocrystalline silicene, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7(1), 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, 
            et al., Fracture toughness of graphene, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3782 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Le and R. C. Batra, Mode-I stress intensity factor in single layer graphene sheets, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2016, 118, 251–258 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Jahan, I. A. Navid and S. Subrina, Thermal Conductivity of Silicene Nanoribbons: An Equilibrium Molecular Dynamics Study, in 2018 IEEE International WIE Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (WIECON-ECE), 2018, pp. 121–124.
A. I. Khan, I. A. Navid, M. Noshin, H. M. Uddin, F. F. Hossain and S. Subrina, Equilibrium molecular dynamics (MD) simulation study of thermal conductivity of graphene nanoribbon: a comparative study on MD potentials, Electronics, 2015, 4(4), 1109–1124 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Park, M. Mohamed, Z. Aksamija and U. Ravaioli, Phonon scattering due to van der Waals forces in the lattice thermal conductivity of Bi2Te3 thin films, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117(1), 015103 CrossRef .
A. L. Moore, M. T. Pettes, F. Zhou and L. Shi, Thermal conductivity suppression in bismuth nanowires, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106(3), 034310 CrossRef .
A. I. Khan, R. Paul and S. Subrina, Characterization of thermal and mechanical properties of stanene nanoribbons: a molecular dynamics study, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(80), 50485–50495 RSC .
A. I. Khan, R. Paul and S. Subrina, Thermal transport in graphene/stanene hetero-bilayer nanostructures with vacancies: an equilibrium molecular dynamics study, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(71), 44780–44787 RSC .
A. I. Khan, I. A. Navid, M. Noshin and S. Subrina, Thermal transport characterization of hexagonal boron nitride nanoribbons using molecular dynamics simulation, AIP Adv., 2017, 7(10), 105110 CrossRef .
I. A. Navid and S. Subrina, Thermal transport characterization of carbon and silicon doped stanene nanoribbon: an equilibrium molecular dynamics study, RSC Adv., 2018, 8(55), 31690–31699 RSC .
M. A. Z. Mamun, A. Al Mohaimen and S. Subrina, Tunable thermal conductivity of single layer MoS 2 nanoribbons: an equilibrium molecular dynamics study, J. Comput. Electron., 2020, 1–9 Search PubMed .
I. A. Navid, A. I. Khan and S. Subrina, Impact of tensile strain on the thermal transport of zigzag hexagonal boron nitride nanoribbon: An equilibrium molecular dynamics study, Mater. Res. Express, 2018, 5(2), 025015 CrossRef .
M. Noshin, A. I. Khan, I. A. Navid, H. A. Uddin and S. Subrina, Impact of vacancies on the thermal conductivity of graphene nanoribbons: A molecular dynamics simulation study, AIP Adv., 2017, 7(1), 015112 CrossRef .
M. Noshin, A. I. Khan and S. Subrina, Thermal transport characterization of stanene/silicene heterobilayer and stanene bilayer nanostructures, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29(18), 185706 CrossRef .
L. F. C. Pereira and D. Donadio, Divergence of the thermal conductivity in uniaxially strained graphene, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87(12), 125424 CrossRef .
P. Pichanusakorn and P. Bandaru, Nanostructured thermoelectrics, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2010, 67(2–4), 19–63 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, T. Feng and X. Ruan, Thermal
conductivity and spectral phonon properties of freestanding and supported silicene, J. Appl. Phys., 2015, 117(8), 084317 CrossRef .
G. Xie, D. Ding and G. Zhang, Phonon coherence and its effect on thermal conductivity of nanostructures, Adv. Phys.: X, 2018, 3(1), 1480417 Search PubMed .

          J. Ziman, Electrons and Phonons, Oxford University Press, London,  1960 Search PubMed .

          M. R. B. Shahadat, A. S. Masnoon, S. Ahmed and A. M. Morshed, Effect of surface roughness and void fraction on thermal transportation of a solid: A molecular dynamics study, AIP Conf. Proc., 2017, 1919, 020037.
H. Zhang, G. Lee and K. Cho, Thermal transport in graphene and effects of vacancy defects, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84(11), 115460 CrossRef .
H. Li and R. Zhang, Vacancy-defect–induced diminution of thermal conductivity in silicene, EPL, 2012, 99(3), 36001 CrossRef .
K. Yamamoto, H. Ishii, N. Kobayashi and K. Hirose, Effects of vacancy defects on thermal conduction of silicon nanowire: nonequilibrium green's function approach, Appl. Phys. Express, 2011, 4(8), 085001 CrossRef .
Y. Pei and D. T. Morelli, Vacancy phonon scattering in thermoelectric In 2 Te 3–InSb solid solutions, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94(12), 122112 CrossRef .
M. R. B. Shahadat, A. S. Masnoon, S. Ahmed and A. Morshed, Effect of the orientation of doped nanoparticles on thermal transportation of a solid: A molecular dynamics study, AIP Conf. Proc., 2017, 1851, 020084 CrossRef .
G. L. Pollack, Kapitza resistance, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1969, 41(1), 48 CrossRef CAS .
J.-W. Jiang, J. Lan, J.-S. Wang and B. Li, Isotopic effects on the thermal conductivity of graphene nanoribbons: Localization mechanism, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 107(5), 054314 CrossRef .

          P. G. Klemens, The scattering of low-frequency lattice waves by static imperfections, Proc. Phys. Soc., London, Sect. A, 68, 12, 1113, 1955.
S. Tamura, Isotope scattering of dispersive phonons in Ge, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1983, 27(2), 858 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, 
            et al., Vacancy scattering for enhancing the thermoelectric performance of CuGaTe 2 solid solutions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(40), 15464–15470 RSC .
S. Wang, W. Wang and G. Zhao, Thermal transport properties of antimonene: an ab initio study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(45), 31217–31222 RSC .

          M. A. Mohebpour, S. M. Mozvashi, S. I. Vishkayi and M. B. Tagani, Prediction of group IV-V hexagonal binary monolayers: electronic, optical, thermoelectric, and photocatalysis properties, ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv200309674, 2020.
C. W. Li, M. M. McKerns and B. Fultz, Raman spectrometry study of phonon anharmonicity of hafnia at elevated temperatures, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80(5), 054304 CrossRef .
T. Lan, X. Tang and B. Fultz, Phonon anharmonicity of rutile TiO 2 studied by Raman spectrometry and molecular dynamics simulations, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85(9), 094305 CrossRef .
K. N. Anindya, M. S. Islam, A. Hashimoto and J. Park, Combined effect of 13C isotope and vacancies on the phonon properties in AB stacked bilayer graphene, Carbon, 2020, 168, 22–31 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuan, 
            et al., Modulating the thermal conductivity in hexagonal boron nitride via controlled boron isotope concentration, Commun. Phys., 2019, 2(1), 1–8 CAS .
M. S. Islam, 
            et al., Molecular dynamics study of thermal transport in single-layer silicon carbide nanoribbons, AIP Adv., 2020, 10(1), 015117 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, 
            et al., Thermal conductivity of silicene nanosheets and the effect of isotopic doping, J. Phys. Appl. Phys., 2014, 47(16), 165301 CrossRef .
Y. D. Kuang, L. Lindsay, S. Q. Shi and G. P. Zheng, Tensile strains give rise to strong size effects for thermal conductivities of silicene, germanene and stanene, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(6), 3760–3767 RSC .
B. Peng, H. Zhang, H. Shao, Y. Xu, X. Zhang and H. Zhu, Low lattice thermal conductivity of stanene, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20225 CrossRef CAS .
G.-S. Kim, 
            et al., Reduction in thermal conductivity of Bi thin films with high-density ordered nanoscopic pores, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8(1), 371 CrossRef .
E. N. Koukaras, G. Kalosakas, C. Galiotis and K. Papagelis, Phonon properties of graphene derived from molecular dynamics simulations, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12923 CrossRef CAS .
M. Takashiri, S. Tanaka, H. Hagino and K. Miyazaki, Combined effect of nanoscale grain size and porosity on lattice thermal conductivity of bismuth-telluride-based bulk alloys, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112(8), 084315 CrossRef .

          M. A. Mohebpour, S. M. Mozvashi, S. I. Vishkayi and M. B. Tagani, Prediction of group IV-V hexagonal binary monolayers: electronic, optical, thermoelectric, and photocatalysis properties, ArXiv Prepr. ArXiv200309674, 2020.
J. Carrete, W. Li, L. Lindsay, D. A. Broido, L. J. Gallego and N. Mingo, Physically founded phonon dispersions of few-layer materials and the case of borophene, Mater. Res. Lett., 2016, 4(4), 204–211 CrossRef CAS .
J.-A. Yan, W. Y. Ruan and M. Y. Chou, Phonon dispersions and vibrational properties of monolayer, bilayer, and trilayer graphene: Density-functional perturbation theory, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77(12), 125401 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, 
            et al., Semiconducting group 15 monolayers: a broad range of band gaps and high carrier mobilities, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128(5), 1698–1701 CrossRef .
S. Zhang, 
            et al., Recent progress in 2D group-VA semiconductors: from theory to experiment, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47(3), 982–1021 RSC .
M.-Y. Liu, Y. Huang, Q.-Y. Chen, Z.-Y. Li, C. Cao and Y. He, Strain and electric field tunable electronic structure of buckled bismuthene, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(63), 39546–39555 RSC .
Y. Cai, J. Lan, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, Lattice vibrational modes and phonon thermal conductivity of monolayer MoS 2, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89(3), 035438 CrossRef .
A. Shafique, A. Samad and Y.-H. Shin, Ultra low lattice thermal conductivity and high carrier mobility of monolayer SnS 2 and SnSe 2: a first principles study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19(31), 20677–20683 RSC .
A. Shafique and Y.-H. Shin, Strain engineering of phonon thermal transport properties in monolayer 2H-MoTe 2, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19(47), 32072–32078 RSC .
B. Peng, 
            et al., Phonon transport properties of two-dimensional group-IV materials from ab initio calculations, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94(24), 245420 CrossRef .
B. Peng, 
            et al., First-principles prediction of ultralow lattice thermal conductivity of dumbbell silicene: a comparison with low-buckled silicene, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(32), 20977–20985 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Liu and C.-C. Chang, Anisotropic thermal transport in phosphorene: effects of crystal orientation, Nanoscale, 2015, 7(24), 10648–10654 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp04785fThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Magnified top view of the initial coordinates of a 40 nm × 40 nm bismuthene nanosheet displaying both the armchair and the zigzag directions, and the bond length between Bi–Bi has been considered to be 0.304 nm (b) front view of the bismuthene with a buckling height of 0.173 nm.	 

 		 

 		 
kα,k′β(q) = KBT[−1(q)]kα,k′β

 		 

 	Fig. 2  Snapshot of initial coordinates of 40 nm × 40 nm β-bismuthene with a magnified view. It is evident that heat is flowing along the armchair direction from the source to the sink. Temperature gradients are calculated using the linear segments of the temperature profile.	 

Graphene	∼1.42	Perfect planar	∼3000–500011
h-BN	∼1.45	Perfect planar	∼550125
SiC	∼1.79	Perfect planar	∼313126
Silicene	∼2.28	∼0.44	∼2081,127
Germanene	∼2.43	∼0.73	∼10.5128
Stanene	∼2.86	∼0.86	∼11.6129
Bismuthene	∼3.04	∼1.73	∼1.3 [Present study]
Bismuthene (1% vacancy)	∼3.04	∼1.73	∼0.75 [Present study]

 	Fig. 3  Effect of increasing temperature on the characteristic stress–strain profile of β-bismuthene subjected to tension along (a) armchair and (b) zigzag directions. Prediction of (c) fracture stress and (d) fracture strain with increasing temperature in the cases of tension along armchair and zigzag edges.	 

 	Fig. 4  Evolution of the in-plane Young's modulus of β-bismuthene with temperature under tensile loading along the armchair and zigzag directions.	 

 	Fig. 5  Initial coordinates of 1% defected β-bismuthene with a magnified view. Bismuth (Bi) atoms are removed randomly from the nanosheet.	 

 	Fig. 6  Effect of monovacancy concentration on the typical stress–strain response of β-bismuthene for loading along (a) armchair and (b) zigzag orientations. Effect of the vacancy concentrations on (c) fracture stress and (d) fracture strain for the loading along the armchair and zigzag orientations. Defects are created by randomly eliminating bismuth atoms from the nanosheet. All the simulations are performed at 300 K.	 

 	Fig. 7  Initial coordinates of 3 nm (a) armchair and (b) zigzag directed pre-cracked β-bismuthene with a magnified view. The crack is introduced by removing a line of atoms from the nanosheet.	 

 	Fig. 8  Effect of crack length on the typical stress–strain response of β-bismuthene at 300 K for loading along (a) armchair and (b) zigzag orientations. Effect of crack length on (c) fracture stress and (d) fracture strain for loading along the armchair and zigzag directions.	 

 	Fig. 9  Fracture phenomenon of 3 nm pre-cracked β-bismuthene for (a) armchair (b) zigzag directed cracks at various strain levels. Color bar shows the stress in N m−1.	 

 	Fig. 10  Demonstration of the stress–strain curve of β-bismuthene at 300 K for various loading rate (a) armchair, (b) zigzag directions.	 

 	Fig. 11  Variations of thermal conductivity of β-bismuthene with (a) temperature and (b) vacancy concentration at 300 K.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 12  Phonon density of states of β-bismuthene with (a) various temperature (b) concentration of defects.	 

 	Fig. 13  Phonon dispersion curves of β-bismuthene at 50 K, 300 K, and 600 K temperatures along the high symmetry directions of the first Brillouin zone.	 

 	Fig. 14  Acoustic phonon group velocities of β-bismuthene along the high symmetry directions at (a) 50 K and (b) 300 K temperatures.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0cp04785f

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2020
