Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides as atomically thin semiconductors: opportunities and challenges  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5CS00507H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5CS00507H
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 8859-8876Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides as atomically thin semiconductors: opportunities and challenges

        
          
            Xidong 
            Duan
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chen 
            Wang
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Anlian 
            Pan
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ruqin 
            Yu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Xiangfeng 
            Duan
          
          
        
      *c
aState Key Laboratory of Chemo/Biosensingand Chemometrics, College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, Hunan 410082, P. R. China. E-mail: xduan@chem.ucla.edu; rqyu@hnu.edu.cn; anlian.pan@hnu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of California, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
Received 
      21st July 2015
    First published on 19th October 2015AbstractThe discovery of graphene has ignited intensive interest in two-dimensional layered materials (2DLMs). These 2DLMs represent a new class of nearly ideal 2D material systems for exploring fundamental chemistry and physics at the limit of single-atom thickness, and have the potential to open up totally new technological opportunities beyond the reach of existing materials. In general, there are a wide range of 2DLMs in which the atomic layers are weakly bonded together by van der Waals interactions and can be isolated into single or few-layer nanosheets. The van der Waals interactions between neighboring atomic layers could allow much more flexible integration of distinct materials to nearly arbitrarily combine and control different properties at the atomic scale. The transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) (e.g., MoS2, WSe2) represent a large family of layered materials, many of which exhibit tunable band gaps that can undergo a transition from an indirect band gap in bulk crystals to a direct band gap in monolayer nanosheets. These 2D-TMDs have thus emerged as an exciting class of atomically thin semiconductors for a new generation of electronic and optoelectronic devices. Recent studies have shown exciting potential of these atomically thin semiconductors, including the demonstration of atomically thin transistors, a new design of vertical transistors, as well as new types of optoelectronic devices such as tunable photovoltaic devices and light emitting devices. In parallel, there have also been considerable efforts in developing diverse synthetic approaches for the rational growth of various forms of 2D materials with precisely controlled chemical composition, physical dimension, and heterostructure interface. Here we review the recent efforts, progress, opportunities and challenges in exploring the layered TMDs as a new class of atomically thin semiconductors.
Xidong Duan
Xidong Duan is a research scientist at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. His current research interests include two-dimensional materials, heterostructures and their applications. He received his BS degree in Chemistry from Hunan University in 1993, MA degree in Materials from Hunan University in 1996. He was previously a senior engineer at Changsha Research Institute of Mining and Metallurgy before joining Hunan University.
Chen Wang
Chen Wang is a PhD candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). His research interests include the growth, structural and spectral characterizations of two-dimensional materials and their device applications. He received his BS degree in Physics from Wuhan University, China in 2012 before starting his graduate program at UCLA.
Anlian Pan
Anlian Pan is a Professor of Physics and Material Science in Hunan University, and is the director of the Key Laboratory for Micro-Nano Physics and Technology of Hunan Province. His main research interests lie in controlled growth and function modulation of semiconductor nanostructures. He received his PhD in Condensed Mater Physics from the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2006, and worked as a Humboldt Research Fellow at the Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics from 2006 to 2007. Later in 2007, he joined Arizona State University as a Postdoctoral Fellow, where he became a Research Assistant Professor.
Ruqin Yu
Ru-Qin Yu has been a Professor of College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, the member of Chinese Academy of Sciences since 1991. He graduated from S. Petersburg University, Russia in 1959. His research interests include chemical sensors and chemometrics. He is the editor-in-chief of the Chinese journal “Chemical Sensors” and editor of “Journal of Chemometrics” (Wiley).
Xiangfeng Duan
Xiangfeng Duan is a Professor at Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, the University of California, Los Angeles. His current research interests include nanoscale heterostructures and devices. He received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology and China (USTC) in 1997, MA degree in chemistry and PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He was previously a founding scientist at Nanosys Inc. before joining UCLA.
1. Introduction
The discovery of graphene has ignited intensive interest in a wide range of two-dimensional layered materials (2DLMs).1–6 In general, there are a wide range of layered materials in which the atomic layers are weakly bonded together by van der Waals interactions and can be readily isolated into single or few-layer nanosheets through mechanical exfoliation or liquid exfoliation processes.7–9 These atomically thin 2D nanosheets derived from the layered materials share many interesting characteristics of the well-known graphene, such as excellent electronic properties, exceptional mechanical flexibility, and partial optical transparency. With the reduced dimensionality and/or quantum confinement effect, these 2D nanosheets can exhibit unique properties distinct from their 3D bulk counterparts. Furthermore, these 2D nanosheets typically have a well-defined crystalline structure with few surface dangling bonds that traditionally plague most semiconductor nanostructures, and therefore can exhibit excellent electronic properties that are not readily achievable in other semiconductor nanostructures. Beyond the typical semiconducting properties, the diverse 2DLMs can also allow access to a wide range of physical properties, including superconducting (e.g., NbSe2), magnetic (e.g., CrSe2), insulating (e.g., BN), topologically insulating (e.g., Bi2Te3), and thermoelectric (e.g., Bi2Te3) properties. Furthermore, different 2DLMs may be combined to create heterostructures or superlattices for further complexity and totally new functions.
A distinct feature of these 2DLMs is the van der Waals interactions between neighboring layers that may allow much more flexible integration of different materials without the limitation of lattice matching, therefore opening up vast possibilities to nearly arbitrarily combine and control different properties at the atomic scale.4 New physics and unique functions may emerge upon combining different layers, each of which has entirely different physical properties. Beyond electron transport, these layered materials can also function as excellent hosting materials for ion insertion and ion transport, which can further modulate the electronic or topological nature of energy bands. Together, these 2DLMs represent a new class of nearly ideal 2D material systems for exploring fundamental chemistry and physics at the limit of single-atom thickness, and have the potential to open up exciting new technological opportunities beyond the reach of existing materials and enable transformative advances across diverse areas ranging from traditional electronics, optoelectronics, energy storage to the emerging areas of flexible electronics, spintronic devices and quantum computing.
The transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) (e.g., MoS2, WS2, and NbSe2) represent a large family of layered materials with the formula MX2, where M is a transition metal element from group IV (Ti, Zr or Hf), group V (V, Nb or Ta) or group VI (Mo, W), and X is a chalcogen atom (S, Se or Te) (Fig. 1a and b). The monolayer TMDs are particularly interesting due to their direct energy band gaps and non-centrosymmetric lattice structure.10–12 For example, MoS2 exhibit tunable bandgaps that can undergo transition from an indirect band gap in bulk crystals to a direct band gap in monolayer nanosheets (Fig. 1c).10,12 Thus, the diverse 2D-TMDs have emerged as an exciting class of atomically thin semiconductors with tunable electronic structures (Fig. 1d). The electronic structure of 2D-TMDs also exhibits special features except for general characteristics of common semiconductors. Electrons in 2D crystals that have a honeycomb lattice structure possess a pair of inequivalent valleys in the k-space electronic structure with an extra valley degree of freedom.13 This new degree of freedom of charge carriers can lead to new physics termed “valleytronics”, as manifested by polarized photoluminescence in monolayer MoS2 and the valley Hall effect.11,14–19 It is worth noting that a number of 2D-TMDs (MX2, where M = Mo, W, and X = S, Se) exhibit nearly identical crystal structures (Fig. 1b) and similar electronic structures (Fig. 1c and d), and will provide a family of semiconducting atomic membranes for exploring the valley physics.
 Fig. 1  Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (2D-TMDs). (a) The table shows common TMDs and their band gap.5,20–27 (b) A schematic illustration of the layered structure of MoS2. (c) Energy dispersion in bulk, quadrilayer (4L), bilayer (2L) and monolayer (1L) MoS2 from left to right. The horizontal dashed line represents the energy of a band maximum at the K point. The red and blue lines represent the conduction and valence band edges, respectively. The lowest energy transition increases with the decreasing layer and evolve from indirect to direct (vertical) transitions. (d) The relative valence and conduction band edge of some common TMDs (monolayer). (b), (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited; ref. 10, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society; and ref. 19, Copyright 2013 AIP Publishing LLC, respectively. 
Recent studies on exfoliated flakes of 2D-TMDs have shown exciting potential of these atomically thin materials, including the demonstration of atomically thin transistors,28 vertical tunnelling transistors that may promise unprecedented switching speed,29 vertical field-effect transistors (VFETs) that could enable 3D electronic integration,30 as well as new types of optoelectronic devices such as tunable photovoltaic devices and light emitting devices.31–35 In parallel, there have also been considerable efforts in developing various synthetic approaches for the rational growth of diverse forms of 2D materials with precisely controlled chemical composition, physical dimension, and heterostructure interface, an essential step towards practical technologies. Here we review the recent efforts, progress, opportunities and challenges in exploring the layered TMDs as atomically thin semiconductors. Since a large fraction of initial research on the fundamental properties and proof-of-concept devices originates from exfoliated flakes, we will begin our discussion on the properties, functions and opportunities of 2D-TMDs before reviewing more recent efforts in synthetic control of 2D-TMDs.
2. Electronic and optoelectronic properties and devices from 2D-TMDs
The 2D-TMDs can display rich physical properties and render as metallic, superconducting, semiconducting or charge density wave (CDW) subjects. Here we focus our discussions on 2D-TMD semiconductors. Many 2D-TMDs have band structures with similar general features (Fig. 1c). A most distinct feature is the widening band gap with decreasing atomic layers because of the quantum confinement effect, which leads to a crossover from an indirect-gap in bulk materials to a direct-gap at the limit of single layers. In 2010, two parallel experimental studies reported the strong photoluminescence in atomically thin MoS2, with the photoluminescence quantum yield increased by more than a factor of 104 in the monolayer materials compared with the bulk crystals,10,12 strongly indicating the transition to a direct band gap semiconductor in monolayer MoS2. A similar increase of photoluminescence quantum yield with the decreasing layer number was also observed in WS2 and WSe2.36 Because of the unique dimensionality, thickness, flatness, transparency, flexibility, finite band-gap and decent carrier mobility, the 2D-TMDs have attracted considerable interest as an exciting class of atomically thin semiconductors for a new generation of electronics with unique functions or unprecedented performance (e.g., transparent and flexible membrane electronics). Indeed, high performance transistors have been reported from monolayer MoS2 with an on/off ratio up to 8 orders of magnitude.28 These initial studies have sparked intense interest in exploring 2D-TMDs as a new generation of atomically thin semiconductors for functional electronics and optoelectronics.
2.1 2D-TMD field-effect transistors and radio frequency circuits
With an intrinsic band gap typically in the range 1–2 eV, the 2D-TMDs can overcome the key shortcomings of graphene for electronic applications – the lack of band gap and unsatisfying on/off current ratio and current saturation characteristics. Indeed, using the exfoliated MoS2 flakes as the semiconductor channels, field-effect transistors with an on/off ratio as large as 8 orders of magnitude have been achieved (Fig. 2a).28,37 The 2D electronics based on single or few-layer TMDs represent the ultimate limit of thickness for pushing the limits of the Moore's law. To create high performance transistors, it is necessary to integrate these atomically thin membranes with multiple distinct materials including oxide dielectrics and metal contacts on the nanometer scale, by using multiple steps of high-resolution lithography processes (typically subtractive lithography via various etching steps). However, it is a considerable challenge to integrate these atomically thin materials into functional transistors with optimized device geometry and performance. With an intrinsic single or few-atom thickness, the 2D-TMDs are intrinsically incompatible with the conventional subtractive lithography processes (e.g., various plasma etching) that can severely damage the atomic structure and degrade the electronic properties of these ultrathin materials. In addition, dielectric integration represents another significant challenge for these dangling-bond-free atomic layers because of their chemical incompatibility with typical oxide dielectrics or the associated deposition processes. Despite several attempts, the direct deposition of high quality high-k dielectrics on 2D-TMDs remains a significant challenge.38–40
 Fig. 2  Electronic and optoelectronic devices from 2D-TMDs. (a) A schematic illustration of a monolayer MoS2 transistor. (b) A schematic illustration of a dual-channel self-aligned MoS2 transistor with transferred gate stacks, and the inset shows the schematic cross-section of the self-aligned gate stack. (c) The cross-sectional TEM image of a typical self-aligned device. The scale bar is 50 nm. (d) The HRTEM image of the interface between MoS2 and the transferred gate stack. The scale bar is 3 nm. (e) The Ids–Vds output characteristics for a 116 nm channel length self-aligned MoS2 transistor. (f) The Ids–VTG transfer characteristics for a 116 nm channel length MoS2 transistor. (g) Small-signal current gain |h21| versus frequency for three devices with a channel length of 216 nm (blue), 116 nm (red), and 68 nm (black), with a highest cut-off frequency of 42 GHz achieved in 68 nm transistor. (h) Maximum available gain (MAG) versus frequency of the self-aligned MoS2 transistors with different channel lengths, with the maximum oscillation frequency (fMAX) up to 50 GHz achieved in the 68 nm transistor. (i) The input and output signals of an MoS2 RF amplifier show a voltage gain of 1.07 at 1 GHz. (j) Propagation delay of a few-layer MoS2 amplifier shows an input signal (black) rise time of 210 ps and an output signal (red) rise time of 580 ps. (k) A photograph of MoS2 circuits on flexible substrates. (l) Small-signal current gain (|h21|), Mason's unilateral power gain (U), and maximum available gain (MAG) versus frequency for a 68 nm channel length MoS2 transistor on a flexible substrate. (m) A schematic view of a monolayer MoS2 photodetector. (n) Time-resolved photoresponse of a monolayer MoS2 photodetector. (o) A schematic illustration of a split-gated WSe2 p–n diode. (p) The scanning photocurrent map of a WSe2 p–n diode showing pronounced photocurrent generation localized to the junction. The orange dashed lines outline the source and drain contacts whereas the blue dashed lines outline the back gates. The scale bar is 4 μm. (a), (b)–(l), (m and n) and (o and p) are reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited, ref. 42 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited, ref. 54 Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited and ref. 55 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively. 
To address these challenges, we have recently developed an additive lithography approach to integrate few-layer MoS2 with transferred gate stacks41 to produce the state-of-the-art MoS2 transistors.42 In this approach, the entire gate stack, a nanometer scale gate electrode with integrated gate dielectrics, is first fabricated on a sacrificial substrate and then transferred onto few-layer MoS2. The transferred gate is then used as a shadow mask for the deposition of the self-aligned source- and drain-electrodes with little gap or little overlap with the gate electrode (Fig. 2b–d). In this way, the transfer-gate strategy can allow for a damage-free process to integrate MoS2 with high quality gate dielectrics and the self-aligned gate to achieve nanoscale MoS2 transistors with optimized device geometry, which can simultaneously minimize the access resistance and parasitic capacitance. The resulting devices exhibit a well-expected transistor behaviour. The output characteristics show excellent current saturation at a high source–drain bias with an intrinsic gain over 30 (Fig. 2e). The transfer characteristics show a large on/off current modulation nearly eight orders of magnitude (Fig. 2f). On-chip microwave measurements demonstrate excellent radio frequency (RF) performance with a highest intrinsic cut-off frequency fT of 42 GHz and a maximum oscillation frequency fMAX of 50 GHz achieved in a 68 nm transistor (Fig. 2g and h).
The creation of the atomically thin transistors that can show both the current gain and voltage gain in the tens of gigahertz regime is rather exciting. Although the highest intrinsic cut-off frequency (fT) achieved in MoS2 (42 GHz) is considerably lower than that in graphene (up to 427 GHz) due to high carrier mobilities (∼1000–10000 cm2 V−1 s in graphene and ∼100 cm2 V−1 s−1 in MoS2),36,41 the maximum oscillation frequency (fMAX) achieved in MoS2 devices (50 GHz) is much close to that of the best graphene devices (fMAX = 70–105 GHz).43,44 The achievement of such a high fMAX in MoS2 can be attributed to the existence of an intrinsic band gap in MoS2 (vs. the semimetal nature of graphene), which leads to excellent current saturation behaviour (Fig. 2e) and voltage gain. In addition, such atomically thin semiconductors can also enable construction of transistors with a much larger on/off ratio, lower off-current and less power consumption, which is highly significant for a new generation of low-power RF electronics. Exploiting these unique advantages, these few-layer MoS2 transistors have been used to construct functional circuits, including logic inverters and RF amplifiers, operating in the gigahertz regime with voltage gain, which is difficult to achieve in graphene based RF circuits (Fig. 2i and j). It is noted that the RF performance of the MoS2 transistors is still inferior to those of traditional silicon or group III–V semiconductor devices largely due to lower carrier mobility in most 2D-TMDs and un-optimized contact resistance.45,46 To further improve the performance of 2D-TMD transistors, interface engineering, including TMD–dielectric and TMD–metal interfaces, is essential for minimizing the interface scattering, improving the gate coupling and reducing the contact resistance. Indeed, recent studies using the phase engineered contact,47 tunable graphene contact and/or boron nitride encapsulation has led to greatly reduced contact resistance and/or increased carrier mobility.48,49 Together, the atomically thin MoS2 may represent an interesting alternative for high-speed low power electronics with excellent potential for the ultimate device scaling due to its atomically thin thickness and superior immunity to the short channel effect. Other 2D-TMDs such as WSe2 have also been shown to exhibit excellent electronic properties and possibility higher carrier mobilities, and therefore can exhibit similar or better potential for atomically thin electronics.50,51
With the atomically thin carrier transport region and exceptional mechanical strength, MoS2 and other 2D-TMD materials are attractive as alternative materials for low-cost flexible electronics that is currently dominated by amorphous silicon, low-temperature processed oxide semiconductors or organic semiconductors with carrier mobilities typically below 10 cm2 V−1 s−1. In particular, these atomically thin 2D-TMD membranes may be readily applied onto bendable substrates and are particularly promising for flexible or wearable electronics. To this end, we have recently demonstrated the best performing MoS2 transistors on plastic substrates with a maximum oscillation frequency up to 10.5 GHz (Fig. 2k and l).42 Taking a step further, we have also demonstrated that multiple MoS2 transistors can be readily integrated on flexible substrates to form logic inverters or RF amplifiers that can operate in the gigahertz regime. The MoS2 transistors on flexible substrates outperform graphene based flexible transistors (fMAX ∼ 3.7 GHz) reported to date.52,53 With the continuing progress in the chemical vapour deposition growth of large area 2D-TMDs, the 2D-TMD materials may also offer an exciting material system with highly flexible membrane electronics.
Besides functioning as atomically thin channel materials for highly flexible field-effect transistors, the unique tunable electronic structure of 2D-TMDs can also open up many other exciting opportunities, including highly sensitive photodetectors (Fig. 2m and n).54 Recent studies have also shown that many of these 2D-TMDs show ambipolar behaviour, and can be explored for the creation of gate-tunable atomically thin lateral p–n diodes by using locally patterned gate electrodes to electrostatically create a spatial modulation of the doping profile (Fig. 2o and p),35,55,56 which can lead to many exciting functions including the photovoltaic effect and light-emitting properties in these atomically thin materials.
2.2 TMD–TMD heterostructures and devices
Semiconductor heterostructures and superlattices represent a powerful material platform that has essentially defined the technological foundation for all modern electronic and optoelectronic devices, including high-electron-mobility transistors, light-emitting diodes, lasers and solar cells. The heterostructures formed among atomically thin 2D materials can allow for steep modulation of the electronic band structure to form atomically sharp heterojunctions.57 With diverse 2D-TMD materials available, a wide variety of complex TMD heterostructures can be designed and created by nearly arbitrarily combining individual 2D-TMD layers into multilayer heterostructures or superlattices without the limitation of lattice matching. These layered heterostructures feature atomically sharp interfaces, zero inter-diffusion of atoms and digitally controlled layered components. The formation of these TMD heterostructures can open up a new dimension for engineering the electronic and optical properties at the atomic level. It can thus enable the creation of a new generation of atomically thin electronic and optoelectronic devices. For example, recent studies on the heterostructures between monolayer WSe2 and MoS2 heterostructures have revealed a rather unique spatially direct absorption but spatially indirect emission (Fig. 3a).58 It is found that photoluminescence intensity of this spatially indirect transition is rather strong, suggesting strong interlayer coupling of the charge carriers. Studies have also shown that such hetero-interface coupling can be readily tuned by inserting dielectric layers (e.g., BN) between WSe2 and MoS2, with a decreasing coupling effect when the number of BN layers is increased (Fig. 3b and c). This rather unique interlayer coupling provides a new degree of freedom in band engineering and may be explored for the design of a new family of semiconductor heterostructures with customized composite layers and thus tunable optoelectronic properties.
 Fig. 3  TMD/TMD heterostructures and device. (a) A schematic band diagram of the WSe2/MoS2 hetero-bilayer under photoexcitation, showing (1) absorption and exciton generation in WSe2 and MoS2 single layers, (2) relaxation of excitons at the MoS2/WSe2 interface driven by the band offset, and (3) radiative recombination of spatially indirect excitons. (b) A schematic illustration of the heterostructure of monolayer-WSe2/monolayer-MoS2 with a few-layer h-BN spacer. (c) Normalized PL spectra from the monolayer-WSe2/monolayer-MoS2 heterostructure with n layers of h-BN (n = 0, 1, and 3). (d) The false colour SEM image of the WSe2/MoS2 vertical heterojunction device, with ML-WSe2 highlighted by blue colour, the BL-WSe2 area by violet colour, MoS2 by green colour, and metal electrodes by golden colour. The scale bar is 3 μm. (e) The PL mapping of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction device, with red colour representing the PL from MoS2 and the green colour representing PL from WSe2. (f) The cross-sectional HRTEM image of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction interface. The scale bar is 5 nm. (g) Gate-tunable output characteristics of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction p–n diode. (h) The false colour scanning photocurrent micrograph of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction device shows efficient photocurrent generation throughout the overlapping junction area. (i) The false colour EL image of the heterojunction device showing light emission only in the overlapping area near the metal electrodes. (j) The EL spectra of 1L-WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction (top) and 2L-WSe2/MoS2 heterojunctions (bottom) at different injection currents. (k) A Schematic of the MoS2/WSe2 junction sandwiched between top- and bottom-graphene electrodes. (l) The optical image and the corresponding photocurrent map show uniform photocurrent generation over the entire junction area of the graphene–sandwiched monolayer p–n junction device (1L/1L) scale bars, 3 μm. (a)–(c), (d)–(j) and (k) and (l) is reproduced with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2014 National Academy of Sciences, ref. 33 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and ref. 32 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively. 
The formation of TMD–TMD heterostructures can allow the creation of diverse functional devices, such as p–n diodes. The p–n diodes represent the most fundamental device building blocks for many optoelectronic functions, including photodiodes, solar cells and light emitting diodes. The traditional semiconductor p–n diodes are usually obtained by selectively doping semiconductor materials into p- and n-type regions. However, it is non-trivial to create p–n diodes in 2D-TMDs due to the difficulties in selectively doping 2D semiconductors and controlling their doping profile. To this end, electrostatic doping has been used to create planar p–n diodes, but usually with a relatively gradual doping profile limited by the fringe electrical field and a typically relatively low optoelectronic efficiency (e.g., photon to electron conversion external quantum efficiency (EQE) ∼0.1–1%).35,54,55,59 Alternatively, it has been recently shown by several groups that an atomically thin p–n diode can be created based on a vertically stacked heterojunction between p-type WSe2 and n-type MoS2 flakes.32–33,60 Photoluminescence (PL) mapping of the stacked single layer WSe2 and multi-layer MoS2 (1L-WSe2/ML-MoS2) heterojunction shows a consistent structure layout as that observed in the corresponding SEM image (Fig. 3d and e). The cross-sectional TEM studies of the stacked heterojunction clearly show an atomically sharp interface (Fig. 3f). Electrical transport studies of the heterojunction show an apparent current rectification behaviour expected for a p–n diode (Fig. 3g). The ultrathin nature of the heterojunction allows using a gate potential to tune the diode characteristics. The diode output characteristics under different back gate voltages show that the output current decreases with the increasing positive gate voltage, suggesting that the single layer p-type WSe2 partly dominates the charge transport behaviour in the device. The output characteristics of the vertical heterojunction can be viewed as a vertical heterojunction p–n diode in series with an additional p-channel FET because the electrical contact has to be made at one side of the monolayer WSe2, instead of the vertical broad area contact. In general, the heterojunction p–n diode resistance decreases exponentially with the increasing bias voltage, and the series p-FET resistance is nearly constant with the bias voltage. Therefore, the heterojunction resistance is dominated by the p–n diode at a low bias and by the p-type 1L-WSe2 FET under a high forward bias. Fitting the diode characteristics gives an ideality factor of n = 1.2, indicating excellent diode behaviour in the atomically sharp heterojunction p–n diode.
The spatially resolved map of the photocurrent generated from the heterojunction p–n diode can offer important insight into diode characteristics of the atomically thin heterostructures. The photocurrent mapping at zero bias shows an obvious photoresponse from the entire WSe2/MoS2 overlapping region (Fig. 3h), suggesting that a broad area p–n junction is formed throughout the overlapping area. The maximum photon to electron conversion EQE achieved in the vertical 1L-WSe2/ML-MoS2 heterostructure devices is about 12%, much higher than those obtained in lateral electrostatically doped WSe2 p–n homojunctions (0.1–3%),34,35 which may be partly attributed to the more efficient charge separation resulting from the atomically sharp vertical p–n junction. It is also interesting to note that the photocurrent in the 1L-WSe2/ML-MoS2 region is much stronger than that in the 2L-WSe2/MoS2 region, suggesting that the direct band gap plays an important role in the photocurrent generation process. A detailed understanding of the different response of 1L-WSe2/ML-MoS2vs. 2L-WSe2/ML-MoS2 will be an interesting topic for upcoming studies.
Recent studies on an atomically thin p–n junction formed within 1L-MoS2 and 1L-WSe2 have also suggested that, in spite of an apparent current rectification behavior, the fundamental transport mechanism could differ substantially from the traditional p–n diode because of the lack of depletion layer in the atomically thin heterostructures. In particular, it has been suggested that the inter-layer tunneling and recombination play an important role in the charge transport characteristics.32 It is also important to note that, within such atomically thin p–n diodes with a lateral contact outside the junction overlapping region, the photo-generated carriers need to go through a relatively long lateral diffusion length in the atomically thin 2D-TMDs, and the competition between interlayer recombination and lateral diffusion can compromise the charge collection efficiency and therefore limit the overall EQE. To reduce the charge diffusion distance/time, a vertical contact device has been created by sandwiching the 2D-TMD heterojunction p–n diode between two graphene electrodes (Fig. 3k and l), in which the graphene electrodes serves as transparent contacts for rapid extraction of photo-generated charge carriers. Importantly, this strategy has led to a greatly increased EQE up to 34% in the ML-WSe2/ML-MoS2 p–n diode.32
Since the p–n diode represents the basic device element for a light-emitting diode, the atomically sharp WSe2/MoS2 heterojunctions may also be explored by electroluminescence (EL) studies. An EL image acquired under a forward bias shows that the EL is only localized in the overlapping area near the metal electrodes, which is in stark contrast to the photocurrent generation from the entire overlapping area. This can be explained by the electric field distribution in the heterojunction under different biases. For photocurrent mapping at zero, the junction resistance of the p–n diode dominates the entire device and series resistance of the WSe2 p-FET is relatively insignificant, and therefore the photocurrent can be seen from the entire overlapping area where there is a p–n junction potential offset. For EL studies at a much higher forward bias exceeding the turn-on voltage of the p–n diode, the resistance of the 1L-WSe2 p-FET becomes an increasingly dominating component of the total resistance. Therefore, most voltage drops occur across the heterojunction edge near the electrodes due to the large series resistance of the 1L-WSe2. A similar observation was also reported in the MoS2/Si heterojunction.35 It is noted that the EL intensity observed in the 1L-WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction is much stronger than that in the 2L-WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction due to a higher radiative recombination rate in the direct band gap 1L-WSe2 than that in the indirect band gap 2L-WSe2. The EL spectra show rich spectral features and can be well fitted using multiple Guassian functions, which can be assigned as excitonic peaks A (∼792 nm) and B (∼626 nm), hot electron luminescence (HEL) peaks A′ (∼546 nm) and B′ (∼483 nm) and an indirect band gap emission peak I (∼880 nm) (Fig. 3j). A careful analysis of these different features can allow for the identification of emissions from different optical transitions. In particular, significantly enhanced hot electron luminescence peaks were observed in EL spectra of WSe2, which can be used to probe the electron–orbital interaction in WSe2.33
With the dangling bond-free surface and van der Waals interaction, the physical stack of 2D-TMDs can allow the creation of high quality atomically sharp interfaces without the limitation of atomic lattice matching. The availability of a broad range of 2D-TMDs and other layered materials with variable electronic band structures can allow the creation of a wide variety of heterojunctions and superlattices with the designated number of atomic layers, precisely tuned electronic functions and designed band alignment. It can thus create a powerful new material platform for novel, high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices.
2.3 Graphene/TMD heterostructure devices
Beyond TMD/TMD heterostructures, the flexible van der Waals interaction can also allow the creation of diverse heterostructures between 2D-TMDs and other atomic layered materials, including graphene and boron nitride. The formation of such heterostructures can also enable the design of entirely new devices with unique attributes not readily available in traditional semiconductor devices. For example, exploiting its “tunable work function” and partial “electrostatic transparency”, graphene has been explored as a tunable contact for creating unique types of vertical tunnelling transistors, vertical field-effect transistors or barristors.29–30,61 Although with slightly different configurations, these devices function under a rather similar mechanism. As an example, we focus our discussion on our own effort towards a vertical field-effect transistor (VFET) created in a graphene–MoS2–metal heterostructure. Within the concept of the VFETs, charge travels in the vertical direction from graphene to MoS2 and then to the metal electrodes (Fig. 4a). A gate voltage modulates the work-function of the graphene and the barrier height across the graphene–MoS2 junction (Fig. 4b). It can thus regulate the amplitude of the current injected across the junction to switch the device on and off. The device was fabricated by physically transferring exfoliated MoS2 flakes onto monolayer graphene on a Si/SiO2 substrate followed by lithography and metallization processes to define the source and drain electrodes. The cross sectional TEM images clearly show the layered structure across the vertical stack (Fig. 4c) and the atomically sharp interface between graphene and MoS2 (Fig. 4d). The output characteristics at different gate voltages show considerable current modulation when graphene is negatively biased, yet much smaller current modulation when graphene is positive biased (Fig. 4e). This difference can be attributed to different electron injection directions under different bias conditions. When graphene is negatively biased, the injection of electrons from graphene to MoS2 dominates the transport behaviour, which is dictated by the potential offset across the graphene/MoS2 interface. Thus the gate tunable potential offset across this interface can result in significant gate modulation of the current. In contrast, when graphene is positively biased, the electron injection from the top-metal to MoS2 dominates the charge transport behaviour, which is much less tunable by the gate. Overall, the device can function as an effective switch in the negative bias regime, and thus enabling a transistor with a room temperature on–off ratio >103 (Fig. 4f). This approach offers a general strategy for the vertical integration of various layered materials to obtain both p- and n-channel transistors by using different layered materials with different intrinsic carrier types. For example, by using the layered p-type Bi2Sr2Co2O8 and n-type MoS2 flakes as the vertical semiconductor channels, we have created both p-type and n-type VFETs. Taking a step further, we have also shown that multiple layered materials, including graphene, p-type Bi2Sr2Co2O8, graphene, n-type MoS2, and a metal thin film can be vertically stacked in sequence to integrate p-type and n-type transistors in the vertical direction, and thus creating a complementary inverter with larger than unit voltage gain (Fig. 4g and h). In this way, the VFET concept can open up a totally new strategy for logic integration in the third dimension, distinct from the two-dimensional integration in traditional planar silicon electronics. This device level vertical integration strategy could thus open up a new totally dimension for future electronics to enable three-dimensional integration.
 Fig. 4  Graphene/TMD heterostructure device. (a) A schematic illustration of a vertical field-effect transistor made of graphene–MoS2–metal stack, with graphene and top-metal thin films functioning as the source and drain electrodes, the MoS2 layer as the vertically stacked semiconducting channel and its thickness defines the channel length. The silicon back gate is used with a 300 nm SiO2 dielectric layer. (b) The band diagram shows that the gate electrode modulates the work-function of graphene and thus the barrier height across graphene–MoS2 heterostructure to switch the device on and off. (c) A cross-section TEM image of a vertical transistor. (d) A cross-section HRTEM image of the interface between multi-layer graphene, multi-layer MoS2 and the top electrode of Ti. A TEM image of a multilayer graphene device is shown here for better illustration and the actual device typically consists of monolayer graphene. (e) The Isd–Vsd output characteristics of a vertical transistor. The current is normalized by the device area. (f) The transfer characteristics of the vertical device at Vsd = −0.1, −0.2, and −0.5 V. (g) A schematic illustration of a complementary inverter created by vertically stacking the layered materials of graphene, Bi2Sr2Co2O8 (BSCO) (p-channel), graphene, MoS2 (n-channel), and metal thin films on a Si/SiNx (20 nm) substrate. (h) The inverter characteristics from vertically stacked p- and n-type VFETs. A negative supply voltage (VDD = −2V) is applied to bottom graphene, and the gain of the inverter is ∼1.7. (i) A schematic illustration of the vertically gated graphene–MoS2–graphne heterostructure device for gate-tunable photocurrent generation. (j) The SEM image and scanning photocurrent images of a device taken at gate biases between −60 V and +60 V under a 514 nm laser. The dashed and solid lines indicate the edge of the bottom graphene and top graphene electrodes, respectively. (k) External quantum efficiency (EQE) of the vertical heterostructure device as a function of the back gate. (l) Schematic band diagrams of the vertical heterostructure with zero, negative, positive, and large-positive biases on the silicon back gate. Blue dots, black circles, and green arrows indicate electrons, holes, and photons, respectively. (a)–(h) and (i)–(l) is reproduced with permission from ref. 30 Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited and ref. 63 Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively. 
It is important to note that the vertical transistor concept is fundamentally different from the traditional “planar transistor” structure that has been used in conventional silicon electronics for more than half a century, in which the charge carriers travel in the planar (lateral) direction from left (source) to right (drain), which is controlled by lithographically defined gate electrodes. The speed of a transistor is in general defined by the time required for electrons to travel from the source to drain electrode, which in turn is determined by the carrier speed of the semiconductor materials (determined by the intrinsic carrier mobility and applied field, or carrier saturation velocity) and the distance between the source and drain electrodes (determined by the lithographically defined gate length). With the same device architecture, the speed of the planar transistors is inevitably limited by the lateral size or the ultimate resolution of the lithography used to fabricate the devices. Importantly, using the vertical transistor concept, the channel length is no longer determined by the lithography, but by the atomic layer thickness of the TMD material here. It can therefore enable ultra-short channel transistors beyond the limitation of traditional lithographic resolution, opening a new pathway to high-speed devices (even using low-resolution lithography). This can be particularly significant for flexible electronics, in which high-resolution lithography is difficult and costly to implement. Indeed, using ultrathin-layered MoS2 as the semiconductor channel, a vertical transistor can deliver a high current that is about two orders of magnitude larger than that of a planar device with a similar footprint. The achievement of high current is central to the performance of a transistor since the intrinsic delay of a transistor (τ = CV/I) is inversely proportional to the deliverable current density. With a similar device geometry (capacitance, C), higher current (I) at the same bias voltage (V) can be directly translated into a much shorter intrinsic delay (τ) and a higher device speed. In addition, the unique vertical (out-of-plane) charge transport across the large-area vertical junction makes the source–drain current much less affected by the in-plane cracks in the semiconductor thin films to afford unprecedented tolerance to in-plane cracks.62 It can thus enable exciting opportunities for highly flexible electronics with exceptional electrical performance and superior mechanical robustness.
The creation of graphene/TMD vertical heterostructures can also allow for the design of a new generation of atomically thin optoelectronic devices including photodetectors, photovoltaics and light emitting devices. For example, by vertically stacking exfoliated flakes to create graphene–MoS2–graphene heterostructures, a broad area photodiode has been demonstrated for highly efficient photon harvesting and photocurrent generation (Fig. 4i).63,64 The graphene–MoS2–graphene heterostructure device closely resembles a traditional photovoltaic device, in which a semiconductor layer is sandwiched between two metallic contacts. Indeed, the current–voltage study of the sandwiched device shows the expected photovoltaic response with clear photocurrent generation and open circuit potential. Spatial mapping of photocurrent reveals strong photocurrent generation throughout the entire overlapping area of the vertical devices (Fig. 4j). It is important to note that photocurrent amplitude can be readily modulated by varying the gate voltage, with the overall photocurrent increasing with the increasing negative gate voltage and decreasing with the increasing positive gate voltage (Fig. 4k). This is in stark contrast to conventional photodiodes and photovoltaic devices in which photocurrent generation is determined by the intrinsic built-in potential of the device and cannot be easily modulated after the device is made.
These experimental observations can be explained by using a similar physical picture described in the vertical transistors. In general, the photocarrier separation and transport are dictated by the built-in potential across the metal–semiconductor contact, the graphene–MoS2 contact in this case. Similar to the vertical transistors discussed above, with the finite density of states in graphene and the weak electrostatic screening effect, the Schottky barrier height (or built-in potential) at the graphene–MoS2 interface can be effectively modulated by an external field applied through the back-gate electrode. Within the vertical heterostructure, the top- and bottom-Schottky barriers are merged together in the ultra-thin semiconducting layer to form a monotonic band slope, which dictates the separation and transport of the excited electrons and holes. Importantly, this band slope is highly tunable by the external gate field (Fig. 4l). With a negative gate voltage, the work function of the bottom graphene increases and so does the graphene–MoS2 Schottky barrier height, which increases the band slope to promote the electron–hole separation and enhance the photocurrent. On the other hand, a positive gate voltage decreases the graphene–MoS2 Schottky barrier height, reduces the band slope to reduce the electron–hole separation and suppresses the overall photocurrent. Importantly, by properly tuning the gate voltage, the quantum efficiency of the photocurrent generation can be greatly modulated by 1–2 orders of magnitude to achieve an internal quantum efficiency up to 85%.
The ability to modulate the photocurrent with an external capacitively coupled gate suggests that it is possible to manipulate the photocarrier generation, separation and transport processes in such vertically stacked devices. Taking a step further, an additional top-gate electrode can be integrated on top of the graphene–MoS2–graphene stack to have complete control of the potential offset at both the bottom graphene–MoS2 and top grpahene–MoS2 interfaces, and thus to have complete control of the amplitude and direction of the band slope in MoS2, which can in turn not only modulate the charge separation driving force, but also the direction. Indeed, it has been clearly demonstrated that both the photocurrent amplitude and polarity can be readily switched by varying the relative gate voltage applied on the top and bottom-gate. In an alternative and probably more simplified picture, the generation and polarity of the photocurrent within the dual-gated vertical devices can be understood without considering the details within the graphene–MoS2–graphene stack. In general, the polarity and amplitude of the overall photocurrent is largely determined by the field direction and field strength across the top and bottom gates, with the photogenerated electrons always moving towards the positively biased gate electrode and holes moving towards the negatively biased gate electrode.
Unlike conventional photodiodes in which the photocarrier separation and transport are dictated by the internal built-in potential and are hardly changeable by any external factors, the unique design of vertical heterostructures of 2D materials allows to use a capacitively coupled gate field to manipulate the photocarrier separation, transport and photocurrent generation processes. It is important to note that the external field direction in the vertical device is parallel to the current direction and can directly modulate the charge separation and transport. This capability is enabled by several unique characteristics in such vertical heterostructures including the partial optical transparency and the partial “electrostatic transparency” of graphene due to its finite density of states and weak electrostatic screening effect. These novel heterostructures have the potential to open up entirely new possibilities for the design of a new generation of photodetection and photovoltaic devices, in which an external gate field may be used to greatly accelerate the charge separation and transport to greatly enhance the photoresponsivity and quantum efficiency. This gate-driven charge separation is not unique to MoS2, and could be particularly useful for the creation of efficient photovoltaic devices from materials such quantum dot thin films or perovskite materials, in which the well-defined p–n junction is difficult to achieve.
Exploiting the unique properties of the atomically thin graphene and 2D-TMDs, the formation graphene/TMD heterostructures can create many unique functions not otherwise possible. Beyond the vertical transistors and tunable photonic devices discussed above, graphene/MoS2 heterostructures have also been explored for creating nonvolatile memory devices.65 Such heterostructures have been explored for highly sensitive photodetectors with ultra-high gain (>108 A W−1) and gate-tunable persistent photoconductivity with nearly-perfect charge retention, which can be attributed to the gate-tunable charge exchange between the graphene and MoS2 layers. In addition, it has also been recently shown that the graphene/TMD heterostructures may offer a unique opportunity for creating barrier free contacts to TMD materials.48,49
3. Synthesis of atomically thin 2D-TMDs
Despite intense interest and considerable progress in 2D-TMDs to date, most of the fundamental physics studies and device demonstrations have largely relied on exfoliated flakes, with the flake size typically limited to the order of 10 μm or less. The fabrication of 2D-TMD heterostructure devices is generally achieved through arduous exfoliation and repeated physical transfer processes, which is clearly not scalable for practical technologies. To move beyond the initial fundamental physical curiosity and explore the full potential of these materials, it is necessary to develop robust synthetic strategies for the growth of these atomically thin materials with a well-controlled physical dimension, chemical composition, and heterostructure interface. To this end, considerable efforts have been exerted to develop various synthetic approaches for the preparation of diverse 2D-TMDs. In general, these approaches can be classified into two distinct groups including: a top-down strategy including various exfoliation approaches to exfoliate bulk 2D crystals into single or few-layered nanosheets, such as mechanical exfoliation, chemical exfoliation and solvent exfoliation; and a bottom-up strategy to chemically synthesize the atomically thin nanosheets either in solution phase or in a chemical vapour deposition process.
Among the top-down exfoliation approaches, the mechanical exfoliation of bulk crystals can be used to prepare ultra-clean 2D-TMDs with variable thicknesses down to a single lattice unit, and has been widely used for initial fundamental studies. It is however limited by the relatively small flake size and low throughput. The chemical and solvent exfoliation approach can allow for production of a relatively large quantity of materials. However, the resulting materials are often contaminated with excessive impurity doping or have a poor control of the flake size and thickness, and are therefore not well suited for high performance electronic applications. On the other hand, the bottom-up chemical synthetic approach, particularly the chemical vapour deposition (CVD) process, can allow the growth of relatively high quality 2D crystals on surfaces with a well-controlled lateral size and layer thickness, which are well suited for device fabrications. Here we would like to focus our discussion on the CVD growth of 2D-TMDs, alloys and heterostructures.
3.1 Chemical vapor deposition growth of 2D-TMDs and alloys
The CVD process is a well-known approach for atomic-scale control of low-dimensional materials, particularly semiconductor heterostructures. The CVD approach has also been recently adapted for the growth of large area graphene,66–68 with the single crystal domain size up to the centimeter scale and a precise control of the layer thickness down to one or two atomic layers.69 The CVD growth of atomically thin 2D-TMDs has attracted considerable recent interest. In general, in most of the studies reported to date, the growth of 2D-TMDs is achieved using a thermal CVD process, in which the chemical vapor is generated by thermal evaporation of a solid source (Fig. 5a).70,71 In most studies, an inert gas (e.g., argon) has been used as the vapor phase carrier gas. In some cases, it has been found that the presence of hydrogen can promote the formation of atomically thin nanosheets (e.g., MoSe2).
 Fig. 5  Chemical-vapour deposition growth of atomically thin 2D-TMDs. (a) A schematic illustration of a thermal CVD system for the growth of 2D-TMDs using the thermally evaporated chemical vapour source. (b) Monolayer/bilayer MoSe2 “triforce” crystals with anti-parallel triangular layers. (c) An AFM image of monolayer and bilayer domains and (d) the corresponding line scans. Optical microscope images of the monolayer WSe2 domains (e) and a continuous monolayer thin film (f). Scale bars are all 5 μm. (g) A photograph of the ∼1 cm sized monolayer WSe2 films transferred onto a glass template. (h) The Raman spectra of the monolayer and bilayer WSe2. The inset shows the magnified view of B2g resonance mode. (i) PL spectra of the monolayer and bilayer WSe2. (j) The corresponding PL map of a continuous film, the scale bar is 10 μm. (k) PL spectra of MoS2xSe2(1−x) nanosheets with complete composition modulation. (l) An HRTEM image and electron diffraction (inset) pattern of a ternary alloy nanosheet show a nearly perfect crystalline structure. (m) A schematic illustration of MOCVD growth setup for the wafer scale growth of a continuous monolayer MoS2 film. (n) False-colour dark field-TEM image showing a continuous monolayer MoS2 film. The false colour represents different crystalline orientations. Scale bar, 1 μm. (o) Patterned growth MoS2 at selected locations. Scale bar, 50 μm. (b)–(d), (e)–(j), (k and i), (m and n) and (o) are reproduced with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2014 Springer, ref. 50 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, ref. 81 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society, ref. 83 Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited and ref. 84 Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively. 
The initial attempts have largely focused on the growth of MoS2 nanosheets and continuous thin films. In this regard, several thermal CVD processes have been reported by using slightly different precursors: (1) dip-coating (NH4)2MoS4 on a substrate followed by annealing in sulfur vapour;71 (2) vaporizing MoO3 and S for co-deposition on a substrate;70 vaporizing MoCl5 and S for co-deposition on a substrate;72 (3) sulfur vapour treatment of Mo thin films on a substrate;73 (4) sulfur vapour treatment of MoO2 thin films on a substrate;74 (5) vaporizing MoS2 at high temperature and vapour transfer deposition on a substrate at lower temperature.74 These methods are general for 2D-TMDs and can be readily extended to the growth of other similar 2D-TMDs, including WS2, MoSe2, and WSe2.50,75,76 For example, by using MoO3 and Se as precursors, we have prepared MoSe2 nanosheets for the first time.75 The resulting nanosheets are typically clearly visible under an optical microscope with triangular shaped domains and thickness dependent contrast that can allow to distinguish between mono- and multi-layers on a silicon substrate with 300 nm SiO2 (Fig. 5b). Atomic force microscopy (AFM) shows the height of the MoSe2 monolayer on the SiO2/Si substrate is typically measured between 0.70–1.0 nm, and the second layer height in bilayers is consistently found to be between 0.60–0.70 nm (Fig. 5c and d), which is in agreement with the step height difference of 0.64 nm between monolayer and bilayer MoSe2. The triangular crystal shape is dictated by the thermodynamically favorable edge termination of either Mo or Se atoms and the three-fold symmetry of the half unit cell of single layer dichalcogenides, compared to the six-fold symmetry of bulk MoSe2. By thermally evaporating WSe2 in a vapor phase transfer process, triangular domains of WSe2 can also be readily prepared.50 The triangular domains typically nucleate randomly on the SiO2/Si substrate with domain sizes up to several tens of micrometers (Fig. 5e). Under suitable conditions, the domains can merge together to form continuous thin films as large as 1 cm2, which is only limited by the size of the reactor (Fig. 5f). The resulting WSe2 films can be readily transferred onto other substrate such as glass for subsequent property characterization and device fabrications (Fig. 5g).
Micro-Raman or micro-photoluminescence studies have been typically employed to probe the structural and optical properties of the resulting nanosheets or thin films. Beyond optical contrast and AFM studies, a careful analysis of different Raman resonance modes can also be used to evaluate the layer number of the WSe2 domains (Fig. 5h). The Raman spectrum of WSe2 typically has two resonance modes: an A1g resonance mode at 252 cm−1 and a B2g resonance mode at 307 cm−1. The B2g signature mode is usually only active in the bilayer or few-layer region,77,78 while the A1g mode is less sensitive to the layer thickness, only with the intensity increasing with reducing atomic layers. The micro-photoluminescence (μ-PL) is another commonly used technique for probing optical properties of the monolayer TMD domains and the continuous thin films. For example, a μ-PL spectra recorded in the WSe2 monolayer region show the characteristic peak at around 766 nm, with a full-width-half-maximum (FWHM) value of 25 nm (Fig. 5i), which is comparable to that of exfoliated WSe2.14,15 The strong light emission from the monolayer indicates the high quality of the continuous WSe2 films. The μ-PL spectra recorded in the bilayer WSe2 region show a wider peak at ∼790 nm with a significantly lower intensity (Fig. 5i). The spatially resolved μ-PL mapping can therefore be used to evaluate the overall quality and thickness of the material. The PL mapping of a CVD grown monolayer WSe2 thin film typically shows rather uniform emission with a few darker triangles (Fig. 5j), indicating that the film largely consists of a monolayer material with a small fraction of bilayer region. In addition, there are also some slightly darker lines that can be attributed the grain boundaries between merged monolayer domains.
Band gap engineering of atomically thin 2DLMs is critical for their applications in nanoelectronics, optoelectronics, and photonics. Precisely control of the band gap of these 2D-TMDs is of central importance for creating optoelectronic devices with tunable spectral responses. Alloying semiconductors with different band gaps represents a common strategy for the bandgap engineering of bulk semiconductors. Considering the similarities in the atomic structure of many 2D-TMDs, it is possible to create a mixed alloy system with tunable band gaps depending on the alloying compositions. Theoretical studies suggested that mixed Mo(S, Se, Te)2 alloys are thermodynamically stable, and thus it is possible to continuously tune their compositions between the constituent limits.79 Indeed, bandgap engineering of 2D-TMDs has recently been achieved by creating a composition of mixed alloys between TMDs with different band gaps.80–82 For example, by using a spatial temperature gradient for the composition selection, we have recently synthesized composition tunable MoS2xSe2(1−x) nanosheets. Elemental analysis of the resulting nanosheets collected at different growth temperatures clearly shows complete composition modulation from x = 0 (pure MoSe2) all the way to x = 1 (pure MoS2). Photoluminescence studies show clean band edge emission with the spectral peak continuously tunable from ∼668 nm (for pure MoS2) to ∼795 nm (for pure MoSe2), clearly demonstrating the band gap modulation within the alloy nanosheets (Fig. 5k).
Transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and the associated electron diffraction (ED) and energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) studies are very useful tools to evaluate the crystal quality, atomic structure and chemical composition of the resulting nanosheets. To this end, the as-grown TMD nanosheets need to be transferred onto a carbon-coated TEM grid. The high resolution TEM (HRTEM) image of the atomically thin nanosheets shows a nearly perfect hexagonal lattice arrangement (Fig. 5l), confirming the excellent crystalline quality of the atomic layered material. The basic electronic properties (e.g., carrier mobility) of the resulting TMD nanosheets can be evaluated by using back-gated field-effect transistors (FETs) on SiO2/Si substrates. In general, a rather broad spread of mobility values (from <1 to >100 cm2 V−1 s−1) has been reported in the synthetic 2D-TMDs to date. These large variations can be partly attributed to the intrinsic material properties and partly to the extrinsic device fabrication steps (e.g., variations in contact resistance). Nonetheless, the highest mobility observed in many synthetic 2D-TMDs is already comparable to the best values reported in the exfoliated materials, highlighting the high crystalline quality of these synthetic materials.50
The thermal CVD process has been proven to be a rather flexible approach for successful growth of diverse 2D-TMDs. However, using the thermally evaporated solid source, it is usually difficult to precisely control the vapor partial pressure and spatial distribution of the chemical vapor precursors. Consequently, it remains a significant challenge to produce continuous 2D-TMD thin films with a precise control of the crystal domain size, domain density and the layer thickness over large area. In general, when the super-saturation of the chemical precursor in a CVD process exceeds a certain threshold, we can expect either the formation of new crystal nuclei or continued growth on the existing nuclei. In the case of 2D-TMDs, the growth can occur on the edge of the existing layer to extend the lateral growth in 2D, or on the top of the existing layer to initiate the vertical growth in 3D, which is equivalent to the formation of new nuclei on the existing template. To grow the 2D-TMDs with controlled lateral, vertical dimensions or heterostructure interfaces, a critical challenge is to independently control the nucleation and growth steps in 2D or 3D. It has been long recognized that the nucleation probability in vapor phase deposition is proportional to the super-saturation and inversely proportional to the substrate temperature. Our recent systematic studies on the synthesis of WSe2 indicate that higher growth temperature yields a lower density of thicker WSe2 domains with a larger domain size, while the increase of super-saturation of the precursors can increase both the domain density and layer thickness. To exert exquisite control of the material growth process, it is necessary to have a fine control over the growth temperature, the flow rate and super-saturation of the vapor phase reactant as well as their spatial distribution uniformity, which is difficult to achieve using the simple thermal CVD process.
A better control might be achievable by directly using vapor phase reactants in a more sophisticate metalorganic CVD (MOCVD) process. Importantly, recent efforts in MOCVD growth of the 2D-TMDs have already shown significant potential of this approach. In particular, with a well-designed MOCVD process, it has been recently demonstrated that highly uniform MoS2 and WS2 monolayers can be produced on a four-inch wafer scale, marking an important milestone toward scalable production of 2D-TMDs (Fig. 5m),83 which is essential for creating highly integrated circuits from 2D-TMDs. However, it is important to note that the continuous atomic thin films resulting from most of the CVD or MOCVD systems to date are typically polycrystalline materials with the grain size ranging from 1 from 10 micrometers (Fig. 5n). The growth of large-area single crystalline thin films will be an important challenge to address. An alternative approach to overcome this challenge could be selective growth of 2D-TMD single crystalline domains with controlled spatial locations (Fig. 5o).84
3.2 Chemical vapor deposition growth of 2D-TMD heterostructures
Exploring the full potential of these 2D-TMDs requires precise spatial modulation of the chemical, structural and electronic properties in these 2D atomic crystals to create well-defined heterostructures, much like the traditional semiconductor heterostructures that have essentially defined the foundation of all modern electronic and optoelectronic devices, including transistors, p–n diodes, photovoltaic/photodetection devices, light-emitting diodes and laser diodes. With the success in the CVD growth of 2D-TMD nanosheets and alloys with a well-controlled composition, the natural next step is to extend this approach to the growth of well-defined heterostructures with designated modulation of chemical compositions and/or electronic structures in the lateral or vertical direction. In general, a lateral heterostructure can in principle be produced through successive growth of a second material (e.g., MoSe2, WSe2) at the edge of an existing domain of the first material (e.g., MoS2, WS2). Since the lattice mismatch between these TMD materials is relatively small (<5%), coherent heterostructures with nearly perfect lattice structures could be produced through a lateral epitaxial process (Fig. 6a–c). Similarly, the vertical heterostructures can also be synthesized through a layer-by-layer van der Waals epitaxial process (Fig. 6d). Although conceptually simple, the growth of TMD heterostructures has been a considerable challenge and was not realized until very recently.85–88 In particular, the continued epitaxial growth of a second material requires an active growth front on the edge of the existing domain. However, the dangling bonds on the edge of a 2D layer could readily reconstruct or adsorb other molecules (e.g., oxygen or water), and thus are passivated and cannot function as the active edge of the continued lateral epitaxial growth. In addition, the atomically thin TMD nanosheets are usually rather delicate and may not withstand substantial changes in growth temperature or conditions necessary for the sequential growth of a second material to form the desired heterostructures. To address these challenges, it is essential to properly design common synthetic conditions that are suitable for both materials of interest and to ensure the material stability and retain a fresh, un-passivated edge growth front for successive lateral epitaxial growth.
 Fig. 6  Growth of 2D-TMD heterostructures. (a and b) A schematic illustration of lateral epitaxial growth of WS2–WSe2 heterostructures. (c) A schematic illustration of successive lateral epitaxial growth of superlattice structure in the lateral dimension. (d) A schematic illustration of van der Waals superlattices through the successive layer-by-layer growth approach. (e) A schematic illustration of a thermal CVD system that can allow in situ switch of the chemical vapour source for lateral hetero-epitaxial growth of 2D heterostructures. (f) A composite image consisting of the Raman mapping of a WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure at 255 cm−1 and 417 cm−1 shows no apparent overlap or gap between the WS2 and WSe2 signals, demonstrating that the WS2 inner triangle and WSe2 peripheral area are laterally connected. (g) A composite image consisting of the PL mapping at 665 nm and 775 nm further confirms the formation of the WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure. (h) The electron diffraction pattern taken across the heterostructure interface, with each diffraction spot consisting of a pair diffraction peaks (see insets for the magnified view) that can be indexed with lattice spacings of 2.70 Å for WS2 and 2.81 Å for WSe2, respectively. (i) A high-resolution TEM image shows highly crystalline structure with coherent lattice fringes across the WS2–WSe2 heterostructure interface. The scale bar is 5 nm. (j) Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental maps of W, S and Se atoms and the composite EDS mapping image of S and Se atoms show relative uniform distribution of W, and seamless lateral integration of WS2 and WSe2 in the heterostructure domain. The scale bar in e–h is 200 nm. (k) Atomic-resolution Z-contrast images (left) and the corresponding atomic models (right) of the atomically sharp lateral interfaces along the zigzag (top) and armchair (bottom) directions of the WS2–MoS2 heterostructure (W, read; Mo, green; S, yellow). Scale bars: (a), 1 nm; (b–d), 0.5 nm. (l) The gate-tunable output characteristics of a lateral WSe2–WS2 heterojunction p–n diode. The gate voltage varies from 80 to 20 V in the steps of 10 V as indicated in the plot. The inset is a scanning photocurrent map of the lateral WSe2–WS2 heterojunction p–n diode. (m) A CMOS inverter obtained by integrating p-type WSe2 and an n-type WS2 FETs shows the expected inverter function with a voltage gain as large 24. The black curve is the output–input curve and the red curve indicates the voltage gain. The inset shows the image and circuit diagram of the WSe2–WS2 CMOS inverter. The scale bar is 2 μm. (a, b, e)–(j, i, m) and (k) are reproduced with permission from ref. 85 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited and ref. 87 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively. 
We have recently shown that a thermal CVD process can be adapted for growth of coherent WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructures. In this design, two magnets (one inside the CVD chamber and one outside) were used to mechanically push the WS2 solid source out of and the WSe2 solid source into the centre hot zone without breaking vacuum (Fig. 6e), and thus allowing an in situ switch of the vapour phase reactants.85 This in situ switch of the chemical source is essential for retaining the active edge growth front for sequential epitaxial growth of WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructures. For example, to produce a WS2–WSe2 heterostructure (Fig. 6a), the WS2 domains were first grown by thermally evaporating a solid WS2 source at the center hot zone. The peripheral edges of the triangular domains feature unsaturated dangling bonds that function as the active growth front for the continued addition and incorporation of precursor atoms to extend the 2D crystal in the lateral direction. By in situ moving the WS2 solid source out of the hot zone and the WSe2 solid source into the hot zone without exposing to the ambient conditions, the chemical vapour source is switched from WS2 to WSe2 in the middle of the growth to enable lateral hetero-epitaxial growth of WSe2 at the peripheral active growth front to produce WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructures.
The micro-Raman and micro-photoluminescence (micro-PL) studies clearly reveal the spatial structural and optical modulation in the triangular WS2–WSe2 heterostructure domain, with the central part consisting of a smaller triangular domain of WS2, and the peripheral region made of WSe2 (Fig. 6f and g). TEM and EDX elemental analysis can further reveal the atomic scale microstructure and chemical modulation within the WS2–WSe2 heterostructures. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern taken across the heterostructure interface (Fig. 6h) shows apparently a single set of hexagonal arrangement of diffraction spots that can be indexed to the hexagonal symmetry of the [001] zone plane of WS2 or WSe2 lattice structures. The observation of a single set of diffraction pattern suggests that the WS2 or WSe2 regions in the triangular heterostructure domain exhibit nearly the same lattice structure and orientation. A magnified view of the diffraction spots reveals that each diffraction spot consists a pair of diffraction peaks corresponding to the lattice spacings of 2.70 Å (WS2) and 2.81 Å (WSe2), respectively. A lattice resolved TEM image across the interface further confirms the single crystalline structure (Fig. 6i). Importantly, the lattice fringes appear to be continuous across WS2 regions to WSe2 regions, indicating the heterostructure is nearly coherent. EDX elemental mapping (Fig. 6j) also confirms the chemical modulation within the heterostructures, with the tungsten (W) signal nearly uniformly distributed throughout the entire triangular domain, while sulfur (S) localized in the centre and selenium (Se) localized in the peripheral area. A high resolution annular dark-field (ADF) scanning TEM (STEM) study has also been employed to study the similar WS2–MoS2 heterostructures, which reveals the nearly perfect hexagonal atomic arrangement and clear atomic modulation across the hetero-structure interface (Fig. 6k).87
The formation of such 2D-TMD heterostructures with a well-defined composition or electronic modulation can open up exciting opportunities for tuning the electronic, optical properties and creating a series of functional electronic and optoelectronic devices. For example, PL intensity maps of lateral heterostructures have shown significantly enhanced emission from the MoSe2–WSe2 heterojunction interface, which might be attributed to the trapping of excitons by defects or enhanced radiative recombination at the interface.84 With well-defined p-type characteristics in WSe2 and n-type characteristics in WS2, the WSe2–WS2 lateral heterostructure can also form a heterojunction p–n diode with an obvious current rectification behavior (Fig. 6l) and photodiodes with a clear photocurrent response (Fig. 6l, inset). The formation of WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructures with both p- and n-type characteristics can also allow the construction of many other functional devices, including a CMOS inverter with a voltage gain as large as 24 (Fig. 6m), which can readily enable on-chip logic integration.
These studies clearly demonstrate that a well-designed synthetic approach can be used to precisely control spatial modulation of chemical compositions and electronic properties in the 2D atomic crystals. Beyond the typical 2D-TMD semiconductors, similar 2D heterostructures may be synthesized among many other 2D materials with highly distinct physical properties, including superconducting, magnetic and topologically insulating materials. It can thus open up a pathway to seamless integration of these highly distinct physical properties at the atomic scale. With continuing development, complex heterostructures and superlattices of two or more 2D crystals maybe envisioned for further complexity and functions. With atomically thin geometry, the atomically sharp lateral “interface” is essentially an “interline” between two distinct 2D materials. With steep modulation of the electron wave function in two dimensions at the “interline”, the formation of the “interline” in the atomically thin 2D crystals offers a exciting new topology for exploring exotic physics and/or entirely new device concepts.
4. Conclusion and perspective
The TMDs consist of a large family of layered materials that can display rich physical properties, and offer an exciting material system for exploring the fundamental physics and developing novel technologies. Many TMDs exhibit tunable band gaps that can undergo a transition from an indirect gap in bulk crystals to a direct gap in monolayer nanosheets. With the unique dimensionality, thickness, flatness, finite band-gap, decent carrier mobility, the 2D-TMDs have attracted considerable interest as alternative semiconductors for a new generation atomically thin electronics with unique functions or unprecedented performance. With the dangling bond-free surface and van der Waals interaction, distinct 2D-TMDs can be flexibly integrated together, allowing the creation of high quality atomically sharp interfaces without the limitation of atomic lattice matching. It can therefore open up vast possibilities to nearly arbitrarily combine and control different properties at the atomic scale. The availability of a broad range of 2D-TMDs with variable electronic band structures can allow the creation of a wide variety of heterojunctions and superlattices with the designed and optimized band alignment and number of atomic layers and precisely tuned electronic functions, thus creating a powerful material platform for novel, high-performance electronic and optoelectronic devices, as illustrated by a few examples discussed in this review.
Despite the significant potential demonstrated to date, there are considerable challenges in applying this potential into practical technologies. In particular, most of the studies have been largely relied on mechanical exfoliation of bulk crystals and arduous layer-by-layer stacking of multiple layers, which is clearly not implementable for practical technologies. Although we have seen increasing efforts in developing new synthetic strategies for the growth of 2D-TMDs, the progress to date is still far from ideal. Most studies have been limited to a thermal CVD process that is convenient for initial proof-of-concept studies, but has a poor control of synthetic conditions and the resulting material parameters. Recent studies on MOCVD growth have shown exciting potential for large-area growth of 2D-TMDs thin films. The resulting 2D-TMD thin films, however, are typically polycrystalline with the grain size ranging from 1 to 10 micrometers. The growth of large area single crystalline thin films, selective growth of the 2D-TMD single crystal domains on the pre-defined locations, and synthetic integration of multiple TMDs to create well-defined heterostructures and superlattices will be important challenges to address. Second, to integrate these atomically thin materials into functional electronic or optoelectronic devices, it is necessary to integrate them with other material systems. To this end, it is a considerable challenge to integrate these atomic layered materials with other materials without damaging their lattice structure or altering the intrinsic electronic properties. For example, making reliable electrical contacts with minimized contact resistance is essential for achieving high performance devices but has been proven to be a rather elusive subject for 2D-TMDs. Recent studies using phase-engineered TMDs or the graphene contact have shown exciting potential. Continuing efforts in this regard will be necessary to realize the full potential of these 2D-TMDs. Third, the carrier mobilities in most 2D-TMDs have been limited to the order of 100 cm2 V−1 s−1 or less, which can limit the potential of these 2D-TMDs for ultrahigh speed devices. It has been shown that proper encapsulation of 2D-TMDs with BN can minimize surface/interface scattering and lead to greatly enhanced carrier mobility. The creation of well-defined heterostructures or superlattice structures with well-designed band-offsets and electronic structures will be an important direction to explore.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support of some of the results discussed in the article by NSFC61528403, NSF DMR1508144 and ONR N00014-15-1-2368.
References
K. S. Novoselov, V. I. Fal'ko, L. Colombo, P. R. Gellert, M. G. Schwab and K. Kim, Nature, 2012, 490, 192–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. O. Weiss, H. Zhou, L. Liao, Y. Liu, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5782–5825 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, H. S. Shin, G. Eda, L. J. Li, K. P. Loh and H. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 263–275 CrossRef PubMed .
X. D. Xu, W. Yao, D. Xiao and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 343–350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, D. Jiang, F. Schedin, T. J. Booth, V. V. Khotkevich, S. V. Morozov and A. K. Geim, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 10451–10453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H. Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Halim, C. R. Zheng, Y. Chen, Z. Lin, S. Jiang, R. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2213 Search PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C. Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 494–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef .
S. F. Wu, J. S. Ross, G. B. Liu, G. Aivazian, A. Jones, Z. Y. Fei, W. G. Zhu, D. Xiao, W. Yao, D. Cobden and X. D. Xu, Nat. Phys., 2013, 9, 149–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. L. McGill, J. Park and P. L. McEuen, Science, 2014, 344, 1489–1492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cao, G. Wang, W. Han, H. Ye, C. Zhu, J. Shi, Q. Niu, P. Tan, E. Wang, B. Liu and J. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 887 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Xiao, G.
B. Liu, W. X. Feng, X. D. Xu and W. Yao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 196802 CrossRef .
D. Xiao, W. Yao and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 236809 CrossRef .
H. L. Zeng, J. F. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao and X. D. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 490–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. B. Li and J. Q. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 012111 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Bayliss and W. Y. Liang, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1982, 15, 1283–1296 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Guo, N. Lu, L. Wang, X. J. Wu and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 7242–7249 CAS .
A. B. Kaul, J. Mater. Res., 2014, 29, 348–361 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lebegue, T. Bjorkman, M. Klintenberg, R. M. Nieminen and O. Eriksson, Phys. Rev. X, 2013, 3, 031002 Search PubMed .
P. A. Lee, G. Said, R. Davis and T. H. Lim, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 1969, 30, 2719–2729 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lv, J. A. Robinson, R. E. Schaak, D. Sun, Y. Sun, T. E. Mallouk and M. Terrones, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Jin, F. A. Rasmussen and K. S. Thygesen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19928–19933 CAS .
H. Terrones, F. Lopez-Urias and M. Terrones, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1549 Search PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, F. Schedin, A. Mishchenko, T. Georgiou, M. I. Katsnelson, L. Eaves, S. V. Morozov, N. M. Peres, J. Leist, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and L. A. Ponomarenko, Science, 2012, 335, 947–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yu, Z. Li, H. Zhou, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 246–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, E. Alarcon Llado, V. Koman, A. Fontcuberta i Morral, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3042–3048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lee, G. H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cheng, D. Li, H. Zhou, C. Wang, A. Yin, S. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5590–5597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. Baugher, H. O. Churchill, Y. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 262–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 257–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhao, Z. Ghorannevis, L. Q. Chu, M. L. Toh, C. Kloc, P. H. Tan and G. Eda, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 791–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Yu, Y. H. Lee, X. Ling, E. J. G. Santos, Y. C. Shin, Y. X. Lin, M. Dubey, E. Kaxiras, J. Kong, H. Wang and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3055–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, S. Kim, W. Choi, S. H. Park, Y. Jung, M. H. Cho and H. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4739–4744 CAS .
H. Liu, K. Xu, X. J. Zhang and P. D. Ye, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 152115 CrossRef PubMed .
X. M. Zou, J. L. Wang, C. H. Chiu, Y. Wu, X. H. Xiao, C. Z. Jiang, W. W. Wu, L. Q. Mai, T. S. Chen, J. C. Li, J. C. Ho and L. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6255–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cheng, J. W. Bai, L. Liao, H. L. Zhou, Y. Chen, L. X. Liu, Y. C. Lin, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 11588–11592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cheng, S. Jiang, Y. Chen, Y. Liu, N. Weiss, H. C. Cheng, H. Wu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Guo, R. Dong, P. S. Chakraborty, N. Lourenco, J. Palmer, Y. K. Hu, M. Ruan, J. Hankinson, J. Kunc, J. D. Cressler, C. Berger and W. A. de Heer, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 942–947 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Feng, C. Yu, J. Li, Q. B. Liu, Z. Z. He, X. B. Song, J. J. Wang and S. J. Cai, Carbon, 2014, 75, 249–254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Zamdmer, K. Jonghae, R. Trzcinski, J. O. Plouchart, S. Narasimha, M. Khare, L. Wagner and S. Chaloux, 2004 Symposium on VLSI Technology Digest of Technical Papers,  2004, vol. 10.2, pp. 98–99.
K. Dae-Hyun and J. A. del Alamo, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2008, 29, 830–833 CrossRef .
R. Kappera, D. Voiry, S. E. Yalcin, B. Branch, G. Gupta, A. D. Mohite and M. Chhowalla, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1128–1134 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. Wu, H.-C. Cheng, S. Yang, E. Zhu, Q. He, M. Ding, D. Li, J. Guo, N. O. Weiss, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3030–3034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, G.-H. Lee, Y. D. Kim, G. Arefe, P. Y. Huang, C.-H. Lee, D. A. Chenet, X. Zhang, L. Wang, F. Ye, F. Pizzocchero, B. S. Jessen, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. A. Muller, T. Low, P. Kim and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 534–540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Zhou, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, X. Q. Huang, Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, Z. Y. Lin, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 709–713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, S. Chuang, T. C. Chang, K. Takei, T. Takahashi and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3788–3792 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhu, D. B. Farmer, K. A. Jenkins, B. Ek, S. Oida, X. S. Li, J. Bucchignano, S. Dawes, E. A. Duch and P. Avouris, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 233102 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Petrone, I. Meric, J. Hone and K. L. Shepard, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 121–125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, D. Lembke, M. Kayci, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 497–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. Kitamura, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Zhang, T. Oka, R. Suzuki, J. T. Ye and Y. Iwasa, Science, 2014, 344, 725–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Haigh, A. Gholinia, R. Jalil, S. Romani, L. Britnell, D. C. Elias, K. S. Novoselov, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim and R. Gorbachev, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 764–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fang, C. Battaglia, C. Carraro, S. Nemsak, B. Ozdol, J. S. Kang, H. A. Bechtel, S. B. Desai, F. Kronast, A. A. Unal, G. Conti, C. Conlon, G. K. Palsson, M. C. Martin, A. M. Minor, C. S. Fadley, E. Yablonovitch, R. Maboudian and A. Javey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 6198–6202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sundaram, M. Engel, A. Lombardo, R. Krupke, A. C. Ferrari, P. Avouris and M. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1416–1421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Furchi, A. Pospischil, F. Libisch, J. Burgdorfer and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4785–4791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, J. Heo, S. Park, H. J. Song, D. H. Seo, K. E. Byun, P. Kim, I. Yoo, H. J. Chung and K. Kim, Science, 2012, 336, 1140–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, H. L. Zhou, R. Cheng, W. J. Yu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1413–1418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yu, Y. Liu, H. L. Zhou, A. X. Yin, Z. Li, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 952–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y. J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. Castro Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Roy, M. Padmanabhan, S. Goswami, T. P. Sai, G. Ramalingam, S. Raghavan and A. Ghosh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 826–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. S. Li, W. W. Cai, J. H. An, S. Kim, J. Nah, D. X. Yang, R. Piner, A. Velamakanni, I. Jung, E. Tutuc, S. K. Banerjee, L. Colombo and R. S. Ruoff, Science, 2009, 324, 1312–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Reina, X. T. Jia, J. Ho, D. Nezich, H. B. Son, V. Bulovic, M. S. Dresselhaus and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 30–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. F. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Zhou, W. J. Yu, L. X. Liu, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, X. Q. Huang, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2096 Search PubMed .
Y. H. Lee, X. Q. Zhang, W. J. Zhang, M. T. Chang, C. T. Lin, K. D. Chang, Y. C. Yu, J. T. W. Wang, C. S. Chang, L. J. Li and T. W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Liu, W. J. Zhang, Y. H. Lee, Y. C. Lin, M. T. Chang, C. Su, C. S. Chang, H. Li, Y. M. Shi, H. Zhang, C. S. Lai and L. J. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Yu, C. Li, Y. Liu, L. Q. Su, Y. Zhang and L. Y. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1866 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Wu, C. M. Huang, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, D. H. Cobden and X. D. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2768–2772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Shaw, H. L. Zhou, Y. Chen, N. O. Weiss, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 511–517 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. F. Zhang, Q. Q. Ji, J. Ju, H. T. Yuan, J. P. Shi, T. Gao, D. L. Ma, M. X. Liu, Y. B. Chen, X. J. Song, H. Y. Hwang, Y. Cui and Z. F. Liu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8963–8971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, G. Lu, Y. L. Wang, Z. Y. Yin, C. X. Cong, Q. Y. He, L. Wang, F. Ding, T. Yu and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 1974–1981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tonndorf, R. Schmidt, P. Bottger, X. Zhang, J. Borner, A. Liebig, M. Albrecht, C. Kloc, O. Gordan, D. R. T. Zahn, S. M. de Vasconcellos and R. Bratschitsch, Opt. Express, 2013, 21, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. P. Komsa and A. V. Krasheninnikov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3652–3656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mann, Q. Ma, P. M. Odenthal, M. Isarraraz, D. Le, E. Preciado, D. Barroso, K. Yamaguchi, G. V. Palacio, A. Nguyen, T. Tran, M. Wurch, A. Nguyen, V. Klee, S. Bobek, D. Z. Sun, T. F. Heinz, T. S. Rahman, R. Kawakami and L. Bartels, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1399–1404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Li, X. D. Duan, X. P. Wu, X. J. Zhuang, H. Zhou, Q. L. Zhang, X. L. Zhu, W. Hu, P. Y. Ren, P. F. Guo, L. Ma, X. P. Fan, X. X. Wang, J. Y. Xu, A. L. Pan and X. F. Duan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3756–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Q. Zhang, X. Duan, X. Wu, X. Fan, X. Zhu, X. Zhuang, W. Hu, H. Zhou and A. Pan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5284–5287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kang, S. E. Xie, L. J. Huang, Y. M. Han, P. Y. Huang, K. F. Mak, C. J. Kim, D. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2015, 520, 656–660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Han, N. J. Kybert, C. H. Naylor, B. S. Lee, J. L. Ping, J. H. Park, J. Kang, S. Y. Lee, Y. H. Lee, R. Agarwal and A. T. C. Johnson, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, J. Jiang, R. Yu and Y. Huang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Huang, S. F. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. P. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. D. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1096–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Gong, J. H. Lin, X. L. Wang, G. Shi, S. D. Lei, Z. Lin, X. L. Zou, G. L. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Li, Y. M. Shi, C. C. Cheng, L. S. Lu, Y. C. Lin, H. L. Tang, M. L. Tsai, C. W. Chu, K. H. Wei, J. H. He, W. H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L. J. Li, Science, 2015, 349, 524–528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Xidong Duan
	Xidong Duan is a research scientist at the College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, China. His current research interests include two-dimensional materials, heterostructures and their applications. He received his BS degree in Chemistry from Hunan University in 1993, MA degree in Materials from Hunan University in 1996. He was previously a senior engineer at Changsha Research Institute of Mining and Metallurgy before joining Hunan University.

Chen Wang
	Chen Wang is a PhD candidate in Materials Science and Engineering at the University of California, Los Angeles (UCLA). His research interests include the growth, structural and spectral characterizations of two-dimensional materials and their device applications. He received his BS degree in Physics from Wuhan University, China in 2012 before starting his graduate program at UCLA.

Anlian Pan
	Anlian Pan is a Professor of Physics and Material Science in Hunan University, and is the director of the Key Laboratory for Micro-Nano Physics and Technology of Hunan Province. His main research interests lie in controlled growth and function modulation of semiconductor nanostructures. He received his PhD in Condensed Mater Physics from the Institute of Physics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2006, and worked as a Humboldt Research Fellow at the Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics from 2006 to 2007. Later in 2007, he joined Arizona State University as a Postdoctoral Fellow, where he became a Research Assistant Professor.

Ruqin Yu
	Ru-Qin Yu has been a Professor of College of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Hunan University, the member of Chinese Academy of Sciences since 1991. He graduated from S. Petersburg University, Russia in 1959. His research interests include chemical sensors and chemometrics. He is the editor-in-chief of the Chinese journal “Chemical Sensors” and editor of “Journal of Chemometrics” (Wiley).

Xiangfeng Duan
	Xiangfeng Duan is a Professor at Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, the University of California, Los Angeles. His current research interests include nanoscale heterostructures and devices. He received his BS degree in chemistry from the University of Science and Technology and China (USTC) in 1997, MA degree in chemistry and PhD degree in physical chemistry from Harvard University in 1999 and 2002, respectively. He was previously a founding scientist at Nanosys Inc. before joining UCLA.

 	Fig. 1  Two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides (2D-TMDs). (a) The table shows common TMDs and their band gap.5,20–27 (b) A schematic illustration of the layered structure of MoS2. (c) Energy dispersion in bulk, quadrilayer (4L), bilayer (2L) and monolayer (1L) MoS2 from left to right. The horizontal dashed line represents the energy of a band maximum at the K point. The red and blue lines represent the conduction and valence band edges, respectively. The lowest energy transition increases with the decreasing layer and evolve from indirect to direct (vertical) transitions. (d) The relative valence and conduction band edge of some common TMDs (monolayer). (b), (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited; ref. 10, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society; and ref. 19, Copyright 2013 AIP Publishing LLC, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electronic and optoelectronic devices from 2D-TMDs. (a) A schematic illustration of a monolayer MoS2 transistor. (b) A schematic illustration of a dual-channel self-aligned MoS2 transistor with transferred gate stacks, and the inset shows the schematic cross-section of the self-aligned gate stack. (c) The cross-sectional TEM image of a typical self-aligned device. The scale bar is 50 nm. (d) The HRTEM image of the interface between MoS2 and the transferred gate stack. The scale bar is 3 nm. (e) The Ids–Vds output characteristics for a 116 nm channel length self-aligned MoS2 transistor. (f) The Ids–VTG transfer characteristics for a 116 nm channel length MoS2 transistor. (g) Small-signal current gain |h21| versus frequency for three devices with a channel length of 216 nm (blue), 116 nm (red), and 68 nm (black), with a highest cut-off frequency of 42 GHz achieved in 68 nm transistor. (h) Maximum available gain (MAG) versus frequency of the self-aligned MoS2 transistors with different channel lengths, with the maximum oscillation frequency (fMAX) up to 50 GHz achieved in the 68 nm transistor. (i) The input and output signals of an MoS2 RF amplifier show a voltage gain of 1.07 at 1 GHz. (j) Propagation delay of a few-layer MoS2 amplifier shows an input signal (black) rise time of 210 ps and an output signal (red) rise time of 580 ps. (k) A photograph of MoS2 circuits on flexible substrates. (l) Small-signal current gain (|h21|), Mason's unilateral power gain (U), and maximum available gain (MAG) versus frequency for a 68 nm channel length MoS2 transistor on a flexible substrate. (m) A schematic view of a monolayer MoS2 photodetector. (n) Time-resolved photoresponse of a monolayer MoS2 photodetector. (o) A schematic illustration of a split-gated WSe2 p–n diode. (p) The scanning photocurrent map of a WSe2 p–n diode showing pronounced photocurrent generation localized to the junction. The orange dashed lines outline the source and drain contacts whereas the blue dashed lines outline the back gates. The scale bar is 4 μm. (a), (b)–(l), (m and n) and (o and p) are reproduced with permission from ref. 28, Copyright 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited, ref. 42 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited, ref. 54 Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited and ref. 55 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  TMD/TMD heterostructures and device. (a) A schematic band diagram of the WSe2/MoS2 hetero-bilayer under photoexcitation, showing (1) absorption and exciton generation in WSe2 and MoS2 single layers, (2) relaxation of excitons at the MoS2/WSe2 interface driven by the band offset, and (3) radiative recombination of spatially indirect excitons. (b) A schematic illustration of the heterostructure of monolayer-WSe2/monolayer-MoS2 with a few-layer h-BN spacer. (c) Normalized PL spectra from the monolayer-WSe2/monolayer-MoS2 heterostructure with n layers of h-BN (n = 0, 1, and 3). (d) The false colour SEM image of the WSe2/MoS2 vertical heterojunction device, with ML-WSe2 highlighted by blue colour, the BL-WSe2 area by violet colour, MoS2 by green colour, and metal electrodes by golden colour. The scale bar is 3 μm. (e) The PL mapping of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction device, with red colour representing the PL from MoS2 and the green colour representing PL from WSe2. (f) The cross-sectional HRTEM image of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction interface. The scale bar is 5 nm. (g) Gate-tunable output characteristics of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction p–n diode. (h) The false colour scanning photocurrent micrograph of the WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction device shows efficient photocurrent generation throughout the overlapping junction area. (i) The false colour EL image of the heterojunction device showing light emission only in the overlapping area near the metal electrodes. (j) The EL spectra of 1L-WSe2/MoS2 heterojunction (top) and 2L-WSe2/MoS2 heterojunctions (bottom) at different injection currents. (k) A Schematic of the MoS2/WSe2 junction sandwiched between top- and bottom-graphene electrodes. (l) The optical image and the corresponding photocurrent map show uniform photocurrent generation over the entire junction area of the graphene–sandwiched monolayer p–n junction device (1L/1L) scale bars, 3 μm. (a)–(c), (d)–(j) and (k) and (l) is reproduced with permission from ref. 58 Copyright 2014 National Academy of Sciences, ref. 33 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society and ref. 32 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 4  Graphene/TMD heterostructure device. (a) A schematic illustration of a vertical field-effect transistor made of graphene–MoS2–metal stack, with graphene and top-metal thin films functioning as the source and drain electrodes, the MoS2 layer as the vertically stacked semiconducting channel and its thickness defines the channel length. The silicon back gate is used with a 300 nm SiO2 dielectric layer. (b) The band diagram shows that the gate electrode modulates the work-function of graphene and thus the barrier height across graphene–MoS2 heterostructure to switch the device on and off. (c) A cross-section TEM image of a vertical transistor. (d) A cross-section HRTEM image of the interface between multi-layer graphene, multi-layer MoS2 and the top electrode of Ti. A TEM image of a multilayer graphene device is shown here for better illustration and the actual device typically consists of monolayer graphene. (e) The Isd–Vsd output characteristics of a vertical transistor. The current is normalized by the device area. (f) The transfer characteristics of the vertical device at Vsd = −0.1, −0.2, and −0.5 V. (g) A schematic illustration of a complementary inverter created by vertically stacking the layered materials of graphene, Bi2Sr2Co2O8 (BSCO) (p-channel), graphene, MoS2 (n-channel), and metal thin films on a Si/SiNx (20 nm) substrate. (h) The inverter characteristics from vertically stacked p- and n-type VFETs. A negative supply voltage (VDD = −2V) is applied to bottom graphene, and the gain of the inverter is ∼1.7. (i) A schematic illustration of the vertically gated graphene–MoS2–graphne heterostructure device for gate-tunable photocurrent generation. (j) The SEM image and scanning photocurrent images of a device taken at gate biases between −60 V and +60 V under a 514 nm laser. The dashed and solid lines indicate the edge of the bottom graphene and top graphene electrodes, respectively. (k) External quantum efficiency (EQE) of the vertical heterostructure device as a function of the back gate. (l) Schematic band diagrams of the vertical heterostructure with zero, negative, positive, and large-positive biases on the silicon back gate. Blue dots, black circles, and green arrows indicate electrons, holes, and photons, respectively. (a)–(h) and (i)–(l) is reproduced with permission from ref. 30 Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited and ref. 63 Copyright 2013 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 5  Chemical-vapour deposition growth of atomically thin 2D-TMDs. (a) A schematic illustration of a thermal CVD system for the growth of 2D-TMDs using the thermally evaporated chemical vapour source. (b) Monolayer/bilayer MoSe2 “triforce” crystals with anti-parallel triangular layers. (c) An AFM image of monolayer and bilayer domains and (d) the corresponding line scans. Optical microscope images of the monolayer WSe2 domains (e) and a continuous monolayer thin film (f). Scale bars are all 5 μm. (g) A photograph of the ∼1 cm sized monolayer WSe2 films transferred onto a glass template. (h) The Raman spectra of the monolayer and bilayer WSe2. The inset shows the magnified view of B2g resonance mode. (i) PL spectra of the monolayer and bilayer WSe2. (j) The corresponding PL map of a continuous film, the scale bar is 10 μm. (k) PL spectra of MoS2xSe2(1−x) nanosheets with complete composition modulation. (l) An HRTEM image and electron diffraction (inset) pattern of a ternary alloy nanosheet show a nearly perfect crystalline structure. (m) A schematic illustration of MOCVD growth setup for the wafer scale growth of a continuous monolayer MoS2 film. (n) False-colour dark field-TEM image showing a continuous monolayer MoS2 film. The false colour represents different crystalline orientations. Scale bar, 1 μm. (o) Patterned growth MoS2 at selected locations. Scale bar, 50 μm. (b)–(d), (e)–(j), (k and i), (m and n) and (o) are reproduced with permission from ref. 75 Copyright 2014 Springer, ref. 50 Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society, ref. 81 Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society, ref. 83 Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited and ref. 84 Copyright 2015 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 6  Growth of 2D-TMD heterostructures. (a and b) A schematic illustration of lateral epitaxial growth of WS2–WSe2 heterostructures. (c) A schematic illustration of successive lateral epitaxial growth of superlattice structure in the lateral dimension. (d) A schematic illustration of van der Waals superlattices through the successive layer-by-layer growth approach. (e) A schematic illustration of a thermal CVD system that can allow in situ switch of the chemical vapour source for lateral hetero-epitaxial growth of 2D heterostructures. (f) A composite image consisting of the Raman mapping of a WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure at 255 cm−1 and 417 cm−1 shows no apparent overlap or gap between the WS2 and WSe2 signals, demonstrating that the WS2 inner triangle and WSe2 peripheral area are laterally connected. (g) A composite image consisting of the PL mapping at 665 nm and 775 nm further confirms the formation of the WS2–WSe2 lateral heterostructure. (h) The electron diffraction pattern taken across the heterostructure interface, with each diffraction spot consisting of a pair diffraction peaks (see insets for the magnified view) that can be indexed with lattice spacings of 2.70 Å for WS2 and 2.81 Å for WSe2, respectively. (i) A high-resolution TEM image shows highly crystalline structure with coherent lattice fringes across the WS2–WSe2 heterostructure interface. The scale bar is 5 nm. (j) Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) elemental maps of W, S and Se atoms and the composite EDS mapping image of S and Se atoms show relative uniform distribution of W, and seamless lateral integration of WS2 and WSe2 in the heterostructure domain. The scale bar in e–h is 200 nm. (k) Atomic-resolution Z-contrast images (left) and the corresponding atomic models (right) of the atomically sharp lateral interfaces along the zigzag (top) and armchair (bottom) directions of the WS2–MoS2 heterostructure (W, read; Mo, green; S, yellow). Scale bars: (a), 1 nm; (b–d), 0.5 nm. (l) The gate-tunable output characteristics of a lateral WSe2–WS2 heterojunction p–n diode. The gate voltage varies from 80 to 20 V in the steps of 10 V as indicated in the plot. The inset is a scanning photocurrent map of the lateral WSe2–WS2 heterojunction p–n diode. (m) A CMOS inverter obtained by integrating p-type WSe2 and an n-type WS2 FETs shows the expected inverter function with a voltage gain as large 24. The black curve is the output–input curve and the red curve indicates the voltage gain. The inset shows the image and circuit diagram of the WSe2–WS2 CMOS inverter. The scale bar is 2 μm. (a, b, e)–(j, i, m) and (k) are reproduced with permission from ref. 85 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited and ref. 87 Copyright 2014 Macmillan Publishers Limited, respectively.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
