Thermalisation rate study of GaSb-based heterostructures by continuous wave photoluminescence and their potential as hot carrier solar cell absorbers  ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE02843C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE02843C
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6225-6232Show Chemical TermsThermalisation rate study of GaSb-based heterostructures by continuous wave photoluminescence and their potential as hot carrier solar cell absorbers†

        
          
            A. 
            Le Bris
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            L. 
            Lombez
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Laribi
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            G. 
            Boissier
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Christol
          
        
      d and 

        
          
            J.-F. 
            Guillemoles
          
        
      *abc
aEDF R&D, Institut de Recherche et Développement sur l'Énergie Photovotlaïque (IRDEP), 6 quai Watier, 78401, CHATOU CEDEX, France. E-mail: arthur.le_bris@centraliens.net; jf-guillemoles@chimie-paristech.fr;   Tel: +33(0)130878505
bCNRS, UMR 7174, 78401, Chatou, France
cChimie ParisTech, 75005, Paris, France
dInstitut d'Électronique du Sud (IES), Université Montpellier II, Place Eugène Bataillon, 34095, Montpellier, France
Received 
      6th October 2011
    , Accepted 15th December 2011First published on 13th February 2012Abstract
        GaSb-based heterostructures are tested as candidates for a hot carrier solar cell absorber. Their thermalisation properties are investigated using continuous wave photoluminescence. Non-equilibrium carrier populations are detected at high excitation levels. An empirical expression of the power lost by thermalisation is deduced from the incident power dependent carrier temperature. The experimentally determined thermalisation rate is then used to simulate the potential efficiency of a hot carrier solar cell, showing a significant efficiency improvement compared to a fully thermalised single p–n junction of similar bandgap.

Broader context
Hot carrier solar cells offer an attractive way to convert optimally the incoming solar radiation but are limited by the thermalization rates of photogenerated carriers. The carrier thermalization rates in GaSb-based heterostructure samples are measured using continuous wave photoluminescence. An empirical law, that relates the electron energy loss rate to the carrier temperature, is deduced from photoluminescence data and used in a hot carrier solar cell model for simulation of device operation accounting for heat losses. The thermalization rates measured on the samples under investigation are shown to enable an efficiency improvement compared to the Shockley–Queisser limit, albeit in the highest accessible solar concentration range.

1 Introduction
Even in the most efficient photovoltaic devices, at least 40% of the incident power is lost as heat dissipation. The hot carrier solar cell was proposed1 as a promising concept to limit such losses by converting most of the residual heat into electricity. This concept, notably, enables a conversion efficiency exceeding the Shockley–Queisser limit.2 It is an attractive solution providing a potential efficiency close to the thermodynamical limit3 combined with a relatively simple architecture (see Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Schematic of a hot carrier solar cell. The non equilibrium photogenerated electron and hole populations at a hot temperature TH in the absorber are extracted through energy selective contacts, with a transmission range δE, towards electrodes at a cold temperature Tc. The energy collected per extracted electron–hole pair is Eext. The quasi Fermi level splitting in the absorber is ΔμH, and the output voltage is V. qV is limited by Eext and can be larger than the absorber band gap Eg. 
Upon solar photon absorption, photogenerated electron–hole pairs gain excess kinetic energy over its thermal average. The efficiency enhancement results from the conversion of this excess kinetic energy, normally lost as heat because of carrier thermalisation, into electrical work. In this case the collected energy per extracted electron–hole pair is larger than the bandgap energy, and the conversion efficiency is increased.
The dominant carrier energy loss mechanism in polar semiconductors is the emission of longitudinal optical (LO) phonons4,5 that occurs at a subpicosecond time scale. A reduction of the carrier cooling rate is necessary to allow the extraction of unthermalised carriers. Remarkably, such a reduction was obtained in GaAs/AlGaAs multi quantum well (MQW) samples at room temperature.6
Here, the thermalisation rate in GaSb-based multi quantum well (MQW) test samples is investigated by continuous wave photoluminescence (CWPL), to obtain material parameters more relevant to photovoltaic operation. Several heterostuctures were analysed, allowing the impact of several features, such as strain or level quantization in wells, to be studied. A heating of the carrier in steady state conditions was detected, enabling us to propose an empirical law for the power lost by thermalisation. Using a hot carrier solar cell model for photovoltaic efficiency simulation, potential solar cell efficiencies were computed. The influence of the thermalisation rate on the simulated efficiency is analyzed. Finally, a quantitative evaluation of an acceptable thermalisation rate in a hot carrier solar cell is proposed and compared to the values measured in our samples.
2 Principles and models of hot carrier solar cells
The photogeneration of an out of equilibrium carrier distribution was demonstrated experimentally by time-resolved photoluminescence.7–9 A reduction of the carrier energy loss rate at high carrier density was observed,10 which was attributed to a phonon bottleneck effect:11,12 when the phonon emission rate is larger than the LO phonon decay rate, an out of equilibrium phonon population is formed. Phonon reabsorption then becomes more probable than phonon decay, and the net phonon emission rate is reduced, resulting in a slowing of the carrier energy loss. Interestingly, the use of nanostructured semiconductors was also found to reduce the electron cooling rate by almost two orders of magnitude.6,13
The extraction of an unthermalised carrier distribution towards cold distributions in the collecting electrodes has to be accompanied by a heat flux. It was shown that this flux can be minimized when the contacts are energy selective, i.e. they allow carrier transmission at a single energy level.14 However, the solution proposed so far showed the technological difficulty to achieve a good selectivity and high contact conductivity.15
The first model of a hot carrier solar cell neglected carrier thermalisation in the absorber and assumed ideal selective contacts.3 This model gives an optimal efficiency of up to 86% under maximal concentration (≈46000 suns). Other models were proposed that include thermalisation in the absorber, considering a thermalisation rate independent of the carrier temperature and of the carrier density.16,17 However, experimental results indicate that the cooling rate does depend on these quantities. A more suitable model for the thermalisation rate is necessary.
These models assumed ideal selective contacts, with a single discrete transmission energy and infinite conductivity. Non ideal selective contacts were included in hot carrier solar cell efficiency simulations showing that semi-selective contacts, allowing carrier extraction with energy above a threshold (high-pass filter for electrons, low-pass filter for holes), would sufficiently limit the heat flow from the absorber and enable high conversion efficiency.18 This solution would be more compatible with large current densities and facilitate the cell design. In the model that is used here, semi-selective contacts are considered.
The model of hot carrier solar cell is derived from the detailed balance model introduced by Shockley and Queisser2 for a conventional p–n junction. The charge and energy balance equations are written:18 (1)where V is the output voltage of the cell, J and P are the particle and energy fluxes crossing the contacts, determined using the Landauer formalism for carrier transport,19 and Jabs/em and Pabs/em are the absorbed/emitted particle and energy fluxes respectively that are given by a generalized Planck law.20 These quantities are functions of the carrier quasi Fermi level splitting in the absorber ΔμH and the carrier temperature TH (see Fig. 1). Pth is the power density lost by thermalisation in W cm−2.
If Pth can be expressed as a function of (ΔμH,TH), the equations in system 1 can be solved numerically and the current delivered by the cell for a given external voltage V and incident solar power Pinc is determined. The efficiency is then obtained as the maximum of Pel = JV/Pinc.
3 
        Carrier thermalisation rate
3.1 Samples
Several MQW samples were grown on GaSb substrates to be tested as candidates for the absorber of a hot carrier solar cell. They were chosen for their small band gap allowing high potential efficiency, as well as their good absorption properties.
The samples were grown by molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) on n-type doped (in the 5–8 × 1017 cm−3 range) epi-ready GaSb [100] substrates. The MBE machine used is a Varian Gen II molecular epitaxy reactor equipped with tellurium (Te) and beryllium (Be) dopant cells, and valved cracker cells for both arsenic and antimony. Growth rates were set at 0.5 ML s−1 for both indium (In) and gallium (Ga) and 1 ML s−1 for both arsenic (As) and antimony (Sb). Prior to the growth, the substrate was outgassed for several hours at 150 °C inside the introduction chamber, then loaded in the growth chamber and heated for 20 min at 550 °C under Sb flux for oxide removal. The n-type doped GaSb (Te-doped) buffer layer was then deposited at 510 °C, followed by the growth of the MQW structure at 400 °C and of the p-type doped GaSb (Be-doped) bottom contact layer. In situRHEED (reflection high energy electron diffraction) has been used for monitoring the sample surface evolution during the growth. More specific details on optimum growth conditions, i.e.growth rates, temperature, V/III ratio, strain adjustment and MBE shutter sequence, to realize high-quality GaSb-based samples are reported elsewhere on comparable GaSb systems.21
Two first samples labelled (a) and (b) consist of a multi-quantum well (MQW) structure composed of a 200 nm thick Te-doped (n = 1 × 1016 cm−3) GaSb buffer layer, an undoped region made of 5 MQW containing five 10 nm-thick GaIn0.2Sb0.8 compressively strained wells (with lattice mismatch on GaSb Δa/a = 1.25%) and six 20 nm-thick GaSb barriers, and 100 nm thick GaSb cap layer (a). The well band gap at room temperature is 597 meV, and the barrier band gap is 725 meV.
The structure of sample (b) is the same as sample (a) with additional 20 nm thick AlSb barriers sandwiching the MQW region. Cladding layers in sample (b) play the role of blocking layers for electrons and holes that limits the heat flow outside of the excited electron–hole plasma, and keeps a carrier density high enough to maintain a hot carrier population.
The second series of samples consists of multi quantum wells made of lattice-matched quaternary compounds (samples (c) and (d)). The sample (c) well region is composed of five 10 nm thick wells and 30 nm thick barriers (see Fig. 2). The well material is Ga0.86In0.14As0.12Sb0.88 with a 0.58 eV band gap at room temperature. The barrier compound is Al0.25Ga0.75As0.03Sb0.97 forming a type I heterojunction with the well (valence band offset: 70 meV, conduction band offset: 515 meV). Large band gap cladding layers (Al0.9Ga0.1As0.07Sb0.93) ensure carrier confinement in the active region. A 20 nm thick GaSb capping layer is grown on top of the structure for surface passivation. Samples (a), (b) and (c) are designed to exhibit luminescence at 0.65 eV at room temperature accounting for confinement energies.
 Fig. 2  Details of sample (c) structure: five 10 nm thick InGaAsSb wells and 30 nm thick AlGaAsSb barriers cladded by 1.1 μm thick large band gap AlGaAsSb layers, all lattice-matched with the GaSb substrate, and capped by a 20 nm thick GaSb passivation layer. Structure designed for emission at 0.65 eV (1.9 μm) at room temperature. 
Sample (d) has an absorbing layer with the same composition as sample (c), but consists of only one 50 nm thick layer instead of a 5 × 10 nm quantum well structure. It is sandwiched by two layers of the AlGaAsSb barrier compound of 60 nm each. Without confinement, the band gap is reduced compared to QW samples, with emission at 0.58 eV at 300 K. The total thickness of the well material is the same as sample (c) so the carrier density is comparable and the effect of carrier confinement and material structuration on the thermalisation properties of the sample can be investigated, by comparing quantum structures and bulk material in the same conditions of excitation.
3.2 Experimental setup and method
The more commonly used technique for the study of carrier energy loss rate is time-resolved photoluminescence, in which the time evolution of a carrier distribution generated by a laser pulse is directly followed by monitoring the emitted photoluminescence with subpicosecond time resolution.22 However, solar cells operate in steady state conditions, so time-resolved techniques that probe transient states are not suitable here. The cooling rate that is estimated that way is underestimated compared to the steady-state energy loss rate by at least one order of magnitude.23
Therefore, steady state thermalisation properties were probed using continuous wave photoluminescence. A continuous laser is used to photogenerate an electron-hole plasma that emits a photoluminescence spectrum by radiative recombination. By increasing the excitation intensity, an out of equilibrium carrier population is generated, which is detected by a change in the shape of the photoluminescence spectrum.
The excitation source was a near infrared laser diode emitting at 781 nm coupled in a multimode optical fiber and collimated into a microscope objective. The power incident on the sample was 17 mW. Neutral density filters were used to tune the incident power from 100% of the nominal power to below 0.01%. The laser spot size on the sample was then measured to be 25 microns in diameter using a micrometric calibration grating.
The signal was collected by the objective with a 11 mm working distance and a 0.6 numerical aperture (NA) and sent in a Ocean Optics NIR256 spectrometer, on a cooled InGaAs detector. The samples were put in a MMR nitrogen cryostat chamber and glued with silver paste for thermal contact.
3.3 Results and discussion

3.3.1 Data analysis. 

Fig. 3 is an example of the photoluminescence spectra obtained on sample (c) at 80 K for excitation intensities ranging from 60 to 3000 W cm−2. This corresponds to absorbed power densities ranging from 23 to 1300 W cm−2 (see Fig. 3). The absorbed power density was determined using a transfer matrix model24 to describe the propagation of light inside the sample, and the optical properties of the different layers were obtained from literature.25 According to their energies, the lower energy peak (0.68 to 0.75 eV) corresponds to the fundamental recombination in the wells, and the higher energy one (0.77 to 0.81 eV) to emission from the GaSb bulk substrate. The band gap of the well, barrier and substrate materials are obtained at 80 K by interpolation of bulk properties of binary compounds found in the literature.26 The confinement energy in the well are then calculated using the energy depth and thickness of the well, and effective masses found in ref. 26. The photoluminescence emission energy is found to be 0.70 eV in the well, 1.10 eV in the barrier and 0.80 eV in the GaSb substrate.
 Fig. 3  
Photoluminescence spectra of sample (c) at 80 K in arbitrary units as a function of the photon energy, with the following values of the absorbed power density, from top to bottom: 1300, 710, 360, 200, 120, 65, 40 and 23 W cm−2. A change in the PL spectrum shape is visible when the excitation power is increased. An exponential fit of the high energy tail of the main peak provides a measurement of the carrier temperature. 
An asymmetric broadening of the well peak, attributed to a heating of the carriers, is visible when the incident power is increased. The position of the peak itself is not shifted which indicates that the lattice is not heated, within a temperature range of about 10 K, according to the temperature dependence of the band gap. This value is much smaller than the measured carrier temperature increase, so the lattice heating can be neglected. Similar spectra are obtained for the other samples.
Assuming a Maxwell–Boltzmann-like distribution for carriers, the high energy tail of the photoluminescence follows an exponential law with photon energy:27 (2)where hv is the photon energy and TH is the carrier temperature, because it probes the occupancy of high energy states of the carriers. In the energy region above the quantum well emission peak, the spectra are well fitted by an exponential law, whose slope in logarithmic scale is related to the carrier temperature from eqn (2). The temperatures obtained from the spectra in Fig. 3 are presented in Fig. 4 as a function of the absorbed power density, for a lattice temperature set to 80 K (filled circles) and 100 K (empty circles).
 Fig. 4  
              Carrier temperature in sample (c) as a function of the absorbed power determined from an exponential fit of the high energy tail of the luminescence peak at two different lattice temperatures: 80 K (filled circles) and 100 K (empty circles). 
At low power density (20 to 100 W cm−2, equivalent to 200 to 1000 suns), the carrier temperature is that of the lattice (within the error bar). When the absorbed power reaches a threshold around 100 W cm−2, the carrier temperature starts to rise up to 280 K at a power density Pabs ≈ 1000 W cm−2 (10000 suns). Very similar trends are observed at lattice temperatures of 80 K and 100 K.
The thermalisation properties of a sample can be determined from the carrier temperature–absorbed power relation. Since there is no electric power extracted, the absorbed power can only be lost as heat towards the lattice or by radiative recombinations. In other words, carriers lose their energy by interaction with phonons or photons. The power lost by thermalisation can then be expressed as the difference between the absorbed power and the radiatively emitted power.
The radiative emission is neglected compared to the incident power. Without a specific design of the front surface to favour light emission (e.g. photonic structure), most of the emitted light will be trapped in the material and reabsorbed, so even with a high radiative yield, the fraction of the power lost by radiative recombination that actually escapes the material is negligible.
The thermalised power comes from interactions with phonons. In polar semiconductors, at temperatures above a threshold around 40 K, electron–phonon interactions are dominated by a strong coupling between electrons and zone center LO phonons,4,5 so it will be considered that only these modes contribute to the carrier energy loss. The power lost by thermalisation can then be written:5,6 (3)where n is the carrier density in cm−3, t is the absorber thickness, ħωLO is the LO phonon energy, and τth is an effective thermalisation time.
If the phonon emission rate by carriers is higher than the LO phonon decay rate by anharmonic interaction with other phonon modes, these LO phonons accumulate and their occupation number diverges from the equilibrium occupation number.11 The formation of such an out of equilibrium phonon population is called the phonon bottleneck effect. The probability of a LO phonon to be reabsorbed by a carrier then becomes higher than its probability to decay into acoustic modes. The net phonon emission rate by carriers (emission minus absorption) is reduced, so the energy loss rate is reduced by saturation of the LO phonon decay process, which translates into an increased thermalisation time τth. In high carrier density conditions (typically above 1018–1019 cm−3), when a phonon bottleneck occurs, the energy transfer from electrons to phonons is saturated and the carrier energy loss rate is limited by the LO phonon decay rate. Eqn (3) becomes:23 (4)where nq is the number of phonon modes in thermal equilibrium with carriers, and τLO is the LO phonon life time. This expression is a particular case of eqn (3) in the limit of strong disequilibrium, with the thermalisation time that becomes: τth = n/nq × τLO.
In this equation, Pth is considered equal to the absorbed power density, TH is deduced from the photoluminescence data, so the nq/τLO ratio can be determined as a function of the carrier temperature. It is plotted in Fig. 5. Interestingly, if nq could be assessed (e.g. by simulations using known dispersion curves), this method could provide an estimate for τLO, a parameter otherwise difficult to measure.
 Fig. 5  
n
q/τLO ratio determined from PL experiments on sample (c) as a function of the temperature difference between carriers and lattice at two different lattice temperatures: 80 K (filled circles) and 100 K (empty circles). A linear relation is observed. 
A linear relation is observed between nq/τLO and the temperature difference between carriers and the lattice. The slope of each data set is related to the cooling rate of the sample, with a fast thermalisation being represented by a steep slope. Eqn (4) then becomes the following semi-empirical law for the thermalised power, with the introduction of a thermalisation coefficient, Q, expressed in W K−1 cm−2 that is proportional to this slope: (5)
As the well compound is mainly composed of GaSb, the GaSb LO phonon energy was considered in this equation. This was confirmed by plotting 1/TH as a function of the incident power in log scale, which is well fitted by a straight line with slope −kB/ħωLO.5 An uncertainty of 1 meV on the phonon energy results in an error on Q inferior to ±5%.‡


3.3.2 Sample comparison. 
Using the method described above, the thermalisation properties of the different samples can be analyzed and compared. First, the effect of cladding layers is found to be crucial. Without these cladding layers, the luminescence of sample (a) is almost suppressed compared to that of a similar structure with additional cladding layers (sample (b)), and no carrier temperature can be determined. Thus, only samples with cladding layers will be considered.
The effect of strain on the thermalisation properties is studied by comparing sample (b) (strained MQW) and sample (c) (lattice-matched MQW). The thermalisation coefficient is determined at the lattice temperature 80 K for both samples and the results are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Experimental and calculated (extrapolated from experimental value at 80 K) thermalisation coefficient of the different samples (b), (c), and (d), at lattice temperatures 80, 100 and 150 K. Uncertainties are estimated from the quality of the linear fit. Extrapolation at 300 K is also reported. Values in brackets are unreliable because of an overlapping of two PL peaks that could lead to an overestimation of the carrier temperature




Sample

Q/W K−1 cm−2


80 K
100 K
150 K
300 K


exp
exp
calc
exp
calc
calc




(b)
72 ± 21
(62 ± 23)
75
—
85
116


(c)
48 ± 14
70 ± 34
50
(47 ± 27)
57
77


(d)
51 ± 16
56 ± 28
53
(43 ± 24)
60
82




A faster thermalisation is measured in the strained sample. However, large uncertainties exist on the Q value. Such uncertainty arises from the few experimental data that are available for the linear fit of the nq/τLO − ΔT relation. Considering a faster thermalisation in compressively strained materials, and because lattice-matched structures are more flexible, allowing to grow thicker layers for instance, lattice matched samples will be preferred.
The use of lattice-matched materials allows in particular to compare a MQW structure (sample (c)) to a non-quantized structure with one 50 nm thick absorbing layer (sample (d)). It has been demonstrated previously that the carrier energy loss rate could be reduced in MQW compared to the bulk at high carrier density in GaAs.6,13,28 Here, no measurable effect of quantization is visible on the thermalisation rate (see Table 1) with indistinguishable values of the thermalisation coefficient.
The energy loss rate reduction in quantum wells compared to bulk is attributed to an enhanced phonon bottleneck effect. However, the origin of this effect is still not completely understood. The degree of overpopulation of hot phonon modes depends on (i) the carrier density, (ii) the electron–phonon interaction potential and (iii) the phonon lifetime. The reduced energy loss rate observed in GaAs/AlGaAs systems can then arise from a change in one or a combination of these parameters. In our experiments, the carrier density in bulk and quantum well samples was unchanged by using the same absorber thickness, and no measurable difference was observed between the two samples. This could indicate that the two other parameters (electron–phonon interaction potential and phonon lifetime) are not affected by quantization in our system, contrary to GaAs. Also, it was pointed out6,28 that the discrepancy in cooling rates between bulk and quantum wells only occurs above a threshold in carrier density. A carrier density that is too low could thus explain the absence of any effect of quantization.


3.3.3 Effect of lattice temperature. 
The thermalisation rate is expected to depend on the lattice temperature. The limiting process in the carrier energy loss mechanism is the LO phonon decay. With a change of the lattice temperature, the occupation numbers of the phonon modes involved in the decay mechanism are modified, which affects the LO phonon lifetime. The temperature dependence of the LO phonon lifetime is given by11: (6)where τ(T) is the LO phonon lifetime at lattice temperature T in Kelvin. This expression can be used to extrapolate the thermalisation coefficient at a temperature T from the measured value at 80 K. This theoretical value is compared with the experimentally determined value of Q at 100 and 150 K in Table 1 for samples (b),(c) and (d). An extrapolation at room temperature is also proposed.
The expected trend of an increasing thermalisation coefficient with the lattice temperature is not always observed from the data: with an increase of the lattice temperature, the overlap of the well and substrate peaks in the photoluminescence spectra increases, which results in a possible overestimation of the carrier temperature, and thus an underestimation of Q. This could explain why the experimental Q value is smaller at 150 K than at 80 and 100 K for samples (c) and (d). For this reason Q could not be determined at 150 K for sample (b). The band gap difference between the well and substrate is smaller than for samples (c) and (d) so the two peaks are closer, and their overlap did not enable us to determine a carrier temperature.

4 Efficiency of a hot carrier solar cell
4.1 Simulated efficiency accounting for heat losses
Expression 5 can be introduced in the energy balance in the hot carrier solar cell model (eqn (1)) to determine the thermalisation losses as a function of the carrier temperature. Only two variables, the quasi-Fermi level splitting and the carrier temperature, are involved in the charge and energy balance equations, so the system can be solved and the efficiency determined.
The cell efficiency is computed as a function of the thermalisation coefficient. Results are presented in Fig. 6 at different solar concentrations, from 100 suns to 46000 suns (full concentration), and for a 1 eV band gap absorber.
 Fig. 6  Simulated efficiency of a hot carrier solar cell with a 1 eV band gap absorber as a function of the thermalisation coefficient for different concentrations: 100 suns (thin dashed line), 1000 suns (thin solid line), 10000 suns (thick dashed line) and 46000 suns or full concentration (thick solid line). 
As expected, the efficiency is close to the optimal efficiency of an ideal unthermalised hot carrier solar cell when the thermalisation coefficient tends to very small values (below 0.1 W K−1 cm−2 at full concentration), and is close to the Shockley–Queisser efficiency for large thermalisation coefficient (Q > 100 W K−1 cm−2). The transition between fully thermalised and unthermalised behaviour occurs in a Q range between these two thresholds.
The transition range between these two limiting cases is shifted towards lower values of Q when the concentration is reduced. For a 10000 sun concentration, which is the order of magnitude of the highest achievable concentration today, a thermalisation coefficient below 10 W K−1 cm−2 is necessary to observe an efficiency enhancement. For a 1000 sun concentration (the highest concentration achievable in large scale application), one has to go to Q values below 1 W K−1 cm−2, much below the thermalisation rates measured on the samples investigated here.
The potential efficiency of the cell, in the whole Q range, is larger with a higher concentration. This is a common result for all types of cells, from conventional single junction to ideal hot carrier solar cells, as long as resistive losses due to the large current densities involved are neglected. In a conventional cell, such an efficiency improvement is a geometrical effect of emission into a solid angle closer to that of illumination. The efficiency in that case varies with the logarithm of the concentration ratio.
In a hot carrier solar cell, an additional effect occurs, that is the saturation of carrier thermalisation, resulting in a decrease of heat losses with increasing concentration. For a given value of Q, this translates into a difference in efficiency between two different concentrations that is larger for a hot carrier solar cell, especially in the transition range, than in the limiting case of a fully thermalised cell (Q > 100 W K−1 cm−2 at 46000 suns). This means that the efficiency enhancement due to concentration can be stronger with hot carrier solar cells than with conventional cells.
4.2 Design of a hot carrier solar cell and expected efficiency
The potential efficiency of a cell with a thermalisation coefficient Q = 80 W K−1 cm−2 (extrapolated from PL experiments) under full concentration and having semi-selective contacts18 is computed. It is reported in Fig. 7, where the efficiency of a hot carrier solar cell is plotted as a function of the absorber band gap for different values of the thermalisation coefficient.
 Fig. 7  Efficiency of a hot carrier solar cell under full concentration as a function of the absorber band gap and for different values of the thermalisation coefficient. The Shockley–Queisser limit is also presented (light green). The 42% potential efficiency of sample (c) (band gap = 0.65 eV, Q = 80 W K−1 cm−2) is reported (circle). A 50% efficiency at full concentration would require a thermalisation coefficient as low as 10 W K−1 cm−2 (<5 W K−1 cm−2 under 10000 suns). 
The limit of efficiency is 42% with such a structure, which represents a 20% relative improvement compared to the 35% Shockley–Queisser limit with the same band gap. However, it is a very small improvement compared to the 41% maximal efficiency of a conventional solar cell at its optimal band gap of 1.1 eV in these conditions. This very limited gain is nevertheless encouraging as it is extrapolated from an existing structure and not a mere model value. There is still a lot of room for improvement compared to the ideal case (Q = 0) that enables close to 65% ultimate efficiency. A potential efficiency of 50% would imply a thermalisation coefficient as low as 10 W K−1 cm−2. This should be the targeted thermalisation coefficient to achieve a significant breakthrough in solar cell efficiency.
In addition, simulations were performed assuming total absorption of the incident photons with energy above the band gap. In practice, important losses due to non-absorption would occur with an absorber as thin as 100 nm or thinner. Only 40% absorption was estimated for the investigated samples at the laser energy. Specific care has to be put into absorption enhancement. Ideas were proposed29 enabling absorption of 69% of the incident power using dielectric gratings. Other ideas involving plasmon resonance with metallic gratings are also studied.30 A high carrier density is a central issue for the formation of a hot carrier population, so the question of efficient absorption in an ultra thin layer is crucial.
5 Conclusion
A method was proposed to probe the carrier thermalisation rate in semiconductors. The investigation of the thermalisation properties of test samples enabled us to determine an empirical law for carrier thermalisation with the introduction of a thermalisation coefficient. This law is then introduced in a hot carrier solar cell model to evaluate a cell efficiency taking into account heat losses in the absorber. The experimentally determined thermalisation properties would enable an absolute efficiency gain of 7% over p–n junctions of the same gap, and of 1% over the Shockley–Queisser limit. Several MQW structures were prepared and measured that enabled the study of the influence of strain and of quantization on the absorber thermalisation properties. Whereas strain is found to increase thermalisation rates, quantization appears to have a negligible effect so that 2D and 3D heterostructures would behave similarly provided the total absorber thickness is kept the same.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank all the partners of the THRIPV project and especially the teams of LCMCP, IOTA and LPN. This work was supported by ANR (THRI-PV project) and the Global Climate and Energy Program (Hot Carrier Solar Cells project).
References
R. Ross and A. Nozik, J. Appl. Phys., 1982, 53, 3813 CrossRef CAS .
W. Shockley and H. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510 CrossRef CAS .
P. Würfel, A. Brown, T. Humphrey and M. Green, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2005, 13, 277 CrossRef .
B. Ridley, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1982, 15, 5899 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lyon, J. Lumin., 1986, 35, 121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Rosenwaks, M. Hanna, D. Levi, D. Szmyd, R. Ahrenkiel and A. Nozik, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1993, 48, 14675 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shah, R. Leheny and W. Wiegmann, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1977, 16, 1577–1580 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shank, R. Fork, R. Leheny and J. Shah, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979, 42, 112 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. D. Linde and R. Lambrich, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1979, 42, 1090 CrossRef .
R. Leheny, J. Shah, R. Fork and C. Shank, Solid State Commun., 1979, 31, 809 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pötz and P. Kocevar, Phys. Rev. B, 1983, 28, 7040 CrossRef .
P. Kocevar, Physica B+C, 1985, 134, 155–163 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu and C. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1984, 44, 692–694 CrossRef CAS .
P. Würfel, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 46, 43 CrossRef .
C. Jiang, M. Green, E. Cho and G. Conibeer, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 5006 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Takeda, T. Ito, T. Motohiro, D. König, S. Shrestha and G. Conibeer, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 074905 CrossRef .
P. Aliberti, Y. Feng, Y. Takeda, S. Shrestha, M. Green and G. Conibeer, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 094507 CrossRef .
A. Le Bris and J. Guillemoles, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 113506 CrossRef .
Y. Imry and R. Landauer, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1999, 71, 306 CrossRef .
P. Würfel, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1982, 15, 3967–3985 CrossRef .
J. Rodriguez, P. Christol, L. Cerutti, F. Chevrier and A. Joullié, J. Cryst. Growth, 2005, 274, 6–13 CrossRef CAS .
A. Othonos, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 1789 CrossRef CAS .
V. Klimov, P. H. Bolivar and H. Kurz, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1995, 52, 4728 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Born and E. Wolf, Principles of Optics: Electromagnetic Theory of Propagation, Interference and Diffraction of Light, Pergamon Press Ltd,  1959 Search PubMed .
R. Ferrini, M. Patrini and S. Franchi, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 84, 4517 CrossRef CAS .
I. Vurgaftman, J. R. Meyer and L. R. Ram-Mohan, J. Appl. Phys., 2001, 89, 5815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shah and R. Leite, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1969, 22, 1304 CrossRef CAS .
W. Pelouch, R. Ellington, P. Powers and C. Tang, Phys. Rev. B, 1992, 45, 1450 CrossRef CAS .
R. Esteban, M. Laroche and J. Greffet, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 221111 CrossRef .

          S. Collin, C. Sauvan, C. Colin, I. Massiot, F. Pardo, N. Bardou, P. Lalanne and J. Pelouard, 25th EU PhotoVoltaic Solar Energy Conference, Valencia (Spain),  2010, p. 265 Search PubMed .

Footnotes† This article was submitted as part of a collection highlighting research from the Advanced inorganic materials and concepts for photovoltaics symposium, at the 2011 E-MRS Bilateral Energy Conference‡ As long as the uncertainty on the phonon energy is much inferior to kBT, little impact on the Q value accuracy is expected. With an error on ħωLO of 1 meV, the error on Q is between −13% to +15% in the worst case where the carrier temperature is the lattice temperature. It becomes less than ±5% when the carrier temperature becomes significantly higher than the lattice temperature (TH > 200 K)This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
Hot carrier solar cells offer an attractive way to convert optimally the incoming solar radiation but are limited by the thermalization rates of photogenerated carriers. The carrier thermalization rates in GaSb-based heterostructure samples are measured using continuous wave photoluminescence. An empirical law, that relates the electron energy loss rate to the carrier temperature, is deduced from photoluminescence data and used in a hot carrier solar cell model for simulation of device operation accounting for heat losses. The thermalization rates measured on the samples under investigation are shown to enable an efficiency improvement compared to the Shockley–Queisser limit, albeit in the highest accessible solar concentration range.


 	Fig. 1  Schematic of a hot carrier solar cell. The non equilibrium photogenerated electron and hole populations at a hot temperature TH in the absorber are extracted through energy selective contacts, with a transmission range δE, towards electrodes at a cold temperature Tc. The energy collected per extracted electron–hole pair is Eext. The quasi Fermi level splitting in the absorber is ΔμH, and the output voltage is V. qV is limited by Eext and can be larger than the absorber band gap Eg.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Details of sample (c) structure: five 10 nm thick InGaAsSb wells and 30 nm thick AlGaAsSb barriers cladded by 1.1 μm thick large band gap AlGaAsSb layers, all lattice-matched with the GaSb substrate, and capped by a 20 nm thick GaSb passivation layer. Structure designed for emission at 0.65 eV (1.9 μm) at room temperature.	 

 	Fig. 3  
Photoluminescence spectra of sample (c) at 80 K in arbitrary units as a function of the photon energy, with the following values of the absorbed power density, from top to bottom: 1300, 710, 360, 200, 120, 65, 40 and 23 W cm−2. A change in the PL spectrum shape is visible when the excitation power is increased. An exponential fit of the high energy tail of the main peak provides a measurement of the carrier temperature.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 4  
              Carrier temperature in sample (c) as a function of the absorbed power determined from an exponential fit of the high energy tail of the luminescence peak at two different lattice temperatures: 80 K (filled circles) and 100 K (empty circles).	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 5  
n
q/τLO ratio determined from PL experiments on sample (c) as a function of the temperature difference between carriers and lattice at two different lattice temperatures: 80 K (filled circles) and 100 K (empty circles). A linear relation is observed.	 
	(5)



(b)	72 ± 21	(62 ± 23)	75	—	85	116
(c)	48 ± 14	70 ± 34	50	(47 ± 27)	57	77
(d)	51 ± 16	56 ± 28	53	(43 ± 24)	60	82
	(6)

 	Fig. 6  Simulated efficiency of a hot carrier solar cell with a 1 eV band gap absorber as a function of the thermalisation coefficient for different concentrations: 100 suns (thin dashed line), 1000 suns (thin solid line), 10000 suns (thick dashed line) and 46000 suns or full concentration (thick solid line).	 

 	Fig. 7  Efficiency of a hot carrier solar cell under full concentration as a function of the absorber band gap and for different values of the thermalisation coefficient. The Shockley–Queisser limit is also presented (light green). The 42% potential efficiency of sample (c) (band gap = 0.65 eV, Q = 80 W K−1 cm−2) is reported (circle). A 50% efficiency at full concentration would require a thermalisation coefficient as low as 10 W K−1 cm−2 (<5 W K−1 cm−2 under 10000 suns).	 
Footnotes
† This article was submitted as part of a collection highlighting research from the Advanced inorganic materials and concepts for photovoltaics symposium, at the 2011 E-MRS Bilateral Energy Conference
‡ As long as the uncertainty on the phonon energy is much inferior to kBT, little impact on the Q value accuracy is expected. With an error on ħωLO of 1 meV, the error on Q is between −13% to +15% in the worst case where the carrier temperature is the lattice temperature. It becomes less than ±5% when the carrier temperature becomes significantly higher than the lattice temperature (TH > 200 K)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
