Periodic nanostructures: preparation, properties and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0CS01146K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0CS01146K
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 6423-6482Periodic nanostructures: preparation, properties and applications

        
          
            Hang 
            Yin†
a, 
      
        
          
            Kaijian 
            Xing†
b, 
      
        
          
            Yurou 
            Zhang†
c, 
      
        
          
            D. M. Aradhana S. 
            Dissanayake
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ziyang 
            Lu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Haitao 
            Zhao
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Zhiyuan 
            Zeng
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jung-Ho 
            Yun
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Dong-Chen 
            Qi
          
          
        
      *fg and 

        
          
            Zongyou 
            Yin
          
          
        
      *a
aResearch School of Chemistry, Australian National University, ACT 2601, Australia. E-mail: zongyou.yin@anu.edu.au
bARC Centre for Future Low Energy Electronics Technologies, School of Physics and Astronomy, Monash University, Clayton, VIC, Australia
cSchool of Chemical Engineering and Australian Institute for Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (AIBN), The University of Queensland, St Lucia QLD 4072, Australia. E-mail: j.yun1@uq.edu.au
dMaterials and Interfaces Center, Shenzhen Institutes of Advanced Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shenzhen 518055, Guangdong, China
eDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong 999077, P. R. China
fSchool of Chemistry and Physics, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland 4001, Australia. E-mail: dongchen.qi@qut.edu.au
gCentre for Materials Science, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Queensland 4001, Australia
Received 
      30th November 2020
    First published on 12th April 2021AbstractPeriodic nanostructures, a group of nanomaterials consisting of single or multiple nano units/components periodically arranged into ordered patterns (e.g., vertical and lateral superlattices), have attracted tremendous attention in recent years due to their extraordinary physical and chemical properties that offer a huge potential for a multitude of applications in energy conversion, electronic and optoelectronic applications. Recent advances in the preparation strategies of periodic nanostructures, including self-assembly, epitaxy, and exfoliation, have paved the way to rationally modulate their ferroelectricity, superconductivity, band gap and many other physical and chemical properties. For example, the recent discovery of superconductivity observed in “magic-angle” graphene superlattices has sparked intensive studies in new ways, creating superlattices in twisted 2D materials. Recent development in the various state-of-the-art preparations of periodic nanostructures has created many new ideas and findings, warranting a timely review. In this review, we discuss the current advances of periodic nanostructures, including their preparation strategies, property modulations and various applications.
Hang Yin
Hang Yin is currently a PhD student at the Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University (Australia). He got his MSc from the University of Macau (China) in 2018 and BSc from Sichuan University (China) in 2015. His research interests lie in supramolecular chemistry, molecular machines, and energy conversion. He is now focusing on the development of novel nano materials for photocatalytic energy conversion.
Kaijian Xing
Dr Kaijian Xing is a postdoc at ARC Centre of Excellent in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies at Monash University. He started Master study on nano-electronic engineering at the University of Melbourne. Afterwards he obtained the PhD degree in condensed matter physics at La Trobe University. He has been working on diamond electronics for the past 4 years, developing a solid-state surface transfer doping approach for controlling the diamond surface conductivity. The recent breakthrough made by him in the heterostructure between diamond and transition metal oxides paves the way for the high-performance diamond surface conducting devices as well as the spintronics.
Yurou Zhang
Yurou Zhang received her BEng degree from East China University of Science and Technology in 2019. Since then, she has been pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Dr Jung Ho Yun at the University of Queensland. Her research interests mainly focus on optoelectronic properties and applications of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials.
Jung-Ho Yun
Jung-Ho Yun is currently an ARC DECRA Fellow in UQ Nanomaterials Centre, School of Chemical Engineering, the University of Queensland, Australia. He received his BSc and MSc degrees from Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea, and PhD degree from the University of New South Wales, Australia in 2012. Prior to the PhD study, he also worked as a researcher to develop functional nanomaterials-based electrodes for electrochemical wastewater treatment systems at R&D Centre, NANOPAC Co., Ltd., Republic of Korea for 5 years. His research interests lie in designing nanostructured semiconducting materials toward solar energy conversion, environmental remediation, and electronic sensing applications.
Dong-Chen Qi
Dongchen Qi is an Associate Professor and ARC Future Fellow at Queensland University of Technology. He received his BSc in Physics from Peking University (2003) and PhD in Physics from the National University of Singapore (2009). His research interests lie in the area of experimental condensed matter physics and surface science, focusing on creating, understanding, and controlling the surfaces and interfaces of functional materials at the nanoscale to develop new technologies and material platforms for the next-generation devices.
Zongyou Yin
Associate Professor Zongyou Yin obtained his BS and MS degrees at Jilin University in China, and completed his PhD at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in Singapore. Then, he started his postdoc careers at NTU/Singapore, IMRE/Singapore, followed by MIT and then Harvard University. Dr Yin started his own research group at Australian National Univesrity (ANU) from 2017. His group's research is interdisciplinary, encompassing the chemistry and physics of nano-to-atomic materials, fundamental relationship among materials-structures-devices, and synergistic integration of multi-functions towards systems for energy and wearable applications.
1. Introduction
The progress of human civilization is in line with the development of materials. From the Stone Age to Bronze and from Bronze to Iron, the application of these materials brought a revolution to the farming tools, accelerating the efficiency of agricultural production. The application of rubber to sealing steam and metals for electricity are two key inventions during the first and second industrial revolutions, respectively. Decades ago, the development of semiconducting materials and their advances in electronic and optoelectronic device technologies significantly influenced modern life. Nowadays, it is the era of nanotechnology, and various nanomaterials have been developed and applied to different areas in catalysis,1–4 biotechnology,5–7 energy conversion,8–10 energy storage,8,9,11,12etc.,13,14 regardless of their composition and morphology.15–18 Among these nanomaterials, periodic nanostructures (PNSs), including notable superlattices, have attracted wide attention from the scientific community due to their periodic ordering that offers unique properties for various applications.
Periodic structures in general consist of several or more regularly repeating identical arrays of nano, micro, or macroscale entities with a geometric shape in an orderly patterned manner. Often, these entities organize along one or several independent directions, and generate short- or long-range ordered assemblies with different configurations and dimensionalities on all scales. In recent years, there has been a growing research interest in the rational design and fabrication of periodic nanomaterials, owing to their potential in a wide range of properties, and further applications by the virtue of periodic orderings at the nanoscale.19–21 In contrast to micro- or macro-scale periodicity, nano-scale periodicity strongly influences the electronic, optical and other properties of the material,22–26 and offers distinct collective characteristics that may be very different from those of their bulk counterparts.27–29 Especially, the discovery of the superconducting graphene bilayer moiré superlattice has brought PNSs to a new level.30 Benefitting from the advantages of these properties, the applications of PNSs in energy conversion,20 and in photoelectronic and electronic devices19,31,32 have been intensively studied.
The concept of PNSs covers a wide range of materials, such as traditional III–V group superlattices,33,34 metal oxide superlattices,24,35 periodic layered materials,28,29 and nanoparticle based periodic arrays.36,37 A number of review papers have discussed some of these PNSs according to their dimensions and compositions, such as reviews on oxide superlattices,38 chemical synthesized 2D superlattices,19 van der Waals 2D material-based superlattices,21 and 2D layered PNSs.20 However, there is still a lack of an overview of PNSs with integrating their preparation strategies, properties, and applications.
Therefore, in this review, we will summarize the advances in periodic nanostructured materials, including their preparation methods, properties, and applications. Herein, we will begin the review by discussing different preparation strategies, including vapor phase preparation, solution phase preparation and other complex preparation methods, which provide the platform for further in-depth studies. Then, the properties of the periodic nanostructured materials, ranging from ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism, piezoelectricity and superconductivity to the electronic, optoelectronic, and optical properties, will be discussed. Finally, we will summarize their applications in energy conversion and (opto)electronic devices, and then present the challenges and opportunities of PNSs for future study.
2. Preparation
With the advancements in PNSs over the past decades, the preparation of PNSs with precisely controlled morphologies at the large scale is still a key challenge that limits their wide range of applications. So far, various preparation strategies (Table 1) were attempted for PNSs with different morphologies, components and applications.
Table 1 Summary of the preparation methods for PNSs




Preparation method
Reaction phase
Advantages for PNS production
Disadvantages for PNS production
Examples
Ref.




CVD
Vapor phase
Accurate growth of periodic structures
Low production efficiency
WS2–WSe2–MoS2, WS2–MoSe2–WSe2, MoSe2–MoS2, InGaAsP/InGaP, CdS/CdS:SnS2

33, 51, 52 and 135



PVD
Vapor phase
Accurate growth of periodic structures
Low production efficiency
SubPC-C60, Si0.7Ge0.3/Si superlattice, LaMnO3/SrIrO3, BiFeO3/BiMnO3

35, 66, 69 and 71



Intercalation
Solution phase
Production in large scale
Less accurate structures and morphologies
MoS2/Pt-NP, MoS2/Pd-NP. MoS2/Ru-NP, MoS2/Au-NP, MoS2/Co-NP

80 and 81



Self-assembly
Solution phase
Production in large scale
Less accurate structures and morphologies
TMA-COR, CoNi/Fe-PP, NiFe/MoS2, CoMnO@CN

37, 93, 104 and 107



Lithography
Multiple phases
Accurate growth of periodic structures
Complex multiple preparation steps
BCP-based multicomponent nanopattern, striped-pattern superlattice

131 and 136



Methods for twisted structures
Multiple phases
Production of special twisted structures
Low production efficiency
Graphene-hBN bilayer, graphene-graphene bilayer moiré superlattice, MoS2 bilayer moiré superlattice, twisted multilayer superstructure

30 and 132–134





2.1. Vapor phase preparation
Vapor phase preparation is widely used to modify the substrate surface, and is also one of the most important methods used to synthesize PNSs. The vapor phase preparation can be divided into chemical vapor deposition and physical vapor deposition. The two separate deposition methods will be summarized and discussed in the following subtitles.

2.1.1. Chemical vapor deposition. 
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) is a general method used to deposit one or more chemical gases or vapors onto the substrate surface to synthesize thin films or nanomaterials.39 In recent years, much progress has been made in fabricating lateral or vertical hetero-nanostructures from CVD epitaxial deposition based on using the lattice mismatch between the multiple crystalline films. These hetero-nanostructures have the potential to be used in electronics and optoelectronics by modulating the electronic properties of ultrathin 2D nanosheets.40
In fabricating two different kinds of transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) monolayers, mono- and multilayer nanosheets of TMDs initially deposit on the SiO2 surface via CVD method.41–43 Subsequently, the second layer epitaxially grows on the edge or surface of the existing TMD layer.44–50 It is important to have a fresh, unpassivated active edge to grow the second layer. Recently, different gas-phase deposition methods have been developed to fabricate lateral and vertical epitaxial hetero-nanostructures of TMD nanosheets. Duan and co-workers reported a CVD-based epitaxial growth technique in preparing lateral hetero-nanostructures composed of WSe2–WS2 and MoSe2–MoS2 by in situ switching the vapor-phase reactants without exposing the active edges to ambient conditions.44 Some other studies demonstrated that tuning the growth temperature45 and the growth time46 are effective approaches to control the growth of MoS2–WS2 heterostructures. By using the step-by-step CVD process, 2D ternary heterostructures (WS2–WSe2–MoS2 and WS2–MoSe2–WSe2), instead of 2D binary heterostructures, were synthesized (Fig. 1).51 In addition, the repeated operation of the same method yielded an A–B–A–B type PNS, i.e., WS2–WSe2–WS2–WSe2 superlattice.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the (b) single component lateral nanosheet, (c) dual components lateral heterostructure, (d) triple components lateral heterostructure, and (e) dual components lateral PNSs via CVD. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2017, AAAS Publishing. 
The additional modifications to the CVD method can also yield PNSs. For instance, Geohegan and co-workers prepared patterned arrays of the monolayer MoSe2–MoS2via lateral epitaxial heterostructures for the first time.52 As given in Fig. 2, a monolayer of MoSe2 was first deposited by CVD method, and then it was masked by conventional patterning processes, following the pulsed laser vaporization of sulphur to selectively convert the unmasked MoSe2 areas to MoS2 in triangles, circles and ribbons.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the MoSe2–MoS2 lateral periodic arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature Publishing. 


2.1.2. Physical vapor deposition. 
Physical vapor deposition (PVD) shares the similar process with CVD. However, there is no chemical reaction during the preparation process, and the chemical vapor directly deposits on the target substrate. Various heterostructures were prepared based on the inorganic,53–56 organic,57–59 and inorganic–organic hybrids60,61via PVD technique. Many organic related materials prepared by PVD showed PNSs due to the self-assembly via supramolecular interactions.62
The preparation of PNSs via PVD method involves different supramolecular interactions, including van der Waals interaction, hydrogen bonding, halogen bonding, intermolecular π–π interaction, and electrostatic interaction. These interactions influence the construction of PNSs, such as the direct formation of backbones and accommodation of additional components.62 For instance, the vapor phase sequential deposition of cobalt(II) hexadecafluoro-29H,31H-phthalocyanine (F16CoPc) and nickel(II) tetraphenyl-21H,23H-porphine (NiTPP) formed densely packed, well-ordered 2D crystalline regions with 1:1 composition on Au(111) through fluorine-phenyl interactions.63 The ordered 2D bimolecular self-assembled 2D regions extended about 100 nm, covering 25% of the surface. The CoPc and NiTPP prepared by coadoption in an ultra-high vacuum (UHV) showed a densely packed, well-defined bimolecular structure, but with a disordered composition.64 The H-bonded honeycomb-like porous network of melamine-PTCDI on a silver-terminated silicon surface in which the pores encapsulated C60 is an example for a well-defined three-component system.65 The hexagonal pores of the binary melamine-PTCDI network consisting of melamine in the vertices and PTCDI in the straight lines accommodated heptametric C60 by inducing the co-location of the several C60 molecules. This new surface phase served as a template for the formation of an additional C60 layer on the hexagonal network of the melamine-PTCDI framework. In another study, chloro[subphthalocyaninato]boron(III) (SubPc) and C60 were self-assembled to well-ordered 2D binary monolayers on Ag(111) in UHV.66 Two phases of the 2D PNSs were constructed: (1) a 2D periodic “stripe” phase consisting of alternate 1D quasilinear chains of C60 and zigzag rows of SubPc, and (2) a 2D hexagonal “star” phase of the C60 trimer surrounded by three SubPc units (Fig. 3).
 Fig. 3  (a) Molecular structures of SubPC and C60. (b) Artificially colored STM image of the basic unit of the “stripe” pattern. (c) Artificially colored STM image of PNSs based on SubPC and C60. (d) STM image showing two different phases on Ag(111). (e) STM image of the 2D hexagonal “star” phase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2002, John Wiley and Sons. 
Molecular beam epitaxy (MBE) is a kind of PVD method, which is conducted under UHV condition. MBE method can precisely control the deposition/epitaxy at the atomic or molecular level,67 which can be ascribed to the effusion cells that can generate a “molecular beam” with low interparticle collisions before reaching the substrate surface, enabling it to produce superlattices. For instance, the PbSeTe/PbTe quantum dot superlattice,68 Si0.7Ge0.3/Si superlattice,69 and Bi2Te3/Sb2Te3 superlattice70 (Fig. 4) were all synthesized by MBE method.
 Fig. 4  (a) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) micrograph recorded on the SL structure and corresponding Fourier transform ([110] zone axis). The (003), (006), and (009) reflections are marked by crosses. Asterisks mark the superlattice reflections. (b) and (c) High-angle annular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) micrographs of the as-grown sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Pulsed laser deposition (PLD) is another kind of PVD method. The high-power laser beam is applied to assist the evaporation and ionization processes of target materials that will be used to deposit on the substrate to form thin films.67 The PLD process can occur not only in UHV, but also in the presence of background gas, such as O2, which is suitable for the deposition of oxide films. Hence, PLD is widely used to synthesize metal oxide-based vertical PNSs via alternate deposition.35,71–74 For instance, LaNiO3/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3,72 BiFeO3/Ce-doped-LaMnO3 (Fig. 5),73 LaMnO3/SrIrO3,71 and BiFeO3/BiMnO335 can be prepared on the SrTiO3(001) substrate, and MgTi2O4/SrTiO3 can be deposited on the (001)-oriented cubic spinel MgAl2O4 substrate,74 respectively, via PLD method.
 Fig. 5  Schematic of the epitaxial BiFeO3 thin film on the SrTiO3 (001) substrate fabricated by alternately depositing BiFeO3 and Ce-doped LaMnO3 layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing. 

2.2. Solution phase preparation
The solution phase preparation method is widely applied for the large-scale preparation of PNSs. In addition, it is an important supplementary preparation method to vapor phase preparation. In this section, solution phase preparation strategies (including intercalation and exfoliation methods to prepare 2D materials), which act as precursors for 2D PNSs and intercalated PNSs will be discussed, and followed with the self-assembly methods for 1D, 2D, and 3D periodic nanomaterials.

2.2.1. Intercalation and exfoliation. 
2D materials are essential precursors for the preparation of 2D layered/based PNSs, but the low yield efficiency of vapor based preparation methods limits the synthesis of 2D layered PNSs based on 2D monolayers. Liquid exfoliation of 2D materials from their bulk counterparts is the general method used to produce 2D materials in a large scale. The critical challenge in exfoliating 2D nanosheets from their bulk materials is overcoming the van der Waals forces between the adjacent layers. The liquid exfoliation has two general routes, and the first route is direct exfoliation in various solvents with the assistance of ultrasonication. This route has been used for the production of graphene, h-BN, and TMDs, and others.75–77 The solvent can minimize the energy of exfoliation. However, it still faces the difficulties to produce 2D monolayer materials in high yield.
Intercalation of ions into the interlayers of the bulk-layered material is another general process applied prior to exfoliation in preparation of 2D materials in the large scale. After the interaction step, the van der Waals forces decrease due to the enlarged spacing between the adjacent layers. Although the intercalation of ions may introduce additional impurities and induce a complex purification process, exfoliation after the interaction of the ions is still one of the mainstream methods, and is widely used to prepare various 2D nanosheets, such as notable TMD nanosheets and LDH nanosheets.78 As shown in Fig. 6, Li+ and related reagents are the first choice to be intercalated into the interlayers of bulk materials. The intercalation of Li+ can not only expand the interlayer spaces to weaken the van der Waals interactions, the products of Li(OH)2 and H2 gas that are produced from the reaction of metallic Li and water will further push apart the layers to accelerate the exfoliation process.78
 Fig. 6  Electrochemical lithiation process for the fabrication of 2D nanosheets from the layered bulk material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons. 
As discussed, the exfoliation process is an essential step prior to further assembling the 2D layered PNSs. However, as a derivative process, the ion-intercalated bulk layered materials can also be transferred to ion/nanoparticle-confined PNSs by exchanging ions with other nanoparticles.79–81 This method is convenient for modulating the spacing between the sheets to further study the effect of the interlayer distance on the activity of the layered materials,79 and also to introduce external active materials to further enhance their performances.80,81


2.2.2. Self-assembly. 
Self-assembly is a powerful and versatile bottom-up synthetic approach that generates structurally-highly organized periodic aggregates from molecular to macroscopic sized components. Various non-covalent interactions, such as hydrogen bonding, electrostatic interactions, π-stacking, van der Waals interaction, metal–metal interactions, hydrophobic interactions, and others, are usually involved in the assembly process.20,62,82,83 Coordination-driven self-assembly, such as metal coordination bonding between the electron-rich end groups of organic linkers and transition-metal atoms, is also an appropriate bonding for self-assembly.83,84 Self-assembly relies on the chemical complementarity and structural compatibility of the starting materials. Therefore, by rationally designing and fabricating the starting materials with complementary shapes and chemical/physical properties, the structure of the final assembly can be encoded in the starting materials. Thus, preconceived self-assembled structures can be fabricated under appropriate reaction conditions.20,82,84 Integrating different concepts and synthetic strategies, enormous complexity and diversity can be introduced to the self-assembled nanostructures.
2.2.2.1. One-dimensional PNSs. 
One-dimensional (1D) materials usually refer to nanowires, which have been intensively studied for various applications. Nanowire can be applied in different areas, such as electronic and optical devices.32,85 In particular, periodic nanostructured nanowires may demonstrate enhanced performances due to their multiple periodic components.86 Therefore, different preparation strategies have been developed to prepare periodic nanowires via solution-based self-assembly process.
A variety of supramolecular interactions, such as electrostatic interaction, π–π stacking and others, can contribute to the construction of 1D PNSs in solution phase via self-assembly. π–π Stacking is widely used for the construction of organic 1D nanowires based on planar π-conjugated molecules.87 π–π Stacking is more suitable for preparing homogeneous nanostructures, rather than PNSs, due to the nature of the π-interactions that have no disparity towards various molecules. π–π Stacking may also construct heterostructures, but it is hard to control their periodicity. Electrostatic interactions are another important type of interactions used to build up supramolecular 1D nanostructures.88 Mirkin et al. reported on a 1D colloidal superlattice based on triangular Au nanoprisms and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) via the balance between the attractive depletion forces and repulsive electrostatic forces.89 This 1D superlattice demonstrated a large spacing distance, which is four times the thickness of a single nanoprism. Zheng et al. proposed a method to produce a Pd nanosheets based 1D Pd superlattice nanowire.90 Different from previous work that used depletion force to balance the electrostatic repulsion, the authors introduced counter-cations (e.g., Fe3+, Al3+) to decrease the repulsive electrostatic force between the negatively charged Pd nanosheets.90 This method offered a controllable length of Pd superlattice nanowire (ranging from 25 nm to 283 nm). By controlling the concentration of the counter-cations in solution, the length of the Pd superlattice nanowire can be increased as a result of the increasing ratio of counter-cations (Fig. 7a–c). It is easy to construct 1D nanowires on planar molecules and 2D nanosheets since the interaction forces align with the growth direction of the nanowires. However, it is challenging to assemble nanowires on nanocrystals (NCs) due to their isotropic nature, which induces nonobvious directional interactions.91 Hence, external assistance is necessary to support the construction of 1D nanowires based on NCs. Dong et al. raised a general method for the preparation of a 1D NC superlattice based on NCs with the assistance of molecular clusters.92 The preparation method yields single-NC-wide polymer-like flexible linear chains containing up to ∼1000 close-packed NCs (with the length exceeding 18 μm), as shown in Fig. 7d–g. This method is suitable for a wide range of hydrophobic NCs, regardless of their composition, size, and shape. It is believed that the balance of solvophobicity and solvophilicity dictates the growth of the 1D NCs superlattice.
 Fig. 7  TEM images of the Pd superlattice nanowires with a Fe3+/Pd ratio of (a) 0.05, (b) 0.1, and (c) 1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the solution based self-assembly process of the 1D NC superlattice. (e) High-magnification TEM image of a segment of a straight NC chain and the corresponding intensity profile (inset) along the chain length (indicated by the arrow). (f) TEM image of an ultralong NC chain. (g) High-magnification TEM image of the region indicated in (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
2.2.2.2. Two-dimensional PNSs. 
Two-dimensional (2D) periodic nanomaterials include lateral single-layered periodic nanomaterials and vertical multi-layered periodic nanomaterials. The single-layered 2D periodic nanomaterials can be prepared by direct assembly from small molecules, while the vertical PNSs are prepared by assembly from single-layered materials yielded by exfoliation process.
A wide range of molecules have been self-assembled to 2D periodic supramolecular assemblies by employing directional intermolecular hydrogen bonding (H-bonding) as the driven force for the molecular recognition process.93–96 The position and the number of functionalities that can form H-bonding strongly influence the structural and functional diversity of the ultimate H-bonded assembly. Trimesic acid (TMA) is an interesting H-bond linker molecule that forms H-bonded supramolecular motifs between the carboxylic groups either with cyclic dimer- or trimer-configuration due to its planer aromatic core with 3-fold carboxylic acids.
Self-assembly of TMA forms a 2D-periodic grid architecture with two different phases on a solid interface; a six-fold “chicken-wire structure” and three-fold “flower-like structures”, which are different in terms of the H-bonding pattern.93,94 The periodic cavities in the H-bonded 2D template of TMA form various host–guest multicomponent nanostructures via host–guest complexation. For example, Fig. 8 demonstrates that the TMA-coronene supramolecular hybrid was fabricated by introducing guest coronene (COR) molecules (diameter of ∼1 nm) into the hexagonal cavities of the chicken-wire TMA hexagonal cell monolayer at 1-octanoic acid/single-layer graphene supported by SiO2.93
 Fig. 8  TMA–COR hybrid assemblies on the single-layer graphene/SiO2. (a) Chemical structure of TMA. (b) Dimeric and trimeric form of TMA. (c) High-resolution STM image and (d) proposed mechanism of the formation of the chicken-wire structure of the host TMA by guest coronene molecules. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The self-assembly of C60 and oligothiophene macrocycles in H-bonded TMA templated 2D network at the liquid–solid interface of heptanoic acid solution and highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG) was also studied with scanning tunnelling microscopy and spectroscopy.94 Here, the Saturn-like complexes of C60 with oligothiophene macrocycles in mono- and bilayers have also been epitaxially assembled on the H-bonded 2D-host template of TMA at the interface of heptanoic acid solution and HOPG via double hosting the C60 molecules by non-covalent interactions.94 The hexagonal cavities of the chicken-wire structure of the 2D TMA monolayer on the liquid/graphite interface with the pore diameter around 12 Å provides the host sites for the epitaxial ordering of the π-expanded macrocyclic oligothiophenes hosting C60 molecules. Here, the self-assembly of the Saturn-like complex was driven by the site recognition of C60 molecules in the templated monolayer of TMA. This study demonstrates that the H-bonding and charge transfer interactions between the donor–acceptor systems can be used to manipulate the electronic properties of the final nano-assembly.
The diverse range of 1,3,5-tris(10-carboxydecyloxy) benzene (TCDB)-based multicomponent architectures are also constructed by encapsulating various guest species into the tetragonal cavities of the 2D, hydrogen-bonded TCBD host network on HOPG by coadsorption approach with scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) under ambient conditions.95 For example, the inclusion of copper phthalocyanine (CuPc) and coronene as the guest species to the cavities of the host network of TCBD on HOPG formed well-ordered CuPc/TCDB and coronene/TCDB host–guest architectures in large areas.95 Another study demonstrated that cavities of the 2D network of TCBD on HOPG could accommodate vanadyl phthalocyanine (VOPc) as a guest molecule to construct 2D VOPc/TCBD host–guest architectures.96 Interestingly, the VOPc/TCBD showed thermal annealing induced phase transformation from the VOPC dimer entrapped VOPc/TCDB (II) phase to the monomer-entrapped VOPc/TCDB (I) phase.96 As illustrated in Fig. 9, it was also found that different unsubstituted metallophthalocyanines (MPc), such as H2Pc, CuPc, VOPc, and ClGaPc, and halogen-substituted MPcs (such as F16CuPc) could be encapsulated in the porous H-bonded network of formed MPc/TCDB architectures.97
 Fig. 9  (a) High-resolution STM (HR-STM) image (649.7 mV, 399.8 pA) of the monomer-entrapped H2Pc/TCDB (I). (b) HR-STM image of (−573 mV, 470 pA) F16CuPc/TCDB (I). (c) and (d) Proposed models of H2Pc/TCDB (I) and F16CuPc/TCDB (I), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. 
The hydrogen bonded porous network of TCBD can also be used to entrap different helical and saddle oligothiophenes on HOPG. Four different nonplaner-ligothiophene molecules, i.e., helical (TMS)2-[7]helicene (T1), naphthalene-cored double (TMS)2-[7]helicene (T2), saddle-shaped cyclooctatetrathiophene (T3) and its derivative α,α,α,α-tetraphenyl-cyclooctatetrathiophene (T4), were encapsulated into the pre-formed porous TCBD-host template to construct TCBD_T1, TCBD_T2, TCBD_T3 and TCBD_T4 on HOPG by using STM under ambient conditions.98 The structure of the TCBD-T1 to T4 strongly depends on the balancing of the H-bonding of the TCBD network, and the other non-covalent interactions between the host-TCBD and guest molecules.
So far, we discussed two component host–guest supramolecular porous networks comprising a single type of host molecule, in which the pores can accommodate guest molecules with specific sizes. However, there are very few experimental studies on multicomponent, periodic host–guest supramolecular networks composed of two or more kinds of host molecular components at the liquid–solid interface. These multicomponent assemblies possess cavities with different sizes/shapes that could entrap appropriate guest species via size- and shape-selective guest inclusion. Therefore, optimized recognition and selection processes are important in the hierarchical self-assembly of a monolayer with preferential binding sites from multiple components, and in controlling the host–guest complexation within the monolayer to accommodate various guest species. The first four-component 2D crystalline architecture was successfully self-assembled from a Kagomé-type heterocomplex-stabilized nanoporous network of bisDBA-C12, which hosted a COR1-ISA6 cluster and TRI molecules in the hexagonal and triangular pores, respectively, at the 1-octanoic acid–HOPG interface with STM at room temperature.99 Here, the control manipulation of the size and shape of the guest molecules/clusters with the nanopores of the Kagomé patterned host complex was successfully applied as the design strategy. Another four-component 2D crystalline architecture was reported from the host molecules of TCDB, host 1,2,17,18,33,34-hexaaza-[2,6](4,40)cyclophane-1,17,33-triene (3NN-Macrocycle), and guest molecules of coronene and heptanoic acid at a liquid–solid interface on HOPG.100 TCBD and 3NN-macrocycles formed the binary hybrid host network with two different cavities, hexagonal (A) and triangular (B), with sizes of about 1.3 and 0.8 nm, respectively. Cavity A encapsulated the coronene, while B accommodated heptanoic acid, featuring the site- and size-selective effects.
A mixed 2D alternate bimolecular adlayer with two domains of copper(II) tetraphenyl-21H,23H-porphine (CuTPP) and cobalt(II) phthalocyanine (CoPc) were on Au(100)-(hex) in benzene solution (Fig. 10). In contrast to the compositionally disordered CoPc and NiTPP molecular assembly prepared under UHV conditions, these assemblies showed 2D, well-organized, alternate molecular arrays (around 50 nm), which ran nearly parallel to the atomic lattice direction of the Au(100) substrate.101
 Fig. 10  (a) HR-STM image of the CoPc and CuTPP periodic nanostructure on the Au(100)-(hex) surface, and (b) height-shaded view. (c) Structural model of the CoPc and CuTPP periodic nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society. 
The formation of binary adlayers of CoPc and CuTPP were also investigated on Au(100)-(hex) and Au(111) by cyclic voltammetry (CV) and in situ STM. The binary supramolecular adlayer of CoPc/CuTPP on Au(100)-(hex) showed well-ordered 2D, striped regions consisting of alternately arranged binary molecular rows. In contrast, the mixed adlayer on Au(111) showed well-ordered regions with 1:1 composition of CoPc and CuTPP, but under different concentrations. This study demonstrated that the supramolecular assembly of CoPc and CuTPP on Au depends on its crystallographic orientation, as well as the concentrations of the constituent molecules.102
As shown in Fig. 11, Xue fabricated 1D patterned four component self-assembled monolayers (SAM) comprising an alkadiyne side chain bearing anthracene derivatives via the alkadiyne side chain shape-dependent molecular recognition strategy (anthracene derivatives differ from the side chain length and the side chain position of the first alkyne carbon).103 Here, the close packing of the specific pairs of shape and length complementary alkadiyne side chains forms the monolayer through van der Waals interactions at the phenyloctane solution-HOPG interface. The monolayer exhibits a periodic patterning with alternating columns of aryl cores and aliphatic chains, and the unit cell contains six anthracene derivatives in the order S1–D1–D2–S2–D2–D1.
 Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structures of one half of the designed unit cell. (b) Image of PNSs of S1-D1-S2-D2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. 
The layer-by-layer method can prepare PNSs with a controllable layer number on a substrate by repeating the process of alternately sinking the substrate in two solutions that contain different materials/ions with opposite charges.20 The strong electrostatic attraction can strongly assemble the heterocomponents into PNSs. For instance, Shao et al. applied the layer-by-layer technique to prepare CoNi/Fe-PP PNSs on a quartz glass substrate.104 The increasing thickness of the CoNi/Fe-PP PNSs as a result of the growth of the layers can be directly characterized by SEM. Strongin et al. prepared MnO2 nanosheets and K+-based PNSs on a positively charged polycation (PEI)-modified fluorinated tin oxide (FTO) slide (Fig. 12).79 AFM showed a height of 2.2 ± 0.2 nm for the MnO2/K+/MnO2 bilayer, and a large interlayer spacing of 0.9 ± 0.2 nm between the two MnO2 nanosheets.
 Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the periodic nanostructure prepared by solution-based layer-by-layer technique. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the preparation methods of the 2D layered materials that require solid substrates, various solid substrate-free methods were also developed to fulfill different demands. The surface tension produced by the interface of liquid-air/liquid–liquid can provide supports for the formation of 2D layered materials. In addition, the as-produced 2D materials can be easily transported to arbitrary substrates for further applications. Murray et al. attempted to produce binary nanocrystal superlattice (BNSL) membranes at the liquid-air interface via self-assembly (Fig. 13a).36 A drop of hexane solution containing FePt and Fe3O4 nanocrystals was spread over the surface of diethylene glycol (DEG). After the evaporation of hexane, a 2D BNSL membrane was yielded on the surface of DEG. This method provides a general process that can be extended to different 2D BNSL systems, since their stoichiometry and structure can be tuned by the modulation of concentration ratios and/or size of nanocrystal components.105,106 Recently, Park et al. studied a laminar assembly polymerization (LAP) process, an interfacial synthesis technique, to produce a monolayer 2D polymer at the sharp interface between pentane and water.84 The LAP process includes three steps: (1) injection; (2) self-assembly; (3) polymerization (Fig. 13b and c). After the monomers were injected into the interlayer between pentane and water, the monomers experienced self-assembly and polymerization in the presence of bridging components to yield a 2D polymer thin film, which can be further assembled with MoS2 nanosheets to construct vertical layered PNSs.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the large-scale BNSL membranes self-assembled at the liquid–air interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2010, Springer Nature Publishing. (b) Schematic of a LAP reactor and in situ optical characterization apparatus. (c) Schematic of the LAP synthesis that involves three phases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2019, AAAS Publishing. 
The full solution-based and substrate-free method, which is based on the electrostatic interaction between the different 2D nanosheets, has been widely used for the construction of 2D layered PNSs.20 The direct mixing of positively charged nanosheets (e.g., LDHs) and negatively charged nanosheets (e.g., graphene, MoS2) can yield layer-by-layer 2D PNSs via electrostatic interaction without other assistance (Fig. 14a). For instance, NiAl LDH and reduced graphene oxide (rGO) can assemble into a NiAl/rGO periodic nanostructure in formamide;108 NiFe LDH and MoS2 can be used to construct a NiFe/MoS2 periodic nanostructure in the solution phase;107 and a CoNiFe/RuO2.1 periodic nanostructure can be yielded from the spontaneous assembly of positively charged trimetallic CoNiFe LDHs and negatively charged RuO2.1 nanosheets.109 However, there is still a demand to assemble two layered materials with the same charge into PNSs. For instance, Sasaki et al. explored a method to alter the surface charge of materials by modifying polymers with opposite charge.28 After the modification of positively charged poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA), the charge of graphene changed from negative to positive, which could be subsequently used to assemble a periodic nanostructure with negatively charged MoS2 nanosheets. The PDDA of the obtained MoS2/graphene-PDDA can be removed by further annealing process (Fig. 14b).
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the general preparation process of the substrate free 2D layered periodic nanostructure in solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Preparation method for the 2D layered periodic nanostructure based on homo-charged nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
2.2.2.3. Three-dimensional PNSs. 
As the most common morphology of nanomaterials, three-dimensional (3D) nanomaterials have been widely studied for various applications. Therefore, different preparation methods were developed to satisfy the wide range of applications. The 3D periodic nanomaterials are usually constructed from ordered, close-packed nanoparticles featuring a high surface area, abundant active sites, and collective properties that differ from the disordered/isolated nanoparticles. Since self-assembly is a general strategy to prepare the 3D periodic nanomaterials, herein the preparation methods of 3D periodic nanomaterials via self-assembly are summarized for further studies.
The spontaneous self-assembly of colloidal particles in suspensions or at the air–liquid interface provide a simple and versatile approach to form highly ordered nanoparticle arrays or structural assemblies known as colloidal superlattices with precise periodicity across large dimensions from several nanometres to micrometres.82 In comparison to the randomly configured nanoparticle mixtures, colloidal superlattices exhibit precise uniformity in particle sizes, as well as the interparticle distances, generating well-defined surface topographical patterns. The assembly of colloidal particles with nano-dimensions, such as quantum dots, nanoparticles, and nanocrystals, are interesting in the design of size-tunable colloidal superlattices.110–112 The assembly of the colloidal superlattice is, in general, driven by the colloidal forces between the individual nanoparticle that lead towards equilibrium. Therefore, various superlattice architectures can be designed by modulating the interparticle interactions and thereby tuning the internal ordering, interparticle distance, precise stoichiometry, and other parameters of the nanoparticles in the superlattice (Fig. 15). A diverse array of mono- or multiple-component colloidal superlattices consisting of either single-sized or different-sized nanoparticle combinations with various types of crystal lattices (such as binary-AB, AB2, AB5 or AB13 colloidal crystals, ternary or more complex superlattices), well-defined morphologies, including spherical and non-spherical components (such as rod, dumbbell, plate, polyhedral disc and others), and different chemical compositions, have been reported so far.36,110–113
 Fig. 15  TEM images of the binary superlattices based on different nanoparticles: (a) 13.4nm γ-Fe2O3 and 5.0nm Au; (b), 7.6nm PbSe and 5.0nm Au; (c) 6.2nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (d) 6.7nm PbS and 3.0nm Pd; (e) 6.2nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (f) 5.8nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (g) 7.2nm PbSe and 4.2nm Ag; (h) 6.2nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (i) 7.2nm PbSe and 5.0nm Au; (j) 5.8nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (k) 7.2nm PbSe and 4.2nm Ag; and (l) 6.2nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2006, Springer Nature Publishing. 
In general, 3D periodic colloidal superlattices can be mainly constructed from two different self-assembly-based synthetic strategies: (1) electrostatic self-assembly, a popular method for building PNSs in various dimensions,88,114 and (2) solvent evaporation induced self-assembly of colloidal suspensions.115 For the nanoparticles that have no particular assembly driven force to form close-packed PNSs, the evaporation of the solvent increases the concentration of nanoparticles to smoothly reduce the available free volume of each nanoparticle until the formation of close-packed PNSs (Fig. 16).37,115,116
 Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures of the CoMnO@CN superlattices via solvent evaporation self-assembly method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
DNA-linked nanoparticle superlattices have been widely studied since their size and morphology can be easily adjusted. This is due to the nature of DNA and the complementary base-pairing rule.117,118 This rule can be applied as an alternative self-assembly route to construct PNSs, as the exposed single DNA chain motif can specifically recognize and bind with its complementary DNA chain motif, thereby offering motivations to assemble hetero DNA-modified nanoparticles into PNSs.119–123 For instance, a body-centred cubic (bcc) crystalline can be constructed by DNA-functionalized nanoparticle via stepwise growth process (Fig. 17).120 The orientations of the bcc superlattices can be modulated by different contacting modes between the superlattice and substrate. In addition, this method can be used to build PNSs based on DNA-tailored nanoparticles in well order, regardless of the composition of the nanoparticles.120,123 After introducing the DNA motifs to the proteins, the DNA-modified proteins can bind with the DNA-modified Au nanoparticles to form organic–inorganic hetero superlattices.123
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the DNA-mediated interaction between nanoparticles. Illustrations of the superlattices grown on substrates, phase planes, 2D GISAXS scattering patterns, and SEM of the (b–e) (100)-oriented bcc superlattices and (f–i) (110)-oriented bcc superlattices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons. 

2.3. Other preparation methods
Previous preparation methods have already provided popular strategies for the construction of PNSs. However, there are still some strategies that rely on multiple techniques that have not been demonstrated yet. As a supplement, this section will offer some useful methods for the preparation of PNSs.

2.3.1. Lithographic templating. 
The combination of bottom-up assembly with top-down microfabrication techniques has been applied in fabricating periodically structured materials at the nanoscale. This integrated approach combines the advantageous features of the “top-down-lithography” and “bottom-up-self-assembly” to create complex periodic architectures with well-defined size, shape, and functionality from either single or multiple components. Some studies have shown that the spontaneous self-assembly of the block copolymer (BCP) into ordered periodic structures can be integrated with advanced lithographic techniques to fabricate highly ordered densely packed nanometre-scale structures, such as nanodots, nanowires, quantum dots, nanopores, and others, on solid substrates.124–127 Here, the self-assembled nanometre-sized domains of ordered BCP thin films serve as a lithographic template to fabricate periodic nanopatterns irrespective of the chemical nature of the underlying solid substrate.128–130 The subsequent selective removal of the organic components creates the patterned structures of the metal particles, which are compatible with the periodic BCP domain ordering. Even though this approach can be successfully applied in fabricating one-component nanopatterns, creating multicomponent nanopatterns is challenging, as the geometry of the self-assembled nanodomains of BCP is generally limited to single shapes, such as spheres, cylinders, or lamellae.
Kim et al. demonstrated a multilevel block copolymer (BCP)-based self-assembly approach in fabricating laterally ordered and multicomponent periodic nanopatterns, consisting of metal nanowires and nanodots of a diverse range of metallic elements (Au, Pt, Fe, Pd, and Co) at the sub-nanometre scale (Fig. 18).131 Here, thin films of polystyrene-block-poly(4-vinylpyridine)(PS-b-P4VP) BCP were initially deposited by directed self-assembly by using a topographically prepatterned substrate of Si(100) substrate via graphoepitaxy effect. The as-deposited well-ordered surface parallel nanocylinder arrays were used as a template for the subsequent metallization. The plasma etching selectively removes the organic components, forming arrays of nanodots or nanowires of parallel cylinders. In the second cycle, PS-b-P4VP thin films were re-deposited on the metal nanowire or nanodot array, followed by the second cycle of metallization to create graphoepitaxially controlled multicomponent nanopatterns of Pd nanodot arrays, alternated with Pt nanowires or a Pt-Au binary nanodot array. This multilevel approach allows for the precise control of the lateral ordering of the metal particles, and enables the fabrication of extended-long range structures with a diverse range of pattern shapes, dimensions, and chemical compositions. Furthermore, the size of the nanocomponents was independently modified without affecting the pattern periodicity. However, a significant amount of research still needs to be conducted in order to unravel the potential of the directional self-assembly of BCP-based multicomponent nanopatterning to create different shapes and sizes.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic procedure of multicomponent nanopatterning. (b) The first level BCP self-assembly for surface parallel cylinders. (c) Pt metallization of parallel cylinders. (d) Second level BCP self-assembly for vertical cylinders. (e) Pd metallization of vertical cylinders to complete the Pt nanowire–Pd nanodot multicomponent nanopattern. EDS elemental mapping of the (f) Pt nanowire–Pd nanodot array and (g) Pd nanowire–Pt nanodot array. Multicomponent nanopatterns of the (h) Pt–Pd nanowire array and (i) Au–Pt nanodot array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. 


2.3.2. Preparation of twisted PNSs. 
Compared with the common PNSs in which periodicity comes from the array of materials, the periodicity of twisted PNSs is yielded from the twisted angle between different layers of materials. Among these, the moiré superlattice is one of the most well-known twisted PNSs. The emerging novel properties of moiré superlattices have attracted intensive studies for the preparation of twisted PNSs. The preparation of the graphene-hBN moiré superlattice is relatively easier. After the construction of the graphene-hBN bilayer heterostructure, the lattice mismatch of δ = 1.8%, and the rotational misalignment between graphene and the hBN layers, the graphene-hBN bilayer heterostructure can transform to moiré superlattices naturally.132 In contrast, the preparation of graphene-graphene bilayer moiré superlattices needs to tear the graphene flake by using the van der Waals force between hBN and graphene, and manually rotate the separated graphene pieces by a twisted angle before restacking to form graphene bilayer moiré superlattices.30 Yuan raised a water bath-assisted process to fabricate MoS2 bilayer moiré superlattices (Fig. 19).133 A MoS2 bilayer was first deposited on the SiO2 substrate, then a MoS2 bilayer accompanied with the SiO2 substrate was dropped in 2 M KOH solution at 80 °C. The hot KOH solution etched the SiO2 layer to release MoS2 film. The tensile strain promoted the released part of the MoS2 film to curve out of the plane and roll up to a nanoscroll, yielding the SiO2 bilayer moiré superlattices.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the bilayer MoS2 nanoscroll. (b) HRTEM image of the MoS2 nanoscroll. The inset is a low-magnification TEM image of the MoS2 nanoscroll. (c) Schematic diagram of the MoS2 moiré superlattice. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Besides the traditional moiré superlattices, novel preparation methods have yielded new types of twisted PNSs. Recently, Jin et al. presented a method to grow Euclidean materials on non-Euclidean surfaces,134 which is different from the traditional layered materials that grown on flat substrates. After dropping a nanoparticle on the planar surface of the substrate, a deformation process formed a cone surface instead of the planar surface. Then, the water vapor-assisted chemical vapor transport (CVT) method was applied to conduct the growth of WX2 (X = S, Se). Therefore, three conditions are present when the growth of WX2 (X = S, Se) occurs on: (1) a Euclidean surface for aligned spiral; (2) non-Euclidean cone surface for fastened spiral; (3) non-Euclidean hyperbolic cone surface for unfastened spiral (Fig. 20). Compared to the previous preparation methods for bilayer twisted materials, this method has opened up a new route to produce twisted multilayer superstructures.
 Fig. 20  (a) Triangular spiral on a Euclidean surface. (b) Triangular spiral on an unfolded non-Euclidean cone surface. (c) A cone can be folded from a circle by cutting along the radius and folding with an angle. (d) Euclidean surface for the aligned spiral; (e) non-Euclidean cone surface for the fastened spiral; (f) non-Euclidean hyperbolic cone surface for the unfastened spiral. (g) Schematic illustration of the growth process of non-Euclidean surfaces. (h) AFM image of the aligned WS2 spirals grown on the flat SiO2/Si substrate. (i–k) AFM images of the representative WS2 supertwisted spirals with various twist angles grown around the WOx particles on the SiO2/Si substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2020, AAAS Publishing. 

3. Properties
The ability to construct PNS in a rational fashion has provided us with a playground to induce and tailor novel physical properties and functionalities that often are absent in their parent materials. In this section, we discussed, with a focus on recent studies, the emergent physical properties of different types of PNS, most notably in the form of superlattices, including ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism, piezoelectricity and superconductivity, as well as engineered electronic/optoelectronic properties (Table 2), which are fundamentally important for exploiting PNS for future applications based on these novel artificial materials.
Table 2 Summary of the properties of PNSs




Properties
Materials
Fabrication
Key parameters/effect of periodic structures
Ref.




Superconductivity
Complex oxides superlattice
[LaNiO3 (2 u.c.)/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 (3 u.c.)]
PLD

T
c = 3.7 K

72



[MgTi2O4/SrTiO3]
Epitaxial growth

T
c = 5 K

74



van der Waals superlattice
[FeSe/TBA+] (Hybrid superlattice)
Intercalation

T
c = 50 K

151



[TMD/organic cation] (hybrid superlattice)
Intercalation

T
c(MoTe2/organicecations) = 7 K

154




T
c(WTe2/organicecations) = 2.3 K


[SnS1.15/TaS2] (misfit superlattice)
CVT

T
c = 3.01 K

164



[SnSe1.16/NbSe2] (misfit superlattice)
CVT

T
c = 3.4 K

168



[H-NbS2/Ba3NbS5]
Heating at UHV

T
c = 1.6 K

171



Moiré superlattices
TBG
Dry transfer (stick and tear)

T
c(θ ≈ 1.1°) = 1 K

30 and 178




T
c(θ ≈ 0.93°) = 0.3–0.5 K


Twisted homo-bilayer WSe2
Dry transfer (stick and tear)
Twist angle of 5.1° for the observation of zero resistance

184



Piezoelectricity
Complex oxides superlattice
[(PbTiO3)6/(SrTiO3)6]
PLD
Piezoelectric coefficient = 0.052

150



Ferroelectricity
Complex oxides superlattice
[BiFeO3/Ce-doped LaMnO3]
PLD

P
r (remnant polarization) = 85 μC cm−2

73



Moiré superlattices
TBG
Dry transfer (stick and tear)
ΔP for device H4 = 0.05 μC cm−2

183



ΔP for device H2 = −0.18 μC cm−2


Ferromagnetism
Complex oxides superlattice
[(LaMn3+O3)m/(SrIrO3) m]
PLD
In-plane ferromagnetic anisotropy

71



Moiré superlattices
TBG
Dry transfer (stick and tear)
Emergent ferromagnetism at ¾ filling of the CB in TBG

180



Multiferroics
Complex oxides superlattice
[(LuFeO3)m/(LuFe2O4)1]
MBE
Simultaneously multiferroics at 250 K

147



Electronic and optoelectronic properties
GaAs–Al0.3Ga0.7As superlattice
MBE
Miniband formation

186



(InSb)n/InSb0.5As1.5 and (InAs)m/InSb0.5As0.5


Modulated band structure

191



Tunable bandgap (0.075–0.084 eV for (InAs)m/InSb0.5As0.5, and 0.054–0.143 eV for (InSb)n/InSb0.5As1.5, respectively)


Superlattice InSe nanosheets
CVD
Low current on/off ratio of 2.9, exhibiting metallic properties

192



Increased carrier sheet density of 6.37 × 1012 cm−2.


Greatly enhanced carrier mobility of 299.1 cm2 V−1 s−1


MAPbI3/MASnI3 periodic structure
Multi-source evaporator
Tunable bandgap

193



Transverse and longitudinal direction-dependent electrical and electronic thermal conductivities


Blue phosphorene on Au(111) substrate
MBE
Inducing band folding

23



Reduced bandgap (1.1 eV)


Reduced electron effective masses (m*x/m0 of 0.130 for electrons, 2.231 for holes)


Enhanced carrier mobility (μx of 1.0263 × 104 cm2 (V s)−1 for electrons and 2.151 × 102 cm2 (V s)−1 for holes) (comparing with black phosphorus, measured at 300 K, in the armchair (ΓS–KS) direction)


Optical properties
1D superconducting-dielectric photonic crystal superlattices


Tunable bandgap

196



Enlarged width of forbidden gaps


Increased number of photonic bandgaps


Lithium niobate-based and liquid crystal-based 1D superlattices


Temperature-sensitive refractive indexes

197



Induce null photonic gap and zero refractive index


Porous 2D photonic crystal perovskite films
Solution phase preparation
Improved light absorption

198



Reduced light reflectance and transmission


Stronger PL intensity due to prolonged carrier lifetime and high crystallinity


Nanogratings
Nanoimprinting with a commercial DVD master
Polarized light sensitivity

198



Reduced light reflectance and transmission


Periodic silver nanogratings
Optical photolithography
Modulated resonant absorption

199



Enhanced the optical absorption in selective wavelength


Polarized light sensitivity




3.1. Ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism and piezoelectricity

3.1.1. Ferroelectricity, ferromagnetism and multiferroics in superlattices. 
Materials that exhibit primary ferroic orders, which can be manipulated by external fields, are central to many technological applications, ranging from data storage and sensors to catalysis. Ferroelectricity is a characteristic of certain materials that have a spontaneous electric polarization, which can be reversed by the application of an external electric field, while ferromagnetism is the spontaneous orientation of magnetic moments that gives rise to ferromagnets. Ferroelectric and ferromagnetic PNS are currently the subjects of intensive research due to the interest they raise for not only technological applications, but also the fundamental scientific importance. Moreover, the coexistence of ferroelectricity and ferromagnetism in a single phase of materials yields the novel designed multiferroics,38 allowing for the manipulation of magnetic properties by an electric field in a more energy-efficient way.
Constructing artificial materials in the form of oxide superlattices has been regarded as a promising way to enhance or induce ferroelectricity, which can be precisely controlled by altering the supercells and periodicity. For example, the bismuth ferrite, BiFeO3, shows great potential in several fields, such as spintronics and ferroelectric memories, due to its versatile physics properties. However, the large leakage current greatly hampers its properties by causing spontaneous depolarization.137,138 Song et al. overcame the leakage current limits of BiFeO3 by artificially fabricating a BiFeO3/Ce-doped LaMnO3 vertical superlattices through PLD, enhancing the ferroelectricity compared with BiFeO3.73 The orthorhombic Ce-doped LaMnO3 has excellent lattice matching with the rohombohedral BiFeO3. More importantly, Ce substitution in LaMnO3 provides an efficient way to precisely control Ce doping for BiFeO3 at the atomic-scale level. This plays the key role for reducing the leakage current and enhancing the ferroelectricity of the BiFeO3/Ce-doped LaMnO3 PNS, because Ce prevents the volatility of Bi cations, as well as suppresses the reduction of Fe3+ to Fe2+.137,139 The strong interface coupling in complex oxide superlattices also helps to stabilize ferroelectricity at room-temperature in ultrathin oxide layers. For example, tunable ferroelectricity in (Sr1−αTiO3)n/BaTiO3 superlattices was reported recently by Wang et al., in which enhanced ferroelectricity was found when α ≈ 5% and n = 6 compared with their parent bulk materials.140 In addition to enhancing the ferroelectricity, Wang and his co-workers predicted the emergent ferroelectric property in SrTiO3/SrRuO3 superlattices by finely modulating the oxygen vacancy at the interface based on density functional theory (DFT) calculations, as well as kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations.141 After achieving the theoretical predication, intriguing ferroelectricity has been observed in the SrTiO3/SrRuO3 superlattices, which opens a way to induce the external physical properties, such as ferroelectricity, by defect-engineered symmetry breaking in the PNS systems.141 In addition to the magnitude of the electric polarization being modulated in the oxide superlattices, the spatial arrangement of the electric dipoles can be engineered into various types of emergent polar topologies towards the realization of magnetic skyrmion-like topological structures in ferroelectric materials (i.e., polar skyrmions), including the demonstration of chiral vortices,142,143 chiral,144 and ferroelectric bubble domains.145 More recently, Das et al. observed room-temperature nanometre-scale polar-skyrmion bubbles in [(PbTiO3)n/(SrTiO3)n]m superlattice systems, which can contribute to the advancement of ferroelectrics towards practical functionalities, such as tunable negative capacitance devices.146
Controlling the magnetic ordering in ferromagnetic materials is central to the functionalities and performance of spintronic devices. The construction of artificial oxide superlattices has also become an important method to tailor the magnetic orders via spin-correlated interfacial coupling. In 2020, Huang et al. successfully modulated the magnetic order in [(LaMn3+O3)m/(SrIrO3)m]n superlattices.71 Four superlattices (m = 8, 4, 2, 1, while n = 1, 2, 4, 8) have been fabricated by PLD, as shown in Fig. 21a. The reduction of magnetization was observed when the repeating period is shorter (Fig. 21b). Simultaneously, the magnetic hysteresis loops were noticed in all four [(LaMn3+O3)m/(SrIrO3)m]n superlattices, while the loop vanished in the reference sample (Fig. 21b). Therefore, they proved that both magnetization and coercivity can be tuned by modulating the period of the [(LaMn3+O3)m/(SrIrO3)m]n superlattices (Fig. 21c and d). They argue that the insight of this phenomena is due to the 3d/5d interface electronic correlation and the Rashba-style spin–orbit interaction. Consequently, a new route has been demonstrated for engineering the magnetic properties, which can make contributions to future developments in high-capacity storage and advanced computing applications.
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the [(LaMn3+O3)m/(SrIrO3)m]n superlattices. (b) Magnetization as a function of temperature measured at 0.1 T external parallel (100-direction) magnetic field. Local magnetization along out-of-plane (c) and 45° (d) measured with X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD). Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing. 
Multiferroics materials with the co-existence of ferroelectric and ferromagnetic ordering have greatly attracted attention because of the coupling between ferromagnetism and ferroelectricity, which enables the control of one ferroic order with the conjugated field of the other with particular excitement of the direct electric-field control of ferromagnetism for unprecedented applications in multifunctional devices, such as energy-efficient logic and memory devices. However, it is challenging to simultaneously integrate both ferroelectricity and ferromagnetism, and induce their coupling in a singe phase of materials. Oxide superlattices provide an effective pathway to achieve the interfacial coupling between ferroelectricity and ferromagnetism through the epitaxial integration of oxide layers with distinct properties. Such designed multiferroics has recently been demonstrated by Mundy et al. in the vertical superlattices of (LuFeO3)m/(LuFe2O4)1 (Fig. 22a). This is achieved by inserting a single layer of geometrically frustrated ferrimagnetic LuFe2O4 into the matrix of geometric ferroelectric LuFeO3. The severe lattice rumpling native to LuFeO3 brings a lattice distortion to the neighboring LuFe2O4. Such an interface-induced geometric distortion enhances the magnetism of LuFe2O4 by reducing its spin frustration, while at the same time, ferroelectricity is induced in it by breaking the mirror symmetry of the LuFe2O4 layer. The magnetoelectric coupling between the ferroelectric and ferrimagnetic order in LuFe2O4 was demonstrated by the direct electric-field control of ferrimagnetism at 200 K (Fig. 22b).147 A similar strategy has been utilized recently by Jin et al. in the vertical multiferroic superlattices of (BiFeO3)m/(BiMnO3)m, as shown in Fig. 22c. The strong polarization field of the ferroelectric BiFeO3 layers exerts an induction effect on adjacent BiMnO3 layers, and causes a displacement of the Mn ions that gives rise to ferroelectric polarization in the otherwise centrosymmetric crystal structure. In contrast to the enhanced magnetism in the (LuFeO3)m/(LuFe2O4)1 case, the originally strong ferromagnetism in BiMnO3 is reduced through interfacial antiferromagnetic superexchange coupling (via Fe–O–Mn). Nevertheless, the remaining ferromagnetism co-exists with the induced ferroelectricity in a single phase of BiMnO3, which can be modulated by precisely controlling the supercell size (Fig. 22d), contributing to the practical applications of artificial multiferroic systems.35
 Fig. 22  The upper images of (a) represent the HAADF-STEM images and schematic view of the crystal structures of LuFe2O4 and LuFeO3. The lower images of (a) represent the (LuFeO3)m/(LuFe2O4)1 superlattices with m = 1–10. The left of (b) is the out-of-plane piezoresponse force microscopy results of the domain structure, following a DC bias applied to the proximal tip. The right of (b) is the X-ray magnetic circular dichroic photoemission electron microscopy image from the Fe L3 edge at 200 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature Publishing. (c) The time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) measurements of the (BiFeO3)m/(BiMnO3)m superlattices. (d) Magnetic properties of the (BiFeO3)m/(BiMnO3)m superlattices for m = 1, 2, 5, 8, 10. The upper figures of (d) show the in-plane field-dependent magnetization hysteresis curves at 10 K. The lower figures of (d) show the in-plane temperature-dependent magnetization curves at 1000 Oe. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2020, the Royal Society Chemistry. 


3.1.2. Piezoelectricity in superlattices. 
Piezoelectricity represents the electric charge accumulation in certain solid materials in response to the external applied mechanical stress, or the generation of mechanical stress due to the applied voltage. Similar to ferroelectricity, the occurrence of piezoelectric properties in materials requires non-centrosymmetric crystal structures, and they often co-exist with ferroelectricity. For example, the PbTiO3/SrTiO3 heterostructure has been regarded as an ideal platform for the investigation of the electrostatic effect, and the manipulation of the superlattice periodicity and the volume fraction of PbTiO3 becomes an efficient way to modulate the physical properties of PbTiO3/SrTiO3-based superlattices.148,149 Kim et al. fabricated [(PbTiO3)6/(SrTiO3)6]5 superlattices on the SrTiO3 substrate, as shown in Fig. 23a. Fig. 23b clearly shows that the piezoelectric coefficient is greater than that of the single PbTiO3/SrTiO3 heterostructure, suggesting the [(PbTiO3)6/(SrTiO3)6]5 superlattices have more efficient piezoelectric behavior. They argue that the increase of the piezoelectric response is attributed to the local disordered polarization introduced by the interfacial coupling of the superlattice.150
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of the [(PbTiO3)6/(SrTiO3)6]5 superlattices on the SrTiO3 substrate with the HAAFD-STEM image of the PNS. (b) Piezoelectric coefficient d33 per unit cell of the PbTiO3 layer as a function of the DC voltage for both PbTiO3 layer and [(PbTiO3)6/(SrTiO3)6]5 PNS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing. 

3.2. Superconductivity
Superconductivity is one of the most fascinating phenomena in condensed matter physics both due to its huge technological implications, as well as its fundamental importance. Artificial PNS offer an effective route to induce or modulate the superconductivity via interface engineering with atomic precision. The most recent breakthrough in the realization of unconventional superconductivity in twisted graphene superlattices30 at the so-called magic angle allows us to tap into superconductivity via band topology engineering, and gives rise to an emerging new field of twistronics. In this section, recent advances in the realization of superconductivity in PNS are discussed.

3.2.1. Superconductivity in complex oxide superlattices. 
Similar to the controlling of ferroic orders in complex oxide superlattices, superconductivity can also be induced or enhanced at strongly coupled complex oxide interfaces prevalent in superlattices. In 2017, the LaNiO3-based superlattice was reported as a potential platform to achieve the high-temperature superconducting state.72 Using PLD technique, a high-quality vertical superlattice with the unit of [LaNiO3 (2 u.c.)/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 (3 u.c.)] was formed, as shown in Fig. 24a. The temperature-dependent resistance performance shows a semiconductor-type property from room temperature down to a few K, and an abrupt superconducting transition was observed at around 3.7 K (the inset of Fig. 24b) with a current of 5 μA. By applying a larger current at 0.1 mA, the superconductivity was destroyed, indicating that the superconductivity arises from the oxide superlattice. The magnetic susceptibility characterization yields the magnetic onset of superconductivity at around 3.5 K (Fig. 24c), which is consistent with the zero-resistance temperature. Furthermore, the magnetic hysteresis loop at 2 K suggests a type-II superconducting nature of this complex oxide superlattice, which is associated with a cuprate-like 3d electron occupancy through the artificial engineering of nicklate heterostructures. More recently, Hu et al. reported the intriguing observation of emergent superconductivity in the spinel insulator, MgTi2O4, by engineering a superlattice with SrTiO3. [MgTi2O4/SrTiO3] superlattices were fabricated on the MgAl2O4 substrate, and the schematic view of this superlattice is illustrated in Fig. 24d. As shown in Fig. 24e, the [MgTi2O4/SrTiO3] superlattice turns to a superconducting state between 3 K to 3.5 K, and eventually reaches the zero resistance at 3 K at zero-magnetic-field condition. The occurrence of superconductivity in MgTi2O4 is associated with the elongation of the out-of-plane lattice constant induced by the epitaxial strain. By modulating this lattice spacing (through controlling the growth temperature of the superlattice), a remarkable tuning of the superconducting transition temperature can be achieved. Intriguingly, the observed superconductivity, albeit induced by interfacial coupling, does not seem to be anisotropically confined to interfaces as typically expected at complex oxide interfaces.74 An isotropic upper critical magnetic field was observed by magnetotransport measurements with both in-plane and out-of-plane magnetic fields (Fig. 24e). They suggest that the emergence of superconductivity can be related to the suppression of orbital ordering by electron-doping effect of the non-stoichiometric Ti/Mg ratio. This work shows the great potential in further exploring the superconductivity in spinel families. However, key questions remain to be answered, such as the isotropic superconductivity behavior, which is in stark contrast to the interface conductivity observed in other oxide heterostructures.
 Fig. 24  (a) HAADF-STEM image for the [LaNiO3 (2 u.c.)/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 (3 u.c.)] superlattices. The inset depicts the schematic of the partial atomic arrangement. (b) Resistivity plots as a function of temperature with a current of 5 μA; the inset shows the zoom-in view at the superconducting transition region. (c) Magnetic susceptibility characterization with a magnetic field of 10 Oe. The inset shows the magnetic hysteresis effect at 2 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the [MgTi2O4/SrTiO3] superlattices. (e) Temperature dependence of the resistance of the [MgTi2O4/SrTiO3] superlattices under different perpendicular (upper one of (e)) and parallel (lower one of (e)) magnetic fields. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020, APS Physics Publishing. 


3.2.2. Superconductivity in intercalated van der Waals PNS. 
A hybrid vertical PNS by intercalating organic molecules into 2D van der Waals materials (inorganic materials) provides a new avenue to induce or enhance the superconductivity. Due to the intercalation of the organic species, the interactions between the inorganic layers can be significantly altered. The introduced organic intercalation layer can screen the Coulomb interaction and reduce the interlayer coupling of cooper pairs, leading to the superconductivity, or act as molecular dopants to dope electrons to the inorganic layer to enhance the superconductivity (e.g., increased Tc). For example, Shi et al. reported that by intercalating the FeSe single crystal with organic cations of tetrabutyl ammonium (TBA+) via electrochemical intercalation method, a novel hybrid vertical PNS can be formed.151 As shown in Fig. 25a, the distance between adjacent FeSe layers is increased from 0.55 nm to 1.49 nm, indicating the successful intercalation with TBA+ ions. Both transport measurements and magnetic susceptibility measurements revealed a consistent superconducting transition temperature of 50 K (Fig. 25b), which is the highest for bulk FeSe superconductors (compared with 8.9 K for pristine crystals). Furthermore, the magnetic susceptibility characterization demonstrated no flux pinning effect, indicating a very small amount of impurities or defects introduced during the intercalation process. This hybrid PNS approach provides a new pathway to induce the high-Tc superconductivity in iron-based bulk superconductors.152 A similar strategy of organic cation intercalation can be widely used in other 2D materials to form hybrid vertical PNS in which the superconducting properties, along with other exotic correlated properties, can be fashioned with atomic-scale accuracy. For example, coupling superconductivity with topological properties could open up exciting opportunities for topological quantum computation.153,154 MoTe2 and WTe2 are Weyl semimetals with many fascinating quantum properties in their monolayer limit, such as edge conduction155 and quantum spin Hall effect.156 Although the superconducting state has been reported in both gated monolayer WTe2 (Tc = 0.82 K)157 and MoTe2 (Tc = 8 K),158 it is very challenging to obtain monolayers of WTe2 or MoTe2 through mechanical exfoliation, greatly hampering the practical applications in the future. Zhang et al. recently reported a strategy to form WTe2 and MoTe2-based vertical inorganic–organic hybrid superlattices through organic cation intercalation.154Fig. 25c shows the schematic illustration of the new class of hybrid TMD intercalated with organic cations. The interlayer coupling strength was reduced after organic cation intercalation, resulting in the transition from a 3D type-II Weyl semimetal to a 3D weak topological insulator.159 The hybrid PNS sample shows larger resistance than the pristine sample at high temperature, as shown in Fig. 25d, but without the sudden change in resistance between 240 K to 260 K of the pristine sample (inset of Fig. 25d) characteristic of phase transitions, suggesting the weaker interlayer coupling effect in intercalated samples. Fig. 25e shows that the onset superconducting transition temperature of intercalated MoTe2 is 7 K, which is significantly higher than that of the corresponding pristine crystals (Tc of 0.25 K). The greatly weakened interlayer coupling by organic intercalation is also expected to lead to 2D superconductivity, which is indeed confirmed by linear R–T behavior with a characteristic 2D Berezinskii–Kosterlitz–Thouless (BKT) transition temperature of 4.7 K. Similarly, intercalated WTe2 displays an enhanced Tc of 2.3 K compared to that of 0.82 K for the monolayer gated WTe2. Consequently, hybrid vertical PNS provides an important pathway for manipulating the superconducting properties of topological 2D materials.
 Fig. 25  (a) The TEM images of FeSe and (TBA)0.3FeSe with the schematic atomic structure shown on the right. (b) The resistance of (TBA)0.3FeSe as a function of temperature, showing the superconducting transition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2018, IOP Science Publishing. (c) Schematic structure for the MoTe2 with organic-cation intercalation. (d) Sheet resistance of MoTe2 with organic-cation intercalation as a function of temperature; the inset shows the temperature-dependent resistance of MoTe2. (e) is the zoom-in view of (d) around the superconducting transition, showing the onset temperature of 7 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In addition to the layered 2D materials being intercalated with organic molecules to form vertical PNS that give rise to emergent properties as discussed above, two different kinds of 2D materials can be intercalated to form vertically stacked superlattices. Unlike oxide superlattices with strongly bonded heterointerfaces, which place a stringent requirement of lattice mismatch for the epitaxial growth, the weak van der Waals type interlayer coupling entails that 2D intercalated superlattices can be constructed arbitrarily by tolerating a much larger lattice mis-match or even incommensurate lattices. The so-called misfit layered compounds is such kind of 2D vertical superlattices with a general formula of (MX)1+α(TX2)m, in which the TMD layer with a m number of layers (represented by TX2) is incommensurately intercalated with a monochalcogenide layer (MX). α represents the mismatch index with the value of 0.08–0.28, which is related to the ratio of the mismatched lattice parameters.160 Among the numerous forms of misfit-layered compounds, those involving TaS2 have received particular attention because of a multitude of correlated states displayed by TaS2, including CDW, chiral charge order and superconducting transition.161,162 Early studies in 1990s demonstrated that the numerous types of (MS)1+αTaS2 misfit-layered compounds show the superconducting state with Tc above 70 mK.163 More recently, Sankar et al. reported a method to grow large-sized single crystal misfit compound of (SnS)1.15TaS2 through chemical vapor transport method.164Fig. 26a and b depict the HRTEM image and schematic view of the misfit (SnS)1.15TaS2, which confirms the quality of the intercalation. Transport measurements revealed the onset of the superconducting transition temperature of 3.01 K under ambient pressure (Fig. 26c). It is higher than the one of the pristine of TaS2 (Tc = 1.90 K)165 and other similar types of misfit compounds,165,166 indicating the enhancement of superconductivity. Additionally, the Tc shows a linear increase with the pressure, as shown in Fig. 26d, reaching 3.85 K at 1.95 GPa. This is likely due to the change of Fermi surfaces upon compression.167 In another example, large-size single crystals of (SnSe)1.16(NbSe2) misfit-layered compound have been reported as a multi-band superconductor with a Tc of 3.4 K.168 Both of these two examples suggest that the misfit PNS is an important system for studying the superconductivity in layered van der Waals materials.
 Fig. 26  (a) HRTEM image of the (SnS)1.15TaS2 superlattices from the cross-section. (b) The schematic of the (SnS)1.15TaS2 superlattices along the b-axis with the incommensurability shown in the SnS layer. Ta, Sn and S atoms are shown in red, blue and green, respectively. (c) Electricity transport measurements for the (SnS)1.15TaS2 superlattices for the in-plane and cross-plane directions. The inset is the zoom-in view of the superconducting transition period near 3 K. (d) Tc as a function of pressure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Superlattices involving the highly anisotropic 2D materials also provide an avenue to explore superconductivity in its clean 2D limit, which can shed light on understanding the unconventional superconductivity or facilitate the construction of unconventional superconducting phases.169,170 Although it is possible to preserve the 2D superconductivity in a monolayer of 2D materials, it often requires encapsulation layers such as BN to protect the fragile 2D superconductivity from the external environment, which complicate the device fabrication and could introduce additional defects and/or disorders during the manual stacking of layers. Very recently, Kaxiras et al. developed a method to synthesize a novel 2D vertical superlattice consisting of alternating layers of a 2D superconductor H-NbS2 and a spacer layer Ba3NbS5, as shown in the STEM result (Fig. 27a).171 The individual layers of Nb H-NbS2 in the resulting Ba6Nb11S28 bulk single crystal are well decoupled and protected by the blocking layer with an electron mobility a few orders of magnitude higher than that in bulk NbS2 or unprotected monolayers. Unlike the misfit superlattices discussed above with incommensurate in-plane unit cells, the Ba6Nb11S28 superlattice has commensurate in-plane superstructures. The superlattice crystal turns into a superconducting state with an onset Tc of 1.6 K (Fig. 27b). The 2D superconductivity described by the BKT transition is revealed by the evolution of the power-law behavior in the temperature-dependent V–I curves (Fig. 27c) from a linear dependence close to the superconducting onset temperature to cubic dependence at the 2D BKT transition temperature of 0.82 K. Magnetotransport measurements show that the upper critical magnetic field, which destroys the superconductivity, increases rapidly as the magnetic field is tilted away from the direction normal to the 2D layers (Fig. 27d). This further corroborates the occurrence of a clean 2D superconducting state in the superlattice.
 Fig. 27  (a) HAADF-STEM image of Ba6Nb11S28 along the [100] direction with the simulated structures overlaid with one unit cell shaded in the transparent green box. (b) The resistivity of Ba6Nb11S28 as a function of temperature, showing the superconducting transition. The inset depicts a magnified view of the transition in temperature-dependent resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measured with zero-field cooling and field cooling, respectively. (c) V–I measurements from 0.28 K to 0.9 K. The inset shows the evolution of the power law V ∝ Iα. The dashed line represents α = 3. (d) Longitudinal resistivity as a function of the magnetic field for different values of θ. θ is defined as the angle between the surface normal and the magnetic field direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020, AAAS Publishing. 
The beauty of the bulk van der Waals superlattices described above lies not only in providing bulk crystalline materials with emergent or enhanced superconductivity, it also opens up a route to construct artificial quantum materials by incorporating 2D materials with other exotic quantum phases, such as topological insulators, which can be modulated or protected by the intercalated spacer layer. Individual flakes could be exfoliated from the bulk superlattice crystals, providing a cleaner and facile route towards 2D heterostructures without the need of manual stacking.


3.2.3. Superconductivity in moiré superlattices of twisted bilayer graphene. 
2D materials not only can be constructed into artificial vertical heterostructures and superlattices by introducing an arbitrary angle of rotation between two adjacent layers, such as in a bilayer graphene, a moiré superlattice with in-plane periodicity featuring a much larger supercell can be formed. The new periodic potential associated with the moiré pattern modifies the original band structure and electron transport behaviors, leading to many fascinating new properties, including unconventional superconductivity. It also gives rise to a burgeoning field called twistronics, which has quickly become the holy grail in condensed matter physics. Bilayer graphene, which normally adopts two graphene layers stacked in the Bernal (AB) stacking geometry, is the archetypical example of twisted moiré superlattices. By twisting the bilayer graphene system with a certain angle, the Dirac bands of graphene are modified into moiré Bloch bands that depend sensitively on the twisting angle.172 At a large twisting angle (e.g. θ > 10°), only the higher energy bands of the widely separated Dirac cones are modified by the interlayer coupling to form saddling points with corresponding Van Hove singularities (VHSs) in the DOS. The low energy bands close to the Dirac points remain barely changed from isolated graphene. As the twisting angle is reduced, interlay coupling starts to affect the low energy Dirac cone states with the VHSs brought closer to the Dirac point. Near the so-called magic angle (θ ≈ 1.1°), the VHSs merge into very narrow and ultra-flat moiré minibands (5–10 meV) with a nearly vanishing Fermi velocity, and the corresponding electron density is strongly localized at the AA stacking region of the moiré superlattice (Fig. 28a and b). The very low kinetic energy of electrons that fill the flat bands implies that the Coulomb interactions can dominate the electronic behavior, and drive the system into strongly correlated phases. Early experimental attempts at twisting angles close to the magic angle indeed revealed signs of correlated insulating states.173,174 A breakthrough was made in 2018 by Cao et al., who reported two ground-breaking discoveries in magic-angle bilayer graphene superlattices that exhibited Mott-like insulating phase at half flat-band filling (i.e., two electrons/holes per moiré unit cell)175 and most surprisingly, unconventional superconductivity when the system is electrostatically doped slightly away from the half-filling state.30 The group achieved the magic twisting angle in bilayer graphene by adopting a modified tear and stack method starting from a single monolayer graphene,173,175,176 allowing for the precise control of the twisting angle with a resolution of 0.1°–0.2°. The twisted bilayer graphene (TBG) was sandwiched between h-BN layers for encapsulation with a gate underneath the bottom h-BN that tunes the electron density in graphene (see Fig. 28c for device schematics). When the Fermi energy is moved below the charge neutrality point near the half filling of the lower flat band through electrostatic gating, the magic-angle TBG exhibits a superconducting transition with a Tc around 1 K (Fig. 28d) with highly anisotropic critical magnetic fields that destroy superconductivity. The temperature-dependent V–I characteristics confirm the 2D superconductivity with a BKT transition temperature of 1.0 K (Fig. 28e). Fig. 28f shows the heat-map for the four-probe resistance of one of the TBG devices (M1) as a function of density and temperature. Superconducting domes were noticed on each side of the half-filling Mott insulating state when the system is doped with additional holes or electrons (relative to half-filling). This phase diagram closely resembles that of high-temperature superconductors, such as cuprates, but is fully electrically tunable. This offers a great advantage to explore unconventional superconductivity and other strongly correlated phenomena over the entire competing phases without the need of introducing impurities or changing compositions, as in cuprates. Following Cao's work, Yankowitz et al. reproduced the superconductivity in TBG with a twist angle of 1.1° both in the hole-doped and electron-doped regions, and TBG with a twist angle larger than the magic angle can be brought back to the superconducting states by enhancing the interlayer coupling through pressure.177 Codecido et al. demonstrated that the TBG showed the superconducting phenomena at an even smaller twist angle of 0.93°, with a critical temperature of 0.3–0.5 K,178 and superconductivity with an even smaller twist angle of 0.79° was reported very recently;179 however, without adjacent Mott-like insulating state. These studies suggest that the range of the “magic” angle is more robust than what was previously believed, which, while it could benefit device applications, also places constraints on the theoretical explanations on the origin of the superconductivity. Nevertheless, moiré superlattices based on bilayer graphene provide a 2D carbon-based material platform to investigate the electron correlation with precise tunability, which in conjunction with band topology can lead to other exotic phases, such as ferromagnetism,180 quantum anomalous Hall (QAH) effect,181,182 and ferroelectricity.183 Following this success, twisting other 2D materials to realize moiré superlattices, such as topological materials, has become a fertile land to achieve the emergent superconducting state. For example, for WSe2, it has been reported that the zero resistance was observed at the cryogenic regime in twisted homo-bilayer WSe2, suggesting a possible transition to the full superconducting state.184
 Fig. 28  (a) The band structure of TBG in the first mini Brillouin zone of the superlattice at θ = 1.05°. (b) The DOS corresponding to the bands in (a), for energies of −10 meV to +10 meV. (c) Schematic of the TBG Hall bar device with gate architecture. (d) Four-probe resistance of two magic angle TBG devices (M1 and M2) as a function of temperature; the inset shows the optical image of device M1. (e) and (d) I–V curves for device M2 with density of −1.44 × 1012 cm−2 at different temperatures. (f) Four-probe resistance measured at different densities and temperatures for device M2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature Publishing. 

3.3. Electronic and optoelectronic properties
Enhancing or tuning the electronic properties of materials always plays an essential role in material science. A lot of studies have been reported based on experimental and theoretical evidences that the materials’ band structures can be engineered by inducing the periodic structured nanomaterials, resulting in the modulation of the electronic properties in terms of the band gaps, mobilities, charge transport, and other properties.
It is well known that the energy band of PNSs consisting of two materials with different bandgaps can be tailored to have a narrow conduction miniband.185Fig. 29a gives the calculated miniband structure for the GaAs–Al0.3Ga0.7As superlattice with a well width of 6.5 nm and barrier width of 2.5 nm,186 in which the barrier width is small. The different approaches of the carrier transport in this special band structure, including the miniband transport,187,188 Wannier–Stark hopping189 and sequential tunneling,34,190 have been intensively studied.186 The strategy of introducing a periodic nanostructure to modulate the optoelectrical properties has been applied to a variety of semiconductor materials.
 Fig. 29  (a) The calculated miniband structure for the GaAs–Al0.3Ga0.7As superlattice with a well width of 6.5 nm and barrier width of 2.5 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2002, Elsevier. Magnified view of the band structures near the Γ point for (b) (InSb)n/InSb0.5As1.5 with n of (I) 1, (II) 2, and (III) 3, and for (c) (InAs)m/InSb0.5As0.5 with m of (IV) 1, (V) 2, and (VI) 3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2019, AIP Publishing. (d) Schematics of the molecular structure of (I) MAPbI3, (II) MASnI3, (III) sandwiched architectures of MAPbI3–MASnI3–MAPbI3, (IV) (MAPbI3)2–(MASnI3)2–(MAPbI3)2, and (V) (MASnI3)2–(MAPbI3)2–(MASnI3)2. Electronic properties of the (e) electrical conductivity per unit relaxation time (σ/τ), and the (f) electron contribution to the thermal conductivity (κe) along the three principal orthogonal directions (x, y and z) for the five structures (structures I, II, III, IV and V are represented in green, blue, red, black and pink curves, respectively). The variations with the chemical potential of the transverse components (along x and y directions) and longitudinal components (along z direction) are shown by (i), (ii) and (iii) respectively, in the figure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Constant energy contours for the Au(111) surface with a superposed scheme of the Brillion zones, with the high-symmetry points obtained by integrating the photoemission spectral weight over a small energy window (±20 meV) with respect to the binding energy of 0 meV, 300 meV, and 600 meV, respectively. S1–S6 and S1′–S6′ represent the sp band folded into the Brillion zones of the 4 × 4 superlattice. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Atanu et al. systematically calculated the band structures of superlattice heterostructures of (InSb)n/InSb0.5As1.5 and (InAs)m/InSb0.5As0.5 with different thicknesses of the semiconductor segments.191 It was reported that an increase in the InSb layer thickness (n) in the (InSb)n/InSb0.5As1.5 structure could modify the band structure and change the number of carrier pockets. Fig. 29b and c demonstrates the band structures near the Γ point of heterostructures with different segment thicknesses. When the InSb layer thickness n was increased from 2 to 3, the band structure was changed from four band transitions with equal gaps of 0.115 eV to two indirect bandgaps of 0.054 eV; the number of carrier pockets in the band structure was reduced to one. In contrast, the change of the InAs thickness in the (InAs)m/InSb0.5As0.5 structure did not show a significant effect on the band structure, which indicated that the choice of a semiconductor segment in the superlattice dominates the effect of band engineering. Wei et al. characterized the properties of the superlattice InSe nanosheets, of which a periodic lattice distortion was induced by thermal annealing.192 The superstructure phase was stable in β-phase without transforming to In2Se3 or oxidizing to InSe1−xOx. Similar to the 2D In2Se3 superstructure,56 the superlattice InSe nanosheets exhibited metallic properties with a low current on/off ratio of 2.9. The electronic properties of the superlattice phase were significantly improved compared with the pristine InSe nanosheets. The carrier sheet density was increased from 0.996 × 1012 cm−2 to 6.37 × 1012 cm−2. The carrier mobility experienced great enhancement from 63.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 to 299.1 cm2 V−1 s−1.
Rahul et al. investigated the electronic transport through the superlattices by introducing periodic structures to perovskite structures for the synthesis of energetically stable geometries.193 Their periodic-structure perovskites had sandwiched architectures of MAPbI3–MASnI3–MAPbI3, (MAPbI3)2–(MASnI3)2–(MAPbI3)2 and (MASnI3)2–(MAPbI3)2–(MASnI3)2, as shown in Fig. 29d. The computational and experimental results revealed direct bandgaps of the superlattice perovskites, which was within the bandgap range of pure MAPbI3 and MASnI3 perovskites, and decreased with the addition of Sn-based perovskite to the structure. Both first principle computations and electrical resistivity measurement suggested that the periodic-structure perovskites were less electrically conductive, resulting from 103 times-lower δ/τ (the electrical conductivity per unit relaxation time) and κe (the electronic contribution of the thermal conductivity) than the typical perovskites along the longitudinal directions (Fig. 29e), even though the transverse components showed higher κe and δ/τ (Fig. 29f). Nevertheless, the κe of the superlattice perovskites was significantly reduced, which was contributed from the interface-induced impedances to thermal conduction and the energy scattering within each layer and across interfaces. This work provides a new strategy for the band engineering of perovskite materials through nanostructuring.
Furthermore, novel periodic structured nanomaterials, such as intercalated compounds or strain-engineered structures, can enhance the electronic and optoelectronic performance, which opens up the door to optoelectronic applications. The deposition of blue phosphorene on the Au(111) substrate was reported to form a periodic structure with large tensile strain, which strongly influenced the carrier dynamic.194 Jincheng et al. investigated this periodic nanostructure and electronic properties by angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES).23 The results revealed that the periodic potential induces the folding of the sp band in Au(111) (Fig. 29g). By combining ARPES with DFT simulations, it was found that the tensile strain residing in the 4 × 4 superlattice led to a reduced bandgap (∼1.1 eV), reduced electron effective masses and enhanced carrier mobility, compared with black phosphorus.
3.4. Optical properties
The formation of PNSs provides an approach to modify the optical properties of materials, such as the photonic band gap, light scattering, and plasmonic resonance. It enhances the intrinsic optical properties compared to their bulk counterparts, which pave a way for the next-generation photodetectors.
Photonic crystals present periodic dielectric structures, through which the light propagation has been well studied. 1D, 2D and 3D photonic crystals with the periodicity of dielectric materials along one or more directions exhibit interesting light phenomena. The device applications of the photonic crystal can be designed by combining simple optical components of mirrors, waveguide and resonant cavities based on theoretical predictions of optical properties.195 Here, examples of integrating the periodic nanostructures to modulate light propagations and optical properties in specific devices are discussed.
In 2011, Li et al. demonstrated the tunable photonic bandgap in one-dimensional superconducting-dielectric photonic crystal superlattices by a transfer-matrix method.196 With the swelling of the thicknesses of the superconductor layer and the dielectric layer, an enlarged width of the forbidden gaps and increased number of photonic bandgaps can be achieved. Some PNSs showed temperature-sensitive refractive indexes, which provided an easy-to-manipulate method to tune the optical properties of such materials. Ye et al. reported a systematic analysis to address this temperature effect on the optical properties of lithium niobate-based and liquid crystal-based 1D superlattices.197 From theoretical calculations, they found that the band structures and the density of states (DOSs), as well as the propagation wavelength, the refractive index and layer width were tunable by varying temperature. Especially, the concurrence of the null photonic gap and zero refractive index occurred in the visible optical range via temperature modulation. For example, the null photonic gap and zero refractive index appeared simultaneously in the 450–664 nm range when increasing the temperature from 68 K to 29893 K. This work shows the potential of superlattice materials for adaptive photonic devices with temperature-adjustable optical properties.
Not only can introducing periodic molecular structures into the material tune the material properties, the rational design of a material system integrated with period structures can improve the overall properties as well. Yan and coworkers developed a light-trapping structure of 1D nanograting bonded porous 2D photonic crystal (PC) perovskite (G-PC-PVK) films, as illustrated in Fig. 30a.198 The regular periodic structure consisted of highly ordered nanogratings on a compact MAPbI3 perovskite layer with period 2D porous PCs. Benefiting from the porous scaffold and the nanoimprinting process, the as-synthesized G-PC-PVK films showed improved crystallinity, larger grain size and prolonged carrier lifetime, compared with conventional flat perovskite (F-PVK) films. In addition, owing to the coupling effect of grating diffraction and 2D PC architecture, the light reflectance and transmission were reduced, thus exhibiting enhanced absorbance (Fig. 30b and c), which led to improving the performance of their G-PC-PVK-based photodetectors. The 1D nanograting arrays also equipped the devices with polarization-dependent light detection with a peak-to-valley ratio of 1.6, indicating the high polarization sensitivity.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic diagrams of the fabrication procedure of the G-PC-PVK photodetector, and the collective advantages of the hierarchical light-trapping architecture. (b) Reflectance and (c) absorbance spectra of the perovskite films with different structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Simulated reflectivity spectra of the InAs/GaSb type-II superlattice-based mid-infrared photodetector devices with different silver grating periods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2019, AIP Publishing. 
Similarly, Meng et al. applied the periodic plasmonic grating structure with the InAs/GaSb type-II superlattice active layer to mid-infrared photodetector devices.199 Silver gratings were embedded on the active layer to improve the light absorption. The integration of InAs/GaSb type-II superlattices and silver gratings showed a combination of the Fabry–Pérot mode and the surface plasmon polariton (SPP) waveguide mode. The gold electrode worked as a transmission-block layer to drive the back-and-forth light traveling, leading to the Fabry–Pérot cavity mode at a certain wavelength where the resonance was strong with the reflectivity of nearly zero. By controlling the thickness of the InAs/GaSb active layer, the reflectivity in the resonant absorption spectra could be tuned. At the same time, the period of the silver gratings influenced the SPP resonant wavelength. This hybrid mode greatly improved the light absorption at selective wavelengths without sacrificing the infrared absorption of their reference device without silver gratings. Their device with silver grating also exhibited high polarized sensitivity.
A fundamental understanding of light-matter interactions is critical to the rational design of periodic nanostructures for optical property modifications. The light interactions with periodic particle and hole arrays were comprehensively reviewed and summarized by FJG De Abajo in 2007.200 This work gives a quantitative model, which describes the light scattering in the planar periodic systems. One important topic in the research field of light-matter interactions is the nanophotonics in 2D and van der Waals materials. Polaritons in van der Waals materials, especially the highly confined plasmon-polaritons observed in graphene, have broadened the applications for sensing,201 nanolasering202 and light modulations,203 manipulating light under the nanoscale. Tailoring the material structure enables the tunable polaritonic characteristics of van der Waals materials towards desired optical properties. Polaritons in 2D and van der Waals materials have been systematically discussed in a number of reviews.204,205 Advanced technologies control photonic quasiparticles, such as plasmons, excitons and magnons, in the same way as photons. A representative review demonstrates a unified view of describing different light–matter interaction phenomena with photonic quasiparticles by macroscopic quantum electrodynamics, providing experimental directions.206
4. Applications
PNSs have been widely studied for various applications, such as energy conversion, optoelectronic and electronic devices. In the following sections, the applications of PNSs in water splitting, CO2 reduction, fuel cells, thermoelectricity, solar cells, photodetector, light-emitting diodes, and memory devices (Table 3) are constructively discussed.
Table 3 Summary of applications of PNSs




Applications
Materials
Fabrication
Operation conditions
Performance
Stability
Ref.




Water splitting
HER
Electrocatalysis
PCN/NG without CV cycles
Self-assembly
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 88.6 mV dec−1
Seldom activity loss >5000 cycles

27



Overpotential = 170 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


PCN/NG after 750 CV cycles
Self-assembly
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 49.1 mV dec−1
Seldom activity loss >5000 CV cycles

27



Overpotential = 80 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


1T-MoS2/PDDA-rGO
Self-assembly
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 48.6 mV dec−1



28



Overpotential = 137 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


2H-MoS2/GNC
Intercalation
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 47 mV dec−1



228



Overpotential = 195 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Turnover frequency = 18.6 min−1


MoS2/Pt-NP
Intercalation
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 25 mV dec−1
>30 h

80



Overpotential = ∼35 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


MoS2/Pd-NP
Intercalation
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 30 mV dec−1



80



MoS2/Ru-NP
Intercalation
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 61 mV dec−1



80



MoS2/Au-NP
Intercalation
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 38 mV dec−1



80



MoS2/Co-NP
Intercalation
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 53 mV dec−1
>1000 CV cycles

81



Overpotential = 89 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


MoS2 moiré superlattice
Water bath
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 73 mV dec−1
>10000 CV cycles

133



Overpotential = 153 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Pt nanoparticles based SP superlattices
Lithography
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 33 mV dec−1
>11 h

136



Overpotential = 15 mV [current density = 14.3 mA cm−2]


Turnover frequency = 1.55 s−1


CoMnO@CN superlattices
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 152 mV dec−1
>55 h

37



Overpotential = 71 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]


NiAl/MoS2-1
Self-assembly
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 74 mV dec−1



29



NiAl/MoS2-2
Self-assembly
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 67 mV dec−1
∼12 h

29



Overpotential = 220 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiAl/MoS2-3
Self-assembly
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 91 mV dec−1



29



NiFe/MoS2-1
Self-assembly
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 102 mV dec−1



29



NiFe/MoS2-2
Self-assembly
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 82 mV dec−1
∼12 h

29



Overpotential = 180 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiFe/MoS2-3
Self-assembly
0.5 M H2SO4
Tafel slope = 107 mV dec−1



29



MoS2/Graphene
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 90 mV dec−1



107



MoS2/NiFe
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 77 mV dec−1
>10 h

107



Overpotential = 110 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Photocatalysis
ICF-5InCuS-Na
Hydrothermal condition
Na2S aqueous solution
H2 evolution rate = 18 μmol h−1 g−1
>96 h

249



Quantum efficiency = ∼3.7% at 420 nm


T4-1
Hydrothermal condition
solid state
H2 evolution rate = 3.5 μmol h−1 g−1



250



DMSO
H2 evolution rate = 6.1 μmol h−1 g−1
>10 h

250



T4-2
Hydrothermal condition
solid state
H2 evolution rate = 5.6 μmol h−1 g−1



250



DMSO
H2 evolution rate = 27.5 μmol h−1 g−1
>10 h

250



T4-3
Hydrothermal condition
solid state
H2 evolution rate = 15.9 μmol h−1 g−1



250



DMSO
H2 evolution rate = 91.5 μmol h−1 g−1
>10 h

250



N-MoS2/CdS
Intercalation and self-assembly
10 vol% lactic acid aqueous
H2 evolution rate = 9.11 mmol g−1 h−1
>20 h

251



OER
Electrocatalysis
NiMn/GO
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 46 mV dec−1
>2 h

239



Overpotential = 260 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiMn/rGO
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 50 mV dec−1
>2 h

239



Overpotential = 280 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Co/GO
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 56 mV dec−1



240



Overpotential = ∼370 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Co3/4Ni1/4/GO
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 47 mV dec−1



240



Overpotential = ∼290 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Co2/3Ni1/3/GO
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 36 mV dec-1
∼15 h

240



Overpotential = 259 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Co1/2Ni1/2/GO
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 60 mV dec−1



240



Overpotential = ∼300 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Ni/GO
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 95 mV dec−1



240



Overpotential = ∼320 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


CoNiFe/RuO2.1
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 48.9 mV dec−1



109



Overpotential = 281 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Turnover frequency = ∼0.045 s−1


NiAl/GO-1
Self-assembly
0.1 M KOH
Tafel slope = 140 mV dec−1



241



Overpotential = 170 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 125 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 284 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 338 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]


NiAl/GO-2
Self-assembly
0.1 M KOH
Tafel slope = 146 mV dec−1



241



Overpotential = 158 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 198 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 272 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 326 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]


NiAl/GO-3
Self-assembly
0.1 M KOH
Tafel slope = 173 mV dec−1



241



Overpotential = 155 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 227 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 240 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 300 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]


NiAl/GO-4
Self-assembly
0.1 M KOH
Tafel slope = 120 mV dec−1



241



Overpotential = 209 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 258 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 209 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 252 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]


NiAl/GO-5
Self-assembly
0.1 M KOH
Tafel slope = 118 mV dec−1
>10 h

241



Overpotential = 225 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 270 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 180 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]


Overpotential = 200 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]


(CoNi/Fe-PP)10
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 42.1 mV dec−1



104



(CoNi/Fe-PP)20
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 42 mV dec−1



104



(CoNi/Fe-PP)30
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 37.6 mV dec−1
>20000 s

104



Overpotential = 264 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


(CoNi/Fe-PP)40
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 37.9 mV dec−1



104



(CoNi/Fe-PP)50
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 44.8 mV dec−1



104



CoMnO@CN superlattices
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 97 mV dec−1
>55 h

37



Overpotential = 263 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]


Ni2/3Fe1/3/GO
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 42 mV dec−1
∼36000 s

245



Overpotential = 230 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


Ni2/3Fe1/3/rGO
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 40 mV dec−1
∼36000 s

245



Overpotential = 210 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiAl/MoS2-1
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 65 mV dec−1



29



Overpotential = 340 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiAl/MoS2-2
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 56 mV dec−1
∼12 h

29



Overpotential = 310 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiAl/MoS2-3
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 62 mV dec−1



29



Overpotential = 380 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiFe/MoS2-1
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 56 mV dec−1



29



Overpotential = 310 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiFe/MoS2-2
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 44 mV dec−1
∼12 h

29



Overpotential = 250 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiFe/MoS2-3
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 52 mV dec−1



29



Overpotential = 380 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


MoS2/NiFe
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 46 mV dec−1
>10 h

107



Overpotential = 210 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]


NiFe/graphene
Self-assembly
1.0 M KOH
Tafel slope = 60 mV dec−1



107



Photocatalysis
ZnCr/titanate
Self-assembly
0.1 M NaClO4
O2 evolution rate = 1.18 mmol g−1 h−1



252



CO2 reduction
Electrocatalysis
AuCu nanoparticles
Hydrothermal condition
0.1 M KHCO3
Faradaic efficiency = ∼80%
∼12 h

259



Overpotential = ∼200 mV


CoTPP SP superlattice
Lithography
0.5 M NaHCO3
Faradaic efficiency = ∼70%



136



Fuel cells
ORR
PtPd BNSL
Self-assembly
0.1 M perchloric acid
Kinetic current density is approximately 2 and 4 times as high as that on the Pt octahedra and the random mixture



262



PtAu SLA
Self-assembly
0.1 M KOH
Onset potential = 0.903 V
>1000 CV cycles

264



2D PtCoFe superlattice
Self-assembly
0.1 M HClO4
ESCA = 62.9 m2 g−1
>10000 CV cycles

265



h-Mn3O4-TMSL
Self-assembly
N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH
Onset potential = ∼0.91 V
>10 h

268



Diffusion-limiting current density = ∼5.7 mA cm−2


Half-wave potential = 0.84 V


FeNC/TiC
Self-assembly
O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH
Onset potential = ∼0.92 V
∼20 h

269



Half-wave potential = 0.84 V


EOR
2D PtCoFe superlattice
Self-assembly
0.1 M HClO4 and 0.2 M ethanol
Peak current density = 4.75 mA cm−2



265



MOR
PtAu SLA
Self-assembly
0.5 M KOH containing 1.0 M methanol
Peak current density = 41.77 mA cm−2



264



PtPd nanocrystal superlattice
Self-assembly
N2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M methanol
ESCA = 46 m2 g−1



274



Specific kinetic current density = 2.08 mA cm−2


PtCu NF
Solution based preparation
0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M methanol
Mass activity = ∼827 A g−1 (Pt)
6 times higher stability than commercial Pt/C catalyst

275



Specific activity = 17.3 A g−1 (Pt)


Thermoelectricity
PbSeTe/PbTe
MBE
300 K

ZT = 2



68



5 nm PbSe/PbS
Simulation
77 K

ZT = 4



276



5 nm PbTe/PbSe
Simulation
77 K

ZT = 6



276



1.7 nm Ge/Si
Calculation
300 K

ZT = 1



280



C3Si3/C
Calculation
300 K

ZT = 1.95



283



C3Ge3/C
Calculation
300 K

ZT = 2.72



283



Al2O3/ZnO
Atomic layer deposition
500 K

ZT ≥ 0.45



288 and 290



Hf:ZnO16/O18
Atomic layer deposition
300 K

ZT = 0.022



292



Bi2Te3/Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3
radio-frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering
400 K

ZT = 1.44



291



[(NbOx)a/(STNO)b]20
PLD
≤ 950 K
N.A.



293



LaNiO3/SrTiO3
Calculation
300 K

ZT = 0.35



295



(LaNiO3)n/(LaAlO3)n


Tensile strain

ZT = 0.8–1.1



296



(SrXO3)1/(SrTiO3)n


300 K

ZT = 0.8



297



(LaS)1.14NbS2
Solid state reaction
950 K

ZT = 0.14



307



graphene/h-BN
Calculation
1100 K

ZT = 2.5



306



TiS2[(HA)x(H2O)y(DMSO)z]
Intercalation
373 K

ZT = 0.28



302



Bi2Se3HA0.11DMSO0.06
Intercalation
300 K

ZT = 0.187



303



poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/Bi2Te3
Hard template
300 K

ZT = 0.58



299



Solar cells
GaAs based
100-period lattice matched InGaAsP/InGaP superlattices
CVD
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 17.6%



33




V
OC of 1.136 V



J
SC of 20.5 mA cm−2


FF of 75.3%


EQE at 700 nm of over 75%


GaAs
CVD
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 13.2%



311




V
OC of 0.653 V



J
SC of 27.6 mA cm−2


FF of 73%


QD
Ge/Si QD
Simulation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 27.22% was predicted for bilayer conical QDSLs with optimised size



312



InAs/GaAs QD
MBE


The formation of miniband enhanced the two-step photocarrier generation, leading to effective carrier separation.



314



CdTe QD
Solution phase preparation


The control of the dimension of the quantum resonance was achieved.



315



InAs/GaAs QD with the period of 5 and 1
MBE
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
With a higher period, light absorption was increased, the hot carrier extraction-induced VOC and JSC were improved.



319




V
OC of ∼0.9 V (measured at the excitation energy of 1.32 eV at 15 K)


GaAs/GaSb QD


AM1.5 spectral irradiance, 1000 suns illumination
PCE of 20.67%,



316




V
OC of 1.41 V



J
SC of 1731.96 mA cm−2


FF of 88.54% (measured at 1000 suns)


Dye-sensitized solar cells
P2Mo18/MoS2@C
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 8.85%



324




V
OC of 0.77 V



J
SC of 18.8 mA cm−2


FF of 61%


Perovskite
(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite (n = 4)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 12.52%,
20% of degradation in PCE after 200 hours of light illumination

326




V
OC of 1.01 V



J
SC of 16.76 mA cm−2


FF of 74.13%


(BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 (n = 3)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 11.44%,


326



V
OC of 1.056 V,



J
SC of 14.37 mA cm−2


FF of 75.39%


(BA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 perovskite (n = 5)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE 8.71%
The structural integrity of the bulk material was maintained for several months.

22




V
OC of 1.0 V



J
SC of 11.44 mA cm−2


FF of 75.59%


NpMA-Pb-based perovskite (n = 4)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 17.25%
Retained 89% of the initial PCE after 1000 hours in ambient condition with 30 ± 5% relative humidity

327




V
OC of 1.24 V



J
SC of 20.89 mA cm−2


FF of 66.35%


AnMA-Pb-based perovskite (n = 4)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 14.47%
Retained 80% of the initial PCE after 1000 hours in ambient condition with 30 ± 5% relative humidity

327




V
OC of 1.08 V



J
SC of 17.54 mA cm−2


FF of 76.4%


(MTEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 (n = 5)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 18.06%
Maintained 87.1% of its initial PCE after 1000 hours of operation under AM 1.5G illumination in glovebox

328




V
OC of 1.088 V



J
SC of 21.77 mA cm−2


FF of 76.27%


(PDA)PbI4 (n = 1)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 0.3%



31




V
OC of 0.64 V



J
SC of 1.04 mA cm−2


FF of 46%


(PDA)(MA)3Pb4I13 (n = 4)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 13.3%
Retained 95% of the original PCE in ambient air for 4000 hours and under light illumination for 3000 hours

31




V
OC of 0.98 V



J
SC of 19.5 mA cm−2


FF of 69%


(PA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (n = 4)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 8.8%
Retained 80% of the original PCE in ambient air for 360 hours

31




V
OC of 0.83 V



J
SC of 19.06 mA cm−2


FF of 55%


(DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13 (n = 4)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 15.16%
Retained 80% of its initial PCE after 300 hours of operation under AM 1.5G, 1 sun illumination in air

329




V
OC of 1.06 V



J
SC of 22.07 mA cm−2


FF of 65%


(BzDA)(Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8)9Pb10(I0.93Br0.07)31 (n = 10)
Solution phase preparation
AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination
PCE of 15.6%
Retained 80% of the initial PCE after 84 hours under dark in ambient environment

330




V
OC of 1.02 V



J
SC of 21.5 mA cm−2


FF of 71%


Photodetector
InAs/InAs0.45Sb0.55 type-II superlattices on GaSb substrates
MBE
Long wavelength infrared photodetector

J
d of 4.4 × 10−4 A cm−2



334




R of 3.47 A W−1



D* 2.8 × 1011 Jones a 50% cut-off wavelength of 10 μm, (measured at −90 mV bias at 77 K)


Superlattices on GaSb/AlSb/Si buffer
MBE
mid-infrared photodetector
EQE of 25.6% (in the spectral ranging from 3.7 to 4.9 μm), R of 0.88 A W−1, D* of 1.5 × 1010 Jones a 50% cut-off wavelength of 5.4 μm (measured under −100 mV bias at 200 K)



335



CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowires
CVD
UV photodetector
On/off ratio of 105



135




R of 2.5 × 103 A W−1


EQE of 8.6 × 105 a response time of 10 ms at 5 V bias (measured under 365 nm excitation with the light intensity of 3.75 mW cm−2)


Single GaN nanowires with 20 periods of AlN/GaN:Ge heterostructure in AlN shell
Plasma-assisted MBE
Visible-band photodetector
Huge dispersion in dark current from 2 pA to 6 μA, due to the coalescence of nanowires.



32



GaN with 30 periods of GaN/AlN superlattices
MBE
Bias-dependent light response
Enhanced responses in 280–330 nm range at positive biases; in 330–360 nm range at negative biases



336



In1.8Ga1.8Zn2.4O7 superlattice consisted of In, Ga/Zn-O layers and In-O layers
CVD
UV photodetector with a transparency of over 80% in the visible light range
On/off ratio of 1.9 × 105



337




R of 1.95 × 105 A W−1


EQE of 9.28 × 107% rise time of 0.93 s (measured at 1 V bias under 261 nm excitation with the light intensity of 2.3 mW cm−2)


InSe-based photodetectors
CVD



R of 1.7 × 104 A W−1



192




D* of 1.4 × 1013 Jones


EQE of 1.7 × 107% a response time of 20 ms contact resistance 2.4 kΩ (measured under at 1 V bias under 490 nm excitation with the light intensity of 0.29 mW cm−2)


Porous 2D photonic crystal MAPbI3 perovskite
Solution phase preparation
Visible light photodetector with polarized light detection

R of 12.67 A W−1



198




D* of 3.22 × 1013 Jones rise time 21 ms decay time 67 ms (measured at 10 V bias, under white light illumination of 32 μW cm−2)


LED
Al0.6Ga0.4N/Al0.57Ga0.43N
Simulation
Deep ultraviolet LED with emission peak at 289 nm
Maximum IQE of 53.9% light output power of 39.52 mW



338



p-Al0.62In0.03Ga0.35N/p-Al0.5In0.03Ga0.47N
Simulation
Deep ultraviolet LED with emission peak at 272.96 nm
Maximum IQE of 93.92% light output power of 84.94 (A.U.) at power density of 200 A cm−2 efficiency droop of 0.84%



339



GaN/In0.18Al0.82N-based short period superlattices
MBE or CVD
LEDs emitting at 450 nm
Light output power 248 mW at 500 mA dynamic resistance 0.94 Ω optical confinement factor from 3.42%



340



Memory
LA0.7Sr0.3MnO3/SrRuO3 superlattices
PLD
Bipolar resistive switching characteristic with set voltage of 0.5∼1 V, reset voltage of −0.5∼-0.6 V
On/off ratio of ∼14
Endurance of 30–40 cycles

344



MAPbI3−xClx
Solution phase preparation
Bipolar resistive switching characteristic with set voltage of 0.8 V, reset voltage of −0.6 V
Small on/off ratio
Endurance of over 100 cycles retention time of 104 s

345



(BzA)2CuBr4
Solution phase preparation
Bipolar resistive switching characteristic with set voltage of 0.2 V, reset voltage of −0.3 V
On/off ratio of 108 large memory window
Endurance of 2000 cycles retention time over 1000 s

346



Ge–Te/Sb–Te suoerlattices
Sputtering
Interfacial phase change memory (iPCM)
1000 times faster switching speed than that of the conventional Ge–Sb–Te alloy-based iPCM
Endurance of 104 cycles retention time over 200 hours.

348





4.1. Energy conversion
Energy is one of the key factors that promote the development of human society. However, the application of traditional fossil fuels caused a series of environmental problems that affect our lives. Therefore, the modern energy conversion has become a main strategy to produce clean energy for the sustainable development of society with the protection of nature. Different types of materials were developed for energy conversion,4,9,10,12 among which PNSs have demonstrated outstanding merits for the enhancement of energy conversion performance due to their unique structural periodicity. The periodicity of PNSs has introduced various benefits to PNSs for energy conversion, such as synergistic effects that can be enhanced to improve catalytic activity,207 catalysts-reactants nanospace interfaces that can be engineered to smoothen product transference,136,208 and bandgaps that can be modulated to broaden light absorption,209 to name a few. The detailed applications of PNSs in various energy conversion processes, including water splitting, CO2 reduction, fuel cells, thermoelectricity, and solar cells, will be discussed in the following sections.

4.1.1. Water splitting (HER, OER). 
Facing challenges of a global warming crisis, “carbon neutral” is one of the most important solutions that the scientific community has devoted to explore. However, reducing the emission of carbonaceous species is the first challenge. As one of the most potential clean energy candidates, hydrogen has attracted great attention as an ideal replacement for the fossil fuels since it has zero carbonaceous species emission. However, the efficient generation of hydrogen is one of the key problems impeding their practical applications. Water, one of the main sources of hydrogen, is cheap, easy to get, and abundant around the world. The most common hydrogen generation process by water is known as water splitting, which consists of two half reactions: (i) hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and (ii) oxygen evolution reaction (OER).210–213 Due to the adverse issues during the water splitting process, extra energy is required to initiate and maintain the catalysis process. Therefore, various strategies including electrocatalytic,214,215 photocatalytic,216,217 and photoelectrocatalytic218,219 water splitting processes have been studied so far. Although catalysts based on precious metals, such as Pt, Ir, and their oxides, are good candidates for these strategies, their expensive prices are not ideal for large-scale production. Hence, catalysts that contain less or no precious metals are required to be designed for efficient water splitting. In the next sections, the catalytic activity of PNSs in water splitting will discussed.
4.1.1.1. Electrocatalytic water splitting. 
As an important branch of water splitting, electrocatalytic water splitting has been intensively studied. Based on the unique electronic properties, many electrocatalysts with PNSs were developed to optimize the cathodic HER and/or anodic OER, as outlined in Table 3.214,215
4.1.1.1.1. Electrocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction. 
The electrocatalytic HER process involves a simple two-electron migration mechanism, whereas the reaction pathways are different, owing to the type of catalysts and pH conditions.215 According to the mechanism of electrocatalytic HER (Fig. 31), many catalysts were developed, aiming to reach or even outperform the catalytic activity of Pt. Catalysts with PNSs showed good performance in electrocatalytic HER,20,220 making them potential candidates for practical applications.
 Fig. 31  Reaction pathways of HER in acidic (in red) and alkaline (in blue) solutions. 
2D materials, such as 2D TMDs,221 graphene and its derivatives,222,223 are well studied for water splitting. For instance, metallic 1T-MoS2 nanosheets (NSs) showed good electrocatalytic HER activities with Tafel slopes of ∼40 mV dec−1,224,225 where graphene acts as either electroactive component or functionalized support.223,226 Constructing layer-by-layer PNSs using different 2D materials may significantly enhance the catalytic activity via synergistic effect.207 A van der Waals heterostructure consisting of g-C3N4 and graphene is one such example for electrocatalytic HER.227 Qiao et al. used a 2D porous g-C3N4 nanolayer that was exfoliated from porous C3N4 and N-doped graphene to construct PNSs (denoted as PCN/NG). The out-of-plane pores between the layers of PCN/NG can benefit mass transport during the catalysis process, where the in-plane pores can provide sufficient active sites for catalysis. Therefore, PCN/NG exhibited good electrocatalytic HER activity with a lower Tafel slope of 49.1 mV dec−1 after initial 750 cyclic voltammetry (CV) compared with the corresponding value of PCN/NG without CV cycles (Tafel slope = 88.6 mV dec−1).27 Another example is the unilamellar metallic nanosheets, which exhibit better electronic property in energy conversion application in comparison to the corresponding few-layered bulk material. Sasaki et al. restacked unilamellar metallic 1T phase MoS2 nanosheets and cationic poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA)-modified reduced graphene oxide (PDDA-rGO) to construct 1T-MoS2/PDDA-rGO superlattice for electrocatalytic HER study. Benefitting from the loosely restacked structure of the 1T-MoS2/PDDA-rGO superlattice, a large interlayer spacing of ∼2.5 nm was expected to provide more accessible active sites to enhance the electrocatalytic HER performance, offering a low overpotential of 137 mV (current density = 10 mA cm−2) and Tafel slope of 48.6 mV dec−1.28 Although the 1T phase MoS2 has good catalytic activity, the 2H phase MoS2 is a thermodynamically stable structure. Ma and co-authors prepared a periodic nanostructure based on 2H-MoS2 and unilaminar graphitic nanocarbon (2H-MoS2/GNC). Different from the direct assembly of two materials, the synthesis of 2H-MoS2/GNC experienced a calcination process after threonic acid intercalation into MoS2 (T-MoS2). The interlayer spacing of 2H MoS2 increased from 0.63 nm to 0.99 nm in T-MoS2, decreasing both the overpotential and Tafel slope from over 500 to 421 mV and 103 to 53 mV dec−1, respectively. However, a slight decrease in the interlayer spacing from 0.99 to 0.98 nm was observed after the formation of 2H-MoS2/GNC, whereas its overpotential and Tafel slope significantly reduced to from 421 to 195 mV and from 53 to 47 mV dec−1, respectively. The enhanced electrocatalytic HER activity of 2H-MoS2/GNC may be ascribed to the conducting unilaminar graphitic nanocarbon structure that promoted an efficient electron transfer for the catalysis and shortened diffusion distance.228
Confined catalysis has attracted increasing attention due to the nanoconfinement effect, which can be used to enhance the catalytic activities in some reactions, such as CO oxidation, H2 oxidation, and electrolysis of water.229 MoS2 has demonstrated good HER activity in acidic condition, owing to the proper adsorption energy of hydrogen at its edge.230 Hence, 2D MoS2 confined nanoparticle electrocatalysts may exhibit high catalytic activity. Various precious metal nanoparticles, including Pt, Ru, Pd, and Au nanoparticles, were intercalated into the layers of MoS2. All of them showed good catalytic activities towards HER, especially the MoS2-confined Pt nanoparticles (MoS2/Pt-NPs) exhibited superior catalytic activity and long-term stability, which outperformed the commercial Pt/C catalysts. The flaw of the conventional way of modifying metal catalysts on the surface of 2D materials is that the metal catalysts would corrode in acidic condition and leach away, which can be avoided by the MoS2/Pt-NP system due to the synergistic host-intercalant effect.80 In comparison to the high HER activity of MoS2 in acidic condition, MoS2 suffered from poor HER activity in alkaline condition due to the sluggish water dissociation process.231 However, it is still important to study alkaline HER since the cost of alkaline electrolytes can be decreased, and the alkaline condition allows the use of earth-abundant transition metals to further reduce the cost compared to that of the precious metals-based catalysts.215 Co species, such as Co(OH)2, is widely considered as good water dissociation centres since it can reduce the energy barrier to break the H-O bond by absorbing oxygen, which can benefit the water dissociation in alkaline conditions. Therefore, Liu and co-authors introduced Co(OH)2 nanoparticles to multilayered MoS2 nanosheets to construct a 2D MoS2 confined Co(OH)2 nanoparticle (MoS2/Co-NP) electrocatalyst. The new MoS2/Co-NP catalyst enhanced the HER performance via accelerating water dissociation in alkaline condition with a Tafel slope of 53 mV dec−1.81
The moiré superlattice has experienced a rapid development in recent years due to the unconventional superconductivity at the magic-angle in twisted bilayer graphene.30,175 The conductivity of the moiré superlattice can be easily tuned by adjusting its twisted angle. Conventional methods to enhance the catalytic activity of MoS2 mainly focused on optimizing popular factors, such as active sites and vacancies. However, the interlayer potential barrier is seldom studied. Yuan and co-authors have fabricated a MoS2 moiré superlattice with a twisted angle of θ ≈ 7.3°. Benefitting from the twisted structure of the bilayer MoS2, a reduced interlayer potential barrier was confirmed by first-principles calculations and ultralow frequency Raman spectra. The low interlayer potential barrier promotes the electron transfer from the conductive substrate to the active sites in the moiré superlattice of MoS2, leading to an enhanced electrocatalytic HER performance with a Tafel slope of 73 mV dec−1.133
Wang et al. utilized a template-assisted printing-based assembly process to construct striped-pattern (SP) superlattices. The SP superlattices could catalyze various gas evolution reactions by using various components. The small gaps between the strips of the SP superlattices can provide a smaller bubble stretch force and higher transference, which significantly enhanced the catalytic activity (Fig. 32). For instance, Pt nanoparticles-based SP superlattices showed a significant enhanced electrochemical HER performance with small gap widths between the strips of 5 μm, yielding a small Tafel slope of 33 mV dec−1 and an overpotential of 15 mV.136
 Fig. 32  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth of gas bubbles on a flat film electrode, which caused a large number of inactive sites to form. (b) Significant stability difference between the flat film and SP electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
4.1.1.1.2. Electrocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction. 
Different from the simple two-electron transfer HER process, OER involves a complex four-electron proton-coupled reaction (Fig. 33), which requires higher energy to overcome the sluggish kinetics.232
 Fig. 33  The OER mechanism for acid (blue line) and alkaline (red line) conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Due to the good electric conductivity, layered structures, such as layered metal oxides, including metal hydroxides (M(OH)2, where M refers to transition metals) and metal oxyhydroxides (MOOH) showed high electrocatalytic OER activity.232 In particular, early 3d transition metal-based hydr(oxy)oxides, benefitting from their low overpotential in alkaline conditions, have attracted great attention for constructing cost-effective OER electrocatalysts.233 Furthermore, their layered double hydroxides (LDHs) showed comparable electrocatalytic efficiency to noble metals (such as IrO2).234
The PNSs constructed by layered metal oxides and other 2D layered materials can further enhance the electrocatalytic OER activity via synergistic effect.235 Graphene and its derivatives are good candidates to be the counterparts to construct multilayered PNSs with LDHs, since their good electrical conductivity,223 high mechanical strength,236 and large surface area237 provide good support to LDHs in catalysis.238 Ma et al. utilized NiMn239 and CoNi240 LDHs to construct layered PNSs with graphene oxide (GO) or reduced graphene oxide (rGO) for electrocatalytic OER. The NiMn/GO and NiMn/rGO PNSs were the first studies. Compared to the thickness of GO (∼1.0 nm), rGO nanosheets have a thinner thickness of ∼0.5 nm due to the oxygen groups having been partially removed. The difference in the thickness between GO and rGO induced the various interlayer spacings of NiMn/GO (∼1.1 nm) and NiMn/rGO (∼0.83 nm). Since the close distance between the layers can shorten the path and accelerate the charge transfer, NiMn/rGO showed better electrocatalytic OER activity with a smaller overpotential of 0.26 V and Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1, where the corresponding values of NiMn/GO are 0.28 V and 50 mV dec−1 in alkaline condition (1 M KOH aqueous solution), respectively.239 Co(OH)2 has been widely used for catalysis. However, its inferior electrical conductivity is not satisfactory for being an electrocatalyst. Hence, different morphologies, atomic substitutions, and counterparts with high conductivity may significantly enhance the electrocatalytic activity of Co(OH)2. Layered CoNi hydroxides, with various ratios of Co and Ni (Co1−xNix, where x = 0, 1/2, 1/3, 1/4, 1), and GO-based PNSs (Co1−xNix/GO) were studied for electrocatalytic OER. The Co2/3Ni1/3/GO showed excellent electrocatalytic OER activity with the overpotential of 259 mV and a Tafel slope of 35.7 mV dec−1, which indicated that the rate-determining step is the transformation of M-O to M-OOH. The outstanding catalytic activity may be ascribed to the composition tunability, which optimizes the electronic structure and binding intermediates and catalysts.240 However, the catalytic activity of the CoNi-based catalyst may be improved by using rGO as a counterpart rather than GO, according to the previous study.239 To further develop the catalysts, there are various strategies, such as changing components of PNSs109 and exposing more active sites of catalysts.241 Despite the graphene and related materials having good properties for electrocatalysis, their corrosion in alkaline condition cannot be ignored.242 Therefore, the more robust and carbon-free RuO2.1, with high catalytic activity and low redox potential was used to replace the role of GO and rGO. Recently, the trimetallic CoNiFe LDHs and RuO2.1 nanosheets were used to assemble CoNiFe/RuO2.1 PNSs. Compared to the mono or bimetallic LDHs, trimetallic catalysts offered better OER catalytic activity via synergistic effect.243 Hence, the CoNiFe/RuO2.1 yielded an overpotential of 281 mV and a Tafel slope of 48.9 mV dec−1.109 An increase of the exposure of active sites is a general strategy to improve the catalytic activity. Since the edges of LDHs are important sources of active sites for catalysis, the array of small LDH nanosheets can offer more active sites than the large LDH nanosheets with the same mass. Zhao et al. prepared periodic tiled/standing nanostructures (NiAl/GO) based on NiAl LDH and GO. The electrocatalytic activities were studied based on the different ratios of NiAl:GO (1:1–5:1 for NiAl/GO-1, 5.6:1 for NiAl/GO-2, 6:1 for NiAl/GO-3, 7:1 for NiAl/GO-4, and 8:1–10:1 for NiAl/GO-5, respectively), where NiAl/GO-5 showed the best electrocatalytic OER activity in 0.1 KOH aqueous solution with a Tafel slope of 118 mV dec−1, and low overpotential of 200 mV (current density of 100 mA cm−2) and 180 mV (current density of 50 mA cm−2), respectively (Fig. 34). The good electrocatalytic activity of NiAl/GO-5 may be ascribed to: (1) the high ratio of NiAl:GO that provides more active sites; (2) the standing form of NiAl nanosheets that exposes more active sites, as compared with the tiling form.241 However, replacing the NiAl LDHs with other more active materials may yield enhanced catalytic activity.
 Fig. 34  The preparation process of NiAl/GO materials, and the assembled structures of (a) NiAl/GO-1, (b) NiAl/GO-2, (c) NiAl/GO-3, (d) NiAl/GO-4, and (e) NiAl/GO-5, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2019, Springer Publishing. 
The layer-by-layer method is a more controllable process to prepare PNSs with an accurate layer number, as required. Iron porphyrin (Fe-PP) is a good candidate for enhancing the charge transfer between LDHs and the electrode due to its extensive 2D 18 p-electrons. Therefore, periodic (CoNi/Fe-PP)n (where n refers to the bilayer number) ultrathin films (UTFs) were prepared based on CoNi LDHs and Fe-PP via electrostatic layer-by-layer technique. The thickness of the (CoNi/Fe-PP)n UTF increased by ∼2 nm per bilayer number, and its OER catalytic activity was continuously enhanced until the bilayer number n increased to 30, with the lowest overpotential of 264 mV and Tafel slope of 37.6 mV dec−1 in 1.0 M KOH. Then, the corresponding activity decreased as a result of the excess bilayer number.104 The results indicate that the proper thickness of the periodic catalyst is necessary for efficient OER catalysis, and an excess thickness may hinder the charge transfer and mass diffusion, thereby influencing the catalysis activity.
4.1.1.1.3. Electrocatalytic overall water splitting. 
Electrocatalytic overall water splitting (OWS) is the integration of electrocatalytic HER and OER.244 Therefore, the catalysts for electrocatalytic OWS need to be rationally designed for both HER and OER. There are two possible strategies that can apply to develop PNSs to catalyze OWS: (1) assemble dispersed catalysts for OWS in good order to enhance the catalysis activity; (2) integrate various catalysts for HER and OER, respectively, into hetero PNSs to realize electrocatalytic OWS.
Featured with high surface area and abundant active sites, the well-ordered and close-packed nanoparticle-based 3D superlattices have attracted much attention for the first strategy to efficiently catalyze OWS. Nitrogen-doped carbon (CN)-coated CoMnO nanoparticles were studied as units for constructing CoMnO@CN nanoparticle superlattices. Herein, CoMnO cores offered an optimized electronic structure for electrocatalytic OER, where the CN shells showed good electronic structure for HER and enhanced electrical conductivity between neighboring nanoparticles. Therefore, the collective properties of the CoMnO@CN superlattices showed good electrocatalytic OWS with low overpotentials of 263 and 71 mV at 20 mA cm−2 for OER and HER, respectively.37
A general strategy to fulfill the requirements for OWS is to utilize the collective properties of PNSs constructed with various materials with either electrocatalytic HER or OER activity. Ma et al. combined NiFe LDHs and GO/rGO for constructing Ni2/3Fe1/3/GO and Ni2/3Fe1/3/rGO, respectively, for water splitting. With the assistance of GO, Ni2/3Fe1/3/GO achieved good electrocatalytic OER activity with an overpotential of 0.23 V and a Tafel slope of 42 mV dec−1. However, the Ni2/3Fe1/3/rGO demonstrated a slightly improved OER activity with a lower overpotential of 0.21 V and a smaller Tafel slope of 40 mV dec−1, which can be ascribed to the better conductivity of rGO. In addition, the observed HER activity of Ni2/3Fe1/3/rGO indicated its ability for FWS catalysis.245 However, rGO is not an ideal candidate for HER catalysis, whereas TMDs, especially MoS2, showed excellent HER activity. In addition, DFT calculations predicted an enhanced charge transfer between the interlayer of LDH and TMD nanosheets, which may further improve the electrocatalytic activity. Hence, various PNSs based on NiAl, NiFe, and MoS2 were synthesized as area-balanced (NiAl/MoS2-1 and NiFe/MoS2-1), charge-balanced (NiAl/MoS2-2 and NiFe/MoS2-2), and LDH-excess (NiAl/MoS2-3 and NiFe/MoS2-3) compositions, respectively. The charge-balanced PNSs, NiAl/MoS2-2 (overpotential of 0.22 V and Tafel slope of 67 mV dec−1 for HER, overpotential of 0.31 V and Tafel slope of 56 mV dec−1 for OER) and NiFe/MoS2-2 (overpotential of 0.18 V and Tafel slope of 82 mV dec−1 for HER, overpotential of 0.25 V and Tafel slope of 45 mV dec−1 for OER), showed the best electrocatalytic activities for both HER and OER. According to X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS), increased binding energies for Ni 2p, Fe 2p, and Al 2p, and a decreased binding energy for Mo 3d were observed. The oxidation of Ni, Fe, and Al ions were accompanied with a reduction of the Mo ions, demonstrating the charge transfer from LDHs to MoS2, which verified the prediction by DFT calculations.29 A recent study further revealed the importance of materials selection for building periodic nanostructure-based catalysts. Three different restacking PNSs, MoS2/NiFe, NiFe/Graphene, and MoS2/Graphene, were prepared. The NiFe/Graphene showed improved OER activity (Fig. 35a), and MoS2/Graphene showed enhanced HER activity (Fig. 35b) compared to sole NiFe and MoS2, respectively, due to the graphene-accelerated charge transfer for both NiFe/Graphene and MoS2/Graphene to further increase their catalytic activity. However, due to the significantly enhanced synergistic effect, MoS2/NiFe showed the best catalytic activity for both HER and OER with an overpotential of 0.11 V and Tafel slope of 77 mV dec−1 for HER, and an overpotential of 0.21 V and Tafel slope of 46 mV dec−1, indicating its high catalytic activity towards OWS (Fig. 35c).107
 Fig. 35  Schematic of the (a) NiFe/Graphene superlattice for OER, (b) MoS2/Graphene superlattice for HER, and (c) MoS2/NiFe superlattice for the overall water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
4.1.1.2. Photocatalytic water splitting. 
Photocatalytic water splitting is one of the general methods to directly transfer solar energy to chemical fuels. The photocatalysis process includes multiple parameters, such as photon absorption, exciton separation, carrier diffusion, carrier transport, catalytic efficiency, and mass transfer of reactants and products. Each parameter contains detailed factors that will influence the catalytic activity (Fig. 36).216 Hence, various catalysts were designed to optimize the photocatalytic water splitting process,217,246,247 and in particular, the PNSs are good candidates since they have unique electronic and optical properties.
 Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of the parameters associated with photocatalysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
4.1.1.2.1. Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution reaction. 
Photocatalytic HER yields from water splitting have three key steps: (1) photon absorption; (2) exciton separation and migration; (3) surface reaction and gas desorption. Various catalysts were designed to optimize these steps to further enhance the photocatalytic HER activity.248
Compared to the dense materials, porous semiconductors showed advantages for photocatalysis since the porous structure reduces the charge recombination rate of hole-electron pairs. This is due to the shortened distance between the reactive surface and the place where the pairs are generated. In addition, the cavities of the porous structure can accommodate other components to further improve their photocatalytic activity via synergistic effect. Therefore, Feng et al. synthesized a series of crystalline porous chalcogenide semiconductors based on In3+, S2−, and one of the transition metal cations (such as Cd2+, Zn2+, Mn2+, and Cu+). ICF-5InCuS-Na (Na14In17Cu3S35·xH2O), with a 3D diamond-type superlattice structure with a low band gap of 2.0 eV, is suitable for photocatalysis in the visible light region. ICF-5InCuS-Na showed good HER activity with 18 μmol h−1 g−1 of H2 gas production in Na2S aqueous solution under visible light irradiation, which can be maintained for over 96 h with the accumulation of more than 890 μmol of H2.249 Subsequently, Hu et al. synthesized a series of soluble supertetrahedral chalcogenido T4 clusters (T4-1, T4-2, and T4-3) with twisted diamond-type superlattice structures. T4-1 ((BMMim)9(Cd3In17S31Cl4), where BMMim refers to 1-butyl-2,3-dimethylimidazolium) and T4-3 (BMMim)9(Cd3In17Se31Cl4)(4,4′-bpy), showed a twisted hexagonal diamond-type superlattice structure, whereas T4-2 ((BMMim)9(Cd3In17Se18Cl4)) showed a twisted cubic diamond-type superlattice structure. Compared to the band gaps of T4-1 (3.25 eV) and T4-2 (2.76 eV), the lowest band gap of 2.60 eV for T4-3 offered T4-3 the best photocatalytic activity with the H2 evolution rate of 15.9 μmol h−1 g−1 in the solid state and 91.5 μmol h−1 g−1 in DMSO, whereas corresponding values of T4-1 and T4-2 are 3.5 and 5.6 μmol h−1 g−1 in the solid state, and 6.1 and 27.5 μmol h−1 g−1 in DMSO (Fig. 37), respectively. Replacement of S with Se offered weak bond energy for the H-bonds and adjusted band structure, which enhanced the photocatalytic activity of the T4 clusters. However, besides the different components, the poor solubility of T4-1 limited further enhancement of the photocatalytic activity in DMSO, which also exhibited the importance to introduce Se to replace S for enhanced solubility.250
 Fig. 37  (a) Photoluminescence spectrum of 5 mg of T4-3 dispersed in 20 mL DMSO. (b) Possible charge transfer process of T4 clusters dispersed in solution. (c) Recycling photocatalytic HER test under visible light illumination on T4 clusters dispersed in DMSO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Song et al. prepared highly stable 1T-MoS2 in aqueous solution via the intercalation of ammonium ions (denoted as N-MoS2). N-MoS2 showed a zigzag chain superlattice structure, which disappeared when transferred to 2H-MoS2via 350 °C annealed treatment. N-MoS2 was then hybridized with CdS nanorods, the suitable light absorber, for photocatalytic H2 production. N-MoS2/CdS showed outstanding photocatalytic HER activity with a H2 evolution rate of 9.11 mmol g−1 h−1, which is 21-fold of the corresponding value for 2H-MoS2/CdS. The significant difference between the photocatalytic activity of N-MoS2/CdS and 2H-MoS2/CdS can be ascribed to: (1) the photogenerated electrons that can be transferred to metallic N-MoS2 rapidly for proton reduction reaction, which is more efficient in comparison to the semiconducting 2H-MoS2; (2) the metallic phase of N-MoS2 may offer more active sites for HER than the semiconducting 2H-MoS2.251
4.1.1.2.2. Photocatalytic oxygen evolution reaction. 
As a part of the photocatalytic water splitting process, photocatalytic OER has attracted intensive study targeting catalytic efficiency enhancement. Different catalysts were prepared to optimize the catalysis mechanism since OER involves a more complex four-electron transfer than HER.
Benefitting from the good photocatalytic activities of ZnCr LDH and titanate, charge-balanced PNSs of ZnCr/titanate were prepared by Hwang et al. The electron transfer between ZnCr LDH and titanate induced a spatial separation of holes and electrons, which further decreased the rate of electron–hole recombination (Fig. 38). Both strong electronic coupling between the layers of two semiconducting materials and the expansion of the surface area contributed to the improvement of the photocatalytic OER activity of ZnCr/titanate with an O2 gas production rate of 1.18 mmol h−1 g−1, which is almost 2-fold higher than that of pristine ZnCr LDH (0.67 mmol h−1 g−1).252
 Fig. 38  (a) Cross-sectional high resolution TEM image of the ZnCr/titanate periodic nanostructure, and (b) its enlarged view and structural model. (c) PL intensity of ZnCr/Titanate with different titanate:ZnCr ratios of 0.91 (-), 1.16 (---), 1.46 (-·-·-), pristine ZnCr LDH (○), and protonated layered titanate (△). (d) Schematic model for the band structures of the ZnCr/titanate periodic nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
4.1.1.2.3. Photocatalytic overall water splitting. 
Different from photocatalytic HER and OER that have already been studied by experiments, studies on the photocatalytic OWS mainly stay at the theoretical calculations. However, these calculation results have demonstrated the great potential of the periodic nanostructure for photocatalytic OWS.
Various PNSs for photocatalytic OWS were studied via DFT and related calculation methods, regardless of the dimensions of materials. For instance, calculations on semiconducting GaN/ZnO superlattice nanowires demonstrated an enhanced visible-light absorption due to its narrowed bandgap, which can be ascribed to the formation of intermediate bands within the bandgaps, referring to the potential of GaN/ZnO for being photocatalysts for OWS.209 The calculations on Ag2ZnSn(S1−xSex)4 (x = 0–1),253 2D hydrogenated-silicene/halogenated-silicene superlattices (SHSXSLs, X = F, Cl, Br, and I),254 and 2D InFeO3255 showed either improved charge mobility253 or enhanced charge separation.254,255 Whereas the key factor that influenced their potential for photocatalytic OWS is their periodic structures that offer modulated bandgaps for the absorption of visible light.209,253–255 The vacancy of experimental research in photocatalytic OWS based on PNSs offered great opportunities for future systematic studies since the theoretical studies have already indicated its direction.


4.1.2. CO2 reduction. 
The excess emission of carbon dioxide (CO2) since the industrial revolution via combustion of fossil fuels has become a significant environmental problem because the high concentration of CO2 induces a critical greenhouse effect. Besides the elimination of fossil fuels, the reduction CO2 to CO is a strategy for both renewable energy and carbon neutrality. However, the high dissociation energy of ∼750 kJ mol−1 for the CO bond is a key barrier before the CO2 reduction reaction (CRR). Hence, various catalysts were designed with different solutions to overcome the barriers of CRR.256,257
Au–Cu bimetallic systems showed attractive electrocatalytic CRR activity, which is controlled by the ratio of each composition.258 Besides the ratio of each composition in the bimetallic system, the order of the structure also showed its unique contribution towards electrocatalytic activity by modulation of active site exposure and mass transfer.208 The electrocatalytic activity between the ordered and disordered materials can be significantly different. For instance, the disordered alloy AuCu bimetallic nanoparticles mainly produce H2 gas, whereas after the transformation from a disordered structure to ordered structure with alternate layers of Au and Cu, the ordered AuCu bimetallic nanoparticles (Fig. 39) showed significantly enhanced CRR activity with a high faradaic efficiency of ∼80%, a lower overpotential of ∼200 mV and an enhanced catalytic turnover by 3.2-fold.259
 Fig. 39  (a and b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of AuCu (a and b) and (c and d) magnified STEM images of the center of the particle together with a schematics illustration of the structure projections. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
The aforementioned method for SP superlattice preparation has provided an attractive platform for different types of catalysis by tuning its composition.136 When replacing Pt with a Co porphyrin (CoTPP), a metal–organic complex showed potential for CRR,260 and with GO at a mass concentration ratio of 2:1, the new CoTPP SP superlattice showed good CRR activity with a higher faradaic efficiency of ∼70% than CoTPP films (∼55%). The convexo-concave structure of the CoTPP SP superlattice accelerates the diffusion of CO2 to further increase the concentration of reactant CO2 and decrease the competitive reactant H2O on the electrode simultaneously, yielding a good selectivity between CRR and HER.136


4.1.3. Fuel cells. 
A fuel cell is a chemical device that directly transfers chemical potential energy stored in fuels to electrical energy with high efficiency, and consists of a cathodic oxygen reduction reaction261,262 and anodic fuel oxidation reaction.263,264 During the reaction, fuel cells need a continuous supply of fuel and oxygen to maintain the chemical reaction. For better catalytic performances, many different materials were studied for electrodes for fuel cells, with good electronic properties. Periodic nanostructured materials are among the choices.
4.1.3.1. Oxygen reduction reaction (ORR). 
Oxygen reduction reaction is one of the most important parts for fuel cells. The most desirable pathway for the oxygen reduction reaction is the reduction of oxygen to water, which involves a direct 4-electron pathway. However, the sluggish cathodic ORR kinetics limit the performance of fuel cells. Therefore, various catalysts for accelerating the ORR process were designed and synthesized, aiming to further enhance the efficiency of fuel cells.
Pt-Based catalysts are widely studied for electrocatalytic ORR due to their extraordinary catalytic activity and stability, whereas their high cost and scarcity limit their practical applications. Hence, many efforts were devoted to developing new Pt-based catalysts for enhancing activity and stability, and minimizing the portion of Pt to reduce cost.261 It was reported that the presence of Pd could significantly promote the catalytic activity of Pt towards ORR by synergistic effect. This is ascribed to the modification of the Pt d-band centre by Pd through diminishing the electronic interaction between the exposed Pt and oxygenated species, and thereby improving ORR activity. The Pt and Pd nanocrystals-based 3D binary superlattices (BNSLs) showed superior electrocatalytic ORR activity compared to the Pt octahedra and Pt–Pd random mixture.262 However, the use of alloy nanoparticles to construct superlattice arrays (SLAs) is the more general strategy. Wang et al. produced PtAu SLAs by using bimetallic PtAu nanoparticles. In comparison to the commercial Pt/C (50%, wt.%) and Pt black catalysts, the new PtAu SLAs exhibited enhanced electrocatalytic ORR activity with higher catalytic current density and more positive onset potential (0.903 V).264 However, the alloys based on two precious metals still suffer the limitation of high production cost, which may be solved by the introduction of earth-abundant metals to alloys. Hence, trimetallic PtCoFe alloy-based monolayer superlattices were prepared. This 2D PtCoFe superlattice displayed a high electrochemically active surface area (ESCA) of 62.9 m2 g−1, which is comparable with 70.2 m2 g−1, the ESCA of commercial Pt/C. The PtCoFe monolayer superlattice showed excellent electrocatalytic ORR activity with high specific activity and mass activity, which are 17.4- and 15.2-fold higher than the corresponding values of Pt/C (Fig. 40).265 Although these alloy-based superlattices have already demonstrated high electrocatalytic ORR activity, their catalytic activities can still be further enhanced via ordering the composition of alloy nanoparticles.208 For instance, structural ordered bimetallic PtFe266 and trimetallic PtNiPb267 alloy nanoparticles showed enhanced electrocatalytic ORR activities.
 Fig. 40  (a) Schematic representation of the formation process of the trimetallic PtCoFe nanoparticle superlattices. (b) CVs recorded at room temperature in 0.1 M HClO4 solution with the sweep rate of 50 mV s−1. (c) ORR polarization curve recorded at room temperature in an oxygen-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 aqueous solution with a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (d) Mass activity and specific activity at 0.9 versus RHE. (d) ORR polarization curves before and after ADTs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
The development of a Pt-free catalyst for electrocatalytic ORR is the ultimate strategy to decrease the cost for their practical applications. Manganese oxides are potential precious metal free electrocatalysts for ORR. Especially Mn3O4, benefiting from its mixed valence of Mn, exhibits rich electrochemical properties. Therefore, carbon-coated tubular monolayer superlattices (TMSLs) were constructed by using hollow Mn3O4 nanocrystals (denote as h-Mn3O4-TMSLs). The structure of h-Mn3O4-TMSLs offered fast mass transport efficiency and enhanced the exposure of active sites. In addition, the carbon coating further enhanced the electron transport and structural robustness. With all these benefits, h-Mn3O4-TMSLs showed excellent electrocatalytic ORR activity with a positive onset potential of ∼0.91 V and diffusion-limiting current density of ∼5.7 mA cm−2, which are comparable to the corresponding values of Pt/C (∼0.90 V and ∼5.8 mA cm−2).268 Featured with large surface areas and highly exposed active sites, 2D materials have always been good candidates for various catalysts, especially since their catalytic activity can be further enhanced via building 2D/2D PNSs due to the synergistic effect. The incorporation of C3N4 nanosheets, Fe clusters and Ti3C2 nanosheets yielded a 2D/2D periodic nanostructure of FeNC/TiC. FeNC/TiC provided a large accessible surface area of 30 m2 g−1, and showed good electrocatalytic ORR activity with a small onset overpotential of ∼0.92 V, which is similar to the Pt/C benchmark.269
4.1.3.2. Ethanol oxidation reaction (EOR). 
Ethanol is a common liquid with low toxicity and low production cost. In comparison to compressed hydrogen, ethanol is more convenient for storage. With all these benefits, the ethanol-based fuel cell has attracted much attention from the scientific community. However, the process of the ethanol oxidation reaction is kinetically more difficult than that of the hydrogen oxidation reaction. Hence, various catalysts were developed to enhance the efficiency of the ethanol oxidation reaction.263,270–273
Although the precious metal-based catalysts for EOR have many limitations for large-scale applications, several precious metal-based catalysts were developed due to their extraordinary catalytic activity.270–273 Constructing alloys by using precious and non-precious metals is a general method that can be applied to decrease the production cost and enhance the catalytic activity. The aforementioned trimetallic PtCoFe alloy monolayer superlattices showed bifunctional catalytic activity for both ORR and EOR. This catalyst exhibited a peak current density of 4.75 mA cm−2 and high mass activity, which are 17.1 and 3.8 times higher than commercial Pt/C benchmark, respectively.265 Like their ORR activity, the EOR activity of the PtCoFe alloy monolayer superlattices may also be enhanced via ordering of the PtCoFe nanoparticles.208
4.1.3.3. Methanol oxidation reaction (MOR). 
Methanol is another candidate for fuel cells. Methanol offers many advantages in fuel cells in comparison to ethanol, such as low CO2 emissions, and easier to catalyze since there is no C–C bond in methanol to break. In addition, methanol can be easily synthesized from natural gas and from other renewable biomasses. Hence, intensive studies focused on the development of new catalysts have emerged for optimizing the MOR process.
Besides the composition, the structure of the catalyst also influences the ultimate catalytic activities. An ordered array of active metal alloy nanoparticles can demonstrate enhanced catalytic activity.208 For instance, the PtAu superlattice array showed good electrocatalytic MOR activity with a peak current density of 41.77 mA cm−2, which is significantly higher than that of commercial Pt/C (13.91 mA cm−2),264 whereas the study of the PtPd nanocrystal superlattices further confirmed the importance of the formation of PNSs for catalytic activity. Compared to the monodispersed PtPd nanocrystal nanoparticles, PtPd nanocrystal superlattices showed extraordinary MOR activity with ECSA of 46 m2 g−1 and specific kinetic current density of 2.08 mA cm−2.274 Crack-tips enriched Pt–Cu superlattice nanoflakes (NFs) were employed as highly efficient anode electrocatalysts for MOR in methanol fuel cells. The Pt–Cu NFs showed 4 times higher mass activity, 6 times higher specific activity and 6 times higher stability than those of the commercial Pt/C catalyst due to the synergistic effects of “crack-tips” and “superlattice crystals”.275


4.1.4. Thermoelectricity. 
With the increasing concern on the environmental protection situation, the invention and development of clean energy has become a key area of global scientific research, among which the thermoelectric conversion technology has been considered an efficient renewable energy technology due to its small size, high reliability, no emission of pollutants, and wide operating temperature range. Thermoelectric materials have the capacity to reversibly convert thermal energy to electric. The thermoelectric materials that combine n- and p- type materials use a temperature difference to generate electricity, and utilize electricity to accurately control temperature. The efficiency of a thermoelectric material is determined by the dimensionless figure of merit ZT = S2σT/κ, where σ is the electrical conductivity, S is the Seebeck coefficient, T is the absolute temperature, and κ is the thermal conductivity and κ can be expressed with κp+ κe (for the phonon and the electronic contribution, respectively). To compete with other energy technologies, ZT is expected to be above 3, but this has not been realized so far. It seems that the simple strategy of increasing the power factor S2σ and decreasing κ can improve the ZT value. However, those values often counteract each other. For example, the increasing of the electrical conductivity normally causes a decline of S and rise of κe. Therefore, it is essential to optimize those parameters to achieve high ZT.
Nanoengineering has achieved many fruits to improve ZT by means of boundary scattering at the interface, where the thermal conductivity decreases without affecting the power factor too much. Recently, periodical nanostructures show much power to control those parameters through filtering low-energy carriers and magnifying the electron density of the states to increase the Seebeck coefficient, adjusting the carrier concentration and mobility to improve the electrical conductivity, and coherent phonon effects to further reduce the thermal conductivity at the sites of boundary scattering. In the following, we will summarize recent achievements on those periodical nanostructures of thermoelectrical materials.
In 2002, a substrate-free, bulk-like PbSeTe/PbTe quantum dot superlattice was fabricated by molecular beam epitaxy and a cooling device based on one-leg of this material was set up. A recorded ZT value of 2.0 was obtained even without optimized structure parameters, and this device cooled down to 43.7 K below room temperature (300 K).68 Lately, the ZT values higher than 4 and 6 are predicted for 5 nm PbSe/PbS and PbTe/PbSe superlattice nanowires at 77 K, respectively, by optimizing parameters such as the segment length, diameter, materials, and doping level. This work stated that the quantum confinement in the superlattice nanowires induced the potential barrier–well inversion as the electron mass differences between different materials.276 A ballistic thermoelectric transport was proposed in a superlattice nanowire. Because of the low temperature, dephasing from electron–electron and electron–phonon scattering can be ignored, resulting in higher output power than a 3D superlattice material.277 However, for practical applications, we may need high superlattice nanowire density, where interwire transport needs to be considered, such as electron hopping strengths, energy levels, and electron tunneling rates.278 Those discoveries inspired the investigation of superlattices with other materials.
As an eco-friendly light-element-based thermoelectric material, C/Si/Ge superlattices are studied both theoretically and experimentally. The thermal conductivity was predicted to be decreased by 92% in Ge/Si superlattice nanowires compared to pure Si nanowires due to the interface phonon scattering and coherent effect.279 By optimizing the wire diameter and superlattice period, ZT values above 1 was proposed for 1.7 nm Ge/Si superlattice nanowires because of the enhanced Seebeck coefficient, unique electronic properties, and ultralow lattice thermal conductivity.280 Further doped Ge/SixGe1−x superlattices exhibited enhanced ZT and power factor compared with both SiGe alloy and Si/Ge superlattice materials at room temperature because of the doping that increased the electrical conductivity.281 The optimized doping concentration in the SixGe1−x barrier was calculated within the range of 10–20%.282 When combined with graphene, the atomically thin C3Si3/C (C3Ge3/C) superlattice could achieve a ZT value of 1.95 (2.72) by tuning the carrier concentration.283 If a conducting polymer was alternately assembled with the layered SiGe alloy, the thermal conductivity was reduced much more than the electrical conductivity, resulting in a doubled ZT value.284 The decrease of the thermal conductivity on n-Ge/SixGe1−x superlattices was experimentally observed.69,285,286 The doping concentration and strain in Si1−xGex help to increase the Seebeck coefficients by tuning the energy band structure and neutralizing the negative interface effect on the electrical conductivity.69,286
For high temperature applications, the Al2O3 interlayer in the Al2O3–ZnO (AO/ZnO) superlattice thin films was fabricated by atomic layer deposition.287 An enhancement of the Seebeck coefficient was observed due to the quantum confinement, whereas the in-plane thermal conductivity was reduced by 261 times compared to the bulk materials, despite the decrease of electrical conductivity. The overall ZT value was doubled compared with the AO/ZnO film.287 In terms of the cross-plane, the low energy carrier filtering and quantum confinement clearly enhance the power factor, producing ZT above 0.45 at 500 K after being combined with low thermal conductivity. This value is of 26 times improvement compared with the ZnO film.288 During the studies, new methods to measure all cross-plane thermal electric properties in superlattice films were developed, where a micro-Peltier heater and Cu foil/plates were used.289,290 They discovered that the Seebeck coefficients are not only related to the temperature, but also varied with the applied temperature difference.289 Furthermore, 6-cycled AO/ZnO superlattice films were tested with the highest ZT value of ∼0.45 at 500 K.290 After that, they applied this test method to measure the Seebeck coefficient, electrical conductivity, and thermal conductivity of the p-type Bi2Te3/Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3 superlattice film, where a recorded ZT value of 1.44 was obtained.291 The Hf-doped ZnO superlattice films were also prepared with atomic layer deposition to obtain a net improvement in the power factor. Further introduction of 18O into the Hf:ZnO films suppressed the thermal conductivity without scarifying the electrical properties.292
Other oxides are also fabricated into superlattices. In [(NbOx)a/(Nb-doped SrTiO3)b]20 superlattices, a decrease in the layer thickness ratio (a/b ratio) would improve both Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity.293 For YBa2Cu3O72–La2/3Ca1/3MnO3 superlattices, an interesting phenomenon was found, where its Seebeck coefficient is positive, while the two individual materials have negative Seebeck coefficients due to a long-range electronic reconstruction at the interfaces.294 The thermoelectric properties of a series of ABO3 compound superlattices were calculated with density functional theory and Boltzmann transport theory. The interface polarity at the LaNiO3/SrTiO3(001) superlattices leads to a band offset and the formation of an electric field, and then induced multiband splitting.295 A large positive Seebeck coefficient (135 μV K−1) and a high figure of merit (0.35) for room-temperature was predicted.295 In (LaNiO3)n/(LaAlO3)n(001) superlattices, high Seebeck coefficients of ±600 μV K−1 were predicted under tensile strain.296 The epitaxial strain could tune the metal-to-insulator transition and the band velocities near the Fermi energy. They found that the thinner layer with n = 1 strongly enhanced the thermoelectric properties compared with n = 3 because the confinement induced Ni-site disproportionation.296 A similar phenomenon was also found in (SrCrO3)1/(SrTiO3)1(001) and (SrMnO3)1/(SrTiO3)1(001) superlattices with Seebeck coefficients of 500–600 μV K−1 near the band edges.297
Another family of periodical thermoelectrical materials is the organic–inorganic superlattices, which has been reviewed by Karppinen et al. in 2015.298 Herein, we will state the advances of organic–inorganic superlattices after that. The main merit of this material is its flexibility and suitability for portable device fabrication. Usually, they are prepared by periodically combining the conductive polymer/organic molecules with other inorganic thermoelectrical materials, such as Bi2Se3/Bi2Te3, layered double hydroxides, TiS2 and others. There are different types of organic–inorganic superlattices. For example, Bi2Te3 nanoparticles are monodispersed in the continuous conductive polymer matrix. The periodic nanofillers significantly scatter phonons, while the continuously conducting polymer phase provides high electronic transport, and this resulted in an excellent ZT value at room temperature.299 Different ladder-type heteroacene molecules in 2D gold nanoparticle–molecule superlattices modified the energy levels to determine the electrical conductivity and affected the Seebeck coefficient by adjusting the charge carrier in the arrays, and thus adjusting the PF.300 The periodic assembly of the layered double hydroxide layer structure with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)-poly(styrene sulfonate) produced an organic–inorganic alternately superlattice, in which the carrier mobility was improved to enhance the electrical conductivity. Furthermore, the low-energy carriers were filtered by sufficient interfaces between organic and inorganic phases, and thus promote the Seebeck coefficient, resulting in improved power factor.301
A general method was developed to synthesize flexible thermoelectric materials through a facile electrochemical intercalation.302 The organic cations intercalated into the TiS2 layers to form a hybrid superlattice of alternating inorganic TiS2 monolayers and hexylammonium ions (Fig. 41). The lattice thermal conductivity was reduced by two orders of magnitude due to stronger phonon scattering, and the electrical conductivity was increased due to the increased carrier density in the hybrid material. The electron mobility is not affected because the Coulomb force can be effectively screened by the polar water molecules and the positive hexylammonium ions. As a result, a high ZT of 0.28 at 373 K was obtained. Furthermore, the mechanical flexibility is even lower than that of plastic materials, such as Teflon. This method can be possibly used to fabricate other organic–inorganic superlattices using many other layered material candidates, such as Bi2Te3 or the transition metal dichalcogenides and various organic molecules with different functional groups.302 Inspired with the above work, the Bi2Se3/organic superlattice with enhanced ZT value was prepared with multiple steps, including lithium intercalation, ionic exchange, and organic exchange.303
 Fig. 41  Structural model of the TiS2 (a) single crystal and the (b) TiS2[(HA)0.08(H2O)0.22(DMSO)0.03] hybrid superlattice. (c) HAADF-STEM image of TiS2[(HA)x(H2O)y(DMSO)z]. Reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature Publishing. 
For thermoelectrical applications with periodic nanostructures, many parameters need to be optimized, such as the period length, height, and shape of the periodic potential barriers.304 Other effects, such as the surface roughness304 and applied fields (e.g., magnetic field),305 may also play important roles in determining the thermoelectric properties. In addition, there are many more materials in this family, such as graphene/h-BN, Bi2Te3/WS2 and (LaS)1.2/CrS2,306,307 giving more and more novel combinations to new materials in the near future.


4.1.5. Solar cells. 
As one of the most important applications in energy conversion, solar cells have been developed for decades, and they are widely applied to various areas. Along with the development, different types of solar cells are also studied, such as III–V GaAs solar cells, quantum dots solar cells, dye-sensitized solar cells and perovskite solar cells, aiming at high solar power conversion efficiency (PCE) and stability for industrial manufacturing and real-life application. During the development of solar cells, PNSs contribute to their unique properties, leading to the improvement of solar cells, which will be summarized in this section.
4.1.5.1. GaAs based solar cells. 
The GaAs-based solar cell is one of the most important branches of solar cell studies. According to the report from National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL), GaAs solar cell has the top conversion rate,308 with strong plasticity, good temperature resistance, and good sensitivity to light. The PNSs offer better performance to this type of solar cell.
GaAs PNSs are intensively studied for the enhanced optoelectrical properties in comparison to their bulk counterparts.309 Lattice-matched InGaAsP/InGaP superlattices were grown with alternate layers of In0.32Ga0.68As60P40 well, and the In0.49Ga0.51P barriers were fabricated into solar cells with good performance (Fig. 42a).33 The EQE at wavelengths beyond the band-edge of In0.49Ga0.51P was greatly improved with increased periods, as shown in Fig. 42b. In this report, the carrier escape mechanism of the superlattice structure was studied. It was found that the carrier tunneling and thermionic emission coexisted in the system, while the carrier tunneling played the dominant role with a thin barrier, as indicated in Fig. 42a. However, for the strain-balanced InGaAsP/InGaP structure, the tunneling probability was zero due to a relatively thicker barrier.310 Under the coexistence of carrier tunneling and thermionic emission, the EQE was improved because carriers are more likely to escape from the quantum well (QW) region and promote the photocurrent.33 Their solar cell device showed further enhanced EQE at resonance peaks beyond the band-edge, with the Fabry–Pérot resonance induced by the gold back surface reflector. Resulting from the high EQE in the sub-bandgap, the JSC was improved by 26% compared with the standard InGaP solar cells (Fig. 42c). The VOC in one sun condition was 0.08 V higher than that of the bulk InGaAsP solar cells. The resultant JSC, VOC, FF, and PCE of the device with back surface reflector and antireflection coating were 20.5 mA cm−2, 1.136 V, 75.3%, and 17.6%, respectively. It also confirmed the positive effect of the back surface reflector and the antireflection coating on the device performance. However, the optimization on the lattice-matched superlattices are desired to increase the relatively low JSCJSC and FF. Recently, a single-junction p-i-n GaAs solar cell fabricated with low-cost flexible metal foils was reported.311 By optimizing the thickness of the intrinsic layer, the best device achieved a PCE of 13.2%, showing great opportunity for enhancing the device performance by modifying the GaAs layer.
 Fig. 42  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of the lattice matched InGaAsP/InGaP superlattice-based solar cell, and the corresponding energy band diagram, illustrating tunneling and thermionic-emission carrier transports in this structure. (b) EQE beyond the band-edge of In0.49Ga0.51P (680 nm) versus the wavelength of the InGaAsP/InGaP superlattice solar cell with different numbers of periods. (c) IV curves of the 100-period device, with and without ARC, with a gold BSR and with a back-filter, under AM 1.5G illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing. (d) Convergence of the carrier extraction efficiency with the number of SL periods for different period thicknesses at a photon energy of 1.25 eV and an effective carrier lifetime of 10 ps. The convergence is faster for the thicker-period device due to the stronger localization. (e) Converged carrier extraction efficiency as a function of the period thickness. The transition of the carrier extraction from quasi-ballistic to sequential tunneling resulted in a significant drop in the carrier extraction efficiency. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018 AIP Publishing. 
Fundamental studies on the carrier dynamics of periodic structure based-solar cells also revealed the great potential for performance enhancement. Aeberhard et al. performed a quantum-kinetic simulation to investigate the carrier transport in the GaAsSb/GaAsN type-II QW superlattice solar cells.34 It was reported that the electron and hole states were localized with increased period thickness, reflecting different carrier transportations with various period thicknesses. At the periodic thickness (dper) of 3 nm, photocarriers proceeded quasi-ballistically, which converted to sequential tunneling with a thermal component when the dper was increased to 12 nm. The transition of the carrier extraction from quasi-ballistic to sequential tunneling resulted in a significant drop in the carrier extraction efficiency (Fig. 42d and e). This work provided a theoretical background in optimizing the design of the GaAsSb/GaAsN superlattice towards efficient carrier extraction in solar cells.
4.1.5.2. Quantum dots solar cells. 
Quantum dots (QDs) are the sub-nanometre sized semiconducting nanoparticles, which show tunable electronic and optical properties through controlling the size of individual QDs or periodic structure of the QDs’ array due to the quantum mechanisms favored by solar cells. The parameters, such as the radius, dot-to-dot spacing and number of layers have a profound effect on the device performance.312 Computational simulations revealed that the PCEs of QD solar cells (QDSCs) are highly dependent on the structure of QDs. For Ge/Si QDSCs, QDs with a large volume have a stronger quantum confinement effect and lower ground-state energy, while a large thickness of QDs has a negative effect on the PCE. An optimum PCE of 27.22% was predicted for bilayer conical QD superlattices (QDSLs) with optimized size.
As mentioned, introducing PNSs could induce a miniband in the energy band, which significantly influences the carrier transport. The minibands could also form in closely-stacked QD through coupling the electronic states along the stacked directions.313 Sho and coworkers demonstrated that the miniband in InAs/GaAs QDSCs had the effect of spatially separating carriers in the built-in field, which subsequently increased the carrier lifetime and inter-subband absorption strength.314 In particular, the formation of a miniband significantly enhanced the two-step photocarrier generation. The temperature-dependent time-resolved-PL decay results revealed that a miniband was formed above 40 K. The photocurrent caused by the inter-subband excitation significantly increased with the formation of a miniband at temperatures above 40 K, which evidenced the effective carrier separation in the miniband. Lee et al. first reported a layer-by-layer method to fabricate distance-controlled CdTe QDSLs with modulated dimensions of the quantum resonance.315 Simply changing the concentration of the QD solution, the distances between the quantum dots were controlled, thus achieving the dimension modulation of 1D, 2D-monolayer and 3D-multilayer QD superlattices. Quantum resonance was achieved in 3D with high in-plane QD density, which means that the quantum resonance not only occurred in the stacking direction. Fig. 43a–d shows the excitation energy-dependent PL spectra of the CdTe solution and QD superlattices. Obviously, no PL peak shift was observed for the QD superlattices, while the peak positions shifted to lower energies with decreased excitation energy for the QD solution with no quantum resonance. This evidenced the formation of minibands in the CdTe QDSL with different dimensions. Introducing highly mismatched GaSb QD superlattices into bulk GaAs solar cells were illustrated to have the effect of preserving the VOC in the solar cells.316 By using the intermediate band material QD with a partially filled intermediate band, the sub-bandgap photon absorption was increased, which consequently enhanced the overall performance by 11.43% compared with the bulk single-junction GaAs solar cells.
 Fig. 43  Excitation energy dependence of the photoluminescence spectra of the (a) CdTe QD solution in which the quantum dots are randomly dispersed, and CdTe QDSLs exhibiting (b) 1D, (c) 2D, (d) 3D quantum resonances. The solid lines show PL spectra with different excitation energies with dashed lines to show the peak value. The excitation energy increases from top to bottom. The insets show the absorption spectra of each sample. The down arrows indicate the excitation energies in the PL measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 315. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publishing. (e) Schematic diagram of the InAs/GaAs QDSCs of five- and one-periods of InAs/GaAs QDSLs. (f) Excitation density-dependent JSC, (i) and VOC, (ii) at the excitation energy of 1.32 eV and temperature of 15 K. Blue and red circles represent the results of the devices with five- and one-periods superlattices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature Publishing. 
Tanibuchi and coworkers applied time-of-flight spectroscopy to investigate the carrier transport dynamics in InAs/GaAs QDSL.317 They observed a rapid carrier flow across the cell under the excitation with high power density, resulting from the state filling effect in the QDSCs. Under strong excitation, a large number of carriers were generated to fill the ground states. The carrier transport through the excited state miniband also occurred under the excitation above the critical power density, which accelerated the carrier transport. This work demonstrated a direct way to investigate the ultra-fast carrier dynamics of the QDSL with a probe structure in the quantum well structure, revealing fundamental knowledge. The studies on the carrier dynamics of the QDSL SCs address the importance of band engineering for efficient SCs, for which the band tuning effect of the periodic nanostructure is one of the strategies.
Hot carrier solar cells can utilize the excess energy of hot carriers to generate power, providing a great potential to increase the PCE. The low-dimensional periodic-nanostructure system has been demonstrated to have slowed carrier thermalization.318 The performance of hot-carrier QDSCs shows the dependence on the period of the periodic structures as well.319Fig. 43d illustrates the device structure of InAs/GaAs QDSL SCs with the superlattice period of 5 and 1. The light absorption of the device cell increased with a higher period, which subsequently improved the hot carrier extraction-induced VOC and JSC (Fig. 43e). The tunnel-assisted carrier escape is also suppressed in high-period QDSL as the adjacent superlattice re-traps the hot electrons, extracted to the conduction band edge.
4.1.5.3. Dye-sensitized solar cells. 
The dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) has been developed through mimicking photosynthesis in nature. Its easy-fabrication, low cost and high performance have attracted great research interests.320,321 The typical DSSCs consist of two primary reactions, which are photoexcitation of the dye by an oxidation reaction on photoanodes and the regeneration of the dye by a reduction reaction on counter electrodes, respectively. The counter electrode transfers electrons to the electrolyte for further process. Pt is the most commonly used material for counter electrodes in DSSCs. However, it is easy to be corroded and the cost is quite high.322 Periodic-nanostructured materials with unique properties are under the investigation for electrode materials. In 2014, Gratzel's group achieved a PCE of 13% with porphyrin dye-based dye-sensitized solar cell.323 Graphene nanoplatelets on FTO glass were employed as the counter electrode material. Wang et al. synthesized a superlattice counter electrode material with highly ordered P2Mo18/MoS2 superlattice nanosheets on C nanoparticles (P2Mo18/MoS2@C).324 The superlattice structure is depicted in Fig. 44a. A 1D interface was formed between the 2D nanosheet and the 3D nanoparticles, resulting in a large specific surface area of 174.2 m2g−1, providing more catalytic active sites. In this hierarchical structure, the electron transport kinetics improved. Cyclic voltammetry measurement and electrochemical Impedance spectroscopy revealed that the superlattice material showed prominent properties of high reduction peak current density, a low peak-to-peak separation and high catalytic capability and high diffusion rate of I3−, compared with Pt. A PCE of 8.85% was achieved by the DSSC with this material, while their Pt reference device demonstrated a PCE of 7.37% under AM 1.5G illumination (Fig. 44b).
 Fig. 44  (a) Schematic diagrams of the structure of C nanoparticles, P2Mo18/MoS2 superlattices and P2Mo18/MoS2@C. (b) IV curves of the dye-sensitized solar cell devices with different counter electrodes under AM 1.5G illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
4.1.5.4. Perovskite solar cells. 
Perovskite has attracted much attention over the last decade due to its superior optoelectrical properties. A record PCE of 25.5% has been achieved for single-junction perovskite solar cells, which is comparable to that of the silicon-based solar cells.308 A 2D perovskite with periodic quantum-well structure, which consists of alternately arranged metal halide layers and organic layers, exhibits better stability over the 3D perovskite materials, offering a great potential for solving the stability issue of the 3D counterparts.325 The Ruddlesden–Popper (RP) phase 2D perovskites have the general formula of A2A′n−1MnX3n+1, where the A site is occupied by a large alkylammonium cation, A′ represents the monovalent organic cation, M is occupied by a divalent metal cation, X is a halide, and n is the number of metal halide monolayer sheets between two neighboring organic layers. For the Dion-Jacobson (DJ) phase 2D perovskite, diammonium cations occupy the A site, forming the formula of AA′n−1MnX3n+1. By varying n, the thickness of each perovskite layer can be tuned.
In 2016, Hsinhan and coworkers adopted the hot-casting technique to fabricate perovskite solar cells based on the RP phase 2D mixed-cation (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite (n = 4) (BA: butylamine, MA: methylamine).326 The solar cell device with the structure of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13/PCBM/Al demonstrated a peak PCE of 12.52%, a VOC of 1.01 V, a JSC of 16.76 mA cm−2 and a FF of 74.13%. The 2D-based devices were far more stable than 3D solar cells. The unencapsulated 2D device experienced 20% of degradation in PCE after 200 hours of light illumination, while the 3D device only retained 40% of its original PCE after 24 hours. Their (BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 perovskite (n = 3) device with the same device structure had a PCE of 11.44%, a VOC of 1.056 V, a JSC of 14.37 mA cm−2 and a FF of 75.39%, which was inferior to the (BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (n = 4) device because the insulating organic layer inhibits the carrier transport in the out-of-plane direction. Constantinos et al. successfully fabricated a (BA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 perovskite (n = 5)-based solar cell with the architecture of FTO/PEDOT:PSS/(BA)2(MA)4Pb5I16/PCBM/Al.22 The corresponding PCE achieved 8.71% with a VOC of 1.0 V, a JSC of 11.44 mA cm−2 and a FF of 75.59%. However, the mixed-cation perovskite solar cells were not comparable to pure 3D phase solar cells in PCE, mostly due to the large bandgap.
Generally, the optoelectrical properties of the RP-phase perovskite would be improved when increasing the n value from 1 to 4, but deterioration occurs with higher n values. The mixed phases with different n values would lead to the structure distortion and, consequently, poor film quality. The coexistence of 2D and quasi-3D phase were reported in NpMA (1-naphthalenemethylammonium) and AnMA (9-anthracenemethylammonium)-based A2(MA)2Pb4I13 perovskite films (n = 4).327 Diffraction rings and Bragg spots were both observed in the GIWAXS patterns (Fig. 45a), implying the disordered orientation. The existence of several phases was clearer in the HRTEM image, in which various lattice spacings were found in different regions (Fig. 45b).
 Fig. 45  (a) GIWAXS patterns of the NpMA-Pb film (left) and the AnMA-Pb film (right). (b) HRTEM images of the NpMA-Pb film (left) and the AnMA-Pb film (right); insets: Fast Fourier transforms (FFT) of the selected area diffraction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 327. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagrams of the charge transport of MTEA (top) and BA-based (bottom) 2D perovskite films. (d) J–V curves of (MTEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 and (BA)2(MA)4Pb5I16-based SCs under AM 1.5G illumination; inset: schematic diagram of the 2DRP perovskite-based solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publishing. 
To enhance the interaction between the two adjacent inorganic frames, MTEA+ (MTEA: 2-(methylthio)ethylamine) was adopted as the spacer cation in the RP-phase 2D perovskite structure.328 As illustrated in Fig. 45c, an extra sulphur–sulphur interaction was formed between the two META+ ions in addition to the weak van der Waals force, which strengthened the interaction between the two inorganic layers and induced a highly ordered orientation, facilitating the carrier transport across layers. Distinct and discrete Bragg spots were observed in the GIWAXS pattern of (MTEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 (n = 4) perovskite, suggesting the highly oriented crystal phase. Accordingly, a lower defect density and higher carrier mobility were characterized. A PCE of 18.06% was recorded for the device of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/(MTEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16/PC61BM/Cr/AU with a VOC of 1.088 V, a JSC of 21.77 mAcm−2 and a FF of 76.27% (Fig. 45d). The device maintained 87.1% of its initial PCE after 1000 hours of operation under AM 1.5G illumination in a glovebox.
In the RP phase 2D perovskite, the two adjacent organic layers interact with each other by van der Waals force, while in in the DJ phase, the relatively weak force is substituted by the hydrogen bonding between two amino groups, having the potential to reinforce the structure stability. Li et al. reported on an ultra-stable DJ phase (PDA)(MA)3Pb4I13 (PDA+: 1,3-propanediamine) 2D perovskite solar cell.31 The molecular structure is illustrated in Fig. 46a. The amino groups at both ends of the PDA2+ bound with the inorganic frame by hydrogen bonding. The optoelectrical properties of (PDA)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 with n = 1, 2, 3, 4 were characterized. With increased n values, a broader light absorption was observed (Fig. 46b), as the bandgaps were reduced from 2.46 eV for n = 1 to 1.63 eV for n = 4, suggesting a tunable bandgap. Solar cell devices with the structure of FTO/TiO2/(PDA)(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au were fabricated. The PCE increased with the increase of n. The device with (PDA)(MA)3Pb4I13 had the best performance of a PCE of 13.3%, a VOC of 0.98 V, a JSC of 19.5 mA cm−2 and a FF of 69% (Fig. 46c), while the RP phase 2D (PA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (PA+: propylamine) perovskite-based solar cell device displayed the highest PCE of only 8.8%. Through TRPL and EIS measurements, it was found that the carrier extraction of the DJ-based device at the FTO/TiO2 side was more efficient, and the charge recombination resistance is over two times larger than the RP-based device. The (PDA)(MA)3Pb4I13-based solar cell showed ultrahigh stability, which retained 95% of the original efficiency after the exposure to ambient air for 4000 hours (Fig. 46d) and to light illumination for 3000 hours. Shi et al. introduced asymmetric diammonium DMAPA (DMAPA: 3-(dimethylammonium)-1-propylammonium) into the perovskite structure and synthesized (DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13 with n = 4.329 The solar cell device with the structure of FTO/TiO2/(DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13/Spiro-OMeTAD/Au exhibited the performance of a PCE of 15.16%, a VOC of 1.06 V, a JSC of 22.07 mA cm−2 and a FF of 65% (Fig. 46e). 80% of its initial PCE was maintained after the 300 hours under AM 1.5G illumination in air. Bat-El reported on the DJ-phase perovskite with a high n value of 10, (BzDA)(Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8)9Pb10(I0.93Br0.07)31 (BzDA:1,4-benzenedimethanamonium).330 BzDA consists of diammonium groups and an aromatic ring, which could stabilize the molecular structure into an arranged orientation, and benefit the carrier transport with free π-electrons. Intensity-modulated photocurrent and photovoltage spectroscopies (IMVS/IMPS) and transient photovoltage and photocurrent (TPV/TPC) measurement revealed that this 2D perovskite exceeded the 3D perovskite ((Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8)Pb(I 0.93Br0.07)3) in its recombination lifetime, charge collection efficiency, carrier diffusion length and carrier extraction under bias, mostly contributed from the molecular structure of BzDA. The best performance of solar cell devices in a mesoporous configuration, which is illustrated in Fig. 46f, displayed a PCE of 15.6%, a VOC of 1.02 V, a JSC of 21.5 mA cm−2 and a FF of 71% (Fig. 46g). The 2D-based device exhibited better stability than the 3D-based device, which retained 80% of the initial PCE after 84 hours under the dark in an ambient environment.
 Fig. 46  (a) Schematic diagram of the RP and DJ Phase 2D Layered Perovskites. (b) UV-Vis spectra of (PDA)(MA)n−1Pbn+1I3n=1; inset: color variation of the films with the increased n values. (c) J–V curve of the device based on (PDA) (MA)3Pb4I13 under AM 1.5G illumination; inset: stabilized photocurrent measured at the maximum power point (Vmp = 0.72 V). (d) Stability test of different SCs in ambient air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) J–V curves (forward and reverse scans) and related PV parameters for the ‘champion’ SC based on (DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13. Reprinted with permission from ref. 329. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic diagram of the perovskite SC based on (BzDA)(Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8)9Pb10(I0.93Br0.07)31 and the organization of the perovskite layers on the substrate. (g) J–V curve of the best device based on (BzDA)(Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8)9Pb10(I0.93Br0.07)31. Reprinted with permission from ref. 330. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The 2D perovskite has demonstrated great potential for ultra-stable solar cells, but the enhancement in PCE is highly desired. Generally, 2D perovskites with n = 1 are not suitable for solar cell devices despite the high stability. This is because of the inefficient carrier transport limited by the strong quantum-well effect,331 while the high n values decrease the stability due to increased 3D compositions. So, the rational design of a perovskite structure with optimized n value should be considered. It is worth noting that during the synthesis, the phase purity is critical. A mixed structure with multiple n values would lead to low film crystallinity with low uniformity and pinholes, which is detrimental to device performance.

4.2. Optoelectronic and electronic devices
Forming PNSs is a novel approach to manipulate the optical and electronic properties, compared with the conventional doping strategy. By exploiting the talent of the PNSs, photodetectors, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), memory devices have been realized by a lot of groups, which will be discussed under this subtitle.

4.2.1. Photodetector. 
Photodetectors can convert light signal into electrical signal, which are widely used for imaging, security, and sensing purposes. Since the periodic nanostructured semiconductors demonstrate improved optoelectronic properties compared to their bulk competitors, they are able to serve as excellent candidates for photodetectors.
Type-II superlattices are suitable for infrared detection due to the tunable band structure towards a small band gap, reduced Auger recombination,332 enhanced light absorption due to the overlap of the electron–hole wavefunction and excellent material quality.333 Razeghi and coworkers reported on the InAs/InAs1−xSbx type-II superlattice nBn photodetector for its long wavelength infrared detection, comprising two n-doped superlattice active regions and a conduction-band-barrier.334 A thin layer of AlAs was introduced into the middle of the InAs layers, which separated the InAs quantum well and induced the conduction-band-barrier due to the large bandgap of AlAs. The barrier had a continuous valence band alignment with the n-doped active regions so that the diffusion of the holes was allowed, while the transportation of electrons was blocked. The device based on the InAs/InAs0.45Sb0.55 type-II superlattices exhibited a 50% cut-off wavelength of 10 μm at 77 K, which achieved the best responsivity (R) of 3.47 A W−1 under front side illumination without anti-reflection coating. The dark current density was characterized to be 4.4 × 10−4 A cm−2 at −90 mV bias at 77 K. The detectivity (D*) of the device stayed almost constant in the wavelength range from 5 μm to 9.5 μm at low biases between −100 mV and −50 mV, suggesting the potential in infrared imaging applications. InAs/InAsSb type-II superlattices are also applied to mid-infrared photodetectors. Evangelia et al. reported an innovative nBn-structure photodetector in which superlattices were grown in GaSb/AlSb/Si buffer by heteroepitaxial growth.335 AlSb/GaSb dislocation filters were used to introduce additional strain to promote the growth of GaSb on Si. Fig. 47a is the schematic diagram of the nBn-structure device, demonstrating a mid-infrared response (Fig. 47b). In the spectral range from 3.7 to 4.9 μm, the device presented a R of 0.88 A W−1, an EQE of 25.6%, a D* of 1.5 × 1010 Jones and a 50% cut-off wavelength at 5.4 μm under −100 mV bias at 200 K (Fig. 47c).
 Fig. 47  (a) Schematic diagram of the InAs/InAsSb type-II superlattice nBn structure grown on top of the GaSb/AlSb/Si buffer, using AlSb/GaSb dislocation filters. (b) Normalized R spectra for the detector at different temperatures (CO2 absorption shown in grey, water vapor absorption in blue). (c) Total spectral R and D* as a function of temperature in the 3.7 to 4.9 μm spectral band. The operation bias voltage for all measurements was 100 mV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 335. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Nanowires presenting high photocurrent gain are promising for photodetector applications. Dai et al. first reported the CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowires for UV photodetectors.135 The superlattice structure, which was synthesized by a micro-environment-controlled co-evaporation technique, had high purity with lengths of up to hundreds of μm, as shown in Fig. 48a and b. Photodetector devices were fabricated on p-type Si semiconductors with a SiO2 layer (Fig. 48c), which exhibited an on/off ratio of 105, a R of 2.5 × 103 A W−1, an EQE of 8.6 × 105 and a response time of 10 ms at 5 V bias under 365 nm excitation with the light intensity of 3.75 mW cm−2. This performance was much higher than that of the pure-CdS nanostructure-based photodetectors, and attributed to the efficient charge transport (Fig. 48d for superlattice device, Fig. 48e for pure-CdS device). Fig. 48f illustrates the band alignment of the superlattice nanowire, where a built-in electric field at the CdS/SnS2 interface promoted the transport of electrons to the CdS side and the holes to the CdS/SnS2 side.
 Fig. 48  (a) SEM images of the CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowires; inset: the magnification SEM of the typical sample. (b) The XRD images of the CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowires, showing narrow peaks. (c) Schematic of a CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowire based photodetector. The bias-dependent photocurrent as a function of the incident light intensity (at 365 nm) of the (d) CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowire-based photodetector, and (e) pure CdS nanowire-based photodetector. (f) Schematic diagram of the energy band for the CdS superlattice nanowire under light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic diagram of the single GaN nanowires with 20 periods of the AlN/GaN:Ge heterostructure in the AlN shell, and HAADF STEM images of two coalesced nanowires with different magnifications. The bright and dark grey areas correspond to GaN and AlN, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic diagrams of the evolution of the band diagram under (i) negative bias, (ii) zero bias, and (iii) positive bias. The Fermi levels are indicated by a dash-dotted blue line in each diagram. (i) Photocurrent spectra of a single nanowire at different biases (±0.5, ±1, and ±2 V). Solid (dashed) lines correspond to a positive (negative) bias. Shadowed areas outline the difference in the response between the positive and negative bias. (j) EBIC heat maps at (i) −2 V bias and (ii) +2 V bias superimposed on an SEM image of the nanowire under study. The location of the GaN/AlN superlattice is outlined with green vertical lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Single GaN nanowires with 20 periods of the AlN/GaN:Ge heterostructure in the AlN shell were developed for visible-band photodetectors (Fig. 48g).32 Due to the coalescence of nanowires with a displacement of the GaN:Ge nanodisks, higher dark current and lower photosensitivity factors were observed as the effective superlattice length was reduced by a smaller number of the active superlattice periods (Fig. 48g). This work indicates that the coalescence of nanowires would reduce the homogeneity, influencing the device performance and leading to low reproducibility. Maria and coworkers reported the single-nanowire photodetector based on GaN with 30 periods of GaN/AlN superlattices with good homogeneity.336 A highly-n-doped GaN capping segment was introduced into the structure, leading to a bias-dependent light response. As illustrated in Fig. 48h, there were two built-in electric fields existing in the system that were induced by the polarization differences between the GaN stem and the superlattice, and between the superlattice and the GaN cap. Under positive biases, a photocurrent was favorably generated in the GaN/AlN superlattice (Fig. 48j-i), while under negative biases, the collection of carriers in the GaN stem was favored (Fig. 48j-ii). As a result, the device showed enhanced responses in the 280–330 nm range at positive biases, and in the 330–360 nm range at negative biases (Fig. 48i).
Ho et al. fabricated a InGaZnO superlattice nanowire-based UV photodetector,337 where the superlattice structure consisted of In, Ga/Zn–O layers and In–O layers. They tuned the material properties by varying the Ga concentration in the superlattices, which subsequently changed the oxygen states with the reduced oxygen vacancies. The best photodetector performance was obtained with In1.8Ga1.8Zn2.4O7 superlattices, delivering an on/off ratio of 1.9 × 105, a R of 1.95 × 105 A W−1, an EQE of 9.28 × 107% and a rise time of 0.93 s at 1 V bias under 261 nm excitation with the light intensity of 2.3 mW cm−2. Interestingly, a transparent photodetector device was developed, which showed a transparency of over 80% in the visible light range. Wei et al. demonstrated highly-sensitive superlattice structure InSe-based photodetectors.192 At a bias of 1 V, their device showed a high R of 1.7 × 104 A W−1, a D* of 1.4 × 1013 Jones, an EQE of 1.7 × 107% and a response time of 20 ms, which is much better than the performance of pristine InSe-based photodetector devices. The superior device performance was largely contributed from the lower contact resistance, which was 2.4 kΩ, 210 times lower than that of pristine InSe.
Periodic-nanostructure integrated perovskite materials also present great potential in photodetector applications. In Li's work, a 1D nanograting bonded porous 2D photonic crystal perovskite photodetector demonstrated a R of 12.67 A W−1 and a D* of 3.22 × 1013 Jones at 10 V bias, under white light illumination of 32 μW cm−2, which was 6–7 times higher than the typical perovskite film-based device with a R of 1.82 A W−1 and a D* of 5.11 × 1012 Jones.198 This enhancement in performance resulted from the improved light absorbance by introducing highly ordered nanogratings and 2D porous structure. However, due to the limitation of the measurement set up, the response time was as long as 21 ms for the rise time and 67 ms for the decay time.


4.2.2. Light-emitting diodes. 
A light-emitting diode (LED) is a semiconductor light source, which emits when a certain current flows through it. It obtains several advantages over the traditional technology in terms of lower power consumption, longer lifetime, faster switching and other properties. The PNSs show great potential in the LED applications for its band-modulating capability.

Fig. 49a illustrates the device structure of a deep ultraviolet (DUV) LED, of which the n-type confinement layer consisted of stepped and 2 period superlattice structure of n-type Al0.6Ga0.4N/Al0.57Ga0.43N.338 The superlattices showed the band-modulating effect on the device. As shown in Fig. 49b, the introduction of a superlattice lowered the effective barrier height of the carriers, which subsequently increased the carrier concentration with efficient carrier injection, guaranteeing the high radiative recombination rate. The electrostatic fields in the QWs were also decreased, enhancing the confinement and reducing carrier leakage in the active region. The DUV LED had an emission peak at 289 nm with the maximum IQE of 53.9% and a light output power of 39.52 mW, which were improved by two times of those of the simple device (26.8% and 19.46 mW, respectively). Efforts were also made to modify the intermediate p-region in the DUV LEDs. Ramit et al. specially designed superlattice quaternary nitride alloy materials for the p-region.339 The material compositions are illustrated in Fig. 49c. All devices had an emission peak at 272.96 nm. The DUV LED device of structure D with p-Al0.62In0.03Ga0.35N/p-Al0.5In0.03Ga0.47N superlattice material with 5 periods demonstrated the best device performance. Its output power was 28.3 times that of the conventional DUV LED with structure A at the current density of 200 A cm−2, and the maximum internal quantum efficiency (IQE) achieved was 93.92%, as shown in Fig. 49d and e. Especially, the DUV LED in the structure had an efficiency drop of 0.84%, lowered by 99.08% in comparison to the conventional structured device, contributed from the lower energy barrier for the holes. A rational design of the composition and the period structure of the periodic nanostructure material provide more chances of performance enhancement.
 Fig. 49  (a) Schematic diagram of the DUV LED with n-type Al0.6Ga0.4N/Al0.57Ga0.43N superlattices. (b) Electrostatic fields in the QWs of the deep ultraviolet LED at 120 mA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 338. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagrams of the four structures (A–D) of the DUV LEDs. (d) The output power and (e) IQE for the four LED structures as a function of the current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 339. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Paliwal et al. designed GaN/In0.18Al0.82N-based short period superlattices as a top waveguide core and cladding layers for LEDs emitting at 450 nm.340 As reviewed in sections 3.3 and 3.4, PNSs have a profound effect on the band structure. Here, the alternately arranged p-type GaN and In0.18Al0.82N layers induced the formation of a stepped mini-band structure, which increased the energy barrier height of the electrons towards the p-type contact side. At the same time, the band modulation also improved the hole transport, resulting in enhanced light output power (248 mW at 500 mA) and reduced dynamic resistance (0.94 Ω). It was also reported that an enhancement in the optical confinement factor from 3.28% to 3.42% led to better optical confinement.


4.2.3. Memory devices. 
Memory is one of the key components of electronic devices for information technology. Especially, random resistive access memory (RRAM) has been acknowledged as a promising candidate for the next-generation non-volatile memories. The RRAM is operated through resistive switching behaviors occurring between the high resistance state (HRS) and low resistance state (LRS), originating by the formation or deformation of a conductive filament across the dielectric materials or the generation of oxygen vacancies due to oxygen atom diffusion from the oxide-based dielectric materials.341–343 In designing RRAM devices, PNSs have attracted major interests due to its improved properties compared to their mixed counterparts, such as significant power efficiency and switching properties. The bipolar resistive-switching characteristics were observed in LA0.7Sr0.3MnO3/SrRuO3 superlattices.344 A planar-structure memory device with 30 layers of LA0.7Sr0.3MnO3/SrRuO3 presented a memory window, which was described by an on/off ratio of ∼14, and an endurance of 30–40 cycles. As an excellent semiconductor material, halide perovskites have also been employed in RRAM devices. Wang et al. first reported the memory application of the mixed-halide perovskite MAPbI3−xClx.345 The device with the structure of Au/MAPbI3−xClx/FTO showed a bipolar resistive switching (RS) characteristic at low bias (<1 V), keeping an endurance of over 100 cycles and a retention time of 104 s. However, the on/off ratio was relatively small, making it difficult to distinguish the storage information. A multi-level memory device was developed on layered 2D perovskite (BzA)2CuBr4 (BzA: benzylamine), which achieved an on/off ratio as high as 108.346Fig. 50a is the IV-curve of the voltage sweep of the device Ag/PMMA/(BzA)2CuBr4/Pt, of which the memory window is large. Furthermore, the device showed reliable HRS and LRS characteristics at different compliance currents, confirming its capacity for multi-level storage (Fig. 50b). The good stability of the 2D perovskites also equipped the device with high endurance of 2000 cycles and a retention time of over 1000 s.
 Fig. 50  (a) I–V curve of the Ag/PMMA/(BzA)2CuBr4/Pt memory device for the first voltage sweep, and (b) multi-level I–V curves measured at a compliance current from 10−5 A to 10−1 A with an interval of 10−1 A. Applied biases for SET and RESET ranged between +0.7 and −0.7 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 346. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic structure of the iPCM devices based on Ge–Te/Sb–Te superlattices. (d) Proposed switching model for iPCM. Ge, Sb, and Te atoms are shown in green, magenta and yellow color, respectively. (e) Time-domain profile of the applied voltage and the resulting current during the bipolar read–write process in iPCM. The zoomed areas at the bottom of the figure show the voltage and current profiles for the RESET and SET processes, and the zoomed area at the top shows the voltage and current profiles for the read process. The three dashed lines in the RESET and SET cases indicate the start of the applied switching voltage, the transition state during the switching process, and the end of that transition. The four dashed lines for the case of the read process indicate the start of the increase in the applied voltage, the maximum of the applied voltage, the start of the decrease in the applied voltage and the end of the read voltage pulse. Reprinted with permission from ref. 348. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. 
Interfacial phase change memory (iPCM) is another type of memory device, which is driven by the changes of the optoelectrical properties of the material with different phases. It was reported that the arrangement of Ge–Te–Sb into a superlattice structure can reduce the switching power consumption, as well as improve the electrical properties.347 Mitrofanov et al. demonstrated a high-speed iPCM device based on the Ge–Te/Sb–Te superlattices.348 The device structure is shown in Fig. 50c. In this case, there were two polarity-sensitive structural states in the Ge–Te/Sb–Te superlattices that could be tuned by the applied bias, leading to the bipolar switching. The transition between LRS and HRS originated from the switching of Ge–Te–Ge–Te/Te–Ge–Te–Ge stacking and Te–Ge–Ge–Te stacking (Fig. 50d).349 The superlattice device had an endurance of 104 cycles and a retention time of over 200 hours. Interestingly, the switching speed of the superlattice device was 1000 times faster than that of the conventional Ge–Sb–Te alloy-based iPCM (Fig. 50e).

5. Challenges and opportunities
In this review, we have discussed the advances in periodic nanostructured materials, focusing on their preparation methods, properties and applications in energy conversion, optoelectronics and electronics. PNSs provide a versatile platform for property modulation and various applications due to their influence on the properties at the atomic and molecular level, collective properties of the corresponding compositions, and synergistic effects. The examples discussed in this review have already showcased their great potential for advanced applications. However, there are still challenges that need to be overcome by providing great opportunities for further studies, and even towards commercialization as summarized below.
(1) The preparation strategies cover a wide range of methods, including vapour phase, solution phase and other complex methods. However, most of these methods suffered from flaws of low production efficiency, uncontrollable morphology and stability issues. For instance, the CVD method can precisely control the morphology, but it is hard to produce lateral PNSs in a large scale; the complex preparation methods used to synthesis DNA-mediated PNSs and most of the moiré superlattices result in low-scale production; the substrate-free self-assembly method cannot precisely control the repeating layers of 2D layered PNSs; and basically every supramolecular assembled materials will face the mechanical strength issue since the nature of non-covalent interactions cannot provide a permanent structure with high durability. Hence, in preparing PNSs, there are opportunities for future studies to either integrate the current preparation methods or develop new methods to balance these shortcomings. For instance, adding coatings to the self-assembled PNSs can permanently maintain their periodic structures. Introducing a microfluidics technique to prepare the supramolecular assembled PNSs can more precisely control the concentration and ratio of each component in a relatively small space, thereby controlling the composition of PNSs, as well as preserving the large-scale production.
(2) A variety of emergent properties have been investigated in various types of PNS, often properties that are absent in their parent compounds. However, the constituents of PNS are mostly restricted to one type of material, e.g., oxide superlattices, with the exception of hybrid organic-2D PNS. It will be interesting to further explore the formation of PNS by combining different classes of materials, e.g., 2D van der Waals materials and 2D metal oxides in terms of inducing new emergent properties by harnessing the synergistic effect. In the organic–inorganic hybrid PNS, the real atomic structure of the organic intercalation layer remains to be clarified. This is in stark contrast to, for example, oxide superlattices in which TEM provides an accurate description of the interfacial atomic arrangements. In addition, the intrinsic properties of the organic species are less explored in the hybrid PNS. It will be interesting to introduce the molecular species with emergent properties, such as magnetism, to combine with the 2D van der Waals layers to exploit the interfacial coupling for new functionalities. In terms of forming novel PNSs, besides the adjustment of compositions or dimensions, the idea of twisting the bilayer graphene with a certain angle opens up a new avenue to induce the emergent superconducting state or strongly correlated phases. This intriguing architecture greatly inspires researchers to try more 2D materials, such as TMDs. However, the fabrication of such structures remains laborious with very low device yields, placing significant challenges for the practical applications of twistronics. Innovations in the fabrication technology for the precise assembly of 2D van der Waals materials with arbitrary sequence and rotation are desired, for example, high throughput automation enabled through robotic arms and machine-learning approaches.
(3) The extraordinary properties of PNSs offer great potential for various applications, and current studies have already demonstrated their unique contribution. For instance, overall water splitting needs to integrate both HER and OER catalytic activities into one catalyst, which is the strength of PNSs since they can collect properties from each composition and enhance the performance via synergistic effects. Introducing PNSs with non-precious compositions to catalysts for fuel cells can reduce the ratio of precious metals in catalysts to further decrease their costs, and enhance their catalytic activity via synergistic effects. Importantly, the tunable optoelectrical properties from the easy-to-modulate periodic structure provide more opportunities to fabricate high-performance applications. By introducing PNSs, enhancements of the carrier transport and light absorption could be achieved for improving the performance of solar cells, LEDs, photodetectors and other optoelectronic devices. The modulation of bandgaps of PNSs can be well suited to the demand of photochemical catalysts, which is also favored in the fabrication of LEDs with desired emission peaks and photodetectors with specific detection range. However, an in-depth understanding of the effect of PNSs for various applications is still limited. For example, studies of the carrier dynamics in 2D perovskite materials are highly required. Although 2D perovskites exhibit superior stability over their 3D counterparts, the quantum confinement still hinders the PCE of solar cells. Performance breakthrough relies on the precise modulation of the optoelectrical properties for PNSs with solid knowledge of the structure.
In summary, faced with all of the benefits, challenges and opportunities of PNSs, the up-to-date studies have resulted in many breakthroughs. However, these breakthroughs are inadequate, and there still exists the gap between laboratory research and industrial applications. After comprehensive review and constructive presentation in this review, we hope to shed some light on the further advancement of next-generation PNSs to be built-up on novel advanced materials for the scientific communities of this specific research area. With further synergistic combination of the lateral development in data-driven materials discoveries, in situ microscopies and spectroscopies, and high throughput manufacturing, the development of PNS science and technology should be further accelerated in the near future.
Author contributions
All of the authors contributed to this review paper.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from the Australian Research Council (DP190100295, LE190100014, FT160100207, DE180101253), and the ANU Futures Scheme (Q4601024). D. Q. acknowledges the continued support from the Queensland University of Technology (QUT) through the Centre for Materials Science.
References
D. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Hodges, E. L. Cates and J.-H. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 642–650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 461–463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Gong, N. Dewangan, K. Hidajat, B. C. Gates and S. Kawi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2937–3004 RSC .
D. Peer, J. M. Karp, S. Hong, O. C. Farokhzad, R. Margalit and R. Langer, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 2, 751–760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pelaz, C. Alexiou, R. A. Alvarez-Puebla, F. Alves, A. M. Andrews, S. Ashraf, L. P. Balogh, L. Ballerini, A. Bestetti, C. Brendel, S. Bosi, M. Carril, W. C. W. Chan, C. Chen, X. Chen, X. Chen, Z. Cheng, D. Cui, J. Du, C. Dullin, A. Escudero, N. Feliu, M. Gao, M. George, Y. Gogotsi, A. Grünweller, Z. Gu, N. J. Halas, N. Hampp, R. K. Hartmann, M. C. Hersam, P. Hunziker, J. Jian, X. Jiang, P. Jungebluth, P. Kadhiresan, K. Kataoka, A. Khademhosseini, J. Kopeček, N. A. Kotov, H. F. Krug, D. S. Lee, C.-M. Lehr, K. W. Leong, X.-J. Liang, M. Ling Lim, L. M. Liz-Marzán, X. Ma, P. Macchiarini, H. Meng, H. Möhwald, P. Mulvaney, A. E. Nel, S. Nie, P. Nordlander, T. Okano, J. Oliveira, T. H. Park, R. M. Penner, M. Prato, V. Puntes, V. M. Rotello, A. Samarakoon, R. E. Schaak, Y. Shen, S. Sjöqvist, A. G. Skirtach, M. G. Soliman, M. M. Stevens, H.-W. Sung, B. Z. Tang, R. Tietze, B. N. Udugama, J. S. VanEpps, T. Weil, P. S. Weiss, I. Willner, Y. Wu, L. Yang, Z. Yue, Q. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X.-E. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhou and W. J. Parak, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2313–2381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. R. Smith and S. S. Gambhir, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 901–986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, C. Tan, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2660–2677 RSC .
Q. Zhang, E. Uchaker, S. L. Candelaria and G. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3127–3171 RSC .
C. Li, Q. Cao, F. Wang, Y. Xiao, Y. Li, J.-J. Delaunay and H. Zhu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4981–5037 RSC .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 31–35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, C. Li, M. Grätzel, R. Kostecki and S. S. Mao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 7909–7937 RSC .
X. Duan, Y. Huang, Y. Cui, J. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2001, 409, 66–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Das, C. D. Vecitis, A. Schulze, B. Cao, A. F. Ismail, X. Lu, J. Chen and S. Ramakrishna, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6946–7020 RSC .
Z. Zeng, Y. Xu, Z. Zhang, Z. Gao, M. Luo, Z. Yin, C. Zhang, J. Xu, B. Huang, F. Luo, Y. Du and C. Yan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1109–1143 RSC .
Z. Lu, G. P. Neupane, G. Jia, H. Zhao, D. Qi, Y. Du, Y. Lu and Z. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001127 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 16–24 RSC .
H. Luo, X. Zhou, C. Ellingford, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, K. Zhou, D. Zhang, C. R. Bowen and C. Wan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4424–4465 RSC .
P. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Duan and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 3129–3151 RSC .
P. Xiong, B. Sun, N. Sakai, R. Ma, T. Sasaki, S. Wang, J. Zhang and G. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. K. Ryu, R. Frisenda and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 11498–11510 RSC .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. M. M. Soe, H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, D. H. Cao, F. Liu, B. Traoré, C. Katan, J. Even, A. D. Mohite and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem, 2017, 2, 427–440 CAS .
J. Zhuang, C. Liu, Q. Gao, Y. Liu, H. Feng, X. Xu, J. Wang, J. Zhao, S. X. Dou, Z. Hu and Y. Du, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5059–5065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Hou, T.-Y. Cai, S. Ju and M.-R. Shen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8552–8562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Noor-A-Alam, O. Z. Olszewski and M. Nolan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20482–20490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Zhao, K. Mu, H. Shan, Y. Guo, J. Wu, Y. Su, Q. Wu, Z. Sun, A. Zhao, X. Cui, C. Wu and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 16398–16404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, S. Chen, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 931–940 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiong, R. Ma, N. Sakai, L. Nurdiwijayanto and T. Sasaki, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 997–1005 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Islam, M. Kim, X. Jin, S. M. Oh, N.-S. Lee, H. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 952–960 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature, 2018, 556, 43–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmad, P. Fu, S. Yu, Q. Yang, X. Liu, X. Wang, X. Wang, X. Guo and C. Li, Joule, 2019, 3, 794–806 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lähnemann, M. Den Hertog, P. Hille, M. a. de la Mata, T. Fournier, J. Schörmann, J. Arbiol, M. Eickhoff and E. Monroy, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3260–3267 CrossRef PubMed .
I. E. H. Sayed, N. Jain, M. A. Steiner, J. F. Geisz and S. M. Bedair, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 111, 082107 CrossRef .
U. Aeberhard, A. Gonzalo and J. M. Ulloa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2018, 112, 213904 CrossRef .
C. Jin, W. Geng, L. Wang, W. Han, D. Zheng, S. Hu, M. Ye, Z. Xu, Y. Ji, J. Zhao, Z. Chen, G. Wang, Y. Tang, Y. Zhu, X. Ma and L. Chen, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 9810–9816 RSC .
A. Dong, J. Chen, P. M. Vora, J. M. Kikkawa and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2010, 466, 474–477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Y. Wang, T. Zhou, H. Zhang, X. Sun, J. Tang, L. Zhang, A. M. Al-Enizi, Z. Yang and G. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14305–14312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ramesh and D. G. Schlom, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 257–268 CrossRef .
H. Li, Y. Li, A. Aljarb, Y. Shi and L.-J. Li, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6134–6150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 12162–12174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhan, Z. Liu, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan and J. Lou, Small, 2012, 8, 966–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-K. Liu, W. Zhang, Y.-H. Lee, Y.-C. Lin, M.-T. Chang, C.-Y. Su, C.-S. Chang, H. Li, Y. Shi, H. Zhang, C.-S. Lai and L.-J. Li, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1538–1544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-H. Lee, X.-Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, M.-T. Chang, C.-T. Lin, K.-D. Chang, Y.-C. Yu, J. T.-W. Wang, C.-S. Chang, L.-J. Li and T.-W. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2320–2325 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. Li, X. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. Zhang, A. Pan, J. Jiang, R. Yu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, S. Lei, G. Ye, B. Li, Y. He, K. Keyshar, X. Zhang, Q. Wang, J. Lou, Z. Liu, R. Vajtai, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6135–6141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, S. Wu, A. M. Sanchez, J. J. P. Peters, R. Beanland, J. S. Ross, P. Rivera, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. Xu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1096–1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Heo, J. H. Sung, G. Jin, J.-H. Ahn, K. Kim, M.-J. Lee, S. Cha, H. Choi and M.-H. Jo, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3803–3810 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Y. Li, Y. Shi, C.-C. Cheng, L.-S. Lu, Y.-C. Lin, H.-L. Tang, M.-L. Tsai, C.-W. Chu, K.-H. Wei, J.-H. He, W.-H. Chang, K. Suenaga and L.-J. Li, Science, 2015, 349, 524 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xie, L. Tu, Y. Han, L. Huang, K. Kang, K. U. Lao, P. Poddar, C. Park, D. A. Muller, R. A. DiStasio and J. Park, Science, 2018, 359, 1131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, P. Chen, X. Duan, K. Zang, J. Luo and X. Duan, Science, 2017, 357, 788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Mahjouri-Samani, M.-W. Lin, K. Wang, A. R. Lupini, J. Lee, L. Basile, A. Boulesbaa, C. M. Rouleau, A. A. Puretzky, I. N. Ivanov, K. Xiao, M. Yoon and D. B. Geohegan, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Oldfield, D. G. McCulloch, C. P. Huynh, K. Sears and S. C. Hawkins, Carbon, 2015, 94, 378–385 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gao, Y. Li, J. Guo, M. Ni, M. Liao, H. Mo and J. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 8787–8795 RSC .
W. Dang, H. Peng, H. Li, P. Wang and Z. Liu, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2870–2876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lin, D. Wu, Y. Zhou, W. Huang, W. Jiang, W. Zheng, S. Zhao, C. Jin, Y. Guo, H. Peng and Z. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13274–13277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. A. Perdigão, E. W. Perkins, J. Ma, P. A. Staniec, B. L. Rogers, N. R. Champness and P. H. Beton, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12539–12542 CrossRef PubMed .
D. E. Barlow, L. Scudiero and K. W. Hipps, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 4413–4421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Huang, W. Chen, H. Li, J. Ma, J. Pflaum and A. T. S. Wee, Small, 2010, 6, 70–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Smerdon, R. B. Rankin, J. P. Greeley, N. P. Guisinger and J. R. Guest, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3086–3094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stepanow, M. Lingenfelder, A. Dmitriev, H. Spillmann, E. Delvigne, N. Lin, X. Deng, C. Cai, J. V. Barth and K. Kern, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 229–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bouju, C. Mattioli, G. Franc, A. Pujol and A. Gourdon, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1407–1444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. W. Hipps, L. Scudiero, D. E. Barlow and M. P. Cooke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2126–2127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Scudiero, K. W. Hipps and D. E. Barlow, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 2903–2909 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Theobald, N. S. Oxtoby, M. A. Phillips, N. R. Champness and P. H. Beton, Nature, 2003, 424, 1029–1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. de Wild, S. Berner, H. Suzuki, H. Yanagi, D. Schlettwein, S. Ivan, A. Baratoff, H.-J. Guentherodt and T. A. Jung, ChemPhysChem, 2002, 3, 881–885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. K. Yap and D. Zhang, Physical Vapor Deposition, in Encyclopedia of Nanotechnology, ed. B. Bhushan, Springer, Netherlands, Dordrecht,  2014, pp. 1–8 Search PubMed .
T. C. Harman, P. J. Taylor, M. P. Walsh and B. E. LaForge, Science, 2002, 297, 2229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Taniguchi, T. Ishibe, N. Naruse, Y. Mera, M. M. Alam, K. Sawano and Y. Nakamura, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 25428–25434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A.-L. Hansen, T. Dankwort, M. Winkler, J. Ditto, D. C. Johnson, J. D. Koenig, K. Bartholomé, L. Kienle and W. Bensch, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 6518–6522 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, L. Wu, M. Wang, N. Swain, M. Motapothula, Y. Luo, K. Han, M. Chen, C. Ye, A. J. Yang, H. Xu, D.-c. Qi, A. T. N'Diaye, C. Panagopoulos, D. Primetzhofer, L. Shen, P. Sengupta, J. Ma, Z. Feng, C.-W. Nan and X. Renshaw Wang, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2020, 7, 011401 CAS .
G. Zhou, F. Jiang, J. Zang, Z. Quan and X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1463–1467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, K. S. Choi, S. Yoon, W. Sohn, S. P. Hong, T. H. Lee, H. An, S. Y. Cho, S.-Y. Kim, D. H. Kim, T. L. Kim, S. Y. Jeong, C. W. Bark, B. H. Lee, S. D. Bu, H. W. Jang, C. Jeon and S. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 11564–11571 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hu, Z. Feng, B.-C. Gong, G. He, D. Li, M. Qin, Y. Shi, Q. Li, Q. Zhang, J. Yuan, B. Zhu, K. Liu, T. Xiang, L. Gu, F. Zhou, X. Dong, Z. Zhao and K. Jin, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 101, 220510 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hernandez, V. Nicolosi, M. Lotya, F. M. Blighe, Z. Sun, S. De, I. T. McGovern, B. Holland, M. Byrne, Y. K. Gun'Ko, J. J. Boland, P. Niraj, G. Duesberg, S. Krishnamurthy, R. Goodhue, J. Hutchison, V. Scardaci, A. C. Ferrari and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhi, Y. Bando, C. Tang, H. Kuwahara and D. Golberg, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 2889–2893 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O’Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zeng, Z. Yin, X. Huang, H. Li, Q. He, G. Lu, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11093–11097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Kang, L. Vernisse, R. C. Remsing, A. C. Thenuwara, S. L. Shumlas, I. G. McKendry, M. L. Klein, E. Borguet, M. J. Zdilla and D. R. Strongin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1863–1870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, K. Leng, X. Zhao, S. Malkhandi, W. Tang, B. Tian, L. Dong, L. Zheng, M. Lin, B. S. Yeo and K. P. Loh, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, X. Li, X. Cai, X. Zou, F. Kang, H.-M. Cheng and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4565–4573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Boles, M. Engel and D. V. Talapin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 11220–11289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. B. Varshey, J. R. Sander, T. Friščić and L. R. MacGillivray, Supramolecular chemistry: from molecules to nanomaterials,  2012 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhong, B. Cheng, C. Park, A. Ray, S. Brown, F. Mujid, J.-U. Lee, H. Zhou, J. Suh, K.-H. Lee, A. J. Mannix, K. Kang, S. J. Sibener, D. A. Muller and J. Park, Science, 2019, 366, 1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, L. Dou and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9230–9233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiong, Y. Cai, X. Ren, B. Cao, J. Liu, Z. Huo and J. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 32424–32429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zang, Y. Che and J. S. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1596–1608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Hill, N. Pinna, K. Char and J. Pyun, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2015, 40, 85–120 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Young, M. R. Jones, J. Zhang, R. J. Macfarlane, R. Esquivel-Sirvent, R. J. Nap, J. Wu, G. C. Schatz, B. Lee and C. A. Mirkin, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 2240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, K. Lin, X. Wang, S. Liu, J. Yi, Y. Tian, B. Wu, G. Chen, H. Yang, Y. Dai, H. Li and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 12856–12859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Srivastava and N. A. Kotov, Soft Matter, 2009, 5, 1146–1156 RSC .
X. Zhang, L. Lv, L. Ji, G. Guo, L. Liu, D. Han, B. Wang, Y. Tu, J. Hu, D. Yang and A. Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 3290–3293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, Y. Li, Q. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Yang, Y. Fang and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8387–8391 RSC .
J. D. Cojal González, M. Iyoda and J. P. Rabe, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14717 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lu, S.-b. Lei, Q.-d. Zeng, S.-z. Kang, C. Wang, L.-j. Wan and C.-l. Bai, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 5161–5165 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Kong, K. Deng, Y.-L. Yang, Q.-D. Zeng and C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9235–9239 CrossRef CAS .
X.-H. Kong, K. Deng, Y.-L. Yang, Q.-D. Zeng and C. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17382–17387 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Lai, Y. Wang, Y. Qian, W. Duan, C. Li, Z. Wang, Q. Fang, H. Wang, B. Tu, Y. Geng and Q. Zeng, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 844–849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Adisoejoso, K. Tahara, S. Okuhata, S. Lei, Y. Tobe and S. De Feyter, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7353–7357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Shen, L. Guan, X.-M. Zhang, S. Wang, L.-H. Gan, Q.-D. Zeng and C. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 12475–12479 RSC .
K. Suto, S. Yoshimoto and K. Itaya, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14976–14977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Suto, S. Yoshimoto and K. Itaya, Langmuir, 2006, 22, 10766–10776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xue and M. B. Zimmt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4513–4516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Zhao, L. Zhou, Z. Li, M. Shao and M. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11516–11523 RSC .
Y. H. Lee, W. Shi, H. K. Lee, R. Jiang, I. Y. Phang, Y. Cui, L. Isa, Y. Yang, J. Wang, S. Li and X. Y. Ling, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qiu, J. R. Edison, Z. Preisler, Y.-F. Zhang, G. Li, A. Pan, C.-H. Hsu, T. M. Mattox, P. Ercius, C. Song, K. Bustillo, M. A. Brady, E. W. Zaia, S. Jeong, J. B. Neaton, S. Du, S. Whitelam and J. J. Urban, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 13172–13176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiong, X. Zhang, H. Wan, S. Wang, Y. Zhao, J. Zhang, D. Zhou, W. Gao, R. Ma, T. Sasaki and G. Wang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 4518–4526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ge, C. Gu, Z. Yin, X. Wang, J. Tu and J. Li, Nano Energy, 2016, 20, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lu, N. Sakai, D. Tang, X. Li, T. Taniguchi, R. Ma and T. Sasaki, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 33083–33093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. V. Shevchenko, D. V. Talapin, N. A. Kotov, S. O'Brien and C. B. Murray, Nature, 2006, 439, 55–59 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lu, Z. Chen and S. O’Brien, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3594–3600 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Redl, K. S. Cho, C. B. Murray and S. O'Brien, Nature, 2003, 423, 968–971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Overgaag, W. Evers, B. de Nijs, R. Koole, J. Meeldijk and D. Vanmaekelbergh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7833–7835 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Kostiainen, P. Hiekkataipale, A. Laiho, V. Lemieux, J. Seitsonen, J. Ruokolainen and P. Ceci, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 52–56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. B. Murray, C. R. Kagan and M. G. Bawendi, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 2000, 30, 545–610 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiao, D. Han, L. Liu, L. Ji, G. Guo, J. Hu, D. Yang and A. Dong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5727–5731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kim, R. J. Macfarlane and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10342–10345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhu, Y. Kim, H. Lin, S. Wang and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 5061–5064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Senesi, D. J. Eichelsdoerfer, K. A. Brown, B. Lee, E. Auyeung, C. H. J. Choi, R. J. Macfarlane, K. L. Young and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7235–7240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Senesi, D. J. Eichelsdoerfer, R. J. Macfarlane, M. R. Jones, E. Auyeung, B. Lee and C. A. Mirkin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 6624–6628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Hellstrom, Y. Kim, J. S. Fakonas, A. J. Senesi, R. J. Macfarlane, C. A. Mirkin and H. A. Atwater, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6084–6090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Ross, J. C. Ku, M. G. Blaber, C. A. Mirkin and G. C. Schatz, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 10292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. McMillan, J. D. Brodin, J. A. Millan, B. Lee, M. Olvera de la Cruz and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1754–1757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Mun, S. K. Cha, H. Kim, H.-S. Moon, J. Y. Kim, H. M. Jin, Y. J. Choi, J. E. Baek, J. Shin and S. O. Kim, Small, 2014, 10, 3742–3749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, E. J. Luber, L. A. Huck, B. C. Olsen and J. M. Buriak, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2184–2193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Cha, J. H. Mun, T. Chang, S. Y. Kim, J. Y. Kim, H. M. Jin, J. Y. Lee, J. Shin, K. H. Kim and S. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5536–5543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. M. Wisser, B. Schumm, G. Mondin, J. Grothe and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2717–2731 RSC .
A. Nunns, J. Gwyther and I. Manners, Polymer, 2013, 54, 1269–1284 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Bates, M. J. Maher, D. W. Janes, C. J. Ellison and C. G. Willson, Macromolecules, 2014, 47, 2–12 CrossRef CAS .
M.-L. Wu, D. Wang and L.-J. Wan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10752 CrossRef PubMed .
D. O. Shin, J. H. Mun, G.-T. Hwang, J. M. Yoon, J. Y. Kim, J. M. Yun, Y.-B. Yang, Y. Oh, J. Y. Lee, J. Shin, K. J. Lee, S. Park, J. U. Kim and S. O. Kim, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8899–8907 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hunt, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, A. F. Young, M. Yankowitz, B. J. LeRoy, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Moon, M. Koshino, P. Jarillo-Herrero and R. C. Ashoori, Science, 2013, 340, 1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jiang, W. Zhou, A. Hong, M. Guo, X. Luo and C. Yuan, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 2830–2835 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, C. Zhang, D. D. Kohler, J. M. Scheeler, J. C. Wright, P. M. Voyles and S. Jin, Science, 2020, 370, 442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gou, G. Dai, C. Qian, Y. Liu, Y. Fu, Z. Tian, Y. He, L. Kong, J. Yang, J. Sun and Y. Gao, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14580–14586 RSC .
Q. Song, Z. Xue, C. Liu, X. Qiao, L. Liu, C. Huang, K. Liu, X. Li, Z. Lu and T. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1857–1863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Quan, W. Liu, H. Hu, S. Xu, B. Sebo, G. Fang, M. Li and X. Zhao, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 084106 CrossRef .
B. K. Vashisth, J. S. Bangruwa, A. Beniwal, S. P. Gairola, A. Kumar, N. Singh and V. Verma, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 698, 699–705 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xing, Y. Ma, Z. Ma, Y. Bai, J. Chen and S. Zhao, Smart Mater. Struct., 2014, 23, 085030 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Cao, Q. Liu, Z. Cui, H. Xu, H. Zhou, X. Zhai and Y. Lu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 314004 CrossRef CAS .
R. He, J. L. Lin, Q. Liu, Z. Liao, L. Shui, Z. J. Wang, Z. Zhong and R.-W. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 45602–45610 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Yadav, C. T. Nelson, S. L. Hsu, Z. Hong, J. D. Clarkson, C. M. Schlepütz, A. R. Damodaran, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, L. R. Dedon, D. Chen, A. Vishwanath, A. M. Minor, L. Q. Chen, J. F. Scott, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Nature, 2016, 530, 198–201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shafer, P. García-Fernández, P. Aguado-Puente, A. R. Damodaran, A. K. Yadav, C. T. Nelson, S.-L. Hsu, J. C. Wojdeł, J. Íñiguez, L. W. Martin, E. Arenholz, J. Junquera and R. Ramesh, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cherifi-Hertel, H. Bulou, R. Hertel, G. Taupier, K. D. Dorkenoo, C. Andreas, J. Guyonnet, I. Gaponenko, K. Gallo and P. Paruch, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, L. Xie, G. Liu, S. Prokhorenko, Y. Nahas, X. Pan, L. Bellaiche, A. Gruverman and N. Valanoor, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702375 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Das, Y. L. Tang, Z. Hong, M. A. P. Gonçalves, M. R. McCarter, C. Klewe, K. X. Nguyen, F. Gómez-Ortiz, P. Shafer, E. Arenholz, V. A. Stoica, S. L. Hsu, B. Wang, C. Ophus, J. F. Liu, C. T. Nelson, S. Saremi, B. Prasad, A. B. Mei, D. G. Schlom, J. Íñiguez, P. García-Fernández, D. A. Muller, L. Q. Chen, J. Junquera, L. W. Martin and R. Ramesh, Nature, 2019, 568, 368–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Mundy, C. M. Brooks, M. E. Holtz, J. A. Moyer, H. Das, A. F. Rébola, J. T. Heron, J. D. Clarkson, S. M. Disseler, Z. Liu, A. Farhan, R. Held, R. Hovden, E. Padgett, Q. Mao, H. Paik, R. Misra, L. F. Kourkoutis, E. Arenholz, A. Scholl, J. A. Borchers, W. D. Ratcliff, R. Ramesh, C. J. Fennie, P. Schiffer, D. A. Muller and D. G. Schlom, Nature, 2016, 537, 523–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zubko, N. Jecklin, A. Torres-Pardo, P. Aguado-Puente, A. Gloter, C. Lichtensteiger, J. Junquera, O. Stéphan and J. M. Triscone, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2846–2851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zubko, N. Jecklin, N. Stucki, C. Lichtensteiger, G. Rispens and J. M. Triscone, Ferroelectrics, 2012, 433, 127–137 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Y. Kim, K. Chu, K.-D. Sung, H.-S. Lee, S.-D. Kim, K. Song, T. Choi, J. Lee, J. P. Buban, S.-Y. Yoon, K.-H. Kim, C.-H. Yang and S.-Y. Choi, APL Mater., 2017, 5, 066104 CrossRef .
M. Z. Shi, N. Z. Wang, B. Lei, J. J. Ying, C. S. Zhu, Z. L. Sun, J. H. Cui, F. B. Meng, C. Shang, L. K. Ma and X. H. Chen, New J. Phys., 2018, 20, 123007 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fan, W. H. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. J. Yan, M. Q. Ren, R. Peng, H. C. Xu, B. P. Xie, J. P. Hu, T. Zhang and D. L. Feng, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 946–952 Search PubMed .
A. Y. Kitaev, Ann. Phys., 2003, 303, 2–30 CAS .
H. Zhang, A. Rousuli, S. Shen, K. Zhang, C. Wang, L. Luo, J. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Xu, W. Duan, H. Yao, P. Yu and S. Zhou, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 188–193 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fei, T. Palomaki, S. Wu, W. Zhao, X. Cai, B. Sun, P. Nguyen, J. Finney, X. Xu and D. H. Cobden, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13, 677–682 Search PubMed .
S. Wu, V. Fatemi, Q. D. Gibson, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. J. Cava and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Science, 2018, 359, 76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Fatemi, S. Wu, Y. Cao, L. Bretheau, Q. D. Gibson, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, R. J. Cava and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Science, 2018, 362, 926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gan, C.-W. Cho, A. Li, J. Lyu, X. Du, J.-S. Wen and L.-Y. Zhang, Chin. Phys. B, 2019, 28, 117401 CrossRef CAS .
R. Noguchi, T. Takahashi, K. Kuroda, M. Ochi, T. Shirasawa, M. Sakano, C. Bareille, M. Nakayama, M. D. Watson, K. Yaji, A. Harasawa, H. Iwasawa, P. Dudin, T. K. Kim, M. Hoesch, V. Kandyba, A. Giampietri, A. Barinov, S. Shin, R. Arita, T. Sasagawa and T. Kondo, Nature, 2019, 566, 518–522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Brehm, J. W. Bennett, M. R. Schoenberg, I. Grinberg and A. M. Rappe, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 224703 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. E. Harper, T. H. Geballe and F. J. DiSalvo, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1977, 15, 2943–2951 CrossRef CAS .
I. Guillamón, H. Suderow, J. G. Rodrigo, S. Vieira, P. Rodière, L. Cario, E. Navarro-Moratalla, C. Martí-Gastaldo and E. Coronado, New J. Phys., 2011, 13, 103020 CrossRef .
D. Reefman, P. Koorevaar, H. B. Brom and G. A. Wiegers, Synth. Met., 1991, 43, 3775–3780 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sankar, G. Peramaiyan, I. Panneer Muthuselvam, C.-Y. Wen, X. Xu and F. C. Chou, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1373–1378 CrossRef CAS .
L. Schmidt, Phys. Lett. A, 1970, 31, 551–552 CrossRef CAS .
D. Reefman, J. Baak, H. B. Brom and G. A. Wiegers, Solid State Commun., 1990, 75, 47–51 CrossRef CAS .
M. Abdel-Hafiez, X. M. Zhao, A. A. Kordyuk, Y. W. Fang, B. Pan, Z. He, C. G. Duan, J. Zhao and X. J. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, M. Wang, Y. Li, H. Bai, J. Ma, X. Sun, Q. Tao, C. Dong and Z.-A. Xu, Supercond. Sci. Technol., 2018, 31, 125010 CrossRef .
L. N. Bulaevskiĭ, Sov. J. Exp. Theor. Phys., 1974, 38, 634 Search PubMed .
C.-X. Liu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 118, 087001 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Devarakonda, H. Inoue, S. Fang, C. Ozsoy-Keskinbora, T. Suzuki, M. Kriener, L. Fu, E. Kaxiras, D. C. Bell and J. G. Checkelsky, Science, 2020, 370, 231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bistritzer and A. H. MacDonald, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 12233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, J. Y. Luo, V. Fatemi, S. Fang, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 117, 116804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, A. DaSilva, S. Huang, B. Fallahazad, S. Larentis, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, B. J. LeRoy, A. H. MacDonald and E. Tutuc, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 3364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, V. Fatemi, A. Demir, S. Fang, S. L. Tomarken, J. Y. Luo, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, E. Kaxiras, R. C. Ashoori and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature, 2018, 556, 80–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, M. Yankowitz, B. Fallahazad, S. Kang, H. C. P. Movva, S. Huang, S. Larentis, C. M. Corbet, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, S. K. Banerjee, B. J. LeRoy and E. Tutuc, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1989–1995 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yankowitz, S. Chen, H. Polshyn, Y. Zhang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, D. Graf, A. F. Young and C. R. Dean, Science, 2019, 363, 1059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Codecido, Q. Wang, R. Koester, S. Che, H. Tian, R. Lv, S. Tran, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, F. Zhang, M. Bockrath and C. N. Lau, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw9770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. S. Arora, R. Polski, Y. Zhang, A. Thomson, Y. Choi, H. Kim, Z. Lin, I. Z. Wilson, X. Xu, J.-H. Chu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Alicea and S. Nadj-Perge, Nature, 2020, 583, 379–384 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Sharpe, E. J. Fox, A. W. Barnard, J. Finney, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, M. A. Kastner and D. Goldhaber-Gordon, Science, 2019, 365, 605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Serlin, C. L. Tschirhart, H. Polshyn, Y. Zhang, J. Zhu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, L. Balents and A. F. Young, Science, 2020, 367, 900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Polshyn, J. Zhu, M. A. Kumar, Y. Zhang, F. Yang, C. L. Tschirhart, M. Serlin, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, A. H. MacDonald and A. F. Young, Nature, 2020, 588, 66–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, Q. Ma, Z. Bi, S. de la Barrera, M.-H. Liu, N. Mao, Y. Zhang, N. Kiper, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Kong, W. A. Tisdale, R. Ashoori, N. Gedik, L. Fu, S.-Y. Xu and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nature, 2020, 588, 71–76 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, E.-M. Shih, A. Ghiotto, L. Xian, D. A. Rhodes, C. Tan, M. Claassen, D. M. Kennes, Y. Bai, B. Kim, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, X. Zhu, J. Hone, A. Rubio, A. N. Pasupathy and C. R. Dean, Nat. Mater., 2020, 19, 861–866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Esaki and R. Tsu, IBM J. Res. Dev., 1970, 14, 61–65 CAS .
A. Wacker, Phys. Rep., 2002, 357, 1–111 CrossRef CAS .
H. Schneider, K. v. Klitzing and K. Ploog, Europhys. Lett., 1989, 8, 575–580 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Hutchinson, A. W. Higgs, D. C. Herbert and G. W. Smith, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 320–324 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tsu and G. Döhler, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1975, 12, 680–686 CrossRef .
J. D. John, S. Okano, A. Sharma, O. Selyshchev, M. Rahaman, N. Miyachi, K. Enomoto, J. Ochiai, I. Saito, T. Masuzawa, T. Yamada, D. H. C. Chua, D. R. T. Zahn and K. Okano, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904758 CrossRef .
A. Patra, M. Chakraborty and A. Roy, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 125, 025704 CrossRef .
W. Feng, F. Qin, M. Yu, F. Gao, M. Dai, Y. Hu, L. Wang, J. Hou, B. Li and P. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18511–18516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Singh, R. Kottokkaran, V. L. Dalal and G. Balasubramanian, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8600–8607 RSC .
J. L. Zhang, S. Zhao, C. Han, Z. Wang, S. Zhong, S. Sun, R. Guo, X. Zhou, C. D. Gu, K. D. Yuan, Z. Li and W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4903–4908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Joannopoulos, P. R. Villeneuve and S. Fan, Solid State Commun., 1997, 102, 165–173 CrossRef CAS .
C.-z. Li, S.-b. Liu, X.-k. Kong, B.-r. Bian and X.-y. Zhang, Appl. Opt., 2011, 50, 2370–2375 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, P. Ou, L. Zhang, Y. Lin and J. Yang, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 2020, 37, 1008–1020 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, Y. Wang, Q. Cheng, C. Li, K. Li, H. Li, J. Peng, B. Lu, Y. Wang, Y. Song, L. Jiang and M. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16456–16462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiong, D. Su, H.-L. Zhou, J.-Y. Wu, S. Iqbal, X.-Y. Zhang and T. Zhang, AIP Adv., 2019, 9, 085121 CrossRef .
F. J. García de Abajo, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2007, 79, 1267–1290 CrossRef .
D. Rodrigo, O. Limaj, D. Janner, D. Etezadi, F. J. García de Abajo, V. Pruneri and H. Altug, Science, 2015, 349, 165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chakraborty, O. P. Marshall, T. G. Folland, Y. J. Kim, A. N. Grigorenko and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2016, 351, 246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar, T. Low, K. H. Fung, P. Avouris and N. X. Fang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3172–3180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. N. Basov, M. M. Fogler and F. J. García de Abajo, Science, 2016, 354, aag1992 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Low, A. Chaves, J. D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N. X. Fang, P. Avouris, T. F. Heinz, F. Guinea, L. Martin-Moreno and F. Koppens, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 182–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Rivera and I. Kaminer, Nat. Rev. Phys., 2020, 2, 538–561 CrossRef .
R. Ma and T. Sasaki, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2015, 45, 111–127 CrossRef CAS .
Q.-X. Chen and S.-H. Yu, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 888–897 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan and Y.-W. Zhang, Nano
Energy, 2012, 1, 488–493 CrossRef CAS .
C.-B. Ma, X. Qi, B. Chen, S. Bao, Z. Yin, X.-J. Wu, Z. Luo, J. Wei, H.-L. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5624–5629 RSC .
Z. Liu, Z. Lu, M. Bosman, N. Li, T. J. Frankcombe, G. Jia, A. Tricoli, Y. Liu, Y. Du and Z. Yin, Small, 2018, 14, 1803233 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Uddin, H. Zhang, Y. Du, G. Jia, S. Wang and Z. Yin, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, X. Ma, J. Pan, C. Zhu, S. E. Saji, J. Hu, X. Xu, L. Sun and Z. Yin, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 281, 119477 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Hao, A. Abudula and G. Guan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11973–12000 RSC .
L. Li, P. Wang, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3072–3106 RSC .
K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8006–8022 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and K. Domen, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 919–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Ding, J. Shi, Z. Wang and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 675–688 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yao, X. An, H. Han, J. Q. Chen and C. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800210 CrossRef .
C. N. R. Rao, K. Pramoda, A. Saraswat, R. Singh, P. Vishnoi, N. Sagar and A. Hezam, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 020902 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Jia, Q. Zhang and X. Wang, Chem, 2018, 4, 1510–1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, M. Kraft and R. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3039–3052 RSC .
V. Georgakilas, J. N. Tiwari, K. C. Kemp, J. A. Perman, A. B. Bourlinos, K. S. Kim and R. Zboril, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5464–5519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lukowski, A. S. Daniel, F. Meng, A. Forticaux, L. Li and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10274–10277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Voiry, M. Salehi, R. Silva, T. Fujita, M. Chen, T. Asefa, V. B. Shenoy, G. Eda and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 6222–6227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, Z. Zhao, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, ChemCatChem, 2017, 9, 1554–1568 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, Y. Zhu, L. H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Chen, A. Du, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3783 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ma, H. Li, S. Jiang, G. Han, J. Gao, X. Yu, H. Lian, W. Tu, Y.-f. Han and R. Ma, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 14441–14449 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fu and X. Bao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1842–1874 RSC .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, T. Wang, P. Liu, S. Liu, R. Dong, X. Zhuang, M. Chen and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2789–2793 RSC .
N.-T. Suen, S.-F. Hung, Q. Quan, N. Zhang, Y.-J. Xu and H. M. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 337–365 RSC .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Song and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Kang, J. Park, D. Suh and W. S. Choi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803732 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lee, X. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Stoller, S. Park, Y. Zhu, J. An and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3498–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J.-Q. Huang and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 675–694 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, R. Ma, J. Wu, P. Sun, X. Liu, K. Zhou and T. Sasaki, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 10425–10432 RSC .
L. Jia, H. Wan, X. Liu, G. Chen, N. Zhang, J. Li, W. Zhou, Y. Cao, R. Ma and G. Qiu, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 5274–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, P. Zhang, R. Xie, Z. Hu, Z. Lu, L. Chen, L. Song, X. Xu, Y. Wu and X. Zhao, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 9034–9048 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yi, G. Weinberg, M. Prenzel, M. Greiner, S. Heumann, S. Becker and R. Schlögl, Catal. Today, 2017, 295, 32–40 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, Z. Cai, X. Lei, W. Tian, Y. Bi, Y. Jia, N. Han, T. Gao, Q. Zhang, Y. Kuang, J. Pan, X. Sun and X. Duan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701905 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Fang, J. Wang, B. Wei, K. Qi, H. Y. Hoh, Q. Hao, T. Sun, Z. Wang, Z. Yin, Y. Zhang, J. Lu, Q. Bao and C. Su, Small, 2019, 15, 1902427 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ma, R. Ma, C. Wang, J. Liang, X. Liu, K. Zhou and T. Sasaki, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1977–1984 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
W. Zhou, Z. Yin, Y. Du, X. Huang, Z. Zeng, Z. Fan, H. Liu, J. Wang and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 140–147 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, L. Piao and X. Chen, Trends Chem., 2020, 2, 57–70 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zheng, X. Bu, H. Vu and P. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5299–5303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hao, Q. Hu, Y. Zhang, M. Luo, Y. Wang, B. Hu, J. Li and X. Huang, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 5126–5133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, X. Li, Q. He, A. Khalil, D. Liu, T. Xiang, X. Wu and L. Song, Small, 2015, 11, 5556–5564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Gunjakar, T. W. Kim, H. N. Kim, I. Y. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14998–15007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Jing, Y. Dai, X. Ma, W. Wei and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 27900–27908 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, P. Yan, J. Li, C. He, T. Ouyang, C. Zhang, C. Tang and J. Zhong, J. Appl. Phys., 2020, 127, 084301 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, M. Seki, H. Zhou, J. Chen and H. Tabata, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 051107 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, W. Chen, D. Zhang, Y. Du, R. Amal, S. Qiao, J. Wu and Z. Yin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5310–5349 RSC .
F. Naseem, P. Lu, J. Zeng, Z. Lu, Y. H. Ng, H. Zhao, Y. Du and Z. Yin, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 7734–7759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, J. Resasco, Y. Yu, A. M. Asiri and P. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kim, C. Xie, N. Becknell, Y. Yu, M. Karamad, K. Chan, E. J. Crumlin, J. K. Nørskov and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 8329–8336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miyamoto and R. Asahi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 9944–9948 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, Z. Zhao, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1802234 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kang, X. Ye, J. Chen, Y. Cai, R. E. Diaz, R. R. Adzic, E. A. Stach and C. B. Murray, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 42–45 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Artiglia, S. Agnoli, L. Savio, J. Pal, E. Celasco, M. Rocca, F. Bondino, E. Magnano, C. Castellarin-Cudia, F. P. Netzer and G. Granozzi, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3715–3723 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Feng, L.-L. He, R. Fang, Q.-L. Wang, J. Yuan and A.-J. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 330, 140–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Z. G. Sial, H. Lin, M. Zulfiqar, S. Ullah, B. Ni and X. Wang, Small, 2017, 13, 1700250 CrossRef PubMed .
X. X. Du, Y. He, X. X. Wang and J. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2623–2632 RSC .
N. Cheng, L. Zhang, H. Jiang, Y. Zhou, S. Yu, L. Chen, H. Jiang and C. Li, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 16945–16953 RSC .
T. Li, B. Xue, B. Wang, G. Guo, D. Han, Y. Yan and A. Dong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12133–12136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Jiang, J. Duan, J. Zhu, S. Chen and M. Antonietti, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2436–2444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Rizo, R. M. Arán-Ais, E. Padgett, D. A. Muller, M. J. Lázaro, J. Solla-Gullón, J. M. Feliu, E. Pastor and H. D. Abruña, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 3791–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fu, C. Wan, A. Zhang, Z. Zhao, H. Huyan, X. Pan, S. Du, X. Duan and Y. Huang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1472–1478 CrossRef CAS .
S. Dai, T.-H. Huang, P.-C. Chien, C.-A. Lin, C.-W. Liu, S.-W. Lee, J.-H. Wang, K.-W. Wang and X. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 2846–2853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cao, C. Li, D. Peng, Y. Lu, K. Huang, J. Wu, C. Zhao and Y. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 3005–3013 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, R. Si, J. Liu, L. Zhang, X. Gong, R. Gao, B. Liu and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 12759–12767 RSC .
L. Zheng, D. Yang, R. Chang, C. Wang, G. Zhang and S. Sun, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8918–8924 RSC .
Y.-M. Lin and M. S. Dresselhaus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 075304 CrossRef .
H. Karbaschi, J. Lovén, K. Courteaut, A. Wacker and M. Leijnse, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 115414 CrossRef .
D. M. T. Kuo, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 045222 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hu and D. Poulikakos, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 5487–5494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Z. Wang and Y. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 20696–20702 CrossRef CAS .
A. Samarelli, L. Ferre Llin, S. Cecchi, J. Frigerio, T. Etzelstorfer, E. Müller, Y. Zhang, J. R. Watling, D. Chrastina, G. Isella, J. Stangl, J. P. Hague, J. M. R. Weaver, P. Dobson and D. J. Paul, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 113, 233704 CrossRef .
R. Dettori, C. Melis and L. Colombo, Eur. Phys. J. B, 2015, 88, 27 CrossRef .
M. Ali, X. Pi, Y. Liu and D. Yang, Nanotechnology, 2017, 29, 045402 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Carrete, N. Mingo, G. Tian, H. Ågren, A. Baev and P. N. Prasad, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 10881–10886 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ferre Llin, A. Samarelli, S. Cecchi, D. Chrastina, G. Isella, E. Müller Gubler, T. Etzelstorfer, J. Stangl and D. J. Paul, Thin Solid Films, 2016, 602, 90–94 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ferre Llin, A. Samarelli, S. Cecchi, T. Etzelstorfer, E. Müller Gubler, D. Chrastina, G. Isella, J. Stangl, J. M. R. Weaver, P. S. Dobson and D. J. Paul, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 143507 CrossRef .
N.-W. Park, J.-Y. Ahn, T.-H. Park, J.-H. Lee, W.-Y. Lee, K. Cho, Y.-G. Yoon, C.-J. Choi, J.-S. Park and S.-K. Lee, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7027–7036 RSC .
W.-Y. Lee, N.-W. Park, S.-Y. Kang, G.-S. Kim, J.-H. Koh, E. Saitoh and S.-K. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 14187–14194 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Yoon, W.-Y. Lee, N.-W. Park, G.-S. Kim, R. Ramos, K. Takashi, E. Saitoh, S.-M. Koo, J.-S. Park and S.-K. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 1670–1680 RSC .
N.-W. Park, W.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Yoon, J.-Y. Ahn, J.-H. Lee, G.-S. Kim, T. G. Kim, C.-J. Choi, J.-S. Park, E. Saitoh and S.-K. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 44472–44482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-W. Park, W.-Y. Lee, Y.-S. Yoon, G.-S. Kim, Y.-G. Yoon and S.-K. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 38247–38254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-W. Shih, W.-P. Hsieh, J.-J. Shyue and F.-Y. Tsai, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 7122–7130 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. S. Kumar, M. N. Hedhili, D. Cha, T. M. Tritt and H. N. Alshareef, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2726–2732 CrossRef CAS .
S. Heinze, H. U. Habermeier, G. Cristiani, S. Blanco Canosa, M. Le Tacon and B. Keimer, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 131603 CrossRef .
B. Geisler, A. Blanca-Romero and R. Pentcheva, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 125301 CrossRef .
B. Geisler and R. Pentcheva, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2018, 2, 055403 CrossRef CAS .
M. Verma, B. Geisler and R. Pentcheva, Phys. Rev. B, 2019, 100, 165126 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Niemelä, A. J. Karttunen and M. Karppinen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10349–10361 RSC .
L. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Wang, L. Fang, J. Qiu, K. Zhang and S. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3817 CrossRef PubMed .
C. E. McCold, L. Domulevicz, Z. Cai, W.-Y. Lo, S. Hihath, K. March, H. M. Mohammad, M. P. Anantram, L. Yu and J. Hihath, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 17–24 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, S.-M. Xu, R. Tian and C. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13371–13377 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Wan, X. Gu, F. Dang, T. Itoh, Y. Wang, H. Sasaki, M. Kondo, K. Koga, K. Yabuki, G. J. Snyder, R. Yang and K. Koumoto, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 622–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-A. Zong, P. Zhang, S. Yin, Y. Huang, Y. Wang and C. Wan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800842 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Wu and Y.-R. Wu, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 115201 CrossRef .
Y. M. Strelniker and D. J. Bergman, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 96, 235308 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, D. Fan and H. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 26630–26636 RSC .
P. Jood, M. Ohta, H. Nishiate, A. Yamamoto, O. I. Lebedev, D. Berthebaud, K. Suekuni and M. Kunii, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2684–2692 CrossRef CAS .
Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart. https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html.
M. Jiang, H. Y. Xiao, S. M. Peng, L. Qiao, G. X. Yang, Z. J. Liu and X. T. Zu, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10, 4862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. E. H. Sayed, C. Z. Carlin, B. G. Hagar, P. C. Colter and S. M. Bedair, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2016, 6, 997–1003 Search PubMed .
D. Khatiwada, C. A. Favela, S. Sun, C. Zhang, S. Sharma, M. Rathi, P. Dutta, E. Galstyan, A. Belianinov, A. V. Ievlev, S. Pouladi, A. Fedorenko, J.-H. Ryou, S. Hubbard and V. Selvamanickam, Prog. Photovoltaics Res. Appl., 2020, 28, 1107–1119 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tsai, M. Lee, Y. Li and S. Samukawa, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2017, 64, 4547–4553 CAS .
A. Takahashi, T. Ueda, Y. Bessho, Y. Harada, T. Kita, E. Taguchi and H. Yasuda, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 235323 CrossRef .
S. Watanabe, S. Asahi, T. Kada, K. Hirao, T. Kaizu, Y. Harada and T. Kita, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 193104 CrossRef .
T. Lee, K. Enomoto, K. Ohshiro, D. Inoue, T. Kikitsu, K. Hyeon-Deuk, Y.-J. Pu and D. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 5471 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Sahoo and G. P. Mishra, Optik, 2020, 212, 164678 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanibuchi, T. Kada, S. Asahi, D. Watanabe, T. Kaizu, Y. Harada and T. Kita, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 195313 CrossRef .
H. Esmaielpour, V. R. Whiteside, H. P. Piyathilaka, S. Vijeyaragunathan, B. Wang, E. Adcock-Smith, K. P. Roberts, T. D. Mishima, M. B. Santos, A. D. Bristow and I. R. Sellers, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 12473 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Harada, N. Iwata, S. Asahi and T. Kita, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2019, 34, 094003 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, L. Yang, H. Wu, Y. Cao, J. Zhang, N. Xu, S. Chen, J.-D. Decoppet, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Joule, 2018, 2, 2145–2153 CrossRef CAS .
M. Freitag, J. Teuscher, Y. Saygili, X. Zhang, F. Giordano, P. Liska, J. Hua, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-E. Moser, M. Grätzel and A. Hagfeldt, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11, 372–378 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, J. Jin, D. Li, Z. Fu, S. Gao, S. Cheng, X. Yu and Y. Xiong, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 22092–22100 RSC .
S. Mathew, A. Yella, P. Gao, R. Humphry-Baker, B. F. E. Curchod, N. Ashari-Astani, I. Tavernelli, U. Rothlisberger, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 242–247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Li, X. Li, T. Wang, P. He, F. Li, W. Chen and E. Wang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 5824–5834 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Cao, C. C. Stoumpos, O. K. Farha, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7843–7850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J.-C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk, M. G. Kanatzidis and A. D. Mohite, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu, D. Lu, F. Liu, H. Lai, X. Wan, X. Zhang, Y. Liu and Y. Chen, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 4871–4881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, S. Yu, L. Chao, Y. Xia, Y. Sun, S. Zuo, F. Li, T. Niu, Y. Yang, H. Ju, B. Li, H. Du, X. Gao, J. Zhang, J. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Chen and W. Huang, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 154–163 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, Q. Dong, J. Zhang, S. Wang, M. Chen, C. Zhao, M. Hu, S. Jin, N. P. Padture and Y. Shi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9919–9926 RSC .
B.-E. Cohen, Y. Li, Q. Meng and L. Etgar, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2588–2597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Febriansyah, T. M. Koh, Y. Lekina, N. F. Jamaludin, A. Bruno, R. Ganguly, Z. X. Shen, S. G. Mhaisalkar and J. England, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 890–898 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Z. Y. Ting, A. Soibel, L. Höglund, J. Nguyen, C. J. Hill, A. Khoshakhlagh and S. D. Gunapala, Chapter 1 - Type-II Superlattice Infrared Detectors, in Semiconductors and Semimetals, ed. S. D. Gunapala, D. R. Rhiger and C. Jagadish, Elsevier,  2011, vol. 84, pp. 1–57 Search PubMed .

          M. Razeghi, Type-II InAs/GaSb Superlattice Photon Detectors, in Technology of Quantum Devices, ed. M. Razeghi, Springer US, Boston, MA,  2010, pp. 367–393 Search PubMed .
A. Haddadi, G. Chen, R. Chevallier, A. M. Hoang and M. Razeghi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 121104 CrossRef .
E. Delli, V. Letka, P. D. Hodgson, E. Repiso, J. P. Hayton, A. P. Craig, Q. Lu, R. Beanland, A. Krier, A. R. J. Marshall and P. J. Carrington, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 538–544 CrossRef CAS .
M. Spies, M. I. den Hertog, P. Hille, J. Schörmann, J. Polaczyński, B. Gayral, M. Eickhoff, E. Monroy and J. Lähnemann, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4231–4239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, Y. Meng, R. Dong, S. Yip, C. Lan, X. Kang, F. Wang, K. S. Chan and J. C. Ho, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 12042–12051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, H. Gu, Y. Wei and S. Zheng, Superlattices Microstruct., 2020, 141, 106492 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Mondal, V. Chatterjee and S. Pal, Opt. Mater., 2020, 104, 109846 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paliwal, K. Singh and M. Mathew, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2020, 35, 045022 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Z. Yin, X. Cao, F. Zhao, L. Wang, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 233–238 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yin, Z. Zeng, J. Liu, Q. He, P. Chen and H. Zhang, Small, 2013, 9, 727–731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Xu, Z.-Y. Yin, C.-X. Xu, J. Dai and J.-G. Hu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 033504 CrossRef .
S. N. Jammalamadaka, J. Vanacken and V. V. Moshchalkov, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 033505 CrossRef .
E. J. Yoo, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun, C. J. Kang, Y. J. Choi and L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6170–6175 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Kim, J.-M. Yang, E.-S. Choi and N.-G. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002653 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Takaura, T. Ohyanagi, M. Tai, M. Kinoshita, K. Akita, T. Morikawa, H. Shirakawa, M. Araidai, K. Shiraishi, Y. Saito and J. Tominaga, In 55-μA GexTe1−x/Sb2Te3 superlattice topological-switching random access memory (TRAM) and study of atomic arrangement in Ge–Te and Sb–Te structures, 2014 IEEE International Electron Devices Meeting, 15-17 Dec. 2014, 2014; pp. 29.2.1–29.2.4.
K. V. Mitrofanov, Y. Saito, N. Miyata, P. Fons, A. V. Kolobov and J. Tominaga, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13, 1900105 CrossRef .
H. Nakamura, I. Rungger, S. Sanvito, N. Inoue, J. Tominaga and Y. Asai, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 9386–9395 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Hang Yin
	Hang Yin is currently a PhD student at the Research School of Chemistry, Australian National University (Australia). He got his MSc from the University of Macau (China) in 2018 and BSc from Sichuan University (China) in 2015. His research interests lie in supramolecular chemistry, molecular machines, and energy conversion. He is now focusing on the development of novel nano materials for photocatalytic energy conversion.

Kaijian Xing
	Dr Kaijian Xing is a postdoc at ARC Centre of Excellent in Future Low-Energy Electronics Technologies at Monash University. He started Master study on nano-electronic engineering at the University of Melbourne. Afterwards he obtained the PhD degree in condensed matter physics at La Trobe University. He has been working on diamond electronics for the past 4 years, developing a solid-state surface transfer doping approach for controlling the diamond surface conductivity. The recent breakthrough made by him in the heterostructure between diamond and transition metal oxides paves the way for the high-performance diamond surface conducting devices as well as the spintronics.

Yurou Zhang
	Yurou Zhang received her BEng degree from East China University of Science and Technology in 2019. Since then, she has been pursuing her PhD degree under the supervision of Dr Jung Ho Yun at the University of Queensland. Her research interests mainly focus on optoelectronic properties and applications of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite materials.

Jung-Ho Yun
	Jung-Ho Yun is currently an ARC DECRA Fellow in UQ Nanomaterials Centre, School of Chemical Engineering, the University of Queensland, Australia. He received his BSc and MSc degrees from Kyung Hee University, Republic of Korea, and PhD degree from the University of New South Wales, Australia in 2012. Prior to the PhD study, he also worked as a researcher to develop functional nanomaterials-based electrodes for electrochemical wastewater treatment systems at R&D Centre, NANOPAC Co., Ltd., Republic of Korea for 5 years. His research interests lie in designing nanostructured semiconducting materials toward solar energy conversion, environmental remediation, and electronic sensing applications.

Dong-Chen Qi
	Dongchen Qi is an Associate Professor and ARC Future Fellow at Queensland University of Technology. He received his BSc in Physics from Peking University (2003) and PhD in Physics from the National University of Singapore (2009). His research interests lie in the area of experimental condensed matter physics and surface science, focusing on creating, understanding, and controlling the surfaces and interfaces of functional materials at the nanoscale to develop new technologies and material platforms for the next-generation devices.

Zongyou Yin
	Associate Professor Zongyou Yin obtained his BS and MS degrees at Jilin University in China, and completed his PhD at Nanyang Technological University (NTU) in Singapore. Then, he started his postdoc careers at NTU/Singapore, IMRE/Singapore, followed by MIT and then Harvard University. Dr Yin started his own research group at Australian National Univesrity (ANU) from 2017. His group's research is interdisciplinary, encompassing the chemistry and physics of nano-to-atomic materials, fundamental relationship among materials-structures-devices, and synergistic integration of multi-functions towards systems for energy and wearable applications.

CVD	Vapor phase	Accurate growth of periodic structures	Low production efficiency	WS2–WSe2–MoS2, WS2–MoSe2–WSe2, MoSe2–MoS2, InGaAsP/InGaP, CdS/CdS:SnS2	
33, 51, 52 and 135

PVD	Vapor phase	Accurate growth of periodic structures	Low production efficiency	SubPC-C60, Si0.7Ge0.3/Si superlattice, LaMnO3/SrIrO3, BiFeO3/BiMnO3	
35, 66, 69 and 71

Intercalation	Solution phase	Production in large scale	Less accurate structures and morphologies	MoS2/Pt-NP, MoS2/Pd-NP. MoS2/Ru-NP, MoS2/Au-NP, MoS2/Co-NP	
80 and 81

Self-assembly	Solution phase	Production in large scale	Less accurate structures and morphologies	TMA-COR, CoNi/Fe-PP, NiFe/MoS2, CoMnO@CN	
37, 93, 104 and 107

Lithography	Multiple phases	Accurate growth of periodic structures	Complex multiple preparation steps	BCP-based multicomponent nanopattern, striped-pattern superlattice	
131 and 136

Methods for twisted structures	Multiple phases	Production of special twisted structures	Low production efficiency	Graphene-hBN bilayer, graphene-graphene bilayer moiré superlattice, MoS2 bilayer moiré superlattice, twisted multilayer superstructure	
30 and 132–134


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the (b) single component lateral nanosheet, (c) dual components lateral heterostructure, (d) triple components lateral heterostructure, and (e) dual components lateral PNSs via CVD. Reprinted with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2017, AAAS Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the MoSe2–MoS2 lateral periodic arrays. Reprinted with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Molecular structures of SubPC and C60. (b) Artificially colored STM image of the basic unit of the “stripe” pattern. (c) Artificially colored STM image of PNSs based on SubPC and C60. (d) STM image showing two different phases on Ag(111). (e) STM image of the 2D hexagonal “star” phase. Reprinted with permission from ref. 66. Copyright 2002, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) High-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) micrograph recorded on the SL structure and corresponding Fourier transform ([110] zone axis). The (003), (006), and (009) reflections are marked by crosses. Asterisks mark the superlattice reflections. (b) and (c) High-angle annular dark field-scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) micrographs of the as-grown sample. Reprinted with permission from ref. 70. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic of the epitaxial BiFeO3 thin film on the SrTiO3 (001) substrate fabricated by alternately depositing BiFeO3 and Ce-doped LaMnO3 layers. Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electrochemical lithiation process for the fabrication of 2D nanosheets from the layered bulk material. Reprinted with permission from ref. 78. Copyright 2011, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  TEM images of the Pd superlattice nanowires with a Fe3+/Pd ratio of (a) 0.05, (b) 0.1, and (c) 1. Reprinted with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the solution based self-assembly process of the 1D NC superlattice. (e) High-magnification TEM image of a segment of a straight NC chain and the corresponding intensity profile (inset) along the chain length (indicated by the arrow). (f) TEM image of an ultralong NC chain. (g) High-magnification TEM image of the region indicated in (f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 92. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  TMA–COR hybrid assemblies on the single-layer graphene/SiO2. (a) Chemical structure of TMA. (b) Dimeric and trimeric form of TMA. (c) High-resolution STM image and (d) proposed mechanism of the formation of the chicken-wire structure of the host TMA by guest coronene molecules. Reprinted with permission from ref. 93. Copyright 2014, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) High-resolution STM (HR-STM) image (649.7 mV, 399.8 pA) of the monomer-entrapped H2Pc/TCDB (I). (b) HR-STM image of (−573 mV, 470 pA) F16CuPc/TCDB (I). (c) and (d) Proposed models of H2Pc/TCDB (I) and F16CuPc/TCDB (I), respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) HR-STM image of the CoPc and CuTPP periodic nanostructure on the Au(100)-(hex) surface, and (b) height-shaded view. (c) Structural model of the CoPc and CuTPP periodic nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2003, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Chemical structures of one half of the designed unit cell. (b) Image of PNSs of S1-D1-S2-D2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic illustration of the periodic nanostructure prepared by solution-based layer-by-layer technique. Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic illustration of the large-scale BNSL membranes self-assembled at the liquid–air interface. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. Copyright 2010, Springer Nature Publishing. (b) Schematic of a LAP reactor and in situ optical characterization apparatus. (c) Schematic of the LAP synthesis that involves three phases. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2019, AAAS Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the general preparation process of the substrate free 2D layered periodic nanostructure in solution. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) Preparation method for the 2D layered periodic nanostructure based on homo-charged nanosheets. Reprinted with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  TEM images of the binary superlattices based on different nanoparticles: (a) 13.4nm γ-Fe2O3 and 5.0nm Au; (b), 7.6nm PbSe and 5.0nm Au; (c) 6.2nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (d) 6.7nm PbS and 3.0nm Pd; (e) 6.2nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (f) 5.8nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (g) 7.2nm PbSe and 4.2nm Ag; (h) 6.2nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (i) 7.2nm PbSe and 5.0nm Au; (j) 5.8nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd; (k) 7.2nm PbSe and 4.2nm Ag; and (l) 6.2nm PbSe and 3.0nm Pd nanoparticles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 110. Copyright 2006, Springer Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 16  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedures of the CoMnO@CN superlattices via solvent evaporation self-assembly method. Reprinted with permission from ref. 37. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the DNA-mediated interaction between nanoparticles. Illustrations of the superlattices grown on substrates, phase planes, 2D GISAXS scattering patterns, and SEM of the (b–e) (100)-oriented bcc superlattices and (f–i) (110)-oriented bcc superlattices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic procedure of multicomponent nanopatterning. (b) The first level BCP self-assembly for surface parallel cylinders. (c) Pt metallization of parallel cylinders. (d) Second level BCP self-assembly for vertical cylinders. (e) Pd metallization of vertical cylinders to complete the Pt nanowire–Pd nanodot multicomponent nanopattern. EDS elemental mapping of the (f) Pt nanowire–Pd nanodot array and (g) Pd nanowire–Pt nanodot array. Multicomponent nanopatterns of the (h) Pt–Pd nanowire array and (i) Au–Pt nanodot array. Reprinted with permission from ref. 131. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the bilayer MoS2 nanoscroll. (b) HRTEM image of the MoS2 nanoscroll. The inset is a low-magnification TEM image of the MoS2 nanoscroll. (c) Schematic diagram of the MoS2 moiré superlattice. Reprinted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Triangular spiral on a Euclidean surface. (b) Triangular spiral on an unfolded non-Euclidean cone surface. (c) A cone can be folded from a circle by cutting along the radius and folding with an angle. (d) Euclidean surface for the aligned spiral; (e) non-Euclidean cone surface for the fastened spiral; (f) non-Euclidean hyperbolic cone surface for the unfastened spiral. (g) Schematic illustration of the growth process of non-Euclidean surfaces. (h) AFM image of the aligned WS2 spirals grown on the flat SiO2/Si substrate. (i–k) AFM images of the representative WS2 supertwisted spirals with various twist angles grown around the WOx particles on the SiO2/Si substrates. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2020, AAAS Publishing.	 

Superconductivity	Complex oxides superlattice	[LaNiO3 (2 u.c.)/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 (3 u.c.)]	PLD	
T
c = 3.7 K	
72

[MgTi2O4/SrTiO3]	Epitaxial growth	
T
c = 5 K	
74

van der Waals superlattice	[FeSe/TBA+] (Hybrid superlattice)	Intercalation	
T
c = 50 K	
151

[TMD/organic cation] (hybrid superlattice)	Intercalation	
T
c(MoTe2/organicecations) = 7 K	
154


T
c(WTe2/organicecations) = 2.3 K
[SnS1.15/TaS2] (misfit superlattice)	CVT	
T
c = 3.01 K	
164

[SnSe1.16/NbSe2] (misfit superlattice)	CVT	
T
c = 3.4 K	
168

[H-NbS2/Ba3NbS5]	Heating at UHV	
T
c = 1.6 K	
171

Moiré superlattices	TBG	Dry transfer (stick and tear)	
T
c(θ ≈ 1.1°) = 1 K	
30 and 178


T
c(θ ≈ 0.93°) = 0.3–0.5 K
Twisted homo-bilayer WSe2	Dry transfer (stick and tear)	Twist angle of 5.1° for the observation of zero resistance	
184

Piezoelectricity	Complex oxides superlattice	[(PbTiO3)6/(SrTiO3)6]	PLD	Piezoelectric coefficient = 0.052	
150

Ferroelectricity	Complex oxides superlattice	[BiFeO3/Ce-doped LaMnO3]	PLD	
P
r (remnant polarization) = 85 μC cm−2	
73

Moiré superlattices	TBG	Dry transfer (stick and tear)	ΔP for device H4 = 0.05 μC cm−2	
183

ΔP for device H2 = −0.18 μC cm−2
Ferromagnetism	Complex oxides superlattice	[(LaMn3+O3)m/(SrIrO3) m]	PLD	In-plane ferromagnetic anisotropy	
71

Moiré superlattices	TBG	Dry transfer (stick and tear)	Emergent ferromagnetism at ¾ filling of the CB in TBG	
180

Multiferroics	Complex oxides superlattice	[(LuFeO3)m/(LuFe2O4)1]	MBE	Simultaneously multiferroics at 250 K	
147

Electronic and optoelectronic properties	GaAs–Al0.3Ga0.7As superlattice	MBE	Miniband formation	
186

(InSb)n/InSb0.5As1.5 and (InAs)m/InSb0.5As0.5	
	Modulated band structure	
191

Tunable bandgap (0.075–0.084 eV for (InAs)m/InSb0.5As0.5, and 0.054–0.143 eV for (InSb)n/InSb0.5As1.5, respectively)
Superlattice InSe nanosheets	CVD	Low current on/off ratio of 2.9, exhibiting metallic properties	
192

Increased carrier sheet density of 6.37 × 1012 cm−2.
Greatly enhanced carrier mobility of 299.1 cm2 V−1 s−1
MAPbI3/MASnI3 periodic structure	Multi-source evaporator	Tunable bandgap	
193

Transverse and longitudinal direction-dependent electrical and electronic thermal conductivities
Blue phosphorene on Au(111) substrate	MBE	Inducing band folding	
23

Reduced bandgap (1.1 eV)
Reduced electron effective masses (m*x/m0 of 0.130 for electrons, 2.231 for holes)
Enhanced carrier mobility (μx of 1.0263 × 104 cm2 (V s)−1 for electrons and 2.151 × 102 cm2 (V s)−1 for holes) (comparing with black phosphorus, measured at 300 K, in the armchair (ΓS–KS) direction)
Optical properties	1D superconducting-dielectric photonic crystal superlattices	
	Tunable bandgap	
196

Enlarged width of forbidden gaps
Increased number of photonic bandgaps
Lithium niobate-based and liquid crystal-based 1D superlattices	
	Temperature-sensitive refractive indexes	
197

Induce null photonic gap and zero refractive index
Porous 2D photonic crystal perovskite films	Solution phase preparation	Improved light absorption	
198

Reduced light reflectance and transmission
Stronger PL intensity due to prolonged carrier lifetime and high crystallinity
Nanogratings	Nanoimprinting with a commercial DVD master	Polarized light sensitivity	
198

Reduced light reflectance and transmission
Periodic silver nanogratings	Optical photolithography	Modulated resonant absorption	
199

Enhanced the optical absorption in selective wavelength
Polarized light sensitivity

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic illustration of the [(LaMn3+O3)m/(SrIrO3)m]n superlattices. (b) Magnetization as a function of temperature measured at 0.1 T external parallel (100-direction) magnetic field. Local magnetization along out-of-plane (c) and 45° (d) measured with X-ray magnetic circular dichroism (XMCD). Reprinted with permission from ref. 71. Copyright 2020, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 22  The upper images of (a) represent the HAADF-STEM images and schematic view of the crystal structures of LuFe2O4 and LuFeO3. The lower images of (a) represent the (LuFeO3)m/(LuFe2O4)1 superlattices with m = 1–10. The left of (b) is the out-of-plane piezoresponse force microscopy results of the domain structure, following a DC bias applied to the proximal tip. The right of (b) is the X-ray magnetic circular dichroic photoemission electron microscopy image from the Fe L3 edge at 200 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 147. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature Publishing. (c) The time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS) measurements of the (BiFeO3)m/(BiMnO3)m superlattices. (d) Magnetic properties of the (BiFeO3)m/(BiMnO3)m superlattices for m = 1, 2, 5, 8, 10. The upper figures of (d) show the in-plane field-dependent magnetization hysteresis curves at 10 K. The lower figures of (d) show the in-plane temperature-dependent magnetization curves at 1000 Oe. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. Copyright 2020, the Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of the [(PbTiO3)6/(SrTiO3)6]5 superlattices on the SrTiO3 substrate with the HAAFD-STEM image of the PNS. (b) Piezoelectric coefficient d33 per unit cell of the PbTiO3 layer as a function of the DC voltage for both PbTiO3 layer and [(PbTiO3)6/(SrTiO3)6]5 PNS. Reprinted with permission from ref. 150. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) HAADF-STEM image for the [LaNiO3 (2 u.c.)/La0.7Sr0.3MnO3 (3 u.c.)] superlattices. The inset depicts the schematic of the partial atomic arrangement. (b) Resistivity plots as a function of temperature with a current of 5 μA; the inset shows the zoom-in view at the superconducting transition region. (c) Magnetic susceptibility characterization with a magnetic field of 10 Oe. The inset shows the magnetic hysteresis effect at 2 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the [MgTi2O4/SrTiO3] superlattices. (e) Temperature dependence of the resistance of the [MgTi2O4/SrTiO3] superlattices under different perpendicular (upper one of (e)) and parallel (lower one of (e)) magnetic fields. Reprinted with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2020, APS Physics Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) The TEM images of FeSe and (TBA)0.3FeSe with the schematic atomic structure shown on the right. (b) The resistance of (TBA)0.3FeSe as a function of temperature, showing the superconducting transition. Reprinted with permission from ref. 151. Copyright 2018, IOP Science Publishing. (c) Schematic structure for the MoTe2 with organic-cation intercalation. (d) Sheet resistance of MoTe2 with organic-cation intercalation as a function of temperature; the inset shows the temperature-dependent resistance of MoTe2. (e) is the zoom-in view of (d) around the superconducting transition, showing the onset temperature of 7 K. Reprinted with permission from ref. 154. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) HRTEM image of the (SnS)1.15TaS2 superlattices from the cross-section. (b) The schematic of the (SnS)1.15TaS2 superlattices along the b-axis with the incommensurability shown in the SnS layer. Ta, Sn and S atoms are shown in red, blue and green, respectively. (c) Electricity transport measurements for the (SnS)1.15TaS2 superlattices for the in-plane and cross-plane directions. The inset is the zoom-in view of the superconducting transition period near 3 K. (d) Tc as a function of pressure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 164. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) HAADF-STEM image of Ba6Nb11S28 along the [100] direction with the simulated structures overlaid with one unit cell shaded in the transparent green box. (b) The resistivity of Ba6Nb11S28 as a function of temperature, showing the superconducting transition. The inset depicts a magnified view of the transition in temperature-dependent resistivity and magnetic susceptibility measured with zero-field cooling and field cooling, respectively. (c) V–I measurements from 0.28 K to 0.9 K. The inset shows the evolution of the power law V ∝ Iα. The dashed line represents α = 3. (d) Longitudinal resistivity as a function of the magnetic field for different values of θ. θ is defined as the angle between the surface normal and the magnetic field direction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020, AAAS Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) The band structure of TBG in the first mini Brillouin zone of the superlattice at θ = 1.05°. (b) The DOS corresponding to the bands in (a), for energies of −10 meV to +10 meV. (c) Schematic of the TBG Hall bar device with gate architecture. (d) Four-probe resistance of two magic angle TBG devices (M1 and M2) as a function of temperature; the inset shows the optical image of device M1. (e) and (d) I–V curves for device M2 with density of −1.44 × 1012 cm−2 at different temperatures. (f) Four-probe resistance measured at different densities and temperatures for device M2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) The calculated miniband structure for the GaAs–Al0.3Ga0.7As superlattice with a well width of 6.5 nm and barrier width of 2.5 nm. Reprinted with permission from ref. 186. Copyright 2002, Elsevier. Magnified view of the band structures near the Γ point for (b) (InSb)n/InSb0.5As1.5 with n of (I) 1, (II) 2, and (III) 3, and for (c) (InAs)m/InSb0.5As0.5 with m of (IV) 1, (V) 2, and (VI) 3. Reprinted with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2019, AIP Publishing. (d) Schematics of the molecular structure of (I) MAPbI3, (II) MASnI3, (III) sandwiched architectures of MAPbI3–MASnI3–MAPbI3, (IV) (MAPbI3)2–(MASnI3)2–(MAPbI3)2, and (V) (MASnI3)2–(MAPbI3)2–(MASnI3)2. Electronic properties of the (e) electrical conductivity per unit relaxation time (σ/τ), and the (f) electron contribution to the thermal conductivity (κe) along the three principal orthogonal directions (x, y and z) for the five structures (structures I, II, III, IV and V are represented in green, blue, red, black and pink curves, respectively). The variations with the chemical potential of the transverse components (along x and y directions) and longitudinal components (along z direction) are shown by (i), (ii) and (iii) respectively, in the figure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Constant energy contours for the Au(111) surface with a superposed scheme of the Brillion zones, with the high-symmetry points obtained by integrating the photoemission spectral weight over a small energy window (±20 meV) with respect to the binding energy of 0 meV, 300 meV, and 600 meV, respectively. S1–S6 and S1′–S6′ represent the sp band folded into the Brillion zones of the 4 × 4 superlattice. Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic diagrams of the fabrication procedure of the G-PC-PVK photodetector, and the collective advantages of the hierarchical light-trapping architecture. (b) Reflectance and (c) absorbance spectra of the perovskite films with different structures. Reprinted with permission from ref. 198. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons. (d) Simulated reflectivity spectra of the InAs/GaSb type-II superlattice-based mid-infrared photodetector devices with different silver grating periods. Reprinted with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2019, AIP Publishing.	 

Water splitting	HER	Electrocatalysis	PCN/NG without CV cycles	Self-assembly	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 88.6 mV dec−1	Seldom activity loss >5000 cycles	
27

Overpotential = 170 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
PCN/NG after 750 CV cycles	Self-assembly	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 49.1 mV dec−1	Seldom activity loss >5000 CV cycles	
27

Overpotential = 80 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
1T-MoS2/PDDA-rGO	Self-assembly	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 48.6 mV dec−1	
	
28

Overpotential = 137 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
2H-MoS2/GNC	Intercalation	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 47 mV dec−1	
	
228

Overpotential = 195 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Turnover frequency = 18.6 min−1
MoS2/Pt-NP	Intercalation	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 25 mV dec−1	>30 h	
80

Overpotential = ∼35 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
MoS2/Pd-NP	Intercalation	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 30 mV dec−1	
	
80

MoS2/Ru-NP	Intercalation	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 61 mV dec−1	
	
80

MoS2/Au-NP	Intercalation	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 38 mV dec−1	
	
80

MoS2/Co-NP	Intercalation	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 53 mV dec−1	>1000 CV cycles	
81

Overpotential = 89 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
MoS2 moiré superlattice	Water bath	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 73 mV dec−1	>10000 CV cycles	
133

Overpotential = 153 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Pt nanoparticles based SP superlattices	Lithography	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 33 mV dec−1	>11 h	
136

Overpotential = 15 mV [current density = 14.3 mA cm−2]
Turnover frequency = 1.55 s−1
CoMnO@CN superlattices	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 152 mV dec−1	>55 h	
37

Overpotential = 71 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]
NiAl/MoS2-1	Self-assembly	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 74 mV dec−1	
	
29

NiAl/MoS2-2	Self-assembly	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 67 mV dec−1	∼12 h	
29

Overpotential = 220 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiAl/MoS2-3	Self-assembly	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 91 mV dec−1	
	
29

NiFe/MoS2-1	Self-assembly	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 102 mV dec−1	
	
29

NiFe/MoS2-2	Self-assembly	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 82 mV dec−1	∼12 h	
29

Overpotential = 180 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiFe/MoS2-3	Self-assembly	0.5 M H2SO4	Tafel slope = 107 mV dec−1	
	
29

MoS2/Graphene	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 90 mV dec−1	
	
107

MoS2/NiFe	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 77 mV dec−1	>10 h	
107

Overpotential = 110 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Photocatalysis	ICF-5InCuS-Na	Hydrothermal condition	Na2S aqueous solution	H2 evolution rate = 18 μmol h−1 g−1	>96 h	
249

Quantum efficiency = ∼3.7% at 420 nm
T4-1	Hydrothermal condition	solid state	H2 evolution rate = 3.5 μmol h−1 g−1	
	
250

DMSO	H2 evolution rate = 6.1 μmol h−1 g−1	>10 h	
250

T4-2	Hydrothermal condition	solid state	H2 evolution rate = 5.6 μmol h−1 g−1	
	
250

DMSO	H2 evolution rate = 27.5 μmol h−1 g−1	>10 h	
250

T4-3	Hydrothermal condition	solid state	H2 evolution rate = 15.9 μmol h−1 g−1	
	
250

DMSO	H2 evolution rate = 91.5 μmol h−1 g−1	>10 h	
250

N-MoS2/CdS	Intercalation and self-assembly	10 vol% lactic acid aqueous	H2 evolution rate = 9.11 mmol g−1 h−1	>20 h	
251

OER	Electrocatalysis	NiMn/GO	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 46 mV dec−1	>2 h	
239

Overpotential = 260 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiMn/rGO	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 50 mV dec−1	>2 h	
239

Overpotential = 280 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Co/GO	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 56 mV dec−1	
	
240

Overpotential = ∼370 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Co3/4Ni1/4/GO	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 47 mV dec−1	
	
240

Overpotential = ∼290 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Co2/3Ni1/3/GO	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 36 mV dec-1	∼15 h	
240

Overpotential = 259 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Co1/2Ni1/2/GO	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 60 mV dec−1	
	
240

Overpotential = ∼300 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Ni/GO	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 95 mV dec−1	
	
240

Overpotential = ∼320 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
CoNiFe/RuO2.1	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 48.9 mV dec−1	
	
109

Overpotential = 281 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Turnover frequency = ∼0.045 s−1
NiAl/GO-1	Self-assembly	0.1 M KOH	Tafel slope = 140 mV dec−1	
	
241

Overpotential = 170 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 125 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 284 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 338 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]
NiAl/GO-2	Self-assembly	0.1 M KOH	Tafel slope = 146 mV dec−1	
	
241

Overpotential = 158 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 198 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 272 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 326 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]
NiAl/GO-3	Self-assembly	0.1 M KOH	Tafel slope = 173 mV dec−1	
	
241

Overpotential = 155 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 227 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 240 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 300 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]
NiAl/GO-4	Self-assembly	0.1 M KOH	Tafel slope = 120 mV dec−1	
	
241

Overpotential = 209 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 258 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 209 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 252 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]
NiAl/GO-5	Self-assembly	0.1 M KOH	Tafel slope = 118 mV dec−1	>10 h	
241

Overpotential = 225 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 270 mV [current density = 40 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 180 mV [current density = 50 mA cm−2]
Overpotential = 200 mV [current density = 100 mA cm−2]
(CoNi/Fe-PP)10	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 42.1 mV dec−1	
	
104

(CoNi/Fe-PP)20	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 42 mV dec−1	
	
104

(CoNi/Fe-PP)30	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 37.6 mV dec−1	>20000 s	
104

Overpotential = 264 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
(CoNi/Fe-PP)40	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 37.9 mV dec−1	
	
104

(CoNi/Fe-PP)50	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 44.8 mV dec−1	
	
104

CoMnO@CN superlattices	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 97 mV dec−1	>55 h	
37

Overpotential = 263 mV [current density = 20 mA cm−2]
Ni2/3Fe1/3/GO	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 42 mV dec−1	∼36000 s	
245

Overpotential = 230 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
Ni2/3Fe1/3/rGO	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 40 mV dec−1	∼36000 s	
245

Overpotential = 210 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiAl/MoS2-1	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 65 mV dec−1	
	
29

Overpotential = 340 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiAl/MoS2-2	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 56 mV dec−1	∼12 h	
29

Overpotential = 310 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiAl/MoS2-3	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 62 mV dec−1	
	
29

Overpotential = 380 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiFe/MoS2-1	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 56 mV dec−1	
	
29

Overpotential = 310 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiFe/MoS2-2	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 44 mV dec−1	∼12 h	
29

Overpotential = 250 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiFe/MoS2-3	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 52 mV dec−1	
	
29

Overpotential = 380 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
MoS2/NiFe	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 46 mV dec−1	>10 h	
107

Overpotential = 210 mV [current density = 10 mA cm−2]
NiFe/graphene	Self-assembly	1.0 M KOH	Tafel slope = 60 mV dec−1	
	
107

Photocatalysis	ZnCr/titanate	Self-assembly	0.1 M NaClO4	O2 evolution rate = 1.18 mmol g−1 h−1	
	
252

CO2 reduction	Electrocatalysis	AuCu nanoparticles	Hydrothermal condition	0.1 M KHCO3	Faradaic efficiency = ∼80%	∼12 h	
259

Overpotential = ∼200 mV
CoTPP SP superlattice	Lithography	0.5 M NaHCO3	Faradaic efficiency = ∼70%	
	
136

Fuel cells	ORR	PtPd BNSL	Self-assembly	0.1 M perchloric acid	Kinetic current density is approximately 2 and 4 times as high as that on the Pt octahedra and the random mixture	
	
262

PtAu SLA	Self-assembly	0.1 M KOH	Onset potential = 0.903 V	>1000 CV cycles	
264

2D PtCoFe superlattice	Self-assembly	0.1 M HClO4	ESCA = 62.9 m2 g−1	>10000 CV cycles	
265

h-Mn3O4-TMSL	Self-assembly	N2-saturated 0.1 M KOH	Onset potential = ∼0.91 V	>10 h	
268

Diffusion-limiting current density = ∼5.7 mA cm−2
Half-wave potential = 0.84 V
FeNC/TiC	Self-assembly	O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH	Onset potential = ∼0.92 V	∼20 h	
269

Half-wave potential = 0.84 V
EOR	2D PtCoFe superlattice	Self-assembly	0.1 M HClO4 and 0.2 M ethanol	Peak current density = 4.75 mA cm−2	
	
265

MOR	PtAu SLA	Self-assembly	0.5 M KOH containing 1.0 M methanol	Peak current density = 41.77 mA cm−2	
	
264

PtPd nanocrystal superlattice	Self-assembly	N2-saturated 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M methanol	ESCA = 46 m2 g−1	
	
274

Specific kinetic current density = 2.08 mA cm−2
PtCu NF	Solution based preparation	0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M methanol	Mass activity = ∼827 A g−1 (Pt)	6 times higher stability than commercial Pt/C catalyst	
275

Specific activity = 17.3 A g−1 (Pt)
Thermoelectricity	PbSeTe/PbTe	MBE	300 K	
ZT = 2	
	
68

5 nm PbSe/PbS	Simulation	77 K	
ZT = 4	
	
276

5 nm PbTe/PbSe	Simulation	77 K	
ZT = 6	
	
276

1.7 nm Ge/Si	Calculation	300 K	
ZT = 1	
	
280

C3Si3/C	Calculation	300 K	
ZT = 1.95	
	
283

C3Ge3/C	Calculation	300 K	
ZT = 2.72	
	
283

Al2O3/ZnO	Atomic layer deposition	500 K	
ZT ≥ 0.45	
	
288 and 290

Hf:ZnO16/O18	Atomic layer deposition	300 K	
ZT = 0.022	
	
292

Bi2Te3/Bi0.5Sb1.5Te3	radio-frequency (RF) magnetron sputtering	400 K	
ZT = 1.44	
	
291

[(NbOx)a/(STNO)b]20	PLD	≤ 950 K	N.A.	
	
293

LaNiO3/SrTiO3	Calculation	300 K	
ZT = 0.35	
	
295

(LaNiO3)n/(LaAlO3)n	
	Tensile strain	
ZT = 0.8–1.1	
	
296

(SrXO3)1/(SrTiO3)n	
	300 K	
ZT = 0.8	
	
297

(LaS)1.14NbS2	Solid state reaction	950 K	
ZT = 0.14	
	
307

graphene/h-BN	Calculation	1100 K	
ZT = 2.5	
	
306

TiS2[(HA)x(H2O)y(DMSO)z]	Intercalation	373 K	
ZT = 0.28	
	
302

Bi2Se3HA0.11DMSO0.06	Intercalation	300 K	
ZT = 0.187	
	
303

poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/Bi2Te3	Hard template	300 K	
ZT = 0.58	
	
299

Solar cells	GaAs based	100-period lattice matched InGaAsP/InGaP superlattices	CVD	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 17.6%	
	
33


V
OC of 1.136 V

J
SC of 20.5 mA cm−2
FF of 75.3%
EQE at 700 nm of over 75%
GaAs	CVD	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 13.2%	
	
311


V
OC of 0.653 V

J
SC of 27.6 mA cm−2
FF of 73%
QD	Ge/Si QD	Simulation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 27.22% was predicted for bilayer conical QDSLs with optimised size	
	
312

InAs/GaAs QD	MBE	
	The formation of miniband enhanced the two-step photocarrier generation, leading to effective carrier separation.	
	
314

CdTe QD	Solution phase preparation	
	The control of the dimension of the quantum resonance was achieved.	
	
315

InAs/GaAs QD with the period of 5 and 1	MBE	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	With a higher period, light absorption was increased, the hot carrier extraction-induced VOC and JSC were improved.	
	
319


V
OC of ∼0.9 V (measured at the excitation energy of 1.32 eV at 15 K)
GaAs/GaSb QD	
	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, 1000 suns illumination	PCE of 20.67%,	
	
316


V
OC of 1.41 V

J
SC of 1731.96 mA cm−2
FF of 88.54% (measured at 1000 suns)
Dye-sensitized solar cells	P2Mo18/MoS2@C	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 8.85%	
	
324


V
OC of 0.77 V

J
SC of 18.8 mA cm−2
FF of 61%
Perovskite	(BA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 perovskite (n = 4)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 12.52%,	20% of degradation in PCE after 200 hours of light illumination	
326


V
OC of 1.01 V

J
SC of 16.76 mA cm−2
FF of 74.13%
(BA)2(MA)2Pb3I10 (n = 3)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 11.44%,	
	326

V
OC of 1.056 V,

J
SC of 14.37 mA cm−2
FF of 75.39%
(BA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 perovskite (n = 5)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE 8.71%	The structural integrity of the bulk material was maintained for several months.	
22


V
OC of 1.0 V

J
SC of 11.44 mA cm−2
FF of 75.59%
NpMA-Pb-based perovskite (n = 4)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 17.25%	Retained 89% of the initial PCE after 1000 hours in ambient condition with 30 ± 5% relative humidity	
327


V
OC of 1.24 V

J
SC of 20.89 mA cm−2
FF of 66.35%
AnMA-Pb-based perovskite (n = 4)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 14.47%	Retained 80% of the initial PCE after 1000 hours in ambient condition with 30 ± 5% relative humidity	
327


V
OC of 1.08 V

J
SC of 17.54 mA cm−2
FF of 76.4%
(MTEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 (n = 5)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 18.06%	Maintained 87.1% of its initial PCE after 1000 hours of operation under AM 1.5G illumination in glovebox	
328


V
OC of 1.088 V

J
SC of 21.77 mA cm−2
FF of 76.27%
(PDA)PbI4 (n = 1)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 0.3%	
	
31


V
OC of 0.64 V

J
SC of 1.04 mA cm−2
FF of 46%
(PDA)(MA)3Pb4I13 (n = 4)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 13.3%	Retained 95% of the original PCE in ambient air for 4000 hours and under light illumination for 3000 hours	
31


V
OC of 0.98 V

J
SC of 19.5 mA cm−2
FF of 69%
(PA)2(MA)3Pb4I13 (n = 4)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 8.8%	Retained 80% of the original PCE in ambient air for 360 hours	
31


V
OC of 0.83 V

J
SC of 19.06 mA cm−2
FF of 55%
(DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13 (n = 4)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 15.16%	Retained 80% of its initial PCE after 300 hours of operation under AM 1.5G, 1 sun illumination in air	
329


V
OC of 1.06 V

J
SC of 22.07 mA cm−2
FF of 65%
(BzDA)(Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8)9Pb10(I0.93Br0.07)31 (n = 10)	Solution phase preparation	AM1.5 spectral irradiance, one sun illumination	PCE of 15.6%	Retained 80% of the initial PCE after 84 hours under dark in ambient environment	
330


V
OC of 1.02 V

J
SC of 21.5 mA cm−2
FF of 71%
Photodetector	InAs/InAs0.45Sb0.55 type-II superlattices on GaSb substrates	MBE	Long wavelength infrared photodetector	
J
d of 4.4 × 10−4 A cm−2	
	
334


R of 3.47 A W−1

D* 2.8 × 1011 Jones a 50% cut-off wavelength of 10 μm, (measured at −90 mV bias at 77 K)
Superlattices on GaSb/AlSb/Si buffer	MBE	mid-infrared photodetector	EQE of 25.6% (in the spectral ranging from 3.7 to 4.9 μm), R of 0.88 A W−1, D* of 1.5 × 1010 Jones a 50% cut-off wavelength of 5.4 μm (measured under −100 mV bias at 200 K)	
	
335

CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowires	CVD	UV photodetector	On/off ratio of 105	
	
135


R of 2.5 × 103 A W−1
EQE of 8.6 × 105 a response time of 10 ms at 5 V bias (measured under 365 nm excitation with the light intensity of 3.75 mW cm−2)
Single GaN nanowires with 20 periods of AlN/GaN:Ge heterostructure in AlN shell	Plasma-assisted MBE	Visible-band photodetector	Huge dispersion in dark current from 2 pA to 6 μA, due to the coalescence of nanowires.	
	
32

GaN with 30 periods of GaN/AlN superlattices	MBE	Bias-dependent light response	Enhanced responses in 280–330 nm range at positive biases; in 330–360 nm range at negative biases	
	
336

In1.8Ga1.8Zn2.4O7 superlattice consisted of In, Ga/Zn-O layers and In-O layers	CVD	UV photodetector with a transparency of over 80% in the visible light range	On/off ratio of 1.9 × 105	
	
337


R of 1.95 × 105 A W−1
EQE of 9.28 × 107% rise time of 0.93 s (measured at 1 V bias under 261 nm excitation with the light intensity of 2.3 mW cm−2)
InSe-based photodetectors	CVD	
	
R of 1.7 × 104 A W−1	
	
192


D* of 1.4 × 1013 Jones
EQE of 1.7 × 107% a response time of 20 ms contact resistance 2.4 kΩ (measured under at 1 V bias under 490 nm excitation with the light intensity of 0.29 mW cm−2)
Porous 2D photonic crystal MAPbI3 perovskite	Solution phase preparation	Visible light photodetector with polarized light detection	
R of 12.67 A W−1	
	
198


D* of 3.22 × 1013 Jones rise time 21 ms decay time 67 ms (measured at 10 V bias, under white light illumination of 32 μW cm−2)
LED	Al0.6Ga0.4N/Al0.57Ga0.43N	Simulation	Deep ultraviolet LED with emission peak at 289 nm	Maximum IQE of 53.9% light output power of 39.52 mW	
	
338

p-Al0.62In0.03Ga0.35N/p-Al0.5In0.03Ga0.47N	Simulation	Deep ultraviolet LED with emission peak at 272.96 nm	Maximum IQE of 93.92% light output power of 84.94 (A.U.) at power density of 200 A cm−2 efficiency droop of 0.84%	
	
339

GaN/In0.18Al0.82N-based short period superlattices	MBE or CVD	LEDs emitting at 450 nm	Light output power 248 mW at 500 mA dynamic resistance 0.94 Ω optical confinement factor from 3.42%	
	
340

Memory	LA0.7Sr0.3MnO3/SrRuO3 superlattices	PLD	Bipolar resistive switching characteristic with set voltage of 0.5∼1 V, reset voltage of −0.5∼-0.6 V	On/off ratio of ∼14	Endurance of 30–40 cycles	
344

MAPbI3−xClx	Solution phase preparation	Bipolar resistive switching characteristic with set voltage of 0.8 V, reset voltage of −0.6 V	Small on/off ratio	Endurance of over 100 cycles retention time of 104 s	
345

(BzA)2CuBr4	Solution phase preparation	Bipolar resistive switching characteristic with set voltage of 0.2 V, reset voltage of −0.3 V	On/off ratio of 108 large memory window	Endurance of 2000 cycles retention time over 1000 s	
346

Ge–Te/Sb–Te suoerlattices	Sputtering	Interfacial phase change memory (iPCM)	1000 times faster switching speed than that of the conventional Ge–Sb–Te alloy-based iPCM	Endurance of 104 cycles retention time over 200 hours.	
348


 	Fig. 31  Reaction pathways of HER in acidic (in red) and alkaline (in blue) solutions.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Schematic illustration of the growth of gas bubbles on a flat film electrode, which caused a large number of inactive sites to form. (b) Significant stability difference between the flat film and SP electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 136. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  The OER mechanism for acid (blue line) and alkaline (red line) conditions. Reprinted with permission from ref. 232. Copyright 2016, the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 34  The preparation process of NiAl/GO materials, and the assembled structures of (a) NiAl/GO-1, (b) NiAl/GO-2, (c) NiAl/GO-3, (d) NiAl/GO-4, and (e) NiAl/GO-5, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2019, Springer Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 35  Schematic of the (a) NiFe/Graphene superlattice for OER, (b) MoS2/Graphene superlattice for HER, and (c) MoS2/NiFe superlattice for the overall water splitting. Reprinted with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  Schematic illustration of the parameters associated with photocatalysis. Reprinted with permission from ref. 216. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 37  (a) Photoluminescence spectrum of 5 mg of T4-3 dispersed in 20 mL DMSO. (b) Possible charge transfer process of T4 clusters dispersed in solution. (c) Recycling photocatalytic HER test under visible light illumination on T4 clusters dispersed in DMSO. Reprinted with permission from ref. 250. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  (a) Cross-sectional high resolution TEM image of the ZnCr/titanate periodic nanostructure, and (b) its enlarged view and structural model. (c) PL intensity of ZnCr/Titanate with different titanate:ZnCr ratios of 0.91 (-), 1.16 (---), 1.46 (-·-·-), pristine ZnCr LDH (○), and protonated layered titanate (△). (d) Schematic model for the band structures of the ZnCr/titanate periodic nanostructure. Reprinted with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 39  (a and b) Aberration-corrected HAADF-STEM images of AuCu (a and b) and (c and d) magnified STEM images of the center of the particle together with a schematics illustration of the structure projections. Reprinted with permission from ref. 259. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 40  (a) Schematic representation of the formation process of the trimetallic PtCoFe nanoparticle superlattices. (b) CVs recorded at room temperature in 0.1 M HClO4 solution with the sweep rate of 50 mV s−1. (c) ORR polarization curve recorded at room temperature in an oxygen-saturated 0.1 M HClO4 aqueous solution with a sweep rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm. (d) Mass activity and specific activity at 0.9 versus RHE. (d) ORR polarization curves before and after ADTs. Reprinted with permission from ref. 265. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 41  Structural model of the TiS2 (a) single crystal and the (b) TiS2[(HA)0.08(H2O)0.22(DMSO)0.03] hybrid superlattice. (c) HAADF-STEM image of TiS2[(HA)x(H2O)y(DMSO)z]. Reprinted with permission from ref. 302. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 42  (a) Schematic diagram of the structure of the lattice matched InGaAsP/InGaP superlattice-based solar cell, and the corresponding energy band diagram, illustrating tunneling and thermionic-emission carrier transports in this structure. (b) EQE beyond the band-edge of In0.49Ga0.51P (680 nm) versus the wavelength of the InGaAsP/InGaP superlattice solar cell with different numbers of periods. (c) IV curves of the 100-period device, with and without ARC, with a gold BSR and with a back-filter, under AM 1.5G illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2017, AIP Publishing. (d) Convergence of the carrier extraction efficiency with the number of SL periods for different period thicknesses at a photon energy of 1.25 eV and an effective carrier lifetime of 10 ps. The convergence is faster for the thicker-period device due to the stronger localization. (e) Converged carrier extraction efficiency as a function of the period thickness. The transition of the carrier extraction from quasi-ballistic to sequential tunneling resulted in a significant drop in the carrier extraction efficiency. Reprinted with permission from ref. 34. Copyright 2018 AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 43  Excitation energy dependence of the photoluminescence spectra of the (a) CdTe QD solution in which the quantum dots are randomly dispersed, and CdTe QDSLs exhibiting (b) 1D, (c) 2D, (d) 3D quantum resonances. The solid lines show PL spectra with different excitation energies with dashed lines to show the peak value. The excitation energy increases from top to bottom. The insets show the absorption spectra of each sample. The down arrows indicate the excitation energies in the PL measurements. Reprinted with permission from ref. 315. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publishing. (e) Schematic diagram of the InAs/GaAs QDSCs of five- and one-periods of InAs/GaAs QDSLs. (f) Excitation density-dependent JSC, (i) and VOC, (ii) at the excitation energy of 1.32 eV and temperature of 15 K. Blue and red circles represent the results of the devices with five- and one-periods superlattices, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 319. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 44  (a) Schematic diagrams of the structure of C nanoparticles, P2Mo18/MoS2 superlattices and P2Mo18/MoS2@C. (b) IV curves of the dye-sensitized solar cell devices with different counter electrodes under AM 1.5G illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 324. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 45  (a) GIWAXS patterns of the NpMA-Pb film (left) and the AnMA-Pb film (right). (b) HRTEM images of the NpMA-Pb film (left) and the AnMA-Pb film (right); insets: Fast Fourier transforms (FFT) of the selected area diffraction. Reprinted with permission from ref. 327. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic diagrams of the charge transport of MTEA (top) and BA-based (bottom) 2D perovskite films. (d) J–V curves of (MTEA)2(MA)4Pb5I16 and (BA)2(MA)4Pb5I16-based SCs under AM 1.5G illumination; inset: schematic diagram of the 2DRP perovskite-based solar cell. Reprinted with permission from ref. 328. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 46  (a) Schematic diagram of the RP and DJ Phase 2D Layered Perovskites. (b) UV-Vis spectra of (PDA)(MA)n−1Pbn+1I3n=1; inset: color variation of the films with the increased n values. (c) J–V curve of the device based on (PDA) (MA)3Pb4I13 under AM 1.5G illumination; inset: stabilized photocurrent measured at the maximum power point (Vmp = 0.72 V). (d) Stability test of different SCs in ambient air. Reprinted with permission from ref. 31. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (e) J–V curves (forward and reverse scans) and related PV parameters for the ‘champion’ SC based on (DMAPA)MA3Pb4I13. Reprinted with permission from ref. 329. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic diagram of the perovskite SC based on (BzDA)(Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8)9Pb10(I0.93Br0.07)31 and the organization of the perovskite layers on the substrate. (g) J–V curve of the best device based on (BzDA)(Cs0.05MA0.15FA0.8)9Pb10(I0.93Br0.07)31. Reprinted with permission from ref. 330. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 47  (a) Schematic diagram of the InAs/InAsSb type-II superlattice nBn structure grown on top of the GaSb/AlSb/Si buffer, using AlSb/GaSb dislocation filters. (b) Normalized R spectra for the detector at different temperatures (CO2 absorption shown in grey, water vapor absorption in blue). (c) Total spectral R and D* as a function of temperature in the 3.7 to 4.9 μm spectral band. The operation bias voltage for all measurements was 100 mV. Reprinted with permission from ref. 335. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 48  (a) SEM images of the CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowires; inset: the magnification SEM of the typical sample. (b) The XRD images of the CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowires, showing narrow peaks. (c) Schematic of a CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowire based photodetector. The bias-dependent photocurrent as a function of the incident light intensity (at 365 nm) of the (d) CdS/CdS:SnS2 superlattice nanowire-based photodetector, and (e) pure CdS nanowire-based photodetector. (f) Schematic diagram of the energy band for the CdS superlattice nanowire under light irradiation. Reprinted with permission from ref. 135. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Schematic diagram of the single GaN nanowires with 20 periods of the AlN/GaN:Ge heterostructure in the AlN shell, and HAADF STEM images of two coalesced nanowires with different magnifications. The bright and dark grey areas correspond to GaN and AlN, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (h) Schematic diagrams of the evolution of the band diagram under (i) negative bias, (ii) zero bias, and (iii) positive bias. The Fermi levels are indicated by a dash-dotted blue line in each diagram. (i) Photocurrent spectra of a single nanowire at different biases (±0.5, ±1, and ±2 V). Solid (dashed) lines correspond to a positive (negative) bias. Shadowed areas outline the difference in the response between the positive and negative bias. (j) EBIC heat maps at (i) −2 V bias and (ii) +2 V bias superimposed on an SEM image of the nanowire under study. The location of the GaN/AlN superlattice is outlined with green vertical lines. Reprinted with permission from ref. 336. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 49  (a) Schematic diagram of the DUV LED with n-type Al0.6Ga0.4N/Al0.57Ga0.43N superlattices. (b) Electrostatic fields in the QWs of the deep ultraviolet LED at 120 mA. Reprinted with permission from ref. 338. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic diagrams of the four structures (A–D) of the DUV LEDs. (d) The output power and (e) IQE for the four LED structures as a function of the current density. Reprinted with permission from ref. 339. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 50  (a) I–V curve of the Ag/PMMA/(BzA)2CuBr4/Pt memory device for the first voltage sweep, and (b) multi-level I–V curves measured at a compliance current from 10−5 A to 10−1 A with an interval of 10−1 A. Applied biases for SET and RESET ranged between +0.7 and −0.7 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 346. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. (c) Schematic structure of the iPCM devices based on Ge–Te/Sb–Te superlattices. (d) Proposed switching model for iPCM. Ge, Sb, and Te atoms are shown in green, magenta and yellow color, respectively. (e) Time-domain profile of the applied voltage and the resulting current during the bipolar read–write process in iPCM. The zoomed areas at the bottom of the figure show the voltage and current profiles for the RESET and SET processes, and the zoomed area at the top shows the voltage and current profiles for the read process. The three dashed lines in the RESET and SET cases indicate the start of the applied switching voltage, the transition state during the switching process, and the end of that transition. The four dashed lines for the case of the read process indicate the start of the increase in the applied voltage, the maximum of the applied voltage, the start of the decrease in the applied voltage and the end of the read voltage pulse. Reprinted with permission from ref. 348. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and Sons.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
