Construction of self-supported bimetallic MOF-mediated hollow and porous tri-metallic selenide nanosheet arrays as battery-type electrodes for high-pe ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA06209C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA06209C
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 23977-23993Construction of self-supported bimetallic MOF-mediated hollow and porous tri-metallic selenide nanosheet arrays as battery-type electrodes for high-performance asymmetric supercapacitors†

        
          
            Jiwan 
            Acharya
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Gunendra Prasad 
            Ojha
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Bishweshwar 
            Pant
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Mira 
            Park
          
        
      *ab
aCarbon Composite Energy Nanomaterials Research Center, Woosuk University, Wanju, Chonbuk 55338, Republic of Korea. E-mail: wonderfulmira@woosuk.ac.kr
bWoosuk Institute of Smart Convergence Life Care (WSCLC), Woosuk University, Wanju, Chonbuk 55338, Republic of Korea
Received 
      23rd July 2021
    , Accepted 1st October 2021First published on 6th October 2021AbstractThe meticulous architecture of novel materials, integrating a rationally constructed highly conductive polyphase transition metal selenide with a carbonaceous nanostructure onto a 3D substrate has been acknowledging the challenging but appealing strategies for the development of auspicious electrode materials for energy storage devices. In this work, for the first time, hollow and porous nickel–zinc–cobalt selenide (Ni–Zn–Co–Se) nanosheet arrays were designated onto a chemically reduced rGO embellished Ni foam (rGO/NF) via a self-sacrificing template, ion exchange and selenization affair, where a Zn–Co-organic framework acts as a template. Ameliorating from the unique porous and hollow nanoarchitecture, the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode tenders sheer electroactive sites, ample accessible territories for facile insertion of electrolytes and curtailed ion diffusion subways, reflecting the superlative electrochemical properties, in terms of an exceptional specific capacity of 464.4 mA h g−1, an admirable rate performance of 68.9% and a remarkable cyclic life span of 93.24% after 7000 cycles in a three-electrode assembly for supercapacitors. To demonstrate the practical applicability, an asymmetric supercapacitor (ASC) device was assembled using Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF and metal–organic framework-derived hollow porous carbon (MDHPC) as a positive and a negative electrode, respectively. The as-sandwiched Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF//MDHPC ASC device exhibited a high energy density of 74.6 W h kg−1 at a power density of 796.91 W kg−1 with a remarkable durability of 96.4% after 7000 successive charge–discharge cycles.
1. Introduction
Owing to the expeditious industrial evolution, the necessity of energy resources steadily mushrooming day by day and the development of efficient energy storage and conversion systems with altitudinous performance is urgently needed to fulfill the demand of clean as well as sustainable energy supply.1,2 Thus, energy storage and conversion devices have great impact towards the energy and power demand of modern society. In recent years, supercapacitors (SCs), solar cells, and multifarious batteries including Li-ion batteries, Na-ion batteries, Li–sulfur batteries, metal–air batteries, and fuel cells are diagnosed as the most efficient class of advanced energy storage and conversion systems.1,3–5 As compared to batteries, SCs hold immense assurance in diverse applications thanks to their several advantages including optimal power density, rapid charge/discharge potency, longer operating time, environmental sustainability and safety features.6,7 Instead, the practical implementation of SCs is still impeded by its minimal energy density than batteries, and needs to be amplified without eschewing power density and cycling life-span.8,9 Based on the equation of E = ½CV2, the energy density (E) can be amended by either enhancing the specific capacitance (C) or broadening the voltage window (V).10,11 Therefore, the amalgamation of two auspicious electrode materials with a widened voltage window (V) and an enhanced specific capacitance (C) to sandwich asymmetric/hybrid supercapacitors (HSCs) is an emphatic approach to achieve great enhancement in the energy density.
In recent times, transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs) have attracted much attention towards multifarious energy storage devices due to their outstanding physiochemical properties.12,13 Furthermore, transition metal selenides (TMSs) are considered as a prominent class of pseudocapacitive materials with upgraded electrochemical activity in terms of superlative electronic conductivity, lower band gap, enhanced redox activity and long-term cyclic stability compared to the corresponding oxides/sulfides.14–16 Till now, diverse monometallic and bimetallic selenides have been diagnosed as electrode materials for supercapacitors, which manifest high value of capacitance as well as tremendous rate capability due to their multiple valence state and better electronic conductivity. For instance, Zhu et al. reported 3D cobalt selenide nanosheets as cathode materials for SCs, which exhibited a high specific capacity of 70.6 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 with an excellent rate performance of 52.8% at 100 A g−1.17 In another approach, Miao et al. prepared Co–Mo–selenide hollow nanosheet arrays as electrode materials for SCs, which delivered a high specific capacity of 70.6 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and delivered a capacity of 159.7 mA h g−1 even when the current was intensified by 20 times, implying an outstanding rate capability of 72% of its initial specific capacity value.18 To further amplify the electrochemical features, the incorporation of a supplementary metal ion is supposed to be an effective pathway while engineering electrode materials. Over the past decennary, poly-phase transition metals primarily Zn, Ni and Co metals have been extensively employed in research during the construction of electrode materials for multifarious energy storage and conversion systems owing to their altitudinous electrochemical properties and high abundance as natural resources.10,19,20 Nevertheless, the recruitment of a zinc–nickel–cobalt selenide as a supercapacitor electrode material has been barely proclaimed.
Unfortunately, the development of TMS electrode materials has been hindered by the slow ion/electron transfer rate and boisterous volume transformation during the redox reaction.15,16,18 To overcome the above-mentioned limitations, the construction of a hybrid structure incorporating carbonaceous materials like reduced graphene oxide (rGO) with diverse pseudocapacitive materials is supposed to be an efficient way to uplift the electrical conductivity and assurance for the complete utilization of electroactive materials, thereby improving overall electrochemical properties.21 Furthermore, the incorporation of rGO onto a conductive substrate serves as a lifeline for possible structural agglomeration and can mitigate conceivable volume changes during long-term cycling processes. For instance, Zardkhoshoui et al. synthesized Ni, CoOH-rGO/NF hybrid electrodes and achieved an outstanding Csp value of 4047 F g−1 with an excellent cycling lifespan of only 9% loss compared to its initial Csp value after 10000 successive charge–discharge cycles.22 Similarly, Xuan et al. prepared a hierarchical Mn–Co-LDH/rGO@NiCo2S4 heterostructure electrode onto a Ni foam and delivered an excellent specific capacity of 1446.5 C g−1 with a remarkable cyclic life-span of 98% capacity retention after 5000 consecutive cycles at 10 A g−1.23 Therefore, amalgamating the preponderant features of Zn–Ni–Co–Se and 3D rGO/Ni foams has been assumed to be a promising avenue to acquire adequate electrochemical activity and supreme electrical conductivity for high-performance SCs.
Furthermore, the rational designation and fabrication of approbative micro/nanostructures is another preferential way to ameliorate overall supercapacitive features. Principally, hollow and porous nanoarchitectures have gained immense interest thanks to their peculiar structure and enormous electrochemical property. As compared to bulk materials, the porous materials could render accessible areas and multichannel pathways for electrolyte ions as well as endow ample redox layouts for efficient charge storage and improved diffusion efficiency.18,24 Additionally, the nanosized architecture can curtain ion–diffusion pathways and accelerate charge transportation, thereby providing rapid electrochemical kinetics and superb supercapacitive performance. Benefiting from hollow and porous nanoarchitectures, the internal cavity can be used to mitigate the swelling stress commencing via volume transfiguration, thereby eschewing the devastation of electroactive materials during the long-term cycling process.25 Nevertheless, it should be noted that the most hollow architecture debuts in the powder form, and dead volume will assuredly initiate during electrode fabrication, thereby reducing the capacitive features of electrode materials. Therefore, it will be highly advantageous to construct hollow and porous nanoarchitectures with multi-components and delightful morphologies onto a conductive substrate as a binder-free electrode for energy storage devices.
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), composed of organic linkers and inorganic moieties, are supposed to be emerging templates to develop hollow and porous nanoarchitectures and tailored configurations for multifarious energy-related applications.26–28 In recent times, it has been divulged that the in situ-grown MOF template can transfigure into hollow and porous transition metal selenide (TMS) nanostructures via facile cost-effective anion exchange reactions. Moreover, it has been reported that MOF-derived TMS nanoarchitectures showed great potential for SCs owing to their immense specific surface area and the presence of pertinent mesopores.29–31 However, the hollow and porous zinc–nickel–cobalt selenide (Ni–Zn–Co–Se) materials derived via MOFs particularly are barely reported. On the basis of the above-mentioned deliberations, herein we propose the modish designation of unique hollow and porous Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheet arrays onto a rGO garnished Ni foam (NF) induced via MOFs. The synthetic approach is absolutely plain and cost-effective, which only comprises in situ growth of triangular bimetallic Zn–Co-based zeolitic imidazole framework (Zn–Co-ZIF) nano-arrayed structures on a 3D rGO/NF substrate followed by subsequent in situ etching reactions with an alcoholic solution of Ni(NO3)2 to achieve a tri-metallic hollow layered double hydroxide (LDH) structure and an ultimate selenization process. The as-fabricated Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF electrode with a hollow nanoarchitecture is highly uniform and possesses excellent conductivity with copious electroactive areas for OH− ions to broadcast paramount electrochemical features in terms of enormous capacitive features, excellent rate performance and stunning cycling life-span. Moreover, a hybrid supercapacitor (HSC) device based on Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF as a positive electrode and MOF-derived hollow and porous carbon (MDHPC) as a negative electrode was successfully assembled, which exhibited a high energy density of 74.6 W h kg−1 at a power density of 796.91 W kg−1 and well maintained an energy density of 53.3 W h kg−1 at a power density of 7679.5 W kg−1.
2. Experimental section
2.1 Material synthesis

2.1.1 Synthesis of a rGO-Ni foam (rGO@NF). 
Prior to synthesis, the NF slices (2 × 5 × 0.4 cm) were rinsed with 2 M HCl, deionized water, ethanol and acetone for 15 min each in order to clean the surface of the NF substrate. The decoration of rGO onto the NF was successfully carried out according to our method reported previously.20


2.1.2 Synthesis of a zinc–cobalt-ZIF onto the rGO/NF (Zn–Co-ZIF@rGO/NF). 
For the synthesis of Zn–Co-ZIF@rGO/NF, 1 mmol of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O and 2 mmol of Co(NO3)2·6H2O were dissolved in 40 ml of deionized water under continuous stirring to achieve clear pink solution A. Furthermore, 16 mmol of 2-methylimidazole was dissolved in another 40 ml of deionized water to prepare clear solution B. Afterwards, solution A and B were mixed together under continuous stirring to obtain a violet colored solution, and a piece of rGO/NF substrate was immersed into the resulting violet solution and aged for 24 h. Then, a piece of violet-colored NF was taken out and carefully washed with deionized water and ethanol followed by drying in air at 65 °C to achieve Zn–Co-ZIF@rGO/NF. For comparison, Co-ZIF@rGO/NF was also prepared under identical conditions except the usage of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O.


2.1.3 Synthesis of nickel–zinc–cobalt-layered hydroxide onto the rGO/NF (Ni–Zn–Co-LDH@rGO/NF). 
In order to synthesize Ni–Zn–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Zn–Co-ZIF@rGO/NF was used as a sacrificial template and an in situ ion exchange method was carried out. For this, 30 ml ethanol solution containing 2 mmol Ni(NO3)2·6H2O was prepared. Then, the as-prepared Zn–Co-ZIF@rGO/NF was immersed in a water bath for 5 h till the violet coloration of NF was successfully transformed into green coloration followed by subsequent washing and drying to obtain Ni–Zn–Co-LDH@rGO/NF. For comparison, the Ni–Co-layered double hydroxide@rGO/NF (Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF) was also prepared using the Co-ZIF@rGO/NF by a similar method.


2.1.4 Synthesis of nickel–zinc–cobalt–selenides onto the rGO/NF (Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF). 
A hydrothermal approach was employed to synthesize the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF. First, 0.1597 g Se powder and 0.15 g NaBH4 were dissolved in 2 ml deionized water and 40 ml absolute ethanol (C2H5OH). Afterwards, the as-prepared Ni–Zn–Co-LDH@rGO/NF sample was vertically immersed into the growth solution and hydrothermally treated at 120 °C for 4 h. The as-obtained product was washed with deionized water and ethanol and dried at 70 °C overnight to obtain Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF. For comparison, Co–Se@rGO/NF, Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF, and Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF were also fabricated under the identical condition by using Co-MOF@rGO/NF, Zn–Co-MOF@rGO/NF and Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF.

2.2 Preparation of MOF-derived hollow and porous carbon (MDHPC)
In order to synthesize MDHPC, first Zn–Co-MOF was synthesized by using 2-MIM as an organic ligand. First, 1 mmol of Co(NO3)2·6H2O and 1 mmol of Zn(NO3)2·6H2O were dissolved in a solution containing a mixture of methanol and water and labelled as solution A. Next, solution B was prepared by dissolving 16 mmol of 2-methylimidazole in 50 ml methanol. Subsequently, solution A and B were mixed together and continuously stirred for 4 h. The as-obtained product was filtered, washed and dried to obtain Zn–Co-ZIF. The as-obtained product was carbonized at 800 °C in a tube furnace chased by etching with 2 M HCl, washing and drying to obtain MOF-derived hollow and porous carbon (MDHPC).
2.3 Material characterization
The microstructure and morphology of the as-prepared materials were scrutinized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM, S-7400, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan), transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and high-resolution TEM (HR-TEM, JEOL JEM-2100F TEM) conjoined with energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) analysis. The crystal structure and phase purity of the as-prepared samples were analyzed by X-ray diffraction technique (Rigaku Co. Tokyo, Japan). The elemental oxidation state and chemical composition of the as-prepared materials were investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS, ESCALAB250, Al Kα radiation).
2.4 Electrochemical measurements in a three-electrode configuration and assembly of the HSC device
The electrochemical properties for the as-synthesized electrode materials were analyzed in 2 M aqueous KOH electrolyte at room temperature in a standard three-electrode cell configuration employing the as-prepared materials as the working electrode, a Ag/AgCl electrode as the reference electrode and a platinum (Pt) wire as the auxiliary electrode respectively. The corresponding cyclic voltammetry (CV), galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of all electrodes were carried out using a VersaSTAT 4 electrochemical workstation. The as-synthesized cathode materials were directly used as free-standing working electrodes, while anode materials were prepared by coating the homogeneous slurry composed of 80 wt% active materials, 10 wt% carbon black and 10 wt% PVDF organic binder mixed in a NMP solvent onto a slice of Ni foam with an area of 1 × 1 cm2, which was ultimately used as the electrode after the drying process was complete.
The CV analysis for positive and negative electrodes was performed in the potential range of −0.2 to 0.7 V and −1.0 to 0.0 V respectively, under different scan rates. Similarly, GCD tests were conducted within the range of 0 to 0.5 V for the positive electrode at different current densities. However, the GCD test for the negative electrode (MDHPC) was examined in the potential window of −1.0 to 0.0 V at different current densities. Accordingly, the electrochemical measurement in terms of CV and GCD test for the as-fabricated ASC device was analyzed at 1.6 V. The EIS spectrum of the prepared materials and ASC device was recorded at 10 mV amplitude of AC voltage in the frequency range of 1 Hz to 100 kHz. The specific capacity (QSC), specific capacitance (CSC), energy density (E), and power density (P) values for two-electrode and three-electrode configurations from the GCD measurements were examined using the following equations:32 QSC = I × Δt/m × 3.6(1) CSC = I × Δt/m × ΔV(2) E = 0.5 × CSC × ΔV2/3.6(3) P = E × 3600/Δt(4)where I, Δt, m and ΔV signify the response current (A), discharge time (s), mass of the active materials (g), and operating voltage (V) respectively.
Similarly, the coulombic efficiency of the HSC device was calculated based on the following equation:10 η = td/tc(5)where tc and td signify the charging and discharging time respectively.
3. Results and discussion
3.1 Material designation and characterizations
Porous and hollow Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheet arrays onto the rGO/NF were prepared via a cost-effective multistep approach, comprising facile precipitation, in situ ion-exchange and selenization method. First, reduced graphene oxide (rGO) was uniformly garnished over a Ni foam by a chemical reduction method (Fig. 1a), according to a method reported previously.20 Afterwards, the solid Zn–Co-ZIF template was grown over the rGO/NF via the reaction of zinc and cobalt ions with 2-methylimidazole. The appearance of violet color of the Ni foam suggests the formation of triangular leaf-like Zn–Co-ZIF arrays with a smooth surface. Then, the Zn–Co-ZIF template was treated with an alcoholic solution of nickel nitrate to design a hollow Ni–Zn–Co-layered hydroxide precursor via an ion-exchange and etching process. Herein, H+ ions induced via hydrolysis will successively corrode the Zn–Co-ZIF and produce Zn2+ and Co2+ ions. Meanwhile, the OH− ions liberated play a pivotal role for the precipitation of Ni2+, Zn2+ and Co2+ to generate Ni(OH)2, Zn(OH)2 and Co(OH)2 onto the surface. As the reactions progress, the Zn–Co-organic framework template was completely etched and transfigured into hollow Ni–Zn–Co-layered-triple-hydroxide (LDH) nanosheet arrays, as indicated by the appearance of green color of the conductive substrate. After the etching process, the surface of the Ni–Zn–Co-LDH precursor turned into rough and produced abundant highly porous nanosheets, which could furnish enhanced redox active sites as well as bounteous accessible regions for the diffusion of electrolyte ions. Ultimately, hollow and porous Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheet arrays onto the rGO/NF were formed by an in situ selenization process, in which the Se powder and NaBH4 were utilized as a source of selenide and reducing agent respectively (Fig. 1b). Here, a NaHSe solution was prepared based on the following equation: NaBH4 + Se + H2O → NaHSe + Na2B4O7 + H2. Furthermore, a Ni–Co–selenide was also prepared via a similar mechanism using the Co-ZIF as a sacrificial template.
 Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the synthesis of (a) rGO/NF and (b) Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF. 
The morphological and microstructural features of the as-synthesized samples were scrutinized by SEM analysis. The SEM images of the pure Ni foam and rGO-decorated Ni foam are displayed in Fig. 2a and b, which demonstrate the successful decoration of rGO-sheets onto the Ni foam via a chemical reduction approach. Furthermore, 2D triangular leaf-like arrays of the vertically aligned Co-ZIF and Zn–Co-ZIF were uniformly grown onto the rGO/NF substrate (Fig. 2c and d). A higher magnification SEM image (inset of Fig. 2c and d) further revealed that Co-ZIF and Zn–Co-ZIF arrays possess a highly smooth surface. Notably, after the etching and ion exchange process, the monolithic Co-ZIF and Zn–Co-ZIF triangular leaf-like arrays were transfigured into Ni–Co-LDH and Zn–Ni–Co-LDH precursors with well-preserved nanosheet arrays (Fig. 2e and f). Instead, the thickness of the Ni–Co-LDH and Ni–Zn–Co-LDH appeared to be reduced and the LDHs sheets become more rough and porous, confirming the successful etching of Co-ZIF and Zn–Co-ZIF in the presence of the alcoholic solution of Ni(NO3)2·6H2O. Imperatively, the enlarged image (inset of Fig. 2f) recommends that the Ni–Zn–Co-LDH precursor nanosheets acknowledge rough and porous surfaces with copious interwoven ultrathin nanoflakes. The SEM images of the Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF are displayed in Fig. 2g. The higher magnification SEM image (inset of Fig. 2g) reveals the more rough, porous and hollow Ni–Co–Se nanosheets after the selenization process. Similarly, the FESEM images of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF are displayed in Fig. 2h. After selenization treatment, the nanosheet arrays deposited onto the rGO/NF were well retained and the surface of nanosheets becomes more porous, and the interior appeared as a hollow architecture without any obvious aggregation and disruption, manifesting a good structural capability (inset of Fig. 2h). Such a mesoporous and hollow nanoarchitecture for both Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF and Zn–Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF could furnish plentiful electroactive surface area for the electrode/electrolyte interface, resulting in rapid charge transfer and complete utilization of the electrode materials. The interlaced Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheets possess multifarious hollow and interstitial spaces, facilitating the spontaneous diffusion of electrolyte ions into the active materials. As displayed in Fig. 2h, after the selenization process, the thickness of Ni–Zn–Co–Se appeared to be reduced, suggesting the successful selenization of the Ni–Zn–Co-LDH nanosheet precursor. It should be emphasized that the formation of Ni–Co-LDH and Ni–Co–Se onto rGO/NF obeys the identical etching and selenization mechanism during the formation of Ni–Zn–Co-LDH and Ni–Zn–Co–Se onto the rGO/NF. The SEM images audaciously reflect that the novel and unique Zn–Ni–Co–Se and Ni–Co–Se nanosheets comprising ultrathin nanosheets have been successfully designated onto the rGO/NF. Additionally, the SEM images of the CoSe@rGO/NF and Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF are displayed in Fig. S1.† As expected, the well-aligned 2D triangular rough nanosheet arrays with a porous and hollow architecture were uniformly garnished over the rGO/NF. The composition of the as-fabricated Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF was further confirmed by EDS analysis (Fig. S2†). The presence of various elements such as Ni, Zn, Co, Se and C with their appropriate ratio bravely confirms the successful designation of the Zn–Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF.
 Fig. 2  FESEM images of (a) bare Ni foam, (b) rGO/NF, (c) Co-MOF@rGO/NF, (d) Zn–Co-MOF@rGO/NF, (e) Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, (f) Ni–Zn–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, (g) Ni–Co–Se@rGO-NF, and (h) Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF (inset of (a)–(h) show the magnified images). 
The in-depth phase purity and crystal nature of the as-fabricated samples were investigated by XRD analysis. The XRD patterns of Co-ZIF (Fig. S3†) and Zn–Co-ZIF (Fig. 3a) showed that all the diffraction peaks were well matched and consistent with the previously reported XRD patterns of Co-ZIF and Zn–Co-ZIF, confirming the successful formation of Co and Zn–Co-organic frameworks with excellent purity and crystallinity.19,33 Following the in situ ion-exchange/etching reaction, the XRD peaks for Zn–Co-ZIF disappeared and the new sets of diffraction peaks with crystal planes of (003), (001), (006), (012) and (110) appeared for Ni–Zn–Co-LDH (Fig. 3a), which were perfectly matched with the previously reported XRD patterns of the hydrotalcite-like LDH phase.34,35 As compared to the binary Ni–CO-LDH phase (Fig. S3†), the Zn–Ni–Co-LDH phase possesses an almost similar XRD pattern, manifesting that they share the identical crystal nature. Instead, the intensity and slight shift in diffraction peaks for the Zn–Ni–Co-LDH phase could be ascribed to the incorporation of Zn into the Ni–Co-LDH phase.36 The XRD pattern of Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF after the selenization reaction is demonstrated in Fig. 3a. After the selenization treatment, the XRD pattern (Fig. 3a) displays that Ni–Zn–Co-LDH is successfully transfigured into Ni–Zn–Co–Se. Meanwhile, except for the three broad peaks of the Ni foam substrate (44.6°, 51.9° and 76.4°), all the other diffraction peaks could be well assigned to the previously reported standard XRD pattern of the Ni–Co–Se phase with JCPDS card no. 291417.16,37 The disappearance of rGO peaks could be ascribed to the tiny amount of rGO deposition onto the Ni foam substrate as compared to the bulk growth of Zn–Co-ZIF and Co-ZIF during the material designation approach. Moreover, the surface elemental composition, valence state and binding energy of the as-fabricated Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF and Ni–Co–Se@rGO-NF nanostructures were scrutinized by XPS measurements. The full-survey spectra (Fig. S4†) for both Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF and Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF show the presence of various elements like Ni, Co, Se, and C. The extra peak of Zn 2p for the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF suggests the presence of Zn. Fig. 3b–e display the high-resolution spectra for Zn 2p, Ni 2p and Co 2p, respectively. As depicted in Fig. 3b, two primary peaks for the Zn 2p spectrum appeared at 1021.6 and 1044.82 eV, ascribed to Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2 for Zn2+ valence states.19 The Ni 2p spectrum (Fig. 3c) was cleaved into four imperative peaks located at 855.42 and 873.12 eV assigned for Ni 2p3/2 and Ni 2p1/2 doublets, respectively, coupled with a pair of shake-up satellite peaks (indicated as Sat.), proclaiming the Ni2+ valence state.9,21 Furthermore, the high-resolution Co 2p spectrum (Fig. 3d) could be well fitted into the doublets (Co 2p3/2 and Co 2p1/2), inclusive of two shake-up satellite peaks, enunciating the co-existence of Co2+ and Co3+ valence states.38 The two essential peaks stationed at 780.3 and 795.82 eV were attributed to the Co2+ valence state, while the peaks centered at 778.92 and 794.08 eV were assigned to the Co3+ oxidation state.39 Moreover, the HR spectrum of Se 3d can be untwisted into two peaks, exploring Se 3d5/2 and Se 3d3/2 centered at 54 and 54.8 eV, respectively, which are attributed to the metal-Se interactions. Meanwhile, the additional peak of Se–O at 59.2 eV is primarily attributed to the reaction of some metal selenides with the oxygen atom on the surface.40 Finally, the HR spectrum of C 1s (Fig. 3f) reveals a solitary peak consorted by other secondary peaks, centered at 284.7, 285.81, and 290.18 eV, manifesting the deposition of chemically reduced rGO onto the Ni foam.20 To examine the effect of Zn2+ on Ni–Co–Se@rGO-NF, the HR-spectra of Co 2p in Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF and Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF were compared (Fig. S5†). The binding energies of both Co 2p3/2 and Co 2p1/2 in the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF are lower than that of the Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF. The incorporation of Zn2+ into the Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF not only changes the chemical environment of Co2+, but also enables the adsorption of the OH− onto the Co cations and tenders the transformation of Co3+/Co4+ state.41,42 Hence, the above-mentioned results indicated that the as-fabricated highly porous Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheets were successfully decorated over the rGO-NF by a cost-effective in situ method.
 Fig. 3  XRD and XPS analysis of the as-synthesized nanomaterials: (a) XRD patterns of Zn–Co-MOF@rGO-NF, Ni–Zn–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF, (b) HR spectra of Zn 2p, (c) HR spectra of Ni 2p, (d) HR spectra of Co 2p, (e) HR spectra of Se 3d, and (f) HR spectra of C 1s. 
The extensive morphological features of the as-prepared Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF were further scrutinized using TEM and HRTEM images. The low-magnification panoramic TEM images (Fig. 4a and b), displayed the well-constructed rough and porous Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheet arrays with a void space, demonstrating the hollow and porous feature, which is well consistent with the SEM outcomes. Furthermore, the enlarged TEM analysis (Fig. 4c) exhibits that the Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanoarchitecture composed of ample of nanocrystallites and nanoparticles generating inter-particle voids with enhanced porous features, recommending that the selenization does not hamper the surface morphology of nanosheets. Imperatively, their arrangement generates a highly interconnected porous structure, which is propitious for the facile adsorption of electrolytic ions, the volume expansion generated via faradaic reactions as well as the charge transfer process. The HRTEM image of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheet is displayed in Fig. 4d. As shown in Fig. 4d, the adjacent lattice fringes with the spacing were evaluated to be 0.31 and 0.27 nm, ascribed to the (100) and (101) crystalline facets of the Ni–Co selenide phase.43,44 Furthermore, as elucidated by the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (the inset of Fig. 4d), the well-defined coaxial rings with occasional bright spots appeared distinguishably, proclaiming the polycrystalline features of the as-fabricated Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF specimen.
 Fig. 4  (a) Low-magnification TEM image, (b and c) enlarged TEM images, and (d) HRTEM image (inset shows the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern) of porous Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheet arrays. 
3.2 Electrochemical properties of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF
The electrochemical properties of various as-fabricated materials as binder-free electrodes for supercapacitors were conducted in a conventional three-electrode configuration using 2 M KOH electrolyte. Fig. 5a shows the cyclic voltammogram (CV) of the Ni foam, rGO/NF, Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Ni–Zn–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Co–Se@rGO/NF, Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF, Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF and Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF in the working potential window of −0.2 to 0.7 V at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. All the CV curves of the as-prepared electrode materials were absolutely divergent from an electric double-layer capacitor (EDLC) behavior with a rectangular skeleton, concluding that the capacitive features of electrodes were governed via faradaic reactions. The charge-storage capability and pertinent capacitive features can be appraised on the basis of the area of CV curve. Indeed, the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF depicts a larger CV curve area than that of the other counterparts, manifesting the higher specific capacity and optimal pseudocapacitive performance.21 It was further endorsed by the galvanostatic charge–discharge (GCD) test. As displayed in Fig. 5b, the charge/discharge sectors consist of apparent plateaus as in the CV curve, suggesting the battery-type characteristics of the as-prepared electrode materials. In agreement with the CV outcomes, the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF exhibited the largest integral area for the discharge region, suggesting better capacitive and charge storage performance than those of the other counterpart electrodes, which could be assigned to the peculiar nanostructure having copious redox reaction sites offered by ternary metal selenides. Furthermore, the CV and GCD profiles of the rGO/NF are much excellent compared to that of the bare Ni foam, manifesting the imperative role of rGO sheets to enhance the conductivity while designing the electrode materials onto the Ni foam garnished with carbonaceous materials.23Fig. 5c describes the typical CV traces of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF with distinct symmetric redox peaks at various scan rates ranging from 5 to 200 mV s−1, reflecting the rapid electronic and ionic transportation of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF. Imperatively, although the scan rate elongated from 5 to 200 mV s−1, all the CV curves appeared identically without distortion, exploring the great electrochemical reversibility and favorable capability of electrode materials.45 For comparison, the CV profiles of various controlled samples including Co–Se@rGO-NF, Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF, Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Zn–Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, and Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrodes at different scan rates within the similar potential range are presented in Fig. S6a, S7a, S8a, S9a and S10a† respectively, manifesting the pseudocapacitive behavior of all electrodes. The rapid redox reactions associated with the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@GO/NF electrode could be ascribed to the following equations:46,47 NiSe + OH− ↔ NiSeOH + e−(6) ZnSe + OH− ↔ ZnSeOH + e−(7) CoSe + OH− ↔ CoSeOH + e−(8) NiSeOH + OH− ↔ NiSeO + H2O + e−(9) CoSeOH + OH− ↔ CoSeO + H2O + e−(10)
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of the as-prepared nanomaterials: (a) CV curves for various electrodes at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, (b) CV curve for Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF at different scan rates, (c) GCD profiles of various electrodes at a current density of 1 A g−1, (d) GCD profile of Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF at different current densities, (e) rate capability curve, (f) EIS as a Nyquist plot, and (g) cyclic performance of Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF and Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrodes. 
The energy storage potentiality of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@GO/NF electrode was further proven by GCD examinations under different current densities within the voltage range of 0 to 0.5 V (Fig. 5d). Remarkably, the GCD profile displayed the strong pseudocapacitive characteristics mediated via faradaic reactions. On enhancing the current densities, the charge–discharge regions of the GCD profile exhibited a symmetrical nature, exploring the remarkable coulombic efficiency, excellent rate performance and outstanding reversible faradaic reactions of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@GO/NF electrode. Furthermore, the voltage (IR) drop induced by intrinsic internal resistance cannot appear in all discharge sectors explaining the noteworthy electronic conductivity of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@GO/NF electrode. The specific capacity of the as-prepared various electrode materials, namely, Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Zn–Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, CoSe@rGO/NF, Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF, Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF and Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrodes at different current densities were calculated based on their respective GCD curves. The GCD profiles for various controlled samples, namely, Co–Se@rGO-NF, Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF, Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Zn–Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, and Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrodes are displayed in Fig. S6b, S7b, S8b, S9b and S10b,† respectively. The relation between specific capacities and current density for the as-prepared electrodes is explained in Fig. 5e. The Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode revealed an ultra-high specific capacity value of 464.4 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1, which was much higher than those of various other electrodes, namely, Co–Se@rGO/NF (105.5 mA h g−1), Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF (166.6 mA h g−1), Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF (340.8 mA h g−1), Zn–Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF (367.7 mA h g−1), and Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF (408 mA h g−1) at the same current density. The uppermost specific capacity of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode could be attributed to the synergistic effect between various metal ions, which could furnish copious electroactive sites and meliorated electronic conductivity. It was examined that the specific capacity value decreased with the increase in current densities, which could be associated with the shielding effect of the ion-diffusion rate, leading to the scarce electrochemical reactions between electrode materials and the electrolyte. Even at a high current density of 20 A g−1, the specific capacity of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode still remains at 320 mA h g−1, suggesting the excellent rate performance (68.9%) and outstanding charge storage capacity. As compared to Co–Se@rGO/NF (57.8%), Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF (58.3%), Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF (55.4%), Zn–Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF (56%), and Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF (63.7%), the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF exhibited high rate performance (68.9%), manifesting better electrical conductivity. Herein, it should be noticed that the electrochemical performance of the hollow and porous Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode was also superior to other previously reported mixed transition metal selenides, as broadcasted in Table 1.
Table 1 Comparison of the capacity performance of the as-prepared Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF and other previously reported bimetal selenide electrode materials




Electrode materials
Method
Electrolyte
Specific capacitance/capacity
Rate performance
Ref.




Co–Mo–Se nanosheets
MOFs and selenization
6 M KOH
221.7 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1
72% at 20 A g−1

18



Ni–Co–Se nanosheets/3D graphene/NF
Hydrothermal
6 M KOH
∼742.4 F g−1 at 1 A g−1
63.54% at 10 mA cm−2

52



Ni–Co–Se nanosheet
Hydrothermal and cation exchange
3 M KOH
430.87 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1
54.8% at 10 A g−1

53



CoFe2Se4–CoNiSe2 composite
Hydrothermal
3 M KOH
183.4 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1
∼94% at 8 A g−1

54



Co–Cd–Se nanorods
Hydrothermal
2 M KOH
192 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1
63.91% at 20 A g−1

55



(NiCo)9Se8/(NiCo)0.85Se (Ni–Co–Se) core–shell
Hydrothermal
1 M KOH
164.44 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1
40.65% at 20 A g−1

56



CoSe2@MoSe2-3-2 hollow sphere
Hydrothermal
3 M KOH
211.97 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1
70.76% at 20 A g−1

57



G/MSZCS-HS
Hydrothermal
6 M KOH
376.75 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1
83.4% at 32 A g−1

46




Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF


MOFs mediated selenization


2 M KOH


464.4 mA h g

−1

at 1 A g

−1



∼8.9% at 20 A g

−1



This work





The electrical conductivity and reaction kinetics of the as-fabricated electrodes were further examined by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS). Fig. 5f shows the Nyquist plots for Co–Se@rGO/NF, Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF, Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Zn–Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF and Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrodes. Additionally, the pertinent equivalent circuit model for various electrodes is depicted in Fig. S11.† In the circuit model, Rct represents the charge transfer resistance, which is associated with the semicircle examined in the high-frequency region. Similarly, Rs is correlated with the internal resistance, which correspond to the intercept of a higher frequency (Z′) region.18,47Rw represents the Warburg impedance resistance, inducing ion diffusion during the electrochemical process. As compared to various samples, the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode displayed a vertical line with a larger slope, demonstrating a rapid charge transfer kinetics and a lower diffusion resistance.19,21 Furthermore, CPE signifies the electrochemical double-layer capacitance and CF denotes the faradaic pseudocapacitance. From the magnified views of the Nyquist plot, it can be emphasized that the Rct and Rs values of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF (Rct = 0.59 Ω and Rs = 0.42 Ω) are significantly minimal than those of the Co–Se@rGO/NF (Rct = 1.18 Ω and Rs = 1.52 Ω), Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF (Rct = 1.26 Ω and Rs = 1.05 Ω), Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF (Rct = 0.98 Ω and Rs = 0.84 Ω), Zn–Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF (Rct = 0.94 Ω and Rs = 0.64 Ω) as well as Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF (Rct = 0.84 Ω and Rs = 0.47 Ω), manifesting that the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode possesses better electrical conductivity, as well as rapid reaction kinetics.
The durability of Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF and Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrodes was revealed via sequential charge–discharge cycles at 15 A g−1. As depicted in Fig. 5g, the specific capacity of both electrodes gradually diminishes during the cycling tests, which could be attributed to the partial exfoliation of electroactive materials aroused by volume expansion. Instead, the specific capacity disintegration of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF is only 6.76% after consecutive 7000 GCD cycles, which is obviously minimal than that of the Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode (10.43%), affirming the satisfactory cyclic life and favorable durability. The remarkable cyclic stability could be ascribed to the designation of the unique hollow Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheet architecture that can tender copious interior spaces to mitigate the swelling density that originated from volume expansion. The inset of Fig. 5g depicts the first and last 10 subsequent GCD cycles for the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode. Remarkably, there was no obvious transfiguration in the shape of GCD curves after the cycling test, implying superlative cyclic performance and boisterous structural probity as evaluated via the SEM image after cycling tests. As depicted in Fig. S12,† there was no obvious collapse, aggregation and transfiguration in the morphology of Ni–Zn–Co–Se proving the excellent structural stability. The porous and ultrathin Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheets were still garnished over the conductive rGO-NF substrate, which can unmask plentiful electroactive sites, assuring high energy storage potentiality. The electrical conductivity of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode after the durability test was also examined by the EIS test (Fig. S13†). As displayed in Fig. S13,† the slight increase in Rs and Rct after the cyclic test revealed the magnificent structure tailorability, which well coincided with the SEM result (Fig. S12†).
The charge storage kinetics of the as-prepared Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode was evaluated based on the relation between the peak current (i) and the square root of sweep rate (v1/2). Fig. 6a depicts the CV curve at different scan rates of 5–50 mV s−1, exhibiting the enhancement in current density on increasing the scan rate. As displayed in Fig. 6b, the anodic and cathodic peak current values increased linearly with v1/2, implying that the electrochemical process acquired by the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode surface was primarily governed by diffusion-controlled reactions.10 To scrutinize the comprehensive rate-limiting mechanism (diffusion-controlled capacity and surface-controlled capacity) of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode, the power law (i = avb) can be employed to expose the correlation between the peak current (i) and sweep rates (v). Here, a and b signify the arbitrary constants. The b-value defines the slope of the line, and it can be achieved by sketching log(i) against log(v) under a constant potential. Primarily, b values of 1 and 0.5 signify the surface-controlled and diffusion-controlled contribution towards the redox reaction, respectively.47 The Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode within 2 M KOH solution exhibited b values of 0.54 and ∼0.52 for anodic and cathodic peaks (Fig. 6c), suggesting the strong evidence for diffusion-controlled induced faradaic reactions. The capacity contributions can be quantified based on the following equation: i(V) = k1v + k2v1/2, where i(V) denotes the current response at a constant potential window of V, v represents the sweep rate, while k1v and k2v1/2 signify the relative contribution from the surface-controlled and diffusion-controlled process, respectively.19,48Fig. 6d depicts the contribution ratio of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode at different scan rates. The capacitive-controlled percentage at a lower scan rate of 5 mV s−1 was predicted to be 71.48%, acknowledging the dominant diffusion-controlled process and feasible insertion of electrolyte ions. Remarkably, the contribution of the diffusion-controlled process was optimal at a lower scan rate (71.48% at 5 mV s−1) and decreased with the increase in sweep rates (46.28% at 50 mV s−1), which could be attributed to the confined intercalation of electrolyte ions onto the surface of the electrode.49
 Fig. 6  (a) CV curves of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode displaying anodic cathodic peak current density to examine kinetic behavior, (b) relation between the anodic and cathodic peak current density and the square root density of scan rates, (c) relationship between log(i) and log(v), (d) evaluation of capacitive and diffusion contribution of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode at different scan rates, and (e) schematic interpretation broadcasting the redox mechanism of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode in an alkaline electrolyte. 
The excellent specific capacity, rate capability and cyclic performance of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode could be attributed to the extensive factors, as illuminated in Fig. 6e: first, the binder-free current collector, the Ni foam, avoids the addition of polymer binders and promotes uniform growth of Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheets, which favors the accessibility of electrolyte ions for charge storage performance. Second, the deposition of rGO onto the Ni foam (rGO/NF) further enhances the electrical conductivity of the bare Ni foam and endeavors curtailed ion-electron superhighway. Similarly, the MOF-derived porous and hollow structure of Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheets provides enhanced electroactive sites and rapid charge transfer roadways from nanosheets to rGO/NF, which are assumed to be highly advantageous for high-rate performance of electrodes. The synergistic effect of Ni, Zn and Co metal ions in Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheets tender prolific electroactive sites, feasible ion–electron pathways and improved redox reaction, thereby providing ultra-high capacitive performance. Moreover, the hollow and porous Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheets with abundant void space bolster the volume changes during consecutive charge–discharge cycles preventing structural deformation. All these inherent features of Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF nanomaterials make them auspicious electrode materials for high-performance supercapacitors.
3.3 Assembly and electrochemical performance of Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF//MDHPC devices
Although the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode revealed outstanding supercapacitor features, the narrow potential domain could hinder its further practical implementation for energy storage devices. Generally, the assembly of the HSC device, incorporating battery-type and capacitor-type electrodes, is supposed to be an efficient and pragmatic approach to broaden the voltage range. In the form of capacitor-type materials, we synthesized MOF-derived hollow and porous carbon (MDHPC) and employed it as a supercapacitor material, enormously thanks to its bizarre features including high surface area, exclusive 3D nanoporous architecture, optimal capacity and good electronic conductivity.50Fig. 7a and b display the FESEM images of as-fabricated MDHPC. Imperatively, MDHPC depicts the loosely bound semi-spherical hollow structure assembled together in the form of a well-defined 3D nanoarchitecture with a highly porous nature. Such a hollow and 3D porous nanostructure provides enormous specific surface area for uppermost ion diffusion, thereby uplifting the overall electrochemical performance. The CV analysis of the MDHPC electrode was scrutinized in a three-electrode configuration in the potential range of −1.0 to 0 V using 2 M aqueous KOH electrolyte solution (Fig. 7c). Particularly, all CV curves were featured by the atypical rectangular shape, manifesting the electric double-layer capacitance (EDLC) behavior of the MDHPC electrode. Imperatively, on increasing the sweep rate from 5 to 200 mV s−1, there was no obvious fluctuation in CV curves implying the excellent electrochemical reversibility and outstanding rate performance of the MDHPC electrode. Similarly, Fig. 7d depicts the GCD profile of the MDHPC electrode at different current densities from 1 to 50 A g−1. The GCD curves showed the symmetrical linear shape, signifying the EDLC features of the MDHPC electrode resulting via an ion adsorption/desorption process, which perfectly coincided with CV results. The specific capacity value (CSC) was evaluated from the pertinent discharge curve of the GCD test of the MDHPC electrode using eqn (2), and the CSC values are revealed in Fig. 7e. The MDHPC electrode delivered a CSC value of 309 F g−1 at 1 A g−1, with excellent rate performance of 64.72% at 50 A g−1. The decline in the CSC value with enhancement in current density could be ascribed to the inadequate ion diffusion onto the surface of the MDHPC electrode. Furthermore, the charge transfer kinetics of the MDHPC electrode was investigated by the EIS test and epitomized in the form of Nyquist plot (Fig. 7f). The Rs and Rct values for the MDHPC electrode were evaluated to be 1.01 Ω and 0.43 Ω, respectively. These all consequences enunciated that the as-synthesized MDHPC could be an auspicious contender as the anode material for SC applications. Prior to assembling the HSC device, it is an imperative task to balance the mass loading of the two electrodes to achieve the optimal energy storage performance via the following equation:51 m+/m− = CSC− × ΔV−/Q+(11)where m+ signifies mass and Q+ denotes the specific capacity of the positive electrode, and m−, CSC− and ΔV− assign the mass, specific capacitance and voltage of the MDHPC electrode, respectively. Based on eqn (11), the optimal mass ratio (m+/m−) between the electrodes was evaluated to be 0.6. Meanwhile, the total mass of the electrodes was evaluated to be 4.8 mg. in the HSC device. Therefore, we assembled the ASC device by sandwiching MDHPC with the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode, as displayed schematically in Fig. 8a. Similarly, Fig. 8b exhibits the CV curves of Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF and MDHPC electrodes at 20 mV s−1 within the voltage range of −0.2 to 0.7 V and −1 to 0 V in a three-electrode configuration, respectively. It can be observed that the voltage range of the HSC device was expected to be 1.8 V. To further affirm this, comparative CV tests of the ASC device were examined at 20 mV s−1 within the voltage range of 0 to 1.8 V (Fig. S14†). Imperatively, beyond the voltage range of 1.6 V, there was an obvious polarization paradox due to the oxygen evolution reactions that occurred at the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode. Therefore, the stable and optimal working voltages of the ASC device were set to be 0–1.6 V. Fig. 8c depicts the CV curves of the ASC device with different sweep rates from 5 to 200 mV s−1 within the voltage range of 0–1.6 V. It can be clearly inspected that the shapes of all the CV curves were well preserved without any deterioration when enhancing the sweep rate by 40 folds, suggesting the excellent rate performance of the ASC device.21Fig. 8d displays the GCD profiles of the ASC device at different current densities from 1 to 10 A g−1. All GCD curves replenished the symmetrical nature implying the praiseworthy electrochemical reversibility and uppermost coulombic efficiency. The CSC value of the as-formulated ASC device was calculated based on eqn (2), and the results are presented in Fig. 8e. The estimated Csp values for the ASC device were 210, 198, 193, 178, 163 and 150 F g−1 at current densities of 1, 2, 3, 5, 8 and 10 A g−1, respectively. Even at a higher current density of 10 A g−1, the ASC device procures a CSC value of 150 F g−1, suggesting admirable rate performance. Moreover, the values of coulombic efficiency (η) at different current densities were estimated using eqn (5) and delineated in Fig. 8e. The coulombic efficiency (η) was 87% at a current density of 1 A g−1, and the η value landed up to 100% when the current density was enhanced by 10 times, manifesting the excellent electrochemical reversibility as strongly reinforced by a relatively symmetrical texture of CV and GCD profiles of the ASC device.
 Fig. 7  Surface morphology and electrochemical performance of MDHPC: (a and b) FESEM images of MDHPC, (c) CV analysis at different scan rates, (d) GCD test at different current densities, (e) rate capability curve showing the relation between specific capacity and current density, and (f) EIS as the Nyquist plot for MDHPC. 
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the as-assembled ASC device, (b) CV curves of the cathode and anode within the respective potential of −0.2 to 0.7 and −1 to 0 V at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1, (c) CV curve of the ASC device at different scan rates of 5–200 mV s−1, (d) GCD curves of the ASC device at different current densities of 1 to 10 A g−1, (e) specific capacity and coulombic efficiency at different current densities, (f) cyclic performance of the ASC device (inset figure shows the first and last 5 cycles), and (g) Ragone plot (inset shows the digital photograph of a yellow and blue LED bulb ignited with the help of the ASC device when connected in a series). 
To appraise the cyclic performance of the ASC device, a consecutive GCD test was conducted within a voltage range of 0–1.6 V at a current density of 10 A g−1, as sketched in Fig. 8f (inset shows 5 successive GCD cycles before and after cyclic performance). After 7000 successive cycles, 96.4% of capacitance retention was achieved, suggesting the excellent cyclic stability of the as-fabricated ASC device. Fig. 8g depicts the energy and power densities of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF//MDHPC ASC device in the form of the Ragone plot. The as-fabricated ASC device revealed the highest energy density of 74.6 W h kg−1 at a power density of 796.91 W kg−1, and successfully secured an energy density of 53.3 W h kg−1 even at the highest power density of 7679.52 W kg−1. The energy and power densities of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF//MDHPC ASC device emanated from an outstanding CSC value and a broadened voltage window were comparable or even higher than those of the previously reported ternary chalcogenide-based ASC devices (Table 2), affirming the pertinency of this device. Ultimately, divulging the high energy capability and other considerable electrochemical properties of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF//MDHPC ASC device, it was implemented for practical applications as an energy power source. For this, two such ASC devices were connected in a series to achieve extended voltage (3.2 V), and after being charged, it powered a yellow and a blue LED (light-emitting diode) bulb (inset of Fig. 8g) with copious intensity. Therefore, it can be emphasized that the hollow and porous Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF//MDHPC ASC device could be employed as an exemplary hybrid SC system for future applications in the energy storage technologies.
Table 2 Comparison of the performance of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF//MDHPC ASC device with those of the previously reported supercapacitor device




Supercapacitor device
Voltage range (V)
Energy density (W h kg−1)
Power density (W h kg−1)
Cyclic stability (%)
Ref.




P-(Ni, Co)Se2//ZC
1.8
45.0
446.3
85.2 (3000 cycles)

47



NiVSe-6h//AC
1.7
53.1
878.5
94.4 (6000 cycles)

58



Zn0.76Co0.24S@Ni3S2//AC
1.7
53.8
853
88.4 (5000 cycles)

59



NiSe@MoSe2//N-PMCN
1.65
32.6
415
91.4 (5000 cycles)

60



Co–Mo–Se//AC
1.55
44.7
1094
90.7 (8000 cycles)

18



(Ni0.5Co0.5)0.85Se//Carbon
1.6
70.58
320.02
91.88 (8000 cycles)

53



Ni–Co–Se-1//AC
1.5
37.54
842.7
89.5 (3000 cycles)

56




Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF//MDHPC


1.6


74.6


796.91


96.4 (7000 cycles)


This work





4. Conclusions
In summary, MOF-derived porous and hollow nickel–zinc–cobalt selenide (Ni–Zn–Co–Se) nanosheet arrays have been successfully fabricated onto a rGO/Ni foam via in situ ion exchange followed by a selenization approach. Such a unique nanoarchitecture embellished with hollow and porous features can tender copious electroactive sites, plentiful accessible surface for rapid electrochemical reactions and affirmative structure stability, reflecting admirable energy storage performance including a splendid specific capacity of 464.4 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 with remarkable rate performance (68.9% at 20 A g−1) and impressive cyclic performance (6.76% depletion of its initial capacity after 7000 cycles). Moreover, the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF//MDHPC ASC device with an operating voltage of 1.6 V was sandwiched, which delivered an admirable energy density of 74.6 W h kg−1 at a high power density of 796.91 W kg−1 conjoined with magnificent durability. These all results indicate that the rationally constructed transition metal selenide nanoarchitecture could unzip the new door for the development of high-performance energy storage devices.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Traditional Culture Convergence Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future Planning (2018 M3C1B5052283). This work was also supported by the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No. NRF-2019R1A2C1004467).
References
Y. Liu, X. Xu, Z. Shao and S. P. Jiang, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 26, 1–22 CrossRef .
J.-Q. Xie, Y.-Q. Ji, J.-H. Kang, J.-L. Sheng, D.-S. Mao, X.-Z. Fu, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 194–205 RSC .
D. K. Lee, D. Lee, M. A. Lumley and K.-S. Choi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2126–2157 RSC .
D. Wang, X. Mu, P. He and H. Zhou, Mater. Today, 2019, 26, 87–99 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, L. Sheng, L. Wang, H. Xu and X. He, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 33, 360–381 CrossRef .
Y. He, W. Chen, X. Li, Z. Zhang, J. Fu, C. Zhao and E. Xie, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 174–182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, D. Ni, H.-F. Li, K. N. Hui, C.-Y. Ouyang and S. C. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 10674–10685 RSC .
G. Nagaraju, S. C. Sekhar, B. Ramulu and J. S. Yu, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 35, 750–760 CrossRef .
Y. Ouyang, H. Ye, X. Xia, X. Jiao, G. Li, S. Mutahir, L. Wang, D. Mandler, W. Lei and Q. Hao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3228–3237 RSC .
J. Acharya, T. H. Ko, J.-G. Seong, M.-K. Seo, M.-S. Khil, H.-Y. Kim and B.-S. Kim, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 8679–8690 CrossRef .
S.-W. Zhang, B.-S. Yin, X.-X. Liu, D.-M. Gu, H. Gong and Z.-B. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chhowalla, Z. Liu and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2584–2586 RSC .
W. Zhao, C. Zhang, F. Geng, S. Zhuo and B. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10909–10919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Du, W. Du, H. Ren, N. Wang, Z. Yao, X. Shi, B. Zhang, J. Zai and X. Qian, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22527–22535 RSC .
R. Manikandan, C. Justin Raj, G. Nagaraju, R. Velayutham, S. E. Moulton, J. Puigdollers and B. Chul Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 414, 128924 CrossRef CAS .
W. Song, X. Teng, Y. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Niu, X. He, C. Zhang and Z. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6401–6409 RSC .
Y. Zhu, Z. Huang, Z. Hu, L. Xi, X. Ji and Y. Liu, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 269, 30–37 CrossRef CAS .
C. Miao, C. Zhou, H.-E. Wang, K. Zhu, K. Ye, Q. Wang, J. Yan, D. Cao, N. Li and G. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2021, 490, 229532 CrossRef CAS .
J. Acharya, T. H. Ko, M.-K. Seo, M.-S. Khil, H.-Y. Kim and B.-S. Kim, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 7383–7396 CrossRef CAS .
J. Acharya, B. Pant, G. P. Ojha, H.-S. Kong and M. Park, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 602, 573–589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Acharya, G. P. Ojha, B.-S. Kim, B. Pant and M. Park, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 17487–17500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Zardkhoshoui and S. S. H. Davarani, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 769, 922–931 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xuan, Y. Guan, X. Han, X. Liang, Z. Xie, P. Han and Y. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 335, 135691 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, H. Tang, H. Ren, R. Yu, J. Qi, D. Mao, H. Zhao and D. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2014, 1, 1400011 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Y. Guan, A. Kushima, L. Yu, S. Li, J. Li and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605902 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-L. Jiang, B. Liu, Y.-Q. Lan, K. Kuratani, T. Akita, H. Shioyama, F. Zong and Q. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11854–11857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. V. Kaneti, J. Tang, R. R. Salunkhe, X. Jiang, A. Yu, K. C.-W. Wu and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604898 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Prasad Ojha, A. Muthurasu, A. Prasad Tiwari, B. Pant, K. Chhetri, T. Mukhiya, B. Dahal, M. Lee, M. Park and H.-Y. Kim, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125532 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chhetri, B. Dahal, A. P. Tiwari, T. Mukhiya, A. Muthurasu, G. P. Ojha, M. Lee, T. Kim, S.-H. Chae and H. Y. Kim, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 404–415 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lin, H. Wang, Y. Yan, X. Zheng, H. Jia, J. Qi, J. Cao, J. Tu, W. Fei and J. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 19151–19158 RSC .
C. Miao, X. Xiao, Y. Gong, K. Zhu, K. Cheng, K. Ye, J. Yan, D. Cao, G. Wang and P. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 9365–9375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. V. V. Muralee Gopi, P. J. S. Rana, R. Padma, R. Vinodh and H.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6374–6386 RSC .
H. Wang, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, H. Xu, L. Cao, H. Qing and R. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23221–23227 RSC .
Q. Li, H. Guo, L. Yue, L. Li, R. Xue, H. Liu, W. Yao, M. Xu, W. Yang and W. Yang, Colloids Surf., A, 2020, 600, 124967 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Q. Cheng, W. Li, Y. Li, C. Yang, K. Tao and L. Han, J. Alloys Compd., 2021, 850, 156864 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, F. Yu, X. Wang, S. Xi, K.-J. Chen and H. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 334, 135586 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xu, W. Zeng, S. Luo, C. Ling, J. Xiao, A. Zhou, Y. Sun and K. Liao, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 241, 41–49 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Zhou, Q. Li, C. Chen, Y.-L. Li, K. Tao and L. Han, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 350, 551–558 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jia, Z. Wang, X. Zheng, J. Lin, H. Liang, Y. Cai, J. Qi, J. Cao, J. Feng and W. Fei, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 351, 348–355 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhong, Q. Ma, W. Tang, Y. Wu, W. Gao, Q. Yang, J. Yang and M. Xu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7, 1003–1011 RSC .
F. Yuan, G. Gao, X. Jiang, W. Bi, Y. Su, J. Guo, Z. Bao, J. Shen and G. Wu, Sci. China Mater., 2021 DOI:10.1007/s40843-021-1717-3 .
X. Zhang, J. Zhang and K. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 21745–21750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hou, Y. Shi, C. Wu, Y. Zhang, Y. Ma, X. Sun, J. Sun, X. Zhang and C. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1705921 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, Y. Chen, M. Wei, H. Fan, X. Liu, Q. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Cao and L. Yang, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 69–81 RSC .
G. P. Ojha, B. Pant, A. Muthurasu, S.-H. Chae, S.-J. Park, T. Kim and H.-Y. Kim, Energy, 2019, 188, 116066 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mohammadi Zardkhoshoui and S. S. Hosseiny Davarani, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 12476–12489 RSC .
Q. Zong, Y. Zhu, Q. Wang, H. Yang, Q. Zhang, J. Zhan and W. Du, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123664 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Shrestha, S. Kandula, G. Rajeshkhanna, M. Srivastava, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24509–24522 RSC .
R. Wang, C. Xu and J.-M. Lee, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 210–221 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chu, F. Meng, T. Deng and W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 5570–5593 RSC .
M. M. Vadiyar, X. Liu and Z. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2019, 415, 154–164 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Zhang, X. Guo, K. Jin, Z. Chen, Y. Liu, L. Yin, L. Li, K. Yin, L. Sun and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 7946–7953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Du, W. Du, Y. Zhao, N. Wang, Z. Yao, S. Wei, Y. Shi and B. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 778, 848–857 CrossRef CAS .
C. V. V. Muralee Gopi, A. E. Reddy and H.-J. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 7439–7448 RSC .
Z.-B. Zhai, K.-J. Huang and X. Wu, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 89–95 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-L. Liu, C. Yan, G.-G. Wang, F. Li, Q. Kang, H.-Y. Zhang and J.-C. Han, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 4040–4050 RSC .
F. Ma, J. Lu, L. Pu, W. Wang and Y. Dai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 563, 435–446 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wang, H. Xuan, J. Yang, G. Zhang, Z. Xie, X. Liang, P. Han and Y. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2021, 388, 138649 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lv, A. Liu, Z. Shi, H. Che, J. Mu, Z. Guo and X. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 349, 397–407 CrossRef CAS .
H. Peng, J. Zhou, K. Sun, G. Ma, Z. Zhang, E. Feng and Z. Lei, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5951–5963 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta06209cThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
QSC = I × Δt/m × 3.6	(1)
CSC = I × Δt/m × ΔV	(2)
E = 0.5 × CSC × ΔV2/3.6	(3)
P = E × 3600/Δt	(4)
η = td/tc	(5)

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of the synthesis of (a) rGO/NF and (b) Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF.	 

 	Fig. 2  FESEM images of (a) bare Ni foam, (b) rGO/NF, (c) Co-MOF@rGO/NF, (d) Zn–Co-MOF@rGO/NF, (e) Ni–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, (f) Ni–Zn–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, (g) Ni–Co–Se@rGO-NF, and (h) Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF (inset of (a)–(h) show the magnified images).	 

 	Fig. 3  XRD and XPS analysis of the as-synthesized nanomaterials: (a) XRD patterns of Zn–Co-MOF@rGO-NF, Ni–Zn–Co-LDH@rGO/NF, Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF, (b) HR spectra of Zn 2p, (c) HR spectra of Ni 2p, (d) HR spectra of Co 2p, (e) HR spectra of Se 3d, and (f) HR spectra of C 1s.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Low-magnification TEM image, (b and c) enlarged TEM images, and (d) HRTEM image (inset shows the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern) of porous Ni–Zn–Co–Se nanosheet arrays.	 
NiSe + OH− ↔ NiSeOH + e−	(6)
ZnSe + OH− ↔ ZnSeOH + e−	(7)
CoSe + OH− ↔ CoSeOH + e−	(8)
NiSeOH + OH− ↔ NiSeO + H2O + e−	(9)
CoSeOH + OH− ↔ CoSeO + H2O + e−	(10)

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of the as-prepared nanomaterials: (a) CV curves for various electrodes at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1, (b) CV curve for Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF at different scan rates, (c) GCD profiles of various electrodes at a current density of 1 A g−1, (d) GCD profile of Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF at different current densities, (e) rate capability curve, (f) EIS as a Nyquist plot, and (g) cyclic performance of Ni–Co–Se@rGO/NF and Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrodes.	 

Co–Mo–Se nanosheets	MOFs and selenization	6 M KOH	221.7 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1	72% at 20 A g−1	
18

Ni–Co–Se nanosheets/3D graphene/NF	Hydrothermal	6 M KOH	∼742.4 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	63.54% at 10 mA cm−2	
52

Ni–Co–Se nanosheet	Hydrothermal and cation exchange	3 M KOH	430.87 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1	54.8% at 10 A g−1	
53

CoFe2Se4–CoNiSe2 composite	Hydrothermal	3 M KOH	183.4 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1	∼94% at 8 A g−1	
54

Co–Cd–Se nanorods	Hydrothermal	2 M KOH	192 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1	63.91% at 20 A g−1	
55

(NiCo)9Se8/(NiCo)0.85Se (Ni–Co–Se) core–shell	Hydrothermal	1 M KOH	164.44 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1	40.65% at 20 A g−1	
56

CoSe2@MoSe2-3-2 hollow sphere	Hydrothermal	3 M KOH	211.97 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1	70.76% at 20 A g−1	
57

G/MSZCS-HS	Hydrothermal	6 M KOH	376.75 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1	83.4% at 32 A g−1	
46


Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF
	
MOFs mediated selenization
	
2 M KOH
	
464.4 mA h g

−1

at 1 A g

−1

	
∼8.9% at 20 A g

−1

	
This work


 	Fig. 6  (a) CV curves of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode displaying anodic cathodic peak current density to examine kinetic behavior, (b) relation between the anodic and cathodic peak current density and the square root density of scan rates, (c) relationship between log(i) and log(v), (d) evaluation of capacitive and diffusion contribution of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode at different scan rates, and (e) schematic interpretation broadcasting the redox mechanism of the Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO/NF electrode in an alkaline electrolyte.	 
m+/m− = CSC− × ΔV−/Q+	(11)

 	Fig. 7  Surface morphology and electrochemical performance of MDHPC: (a and b) FESEM images of MDHPC, (c) CV analysis at different scan rates, (d) GCD test at different current densities, (e) rate capability curve showing the relation between specific capacity and current density, and (f) EIS as the Nyquist plot for MDHPC.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic diagram of the as-assembled ASC device, (b) CV curves of the cathode and anode within the respective potential of −0.2 to 0.7 and −1 to 0 V at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1, (c) CV curve of the ASC device at different scan rates of 5–200 mV s−1, (d) GCD curves of the ASC device at different current densities of 1 to 10 A g−1, (e) specific capacity and coulombic efficiency at different current densities, (f) cyclic performance of the ASC device (inset figure shows the first and last 5 cycles), and (g) Ragone plot (inset shows the digital photograph of a yellow and blue LED bulb ignited with the help of the ASC device when connected in a series).	 

P-(Ni, Co)Se2//ZC	1.8	45.0	446.3	85.2 (3000 cycles)	
47

NiVSe-6h//AC	1.7	53.1	878.5	94.4 (6000 cycles)	
58

Zn0.76Co0.24S@Ni3S2//AC	1.7	53.8	853	88.4 (5000 cycles)	
59

NiSe@MoSe2//N-PMCN	1.65	32.6	415	91.4 (5000 cycles)	
60

Co–Mo–Se//AC	1.55	44.7	1094	90.7 (8000 cycles)	
18

(Ni0.5Co0.5)0.85Se//Carbon	1.6	70.58	320.02	91.88 (8000 cycles)	
53

Ni–Co–Se-1//AC	1.5	37.54	842.7	89.5 (3000 cycles)	
56


Ni–Zn–Co–Se@rGO-NF//MDHPC
	
1.6
	
74.6
	
796.91
	
96.4 (7000 cycles)
	
This work

Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta06209c

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
