PbS QD-based photodetectors: future-oriented near-infrared detection technology  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC04612D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC04612D
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 417-438PbS QD-based photodetectors: future-oriented near-infrared detection technology

        
          
            Xingtian 
            Yin
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Cong 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuxiao 
            Guo
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yawei 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yonglei 
            Xing
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Wenxiu 
            Que
          
        
      a
aElectronic Materials Research Laboratory, Key Laboratory of the Ministry of Education & International Center for Dielectric Research, Shaanxi Engineering Research Center of Advanced Energy Materials and Devices, School of Electronic Science and Engineering, Xi’an Jiaotong University, Xi’an 710049, China. E-mail: xt_yin@mail.xjtu.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of High-Efficiency Utilization of Coal and Green Chemical Engineering, School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, National Demonstration Center for Experimental Chemistry Education, Ningxia University, Yinchuan, 750021, P. R. China
Received 
      27th September 2020
    , Accepted 3rd December 2020First published on 5th January 2021AbstractWith the increasing demand for near-infrared (NIR) detection in the fields of automation, military industry, communications and medical health, how to develop novel high quality and low cost NIR photodetectors has become a research hotspot in recent years. In order to solve the problems such as expensive raw materials, complex production equipment and difficulty in integration of traditional III–V semiconductors, PbS quantum dots (QDs) have become the most promising emerging nanomaterials for commercial NIR detection due to their excellent light absorption performance, low cost, simple deposition process and tunable band gap. This review summarizes the development strategies of PbS QD-based photodetectors over the past, focusing on the performance of devices with different structures and the feasibility of commercialization. In order to meet the needs of modern industry for NIR detection and realize commercialization, PbS QD-based photodetectors need to make breakthroughs in detection performance, device stability, device integration and large-scale preparation. These contents are discussed in detail in this paper. By comparing different strategies, the deficiencies of PbS QD-based photodetectors are proposed, and it is hoped that it can provide a reference for the further development of PbS QD-based photodetectors.
1 Introduction
The demand for NIR spectrum detection is increasing, particularly in optical fiber communications, spectroscopy, imaging, security, remote sensing and metrology as well as in several fields such as food inspection, agriculture, pharmaceutical and biology.1 On the one hand, the increased demand requires a reduction in the production cost of NIR photodetectors and on the other hand, emerging fields such as military, autonomous driving and medical health have put forward higher requirements for the performance of NIR detectors.
Traditional commercial photodetectors based on III–V compound semiconductors cannot be widely used because of the high cost of materials and related technology, such as the photodetectors based on InGaAs and InGaAsP. Limited by the basic properties of III–V semiconductor compounds, the problems of lattice mismatch, high thermal budget and cross contamination hinder the monolithic integration of III–V devices on silicon electronics.2,3 It is hoped that III–V detectors will be integrated with amplification and readout circuitry, but this will not reduce the production costs and complexity.4 Although CMOS compatible Ge on Si photodetector technology has made great progress, the fabrication cost is still very high and the operating spectral range is limited to less than 1600 nm (Ge direct band gap).5–7 In addition, with the increase in the use of NIR photodetectors in modern medical and health fields such as electronic skin, the demand for flexible NIR photodetectors has increased rapidly. However, traditional III-V semiconductors prepared by the epitaxial growth method is difficult to be applied in flexible devices.
Due to the above reasons, a large number of new materials have been investigated in the field of NIR photodetectors, among which colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) are of great concern. CQDs are semiconductor nanostructures that bind excitons in three spatial directions. Their typical strong confinement makes CQDs show strong light–matter interactions and unique optical properties, among which the most important are wide tunable band gaps and high absorption coefficients.8–11 In the meantime, multiple exciton generation effects and ease of fabrication as solution-processable materials are also important benefits of CQDs.12,13 Therefore, CQDs have great potential to work as absorbers for low cost NIR detectors with a tunable spectrum response.
As a traditional IR response semiconductor with a band gap of 0.6 eV, bulk PbS was employed in IR detectors as early as 1940s.14 However, nanoscaled PbS CQDs exhibit some distinguished properties, such as a wide range of tunable band gaps (0.6–1.6 eV),15 a high molar broadband absorption coefficient (≈106 M−1 cm−1), and a large Bohr exciton radii (∼18 nm),16 and the advantages of low-cost, easy solution processabilities and high stability in air. Therefore, PbS CQDs are increasingly used in the field of infrared detection. Since G. Konstantatos et al. reported the first PbS QD-based photoconductor in 2005, which can be compared with commercial InGaAs photodetectors, PbS QD-based photodetectors have developed vigorously.17 Their key performance parameters, such as detectivity D*, responsivity R, response speed, dark current and on/off ratio, can not only be comparable with those of traditional III–V semiconductor photodetectors, but also surpass in some aspects. More importantly, they show potential in flexible electronic devices, selective optoelectronic detection and NIR long-wave detection, which are not possible with traditional semiconductor photodetectors. In the past few decades, the preparation and deposition processes of PbS QDs have matured rapidly. The development of ligand exchange technology made it possible to adjust the work function, carrier mobility and carrier concentration while improving the stability of PbS QDs. Generally speaking, PbS QD-based photodetectors can be categorized into three classes, which are photoconductors, photodiodes and phototransistors, all of which have made great progress in recent years. Therefore, this review is written to summarize the current situation in the development of PbS QD-based photodetectors, and the scientific issues involved in their development, such as materials science, interface engineering, band engineering and device structure, are discussed in detail. As basic methods to optimize the PbS QD-based photodetectors, tuning the preparation of PbS QDs and developing new ligand exchange technology are briefly described in the second section of this paper, and the effects of above factors on the performance of devices are discussed. In the third section, we separately describe the development strategies of PbS QD-based photodetectors with three different device structures in recent years. Finally, we discuss the current problems and further development trends of PbS QD-based photodetectors by comparing the different strategies employed for PbS QD-based photodetectors with that of commercial InGaAs photodetectors.
2 Preparation and ligand exchange technologies of PbS QDs
With a particle size less than twice of its exciton Bohr radius, quantum dots have undergone considerable development for more than three decades since they were first named in 1983.18 Vapor-phase epitaxial growth technology is a mature method for preparing high-quality quantum dots,19,20 but the required equipment is expensive and the prepared quantum dots are difficult to be separated from the substrate.21,22 Relatively speaking, the liquid-phase synthesis method has been favored by researchers in recent years. The liquid phase synthesis route includes the hot-injection method, non-injection organometallic method, aqueous method and biosynthesis method, and among them, the most common hot-injection organometallic method is shown in Fig. 1(a).23 For PbS QDs, the currently commonly used synthesis methods are Hinse synthesis and Cademartiri synthesis. Hinse synthesis is based on the reaction of lead oleate and bis(trimethylsilyl)-sulfide in octadecene.24 This method can produce bright and monodisperse quantum dots in a wide range of sizes,25–27 but it does not ensure the stability of quantum dots for all sizes.28 Codemartiri synthesis uses lead chloride (PbCl2) and sulfur elements as the precursors and oleylamine as the solvent to prepare quantum dots.29 The product exhibits a narrow size range and a high photoluminescence quantum yield (PL QY), and the thin films prepared with such quantum dots show good stability.30 Later, Iwan Moreels et al. further introduced tri-n-octylphosphine (TOP) to the basis of Codemartiri synthesis, which is able to produce highly stable PbS QDs with a wider size range.15
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the hot-injection organometallic methods for PbS QDs.23 Copyright©2018, American Chemical Society. (b) The schematic diagram of common ligand materials suitable for PbS QDs and the energy level diagram of PbS QDs after ligand exchange.14 Copyright©2014, American Chemical Society. 
The tunable optoelectronic properties of PbS QDs are important reasons why they are widely used in new electronic devices as the active materials. On the one hand, by changing the size of the quantum dots to control their band gap, the detection of incident light with different wavelengths is realized. In recent years, researchers have devoted themselves to synthesize large-scale PbS QDs with absorption peaks above 1900 nm to achieve a wider range of NIR light detection while ensuring a good dispersion.31 On the other hand, the existence of ligands can prevent the aggregation of PbS QDs, and ligands of different types and lengths can even tune a series of electrical properties of PbS QDs.32,33 Ligand exchange can affect the carrier mobility by changing the medium environment and tunneling distance between QDs. The carrier mobility tends to increase exponentially with the decreasing ligand length.34 In addition, appropriate ligands can also passivate trap sites on the surface of QDs, thereby increasing the lifetime of carriers and excitons, and directly affecting the doping type and level of quantum dot thin films.35–37
There are a wide variety of ligands that can be employed for PbS QDs. Fig. 1(b) shows the common ligand materials suitable for PbS QDs and the energy level diagram of PbS QDs after ligand exchange. Although the most common ligands for PbS QDs are oleic acid (AC),38 these long capped ligands seriously hinder the carrier exchange among the PbS QDs. Therefore, shorter ligands are needed to replace these long insulating aliphatic ligands in order to enhance the charge coupling between PbS QDs to further realize the effective charge transfer and high carrier mobility between quantum dots. Generally speaking, the mobility of PbS QD films with small organic molecules containing sulfur groups, carboxyl groups, and hydroxyl groups as ligands is usually lower than 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1. Although these kinds of ligands are not conducive to the carrier transport process, their excellent passivation effect can effectively improve the photoluminescence quantum yield of PbS QDs, so these types of films are widely used in LED (light emitting diode) devices.39 However, metal sulfide complex molecular ligands can improve the mobility and conductivity of the PbS QD film, which makes them very popular in the photodetector field. However, a large number of defects introduced by such ligands make them currently difficult to be applied in solar cells. Inorganic halogen ligands combine the advantages of the above-mentioned two ligands, which can effectively improve the conductivity of QDs while achieving a good passivation effect.40 For example, halide ions (I−, Br−, Cl−) as electron-donating ligands can reduce the valence band (VB) of PbS QDs to a lower energy, whereas amines and thiolates shift the VB to a higher energy.41 In the work of Hu et al., S2− and OH− were also used as ligands.42 It is worth mentioning that, to achieve a better device performance, not only the interaction between ligands and PbS QDs, but also the energy level matching between PbS QDs and other active materials should be considered during the selection of ligands. This is more important in the design of complex photodiodes and phototransistors. In addition, due to the different energy levels of PbS QDs with different ligands, researchers use PbS QDs films with different ligands to construct junctions, which has become an effective strategy to improve the detection performance of PbS QD-based photodetectors.
Since the band gap of PbS QDs is inversely proportional to its diameter, a large diameter PbS QDs with good monodispersity are necessary for the detection of NIR light above 2000 nm. Large QDs often require longer reaction times and higher reaction temperatures during the hydrothermal process, making it difficult for large-size PbS QDs to achieve the required dispersity.15,16 In addition, the dispersion of QDs needs attention. As deep traps, small band gap QDs can severely impede the extraction of photo carriers. Therefore, PbS QDs with size dispersion greater than 20% are difficult to find application in photodetectors. Zhang et al. prepared monodisperse PbS QDs with an absorption peak of 1900 nm by means of the cation exchange method.43 Dong et al. developed a multiple injection method, using QDs with an absorption peak of 1960 nm as seed crystals, and obtained oversized PbS QDs with an absorption peak exceeding 2530 nm through multiple injections.31 By this way, PbS QD photodetectors with a detectivity D* of more than 1011 Jones and a bandwidth of beyond 2 μm were first realized.
3 PbS QD-based photodetectors
3.1 PbS QD-based photoconductors
Among the three common structures of PbS QD-based photodetectors, photoconductors have the simplest structure which is usually composed of a homogeneous semiconductor slab with two ohmic metal contacts (drain D and source S). Fig. 2 summarizes the typical schematic diagram and pros and cons of three common device structures of PbS QD-based photodetectors. The simple device structure makes it stable, low-cost and easy to integrate. In this coplanar structure device, the existence of trap states and sensitization centers prolongs the lifetime of one kind of carrier, and the other carrier can be circulated many times in the external circuit, resulting in a considerable photoconductive gain. Therefore, photoconductors usually have much higher responsivity than photodiodes. However, as the response time and gain are all determined by the carrier lifetime, the bandwidth of photoconductors is often lower than that of photodiodes. When designing photoconductors, a trade-off between gain and bandwidth should be made according to the demand. At the same time, ohmic contact means a large dark current, so a high gain photoconductor does not usually have a large signal-to-noise ratio (SNR).
 Fig. 2  The typical device structure diagrams and pros and cons of three different structures of PbS QD-based photodetectors. 

3.1.1 Original coplanar PbS QD-based photoconductors. 
With the development of the preparation process of PbS QDs, PbS QDs with a high absorption coefficient and wide absorption range spanning the visible light region and NIR light region stand out from many different kinds of QDs, and are used in NIR light or vis-NIR wide spectrum detection. In 2006, Konstantatos et al. reported a photoconductor with a single layer of PbS QDs deposited on interdigital gold electrodes, which opened the prelude to the study of low cost, large device area, flexible and easy to integrate PbS QD-based photoconductors.38 The detectivity D* of the resulting device reached 1.8 × 1013 Jones, which was comparable to that of the most advanced commercial epitaxially grown InGaAs photodetectors at that time. However, long-lived quantum dot surface traps make the device show a very slow response time (f3db < 20 Hz), which seriously limits its application in high-speed optical communication and other areas requiring a rapid response. In addition, the spectral response range, detectivity, responsivity and stability of the PbS QD-based photoconductor need to be further optimized, and other problems such as dark current, flexibility and integration need to be further solved to meet the increasingly wide application of near-infrared detectors. Based on the work of Konstantatos et al., coplanar PbS QD-based photoconductors have developed rapidly over the past decade. Among them, the construction of double-layer heterojunction devices and the hybrid of active layers with other semiconductors have become the main strategies to improve the performance of these devices.


3.1.2 Double-layer heterojunction PbS QD-based photoconductors. 
The fundamental trade-off between gain and bandwidth is common in PbS QD-based planar photoconductors. The early strategy to improve the response speed of the device is to sacrifice the photoconductive gain appropriately.44 For example, by choosing appropriate quantum dot ligands, we can limit the presence of trap states so as to obtain desired lifetimes. This strategy sets an upper limit for the device bandwidth, which depends on the fastest trap state that can be isolated by chemical treatment. A new strategy is to adjust the charge carrier recombination rate by constructing the heterojunction, which is able to control the transient response of the planar PbS QD photoconductor. By introducing an interface of the double-layer heterojunction into the PbS QD-based coplanar photoconductor, many parameters such as the photocurrent, dark current and response time of the device are optimized. Due to the existence of heterojunctions, the photogenerated electrons and holes can be spatially separated, which significantly inhibits the carrier recombination, so the photocurrent of the double heterojunction photoconductor can remain at a high level. At the same time, the formation of the depletion region around the heterojunction narrows the conducting regions in the whole film. This greatly reduces the dark current of the double-layer heterojunction device. More importantly, the separation and recombination process of the photogenerated carrier controlled by the heterojunction replaces the trap-assisted carrier separation and recombination processes, so the rise/decay time of the double-layer device is significantly reduced.
Organic semiconductors were first used to construct heterojunctions with PbS QD films because of their easy processing, low cost and high flexibility. In order to change the charge carrier recombination rate and improve the transient response of the device, Biebersdorf et al. first reported the charge separation at the QD/fullerene interface.45 A monolayer planar photoconductor was developed by mixing PbS QDs with [6,6]-phenyl C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM).46 On this basis, Osedach et al. deposited PCBM on QD films to prepare a type-II heterojunction double-layer planar photoconductor. In this device, with the help of the heterojunction interface, the photogenerated electrons can quickly transfer to the PCBM layer, and recombine across the heterojunction interface.47 By this way, photogenerated electrons need not participate in slow trap-mediated bulk recombination processes in PbS QD films. Although the photosensitivity of the device is reduced to some extent, the introduction of the fast interface recombination mechanism reduces the carrier lifetime, which makes the double-layer device realize fast operation (f3db > 300 kHz). Wei et al. deposited organic layers on the PbS QDs–TBAI films, which were hybridized by p-type polymer (poly[(2,6-(4,8-bias(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophen-2-yl)-benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene))-alt-(5,5-(1′-3′-di-2-thienyl-5′,7′-bis(2-ethylhexyl)-benzo[1′,2′-c:4′,5′-c′]dithiophene-4,8-dione))]) (PBDB-T) and n-type nonfullerene molecule PBI-Por.48 Its simple coplanar structure is shown in Fig. 3(a and b). In this device, photoexcitons are separated at the PBDB-T and PBI-Por interfaces. When the holes flow to PBDB-T, the electrons flow to PBI-Por, and then fall into the PbS–TBAI film at the PbS–TBAI/PBI-Por interface. The schematic diagram of the energy band structure is shown in Fig. 3(c). Under 630 nm light, the responsivity and detectivity of the double-layer device reach 6.32 A W−1 and 1.12 × 1013 Jones, respectively. Besides, it shows an impressive SNR of 1690 and a LDR of 65 dB. The detection performance of the double-layer device has been greatly improved compared to that of single-layer photoconductors. It is worth mentioning that this device has a slow response speed, with a rise time and a decay time of 0.42 s and 0.37 s, respectively, which the author attributes to the large number of long-lived trap states contained in the amorphous organic material. As the light intensity increases, the long-lived trap states are filled, while the short-lived trap states play a major role in capturing carriers, resulting in a decrease in gain and responsivity.
 Fig. 3  (a) Device structure diagram of organic/PbS QD double-layer photoconductor. (b) Cross-sectional TEM image of the double-layer device. (c) Energy band diagram. (d) Absorption spectra of the PbS–TBAI, organic and bilayer films.48 Copyright©2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic diagram of the PbS–EDT/PbS–TBAI double-layer heterojunction device and (f) energy band diagram of the heterojunction.33 Copyright©2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
In 2017, Ren et al. designed a bilayer heterojunction photoconductor composed of PbS QD layers with different ligands (tetrabutylammonium iodide (TBAI) and 1,2-ethanedithiol (EDT), respectively).33Fig. 3(e) and (f) show the device structure and energy band diagram of this double-layer heterojunction device. This design idea is very innovative because it not only uses the double-layer heterostructure to promote the performance of the device, but also avoids the introduction of other kinds of materials, which will bring other adverse effects to the device, such as stability problems, dark current problems, etc. Due to the existence of heterojunctions, the photogenerated electrons and holes can be spatially separated, which significantly inhibits the carrier recombination, so the photocurrent of the double heterojunction photoconductor remains at a high level. At the same time, the formation of the depletion region around the heterojunction narrows the conducting regions in the two films, which greatly reduces the dark current of the double-layer heterojunction device. In the double-layer heterojunction device, the separation and recombination process of the photogenerated carrier are controlled by the heterojunction rather than the trap-assisted carrier separation and recombination processes, so the rise/decay time of the double-layer device is significantly reduced. As a result, the new double-layer heterojunction device obtains a high responsivity of 268.24 A W−1 and a great detectivity D* of 1.71 × 1012 Jones. In addition, this device can be integrated on a flexible polyimide substrate and its performance is still superior to that of the single-layer PbS QD photoconductor. (See Table 1 below for parameter comparison of four devices).
Table 1 Performance comparison of the bilayer device, single-layer device and flexible bilayer device




(580 nm)

D* (Jones)

R (A W−1)
SNR (dB)
LDR




Bilayer device
1.71 × 1012
268.24
1113.31
60.94


PbS QDs–TBAI
0.54 × 1012
143.25
291.58
49.32


PbS QDs–EDT
0.46 × 1012
265.15
99.48
40.04


Flexible device
1.44 × 1012
283.92
781.14
57.87




Due to the unique geometrical and electronic characteristics, 1D nanowires (NWs) can provide a large aspect-ratio and direct pathways for charge transport. In recent years, researchers have found that applying 1D NWs to PbS QD-based photodetectors can retain the original detection performance of the device even after repeated bends.49 Zheng et al. prepared ZnO NW array/PbS QD photoconductors through the modified electrospinning method and an exchange process.50 The device has responses in the UV-vis-NIR spectrum range with a responsivity of 0.051 A W−1, and a detectivity D* of 3.4 × 108 Jones. Compared with pure ZnO NW-based devices, hybrid devices ensure a relatively fast response speed when they achieve excellent flexibility. In this device, the interaction between PbS QDs and nanowires passivate the surface of the nanowires, which enables more carriers to be transported to the inside of the nanowires, avoiding the complex defects such as oxygen vacancies on the surface of the ZnO nanowires that impede the electron transport. It is worth noting that this method of introducing ZnO NWs into QD-based photoconductors by electrospinning can be extended to other NW/QD combinations and become an effective strategy for the development of new flexible NIR detectors.


3.1.3 Mixed and doped PbS QD-based photoconductors. 
After ligand exchange, PbS QDs are usually further hybridized with other materials, which is expected to obtain more functional active layer materials for photoconductors. In recent years, carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have attracted more and more attention because of their excellent electrical properties, especially for the high mobility of ∼104 cm2 V−1 s−1. As the charge extractor, CNTs are widely used in PbS QD-based photodetectors. CNT doping can not only improve the conductivity of the film, but also greatly improve the flexibility of photodetectors. Therefore, the hybrid material of PbS QDs and CNTs has been used as the active material of photodetectors to achieve the synergistic effect of high sensitivity and high flexibility.
As one kind of sensor electronics, electronic skin is well-known for its comfortable and convenient physiological measurement and wide application in intelligent robot technology. The application of photodetectors in electronic skin requires the active layer material have the ability of bending.51 In 2014, Gao et al. prepared sensitive and flexible photoconductors by depositing physically mixing blend (PMD, made up of physically mixed MWCNTs and PbS QDs) and chemically anchoring blend (CAB, consisted of PbS QDs and MWCNTs chemically anchored by QDs) on flexible substrate PET (polyethylene terephthalate).52 Among them, the CAB device (Fig. 4(a)) shows better detection performance. Under a bias of 40 V, the obtained R and D* of 1 wt% CAB photodetectors can reach 583 mA W−1 and 3.25 × 1012 Jones, respectively, which are both about 3.6 times that of the pure PbS QD photodetectors and 2 times that of the 1 wt% PMB photodetectors. According to the author, the chemically anchoring contact between PbS QDs and MWCNTs and their favorable energy level alignment benefit the holes’ injection from PbS QDs into the MWCNT, which greatly improves the carrier lifetime and charge transport. As a result, a rise time of 0.7 ms and a decay time of 3.8 ms are obtained on the resulting CAB photoconductors. The device flexibility is also improved after incorporating PbS QDs with CNTs. After 10000 times of 20 degree bending, the photocurrent of the CAB device almost remains unchanged, which provides the possibility for its application in electronic skin products. This device has been used in the field of medical health, and it can clearly measure the relevant features of the pulse, including the heart rate, systole, diastole, and the pulse wave reflection.
 Fig. 4  (a) Device structure diagram of the CAB PbS QD photoconductor. The red dot indicates PbS QDs, the black solid line indicates MWCNTs, and the dashed line indicates the possible charge transfer path.52 Copyright©2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (b) Device structure diagram and responsivity spectra at a voltage of 2 V and 5 V of μ-PC device.55 Copyright©2020, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the SWCNT–PbS and QD–MAPbI3−xClx hybrid.56 Copyright©2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of a stretchable UV-vis-NIR NWPD array. (e) A photograph of the NWPD array and a series of optical microscopy images showing stretching of up to 100%.57 Copyright©2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
According to the latest research, the method of anchoring PbS QDs to the surface of CNTs by means of surface defects caused by functionalization may have adverse effects on the photoelectric performance of CNTs and further affect the device performance.53,54 In 2020, Ibrahima Ka et al. deposited high-quality PbS QDs onto double-walled carbon nanotubes (DWCNTs) to form a new type of nanohybrid (NH) by pulsed laser deposition (PLD),55 which was further employed as the active material to fabricate the photoconductor. Fig. 4(b) presents the device structure diagram and responsivity spectra at voltages of 2 V and 5 V. The resulting devices exhibit responsivities of 65 A W−1 and 230 A W−1 in the visible range and the ultraviolet range, respectively. Since the excess majority carriers created in PbS QDs can be injected into DWCNTs rapidly, the transfer of which is facilitated by both the high-crystalline quality of the DWCNTs and the direct atomic S–C bonds (direct atomic anchoring with no ligands) formed between PbS QDs and MWCNTs, the device shows very fast response speed under the light illumination with a rise and decay time of 30 μs and 2.73 μs, respectively. It proves that hybridization with CNTs is an effective strategy to obtain fast response devices. Besides, the PbS QD decorated single-wall carbon nanotubes were also embedded in a perovskite (CH3NH3I3−xClx) matrix to fabricate a high-speed photodetector.56Fig. 4(c) shows the cross-sectional SEM image of the hybrid active layer. In this case, both CH3NH3I3−xClx and PbS QDs are used as the light harvesters, while the SWCNT mesh works as the charge collector. As a result, due to the high carrier mobility of SWCNTs and the favorable band alignment, the response time of the device is less than 250 μs, which is quite remarkable in broadband perovskite photodetectors.
Organic semiconductors have made breakthrough in the field of stretchable/flexible nanophotonics. As shown in Fig. 4(d) and (e), a novel scalable nanowire photodetector has been designed. Oleic acid capped PbS QDs were hybridized with P3HT to fabricate P3HT/PbS QD nanowires by the meniscus-guiding method, which was then employed to connect two metal electrodes to achieve the single PbS QD–P3HT hybrid nanowire photodetector.57 This device shows good responsivity in the UV-to-NIR region with a high on/off ratio (UV-310, vis-550, and NIR-14) and a high detectivity D* (2.1 × 1012 Jones in the ultraviolet range). Particularly, the device has excellent flexibility and ductility, and its optical and electrical properties remain stable after extreme (up to 100%) and repeated (up to 100 cycles) stretching, though the response speed of the device needs to be further improved.
Doping control of PbS QD thin films is a technical challenge for the further development of PbS QD-based photoconductors. The existence of oxygen species usually forms shallow electron acceptor states in PbS QDs, resulting in a p-type nature for the PbS QD film under environmental conditions.35 For example, the free electrons generated by Pb2+ atoms in Pb-rich PbS QDs tend to promote the material to n-type, but the presence of ligands, dangling bonds and surface oxygen adsorbate species (PbSO,3 PbSO,4etc.) leads to the emergence of electron acceptor states, which ultimately results in a p-type semiconductor under ambient conditions.58 Traditional doping strategies focus on the preparation of PbS QDs, including the partial substitution of Pb2+ with heteroatomic cations such as Bi3+ to provide additional electrons and post-synthesis methods based on surface iodine ion passivation and anion substitution. However, Arquer et al. proposed a novel route to adjust the doping concentration in the PbS QD films by mixing different concentrations of Ag nanoparticles (NPs) with PbS QDs in solution.59 The shallow work function Ag NPs near PbS QDs can act as electron donors, provide free electrons for the composite material, restore the n-type characteristics of the QDs when the Fermi level shifts into the conduction band, and passivate the localized midgap states. This process is not equivalent to Ag+ doping, which results in stronger p-type characteristics of PbS QD thin films. Doped photoconductors have very high gain (∼103 A W−1) because the sensitizing centers allow majority carriers to recirculate when capturing minority carriers. At the same time, according to the formula  (q-the elementary charge, μ-carrier mobility, E-the electric field and L-channel length) and related experiments, it proves that the dark current of the device can be reduced effectively by changing the majority carrier concentration Nh by doping Ag nanoparticles.
The doping of Ag nanocrystals (NCs) is expected to break through the trade-off between the increasing photocurrent and reducing dark current in photoconductors. In the dark, because the work function of Ag is different from the Fermi level of PbS QDs, local band bending occurs between PbS QDS and Ag NCs, which will hinder the hole transmission and reduce the dark current; under light, due to the position of the work function, Ag NCs capture electrons from the conduction band of PbS CQDs as trap states, and these carriers reside in Ag NCs, and thus the carrier lifetime can be prolonged and the device can generate greater gain. He et al. doped 1% Ag NCs in PbS QDs, and prepared the composite material as a photoconductive detector.60 The detectivity D* of the device can reach 7.1 × 1011 Jones. If the device is prepared on a flexible substrate stone paper, the detectivity D* can reach 1.47 × 1010 Jones. After bending for 400 times at 20 degrees, the performance of the flexible device is only 10% degraded, showing good flexibility and stability.

3.2 PbS QD-based photodiodes
Photodiodes are the most common photodetectors with many different structures, such as PN junction photodiodes (between oppositely doped semiconductors), PIN photodiodes (p+–intrinsic–n+ type), heterojunction photodiodes (one or more blocking contacts between intrinsic semiconductors or intrinsic semiconductors and metals), Schottky junction photodiodes (between a doped semiconductor and one of the metal electrodes) and avalanche photodiodes. The existence of the built-in electric field in the junction can separate the photogenerated carriers and drive the electrons and holes to the opposite contact electrodes efficiently. The response time of photodiodes depends on the transport time of the carrier to the corresponding electrode, so semiconductors with high carrier mobility often mean high bandwidth operation.49 Due to the potential barrier at the junction which prohibits charge carrier recirculation, the highest principle quantum efficiency of common photodiodes is 100%. That is to say it cannot produce gain and the improvement of signal strength is limited. However, the dark current of photodiodes benefit from the junction barrier, and only a few hot  carriers can pass through the junction and produce very low dark current, leading to a high SNR. The use of an avalanche or carrier multiplication effect makes it possible for multiple carriers generated per single photon. Many groups have reported PbS CQD-based photodiodes with an EQE greater than 100% using the carrier multiplication effect.

3.2.1 Producing PbS QD bulk heterojunctions with different semiconductors. 
Nowadays, commercial detectors usually use three different materials, GaN, Si, and InGaAs to detect ultraviolet light, visible light, and NIR light, respectively, which greatly increases the cost and complexity of multi-wavelength detection. It is a simple method to extend the detection range from the visible range to the vis-NIR range by mixing narrow band gap QDs into the active layer of the polymer-based photodiodes or perovskite-based photodiodes.61 Thereinto, the development of broadband response PbS QD-based photodetectors with a simple structure, low cost, high quantum efficiency and high responsivity is of great significance. The interface between other semiconductor materials and PbS QDs in bulk heterojunction can promote exciton dissociation to reduce the dark current and increase the photocurrent. Besides, the introduction of PbS QDs containing a large number of trap states into polymer or perovskite thin films is expected to improve the device responsivity.58,62–64
Polymer–PbS QD composites were already employed as the active layer for photodiodes, where both the polymer and PbS QDs can generate excitons. The exciton then dissociates at the polymer–PbS QDs interface, and then the resulting electrons and holes are transported to the cathode and anode, respectively. The effective dissociation of excitons is the key to reduce the dark current and enhance the photocurrent in these devices. Xu et al. reported a photodiode with a bulk heterojunction composed of poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) and PbS QDs.65 In this system, the existence of the P3HT:PbS QD bulk heterojunction makes the distribution of populated midgap trap states less, which is conducive to achieving a more effective interface charge separation and resonance exciton transfer process. The resulting device has a wide spectral response range from 300 nm to 1600 nm, and the detectivity D* exceeds 1011 Jones in the UV and visible region, and it is greater than 1010 Jones in the NIR region.
The selective detection of near-infrared light is usually needed in some fields, such as night vision systems and biomedical imaging. Thus band-pass filters or optical filters are often needed to eliminate the noise caused by visible light,66 which complicates device manufacturing and even increases the size of the equipment. Therefore, a filterless spectrum selective NIR photodetector is very promising. Shen et al. used the poly[2,7-(5,5-bis-(3,7-dimethyloctyl)-5H-dithieno[3,2-b:2′,3′-d]pyran)-alt-4,7-(5,6-difluoro-2,1,3-benzothia diazole)] (PDTP-DFBT):[6,6]-phenyl C71 butyric acid methyl ester (PC71BM) mixture doped with PbS QDs as the active layer to realize a high sensitive, filter less, visible blind and narrow-band NIR photodetector.66Fig. 5(a) and (b) show the device structure diagram, cross-sectional SEM, and the element distribution of Pb and S of the active layer, respectively. The working mechanism of the device is shown in Fig. 5(f). The incident length of visible light is short, and photogenerated holes are generated in the active layer near the anode. If the sum of the incident length of the visible light and the drift distance (L2d) of the hole is less than the thickness of the active layer, the photogenerated hole cannot be collected by the cathode, so that the device does not respond in the visible light range. However, the photogenerated holes generated by near-infrared light with longer penetration length can cause the device response. In addition, PbS QDs with strong hole trapping capabilities have played a major role in improving the external quantum efficiency of the device. In the active layer near the anode region, a large number of holes captured by PbS QDs make the highest occupied molecular orbital energy level of PDTP-DFBT move upwards, thus aligning the Fermi level of the active layer with that of the anode. The bending of the band thins the Schottky barrier, so electrons are more easily injected into the active layer from the anode through the tunneling effect, resulting in a change in the operating mode of the device from a photodiode to a photoconductor. As a result, the ratio of the EQE in the near infrared region to that in the visible region is up to 470. At 890 nm, the detectivity D* of the device is 7.98 × 1011 Jones and the LDR is 110 dB. Thus, the device exhibits excellent selectivity and near infrared detection performance. This work provides a new idea for the development of selective photodetectors.
 Fig. 5  (a) Device structure of the PDTP-DFBT:PC71BM:PbS QDs hybrid photodiodes. (b) Cross-sectional SEM of the hybrid active layer. The distribution of Pb (c) and S (d) in the hybrid active layer is mapped with EDX. (e) Absorption spectra of pure PbS QD films, 4 μm thick PDTP-DFBT:PC71BM films with or without PbS QD added. (f) The working mechanism of the narrow-band NIR photodetector.66 Copyright©2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. The energy level alignment of the materials used for the fabrication of perovskite hybrid photodetectors (pero-HPDs) (g) in the dark and (h) under illumination. (i) Device structure of pero-HPDs.67 Copyright©2016, Elsevier Ltd. 
One type of charge carrier is captured at the semiconductor/metal electrode interface, and the opposite type of charge is injected through the corresponding electrodes to achieve a compromise between a small polymer dielectric constant and a low carrier mobility. This process is called the trap-assisted charge-injection process,68,69 and is widely used to improve the EQE of polymer-based photodetectors. However, due to the low carrier mobility of the polymer, the polymer-based photodetector still faces the problems of long response time and large required bias voltage. This limits its application as a high-speed, low-power photodetector in chemical/biological sensing, communications, and other fields. Compared with organic semiconductors, perovskite hybrid materials with intrinsic trap states have many advantages including high carrier mobility, long carrier diffusion length and high absorption coefficient, which are more suitable for the active layer of photodetectors. Liu et al. used a hybrid material composed of organic metal halide perovskite hybrid materials CH3NH2PbI3 and PbS QDs as the active layer of the photodiode.67 The device structure (i) and working mechanism (g and h) of this new kind of device are shown in Fig. 5. The high electrical conductive PbS QDs are added to the CH3NH2PbI3 active layer to produce additional trap states, which improves the device optical response speed and photoconductive gain remarkably. PbS QDs with relatively low LUMO energy levels can capture photogenerated electrons in the CH3NH2PbI3 layer, which causes the conduction band minimum (CBM) of the active layer to shift down at the interface between it and Al cathode. Then the Fermi level of the active film is aligned at the work function of Al cathode, which effectively reduces the hole injection barrier. As a result, at a low bias voltage (−2 V), the device exhibits a high EQE of 4500%, a responsivity R of 15 A W−1, and a detectivity D* of 6 × 1013 Jones. The ultra-high EQE is a significant breakthrough for photodiodes. It should be mentioned that the detection range of the device can be further extended by using large-size PbS QDs.70,71


3.2.2 Producing PbS QD bilayer heterojunctions with different semiconductors. 
Another reliable strategy to improve the performance of PbS QD-based photodiodes is to construct PbS QD bilayer heterojunctions. Bilayer heterojunctions are composed of donor and acceptor materials. The energy level difference between the two materials forms a junction at the interface, which is the main driving force for charge separation. When the barrier at the interface is larger than the exciton binding energy, it will facilitate the exciton dissociation and the electrons will tend to transfer to materials with higher electron affinity. Compared with bulk heterojunctions, double-layer heterojunctions have continuous donor and acceptor materials on both sides of the interface, which facilitate charge transfer and make it difficult for electrons to recombine with holes. However, if the exciton diffusion length of the material constituting the double-layer heterojunction is relatively short, the exciton far away from the heterojunction interface cannot reach the interface, resulting in a low exciton utilization rate. This problem does not occur in bulk heterojunctions. Compared to the photoconductors, the role and mechanism of heterojunctions in photodiodes show obvious difference. The most important function of heterojunctions in photodiodes is to promote the rapid separation of photogenerated excitons to obtain faster device response speed. However, in photoconductors, the heterojunction interface not only promotes the separation of photogenerated excitons into electrons and holes, but also confines them to transport in the different planar layers to obtain higher photoconductivity gain.
Ethan klem fabricated PbS QD–fullerene heterojunction photodiodes directly on readout integrated circuit substrates, as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b).72,73 The PbS QD–C60 heterojunction can not only rapidly separate photogenerated excitons, but also effectively extract charge carriers—holes are transported through the PbS QDs layer, and electrons are transported through the fullerene layer. Both materials constituting the heterojunction can provide high carrier mobility which are nearly balanced between the two layers, so that the heterojunction can obtain a relatively high EQE. In the NIR region, the device's EQE usually exceeds 20%. And its detectivity D* is about 5 × 1012 Jones, which is very close to that of commercial InGaAs-based photodiodes.
 Fig. 6  The PbS QD/C60 photodiode and its readout integrated circuit. (a) Schematic diagram of the PbS QD/C60 photodiode structure. PbS QD/C60 heterojunction can provide effective charge separation and carrier extraction.73 Copyright©2015, SPIE CCC. (b) Image of a completed CQD array on Si fanout die assembled into a LTCC for test.72 Copyright©2013, SPIE CCC. Schematic energy-band diagram of the ITO/ZnO/PbS–TBAI/PbS–EDT/Au photodiode before (c) and after (d) passivation of PbI2 films and ligands.78 Copyright©2017, The Royal Society of chemistry. 
Compared to organic semiconductors, inorganic semiconductors which usually have longer exciton diffusion lengths are more frequently employed to construct double-layer heterojunctions with PbS QD films. Generally, ZnO and TiO2 are the most common electron transport materials, while NiOx,74 VOx and MoOx75 are often used as the hole transport materials. Xu et al. reported a photodiode with a structure of ITO/ZnO/PbS–TBAI/PbS–EDT/Au, where different ligands were used to modify PbS QDs to change the inter dot carrier transport ability and defect density.76,77 In this work, PbS–EDT is of p-type, while PbS–TBAI is of n-type. Thus a wide depletion region is formed at the heterojunction interface, which promotes the exciton dissociation and improves the EQE of the device. The ZnO layer acts as a hole blocking layer (HBL) and keeps the device off in the absence of incident light. At the same time, the valence band of ZnO sets a barrier height for the hole diffusion from the active layer to ITO, which is conducive to the reduction of the device dark current. By optimizing the thickness of the two PbS QD films, the device achieved a responsivity of 385 A W−1 and a detectivity of 3.93 × 1013 Jones under 910 nm light and a responsivity of 444 A W−1 and a detectivity of 5.52 × 1013 Jones under 500 nm light. Qiao et al. further introduced a thin layer of PbI2 to passivate ZnO and the PbS QD surface and fabricated a photodiode with the structure of ITO/ZnO/PbI2/PbS–PbI2/PbS–EDT/Au.78Fig. 6(c) and (d) show that the interface passivation (IP) and bulk passivation (BP) with PbI2 films and ligands can effectively remove the sub-band gap defect states and interface defects originating from the oxide species, facilitate the carrier transfer, and increase the photocurrent eventually. At the same time, the PbI2 thin film as an electron injection barrier can effectively reduce the dark current of the device. The improved device exhibits a fast response speed of microseconds and a detectivity of up to 1013 Jones. The PbS QD bilayer heterojunction photodiodes using other metal oxides such as TiO2 have also been reported.
As the most widely used HTL, NiOx requires a high processing temperature, which may result in the oxidation of standard back contact electrodes (such as molybdenum) used in silicon-based readout integrated circuits at high temperatures. To solve this problem, Yu et al. attempted to prepare PbS QD photodiodes using low temperature processed CuOx as the HTL and obtained similar performance with the NiOx devices.79 Lee et al. designed a photodiode with a structure of ITO/ZnO NCs/PbS QDs/TAPC/MoO3/Ag, where the existence of electron and hole barrier layers can effectively suppress the carrier injection from the electrodes.80 Ag penetrates into the TAPC layer during thermal evaporation and produces trap states, which leads to the accumulation of holes and distorts the electron injection barrier of TAPC. As a result, the PbS QD-based p–i–n photodiode achieves a detectivity D* up to 7 × 1013 Jones. However, the stability of TAPC becomes the hidden danger of this device, and the slow response speed of millisecond level also needs to be further improved.
Integrating PbS QD-based photodiodes prepared by the solution method into a silicon-based CMOS readout circuit is considered a reliable means to commercialize PbS QD-based photodiodes. Compared with traditional InGaAs devices, PbS QD devices integrated on the silicon substrate not only have the advantages of easy preparation, low cost and tunable band gap, but also have the potential to break through the limitation of device resolution and enable full wafer level processing. The related work has received wide attention. Georgitzikis et al. reported for the first time a PbS QD photodiode with a photolithography-patterned pixel stack.81 In the NIR region, it showed a detectivity D* of more than 1012 Jones, an EQE of more than 20%, a microsecond response speed, and a low dark current, which already meets the requirements of practical application. Although the performance of PbS QD-based photodiodes is still not as good as that of traditional InGaAs devices, QD devices have better development prospects.


3.2.3 Up-conversion photodetectors. 
In recent years, various kinds of optoelectronic devices, such as solar cells, photodetectors and light-emitting diodes, have been mainly composed of stacked structures. Due to the increasingly mature theoretical research and fabrication technology of stacked devices, some special applications are expected to be realized through the innovation of the device structure. Among them, up-conversion devices are the most typical.
Infrared imaging has attracted much attention due to its wide application in night vision, national defense, gesture recognition, three-dimensional imaging and biological imaging.82 Traditional NIR display devices need to use a readout circuit to convert the response of the NIR photodetector into an electrical signal, and then drive the visible LED through a signal processing system. In the up-conversion device, since the LED is directly integrated on the NIR detector, the photo-generated carriers generated by the NIR detector can drive the LED directly, which reduces the production cost and volume of the NIR display effectively. At present, vacuum-deposited materials are widely used in the relatively mature up-converter devices, which make the production process of up-conversion devices very complicated and expensive.83–88 The typical device structure diagram is shown in Fig. 7(a). However, the high operating voltage and inability to fabricate flexible devices limit the application of vacuum-deposited material-based up-conversion devices. Thus, similar to other types of photodetectors, PbS QD-based up-conversion detectors fabricated by the solution method have gradually become the focus of attention in the past five years.
 Fig. 7  (a) Structure diagram of a traditional up-conversion detector which is mainly composed of vacuum-deposited materials.85 Copyright©2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Response speed (b), schematic diagram (c) and operation mechanism (d) of PbS QD-based up-conversion light-emitting field-effect-transistor.89 Copyright©2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. Schematic diagram (e) and schematic energy level diagram (f) of the low operation voltage PbS QD-based up-conversion detector.90 Copyright©2020, Springer Nature. 
By simply integrating a high-responsivity photodetector and a high-efficiency LED a good up-conversion device cannot be obtained. For combined devices, the operating voltage and response speed are the most important performance parameters. Considering the above problems, in 2016, Hyeonggeun Yu et al. hoped that the photocurrent generated in photodetectors can effectively modulate the LED to achieve a faster response speed, and they reported a highly creative PbS QD-based up conversion light-emitting field-effect-transistor, and the device structure diagram is shown in Fig. 7(c).89 In the working state, the photocurrent generated by the photodetector induces a strong field-effect in the region where C60 is in contact with the porous ITO source electrode and the HfO2 gate dielectric layer. In this way, the gate voltage and incident light intensity can effectively modulate the barrier between the porous ITO layer and the C60 layer, and finally realize the fast control of LED luminous efficiency. The energy band structures of the device under different conditions are shown in Fig. 7(d). As shown in Fig. 7(b), the cut-off frequency of the device is as high as 20 kHz, which is particularly prominent in up conversion light-emitting devices. In addition, doping Ag nanoparticles (NPs) into the ETL is expected to reduce the operating voltage of up-conversion devices. A low-operating-voltage device designed by Wenjia Zhou is shown in Fig. 7(e).90 When the device is working, the photogenerated electrons are captured by Ag NPs, which promotes the accumulation of photogenerated electrons at the ITO/ZnO interface. Thus, the band bending at the device interface is increased and the barrier width is reduced, leading to an effective hole tunneling. The schematic energy level diagram of the device under infrared light irradiation is shown in Fig. 7(f). Generally speaking, the research and development of PbS QD-based up-conversion devices is still in its initial stage, but it has great development potential. The slow response speed is the most important factor that restricts its practical application. In addition, the low “photon to photon” conversion efficiency also seriously restricts the quality of near-infrared imaging. In the future, more excellent interface engineering and band engineering work are needed to be applied to up-conversion devices.

3.3 PbS QD-based photo-field-effect transistors (photo-FETs)
Due to their ability to achieve low dark current and high gain at the same time, photo-field-effect transistors (photo-FETs) have become a research hotspot of photodetectors. The photo-FETs can be regarded as a photoconductor with an additional gate terminal, which is electrically isolated from the semiconductor channel through a thin dielectric. The applied gate voltage VG can electrically modulate the carrier density through the field effect, thus operating the device in the depletion regime to switch off the dark current.

3.3.1 PbS QD hybrid material based photo-FETs. 
The performance of photo-FETs mainly depends on the channel material. Ideally, the channel material is expected to have a high carrier mobility, so that the device has a high gain and high bandwidth; the channel material is expected to have a moderately large and direct band gap, so that the device has better field effect modulation and optical absorption; the channel material is also expected to have a thinner thickness, so that the device can be completely depleted and operated at low dark current. At the same time, in order to yield low sub-threshold swings, the channel material needs to show a very low density of trap states. Generally speaking, PbS QDs have excellent optical properties, but their electrical properties do not meet their needs as channel materials for Photo-FET. A feasible strategy is to hybridize PbS QDs with other semiconductor nanomaterials, among which the most mature one is to hybridize PbS QDs with perovskites which have the advantages of long exciton diffusion length and low exciton binding energy.91–95 Researchers usually construct PbS QDs/perovskite heterojunctions by spin-coating. The integration with perovskite nanomaterials enables devices to achieve a broadband response (UV-vis-NIR) to meet a wider range of needs.64,96–98 In this process, the three key factors determining the device performance are the morphology of the perovskite film, the surface chemical state of the perovskite film, and the band alignment between PbS QDs and perovskites. Fortunately, the above three factors can be partially fulfilled by selecting appropriate PbS QD ligands. Zhang et al. used a one-step antisolvent method to deposit CH3NH3PbI3 films on PbS QD films, and proved that ammonium thiocyanate (NH4SCN) is a suitable ligand for PbS QDs in this system.99 The structure diagram and schematic energy level diagram of this device are shown in Fig. 8(a) and (b). The stronger inter-CQD coupling enables SCN− to have high conductivity, which increases the responsivity of the devices passivated by SCN− to the entire UV-vis-NIR region. However, the low barrier at the interface of PbS–SCN−/CH3NH3PbI3 contributes to a relatively high dark current. Finally, devices exhibit detectivities of 4.9 × 1013 Jones and 3.0 × 1011 Jones in ultraviolet and near infrared regions, respectively, with a response speed of less than 43 ms. In addition, researchers are attempting to build vertical field effect phototransistors (VFEpTs) to further improve the performance of PbS QD/perovskite devices, and the device structure diagram is shown in Fig. 8(c) and (d).100 The photo-generated carriers in VFEpTs only need to move for a short distance before reaching the contact point, avoiding the influence of structural defects and grain boundary scattering to a certain extent, and can cycle in the short channel many times before recombination. Yu et al. integrated colloidal all-inorganic perovskite quantum dot CsPbBr3 with PbS QDs. The vertical heterojunction formed by them facilitates the separation of photogenerated carriers and ensures efficient carrier transport in short channels.101 The device has a responsivity of 9 × 105 A W−1 and a detectivity of 2 × 1017 Jones in the near infrared region, which is a breakthrough for PbS QD-based photo-FETs.
 Fig. 8  (a) Device structure of the PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3 based photodetector and the schematic diagram of the ligands used for exchange. Inset shows the TEM image of PbS QDs–OA. (b) Schematic energy level diagram of the PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3 composite.99 Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society (c) The structure diagram of vertical field effect phototransistors. (d) Optical absorption spectrum of PbS QD/perovskite composites.100 Copyright©2018, SPIE CCC. (e) Speed characterization of the photo-JFET.102 Copyright©2015 American Chemical Society. 
In addition, a photojunction field-effect transistor that completely depletes the channel in the dark by constructing a rectifying junction between a deep-work-function transparent conductive top contact and a moderately n-type PbS QD film has become a new PbS QD-based phototransistor development strategy. In 2015, adinolfi et al. prepared an MoO3 layer on the PbS CQD channel by the photolithography technique to construct a photojunction-FET structure, which broke the original response/speed/dark current balance of the photoconductor and enabled the device to provide gain.102 Compared with the traditional FETs, photojunction-FETs modulate the channel conductance by using photoinduction rather than the external field effect. This structure can make the channel of the device completely depleted in the dark, and obtain a very low dark current, so that the transit time can be small enough to obtain a large gain. The device shows a gain of nearly 10 and a dark current of two orders of magnitude lower than that of the previous photoconductive detector. As shown in Fig. 8(e), this device exhibits an excellent response speed with a rise time of 10 μs.


3.3.2 PbS QD based sensitized photo-FETs. 
It is not difficult to conclude that, on one hand, the channel material needs to have excellent electrical performance to ensure that the FET can be properly modulated through the gate voltage. On the other hand, in photo-FETs, channel materials further need to have good optical properties to absorb the incoming light as active layer materials. Therefore, as shown in Fig. 9, there is a trade-off between the optical absorption and the charge transfer properties of channel materials in photo-FETs.103 The thickness of the channel varies greatly from several nanometers to hundreds of nanometers. For the thin channel, because of the ultrathin atomic layer, the device has a high on/off ratio, and the channel can be completely depleted and work under the low dark current, showing the excellent charge transfer performance of the thin channel. But the short path of incident light due to the thin channel absorber also results in poor light absorption efficiency. For the thick channel, in contrast, it can fully absorb light and has a good optical absorption efficiency due to its long optical path. However, the thick channel cannot be completely depleted, resulting in a large leakage current and a very low on/off ratio.
 Fig. 9  There is a trade-off between the electrical properties and optical properties of channel materials.103 Copyright©2016, American Chemical Society. 
In order to solve the above problem and obtain photo-FETs with good optical absorption and electronic transmission performance, the concept of sensitized FETs came into being. The thin channel is still selected for the photo-FET, but a layer of oppositely doped (usually p-type) semiconductor material with good optical absorption performance is prepared on the channel, which is called sensitizer, forming a vertical heterostructure. In this way, the sensitizer and the channel are respectively responsible for the absorption of light and the transmission of the electric charge; in the heterojunction, the photogenerated carriers are separated, avoiding the rapid recombination, and the holes are trapped in the sensitizer, while the electrons circulate in the channel, generating gains.
Researchers hoped to use graphene with excellent electrical properties as a channel material for photo-FETs, and QDs with excellent optical absorption and multiple exciton generation effects as sensitizers for the development of new type of FET photodetectors. In 2012, Gerasimos Konstantatos et al. deposited PbS QDs on graphene and realized PbS QD based phototransistors with over 107 A W−1 responsivity and 7 × 1013 Jones detectivity.104 Since then, an increasing number of PbS QD-based sensitized FETs have been developed, among which graphene/PbS QD devices are the most widely studied system, and most of these devices have the structure shown in Fig. 10(a). In such devices, the hole–electron pair produced by PbS QD is separated at the interface between the PbS QD layer and the graphene layer due to the built-in electric field. Photogenerated electrons are trapped in quantum dots, while photogenerated holes circulate in graphene channels, resulting in photoconductivity gains. It is generally believed that the high carrier mobility of graphene and the recirculation of charge carriers through the prolonged lifetime of the carriers that remain trapped in the PbS QDs are the key to the ultra-high gain of the device. The gain of graphene/PbS QD devices have a qualitative leap compared with that of pure graphene devices or PbS QD devices, and they have become the intersection of research.105–110
 Fig. 10  (a) Graphene/PbS QDs photo-FETs device structure diagram.104 Copyright©2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) A schematic diagram of the ligand exchange process and the PbS QD/IGZO hybrid phototransistor. (c) Corresponding cross-sectional HRTEM images.122 Copyright©2016, Nature publishing group. Device design and FET properties of PbS QDs/TiO2/MoS2 photo-FET. (d) Schematic diagram of the device preparation process. (e) The transfer curves for all stages of fabrication are plotted in linear (e) and logarithmic (f) scale.123 Copyright©2016, American Chemical Society. 
In recent years, graphene/PbS QD devices have been improved from the aspects of quantum dot ligands, quantum dot deposition methods and device structures, so the detectivity, responsivity, external quantum efficiency, linear dynamic range and 3 dB bandwidth of graphene/PbS QDs devices have made great progress. By changing the ligands of the PbS QDs, the electron transfer, the conductivity polarity and carrier concentration of the single-layer graphene (SLG) can be changed, thereby improving the responsivity of the device. Turyanska et al. believed that shortening the length of the quantum dot ligands can reduce the thickness of the dielectric barrier between PbS QDs and SLG.111 They attempted to use polyethylene glycol with different polymerization degrees (PEG2000 and PEG500) and a mixture of thioglycerol (TGL) and 2,3-dimer-capto-1-propanol (DTG) as ligands for PbS QDs.111 The length of the former is 10 and 5 nm, respectively, while the length of the latter is only 0.5 nm. The single-layer graphene modified by PbS QDs–TGL is transformed from p-type to n-type and has a responsivity R of up to 109 A W−1. The increase in responsivity is attributed to the decrease in the electron transfer time due to the increase of carrier mobility in graphene. However, the increase in photo-gate efficiency has mainly resulted from the long life of the photoexcited holes and the increase in the charge transfer efficiency at the QD–SLG interface.
Many different methods including spin-coating, drop-casting, conventional inkjet printing and contact printing with polydimethylsiloxane stamp have been applied for the deposition process of PbS QDs.104,112–115 These deposition methods achieve relatively large device area coverage, but there are inherent limitations in the spatial accuracy, resolution of material deposition and uniformity of the QD layer.115–117 In 2019, Grotevent et al. prepared a graphene/PbS QD infrared detector with the help of electrohydrodynamic nanoprinting technology, and realized a small-scale detector with high spatial resolution without affecting the high carrier mobility of graphene.118 It is feasible to use this process to realize submicron graphene/PbS QD photo-FETs, but the possible short channel effect and other problems still need to be further solved. In 2015, Nikitskiy et al. integrated a PbS QD photodiode on a graphene phototransistor, which avoided the limitations of the electrically passive sensitizing layer on the quantum efficiency, linear dynamic range and response speed of the devices, achieving a breakthrough in the device structure.114 In this way, the transport of carriers no longer relies solely on diffusion, but are more driven by electric fields, which effectively improves the charge collection capability of the device. This kind of hybrid photodetector achieves more than 70% EQE, sub-millisecond time response, LDR over 110 dB and a detectivity of 1013 Jones. This new device structure has opened up the ideas for the development of sensitized field effect transistors.
Unfortunately, although graphene/PbS QD photo-FETs have obtained considerable detectivity and responsivity for NIR incident light, their serious dark current problems still restrict their further development.119 In addition to graphene, many other materials with excellent electrical properties have also been used as channel materials for phototransistors. A number of sensitized field effect transistor detectors have emerged, which take into account the electrical performance, detection performance and device stability and are easy to integrate. These materials, particularly two-dimensional layered nanomaterials, have achieved the trade-off between low dark current and high gain, which has become a research hotspot in recent years. Transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDCs) are more and more used in photoelectric devices because of their high in-plane carrier mobility and their atomic level thickness which can meet the requirements of low dark current.120 Kufer et al. used MoS2 as the channel material and PbS QDs as the sensitizer to realize a new type of sensitized Photo-FET with high response, high gain and fast response speed.121 The high gain of the device is due to the high carrier mobility of the MoS2 layer. The transit time (τtransit) of the carriers in the MoS2 channel is several orders of magnitude shorter than the trapping lifetime (τlifetime) of carriers in the QDs. At the same time, the high responsivity R of the device stems from the synergistic effect of PbS QDs and MoS2 layer. To further improve the device performance, a TiO2 buffer layer was deposited between the MoS2 channel and the PbS QD sensitizer, as shown in Fig. 10(d).103 The TiO2 buffer layer does not affect the gate modulation, but is able to avoid the influence of PbS QDs on theMoS2 layer (uncontrolled doping), thus avoiding the decrease of the on/off ratio of the device, affording the hybrid device work under low dark current. From the transfer curves in Fig. 10(e) and (f), we can clearly understand the effect of the TiO2 buffer layer on the electrical performance of the device. Finally, compared with the device without the TiO2 buffer layer, the device performance is greatly improved with a high responsivity R of 103–105 A W−1 and an outstanding detectivity D* of 5 × 1012 Jones.
Besides, two-dimensional SnS2 is also used as a channel material in PbS QD-based photo-FETs. In 2016, Gao et al. constructed a 0D–2D hybrid system using SnS2 nanosheets and PbS CQDs, realizing a new type of broadband and spectrally distinctive (BSD) photodetector with high responsivity and unique functions.124 The unique feature of the device is that it has different responsivity for different incident wavelengths, so the wavelength of incident light with the same intensity can be judged according to the output signal. When the device is irradiated by short-wavelength ultraviolet, both the SnS2 channel and PbS QD sensitizer are excited, showing a positive photoconductivity (PPC) effect; when the device is irradiated by long wavelength infrared, only PbS QDs are excited, and photogenerated electrons flow into the SnS2 nanosheet, which makes the energy level of SnS2 move upward, and a Schottky contact is formed between the SnS2 nanosheet and Au electrode, hindering electron transmission and triggering the negative photoconductivity (NPC) effect. The unique performance of the device makes it possible to judge the wavelength of the incident light and even the color temperature of a series of white LEDs, which expands the application range of PbS QD-based photo-FETs.
Although PbS QD sensitized FETs using two-dimensional nanomaterials as the channel show excellent detection performance, the complex fabrication process of these devices limits their large-scale production. In order to be compatible with complementary metal oxide semiconductors (CMOS), inorganic broadband metal oxide semiconductors have become the research intersection. The integration of PbS QDs into amorphous metal oxide semiconductor thin film transistors (TFTs) with high optical transparency, high electron mobility, low off-current and low processing temperature has become a new development strategy for PbS QD-based photo-FET.125–130 In 2015, Hwang et al. deposited PbS QDs on indium-gallium-zinc-oxide (InGaZnO, IGZO) thin films by a simple spin-coating process and prepared the PbS QD sensitized IGZO TFTs.122Fig. 10(b) and (c) show its device structure diagram, and the corresponding cross-sectional HRTEM images. Under 1000 nm light, the device showed a responsivity of 106 A W−1, a detectivity of 1013 Jones, and a response time of 0.1–0.3 s. The slow response time is attributed to the presence of photogenerated holes trapped at the PbS QDs/IGZO interface, which limits the application of devices in many fields. However, the additional positive gate voltage pulse can promote the rapid recombination of holes in the PbS QD layer to reset the device. Besides, amorphous ZnO semiconductors have the properties of high transparency, tunable conductivity, and broadband, and can be easily prepared on silicon substrates in a large-scale in the form of a thin film.104,131 Wang et al. realized the amorphous ZnO/PbS QD hybrid system by means of pulsed laser deposition (PLD) in 2019.132 The device exhibited a detectivity of 7.9 × 1012 Jones and a responsivity of 10.9 A W−1 under 640 nm light and a detectivity of 4.1 × 1011 Jones and a responsivity of 0.47 A W−1 under 1310 nm light. The rise and decay time of the device are up to 4.3 s and 7.63 s, respectively, which may be related to the strong oxygen absorption/desorption process of surface oxygen vacancies.

4 Summary and outlook
With the rapid development of nanotechnology, PbS QDs as representative photoelectric nano-materials are expected to be widely used in the NIR detection field. PbS QD-based photodetectors with a simple preparation process and low cost are expected to solve the problem faced by traditional III–V group semiconductor-based NIR photodetectors. As the research on PbS QD-based photodetectors matures rapidly, this article presents a detailed overview of their development in the past five years using the device structure as the main classification standard, and a brief summary of the device performance parameters for different devices is presented in Table 2. PbS QD-based photodetectors with different device structures have their own characteristics and are expected to make breakthroughs in different directions. In the development strategies of PbS QD-based photodetectors, ligand exchange and building bulk or double layer heterojunctions are the main methods to improve the optical absorption and electrical properties of the active layer. Particularly, the strategies of energy band regulation and interface engineering have been widely used in photodiodes and photo-FETs to improve the device performance. Besides, the PbS QD-based photodetectors also have unique advantages in flexible devices, and the simple preparation processes enable them to achieve more device structure innovations to meet different detection requirements.
Table 2 Summary of the main parameters of typical PbS QD-based photodetectors in recent years




Device structure
Materials
Detection range
Detectivity (Jones)
Responsivity or EQE
Rise and decay time (f3dB)
Year
Ref.




Photoconductor
PbS QDs
1300 nm
1.8 × 1013
>103 A W−1
<20 Hz
2006

38



Photoconductor
PbS QDs(EDT)/PCBM
<1400 nm
3.3 × 1011
57%
>300 kHz
2010

46



Photoconductor
PbS QDs (TBAI)/PBDB-T/PBI-Por
630 nm
1.12 × 1013
1.89 A W−1
0.42 s/0.37 s
2018

48



Photoconductor
PbS QDs(EDT)/PbS QDs(TBAI)
<1100 nm
1.71 × 1012
268.24 A W−1
3.63 ms/29.56 ms
2017

33



Photoconductor
PbS QDs(EDT)/ZnO Ns Array
UV-vis-NIR
3.4 × 108
0.051 AW-1
9 s/2 s
2017

50



Photoconductor
PbS QDs/MWCNTs
NIR
3.25 × 1012
0.583 AW-1
0.7 ms/3.8 ms
2014

52



Photoconductor
PbS QDs/DWCNTs
Vis/UV
8 × 1012
65/230 A W−1
30 μs/2.723 μs
2020

55



Photoconductor
PbS QDs/P3HT NWS
UV-vis-NIR
2.1 × 1012
—
0.1–0.58 s
2015

57



Photoconductor
PbS QDs/Ag NCs
900 nm
7.1 × 1010
0.0038 AW-1
9.4 Hz
2014

60



Photoconductor
PBS QDs/Ag NPs
<1700 nm
—
1000 A W−1
200 Hz
2015

59



Photodiode
Large PbS QDs
>2 μm
1011
0.385
8.1 kHz
2019

31



Photodiode
PbS QDs/P3HT
300–1600 nm
1011 (UV)
80% (UV)
—
2017

65



1010 (NIR)
10% (NIR)


Photodiode
PbS QDs/PDTP-DFBT/PC71BM
890 nm
7.98 × 1011
1.31 A W−1
1.1 kHz
2016

66



Photodiode
PbS QDs/CH3NH2PbI3
400–800 nm
6 × 1013
15 A W−1
11.5 μs (decay time)
2016

67



Photodiode
PbS QDs/C60
<1800 nm
5 × 1012
>20%
—
2015

73



Photodiode
ZnO/PbS QDs(TBAI)/PbS QDs(EDT)
<1100 nm
5.52 × 1013 (550 nm)
444 A W−1 (550 nm)
25.5 ms/25.6 ms
2018

76



3.93 × 1013 (910 nm)
385 A W−1 (910 nm)

77



Photodiode
ZnO/PbI2/PbS QDs(PbI2)/PbS QDs (EDT)
<1000 nm
9.54 × 1012
0.57 A W−1
5.3 μs/4.9 μs
2017

78



Photodiode
CuOx as the HTL
<1200 nm
1013
10%
9 μs/10 μs
2016

79



Photodiode
ITO/ZnO NCs/PbS QDs/TAPC/MoO3/Ag
<1500 nm
7 × 1013
13800%
3.2 ms/8 ms
2015

80



Photodiode
PbS QDs integrated on silicon
<1100 nm
1012
>20%
57 μs/86 μs
2019

81



Photo-FET
PbS QDs (SCN−)/CH3NH3PbI3
365–1550 nm
4.9 × 1013 (365 nm)
255 A W−1 (365 nm)
42 ms/43 ms
2016

99



3 × 1011 (940 nm)
1.58 A W−1 (940 nm)


VFEpTs
PbS QDs/perovskite
400–1500 nm
2 × 1017
9 × 108 A W−1
3 μs/3 μs
2020

100



Photo-FET
PbS QDs/MoO3
<1100 nm
—
Nearly 10
100 kHz
2015

102



Sensitive photo-FET
PbS QDs/graphene
<1600 nm
7 × 1013
107 A W−1
10 ms/10 ms
2012

104



Sensitive photo-FET
PbS QDs (TGL)/SLG
532 nm
—
109 A W−1
<1 ms
2015

111



Sensitive photo-FET
PbS QDs/graphene
<1400 nm
109 (1200 nm)
2 × 103 A W−1
—
2019

118



Sensitive photo-FET
PbS QDs/graphene
<1800 nm
1013
>70%
1.5 kHz
2016

114



Sensitive photo-FET
MoS2/TiO2/PbS QDs
<1100 nm
5 × 1012
103–105 A W−1
≤12 ms
2016

121



Sensitive photo-FET
PbS QDs/SnS2 nanosheets
300–1000 nm
>1012
1 × 106 A W−1 (NIR)
160–420 ms (NIR)
2016

124



3 × 105 A W−1 (UV)
∼20 ms (UV)


Sensitive photo-FET
PbS QDs/IGZO
1000 nm
1013
106 A W−1
0.1–0.3 s
2015

122



Sensitive photo-FET
PbS QDs/ZnO
Vis-NIR
5 × 1012 (640 nm)
10.9 A W−1 (640 nm)
4.3 s/7.63 s
2020

131



4 × 1011 (1310 nm)
0.47 A W−1 (1310 nm)




After nearly 20 years of rapid development, PbS QD-based photodetectors have injected vitality and more possibilities into the field of NIR detection, and PbS QDs have also become the most likely nanomaterials for large-scale commercialization in this field. The performance parameters of the most representative PbS QD-based photodetectors are summarized in Table 2. Generally speaking, responsivity R and detectivity D* of PbS QD-based photodetectors are already high enough which even exceed those of commercial InGaAs-based photodetectors. However, the response speed is usually two orders of magnitude lower for the PbS QD-based photodetectors. In particular, some PbS QD-based photodetectors with flexibility as the main feature have very slow response speeds, with the rise/decay time exceeding 1 s. Although it is still difficult for PbS QD based photodetectors to replace the III–V group compound-based photodetectors, they are expected to be used in some special occasions where the response speed is not too strict. In addition, it should be mentioned here that the study on PbS QD-based photodetectors is still not comprehensive enough, and the report on several important properties is still scarce, such as stability and working temperature tolerance. Besides, for commercial application, the creative device structure and device fabrication process should be compatible with the integration and packaging technology, which still needs further research. At this point, we have seen some drawbacks and immaturity of PbS QD-based photodetectors, but there is no doubt that their inherent advantages will inspire us to promote their continuous development. In the future, low-cost, flexible, response tunable new infrared detectors are expected to change all aspects of people's lives.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Natural Science Basic Research Plan in Shaanxi Province of China (2020JZ-04) and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019M653639).
References
A. De Iacovo, C. Venettacci, L. Colace, L. Scopa and S. Foglia, PbS Colloidal Quantum Dot Photodetectors operating in the near infrared, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 37913 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hopkinson, T. Martin and P. Smowton, III–V semiconductor devices integrated with silicon, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2013, 28(9), 090301 CrossRef CAS .
L. Colace, G. Assanto, D. Fulgoni and L. Nash, Near-Infrared p-i-n Ge-on-Si Photodiodes for Silicon Integrated Receivers, J. Light Technol., 2008, 26(16), 2954–2959 Search PubMed .
M. J. R. Heck, J. F. Bauters, M. L. Davenport, J. K. Doylend, S. Jain, G. Kurczveil, S. Srinivasan, Y. Tang and J. E. Bowers, Hybrid Silicon Photonic Integrated Circuit Technology, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2013, 19(4), 6100117 Search PubMed .
L. Colace and G. Assanto, Germanium on Silicon for Near-Infrared Light Sensing, IEEE Photonics J., 2009, 1(2), 69–79 Search PubMed .
P. P. Absil, P. Verheyen, P. De Heyn, M. Pantouvaki, G. Lepage, J. De Coster and J. Van Campenhout, Silicon photonics integrated circuits: a manufacturing platform for high density, low power optical I/O's, Opt. Express, 2015, 23(7), 9369–9378 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sorianello, A. Perna, L. Colace, G. Assanto, H. C. Luan and L. C. Kimerling, Near-infrared absorption of germanium thin films on silicon, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93(11), 111115 CrossRef .
I. Moreels, K. Lambert, D. Smeets, D. De Muynck, T. Nollet, J. C. Martins, F. Vanhaecke, A. Vantomme, C. Delerue, G. Allan and Z. Hens, Size-dependent optical properties of colloidal PbS quantum dots, ACS Nano, 2009, 3(10), 3023–3030 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, Opportunities and challenges for quantum dot photovoltaics, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10(12), 994–997 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rauch, M. Böberl, S. F. Tedde, J. Fürst, M. V. Kovalenko, G. Hesser, U. Lemmer, W. Heiss and O. Hayden, Near-infrared imaging with quantum-dot-sensitized organic photodiodes, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3(6), 332–336 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Carey, A. L. Abdelhady, Z. Ning, S. M. Thon, O. M. Bakr and E. H. Sargent, Colloidal Quantum Dot Solar Cells, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115(23), 12732–12763 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Ellingson, M. C. Beard, J. C. Johnson, P. R. Yu, O. I. Micic, A. J. Nozik, A. Shabaev and A. L. Efros, Highly efficient multiple exciton generation in colloidal PbSe and PbS quantum dots, Nano Lett., 2005, 5(5), 865–871 CrossRef CAS .
J.-S. Lee, M. V. Kovalenko, J. Huang, D. S. Chung and D. V. Talapin, Band-like transport, high electron mobility and high photoconductivity in all-inorganic nanocrystal arrays, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6(6), 348–352 CrossRef CAS .
R. Saran and R. J. Curry, Lead sulphide nanocrystal photodetector technologies, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10(2), 81–92 CrossRef CAS .
I. Moreels, Y. Justo, B. De Geyter, K. Haustraete, J. C. Martins and Z. Hens, Size-Tunable, Bright, and Stable PbS Quantum Dots: A Surface Chemistry Study, ACS Nano, 2011, 5(3), 2004–2012 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, R. W. Crisp, J. Gao, D. M. Kroupa, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Synthetic Conditions for High-Accuracy Size Control of PbS Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6(10), 1830–1833 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. G. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Solution-processed PbS quantum dot infrared photodetectors and photovoltaics, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4(2), 138–142 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Steigerwald, A. P. Alivisatos, J. M. Gibson, T. D. Harris, R. Kortan, A. J. Muller, A. M. Thayer, T. M. Duncan, D. C. Douglass and L. E. Brus, Surface derivatization and isolation of semiconductor cluster molecules, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110(10), 3046–3050 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, Y. Deng, X. Peng and Y. Jin, Quantum-Dot Light-Emitting Diodes for Large-Area Displays: Towards the Dawn of Commercialization, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(14), 1607022 CrossRef .
J. Owen and L. Brus, Chemical Synthesis and Luminescence Applications of Colloidal Semiconductor Quantum Dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(32), 10939–10943 CrossRef CAS .
A. Surrente, R. Carron, P. Gallo, A. Rudra, B. Dwir and E. Kapon, Self-formation of hexagonal nanotemplates for growth of pyramidal quantum dots by metalorganic vapor phase epitaxy on patterned substrates, Nano Res., 2016, 9(11), 3279–3290 CrossRef CAS .
M. Paul, J. Kettler, K. Zeuner, C. Clausen, M. Jetter and P. Michler, Metal-organic vapor-phase epitaxy-grown ultra-low density InGaAs/GaAs quantum dots exhibiting cascaded single-photon emission at 1.3 μm, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106(12), 122105 CrossRef .
Y. Pu, F. Cai, D. Wang, J.-X. Wang and J.-F. Chen, Colloidal Synthesis of Semiconductor Quantum Dots toward Large Scale Production: A Review, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57(6), 1790–1802 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Hines and G. D. Scholes, Colloidal PbS nanocrystals with size-tunable near-infrared emission: Observation of post-synthesis self-narrowing of the particle size distribution, Adv. Mater., 2003, 15(21), 1844–1849 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lin, K. Fritz, G. Guerin, G. R. Bardajee, S. Hinds, V. Sukhovatkin, E. H. Sargent, G. D. Scholes and M. A. Winnik, Highly luminescent lead sulfide nanocrystals in organic solvents and water through ligand exchange with poly(acrylic acid), Langmuir, 2008, 24(15), 8215–8219 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Abel, J. Shan, J.-C. Boyer, F. Harris and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Highly photoluminescent PbS nanocrystals: The beneficial effect of trioctylphosphine, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20(12), 3794–3796 CrossRef CAS .
O. E. Semonin, J. C. Johnson, J. M. Luther, A. G. Midgett, A. J. Nozik and M. C. Beard, Absolute Photoluminescence Quantum Yields of IR-26 Dye, PbS, and PbSe Quantum Dots, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1(16), 2445–2450 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, L. Brzozowski, D. A. R. Barkhouse, X. Wang, R. Debnath, R. Wolowiec, E. Palmiano, L. Levina, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, D. Jamakosmanovic and E. H. Sargent, Quantum Dot Photovoltaics in the Extreme Quantum Confinement Regime: The Surface-Chemical Origins of Exceptional Air- and Light-Stability, ACS Nano, 2010, 4(2), 869–878 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cademartiri, J. Bertolotti, R. Sapienza, D. S. Wiersma, G. von Freymann and G. A. Ozin, Multigram scale, solventless, and diffusion-controlled route to highly monodisperse PbS nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110(2), 671–673 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cademartiri, G. von Freymann, A. C. Arsenault, J. Bertolotti, D. S. Wiersma, V. Kitaev and G. A. Ozin, Nanocrystals as precursors for flexible functional films, Small, 2005, 1(12), 1184–1187 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, S. Liu, N. Barange, J. Lee, T. Pardue, X. Yi, S. Yin and F. So, Long-Wavelength Lead Sulfide Quantum Dots Sensing up to 2600 nm for Short-Wavelength Infrared Photodetectors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(47), 44451–44457 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gong, Z. Yang, G. Walters, R. Comin, Z. Ning, E. Beauregard, V. Adinolfi, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Highly efficient quantum dot near-infrared light-emitting diodes, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10(4), 253–257 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, J. Sun, H. Li, P. Mao, Y. Wei, X. Zhong, J. Hu, S. Yang and J. Wang, Bilayer PbS Quantum Dots for High-Performance Photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(33), 1702055 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, M. Gibbs, J. Puthussery, S. Gaik, R. Ihly, H. W. Hillhouse and M. Law, Dependence of Carrier Mobility on Nanocrystal Size and Ligand Length in PbSe Nanocrystal Solids, Nano Lett., 2010, 10(5), 1960–1969 CrossRef CAS .
O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, P. Stadler, Z. Ning, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, A Charge-Orbital Balance Picture of Doping in Colloidal Quantum Dot Solids, ACS Nano, 2012, 6(9), 8448–8455 CrossRef CAS .
S. J. Oh, N. E. Berry, J.-H. Choi, E. A. Gaulding, T. Paik, S.-H. Hong, C. B. Murray and C. R. Kagan, Stoichiometric Control of Lead Chalcogenide Nanocrystal Solids to Enhance Their Electronic and Optoelectronic Device Performance, ACS Nano, 2013, 7(3), 2413–2421 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kim, D.-H. Kim, J.-H. Lee and J. C. Grossman, Impact of Stoichiometry on the Electronic Structure of PbS Quantum Dots, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 110(19), 196802 CrossRef .
G. Konstantatos, I. Howard, A. Fischer, S. Hoogland, J. Clifford, E. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Ultrasensitive solution-cast quantum dot photodetectors, Nature, 2006, 442(7099), 180–183 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, H. Zhong, F. Zheng, Y. Xie, D. Li, D. Wu, Z. Zhou, X.-W. Sun and K. Wang, Near-infrared lead chalcogenide quantum dots: Synthesis and applications in light emitting diodes, Chin. Phys. B, 2019, 28(12), 128504 CrossRef CAS .
F. Bertolotti, D. N. Dirin, M. Ibanez, F. Krumeich, A. Cervellino, R. Frison, O. Voznyy, E. H. Sargent, M. V. Kovalenko, A. Guagliardi and N. Masciocchi, Crystal symmetry breaking and vacancies in colloidal lead chalcogenide quantum dots, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15(9), 987–994 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Harris, S. B. Homan, M. Kodaimati, C. He, A. B. Nepomnyashchii, N. K. Swenson, S. Lian, R. Calzada and E. A. Weiss, Electronic Processes within Quantum Dot-Molecule Complexes, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116(21), 12865–12919 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, A. Gassenq, Y. Justo, K. Devloo-Casier, H. Chen, C. Detavernier, Z. Hens and G. Roelkens, Air-stable short-wave infrared PbS colloidal quantum dot photoconductors passivated with Al2O3 atomic layer deposition, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105(17), 171110 CrossRef .
C. Zhang, Y. Xia, Z. Zhang, Z. Huang, L. Lian, X. Miao, D. Zhang, M. C. Beard and J. Zhang, Combination of Cation Exchange and Quantized Ostwald Ripening for Controlling Size Distribution of Lead Chalcogenide Quantum Dots, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(8), 3615–3622 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, L. Levina, A. Fischer and E. H. Sargent, Engineering the temporal response of photoconductive photodetectors via selective introduction of surface trap states, Nano Lett., 2008, 8(5), 1446–1450 CrossRef CAS .
A. Biebersdorf, R. Dietmuller, A. S. Susha, A. L. Rogach, S. K. Poznyak, D. V. Talapin, H. Weller, T. A. Klar and J. Feldmann, Semiconductor nanocrystals photosensitize C-60 crystals, Nano Lett., 2006, 6(7), 1559–1563 CrossRef CAS .
K. Szendrei, F. Cordella, M. V. Kovalenko, M. Boeberl, G. Hesser, M. Yarema, D. Jarzab, O. V. Mikhnenko, A. Gocalinska, M. Saba, F. Quochi, A. Mura, G. Bongiovanni, P. W. M. Blom, W. Heiss and M. A. Loi, Solution-Processable Near-IR Photodetectors Based on Electron Transfer from PbS Nanocrystals to Fullerene Derivatives, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(6), 683 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Osedach, N. Zhao, S. M. Geyer, L.-Y. Chang, D. D. Wanger, A. C. Arango, M. C. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Interfacial Recombination for Fast Operation of a Planar Organic/QD Infrared Photodetector, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(46), 5250–5254 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wei, Z. Ren, A. Zhang, P. Mao, H. Li, X. Zhong, W. Li, S. Yang and J. Wang, Hybrid Organic/PbS Quantum Dot Bilayer Photodetector with Low Dark Current and High Detectivity, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(11), 1706690 CrossRef .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, Nanostructured materials for photon detection, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5(6), 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, L. Gan, J. Zhang, F. Zhuge and T. Zhai, An Enhanced UV-Vis-NIR an d Flexible Photodetector Based on Electrospun ZnO Nanowire Array/PbS Quantum Dots Film Heterostructure, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4(3), 1600316 CrossRef .
J. A. Rogers, T. Someya and Y. Huang, Materials and mechanics for stretchable electronics, Science, 2010, 327(5973), 1603–1607 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, D. Dong, J. He, K. Qiao, F. Cao, M. Li, H. Liu, Y. Cheng, J. Tang and H. Song, Wearable and sensitive heart-rate detectors based on PbS quantum dot and multiwalled carbon nanotube blend film, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105(15), 153702 CrossRef .
E. Del Canto, K. Flavin, D. Movia, C. Navio, C. Bittencourt and S. Giordani, Critical Investigation of Defect Site Functionalization on Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23(1), 67–74 CrossRef CAS .
B.-H. Kim, K.-R. Lee, Y.-C. Chung and M. Park, Functionalization effect on a Pt/carbon nanotube composite catalyst: a first-principles study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18(32), 22687–22692 RSC .
I. Ka, V. Le Borgne, K. Fujisawa, T. Hayashi, Y. A. Kim, M. Endo, D. Ma and M. A. El Khakani, PbS-quantum-dots/double-wall-carbon-nanotubes nanohybrid based photodetectors with extremely fast response and high responsivity, Mater. Today Energy, 2020, 16 Search PubMed .
I. Ka, L. F. Gerlein, I. M. Asuo, R. Nechache and S. G. Cloutier, An ultra-broadband perovskite-PbS quantum dot sensitized carbon nanotube photodetector, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(19), 9044–9052 RSC .
J. Yoo, S. Jeong, S. Kim and J. H. Je, A Stretchable Nanowire UV-Vis-NIR Photodetector with High Performance, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(10), 1712 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos and E. H. Sargent, PbS colloidal quantum dot photoconductive photodetectors: Transport, traps, and gain, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91(17), 173505 CrossRef .
F. Pelayo Garcia de Arquer, T. Lasanta, M. Bernechea and G. Konstantatos, Tailoring the Electronic Properties of Colloidal Quantum Dots in Metal-Semiconductor Nanocomposites for High Performance Photodetectors, Small, 2015, 11(22), 2636–2641 CrossRef .
J. He, K. Qiao, L. Gao, H. Song, L. Hu, S. Jiang, J. Zhong and J. Tang, Synergetic Effect of Silver Nanocrystals Applied in PbS Colloidal Quantum Dots for High-Performance Infrared Photodetectors, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1(10), 936–943 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, Z. Yang, D. Yang, X. Ren, L. Pang and S. Liu, Thinness- and Shape-Controlled Growth for Ultrathin Single-Crystalline Perovskite Wafers for Mass Production of Superior Photoelectronic Devices, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(41), 9204–9209 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. Ip, S. M. Thon, S. Hoogland, O. Voznyy, D. Zhitomirsky, R. Debnath, L. Levina, L. R. Rollny, G. H. Carey, A. Fischer, K. W. Kemp, I. J. Kramer, Z. Ning, A. J. Labelle, K. W. Chou, A. Amassian and E. H. Sargent, Hybrid passivated colloidal quantum dot solids, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7(9), 577–582 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, K. W. Kemp, S. Hoogland, K. S. Jeong, H. Liu, L. Levina, M. Furukawa, X. Wang, R. Debnath, D. Cha, K. W. Chou, A. Fischer, A. Amassian, J. B. Asbury and E. H. Sargent, Colloidal-quantum-dot photovoltaics using atomic-ligand passivation, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10(10), 765–771 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dong, Y. Fang, J. Chae, J. Dai, Z. Xiao, Q. Dong, Y. Yuan, A. Centrone, X. C. Zeng and J. Huang, High-Gain and Low-Driving-Voltage Photodetectors Based on Organolead Triiodide Perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(11), 1912–1918 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, Y. Fang, Y. Yuan, L. Shen and J. Huang, Trap Engineering of CdTe Nanoparticle for High Gain, Fast Response, and Low Noise P3HT:CdTe Nanocomposite Photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(34), 4975–4981 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, Y. Zhang, Y. Bai, X. Zheng, Q. Wang and J. Huang, A filterless, visible-blind, narrow-band, and near-infrared photodetector with a gain, Nanoscale, 2016, 8(26), 12990–12997 RSC .
C. Liu, H. Peng, K. Wang, C. Wei, Z. Wang and X. Gong, PbS quantum dots-induced trap-assisted charge injection in perovskite photodetectors, Nano Energy, 2016, 30, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Chou, K. Lai, K. Kumar, P. Chowdhury and J. C. Lee, Modeling of stress-induced leakage current in ultrathin oxides with the trap-assisted tunneling mechanism, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1997, 70(25), 3407–3409 CrossRef CAS .
M. Houssa, M. Tuominen, M. Naili, V. Afanas’ev, A. Stesmans, S. Haukka and M. M. Heyns, Trap-assisted tunneling in high permittivity gate dielectric stacks, J. Appl. Phys., 2000, 87(12), 8615–8620 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, J. Huang, R. Qin, G. Yang and J. Yu, Efficient Visible-Near-Infrared Hybrid Perovskite: PbS Quantum Dot Photodetectors Fabricated Using an Antisolvent Additive Solution Process, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6(23), 1800979 CrossRef .
W. Xu, H. Peng, T. Zhu, C. Yi, L. Liu and X. Gong, A solution-processed near-infrared polymer: PbS quantum dot photodetectors, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(55), 34633–34637 RSC .

          E. Klem; J. Lewis; C. Gregory; G. Cunningham; D. Temple; A. D'Souza; E. Robinson; P. S. Wijewarnasuriya and N. Dhar, High-performance SWIR sensing from colloidal quantum dot photodiode arrays, in Infrared Sensors, Devices, and Applications Iii, ed. P. D. LeVan, A. K. Sood, P. S. Wijewarnasuriya and A. I. Dsouza,  2013, vol. 8868 Search PubMed .

          E. J. D. Klem; C. Gregory; D. Temple and J. Lewis, PbS Colloidal Quantum Dot Photodiodes for Low-cost SWIR Sensing, in Infrared Technology and Applications Xli, ed. B. F. Andresen, G. F. Fulop, C. M. Hanson and P. R. Norton,  2015, vol. 9451 Search PubMed .
K. X. Steirer, P. F. Ndione, N. E. Widjonarko, M. T. Lloyd, J. Meyer, E. L. Ratcliff, A. Kahn, N. R. Armstrong, C. J. Curtis, D. S. Ginley, J. J. Berry and D. C. Olson, Enhanced Efficiency in Plastic Solar Cells via Energy Matched Solution Processed NiOx Interlayers, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1(5), 813–820 CrossRef CAS .
S. Murase and Y. Yang, Solution Processed MoO3 Interfacial Layer for Organic Photovoltaics Prepared by a Facile Synthesis Method, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(18), 2459–2462 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, H. Wang, S. Yang, G. Ni and B. Zou, High-sensitivity broadband colloidal quantum dot heterojunction photodetector for night-sky radiation, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 764, 446–451 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang and E. M. J. Johansson, Reduction of charge recombination in PbS colloidal quantum dot solar cells at the quantum dot/ZnO interface by inserting a MgZnO buffer layer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(1), 303–310 RSC .
K. Qiao, Y. Cao, X. Yang, J. Khan, H. Deng, J. Zhang, U. Farooq, S. Yuan and H. Song, Efficient interface and bulk passivation of PbS quantum dot infrared photodetectors by PbI2 incorporation, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(83), 52947–52954 RSC .
H. Yu, S. Liu, S. Baek, D. Y. Kim, C. Dong and F. So, Solution-processed copper oxide interlayers for broadband PbS quantum-dot photodiodes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4(47), 11205–11211 RSC .
J. W. Lee, D. Y. Kim, S. Baek, H. Yu and F. So, Inorganic UV-Visible-SWIR Broadband Photodetector Based on Monodisperse PbS Nanocrystals, Small, 2016, 12(10), 1328–1333 CrossRef CAS .
E. Georgitzikis, P. E. Malinowski, Y. Li, J. Maes, L. M. Hagelsieb, S. Guerrieri, H. Zeger, P. Heremans and D. Cheyns, Integration of PbS Quantum Dot Photodiodes on Silicon for NIR Imaging, IEEE Sens. J., 2020, 20(13), 6841–6848 CAS .
Y. Zhao, S. Yang, J. Zhao and B. Zou, PbS quantum dots based organic-inorganic hybrid infrared detecting and display devices, Mater. Lett., 2017, 196, 176–178 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, D. Ban, X. Feng, Z. Lu, S. Fathololoumi, A. J. SpringThorpe and H. C. Liu, Enhanced efficiency in near-infrared inorganic/organic hybrid optical upconverter with an embedded mirror, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103(10), 103112 CrossRef .
J. Chen, D. Ban, M. G. Helander, Z.-H. Lu and P. Poole, Near-Infrared Inorganic/Organic Optical Upconverter with an External Power Efficiency of > 100%, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(43), 4900–4904 CrossRef CAS .
J. Chen, J. Tao, D. Ban, M. G. Helander, Z. Wang, J. Qiu and Z. Lu, Hybrid Organic/Inorganic Optical Up-Converter for Pixel-Less Near-Infrared Imaging, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24(23), 3138–3142 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lu, Y. Zheng, Z. Chen, L. Xiao and Q. Gong, Optical upconversion devices based on photosensitizer-doped organic light-emitting diodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91(20), 201107 CrossRef .
H. Luo, D. Ban, H. C. Liu, Z. R. Wasilewski and M. Buchanan, Optical upconverter with integrated heterojunction phototransistor and light-emitting diode, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88(7), 073501 CrossRef .
D. Y. Kim, K. R. Choudhury, J. W. Lee, D. W. Song, G. Sarasqueta and F. So, PbSe Nanocrystal-Based Infrared-to-Visible Up-Conversion Device, Nano Lett., 2011, 11(5), 2109–2113 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yu, D. Kim, J. Lee, S. Baek, J. Lee, R. Singh and F. So, High-gain infrared-to-visible upconversion light-emitting phototransistors, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10(2), 129 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Y. Shang, F. P. G. de Arquer, K. Xu, R. Wang, S. Luo, X. Xiao, X. Zhou, R. Huang, E. H. Sargent and Z. Ning, Solution-processed upconversion photodetectors based on quantum dots, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3(5), 251–258 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, Y. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Solution-processed hybrid perovskite photodetectors with high detectivity, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xu, C.-C. Chueh, P. Jing, Z. Yang, X. Shi, T. Zhao, L. Y. Lin and A. K. Y. Jen, High-Performance Near-IR Photodetector Using Low-Bandgap MA(0.5)FA(0.5)Pb(0.5)Sn(0.5)I(3) Perovskite, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(28), 1701053 CrossRef .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. Hu, W. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Ambipolar solution-processed hybrid perovskite phototransistors, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8238 CrossRef .
L. Wang, X. Zou, J. Lin, J. Jiang, Y. Liu, X. Liu, X. Zhao, Y. F. Liu, J. C. Ho and L. Liao, Perovskite/Black Phosphorus/MoS2 Photogate Reversed Photodiodes with Ultrahigh Light On/Off Ratio and Fast Response, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(4), 4804–4813 CrossRef CAS .
H. Si, Q. Liao, Z. Kang, Y. Ou, J. J. Meng, Y. Liu, Z. Zhang and Y. Zhang, Deciphering the NH4PbI3 Intermediate Phase for Simultaneous Improvement on Nucleation and Crystal Growth of Perovskite, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(30), 1701804 CrossRef .
B. R. Sutherland, A. K. Johnston, A. H. Ip, J. Xu, V. Adinolfi, P. Kanjanaboos and E. H. Sargent, Sensitive, Fast, and Stable Perovskite Photodetectors Exploiting Interface Engineering, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2(8), 1117–1123 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, X. Pang, X. Liu, B. Jiang, Y. He, H. Snaith and Z. Lin, Monodisperse Dual-Functional Upconversion Nanoparticles Enabled Near-Infrared Organolead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(13), 4280–4284 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X. Zhang, L. Liang, J. Bao, S. Li, W. Yang and Y. Xie, High-Performance Flexible Broadband Photodetector Based on Organolead Halide Perovskite, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24(46), 7373–7380 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Zhang, J.-L. Xu, T. Chen, X. Gao and S.-D. Wang, Toward Broadband Imaging: Surface-Engineered PbS Quantum Dot/Perovskite Composite Integrated Ultrasensitive Photodetectors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(47), 44430–44437 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Yu; Y. Zhang; L. Jin; Z. Chen; Y. Li; Q. Li; M. Cao; Y. Che and J. Yao, Highly Photosensitive Vertical Photodetectors Based on CsPbBr3 and PbS Quantum Dot Layered Heterojunction, in Optoelectronic Devices and Integration Vii, ed. X. Zhang, B. Li, C. Yu and X. Zhang,  2018, vol. 10814 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Z.-F. Shi, S. Li, L.-Z. Lei, H.-F. Ji, D. Wu, T.-T. Xu, Y.-T. Tian and X.-J. Li, High-performance perovskite photodetectors based on solution-processed all-inorganic CsPbBr3 thin films, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5(33), 8355–8360 RSC .
V. Adinolfi, I. J. Kramer, A. J. Labelle, B. R. Sutherland, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Photojunction Field-Effect Transistor Based on a Colloidal Quantum Dot Absorber Channel Layer, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(1), 356–362 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kufer and G. Konstantatos, Photo-FETs: Phototransistors Enabled by 2D and OD Nanomaterials, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3(12), 2197–2210 CrossRef CAS .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Hybrid graphene-quantum dot phototransistors with ultrahigh gain, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7(6), 363–368 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, Y. H. Ahn and C. Ruiz-Vargas, Imaging of Photocurrent Generation and Collection in Single-Layer Graphene, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(5), 1742–1746 CrossRef CAS .
E. J. H. Lee, K. Balasubramanian, R. T. Weitz, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Contact and edge effects in graphene devices, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3(8), 486–490 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, R. Golizadeh-Mojarad, M. Freitag, Y.-M. Lin, J. Tsang, V. Perebeinos and P. Avouris, Photocurrent Imaging and Efficient Photon Detection in a Graphene Transistor, Nano Lett., 2009, 9(3), 1039–1044 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y.-M. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia and P. Avouris, Ultrafast graphene photodetector, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4(12), 839–843 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mueller, F. Xia and P. Avouris, Graphene photodetectors for high-speed optical communications, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4(5), 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Echtermeyer, L. Britnell, P. K. Jasnos, A. Lombardo, R. V. Gorbachev, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, A. C. Ferrari and K. S. Novoselov, Strong plasmonic enhancement of photovoltage in graphene, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 458 CrossRef CAS .
L. Turyanska, O. Makarovsky, S. A. Svatek, P. H. Beton, C. J. Mellor, A. Patane, L. Eaves, N. R. Thomas, M. W. Fay, A. J. Marsden and N. R. Wilson, Ligand-Induced Control of Photoconductive Gain and Doping in a Hybrid Graphene-Quantum Dot Transistor, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1(7), 1500062 CrossRef .
S. Goossens, G. Navickaite, C. Monasterio, S. Gupta, J. J. Piqueras, R. Perez, G. Burwell, I. Nikitskiy, T. Lasanta, T. Galan, E. Puma, A. Centeno, A. Pesquera, A. Zurutuza, G. Konstantatos and F. Koppens, Broadband image sensor array based on graphene-CMOS integration, Nat. Photonics, 2017, 11(6), 366–371 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bessonov, M. Allen, Y. Liu, S. Malik, J. Bottomley, A. Rushton, I. Medina-Salazar, M. Voutilainen, S. Kallioinen, A. Colli, C. Bower, P. Andrew and T. Ryhanen, Compound Quantum Dot-Perovskite Optical Absorbers on Graphene Enhancing Short-Wave Infrared Photodetection, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(6), 5547–5557 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nikitskiy, S. Goossens, D. Kufer, T. Lasanta, G. Navickaite, F. H. L. Koppens and G. Konstantatos, Integrating an electrically active colloidal quantum dot photodiode with a graphene phototransistor, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11954 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gong, Q. Liu, B. Cook, B. Kattel, T. Wang, W.-L. Chan, D. Ewing, M. Casper, A. Stramel and J. Z. Wu, All-Printable ZnO Quantum Dots/Graphene van der Waals Heterostructures for Ultrasensitive Detection of Ultraviolet Light, ACS Nano, 2017, 11(4), 4114–4123 CrossRef CAS .
T.-H. Kim, K.-S. Cho, E. K. Lee, S. J. Lee, J. Chae, J. W. Kim, D. H. Kim, J.-Y. Kwon, G. Amaratunga, S. Y. Lee, B. L. Choi, Y. Kuk, J. M. Kim and K. Kim, Full-colour quantum dot displays fabricated by transfer printing, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5(3), 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J. Chen, M. S. Bradley, J. E. Halpert, M. C. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Inkjet-Printed Quantum Dot-Polymer Composites for Full-Color AC-Driven Displays, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(21), 2151–2155 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Grotevent, C. U. Hail, S. Yakunin, D. N. Dirin, K. Thodkar, G. B. Barin, P. Guyot-Sionnest, M. Calame, D. Poulikakos, M. V. Kovalenko and I. Shorubalko, Nanoprinted Quantum Dot-Graphene Photodetectors, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7(11), 1900019 CrossRef .
N. Huo and G. Konstantatos, Recent Progress and Future Prospects of 2D-Based Photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(51), 1801164 CrossRef .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Electronics and optoelectronics of two-dimensional transition metal dichalcogenides, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7(11), 699–712 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kufer, I. Nikitskiy, T. Lasanta, G. Navickaite, F. H. L. Koppens and G. Konstantatos, Hybrid 2D-0D MoS2-PbS Quantum Dot Photodetectors, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(1), 176–180 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Hwang, Y. T. Lee, H. S. Lee, Y. J. Lee, S. H. Shokouh, J.-H. Kyhm, J. Lee, H. H. Kim, T.-H. Yoo, S. H. Nam, D. I. Son, B.-K. Ju, M.-C. Park, J. D. Song, W. K. Choi and S. Im, Ultrasensitive PbS quantum-dot-sensitized InGaZnO hybrid photoinverter for near-infrared detection and imaging with high photogain, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e233 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kufer, T. Lasanta, M. Bernechea, F. H. L. Koppens and G. Konstantatos, Interface Engineering in Hybrid Quantum Dot-2D Phototransistors, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3(7), 1324–1330 CrossRef CAS .
L. Gao, C. Chen, K. Zeng, C. Ge, D. Yang, H. Song and J. Tang, Broadband, sensitive and spectrally distinctive SnS2 nanosheet/PbS colloidal quantum dot hybrid photodetector, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16126 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Wager, Transparent electronics, Science, 2003, 300(5623), 1245–1246 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nomura, H. Ohta, A. Takagi, T. Kamiya, M. Hirano and H. Hosono, Room-temperature fabrication of transparent flexible thin-film transistors using amorphous oxide semiconductors, Nature, 2004, 432(7016), 488–492 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. C. Fortunato, P. M. C. Barquinha, A. Pimentel, A. M. F. Goncalves, A. J. S. Marques, L. M. N. Pereira and R. F. P. Martins, Fully transparent ZnO thin-film transistor produced at room temperature, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17(5), 590–594 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. K. Park, C.-S. Hwang, M. Ryu, S. Yang, C. Byun, J. Shin, J.-I. Lee, K. Lee, M. S. Oh and S. Im, Transparent and Photo-stable ZnO Thin-film Transistors to Drive an Active Matrix Organic-Light-Emitting-Diode Display Panel, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(6), 678–682 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Oh, K. Lee, K. H. Lee, S. H. Cha, J. M. Choi, B. H. Lee, M. M. Sung and S. Im, Transparent Photo-Stable Complementary Inverter with an Organic/Inorganic Nanohybrid Dielectric Layer, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19(5), 726–732 CrossRef CAS .
K. Lee, M. S. Oh, S.-J. Mun, K. H. Lee, T. W. Ha, J. H. Kim, S.-H. K. Park, C.-S. Hwang, B. H. Lee, M. M. Sung and S. Im, Interfacial Trap Density-of-States in Pentacene- and ZnO-Based Thin-Film Transistors Measured via Novel Photo-excited Charge-Collection Spectroscopy, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22(30), 3260–3265 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yin, H. Zhang, Y. Qiu, Y. Luo, Y. Zhao and L. Hu, The light-induced pyro-phototronic effect improving a ZnO/NiO/Si heterojunction photodetector for selectively detecting ultraviolet or visible illumination, Nanoscale, 2017, 9(44), 17199–17206 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Xu, X. Yan, X. Xiao, C. Aruta, V. Foglietti, Z. Ning and N. Yang, Amorphous ZnO/PbS Quantum Dots Heterojunction for Efficient Responsivity Broadband Photodetectors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(7), 8403–8410 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the hot-injection organometallic methods for PbS QDs.23 Copyright©2018, American Chemical Society. (b) The schematic diagram of common ligand materials suitable for PbS QDs and the energy level diagram of PbS QDs after ligand exchange.14 Copyright©2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 2  The typical device structure diagrams and pros and cons of three different structures of PbS QD-based photodetectors.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Device structure diagram of organic/PbS QD double-layer photoconductor. (b) Cross-sectional TEM image of the double-layer device. (c) Energy band diagram. (d) Absorption spectra of the PbS–TBAI, organic and bilayer films.48 Copyright©2018, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e) Schematic diagram of the PbS–EDT/PbS–TBAI double-layer heterojunction device and (f) energy band diagram of the heterojunction.33 Copyright©2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

Bilayer device	1.71 × 1012	268.24	1113.31	60.94
PbS QDs–TBAI	0.54 × 1012	143.25	291.58	49.32
PbS QDs–EDT	0.46 × 1012	265.15	99.48	40.04
Flexible device	1.44 × 1012	283.92	781.14	57.87

 	Fig. 4  (a) Device structure diagram of the CAB PbS QD photoconductor. The red dot indicates PbS QDs, the black solid line indicates MWCNTs, and the dashed line indicates the possible charge transfer path.52 Copyright©2014, AIP Publishing LLC. (b) Device structure diagram and responsivity spectra at a voltage of 2 V and 5 V of μ-PC device.55 Copyright©2020, Elsevier Ltd. (c) Cross-sectional SEM image of the SWCNT–PbS and QD–MAPbI3−xClx hybrid.56 Copyright©2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of a stretchable UV-vis-NIR NWPD array. (e) A photograph of the NWPD array and a series of optical microscopy images showing stretching of up to 100%.57 Copyright©2015, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Device structure of the PDTP-DFBT:PC71BM:PbS QDs hybrid photodiodes. (b) Cross-sectional SEM of the hybrid active layer. The distribution of Pb (c) and S (d) in the hybrid active layer is mapped with EDX. (e) Absorption spectra of pure PbS QD films, 4 μm thick PDTP-DFBT:PC71BM films with or without PbS QD added. (f) The working mechanism of the narrow-band NIR photodetector.66 Copyright©2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. The energy level alignment of the materials used for the fabrication of perovskite hybrid photodetectors (pero-HPDs) (g) in the dark and (h) under illumination. (i) Device structure of pero-HPDs.67 Copyright©2016, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 6  The PbS QD/C60 photodiode and its readout integrated circuit. (a) Schematic diagram of the PbS QD/C60 photodiode structure. PbS QD/C60 heterojunction can provide effective charge separation and carrier extraction.73 Copyright©2015, SPIE CCC. (b) Image of a completed CQD array on Si fanout die assembled into a LTCC for test.72 Copyright©2013, SPIE CCC. Schematic energy-band diagram of the ITO/ZnO/PbS–TBAI/PbS–EDT/Au photodiode before (c) and after (d) passivation of PbI2 films and ligands.78 Copyright©2017, The Royal Society of chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Structure diagram of a traditional up-conversion detector which is mainly composed of vacuum-deposited materials.85 Copyright©2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Response speed (b), schematic diagram (c) and operation mechanism (d) of PbS QD-based up-conversion light-emitting field-effect-transistor.89 Copyright©2016 Macmillan Publishers Limited. Schematic diagram (e) and schematic energy level diagram (f) of the low operation voltage PbS QD-based up-conversion detector.90 Copyright©2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Device structure of the PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3 based photodetector and the schematic diagram of the ligands used for exchange. Inset shows the TEM image of PbS QDs–OA. (b) Schematic energy level diagram of the PbS QDs/CH3NH3PbI3 composite.99 Copyright©2019 American Chemical Society (c) The structure diagram of vertical field effect phototransistors. (d) Optical absorption spectrum of PbS QD/perovskite composites.100 Copyright©2018, SPIE CCC. (e) Speed characterization of the photo-JFET.102 Copyright©2015 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 9  There is a trade-off between the electrical properties and optical properties of channel materials.103 Copyright©2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Graphene/PbS QDs photo-FETs device structure diagram.104 Copyright©2012, Macmillan Publishers Limited. (b) A schematic diagram of the ligand exchange process and the PbS QD/IGZO hybrid phototransistor. (c) Corresponding cross-sectional HRTEM images.122 Copyright©2016, Nature publishing group. Device design and FET properties of PbS QDs/TiO2/MoS2 photo-FET. (d) Schematic diagram of the device preparation process. (e) The transfer curves for all stages of fabrication are plotted in linear (e) and logarithmic (f) scale.123 Copyright©2016, American Chemical Society.	 

Photoconductor	PbS QDs	1300 nm	1.8 × 1013	>103 A W−1	<20 Hz	2006	
38

Photoconductor	PbS QDs(EDT)/PCBM	<1400 nm	3.3 × 1011	57%	>300 kHz	2010	
46

Photoconductor	PbS QDs (TBAI)/PBDB-T/PBI-Por	630 nm	1.12 × 1013	1.89 A W−1	0.42 s/0.37 s	2018	
48

Photoconductor	PbS QDs(EDT)/PbS QDs(TBAI)	<1100 nm	1.71 × 1012	268.24 A W−1	3.63 ms/29.56 ms	2017	
33

Photoconductor	PbS QDs(EDT)/ZnO Ns Array	UV-vis-NIR	3.4 × 108	0.051 AW-1	9 s/2 s	2017	
50

Photoconductor	PbS QDs/MWCNTs	NIR	3.25 × 1012	0.583 AW-1	0.7 ms/3.8 ms	2014	
52

Photoconductor	PbS QDs/DWCNTs	Vis/UV	8 × 1012	65/230 A W−1	30 μs/2.723 μs	2020	
55

Photoconductor	PbS QDs/P3HT NWS	UV-vis-NIR	2.1 × 1012	—	0.1–0.58 s	2015	
57

Photoconductor	PbS QDs/Ag NCs	900 nm	7.1 × 1010	0.0038 AW-1	9.4 Hz	2014	
60

Photoconductor	PBS QDs/Ag NPs	<1700 nm	—	1000 A W−1	200 Hz	2015	
59

Photodiode	Large PbS QDs	>2 μm	1011	0.385	8.1 kHz	2019	
31

Photodiode	PbS QDs/P3HT	300–1600 nm	1011 (UV)	80% (UV)	—	2017	
65

1010 (NIR)	10% (NIR)
Photodiode	PbS QDs/PDTP-DFBT/PC71BM	890 nm	7.98 × 1011	1.31 A W−1	1.1 kHz	2016	
66

Photodiode	PbS QDs/CH3NH2PbI3	400–800 nm	6 × 1013	15 A W−1	11.5 μs (decay time)	2016	
67

Photodiode	PbS QDs/C60	<1800 nm	5 × 1012	>20%	—	2015	
73

Photodiode	ZnO/PbS QDs(TBAI)/PbS QDs(EDT)	<1100 nm	5.52 × 1013 (550 nm)	444 A W−1 (550 nm)	25.5 ms/25.6 ms	2018	
76

3.93 × 1013 (910 nm)	385 A W−1 (910 nm)	
77

Photodiode	ZnO/PbI2/PbS QDs(PbI2)/PbS QDs (EDT)	<1000 nm	9.54 × 1012	0.57 A W−1	5.3 μs/4.9 μs	2017	
78

Photodiode	CuOx as the HTL	<1200 nm	1013	10%	9 μs/10 μs	2016	
79

Photodiode	ITO/ZnO NCs/PbS QDs/TAPC/MoO3/Ag	<1500 nm	7 × 1013	13800%	3.2 ms/8 ms	2015	
80

Photodiode	PbS QDs integrated on silicon	<1100 nm	1012	>20%	57 μs/86 μs	2019	
81

Photo-FET	PbS QDs (SCN−)/CH3NH3PbI3	365–1550 nm	4.9 × 1013 (365 nm)	255 A W−1 (365 nm)	42 ms/43 ms	2016	
99

3 × 1011 (940 nm)	1.58 A W−1 (940 nm)
VFEpTs	PbS QDs/perovskite	400–1500 nm	2 × 1017	9 × 108 A W−1	3 μs/3 μs	2020	
100

Photo-FET	PbS QDs/MoO3	<1100 nm	—	Nearly 10	100 kHz	2015	
102

Sensitive photo-FET	PbS QDs/graphene	<1600 nm	7 × 1013	107 A W−1	10 ms/10 ms	2012	
104

Sensitive photo-FET	PbS QDs (TGL)/SLG	532 nm	—	109 A W−1	<1 ms	2015	
111

Sensitive photo-FET	PbS QDs/graphene	<1400 nm	109 (1200 nm)	2 × 103 A W−1	—	2019	
118

Sensitive photo-FET	PbS QDs/graphene	<1800 nm	1013	>70%	1.5 kHz	2016	
114

Sensitive photo-FET	MoS2/TiO2/PbS QDs	<1100 nm	5 × 1012	103–105 A W−1	≤12 ms	2016	
121

Sensitive photo-FET	PbS QDs/SnS2 nanosheets	300–1000 nm	>1012	1 × 106 A W−1 (NIR)	160–420 ms (NIR)	2016	
124

3 × 105 A W−1 (UV)	∼20 ms (UV)
Sensitive photo-FET	PbS QDs/IGZO	1000 nm	1013	106 A W−1	0.1–0.3 s	2015	
122

Sensitive photo-FET	PbS QDs/ZnO	Vis-NIR	5 × 1012 (640 nm)	10.9 A W−1 (640 nm)	4.3 s/7.63 s	2020	
131

4 × 1011 (1310 nm)	0.47 A W−1 (1310 nm)

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
