Perspectives on metal–organic frameworks with intrinsic electrocatalytic activity  - CrystEngComm (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CE00215G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CE00215G
(Highlight)
CrystEngComm, 2017, 19, 4049-4065Perspectives on metal–organic frameworks with intrinsic electrocatalytic activity

        
          
            Marcello B. 
            Solomon
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Tamara L. 
            Church
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Deanna M. 
            D'Alessandro
          
        
      *a
aSchool of Chemistry, The University of Sydney, New South Wales 2006, Australia. E-mail: deanna.dalessandro@sydney.edu.au
bDepartment of Materials and Environmental Chemistry, Stockholms Universitet, 106 91, Sweden
Received 
      29th January 2017
    , Accepted 6th March 2017First published on 23rd March 2017AbstractThis highlight article focuses on the rapidly emerging area of electrocatalytic metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) with a particular emphasis on those systems displaying intrinsic activity. Three electrocatalytic conversion processes are discussed, including CO2 reduction, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), as well as a selection of other relevant examples. The scope of our discussion encompasses aspects of MOF structure that are key to their function, performance characteristics such as stability and selectivity, together with methods for interfacing MOFs with surfaces. Key challenges that have emerged are highlighted in addition to opportunities that are relevant to the field in the design of more stable, selective and robust electrocatalysts for a range of industrial processes.
1. Introduction
The demand for energy to satisfy the needs of an ever-growing population has led to the reliance on fossil fuels for their high energy density to generate the necessary power for the human population. Industrialisation has been heavily dependent on the use of coal, which is responsible for over 40% of electricity production worldwide.1 Additionally, in excess of 12 million tonnes of oil and 8 million cubic tonnes of natural gas are consumed daily to provide energy. The dependence on fossil fuels has led to the increased concentration of CO2 into the atmosphere, with CO2 levels surpassing 400 ppm for the first time in recorded history.2 Efforts to reduce the reliance on fossil fuels for the production of energy has seen various approaches. One such strategy is CO2 capture and conversion, to reduce the levels of CO2 in the atmosphere (the subject of many recent reviews2–9), and to capitalise on the rich carbon source that CO2 can provide as a chemical feedstock. Another strategy is the use of renewable energy sources such as wind, hydro and solar-based energies to generate more environmentally benign fuels such as H2 and O2 in renewable fuel cells.
Studies into the feasibility of cheap and abundant feedstocks, such as CO2 and H2O, have probed their uses as alternatives to fossil fuels. The benefit of CO2 being a cheap and abundant source of carbon is limited by carbon being in its most oxidised form; this means that it is difficult to chemically access for transformation into a commodity chemical. Investing energy to convert CO2 into a more reactive intermediate could enable the generation of a cleaner fuel source. The conversion of H2O can generate both H2 and O2 which supports the move towards a hydrogen fuel economy.10 The challenge here lies in the limitations of conventional methods for water splitting, including the use of high temperatures or pressures, resulting in a lower efficiency of H2 production. As a consequence, catalysts are required to lower the energy penalty associated with these reaction pathways and provide more viable routes for conversion.
Currently, there exist a number of classes of catalysis for the generation of useful fuels. These include, but are not limited to biocatalysis,11 chemical catalysis (including organometallic12 and organocatalysis13), photocatalysis14 and electrocatalysis.15 A particular attraction of electrocatalysis lies in its relative simplicity and the ability to control the reaction through modulation of electric potential difference. Unlike biocatalysis, the electrocatalytic conversion does not require the additional complexity of modelling enzyme stability (which is highly pH dependent) and metabolic pathways for multi-step biocatalytic reactions.11 Electrocatalysts are considered a feasible alternative to organometallic catalysts since a large proportion of the latter are based on rare and precious metals, are tedious to manipulate due to their traditionally air sensitive nature and may contribute to heavy metal pollution upon their use. While the limitations in cost, robustness and abundance of precursors for organometallic catalysis can be addressed by designing organocatalysts, they require a high catalyst loading to achieve catalytic transformation in high efficiencies.16 Finally, although photocatalytic catalysis in many cases (e.g., CO2 reduction) may allow for a more direct conversion of a substrate to a product, the conversion measured by quantum yield is often very low.17 In comparison, some electrocatalytic transformations can occur in Faradaic efficiencies of up to 100%.18 Electrocatalysis is also beneficial since it is relatively easily coupled with a renewable energy source such as hydro, solar or wind power to generate the necessary potential for conversion.19
Techniques in electrocatalysis were initially developed in the solution phase because it is comparatively simple to apply solution state spectroscopic techniques to quantify products of catalytic transformation, understand the kinetics of the reaction and elucidate the mechanism.20,21 It is also more straightforward to generate a library of discrete compounds for solution state electrochemistry in order to systematically modulate the catalyst and relate its structure to its electrochemical function. Homogeneous electrocatalysis has been very well developed and is the subject of many reviews for applications in CO2 conversion,20,22 H2 production,23–27 O2 production,28–30 general organic synthesis31 and for industrial applications;32,33 however, with the increasing number of electroactive solid-state materials being reported in the literature,34 alternative methods for assessing catalysts and quantifying catalytic processes need to be explored.
Despite the advantages of homogeneous catalysis (tunability and chemical robustness), heterogeneous catalysts possess a number of long-term benefits in the context of electrocatalysis. Homogeneous electrocatalysts are only electroactive at the surface of an electrode, or within the diffuse double layers of an electrochemical cell, such that bulk electrocatalysis is dictated by diffusion and mass transport.35 In solution, electroactive complexes may physically or chemically interact with each other, triggering a deactivation process of the active site.36 By suspending a discrete complex in a crystalline matrix, it may be possible to control the environment of the catalytically active site to avoid its deactivation and lengthen its lifetime.37 The use of a heterogeneous catalyst may also open up the possibility of using solvents that are more favourable for electrochemistry, since solubility is not a requirement for heterogeneous catalyst function.38 If a heterogeneous scaffold is localised on an electrode, it will not be controlled by the rate of diffusion in the solvent. Heterogenisation also prevents the two active half-cell reactions in an electrochemical cell from interfering with each other. For example, if an active homogeneous reduction catalyst reaches the anode, then it may partake in the oxidation half reaction of the electrochemical cell, or may itself undergo oxidative degradation.39 Improving the conductivity of a crystalline matrix containing catalytically active sites may allow for charge propagation through the solid, leading to improved overall rates of catalysis. With constant improvements in solid state spectroscopic and electrochemical techniques, and the development of new experimental methods to study surfaces, heterogeneous catalysis is no longer limited by restrictions such as low temperatures and high vacuum conditions40 or inhomogeneous surfaces.41 Finally, heterogeneous catalysis enables the ease of separation of products from the catalyst since the products may be in a different phase.
An electrocatalyst functions by facilitating electron transfer between an electrode and a substrate, thereby reducing the high electrochemical driving force required for the reaction by providing a lower energy pathway. A good electrocatalyst needs to fulfil certain requirements: it must offer a good catalytic rate constant (kcat) for the reaction it was designed to accelerate, be stable to redox processes, be cheap, efficient, durable and selective in its catalysis, and be easily regenerated. For both CO2 reduction and water splitting, the electrocatalyst should be reduced to form an intermediate that can transfer electrons to CO2 to activate it, or to allow for the electrochemical destabilisation H2O to occur. A number of electrochemical techniques are available to assist in the search for a good electrocatalyst. The most important tools are cyclic voltammetry (CV), linear squarewave voltammetry (LSV) differential pulse voltammetry (DPV) and controlled potential electrolysis (CPE). These electrochemical experiments can yield information for Tafel plots, which relate the overpotential of a reaction to its rate limiting step.15 A particularly important parameter derived from such plots is the Tafel slope, which yields information about the exchange current density of a reaction and the rate of electron transfer (i.e., the smaller the gradient, the better the electron transfer). Spectroelectrochemistry (SEC) can also be used to provide spectroscopic information about the behaviour of an electrocatalyst in situ, which adds another important dimension to the characterisation of an electrochemical reaction and the elucidation of the mechanism of catalysis.18,42–47 Finally, combining CPE with gas- and solution-phase techniques can assist in identifying and quantifying the catalytic products.
An attractive opportunity for heterogeneous electrocatalysis is metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), which hold promise as a class of highly ordered multifunctional materials that can be readily formed and tuned. Defined by IUPAC as “coordination polymers with an open framework that contain potential voids”,48 frameworks were first reported in 198949 and consist of metal ions that are linked together by organic ligands to form scaffolds.50 A key advantage to MOFs is that they possess high dimensionality, can be robust and are insoluble. It is also possible to tune the components of the MOF in a similar fashion to tuning a discrete homogeneous catalyst.51 With the large availability of ligands and metal salts, there are a plethora of different MOF topologies that may be synthesised and explored, enabling a move away from precious metals and expensive precursors commonly associated with catalytic processes.52 Robson et al. predicted that the components of frameworks could be rationally chosen to yield a material with desirable functionality – a process known as crystal engineering.53
The potential use of MOFs as electrocatalysts is receiving increasing attention as these materials circumvent a number of the limitations of homogeneous catalysts. Through the immobilisation of catalytic sites in MOFs, it may be possible to inhibit deleterious reactions such as dimerisation, since the sites are physically separated in a higher-order structure. Immobilising catalysts in the solid state with various metal nodes can also impact the electrochemical driving force necessary for electron transfer between the electrode and the catalyst, as well as improving the lifetime of the catalytic site and its selectivity. Additionally, if the MOF has a high internal surface area, a high concentration of catalytic sites should be accessible. It is usually expected that the use of a MOF as an electrocatalyst would require an active surface area, a known propagation of charge, an optimised pore size distribution and good crystallinity.54 One crucial factor that affects the electrocatalytic performance of a MOF is how well the catalyst is anchored to a conductive surface, since this may allow for charge hopping rather than diffusion to activate any catalytic sites in the MOF.55
Methods for the attachment of MOFs to an electrode surface are required to quantify catalyst loading and have been derived from the surface anchoring of discrete complexes. Current approaches to surface attachment involve modifying the conductive surface in order to directly graft functionalised metal complexes. Grafting methods of metal complexes for heterogeneous catalysis have previously been explored,56–63 and the conductive surfaces used have included carbon nanotubes,58 graphene,64 glassy carbon,65 conductive tin oxides,66 silver,67 copper68 and gold69 among others. While these surface attachment methods have enabled quantification of catalyst loading, they result in low surface coverage. MOFs as heterogeneous catalysts offer significant potential advantages in terms of the higher number of catalytic sites that may be activated via charge hopping mechanisms. As a result, a better understanding of surface fabrication and quantification of heterogeneous catalysis is crucial to enhance their properties and advance the field.
1.1 Scope
With the advent of crystal engineering and a relatively large body of existing literature on photocatalytic MOFs,70–73 the use of MOFs as electrocatalysts is now gaining pace. Various methods exist for the attachment of MOFs to conductive surfaces – an important consideration to quantify their electrocatalytic activity. This highlight article focuses on the key challenges that have emerged for electrocatalytic MOFs, including aspects of structure that are key to their function, and performance characteristics such as stability and selectivity, in addition to methods for interfacing MOFs with surfaces. Three electrocatalytic conversions processes are discussed, including CO2 reduction, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), as well as a selection of other relevant catalytic processes. The highlight is restricted to electrocatalysis intrinsic to MOFs (that is, where the MOF retains its structural integrity and catalytic properties after CPE), and quantification of the catalysis will be discussed on the basis of Faradaic efficiencies, turnover frequencies (TOFs), turnover numbers (TONs) and Tafel analysis where reported. Readers are additionally directed to a recent comprehensive review on MOF and MOF-derived nanomaterials for electrocatalysis74 and the use of MOFs as catalyst precursors for catalytic oxides71,75 (note that these reviews did not address the issue of surface attachment as discussed here).
2. CO2 reduction
The electrocatalysis of CO2 reduction requires the presence of coordinatively unsaturated metal sites, or at least metal sites with labile ligands. In the case of homogeneous catalysts, many transition metal systems that interact with CO2 have been reported, of which the strength and the reversibility of the association with CO2 is a critical factor.76 In many examples, the metal–CO2 bond is strong, which may deactivate the catalytic ability of the transition metal.
From a thermodynamic viewpoint, CO2 has the capacity to accept an electron to form a CO2˙− radical anion which has provided the impetus for the study of CO2 electrocatalysis.15 The CO2˙− radical is a highly energetic species that is observed when CO2 is reduced at a potential of Epc = −1.90 V vs. NHE.20 The Tafel slope for the formation of the radical has previously been reported as 118 mV dec−1;77 therefore, a lower Tafel slope may imply a faster initial electron transfer before a later non-electron transfer rate-determining step.78 The direct reduction of CO2 is not favoured thermodynamically due to the large overpotentials associated with the electron transfer. The proton-coupled reduction of CO2 provides a feasible alternative to direct reduction and can lead to a number of useful products (Table 1).20,79,80 These products are more thermodynamically favourable than CO2˙−; however, the activation energy for their formation is still significant and kinetic penalties are introduced. Since a proton source is required to facilitate CO2 reduction, it is important that the electrocatalyst does not simply promote reduction of the proton source to H2 gas (a thermodynamically favoured transformation), but instead has a kinetic preference for CO2 reduction. The Tafel slope provides useful insight here, since a higher slope may indicate competing reactions with the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) (vide infra).81,82
Table 1 Reduction reactions of CO2 and their thermodynamic potentials at neutral pH79




Reaction

E
0 (V vs. SHE)




CO2 (g) + 4H+ + 4e− → C (s) + 2H2O (l)
+0.210


CO2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 4e− → C (s) + 4OH−
−0.627


CO2 (g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH (l)
−0.250


CO2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 2e− → HCOO− (aq) + OH−
−1.078


CO2 (g) + 2H+ + 2e− → CO (g) + H2O (l)
−0.106


CO2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 2e− → CO− (g) + 2OH−
−0.934


CO2 (g) + 4H++ 4e− → CH2O (l) + 4OH−
−0.898


CO2 (g) + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH (l) + H2O−
+0.016


CO2 (g) + 5H2O (l) + 6e− → CH3OH (l) + 6OH−
−0.812


CO2 (g) + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 (g) + H2O (l)
+0.169


CO2 (g) + 6H2O (l) + 8e− → CH4 (g) + 8OH−
−0.659


2CO2 (g) + 2H+ + 2e− → H2C2O4 (aq)
−0.500


2CO2 + 2e− → 2CO2˙− → C2O42− (aq)
−0.590


2CO2 (g) + 12H+ + 12e− → CH2CH2 (g) + 4H2O (l)
+0.064


2CO2 (g) + 8H2O (l) + 12e− → CH2CH2 (g) + 12OH− (l)
−0.764


2CO2 (g) + 12H+ + 12e− → CH3CH2OH (l) + 3H2O (l)
+0.084


2CO2 (g) + 9H2O (l) + 12e− → CH3CH2OH (l) + 12OH−
−0.240


2H+ + 2e− → H2 (g)
+0.000




An important factor in catalyst design for the conversion of CO2 is addressing the kinetic factors associated with its transformation. Despite the thermodynamic incentive to form methane (ΔG° = −130.8 kJ mol−1) or methanol (ΔG° = −17.3 kJ mol−1) in a single step, the relatively simpler two proton, two electron reduction process to fuel precursors has been the subject of much analysis.20 The reduction of CO2 to CO is particularly attractive as CO can be converted into liquid fuels via Fischer–Tropsch processes83 and is a feedstock for a number of aldehydes;84 it is particularly useful on a large scale in metallurgical processes, such as the Mond process for refining Ni.85 Additionally, the generation of formic acid from CO2 is an important industrial process because it is useful as a preservative and antibacterial agent, and in the textile industry.86 The slight thermodynamic penalty for forming CO (ΔG° = +19.9 kJ mol−1) and formic acid (ΔG° = +38.4 kJ mol−1) from CO2 means that an electrocatalyst is required to assist the transformation.20
A number of the early examples of MOFs examined for the reduction of CO2 contained Cu secondary building units (SBUs). Interest in these Cu frameworks was based on precedence for the reduction of CO2 at low overpotentials on Cu electrodes, where deposited Cu2O layers were found to be electrocatalytically active.87–93 The first reported framework for electrochemical CO2 reduction was a copper rubeanate MOF reported in 2012 by Yamada et al.94 The as-synthesised MOF particles were mechanically immobilised onto carbon paper to act as the working electrode. Upon CPE at Epc = −1.2 V vs. SHE, formic acid was found to be the primary product and was produced in 30% Faradaic efficiency after reaction in aqueous media. The reported overpotentials were lowered by 0.2 V compared to CO2 reduction on a bare Cu electrode. Characterisation of the framework was achieved using PXRD, elemental analysis and IR, however the definitive structure of the material was not reported. This work serves to highlight a number of challenges in the quantification of electrocatalytic processes involving MOFs including the difficulty in elucidating a reaction mechanism (which often requires a Tafel analysis), their instability under the conditions (structural data such as PXRD is rarely reported post-reaction), and the need for secure attachment of the MOF to the electrode in order to quantify the electroactive surface area.
Work from Kulandainathan et al. demonstrated that Cu3(btc)2 could be coated onto glassy carbon using Nafion, a conductive, gas permeable and chemically inert matrix used to adhere the MOF to the surface. CPE was performed on a solution at Epa = −2.5 V vs. Ag/Ag+, with the primary product of catalysis found to be oxalic acid, thus providing the first example of a multifunctional MOF that could be used for both the capture and electrochemical conversion of CO2.95 The detection of oxalic acid via IR spectroscopy occurred at overpotentials that had been lowered by up to 0.65 V, however quantification of the product was not performed. It was suggested that a Cu(I) species was the catalytic agent, however the structural stability of the framework to the catalytic conditions was not thoroughly analysed, nor was Tafel analysis conducted to verify the rate limiting step of the reduction. 13CO2-labelled experiments would be useful in the future to verify the source of the product (i.e., oxalic acid generation from CO2 itself rather than reduction of the solvent, DMF). It is also interesting to note that although Nafion assists the adhesion of the MOF onto the glassy carbon surface, it may also interfere with the properties of the framework, resulting in an inhomogeneous coverage of MOF on the surface and affecting the diffusion of electrons, leading to increased capacitance.66
Strategies to address the stability of Cu based MOFs for electrocatalysis have been reported in the work of Albo et al., who investigated both Cu3(btc)2 and [Cu3(μ-C2H2N2S2)]n MOFs, as well as metal–organic aerogels for the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to alcohols.96 The MOFs were deposited onto a gas diffusion electrode (GDE), which is a porous composite electrode constructed from Nafion bonded catalyst particles and a carbon support (carbon paper). The benefit of a GDE is that it can be operated at higher current densities (200–600 mA cm−2) and can form a characteristic gas-solid-liquid three-phase interface, which allows a homogeneous distribution over the catalyst surface and overcomes the limitations of mass transport.97 However, the presence of Nafion as a binder may also impact the conductive properties of a framework which are important for charge transport within the highly porous electrocatalytic system. The electrodes were characterised using SEM, ATR-IR and PXRD, where homogeneous coverage of MOF was found on the electrode surface. Bulk electrolysis revealed that Cu3(btc)2 and [Cu3(μ-C2H2N2S2)] could convert CO2 to methanol and ethanol in Faradaic efficiencies of 15.9% and 1.2%, respectively, with a current density of 10 mA cm−2 after optimisation of the electrolyte and gas flow rates. Despite the low conversion of CO2, catalysis was attributed to unhindered and highly active defect Cu sites in [Cu3(μ-C2H2N2S2)]. On this basis, it was suggested that focus should be shifted towards MOFs containing bare metal sites for electrocatalysis. Characterisation of the MOF stabilities revealed that Cu3(btc)2 and [Cu3(μ-C2H2N2S2)] exhibit catalytic behaviour for up to 17 and 12 h, respectively, with gradual deactivation a result of their propensity to undergo hydrolysis in aqueous media.98 There was also evidence for the formation of malachite (CH2CuO2) and leaching of Cu from the carbon support, which are themselves electrocatalytically active, and may have contributed to the observed activity.99
A challenge arising from the use of Cu as the active metal for CO2 electroreduction is that various mixtures of hydrocarbon products are generated, and it is not trivial to improve the selectivity of any specific one.100–102 The field has therefore expanded to consider other metals that may increase selectivity for certain products of CO2 reduction, with a particular focus on MOFs incorporating electrocatalytically-active metals into the SBUs and bare metal sites into the struts. Particular efforts have focused on the incorporation of porphyrins into MOFs, because discrete metal Co and Fe porphyrins have previously been examined as homogeneous electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction.103–108 The electrocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CO was reported in a COF containing 4,4′, 4′′,4′′′-(porphyrin-5,10,15,20-tetrayl)tetrabenzoate)Co(II) (tcpp-Co) by Yaghi and co-workers.109 For electrochemical experiments, the COF was mechanically deposited onto porous, conductive carbon fabric, and an electrochemically active surface concentration of the COF was measured by integrating the reduction wave. CO was formed in Faradaic efficiencies of 90%, with no degradation of the COF observed over the first 24 h of the reaction. This material displayed a high activity for the reduction of CO2 to CO, achieving TONs as high as 290000 and an initial TOF of 2.6 s−1. The immobilisation of the porphyrin into the solid state resulted in an improvement in the activity of the catalytic site by a factor of 60. The direct growth of the MOF onto the conductive surface resulted in a lower Faradaic efficiency (86%), but an improvement in the TOF (665 hour−1), suggesting that direct methods of surface attachment are necessary to improve electrocatalysis. Tafel analysis on the COF suggested that further mechanistic studies are required, because a higher Tafel slope for the COF (550 mV dec−1) than tcpp-Co (270 mV dec−1) itself may indicate that the mechanism of CO2 reduction is occurring in a different way in the heterogeneous MOF system.
Taking inspiration from the aforementioned COF, the same group incorporated tcpp-Co porphyrin into a MOF, where the porphyrin was linked through aluminium oxide rods to generate a 3D framework (Fig. 1A).110 The MOF was deposited onto ITO through the atomic layer deposition (ALD) of an aluminium oxide layer prior to direct MOF growth.67 The benefit of ALD lies in the ability to control the defects and thickness of the film,111 improve deposition times, lower deposition temperatures and increase scalability/repeatability.112 The direct growth of the MOF onto the surface also removed the need for binders. The electroactive surface of the MOF was quantified using ICP-AES, where an upper concentration limit of Co of 1.1 × 10−7 mol cm−2 was obtained. The Co MOF exhibited improved electrocatalytic activity in the presence of CO2, with an increase in current density from 3.5 to 5.9 mA cm−2 at E1/2 = −0.5 V vs. RHE (Fig. 1C). During CPE, the MOF films demonstrated a high selectivity for the conversion of CO2 to CO, with TONs of 1400 per catalytic site and a selectivity for CO production in aqueous media with 76% Faradaic efficiency at Epc = −0.7 V vs. RHE (Fig. 1D). Spectroelectrochemical experiments suggested that the Co(II/I) redox couple was responsible for the conversion. Tafel plots were examined to gain insight into the mechanism of CO2 reduction (Fig. 1E), with Tafel slopes ranging from 100–300 mV dec−1, implying that the mechanism involved more steps than those involving the active Co site and the generation of the CO2˙− radical as the rate limiting step. The stability of the MOF was initially evaluated through chronoamperometric measurements and Faradaic efficiency measurements. Physical characterisation of the MOF after CPE (using PXRD, SEM and surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS)) suggested that the MOF largely retained its crystallinity and morphology after 7 h of CPE.
 Fig. 1  A: The organic building units in the form of cobalt-metalated tcpp are assembled into a 3D MOF, Al2(OH)2 (tcpp-Co). Co: orange spheres; O, red spheres; C, black spheres; N, blue spheres; Al, light-blue octahedra; and pyrrole ring, blue. Each porphyrin is bound to the aluminium organic backbone. B: A schematic of the MOF integrated with a conductive substrate to achieve a functional CO2 electrochemical reduction system. C: CV of the MOF catalyst exhibiting a current increase in a CO2 environment relative to an argon-saturated environment. D: The selectivity of CO2 over H2 at different potentials, reaching Faradaic efficiencies of up to 76% for CO. E: The Tafel plot for the MOF, with a Tafel slope implying that the one-electron reduction from CO2 to CO2˙− is the rate limiting step. Adapted with permission from 110. 
Fe-porphyrins were chosen for incorporation into MOFs by Hupp and co-workers who electrophoretically deposited (EPD) Fe_MOF-525 onto the conductive substrate FTO.113 The benefit of EPD is that a powdered form of the MOF can be attached to a highly charged electrode surface by virtue of defects in both the MOF and the surface without the need for a binder. The initial electrochemically accessible surface area was characterised through chronoamperometry, where the current decay over time was recorded and compared to the charge passed. An active surface area of Fe porphyrin of 6.2 × 10−8 mol cm−2 was calculated (which is up to 77% of the surface area of the MOF itself). CPE at Epc = −1.3 V vs. NHE resulted in the generation of CO and H2 in a combined Faradaic efficiency of up to 100% (CO = 54%, H2 = 45%, TON = 272 in the absence of 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol (TFE) and CO = 60%, H2 = 41% in the presence of TFE). It was suggested that the Fe(I/0) redox couple at E1/2 = −1.4 V vs. NHE was responsible for the transformation of CO2 on the basis of evidence from mechanistic studies in the homogeneous systems; namely, a Fe–CO2 adduct forms that allows for cleavage of a C–O bond and the release of CO.114,115 The MOF was found to degrade over 5 h, allowing for the release of the homogeneous catalyst into solution, however detailed studies on the degradation of the MOF were not pursued.
In addition to porphyrin-based ligands, the [M(bpy)(CO)3X] (M = Mn, Re, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine, X = halogen) complexes are well-known to be good homogeneous electrocatalysts for the proton-dependent reduction of CO2 into CO with high TOF/TONs and good Faradaic efficiencies.18,65,116–120 Recently, the incorporation of [Re(bpy)(CO)3Cl] into a Zn-paddlewheel based MOF for electrochemical CO2 reduction was reported by Sun and co-workers (Fig. 2A).121 Deposition of the MOF onto FTO was achieved via liquid-phase epitaxy (LPE), which is a very well established method for the deposition of MOFs onto thin films.122 LPE has the added benefit of enabling the fabrication of highly oriented and homogeneous MOF thin films with controllable thicknesses.123 The surfaces were characterised by XRD, suggesting that growth of the MOF was directed along the [001] surface, however, single crystal data was not obtained and the structure was therefore proposed on the basis of Le Bail refinements. Further characterisation through IR and XPS confirmed the incorporation of the [Re(bpy)(CO)3Cl] complex into the MOF. CV of the MOF revealed two processes at E1/2 = −0.7 and −0.9 V vs. NHE, corresponding to the reduction of Re(I/0) and its subsequent loss of chloride, with a noticeable enhancement in current density in the presence of CO2 (Fig. 2B). CPE was performed on the MOF at Epc = −0.9 V vs. NHE for 2 h, with current densities up to 2.5 mA cm−2 which were sustained for 30 min. CO production was reported in Faradaic efficiencies up to 93%, an initial TOF of 690 h−1 after 30 min and a TON of 580 after 2 h, although these values are based upon an estimation of catalytic sites on an FTO surface (7 × 10−8 mol cm−2 assuming a full packing of Re centres on a uniform surface of the electrode) (Fig. 2C). A redox hopping mechanism was proposed for charge propagation in the framework. The proposal of mechanism for CO2 reduction was based on the behaviour of the homogeneous catalyst, but was not supported by Tafel analysis. The long term stability of the MOF was not addressed.
 Fig. 2  A: The proposed ideal atomic structure of Re-SURMOF B: CV of Re-SURMOF in saturated electrolyte at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1; C: Faradaic efficiency of Re-SURMOF and Re-linker (0.5 mM) catalysed CO2 reduction as a function of applied potential. The electrolyte was saturated with CO2 or N2. Adapted with permission from 121. 
Han and co-workers reported the first work on the electrochemical reduction of CO2 using MOFs as a cathode material and ionic liquids (ILs) as the electrolyte to generate the multi-electron reduction product methane (Table 1).124 The use of ILs hinges on their wide solvent window which allows access more cathodic reduction potentials in MOFs without the IL itself being reduced. Different mass fractions of Zn(btc) (based on the Zn node) were deposited onto carbon paper using EPD, with a mixture of 1-dodecyl-3-methylimidazolium (75 wt%) and glycerol (25 wt%) used as the electrolyte. The surface was characterised using PXRD, SEM and SAXS, with XPS used prior to and following EPD to ensure that the MOF retained its structure. The CO2 reduction studies took place in 1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate, with an enhanced reduction of CO2 at E1/2 = −2.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+. CPE at Epc = −2.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+ for 2 h yielded CH4 and CO in the gas phase in Faradaic efficiencies of up to 88 and 8%, respectively, depending on the IL used. A Tafel slope of 146 mV dec−1 was obtained, suggesting that the rate limiting step of the reaction was the formation of the CO2˙− radical. Only XPS was used to characterise the surface following CPE. It was suggested that the use of the MOF as the cathode demonstrated comparable activity, but higher selectivity for methane production than a traditional metal electrode.
3. Water splitting
An important electrochemically catalysed reaction is the splitting of water into H2 and O2, both of which play key roles in the development of clean energy technologies.125 The formation of O2 through the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) at the anode and H2 through the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) at the cathode usually occur at very high overpotentials, making it critical to include a catalyst for efficient and economical water splitting.126 Early homogeneous catalysts were based on Ru,127,128 Ir129,130 and Pt,131 however recent efforts have focused on Earth-abundant elements such as Mn,132 Ni,133 Cu134 and Co135 for scaling the reaction to an industrial level, where discrete Co complexes have already been found to show particularly good activity for OER.136 Studies on water oxidation have been conducted on discrete metal oxides and layered double hydroxides.125
3.1 OER
Traditionally, OER possesses a higher kinetic barrier and sluggish reaction kinetics compared with HER because it is a four electron process and therefore usually requires high performance catalysts.137 Tafel analysis is difficult in the context of the OER, since there are postulated to be up to five steps involved in the mechanism under alkali conditions (Table 2).138
Table 2 The OER and its individual mechanism steps under alkali conditions. M represents the electrochemically active site139




Equation

E
0 (V vs. SHE)
Individual steps




2H2O (l) ⇌ O2 (g) + 4H+ + 4e−
−1.23








M + OH− ⇌ MOH






MOH + OH− ⇌ MO + H2O + e−






MO + OH− ⇌ MOOH + e−






MOOH + OH− ⇌ MOO− + H2O






MOO− + OH− ⇌ M + O2 + e−




A challenge for OER is the need for alkaline conditions to promote the reaction; however MOFs are not traditionally known to be stable under these conditions.140 Interestingly, MOF-derived catalysts resulting from decomposition into discrete oxides/hydroxides have been shown to be capable of promoting OER catalysis, however the scope of this review concerns catalysis intrinsic to MOFs.
Some of the first examples of coordination polymers that demonstrated intrinsic catalytic behaviour in OER were Co(bpamb)0.5(adip) and Co2(bpamb)2(5-H2bdc)2(H2O)2·H2O [bpamb = 1,4-bis(3-pyridylaminomethyl)benzene, adip = adipic acid, 5-H2bdc = 5-nitro-isophthalic acid], reported by Gong et al.141 Much of the interest in Co-based MOFs stemmed from the observation that many of the discrete homogeneous catalysts for OER contain Co.142–146 The coordination polymers were immobilised onto glassy carbon using Nafion. For Co(bpamb)0.5(adip) in an aqueous buffer solution (pH = 6.8, H3PO4–KOH, 0.2 M), a quasi-reversible redox couple was observed at E1/2 = +1.07 V vs. SCE, and corresponded to the generation of O2 from water (overpotential is 0.46 V) with an improved current density compared to the bare glassy carbon electrode. The redox activity the coordination polymer was maintained over multiple potential cycles in the CV. CPE was performed at +1.40 V vs. SCE for both coordination polymers, where no significant loss of activity over a period of 2 h was observed, which was corroborated by PXRD analysis. Faradaic efficiencies for the evolution of oxygen were estimated to be ∼95% with a TON of 2.44, based on the amount of the complex that was used in the synthesis (assuming all sites are catalytically active). Small Tafel slopes were reported, suggesting that there was improved electron transfer, with work on the mechanism to be published in the future.
Pintado et al. examined water oxidation using Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) containing Co and Fe.137 The PBA electrode was formed by electroplating the FTO conductive substrate with Co to improve the anchoring of the PBA, then electrocrystallising the surface at anodic potentials in the presence of hexacyanoferrate(III) to generate the electrode. Surface characterisation was through SEM, PXRD and EDX, which assisted in imaging the surface, determining its crystallinity and evaluating its average stoichiometry (K2xCo(2−x)[Fe(CN)6], where 0.85 < x < 0.95). IR studies showed a single CN stretch, suggesting that only coordinated cyanides were present in the sample. CV measurements revealed a quasi-reversible oxidation at E1/2 = +1.04 V vs. NHE and CPE was performed at Epa = +1.41 V vs. NHE at pH 7.0, where a steady current was observed (at 35–40% of the initial catalytic current) after one day. The good stability of the material was confirmed by remeasuring the electrodes in new buffer systems, with a measured TOF of 0.7 s−1. Quantitative O2 evolution was also claimed based upon fluorescence measurements. Tafel analysis revealed slopes in the range of 85–95 mV dec−1 suggesting good electron transfer. It was also claimed that no adventitious cobalt oxides were formed on the basis of characterisation of the electrode surface using EDX, and CV/DPV of the electrolyte after electrolysis (which did not yield any additional redox features). Finally, PXRD of the surface post-catalysis suggested that the systems had mostly retained their structures.
The success observed with Co-based MOFs allowed for the investigation into OER using zeolitic imidazolate frameworks (ZIFs), a subclass of MOF topologically analogous to aluminosilicate zeolite structures which exhibit high thermal and chemical stabilities.147 Co-ZIF-9 was shown to catalyse the OER across a wide pH range by Wang et al.148 The ZIF was immobilised onto FTO with a mixture of Nafion, which was postulated to affect the mediation of electron and proton transfer (Tafel slope = 150 mV dec−1). O2 evolution was monitored with a fluorescence based sensor, where 8 μmol of O2 was detected after a 3 h CPE experiment at +1.60 V vs. RHE. A TOF of 1.76 × 10−3 s−1 was calculated, however, no Faradaic efficiency was reported. Furthermore, the electrolyte was made increasingly basic in subsequent electrolysis runs, which resulted in the lowering of the overpotential. The ZIF did not undergo any obvious deactivation over 25 h; however, only XPS was performed to demonstrate its stability after electrolysis.
Porphyrin-based frameworks were further examined to both introduce stability and active bare metal sites into a MOF. The Pb porphyrin MOF [Pb2(H2tccp)]·4DMF·H2O was synthesised by Dai et al., and was described as the first 3D Pb-porphyrin MOF which could be used for both gas capture and electrocatalysis.149 CV studies on the MOF revealed that OER occurs at Epa = +1.70 V vs. RHE, and is primarily localised at the framework surface. The TOF was affected by the pH of the solution, and addition of different concentrations of KOH yielded TOFs as high as 5.1 × 10−4 s−1. Tafel analysis suggested that surface adsorption was the rate limiting step (Tafel slope = 106–126 mV dec−1). Limited information was available on the nature of the attachment of the MOF to the surface or characterisation of the structure following electrolysis.
Morris and co-workers demonstrated the incorporation of Ni porphyrin into the Zr-based MOF PCN-224, which was found to electrochemically facilitate water oxidation at near neutral pH (Fig. 3A).150 The water splitting ability of the discrete porphyrin was improved by its incorporation into a MOF containing highly oxophilic metal ions (i.e., Zr(IV)) to improve upon the chemical and structural integrity of the material. The MOF thin film was prepared on FTO via a solvothermal reaction of ZrCl4 and Ni(tcpp) in the presence of formic acid as a modulator, and the film was characterised using PXRD and SEM (Fig. 3C). For the MOF containing Ni(tcpp), the CV revealed an increase in the current density at Epa = +1.0 V vs. NHE, which was larger than that for both the blank FTO substrate and the MOF containing a free base porphyrin, suggesting that the oxidation of the Ni(tcpp) species was responsible for water splitting (Fig. 3B). The Tafel plot, with a slope of 150 mV dec−1 suggested a mechanism in which electrochemical oxidation induces a chemical transformation of oxygen according to Fig. 3C. CPE in 0.1 M NaClO4 at Epa = +1.5 V vs. NHE for 60 min revealed a steady current density. To calculate the TOF, the MOF was digested and ICP was used to provide an overestimate of the activity (2 × 10−4 s−1). The Faradaic efficiency was found to be up to 35%. A key result of this work was the proposal and verification of mechanistic steps of the OER using Tafel analysis, taking inspiration from work on the discrete Ni(tcpp) (Fig. 3D).133 This report also provided a detailed characterisation of the MOF thin films following electrolysis using XPS, SEM, ICP and PXRD to demonstrate that there had been significant structural changes.
 Fig. 3  A: PCN-224 structure with the Ni(II)-to-Ni(II) distance illustrated. Hydrogen atoms have been omitted for clarity. Carbon: grey; oxygen, red; nitrogen, blue; nickel, green; zirconium, light blue B: CV of PCN-224-Ni in 0.1 M TBAPF6/CH3CN (black) with increasing H2O concentrations C: SEM image of solvothermally prepared PCN-224-Ni on FTO showing a film thickness of ca. 30 μm D: proposed mechanism for the electrochemical water oxidation reaction catalysed by PCN-224-Ni. Some carboxylate groups have been omitted from the Zr node for clarity. Adapted with permission from 150. 
Post-synthetic exchange (PSE) has also been considered as a viable pathway for introducing electroactivity into a MOF. Lu et al. examined ion exchange of the chlorido ligands in the MOF Co2(μ-Cl)2(btta) [MAF-X27-Cl, H2btta = 1H,5H-benzo(1,2-d:4,5-d′)bistriazole] to generate Co2(μ-OH)2(btta) [MAF-X27-OH], which dramatically improved the electrocatalytic activity of the MOF. They were also able to demonstrate that the improved activity was linked to the incorporation of the hydroxido ligand which is necessary for catalytic behaviour.55 Importantly, these frameworks were found to retain their stability in strongly acidic or alkali media for at least one week. The frameworks were mechanically immobilised onto a glassy carbon electrode with a Nafion binder; however, to more accurately evaluate the OER, MAF-X27-Cl was directly grown onto Cu foil and subjected to ion exchange. In the LSV of the framework, the chlorido was replaced by hydroxide anions, as confirmed by a colour change in the MOF and XPS analysis. The surfaces of both MOFs were characterised using Raman, SEM, TEM, PXRD and TGA, where it was found that the morphologies of the frameworks were analogous. When both structures were tested electrochemically, the MAF-X27-Cl framework demonstrated very poor OER behaviour, with a current density of 0.028 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 570 mV, while MAF-X27-OH achieved a current density of 2.0 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 489 mV. To examine the mechanism of OER, IR isotope tracing experiments were performed which demonstrated the direct participation of the hydroxido in the MOF for OER. TOFs of 0.25 s−1 at overpotentials of 400 mV were reported with Faradaic efficiencies of 100%. Durability of the frameworks were tested through chronopoteniometry, CV, LSV, PXRD and SEM, where negligible changes were observed following electrolysis.
Wang et al. examined Ni(btc), Fe(btc) and Fe/Ni(btc) (with different ratios of Fe:Ni) as possible electrocatalysts for OER.151 It was found that the heterometallic Fe/Ni(btc) MOF possessed an adventitious combination of the lower onset potentials of OER and improved stability of Ni(btc) with the larger current densities associated with Fe(btc).152 In particular, the Ni/Fe(btc) MOF (Ni:Fe = 12:1) demonstrated the most optimal electrocatalytic performance (of those mixtures examined) in alkaline solution with low overpotentials of 270 mV at 10 mA cm−2, and a small Tafel slope of 47 mV dec−1, suggesting good kinetics of electron transfer. In order to avoid the use of binders to immobilise the MOF, EPD was employed to attach the material to Ni foam. PXRD and SEM analysis were used to examine the coverage of the Ni foam electrodes and the crystallinity of the MOF, while EDX and ICP-AES were used to quantify the amount of MOF attached to the surface and demonstrate that both Ni and Fe sites were homogeneously distributed across the surface. CPE was performed at Epa = +1.53 V vs. RHE, where O2 was observed by gas chromatography, with a Faradaic efficiency of 95% and a TOF of 468 h−1 (which was based on the amount of Ni present in the sample, as calculated from ICP analysis). Characterisation of the films was conducted after 15 h of CPE using SEM, XPS, IR and PXRD, with no apparent degradation observed.
3.2 HER
HER is an important reaction for the generation of energy,153–155 with a two-step mechanism invoked for the reaction. The first step involves the adsorption of one H onto the catalyst surface (Volmer step), followed by either the reaction of the adsorbed H with an H+ (Heyrovsky step) or another adsorbed H (Tafel step) (Table 3). Tafel plots have been widely employed to gain insight into the reaction mechanism. Like the OER, HER is also affected by pH, such that MOFs that are stable to acidic conditions are desired. The benchmark for all HER catalysts is Pt, where the onset potential for a bare Pt catalyst is −0.24 V vs. SCE.156 It is hoped that using MOFs could reduce current overpotentials to this level.
Table 3 The HER and its individual mechanism steps in acidic conditions156




Reaction
Equation

E (V vs. SHE)
Tafel slope (mV dec−1)




HER
4H+ + 4e− ⇌ 2H2 (g)
0.00




Volmer step
H+ + e− → Had


120


Heyrovsky step
H+ + Had → H2 (g)


40


Tafel step
2Had → H2 (g)


30




Only a couple of reports in the literature have emerged where HER results from the intrinsic catalytic activity of the MOF. In these cases, Co, Cu, Ni and Zn are the metals that are usually chosen as the nodes. The work of Gong et al. examined MOFs based upon 4-(5-(pyridin-4-yl)-4H-(1,2,4-triazol-3-yl) benzoic acid (pytriben) for synthesis of M2(pytriben)4·3H2O [M = Co, Cu, Zn].157 This work revealed that the Co and Cu analogues displayed electrochemical activity for HER, suggesting that the origin for the catalysis was the metal cluster. Samples were immobilised onto glassy carbon with Nafion as a binder. CVs of the electroactive frameworks were performed, where Co2(pytriben)4·3H2O exhibited a weak one-electron reduction at E1/2 = −0.90 V vs. SCE and a catalytic onset for H+ reduction at Epc = −1.30 V vs. SCE (overpotential = −0.66 V); in comparison, Cu2(pytriben)4·3H2O exhibited a weak one-electron reduction at E1/2 = −0.93 V vs. SCE with the catalytic onset of H+ reduction at −1.40 V vs. SCE (overpotential = −0.76 V). Water oxidation was also observed at +1.05 and +1.37 V vs. SCE (overpotential = +0.46 V, +0.78 V) for Co2(pytriben)4·3H2O and Cu2(pytriben)4·3H2O, respectively. While Tafel plots were provided to demonstrate lowered overpotentials in the presence of the MOF (compared with the blank glassy carbon and the organic linker), the mechanism of HER was not well explored. CPE was performed at Epc = −1.50 V vs. SCE for HER and +1.40 V vs. SCE for OER, where the catalyst for H2 and O2 were operating at 98% Faradaic efficiency. TONs of 1.92 and 1.29 (for H2), and 6.73 and 2.25 (for O2) were recorded for Co2(pytriben)4·3H2O and Cu2(pytriben)4·3H2O, respectively. The glassy carbon was characterised by PXRD after HER electrolysis, confirming that the structures of the MOFs had been retained, while the bulk electrolysis solution was examined using UV-vis-NIR, with no evidence for leaching of the metal centres. For OER, there was evidence for catalyst degradation, but this was not quantified. Given the improved electrocatalytic behaviour observed for the Co catalyst, the work was followed-up by further reports of two Co-based MOFs based on 4,5-di(4′-carboxylphenyl)phthalic acid (cppa), namely [Co4(cppa)(bpy)(H2O)·3.5H2O] and [Co2(cppa)(azene)(H2O)3·DMF] (azene = (E)-1,2-di(pyridin-4-yl)diazene), where similar catalytic ability from the metal centre was observed.158
Success for HER has also been demonstrated in a class of MOFs that incorporate polyoxometallates (POMs), which are well-known to possess good catalytic activity. POMs are soluble anionic metal oxide clusters of transition metals in high oxidation states (such as W(IV), Mo(V/VI) or V(IV,V) among others) that have previously been used as molecular electrocatalysts.159 Their solubility has enabled their incorporation into a number of MOFs, where the metal nodes acts as the SBUs in the MOF (defined as a POMOF).160 POMOFs are usually synthesised under acidic conditions, and are therefore functional with minimal degradation in acidic media and are highly redox-active.161 POMs may also be incorporated into MOFs through their encapsulation or anchoring to the MOF surface. These are referred to as POM-based MOF materials and are not examined in this article.162
Dolbecq and co-workers incorporated a Mo-based POM into a series of POMOFs and investigated their electrocatalytic activity towards the HER.163,164 In their initial studies, three novel POMOFs were generated hydrothermally consisting of [PMo(IV)8Mo(VI)4O36(OH)4Zn4] and btc ligands, with channels occupied by tetrabutylammonium counter cations (Fig. 4A).163 The electrodes were fabricated through the preparation of a carbon paste electrode containing the MOFs. CVs of these POMOFs demonstrated two Mo-reduction waves, corresponding to the reversible reduction of Mo(VI/IV).165 The electrodes could be recycled hundreds of times without significant alteration, while a number of electrodes were left in air for months and tested without any significant diminution of activity. Intercalation of Li+, Na+ and K+ into the POMOF was studied, where it was shown that HER was still observed, with the Li+ intercalation exhibiting the best activity. HER was detected at an onset potential of Epa = +0.20 V vs. SCE, which corresponds to a lowering in the overpotential by 260 mV compared with Pt itself, in Faradaic efficiencies above 95% and a TON as high as 1.2 × 105 over 5 h (TOF = 6.7 s−1, which exceeds the activity of the Pt metal benchmark in HER catalysis). The structural stability of the materials towards the electrochemical process was not discussed in detail, however a mechanism for HER was tentatively proposed. Later studies by this group focused on the effect of different organic linkers in the POMOF for HER, where it was revealed that HER catalysis depended primarily on the presence of the [PMo(IV)8Mo(VI)4O36(OH)4Zn4] SBU.164
 Fig. 4  A: POM building blocks of ε(trim)4/3, ε2(trim)2, and [ε(trim)]∞, a view of their unit cell, and their schematic representation; black lines indicate connections between POMs and trim linkers, while orange lines symbolize condensation reactions between POMs. B: Comparison of ε(trim)4/3, ε2(trim)2, and [ε(trim)]∞ at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, highlighting the catalytic process. The reference electrode was SCE. C: CVs observed for the oxidized form ε(trim)4/3/CPE as a function of potential scan rate in a (1 M LiCl + HCl (pH 1)) medium at scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from 163. 
Using the [PMo(IV)8Mo(VI)4O36(OH)4Zn4] POM, Zhou and co-workers reported the synthesis of two novel POMOFs containing benzene tribenzoate (btb) and 1,1′-biphenyl]-3,4′,5-tricarboxylate (bpt), which were found to exhibit good stability in both acidic and basic media.166 The POMOFs (50 wt%) were attached to a glassy carbon electrode in a mixture of carbon black (50 wt%). CVs for {[PMo(IV)8Mo(VI)4O36(OH)4Zn4](btb)} exhibited three redox processes at E1/2 = −0.091, +0.176 and +0.296 V vs. SCE while {[PMo(IV)8Mo(VI)4O36(OH)4Zn4](bpt)} showed three redox processes at E1/2 = −0.092, +0.177 and +0.288 V vs. SCE. Scan rate dependence studies revealed that the redox processes were surface controlled. Bulk electrolysis on {[PMo(IV)8Mo(VI)4O36(OH)4Zn4](btb)} confirmed its highest activity among all MOF materials reported to date for HER, with an onset potential of Epa = +0.18 V vs. SCE (overpotential = 237 mV). The activity of the composite was improved over that of carbon or the POMOF itself, suggesting that the carbon black aids in increasing the current density, while the POMOF lowers the overpotential. The Tafel analysis of both frameworks yielded a slope of 96 mV dec−1 for {[PMo(IV)8Mo(VI)4O36(OH)4Zn4](btb)} and 137 mV dec−1 for {[PMo(IV)8Mo(VI)4O36(OH)4Zn4](bpt)}, suggesting a good current exchange for HER. The POMOFs were also found to maintain their electrocatalytic activity after 2000 cycles. PXRD patterns were measured for both POMOFs after immersion of the as-synthesised material into an acidic solution for 6 h, where there was limited change, supporting the retention of structure of the MOFs under the electrocatalytic conditions.
From these initial findings on POMOFs, studies have sought to vary the identity of the POM to improve the catalytic behaviour of the framework by addition of electrocatalytically active metals. This includes the work on 1D chains containing unsaturated metal centres based on Cu8(Mo8O26)(atri)4 [atri = 4H-4-amino-1,2,4-triazole] and Ag4(Mo8O26)(dmatri) [dmatri = 3,5-dimethyl-4-amino-4H-1,2,4-triazole). Although these materials are not technically MOFs,48 the results of this study are pertinent to the discussion.161 The surfaces were fabricated by dispersing the MOF in Nafion and adhering it to a glassy carbon surface. Both the Cu and Ag based chains exhibited improved H2 generation, with the Cu chain possessing higher activity than its Ag counterpart. As a specific example, the electrocatalytic behaviour of Cu8(Mo8O26)(atri)4 was examined using CV, where the onset potential for HER was −0.67 V vs. Ag/AgCl (overpotential = −0.53 V) and was accompanied by an increase in the current density. CPE at −0.8 V vs. Ag/AgCl revealed a linear build-up of charge over time, with a Faradaic efficiency of 98% for the production of H2 and a TON of 2.6 × 103 over 2 h.
4. Other types of catalysis
Catalysis in MOFs is not only limited to the aforementioned classes discussed here, and a number of other industrially relevant processes where electrocatalytically active MOFs may be relevant have been reported. A particular driving force has been the need to improve the viability of alternative fuel supplies, such as water and direct alcohol fuel cells, and to find a way to efficiently remove potentially harmful pollutants from the atmosphere. In many cases, Pt, Pd and Ru catalysts play central roles in current technologies, however these metals are expensive, and are increasingly becoming scare. A serious need therefore exists for alternative materials, such as MOFs, to function in these processes.
The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is an important process that has gained particular attention for possible applications in fuel cells. The limitation that exists for a large scale reaction in the current environment is that Pt-based catalysts have been essential in improving upon the slow kinetics associated with the reaction.167 The expense associated with Pt group metals has seen developments in using metal oxides and carbon-based non-noble and metal free catalysts; however, there is still a significant way to go before these materials will become competitive with the noble-metal candidates in the literature. There has been increased attention on the use of MOFs for electrocatalysis, offering potential as a more economical alternative to improve upon the slow rates of reaction and limited activity of the four electron reduction reaction which is thermodynamically and kinetically challenging.167 The use of MOFs as a class of low-platinum catalysts for the reaction has already been extensively examined in previous reviews.54,74,167–169
MOFs have also been used as candidates for a number of other electrocatalysis reactions (Table 4). In particular, a number of these simpler catalysis reactions and the attachment of the MOFs examined onto surfaces has allowed for studies into the differences between heterogeneous MOF catalysis and homogeneous catalysis, paving the way for improved mechanistic studies for catalytically-active MOFs. Morris and co-workers reported the direct growth of a Co porphyrin Co(tcpp) onto FTO substrates for the purpose of reducing CCl4.170 An increase in the current density was observed in the framework using CV, while spectroelectrochemical measurements throughout the catalysis indicated that there were limited changes in the framework. Long term CPE measurements were also performed, where no significant short term deterioration of the film was observed (through SEM analysis), and no additional absorption features were apparent in measurements of the electrochemical solution. A slow deterioration of the Co SBU cluster and release of the Co(tcpp) was proposed in the longer term. Although the quantification of CCl4 reduction was not pursued, the immobilisation of the framework onto the FTO surface allowed for conductivity measurements to be performed, which showed that despite the framework being insulating in nature, charge transfer occurred through a hopping mechanism (Fig. 5).
Table 4 Examples of electrocatalysis that has been performed using MOFs and the method of surface attachment employed for its quantification




Type of catalysis
MOF used
Surface attachment method
Ref.






H

2

dtoa = dithiooxamide, maa = mercaptoacetic acid, btc = 1,3,5-benzenetricaboxylic acid, ta = trimesic acid, bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine, 4-ptz 5-(4-pyridyl)tetrazole, bpp = 1,3-bi(4-pyridyl)propane, adp = adipic acid, bib = 1,4-bisimidazolebenzene, H4tcpp = meso-tetra(4-carboxyphenylporphyrin piv = 2,2-dimethylpropanoic acid pca = 4-pyridinecarboxylic acid pcb = 2-pyridinecarbaldehyde, tcpp = 5,10,15,20-(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin, bptz = 3,6-(4-pyridyl)-1,2,4,5-tetrazine, bptztz = 2,5-di-(4-pyridyl)-thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole, btb = 1,3,5-tris-(4-carboxyphenyl)-benzene.





Alcohol oxidation
(HOC2H4)2(dtoa)Cu
Mechanical immobilisation with Nafion

171, 172





(maa)Cu3(btc)2
Self assembled monolayers on gold

173



(ta)Cu3(btc)2




Cu2(bpy)2(btc)
Mechanical immobilisation

174



Hydrazine oxidation and nitrobenzene reduction
Co2(4-ptz)2(bpp)(N3)2
Dip coating

175



Nitrite oxidation
MOF-525
Direct crystallisation onto FTO

176



Peroxide oxidation
[Cu(adp)(bib)(H2O)]n
Drop casting onto glassy carbon

177



Dopamine oxidation and nitrobenzene reduction
MIL-101
Immobilised in a carbon paste electrode

178



Halide reduction
Co(tcpp)
Solvothermal deposition

170





Fe2NiO(piv)6(bptz)x
Mechanical immobilisation

179



Fe2NiO(piv)6(bptztz)x




[TBA]6[H3PMo12O40]2[Zn8(btb)2]
Immobilised in a carbon paste electrode

180





 Fig. 5  A schematic attachment of the Co(tcpp) MOF onto a FTO and its proposed charge hopping mechanism. Reproduced with permission from 170. 
The theoretical mechanism for the electrochemical oxidation of ethanol by (HOC2H4)2(dtoa)Cu was proposed and experimentally confirmed by Kitagawa and co-workers.171 Analogues of the MOFs R2(dtoa)(Cu) [R = HOC3H6, C2H5, C3H7, CH3, H] were also examined and related to the theoretical results. The MOFs were immobilised onto the surface as mixture with Nafion. The proton transfer reaction for the oxidation was first considered using DFT, where it was determined that the proton was transferred from the ethanol to the HOC2H4, which was energetically more favourable than an indirect transfer. To confirm this, ethanol sorption isotherms were employed to observe changes in the hysteresis of the ethanol, where a shorter hydroxyl chain on the SBU yielded a smaller hysteresis, suggesting a lower adsorption energy. The increase in the current density and change in peak shape in the CV of the MOF upon the titration of ethanol revealed that electrooxidation of ethanol was occurring. CPE experiments were subsequently performed on the MOFs, where only acetaldehyde was detected in Faradaic efficiencies of 4.6% for (HOC3H6)2(dtoa)Cu and 6.8% for (HOC2H4)2(dtoa)Cu, confirming that the mechanism proceeds via a direct protonation. Although electroxidation reaction activity was reported for (C2H5)2(dtoa)Cu, no Faradaic efficiency was determined. Despite the mechanism of reduction being examined in the MOF, and supported by DFT calculations, experimental data on the structural stability of the MOF following catalysis and the mechanism were not reported.
Surface attachment has largely been considered as a viable option for improving the stability of MOFs in aqueous solution. Vulcu et al. examined the tethering of Cu3(btc)2 to a gold surface using mercaptoacetic acid and trimesic acid to gold surfaces.173 When not attached to a surface, Cu3(btc)2 was found to retain its structure with water present up to 0.5 mol of the copper content of the framework.181 Additional water would result in the decomposition of the MOF, which has negative ramifications for electrocatalysis in aqueous media. The surface was prepared through anodisation of the gold, prior to the generation of a self-assembled monolayer of mercaptoacetic or trimesic acid, and immersion of the gold in a solution of the framework to allow for crystallisation of Cu3(btc)2. Not only did this allow for the selective orientation of the MOF along the [111] axis, but also a significant enhancement in the current density of the anchored MOF was observed in the presence of methanol, suggesting that surface anchoring improves the electrochemical response of Cu3(btc)2. These results were compared to the bare gold electrode, the self-assembled monolayer and the deposited MOF on the surface in H2SO4, suggesting that the catalytic ability arises from a combination the MOF and the methanol. When the MOF was drop cast onto glassy carbon, no activity was reported for the MOF, suggesting that immobilisation onto a surface is essential for activity to be achieved. The stability of the electrodes was examined through chronoamperometry, suggesting that there was degradation of the surface after approximately 20 min.
5. Conclusions and perspectives
As is evident from the examples described above, there is an excellent opportunity to exploit redox-activity of MOFs for use as electrocatalysts.34 Significant progress has already been made to identify key structural features of MOFs that make them suitable for catalysis, upon which further improvements will no doubt be forthcoming. One of the greatest challenges that currently exists is the long term stability of the frameworks. If the MOF degrades upon catalysis, the discrete complexes responsible for catalysis may be released into solution as homogeneous catalysts, making the elucidation of mechanism difficult. Currently, a significant amount of literature exists concerning the use of pyrolysis of MOF precursors as a platform for generating catalytically active species, as well as the controlled decomposition of frameworks to catalytic oxides.75,182–184 As a result, there has been an increase in studies to improve the structural integrity of MOFs. One such pathway has been the design of MOFs with increased stability in aqueous media, particularly at acidic and basic pH levels. There is also scope to explore MOF hybrids to improve the integrity of frameworks while maintaining their tunability. Studies into MOF/polymer (polyMOFs)185,186 and MOF/carbon composites are currently underway to develop and exploit synergistic properties which may enhance the catalytic performance, as has already been observed.166
The selectivity for generating desirable electrocatalytic products is also a key concern. In the context of CO2 reduction for example, it was observed that metals such as Cu would yield many different hydrocarbon products.100–102 Likewise, H2 production often competes with electrocatalysis, since it is generated at lower overpotentials than other carbon based fuels.
A further key issue that underlies electrocatalytic performance is the intrinsic electronic conductivity of the MOF, which facilitates charge propagation.34 As noted above, some studies have sought to improve conductivity of insulating and semi-conducing MOFs by immobilising them in a conductive matrix such as carbon black or Nafion. An alternative strategy lies in improving the intrinsic conductivity of the MOF, and significant recent strides have been made in this area, though more specifically within the context of electronic devices for applications such as chemisensors.187–189
Although significant advances have been made in methods for the attachment of frameworks to surfaces, a number of the challenges remain to be overcome. To date, the majority of methods have involved the addition of a conductive binder, such as Nafion, which has previously been shown to diminish the electrocatalytic performance of a MOF due to the different kinetics of charge transfer. Likewise, during catalysis, if there is no strong anchoring, the MOF may detach from the surface, affecting the calculation of reliable Faradaic efficiencies, TONs and TOFs. Moreover, insight into the mechanism of electrocatalytic processes, which are relatively poorly understood at the present time, is significantly convoluted if detachment or dissolution occurs during the process. Computational modelling studies will offer important insights, as they have for homogeneous systems, with the additional complication of addressing the infinite periodic structure of the MOF. Nevertheless, progress is being made in this area, which will lead to improved understandings of how heterogeneous processes differ from their homogeneous counterparts.
A number of additional areas will help propel the field of electrocatalytic MOFs forward, including the scope to explore the deliberate incorporation of defects into MOFs. Defect sites can assist in improving surface attachment techniques such as EPD, and can themselves act as the active sites for electrocatalysis. Designing oriented films may also improve the selectivity for desired products. Finally, new and interesting high throughput techniques for surface attachment, such printing MOF inks onto electrodes are being explored, and offer alternate avenues to achieve surface adhesion of MOFs.190
While a number of challenges remain to be addressed, this perspective article has sought to highlight the significant opportunities that exist for electrocatalytic MOFs, and the key areas which are deserving of future research efforts.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Australian Research Council and the Science and Industry Endowment Fund (SIEF) as part of the ‘Solving the Energy Waste Roadblock’ venture. We gratefully acknowledge Dr Danielle Kennedy at the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organisation (CSIRO) for her support in the provision of an OCE PhD top-up scholarship for MBS. We are also grateful to Dr Charles Machan from The University of Virginia for his helpful comments on an initial version of the section on CO2 electrocatalysis.
References
R. Carapellucci, L. Giordano and M. Vaccarelli, Energy Procedia, 2015, 82, 350–357 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wennersten, Q. Sun and H. Li, J. Cleaner Prod., 2015, 103, 724–736 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Olah, G. K. S. Prakash and A. Goeppert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12881–12898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. D'Alessandro, B. Smit and J. R. Long, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6058–6082 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-R. Li, Y. Ma, M. C. McCarthy, J. Sculley, J. Yu, H.-K. Jeong, P. B. Balbuena and H.-C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2011, 255, 1791–1823 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Rubin, J. E. Davison and H. J. Herzog, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2015, 40, 378–400 CrossRef CAS .
R. Barker, Y. Hua and A. Neville, Int. Mater. Rev., 2016, 1–31,  DOI:10.1080/09506608.2016.1176306 .
J. Liu, P. K. Thallapally, B. P. McGrail, D. R. Brown and J. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2308–2322 RSC .
J.-R. Li, R. J. Kuppler and H.-C. Zhou, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1477–1504 RSC .
J. O. M. Bockris, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2002, 27, 731–740 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schmid, J. S. Dordick, B. Hauer, A. Kiener, M. Wubbolts and B. Witholt, Nature, 2001, 409, 258–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Fürstner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 8587–8598 CrossRef PubMed .
M. C. Holland and R. Gilmour, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3862–3871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kaufhold, L. Petermann, R. Staehle and S. Rau, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 304–305, 73–87 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Wang, Analytical Electrochemistry, John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey,  2006 Search PubMed .
I. R. Shaikh, J. Catal., 2014, 2014, 35 Search PubMed .
S. C. Roy, O. K. Varghese, M. Paulose and C. A. Grimes, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1259–1278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hawecker, J.-M. Lehn and R. Ziessel, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1984, 328–330 RSC .
J. Albo, M. Alvarez-Guerra, P. Castano and A. Irabien, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2304–2324 RSC .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .
Y. Li and Q. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600463,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201600463 .
C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Saveant, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2423–2436 RSC .
J. R. McKone, S. C. Marinescu, B. S. Brunschwig, J. R. Winkler and H. B. Gray, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 865–878 RSC .
M. T. M. Koper and E. Bouwman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3723–3725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, L. Chen and L. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6763–6778 CAS .
V. S. Thoi, Y. Sun, J. R. Long and C. J. Chang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2388–2400 RSC .
G. A. N. Felton, C. A. Mebi, B. J. Petro, A. K. Vannucci, D. H. Evans, R. S. Glass and D. L. Lichtenberger, J. Organomet. Chem., 2009, 694, 2681–2699 CrossRef CAS .
T. Reier, H. N. Nong, D. Teschner, R. Schlögl and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1601275,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201601275 .
D. J. Wasylenko, R. D. Palmer and C. P. Berlinguette, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 218–227 RSC .
J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss, M. K. Brennaman, P. G. Hoertz, A. O. T. Patrocinio, N. Y. Murakami Iha, J. L. Templeton and T. J. Meyer, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1954–1965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wendt, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1513–1525 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Gogate, Chem. Eng. Commun., 2017, 204, 1–27 CrossRef CAS .
G. Pliego, J. A. Zazo, P. Garcia-Muñoz, M. Munoz, J. A. Casas and J. J. Rodriguez, Crit. Rev. Environ. Control, 2015, 45, 2611–2692 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. D'Alessandro, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 8957–8971 RSC .
E. Roduner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8226–8239 RSC .
Z. Chen, J. J. Concepcion, J. W. Jurss and T. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15580–15581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Lieber and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 5033–5034 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yoshida, K. Tsutsumida, S. Teratani, K. Yasufuku and M. Kaneko, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1993, 631–633,  10.1039/C39930000631 .
C. Zhang, J. Tang, C. Peng and M. Jin, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 221, 1145–1150 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Vang, E. Laegsgaard and F. Besenbacher, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 3460–3469 RSC .
G. A. Somorjai, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 3176–3182 CrossRef CAS .
J. Desilvestro and S. Pons, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1989, 267, 207–220 CrossRef CAS .
F. P. A. Johnson, M. W. George, F. Hartl and J. J. Turner, Organometallics, 1996, 15, 3374–3387 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Kauffman, D. Alfonso, C. Matranga, H. Qian and R. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10237–10243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. K. Ramesha, J. F. Brennecke and P. V. Kamat, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3249–3254 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Stor, F. Hartl, J. W. M. van Outersterp and D. J. Stufkens, Organometallics, 1995, 14, 1115–1131 CrossRef CAS .
S. Berger, A. Klein, W. Kaim and J. Fiedler, Inorg. Chem., 1998, 37, 5664–5671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Batten, N. R. Champness, X.-M. Chen, J. Garcia-Martinez, S. Kitagawa, L. Öhrström, M. O’Keeffe, M. Paik Suh and J. Reedijk, Pure Appl. Chem., 2013, 85, 1715 CrossRef CAS .
B. F. Hoskins and R. Robson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1989, 111, 5962–5964 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schneemann, S. Henke, I. Schwedler and R. A. Fischer, ChemPhysChem, 2014, 15, 823–839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Eddaoudi, J. Kim, N. Rosi, D. Vodak, J. Wachter, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2002, 295, 469–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Freyschlag and R. J. Madix, Mater. Today, 2011, 14, 134–142 CrossRef CAS .
R. Robson, J. Chem. Soc., Dalton Trans., 2000, 3735–3744,  10.1039/B003591M .
W. Xia, A. Mahmood, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1837–1866 CAS .
X.-F. Lu, P.-Q. Liao, J.-W. Wang, J.-X. Wu, X.-W. Chen, C.-T. He, J.-P. Zhang, G.-R. Li and X.-M. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 8336–8339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Vaddipalli, S. R. Sanivarapu, S. Vengatesan, J. B. Lawrence, M. Eashwar and G. Sreedhar, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23049–23059 CAS .
A.-Y. Lu, X. Yang, C.-C. Tseng, S. Min, S.-H. Lin, C.-L. Hsu, H. Li, H. Idriss, J.-L. Kuo, K.-W. Huang and L.-J. Li, Small, 2016, 12, 5530–5537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Hu and S. Dong, J. Mater. Chem., 2008, 18, 1279–1295 RSC .
C. Jin, J. Zhu, R. Dong, Z. Chen and Q. Huo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 16851–16857 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Li, P. Guo, H. Ma and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8497–8511 CAS .
T. N. Pham-Truong, F. Lafolet, J. Ghilane and H. Randriamahazaka, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 70, 13–17 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Gladysheva, B. I. Podlovchenko, D. S. Volkov and A. Y. Filatov, Mendeleev Commun., 2016, 26, 298–300 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu and M. Shao, J. Solid State Chem., 2016, 20, 861–873 CAS .
J. Xiao, Q. Kuang, S. Yang, F. Xiao, S. Wang and L. Guo, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2300 Search PubMed .
S. Oh, J. R. Gallagher, J. T. Miller and Y. Surendranath, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1820–1823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hod, W. Bury, D. M. Karlin, P. Deria, C. W. Kung, M. J. Katz, M. So, B. Klahr, D. Jin, Y. W. Chung, T. W. Odom, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6295–6300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, N. Kornienko, Z. Liu, C. Zhu, S. Asahina, T.-R. Kuo, W. Bao, C. Xie, A. Hexemer, O. Terasaki, P. Yang and O. M. Yaghi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2199–2202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Homayoonnia and S. Zeinali, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 237, 776–786 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hermes, F. Schröder, R. Chelmowski, C. Wöll and R. A. Fischer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13744–13745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mohaghegh, M. Tasviri, E. Rahimi and M. R. Gholami, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 351, 216–224 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Z. Xie, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, S. Zhang, L. Xu, J. Wang, L.-X. Shi, Z.-N. Chen, M. Hong and J. Luo, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3808–3813 RSC .
W. Liang, T. L. Church, S. Zheng, C. Zhou, B. S. Haynes and D. M. D'Alessandro, Chem. – Eur. J., 2015, 21, 18576–18579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahmood, W. Guo, H. Tabassum and R. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 16000423,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201600423 .
S. Ma, G. A. Goenaga, A. V. Call and D. J. Liu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 2063–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. English, M. M. El-Hendawy, D. A. Mooney and J. M. D. MacElroy, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 269, 85–95 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ogura, H. Sugihara, J. Yano and M. Higasa, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 419–424 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Lu, J. Rosen, Y. Zhou, G. S. Hutchings, Y. C. Kimmel, J. G. Chen and F. Jiao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3242 Search PubMed .
B. Kumar, J. P. Brian, V. Atla, S. Kumari, K. A. Bertram, R. T. White and J. M. Spurgeon, Catal. Today, 2016, 270, 19–30 CrossRef CAS .
C. Amatore and J. M. Saveant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 5021–5023 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schrebler, P. Cury, F. Herrera, H. Gómez and R. Córdova, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 516, 23–30 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1986–1989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Fischer and H. Tropsch, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges., 1927, 60, 1330–1334 CrossRef .
A. Schönweiz, J. Debuschewitz, S. Walter, R. Wölfel, H. Hahn, K. M. Dyballa, R. Franke, M. Haumann and P. Wasserscheid, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 2955–2963 CrossRef .
G. Hayward and S. Baksa, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 1708–1714 RSC .
I. C. Um and Y. H. Park, Fibers Polym., 2007, 8, 579–585 CrossRef CAS .
K. W. Frese, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 3338–3344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, R. Takahashi, Y. Yoshinami and A. Murata, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7075–7081 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee and Y. Tak, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3015–3022 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gattrell, N. Gupta and A. Co, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 594, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
X. Nie, M. R. Esopi, M. J. Janik and A. Asthagiri, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2459–2462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7231–7234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Le, M. Ren, Z. Zhang, P. T. Sprunger, R. L. Kurtz and J. C. Flake, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, E45–E49 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hinogami, S. Yotsuhashi, M. Deguchi, Y. Zenitani, H. Hashiba and Y. Yamada, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2012, 1, H17–H19 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Kumar, S. S. Kumar and M. A. Kulandainathan, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 25, 70–73 CrossRef .
J. Albo, D. Vallejo, G. Beobide, O. Castillo, P. Castaño and A. Irabien, ChemSusChem, 2016 DOI:10.1002/cssc.201600693 .
J. Albo and A. Irabien, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 232–239 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, H. Wang, J. Chen, Z. Wang, J. Sun, D. Zhao and Y. Yan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2003, 58, 105–114 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ren, Y. Deng, A. D. Handoko, C. S. Chen, S. Malkhandi and B. S. Yeo, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 2814–2821 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshio, K. Katsuhei, M. Akira and S. Shin, Chem. Lett., 1986, 15, 897–898 CrossRef .
D. W. DeWulf, T. Jin and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 1686–1691 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, A. Tsuneto, A. Kudo and T. Sakata, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, 2097–2103 CrossRef CAS .
E. A. Mohamed, Z. N. Zahran and Y. Naruta, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 16900–16903 RSC .
D. Quezada, J. Honores, M. Garcia, F. Armijo and M. Isaacs, New J. Chem., 2014, 38, 3606–3612 RSC .
J. Choi, T. M. Benedetti, R. Jalili, A. Walker, G. G. Wallace and D. L. Officer, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 14158–14161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mondal, A. Rana, P. Sen and A. Dey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11214–11217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Ambre, Q. Daniel, T. Fan, H. Chen, B. Zhang, L. Wang, M. S. G. Ahlquist, L. Duan and L. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 14478–14481 RSC .
J. E. Pander, A. Fogg and A. B. Bocarsly, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 3536–3545 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, C. S. Diercks, Y. B. Zhang, N. Kornienko, E. M. Nichols, Y. Zhao, A. R. Paris, D. Kim, P. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and C. J. Chang, Science, 2015, 349, 1208–1213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Kornienko, Y. Zhao, C. S. Kley, C. Zhu, D. Kim, S. Lin, C. J. Chang, O. M. Yaghi and P. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14129–14135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Drygała, L. A. Dobrzański, M. Szindler, M. M. Szindler, M. Prokopiuk vel Prokopowicz and E. Jonda, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 7563–7567 CrossRef .
C. G. Carvajal, S. Rout, R. Mundle and A. K. Pradhan, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 11–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hod, M. D. Sampson, P. Deria, C. P. Kubiak, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6302–6309 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bonin, M. Robert and M. Routier, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16768–16771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Costentin, S. Drouet, G. Passard, M. Robert and J.-M. Savéant, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 9023–9031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Machan, M. D. Sampson, S. A. Chabolla, T. Dang and C. P. Kubiak, Organometallics, 2014, 33, 4550–4559 CrossRef CAS .
C. Riplinger and E. A. Carter, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 900–908 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Machan and C. P. Kubiak, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 15942–15950,  10.1039/C6DT01956K .
C. Riplinger, M. D. Sampson, A. M. Ritzmann, C. P. Kubiak and E. A. Carter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16285–16298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Smieja and C. P. Kubiak, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 9283–9289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, J. X. Liu, Y. Gao, C. H. Gong, M. Addicoat, T. Heine, C. Woll and L. C. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15320–15326 CAS .
M. C. So, S. Jin, H.-J. Son, G. P. Wiederrecht, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15698–15701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, J. Liu, R. A. Fischer and C. Woll, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1081–1106 RSC .
X. Kang, Q. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Hu, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and B. Han, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 266–273 RSC .
B. M. Hunter, H. B. Gray and A. M. Müller, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14120–14136 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Merki and X. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3878–3888 CAS .
S. Neudeck, S. Maji, I. López, S. Meyer, F. Meyer and A. Llobet, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 24–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Tsuji, A. Imanishi, K.-I. Fukui and Y. Nakato, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 2009–2016 CrossRef CAS .
R. Lalrempuia, N. D. McDaniel, H. Müller-Bunz, S. Bernhard and M. Albrecht, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9765–9768 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Sheehan, J. M. Thomsen, U. Hintermair, R. H. Crabtree, G. W. Brudvig and C. A. Schmuttenmaer, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mills, Chem. Soc. Rev., 1989, 18, 285–316 RSC .
J. L. Fillol, Z. Codolà, I. Garcia-Bosch, L. Gómez, J. J. Pla and M. Costas, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 807–813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, Y. Wu, W. Lai and R. Cao, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 5604–5613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Barnett, K. I. Goldberg and J. M. Mayer, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 498–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Evangelisti, R. Güttinger, R. Moré, S. Luber and G. R. Patzke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18734–18737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Al-Mamun, Y. Wang, P. Liu, Y. L. Zhong, H. Yin, X. Su, H. Zhang, H. Yang, D. Wang, Z. Tang and H. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 18314–18321 CAS .
S. Pintado, S. Goberna-Ferrón, E. C. Escudero-Adán and J. R. Galán-Mascarós, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13270–13273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rossmeisl, Z. W. Qu, H. Zhu, G. J. Kroes and J. K. Nørskov, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 607, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shinagawa, A. T. Garcia-Esparza and K. Takanabe, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13801 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Low, A. I. Benin, P. Jakubczak, J. F. Abrahamian, S. A. Faheem and R. R. Willis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15834–15842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, H.-F. Shi, Z. Hao, J.-L. Sun and J.-H. Lin, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 12252–12259 RSC .
M. W. Kanan, Y. Surendranath and D. G. Nocera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 109–114 RSC .
M. W. Kanan and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2008, 321, 1072–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Gerken, J. G. McAlpin, J. Y. C. Chen, M. L. Rigsby, W. H. Casey, R. D. Britt and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 14431–14442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen and A. Selloni, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2808–2814 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 1841–1844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Park, Z. Ni, A. P. Côté, J. Y. Choi, R. Huang, F. J. Uribe-Romo, H. K. Chae, M. O’Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 10186–10191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Hou, S. Lin and X. Wang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9930–9934 RSC .
F. Dai, W. Fan, J. Bi, P. Jiang, D. Liu, X. Zhang, H. Lin, C. Gong, R. Wang, L. Zhang and D. Sun, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 61–65 RSC .
P. M. Usov, S. R. Ahrenholtz, W. A. Maza, B. Stratakes, C. C. Epley, M. C. Kessinger, J. Zhu and A. J. Morris, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16818–16823 CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Wu, R. Cao, L. Ren, M. Chen, X. Feng, J. Zhou and B. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16736–16743 CAS .
K. F. Babu, M. A. Kulandainathan, I. Katsounaros, L. Rassaei, A. D. Burrows, P. R. Raithby and F. Marken, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 632–635 CrossRef CAS .
D. Strmcnik, P. P. Lopes, B. Genorio, V. R. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Nano Energy, 2016, 29, 29–36 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, W. Lai and R. Cao, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 3717–3797,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemrev.6b00299 .
P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 951–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fletcher, J. Solid State Chem., 2009, 13, 537–549 CAS .
Y. Gong, H.-F. Shi, P.-G. Jiang, W. Hua and J.-H. Lin, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 649–657 CAS .
Y. Gong, Z. Hao, J. Meng, H. Shi, P. Jiang, M. Zhang and J. Lin, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 266–277 CrossRef CAS .
B. Keita and L. Nadjo, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 262, 190–215 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, S. Li, G. Zhang, A. Dolbecq, P. Mialane and B. Keita, J. Cluster Sci., 2014, 25, 711–740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, T. Wu, P. G. Jiang, J. H. Lin and Y. X. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 777–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-Y. Du, J.-S. Qin, S.-L. Li, Z.-M. Su and Y.-Q. Lan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 4615–4632 RSC .
B. Nohra, H. El Moll, L. M. Rodriguez Albelo, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, C. Mellot-Draznieks, M. O’Keeffe, R. Ngo Biboum, J. Lemaire, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13363–13374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Rousseau, L. M. Rodriguez-Albelo, W. Salomon, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, F. Doungmene, I.-M. Mbomekallé, P. de Oliveira and A. Dolbecq, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 15, 449–456 CAS .
L. Marleny Rodriguez-Albelo, A. R. Ruiz-Salvador, A. Sampieri, D. W. Lewis, A. Gómez, B. Nohra, P. Mialane, J. Marrot, F. Sécheresse, C. Mellot-Draznieks, R. Ngo Biboum, B. Keita, L. Nadjo and A. Dolbecq, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16078–16087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Qin, D.-Y. Du, W. Guan, X.-J. Bo, Y.-F. Li, L.-P. Guo, Z.-M. Su, Y.-Y. Wang, Y.-Q. Lan and H.-C. Zhou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 7169–7177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J.-P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-B. Huang, J. Liang, X.-S. Wang and R. Cao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 126–157,  10.1039/C6CS00250A .
H. Zhang, H. Osgood, X. Xie, Y. Shao and G. Wu, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 331–350 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Ahrenholtz, C. C. Epley and A. J. Morris, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2464–2472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ishimoto, T. Ogura, M. Koyama, L. Yang, S. Kinoshita, T. Yamada, M. Tokunaga and H. Kitagawa, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 10607–10614 CAS .
L. Yang, S. Kinoshita, T. Yamada, S. Kanda, H. Kitagawa, M. Tokunaga, T. Ishimoto, T. Ogura, R. Nagumo, A. Miyamoto and M. Koyama, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 5348–5351 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vulcu, L. Olenic, G. Blanita and C. Berghian-Grosan, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 630–637 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jia, Y. Gao, W. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Cao, C. Li and J. Liu, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 34, 211–214 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Bo, A. Nsabimana, C. Han, M. Li and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 732–738 CAS .
C.-W. Kung, T.-H. Chang, L.-Y. Chou, J. T. Hupp, O. K. Farha and K.-C. Ho, Electrochem. Commun., 2015, 58, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, M. Wang, L. Liu, X. Yang and X. Xu, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 33, 131–134 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, C. Huangfu, H. Du, W. Liu, Y. Li and J. Ye, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2013, 709, 65–69 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Lytvynenko, R. A. Polunin, M. A. Kiskin, A. M. Mishura, V. E. Titov, S. V. Kolotilov, V. M. Novotortsev and I. L. Eremenko, Theor. Exp. Chem., 2015, 51, 54–61 CrossRef CAS .
B.-X. Dong, L. Chen, S.-Y. Zhang, J. Ge, L. Song, H. Tian, Y.-L. Teng and W.-L. Liu, Dalton Trans., 2015, 44, 1435–1440 RSC .
N. C. Burtch, H. Jasuja and K. S. Walton, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 10575–10612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Afsahi and S. Kaliaguine, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12270–12279 CAS .
B. Volosskiy, H. Fei, Z. Zhao, S. Lee, M. Li, Z. Lin, B. Papandrea, C. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26769–26774 CAS .
P. M. Usov, C. McDonnell-Worth, F. Zhou, D. R. MacFarlane and D. M. D’Alessandro, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 153, 433–438 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, H. T. H. Nguyen, S. A. Miller, A. M. Ploskonka, J. B. DeCoste and S. M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 920–925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, H. T. H. Nguyen, S. A. Miller and S. M. Cohen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6152–6157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, M. G. Campbell and M. Dincă, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3566–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. Leong, P. M. Usov and D. M. D’Alessandro, MRS Bull., 2016, 41, 858–864 CrossRef .
D. M. D'Alessandro, J. R. R. Kanga and J. S. Caddy, Aust. J. Chem., 2011, 64, 718–722 CrossRef .
C. H. Su, C. W. Kung, T. H. Chang, H. C. Lu, K. C. Ho and Y. C. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 11094–11102 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

CO2 (g) + 4H+ + 4e− → C (s) + 2H2O (l)	+0.210
CO2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 4e− → C (s) + 4OH−	−0.627
CO2 (g) + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH (l)	−0.250
CO2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 2e− → HCOO− (aq) + OH−	−1.078
CO2 (g) + 2H+ + 2e− → CO (g) + H2O (l)	−0.106
CO2 (g) + 2H2O (l) + 2e− → CO− (g) + 2OH−	−0.934
CO2 (g) + 4H++ 4e− → CH2O (l) + 4OH−	−0.898
CO2 (g) + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH (l) + H2O−	+0.016
CO2 (g) + 5H2O (l) + 6e− → CH3OH (l) + 6OH−	−0.812
CO2 (g) + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 (g) + H2O (l)	+0.169
CO2 (g) + 6H2O (l) + 8e− → CH4 (g) + 8OH−	−0.659
2CO2 (g) + 2H+ + 2e− → H2C2O4 (aq)	−0.500
2CO2 + 2e− → 2CO2˙− → C2O42− (aq)	−0.590
2CO2 (g) + 12H+ + 12e− → CH2CH2 (g) + 4H2O (l)	+0.064
2CO2 (g) + 8H2O (l) + 12e− → CH2CH2 (g) + 12OH− (l)	−0.764
2CO2 (g) + 12H+ + 12e− → CH3CH2OH (l) + 3H2O (l)	+0.084
2CO2 (g) + 9H2O (l) + 12e− → CH3CH2OH (l) + 12OH−	−0.240
2H+ + 2e− → H2 (g)	+0.000

 	Fig. 1  A: The organic building units in the form of cobalt-metalated tcpp are assembled into a 3D MOF, Al2(OH)2 (tcpp-Co). Co: orange spheres; O, red spheres; C, black spheres; N, blue spheres; Al, light-blue octahedra; and pyrrole ring, blue. Each porphyrin is bound to the aluminium organic backbone. B: A schematic of the MOF integrated with a conductive substrate to achieve a functional CO2 electrochemical reduction system. C: CV of the MOF catalyst exhibiting a current increase in a CO2 environment relative to an argon-saturated environment. D: The selectivity of CO2 over H2 at different potentials, reaching Faradaic efficiencies of up to 76% for CO. E: The Tafel plot for the MOF, with a Tafel slope implying that the one-electron reduction from CO2 to CO2˙− is the rate limiting step. Adapted with permission from 110.	 

 	Fig. 2  A: The proposed ideal atomic structure of Re-SURMOF B: CV of Re-SURMOF in saturated electrolyte at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1; C: Faradaic efficiency of Re-SURMOF and Re-linker (0.5 mM) catalysed CO2 reduction as a function of applied potential. The electrolyte was saturated with CO2 or N2. Adapted with permission from 121.	 

2H2O (l) ⇌ O2 (g) + 4H+ + 4e−	−1.23	


	
	M + OH− ⇌ MOH

	
	MOH + OH− ⇌ MO + H2O + e−

	
	MO + OH− ⇌ MOOH + e−

	
	MOOH + OH− ⇌ MOO− + H2O

	
	MOO− + OH− ⇌ M + O2 + e−

 	Fig. 3  A: PCN-224 structure with the Ni(II)-to-Ni(II) distance illustrated. Hydrogen atoms have been omitted for clarity. Carbon: grey; oxygen, red; nitrogen, blue; nickel, green; zirconium, light blue B: CV of PCN-224-Ni in 0.1 M TBAPF6/CH3CN (black) with increasing H2O concentrations C: SEM image of solvothermally prepared PCN-224-Ni on FTO showing a film thickness of ca. 30 μm D: proposed mechanism for the electrochemical water oxidation reaction catalysed by PCN-224-Ni. Some carboxylate groups have been omitted from the Zr node for clarity. Adapted with permission from 150.	 

HER	4H+ + 4e− ⇌ 2H2 (g)	0.00	

Volmer step	H+ + e− → Had	
	120
Heyrovsky step	H+ + Had → H2 (g)	
	40
Tafel step	2Had → H2 (g)	
	30

 	Fig. 4  A: POM building blocks of ε(trim)4/3, ε2(trim)2, and [ε(trim)]∞, a view of their unit cell, and their schematic representation; black lines indicate connections between POMs and trim linkers, while orange lines symbolize condensation reactions between POMs. B: Comparison of ε(trim)4/3, ε2(trim)2, and [ε(trim)]∞ at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, highlighting the catalytic process. The reference electrode was SCE. C: CVs observed for the oxidized form ε(trim)4/3/CPE as a function of potential scan rate in a (1 M LiCl + HCl (pH 1)) medium at scan rate of 2 mV s−1. Adapted with permission from 163.	 


Alcohol oxidation	(HOC2H4)2(dtoa)Cu	Mechanical immobilisation with Nafion	
171, 172


	(maa)Cu3(btc)2	Self assembled monolayers on gold	
173

(ta)Cu3(btc)2

	Cu2(bpy)2(btc)	Mechanical immobilisation	
174

Hydrazine oxidation and nitrobenzene reduction	Co2(4-ptz)2(bpp)(N3)2	Dip coating	
175

Nitrite oxidation	MOF-525	Direct crystallisation onto FTO	
176

Peroxide oxidation	[Cu(adp)(bib)(H2O)]n	Drop casting onto glassy carbon	
177

Dopamine oxidation and nitrobenzene reduction	MIL-101	Immobilised in a carbon paste electrode	
178

Halide reduction	Co(tcpp)	Solvothermal deposition	
170


	Fe2NiO(piv)6(bptz)x	Mechanical immobilisation	
179

Fe2NiO(piv)6(bptztz)x

	[TBA]6[H3PMo12O40]2[Zn8(btb)2]	Immobilised in a carbon paste electrode	
180


 	Fig. 5  A schematic attachment of the Co(tcpp) MOF onto a FTO and its proposed charge hopping mechanism. Reproduced with permission from 170.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
