Eutectics: formation, properties, and applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CS00404B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CS00404B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 8596-8638Eutectics: formation, properties, and applications

        
          
            Dongkun 
            Yu
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhimin 
            Xue
          
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Tiancheng 
            Mu
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Renmin University of China, Beijing 100872, P. R. China. E-mail: tcmu@ruc.edu.cn
bBeijing Key Laboratory of Lignocellulosic Chemistry, College of Materials Science and Technology, Beijing Forestry University, Beijing 100083, P. R. China. E-mail: zmxue@bjfu.edu.cn
Received 
      26th April 2021
    First published on 17th June 2021AbstractVarious eutectic systems have been proposed and studied over the past few decades. Most of the studies have focused on three typical types of eutectics: eutectic metals, eutectic salts, and deep eutectic solvents. On the one hand, they are all eutectic systems, and their eutectic principle is the same. On the other hand, they are representative of metals, inorganic salts, and organic substances, respectively. They have applications in almost all fields related to chemistry. Their different but overlapping applications stem from their very different properties. In addition, the proposal of new eutectic systems has greatly boosted the development of cross-field research involving chemistry, materials, engineering, and energy. The goal of this review is to provide a comprehensive overview of these typical eutectics and describe task-specific strategies to address growing demands.
Dongkun Yu
Dongkun Yu received his MSc degree from Renmin University of China in 2020 under the supervision of professor Tiancheng Mu. He is currently a PhD candidate at KTH Royal Institute of Technology, with the support from China Scholarship Council. His research focuses on non-covalent interactions and novel eutectics. He has co-authored over a dozen publications.
Zhimin Xue
Dr Zhimin Xue received her PhD degree from Renmin University of China in 2014 under the co-supervision of Academician Buxing Han, Professor Jianling Zhang, and Professor Tiancheng Mu. From 2017 to 2018, she was a visiting associate professor in the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, cooperated with Professor Sheng Dai. She is currently an associate professor in the College of Materials Science and Technology, Beijing Forestry University. Her research interests cover treatment and conversion of biomass, design, and applications of green solvents. She has co-authored over 75 peer-reviewed scientific publications and three chapters. Now she also serves as a member of the Ionic Liquids Professional Committee of the Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China and a member of a council of Beijing Thermal Analysis Association. She was selected as the Top Youth talents of National Forestry and Grassland Administration in 2020.
Tiancheng Mu
Dr Tiancheng Mu received his PhD in physical chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Then, he worked in the Department of Industrial Chemistry, Oldenburg University (Germany) as a postdoctoral researcher. He is currently a full professor in the Department of Chemistry, Renmin University of China. His research interests involve solution chemistry and green chemistry. He has authored over 160 scientific publications. Furthermore, he was awarded the Prize of Liangxi Forestry Science and Technology Award (2019) and Science and Technology Award of the China Association for Instrumental Analysis (2016). Now he serves as an associate editor for RSC Advances, editorial board member for The Chinese Journal of Process Engineering, vice director of Beijing Thermal Analysis Society, a member of ionic liquids professional committee of Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China, and a member of the green chemistry professional committee of Chinese Chemical Society.
1. Introduction
The word “eutectic” originated in metallurgy. Many eutectics have gradually gained popularity over the past few decades and play important roles in electronic devices, semiconductor engineering, chemical engineering, and separation technology.1–5 However, many researchers still believe that eutectics is an area of interest only to physicochemical experts and not attractive enough to general chemistry readers. Although a considerable number of reviews have been made on eutectics, most of them profoundly summarize a kind of eutectic system. Eutectic systems vary greatly in properties and applications. For example, to the best of our knowledge, there have been many studies on eutectic metals in the field of electronics but little review and research work on those in dissolution and separation; moreover, there are many publications about the use of eutectic salts in energy storage but those on their role in environmental science are fewer.6–8 In fact, deep eutectic solvents (DESs) have shown great promise for applications in the fields of environmental science and separation science.9,10 In some fields, including battery technology, there are cross-linked applications of these eutectics.11,12 Therefore, it was necessary to review the diverse eutectics and the related research progress. This work is intended to contribute to the development of interdisciplinary studies in fields such as chemistry and industry, chemistry and materials, and chemistry and the environment.
A famous example that demonstrates the application of eutectics is the Hall–Héroult process.13 Aluminium electrolysis from Al2O3 (melting point 2072 °C) can be carried out at around 960 °C by the formation of a eutectic system with Na3AlF6 (melting point 1010 °C). In addition, this lowering of the melting point led to the development of soldering technology.
Another important significance of eutectics is that they can broaden conventional mixed solvent systems (under certain temperature and pressure conditions). Thus, a two-solid system could also be designed as a solvent (Fig. 1A). The most commonly used DES is a eutectic mixture composed of choline chloride (ChCl) and urea at a molar ratio of 1:2.14 The melting point of this eutectic system is 13 °C, whereas the melting points of ChCl and urea are much higher than 25 °C. Through this strategy, a liquid system can be designed to suit specific requirements. For example, a dimethyl sulfoxide-aqueous system with a freezing point lower than −130 °C was developed as an ultra-low temperature electrolyte for sodium ion batteries.15
 Fig. 1  Significance of eutectics in broadening the solvent systems (A). Comparison of three different eutectics (B). 
In this review, three typical but distinct eutectics (eutectic metals, eutectic salts, and DESs) are discussed to introduce readers to eutectics and eutectic systems. As their names suggest, they are all eutectic systems, although their melting points are very different. This work mainly introduces their applications in the liquid state. On the one hand, they have similarities in forming eutectic systems. On the other hand, they represent metals, inorganic salts, and organic substances, and their main interactions are metal bonds, ionic bonds, and van der Waals forces, respectively. These different structures and interactions indicate their different properties. For example, a eutectic metal is always an electric conductor, whereas eutectic salts and DESs are conductive because of freely moving ions.16 However, their huge latent heat during phase change allows all of them to be used for energy storage. Therefore, they are very representative (Fig. 1B). The researchers will be enlightened with a full understanding of different eutectics, and such interdisciplinary knowledge will also stimulate innovation. The relevant historical background, important properties, and applications are introduced and summarized in the following sections. We also present some new views on eutectics and consider future directions.
2. An overview of eutectics
The original meaning of eutectics is “easy to melt”, which we interpret as “reducing the melting point after mixing”. In most of the systems discussed here, under certain temperature and pressure conditions, the single components are in the solid state whereas the eutectic systems are in the liquid state. In general, most substances are composed of atoms, ions, or molecules. The types of binary systems that can be formed are shown in Table 1. Metals are atomic in nature, so eutectic metals can be regarded as eutectic mixtures of atoms. A metal can also be understood as being composed of fixed nuclei and free electrons; thus, a eutectic metal is a system of cations and electrons (Fig. 1B). Both salts and eutectic salts are systems composed of anions and cations; however, the latter contain more types of ions than the former. In the same way, the composition of eutectic molecular liquids is easy to understand. DESs are actually a class of mixtures of ions and molecules. The most interesting system is Bi–BiCl3, which is called a metal in salt.17 According to the principle of (Pauling) electronegativity, BiCl3 is a covalent compound (χBi: 2.02, χCl: 3.16). The “medium” property appears to allow a Bi-based salt to form a eutectic system with the Bi element. Elements such as Li cannot form a eutectic system with their salts.18 Moreover, the crystal structure of BiCl3 verifies this point: the triangular pyramidal molecules are arranged regularly in space. However, some properties such as electrical conductivity indicate that it is an ionic compound. This “metal–salt” example is in fact neither common nor typical, because the formed eutectic system can be regarded as a combination of two salts. The properties of different eutectics can be inferred from their respective compositions. For example, a system containing ions possesses ionic conductivity, whereas the one containing free electrons possesses electronic conductivity. Although the composition is different, the eutectic principle is the same. In the following sections, the formation of eutectics will be discussed in depth.
Table 1 All kinds of binary systems, composed of atoms, ions, and molecules




Type
Category (nature)
Example
Ref.




①: Metal (atoms); ②: salt (ions); ③: molecular compound.




① + ①
Eutectic metal (eutectic atomic mixture)
Pb–Sn

19



② + ②
Eutectic salt (eutectic ionic mixture)
LiCl–KCl

20



③ + ③
Eutectic molecular mixture
Benzophenone–diphenylamine

21



② + ③
DES (eutectic ionic and molecular mixture)
ChCl–urea

14



① + ②
Metal in salt (eutectic atomic and ionic mixture)
Bi–BiCl3

17



① + ③
—
—
—




2.1 Formation of eutectics
In a binary phase diagram, the eutectic process is described as a three-phase transformation that occurs at a certain temperature and pressure. Generally, the effect of pressure is negligible during solid–liquid phase transition. The relationship between state functions and temperature can be established.

2.1.1 Entropy change. 
Entropy represents the degree of chaos in a system. Under a constant temperature and pressure, two different solids are mixed to form a liquid. For all eutectics, the entropy of the system increases during this process. It is simple and easy to understand by the entropy increase process, and to explain the depression of melting point.
If a phase transition occurs at the eutectic point, ΔG = 0. According to Gibbs equation, the following equation can be obtained, (1)where Tm is the melting point of a pure substance, ΔHfus* and ΔSfus* are enthalpy and entropy changes of melting, respectively. If there is a eutectic system, eqn (2) can be rewritten as, (2)where the subscript e represents the physical quantity of the eutectic system. The species in the solid have a small range of motion in the body phase, so the difference in entropy between pure solids and impure solids is small. However, the difference in entropy between pure liquid and impure liquid is greater because the species in impure liquid is more disordered.22 For most eutectic systems, compared to entropy change, the enthalpy change is much less. Therefore, the change in entropy of melting an impure solid into an impure liquid is greater than that of melting a pure solid into a pure liquid.
The comparison of eqn (1) and (2) becomes simple. Both numerators on the right side of the equations do not change much, while the denominator of eqn (2) becomes much larger. Therefore, it can be understood that the melting point of the eutectic system is lower than that of a single component. For cocrystals which will be introduced below, a large enthalpy change makes their melting point relatively high.23 For the same reason, increasing the entropy change and decreasing the enthalpy change can be considered as a strategy to lower the melting point (or glass transition temperature) of the target mixture. Recently, Mason and coworkers have reported a series of metal–bis(acetamide) frameworks with low melting temperatures (Fig. 2A).24 Apart from Coulomb interactions, the hydrogen bonding and coordination interactions are believed to play an important role in affecting the enthalpy and entropy changes. The strength of the interaction determines the degree of change in enthalpy and entropy during phase transition. The corresponding relationship is shown in Fig. 2B.
 Fig. 2  The strategy by which low melting temperature (Tm) is achieved by minimizing the fusion enthalpy ΔHfus, and maximizing the entropy of fusion, ΔSfus. (A) Illustration of design principles to promote the formation of coordination network-forming liquids with low Tm. (B) Comparison of ΔHfus, ΔSfus, and Tm for selecting metal–bis(acetamide) frameworks. The symbol shape identifies the series of compounds, while the symbol colour designates the metal, and the border colour designates the anion.24 Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society. 
However, the above interpretations and inferences are shallow, which just help readers quickly understand the thermodynamic principles behind eutectics.


2.1.2 Chemical potential. 
The chemical potential is considered a good site to explain eutectics. The concept of chemical potential originates from potential energy, and it is applicable to most chemical reactions, and even physical processes. It is also very specific, and the phase transition or equilibrium can be discussed by fixing factors such as temperature. Under a constant temperature and pressure, the chemical potential of component i can be obtained from its mole fraction and the chemical potential of pure substance i, μi = μideali + μexcessi = μi* + RTlnχi + RTlnγi(3)where χi is the mole fraction of component i, and γi is the activity coefficient which represents correction of interactions between different species.
First, consider a solid–liquid transition around a eutectic temperature, and assume that the solid pure substance is precipitated, the heat capacity change remains constant, so the equilibrium can be described as,25 (4)where ΔmCp,i denotes the difference in isobaric heat capacity of i in solid and liquid phases, and ΔfusHi is the enthalpy of fusion of pure i. Given the small temperature difference between transition temperature and eutectic temperature, ΔmCp,i is negligible, thus eqn (4) can be rewritten as the following equation: (5)
Second, when considering the composition of solid, T, the chemical potential of component i in the equilibrium of solid (μsi) and liquid (μli) phases, can be expressed as, (6) (7)where  and  are chemical potentials of pure i in solid and liquid, χi,l and Xi,s are the mole fractions of component i in liquid and solid, and γi,l and Γi,s are activity coefficients of component i in liquid and solid, respectively. At equilibrium, μsi and μli are equal, and the following equation is obtained. (8)
By combining entropy and capacity changes, the following equation is obtained.26 (9)The form of eqn (9) is the same as that of 4, with the addition of state in solid. Note that the above formula has undergone some approximate transformations and is not a strictly universal formula.
The chemical potential has a good relationship between the temperature and the composition of the eutectic system. It also explains the phase equilibrium at the eutectic point. However, no more information is given about the non-ideal part of the chemical potential, that is, the interaction between different species.


2.1.3 Interactions. 
Interactions exist widely in the chemical world. Based on electrostatic force, the chemical bond theory was established. The Coulomb interaction between oppositely charged ions is called ionic bond, and covalent bond is the interaction between atoms by sharing electron pairs (electron cloud overlap). Metal bonds are similar to covalent bonds in nature. Modified covalent bond theory and energy band theory have perfected the structure of metals. The non-covalent interactions between molecules also cover a wide range. With in-depth exploration, the boundary between covalent and ionic bonds and the boundary between covalent and non-covalent interactions have become blurred.27 In recent years, some new chemical bonds have also even been discovered.28
In the description of chemical potential, the deviation of a non-ideal system comes from the interaction between different species. The interaction between metal and salt is relatively simple because the structure of the species that compose them is relatively simple.29,30 Moreover, the interaction between metal atoms also involves the transfer of outer electrons, which will be mentioned later. The formation of DESs is best explained by interaction. For DESs, strong interactions (such as hydrogen bonds) between species are considered to be the cause for the drop in melting point. This is widely used to explain the decrease in the melting point of DESs.31
Although widely adopted, this explanation is simplistic and not rigorous. Because two strong interaction will cause the break of old chemical bond and the formation of new bond (chemical reaction), eutectic is essentially a physical process. In addition, this interpretation overemphasizes the factor of unit species. In bulk environment, every species is surrounded by a number of others, both orientation and interaction are complex.32 A central molecule rotates and moves in three-dimensional space, and causes the surrounding molecules to change simultaneously (Fig. 3). Therefore, strong interaction is only a necessary condition for eutectic to occur and cannot be used for quantification.
 Fig. 3  Simulation boxes (ball and stick model) of urea–betaine system. Urea in orange and betaine in green.32 Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2021 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.1.4 Vibration and diffusion mechanism. 
There have been some descriptions for eutectic reactions (physical processes) from the perspective of dynamics. But most of them have been focused on the transformation from a liquid (single-phase) to solids (two-phase) under a constant temperature and pressure.33 As mentioned above, the original meaning of the term eutectics is “easy to melt”, instead of “crystallizing below the crystallization point of each single component”. Therefore, the authors will discuss the process by which two solids produce liquids below their melting points. When the above discussions on entropy change, chemical potential and interaction explain why eutectic process occurs, the diffusion mechanism reveals how it occurs.
The study of melting began with single substances because their structure is simple. It has been proved that the melting process begins on the surface of the crystal. The coordination number of surface atoms (or molecules, ions) is fewer than that in bulk (Fig. 4A). Therefore, surficial atoms have high energy at the same temperature, which can also be used to explain the surface energy of solids. According to Lindemann, melting occurs when the thermal vibration amplitude of an atom becomes large enough to cause atomic collision.34 On this basis, Galvarry proposes the formula,35 〈u2〉1/2 = reδ(10)where 〈u2〉1/2 is the r.m.s. amplitude of atomic vibration, re is the atomic apace under equilibrium, and δ is the constant of the oscillator at melting point. Experiments with cubic elements have proved that the melting relationship may be valid for alkali halide crystals.36 If it is a mixed system, the situation will become complicated. Fig. 4B sets metal as an example to describe how a “liquid atom” appears.
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic of contact between two crystals. The crystal atoms (labelled by *) on the surface have a low coordination number and can be regarded as activated atoms. (B) Diagram illustrates how a “liquid” atom is generated. (C) Photograph of benzophenone (left) and diphenylamine (right). (D) Eutectic liquid formed along the interface of benzophenone and diphenylamine.21 Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2007 Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) Image of diazobenzene (upper) and acenaphthene (lower) placed at 47.6 °C. (F) Progressive accumulation of eutectic droplets and melting of solid components at 50.6 °C.38 Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 1952 American Chemical Society. (G) A complete phase diagram with the axis of pressure. 
(1) Surface atoms are more active, and have higher vibration amplitudes.
(2) When the two solid monomers of the eutectic system contact, the distance between different atoms is also reduced. At this point, atom A tends to interact with atom B (new coordination) to reduce its energy.
(3) This penetration behaviour intensifies, and atom A continues to approach the other B. At the same time, it is accompanied by the breaking of old bonds and the generation of new bonds.
(4) When atom A has completely moved away from the lattice A, the first “liquid atom” appears.
The above process occurs between other atoms A and B, as long as their vibration amplitude reaches a threshold (at eutectic temperature). Thus, the eutectic process is produced from a macro perspective. The above principles can also be used to explain the growth of pure small crystals at high temperature. As shown in the second step in Fig. 4B, atom A1 will contact atom A2 of another crystal, and a new interaction will be formed to reach a stable state, instead of continuous diffusion. Therefore, a small grain will grow at high temperature.
It is worth mentioning that the eutectic process of ion and molecular compounds can also be explained using this principle of diffusion.37Fig. 4C and D show benzophenone and diphenylamine form a eutectic liquid along the interface at ambient temperature.21 For eutectic salt and DES, the mechanism is the same. The units of vibration are ions and molecules, and the situation is more complicated. The phase transition principle of molecular compounds is very complicated, which is a challenge for the research of molecule-based eutectic systems.


2.1.5 Vapor–liquid–solidA–solidB phase mechanism. 
In a general binary phase diagram, the eutectic point represents the solidA–solidB–liquid-equilibrium. The situation of the system can be described using Gibbs phase rule, f* = 2 − Φ + 1(11)where f* is the degree of freedom at constant pressure. Many eutectic systems are discussed under constant pressure because the vapor pressure of solids is relatively low. However, this does not mean the gas phase of a system should be ignored. Durand et al. studied the non-contact equilibrium fusion around the eutectic temperature.38 The eutectic temperature of diazobenzene (Tm = 67 °C) and acenaphthene (Tm = 90 °C) is 48.6 °C. Without contact, two crystals were placed at 47.6 °C (lower than eutectic temperature), and no obvious phenomenon occurred after 1 hour (Fig. 4E). While at 50.6 °C, many droplets occurred in the adjacent part (Fig. 4F). Petrucci explained the above experiment and proposed a “vapor–liquid–solidA–solidB” four-phase equilibrium mechanism, vapor–liquid–solidA–solidB.
As described by Petrucci, the reason why this mechanism has not received widespread adoption might be due to its incompatibility with the condensed systems. In contrast with molecular crystals, most atomic and ionic crystals have negligible vapor pressure before melting. However, there are studies on eutectic systems under different pressure conditions.39 Therefore, the authors remind researchers not to ignore the gas phase (pressure) when studying eutectic systems. The complete phase diagram is shown in Fig. 4G.

2.2 Eutectics and cocrystal
Researchers who are not familiar with crystals get easily confused with the terms “eutectics” and “cocrystal”. Even some professionals sometimes cross the borderline between them. In 2012, Zaworotko et al. proposed the definition and classification of a eutectic system from the perspective of active pharmaceutical ingredients: cocrystals are solids that are crystalline single phase materials composed of two or more different molecular and/or ionic compounds generally in a stoichiometric ratio.40 However, this definition has its limitations. For example, it does not include host–guest inclusion compounds. Although some multi salt systems are thought to form coordination complexes, the above definition can be used as a simple definition of cocrystals.41
Stahly proposed a simple insight between eutectics and cocrystal.42 A binary system which forms a cocrystal exhibits two eutectics, between which resides the cocrystal (Fig. 5A). At the eutectic point, mixed crystals are precipitated by cooling. In addition, the melting point of the cocrystal is not necessarily lower than the melting point of each monomer. However, according to the geometric relationship, the melting point of the eutectic system is higher than the two adjacent eutectic temperatures.
 Fig. 5  A binary phase diagram with two eutectic points. (A) The cocrystal resides between the two eutectic points, with a certain stoichiometric ratio of substances A and B. (B) Hypoeutectic and hypereutectic regions are on both sides of eutectic composition. 
2.3 Hypoeutectic and hypereutectic
The scope of the terms “hypoeutectic” and “hypereutectic” is quite limited. In a simple eutectic system (usually with one eutectic point), they are used to describe the comparison of a solid component and the eutectic component. The area to the left of the eutectic component will form a hypoeutectic, which means that the content of the component A is less than that of the eutectic component (Fig. 5B). Conversely, the ratio(A) greater than the eutectic ratio is hypereutectic. Although these solids are mixed crystals, strength differs from composition to composition.43 It is worth mentioning that the judgment of hypoeutectic and hypereutectic depends on the position of substances A and B in a phase diagram, which is usually determined by conventions.
3. Eutectic metals
A eutectic metal (eutectic alloy) is a mixture of metals with a melting point lower than that of any of its components. The history of the Bronze Age in various regions is not clear because of subsequent intentional or unintentional acts of sabotage. Africa is considered the earliest region to use bronze smelting, in about 4000 B.C., and bronze decorated with obsidian has been found in Europe along the Aegean Sea.44,45
Bronze was produced by mixing 25 wt% tin into copper, so that the melting point of the mixture would decrease from 1083 °C to around 800 °C.46 This is a typical example of mixing metals to decrease the operating temperature and increase wear resistance and chemical stability. Although bronze is not an example of a eutectic system (Fig. 6A), it provides some inspiration to explore this useful phenomenon. Eutectic alloys, including lead–tin, silver–copper, and gallium–indium–tin alloys, have gradually been discovered (Fig. 6B).19,47,48
 Fig. 6  Phase diagram of the Cu–Sn system (A).51 Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2012 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Phase diagram of the Pb–Sn system under the atmospheric pressure (B).52 Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2019 Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute. 
In the solid state, the melting point of a metal depends on several factors, including the number of electrons involved in the metal bonds, the degree of ionization, and the crystal structure. The relatively low melting points of zinc-group elements are believed to result from complete filling of electrons in the d and s shells. The same is true for some post-transition metals, where completely filled d shells and partially filled p shells are responsible for their low melting points.
Gallium, whose melting point is the lowest in post transition metals is the most common component in the formation of eutectic metals. Heine studied the distances, covalency and the axial ratios of Ga crystal. Result showed that the number of near neighbours makes Ga pseudo hexagonal about the A axis as well as pseudo tetragonal about the C axis.49 In addition, studies have shown that dimer molecules exist in crystalline gallium.50 These intrinsic characters result in the low melting point of gallium, and make Ga exhibit both covalent and metallic bonding in the solid state. When gallium and other metals are mixed at the atomic level, the larger distance between atoms constitutes a significant structural anisotropy. This indicates that the binding force is weak, which promotes the rupture of the crystal structure at low temperatures, resulting in eutectics (decrease in melting point).
It is necessary to mention that the phrase “liquid metals” is more common used in research articles than “eutectic metals”. Among them, some refer to pure gallium, some are eutectic alloys, and others are non-eutectic alloys. In this review, all liquid metals denote eutectic liquid metals.
3.1 Properties of eutectic metals
Eutectic metals, especially gallium alloys, have a low viscosity and a high surface tension as ‘liquid’, while they have high thermal and electrical conductivities as ‘metal’. In recent years, a series of eutectic liquid alloys have caught people's eyes. In particular, the gallium based alloys have excellent properties and have been widely used in various fields.48 Consequently, it is of great value to investigate the thermophysical properties of eutectic liquid alloys to develop new applications.
The physical properties (i.e. melting point) of gallium, eutectic Ga–In alloy, Ga–In–Sn alloy and mercury are given in Table 2.
Table 2 Physical properties of Ga, Hg, water and some eutectics53,54




Parameter
Ga
EGaIn
Galinstan
Na27K73
Mercury
Water@21.85 °C





a Note: this value is often confused with the freezing point (−19.0 °C).3





Melting point (°C)
29.76
15.5
13.2a
−11
−38.8
0


Density at 20 °C (g cm−3)
5.90
6.280
6.440
0.8682
13.533
998.0


Heat capacity (J kg−1 K−1)
410
404
295
982.1
140
4181


Viscosity (Pa s)
1.37 × 10−3
1.99 × 10−3
2.4 × 10−3
0.77 × 10−3
1.53 × 10−3
0.96 × 10−3


Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
29.3
26.6
16.5
21.8
8.5
0.606


Electrical conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
6.73 × 106
3.40 × 106
3.46 × 106
2.878 × 106
1.04 × 106
5.5 × 10−6





3.1.1 Density and rheological properties. 
Mozgovoi studied some Pb eutectic liquids from both theoretical and experimental standpoints.55,56 For Pb–Li alloy, the density could be given by the following equations: ρsolid = 10.69(1 − 80 × 10−6T)(12) ρliquid = 10.47(1 − 110 × 10−6T)(13)where ρsolid and ρliquid are in g cm−3 and T is in K.
Gancarz et al. studied the density and viscosity of the Ga–Sn system and the ternary system (with Zn added).57 The results showed that there is a good linear relationship between density data and temperature. Compared with the Ga–Sn system, the density after adding Zn increases, which is related to the high density of Zn (6.819 g cm−3 at 750 K). The comparison between Gancarz's work and other publications is shown in Fig. 7.58–61
 Fig. 7  Temperature dependences of density (A) and viscosity (B) for Ga–Sn eutectic based alloys with Zn additions.57 Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. 
Physicochemical properties like rheology and viscosity play a significant role in smelting alloys, as well as in some other applications. A great deal of research work has been carried out over the decades. Greer and coworkers collected some empirical correlations for the viscosity of pure liquid elements, and extended to the cases of intermetallic compounds and eutectics.62 They discussed, further, the available formulae attempting to describe the viscosity as a function of composition and temperature, with particular attention to glass-forming alloys.
The Andrade formula for the melting point viscosity, η(Tm), of liquids has been reassessed by analyzing a great quantity of thermodynamic data on metallic elements and eutectic alloys: (14)where CA is an estimated value of 1.655 × 10−7 (J K−1 mol−1/3)1/2, A is the atomic weight, and V is the molar volume at Tm.
If the diffusivity of an atom in liquid phase is known, Stokes–Einstein relation can be used to calculate the viscosity of elements. In a binary alloy, the composition-dependence of isothermal viscosity is not strong. The η(T) of systems which are easy to form the glass state is non-Arrhenius while best fitted by the Vogel–Fulcher–Tammann equation: (15)where Γ and Θ are constants, and T′ is the temperature at which the excess configurational entropy or the free volume is zero.
Whitesides et al. reported the rheological behaviour of the eutectic liquid metal (75% Ga and 25% In by weight, melting point: 15.5 °C) as it is injected into microfluidic channels to form stable microstructures of liquid metal.63


3.1.2 Melting point. 
So far, all metals except mercury are solid at room temperature (25 °C). Among them, gallium is particularly special. Ga possesses a melting point of 29.76 °C, and some of Ga-based alloys possess a lower melting point and therefore have a larger temperature range in liquid applications.48,64 In addition, Ga is considered to be environmentally friendly, so it is expected that Ga and its alloys could replace transition metals in the field of materials.48
In another work, thermodynamic properties of uranium were studied in the (U + Ga), (U + Sn) and (U + Ga + Sn) systems.65 It was verified that the activity of uranium in (Ga + Sn + U), (Ga + U) and (Sn + U) alloys is close. However, the activity coefficients of uranium in liquid Ga and (Ga + Sn) eutectics are lower than those in alloys with tin, and lowering the temperature will make the difference more significant. Furthermore, pressure can induce crystallization of Ga–In eutectic alloy.66 Jiang et al. reported a quaternary alloy (Ga–In–Sn–Zn) with a low melting point, which has pushed the boundaries a little further reaching a melting point below 10 °C.67


3.1.3 Surface tension. 
The surrounding environment of the molecules on the surface of the substance is different from that of the internal molecules, so the characteristics of the surface are different from the inside. Molecules on the gas–liquid interface are subject to little force from gas phase molecules, and greater force from liquid phase molecules, so they are subjected to a pulling force directed to the inside of the liquid. Free deformable surfaces are characteristic of the liquid phase, so the liquid surface has the tendency to automatically shrink to a minimum.
The measurements of surface tension are important. Ozawa et al. reviewed the experimental progress and theoretical framework in the past few years.68 They summarized three main methods for measuring the surface tension of liquid metals: the sessile drop technique, pendant/sessile drop combined method, and levitated drop method (electromagnetic levitation, drop oscillations, and microgravity experiments). The methods they proposed are contributing to measure the surface tension of high-temperature melts while ensuring their stability.
In another work, Dickey et al. introduced a method which controlled the interfacial tension of metals by electrochemistry and electrocapillarity, thereby quickly (in microseconds) changing and adjusting the size of liquid metal droplets.69 The use of electric potential is easy to operate, and the method is expected to be applied to some technology such as microfluidics. In addition, the surface tension of the liquid alloy can be controlled by controlling surface oxidation.70


3.1.4 Thermal and electrical conductivities. 
Eutectic Ga–In–Sn alloy, often called EGaInSn and Galinstan, is widely used in various fields. Novakovic et al. used raw materials with a purity of 99.999% to thoroughly study the thermodynamic properties of EGaInSn in a large temperature range.71 The temperature dependence of conductivity (291 to 723 K) can be approximated using the following equation, σ(T) = σ0 − 49.8(T − Tm) + 0.0476(T − Tm)2(16)where σ0 = 33170 Ω−1 cm−1 is the electrical conductivity at 291 K. The research result was compared with the related publications and database. This work not only corrected the inaccurate data in the past, but also contributed to the popularization of EGaInSn. Rykaczewski and coworkers reported a method for preparing chemically stable solid–liquid metal mixtures with enhanced thermal interfaces.72 Metal particles (tungsten) were shear mixed with EGaInSn in a mortar to produce a paste-like mixture. A stepped-bar apparatus following the ASTM D5470 standard and the Hot Disk transient plane source method was constructed. The outcome showed that the thermal conductivity can be up to 2 times compared with that of EGaInSn. As the proportion of tungsten increases, the morphology of the mixture gradually changes from a paste-like morphology to a powder. These thermal interface materials synthesized using EGaInSn are expected to be applied in wearable devices and soft robots.
The resistivity of the Sn–Bi alloy shows a significant temperature dependence. Moreover, as the content of Bi increases, the resistivity increases, which may be related to the larger intrinsic resistivity of Bi.73 Interestingly, for Sn–Bi alloys (Bi 63 wt% and 58 wt%), the resistance and temperature dependence below 220 °C are similar to those of semiconductors. The result along with that of magnetic susceptibility obtained give support to the statement that the eutectic Sn–Bi alloy differs significantly in its electron structure from hypo and hyper eutectic alloys.

3.2 Applications of eutectic metals
Compared to mercury, these liquid metal alloys are much safer for they have a negligible vapour pressure and low toxicity, which make them good candidates for various electronic applications. Furthermore, unique properties show potential usage in materials science and semiconductor engineering. For example, some gallium liquid alloys can rapidly form an atomically thin layer gallium oxide over their surface when exposed to oxygen. They have even been considered as potential coolants in nuclear power plants which will replace the status of Na. Finally, combining with many other materials can greatly expand their applications.

3.2.1 Eutectic for preparing nano materials. 
Nanotechnology has penetrated every aspect of modern life, and the preparation of nanomaterials has gained importance. Vapour–liquid–solid, the triple phase coordination is supposed to be the process of preparing metal nanowires.74 Kodambaka and coworkers found that the kinetic enrichment of the eutectic alloy composition might be the reason for nanowires to grow below the eutectic temperature (Fig. 8A–C). Fig. 8A shows a series of images of a single Ge wire acquired at times t = 0, 309, and 618 s (from left to right, respectively) during growth using the vapour–liquid–solid mechanism at 340 °C and 4.6 × 10−6 torr Ge2H6. The rate of growth is 9.9 × 10−2 nm s−1. Fig. 8B shows a series of image for a second wire growing at the same temperature and pressure but with a solid catalyst at t = 0, 1340 and 1824 s (from left to right, respectively). The growth rate for this mode is 1.3 × 10−2 nm s−1. The result also showed that in the process of using Au to grow Ge wire, the state of catalyst may be lower than Te which may be either solid or liquid. The state of catalyst depends not only on temperature, but also on the pressure and history of Ge2H6. Moreover, their work could provide reference value for other nanowires.
 Fig. 8  (A) Series of images of a single Ge wire growth at 340 °C and 4.6 × 10−6 torr Ge2H6, t = 0, 309, and 618 s. (B) Another image series for a second wire growing at the same temperature and pressure, t = 0, 1340 and 1824 s. (C) Binary phase diagram of Au and Ge.74 Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2009 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (D) Schematic representation of the touch-print method. (E) Schematic representation of air-bubble method.75 Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Although eutectic liquid metal is liquid at room temperature, it does not spontaneously return to the shape with the lowest interfacial free energy like Hg and H2O. The eutectics can form metastable, non-spherical structures (e.g., cones and filaments with a diameter of 1 mm). These desirable properties make eutectic metal useful for forming electrodes for thin-film devices. In another work, Daeneke and coworkers developed two efficient methods to synthesize desired metal oxide nanosheets using eutectic gallium-based alloys as the reaction solvent.75 In the first method, a pristine liquid metal droplet is first exposed to an environment with oxygen. Then touching the liquid metal with a solid substrate allows the transfer of the interfacial oxide layer. The whole process is called van der Waals exfoliation technique (Fig. 8D). The second method relies on oxygen-contained bubbles to produce metal oxide nanosheets by injecting pressurized air into the eutectic liquid metal (Fig. 8E). This pioneering work provided good methods for preparing 2D materials at room temperature, and metal nitrides can be prepared in the same way.76 Maldonado et al. used an electrochemical liquid–liquid–solid method to control the morphology of micro–nanowires.77 Compared with pure Ga, a liquid Ga–In alloy can make Ge wires grow more uniformly.


3.2.2 Flexible electronics and microfluidics. 
Electric devices have gained increasing popularity. The demand for electronic components such as battery electrodes, battery diaphragms and self-repairable conductors is unprecedentedly high. Copper along with silver wires are generally used as conductors. They have good electrical conductivity but are easy to break permanently. The combination of liquid metal and other materials can solve the drawbacks of poor tensile properties and non-self-healing nature of collectors. Lee and coworkers presented a self-healing conductor that is composed of nickel flakes, eutectic gallium indium particles and carboxylated polyurethane.78 Self-healing can be achieved when the damaged regions are electrically restored by the flow of liquid metal, and mechanically healing can be activated by the interfacial hydrogen bonding of polymer. Park et al. found that eutectic gallium–indium can diffuse on the surface of an alkanol-based hydrogel while maintaining good stretchability (Fig. 9A).79 The prepared composite electrode can be stretched by 1500%. It was then cut, and after recovering under environmental conditions for 5 minutes, its new maximum elongation is about 900% (Fig. 9B). At the same time, the resistance change of the electrode is negligible. Moreover, the pattern of the electrode can be designed (Fig. 9C).
 Fig. 9  Eutectic metals for soft and stretchable electronics. (A) Photographs of latertally stretched micropatterned high-density EGaIn electrodes. (B) Stress–strain curves of a pristine composite electrode and a self-healed electrode following cutting. (C) Photograph of micropatterned electrode on alkanol-based hydrogel.79 Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (D) Fabrication process of a heater sheet by the direct ink writing method of EGaIn. (E) Photograph of assembled glove. (F) Optical camera and (G) IR camera image of the hand in glove. (H) Image of hand posture and (I) reconstructed animation in VR environment.83 Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (J) Soft sensing insole measuring ground reaction forces connected by an electroless nickel immersion gold finished flexible flat cable. (K) Soft sensing insole attached below the foot using medical tapes. (L) Sensing signals recorded during three gait cycles.84 Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society. 
Goodenough and coworkers reported a room-temperature liquid alloy based anode membrane with the immobilized organic liquid electrolyte.80 No self-discharge was observed since the liquid Na–K did not dissolve into the liquid carbonate electrolytes. Dendrite growth and serious interface issues are still fundamental challenges for the practical application of alkali metal batteries. In another work, Yu and coworkers reported a highly stable Na–K alloy–graphene composite electrode, which realized alkali metal anode with a high energy density and low redox potential.81 Moreover, the immiscibility with organic compounds makes eutectic metals a class of good candidates for incorporation into functional, packaged organic devices.82 In the future, this would be a useful technique for complex large areal stretchable printed electronic systems.
Virtual reality (VR) has been widely used for training and games, and the value of VR as a contactless technology is constantly increasing. In a recent work, Bea et al. developed a multi-modal sensing and feedback glove.83 The manufacturing steps of the thermal sensor layer are shown in Fig. 9D. Before directly writing the eutectic Ga–In alloy (EGaIn) traces, an organic silicon layer is formed by a blade coating process. A flexible flat cable (FFC) is connected to the silicone layer, which is placed according to the written EGaIn traces. The FFC and EGaIn traces are connected by a direct ink writing 3D printing method. The writing trace is encapsulated by the second silicone resin layer. After curing, all unnecessary parts of the silicone film are removed. The sensor was prepared as fabric-covered gloves and tested in a VR environment. There are eight heating elements embedded in the heating plate (five for each finger and three for the palm), which can be controlled independently, as shown in Fig. 9E. As shown in Fig. 9F and G, the flexion and extension movements of the five fingers are captured by the sensor sheet attached to the back of the hand. Therefore, animation of hand can be reconstructed (Fig. 9H and I). In another work, the same research group prepared a soft electrode system by using contact sensing of a eutectic metal.84 A wearable sensor can be prepared by writing EGaIn wires on a silicone substrate to measure the ground reaction force (Fig. 9J and K). As shown in Fig. 9L, the signal shows a repetitive pattern during walking. During walking, only 6 sensors (sensors 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, and 10) of the 10 sensors on the soles of the feet had significant changes. As the heel touched the ground, sensors 8, 9 and 10 in the heel were activated sequentially from the back of the heel. When the centre of pressure moved from the back of the foot to the front of the foot, sensors 2, 3 and 5 were activated, and the resistance changed more widely. The higher resistance change is attributed to the concentrated load generated by the bone structure of the foot.
Brand et al. reported a more exciting technology about all-soft and high-density electronic devices based on a eutectic metal.85 The hybrid lithography process is applied to dual-phase structures to create soft nano/microstructures embedded in elastomeric materials. Using this extremely high-resolution EGaIn patterning technology, a submicron EGaIn thin film pattern with a feature size as small as 180 nm and a line pitch of 1 μm can be realized. The resulting stretchable EGaIn pattern provided a currently unparalleled combination of resolution, electrical conductivity, and electronic/wiring density. It is hoped that the developed EGaIn nanofabrication technique based on hybrid lithography plays an important role in the field of bio-integrated electronics.
Motivated by the increasing demand of flexible electronic products, liquid metal microfluidics have developed greatly in recent years, which can be traced back to the field of microfluidic channels.86 Elastic materials are often used as a shell for encapsulating the liquid metal to protect the continuous phase of the liquid metal. The composite material in the droplet is usually an insulator, but the liquid metal packaged in the elastomer becomes a conductor due to its continuous phase, and its electrical conductivity and thermal conductivity can be adjusted.
He et al. studied the movement of Galinstan and liquid gallium micromachines under a direct-current electric field.87 The liquid metal Galinstan micromachine was pushed to the positive electrode by the surface tension gradient, while the liquid pure gallium micromachine was pushed to the negative electrode by the generated hydrogen bubbles. These works provide new possibilities for the motion control of micromachines in the channel.
Petit and coworkers reported a numerical model and some experiments of a micro-channel liquid metal cooler.88 A numerical study on the effect of thermal conductivity of cooler materials was carried out, and a discussion on the correlation of using classical convection heat transfer was presented. By the cooling experiment of silicon chips, liquid metal showed a strong advantage compared with water. This work is expected to provide a good heat dissipation strategy for high power density electronic devices. Furthermore, the liquid metal microfluidics based electronic systems are found to have potential in deformable antennas, soft diodes, transient circuits, etc.


3.2.3 Motion robots. 
Robots based on eutectic metals have attracted attention because they can respond to electricity, magnetism, and light. In Zhang's work, a wheeled robot using a room temperature liquid metal droplet as the core of the driving system was developed.89 The metal droplets inside the robot were driven by voltage to change the centre of gravity, thus generating a rolling torque (Fig. 10A–C). The driving module in this robot was relatively lightweight and facile to replace. Therefore, the study is expected to expand the research of liquid metal based actuators and to accelerate the development of future complex robotic systems. In another work, Liu et al. prepared a eutectic metal based micromotor by a simple general-purpose ice-assisted transfer printing method.90 The micro-swimmer showed effective propulsion under an elliptical polarized magnetic field (Fig. 10D and E). The force and motion analysis of liquid motors of different shapes is shown in Fig. 10F and G. Moreover, the micromotor can undergo drastic morphological transformation in an aqueous environment under the irradiation of an alternating magnetic field. These properties facilitate the micromotor to have broad potentials in chemical induction and artificial intelligence, which cannot be achieved by rigid micro-robots. A photochemically induced motion of liquid metal marbles was reported by Mitchell and coworkers.91 The addition of WO3 nanoparticles allows the eutectic alloy to generate H2O2 bubbles under UV light, which thereby generate a propulsion force (Fig. 10H). Fig. 10I shows the movement of a WO3 coated marble for 240 seconds, and the time–displacement curve is shown in Fig. 10J.
 Fig. 10  Soft robots driven by electricity, magnetism, and light. (A) Structure and composition of a wheel robot. (B) Schematic of the driving module and the working mechanism. (C) Sequential snapshots for actuating an actual wheeled robot at a steady speed, the inset shows the time–displacement plot.89 Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (D) Schematic of the magnetic propulsion of liquid metal micromotors. (E) Time lapse images depicting swimming of a micromotor. (F) Mechanical analysis and swimming mechanism of the bowling-pin-like liquid metal microswimmer in an elliptically polarized magnetic field. (G) The dependence of average speed V upon the polarization of the applied magnetic field Hmax (Hmin = 10 mT).90 Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (H) Schematic of the experimental setup showing the motion mechanism of the EGaInSn marble. The light beam passes through an objective lens (also used for imaging) and is focused onto one side of the marble. (I) Sequential snapshots of the motion of a 2 mm diameter sphere marble in 15% H2O2 solution when a light intensity of 100% is approaching the marble from the left-hand side at a constant speed of 4.5 mm min−1. The visible purple spot is the light beam. (J) Time displacement plots for both the light spot and the marble.91 Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 American Institute of Physics. 
Liu et al. studied the coloration of a eutectic alloy.92 This liquid metal soft robot is bio-inspired and has adjustable structural colour. In different electrolytes, the colour of the alloy droplets can be tuned by changing the substrate. Further research show that the colour change is related to the Ga2O3 film formed on the surface of eutectic alloy and the iridescence was triggered by film interference.


3.2.4 Catalysis. 
Metals and their compounds are usually used for catalysis, so are eutectic metals, especially gallium alloys. On one hand, the melting point of gallium is pretty low; on the other hand, gallium is relatively active. The EGaInSn droplets of macro size can be used for current displacement to produce silver and gold.93 In principle, this allows one to recover precious metal ions from solution in their metallic form, which are immobilized on the liquid metal and therefore easy to recover. Additionally, eutectic alloys can be used in other reactions, such as dehydrogenation of propane and methylcyclohexane.94,95
O'Mullane introduced a simple method for preparing catalytically active materials from eutectic alloys.96 The EGaInSn droplets were sonicated in an alkaline solution or treated in a reducing medium to form In/Sn-rich solid microspheres with reductive catalytic activity. In another work, Kalantar-Zadeh et al. reported a method for synthesizing metal foams with inherent catalytic properties based on eutectic metals.97 With indium as the additive, low-cost Bi–Sn alloy was processed into nano-structured metal foams. At a current density of −25 mA cm−2 (−1.2 V vs. RHE), a high CO2 electrical conversion efficiency (82%) can be achieved. This work is considered important for the design of heterogeneous catalytic reactions and reactors.
Existing research indicates that there are many kinds of eutectic metals with desirable properties. Alloying is not only a general method to lower the application temperature, but also a strategy to prepare task-specific systems. This inspires researchers to develop new eutectic systems.

4. Eutectic salts
In the 1940s, Glauber's salt (Na2SO4·10H2O) was used as a medium to store solar energy.99,100 Later, research was focused on the thermophysical properties (including viscosity, surface tension, and density) of the equal molar mixture NaNO3–KNO3 in the temperature range of 300–600 °C in oxygen and argon.101 Compared with the surface tension and viscosity, density of this salt mixture is mainly affected by the presence of nitrite. The fundamental research on molten salts might be beneficial to the implementation of the project “Solar Two”.98,102 Although eutectic salts possess high melting enthalpy and low melting points, their engineering technology requires optimization. In “Solar Two”, eutectic salts were used as energy storage materials to achieve high-quality energy storage and conversion (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of a “Solar Two” plant. EPGS for electric power generation system.98 
During operation, a cold (285 °C) molten salt is withdrawn from the cold salt tank and passed through a receiver where it is heated to 565 °C. It then flows under gravity to the hot salt tank, where it is stored until steam is needed to drive the turbine. When needed, it is pumped through the steam generator, generating a 512 °C steam for the electric power generation system (EPGS), and then sent back to the cold box to repeat the cycle.103 Molten salts can also store energy in large containers for future use, such as at night or a cloudy day. The “Solar Two” has enough capacity to run continuously for three hours after sunset. The commercial plant, called “Solar Tres” built in Spain combined “Solar One” and “Solar Two” technologies.104 Although there is no improvement in energy storage medium, the plant is able to work 24 h per day in summer.
Eutectic salts were customarily called “molten salts”. In some circumstances, their melting properties have been of more interest, while their eutectic properties were ignored. The principle of eutectic causes the melting point of a salt mixture lower than that of its single component, which intensifies the promotion of the term “molten salt”. Molten salt has a wider scope than eutectic salt and includes single substances and other non-eutectic systems. Although there are differences between eutectic salts and molten salts, most of the molten salts mentioned in this review are eutectic systems.
4.1 Properties of eutectic salts
The properties of eutectic salts, especially their thermodynamic properties, have been studied in depth. The density of a eutectic salt determines the strength and size of the container, and its melting point has a strong relationship with the operating temperature. However, the most important property is enthalpy, that is, the latent heat of the eutectic salt. This is the key element for energy storage, because a high melting enthalpy can increase the energy storage efficiency, with consequent economic benefits. Therefore, a great deal of measurement work for specific systems has been performed, and many empirical and semi-empirical prediction equations have been established. Last but not least, the stability of eutectic salts under high temperature or carbon dioxide conditions has been investigated.

4.1.1 Density. 
The density of a molten salt is crucial to its usage because it is related to the size and strength of the energy storage devices. The density measurement of a molten salt is no longer a major problem, and its microscopic exploration and prediction of density are the focus of current research. As mentioned above, the mixture of NaNO3 and KNO3 is known as solar salt, which has been commercialized. Bonk's work introduced semi-empirical estimates of the density of solar salt and other molten salt mixtures at low melting temperatures in the range of 70 °C to 140 °C.105 Excitingly, the density of a ternary even a multicomponent mixture can be predicted from the concentration of the addition. The density of other types of eutectic salts and their multiple systems has also been studied.106
The density of eutectic salts can be derived from the product function of the coordinated properties of anions and cations, respectively.107 Moreover, the results are highly accurate and stable. This method is the theoretical development of a eutectic salt, which avoids some measurement operations under extreme temperature. Understanding the microscopic properties of eutectic salts is essential for their applications. For example, the pyrometallurgical process can be used to process scrap metal nuclear fuel. Vaden et al. reported a model for determining the density of molten salt, electro-refining uranium metal in the LiCl–KCl system.108 The basis for the correction factor is knowing the chloride ion coordination chemistry of U3+. After applying the correction factor, the accuracy can be improved greatly.


4.1.2 Melting point. 
Measuring the melting point of a eutectic salt is usually not a difficult task, thanks to the development of technologies such as differential scanning calorimetry. Tang et al. measured the melting point of the eutectic Na2CO3–NaCl binary salt mixture.109 An exponential relationship between viscosity and temperature is observed, and the vapor pressure increases significantly as the temperature increases. Melting point is usually studied together with other properties, such as viscosity and conductivity. Tasaka et al. developed a simulation technique, calculation of phase diagram and thermodynamics method, to estimate ion conductivity and melting point of LiF–LiCl–LiBr-based quaternary systems.110 These molten salts have the potential as electrolytes in high temperature batteries; hence, the simulation of their ionic conductivities and melting points is of great significance. Furthermore, numerous research work has been done to predict the melting point of halide and nitrate eutectic salts.111–113
As a typical example of a ternary eutectic mixture, the LiF–NaF–KF system is of interest because it is a good solvent and low-pressure heat-transfer medium.114 This eutectic salt possesses good solvent properties, high thermal stability, and extended liquid range from 500 to 700 °C.
In industry, the use of molten salt is in large-scale. Storage tanks are generally covered with thick rock wool insulation during operation; the insulation of storage vessels is a big challenge. In Li's work, the dissolution process of over 24 tons of molten salt was studied (Fig. 12).115 Manual and automatic heating methods are used to heat the salt tank to achieve fast and safe operation. The temperature change is most obvious in the first 38 hours after the start. During the whole melting process (314 h), there is a large temperature difference between the heights of 325 to 825 mm across the entire tank, which is 108 °C. Salt near the bottom area in the tank must be well heated. In this manner, the economic operation mode of molten salt heat storage tank is obtained.
 Fig. 12  Structure of salt tank coupled with heaters and temperature sensors.115 Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019 Elsevier. 
The melting points of other multicomponent mixtures have also been explored. However, as a class of energy storage materials, the latent heat of the fusion (melting enthalpy) of eutectic salts is worthy of more attention.116


4.1.3 Heat capacity and enthalpy. 
Heat capacity and enthalpy are both important properties because they determine the amount of energy stored in molten salts. After fully studying the phase diagram of binary eutectic salts, the isobaric heat capacities of many systems have been reported. In Zaikov's work, the isobaric heat capacity of some chloride and bromide based eutectic salts was measured with high accuracy.117 It showed that the molar heat capacity of these mixtures is close to that of the pure salt in the same state. Kumkov et al. studied the isobaric molar heat capacities of a library of binary and ternary halide mixed salts.118 This is a very systematic work, and its error is extremely low (less than 5%). The molar heat capacity of a molten halide mixture is the sum of the heat capacities of each single component plus a certain value proportional to the enthalpy of mixing. Moreover, the molar heat capacity of the mixture is the sum of the heat capacities of the components if the mixing enthalpy is negligible. Gaune and coworkers measured the mixing enthalpy of a ternary system by direct calorimetry.119 Pure NdCl3 was added to eutectic LiCl–KCl at 1100 K, and the amount of NdCl3 was varied from 0.021 to 0.950 (in molar ratio). When the ratio is 0.400, the maximum enthalpy change is −7.10 kJ mol−1. Compared to earlier research, the value of enthalpy change is related to the cation radius. It is conjectured that the larger cation is more likely to coordinate with CI− than the smaller one. Both macroscopic laws and microscopic reasons have been studied, which are of great help in predicting the thermophysical properties of molten salts.
Apart from measuring, research has been done on predicting the molten salts’ fusion latent heat based on the properties of each single component. Kosa et al. proposed a method based on the assumption that the entropy of a binary eutectic is equal to the entropy of the individual components.120,121 The following equations are proposed: (17)where Aq/(q+r)Br/(q+r) represents the two components of 1 mole binary mixture, Tfus is the melting temperature of the eutectic in K, a is the activity coefficient of the component, ΔSfus and ΔCp,fus are the difference of entropy and heat capacity of the component, respectively, and ΔH is the heat of the mixing process.
The equation can be modified to apply to n-component eutectic mixture, which is given by:121 (18)where ΔSf,i is the entropy change of fusion for component i, and ai is the activity coefficient of component i. Useful thermodynamic properties of eutectic salts have been extensively studied and some of them can be found in reference books.122


4.1.4 Stability and reactivity. 
Eutectic salts are applied in various technological processes because they are quite stable at high temperature. They exhibit strong inertness in terms of thermal stability and reactivity. Some eutectic salts showed no decomposition under CO2 atmosphere, and little decomposition (0.15% weight loss) under N2 atmosphere up to 700 °C.123,124 This makes eutectic salts to be reliable phase change materials used in the power cycle based on supercritical carbon dioxide, which promotes the development of commercial thermal energy storage. Bruno et al. explored the use of a eutectic NaCl–Na2CO3 salt as a reliable high temperature phase change material.123 The eutectic salt was been thermally cycled up to 1000 times. Its thermophysical properties were measured before and after it had been subjected to thermal cycling, and its corrosion behaviour was also investigated. This eutectic salt shows good thermal stability without degradation after cycling 1000 times between 600 and 650 °C.
As eutectic molten salts are increasingly used for thermal energy storage, one problem is highlighted: containment materials for storing these eutectic salts. In view of the oxidation of molten salts on alloys, their corrosion effects have been studied.125,126 Steel alloys are considered as economic candidates for containment materials in thermal energy storage systems. Eutectic compositions of molten chlorides, nitrates, carbonates, and fluorides are the most popular storage media. An oxygen containing anion (such as carbonate) possesses a larger thermal capacity compared with chloride. This eutectic salt has attracted much attention because of its high energy density and less corrosive behaviour. The furnace test is a simple and feasible method.127 Salt containers are placed in the furnace at room temperature and then gradually heated to the final temperature. Once the salt melts and the chamber conditions are stable, the coupons will be immersed. Then, the top half of sample can be exposed to the air and the bottom half submerged into the molten salt. The samples were exposed to molten salts until they were removed after 120 hours. This method allows researchers to compare both the corrosion of salts and oxygen. It was also found that the decomposition gases of salt can increase the corrosive impact of the atmosphere. In addition, the corrosivity of molten salt on high-density graphite electrodes and their zirconia coatings has been studied.128
However, salt systems with high redox activity are valuable in some cases because of their unique physicochemical properties. Sagara et al. prepared a redox-active ionic liquid (RAIL) by mixing two distinct ionic liquids.129 Charge transfer (CT) was conducted by choosing a carbazole based ionic liquid ([CzC4ImC1][TFSI]) as the donor and a viologen-based ionic liquid ([C4VC7][TFSI]2) as the acceptor (Fig. 13A). The electrochemical reaction of neat CT-IL is shown in Fig. 13B. Among them, the second circle attracted the attention of researchers. Cyclic voltammetry curves of viologen in region A in Fig. 13B produced peaked diffusion-limited waveforms due to semi-infinite planar diffusion to the electrode surface. Further analysis proved that these cyclic voltammetry curves can be regarded as electrochemically reversible responses.
 Fig. 13  Preparation of a redox-active ionic liquid with charge transfer interaction from carbazole-based and viologen-based RAILs (A). Overview of the electrochemical reaction of neat CT-IL (B).129 Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2021 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
There is a lot of research work on molten salts. However, the data and conclusions obtained by different researchers are not always consistent. One of the reasons is the preparation method of the eutectic salt. Tie et al. used 6 preparation methods to study the relationship between the preparation of NaNO3–KNO3 binary molten salt and its thermophysical properties, including latent heat, decomposition temperature and melting range.130 The study showed that the static melting method, stirring evaporation method, boiling evaporation method, tap water dissolution method, and grinding method can be used to prepare a binary system with good thermophysical properties. However, the dissolution method may cause uneven distribution of compositions. In Castro's review, it is revealed that there are still large discrepancies between different sets of data for the same salt systems.131 The impact of these discrepancies has been discussed. Currently, it may be difficult to recommend reference data/measuring methods that can guide the reader toward the selection of the best systems. Therefore, although the research on the properties of molten salts seems to be a cliché, thermodynamic research on molten salts is still going on.132,133

4.2 Applications of eutectic salts
The applications of eutectic salts can be broadly divided into traditional energy storage and preparation of emerging materials. Relatively mature technologies using eutectic salts for thermal energy storage and as thermoelectric conversion media have already been developed. There have been successful examples, as evidenced by the various patents that have been granted. Moreover, the emerging applications focusing on the preparation of nanomaterials have enriched the use of eutectic salts.

4.2.1 Eutectic salts for energy storage. 
In 1968, Dijkhuis and coworkers summarized the physicochemical properties of a series of molten salts and evaluated their application in electromotive force equilibrium cells (Table 3).134 Though they did not pay attention to eutectics (actually they called it “low-melting mixture”), some of the mixtures were proved to be eutectic systems in other works.135
Table 3 Examples of a binary eutectic mixture as electrolyte (with common anion)134




Component 1
Component 2




AgCl
MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Pb)


AgBr
MBrn (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Pb)


CdCl2
MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Ba)


CdBr2
KBr


CeCl3
MCln (M = Na, K, Ca)


MgCl2
MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Rb)


NaCl
MCln (M = Ca, Ba, Sr)


PbCl2
MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Ca, Sr, Ba, Zn)


PbBr2
MBrn (M = Na, Zn)


ZnCl2
MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Ba)




When converting solar energy into thermal energy, a key issue is the conversion efficiency of the devices. Among them, the part that directly receives solar energy is of vital importance because it dominates the first step in energy conversion. In a solar energy project, Tamaura and coworkers developed a molten salt based solar energy receiver.136 A cavity-shaped receiver for a beam-down solar concentrating system was proposed. A simulation program was applied for using the heat flux distribution of solar radiation, and the properties of the constituent materials were set as input data to display the temperature distribution of the receiver and molten salt. The conversion efficiency of radiation to heat is calculated based on the input solar energy and the heat transferred to the molten salt. Under ideal experimental conditions, the conversion efficiency of the designed receiver is about 90%.
The cover of the tank is the first barrier to block sunlight. On one hand, we need it to block impurities and prevent the evaporation of molten salt; on the other hand, it will block part of the sunlight and reduce the light conversion rate. Tetreault et al. designed a solar receiving system composed of floating hollow fused silica balls.137 The high light transmission characteristics make it possible to reduce convection and radiation losses, and to minimize the surface area available for evaporation losses. The improvement in this work is believed to reduce the heat loss by up to 51%, while reducing light efficiency by less than 5%. The independent spheres are easy to replace, and their size can be adjusted according to different equipment (Fig. 14A). This transparent cover layer has the potential to achieve a higher solar energy efficiency, and it can also be used in other high-temperature industrial applications. Additionally, other improvements have also been investigated, such as the use of metal foam to enhance the heat recovery process.139 A model was developed for investigating energy discharge from a thermocline thermal energy storage system using a eutectic salt as the heat transfer media.140 The temperature profiles were systematically investigated, as well as the discharge efficiency of the storage tank. During the discharge process, the heat exchange zone expands with increase in time and Reynolds number, and its propagation speed is constant. Furthermore, the discharge efficiency of the energy storage tank increases with the height of the tank and decreases with the increase in the Reynolds number.
 Fig. 14  (A) Simplified diagram of the experimental setup used for evaluating the thermal insulation performance of the floating spheres, and 3D representation of the simulated section. An infrared camera is used to measure the photon flux losses from the surface of a heated beaker filled with molten salt, with and without floating spheres.137 Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (B) Cost of some molten salts as phase change materials for supercritical CO2 cycles.138 Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2020 Elsevier. 
Tamaura et al. studied the use of a mixture of K2CO3 and Na2CO3 to convert solar energy into chemical energy.141 At 1123 K, the product CO is obtained through Boudouard reaction (C + CO2 → 2CO), which is finally converted to methanol by hydrogenation. The sources of hydrogen and carbon are methane, which has a wide range of sources and low prices. This work provides a way for coupling reactions to produce energy. Apart from electrothermal conversion, molten salts can be used in new batteries.142,143
In industrial applications, model-based simulation is very important. Feasibility analysis was carried out from both scientific and economic standpoints.138,144 In Polten's work, massive available thermodynamic and phase equilibrium data for the (NaCl + KCl + AlCl3) system were critically evaluated to obtain optimized parameters of models for all condensed phases and relevant gaseous species.144 The models can be used along with the Gibbs free energy minimization software to interpolate and extrapolate, and to calculate all thermodynamic properties, such as vapour pressures and phase diagram sections at all compositions and even over extended ranges of temperature and pressure. Chartrand and coworker evaluated and optimized the thermodynamic properties of the (NaCl + KCl + MgCl2 + CaCl2 + ZnCl2) system.145 They discovered that the model parameters of thermodynamic properties and phase equilibria obtained for the binary and ternary systems can be used to predict those for the multicomponent (>4) system. In addition to thermodynamic properties such as melting point, heat capacity, and enthalpy change, the price per kilogram was also considered as an important factor in evaluating the economics of energy storage.138Fig. 14B shows the cost price per kilogram and per kilojoule. From the perspective of energy storage per unit price, molten salt NaCl–KCl–NaF is almost the same as NaCl–Na2SO4 and NaCl–Na2CO3. In term of energy density, the higher latent heat of NaCl–KCl–NaF makes the container smaller, and the concentrated solar power system is more compact. Therefore, the NaCl–KCl–NaF system is considered a good phase change material for energy storage. As a relatively mature field, there are many databases and patents on molten salt energy storage, which provides a good platform for researchers from both academia and industry.146,147


4.2.2 Fabrication and synthesis. 
Although most of the applications of eutectic salts are focused on energy storage, there are some applications in fabrication of materials. Covalent organic framework (COF) has received extensive attention due to its excellent crystallinity and high modularity. Lotsch et al. reported the ion-thermal synthesis of crystals and porous polyimide-linked COF in a mixture of zinc chloride and eutectic salt.148 This method overcomes the shortcomings of the conventional solvothermal one, whose reversibility is very poor in a ring-closing reaction. Moreover, the synthesis does not require soluble precursors, and the reaction time is significantly reduced. Interestingly, some COFs must be synthesized by using eutectic salts, which is believed due to the Lewis acidity of the ion-thermal environment (Fig. 15A).
 Fig. 15  Eutectic metals for preparing materials. (A) Synthesis of PMDA based COFs in a eutectic salt mixture, TT–PMDA: 2,4,6-tris(4-aminophenyl)–triazine pyromellitic dianhydride, TAPA–PMDA: 2,4,6-tris(4aminophenyl)–amine pyromellitic dianhydride.148 Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (B) Sectional schematic of the vertical driving force and horizontal liquid transport. (C) When sulphur vapor was introduced early, the Na2Mo2O7 precursor rapidly formed the MoS2 seed layer when exposed on the surface. (D) When sulphur vapor was introduced later, the MoS2 seed layer was formed at the solid–liquid interface, thus leaving a droplet of the liquid precursor on top of the interface. Optical image of monolayer (E) and bilayer (F) MoS2. Scale bar is 50 μm.149 Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the Springer Nature, copyright 2020. 
There have been reports that a single-component molten salt can be used to prepare metals, carbon, and other materials.150–152 The eutectic salt can be used for the preparation of various materials thanks to its multiple properties. Teshima et al. reported a strategy for fabricating Ta3N5 photoanodes by utilizing a mixture of NaCl and Na2CO3.153 The molar ratio of this system was very different (99.9:0.1), so the effect of eutectic may not be obvious. However, in Qu's work, the morphology of tin-based oxide hierarchical structures was tuned by changing the ratio of NaCl:Na2CO3 from 1:1 to 1:4.154 The obtained materials were considered to have potential to be applied as anodes in the battery industry. In Jin's work, Mg powder, TiO2, SiO2 (20:5:3 in molar ratio), and KCl–LiCl eutectic salt were ground for 15 min.155 The mixture was then heated (700 °C) in a box furnace for 2 hours. After washing and drying, electron microscopy images showed the formation of uniform TiSi5 nanoparticles.
Graphene based carbon materials can also be prepared by using a molten salt. Amorphous carbon is regarded as a valuable alternative to commercial graphite as anodes for lithium ion batteries because it can reversibly store a lot of lithium ions. Wu and coworkers introduced a simple route for the synthesis of ultrathin amorphous carbon nanosheets from petroleum asphalt in large scale.156 The carbon nanosheets prepared in this work were high performance anode materials for lithium ion batteries. The electrodes delivered a high reversible capacity, outstanding rate capability, and superior cycling performance (579 and 396 mA h g−1 at 2 and 5 A g−1 after 900 cycles). This research not only paved the way for the synthesis of carbon electrode for battery industry, but also expanded the application of molten salt in advanced field.
Chen et al. reported a gas–liquid–solid method to prepare micron-sized MoS2 films.149 A eutectic mixture in liquid is formed by mixing MoO3 and NaF, which is then sulfided into MoS2 (Fig. 15B). The formed MoS2 seed crystal acts as a covering layer, which can reduce nucleation density and promote lateral growth. By adjusting the driving force of the reaction (timing of introducing sulphur vapour), large single/double-layer flakes can be grown on a centimeter-level substrate (Fig. 15C–F). The field-effect transistor made of the full-coverage film showed high mobility. This method overcomes the bottleneck of conventional chemical vapor deposition reaction and is expected to realize the preparation of two-dimensional materials in large scale.
Different from the previous HF etching method of Mxene precursor, Gogotsi et al. proposed a method of using molten salt synthesis.157 A KF–NaF–LiF system was used to etch the aluminium atomic layer in Ti4AlN3 under an argon atmosphere at 550 °C. The resulting MXene was further stripped to produce several-layer nanosheets and monolayer films of Ti4N3Tx. This method can avoid the use of corrosive acids and is safer during operation.
Eutectic salts can also act as solvents or catalysts for gas synthesis and conversion. Methane reforming and methane pyrolysis are currently important sources of hydrogen. In McFarland's work, a ternary salt system (FeCl3–NaCl–KCl) was found to be catalytic for methane decomposition (Fig. 16A).158 It is believed that the reduction of activation energy is due to the presence of Fe species, which facilitate the pyrolysis of methane.
 Fig. 16  (A) Photo and schematic diagram of device for methane pyrolysis.158 Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Catalytic cycle proposed for electrochemical NH3 synthesis in molten LiCl–KCl–LiH. Species added to the reaction are shown in blue, remaining species in black are generated in situ, sole product NH3 is shown in green. Red dashed lines indicate opportunities for unproductive side reactions.159 Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
The reduction of nitrogen to ammonia has been a hot topic in recent years.160,161 However, the catalytic reactions in aqueous solutions are facing a major challenge, that is, the hydrogen evolution reaction. Tsang et al. reported a method to directly reduce nitrogen to ammonia in a molten salt electrolyte, which provides a new idea for the development of this field.159 Li3N in the eutectic salt will promote the spontaneous chemical disproportionation of H2 into H− and H+, resulting in the release of the product, NH3. The catalytic cycle is shown schematically in Fig. 16B.
Du et al. described a strategy from the changes of the vanadium valence state and mineral phase, and the promotion of vanadium oxidation by molten salt was realized.162 In addition, synthesis of silicate and zirconate powders by molten salts was also reported.163,164

4.3 Liquid metal batteries
In foregoing paragraphs, eutectic alloys and eutectic salts were introduced. By coupling eutectic metal and eutectic salt, all-liquid electrical cells can be achieved. More excitingly, they do not require any membrane. A liquid metal battery consists of two liquid metal electrodes separated by a molten salt electrolyte that self-segregates into three layers based upon density and immiscibility (Fig. 17).11,165 Metals A and B can form eutectic alloys, which can reduce the working temperature. At this temperature, eutectic molten salts between electrodes act as both conductors and metallic suppliers. For example, alloying Sb with Pb has been known to achieve significant reductions in the melting point of the positive electrode as well as the cell operating temperature without an attendant decrease in cell voltage. The process not only lowers the cost of Li–Sb–Pb batteries, increasing their attractiveness for stationary applications, but also serves as an example of how to broaden the selection of positive-electrode materials for liquid metal batteries. Sadoway and coworkers described a Li–Sb–Pb liquid metal battery that potentially meets the performance specifications for stationary energy storage applications.166 This Li–Sb–Pb battery consists of a liquid lithium negative electrode, a molten salt electrolyte, and a liquid Sb–Pb alloy (18:82 in molar ratio, Tm is 253 °C) positive electrode, which self-segregates by density into three distinct layers owing to the immiscibility of the contiguous salt and metal phases. The all-liquid construction confers the advantages of higher current density, longer cycle life and simpler manufacturing of large-scale storage systems (because no membranes or separators are involved) compared to those of conventional batteries. At a charge–discharge current density of 275 mA cm−2, the cells cycled at 450 °C with 98% coulombic efficiency and 73% round-trip energy efficiency.
 Fig. 17  Schematic diagram of a liquid metal battery upon (A) discharging and (B) charging.11 
In Sadoway's review, electrodes and electrolytes with the desired characteristics are constrained according to the following requirements (Table 4).11
Table 4 The selection of properties in liquid metal batteries11




Electrodea
Electrolyte





a In this part, the candidates of electrode materials are pure metals.





• Tb > 25 °C, Tm < 1000 °C
• Low melting temperature


• Electrically conductive, with a minimum electronic conductivity greater than the ionic conductivity of a typical molten salt electrolyte (σ > 1 S cm−1)
• A density intermediate between the positive and negative electrodes to facilitate the self-segregation of three liquid layers


• Nonradioactive
• Minimal metal solubility




• No irreversible side reactions of spectator ions within the operating voltage window




• High ionic conductivity for high-rate capability and energy efficiency




5. Deep eutectic solvents
Water is the most common solvent, and aqueous solutions indeed represent a widely used class of polar solvents with excellent properties. However, in certain environments, water-based solvents have disadvantages. For example, the use of water-based solvents will result in hydrogen evolution side-reactions during the electrodeposition process, and some organic reactions require an anhydrous environment. Therefore, the development of non-aqueous solvent systems has attracted increasing attention.
DESs are a family of environmentally friendly solvents that are composed of an ionic compound such as a quaternary ammonium salt and a molecular compound such as a polyol.14 They have been applied in various fields since they were proposed by Abbott et al. in 2003.14,167 When components that constitute the DESs are primary metabolites, the DESs are so called NADES (meaning natural DESs). The versatility of NADES is comparable to that of ionic liquids with their great advantages being their much lower cost and high sustainability.168 Therefore, NADES are called the solvents for the 21st century. In 2014, Abbott et al. redefined four types of DESs (Table 5).169 The third type is the most popular category because of its excellent properties and diversity. Owing to increasing demand, a large number of DESs have been prepared for different applications. It is necessary to study their properties.
Table 5 General formula for the classification of DESs169




Type
General formula
Terms




Type I
Cat+X−zMClx
M = Zn, Sn, Fe, Al, Ga, In


Type II
Cat+X−zMClx·yH2O
M = Cr, Co, Cu, Ni, Fe


Type III
Cat+X−zRZ
Z = CONH2, COOH, OH


Type IV
MClx+RZ = MClx−1+·RZ + MClx+1
M = Al, Zn and Z = CONH2, OH




5.1 ILs and DESs
At first, ionic liquids (ILs) referred to pure salts or eutectic salts in molten state. With the deepening of research, ILs have gradually evolved into different types (Fig. 18A).170 Room temperature ionic liquids (RTILs) are regarded as the missing link between aqueous/organic solutions and high temperature molten salts.171 Their high thermal stability and wide electrochemical windows make them good candidates for application in in electrochemistry, biochemistry, engineering, physical chemistry, and analytical chemistry.172 Many properties of ILs can be tuned by changing the combination of anions and cations according to their applications. In addition, chemical modification of ions (usually cations) improves their performance as task-specific solvents. A longer alkyl chain in cation is believed to be beneficial for lowering its melting point. ILs with long side chains exhibit a bicontinuous morphology, one region consists of polar moieties and the other of apolar, alkyl tails (Fig. 18B).173 As analogues of RTILs, DESs also possess polar and apolar domains in nanoscale. Studies have shown that the applications of DESs almost cover those of ILs in many fields. What's more, the preparation process of DESs is much simpler than that of ILs. Therefore, DESs can also be regarded as the development of eutectic salts.
 Fig. 18  (A) The evolution of ionic liquids. (B) Comparison of ionic liquid and DES. 
5.2 Formation of deep eutectic solvents
Researchers claim that hydrogen bonding interaction in DESs is the reason for the formation of eutectic systems.31 It can be interpreted that the hydrogen bonding interaction between hydrogen in molecules and anions hinders the crystallization of the whole system. Although this seems to be a generally accepted explanation, it is ambiguous as well. When increasing the strength of hydrogen bonds between the hydrogen bond donors (HBDs) and hydrogen bond acceptors (HBAs), it seems that negative charge will spread more from the anions to the organic compounds, whereas the positive charge will locate more strongly around the cations. However, in Mollenhauer's work, it showed that the negative charge transferred from chloride to urea in choline chloride urea mixtures was negligible.174 Thus, they raised a question: is the charge delocalization occurring through hydrogen bonding between the halide anion (the HBA) and the organic compound (the HBD) responsible for eutectic? This inspired researchers to continue to explore the intrinsic reasons for the formation of eutectics.
Nonetheless, hydrogen bonding interaction is widely believed to be one of the reasons for eutectics. Almost all researchers will conduct experiments to verify the formation of a eutectic system after preparing a DES. Common characterization studies are IR, nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR), and differential scanning calorimetry (DSC).175–178 For example, the displacement and change of characteristic peaks in the IR spectra are supposed to be an evidence for the formation of hydrogen bonding interaction, and the principle of NMR is the same. These microscopic spectra combined with macroscopic information such as melting point and phase diagram are believed sufficient to explain the formation of the eutectic system. However, with the achievement of instruments and simulation methods, some more profound topics are studied.
In Zahn's work, the ab initio molecular dynamics simulations of reline (ChCl:urea = 1:2) reveal similar hydrogen bonding interactions in spatial distribution between both constituents (Fig. 19A).179 In addition, chloride anions and the oxygen atoms of urea also show a similar spatial distribution around the cationic core of choline (Fig. 19B). There are undetectable cluster migration which is induced by multiple similar interactions, and fast hydrogen bonding dynamics facilitated by the hydrogen atoms contributes to the low melting point of reline. In pure substance (salt), the anions and cations combine with each other; in DES, this combination is broken by the molecular compound, that is, cations and hydrogen compete for anions.
 Fig. 19  Spatial distribution function of Cl− (green, isosurface 20 nm−3) and Ourea (red, isosurface 20 nm−3) close to choline (A) and urea (B).179 Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) A hypothetical diagram of eutectic mechanism, balls in blue and red represent different molecules. 
In addition to the formation of hydrogen bonding interaction, the increase in entropy is considered to be another important change in the mixed system. In a pure substance, molecules or ions (simplified as balls with different colour) arrange regularly; while in DES, molecules or ions are disordered (Fig. 19C). When forming a new mixing system, the microenvironment around the original molecules becomes more complex. Marcus studied the entropy change of DES formation.180 It has been proved that the mixing entropies are positive, due to the increased amount and kinds of hydrogen bonds present in the DESs compared to those in the components. The standard entropy ΔSθ of a DES is derived from the densities or crystal structures of HBA and HBD. These values are compared with those of single components (according to the molar ratio) to obtain the standard entropies of DES formation ΔSf. It seems that the formation of new hydrogen bonding interactions and the increase of entropy are not contradictory, but are mutually responsible. This sort of noncovalent interaction (i.e. hydrogen bonding interaction) is so strong that it leads to the low-selectivity of molecular binding. This low-selectivity makes the mixture system difficult to form crystals, so the solidification point will be reduced.
There is also a study that shows that DESs are able to form ionic hydrogen bonds.181 Evidence has been found for a tripodal CH⋯Cl doubly ionic H-bond motif. In reline, the strongest H-bond forms between urea and choline, rather than the hydrogen bond between urea and chloride anions. In Hunt's work, an “alphabet soup” model was proposed. It was also found that there are different types of H-bonds (OH⋯OC, NH⋯OC, OH⋯Cl, NH⋯Cl, OH⋯NH, CH⋯Cl, CH⋯OC, NH⋯OH and NH⋯NH) in reline, which exhibited high diversity. It is anticipated that these noncovalent interactions will have a significant impact on the entropy of the system, and, thus could play an important role in the formation of the eutectic system.
No essential structural change has been detected from liquid to solid, demonstrating that the solidification of the DES (molar ratio ChCl:malic acid = 1:1) is a glass transition rather than a first order phase change.182 Quasi elastic neutron scattering (QENS) data support this by showing a gradual change in solvent dynamics rather than a step change. The finding of structure in DESs will help to further understand the mechanism of these green solvents on a molecular scale during the chemical processes, and, the role of natural DESs in plant physiology.
5.3 Properties of DESs
In this part, the heterogeneity of DESs is discussed, which may be helpful to unravel the intrinsic mechanism of their excellent solubility properties. Thanks to advanced neutron scattering technology and molecular dynamics simulation, the complex hydrogen bonding networks in DESs have been studied. In general, measuring the physical properties such as density and viscosity of DESs is the basis for their industrial use.183 Compared with water and some volatile organic solvents, DESs possess a relatively high viscosity. However, it is very instructive that adding a certain proportion of water may not affect the microstructure of DESs, which implies that the viscosity of the solvent system can be reduced by dilution. For a particular DES, the proportion of water can be as high as 83%.184 This suggests that dilution can greatly reduce the costs in industrial applications.
In addition, thermodynamic properties such as enthalpy change, entropy change, and melting point are also discussed. Thermal stability is a key property for DESs because it determines the maximum operating temperature. Some existing thermal stability laws are summarized, and a new test method is also given to test the thermal stability of DESs under long-term heating. Apart from measuring and testing, there are physical and chemical properties such as melting point prediction through formula derivation and machine learning.185,186 The results of simulation data show excellent correlation with those of some testing experiments.
Finally, the electrochemical properties of DESs are discussed, which contribute to the development of a battery. DESs have good conductivity and wide electrochemical windows, and are expected to make breakthroughs in this field.

5.3.1 Heterogeneous structure in nanoscale. 
Once we have determined the existence and function of hydrogen bonds in DESs, an important question arises. We know that there are hydrogen-bonding interactions in each eutectic system, but in what form? This depends on the internal structure of the DES, which is important for further applications. Edler et al. carried out a liquid phase neutron diffraction experiment on reline.189 A hydrogen-deuterium isotope substitution was used to obtain cross-sections of differential neutron scattering, and a corrected empirical potential energy structure model was fitted based on experimental data. The result of the radial distribution function revealed the existence of a hydrogen-bonding network in DESs. These networks exist not only between urea and chloride but also between all species in DESs with important and orderly interactions. The hydroxyl group in choline was found to play a decisive role in the bonding network. In addition to the hydrogen-bonding network, strong ion pairs were also proved to exist in some non-choline DESs.190 Does this simply mean that DES is closer to ionic solvents? Hapiot‘s work negated this question. From the results of electron transport kinetics, ethaline (choline chloride:ethylene glycol = 1:2) seems to be more similar to a molecular solvent than an IL or an aqueous solution.187 The electron transfer in ethaline is relatively faster than in most of the ILs, while similar to that in water. Kinetic rate constant in ethaline is more than 1 order of magnitude larger than its estimation from the longitudinal relaxation times (Fig. 20A).
 Fig. 20  (A) The deviation of Ethaline DES from the aqueous solution and classical ionic liquids, BMF-TFSI: 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, EMIM-BF4: 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate.187 Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) A schematic representation showing different domains/regions in DESs and possible locations of various solutes in these regions.188 Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Despite the formation of a ubiquitous hydrogen bonding network, a DES as liquid phase is inevitably heterogeneous at nanoscale (Fig. 20B). In other words, on the nanometer scale, there are high-polarity regions and low-polarity regions in a DES. Samanta et al. studied the structure and dynamics of some carefully chosen systems.188 The results showed that, when the chain length of one of these solvents increases, both spatial and dynamic heterogeneity increases. However, with the change of hydroxyl position, no obvious heterogeneity was observed. Kashyap et al. studied lithium perchlorate based DESs using X-ray and neutron scattering.191 The scattering structure functions and correlation between the ion species reveal that the nano-heterogeneity in DESs increases with increasing temperature. This heterogeneity in nanostructure helps people understand the excellent solubility of DESs, which will be discussed in the following paragraph.
The excellent solubility of DESs is believed to originate from this nano-inhomogeneity. Golgoun et al. compared the solubility of 6 drugs (acetaminophen, naproxen, celecoxib, piroxicam, meloxicam and betamethasone) in water and different DESs at a certain temperature range, and used dynamic light scattering measurement and polarized optical microscopy to gain an in-depth understanding of the interactions between drugs and each single component of DESs.192 The results showed that the solubility of drugs in DESs is significantly improved compared with that in water. Hansen solubility parameter is used to evaluate the performance of DESs during the solubilization process. This method is hoped to be useful in studying the solvent behaviour in other fields.
β-Cyclodextrin (β-CD) is a typical amphiphilic molecule; the hydrophobic part of the inner cavity can accommodate oily molecules, thereby increasing its dispersion in polar solvents. In addition, β-CD can be used for targeted drug delivery. Small angle X-ray scattering proved that quite a large amount of β-CD (at most 800 mg mL−1) can be dissolved in reline, which is much larger than 18 mg mL−1 in water.193 At the micro level, hydrogen bonding and hydrophobic interaction determine the solvation of β-CD, which is also a strong proof of the heterogeneity in DESs. The above typical developments benefit drug design and delivery. The results of small angle X-ray scattering, dynamic light scattering, and transmission electron microscopy demonstrated that DESs can be an alternative choice for the growth of nanoparticles restricted by water.194 This characteristic helps to prepare some nanomaterials with special morphology.195
The results of some other small-angle scattering experiments showed that some DESs are excellent solvents for macromolecules such as proteins and polymers.196–198 They can even provide the environment where proteins can retain their specific structure.


5.3.2 Solvation and interface properties. 
The microenvironment and solute–solvent interactions in DESs are critical for their potential applications, such as extraction and separation. Therefore, in addition to the heterogeneity which has already been described above, solvent kinetics of DESs has been studied. Amphiphilic nanostructure (i.e. microheterogeneity) in liquid is important for dissolution. Atkin and coworkers revealed that the cation alkyl chain is the signature of amphiphilic liquid nanostructure in tetra-alkyl ammonium based DESs.199 The ability to form amphiphilically nanostructured DESs highlighted the possibility that other interfacial properties of ionic liquids could be extended to the field of DESs. In another work, Kashyap and coworkers used molecular dynamics simulations to investigate the structural morphology of molecule in bulk and at the graphene interface (neutral and charged).200 It revealed that there is not only a complex structure in bulk DES, but also a layered structure on the surface of the electrode, and the latter varies significantly with the size of the charge carried by the electrode. This conclusion contributes to the electrochemical application in DESs.
Bagchi et al. used single molecule based fluorescence correlation spectroscopy techniques and set based time resolved fluorescence anisotropy measurement methods to study the translational and rotational diffusion dynamics of species in the eutectic system.175 The results showed that the spatial and dynamic heterogeneity of these DES becomes more prominent in cation systems with longer alkyl chain length, which is consistent with Atkin's experimental results. The results also showed that as the chain length increases, the kinetics of the solvent decreases monotonously, which leads to an increase in viscosity.201
DESs can be used to prepare dynamic soft templates because they can guide the growth of nanoparticles with limited size or shape in water restricted media.202 It is also reported that the aggregation of surfactants is attributed to the hydrophobic interaction between them and the alkyl chain of DESs.203 In addition to commonly used surfactants, Warr et al. studied the chain melting temperature of phospholipids by X-ray scattering.204 Chain melting is most sensitive to the length of the alkyl chain of the cation, which is consistent with the experimental results of solvation kinetics.


5.3.3 Density and viscosity. 
In recent years, there have been few publications solely on density and viscosity of DESs. Instead, some experiments on density and viscosity (if any) are placed in front of application experiments as less important content.205,206 These physical properties are not meaningless, they are more important in industrial research. While in academic research, they are usually studied in combination with other microscopic dynamics. According to Pandey's work, the density of reline decreases with increasing temperature, following a quadratic expression.207 It was found that at all temperatures and compositions, the molar volume of the excess linear aqueous mixture is negative. Generally, as the temperature increases from 293.15 K to 323.15 K, the absolute excess molar volume decreases. Hydrogen bond is suggested to be the cause of this phenomenon. It is further proved that the HBDs dominate the interaction in DESs and their aqueous solutions, and the important role of HBDs has been fully emphasized. In addition, most experimental data showed that the density of DESs has a good linear relationship with temperature, and the viscosity fits the commonly used Arrhenius equation.208 Contrary to density and viscosity, conductivity and excess molar volume ratio show a tendency to increase with increasing temperature.209 Understanding the laws of these volume properties is of great guiding significance for industrialization practice.
Buchner et al. studied the density and viscosity of reline under ultra-dry conditions.210 At 298.15 K, when the water content is 0.81%, the density decreases by 0.14%, while the viscosity decreases by 36%. This shows that water has different effects on different properties. By dilution, some properties can be adjusted without changing other properties. Although DESs have emerged as designable solvents for many applications such as catalysis and separation engineering, their high viscosity may hinder their usage in the field of bioactive components.211,212 An efficient method to reduce viscosity is dilution. Because the internal structure (especially in nanoscale) may vary remarkably, studying the whole system is important.213,214
It has been proved that some DES–H2O systems have better performance and lower cost.215 With the help of advanced experimental technology, the internal nanostructure of hydrated DESs with complexed interaction mechanism can be studied. In Edler's work, the nanostructure of a series of ChCl/urea/water mixtures across a wide hydration range were characterized by neutron total scattering and empirical potential structure refinement.184 The result showed that the nanostructure of reline is retained at a pretty high level of water (ca. 42 wt%), while at 51 wt% or 83 mol% H2O, the structure of reline is disrupted. Under high hydration conditions, water–water and DES–water interactions dominated instead of the inner interactions between single components (Fig. 21). Consequently, they proposed that at and above 83 mol% H2O, the DES–water mixture can be best described as an aqueous solution.
 Fig. 21  Spatial density function plots describing the 3D nanostructure of DES with water. Isosurfaces represent urea (lilac), chloride (green), choline (yellow), and water (blue) molecules at the 7.5% probability level. The central molecules from left to right are choline, urea, and choline respectively. ChCl:urea:water 1:2:1 and 1:2:15 in molar correspond to the top (1w) and bottom (15w) respectively.184 Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons. 
The above work has a great significance for proving the role of water in DESs, and it draws a line between DES and their aqueous solutions. However, one of the shortcomings is that it only studied one DES (reline), while the properties of different eutectic systems vary greatly. For example, Kashyap et al. applied a molecular dynamics simulation research on ethaline.216 The result showed that the change of ethaline from a ternary system to an aqueous solution is a step change. When the water content exceeded 40 mol%, hydrogen bonding between ethylene glycol and each hydrogen bonding acceptor was sharply destroyed. Similar to Edler's work, the research result of Kashyap et al. showed that the effect of water on the structure of DES is nonlinear. Above a certain critical water content, the hydrogen bonding network between the two monomers of DES begins to break. In reline, the critical water content is 42 mol%, while in ethaline this number is 40 mol%. However, there are still certain differences. The dividing line of aqueous solution in reline is 83 mol%, while in ethaline, it is 62.5–76.9 mol%. Since the above two DESs have the same HBA, quantifying the effects of water on different HBDs is worth for further investigation.


5.3.4 Enthalpy and entropy change. 
As mentioned above, entropy change is an important reason for the formation of DESs. The process of mixing the two monomer compounds increases the entropy, which makes the eutectic system more stable. One of the most important prerequisites for applying DESs is to understand their phase behaviour. The non-ideality of the phase behaviour is determined by the contribution of excess entropy and enthalpy. Although the total Gibbs free energy change of the mixing process can be inferred from the solid–liquid phase behaviour, the contribution of entropy and enthalpy is difficult to be distinguished, respectively. With et al. proposed two entropy models in non-ideal situations in order to predict the phase behaviour of DESs.217 They found that the ideal mixing entropy underestimates the entropy contribution of the components in a mixture, and the molar volume employed has a significant impact on the entropy and enthalpy changes during the mixing process. Recent research has shown that the formation processes of some common DESs are an endothermic process (ΔH > 0).218 The corresponding molar enthalpy change ranges from 1.90 to 5.35 kJ mol−1. A deeper conclusion is that, noncovalent interactions between the molecules in pure components are stronger than those in eutectics. Interestingly, this work reported the decisive roles of HBA in affecting the entropy change.
Lu et al. studied the enthalpy change of the hydration process of 3 ratios of choline chloride/urea eutectic systems at 308.15 K and 318.15 K.219 As the water content increases, ChCl/urea (1:2.5) showed endothermal behaviour over the entire range; while ChCl/urea (1:1.5) and ChCl/urea (1:2) showed endothermic behaviour first, which then changed to be exothermic (Fig. 22). This result showed that when there is a lot of water in the mixture, the intermolecular interaction between DES–DES and water–water is stronger than that of DES–water. As the content of DES in the mixture increases, the DES–water interaction changes to take the dominant role, and the eutectic system shows an exothermic behaviour.
 Fig. 22  Molar enthalpy of mixing Hm (with water) for ChCl/urea at different molar ratios (1:2.5, 1:2, 1:1.5). Blue points are experimental data at 308.15 K: (◆) 1:2.5, (▲) 1:2, and (●) 1:1.5; black points, experimental data at 318.15 K: (◊) 1:2.5, (△) 1:2, and (○) 1:1.5. Curves: calculated results from nonrandom two-liquid model.219 Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. 
All in all, the entropy change and the enthalpy change are critical to assess their potential in practical applications on an industrial scale.


5.3.5 Melting point and thermal stability. 
Almost all the research on DESs include the characterization of the melting point (phase transition point) of the eutectic system. A phase diagram is required to prove the formation of a eutectic system, or at least to verify that the melting point of the mixed system is lower than that of each single component. However, different researchers hold different views about the melting point in the definition of DESs. Some people have a strict definition of DESs: the melting point of the mixed system must be lower than the melting point of any pure component, and lower than 25 °C. Others claim that the melting point of DES only needs to lower than every single component. Here, authors advocate that it may be helpful to review the history of RTILs. In the early days, researchers referred to ILs with a melting point below 25 °C as RTILs. However, with the deepening of research and applications, the definition of RTILs has been enlarged (melting points below 100 °C). Therefore, the broad definition of DESs related to the melting point is beneficial to their development.
The characterization of melting point is usually conducted by DSC, supplemented by optical microscope and other instruments. A phase diagram is completed by linking the phase transition points on DSC curves. This series of operations is not difficult. However, it is worth mentioning that a number of DESs do not possess a real melting point, but have a glass transition temperature.220,221 The reason for this phenomenon is still under study, and hydrogen bonding is believed to hinder the crystallization of the eutectic systems. Therefore, some DESs are called low-transition temperature mixtures.222
DESs as the analogue of ionic liquids are considered to be less volatile. However, it is still necessary to study their thermal stability. Research has shown that DESs have low but detectable vapour pressure under ambient conditions.223 The essence of vapour pressure is considered to be the result of volatilization of one or all components in DESs. A systematic research on the thermal stability of 40 DESs by thermal gravimetric analysis (TGA) was carried out.224 It was found that the decomposition process of DESs is different from that of ionic liquids.225 DESs are multi-component systems, although there is a strong interaction between each single component. When heated, DESs will undergo a two-stage decomposition process. First, the relatively volatile molecular components (usually hydrogen bond donors) will evaporate, followed by the decomposition of the remaining components. The strength of the hydrogen bond determines the volatilization rate of the HBD, and thus the onset decomposition temperatures (Tonset). The thermal stability of DESs is largely affected by the thermal stability of HBD. In addition to TGA, FT-IR and 2D-IR were used to study the volatility and long-term volatility of DESs.226,227 It was demonstrated that some DESs are volatile under ambient temperature and pressure, and it is necessary to pay attention to the tightness of the container in industrial scale.
In a recent work, the thermal stability of 8 ChCl-based DESs (of which the HBDs are levulinic acid, malonic acid, glycerol, ethylene glycol, phenylacetic acid, phenylpropionic acid, urea, and glucose, respectively) has been studied using thermal gravimetric analysis/Fourier transform infrared-attenuated total reflectance spectroscopy (TGA–FT-IR-ATR) techniques under isothermal conditions.228 By this method, the structural transition, temperature, and duration of DESs can be confirmed, respectively. The Tonset of DESs obtained using TGA was significantly lower than those obtained using TG–FT-IR-ATR. It is worth thinking about using traditional TGA to analyse the application (especially long-term application) temperature of DESs.
These research work can help understand the decomposing dynamics of DESs and provide guidance for designing DESs with appropriate thermal stability.


5.3.6 Electrochemical properties. 
DESs are also supposed to be a class of ideal candidates for electrochemical systems due to their ionic conductivity, and environmentally friendly and relatively stable nature.169
In electrochemical research, transport properties such as viscosity and conductivity are of vital importance. Recent reports have shown that the displacements associated with the localized diffusive motions are actually larger for choline when the diffusion dynamics are analysed on the sub-nanoscale.229 Loidl and coworkers did a thorough research on reorientational relaxation dynamics and the ionic charge transport of 3 DESs by broadband dielectric spectroscopy.230 The experiments cover a broad temperature range from low viscosity liquid to the deeply super cooled state, which allowed them to investigate the significant influence of glassy freezing on the ionic charge transport in these systems. Moreover, they threw light on a close coupling of the ionic conductivity in these materials to reorientational dipolar motions, which should be considered when designing DESs optimized for electrochemical applications.
DESs have been proven to have very good electrical conductivity, so they are considered for the preparation of flexible electronic devices. Soin et al. synthesized polymer electrolytes by electrospinning technology, and then immersed them in a series of DESs to enhance the electrical conductivity of the composite.231 After being immersed in DES (N,N-diethylethanolammonium chloride:ethylene glycol = 1:2), the conductivity of the membrane increases nearly 10000 times. Cyclic voltammetry experiments show that the linear diffusion is common in DESs.232 In addition, semi-integrative voltammetry has proved to be a good tool for studying simple electrochemical systems in DESs.233
Although some of their properties were well studied, the interfacial especially the electrified confined properties have barely been investigated. To benefit the applications of DESs in the electrochemistry field, Proft and coworkers illustrated the electrical double layer structures of reline by atomistic molecular dynamics simulations.234 The result showed that urea molecules are adsorbed on both positive and negative electrodes. Whereas choline ions tend to adsorb on the negative electrode, chloride ions tend to adsorb on the positive electrode (Fig. 23A). More than this, urea tends to be perpendicular to negatively charged graphene, while being parallel to positively charged graphene (Fig. 23B). This may result in the first layer of the negative electrode being thicker than that of the positive electrode. The conclusion of this study provided new insights into the electrical double layer structures of DESs. The interfacial structure can be tuned at the molecular level.
 Fig. 23  The behaviour of molecules on electrodes. (A) A single and double adsorption layer on positive and negatively charged electrodes. Gray clusters represent urea molecules, blue clusters represent choline cations, and green balls represent chloride ions. (B) The orientation of urea on positive and negative electrodes (blue represents the graphene electrode with negative charge, red represents the graphene electrode with positive charge).234 Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 

5.4 Applications of DESs
Understanding the properties of DESs is conducive to utilizing them, and then, extending new applications. As a class of green solvents, they are widely used for dissolution and separation. Many natural products can be dissolved in DESs. By designing a task-specific system, the target product can be dissolved in it, while the impurities are insoluble. In this way, the purified target product can be obtained simply by effective filtering. Moreover, the filtrate can be used directly to carry out a series of chemical reactions, such as the conversion of cellulose to 5-hydroxymethylfurfural.238–241 In addition, many DESs possess good electrical conductivity and can be used as electrolytes in batteries and electrocatalytic reactions. Inspired by the hydrothermal and solvothermal methods, DESs have also been used to synthesize nanomaterials. In some reactions, DES only serves as a solvent; while in other reactions, DES participates in synthesizing materials by decomposition.

5.4.1 Absorption, dissolution, and separation. 
DESs are considered as promising absorbents for carbon dioxide, sulphur dioxide, and other gases, thus contributing to environmental protection.242–244 There are many studies that aimed at exploring the design and preparation of effective eutectic absorbents.245 The synergistic effect of anions and cations has proved to be crucial for capturing CO2. In addition, the protonated super base plays a key role in the absorption process. The same with carbon dioxide, and sulphur dioxide is an acid gas. Therefore, the nitrogen atoms in DESs were considered to be the binding sites for sulfur dioxide.246,247 Wang et al. used FT-IR and NMR to study the absorption performance of piperazine-based DES at different SO2 concentrations and absorption temperatures. It has been found that the 1,4-dimethyl-piperazinium bromide/glycerol = 1:1 system can obtain 4.28 mol SO2 per mole of DES at 20 °C and 1 bar. The tertiary amine groups in DESs were the main interaction sites for SO2, and this kind of interaction is considered the chemical bonding. By mixing organic bases and alcohols, CO2-switchable systems can be prepared.235,248 Alternate blowing of CO2 and N2 can realize the reversible soluble–insoluble phase transition (Fig. 24A). For example, an emulsion was formed when mixing olive oil and the imidazole/ethylene glycol system. After bubbling CO2, the emulsion can be separated into two transparent phases (Fig. 24B and C).235 Spectral studies have shown that the intrinsic reason for this phase transition is H2CO3. The acidity of H2CO3 is stronger than HBDs, leading to the destruction of the original hydrogen bond in DESs. In this way, the extraction of soluble substances in water can be achieved. In another work, Andanson et al. proposed a thermo-switchable DES based on oleic acid and lidocaine.236 This phase separation was believed to be caused by decrease in hydrophilicity. The selected system can accurately achieve phase separation at 26 °C (Fig. 24D and E). Although there is no light-switchable DES reported till now, authors hold the view that such DESs will be proposed in the near future. The breakthrough of ionic liquid provides guidance for designing DESs.249
 Fig. 24  (A) The photos of the initial imidazole/EG–olive oil emulsion. (B) The laser scanning confocal microscopy image of the initial emulsion. (C) The laser scanning confocal microscopy image of lower phase after CO2 bubbling for 30 min.235 Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2021 Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Schematic diagram of thermo-switchable DES in water. (E) Evolution of the liquid–liquid phase observed by optical microscopy of a sample with 50 wt% water and 50 wt% DES, from 25 to 26 °C.236 Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (F) Schematic view of reaction and separation process in DES.237 Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
In Qi's work, a eutectic system was designed with reference to the solubility of reactants and products.237 The esterification reaction of isobutyric acid and isobutanol proceeds in the DES phase, and isobutyl isobutyrate enters the upper ester phase as a product.
Metal oxides exist in the form of ore in nature, and sulfate acid is usually used to dissolve them in industrial hydrometallurgy. However, studies have shown that DES can be a good substitute for H2SO4.205,206,250,251 In a recent work, Hartley and coworkers studied the effect of acidity and coordination on the dissolution of metal oxides in DESs.250 Metal oxides turned to dissolve more in HBDs with stronger coordinating ability. The surface reaction was accelerated by the subsequent ligand exchange reaction in liquid. It has also been proved that the leaching process of metal oxides is selective, and its solubility largely depends on the lattice energy and the Gibbs energy of metal oxides. The good solubility of metal oxides in DESs is the cornerstone for the metal electrodeposition mentioned below.
DESs, especially NADESs, are often used to treat biomass.252 Gonzalez-Miquel et al. compared the performance of ionic liquids, organic solvents, biobased solvents and NADESs for the recovery of biobased organic acids.253 Furthermore, a reasonable screening method was established to identify suitable solvents for the recovery of biobased acids with different structures. Finally, this work provided guidance for the design of sustainable separation process of such organic acids. In another work, Zhang et al. investigated the acidity of various acid-containing NADESs.254 Chitin in shrimp shells was separated by acid–base reaction and hydrogen bond interaction. This method has replaced the conventional one, which needs acid, alkali, catalyst, and acylation reagent. A multi-step transition including decalcification, deproteinization and acylation can be carried out simultaneously. The results showed that nano-components, experimental temperature and reaction time have important effects on the purity and substitution of o-acylated chitin.
It is well known that hydrogen bonding is one of the most important intermolecular interactions, and it plays a key role in the structure of biomass. As mentioned above, the intrinsic mechanism of dissolving biomass is usually to destroy their original hydrogen bond network structures. This can explain why it is necessary to use strong acids or alkalis during the pre-treatment of biomass in the traditional processes. In a recent work, Xu et al. have developed an experimental method to determine the value of hydrogen-binding energy (EHB) as a function of chemical shift (δ) through a linear equation, given by,271 (19)where δ is the chemical shift of hydrogen, σδ is the compensated term, and A is a constant. It was found that EHB acts as a driving force for controllably reconstructing hydrogen bonding interactions with molecular scissors, which is consistent with previous studies.272
We have summarized a series of resources, from water to bitumen, and from metals to organic nutrients, that can be recycled using DESs (Table 6).
Table 6 Different resources recycled by DESs




Water255



Sea water, waste water


Metals256
Flue dust


Protein257,258
Oilseed cakes, cod skins


Lipid259
Microalga P. tricornutum


Lignin260
Switchgrass


Chitin254,261
Crustacean shells


Vitamins262
Button mushroom


Rutin263

Sophora japonica



Astaxanthin264
Shrimp byproducts


Flavone265
Chinese herbal medicines


Anthocyanins266
Wine lees


Curcumin267
Herbal tea


Polyphenols268

Chlorella vulgaris



Polygodial269
Pseudowintera colorata leaves


Bitumen270
Oil sands




Furthermore, the applications of DESs in the fields of polymer science and engineering have made great progress, which comprises the fundamentals studies involving synthesis, extraction, modification of polymer, and the early developments on the formulation of DES–polymer products.273 The combination of DESs and polymers has a high prospect in the preparation of polymer materials with sustainability. There is plenty of room for development in this field, which will be introduced in Section 5.6.


5.4.2 DESs for batteries. 
As described above, the electrochemical and interfacial properties of DESs make them good electrolytes to be used for electrodeposition and in batteries.
The electrodeposition process is considered an excellent method for the selective extraction of minor metals from complex mixtures. Owing to developments in technology, electrodeposition is not only used to prepare plastics, metals, and alloys but can also be used to prepare thin-layer materials with nanostructures. Water is the most common solvent for metal electro-treatment. However, its narrow electrochemical window is a hindrance in the electrochemical process. Aqueous solutions and their related techniques are limited to niche markets and high-value products because of the high capital investment and significant costs involved. Therefore, a more ideal electrolyte should have the following properties: non-flammability, low cost, low ohmic loss, high solubility of metal compounds, high conductivity, high-quality transfer rate, and a wide electrochemical window. The solubility of metal-containing compounds in DESs is higher, and many DESs possess an electrochemical window much wider than that of water.176,205,274 These two advantages mean that DESs are excellent solvents for electroplating and other processes.
Tu et al. reported a method for electrodeposition of Ni films in DES (ChCl:ethylene glycol = 1:2).275 Three voltage profiles (very high voltage, pulsed voltage and reverse pulsed voltage) have been tried to prepare films with specific structures on the nanoscale. Regular nanosheets, aligned nanoribbons, and hierarchical flowers can be achieved by controlling the operation modes. Interestingly, the Ni nano-films prepared by electrodeposition in DES exhibit superhydrophobic surfaces. Furthermore, nickel layer with special morphology showed a relatively lower corrosion potential during the electrochemical measurements. Brighteners can be added to the electrolyte to improve the surface finish. Compared with the systems without additives, nicotinic acid can significantly change the nucleation and growth mechanism.276 Gold, copper, and other metals can also be electrodeposited from their salt solutions.277,278
Silva et al. studied the effect of an electric double layer on the electrodeposition of Zn in two DESs.279 The results of extended X-ray absorption fine structure showed that changing the concentration of the solute could affect the physical properties of the liquid, although it could hardly influence the morphology of the deposited Zn. Double layer capacitance studies indicated that there are differences between these two DESs, which were believed to be due to the adsorption of chloride on the electrode. The deposition of platelet-like crystal in glycol-based DES is attributed to blocking of certain crystal faces (Fig. 25).
 Fig. 25  Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Zn deposits obtained from 0.3 M ZnCl2 in (A) 1:2 ChCl:U and (B) 1:2 ChCl:EG at 50 °C, on mild steel at I = 3 mA cm−2.279 Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
DESs are generally considered non-toxic. However, some carboxylic acid-based DESs have proven to be “moderately toxic”. This may be related to the protons ionized by acids because toxicity is dominated by acidity.280 Cordeiro et al. showed that the toxicity of some DESs cannot be ignored, and their toxicity can be initially predicted.281 Binnemans et al. studied the thermal stability and long-term stability of carboxylic acid–choline chloride DESs.282 They found that DESs degraded due to the esterification reaction, which mainly occurred between the carboxylic acid and alcohol parts of ChCl. The rate of esterification is slow at room temperature, and the reaction tends to accelerate at high temperature, which is accompanied by a decarboxylation reaction (generation of CO2). Fully understanding these properties makes it possible to design an electrolyte with low toxicity, high stability, and high conductivity.
Yu et al. demonstrated a low-cost and high-energy Fe–Al hybrid battery, taking advantage of the desirable properties of DESs.12 The lattice energy was reduced by forming a eutectic system, thus the solidification point was depressed. Dissociating the iron complexes in Fe(126) enabled full charging and discharging of the battery with a long cycle life. Fe(126) means the DES with the molar ratio of FeCl3·6H2O/urea/ethylene glycol is 1:2:6, and the same is true for Fe(210) DES. At the same time, Al can be stripped and deposited stably. When using a 5 mol L−1 Fe(210) as the catholyte, the Fe–Al battery can achieve delivering approximately 166 W h L−1 with an average operating voltage of 1.41 V. Furthermore, by adding the iron complexes in Fe(126) DES, the battery achieved the full charge and discharge over 60 cycles without any apparent degradation. It further provided a new platform for the development of sustainable redox substances based on eutectic theory (Fig. 26). Similarly, aluminium-based DESs can be used as the anolyte in redox flow batteries.283
 Fig. 26  The schematic diagram of the Fe–Al hybrid liquid battery concept.12 Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2017 Cell Press Elsevier. 
Apart from high efficiency, extreme operating environment, like ultra-low temperature is another research topic of batteries. Shahbaz and coworkers used ChCl and ethylene glycol to form a eutectic system with a melting point of −66 °C.284 The purpose of their work was to separate glycerol from palm oil-based biodiesel. In order to lower the viscosity, an amine compound was used. In another work, ChCl and lactic acid were mixed (with the molar ratio of 1:2) to produce a DES.285 The eutectic system does not possess a melting point in the strict sense, but a glass transition temperature as low as −77 °C. Although both of above works used DESs for biomass processing, such low phase transition temperatures, combined with ionic conductivity, make these DESs promising for low temperature electrolytes. Recently, Tao et al. reported an ultra-low temperature electrolyte with a melting point below −130 °C based on the concept of eutectic.15 In a water/DMSO mixed electrolyte, the dominated conformation of hydrogen bonds are formed between OSO in DMSO and HO–H in water. Therefore, when temperature drops, the intermolecular hydrogen bond between DMSO and water prevents the formation of the tetrahedral structure of ice. Furthermore, the battery test results show that the capacity at −50 °C is about 60% of that at 25 °C.
DESs can also be used for recycling metals in batteries. Lithium ion batteries are alternatives to lead–acid batteries and are increasingly used in electronic products. Recovering lithium and related metals efficiently from batteries has become an important issue for avoiding resource waste. A method to extract valuable metals in lithium ion batteries by using DESs was introduced by Ajayan et al.286 According to this method, more than 90% of lithium and cobalt can be obtained from lithium cobalt(III) oxide. Other components in battery, such as aluminium and polymers can be recovered separately. Therefore, DESs are expected to be applied in industrial scale for extracting valuable metals from batteries in the future. In addition to substance separation, the application of DESs in the degradation of white pollution has also been noted.287


5.4.3 Synthesis and catalysis. 
Although volatile organic solvents easily cause environmental pollution and safety problems, they are still widely used in production activities.288 DESs are expected to replace these organic solvents due to their higher designability and less environmental impact. This is the basis for their use in synthesis and catalytic reactions.
In Srivastava's work, condensation of benzaldehyde with active methylene compound was carried out in DES (ChCl:PEG200 = 1:2 in molar ratio, where PEG is polyethylene glycol).289 Compared to the control group (pure chlorine chloride and PEG200), yield of the test group can be increased by about 70% (up to 92%). Moreover, the temperature of reaction can be decreased from 100 to 80 °C. The remaining 28 products can also be synthesized based on optimized reaction conditions with a yield of 70–92%. DES can be recycled for 5 times without significant loss in yield, which showed the possibility of reuse. Furthermore, DESs can be used for oxidation, esterification of alcohols, and the synthesis of other compounds.290–292 For example, ChCl-based DESs are able to control the reactivity of organic lithium reagents at room temperature, thus providing a mild reaction environment.293–295 It is also reported that DESs can achieve chemical selective addition of inactive imines and quinolines at room temperature and in air. This shatters the long-held dogma that organolithium chemistry needs to be performed under inert atmospheres. It is safer and more sustainable to use DESs rather than volatile organic compounds as solvents.
The C–H bond activation reactions can efficiently construct compounds, and improve reaction efficiency and atomic economy, and have received numerous attentions in recent years. Organometallic reagents are usually used in direct arylation and are sensitive to air and moisture and expensive. The difficulty of this type of reaction is the choice of solvent. Highly polar and highly toxic compounds such as N,N-dimethylformamide, N,N-dimethylacetamide, and N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone are the common choices. Farinola and coworkers reported a thiophene–aryl coupling reaction via direct C–H bond activation in DES for the first time.296 This strategy allows researchers to discard the previous highly toxic solvents and provides an idea for C–H activation based on green and low-cost solvents.
D’anna et al. reported the ultra-sound assisted Diels–Alder reaction in DES.297 The combination of ultrasound activation and DES reduces the reaction time greatly with a good yield, which is believed to reduce the energy consumption by more than 99% compared to silent reaction. Furthermore, DESs can also be used as solvents for bacterial photosynthesis reaction centres. The reaction centre in DESs can maintain its normal function and even perform its natural photocycle.298


5.4.4 Preparation of materials. 
Materials science is a subject concerned with human life. From daily necessities to spacecrafts, materials science has made a great deal of success. Recent works related to the preparation of materials especially nanomaterials by using DESs were sorted out (Table 7). In addition to simple preparation, the application of DES-obtained materials has been studied.299,301 For example, Sn/SnO2@C can be used for supercapacitors, while Ni2P@G for electrochemical overall water splitting. Despite the large number, the materials summarized in Table 7 follow the following logic: from carbon materials to carbon composites, from other non-metallic materials to metals and alloys, and from metal oxides to metal complexes.
Table 7 Materials synthesized using DESs




Materials synthesized
Molar ratio
DES
Ref.




Abbreviations: AHCl: anilinium chloride; TBAB: tetrabutylammonium bromide; CTAB: cetyltrimethylammonium bromide; and 2-Mim: 2-methylimidazole.a Represents more than one ratio.




Ni2P@graphene
1:3a
NiCl2·6H2O:malonic acid

299



S,N doped reduced graphene oxide
1:2
ChCl:Na2S

300



Sn/SnO2@C
1:2
ChCl:SnCl2

301



N doped and N,P-codoped porous carbon
1:3
AHCl:ethylene glycol

302



CuO/g-C3N4
1:2
ChCl:urea

303



Nanoporous Au
1:3.5
ZnCl2:urea

304



Co films
1:2
ChCl:PEG200

305



SmCo films
1:2a
ChCl:ethylene glycol

306



Various Sn–Se crystalline species
1:2
ChBr:urea

307



CeO2 nanoparticles
1:1
CTAB:acetic acid

308



γ-Fe2O3
1:2a

D-L-Menthol:pyruvic acid

309



BaTiO3
1:1
ChCl:malonic acid

310



Layered zinc phosphates
1:1
ChCl:oxalic acid

311



(VO)2P2O7
1:1
ChCl:oxalic acid/glucose

312



CdS@CeO2
—
Thiourea:PEG200

313



Zeolitic imidazolate framework-8
6:4a
TBAB:2-Mim

314



Zeolite analogues
1:2
ChCl:urea

315



2D-[Co(NH3)4CO3]Cl
5:18.3
CoCl2·6H2O:urea

316





Duarte et al. demonstrated the possibility of using NADESs as polymer plasticizing agents to develop 3-dimensional porous materials.317 These materials are supposed to have applications in a wide variety of fields, which makes this work contribute a lot to the fields of green chemistry and chemical engineering.
An interesting phenomenon has been noticed. Sometimes, the molar ratio of two components was tunable.299,306,309,314 That is to say, not all the liquids used were eutectic mixtures. There are also liquids with a molar ratio different from that at the eutectic point.304 But all these efforts were aimed at synthesizing target materials. Moreover, the liquids used in the preparation have the eutectic properties (i.e. melting point is lower than that of each single component). Therefore, DESs need not be used always at the specific proportion. Controversy over the definition of DESs has always existed.318,319 Although the focus of contention is the difference between ionic liquids and DES, it can be inferred that if DESs are successfully used to achieve the purpose, their definition can be reasonably extended. Consequently, apart from several conventional terms, eutectics is expected to be used to refer to a system with a melting point lower than that of each single component. This can make the whole field more diverse.


5.4.5 Biological applications. 
DESs can be applied in biological science thanks to their biocompatibility. The ecotoxicological profile of DESs was studied through the Microtox® acute toxicity test.320 The low toxicity of DESs makes them desirable for biological applications. DESs have been used for analysis of genetic material structure.321 The structure of human telomere sequence (HTS) DNA has attracted much attention due to the role of telomeres in aging and cancer. In reline, HTS DNA tends to form a Gquadruplex with the parallel-stranded (propeller) fold. Further studies showed that this dynamic transition is related to the viscosity of the whole solvent system. Another work reported that nucleic acids can form several secondary structures that reversibly denature with heating in an anhydrous DES.322 In some cases, the nucleic acid sequences showed different relative stabilities and secondary structures in DES comparing to those in aqueous solutions. In addition, DES has been proved to significantly maintain the integrity and viability of bacteria through freeze-drying technology.323 The findings opened up bright prospects for the application of microorganisms in the biocatalytic process in non-aqueous systems. Furthermore, the possibility of eutectics as improved pharmaceutical materials was discussed.324 DESs have shown good applicability in the intersection of biology and chemistry and are expected to be applied in DNA-based nanotechnology.

5.5 Eutectic molecular liquids
Apart from coulombic interaction between ions, the main interaction in DESs is hydrogen bonding, which belongs to noncovalent interaction. This intrinsic nature determines that DES has good effect in dissolving some polar polymers, such as cellulose.252 However, there are few reports about dissolving low-polar substances, such as plastics. Therefore, it is necessary to develop new solvents to tackle this issue.
In recent years, other noncovalent interactions including halogen (group VIIA elements), chalcogen (group VIA elements), pnicogen (group VA elements), tetrel (group IA elements) and even aerogen (group VIIIA elements) bonding have been discovered and studied.325–331 Mu et al. proposed eutectic molecular liquids (EMLs), which are composed of two molecular compounds based on various noncovalent interactions.332Fig. 27 shows the differences between DES and EML from component to interaction. Here, the most typical DES was chosen. DES (binary for example) is composed of an ionic compound and a molecular compound, while EML is composed of two molecular compounds. Furthermore, a large number of EMLs can be strategically designed and prepared by simply mixing two molecular components based on noncovalent interactions. These interactions include hydrogen bonding interactions; π–π stacking; and σ-hole (halogen, chalcogen, pnicogen, tetrel bonds), π-hole, κ-hole, and μ-hole bonding interactions. In this way, the eutectic liquid systems can be enriched greatly.
 Fig. 27  Differences between DESs and EMLs. Various “bonds” shown in the right side are bonding interactions. 
Interestingly, Coutinho and coworkers also noticed non-ionic eutectics. In their recent work, molecular compounds (like thymol and menthol) were mixed to produce diverse eutectics.333 In the thymol–menthol system, a strong molecular interaction was identified among them. The tremendous acidity difference between the phenolic and aliphatic hydroxyl groups was conceived to be the reason for the forming of eutectics. Actually, this interaction is hydrogen bonding interaction according to a review work.334 Consequently, they called these eutectics non-ionic “the type V DES”. Although the name is different from EML, it is essentially a kind of eutectic system formed by two molecular compounds. This also reflects from the side that it is of significance to propose EMLs.
Semiconductor films have received a great deal of attention due to their usage in the field of optoelectronics. However, the thorny problem is that they are insoluble in common solvents. Brutchey and coworker described a novel binary mixture (1,2-ethanedithiol:1,2-ethylenediamine = 1:10 in volume) which possesses the remarkable ability to dissolve a series of bulk V2VI3 chalcogenides (V = As, Sb, Bi; VI = S, Se, Te) under mild conditions.335 In addition, the method they proposed has been broadened to over 65 bulk precursors, which can be utilized to develop new routes to functional chalcogenide materials.336 Although Brutchey et al. did not pay attention to the name of this binary mixture, the authors hold the view that the solvent they used was a eutectic complex (i.e. EML).
EMLs, as a family of new solvents, have been applied in synthesizing 2-dimensional materials. Mu and coworkers synthesized CoSx from EML (1,2-ethanethiol:n-butylamine = 4:1 in volume) at room temperature by compressing carbon dioxide as an assistant.337 The nano sized CoSx achieved a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 271 mV for the oxygen evolution reaction. Moreover, the method they proposed can be used to prepare other transition metal chalcogenides. In another work, a solvothermal method for synthesizing nanostructured Fe3S4 was reported.338 The as-obtained Fe3S4 catalyst was capable of electrochemically reducing N2 to NH3 under ambient conditions, which exhibited a high NH3 yield (75.4 μg h−1 mg−1 cat.) and faradaic efficiency (6.45%) at −0.4 V vs. a reversible hydrogen electrode.
Mu and coworkers reported a series of EMLs based on hydrogen bonding and π–π stacking.339 These liquids possess a relatively higher thermal stability than conventional volatile organic compounds and can be used for multiple tasks. As is shown in Fig. 28, the EML can be used to exfoliate 2D materials and dissolve polymers. In addition, they proposed a process to recycle three typical waste materials: plastic foam, acrylic, and CD dish.
 Fig. 28  (A) Photographs of EML and 2D materials dispersed after peering in EML. Abbreviations: G for graphene, BSb for black antimony. (B) Tyndall phenomenon of 5 mixtures. (C) Photographs of EML and polymers dissolved in EML. Abbreviations: Ori for original EML, Lig for lignin, PS for polystyrene, PEG for polyethylene glycol, TPIP for trans-1,4-polyisoprene, PMMA for polymethyl methacrylate, PC for polycarbonate. (D) Three kinds of typically waste plastic in daily life. (E) A complete sketch of CD recovery process.339 Reproduced with permission from ref. 339. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. 
5.6 Supramolecular systems with the concept of eutectic
As mentioned above, DESs can be used as electrolytes owing to their excellent conductivity. The leakage of electrolytes remains a challenging issue. More seriously, the compatibility between DES electrolytes and lithium is poor, which reduces the reversible capacity and cycle life of the battery. It has been shown that the scope of eutectics can be extended beyond liquids. Eutectogels, first proposed by Joos et al., are a class of eutectic systems that are composed of ionic and molecular substances with a supramolecular structure.340 Normally, the system contains a certain amount of polymer, and there are non-covalent interactions between various species. These materials are expected to become new anhydrous or low-water media, with important roles in the field of electrolytes.
Lithium ion batteries and lithium metal batteries with high capacity and long life at room temperature or even high temperature are expected all the time. However, the dendrite growth of lithium has hindered further development. The lack of stable, environmentally friendly electrolytes has also stalled these high-energy density devices. Joos et al. reported a solid composite electrolyte based on DES with a high conductivity (1.46 mS cm−1), and thermal and electrochemical stability (4.8 V).340 These insights enlarged the scope of electrolytes, thus improving the development of more performant batteries with high safety and durability. More importantly, the strategy can be extended to other ion batteries. In Smith's work, a series of eutectogel were formed by self-assembly based on non-covalent interactions.341 The addition of 1,3:2,4-dibenzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS) gave the systems a gel-like property (Fig. 29A). Electron microscopy and X-ray diffraction indicated DBS networks in eutectogel, and DSC showed that the eutectic solvent properties of the liquid phase were retained (Fig. 29B). The eutectogel was tolerant to lithium salts, and the result showed the electromigration of ions was not affected in it compared with that in DESs.
 Fig. 29  (A) Deep eutectic solvents formed by mixing an organic salt and a hydrogen bond donor (1:2 ratio) can be turned into gel-phase materials by the addition of 1,3:2,4-dibenzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS, 5% wt/vol), which self-assembles into nanofibers, forming a new class of ‘supramolecular eutectogels’. (B) SEM image of supramolecular eutectogel made in DES (ChCl:EG), then solvent exchanged with water and cryo-dried prior to imaging.341 Reproduced with permission from ref. 341. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (C) Photos of the flexible electrochromic device at −0.7 V for colouring and 0 V for bleaching.342 Reproduced with permission from ref. 342. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (D) Numerical simulations of the Li ion flux distribution on the Li metal anode surfaces for DES electrolyte with glass fibre membrane and DES-based self-healing polymer electrolyte.346 Reproduced with permission from ref. 346. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (E) Molecular structure of a newly designed linear liquid crystal polymer. (F) Photographs showing light-driven contraction up to 81% of the polymer fibre upon irradiation with a 470 nm light (100 mW cm−2).348 Reproduced with permission from ref. 348. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. 
The eutectogel prepared by Liu et al. possesses high thermal stability and excellent electrochromic activity.342 The colour of the eutectogel changed from pristine to blue as the potential increased from 0 V to −0.7 V (Fig. 29C). Moreover, slight bending did not affect the electrochromic performance. These bio-based gels are expected to be candidates for the development of next-generation flexible electronic products with less environmental impact. In addition, He et al. reported a series of eutectic elastomers by in situ polymerization of acrylic acid based DESs.343–345 The synthesized supramolecular materials possess good mechanical, electrical and optical properties.
Wang et al. reported a lithium metal battery based on eutectogel.346 The electrolyte was easily prepared by in situ copolymerization of acrylic acid derivatives, with fluoroethylene carbonate as an additive. The gel-like electrolyte possesses both high ionic conductivity and electrochemical stability. Polymer networks in this eutectogel act as mesh structures to make the distribution of Li ions more uniform, thereby inhibiting the generation of branch crystals (Fig. 29D). Further experiments have proved that this electrolyte can significantly increase the capacity of the battery.
In addition to the above systems, some electrically neutral system with the concept of eutectics has also been reported.347,348 Yu et al. proposed a new material by combining the concepts of shape memory and photochemical phase transition.348 As showed in Fig. 29E, the whole system was composed of a photoresponsive (azobenzene based) mesogen and a eutectic (phenyl benzoate based) mesogen. The polymer fibre can realize light-driven contraction and is expected to be used in fields of soft robots and bionic muscles (Fig. 29F).
Study has also shown that the state of the polymer in a binary eutectic system changes with its molar ratio.349 Control of the morphology of polymers in a supramolecular system is conducive to the design of eutectics with good chemical, mechanical and electrical properties.
6. Outlooks and conclusions
Although various valuable eutectic systems have emerged, overcoming their intrinsic shortcomings remains a challenge. In the case of DESs, their high viscosity and relatively low thermal stability may hinder their industrial applications. Fortunately, these problems can be solved by diluting and sealing operations. As discussed in the previous sections, dilution of DESs with a certain amount of water does not change their properties. However, some deeper problems cannot be easily solved. On the other hand, developing new eutectic systems with excellent properties is a good target; moreover, in order to effectively use these superior systems, industrial optimization will be essential. Machine learning will play an increasingly important role in these processes.
6.1 In-depth exploration of eutectics

6.1.1 Mechanisms of eutectics. 
The study of eutectics started with research on the melting properties of single substances. Neutron scattering and Monte Carlo simulation are the two most representative research methods. Later, as mentioned above, a series of theories emerged to explain the mechanisms of eutectics. The increase in entropy change simply explains the eutectic mechanism, the interaction explains the driving force of the eutectic from a molecular point of view, and the chemical potential explains the determination of the eutectic temperature from an energy perspective. However, there has been no systematic work to integrate these principles. Owing to the complexity of molecular compounds, eutectic systems are very complicated, which creates a major difficulty for mechanism research. Therefore, research in this area needs to continue.
On the other hand, the microscopic dynamic process of eutectics remains unclear. Much research on their thermodynamics and kinetics date back to decades ago, and research in recent years has been devoted to their applications. Consequently, more in-depth research is needed in the future.


6.1.2 Development of new systems. 
From ancient eutectic metals to newly emerging DESs, eutectic systems continue to flourish. In order to meet different needs, task-specific systems have been designed and applied. Eutectic salts originated from the need for high-temperature phase-change materials, and the demand for non-aqueous and green solvents brought about DESs. Eutectic molecular liquids based on non-covalent interactions other than hydrogen bonds have also been shown to have potential for dissolution and separation. New systems could be designed and prepared based on halogen bonds, chalcogen bonds, etc. From the perspective of composition, a eutectogel incorporates a polymer compound into the eutectic system, which greatly enriches the system. In particular, eutectogels have an important role in stretchable materials and solid electrolytes. Therefore, the design of new eutectic systems should consider both internal interaction and composition to meet specific application needs.


6.1.3 New combinations. 
In Section 4.3, we introduced the liquid metal battery, which is a battery composed of eutectic alloys and eutectic salts. Although it is based on two known eutectics, the liquid metal battery is a new concept that is receiving increasing attention. It is foreseeable that composite materials combining eutectic metals and eutectogels will be proposed in the near future. Compared with general polymer materials, eutectogels have good electrical conductivity, which makes their composite materials both ionic conductors and electronic conductors. Compared with the combinations with hydrogels, the eutectic phase of these materials has a lower melting point (or Tg) and higher stability. This greatly enlarges the application scope of the eutectic metal–eutectogel systems.

6.2 Technical optimizations
Eutectics systems have a few shortcomings, so attention should be paid on their optimization. At present, the scientific community is mainly concerned with the feasibility of these systems, while in industrialization and deeper economics level, there is less research. Although great progress has been made in the industrialization of eutectic salts, this is limited to certain types of eutectic salts, and their use is relatively single. It may also be related to the early start of its scientific research.350,351 DESs have made significant progress in dissolution and transformation of biomass. However, most of the experiments stay at “get products” rather than “get pure products”. The differences between these two targets involve the separation and purification process, which may contain significant obstacles. Although the preparation process of DESs is simpler than that of ILs, the purification of DESs is more difficult. Because a DES is composed of at least two components, HBA and HBD, and the boiling point of each component can be very different. It is difficult to obtain original DES after distillation, but the compounds with low thermal stability will be obtained. For example, reline is a common DES which is composed of ChCl and urea at a molar radio of 1:2. The boiling point of urea is about 184 °C, while the melting point of ChCl is over 240 °C. When reline is purified by distillation, the pure phase collected is likely to be urea, and the liquid will be enriched in ChCl (Fig. 30A). Compared with H2O, organic solvents, and even some ionic liquids, DESs have great disadvantages in terms of purification. However, this does not indicate that DESs are of little significance. Mu et al. reported a strategy in which the product could be separated from the reaction system by self-precipitation (Fig. 30B).272 In this work, a FeCl3 based DES acts as both catalyst and solvent for the transition of cellulose to gluconic acid. Moreover, the gluconic acid will precipitate from DES because of the extremely low solubility. As the consequence, complexed separation processes could be avoided, and the catalytic DES could be reused by filtration. Although this method is an individual case, it smartly realizes the integration of solvents and catalysts, as well as reaction and separation. It is a green and sustainable method and has great potential in industrial applications.
 Fig. 30  Purification mode of conventional reaction (A) and self-precipitation reaction (B). 
Mostly, it would be uneconomical for gallium based eutectic metals to be used in large scale, owning to their relatively high prices. But in a “micro scale”, it is very useful in microelectronic devices and soft materials. Microfluidic electronics facilitate the integration of electronic components, and flexible electronic materials have made breakthroughs in wearable devices. One huge problem that needs attention is that the surface of a eutectic metal can get easily oxidized, and the tightness of the equipment must be fully guaranteed. However, controlling the oxidation process of metal droplets can produce a variety of two-dimensional nanosheets for use in semiconductor devices or catalytic reactions. To achieve long-term development in academia and industry, it is necessary to explore new applications. Microelectronics or micro-smart devices are supposed to be introduced to some possible fields, such as biological and medical devices.
There is a wide spectrum of maturity for eutectic salts, ranging from energy storage to material synthesis. However, the high operating temperature brings huge challenges to equipment safety and cost. In view of this, current energy storage research needs to explore eutectic salts with greater energy storage density and higher stability. Moreover, the corrosion mechanism of various salts has not been completely resolved, and the effects of different species are still ambiguous. It is also imperative to develop electrodes and containers with high chemical stability. For industry, more attentions should be paid on equipment and process optimization, such as more efficient reflectors and thermal insulation materials.
6.3 Machine learning
The basic principle of machine learning is to use algorithms to parse data, learn from it, and then make decisions and predictions about events in the real world. Research and applications based on algorithms have become increasingly pervasive and deeply entrenched components of modern technology, and machine learning has also made significant advances in various fields.352–355 Compared with pure substances, the mixed eutectic systems possess an exponentially greater degree of complexity. At the same time, exploration and screening based on human efforts are undoubtedly time-consuming and inefficient. In order to conform to trends in development and multidisciplinary interaction, the design of eutectic systems should make use of machine learning and big data.
Taking DES as an example, future research can be considered from two perspectives. In terms of basic research, machine learning could be used to explore the structure of hydrogen-bonding networks in DESs and to design new DESs based on various non-covalent interactions (including halogen and chalcogen bonding); in terms of application research, solvent systems could be designed according to the characteristic properties needed for practical purposes. As in the model shown in Fig. 31, the solubility of the reactant and product in a solvent is very distinct, allowing the product to automatically separate from the reaction solution. Recent research progress has proved the feasibility of this approach. Machine learning-based models will make it possible to correct some of the problems that plague many common approximations in traditional computing.356 Besides, molecular dynamics and electron-density-based solution studies provide new means of exploring binary fluids.357–359 The progress described above has laid the foundation for practical applications including predicting and selecting the solvent systems.
 Fig. 31  The role of machine learning in the development of eutectics. Double arrow indicates a mature interaction between industry and academia. Solid arrows indicate that machine learning needs data from practical applications and scientific experiments, while dash arrows represent the feedback. 
Machine learning in chemistry is so far still in its infancy. It requires input of a large amount of data from both industry and academia (solid arrows in Fig. 31). Machine learning models have emerged to solve some basic problems. However, it is mostly used as an auxiliary or alternative method, rather than the best method. By now, industry and academia can gradually get feedback from machine learning (the dotted line in Fig. 31). It is hoped that one day in the future, this increasing feedback will guide and dominate the development of science and technology.
7. Conclusions
In conclusion, eutectics has been a rapidly developing field from ancient times to the present. The main purpose of this review was to introduce the significant research progress that has been made regarding three typical eutectics: DESs, eutectic metals, and eutectic salts. DESs are considered to be environmentally friendly solvents and are expected to be used in sustainable development. Gallium based eutectic metals are relatively expensive, so they are suitable for use in small parts and sophisticated smart devices. Most of the applications of eutectic salts remain limited to the field of thermal energy conversion. Eutectic molecular liquids and eutectogels supplement existing eutectic systems from the perspectives of interaction and composition, respectively. Future work should focus on in-depth exploration of eutectic principles and the development of new systems. Eutectic system design and industrial process optimization based on machine learning will be essential in the future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors thank Dr. Zhenghui Liu for his help in proofreading. This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (22073112, 21873012, 21773307), and the China Scholarship Council (202006360037).
References
N. Matsuhisa, X. Chen, Z. Bao and T. Someya, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2946–2966 Search PubMed .

          G.-A. Nazri and G. Pistoia, Lithium Batteries Science and Technology, Springer, New York,  2003 Search PubMed .
T. Daeneke, K. Khoshmanesh, N. Mahmood, I. A. de Castro, D. Esrafilzadeh, S. J. Barrow, M. D. Dickey and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4073–4111 Search PubMed .
Y. Gu and F. Jerome, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 9550–9570 Search PubMed .
G. García, S. Aparicio, R. Ullah and M. Atilhan, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 2616–2644 Search PubMed .
Y. Qu, T. Nguyen-Dang, A. G. Page, W. Yan, T. Das Gupta, G. M. Rotaru, R. M. Rossi, V. D. Favrod, N. Bartolomei and F. Sorin, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707251 Search PubMed .
S. Park, G. Loke, Y. Fink and P. Anikeeva, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1826–1852 Search PubMed .
X. Lin, M. Salari, L. M. Arava, P. M. Ajayan and M. W. Grinstaff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5848–5887 Search PubMed .
S. Vuoti, K. Narasimha and K. Reinikainen, J. Water Process Eng., 2018, 26, 83–91 Search PubMed .
R. D. Alli, I. M. AlNashef and M. C. Kroon, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2018, 125, 172–179 Search PubMed .
H. Kim, D. A. Boysen, J. M. Newhouse, B. L. Spatocco, B. Chung, P. J. Burke, D. J. Bradwell, K. Jiang, A. A. Tomaszowska, K. Wang, W. Wei, L. A. Ortiz, S. A. Barriga, S. M. Poizeau and D. R. Sadoway, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 2075–2099 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, C. Zhang, Y. Ding, K. Ramirez-Meyers and G. Yu, Joule, 2017, 1, 623–633 Search PubMed .

          C. J. Schmitz, Handbook of Aluminium Recycling, Vulkan-Verlag GmbH, 1st edn,  2007, ISBN-10: 3802729366 Search PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed and V. Tambyrajah, Chem. Commun., 2003, 70–71 Search PubMed .
Q. Nian, J. Wang, S. Liu, T. Sun, S. Zheng, Y. Zhang, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16994–16999 Search PubMed .
Q. Gui, Y. He and Y. Wang, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2020, 7, 2000780,  DOI:10.1002/aelm.202000780 .
D. Cubicciotti, J. Chem. Educ., 1959, 37, 540–544 Search PubMed .
J. Guo, A. Merwin, C. J. Benmore, Z. G. Mei, N. C. Hoyt and M. A. Williamson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2019, 123, 10036–10043 Search PubMed .
R. A. Islam, B. Y. Wu, M. O. Alam, Y. C. Chan and W. Jillek, J. Alloys Compd., 2005, 392, 149–158 Search PubMed .
T. W. Richards and W. B. Meldrum, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1917, 39, 1816–1828 Search PubMed .
K. Chadwick, R. Davey and W. Cross, CrystEngComm, 2007, 9, 732–734 Search PubMed .

          L. Nichols, Melting Point Theory, Retrieved April 8, 2021, from https://chem.libretexts.org/@go/page/93433.
S. N. Black, C. L. Woon and R. J. Davey, Cryst. Growth Des., 2018, 18, 6918–6928 Search PubMed .
M. Liu, R. D. McGillicuddy, H. Vuong, S. Tao, A. H. Slavney, M. I. Gonzalez, S. J. L. Billinge and J. A. Mason, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 2801–2811 Search PubMed .
A. P. C. Joao, I. A. Simon and H. S. Erling, Fluid Phase Equilib., 1995, 103, 23–39 Search PubMed .
B. B. Hansen, S. Spittle, B. Chen, D. Poe, Y. Zhang, J. M. Klein, A. Horton, L. Adhikari, T. Zelovich, B. W. Doherty, B. Gurkan, E. J. Maginn, A. Ragauskas, M. Dadmun, T. A. Zawodzinski, G. A. Baker, M. E. Tuckerman, R. F. Savinell and J. R. Sangoro, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 1232–1285 Search PubMed .
R. P. Feynman, Phys. Rev., 1939, 56, 340–343 Search PubMed .
P. Salvador, E. Vos, I. Corral and D. M. Andrada, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 1498–1502 Search PubMed .
P. Cucka and C. S. Barrett, Acta Crystallogr., 1962, 15, 865–872 Search PubMed .
S. A. Rice, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1962, 58, 499–510 Search PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, D. Boothby, G. Capper, D. L. Davies and R. K. Rasheed, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 9142–9147 Search PubMed .
R. Contreras, L. Lodeiro, N. Rozas-Castro and R. Ormazabal-Toledo, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 1994–2004 Search PubMed .
M. A. R. Martins, S. P. Pinho and J. A. P. Coutinho, J. Solution Chem., 2018, 48, 962–982 Search PubMed .
F. A. Lindemann, Phys. Z., 1910, 11, 609–612 Search PubMed .
J. J. Gilvarry, Phys. Rev., 1956, 102, 308–316 Search PubMed .
C. J. Martin and D. A. O’Connor, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1977, 10, 3521–3526 Search PubMed .
A. A. Kulkarni, E. Hanson, R. Zhang, K. Thornton and P. V. Braun, Nature, 2020, 577, 355–358 Search PubMed .
C. H. Sorum and E. A. Durand, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1952, 74, 1071–1073 Search PubMed .
E. G. Rivera-Valentin, V. F. Chevrier, A. Soto and G. Martinez, Nat. Astron., 2020, 4, 756–761 Search PubMed .
S. Aitipamula, R. Banerjee, A. K. Bansal, K. Biradha, M. L. Cheney, A. R. Choudhury, G. R. Desiraju, A. G. Dikundwar, R. Dubey, N. Duggirala, P. P. Ghogale, S. Ghosh, P. K. Goswami, N. R. Goud, R. R. K. R. Jetti, P. Karpinski, P. Kaushik, D. Kumar, V. Kumar, B. Moulton, A. Mukherjee, G. Mukherjee, A. S. Myerson, V. Puri, A. Ramanan, T. Rajamannar, C. M. Reddy, N. Rodriguez-Hornedo, R. D. Rogers, T. N. G. Row, P. Sanphui, N. Shan, G. Shete, A. Singh, C. C. Sun, J. A. Swift, R. Thaimattam, T. S. Thakur, R. Kumar Thaper, S. P. Thomas, S. Tothadi, V. R. Vangala, N. Variankaval, P. Vishweshwar, D. R. Weyna and M. J. Zaworotko, Cryst. Growth Des., 2012, 12, 2147–2152 Search PubMed .
F. H. Hurley and T. P. Wier, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1951, 98, 203–206 Search PubMed .
G. P. Stahly, Cryst. Growth Des., 2009, 9, 4212–4229 Search PubMed .
J. Jorstad and D. Apelian, Int. J. Metalcast., 2009, 3, 13–36 Search PubMed .

The Times Atlas of World History, ed. G. Barraclough, Hammond, 1st edn,  1979, ISBN-10: 0843711256 Search PubMed .

          P. M. Warren and V. Hankey, Aegean Bronze Age Chronology, Bristol Classical Press,  1989 Search PubMed .
N. Saunders and A. P. Miodownik, Bull. Alloy Phase Diagrams, 1990, 11, 278–287 Search PubMed .

          H. Max, Constitution of Binary Alloys, McGraw-Hill, 2nd edn,  1958, ISBN-10: 0070260508 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, K. Sweatman, S. McDonald and K. Nogita, Materials, 2018, 11, 1384–1403 Search PubMed .
V. Heine, J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys., 1968, 1, 222–231 Search PubMed .
O. Zuger and U. Durig, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 46, 7319–7321 Search PubMed .

          T. Luu, A. Duan, K. Wang, K. E. Aasmundtveit and N. Hoivik, 2012 4th Electronic System-Integration Technology Conference, Amsterdam, Netherlands, 2012, pp. 1–5.
J. Yan, D. Zhu, Y. Liu and J. Xu, Appl. Sci., 2019, 9, 392,  DOI:10.3390/app9030392 .
A. Miner and U. Ghoshal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 506–508 Search PubMed .
K. Khoshmanesh, S.-Y. Tang, J. Y. Zhu, S. Schaefer, A. Mitchell, K. Kalantar-zadeh and M. D. Dickey, Lab Chip, 2017, 17, 974–993 Search PubMed .
S. V. Stankus, R. A. Khairulin and A. G. Mozgovoi, High Temp., 2006, 44, 829–837 Search PubMed .
B. B. Alchagirov, T. M. Shamparov and A. G. Mozgovoi, High Temp., 2003, 41, 210–215 Search PubMed .
A. Dobosz and T. Gancarz, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 264, 600–606 Search PubMed .
M. J. Assael, I. J. Armyra, J. Brillo, S. V. Stankus, J. Wu and W. A. Wakeham, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 2012, 41, 033101 Search PubMed .
T. Gancarz, W. Gąsior and H. Henein, Int. J. Thermophys., 2013, 34, 250–266 Search PubMed .
T. Gancarz, J. Mol. Liq., 2017, 241, 231–236 Search PubMed .
A. Dobosz, Y. Plevachuk, V. Sklyarchuk, B. Sokoliuk and T. Gancarz, Fluid Phase Equilib., 2018, 465, 1–9 Search PubMed .
L. Battezzati and A. L. Greer, Acta Metall., 1989, 37, 1791–1802 Search PubMed .
M. D. Dickey, R. C. Chiechi, R. J. Larsen, E. A. Weiss, D. A. Weitz and G. M. Whitesides, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 1097–1104 Search PubMed .

          W. Martienssen, Springer Handbook of Condensed Matter and Materials Data, Springer,  2005 DOI:10.1007/1003-1540-30437-30431_30434 .
D. S. Maltsev, V. A. Volkovich, L. F. Yamshchikov and A. V. Chukin, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2016, 93, 95–100 Search PubMed .
Q. Yu, A. S. Ahmad, K. Stahl, X. D. Wang, Y. Su, K. Glazyrin, H. P. Liermann, H. Franz, Q. P. Cao, D. X. Zhang and J. Z. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1139–1149 Search PubMed .
Q. Yu, Q. Zhang, J. Zong, S. Liu, X. Wang, X. Wang, H. Zheng, Q. Cao, D. Zhang and J. Jiang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 492, 143–149 Search PubMed .
E. R. I. Egry, R. Novakovic and S. Ozawa, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 159, 198–212 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Tang, I. D. Joshipura, Y. Lin, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Mitchell, K. Khoshmanesh and M. D. Dickey, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 604–609 Search PubMed .
M. R. Khan, C. B. Eaker, E. F. Bowden and M. D. Dickey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 14047–14051 Search PubMed .
Y. Plevachuk, V. Sklyarchuk, S. Eckert, G. Gerbeth and R. Novakovic, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2014, 59, 757–763 Search PubMed .
W. Kong, Z. Wang, M. Wang, K. C. Manning, A. Uppal, M. D. Green, R. Y. Wang and K. Rykaczewski, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904309 Search PubMed .
V. E. Sidorov, S. A. Uporov, D. A. Yagodin, K. I. Grushevskii, N. S. Uporova and D. V. Samokhvalov, High Temp., 2012, 50, 348–353 Search PubMed .
S. Kodambaka, J. Tersoff, M. C. Reuter and F. M. Ross, Science, 2009, 316, 729–732 Search PubMed .
A. Zavabeti, J. Z. Ou, B. J. Carey, N. Syed, R. Orrell-Trigg, E. L. H. Mayes, C. Xu, O. Kavehei, A. P. O’Mullane, R. B. Kaner, K. Kalantar-zadeh and T. Daeneke, Science, 2017, 358, 332–335 Search PubMed .
S. Cai, M. Mayyas, M. G. Saborio, M. B. Ghasemian, J. Tang, T. Daeneke, J. Han, A. A. Esmailpour, F.-M. Allioux and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 16593–16602 Search PubMed .
A. I. Carim, S. M. Collins, J. M. Foley and S. Maldonado, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13292–13295 Search PubMed .
S. Park, G. Thangavel, K. Parida, S. Li and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805536 Search PubMed .
J. E. Park, H. S. Kang, M. Koo and C. Park, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, e2002178 Search PubMed .
L. Xue, W. Zhou, S. Xin, H. Gao, Y. Li, A. Zhou and J. B. Goodenough, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 14184–14187 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, S. Peng, Y. Ding, X. Guo, Y. Qian, H. Celio, G. He and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1989–1998 Search PubMed .
R. C. Chiechi, E. A. Weiss, M. D. Dickey and G. M. Whitesides, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 142–144 Search PubMed .
J. Oh, S. Kim, S. Lee, S. Jeong, S. H. Ko and J. Bae, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 2007772 Search PubMed .
S. Kim, J. Oh, D. Jeong and J. Bae, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 20557–20565 Search PubMed .
M. G. Kim, D. K. Brown and O. Brand, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1002 Search PubMed .
L. Zhu, B. Wang, S. Handschuh-Wang and X. Zhou, Small, 2020, 16, e1903841 Search PubMed .
D. Wang, Z. Lin, C. Zhou, C. Gao and Q. He, Adv. Intell. Syst., 2019, 1, 1900064 Search PubMed .
M. Tawk, Y. Avenas, A. Kedous-Lebouc and M. Petit, IEEE Trans. Ind. Appl., 2013, 49, 1421–1429 Search PubMed .
J. Wu, S. Y. Tang, T. Fang, W. Li, X. Li and S. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805039 Search PubMed .
M. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Kuai, J. Cong, Y. Xu, H. G. Piao, L. Pan and Y. Liu, Small, 2019, 15, e1905446 Search PubMed .
X. Tang, S.-Y. Tang, V. Sivan, W. Zhang, A. Mitchell, K. Kalantar-zadeh and K. Khoshmanesh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 174104 Search PubMed .
Y. Hou, H. Chang, K. Song, C. Lu, P. Zhang, Y. Wang, Q. Wang, W. Rao and J. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 41627–41636 Search PubMed .
F. Hoshyargar, J. Crawford and A. P. O'Mullane, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 1464–1471 Search PubMed .
E. A. Redekop, V. V. Galvita, H. Poelman, V. Bliznuk, C. Detavernier and G. B. Marin, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1812–1824 Search PubMed .
O. Sebastian, S. Nair, N. Taccardi, M. Wolf, A. Søgaard, M. Haumann and P. Wasserscheid, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 4533–4537 Search PubMed .
F. Hoshyargar, H. Khan, K. Kalantar-zadeh and A. P. O'Mullane, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 14026–14029 Search PubMed .
F. M. Allioux, S. Merhebi, M. B. Ghasemian, J. Tang, A. Merenda, R. Abbasi, M. Mayyas, T. Daeneke, A. P. O'Mullane, R. Daiyan, R. Amal and K. Kalantar-Zadeh, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 4403–4409 Search PubMed .

          R. Bradshaw, D. Dawson, W. D. Rosa, R. Gilbert, S. Goods, M. J. Hale, P. Jacobs, S. A. Jones, G. Kolb, J. Pacheco, M. R. Prairie, H. Reilly, S. Showalter and L. Vant-Hull, Final Test and Evaluation Results from the Solar Two Project, 2002,  DOI:10.2172/793226.

          B. Andrew, Engines of Our Ingenuity, no. 2608, https://www.uh.edu/engines/epi2608.htm.

          S. Adrienn, Daily News Hungary, 2016, https://dailynewshungary.com/maria-telkes-the-hungarian-pioneer-of-solar-energy/.
D. A. Nissen, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 1982, 27, 269–273 Search PubMed .

          S. Lab, Solar Two Demonstrates Clean Power for the Future, National Laboratories of America,  2000 Search PubMed .

          C. E. Tyner, J. P. Sutherland and W. R. Gould, Solar Two: A Molten Salt Power Tower Demonstration, United States: N. p. 1995, Web.
J. I. Ortega, J. I. Burgaleta and F. M. Téllez, J. Sol. Energy Eng., 2008, 130, 024501 Search PubMed .
T. Bauer and A. Bonk, Int. J. Thermophys., 2018, 39, 134,  DOI:10.1007/s10765-018-2456-2 .
C. Zhang and M. F. Simpson, J. Nucl. Fuel Cycle Waste Technol., 2017, 15, 117–124 Search PubMed .
R. Notoya, Russ. J. Electrochem., 2002, 38, 255–260 Search PubMed .
R. D. Mariani and D. Vaden, J. Nucl. Mater., 2010, 404, 25–32 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, C. Tang, Y. Chen, S. Yang and M. Tang, Thermochim. Acta, 2014, 596, 14–20 Search PubMed .
S. Fujiwara, M. Inaba and A. Tasaka, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 7691–7700 Search PubMed .
S. Fukada and A. Nakamura, Fusion Sci. Technol., 2017, 66, 322–336 Search PubMed .
R. S. DeFever, H. Wang, Y. Zhang and E. J. Maginn, J. Chem. Phys., 2020, 153, 011101 Search PubMed .
D. Mantha, T. Wang and R. G. Reddy, J. Phase Equilib. Diffus., 2012, 33, 110–114 Search PubMed .
K. Torklep and H. A. Oye, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 1980, 25, 17–21 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, Q. Zhang, Z. Wang and J. Li, J. Therm. Sci., 2019, 29, 457–463 Search PubMed .
L. Brunet and J. Caillard, Int. J. Mod. Phys. C, 2004, 15, 675–687 Search PubMed .
A. Redkin, I. Korzun, T. Yaroslavtseva, O. Reznitskikh and Y. Zaikov, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2016, 128, 621–626 Search PubMed .
A. A. Redkin, Y. P. Zaikov, I. V. Korzun, O. G. Reznitskikh, T. V. Yaroslavtseva and S. I. Kumkov, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2015, 119, 509–512 Search PubMed .
R. Takagi, L. Rycerz and M. Gaune-Escard, J. Alloys Compd., 1997, 257, 134–136 Search PubMed .
L. Kosa, I. Proks, J. Strecko, K. AdamkoviCova and I. Nerad, Thermochim. Acta, 1993, 230, 103–111 Search PubMed .
R. Raud, R. Jacob, F. Bruno, G. Will and T. A. Steinberg, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 70, 936–944 Search PubMed .

          J. J. George, Rensselaerr Polytechnic Institute, Academic Press, New York,  1967 Search PubMed .
M. Liu, S. Bell, M. Segarra, N. H. Steven Tay, G. Will, W. Saman and F. Bruno, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 170, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Jiang, Y. Sun, M. Liu, F. Bruno and S. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 152, 155–160 Search PubMed .
M. Sarvghad, G. Will and T. A. Steinberg, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 172, 220–229 Search PubMed .
J. C. Gomez-Vidal, J. Noel and J. Weber, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 157, 517–525 Search PubMed .
M. Sarvghad, T. A. Steinberg and G. Will, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 170, 48–59 Search PubMed .
J. Sure, A. Ravi Shankar, S. Ramya and U. Kamachi Mudali, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 2803–2812 Search PubMed .
H. Tahara, Y. Tanaka, S. Yamamoto, S. Yonemori, B. Chan, H. Murakami and T. Sagara, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 4872–4882 Search PubMed .
C. Zhu, L. Gong and S.-N. Tie, AIP Adv., 2020, 10, 025214,  DOI:10.1063/1.5129609 .
V. M. B. Nunes, C. S. Queirós, M. J. V. Lourenço, F. J. V. Santos and C. A. Nieto de Castro, Appl. Energy, 2016, 183, 603–611 Search PubMed .
B. Kubíková, J. Mlynáriková, O. Beneš, E. Mikšíková, J. Priščák, A. Tosolin and M. Boča, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 268, 754–761 Search PubMed .
M. Beilmann, O. Beneš, R. J. M. Konings and T. Fanghänel, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2011, 43, 1515–1524 Search PubMed .
C. Dijkhuis, R. Dijkhuis and G. J. Janz, Chem. Rev., 1968, 68, 253–275 Search PubMed .
H. J. Seifert and G. Thiel, Thermochim. Acta, 1986, 100, 81–107 Search PubMed .
H. Hasuike, Y. Yoshizawa, A. Suzuki and Y. Tamaura, Sol. Energy, 2006, 80, 1255–1262 Search PubMed .
M. Tetreault-Friend, M. Diago, T. A. Cooper, L. A. Gray and A. H. Slocum, Sol. Energy, 2018, 176, 465–482 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Li, N. Li, C. Ling, Z. Tang and Z. Li, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 218, 110756 Search PubMed .
P. Zhang, X. Xiao, Z. N. Meng and M. Li, Appl. Energy, 2015, 137, 758–772 Search PubMed .
Z. Yang and S. V. Garimella, Sol. Energy, 2010, 84, 974–985 Search PubMed .
S. Yoshida, J. Matsunami, Y. Hosokawa, O. Yokota and Y. Tamaura, Energy Fuels, 1999, 13, 961–964 Search PubMed .
C. Peng, C. Guan, J. Lin, S. Zhang, H. Bao, Y. Wang, G. Xiao, G. Z. Chen and J. Q. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1880–1886 Search PubMed .
S. J. Percival, L. J. Small and E. D. Spoerke, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 165, A3531–A3536 Search PubMed .
C. Robelin, P. Chartrand and A. D. Pelton, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2004, 36, 683–699 Search PubMed .
C. Robelin and P. Chartrand, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2011, 43, 377–391 Search PubMed .
R. Serrano-López, J. Fradera and S. Cuesta-López, Chem. Eng. Process., 2013, 73, 87–102 Search PubMed .
Chiyoda, Corp., Solar Heat Collection System, 2016, WO2016027872, PCT/JP2015/073443.
J. Maschita, T. Banerjee, G. Savasci, F. Haase, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15750–15758 Search PubMed .
M. C. Chang, P. H. Ho, M. F. Tseng, F. Y. Lin, C. H. Hou, I. K. Lin, H. Wang, P. P. Huang, C. H. Chiang, Y. C. Yang, I. T. Wang, H. Y. Du, C. Y. Wen, J. J. Shyue, C. W. Chen, K. H. Chen, P. W. Chiu and L. C. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3682,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-020-17517-6 .
G. Z. Chen, D. J. Fray and T. W. Farthing, Nature, 2000, 407, 361–364 Search PubMed .
X. Deng, B. Zhao, L. Zhu and Z. Shao, Carbon, 2015, 93, 48–58 Search PubMed .
L. Yang, J. Qiu, Y. Wang, S. Guo, Y. Feng, D. Dong and J. Yao, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2020, 856, 113673 Search PubMed .
S. Suzuki, M. Yanai, T. Yamada, H. Wagata, Y. Sasaki, S. Oishi, K. Domen and K. Teshima, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 6129–6135 Search PubMed .
X. Li and Y. Qu, Cryst. Growth Des., 2015, 16, 34–41 Search PubMed .
M. Estruga, S. N. Girard, Q. Ding, L. Chen, X. Li and S. Jin, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 1454–1457 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Tian, L. Wang, H. Zhang, J. Liu, T. Peng, L. Pan, X. Wang and M. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 5577–5585 Search PubMed .
P. Urbankowski, B. Anasori, T. Makaryan, D. Er, S. Kota, P. L. Walsh, M. Zhao, V. B. Shenoy, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 11385–11391 Search PubMed .
D. Kang, C. Palmer, D. Mannini, N. Rahimi, M. J. Gordon, H. Metiu and E. W. McFarland, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7032–7042 Search PubMed .
I. J. McPherson, T. Sudmeier, J. P. Fellowes, I. Wilkinson, T. Hughes and S. C. E. Tsang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 17433–17441 Search PubMed .
T. N. Ye, S. W. Park, Y. Lu, J. Li, M. Sasase, M. Kitano, T. Tada and H. Hosono, Nature, 2020, 583, 391–395 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, M. Cong, X. Ding, Y. Jin, F. Xu, Y. Wang, L. Chen and L. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 10888–10893 Search PubMed .
X. Yang, Y. Feng, H. Li and Z. Du, Minerals, 2017, 7, 103–115 Search PubMed .
J. Lu, X. Wang, H. Jiang and Y. Xu, Mater. Manuf. Processes, 2013, 28, 126–129 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, W. E. Lee and S. Zhang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 364–368 Search PubMed .
D. J. Bradwell, H. Kim, A. H. Sirk and D. R. Sadoway, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1895–1897 Search PubMed .
K. Wang, K. Jiang, B. Chung, T. Ouchi, P. J. Burke, D. A. Boysen, D. J. Bradwell, H. Kim, U. Muecke and D. R. Sadoway, Nature, 2014, 514, 348–350 Search PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, H. L. Munro, R. K. Rasheed and V. Tambyrajah, Chem. Commun., 2001, 2010–2011 Search PubMed .
A. Paiva, R. Craveiro, I. Aroso, M. Martins, R. L. Reis and A. R. C. Duarte, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 1063–1071 Search PubMed .
E. L. Smith, A. P. Abbott and K. S. Ryder, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11060–11082 Search PubMed .
C. A. Angell, Y. Ansari and Z. Zhao, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 154, 9–27 Search PubMed .
S. Z. El Abedin and F. Endres, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 1106–1113 Search PubMed .
B. Wang, L. Qin, T. Mu, Z. Xue and G. Gao, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 7113–7131 Search PubMed .
B. L. Bhargava, R. Devane, M. L. Klein and S. Balasubramanian, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 1395–1400 Search PubMed .
S. Zahn, B. Kirchner and D. Mollenhauer, ChemPhysChem, 2016, 17, 3354–3358 Search PubMed .
S. Chatterjee, D. Ghosh, T. Haldar, P. Deb, S. S. Sakpal, S. H. Deshmukh, S. M. Kashid and S. Bagchi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2019, 123, 9355–9363 Search PubMed .
D. Yu, H. Mou, H. Fu, X. Lan, Y. Wang and T. Mu, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 4183–4188 Search PubMed .
T. El Achkar, T. Moufawad, S. Ruellan, D. Landy, H. Greige-Gerges and S. Fourmentin, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 3385–3388 Search PubMed .
H. Mou, J. Wang, D. Yu, D. Zhang, W. Chen, Y. Wang, D. Wang and T. Mu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44360–44365 Search PubMed .
S. Zahn, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 4041–4047 Search PubMed .
Y. Marcus, Entropy, 2018, 20, 524–528 Search PubMed .
C. R. Ashworth, R. P. Matthews, T. Welton and P. A. Hunt, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 18145–18160 Search PubMed .
O. S. Hammond, D. T. Bowron, A. J. Jackson, T. Arnold, A. Sanchez-Fernandez, N. Tsapatsaris, V. G. Sakai and K. J. Edler, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2017, 121, 7473–7483 Search PubMed .
K. Shahbaz, F. S. Mjalli, M. A. Hashim and I. M. AlNashef, Thermochim. Acta, 2011, 515, 67–72 Search PubMed .
O. S. Hammond, D. T. Bowron and K. J. Edler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 9782–9785 Search PubMed .
X. Xu, J. Range, G. Gygli and J. Pleiss, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2019, 65, 1172–1179 Search PubMed .
P. Pyykko, ChemPhysChem, 2019, 20, 123–127 Search PubMed .
F. Zhen, L. Percevault, L. Paquin, E. Limanton, C. Lagrost and P. Hapiot, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2020, 124, 1025–1032 Search PubMed .
S. S. Hossain and A. Samanta, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 24613–24622 Search PubMed .
O. S. Hammond, D. T. Bowron and K. J. Edler, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2736–2744 Search PubMed .
S. Kaur, A. Gupta and H. K. Kashyap, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2016, 120, 6712–6720 Search PubMed .
S. Kaur and H. K. Kashyap, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2018, 122, 5242–5250 Search PubMed .
M. Mokhtarpour, H. Shekaari, M. T. Zafarani-Moattar and S. Golgoun, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 297, 111799 Search PubMed .
A. Triolo, F. Lo Celso and O. Russina, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2020, 124, 2652–2660 Search PubMed .
M. Pal, R. K. Singh and S. Pandey, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 2538–2542 Search PubMed .
V. S. Raghuwanshi, M. Ochmann, A. Hoell, F. Polzer and K. Rademann, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 6038–6046 Search PubMed .
L. Sapir, C. B. Stanley and D. Harries, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 3253–3259 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, S. McDonald, P. FitzGerald, G. G. Warr and R. Atkin, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 506, 486–492 Search PubMed .
A. Sanchez-Fernandez, K. J. Edler, T. Arnold, D. Alba Venero and A. J. Jackson, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 8667–8670 Search PubMed .
S. McDonald, T. Murphy, S. Imberti, G. G. Warr and R. Atkin, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 3922–3927 Search PubMed .
S. Kaur, S. Sharma and H. K. Kashyap, J. Chem. Phys., 2017, 147, 194507 Search PubMed .
S. S. Hossain, S. Paul and A. Samanta, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2019, 123, 6842–6850 Search PubMed .
M. Pal, R. Rai, A. Yadav, R. Khanna, G. A. Baker and S. Pandey, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 13191–13198 Search PubMed .
M. Sakuragi, S. Tsutsumi and K. Kusakabe, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 12635–12641 Search PubMed .
S. J. Bryant, R. Atkin and G. G. Warr, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 6878–6884 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, J. Jiang, X. Lan, X. Zhao, H. Mou and T. Mu, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 4748–4756 Search PubMed .
J. Jiang, X. Bai, X. Zhao, W. Chen, T. Yu, Y. Li and T. Mu, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 5571–5578 Search PubMed .
A. Yadav and S. Pandey, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2014, 59, 2221–2229 Search PubMed .
O. G. Sas, R. Fidalgo, I. Domínguez, E. A. Macedo and B. González, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2016, 61, 4191–4202 Search PubMed .
H. B. Balaraman and S. K. Rathnasamy, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2019, 64, 3307–3315 Search PubMed .
V. Agieienko and R. Buchner, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2019, 64, 4763–4774 Search PubMed .
C. J. Clarke, W. C. Tu, O. Levers, A. Brohl and J. P. Hallett, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 747–800 Search PubMed .
M. B. Haider, D. Jha, B. Marriyappan Sivagnanam and R. Kumar, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 102747 Search PubMed .
C. Ma, A. Laaksonen, C. Liu, X. Lu and X. Ji, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8685–8720 Search PubMed .
A. T. Celebi, T. J. H. Vlugt and O. A. Moultos, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2019, 123, 11014–11025 Search PubMed .
N. López-Salas, J. M. Vicent-Luna, S. Imberti, E. Posada, M. J. Roldán, J. A. Anta, S. R. G. Balestra, R. M. Madero Castro, S. Calero, R. J. Jiménez-Riobóo, M. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer and F. del Monte, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17565–17573 Search PubMed .
S. Kaur, A. Gupta and H. K. Kashyap, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2020, 124, 2230–2237 Search PubMed .
L. J. B. M. Kollau, M. Vis, A. van den Bruinhorst, R. Tuinier and G. de With, J. Mol. Liq., 2020, 302, 112155 Search PubMed .
P. López-Porfiri, J. F. Brennecke and M. Gonzalez-Miquel, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2016, 61, 4245–4251 Search PubMed .
C. Ma, Y. Guo, D. Li, J. Zong, X. Ji, C. Liu and X. Lu, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2016, 61, 4172–4177 Search PubMed .
R. Craveiro, I. Aroso, V. Flammia, T. Carvalho, M. T. Viciosa, M. Dionísio, S. Barreiros, R. L. Reis, A. R. C. Duarte and A. Paiva, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 215, 534–540 Search PubMed .
E. E. Tereshatov, M. Y. Boltoeva and C. M. Folden, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 4616–4622 Search PubMed .
M. Francisco, A. van den Bruinhorst and M. C. Kroon, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3074–3085 Search PubMed .
K. Shahbaz, F. S. Mjalli, G. Vakili-Nezhaad, I. M. AlNashef, A. Asadov and M. M. Farid, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 222, 61–66 Search PubMed .
W. Chen, Z. Xue, J. Wang, J. Jiang, X. Zhao and T. Mu, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2018, 34, 904–911 Search PubMed .
Y. Cao and T. Mu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 8651–8664 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, Q. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Li, W. Chen, L. Zhou, J. Qin, Y. Meng and T. Mu, New J. Chem., 2020, 44, 9493–9501 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, D. Yu, Y. Lu, G. Li, L. Fu and T. Mu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 7308–7317 Search PubMed .
N. Delgado-Mellado, M. Larriba, P. Navarro, V. Rigual, M. Ayuso, J. García and F. Rodríguez, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 260, 37–43 Search PubMed .
D. V. Wagle, G. A. Baker and E. Mamontov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2924–2928 Search PubMed .
D. Reuter, C. Binder, P. Lunkenheimer and A. Loidl, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 6801–6809 Search PubMed .
S. M. Rahman, S. B. Mohd Said, B. Subramanian, B. D. Long, M. A. Kareem and N. Soin, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 8341–8348 Search PubMed .
C. A. Nkuku and R. J. LeSuer, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 13271–13277 Search PubMed .
A. M. Perdizio Sakita, R. Della Noce, C. S. Fugivara and A. V. Benedetti, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 8296–8303 Search PubMed .
M. H. Mamme, S. L. C. Moors, H. Terryn, J. Deconinck, J. Ustarroz and F. De Proft, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9, 6296–6304 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, Z. Xue, X. Lan, Z. Liu and T. Mu, Chem. Commun., 2021, 57, 627–630 Search PubMed .
O. Longeras, A. Gautier, K. Ballerat-Busserolles and J.-M. Andanson, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 12516–12520 Search PubMed .
H. Qin, Z. Song, Q. Zeng, H. Cheng, L. Chen and Z. Qi, AIChE J., 2019, 65, 675–683 Search PubMed .
A. Osatiashtiani, A. F. Lee, M. Granollers, D. R. Brown, L. Olivi, G. Morales, J. A. Melero and K. Wilson, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4345–4352 Search PubMed .
J. B. Binder and R. T. Raines, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1979–1985 Search PubMed .
J. Fan, M. De bruyn, V. L. Budarin, M. J. Gronnow, P. S. Shuttleworth, S. Breeden, D. J. Macquarrie and J. H. Clark, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11728–11731 Search PubMed .
S. Marullo, A. Sutera, G. Gallo, F. Billeci, C. Rizzo and F. D’Anna, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11204–11214 Search PubMed .
B. Jiang, J. Ma, N. Yang, Z. Huang, N. Zhang, X. Tantai, Y. Sun and L. Zhang, Energy Fuels, 2019, 33, 7569–7577 Search PubMed .
J. Zhang, L. Yu, R. Gong, M. Li, H. Ren and E. Duan, Energy Fuels, 2019, 34, 74–81 Search PubMed .
Y. Chen, X. Han, Z. Liu, D. Yu, W. Guo and T. Mu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5410–5430 Search PubMed .
M. B. Haider, D. Jha, B. Marriyappan Sivagnanam and R. Kumar, J. Chem. Eng. Data, 2018, 63, 2671–2680 Search PubMed .
N. Zhang, Z. Huang, H. Zhang, J. Ma, B. Jiang and L. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 13321–13329 Search PubMed .
G. Cui, J. Liu, S. Lyu, H. Wang, Z. Li and J. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 14236–14246 Search PubMed .
W. Wan, D. Xiong, Q. Zhang and J. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 17882–17887 Search PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Shi, A. Zhu, Y. Zhao, H. Wang, B. P. Binks and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 3928–3933 Search PubMed .
I. M. Pateli, D. Thompson, S. S. M. Alabdullah, A. P. Abbott, G. R. T. Jenkin and J. M. Hartley, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 5476–5486 Search PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, G. Capper, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed and P. Shikotra, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6497–6499 Search PubMed .
Y.-L. Loow, E. K. New, G. H. Yang, L. Y. Ang, L. Y. W. Foo and T. Y. Wu, Cellulose, 2017, 24, 3591–3618 Search PubMed .
P. López-Porfiri, P. Gorgojo and M. Gonzalez-Miquel, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8958–8969 Search PubMed .
M. Feng, X. Lu, J. Zhang, Y. Li, C. Shi, L. Lu and S. Zhang, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 87–98 Search PubMed .
A. Mahto, D. Mondal, V. Polisetti, J. Bhatt, N. M. Rajappa, K. Prasad and N. S. Kotrappanavar, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 14623–14632 Search PubMed .
G. Capper, A. P. Abbott, D. L. Davies, R. K. Rasheed and P. Shikotra, Inorg. Chem., 2005, 44, 6497–6499 Search PubMed .
A. Grudniewska, E. M. de Melo, A. Chan, R. Gniłka, F. Boratyński and A. S. Matharu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 15791–15800 Search PubMed .
C. Bai, Q. Wei and X. Ren, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7220–7227 Search PubMed .
E. Tommasi, G. Cravotto, P. Galletti, G. Grillo, M. Mazzotti, G. Sacchetti, C. Samorì, S. Tabasso, M. Tacchini and E. Tagliavini, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8316–8322 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, X. Bai, A. Lusi and C. Wan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 12205–12216 Search PubMed .
W.-C. Huang, D. Zhao, N. Guo, C. Xue and X. Mao, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2018, 66, 11897–11901 Search PubMed .
H. Cheng, J. Li, J. Wang, L. Chen and Z. Qi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 5547–5554 Search PubMed .
B.-Y. Zhao, P. Xu, F.-X. Yang, H. Wu, M.-H. Zong and W.-Y. Lou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2746–2755 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, B. Tang and K. H. Row, Anal. Lett., 2014, 47, 742–749 Search PubMed .
L. Duan, L.-L. Dou, L. Guo, P. Li and E. H. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 2405–2411 Search PubMed .
T. Bosiljkov, F. Dujmić, M. Cvjetko Bubalo, J. Hribar, R. Vidrih, M. Brnčić, E. Zlatic, I. Radojčić Redovniković and S. Jokić, Food Bioprod. Process., 2017, 102, 195–203 Search PubMed .
A. Funda, Y. Erkan and S. Mustafa, Food Chem., 2018, 243, 442–447 Search PubMed .
W. M. A. Wan Mahmood, A. Lorwirachsutee, C. Theodoropoulos and M. Gonzalez-Miquel, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5018–5026 Search PubMed .
J. Nadia, K. Shahbaz, M. Ismail and M. M. Farid, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 6, 862–871 Search PubMed .
N. Pulati, A. Lupinsky, B. Miller and P. Painter, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 4927–4935 Search PubMed .
Y. Luo, H. Ma, S. Zhang, D. Zheng, P. Che, X. Liu, M. Zhang, J. Gao and J. Xu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6085–6092 Search PubMed .
F. Liu, Z. Xue, X. Zhao, H. Mou, J. He and T. Mu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 6140–6143 Search PubMed .
A. Roda, A. A. Matias, A. Paiva and A. R. C. Duarte, Polymers, 2019, 11, 912–933 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, J. Jiang, G. Li, W. Zhao, X. Zhao and T. Mu, Sci. China: Chem., 2016, 59, 571–577 Search PubMed .
C. Gu and J. Tu, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 10132–10140 Search PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, A. Ballantyne, R. C. Harris, J. A. Juma and K. S. Ryder, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19, 3219–3231 Search PubMed .
I. Korolev, S. Spathariotis, K. Yliniemi, B. P. Wilson, A. P. Abbott and M. Lundström, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 3615–3625 Search PubMed .
A. Syahrie, B. Francesca, C. H. Robert, F. Gero, M. H. Jennifer, R. T. J. Gawen and P. A. Andrew, Green Chem., 2019, 21, 6502–6512 Search PubMed .
A. P. Abbott, J. C. Barron, G. Frisch, S. Gurman, K. S. Ryder and A. Fernando Silva, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10224–10231 Search PubMed .
P. de Morais, F. Gonçalves, J. A. P. Coutinho and S. P. M. Ventura, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 3398–3404 Search PubMed .
A. K. Halder and M. N. D. S. Cordeiro, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10649–10660 Search PubMed .
N. Rodriguez Rodriguez, A. van den Bruinhorst, L. J. B. M. Kollau, M. C. Kroon and K. Binnemans, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 11521–11528 Search PubMed .
C. Zhang, Y. Ding, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Zhao, X. Zhang and G. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 7454–7459 Search PubMed .
K. Shahbaz, F. S. Mjalli, M. A. Hashim and I. M. ALNashef, J. Appl. Sci., 2010, 10, 3349–3354 Search PubMed .
M. Francisco, A. van den Bruinhorst and M. C. Kroon, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2153–2157 Search PubMed .
M. K. Tran, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, K. Kato, G. Babu and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 339–345 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, X. Yao, Y. Geng, Q. Zhou, X. Lu and S. Zhang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 2473–2479 Search PubMed .
J. Garcia-Alvarez, E. Hevia and V. Capriati, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 14854–14863 Search PubMed .
S. Srivastava, ChemistrySelect, 2020, 5, 799–803 Search PubMed .
N. Azizi, M. Khajeh and M. Alipour, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 15561–15565 Search PubMed .
R. Craveiro, L. Meneses, L. Durazzo, Â. Rocha, J. M. Silva, R. L. Reis, S. Barreiros, A. R. C. Duarte and A. Paiva, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19943–19950 Search PubMed .
P. Xu, Y. Xu, X.-F. Li, B.-Y. Zhao, M.-H. Zong and W.-Y. Lou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 718–724 Search PubMed .
C. Vidal, J. Garcia-Alvarez, A. Hernan-Gomez, A. R. Kennedy and E. Hevia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5969–5973 Search PubMed .
C. Vidal, J. Garcia-Alvarez, A. Hernan-Gomez, A. R. Kennedy and E. Hevia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 16145–16148 Search PubMed .
F. F. Mulks, L. J. Bole, L. Davin, A. Hernan-Gomez, A. Kennedy, J. Garcia-Alvarez and E. Hevia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19021–19026 Search PubMed .
A. Punzi, D. I. Coppi, S. Matera, M. A. M. Capozzi, A. Operamolla, R. Ragni, F. Babudri and G. M. Farinola, Org. Lett., 2017, 19, 4754–4757 Search PubMed .
S. Marullo, A. Meli and F. D’Anna, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 4889–4899 Search PubMed .
F. Milano, L. Giotta, M. R. Guascito, A. Agostiano, S. Sblendorio, L. Valli, F. M. Perna, L. Cicco, M. Trotta and V. Capriati, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7768–7776 Search PubMed .
H. Mou, J. Wang, D. Yu, D. Zhang, F. Lu, L. Chen, D. Wang and T. Mu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13455–13459 Search PubMed .
S. Some, P. Wadekar, R. Khose and D. Pethsangave, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 3326–3335 Search PubMed .
G. M. Thorat, H. S. Jadhav, W.-J. Chung and J. G. Seo, J. Alloys Compd., 2018, 732, 694–704 Search PubMed .
R. J. Sánchez-Leija, N. López-Salas, J. L. G. Fierro, M. C. Gutiérrez, M. L. Ferrer, J. D. Mota-Morales, G. Luna-Bárcenas and F. del Monte, Carbon, 2019, 146, 813–826 Search PubMed .
A. Verma, D. P. Jaihindh and Y. P. Fu, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 8594–8610 Search PubMed .
K. Rong, L. Huang, H. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Fang and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 8853–8856 Search PubMed .
A. Y. M. Al-Murshedi, A. Al-Yasari, H. F. Alesary and H. K. Ismail, Chem. Pap., 2019, 74, 699–709 Search PubMed .
G. Panzeri, M. Tresoldi, C. Rinaldi and L. Magagnin, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, D930–D933 Search PubMed .
K. Y. Wang, D. Ding, S. Zhang, Y. Wang, W. Liu, S. Wang, S. H. Wang, D. Liu and C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4806–4809 Search PubMed .
J. Iqbal, N. S. Shah, M. Sayed, N. Muhammad, S.-U. Rehman, J. A. Khan, Z. U. Haq Khan, F. M. Howari, Y. Nazzal, C. Xavier, S. Arshad, A. Hussein and K. Polychronopoulou, J. Water Process Eng., 2020, 33, 101012,  DOI:10.1016/j.jwpe.2019.101012 .
M. T. Vallejo-Macías, C. L. Recio-Colmenares, J. B. Pelayo-Vázquez, S. Gómez-Salazar, F. Carvajal-Ramos, J. F. Soltero-Martínez, M. Vázquez-Lepe, J. D. Mota-Morales and M. G. Pérez-García, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 5794–5806 Search PubMed .
R. Boston, P. Y. Foeller, D. C. Sinclair and I. M. Reaney, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 542–547 Search PubMed .
P. C. Jhang, N. T. Chuang and S. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4200–4204 Search PubMed .
B. He, Z. Li, H. Zhang, F. Dai, K. Li, R. Liu and S. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2019, 58, 2857–2867 Search PubMed .
J. Xu, M. Li, J. Qiu, X.-F. Zhang, Y. Feng and J. Yao, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 383, 123135 Search PubMed .
L. Hu, L. Chen, Y. Fang, A. Wang, C. Chen and Z. Yan, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 268, 207–215 Search PubMed .
D. Nakamura, I. Gunjishima, S. Yamaguchi, T. Ito, A. Okamoto, H. Kondo, S. Onda and K. Takatori, Nature, 2004, 430, 1009–1012 Search PubMed .
S. Liu, C. Zhang, B. Zhang, Z. Li and J. Hao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8964–8971 Search PubMed .
M. Martins, I. M. Aroso, R. L. Reis, A. R. C. Duarte, R. Craveiro and A. Paiva, AIChE J., 2014, 60, 3701–3706 Search PubMed .
R. D. Rogers and G. Gurau, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E10999 Search PubMed .
A. Banerjee, K. Ibsen, T. Brown, R. Chen, C. Agatemor and S. Mitragotri, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, E11000 Search PubMed .
I. P. E. Macario, F. Jesus, J. L. Pereira, S. P. M. Ventura, A. M. M. Goncalves, J. A. P. Coutinho and F. J. M. Goncalves, Chemosphere, 2018, 212, 890–897 Search PubMed .
F. M. Lannan, I. Mamajanov and N. V. Hud, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15324–15330 Search PubMed .
I. Mamajanov, A. E. Engelhart, H. D. Bean and N. V. Hud, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6310–6314 Search PubMed .
M. C. Gutierrez, M. L. Ferrer, L. Yuste, F. Rojo and F. del Monte, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 2158–2162 Search PubMed .
S. Cherukuvada and A. Nangia, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 906–923 Search PubMed .
A. Bauza, T. J. Mooibroek and A. Frontera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 12317–12321 Search PubMed .
S. Zahn, R. Frank, E. Hey-Hawkins and B. Kirchner, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6034–6038 Search PubMed .
W. Wang, B. Ji and Y. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 8132–8135 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, W. Wang and W. J. Jin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 5072–5104 Search PubMed .
A. Bauza and A. Frontera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7340–7343 Search PubMed .
G. R. Desiraju, P. S. Ho, L. Kloo, A. C. Legon, R. Marquardt, P. Metrangolo, P. Politzer, G. Resnati and K. Rissanen, Pure Appl. Chem., 2013, 85, 1711–1713 Search PubMed .
Q. Li, Q. Lin, W. Li, J. Cheng, B. Gong and J. Sun, ChemPhysChem, 2008, 9, 2265–2269 Search PubMed .
D. Yu and T. Mu, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2019, 123, 4958–4966 Search PubMed .
D. O. Abranches, M. A. R. Martins, L. P. Silva, N. Schaeffer, S. P. Pinho and J. A. P. Coutinho, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 10253–10256 Search PubMed .
S. C. C. van der Lubbe and C. Fonseca Guerra, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 2760–2769 Search PubMed .
D. H. Webber and R. L. Brutchey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15722–15725 Search PubMed .
C. L. McCarthy and R. L. Brutchey, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4888–4902 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao, J. Jiang, Z. Xue, C. Yan and T. Mu, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 9418–9421 Search PubMed .
X. Zhao, X. Lan, D. Yu, H. Fu, Z. Liu and T. Mu, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 13010–13013 Search PubMed .
D. Yu, H. Mou, X. Zhao, Y. Wang and T. Mu, Chem. – Asian J., 2019, 14, 3350–3356 Search PubMed .
B. Joos, T. Vranken, W. Marchal, M. Safari, M. K. Van Bael and A. T. Hardy, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 655–662 Search PubMed .
J. Ruiz-Olles, P. Slavik, N. K. Whitelaw and D. K. Smith, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 4173–4178 Search PubMed .
C. Gu, Y. Peng, J. Li, H. Wang, X. Q. Xie, X. Cao and C. S. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 18768–18773 Search PubMed .
R. A. Li, T. Fan, G. Chen, K. Zhang, B. Su, J. Tian and M. He, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 874–881 Search PubMed .
K. Zhang, G. Chen, R. A. Li, K. Zhao, J. Shen, J. Tian and M. He, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5132–5139 Search PubMed .
R. Tong, L. Cai, G. Chen, J. Tian and M. He, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 2771–2774 Search PubMed .
P. Jaumaux, Q. Liu, D. Zhou, X. Xu, T. Wang, Y. Wang, F. Kang, B. Li and G. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9134–9142 Search PubMed .
S. Wu, C. Cai, F. Li, Z. Tan and S. Dong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 11871–11875 Search PubMed .
X. Pang, L. Qin, B. Xu, Q. Liu and Y. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002451 Search PubMed .
B. Kuttich, A. Matt, C. Appel and B. Stuhn, Soft Matter, 2020, 16, 10260–10267 Search PubMed .
J. Sangster and A. D. Pelton, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1987, 16, 509–561 Search PubMed .
G.
J. Janz, J. Chem. Educ., 1962, 39, 59–67 Search PubMed .
M. Ruck, B. Garlyyev, F. Mayr, A. S. Bandarenka and A. Gagliardi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1773–1780 Search PubMed .
J. R. Boes and J. R. Kitchin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 3479–3487 Search PubMed .
T. Luechtefeld, C. Rowlands and T. Hartung, Toxicol. Res., 2018, 7, 732–744 Search PubMed .
Y. Xie, C. Zhang, X. Hu, C. Zhang, S. P. Kelley, J. L. Atwood and J. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 1475–1481 Search PubMed .
O. A. von Lilienfeld, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4164–4169 Search PubMed .
A. Fabrizio, A. Grisafi, B. Meyer, M. Ceriotti and C. Corminboeuf, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 9424–9432 Search PubMed .
T. Morawietz, A. S. Urbina, P. K. Wise, X. Wu, W. Lu, D. Ben-Amotz and T. E. Markland, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 6067–6073 Search PubMed .
Y. Amar, A. M. Schweidtmann, P. Deutsch, L. Cao and A. Lapkin, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 6697–6706 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Dongkun Yu
	Dongkun Yu received his MSc degree from Renmin University of China in 2020 under the supervision of professor Tiancheng Mu. He is currently a PhD candidate at KTH Royal Institute of Technology, with the support from China Scholarship Council. His research focuses on non-covalent interactions and novel eutectics. He has co-authored over a dozen publications.

Zhimin Xue
	Dr Zhimin Xue received her PhD degree from Renmin University of China in 2014 under the co-supervision of Academician Buxing Han, Professor Jianling Zhang, and Professor Tiancheng Mu. From 2017 to 2018, she was a visiting associate professor in the University of Tennessee, Knoxville, cooperated with Professor Sheng Dai. She is currently an associate professor in the College of Materials Science and Technology, Beijing Forestry University. Her research interests cover treatment and conversion of biomass, design, and applications of green solvents. She has co-authored over 75 peer-reviewed scientific publications and three chapters. Now she also serves as a member of the Ionic Liquids Professional Committee of the Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China and a member of a council of Beijing Thermal Analysis Association. She was selected as the Top Youth talents of National Forestry and Grassland Administration in 2020.

Tiancheng Mu
	Dr Tiancheng Mu received his PhD in physical chemistry from the Institute of Chemistry, the Chinese Academy of Sciences. Then, he worked in the Department of Industrial Chemistry, Oldenburg University (Germany) as a postdoctoral researcher. He is currently a full professor in the Department of Chemistry, Renmin University of China. His research interests involve solution chemistry and green chemistry. He has authored over 160 scientific publications. Furthermore, he was awarded the Prize of Liangxi Forestry Science and Technology Award (2019) and Science and Technology Award of the China Association for Instrumental Analysis (2016). Now he serves as an associate editor for RSC Advances, editorial board member for The Chinese Journal of Process Engineering, vice director of Beijing Thermal Analysis Society, a member of ionic liquids professional committee of Chemical Industry and Engineering Society of China, and a member of the green chemistry professional committee of Chinese Chemical Society.

 	Fig. 1  Significance of eutectics in broadening the solvent systems (A). Comparison of three different eutectics (B).	 


① + ①	Eutectic metal (eutectic atomic mixture)	Pb–Sn	
19

② + ②	Eutectic salt (eutectic ionic mixture)	LiCl–KCl	
20

③ + ③	Eutectic molecular mixture	Benzophenone–diphenylamine	
21

② + ③	DES (eutectic ionic and molecular mixture)	ChCl–urea	
14

① + ②	Metal in salt (eutectic atomic and ionic mixture)	Bi–BiCl3	
17

① + ③	—	—	—
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  The strategy by which low melting temperature (Tm) is achieved by minimizing the fusion enthalpy ΔHfus, and maximizing the entropy of fusion, ΔSfus. (A) Illustration of design principles to promote the formation of coordination network-forming liquids with low Tm. (B) Comparison of ΔHfus, ΔSfus, and Tm for selecting metal–bis(acetamide) frameworks. The symbol shape identifies the series of compounds, while the symbol colour designates the metal, and the border colour designates the anion.24 Reproduced with permission from ref. 24. Copyright 2021 American Chemical Society.	 
μi = μideali + μexcessi = μi* + RTlnχi + RTlnγi	(3)
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)

 	Fig. 3  Simulation boxes (ball and stick model) of urea–betaine system. Urea in orange and betaine in green.32 Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2021 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
〈u2〉1/2 = reδ	(10)

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic of contact between two crystals. The crystal atoms (labelled by *) on the surface have a low coordination number and can be regarded as activated atoms. (B) Diagram illustrates how a “liquid” atom is generated. (C) Photograph of benzophenone (left) and diphenylamine (right). (D) Eutectic liquid formed along the interface of benzophenone and diphenylamine.21 Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. Copyright 2007 Royal Society of Chemistry. (E) Image of diazobenzene (upper) and acenaphthene (lower) placed at 47.6 °C. (F) Progressive accumulation of eutectic droplets and melting of solid components at 50.6 °C.38 Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 1952 American Chemical Society. (G) A complete phase diagram with the axis of pressure.	 
f* = 2 − Φ + 1	(11)

 	Fig. 5  A binary phase diagram with two eutectic points. (A) The cocrystal resides between the two eutectic points, with a certain stoichiometric ratio of substances A and B. (B) Hypoeutectic and hypereutectic regions are on both sides of eutectic composition.	 

 	Fig. 6  Phase diagram of the Cu–Sn system (A).51 Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2012 Institute of Electrical and Electronics Engineers. Phase diagram of the Pb–Sn system under the atmospheric pressure (B).52 Reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2019 Multidisciplinary Digital Publishing Institute.	 


Melting point (°C)	29.76	15.5	13.2a	−11	−38.8	0
Density at 20 °C (g cm−3)	5.90	6.280	6.440	0.8682	13.533	998.0
Heat capacity (J kg−1 K−1)	410	404	295	982.1	140	4181
Viscosity (Pa s)	1.37 × 10−3	1.99 × 10−3	2.4 × 10−3	0.77 × 10−3	1.53 × 10−3	0.96 × 10−3
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)	29.3	26.6	16.5	21.8	8.5	0.606
Electrical conductivity (W m−1 K−1)	6.73 × 106	3.40 × 106	3.46 × 106	2.878 × 106	1.04 × 106	5.5 × 10−6
ρsolid = 10.69(1 − 80 × 10−6T)	(12)
ρliquid = 10.47(1 − 110 × 10−6T)	(13)

 	Fig. 7  Temperature dependences of density (A) and viscosity (B) for Ga–Sn eutectic based alloys with Zn additions.57 Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. Copyright 2018 Elsevier.	 
	(14)
	(15)
σ(T) = σ0 − 49.8(T − Tm) + 0.0476(T − Tm)2	(16)

 	Fig. 8  (A) Series of images of a single Ge wire growth at 340 °C and 4.6 × 10−6 torr Ge2H6, t = 0, 309, and 618 s. (B) Another image series for a second wire growing at the same temperature and pressure, t = 0, 1340 and 1824 s. (C) Binary phase diagram of Au and Ge.74 Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. Copyright 2009 The American Association for the Advancement of Science. (D) Schematic representation of the touch-print method. (E) Schematic representation of air-bubble method.75 Reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2017 The American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 9  Eutectic metals for soft and stretchable electronics. (A) Photographs of latertally stretched micropatterned high-density EGaIn electrodes. (B) Stress–strain curves of a pristine composite electrode and a self-healed electrode following cutting. (C) Photograph of micropatterned electrode on alkanol-based hydrogel.79 Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (D) Fabrication process of a heater sheet by the direct ink writing method of EGaIn. (E) Photograph of assembled glove. (F) Optical camera and (G) IR camera image of the hand in glove. (H) Image of hand posture and (I) reconstructed animation in VR environment.83 Reproduced with permission from ref. 83. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (J) Soft sensing insole measuring ground reaction forces connected by an electroless nickel immersion gold finished flexible flat cable. (K) Soft sensing insole attached below the foot using medical tapes. (L) Sensing signals recorded during three gait cycles.84 Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Soft robots driven by electricity, magnetism, and light. (A) Structure and composition of a wheel robot. (B) Schematic of the driving module and the working mechanism. (C) Sequential snapshots for actuating an actual wheeled robot at a steady speed, the inset shows the time–displacement plot.89 Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons. (D) Schematic of the magnetic propulsion of liquid metal micromotors. (E) Time lapse images depicting swimming of a micromotor. (F) Mechanical analysis and swimming mechanism of the bowling-pin-like liquid metal microswimmer in an elliptically polarized magnetic field. (G) The dependence of average speed V upon the polarization of the applied magnetic field Hmax (Hmin = 10 mT).90 Reproduced with permission from ref. 90. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (H) Schematic of the experimental setup showing the motion mechanism of the EGaInSn marble. The light beam passes through an objective lens (also used for imaging) and is focused onto one side of the marble. (I) Sequential snapshots of the motion of a 2 mm diameter sphere marble in 15% H2O2 solution when a light intensity of 100% is approaching the marble from the left-hand side at a constant speed of 4.5 mm min−1. The visible purple spot is the light beam. (J) Time displacement plots for both the light spot and the marble.91 Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2013 American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of a “Solar Two” plant. EPGS for electric power generation system.98	 

 	Fig. 12  Structure of salt tank coupled with heaters and temperature sensors.115 Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019 Elsevier.	 
	(17)
	(18)

 	Fig. 13  Preparation of a redox-active ionic liquid with charge transfer interaction from carbazole-based and viologen-based RAILs (A). Overview of the electrochemical reaction of neat CT-IL (B).129 Reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2021 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

AgCl	MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Pb)
AgBr	MBrn (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Pb)
CdCl2	MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Ba)
CdBr2	KBr
CeCl3	MCln (M = Na, K, Ca)
MgCl2	MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Rb)
NaCl	MCln (M = Ca, Ba, Sr)
PbCl2	MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Ca, Sr, Ba, Zn)
PbBr2	MBrn (M = Na, Zn)
ZnCl2	MCln (M = Li, Na, K, Rb, Cs, Ba)

 	Fig. 14  (A) Simplified diagram of the experimental setup used for evaluating the thermal insulation performance of the floating spheres, and 3D representation of the simulated section. An infrared camera is used to measure the photon flux losses from the surface of a heated beaker filled with molten salt, with and without floating spheres.137 Reproduced with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2018 Elsevier. (B) Cost of some molten salts as phase change materials for supercritical CO2 cycles.138 Reproduced with permission from ref. 138. Copyright 2020 Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Eutectic metals for preparing materials. (A) Synthesis of PMDA based COFs in a eutectic salt mixture, TT–PMDA: 2,4,6-tris(4-aminophenyl)–triazine pyromellitic dianhydride, TAPA–PMDA: 2,4,6-tris(4aminophenyl)–amine pyromellitic dianhydride.148 Reproduced with permission from ref. 148. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (B) Sectional schematic of the vertical driving force and horizontal liquid transport. (C) When sulphur vapor was introduced early, the Na2Mo2O7 precursor rapidly formed the MoS2 seed layer when exposed on the surface. (D) When sulphur vapor was introduced later, the MoS2 seed layer was formed at the solid–liquid interface, thus leaving a droplet of the liquid precursor on top of the interface. Optical image of monolayer (E) and bilayer (F) MoS2. Scale bar is 50 μm.149 Reproduced from ref. 149 with permission from the Springer Nature, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Photo and schematic diagram of device for methane pyrolysis.158 Reproduced with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) Catalytic cycle proposed for electrochemical NH3 synthesis in molten LiCl–KCl–LiH. Species added to the reaction are shown in blue, remaining species in black are generated in situ, sole product NH3 is shown in green. Red dashed lines indicate opportunities for unproductive side reactions.159 Reproduced with permission from ref. 159. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 17  Schematic diagram of a liquid metal battery upon (A) discharging and (B) charging.11	 


• Tb > 25 °C, Tm < 1000 °C	• Low melting temperature
• Electrically conductive, with a minimum electronic conductivity greater than the ionic conductivity of a typical molten salt electrolyte (σ > 1 S cm−1)	• A density intermediate between the positive and negative electrodes to facilitate the self-segregation of three liquid layers
• Nonradioactive	• Minimal metal solubility

	• No irreversible side reactions of spectator ions within the operating voltage window

	• High ionic conductivity for high-rate capability and energy efficiency

Type I	Cat+X−zMClx	M = Zn, Sn, Fe, Al, Ga, In
Type II	Cat+X−zMClx·yH2O	M = Cr, Co, Cu, Ni, Fe
Type III	Cat+X−zRZ	Z = CONH2, COOH, OH
Type IV	MClx+RZ = MClx−1+·RZ + MClx+1	M = Al, Zn and Z = CONH2, OH

 	Fig. 18  (A) The evolution of ionic liquids. (B) Comparison of ionic liquid and DES.	 

 	Fig. 19  Spatial distribution function of Cl− (green, isosurface 20 nm−3) and Ourea (red, isosurface 20 nm−3) close to choline (A) and urea (B).179 Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2017 Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) A hypothetical diagram of eutectic mechanism, balls in blue and red represent different molecules.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) The deviation of Ethaline DES from the aqueous solution and classical ionic liquids, BMF-TFSI: 1-butyl-1-methylpyrrolidinium bis-(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, EMIM-BF4: 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate.187 Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (B) A schematic representation showing different domains/regions in DESs and possible locations of various solutes in these regions.188 Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Spatial density function plots describing the 3D nanostructure of DES with water. Isosurfaces represent urea (lilac), chloride (green), choline (yellow), and water (blue) molecules at the 7.5% probability level. The central molecules from left to right are choline, urea, and choline respectively. ChCl:urea:water 1:2:1 and 1:2:15 in molar correspond to the top (1w) and bottom (15w) respectively.184 Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2017 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 22  Molar enthalpy of mixing Hm (with water) for ChCl/urea at different molar ratios (1:2.5, 1:2, 1:1.5). Blue points are experimental data at 308.15 K: (◆) 1:2.5, (▲) 1:2, and (●) 1:1.5; black points, experimental data at 318.15 K: (◊) 1:2.5, (△) 1:2, and (○) 1:1.5. Curves: calculated results from nonrandom two-liquid model.219 Reproduced with permission from ref. 219. Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  The behaviour of molecules on electrodes. (A) A single and double adsorption layer on positive and negatively charged electrodes. Gray clusters represent urea molecules, blue clusters represent choline cations, and green balls represent chloride ions. (B) The orientation of urea on positive and negative electrodes (blue represents the graphene electrode with negative charge, red represents the graphene electrode with positive charge).234 Reproduced with permission from ref. 234. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) The photos of the initial imidazole/EG–olive oil emulsion. (B) The laser scanning confocal microscopy image of the initial emulsion. (C) The laser scanning confocal microscopy image of lower phase after CO2 bubbling for 30 min.235 Reproduced with permission from ref. 235. Copyright 2021 Royal Society of Chemistry. (D) Schematic diagram of thermo-switchable DES in water. (E) Evolution of the liquid–liquid phase observed by optical microscopy of a sample with 50 wt% water and 50 wt% DES, from 25 to 26 °C.236 Reproduced with permission from ref. 236. Copyright 2020 American Chemical Society. (F) Schematic view of reaction and separation process in DES.237 Reproduced with permission from ref. 237. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 
	(19)
Water255	

	Sea water, waste water
Metals256	Flue dust
Protein257,258	Oilseed cakes, cod skins
Lipid259	Microalga P. tricornutum
Lignin260	Switchgrass
Chitin254,261	Crustacean shells
Vitamins262	Button mushroom
Rutin263	
Sophora japonica

Astaxanthin264	Shrimp byproducts
Flavone265	Chinese herbal medicines
Anthocyanins266	Wine lees
Curcumin267	Herbal tea
Polyphenols268	
Chlorella vulgaris

Polygodial269	Pseudowintera colorata leaves
Bitumen270	Oil sands

 	Fig. 25  Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of Zn deposits obtained from 0.3 M ZnCl2 in (A) 1:2 ChCl:U and (B) 1:2 ChCl:EG at 50 °C, on mild steel at I = 3 mA cm−2.279 Reproduced with permission from ref. 279. Copyright 2011 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  The schematic diagram of the Fe–Al hybrid liquid battery concept.12 Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2017 Cell Press Elsevier.	 


Ni2P@graphene	1:3a	NiCl2·6H2O:malonic acid	
299

S,N doped reduced graphene oxide	1:2	ChCl:Na2S	
300

Sn/SnO2@C	1:2	ChCl:SnCl2	
301

N doped and N,P-codoped porous carbon	1:3	AHCl:ethylene glycol	
302

CuO/g-C3N4	1:2	ChCl:urea	
303

Nanoporous Au	1:3.5	ZnCl2:urea	
304

Co films	1:2	ChCl:PEG200	
305

SmCo films	1:2a	ChCl:ethylene glycol	
306

Various Sn–Se crystalline species	1:2	ChBr:urea	
307

CeO2 nanoparticles	1:1	CTAB:acetic acid	
308

γ-Fe2O3	1:2a	
D-L-Menthol:pyruvic acid	
309

BaTiO3	1:1	ChCl:malonic acid	
310

Layered zinc phosphates	1:1	ChCl:oxalic acid	
311

(VO)2P2O7	1:1	ChCl:oxalic acid/glucose	
312

CdS@CeO2	—	Thiourea:PEG200	
313

Zeolitic imidazolate framework-8	6:4a	TBAB:2-Mim	
314

Zeolite analogues	1:2	ChCl:urea	
315

2D-[Co(NH3)4CO3]Cl	5:18.3	CoCl2·6H2O:urea	
316


 	Fig. 27  Differences between DESs and EMLs. Various “bonds” shown in the right side are bonding interactions.	 

 	Fig. 28  (A) Photographs of EML and 2D materials dispersed after peering in EML. Abbreviations: G for graphene, BSb for black antimony. (B) Tyndall phenomenon of 5 mixtures. (C) Photographs of EML and polymers dissolved in EML. Abbreviations: Ori for original EML, Lig for lignin, PS for polystyrene, PEG for polyethylene glycol, TPIP for trans-1,4-polyisoprene, PMMA for polymethyl methacrylate, PC for polycarbonate. (D) Three kinds of typically waste plastic in daily life. (E) A complete sketch of CD recovery process.339 Reproduced with permission from ref. 339. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 29  (A) Deep eutectic solvents formed by mixing an organic salt and a hydrogen bond donor (1:2 ratio) can be turned into gel-phase materials by the addition of 1,3:2,4-dibenzylidene-D-sorbitol (DBS, 5% wt/vol), which self-assembles into nanofibers, forming a new class of ‘supramolecular eutectogels’. (B) SEM image of supramolecular eutectogel made in DES (ChCl:EG), then solvent exchanged with water and cryo-dried prior to imaging.341 Reproduced with permission from ref. 341. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Sons. (C) Photos of the flexible electrochromic device at −0.7 V for colouring and 0 V for bleaching.342 Reproduced with permission from ref. 342. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (D) Numerical simulations of the Li ion flux distribution on the Li metal anode surfaces for DES electrolyte with glass fibre membrane and DES-based self-healing polymer electrolyte.346 Reproduced with permission from ref. 346. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons. (E) Molecular structure of a newly designed linear liquid crystal polymer. (F) Photographs showing light-driven contraction up to 81% of the polymer fibre upon irradiation with a 470 nm light (100 mW cm−2).348 Reproduced with permission from ref. 348. Copyright 2020 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 30  Purification mode of conventional reaction (A) and self-precipitation reaction (B).	 

 	Fig. 31  The role of machine learning in the development of eutectics. Double arrow indicates a mature interaction between industry and academia. Solid arrows indicate that machine learning needs data from practical applications and scientific experiments, while dash arrows represent the feedback.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
