Strategic review of secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in kesterite CZTS–Se solar cells  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE02153G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE02153G
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3134-3159Strategic review of secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in kesterite CZTS–Se solar cells

        
          
            Mukesh 
            Kumar
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Ashish 
            Dubey
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Nirmal 
            Adhikari
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Swaminathan 
            Venkatesan
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Qiquan 
            Qiao
          
          
        
      *b
aFunctional and Renewable Energy Materials Laboratory, Department of Physics, Indian Institute of Technology Ropar, Punjab 140 001, India. E-mail: mkumar@iitrpr.ac.in
bCenter for Advanced Photovoltaics, Electrical Engineering and Computer Science Department, South Dakota State University, Brookings, SD 57007, USA. E-mail: qiquan.qiao@sdstate.edu
Received 
      13th July 2015
    , Accepted 21st August 2015First published on 21st August 2015AbstractEarth abundant kesterite copper-zinc-tin-sulfide–selenide (CZTS–Se) is considered as cost-effective material for next generation solar cells. However, current CZTS–Se solar cells have much lower efficiency than CIGS solar cells. Rapid progress in achieving the target efficiency in CZTS–Se solar cells is hindered by the narrow phase stability of the quaternary phase, Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4, and the existence of other competitive and complex secondary phases and defects. This resulted in structural inhomogeneity, local fluctuation of open circuit voltage and high carrier recombination that finally lead to poor device performance and repeatability issues. The higher performance of off-stoichiometric CZTS materials, copper-poor and zinc-rich, and their inherent association with secondary phases and defects force the scientific community to investigate them together. This work aims to provide a comprehensive review for optimum growth conditions to achieve efficient kesterite CZTS–Se material under different conditions, complementary characterization techniques to detect unwanted phases, defects and defect-complexes and various approaches to reduce the secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes for higher performance in CZTS–Se solar cells. Understanding and addressing the structural inhomogeneity, control growth and material characterization are expected to yield closer performance parity between CZTS–Se and CIGS solar cells.
Mukesh Kumar
Dr Mukesh Kumar is an assistant professor in the Department of Physics at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Ropar, India. He is a BASE fellow under Indo-US Science and Technology Forum, India and recently received the young scientist research award from Department of Atomic Energy, India. He did his PhD in physics from IIT Delhi, India in 2010 and worked at South Dakota State University, Colorado School of Mines and National Center for Photovoltaics, USA from 2010–2013. Current research focuses on kesterite and chalcopyrite materials, polymer BHJ, perovskite solar cells, transparent conducting electrodes and sensor development.
Ashish Dubey
Ashish Dubey is a graduate student in Electrical Engineering at South Dakota State University, US. He received his master's degree in Nanotechnology from Amity University, India. Currently he is carrying out his doctoral thesis work in the Dr Qiquan Qiao group. His research work includes perovskite solar cells, organic–inorganic semiconductor hybrid solar cells, structural and morphological studies of donor–acceptor blend films, and their optical and electrical characterization.
Nirmal Adhikari
Nirmal Adhikari received his Bachelor's Degree in Electrical Engineering from Institute of Engineering, Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, Nepal in 2006 and completed his Master's degree in Materials and Process of Sustainable Energetics from Tallinn University of Technology, Eastern Europe in 2011. He is currently pursuing his Doctoral degree in Electrical Engineering from South Dakota State University under the supervision of Dr Qiquan Qiao. His major research is on the interface engineering of perovskite solar cells at the nanoscale for efficient charge transport using Kelvin Probe Force microscopy (KPFM) and Transient Photoconductivity measurements.
Swaminathan Venkatesan
Swaminathan Venkatesan received his Bachelor's degree in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering from National Institute of Technology, Trichy, India in 2006. He then completed his Masters in Materials Science and Engineering from University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA. He defended his Doctoral dissertation under the guidance of Dr Qiquan Qiao titled “Engineering nanomorphology in polymer solar cells for efficient charge transport”. He is currently working as a Post-Doctoral Researcher with Dr Yan Yao where his research work includes studying the phase transition and charge transport in organic and inorganic–organic hybrid photovoltaic materials and devices.
Qiquan Qiao
Dr Qiquan Qiao is an associate professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at South Dakota State University (SDSU), where he established the Organic Electronics Laboratory. Current research focuses on polymer photovoltaics, Perovskite solar cells and dye-sensitized solar cells. He received the 2014 F O Butler Award for Excellence in research, the 2012 College of Engineering Young Investigator Award, the 2010 US NSF CAREER Award, and the 2009 Bergmann Memorial Award from the US-Israel Bi-national Science Foundation (BSF).

Broader context
Earth abundant kesterite (CZTS) material is considered as a strong candidate for next generation cost-effective solar cell applications. The closest material and similar device structure of chalcopyrite (CIGS) with its champion solar cell recently demonstrated 21.6% of photoconversion efficiency. However, current kesterite solar cells with their champion solar cell revealed only 12.6% efficiency. This performance gap is caused by the narrow phase stability of the quaternary kesterite phase, Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4, and the existence of other competitive and complex secondary phases and defect-complexes along with interfacial carrier recombination. This article presents a strategic review of secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in kesterite CZTS–Se solar cells, controlled growth to improve material performance and complementary characterization techniques to identify unwanted phases and defect complexes. The knowledge of structural inhomogeneity, control growth and material characterization is expected to yield closer performance parity between kesterite and chalcopyrite materials for future and cost-effective clean energy.

1. Introduction
Earth receives more energy from the sun in a given day than the energy consumed by the total world population in a year. As the globe assembles together to explore non-conventional energy resources for the future energy requirement of the mass population, energy harvesting through solar photovoltaics is on the leading edge among other renewable energy resources.1–3 Silicon-based solar cells currently share approximately 85% of the total photovoltaic market. This may be due to the availability of large quantities of Si on the earth in addition to the fact that the growth mechanism of high-quality Si thin films is well-developed in the semiconductor industry for mass production. The main challenges in marketing solar cell technology are the high manufacturing costs and the non-availability of novel techniques to enhance the cell efficiency.4,5 Other concerns are inefficient light harvesting and carrier losses in the active layer of the device leading to a decrease in solar cell efficiency.6 The main expenditure is the cost of the materials used for the solar cell fabrication. Hence, there is a need to reduce the material cost to make highly efficient solar cells suitable for common household purposes. It is well documented that 40% of the cost of solar cell fabrication is in the materials side, and hence any reduction in the quantity of material can lead to a drop in the cost of solar cells.5
The direct optical band gap of chalcogenide based solar cells offers the benefit of high absorption in comparison to silicon.7 Furthermore, the band gap tunability either by metal or chalcogenide substitutions can optimize the absorber band gap as per the solar spectrum.8 To make solar energy available for widespread use to common masses, the absorbing materials should be of low cost, non-toxic, earth abundant and offer a comparable or higher efficiency and lifetime than standard silicon solar cells. The direct band gap chalcogenide thin film photovoltaics (PVs) with higher absorption than silicon could allow the production on the module scale.9,10 Recently, CuInGaSe2 (CIGS) based solar cells show a world record efficiency of 21.7% on the laboratory scale.11,12 On the module scale, 16 × 16 cm2, ∼16% efficiency in CIGS solar cells was reported. However, the involvement of indium and gallium metals is the main obstacle to the widespread use of this technology. In copper-zinc-tin-sulphide (CZTS) solar cells, the expensive and rare metals including indium and gallium were replaced by earth abundant zinc and tin metal. CZTS and CIGS exhibit closely related characteristics due to their isovalency and similarities in the crystal structure. By replacing In and Ga metals with Zn and Sn, CZTS has become an emerging material to further advance thin film PVs.13–15 Earth abundant, non-toxic and cost-effective CZTS offers a high absorption coefficient of ∼104 cm−1 and tunability in the optical band gap from 1.5 to 1.0 eV by adding selenium to better match the solar spectrum.8,15,16 The first CZTS solar cell achieved a 0.66% power conversion efficiency (PCE) in 1966.17,18 Subsequent optimization of materials and growth techniques increased the PCE to 6.7% in 2008.19 Further material growth optimization increased the efficiency to 9.7% in 2010 and 10.1% in 2011.9,20 The highest efficiency for CZTS–Se solar cells was 12.6% by the Mitzi group in 2014.21Fig. 1 depicts the evolution of device efficiency for CZTS solar cells, in which the performance gap between the state of the art efficiencies of CZTS–Se and CIGS solar cells is shown.
 Fig. 1  Efficiency evolution of CZTS–Se and comparison with latest efficiency reported for CIGS solar cells. The efficiency gap between the two technologies is demonstrated as a performance gap. 
In this work, recent developments of CZTS–Se solar cells are reviewed along with the main reasons responsible for the performance gap between CZTS–Se and CIGS technologies. Firstly, we introduce in detail the secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes defected experimentally or predicted theoretically in CZTS–Se and their impacts on solar cell performance. Secondly, growth techniques for CZTS–Se are described. Thirdly, experimental techniques to detect unwanted phases, defects and defect-complexes are discussed. Fourth, various approaches to reduce the secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in CZTS–Se are described. Finally, challenges and future prospects to improve CZTS–Se solar cell performance are presented.
2. Secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in CZTS materials
2.1 Secondary phases in CZTS materials
After impressive development of CZTS–Se solar cells, the key question remains how to fill the performance gap between CZTS–Se and CIGS solar cells to the level of commercialization. The major challenges in CZTS–Se material are to develop impurity-free and phase-controlled Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4 thin films. The narrow phase stability makes the defects and the secondary phase easy to form during the growth and post-growth processes.22–25Fig. 2 shows an experimentally determined pseudoternary phase diagram from binary Cu2S, ZnS and SnS2 phases to form the CZTS phase along with their crystal structures.
 Fig. 2  The pseudoternary phase diagram to form the CZTS phase and other secondary phases along with their crystal structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. 
The complexity of this quaternary system increases many folds because of an intense competition between CZTS growth and the growth of binary [Cu2S, ZnS, SnS, and SnS2] and ternary phases [Cu2SnS3].15,23,27,28 The CZTS phase formation is more complex and narrow in phase stability, as seen in Fig. 2.29 More details can be seen in Fig. 3 which shows the chemical potential-based stability diagram and the existence of other secondary phases along with the CZTS phase while varying the chemical potential of Zn and Sn and fixing chemical potential for copper.30,31 In a four-component system, three out of four chemical potentials are independent, and one potential is fixed by the requirement that the stoichiometrically weighted sum i.e. Cu2ZnSnS4 of the chemical potentials should be equal to the total energy of the compound formed.25,30
 Fig. 3  Chemical potential domains for the CZTS phase formation for tin and zinc under (a) copper-rich and (b) copper-poor conditions. Δμ is the chemical potential for the standard element. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. 
The chemical potential diagrams clearly reveal that even under copper-rich conditions (Fig. 3a), CZTS is formed only in a very narrow region and the CZTS phase shares the boundaries with other secondary phases including ZnS, SnS, Cu2SnS3 and CuS under different conditions. The phase stability of CZTS is squeezed to nearly a point under copper-poor conditions (Fig. 3b). The model of phase stability discussed in Fig. 3 does not take account of the possible stoichiometric variation in CZTS. The chemical potential domain showed that under equilibrium conditions, a copper-rich ambient is required to produce the kesterite CZTS phase. On the other hand, copper-poor and zinc-rich conditions, Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.8 and Zn/Sn = 1.2, were associated with high efficiency CZTS solar cells, as reported in the literature.10,13,32 Therefore, device performance and formation of secondary phases are coupled to each other.
The narrow phase stability in the copper-poor conditions and formation of secondary phases were further complicated by the volatile nature of Zn and Sn. Out diffusion of S under favorable high temperature annealing conditions during CZTS solar cell fabrication further creates encouraging conditions to form secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes.

Table 1 summarizes the reported secondary phases and their properties in CZTS materials.17,33–35 ZnS is a wide band gap (3.54 eV) material and insulating in nature and therefore can reduce the active area to generate the electron–hole pairs and current collection. Also, ZnS and Cu2SnS3 have a similar crystal structure making it difficult to observe them in X-ray diffraction measurements.36,37 Cho et al. have reported the presence of voids and ZnS secondary phases in CZTS using the energy dispersive X-ray analysis technique.38 They also observed the presence of Cd near the voids as was found in CIGS solar cells.39
Table 1 Various properties of secondary phases observed in CZTS materials




Properties
Cu2ZnSnS4
ZnS
Cu2S
SnS2
Cu2SnS3




Band gap
∼1.45 eV
3.54–3.68 eV
1.21 eV
2.2 eV
0.98–1.35 eV


Electrical properties
Semiconductor, p-type
Insulator
p-Type, metal like, and highly defective
n-Type
p-Type


Structural properties
Kesterite
Sphalerite and wurtzite
Chalcocite
Rhombohedral
Cubic and tetragonal


Impact on solar cell performance
Essential absorbing material
Insulating, reduces device active area
Metallic and short solar cell
n-type, forms diodes and barriers for carrier collection
Affects carrier collection efficiency




Cu2S is highly conductive in nature and may short solar cells. Moreover, SnS2 is a n-type semiconductor with a band gap of ∼2.2 eV.34 This may form a secondary diode inside the absorbing layer or it could be insulating in nature, which can cause high photocarrier recombination. There are other phases made of Sn and S such as SnS and Sn2S3, which were also observed in CZTS solar cells. These phases show entirely different properties than the SnS2 phase. SnS is a p-type semiconductor with an optical band gap of 1.11 eV, while Sn2S3 is a mixed phase depending on the Sn and S defects. It shows an optical band gap of 1.09 eV. Cu2SnS3 (CTS) is another phase observed in CZTS materials under Zn-poor conditions. Although CTS is a p-type semiconductor with a band gap close to CZTS–Se, and may absorb light in the same range of the solar spectrum; recent studies reveal that this material is less efficient than CZTS thin film.40,41 This unwanted secondary phase in CZTS can hamper solar cell performance.
Wang et al. reported a detailed investigation of secondary phases and microstructural analysis of CZTS solar cells grown by thermal evaporation.42 Secondary phases and voids were observed near the Mo–CZTS interface. Fig. 4(a) shows the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image along with the elemental analysis across different regions as scan 1, scan 2 and scan 3, Fig. 4(c and d).
 Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of the CZTS solar cell and (b–d) corresponding line scans in different regions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. 
Scan 1 (Fig. 4b) indicates that the Zn concentration drastically decreases as the line scan crosses from CZTS to a different contrast region. This reveals that the region is either CuSnS3 or another phase of Cu–Sn–S. While in scan 2 (Fig. 4c), which goes from CZTS to another grain, elemental analysis indicates that Cu and Sn signals decrease while the Zn signal increases. This grain is the ZnS secondary phase in CZTS. Scan 3 (Fig. 4d), from ZnS to Mo, shows that copper out diffuses into Mo back contact. This might be the reason that secondary phases near the Mo interface have been observed. Han et al. have also reported that the crystallization behavior of CZTS strongly depends on post-processing conditions such as annealing temperature, annealing time and sulfurization.43
2.2 Defects and defect-complexes in CZTS
In addition to the secondary phases, a variety of other defects were observed in CZTS, as discussed in Table 2. Similar radii of different ionic species support their formation in CZTS. These defects include vacancies, antisites, interstitials and complexes.23,25,30,31,44 These defects and defect-complexes form shallow donor levels, shallow acceptor levels, mid-gap states and deep trap states within the band gap of CZTS absorbing material.31 The complex defects may be responsible for local fluctuation in the chemical potential of elements and hence local stoichiometric variation.
Table 2 Possible defects and defect-complexes in CZTS




 
Details of defects
Ionization levels (donor/acceptor)
Impact on CZTS solar cell performance




Vacancies
Copper vacancy (VCu)
One, acceptor
Ionized from the neutral to −1 state and the transition level, ε(−/0) forms the shallow state, beneficial for higher solar cell efficiency


Zinc vacancy (VZn)
Two, acceptor
Not favorable, deep levels


Tin vacancy (VSn)
Four, acceptor
Adversely affect device performance, deep levels


Sulfur/selenium vacancy (VS/VSe)
One/one, donor/donor
Not favorable, mid gap states






Antisites
Copper-on-zinc antisite (CuZn)
One, acceptor
Deeper than copper vacancy, contribute to the p-type nature of CZTS


Zinc-on-copper antisite (ZnCu)
One, donor
Not favorable, shallow level near the conduction band


Copper-on-tin antisite (CuSn)
Three, acceptor
Not favorable, deep and multilevels


Tin-on-copper antisite (SnCu)
Two, donor
Not favorable, deep level/mid gas state


Zinc-on-tin antisite (ZnSn)
Two, acceptor
Not favorable, deep levels


Tin-on-zinc antisite (SnZn)
Two, donor
Not favorable, mid gap states






Interstitials
Copper interstitial (Cui)
One, donor
Not favorable, shallow states near the conduction band


Zinc interstitial (Zni)
Two, donor
Not favorable, mid gap states






Defect complexes

Stoichiometric-conserving defect complex
(CuZn + ZnCu), (CuSn + SnCu), (ZnSn + SnZn)

(CuZn + ZnCu): ∼0.2 eV formation energy, for other two >0.2 eV

(CuZn + ZnCu): low impact on optoelectronic properties
Other two have a significant impact on CZTS and decrease the band gap by 0.3 eV




Non-stoichiometric-conserving defect complex
(VCu + ZnCu), (VZn + SnZn), (ZnSn + 2ZnCu), (2CuZn + SnSn)

Formation energy ∼0.3–0.6 eV
Significant impact and responsible for local variation in chemical potential and stoichiometric in-homogeneity




Among all listed defects, copper vacancies (VCu) form a shallow acceptor level just ∼0.02 eV above the valance band maxima (VBM) and are proven to be beneficial to improve the p-type nature of the CZTS material and device efficiency while other vacancies such as VZn, VSn, VS and VSe are not favorable.45–47 Moreover, VS and VSe form mid gap states while VZn and VSn form multiple states including both deep levels and mid gap states within the band gap of CZTS.23,48 Other acceptor vacancies play a negligible role in improving the p-type nature of CZTS. The formation of antisite defects in CZTS is supported by the similar radii and even similar valences of elements like copper and zinc. Depending on defect formation energies and their transition levels, antisite defects can form either acceptor or donor levels in CZTS. Copper on the zinc antisite (CuZn) behaves like a shallow acceptor level, but the formation energy is higher than VCu (∼0.02 eV) while a zinc on the copper antisite (ZnCu) behaves like the shallow donor level. Another antisite defect (SnCu) forms multi-levels within the band gap including the mid-gap state and the shallow level while a CuSn antisite defect forms three transition levels. Similarly, when Sn replaces Zn (SnZn) it forms two mid-gap states.23 The two commonly observed interstitials, Cui and Zni, under stoichiometric CZTS or copper-rich conditions are undesirable as they form the shallow donor level and mid-gap states, respectively. Therefore, the higher solar cell efficiency under copper-poor and zinc-rich conditions can be understood.49 On the other hand, non-stoichiometry of one element in the CZTS material favors the formation of another undesirable defect and defect-complexes. Besides, vacancies, antisite defects and defect-complexes are the other dominating defects observed in CZTS. The crystal structure of CZTS and possible valances are shown in Fig. 5(a and b). The dotted circles are in-plane while solid circles are out-of-plane.
 Fig. 5  (a) Crystal structure and (b) valence states of CZTS. The dotted circles are in the plane while the solid circles are out-of-plane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23. 
The defect-complexes are self-compensated defects that form because of the presence of donor and acceptor vacancies, interstitials and antisites in CZTS.44 These defect complexes include (CuZn + ZnCu), (SnZn + ZnSn), (CuSn + SnCu), (VCu + ZnCu), (VZn + SnZn), (ZnSn + 2ZnCu) and (2CuZn + SnSn). They are formed because their formation energy is lower than the formation energy of individual antisite defects.
These defect-complexes can be further divided into two categories: (i) stoichiometric-conserving complex defects such as (AB + BA), (CuZn + ZnCu), (SnZn + ZnSn), and (CuSn + SnCu), where element A replaces B in one antisite and element B replaces A in another antisite; and (ii) non-stoichiometric-conserving complex defects including, (VCu + ZnCu), (VZn + SnZn), (ZnSn + 2ZnCu), and (2CuZn + SnZn).30,31,50 The formation of stoichiometric-conserving defect complexes is independent of stoichiometric variations in CZTS, and their formation is universal under copper-rich and copper-poor conditions. These defects do not have any impact on the stoichiometry variation in CZTS. However, non-stoichiometric-conserving defect-complexes such as (2CuZn + SnZn) caused a local variation in stoichiometry. In, for example, the (2CuZn + SnZn) defect-complex, two antisites, including copper replacing zinc and tin replacing zinc, come together and form a self-compensating defect-complex. Chen et al. recently reviewed different defects and complexes in CZTS and CIGS. Although the density of complex defects was ∼1018 cm−3, and difficult to be observed by any advanced instrument, it is sufficient to impact the efficiency of earth abundant CZTS solar cells.23
2.3 Impact of secondary phases, defects and defect complexes on solar cell performance
The formation of secondary phases, vacancies, antisites and self-compensating defect-complexes in CZTS along with carrier recombination at different interfaces affects the device efficiency and may be the main reason for the performance gap between CZTS and CIGS solar cells.19,23,51 The strong competition between the kesterite phase and secondary phases, dependence of the p-type conductivity of CZTS on copper VCu and CuZn antisites and their strong correlation with Cu/(Zn + Sn) and Zn/Sn impact the photogenerated carrier collection at end electrodes. The secondary phases and defects may not be randomly segregated in CZTS thin films. Depending on the processing conditions, secondary phases may be found at the Mo/CZTS interface, in the bulk, at the grain boundaries of CZTS grains and/or on the surface of CZTS thin film. During the post-annealing process of CZTS thin films, annealing in an inert ambient or a sulfur ambient and the annealing temperature determine the out diffusion of different elements. For example, Cu has a higher diffusion rate than sulfur and leaves voids behind. These voids collapse together and grow bigger at the Mo–CZTS interface and within the CZTS thin films. These voids may impact the solar cell performance. Other secondary phases may be segregated in the bulk or at the surface as reported by Han et al. and other groups using the high resolution electron microscopy technique.52–54 The secondary phases and other defect complexes may be distributed in the CZTS absorber layer and can influence the solar cell performance. If the secondary phase at the Mo/CZTS or CdS/CZTS interface has a lower band gap than CZTS, it will limit open-circuit voltage of solar cells. The secondary phases with a wide band gap in the bulk of CZTS can reduce the actual volume that absorbs the light and generate photocarriers while at the interfaces it can increase the series resistance and reduce the fill factor and short circuit current.
The electrostatic fluctuation due to structural inhomogeneity was also reported for CIGS and silicon solar cells.55,56 Depending on the ionization of defects and antisites in CZTS, the conduction band minima (CBM) and valance band maxima (VBM) may locally vary.

Fig. 6 shows the band tail and mid gap states in CZTS and only band tail states in CIGS. The presence of mid gap states might increase the carrier trapping and lead to photogenerated carrier losses. The emission band in CZTS will be closely related to the band tail states so any fluctuation in the spectra will directly correlate with potential fluctuations, which are the cause for poor device efficiency. (1)where VOC is the open circuit voltage and K, T and q are nominal constants. JSC and J0 are the short circuit current and dark current, respectively. The shorter carrier lifetime of photogenerated carriers increases the dark current (J0) and hence reduces VOC.
 Fig. 6  The schematic band diagram for CIGS (Cu-poor) and CZTS (Cu-poor and Zn-rich). The CIGS only forms the band tail while CZTS forms both band tail and mid gap states. The transitions BT and BB correspond to band–tail and band–band transition, respectively. The CB and VB are the conduction band and the valance band, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57. 
Zinc on the copper site (ZnCu) ionized to positive charge and acts like the shallow donor. These defects may accumulate and behave like the electron sink and hole barrier. These defects not only increase the electron recombination but also induce open circuit voltage due to structural inhomogeneity in CZTS–Se solar cells. The maximum open circuit voltage reported for CZTS is in the range of 0.5–0.6 V, which is much lower than its band gap (∼1.45 eV).51 The open circuit voltage is limited by the activity of defects in CZTS–Se solar cells. Other factors responsible for VOC deficit are deep level recombination centers in the bulk of CZTS, interfaces and grain boundaries.10,22 These mid gap states cause non-radiative recombination and a subsequent decrease in VOC. However, the defect pair copper vacancy (Vcu) and zinc interstitial on copper (Zncu) [Vcu + ZnCu] are beneficial in nature facilitating charge transport in CZTS–Se solar cells.58 This helps to increase the overall performance of the device. The defect pair [Vcu + ZnCu] is energetically favorable which lowers the valence and conduction band edge. This repels the holes and helps to collect the minority charge carriers from the copper-poor and zinc-rich area channel to the n-type buffer layer.30
On the other hand, the defects and defect-complexes tabulated in Table 2 also play a more critical role in final device efficiency. The formation of deep level states, mid gap states and donor levels acts like the trap and recombination centers for photogenerated carriers. Moreover, the formation of non-stoichiometric-conserving defect-complexes results in the fluctuation of local stoichiometry and variation in the bottom of the conduction band and top of the valance band in CZTS.23,59 The formation of shallow and donor defects effectively reduces the optical band gap of CZTS and finally affects light absorption in solar cells.
Not all the defects formed in CZTS–Se are harmful. There are some defects that segregate specifically on the grain boundaries reducing carrier recombination.60,61 The segregation of defects like ZnSn, OSe, and Nai at grain boundaries is beneficial because: (i) weakening or breakage of bonds results in deep levels in CZTS–Se and (ii) creates barrier for holes and easy transport of electrons through grain boundaries.62 Yan et al. reported that the defects at the grain boundaries are electrically benign and do not form high recombination sites.61 In CZTS materials, grain boundaries help for efficient transport of minority carriers (electrons) to the end electrode. On the other hand, in other solar cells like polymer solar cells and hydrogenenated silicon solar cells, grain boundaries act like recombination centers.63
3. Growth techniques for the CZTS absorbing layer
CZTS films can be processed using vacuum (e.g., evaporation of single CZTS compound, co-evaporation and co-sputtering of CZTS precursors) and non-vacuum (e.g., electrochemical deposition and hot-injection methods for making CZTS nanocrystals and hydrazine based precursor solution) methods. In last two decades, numerous studies on CZTS, CZTSe and CZTS–Se films made by vacuum and non-vacuum methods have been reported with highest efficiency reaching 12.6%.21 A typical CZTS solar cell device structure is shown in Fig. 7, where the CZTS layer is fabricated by various methods including vacuum and non-vacuum based techniques on Mo coated glass substrates.
 Fig. 7  Typical device structure for CZTS solar cells. 
3.1 Synthesis of CZTS using vacuum based methods
Vacuum-based processing of CZTS films utilizes thermal evaporation, electron beam evaporation and sputtering of precursor materials in high vacuum. CZTS films are processed by co-evaporating/co-sputtering precursor elements in high vacuum to obtain desired stoichiometric CZTS film. During the processing of CZTS films using these methods, various processing conditions such as the rate of evaporation/sputtering, substrate temperature and time play an important role in determining the quality and composition of kesterite films. The maximum solar cell efficiency reported by vacuum based techniques is 10.8%, which is lower than the highest 12.6% reported efficiency for non-vacuum based methods (Table 3). In this section, we will discuss different processing conditions for evaporated/sputtered CZTS film and highlight the formation of various secondary phases/defects in the film and their effects in device performance.
Table 3 CZTS solar cell performance along with different parameters reported over the time with improved process optimization




Method
Material
Reason for efficiency/optimized process

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)

η (%)
Year
Ref.




Vacuum
CZTS
Poor fill factor/first time report
0.40
6.0
27.7
0.66
1997

18



CZTS
Sequential deposition and annealing, Cu-rich phase
0.44
6.0
41
1.1
2009

67



CZTS
Heated during the evaporation process
0.52
14.1
35.5
2.62
2001

45



CZTS
Control metal composition, Cu-poor
0.63
12.53
58
4.53
2005

66



CZTS
Control metal composition, Cu-poor
0.66
15.7
55
5.74
2007

124



CZTSe
ZnO nanolayer used on the Mo back contact
0.36
28.6
57.5
6.0
2013

71



CZTSe
ZnSe-rich secondary phases
0.33
31.0
63
6.4
2013

125



CZTS
Annealed in sulfur and at optimized temperature
0.61
17.9
62
6.8
2009

126



CZTS
Deionized water based elimination of metal oxide particles
0.61
17.9
62
6.77
2008

68



CZTS
Optimized Cu/(Zn + Sn)
0.66
19.5
65.9
8.4
2011

27



CZTS
Mo contact instability
0.67
19.6
60
7.9
2013

70



CZTSe
Optimized Zn/Sn ratio
0.42
37.6
58.7
9.2
2013

69



CZTS–Se
Hybride buffer layer and high light absorption
0.50
33.5
64
10.8
2013

127



CZTS
Secondary phases and stoichiometry variation
0.26
9.8
38
0.98
2009

128



CZTS
Optimized CdS layer
0.55
6.7
43.4
1.61
2009

129



CZTS
Optimized chemical composition
0.57
9.69
36.4
2.03
2011

130







Non-vacuum
CZTS
Zn-rich composition/single step of metal stack deposition
0.54
12.6
46.4
3.16
2009

131



CZTS
Air-stable non-toxic solvent-based inks
0.51
18.9
53
5.14
2012

132



CZTS–Se
Graded band gap with Se
0.51
24.5
57.8
7.17
2013

96



CZTSe
Low shunt and contains oxygen/optimized annealing temperature
0.69
16.2
62.4
7.0
2013

133



CZTS–Se
Zn–Se-rich phase at the Mo interface/fast annealing and low loss of Sn
0.40
29.5
62.8
7.5
2013

134



CZTS–Se
Voids near the Mo interface
0.52
28.6
65
9.66
2010

9



CZTS–Se
Improved interface and carrier lifetime
0.52
30.8
63.7
10.1
2012

20



CZTS–Se
Hydrazine based slurry method, uniform Cu-poor and Zn-rich composition
0.51
35.2
69.8
12.6
2014

21






3.1.1 Co-evaporation. 
In one of the earlier Cu2ZnSnS4 solar cells reported by Katagiri et al. in 2001, sequential deposition of precursors (e.g., ZnS, Sn, and Cu) by thermal evaporation assisted by vapor-phase sulfurization led to devices with an efficiency of 2.62%.45 The solar cell was made on the molybdenum (Mo)–soda lime glass (SLG) substrate with the structure Al/ZnO:Al/CdS/CZTS/Mo–SLG. Depending on the evaporation of the different precursor layers, the high temperature on the substrate facilitates inter-diffusion of different elements for CZTS formation. The evaporated CZTS films then underwent sulfurization in a furnace by maintaining the deposited CZTS film at 550 °C for 1 h. The crystal structure of CZTS film was studied using an X-ray diffractometer (XRD), whose spectrum showed peaks corresponding to CZTS planes along with the presence of a secondary phase with peaks corresponding to the Cu–Sn–S compound. Further progress in the co-evaporation of precursor sources in high vacuum with and without post-annealing and sulfurization increased the efficiency of CZTS solar cells from 4.1%64 to 9.15%.65
In 2012, Repins et al. reported 9.15% efficient CZTSe solar cells using the co-evaporation method.65 The device structure consisted of a Mo-coated SLG, an e-beam evaporated NaF precursor (150 Å thick), a chemical bath deposited (CBD) CdS layer, a sputtered resistive/conductive ZnO bi-layer, a Ni/Al grid by e-beam evaporation, and MgF2 as an antireflective layer. The NaF layer is widely used in CIGS cells, which is deposited on Na-free substrates. Here NaF was used alongside the SLG substrate to compensate out-diffusion of Na, which occurs at low deposition temperature. It was observed that the use of NaF resulted in improved short-circuit current density (JSC), open circuit voltage (VOC) and fill factor (FF) of the device. The co-evaporation parameters such as the metal and selenium evaporation rate and the substrate temperature in relation to deposition time are shown in Fig. 8(a and b). In order to obtain desired CZTSe composition for efficient device performance, the co-evaporation in the first 12.5 minutes involved evaporation of Cu at a higher rate making Cu-rich with an elemental ratio of Cu/(Zn + Sn) > 1. It was observed that CZTSe possessed a large grain size with evaporation profile having a Cu-rich window that was formed initially at a high substrate temperature. Crystallization of the liquid CuxSey phase occurs which later forms the kesterite phase along with co-evaporated Sn and Zn. The formation of a Cu-rich phase and its dependence on the kesterite morphology are still not clear as there are different deposition parameters, such as temperature and composition, which could also cause the kesterite morphology.
 Fig. 8  CZTSe deposition parameters for different precursors using co-evaporation: (a) metal deposition rate and (b) substrate temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65. 
By maintaining Zn-rich conditions, the device showed enhanced VOC, JSC and FF. After evaporation, the CZTSe film was oxidized by being kept in an oven at low temperature, during which it converts the excess Zn into ZnO which is beneficial. The fabricated devices showed a 5% enhancement in fill factor. After being co-evaporated for 42 minutes, the Cu2ZnSnSe4 (CZTSe) film showed PL emission at 0.96 eV. For the highest performing device the CZTSe film thickness was 1.4 μm. The X-ray fluorescence (XRF) results showed an elemental composition ratio (atomic ratio) of 1.4 μm thick film as Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.86 and Zn/Sn = 1.15. The other co-evaporation methods using the electron beam evaporation technique have also been reported.18,27,45,66,67


3.1.2 Co-sputtering. 
Katagiri et al. in 2008 demonstrated the deposition of ∼1.3 μm Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) film using co-sputtering of Cu, SnS, and ZnS targets and obtained an efficiency >6% for CZTS solar cells.68 CZTS film was co-sputtered on 1 μm thick molybdenum (Mo) coated on SLG using RF-magnetron co-sputtering. The CZTS absorber layer was then soaked in deionized (DI) water for 10 minutes prior to the CdS deposition (70 nm) and by chemical bath deposition the ZnO:Al window layer. The J–V characteristics of CZTS solar cells with an active area of 0.15 cm2 showed η = 6.77% with open circuit voltage (VOC) = 0.61 V, short circuit current density (JSC) = 17.9 mA cm−2, fill factor (FF) = 0.62, series resistance (Rs) = 4.25 Ω, and shunt resistance (Rsh) = 370 Ω. The CZTS solar cells made without DI water soaking of CZTS film showed η = 5.74%, with VOC = 0.662 V, JSC = 15.7 mA cm−2, FF = 0.55, Rs = 9.04 Ω, and Rsh = 612 Ω. The improvement in JSC and FF for solar cells with DI water soaked CZTS film was due to low Rs caused by DI water soaking of CZTS film. To determine the effect of DI water soaking, electron probe X-ray microanalysis (EPMA) of CZTS film was carried out before and after 4 h DI water soaking of CZTS film. Fig. 9 shows the in-plane distribution of oxygen species in CZTS film before DI water soaking. A higher O2 content (Fig. 9) was seen in films without DI water soaking, attributing to the presence of metal oxides in CZTS films as secondary phases. Films soaked with DI water showed a negligible presence of O2 in CZTS film, indicating the absence of metal oxide. This shows that DI water soaking helps in dissolving metal oxide and it helps in selective etching of metal oxide from CZTS film. It was assumed that the removal of metal oxide from CZTS film helped to increase the interfacial contact area between the CZTS and CdS buffer layer, thus reducing Rs and giving higher efficiency for CZTS solar cells. Other co-sputtering techniques were also reported for the growth of CZTS–Se thin films under different conditions.69–71
 Fig. 9  In-plane distribution of O2 in CZTS film before DI water soaking. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68. 

3.2 Synthesis of CZTS films using non-vacuum methods
Non-vacuum methods of depositing kesterite films include solution processing of films via spin-coating of a CZTS precursor solution, chemically synthesizing CZTS nanocrystal solution, and electrochemical deposition. Here various solution processed routes to deposit CZTS films are reviewed. The growth mechanism and approaches to control stoichiometry and defects are discussed to obtain efficient solar cells. The non-vaccum based methods hold the record efficiency of 12.6% for CZTS–Se solar cells.

3.2.1 Kesterite nanocrystals using the hot-injection method. 
Guo et al. reported a CZTS–Se solar cell with 7.2% efficiency using CZTS nanocrystals.72 CZTS nanocrystals were synthesized using the hot injection method, wherein the precursor elements (e.g., Cu, Zn, and Sn) are mixed together in a solvent oleylamine. After the reaction was completed, the CZTS nanocrystals were collected by centrifugation using a mixed solvent with an equal ratio of hexane and ethanol. The obtained CZTS nanocrystals consist of copper-poor and zinc-rich phases, which were controlled by choosing the amount of precursor elements. By maintaining copper in excess, binary and ternary phases of copper chalcogenide are formed in the CZTS film, thus inhibiting device performance. The composition of CZTS formed from nanocrystals was determined by energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS). The devices were made on ∼1 μm thick molybdenum coated on the SLG substrate by knife coating. The dense and uniform CZTS film of 1 μm thickness was achieved by annealing at 500 °C for 20 min under selenium (Se) vapors. The formed CZTS–Se film consisted of large grains with dense packing, having a Cu/(Zn + Sn) ratio of 0.79 and a Zn/Sn ratio of 1.11, which are in accordance with obtaining high performance solar cells. The device with an area of 0.47 cm2 was obtained by depositing CdS (∼50 nm) by CBD, i-ZnO (∼50 nm) and ITO (∼200 nm) by RF sputtering, and the Ni/Al grid as the top contact by thermal evaporation. The device showed efficiencies of 6.7% and 7.2% after 15 minutes of light soaking. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) of CZTS–Se devices was ∼90% in the visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum, but is low in longer wavelength, which was attributed to a lower thickness (∼1 μm) of CZTS–Se film at around 2 μm for high performing devices. The band gap of CZTS–Se was determined to be ∼1.05 eV as obtained from EQE data, which is much lower than the CZTS band gap of 1.5 eV. This was attributed to the exchange of sulfur by selenium, which helped in tuning the band gap.
Tan et al. reported the growth mechanism of CZTS nanoparticles by studying the role of metal salt precursors.73 As discussed above, the biggest challenge in CZTS nanoparticles is to control the formation of secondary phases including binary phases (e.g., copper sulfide, zinc sulfide, and tin sulfide) and ternary phases (e.g., copper-tin-sulfide, CTS). To identify these secondary phases in CZTS films, XRD and Raman spectroscopy studies were performed. However, XRD was unable to resolve distinctly, as different secondary phases and the CZTS phase have overlapping diffraction peaks. The Raman spectrum can better resolve CZTS and its secondary phases as it shows typical characteristic vibrational modes for CZTS (338 cm−1), Cu3SnS4 (318 cm−1), Cu2SnS3 (298 cm−1), and Cu2−xS (269, 301 and 470 cm−1). However, one drawback of Raman spectroscopy is that it has a small cross-section for Raman scattering, causing poor sensitivity.
In order to study the growth mechanism of CZTS nanoparticles, aliquots of the CZTS reaction mixture were taken and characterized at regular intervals by TEM and surface enhanced Raman spectroscopy (SERS) (Fig. 10a–i). Within 2 minutes of the initial reaction (Fig. 10a and b), the aliquots were characterized and a wide peak at ∼290 cm−1 was found in Raman scattering, which corresponds to Cu2−xS nuclei with a size of ∼4 nm.
 Fig. 10  TEM images and SERS spectra of CZTS nanoparticles extracted at different reaction times of 2 minutes (a and b), 8 minutes (c and d), 12 minutes (e and f) and 90 minutes (g and h). (i) Schematic of the CZTS nanoparticle growth. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. 
After 8 minutes of the reaction (Fig. 10c and d), the aliquots showed Raman peaks for Cu2−xS at 260, 289 cm−1 and 320 cm−1 corresponding to the CTS phase. This indicates that Sn4+ is present which is caused by the diffusion of Sn4+ present in Cu2−xS, forming Cu2−xS/CTS nanoparticles of size ∼8 nm. After 12 minutes of reaction (Fig. 10e and f), the aliquots showed Raman peaks at 298 cm−1 for the CTS phase, as well as 334 and 372 cm−1 for the CZTS phase. The formation of CZTS after 12 minutes of reaction indicates the diffusion of Zn2+ in the CTS phase. TEM images show small nanoparticles of ∼2–4 nm along with larger nanoparticles of ∼10 nm in the reaction mixture taken at 12 minute. Upon completing 90 minutes of the reaction (Fig. 10g and h), the aliquots showed three peaks in Raman spectra at positions 292, 335 and 372 cm−1, which correspond to CZTS phase nanoparticles (∼14 nm). This shows that the formation of the CZTS phase is initiated from the CTS phase. The growth mechanism is discussed in Fig. 10(i).
This study concludes that CZTS growth occurs in following steps: (a) nucleation of Cu2−xS nanoparticles, (b) diffusion of Sn4+ in Cu2−xS nanoparticles to form the CTS phase, and (c) Zn2+ diffusion in the CTS phase to form CZTS nanoparticles.


3.2.2 Electroplating method for the deposition of CZTS film. 
Ennaoui et al. reported a non-vacuum electroplating deposition technique for CZTS absorber layer formation.74 This technique was chosen to prepare large area films using cheaper precursors and a simpler setup. The CZTS layer was deposited on the 0.5 μm Mo-coated glass substrate with a simple setup of three electrode assembly consisting of Ag/AgCl as reference, an inert anode and a working electrode (Mo) on the glass substrate of size 10 × 10 cm2 area.
An aqueous alkaline electrolyte having sodium-pyrophosphate as a supporting electrolyte with metal salts of Cu(II), Zn(II) and Sn(IV) ions, complex agents and additives was used. In order to obtain a stoichiometric composition of precursors, the concentrations of Cu(II) and Zn(II) were kept around 3 mM, but that of Sn(IV) was 10 times more in the electrolyte (∼30 mM).
A CZTS film was deposited in 20 minutes by controlling the temperature, bath flow and pH values (Fig. 11). CZTS films were Cu-poor and were etched with a 3.5% aqueous KCN solution to remove any CuxS from the CZTS surface. The device was completed with the deposition of CdS, ZnO, ZnO:Al and Ni/Al metal grids on top of CZTS film. SEM images (Fig. 12) show that CZTS films treated with Ar/H2S were continuous. However, voids were observed near the CZTS/Mo interface, with a 100 nm thick MoS2 layer being formed between the CZTS and Mo layers. EDX mapping for Cu, Zn, Sn and S is shown in Fig. 13(a–d). The results indicate that atomic% of Cu and Sn was found to be reduced whereas the Zn concentration was high, which was attributed to the formation of ZnS precipitates. The Zn concentration was low near the MoS2/Mo interface (Fig. 13b), indicating that this region is mainly composed of Cu2SnS3. This implied that at the bottom interface the reaction of ZnS with Cu2SnS3 was incomplete. This study shows that electroplating is a very promising technique for making large scale, low cost CZTS film, but further optimization of processing needs to be done to obtain single phase CZTS film.
 Fig. 11  Schematic of the sulfurisaton process showing the temperature profile. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. 
 Fig. 12  SEM image of delamination of MoS2 and CZTS interfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. 
 Fig. 13  EDX mapping of the CZTS solar cell with (a) S, (b) Zn, (c) Cu and (d) Sn signals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74. 


3.2.3 CZTS from hydrazine solution. 
Wang et al. reported a CZTS–Se thin film solar cell with 12.6% efficiency, which is the highest efficiency to date.21 The CZTS–Se films were made using a slurry based deposition technique as described previously. This deposition method overcame many challenges which occurred during solution processing and suspension of constituent elements. The slurry used for deposition consisted of Cu–Sn chalcogenide (S or S–Se) mixed in a hydrazine (N2H4) solution. The slurry also contained in situ formed Zn-chalcogenide precursors ZnSe(N2H4) or ZnS(N2H4), which are easily dispersed. The constituent elements in the slurry were chosen to be Cu-poor and Zn-rich (Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.8 and Zn/Sn = 1.1) in the final stoichiometry. Multiple layers were coated on Mo-coated SLG substrates with single phase CZTS–Se films formed after annealing the deposited film at a temperature higher than 500 °C (e.g., ∼540 °C).
The slurry provides the same advantage as the solution and suspension based method, and is comprised of solution containing solid particles (metal and chalcogen elements), which are seen in the deposited film. The use of slurry overcomes (a) solubility issues as any element or combination of elements can be mixed, (b) need for a binder as constituent elements can be used as a binding agent for particles, (c) stress and cracks in the film as solid particles act as crack-deflection centers, thus assisting in the deposition of a thicker film, and (d) formation of separate phases as two phases come in contact to react rapidly, leading to the formation of a homogenous phase. The CZTS–Se absorber layer of 2 μm thickness deposited from hydrazine solution showed dense and pin-hole free films except for few small gaps at the CZTS–Se/Mo interface.
The Mo(S,Se)2 layer with a thickness of 185 ± 30 nm was observed to form at the CZTS–Se/Mo interface during post deposition thermal annealing. The bulk of the CZTS–Se film showed uniform elemental distribution, however composition varied at the Mo back contact where small amounts of copper were observed. At the CZTS–Se/CdS interface all elemental (Cu, Sn, and Zn) compositions were uniform except the existence of a few Zn(S,Se) grains at the CZTS–Se surface. Fig. 14(a and b) show the EDX analysis of the CZTS–Se cross-section and the CdS/CZTSe interface.
 Fig. 14  EDX analysis of (a) CZTS–Se cross-section and (b) CdS/CZTS–Se interface. The inset shows the physical line profile taken across different layers for EDX analysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21. 

4. Characterization of secondary phases and defects in the CZTS–Se layer
Complimentary techniques are used to identify secondary phases, defects, and defect complexes and correlate them with the synthesis process and device performance. The variety of secondary phases, defects, and defect complexes cannot be detected by a single technique. Various techniques used to identify the secondary phases, defects, and defect complexes in CZTS solar cells are discussed in this section.
4.1 Detection of secondary phases and stoichiometric inhomogeneity in CZTS
The secondary phases mentioned in Table 1 can be quantified using bulk characterization techniques such as XRD and Raman spectroscopy. The XRD technique can identify the crystalline phases and preferred orientation in CZTS films, but fails to quantify phases that are amorphous and/or present in small quantities. Typically, similar crystal structure secondary phases are difficult to be identified by the XRD technique. Raman spectroscopy has been beneficial in identifying the secondary phases in the CZTS or CZTS–Se absorber films as it is not sensitive to long range orders.75–79 By carefully analyzing the peak shift, one can also evaluate the strain and possible lattice distortions in the crystal. Raman spectroscopy is also a non-destructive method to probe the secondary phases. However in most cases Raman can only provide information of the surface. Acquiring signals for the bulk into the sample can be tricky and would need surface etching that makes this technique destructive. The optical penetration depth and resonant scattering need to be known to allow the identification of each phase. Fernandes et al. studied the secondary phases in polycrystalline CZTS films grown by sulfurization of stacked metallic layers deposited by dc magnetron sputtering.80 In this study the absorber layer was probed by Raman spectra using different excitation wavelengths at 488 nm, 514 nm, 633 nm and 785 nm, shown in Fig. 15(a–d). Irrespective of excitation wavelengths, strong peaks at 288 cm−1 and 338 cm−1 correspond to the CZTS phase and in particular the A1 symmetry originates from the vibration of S atoms. A peak at 352–353 cm−1 was observed for shorter wavelengths attributed to the ZnS phase. Accurate deconvolution and fitting are required to identify and quantify these peaks. At longer wavelengths, distinct peaks were observed for Sn2S3 and SnS2 at 307 cm−1 and 315 cm−1, respectively.
 Fig. 15  Raman spectra of the CZTS films using (a) 488 nm, (b) 514 nm, (c) 633 nm and (d) 785 nm of excitation laser wavelengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80. 
Siebentritt et al. performed depth resolved Raman spectroscopy on CZTS films by sputter etching the film (Fig. 16a). Films were grown using electrodeposition of metal layers followed by sulfurization at 550 °C.36 Spectra were acquired every 250 nm to probe the secondary phases using two different excitation wavelengths namely 532.5 nm and 325 nm. At 532.5 nm laser excitation, strong peaks for the Cu2ZnSnS4 phase were found at 286 cm−1 and 337 cm−1 for all depths. For depths greater than 1 μm, two additional peaks at 380 cm−1 and 408 cm−1 were observed and attributed to the formation of MoS2 at the bottom electrode interface. However at 325 nm laser excitation, the ZnS phase was clearly identified at 350 cm−1 and became the dominant peak at increased depths. The enhanced detection at shorter wavelength was attributed to resonance between excitation at 325 nm and the band gap of ZnS (∼3.8 eV). Dimitrievska et al. performed a detailed analysis and identification of 18 different peaks in CZTS layers using multi-wavelength Raman scattering measurements, as shown in Fig. 16(b).81 They used six different excitation wavelengths to identify these phases and compared them with theoretical predictions to validate their results. Other similar studies based on the IR spectra were also reported for CZTS and CZTS–Se materials.82
 Fig. 16  Raman spectra of CZTS films at (a) different depths from the surface with sputtering and (b) different excitation laser wavelengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36 and 81. 
They also employed polarized Raman spectroscopy to confirm the symmetry of the polycrystalline phases. Hence the excitation wavelength plays a critical role in identifying different phases in the absorber layer and researchers need to take this into consideration before analyzing secondary phases. In addition, researchers need to be aware that the penetration of the excitation laser becomes larger with longer wavelengths due to a sharp decrease in the absorption coefficient at longer wavelengths. The variation of elemental composition from the surface to the volume was studied by using the surface sensitive X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) technique.83,84 Calderón et al. have reported the variation in Cu, Zn, Sn and S composition with sputtering times of 1, 6 and 9 mins. The relative concentration of elements, Cu, Zn, Sn and S, with depth is useful information to correlate with different processing parameters.

Fig. 17(a–d) show the core level spectra of S, Cu, Sn and Zn. Ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) also provides vital information about the valance spectra at different interfaces of CZTS. The combination of XRD, Raman and XPS can be vital tools to identify the crystallinity of the CZTS phase, the presence of secondary phases on the surface and in the bulk material; however detection of secondary phases on specific location with sub-micron or nanoscale accuracy might be an issue for these techniques.
 Fig. 17  Core level spectra of (a) S, (b) Cu, (c) Sn and (d) Zn elements with sputtering times of 1 min, 6 min and 9 min. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. 
4.2 Nanoscale defects, secondary phases and grain boundaries in CZTS
CZTS film formation results in numerous secondary phases and intrinsic defects due to non-stoichiometry. Some of the secondary phases have similar crystal structures. In addition, CZTS film formation has certain binary phases such as copper sulfide, zinc sulfide, and tin sulfide and ternary sulfides such as copper tin sulfides (CTS). The electrical performance of CZTS is reduced by the low band gap semiconductor with high conducting phases (e.g., copper tin sulfides and copper sulfides) trapping the generated electron hole pairs. Lattice defects are one of the other important factors that influence the generation, separation and recombination of photo-generated charge carriers.73,85,86
Generally, the grain boundary is a defect in semiconductors, which separates two adjacent crystallites of the same crystal structure and chemical composition, but of different orientation and acts as a trap center for charge carrier recombination. However, grain boundaries in CZTS materials act as conduction paths for photo-generated electrons suppressing the recombination. Different ordered defects were believed to decrease the valence and conduction band edge energy relative to the bulk of the material giving insight into reduced grain boundary recombination and surface potential barriers. This band bending due to ordered defect compounds is considered to be a charge inversion which minimizes the recombination at the absorber-buffer layer.22,50,88,89Fig. 18(a and b) show the surface topography and contact potential difference for CZTS–Se thin film. SPM measures topography, nanoscale current distribution and changes in surface potential due to the presence of secondary phases and defects in CZTS films with high spatial resolution. A potential change indicates the presence of charged defects within the CZTS films.90,91 A nanoscale contact potential difference was measured in CZTS–Se thin films, which support the theory of different potentials at the grain and grain boundaries.87,92,93 This increases charge separation and enhances the collection of minority charge carriers.
 Fig. 18  (a) Surface topography and (b) contact potential difference of CZT–Se thin film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. 
Kim et al. studied surface potential and carrier transport in CZTS–Se solar cells prepared from RF sputtering.94 As shown in Fig. 19, CZTS–Se thin films with the highest device efficiency exhibited positive band bending of surface potential around the grain boundaries, which dominates current paths around them. These positively charged grain boundaries (GBs) conduct minority charge carriers.
 Fig. 19  Band bending near the GB of CZTS–Se thin films prepared from RF sputtering. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94. 
The nanoscale variation of current in CZTS thin films was investigated by current sensing atomic force microscopy (CS-AFM), which revealed higher current flow in the grain boundary region than the interior grains of the films, as shown in Fig. 20(a and b). This shows that grain boundaries are channeling the current rather than acting as a recombination center. CZTS–Se thin films also exhibit local current flowing near the grain boundary.87,95
 Fig. 20  Spatial mapping of (a) topography and (b) current of CZTS sample bias at 0 V. Dots show regions of higher current flow. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87. 
The grain boundaries of CZTS–Se films have similar properties to CIGSe solar cells. Grain boundaries in CIGSe repel the holes and thus reduce the recombination. The reason is that the copper-poor region in grain boundaries modifies the valence band offset. Michael et al. used the integration of AFM-SEM-EDX techniques to correlate local structure and composition with micro- and nano-scopic electrical properties of CZTS–Se films. Fig. 21(a) shows the EDX mapping of CZTS–Se samples and Fig. 21(b) shows overlapping of composition on top of the measured surface potential. Fig. 21(c) and (d) reveal the line profiles of surface potential and the S/Se ratio on the CZTS–Se surface. The variation in surface potential is due to the changes in the [S/(S + Se)] ratio for solution processed CZTS–Se films. The increase in sulfur concentration increases the acceptor-like defects which play an important role in CZTS–Se films and device optimization.58,93
 Fig. 21  (a) EDX mapping, (b) surface potential overlapped with S/Se composition variation and line profiles (c) surface potential, (d) S/Se composition variation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93. 
The information about the secondary phases deep in the bulk of the CZTS absorbing material can be identified by transmission electron microscopy (TEM) and elemental mapping at high resolution. Fig. 22(a) shows the TEM images of the CZTS–Se layer with Mo contact and elemental mapping near the Mo/CZTS–Se interface for Cu, Zn, Sn, S, Se and Mo is shown in Fig. 22(b–g). The secondary phases of ZnS–Se near the Mo contact were observed.96
 Fig. 22  (a) TEM images of the CZTS–Se layer along with the high resolution elemental mapping for (b) Cu, (c) Zn, (d) Sn, (e) S, (f) Se and (g) Mo. The presence of the secondary phase (e.g., ZnS–Se) can be seen easily. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. 
4.3 Shallow, mid gap and deep level defects in CZTS
The presence of secondary phases, their location and impact on the surrounding can be accurately measured using the above mentioned characterization techniques. The effects of these defects and defect-complexes on device performance should be correlated with the photogenerated carrier dynamics. The photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL), deep level transient spectroscopy (DLTS), admittance spectroscopy (AS) and carrier lifetime measurement techniques help to understand the physics of defects and defect-complexes, their density and energy levels in the band gap of the absorbing material.97–99
The defect levels can trap the electrons or holes depending on their nature and the thermal/photon activation energy. The trapped electrons/holes can be de-trapped and detected. Therefore, the DLTS technique is very sensitive to identify electrically active defects in CZTS–Se. It provides valuable information relating to the defect activation energies and defect concentration. Das et al. reported the DLTS studies on two different CZTS–Se solar cells as characterized in Fig. 23(a and b), two solar cells with normal stacking, Mo/CZTS–Se/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al/Al with S/Se ratios of 0.4 (cell A) and 0 (cell B). Cell A showed poor performance with an open circuit voltage of 350 meV while cell B showed the better power conversion efficiency with an open circuit voltage of 506 meV.
 Fig. 23  (a) Current measurements in DLTS for the CZTS solar cell structure of Mo/CZTS–Se/Cds/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al/Al (a) cell A, the S/Se ratio is 1.4, and (b) cell B, the S/Se ratio is 0, for different time and temperature ranges. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99. 
The DLTS spectra of cell A, Fig. 23(a), revealed two peaks while cell B showed only one peak. These peaks correspond to the defect levels in CZTS–Se solar cells. The activation energy corresponding to the peaks was reported. The activation energy of defect levels for cell A corresponding to peak 1 and peak 2 are 0.12 and 0.32 eV, respectively. Based on the activation energy of defect levels in cell A, the energy levels at 0.12 eV were assigned to CuZn because Vcu is much more shallow and has the lowest activation energy near the valance band maxima. The other peak corresponding to 0.32 eV was assigned to CuSn anti-site defects.23 These shallow and deep levels are absent in cell B, Fig. 23(b), and it showed a level at 0.03 eV which is a shallow level and can be assigned to Vcu. Therefore, the DLTS technique provides deep insight to correlate the device efficiency and material properties. Kask et al. reported admittance spectroscopy (AE) for CZTS solar cells.100 AE measured the junction capacitance of absorbing material at different frequencies and temperatures, as shown in Fig. 24. The capacitance spectra reveal the two levels as N1 and N2, which correspond to two charging and discharging states of defects in CZTS. The transition energy of these two levels was reported to be 0.12 eV and 0.16 eV, respectively. The deep level defect with an activation energy of 0.12 eV was present and consistent in all solar cells while the defect with an activation energy of 0.16 eV was found to vary from cell to cell. Also, the activation energy of a later defect level varied with applied voltage which is unusual with bulk defects. Therefore, the transition level at 0.12 meV was assigned to CuZn antisite activation energy while the defect with an activation energy of 0.16 eV was assigned to interface states.
 Fig. 24  The AE spectra of CZTS solar cells at different frequencies and temperatures. The N1 and N2 are the two levels corresponding to the charging and discharging of the capacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. 
PL spectroscopy is an insightful tool to probe the electronic structure of semiconductor films and has been widely used in CZTS and CZTS–Se based absorbers to gain a better understanding of radiative and non-radiative recombination processes.65,101–110 When PL measurements are conducted at different temperatures and excitation intensities, the acceptor level ionization energy and the potential fluctuation in the absorber layer can be found. Due to the presence of shallow defects near the band edge of CZTS, donor–acceptor pair (DAP) recombination has been identified as the dominant recombination mechanism in CZTS.104 Due to different growth and processing conditions, the resulting films or crystals can possess different defect distributions and densities and therefore a wide range of emission peaks at different wavelengths, ionization energies and radiative recombination mechanisms have been reported.57,65,98,101–103,105–110
Miyamoto et al. observed PL emission in CZTS films prepared by the sol–gel method in 2008.111 They deposited a stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric (Cu-poor and zinc-rich) CZTS and compared the PL emission between the two. Both films showed a broad PL emission from 1.1 eV and 1.45 eV with a blue shift of 24.7 meV in peak emission in non-stoichiometric films. The calculated activation energy for DAP recombination was found to be 39 meV and 59 meV for stoichiometric and non-stoichiometric films, respectively. Radiative recombination in CZTSe mono-grains was studied by Grossberg et al. and PL emission at 0.946 eV was attained for the compound with acceptor defect level's ionization energy at 69 ± 4 meV.106 Leitao et al. performed a detailed analysis of asymmetric PL emission in Cu-poor and Zn-rich CZTS films to calculate the ionization energy of the acceptor level as well as the fluctuating potential level of the valence band. PL measurements were carried out with varying excitation power intensity (Fig. 25a) and temperature (Fig. 25b). Peaks were found to shift to higher energies with increasing power and to lower energies with increasing temperatures.
 Fig. 25  PL spectra of the CZTS absorbing layer at (a) different laser powers and (b) different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98. 
This contradicted the traditional DAP radiative recombination. Thus, a radiative recombination model was proposed based on their films which are heavily p-type doped with non-degenerate characteristics as supported by their electrical measurements.98 Guha et al.112 proposed a quasi-DAP radiative recombination model based on their PL results of the CZTS absorber layer exhibiting 8.4% efficiency when used in conventional device structures. Their model is based on the observation of the blue shift of PL emission peaks with increasing excitation intensities attributing the behavior if Coulombic interaction between localized donor-like and acceptor-like states. Further the authors calculated an average defect spacing of 3.3 nm and a total defect density of 6.6 × 1019 cm−3.
Time resolved PL (TRPL) measurements on CZTS based films have also been performed and a carrier lifetime of 1–2 ns has been calculated.65,102 This value is an order or two shorter than those observed for CIGS solar cells.103,105 The reduced carrier lifetime is possibly the main reason for lower VOC and poor efficiency in CZTS based solar cells.
5. Approaches to reduce secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in CZTS
There are many approaches reported in the literature to avoid or minimize the secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in CZTS–Se and other solar cell materials. This includes defect passivation, controlled stoichiometry during post-annealing treatment and modified molybdenum interfaces. The approaches avoid out diffusion and suppress secondary phases at the Mo/CZTS–Se interface and in the absorbing layer which is mainly responsible for high carrier recombination and lower VOC and fill factor in CZTS–Se solar cells.
5.1 Modified growth approaches

5.1.1 Defect passivation. 
Zhou et al. reported defect passivation in Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4 (CZTS–Se) thin films using Cu2ZnSn(S,Se)4:Na (CZTS–Se:Na) nanocrystals.113 The solution processed kesterite films possess a number of defects, arising from surface dangling bonds and distorted ion arrangement. Defect passivation can be done by high temperature treatment and doping. The solution processed CZTS–Se film contains a number of defects arising from an arrangement of complex cations, which affects device performance by reducing VOC and shortening minority carrier lifetime. To overcome this challenge, sodium (Na) was homogenously incorporated on the CZTS nanocrystal surface to passivate the defects. CZTS:Na nanocrystals were synthesized by a thermolysis method. CZTS nanocrystals were first prepared and then Na was incorporated on the CZTS nanocrystal surface.
In a typical reaction mixture of CZTS nanocrystals, CF3COONa in oleic acid is injected into the CZTS solution and allowed to react for 30 minutes. Fig. 26 shows a schematic of defect passivation in CZTS–Se solar cells. Defect passivation by Na ions led to an increase in carrier concentration and longer minority carrier lifetime, thus enhancing device performance. To understand the effects of Na passivation on device performance (Fig. 27b), external quantum efficiency (EQE) (Fig. 27c), lifetime measurement and carrier concentration measurement (Fig. 27d and e) were performed. Via the Na passivation, device efficiency was improved from 3.89% to 6.15%, VOC from 0.316 V to 0.361 V, and FF from 39.75% to 50.95%. The improved carrier lifetime and higher carrier concentration were observed for Na passivated CZTS solar cells. Na was not observed to participate in grain growth but it was reported to affect the grain boundaries and the minority carrier lifetime.114
 Fig. 26  Schematic of defect passivation in CZTS–Se solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. 
 Fig. 27  (a) SEM images of Mo/CZTS:Na/CZTS/Ag nanowires/ITO, (b) J–V characteristics, (c) EQE spectra, (d) time-resolved photoluminescence and (e) carrier density measurement using capacitance–voltage measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113. 
There are a number of reports for defect passivations using Na in CZTS and CIGS solar cells.114–116 Li et al. investigated the effects of Na in CZTS–Se solar cell performance and reported improved VOC, FF and overall device efficiency. The Na incorporation leads to the reduced concentration of deep level recombination centers and increased hall carrier density and mobility. The passivation of defects using non-solution methods increased the carrier concentration but decreased the carrier lifetime.115 With similar studies in CIGS solar cells, Ishizuka et al. investigated the effects of different soda-lime glass thicknesses on defect passivation.117 The variation in the photoluminescence signal with soda lime glass thin film (SLGTF) thickness (Fig. 28) may originate from the oxygen antisite to selenium (OSe) and enhance the p-type nature of CIGS, leading to higher efficiency. The carrier recombination and dark current critically affect the VOC and FF, so defect passivation in modified solution growth approaches is vital to achieve higher device efficiency.
 Fig. 28  PL spectra of the CIGS absorbing layer deposited on different thicknesses of soda lime glass thin film (SLGTF). The two peaks correspond to donor–acceptor pair luminescence. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. 


5.1.2 Control stoichiometry during post-deposition treatment of CZTS. 
The Cu-poor, Cu/(Zn + Sn) = 0.8, condition is preferable for higher device efficiency in CZTS solar cells.10 Small regions of the ternary phase diagram of Cu2S–SnS2–ZnS for the stoichiometric phase of CZTS (Fig. 2) lead to favorable conditions to form secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes during post-deposition treatment. Although solution based growth is reported to control the CZTS phase for higher device efficiency, there are limited reports to control the secondary phase and defect-complexes. In a recently reported 21.7% CIGS solar cell, post-deposition treatment was optimized to increase the device efficiency.118 Therefore along with a careful study of control stoichiometry during the growth, it is necessary to control the stoichiometry during the post-deposition steps such as sulfurization at high temperature. Yang et al. reported the relationship between the post-deposition process, composition distribution and subsequent defect formation in the CZTS absorbing layer.119 It was observed that the sulfurization process at different temperatures impacts the distribution of metal species and controls the secondary phases and defect-complexes in CZTS. Fig. 29 shows a cross-sectional TEM image along with elemental distributions at an optimized sulfurization temperature of 570 °C. The TEM image in Fig. 29(a) is marked with points 1 to 7 and two lines from (a–d) at which the EDX measurement was performed. The composition percentage and compositional ratio, Fig. 29(b), indicate the uniform distribution of Cu, Zn, Sn and S elements at different positions. 2-D elemental mapping for Cu, Zn, Sn and S is shown with uniform distribution which is depicted in Fig. 29(c–f). The composition variation across line (a–d) is shown in Fig. 29(g) and (g), respectively. This elemental mapping was performed on an optimized annealed CZTS sample.
 Fig. 29  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image with marked points (1 to 7) and lines (a–d) for EDX measurements. (b) Compositional percentage and compositional ratio of different elements at positions 1 to 7. The 2-D elemental mapping in a marked rectangular region for (c) Cu, (d), Zn, (e) Sn and (f) S. The compositional variation of different elements across the marked line (g) from position a to position b and (h) from position c to position d. The CZTS film was annealed at an optimum temperature of 570 °C in a sulfur ambient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. 
In a similar study, it was reported that not only the post-annealing sulfurization temperature but also the partial pressure of sulfur critically affects the elemental distribution in the absorbing layer and decides device performance ranging from electrical short devices to 6.4%.120 10 kPa sulfur pressure was found to be an optimum condition to achieve balanced elemental diffusion at high temperature.
Possible surface reaction and diffusion of elements during heating are shown in Fig. 30. The optimum sulfurization temperature and pressure provide uniform copper-poor and inhibit CZTS–Se decomposition by reactions 3, 4 and 5, and form benign defect states (Fig. 30).
 Fig. 30  Surface reaction and possible diffusion of elements in the CZTS–Se absorbing layer during sulfurization at high temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. 

5.2 Modified molybdenum interface
The secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes segregated at the Mo/CZTS interface may increase carrier recombination and any secondary phases with lower optical band gap may reduce the VOC and fill factor; while, secondary phases with higher band gap may increase the series resistance and reduce the fill factor and short circuit current. In most devices under the sulfurization process, MoS2 is observed to form at the Mo/CZTS interface. Since MoS2 is a low band gap indirect semiconductor, it reduced the VOC of devices. In addition, out-diffusion of elements creates voids at the Mo/CZTS interface. All the above mentioned secondary phases and defects lead to reduced power conversion efficiency of CZTS–Se solar cells. There are many approaches to improve the Mo/CZTS interface to avoid/minimize the secondary phases. During the post-annealing treatment on CZTS–Se solar cells, in-diffusion and out-diffusion of elements create stoichiometric in-homogeneity which leads to the formation of secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes. Fig. 31 shows cross-sectional SEM images of (a) Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al and (b) Mo/Ag (20 nm)/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al. The intermediate Ag layer improved back contact, suppressed voids and secondary phases such as MoS2 and SnS2 in the absorbing layer and at the Mo/CZTS interface.53 The intermediate Ag layer reduced the series resistance and carrier recombination that enhanced the device efficiency from 2.3% to 4.4%.
 Fig. 31  SEM images of (a) Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al and (b) Mo/Ag/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al. The voids are completely absent in Ag coated solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53. 
In another report by Scragg et al., a TiN intermediate layer of 10–20 nm was used to avoid secondary phases and defects at the Mo/CZTS interface, Fig. 32(a and b). The diffusion of S toward the Mo/CZTS interface was completely blocked but the insulating nature of TiN showed increased series resistance and the reduced fill factor. Metal oxide (e.g., ZnO) thin films were also reported as intermediate layers to modify the Mo/CZTS interface and improved device performance.121 Recently, Tajima et al. have reported the improvement in open circuit voltage of CZTS solar cells by using a double layer, a Cu-rich layer near the Mo interface and Cu-poor near the top of the surface. This approach resulted in 0.78 V of open circuit voltage and 8.8% device efficiency.122
 Fig. 32  Cross-sectional SEM images of the Mo/CZTS interface (a) without and (b) with TiN thin intermediate layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70. 
5.3 Challenges and future prospects
Although earth abundant, non-toxic and cost effective CZTS–Se materials hold promise to compete with CIGS technology, the presence of secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes results in many challenges. The similar crystal structures of many secondary phases with CZTS make it difficult to detect using the present techniques. Also, the defect concentration in CZTS is lower than the detectable limit for most techniques but sufficient enough for poor device performance. The efficiency for CZTS–Se solar cells has reached 12.6% with VOC = 0.51 V, JSC = 35.2 mA cm−2, and FF = 69.8%.21 On the other hand, the highest efficiency reported for CIGS is 21.7% with VOC = 0.75 V, JSC = 36.6 mA cm−2, and FF = 79.3%.118 There is enough room for improvement especially in open circuit voltage and fill factor for CZTS–Se solar cell technology. For the further improvement in solar cell efficiency, the focus should be given to a triangle relationship among (1) novel growth and characterization techniques, (2) interface engineering and (3) deeper theoretical understanding of defects and secondary phase formation.
The photoconversion efficiency evolution for the CZTS–Se solar cell depicted in Table 3 is categorized by vacuum and non-vacuum based synthesis methods. Novel growth techniques are required to detect and avoid the secondary phases and defects during the material growth. The Yang group reported effective passivation of defects in solar cells made from the CZTS:Na precursor and achieved nearly a 50% increment in carrier lifetime and device efficiency in comparison to the un-passivated CZTS.113 This approach provides a route to minimize or even eliminate the defects during the material growth. A breakthrough for surface passivation was achieved by thiol-terminated ligands on a PbS quantum dot based solar cell and a nearly ten-fold increment was obtained. The development of such novel passivation with synthesis technique approaches for CZTS can passivate the defect during the growth and post-processing.123 Novel growth techniques are required that can reduce the unwanted secondary phases and increase the beneficial defects such as VCu and CuZn and grain boundary defects that help to transport the minority carriers. Many current characterization techniques are not appropriate to detect the secondary phases and defects in the CZTS absorbing layer. The nanoscale topography, current imaging and contact potential difference provide vital information about the secondary phases and defect accumulation at grain boundaries. SPM is limited to the surface of CZTS only. Recently, the Ginger group has reported the integration of scanning probe microscopy, scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive X-ray analysis techniques to correlate the variation of stoichiometry at the nanoscale with the surface potential.93 This combination is still limited to the surface characterization but extension from the surface to the bulk will provide vital information. The combination of characterization techniques that can find the 3D distribution of stoichiometry with precision at the nanoscale will be a vital tool. The development of such integrated techniques could be useful to identify and correlate variations of defects and defect-complexes that cause changes in the local stoichiometry. This is the major reason for the local fluctuation in the open circuit voltage and carrier recombination.
The multilayer structure of solar cells (Ag/AZO:i-ZnO/CdS/CZTS/Mo/glass) demands the optimization of individual interfaces for band gap alignment and efficient carrier transport to end electrodes. The interface within the absorbing layer, between grains, and grain boundaries is important to reduce carrier recombination. The CdS/CZTS interface shows a large, positive spike as a barrier for electrons to overcome and reduces the short circuit current. While, the negative spike increases the carrier recombination and reduces the open circuit voltage. An alternative interfacial layer will not only provide Cd free CZTS solar cells but also improve carrier transport at the interface.
The accumulation of secondary phases and voids near the Mo interface further reduces open circuit voltage and short circuit current. Interfaces should be modified to avoid such burning issues in current CZTS solar cell technology. The possibility of various defect and defect-complex formation and their energy levels in CZTS should be investigated to support the experimental findings. Extensive theoretical and simulation knowledge needs to be gained to help with the design of novel growth techniques to avoid the secondary phases and defects, but also increase beneficial defects in CZTS–Se. New efficient carrier transport materials are also needed to replace existing interfacial materials.
6. Conclusions
In this work, we strategically reviewed secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in the earth abundant CZTS–Se absorbing layer, which causes poor solar cell performance. The control growth and detection of these secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes are the prime way towards higher CZTS–Se solar cell efficiency. Therefore, different synthesis approaches were discussed for the control growth of CZTS phases, suppression of secondary phases and defects in the absorbing layer. The same/identical crystal structure of many secondary phases in CZTS makes their detection difficult. Therefore, complimentary characterization techniques were used to identify secondary phases, defects and complex-antisite-detects in CZTS thin films. The present status of growth and characterization techniques is discussed with the hopes that it might help researchers to focus their future prospects for more effective control material growth and integration of multiple characterization techniques for material characterization. The knowledge of detecting unwanted secondary phases, defects and defect complexes, and control growth will help to overcome the performance gap between CZTS and CIGS solar cells.
Acknowledgements
M.K. sincerely acknowledges the Bhaskara Advanced Solar Energy (BASE) Fellowship under Indo-US Science and Technology Forum (IUSSTF) and Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India. Q.Q, A.D., N.A. and S.V. acknowledge support from NASA EPSCoR (NNX13AD31A), NSF MRI (grant no. 1229577 and 1428992) and the SDSU PhD program.
References
J. Oh, H. C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 743–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. S. Sariciftci, L. Smilowitz, A. J. Heeger and F. Wudl, Science, 1992, 258, 1474–1476 CAS .
B. O'Regan and M. Gratzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Oh, H. C. Yuan and H. M. Branz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 743–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lee, G. H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. Chen, Y. Li, M. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mokkapati and K. R. Catchpole, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 101101 CrossRef PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov and D. A. R. Barkhouse, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2013, 371, 1–22 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. Riha, B. A. Parkinson and A. L. Prieto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15272–15275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, K. B. Reuter and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E156–E159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, E. Lotter, S. Paetel, R. Wuerz, R. Menner, W. Wischmann and M. Powalla, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 894–897 CAS .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. B. Mitzi, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov, K. Wang and S. Guha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1421–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Dong, Y. F. Li, B. Yao, Z. H. Ding, G. Yang, R. Deng, X. Fang, Z. P. Wei and L. Liu, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2014, 47, 075304 CrossRef .
S. Siebentritt and S. Schorr, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 512–519 CAS .
K. Ramasamy, M. A. Malik and P. O'Brien, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5703–5714 RSC .
I. Kentaro and T. Nakazawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 1988, 27, 2094–2097 CrossRef .
H. Katagiri, N. Sasaguchi, S. Hando, S. Hoshino, J. Ohashi and T. Yokota, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1997, 49, 407–414 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, O. Gunawan, T. Todorov, B. Shin, S. J. Chey, N. A. Bojarczuk, D. Mitzi and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 143508 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2012, 20, 6–11 CAS .
W. Wang, M. T. Winkler, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, T. K. Todorov, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301465 Search PubMed .
A. Polizzotti, I. L. Repins, R. Noufi, S. H. Wei and D. B. Mitzi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3171–3182 CAS .
S. Y. Chen, A. Walsh, X. G. Gong and S. H. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1522–1539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Preis and H. Gamsjager, J. Chem. Thermodyn., 2002, 34, 631–650 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nagoya, R. Asahi, R. Wahl and G. Kresse, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81 CrossRef CAS .
H. Du, F. Yan, M. Young, B. To, C. S. Jiang, P. Dippo, D. Kuciauskas, Z. H. Chi, E. A. Lund, C. Hancock, O. O. W. M. Hlaing, M. A. Scarpulla and G. Teeter, J. Appl. Phys., 2014, 115, 173502 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Shin, O. Gunawan, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. J. Chey and S. Guha, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2013, 21, 72–76 CAS .
P. M. P. Salome, J. Malaquias, P. A. Fernandes, M. S. Ferreira, J. P. Leitao, A. F. da Cunha, J. C. Gonzalez, F. N. Matinaga, G. M. Ribeiro and E. R. Viana, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3482–3489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. D. Olekseyuk, I. V. Dudchak and L. V. Piskach, JAllC, 2004, 368, 135–143 CAS .
S. Y. Chen, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S. H. Wei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 021902 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Chen, J. H. Yang, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S. H. Wei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 245204 CrossRef .
W. Ki and H. W. Hillhouse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 732–735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, C. Wadia, W. L. Ma, B. Sadtler and A. P. Alivisatos, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2551–2555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Burton, D. Colombara, R. D. Abellon, F. C. Grozema, L. M. Peter, T. J. Savenije, G. Dennler and A. Walsh, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4908–4916 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Haight, N. Sakai, H. Hiroi, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 193904 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Fontane, L. Calvo-Barrio, V. Izquierdo-Roca, E. Saucedo, A. Perez-Rodriguez, J. R. Morante, D. M. Berg, P. J. Dale and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 181905 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Redinger, K. Hones, X. Fontane, V. Izquierdo-Roca, E. Saucedo, N. Valle, A. Perez-Rodriguez and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 101907 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Cho, A. Ismail, S. J. Park, W. Kim, S. Yoon and B. K. Min, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4162–4165 CAS .
C. Lei, M. Duch, I. M. Robertson and A. Rockett, J. Appl. Phys., 2010, 108, 114908 CrossRef PubMed .
S. A. Vanalakar, G. L. Agawane, A. S. Karnble, C. W. Hong, P. S. Patil and J. H. Kim, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 138, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Umehara, Y. Takeda, T. Motohiro, T. Sakai, H. Awano and R. Maekawa, Appl. Phys. Express, 2013, 6, 045501 CrossRef .
K. J. Wang, B. Shin, K. B. Reuter, T. Todorov, D. B. Mitzi and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 051912 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Han, S. W. Shin, M. G. Gang, J. H. Kim and J. Y. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 095706 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Y. Chen, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S. H. Wei, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 041903 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Katagiri, K. Saitoh, T. Washio, H. Shinohara, T. Kurumadani and S. Miyajima, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 65, 141–148 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Wibowo, W. S. Kim, E. S. Lee, B. Munir and K. H. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2007, 68, 1908–1913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tanaka, T. Nagatomo, D. Kawasaki, M. Nishio, Q. X. Guo, A. Wakahara, A. Yoshida and H. Ogawa, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66, 1978–1981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Biswas, S. Lany and A. Zunger, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 201902 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Tanaka, M. Oonuki, N. Moritake and H. Uchiki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 583–587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Wei and S. B. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2005, 66, 1994–1999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ahmed, K. B. Reuter, O. Gunawan, L. Guo, L. T. Romankiw and H. Deligianni, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 253–259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Han, S. W. Shin, M. G. Gang, J. H. Kim and J. Y. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 095706 CrossRef PubMed .
H. T. Cui, X. L. Liu, F. Y. Liu, X. J. Hao, N. Song and C. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 041115 CrossRef PubMed .
B. G. Mendis, M. C. J. Goodman, J. D. Major, A. A. Taylor, K. Durose and D. P. Halliday, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 124508 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Gloeckler, J. R. Sites and W. K. Metzger, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 113704 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Wong, J. L. Huang, S. Varlamov, M. A. Green, R. Evans, M. Keevers and R. J. Egan, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2011, 19, 695–705 CAS .
M. J. Romero, H. Du, G. Teeter, Y. F. Yan and M. M. Al-Jassim, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 165324 CrossRef .
A. Redinger, M. Mousel, M. H. Wolter, N. Valle and S. Siebentritt, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 535, 291–295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yin, G. M. Cheng, Y. Feng, Z. H. Li, C. L. Yang and X. D. Xiao, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 40369–40374 RSC .
C. Persson and A. Zunger, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91, 266401 CrossRef .
Y. Yan, C. S. Jiang, R. Noufi, S. H. Wei, H. R. Moutinho and M. M. Al-Jassim, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 235504 CrossRef .
W. J. Yin, Y. L. Wu, S. H. Wei, R. Noufi, M. M. Al-Jassim and Y. F. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1 Search PubMed .
P. Dutta, M. Kumar, M. Rathi, S. P. Ahrenkiel, S. Paul, D. Galipeau and V. Bommisetty, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2013, 13, 6711–6720 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-A. Schubert, B. Marsen, S. Cinque, T. Unold, R. Klenk, S. Schorr and H.-W. Schock, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2011, 19, 93–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Repins, C. Beall, N. Vora, C. DeHart, D. Kuciauskas, P. Dippo, B. To, J. Mann, W. C. Hsu, A. Goodrich and R. Noufi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 154–159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kobayashi, K. Jimbo, K. Tsuchida, S. Shinoda, T. Oyanagi and H. Katagiri, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 2005, 44, 783–787 CrossRef CAS .
A. Weber, H. Krauth, S. Perlt, B. Schubert, I. Kotschau, S. Schorr and H. W. Schock, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2524–2526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Katagiri, K. Jimbo, S. Yamada, T. Kamimura, W. S. Maw, T. Fukano, T. Ito and T. Motohiro, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 041201 CrossRef .
G. Brammertz, M. Buffiere, Y. Mevel, Y. Ren, A. E. Zaghi, N. Lenaers, Y. Mols, C. Koeble, J. Vleugels, M. Meuris and J. Poortmans, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 013902 CrossRef PubMed .
J. J. Scragg, T. Kubart, J. T. Watjen, T. Ericson, M. K. Linnarsson and C. Platzer-Bjorkman, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 3162–3171 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lopez-Marino, M. Placidi, A. Perez-Tomas, J. Llobet, V. Izquierdo-Roca, X. Fontane, A. Fairbrother, M. Espindola-Rodriguez, D. Sylla, A. Perez-Rodriguez and E. Saucedo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8338–8343 CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W.-C. Yang, B. C. Walker, E. A. Stach, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17384–17386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. R. Tan, Y. H. Lee, S. Pedireddy, T. Baikie, X. Y. Ling and L. H. Wong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6684–6692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ennaoui, M. Lux-Steiner, A. Weber, D. Abou-Ras, I. Kotschau, H. W. Schock, R. Schurr, A. Holzing, S. Jost, R. Hock, T. Voss, J. Schulze and A. Kirbs, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2511–2514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ganchev, J. Iljina, L. Kaupmees, T. Raadik, O. Volobujeva, A. Mere, M. Altosaar, J. Raudoja and E. Mellikov, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 7394–7398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Fernandes, P. M. P. Salomé and A. F. da Cunha, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2519–2523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He, L. Sun, S. Chen, Y. Chen, P. Yang and J. Chu, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 511, 129–132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Park, D. Nam, S. Jung, S. An, J. Gwak, K. Yoon, J. H. Yun and H. Cheong, Thin Solid Films, 2011, 519, 7386–7389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Khare, B. Himmetoglu, M. Johnson, D. J. Norris, M. Cococcioni and E. S. Aydil, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 083707 CrossRef PubMed .
P. A. Fernandes, P. M. P. Salomé and A. F. da Cunha, J. Alloys Compd., 2011, 509, 7600–7606 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Dimitrievska, A. Fairbrother, X. Fontane, T. Jawhari, V. Izquierdo-Roca, E. Saucedo and A. Perez-Rodriguez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 021901 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Skelton, A. J. Jackson, M. Dimitrievska, S. K. Wallace and A. Walsh, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 041102 Search PubMed .
N. Terada, S. Yoshimoto, K. Chochi, T. Fukuyama, M. Mitsunaga, H. Tampo, H. Shibata, K. Matsubara, S. Niki, N. Sakai, T. Katou and H. Sugimoto, Thin Solid Films, 2015, 582, 166–170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gordillo, C. Calderon and P. Bartolo-Perez, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 305, 506–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Melitz, J. Shen, A. C. Kummel and S. Lee, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2011, 66, 1–27 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Henry, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 4494–4500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Li, V. Chawla and B. M. Clemens, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 720–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Adhikari, S. Bereznev, K. Laes, J. Kois, O. Volobujeva, T. Raadik, R. Traksmaa, A. Tverjanovich, A. Öpik and E. Mellikov, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 2374–2381 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bereznev, N. Adhikari, J. Kois, T. Raadik, R. Traksmaa, O. Volobujeva, E. Kouhiisfahani and A. Öpik, Sol. Energy, 2013, 94, 202–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sadewasser, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2006, 203, 2571–2580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. De Wolf, R. Stephenson, T. Trenkler, T. Clarysse, T. Hantschel and W. Vandervorst, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Microelectron. Nanometer Struct. – Process., Meas., Phenom., 2000, 18, 361–368 CrossRef CAS .
C.-S. Jiang, I. Repins, L. Mansfield, M. Contreras, H. Moutinho, K. Ramanathan, R. Noufi and M. Al-Jassim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 253905 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Salvador, S. M. Vorpahl, H. Xin, W. Williamson, G. Z. Shao, D. U. Karatay, H. W. Hillhouse and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6926–6930 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Kim, J. R. Kim, W. Jo, D. H. Son, D. H. Kim and J. K. Kang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2014, 9, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Azulay, O. Millo, I. Balberg, H.-W. Schock, I. Visoly-Fisher and D. Cahen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 85–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Woo, Y. Kim, W. Yang, K. Kim, I. Kim, Y. Oh, J. Y. Kim and J. Moon, Sci Rep., 2013, 3, 3069 Search PubMed .
H. S. Reehal, M. P. Lesniak and A. E. Hughes, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 1996, 29, 934 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Leitao, N. M. Santos, P. A. Fernandes, P. M. P. Salome, A. F. da Cunha, J. C. Gonzalez, G. M. Ribeiro and F. M. Matinaga, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 024120 CrossRef .
S. Das, S. K. Chaudhuri, R. N. Bhattacharya and K. C. Mandal, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 192106 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Kask, T. Raadik, M. Grossberg, R. Josepson and J. Krustok, Energy Procedia, 2011, 10, 261–265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grossberg, T. Raadik, J. Raudoja and J. Krustok, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2014, 14, 447–450 CrossRef PubMed .
O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 233506 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Repins, W. K. Metzger, C. L. Perkins, J. V. Li and M. A. Contreras, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2010, 57, 2957–2963 CrossRef .
W. K. Metzger, I. L. Repins and M. A. Contreras, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 022110 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Ohnesorge, R. Weigand, G. Bacher, A. Forchel, W. Riedl and F. H. Karg, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 1224–1226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grossberg, J. Krustok, K. Timmo and M. Altosaar, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2489–2492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Grossberg, J. Krustok, J. Raudoja and T. Raadik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 102102 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Miyamoto, K. Tanaka, M. Oonuki, N. Moritake and H. Uchiki, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 596–597 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gershon, B. Shin, N. Bojarczuk, T. Gokmen, S. Y. Lu and S. Guha, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 154905 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Hones, E. Zscherpel, J. Scragg and S. Siebentritt, Physica B, 2009, 404, 4949–4952 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Yusuke, T. Kunihiko, O. Masatoshi, M. Noriko and U. Hisao, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 47, 596 CrossRef .
T. Gershon, B. Shin, N. Bojarczuk, T. Gokmen, S. Lu and S. Guha, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 154905 CrossRef PubMed .
H. P. Zhou, T. B. Song, W. C. Hsu, S. Luo, S. L. Ye, H. S. Duan, C. J. Hsu, W. B. Yang and Y. Yang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15998–16001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kronik, D. Cahen and H. W. Schock, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 31–36 CrossRef CAS .
Rockett, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480, 2–7 CrossRef PubMed .
J. V. Li, D. Kuciauskas, M. R. Young and I. L. Repins, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 163905 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Ishizuka, A. Yamada, M. M. Islam, H. Shibata, P. Fons, T. Sakurai, K. Akimoto and S. Niki, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 034908 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Jackson, D. Hariskos, R. Wuerz, O. Kiowski, A. Bauer, T. M. Friedlmeier and M. Powalla, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2015, 9, 28–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-J. Yang, J.-H. Sim, D.-H. Son, D.-H. Kim, G. Y. Kim, W. Jo, S. Song, J. Kim, D. Nam, H. Cheong and J.-K. Kang, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2015 DOI:10.1002/pip.2619 .
J. Zhong, Z. Xia, M. Luo, J. Zhao, J. Chen, L. Wang, X. S. Liu, D. J. Xue, Y. B. Cheng, H. S. Song and J. Tang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Liu, H. T. Cui, W. Li, N. Song, F. Y. Liu, G. Conibeer and X. J. Hao, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 966–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Tajima, T. Itoh, H. Hazama, K. Ohishi and R. Asahi, Appl. Phys. Express, 2015, 8, 082302 CrossRef .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, A. G. Pattantyus-Abraham, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 2356–2362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jimbo, R. Kimura, T. Kamimura, S. Yamada, W. S. Maw, H. Araki, K. Oishi and H. Katagiri, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 5997–5999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Bishop, B. E. McCandless, T. C. Mangan, K. Dobson and R. Birkmire, MRS Online Proc. Libr., 2013, 1538, 75–82 CrossRef .
H. Katagiri, K. Jimbo, W. S. Maw, K. Oishi, M. Yamazaki, H. Araki and A. Takeuchi, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2455–2460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hiroi, N. Sakai, T. Kato and H. Sugimoto, IEEE Photovoltaic Spec. Conf., 39th, 2013 DOI:10.1109/PVSC.2013.6744281 .
J. J. Scragg, P. J. Dale and L. M. Peter, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2481–2484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Moritake, Y. Fukui, M. Oonuki, K. Tanaka and H. Uchiki, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2009, 6, 1233–1236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tanaka, Y. Fukui, N. Moritake and H. Uchiki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 838–842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Araki, Y. Kubo, A. Mikaduki, K. Jimbo, W. S. Maw, H. Katagiri, M. Yamazaki, K. Oishi and A. Takeuchi, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 996–999 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Woo, Y. Kim and J. Moon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5340–5345 CAS .
L. Guo, Y. Zhu, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, V. R. Deline, S. Ahmed, L. T. Romankiw and H. Deligianni, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2014, 22, 58–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Schnabel, M. Low and E. Ahlswede, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 117, 324–328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Mukesh Kumar
	Dr Mukesh Kumar is an assistant professor in the Department of Physics at Indian Institute of Technology (IIT) Ropar, India. He is a BASE fellow under Indo-US Science and Technology Forum, India and recently received the young scientist research award from Department of Atomic Energy, India. He did his PhD in physics from IIT Delhi, India in 2010 and worked at South Dakota State University, Colorado School of Mines and National Center for Photovoltaics, USA from 2010–2013. Current research focuses on kesterite and chalcopyrite materials, polymer BHJ, perovskite solar cells, transparent conducting electrodes and sensor development.

Ashish Dubey
	Ashish Dubey is a graduate student in Electrical Engineering at South Dakota State University, US. He received his master's degree in Nanotechnology from Amity University, India. Currently he is carrying out his doctoral thesis work in the Dr Qiquan Qiao group. His research work includes perovskite solar cells, organic–inorganic semiconductor hybrid solar cells, structural and morphological studies of donor–acceptor blend films, and their optical and electrical characterization.

Nirmal Adhikari
	Nirmal Adhikari received his Bachelor's Degree in Electrical Engineering from Institute of Engineering, Tribhuvan University, Kathmandu, Nepal in 2006 and completed his Master's degree in Materials and Process of Sustainable Energetics from Tallinn University of Technology, Eastern Europe in 2011. He is currently pursuing his Doctoral degree in Electrical Engineering from South Dakota State University under the supervision of Dr Qiquan Qiao. His major research is on the interface engineering of perovskite solar cells at the nanoscale for efficient charge transport using Kelvin Probe Force microscopy (KPFM) and Transient Photoconductivity measurements.

Swaminathan Venkatesan
	Swaminathan Venkatesan received his Bachelor's degree in Metallurgical and Materials Engineering from National Institute of Technology, Trichy, India in 2006. He then completed his Masters in Materials Science and Engineering from University of Southern California, Los Angeles, USA. He defended his Doctoral dissertation under the guidance of Dr Qiquan Qiao titled “Engineering nanomorphology in polymer solar cells for efficient charge transport”. He is currently working as a Post-Doctoral Researcher with Dr Yan Yao where his research work includes studying the phase transition and charge transport in organic and inorganic–organic hybrid photovoltaic materials and devices.

Qiquan Qiao
	Dr Qiquan Qiao is an associate professor in the Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science at South Dakota State University (SDSU), where he established the Organic Electronics Laboratory. Current research focuses on polymer photovoltaics, Perovskite solar cells and dye-sensitized solar cells. He received the 2014 F O Butler Award for Excellence in research, the 2012 College of Engineering Young Investigator Award, the 2010 US NSF CAREER Award, and the 2009 Bergmann Memorial Award from the US-Israel Bi-national Science Foundation (BSF).

Broader context
Earth abundant kesterite (CZTS) material is considered as a strong candidate for next generation cost-effective solar cell applications. The closest material and similar device structure of chalcopyrite (CIGS) with its champion solar cell recently demonstrated 21.6% of photoconversion efficiency. However, current kesterite solar cells with their champion solar cell revealed only 12.6% efficiency. This performance gap is caused by the narrow phase stability of the quaternary kesterite phase, Cu2ZnSn(SxSe1−x)4, and the existence of other competitive and complex secondary phases and defect-complexes along with interfacial carrier recombination. This article presents a strategic review of secondary phases, defects and defect-complexes in kesterite CZTS–Se solar cells, controlled growth to improve material performance and complementary characterization techniques to identify unwanted phases and defect complexes. The knowledge of structural inhomogeneity, control growth and material characterization is expected to yield closer performance parity between kesterite and chalcopyrite materials for future and cost-effective clean energy.


 	Fig. 1  Efficiency evolution of CZTS–Se and comparison with latest efficiency reported for CIGS solar cells. The efficiency gap between the two technologies is demonstrated as a performance gap.	 

 	Fig. 2  The pseudoternary phase diagram to form the CZTS phase and other secondary phases along with their crystal structures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26.	 

 	Fig. 3  Chemical potential domains for the CZTS phase formation for tin and zinc under (a) copper-rich and (b) copper-poor conditions. Δμ is the chemical potential for the standard element. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25.	 

Band gap	∼1.45 eV	3.54–3.68 eV	1.21 eV	2.2 eV	0.98–1.35 eV
Electrical properties	Semiconductor, p-type	Insulator	p-Type, metal like, and highly defective	n-Type	p-Type
Structural properties	Kesterite	Sphalerite and wurtzite	Chalcocite	Rhombohedral	Cubic and tetragonal
Impact on solar cell performance	Essential absorbing material	Insulating, reduces device active area	Metallic and short solar cell	n-type, forms diodes and barriers for carrier collection	Affects carrier collection efficiency

 	Fig. 4  (a) TEM image of the CZTS solar cell and (b–d) corresponding line scans in different regions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42.	 

Vacancies	Copper vacancy (VCu)	One, acceptor	Ionized from the neutral to −1 state and the transition level, ε(−/0) forms the shallow state, beneficial for higher solar cell efficiency
Zinc vacancy (VZn)	Two, acceptor	Not favorable, deep levels
Tin vacancy (VSn)	Four, acceptor	Adversely affect device performance, deep levels
Sulfur/selenium vacancy (VS/VSe)	One/one, donor/donor	Not favorable, mid gap states


Antisites	Copper-on-zinc antisite (CuZn)	One, acceptor	Deeper than copper vacancy, contribute to the p-type nature of CZTS
Zinc-on-copper antisite (ZnCu)	One, donor	Not favorable, shallow level near the conduction band
Copper-on-tin antisite (CuSn)	Three, acceptor	Not favorable, deep and multilevels
Tin-on-copper antisite (SnCu)	Two, donor	Not favorable, deep level/mid gas state
Zinc-on-tin antisite (ZnSn)	Two, acceptor	Not favorable, deep levels
Tin-on-zinc antisite (SnZn)	Two, donor	Not favorable, mid gap states


Interstitials	Copper interstitial (Cui)	One, donor	Not favorable, shallow states near the conduction band
Zinc interstitial (Zni)	Two, donor	Not favorable, mid gap states


Defect complexes	
Stoichiometric-conserving defect complex
(CuZn + ZnCu), (CuSn + SnCu), (ZnSn + SnZn)
	(CuZn + ZnCu): ∼0.2 eV formation energy, for other two >0.2 eV	
(CuZn + ZnCu): low impact on optoelectronic properties
Other two have a significant impact on CZTS and decrease the band gap by 0.3 eV


Non-stoichiometric-conserving defect complex
(VCu + ZnCu), (VZn + SnZn), (ZnSn + 2ZnCu), (2CuZn + SnSn)
	Formation energy ∼0.3–0.6 eV	Significant impact and responsible for local variation in chemical potential and stoichiometric in-homogeneity

 	Fig. 5  (a) Crystal structure and (b) valence states of CZTS. The dotted circles are in the plane while the solid circles are out-of-plane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 23.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 6  The schematic band diagram for CIGS (Cu-poor) and CZTS (Cu-poor and Zn-rich). The CIGS only forms the band tail while CZTS forms both band tail and mid gap states. The transitions BT and BB correspond to band–tail and band–band transition, respectively. The CB and VB are the conduction band and the valance band, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 57.	 

 	Fig. 7  Typical device structure for CZTS solar cells.	 

Vacuum	CZTS	Poor fill factor/first time report	0.40	6.0	27.7	0.66	1997	
18

CZTS	Sequential deposition and annealing, Cu-rich phase	0.44	6.0	41	1.1	2009	
67

CZTS	Heated during the evaporation process	0.52	14.1	35.5	2.62	2001	
45

CZTS	Control metal composition, Cu-poor	0.63	12.53	58	4.53	2005	
66

CZTS	Control metal composition, Cu-poor	0.66	15.7	55	5.74	2007	
124

CZTSe	ZnO nanolayer used on the Mo back contact	0.36	28.6	57.5	6.0	2013	
71

CZTSe	ZnSe-rich secondary phases	0.33	31.0	63	6.4	2013	
125

CZTS	Annealed in sulfur and at optimized temperature	0.61	17.9	62	6.8	2009	
126

CZTS	Deionized water based elimination of metal oxide particles	0.61	17.9	62	6.77	2008	
68

CZTS	Optimized Cu/(Zn + Sn)	0.66	19.5	65.9	8.4	2011	
27

CZTS	Mo contact instability	0.67	19.6	60	7.9	2013	
70

CZTSe	Optimized Zn/Sn ratio	0.42	37.6	58.7	9.2	2013	
69

CZTS–Se	Hybride buffer layer and high light absorption	0.50	33.5	64	10.8	2013	
127

CZTS	Secondary phases and stoichiometry variation	0.26	9.8	38	0.98	2009	
128

CZTS	Optimized CdS layer	0.55	6.7	43.4	1.61	2009	
129

CZTS	Optimized chemical composition	0.57	9.69	36.4	2.03	2011	
130



Non-vacuum	CZTS	Zn-rich composition/single step of metal stack deposition	0.54	12.6	46.4	3.16	2009	
131

CZTS	Air-stable non-toxic solvent-based inks	0.51	18.9	53	5.14	2012	
132

CZTS–Se	Graded band gap with Se	0.51	24.5	57.8	7.17	2013	
96

CZTSe	Low shunt and contains oxygen/optimized annealing temperature	0.69	16.2	62.4	7.0	2013	
133

CZTS–Se	Zn–Se-rich phase at the Mo interface/fast annealing and low loss of Sn	0.40	29.5	62.8	7.5	2013	
134

CZTS–Se	Voids near the Mo interface	0.52	28.6	65	9.66	2010	
9

CZTS–Se	Improved interface and carrier lifetime	0.52	30.8	63.7	10.1	2012	
20

CZTS–Se	Hydrazine based slurry method, uniform Cu-poor and Zn-rich composition	0.51	35.2	69.8	12.6	2014	
21


 	Fig. 8  CZTSe deposition parameters for different precursors using co-evaporation: (a) metal deposition rate and (b) substrate temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 65.	 

 	Fig. 9  In-plane distribution of O2 in CZTS film before DI water soaking. Reproduced with permission from ref. 68.	 

 	Fig. 10  TEM images and SERS spectra of CZTS nanoparticles extracted at different reaction times of 2 minutes (a and b), 8 minutes (c and d), 12 minutes (e and f) and 90 minutes (g and h). (i) Schematic of the CZTS nanoparticle growth. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of the sulfurisaton process showing the temperature profile. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74.	 

 	Fig. 12  SEM image of delamination of MoS2 and CZTS interfaces. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74.	 

 	Fig. 13  EDX mapping of the CZTS solar cell with (a) S, (b) Zn, (c) Cu and (d) Sn signals. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74.	 

 	Fig. 14  EDX analysis of (a) CZTS–Se cross-section and (b) CdS/CZTS–Se interface. The inset shows the physical line profile taken across different layers for EDX analysis. Reproduced with permission from ref. 21.	 

 	Fig. 15  Raman spectra of the CZTS films using (a) 488 nm, (b) 514 nm, (c) 633 nm and (d) 785 nm of excitation laser wavelengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 80.	 

 	Fig. 16  Raman spectra of CZTS films at (a) different depths from the surface with sputtering and (b) different excitation laser wavelengths. Reproduced with permission from ref. 36 and 81.	 

 	Fig. 17  Core level spectra of (a) S, (b) Cu, (c) Sn and (d) Zn elements with sputtering times of 1 min, 6 min and 9 min. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Surface topography and (b) contact potential difference of CZT–Se thin film. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87.	 

 	Fig. 19  Band bending near the GB of CZTS–Se thin films prepared from RF sputtering. Reproduced with permission from ref. 94.	 

 	Fig. 20  Spatial mapping of (a) topography and (b) current of CZTS sample bias at 0 V. Dots show regions of higher current flow. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) EDX mapping, (b) surface potential overlapped with S/Se composition variation and line profiles (c) surface potential, (d) S/Se composition variation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 93.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) TEM images of the CZTS–Se layer along with the high resolution elemental mapping for (b) Cu, (c) Zn, (d) Sn, (e) S, (f) Se and (g) Mo. The presence of the secondary phase (e.g., ZnS–Se) can be seen easily. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Current measurements in DLTS for the CZTS solar cell structure of Mo/CZTS–Se/Cds/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al/Al (a) cell A, the S/Se ratio is 1.4, and (b) cell B, the S/Se ratio is 0, for different time and temperature ranges. Reproduced with permission from ref. 99.	 

 	Fig. 24  The AE spectra of CZTS solar cells at different frequencies and temperatures. The N1 and N2 are the two levels corresponding to the charging and discharging of the capacitor. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100.	 

 	Fig. 25  PL spectra of the CZTS absorbing layer at (a) different laser powers and (b) different temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 98.	 

 	Fig. 26  Schematic of defect passivation in CZTS–Se solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) SEM images of Mo/CZTS:Na/CZTS/Ag nanowires/ITO, (b) J–V characteristics, (c) EQE spectra, (d) time-resolved photoluminescence and (e) carrier density measurement using capacitance–voltage measurements. Reproduced with permission from ref. 113.	 

 	Fig. 28  PL spectra of the CIGS absorbing layer deposited on different thicknesses of soda lime glass thin film (SLGTF). The two peaks correspond to donor–acceptor pair luminescence. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Cross-sectional TEM image with marked points (1 to 7) and lines (a–d) for EDX measurements. (b) Compositional percentage and compositional ratio of different elements at positions 1 to 7. The 2-D elemental mapping in a marked rectangular region for (c) Cu, (d), Zn, (e) Sn and (f) S. The compositional variation of different elements across the marked line (g) from position a to position b and (h) from position c to position d. The CZTS film was annealed at an optimum temperature of 570 °C in a sulfur ambient. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119.	 

 	Fig. 30  Surface reaction and possible diffusion of elements in the CZTS–Se absorbing layer during sulfurization at high temperature. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120.	 

 	Fig. 31  SEM images of (a) Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al and (b) Mo/Ag/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZnO:Al. The voids are completely absent in Ag coated solar cells. Reproduced with permission from ref. 53.	 

 	Fig. 32  Cross-sectional SEM images of the Mo/CZTS interface (a) without and (b) with TiN thin intermediate layers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 70.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
