UV curable hydrophobic inorganic–organic hybrid coating on solar cell covers for photocatalytic self cleaning application  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA12314F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA12314F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 12641-12649UV curable hydrophobic inorganic–organic hybrid coating on solar cell covers for photocatalytic self cleaning applicationVenu Sreekala Smitha, Kanakkanmavudy B. Jaimy, Palantavida Shajesh, Jose K. Jeena and Krishna Gopakumar WarrierMaterials Science and Technology Division, National Institute for Interdisciplinary Science and Technology, (CSIR), Thiruvananthapuram, 695 019, India. E-mail: warrier@niist.res.in;  Fax: +91-471-2491712;   Tel: +91-471-2515280Received 14th June 2013, Accepted 15th August 2013First published on 15th August 2013AbstractA process for obtaining a low temperature, UV curable inorganic–organic hybrid coating having excellent photoactive properties which is suitable for glass surfaces such as solar cell covers, automobile rear view mirrors and several electronic devices is presented. Nano titania sol having an average particle size of 19 nm has been synthesized using the aqueous sol–gel route starting from titanyl sulphate and was made highly photoactive by crystallizing through a simple microwave treatment which is of considerable importance in the synthesis of hybrid coatings where conventional heat treatment is not possible. The photoactive titania particles were then partially covered by silica particles by optimizing the amount of the silane moiety. A multifunctional monomer composition was further prepared and coated on a solar cell cover glass followed by a second layer coating using photoactive titania particles by dip coating and was cured under UV for six hours. The coated substrate shows photocatalytic efficiency as well as transparency >90% and further, a water contact angle >90°. Titania particles were uniformly distributed on the surface of the top coating as revealed by AFM and the coating had a total thickness of approximately 2.5 μm. The appropriate ratio of organic silanes/acrylates imparts strong adhesion to the substrate, while the inorganic components composed of a hybrid mixture of silica/titania enhanced the self cleaning efficiency. Such multifunctional coatings on solar cell covers have considerable advantage in preventing surface contamination from the exposed atmosphere which decreases the efficiency of such panels in the 15–25% range.1. IntroductionSelf cleaning coatings have been widely researched recently in the area of solar cells1 since large area solar panels are being installed in difficult-to-access locations and on high rise buildings which makes frequent manual cleaning extremely difficult. An efficiency reduction up to 33% for each 1 g per m2 of dust accumulation on solar cell covers is reported.2 The dust accumulated on the solar cell covers results in the loss of the incident solar energy mainly through scattering or absorption.3 In addition, other atmospheric contaminants of oily nature also aggravate the situation. In this context, the use of self cleaning solar cell covers is a viable alternative. The problem of dust accumulation on module surfaces over time can be solved by applying self cleaning coatings over glass covers which keep the surface clean after rain by simple rolling of the water droplets over the surface carrying the dirt away4 and while being photoactive, degrades the organic contaminants still adhering to the surface under illumination of ultra violet light5 or sunlight, as the case may be. Thus, a photoactive, transparent and hydrophobic coating is an ideal choice for solar cell cover glasses since this may not reduce the efficiency of the solar cells further.Titanium dioxide is a promising material for providing photocatalytic activity,6,7 which is mainly determined by several factors including crystal structure and crystallinity.8 At low temperatures, titania is usually amorphous and anatase, the most photoactive among the different polymorphs of titanium dioxide, requires calcination for its crystallization. Further, adhesion of such coatings to the glass surface should be very good for long term stability. Usually, titanium dioxide coatings become adherent after thermal annealing at temperatures above 450 °C.9 This limits the use of photoactive titanium dioxide coatings on solar cell covers since most of the PV assembling industries use pre-manufactured solar cell covers where there is no possibility of thermal treatments.10 This is the case with assembled rear view mirrors in automobiles also, where thermal annealing is not possible. The solution will be the use of a low temperature inorganic–organic hybrid coating. Zang et al. reported antireflecting, self cleaning coatings by a bilayer deposition method which involves calcination at 500 °C.11 High-refractive-index trialkoxysilane-capped PMMA–titania hybrid optical thin films were prepared by Lee et al. through an in situ sol–gel process, followed by spin-coating and multistep baking.12 Transparent, superhydrophobic self cleaning films were prepared by Nakajima et al. in which titania was formed from the decomposition of titanium acetyl acetonate during calcination at 500 °C and (heptadecafluorodecyl) trimethoxysilane was used as the hydrophobising agent. In all the cases, a calcination step is involved13 and hence these methods are not suitable for a surface which cannot be heated to such temperatures.The present work involves a novel approach for the preparation of a transparent, hydrophobic and photoactive titania coating on glass substrates through an inorganic–organic hybrid approach which does not require any calcination step. The hybrid coating contains organic polymers and titania nanoparticles in which an organofunctional silane bearing an acrylic group will enable the low temperature healing of the coating under UV irradiation, thereby providing better adhesion to the substrate, while crystallized nano titanium dioxide particles provide photocatalytic activity. Since photoactive titania can degrade the organic part of the coating,14 a protective layer between titania nanoparticles and the organic part is necessary. Si–O–Ti bonds are known to be stable to photocatalysis15 and these bonds are easily formed during the sol–gel process. So the coating will be linked to the glass substrate through the Si–O–Si bonds which will form part of the polymer chain and titania nanoparticles that are linked to the polymer network through the Si–O–Ti bonds will be on the outer surface of the coating. A schematic of the proposed system is provided in Scheme 1. The double layer coating is then subjected to UV radiation for polymerization.16 Scheme 1  Schematic of an inorganic–organic hybrid coating on glass substrates (NP-nanoparticle). The multifunctional hybrid coatings prepared on solar cell covers in this study are the first ones that satisfy the requirements of photoactivity, transparency and hydrophobicity, which do not require any calcination step.2. Experimental sectionThe precursor used for the preparation of titanium oxide was titanium(IV) oxysulphate (99.99%, Sigma-Aldrich Chemicals). In a typical experiment, 16 g of titanyl sulphate was dissolved in 500 ml of distilled water to prepare a 0.2 M solution and was hydrolyzed by slow addition of ammonium hydroxide (25%, s.d. FINE-CHEM Ltd., India) solution under constant stirring at room temperature (32 °C), when the pH is brought to 7.5 and allowed to stay stable. The precipitate obtained was separated by filtration, washed free of sulphate ions with distilled water, as was confirmed by the BaCl2 test. The precipitate was then redispersed in 500 ml of distilled water and was peptized by the dropwise addition of a 2 M HNO3 (LR, Merck, India) solution, till the pH is brought down to 1.8–2 to get a stable titania sol. The stable sol was then aged for 24 h at room temperature. For the synthesis of crystalline titania sol, 125 ml of the prepared titania sol was taken in a conical flask, covered properly using aluminium foil and was subjected to microwave treatment for 5 minutes. The microwave treatment was carried out using a kitchen microwave oven (2.45 GHz, 420 W).The microwave treated crystalline TiO2 particles were partially covered by silica particles following the procedure below. Tetraethoxy silane (TEOS, Aldrich Chemicals, USA), isopropanol (ISP, Ranbaxy Fine Chemicals, India) and 0.001 M HCl (LR, Merck, India) were mixed at a molar ratio of 1:4:16 and stirred for 1 h to prepare the hydrolyzed silica particles. The hydrolyzed silica particles were then added to the crystalline titania sol. In a typical experiment, 1.0625 g of TEOS was mixed with 1.2260 g of ISP and 1.4688 g of 0.001 M HCl in a beaker and stirred for 2 h for partial hydrolysis and was then added to 250 ml of titania sol, stirred for further two hours and was then aged for 24 h at 30 °C. The overall process is demonstrated in Scheme 2. Scheme 2  Schematic showing the partial coverage of titania nano particles (NP) by hydrolyzed silica. The partial coverage of crystalline titania particles with silica was done based on the assumption that in the final coating, the titania particles will be exposed to the surface and the partially covered silica particles will be attached to the organic base layer of the coating. Since the partial coverage of the titania nano particles by organo silane can result in transparency reduction and a reduction in the available catalytic surface, which is crucial to the coating performance, an optimum precursor ratio needs to be identified. The number of SiO2 molecules required for the partial coverage of the spherical titania particles was calculated by considering the surface area of the titania particles in the matrix and the bond length of the amorphous Si–O bond (0.162 nm). According to the calculations made, about 24.5 mol% of silica was used for the partial coverage of titania particles, and this SiO2 precursor content was found to have a negligible effect on the transparency of the synthesized coatings.For the preparation of the organic part, 3-(trimethoxy silyl) propyl methacrylate (MPTMS-Sigma-Aldrich, 98%), vinyl trimethoxy silane (VTMS-Sigma-Aldrich, 98%), 3-glycidoxy propyl trimethoxy silane (GPTMS-Sigma-Aldrich, 98%), ethyl alcohol (EtOH-SD Fine Chem Pvt. Ltd., 99.9%) and 0.001 M HCl (AR grade, Qualigens Pvt. Ltd.) were mixed in the ratio 1:0.5:0.5:5:10 and hydrolysis was completed over 24 hours. The monomer triethylene glycol dimethacrylate (TEGDMA-Sigma-Aldrich, 95%) and EtOH were mixed in the ratio 1:15 and 2 wt% of 1H, 1H, 2H, 2H-perfluoro decyl triethoxysilane (PFDTES-Sigma-Aldrich, 97%) and 1 wt% of the initiator 2-hydroxy 2-methyl propiophenone (Darocure) (Sigma-Aldrich, 97%) were added to it and stirred for 10 minutes in the dark. The monomer solution was then added to the partially hydrolyzed silane and stirred well for another half an hour in the dark for homogenization. The prepared monomer composition was coated on to the solar cell cover glasses of size 5 × 5 cm2 (provided by Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Bangalore) by a dip coating method in a KSV dip coating unit at a speed of 20 mm per minute and providing a retention time of 1 minute. This was immediately followed by a second layer coating by the crystalline titania sol in which the titania particles are partially covered by silica particles. The glass after monomer and titania coating was then kept in a UV chamber for about 6 hours for curing. The UV chamber has a total power of 150 Watts and the intensity of UV light inside the chamber was 3.25 mW cm−2.The solar cell cover glass used for coating had a textured pattern on one side of the substrate (back), whereas the other side was smooth (front). Surface texturing of solar cell covers (back side) plays a critical role in the performance of solar cells, affecting both reflectance and light trapping. The texture improves the in-coupling of solar irradiance and trapping of weakly absorbed irradiance by total internal reflection which increases the electrical efficiency of the solar cells.17 The solar cell cover glass after surface cleaning was used directly for the preparation of an inorganic–organic hybrid coating over the smooth surface only (textured surface was covered with parafilm while coating).The particle size of the microwave treated titania sol was measured by photon correlation spectroscopy (Zetasizer 3000 HSA, Malvern Instruments Ltd., UK). X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns of the calcined composite powders were obtained using a Philips X'Pert Pro diffractometer in the 20–60° 2θ range using Cu Kα radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å). The anatase and brookite in the sample were quantitatively estimated using two modified equations provided below, with a special case of the equations reported by Zhang and Banfield,18 when the rutile phase is absent. WA = kAAA/kAAA + kBAB(1) WB = kBAB/kAAA + kBAB(2)where WA and WB represent the weight fraction of anatase and brookite, respectively. AA is the integrated intensity of the anatase (101) peak and AB is the integrated intensity of the brookite (121) peak, and kA and kB are two coefficients whose values were optimized as 0.886 and 2.721, respectively.The crystallite size was calculated using the Scherrer eqn (3) DXRD = 0.9λ/βcosθ(3)where DXRD is the average crystal diameter (nm), 0.9 is the shape factor, λ is the X-ray wavelength, β is the full width at half maximum intensity (in radian), and θ is the Bragg angle.The gel fraction of the monomer composition was measured which is an indicator of the cross-linked or network polymers.19 3 grams of the samples was soaked in toluene for 24 hours at 50 °C and the soluble part was then removed by filtration and dried at 50 °C to a constant weight. The gel fraction was then calculated by the following equation.20 Gel fraction (%) = (W1/W0) × 100(4)where W0 = weight before soaking in the solvent and W1 = weight after drying.FTIR analysis was also done for monitoring the progress of curing of the monomer composition. The monomer solution before UV exposure and the polymerized solid masses obtained after UV exposure in definite intervals were subjected to FTIR analysis. FTIR spectra were recorded on a Shimadzu IR Prestige 21 spectrometer. The surface morphology of the coatings was studied using a scanning electron microscope (SEM) (JEOL JSM-5600LV), Japan, operated at 20 kV. The surface roughness analysis of the inorganic–organic hybrid coatings was done using an AFM instrument, NTEGRA (NTMDT), using micro fabricated TiN cantilever tips (NSG-10) with a resonating frequency of 299 kHz and a spring constant of 20–80 N m−1 and a multimode scanning probe microscope (Nanoscope IV controller, Digital Instruments), using tapping mode techniques.The photocatalytic activity of the hybrid coatings on the glass was measured by monitoring the degradation of an organic dye, methylene blue (MB) under UV light. An aqueous solution of MB having a concentration of 1.5632 × 10−4 M was prepared and the coated glass substrates were dipped in the MB solution for 2 minutes and were taken out and allowed to dry. The absorbance of the dye on the glass was measured using a UV-Visible spectrometer (Shimadzu, Japan, UV-2401PC) and was taken as the initial absorbance (A0). Then, the glass substrate stained with MB was irradiated in a UV chamber where the intensity of UV light was 0.564 mW cm−2 and the absorbance after two hours of UV exposure was taken as A. The absorbance values can be equated to the concentration values.7 The dye degradation efficiency was then calculated using the following equation.21 d = (C0 − C)/C0 × 100%(5)where ‘C0’ corresponds to the initial absorbance of the MB dye without UV exposure and ‘C’ corresponds to the absorbance of the MB dye upon 2 h of UV exposure.The transmittance of the coated samples was recorded using a Shimadzu UV 2401 PC spectrophotometer (spectral range 200–800 nm). The transmittance values were normalized by taking the uncoated glass of the same type (either normal or solar cell cover glass) as the reference. The static contact angle measurements of the coated samples were performed by the sessile drop method with a DataPhysics OCA 40 micro automatic contact angle meter. In a typical analysis, the needle used for dropping water onto the surface of the coating had a capacity of 50 μL and the volume of the water drop used for the contact angle measurement was 3 μL. The adhesion test of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating on solar cell covers was carried out by the cross-hatch adhesion test according to the ASTM method D 3359B-02.22 The cross hatch adhesion test is a subjective test for flat surfaces for a limited thickness range up to 125 μm, and in this method, adhesion can be classified from 0B to 5B, where 0B represents complete removal of the coating from the substrate and 5B represents excellent adhesion in which there is no removal of the coating.233. Results and discussion3.1. Characterization of titanium dioxide sol and powderThe particle size distributions of the pure titania sol and microwave treated titania sol are presented in Fig. 1. The average particle size measured for the titania sol was 19 nm which increased to 83 nm after exposing the titania sol to microwaves for a duration of 5 minutes. Fig. 1  Particle size distributions of (a) titania sol, (b) 5 min microwave treated titania sol and (c) crystalline anatase titania, conventionally calcined at 400 °C. The particle size of the conventionally calcined crystalline anatase titania powder was 753 nm with a bimodal distribution. The microwave treatment is reported to enhance the crystallization of titania in suspension. The presence of water as a solvent favors crystallite formation.24 Polar solvents such as water easily absorb microwave energy and the energy transfer is extremely rapid resulting in a homogeneous nucleation of the system.25An enhancement in crystallinity is expected for the aqueous-derived titania sol. The particle size increment after microwave treatment of the titania sol can be attributed to the enhanced crystallization of titania which is further clear from the XRD data provided in Fig. 2. Fig. 2  XRD patterns of (a) titania powder without microwave treatment, (b) microwave treated titania powder and (c) conventionally calcined titania powder (400 °C). Titania before microwave treatment is less crystalline, whereas after microwave treatment crystallinity increased considerably. The use of microwaves significantly helps in increasing the kinetics of the crystallization of titania sol in a shorter reaction time.25 The crystallite size for microwave treated titania was 5.7 nm. Microwave energy facilitated the predominant growth of anatase crystallites (∼85.7%) and a considerable amount of brookite phase (∼14.3%) was also present. Since the synthesis of crystalline titania does not involve any calcination, an impurity peak at 28.9° corresponding to the (111) plane of nitrates with a d-spacing 3.085 Å was also present in the diffraction pattern. The X-ray diffraction pattern of the conventionally calcined titania powder is also provided for comparison which shows an anatase crystallite size of 8.5 nm. The XRD pattern for microwave treated titania was similar to the conventionally calcined titania except the peak for nitrates. The crystal size of anatase was low for the microwave treated titania when compared with that of conventionally calcined titania powder.3.2. Curing studies of the monomer: degree of crosslinkingThe changes in the gel fraction of the monomer composition with the UV radiation dose are shown in Fig. 3. The gel fraction increased quickly due to the crosslinking of acrylic units upon UV irradiation. But at a high radiation dose, the gel fraction decreased considerably. Fig. 3  Variation of gel fraction of the monomer composition with respect to UV exposure time. The mechanism of the photopolymerization of multifunctional monomers is described as a free-radical chain reaction.26 Light absorption by the initiator leads to the formation of radical species which react with monomer molecules leading to chain growth. Since the multifunctional monomers contain a few functional groups, the formed network contains a significant amount of trapped radicals and unreacted double bonds and finally the reaction is terminated by radical recombination.27In the present study, when monomer formulation is subjected to UV irradiation, the radicals formed could initiate acrylic groups in MPTMS and TEGDMA and vinyl groups in VTMS leading to the formation of a cross-linked polymeric network. The 80% gel fraction obtained upon 6 h of UV irradiation was due to the cross-linked acrylic–vinyl networks. If the energy of the UV radiation is high, the polymeric network will undergo chain breaking mainly due to the C–C bond cleavage and the degradation of the cross-linked networks can result in the decrease in a gel fraction at high radiation dosages. The time required for complete curing of the monomer depends on the intensity of UV light27 and the quantity of silane in the monomer composition. The formulation viscosity and condensation rate of silanes can have a significant effect on the acrylic double bond conversion,16 thereby increasing the time required for the complete curing of the monomer. Curing time is a crucial factor governing the inorganic–organic network density,28 thereby influencing the interfacial mechanical strength of the prepared coatings. However, in the present study, after the condensation step, gel contents still above 80% are achieved, indicating sufficient crosslinking density.The UV-curing kinetics of the monomer formulation was studied by FTIR spectroscopy. Fig. 4 shows the IR spectra for the monomer and polymer obtained at different UV exposure times (10 min, 1, 6 and 12 h). The conversions of acrylate groups in the formulation were followed by monitoring the decrease in the absorbance at 1635 cm−1 and 810 cm−1. The peak at 1635 cm−1 indicates the CC stretching vibration and the one at ∼810 cm−1, is assigned to the C–H stretching vibration. The CC band intensity decreases visibly with polymerization, indicating that, as expected, the reaction of the unsaturated carbons is central to the polymerization reaction.29 Fig. 4  FT-IR spectra of the monomer composition at different UV exposure times. Before UV irradiation, the absorption bands of the acrylate group (CC–CO) are seen at around 810 cm−1 (denoted by the circle). The disappearance of this band clearly indicates the polymerization upon UV exposure. Another band centered around 1720 cm−1 is due to the CO stretching vibration.30The CO band is sharp and symmetrical in the monomer spectra, and becomes broader and asymmetrical in the polymers. After UV curing, a new peak appeared at ∼750 cm−1, indicating the polymerization reaction, and this band corresponds to the rocking motion of the CH2 groups in polymers.31 The intensity of the characteristic peaks (1720 and 1635 cm−1) of the monomer reduced and the peak at 810 cm−1 disappeared for the 10 min UV cured sample. The decrease in the intensity of the peak at 1720 cm−1 (carbonyl group) is due to the polymerization reaction. Also, a broad band at 750 cm−1, characteristic of the polymer, sharpened after 10 min of UV curing. The same peak broadened for the 12 h cured sample, and this may be due to the decomposition after polymerization. So it is possible that polymerization was completed at 6 h and further curing increases the chance for the decomposition of the formed polymer, thus broadening the characteristic peak at 750 cm−1. These results indicate that the complete conversion of monomer to polymer may occur upon 6 h of UV exposure. Bag et al.29 have reported an optimum curing time of 7.8 s for a difunctional silane monomer by using a UV light intensity of 8 W cm−2. Since the intensity of UV light used for curing was only 3.2 mW cm−2 in the present study, an optimum curing time of 5.4 h is justified.3.3. Characterization of inorganic–organic hybrid coatingsThe surface topography of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating and that of a conventional titania coating prepared on glass, as observed using an atomic force microscope, are presented in Fig. 5. Titania particles having sizes around 100–150 nm were uniformly distributed on the surface of the hybrid coating. Fig. 5  AFM image of the (a and c) surface and the 3-D view of an inorganic–organic hybrid coating and (b and d) the surface and the 3-D view of a conventional titania coating (annealed at 400 °C), all on the glass substrate. The particle size increment for the titania particles in the AFM image is a clear evidence for the partial coverage of titania particles by silica since the average particle size of the microwave treated titania was only 83 nm. The size of the particles would have been much larger, more than double in the AFM image, if the titania particles were fully covered by silica particles. AFM analysis revealed that the titania particles are partially covered by silica particles and resulted in a rough coating as indicated by an average surface roughness of 41.6 nm. The AFM image of a conventionally calcined titania coating (Fig. 5b) is presented for comparison which shows particles in the 200–250 nm size range and the average surface roughness was only 6.5 nm.32 This could be due to the homogeneous but even packing of titania particles in the coating. The conventionally calcined titania coating had larger titania particles when compared with that of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating which is consistent with that of the crystallite size data from XRD.Scanning electron micrographs of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating are presented in Fig. 6. The coating thickness of the inorganic–organic hybrid was found to be around 2.5 μm. The two layer coating containing the polymerized organic part as the first layer and the second layer containing the inorganic particles can be clearly identified from a zoomed area in the image. Fig. 6  SEM image (isometric view) of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating (a) showing the coating thickness and (b) a high resolution image that distinguishes the two layer coating. The dye degradation efficiency of the inorganic–organic hybrid coatings on the solar cell cover glass was evaluated by monitoring the degradation of the MB dye.33 The absorption spectra for the hybrid coating on the glass substrate in which the methylene blue dye molecules are adsorbed on the surface was taken before and after exposure to UV light. The intensity of the peak at 665 nm was followed up as a measure of the photocatalytic activity. The MB dye has a cationic configuration in an aqueous solution, which results in its adsorption through the coulombic interaction with the OH− ions present on the surface of TiO2 nanocrystallites.34 The degradation of the MB begins with cleavage of the C–S+C functional group, since this group is responsible for the adsorption of the MB dye on the surface of TiO2 nanocrystallites.35Fig. 7 shows the change in absorption of the MB dye for the hybrid coating with respect to the UV exposure time, on the solar cell cover glass. The inorganic–organic hybrid coating has shown a dye degradation efficiency of 94% upon 2 h of UV exposure. The titania particles that are exposed to the surface of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating resulted in high dye degradation efficiency in the present study which can be attributed to the lower crystallite size of the microwave treated titania. Fig. 7  Methylene blue degradation by the inorganic–organic hybrid coating on the solar cell cover glass upon UV exposure for two hours. A lower crystallite size is usually accompanied by a high surface area36 which increases the dye adsorption, thereby inducing a high efficiency for the photodegradation.The UV-Visible transmittance of the hybrid coatings on the solar cell cover glass was measured and is presented in Fig. 8. The transmittance of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating on the solar cell cover glass was about 92% in the visible region and the irregular spectra obtained can be attributed to the textured patterning on one side of the substrate. The function of texturing the surface is to reduce the reflection at the air/glass interface of the solar cell covers.2 Fig. 8  Transmittance of inorganic–organic hybrid coatings on (a) the solar cell cover glass and (b) the conventional titania coating on the glass annealed at 400 °C. The transmittance of a conventional titania coating (calcined at 400 °C) was below 90% as provided in Fig. 8. The hybrid coating was more transparent than the conventional titania coating. The high transmittance of the hybrid coating originates from its high uniformity37 and lower particle size. Also, for the conventional titania coating, transmittance below 400 nm is decreased significantly due to absorption of light by the anatase titania thin film in the UV region.32 Since the hybrid coating contains titania particles partially covered by silica particles, transmittance in the UV region is not reduced significantly. The hydrophobic nature of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating is clearly revealed from the water contact angle measurements by the sessile drop method which is provided in Fig. 9. Reasonably good water repellency with a water contact angle of 91° was shown by the hybrid coating on the solar cell cover glass. Sangermano et al. have reported a water contact angle of 100° for a pure acrylate based organic coating while it decreased to 20° by increasing the titania concentration to 30 wt% in the hybrid coating.38 Usually, the presence of titanium dioxide in a coating induces hydrophilicity39 and a water contact angle of 45° is reported for a sol–gel derived conventional titania coating on the glass substrate.40 The hydrophobic nature of the hybrid coating in the present study may be essentially due to the surface roughness of the prepared coatings arising from the synergistic effect of organic and inorganic components in the hybrid coating. Fig. 9  (a) Photograph showing the hydrophobicity of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating and (b) the water contact angle (WCA) for the inorganic–organic hybrid coating on the solar cell cover glass. Thus, in the present study, a precise control of surface roughness was achieved through an inorganic–organic hybrid approach using appropriate ratios of organic and inorganic moieties for satisfying both hydrophobicity and transparency.The mechanical stability of the hybrid coating is also a significant factor in determining the overall performance.41 In order to obtain a qualitative impression of the adhesion between the hybrid coating material and the glass substrate, an adhesion test was applied according to the ASTM method D 3359B-02.22 The strength of the bond between the substrate and the coating or between different coating layers or the cohesive strength of some substrates are quantified by this test.42 Usually, such an adhesion test is used for the analysis of the mechanical strength of UV curable hybrid coatings.43 The hybrid coating developed on normal glass and solar cell covers in this work has exhibited very good adhesion indicated by a value of 4B according to the above test procedure.22 An adhesion value of 4B implies that a cross cut area less than 5% is affected, indicating better adhesion properties between the hybrid coating and the substrate.43In general, the overall performance of solar cells is greatly influenced by several other parameters such as ambient temperature, humidity, rain and dust. Even though, an appropriate tilted angle of solar panels can reduce the dust accumulation to some extent,44 oily deposits and organic matter can form a thin film which sticks on to the surface and can affect the overall performance considerably. In the present study, the hybrid coating contains a photoactive titanium dioxide layer on the top surface which can act on the organic contaminants in presence of light and decompose them. Once the surface is kept clean, the possibility of dust particles getting strongly adhered to the surface will be reduced considerably. The more loosely bound dust particles can be easily rolled off by the action of either wind45 or rain. A hydrophobic surface (WCA > 90°) is more effective in removing dust by the action of wind and rain provided the surface is at a particular angle of tilting. Computational fluid dynamics models available for predicting the effect of wind direction and velocity on dust removal46 can be utilized for the effective and proper setting up of the coated solar panels for generating better efficiency.Thus, the novel inorganic–organic hybrid double layer coating, which satisfies the requirements of photoactivity, transparency, hydrophobicity and adhesion strength, provides a great opportunity for further development of water-shedding, transparent, photoactive coatings for various industrial applications including solar cells.4. ConclusionsA photoactive, transparent and hydrophobic UV-curable organic–inorganic hybrid coating was developed on solar cell covers by an organic–inorganic hybrid approach. The appropriate ratios of organic silanes to acrylates can impart strong adhesion to the substrate, while inorganic components composed of a hybrid mixture of silica and titania can provide enhanced self cleanability. The fast crystallization of the inorganic component was achieved by microwave treatment of the precursor sol itself and is a promising method for the synthesis of hybrid coatings where conventional heat treatment is not possible. Precise control of surface roughness is required for the simultaneous existence of hydrophobicity and transparency which were achieved using suitable precursor ratios. This novel inorganic–organic hybrid double layer coating which satisfies the requirements of photoactivity, transparency, hydrophobicity and adhesion strength provides a great opportunity for the development of water-shedding, transparent, photoactive coatings for various industrial applications including solar cells.AcknowledgementsThe authors acknowledge the Department of Science and Technology (DST), Government of India, for funding the project. Bharat Heavy Electricals Limited, Bangalore (BHEL-CTI), is acknowledged for supplying solar cell cover glass. Authors Smitha, V. S., and Warrier, K. G. K., acknowledge CSIR, India, for providing Fellowship and CSIR Emeritus Scheme, respectively. Mr Prasanth Kumar is being acknowledged for AFM images. All the members of the Materials Science and Technology Division are acknowledged for providing general support.Notes and referencesX. Li, X. Du and J. He, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 13528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. K. Verma, M. Sakhuja, J. Son, A. J. Danner, H. Yang, H. C. Zeng and C. S. Bhatia, Renewable Energy, 2011, 36, 2489 CrossRef CAS .T. Saito, Metrologia, 2012, 49, S118 CrossRef CAS .J. A. Howarter and J. P. Youngblood, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2008, 29, 455 CrossRef CAS .K. Y. Jung and S. B. Park, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1999, 127, 117 CrossRef CAS .E. V. Skorb, D. G. Shchukin, H. Mohwald and D. V. Sviridov, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4931 RSC .V. S. Smitha, K. A. Manjumol, K. V. Baiju, S. Ghosh, P. Perumal and K. G. K. Warrier, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2010, 54, 203 CrossRef CAS .V. S. Smitha, K. V. Baiju, P. Perumal, S. Ghosh and K. G. Warrier, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 2012, 226 CrossRef CAS .R. Mechiakh, N. Ben Sedrine, R. Chtourou and R. Bensaha, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 257, 670 CrossRef CAS .B. Ray, P. R. Nair and M. A. Alam, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 3287 CrossRef CAS .X. T. Zhang, O. Sato, M. Taguchi, Y. Einaga, T. Murakami and A. Fujishima, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 696 CrossRef CAS .L. H. Lee and W. C. Chen, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1137 CrossRef CAS .A. Nakajima, K. Hashimoto, T. Watanabe, K. Takai, G. Yamauchi and A. Fujishima, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 7044 CrossRef CAS .V. K. Konaganti and G. Madras, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2009, 94, 1325 CrossRef CAS .H. S. Kibombo and R. T. Koodali, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25568 CAS .S. Karatas, N. Kayaman-Apohan, O. Turunc and A. Gungor, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2011, 22, 567 CrossRef CAS .P. Campbell, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1993, 10, 2410 CrossRef CAS .H. Z. Zhang and J. F. Banfield, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 3481 CrossRef CAS .J. F. Larche, P. O. Bussiere, S. Therias and J. L. Gardette, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2012, 97, 25 CrossRef CAS .Y.-M. Lim, H.-J. Gwon, J.-S. Park, Y.-C. Nho, J.-W. Shim, I. K. Kwon, S.-E. Kim and S.-H. Baik, Macromol. Res., 2011, 19, 436 CrossRef CAS .Z. Yuan, J. Zhang, B. Li and J. Li, Thin Solid Films, 2007, 515, 7091 CrossRef CAS .American Society for Testing and Materials, West Con-shohocken, PA, D-3359-02 cross-cut tape test for adhesion.Y. J. Chen and D. D. Dionysiou, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 244, 73 CrossRef CAS .A. M. Peiro, J. Peral, C. Domingo, X. Domenech and J. A. Ayllon, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 2567 CrossRef CAS .F. Dufour, S. Cassaignon, O. Durupthy, C. Colbeau-Justin and C. Chaneac, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 2012, 2707 CrossRef CAS .E. Andrzejewska, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2001, 26, 605 CrossRef CAS .H. Kaczmarek and I. Vukovic-Kwiatkowska, eXPRESS Polym. Lett., 2012, 6, 78 CrossRef CAS .Y. Mulazim, M. V. Kahraman, N. K. Apohan, S. Kiziltas and A. Gungor, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2011, 120, 2112 CrossRef .D. S. Bag and K. U. B. Rao, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 115, 2352 CrossRef CAS .H. Javaheriannaghash and N. Ghazavi, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2012, 9, 323 CrossRef CAS .B. R. Smith, Infrared spectral interpretation, CRC Press,  1998 Search PubMed .C. K. Jyothi, K. B. Jaimy, S. Ghosh, S. Sankar, V. S. Smitha and K. G. K. Warrier, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 1867 CrossRef CAS .R. Subasri, M. Tripathi, K. Murugan, J. Revathi, G. V. N. Rao and T. N. Rao, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 124, 63 CrossRef CAS .K. V. Baiju, S. Shukla, K. S. Sandhya, J. James and K. G. K. Warrier, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7612 CAS .F. Ping-feng, Z. Zhuo, P. Peng and D. Xue-gang, Chin. J. Process Eng., 2008, 8, 65 Search PubMed .S. Sitthisang, S. Komarneni, J. Tantirungrotechai, Y. D. Noh, H. H. Li, S. Yin, T. Sato and H. Katsuki, Ceram. Int., 2012, 38, 6099 CrossRef CAS .M. N. Ghazzal, H. Kebaili, M. Joseph, D. P. Debecker, P. Eloy, J. De Coninck and E. M. Gaigneaux, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 115, 276 CrossRef .M. Sangermano, E. Amerio, A. Priola, A. Di Gianni and B. Voit, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2006, 102, 4659 CrossRef CAS .R. J. Zeng, L. C. Zhang, Z. H. Lin, Z. M. Fang, Q. Pang and J. F. Deng, Int. J. Mater. Prod. Technol., 2001, 1, 191 Search PubMed .A. Eshaghi and A. Eshaghi, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2012, 35, 137 CrossRef CAS .Y. Xiu, Y. Liu, D. W. Hess and C. P. Wong, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 155705 CrossRef PubMed .A. Steele, I. Bayer and E. Loth, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2012, 125, E445 CrossRef CAS .F. Xu, X. Sun, J. Hang, D. Shang, L. Shi, W. Sun and L. Wang, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2012, 63, 382 CrossRef CAS .A. O. Mohamed and A. Hasan, J. Basic Appl. Sci. Res., 2012, 2, 11030 Search PubMed .D. Goossens and E. Van Kerschaever, Sol. Energy, 1999, 66, 277 CrossRef .P. J. Witt, K. G. Carey and T. V. Nguyen, Appl. Math. Model., 2002, 26, 297 CrossRef .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic of an inorganic–organic hybrid coating on glass substrates (NP-nanoparticle).	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic showing the partial coverage of titania nano particles (NP) by hydrolyzed silica.	 
WA = kAAA/kAAA + kBAB	(1)
WB = kBAB/kAAA + kBAB	(2)
DXRD = 0.9λ/βcosθ	(3)
Gel fraction (%) = (W1/W0) × 100	(4)
d = (C0 − C)/C0 × 100%	(5)

 	Fig. 1  Particle size distributions of (a) titania sol, (b) 5 min microwave treated titania sol and (c) crystalline anatase titania, conventionally calcined at 400 °C.	 

 	Fig. 2  XRD patterns of (a) titania powder without microwave treatment, (b) microwave treated titania powder and (c) conventionally calcined titania powder (400 °C).	 

 	Fig. 3  Variation of gel fraction of the monomer composition with respect to UV exposure time.	 

 	Fig. 4  FT-IR spectra of the monomer composition at different UV exposure times.	 

 	Fig. 5  AFM image of the (a and c) surface and the 3-D view of an inorganic–organic hybrid coating and (b and d) the surface and the 3-D view of a conventional titania coating (annealed at 400 °C), all on the glass substrate.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM image (isometric view) of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating (a) showing the coating thickness and (b) a high resolution image that distinguishes the two layer coating.	 

 	Fig. 7  Methylene blue degradation by the inorganic–organic hybrid coating on the solar cell cover glass upon UV exposure for two hours.	 

 	Fig. 8  Transmittance of inorganic–organic hybrid coatings on (a) the solar cell cover glass and (b) the conventional titania coating on the glass annealed at 400 °C.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Photograph showing the hydrophobicity of the inorganic–organic hybrid coating and (b) the water contact angle (WCA) for the inorganic–organic hybrid coating on the solar cell cover glass.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
