Smart drug delivery systems: from fundamentals to the clinic  - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CC01429D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CC01429D
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7743-7765Smart drug delivery systems: from fundamentals to the clinic

        
          
            Carmen 
            Alvarez-Lorenzo
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Angel 
            Concheiro
          
          
        
      
Departamento de Farmacia y Tecnología Farmacéutica, Universidad de Santiago de Compostela, 15782-Santiago de Compostela, Spain. E-mail: carmen.alvarez.lorenzo@usc.es
Received 
      24th February 2014
    , Accepted 23rd April 2014First published on 23rd April 2014AbstractForty years after the first reports on stimuli-responsive phase transitions in synthetic hydrogels, the first medicines based on responsive components are approaching the market. Sensitiveness to internal or external signals of the body can be achieved by means of materials (mostly polymers, but also lipids and metals) that modify their properties as a function of the intensity of the signal and that enable the transduction into changes in the delivery system that affect its ability to host/release a therapeutic substance. Integration of responsive materials into implantable depots, targetable nanocarriers and even insertable medical devices can endow them with activation-modulated and feedback-regulated control of drug release. This review offers a critical overview of therapeutically-interesting stimuli to trigger drug release and the evolution of responsive materials suitable as functional excipients, illustrated with recent examples of formulations in clinical trials or already commercially available, which can provide a perspective on the current state of the art on smart drug delivery systems.
Carmen Alvarez-Lorenzo
Carmen Alvarez-Lorenzo received her PhD degree (1998) from University of Santiago de Compostela. She was a postdoctoral fellow (1998–2001) in the Department of Physics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the group of Prof. Toyoichi Tanaka. Then, she returned to the University of Santiago de Compostela as a Ramón y Cajal research fellow (2001–2006) and was promoted to Titular Professor in Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Technology in 2007. Her research interests include drug delivery, polymeric micelles, stimuli-responsive and imprinted networks, biomimetic materials, scaffolds, and drug–medical device combination products. She has co-edited the book Smart Materials for Drug Delivery (RSC, 2013).
Angel Concheiro
Angel Concheiro received his PhD degrees (1976 Chemistry and 1981 Pharmacy) from University of Santiago de Compostela. He was appointed Titular Professor in Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Technology in 1983 and promoted to Full Professor in 1988. Since 2012 he has been the President of the Committee of Veterinary Medicines of AEMPS. His research interests include design and evaluation of drug delivery systems for targeting and stimuli-responsive release, polymeric micelles, cyclodextrins, hydrogels, scaffolds, and drug–medical device combination products. He has co-edited Smart Materials for Drug Delivery (RSC, 2013) and Handbook of Molecularly Imprinted Polymers (Smithers Rapra, 2013).
1. Evolution of the drug dosage forms: the need for smartness
Pharmacological treatments require that the active substance reaches the target in such a way that a concentration sufficiently large is maintained for the time required to produce the therapeutic effect. Ideally, only the tissues where the pharmacological target is located should be exposed to the drug in order to maximize the response and minimize the collateral effects. Nevertheless, drug administration has been traditionally limited to make the drug accessible to the blood stream, relying on the irrigation and the drug affinity of the tissues for the access to the target. In fact, bioavailability is still measured from the levels of drug in the blood stream, not in the target surroundings. However, there are numerous challenges that the drug alone finds hard to overcome, such as the attack of enzymes, the poor permeability of some tissues, and the difficulty of access to the target once arriving at the destination cells, among others. As a consequence, the treatments usually involve the administration of relatively high doses of drug with the hope that a portion, although minor, goes to the right tissues or cells. The situation becomes worse in the case of new active substances obtained via biotechnological processes (peptides, enzymes, genes etc.), which have a complex structure and too deficient physicochemical and stability features to be able to reach/withstand the blood circulation. Overall, the efficiency of the therapy is strongly dependent on the success rate of the active substances to reach the target site. Therefore, the therapeutic requirements in terms of delivery site and release rate are more demanding everyday.
Most commercially available sustained-release medicines are designed to release the drug according to a pre-established rate in the absorption site with the purpose of regulating the access of the drug to the blood circulation, from where it can distribute to the organism tissues. The so-called first generation controlled release systems rely on the fact that a rate-programmed drug release may become the limiting step of the absorption process.1,2 Their development notably prompted the search of excipients (mostly polymers) that can endow the dosage forms with the capability to regulate the release via dissolution, diffusion, erosion or osmotic mechanisms. The maintenance of drug levels in a therapeutically desirable range with lower dose per day notably improves both the efficacy of treatments with short half-life drugs and the compliance of the patients, as well as allows minimizing adverse events.3 A further step in the development of oral controlled release formulations is related to the use of components that can regulate the site at which the release process should occur; namely, the region of the gastrointestinal tract more favourable for the stability or the absorption of the drug. In the second generation of controlled release systems, activation-modulated drug release is accomplished by means of excipients that respond to certain physical, chemical or biochemical processes in the gastrointestinal tract, as for example, the pH gradients or the enzymatic activity.4 The third generation pursues a feedback-regulated drug release by means of advanced dosage forms with the ability to deliver the drug (as a true courier) in the best condition possible to the target site, and that can also feedback-regulate drug release fitting it to the physio/pathological conditions of the body, preferably to the progression of certain illness markers.5–7 The medicines of this latter generation are also called drug delivery systems (DDSs) to differentiate from dosage forms that just regulate drug release before the absorption/distribution process. The mechanisms behind the three generations of controlled release systems are schematically depicted in Fig. 1.8
 Fig. 1  Drug release patterns from a drug dosage form. In the rate-programmed systems, the release occurs according to a pre-established pattern, disregarding the conditions in the body. The release from activation-modulated systems is triggered by certain internal or external stimuli. Finally, feed-back regulated release systems adjust the release rate to the levels of a biomarker; the presence of the biomarker triggers drug release and as a consequence the level of the biomarker decreases, leading to the stop of the release until the biomarker level increases again.8 Copyright 2013 Smithers Rapra. 
Both activation-modulated and feedback-regulated systems require components that can act as “sensors” of the surrounding conditions and as “actuators” with the ability to trigger the release of the drug in the case of the activation-modulated systems, or to finely tune the rate in the case of feedback-regulated systems. The design of such sensor/actuator (stimuli-responsive) excipients is truly challenging since the composition of the biological environment is complex and the changes caused by a pathological process are mostly of scarce magnitude.
In addition to the internal variables, development of materials with the ability to respond to external stimuli has also been considered. Thus, two major classes of responsive DDSs can be distinguished: (a) those that recognize changes in the biological medium (for example, in pH, temperature or concentration of some substances) activating or modulating the release rate are named closed-loop or self-regulated systems and (b) DDSs that switch drug release on/off as a function of specific external stimuli (e.g. light, or electric or magnetic field) are considered to work in an open circuit, and they can provide pulsed drug release when externally activated.9,10 The search for advanced excipients that can lead to responsive formulations has prompted an amazing effort for finding suitable stimuli-sensitive materials, and it is responsible for the exponential increase in publications related to “smart” delivery systems.
The adjectives smart, stimuli-responsive and environmental-responsive are commonly used indistinctly from each other, although some differential aspects should be taken into account. Sensitiveness to internal or external signals of the body is typically achieved by means of semisynthetic or synthetic materials (mostly polymers) that bear functional groups which modify their properties as a function of the intensity of the signal and that enable its transduction into changes in the material features.11–13 These changes can have different levels of complexity; for example, (i) modification of the solubility, shape, or state of aggregation of single components (e.g. assembly–disassembly of micelle unimers or sol–gel transition), (ii) reversible change in the conformation of chemically cross-linked networks that lead to volume phase transitions and modifications in affinity towards other chemical groups or molecular entities, or (iii) reversible stretching–shrinking of surface-immobilized chains or networks on inert substrates (Fig. 2).10,14–16 Only when these possible structural changes are reversible and proportional to the stimulus intensity, the DDS can be considered to behave as “smart”.
 Fig. 2  Some transitions associated with the responsiveness to a stimulus: (i) deaggregation of amphiphilic polymers; (ii) volume phase transition; and (iii) helix to random coiling. 
It should be noted that there are a number of advanced DDSs named with the acronym SMART. Three categories have been recently proposed, as follows:17
– Type 1. Systems to Maximise Access, Retention and Therapy, which are formed by nanoparticles intended for passive or active drug targeting. Examples of these systems are nanoparticles decorated with monoclonal antibodies, magnetically guided particles, and bioconjugates designed to improve the targeting efficiency compared to that of DDSs that rely only on the Enhanced Permeability and Retention (EPR) effect observed in some pathological tissues.
– Type 2. Systems that Monitor, Analyze and Respond in Time. These DDSs are designed to feed-back-modulate drug release by means of mechanically driven mechanisms or cell-based constructs. In the first case, the system is integrated by a biosensor that monitors the concentration of certain biomarkers, therapy management software, and a pump system that releases the drug at the adequate rate. In the second case, stem cells or xenotransplants of non-human cells are implanted in the body to supply the lacking substance.
– Type 3. Systems Mute until Activation by a Remote Trigger. Remote triggering release has already been tested for oral capsules and for parenteral nanocarriers using near infrared (NIR) light, magnetic field or ultrasound as trigger agents.
Most of these SMART technologies are still in development process or early clinical phases. Type 1 nanomedicines that have so far entered into the market are those that have been clearly proved as Systems Modulating Adverse Reactions and Toxicity, such as Abraxane® and Doxil®.18 In this context, it should be noted that although “smart” (stimulus-responsive) materials are not endowed with the natural or artificial intelligence of living cells or computer software, they have the advantage of being more simple and cheap and, in most cases, resemble better the natural mechanisms of transport and delivery of substances in the living bodies (where changes in the levels of physical or chemical factors regulate a series of biochemical processes).19 Therefore, they may play a relevant role as components of advanced DDSs, Types 2 and 3, and even Type 1, as recently revisited in the comprehensive book Smart Materials for Drug Delivery.20 Moreover, there are a number of stimuli-responsive products under clinical evaluation, (e.g. Opaxio™ and ThermoDox®),21,22 and some of them have already been approved for clinical use (NanoTherm®) or commercialized for research use only.23–25 The information generated in the design and evaluation of these pioneering products should pave the way to the development and approval of more smart nanomedicines. In the present review, the word “smart” is thereinafter used in the context of stimuli responsiveness for drug delivery. Comprehensive reviews on particle requirements for targeting, and examples of smart changes in size, shape and surface properties for maximizing the targeting can be found elsewhere.26 The present review aims to provide a perspective on the current state of the art on smart DDSs in terms of delivery site and release rate, supported by recent examples of formulations in clinical trials or already commercially available.
2. Smart DDSs
Smart DDSs can be materialized at macro-, micro- and nanoscales. For example, they can be prepared in the form of macro/microdepots that are directly placed in the target tissue/organ using more or less invasive approaches. From their static position, the macro/microdepots are intended to trigger or modulate the release of the drug towards the surrounding cells. Preparation of nanocarriers opens the possibility of combining systemic administration with release at specific cells, if adequately designed. The drug-loaded nanocarrier is intended to be parenterally administered to transport the drug towards specific tissues, modifying the distribution and clearance of the drug. As far as the drug is inside the nanocarrier it cannot freely extravasate from the blood stream. The drug only gets access via passive or active targeting to the tissues where the nanocarrier accumulates.27 Thus, an efficient nanocarrier should fulfill somehow contradictory requirements: (i) it should be able to strongly retain the drug, without premature leakage, during the movement towards the target tissue/cells, where it has to release 100% drug in a short period of time and (ii) it should move in the body avoiding the adsorption of proteins or lipids that can trigger the recognition by the phagocytic mononuclear system and the retention in non-target tissues, but it has to strongly interact with the target cells. When the target cells are those of a tumor, these requirements can be summarized in the sentences “drug Retention in blood circulation versus Release in tumor cells (2R)” and “Stealthy in blood versus Sticky in tumor (2S)”.28 The difficulty in accomplishing the 2R2S features together with the poor performance of some nanocarrier materials as excipients suitable for large scale production are behind the notable delay of the entry of nanomedicines in the market. In this context, smart materials may contribute to solve, at least, the 2R challenge. Below, some useful materials to endow DDSs with smart behavior and therapeutically-interesting stimuli to trigger drug release are analyzed.
2.1. Smart components
At this point it seems clear that smart DDSs require components that do not behave as inert, but take part actively in the performance during release.29 Thus, the evolution from classical dosage forms to advanced DDSs runs in parallel to the development of active excipients, which in turn is linked to the evolution of the biomaterials.30 As biomaterials can be defined as any material that interfaces with biological systems to evaluate, treat, augment or replace any tissue, organ or function of the body,31 excipients can be considered to be a particular type of biomaterials. The traditional functions of excipients are to facilitate the preparation of medicines (e.g. making some technological steps easier) and to ensure stability during storage. Importantly, these two key functions should not be forgotten even when more sophisticated performances are demanded (advanced nanoDDSs would not enter into the market if they could not be produced in a reproducible way). The first generation biomaterials were the result of a change of paradigm in the understanding of the materials as entities not to be separately studied as a function of their nature (metals, ceramics, polymers etc.), but to be evaluated regarding the processing–structure–property interrelationships.32 As the first generation of biomaterials, traditional excipients can be considered to be bioinert materials; e.g., their role in drug release from solid medicines was limited to facilitate the disintegration of the dosage form once in contact with the physiological fluids. For a variety of purposes (e.g. immediate oral release), this feature is still valid today.
In the last third of the 20th century, the integration of materials science and engineering principles with biology and biomedical criteria enabled the development of the so-called second generation of biomaterials that elicit favorable biological responses in order to achieve a better interaction with the surrounding tissues during permanent or temporal (biodegradation) contact. Major advances in knowledge about the body components and their performances together with a new way to look at the biological systems as engineering structures led to a progressive change in the biocompatibility concept and, as a consequence, of the design and use of biomaterials.32,33 A third generation biomaterial is expected to interact with biological components of the patient and, in turn, directly participate in the course of the medical treatment.31 Accordingly, the third generation excipients should help to overcome constraints that prevent the drug from reaching the optimum therapeutic plasma/tissue level, tuning drug release and pharmacokinetics.30 A lesson to learn from natural materials is that their outstanding performances come from the hierarchical structure and their ability to adapt to modifiable circumstances.34 Thus, the current design of lipids and polymers benefits from the knowledge about the conformation and functionality of natural biomacromolecules, with the advantage that the synthetic structures are more stable and can be prepared by applying versatile, less-expensive procedures.14,35 Biomimetic (also called smart or fourth-generation) implantable biomaterials are expected to actively participate in the regeneration process of damaged tissues by stimulating specific cellular responses at the molecular level.33 Stimuli-responsive excipients clearly form part of this avant-garde generation as components of smart DDSs and theranostic systems, which combine diagnosis and drug delivery capabilities in a single entity.36,37
Like the natural materials that modulate their conformation and performance as a function of the conditions (stimuli) of the surrounding environment, high-performance components of DDSs should be able to tune the release as a function of the physio/pathological state of the body. Therefore, they should proactively interact with the biological functions, being able to perceive certain signals from the body, process them and consequently modify the behavior and functioning of the DDSs. In this sense, smart DDSs can also be labeled as “adaptative” medicines, which adjust their properties as they navigate through complex biological environments or in response to an external stimulus.19,26 In addition to stimuli-responsiveness, safety and excretion/elimination assessments have to be kept in mind during the design of materials intended to reach profound tissues and cell structures.14,38–40 The large list of requirements that smart materials have to fulfill to be suitable components of medicines is depicted in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Features to be taken into account when a polymer is intended to be used in a drug delivery system.14 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH. 

2.1.1. Phase transitions. 
Smart DDSs require the incorporation of sensitive components at adequate proportion and arrangement.11,41 Polymers are the most widely used since they can be prepared with an unequalled richness of structures and functional groups that sharply modify their features, undergoing reliable and reversible phase transitions, in response to the stimulus of interest.12,13,29 It should be emphasized that the thermodynamics governing phase transitions is the mechanistic basis of the smartness. In fact, smart DDSs have been recently referred by D. W. Grainger as examples of Some Modest Attempts to Respect Thermodynamics.42
Up to now ten phase transition types have been described; more than half being exclusive of polymers.43 Phase transitions are mainly of first or second order. In the first-order transitions, the extensive thermodynamic quantities of volume, energy, entropy or number of moles of the macromolecules show a discontinuity as a function of the intensive quantities of pressure, temperature, or chemical potential, among others. In the second-order case, no discontinuity is evident, but it appears when the derivatives of the extensive thermodynamic quantities are plotted. Mainly, to be useful as a stimuli-sensitive component for drug delivery, the polymer has to respond to the appearance/disappearance of the stimulus undergoing a first-order phase transition, which should be accompanied by a change in the specific volume of the polymer.44,45
A single molecule or a collection of molecules can be involved in the transition.43 Transitions within one macromolecule may occur because the sequential connectivity of the monomers along the polymer chain makes them distinguishable from each other, differently to what happen when the monomers are free in solution, which behave similarly. Examples of this transition type are “helix to random coil” and “collapse” transitions.29 Helix to coil transitions are typical of single-stranded polypeptides, double-stranded DNA, and triple-stranded collagen, which undergo diffuse, second-order and first-order transitions, respectively, when a change in temperature or chemical potential alters intra- and inter-strand hydrogen bonds. It should be noted that DNA in the cells do not pack alone, but with other molecules in order to undergo first order transitions and to be more packed, since a second order transition of naked DNA would lead to a random coil conformation with dimensions larger than those of the cells.46 A collapse transition refers to the competition between the attractive interactions among monomers that drive the self-collapse of the polymer and the entropy of the chains (rubber elasticity) that tries to expand the polymer.47 Since each monomer occupies a certain volume in the polymer and the monomers cannot penetrate each other, there is repulsion at short distances. Such repulsion prevails in a good solvent and thus the polymer coils are expanded (swollen). A change in the environmental conditions, such as temperature, pH or polarity, can modify the balance between the free energy of the internal (polymer–polymer and polymer–solvent) interactions and the elasticity component. If the attractive interactions between monomers become strong enough, a coil-to-globule transition occurs at a condition called θ point.46 This transition may also occur when the polymer chains are cross-linked, forming a three-dimensional hydrogel network. In a good solvent, the chains confined between two adjacent cross-linking points behave as polymer coils. If the solvent conditions change towards the θ point, each subchain undergoes a coil–globule transition and, as a result, the network as a whole shrinks, i.e., a volume phase transition occurs.48 Hydrogel collapse is driven by any one of the four basic types of intermolecular interactions operational in water solutions and biological systems, namely, hydrogen bonds and van der Waals, hydrophobic and Coulomb interactions.49,50 As a consequence of the volume phase transition, the flow of fluids through the network and also the diffusion of solutes, such as drugs, are notably altered, particularly if the monomers are connected into flexible long chains. Therefore, small changes in the intensive thermodynamic variables (temperature, pressure, and chemical potential) lead to drastic changes in the polymer conformation.51
Regarding the transitions within collections of molecules, the most exploited one for smart drug delivery is that related to block copolymers that can associate as membranes, micelles, or vesicles. Incompatible polymers are attached together as blocks that cannot move far away from each other. Nevertheless, the incompatibility persists and it leads to microphase separation; namely, a pattern of microdomains, each of them containing mainly one of the blocks, separated by thin interphase regions.46 Depending on the relative length of each block, the microdomains can adopt different shapes, forming lamellar, cylindrical or spherical phases. Free standing membranes, micelles and vesicles can exist in media with enough solvent.
It might occur that under certain physiological circumstances (e.g. hydrolysis or oxidation/reduction processes) a material suddenly changes its chemical nature and transforms into another material with different chemical groups. Thermodynamic transitions can accompany such transformation. Moreover, one transition does not exclude the occurrence of others, and in Nature, the transitions of macromolecules are frequently coupled.43 In fact, biopolymers that can undergo phase transitions are essential for all evolved life forms, since they are the only material that can fulfill the three main requirements of the living systems: (i) minimal complexity to form and function, (ii) ability to produce different structures in a reproducible way, and (iii) ability to transmit all information necessary to the forms and functions.
It should be noted that most phase transitions have been studied in isolated (in vitro) systems, having all other variables strictly controlled. A stimuli-responsive material to be useful as a component of a smart DDS should maintain their ability to undergo phase transitions in the complex biological environment, namely in the presence of a high concentration of salts and proteins that can notably alter the polymer–solvent interactions themselves.42 Otherwise, promising in vitro systems may fail under in vivo conditions. Moreover, the time required for the phase transition to occur in each direction when the stimulus appears/disappears, and the possible hysteresis effects, should fit the therapeutic demands for correct switching on and off of the drug release. Nanometer-size structures show faster transitions and less hysteresis than macroscopic networks. Nevertheless, characterization of the stimuli-responsiveness of a smart DDS under physiological conditions and the relevant disease states is still quite challenging.42

2.2. Stimuli and suitable smart DDSs
Most smart DDSs are designed to physically entrap the drug, until the stimulus triggers conformational changes, in the entire carrier or in specific layers or channels, that lead to the release of the drug.24,52,53 Some stimuli (e.g. pH or enzyme) can also be exploited by means of carriers made of labile bonds or having the drug molecules conjugated through cleavable bonds, which are broken under the action of the stimulus19 (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 4  Release of active agents from (a) supramolecular complexes like dendritic core–shell particles with a cleavable shell and (b) dendritic scaffolds with attached solubilizing/stealth groups using cleavable linkers for the drug conjugation.19 Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V. 

2.2.1. pH. 
The variety of pH gradients that can be found in the body has notably attracted the interest of researchers, being one of the first and most evaluated stimuli. In addition to the changes in pH typical of the gastrointestinal tract that have been exploited to prepare site-specific release oral formulations, pH gradients that occur at a cellular level are particularly suitable for the design of intracellular-specific delivery. The differences in pH among the cytosol (7.4), Golgi apparatus (6.40), endosomes (5.5–6.0) and lysosomes (4.5–5.0) are considerable.54 Moreover, the extracellular pH of blood and healthy tissues (7.4) is higher than that recorded in tumor tissues (6.5–7.0), mainly because of the overproduction of lactic acid due to the hypoxic environment and fast metabolic rates of tumor cells.55 Similarly, a drop in pH up to 6.5 is observed after 60 h of the onset of an inflammatory process.56 The evolution of the pH of the wounds can also be used as an index of the progression of healing.57
Development of pH-responsive systems is mostly based on polymers that bear weak acid (e.g. carboxylic acid) or base (e.g. primary and tertiary amines) groups with a pKa that enables sharp changes in the ionization state at the pH of interest. An increase in the degree of ionization can dramatically alter the conformation and the affinity of the chains for the solvent as well as the interactions among them, resulting in either the disassembly of components or the swelling–shrinking of covalent networks. The pH-responsiveness can be easily tuned by varying the nature of the co-monomers used to prepare the polymer.58
The pH-responsive micelles for tumor-targeted release have been prepared using amphiphilic copolymers with amino groups in one of the blocks.59,60 At blood pH 7.4, the non-ionized amino blocks self-aggregate forming the micellar core. Once they enter into the tumor cells via endocytic pathways, fusion with lysosomes (pH 5–6) causes the ionization of the hydrophobic blocks leading to micelle disassembly and drug release.61 However, since both tumor cells and normal cells have the same endosomal acid pH, a more tumor-specific release can be achieved with micelles that disassemble at the weakly acidic tumor microenvironment.60 In this sense, methyl ether poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly(α-amino ester) (MPEG-PAE) micelles intravenously injected into MDA-MB231 human breast tumor-bearing mice demonstrated preferential accumulation in the tumor, with minimal distribution to the healthy tissues. This behavior clearly contrasted with the non-selective distribution observed for non-responsive polymeric micelles.60 MPEG-PAE micelles loaded with Fe3O4 nanoparticles have also been shown to be useful for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and selectively released into the cerebral ischemic area, which has an acidic environment.62 Rapid, tumor-specific diagnosis has been recently achieved with oligopeptide-based micelles that quickly dissociate exhibiting fluorescence when encountering a subtle pH-change from 7.4 to 6.8.63 The oligopeptides contained a fluorescent dye and its quencher and, therefore, did not emit fluorescence when self-assembled. In vivo distribution and tumor accumulation studies demonstrated that these micelles can behave as activatable probes that emit fluorescent signals from the extracellular matrix of tumor tissues as early as 10 min post injection, with a steady increase in fluorescent intensity up to 1–1.5 h. Dissociation of the micelles could be also exploited for antitumor drug release, being useful for theranostics. An alternative to disassembly-dependent release is the conjugation of the drug with block copolymers or dendrimers via a labile bond. Micelles, polymersomes and dendritic structures decorated with active targeting elements can be internalized in tumor cells, where the labile bonds are broken and the drug is released.64–66
The pH-sensitive polymeric micelles have also a great potential as carriers of DNA or siRNA, which interact with the amino groups of the copolymers, forming a complex inside the micelles (micelleplex) that protects nucleic acids from enzymatic degradation.67–69 Micelles of poly(ethylene glycol)-b-poly[(3-morpholinopropyl) aspartamide]-b-poly(L-lysine) (PEG-b-PMPA-b-PLL) combine the buffering capacity of PMPA with the excellent aptitude of PLL to condense DNA, resulting in high transfectional efficiency.70 An approach suitable to combine prolonged circulation, low cytotoxicity and improved transfection consists of the preparation of detachable negatively-charged coatings or PEG-based shells, which shield the positive charges of the polyplex in the serum (Fig. 5). Once internalized, the coating or the shell degrades at the acidic pH of the endosome, unmasking the positively charged polyplex, which facilitates endosomal escape and transfection.71,72 Nevertheless, as shown below, pH-responsiveness is nowadays combined with components responsive to other stimuli in order to improve the specificity of the site and the control of the release of the active substances.73
 Fig. 5  Ternary polyplex prepared by combining plasmid DNA with pAsp(DET) (poly{N-[N′′-(2-aminoethyl)-2-aminoethyl]aspartamide}) followed by coating with pAsp(DET-Aco) (poly(N-{N′-[(N′′-cis-aconityl)-2-aminoethyl]-2-aminoethyl}aspartamide)). The polyplex is negatively charged at pH 7.4, which facilitates serum stability and low cytotoxicity. The cis-aconitic amide moieties are degraded at the endosomal pH, which leads to the charge-conversion components and facilitates the endosomal escape of the polyplex through membrane disruption.71 Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons. 


2.2.2. Redox conditions. 
In Nature, sulfur(II)-containing molecules such as cysteine and cysteine-derived compounds (e.g. glutathione, GSH etc.), play relevant roles as defense compounds.74 They usually act as transition metal binders for detoxification or modulation of the catalytic activity of metalloenzymes, or participate as redox buffers to attenuate the detrimental effects of oxidants.75 GSH–glutathione disulfide is the major redox couple in animal cells. GSH is kept reduced by NADPH and glutathione reductase, although the intracellular levels of GSH are also dependent on other redox couples. The intracellular compartments (cytosol, mitochondria, and nucleus) contain 2 to 3 orders of magnitude higher level of GSH tripeptide (2–10 mM) than the extracellular fluids (2–20 μM). Thus, GSH is an ubiquitous intracellular substance suitable as a stimulus for triggering drug release inside cells. Moreover, tumor tissues have a greater concentration in GSH (4-to-7-fold higher) than the healthy ones, which reinforces the role of GSH to specifically trigger drug release in tumor cells.
Block copolymers or polymer nanogels bearing disulfide (–S–S–) bonds are suitable to undergo reduction reactions in the presence of GSH, leading to the rupture of the polymer bonds. A large variety of GSH-responsive systems, comprising shell-detachable micelles and reduction-sensitive micellar cores, polymersomes, capsules and nanogels, have already been evaluated.76 As a consequence of the redox process, the nanostructure swells or disassembles and the drug is released. Nevertheless, it has been recently reported that the nature of the reductant species can exert a strong influence on the release process. In vitro studies carried out with poly(methacrylic acid) (PMAA) nanogels crosslinked with N,N-bis(acryloyl)cystamine have shown that doxorubicin release is notably faster when GSH is added to the medium, compared to the levels attained when dithiothreitol (DTT, a synthetic reductant) was used.77 In the literature, GSH and DTT are used almost indistinctly to mimic the intracellular environment of the reductant. In fact both have a similar capability to reduce the disulfide bonds. However, while DTT is a neutral species, GSH (isoelectric point 5.93) becomes positively charged at the acidic environment of tumors. As a consequence, antitumor agents that are positively charged at acid pH may remain bound to the carrier via electrostatic interactions when DTT is used. Oppositely, GSH can displace the drug from the polymer, notably prompting the release (Fig. 6). Thus, the natural reductant environment triggers drug release more efficiently. This again calls attention to the importance of correctly mimicking the physiological environment in the in vitro release studies in order to obtain information that can be extrapolated to the in vivo conditions. Interestingly, several antibody–drug conjugates with labile bonds responsive to the intracellular redox conditions are already in clinical phase II/III trials for breast cancer (Trastuzumab-DM1)78 and multiple myeloma (Maytansine).79
 Fig. 6  Possible reaction mechanism for nanohydrogels with varying responses to DTT and GSH as reducing agents, which is caused by a drug exchange process between GSH and the PMAA–doxorubicin (DOX) complex.77 Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V. 
Tissues affected by ischemic stroke and cancer usually exhibit hypoxia; namely, the tissue partial pressure of oxygen is near 0 mmHg, which is substantially lower than that in the normal tissue (30 mmHg).80 The highly reductive environment of hypoxia has been exploited to develop imaging agents and responsive DDSs. For example, hydrophobic 2-nitroimidazole groups are converted, under hypoxic conditions, to hydrophilic 2-aminoimidazoles via a series of selective bioreductions. Hydrophilic polymers bearing hydrophobically modified 2-nitroimidazole groups self-assemble under normoxic conditions, behaving as nanocarriers of antitumoral agents, but release the drug faster into cells under hypoxic conditions. In vivo biodistribution studies proved that these polymers selectively accumulate at the hypoxic tumor tissues leading to high anti-tumor activity.81 On the other hand, layer-by-layer nanoparticles with a trilayer architecture of poly-L-lysine (PLL) modified with iminobiotin, followed by protein neutravidin, and biotin end-functionalized poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) have been shown to gradually lose the PEG shells as the iminobiotin–neutravidin interactions decrease in the hypoxic tumor environment, allowing the exposed PLL layer to facilitate cellular uptake, thus shifting the biodistribution of the nanoparticles towards tumor retention.82
The responsiveness of DDSs to reactive oxygen species (ROS) or reactive nitrogen species (RNS) is still barely explored. ROS such as hydrogen peroxide, superoxide or OH radicals are the main contributors to the intra- and extracellular redox potential associated with stress conditions, signaling cascades, diabetes, hypertension, atherosclerosis or cancer.83 An oxidative environment is present under inflammatory conditions, where cytokines induce the production of ROS.84,85 Typical chemical groups responsive to physiological oxidants are metallocenes, pyridyl metal complexes, polyconjugated sequences, thiols, thioethers (sulfides) and stannanes.83 Sulfur(II)-containing polymers, in the form of polysulfides, have been recently pointed out to be particularly suitable for anti-inflammatory therapy. In the presence of ROS, sulfur(II) is converted to higher oxidation states (sulfoxides or sulfones) which in turn increase the polarity of the polymer and its water solubility or swellability.86 Oxidation-responsive swellable nanoparticles have been prepared via cross-linking of poly(propylene sulfide) (PPS) and decoration with PEO chains, either by incorporation of a pre-functionalized Pluronic (PEO–PPO–PEO copolymer) during the polymerization of PPS or by adsorption of Pluronic onto the preformed particles.87 Di- and tri-block copolymers have also been prepared by combining PPS and PEO via anionic ring-opening polymerization of propylene sulfide.88
Since most tumors show heterogeneous levels of GSH and ROS depending on the tumor region or the development stage,89 a nanocarrier that responds to both intracellular GSH and ROS may enable rapid release of an antitumoral agent in any tumor tissue. To prepare such a dually-responsive carrier, the camptothecin-based topoisomerase I inhibitor 7-ethyl-10-hydroxyl-camptothecin (SN38) was conjugated to ethylene oxide oligo(ethylene glycol) (OEG), by means of a thioether linker labile to either GSH levels or highly oxidant ROS species, such as H2O2, O2˙, and OH˙, but not to NO (differentiating between tumor and inflamed tissues) (see Fig. 7). By tuning the length of the OEG chain and the nature of the thioether linker, amphiphilic conjugates capable of self-assembling into nanocapsules were obtained. In vivo studies carried out in a Bcap37 breast tumor xenograft model and a dimethylhydrazine (DMH)-induced autochthonous colon cancer model evidenced that the conjugate was better tolerated than the free drug and is significantly more efficient.90
 Fig. 7  Structure of GSH and the ROS-responsive conjugate of SN38. The conjugate self-assembled as nanocapsules that can release SN38 as a function of the concentration of GSH or H2O2.90 Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Another approach to prepare inflammation-responsive systems, which has already been tested in vivo for the treatment of uveitis, is based on lipoidal-chitosan-poly(ε-caprolactone) nanoparticles loaded with an anti-inflammatory agent. The nanoparticles were coated with a cross-linked network of hyaluronic acid, alginate and poly(acrylic acid) loaded with an antimicrobial agent.91 Sustained-release intraocular implants for the treatment of uveitis have the drawback of a continuous release of corticosteroid drugs, disregarding the inflammation status, augments the likelihood of side effects, such as cataract development or intraocular pressure elevation. Thus, inflammation-responsive implants may notably improve the safety of the treatment. The network of hyaluronic acid, alginate and poly(acrylic acid) notably alters its conformation upon binding of OH radicals, which in turn decreases the consistency of the network and accelerates the drug release. The changes were proved to be reversible and the implant exhibited on–off inflammation-responsive drug release. In vivo tests demonstrated higher levels of both indomethacin and ciprofloxacin in the posterior ocular fluid of inflamed eyes compared to normal ones. Histological analysis corroborated the success of the approach.91


2.2.3. Molecule-responsiveness and imprinted systems. 
Pathology-related markers, such as enzymes and antibodies, have been widely explored as stimuli that can enable a precise control and feed-back regulation of drug release. There is a large variety of diseases that are caused or can be detected by dysregulation of enzyme activity.92 Capthesins, plasmin, urokinase-type plasminogen activator, prostate-specific antigen, matrix metalloproteases, β-glucuronidase, and carboxylesterases are overexpressed in tumors.19 Design of enzymatically triggered DDSs relies on (i) carriers susceptible to the degradation by the corresponding enzyme, (ii) drug–polymer conjugates with linkers that serve as substrates of the enzyme, or (iii) nanoparticles having caps that can be removed by the action of the enzyme.93–96 A recent example is the development of bio-responsive delivery of tissue-type plasminogen activator (tPA) for localized thrombolysis.97 The major challenge toward developing a clot-specific delivery system for tPA is to produce immediate thrombolytic action followed by rapid vascular reperfusion. A nanocarrier was developed using tPA camouflaged with human serum albumin (HSA) via a thrombin-cleavable peptide (GFPRGFPAGGCtPA), and the surface of the albumin was decorated with a homing peptide (CQQHHLGGAKQAGDV) that binds with GPIIb/IIIa expressed on activated platelets (Fig. 8). The camouflaged construct suppressed the enzymatic activity of tPA in the systemic circulation, but regenerated its thrombolytic action upon contact with thrombin present in the thrombus. In a rat thrombosis model, camouflaged tPA showed a similar thrombolytic activity in the thrombus, but a 2-fold lower degradation of the circulating fibrinogen compared to native tPA, which reduces the risk of hemorrhagic incidence.97
 Fig. 8  (A) Construct of camouflaged tPA. The activity of tPA was masked by albumins (HSA) attached via a thrombin-cleavable peptide. (B) Targeted/triggered release action of camouflaged tPA: (i) HSA creates a steric hindrance against the systemic plasminogen and tPA-binding macromolecules in the plasma; (ii) accumulation of the complex on the thrombus surface via the targeting peptide; (iii) release of active tPA upon thrombin-mediated cleavage of the peptide linker.97 Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V. 
Alternatively, the enzyme can be incorporated into pH-responsive networks in such a way that the enzyme–substrate reaction results in the modification of the inner pH of the network. In the absence of the substrate, the network does not modify its conformation, but when the substrate concentration reaches a certain level, it reacts with the enzyme resulting in a product that modifies the local pH and, consequently, induces the network to change the degree of swelling. Once the substrate is consumed, the pH restores to the original value and the network adopts its initial degree of swelling. A proof of the interest for this type of hydrogels for drug delivery was shown for glucose-responsive insulin release from polymethacrylic acid networks containing glucose oxidase.98 The high incidence of diabetes has notably prompted the development of glucose (enzyme-based or not) biosensors that can be implanted under the skin and continuously monitor blood glucose concentrations.99,100 The biosensor can be coupled to a transdermal signal reader, in the form of a “smart tattoo”, that sends a warning signal in the case of hypo- or hyperglycemia.101 The most widely investigated fluorescence sensors are those based on glucose oxidase (e.g., CGMS Gold® first commercialized in 1999, and advanced generations, Guardian Real-Time®, Seven®, Dexcom® G4™ Platinum or Enlite™ in the market since 2005, 2006, 2012 and 2013, respectively) (Fig. 9), wired enzyme technology (e.g. FreeStyle Navigator® since 2008), the plant-sugar-binding protein concanavalin A, or boronic acid which modify its conformation and the degree of ionization in the presence of molecules containing cis-diol groups, such as glucose. It has already been shown that diboronic acid-based sensors immobilized in a biocompatible micro-scaled hydrogel can be safely implanted, and that fluorescence can be detected through the skin, precisely monitoring blood glucose concentrations for up to 140 days.102 The information about glucose levels can help the patient to undergo insulin-based treatment. Optionally, the biosensor could be coupled to a closed-loop insulin release system that can autonomously maintain blood glucose levels in the non-diabetic range.103 Development of glucose biosensors has led to a valuable gain in the knowledge on protein and cellular biofouling of implantable devices, host variables that can interfere with signal sensing, and strategies to overcome these issues. Clinical experience on long-lasting glucose biosensors is the first step towards reliable closed-loop insulin release systems.104
 Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the principles of first-, second-, and third-generation glucose sensors. Electrons from the glucose oxidation reaction are first taken up by the enzyme's cofactor (primary electron acceptor) and transferred to either oxygen (first generation), an electron mediator (second generation), or directly to the electrode (third generation).99 Copyright 2011 Diabetes Technology Society. 
Perhaps one of the first explored recognition elements coupled to responsive hydrogels was natural antibodies. IgG antigens and antibodies can be modified with polymerizable moieties to be incorporated into hydrogels during copolymerization of common monomers. The antigen–antibody binding acts as a dynamic crosslink. If the hydrogel comes into contact with free antigens, they will compete with the copolymerized antigens for the interaction with the antibodies. Dissociation of the former antigen–antibody binding results in an increase in the degree of swelling of the hydrogel. Since nowadays it is possible to prepare antibodies for almost any biomarker, reversible antigen-sensitive hydrogels appear as highly promising biomaterials for constructing self-regulated drug release systems. In the absence of the antigen of interest (i.e., the biomarker), the hydrogel does not release the drug because of high cross-linking density (thus, a low mesh size) that the internal antigen–antibody interactions communicate with the network. Oppositely, drug release starts when the antigen biomarker appears in the surrounding medium.105 A step forward in this field is the use of aptamers as components of responsive gates or valves to be inserted into DDSs.106 Aptamers are single-stranded short oligonucleotides that can be prepared to exhibit high binding selectivity and specificity for almost any kind of molecule.107 In the absence of the molecular stimulus, aptamers form metastable structures, which become disrupted when the stimulus is recognized.108 Molecular-gate-based DDSs mostly consist of nanocontainers (e.g. silica particles) with pores that can load the drug of interest and that, subsequently, are capped by a gating molecule. The gatekeeper (called aptavalve when formed by an aptamer) can be of very diverse nature in order to open or close the pores according to the variety of stimuli.109
Mesoporous silica nanoparticles have been designed to exhibit recognition to cancer cells (by means of DNA aptamers) and release of antitumor agents via responsiveness to vitamin H.110 The levels of vitamin H (also known as biotin and coenzyme R) in cancer cells are substantially larger than in normal cells and can be exploited not only for targeting, but also for triggering release.111,112 The external surface of the nanoparticles was decorated with desthiobiotin molecules and the pores capped by avidin proteins that interact with desthiobiotin (association constant, Ka, 5 × 1013 M−1). A cancer cell-specific aptamer was then attached to avidin (Fig. 10). The nanoparticles showed an enhanced capability to enter into cancer cells through receptor-mediated endocytosis. Intracellular vitamin H was strongly bound to avidin (Ka = 1 × 1015 M−1) causing the uncapping of the pores, which accelerated the drug release.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematics of a vitamin-responsive drug release process for the nanovalves. (b) Release curve for MSN–Avi–Apt with and without vitamin H addition. Data have been normalized to the maximum level of dye released in the experiment.110 Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
A different approach consists of designing synthetic networks with domains capable of mimicking the recognition features of the biological macromolecules. By applying the molecular imprinting technology it is possible to reproduce the small, but critical, part of the biomacromolecules responsible for the interaction with the target molecule.113,114 This approach pursues the creation of polymer networks with cavities (artificial receptors) that are sterically and chemically complementary to the target molecule, recognizing it with high selectivity. To do that, the substance of interest is used as a template during polymerization in order to induce an adequate arrangement of the monomers, forming complexes with some of them at an appropriate stoichiometry in a favorable solvent (Fig. 11). The arrangement is made permanent during polymerization, and finally the artificial receptors are revealed when the template is washed out.115–117 Molecularly imprinted polymers (MIPs) may be particularly suitable for affinity-regulated and activation-modulated release.8
 Fig. 11  Diagram of the synthesis of an imprinted hydrogel and the washing out/release and re-loading processes. The effect of stimuli on the conformation of the drug-receptors is also depicted. 
When a drug is used as a template, the artificial receptors created in the MIP structure selectively recognize that particular drug and rebind it strongly from a liquid medium. This enables the obtaining of high payloads. Moreover, under physiological-mimicking conditions the loaded drug is released from the MIP at a much slower rate than from the corresponding non-imprinted network. This approach has already been shown to be very useful for the in vivo sustained release of ophthalmic drugs from imprinted soft contact lenses.118 For example, timolol-imprinted ultrathin N,N-diethylacrylamide-based lenses (34 μg of drug per lens) displayed the maximum ocular level of timolol in the lachrymal fluid 5 min after wearing, followed by a monoexponential decay which was prolonged for 180 min, compared to the 90 min for the non-imprinted contact lenses (20 μg of drug per lens) and the 30 min for eyedrops (Fig. 12). The imprinted lenses showed 3.3-fold and 8.7-fold higher area under the timolol concentration–time curve than the non-imprinted ones and eyedrops, respectively.119 Imprinted contact lenses have also been shown to reduce the precorneal elimination of other drugs, such as ketotifen fumarate,120 compared to the eyedrops and, as a consequence, much a smaller amount of drug is needed to achieve and prolong the duration of the desired therapeutic levels.
 Fig. 12  Timolol tear fluid concentration–time profiles after application of drug-loaded imprinted and non-imprinted contact lenses or instillation of eyedrops in rabbit eyes. The doses were 34 μg for imprinted contact lens (solid squares), 21 μg for non-imprinted contact lens (open squares), and 34 μg (open circles) and 125 μg (solid circles) when 0.068% or 0.25% timolol eyedrops were instilled. Each point represents the mean ± S.D. (n = 3–5).119 Copyright 2005 Elsevier B.V. 
MIPs have also been tested as a way to endow tablets with molecular responsiveness. The tablets were prepared via compression of alternating layers of MIP microparticles and the drug. In the absence of the template biomarker, no release occurs. When the biomarker appears in the medium, it is captured by the MIP particles, which in turn causes disruption of the MIP layer and exposes the drug layer to the medium. This enables the release of the drug until that the underlying MIP layer is exposed. Then, depending on the level of the biomarker, whether the MIP layer is disrupted or not, the drug release is switched on or off.121
Regarding nano-sized MIP particles for systemic administration, detailed in vivo studies have so far focused on their use as traps with the ability to recognize melittin, a cytolytic peptide that is the principal component of bee venom.122,123 A library of tailored multifunctional copolymer nanoparticles was systematically investigated to elucidate the effect of the composition (hydrophobicity and charge) and the size of the particles on their binding affinity and capacity. MIP particles (50 nm diameter) with a higher affinity for melittin were those prepared with N-isopropylacrylamide cross-linked with N,N′-methylenebisacrylamide, and using as functional monomers N-t-butylacrylamide (hydrophobic) and acrylic acid (negatively charged). The most suitable ones were then investigated regarding stability, toxicity, distribution, and capability to neutralize melittin's toxicity in vivo (Fig. 13). Mice were intravascularly injected with melittin (0.3–4.5 mg kg−1) and after 20 seconds they were injected with MIPs. A 100 percent mortality rate was observed in mice that were not treated with MIPs (8 animals). By contrast, those treated with the most efficient and less cytotoxic particles (10–30 mg kg−1) in vitro led to a significant decrease in mortality (2 out of 8 animals) and notably alleviate the peritoneal inflammation and weight loss caused by melittin. This indicates that while in the bloodstream, MIP traps specifically recognized melittin and neutralized its activity. These findings clearly evidence that a rational design of MIPs may help to preserve in vivo the affinity and selectivity of the nanoparticles when used either as drug suppliers or as detoxifying agents, avoiding deleterious effects of protein adsorption and immunogenicity.
 Fig. 13  Biodistribution of melittin and MIP traps according to fluorescent images of Cy5-melittin after intravenous injection (1 mg kg−1). MIP traps (27 mg kg−1) were injected 20 s after the injection of melittin. Controls did not receive the MIP nanoparticles. The fluorescent intensity of Cy5-melittin diminished immediately after administration of MIP traps. Ex vivo results showed that Cy5-melittin accumulated in the liver with a dose dependence on the amount of MIP nanoparticles administered.122 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Preparation of stimuli-responsive imprinted networks requires memorization of the structure of the artificial receptors after several swelling–collapse cycles.124,125 To do that, the MIP is synthesized in the presence of the template in a conformation that corresponds to the global minimum energy. The imprinted cavities develop affinity for the template molecules when the functional monomers come into proximity, but when they are separated, the affinity diminishes. The proximity is controlled by the reversible phase transition of the network that consequently controls the adsorption/release of the template (Fig. 11). For example, hydrogels imprinted for doxorubicin and capable of pH-responsive release have been recently prepared maximizing the interactions between the drug and the functional monomer 4-vinyl pyridine via coordination with Cu2+ ions. The MIP reloaded 2.7-fold more drug than the corresponding non-imprinted polymer, and released the drug faster at pH 5.0 than at pH 7.2.126 Temperature-responsive nanogels have also been shown as suitable platforms for switchable loading and release of proteins, as the volume phase transition notably alters the size of the imprinted cavities and, consequently, their ability to host the template protein. Interestingly, dually- and even multiresponsive MIPs have been recently investigated (Fig. 14).127 Magnetic and temperature-,128,129 magnetic and photo-,130 photo and temperature-,131 temperature and salt-,132 and photo, temperature and pH-126 responsive MIPs have been shown to exhibit activatable and reversible molecular recognition.
 Fig. 14  Schematic protocol for the preparation of narrowly dispersed water-compatible MIP microspheres with photo-, thermo- and pH-responsive template binding properties by successive RAFT polymerization.127 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.2.4. Temperature. 
Body temperature is maintained in a short range of values under healthy conditions. Fever is associated with pyrogenic substances during microorganism infections, although there are several other pathological conditions (such as inflammation, infarction, or tumor) that evolve with local increments of temperature.133 A focalized increase in temperature can be achieved by means of external sources of heat that can be applied on the skin or can be remotely induced via irradiation of metals in the DDS that transform the energy into heat.
Temperature-responsive DDSs are based on components that modify their affinity for water as a function of temperature, which in turn causes the swelling or shrinking of the network.45 There is a large list of polymers that exhibit critical solubility temperature (CST).134,135 Poly-N-isopropylacrylamide (PNIPAAm), poly-N,N-diethylacrylamide, poly(methyl vinyl ether) (PMVE), poly-N-vinylcaprolactam (PVCL) and poly(ethylene oxide)–poly(propylene oxide) (PEO–PPO) block copolymers have been widely explored as components of temperature-responsive DDSs because their CST is near the body temperature or can be easily tuned with minor changes in composition.136,137 Natural polysaccharides and linear polypeptides may also provide temperature-responsiveness.138 For example, homopolypeptides made of a single amino acid type have a well-defined collapse temperature: 24 °C for valine, 40 °C for proline, 45 °C for alanine, and 55 °C for glycine.139,140 A combination of various amino acids renders “elastin-like polypeptides” with tunable CST.141
Micellization–demicellization cycles due to changes in temperature and pH have been reported for poly(2-diethylaminoethyl-methyl methacrylate)-poly(ethylene oxide)-poly(propylene oxide)-poly(ethylene oxide)-poly(2-diethylaminoethyl-methyl methacrylate) (PDEAEM25-PEO100-PPO65-PEO100-PDEAEM25),142 NIPAAm, N,N-dimethylacrylamide and N-acryloylvaline.143 Similarly, polymersomes consisting of poly(ε-caprolactone) and PNIPAAm have shown reversible disintegration in response to tiny changes in temperature.144 In the case of cross-linked networks, the magnitude, rate and hysteresis of the responsiveness are strongly dependent on the overall size of the network and its porosity.145 Lipid-based liquid crystals, which are prepared using amphiphilic lipids that spontaneously self-assemble into ordered structures upon exposure to excess water, have also been proposed as temperature-responsive DDSs owing to their ability to undergo transitions from an inverse bicontinuous cubic phase (Q2) to an inverse hexagonal phase (H2) when temperature increases.146
Temperature-sensitive liposome formulation ThermoDox® is perhaps the smart DDS that has been more clinically evaluated so far. There are already several liposomal formulations of anticancer drugs in the market, which showed an improved safety profile compared to free drug solutions. However, drug bioavailability at tumor is still quite low due to a slow release from the liposomes, which in turn leads to insufficient improvement in therapeutic activity.147 ThermoDox® is intended for passive targeting of doxorubicin towards tumor tissues and to deliver the payload in the microvasculature of the tumor when an external source of heating is applied. It should be noted that mild hyperthermia has been safely applied in oncology for decades.148 The formulation comprises an encapsulating solid phase membrane (dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine, DPPC) capable of undergoing solid–liquid phase transition at 41.5 °C, a permeabilizing component (monostearoylphosphatidylcholine, MSPC) embedded in the bilayer and that can induce thermally-enhanced permeability to small molecules and ions, an encapsulated drug (e.g. doxorubicin) that crystallizes in the liposome interior, and a protective PEG-layer (distearoylphosphatidyl ethanolamine-PEG2000) that avoids opsonization and ensures long circulation half-life.149 ThermoDox® design followed a reverse engineering process (Fig. 15), which has been kindly disclosed and may be an useful tool for further improvements and new developments.150 Thus, starting from a clear idea of what has to be made or achieved, the task begins with the Performance in service step151 and uses an already existing product as a model (e.g. red blood cells as encapsulating entities), the iterative scheme tries to answer a sequence of questions that may be useful for the design of new prototypes or further innovations (e.g. liposomes for drug delivery).
 Fig. 15  The nine steps of the design methodology scheme. The numbers represent the sequence for ‘reverse engineering’, i.e., starting at (1), with an evaluation of the design's performance-in-service. The key questions when analyzing a design can be linked to these steps as follows: What is it for? (2); How should it work? (3); What is it made of? (4); What are the characteristics of the material? (5); How is it made? (7); Has anybody made something similar? (8); Does it really work? (1).151 Copyright 2006 Elsevier B.V. 
Although it has long been known that tumor vasculature can be hyperpermeable and that colloidal carriers may extravasate and accumulate within the tumor tissue (EPR effect),152 the leakiness is locally heterogeneous or even absent in most spontaneous tumors.153 Even if liposomes extravasate, the poor blood supply and high interstitial fluid pressure of the tumor together with the liposome diameter larger than the inter-fiber distance in the extracellular matrix (ECM) would make liposomes to remain trapped in the peri-vasculature space for weeks.154 As lipids would be degraded, the drug could diffuse along the most dominant concentration gradient. Since the concentration in blood would be virtually zero, much of the drug might be reabsorbed in the blood stream, in the opposite direction to tumor penetration. In the case of ThermoDox®, this problem has been addressed by means of local hyperthermia (for 1 h at 42 °C), which increases the size of the endothelial junctions and leads to up to 13-fold increase in liposome accumulation in the tumor.22 Moreover, drug release can be triggered from the temperature-responsive liposomes when they are still in the blood stream of the warmed tumor in order that the drug can readily diffuse throughout the neoplasm, deeply penetrate the whole cancer tissue, cross cell membranes and arrive at its target (i.e., the DNA and RNA of all cells in the tumor) (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Combining hyperthermia and temperature-sensitive liposomes tumor-specific accumulation of drugs can be achieved. The EPR effect provides only limited access to large liposomes (picture on the left); hyperthermia can make the blood vessels more leaky and facilitates interstitial movement of liposomes and drugs (in the middle); ThermoDox® does not need to extravasate, it can release the drug in the blood stream of the warmed tumor and the drug can readily diffuse throughout the neoplasm (on the right).22 Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
ThermoDox® has been tested in a Phase III clinical trial in liver cancer (HEAT study), a Phase II trial in chest wall recurrence of cancer (DIGNITY study), and a Phase II trial of patients with colorectal liver metastases (ABLATE study).155 This formulation has also been shown to be safe and efficient against widely disseminated chest wall tumors, and is currently being evaluated for a range of other drugs, imaging agents and biological modifiers using high frequency ultrasound as a heating modality. The protocol of preheating/heating of the tumor, as well as the time during which the formulation is infused appear as critical issues for efficient results.150,156 By applying similar formulation and heating protocols, other heat-activated thermosensitive liposomes have been designed to release approximately 90% of the loaded cisplatin in less than 5 min under mild heating conditions (42 °C) for the treatment of cervical cancer.157


2.2.5. Light. 
Light-responsive DDSs have attracted much attention as a way to take advantage of either the daily and seasonal exposure to natural solar irradiation or artificial sources of electromagnetic radiation of very specific wavelengths in the range from 2500 to 380 nm. Ultraviolet (UV) and visible light can trigger drug release from formulations placed on the skin or that circulate through blood vessels close to the body surface (e.g. eye structures). The development of these responsive DDSs can notably benefit from the knowledge about already commercialized photodynamic therapy-based treatments. For example, an intravenous nonPEGylated liposome formulation of photosensitizer verteporfin (Visudyne®) is commonly used for the treatment of subfoveal choroidal neovascularization due to age-related macular degeneration, pathologic myopia, and ocular histoplasmosis. Fifteen minutes after perfusion onset, red-light laser is applied for 83 s on one or both the eyes to make the drug cytotoxic.158 Similarly, photodynamic therapy using photosensitizers encapsulated in adequate nanocarriers can be used for cancer therapy.159
Biomimetic visible-light responsive hydrogels have been prepared by adding chlorophyll (the natural light absorbent of plants) into a PNIPAAm network.160 Nevertheless, UV-vis light-responsiveness is most commonly achieved by means of photoactive groups, such as azobenzene, cinnamoyl, spirobenzopyran or triphenylmethane.161 For example, the trans–cis isomerisation of the azobenzene chromophore that occurs upon exposure to UV light is accompanied by an increase in the hydrophilicity, which can lead to the disassembly of polymeric micelles, liposomes or complexes with cyclodextrins.162,163 Based on the performance of azobenzene groups, rotaxane-functionalized mesoporous silica nanoparticles have been shown to be suitable for in vivo remote-controlled drug release on wild-type, optically transparent zebrafish larvae. The pores of the nanoparticles were decorated with chains of triazole/ethylene glycol bearing an azobenzene unit at the end and loaded with curcumin for the treatment of heart failure (Fig. 17). α-Cyclodextrin can thread along the azobenzene group. Upon irradiation with 365 nm UV light, the trans-to-cis isomerization of the azobenzene group pushes α-cyclodextrin towards the entrance of the pores, hindering the exit of the drug molecules. The cis-to-trans isomerization upon exposure to visible light or heating enables the movement of α-cyclodextrin to the end of the chain, resulting in the opening of the pores and the release of curcumin.164
 Fig. 17  A graphical representation of the injection of drug-loaded mesoporous silica nanoparticles into zebrafish larvae for in vivo drug delivery, triggered by either heating or visible light irradiation. The nanoparticles were functionalized with photothermal-responsive [2]rotaxanes on the surface. The chemical structure of the [2]rotaxane containing the α-CD ring and azobenzene unit is shown.164 Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Near infrared (NIR) radiation can penetrate deeper into the body and switch drug release on and off at a very focalized site of a tissue.161 In this context, near-infrared fluorescent core–shell silica-based nanoparticles (known as Cornell dots or C dots) have been recently approved by FDA for human stage I molecular imaging of cancer.165 C dots (6–8 nm enclosing several dye molecules) coated with PEG avoid adsorption of serum proteins and are efficiently cleared from the body by the kidneys. The nanoparticles can also be decorated with ligands for selective sticking to tumor cells. When exposed to NIR radiation, the dots fluoresce much brighter than the unencapsulated dye enabling an overall visualization of tumor cells and blood vessels, and even metastatic spread to lymph nodes and distant organs.166 For the human trials, dots labeled with radioactive iodine can be visible in PET scans to investigate how many dots are taken up by tumors and where else in the body they go and for how long. Such information will be very valuable for designing efficient NIR-triggered release silica nanoparticles.
Gold-containing DDSs are particularly suitable for combination of thermal ablation and chemotherapy for the management of tumors.167,168 Under NIR irradiation, the unique surface plasmon resonance (SPR) of gold nanoparticles causes a local increase of several degrees above body temperature. This feature is being exploited by AuroShell® formulations already in the Phase I trial for solid tumor hyperthermia. After intravenous injection, the nanoparticles are irradiated with fiberoptic laser to provide high temperature to the tumor area.169 Moreover, the surface of gold nanoparticles is very suitable for conjugation of drugs, oligonucleotides and peptides and, therefore, gold nanoparticles serve as adequate platforms for DDSs activatable by external or internal stimuli.170 Light-responsive release can be attained by conjugating drugs via photo-cleavable bonds.171 It can also be achieved by exploiting the changes that hyperthermia may induce in the shape of the nanoparticles, which affects the binding of biomolecules conjugated to their surface,172 or the degree of swelling of temperature-responsive polymers.173 For example, NIR-triggered release was reported for poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid) (PLGA) matrix particles containing doxorubicin and covered with a gold over-layer. Upon irradiation with NIR light, doxorubicin was abruptly released leading to high cancer cell toxicity, while the increase in temperature caused tissue ablation.174 Similarly, PEGylated polyamidoamine (PAMAM) dendrimers have been developed to integrate gold nanoparticles for photothermal therapy, with high payloads of chemotherapy agents in a hydrophobic inner space.175
In a related field, the therapeutic potential of using X-ray radiation as stimulus is also being evaluated. Nanoparticles excitable by X-rays, such as NanoXray products from Nanobiotix in the Phase I trial, aim to amplify the dose of radiation delivered to the tumor without increasing it in healthy tissues.176 Nanoparticles with a core of hafnium crystals can be directly injected into the tumor (NBTXR3 product) or intravenously for advanced stage tumors that have invaded the surrounding lymph nodes (NBTXIV product). Recently developed NBTX-TOPO product is a hafnium-containing gel designed for direct application to the tumor bed, i.e., the cavity left following the surgical removal of a tumor. Hafnium nanoparticles are radio-opaque to X-rays, which enable a precise visualization of the tumor bed, and simultaneously when excited by X-rays the nanoparticles emit very large quantities of electrons, thereby considerably amplifying the dose of energy in the tumor.177 This product could form part of the standard procedure to prepare a site for post-operative radiotherapy for destroying residual cancer cells and might be combined with drugs in the future.


2.2.6. Electrical field. 
Equipment developed for transdermal delivery can be easily adapted as a source of precisely regulated electrical stimuli for responsive DDSs. Electrically-sensitive networks can be made of polyelectrolytes with a high density in ionizable groups, similar to those used for preparing pH-responsive systems.178 These networks can be administered in the form of injectable drug-loaded microparticles or implants for subcutaneous insertion. An electro-conducting patch should be placed on the skin over the implantation site. When the battery is on, the movement of the protons to the cathode causes a change in pH near the electrodes that makes the network to shrink. Then, drug release occurs via squeezing. When the electrical field is switched off, the hydrogel swells again. Thus, by tuning the intensity of the electrical field and the time the current is applied, it is possible to regulate drug release rate and duration.
Intrinsically conducting polymers (ICPs) may offer advanced performances. ICPs, such as polypyrrole or polyanaline, possess the electrical, electronic, magnetic, and optical properties of a metal, and the versatility of biomedical processing of a polymer. The electrical conductivity is due to the uninterrupted and ordered π-conjugated backbone.179 ICPs are electrochemically formed as a continuous film on the surface of a working electrode. The formed polymer is in the oxidised form with positive charges distributed along the backbone, which are balanced by anionic dopant molecules. Drugs can be loaded either during film formation or in a subsequent step. When the current is applied, the ICP undergoes reversible redox reactions that alter the electrostatic forces and the degree of swelling of the film. Changes in the polymer from positive to neutral state favour the release of anionic drugs, but the uptake of cationic ones. These changes in the polymer charge are balanced with the movement of solvated ions in and/or out of the polymer, which in turn leads to swelling or collapse of the film and may enable pulsatile drug release.180 ICPs can be prepared as components of microchips,181 microneedles,182 transdermal devices,183 and microelectrodes.184 For example, ICPs have been shown to be useful as coatings of cochlear implants used to provide auditory perception to profoundly deaf individuals, by electrically stimulating spiral ganglion neurons (SGNs) via an electrode array implanted into the scala tympani of the cochlea. Nevertheless, the loss of hair cells, which is responsible for the sensorineural hearing loss and may lead to secondary degeneration and apoptosis of SGNs, is exacerbated by the cochlear implant itself due to the continuous electrical discharge. To overcome this problem, the electrode array has been coated with a layer of polypyrrole containing therapeutic neutrophins with the ability to prevent the loss of SGNs. The ICP-coated electrode array can provide activation of central auditory pathways and, at the same time, the electrical stimulation increases the release of the neutrophins to the SGNs.184 Incorporation of para-toluene sulphonate as an ICP dopant notably enhanced both the compatibility of the electrode with the primary auditory nerve tissue and its ability to release sufficient amounts of neurotrophic proteins.185 The localised release of two neurotrophins (BDNF and NT-3) has been shown to exert a synergistic effect on neurite outgrowth (Fig. 18).186
 Fig. 18  Images of cochlear neural explants grown on polypyrrole (PPy)–p-toluene sulphonic acid sodium salt (pTS) coatings with and without neurotrophins. Neurites were visualised by immunocytochemistry using a neurofilament-200 primary antibody and a fluorescent secondary antibody (green). Cell nuclei are labelled with DAPI (blue). Neurotrophins increased the number of sprouting neurites, particularly under electrical stimulation because of the faster release (8.3 ng per cm2 per day vs. 2.80 ng per cm2 per day) from the coatings. Scale bar is 200 μm.186 Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. 


2.2.7. Magnetic field. 
A variety of magnetic nanoparticles, mostly based on magnetite and maghemite, are already in the market as contrast agents for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).187 An intensive investigation has been carried out to endow the nanoparticles with physical and chemical stability as well as a long circulation time for MRI of cancer. For such a purpose, monodispersed particles of ca. 30 nm behave as very suitable contrast agents, but they tend to aggregate. To overcome this problem, clustering of multiple nanoparticles using an adequate dispersing agent leads to high MR contrast effects. The resultant colloidal suspensions are known as ferrofluids.188 These superparamagnetic nanoparticles can further integrate optically detectable fluorophores for providing morphological and functional information of the tumor,189 and therapeutic molecules to be delivered at the pathological tissue190,191 (Fig. 19). Different from other responsive systems that do not allow by themselves tissue guidance, drug carriers bearing magnetic particles can be concentrated in a specific region by applying high-gradient magnetic fields. This enables a high local concentration even though the total injected dose is low. The drug can be released while an alternating magnetic field is on, leading to site-specific treatment.192
 Fig. 19  Magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications: imaging and diagnosis, therapy, and guidance.190 Copyright 2007 Elsevier B.V. 
Magnetic nanoparticles rotate when exposed to a large alternating magnetic field, and the heat equivalent to the magnetic loss dissipates into the surrounding tissues.187 Heating in the 46–56 °C range causes thermoablation by direct cell necrosis, while an increase in temperature up to 41–45 °C activates signaling pathways that may result in apoptosis.193 This last modality has already been approved as an adjunct to other treatment modalities, such as surgery, chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Compared to other heating resources (microwaves, radio frequency, ultrasound, and lasers), magnetic hyperthermia can deliver high heat energy into deeply situated tumors without heat loss to the healthy ones. There is already one product in the market (NanoTherm®) and several others are in the pre-clinical phase.25 As an example, the ferrofluid NanoTherm® is formed by water-dispersable nanoparticles of 15 nm diameter that contain an iron oxide core with an aminosaline coating.194 The nanoparticles can be dispensed with a syringe and, due to their core–shell structure, remain in the tumor tissue as a stable depot. Using an adequate alternating magnetic field applicator and therapy planning software, it is possible to estimate/monitor the temperature distribution inside the tumor, to regulate the necessary magnetic field strength, and to repeat the heat treatment several times until a complete eradication of the tumor. This product has got approval for treatment of glioblastoma, and it is in Phase I trial for prostate and pancreatic carcinoma.195
The gain in knowledge about the handling of superparamagnetic nanoparticles in patients is paving the way to the clinical evaluation of some of the numerous theranostic prototypes described in the literature.196 Drug-loaded superparamagnetic nanoparticles have already demonstrated synergistic therapeutic effects. A variety of designs have been implemented to prepare drug-loaded superparamagnetic DDSs.192 Core–shell nanoparticles consist of a core of magnetic iron oxide and a shell of a polymer (dextran, PLGA, or PVA) and/or a nonpolymer (silica or metal), with the drug covalently attached to the surface or entrapped or adsorbed within the pores of the magnetic carrier.197,198 Nanocapsules can be prepared by encapsulating the drug and the superparamagnetic particles into lipid bilayers or mesoporous silica nanoparticles, which have to be endowed with stealth features.199–201 A small increase in temperature can be exploited to trigger reversible pulsatile drug squeezing from temperature-responsive networks, while a strong increase may lead to carrier disintegration and subsequent rapid drug release.135


2.2.8. Ultrasound. 
Ultrasound can be applied to the body, using a common physiotherapy equipment, to facilitate the penetration of nanostructures into specific regions and to trigger drug release, while efficiently monitoring the therapy.202,203 Compared to other external stimuli, low-frequency ultrasound can penetrate several centimeters into the body with very low scattering. Cavitation (i.e., oscillations accompanied by expansion and contraction) can cause disassembly of polymeric micelles and polymersomes (Fig. 20),204,205 and disruption of networks or liposomes containing gas-filled microbubbles.206 There is already a list of commercially available microbubble-based contrast agents clinically used in ultrasound imaging and that can be easily adapted to perform as ultrasound-responsive DDSs.207 These systems enable visualization of drug-loaded microbubbles with low acoustic pressures, protection of biopharmaceuticals such as proteins and nucleic acids against premature degradation, targeted delivery to the tissue exposed to ultrasound, and enhanced uptake by cells via sonoporation. As a recent example, ultrasound-triggered release of an acidic fibroblast growth factor from heparin-modified microbubbles has been proved to be useful for treatment of ischemic heart tissues. This formulation markedly stimulated neogenesis in myocardial vessels, resulting in significant improvement of both regional and global contractile functions in the myocardium.208
 Fig. 20  Expanding shockwave from a collapse cavitation event causes mechanical disruption of micelles. The compressional shock wave is thought to transiently shear open micelles, thus releasing their contents.205 Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The large size of microbubbles (1–10 μm) restricts their application to cardiovascular targets and tumor endothelium. Ultrasound-responsive nanocarriers (mainly, polymeric micelles) and nanobubble-containing liposomes enable deeper tissue penetration.209,210 Ultrasound-triggered release from intravenously injected polymeric micelles has been tested for a pulsatile drug delivery in tumors. The ultrasounds are applied when the maximum micelle accumulation in the tumor is reached; namely between 4 and 8 hours for doxorubicin-loaded Pluronic P-105 polymeric micelles or PEO-diacylphospholipid mixed micelles. The amount of drug released can be modulated by tuning the frequency, the power density, the pulse length and the inter-pulse intervals.211,212 Drug release from the micelles is reversible; i.e., during inter-pulse intervals exceeding 0.5 s, the drug can be completely re-encapsulated into the restored micelles. Ultrasound has also been shown to be suitable for site-specific release of tPA for localized thrombolysis, as an alternative approach to that described in Section 2.2.3. Encapsulation of tPA in gelatin–PEG nanoparticles suppressed the enzymatic activity to 45% that of free tPA. After intravenous injection, exposure of the nanoparticles to ultrasound led to a complete recovery of tPA activity and, as a consequence, to full blood recanalization.213
While still the effects of ultrasound on cell apoptosis and genotoxicity should be elucidated,214 other barriers to the clinical use of ultrasound-responsive DDSs and theranostic systems are being solved.207,215 For example, attenuation of ultrasound by the bone can be overcome by combining modern imaging methods, which makes it possible to deliver drugs through the intact skull towards target regions in the brain.216


2.2.9. Autonomous responsiveness. 
Advanced stimuli-responsive hydrogels can be prepared in such a way that they combine in a single entity the responsive network and the stimulus. The stimulus is periodically generated inside the network enabling a rhythmic reversible phase transition. The autonomously responsive networks may be useful to mimic the pulsatile circadian levels of certain hormones.217
Chemical oscillating reactions in which large changes in pH occur are mainly based on the Belousov–Zhabotinsky reaction that involves the oxidation and reduction of salts such as permanganates, iodates, sulfates, chlorates or bromates.218 Poly(2-acrylamido-2-methyl-1-propane-sulfonic acid), as well as other sulfonic acid polymers, can also undergo chemical oscillating reactions.219 Similar reactions have been shown to be useful for inducing the self-oscillation of temperature-responsive networks.220 To be useful in drug delivery, the hydrogel has to be designed in such a way that the time required for the drug to diffuse out is shorter than the oscillation period.
Networks made of polyelectrolytes of different charge, or that combine a polyelectrolyte and a temperature-responsive polymer and/or a grafted enzyme can undergo autonomous oscillations due to positive and negative feedbacks that forbid the system from reaching a stationary state.221 For example, a pH oscillator that modulates the ionization state of a model drug, benzoic acid, has been shown to regulate the permeation of the drug through a lipophilic membrane. The swelling of a poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-methacrylic acid) hydrogel membrane was coupled to an enzymatic reaction (involving glucose oxidase, catalase, and gluconolactonase), in such a way that the hydrogel controlled the access of the substrate to the enzyme, and the product of the enzyme reaction controlled the hydrogel swelling. This system has been shown to be useful for delivery of gonadotropin releasing hormone (GnRH) in rhythmic pulses, with a periodicity similar to that observed in sexually mature adult humans.

3. Smart drug-eluting medical devices
An additional field of application of smart materials is that of the drug-eluting medical devices, which is a particular group of combo products known as drug-enhanced devices.222 Integration in a single entity of the drug and the medical device can provide synergistic outcomes: (i) the drug can regulate the response of the body to the device, minimizing the foreign-body reactions and biofouling, and can also prevent the adhesion of microorganisms, preventing biofilm formation and (ii) the device may serve as a platform for the release of the drug to tissues hardly accessible otherwise, with an improved therapeutic efficacy compared to the systemic release. Consequently, device-related complications that are refractory to conventional systemic drug administration can be successfully overcome by the local release, whereas the efficacy and safety of the treatment, as well as its cost-effectiveness, are improved. A well-known example of drug-eluting medical devices is that of already commercially available medicated stents.223
The approaches for preparing drug-eluting medical devices can be categorized into two large groups: (i) those that enable the incorporation of the drug into the bulk of the medical device, during its fabrication (compounding) or in a latter step (presoaking) and (ii) those that incorporate the drug into the outer layers of the device by means of coating procedures, covalent binding or weak chemical interactions.16,224,225 The second approach avoids structural changes caused by the compounding with the drug, and provides greater payloads than pre-soaking. Surface functionalization of medical devices with stimuli-responsive brushes, networks or layers suitable for hosting and release the drugs during the time the device is inserted/implanted in the body is gaining increasing attention.226,227
The usefulness of grafting of responsive hydrogels to solid substrates has already been demonstrated in the field of cell culture and artificial tissues.228,229 A directly related approach is the use of silicon nanowires with both pH- and glucose-responsive surfaces for reversible capture of cancer cells, without altering their viability.230 Interestingly, device surfaces can be decorated with a switchable capability to attract, kill and release bacteria by means of nanopatterned, thermoresponsive PNIPAAm brushes and biocidal quaternary ammonium salts (Fig. 21). Above the LCST (e.g. body temperature), bacteria can adhere to the surface and become exposed to the biocidal agent. Below the LCST (e.g. cleaning temperature), swelling of PNIPAAm brushes promote the release of dead bacteria.231
 Fig. 21  Nanopatterned surfaces combining PNIPAAm chains and the biocidal quaternary ammonium salt. Above the LCST, the collapsed and hydrophobic PNIPAAm chains permit attachment of Escherichia coli K12, while simultaneously exposing the biocidal agent. Upon reduction in the temperature below the LCST, the hydration and swelling of PNIPAAm chains occur releasing the dead bacteria due to mild shearing.231 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
As an alternative to chemical grafting, layer-by-layer coating of solid surfaces may enable temporal protection of the device, the layer components being degradable or eliminable.52 For example, this technique has been shown to be suitable for the loading of the enzyme dispersin B, which happened to be useful to inhibit biofilm formation by two clinical strains of Staphylococcus epidermidis.232
Regarding drug release, several architectures have been tested.226 Grafting of block copolymers leads to an inner layer that acts as a reservoir for guest molecules and a stimuli-responsive layer on top that can close or open the compartment where the drug is hosted. Triple-responsive temperature, pH and light wavelength release were observed for devices grafted with PNIPAAm and poly(4,5-dimethoxy-2-nitrobenzyl methacrylate) (Fig. 22).233
 Fig. 22  Surface-grafted diblock copolymer brushes with a top layer with the abilty to switch between collapsed and extended chains in response to temperature, pH or light.233 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. 
Surface grafting of temperature- and pH-responsive polymers onto polypropylene (PP) and polyethylene (PE) has been shown to be suitable for preparing vancomycin-eluting devices.234–236 PP and PE surfaces were modified with a hydrogel layer containing chemical groups with affinities for those of the drug and with switchable control of drug diffusion in (loading) and out (release) of the hydrogel. Interpenetrating networks of PNIPAAm and poly(acrylic acid) were swollen at temperature below LCST and/or at neutral pH. Swelling facilitated the contact of the drug with the acrylic acid groups. At 37 °C the grafted network was capable of controlling drug release rate by the concomitance of the affinity of poly(acrylic acid) and the hindering of the diffusion through the collapsed PNIPAAm mesh. Microbiological tests demonstrated that the vancomycin-loaded devices have a small likelihood of biofilm formation by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus.234 Grafting of poly(acrylic acid) networks from Prolene® sutures has been proved to be useful for controlled release of vancomycin.237 On the other hand, fungi-responsive release of antifungal agents has been recently demonstrated for devices grafted with ergosterol, which can mimic the interactions of the fungi cell membrane with the antifungal agents.238
4. Conclusions and a view to the future
Pharmaceutical and bio-related industries are undergoing a notable transformation. The last few decades of the 20th century have witnessed the success of blockbusters based on small synthetic drugs useful for treatment of pathologies affecting large groups of population, mostly in the form of sustained release systems. However, the everyday more strict requirements of quality and safety imposed by regulatory agencies, the restrictions to the health-related expenses applied by most governments and private insurance companies, the raising of the generic market, and the increasing education of people regarding medicines (the Internet has popularized therapeutic concepts and keeps people alert about novel discoveries) have driven the companies to focus the R&D efforts on more specialized treatments for specific patients groups with unmet needs.239 In this new context, target nanocarriers, smart DDSs and theranostic systems appear to be excellent tools to pursue personalized medicine.240 In particular, stimuli-responsiveness may help to overcome some barriers that the current passive and active targeting strategies have to face (mostly related to heterogeneity of pathophysiological properties of target tissues).
The literature on smart DDSs is exponentially increasing and the variety of stimuli-responsive materials already described is amazing. The information about the performance in vivo, although still limited, highlights the role smart DDSs are known to play in the clinic (as summarized in Table 1). However, extrapolation of the behaviour from animal models to humans is not easy. Most studies focus on the local administration to small animals, which have significantly different pathologies, physiologies, anatomies, immune systems and host responses to the materials compared to humans.42 The possibilities of curing cancer in rodents using smart DDSs have already been demonstrated in hundreds of papers. By contrast, just a few of those systems have entered into clinical phases yet.
Table 1 Some medicines based on stimuli-responsive components that are in clinical trials or already commercialized. Biosensors useful for biomarker control and some formulations that have shown outstanding results in vivo are also included




Product
Stimuli
Structure
Clinical status
Ref.




Opaxio™
Tumor enzyme
Paclitaxel poligumex
Approved orphan drug for glioblastoma multiforme

21



Trastuzumab-DM1
GSH concentration
Antibody–drug conjugate
Phase II/III in breast cancer

78



Maytansine
GSH concentration
Antibody–drug conjugate
Phase II/III in multiple myeloma

79



Nanocapsule prototype
Dually responsive to GSH and ROS
Camptothecin-based topoisomerase I inhibitor conjugated to nanocapsules

In vivo tests with breast tumor xenograft models and autochthonous colon cancer models

89 and 90



Implant prototype for antinflammatory release
OH˙ radicals
Lipoidal-chitosan-poly(ε-caprolactone) nanoparticles coated with hyaluronic acid, alginate and poly(acrylic acid)
Intraocular tests in the rabbit model of uveitis

91



Nanocarrier prototype for tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)
Thrombin in the clot
tPA camouflaged with human serum albumin via a thrombin-cleavable peptide, and coated with a homing peptide that binds with GPIIb/IIIa expressed on activated platelets
Rat thrombosis model

97



Glucose biosensors Guardian Real-Time®, Seven®, Dexcom® G4™ Platinum, or Enlite™, FreeStyle Navigator®
Glucose concentration
Glucose oxidase enzyme coupled to other enzymes and transducers for continuous monitoring of glucose levels and regulation of insulin release from pumps
Approved, commercially available implantable biosensors

99 and 100



Nanoparticles as traps of bee venom
Melittin
Imprinted nanocarrier that selectively captures melittin in the bloodstream
Mice models

122 and 123



ThermoDox®
Temperature (external source)
DPPC-based liposomes for tumor-specific release of doxorubicin
Phase III in liver cancer, Phase II in chest wall recurrence of cancer, colorectal liver metastases, lung cancer and bone metastases

22, 149 and 150



Visudyne®
UV light
NonPEGylated liposome formulation of photosensitizer verteporfin
Approved, commercially available injectable solution

158



Rotaxane-functionalized mesoporous silica nanoparticles
UV light
Nanoparticles with pores capped with chains of triazole/ethylene glycol and an azobenzene unit that interact with α-cyclodextrin
Wild-type zebrafish larvae

164



Cornell dots (C dots)
Near infrared radiation
Fluorescent core–shell silica-based nanoparticles
Approved for human stage I molecular imaging of cancer

165 and 166



AuroShell®
Near infrared radiation
Gold nanoparticles for solid tumor hyperthermia
Phase I solid tumors

169



NanoXray products
X-rays
Hafnium crystals that amplify the dose of radiation delivered to the tumor
Phase I

176 and 177



Cochlear implants coated with ICPs
Electrical stimulus
Coatings of intrinsically conducting polymers that switch neurotrophin release on and off
Animal models

184–186



NanoTherm®
Magnetic field
Water-dispersable iron oxide nanoparticles coated with aminosaline
Approved for thermoablation of glioblastoma; Phase I prostate and pancreatic carcinoma

194 and 195



Nanocarrier prototype for tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)
Ultrasound
tPA encapsulated in gelatin-PEG nanoparticles for localized thrombolysis
Rat thrombosis model

213





One can point out several reasons for such slow incorporation of nanocarriers, in particular, stimuli-responsive DDSs, to the therapeutics. A relevant one is the difficulty to follow one key principle of the pharmaceutical industry: quality control. Most materials are synthesized under poorly reproducible conditions and the methods to prepare the smart DDSs are not standardized. In this sense, regulatory agencies are still working on guidances for preparation and evaluation of nanosized materials. Moreover, the developed combinations of polymers, lipids or silica are considered to be “new excipients” and thus cytotoxicity, genotoxicity, antigenicity and clearance are major issues to be elucidated. Different from the traditional dosage forms, bioavailability of drugs incorporated into smart DDSs has to be measured in the target tissue or cell; therefore, there is a need for developing suitable analytical techniques to do that. Another important point is the cost-effective evaluation of smart products.33 The development of complex responsive products may be extraordinarily expensive. Thus, the increase in healthcare versus the increase in costs compared with already established medical options may not be so evident.
Despite the relevant concerns mentioned above, development of the first commercially available smart DDS and advances in knowledge about the in vivo measurement of stimuli and transduction are notable steps towards optimized design, easily translatable production and evaluation in humans of more efficient formulations. The availability of tools and nanoprobes that can quantify in situ glucose concentration,100 temperature in tumor and its increase when an external source of heating is applied,241 hypoxic/acid regions in live tissues and cells,242 or distribution of drug nanocarriers inside the target tissue (for example, using C dots165,166 or related nanostructures243) is very valuable. Moreover, smart DDSs could enable the treatment of movable pathological cells, such as metastatic cancer cells or infected erythrocytes (as recently observed for Plasmodium-infected red blood cells)244 without the use of expensive recognition elements, which open novel strategies of treatment.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Spanish Ministerio de Economía y Competividad (SAF 2011-22771), Xunta de Galicia (CN 2012/045) and FEDER.
Notes and references
A. S. Hoffman, J. Controlled Release, 2008, 132, 153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Dokoumetzidis and P. Macheras, Int. J. Pharm., 2006, 321, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Langer, Nature, 1998, 392, 5 CAS .
Y. W. Chien and S. Lin, Clin. Pharmacokinet., 2002, 41, 1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kost and R. Langer, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2001, 46, 125 CrossRef CAS .
K. Y. Lee and S. H. Yuk, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kopecek and J. Yang, Polym. Int., 2007, 56, 1078 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, in Handbook of Molecularly Imprinted Polymers, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Smithers Rapra, Shawbury, UK,  2013, p. 309 Search PubMed .
S. Sershen and J. West, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2002, 54, 1225 CrossRef CAS .
C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Mini-Rev. Med. Chem., 2008, 8, 1065 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schmaljohann, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2006, 58, 1655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Motornov, Y. Roiter, I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pasparakis and M. Vamvakaki, Polym. Chem., 2011, 2, 1234 RSC .
S. Grund, M. Bauer and D. Fischer, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2011, 13, B61 CrossRef .
C. Alexander and K. M. Shakesheff, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 3321 CrossRef CAS .
C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, E. Bucio, G. Burillo and A. Concheiro, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2010, 7, 173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. A. Crommelin and A. T. Florence, Int. J. Pharm., 2013, 454, 496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lammers, Int. J. Pharm., 2013, 454, 527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Fleige, M. A. Quadir and R. Haag, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64, 866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013 Search PubMed .

          http://www.news-medical.net/news/20140128/Cell-Therapeutics-completes-patient-enrollment-in-Phase-3-clinical-trial-of-Opaxio-in-ovarian-cancer.aspx, accessed February 2014.

          D. Needham and M. W. Dewhirst, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 1, p. 33 Search PubMed .
P. R. Gil, Pharmacol. Res., 2010, 62, 115 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Lehner, X. Wang, M. Wolf and P. Hunziker, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 161, 307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Etheridge, S. A. Campbell, A. G. Erdman, C. L. Haynes, S. M. Wolf and J. McCullough, Nanomedicine, 2013, 9, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Yoo, N. Doshi and S. Mitragotri, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 63, 1247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. van der Meel, L. J. C. Vehmeijer, R. J. Kok, G. Storm and E. V. B. van Gaal, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 1284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, M. Radosz and Y. Shen, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 164, 156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 1, p. 1 Search PubMed .
J. Hamman and J. Steenakamp, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2012, 9, 219 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Williams, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 5897 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Roeder, JOM, 2010, 62, 49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. M. Holzapfel, J. C. Reichert, J. T. Schantz, U. Gbureck, L. Rackwitz, U. Nöth, F. Jakob, M. Rudert, J. Groll and D. W. Hutmacher, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Meyers, P. Y. Chen, A. Y. M. Lin and Y. Seki, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2008, 53, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Duncan, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery, 2003, 2, 347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2013, 24, 1167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. M. Y. Koo and S. A. Varia, Ther. Delivery, 2011, 7, 949 CrossRef .
R. Gaspar and R. Duncan, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2009, 61, 1220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bertrand and J. C. Leroux, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 161, 152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yoshida and J. Lahann, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Grainger, Int. J. Pharm., 2013, 454, 521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Di Marzio, Prog. Polym. Sci., 1999, 24, 329 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hirokawa and T. Tanaka, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 81, 6379 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Y. Galaev, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1995, 84, 471 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. Yu. Grosberg and A. R. Khokhlov, Giant molecules: here, there, and everywhere..., Academic Press, San Diego,  1997 Search PubMed .

          P. J. Flory, Principles of Polymer Chemistry, Cornell, New York,  1953 Search PubMed .

          M. Shibayama and T. Tanaka, in Advances in polymer science, responsive gels: volume transitions I, ed. K. Dusek, Springer, Berlin,  1993, vol. 109, p. 1 Search PubMed .
F. Ilmain, T. Tanaka and E. Kokufuta, Nature, 1991, 349, 400 CrossRef CAS .
F. Liu and M. W. Urban, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 3 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Cohen Stuart, W. T. S. Huck, J. Genzer, M. Müller, C. Ober, M. Stamm, G. B. Sukhorukov, I. Szleifer, V. V. Tsukruk, M. Urban, F. Winnik, S. Zauscher, I. Luzinov and S. Minko, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Pavlukhina and S. Sukhishvili, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 2, p. 117 Search PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. Tian and L. Jiang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 10048 RSC .
N. Nishiyama, Y. Bae, K. Miyata, S. Fukushima and K. Kataoka, Drug Discovery Today: Technol., 2005, 2, 21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Webb, M. Chimenti, M. P. Jacobson and D. L. Barber, Nat. Rev. Cancer, 2011, 11, 671 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. Ganta, A. Iyer and M. Amiji, in Targeted Delivery of Small and Macromolecular Drugs, ed. R. I. Mahato and A. S. Narang, Taylor & Francis, CRC Press, Boca Raton, FL,  2010, p. 555 Search PubMed .
L. A. Schneider, A. Korber, S. Grabbe and J. Dissemond, Arch. Dermatol. Res., 2007, 298, 413 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Siegel and B. A. Firestone, Macromolecules, 1988, 21, 3254 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Luo, J. F. Yuan, X. J. Liu, H. Xie and Q. Y. Gao, J. Bioact. Compat. Polym., 2010, 25, 292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Min, J. H. Kim, S. M. Bae, H. Shin, M. S. Kim, S. Park, H. Lee, R. W. Park, I. S. Kim, K. Kim, I. C. Kwon, S. Y. Jeong and D. S. Lee, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 144, 259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Bae, N. Nishiyama, S. Fukushima, H. Koyama, M. Yasuhiro and K. Kataoka, Bioconjugate Chem., 2005, 16, 122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Gao, J. W. Lee, M. K. Nguyen, G. H. Im, J. Yang, H. Heo, P. Jeon, T. G. Park, J. H. Lee and D. S. Lee, J. Controlled Release, 2011, 155, 11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, T. Ji, H. Wang, S. Li, Y. Zhao and G. Nie, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 177, 11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Lee, E. R. Gillies, M. E. Fox, S. J. Guillaudeu, J. M. J. Fréchet, E. E. Dy and F. C. Szoka, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 16649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Calderón, P. Welker, K. Licha, I. Fichtner, R. Graeser, R. Haag and F. Kratz, J. Controlled Release, 2011, 151, 295 CrossRef PubMed .
W. She, N. Li, K. Luo, C. Guo, G. Wang, Y. Geng and Z. Gu, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 2252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bromberg, S. Deshmukh, M. Temchenko, L. Iourtchenko, V. Alakhov, C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, R. Barreiro-Iglesias, A. Concheiro and T. A. Hatton, Bioconjugate Chem., 2005, 16, 626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Convertine, C. Diab, M. Prieve, A. Paschal, A. S. Hoffman, P. H. Johnson and P. S. Stayton, Biomacromolecules, 2010, 11, 2904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Alexander and F. Fernandez-Trillo, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 1, p. 256 Search PubMed .
S. Fukushima, K. Miyata, N. Nishiyama, N. Kanayama, Y. Yamasaki and K. Kataoka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 127, 2810 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lee, K. Miyata, M. Oba, T. Ishii, S. Fukushima, M. Han, H. Koyama, N. Nishiyama and K. Kataoka, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 5163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Miyata, N. Gouda, H. Takemoto, M. Obad, Y. Lee, H. Koyama, Y. Yamasaki, K. Itaka, N. Nishiyama and K. Kataoka, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 4764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cheng, F. Meng, C. Deng, H. A. Klok and Z. Zhong, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 3647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rausch and A. Wachter, Trends Plant Sci., 2005, 10, 503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. D. Vo, G. Kilcher and N. Tirelli, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2009, 30, 299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Cheng, F. Meng, C. Deng and Z. Zhong, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 1, p. 208 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Pan, Y. Y. Chen, D. R. Wang, C. Wei, J. Guo, D. R. Lu, C. C. Chu and C. C. Wang, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 6570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Verma, D. Miles, L. Gianni, I. E. Krop, M. Welslau, J. Baselga, M. Pegram, D. Y. Oh, V. Diéras, E. Guardino, L. Fang, M. W. Lu, S. Olsen, K. Blackwell and for the EMILIA Study Group, N. Engl. J. Med., 2012, 367, 1783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://www.biotest.de/ww/en/pub/investor_relations/news/newsdetails.cfm?newsID=138796, accessed February 2014.
M. Takasawa, R. R. Moustafa and J. C. Baron, Stroke, 2008, 39, 1629 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Thambi, V. G. Deepagan, H. Y. Yoon, H. S. Han, S. H. Kim, S. Son, D. G. Jo, C. H. Ahn, Y. D. Suh, K. Kim, I. C. Kwon, D. S. Lee and J. H. Park, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 1735 CAS .
Z. Poon, D. Chang, X. Zhao and P. T. Hammond, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Lallana and N. Tirelli, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2013, 214, 143 CrossRef CAS .
N. Khansari, Y. Shakiba and M. Mahmoudi, Recent Pat. Inflammation Allergy Drug Discovery, 2009, 3, 73 CrossRef CAS .
R. Di Paola and S. Cuzzocrea, Curr. Pharm. Des., 2013, 18, 3889 CrossRef .
P. Carampin, E. Lallana, J. Laliturai, S. C. Carroccio, C. Puglisi and N. Tirelli, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2012, 213, 2052 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rehor, J. A. Hubbell and N. Tirelli, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 411 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Napoli, N. Tirelli, G. Kilcher and J. A. Hubbell, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 8913 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fang, T. Seki and H. Maeda, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2009, 61, 290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. Sun, W. Mao, W. Sun, J. Tang, M. Sui, Y. Shen and Z. Gu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. C. Du Toit, T. Carmichael, T. Govender, P. Kumar, Y. E. Choonara and V. Pillay, Pharm. Res., 2014, 31, 607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. F. Caponi and R. V. Ulijn, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 1, p. 232 Search PubMed .
W. Fischer, M. Calderon, A. Schulz, I. Andreou, M. Weber and R. Haag, Bioconjugate Chem., 2010, 21, 1744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Clark, H. A. Aliyar, C. won Lee, J. I. Jay, K. M. Gupta, K. M. Watson, R. J. Stewart, R. W. Buckheit and P. F. Kiser, Int. J. Pharm., 2011, 413, 10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bernardos, L. Mondragon, E. Aznar, M. D. Marcos, R. Martinez-Mañez, F. Sancenon, J. Soto, J. M. Barat, E. P. Paya and C. Guillem, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Singh, A. Karambelkar, L. Gu, K. Lin, J. S. Miller, C. S. Chen, M. J. Sailor and S. N. Bhatia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Absar, Y. M. Kwon and F. Ahsan, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 177, 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Farmer, T. F. Edgar and N. A. Peppas, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2008, 47, 10053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ferri, K. Kojima and K. Sode, J. Diabetes Sci. Technol., 2011, 5, 1068 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. J. Heo and S. Takeuchi, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Russell, M. V. Pishko, C. C. Gefrides, M. J. McShane and G. L. Coté, Anal. Chem., 1999, 71, 3126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Heo, H. Shibata, T. Okitsu, T. Kawanishi and S. Takeuchi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 13399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Heo and S. Takeuchi, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Christiansen, T. Bailey, E. Watkins, D. Liljenquist, D. Price, K. Nakamura, R. Boock and T. Peyser, Diabetes Technol. Ther., 2013, 15, 881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          T. Miyata, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 2, p. 261 Search PubMed .
V. C. Ozalp, F. Eyidogan and H. A. Oktem, Pharmaceuticals, 2011, 4, 1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mayer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Ozalp, A. Pinto, E. Nikulina, A. Chuvilin and T. Schäfer, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 161 CrossRef .
M. Colilla, B. González and M. Vallet-Regí, Biomater. Sci., 2013, 1, 114 RSC .
L. Li, M. Xie, J. Wang, X. Li, C. Wang, Q. Yuan, D. W. Pang, Y. Lu and W. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 5823 RSC .
G. Russell-Jones, K. McTavish, J. McEwan, J. Rice and D. Nowotnik, J. Inorg. Biochem., 2004, 98, 1625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, X. Zhao, J. Chen, J. Chen, L. Kuznetsova, S. S. Wong and I. Ojima, Bioconjugate Chem., 2010, 21, 979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ribeiro, F. Veiga, D. Santos, J. J. Torres-Labandeira, A. Concheiro and C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Kryscio and N. A. Peppas, Acta Biomater., 2012, 8, 461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. G. Mayes and M. J. Whitcombe, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2005, 57, 1742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye and K. Mosbach, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 859 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schirhagl, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gonzalez-Chomon, A. Concheiro and C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, Ther. Delivery, 2013, 4, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hiratani, A. Fujiwara, Y. Tamiya, Y. Mizutani and C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 1293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tieppo, C. J. White, A. C. Paine, M. L. Voyles, M. K. McBride and M. E. Byrne, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 157, 391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. A. Peppas, B. Ekerdt and M. Gomez-Burgaz, Method and process for the production of multi-coated recognitive and releasing systems, US pat., 20090232858,  2009 Search PubMed .
Y. Hoshino, H. Koide, T. Urakami, H. Kanazawa, T. Kodama, N. Oku and K. J. Shea, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 6644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hoshino, H. Koide, K. Furuya, W. W. Haberaecker, S. H. Lee, T. Kodama, H. Kanazawa, N. Oku and K. J. Shea, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, C. Gonzalez-Chomon and A. Concheiro, in Smart materials for drug delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 2, p. 228 Search PubMed .
S. Xu, H. Lu, X. Zheng and L. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 4406 RSC .
Q. Zhang, L. Zhang, P. Wang and S. Du, J. Pharm. Sci., 2014, 103, 643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, Y. Zhang, M. Zhao, X. Guo and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 6217 RSC .
L. Xu, J. Pan, J. Dai, X. Li, H. Hang, Z. Cao and Y. Yan, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 233–234, 48 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Pan, H. Hang, X. Dai, J. Dai, P. Huo and Y. Yan, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17167 RSC .
S. F. Xu, J. H. Li, X. L. Song, J. Liu, H. Z. Lu and L. X. Chen, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 124 RSC .
L. Fang, S. Chen, X. Guo, Y. Zhang and H. Zhang, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 9767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Hua, Z. Chen, Y. Li and M. Zhao, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. White, C. M. Bosio, B. N. Duplantis and F. E. Nano, Cell. Mol. Life Sci., 2011, 68, 3019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Y. Galaev and B. Mattiasson, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1993, 15, 354 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Liu, S. H. Hu, D. M. Liu, S. Y. Chen and I. W. Chen, Nano Today, 2009, 4, 52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bikram and J. L. West, Expert Opin. Drug Delivery, 2008, 5, 1077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Lago, V. Ya. Grinberg, T. V. Burova, A. Concheiro and C. Alvarez-lorenzo, J. Funct. Biomater., 2011, 2, 373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, B. Blanco-Fernandez, A. M. Puga and A. Concheiro, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. Urry, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 11007 CrossRef CAS .
M. Casolaro, I. Casolaro and S. Lamponi, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2012, 80, 553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Rodríguez-Cabello, L. Martín, A. Girotti, C. García-Arévalo, F. J. Arias and M. Alonso, Nanomedicine, 2011, 6, 111 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Determan, J. P. Cox and S. K. Mallapragada, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2007, 81, 326 CrossRef PubMed .
B. S. Lokitz, A. W. York, J. E. Stempka, N. D. Treat, Y. Li, W. L. Jarrett and C. L. McCormick, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 6473 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Juang, J. Zhao, X. Ren, D. Chen and G. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 695 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tokarev and S. Minko, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Fong, T. Hanley and B. J. Boyd, J. Controlled Release, 2009, 135, 218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. White, P. Lorigan, G. P. Margison, J. M. Margison, F. Martin, N. Thatcher, H. Anderson and M. Ranson, Br. J. Cancer, 2006, 95, 822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wust, B. Hildebrandt, G. Sreenivasa, B. Rau, J. Gellermann, H. Riess, R. Felix and P. M. Schlag, Lancet Oncol., 2002, 3, 487 CrossRef CAS .
D. Needham, J. Y. Park, A. M. Wright and J. Tong, Faraday Discuss., 2013, 161, 515 RSC .

          D. Needham, in Biomaterials for Cancer Therapeutics, ed. K. Park, Woodhead Publishing Ltd, Oxford, UK,  2013, ch. 12 Search PubMed .

          M. F. Ashby and D. R. H. Jones, Engineering Materials 2: An Introduction to Microstructures, Processing and Design, Elsevier, Oxford, UK, 3rd edn,  2006, p. 319 Search PubMed .
H. Maeda and Y. Matsumura, Crit. Rev. Ther. Drug Carrier Syst., 1989, 6, 193 CAS .
H. Maeda, J. Controlled Release, 2012, 164, 138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yuan, M. Leunig, S. K. Huang, D. A. Berk, D. Papahadjopoulos and R. K. Jain, Cancer Res., 1994, 54, 3352 CAS .
Celsion Corporation. http://http://www.celsion.com, accessed February 2014.
L. Li, T. L. Ten Hagen, A. Haeri, T. Soullié, C. Scholten, A. L. Seynhaeve, A. M. Eggermont and G. A. Koning, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 174, 202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. N. Dou, J. Zheng, W. D. Foltz, R. Weersink, N. Chaudary, D. A. Jaffray and C. Allen, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 178, 69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. I. Chang, M. Y. Cheng and M. K. Yeh, Sci. Rep., 2012 DOI:10.4172/scientificreports.195  , accessed February 2014.
A. Juarranz, P. Jaén, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, J. Cuevas and S. González, Clin. Transl. Oncol., 2008, 10, 148 CrossRef CAS .
A. Suzuki and T. Tanaka, Nature, 1990, 346, 345 CrossRef CAS .
C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, L. Bromberg and A. Concheiro, Photochem. Photobiol., 2009, 85, 848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, S. Deshmukh, L. Bromberg, T. A. Hatton, I. Sandez and A. Concheiro, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 11475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Leung and M. Romanowski, Theranostics, 2012, 2, 1020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, C. Teh, S. Sreejith, L. Zhu, A. Kwok, W. Fang, X. Ma, K. T. Nguyen, V. Korzh and Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://phys.org/news/2013-04-cornell-dots-scientists-world-smallest.html, accessed February 2014.
A. A. Burns, J. Vider, H. Ow, E. Herz, O. Penate-Medina, M. Baumgart, S. M. Larson, U. Wiesner and M. Bradbury, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Angelatos, B. Radt and F. Caruso, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 3071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. T. Wu, J. Shen, P. Banerjee and S. Q. Zhou, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Schwartz, Cancer Res., 2009, 69, 1659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. K. Lim, K. Lee, Y. M. Huh and S. Haam, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 2, p. 1 Search PubMed .
S. S. Agasti, A. Chompoosor, C. C. You, P. Ghosh, C. K. Kim and V. M. Rotello, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 5728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. C. Chen, Y. P. Lin, C. W. Wang, H. C. Tzeng, C. H. Wu, Y. C. Chen, C. P. Chen, L. C. Chen and Y. C. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, X. Cai, C. Kim, G. Sun, Y. Zhang, R. Deng, M. Yang, J. Chen, S. Achilefu, L. V. Wang and Y. Xia, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1724 RSC .
J. Yang, J. Lee, J. Kang, S. J. Oh, H. J. Ko, J. H. Son, K. Lee, J. S. Suh, Y. M. Huh and S. Haam, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4339 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kojima, H. Kawabata, A. Harada, H. Hirunaka and K. Kono, Chem. Lett., 2013, 42, 612 CrossRef CAS .
Anonymous, Nanomedicine, 2009, 4, 504 Search PubMed .

          http://www.nanobiotix.com/technology-products/, accessed February 2014.
S. Murdan, J. Controlled Release, 2003, 92, 1 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Sharma, D. Svirskis and S. Garg, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 1, p. 283 Search PubMed .
D. Svirskis, J. Travas-Sejdic, A. Rodgers and S. Garg, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 146, 6 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ge, X. Tian, R. Qi, S. Huang, J. Mu, S. Hong, S. Ye, X. Zhang, D. Li and W. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 55, 271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Valdés-Ramírez, J. R. Windmiller, J. C. Claussen, A. G. Martinez, F. Kuralay, M. Zhou, N. Zhou, R. Polsky, P. R. Miller, R. Narayan and J. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 161, 1018 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Jeon, S. Y. Yang, J. Byun and J. K. Kim, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 1284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. T. Richardson, A. K. Wise, B. C. Thompson, B. O. Flynn, P. J. Atkinson, N. J. Fretwell, J. B. Fallon, G. G. Wallace, R. K. Shepherd, G. M. Clark and S. J. O'Leary, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 2614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Thompson, S. E. Moulton, R. T. Richardson and G. G. Wallace, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 3822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Thompson, R. T. Richardson, S. E. Moulton, A. J. Evans, S. O'Leary, G. M. Clark and G. G. Wallace, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 141, 161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kim, K. Lee, Y. M. Huh and S. Ham, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 729 RSC .
S. F. Medeiros, A. M. Santos, H. Fessi and A. Elaissari, Int. J. Pharm., 2011, 403, 139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, J. Yang, E. K. Lim, E. Kim, J. Choi, J. K. Ryu, N. H. Kim, J. S. Suh, J. I. Yook, Y. M. Huh and S. Haam, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 945 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Arruebo, R. Fernández-Pacheco, M. R. Ibarra and J. Santamaría, Nano Today, 2007, 2, 22 CrossRef .
C. S. S. R. Kumar and F. Mohammad, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2011, 14(63), 789 CrossRef PubMed .

          S. Y. Chen, S. H. Hu and T. Y. Liu, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 2, p. 32 Search PubMed .
P. Wust, B. Hildebrandt, G. Sreenivasa, B. Rau, J. Gellermann, H. Riess, R. Felix and P. M. Schlag, Lancet Oncol., 2002, 3, 487 CrossRef CAS .

          http://www.magforce.de/en/produkte.html, accessed February 2014.
K. Maier-Hauff, F. Ulrich, D. Nestler, H. Niehoff, P. Wust, B. Thiesen, H. Orawa, V. Budach and A. Jordan, J. Neuro-Oncol., 2011, 103, 317 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mura, J. Nicolas and P. Couvreur, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, D. Liu, W. Tung, C. Liao and S. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2946 CrossRef CAS .
N. Singh, A. Agrawal, A. K. L. Leung, P. A. Sharp and S. N. Bhatia, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Namiki, T. Namiki, H. Yoshida, Y. Ishii, A. Tsubota, S. Koido, K. Nariai, M. Mitsunaga, S. Yanagisawa, H. Kashiwagi, Y. Mabashi, Y. Yumoto, S. Hoshina, K. Fujise and N. Tada, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ruiz-Hernandez, A. Baeza and M. Vallet-Regi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 1259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, H. Chen and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Mason, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2011, 18, 847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Deckers and C. T. W. Moonen, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 148, 25 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. D. Pangu, K. P. Davis, F. S. Bates and D. A. Hammer, Macromol. Biosci., 2010, 10, 546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. G. Pitt, G. A. Husseini and L. N. Kherbeck, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 1, p. 148 Search PubMed .
S. Hernot and A. L. Klibanov, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 1153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Zao, L. N. Du, C. T. Lu, Y. G. Jin and S. P. Ge, Int. J. Nanomed., 2013, 8, 1621 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. T. Lu, X. K. Li, Q. Q. Tang, X. Q. Tian, Y. P. Zhao, Y. Zhang, J. L. Tian, W. Yang, S. Ge, C. K. Nair and X. Shen, J. Drug Targeting, 2012, 20, 623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mohan and N. Rapoport, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2010, 7, 1959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Lin, M. Javadi, D. M. Belnap, J. R. Barrow and W. G. Pitt, J. Nanomed. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10, 67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. A. Husseini and W. G. Pitt, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2008, 60, 1137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Ghaleb, D. Stevenson-Abouelnasr, W. G. Pitt, K. T. Assaleh, L. O. Farahat and J. Fahadi, Colloids Surf., A, 2010, 359, 18 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Uesugi, H. Kawata, J. I. Jo, Y. Saito and Y. Tabata, J. Controlled Release, 2010, 147, 269 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Furusawa, Y. Fujiwara, P. Campbell, Q. L. Zhao, R. Ogawa, M. A. Hassan, Y. Tabuchi, I. Takasaki, A. Takahashi and T. Kondo, PLoS One, 2012, 7, e29012 CAS .
X. Wang, H. Chen, K. Zhang, M. Ma, F. Li, D. Zeng, S. Zheng, Y. Chen, L. Jiang, H. Xu and J. Shi, Small, 2013, 8, 1621 Search PubMed .
M. A. O'Reilly and K. Hynynen, Int. J. Hyperthermia, 2012, 28, 386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. A. Siegel, in Chemomechanical Instabilities in Responsive Materials, ed. P. Borckmans, P. De Kepper, A. R. Khokhlov and S. Métens, NATO Science for Peace and Security Series A: Chemistry and Biology, Springer, Berlin,  2009, p. 175 Search PubMed .
R. Yoshida, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Topham, J. R. Howse, C. J. Crook, A. J. Gleeson, W. Bras, S. P. Armes, R. A. L. Jones and A. J. Ryan, Macromol. Symp., 2007, 256, 95 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sakai and R. Yoshida, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 1036 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Siegel, in Nonlinear Dynamics with Polymers, ed. J. A. Pojman and Q. Tran-Cong-Miyata, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2010, p. 189 Search PubMed .
D. S. Couto, L. Perez-Breva, P. Saraiva and C. L. Cooney, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64, 69–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Puranik, E. R. Dawson and N. A. Peppas, Int. J. Pharm., 2013, 441, 665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Goddard and J. H. Hotchkiss, Prog. Polym.
Sci., 2007, 32, 698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Vasilev, S. S. Griesser and H. J. Griesser, Plasma Processes Polym., 2011, 8, 1010 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 2, p. 313 Search PubMed .
E. Cabane, X. Zhang, K. Langowska, C. G. Palivan and W. Meier, Biointerphases, 2012, 7, 9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Takahashi and T. Okano, in Smart Materials for Drug Delivery, ed. C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and A. Concheiro, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2013, vol. 2, p. 290 Search PubMed .
U. A. Gurkan, S. Tasoglu, D. Akkaynak, O. Avci, S. Unluisler, S. Canikyan, N. MacCallum and U. Demirci, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2012, 1, 661 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Li, K. Sun, J. Fan, P. Zhang, J. Meng, S. Wang and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yu, J. Cho, P. Shivapooja, L. K. Ista and G. P. López, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 9295 CAS .
S. V. Pavlukhina, J. B. Kaplan, L. Xu, W. Chang, X. Yu, S. Madhyastha, N. Yakandawala, A. Mentbayeva, B. Khan and S. A. Sukhishvili, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4708 CAS .
S. Kumar, Y. L. Dory, M. Lepage and Y. Zhao, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7385 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Ruiz, C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, P. Taboada, G. Burillo, E. Bucio, K. De Prijck, H. S. Nelis, T. Coenye and A. Concheiro, Eur. J. Pharm. Biopharm., 2008, 70, 467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Muñoz-Muñoz, J. C. Ruiz, C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, A. Concheiro and E. Bucio, Eur. Polym. J., 2009, 45, 1859 CrossRef PubMed .
F. D. Muñoz-Muñoz, J. C. Ruiz, C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, A. Concheiro and E. Bucio, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2012, 81, 531 CrossRef PubMed .
M. García-Vargas, C. González-Chomón, B. Magariños, A. Concheiro, C. Alvarez-Lorenzo and E. Bucio, Int. J. Pharm., 2014, 461, 286 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Segura, A. M. Puga, G. Burillo, J. Llovo, G. Brackman, T. Coenye, A. Concheiro and C. Alvarez-Lorenzo, Biomacromolecules, 2014 DOI:10.1021/bm500257s .

          S. P. Bradley and J. Weber, Harvard Business School case study 9-703-489, 2003.
S. Mura and P. Couvreur, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64, 1394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Davis, B. L. Viglianti, P. Yarmolenko, J. Y. Park, P. Stauffer, D. Needham and M. W. Dewhirst, Int. J. Hyperthermia, 2013, 29, 569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Madsen, I. Canton, N. J. Warren, E. Themistou, A. Blanazs, B. Ustbas, X. Tian, R. Pearson, G. Battaglia, A. L. Lewis and S. P. Armes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14863 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Mikhail, S. Eetezadi, S.
N. Ekdawi, J. Stewart and C. Allen, Int. J. Pharm., 2014, 464, 168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Urbán, J. J. Valle-Delgado, N. Mauro, J. Marques, A. Manfredi, M. Rottmann, E. Ranucci, P. Ferruti and X. Fernàndez-Busquets, J. Controlled Release, 2014, 177, 84 CrossRef PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

Carmen Alvarez-Lorenzo
	Carmen Alvarez-Lorenzo received her PhD degree (1998) from University of Santiago de Compostela. She was a postdoctoral fellow (1998–2001) in the Department of Physics at Massachusetts Institute of Technology in the group of Prof. Toyoichi Tanaka. Then, she returned to the University of Santiago de Compostela as a Ramón y Cajal research fellow (2001–2006) and was promoted to Titular Professor in Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Technology in 2007. Her research interests include drug delivery, polymeric micelles, stimuli-responsive and imprinted networks, biomimetic materials, scaffolds, and drug–medical device combination products. She has co-edited the book Smart Materials for Drug Delivery (RSC, 2013).

Angel Concheiro
	Angel Concheiro received his PhD degrees (1976 Chemistry and 1981 Pharmacy) from University of Santiago de Compostela. He was appointed Titular Professor in Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Technology in 1983 and promoted to Full Professor in 1988. Since 2012 he has been the President of the Committee of Veterinary Medicines of AEMPS. His research interests include design and evaluation of drug delivery systems for targeting and stimuli-responsive release, polymeric micelles, cyclodextrins, hydrogels, scaffolds, and drug–medical device combination products. He has co-edited Smart Materials for Drug Delivery (RSC, 2013) and Handbook of Molecularly Imprinted Polymers (Smithers Rapra, 2013).

 	Fig. 1  Drug release patterns from a drug dosage form. In the rate-programmed systems, the release occurs according to a pre-established pattern, disregarding the conditions in the body. The release from activation-modulated systems is triggered by certain internal or external stimuli. Finally, feed-back regulated release systems adjust the release rate to the levels of a biomarker; the presence of the biomarker triggers drug release and as a consequence the level of the biomarker decreases, leading to the stop of the release until the biomarker level increases again.8 Copyright 2013 Smithers Rapra.	 

 	Fig. 2  Some transitions associated with the responsiveness to a stimulus: (i) deaggregation of amphiphilic polymers; (ii) volume phase transition; and (iii) helix to random coiling.	 

 	Fig. 3  Features to be taken into account when a polymer is intended to be used in a drug delivery system.14 Copyright 2011 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH.	 

 	Fig. 4  Release of active agents from (a) supramolecular complexes like dendritic core–shell particles with a cleavable shell and (b) dendritic scaffolds with attached solubilizing/stealth groups using cleavable linkers for the drug conjugation.19 Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 5  Ternary polyplex prepared by combining plasmid DNA with pAsp(DET) (poly{N-[N′′-(2-aminoethyl)-2-aminoethyl]aspartamide}) followed by coating with pAsp(DET-Aco) (poly(N-{N′-[(N′′-cis-aconityl)-2-aminoethyl]-2-aminoethyl}aspartamide)). The polyplex is negatively charged at pH 7.4, which facilitates serum stability and low cytotoxicity. The cis-aconitic amide moieties are degraded at the endosomal pH, which leads to the charge-conversion components and facilitates the endosomal escape of the polyplex through membrane disruption.71 Copyright 2008 John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 6  Possible reaction mechanism for nanohydrogels with varying responses to DTT and GSH as reducing agents, which is caused by a drug exchange process between GSH and the PMAA–doxorubicin (DOX) complex.77 Copyright 2012 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure of GSH and the ROS-responsive conjugate of SN38. The conjugate self-assembled as nanocapsules that can release SN38 as a function of the concentration of GSH or H2O2.90 Copyright 2013 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) Construct of camouflaged tPA. The activity of tPA was masked by albumins (HSA) attached via a thrombin-cleavable peptide. (B) Targeted/triggered release action of camouflaged tPA: (i) HSA creates a steric hindrance against the systemic plasminogen and tPA-binding macromolecules in the plasma; (ii) accumulation of the complex on the thrombus surface via the targeting peptide; (iii) release of active tPA upon thrombin-mediated cleavage of the peptide linker.97 Copyright 2014 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic representation of the principles of first-, second-, and third-generation glucose sensors. Electrons from the glucose oxidation reaction are first taken up by the enzyme's cofactor (primary electron acceptor) and transferred to either oxygen (first generation), an electron mediator (second generation), or directly to the electrode (third generation).99 Copyright 2011 Diabetes Technology Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematics of a vitamin-responsive drug release process for the nanovalves. (b) Release curve for MSN–Avi–Apt with and without vitamin H addition. Data have been normalized to the maximum level of dye released in the experiment.110 Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Diagram of the synthesis of an imprinted hydrogel and the washing out/release and re-loading processes. The effect of stimuli on the conformation of the drug-receptors is also depicted.	 

 	Fig. 12  Timolol tear fluid concentration–time profiles after application of drug-loaded imprinted and non-imprinted contact lenses or instillation of eyedrops in rabbit eyes. The doses were 34 μg for imprinted contact lens (solid squares), 21 μg for non-imprinted contact lens (open squares), and 34 μg (open circles) and 125 μg (solid circles) when 0.068% or 0.25% timolol eyedrops were instilled. Each point represents the mean ± S.D. (n = 3–5).119 Copyright 2005 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 13  Biodistribution of melittin and MIP traps according to fluorescent images of Cy5-melittin after intravenous injection (1 mg kg−1). MIP traps (27 mg kg−1) were injected 20 s after the injection of melittin. Controls did not receive the MIP nanoparticles. The fluorescent intensity of Cy5-melittin diminished immediately after administration of MIP traps. Ex vivo results showed that Cy5-melittin accumulated in the liver with a dose dependence on the amount of MIP nanoparticles administered.122 Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Schematic protocol for the preparation of narrowly dispersed water-compatible MIP microspheres with photo-, thermo- and pH-responsive template binding properties by successive RAFT polymerization.127 Copyright 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  The nine steps of the design methodology scheme. The numbers represent the sequence for ‘reverse engineering’, i.e., starting at (1), with an evaluation of the design's performance-in-service. The key questions when analyzing a design can be linked to these steps as follows: What is it for? (2); How should it work? (3); What is it made of? (4); What are the characteristics of the material? (5); How is it made? (7); Has anybody made something similar? (8); Does it really work? (1).151 Copyright 2006 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 16  Combining hyperthermia and temperature-sensitive liposomes tumor-specific accumulation of drugs can be achieved. The EPR effect provides only limited access to large liposomes (picture on the left); hyperthermia can make the blood vessels more leaky and facilitates interstitial movement of liposomes and drugs (in the middle); ThermoDox® does not need to extravasate, it can release the drug in the blood stream of the warmed tumor and the drug can readily diffuse throughout the neoplasm (on the right).22 Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  A graphical representation of the injection of drug-loaded mesoporous silica nanoparticles into zebrafish larvae for in vivo drug delivery, triggered by either heating or visible light irradiation. The nanoparticles were functionalized with photothermal-responsive [2]rotaxanes on the surface. The chemical structure of the [2]rotaxane containing the α-CD ring and azobenzene unit is shown.164 Copyright 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 18  Images of cochlear neural explants grown on polypyrrole (PPy)–p-toluene sulphonic acid sodium salt (pTS) coatings with and without neurotrophins. Neurites were visualised by immunocytochemistry using a neurofilament-200 primary antibody and a fluorescent secondary antibody (green). Cell nuclei are labelled with DAPI (blue). Neurotrophins increased the number of sprouting neurites, particularly under electrical stimulation because of the faster release (8.3 ng per cm2 per day vs. 2.80 ng per cm2 per day) from the coatings. Scale bar is 200 μm.186 Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 19  Magnetic nanoparticles for biomedical applications: imaging and diagnosis, therapy, and guidance.190 Copyright 2007 Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 20  Expanding shockwave from a collapse cavitation event causes mechanical disruption of micelles. The compressional shock wave is thought to transiently shear open micelles, thus releasing their contents.205 Copyright 2013 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 21  Nanopatterned surfaces combining PNIPAAm chains and the biocidal quaternary ammonium salt. Above the LCST, the collapsed and hydrophobic PNIPAAm chains permit attachment of Escherichia coli K12, while simultaneously exposing the biocidal agent. Upon reduction in the temperature below the LCST, the hydration and swelling of PNIPAAm chains occur releasing the dead bacteria due to mild shearing.231 Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Surface-grafted diblock copolymer brushes with a top layer with the abilty to switch between collapsed and extended chains in response to temperature, pH or light.233 Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

Opaxio™	Tumor enzyme	Paclitaxel poligumex	Approved orphan drug for glioblastoma multiforme	
21

Trastuzumab-DM1	GSH concentration	Antibody–drug conjugate	Phase II/III in breast cancer	
78

Maytansine	GSH concentration	Antibody–drug conjugate	Phase II/III in multiple myeloma	
79

Nanocapsule prototype	Dually responsive to GSH and ROS	Camptothecin-based topoisomerase I inhibitor conjugated to nanocapsules	
In vivo tests with breast tumor xenograft models and autochthonous colon cancer models	
89 and 90

Implant prototype for antinflammatory release	OH˙ radicals	Lipoidal-chitosan-poly(ε-caprolactone) nanoparticles coated with hyaluronic acid, alginate and poly(acrylic acid)	Intraocular tests in the rabbit model of uveitis	
91

Nanocarrier prototype for tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)	Thrombin in the clot	tPA camouflaged with human serum albumin via a thrombin-cleavable peptide, and coated with a homing peptide that binds with GPIIb/IIIa expressed on activated platelets	Rat thrombosis model	
97

Glucose biosensors Guardian Real-Time®, Seven®, Dexcom® G4™ Platinum, or Enlite™, FreeStyle Navigator®	Glucose concentration	Glucose oxidase enzyme coupled to other enzymes and transducers for continuous monitoring of glucose levels and regulation of insulin release from pumps	Approved, commercially available implantable biosensors	
99 and 100

Nanoparticles as traps of bee venom	Melittin	Imprinted nanocarrier that selectively captures melittin in the bloodstream	Mice models	
122 and 123

ThermoDox®	Temperature (external source)	DPPC-based liposomes for tumor-specific release of doxorubicin	Phase III in liver cancer, Phase II in chest wall recurrence of cancer, colorectal liver metastases, lung cancer and bone metastases	
22, 149 and 150

Visudyne®	UV light	NonPEGylated liposome formulation of photosensitizer verteporfin	Approved, commercially available injectable solution	
158

Rotaxane-functionalized mesoporous silica nanoparticles	UV light	Nanoparticles with pores capped with chains of triazole/ethylene glycol and an azobenzene unit that interact with α-cyclodextrin	Wild-type zebrafish larvae	
164

Cornell dots (C dots)	Near infrared radiation	Fluorescent core–shell silica-based nanoparticles	Approved for human stage I molecular imaging of cancer	
165 and 166

AuroShell®	Near infrared radiation	Gold nanoparticles for solid tumor hyperthermia	Phase I solid tumors	
169

NanoXray products	X-rays	Hafnium crystals that amplify the dose of radiation delivered to the tumor	Phase I	
176 and 177

Cochlear implants coated with ICPs	Electrical stimulus	Coatings of intrinsically conducting polymers that switch neurotrophin release on and off	Animal models	
184–186

NanoTherm®	Magnetic field	Water-dispersable iron oxide nanoparticles coated with aminosaline	Approved for thermoablation of glioblastoma; Phase I prostate and pancreatic carcinoma	
194 and 195

Nanocarrier prototype for tissue plasminogen activator (tPA)	Ultrasound	tPA encapsulated in gelatin-PEG nanoparticles for localized thrombolysis	Rat thrombosis model	
213


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
