Application of carbon fibers to flexible, miniaturized wire/fiber-shaped energy conversion and storage devices  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA07868K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA07868K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2444-2459Application of carbon fibers to flexible, miniaturized wire/fiber-shaped energy conversion and storage devices

        
          
            Xin 
            Cai
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Chaoqun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shengsen 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yueping 
            Fang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Dechun 
            Zou
          
          
        
      *b
aCollege of Materials and Energy, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, Guangdong 510642, China. E-mail: caixin2015@scau.edu.cn
bBeijing National Laboratory for Molecular Sciences, Key Laboratory of Polymer Chemistry and Physics of Ministry of Education, College of Chemistry and Molecular Engineering, Peking University, Beijing 100871, China. E-mail: dczou@pku.edu.cn
Received 
      11th September 2016
    , Accepted 2nd December 2016First published on 2nd December 2016AbstractCarbon fibers (CFs) and CF-reinforced composites have been widely used as high performance structural materials in various military and civilian fields for decades. Owing to the rapid advances and boom in flexible/wearable electronics, CF materials endowed with excellent material properties have received great attention for building lightweight, cost-efficient and miniaturized flexible/wearable energy devices. Herein, a detailed overview of recent progress in wire/fiber-shaped flexible power devices made from micro-CFs is given for the first time. With an emphasis on electrode materials and architecture designs, CF-based wire/fiber energy devices including fiber nanogenerators, wire/fiber solar cells, wire-type batteries, fiber supercapacitors and integrated/hybrid fiber devices are discussed. Aiming to motivate more exciting applications, research directions and perspectives, efficient flexible wire-type CF energy devices are proposed.Xin CaiDr. Xin Cai obtained her B.S. Degree in 2010 from the University of Science and Technology, Beijing, P. R. China. She received her Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry and physics from Peking University in 2015. She is currently working as a faculty member at the College of Materials and Energy in South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, P. R. China. Her research interests focus on designing novel active electrode materials for efficient carbon fiber-based solar cells and flexible fiber-type electrochemical energy storage devices, as well as interface engineering to optimize the device manufacturing process.Chaoqun ZhangDr. Chaoqun Zhang received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering in 2014 from Iowa State University, USA. Following his Ph.D., he served as a postdoctoral research associate working on developing bio-based polymers and nano-composites from natural resources at the Center for Sustainable Polymers at the University of Minnesota from 2014 to 2015. After another year of postdoctoral research at Texas A&M University on bio-inspired materials and flame retardant nanocoatings produced using layer-by-layer assembly from 2015 to 2016, he is currently working on bio-based polymeric materials at South China Agricultural University as a faculty member of the college of materials and energy.Shengsen ZhangDr. Shengsen Zhang is an Associate Professor in the College of Materials and Energy, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, P. R. China. His research interests include nanomaterials synthesis, characterization, modifications, and applications in renewable energies, such as photocatalysis and environmental pollution removal.Yueping FangProf. Yueping Fang received his BS and MS degrees in chemistry from Wuhan University in 1987 and 1990, respectively. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in Chemistry from Sun Yat-sen University in 2004. He was a post-doctoral researcher at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology from 2004 to 2005. Since 2009 he has been a professor of Applied Chemistry at South China Agricultural University. During 2008–2009 and 2013–2014, he worked as a visiting professor at Kansas State University. His research interests include the synthesis and applications of quasi-one-dimensional nanomaterials and hybrid organic–inorganic nanocomposite materials.Dechun ZouProf. Dechun Zou received his doctoral degree from Kyushu University, Japan in 1990. He then worked at Mitsubishi Petrochemicals and Casio Computer Co., Ltd. From 1998 to 2001, he was an associate professor at Kyushu University, Japan. Since 2002, he has been a professor at Peking University. He was one of the recipients of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars and was the project leader of 973 research programs on fiber-shaped solar cells in China. His research interests include light-emitting and photovoltaic materials and related device physics, as well as new process technologies for optoelectronic device fabrication.
1. Introduction
Carbon fibers (CFs) are a classic type of carbon material with a carbon content of over 90 wt%. Generally, CFs are fibriform and composed of turbostratic carbon layers consisting of graphite crystallites or flakes oriented along the fiber axis.1,2 Benefiting from their unique structure and compositions, CFs are super tough materials with exceptional tensile strength, and high modulus and stiffness, excellent high-temperature and fatigue resistance, good electrical conductivity and low specific density. Since their industrial production from polyacrylonitrile (PAN) and pitch precursors became available in the 1960s, CF and CF-reinforced composites have gradually attracted tremendous attention for use as high-performance and indispensable structural materials.3 During the past few decades, they have achieved significant applications in aerospace, construction, automobile, electrical and electronic fields, biomedical apparatus/instruments, numerous high-end sports goods, etc.4,5 Commercial CFs (PAN-based or pitch-based) always include thousands of monofilaments with a diameter of 5–10 μm. With the boosting of nanomaterials and preparation technologies, different kinds of CF materials including CF fabric/textile/papers/webs, carbon nanofibers and carbon nanotube (CNT) fibers with diverse forms, compositions and microstructures have been developed.6–10 Novel CF materials such as CNT fibers and graphene fibers can contain pure carbon atoms with a carbon content as high as nearly 100%,11–13 which have demonstrated great potential in high-strength fibers, flexible conductors/electrodes, electrocatalysis, biosensing, and so on.14–17
Flexible/wearable electronic devices are highly bendable, deformable, and aesthetic and can operate or be installed effectively under more complicated situations than conventional rigid electronics. In recent years, they have received immense recognition for advancing new-generation smart electronics and portable device systems.18–21 To realize desirable functional electronic device systems, the development of flexible/wearable power supplies (energy conversion and storage devices) dedicated to flexible/wearable electronics is very essential and crucial. To date, a variety of flexible energy devices, mainly including flexible solar cells, nanogenerators, supercapacitors and lithium-ion batteries, have made great progress in material utilization, electrode designs and device performances.22–25 These flexible energy conversion and storage devices are mostly built on plastics, metal foils, conducting film/papers (e.g. CNT films and graphene papers), or carbon cloths/fabrics.26–28 Different from general planar-architectured flexible energy devices, wire/fiber-shaped energy devices possess remarkable omni-directional flexibility. They are emerging as innovative technology toward highly flexible, miniaturized and high-performance energy devices, which are especially suitable for achieving wearable/weavable electronics, smart fabrics and multifunctional “e-textiles”.29–32 In consideration of the special shape and structure, it is primarily important to develop efficient and durable fibrous electrodes for wire/fiber energy devices. However, existing fibrous materials (i.e. natural fibers, inorganic fibers and synthetic polymer fibers) that can simultaneously meet the requirements such as good electrical, chemical and thermal properties for efficient fibrous/wire electrodes are very limited. Meanwhile, flexible CFs are made with a macroscopic wire format and prominent material properties. To this end, CFs with sufficient electronic conductivity, thermal stability and easy modifications with guest nanomaterials have intrigued growing interest for preparing flexible wire/fiber-shaped energy devices.33 Using various kinds of functionalization strategies and device fabrication techniques, flexible wire/fiber-shaped energy conversion and storage devices made from CF scaffolds or CF active electrodes have been obtained with considerable performances, which showed exciting prospects for achieving lightweight, cost-efficient and miniaturized flexible/wearable power sources.
In this tutorial review, we will highlight recent progress in CF-based wire/fiber-shaped flexible energy conversion and storage devices, with an emphasis on the preparation of electrode materials, device designs and performances. It should be noted that the wire/fiber-shaped energy devices described here are macroscopic and visible to the naked eye, and directly fabricated from microfibers. The total device diameter usually ranges from tens of micrometers to millimeters, and the device can be extremely long theoretically. These wire/fiber-type energy devices can be more easily handled and convenient for assembling device modules, or even knitted to form functional textiles.34 Meanwhile, similar wire/fiber energy devices based on micro-CNT fibers and graphene fibers are beyond the scope of current discussion, since readers with an interest can refer to a good recent review for more information.35 In particular, we will focus on flexible/wearable wire/fiber energy devices made from microscale polymeric CFs. Polymeric CFs are already an industrial product with mature large scale manufacturing. For the sake of stimulating more exciting applications and advancement of CF materials, this article aims to offer a useful coverage of CFs as novel functional materials for flexible microfiber energy devices rather than structural materials merely for traditional applications. In the following second part, the description of several prototypes of CF-based fiber nanogenerators will be given. In the third part, CF-based wire solar cells will be discussed and summarized. In the fourth part, the application of CFs to wire/fiber batteries and supercapacitors will be introduced. In the fifth part, some interesting illustrations of fiber hybrid/integrated devices build on CFs will be highlighted. Finally, the challenges and opportunities of the research field will be proposed, as well as some private insights into future directions of the promising flexible wire/fiber energy devices to further maximize their potential.
2. CF-based fiber nanogenerators
Nanogenerators (NGs) are an emerging type of energy device for converting random mechanical energy into electricity. They can harvest ubiquitous mechanical vibrations or disturbance covering a relatively wide range of frequencies, such as friction, air pressure, ambient noise, body motions (e.g. breathing, footsteps, and heartbeats) and other environmental mechanical energy sources (e.g. wind and tide).36,37 Fiber nanogenerators (FNGs) made from two entangled fibers have been demonstrated as an efficient way for scavenging low frequency energy using piezoelectric zinc oxide nanowires grown around textile fibers.38
To enhance the output of FNGs, an alternative design using conductive CFs instead of insulating Kevlar fiber or poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) fiber was reported in 2011.39 Through physical vapor deposition, a textured and cylindrical ZnO thin film composed of densely packed nanorods was radially grown onto CFs. When cycled or periodic strain was induced in the ZnO film under applied external pressure through air/liquid flow, a macroscopic piezoelectric potential was produced, leading to a peak output voltage of 3.2 V and an average current density of 0.15 μA cm−2. In this FNG, the conductive CF is not only used as a stable and soft substrate to support the active ZnO film, but also plays a key role in charge transport and the use of pressure from all directions. The flexible FNG is promising for non-contact mode operations and ultrasensitive 3D sensors in medical diagnostics. On this basis, a similar flexible and coaxial piezoelectric NG built on CF/ZnO nanowires (NWs) wrapped by foldable Au-coated ZnO NWs on paper was reported. ZnO NWs were grown on CFs and the paper substrate by a seed-assisted two-step hydrothermal approach. By increasing the number of CF/ZnO microfibers, the electrical output of the NG can be greatly enhanced and an output current of 35 nA was generated.40 In order to improve the output current, ZnO NWs–ZnSe nanosphere bilayer structures were synthesized on CFs, and the optimized piezoelectric NGs produced an output current of ca. 333 μA under ∼0.55% tensile strain.41 Going a step further, the CF/ZnO nanoarray-based piezoelectric NG (PENG) was integrated with a triboelectric NG (TENG) to form a 3D fiber hybrid NG, as illustrated in Fig. 1a and b. The hybrid FNG can be more efficient in converting mechanical energy than the individual PENG or TENG due to the complementary design, which exhibited an instantaneous output power density of 10.2 and 42.6 mW m−2, respectively. When weaved into fabric or cloth, the hybrid FNG showed impressive performance either for the power bag or to detect the arm bending motion (Fig. 1c and d).42 Using a wind-driven triboelectric NG to provide enough voltage bias and assist charge separation, a photoelectrocatalysis device constructed from TiO2 nanowires grown on carbon microfibers was also demonstrated for the degradation of methyl orange and water splitting.43
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a 3D fiber-based hybrid nanogenerator composed of a piezoelectric nanogenerator (PENG) and a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG); (b) cross-sectional view of ZnO NRs grown on a carbon fiber; generated current from the output 1 (c) and output 2 (d) of the power suit with a fiber-based hybrid nanogenerator weaved in under the impact of human motion.42 Reprinted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society. 
In the above-mentioned fiber NGs, CFs mainly act as individual conductive substrates/scaffolds, which play a dual role in supporting the active film and transporting the carriers. Since existing NGs are commonly micro/nano-device systems, they are more suitable for miniaturized and portable electronics toward high-speed sensing and energy scavenging requiring a high power output per unit rather than a high power density for the total device/system. Lightweight CFs with a unique 3D cylindrical shape and good electrical properties are especially promising to reduce the device weight and realize good specific piezoelectric performance. However, the power output (ca. tens of milliwatt per square meter) of the current CF-based fiber NGs is still far from expectations. In this sense, more attention should be paid to fiber-type NGs when drawing lessons from the emerging NGs and triboelectric NGs, along with device construction with an emphasis on the interface between CFs and the functional part. Besides, developing more efficient active materials aside from the only ZnO nanowires is urgently encouraged.
3. CF-based wire-type solar cells
3.1 Silicon solar cells
Solar cells, or photovoltaics, are one of the most efficient, sustainable and green energy technologies to convert solar light into electricity. Generally, the developing third-generation film solar cells, such as organic photovoltaics, nanocrystalline DSSCs and quantum dot-sensitized solar cells (QDSSCs), always utilize a planar sandwiched-structure and the inevitable transparent conductive oxide (TCO) glasses for light transmission.44–46 However, the relatively high-cost and fragility of TCO glass cannot be ignored as for practical applications.
CF materials are opaque and irregularly shaped, and hence they had long been considered as not feasible for fabricating solar cells. However, CFs can be applied to solar cells as useful electrode materials or device components via an elaborated device structure and film preparation. Herein, the electrode materials and efficiencies of reported CF-based wire-type solar cells are summarized in Table 1. Incorporating a radial p–n architecture, silicon solar cells based on single CFs were firstly reported in 2010, in which CFs acted as a core electrode to collect photogenerated carriers, as well as to support the photoactive shell of the polysilicon (poly-Si) film prepared by low pressure chemical vapor deposition. The obtained macro-long solar cell was hairlike, and a single CF solar cell (11 μm-diameter) showed an efficiency of 0.04%.47 Though the photovoltaic performance was poor, the potential of high-strength, conductive and lightweight CFs that are compatible with high-temperature processing for photovoltaics is noteworthy. As for more efficient CF-based silicon solar cells, more efforts on the doping process and the preparation of uniform crystalline films on cylindrical fibers are quite necessary. After optimization of the film thickness and doping concentration in p- and n-type poly-Si functional layers, the efficiency of solar cells based on the CF core electrode was enhanced to ∼10.5%.48 It should be noted that the best efficiency is obtained when a 40 μm-thick p-type poly-Si film and 0.1 μm-thick n-type poly-Si film were used. The diameter of the general CF core is only 5–10 μm. Too thick a silicon active shell is beneficial for light harvesting, but it can be harmful to the mechanical strength and stability of the microfiber solar cells. Apart from being used as an electrode to transport and collect carriers, CFs can serve as another structural component. Using a so-called co-curing scheme, microcrystalline p–i–n thin-film silicon solar cell modules were integrated on a CF-reinforced epoxy composite. The photovoltaic performance of the multifunctional solar cells can be maintained under 0.3%-strain cyclic tension loading up to 100 cycles.49 CFs have been successfully applied to fiber-shaped silicon solar cells in spite of the few cases. However, the relatively complicated preparation and doping process of the crystalline silicon film especially the deposition of a thick and uniform silicon layer onto non-planar micro-CFs under high temperature and strict conditions is still challenging, which largely restricts the further development of the field. At least, more technical efforts are necessary to fabricate efficient microfiber silicon solar cells on CFs.
Table 1 CF-based wire-type solar cells




Photovoltaic type
Device & electrode materials
Efficiency (%)
Ref.




Silicon solar cells
CF/p-poly-Si/n+-poly Si
0.04

47



Silicon solar cells
CF/p-poly Si/n-poly Si/electrode 2
10.5

48



DSSC
Ti wire/TiO2 nanoparticles/N719/I−–I3−/Pt/CF
5.08

50



DSSC
Ti wire/TiO2 nanotubes/N719/I−–I3−/Pt/CF
3.07

51



DSSC
Ti wire/TiO2/N719/I−–I3−/ink nanocarbon/CF
5.23

52



DSSC
Ti wire/TiO2/N719/I−–I3−/PEDOT/CF
5.61

53



DSSC
Ti wire/TiO2 nanotubes/N719/I−–I3−/CoNi2S4 nanoribbons/CF
7.03

54



DSSC
CF/TiN nanoplates/I−–I3−/N719/TiO2 nanotubes/Ti wire
7.20

55



QDSSC
CF/Co9S8 nanotube/Sx2−–S2−/CdS–CdSe/TiO2 nanotubes/Ti wire
3.79

56



QDSSC
CF/ZnO nanowires/CdS/Sx2−–S2−/Au/CF
0.006

58



DSSC
CF/TiO2 nanorods/N719/I−–I3−/Pt wire
1.28

60



DSSC
CF/TiO2 nanowires/N719/I−–I3−/Pt wire
2.48

61



DSSC
CF/TiO2 nanoparticles/N719/I−–I3−/nanocarbon/CF
1.9

59



DSSC
CF/TiO2 nanowires/N719/I−–I3−/Pt/CF
2.46

61





3.2 Dye-sensitized solar cells
To fully exert the potential of CF materials toward high performance photovoltaics, both the photovoltaic cell architecture and the electrode preparation need targeted design. A real breakthrough was achieved when flexible/weavable wire/fiber-shaped solar cells especially two fiber twisted-structured wire/fiber dye-sensitized solar cells (WDSSCs or FDSSCs) caught the attention of researchers and received rapid development. Compared with other types of solar cells, DSSCs have several advantages such as low-cost, simple processing and environmental friendliness. The intrinsic properties of CF materials such as high flexibility, fibrous form, and excellent thermal/chemical stability, along with considerable electrical conductivity are essential and favorable features for efficient FDSSCs. In addition, the electrochemical activity and wide potential window of CF materials will bring extra benefits for the catalytic electrodes of FDSSCs that can operate effectively based on a photoelectrochemical mechanism.
In this regard, CFs were first utilized as an electrocatalytic electrode for FDSSCs (Fig. 2). For example, CF bundles with diameters ranging from tens to hundreds of microns can be directly used as a catalytic counter electrode. To fabricate a FDSSC, a bundle of CFs are intertwined onto a fibrous photoanode that is usually an organic ruthenium dye (or quantum dots) sensitized TiO2 film electrode (Fig. 2a–c). In fact, the poor electrocatalytic activity of pristine CFs could largely limit the photovoltaic conversion efficiency, which was generally less than 2%. Therefore, platinum nanoparticle catalysts were used to obtain a CF/Pt composite electrode. Usually, Pt films were prepared onto a CF conductive substrate by magnetron sputtering or pyrolysis of chloroplatinic acid, which can significantly improve the catalytic activity of the CF counter electrode.50,51 As a result, a highest efficiency of 5.08% was reported. Thanks to the relatively large specific surface area of microscale CFs and the Pt electrocatalyst, FDSSCs made from an inexpensive CF/Pt counter electrode obtained comparable and even higher efficiency than typical FDSSCs adopting a Pt wire counter electrode. Previous studies have indicated that (i) CF bundles can serve as good current collectors and offer a slight catalytic contribution for the photoelectric conversion; (ii) the diameter or the number of monofilaments of the CF bundle electrode can influence the catalytic surface area and the light transmission (electrode shadow) in an opposite way. Hence, the diameter of the CF bundle electrode should be carefully optimized in the two fiber-twisted CF solar cells.
 Fig. 2  Fiber-shaped DSSC based on the CF counter electrode. (a) Scheme of a FDSSC; (b) optical photograph of a FDSSC; (c) SEM image of the Pt-deposited CF counter electrode.50 [Ref. 50] – Reproduced by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of a FDSSC based on the CF/TiN nanoplate counter electrode; (e) SEM image of the TiN nanoplates grown on CFs.55 Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
As platinum is scarce and precious, various Pt-free and low cost electrocatalysts are further developed for CF counter electrodes in FDSSCs. For instance, an active ink nanocarbon film and the poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT) conducting polymer can be coated onto CFs via simple dip-coating, giving rise to FDSSCs with power conversion efficiencies of over 5%.52,53 The results infer that it is reasonable to parallel place the CF counter electrode with the fibrous anode to minimize the electrode shadow effect existing in the two fiber-twisted solar cells. Nevertheless, the distance between the two parallel fibrous electrodes is more difficult to control for ensuring effective carrier transport and collection. Through in situ thermal growth, CoNi2S4 nanoribbons, single crystalline TiN nanoplates (Fig. 2d and e) and Co9S8 nanotube arrays were successfully decorated on CFs to prepare efficient and highly flexible CF counter electrodes, leading to fiber solar cells with an optimal efficiency of 7.03%, 7.2% and 3.79%, respectively.54–56 Benefiting from the excellent activity of the TiN nanoplate modified CF catalytic electrode, a solar cell model assembled with four 21 cm-long FDSSCs can easily drive a small fan motor under outdoor sunlight.55 It would be of interest that an inverted device structure, i.e. obtained by twisting the fibrous photoanode onto the wire counter electrode rather than winding the wire counter electrode onto the fibrous photoanode,55,57 could probably favor light collection because of the opaque and light-blocking CF counter electrode, even though the latter device structure is more widely used for FDSSCs due to the difficulty in preparing reproducible and helical fibrous photoanodes for inverted FDSSCs. Despite the considerable performance of Pt-free CF counter electrodes for low cost FDSSCs, the long term stability of metal sulfide and metal nitride nano-catalysts in the FDSSCs is not clear. The applicability of catalytic CF counter electrodes including their actual flexibility and scalable preparation together with the mechanical performance of the whole device and the mechanism of performance degradation toward flexible/wearable power sources remains to be examined.
Apart from being catalytic electrodes, one-dimensional, macroscopic and wire-format CFs have been successfully employed as a photoanode to obtain FDSSCs, which is more impressive and challenging. After the growth of ZnO nanowires on the CF substrate, the ZnO coated CFs were used as the photoanode in CdS quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, and an initial efficiency of 0.006% was reported.58 The photovoltaic performance is poor. To achieve reasonable photoelectric conversion, both the morphology of the photoactive layer and the cell structure of the QDSSC need dedicated optimization. The first demonstration of the CF photoanode in efficient FDSSCs is by dip coating TiO2 nanoparticle colloids onto CFs, forming a multi-core (CF)/shell (TiO2) structured electrode. The CF/TiO2 anode was assembled with a nanocarbon coated CF counter electrode. The FDSSC acquired an energy conversion efficiency of 1.9%.59 It is worth noting that it is the first prototype of solar cells based on all-CF electrodes. The acceptable efficiency is obtained mainly because of the high photocurrent density when adopting a relatively thick TiO2 nanoparticle film (thickness of approximately 20 μm). However, the open-circuit voltage (Voc: ∼0.3 V) and fill factor (FF) of the cell are quite low, which largely result from the limited charge transport and severe electron recombination in the thick TiO2 nanoparticle film.
Through a “dissolve and growth” method, single-crystalline and rectangular TiO2 nanorod arrays were grown on CFs from the metal titanium source, as shown in Fig. 3a and b. The original TiO2 nanorods can be further etched with HCl into bunched TiO2 nanorods having a larger surface area to adsorb more dye molecules. The bunched TiO2 nanorod array covered CFs were further adopted as the photoanode to fabricate FDSSCs, which obtained an efficiency of 1.28% (Fig. 3c and d).60 Since each CF micro-substrate was covered by uniform TiO2 nanorod arrays, the electron recombination at the CF/TiO2 interfaces was greatly inhibited and Voc was improved to ∼0.6 V. Afterwards, vertically aligned TiO2 nanowires and hierarchical TiO2 nanowire/nanoparticles were in situ grown on CF substrates through a facile, controllable, and seed-assisted solvothermal process (Fig. 3e). By adjusting the length of nanowires and the thickness of the TiO2 nanoparticle film, the charge recombination of the CF/TiO2 photoanode could be reduced to a certain extent. An optimal efficiency of 2.46% is obtained for the all-CF electrode-based FDSSC when combined with a Pt-modified CF counter electrode. Moreover, a completely flexible FDSSC made from the CF photoanode was first realized and its bending durability was investigated, as displayed in Fig. 3f.61 Unfortunately, the photovoltaic efficiency of the flexible CF solar cell is much lower than that of non-flexible devices. Also, the device performance under cyclic bending is not desirable.
 Fig. 3  (a) and (b) SEM images of the top view of TiO2 nanorod arrays on carbon fibers; (c) schematic of the carbon fiber/TiO2 nanorod array based tube-shaped 3D-DSSC; (d) I–V curves of the DSSC based on TiO2 nanorod arrays and bunched TiO2 nanorod arrays on carbon fibers.60 Reprinted with permission from ref. 60, Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM image of hierarchical TiO2 nanowire/nanoparticles on CF substrates; (f) efficiency retention versus the number of bending cycles of the flexible CF-based wire DSSC.61 Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission, Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Compared to other planar-type DSSCs or FDSSCs based on metal wires, state-of-the-art CF DSSCs built on the CF/TiO2 photoanode exhibit much lower efficiencies. This may be due to some possible reasons. First, the preparation method and active materials of CF photoanodes are still limited. Second, ordinary CF materials are less conductive than TCOs and metals, which always increases the internal resistance of the electrode and thus the FF of the corresponding devices. This impact becomes more significant and even dominant when the size of the CF electrode/device increases. Developing novel CF materials with enhanced conductivity is favorable. Third, the charge recombination at the interfaces of CFs and the TiO2 photoanode still plays a key role in affecting the Voc of FDSSCs. To gain more efficient, flexible and mechanically tough CF photoanodes, the preparation of ultrafine, high quality active TiO2 nanostructures with defined crystal faces (e.g. anatase TiO2 nanoarrays) and good interface contact on cylindrical CFs is crucial. If highly efficient photoactive materials such as organohalide perovskites are adopted,33 more efficient fiber/wire solar cells based on the CF photoanode are expected.
CF-based solar cells can be totally TCO-free and the electrode materials are abundant, which will greatly reduce the device cost. Moreover, the outstanding 3D light harvesting ability of fiber/wire solar cells has been quite unique and attractive.62–64 In conjunction with a simple reflector or plentiful optical designs, the power output of fiber/wire solar cells can be enhanced by a factor of 2–6 due to their architecture superiority,65 which is also suitable for CF-based solar cells. Compared with other metal wire-based fiber/wire solar cells,33,66–68 CF materials possess better thermal/chemical stability and are more lightweight. Fiber/wire-shaped solar cells are inherently flexible and deformable. The considerable flexibility of CF-based solar cells stemming from the exceptional mechanical properties of the CF material is even more appealing. However, most of the reported CF-based solar cells are still rigid because glass capillaries rather than soft materials are often employed for encapsulation, even though the CF catalytic electrode or CF photoanode can be highly flexible. One of the great challenges is to realize completely flexible CF solar cells with considerable efficiency. At present, CF-based wire/fiber-shaped solar cells are still in their infant stage. Their photovoltaic performance is poor compared to their planar counterpart and far from satisfactory. Particularly, the final devices are often tiny and small, with an effective device length of no more than 5 cm. To achieve efficient devices with a larger size is equally important. Main obstacles include the preparation and more precise control of effective active layers on cylindrical micro-CFs, along with tailored properties of functional materials and cooperative design of the photoelectrode/device structure. With collaborative studies on the working mechanism, device physics and encapsulation, more-efficient CF solar cells with ideal flexibility are on the way. In any case, further development of high-performance CF-based solar cells is significant and promising for building cost-efficient, lightweight and flexible/wearable solar cells.
4. CFs as electrode materials for wire/fiber energy storage devices
During the past twenty years, all kinds of carbon materials with various compositions, microstructures, morphologies and forms (e.g. powders, fibres, films, paper, fabrics, mats, etc.) have been widely used in many electrochemical energy storage devices because of their abundance, ease of processing and moderate material properties.69–72 CFs have sufficient electrical, electrochemical, porous and mechanical properties. A variety of CF materials, such as chopped CFs, carbon cloths//felts, CF textiles and carbon nanofibers, have attracted intensive attention for applications in fuel cells, microbial fuel cells, capacitors and lithium-ion batteries.73–77 In particular, they can act as a part of the device structure components like the current collector, conductive supports and catalyst scaffolds, or functional components like electroactive electrode materials, conductive additives and gas diffusion layers.
4.1 Wire-type batteries
With the advent of flexible wire/fiber electronics, continuous and fibriform CF (i.e. yarns, threads, bundles or tows) materials endowed with excellent mechanical performance and electrochemical properties will undoubtedly find new opportunities in flexible, knittable and wearable wire/fiber energy storage devices. The electrode materials and related performance parameters of reported CF-based wire-type batteries/supercapacitors are summarized in Table 2. For example, a fibrous zinc–carbon battery prototype based on CF electrodes was presented. As shown in Fig. 4a, the negative electrode is Zn wire or Zn paste coated CFs, whereas the positive electrode is MnO2 paste coated CFs.78 A discharge capacity of 166 mA h g−1 was demonstrated. The flexible battery exhibited good cycling stability and can be wrapped onto fingers to light a LED (Fig. 4b). In consideration of the thick and fragile MnO2 film, the mechanical flexibility of the CF/MnO2 electrode is very limited and the active layer will probably be destroyed under bending and stress situations. Peng and co-workers achieved flexible fiber-shaped zinc bromide flow batteries, in which commercially available CFs can be directly used as the cathode (Fig. 4c).79 Impressive capacity performances with a specific capacity of 1550 mA h g−1 (calculated by the weight of the cathode) and a linear energy density of 1.43 mW h cm−1 were demonstrated. The fiber flow batteries also showed considerable rate capabilities and high tolerance to shape changes (Fig. 4d), which indicated their good potential for accessible and portable/wearable power sources. Though CF materials with planar shapes have been extensively used in various rechargeable batteries, good examples of fiber-type rechargeable batteries made from CFs are rarely reported. Since it is feasible in principle,80 CF-based wire-type batteries can be extended to other efficient rechargeable battery systems such as lithium–sulfur batteries, lithium (metal)–air batteries, sodium batteries, etc., which could significantly expand their applications and improve the theoretical specific capacity as well.
Table 2 CF-based wire-type batteries and supercapacitors




Device/electrode materials
Specific capacitance
Linear, areal or volumetric capacitance
Power density
Energy density
Ref.




CF/Zn/NH4Cl–ZnCl2/MnO2/CF
166 mA h g−1
0.29 mA h cm−1; 1.85 mA h cm−2





78



Zn/ZnBr2//ZnBr2/CF
1550 mA h g−1




1.43 mW h cm−1

79



CF/ZnBr2//ZnBr2/CF
624 mA h g−1




0.44 mW h cm−1

79



CF/nanocarbon


26.4 mF cm−2





84



CF/ink-carbon/PVA–LiCl//ink-carbon/CF


4.31 mF cm−2
5.6 × 10−3 mW cm−2
3.8 × 10−4 mW h cm−2

85



CF/rGO


13.5 mF cm−1; 307 mF cm−2
0.74 mW cm−1; 8.5 mW cm−2
1.9 μW h cm−1; 21.4 μW h cm−2

87



ACF/MnO2/CNTs


640 mF cm−2
8028 μW cm−2
11.1 μW h cm−2

86



CF/CoMn-LDH
1079 F g−1


65.6 kW kg−1
126.1 W h kg−1

88



CF/MnO2


2.5 F cm−3


0.22 mW h cm−3

89



CF/honeycomb MnO2
295 F g−1


400 W kg−1
22.2 W h kg−1

90



CF/Mn2O3 cubes


4.2 mF cm−1





91



CF/rGO/MnO2/polyacrylate–KCl/graphene hydrogel/Cu


50.8 mF cm−2; 22.54 F cm−3
0.2 W cm−3
18.1 μW h cm−2; 0.9 mW h cm−3

95



CF/rGO/MnO2/polyacrylate–KCl/graphene hydrogel/CF


122.5 mF cm−2
0.4 mW cm−2; 0.27 W cm−3
1.23 mW h cm−3

96



Activated CF/polyaniline/PVA–H3PO4/CF


∼12.5 F cm−3
11 W cm−3
2 mW h cm−3

97



CF/MnO2/polypyrrole/LiCl/polyaniline/V2O5/CF


0.613 F cm−2; 19.5 F cm−3
30 mW cm−2
0.34 mW h cm−2

98



Core–shell CFs
146 F g−1
23.7 mF cm−1
122 W kg−1; 10.1 mW cm−3
3.3 W h kg−1; 0.37 W h cm−3

99



Activated CF tows


14.2 F cm−3
3 W cm−3
0.35 mW h cm−3

100



CF bundle/MWCNTs/PVA–H3PO4/carbon nanofiber film


6.3 mF cm−1; 86.8 mF cm−2
13.7 μW cm−1; 189.4 μW cm−2
0.7 μW h cm−1; 9.8 μW h cm−2

101



Au wire/MnO2 nanoflowers/gel/CNTs/carbon paper
839.4 F g−1
12 mF cm−2
2531 μW cm−2
5.4 μW h cm−2

102



CF/ZnCo2O4 NWs
650 mF g−1







106



CF/WO3 NWs/polypyrrole/PVA–LiCl/V2O5/WO3 NWs/CF


56 F cm−3
280 mW cm−3
31.1 mW h cm−3

107



RuO2·xH2O@CF/PVA–H3PO4/RuO2·xH2O@CF


3.2 mF cm−1; 146 mF cm−2; 83.5 F cm−3
4.12 W cm−3



109



CF@Ni@rGO/PVA–KOH/CF@NiPx


6740 mF cm−2; 817 F cm−3; 33 F cm−3 (device)


8.97 mW h cm−3

110





 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the fiber battery based on Zn wire and MnO2/carbon fiber; (b) discharge curves of the fiber battery under different bending radii. Inset: two fiber batteries connected in series continuously driving a commercial green LED when bent around a human finger.78 Reprinted from ref. 78, Copyright © 2013, with permission from Elsevier. (c) Schematic of a zinc bromide (ZnBr2)-based fiber flow battery; (d) rate capability of the flexible ZnBr2-based fiber flow battery.79 [Ref. 79] – Reproduced by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.2 Fiber supercapacitors
Supercapacitors (or electrochemical capacitors) can make full use of the electrochemical double layer to adsorb ions or allow fast and reversible redox reactions at the electrode/electrolyte interfaces to store energy. Supercapacitors have several advantages such as ultrafast charging/discharging capability, exceptional power density, long cycling life and a wide working temperature range, which basically stem from the charge storage mechanism. So far, they have been regarded as one of the most competitive and promising energy storage technologies toward portable electronics, hybrid vehicles and back-up power supplies for intermittent power systems.81,82 Interestingly, the research field of wire/fiber-type supercapacitors is relatively new as the first successful prototype was invented in 2011.83 In 2012, Zou and co-workers introduced a trihelix-structured fiber supercapacitor, which is mainly composed of two parallel active fiber electrodes and a helical spacer wire twisted onto one active electrode, as shown in Fig. 5a.84 This type of wire-format supercapacitor is particularly favorable for the preparation of high performance, scalable and shape-variable flexible micro-supercapacitors. By adopting ink nanocarbon dip-coated CFs as the active electrode, flexible fiber supercapacitors obtained an areal specific capacitance of 26.4 mF cm−2 (Fig. 5b). Benefiting from the considerable specific surface area of the multiple micro-CF electrodes, CF built fiber supercapacitors gained much better capacitive performance than Au-sputtered plastic fiber supercapacitors. Since then, flexible wire/fiber supercapacitors have intrigued extensive interest and experienced rapid development.31
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the tri-helix structured fiber supercapacitor; (b) cyclic voltammograms (0.1 V s−1) of the fiber supercapacitor based on Au-coated plastic fibers and CFs.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission, Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic of the coaxial fiber supercapacitor; (d) charge–discharge curves at different current densities for the coaxial fiber supercapacitor; (e) CV curves with different bending angles of the coaxial fiber supercapacitor; (f) cycle performance of the coaxial fiber supercapacitor and coin cell supercapacitor at a current density of 275 μA cm−1 (the inset is LED lighting using four coaxial fiber supercapacitors connected in series, corresponding to 14.4 cm in length).101 Reprinted with permission from ref. 101, Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society. 
In virtue of their good electronic conductivity and mechanical performance, CFs are commonly employed as structural scaffolds and current collectors to load active materials for flexible wire-shaped supercapacitors. In fact, pristine CFs can also contribute certain capacitive performance (electrochemical double layer capacitance), though the contribution is beyond requirement. To enhance the electrochemical capacity, CFs can be decorated with other more active carbon nanomaterials, such as commercial ink-carbon, CNTs and reduced graphene.85–87 Zhu and co-workers deposited reduced graphene oxide (rGO) onto CFs for flexible fiber supercapacitors via a synchronous electrochemical reduction method. The synergistic effect between wrinkled and porous rGO sheets and highly conductive CFs can favor the double-layer capacitive behavior. As a result, the electrochemical performance of the CF/rGO hybrid fiber was enhanced by three orders of magnitude compared to pure CFs, leading to high performance fiber supercapacitors with a maximum power density of 8.5 mW cm−2.87
However, both the specific capacitances and energy density of these CF-based electrochemical double layer capacitors are not ideal. Taking advantage of the faradaic charge transfer process in pseudocapacitive electrodes, highly electroactive and pseudocapacitive materials including conducting polymers, metal oxides and their composites were used for CF-based flexible wire supercapacitors. Through a “dipping and freeze-drying” process, Dong et al. proposed a novel “down to wire” strategy for the simultaneous production of efficient flexible textile electrodes and fiber electrodes. By dismantling activated CF textiles, composite CF/CNT and CF/MnO2/CNT fiber electrodes can be easily prepared, which exhibited an areal capacitance of up to 640 mF cm−2.86 The method is quite simple and the fiber supercapacitors are very effective, which showed a good example of reverse thinking to fabricate efficient fibrous CF electrodes. Since the dismantling procedure was artificially controlled, the reproducibility of device performance may be correlated with experience. According to an in situ one-step growth approach, CoMn-layered double hydroxide (CoMn-LDH) nanowalls were anchored to CFs and used for fiber supercapacitors. The flexible supercapacitor based on a pair of CF/CoMn-LDH electrodes achieved a specific energy up to 126.1 W h kg−1 and a specific power of 65.6 kW kg−1.88 The hierarchical structured CoMn-LDH with exposed active sites of Co and Mn can largely improve the pseudocapacitive performance. This demonstrates that a rational design of hierarchical active materials with defined micro-structures on CFs is extremely useful. Zhou and co-workers fabricated a core–shell structured CF/MnO2 fiber electrode by a simple reaction between CFs and KMnO4. Using H3PO4/poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) as the electrolyte, fiber solid-state supercapacitors based on two CF/MnO2 electrodes were assembled. The device achieved high rate capability with a scan rate up to 20 V s−1 and a high volume capacitance of 2.5 F cm−3.89 Zhang et al. used a similar hydrothermal method by redox replacement reaction to prepare porous honeycomb-like MnO2 on CFs. CFs served as the reaction substrate and a sacrificial reductant as well.90 In addition to the active materials, different structures of the CF fiber electrode can also make a difference. Liu et al. investigated the influence of the fiber electrode structure (straight, bent or coiled) on the electrochemical performance of single yarn supercapacitors. They synthesized Mn2O3 cube-arrays on a CF matrix and found that the coiled wire supercapacitor delivered the best capacitive performance and rate capability, which is due to a compact configuration for better space-utilization.91 In view of the unique form and architecture of fiber (wire)/yarn supercapacitors, the spatial distribution of CF electrodes will have a more significant effect on the final device performance. Therefore, CF-based supercapacitors should be assigned with a rational configuration in the case of modules/integration systems toward practical applications.
Supercapacitors always own outstanding power density and cycling life at the expense of energy density. The energy output of flexible supercapacitors is still not high enough, which has long been a limiting factor as for actual applications.92,93 The development of flexible supercapacitors with high energy density without compromising the power density at the same time is urgently necessary and meaningful. In this regard, a very useful strategy to further improve the performance of CF-based supercapacitors is assembling asymmetric supercapacitors, which can greatly extend the voltage window and thus the device energy density.94 In particular, in order to maximize the electrochemical performance, the positive electrode and the negative electrode of the CF-based asymmetric supercapacitors should be carefully matched and balanced to store charges.
By facile immersion of graphene oxide solution and subsequent electrochemical deposition, Zhang et al. prepared a rGO/MnO2 film on CFs and a porous graphene hydrogel on copper wire. A flexible fiber asymmetric supercapacitor based on the CF/rGO/MnO2 positive electrode and Cu/graphene hydrogel negative electrode was then constructed. The fabrication process of the CF-based asymmetric supercapacitor is shown in Fig. 6a. The device can be reversibly charged/discharged over a voltage region of 1.6 V, delivering a volumetric energy density of 0.9 mW h cm−3.95 The same group further adopted CFs to replace Cu wire and assembled a similar fiber solid-state asymmetric supercapacitor, which demonstrated an improved volumetric energy density of 1.23 mW h cm−3. The fully charged fiber supercapacitors connected in series can power a phthalocyanine photodetector.96 Jin et al. prepared conducting polyaniline coated CFs by electrochemical oxidation of aniline. After joining with a functionalized CF electrode, a flexible, knittable and even stretchable asymmetric wire supercapacitor with an operating voltage of 1.6 V was produced. The maximum power density and energy density of the device were up to 2 mW h cm−3 and 11 W cm−3, respectively.97 To combine the pseudocapacitive features of metal oxides and the conducting polymer, a wire-shaped fiber asymmetric supercapacitor was developed based on the CF/MnO2/polypyrrole positive electrode and CF/V2O5/polyaniline negative electrode. The device was cycling stable, flexible and bendable, which showed a wide potential range of 2.0 V and a high areal capacitance of 0.613 F cm−2. Besides, a considerable energy density of 0.34 mW h cm−2 and a maximum power density of 30 mW cm−2 were attained.98
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the design and fabrication process of the carbon fiber-based asymmetric supercapacitor.95 Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of a porous core–shell CF; (c) TEM image of the porous core–shell CF; (d) CV curves at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 for the wire-like flexible all-carbon supercapacitor. Inset: photograph of the frizzy wire-like all-carbon supercapacitors.99 Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Thanks to the functionalization and formation of composites with various capacitive materials, current wire/fiber supercapacitors built on the CF matrix have achieved impressive electrochemical performance and cycling endurance. However, more complicated CF composites with less stable pseudocapacitive materials may bring uncertain side effects and long-term stability problems of the device. On one hand, a further understanding of the interplay between the CF substrates and the active layer is necessary. On the other hand, it is worth noting that if there are more effective ways to modify or tailor the surface properties of pure or pristine CFs, the activated or functionalized CFs are expected to be directly used alone as highly active electrodes. If so, high power and durable CF-based wire/fiber supercapacitors with acceptable energy density could be realized.
In an attempt to address this issue, several high performance fiber supercapacitors made from the pure CF electrode without any other active materials are developed. Through a facile “acid oxidation-NaBH4 reduction” process, the preparation of porous core–shell carbon fibers was demonstrated (Fig. 6b and c). The porous and amorphous shell was mainly composed of graphene-like carbon nanosheets. When adopted as the active electrode for electrochemical double layer capacitors, the porous core–shell CF-based wire-like supercapacitors achieved an encouraging energy density of 3.3 W h kg−1 (0.37 W h cm−3) at a power density of 122 W kg−1 (10.1 mW cm−3). The wire supercapacitor also exhibited good cyclic stability and bending resistance (Fig. 6d).99 To further increase the surface area (<10 m2 g−1) and porosity of CF yarns, Chen and co-workers developed a facile and scalable “exfoliation–annealing–reduction” strategy to attain activated CF tows (A-CFT) with larger surface area and high mesoporosity. There existed abundant and exfoliated ultrathin carbon sheets attached to the intact fiber core of the A-CFT. A-CFTs without loading any other capacitive materials demonstrated a high volumetric capacitance up to 14.2 F cm−3 (in aqueous H2SO4 electrolyte) and gave rise to all-solid-state flexible fiber supercapacitors with a high power density of 3 W cm−3 and an energy density of 0.35 mW h cm−3.100 Hence, fiber supercapacitors based on pure CFs can also afford impressive rate capability and even energy density getting rid of pseudocapacitive materials. Exploring more energy saving methods under mild conditions to activate CFs is quite promising.
These above-mentioned wire/fiber supercapacitors made from CF materials usually employ a two-fiber or two-ply structure, that is, the two active fiber electrodes can be parallel or twisted with each other. Not only that, coaxial CF supercapacitors based on single fiber architecture have also been introduced. Lee and co-workers first invented coaxial fiber supercapacitors using all-carbon material electrodes. To complete the fiber supercapacitor, micro-CF bundles were coated with multiwalled CNTs and used as the core electrode, which was wrapped by a separator and the carbon nanofiber film (outer electrode), as shown in Fig. 5c. The coaxial fiber exhibited good charging/discharging capability and flexibility (Fig. 5d–f). A high areal specific capacitance of 86.8 mF cm−2 and an energy density of 9.8 μW h cm−2 at a power density of 189.4 μW cm−2 were reported.101 Based on a similar structure, a coaxial fiber asymmetric supercapacitor built on MnO2 deposited nanoporous gold wire wrapped by CNT coated carbon paper was proposed. The fiber supercapacitor obtained an operating voltage of 1.8 V, with an areal capacitance of 12 mF cm−2 and an energy density of 5.4 μW h cm−2.102 It is necessary to note that other sheet-like CF materials such as CF paper, textiles or cloth, aside from yarns or bundles, can also be feasible electrodes for coaxial fiber supercapacitors by curling into cylindrical forms. Therefore, the application potential of functional CF materials for diverse, high performance and flexible wire-type supercapacitors is more compelling.
5. CFs for wire/fiber hybrid or integrated devices
Apart from the 1D architecture superiority and shape variability toward flexible/wearable electronics, another important advantage of wire/fiber energy devices is that it is more convenient to integrate or hybridize them with other types of devices to fulfill multifunctional devices/systems.22,103,104 By precise control or patterning of the active sites and subzones, it is realistic to deposit and build different device parts with varied functionalities on a single fiber or shared fibrous matrix. Besides, it is much easier to assemble multiple wire/fiber energy device units into integrated device modules by simple series or parallel connection/assembly.32,33,105
In a typical report, three fiber supercapacitors made from CF/MnO2 fibrous electrodes were connected in series. The integrated device can operate in a 2.4 V charge/discharge voltage window, which is about three times the voltage of the single fiber supercapacitor (Fig. 7a). Meanwhile, the capacitance performance of the parallel assemblies of the fiber supercapacitors showed a linear dependence with respect to the number of the CF/TiO2 fiber electrodes (Fig. 7b).89 In other words, by simply varying the length or number of the device units, arbitrary power and energy output can be gained. In another study, highly ordered ZnCo2O4 NW array grown CF composite fibers were prepared for solid-state flexible fiber supercapacitors, and further assembled in a planar-integration composed of several to tens of composite fibers. The integrated fiber supercapacitors were achieved by simple alignment of CF electrodes on a polymer substrate, in which an enhanced distributed-capacitance effect was recognized by the increased number of composite fibers.106 He and co-workers prepared hierarchical WO3 NWs/polypyrrole and WO3 NWs/V2O5 on micro-sized CFs, which were used as the positive electrode and negative electrode for fiber asymmetric supercapacitors with a large operating voltage of 2 V. A remarkable volumetric capacitance of 56 F cm−3 (calculated by the whole device volume) and an energy density of ca. 31.1 mW h cm−3 are demonstrated. The high-performance flexible micro-fiber supercapacitors can be easily integrated in series or in parallel to drive LEDs.107 Obviously, it is convenient for fiber-type energy devices to readily meet various high power/energy requirements toward portable electronics and smart textiles.
 Fig. 7  (a) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of a single supercapacitor (SC) and three SCs connected in series. (b) Capacitance with respect to CF/MnO2 core/shell fiber numbers to demonstrate that the device could be scaled up. The inset is the optical image of a SC fabricated with 50 CF/MnO2 core/shell fibers.89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic 3D representation of a single fiber-based hybrid nanogenerator for simultaneous harvesting of biochemical and mechanical energy from an external force or pressure applied to a liquid.108 Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission, Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Not only is the integration of the same kind of device viable, also the hybridization/integration of different types of devices has been achieved. Wang and co-workers created an innovative and flexible fiber-based hybrid nanogenerator consisting of a FNG and a fiber biofuel cell. As displayed in Fig. 7c, the FNG and the fiber biofuel cell were arranged on a single CF, which can capture mechanical energy and biochemical energy simultaneously or independently. The CF served as the flexible substrate and the core electrode as well. The hybrid FNG can also act as a self-powered system for the detection of pressure variation in bio-liquids such as glucose/blood.108 Later, they combined a fiber supercapacitor and a triboelectric NG to realize a flexible self-charging power system.109 RuO2·xH2O was hydrothermally synthesized on the surface of CFs and served as an active electrode for fiber supercapacitors. Poly(dimethylsiloxane) (PDMS) was coated onto CFs to form a triboelectric NG. Through the function of rectifiers, fiber supercapacitors can be effectively charged by the triboelectric NG to fulfill self-charging. In addition, the integration of fiber solar cells with fiber batteries to complete an entire energy conversion–storage device system is equally attractive. In a successful prototype, a rechargeable fiber-type zinc bromide battery made from the CF electrode was connected with four fiber DSSCs to form an energy integration system. The flexible hybrid fiber power system gained a maximum overall energy conversion efficiency of 3.4%.79 In a recent study, vertically aligned nickel phosphide (NiPx) nanoflakes were grown on CFs via an electrodeposition–phosphidation process. The resulting CF@NiPx electrode is special for its bifunctional activity. It exhibited superior electrocatalytic water splitting ability and ultrahigh specific volumetric capacitance as well.110 It could shed light on the design of efficient CF-based electrocatalytic-energy storage device/systems.
Ranging from piezoelectrical–biochemical, triboelectrical–electrochemical and photo-electrical–electrochemical, etc., these innovative prototypes of CF-based wire-type hybrid devices have demonstrated great potential toward energy-integrated utilization. However, it is worth pointing out that these hybrid devices/systems still basically stay at the concept level. For most of the so-called integrated/hybrid devices, different functional parts are often tested individually. Performance data and characterization relevant to the actual operation of the whole device/system are seldom provided. There is plenty of room to improve the overall energy utilization efficiency and the architecture design of these hybrid devices.
6. Challenges and outlook
CF materials are flexible, lightweight, tolerant, electrically conductive and biocompatible. It is reasonable that they can play more active roles in renewable energy technologies and the rising flexible/wearable electronics, rather than being confined as structural materials. Recent progress has proved that micro-CFs can be feasible fibrous substrates and free-standing current collectors for various flexible wire/fiber energy devices. They can perform as alternative electrodes for wire/fiber solar cells and wire-type electrochemical energy storage devices (batteries and supercapacitors) when decorated with efficient guest nanomaterials or active layers. Besides, the surface functionalization and activation of pristine CFs are especially important and meaningful. It is of particular interest that high-performance supercapacitors with exceptional rate capability can be obtained using pure core–shell CF electrodes. Indeed, the functional materials, electrode interfaces and device architecture should be synergistically considered and optimized to realize desirable device performance. It has been only about six years since the first prototype of a CF-based wire/fiber energy device was invented. Owing to the rapid advance of flexible/wearable wire/fiber electronics, state-of-the-art CF-based wire solar cells (adopting CFs as the catalytic electrode) and fiber supercapacitors can exhibit comparable specific performance compared to their bulk counterparts.
The majority of the reported studies still focus on the application of materials learned from planar-type electronics and thus are unsystematic and lack in-depth investigation. An innovative endeavor in fiber/wire-type electronic devices would probably make a breakthrough. Regarding the inadequate performances and limited studies on device flexibility toward practical applications, CF-based wire/fiber energy devices are still in their infancy. New CF materials and fundamental insight into the working mechanism of wire/fiber-type devices should be highlighted. Also, many issues such as long-term durability, scalability, encapsulation, device physics and cost remain to be solved. In order to develop more efficient CF-based energy devices, there are several research aspects to be considered and concerned.
First, to identify new and more active CF electrodes and high performance CF device units is primarily necessary. CFs are relatively ready-made materials. The fabrication of functional CF electrodes commonly involves two strategies. One is the “top down” strategy to etch the surface of inert micro-CFs for introducing more active sites and defects by using strong acids and oxidizers. Another is to deposit or load more active guest materials onto CFs. However, these two strategies are still limited to largely improve the properties of CFs to some extent. Instead, if more efficient ways for the nano-functionalization of CFs such as the “bottom up” strategy (e.g. blend spinning or biscrolling yarns111,112) are developed, composite CFs with improved conductivity and tailored microstructures/compositions are expected. Furthermore, more work into the optimization of the overall device components, the structural design and the device mechanism is fundamentally important, especially for enhancing the specific areal/volumetric performance of the corresponding devices. High-efficiency CF-based wire/fiber power device units will further facilitate their integration with other flexible electronic devices such as sensors, displays or lighting sources, and eventually fulfill portable, ubiquitous and multifunctional micro/nano-device systems.
Second, a mutual promotion and development between CFs and CNT fibers or graphene fibers should be recognized. CNT fibers and graphene fibers have emerged as good functional fiber candidates for diverse applications. Their large scale production can draw lessons from the existing industrial technologies of CFs. Meanwhile, more exciting applications of CF materials by learning from novel CNT fibers and graphene fibers could be anticipated.
Third, more reliable and unified standards for the fabrication and characterization of wire/fiber energy devices should be established. The above-mentioned devices are usually manually fabricated. Most of these micro-CF-based electrodes and wire/fiber devices are miniaturized micro-devices, which demand careful handling and experience to ensure reproducibility. The device performance can vary with device size and the number of CF monofilaments. Thus insightful generalizations are necessary for preparing and evaluating the actual devices. In terms of device flexibility, exact characterizations are very rare for most reported devices. More investigations of their mechanical properties should be conducted.
Finally, targeted research and cooperation with the CF industrial community may motivate technological innovations of high-performance CF materials with defined structures and required properties. Moreover, waste biomass derived CF materials for functional CF energy devices may be a possible research direction.
Acknowledgements
This work was jointly supported by the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 51602109 and NSFC 91333107) and the Guangdong Provincial Science and Technology Project (No. 2016A050502048 and No. 2014A030310427).
References
Y. D. Liu and S. Kumar, Polym. Rev., 2012, 52, 234–258 CrossRef CAS .
E. Frank, F. Hermanutz and M. R. Buchmeiser, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2012, 297, 493–501 CrossRef CAS .
X. S. Huang, Materials, 2009, 2, 2369–2403 CrossRef CAS .
N. Saito, K. Aoki, Y. Usui, M. Shimizu, K. Hara, N. Narita, N. Ogihara, K. Nakamura, N. Ishigaki, H. Kato, H. Haniu, S. Taruta, Y. A. Kim and M. Endo, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3824–3834 RSC .
E. Frank, L. M. Steudle, D. Ingildeev, J. M. Sporl and M. R. Buchmeiser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 5262–5298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Behabtu, C. C. Young, D. E. Tsentalovich, O. Kleinerman, X. Wang, A. W. K. Ma, E. A. Bengio, R. F. ter Waarbeek, J. J. de Jong, R. E. Hoogerwerf, S. B. Fairchild, J. B. Ferguson, B. Maruyama, J. Kono, Y. Talmon, Y. Cohen, M. J. Otto and M. Pasquali, Science, 2013, 339, 182–186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, J. P. Rong, D. S. Ma and B. Q. Wei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2152–2159 CAS .
X. H. Lu, T. Zhai, X. H. Zhang, Y. Q. Shen, L. Y. Yuan, B. Hu, L. Gong, J. Chen, Y. H. Gao, J. Zhou, Y. X. Tong and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 938–944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Endo, Y. A. Kim, T. Hayashi, K. Nishimura, T. Matusita, K. Miyashita and M. S. Dresselhaus, Carbon, 2001, 39, 1287–1297 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Wang and R. A. W. Dryfe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5279–5283 CAS .
B. Vigolo, A. Penicaud, C. Coulon, C. Sauder, R. Pailler, C. Journet, P. Bernier and P. Poulin, Science, 2000, 290, 1331–1334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Koziol, J. Vilatela, A. Moisala, M. Motta, P. Cunniff, M. Sennett and A. Windle, Science, 2007, 318, 1892–1895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xu and C. Gao, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 571 CrossRef PubMed .
W. B. Lu, M. Zu, J. H. Byun, B. S. Kim and T. W. Chou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1805–1833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Foroughi, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, J. Oh, M. E. Kozlov, S. Fang, T. Mirfakhrai, J. D. W. Madden, M. K. Shin, S. J. Kim and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2011, 334, 494–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Qu, J. L. Cheng, X. D. Li, D. M. Yuan, P. N. Chen, X. L. Chen, B. Wang and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3646–3652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Yu, K. Goh, H. Wang, L. Wei, W. C. Jiang, Q. Zhang, L. M. Dai and Y. Chen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 555–562 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Chortos and Z. N. Bao, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 321–331 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Xu, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 161–192 RSC .
S. Xu, Y. H. Zhang, L. Jia, K. E. Mathewson, K. I. Jang, J. Kim, H. R. Fu, X. Huang, P. Chava, R. H. Wang, S. Bhole, L. Z. Wang, Y. J. Na, Y. Guan, M. Flavin, Z. S. Han, Y. G. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Science, 2014, 344, 70–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Weng, P. N. Chen, S. S. He, X. M. Sun and H. S. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6140–6169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, M. Peng, X. Yu, Y. Fu and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1184–1200 RSC .
G. Zhou, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1307–1338 CAS .
H. C. Weerasinghe, F. Z. Huang and Y. B. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 174–189 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, Y. Hu, C. Xu, Y. Zhang, R. Zhang, X. Wen and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 75–81 CrossRef CAS .
X. F. Wang, X. H. Lu, B. Liu, D. Chen, Y. X. Tong and G. Z. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4763–4782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xie and B. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3592–3617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Gwon, J. Hong, H. Kim, D. H. Seo, S. Jeon and K. Kang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 538–551 CAS .
X. Wang, K. Jiang and G. Shen, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 265–272 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, J. Ren, W. Weng and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4524–4531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yu, Q. Qian, L. Wei, W. Jiang, K. Goh, J. Wei, J. Zhang and Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 647–662 RSC .
S. W. Pan, J. Ren, X. Fang and H. S. Peng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501867 CrossRef .
M. Peng and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 20435–20458 CAS .
D. Zou, Z. Lv, X. Cai and S. Hou, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 273–281 CrossRef CAS .
G. Z. Sun, X. W. Wang and P. Chen, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 215–226 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Y. Qin, C. Xu, Y. G. Wei, R. S. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 366–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9533–9557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qin, X. D. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2008, 451, 809 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 84–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liao, Z. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. Mohr, Y. Zhang and H. J. Fecht, Nano Res., 2014, 7, 917–928 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, W. Zhang, J. Sun, J. Wen, Q. Yang, H. Cuo, X. Ma and M. Zhang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 322, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Z. H. Lin, G. Cheng, X. Wen, Y. Liu, S. Niu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10674–10681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, X. Han, Z. Zhao, J. Zhang, W. Guo, C. Pan, A. Li, H. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 19–27 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Zou, D. Wang, Z. Z. Chu, Z. B. Lv and X. Fan, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2010, 254, 1169–1178 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kawashima, Y. Tamai, H. Ohkita, I. Osaka and K. Takimiya, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          W. J. Xu, S. Choi and M. G. Allen, in Mems 2010: 23rd Ieee International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems, Technical Digest,  2010, pp. 1187–1190 Search PubMed .
M. S. Yoon, Y. B. Shim and Y. G. Han, J. Opt. Soc. Korea, 2015, 19, 199–205 CrossRef .
K. J. Maung, H. T. Hahn and Y. S. Ju, Sol. Energy, 2010, 84, 450–458 CrossRef .
S. Hou, X. Cai, Y. Fu, Z. Lv, D. Wang, H. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Chu and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13776–13779 RSC .
M. Sun and X. Cui, J. Power Sources, 2013, 223, 74–78 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, Z. Lv, H. Wu, S. Hou and D. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9639–9644 RSC .
S. Hou, X. Cai, H. Wu, Z. Lv, D. Wang, Y. Fu and D. Zou, J. Power Sources, 2012, 215, 164–169 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Zhou, H. Dai, T. Yu, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 697–703 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, H. Dai, Y. Zhou, Y. Hu, T. Yu, J. Liu and Z. Zou, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 14321–14324 RSC .
W. Guo, C. Chen, M. Ye, M. Lv and C. Lin, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3656–3663 RSC .
Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Shen and W. Chen, Appl. Energy, 2010, 87, 436–441 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, L. Zhu, H. Liu and W. Li, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 075402 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cai, S. Hou, H. Wu, Z. Lv, Y. Fu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, H. Kafafy, Z. Chu and D. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 125–130 RSC .
W. Guo, C. Xu, X. Wang, S. Wang, C. Pan, C. Lin and Z. L. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4437–4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cai, H. Wu, S. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. Zou, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 474–482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peng, X. Yu, X. Cai, Q. Yang, H. Hu, K. Yan, H. Wang, B. Dong, F. Zhu and D. Zou, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 117–124 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fan, Z. Z. Chu, F. Z. Wang, C. Zhang, L. Chen, Y. W. Tang and D. C. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 592–595 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. Lee, R. D. Eckert, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, C. J. Brabec and R. A. Gaudiana, Science, 2009, 324, 232–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang, Z. Z. Chu, X. Cai, X. Fan, Z. L. Wang and D. C. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3379–3383 CAS .
X. Fang, Z. B. Yang, L. B. Qiu, H. Sun, S. W. Pan, J. Deng, Y. F. Luo and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1694–1698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Lv, J. F. Yu, H. W. Wu, J. Shang, D. Wang, S. C. Hou, Y. P. Fu, K. Wu and D. C. Zou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 1248–1253 RSC .
Y. P. Fu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, H. W. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang and D. C. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 37–41 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Fu, K. Tang, K. P. Song, P. A. van Aken, Y. Yu and J. Maier, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1384–1389 RSC .
Y. F. Li, Z. P. Huang, K. Huang, D. Carnahan and Y. C. Xing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3339–3345 CAS .
X. Li and B. Q. Wei, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 159–173 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, Y. Dou, D. Zhao, P. F. Fulvio, R. T. Mayes and S. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4828–4850 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yang, K. Cheng, X. Xiao, J. L. Yin, G. L. Wang and D. X. Cao, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 89–94 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Chen, H. Q. Hou, F. Harnisch, S. A. Patil, A. A. Carmona-Martinez, S. Agarwal, Y. Y. Zhang, S. Sinha-Ray, A. L. Yarin, A. Greiner and U. Schroder, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1417–1421 CAS .
G. Milczarek, A. Ciszewski and I. Stepniak, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 7882–7885 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, X. F. Wang, B. Y. Liu, Q. F. Wang, D. S. Tan, W. F. Song, X. J. Hou, D. Chen and G. Z. Shen, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 525–534 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Tao, N. S. Liu, W. Z. Ma, L. W. Ding, L. Y. Li, J. Su and Y. H. Gao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2286 Search PubMed .
X. Yu, Y. Fu, X. Cai, H. Kafafy, H. Wu, M. Peng, S. Hou, Z. Lv, S. Ye and D. Zou, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1242–1248 CrossRef CAS .
M. Peng, K. Yan, H. W. Hu, D. H. Shen, W. X. Song and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2157–2165 RSC .
X. Fang, W. Weng, J. Ren and H. S. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 491–496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lu, J. G. Chen and J. Q. Xiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 1882–1889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
J. Bae, M. K. Song, Y. J. Park, J. M. Kim, M. L. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1683–1687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. P. Fu, X. Cai, H. W. Wu, Z. B. Lv, S. C. Hou, M. Peng, X. Yu and D. C. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5713–5718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dai, H. Guo, M. Wang, J. Liu, G. Wang, C. Hu and Y. Xi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19665–19669 CAS .
L. B. Dong, C. J. Xu, Y. Li, C. L. Wu, B. Z. Jiang, Q. Yang, E. L. Zhou, F. Y. Kang and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1675–1681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, M. Zhu, P. Li, R. Zhang, X. Li, Q. Gong, K. Wang, M. Zhong, D. Wu, F. Lin and H. Zhu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 19550–19556 RSC .
J. Zhao, J. Chen, S. Xu, M. Shao, D. Yan, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8836–8843 CAS .
X. Xiao, T. Li, P. Yang, Y. Gao, H. Jin, W. Ni, W. Zhan, X. Zhang, Y. Cao, J. Zhong, L. Gong, W. C. Yen, W. Mai, J. Chen, K. Huo, Y. L. Chueh, Z. L. Wang and J. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9200–9206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo and P. K. Chu, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 47–57 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, B. Liu, X. Wang, D. Chen, Z. Fan and G. Shen, Nano Energy, 2014, 10, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797–828 RSC .
M. Beidaghi and Y. Gogotsi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 867–884 CAS .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei and Z. J. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300816 CrossRef .
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11215–11223 CAS .
Z. Zhang, F. Xiao, J. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11817–11823 CAS .
H. Jin, L. Zhou, C. L. Mak, H. Huang, W. M. Tang and H. L. W. Chan, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 662–670 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, N. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Chen, C. Yang, J. Tao, S. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Su, L. Li and Y. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13461–13467 CAS .
W. Zhou, K. Zhou, X. Liu, R. Hu, H. Liu and S. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 7250–7255 CAS .
D. Yu, S. Zhai, W. Jiang, K. Goh, L. Wei, X. Chen, R. Jiang and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4895–4901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Viet Thong, H. Kim, A. Ghosh, J. Kim, J. Chang, V. Quoc An, P. Duy Tho, J.-H. Lee, S.-W. Kim and Y. H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5940–5947 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Xu, X. Hu, Y. Sun, H. Yang, X. Liu and Y. Huang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1148–1158 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, H. Wu, S. Ye, X. Cai, X. Yu, S. Hou, H. Kafafy and D. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 805–812 CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lv, Y. Fu, S. Hou, D. Wang, H. Wu, C. Zhang, Z. Chu and D. Zou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 10076–10083 RSC .
B. Liu, D. Tan, X. Wang, D. Chen and G. Shen, Small, 2013, 9, 1998–2004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, X. Zhan, Z. Cheng, Q. Wang, Z. Wang, F. Wang, K. Xu, Y. Huang, M. Safdar and J. He, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 1400053 CrossRef .
C. Pan, Z. Li, W. Guo, J. Zhu and Z. L. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 11192–11196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, X. H. Li, Y. L. Zi, S. H. Wang, Z. L. Li, L. Zheng, F. Yi, S. M. Li and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4830–4836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, S. Liu, J. Xiao and S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9691–9699 CAS .
M. D. Lima, S. Fang, X. Lepro, C. Lewis, R. Ovalle-Robles, J. Carretero-Gonzalez, E. Castillo-Martinez, M. E. Kozlov, J. Oh, N. Rawat, C. S. Haines, M. H. Haque, V. Aare, S. Stoughton, A. A. Zakhidov and R. H. Baughman, Science, 2011, 331, 51–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Lee, M. K. Shin, S. H. Kim, H. U. Cho, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, M. D. Lima, X. Lepro, M. E. Kozlov, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1970 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Xin Cai	Dr. Xin Cai obtained her B.S. Degree in 2010 from the University of Science and Technology, Beijing, P. R. China. She received her Ph.D. degree in polymer chemistry and physics from Peking University in 2015. She is currently working as a faculty member at the College of Materials and Energy in South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, P. R. China. Her research interests focus on designing novel active electrode materials for efficient carbon fiber-based solar cells and flexible fiber-type electrochemical energy storage devices, as well as interface engineering to optimize the device manufacturing process.
Chaoqun Zhang	Dr. Chaoqun Zhang received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering in 2014 from Iowa State University, USA. Following his Ph.D., he served as a postdoctoral research associate working on developing bio-based polymers and nano-composites from natural resources at the Center for Sustainable Polymers at the University of Minnesota from 2014 to 2015. After another year of postdoctoral research at Texas A&M University on bio-inspired materials and flame retardant nanocoatings produced using layer-by-layer assembly from 2015 to 2016, he is currently working on bio-based polymeric materials at South China Agricultural University as a faculty member of the college of materials and energy.
Shengsen Zhang	Dr. Shengsen Zhang is an Associate Professor in the College of Materials and Energy, South China Agricultural University, Guangzhou, P. R. China. His research interests include nanomaterials synthesis, characterization, modifications, and applications in renewable energies, such as photocatalysis and environmental pollution removal.
Yueping Fang	Prof. Yueping Fang received his BS and MS degrees in chemistry from Wuhan University in 1987 and 1990, respectively. He obtained his Ph.D. degree in Chemistry from Sun Yat-sen University in 2004. He was a post-doctoral researcher at the Hong Kong University of Science and Technology from 2004 to 2005. Since 2009 he has been a professor of Applied Chemistry at South China Agricultural University. During 2008–2009 and 2013–2014, he worked as a visiting professor at Kansas State University. His research interests include the synthesis and applications of quasi-one-dimensional nanomaterials and hybrid organic–inorganic nanocomposite materials.
Dechun Zou	Prof. Dechun Zou received his doctoral degree from Kyushu University, Japan in 1990. He then worked at Mitsubishi Petrochemicals and Casio Computer Co., Ltd. From 1998 to 2001, he was an associate professor at Kyushu University, Japan. Since 2002, he has been a professor at Peking University. He was one of the recipients of the National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars and was the project leader of 973 research programs on fiber-shaped solar cells in China. His research interests include light-emitting and photovoltaic materials and related device physics, as well as new process technologies for optoelectronic device fabrication.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic of a 3D fiber-based hybrid nanogenerator composed of a piezoelectric nanogenerator (PENG) and a triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG); (b) cross-sectional view of ZnO NRs grown on a carbon fiber; generated current from the output 1 (c) and output 2 (d) of the power suit with a fiber-based hybrid nanogenerator weaved in under the impact of human motion.42 Reprinted with permission from ref. 42, Copyright © 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

Silicon solar cells	CF/p-poly-Si/n+-poly Si	0.04	
47

Silicon solar cells	CF/p-poly Si/n-poly Si/electrode 2	10.5	
48

DSSC	Ti wire/TiO2 nanoparticles/N719/I−–I3−/Pt/CF	5.08	
50

DSSC	Ti wire/TiO2 nanotubes/N719/I−–I3−/Pt/CF	3.07	
51

DSSC	Ti wire/TiO2/N719/I−–I3−/ink nanocarbon/CF	5.23	
52

DSSC	Ti wire/TiO2/N719/I−–I3−/PEDOT/CF	5.61	
53

DSSC	Ti wire/TiO2 nanotubes/N719/I−–I3−/CoNi2S4 nanoribbons/CF	7.03	
54

DSSC	CF/TiN nanoplates/I−–I3−/N719/TiO2 nanotubes/Ti wire	7.20	
55

QDSSC	CF/Co9S8 nanotube/Sx2−–S2−/CdS–CdSe/TiO2 nanotubes/Ti wire	3.79	
56

QDSSC	CF/ZnO nanowires/CdS/Sx2−–S2−/Au/CF	0.006	
58

DSSC	CF/TiO2 nanorods/N719/I−–I3−/Pt wire	1.28	
60

DSSC	CF/TiO2 nanowires/N719/I−–I3−/Pt wire	2.48	
61

DSSC	CF/TiO2 nanoparticles/N719/I−–I3−/nanocarbon/CF	1.9	
59

DSSC	CF/TiO2 nanowires/N719/I−–I3−/Pt/CF	2.46	
61


 	Fig. 2  Fiber-shaped DSSC based on the CF counter electrode. (a) Scheme of a FDSSC; (b) optical photograph of a FDSSC; (c) SEM image of the Pt-deposited CF counter electrode.50 [Ref. 50] – Reproduced by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic of a FDSSC based on the CF/TiN nanoplate counter electrode; (e) SEM image of the TiN nanoplates grown on CFs.55 Reproduced from ref. 55 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) and (b) SEM images of the top view of TiO2 nanorod arrays on carbon fibers; (c) schematic of the carbon fiber/TiO2 nanorod array based tube-shaped 3D-DSSC; (d) I–V curves of the DSSC based on TiO2 nanorod arrays and bunched TiO2 nanorod arrays on carbon fibers.60 Reprinted with permission from ref. 60, Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM image of hierarchical TiO2 nanowire/nanoparticles on CF substrates; (f) efficiency retention versus the number of bending cycles of the flexible CF-based wire DSSC.61 Reproduced from ref. 61 with permission, Copyright © 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

CF/Zn/NH4Cl–ZnCl2/MnO2/CF	166 mA h g−1	0.29 mA h cm−1; 1.85 mA h cm−2	
	
	
78

Zn/ZnBr2//ZnBr2/CF	1550 mA h g−1	
	
	1.43 mW h cm−1	
79

CF/ZnBr2//ZnBr2/CF	624 mA h g−1	
	
	0.44 mW h cm−1	
79

CF/nanocarbon	
	26.4 mF cm−2	
	
	
84

CF/ink-carbon/PVA–LiCl//ink-carbon/CF	
	4.31 mF cm−2	5.6 × 10−3 mW cm−2	3.8 × 10−4 mW h cm−2	
85

CF/rGO	
	13.5 mF cm−1; 307 mF cm−2	0.74 mW cm−1; 8.5 mW cm−2	1.9 μW h cm−1; 21.4 μW h cm−2	
87

ACF/MnO2/CNTs	
	640 mF cm−2	8028 μW cm−2	11.1 μW h cm−2	
86

CF/CoMn-LDH	1079 F g−1	
	65.6 kW kg−1	126.1 W h kg−1	
88

CF/MnO2	
	2.5 F cm−3	
	0.22 mW h cm−3	
89

CF/honeycomb MnO2	295 F g−1	
	400 W kg−1	22.2 W h kg−1	
90

CF/Mn2O3 cubes	
	4.2 mF cm−1	
	
	
91

CF/rGO/MnO2/polyacrylate–KCl/graphene hydrogel/Cu	
	50.8 mF cm−2; 22.54 F cm−3	0.2 W cm−3	18.1 μW h cm−2; 0.9 mW h cm−3	
95

CF/rGO/MnO2/polyacrylate–KCl/graphene hydrogel/CF	
	122.5 mF cm−2	0.4 mW cm−2; 0.27 W cm−3	1.23 mW h cm−3	
96

Activated CF/polyaniline/PVA–H3PO4/CF	
	∼12.5 F cm−3	11 W cm−3	2 mW h cm−3	
97

CF/MnO2/polypyrrole/LiCl/polyaniline/V2O5/CF	
	0.613 F cm−2; 19.5 F cm−3	30 mW cm−2	0.34 mW h cm−2	
98

Core–shell CFs	146 F g−1	23.7 mF cm−1	122 W kg−1; 10.1 mW cm−3	3.3 W h kg−1; 0.37 W h cm−3	
99

Activated CF tows	
	14.2 F cm−3	3 W cm−3	0.35 mW h cm−3	
100

CF bundle/MWCNTs/PVA–H3PO4/carbon nanofiber film	
	6.3 mF cm−1; 86.8 mF cm−2	13.7 μW cm−1; 189.4 μW cm−2	0.7 μW h cm−1; 9.8 μW h cm−2	
101

Au wire/MnO2 nanoflowers/gel/CNTs/carbon paper	839.4 F g−1	12 mF cm−2	2531 μW cm−2	5.4 μW h cm−2	
102

CF/ZnCo2O4 NWs	650 mF g−1	
	
	
	
106

CF/WO3 NWs/polypyrrole/PVA–LiCl/V2O5/WO3 NWs/CF	
	56 F cm−3	280 mW cm−3	31.1 mW h cm−3	
107

RuO2·xH2O@CF/PVA–H3PO4/RuO2·xH2O@CF	
	3.2 mF cm−1; 146 mF cm−2; 83.5 F cm−3	4.12 W cm−3	
	
109

CF@Ni@rGO/PVA–KOH/CF@NiPx	
	6740 mF cm−2; 817 F cm−3; 33 F cm−3 (device)	
	8.97 mW h cm−3	
110


 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the fiber battery based on Zn wire and MnO2/carbon fiber; (b) discharge curves of the fiber battery under different bending radii. Inset: two fiber batteries connected in series continuously driving a commercial green LED when bent around a human finger.78 Reprinted from ref. 78, Copyright © 2013, with permission from Elsevier. (c) Schematic of a zinc bromide (ZnBr2)-based fiber flow battery; (d) rate capability of the flexible ZnBr2-based fiber flow battery.79 [Ref. 79] – Reproduced by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of the tri-helix structured fiber supercapacitor; (b) cyclic voltammograms (0.1 V s−1) of the fiber supercapacitor based on Au-coated plastic fibers and CFs.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission, Copyright © 2012 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (c) Schematic of the coaxial fiber supercapacitor; (d) charge–discharge curves at different current densities for the coaxial fiber supercapacitor; (e) CV curves with different bending angles of the coaxial fiber supercapacitor; (f) cycle performance of the coaxial fiber supercapacitor and coin cell supercapacitor at a current density of 275 μA cm−1 (the inset is LED lighting using four coaxial fiber supercapacitors connected in series, corresponding to 14.4 cm in length).101 Reprinted with permission from ref. 101, Copyright © 2013, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic of the design and fabrication process of the carbon fiber-based asymmetric supercapacitor.95 Reproduced from ref. 95 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) SEM image of a porous core–shell CF; (c) TEM image of the porous core–shell CF; (d) CV curves at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 for the wire-like flexible all-carbon supercapacitor. Inset: photograph of the frizzy wire-like all-carbon supercapacitors.99 Reproduced from ref. 99 with permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of a single supercapacitor (SC) and three SCs connected in series. (b) Capacitance with respect to CF/MnO2 core/shell fiber numbers to demonstrate that the device could be scaled up. The inset is the optical image of a SC fabricated with 50 CF/MnO2 core/shell fibers.89 Reprinted with permission from ref. 89, Copyright © 2012, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic 3D representation of a single fiber-based hybrid nanogenerator for simultaneous harvesting of biochemical and mechanical energy from an external force or pressure applied to a liquid.108 Reproduced from ref. 108 with permission, Copyright © 2011 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
