Developing understanding of organic photovoltaic devices: kinetic Monte Carlo models of geminate and non-geminate recombination, charge transport and  ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3EE41621F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3EE41621F
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3202-3217Developing understanding of organic photovoltaic devices: kinetic Monte Carlo models of geminate and non-geminate recombination, charge transport and charge extractionChris GrovesSchool of Engineering and Computing Sciences, Durham University, South Road, Durham, DH1 3LE, UK. E-mail: chris.groves@durham.ac.ukReceived 10th May 2013, Accepted 9th September 2013First published on 9th October 2013AbstractThis Perspective discusses the physics, implementation and findings of Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) models applied to organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs). It is shown that KMC models can relate morphology and energy levels on the nano-scale to geminate and non-geminate recombination, charge transport, charge injection and charge extraction measured in macro-scale OPVs. In particular, KMC investigations probing the circumstances under which geminate recombination is, and is not, a significant loss mechanism in OPVs are reviewed. Furthermore, the mechanisms which yield non-geminate (bimolecular) recombination in OPVs that is both slower than the predictions of Langevin, and charge density dependent, are discussed. It is also shown how KMC models can predict average mobility, as well as spatial heterogeneity and temporal dispersion around this average value in disordered bulk heterojunctions. Finally, it is shown how KMC can be used to quantify the effect of non-ideal electrodes, interlayers and surface wetting layers on OPV performance.Broader contextOrganic solar cells are a promising technology for the cheap, scalable production of source of renewable energy. However, understanding their operation is made complex due to the detailed, heterogeneous morphological and energetic structure on the nanoscale. This Perspective reviews the use and findings of kinetic Monte Carlo models to make the link between nanoscale structure and device performance. It is demonstrated that such models can provide quantitative agreement with experiment, whilst also providing insight into the operation of organic solar cells.1. IntroductionThe need for cheap and sustainable sources of renewable energy has motivated extensive research in organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs). As their name suggests, OPVs utilize organic materials such as conjugated polymers, oligomers and fullerene derivatives as the active materials in a photovoltaic (PV) diode. By manufacturing PVs using these materials it is possible to tune optical absorption to match the solar spectrum via chemical structure,1 as well as utilize scalable manufacturing methods such as roll-to-roll printing,2 slot-die coating,3 or evaporation.4 Although OPVs of varying descriptions have been investigated for over 30 years,5 arguably the first OPV architecture with the potential to become a viable source of renewable energy was the bulk heterojunction (BHJ) OPV.6,7 A BHJ is a thin film (∼100–200 nm) which comprises an intimate mixture of an electron accepting and electron donating material, such as a fullerene and a conjugated polymer, shown in Fig. 1. This structure allows efficient conversion of photogenerated excitons into charges which can contribute to useful current. The BHJ morphology has enabled OPV power conversion efficiencies to improve from η ∼ 1% (ref. 8) for bilayer OPVs to over 9% (ref. 9) and 12% (ref. 10) for lab-made, solution processed and evaporated BHJ OPVs respectively. However, for OPVs to succeed as a commercial technology, further improvements in efficiency are needed to offset the penalties associated with scaling up to module sized devices.3 Rational design of materials and processing conditions to achieve this goal is made difficult by the complexity of BHJ OPVs' energetic and morphological structure, and an incomplete knowledge about how these factors impact performance. Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a typical bulk heterojunction organic photovoltaic device. Donor regions are shown as red, acceptor regions as blue, and mixed phases as purple. Zoomed region shows some of the nano-scale arrangements of donor polymer chains (lines) and fullerene acceptor molecules (dots) that may occur in a polymer–fullerene OPV. Although a quantitative understanding of what determines BHJ OPV (hereafter referred to as OPV) performance is somewhat elusive, the basic principle of OPV operation is relatively straightforward. Unlike their inorganic counterparts, absorbing a photon in an OPV yields an exciton with a binding energy of roughly 0.2–0.5 eV (ref. 11 and 12) rather than free charges. The donor and acceptor materials are therefore chosen to form a type-II heterojunction, shown in Fig. 2, which facilitates charge transfer of electrons to the donor and holes to the acceptor, thereby dissociating bound excitons into geminate charge pairs. Optimized BHJs have donor–acceptor heterojunctions distributed throughout the film to improve the probability of exciton dissociation, usually on a lengthscale approximating the typical exciton diffusion length of ∼10 nm.13 This generic BHJ morphology can be obtained fairly easily by dissolving the donor and acceptor in a common solvent prior to deposition, or by co-evaporation. However, creating the geminate charges is only the first step, as the charges must also avoid mutual (geminate) recombination, and (non-geminate) recombination with other charges before they can be extracted by the electrodes as photocurrent. Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the energy levels in a donor–acceptor heterojunction and charge generation process by electron transfer. Thick solid and dashed lines represent the Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) and the Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO) respectively, while the thin solid and dashed lines show electron and hole polaron levels respectively. It may be expected that morphology would be important to OPV performance since the donor–acceptor network defines the pathways through which charges travel toward their removal, either via the contacts or recombination, as well as the likelihood of exciton dissociation. This has been demonstrated by experiment, since changing the morphology via thermal14 or solvent vapor15 annealing, polymer regioregularity,16 fullerene size,17 polymer molecular weight,18 and weight percentage of donor and acceptor19 have all been shown to affect OPV efficiency. However, while it is well established that the performance of OPVs is dependent upon their morphology,20,21 morphology is a broad term that encompasses a wide range of structural characteristics that (may) influence OPV performance. For example, a morphology might comprise miscible phases,22,23 crystalline/aggregated phases,24,25 hierarchies of phase separation,26,27 a compositional gradient through the film,28,29 or wetting layers at the surface.30,31 A morphology may additionally be characterized by the size(s) of donor and acceptor domains,32,33 molecular orientation,34 or the form of the percolation network.28,35 Correlating this range of characteristics to OPV performance requires careful and detailed analysis, often utilizing a range of processing20 and experimental techniques.36 However, developing observed correlations into a more quantitative understanding of the morphology–performance relationship in OPVs is challenging even with the range of experimental tools available.Although the performance of OPVs can, on the one hand, be viewed as being limited by the physical morphology within which exciton dissociation, charge transport and recombination occurs, it is also important to consider the energetic states which determine the kinetics of these processes. The energetic states at the donor–acceptor interface in particular are of great importance to OPVs since these determine the early life of the geminate charges via the nature of the charge transfer (CT) state formed (if any),37,38 and the rate with which these charge transfer states recombine.39,40 These energetic states are determined by just a few molecules close to the interface in question.41 Consequently, it might be expected that the degree of geminate recombination depends on the materials used42,43 and their arrangement at the donor–acceptor interface (i.e. morphology),44,45 which has indeed been demonstrated by experiment. However, while it is known that the energetic structure at the donor–acceptor interface is important in determining geminate recombination; energetic structure can lead to many behaviors. These behaviors can include transiently delocalized ‘hot’ CT states,38,46 charges that are localized within static disorder43,47 or delocalized along a polymer chain,48,49 exciton delocalization,50,51 cascaded energy heterojunctions,52,53 or dipoles.54,55 These behaviors can help explain why geminate recombination is often found to be less of a problem than might be expected from simple Onsager–Braun analysis.56 However, it is challenging to quantify the effect of specific behaviors upon geminate recombination since this involves relating energetic structure of a few molecules on the nano-scale to device performance on the macro-scale. Energetic structure can also affect non-geminate recombination via charge trapping in the broadened density of states.57,58The complexity of OPV morphology and energetic structure therefore poses a significant challenge to developing a more quantitative understanding of how OPVs operate. However, improved understanding is necessary if better OPVs are to be designed, as opposed to being discovered by laborious trial-and-error optimization. This Perspective will discuss how Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) modeling is a valuable tool which can be used in conjunction with experiment to achieve greater understanding of OPV operation. It will be shown how KMC models can quantify the relationship between properties on the nano-scale, such as a particular morphology, and macro-scale device metrics, such as non-geminate recombination rate. The article will be arranged as follows: Section 2 discusses the physics and implementation of KMC models; Section 3 reviews KMC data relating to the ongoing debate as to when geminate recombination is, and is not important in OPVs; Section 4 summarizes KMC investigations into what determines the rate of non-geminate recombination in BHJs; Section 5 examines KMC data that describes the charge transport and charge extraction in a BHJ. The article will conclude with a summary and outlook.2. Kinetic Monte CarloMonte Carlo simulations seek to describe the behavior of individual charges or excitons within the OPV. The basic methodology used to achieve this is fairly straightforward. First, the rates, R of the competing events a particle may experience, such as hopping or recombination, are evaluated. Next, the model generates random numbers to calculate waiting times for each possible event using eqn (1): (1)Here X is a random number between 0 and 1. The event with the shortest waiting time is chosen as the behavior for the particle. Time is then advanced to when the event is scheduled to occur, the state of the particle is changed (e.g. moved a new position for a hop), and the next behavior of the particle is determined. When multiple particles are present in the simulation, the events for each particle are arranged by increasing waiting time (a queue) and executed in order. In a simulation with multiple charges, the behavior of the charges will depend upon mutual Coulomb interactions, which in turn depend upon relative orientation of the charges. As such, the behavior of charges should be recalculated whenever a charge moves, to account for the new Coulomb environment. However, this is time-consuming and so an approximate technique called the first reaction method (FRM) is commonly used. In the FRM the behavior of a charge are not affected by subsequent movement of surrounding charges, and although approximate, the FRM has been shown to have very little effect on the accuracy of KMC simulations.59A single simulation will typically consider a chain of events until some outcome is reached, such as recombination or the photocurrent in an OPV stabilizing, and is often repeated to build up statistical information on the quantity of interest. This simple methodology allows examination of systems of almost arbitrary complexity provided one knows the rates of the various processes that can happen. A more detailed description of the simulation methodology is described elsewhere.59–612.1 Charge transportOrganic materials are typically characterized by weak electronic coupling between molecules, and so charge transport progresses by a series of non-adiabatic tunneling events, or hops.58,62 The rate of hopping is described by the Marcus equation:63 (2)Here J is the electronic transfer integral associated with the hop, ER is the reorganization energy (equal to half the polaron binding energy), ΔE is the change in energy associated with the hop, ħ is the reduced Planck's constant (h/2π), k is Boltzmann's constant, and T is the temperature. The term ΔE includes contributions from energetic disorder, the internal electric field, and Coulomb interactions between charges and image charges. Including Coulomb interactions implies a prohibition on double occupancy of a particular site, in turn assuring that Fermi–Dirac statistics are obeyed.There are two ‘breeds’ of Monte Carlo OPV simulations that differ in their treatment of eqn (2). One breed, which will be referred to as Quantum Chemical Monte Carlo (QCMC),62 calculates explicitly the electronic coupling for each hop using quantum chemical methods.58 This approach enables ab initio calculations of, for example, mobility and its dependence on molecular orientation.64,65 However, the computational overhead involved in calculating the electronic couplings prohibits the examination of entire devices. The other breed and the subject of this Perspective, which is here termed Kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC), treats the prefactor in eqn (2) as a fitting parameter, v0 that may be isotropic60,61 or anisotropic67 as appropriate. This implies that KMC considers the time-averaged electronic coupling of the electron or hole. Treating the electronic coupling in this way reduces the computational overhead and allows examination of entire OPV devices. Whether such an assumption is appropriate to the system in question will be an important consideration before embarking upon a KMC-type model. It has been shown, however, that KMC models can obtain quantitative agreement with experimental data for both all-polymer66,68 and polymer–fullerene47 OPV devices, as well as multilayer organic light-emitting diodes.69 An example of the agreement between KMC models and experimental data is shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3  Measured (lines) and KMC predicted (symbols) experimental external quantum efficiency, EQE (dashed lines, diamonds) and current density, J (solid lines, squares) for a poly[9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-bis[N,N′-(4-butylphenyl)]bis(N,N′-phenyl-1,4-phenylene)diamine] (PFB) and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT) bilayer OPV. kr = 107 s−1. Reprinted figure with permission from ref.%2066. Copyrighted (2012) by the American Physical Society.‡ Electron and hole wavefunctions in disordered organic materials are usually localized to a particular segment of molecule, leading to short-range hopping.58 This can be implemented in KMC models in two ways. The first is to assume charges only hop to adjacent cells in the simulation, so-called nearest-neighbor hopping.60,61 The second, termed variable range hopping (VRH), modifies the hop rate of eqn (2) by a term of the form exp(−αr) which describes the decay of the electron or hole wavefunction, where r is the range of the hop and α is an inverse length which describes the spatial decay of the wavefunction. Assuming nearest-neighbor hopping implies fewer calculations than VRH. As a result, VRH is typically used only when long-range hops (i.e. greater than one lattice unit) are expected to compete with shorter range hops, such as in materials where charges are delocalized or when tunneling barriers are present.70Charge transport competes with recombination with either a constant rate when charges are adjacent (nearest-neighbor approximation), kr, or at a rate that varies with separation as kr exp(−αr) (VRH approximation). Typically this rate describes the total rate of decay from the charge pair to ground through any means. However, there is no reason why this cannot be refined to consider decay mechanisms by a variety of routes, such as via exciplex71 or triplet72 formation.2.2 Exciton transportExciton transport in disordered organic materials is expected to proceed by Förster resonant energy transfer (FRET),73,74 which can be described by eqn (3): (3)where we is a constant related to the attempt to hop frequency, R0 is the exciton localization radius, r is the hop distance, ΔE is the associated change in energy, and f(ΔE) is given by: (4)FRET competes with exciton relaxation which occurs at a constant rate typically taken from experimental values.60,61 The rate of exciton creation is typically calculated using knowledge of the incident light intensity and absorption characteristics of the materials used.682.3 Morphology and energetic disorderThe simulation volume of KMC models comprises a cubic lattice of hopping sites which the electrons, holes or excitons can inhabit. These sites are assigned energy levels drawn from a distribution function to mimic the effects of energetic disorder. Typically this distribution is chosen to be Gaussian, since this is a predicted consequence of random polymer chain conformations.58 Additionally for OPVs, lattice sites are defined as either donor or acceptor in accordance with a BHJ morphology generated by simulation. KMC models up until now have almost exclusively considered donor:acceptor blends with a 1:1 volume ratio. The use of simulated morphologies is necessary since experiment has yet to provide the 3D donor–acceptor morphology of OPVs with sufficient detail and contrast for use in KMC simulations, although techniques based on transmission electron microscopy may soon reach this requirement.75 Generally, morphology simulation techniques involve coarsening an initially fine blend to yield the desired morphology. The simplest method to achieve this is simulated annealing using an Ising Hamiltonian,76 although this does not explicitly take into account the kinetics and thermodynamics of blend coarsening. These factors can be addressed by instead using Cahn–Hilliard techniques.77,78 A further benefit of a Cahn–Hilliard approach is that it provides a framework to incorporate the physics of other important effects in BHJ formation, such as solvent evaporation79 and surface wetting.802.4 Simulation methodologyPerforming simulations of OPVs involving many particles requires careful thought about how to perform the calculations efficiently, or a powerful computer and ample patience. One of the major difficulties is calculating the Coulomb interactions between charges and image charges that contribute to ΔE in eqn (2). For maximum accuracy all Coulomb interactions should be included, but this can be time-consuming. Some KMC models mitigate this problem by only including the Coulomb interactions up to a limit, termed the cut-off radius, rc.60,61 However, it has latterly been shown that this approach can lead to errors in predicted short-circuit current when rc is small.81 An improvement to this method involves using a Poisson solver to calculate the Coulomb interactions between charges at distances beyond rc, effectively ‘smearing out’ these distant charges into 2D charge sheets, rather than ignoring them entirely.82,83 However, if full accuracy is to be retained, another approach is to calculate the Coulomb potentials where needed (i.e. locations where charges are moving from and to), and nowhere else.593. Why might geminate separation be efficient?In order to avoid recombination, geminate charges must overcome the mutual Coulomb attraction associated with the initial positions of the electron and hole. An unfortunate property of organic materials is that their dielectric constant is typically small (ε ∼ 3–4), and so the mutual separation where the attraction between geminate charges reduces to −kT (i.e. the thermal capture radius, rtc) is of the order rtc = 15–20 nm. This distance is large compared to the length of a hop, so the efficiency of charge separation, ηGS might be expected to be small. This expectation is reinforced by the commonly used Onsager–Braun (O–B)84,85 analytical model. When recombination rates determined by experiment are used as input parameters in O–B, significant geminate recombination is predicted (i.e. small ηGS), as is a strong electric field dependence of ηGS.56 However, while some OPV systems show inefficient and/or field-activated42,72,86–89 geminate separation in accordance with these expectations, other OPV systems have efficient and/or field-independent42,45,90–92 geminate separation counter to these expectations. The fact that O–B fails to describe charge separation in all OPV blends is, however, perhaps unsurprising since the derivation does not explicitly include a variety of physical properties and processes known to be important in OPVs. KMC models allow the opportunity to consider the factors absent from O–B analysis, and in doing so, can lead to better understanding what factors may lead to high OPV performance.†An important point to note, however, is that the lifetime of CT states measured in experiment is generally shorter, sometimes by orders of magnitude, than the rates used in KMC models to obtain ηGS similar to that measured in experiment. This is especially the case for polymer–fullerene devices in which ηGS is generally >50% despite CT state lifetimes of the order of ns. So, whilst KMC represents a step forward compared to O–B analysis, one has to remember that parts of these models will inevitably be approximate and qualitative. However, as KMC models continue to be developed to incorporate more of the important physics of OPV operation, this situation will improve. This section will discuss some of these advances.3.1 Energetic disorderRandom conformations of molecules are expected to result in broadened density of states functions for the HOMO and LUMO levels.58 Albrecht and Bässler93 showed that this energetic disorder can be beneficial to geminate charge separation since the electron and hole can overcome their mutual Coulomb attraction by relaxing in the density of states. van Eersel et al.47 examined this effect in poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1-4-phenylene vinylene] (MDMO-PPV): [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butryic acid methyl ester (PCBM) OPVs. Fig. 4 shows the average energy of the electron and hole within the density of states, the attractive Coulomb energy, and the system. To begin with the electron and hole are not at equilibrium, and so are transiently ‘hot’. As time progresses the electron and hole move apart, as indicated by less negative Coulomb energy. The important point to note is that the relaxation of the charges in the density of states is sufficient to allow the system to relax, even while the charges overcome mutual Coulomb attraction. Note also that self-trapping by polaron formation is not considered here. Of course the effectiveness of this process depends on the energy with which charges are created. If charges are created transiently ‘hot’ with respect to the equilibrium energy distribution, then ηGS is enhanced compared to when disorder is absent.94 The converse is also true, if charges are created ‘trapped’ (i.e. at energies below the equilibrium energy distribution) then ηGS is substantially reduced.59,95 Whether charges are created trapped or not depends sensitively upon the molecular structure of the donor and acceptor as well as the relative orientation of the molecules.37 Not only is the energy of the charges within the density of states important, but so is the spatial ordering of the energetic disorder itself, i.e. the relationship between one site energy and that of its surroundings. Spatially correlated energetic disorder,96 as may occur in a crystal for example, reduces the likelihood that charges will be trapped at an interface where recombination can occur. KMC has shown that OPVs with spatially correlated energetic disorder have ηGS which is both larger and less field dependent than the case when energetic disorder is uncorrelated, even when other transport and recombination characteristics are the same.95 This finding highlights the difficulty in using bulk parameters (such as the width of the density of states, mobility, etc.) and models which use bulk parameters (such as O–B and its variants) to describe ηGS, since charge separation occurs on the nanoscale, not in the generic bulk. Fig. 4  Time dependence of energies during charge separation in a random MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend. Electron and hole energies are measured with respect to the centre of the LUMO and HOMO respectively. Total energy is measured with respect to the centre of the donor exciton level. Here kr = 109 s−1. Copyright© 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Used with permission from ref. 47. One of the benefits of KMC is that it allows one to look more closely at the charge separation process. Fig. 5 plots the separation efficiency of geminate charges as a function of their separation, d.97 It can be seen that charges which obtain a separation of only d ∼ 4 nm have substantially larger separation efficiencies than charges either side of the heterojunction (d = 1 nm). This is despite the fact that these charges are separated by substantially less than rtc = 16 nm (here ε = 4) which might be expected to be the significant lengthscale for charge separation. Fig. 5  Charge separation efficiency for a bilayer as a function of separation, d, at electric fields ξ = 0, 5 × 106, 1 × 107, 2 × 107 and 2.4 × 107 V m−1. Here kr = 5 × 105 s−1. Reprinted with permission from C. Groves et al., J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 114903. Copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics. To summarize, the energy with which geminate charges are created within energetic disorder can have a substantial effect on both the magnitude and field dependence of ηGS. For two cases reviewed here, corresponding to ‘hot’ geminate charges47 and spatially correlated energetic disorder,95 charge separation was shown to be efficient and almost independent of electric field.3.2 DelocalizationSection 3.1 considered the case where electrons and holes are generated either side of the donor–acceptor interface, representing the worst-case scenario for Coulomb attraction between geminate charges. Charge delocalization is one method by which larger effective geminate charge separations, and therefore lower Coulomb attraction, could be achieved. Indeed, recent experimental data has shown that direct excitation of ‘hot’ delocalized charge transfer (CT) states leads to efficient charge separation38,43,46,98 (note that these ‘hot’ CT states are higher lying energy levels, while the ‘hot’ charges discussed in Section 3.1 are charges in the lowest CT state but with a non-equilibrium energy distribution). The hot CT state, and its associated delocalization, has a short lifetime (typically sub-ps) due to vibrational relaxation. However, it has been argued that delocalization can play a role in the lowest charge transfer state over much longer time periods if there is strong electronic coupling along a polymer chain segment. Indirect evidence of charge delocalization in the lowest excited state is suggested by experiments on highly-ordered conjugated polymers which show charge mobility is strongly enhanced in one direction.99,100 However, to date there is no direct evidence of substantial charge delocalization in the lowest excited state. Nonetheless, the effect of charge delocalization in the lowest excited state on geminate charge separation was examined by Deibel et al.,49 in which it was assumed the hole was ‘shared’ along a polymer chain of conjugation length, CL which ranged from 1 nm (i.e. no delocalization) to 10 nm. Fig. 6 shows that only a small increase in CL from 1 nm to 4 nm is required to increase ηGS by nearly an order of magnitude over the typical operating range of OPVs (∼106 to 107 V m−1). Increasing CL still further to 10 nm yields ηGS in excess of 70% over the entire field range. Note that changing the assumed physics (here CL) has a profound effect on the electric field dependence of ηGS, with greater delocalization leading to a smaller field dependence. The field dependence of ηGS predicted by KMC will in general depend sensitively on the assumed physics (e.g. CL in Fig. 6) or the population of charges being considered (e.g. charges at varying dFig. 5). Fig. 6  Predicted charge separation efficiency as a function of electric field for a variety of conjugation lengths (CL) and recombination rates (1/τeff) as shown in the figure legend. The solid line shows experimental data for P3HT:PCBM solar cell from ref. 101. Here kr = 1/τf shown in the inset. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyrighted (2009) by the American Physical Society.‡ It is unclear, to this author at least, whether the ‘always on’ delocalization described in the work of Deibel et al.,49 or the transient delocalization of hot CT states, would be more beneficial to charge separation. However, in the case of hot CT states, it seems likely that the maximum separation that can be obtained via a hot CT state will be bounded by the local donor or acceptor morphology, or perhaps even the local phase of the donor or acceptor. Many optimised blends appear to have morphological features smaller than the Coulomb capture radius,26 and so in some cases, hot CT states may yield charges which are not directly adjacent but may still be considered bound. However, as has been shown in Section 3.1, only modest separations of ∼4 nm are required for viable charge separation efficiencies. This re-affirms the importance of examining the charge separation behavior of charges in the lowest excited state, because hot CT states, in some cases at least, may not yield charges with initial separations greater than the Coulomb capture radius.Exciton dissociation may likewise yield geminate charges with large initial separations. Quantum chemical calculations considering the donor phase to be partially ordered polymer lamellae, as in crystalline poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) for example, predict that exciton dissociation is likely to yield geminate charges with initial separations greater than 1.5–2 nm.50 Recalling Fig. 5, KMC predicts that geminate charges created with these separations are likely to have much higher ηGS than charges created adjacent to the donor–acceptor interface.Delocalization therefore helps mitigate the strong Coulomb interactions in organic materials by increasing the effective separation between geminate charges. KMC models have shown that charge delocalization over only a few nanometers is sufficient to make ηGS both efficient and largely independent of the applied field, as demonstrated in some OPV systems.42,45,90–923.3 MorphologyThe donor–acceptor bulk heterojunction morphology has long been recognized as being important to OPV performance.20,102 Not only does the network determine the efficiency of exciton dissociation,60,61,103 but also it constrains the motion of electrons and holes to the acceptor and donor material respectively. KMC has shown that simply constraining motion of charges to the respective phases in a bilayer improves ηGS compared to the predictions of O–B,104 although this does depend upon orientation of the donor–acceptor interface to the internal field.97,105 The effects of a distributed heterojunction morphology on charge separation is, however, more complex. Generally speaking, larger domains of donor or acceptor material aid the separation of charges, while smaller domains hinder the separation of charges. These larger domains can be thought of as providing greater entropy to drive charge separation.106 This behavior has been shown in KMC simulations for a variety of distributed heterojunction morphologies, including BHJs,60,61,78,103,107–109 columns60,81,103,108 and gyroids.110 Comparing these morphology types shows that columns give the best performance60,61,103,108 (although unfortunately their manufacture is more complicated111), while gyroid and BHJ morphologies give similar performance for equivalent domain sizes.110The distributed heterojunction with greatest practical importance is the BHJ. BHJs can show a multitude of characteristics; the interface between donor and acceptor materials can be sharp or diffuse,68 the domains can be large or small,26,32 largely impure112 or largely pure.113 Lyons et al.78 used KMC to deconvolve the impact of these various features on OPV performance. Three types of morphology were considered, shown in Fig. 7, one in which domains were impure and interfaces diffuse (termed CI), one in which the domains were pure and the interfaces diffuse (termed DII), and one in which the domains were pure and the interfaces sharp (termed SII). The predicted short circuit current is also shown in Fig. 7. Each type of morphology has a peak in photocurrent for a domain size of ∼7 nm where the competing requirements of exciton dissociation and charge separation processes balance. More interesting however, is that the effect of changing domain size over the optimal range is dwarfed by the effect of changing the interface morphology. For example, the short circuit current of an OPV with sharp interfaces but domains of only 4 nm (which might be considered ‘too fine’) is greater by a factor of nearly two than an OPV with diffuse interfaces and the ‘optimum’ domain size of ∼7 nm. This shows that large separation efficiencies can be obtained with small feature sizes in the morphology. This relates back to the findings in Fig. 5, which shows that the ∼4–5nm appears to be the significant lengthscale over which geminate separation is determined, rather than the much larger Coulomb capture radius (∼15–20 nm). Fig. 7  (a) 2-d slices through a morphology donor (black) and acceptor (white) sites for three interpretations of a Cahn–Hilliard morphology giving rise to different morphological characteristics; CI, DII and SII. Here kr = 107 s−1. (b) Predicted short-circuit current, J, exciton dissociation efficiency (ηex) and carrier collection efficiency (ηcc) for CI (black circles), DII (red triangles) and SII (blue squares) morphologies. Adapted from ref. 78. Controlling the environment in the few nanometers around the donor–acceptor interface is therefore seemingly more important than controlling the long-range domain structure. It is important to note that some OPV systems show good performance in spite of highly miscible components, corresponding to CI morphologies in Fig. 7.112,114 Clearly, therefore, morphology is not the only factor that determines OPV performance. However, as discussed in this Perspective, there are other factors which can have a strong influence on charge separation efficiency.3.4 Energy cascadesBuilding on Section 3.3, a bulk heterojunction is not only defined by the arrangement of donor or acceptor, since solution-processed OPVs often have the donor or acceptor present in a number of phases.36 In turn, whether the donor or acceptor is locally crystalline, aggregated or amorphous can influence the local energetic structure. For example, the almost ubiquitous acceptor, PCBM, in an aggregated phase has an electron affinity 100 meV larger than in a finely mixed phase.25 Similar local variations in energetic structure can occur for the polymer donor. Quantum chemical calculations show that disordered P3HT, as occurs near a donor–acceptor interface, has a deeper HOMO than ordered P3HT, as occurs far from a donor–acceptor interface.52 Hence the local variations in energetic structure can be correlated to the donor–acceptor heterojunction where geminate charges are created. Fortunately, for some OPVs at least, it seems that an energy cascade self-organizes in the region of the heterojunction which encourages the separation of the geminate charges.25,52 This is supported by experimental data which correlates the appearance of semi-crystalline polymer115 and aggregated PCBM phases25 with improved OPV performance in some OPV blends, although it should be noted that crystallization is by no means a pre-requisite for high performance in all OPV systems.The quantitative effect of cascaded energy heterojunctions has been examined using a KMC model.70Fig. 8 shows predicted ηGS as a function of HOMO level offset, Δ for a cascaded energy heterojunction also shown in Fig. 8. Similar to the case of delocalization, the energy cascade has a profound effect on charge separation, particularly in the operating field range of the OPV. It is noteworthy that the values of Δ considered are within the range reported for P3HT crystallisation,116,117 and so may help explain the efficient charge separation process in P3HT:PCBM solar cells in which the P3HT is allowed to crystallize.45 Fig. 8  (a) A schematic of the cascaded energy heterojunction under consideration, here holes can occupy the donor and cascade layers, while electrons can occupy the acceptor. (b) Predicted separation efficiency for a bilayer geometry. Donor–cascade–acceptor heterojunctions with Δ = 50 meV (red circles), 100 meV (green triangles), 150 meV (blue diamonds) and 300 meV (purple stars) are considered, while black symbols show an equivalent donor–acceptor heterojunction for comparison. kr = 107 s−1. Adapted from ref. 70. A cascaded energy heterojunction is, however, just a trap by another name, with the crystallized/aggregated material far from the interface being the trap. As was discussed in Section 3.1, energetic disorder can assist charge separation by the charges relaxing in the density of states. Again, this process can be thought of as charges becoming more deeply trapped, and yet this helps charge separation. Trapping can therefore have a positive influence on geminate charge separation, but the position of these traps is very important, as it has been shown that traps at the interface lowers performance.59,95 Intentionally adding traps away from the donor–acceptor interface may prove to be an interesting route to improve device performance.4. What determines the rate of non-geminate recombination?Non-geminate recombination is the recombination of charges which were introduced into the device from different sources, such as different excitons or contacts. Because charges start from different positions within the device, non-geminate recombination is limited by the speed at which charges move to relative positions where recombination is possible. This transport rate which describes this process is defined as β, such that βnp is the total rate of local recombination (here n and p are the local electron and hole density respectively). Assuming isotropic charge transport, and in the absence of trapping or a donor–acceptor morphology, the transport rate is described by the Langevin equation:118 (5)Here q is the electronic charge, ε0 is the permittivity of free space, while μe and μh are the electron and hole mobilities respectively. Under these circumstances, β is a local property of the materials, rather than the context of device operation (i.e. n an p). Ultimately, the transport rate and the variation of charge density under the conditions of interest will determine the integrated amount of non-geminate recombination119 and associated recombination lifetime120 within a device. Practically speaking, non-geminate recombination can limit the fill factor, and hence power conversion efficiency, of OPVs.42,120–125 Hence the transport rate can play a major role in determining whether an OPV has a viable efficiency or not. Knowledge of its value and how to control it is therefore important.Returning to the Langevin equation, it is perhaps unsurprising when one considers its derivation that its predictions are not always in agreement with the measured recombination rate, βeff in OPVs. In particular, βeff is commonly reported to be smaller than the predictions of the Langevin equation121,122,126,127 and to be dependent on charge density.120,121,124 KMC models have been used to explore the reasons why this may be the case.4.1 MorphologyThe Langevin equation was derived under the assumption that the transporting material is ambipolar. When used in this context the Langevin equation agrees fairly well with the predictions of KMC models, particularly at low fields (<107 V m−1)67,128–131 and if the mobility measured in the presence of both charges129 is used. This agreement is in spite of the presence of energetic disorder in the KMC models, which is not considered by Langevin.However, in OPVs a BHJ morphology is used to promote exciton dissociation, meaning that charges are constrained to the donor or acceptor phases. The simplest case of a donor–acceptor morphology is a bilayer. Non-geminate recombination in bilayer devices in the presence of energetic disorder was examined by Greenham and Bobbert132 using KMC and master equation techniques. It was found that in this case, βeff is weakly dependent on charge density, βeff ∝ n0.43. Similar findings have been reported from other KMC simulations67 in which charge transport was constrained to a 2-dimensional slab of finite thickness, l, effectively making transport ‘2.5-dimensional’. In this slightly different case, it was found that βeff ∝ n0.33, and that the Langevin equation can be corrected if multiplied by a factor γ = 1.5n0.33l (valid in regime where γ < 1). These data for simple donor–acceptor morphologies help explain experimental data for OPVs which show that the kinetics of non-geminate recombination have a greater than 2nd order power law dependence on charge density (as expected from βnp). For these bilayer-type devices, the additional dependence on charge density appears to be due to two mechanisms, namely the dependence of mobility on charge density,133,134 and the spatial distribution of charges (and therefore distances to travel) being different for 2- and 2.5-dimensional67,132 volumes than it is for 3-dimensional118 volumes. The effect dimensionality has on non-geminate recombination has been further examined for the particular case of P3HT lamellae.135The effect of BHJ morphology was examined by Groves and Greenham.67Fig. 9 shows predicted βeff for donor–acceptor blends with average domain sizes between 4 and 35 nm as a function of electron mobility, μe. The hole mobility, μh was 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 in all cases. For the selection of electric fields (F = 0, 107 V m−1) and degrees of energetic disorder (σ = 0, 75 meV) examined, it can be seen that βeff is generally below the predictions of the Langevin relation of eqn (5). The mismatch β/βeff varies between 2 and >10 depending upon the conditions considered. Larger domains, increasing energetic disorder, and larger mismatch between the electron and hole mobility all increase β/βeff. The difference between the Langevin and KMC predictions is due to the transport of charges in the latter being limited to either donor or acceptor phases, and that both charges are required at the heterojunction for recombination to occur. Hence, on average, there will be some delay as one charge ‘waits’ at the interface for the other charge to arrive. This wait time will increase with domain size, as charges are on average further away from an interface, and with increasing disorder, since charges have an increased chance of being trapped. Similar arguments were made by Koster et al.,122 who used a drift-diffusion model to fit to experimental data. However, in this case, it was argued that non-geminate recombination is limited by the slowest charge carrier, which can be seen on Fig. 9, gives a lower βeff than predicted by KMC. Fig. 9  Prediction of recombination rate (symbols) for bulk heterojunctions with 4 nm (black) and 35 nm (red) domains. Squares correspond to no energetic disorder, while triangles assume Gaussian-distributed energetic disorder with σ = 75 meV. Solid line shows the prediction of the Langevin equation. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyrighted (2008) by the American Physical Society.‡ To summarize, KMC models have shown that in the presence of a donor–acceptor morphology, βeff has a charge density dependence and is generally smaller than the predictions of the Langevin relation, in accordance with experiment.4.2 Charge trappingA further consideration absent from the Langevin derivation is the possibility of charge trapping. As was discussed in the previous section, trapping in a Gaussian distributed density of states in an ambipolar material leads to only small differences between the predictions of Langevin and KMC. However, while a Gaussian distribution may be a reasonable generic description of the density of states in an organic material, individual materials may show deviations from this.136 The effect of other density of state (trap distribution) functions was examined by Nelson.57 In this paper a KMC-like model was used in which charge transport was via two types of states; free states, within which charges move by diffusion; and trap states, from which charges de-trap with a thermally activated rate. Transient optical spectroscopy data for an MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend57 was fitted by tuning both the trap distribution and the trap density over a range of temperatures. This in turn showed that the trap density of MDMO-PPV was of the order 1017 cm−3 and the trap distribution was exponential with a characteristic temperature of 750 K. Hence, Monte Carlo models in conjunction with experiment can be used to obtain precise details about the trapping behavior of OPV blends.5. Charge transport, injection and extractionWhile the previous sections have considered charge transport in the context of recombination mechanisms, it is useful to also examine charge transport in the context of charges moving through the device and being extracted at the electrodes. A variety of experimental techniques, such as space-charge-limited diodes,137 photo-CELIV,127 and transistor measurements138 can characterize the bulk average mobility of charges. However, as a consequence of energetic disorder and the donor–acceptor morphology, charge transport in organic materials can show significant deviations around this average behavior. Spatial heterogeneity in charge transport is often revealed in conducting atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements,139,140 while temporally dispersive charge transport141 is often shown in time-of-flight measurements.142,143Extracting charges from the organic active layer can be challenging due to imperfect matching of the electrode workfunctions to the HOMO or LUMO levels,144,145 heterogeneity in electrode/interlayer conduction properties,146,147 and wetting layers of the ‘wrong’ material next to an electrode (particularly the polymer donor at the cathode).148,149 This in turn has spurred a great deal of work examining the use of surface modification, interlayers or charge blocking layers to improve OPV characteristics.150 The reverse process of charge injection, together with non-geminate recombination kinetics, also determines the diode current of the OPV, and so affects the open circuit voltage.KMC models have been used to examine both the average and distribution of mobilities seen in organic materials. Furthermore, they have been used to better understand the impact of charge extraction at complex interfaces on OPV performance.5.1 Charge transportCharge transport can be described in terms of bulk average mobility or local and temporal variations around this average. KMC models have been used to examine both aspects, but we begin by reviewing data relating to mobility, μ. Bässler151 used a KMC model to predict how hopping conduction is effected by energetic disorder and an electric field in the limit of small charge density. These mobility data were fitted by an empirical relationship termed the Gaussian Disorder Model (GDM), which has subsequently been used to interpret experimental data for organic materials. The GDM was derived under the assumption that energetic disorder was spatially random (i.e. uncorrelated). However, Gartstein and Conwell96 later noted that this assumption does not give the experimentally observed Poole–Frenkel type field-dependence (i.e. μ ∝ ) over a wide field range. They used a KMC model in which the site energies were drawn from a Gaussian distribution, but were additionally spatially correlated, to predict mobility and the expected field dependence was recovered. The charge carrier density dependence of mobility was examined by Zhou et al.133 It was shown that mutual Coulomb interactions can reduce mobility when disorder is small, and enhance mobility when disorder is large. KMC models have also been used to show how mobility depends upon donor–acceptor morphology,152 in particular showing that smaller domains and smaller transporting fractions (e.g. donor for hole transport) lead to smaller mobilities.However, as noted above, charge transport in organic materials is characterized by a significant local heterogeneity and temporally dispersive character. van der Holst et al.153 used a KMC model to examine the local variations in current for a single material assuming uncorrelated disorder, shown in Fig. 10. It can be seen that current flow is generally heterogeneous for the energetic disorder values considered. Furthermore, current becomes more strongly filamentary when the standard deviation of the Gaussian density of states, σ increase from 75 meV to 150 meV. Filaments in the context of a BHJ were examined by Lyons et al.77 Here the positions that charges emerged from the film were recorded and used to calculate the probability distribution function (pdf) of the number of charges extracted per site on the film surface. If the collection of charges from the film surface was random this pdf would be a Poisson distribution. However, the probability that individual sites do not conduct at all was shown to be enhanced with respect to a Poisson distribution (i.e. more ‘dead’ sites), as was the probability that an individual site conducts an order of magnitude more current than the film average (i.e. a filament). This strong heterogeneity of charge current flow is in qualitative agreement with findings from conducting AFM measurements, although it should be noted that the resolution of a KMC measurement is limited by the lattice unit size (∼1 nm), while the resolution of AFM measurements is limited by the tip diameter (∼10–20 nm). Fig. 10  Simulated relative local current density flowing through an energetically disordered material (not a blend) when disorder is σ = 75 meV (top) and 150 meV (middle) shown as a 3-dimensional representation viewed from the collecting electrode. Device thickness is 22 nm, driving voltage is 2 V, and lateral grid size is 80 × 80 nm. Bottom panel shows color scale. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 153. Copyrighted by the American Physical Society.‡ Dispersive charge transport and its dependence on morphology was examined by Frost et al.142 Here a KMC-like model was used to predict time-of-flight characteristics for blends in which the polymer chains were heterophilic or homophilic. Heterophilic interactions led to dispersion of the polymer chains, while homophilic interactions led to bundles of coiled polymer chains, as shown in Fig. 11. The simulated time-of-flight characteristics, also shown in Fig. 11, showed that the heterophilic polymer chains gave well-defined (i.e. non-dispersive) transit times. Homophilic polymer chains, by contrast showed dispersive charge transport. This in turn shows that not only can the nature of morphology change the average mobility,152 it can also change the distribution of behavior shown by charges. Fig. 11  Panels (a) and (b) show 2-dimensional morphologies with homophilic and heterophilic interactions respectively. Panels (c) and (d) respectively show simulated time-of-flight characteristics for homophilic and heterophilic morphologies at a range of electric fields. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society. KMC models can therefore help understand the variation in average charge mobility, but more profound is the wide distribution in transport behaviors caused by the donor–acceptor morphology and trapping within the density of states. The observed variation in charge behavior means care should be exercised when interpreting data in terms of average quantities.5.2 Charge injection and extractionTraditional models to describe charge injection include Fowler–Nordheim (F–N), which considers a single tunneling event through a triangular injection barrier, and Richardson–Schottky (R–S), which considers thermally assisted jumps over the injection barrier. In an OPV this picture is complicated by the anticipated broadening of the HOMO or LUMO level and hopping transport. Wolf et al.154 used a KMC model to predict injection efficiency under these conditions, and while the KMC data shared some similarities with the predictions of F–N and R–S theory, neither analytical model obtained quantitative agreement. The same KMC model was shown to give excellent agreement with experimental data for organic small molecule space charge limited diodes.155 The reverse process of charge extraction is, however, of more direct concern for OPV devices. Unfortunately, it is often reported that organic–electrode interfaces in OPVs have some characteristic that may inhibit charge extraction.Differences in surface energy between the polymer donor and the fullerene acceptor often leads to polymer-rich wetting layers adjacent to the cathode interface where electrons are extracted.148,149 Examining the effect of these wetting layers by experiment is challenging due to the conjoined nature of bulk and surface morphology. Lyons et al.77 used a KMC model to address this problem by comparing the short-circuit current of OPV blends in which the wetting layer was independently controlled via a Cahn–Hilliard morphology simulation which included differing surface energies. A range of morphologies were generated that were similar in the bulk but varied in cathode surface composition, ranging from being rich in the ‘correct’ material, to being rich in the ‘wrong’ material. Fig. 12 shows the predicted change in short circuit photocurrent for these morphologies with a surface wetting layer referenced to a blend with no surface wetting layer. It was shown that a ‘correct’ wetting layer can be worse than no wetting layer at all, because a blocking layer accumulates underneath the favorable surface (as demonstrated to some extent by experiment156). Instead, the peak composition of ‘wrong’ material en route to the electrode, ϕB was shown to control the short circuit current. It was shown that ϕB up to 85% does not significantly affecting device performance, counter to what one might expect from the percolation threshold. The reason for this apparent discrepancy is that the wetting layers examined were thin (<5 nm), and so the deleterious effect of poor percolation is strongly reduced. Fig. 12  Variation in photocurrent for a blend as a wetting layer is introduced to the top surface, plotted in terms of the peak composition of ‘wrong’ material en route to the electrode, ϕB. Photocurrent is shown normalized to that for a blend with no wetting layer. Black, open blue, and filled blue symbols correspond to morphologies with neutral, ‘correct’, and ‘wrong’ wetting layers, respectively. The data shown are for an internal field of 107 V m−1, corresponding approximately to short circuit. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society. On the anode side of the OPV, the conductivity of electrode can be electrically heterogeneous144,145 and so present a barrier to the extraction of holes. This in turn has led to efforts to develop alternative anodes based on conductive grid networks.157,158 Zacher and Armstrong159 examined the effect of such electrically heterogeneous electrodes on OPV performance. It was found that an electrode which had 20% of its surface electrically active which was randomly distributed (as may occur for PEDOT:PSS) required an additional 15 mV of voltage (termed overvoltage) to have the same collection efficiency as an electrode with a 100% electrically active electrode. However, if the 20% of electrically active area was instead arranged in a regular grid (as may occur for conducting wire networks), the overvoltage required to obtain the same collection efficiency as a perfect electrode rose to 19 mV. It was then shown that a 5 nm highly conductive interlayer interposed between the conducting grid and the OPV reduced the overvoltage to 9 mV, demonstrating the efficacy of conductive interlayers. A further use of interlayers is to increase electrode selectivity, and so minimize the amount of charge collected by the ‘wrong’ electrodes (interface recombination). Feron et al.160 examined the effect of non-selective electrodes with a KMC model and found that interface recombination for blend devices exceeded geminate and non-geminate recombination when the film thickness was less than 50 nm, also testifying to the importance of effective charge blocking layers in OPVs.6. Conclusions and outlookThis article has reviewed the physics and implementation of KMC models, as well as investigations using these models examining geminate and non-geminate recombination, charge transport and charge extraction in organic photovoltaic devices (OPVs). It was shown that there are many properties of OPVs which can yield efficient geminate charge separation, such as cooling within the density of states, charge delocalization, cascaded energy heterojunctions, and long-range exciton dissociation. Therefore one may not need to be pessimistic about the performance of OPVs in which hot delocalized CT states do not form. In essence, some of the mechanisms examined here perform the same function, namely trading energy (and hence open circuit voltage) to improve the separation efficiency. The factors considered (namely morphology, disorder, cascades and delocalization) all point to the importance of the environment within a few nanometers of the donor–acceptor heterojunction upon geminate separation. Bulk characteristics, such as domain size, appear to be less important by comparison. Non-geminate recombination in OPVs has likewise been reported to deviate from the predictions of simple analytical theory which does not account for energetic or morphological structure. KMC has been used to examine non-geminate recombination in this context, and has shown that the commonly reported reduced and charge-density dependent recombination rate constant should be generally expected for energetically disordered, bulk-heterojunction OPVs. KMC has also allowed examination of the wide distribution of charge transport behavior caused by charge trapping and the donor–acceptor bulk heterojunction, highlighting the possible dangers of describing charge transport in terms of bulk average quantities. Finally, KMC has shown that wetting layers have a smaller effect than might be expected considering percolation theory, while interlayers can help overcome difficulties associated with heterogeneous and imperfectly blocking electrodes.These studies have highlighted some of the areas where KMC models can play a useful role in developing understanding of OPVs. In particular, they have shown that KMC can link features in the nano-scale morphology and energetic structure of OPVs to their macro-scale performance. The predictive capability of KMC models will continue to improve as they are modified to incorporate findings from spectroscopy and quantum chemical calculations, which reveal the energetic structure of OPVs (particularly at the interface), and structural characterization, which quantifies the donor–acceptor morphology.36Notes and referencesY. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 723–733 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. J. Brabec, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2004, 83, 273–292 CrossRef CAS .F. C. Krebs, T. Tromholt and M. Jorgensen, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 873–886 RSC .S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. A. Chamberlain, Sol. Cells, 1983, 8, 47–83 CrossRef CAS .J. J. M. Halls, C. A. Walsh, N. C. Greenham, E. A. Marseglia, R. H. Friend, S. C. Moratti and A. B. Holmes, Nature, 1995, 376, 498–500 CrossRef CAS .G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CAS .C. W. Tang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1986, 48, 183–185 CrossRef CAS .Polyera Press Release, http://www.polyera.com, accessed 9th March 2013.Heliatek Press Release, http://www.heliatek.com, accessed 9th March 2013.J. L. Bredas, J. Cornil and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 1996, 8, 447–452 CrossRef CAS .S. F. Alvarado, P. F. Seidler, D. G. Lidzey and D. D. C. Bradley, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 81, 1082–1085 CrossRef CAS .S. R. Scully and M. D. McGehee, J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 100, 034907 CrossRef .X. N. Yang, J. Loos, S. C. Veenstra, W. J. H. Verhees, M. M. Wienk, J. M. Kroon, M. A. J. Michels and R. A. J. Janssen, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 579–583 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Li, Y. Yao, H. Yang, V. Shrotriya, G. Yang and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2007, 17, 1636–1644 CrossRef CAS .Y. Kim, S. Cook, S. M. Tuladhar, S. A. Choulis, J. Nelson, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley, M. Giles, I. McCulloch, C. S. Ha and M. Ree, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 197–203 CrossRef CAS .N. C. Cates, R. Gysel, Z. Beiley, C. E. Miller, M. F. Toney, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and M. D. McGehee, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 4153–4157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Schilinsky, U. Asawapirom, U. Scherf, M. Biele and C. J. Brabec, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17, 2175–2180 CrossRef CAS .J. K. J. van Duren, X. N. Yang, J. Loos, C. W. T. Bulle-Lieuwma, A. B. Sieval, J. C. Hummelen and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 425–434 CrossRef CAS .C. J. Brabec, M. Heeney, I. McCulloch and J. Nelson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1185–1199 RSC .C. R. McNeill and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3840–3850 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Collins, E. Gann, L. Guignard, X. He, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 3160–3166 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Collins, Z. Li, C. R. McNeill and H. Ade, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 9747–9751 CrossRef CAS .H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005–1011 CrossRef CAS .F. C. Jamieson, E. B. Domingo, T. McCarthy-Ward, M. Heeney, N. Stingelin and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 485–492 RSC .R. C. Nieuwendaal, H. W. Ro, D. S. Germack, R. J. Kline, M. F. Toney, C. K. Chan, A. Agrawal, D. Gundlach, D. L. VanderHart and D. M. Delongchamp, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1255–1266 CrossRef CAS .W. Chen, T. Xu, F. He, W. Wang, C. Wang, J. Strzalka, Y. Liu, J. G. Wen, D. J. Miller, J. H. Chen, K. L. Hong, L. P. Yu and S. B. Darling, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 3707–3713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. S. van Bavel, E. Sourty, G. de With and J. Loos, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 507–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .K.-H. Yim, Z. Zheng, R. H. Friend, W. T. S. Huck and J.-S. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2897–2904 CrossRef CAS .A. C. Arias, N. Corcoran, M. Banach, R. H. Friend, J. D. MacKenzie and W. T. S. Huck, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2002, 80, 1695–1697 CrossRef CAS .D. S. Germack, C. K. Chan, B. H. Hamadani, L. J. Richter, D. A. Fischer, D. J. Gundlach and D. M. DeLongchamp, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 233303 CrossRef .C. R. McNeill, S. Westenhoff, C. Groves, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 19153–19160 CAS .A. C. Arias, J. D. MacKenzie, R. Stevenson, J. J. M. Halls, M. Inbasekaran, E. P. Woo, D. Richards and R. H. Friend, Macromolecules, 2001, 34, 6005–6013 CrossRef CAS .B. A. Collins, J. E. Cochran, H. Yan, E. Gann, C. Hub, R. Fink, C. Wang, T. Schuettfort, C. R. McNeill, M. L. Chabinyc and H. Ade, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 536–543 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. van Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. Giridharagopal and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1160–1169 CrossRef CAS .Y. S. Huang, S. Westenhoff, I. Avilov, P. Sreearunothai, J. M. Hodgkiss, C. Deleener, R. H. Friend and D. Beljonne, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 483–489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. A. Bakulin, A. Rao, V. G. Pavelyev, P. H. M. van Loosdrecht, M. S. Pshenichnikov, D. Niedzialek, J. Cornil, D. Beljonne and R. H. Friend, Science, 2012, 335, 1340–1344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .V. Lemaur, M. Steel, D. Beljonne, J. L. Bredas and J. Cornil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6077–6086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .T. Kawatsu, V. Coropceanu, A. J. Ye and J. L. Bredas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3429–3433 CAS .J. L. Bredas, J. E. Norton, J. Cornil and V. Coropceanu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1691–1699 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. F. A. Dibb, F. C. Jamieson, A. Maurano, J. Nelson and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 803–808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. A. Bakulin, S. D. Dimitrov, A. Rao, P. C. Y. Chow, C. B. Nielsen, B. C. Schroeder, I. McCulloch, H. J. Bakker, J. R. Durrant and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 209–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. P. Rand, D. Cheyns, K. Vasseur, N. C. Giebink, S. Mothy, Y. P. Yi, V. Coropceanu, D. Beljonne, J. Cornil, J. L. Bredas and J. Genoe, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2987–2995 CrossRef CAS .I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister and F. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14866–14876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .A. E. Jailaubekov, A. P. Willard, J. R. Tritsch, W. L. Chan, N. Sai, R. Gearba, L. G. Kaake, K. J. Williams, K. Leung, P. J. Rossky and X. Y. Zhu, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 66–73 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. van Eersel, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2700–2708 CrossRef CAS .O. Rubel, S. D. Baranovskii, W. Stolz and F. Gebhard, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 100, 196602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Deibel, T. Strobel and V. Dyakonov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 036402 CrossRef PubMed .D. Caruso and A. Troisi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 13498–13502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .M. C. Heiber and A. Dhinojwala, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 137, 014903 CrossRef PubMed .D. P. McMahon, D. L. Cheung and A. Troisi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2737–2741 CrossRef CAS .C. W. Schlenker, V. S. Barlier, S. W. Chin, M. T. Whited, R. E. McAnally, S. R. Forrest and M. E. Thompson, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4132–4140 CrossRef CAS .M. Wiemer, A. V. Nenashev, F. Jansson and S. D. Baranovskii, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 99, 013302 CrossRef .V. I. Arkhipov, P. Heremans and H. Bassler, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 4605–4607 CrossRef CAS .T. M. Clarke and J. R. Durrant, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6736–6767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Nelson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 67, 155209 CrossRef .V. Coropceanu, J. Cornil, D. A. da Silva, Y. Olivier, R. Silbey and J. L. Bredas, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 926–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Groves, R. G. E. Kimber and A. B. Walker, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 144110 CrossRef PubMed .P. K. Watkins, A. B. Walker and G. L. B. Verschoor, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1814–1818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. A. Marsh, C. Groves and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 101, 083509 CrossRef .J. Nelson, J. J. Kwiatkowski, J. Kirkpatrick and J. M. Frost, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1768–1778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. A. Marcus, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1993, 32, 1111–1121 CrossRef .J. J. Kwiatkowski, J. M. Frost and J. Nelson, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1085–1090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Athanasopoulos, J. Kirkpatrick, D. Martinez, J. M. Frost, C. M. Foden, A. B. Walker and J. Nelson, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 1785–1788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. G. E. Kimber, E. N. Wright, S. E. J. O'Kane, A. B. Walker and J. C. Blakesley, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 86, 235206 CrossRef .C. Groves and N. C. Greenham, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 155205 CrossRef .H. Yan, S. Swaraj, C. Wang, I. Hwang, N. C. Greenham, C. Groves, H. Ade and C. R. McNeill, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 4329–4337 CrossRef CAS .M. Mesta, M. Carvelli, R. J. de Vries, H. van Eersel, J. J. M. van der Holst, M. Schober, M. Furno, B. Lussem, K. Leo, P. Loebl, R. Coehoorn and P. A. Bobbert, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 652–658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Groves, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1546–1551 CAS .A. Gonzalez-Rabade, A. C. Morteani and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 3924–3927 CrossRef CAS .S. Westenhoff, I. A. Howard, J. M. Hodgkiss, K. R. Kirov, H. A. Bronstein, C. K. Williams, N. C. Greenham and R. H. Friend, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 13653–13658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Athanasopoulos, E. V. Emelianova, A. B. Walker and D. Beljonne, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 195209 CrossRef .K. Feron, X. Zhou, W. J. Belcher and P. C. Dastoor, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 044510 CrossRef .D. M. DeLongchamp, R. J. Kline and A. Herzing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5980–5993 CAS .P. Peumans, S. Uchida and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2003, 425, 158–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. P. Lyons, N. Clarke and C. Groves, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22572–22577 CAS .B. P. Lyons, N. Clarke and C. Groves, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7657–7663 CAS .O. Wodo and B. Ganapathysubramanian, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2012, 55, 113–126 CrossRef CAS .I. C. Henderson and N. Clarke, Macromol. Theory Simul., 2005, 14, 435–443 CrossRef CAS .M. Casalegno, G. Raos and R. Po, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 094705 CrossRef PubMed .L. Y. Meng, D. Wang, Q. K. Li, Y. P. Yi, J. L. Bredas and Z. G. Shuai, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 134, 124102 CrossRef PubMed .J. J. M. van der Holst, F. W. A. van Oost, R. Coehoorn and P. A. Bobbert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 085206 CrossRef .L. Onsager, Phys. Rev., 1938, 54, 554 CrossRef CAS .C. L. Braun, J. Chem. Phys., 1984, 80, 4157–4161 CrossRef CAS .D. Veldman, O. Ipek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. van Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7721–7735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Gao, J. Wang, J. C. Blakesley, I. Hwang, Z. Li and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 956–961 CrossRef CAS .L. J. A. Koster, M. Kemerink, M. M. Wienk, K. Maturová and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1670–1674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. A. Marsh, J. M. Hodgkiss and R. H. Friend, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3672–3676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. H. Park, A. Roy, S. Beaupre, S. Cho, N. Coates, J. S. Moon, D. Moses, M. Leclerc, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 297–302 CrossRef CAS .F. Etzold, I. A. Howard, R. Mauer, M. Meister, T.-D. Kim, K.-S. Lee, N. S. Baek and F. d. r. Laquai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9469–9479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. A. Street, S. Cowan and A. J. Heeger, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 121301 CrossRef .U. Albrecht and H. Bassler, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 235, 389–393 CrossRef CAS .E. V. Emelianova, M. v. d. Auweraer and H. Bassler, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 128, 224709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .C. Groves, J. C. Blakesley and N. C. Greenham, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1063–1069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .Y. N. Gartstein and E. M. Conwell, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1995, 245, 351–358 CrossRef CAS .C. Groves, R. A. Marsh and N. C. Greenham, J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 114903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Grancini, M. Maiuri, D. Fazzi, A. Petrozza, H. J. Egelhaaf, D. Brida, G. Cerullo and G. Lanzani, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 29–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .E. J. W. Crossland, K. Tremel, F. Fischer, K. Rahimi, G. Reiter, U. Steiner and S. Ludwigs, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 839–844 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Zaumseil, C. Groves, J. M. Winfield, N. C. Greenham and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3630–3637 CrossRef CAS .M. Limpinsel, A. Wagenpfahl, M. Mingebach, C. Deibel and V. Dyakonov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 81, 085203 CrossRef .C. R. McNeill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5653–5667 CAS .F. Yang and S. R. Forrest, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1022–1032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Peumans and S. R. Forrest, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 398, 27–31 CrossRef CAS .A. Pershin, S. Donets and S. A. Baeurle, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 11 CrossRef PubMed .B. A. Gregg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 3013–3015 CrossRef CAS .A. G. Gagorik, J. W. Mohin, T. Kowalewski and G. R. Hutchison, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 36–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. Y. Meng, Y. Shang, Q. K. Li, Y. F. Li, X. W. Zhan, Z. G. Shuai, R. G. E. Kimber and A. B. Walker, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2010, 114, 36–41 CrossRef CAS PubMed .F. Wei, L. Liu and G. Li, IEEE J. Photovolt., 2013, 3, 300–309 CrossRef .R. G. E. Kimber, A. B. Walker, G. E. Schroder-Turk and D. J. Cleaver, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 844–851 RSC .X. M. He, F. Gao, G. L. Tu, D. Hasko, S. Huttner, U. Steiner, N. C. Greenham, R. H. Friend and W. T. S. Huck, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1302–1307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. A. Collins, J. R. Tumbleston and H. Ade, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 3135–3145 CrossRef CAS .B. Watts and C. R. McNeill, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1706–1712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .P. Westacott, J. R. Tumbleston, S. Shoaee, S. Fearn, J. H. Bannock, J. B. Gilchrist, S. Heutz, J. deMello, M. Heeney, H. Ade, J. Durrant, D. S. McPhail and N. Stingelin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2756–2764 CAS .P. E. Keivanidis, T. M. Clarke, S. Lilliu, T. Agostinelli, J. E. Macdonald, J. R. Durrant, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 734–738 CrossRef CAS .W. C. Tsoi, S. J. Spencer, L. Yang, A. M. Ballantyne, P. G. Nicholson, A. Turnbull, A. G. Shard, C. E. Murphy, D. D. C. Bradley, J. Nelson and J.-S. Kim, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 2944–2952 CrossRef CAS .F. Paquin, G. Latini, M. Sakowicz, P.-L. Karsenti, L. Wang, D. Beljonne, N. Stingelin and C. Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 197401 CrossRef PubMed .P. Langevin, Ann. Chim. Phys., 1903, 28, 433 Search PubMed .L. J. A. Koster, E. C. P. Smits, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 085205 CrossRef .A. Maurano, C. C. Shuttle, R. Hamilton, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, W. M. Zhang, M. Heeney and J. R. Durrant, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 5947–5957 CAS .C. G. Shuttle, B. O'Regan, A. M. Ballantyne, J. Nelson, D. D. C. Bradley and J. R. Durrant, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 113201 CrossRef .L. J. A. Koster, V. D. Mihailetchi and P. W. M. Blom, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 88, 052104 CrossRef .K. Maturova, S. S. van Bavel, M. M. Wienk, R. A. J. Janssen and M. Kemerink, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 3032–3037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. F. A. Dibb, T. Kirchartz, D. Credgington, J. R. Durrant and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2407–2411 CrossRef CAS .S. Shoaee, M. P. Eng, E. Espildora, J. L. Delgado, B. Campo, N. Martin, D. Vanderzande and J. R. Durrant, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 3, 971–976 Search PubMed .G. Juška, K. Arlauskas, J. Stuchlik and R. Osterbaka, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2006, 352, 1167–1171 CrossRef .A. Pivrikas, N. S. Sariciftci, G. Juška and R. Österbacka, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2007, 15, 677–696 CAS .U. Albrecht and H. Bassler, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1995, 191, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .J. J. M. van der Holst, F. W. A. van Oost, R. Coehoorn and P. A. Bobbert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 235202 CrossRef .Y. N. Gartstein, E. M. Conwell and M. J. Rice, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 249, 451–458 CrossRef CAS .B. Ries and H. Bassler, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1984, 108, 71–75 CrossRef CAS .N. C. Greenham and P. A. Bobbert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2003, 68, 245301 CrossRef .J. Zhou, Y. C. Zhou, J. M. Zhao, C. Q. Wu, X. M. Ding and X. Y. Hou, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 153201 CrossRef .W. F. Pasveer, J. Cottaar, C. Tanase, R. Coehoorn, P. A. Bobbert, P. W. M. Blom, D. M. de Leeuw and M. A. J. Michels, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94, 206601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .G. Juška, K. Genevičius, N. Nekrašas and G. Sliaužys, Phys. Status Solidi C, 2010, 7, 980–983 Search PubMed .R. C. I. MacKenzie, C. C. Shuttle, M. L. Chablinyc and J. Nelson, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 662–669 CrossRef CAS .V. D. Mihailetchi, J. K. J. van Duren, P. W. M. Blom, J. C. Hummelen, R. A. J. Janssen, J. M. Kroon, M. T. Rispens, W. J. H. Verhees and M. M. Wienk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2003, 13, 43–46 CrossRef CAS .H. Sirringhaus, P. J. Brown, R. H. Friend, M. M. Nielsen, K. Bechgaard, B. M. W. Langeveld-Voss, A. J. H. Spiering, R. A. J. Janssen, E. W. Meijer, P. Herwig and D. M. de Leeuw, Nature, 1999, 401, 685–688 CrossRef CAS .C. Groves, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 612–620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. S. C. Pingree, O. G. Reid and D. S. Ginger, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 19–28 CrossRef CAS .H. Scher and E. Montroll, Phys. Rev. B: Solid State, 1975, 12, 2455–2477 CrossRef CAS .J. M. Frost, F. Cheynis, S. M. Tuladhar and J. Nelson, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1674–1681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .R. U. A. Khan, D. Poplavskyy, T. Kreouzis and D. D. C. Bradley, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 035215 CrossRef .K. M. Knesting, P. J. Hotchkiss, B. A. MacLeod, S. R. Marder and D. S. Ginger, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 642–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .S. Khodabakhsh, B. M. Sanderson, J. Nelson and T. S. Jones, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 95–100 CrossRef CAS .G. A. MacDonald, P. A. Veneman, D. Placencia and N.
R. Armstrong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9623–9636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .L. S. C. Pingree, B. A. MacLeod and D. S. Ginger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 7922–7927 CAS .D. S. Germack, C. K. Chan, R. J. Kline, D. A. Fischer, D. J. Gundlach, M. F. Toney, L. J. Richter and D. M. DeLongchamp, Macromolecules, 2010, 43, 3828–3836 CrossRef CAS .C. R. McNeill, J. J. M. Halls, R. Wilson, G. L. Whiting, S. Berkebile, M. G. Ramsey, R. H. Friend and N. C. Greenham, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2309–2321 CrossRef CAS .E. L. Ratcliff, B. Zacher and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1337–1350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .H. Bassler, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1993, 175, 15–56 CrossRef .C. Groves, L. J. A. Koster and N. C. Greenham, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 105, 094510 CrossRef .J. J. M. van der Holst, M. A. Uijttewaal, R. Balasubramanian, R. Coehoorn, P. A. Bobbert, G. A. de Wijs and R. A. de Groot, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 085203 CrossRef .U. Wolf, V. I. Arkhipov and H. Bassler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 7507–7513 CrossRef CAS .S. Barth, U. Wolf and H. Bassler, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 60, 8791–8797 CrossRef CAS .Y. Vaynzof, D. Kabra, L. H. Zhao, L. L. Chua, U. Steiner and R. H. Friend, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 329–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .J. Woerle and H. Rost, MRS Bull., 2011, 36, 789–793 CrossRef CAS .L. Hu, H. S. Kim, J.-Y. Lee, P. Peumans and Y. Cui, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2955–2963 CrossRef CAS PubMed .B. Zacher and N. R. Armstrong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 25496–25507 CAS .K. Feron, C. J. Fell, L. J. Rozanski, B. B. Gong, N. Nicolaidis, W. J. Belcher, X. Zhou, E. Sesa, B. V. King and P. C. Dastoor, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 193306 CrossRef .Footnotes† It should be noted that this section should not be viewed as a complete discussion of the mechanisms by which geminate recombination may or may not be significant. Rather this section reviews the KMC data relating to this question. The interested reader is directed to the references in the introduction.‡ Readers may view, browse, and/or download material for temporary copying purposes only, provided these uses are for noncommercial personal purposes. Except as provided by law, this material may not be further reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, adapted, performed, displayed, published, or sold in whole or part, without prior written permission from the American Physical Society.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
Table Content:
Broader contextOrganic solar cells are a promising technology for the cheap, scalable production of source of renewable energy. However, understanding their operation is made complex due to the detailed, heterogeneous morphological and energetic structure on the nanoscale. This Perspective reviews the use and findings of kinetic Monte Carlo models to make the link between nanoscale structure and device performance. It is demonstrated that such models can provide quantitative agreement with experiment, whilst also providing insight into the operation of organic solar cells.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic diagram of a typical bulk heterojunction organic photovoltaic device. Donor regions are shown as red, acceptor regions as blue, and mixed phases as purple. Zoomed region shows some of the nano-scale arrangements of donor polymer chains (lines) and fullerene acceptor molecules (dots) that may occur in a polymer–fullerene OPV.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the energy levels in a donor–acceptor heterojunction and charge generation process by electron transfer. Thick solid and dashed lines represent the Lowest Unoccupied Molecular Orbital (LUMO) and the Highest Occupied Molecular Orbital (HOMO) respectively, while the thin solid and dashed lines show electron and hole polaron levels respectively.	 
	(1)
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Measured (lines) and KMC predicted (symbols) experimental external quantum efficiency, EQE (dashed lines, diamonds) and current density, J (solid lines, squares) for a poly[9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-bis[N,N′-(4-butylphenyl)]bis(N,N′-phenyl-1,4-phenylene)diamine] (PFB) and poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-benzothiadiazole) (F8BT) bilayer OPV. kr = 107 s−1. Reprinted figure with permission from ref.%2066. Copyrighted (2012) by the American Physical Society.‡	 
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Time dependence of energies during charge separation in a random MDMO-PPV:PCBM blend. Electron and hole energies are measured with respect to the centre of the LUMO and HOMO respectively. Total energy is measured with respect to the centre of the donor exciton level. Here kr = 109 s−1. Copyright© 2012 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Used with permission from ref. 47.	 

 	Fig. 5  Charge separation efficiency for a bilayer as a function of separation, d, at electric fields ξ = 0, 5 × 106, 1 × 107, 2 × 107 and 2.4 × 107 V m−1. Here kr = 5 × 105 s−1. Reprinted with permission from C. Groves et al., J. Chem. Phys., 2008, 129, 114903. Copyright 2008, American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 6  Predicted charge separation efficiency as a function of electric field for a variety of conjugation lengths (CL) and recombination rates (1/τeff) as shown in the figure legend. The solid line shows experimental data for P3HT:PCBM solar cell from ref. 101. Here kr = 1/τf shown in the inset. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 49. Copyrighted (2009) by the American Physical Society.‡	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) 2-d slices through a morphology donor (black) and acceptor (white) sites for three interpretations of a Cahn–Hilliard morphology giving rise to different morphological characteristics; CI, DII and SII. Here kr = 107 s−1. (b) Predicted short-circuit current, J, exciton dissociation efficiency (ηex) and carrier collection efficiency (ηcc) for CI (black circles), DII (red triangles) and SII (blue squares) morphologies. Adapted from ref. 78.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) A schematic of the cascaded energy heterojunction under consideration, here holes can occupy the donor and cascade layers, while electrons can occupy the acceptor. (b) Predicted separation efficiency for a bilayer geometry. Donor–cascade–acceptor heterojunctions with Δ = 50 meV (red circles), 100 meV (green triangles), 150 meV (blue diamonds) and 300 meV (purple stars) are considered, while black symbols show an equivalent donor–acceptor heterojunction for comparison. kr = 107 s−1. Adapted from ref. 70.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 9  Prediction of recombination rate (symbols) for bulk heterojunctions with 4 nm (black) and 35 nm (red) domains. Squares correspond to no energetic disorder, while triangles assume Gaussian-distributed energetic disorder with σ = 75 meV. Solid line shows the prediction of the Langevin equation. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 67. Copyrighted (2008) by the American Physical Society.‡	 

 	Fig. 10  Simulated relative local current density flowing through an energetically disordered material (not a blend) when disorder is σ = 75 meV (top) and 150 meV (middle) shown as a 3-dimensional representation viewed from the collecting electrode. Device thickness is 22 nm, driving voltage is 2 V, and lateral grid size is 80 × 80 nm. Bottom panel shows color scale. Figure adapted with permission from ref. 153. Copyrighted by the American Physical Society.‡	 

 	Fig. 11  Panels (a) and (b) show 2-dimensional morphologies with homophilic and heterophilic interactions respectively. Panels (c) and (d) respectively show simulated time-of-flight characteristics for homophilic and heterophilic morphologies at a range of electric fields. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2006 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  Variation in photocurrent for a blend as a wetting layer is introduced to the top surface, plotted in terms of the peak composition of ‘wrong’ material en route to the electrode, ϕB. Photocurrent is shown normalized to that for a blend with no wetting layer. Black, open blue, and filled blue symbols correspond to morphologies with neutral, ‘correct’, and ‘wrong’ wetting layers, respectively. The data shown are for an internal field of 107 V m−1, corresponding approximately to short circuit. Reprinted (adapted) with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2011 American Chemical Society.	 
Footnotes
† It should be noted that this section should not be viewed as a complete discussion of the mechanisms by which geminate recombination may or may not be significant. Rather this section reviews the KMC data relating to this question. The interested reader is directed to the references in the introduction.
‡ Readers may view, browse, and/or download material for temporary copying purposes only, provided these uses are for noncommercial personal purposes. Except as provided by law, this material may not be further reproduced, distributed, transmitted, modified, adapted, performed, displayed, published, or sold in whole or part, without prior written permission from the American Physical Society.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2013
