Harnessing versatile dynamic carbon precursors for multi-color emissive carbon dots  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC05392B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC05392B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 1932-1967Harnessing versatile dynamic carbon precursors for multi-color emissive carbon dots

        
          
            Zitong 
            Wei†
, 
      
        
          
            Wenyi 
            Lu†
, 
      
        
          
            Ximin 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jiping 
            Ni
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Umme Hani 
            Prova
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chunxia 
            Wang
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Guoyong 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Heavy Oil Processing, College of New Energy and Materials, China University of Petroleum (Beijing), Beijing 102249, China. E-mail: cxwang@iccas.ac.cn; huanggy@cup.edu.cn
Received 
      9th November 2021
    , Accepted 20th December 2021First published on 21st December 2021AbstractCarbon dots (CDs), as a relatively new type of fluorescent nanomaterials, are superior to carbon allotropes due to their excellent biocompatibility, controllable photoluminescence, high quantum yield (QY), and unique electronic and physicochemical properties, leading to outstanding applications in multiple different fields. However, the versatile properties of CDs are notably dependent on their precursors, which directly or indirectly dominate their corresponding multi-emissive photoluminescence properties. Consequently, in this review, we aim to review the recent progress on the synthesis of CDs using numerous precursors including aromatic organic small molecules, citric acid, natural biomass, synthetic and natural polymers, petroleum products, and various unique morphologies of carbon in terms of multi-color emission, QY, synthetic method, and formation mechanism, with emphasis on how these different precursors produce the corresponding multi-color CDs over the last ten years. This review also introduces the creative applications of CDs considering the fields of biosensing, biomedicine, WLEDs and anti-counterfeiting owing to their corresponding excellent photoluminescence properties and the future perspective and directions of CDs in these emerging fields. It is hoped that this review will inspire and guide future investigations on the design of tailored CDs by selecting appropriate precursors or their combination, serving as a source to develop versatile CDs.
Zitong Wei
Zitong Wei received her Bachelor's Degree from Quanzhou Normal University in China in 2018. She is currently a Master's student in China University of Petroleum-Beijing. Her research interests focus on the development of quantum dots and their optical sensing.
Wenyi Lu
Wenyi Lu received his Bachelor's Degree from Liaocheng University in China in 2020. He is currently a Master's student in China University of Petroleum-Beijing. His research interests focus on the development of carbon-based nanomaterials and their applications in electroanalysis.
Chunxia Wang
Chunxia Wang is currently an Associate Professor in the Institute of New Energy, China University of Petroleum-Beijing. She received her Bachelor's Degree and Master's Degree from Xinyang Normal University (2005) and Dalian University of Technology (2008), respectively. Then she joined Tohoku University and received her PhD in 2013. Her research interest is focused on the synthesis of low-dimensional nanomaterials and their application.
Guoyong Huang
Guoyong Huang received his BS (2005) in Polymer Science and Engineering, MS (2007) and PhD (2015) in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Tsinghua University in China. In 2019, he became a Professor at the College of New Energy and Materials at China University of Petroleum-Beijing. His research is devoted to the utilization of recycled resources.
1. Introduction
The last decade has witnessed the emergence of carbon dots (CDs) with outstanding performances compared to the other members of the carbon family owing to their astonishing properties. The pioneer work involved the accidental discovery of fluorescent nanoparticles during the electrophoretic purification of single-walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNTs) by Xu et al. in 2004.1 Subsequently, Sun et al. synthesized luminescent carbon nanoparticles with a size distribution of less than 10 nm, which give birth to the definition of CDs.2 Since then, intense research has been devoted to explore the fascinating CDs with versatile properties.3,4 One of the most prominent features of CDs is that they possess unprecedented and remarkable properties such as tunable photoluminescence, high quantum yield (QY), anti-bleaching fluorescence, controllable surface modification, high photostability and chemical stability, good aqueous solubility, and superior biocompatibility.5,6 Accordingly, owing to these outstanding properties, CDs have been employed in the fields of biosensing, bioimaging, biomedicine, electronic devices, and anti-counterfeiting.4,7,8
To date, a variety of synthetic or natural small molecules, natural derived biomass, petroleum byproduct, polymers, various carbon structures, etc. have been considered as a carbon source to fabricate multi-color CDs. This is because well-defined precursors contribute to the synthesis of functional CDs with controllable surface chemistry and tunable photoluminescence. By rationally selecting appropriate precursors, full-colored CDs can be achieved. Moreover, the diverse synthetic approaches result in diverse morphologies and properties of CDs, which can be briefly summarized in two categories. One is bottom-up synthesis from carbon and oxygen/nitrogen-based groups or polymeric aggregation and the other is top-down synthesis, which converts large precursors to small CDs.
The abundant carbon sources and variety of synthetic strategies result in diverse CDs. There are some reviews focusing on CDs, covering their synthesis, mechanism, surface engineering, and fluorescence-based sensing and bio-imaging. In this review, aiming to present the current versatile carbon sources, we introduce the synthetic methods, formation mechanism, applications of various carbon precursor-derived CDs and highlight the multi-color photoluminescence properties of various carbon precursors including aromatic small molecules, citric acid, biomass, polymers, petroleum products, and multiple carbon structures. This type of review is still lacking in the literature, and thus, herein, we attempt to fill the gap in the recent years. Fig. 1 demonstrate an update on the progress achieved in the last ten years from multiple precursors in terms of synthetic approach, formation mechanism, multi-color emission, QY, and optical based applications. Besides, we also discuss the prospective and challenges in the preparation and application of CDs.
 Fig. 1  Various precursors-derived multi-color CDs and their applications in sensing, biomedicine, WLEDs and anti-counterfeiting. 
2. Synthetic approach and formation mechanism
2.1. Synthetic approach
Recently, to manufacture well-defined multi-color CDs, several effective and eco-friendly procedures have been developed to produce fluorescent CDs. Enormous improvement has been made on the development of CDs using various synthetic tactics to generate CDs with high QY and multi-colored emissions. These available abundant synthetic approaches can be roughly divided into two predominant categories, i.e., top-down and bottom-up methods including the exfoliation, hydrothermal, solvothermal, pyrolysis, microwave-assisted pyrolysis and electrochemical approaches3 (Fig. 2). The former involves the breaking down or cleavage of larger carbon structures into smaller ones via chemical, electrochemical, and physical approaches. The latter is realized via pyrolysis, dehydration and/or carbonization of small organic molecules or the stepwise chemical conjugation of small aromatic molecules.9–12
 Fig. 2  Synthetic approaches for multi-color CDs. 
In general, top-down approaches promote the manufacture of CDs with high crystallinity and relatively intact structure, while bottom-up approaches aim to generate CDs with amorphous carbon cores containing multiple doping sites and functional groups.13 Top-down routes typically employ large carbon structures (graphite, graphene, carbon nanotubes, carbon black, coal, petroleum coke, asphalt, etc.) through chemical and/or physical treatment to produce small-sized fragments CDs, usually relying on arch discharge,1 laser ablation,2 chemical oxidation,14 and electrochemical approach.14–16 The top-down approach is realized by cutting bulk graphite-based or similar sp2 carbon-based materials into CDs through stepwise dissociation procedures. The widely used top-down strategies normally require vigorous oxidation by strong oxidizing agents combined with concentrated strong acids and/or hydrothermal or solvothermal cracking at high temperatures under pressure. For instance, nano carbon or coal was utilized as a starting material and transformed to CDs via chemical oxidation in the presence of strong acid treatment under high temperature,17 where the whole operation requires demanding conditions. Sometimes, post-separation via dialysis or centrifugation, and even column separation may be required. However, during this process, the top-down approaches tend to form CDs with high crystallinity and distinct structures due to the use of well-known precursors.
The other strategy is the bottom-up approach, which involves organizing conventional small molecules as precursors to form polymerized CDs under rather moderate conditions via hydrothermal, solvothermal, calcination, microwave3,4,18,19 and electrochemical treatment.20 Compared with the top-down method, by using well-selected or designed precursors, the bottom-up method may allow more accurate control over the purity, morphology, size distribution, and lattice dimensions of the products.21–23 Moreover, this approach favors the addition of heteroatoms simultaneously during the initial carbonization process, which enables the homogeneous doping of heteroatoms under moderate or high temperature via the solvothermal or hydrothermal process and results in heteroatom doping and rich surface functional groups.24 Simultaneously, the bottom-up process enables synthetic procedures that can be used in future scale-up operations, which are in high demand in terms of cost-effectiveness.
In summary, the top-down and bottom-up synthetic strategies both contribute to the versatile photoluminescence, rich surface chemistry and controllable size of CDs, regardless of which approach is employed for the fabrication of multi-colored CDs. It should be noted that the most commonly used and simple approach involves hydrothermal and solvothermal, electrochemical and microwave approaches accompanied with oxidation or calcination.25,26 Hydrothermal and solvothermal processes are the most common one-step synthesis approaches, which proceed using chemical reagents, aqueous solution, or non-aqueous solvents. These approaches enable the self-passivation of CDs without any post-treatment in a simple preparation with low energy consumption. However, they require high temperature or harsh pyrolytic treatments, while resulting in low luminescence.27,28 Acid oxidation is considered the most traditional approach, which requires the use of strong acid as the oxidizing agent, resulting in the formation of CDs with abundant surface functional groups. The charged oxygenated groups offer a high hydrophilic property, and therefore contribute to the high stability of CDs. It should be mentioned that the harsh conditions such as excess amount of oxidizing agent with concentrated acid, high temperature, and high-pressure result in the need for complex post-treatment, and therefore hinder the application of this synthetic approach and complicate the formation mechanism.12,29,30 Calcination displays a simple, economical and scalable approach at high temperature with the production of a high yield of CDs, but with few functional groups and poor water solubility.31 The electrochemical method is performed by exfoliating the precursor under constant voltage, which can be easily employed for wide-scale application. The electrochemical methods can be operated at low cost with easy manipulation, while contributing to the adjustable emission of CDs. The microwave-based approach refers to the use of microwaves in an open system without high temperature and features the fastest and simplest approach, which can be completed within several minutes.32,33 Consequently, tremendous efforts have been devoted to searching for more convenient, sustainable strategies to prepare CDs with versatile surface chemistry and multi-color. According to the above discussion, it is worthwhile to note that synthetic route for CDs is actually at the crossroad of nano, organic, and materials chemistry. Thus, along this way, some explorations may include electrochemical etching and surface functionalization, organic total synthesis, and controllable conversion of polymers with monodisperse molecular weight.29,34,35
2.2. Formation mechanism
Even though the optical properties of CDs have been extensively studied and attracted interest from the research community in recent years, the mechanisms underlying their tunable PL properties and high QY are still under debate, which is mainly due to the large heterogeneity of CD samples even from diverse synthesis processes and the fact that CDs have a variety of properties derived from different precursors used in their formation.36 Specifically, suitable precursors are crucial to the optical properties of multi-color emissive CDs. Thus, considering the exploration and efforts of researchers, a large quantity of substances has been chosen as efficient precursors for the preparation of multi-color CDs. The precursors combined with the chosen synthesis procedure often determine the physicochemical properties of the resulting CDs, which include size, crystallinity, oxygen/nitrogen content, fluorescence characteristics and QY, and biocompatibility. In terms of different structures of precursors, the formation mechanism is also related to multiple factors including the mass and composition of the precursors, the structure of the precursors, and the surface chemistry of the precursors, which contribute to the formation of multi-color emissive CDs with diverse structures and PL properties.
Specifically, a carbogenic core with a large conjugated domain plays an essential role of the wavelength of CDs. New and more appropriate precursors have been adopted to form CDs such as small molecules with aromatic rings containing oxygen and/or nitrogen atoms, and even organic dyes could be explored for the synthesis of multi-color and high QY CDs.3 Aromatic organic small molecules are used to synthesize versatile CDs with an exact molecular structure of conjugated sp2 cores and undergo four stages in the formation of CDs including condensation, polymerization, carbonization, and passivation (Fig. 3). Condensation reactions such as amination, aldol condensation, Schiff base condensation, and radical reaction will initially form chain compound intermediates from small organic molecule byproducts. Secondly, through covalent, non-covalent, or other interactions, the intermediates are further polymerized or aggregated into polymer-like CDs with some polymers (also known as carbon clusters). Particularly at high temperatures, the polymers are carbonized to form a carbon core. Finally, the residual precursors can be adjusted on the surface of the CDs as surface passivating agents to improve their luminescence performance.4 Moreover, column purification, centrifugation, and/or ultrafiltration approaches, gel electrophoresis, ion-exchange chromatography and normal- or reversed-phase chromatography offer alternative way to obtain highly purified CDs.37,38
 Fig. 3  Possible formation mechanism for the synthesis of CDs with tunable PL emission.44 Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Small molecules, especially citric acid and ethanediamine (EDA) have been considered as representative reagents to form CDs based on condensation and carbonization, in which rich functional groups are attached on their surface. During the formation of CDs, temperature is an important factor for the formation and QY of CDs. Polymeric-like CDs are initially formed at lower temperature, and then transformed into carbogenic CDs as the temperature increases up to 200 °C. Besides the most commonly recognized emissive centers are polymers and carbon cores for CDs. Song et al. reveal that the blue emission of CDs originates from a specific fluorescent molecule (imidazo[1,2-α]pyridine-7-carboxylic acid, 1,2,3,5-tetrahydro-5-oxo-, IPCA) that is possibly attached on their surface or inside their carbon cores, which contributes to the fluorescence and high QY of CDs.39 Biomass-derived CDs are commonly obtained via polymerization, dehydration and carbonization processes, in which the component of biomass is critical to the size and shape of the CDs.40 Natural biomass contains amino and carboxyl groups, which exhibit a cross-linking effect during the carbonization process together with heteroatom doping, and therefore induces the formation of multi-color and distinct QY in CDs. Polymeric molecules with well-defined structures contain heteroatoms and their good reproducibility in large-scale production with tunable properties (i.e., polymer chain length, polarity, terminal functionalities, and carbon contents) makes them ideal carbon sources during polymerization and carbonization to produce various surface-functionalized CDs under hydrothermal or solvothermal conditions. Initially, the polymer chains are transferred to the carbon fragment and they react with each other, undergoing crosslinking and dehydration. Then, after crosslinking and dehydration, the polymerized clusters are assembled to form a nucleus with a hydrophobic structure inside and hydrophilic structure outside, namely, the nucleation process. Following nucleation, the polymers or fragments attached to the surface of the nucleus undergo carbonization and dehydration, resulting in highly cross-linked polymerized CDs.
Petroleum products contain a suitable aromatic structure, and the potential formation mechanism of CDs involves a series of complex chemical procedures, together with the simultaneous combination of dehydration, decomposition, polymerization, condensation, aromatization, and nucleation, which inherently lower the energy gap by generating large sp2 domains. However, the ambiguous formation mechanism of these CDs from the respective precursors is derived from the difficulty in characterizing the intermediate complex in each step theoretically and experimentally. Specifically, asphaltene, petroleum coke, and coal feature a heterogeneous property with a 3D cross-linked network, consisting of aromatic units connected by short aliphatic and ether linkages, which can be converted to CDs by cutting their large domains to ultra-small sized fragments. Besides, some of them possess a nano-size graphene structure with polycyclic aromatic domains or carbonaceous microcrystals, which will experience nucleation, dispersion, and carbonization to produce nano-size CDs.
Different morphologies of carbon structures are used as the traditional carbon precursors to form CDs by crashing sheet-like or bulk carbon into smaller units. To obtain CDs derived from carbon nanomaterials, the “top-down” method is employed. The “top-down” method involves cleaving or breaking down sheet-like or bulky carbon materials such as graphite, carbon soot, carbon fibers, and activated carbon through chemical, electrochemical, and physical approaches into smaller segments in the nanosize range (<10 nm). Among these methods, nitric acid oxidation is a convenient method, which can easily introduce oxygen and nitrogen elements and increase the degree of surface defects.3 During the acid oxidation process, the rigid structure can be broken and oxygen and nitrogen heteroatoms are incorporated on the surface of the original carbon structure, resulting in the formation of rich surface functional group- or surface defect-induced CDs. Therefore the entire formation mechanism depends on the breakdown of the bond between carbon atoms.41
Besides the detailed explanation of the above-mentioned formation mechanism derived from different precursors, the well-known factors that dominate the QY and wavelength of CDs are also reviewed here. For example, quantum confinement effects are prominent in CDs, which means that the PL emission of CDs is determined by their size, where a small size usually leads to emission at a shorter wavelength, whereas a larger size results in a redshifted emission wavelength (Fig. 4A).42 Another emissive origin of CDs is the overall size of the conjugated domain in the CDs, which is responsible for the regulation of their emission. Specifically, larger conjugated domains in the CD cores narrow the band gap of CDs with an increase in their particle size, thereby leading to a decrease in their bandgap and redshifted emission peaks.44
 Fig. 4  (A) Schematic representation of four different selected sizes and the different extents of π-conjugated domains of the resulting CDs, which are influenced by the different amount of seed CDs and reaction times, as provided below the arrow. The colors represent the real PL color of the samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (B) Proposed mechanism for the tunable surface-controlled emission of CDs with different oxidation degrees. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (C) Nitrogen content triggers full color CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
Moreover, the multi-color emissions of CDs are highly reliant on their surface state, which is related to their surface composition and functional groups. The surface of CDs can be functionalized via chemical modification (Fig. 4B).45 In one way, surface oxidation can result in a redshifted emission given that the surface state emissive trap governs the emission of CDs. Moreover, the abundant functional groups after surface modification tend to form a π-conjugated structure, affect the local surface environment of CDs, and eventually lead to surface state-related emissions.
Besides the surface state tailored mechanism, the origins of the emissive features of CDs are highly related to heteroatom doping (N, P, S, and B), which enables the alteration of the electron orbital region of sp3 hybridization in the carbon core and sp2 hybridization on the surface.43,46 The incorporation of heteroatoms can tailor the structural and electronic properties of CDs, and therefore control their PL features and regulate their emission wavelength. Especially, a higher content of N and O favors a redshift in the emission wavelength of CDs (Fig. 4C).47–49 Namely, the incorporation of heteroatoms on the surface of CDs not only offers more active sites, but also enables the adjustment of their initial band gap, thereby altering their energy levels.
3. Various precursor-derived CDs
3.1. Aromatic small molecule-based CDs
Aromatic organic small molecules possessing luminescent units and abundant functional groups act ideal candidate carbon precursors for multi-color CDs.50,51
Phenylenediamine (PD), which consists of an aromatic ring with amino group, tends to produce many heterocyclic compounds and polymers, providing a new way to produce internal doped multi-wavelength CDs. Recent studies have found that the use of PD as a precursor can result in higher QY and long wavelength. o-Phenylenediamine (o-PD), m-phenylenediamine (m-PD), and p-phenylenediamine (p-PD) as PD isomers have been adopted as a carbon source to produce multi-purpose CDs containing o-CDs, m-CDs, and p-CDs, respectively, through hydrothermal approach by selecting a suitable solvent and optimizing the reaction time and temperature.52
The fabrication of these CDs is based on the dehydration and carbonization mechanism through the pyrolysis process.44,53 Initially, the dehydration reactions will produce polymer dots, forming intertwined polymer chains with benzene rings and heterocycles in their backbone. Thus, the production of conjugated sp2-domains and the incorporation of heteroatoms in the domains can be expected.36 Then, they agglomerate to form large molecules or cross-linked polymer chains that are amorphous. Finally, the cross-linked structure carbonized to form CDs. During this process, temperature is critical for CDs synthesis since when temperature is set as 250 °C, almost all the molecules and polymer chains are carbonized. Therefore, the temperature is of vital important to the particle size and graphitization degree of the final CDs.54
Benefiting from the heteroatom-containing aromatic structure of PD, Jiang et al. designed a facile approach to prepare three types of CDs from m-PD, o-PD, and p-PD emitting blue, green, and red luminescence centered at 435, 535, and 604 nm with QYs were determined to be 4.8%, 10.4%, and 20.6%, respectively.55 They concluded that the redshift in the PL emission from blue to red color was closely associated with in nitrogen content and average particle size. Subsequently, Lin et al. developed green and red color CDs with a QY up to 22% by using tartaric acid (TA) as a surface modifier in m-PD or o-PD solution, respectively.56 Their structural classification results displayed that TA played a vital role in tuning the surface state of the CDs and the increased surface oxidation and carboxylation were responsible for the red-shifts in emission. Due to the fact that o-PD and dopamine can generate large conjugated sp2-domains, Lu et al. achieved R-CDs (centered at 710 nm in a dilute ethanol solution, QY 26.28%) with two-photon fluorescence via a facile high-output method.53 Also, they demonstrated that CO and graphitic N play important roles in the red emission.
Solvent also plays a significant role in the degree of dehydration and carbonization of the precursors during the fabrication process of CDs. The size of the sp2-conjugated extensions in CDs can be tuned by varying the solvent during their solvothermal synthesis. Formamide was selected as a co-precursor with p-PD to afford blue to red color CDs with a wavelength in the range of 440–625 nm and the QY of the R-CDs was ca. 24%.45 The distinct degree of surface oxidation governed the surface states of the CDs, and therefore result in exceptional colored CDs. The novel property endowed by the introduction of the solvent was also evidenced by using DMF. By using o-PD/p-PD as precursors and DMF as the solvent, Lin et al. designed a facile strategy to produce long-wavelength emitting o-CDs (orange emission with a QY of 58.8%) and p-CDs (red emission with a QY of 52.4%) without any separation process.57 The CDs exhibit a both concentration dependent PL property and solvent dependent propery. The found out that with increase in CD concentration or change of the solvent polarity, o-CDs and p-CDs generated a red-shift from 520 nm to 580 nm and from 575 nm to 630 nm, respectively. Additionally, by varying the solvent including acetone, ethyl acetat, tetrahydrofuran, ethanol and water during the reaction, blue to red color emissive CDs were obtained.58 The solvent controls the particle size, band gap, and nitrogen doping amount of the CDs. In a protic solvent, a higher N content and presence of imine N contribute to the red emission. Conversely, in an aprotic solvent, a blueshift was observed (Fig. 5).
 Fig. 5  Effect of solvent-derived highly luminescent multi-color carbon dots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
More interestingly, the solvatochromic effect, which contributes to the intramolecular charge transfer, also plays an important role in multi-color CDs.59–61 Wang et al. developed a type of CDs from p-PD that could emit long-wavelength properties (green to red) independent of the excitation wavelength when dispersed in different solvents.62 The CDs showed a QY of 10–35% in different solvents with distinct color emissions. Subsequently, by using o-PD and L-glutamic as precursors, a series of CDs with tunable emission ranging from 443 to 745 nm and QY in the range of 13–54% were obtained by changing the solvent.44 As shown in Fig. 6, the distinct optical features of CDs from blue to NIR that rely on the size distribution, graphitic nitrogen content, and oxygen-containing functional groups can be modulated by using multiple reactions solvents. Especially when aqueous H2SO4 was employed, the solvent controlled dehydration reaction and carbonization process are accelerated due to the catalysis of H2SO4, which determine the size of sp2-conjugated domains and the content of graphitic nitrogen in CDs, finally yielding different emission colors of CDs from blue to NIR with an increase in size and content of graphitic nitrogen.
 Fig. 6  Solvent-engineered strategy for the synthesis of CDs from L-Glu and o-PD and the optical property of multicolor emission CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to organic solvents, inorganic acid also shows a noteworthy effect on tuning the PL properties of CDs towards long wavelengths. The introduction of H3PO4 as a solvent for o-PD endows dual-color emission CDs at 440 nm (blue) and 624 nm (red), as reported by Song et al. (Fig. 7A).63 The successful formation of red emission CDs is attributed to the synergetic effect from the concentrated H3PO4 and the structure of PD. By employing p-PD and H3PO4 as precursors, Chen et al. synthesized well-dispersed pure R-CDs with an emission at 620 nm and QY of 11.2%.64 With the assistance of acids, such as HNO3, H3PO4, and HF, R-CDs were synthesized from p-PD and their fluorescence could be enhanced by increasing the amount of acid.65 The CDs in dilute HNO3 also exhibited bright fluorescence in the red region at 680 nm with a QY of 15.8%. They concluded that the addition of HNO3 can inhibit the polymerization progression and the gradually increasing acidity and oxidation of acids directly led to red emission. Zhu et al. synthesized a kind of multi-emission CDs (M-CDs), which exhibited three fluorescence (FL) emissions (370, 425, and 505 nm) via the hydrothermal method by utilizing 2,4-diaminotoluene, EDA, and phosphoric acid.36 The QY of the blue, green, yellow M-CDs was determined to be 44.62%, 25.73%, and 50.68%, respectively. They demonstrated that H3PO4 can enhance the photostability of CDs and EDA can serve as a passivation agent for the amino groups and as a nitrogen source to improve the FL.66
 Fig. 7  (A) Schematic diagram of the procedure for the preparation of CDs and specific ratiometric detection of lysine and pH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of G-CDs, Y-CDs, and R-CDs and their related PL mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
The distinctive multi-color CDs can be also well adjusted by changing the pH value in the reaction solution. For instance, Jiao et al. proposed that the fluorescence of CDs exhibits a red shifted wavelength with a variation in color from green and yellow to red by adjusting the precursor solution from alkali to acid (Fig. 7B).67 They demonstrated that the CDs synthesized under alkaline conditions have stronger oxidation resistance and the amino groups on the p-PD precursor are more easily activated under acidic conditions, which results in in-depth cross-linking and facilitates a long wavelength emission. Moreover, the pursuit of developing intense emissions in the far-red and near-infrared regions (>600 nm) is attracting increasing attention owing to their superior properties, such as minimum tissue absorption, deep tissue penetration, low interference from auto fluorescence, and minimal photo damage from far-red and NIR light to biological samples. Wang et al. reported a microwave-assisted treatment for the production of CDs with pure red fluorescence (615 nm) in ethanol/water with a QY of 15%.68
In addition to the favoured phenylenediamine, many organic compounds with a benzene ring structure and numerous functional groups also contributed to the synthesis of long-wavelength CDs. For instance, using 1,2,4-triaminobenzene and formamide, yellow-emissive N-doped CDs were prepared via the solvothermal method.69 The y-CDs showed an excitation-independent feature with an emission maximum at 568 nm and QY of 32.5% in ethanol. They demonstrated that the carboxyl and/or C–N relevant structures in the y-CDs are responsible for the observed yellow emission. Moreover, naphthalene with the smallest sp2 domain, can be used as a building block to create a massive conjugated sp2 cluster. Yang et al. obtained N-doped CDs with excitation-independent red emission at 588 nm in acetonitrile at room temperature using sodium-naphthalene.70 The molecular state of the N-bonded aromatic carbon rings in the CDs determines the FL characteristics. Employing the adjustable sequential dehydratase condensation and dehydrogenate planarization (DCDSP) technique, Wang et al. synthesized rather efficient R-CDs targeted at 628 nm with a QY as high as 53% via the treatment of 1,3-dihydroxy naphthalene.71 They demonstrated that the R-CDs consisted of uniformly large-sized conjugated sp2 clusters, resulting in the strong red emission. Two isomers (1,5-diaminonaphthalene (1,5-DAN) and 1,8-diaminonaphthalene (1,8-DAN)) were also selected as precursors to obtain full-color CDs (from blue to red) via the hydrothermal method.72 The QY of the full-color CDs reached 73.89%. Interestingly, two distinct red colors (Em: 670 nm and Em: 620 nm) were produced from only one type of CDs by varing solvent from ethanol and DMF, respectively.
Among the aromatic small molecules, dihydroxybenzene and three-fold symmetric phloroglucinol are also important precursors for the synthesis of CDs. Using m-dihydroxybenzene as the precursor and EDA as the solvent, Li et al. prepared multicolor emissive CDs, which give three types of CDs, emitting bright and stable yellow, green, and blue fluorescence.73 They demonstrated that the emission from the CDs and the bandgap narrowed with an increase in the content of CN, were strongly associated with the CN surface functional groups, which thereby result in a redshift of peak emission. By altering the ratio of p-dihydroxybenzene, o-dihydroxybenzene, m-dihydroxybenzene and ethanol, multi-color CDs from blue to red were synthesized based on the hydrothermal method (Fig. 8).74 Both o-CDs and m-CDs emitted yellow fluorescence at 540 nm, while p-CDs released a red fluorescence with a maximum emission of 598 nm. Importantly, they demonstrated that the surface nitrogen content in the CDs and their particle size regulated their energy gap.
 Fig. 8  Schematic of the growth processes and the structural models of o-CDs (A), m-CDs (B) and p-CDs (C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Besides, Yuan et al. synthesized multi-colored triangular CQDs (NBE-T-CQDs) with high color-purity, narrow bandwidth emission, and QY of up to 54–72% by using three-fold symmetric phloroglucinol (PG) as a carbon source via the solvothermal approach, as shown in Fig. 9A.75 The reaction was completed by a tri-molecular reaction in which the neighbouring electron-donating hydroxyl groups and active hydrogen groups are condensed into a six-membered ring cyclization, forming rigid triangular narrow bandwidth NBE-T-CQDs. The morphology characterization and theoretical calculation revealed that the unique structure plays the main role in the high color purity of the perfect crystalline structure of the triangular NBE-T-CQDs. Moreover, the multi-color of NBE-T-CQDs was also modulated by the introduction of a small amount of concentrated sulfuric acid in the ethanol solution to control their size. Consequently, the bright multi-colored emissions of blue (B), green (G), yellow (Y), and red (R) were observed from the NBET-CQD solution with a gradually increase in their size from 1.9 nm, 2.4 nm, 3.0 nm to 3.9 nm, respectively, manifesting the quantum confinement effect.
 Fig. 9  (A) Design, synthesis and optical properties of narrow bandwidth emission triangular CQDs from three-fold symmetric phloroglucinol (PG). Reproduced with permission from ref. 75, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (B) Scheme showing the formation of H-CDs, their appearance in various states, proposed structure, and fluorescence principle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
Drug molecules with numerous heteroatoms (such as N, S, and P), such as the antibiotic drug amino salicylic acid (ASA), was also developed as a precursor for the synthesis of color-tunable N-CDs via a solvothermal method by Song et al.76 The emission wavelength of the as-prepared NCDs increased from 416 to 646 nm, with a QY of 16.4% which is attributed to the doping of N element. Also, Yang's group synthesized hydrophobic N,S-doped CDs (H-CDs) with blue dispersed-emission at 467 nm and red aggregation-induced emission at 621 nm through a one-pot solvothermal process using melamine (MA) and a dithiosalicylic acid (DTSA)/acetic acid solution.77 The introduction of water caused the blue emission H-CDs to suffer from stacking interactions, which led to the aggregation-induced red emission due to the intramolecular rotation of the symmetrical heterocycles of the disulfide bond on the surface of the H-CDs was restricted. However, this switch on–off property could be reversed once the H-CDs were dissolved. The hydrophobic interaction from the abundance of pyridine and epoxy groups on the symmetrical heterocyclic surface of the H-CDs led to their aggregation, as highlighted in Fig. 9B. Due to the reversible nature of H-CDs, an anti-counterfeiting ink was established for advanced anti-counterfeiting and dual encryption.
3.2. Citric acid-derived CDs
The citric acid (CA), as one of the wide-ranging carbon precursors, possessing many carboxyl and hydroxyl groups, is one of the most commonly used carbon source to produce CDs.23 Besides, nitrogen-containing compounds are considered as a co-reagent for combination with citric acid to afford multi-color CDs. Thus, by integrating citric acid with a variety of nitrogen-containing precursors including ethanediamine (EDA), formamide, urea, thiourea, dimethylformamide (DMF), and dimethylsulfone (DMSO), multi-colors and high QY of CDs can be created. Moreover, the surface functional groups and carbon core of CDs can be effectively tuned to manufacture CDs covering the entire light spectrum, ranging from the ultraviolet to near-infrared region by altering the synthetic approach and/or regulating the thermal pyrolysis temperature.
As a pioneering work, one of the frequently used nitrogen-containing molecules, EDA, was first employed in combination with citric acid. Zhu et al. reported the synthesis of a type of blue and green CDs from citric acid and EDA via the hydrothermal approach. These CDs displayed a QY as high as ca. 80% by optimizing the reaction temperature and adjusting the ratio of citric acid and EDA. The CDs underwent a polymerization stage, in which their surface state plays the main role in the polymeric-like CDs, and carbonization stage, whereas both the carbon core and the surface/molecule state dominate the PL of the CDs when the reaction temperature is changed from low to high.78 Besides, they attributed the carbon core state-induced high QY to the formation of the bright blue independent fluorescent molecule (IPCA), which possibly connected on the surface or inside the carbon core.39 Moreover, the fluorescence resulting from either the carbon-core or surface domain was also significantly affected by the nature of the functional groups on the surface. Due to the electron-withdrawing and -donating properties of functional groups, electron transfer may take place to regulate the fluorescence intensity.79 Hu et al. first reported tunable CDs across the entire visible spectrum from 400 nm to 710 nm, which were produced by altering the ratio of citric acid, ethylene glycol and EDA.80 They demonstrated that H3PO4 could drive the dehydration reaction and the increase of oxygen content, and hence resulted in a red-shift in the maximum wavelength. Yue et al. also proposed a new type of blue fluorescent CDs with a PL peak at 460 nm using citric acid and EDA, whose surface was modified by ethylene bis(oxyethylenenitrilo)tetraacetic acid (EGTA) through a secondary hydrothermal method. They confirmed that the secondary hydrothermal method can achieve cross-linking of the carboxyl and amino groups, and the detection of calcium ions could be realized, as shown in Fig. 10A.81
 Fig. 10  (A) Illustration of EGTA-modified CDs for the detection of Ca2+. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (B) Synthetic route for R-CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
In addition to EDA, formamide with an active carbonyl group and amide functional groups, which are prone to chemical reactions and generate many nitrogen-containing heterocyclic compounds, have been considered as a nitrogen precursor for the synthesis of CDs.82 By using citric acid and formamide as precursors, Pan et al. first proposed a microwave-assisted route at 160 °C for 1 h for the preparation of full-color CDs across a wide range from 330 to 600 nm with a QY of 26.2%.83 They demonstrated that the CDs contain multiple emission centers, while C–N/C–O and other functional groups contribute to their long-wavelength emissions. Further improvement was achieved by additional hydrolysis at 120 °C for 1 h in addition to the above-mentioned microwave approach. Sun et al. also prepared pure red emissive CDs (R-CDs), showing a maximum wavelength at 640 nm with a QY of 22.9%.82 Besides, Ding et al. proposed a facile solvothermal method for the synthesis of CDs models from citric acid, EDA, and formamide, in which red-colored CDs with a PL peak at 627 nm and absolute QY of 53% could be successfully prepared on the gram scale (Fig. 10B).84 They revealed that large nitrogen content and the CO and CN functional groups in CD cores are synergistically responsible for the intense red fluorescence. Importantly, compared with other reagents such as water, formamide exerted a major influence on the favorable realization of R-CDs.
In addition to the single-color CDs from citric acid and corresponding nitrogen-containing groups, Gao et al. synthesized multicolor emissive CDs via a solvothermal method by heating citric acid and formamide solution in the presence of ethanol.85 They demonstrated that the addition of ethanol will promote the formation of a high proportion of amorphous structures and low degree of graphitization in CDs, and therefore the prepared CDs displayed multicolor emissions in different solvents (QY 15.81% in water (blue), 22.43% in DMSO (yellow), 25.80% in DMF (yellow), and 19.42% in methanol (red)). Moreover, they proposed a novel double emission mechanism for the multicolor emission of the CDs. The excitation-dependent blue emissions originated from the intrinsic surface states of the E-CDs, while the excitation-independent long wavelength emissions originated from the solvent molecules connected on the surface of the CDs via hydrogen bonds.
Urea, which has two amino groups, is one of the commonly used nitrogen sources for the synthesis of high nitrogen-doped CDs.49,86 Therefore, employing urea as a nitrogen source instead of EDA also affords a versatile color and highly luminescent CDs. For instance, as depicted in Fig. 11A, by regulating the pyrolysis temperature and the ratio of citric acid and urea in DMF, Miao et al. synthesized multiple color emission CDs from 430 nm to 630 nm with controllable graphitization and carboxyl functional groups. The obtained CDs displayed blue, green, and red emission with their QY reaching up to 52.6%, 35.1%, and 12.9%, respectively. They attributed the redshifted wavelength of the CDs to the higher graphitization of CDs, which induced an extended conjugation length or an increase in the amount of sp2 domains and surface carboxylic groups.30 When the molar ratio of citric acid/urea was larger than 0.7 at 200 °C, the maximum emission peak red-shifted to ≈630 nm in the red spectrum region due to the higher extent of graphitization and the amount of graphite nitrogen and surface carboxylic function groups.30,49 Using citric acid and urea as precursors and dimethylformamide (DMF) as the solvent, highly efficient orange-emissive CDs with a PL peak at 580 nm and QY of 46% were prepared (Fig. 11B).87 The efficient orange emission of the CDs was realized through conjugated sp2-domain control and surface charge engineering, which was controlled by adding alkali (NaOH or KOH) solution to modify the surface carboxyl and phenolic hydroxyl groups of the CDs.
 Fig. 11  (A) Optical property of the CDs in ethanol solution prepared from citric acid and urea under different reaction conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (B) Possible growth mechanism for CND1 and CND2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. 
Subsequently, in 2018, by changing the solvent DMF to DMSO, this group also presented strong NIR CDs that peaked at 720 nm via the incorporation of the sulfur-containing solvent DMSO.88 The NIR emission of the CDs possibly originated from the lowered optical bandgaps due to S-doping, resulting in a redshift in the wavelength.89 After that, Li et al. also produced red-luminescent CDs with a PL peak at 715 nm and QY of 26% in DMSO solution by modifying molecules or polymers on the surface of the CDs.90 Other aprotic polar solutions, such as DMF, N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP), and poly(vinylpyrrolidone) (PVP), additionally offer electron-acceptor groups, consisting of SO and CO, which can be used to alter the outer layers and the edges of the CDs to facilitate optical band gap and electron transformations with NIR excitation. It was found that the reaction solvent strongly affected the surface state of the CDs, and subsequently modified their optical properties. By choosing a suitable solvent, multi-color CDs can be intentionally obtained. Zhu et al. reported a specific type of CDs with different chromatic blue, green and red emissions by changing the reaction solvent (water, ethanol, and DMF) during the hydrothermal treatment, which afforded blue, green and red emission CDs with a QY of 34%, 19% and 47%, respectively.91
According to previous studies, it is known that the redshifted wavelength emission and the color change in CDs are closely related to their nitrogen sources.92 Thiourea, with a similar structure as urea, in which oxygen is replaced by sulfur, was also selected as a precursor to prepare CDs. For example, S,N-doped CDs (S,N-CDs) with red emission were developed using citric acid and thiourea in acetone at 160 °C for 8 h via a hydrothermal process.89 The CDs showed a QY of 29% and 22% in ethanol and water, respectively. In 2020, red-emitting CDs (R-CDs) with a QY of 24% were prepared via the solvothermal treatment of citric acid and thiourea in DMF solution.93 The dehydrolysis procedure occurred between CA and thiourea to generate nitrogen-enriched CDs with a large-sized conjugated sp2 domain functionalized with amide, carboxyl, and hydroxyl groups. While sodium hydroxide treatment achieved surface charge engineering, leading to a color change from blue to red.
3.3. Biomass-derived CDs
Natural precursors are a treasure of exciting precursors, which motivate the constant development of benign synthetic routes. Nature provides a limitless supply of natural resources featuring with abundant carbon sources, many organic molecules, and phenolic compounds as appropriate precursors for the preparation of CDs.94 Moreover, some natural resources possess heteroatoms such as nitrogen, sulfur and phosphorus, which can increase the QY and modulate the emission color of the CDs with surface passivation. The initial synthesis of CDs was limited to low QY, however, recently researchers are searching for sustainable precursors to obtain multi-color and high-emission efficiency CDs. Hsu et al. reported the pioneer CDs derived from coffee grounds as green emissive CDs with a QY of 3.8%.95 The raw natural precursors include fruits such as bananas, potato, plants such as rose flowers and coriander leaves, and Eichhornia crassipes vegetables and foods such as peppers, lotus roots, rice, garlic, egg, soymilk and flour, as well as some waste plastic and amino acid derivatives.13,96,97 The mechanism for the formation of these CDs mainly involves polymerization, dehydration and carbonization of the constituents such as saccharides, citric acid, and ascorbic acid in mushrooms.40
Liu et al. caused a paradigm shift with the use of grass as a natural carbon source for CDs with a QY of 6.2%, which started a trend in the use of biomass for the synthesis of CDs.98 After the first use of grass, parts of plants such as leaves,99 stems,100 fruits,101 flowers,102 roots,103 and their derivatives encompass an essential and significant portion of biomass for CDs. For example, Xu et al. reported fluorescent green emissive CDs at 503 nm with a QY of up to 10.3% via a hydrothermal process using aloe as the carbon source at 180 °C for 11 h, which were utilized for the selective detection of tartrazine in food samples.104 Also, improvements have been made by using eutrophic algal blooms as a carbon source to give blue-colored CDs with a QY of up to 13% under microwave irradiation for 5 min.105 This QY is similar to that of the blue CDs derived from roseheart radish (QY 13.6%).106 Moreover, Ayurvedic medicinal plant Andrographis paniculata (AP)-derived blue CDs exhibited a QY of 15.1%107 under hydrothermal treatment, which was higher than that of Gynostemma-derived blue emissive CDs obtained via calcination at 400 °C for 4 h (5.7%)108 and Ocimum sanctum (9.3%)-derived green emissive CDs obtained via the hydrothermal method.109 The green emission of the Ocimum sanctum-derived CDs is probably due to the large number of organic compounds such as rosmarinic acid, oleanolic acid, ursolic acid, and carvacrol.
By choosing plant leaves such as Cinnamomum plants rich in C, N and O as the carbon precursors, multi emissive CDs could be obtained via solvothermal treatment at 180 °C for 6 h with a QY of up to 10.2%. The CDs exhibited two distinct peaks at 470 nm, belonging to the intrinsic structure of CDs, and 670 nm, originating from chlorophyll-derived porphyrins,110 which are sensitive to aluminum ions and water, respectively, and thus developed for the online analysis of aluminum and water on a smartphone-based portable platform.111 However, few attempts succeeded in the synthesis of bright deep red/NIR emissive CDs although much attention has been paid to the synthesis CDs with high QY in the blue and green spectral regions.112 The deep red-region CDs with longer wavelength emission will remarkably improve the optical imaging, benefitting from minimum autofluorescence and light scattering by tissue.53 However, most CDs possess multiple photoluminescence centers and generally demonstrate a wide full width at half maximum-induced color impurity. Thus, to alleviate this, Liu et al. proposed that Taxus leaves can produce high-performance deep-red emissive CDs with a peak at around 673 nm. These CDs could be easily obtained by treating Taxus leaves in acetone solution at 120 °C for 5 h and purified by silica gel column chromatography to yield 1% product, as depicted in Fig. 12A.113 Under the excitation of 413 nm, the CDs possessed the brightest deep red emissive properties, with their QY reaching 59%. Also, the narrowest full width at half maximum of 20 nm is superior to that of the reported CDs. Moreover, green emissive CDs with a maximum emission wavelength at around 500 nm were obtained from the leaves of an invasive aquatic plant, water hyacinth, via an acid-treated assisted pyrolysis approach, as shown in Fig. 12B.114 During this process, the acid treatment effectively converted the polysaccharides, cellulose and crude proteins into small molecules for further carbonization, and therefore, enhanced the QY up to 27% in comparison with the non-acid treatment with 6.5% QY.
 Fig. 12  (A) Synthesis and optical properties of carbonized polymer dots in acetone solution from Taxus leaves (reproduced with permission from ref. 113, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH) and (B) water hyacinth leaves (reproduced with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2019, Elsevier). 
Furthermore, a great deal of research has been focused on the production of fluorescent CDs using natural resources or cheap ingredients as precursors, such as apple juice (QY 4.278%, maximum emission at 475 nm),115 tomato juice (QY 13.9%, maximum emission at 440 nm) (Fig. 13A),116 papaya (QY 18.98%, maximum emission at 450 nm)117 and peaches (QY 28.46%, maximum emission at 445 nm),101 which were subjected to hydrothermal treatment for the synthesis of CDs. However, most of the biomass-based CDs emit intense blue-green luminescence under excitation of ultraviolet (UV) light and have a relatively low QY in the long wavelength range. Thus, attempts have been made to improve the QY or increase the wavelength of these CDs. Besides these precursors, Ding et al. employed lemon juice as the carbon precursor for the synthesis of red-emitting carbon dots (R-CDs) via the solvothermal heating of an ethanol solution, which exhibited a PL peak at 631 nm and QY of 28% in the presence of ethanol due to the increase in the nitrogen content up to 15% in the core state of the CDs.118 This offers a new avenue to increase the QY of fruit-based CDs. Further advancement has been made to generate CDs with high QY and multi-color emissions. Recently, the Cucumis melo fruit belonging to the Cucurbitaceae family, which contains several bioactive compounds including vitamin A, vitamin C, folic acid, toxic cucurbitacins and flavonoids, and phenolic compounds, was favored as a low-cost carbon precursor for the fabrication of fluorescent CDs. For the functionalization of multi-color emissive CDs, the muskmelon fruit was explored as a new natural carbon source via acid oxidation for 80–100 minutes (Fig. 13B). The CDs emitted blue, green, and yellow with emission wavelengths at 432 nm, 515 nm, and 554 nm when excited at 342 nm, 415 nm, and 425 nm, and gave rise to a QY of 7.05%, 26.9% and 14.3%, respectively. The green emissive CDs were then employed for the sensing of Hg2+ in biological samples.119
 Fig. 13  (A) Fabrication of multi-color-emissive CDs from tomato juice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (B) Fabrication of multi-color-emissive CDs from C. melo fruit as a carbon source via acid oxidation (reproduced with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society), (C) fungus (reproduced with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2017, Elsevier) and (D) water chestnut and onion (reproduced with permission from ref. 126, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society). 
The impressive use of grass as a carbon source led to the exploitation of vegetables, fruits, and food-derived sources for the preparation of CDs. Accordingly, the successful use of plant leaves indicated the possibility of exploring plant fruits for the synthesis of CDs. The natural precursors can be vegetables such as cabbage,120 giving CDs with a blue emission and QY of 17.5%, chinese yam with blue emission at 420 nm and QY 9.3%121 and onion122 with blue emission at 464 nm and QY 28%. Even garlic with nitrogen and sulfur co-doped carbon dots (CDs) exhibited a blue emission at 442 nm with a QY of 17.5%,123 that from fungus exhibited a blue emission at 455 nm with QY 15.3% (Fig. 13C),124 and CDs from mushroom exhibited a blue emission at 455 nm with a QY of 6.0%.125 Water chestnut and onion mixture-derived N,S-co-doped CDs exhibited a blue emission at 475 nm with a QY of 12% (Fig. 13D).126 The reason for the higher QY by using two types of biomass as precursors simultaneously may be owing to the synergistic effects between the N atoms in the water chestnut and S atoms in onion via the hydrothermal process, which is much higher than that of pea and sesame-derived CDs with a blue emission at 460 nm and QY of 3.37%.127 Also, there are many reports on the preparation of CDs using biomass as a precursor, including coffee grounds (3.8%),95 watermelon peel (6.7%),128 and sweet potatoes (2.8%).129
In addition to the above-mentioned precursors, microwave treatment of lotus root also offered N-doped CDs with blue emission at 435 nm and QY of 19.0%.130 Calcination of oats at 400 °C for 2 h and subsequent microwave treatment for 12 min also produced dual blue luminescence CDs at 347 nm and 428 nm with a QY of up to 3.0%.131 However, egg white132 was treated via the hydrothermal strategy at 220 °C for 48 h, affording blue emission at 420 nm with a QY of up to 64%. The low-cost, widespread, and eco-friendly raw biomass resources hold great potential as precursors to generate CDs. Therefore, waste materials can be converted to high-value emissive CDs. For example, the up-recycling of urine led to pee-dots under carbonization at 200 °C for 12 h to yield green emissive CDs at 500 nm with a QY of 5.3%.133 A type of waste-expanded polystyrene was considered as the precursor to produce tunable solid CDs from yellow to orange with a maximum wavelength at 470 nm, 530 nm, and 630 nm, corresponding to a QY of 5.2%, 3.4%, and 3.1%, respectively via the solvothermal method under 200 °C for 5 h (Fig. 14A).134 Besides, crushed olive pits (OPs), a residue from the production of olive oil, were selected as a carbon source precursor and subjected to a soft one-step treatment for the preparation of oxygen-enriched CDs with blue emission at 456 nm (Fig. 14B).135 Recently, turtle shells, the residue of food waste, which are rich in amidogen, carboxyl, and oxhydryl functional groups, constitute an important source of CDs and served as a carbon source for the preparation of CDs.4,13,132 Blue emission CDs at 390 nm with a QY of 45% were synthesized from turtle shells via carbonization at 500 °C for 5 h. Benefitting from the bright fluorescence, rich surface functionalization, and excellent water solubility, the CDs were investigated for practical application toward anti-counterfeiting and coding, as depicted in Fig. 14C.8
 Fig. 14  (A) Schematic of the fabrication of solid-state fluorescent CDs, photographs of W-CDs, Y-CDs, and O-CDs under daylight (top) and 365 nm UV (bottom), and their SSF spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) Synthesis of CDs from olive pits. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic preparation and application of CDs via the pyrolysis of turtle shells and application in anti-counterfeiting via a 3D microfluidic printing technique. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
Alternatively, amino acids are readily available, affordable, and biocompatible because they are the vital base elements of protein. They have both amino and carboxyl groups, providing the convenient cross-linking of amide groups. A series of amino acids consisting of serine, histidine, and cystine was treated via the hydrothermal approach at 200 °C for 12 h to produce blue emission CDs at around 415 nm with a QY of ∼7.5% (Fig. 15A).136 Wang et al. described the use of glucose, xylose, and glucosamine as raw ingredients to make biomass CDs functionalized with alginate and cellulose nanofibers to form corresponding fsluorescent hydrogels. All the prepared CDs possessed abundant active surface groups such as oxygen-containing groups or amino groups, emitting blue color emission at 455, 437, and 442 nm with a QY of 3.38%, 3.27%, and 16.55%, respectively.137 Moreover, cellulose, as the most available biodegradable and renewable sustainable raw material, is also considered as a source for the modification of CDs due to the regularly distributed hydroxyl groups on its surface. To suppress the self-aggregation of CDs, cellulose derivatives with positive and negative charges were embedded on the surface of CDs, resulting in core–shell CDs@cellulose with bright blue fluorescence with a maximum emission wavelength of 446 nm and green emission at 530 nm. These phenomena support the fact that Cel-N+ forms a shell layer on the surface of NCDs, thereby effectively isolating each particle of NCDs. The introduction of the cellulose derivative effectively isolated the CDs from each other and significantly improves the QY (71.5%) compared that of the pure CDs (0.17%).138
 Fig. 15  (A) CDs derived from amino acids (reproduced with permission from ref. 136, Copyright 2015, Elsevier) and (B) schematic illustration of the synthetic route for CD-based anti-counterfeiting inks. NCD1 was taken as an example for demonstration. For NCD1-C, NCD2-C and NCD3-C, photographs of the inks in quartz cells are shown under daylight and under UV light at 365 nm and the printed patterns on paper under excitation at 254, 365, or 450 nm (ON) and after ceasing the excitation (OFF) (reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Besides amino acids, carbohydrates and other carbon-rich precursor compounds are commonly used as source materials to create CDs through dehydration, polymerization, carbonization and other processes.139 For instance, the use of L-cysteine and galactose in the presence of a base was developed as a straightforward and one-step refluxing process at 80 °C for 24 h for the preparation of multi-coloured CDs with different emission colours including blue, green, and yellow with an emission wavelength located at 400, 500, and 560 nm, corresponding to a QY of 2%, 34%, and 76%, respectively.140 Folic acid was embedded in urea at 155 °C for 6 h, resulting in the formation of CDs with full-color afterglow emission from blue (430 nm) and green (518 nm) to red (625 nm) with a QY of 7.23%, 14.0%, and 11.0%, respectively (Fig. 15B).141
Additionally, silkworm chrysalis as a natural carbon source was also employed to produce CDs with a blue emission at 420 nm, resulting in a QY of 46% with an N content of 5.72%.142 Wool, a type of nontoxic and natural raw material, was chosen as the precursor to prepare CDs via a one-step microwave-assisted pyrolysis process at 200 °C for 60 min. The CDs had a high QY (16.3%) with blue emission from 435 nm to 480 nm.143
3.4. Polymer-based CDs
Beyond the above mentioned precursors, well-defined molecular precursors, especially polymers that contain heteroatoms and uniform rigid structure exhibiting tunable properties (i.e., polymer chain length, polarity, terminal functionalities, carbon contents, etc.), are ideal carbon sources with elegant characteristics for special purposes, which can be tailored for the fabrication of specific CDs, significantly expanding the realm of CDs with unambiguous and repeating structures.144,145 Besides synthetic conjugated polymers and non-conjugated chemical polymers146, nature-derived polymers such as lignin and chitosan147,148 have been employed for the synthesis of CDs. To yield new surface-functionalized CDs, polymerization and carbonization are typically needed during the formulation of CDs extracted from polymers,149–151 among which polymeric structures have often been mentioned.78,152,153
Most of the formation reactions of CDs go through a “pyrolysis–clustering–carbonization” process. Initially, the polymer chains are transferred from sp3 to sp2 hybridized carbon with fragments formed in the first stage during pyrolysis. Secondly, the surface functional groups which including amine, carboxyl, and hydroxyl, react with each other through polycondensation to form small cross-linked polymer clusters, which are then crosslinked and carbonized. The formation of a cross-linked structure would improve the hydrophobicity, resulting in a decrease in water concentration and microphase separation in the nuclear area, making it much easier to dehydrate and carbonize, allowing the dehydration reaction to continue indefinitely (Fig. 16A).154 Thirdly, the hydrophobicity of the polymerized clusters increases after bonding and dehydration, resulting in a hydrophobic structure inside and a hydrophilic structure outside, lead to microphase separation and the formation of a nucleus (Fig. 16B).155 Following nucleation, the small molecules or polymers in the solution bind to the surface of the nucleus, and the nucleus dehydrates and carbonizes to form a highly cross-linked structure or carbon skeleton with a graphite or like-diamond structure. The structure of the new surface and the enlargement of the carbon core lead to the growth of CDs, resulting in an increase in the amount of CDs.156 This process is quite essential for continuous and fruitful efforts in figuring out the detailed structure of CDs as well as their formation and PL mechanism.157
 Fig. 16  (A) Illustration of the possible synthetic mechanism of CDs@PEG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154, Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Schematic diagram of the nucleation and reaction process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 155, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Based on the above-mentioned formation mechanism, versatile polymers have been selected as preferred precursors to fabricate multi-color CDs. For instance, polythiophene derivatives were identified as potent conjugated polymeric precursors for the preparation of multi-color CDs.158,159 With tunable emissions ranging from the blue to NIR region, Ge et al. reported a series of surfaced-functionalized polymer-derived multi-color CDs via the hydrothermal method at 170 °C for 24 h, as demonstrated Fig. 17A. They investigated how the nitrogen and oxygen content of polythiophene derivatives affect the PL property of CDs. The results demonstrated that the surface state of the as-obtained CDs is highly reliant on the ratio of oxygen-doped polythiophene and nitrogen-doped precursors with emission wavelengths ranging from 482 nm to 680 nm. Both the absorption and fluorescence spectra red-shift when the N content increased. They attributed the redshift in the emission wavelength of the CDs to the effective increase in the content of nitrogen due to the increasing ratio of nitrogen-containing polythiophene derivatives.160
 Fig. 17  (A) Synthetic routes to obtain C-dots and the emission colors of the various C-dots under UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160, Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Synthesis scheme of CDs from PEI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. 
In terms of non-conjugated polymer precursors, polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), polyethyleneimine (PEI) and polyethylene glycol (PEG) have been reported as carbon precursors to assemble a type of CDs with an amorphous structure.2,161 PEI possess a large number of primary amines, which favor nitrogen-doping in CDs and many branched structures, undergoing cross-link polymerization. For instance, Li et al. prepared blue luminescent CDs with a QY of up to 48.3% ± 5.3% via a one-pot hydrothermal reaction in the presence of citric acid and PEI (MW = 1800) at 110 °C for 2 h (Fig. 17B).162 The peak of the PL emission remained at approximately 459 nm with a blue emission as the excitation wavelength varied, indicating the excitation-wavelength independent PL property, which is attributed to both the surface state and size of the CDs.162,163 Then, the branched PEI (MW = 25000) was also employed as the sole carbon source and surface passivation agent via a one-step pyrolysis method at 180 °C to prepare blue fluorescent CDs with the maximum wavelength at 457 nm and QY of 9.0%. In this course, carbonization and functionalization progressed simultaneously, and the fluorescence characteristics and surface distribution of the polymer chains on the synthesized CDs were enhanced. Moreover, this branched PEI endowed the CDs with surface passivation via its polymer chains to prevent agglomeration and endowed the CDs with remarkable stability over several months.146
Polyethylene glycol (PEG), as a biocompatible non-conjugated polymer, was used as both a carbon source and passivating agent to synthesize CDs.2 PEG not only has a high percentage of carbon but also is subjected to easy dehydration, polymerization and carbonization. Fan et al. established a one-step hydrothermal route at 120 °C for 72 h to prepare fluorescent CDs from the non-conjugated polymer PEG. The major formation path of the CDs is the dehydration and carbonization mechanism during hydrothermal synthesis. The CDs displayed the strongest emission peak at 435 nm, corresponding to blue light and QY of 3.5%.164 Li et al. developed a low-cost electrolysis method to obtain high-intensity fluorescent CDs using different molecular weights of PEG (PEG-200, PEG-400, PEG-400, and PEG-800) as the carbon source. The electrolysis of PEG-600 in NaOH solution yielded blue color CDs with a maximum emission peak at 485 nm and the highest QY of 38% among the PEG compounds.165 Moreover, Kumar et al. designed a simple sonochemical method for the synthesis of CDs from PEG-400 under different reaction times. The carbonization process may arise from cross-linking, induced by the intermolecular dehydration of PEG-400 due to the extreme conditions of high pressure (ca. 500 atm.) and temperature (ca. 5500 K), which are suitable for the decomposition of PEG and the formation of CDs. They investigated the experimental conditions including sonication time, temperature, and sonication power to choose the optimum reaction parameters for the synthesis of CDs. The CDs had a QY of 16% and maximum emission in the range of 460–480 nm.166 Ionic liquids can also be used as a passivating agent, where PEG-2000 was used to create acidophilic highly photoluminescent ionic liquid (IL)-modified blue color CDs by Chen et al. through a simple one-step hydrothermal method at 200 °C for 12 h in a system containing an IL (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium bromide [C4mim] Br) and hydrochloric acid (HCl). During this procedure, [C4mim] Br acted as the modifier and HCl as the accelerator. The introduction of H+ changed the surface groups of the CDs and generated a high PL intensity and blue color CDs with a maximum wavelength of up to 455 nm and QY of up to 43%, which is higher than that without H+.167 The synthesis of PEG-based CDs can be regarded as the “bottom-up” approach, similar to the conjugated polymer phase. The polymer chains are broken down and oxidized into many fragments (i.e., polymeric radicals, carbonyls, hydroxyls and alkenes) in the presence of oxygen in the first stage of pyrolysis. Then, it proceeds to the clustering step, where the electron-rich fragments (i.e., alkenes and even aromatic rings) formed by the oxidized PEG will aggregate to form a hydrophobic core, and gradually grow into a larger one as the reaction proceeds. Besides, hydrophilic oxygen-containing groups (i.e., hydroxyls, carbonyls, and ethers) tend to form a surface passivation layer around the surface of the cluster. As these processes progress, PEG CDs will eventually be formed.168,169
Chitosan, as a natural polymer precursor, is an amino-polysaccharide derived from the deacetylation of the naturally abundant chitin, exhibiting a number of favorable properties such as biocompatibility, biodegradability, non-toxicity and antimicrobial activity.170 The use of chitosan gel as a precursor generated blue emissive CDs in acetic acid conditions under rigorous stirring at room temperature for 1 h.171 Then, the addition of PEG and PEI as passivating agents significantly enhanced the QY up to 7.01% to 13.15%, respectively.172 Microwave-assisted pyrolysis is an excellent alternative to direct heating and hydrothermal treatment for the synthesis of CDs. Consequently, the microwave-assisted of CDs from PEG has been attempted. Wang et al. produced a CD/chitosan composite via a microwave oven heating approach. The CD/chitosan composite exhibited blue color with a maximum emission peak at 435 nm, corresponding to a QY of 29.2%.148
Crosslinking and wrapping the fluorescence centers with polyacrylic acid polymer decreased the motion freedom and provided a solvation effect, which led to an improved QY and red-shifted emission.173 Tao et al. synthesized a new type of polymer CDs with an absolute QY as high as 44.18% by hydrothermally crosslinking polyacrylic acid and EDA at 200 °C for 8 h. (Fig. 18).174 They attributed the PL centers to –NO and –CO (mainly amide and/or its derived structures) possibly from EDA, which was similar to the previously reported sub-fluorophores. Besides, by crosslinking and wrapping the fluorescence centers, the PAA chains were considered to restrict the vibration and rotation of the fluorophores and provide a stable chemical environment, resulting in an improved QY (from 25.29% to 44.18%) and red-shifted emission (from 380 nm to 410 nm). Based on the extensive study on the fluorescence of CDs, using polyacrylic acid (PAA) as a precursor, by changing EDA, ethanolamine and ethylene glycol were used to prepare CDs with a similar structure but different nitrogen content. The most prominent character of this type of CDs is that they displayed room temperature phosphorescence (RTP). The afterglow spectrum revealed the phosphorescence emission behaviour of the CDs from EDA and PAA, with a broad peak from 425 nm to 700 nm, mainly centered at around 494 nm. Due to the inherited polymer structure, the CDs could successfully overcome the aggregation-caused quenching problem that plagues most solid-state CDs, while having excellent solid-state fluorescence and unique RTP characteristics without the need for other matrix or composite structures. The QY of the CDs prepared with the aid of ethylenediamine, ethanolamine, and ethylene glycol decreased sequentially, indicating that nitrogen has a great impact on their luminescence.175
 Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the experimental procedure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174, Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
Additionally, polyacrylamide was combined with sodium citrate under a hydrothermal method to produce bright-blue fluorescent CDs with a maximum emission intensity at 434 nm and QY of 18.0%.176 Recently, polylactide (PLA) oligomers, attained from the hydrolytic degradation of PLA, were converted to blue color CDs with an emission centered at 400 nm via a one-pot hydrothermal synthesis approach. The CDs consisted of a carbonaceous nucleus having an sp2 conformation with carboxyl and hydroxyl surface groups.177
3.5. Petroleum product-based CDs
CDs are relatively new nanomaterials, which have had an impact in multiple fields thanks to their distinctive photoluminescence properties and excellent biocompatibility. By carefully choosing precursors, CDs with strong emission can be successfully obtained from natural precursors such as petrochemical product with coal, asphaltene and petroleum coke, which are abundant fossil fuels in nature and mined and utilized in many fields.178 Coal features a heterogeneous property with a three-dimensionally cross-linked network, which comprises aromatic and hydro aromatic units connected by short aliphatic and ether linkages (Fig. 19A).179 Natural asphaltene contains a natural nano-size graphene-structure with polycyclic aromatic domains and offers asphaltene-derived CDs with a variety of oxygen-containing and nitrogen-containing functional groups such as carboxyl, hydroxyl, amine, and nitro groups.180 Besides, petroleum coke, a by-product of the oil refining sector, and the manufactured goods from the delayed coking of asphaltene, have a rich benzene ring or aromatic domain and graphene structure. All these aromatic-containing fossil fuels products could be utilized to prepare CDs with high value-added utilization.181
 Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of the acid oxidation of CDs from coal. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (B) Synthesis of CQDs from mesophase pitch. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184, Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The formation of CDs from fossil fuels comprises coal, petroleum asphaltene, and petroleum coke usually adopt the top-down method. Under extreme conditions, such as arc discharge, laser ablation, electrochemical etching, and chemical oxidation, larger carbon structures (graphite, graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), carbon black, tar, etc.) are “crushed” into smaller nanoscale particles by conducting top-down methods.182 The top-down approach, relying on cutting bulk graphite-based or similar sp2 carbon-based materials into CDs through stepwise dissociation procedures, is a common method for the preparation of CDs from petrochemical products. For instance, petroleum coke with irregular size and shape distributions can be oxidized by a mixture of concentrated nitric acid and sulfuric acid to form small CDs, which are rich of oxygen-containing functional groups.183 During the procedure for the preparation of CDs from asphaltene, mild oxidative agents (mixed acids) were used to disaggregate the asphaltene multimers, remove impurities, and cut off the surrounding branches from the polycyclic aromatic carbon core structure of the asphaltene molecules, while retaining the polycyclic aromatic carbon core structure to form high-quality water-soluble CDs.181
Besides, the bottom-up method is also employed in the formation of CDs, which commonly involves nucleation, dispersion, and carbonization. For instance, nano-sized carbonaceous microcrystals, intermediates in the solidification of asphaltene experience bottom-up approach to produce CDs. Typically, the mesophase pitch from the slurry oil could directly form dispersed carbonaceous microcrystals in the mesophase pitch carbonization phase to produce nano-size CDs without oxygen-rich functional groups. The slurry oil in this process contained 45.9 wt% aromatics and 14.4 wt% asphaltene, indicating a high content of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, which were calcined to form mesophase carbon spheres and nano-sized carbonaceous crystals. Subsequently, they were well dispersed in xylene and deposited on an Si wafer to form CDs, while the larger mesospheres were extruded. During this process, the calcination temperature is crucial for the formation of the mesophase, which determines the size of the CDs (Fig. 19B).184

3.5.1. Coal. 
Coal is the most abundant and readily combustible energy resource used worldwide. As is known, anthracite features a macromolecular structure mainly made of sp2-carbon domains and adjacent layers linked by bridging bonds.178 Benefiting from the crystalline carbon in the coal, which is easier to oxidatively displace than pure sp2-carbon structures, nanometre-sized graphene quantum dots prepared by using several types of coals with amorphous carbon groups on their edges have been established.179 Given that surface grafting with organic agents such as acyl chloride derivatives is a feasible strategy to improve and tailor the PL properties of CDs and provide an important way for the surface modification of CDs,185 Qiu and coworkers developed a facile one-step wet chemistry route to prepare highly luminescent CDs from Jincheng Anthracite. The raw coal was dispersed in concentrated nitric acid, and then heated at 140 °C for 24 h for the formation of the pristine CDs. Subsequently, the pristine CDs were treated with a series of organic amino groups to produce surface-grafted CDs. The as-synthesized CDs grafted with EDA were found to emit strong blue fluorescence with a maximum QY of 18.6% and maximum emission at 450 nm.186
However, the above-mentioned acid oxidation treatment led to a comparatively low QY because the subdomains formed by acidic oxidation treatment are energetically unfavorable, thus leading to weakly intrinsic emission.187 Moreover, acid oxidation produces oxygen-containing functional groups on CDs, which will induce the nonradioactive recombination of electron–hole pairs, thus resulting in a low QY.188 Thus, to solve this problem, Qiu et al. proposed the use of TaiXi coal as a carbon precursor and gained N-doped blue color CDs with a high QY via the solvothermal method in DMF solvent at 180 °C for 12 h. DMF is supposed to decompose to dimethylamine partially, which can be doped into the sp2-carbon domains of coal via nucleophilic ring-opening reaction with the bridging bonds between the adjacent layers, thus leading to the formation of coal-based N-CDs.189,190 In comparison with the CDs obtained from the acidic oxidation method, the as-prepared N-CDs via the solvothermal approach feature a higher nitrogen-doping conjugated structure. Therefore, the as-obtained N-CDs emitted blue PL at 445 nm with a QY of 47%.191
Recently, Zhang and coworkers described a facile and fast mechanical method to prepare blue luminescent coal-derived CDs (C-GQDs) via the ultrasonic physical tailoring process. As depicted in Fig. 20A, the anthracite coal was first dispersed in DMF for homogeneous dispersion, and then treated with ultrasound irradiation to form nano-sized C-GQDs. The PL emission peaks of the as-made blue C-GQDs were 429 and 469 nm. After reduction with sodium borohydride, the PL peak (469 nm) was blue-shifted, which was ascribed to the decreased number of oxygen functional groups and increased number of sp2-carbon domain structures in the C-GQDs. The C-GQDs exhibited a good QY of 5.98%.192
 Fig. 20  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of C-GQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (B) Diagram for the preparation of CQDs and N-CQDs from petroleum coke. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183, Copyright 2014, Elsevier. 
By reviewing the literature in recent years, we have found that researchers have made a substantial change in the preparation system of CDs from the initially concentrated acid chemical oxidation method to the greener, higher yield solvothermal or ultrasound physical synthesis method, which is consistent with the idea of the CD synthesis and sustainable development strategy. Compared to CDs prepared via acidic oxidation treatment, the CDs prepared using the latter method have less oxygen-containing functional groups and a more conjugated structure. Consequently, nonradioactive electron–hole pair recombination is not as dominant, resulting in an increase in QY.178 Furthermore, the solvothermal treatment creates energetically favorable subdomains for high QY, resulting in a strong intrinsic emission.187


3.5.2. Petroleum coke. 
Petroleum coke is a by-product in the oil refining pathway, which has a high content of carbon and low content of ash and has been demonstrated to be a good starting material for the production of porous carbons.193 Petroleum coke is rich in benzene rings or aromatic domains, which make it possible to prepare high-quality CDs. Preparing CDs from petroleum coke has been investigated by Wu and coworkers. In 2014, Wu et al. produced water-soluble photoluminescent CQDs from petroleum coke for the first time via an ultrasonic-assisted chemical oxidation method and additional hydrothermal amination, obtaining yellow fluorescent CQDs and blue fluorescent N-CQDs with QYs of 8.7% and 15.8%, respectively. As depicted in Fig. 20B, petroleum coke was oxidized first in mixed concentrated H2SO4 and HNO3, and then the mixture was surface functionalized via hydrothermal ammonia treatment. The as-made CDs were treated hydrothermally in ammonia, which were rich in oxygen-containing functional groups and exhibited bright green emission at 510 nm with a QY reaching up to 8.7%, resulting in the formation of N-CDs, displaying bright blue emission at 475 nm with a QY reaching up to 15.8%.181 Also, with the assistance of mixed strong acids and ultrasonic treatment at 120 °C for 24 h, yellow fluorescent CDs could be directly obtained from petroleum coke without any further passivation or modification. The yellow emissive CDs showed a QY as high as 9.8% and were utilized for the sensing of copper ions in water.194
Subsequently, by effectively tuning the types and contents of the functional groups of CDs by controlling different oxidative and reducing agents and oxidation temperature, strong green photoluminescence CDs (510 nm) were generated at 120 °C, which contained more CO and SO groups than that prepared at 180 °C, showing an improved electron transfer capacity and photooxidation efficiency.181


3.5.3. Asphaltene. 
Petroleum asphaltene is an excellent CD precursor given that it is mainly made up of natural nano-size polycyclic aromatic domains. Compared to petroleum coke, asphaltene is “purer” with more nano-sized polycyclic aromatic carbon (PAC) sheets and higher reactivity, more crystalline PAC structures, and less impurities such as ash and amorphous carbon components. Therefore, asphaltene is potentially more suitable to prepare high-quality CDs. Benefiting from the natural nano-size graphene-structure in the natural asphaltene material, Zhao et al. proposed a simple one-pot mild chemical oxidation of low-value petroleum asphaltene followed by routine ammonium neutralization. The CDs exhibited a high photoluminescence QY of 18% and the ability to maintain strong green fluorescence over time, which differ from many asphaltene-derived blue emissive CDs.180 Moreover, asphaltene molecules have a relatively high C concentration, with a central island architecture dominating one aromatic ring structure.195 Also, when the central aromatic ring system of asphaltene molecules aggregates as a result of π–π interaction, CDs can be formed. Accordingly, CDs were prepared via the direct carbonization of dispersed carbonaceous microcrystals in mesophase pitch. The size of the as-prepared CDs was regulated by adjusting the nucleation temperature for the formation of a mesophase. Due to their oxygen-free nature, the CDs exhibited excitation-independent fluorescent behavior with a QY of up to 87% and emission peaks located at about 435 nm, showing the brightest deep-blue emitting property.184

3.6. Carbon-based CDs
After the first discovery of CDs from single-walled carbon nanotubes,1 Sun et al. produced CDs via the laser ablation of graphite powder and cement with a QY ranging from 4% to more than 10%.2 Subsequently, many commercial carbon sources such as coal activated carbon (CAC), wood activated carbon (WAC) and coconut activated carbon (CNAC), carbon nanotubes mixed with graphite, graphite rods, and nanodiamond have been employed to produce multi-color CDs with luminescence ranging from blue (430 nm) to yellowish–green (530–550 nm) and QY from 3% to 12.6% via the hydrothermal or electrochemical approach.34,196–198 Moreover, CDs exhibiting various colors of fluorescence can be prepared by varying their degree of surface oxidation or their size.199 Therefore, Tang et al. used carbon fibers to prepare carbon dots with different oxidation degrees via nitric acid acidification. The emission wavelengths of these CDs ranged from 430 to 610 nm. Due to their surface-state emission nature, the QY of the CDs decreased from 20.7% and 4.5% to 1.8%. It was revealed that the surface defects created by surface oxidation serve as capturing centers of excitons, thereby giving rise to surface-state-related fluorescence.15,200
Single-walled carbon nanotubes, multi-walled carbon nanotubes, and graphite were also oxidized to CDs via the acid oxidation approach. These CDs exhibited strong yellow fluorescence under UV irradiation and shifted emission peaks with a chance in the excitation wavelength. Interestingly, all three types of CDs prepared from the above-mentioned carbon sources showed similar fluorescence properties with a QY in the range of 3–6% and maximum emission at 535 nm under excitation at 460 nm201 (Fig. 21A). Carbon fibers, with stacked graphitic submicrometer domains are easily broken down under acid treatment and chemical exfoliation to produce luminescent CDs. Moreover, multi-colored CDs with different molecular weights were achieved through the oxidation of carbon fibers in nitric acid followed by ultrafiltration202 (Fig. 21B). They found out that the size and degree of surface oxidation of the CDs could be tuned by varying the reaction time, temperature, and concentration of nitric acid, therefore influencing the photoluminescence property of the CDs. A longer reaction time will enhance the surface oxidation, resulting in a red-shifted wavelength. Alternatively, higher concentrations of acid induced a red-shifted wavelength for short reaction times. Also, low temperature preferentially resulted in a blue-shifted wavelength, whereas a higher temperature led to a red-shifted wavelength. It is possible that nitric acid shows a low oxidizing capacity at low temperature with less surface oxidation and a short wavelength203 (Fig. 21C).
 Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of CDs from different carbon morphologies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201, Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (B) Scheme illustrating the oxidation cutting of carbon fibers into GQDs and UV-vis spectra of GQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202, Copyright 2012, the American Chemical Society. (C) Optical images of as-prepared multi-color fluorescent CDs and fluorescence emission spectra with excitation at 360 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 203, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (D) Formation process of CDs from fullerene.208 Reproduced with permission from ref. 208, Copyright 2015, Elsevier. 
The top-down approach facilitates the fabrication of CDs with high-crystallinity and relatively intact structures.163 However, the as-prepared CDs with a perfect sp2 carbon structure lack an efficient bandgap to generate fluorescence. Therefore, surface modification is often required to develop their fluorescence efficiency.204 Moreover, these synthesis methods are invariably complicated and uncontrollable with relatively low yields and QY, some even causing hazards to the environment, and thus are not suitable for the large-scale production of CDs with high photoluminescence QY.205 There have been further efforts to develop alternative strategies to produce CDs from carbon nanomaterials. Solid-state synthesis (SSS) has already been considered as a viable procedure for the assembly of low-dimension nanostructures.206 The SSS strategy has the advantages of simple operation, solvent-free conditions for mass-production, in line with the concept of green chemistry, low cost, and can be industrialized. It starts from the core formed in a certain site, and reaction dynamics depend on the formation and growth speed of the core. The core grows quickly once it is formed because the formation activation energy is higher than the growth activation energy.207 Lan et al. realized the simple, easy to repeat and large-scale preparation of fluorescent CDs through the solid-state synthesis (SSS) of fullerene (C60) and solid sodium hydroxide calcination. The CDs were obtained by grinding C60 and sodium hydroxide in a ceramic crucible, and then calcining at high temperature for 4 h (Fig. 21D). The cage of fullerenes could be opened and the hydroxyl and carboxyl were successfully introduced in the presence of sodium hydroxide at high temperature. A well-defined emission peak with blue emission was found at 400 nm with a QY of 4.82%.208
The properties of CDs prepared using carbon precursors with different morphologies are also highly dependent on their degree of surface oxidation or size.15,199,200 Bao et al. used carbon fibers to prepare multi-color CDs in a controllable wet oxidation method via nitric acid oxidation followed by ultrafiltration. The PL properties of the CDs, which were mainly influenced by their size and degree of surface oxidation, could be tuned by varying the reaction time, temperature, and concentration of nitric acid. Three separate fractions of CDs with different molecular weights (<3, 3–10, and 10–30 kDa) under different oxidation degrees were obtained, presenting an emission wavelength independent of the excitation wavelength (430 nm to 520 nm, 505 nm to 570 nm, and 510 nm to 610 nm, respectively). Furthermore, a prolonged reaction time resulted in a red-shifted emission wavelength for the three types of CDs, which is probably due to the fact that a longer reaction time will induce a higher degree of surface oxidation and more surface defects will be produced, consequently giving rise to narrowed energy levels and a red-shifted emission.199 The nature of the surface-state emission was also evidenced by using CDs with a molecular weight lower than 3 kDa, where they found out that increasing the oxidation time will create more surface emissive sites and the brightness of the CDs increased with an increase in the QY from 1.1% to 20.7%. In addition, the peak wavelength of CDs obtained at a fixed time displayed a red-shift wavelength as the size of the CDs increased.
Suitable carbon sources are vital to the optical properties of CDs. A superior precursor with an aromatic structure will generate large domains, which will inherently lower the energy gap and result in a size difference, while heteroatoms contribute to a red shift in wavelength. CDs with abundant carboxyl and hydroxyl group are the most commonly used carbon ingredient to produce multi-color CDs with a high yield, in which the properties of the CDs are highly sensitive to temperature. In the case of CDs prepared from aromatic organic small molecules, they display large conjugated domains; however, their post-treatment is relatively difficult. Biomass offers a limitless supply of natural resources with functional groups and heteroatoms; however, it needs a complex early treatment and lacks repeatability. Polymeric molecules with a rigid structure usually undergo polymerization and carbonization to offer surface-functionalized CDs with delicate temperature control and reaction time. Petroleum products contain a suitable aromatic structure and strong acid and etching can be employed to obtain CDs with a moderate QY. All these precursors contribute to the colorful property of CDs and prompt the development of CDs aggressively.
4. Applications
CDs derived from various precursors are endowed with excellent luminescent optical properties, various functional surface groups, good biocompatibility, inherent property originating from their precursors and suitable surface modifications, which expand their applications in diverse fields. In this section, we provide a brief introduction to the applications of these different precursor-derived CDs in the fields of sensing, biomedicine, white light-emitting devices (WLEDs) and anti-counterfeiting due to their optical properties.
4.1. Sensing
Multi-color emissive CDs have been widely used as fluorescent sensors in biological systems due to their adjustable PL properties, rich surface chemistry, easily functional decoration, and good stability. Based on this, an enhanced/activated (turn-on) and quenched (turn-off) strategy by monitoring the fluorescence change due to the interaction between their rich surface functional groups and target substances has been successfully developed based on photoinduced electron transfer (PET), fluorescence resonance energy transfer (FRET), and the inner filter effect (IFE). For example, CDs are commonly used to sense metal ions such as Fe3+,209 Cu2+,210 Ag+211 and many other metal ions,101,212 in which the surface groups of CDs such as carboxylate and amino groups can effectively bind with the corresponding metal ions through coordination/electrostatic interaction or free radical reaction. Yue's group proposed EGTA-modified CDs for the detection of Ca2+via fluorescence quenching. The complexation of EGTA and Ca2+ leads to the aggregation of the CDs, resulting in fluorescent quenching. Also, the limit of detection (LOD) was calculated to be 0.38 μM.84 Apart from the single-channel sensing of metal ions, dual-emission CDs with a ratiometric fluorescence sensing system based on the ratio changes of the fluorescence intensities was also developed as a fluorescence ratiometric probe for Fe3+. The fluorescent CDs showed two emission peaks at 470 and 570 nm, while Fe3+ could quench solely the fluorescence intensity at 570 nm due to its special coordination interaction with the phenolic hydroxyl groups of the CDs, while the intensity of the peak at 470 nm remained constant.213 Taking advantage of these quenching phenomena, sensing of other target analytes has also been proposed. Similar to the sensing mechanism of Fe3+ and Ca2+, most strategies have been developed based on the quenching fluorescence of CDs for other metal ions including Cu2+,214 Hg2+,215 and Pb2+.216 For instance, as shown in (Fig. 22A),215 blue emissive CDs showed high sensitivity for Hg2+ and were employed for observing Hg2+ in cellular imaging. Jiang et al. developed a simple, instrument-free, paper-based dual-emission CD analysis device for the semi-quantitative, visual, and sensitive speciation analysis of Pb2+.217 Kailasa et al. prepared a sensor using CDs prepared from muskmelon fruit, which could be used to detect Hg2+ in biological and water samples.119 Moreover, some types of CDs can be used for sensing multiple metal ions. For instance, the red emissive CDs prepared by Zhou et al. were used for sensing Pt2+, Au3+, and Pd2+.218 Meanwhile, CDs can achieve the simultaneous sensing of multiple ions. As depicted in Fig. 22B, Xiao et al. developed a paper-based microarray for the simultaneous quantitation of Hg2+, Pb2+, and Cu2+in situ by integrating fluorescent CDs and a smartphone-based portable reader.219
 Fig. 22  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CDs and their application for the label-free detection of Hg2+. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215, Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (B) Stand-alone smartphone-based portable reader (SBR) with a custom-designed application (SBR-app) for receiving fluorescence shifts away from the microarrays and automatically reporting results, as well as defining the logical information of fluorescent CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
In addition to metal ions, CDs can also be used to detect a variety of biomolecules, such as proteins,220 ascorbic acid,221 glucose,222 and glutathione.223 Pandit et al. proposed an array-based CD sensor for sensing proteins in buffer and in the human serum. More importantly, when the array was used in combination with machine learning technology, proteins could be distinguished with 100% efficiency.224 Loo et al. reported that surface-functionalized CDs with carboxyl groups could be also employed for the sensing of single-stranded DNA with excellent detection range and selectivity.225 By using a similar strategy, He's group proposed a highly selective and sensitive fluorescence ratiometric method for the detection of dopamine (DA) by using DA to quench 3-aminophenylboronic acid (APBA) modified-CDs.226 In addition to the fluorescence detection of CDs of biomolecules, fluorescence/colorimetric dual-mode carbon dots (RD-CD) have also been developed to sense hypochlorite and ascorbic acid in cells and body fluids. The quenching may be due to the fact that ClO− acts an oxidant, which may destroy the surface passivation of CDs.227
4.2. Biomedical applications
Biosensing using CDs mainly depends on the interaction between their rich surface functional groups and the target species, which possibly requires specific surface decoration. For biomedical applications, CDs need to power themselves with a prominent photoluminescence property with suitable wavelength, high photobleaching resistivity, good aqueous solubility, good biocompatibility, low cytotoxicity, and minimal photodamage to biological samples and high stability even with delicate specific targeting ability.228,229 For example, red emissive CDs prepared with citric acid as a carbon source, UA as a nitrogen dopant, and sodium fluoride as a fluorine dopant were used as optical nanoprobes for tumor bioimaging.230 Tricolor CDs prepared from CA and 5-amino-1,10-phenanthroline with a high QY of 52% were used as a new type of cellular imaging marker to detect intracellular pH and could well avoid the use of fluorescent dyes and protein fluorescence interference due to their unique tricolor emission property (Fig. 23A).231 Sun et al. used a variety of phenylenediamine isomers to prepare multi-color CDs covering multiple colors in the visible light spectrum. Blue, yellow, and red fluorescence were observed in HepG2 cells upon incubation with these CDs (Fig. 23B). In addition, folic acid@CDs could realize the in vivo imaging of target tumor sites of HepG2 tumor mice as well as ex vivo imaging of isolated organs of mice at 24 h after their injection of folic acid@R-CDs. Because CDs have good stability and low biological toxicity, they can be used for in vitro cell imaging and in vivo tumor tissue imaging.232 Moreover, the water-soluble phosphorescent carbon nanodots (CNDs) with high stability and good biocompatibility prepared by Shan et al. could be used as afterglow agents for afterglow imaging for in vivo/in vitro bio-imaging.233
 Fig. 23  (A) Schematic illustration of the structure and application of AC-CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) Application of B-CDs, Y-CDs, and R-CDs in in vivo imaging, biodistribution of HepG2 tumor mice and ex vivo images of isolated organs of mice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. 
Many chemotherapy drugs suffer from water dispersion, biocompatibility problems, and side effects, and thus different CD carriers have been developed by grafting and loading other materials to overcome these drawbacks.234,235 Because of the carriers biocompatibility, low relative cytotoxicity, and good cell uptake of different CDs, they are excellent resources for gene delivery,236,237 antibacterial238 and antiviral.239 Su et al. developed red-emitting CDs for the delivery of nuclear drugs to cancer stem cells (CSCs). CSCNP-R-CQDs, which have nitrogen functional groups on their surfaces, were more efficient at transporting DOX into the nuclei of cancer cells, especially the nuclei of CSCs, than free DOX, resulting in excellent tumor cell killing and increased therapeutic effectiveness with no recurrence.240 In addition to drug delivery, gene delivery is also proven to be an effective toolkit for theranostics of cancer. Kim et al. developed highly biocompatible fluorescent CDs for the delivery of siRNA. The CD nanoparticle-mediated siRNA delivery significantly silenced the expression of the green fluorescence protein (GFP) and inhibited tumor growth in a breast cancer cell xenograft mouse model of tumor-specific therapy.241 Moreover, CDs can also be used as antibacterial and antiviral agents.
The CDs prepared by Huang et al. using spermidine displayed effective antibacterial activity against Pseudomonas aeruginosa, methicillin-resistant S. aureus, etc. CDs have a small size and highly positive charge, which cause severe disruption of the bacterial membrane with good biocompatibility. Therefore, CDs are promising antibacterial drugs, which can be used to treat bacterial infections of the eye and even persistent bacterial infections.242 Besides, CDs can effectively interact with viruses and block the infectivity of viruses. Cao et al. prepared benzoxazine monomer-derived CDs (BZM-CDs). The BZM-CDs could directly bind to the surface of virus ions, which ultimately hinders the first step of virus-cell interaction. Therefore, the application of BZM-CDs may constitute an interesting broad-spectrum method to control virus infections.243
4.3. White light-emitting devices (WLEDs)
As newly developing fluorescent materials, multi-color CDs are expected to replace the expensive rare-earth-based phosphors and toxic metal-based semiconductor QDs in white light-emitting devices (WLEDs) because of their abundance, adjustable PL colors, low cost, and environmental friendliness.43 Multi-color CDs can either act as phosphors in LEDs or active layers in electroluminescent devices or can be mixed with luminescent ingredients in certain ratios to obtain white-emitting materials, which can be embedded in transparent polymer films or used to create trichromatic phosphors with red, green, and blue to produce white WLEDs with a high color rendering index (CRI).244 Guo et al. first proved that solid-state CDs can be used as novel phosphors to construct LED devices. They synthesized blue-, orange- and white-light-emissive CDs via the chemical unzipping of epoxy-enriched polystyrene (PS) photonic crystals through a one-step pyrolysis procedure.245 However, the aggregation-induced luminescence quenching of solid-state CDs exhibits weak or no photoluminescence, which is a great obstacle in the development of CD-based multi-color solid-state phosphor LEDs. To solve this problem, Feng et al. used p-aminosalicylic acid and CA to synthesize bright blue (B-CDs) and yellow-green (YG-CDs) dual-color emissive CDs with self-quenching-resistant character in the solid state via the hydrothermal method. The self-quenching-resistant character is achieved through the supramolecular cross-link-enhanced emission effect. Full color and white color phosphor-based LEDs were achieved by adjusting the cross-linking degree of B-CDs and YG-CDs in PVA to shape coat CDs/PVA composite films, and the WLEDs had a reasonable CRI of 83.246 Surface engineering of CDs helps to overcome aggregation-induced luminescence quenching. Zhou et al. treated blue emission CDs prepared from citric acid with H2O2 solution to achieve a strong green emission CDs phosphor in the aggregate state (QY up to 25%). Utilizing this CDs phosphor, WLEDs with CIE coordinates, color temperature (CT), and CRI of (0.33, 0.34), 5129 K, and 79, respectively, were produced.247 Moreover, they prepared self-quenching-resistant CDs via a one-step hydrothermal strategy using citric acid as the carbon source and branched poly(ethylenimine) as the nitrogen source and surface passivation agents. Compared with the CDs phosphor by H2O2 treatment, this method is versatile and simple without post-treatment. By using CDs as an emitting layer, a CDs-based WLED with CIE coordinates (0.34, 0.34), CT of 4850 K, and CRI of 70.5 was prepared.248 Wang et al. synthesized CDs with UA and citric acid and prepared the solid white-light-emitting phosphors (WCDs@PS) with the prepared CDs and polystyrene (PS) nanospheres. The aid of PS effectively overcomes the aggregation-induced luminescence quenching. As shown in Fig. 24A, in the range of 20–80 °C, the light-emission spectrum of these WLEDs could be modified from white (λ ∼ 400–730 nm) to blue (λ ∼ 440 nm). The CIE coordinates were also changed from (0.35, 0.36) to (0.32, 0.23).249 Additionally, full-color CDs were also prepared by reacting citric acid and urea in formamide through a microwave-assisted approach. Different fractions with distinct colors ranging from blue, cyan, green, yellow, and orange to red color with different molecular weight displayed a chromaticity in the range of (0.156, 0.107) to (0.633, 0.36), as depicted in Fig. 24B.250
 Fig. 24  (A) (a1, b1, and c1) Photographs of candies with different colors illuminated with a WCD@PS-based WLED under different operating temperatures. (a2, b2, and c2) Corresponding emission spectra of WLEDs. (a3, b3, and c3) Corresponding CIE chromaticity coordinates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (B) Photograph of obtained CD fractions illuminated by UV light and the chromaticity diagram of CD fractions (CD-Y and CD-O overlap). Reproduced with permission from ref. 250, Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Recently, Tang et al. used citric acid to prepare blue and green-emitting CDs, combining CDs and Ag–In–Zn–S (AIZS) nanoparticles with red emission to build an outstanding WLED device. Furthermore, the prepared WLED exhibited enhanced light-emitting properties with a maximum CRI of 97 and a CRI value above 90 throughout the CCT tuning range of 3387 to 8018 K. This strategy provides new ideas for the preparation of environmentally friendly WLEDs with a high CRI.251
4.4. Anti-counterfeiting
Fingerprint imaging is a commonly used technique in criminal investigations. Once a finger contacts the surface of a substance, it leaves characteristic images, differing from each other due to sweat and oily sebum and can be visualized by a specific technique, which is denoted as the latent fingerprint (LFP). CDs with multicolor and bright fluorescence can be possibly employed in LFP-related anti-counterfeiting and encoding due to the fact that they interact with fingerprint residues, which is now under investigation.252 Guo et al. synthesized highly fluorescent CDs via a simple pyrolysis process using a combination of turtle shells as precursors and demonstrated their use in the fields of multi signal coding and anti-counterfeiting (CPCs). The resulting CDs acted as fluorescent ink for an anti-counterfeiting inkjet printing pattern.8 Chen et al. synthesized new CDs with bright red fluorescence via hydrothermal treatment. These red fluorescence CDs exhibited an emission wavelength at about 620 nm with a QY of over 10%. By spraying R-CDs on the fingerprints on various types of solid surfaces, red fluorescence of fingerprint-touched areas could be easily distinguished from the non-contact areas, which could detect latent fingerprints (LFP), as shown in Fig. 25A.64 Liu et al. reported the use of highly fluorescent blue colored nitrogen-doped CDs (N-CDs) via the hydrothermal treatment of citric acid and tris(hydroxymethyl)methyl aminomethane (Tris). The N-CDs with a high QY of 75%, excellent stability and good transparency acted as a proper invisible ink for recording information. By combining this invisible ink with polyvinyl alcohol (PVA), the N-CDs/PVA flexible composite material will emit bright blue fluorescence under ultraviolet radiation and thus an icon could be loaded on the N-CDs/PVA film.253
 Fig. 25  (A) Fluorescence staining process and mechanism of R-CDs toward observing the fingerprints on solid substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the CL-based information encryption and decryption, burn-after-reading information encryption process based on CD-based CL system and the images of the Morse code printed with g-CDs (Ink A) and g-CDs/NaAc (Ink B) as inks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 254, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) Presentation and principle of H-CD reversible dual-fluorescence. Photographs of filter papers with different treatments under variable irradiation and schematic diagram of the H-CDs precipitated upon the addition of water and redissolving into ethanol, with the resulting multimode fluorescence. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
It should be noted that by utilizing citric acid and urea as precursors with the solvent-thermal method, blue, green, and red fluorescence CDs can be synthesized, which can also be used for advanced information encryption.254 As demonstrated in Fig. 25B, the Arabic numeral printed on filter paper by the red CDs ethanol solution as ink could not be observed under daylight, whereas it could be observed with naked eyes upon the addition of bis(2,4,5-trichloro-6-carbopentoxyphenyl) oxalate (CPPO) and H2O2. Besides, multi-color patterns consisting of squares, patterns, badge, lines, and letters could be also encrypted using this type of red CDs ethanol inks. Furthermore, burn-after-reading information encryption could be established by this CDs-based system in a Morse code communication system for the first time. More interestingly, Yang et al. developed hydrophobic-CDs (H-CDs) with reversible two-switch-mode luminescence (blue dissolved fluorescence and red aggregation-induced emission), which could be used in advanced anti-counterfeiting and dual-encryption, as shown in Fig. 25C. Based on the two-switch-mode luminescence of H-CDs, an anti-counterfeiting fluorescence ink for advanced anti-counterfeiting and dual encryption was developed. The reversible color transformations of the water-dissolved blue emissive monomers and ethanol-induced red aggregates of H-CDs could be accomplished by modifying the solvents of water and ethanol. Therefore, the reversible transformation between monomer and aggregate of H-CDs can be effectively employed in anti-counterfeiting and encryption.77
In addition to the above-mentioned applications, there is also an extremely wide application of CDs in other aspects. For instance, freshly freeze-dried CDs with high hygroscopic property, excellent water solubility, and rich surface functional groups are highly desired as humectants.27 More interestingly, CDs exhibit a reversible thermosensitive fluorescence behavior under heating and cooling processes, enabling their use as potential switchable temperature-responsive sensors based on the competitive restriction of intramolecular vibrations (RIVs) and π–π interactions.28 Moreover, CDs can be integrated in the photoactive layer in solar cells, which synergically enhance the photo-absorbance and reduce the recombination process, demonstrating the potential application of CDs in energy harvesting devices.255 Far beyond the above promising applications, CDs alone or combined with various materials (e.g., noble metals,256 metal oxides,257 and carbon nitrides) have been extensively explored in photocatalysis258 and electrocatalysis,259 nanoenzymes,260 and machine learning.261
5. Conclusion and perspective
As reviewed above, a large number and different morphologies of carbon precursors have been extensively investigated for the construction of multi-color CDs and employed for biosensing, biomedical, WLEDs, and anti-counterfeiting applications. The versatile category of carbon precursors with a rich skeleton and surface chemistry makes CDs possess numerous unique structures and physical properties compared to other carbon nanostructures, which have attracted interest in the exploration of a variety and diverse morphologies of carbon sources to fabricate multi-color CDs. In this study, we primarily summarized the recent progress in the synthesis of multi-color CDs from a wide range of precursors, such as aromatic small molecules, citric acid, biomass resources, synthetic and natural polymers, natural petroleum products, and multiple morphologies of carbons in terms of synthesis approach, formation mechanism, multi-color emission, QY, and the corresponding optical properties together with the effects of particle size, reaction solvents, surface states, and heteroatom doping on the optical properties of CDs and their application in biosensing, biomedicine, white light emitting light-emitting devices (WLEDs), and anti-counterfeiting.
In particular, the optical properties and formation mechanism of multi-color CDs not only are highly dependent on the top-down and bottom-up approaches, but also highly sensitive to the diverse precursors due to their inherent morphology and structures. Aromatic organic small molecules with luminescent conjugated systems and abundant functional groups afford well-defined CDs with emissions ranging from blue color to the infrared region. Citric acid and EDA are the most common molecules used to construct controllable nitrogen-doped CDs with extremely high QYs given that their abundant functional groups (-COOH, -OH, -NH2, etc.) are critical to modulate the electronic structure of CDs, and therefore lead to an increased QY and redshifted wavelength. Natural biomass with a limitless supply of natural carbon sources ranging from fruit to waste materials provides new insight for the fabrication of CDs with low cost and high value. Well-defined synthetic and natural polymers with elegant repeating structures form well-tailored multi-color CDs usually via a pyrolysis procedure and produce moderate QY. Petroleum products feature a heterogeneous property with either a three-dimensionally cross-linked network or nano-sized graphene structure, which consist of polycyclic aromatic and hydro aromatic domains connected by short aliphatic and ether linkages, but do not give a satisfactory QY and emission wavelength. The multi-morphology of carbon structures with high crystallinity and a relatively intact structure produces blue to green colored CDs usually via the top-down approach. However, improving their luminescence efficiency often necessitates surface modification.
Despite the considerable exploration of the multi-precursors and synthetic approach discussed in this review, continued research is required to search for suitable precursors for the large-scale production of multi-color CDs with high purity. Although multi-color CDs up to the near-infrared region have been synthesized, the selection of well-defined precursors and engineering their emission bands with high QY in the visible region remains a critical challenge. Furthermore, the development of facile and effective approaches to prepare scalable high-quality CDs for their industrial production is still in its early stages. Additionally, multi-color CDs suffer from low selectivity due to their unclear intrinsic structures and surface groups. However, if their chemical groups can be controllably synthesized, it will be possible to systematically manipulate the electronic structures and predict a definite luminescence mechanism of CDs and high selectivity can be achieved. Recent advancements in selecting appropriate carbon precursors and facile approaches are now facilitating the search for an all-in-one strategy to obtain multi-coloured CDs. Therefore, we hope that more researchers will further explore new synthetic strategies in this field, discover more interesting carbon precursors, and establish new methods to uncover the definite mechanisms and new applications of CDs. Although a great number of versatile precursor-derived CDs have been summarized in this review, CDs solely or combined with various types of nanomaterials are now being investigated in various fields including photocatalysis, electrocatalysis, solar cells, switchable temperature-responsive sensors, moisturizing products, nanoenzymes, and even hot emerging topics in machine learning. Thus, with the rapid development of CDs-based materials chemistry, a broader potential application in related fields is emerging in the near future.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is financially supported by Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21804319 for C. Wang, 52022109, 2202047 and 51834008 for G. Huang), the Science Foundation of China University of Petroleum (Beijing) (2462018YJRC041 and 2462020YXZZ016).
References
X. Y. Xu, R. Ray, Y. L. Gu, H. J. Ploehn, L. Gearheart, K. Raker and W. A. Scrivens, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 12736–12737 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. Shiral Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. F. Wang and P. G. Luo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, H. Meng, Y. Sun, L. Qu, Y. Lin, Z. Li and D. Du, Small, 2019, 15, 1901507 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, D. Pickens Iii, T. He, X. Zhang, Y. Liu, T. Nishino and Q. Jane Wang, J. Tribol., 2019, 141, 041501 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, K. J. Mintz, S. K. Sharma and R. M. Leblanc, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 9115–9132 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. T. Tian and X. B. Yin, Small, 2019, 15, 1901803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. C. Hoang, K. Dave and V. G. Gomes, Nano Energy, 2019, 66, 104093 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, H. Li, L. Ling, G. Li, R. Cheng, X. Lu, A. Q. Xie, Q. Li, C. F. Wang and S. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 8, 1566–1572 CrossRef .
F. Arcudi, L. Dordevic and M. Prato, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2070–2079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu, M. Li, J. Qiu and Y. P. Sun, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2315–2337 RSC .
P. Miao, K. Han, Y. Tang, B. Wang, T. Lin and W. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 1586–1595 RSC .
B. Yao, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Trends Chem., 2019, 1, 235–246 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sharma, P. Tiwari and S. M. Mobin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8904–8924 RSC .
H. Liu, T. Ye and C. Mao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 6473–6475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Zhou, C. Booker, R. Y. Li, X. T. Zhou, T. K. Sham, X. L. Sun and Z. F. Ding, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 744–755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hu, Z. Wei, Q. Chang, A. Trinchi and J. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 378, 402–407 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ye, C. Xiang, J. Lin, Z. Peng, K. Huang, Z. Yan, N. P. Cook, E. L. Samuel, C. C. Hwang, G. Ruan, G. Ceriotti, A. R. Raji, A. A. Marti and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7063 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, M. Jiang, N. Niu, Z. Chen, S. Li, S. Liu and J. Li, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 11–24 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Nekoueian, M. Amiri, M. Sillanpaa, F. Marken, R. Boukherroub and S. Szunerits, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4281–4316 RSC .
J. Deng, Q. Lu, N. Mi, H. Li, M. Liu, M. Xu, L. Tan, Q. Xie, Y. Zhang and S. Yao, Chemistry, 2014, 20, 4993–4999 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, Y. He, S. Li and H. Cui, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 9634–9636 RSC .
J. Schneider, C. J. Reckmeier, Y. Xiong, M. von Seckendorff, A. S. Susha, P. Kasák and A. L. Rogach, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 2014–2022 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhu, X. Zhao, Y. Song, S. Lu and B. Yang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 128–132 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. M. Hutton, B. C. M. Martindale and E. Reisner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6111–6123 RSC .
L. Jiang, H. Ding, M. Xu, X. Hu, S. Li, M. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Q. Wang, S. Lu, Y. Tian and H. Bi, Small, 2020, 16, 2000680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Kanga and D. H. Kang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 129990 CrossRef .
C. Dong, M. Xu, S. Wang, M. Ma, O. U. Akakuru, H. Ding, A. Wu, Z. Zha, X. Wang and H. Bi, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2021, 19, 299 CrossRef .
C. Dong, M. Xu, J. Huang, F. Li, P. Wei, A. C. Tedesco and H. Bi, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 10560–10564 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, S. Zhu, T. Feng, M. Yang and B. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1901316 CrossRef CAS .
X. Miao, D. Qu, D. Yang, B. Nie, Y. Zhao, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704740 CrossRef .
J. Xu, Q. Ji, Y. Wang, C. Wang and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 426, 130808 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jiang, H. Ding, S. Lu, T. Geng, G. Xiao, B. Zou and H. Bi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 9986–9991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ganguly, P. Das, E. Itzhaki, E. Hadad, A. Gedanken and S. Margel, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 51940–51951 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ming, Z. Ma, Y. Liu, K. Pan, H. Yu, F. Wang and Z. Kang, Dalton Trans., 2012, 41, 9526–9531 RSC .
I. Pozo, E. Guitian, D. Perez and D. Pena, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2472–2481 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhu, K. Tan, Q. Chen, J. Xiong and L. Gao, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 4732–4742 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Essner, J. A. Kist, L. Polo-Parada and G. A. Baker, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 1878–1887 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tucureanu, A. Matei and A. M. Avram, Crit. Rev. Anal. Chem., 2016, 46, 502–520 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Song, S. Zhu, S. Zhang, Y. Fu, L. Wang, X. Zhao and B. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 5976–5984 RSC .
Y. Lou, X. Hao, L. Liao, K. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Li, J. Ou, A. Qin and Z. Li, Nano Select, 2021, 2, 1117–1145 CrossRef .
Y. Du and S. Guo, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2532–2543 RSC .
J. Zhu, X. Bai, X. Chen, H. Shao, Y. Zhai, G. Pan, H. Zhang, E. V. Ushakova, Y. Zhang, H. Song and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801599 CrossRef .
Z. Zhu, Y. Zhai, Z. Li, P. Zhu, S. Mao, C. Zhu, D. Du, L. A. Belfiore, J. Tang and Y. Lin, Mater. Today, 2019, 30, 52–79 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, J. S. Wei, P. Zhang, Z. Y. Zhou, Q. Y. Gao and H. M. Xiong, Small, 2018, 14, 1800612 CrossRef .
H. Ding, S. B. Yu, J. S. Wei and H. M. Xiong, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 484–491 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, D. Shen, C. Wu and S. Gu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 22017–22039 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xiao, W. Zhang, P. Li, W. Zhang, X. Wang and B. Tang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 4216–4230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. K. Walther, C. Z. Dinu, D. M. Guldi, V. G. Sergeyev, S. E. Creager, J. P. Cooke and A. Guiseppi-Elie, Mater. Today, 2020, 39, 23–46 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hola, M. Sudolska, S. Kalytchuk, D. Nachtigallova, A. L. Rogach, M. Otyepka and R. Zboril, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 12402–12410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, X. Qin, J. Tian, L. Wang and X. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 171-172, 886–890 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vedamalai, A. P. Periasamy, C. W. Wang, Y. T. Tseng, L. C. Ho, C. C. Shih and H. T. Chang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 13119–13125 RSC .
X. G. Li, M. R. Huang and W. Duan, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 2925–3030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lu, L. Sui, J. Liu, S. Zhu, A. Chen, M. Jin and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603443 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Tian, X. Zhang, D. Li, D. Zhou, P. Jing, D. Shen, S. Qu, R. Zboril and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700416 CrossRef .
K. Jiang, S. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Lu, A. Wu, C. Cai and H. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5360–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, X. Feng, X. Gao, Y. Wang, C. Cai, Z. Li and H. Lin, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lin, C. Lin, M. He, R. Yuan, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhou, W. Xiang and X. Liang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 41552–41560 RSC .
R. Kumari and S. K. Sahu, Langmuir, 2020, 36, 5287–5295 CrossRef CAS .
F. Terenziani, A. Painelli, C. Katan, M. Charlot and M. Blanchard-Desce, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 15742–15755 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dong, K. M. Solntsev and L. M. Tolbert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 12038–12039 CrossRef CAS .
P. K. Lekha and E. Prasad, Chemistry, 2011, 17, 8609–8617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, C. Sun, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, V. L. Colvin, Q. Rice, J. Seo, S. Feng, S. Wang and W. W. Yu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1909–1915 RSC .
W. Song, W. Duan, Y. Liu, Z. Ye, Y. Chen, H. Chen, S. Qi, J. Wu, D. Liu, L. Xiao, C. Ren and X. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 13626–13633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. S. Wei, P. Zhang, X. Q. Niu, W. Zhao, Z. Y. Zhu, H. Ding and H. M. Xiong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18429–18433 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan, X. Su, C. Zhou, B. Wang, Q. Zhan and S. He, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 40952–40956 RSC .
X. M. Wei, Y. Xu, Y. H. Li, X. B. Yin and X. W. He, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 44504–44508 RSC .
Y. Jiao, Y. Liu, Y. Meng, Y. Gao, W. Lu, Y. Liu, X. Gong, S. Shuang and C. Dong, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8585–8592 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, K. Jiang, Q. Wu, J. Wu and C. Zhang, Chemistry, 2016, 22, 14475–14479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jiang, S. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, C. Cai and H. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 23231–23238 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, S. Zhu, Z. Li, Z. Li, C. Chen, L. Sun, W. Tang, R. Liu, Y. Sun and M. Yu, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 11912–11914 RSC .
Z. Wang, F. Yuan, X. Li, Y. Li, H. Zhong, L. Fan and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702910 CrossRef .
F. Huo, W. Liang, Y. Tang, W. Zhang, X. Liu, D. Pei, H. Wang, W. Jia, P. Jia and F. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2019, 54, 6815–6825 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, S. G. Liu, J. X. Dong, J. Y. Liang, L. J. Li, N. B. Li and H. Q. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 10785–10793 RSC .
Y. Wang, Q. Su and X. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 11312–11315 RSC .
F. Yuan, T. Yuan, L. Sui, Z. Wang, Z. Xi, Y. Li, X. Li, L. Fan, Z. A. Tan, A. Chen, M. Jin and S. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2249 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Song, C. Zhu, J. Song, H. Li, D. Du and Y. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7399–7405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Liu, Z. Guo, B. Lei, J. Zhuang, X. Zhang, Z. Liu and C. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1789 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zhu, Q. Meng, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. Sun, H. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953–3957 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dhenadhayalan, K. C. Lin, R. Suresh and P. Ramamurthy, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 1252–1261 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, A. Trinchi, P. Atkin and I. Cole, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 2970–2974 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yue, L. Li, L. Cao, M. Zan, D. Yang, Z. Wang, Z. Chang, Q. Mei, P. Miao and W. F. Dong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 44566–44572 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sun, L. Zhang, K. Jiang, A. Wu and H. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 8659–8668 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, S. Sun, A. Zhang, K. Jiang, L. Zhang, C. Dong, Q. Huang, A. Wu and H. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7782–7787 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, J. S. Wei, N. Zhong, Q. Y. Gao and H. M. Xiong, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 12635–12642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, X. Liu, D. Jiang, H. Zhao, Y. Zhu, X. Chen, H. Luo, H. Fan and X. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 277, 373–380 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Mondal and S. K. Saha, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 19669–19678 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qu, D. Zhou, D. Li, W. Ji, P. Jing, D. Han, L. Liu, H. Zeng and D. Shen, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3516–3521 CrossRef CAS .
X. Bao, Y. Yuan, J. Chen, B. Zhang, D. Li, D. Zhou, P. Jing, G. Xu, Y. Wang, K. Hola, D. Shen, C. Wu, L. Song, C. Liu, R. Zboril and S. Qu, Light: Sci. Appl., 2018, 7, 91 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, K. Ai, J. Liu, M. Deng, Y. He and L. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 1353–1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, P. Jing, L. Sun, Y. An, X. Shan, X. Lu, D. Zhou, D. Han, D. Shen, Y. Zhai, S. Qu, R. Zboril and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705913 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, X. Bai, J. Bai, G. Pan, Y. Zhu, Y. Zhai, H. Shao, X. Chen, B. Dong, H. Zhang and H. Song, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 085705 CrossRef .
H. Peng, Y. Li, C. Jiang, C. Luo, R. Qi, R. Huang, C. G. Duan and J. Travas-Sejdic, Carbon, 2016, 100, 386–394 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, D. Su, H. Gao, X. Yan, D. Kong, R. Jin, X. Liu, C. Wang and G. Lu, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 3198–3205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Meng, X. Bai, B. Wang, Z. Liu, S. Lu and B. Yang, Energy Environ. Mater., 2019, 2, 172–192 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Hsu, Z. Y. Shih, C. H. Lee and H. T. Chang, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 917–920 RSC .
A. Sachdev and P. Gopinath, Analyst, 2015, 140, 4260–4269 RSC .
Q. Yang, J. Duan, W. Yang, X. Li, J. Mo, P. Yang and Q. Tang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 434, 1079–1085 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Tian, L. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Qin, Y. Luo, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2037–2041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, M. Zhang, H. Wang, B. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Mater. Today Commun., 2020, 24, 101222 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. A. Vandarkuzhali, V. Jeyalakshmi, G. Sivaraman, S. Singaravadivel, K. R. Krishnamurthy and B. Viswanathan, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 252, 894–900 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liao, Z. Cheng and L. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 3053–3061 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, Y. Wan, K. Zhang, Q. Fu, L. Wang, J. Zeng, Z. Xia and D. Gao, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2019, 411, 2715–2727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Xu, Y. Wu, J. Zhuang, X. Zhang, H. Zhang, B. Lei, C. Hu and Y. Liu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 437–448 RSC .
H. Xu, X. Yang, G. Li, C. Zhao and X. Liao, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2015, 63, 6707–6714 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ramanan, S. K. Thiyagarajan, K. Raji, R. Suresh, R. Sekar and P. Ramamurthy, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 4724–4731 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, H. Diao, H. Chang, H. Wang, T. Li and W. Wei, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 241, 190–198 CrossRef CAS .
G. G. Naik, M. B. Alam, V. Pandey, D. Mohapatra, P. K. Dubey, A. S. Parmar and A. N. Sahu, J. Fluoresc., 2020, 30, 407–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, L. Li, J. Liu, L. Yu, H. Li, F. Cheng, X. Yi, J. He and B. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9832–9840 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, A. R. Chowdhuri, D. Laha, T. K. Mahto, P. Karmakar and S. K. Sahu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 242, 679–686 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, M. Huang, L. Zhang, M. Zou, D. Chen, Y. Huang and S. Zhao, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 8044–8049 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rao, W. Liu, K. He, S. Zhao, Z. Lu, S. Zhang, M. Sun, P. Zou, X. Wang, Q. Zhao, Y. Wang and T. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 8857–8867 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, X. Liu, Y. Fan, X. Guo, L. Zhou, Y. Lv and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15281–15287 RSC .
J. Liu, Y. Geng, D. Li, H. Yao, Z. Huo, Y. Li, K. Zhang, S. Zhu, H. Wei, W. Xu, J. Jiang and B. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1906641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Prathumsuwan, P. Jaiyong, I. In and P. Paoprasert, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 299, 126936 CrossRef CAS .
V. N. Mehta, S. Jha, H. Basu, R. K. Singhal and S. K. Kailasa, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 213, 434–443 CrossRef CAS .
H. Miao, L. Wang, Y. Zhuo, Z. Zhou and X. Yang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 86, 83–89 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Y. Wang, T. Guo, T. Yang, M. Chen and J. Wang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2016, 85, 68–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ding, Y. Ji, J. S. Wei, Q. Y. Gao, Z. Y. Zhou and H. M. Xiong, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 5272–5277 RSC .
M. L. Desai, S. Jha, H. Basu, R. K. Singhal, T. J. Park and S. K. Kailasa, ACS Omega, 2019, 4, 19332–19340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Alam, B. Y. Park, Z. K. Ghouri, M. Park and H. Y. Kim, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 3791–3797 RSC .
Z. Li, Y. Ni and S. Kokot, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2015, 74, 91–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bandi, B. R. Gangapuram, R. Dadigala, R. Eslavath, S. S. Singh and V. Guttena, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 28633–28639 RSC .
S. Zhao, M. Lan, X. Zhu, H. Xue, T. W. Ng, X. Meng, C. S. Lee, P. Wang and W. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 17054–17060 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, M. Liu, Y. Wang, S. Wang, H. Miao, L. Yang and X. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 251, 503–508 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Wang, J. M. Xia, J. Feng, M. Q. He, M. L. Chen and J. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 7130–7137 RSC .
Y. Hu, L. Zhang, X. Li, R. Liu, L. Lin and S. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 4992–5000 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Su, L. Gan, J. Liu and X. Yang, Anal. Biochem., 2020, 589, 113476 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhou, Z. Sheng, H. Han, M. Zou and C. Li, Mater. Lett., 2012, 66, 222–224 CrossRef CAS .
W. Lu, X. Qin, A. M. Asiri, A. O. Al-Youbi and X. Sun, J. Nanopart. Res., 2012, 15, 1344 CrossRef .
D. Gu, S. Shang, Q. Yu and J. Shen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 390, 38–42 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, X. Li, Y. Li, X. Wen, J. Li, M. M. F. Choi, C. Dong and S. Shuang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 210, 533–541 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, W. Sun and P. Wu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 1412–1418 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Essner, C. H. Laber, S. Ravula, L. Polo-Parada and G. A. Baker, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 243–250 RSC .
H. Song, X. Liu, B. Wang, Z. Tang and S. Lu, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1788–1794 CrossRef CAS .
M. Algarra, L. d. Orfãos, C. S. Alves, R. Moreno-Tost, M. S. Pino-González, J. Jiménez-Jiménez, E. Rodríguez-Castellón, D. Eliche-Quesada and E. Castro, R. Luque, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 10493–10500 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pei, J. Zhang, M. Gao, D. Wu, Y. Yang and R. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 439, 129–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Liang, Z. Su, K. Zhang, J. Ren, R. Sun and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2018, 1, 1398–1407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jin, J. Zhang, W. Tian, X. Ji, J. Yu and J. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 5937–5945 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Li and Y. H. Chu, Molecules, 2019, 25, 104 CrossRef .
T. Y. Wang, C. Y. Chen, C. M. Wang, Y. Z. Tan and W. S. Liao, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 354–363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lin, Y. Zhuang, W. Li, T. L. Zhou and R. J. Xie, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6584–6590 RSC .
J. Feng, W. J. Wang, X. Hai, Y. L. Yu and J. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 387–393 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Bi, J. Hou, H. Li, Y. Xu, B. Wang, H. Ding and L. Ding, Talanta, 2016, 160, 268–275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge, Q. Jia, W. Liu, L. Guo, Q. Liu, M. Lan, H. Zhang, X. Meng and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4169–4177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ge, Q. Jia, W. Liu, M. Lan, B. Zhou, L. Guo, H. Zhou, H. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Gu, X. Meng and P. Wang, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2015, 5, 665–675 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, L. Wang, L. Zuo, C. Zhao, H. Li and L. Ding, Mikrochim. Acta, 2019, 186, 652 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Chen, C. Hu, Y. Yang, J. Cui and Y. Liu, Materials, 2016, 9, 184 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Geng, Y. Xiong, W. Wu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 7511–7517 RSC .
J. Wang, P. Zhang, C. Huang, G. Liu, K. C. Leung and Y. X. Wang, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 8063–8073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, Z. Li, M. Xu, Y. Ma, J. Zhang, Y. Su, F. Gao, H. Wei and L. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2013, 5, 247–259 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, W. Li, X. Zhai, C. Liu, L. Dai and W. Liu, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10431–10433 RSC .
M. Fu, F. Ehrat, Y. Wang, K. Z. Milowska, C. Reckmeier, A. L. Rogach, J. K. Stolarczyk, A. S. Urban and J. Feldmann, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 6030–6035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, J. Lin, X. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Zhang, M. He, K. Wang, F. Chen, Z. Li, G. Shen, D. Cui and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5104–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, W. Jiang, L. Qiu, X. Jiang, D. Zuo, D. Wang and L. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6104–6113 RSC .
C. Xia, S. Tao, S. Zhu, Y. Song, T. Feng, Q. Zeng, J. Liu and B. Yang, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 1303–11308 Search PubMed .
J. Gu, W. Wang, Q. Zhang, Z. Meng, X. Jia and K. Xi, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15589–15591 RSC .
S. Tao, S. Zhu, T. Feng, C. Xia, Y. Song and B. Yang, Mater. Today Chem., 2017, 6, 13–25 CrossRef .
J. Ge, M. Lan, B. Zhou, W. Liu, L. Guo, H. Wang, Q. Jia, G. Niu, X. Huang, H. Zhou, X. Meng, P. Wang, C. S. Lee, W. Zhang and X. Han, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Meng, M. Lan, L. Guo, L. Xie, H. Wang, W. Liu, Y. Wang and P. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 26886–26890 RSC .
L. Guo, J. Ge, W. Liu, G. Niu, Q. Jia, H. Wang and P. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 729–734 RSC .
S. Pal, P. Y. Zavalij and A. N. Vedernikov, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5376–5378 RSC .
J. Y. Li, Y. Liu, Q. W. Shu, J. M. Liang, F. Zhang, X. P. Chen, X. Y. Deng, M. T. Swihart and K. J. Tan, Langmuir, 2017, 33, 1043–1050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. He, Z. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Lian, C. H. Tsang, X. Yang and S. T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Fan, Q. Sun, L. Zhang, Y. Zhang and A. H. Lu, Carbon, 2014, 71, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, J. Liu, S. Guo, Y. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2015, 3, 2378–2387 RSC .
V. B. Kumar, Z. Porat and A. Gedanken, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2016, 28, 367–375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Q. Yang, P. Xu, L. Sun, D. Sun and K. Zhuo, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 5251–5259 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, W. Wang and X. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 3937–3945 RSC .
Z. Peng, C. Ji, Y. Zhou, T. Zhao and R. M. Leblanc, Appl. Mater. Today, 2020, 20, 100677 CrossRef .
P. B. Malafaya, G. A. Silva and R. L. Reis, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2007, 59, 207–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chowdhury, N. Gogoi and G. Majumdar, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12156–12159 RSC .
A. Sachdev, I. Matai and P. Gopinath, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 20915–20921 RSC .
S. Zhu, L. Wang, N. Zhou, X. Zhao, Y. Song, S. Maharjan, J. Zhang, L. Lu, H. Wang and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13845–13848 RSC .
S. Tao, Y. Song, S. Zhu, J. Shao and B. Yang, Polymer, 2017, 116, 472–478 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao, S. Lu, Y. Geng, S. Zhu, S. A. T. Redfern, Y. Song, T. Feng, W. Xu and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 2393–2398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Q. Zhou, Y. Yuan and Y. Wu, Carbon, 2017, 115, 550–560 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lauria and E. Lizundia, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 262, 121288 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu, C. Yu, M. Li, X. Wang, J. Yang, Z. Zhao, A. Eychmuller, Y. P. Sun and J. Qiu, Small, 2014, 10, 4926–4933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ye, C. Xiang, J. Lin, Z. Peng, K. Huang, Z. Yan, N. P. Cook, E. L. Samuel, C. C. Hwang, G. Ruan, G. Ceriotti, A. R. Raji, A. A. Marti and J. M. Tour, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2943 CrossRef .
P. Zhao, M. Yang, W. Fan, X. Wang, F. Tang, C. Yang, X. Dou, S. Li, Y. Wang and Y. Cao, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2016, 33, 635–644 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shao, W. Wu, R. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Li, Y. Wang, J. Zheng, W. Xia and M. Wu, J. Catal., 2016, 344, 236–241 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Huang, W. Cao, B. Mao, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1586–1613 RSC .
M. Wu, Y. Wang, W. Wu, C. Hu, X. Wang, J. Zheng, Z. Li, B. Jiang and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2014, 78, 480–489 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, G. Ning, X. He, X. Ma, F. Yang, Z. Xu, S. Zhao, C. Xu and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21492–21498 RSC .
J. Zhang, W. Shen, D. Pan, Z. Zhang, Y. Fang and M. Wu, New J. Chem., 2010, 34, 591–593 RSC .
M. Li, C. Hu, C. Yu, S. Wang, P. Zhang and J. Qiu, Carbon, 2015, 91, 291–297 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoon, Y. H. Chang, S. H. Song, E. S. Lee, S. H. Jin, C. Park, J. Lee, B. H. Kim, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Kim and S. Jeon, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5255–5261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bacon, S. J. Bradley and T. Nann, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 415–428 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liu, B. Guo, Z. Rao, B. Zhang and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2436–2441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, J. Zhang, C. Qiao, S. Tang, Y. Li, W. Yuan, B. Li, L. Tian, F. Liu, R. Hu, H. Gao, H. Wei, H. Zhang, H. Sun and B. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6858–6860 RSC .
M. Li, C. Yu, C. Hu, W. Yang, C. Zhao, S. Wang, M. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. Wang and J. Qiu, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 320, 570–575 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Li, S. Ren, Y. Dang, G. Liu, R. Zhang, K. Zhang, X. Long and K. Jia, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 9793–9799 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wu, Q. Zha, J. Qiu, X. Han, Y. Guo, Z. Li, A. Yuan and X. Sun, Fuels, 2005, 84, 1992–1997 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, W. Wu, M.-B. Wu, H. Sun, H. Xie, C. Hu, X. Wu and J. Qiu, New Carbon Mater., 2015, 30, 550–559 CrossRef CAS .
O. C. Mullins, H. Sabbah, J. Eyssautier, A. E. Pomerantz, L. Barré, A. B. Andrews, Y. Ruiz-Morales, F. Mostowfi, R. McFarlane, L. Goual, R. Lepkowicz, T. Cooper, J. Orbulescu, R. M. Leblanc, J. Edwards and R. N. Zare, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 3986–4003 CrossRef CAS .
Z. A. Qiao, Y. Wang, Y. Gao, H. Li, T. Dai, Y. Liu and Q. Huo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8812–8814 RSC .
S. Yao, Y. Hu and G. Li, Carbon, 2014, 66, 77–83 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, S. Wang, C. Zhu, M. Liu, Y. Ji, L. Feng, L. Tao and Y. Wei, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 397, 39–44 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bao, Z. L. Zhang, Z. Q. Tian, L. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Lin, B. Qi and D. W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5801–5806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. B. Tang, R. B. Ji, X. K. Cao, J. Y. Lin, H. X. Jiang, X. M. Li, K. S. Teng, C. M. Luk, S. J. Zeng, J. H. Hao and S. P. Lau, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5102–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tao, K. Yang, Z. Ma, J. Wan, Y. Zhang, Z. Kang and Z. Liu, Small, 2012, 8, 281–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Peng, W. Gao, B. K. Gupta, Z. Liu, R. Romero-Aburto, L. Ge, L. Song, L. B. Alemany, X. Zhan, G. Gao, S. A. Vithayathil, B. A. Kaipparettu, A. A. Marti, T. Hayashi, J. J. Zhu and P. M. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 844–849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bao, C. Liu, Z. L. Zhang and D. W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1663–1667 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Song, X. Zhao, J. Shao, J. Zhang and B. Yang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 355–381 CrossRef CAS .
F. Yuan, S. Li, Z. Fan, X. Meng, L. Fan and S. Yang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 565–586 CrossRef CAS .
K. Onar and M. E. Yakinci, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 620, 210–216 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, K. Zhu, B. Sheng, Z. Li, G. Tai, J. Qiu, J. Wang, J. Chen, Y. You, Q. Gu and P. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 618, 67–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lan, C. Liu, M. Gao and C. Huang, Talanta, 2015, 144, 93–97 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, W. Duan, W. Song, J. Liu, C. Ren, J. Wu, D. Liu and H. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 12663–12672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Bhamore, S. Jha, T. J. Park and S. K. Kailasa, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 277, 47–54 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Y. Lu, R. Zhang, S. He, J. Ju, M. Liu, L. Li and W. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2302–2309 RSC .
R. Zhang and W. Chen, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2014, 55, 83–90 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pang and S. Liu, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2020, 1105, 155–161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, M. Li, W. Li, Y. Han, Y. Liu, Z. Li, B. Zhang and D. Pan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 12668–12674 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Wang, J. C. Jin, Z. Q. Xu, Z. W. Jiang, X. Li, F. L. Jiang and Y. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 551, 101–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lu, S. Xu and J. Liu, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 1917–1924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, L. Yang, S. Chu, B. Liu, Q. Zhang, L. Zou, S. Yu and C. Jiang, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 9292–9299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gao, H. Song, X. Wang, X. Liu, X. Pang, Y. Zhou, B. Gao and X. Peng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1147–1154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiao, Z. Liu, N. Xu, L. Jiang, M. Yang and C. Yi, ACS Sens., 2020, 5, 870–878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xu, Z. Su, Z. Zhang, Y. Nie, J. Wang, G. Ge and X. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5, 8748–8753 RSC .
X. Luo, W. Zhang, Y. Han, X. Chen, L. Zhu, W. Tang, J. Wang, T. Yue and Z. Li, Food Chem., 2018, 258, 214–221 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Yi, D. Velado, Y. Yu and S. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15735–15745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhong, Y. Chen, A. Su and Y. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 273, 1098–1102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pandit, T. Banerjee, I. Srivastava, S. Nie and D. Pan, ACS Sens., 2019, 4, 2730–2737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. H. Loo, Z. Sofer, D. Bousa, P. Ulbrich, A. Bonanni and M. Pumera, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 1951–1957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, R. Gui, H. Jin, B. Wang, X. Bu and Y. Fu, Talanta, 2018, 178, 109–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wei, H. Li, S. Liu, W. Wang, H. Chen, L. Xiao, C. Ren and X. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 15477–15483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qu, L. Liu, T. Sun, J. Hou, Y. Sun, M. Yu, Y. Diao, S. Lu, W. Zhao and L. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2020, 31, 175102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Shen, Q. Lou, J. H. Zang, K. K. Liu, S. N. Qu, L. Dong and C. X. Shan, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, H. Zhang, J. Lai, X. Peng, Y. Hu, W. Gu and L. Ye, Carbon, 2018, 128, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, S. Dong, F. Zhao, M. Deng, Y. Fu and C. Lü, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 298, 126869 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cui, J. Sun, J. de Dieu Habimana, X. Yang, J. Ji, Y. Zhang, H. Lei, Z. Li, J. Zheng, M. Fan and X. Sun, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91, 14681–14690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Liang, S. S. Gou, K. K. Liu, W. J. Wu, C. Z. Guo, S. Y. Lu, J. H. Zang, X. Y. Wu, Q. Lou, L. Dong, Y. F. Gao and C. X. Shan, Nano Today, 2020, 34, 100900 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gong, L. Sun, F. Wang, X. Liu, Z. Yan, M. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Tian, Z. Liu and J. You, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 356, 994–1002 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, E. H. Miyanji, Y. Zhou, J. Pardo, S. D. Hettiarachchi, S. Li, P. L. Blackwelder, I. Skromne and R. M. Leblanc, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 17533–17543 RSC .
X. He, Q. Luo, J. Zhang, P. Chen, H. J. Wang, K. Luo and X. Q. Yu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 12973–12982 RSC .
X. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Shen, C. Su, J. Yang, M. Piao, F. Jia, G. Gao, L. Zhang and Q. Lin, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 492, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, J. Huang, Y. Song, M. Zhang, H. Wang, F. Lu, H. Huang, Y. Liu, X. Dai, Z. Gu, Z. Yang, R. Zhou and Z. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 26936–26946 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Tong, H. Hu, J. Zhou, S. Deng, X. Zhang, W. Tang, L. Fang, S. Xiao and J. Liang, Small, 2020, 16, 1906206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Su, R. Guo, F. Yuan, Y. Li, X. Li, Y. Zhang, S. Zhou and L. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1357–1363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, Y. Choi, G. Park, C. Won, Y.-J. Park, Y. Lee, B.-S. Kim and D.-H. Min, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 503–519 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Jian, R. S. Wu, T. Y. Lin, Y. J. Li, H. J. Lin, S. G. Harroun, J. Y. Lai and C. C. Huang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6703–6716 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, J. Gu, J. Ye, B. Fang, S. Wan, C. Wang, U. Ashraf, Q. Li, X. Wang, L. Shao, Y. Song, X. Zheng, F. Cao and S. Cao, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 542, 198–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xie, Z. Yin, Y. Wu, C. Liu, X. Hao, Q. Du and X. Xu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 12146 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Guo, C. F. Wang, Z. Y. Yu, L. Chen and S. Chen, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 2692–2694 RSC .
T. Feng, Q. Zeng, S. Lu, X. Yan, J. Liu, S. Tao, M. Yang and B. Yang, ACS Photonics, 2017, 5, 502–510 CrossRef .
Z. Zhou, P. Tian, X. Liu, S. Mei, D. Zhou, D. Li, P. Jing, W. Zhang, R. Guo, S. Qu and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800369 CrossRef PubMed .
E. Liu, D. Li, X. Zhou, G. Zhou, H. Xiao, D. Zhou, P. Tian, R. Guo and S. Qu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 9301–9308 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, T. Hu, Y. Chen, Y. Xu and Q. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 22332–22338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhi, X. Yao, M. Wu, A. Mensch, Y. Cui, J. Deng, J. J. Duchimaza-Heredia, K. J. Trerayapiwat, T. Niehaus, Y. Nishimoto, B. P. Frank, Y. Zhang, R. E. Lewis, E. A. Kappel, R. J. Hamers, H. D. Fairbrother, G. Orr, C. J. Murphy, Q. Cui and C. L. Haynes, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 2441–2455 RSC .
Y. Huang, H. Lin, J. Qiu, Z. Luo, Z. Yao, L. Liu, H. Liu, X. Tang and X. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 7734–7740 RSC .
D. Fernandes, M. J. Krysmann and A. Kelarakis, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4902–4905 RSC .
Y. Liu, L. Zhou, Y. Li, R. Deng and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 491–496 RSC .
C. L. Shen, Q. Lou, C. F. Lv, J. H. Zang, S. N. Qu, L. Dong and C. X. Shan, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1802331 CrossRef PubMed .
K. P. Shejale, A. Jaiswal, A. Kumar, S. Saxena and S. Shukla, Carbon, 2021, 183, 169e175 CrossRef .
N. Dhenadhayalan and K. C. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 13759–13769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, R. Ge, Y. Chen, M. Huang, R. Zhu, W. Li, Y. Liu, L. Feng and R. Che, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 127598 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, S. Reischauer, B. Pieber and M. Delbianco, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 4524–4530 RSC .
J. Yu, H. Song, X. Li, L. Tang, Z. Tang, B. Yang and S. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2107196 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Lopez-Cantu, R. B. González-González, E. M. Melchor-Martínez, S. A. H. Martínez, R. G. Araújo, L. Parra-Arroyo, J. E. Sosa-Hernández, R. Parra-Saldívar and H. M. N. Iqbal, Int. J. Biol. Macromol., 2022, 194, 676–687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huan, B. Tang, L. Wang, H. Bao, Y. Lu, C. Guan, L. Zhang, M. Le, Z. Liu and M. Wu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 14761–14768 CrossRef PubMed .

Footnote† These authors contribute equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Zitong Wei
	Zitong Wei received her Bachelor's Degree from Quanzhou Normal University in China in 2018. She is currently a Master's student in China University of Petroleum-Beijing. Her research interests focus on the development of quantum dots and their optical sensing.

Wenyi Lu
	Wenyi Lu received his Bachelor's Degree from Liaocheng University in China in 2020. He is currently a Master's student in China University of Petroleum-Beijing. His research interests focus on the development of carbon-based nanomaterials and their applications in electroanalysis.

Chunxia Wang
	Chunxia Wang is currently an Associate Professor in the Institute of New Energy, China University of Petroleum-Beijing. She received her Bachelor's Degree and Master's Degree from Xinyang Normal University (2005) and Dalian University of Technology (2008), respectively. Then she joined Tohoku University and received her PhD in 2013. Her research interest is focused on the synthesis of low-dimensional nanomaterials and their application.

Guoyong Huang
	Guoyong Huang received his BS (2005) in Polymer Science and Engineering, MS (2007) and PhD (2015) in Chemical Engineering and Technology from Tsinghua University in China. In 2019, he became a Professor at the College of New Energy and Materials at China University of Petroleum-Beijing. His research is devoted to the utilization of recycled resources.

 	Fig. 1  Various precursors-derived multi-color CDs and their applications in sensing, biomedicine, WLEDs and anti-counterfeiting.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthetic approaches for multi-color CDs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Possible formation mechanism for the synthesis of CDs with tunable PL emission.44 Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Schematic representation of four different selected sizes and the different extents of π-conjugated domains of the resulting CDs, which are influenced by the different amount of seed CDs and reaction times, as provided below the arrow. The colors represent the real PL color of the samples. Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (B) Proposed mechanism for the tunable surface-controlled emission of CDs with different oxidation degrees. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. (C) Nitrogen content triggers full color CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 49. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  Effect of solvent-derived highly luminescent multi-color carbon dots. Reproduced with permission from ref. 58. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Solvent-engineered strategy for the synthesis of CDs from L-Glu and o-PD and the optical property of multicolor emission CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Schematic diagram of the procedure for the preparation of CDs and specific ratiometric detection of lysine and pH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 63. Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of G-CDs, Y-CDs, and R-CDs and their related PL mechanism. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic of the growth processes and the structural models of o-CDs (A), m-CDs (B) and p-CDs (C). Reproduced with permission from ref. 74, Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Design, synthesis and optical properties of narrow bandwidth emission triangular CQDs from three-fold symmetric phloroglucinol (PG). Reproduced with permission from ref. 75, Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (B) Scheme showing the formation of H-CDs, their appearance in various states, proposed structure, and fluorescence principle. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Illustration of EGTA-modified CDs for the detection of Ca2+. Reproduced with permission from ref. 81, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (B) Synthetic route for R-CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) Optical property of the CDs in ethanol solution prepared from citric acid and urea under different reaction conditions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (B) Possible growth mechanism for CND1 and CND2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 87, Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Synthesis and optical properties of carbonized polymer dots in acetone solution from Taxus leaves (reproduced with permission from ref. 113, Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH) and (B) water hyacinth leaves (reproduced with permission from ref. 114, Copyright 2019, Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Fabrication of multi-color-emissive CDs from tomato juice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116, Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (B) Fabrication of multi-color-emissive CDs from C. melo fruit as a carbon source via acid oxidation (reproduced with permission from ref. 119, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society), (C) fungus (reproduced with permission from ref. 124, Copyright 2017, Elsevier) and (D) water chestnut and onion (reproduced with permission from ref. 126, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Schematic of the fabrication of solid-state fluorescent CDs, photographs of W-CDs, Y-CDs, and O-CDs under daylight (top) and 365 nm UV (bottom), and their SSF spectra. Reproduced with permission from ref. 134, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) Synthesis of CDs from olive pits. Reproduced with permission from ref. 135, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic preparation and application of CDs via the pyrolysis of turtle shells and application in anti-counterfeiting via a 3D microfluidic printing technique. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) CDs derived from amino acids (reproduced with permission from ref. 136, Copyright 2015, Elsevier) and (B) schematic illustration of the synthetic route for CD-based anti-counterfeiting inks. NCD1 was taken as an example for demonstration. For NCD1-C, NCD2-C and NCD3-C, photographs of the inks in quartz cells are shown under daylight and under UV light at 365 nm and the printed patterns on paper under excitation at 254, 365, or 450 nm (ON) and after ceasing the excitation (OFF) (reproduced with permission from ref. 141, Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 16  (A) Illustration of the possible synthetic mechanism of CDs@PEG. Reproduced with permission from ref. 154, Copyright 2015, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Schematic diagram of the nucleation and reaction process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 155, Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Synthetic routes to obtain C-dots and the emission colors of the various C-dots under UV light. Reproduced with permission from ref. 160, Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) Synthesis scheme of CDs from PEI. Reproduced with permission from ref. 162, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Schematic diagram of the experimental procedure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174, Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  (A) Schematic illustration of the acid oxidation of CDs from coal. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179, Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. (B) Synthesis of CQDs from mesophase pitch. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184, Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 20  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of C-GQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 192, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (B) Diagram for the preparation of CQDs and N-CQDs from petroleum coke. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183, Copyright 2014, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 21  (A) Schematic illustration of CDs from different carbon morphologies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 201, Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (B) Scheme illustrating the oxidation cutting of carbon fibers into GQDs and UV-vis spectra of GQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 202, Copyright 2012, the American Chemical Society. (C) Optical images of as-prepared multi-color fluorescent CDs and fluorescence emission spectra with excitation at 360 nm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 203, Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (D) Formation process of CDs from fullerene.208 Reproduced with permission from ref. 208, Copyright 2015, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  (A) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of CDs and their application for the label-free detection of Hg2+. Reproduced with permission from ref. 215, Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (B) Stand-alone smartphone-based portable reader (SBR) with a custom-designed application (SBR-app) for receiving fluorescence shifts away from the microarrays and automatically reporting results, as well as defining the logical information of fluorescent CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 219, Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (A) Schematic illustration of the structure and application of AC-CDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 231, Copyright 2019, Elsevier. (B) Application of B-CDs, Y-CDs, and R-CDs in in vivo imaging, biodistribution of HepG2 tumor mice and ex vivo images of isolated organs of mice. Reproduced with permission from ref. 232, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  (A) (a1, b1, and c1) Photographs of candies with different colors illuminated with a WCD@PS-based WLED under different operating temperatures. (a2, b2, and c2) Corresponding emission spectra of WLEDs. (a3, b3, and c3) Corresponding CIE chromaticity coordinates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 249, Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society. (B) Photograph of obtained CD fractions illuminated by UV light and the chromaticity diagram of CD fractions (CD-Y and CD-O overlap). Reproduced with permission from ref. 250, Copyright 2021, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 25  (A) Fluorescence staining process and mechanism of R-CDs toward observing the fingerprints on solid substrates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 64, Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. (B) Schematic illustration of the CL-based information encryption and decryption, burn-after-reading information encryption process based on CD-based CL system and the images of the Morse code printed with g-CDs (Ink A) and g-CDs/NaAc (Ink B) as inks. Reproduced with permission from ref. 254, Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (C) Presentation and principle of H-CD reversible dual-fluorescence. Photographs of filter papers with different treatments under variable irradiation and schematic diagram of the H-CDs precipitated upon the addition of water and redissolving into ethanol, with the resulting multimode fluorescence. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77, Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 
Footnote
† These authors contribute equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
