Recent developments in fabrication and performance of metal halide perovskite field-effect transistors  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC03693E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03693E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 16691-16715Recent developments in fabrication and performance of metal halide perovskite field-effect transistors

        
          
            Yu 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ping-An 
            Chen
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yuanyuan 
            Hu
          
          
        
      *
      Key Laboratory for Micro/Nano Optoelectronic Devices of Ministry of Education and Hunan Provincial Key Laboratory of Low-Dimensional Structural Physics and Devices, School of Physics and Electronics, Hunan University, Changsha 410082, China. E-mail: yhu@hnu.edu.cn
Received 
      4th August 2020
    , Accepted 9th November 2020First published on 11th November 2020AbstractIn the past few years, metal halide perovskites (MHPs) have received numerous attention for being applied in photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes and photodetectors due to their excellent optoelectronic characteristics. However, the utilization of MHPs for field-effect transistors (FETs) lags much behind, which is mainly attributed to the challenges in device fabrication and the less-than-expected performance of MHP-based FETs. Summarizing the recent developments in fabrication and performance of MHP-based FETs is essential to further optimize device fabrication processes and to enhance device performance. This review focuses on the recent advances and developments in the fabrication and performance of MHP-based FETs. To begin with, the basics of FETs are briefly introduced. Next, the advances of FETs using 3D and 2D MHPs as semiconductor layers are summarized and the strategies, which can be employed to enhance device performance, are discussed. Finally, brief conclusions and perspectives of MHP FETs are given. Overall, this review brings together important information that aids the fabrication of MHP-based FETs with reliable and enhanced performance, aiming to promote the advancement and application of MHP-based FETs.
Yu Liu
Yu Liu received his BE degree in electronic science and technology from Hunan University, and he is currently a PhD candidate in Hunan University. His present research interests include charge transport physics in organic and perovskite semiconductors.
Ping-An Chen
Ping-An Chen received his MS degree in electronic science and technology from Hunan University, and he is currently a PhD candidate in Hunan University. His research focuses on fundamental studies and development of organic/perovskite thermoelectric materials and devices.
Yuanyuan Hu
Yuanyuan Hu is a professor at Hunan University in China. He received his BS from Nanjing University in 2008 and his PhD from the University of Cambridge in 2015. He was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of California, Santa Barbara between 2015 and 2017. His current research is on fabrication, characterization and mechanism studies of electronic and photonic devices based on solution-processable semiconductors.
1. Introduction
Metal halide perovskites (MHPs) have made extensive research progress over the past years in optoelectronic devices such as perovskite solar cells (PSCs),1–5 light-emitting diodes (LEDs),6–10 and photodetectors,11–16 due to the excellent optoelectronic properties of these materials, e.g., large light absorption coefficients, weakly bound excitons, long charge carrier diffusion lengths, and tunable bandgaps.13,17–20 Particularly, the power conversion efficiency of perovskite SCs has rapidly increased from 3.8% to 25.2% in a decade,1,21 and the external quantum efficiency of perovskite LEDs has achieved 21.6%.8 Despite these inspiring results, the charge transport mechanism, including carrier scattering and trapping, the effect of ion migration, the origin of hysteresis, and the electronic structure of grain boundaries in MHPs remain to be fully explored.22 In terms of this, field-effect transistors (FETs) provide a suitable platform to study and understand the charge transport mechanism in MHP materials due to the precise electrical control of the charge densities of FETs.22–24 Furthermore, the intrinsic high charge carrier mobility (over 100 cm2 V−1 s−1 measured by terahertz techniques)25–27 makes MHPs especially attractive for the fabrication of high-performance FETs. Besides, the solution processability and mechanical flexibility of MHPs render them promising candidates for applications in low-cost, large-area, and flexible electronics.28–32 Therefore, the MHP-based FETs have attracted numerous attention.
Despite the remarkable advantages and potential applications of MHP FETs, achieving reproducible devices with decent performance at room temperature (RT) has been challenging and represents a fundamental bottleneck for understanding electronic charge transport in these materials. The ion migration in MHPs, which leads to partial screening of the applied gate electric field, is a critical issue impeding the achievement of well-performing FETs.22,33–36 Other obstacles including hysteresis,37–42 contacts of the metal/MHP and dielectric/MHP interfaces,35,43–48 environmental instabilities (sensibility to air, heat, and light) and long-term operational instability38,40,42,49–52 also hinder the development of high-performance MHP FETs.
Although there have been a few review articles on perovskite-based FETs,53–55 a review particularly focusing on device fabrication techniques and performance of MHP FETs is still lacking. In this review, we aim to summarize the progress of fabrication and performance of MHP FETs to date and the strategies to improve their performance. Brief basics of FETs including device structures and extraction of device performance parameters are firstly introduced. Next, the fabrication and performance of FETs based on 3D and 2D MHPs, and especially, the strategies to improve the performance of these FETs, including film morphology/structure engineering, interface engineering, composition engineering, molecule engineering, etc. are summarized. Finally, concise conclusions on the full review and perspectives of MHP FETs are given.
2. Basics of field-effect transistors
2.1. Device structure
FET is a three-terminal device consisting of a semiconductor layer, a gate electrode (G), a gate dielectric layer, and two source/drain (S/D) electrodes, which is used to amplify or switch electronic signals by controlling the electric field. Conventional FETs are typically made from inorganic semiconductors like silicon. However, with the development of semiconductor materials, it is possible to fabricate FETs using various semiconductors such as organic semiconductors, metal-oxide semiconductors, 2D semiconductors, and perovskite semiconductors. FETs are not only important for electronic applications as switches or controlling parts but also essential for the fundamental investigation of electrical properties and charge transport physics of novel semiconductors.
Generally, depending on the order of layer deposition, four kinds of device structures are commonly used for constructing FETs, as shown in Fig. 1a–d: bottom-gate bottom-contact (BGBC), bottom-gate top-contact (BGTC), top-gate bottom-contact (TGBC), and top-gate top-contact (TGTC). The FET can be regarded as a plane capacitor where the gate electrode and the semiconductor layer are two plates of the capacitor. The source and drain electrodes directly in contact with the semiconductor layer play the roles of injecting and retrieving charge carriers to and from the semiconductor, respectively, and the source electrode is normally grounded (VS = 0 V). The capacitor is charged by applying a voltage between the source and gate (VG). When VG goes beyond a given threshold voltage (VT), an equal amount of charge, but opposite in sign, appears at both sides of the dielectric layer, which results in the formation of the conducting channel.56
 Fig. 1  Four types of common device structures of FETs: (a) bottom-gate bottom-contact (BGBC), (b) bottom-gate top-contact (BGTC), (c) top-gate bottom-contact (TGBC), and (d) top-gate top-contact (TGTC). Current–voltage characteristics of a field-effect transistor: (e) output characteristics indicating the linear regime (|VG − VT| ≫ |VD|) and saturation regime (|VG − VT| < |VD|), (f) transfer characteristics in the linear regime highlighting the subthreshold regime between turn-on voltage (Von) and VT, and (g) transfer characteristics in the saturation regime with forward and reverse sweeps. 
The four kinds of device structure can be divided into two categories, i.e. staggered (BGTC and TGBC) and coplanar (BGBC and TGTC) configurations.37 The performance of FETs with the same composition but different device structures may vary greatly, because of the interface contacts: one between semiconductor layers and source/drain electrodes and the other one between semiconductor layers and dielectric layers are related to the device configuration. Different device structures have their advantages and disadvantages. For example, for bottom-gate devices, the semiconductor layer can make good contact with the dielectric layer such as SiO2, which has high-quality surface topography. Meanwhile, the deposition of the semiconductor layer is the final step in BGBC fabrication, and thus the semiconductor film is less susceptible to other artifacts in this device structure compared to those of the other structures.57 However, the semiconductor layer is directly exposed to the oxygen and moisture in the air for the bottom-gate structure, which may result in degradation of the semiconductor material. As a result, an additional encapsulation layer is needed. As a comparison, the dielectric layer in the top-gate structure can reduce the degradation, and so top-gate devices generally have better operation stability, although the semiconductor layer may be influenced during the deposition of dielectric layers and electrodes.
2.2. Characterization of FET performance
Basic parameters including mobility (μ), on/off ratio, threshold voltage (VT), subthreshold swing (SS), and hysteresis are important to characterize the device performance of FETs. In the following, we shall give a short introduction to these parameters.

2.2.1. Mobility. 
Mobility in FETs refers to the average drift velocity of carriers generated under unit electric field strength in the semiconductor, which is not exactly the intrinsic mobility of the semiconductor material but can still well reflect it.57 The output characteristics and transfer characteristics in linear and saturation regimes are shown in Fig. 1e–g. The mobility can be derived from the transfer characteristics in a linear regime (|VG − VT| ≫ |VD|, VD is drain voltage) and saturation regime (|VG − VT| < |VD|). The equations describing the current in linear and saturation regimes are shown as eqn (1) and (2), respectively, and the corresponding equations for mobility extraction are eqn (3) and (4), respectively. (1) (2) (3) (4)
Here, Ci, W, and L are the capacitance per unit area of the dielectric, the width of channel, and the length of channel, respectively.
However, these above equations are based on some premises, mainly including constant mobility μ and threshold voltage VT, ohmic contact, single polarity of carrier, and minimal bulk and interfacial defects.56–59 It is not unusual that these assumptions are not fully satisfied, thus causing difficulties in accurate extraction of mobility. In particular, the “kink” or “double-slope” effect observed in OFETs raises a lot of arguments on the appropriate extraction of mobility and is a commonly concerned issue in the community.60 Choi et al. recently discussed the common pitfalls in mobility extraction and articulated the proper way to calculate mobility. It is suggested to use eqn (3) and (4) for mobility calculation only when transfer characteristics are linear over a substantial range of gate voltage, and importantly, to quote the measurement reliability factor for avoiding inaccurate or overestimated mobilities.61,62 It is also worth noting that the mobility of FETs not only depends on the intrinsic properties of the semiconductor layers but also on the device compositions and operating conditions.


2.2.2. On/off ratio. 
The on/off ratio is defined as the ratio of the drain current in the on-state (Ion) and off-state (Ioff) of the device (i.e. Ion/Ioff). The off-state current is the minimum drain current in the transfer curves, which mainly depends on the gate leakage and background conductivity. The on-state current corresponds to the drain current at a particular VG, which is mainly dependent on the mobility of the semiconductor and the capacitance of the gate dielectric. Apparently, the on/off ratio is dependent on the range of the applied VG as higher VG would yield a higher Ion.37


2.2.3. Threshold voltage and subthreshold swing. 
To induce mobile charge carriers in the semiconductor, which results in the formation of the conducting channel, a certain value of VG is necessary to go beyond a given threshold voltage VT. Thus, the effective gate voltage for charge carrier induction is VG − VT.37 The advent of VT results from several origins, such as the contact resistance at the metal/semiconductor interface, deep traps in the semiconductor, and charged states or dipoles at the dielectric surface. Moreover, the threshold voltage may be negative or positive depending on the sign of the charged states or dipoles.56,63,64 As shown in Fig. 1f, VT can be obtained by extending the linear part of the ID–VG curve in a linear regime to the VG coordinate axis, and the voltage at the intersection of the extension line and the VG coordinate axis is VT. Similarly, the VT can also be extracted from the ID1/2–VG curve in the saturation regime.
The subthreshold regime (between turn-on voltage Von and VT) of the I(log)D–VG curve in transfer characteristics is highlighted in Fig. 1f, the reciprocal of the slope of which is subthreshold swing (SS), SS = dVG/d(logID)(5)
The subthreshold swing reflects the switching speed from the off state to on state, and depends on the gate dielectric capacitance and the trap states at the interface.37


2.2.4. Hysteresis. 
The hysteresis represents the difference of forward and reverse sweeps of transfer curves (Fig. 1g), which results from charge trapping at the dielectric/semiconductor interface, charge injection, slow reaction of mobile charge carriers, mobile ions in the semiconductor or dielectric, polarization of the dielectric, etc.65–67 Notably, the scanning rate of VG also affects the amplitude of hysteresis.66

3. 3D MHP FETs
As stated above, perovskite semiconductors, including both 3D and 2D perovskites, are very promising for application in FETs. Despite the great progress of MHP-based PSCs due to the excellent optoelectronic characteristics of MHPs, the developments of FETs with MHPs as semiconductor layers are hindered due to the gate-screening effect caused by ion migration, hysteresis effect, environmental and operational stability, etc.22,68,69 In the following sections, we will summarize progress in device fabrication and performance of FETs based on both 3D and 2D MHPs, particularly focusing on the strategies to improve the performance of these MHP-based FETs.
3.1. Crystal structures and electronic properties of 3D MHPs
3D MHPs with stable crystal structures possess a general formula of ABX3, where the A-site monovalent cations can be organic (e.g., methylammonium (CH3NH3+, MA) or formamidinium (HC(NH2)2+, FA+)), inorganic (e.g. Cs+ or Rb+), or organic–inorganic mixtures, the B-site divalent metal cations are usually Pb2+, Sn2+, Ge2+, or their mixtures, while X denotes monovalent halide anions (e.g., Cl−, Br−, and I−) or their mixtures.70 In such a 3D MHP crystal structure, an A cation can fit into the interstitial space between the [BX6]4− octahedrons.
The relative sizes of these ions can affect the stability and distortion of the MHP structure, which can be gauged by the Goldschmidt tolerance factor (TF) and the octahedral factor (OF), and they can be defined by eqn (6) and (7) as (6) (7)where RA, RB, and RX denote ionic radii of A, B, and X, respectively.71,72 It has been reported by Li et al. that a stable halide perovskite structure of ABX3 compounds can form when 0.81 ≤ TF ≤ 1.1 and 0.44 ≤ OF ≤ 0.90.72 The tolerance factor TF can gauge whether the A-site cation can fit within the cavity between the [BX6]4− octahedrons. More specifically, a perfect fit and high-symmetry cubic perovskite structure (Fig. 2a) can be obtained when TF = 1, which provides optimum electronic properties due to a high degree of ionic bonding.70 The octahedral factor (OF) can assess whether the size of the B-site cation is suitable for the X6 octahedron.
 Fig. 2  The unit cells of the (a) cubic, (b) tetragonal, and (c) orthorhombic phases of MAPbI3. 
The electronic properties of MHP compounds are determined by the B–X bond of the inorganic framework, while the size of the A cation can indirectly distort the B–X bonds to affect the symmetry and electronic properties.70 Therefore, the electronic properties can be tuned by modifying the elements and relative contents in MHPs, as long as the crystal structure of ABX3 is maintained. Usually, the A-site cation is a small monovalent cation, such as Cs, MA, and FA, which causes 0.81< TF < 1. By increasing RA (RCs < RMA < RFA) the tolerance factor approaches 1, a higher symmetry and a smaller band gap of analogues with the same B and X can be obtained. For instance, at RT the CsPbI3, MAPbI3 and FAPbI3 adopt orthorhombic, tetragonal and nearly cubic structures, respectively, and the bandgaps of CsPbI3, MAPbI3, and FAPbI3 are 1.67 eV, 1.52 eV, and 1.48 eV, respectively.25,73,74 Thus, the ability of light harvesting can be enhanced, as long as the radius of the A cation is not too large (TF > 1).25,70 The B-site cations are usually Pb2+, Sn2+, and Ge2+, upon proceeding up group IVA on the periodic table (Pb → Ge), although a reduction in band gap with an increase in electronegativity can be obtained, and Sn-based hybrid perovskites are reported to have higher carrier mobilities than Pb-based hybrid perovskites,25 the divalent oxidation state of each element suffers from a reduction of the stability, i.e. the Ge2+ and Sn2+ are more susceptible to oxidation than Pb2+. In the case of the X element, upon proceeding down group VIIA (Cl → I) atomic size increases, resulting in (i) the structural symmetry of MAPbX3 shifting from cubic phase to tetragonal phase at RT;75 (ii) reduced bandgaps and resulting red-shifted absorption peaks.70,76,77
In addition to the internal element size effects, the external factors, such as heat, can also lead to distortion of the crystal structure and symmetry. In the case of the methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3), the unit cells with cubic, tetragonal, and orthorhombic phases are shown in Fig. 2. It exhibits a cubic phase (Fig. 2a) above 327 K, below which it transforms into the tetragonal phase (Fig. 2b), and further into the orthorhombic phase (Fig. 2c) below 165 K.78 In general, perovskites adopt cubic structures at high temperatures and undergo phase transitions from cubic to tetragonal to orthorhombic with the reduction of temperature.79
According to the above analysis of different A-site cations, the 3D hybrid organic–inorganic metal halide perovskites (HOIPs) (e.g. A cations are MA or FA) possess higher symmetry and smaller band gap compared to the all-inorganic metal halide perovskites (AIPs) (e.g. A cation is Cs) with same B and X ions, due to the larger RA of HOIPs.70,74 Furthermore, the HOIPs combine the characteristics of both inorganic and organic semiconductors. The inorganic component forms an extended framework bound by strong covalent and/or ionic interactions resulting in high carrier mobility. The organic component facilitates the self-assembly of these materials, enabling HOIPs to be deposited by simple, low-cost, and low-temperature processes like organic materials, which, however, also leads to poor stability in the air.54,80 As a comparison, AIPs exhibit better environmental stability, but their fabrication processes are more complicated.68,81,82
3.2. 3D HOIP FETs

3.2.1. Thin-film devices. 
The first successful 3D HOIP-based FETs with ambipolar transport were demonstrated in the TGBC structure by Mei et al. in 2015.69 The MAPbI3−xClx was spin-coated on an Au source and drain electrodes, which were treated with the 2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-4-(trifluoromethyl)benzenethiol (TTFB) self-assembled monolayer (SAM), and the fluoropolymer Cytop was used as the dielectric layer. The devices exhibited ambipolar transport characteristics at RT (Fig. 3a and b). For electron transport, saturation μe = 1 cm2 V−1 s−1, on/off ratio = 102, and SS = 1.5 V dec−1. For hole transport, saturation μh = 1.3 cm2 V−1 s−1, on/off ratio = 102, and SS = 2.1 V dec−1. However, the device yield is low and the devices suffered from performance degradation during operation and/or storage.69
 Fig. 3  Transfer characteristics for the (a) p-type transport and (b) n-type transport of FETs based on MAPbI3−xClx. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Materials Research Society, copyright 2015. (c) Temperature dependence of field-effect electron and hole mobilities in BGBC light-emitting FET. Inset: Schematic of the BGBC light-emitting FET configuration. Adapted from ref. 85 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (d) Transfer characteristics of MAPbI3 FET measured at various temperatures between 150 and 250 K. Inset: Schematic of the BGTC FET structure. Reproduced with permission.33 (e) Spectra of a MAPbI3 light-emitting transistor driven in DC- and AC-modes at comparable voltages (DC: VD = 50 V, and VG = 100 V; AC: VD = 50 V, VG = ±100 V, and 10 kHz square wave). Inset: Schematic of pulse operated perovskite BGTC light-emitting transistor in AC-driven gate operation mode. Adapted from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (f) Transfer characteristics of MAPbI3 BGTC FET in the dark (black and red symbols) and under light illumination (blue and magenta symbols). Solid and dashed curves are measured during forward and backward sweepings, respectively. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. 
In fact, it is well acknowledged that ions in MHPs will drift under an electric field due to the presence of ion vacancies,83,84 causing screening of the gate electric field and thus usually no or very weak field-effect behavior can be observed in HOIP-based FETs at RT. This point is supported by Chin et al.'s work, in which they fabricated a light-emitting BGBC FET with Ni/Au bottom-contact electrodes using spin-coated MAPbI3 as the semiconductor layer (inset of Fig. 3c), and transfer characteristics with large hysteresis were observed at temperatures lower than 258 K.85 It is found that reducing the operating temperature of devices is an effective way to reduce ion migration and the consequent hysteresis effects. The field-effect carrier mobility was found to increase by almost two orders of magnitude below 200 K (Fig. 3c), which is consistent with phonon scattering-limited transport. The balanced electron and hole mobilities extracted in saturation regime at 78 K were 7.2 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 2.1 × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. Under balanced ambipolar carrier injection, electroluminescence at different temperatures was observed from the transistor channel, through which the structural transition from a low-temperature orthorhombic phase to a high-temperature tetragonal phase occurring around 162 K was revealed.85–87 The temperature-dependent mobility of MAPbI3 was also observed in BGTC FETs with Al top-contact electrodes (inset of Fig. 3d) by Labram et al.33 There was no gate-field induced current modulation above 220 K, and the magnitude of extracted saturation electron mobilities was 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1 in the temperature range of 180–220 K but increased approximately one order of magnitude below 180 K (Fig. 3d).33
The preliminary studies on 3D HOIP FETs show that the devices suffer from serious problems of weak-gate modulation and large hysteresis, which indicates the importance of mitigating or removing ion migration effects for achieving devices with decent performance. Although at low temperatures the ion migration can be suppressed, building a device that can operate at RT is in urgent need. Aiming at this goal, researchers have proposed various methods to obtain HOIP FETs with decent performance at RT.
AC–voltage driving and light illumination. 
The application of high-frequency modulated gate voltage provides a way to mitigate the negative effects of ion migration in MHP FETs.22,88 Maddalena et al. reported a pulse operated light-emitting transistor in BGTC structure with spin-coated MAPbI3 as the channel, and the observed electroluminescence of the device driven in AC-mode (VD = 50 V, and VG = ±100 V, 10 kHz square wave) was 20 times higher than that in DC-mode at comparable voltages (DC: VD = 50 V, and VG = 100 V) (Fig. 3e). They attributed the increase in electroluminescence to the suppression of ion migration and MA+ polarization as well as to the improved carrier injection in AC-mode.88
Besides, external illumination can be utilized to enhance the gate modulation on currents. Li et al. investigated the effects of light illumination on the performance of BGTC FETs based on MAPbI3 and MAPbI3−xClx with poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) encapsulated to protect the channel from moisture and oxygen.38 For both the kinds of FETs, the gate-tuning effect on current improved greatly under illumination compared with that in the dark. The transfer characteristics of the MAPbI3 FET measured at RT in the dark and under light illumination are shown in Fig. 3f, which implies that the photo-excited carriers dominate the channel transport. Meanwhile, they found that the room-temperature saturation mobilities of mixed-halide MAPbI3−xClx-based devices (1.01 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons and 1.24 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes) were much higher than those of MAPbI3-based devices (0.17 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons and 0.18 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes) under the same light illumination, which is consistent with the Cl-enhanced electron–hole diffusion lengths observed in previous works on perovskite solar cells.17,18,38
The measurements of HOIP FETs at low-temperatures, with the application of AC voltage, or under light illumination are efficient in enhancing the device performance by suppressing ionic transport or inducing photo-excited carriers as shown above. However, these are external means instead of the fundamental solution towards high-performance MHP FETs. In the following, we shall introduce methods applied to the device itself for improving device performance, including film morphology/structure engineering, interface engineering, composition engineering, etc.
Film morphology/structure engineering. 
Although the mechanism of ion motion in perovskite is still under debate, it is generally believed that ion vacancies or interstitials, which are known as defects in perovskites, largely account for the ion motion under an external electric field. These defects are commonly found at film surfaces or in grain boundaries. Polycrystalline perovskite thin films contain a lot of grain boundaries, which can act as high-speed pathways for ion migration.52,84,89 Therefore, ion migration and the resulting gate-screening effect can be suppressed through film morphology/structure engineering, such as choice of reactants, concentration control of precursor solutions, solvent vapor annealing (SVA), solvent engineering, antisolvent techniques or other solvent treatments.
Senanayak et al. fabricated solution-processed MAPbI3-based TGBC FETs with a Cytop dielectric layer. They demonstrated that the devices fabricated from the Pb(Ac)2 precursor exhibited much better n-type transport characteristics than that fabricated from the PbI2 precursor because the film morphology such as grain size and roughness was better in the former. Furthermore, the morphology of MAPbI3 films can be improved by increasing the concentration of Pb(Ac)2-based precursor from 0.25 M to 0.75 M. As shown in Fig. 4a, the precursor with higher concentration leads to larger grain size in MAPbI3 film, resulting in improved source–drain current, reduced hysteresis, and improved saturation electron mobility of 0.05 ± 0.01 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 270 K.22
 Fig. 4  (a) Transfer characteristics at 270 K for MAPbI3 FETs deposited from Pb(Ac)2-based precursors with different concentrations. Insets: Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MAPbI3 films fabricated from 0.25 and 0.75 M precursors (scale bars, 200 nm). Adapted from ref. 22 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2017. (b) Average hole and electron mobilities as a function of solvent annealing time. (c) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of pristine film (top left) and solvent-annealed film (top right) (scale bars, 200 nm), as well as X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of perovskite films at different stages of solvent annealing (bottom). Adapted from ref. 35 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (d) Transfer characteristics measured at 100 K of TGBC FET fabricated with MAPbI3 perovskite films spin-coated with (red) and without (black) the antisolvent methods. Inset: Optical images of the devices. (e) Transfer characteristics of MAPbI3 n-type TGBC FET at 300 K with Lewis base treatment (ethyl acetate, methyl acetate, and diethyl ether), which also forms a positive azeotropic mixture with water, as well as with Lewis acid treatment (1,3,5-tribromobenzene). The boiling points of positive azeotropes are given. (f) Transfer characteristics of FAMAPbBr3 p-type TGBC FET at 300 K with Lewis base treatment (methyl acetate and diethyl ether) and Lewis acid treatment (1,3,5-tribromobenzene). Adapted from ref. 90 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2020. 
SVA can also be used to optimize the microstructure of perovskite films.35,91 Zeidell et al. demonstrated a spin-coated MAPbI3−xClx transistor in BGTC configuration with balanced RT electron and hole mobilities (saturation) reaching 10 ± 2.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 10 ± 3.4 cm2 V−1 s−1 by N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)-vapor annealing for 80 min, respectively, but further solvent annealing to 100 min or longer yielded a decrease in charge carrier mobility of both holes and electrons and also led to nonoperational devices (Fig. 4b).35 It is found that solvent annealing of the perovskite films results in: (i) removal of the tetragonal phase that adopts preferential [110] orientation (corresponding to XRD peaks located at 14.12° and 28.44°), which is not favorable for charge transport in a FET architecture; (ii) increase in grain size (Fig. 4c); and (iii) formation of intermediate species of MAI:PbI2:DMF solvate and/or PbI2:DMF ligand. These consequences are all beneficial for improving device performance.35
The solvent ingredient in the perovskite precursor can affect the growth of grains and thus the film structures. Mallory et al. prepared spin-coated MAPbI3 films via solvent engineering, i.e. fabricating the MAPbI3 films with precursor solvent of DMF mixed with dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) and hydroiodic acid (HI) in ambient air.52 In the mixed solvent system, the HI promotes homogeneous nucleation, while the low boiling point of DMF and the high vapor pressure and strong Lewis base property of DMSO lead to fast crystallization and consequent large grain size. Moreover, the oxygen in the air passivates grain boundary defects, thereby improving lateral conduction and minimizing defect-mediated ion migration at grain boundaries. BGBC transistors based on the MAPbI3 films were fabricated with Mo as the gate electrode, AlOx as the dielectric layer, and indium zinc oxide (IZO) as the source and drain electrodes. The devices exhibited saturation electron mobility of 0.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and SS ∼ 0.5 V dec−1 with stable ambient air operation at RT, which was attributed to the enlarged grain size and reduced grain boundary defects.52
Drop casting of antisolvents, such as toluene and chlorobenzene, can reduce the crystallization time by rapidly reducing the solubility of perovskite, and thus facilitates fast nucleation and growth of crystals.52,90,92 Recently, Senanayak et al. optimized the morphology of MAPbI3 films through the antisolvent technique in a one-step solution method by introducing antisolvent chlorobenzene during the spin coating of the perovskite precursor solution. The antisolvent treated MAPbI3 films exhibited much smoother morphology than the pristine ones (inset of Fig. 4d). Consequently, the devices processed with antisolvent exhibited at least an order of magnitude increase in the channel current compared to the pristine devices at 100 K (Fig. 4d).90
Lewis acid/base doping. 
Ubiquitous adsorbed water in perovskite tends to get incorporated into pores in the perovskite films or at grain boundaries and could act as trap centers for electron charge transport.93 To cope with this problem, Senanayak et al. utilized azeotropic solvents to fabricate perovskite TGBC FETs. Before the Cytop dielectric layer was spin-coated, the top surfaces of MAPbI3 films were washed by an orthogonal solvent to form a positive azeotrope with water to suppress the boiling point of water and thus reduce the water content in the films.90 The devices treated with diethyl ether, which led to the lowest boiling point of 34.2 °C of the azeotropic mixture, exhibited an increase in ID by two orders of magnitude than the pristine devices (Fig. 4e). However, it is found that water removal is not the only factor that governs the efficacy of such solvent treatment. They demonstrated that these positive azeotrope solvents may also act as Lewis bases (acids), which enable a reduction in defect density and substantial improvement in performance and stability of n-type (p-type) perovskite devices. For example, n-type MAPbI3 FETs treated by Lewis bases, such as ethyl acetate, methyl acetate, and diethyl ether, all exhibited higher Ion than their corresponding pristine ones. Similarly, Lewis acid (1,3,5-tribromobenzene)-treated FAMAPbBr3 FETs exhibited enhanced performance (p-type) compared to the pristine ones (Fig. 4e and f). This is because the Lewis bases (acids) can eliminate/passivate electron (hole) traps in n-type (p-type) perovskites by donating (withdrawing) electrons. However, Lewis base (acid)-treated p-type (n-type) perovskite devices exhibited degraded charge transport characteristics, namely the Lewis acid (1,3,5-tribromobenzene)-treated MAPbI3 FET (n-type) and Lewis base (methyl acetate and diethyl ether)-treated FAMAPbBr3 (FA0.8MA0.2PbBr3) FET (p-type) both exhibited lower channel current than their corresponding pristine ones (Fig. 4e and f). Although the solvent-based Lewis acid/base treatments worked well for TGBC devices, they failed to have any effect on the performance of BGBC devices, probably because the solvent effect is mainly limited to the surface of perovskite films. Therefore, they introduced halides (F− and I−) and divalent additives (Zn2+ and Cd2+) at the SiO2/MAPbI3 interface, which behave as soft Lewis bases and acids, respectively, to explore their effects on BGBC devices, and conclusions similar to that of TGBC devices were obtained.90
Interface engineering. 
Further improvements in the device performance are expected to arise from improvements at the metal/MHP contact interface and MHP/dielectric interface. The metal/MHP interface can be modified by various interlayers or buffer layers.22,94 Senanayak et al. modified the Au source–drain electrodes with pentafluorobenzene thiol (PFBT) and polyethylenimine ethoxylated (PEIE) interlayers to increase and decrease the work function of gold, respectively. Interestingly, both of the corresponding TGBC FETs exhibited improved electron mobility and smaller hysteresis at 100 K (Fig. 5a).22 The device with PEIE-treated Au contacts exhibited saturation electron mobility from 0.1 to 3 cm2 V−1 s−1 at RT. Notably, this improvement was attributed to the modification-induced enhanced crystalline order as well as isolation of the source–drain electrodes from the perovskite instead of the modified electron injection. Additionally, several papers reported that MoO3 could be used as a buffer layer between the perovskite layer and the top-contact electrode, which results in reduced contact resistance and consequently improved hole mobility.45,94,95
 Fig. 5  (a) Transfer characteristics at 100 K with forward and reverse sweeps for different source–drain contact modifications. Adapted from ref. 22 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2017. (b) Transfer characteristics of the perovskite FETs at 202 K on the three-polymer gate dielectric surfaces. Adapted from ref. 44 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (c) Comparison of the transfer characteristics of BGBC FETs based on mixed cation perovskite and MAPbI3. Inset: Schematic diagram of perovskite field-effect transistors fabricated using HfO2 as a gate dielectric layer. Adapted from ref. 40 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. Transfer characteristics in the (d) p-channel and (e) n-channel of triple cation ambipolar transistor. Inset: Schematic diagram of triple cation perovskite FET. Adapted from ref. 50 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (f) Transfer characteristics of TGBC FETs based on MAPbI3, FAMAPbI3, CsFAMAPbI3, and RbCsFAMAPbI3 at 300 K with forward and reverse scans. Adapted from ref. 90 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2020. 
As for the MHP/dielectric interfaces, generally, more hydrophobic polymer layers favor the growth of larger crystals but result in less favorable adhesion of the perovskite.44 To overcome this obstacle, Ngai et al. reported spin-coated MAPbI3 FETs in BGTC configuration with PMMA, poly(ethyl methacrylate) (PEMA), and poly(phenyl methacrylate) (PPhMA) as dielectric layers. Among these polymers, PPhMA possesses the necessary O atoms in the methacrylate groups for inducing the initial nucleation of the precursor PbI2, and at the same time, the presence of the phenyl ring provides cation–π interactions between the polymer surface and Pb2+ ions with good hydrophobicity to favor large crystal growth. Perovskite films fabricated on PPhMA offered the largest and tightly packed crystallites, with an average size of 1.1 mm2, and the corresponding transistor showed saturation electron mobility of 0.4 cm2 V−1 s−1, threshold voltage of 34.3 V, and on/off ratio of 5.1 × 105 at 202 K (Fig. 5b).44
The dielectrics not only affect the film morphology/structure of semiconductors, but also have a significant effect on charge transport in semiconductors. Generally, dielectrics with low surface density of trap states are preferred for FET fabrication. For example, Ward et al. reported a FET based on MAPbI3−xClx in BGTC structure, with ITO as the gate electrode, Cytop as the dielectric, and Au as source–drain electrodes on a flexible polyethylene terephthalate substrate. Cytop is a fluoropolymer known to have low density of electronic traps at the surface and is a better dielectric than SiO2 for fabricating FETs. In such BGTC devices with Cytop as the dielectric, conservative estimation of saturation hole mobility of 0.04 cm2 V−1 s−1 was obtained at RT.29
Besides, using a high-k dielectric layer was claimed to be beneficial to improve gate modulation, which can help overcome the ionic screening effect.40,94 Canicoba et al. fabricated MAPbI3-based BGBC FETs with good gate modulation and negligible hysteresis at RT by using the high-k dielectric HfO2 with relative permittivity (ε) of 23.5 (inset of Fig. 5c). The on/off ratios of the FETs made with HfO2 were 102–104, which were larger than those of the FETs made with SiO2 (ε = 3.9) or Si3N4 (ε = 7.5). They argued that although the ionic vacancies have a strong screening effect on the gate electric field at RT, the operation of perovskite FET can still be achieved by using a high-k dielectric, which provides a strong gate modulation.40
Composition engineering. 
The composition of perovskites, including the ratios and types of cations and anions, can affect the charge transport in perovskite films. The impact of MAI/PbI2 ratio in precursors on the ion migration of MAPbI3 transistors was investigated by Haque et al.36 It is found that BGBC transistors employing MAPbI3 films with low levels of residual PbI2 have higher channel conductivity and smaller hysteresis compared to transistors with the stoichiometric or PbI2-poor films. They explained that the excess PbI2 passivates pathways for ion migration, which exist in the form of grain boundary defects, while the excess PbI2 can be detrimental to device performance when present in large amounts.36
Incorporation of multiple cation mixtures, such as FA+, Cs+, or Rb+, can improve the performance and stability of FETs.40,50,73,90,96,97 Yusoff et al. fabricated TGBC FETs with PMMA as the dielectric layer by using triple cation perovskites, Csx(MA0.17FA0.83)1−xPb(Br0.17I0.83)3 (x ranged from 0% to 30%) (inset of Fig. 5d).50 As x increased from 0% to 10%, the saturation mobility at RT increased monotonically from (1.46 ± 0.44) × 10−2 to (8.96 ± 2.08) × 10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes and from (3.51 ± 9.55) × 10−2 to (2.53 ± 0.95) × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons. However, no significant change in the charge-carrier mobilities was observed when x is higher than 15%. When x = 15% the saturation hole and electron mobilities were 1.13 ± 0.52 and 1.97 ± 0.83 cm2 V−1 s−1 at RT, respectively, and the on/off ratios of p-type and n-type transport were both nearly 104 (Fig. 5d and e). The high performance might be related to the stable perovskite phase and highly uniform perovskite grains due to the introduction of Cs+.50,73 Canicoba et al. also demonstrated high-performance FETs by replacing the MAPbI3 with the mixed cation perovskite Cs0.05FA0.75MA0.25PbI3, which exhibited improved hole mobility (10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1), an on/off ratio (∼104), and subthreshold swing at RT in the saturation regime (Fig. 5c). The improvement of performances was attributed to the larger grains of the mixed cation perovskites as compared to those of MAPbI3, and a reduction of the barriers between the source–drain electrodes and the perovskite.40
Recently, Senanayak et al. performed a systematic investigation of performance and operational stability of mixed cation perovskite TGBC FETs.90 The hysteresis of MAPbI3 can be attributed to the strong dipolar nature of the MA+, while the hysteresis of FAPbI3 at 100 K is negligible due to the smaller dipole moment of FA+ than that of MA+.98,99 However, the hysteresis-free characteristics of FAPbI3 FETs are not retained at RT and also the magnitude of the transistor current ID is lower by up to two orders of magnitude for FAPbI3 than for MAPbI3 at 300 K, which can be attributed to the existence of a small fraction of the non-perovskite δ-FAPbI3 phase.100 The issue of the unstable non-perovskite phase can be mitigated by inducing mixed cation compositions of FA+, MA+, and Cs+.97,101 Through the incorporation of smaller cations Cs into the lattice, the lattice strain, which results from ionic size mismatch between the A cation and the lead halide cage is expected to be reduced, and thus the lattice becomes more stable.102,103 As shown in Fig. 5f, the FETs based on FA0.2MA0.8PbI3 (FAMAPbI3) and Cs0.05FA0.17MA0.78PbI3 (CsFAMAPbI3) exhibited nearly hysteresis-free transfer characteristics at 300 K with saturation electron mobilities of 0.1 ± 0.03 and 0.3 ± 0.05 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. They also explored the effect of Rb by adding RbI solution into the CsFAMAPbI3 precursor solution in varying compositions. As a result, improved ID and saturation electron mobility of ∼0.8 cm2 V−1 s−1 were obtained for 5% concentration of Rb in solution, i.e. Rb0.05Cs0.05FA0.15MA0.75PbI3 (RbCsFAMAPbI3), which can be attributed to the changes in crystallization kinetics and improved crystalline quality due to the addition of Rb. However, the saturation electron mobility dropped down to ∼0.001 cm2 V−1 s−1 by increasing the Rb concentration to 10%, which is related to a phase-segregated Rb-based non-perovskite phase.90,104 The transfer characteristics of TGBC FETs based on MAPbI3, FAMAPbI3, CsFAMAPbI3, and RbCsFAMAPbI3 without solvent treatment at 300 K are shown in Fig. 5f.90
As discussed above, one of the major problems for MHP FETs is that the grain boundaries where ion vacancies/interstitials are highly concentrated provide more chances for ion migration. Therefore, reducing the number of grain boundaries in MHP thin films is critical for suppressing defect-mediated ion migration, by which improved performance of MHP FETs can be obtained.22,35,52 More than that, charge transport will be improved once grain boundaries are removed. Therefore, the perovskite microplates and single crystals with less or no grain boundaries inside may offer better device performance of MHP FETs, as will be discussed below.


3.2.2. Microplate devices. 
Wang et al. reported patterned FET devices by selective growth of perovskite microplates (about 10 μm) on pre-patterned gold electrodes through a lithographic process.105 The Si/SiO2 wafer was treated with (octadecyl)trichlorosilane (OTS), and then a lithography process was used to selectively remove the OTS to create periodic arrays of hydrophilic regions. PbI2 microplates were formed from an aqueous solution through a seeded growth process, and then the PbI2 microplates were converted to MAPbI3 microplates through a gas-solid heterophase intercalation process under methylammonium iodide vapor in a tube furnace system. The X-ray diffraction (XRD) of converted MAPbI3 microplates in Fig. 6a show that all of the diffraction peaks could be indexed to the tetragonal structure of MAPbI3 materials and that the diffraction peaks of PbI2 disappeared entirely, suggesting the complete conversion of the layered PbI2 into perovskite microplates. However, these microplates are not single crystalline because they have rough surfaces due to the residual nucleation sites (Fig. 6b). The BGBC FETs showed a notable hysteresis, and saturation electron mobility can reach up to ∼2.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 (backward sweep) and ∼1 cm2 V−1 s−1 (forward sweep) at 77 K (Fig. 6c), both of which are significantly better than that obtained in spin-coated polycrystalline perovskite thin films (<10−1 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 77 K) under similar measurement conditions.85,88,105 Following this, they adopted a similar gas-solid heterophase intercalation process to grow MAPbI3 microplates with different thicknesses, based on which BGBC FETs were fabricated (inset of Fig. 6d).49 As shown in Fig. 6d, the device mobility is found to be seriously dependent on the thickness of the microplate. More importantly, they demonstrated that the mobility drops abruptly when orthorhombic-to-tetragonal phase transition occurs, and this transition temperature (Tt–o) decreases with the decreasing thickness of the perovskite microplates, as seen from the arrows, which indicated the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic phase transition temperatures in Fig. 6d. The saturation electron mobility for the 300 nm MAPbI3 microplate was about 0.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 77 K.49
 Fig. 6  (a) XRD pattern of converted perovskite microplates on a glass substrate. (b) Bright-field optical microscopy image of perovskite microplate arrays, scale bar: 20 μm. (c) Transfer (VD = 10, 15, 20, and 25 V) characteristics of an FET based on a perovskite microplate crystal at 77 K. Adapted from ref. 105 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2015. (d) The temperature-dependent field-effect electron mobilities of BGBC FETs based on MAPbI3 microplates with three different thicknesses; the arrows indicate the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic phase transition temperatures. Inset: Schematic of the MAPbI3 microplate BGBC FET. Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (e) Schematic of the BGBC MAPbI3 microplate field-effect transistor with monolayer graphene as the contact. (f) The temperature-dependent transfer characteristics of the graphene-contacted field-effect transistor in (e) (the source–drain voltage is 10 V). Adapted from ref. 34 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. 
The same group further fabricated MAPbI3 microplate-based BGBC FETs with mono- or bilayer graphene stripes as the source–drain contact electrodes to tune the barrier height between graphene and MAPbI3 microplates by the gate voltage (Fig. 6e). Similar to the thin-film devices, these microplate devices showed a huge hysteresis and weak field effect above 240 K, attributed to the significant ion migration.34,41 The saturation electron mobility was around 4 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 77 K and 3 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 160 K, but it should be mentioned that this was estimated from the negative sweeping direction of the transfer curve, which exhibited strong hysteresis (Fig. 6f).34 They also investigated the effect of thermal annealing on the device performance and found that the FETs exhibited a transition from unipolar n-type to ambipolar and finally to unipolar p-type behavior with increasing annealing temperature (from 90 °C to 120 °C) and annealing time (several minutes), which may be partially attributed to the slight disintegration of MAPbI3 and p-type doping of Pb clusters. Meanwhile, the source–drain current and mobility greatly decreased after thermal annealing due to enhanced carrier-defects scattering.34


3.2.3. Single crystal devices. 
Although HOIP microplates own better crystal quality compared to thin films, they are not single crystal in nature and thus the device performance may still be affected by traps and defects in microplates, which are closely related to ion migration. Therefore, HOIP single crystals are highly in demand for exploring the performance limit of the FET devices, although single crystals are inferior to solution-processable films in low-cost, scalable, and flexible applications. Yu et al. synthesized micrometer-thick single crystals of different HOIPs (MAPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I) (see Fig. 7a) with tunable lateral sizes ranging from micrometers to millimeters by a spatially-confined inverse temperature crystallization strategy.46 As shown in Fig. 7b and c, ambipolar MAPbX3-based FETs with both BGTC and BGBC architectures were demonstrated. The field-effect hole (electron) mobilities of BGTC devices were as high as 1.8 ± 0.6 (1.3 ± 0.5), 1.9 ± 0.7 (1.1 ± 0.4), and 1.5 ± 0.7 (0.7 ± 0.3) cm2 V−1 s−1 in the saturation regimes at RT for X = Cl, Br, and I, respectively. For BGBC devices, the field-effect hole (electron) mobilities were as high as 2.1 ± 0.9 (0.27 ± 0.04), 2.3 ± 0.7 (0.19 ± 0.05), and 2.9 ± 1.0 (1.12 ± 0.12) cm2 V−1 s−1 in the saturation regimes at RT for X = Cl, Br, and I, respectively. The devices also exhibited on/off ratios up to 105 and low threshold voltages. The high performance of thin single crystal FETs was attributed to the superior semiconductor-dielectric interface in the channel achieved owing to the significantly reduced roughness, defects, and contamination of the confined crystal facet as compared to those of the polycrystalline films and freely grown bulk single crystals. An interesting phenomenon observed in this study is that those BGTC and BGBC single-crystal devices fabricated with Au as source/drain electrodes can work well, yet devices with lower work function contacts, including Ag and Al cannot work or were damaged shortly after initiating measurements. The authors suspect that chemical damage occurs to the contacts with evidence of discoloration shortly after fabrication.46
 Fig. 7  (a) Fluorescence microscopy images of MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbCl3 thin single crystals (which are excited with pulsed 450, 473, and 405 nm lasers, respectively), as well as corresponding XRD spectra. Scale bar: 100 μm. Insets: Optical images of MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbCl3 thin single crystals. Scale bar: 200 μm. (b) Transfer characteristics of BGTC FETs based on MAPbCl3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbI3 single crystals. Inset: The schematic of the BGTC FET. (c) Transfer characteristics of BGBC FETs based on MAPbCl3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbI3 single crystals with forward and reverse sweeps. Inset: The schematic of the BGBC FET. Adapted from ref. 46 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Transfer characteristics at 80 K of the MAPbBr3 single-crystal devices with bare Au, PEDOT:PSS and PFBT-modified Au as source/drain electrodes (inset: FET device configuration, and molecular structures of PEDOT:PSS and PFBT). Adapted from ref. 47 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. 
The possible chemical interaction between metal contacts and perovskites was further investigated by Wang et al. In that work, they used an antisolvent vapor-assisted crystallization method106 to grow high-quality MAPbBr3 single crystals.47 They found that the devices degraded quickly when Au was used as top-contacts, though the contacts were formed by a gentle, soft lamination method. They ascribed the device instabilities to electrochemical reactions at the Au/MHP interface, which led to a defective, intermixed layer formed at the interface upon biasing the device, forming defects in the perovskite. They, therefore, fabricated BGBC devices to overcome this problem, and to minimize the large access/contact resistance that would have resulted from the relatively large thickness of perovskite crystals (1–5 μm) in top-contact devices. They successfully modified Au employing the conducting polymer poly(3,4-ethylene-dioxythiophene) doped with polystyrene sulfonic acid (PEDOT:PSS) and the self-assembled monolayer pentafluorothiophenol (PFBT). Although the work functions of PEDOT:PSS- and PFBT-modified Au are smaller (4.9 eV) and larger (5.48 eV) than that of the unmodified Au surface (5.1 eV), respectively, similar enhancements in FET performance were observed for both PEDOT:PSS and PFBT treatment, as shown in Fig. 7d. The best characteristics were obtained for PFBT-modified devices, as their on/off ratio was four orders of magnitude higher compared to that of the device with bare Au electrodes, and the saturation hole mobility could reach up to ∼15 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 80 K. These results suggested that the performance improvement is not a consequence of work function effects but the suppression of the interfacial electrochemical reaction at the Au/MHP interface.47

3.3. 3D AIP FETs
Apart from the well-studied HOIPs, AIPs have also attracted much attention recently because of their improved chemical stability to heat and moisture compared to that of HOIPs. However, the employment of AIPs for constructing FETs has not been commonly seen. In this part, we shall shortly summarize the few works regarding FETs based on AIPs.
Hu et al. developed a method of direct growth of CsPbBr3 microplates (lateral dimensions of several to a few tens of micrometers) on top of pre-patterned indium tin oxide (ITO) electrodes with good contact via a vapor-phase deposition method.81 The CsPbBr3 microplate-based transistors in the TGBC structure with PMMA as dielectric layers were fabricated. The device structure and transfer characteristic measured at RT are shown in Fig. 8a. The linear hole mobility is distributed between 0.2 and 1.0 cm2 V−1 s−1 at the VG of 16 V and VD of 3 V.81 High-performance AIP FETs profiting from both van der Waals epitaxial boundary-free CsPbBr3 ultrathin single crystal and completely dry-processed transfer technique without chemical contaminant were achieved by Huo et al.82 The transfer characteristics are shown in Fig. 8b, with the best hole mobility (linear) and on/off ratio at RT being 0.32 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 6.7 × 103, respectively, and these values were enhanced at 237K to be 1.04 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 1.3 × 104, respectively.82 To improve the metal/MHP contact, Liu et al. proposed a strategy to fabricate BGBC FETs by directly growing perovskite crystals on microscale metallic structures in the liquid phase.48 As shown in the inset of Fig. 8c, the CsPbBr3 solution was first dropped on the substrate with predefined Ag electrodes, and CsPbBr3 nanocrystals grew around Ag electrodes which acted as the preferential nucleation centers. Then a polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) plate was used to cover the substrate and pressure was applied. During the evaporation of the solvent driven by the capillary force, the CsPbBr3 crystals tended to nucleate and grow between the two nearest silver electrodes, instead of disorderly growing over the silver electrodes. The well-contacted metal/MHP interfaces ensured these silver/CsPbBr3 heterostructures serve as high-performance FETs. The corresponding transfer characteristics at 150 K are shown in Fig. 8c, which shows that the on/off ratio stabilizes in the range of 105 to 106, and the linear hole mobilities range from 0.5 to 2.3 cm2 V−1 s−1.48
 Fig. 8  (a) Transfer characteristic of CsPbBr3 microplate FETs at RT. Inset: Schematic of the TGBC FET. Adapted from ref. 81 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) Transfer characteristics of the CsPbBr3 crystal FETs at RT (top) and 237 K (bottom). Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Transfer characteristics of CsPbBr3 crystals BGBC FETs at 150 K. Inset: Schematic diagram for the growth of CsPbBr3 between silver electrodes. Adapted from ref. 48 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (d) The saturation transfer characteristics of CsPbBr3 microplate FET in the n-type and p-type regions at RT. White LED light intensity: 50 mW cm−2. Adapted from ref. 68 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (e) Transfer characteristics of vertical transistors. Inset: Schematic illustration of a CsPbBr3-based vertical FET. (f) Transfer characteristics of planar transistors. Inset: Schematic illustration of a CsPbBr3-based planar FET. Adapted from ref. 107 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020. 
Zou et al. fabricated BGTC transistors based on high-crystallinity CsPbBr3 microplates (lateral size up to millimeters), which were synthesized between two slides following the inverse temperature crystallization strategy. In contrast to previous results, these CsPbBr3 devices exhibited anomalous ambipolar transport characteristics at RT.68 Similar to HOIP FETs,38 it was also observed that light illumination can significantly enhance the device performance. The maximum saturation hole (electron) mobility in the dark reached 0.02 (0.19) cm2 V−1 s−1, and the SS for hole (electron) transport regime was 24 (17) V dec−1. In comparison, the maximum hole (electron) mobility (saturation) increased to 0.34 (0.40) cm2 V−1 s−1 and the SS for the hole (electron) transport regime decreased to 3.1 (5.3) V dec−1 under light illumination with a power density of 50 mW cm−2 (Fig. 8d).68
A noteworthy work was done by Zhou et al., who grew CsPbBr3 microplates by a van der Waals epitaxy method, based on which vertical FETs with graphene source electrode were fabricated on Si/SiO2 substrates.107 The length of the channel in vertical FETs is the thickness of a CsPbBr3 microplate (351 nm), which is much shorter than that of planar FETs (on the order of μm), and thus the response speed is increased and the required driving voltage is smaller in such vertical FETs. It is also argued that the effect of ion migration in vertical FETs could be neglected because the direction of the drain-source electric field is parallel to the direction of the gate electric field in vertical FETs.108 The RT on/off ratios of the vertical FET and planar FET in the linear regime were 106 (at VD = −0.5 V) and 5 × 103 (at VD = −5 V), respectively (Fig. 8e and f).107 The strong gate-field modulation at RT exhibited the great potential of vertical FETs being used for perovskite FETs.
All in all, significant efforts have been made to promote the study and application of 3D MHP FETs in the last few years, and some works have demonstrated devices with impressive performance. In Table 1 we summarize the performance of 3D MHP FETs reported in the literature that were measured in normal conditions (no external illumination or excitation). It can be seen that the mobilities of 3D MHP FETs vary a lot (order of magnitude ranges from 10−4 to 10 cm2 V−1 s−1). Although the mobilities strongly depend on the device fabrication possess and device configurations, it is still apparent that the fabrication of devices with reliable performance remains a challenge.
Table 1 Summary of the device performance of 3D MHP FETs




Semiconductor
Morphology
Configuration
Dielectric layer
Source and drain

μ [cm2 V−1 s−1]
On/off ratio
Temperature [K]
Ref.


Electrons
Holes
Electrons
Holes





a Indicates that these values were extracted from the linear regimes, while others were extracted from saturation regimes.





MAPbI3−xClx
Thin film
TGBC
Cytop
Au
1
1.3
102
102
RT

69



MAPbI3
Thin film
BGBC
SiO2
Ni/Au
7.2 × 10−2
2.1 × 10−2
103–104
103–104
78

85



MAPbI3
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Al
7.5 × 10−3


3 × 103


150

33



MAPbI3
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au
0.11
0.025
102
50
78

88



MAPbI3−xClx
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au
1.17 × 10−4
1.62 × 10−4
103
2 × 103
RT

38



MAPbI3−xClx
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au
10 ± 2.5
10 ± 3.4
∼103
103
RT

35



MAPbI3−xClx
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au
7.3 × 10−3
0.01
104
1.3 × 104
RT

91



MAPbI3
Thin film
BGBC
AlOx
IZO
0.2


104


RT

52



MAPbI3
Thin film
TGBC
Cytop
Cr/Au
0.1–3


104


RT

22



MAPbI3
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
MoO3/Au


7.47


5 × 104
RT

95



MAPbI3
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
MoO3/Au


3.88


104
RT

45



MAPbI3
Thin film
BGTC
Al2O3
MoO3/Au


21.41


104
RT

94



MAPbI3
Thin film
BGTC
PPhMA


0.4


5.1 × 105


202

44



MAPbI3−xClx
Thin film
BGTC
Cytop
Au
0.04


4 × 101


RT

29



MAPbI3
Thin film
BGBC
AlOx
IZO
0.05


103


RT

36



FA0.5MA0.25Cs0.25PbI3
Thin film
BGBC
SiO2
Cr/Au


10−3


104
RT

40



Cs0.15(MA0.17FA0.83)0.85Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3
Thin film
TGBC
PMMA
Au
1.97 ± 0.83
1.13 ± 0.52
∼104
∼104
RT

50



Rb0.05Cs0.05FA0.15MA0.75PbI3
Thin film
TGBC
Cytop
Cr/Au
1.2


104


RT

90



MAPbI3
Microplate
BGBC
SiO2
Au
2.5


7 × 104


77

105



MAPbI3
Microplate
BGBC
SiO2
Cr/Au
0.5


104


77

49



MAPbI3
Microplate
BGBC
SiO2
Graphene/Au
4


105


77

34



MAPbI3
Microplate
BGBC
SiO2
Graphene/Au
5.6


104


77

41



MAPbCl3
Single crystal
BGTC
SiO2
Au
1.3 ± 0.5
1.8 ± 0.6
∼104
∼2.4 × 104
RT

46



MAPbBr3
Single crystal
BGTC
SiO2
Au
1.1 ± 0.4
1.9 ± 0.7
∼103
∼4.8 × 103
RT

46



MAPbI3
Single crystal
BGTC
SiO2
Au
0.7 ± 0.3
1.5 ± 0.7
∼103
∼6.7 × 103
RT

46



MAPbCl3
Single crystal
BGBC
SiO2
Au
0.27 ± 0.04
2.1 ± 0.9
∼103
∼1.45 × 105
RT

46



MAPbBr3
Single crystal
BGBC
SiO2
Au
0.19 ± 0.05
2.3 ± 0.7
∼103
∼3.37 × 105
RT

46



MAPbI3
Single crystal
BGBC
SiO2
Au
1.12 ± 0.12
2.9 ± 1.0
∼103
∼8.78 × 104
RT

46



MAPbBr3
Single crystal
BGBC
SiO2
Cr/Au


15


106
80

47



CsPbBr3
Microplate
TGBC
PMMA
ITO


0.2–1.0a


104–106a
RT

81



CsPbBr3
Microplate
BGTC
SiO2
Au
0.19
0.02
103
102
RT

68



CsPbBr3
Single crystal
BGBC
SiO2
Au


0.32a


6.7 × 103a
RT

82



CsPbBr3
Single crystal
BGBC
SiO2
Ag


0.5–2.3a


105–106a
150

48





4. 2D MHP FETs
4.1. Crystal structure and electronic properties of 2D MHPs
2D MHPs are inherited from 3D MHPs, but there is at least one large cation (typically an organic cation) in 2D MHPs (tolerance factor TF >1), which cannot fit into the center of the interstitial space between the [BX6]4− octahedrons thus yielding the inorganic framework layers isolated from electric coupling.109,110 It should be noted that although strictly speaking these 2D metal halide compounds are not perovskites, we adopt the common nomenclature by referring to them as 2D MHP here. The most commonly used 2D MHPs possess the Ruddlesden–Popper phase (taking n layers from the parent 3D structure along the 〈100〉 direction, as shown in Fig. 9a), which have a general formula of (RNH3)2MAn−1MnX3n+1,111–113 where RNH3+ is a large organic cation (e.g., phenylethyl ammonium (C6H5-CH2CH2-NH3+, PEA+) or butyl ammonium (C4H9-NH3+, BA+)), MA is methylammonium, M is a metal cation (such as Sn2+, and Pb2+), X represents halide anions (e.g., Cl−, Br−, and I−), and n represents the number of inorganic metal halide octahedron layers between neighboring insulating organic cation layers.
 Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structures of 2D layer-structured MHP analogues (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 3) derived from a 3D parent perovskite MAPbI3 (n → ∞) along the 〈100〉 direction. Adapted from ref. 121 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic of a BGBC FET structure having a layered (PEA)2SnI4 as the semiconducting channel. (c) Transfer characteristics of (PEA)2SnI4 BGBC FET shown in (b). Adapted from ref. 80 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 1999. (d) Transfer characteristics of a (PEA)2SnI4 FET in the dark (VD = −40 V) processed by spin-coating. Adapted from ref. 122 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (e) SEM images of (PEA)2SnI4 films fabricated with different conditions. Scale bar: 1 μm. (f) Transfer characteristics of FETs fabricated using the initial (top) and optimized (bottom) (PEA)2SnI4 films shown in (e). Adapted from ref. 51 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2019. 
The optoelectronic characteristics of 2D MHPs are highly dependent on the quantum confinement effect, which is mainly decided by the value of n.110 For example, the 2D BA2MAn−1PbnI3n+1 exhibit reduced optical bandgaps from 2.33 to 2.00 eV as the number of inorganic layer n increases from 1 to 3.109 When n = 1, the structure becomes an ideal quantum well with only one atomic layer of inorganic slabs separated by organic chains, while the structure approaches the 3D parent perovskite when n → ∞.114 Compared to 3D MHPs, the 2D analogues possess suppressed ion migration partly owing to the less movable large organic cation and the separated inorganic layers by the organic spacing layers,43,115 and also display better resistance to moisture mainly because the inorganic [MX6]4− octahedrons are protected by the long organic hydrophobic chains from the water vapor.116,117 On the other hand, the charge transport along the direction perpendicular to the inorganic layers in 2D MHPs is limited compared with the parallel direction due to the insertion of organic layers between the inorganic layers. Interestingly, the inorganic sheets are usually formed parallel to the substrate in solution-processed and vacuum-deposited 2D MHP films, which makes them more suitable for coplanar FETs than for staggered FETs.43,80,118–120
4.2. 2D MHP-based FETs

4.2.1. Thin-film devices. 
The first 2D MHP FETs were reported by Kagan et al. as early as 1999.80 They demonstrated spin-coated (C6H5C2H4NH3)2SnI4 (hereafter (PEA)2SnI4) BGBC FETs with a maximum saturation hole mobility of 0.62 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on/off ratio of 104 at RT. Although the (PEA)2SnI4 was deposited by spin coating, highly oriented crystals were obtained, thus favoring hole transport in the 2D crystal plane parallel to the transistor channel (Fig. 9b). The transfer characteristics of the device are shown in Fig. 9c. This work presents the great potential of 2D MHPs for FET applications. However, only in the recent last few years, the performance of 2D MHP FETs has been remarkably improved through the work on film morphology/structure engineering, interface engineering, and molecular engineering of organic cations.
Film morphology/structure engineering. 
The microstructure of 2D MHP films, such as crystallinity and grain boundaries, is believed to be the most critical to the performance of FETs. Mitzi et al. demonstrated BGBC FETs based on melt-processed (PEA)2SnI4 (melting temperature is 213 °C). This was done by placing the (PEA)2SnI4 between the polyimide treated silicon substrate and a Kapton cover sheet, which was then heated on a hotplate maintained within ±5 °C of the melting temperature, and another heated plate, maintained approximately 5–10 °C above the melting temperature, was hand-pressed on top of the sandwich structure. The melted film was cooled down and solidified as the top plate was removed. The melt-processed channel layers exhibited substantially increased grain size relative to the spin-coated films, leading to fewer grain boundaries. Consequently, the melt-processed devices exhibited both higher saturation- and linear-regime hole mobilities of 2.6 and 1.7 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively, at RT.123
As for the FETs based on vacuum-deposited 2D MHP films, Matsushima et al. optimized the growth rate and temperature of OTS-modified substrates to improve the morphology of (PEA)2SnI4 films, and reduced the thickness of films to reduce the bulk resistance in BGTC FETs.120,124–126 At an optimized substrate temperature (Tsub) of 60 °C and film thickness of 31 nm, perovskite films with enlarged grains and well-developed layered structure were obtained, which resulted in the notably improved saturation hole mobility of 0.78 ± 0.24 cm2 V−1 s−1 at RT, a value that was about 5000 times higher than that of the device fabricated at Tsub = 24 °C with a film thickness of 50 nm.124
In spin-coated 2D MHP FETs, the microstructures of perovskite films can be improved by increasing the concentration of the precursor solution and utilizing optimized organic solvents as well as annealing temperature.51,122 Chen et al. fabricated 2D (PEA)2SnI4-based BGTC FETs by a one-step solution method. At RT, a saturation hole mobility of 0.76–1.2 cm2 V−1 s−1 was obtained when the concentration of the (PEA)2SnI4 precursor was 0.3 mmol mL−1 (Fig. 9d). By decreasing the concentration of the precursor to 0.2 and 0.1 mmol mL−1, the saturation hole mobilities were 0.06–0.14 and 0.09–0.12 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively. This could be attributed to the higher crystallinity of films processed from a higher precursor concentration.122 Matsushima et al. deposited (PEA)2SnI4 films with different precursor solvents and annealing temperatures, and fabricated BGTC FETs with MoOx as hole-injection layers.51 Compared with the initial conditions (methanol solvent with a boiling point of 65 °C and annealing at 80 °C), the optimized conditions (ethanol solvent with a boiling point of 78 °C and annealing at 100 °C) resulted in larger grain size and thus improved device performance (Fig. 9e and f). However, the (PEA)2SnI4 films deposited from other solvents (1-propanol and 1-butanol) with higher boiling points were discontinuous. At RT, the devices fabricated under the initial conditions had performance of saturation μh = 0.40 ± 0.19 cm2 V−1 s−1, VT = −73 ± 5 V, on/off ratio = (2.8 ± 14) × 105, and SS = 5.4 ± 3.1 V dec−1, while the parameters in saturation regime for devices fabricated under the optimized conditions were μh = 7.9 ± 2.3 cm2 V−1 s−1, VT = −54 ± 13 V, on/off ratio = (1.0 ± 2.7) × 107, and SS = 2.9 ± 1.4 V dec−1. In addition to the improved electrical performance, the increase of grain size reduced the oxygen-induced degradation possibly originating from the grain boundaries.51
Interface engineering. 
Matsushima et al. deposited (PEA)2SnI4 films by a vacuum vapor deposition technique on top of OTS-treated Si/SiO2 substrates to improve the organization of films close to the surface.120,124,125 Saturation hole mobility of 0.28 cm2 V−1 s−1, on/off ratio of 105–106, and threshold voltage of −3.2 V were obtained in BGTC FETs at RT but with an obvious hysteresis effect.125 A significantly improved performance was achieved later by the same group. This time they fabricated solution-processed (PEA)2SnI4-based TGTC FETs through surface treatment of the silica substrates with a self-assembled monolayer containing ammonium iodide terminal groups (NH3I-SAM). More than that, they inserted MoOx as hole-injection layers between Au and perovskites.43 As a result, the device exhibited a saturation hole mobility of 12 ± 1 cm2 V−1 s−1 at RT with negligible hysteresis, and the on/off ratio was 106 (Fig. 10a). It is argued that the NH3I-SAM treatment induced better-developed perovskite formation and improved conversion to perovskite and crystallites, thus resulting in a reduced amount of residual starting materials and related ions in perovskite films. Additionally, the top-gate device using Cytop as the dielectric reduced the hole trap density near the dielectric/MHP interface, and the coplanar TGTC structure helps lower the access resistance, which is nontrivial because the holes needed to traverse the alternating smaller-bandgap inorganic and larger-bandgap organic sheets of 2D (PEA)2SnI4 films in staggered configuration.43,118,119 Matsushima et al. further demonstrated an n-channel (PEA)2SnI4-based FET in TGTC configuration with C60 buffer layers between the perovskite and Al electrodes (Fig. 10b). The saturation electron mobility of 1.5 ± 0.3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on/off ratio of (2.4 ± 6.4) × 104 were obtained at RT, which resulted from the reduced injection barrier and suppressed electrode degradation by using the low-work-function Al S/D electrodes and C60 buffer layers.39 This work unambiguously presented the ambipolar charge transport nature in 2D (PEA)2SnI4.
 Fig. 10  (a) Transfer characteristics of a p-type (PEA)2SnI4 TGTC FET. Inset: Schematic of corresponding TGTC FET with MoOx layers. Adapted from ref. 43 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. (b) Transfer characteristics of an n-type (PEA)2SnI4 TGTC FET. Inset: The schematic of corresponding TGTC FET with C60 layers. Adapted from ref. 39 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2016. (c) Transfer characteristics of (PEA)2SnI4 FET. The inset demonstrates the device configuration. Adapted from ref. 127 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 
Zhang et al. demonstrated that a high-quality dielectric/MHP interface can also be obtained by using cross-linking poly(4-vinylphenol) (CL-PVP)-modified polymer dielectric poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA).127 They fabricated solution-processed (PEA)2SnI4-based BGTC FETs with PVA/CL-PVP as the dielectric layer and indium tin oxide (ITO) as the gate electrode. The reverse scanning transfer characteristics exhibited a saturation hole mobility of 0.30 ± 0.07 cm2 V−1 s−1, threshold voltage of 36 ± 8 V, and on/off ratio of ∼1 × 103 at RT. In particular, negligible hysteresis was observed in the device (Fig. 10c), which was attributed to the high-quality surface of the PVA/CL-PVP layer, good compatibility of the perovskite with the polymer dielectric, and suppressed ion migration in the (PEA)2SnI4 film.127
Molecular engineering of organic cations. 
Similar to that in 3D MHPs, the organic cations in 2D MHPs have nonnegligible effects on FET performance. So, engineering the cation composition and structure is an important way to improve device performance. As early as 2001, Mitzi et al. demonstrated the possibility of tuning the electronic properties of (PEA)2SnI4 by substituting a hydrogen atom on the phenyl ring of the PEA with a fluorine atom, by which they obtained m-fluoro phenethyl ammonium-based ((C6H4FC2H4NH3)2SnI4 (m-FPEA)2SnI4) perovskites (m = 2, 3, and 4, representing the position of the fluorine atom). Fig. 11a shows the molecular structure of the 4-fluoro phenethylammonium cation in (4-FPEA)2SnI4.128 The organic cation substitutions induced subtle structural changes, such as the Sn–I–Sn bond angles shifted from 156.4° (m = 4) to 154.2° (m = 3) and 153.3° (m = 2). The (m-FPEA)2SnI4-based BGBC FETs exhibited RT saturation hole mobilities up to 0.56 cm2 V−1 s−1 (m = 4), 0.51 cm2 V−1 s−1 (m = 3), and 0.24 cm2 V−1 s−1 (m = 2), respectively. Although the device mobility is not apparently improved, this work still provides a paradigm of producing subtle changes in the crystal and electronic structure of the 2D perovskites through chemical interactions imposed by molecular engineering.128 Recently, Gao et al. synthesized a stable 2D perovskite by incorporating a π-conjugated oligothiophene ligand, namely (4Tm)2SnI4, where 4Tm is 2-(3′′′,4′-dimethyl-[2,2′:5′,2′′:5′′,2′′′-quaterthiophen]-5-yl)ethan-1-ammonium, into a Sn(II)-based 2D perovskite crystal lattice. The chemical structures of PEA and 4Tm are shown in the insets of Fig. 11b and c, respectively. At RT, the BGTC FETs based on (PEA)2SnI4 and (4Tm)2SnI4 exhibited average saturation hole mobilities of 0.11 and 1.78 cm2 V−1 s−1, on/off ratios of 104–105 and 105–106, and SS of ∼16 and ∼10 V dec−1, respectively. This improvement was attributed to the larger grain size of (4Tm)2SnI4 and improved charge injection in (4Tm)2SnI4-based FETs due to the conjugated ligands.42 These works open up many new opportunities toward high-performance, highly stable Sn-based 2D perovskite devices via molecular engineering of organic cations.
 Fig. 11  (a) Transfer characteristics of (4-FPEA)2SnI4 BGBC FETs. Inset: Chemical structure of 4-FPEA. Adapted from ref. 128 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2001. (b) Transfer characteristics of BGTC FETs based on (PEA)2SnI4. Inset: Chemical structure of PEA. (c) Transfer characteristics of BGTC FETs based on (4Tm)2SnI4. Inset: Chemical structure of 4Tm. Adapted from ref. 42 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 


4.2.2. Exfoliated crystal devices. 
To achieve 2D MHP FETs with even higher performance, Matsushima et al. fabricated BGBC FETs based on exfoliated (PEA)2SnI4 crystals with a MoOx hole injection layer (Fig. 12a).129 The (PEA)2SnI4 crystal was grown from a solution containing PEAI and SnI2 at around −25 °C overnight due to the reduced solubility. Then, the inhomogeneous and rough as-grown crystal was treated with scotch tape to exfoliate the superficial residue layer. The optical microscopy images of the as-grown and exfoliated (PEA)2SnI4 crystals are shown in Fig. 12b, which show that the exfoliation can effectively remove residual layers. However, the interlayer spacing between neighboring SnI sheets estimated from the XRD measurement was closer to that of spin-coated (PEA)2SnI4 films rather than single crystals, which indicated the obtained exfoliated (PEA)2SnI4 crystal is not really a single crystal. Unfortunately, the exfoliated crystal surfaces were not always flat enough to attain sufficient contact with the electrodes, and thus the yield of operatable FETs was lower than 1%. In spite of these disadvantages, the fabricated FETs exhibited an average saturation regime hole mobility of ∼40 cm2 V−1 s−1 at RT (Fig. 12c), which can be attributed to the low grain boundary density and small structural disorder in the exfoliated crystal.129
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic architecture of (PEA)2SnI4 BGBC FET. (b) Optical microscopy images of the as-grown and exfoliated (PEA)2SnI4 crystals. (c) Transfer and output characteristics of an exfoliated (PEA)2SnI4 crystal BGBC FET. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2019. (d) Schematic diagram of a BGTC 2D MHP FET based on exfoliated crystals, together with the molecular structure of (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3) Pb2I7. (e) Transfer characteristics of devices shown in (d) with Au, Ag, and Ca metal contacts. Adapted from ref. 130 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. 
Recently, highly reliable and reproducible n-type BGTC FETs (Fig. 12d) based on exfoliated (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 2, 3, 4 and 5) crystals were fabricated by Liu et al.130 As the value of n increases, i.e. the thickness of the ‘quantum well’ increases, the linear electron mobilities of (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 FETs at 150 K increase, while the hysteresis becomes more significant due to the more serious ion migration. Temperature-dependent measurements show an increasing mobility and a decreasing hysteresis with decreasing temperature, indicating the suppression of ion migration at low temperatures. Furthermore, the charge injection resistance caused by the Schottky barrier at the metal/perovskite interface was significantly reduced by replacing Au electrodes with Ca, which has a lower work function. The optimized FETs based on (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3)Pb2I7 (n = 2) with Ca electrodes at 150 K exhibited an on/off ratio of 106, SS of 1.28 ± 0.27 V dec−1, and a linear electron mobility of 0.129 ± 0.048 cm2 V−1 s−1 (Fig. 12e).130
A summary of the device performance of 2D MHP FETs is shown in Table 2. On the whole, 2D MHP FETs demonstrate a higher and more reliable device performance than that of the 3D MHP counterparts. One impressive fact is that 2D MHP FETs have been generally reported to be capable of working at RT, which is remarkable for further investigation and applications. This also indicates that the ion migration issue might be less severe in 2D MHPs due to the less movable large organic cation and layered crystal structure of 2D MHPs. In addition, the mobility range of 2D MHP FETs is smaller compared with that of 3D MHP FETs (Table 1), and the mobilities of the former are generally higher. Therefore, even though 2D MHPs may not be appropriate for constructing diode-structure devices like PSCs or LEDs, they are very promising for FET applications.
Table 2 Summary of the device performance of 2D MHP FETs




Semiconductor
Morphology
Configuration
Dielectric layer
Source and drain

μ [cm2 V−1 s−1]
On/off ratio
Temperature [K]
Ref.


Electrons
Holes





a Indicates that these values are extracted from the linear regimes, while others are extracted from saturation regimes.





(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGBC
SiO2
Pd


0.62
104
RT

80



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGBC
SiO2
Pd


0.5
105
RT

131



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGBC
SiO2
Au


2.6
106
RT

123



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au


0.78
4.2 × 105
RT

120



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au


0.78 ± 0.24
(4.4 ± 3.5) × 105
RT

124



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au


0.28
105–106
RT

125



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au


0.76–1.2
>103
RT

122



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au


7.9 ± 2.3
(1.0 ± 2.7) × 107
RT

51



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
TGTC
Cytop
MoOx/Au


12 ± 1
(1.9 ± 2.1) × 106
RT

43



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
TGTC
Cytop
C60/Al
1.5 ± 0.3


(2.4 ± 6.4) × 104
RT

39



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
TGTC
Cytop
MoOx/Au


22
106–108
RT

119



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
TGTC
Cytop
C60/Al
3.8


104–106
RT

119



(PEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGTC
PVA/CL-PVP
Au


0.30 ± 0.07
∼103
RT

127



(4-FPEA)2SnI4
Thin film
BGBC
SiO2
Cr/Pd


0.11–0.56
∼105
RT

128



(4Tm)2SnI4
Thin film
BGTC
SiO2
Au


1.78
105–106
RT

42



(PEA)2SnI4
Exfoliated crystal
BGBC
SiO2
Au/MoOx


∼40
3.6 × 106
RT

129



(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7
Exfoliated crystal
BGTC
SiO2
Ca
0.129 ± 0.048a


106–107a
150

130





Finally, we pictured the progress of mobilities of MHP-based FETs in the last decades (Fig. 13). The graph represents a clear and fast increasing trend in field-effect mobility for both 3D and 2D MHPs, which is inspiring for researchers to achieve even higher mobility in the future. It is noted that although the intrinsic mobility of 2D MHPs is reported to be lower than that of 3D parent MHPs (n → ∞),132,133 the field-effect mobilities of 2D MHPs are generally higher (Fig. 13) probably due to the suppressed ion migration43,115 and better resistance to moisture.117
 Fig. 13  The development of electron and hole mobilities of 3D and 2D MHP FETs extracted at RT. The mobility values are the highest values reported in the references. 
It is worth mentioning that in this review we have only focused on mobilities of MHPs obtained from FETs, while there are also many other methods to characterize mobilities of MHPs. Both electrical (e.g. the space-charge limited-current (SCLC) technique, Hall effect measurements, and the time-of-flight (TOF) technique), and noncontact probes (e.g. THz conductivity (THzC) measurements, the transient microwave conductivity (MWC) technique, and the photoluminescence quenching (PLQ) methods) have been used to investigate charge carrier mobilities in MHPs. The detailed description of these techniques is beyond the scope of this review but can be found in a perspective article written by Herz.27 In that work, the charge carrier mobilities of MHPs extracted from these different measurement techniques were compared, which reveals a substantial variation of values even for the same sample, indicating the inherent uncertainties in different measurement techniques.27 Taking MAPbI3 single crystal as an example, reports range between a value of 2.5 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the hole mobility and 600 cm2 V−1 s−1 for the electron–hole sum mobility, showing the large discrepancy in different results. Nevertheless, the average RT mobility values of 73 ± 58 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes in MAPbI3 single crystals can serve as a benchmark value for us to set realistic goals as to what can be achieved through improved processing strategies. Indeed, this average experimental mobility value of MAPbI3 single crystals is still much lower than the theoretically calculated values. Under the assumption of sole Fröhlich contributions, the upper limits of the room-temperature charge carrier mobility of MAPbI3 single crystals is found to be 197 cm2 V−1 s−1.134 This value is much higher than the highest mobilities we have probed in MAPbI3 single crystal FETs at RT (1.51 cm2 V−1 s−1 for electrons and 4.7 cm2 V−1 s−1 for holes).46 The factors lead to huge discrepancy between theoretically predicted mobility values and the low and widespread mobility values of MHP FETs mainly include ion migration, grain boundaries, and charge carrier scattering/trapping by defects,27,132,135 but further understanding requires more experimental and theoretical insight.

5. Conclusions and perspectives
Undeniably, great progress has been made in the development of MHP-based FETs. With a focus on the device fabrication and performance of MHP-based FETs, here we have mainly summarized the recent developments of both 3D and 2D MHP FETs as well as the strategies to enhance the performance of them. For FETs based on 3D MHPs, the essential problem is the ion migration, which causes the gate-screening effect and large device hysteresis at RT, thus seriously deteriorating the device performance. In spite of this, various measures including film morphology/structure engineering, Lewis acid/base doping, interface engineering and composition engineering can be taken to obtain high-performance 3D MHP FETs. Notably, the recent work carried out by Sirringhaus and colleagues have reported MHP thin-film FETs being able to work at RT with a saturation electron mobility higher than 1 cm2 V−1 s−1, neglectable hysteresis, and high threshold voltage stability (ΔVT < 2 V over 10 hours of continuous operation), which is very inspiring as these results promise the possibilities of using 3D MHPs for applications in low-cost, large-area electronics and for investigating the charge transport physics of perovskite semiconductors.90 Compared with 3D MHPs, although the intrinsic mobilities of 2D MHPs are lower, the 2D MHPs exhibit suppressed ion migration and better resistance to moisture due to their layered structure, and thus the 2D MHP FETs may have more chances to work well at RT, as shown in Fig. 13. Though the charge transport along the direction perpendicular to the inorganic layers in 2D MHPs is limited, they still enable the fabrication of high-mobility MHP FETs by taking measures such as the film morphology/structure engineering, interface engineering, molecular engineering of organic cations, etc. The record saturation hole mobility over 40 cm2 V−1 s−1 was obtained in 2D MHP crystal FET at RT although the yield of these devices is low.129 These achievements definitely demonstrate the great potential of 2D MHPs to be used for constructing low-cost and high-performance FETs.
In spite of these encouraging results, plenty of challenges remain to be addressed. For example, as shown in Table 1, MAPbI3 has been the most heavily used perovskite for fabricating FETs, yet the reported field-effect mobilities by different groups vary a lot although similar device structure or fabrication procedures have been adopted.35,38,45,95 Thus, standardized and reproducible device fabrication techniques are required to obtain a proper evaluation of device performance. Furthermore, the mechanism and effects of ion migration on charge transport are not fully clear. Even though quite a few of the works have reported devices working properly at RT with negligible hysteresis,22,40,43,52,90,127 the main origins of the hysteresis effect are still under debate, including the ion migration, ferroelectricity, surface dipole, and trap states.136,137 The surface dipoles or trap states are reported to mainly account for hysteresis at low temperature (for example, 77 K),34,38 while ion migration is believed to be the dominant factor at RT.34,69 It is well acknowledged that ions in MHPs will drift under an electric field due to the presence of grain boundaries and ion vacancies.83,84 Therefore, the ion migration can be mitigated by various methods, including improving the microstructure of MHP films with reduced grain boundaries,22,46 using less polar and less orientationally mobile cations,50,90 or using Lewis bases (acids) in n-type (p-type) perovskites to reduce the defect density,90etc. However, it is still not fully clear how ion migration influences the performance of MHP FETs, which ions and how these ions move, and how to fundamentally suppress ion migration. Especially, understanding of the unique ionic nature of MHPs will be very helpful to mitigate ion migration efficiently or even utilize it for ion-involved optoelectronics such as artificial synapses, or serving as dielectric layers in FETs or capacitors due to the high dielectric constant of MHPs in low-frequency regimes (e.g. <1 Hz).32,138–141
The moisture, light, oxygen, and heat instabilities of MHPs as well as long-term operational instability of MHP FETs hinder their development toward commercialization.142 Among these factors, the moisture-assisted degradation process has been considered as one of the biggest challenges in MAPbX3.143 The methylamine group tends to be lost via sublimation and PbI2 is formed due to the hygroscopic nature of the amine salt.144 Light and oxygen can also lead to instability. For instance, photo-generated electrons in the perovskite can react with molecular oxygen to form the superoxide, which further reacts with the MA of the perovskite.145 The degradation of the perovskite also results from exposure to a high temperature (e.g. over 85 °C).146 In addition to these environmental instabilities, the long-term operational instability of MHP FETs due to the ion migration is also serious.90,147 Although these instabilities can be mitigated by encapsulation techniques,34,38,51 solvent engineering,52 or employing more stable ions,42,50 such instability problems still require more studies both experimentally and theoretically.
The lead (Pb) element is commonly used in MHPs due to the suitable ionic radius and good stability of Pb2+, which, however, may leak into the environment and result in toxicity to living organisms. There are also many reports about low-toxicity of Sn2+-based MHPs,43,51,148 but the Sn2+ has a facile tendency toward oxidation, which causes the material to be doped with Sn4+ and thus behaves as a p-type semiconductor displaying metal-like conductivity.25,113 The methods to reduce the amount of Pb or avoid leakage of Pb in FETs deserve further investigation, and lessons can be learned from PSCs employing lead-free MHPs or lead-absorbing films.148,149
Only a few works have been done to tune the charge transport properties of MHPs by finely tuning the molecular structure of organic cations.128,129 Nevertheless, this is a very attractive research direction, which can combine and utilize the understanding and knowledge of organic semiconductors, and has great potential to enhance charge transport efficiency and stability of MHPs, especially for 2D MHPs with a larger A cation, which provides more possibilities for molecular design. We may have exciting results from this in the future.
Gazing into the future, the field of MHP FETs is absolutely exciting and full of possibilities, providing researchers various opportunities to explore high-performance devices and clarify semiconductor physics in MHPs. Along with the technological breakthroughs in material synthesis, semiconductor growth, and device fabrication, we believe MHP FET may become an important candidate for realizing large-area and flexible electronics with low manufacturing cost.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y. Hu thanks the National Natural Science Foundation of China (61804051) and the Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (2018RS053, 2019GK2245) for financial support.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. McMeekin, G. Sadoughi, W. Rehman, G. E. Eperon, M. Saliba, M. T. Hörantner, A. Haghighirad, N. Sakai, L. Korte, B. Rech, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2016, 351, 151 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tan, A. Jain, O. Voznyy, X. Lan, F. P. García de Arquer, J. Z. Fan, R. Quintero-Bermudez, M. Yuan, B. Zhang, Y. Zhao, F. Fan, P. Li, L. N. Quan, Y. Zhao, Z.-H. Lu, Z. Yang, S. Hoogland and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2017, 355, 722 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. Zhang, H. He, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and T. Xu, Nature, 2020, 578, 555–558 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Chen, Y. Yang, Q. Xue, H.-L. Yip and Y. Cao, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1027 CrossRef .
M. Lu, Y. Zhang, S. Wang, J. Guo, W. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1902008 CrossRef .
W. Xu, Q. Hu, S. Bai, C. Bao, Y. Miao, Z. Yuan, T. Borzda, A. J. Barker, E. Tyukalova, Z. Hu, M. Kawecki, H. Wang, Z. Yan, X. Liu, X. Shi, K. Uvdal, M. Fahlman, W. Zhang, M. Duchamp, J.-M. Liu, A. Petrozza, J. Wang, L.-M. Liu, W. Huang and F. Gao, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 418–424 CrossRef CAS .
C. Cho, B. Zhao, G. D. Tainter, J.-Y. Lee, R. H. Friend, D. Di, F. Deschler and N. C. Greenham, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 611 CrossRef CAS .
C. Qin, T. Matsushima, W. J. Potscavage, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, M. R. Leyden, F. Bencheikh, K. Goushi, F. Mathevet, B. Heinrich, G. Yumoto, Y. Kanemitsu and C. Adachi, Nat. Photonics, 2020, 14, 70–75 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, Y. Yang, J. You, Z. Hong, W.-H. Chang, G. Li and Y. Yang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5404 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, D. Yu, F. Cao, X. Li, J. Ji, J. Chen, X. Song and H. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1700364 CrossRef .
Z. Lian, Q. Yan, Q. Lv, Y. Wang, L. Liu, L. Zhang, S. Pan, Q. Li, L. Wang and J. L. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16563 CrossRef .
S. Chen, C. Teng, M. Zhang, Y. Li, D. Xie and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5969–5974 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, H. Wei, J. Guo, P.-A. Chen, S. Liu, J. Li, L. Miao, N. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Wang, H. Chen and Y. Hu, Org. Electron., 2019, 75, 105372 CrossRef CAS .
P.-A. Chen, J. Guo, M. Nouri, Q. Tao, Z. Li, Q. Li, L. Du, H. Chen, Z. Dong, L. Chang, Y. Liu, L. Liao and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 2353–2362 RSC .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Grätzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Science, 2013, 342, 344 CrossRef CAS .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Saidaminov, A. L. Abdelhady, B. Murali, E. Alarousu, V. M. Burlakov, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Wang, Y. He, G. Maculan, A. Goriely, T. Wu, O. F. Mohammed and O. M. Bakr, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7586 CrossRef .
X. Qiu, Y. Liu, W. Li and Y. Hu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 22425–22451 RSC .
Best Research-Cell Efficiency Chart, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html, accessed 2020/05/24, 2020.
S. P. Senanayak, B. Yang, T. H. Thomas, N. Giesbrecht, W. Huang, E. Gann, B. Nair, K. Goedel, S. Guha, X. Moya, C. R. McNeill, P. Docampo, A. Sadhanala, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1601935 CrossRef .
B. Radisavljevic and A. Kis, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 815–820 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 2411–2425 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas and M. G. Kanatzidis, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9019–9038 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Yettapu, D. Talukdar, S. Sarkar, A. Swarnkar, A. Nag, P. Ghosh and P. Mandal, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4838–4848 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Herz, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1539–1548 CrossRef CAS .
V. Q. Dang, G.-S. Han, T. Q. Trung, L. T. Duy, Y.-U. Jin, B.-U. Hwang, H.-S. Jung and N.-E. Lee, Carbon, 2016, 105, 353–361 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Ward, H. L. Smith, A. Zeidell, P. J. Diemer, S. R. Baker, H. Lee, M. M. Payne, J. E. Anthony, M. Guthold and O. D. Jurchescu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18120–18126 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xie, P. You, Z. Liu, L. Li and F. Yan, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e17023 CrossRef .
Z.-Y. Peng, J.-L. Xu, J.-Y. Zhang, X. Gao and S.-D. Wang, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800505 CrossRef .
J. Choi, J. S. Han, K. Hong, S. Y. Kim and H. W. Jang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1704002 CrossRef .
J. G. Labram, D. H. Fabini, E. E. Perry, A. J. Lehner, H. Wang, A. M. Glaudell, G. Wu, H. Evans, D. Buck, R. Cotta, L. Echegoyen, F. Wudl, R. Seshadri and M. L. Chabinyc, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3565–3571 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, H. C. Cheng, Y. Wang, Z. Zhao, G. Wang, H. Wu, Q. He, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601959 CrossRef .
A. M. Zeidell, C. Tyznik, L. Jennings, C. Zhang, H. Lee, M. Guthold, Z. V. Vardeny and O. D. Jurchescu, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800316 CrossRef .
F. Haque, N. T. T. Hoang, J. Ji and M. Mativenga, IEEE Electron Device Lett., 2019, 40, 1756–1759 CAS .
J. Zaumseil and H. Sirringhaus, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 1296–1323 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, C. Ma, H. Wang, W. Hu, W. Yu, A. D. Sheikh and T. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8238 CrossRef .
T. Matsushima, F. Mathevet, B. Heinrich, S. Terakawa, T. Fujihara, C. Qin, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, J.-C. Ribierre and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 253301 CrossRef .
N. D. Canicoba, N. Zagni, F. Liu, G. McCuistian, K. Fernando, H. Bellezza, B. Traoré, R. Rogel, H. Tsai, L. Le Brizoual, W. Nie, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, C. Katan, J. Even, M. G. Kanatzidis, B. W. Alphenaar, J.-C. Blancon, M. A. Alam and A. D. Mohite, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1, 633–640 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, H. C. Cheng, H. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Guo, G. Wang, Y. Huang and X. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 429–434 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, Z. Wei, P. Yoo, E. Shi, M. Zeller, C. Zhu, P. Liao and L. Dou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 15577–15585 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsushima, S. Hwang, A. S. Sandanayaka, C. Qin, S. Terakawa, T. Fujihara, M. Yahiro and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10275–10281 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. L. Ngai, J. K. W. Ho, R. K. H. Chan, S. H. Cheung, L. M. Leung and S. K. So, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 49353–49360 RSC .
Y. Peng, L. Tang, Z. Zhou, J. Xu, J. Li, H. Cai, J. Ni and J. Zhang, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 445101 CrossRef .
W. Yu, F. Li, L. Yu, M. R. Niazi, Y. Zou, D. Corzo, A. Basu, C. Ma, S. Dey, M. L. Tietze, U. Buttner, X. Wang, Z. Wang, M. N. Hedhili, C. Guo, T. Wu and A. Amassian, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5354 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, S. P. Senanayak, J. Liu, Y. Hu, Y. Shi, Z. Li, C. Zhang, B. Yang, L. Jiang, D. Di, A. V. Ievlev, O. S. Ovchinnikova, T. Ding, H. Deng, L. Tang, Y. Guo, J. Wang, K. Xiao, D. Venkateshvaran, L. Jiang, D. Zhu and H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902618 CrossRef .
J. Liu, F. Liu, H. Liu, R. Hou, J. Yue, J. Cai, Z. Peng, J. Impundu, L. Xie, Y. J. Li and L. Sun, Small, 2020, 16, e1906185 CrossRef .
D. Li, G. Wang, H.-C. Cheng, C.-Y. Chen, H. Wu, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11330 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Yusoff, H. P. Kim, X. Li, J. Kim, J. Jang and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602940 CrossRef .
T. Matsushima, S. Terakawa, M. R. Leyden, T. Fujihara, C. Qin and C. Adachi, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 125, 235501 CrossRef .
M. Mativenga, J. Ji, N. T. T. Hoang and F. Haque, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901777 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lin, P. Pattanasattayavong and T. D. Anthopoulos, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702838 CrossRef .
X. Liu, D. Yu, X. Song and H. Zeng, Small, 2018, 14, e1801460 CrossRef .
T. Wu, W. Pisula, M. Y. A. Rashid and P. Gao, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1900444 CrossRef CAS .
D. Braga and G. Horowitz, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1473–1486 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kim, S. U. Ryu, S. A. Park, K. Choi, T. Kim, D. Chung and T. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1904545 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1319–1335 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yang, Q. Wu, F. Dai, K. Huang, H. Xu, C. Liu, C. Chen, S. Hu, X. Liang, X. Liu, Y. Y. Noh and C. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1903889 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Bittle, J. I. Basham, T. N. Jackson, O. D. Jurchescu and D. J. Gundlach, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10908 CrossRef CAS .
I. McCulloch, A. Salleo and M. Chabinyc, Science, 2016, 352, 1521 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Choi, K. Cho, C. D. Frisbie, H. Sirringhaus and V. Podzorov, Nat. Mater., 2017, 17, 2–7 CrossRef .
G. Horowitz, R. Hajlaoui, H. Bouchriha, R. Bourguiga and M. Hajlaoui, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 923–927 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Pernstich, S. Haas, D. Oberhoff, C. Goldmann, D. J. Gundlach, B. Batlogg, A. N. Rashid and G. Schitter, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 96, 6431–6438 CrossRef CAS .
M. Egginger, M. Irimia-Vladu, R. Schwödiauer, A. Tanda, I. Frischauf, S. Bauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 1018–1022 CrossRef CAS .
M. Egginger, S. Bauer, R. Schwödiauer, H. Neugebauer and N. S. Sariciftci, Monatshefte für Chemie – Chem. Mon., 2009, 140, 735–750 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tries, N. Richter, Z. Chen, A. Narita, K. Müllen, H. I. Wang, M. Bonn and M. Kläui, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 5667–5672 RSC .
Y. Zou, F. Li, C. Zhao, J. Xing, Z. Yu, W. Yu and C. Guo, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900676 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Mei, C. Zhang, Z. V. Vardeny and O. D. Jurchescu, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. Yang, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, H. Zhao, Z. Hong, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 355–396 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Ber. Dtsch. Chem. Ges. B, 1927, 60, 1263–1296 CrossRef .
C. Li, X. Lu, W. Ding, L. Feng, Y. Gao and Z. Guo, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., 2008, 64, 702–707 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J.-S. Park, S.-H. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 28, 284–292 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, W. Meng, J. Wang, D. B. Mitzi and Y. Yan, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 206–216 RSC .
G. Niu, X. Guo and L. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
E. Mosconi, P. Umari and F. De Angelis, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 27158–27164 RSC .
Y. Ogomi, A. Morita, S. Tsukamoto, T. Saitho, N. Fujikawa, Q. Shen, T. Toyoda, K. Yoshino, S. S. Pandey, T. Ma and S. Hayase, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1004–1011 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Weller, O. J. Weber, P. F. Henry, A. M. Di Pumpo and T. C. Hansen, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 4180–4183 RSC .
D. Weber, Z. Naturforsch. B, 1978, 33, 1443 Search PubMed .
C. R. Kagan, D. B. Mitzi and C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, Science, 1999, 286, 945–947 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, H. Zhou, Z. Jiang, X. Wang, S. Yuan, J. Lan, Y. Fu, X. Zhang, W. Zheng, X. Wang, X. Zhu, L. Liao, G. Xu, S. Jin and A. Pan, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 9869–9876 CrossRef CAS .
C. Huo, X. Liu, X. Song, Z. Wang and H. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4785–4792 CrossRef CAS .
C. Eames, J. M. Frost, P. R. Barnes, B. C. O'Regan, A. Walsh and M. S. Islam, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7497 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, Y. Fang, T. Li, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, Y. Deng, Y. Yuan, H. Wei, M. Wang, A. Gruverman, J. Shield and J. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1752–1759 RSC .
X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, J. Yin, A. Bruno and C. Soci, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7383 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wu, A. Bera, C. Ma, Y. Du, Y. Yang, L. Li and T. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 22476–22481 RSC .
H.-H. Fang, R. Raissa, M. Abdu-Aguye, S. Adjokatse, G. R. Blake, J. Even and M. A. Loi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2378–2385 CrossRef CAS .
F. Maddalena, X. Y. Chin, D. Cortecchia, A. Bruno and C. Soci, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 37316–37325 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, W. Mao, U. Bach, B. Jia and X. Wen, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1900273 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Senanayak, M. Abdi-Jalebi, V. S. Kamboj, R. Carey, R. Shivanna, T. Tian, G. Schweicher, J. Wang, N. Giesbrecht, D. Di Nuzzo, H. E. Beere, P. Docampo, D. A. Ritchie, D. Fairen-Jimenez, R. H. Friend and H. Sirringhaus, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz4948 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Li, L. Tang, Y. Peng, Y. Wu, Y. Du, L. Huang, J. Ni, H. Cai and J. Zhang, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2017, 214, 1700170 CrossRef .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Bobbert, A. Sharma, S. G. J. Mathijssen, M. Kemerink and D. M. de Leeuw, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1146–1158 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Z. Zhou, Y. Peng, L. Tang, N. Guo and Y. Sun, Org. Electron., 2020, 105740,  DOI:10.1016/j.orgel.2020.105740 .
L. Tang, Y. Peng, Z. Zhou, Y. Wu, J. Xu, J. Li, Y. Du, L. Huang, H. Cai, J. Ni and J. Zhang, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2018, 124, 624 CrossRef .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. R. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Science, 2016, 354, 206 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 RSC .
P. F. Ndione, Z. Li and K. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 7775–7782 RSC .
J. M. Frost, K. T. Butler, F. Brivio, C. H. Hendon, M. van Schilfgaarde and A. Walsh, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2584–2590 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, J. Li, W. Li, N. Lin, L. Wang and J. Qiao, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 800–805 RSC .
A. Binek, F. C. Hanusch, P. Docampo and T. Bein, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1249–1253 CrossRef CAS .
U. Aschauer, R. Pfenninger, S. M. Selbach, T. Grande and N. A. Spaldin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 88, 054111 CrossRef .
M. I. Saidaminov, J. Kim, A. Jain, R. Quintero-Bermudez, H. Tan, G. Long, F. Tan, A. Johnston, Y. Zhao, O. Voznyy and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 648–654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, M. F. Aygüler, M. L. Petrus, T. Bein and P. Docampo, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 2212–2218 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, D. Li, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Li, C.-Y. Chen, A. Yin, Z. Zhao, Z. Lin, H. Wu, Q. He, M. Ding, Y. Liu, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500613 CrossRef .
D. Shi, V. Adinolfi, R. Comin, M. Yuan, E. Alarousu, A. Buin, Y. Chen, S. Hoogland, A. Rothenberger, K. Katsiev, Y. Losovyj, X. Zhang, P. A. Dowben, O. F. Mohammed, E. H. Sargent and O. M. Bakr, Science, 2015, 347, 519 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, L. Xie, X. Song, Z. Wang, C. Huo, Y. Xiong, Z. Cheng, Y. Wang, S. Zhang, X. Chen and H. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 12632–12637 RSC .
X. Song, X. Liu, D. Yu, C. Huo, J. Ji, X. Li, S. Zhang, Y. Zou, G. Zhu, Y. Wang, M. Wu, A. Xie and H. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 2801–2809 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Y. Chu and J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 25660–25666 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, L. Yan and W. You, Adv. Mater., 2018, e1802041,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201802041 .
S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, Acta Crystallogr., 1957, 10, 538–539 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Ruddlesden and P. Popper, Acta Crystallogr., 1958, 11, 54–55 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saparov and D. B. Mitzi, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 4558–4596 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lin, Y. Bai, Y. Fang, Q. Wang, Y. Deng and J. Huang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1571–1572 CrossRef CAS .
L. N. Quan, M. Yuan, R. Comin, O. Voznyy, E. M. Beauregard, S. Hoogland, A. Buin, A. R. Kirmani, K. Zhao, A. Amassian, D. H. Kim and E. H. Sargent, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2649–2655 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tsai, W. Nie, J. C. Blancon, C. C. Stoumpos, R. Asadpour, B. Harutyunyan, A. J. Neukirch, R. Verduzco, J. J. Crochet, S. Tretiak, L. Pedesseau, J. Even, M. A. Alam, G. Gupta, J. Lou, P. M. Ajayan, M. J. Bedzyk and M. G. Kanatzidis, Nature, 2016, 536, 312–316 CrossRef CAS .
I. E. Rauda, R. Senter and S. H. Tolbert, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1423–1427 RSC .
T. Matsushima, S. Hwang, S. Terakawa, T. Fujihara, A. S. D. Sandanayaka, C. Qin and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Express, 2017, 10, 024103 CrossRef .
T. Matsushima, K. Fujita and T. Tsutsui, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 43, L1199–L1201 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Stoumpos, D. H. Cao, D. J. Clark, J. Young, J. M. Rondinelli, J. I. Jang, J. T. Hupp and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 2852–2867 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, X. Zhang, G. Wu, H. Li and H. Chen, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1600539 CrossRef .
D. B. Mitzi, C. D. Dimitrakopoulos, J. Rosner, D. R. Medeiros, Z. Xu and C. Noyan, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1772–1776 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsushima, T. Yasuda, K. Fujita and C. Adachi, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 120, 233301 CrossRef .

          T. Matsushima, T. Yasuda, K. Fujita and T. Tsutsui, Organic–inorganic field effect transistor with SnI-based perovskite channel layer using vapor phase deposition technique, SPIE,  2003 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, S. Jiang, B. Zhang, E.-Y. Shin, Y.-Y. Noh, Y. Xu, Y. Shi and Y. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 1466–1472 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, H. Zhang, L. Zhu, L. Qin, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Lou, Y. Hou and F. Teng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 4004–4012 RSC .
D. B. Mitzi, C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and L. L. Kosbar, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 3728–3740 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsushima, M. R. Leyden, T. Fujihara, C. Qin, A. S. D. Sandanayaka and C. Adachi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 115, 120601 CrossRef .
F. Liu, L. Wang, J. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Chen, S. Zhang, H. Sun, J. Liu, G. Wang, Y. Hu and C. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, n/a, 2005662 CrossRef .
C. R. Kagan, T. L. Breen and L. L. Kosbar, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79, 3536–3538 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Milot, R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, A. A. Haghighirad, J. Martinez Hardigree, L. Miranda, H. J. Snaith, M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7001–7007 CrossRef CAS .
M.-K. Li, T.-P. Chen, Y.-F. Lin, C. M. Raghavan, W.-L. Chen, S.-H. Yang, R. Sankar, C.-W. Luo, Y.-M. Chang and C.-W. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1803763 CrossRef .
M. Sendner, P. K. Nayak, D. A. Egger, S. Beck, C. Müller, B. Epding, W. Kowalsky, L. Kronik, H. J. Snaith, A. Pucci and R. Lovrinčić, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 613–620 RSC .
T. M. Brenner, D. A. Egger, A. M. Rappe, L. Kronik, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4754–4757 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Y. Yuan, Y. Shao, Q. Wang, Q. Dong, C. Bi, P. Sharma, A. Gruverman and J. Huang, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 193–198 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Bisri, S. Shimizu, M. Nakano and Y. Iwasa, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607054 CrossRef .
M. Chen, X. Shan, T. Geske, J. Li and Z. Yu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 6312–6318 CrossRef CAS .
A. Daus, C. Roldan-Carmona, K. Domanski, S. Knobelspies, G. Cantarella, C. Vogt, M. Gratzel, M. K. Nazeeruddin and G. Troster, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1707412 CrossRef .
K. Hong, J. M. Kim, K. G. Cho, W.-S. Choi, J. Y. Park, J. Ham, J.-L. Lee and K. H. Lee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 10552–10558 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z. K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808843 CrossRef CAS .
B. Philippe, B.-W. Park, R. Lindblad, J. Oscarsson, S. Ahmadi, E. M. J. Johansson and H. Rensmo, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1720–1731 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Kwon, J. Lim, H.-J. Yun, Y.-H. Kim and T. Park, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1454–1460 RSC .
D. Bryant, N. Aristidou, S. Pont, I. Sanchez-Molina, T. Chotchunangatchaval, S. Wheeler, J. R. Durrant and S. A. Haque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1655–1660 RSC .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D'Haen, L. D'Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca, E. Mosconi, F. D. Angelis and H.-G. Boyen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
L. Liu, S. Huang, Y. Lu, P. Liu, Y. Zhao, C. Shi, S. Zhang, J. Wu, H. Zhong, M. Sui, H. Zhou, H. Jin, Y. Li and Q. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800544 CrossRef .
Z. Shi, J. Guo, Y. Chen, Q. Li, Y. Pan, H. Zhang, Y. Xia and W. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605005 CrossRef .
X. Li, F. Zhang, H. He, J. J. Berry, K. Zhu and T. Xu, Nature, 2020, 578, 555–558 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Yu Liu
	Yu Liu received his BE degree in electronic science and technology from Hunan University, and he is currently a PhD candidate in Hunan University. His present research interests include charge transport physics in organic and perovskite semiconductors.

Ping-An Chen
	Ping-An Chen received his MS degree in electronic science and technology from Hunan University, and he is currently a PhD candidate in Hunan University. His research focuses on fundamental studies and development of organic/perovskite thermoelectric materials and devices.

Yuanyuan Hu
	Yuanyuan Hu is a professor at Hunan University in China. He received his BS from Nanjing University in 2008 and his PhD from the University of Cambridge in 2015. He was a postdoctoral fellow at the University of California, Santa Barbara between 2015 and 2017. His current research is on fabrication, characterization and mechanism studies of electronic and photonic devices based on solution-processable semiconductors.

 	Fig. 1  Four types of common device structures of FETs: (a) bottom-gate bottom-contact (BGBC), (b) bottom-gate top-contact (BGTC), (c) top-gate bottom-contact (TGBC), and (d) top-gate top-contact (TGTC). Current–voltage characteristics of a field-effect transistor: (e) output characteristics indicating the linear regime (|VG − VT| ≫ |VD|) and saturation regime (|VG − VT| < |VD|), (f) transfer characteristics in the linear regime highlighting the subthreshold regime between turn-on voltage (Von) and VT, and (g) transfer characteristics in the saturation regime with forward and reverse sweeps.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
SS = dVG/d(logID)	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 2  The unit cells of the (a) cubic, (b) tetragonal, and (c) orthorhombic phases of MAPbI3.	 

 	Fig. 3  Transfer characteristics for the (a) p-type transport and (b) n-type transport of FETs based on MAPbI3−xClx. Reproduced from ref. 69 with permission from the Materials Research Society, copyright 2015. (c) Temperature dependence of field-effect electron and hole mobilities in BGBC light-emitting FET. Inset: Schematic of the BGBC light-emitting FET configuration. Adapted from ref. 85 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (d) Transfer characteristics of MAPbI3 FET measured at various temperatures between 150 and 250 K. Inset: Schematic of the BGTC FET structure. Reproduced with permission.33 (e) Spectra of a MAPbI3 light-emitting transistor driven in DC- and AC-modes at comparable voltages (DC: VD = 50 V, and VG = 100 V; AC: VD = 50 V, VG = ±100 V, and 10 kHz square wave). Inset: Schematic of pulse operated perovskite BGTC light-emitting transistor in AC-driven gate operation mode. Adapted from ref. 88 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (f) Transfer characteristics of MAPbI3 BGTC FET in the dark (black and red symbols) and under light illumination (blue and magenta symbols). Solid and dashed curves are measured during forward and backward sweepings, respectively. Adapted from ref. 38 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Transfer characteristics at 270 K for MAPbI3 FETs deposited from Pb(Ac)2-based precursors with different concentrations. Insets: Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of MAPbI3 films fabricated from 0.25 and 0.75 M precursors (scale bars, 200 nm). Adapted from ref. 22 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2017. (b) Average hole and electron mobilities as a function of solvent annealing time. (c) Atomic force microscopy (AFM) images of pristine film (top left) and solvent-annealed film (top right) (scale bars, 200 nm), as well as X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra of perovskite films at different stages of solvent annealing (bottom). Adapted from ref. 35 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2018. (d) Transfer characteristics measured at 100 K of TGBC FET fabricated with MAPbI3 perovskite films spin-coated with (red) and without (black) the antisolvent methods. Inset: Optical images of the devices. (e) Transfer characteristics of MAPbI3 n-type TGBC FET at 300 K with Lewis base treatment (ethyl acetate, methyl acetate, and diethyl ether), which also forms a positive azeotropic mixture with water, as well as with Lewis acid treatment (1,3,5-tribromobenzene). The boiling points of positive azeotropes are given. (f) Transfer characteristics of FAMAPbBr3 p-type TGBC FET at 300 K with Lewis base treatment (methyl acetate and diethyl ether) and Lewis acid treatment (1,3,5-tribromobenzene). Adapted from ref. 90 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Transfer characteristics at 100 K with forward and reverse sweeps for different source–drain contact modifications. Adapted from ref. 22 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2017. (b) Transfer characteristics of the perovskite FETs at 202 K on the three-polymer gate dielectric surfaces. Adapted from ref. 44 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (c) Comparison of the transfer characteristics of BGBC FETs based on mixed cation perovskite and MAPbI3. Inset: Schematic diagram of perovskite field-effect transistors fabricated using HfO2 as a gate dielectric layer. Adapted from ref. 40 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. Transfer characteristics in the (d) p-channel and (e) n-channel of triple cation ambipolar transistor. Inset: Schematic diagram of triple cation perovskite FET. Adapted from ref. 50 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (f) Transfer characteristics of TGBC FETs based on MAPbI3, FAMAPbI3, CsFAMAPbI3, and RbCsFAMAPbI3 at 300 K with forward and reverse scans. Adapted from ref. 90 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2020.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) XRD pattern of converted perovskite microplates on a glass substrate. (b) Bright-field optical microscopy image of perovskite microplate arrays, scale bar: 20 μm. (c) Transfer (VD = 10, 15, 20, and 25 V) characteristics of an FET based on a perovskite microplate crystal at 77 K. Adapted from ref. 105 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 2015. (d) The temperature-dependent field-effect electron mobilities of BGBC FETs based on MAPbI3 microplates with three different thicknesses; the arrows indicate the tetragonal-to-orthorhombic phase transition temperatures. Inset: Schematic of the MAPbI3 microplate BGBC FET. Adapted from ref. 49 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2016. (e) Schematic of the BGBC MAPbI3 microplate field-effect transistor with monolayer graphene as the contact. (f) The temperature-dependent transfer characteristics of the graphene-contacted field-effect transistor in (e) (the source–drain voltage is 10 V). Adapted from ref. 34 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Fluorescence microscopy images of MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbCl3 thin single crystals (which are excited with pulsed 450, 473, and 405 nm lasers, respectively), as well as corresponding XRD spectra. Scale bar: 100 μm. Insets: Optical images of MAPbI3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbCl3 thin single crystals. Scale bar: 200 μm. (b) Transfer characteristics of BGTC FETs based on MAPbCl3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbI3 single crystals. Inset: The schematic of the BGTC FET. (c) Transfer characteristics of BGBC FETs based on MAPbCl3, MAPbBr3, and MAPbI3 single crystals with forward and reverse sweeps. Inset: The schematic of the BGBC FET. Adapted from ref. 46 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (d) Transfer characteristics at 80 K of the MAPbBr3 single-crystal devices with bare Au, PEDOT:PSS and PFBT-modified Au as source/drain electrodes (inset: FET device configuration, and molecular structures of PEDOT:PSS and PFBT). Adapted from ref. 47 with permission from the Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Transfer characteristic of CsPbBr3 microplate FETs at RT. Inset: Schematic of the TGBC FET. Adapted from ref. 81 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (b) Transfer characteristics of the CsPbBr3 crystal FETs at RT (top) and 237 K (bottom). Adapted from ref. 82 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. (c) Transfer characteristics of CsPbBr3 crystals BGBC FETs at 150 K. Inset: Schematic diagram for the growth of CsPbBr3 between silver electrodes. Adapted from ref. 48 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020. (d) The saturation transfer characteristics of CsPbBr3 microplate FET in the n-type and p-type regions at RT. White LED light intensity: 50 mW cm−2. Adapted from ref. 68 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2019. (e) Transfer characteristics of vertical transistors. Inset: Schematic illustration of a CsPbBr3-based vertical FET. (f) Transfer characteristics of planar transistors. Inset: Schematic illustration of a CsPbBr3-based planar FET. Adapted from ref. 107 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2020.	 



MAPbI3−xClx	Thin film	TGBC	Cytop	Au	1	1.3	102	102	RT	
69

MAPbI3	Thin film	BGBC	SiO2	Ni/Au	7.2 × 10−2	2.1 × 10−2	103–104	103–104	78	
85

MAPbI3	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Al	7.5 × 10−3	
	3 × 103	
	150	
33

MAPbI3	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	0.11	0.025	102	50	78	
88

MAPbI3−xClx	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	1.17 × 10−4	1.62 × 10−4	103	2 × 103	RT	
38

MAPbI3−xClx	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	10 ± 2.5	10 ± 3.4	∼103	103	RT	
35

MAPbI3−xClx	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	7.3 × 10−3	0.01	104	1.3 × 104	RT	
91

MAPbI3	Thin film	BGBC	AlOx	IZO	0.2	
	104	
	RT	
52

MAPbI3	Thin film	TGBC	Cytop	Cr/Au	0.1–3	
	104	
	RT	
22

MAPbI3	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	MoO3/Au	
	7.47	
	5 × 104	RT	
95

MAPbI3	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	MoO3/Au	
	3.88	
	104	RT	
45

MAPbI3	Thin film	BGTC	Al2O3	MoO3/Au	
	21.41	
	104	RT	
94

MAPbI3	Thin film	BGTC	PPhMA	
	0.4	
	5.1 × 105	
	202	
44

MAPbI3−xClx	Thin film	BGTC	Cytop	Au	0.04	
	4 × 101	
	RT	
29

MAPbI3	Thin film	BGBC	AlOx	IZO	0.05	
	103	
	RT	
36

FA0.5MA0.25Cs0.25PbI3	Thin film	BGBC	SiO2	Cr/Au	
	10−3	
	104	RT	
40

Cs0.15(MA0.17FA0.83)0.85Pb(Br0.17I0.83)3	Thin film	TGBC	PMMA	Au	1.97 ± 0.83	1.13 ± 0.52	∼104	∼104	RT	
50

Rb0.05Cs0.05FA0.15MA0.75PbI3	Thin film	TGBC	Cytop	Cr/Au	1.2	
	104	
	RT	
90

MAPbI3	Microplate	BGBC	SiO2	Au	2.5	
	7 × 104	
	77	
105

MAPbI3	Microplate	BGBC	SiO2	Cr/Au	0.5	
	104	
	77	
49

MAPbI3	Microplate	BGBC	SiO2	Graphene/Au	4	
	105	
	77	
34

MAPbI3	Microplate	BGBC	SiO2	Graphene/Au	5.6	
	104	
	77	
41

MAPbCl3	Single crystal	BGTC	SiO2	Au	1.3 ± 0.5	1.8 ± 0.6	∼104	∼2.4 × 104	RT	
46

MAPbBr3	Single crystal	BGTC	SiO2	Au	1.1 ± 0.4	1.9 ± 0.7	∼103	∼4.8 × 103	RT	
46

MAPbI3	Single crystal	BGTC	SiO2	Au	0.7 ± 0.3	1.5 ± 0.7	∼103	∼6.7 × 103	RT	
46

MAPbCl3	Single crystal	BGBC	SiO2	Au	0.27 ± 0.04	2.1 ± 0.9	∼103	∼1.45 × 105	RT	
46

MAPbBr3	Single crystal	BGBC	SiO2	Au	0.19 ± 0.05	2.3 ± 0.7	∼103	∼3.37 × 105	RT	
46

MAPbI3	Single crystal	BGBC	SiO2	Au	1.12 ± 0.12	2.9 ± 1.0	∼103	∼8.78 × 104	RT	
46

MAPbBr3	Single crystal	BGBC	SiO2	Cr/Au	
	15	
	106	80	
47

CsPbBr3	Microplate	TGBC	PMMA	ITO	
	0.2–1.0a	
	104–106a	RT	
81

CsPbBr3	Microplate	BGTC	SiO2	Au	0.19	0.02	103	102	RT	
68

CsPbBr3	Single crystal	BGBC	SiO2	Au	
	0.32a	
	6.7 × 103a	RT	
82

CsPbBr3	Single crystal	BGBC	SiO2	Ag	
	0.5–2.3a	
	105–106a	150	
48


 	Fig. 9  (a) Crystal structures of 2D layer-structured MHP analogues (BA)2(MA)n−1PbnI3n+1 (n = 1, 2, and 3) derived from a 3D parent perovskite MAPbI3 (n → ∞) along the 〈100〉 direction. Adapted from ref. 121 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic of a BGBC FET structure having a layered (PEA)2SnI4 as the semiconducting channel. (c) Transfer characteristics of (PEA)2SnI4 BGBC FET shown in (b). Adapted from ref. 80 with permission from the AAAS, copyright 1999. (d) Transfer characteristics of a (PEA)2SnI4 FET in the dark (VD = −40 V) processed by spin-coating. Adapted from ref. 122 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2017. (e) SEM images of (PEA)2SnI4 films fabricated with different conditions. Scale bar: 1 μm. (f) Transfer characteristics of FETs fabricated using the initial (top) and optimized (bottom) (PEA)2SnI4 films shown in (e). Adapted from ref. 51 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Transfer characteristics of a p-type (PEA)2SnI4 TGTC FET. Inset: Schematic of corresponding TGTC FET with MoOx layers. Adapted from ref. 43 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2016. (b) Transfer characteristics of an n-type (PEA)2SnI4 TGTC FET. Inset: The schematic of corresponding TGTC FET with C60 layers. Adapted from ref. 39 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2016. (c) Transfer characteristics of (PEA)2SnI4 FET. The inset demonstrates the device configuration. Adapted from ref. 127 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Transfer characteristics of (4-FPEA)2SnI4 BGBC FETs. Inset: Chemical structure of 4-FPEA. Adapted from ref. 128 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2001. (b) Transfer characteristics of BGTC FETs based on (PEA)2SnI4. Inset: Chemical structure of PEA. (c) Transfer characteristics of BGTC FETs based on (4Tm)2SnI4. Inset: Chemical structure of 4Tm. Adapted from ref. 42 with permission from the American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic architecture of (PEA)2SnI4 BGBC FET. (b) Optical microscopy images of the as-grown and exfoliated (PEA)2SnI4 crystals. (c) Transfer and output characteristics of an exfoliated (PEA)2SnI4 crystal BGBC FET. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from AIP Publishing, copyright 2019. (d) Schematic diagram of a BGTC 2D MHP FET based on exfoliated crystals, together with the molecular structure of (C4H9NH3)2(CH3NH3) Pb2I7. (e) Transfer characteristics of devices shown in (d) with Au, Ag, and Ca metal contacts. Adapted from ref. 130 with permission from Wiley-VCH, copyright 2020.	 



(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGBC	SiO2	Pd	
	0.62	104	RT	
80

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGBC	SiO2	Pd	
	0.5	105	RT	
131

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGBC	SiO2	Au	
	2.6	106	RT	
123

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	
	0.78	4.2 × 105	RT	
120

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	
	0.78 ± 0.24	(4.4 ± 3.5) × 105	RT	
124

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	
	0.28	105–106	RT	
125

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	
	0.76–1.2	>103	RT	
122

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	
	7.9 ± 2.3	(1.0 ± 2.7) × 107	RT	
51

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	TGTC	Cytop	MoOx/Au	
	12 ± 1	(1.9 ± 2.1) × 106	RT	
43

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	TGTC	Cytop	C60/Al	1.5 ± 0.3	
	(2.4 ± 6.4) × 104	RT	
39

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	TGTC	Cytop	MoOx/Au	
	22	106–108	RT	
119

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	TGTC	Cytop	C60/Al	3.8	
	104–106	RT	
119

(PEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGTC	PVA/CL-PVP	Au	
	0.30 ± 0.07	∼103	RT	
127

(4-FPEA)2SnI4	Thin film	BGBC	SiO2	Cr/Pd	
	0.11–0.56	∼105	RT	
128

(4Tm)2SnI4	Thin film	BGTC	SiO2	Au	
	1.78	105–106	RT	
42

(PEA)2SnI4	Exfoliated crystal	BGBC	SiO2	Au/MoOx	
	∼40	3.6 × 106	RT	
129

(BA)2(MA)Pb2I7	Exfoliated crystal	BGTC	SiO2	Ca	0.129 ± 0.048a	
	106–107a	150	
130


 	Fig. 13  The development of electron and hole mobilities of 3D and 2D MHP FETs extracted at RT. The mobility values are the highest values reported in the references.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
