Recent advances in carbon quantum dot (CQD)-based two dimensional materials for photocatalytic applications  - Catalysis Science & Technology (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CY01452G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CY01452G
(Minireview)
Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 5882-5905Recent advances in carbon quantum dot (CQD)-based two dimensional materials for photocatalytic applications

        
          
            Sue Jiun 
            Phang
          
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Lling-Lling 
            Tan
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Engineering and Physical Sciences, Heriot-Watt University Malaysia, Jalan Venna P5/2, Precinct 5, 62200 Putrajaya, Malaysia
bMultidisciplinary Platform of Advanced Engineering, Chemical Engineering Discipline, School of Engineering, Monash University, Jalan Lagoon Selatan, Bandar Sunway 47500, Selangor, Malaysia. E-mail: tan.llinglling@monash.edu
Received 
      22nd July 2019
    , Accepted 12th September 2019First published on 19th September 2019AbstractCQDs are a new class of carbon material with ultrafine sizes and readily tunable optical properties, which make them extremely intriguing. CQDs have gained widespread attention due to their potential and versatility, and they can be applied in many different fields. One of their many applications is photocatalysis, which has garnered incessant research interest in recent years. State-of-the-art technology utilizes sustainable solar energy, which is both clean and virtually inexhaustible. To date, the photocatalytic performance of CQDs in their raw form is still far from ideal. Nevertheless, they can be substantially enhanced through several modification techniques. In this review, strategies to improve the photocatalytic performance of CQDs, such as size-tuning, surface passivation and functionalization, and elemental doping, are extensively discussed. The review also covers the latest advances in the use of CQDs in photocatalysis to address both environmental and energy-related issues. Particular emphasis is placed on the formation of 0D/2D heterojunction nanocomposites with several 2D materials, such as graphene, graphitic carbon nitride, metal oxides and metallates, metal oxyhalides, transition metal oxides and chalcogenides. The hybridization routes to binary nanocomposites, and their photocatalytic application to carbon dioxide reduction, hydrogen production, and dye and pollutant degradation, are thoroughly reviewed in this paper.Sue Jiun PhangSue Jiun Phang received her MEng degree in Chemical Engineering with Oil and Gas Technology from the School of Engineering and Physical Science (EPS), Heriot-Watt University, in 2018. She is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at Heriot-Watt University Malaysia under the supervision of Dr. Tan Lling-Lling. Her research work focuses on the design and development of carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and two-dimensional hybrid nanocomposites for photocatalytic applications in energy and environmental-related fields.Lling-Lling TanLling-Lling Tan received her Ph.D. degree in Chemical Engineering from the School of Engineering, Monash University, in 2015. She is currently an assistant professor at the School of Engineering and Physical Sciences (EPS) at Heriot-Watt University Malaysia. She is an early career researcher who is active in the areas of advanced materials, nanotechnology and catalysis. Her research interests include the design and development of two-dimensional hybrid nanocomposites (e.g., graphene- and graphitic carbon nitride-based materials) for energy and environmental-related applications. In 2017, she received the Young Researcher Award from IChemE Malaysia, in recognition of her work in the field of photocatalysis.
1.0 Introduction
Carbon quantum dots (CQDs) are a novel class of carbon material composed of quasi-spherical and discrete nanoparticles with ultrafine sizes below 10 nm.2,3 In recent years, CQDs have gradually attracted the interest of many researchers due to their advantages, including their low cost,1 low toxicity and abundance in nature.4,5 On top of those, CQDs also possess qualities that are superior in terms of their biocompatibility, high solubility in aqueous solution, strong luminescence, ease of modification and functionalization, and their high resistance to photo-bleaching and chemical inertness.4,6–9 As a result of the aforementioned properties of CQDs, there have been significant advances in their synthesis methods and practical applications. Several techniques have been proposed for the preparation of CQDs that can be classified using two categories: “top-down” and “bottom-up” approaches. In a top-down approach, CQDs are synthesized via the breakdown of carbonaceous materials, such as graphene, carbon nanotubes and carbon fibers, whereas a bottom-up approach involves the polymerization of different aromatic compounds, including citric acid, amino acids, carbohydrates etc.10,11 These techniques include the use of chemical ablation, electrochemical carbonization, laser ablation, microwave irradiation and hydrothermal or solvothermal treatment.5 To date, the applications of CQDs have been expanded to various industries, such as healthcare, optoelectronics, the environment and renewable energy.5
Photocatalysis has gained much attention, as it has promising potential to be applied industrially to wastewater treatment, air pollution control, the production of hydrogen fuel and the reduction of carbon dioxide.12–18 Semiconductor-based or heterogeneous photocatalysis is defined as a “reaction assisted by photons in the presence of a semiconductor photocatalyst”.19 This practice not only addresses the issue of global energy scarcity but also helps to alleviate environmental pressure through eliminating greenhouse gases. The utilization of sunlight, a source of energy that is green and abundant,20 ensures that the environment is not negatively impacted, while being a viable energy source in the long term. CQDs play an influential role in photocatalysis as they exhibit admirable capabilities to expand the response range towards the solar spectrum, enhancing the adsorption capacities of composite systems and separating photogenerated electron–hole pairs. Moreover, CQDs have been reported to act as photoelectron mediators to suppress the recombination of photoinduced charge carriers.2,21,22
In order to further improve the performance and efficiency of CQDs in photocatalysis, the synthesis of CQD-based nanocomposites has been extensively researched. Novel nanohybrids are composed of CQDs and nanoparticle cores, such as zinc oxide, silica and titania.23–25 The produced nanohybrids result in the integration of the optical properties of the CQDs with the magnetic or mechanical properties of the nanoparticle cores.5 Recently, the development of two-dimensional (2D) materials has been prompted via the successful mechanical exfoliation of graphene from graphite.26 The advantages of the application of 2D materials to photocatalysis have been focused on due to their superior properties, which are primarily attributed to structural features. They are mainly classified into five categories, namely graphene; graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4); metal oxides and metallates; metal oxyhalides; and transition metal oxides and chalcogenides.27 2D nanomaterials possess excellent physio-chemical properties, such as high dispersibility in both aqueous and non-aqueous solutions, facile ease of functionalization and/or doping, and novel luminescence properties.28–30 These superior properties have broadened their field of application to include bioimaging,31–33 cancer therapy,34,35 sensing,36–38 supercapacitors,39,40 and batteries.41,42 The implantation of CQDs into 2D materials, producing 0D/2D heterojunction nanocomposites, resulted in enhanced photocatalytic performance due to the synergistic effects of strong interfacial coupling effects, wider visible light absorbance, abundant surface-confined reactive sites, and reduced recombination rates of charge carriers.43
This review will present up-to-date research findings along with comprehensive and critical insights into the trending topics of pristine CQDs and CQD-based 2D nanomaterial composites. This paper will be divided into several parts. The fundamental concepts of photocatalysis are briefly presented prior to the introduction of CQDs in terms of their unique optical properties for employment in photocatalysis. The subsequent section focuses on methods to enhance the photocatalytic performance of CQDs, including size tuning, surface functionalization and passivation, and elemental doping, followed by detailed discussion of the doping of CQDs onto different types of 2D materials, such as graphene, g-C3N4, metal oxides and metallates, metal oxyhalides, transition metal oxides and chalcogenides. Finally, the current applications of CQD-based 2D materials in numerous fields as photocatalysts will also be discussed. From our perspective, this novel review, with an emphasis on the synthesis, modification and photocatalytic applications of CQD-based 2D materials, will generate more research ideas and inspiration, fully utilizing the advantages of 2D nanomaterials as superior photocatalysts in comparison to other morphologies. Aside from pure 2D nanosheets, this work also highlights that hybridizing different 2D materials to form homojunction or heterojunction nanocomposites can carry great potential for further optimizing the photocatalytic efficiencies of 2D nanomaterials, as this approach takes advantage of the differences in the levels of the valence and conduction bands of different materials, prompting researchers to explore 2D nanosheets from a new direction that is slightly diverted from conventional strategies. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no comprehensive reviews of CQD-doped 2D nanocomposites published in the literature to date. The advances in 0D CQD-based 2D nanomaterials have been significant and a review of the related synthesis strategies, mechanisms and photocatalytic effects is therefore timely. As shown in Fig. 1(A) and (B), using data extracted from the Web of Science, the trend for publications and citations involving the use of CQDs in photocatalysis has been increasing noticeably in recent years.
 Fig. 1  (A) The number of publications relating to CQDs for photocatalytic applications from 2009–2018. (B) The number of citations relating to CQDs for photocatalytic applications from 2009–2018. 
2.0 Fundamental concepts of photocatalysis
Photocatalysis is regarded as a photoinduced redox process based on the band structures and ability to transport charge carriers of semiconductor catalysts.44 Semiconductor photocatalysis involves three fundamental steps: (1) light absorption and the generation of electron–hole pairs; (2) the separation and transfer of charger carriers; and (3) the occurrence of oxidation and reduction reactions at the surface of the photocatalyst.45 A schematic representation of the photocatalysis process is depicted in Fig. 2(A).
 Fig. 2  (A) A schematic representation of the photocatalysis mechanism of semiconductors. (B) The band structures of common 2D semiconductors. 
The process is initiated by the absorption of photons with energies equal to or greater than the band gap (Eg) by the semiconductor (photocatalyst/photosensitizer). Electrons (e−) in the semiconductor are excited by the photonic energy and are promoted from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB). At the same time, holes (h+) are generated in the VB. The photoinduced electrons and holes in the CB and VB, respectively, migrate towards the surface of the semiconductor. The recombination of electrons and holes (volume recombination) then simultaneously takes place with the generation of an electrostatic force of interaction, producing photons or heat. Surface recombination may also occur due to the number of active surface states in the semiconductor.45 The electrons at the surface initiate reduction reactions, forming superoxide radicals (˙O2−) with a reductive potential of between +0.5 and −1.5 V vs. NHE, while the holes initiate oxidation reactions and produce hydroxyl radicals (˙OH) with an oxidative potential between +1.0 and +3.5 V vs. NHE.45 The band structures of typical 2D semiconductors are presented in Fig. 2(B).
For the design of highly efficient photocatalysts, the band gap energy of the particular semiconductor is of utmost importance. The entire solar spectrum is composed of approximately 6% ultraviolet (UV) light, 42% visible light and 52% near-infrared (NIR) light.46 The energy of the visible spectrum ranges from 2.43 eV to 3.2 eV and the band gap energy of a suitable semiconductor photocatalyst must be below these values. Besides that, the VB must be more positive than the oxidation potential while the CB must be more negative than the reduction potential in terms of the energy levels. The intrinsic generation and separation of the holes and electrons being transferred towards the surface of the semiconductor through diffusion, in order for redox reactions to take place, also have an influential role on the photocatalytic performance. In addition, the presence of surface states at the surface of the photocatalyst is important for trapping the charge carriers and reducing their recombination, which also improves the lifetime of the photocatalyst. The ability of a photocatalyst to withstand photocorrosion and dissolution caused by the accumulation of photogenerated carriers and pollutants is essential to ensure its durability. To minimize these issues, direct contact between the photocatalyst and pollutants is discouraged through the introduction of a thin protective layer via surface passivation.47
Although there are several semiconductors, such as titanium oxide (TiO2), with wide band gaps that are ideal for use as photocatalysts, the drawback is that only high energy UV irradiation can be utilized, which is merely 6% of the total solar spectrum. Another issue to be addressed is the rapid recombination of charge carriers during migration towards the surface of the semiconductor prior to the occurrence of photocatalytic reactions. Therefore, the utilization of a wider range of the solar spectrum and the separation of charge carriers are highly desirable to achieve high efficiency photocatalysis for practical applications. Following the discovery of CQDs, their optical and structural properties were found to match the requirements mentioned above. CQDs act as an excellent electron mediator, with high electron conductivity and a huge capacity for electron storage; this is attributed to the sp2 graphitic carbon composition.10 This promotes electron transfer between heterojunction composites, suppressing electron–hole recombination for photocatalysis with enhanced performance. Other than that, CQDs also play a role as a photosensitizer through effectively extending the harvesting of solar light and absorbing more visible photons. This makes them an ideal substitute for the heavy metal compounds with high toxicity, such as cadmium, that are currently used as photosensitizers to harvest visible light.48 With their up-conversion photoluminescence properties, CQDs are considered as spectral converters, as they emit photons of shorter wavelength with the simultaneous absorption of multiple photons of longer wavelength. This shows that CQDs have the potential to be used in the design of photocatalysts that are responsive to the broad solar spectrum, including to NIR irradiation.
3.0 The unique properties of CQDs as photocatalysts
Zero-dimensional CQDs are regarded as valuable materials for photocatalytic applications due to their advantageous properties, including their relatively wide absorption of the solar spectrum, variable photoluminescence (PL) properties, efficient electron transfer abilities, and unique up-conversion photoluminescence (UCPL) properties. These properties can be readily tailored through tuning the sizes of the particles (due to quantum confinement effects), surface modification or doping.5
3.1 Optical absorption
CQDs exhibit prominent optical absorption in the UV region with a tail extending into the visible range (as shown in Fig. 3(A)).49 The presence of π–π* transitions in aromatic CC double bonds and n–π* transitions in CO bonds or other surface groups are responsible for the absorption shoulders in the absorption spectra.5,50 CQDs have been reported to serve as photosensitizers during their incorporation with wide band gap semiconductors, such as TiO2, extending the photoactive region from UV to visible light.2,51,52 Surface functional groups are also inferred to play key roles in absorption in the UV-visible region. A gradual red-shift in the absorption spectrum can be observed when CQDs are surface passivated with passivating agents such as PEG1500N and PPEI-EI.
 Fig. 3  (A) The absorption and luminescence spectra of PPEI-EI CQDs from 400–800 nm (inset: normalized spectral peaks at different wavelengths); adapted with permission;49 copyright: 2006, American Chemical Society. (B) PL spectra of CQDs at different excitation wavelengths of 300–460 nm; adapted with permission;53 copyright: 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.2 Photoluminescence (PL)
Another interesting optical feature of CQDs is their PL. In general, PL is regarded as the emission of light due to the absorption of photons and it is initiated via photoexcitation. Fig. 3(B) shows the different levels of PL emission upon photoexcitation at increasing wavelengths. However, there are still ongoing debates concerning the origin of the PL properties displayed by CQDs, which will be discussed below.
Several factors have been proposed in the literature, including size-dependent optical properties (quantum confinement effects),23 emissive surface energy traps,54 fluorophores with different degrees of π-conjugation55,56 and the recombination of surface confined electron–hole pairs.57 Regardless of the origin, the emission wavelength is correlated with the intensity of the excitation wavelength, λex. An investigation into the formation mechanism of CQDs synthesized via pyrolysis with citric acid (CA) and ethanolamine (EA) as precursors at various temperatures has been reported.58 Pyrolysis at 180 °C led to a carbogenic nanoparticle molecular precursor, with an intense PL spectrum and a high quantum yield, due to the dehydration of CA–EA. The formation of the carbogenic core was initiated at a higher temperature (230 °C), and the PL is attributed to both molecular fluorophores and the carbogenic core (as shown in Fig. 4(A)). CQDs that emit PL mainly and exclusively from the carbogenic cores are obtained at temperatures of 300 °C and 400 °C, respectively. Molecular fluorophores are predominantly formed at low temperatures, while the formation of carbogenic cores started at higher temperatures. This indicates that the PL behaviour of CQDs is highly sensitive to the conditions during their synthesis.
 Fig. 4  (A) A schematic representation of three photoactive species at different temperatures. As the temperature increases, the PL component associated with the carbogenic cores (black bars) increases at the expense of the component that arises from the fluorophores (blue bars); adapted with permission;58 copyright: 2012, American Chemical Society. (B) The UCPL properties of CQDs dispersed in water at excitation wavelengths from 805 nm to 1035 nm; adapted with permission;59 copyright: 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
It can also be observed that the effective quenching of the PL intensity of CQDs can be performed using either electron donors or acceptors. Sun et al. discovered that the PL emitted from CQDs can be effectively quenched with either electron acceptors, including 4-nitrotoluene and 2,4-dinitrotoluene, or electron donors, such as N,N-diethylaniline.60 This indicates that photoexcited CQDs are both excellent electron donors and acceptors.54 It was also verified that the surface doping of metals on CQDs results in high efficiency PL quenching through disrupting the excited state redox processes. The transfer of electrons in CQD-based nanocomposites, such as CQDs–GO (graphene oxide), without linker molecules was studied using steady-state and time-resolved spectroscopy.61 It was observed that CQDs–GO exhibited significant PL quenching due to ultrafast electron transfer from the CQDs to GO with a time constant of 400 fs. The photoinduced electron transfer (PET) properties of CQDs make them an advantageous material to be applied to catalysis and the conversion of solar energy.
It was initially assumed that the PL properties change according to the size of the CQDs. The emission spectra red-shifted as the size of the CQDs increased. According to Li et al., increasing sizes of CQDs emitted blue, green, yellow and orange light, respectively, while being excited at an identical λex wavelength.23 The CQDs were further processed via H2 plasma treatment for the removal of oxygen species on the surfaces, and no obvious further shifts in the emission spectra were observed. This further affirmed that the PL emission of CQDs depends on the size of the particles instead of surface confined emissive traps. Contrastingly, Bao et al. reported that the PL emission peak red-shifted as the CQDs became smaller in size at an identical λex wavelength.62 It was suggested that smaller CQDs have a higher tendency to be oxidized and have more oxygen-related species on their surfaces. Therefore, it is presumed that the shifts in the PL emission peaks could be attributed to emissive surface energy traps rather than variations in the sizes of the CQDs. Recently, CQDs with tunable sizes were prepared from single chain polymeric nanoparticles.63 A study of the PL showed that the optical emission wavelength of the CQDs was red-shifted as the size of the CQDs decreased, which contradicted the typical trends exhibited by CQDs synthesized from graphitized materials. Theoretical studies based on density functional theory were conducted in order to elucidate the PL mechanism of CQDs synthesized from different precursors. Fused aromatic rings and cyclo-1,4-naphthylenes were studied, as they result in CQDs with distinctive microstructures. The results indicated that the intensity of the PL energy from the CQDs was dependent on the size of the particles and the microstructure of the sp2 carbon core. For CQDs with graphitized cores, higher PL energy was exhibited at smaller core sizes, while CQDs with amorphous cores exhibited an inverse trend. Higher PL intensity was observed but no notable shifts in the emission were seen after surface reduction, which further verified that the quantum yields of CQDs are controlled by the surface chemistry.64
3.3 Up-converted photoluminescence (UCPL)
UCPL is another unique optical property of CQDs, as shown in Fig. 4(B). UCPL originates from the simultaneous absorption of multiple photons, whereby light of shorter wavelength is emitted compared to the excitation source (anti-Stokes type emission).5,10,65 On the other hand, there have been recent studies on UCPL showing the synthesis of five different types of CQDs with no observable UCPL behaviour.66 The authors reported that UCPL was derived from normal fluorescence (FL) (the emission of light that does not originate from up-conversion) excited by a leaking component from the second diffraction in the monochromator of the FL spectrometer. It was also suggested that UCPL could be effectively eliminated with the use of a compatible long-pass filter in the excitation pathway of the FL spectrophotometer. Therefore, extra precautions should be taken to ensure the complete removal of normal FL during UCPL measurements to accurately define the extent of UCPL in CQDs.
4.0 Modifications of CQDs
The enhancement of the photocatalytic performances of CQDs can be achieved from several different perspectives. The facile synthesis and modification of CQDs makes them popular, as their optical, electronic and physical properties are readily tunable. These modifications include size control for uniformity, surface functionalization and passivation, elemental doping and the creation of novel nanohybrids. Each of these modification techniques will be explained in further detail in the following sub-sections, including synthesis methods, experimental parameters and the effects of each modification.
4.1 Size tunability
The particle size of CQDs is a prominent feature due to quantum confinement effects, and optical properties and electronic properties are highly sensitive to changes in size. Therefore, it is important to develop facile synthesis routes with the easy control of size and monodispersity.
CQDs have been synthesized using reversed micelles as nanoreactors by several researchers, as this technique offers size tunability and monodispersity without the need for complicated separation processes.67 Kwon and Rhee synthesized water-in-oil reverse micelles, where microemulsions of glucose (water phase) were encapsulated by surfactant molecules (bis(2-ethylhexyl)sulfosuccinate sodium salt, AOT) in an immiscible oil phase (decane).68 It was observed that the size of the particles synthesized from the reversed micelles corresponds to the size of the micelles, which in turn depends on the water–surfactant (S) molar ratio. The diameter, Dm, of the micelles using AOT as a reactant is governed by eqn (1):69 Dm(nm) = 0.3w(1)where w = [H2O]/[S]. The average diameter of the particles is proportional to the w ratio. An increase in the water content also increased the polydispersity in terms of the sizes of the particles. However, the distribution of sizes is still relatively narrow compared to other routes.23 Besides that, this synthesis technique is also able to prevent the undesirable aggregation of reactants and products, resulting in high product yields and making mass production viable. In another report by Prikhozhdenko et al., an emulsion system with hexane as the nonpolar phase and either water or dextran sulfate aqueous solution (DS) as the polar phase was produced, with non-ionic polyoxyethylene (4) lauryl ether (Brij L4) acting as a surfactant.70 Four different samples were synthesized in this study, namely hexane:Brij L4; hexane:Brij L4:water; hexane:Brij L4:DS; and water:DS. In all cases, the particles synthesized using this method exhibited uniform size, with an average size of 5.0 ± 0.7 nm. This approach provides size control over particles, with the ability to limit material diffusion between separate micelles.
As reported by Tayyebi et al., the average size and thickness of carbon nanoparticles was reduced, while the production yield increased, when the temperature of water was brought above its critical point during synthesis.71 On top of that, the size distribution of particles was observed to be significantly narrower. In this experiment, water at different temperatures was used as a reducing agent to prepare reduced graphene oxide (rGO) sheets, which served as the precursors for the CQDs. Three different water temperatures, subcritical (250 °C), near-critical (370 °C) and supercritical (400 °C), were used to investigate the effects of temperature on the size and uniformity of the particles. Fig. 5 shows TEM images of CQDs obtained at the different water temperatures of 250 °C, 370 °C and 400 °C. The results show that the average sizes of carbon nanoparticles synthesized under subcritical, near-critical and supercritical water conditions are 55 ± 5, 5 ± 0.4 and 3 ± 0.2 nm, respectively. Supercritical water possesses unique properties, which include a low dielectric constant, large specific heat capacity and high pressure.72 The molecules of supercritical water involved in the breakage of chemical bonds also exhibit significantly lower activation energy. As a result of these properties, the as-synthesized products were found to have enhanced thermal conductivities under supercritical conditions.
 Fig. 5  TEM images of CQDs synthesized under (A) and (B) subcritical; (C) and (D) near critical; and (E) and (F) supercritical conditions; insets: the size distributions of the CQDs. Adapted with permission;71 copyright: 2018, Elsevier. 
In another experiment conducted by Atabaev, it was reported that the particle sizes of synthesized carbon nanoparticles could be tuned easily through manipulating the reaction time and precursor concentration.73 Dextrose (C6H12O6) with a concentration of no less than 99.5% was dissolved in deionized water and eventually placed in an autoclave reactor, which was maintained at 180 °C. The reaction time and precursor concentration were varied between 4–6 h and 0.075–0.125 g mL−1, respectively. Results indicated that the mean diameter of the carbon nanoparticles increased as the concentration was increased. It was also concluded that the relationship between the size of the particles and the reaction time is directly proportional. Therefore, the reported results indicate that particle sizes are easily tunable via adjusting the initial growth parameters.
To date, there have been no reports on the direct correlation between the sizes of CQDs and their photocatalytic activities. Nevertheless, it is fundamentally understood that smaller sizes of carbon nanoparticles offer larger surface area-to-volume ratios, ensuring the high availability of diverse surface-confined defect sites for photoinduced redox reactions to take place. On the other hand, quantum confinement effects (QCEs) in CQDs are associated with the optical and electronic properties of the nanoparticles. Smaller sizes of CQDs are known to exhibit higher PL efficiencies.74 It has also been verified through theoretical calculations that the size of the semiconductor affects the HOMO–LUMO gap, and the gap gradually decreases as the size of the graphene fragments increases.5
4.2 Surface functionalization
It has been verified that photocatalytic performance is heavily dependent on the surface chemistry of CQDs governing the selectivity and kinetics of redox reactions on the photocatalyst.75 Surface functionalization has been proven to be effective for the separation of charge carriers. Reductions in the recombination rates of electron–hole pairs are achieved through trapping them at various surface sites. Several techniques have been developed for surface modification and functionalization, including π–π interactions,76 sol–gel methods,77,78 coordination79 and covalent bonding.80,81
Acid treatment is one of the pioneering methods used for surface functionalization; it involves refluxing CQDs in a concentrated nitric acid solution. This step not only generates surface defects but it also introduces numerous oxygen functional groups, including carboxyl, carbonyl and hydroxyl groups.82 A one-step pyrolysis experiment was performed by Bourlinos et al., where different amines were mixed with citric acid, and functionalized nanoparticles were formed upon thermal decomposition.74 The mechanism behind this formation is that citric acid protonates the amine, and ammonium citrate salts are formed through ionic interactions (–NH3 + –COO–). The citrate unit serves as the carbon source, while the ammonium group provides the surface modifier upon thermal treatment. The functionalization is completed when the thermal dehydration of ammonium carboxylate moieties creates amide linkages (–NHCO–) and covalently binds the organic groups to the core. Polyamine-functionalized CQDs are more efficient compared to pristine CQDs in terms of FL quenching via an inner filter effect, which results in a higher quantum yield.83 Besides that, amino-functionalized CQDs exhibit high PL efficiency, and tunable and well-defined PL under a single UV excitation wavelength.84 In another covalent bonding example, Bo and co-workers functionalized CQDs with spiropyrans.85 The emission from these functionalized CQDs can be quenched after irradiation with UV light, with energy transfer between the CQDs and spiropyrans. This is an invertible process via irradiation with visible light. These functionalized CQDs are advantageous, with high photostability and excellent photo-reversibility. Wang et al. functionalized CQDs with polyethylene glycol diamine (PEG1500N) and obtained fluorescent derivatives.60 CQDs were refluxed with aqueous nitric acid for oxidation purposes prior to being treated with thionyl chloride. The acyl chloride derivatives were then reacted with PEG1500N to produce CQDs with modifiers attached to the surfaces. In another experiment, conducted by Gupta and colleagues, pristine CQDs were reacted with nitric acid, followed by acyl formation with dimethylformamide (DMF) as the catalyst. As a result, the acylation reaction of CQDs with either aniline or methylene blue (MB) resulted in covalent connections. In addition, Kwon et al. synthesized CQDs with a series of para-substituted anilines for PL control.86 The surface functionalization of para-substituted anilines resulted in CQDs with new energy levels, emitting long wavelength PL with narrow spectral width.
Huang et al. conducted the surface functionalization of CQDs using 1-ethyl-3-(3-dimethylaminopropyl)carbodiimide (EDC) chemistry. To react with the amine groups of CQDs passivated with PEG2000N, the carboxyl groups of chlorin e6, better known as talaporfin and used as a photosensitizer, were activated with EDC and N-hydroxysuccinimide (NHS) beforehand.87 Eventually, chlorin e6 was covalently grafted onto the CQDs through amide bonds. Other than that, quinoline-derivative functionalized CQDs were fabricated by Zhang and co-workers. The CQDs were synthesized with citric acid and branched polyethylenimine (BPEI) at 160 °C, and carbodiimide chemistry was applied to conjugate the quinoline derivatives onto the CQD surfaces covalently.88 BPEI-coated CQDs prepared at low temperatures (<200 °C) exhibited strong FL activity and a relatively high FL quantum yield of 42.5%.80 Wang and co-workers also prepared PEI-functionalized CQDs with GO sheets as the carbon source. In comparison to unfunctionalized CQDs, PEI-CQDs were found to be well dispersed, with an average size of ca. 1.66 nm, and possessed superior optical properties, including a high quantum yield and narrow spectral emission features.89 In addition, Yang et al. also employed EDC/NHS chemistry to attach nuclear localization signal (NLS) peptides onto the surfaces of amino-functionalized CQDs covalently.90 Prior to that, N-doped CQDs were produced at 60 °C over 8 hours through reacting citric acid, PEG2000 and ethylenediamine, followed by conjugation with simian virus 40 T-antigen NLS. The conjugation was carried out over a duration of 48 h at room temperature in complete darkness. In another experiment, conducted by Sonthanasamy, CQDs were synthesized from Dioscorea hispida starch and modified with PEG1500N and BPEI to increase their functional efficiency for biological applications.91 The size of the modified CQDs decreased to 3–20 nm from an original size of 6–25 nm. CQDs functionalized with PEG1500N and BPEI also exhibited competitive quantum yields of 15% and 12.6%, respectively. Besides its role as a surface functionalization agent, BPEI also served to provide electron transfer channels, facilitating the dissociation and transfer of excitons.92
Organosilane-functionalized CQDs were also synthesized by several groups of researchers. Wang's group synthesized highly luminescent CQDs through the pyrolysis of anhydrous citric acid and N-(β-aminoethyl)-ϒ-aminopropylmethyl-dimethoxysilane (AEAPMS) at 240 °C for 1 minute.78 The produced CQDs were ultra-small, with an average size of approximately 0.9 nm and a high quantum yield of about 47%. The CQDs were further processed in the presence of silane, which expanded the variety of possible reactions or functional groups that were available to attach to the surfaces of the CQDs covalently. Besides that, Huang and colleagues functionalized CQDs with (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane (APS) through one-step preparation, involving passivation and functionalization simultaneously.93 Glycerol served as the carbon precursor and it was reacted with APS at 200 °C for 30 minutes in a microwave, which resulted in the formation of CQDs with silicate and amine surface functional groups.
Zhu et al. prepared CQDs with citric acid and urea via a solvothermal route and further modified the CQDs with concentrated nitric acid (HNO3) and sodium borohydride (NaBH4) to obtain oxidized (o-CQDs) and reduced (r-CQDs) CQDs, respectively.94 Film was then constructed through incorporating the synthesized CQDs into polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP). From the emission spectra exhibited by the pristine CQDs, o-CQDs and r-CQDs, it was verified that blue, green and red light emission originated from three different emitting states: the intrinsic, CO-, and CN-related surface states, respectively. In another study, the Hu group reported the effects of the surface atoms N and Cl on CQDs with regards to their PL and photocatalytic activities.95 The oppositely charged surface groups resulted in the effective separation of electron–hole pairs, enhancing the photocatalytic performance of CQDs with chlorine and resulting in stronger PL from CQDs with nitrogen on the surface.
Different types of functionalization routes and precursors give rise to different functional groups on the surfaces of CQDs. Nevertheless, surface functionalization in general improves the performances of CQDs in terms of their functional efficiencies, with higher quantum yields, higher luminescence stabilities, better size control and distribution, and higher conductivities, comparatively reducing the loss of photons. In summary, surface functionalization can bring about several advantages in relation to the photocatalytic activities of CQDs.
4.3 Surface passivation
The surface passivation of CQDs is essential for prolonging their lifetimes through minimizing direct contact with pollutants and contaminants, thus reducing photocorrosion. CQDs with bare surfaces are not only directly exposed to contaminants but they also show low tolerance to pollutants due to the presence of carbon and oxygen, whose endogenous nature is to react with organic molecules, which may result in the disappearance of their optoelectronic properties.47 Therefore, surface passivation is necessary to create a thin protective film to ensure the stability and long lifespan of CQDs. On top of that, passivated CQDs are shielded from impurity adhesion and have improved fluorescent intensities. Several organic molecules and polymers are employed as surface passivation agents, such as PEG1500N and PPEI-EI, which do not contain visible or near-UV chromophores and are non-emissive at visible wavelengths.49 The bright luminescence observed is therefore solely attributed to the surface-passivated CQDs.
Sun et al. passivated CQDs with diamine-terminated oligomeric poly(ethylene glycol). In the reaction, PEG1500N was mixed with acid-treated carbon nanoparticles and the mixture was heated at a temperature of 120 °C for 72 h.49 The mixture was then cooled to room temperature and dispersed in water, followed by centrifugation for 30 minutes. This resulted in a colored and homogeneous supernatant of PEG1500N-passivated CQDs.55,82,96,97 CQDs were also passivated with PPEI-EI using the same methodology and reaction conditions.97 Over the years, several researchers have also applied the aforementioned treatment (120 °C for 72 h) as reported or with slight modifications in relation to the passivating agents, including the use of branched or linear PEI.80,98 As reported by Wu and colleagues, the fluorescence properties of carbon nanoparticles were significantly enhanced through utilizing hyper-branched polymers for surface passivation.99 NIR emission was increased dramatically compared with nanoparticles coated with linear PEG. It was observed that as the passivating agent became more extensively branched (pseudo-generation 2 to 4), the average radiant efficiency was notably amplified due to the increased surface area available for light passivation. In another experiment, conducted by Wang and co-workers, carbon dots were functionalized with hydroxyl groups via the monoesterification of ethylene glycol. The particles exhibited a narrow size distribution of 1–4 nm and enhanced PL intensity, which was ascribed to an increased number of electron donor hydroxyl groups.100
Besides forming a protective film over CQDs to enhance their stability, surface passivation can also be considered as a form of surface functionalization to some extent as these treatments also introduce functional groups such as amines. For example, the surface functionalization of CQDs with PEI and BPEI88,89 is analogous to the surface passivation of CQDs,80,98 with the introduction of amine groups on the surface. At this point, it can be clearly perceived that there are many similarities between the surface functionalization and passivation of CQDs in term of the reagents, methods, etc., making these two modification strategies virtually identical. However, the ultimate purposes of the surface functionalization and passivation of CQDs are distinctive. Surface functionalization is intended to introduce various functional groups for specific chemical/biological reactivity, or to generally improve the optoelectronic properties. On the other hand, the purpose of surface passivation is to construct a protective layer encapsulating the particles in order to minimize the impact of surface-attached defects and trap sites, and direct quenching by the surroundings, which are all responsible for enhancing fluorescence emission.101 The distinct differences between the processes of CQD surface functionalization and passivation are depicted in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  A schematic illustration of the surface functionalization and surface passivation of CQDs. 
4.4 Elemental doping
Efficient means of tuning the emission wavelengths of CQDs are highly desirable; several studies had been carried out on tuning the emission of phosphors through doping effects and they have shown promising outcomes.102 Generally, there are two types of doping processes: doping during synthesis and doping post-synthesis. CQDs are commonly doped with either metal or non-metal heteroatoms. Metal dopants include potassium, zinc, magnesium, etc.,103 while non-metal dopants comprise elements such as nitrogen (N), sulfur (S) and boron (B).104
For the non-metal doping of CQDs, Zhang et al. designed a facile route for synthesizing N-doped CQDs at relatively low reaction temperatures, employing carbon tetrachloride (CCl4) as a source of carbon and sodium amide (NaNH2) as a dechlorination agent and source of nitrogen.105 It was identified that the emission wavelength of the CQDs was readily adjustable from blue and cyan to yellow through nitrogen doping. Other than that, the as-synthesized N-CQDs were also reported to exhibit highly efficient up-conversion emission. The synthesis reaction was proposed to take place according to eqn (2). CCl4 + NaNH2 → N-CQDs + NaCl + N2 + NH3 + by-products(2)
The optimum temperature for the reaction is ca. 200 °C. To prove that the optical properties of the CQDs were heavily dependent on the amount of N-doping rather than the particle size, the quantity of NaNH2 was increased in particles with identical sizes, and the PL emission peak was found to blue-shift gradually. In another experiment, Qu and co-workers observed that N-CQDs exhibited blue-shifted PL compared to their N-free counterparts.104 This further attested the effects of N-doping on the optical properties of CQDs. In other reports, highly luminescent N-CQDs were also prepared using citric acid and ethylenediamine as sources of carbon and nitrogen, respectively.106,107
Other than N doping, the introduction of S atoms into CQDs has also been reported to increase their ability to donate electrons, which is ascribed to the electron-rich nature of S and its comparable electronegativity relative to C.108 It was reported by the Li group that doping with S atoms can tune the optoelectrical properties of synthesized CQDs effectively.109 S-CQDs emit a variety of colors with different excitation wavelengths ranging from blue (λEx = 300, 325 nm) to greenish yellow (λEx = 450, 475 nm) to red (λEx = 550, 575 nm). Therefore, the doping of N and/or S into CQDs is a viable strategy to manipulate their inherent features for specific applications. Wang et al. synthesized N,S-doped CQDs for use in organic solar cells as a ZnO modifier, to eliminate the light soaking effect.108 The synthesis of N,S-CQDs was performed via hydrothermal treatment, employing ascorbic acid and ammonium persulfate as reagents. The light soaking effect is hazardous to cells used in organic solar cells (OSCs), as high-energy UV light can destroy the conjugated polymers, and it is not desirable for practical applications.110 N,S-CQDs do not only serve as surface defect passivation agents for ZnO in OSCs but they also exhibit superior electronic behaviour, excellent down-conversion (with a quantum yield of 33%), excitation-dependent PL features and high luminescence stability.
In another non-metal doping experiment, Liu et al. employed thermal annealing, a universal post-synthesis technique where doping is carried out via annealing CQDs with the respective dopant source.111 Thermal annealing has distinct advantages, including high doping efficiency and a wider range of adjustment, wide applicability to low-dimensional graphitic materials of any form, and the ability to maintain the sp2 network of the CQDs.112 The level of doping is dictated by the concentrations of vacancies in the graphitic lattices of CQDs and it is often limited due to a low concentration of vacancies. Attempts to address this issue have been made via oxidation and subsequent de-oxidation, NH3 etching and ion irradiation approaches.113 Despite these efforts, successes in achieving high-level doping have still been somewhat limited. It should be noted that high levels of N-doping in CQDs are highly desirable for applications in high-performance supercapacitors, fuel cells, ferromagnetic materials and energy-storage devices.112,114,115 In experiments be Liu et al., it was shown that fluorination followed by thermal annealing could significantly increase the doping levels of N, S and B. Ammonia, sulfur vapour and boron trichloride (BCl3) were employed as dopant sources for N, S and B, respectively. Fluorination improved the levels of doping through creating a high concentration of vacancies in the graphitic lattices of CQDs. The vacancy concentrations could be effectively tuned via manipulating the degree of fluorination. As carbon monofluoride is unstable at high temperatures,116 the thermal defluorination of fluorinated CQDs consumed C atoms, which eventually led to the creation of vacancies. Fluorination was carried out via heating CQDs in xenon difluoride (XeF2),117 and the optimum annealing temperature was identified to be 500 °C. This method proved to be an effective technique to improve the doping levels, as it resulted in CQDs being doped by 36.38% with a nitrogen dopant.
Compared to non-metallic heteroatoms, metal heteroatoms are more electropositive and thus tend to have more unoccupied valence orbitals. Besides that, metal ions also have larger atomic radii than non-metallic heteroatoms.103 The metal doping of CQDs offers opportunities to change the charge densities and transition states between carbon nanoparticle matrices and metal ions, through combining metal ions with the high electronic mobilities of CQDs; this can broaden the range of the tunability of the physiochemical properties of CQDs. Besides that, the existence of electrons and unoccupied orbitals separate to the metal ions enables the carbon nanoparticles to chelate with functional groups, such as amino and carboxyl groups, on the surface. In general, the synthesis methods for metal-doped CQDs can be classified into two main categories: (I) one-step synthesis, which includes hydrothermal and solvothermal methods, microwave methods and ultrasonic chemical methods; and (II) multi-step routes, which synthesize metal-doped CQDs via the exfoliation of the metal ion doped carbonaceous materials that are obtained via an extra step of metal ion doping during cleavage.103 Hydrothermal methods are the most common one-step synthesis route, and they are widely applied to obtain metal-CQDs because of their facile implementation, low-cost, effectiveness and environmental friendliness. Currently, potassium-doped CQDs (K-CQDs),118 copper-doped CQDs (Cu-CQDs),119,120 zinc-doped CQDs (Zn-CQDs)121 and magnesium, nitrogen co-doped CQDs (Mg,N-CQDs)122,123 have been produced with this method. As for the multi-step synthesis route, Lin et al. prepared europium (Eu)-doped CQDs using europium trichloride (EuCl3) and graphene oxide (GO) as precursors. EuCl3–GO underwent acid treatment with concentrated sulfuric acid (H2SO4) and nitric acid (HNO3) at 75 °C for 7.5 h.103 Eu-CQDs were eventually obtained after neutralization and dialysis for 24 h.
The optical properties of metal-doped CQDs are different compared to those of pristine CQDs. Most metal-CQDs exhibit strong and broad absorption bands at 200 and 600 nm,124 while some have a characteristic peak at around 225 nm, which corresponds to the π–π* transitions of sp2 domains.125 An enhancement in the absorbance in the visible region of metal-CQDs was observed compared to pristine CQDs at the same concentration. This was due to the presence of metallic dopants, which resulted in metal ion to graphite charge-transfer absorption.126 Besides that, metal-CQDs emit different fluorescence under 365 nm UV light, such as ultraviolet,127 blue,128 blue-green,129 green130 and yellow.56,103 In comparison with pristine CQDs, metal-doped CQDs were found to exhibit red-shifted fluorescence emission peaks. Furthermore, a composite material was also reported to possess excitation-dependent PL behaviour.125,131 As shown in Fig. 7(A) and (B), when the excitation wavelength was increased from 290–490 nm and from 320–400 nm, respectively, the emission peaks displayed by metal-doped CQDs were gradually red-shifted, with a reduction in intensity.
 Fig. 7  (A) The PL emission spectra of Gd3+-CQDs obtained at different excitation wavelengths (inset: the normalized PL spectra); adapted with permission;131 copyright: 2016, Elsevier. (B) The PL emission spectra of Cu-CQDs; adapted with permission;120 copyright: 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Other than that, the quantum yield of CQDs can be enhanced through metallic doping. It is suggested that the PL of metal-CQDs is attributed to the radiative recombination of surface-confined electrons and holes.129 Therefore, the high quantum yields of metal-CQDs in comparison to pristine CQDs were due to the presence of doped metal ions with surface-trapped electrons and their structural properties, disrupting the carbon rings and improving the electron–hole purging resulting from the produced emission energy traps.132 In summary, metal-doped CQDs not only possess optical properties that are favourable for effective photocatalysis, but they also exhibit high quantum yields. On the other hand, non-metal-doped CQDs also have the distinctive advantages of highly tunable emission wavelengths and enhanced luminescence stabilities.
5.0 CQD-based 2D material nanocomposites
As is known, the band gaps of semiconductors can be effectively narrowed through chemically bonding them with CQDs to form CQD-based semiconductor composites.92,133 Since the achievement of the successful exfoliation of graphene from graphite via a mechanical cleavage method by Novoselov et al.,134 2D nanomaterials have been the focus of attention for many researchers due to their unique optical and electronic properties and outstanding structural features. 2D nanostructures exhibit distinct advantages, including the ability for architecture modulation, efficient charge separation and light harvesting, and tunability. The relatively large lateral size of 2D nanosheets provides a high density of active sites for surface reactions.135 Besides that, the ultrathin layers ease the diffusion of charge carriers to the surface through shortening the transportation distance, while the high levels of low-coordinated layers allow for the larger exposure of surface area for light harvesting.136,137 Numerous synthetic methods have been developed for the preparation of 2D nanomaterials, such as mechanical cleavage, liquid exfoliation, ion-intercalation and exfoliation, chemical vapour deposition and wet chemical synthesis.26 To allow readers to gain a deeper understanding of the key merits of 2D nanomaterials, a comprehensive discussion of the synthesis methods and mechanisms regarding various CQD-based 2D nanocomposites will be presented below. Examples of 2D nanomaterials that will be covered include graphene, graphitic carbon nitride, metal oxides and metallates, metal oxyhalides, and transition metal oxides and chalcogenides.
5.1 Graphene
Graphene consists of single layer sp2-bonded carbon atoms with unique electronic properties, excellent thermal conductivity and admirable mechanical strength. Due to its aforementioned features, graphene is regarded as an ideal templating material for producing functional hybrid nanostructures.138 It also exhibits high mobility for charge carriers at room temperature, the quantum Hall effect, high specific surface area and excellent optical transparency.139,140 Graphene has been combined with several types of semiconductors to form nanocomposites for photocatalytic applications, making use of its multiple functions such as its abilities to act as an electron sink, a conductive mediator, a deposition substrate, an absorbent and a photosensitizer.138,141 Zero-dimensional (0D) CQDs can be derived from 2D graphene via top-down synthesis, incorporating the superior qualities of 2D nanomaterials with improved or novel properties due to quantum confinement effects and prominent edge and surface defects. 0D CQDs offer high surface area-to-volume ratios, improved solubility in aqueous and non-aqueous solutions, and high tunability in terms of both their optical and electronic properties. Moreover, they can be easily doped and/or functionalized to form various types of nanocomposite materials.142
Zheng et al. prepared a novel CQDs/GO composite nanohybrid, integrating the favorable optical properties of CQD and graphene phases via electrochemical methods.53 It can be observed in Fig. 8(A) that the emission peak of the CQDs decreased dramatically after incorporating GO, indicating a prominent PL quenching effect in the CQDs/GO nanocomposite. Therefore, the observation of quenching shows that efficient charge transfer occurred at the interface between the CQDs and GO, as it is understood that PL emission from CQDs can be quenched by both electron donors and acceptors. The energy transferred from the CQDs is accepted by GO, which exhibits a higher PL intensity compared to raw GO. Besides that, the PL emission of the CQDs/GO nanocomposite was also found to be dependent on the excitation wavelength, as depicted in Fig. 8(B). The highly effective charge transfer between the CQDs and GO highlights the potential of CQDs/GO nanocomposites to be applied in excellent light conversion and photonic logic devices.
 Fig. 8  (A) PL spectra (λex = 320 nm) of CQDs, GO and CQD/GO in aqueous solution at room temperature. (B) PL spectra of the CQD/GO hybrid at different excitation wavelengths. Adapted with permission;53 copyright: 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Non-linear optical (NLO) phenomena occur when the response of a material to an applied optical field depends on the strength of the optical field in a non-linear manner.143 Meanwhile, optical limiting (OL) is a non-linear effect consisting of a decrease in the transmittance of a material under high-intensity illumination.144 Improved NLO performance and optical limiting (OL) effects are expected from CQDs/GO nanocomposites due to efficient energy transfer between the CQDs and GO, compared to pristine GO. Besides that, the enhanced OL effects shown by nanohybrids are also mainly attributed to a combination of enhanced non-linear scattering and absorption.
In general, the enhancement of the performance of graphene-based semiconductors in photocatalysis can be attributed to the high levels of electron mobility and surface confined traps on graphene, which endow the composite system with improved electron transport and charge carrier separation. Besides that, functionalized GO layers allow for the adsorption of reactive substances and create more possibilities for surface modifications. Finally, physiochemical interactions between graphene and photocatalytic substances could broaden the solar spectrum light harvesting range, as demonstrated in various studies.145
5.2 Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4)
g-C3N4 is a semiconductor that possesses a similar molecular structure to graphene, with carbon and nitrogen as its primary constituents.146 Its planar configuration, with π-conjugated systems, has the ability to transport charge carriers and its band gap of approximately 2.7 eV enables it to be responsive in the visible light region, at approximately 460 nm. Besides that, g-C3N4 has high chemical and thermal stability under ambient conditions, strong resistance to acidic and alkaline surroundings, low toxicity and environmental benignity.147,148 Despite these attributes, the practical applications of bare g-C3N4 in photocatalytic water splitting and pollutant degradation are still limited due to its low crystallinity and the poor conductivity of photogenerated charge carriers.149,150 These limitations can be addressed through elemental doping, coupling with other photoactive materials, and nanostructure modifications. The formation of relevant composites increases the number of reactive sites and the optical absorption coefficient and simultaneously decreases the diffusion distance between photoexcited charger carriers and reaction sites.151 Below, discussion will be focused on the doping of CQDs into the backbone of g-C3N4 to enhance its photocatalytic performance.
g-C3N4 can be easily prepared via the thermal polycondensation of economically favorable carbon-based precursors that are rich in nitrogen, such as melamine,152 urea153 and thiourea.152 In several experiments, the successful deposition of CQDs onto the surface of g-C3N4 has been reported. The resulting hybrid composite was shown to exhibit enhanced photocatalytic performance, which was ascribed to the effective harvesting of the solar spectrum, the broadening of the light absorption range and a reduction in electron–hole recombination. Ong et al. demonstrated the successful construction of CQDs/pCN (hybridized protonated g-C3N4) heterojunction photocatalysts via electrostatic attraction, with different mass loadings of CQDs ranging from 0.5 to 5 wt%.154 The protonation of g-C3N4 helped to strengthen the connection between the CQDs and pCN, as the electrostatic attraction of oppositely charged materials was used to hybridize the negatively charged CQDs with positively charged pCN. Also, Wang's group prepared CQDs/g-C3N4via a facile hydrothermal method, employing L-ascorbic acid and melamine as precursors to the CQDs and g-C3N4, respectively.155 To ensure strong interfacial contact between CQDs and g-C3N4, an in situ one-step approach was employed, as shown in Fig. 9. Firstly, bulk g-C3N4 was synthesized via thermal polymerization, composed of condensed tri-s-triazine subunits connected through planar tertiary amino groups. Additional amine functional groups were also found at the edges due to structural defects and incomplete condensation. Subsequently, L-ascorbic acid was added to the g-C3N4 suspension, where the molecules were strongly bonded to the surface due to the acidic properties of the hydroxyl groups and the alkaline properties of the amino groups from L-ascorbic acid and g-C3N4, respectively. This created a homogeneous and solid distribution of CQDs on the surface of g-C3N4 following thermal polymerization at 180 °C.
 Fig. 9  The synthesis of the carbon dots (CDs)/g-C3N4 composite: (A) melamine; (B) bulk g-C3N4; (C) an L-ascorbic acid/bulk g-C3N4 complex; and (D) CDs/g-C3N4. Adapted with permission;155 copyright: 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The CQDs/g-C3N4 nanocomposite exhibited improved photocatalytic activity for the production of H2 compared to pure g-C3N4. This was ascribed to the rapid transfer of photo-generated electrons from the LUMO of g-C3N4 to that of the CQDs and the increased availability of active sites provided by the CQDs. In addition, CQDs/g-C3N4 hybrids were further modified with Pt as a co-catalyst via a photo-reduction approach. The amount of H2 generated by 10 wt% Pt-CQDs/g-C3N4 was approximately 183.0 μmol h−1, which was 2.1 times higher than the amount produced by Pt/g-C3N4. Again, this highlighted the influential role played by the CQDs in the enhancement of photocatalytic H2 production through promoting the effective transfer of electrons from g-C3N4 to the CQDs, and then from the CQDs to Pt. The reduction of H2O to form H2 occurred on the Pt co-catalyst due to the availability of abundant active sites and the low over-potential.155
5.3 Metal oxides, transition metal oxides (TMOs) and transition metal chalcogenides (TMCs)
Several papers have reported the doping of CQDs into 2D metal oxides, TMOs and TMCs to produce novel photocatalytic nanocomposites. Examples of these 2D materials include iron oxide (Fe3O4), tungsten trioxide (WO3) and titanium dioxide (TiO2), which will be discussed in detail below.
Dong and colleagues synthesized tertiary nanocomposites of Fe3O4/WO3/CQDs using citric acid as an additive and a co-precipitation method.156 UV-vis absorption curves showed that the absorption peak intensity of the Fe3O4/WO3/CQDs composite is higher than that of Fe3O4/WO3. Besides that, Fe3O4/WO3/CQDs has a distinct absorption peak in the UV region, ascribed to the π–π* transition in CQDs. The specific surface area was also significantly increased in the presence of CQDs, with an increase of 90.21% compared to Fe3O4/WO3 alone, which offers more adsorption sites for the reaction to take place and is critical for the enhancement of photocatalytic performance.
TMOs, such as TiO2, ZnO, SrTiO3, etc., have been extensively studied for their performances as photocatalysts.157 However, the photocatalytic performance of TiO2 is largely limited due to its poor adsorption of organic pollutants and inefficient visible light harvesting abilities; the latter is due to the relatively large band gap energy.158 2D materials (e.g., 2D TiO2) are advantageous over their 0D counterparts (such as nanoparticles) in terms of having augmented specific surface areas of contact, to increase the number of adsorption and reactive sites, along with high crystallinity to facilitate charge transport.159
Li prepared 0D CQDs/2D TiO2 nanosheets via a hydrothermal method using citric acid as the carbon precursor.160 The loading amounts of CQDs were varied using citric acid of different concentrations, ranging from 0.05 to 0.4 M, and the CQDs were incorporated with the TiO2 nanosheets through Ti–O–C bonds. The photocatalytic activities of all samples were tested through the photoreduction of chromium(VI) to the less toxic and carcinogenic chromium(III). The highest photoactivity was exhibited by 0.2 M CQDs/TiO2, reducing over 99.2% of Cr(VI) after 120 min of irradiation, which was 3 times higher than pure TiO2 nanosheets. Excessive amounts of CQDs in the nanocomposites led to a decrease in the photocatalytic performance owing to a decreased number of active sites, an increased recombination rate of charge carriers, and competition for visible light absorption.160–162
Besides that, Ma's group synthesized 0D CQDs/2D ZnO nanosheets via a hydrothermal method and the thermal decomposition of a porous metal–organic framework precursor, employing zinc nitrate hexahydrate, 4,4′-oxybisbenzoic acid and 4,4′-bypyridine as precursors.163 Characterization of the structure and properties using X-ray powder diffraction (XRD), transmission electron microscopy (TEM), fluorescence spectrophotometry, etc., showed the successful formation of a CQDs/ZnO nanocomposite with a novel laminar triangular structure and an average CQD size of 4 nm. According to Kang, the 2D ZnO nanosheets demonstrated high photocatalytic activity for the degradation of rhodamine B (RhB), with about 95% degradation after 30 min of irradiation.163,164 Therefore, the as-synthesized CQD/ZnO nanocomposites are regarded as promising photocatalysts, provided that the recombination of electrons and holes can be hindered effectively.
The high surface areas and unique physiochemical, electronic and optical properties of TMCs have been demonstrated to facilitate enhanced photocatalytic activity.165 Numerous TMCs have been studied as photocatalysts, including molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), zinc sulfide (ZnS) and cadmium sulfide (CdS).166–168 In all cases, the incorporation of TMCs with semi-conductive CQDs to form heterojunctions was found to improve light harvesting and photoinduced charge separation, leading to improved photocatalytic performances.
Zhao et al. employed a facile hydrothermal method to synthesize 0D CQDs/2D MOS2 composites, mainly composed of sandwiched S–Mo–S layers, for use as catalysts in the hydrogen evolution reduction (HER) reaction.169Fig. 10 shows TEM images of the as-synthesized CQDs/MOS2, exhibiting the typical stacking of the nanosheet structure. The ultrathin sheets had relatively wide lateral dimensions, and the highly exposed edges of the 2D MOS2 crystalline layers contained a majority of the disulfide S22− and apical S2−, which acted as the active sites and promoted the absorption of hydrogen atoms.169–171 Results showed that the HER activity of CQDs/MOS2 was improved compared to bare MOS2 after irradiation with visible light for 30 minutes, exhibiting an overpotential of ca. 0.12 V at 10 mA cm−2, and the composite also has high stability after testing over 1000 cycles. The improvements in performance are ascribed to the high charge transfer efficiency arising from the CQDs, reducing the amount of S4+ while increasing the amounts of S22− and S2−.
 Fig. 10  The characterization of the CQDs/MoS2 composite: (A) low and (B) high magnification TEM images. Adapted with permission;169 copyright: 2018, Elsevier. 
Kaur et al. also performed the synthesis of CQDs/ZnS nanocomposites via a facile chemical precipitation technique for use as photocatalysts for the degradation of Alizarin Red S (ARS) dye.172 It was reported that CQDs/ZnS exhibited superior photocatalytic activity, degrading 89% of ARS dye, in comparison to pristine ZnS (63%) under irradiation by visible light for 250 min. The improved photocatalytic activity in the presence of the CQDs was due to the effective absorbance of visible light, the suppressed recombination rate of electron–hole pairs, and improved separation of charge carriers.
5.4 Metal oxyhalides and metallates
Several metal oxyhalides, such as BiOX (X = Cl, Br or I), have been reported to be promising photocatalysts due to their unique layered structures.173 The photocatalytic activities of bismuth oxyhalides can be enhanced through modulating the compositions and arrangements of the layered structures, and the implantation of CQDs is one of the various available strategies. Deng et al. synthesized 0D CQDs/2D BiOCl nanocomposites via a template-free co-precipitation method at room temperature.174 The specific surface areas and porosities of both the CQDs/BiOCl nanocomposites and pristine BiOCl were measured. The results showed that CQDs changed their morphology and resulted in a large specific surface area in comparison to bare BiOCl. The optimum size of the CQDs/BiOCl composites was reported to be in the range of 50–150 nm. This size of composite exhibited the highest light absorption and photocurrent density (0.44 μA cm−2) with the most optimal photocatalytic activity in comparison to composites with size ranges of 0–50 nm and 150–200 nm. Besides that, Di and co-workers also prepared CQD-modified BiOCl ultrathin nanosheets using a facile solvothermal method, with the mass loading of CQDs onto BiOCl ranging from 0 to 8 wt%.175 Absorption spectra were obtained using a UV-vis spectrometer and it was shown that BiOCl alone showed photo-absorption only in the UV region, with an absorption edge at 360 nm. On the other hand, the CQDs/BiOCl nanocomposites exhibited extended light absorption into the visible light region and enhanced light absorption intensities. The results indicated that more electron–hole pairs can be generated by CQDs/BiOCl upon excitation under the same light irradiation, exhibiting enhanced photocatalytic performance over bare BiOCl. The 5 wt% CQDs/BiOCl nanocomposite performed most optimally, showing the highest light absorption intensity.
In another report, Zhao et al. synthesized CQDs/2D BiOBr/2D BiOCl via a facile solvothermal method.176 The photo-absorption capability was evaluated via UV-vis diffuse reflectance absorption spectroscopy (DRS); the spectra showed that there was a gradual red-shift in the absorption edge of CQDs/BiOBr/BiOCl compared to BiOBr/BiOCl, indicating an enhancement in optical absorption in the visible light region. Besides that, the PL spectra also showed that the relative PL intensity of CQDs/BiOBr/BiOCl was significantly lower than that of BiOBr/BiOCl. A weaker intensity reflects a lower recombination rate of electron–hole pairs. This phenomenon can be attributed to efficient charge transfer from BiOBr/BiOCl to the CQDs with a conjugated π structure, leading to the efficient separation of charge carriers. Therefore, it can be summarized that CQDs play several crucial roles in improving the photocatalytic performances of metal oxyhalides, including providing superior electron transfer abilities, broadened light absorption and enhanced light harvesting, along with boosting the catalytic active sites.175
Alternatively to metal oxyhalides, CQDs/2D Bi2WO6 metallate nanocomposites were synthesized by the Zhang group.177 UV-vis DRS studies showed that the absorption edge was red-shifted and the absorption intensity increased with an increase in the loading amount of CQDs. Bare Bi2WO6 can only harvest a minor fraction of the visible light region and has a high recombination rate of electron–hole pairs. The enhanced visible light harvesting of CQDs/Bi2WO6 was attributed to the intrinsic optical absorbance of the CQDs along with their UCPL properties. This suggested that the incorporation of CQDs resulted in more effective solar light utilization for the generation of photo-induced electron–hole pairs, which contributed to the enhancement of the photocatalytic activity. On top of that, the improved performance was also ascribed to the high electron capacity and photoinduced charge transfer properties of the CQDs. In another report, Qian et al. incorporated CQDs with Bi2WO6via a facile wet impregnation method.178 DRS showed that there was a gradual red-shift in absorption as the loading amount of CQDs increased from 1.0–6.0 g in 0.02 g mL−1 Bi2WO6. This indicates that the CQDs enhanced the harvesting of light in the visible region, which in turn improved the photocatalytic activity of the composite. Nevertheless, there was a limit to the loading amount of CQDs, approximately 3 wt%.179 The excessive loading of CQDs resulted in competition for visible light absorption within the system, which in turn led to a decrease in photocatalytic performance.
Di's group also prepared CQDs/Bi2WO6 hybrid materials using a facile hydrothermal method, with the CQD content ranging from 1 to 4 wt%.180 As observed from TEM images of both pure Bi2WO6 and CQDs/Bi2WO6, the identical structures indicate that the introduction of CQDs into Bi2WO6 did not cause an impactful change in the primary morphology. It has also been demonstrated that the introduction of CQDs into Bi2WO6 increases the specific surface area as the mass ratio of CQDs is gradually increased, as shown via N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms. Having a larger surface area exposed is advantageous for the adsorption of more active species and reactants on the surface.
5.5 A comparison between 0D (CQD)/2D nanocomposites and other morphologies
Based on the work regarding CQDs/2D nanocomposites reviewed above, it has been clearly underlined that synergistic effects between CQDs and 2D nanomaterials result in photocatalysts with substantially enhanced photocatalytic performance. As the efficiency of photogenerated electron transfer across interfaces between components depends on dimensionality, the manipulation of photoactive component dimensions is a significant factor that influences the photocatalytic activities of nanocomposites.181–184
In comparison to zero-dimensional (0D) and one-dimensional (1D) nanomaterials, such as graphene quantum dots, graphene nanoribbons, nanowires, etc., 2D materials possess several advantages with promising potential for photocatalytic applications. As shown in Fig. 11, the merits of 2D materials include: (1) their possession of relatively large specific surface areas compared to their bulk structures, which results in an increased number of active sites on the surfaces;185–187 (2) their excellent conductivities and superior electron mobilities, which are ascribed to the presence of 2D π-conjugated structures such as graphene. These provide an ultrafast platform for electron transfer to facilitate the separation of photogenerated carriers in photocatalysts;188–190 and (3) their ability to act as excellent catalyst supports, promoting the dispersion of catalysts. This enhances the photocatalytic performance of 2D composite materials due to increased areas of surface contact and charge transfer rates.
 Fig. 11  (A) The advantages of 2D layered materials in comparison with 0D and 1D materials. (B) An illustration of 0D/0D, 0D/1D and 0D/2D composites. Adapted with permission;185 copyright: 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3D materials such as graphene-based frameworks, which include graphene foams/sponges,138,191,192 hydrogels193–195 and aerogels,138,196,197 can be assembled from building blocks of lower dimension, such as graphene nanosheets. 3D materials have high specific surface areas, tunable porosities, resistance to aggregation, and rapid electron transport kinetics properties, rendering them ideal for photocatalytic applications.138,198,199 For instance, Wang et al. synthesized CQDs/graphene aerogel (GA) composites with CQDs spatially distributed throughout the 3D frameworks.200 3D GA possesses unique electron transport pathways of interconnected networks, while preserving the benign electronic conductivity of 2D graphene nanosheets.200,201
The most prominent advantage of 3D materials over 2D examples is the hierarchical 3D frameworks, which prevent the aggregation or stacking of sub-units, exposing more active sites for photocatalytic reactions.200,202 However, the structures of CQDs/GA composites become soft and fragile when more CQDs (>25%) are injected to the solution during the synthesis process, whereas 2D materials are less prone to being altered.200 Besides that, the binding energies of photogenerated carriers in 2D materials are typically 1 or 2 orders of magnitude larger than those in conventional 3D materials, resulting in longer lifespans and diffusion paths prior to recombination.203,204
6.0 The photocatalytic applications of CQD-based 2D nanomaterials
Photocatalysis, a green approach that utilizes solar light, has been extensively applied in several fields, particularly in the areas of environmental remediation and energy generation.205 In the following discussion, the applications of CQD-based 2D nanomaterials in CO2 photoreduction, pollutant/dye degradation, H2 generation via photocatalytic water splitting, etc. will be thoroughly reviewed. Emphasis will be placed on discussing the photocatalytic mechanism along with the distinct roles played by CQDs in improving the overall composite performance in the aforementioned applications.
6.1 The photocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide
Carbon dioxide (CO2) is one of the major contributors to global warming, consisting of up to 65% of all global greenhouse gases (GHGs).206,207 Therefore, the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 presents an intriguing solution to ensuring that the concentration of atmospheric CO2 is kept at bay while supplying value-added fuels and chemical products. Examples of products of CO2 reduction include methane, methanol, acetic acid, and formic acid.8 Photocatalytic CO2 reduction is relatively challenging from both thermodynamics and kinetics perspectives. Thermodynamics dictate that CO2 reduction requires electrons with a higher reduction potential than water, while the reaction kinetics of CO2 reduction underlie the need to undergo several steps where electrons and protons are transferred to CO2 consecutively or simultaneously.20 A few of the many different products and reduction reactions related to CO2 reduction are expressed in the following equations:208 (3) (4) (5)
Ong et al. conducted photocatalytic CO2 reduction with synthesized CQDs-hybridized protonated g-C3N4 (pCN) under visible and simulated solar light.154 The CQDs/pCN nanocomposite with 3 wt% CQDs exhibited the highest photocatalytic activity. 29.23 and 58.82 μmol gcatalyst−1 of CH4 and CO were generated, respectively, after 10 h of visible-light irradiation, 3.6 and 2.28 times higher than the amounts generated by pCN alone. In addition, CQDs/pCN also exhibited excellent stability and durability after undergoing four consecutive photo-reaction cycles, showing a negligible decrease in the photocatalytic activity. The improved photocatalytic performance of CQDs/pCN was ascribed to the effective transfer of photoinduced electrons from the CB of pCN to that of the CQDs, which led to the suppressed recombination of electron–hole pairs.
Kong et al. studied the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 using CQDs/ultrathin Bi2WO6 (UBW) over the vis-NIR broad spectrum.209 An optimized CQDs/UBW nanocomposite with 1 wt% CQD loading exhibited remarkable photocatalytic performance under visible light irradiation (λ > 400 nm) with a total yield of 7.19 μmol g catalyst−1, showing 9.5 and 3.1-fold enhancements in CH4 production compared to pristine Bi2WO6 platelets and bare UBW, respectively. On top of that, the CQDs/UBW nanocomposites extended the light absorption into the NIR region (λ: >700 nm), showing a low but noticeable CH4 production yield. This promising outcome opens up new possibilities for the development of novel photocatalytic systems that are capable of harvesting a broader spectrum of solar light. The successful harvesting of NIR light is attributed to the synergistic effects of (1) ultrathin nanostructures and the huge exposure of the {001} facets of UBW; (2) the excellent spectral coupling of CQDs and UBW; and (3) the presence of CQDs as excellent electron traps to suppress the recombination of photoinduced charge carriers.
6.2 The degradation of organic dyes/pollutants
One of the major causes of water pollution is the disposal of dyes and other pollutants into water bodies such as rivers, lakes and oceans. These pollutants are primarily produced by industry, including textile, paper and plastic manufacturing.210,211 The photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants in the presence of CQDs has a great impact on environmental remediation. There are two different mechanisms for photocatalytic dye degradation: direct and indirect.211 Indirect dye degradation involves a series of redox reactions in the CBs and VBs of semiconductors, where reactive species including holes, electrons, ˙OH, ˙O2− and H2O2 are generated, as shown in Fig. 12(A). On the other hand, the direct mechanism for dye degradation arises as a result of the ability of dyes to absorb a fraction of visible light easily. The reactions are initiated when the dye is excited from the ground state to the triplet excited state. The main reactive species responsible for the oxidation of organic compounds is ˙OH, as shown in Fig. 12(B).
 Fig. 12  (A) The mechanism of the indirect dye degradation process. (B) The mechanism of the direct dye degradation process. Adapted with permission;214 copyright: 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In general, the role of CQDs in direct and indirect photocatalytic dye degradation is similar; it takes up a vital role as a co-catalyst working alongside various 2D nanomaterials in most cases. One of the main roles of CQDs is to suppress the recombination rates of photo-generated carriers, electron–hole pairs, which are responsible for photocatalytic dye degradation.
In a paper by Yu et al., CQDs/2D TiO2 nanosheets were prepared through alkali-assisted electro-chemical and hydrothermal methods.23,212,213 The nanocomposites were studied under visible irradiation and the degradation efficiency towards RhB increased gradually from 27.2% to 95.4% when the amount of CQDs in solution increased from 2.5 to 10 ml. It was determined that the unique UCPL behaviour and highly reactive {001} facets of the TiO2 nanosheets played crucial roles in the improved photocatalytic activity of the nanocomposites.
As previously mentioned above, Di et al. synthesized 0D CQDs/2D Bi2WO6 nanocomposites via a facile hydrothermal method.180 The photocatalytic performance of the hybrid nanocomposites was evaluated towards the degradation of different organic pollutants, including RhB, ciprofloxacin (CIP), tetracycline hydrochloride (TC-HCl), and the endocrine-disrupting chemical bisphenol A (BPA). Fig. 13(A) shows that the 2 wt% CQDs/Bi2WO6 hybrid material exhibits the highest photocatalytic activity for the degradation of RhB under visible light irradiation over 120 minutes, approximately 1.8 times higher than that shown by pure Bi2WO6 nanosheets. CIP is regarded as an antibiotic, commonly employed for the treatment of bacterial infections. However, its presence in natural surroundings may cause several health issues and it has adverse effects on the ecosystem, as evaluated via toxicity tests.215 It was reported that 2 wt% CQDs/Bi2WO6 is able to degrade 64% and 87% of CIP in 20 and 120 minutes respectively; these are substantially higher photodegradation rates compared to pure Bi2WO6 nanosheets (Fig. 13(B)). The photocatalytic performances of the CQDs/Bi2WO6 nanocomposites were further tested via the photodegradation of BPA and TC-HCl (Fig. 13(C) and (D)). Studies on all four organic pollutants imply that the photocatalytic efficiency of Bi2WO6 has been tremendously improved in the presence of CQDs. Besides its admirable photocatalytic efficiency, CQDs/Bi2WO6 also showed excellent stability and reusability, showing negligible regression in its efficiency over 5 consecutive cycles of RhB photodegradation.
 Fig. 13  The photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants in the presence of pure Bi2WO6 and CQDs/Bi2WO6 hybrid materials under visible light irradiation: (A) RhB; (B) CIP; (C) BPA; and (D) TC-HCl. Adapted with permission;180 copyright: 2018, Elsevier. 
In another report, the Guo group prepared different samples of CQDs/g-C3N4/ZnO composites via a facile impregnation-thermal method for the photodegradation of TC.216 The as-synthesized products ranged from 10–50 wt% g-C3N4 in the nanocomposites. 30 wt% g-C3N4/ZnO with 4 mL of CQD solution (500 mg L−1) displayed the highest photocatalytic activity, degrading 100% of TC within 30 min. This emphasizes the role of CQDs in increasing the visible-light response and also promoting the efficiency of electron–hole pair separation. In addition, Hong et al. also reported that synthesized 0.5 wt% CQDs/g-C3N4 is most effective compared to other samples with different CQD loading levels.217 It displayed reaction rate constants of 0.01438 and 0.00642 min−1 for the photodegradation of RhB and TC-HCl, respectively, 3.7 and 1.9-times higher than those of pristine g-C3N4.
Based on the works reviewed above, the incorporation of CQDs into other nanomaterials to form nanocomposites can result in highly effective photocatalysts to be utilized by several industries for the removal of organic dyes using sunlight as the source of energy.
6.3 Photocatalytic water splitting to produce hydrogen
Effective solar light-driven water splitting is highly desirable for the mass production of hydrogen to cater to future energy demands. Water splitting is the decomposition of water (H2O) into hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) molecules under solar irradiation, as shown in Fig. 14(A).218,219 The equation for the water splitting reaction is as follows: H2O → H2 + 1/2O2, ΔG = 237 kJ mol−1(6)
 Fig. 14  (A) The photocatalysis process for hydrogen production; adapted with permission;224 copyright: 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) The separation of H2 and O2 molecules by a C3N4 layer; adapted with permission;222 copyright: 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) The mechanism of hydrogen production with CQD-decorated TiO2/g-C3N4 nano-heterojunctions; adapted with permission;223 copyright: 2018, Elsevier. 
Yu et al. reported that CQDs and {001}-faceted anatase TiO2 composites can be used to effectively perform the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).220 The CQDs are implanted into {001} TiO2 sheets without causing any noticeable changes to their intrinsic structure. With the optimum loading amount of CQDs (5 wt%), CQDs/{001} TiO2 exhibited a H2 evolution rate of 79.3 μmol g−1 h−1, which is 8 times that obtained with bare {001} TiO2. In addition, the CQDs/{001} TiO2 hybrids are also relatively stable after being repeatedly used for 3 cycles over 30 h, as there is no significant drop in the amount of H2 production. The enhancement of the photocatalytic efficiency is ascribed to the presence of CQDs as electron traps, leading to the effective separation of charge carriers and facilitating the transfer of photoexcited electrons from the CQDs to the CB of TiO2.
In another similar report, Sui and co-workers compared the photocatalytic H2 evolution performance of {001} TiO2 nanosheets, anatase and P25, with and without the presence of CQDs in all three materials.221 Without CQD loading, all materials exhibited relatively low H2 evolution rates (<2 μmol h−1). The photocatalytic activity was significantly increased following the implantation of CQDs; the highest evolution rate obtained was 7.9 μmol h−1 for CQDs/{001} TiO2, which was 4 times higher than {001} TiO2 alone, followed by CQDs/P25 and CQDs/anatase. The CQDs incorporated into TiO2 serve as photosensitizers, where they maximize the light absorption in the visible region and simultaneously act as excellent electron acceptors to enhance charge separation, leading to boosted hydrogen production. The photocatalytic hydrogen production rate is dependent on the loading amount of CQDs, as an excessive amount may lead to the possible formation of CQD aggregates and cause a shielding effect, resulting in decreased photocatalytic activity.
Besides that, the Wang group synthesized a hybrid structure of CQDs attached to single-layered C3N4.222 The main objective of this study was to overcome the challenges of reverse reactions and damaging explosions due to the mixing of hydrogen and oxygen, as a close reduction–oxidation distance is required with the same photocatalyst. The synthesized CQDs/C3N4 nanocomposites can harvest light in the visible and infrared regions. They also have a close reduction–oxidation distance, while ensuring the rapid delivery of photogenerated electrons and holes to the interiors of the CQDs and the exterior of C3N4, respectively. Water molecules are decomposed by the holes, producing protons in the outer regions of C3N4. Due to electrostatic attraction, the produced protons eventually migrate to react with the photogenerated electrons to produce oxygen molecules on the CQD side. Therefore, the two products are isolated, since neither H2 nor O2 molecules can diffuse through the C3N4 layer, inhibiting reverse reactions (Fig. 14(B)).
Pan et al. synthesized CQD-modified g-C3N4/TiO2 nano-heterojunctions via a facile hydrothermal method.223 Porous g-C3N4 nanosheets were prepared via thermal condensation while TiO2 nanoparticles were synthesized hydrothermally. This was followed by the introduction of CQDs onto the surfaces on g-C3N4 and TiO2 successively. The g-C3N4/TiO2 nanocomposites exhibited significantly enhanced hydrogen production values, approximately 12, 6 and 1.5 times higher than those of C3N4/TiO2, CQDs/TiO2 and CQDs/C3N4, respectively. The enhancement in photocatalytic hydrogen production was attributed to the numerous superior properties of CQDs, including their large storage capacity of electrons and their unique UCPL, which led to high catalytic activity for hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) decomposition, as illustrated in Fig. 14(C).
6.4 The degradation of poisonous/toxic gases
An excessive concentration of poisonous or toxic gaseous pollutants in the atmosphere contributes to environmental issues such as acid rain and photochemical smog,225,226 and it can also jeopardize the health of human beings. Examples of gaseous pollutants include nitrogen oxides (NOx), benzene (C6H6) and methanol (CH3OH).
Methods for NOx removal can be classified into primary and secondary routes, where photocatalytic methods are categorized in the secondary group. Photocatalytic methods can be further divided into photooxidation, photodecomposition and photo-selective catalytic reduction (SCR). Photodecomposition and photo-SCR are reduction methods that transform NOx into N2 and other harmless compounds. On the other hand, photooxidation converts NOx to nitric acid, which must eventually be removed from the surface of the photocatalyst.
Besides that, Chai et al. reported a layer-by-layer fabrication method for CQDs/2D CdS nanocomposites; these were applied to the photocatalytic reduction of nitro-benzene derivatives in the aqueous phase under low power visible light irradiation.1 After a reaction time of 2.5 h, 70% of p-nitroaniline was reduced in the presence of CQDs/CdS, while pure CdS only managed to reduce 24% of it. The as-synthesised CQDs/CdS nanohybrids were further evaluated in the presence of various nitro-aromatic compounds, including nitrochlorobenzene and bromonitrobenzene, all of which exhibited a similar trend where CQDs/CdS demonstrated superior photocatalytic performance. A schematic diagram of the mechanism behind the photocatalytic activity of CQDs/CdS is shown in Fig. 15. Upon light irradiation, the CQDs and CdS are both excited, prompting the generation of electrons and holes within each entity. The lower lying CB level of the CQDs enables the transfer of electrons from CdS to the CQDs. On the other hand, the holes of the CQDs are transferred to the higher VB level of CdS. As a result, the charge carriers are effectively separated, and the electrons thereafter participate in reduction reactions.
In summary, CQDs play critical roles in enhancing the photocatalytic performances of nanocomposites, including the effective transfer of photoinduced electrons to hinder electron–hole pair recombination, having UCPL properties, and also assisting the enhanced absorption of gaseous molecules onto the surfaces of nanocomposites due to π–π interactions between the conjugated structure of CQDs and nanomaterials. Fig. 15  A schematic illustration of the mechanism for the CQDs/CdS photocatalytic process; adapted with permission;1 copyright: 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. 

Table 1 summarizes the synthesis methods and photocatalytic applications of various CQDs/2D hybrid nanomaterials based on the research work reviewed above.
Table 1 A summary of the photocatalytic applications of different CQDs/2D nanocomposites




CQDs/2D photocatalyst
CQD content
Synthesis method
Illumination λEx [nm]; other details
Application
Performance
Ref.





a RhB: rhodamine B.
b TC-HCL: tetracycline hydrochloride.
c ARS: alizarin red S.
d 2-NP: 2-nitrophenol.
e BPA: bisphenol A.
f CIP: ciprofloxacin.
g VOCs: volatile organic compounds.
h 
p-NA: p-nitroaniline.
i 4-NCB: 4-nitrochlorobenzene.
j BNB: bromonitrobenzene.





CQDs/2D g-C3N4
3 wt%
Electrostatic attraction at 120 °C for 4 h
Vis: >400, 500 W Xe lamp
Reduction of CO2
Yield: 29.23 and 58.82 μmol gcatalyst−1 of CH4 and CO, respectively

145



0.5 wt%
Mechanical mixing for 12 h
Vis: 420, 250 W Xe lamp
Degradation of RhBa and TC-HCLb

k = 0.01438 min−1 (RhB) and 0.00642 min−1 (TC-HCl)

208



CQDs/2D g-C3N4
10 wt%
Hydrothermal at 180 °C for 4 h
UV: 365, 3 W LED lamp, 80 mW cm−2
Production of H2
2.2 μmol h−1

146



Pt-CQDs/2D g-C3N4
10 wt%
Hydrothermal at 180 °C for 4 h
UV: 365; vis: 420, 3 W LED lamp, 80 mW cm−2
Production of H2
183 μmol h−1

146



48.1 μmol h−1


CQDs/2D g-C3N4/2D ZnO
4 wt%
Mechanical mixing for 2 h
Vis: >420 nm, Xe lamp, 18 mW cm−2
Degradation of TC-HCl

k = 0.082 min−1

207



CQDs/2D Fe3O4/2D WO3
10 wt%
Co-precipitation at 220 °C for 4 h
Vis: λ not specified
Degradation of RhB
65.56% in 240 min

147



CQDs/2D TiO2
0.2 M
Hydrothermal at 160 °C for 4 h
Vis: >420, 300 W Xe lamp, 25.6 mW cm−2
Reduction of chromium Cr(VI)

k = 0.027 min−1

151



10 mL
Vis: >420, 500 W Xe lamp
Degradation of RhB
95.4% in 60 min

203, 204


0.5 wt%
Hydrothermal at 140 °C for 4 h
500 W Hg lamp, λ not specified
Production of H2
79.3 μmol g−1 h−1

211



10 mL g−1
300 W Xe lamp, λ not specified
7.9 μmol h−1

212



CQDs/2D g-C3N4/2D TiO2
6.7 wt%
Oven drying at 85 °C for 12 h
Vis: >400, 300 W Xe lamp
Production of H2
6.497 μmol g−1 h−1

214



CQDs/2D ZnO
0.3 mol
Hydrothermal at 90 °C for 24 h
UV: 365, 300 W Hg lamp
Degradation of RhB
95% in 30 min

154, 155


CQDs/2D ZnS
16 wt%
Chemical precipitation at 160 °C for 3 h
Vis: 400–520, 150 W lamp
Degradation of ARSc dye
89% in 250 min

163



CQDs/2D BiOCl
150 mL
Template free co-precipitation at room temperature for 12 h
Vis: >400 nm, 300 W Xe lamp
Degradation of 2-NPd
∼100% in 120 min

165



5 wt%
Solvothermal method at 160 °C for 3 h
Vis: 400, 300 W Xe lamp
Degradation of RhB and BPAe
89% (RhB) and 92% (BPA) in 40 min

166



CQDs/2D BiOBr/2D BiOCl
4 wt%
Solvothermal method at 180 °C for 2 h
UV: 400, 300 W Xe lamp
Degradation of RhB

k = 0.0609 min−1

167



CQDs/2D Bi2WO6
3 wt%
Hydrothermal at 160 °C for 20 h
500 W Xe lamp, λ not specified
Degradation of RhB
Degradation efficiency of 97.0% in 10 min

168



2 wt%
Hydrothermal at 140 °C for 24 h
Vis: >400; NIR: >700, 500 W Xe lamp
Reduction of CO2
CH4 yields: 7.19 and 0.41 μmol gcatalyst−1 in 8 h under vis and NIR, respectively

200



2 wt%
Hydrothermal at 140 °C for 24 h
Vis: 400, 300 W Xe lamp
Degradation of RhB, CIP,f BPA and TC-HCl
Degradation efficiencies of 90% (RhB), 95% (BPA), 90% (CIP) and 80% (TC-HCl) in 120 min

171



CQDs/2D Bi2WO6
2 wt%
Wet-impregnation and ultrasonication
Vis: >420; UV-vis: λ not specified, 500 W Xe lamp, ∼400 mW cm−2
Removal of gaseous VOCsg
CO2 production: under vis: 47 ppm h−1 (acetone); under UV-vis: 10 μmol h−1 (acetone); 1.5 μmol h−1 (toluene)

169



CQDs/2D CdS
8.25 mmol
Electrophoretic and chemical bath deposition method
Vis: >420, 3 W LED lamp
Reduction of nitrobenzene derivatives
Reduction efficiency: 72% (p-NAh); 90% (4-NCBi 90% (BNBj) in 150 min

218



CQDs/2D GO
8 vol%
One-step electrochemical at 30 V for 120 h
UV: 340
Photonic logic and light conversion devices
Significant decrease in the emission peak (1750000 a.u.) upon excitation at 340 nm

45





7.0 Conclusions and future outlook
In this review paper, the latest progress and advancements in CQD research have been presented, with an emphasis on CQD-based 2D nanocomposites. It is obvious that CQDs have emerged as a prominent research subject and this area is still advancing rapidly, as reflected by the surge in the number of publications in recent years. While many research studies have been conducted regarding the unique optical properties, including the strong absorption of light across the solar spectrum, and the effective transfer and separation of photo-generated charge carriers, detailed mechanisms and information about the origin of these PL features are still debatable. The facile tunability of CQD optoelectronic properties opens up endless possibilities for their applications. Hence it is critical to develop novel techniques that are capable of subtly controlling these properties, particularly recently discovered examples, such as phosphorescence and the highly debatable UCPL. The ambiguous explanations behind these luminescence mechanisms are primarily due to interiors that range from being amorphous to nearly crystalline, which must be deciphered using analytical and intelligent considerations.
Despite advances having been made in the synthesis of CQDs, feasible synthesis routes with well-defined structures and precise control over the sizes of the nanoparticles are hardly available. The development of facile, low-cost and green synthesis methods for CQDs with calculated control over structures and sizes is critical, as the morphologies and sizes of CQDs play critical roles in determining their properties and selective applications. Even though a wide variety of 2D materials is applicable for photocatalysis, the photocatalytic performances are far from ideal due to several drawbacks including wide bandgaps, limiting the effective utilization of solar light, and high recombination rates of electron–hole pairs. Thus, the incorporation of CQDs to form 0D/2D heterojunction nanocomposites can overcome these challenges and maximize the photocatalytic efficiency. Besides that, the photo-stabilities of CQDs/2D material nanocomposites have been significantly enhanced via improved charge transfer rates across the heterostructures, resulting in excellent photocatalytic activities. Therefore, the development of synthesis routes that ensure CQDs/2D material nanohybrids with excellent connectivity is critical for achieving ideal photocatalytic performance. Together with the emergence of novel ultrathin 2D nanomaterials with either single or multi-atom layers, exploring the integration of compatible 2D nanomaterials to form homojunction or heterojunction hybrids is another interesting and challenging topic. With a promising outlook, 2D nanomaterials could prove to be efficient yet economical photocatalysts for various industrial applications.
However, there are still several existing issues and drawbacks that need to be addressed before CQD-based 2D material nanocomposites can be considered for commercial applications. For instance, the photostability of CQDs is reported to be mediocre, which allows them to be deactivated easily. In prior discussion, several strategies, including surface passivation and functionalization, the formation of hybrids with 2D nanomaterials etc., have been proposed to enhance the stability of CQDs to some extent in terms of structure design, photostability and also photochemical corrosion, especially in the presence of toxic heavy-metal ions. This challenge needs to be dealt with through conducting detailed studies to discover various stabilizing and synthetic capping agents to prevent CQDs from agglomerating or deactivating so readily. Besides that, 2D nanosheets have a high tendency to stack with each other, which reduces the number of accessible surface areas and active sites for photocatalytic reactions to take place. Novel techniques to prevent the re-stacking of individual sheets, while retaining their high conductivities and the availability of active sites, must be explored. Thus, the incorporation of noble metals and metal sulphide/oxide semiconductors into the nanocomposite systems should be further studied and developed. Focus should also be directed on the phase engineering of 2D nanomaterials, as this plays an influential role in improving the degree of available active sites and the adsorption of reactant molecules. Moreover, the full potential of CQDs has yet to be realized. Research attention should be directed towards the rational design and synthesis of CQD-based 2D nanomaterials to achieve optimum structural features, encompassing size, dimensions, crystal phases, defects, and so on.
Overall, CQD-based 2D nanomaterials are highly valued for their extensive and multi-disciplinary applications, with further research and study required in the future. These next-generation photocatalytic systems are expected to be developed as a robust means of addressing various environmental and energy-related issues, which are the two biggest challenges faced by society today.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was funded by the Ministry of Higher Education (MOHE) Malaysia under the Fundamental-Research Grant Scheme (FRGS) (Ref no: FRGS/1/2018/TK02/HWUM/03/2).
Notes and references
N.-N. Chai, H.-X. Wang, C.-X. Hu, Q. Wang and H.-L. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16613–16620 RSC .
K.-Q. Lu, Q. Quan, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 927–935 CrossRef .
R. Wang, K.-Q. Lu, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3717–3734 RSC .
S. N. Baker and G. A. Baker, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6726–6744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 6921–6939 RSC .
S. C. Ray, A. Saha, N. R. Jana and R. Sarkar, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 18546–18551 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tang, R. Ji, X. Cao, J. Lin, H. Jiang, X. Li, K. S. Teng, C. M. Luk, S. Zeng, J. Hao and S. P. Lau, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5102–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Huang, H. Ming, H. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10501–10506 RSC .
H. Li, X. He, Y. Liu, H. Huang, S. Lian, S.-T. Lee and Z. Kang, Carbon, 2011, 49, 605–609 CrossRef CAS .

          S. C. A. Z. Zhao, in Visible-Light Photocatalysis of Carbon-Based Materials, ed. Y. Yao, IntechOpen, Rijeka,  2018, ch. 4,  DOI:10.5772/intechopen.70801 .

          P. Karfa, S. De, K. C. Majhi, R. Madhuri and P. K. Sharma, Functionalization of Carbon Nanostructures, in Comprehensive Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (Second Edition), ed. D.L. Andrews, R. H. Lipson and T. Nann, Academic Press, Oxford,  2019, pp. 123–144 Search PubMed .
Y. Lu, Y. Huang, J.-j. Cao, H. Li, W. Ho and S. C. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15782–15793 RSC .
Y. Huang, P. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Rao, J.-j. Cao, S. Pu, W. Ho and S. C. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 240, 122–131 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Y. Gao, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J.-j. Cao, W. Ho and S. C. Lee, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 354, 54–62 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Liang, Y. Rao, D. Zhu, J.-j. Cao, Z. Shen, W. Ho and S. C. Lee, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 2924–2933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          A. Mishra, S. Basu, N. P. Shetti, K. R. Reddy and T. M. Aminabhavi, in Nanoscale Materials in Water Purification, ed. S. Thomas, D. Pasquini, S.-Y. Leu and D. A. Gopakumar, Elsevier,  2019, pp. 759–781,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-12-813926-4.00035-5 .
Y. Wang, J. Chen, L. Liu, X. Xi, Y. Li, Z. Geng, G. Jiang and Z. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 1618–1625 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Deng, Y. Liu, X. Zeng, D. Wiley and J. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 4419–4422 RSC .

          B. T. Jinlong Zhang, L. Wang, M. Xing and J. Lei, Photocatalysis-Fundamentals, Materials and Applications, Springer, Singapore,  2018 Search PubMed .
A. Corma and H. Garcia, J. Catal., 2013, 308, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
J. Di, J. Xia, M. Ji, H. Li, H. Xu, H. Li and R. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11433–11443 RSC .
H. Yu, H. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, H. Li, H. Ming and Z. Kang, New J. Chem., 2012, 36, 1031–1035 RSC .
H. Li, X. He, Z. Kang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, J. Liu, S. Lian, C. H. A. Tsang, X. Yang and S.-T. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4430–4434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, H. Ming, S. Lian, H. Huang, H. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Z. Kang and S.-T. Lee, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 10822–10825 RSC .
J. Wang, M. Gao and G. W. Ho, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 5703–5709 RSC .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Zeng, X. Hu, J. Hu and X. Zhang, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2019, 94, 22–37 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Yoo, J. H. Kang and B. H. Hong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 4835–4852 RSC .
F. Liu, M.-H. Jang, H. D. Ha, J.-H. Kim, Y.-H. Cho and T. S. Seo, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3657–3662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buzaglo, M. Shtein and O. Regev, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 21–24 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, Y. Li, S. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Zheng, C. Liu, Z. Qing, J. Li and R. Yang, Anal. Chem., 2016, 88, 4833–4840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gu, Y. Yan, X. Cao, C. Zhang, C. Ding and Y. Xian, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2016, 4, 27–31 RSC .
F.-Q. S. Hua Li, H. Huang, J.-J. Feng and A.-J. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 226, 506–511 CrossRef .
Y. Yong, X. Cheng, T. Bao, M. Zu, L. Yan, W. Yin, C. Ge, D. Wang, Z. Gu and Y. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 12451–12463 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yuwen, J. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, J. Shan, Z. Luo, L. Weng, Z. Teng and L. Wang, Aqueous phase preparation of ultrasmall MoSe2 nanodots for efficient photothermal therapy of cancer cells, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2720–2726 RSC .
Y. Wang and Y. Ni, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 7463–7470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, L. Zhao, C. Lan and S. Zhao, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 223, 246–251 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiaoyan, L. Ruiyi, L. Zaijun, G. Zhiguo and W. Guangli, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 42751–42755 RSC .
J. Liu, M. Zheng, X. Shi, H. Zeng and H. Xia, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 919–930 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Song, X. Chen, J. Zhou, S. Hong and M. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 19292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wei, Q. An, Q. Wei, M. Yan, X. Wang, Q. Li, P. Zhang, B. Wang and L. Mai, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 18680–18685 RSC .
D. Chao, C. Zhu, X. Xia, J. Liu, X. Zhang, J. Wang, P. Liang, J. Lin, H. Zhang, Z. X. Shen and H. J. Fan, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 565–573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, H. Gao, X. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Xu, N. S. Alharbi, T. Hayat and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 35138–35149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, F. Wang, Y. Sang and H. Liu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700473 CrossRef .

          R. C. Pawar and C. S. Lee, in Heterogeneous Nanocomposite-Photocatalysis for Water Purification, ed. R. C. Pawar and C. S. Lee, William Andrew Publishing, Boston,  2015, pp. 1–23,  DOI:10.1016/B978-0-323-39310-2.00001-1 .

          J. Moan, 7 Visible Light and UV Radiation,  2001 Search PubMed.
D. Konstantinos, Curr. Org. Chem., 2016, 20, 682–695 CrossRef .
B. B. Tewari, C. O. Thornton, N. Hamid, A. K. Tiwari and M. V. Boodhoo, Rev. Boliv. Quim., 2016, 33, 07–19 Search PubMed .
Y.-P. Sun, B. Zhou, Y. Lin, W. Wang, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Pathak, M. J. Meziani, B. A. Harruff, X. Wang, H. Wang, P. G. Luo, H. Yang, M. E. Kose, B. Chen, L. M. Veca and S.-Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7756–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin and S. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 10177–10179 RSC .
Y. Zhang, N. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 9777–9789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Bai, L. Wang and Y. Zhu, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2769–2778 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zheng, L. Huang, Q. Guo, W. Chen, W. Li and H. Wang, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 10267–10276 RSC .
L. Cao, M. J. Meziani, S. Sahu and Y.-P. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 171–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Mao, H.-Z. Zheng, Y.-J. Long, J. Du, J.-Y. Hao, L.-L. Wang and D.-B. Zhou, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2010, 75, 553–557 CrossRef PubMed .
A. B. Bourlinos, R. Zbořil, J. Petr, A. Bakandritsos, M. Krysmann and E. P. Giannelis, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 6–8 CrossRef CAS .
S. Srivastava and N. S. Gajbhiye, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 2624–2632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Krysmann, A. Kelarakis, P. Dallas and E. P. Giannelis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 747–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jia, J. Li and E. Wang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 5572–5575 RSC .
X. Wang, L. Cao, F. Lu, M. J. Meziani, H. Li, G. Qi, B. Zhou, B. A. Harruff, F. Kermarrec and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2009, 3774–3776 RSC .
P. Yu, X. Wen, Y.-R. Toh, Y.-C. Lee, K.-Y. Huang, S. Huang, S. Shrestha, G. Conibeer and J. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2894–2901 RSC .
L. Bao, Z.-L. Zhang, Z.-Q. Tian, L. Zhang, C. Liu, Y. Lin, B. Qi and D.-W. Pang, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5801–5806 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhu, S. Sun, Y. Wang, S. Deng, G. Qian, M. Wang and A. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 580–586 RSC .
H. Zheng, Q. Wang, Y. Long, H. Zhang, X. Huang and R. Zhu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10650–10652 RSC .
M. Farshbaf, S. Davaran, F. Rahimi, N. Annabi, R. Salehi and A. Akbarzadeh, Artif. Cells, Nanomed., Biotechnol., 2018, 46, 1331–1348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wen, P. Yu, Y.-R. Toh, X. Ma and J. Tang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4703–4706 RSC .
K. Linehan and H. Doyle, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 18–21 RSC .
W. Kwon and S.-W. Rhee, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 5256–5258 RSC .
M. P. Pileni, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 3266–3276 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Prikhozhdenko, D. N. Bratashov, A. N. Mitrofanova, A. V. Sapelkin, A. M. Yashchenok, G. B. Sukhorukov and I. Y. Goryacheva, J. Nanopart. Res., 2018, 20, 234 CrossRef .
A. Tayyebi, O. Akhavan, B.-K. Lee and M. Outokesh, Carbon, 2018, 130, 267–272 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bröll, C. Kaul, A. Krämer, P. Krammer, T. Richter, M. Jung, H. Vogel and P. Zehner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1999, 38, 2998–3014 CrossRef .
S. Atabaev, Mater. Today: Proc., 2017, 4, 4896–4899 Search PubMed .
A. B. Bourlinos, A. Stassinopoulos, D. Anglos, R. Zboril, M. Karakassides and E. P. Giannelis, Small, 2008, 4, 455–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tong, S. Ouyang, Y. Bi, N. Umezawa, M. Oshikiri and J. Ye, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 229–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, J. Tian and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 961–963 RSC .
Y. Mao, Y. Bao, D. Han, F. Li and L. Niu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 38, 55–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. Xie, H. Zhang, C.-y. Liu and Y.-g. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1027–1031 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhao, L. Q. Liu, Z. D. Liu, Y. Wang, X. J. Zhao and C. Z. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 2604–2606 RSC .
Y. Dong, R. Wang, H. Li, J. Shao, Y. Chi, X. Lin and G. Chen, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2810–2815 CrossRef CAS .
J.-Y. Yin, H.-J. Liu, S. Jiang, Y. Chen and Y. Yao, ACS Macro Lett., 2013, 2, 1033–1037 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, D. Wu, S. Liu, K. Koynov, W. Knoll and Q. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 4598–4601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, R. Wang, G. Li, C. Chen, Y. Chi and G. Chen, Anal. Chem., 2012, 84, 6220–6224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tetsuka, R. Asahi, A. Nagoya, K. Okamoto, I. Tajima, R. Ohta and A. Okamoto, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5333–5338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liao, P. Long, B. He, S. Yi, B. Ou, S. Shen and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3716–3721 RSC .
W. Kwon, S. Do, J.-H. Kim, M. Seok Jeong and S.-W. Rhee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 12604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Huang, J. Lin, X. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Zhang, M. He, K. Wang, F. Chen, Z. Li, G. Shen, D. Cui and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5104–5110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Shi, Y. Pan, X. Cheng, L. Zhang, J. Chen, M.-J. Li and C. Yi, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 5020–5027 RSC .
H. Wang and X. Wang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 75380–75385 RSC .
L. Yang, W. Jiang, L. Qiu, X. Jiang, D. Zuo, D. Wang and L. Yang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6104–6113 RSC .
R. S. A. Sonthanasamy, S. Fazry, B. M. Yamin and A. M. Lazim, J. King Saud Univ., Sci., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.jksus.2018.05.004 .
S. Li, B. Weng, K. Lu and Y. Xu, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2018, 34, 708–718 CAS .
Y.-F. Huang, X. Zhou, R. Zhou, H. Zhang, K.-B. Kang, M. Zhao, Y. Peng, Q. Wang, H.-L. Zhang and W.-Y. Qiu, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 5640–5648 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, H. Shao, X. Bai, Y. Zhai, Y. Zhu, X. Chen, G. Pan, B. Dong, L. Xu, H. Zhang and H. Song, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29, 245702 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Hu, R. Tian, Y. Dong, J. Yang, J. Liu and Q. Chang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11665–11671 RSC .
L. Cao, S. Sahu, P. Anilkumar, C. E. Bunker, J. Xu, K. A. S. Fernando, P. Wang, E. A. Guliants, K. N. Tackett and Y.-P. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 4754–4757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Veca, A. Diac, I. Mihalache, P. Wang, G. E. LeCroy, E. M. Pavelescu, R. Gavrila, E. Vasile, A. Terec and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 613, 40–44 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhao and Y. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 196, 647–652 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, M. Luderer, X. Yang, C. Swain, H. Zhang, K. Nelson, A. J. Stacy, B. Shen, G. M. Lanza and D. Pan, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 677–686 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, P. Long, Y. Feng, C. Qin and W. Feng, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 2810–2816 RSC .
V. Milosavljevica, A. Moulicka, P. Kopela, V. Adama and R. Kizeka, Journal of Metallomics and Nanotechnologies, 2014, 3, 16–22 Search PubMed .
F. Wang, R. Deng, J. Wang, Q. Wang, Y. Han, H. Zhu, X. Chen and X. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lin, Y. Luo, P. Tsai, J. Wang and X. Chen, Metal ions doped carbon quantum dots: Synthesis, physicochemical properties, and their applications, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2018, 103, 87–101 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Q. Zhang, D.-K. Ma, Y. Zhuang, X. Zhang, W. Chen, L.-L. Hong, Q.-X. Yan, K. Yu and S.-M. Huang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16714–16718 RSC .
D. Qu, M. Zheng, L. Zhang, H. Zhao, Z. Xie, X. Jing, R. E. Haddad, H. Fan and Z. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhu, Q. Meng, L. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Song, H. Jin, K. Zhang, H. Sun, H. Wang and B. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3953–3957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, L. Yan, G. Ji, C. Wang, H. Gu, Q. Luo, Q. Chen, L. Chen, Y. Yang, C.-Q. Ma and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 2243–2253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, S. P. Lau, L. Tang, R. Ji and P. Yang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 5323–5328 RSC .
G. Kim, J. Kong, J. Kim, H. Kang, H. Back, H. Kim and K. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401298 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, Y. Shen, L. Sun, J. Li, C. Liu, W. Ren, F. Li, L. Gao, J. Chen, F. Liu, Y. Sun, N. Tang, H.-M. Cheng and Y. Du, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D.-H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
B. Guo, Q. Liu, E. Chen, H. Zhu, L. Fang and J. R. Gong, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 4975–4980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. N. R. Rao, K. Gopalakrishnan and A. Govindaraj, Nano Today, 2014, 9, 324–343 CrossRef CAS .
U. N. Maiti, W. J. Lee, J. M. Lee, Y. Oh, J. Y. Kim, J. E. Kim, J. Shim, T. H. Han and S. O. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 40–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-J. Jung, H.-R. Yu and Y.-S. Lee, Preparation of fluorinated graphite with high fluorine content and high crystallinity, Carbon Letters, 2018, 26, 112–116 Search PubMed .
Q. Feng, N. Tang, F. Liu, Q. Cao, W. Zheng, W. Ren, X. Wan and Y. Du, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 6729–6734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qian, X. Li, L. Tang, S. K. Lai, C. Lu and S. P. Lau, AIP Adv., 2016, 6, 075116 CrossRef .
X. Ren, J. Liu, J. Ren, F. Tang and X. Meng, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 19641–19646 RSC .
Q. Xu, J. Wei, J. Wang, Y. Liu, N. Li, Y. Chen, C. Gao, W. Zhang and T. S. Sreeprased, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 28745–28750 RSC .
Q. Xu, Y. Liu, R. Su, L. Cai, B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wang, N. Li, X. Gong, Z. Gu, Y. Chen, Y. Tan, C. Dong and T. S. Sreeprasad, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17919–17927 RSC .
F. Li, C. Liu, J. Yang, Z. Wang, W. Liu and F. Tian, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 3201–3205 RSC .
T. Liu, N. Li, J. X. Dong, H. Q. Luo and N. B. Li, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 231, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
B. B. Chen, Z. X. Liu, H. Y. Zou and C. Z. Huang, Analyst, 2016, 141, 2676–2681 RSC .
M. Li Liu, B. B. Chen, T. Yang, J. Wang, X. Dong Liu and C. Zhi Huang, Methods Appl. Fluoresc., 2017, 5, 015003 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhang, W. Xu, C. Han, X. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Li, W. Wu and M. Wu, Carbon, 2018, 126, 128–134 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, S. Yang, J. Sun, P. He, N. Yuan, J. Ding, R. Mo, G. Wang, G. Ding and X. Xie, Synth. Met., 2015, 209, 468–472 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liao, Z. Wang, S. Chen, H. Wu, X. Ma and M. Tan, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 66575–66581 RSC .
Y. H. Yuan, R. S. Li, Q. Wang, Z. L. Wu, J. Wang, H. Liu and C. Z. Huang, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 16841–16847 RSC .
N. Gong, H. Wang, S. Li, Y. Deng, X. A. Chen, L. Ye and W. Gu, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 10933–10939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Ren, X. X. Yuan, Y. P. Wang, C. L. Liu, Y. Qin, L. P. Guo and L. H. Liu, Opt. Mater., 2016, 57, 56–62 CrossRef CAS .
T. X. Caiyan Yu, Y. Chen, Z. Zhao, X. Liu, G. Lian and H. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 688, 611–619 CrossRef .
Y.-Q. Zhang, D.-K. Ma, Y.-G. Zhang, W. Chen and S.-M. Huang, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 545–552 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 623–636 RSC .
D. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, J. Xiong, H. Li and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704548 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Quan, X. Lin, N. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 2398–2416 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Y.-W. Tan, H. L. Stormer and P. Kim, Nature, 2005, 438, 201–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308–1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
X. Wang, G. Sun, N. Li and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2239–2262 RSC .

          R. W. Boyd, in Nonlinear Optics, ed. R. W. Boyd, Academic Press, San Diego, 2nd edn,  2003, pp. 1–65,  DOI:10.1016/B978-012121682-5/50002-X .

          G. de la Torre, M. Nicolau and T. Torres, in Supramolecular Photosensitive and Electroactive Materials, ed. H. S. Nalwa, Academic Press, San Diego,  2001, pp. 1–111,  DOI:10.1016/B978-012513904-5/50003-X .
X. Zeng, G. Wang, Y. Liu and X. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 2248–2266 RSC .
A. Naseri, M. Samadi, A. Pourjavadi, A. Z. Moshfegh and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23406–23433 RSC .
Y. Zhang, Q. Pan, G. Chai, M. Liang, G. Dong, Q. Zhang and J. Qiu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1943 CrossRef PubMed .
Y.-p. Sun, W. Ha, J. Chen, H.-y. Qi and Y.-p. Shi, Advances and applications of graphitic carbon nitride as sorbent in analytical chemistry for sample pretreatment: A review, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2016, 84, 12–21 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lin, H. Ou, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 3921–3931 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cao and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2101–2107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, S. Wang, Y. Li, J. Wang and L. Wang, Chem. – Asian J., 2017, 12, 1421–1434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Panneri, P. Ganguly, B. N. Nair, A. A. P. Mohamed, K. G. K. Warrier and U. N. S. Hareesh, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2017, 24, 8609–8618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, Z. Hou, L. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. Gao and X. Chen, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 317–323 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L. K. Putri, Y.-C. Tan, L.-L. Tan, N. Li, Y. H. Ng, X. Wen and S.-P. Chai, Unravelling charge carrier dynamics in protonated g-C3N4 interfaced with carbon nanodots as co-catalysts toward enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction: A combined experimental and first-principles DFT study, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1673–1696 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Cheng, H. Yu and J. Yu, Dalton Trans., 2017, 46, 6417–6424 RSC .
L. Dong, D. Liu, H. Fu, X. Li and L. Shan, Synthesis and Photocatalytic Activity of Fe3O4–WO3–CQD Multifunctional System, J. Inorg. Organomet. Polym. Mater., 2019, 29, 1297–1304 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batzill, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3275–3286 RSC .
H. Dong, G. Zeng, L. Tang, C. Fan, C. Zhang, X. He and Y. He, Water Res., 2015, 79, 128–146 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Zhang, S. Cao, M. Du, X. Ye, Y. Wang and J. Ye, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 91 CrossRef .
Y. Li, Z. Liu, Y. Wu, J. Chen, J. Zhao, F. Jin and P. Na, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 508–517 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ren, X. Liu, H. Chu, H. Yu, Y. Xu, W. Zheng, W. Lei, P. Chen, J. Li and C. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 488, 190–195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yu, Y. Zhao, C. Zhou, L. Shang, Y. Peng, Y. Cao, L.-Z. Wu, C.-H. Tung and T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3344–3351 RSC .
Q. Ma, Z. Zhang and Z. Yu, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 642, 148–152 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Tong, J. Cheng, Y. Liu and G. G. Siu, Scr. Mater., 2009, 60, 1093–1096 CrossRef CAS .
F. Haque, T. Daeneke, K. Kalantar-zadeh and J. Z. Ou, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 10, 23 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-S. Hu, L.-L. Ren, Y.-G. Guo, H.-P. Liang, A.-M. Cao, L.-J. Wan and C.-L. Bai, Angew. Chem., 2005, 117, 1295–1299 CrossRef .
F. Li, X. Liu, Q. Zhang, T. Kong and H. Jin, Cryst. Res. Technol., 2012, 47, 1140–1147 CrossRef CAS .
B. Peng, P. K. Ang and K. P. Loh, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 128–137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhao, C. Li, L. Wang, N. Liu, S. Qiao, B. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Liu and Z. Kang, Carbon, 2016, 99, 599–606 CrossRef CAS .
K.-J. Huang, L. Wang, J. Li and Y.-M. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2013, 178, 671–677 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Huo, P. Liu, Y. Tang, J. Xu, X. Liu and Y. Zhou, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 242, 327–336 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaur, S. Sharma and S. K. Kansal, Superlattices Microstruct., 2016, 98, 86–95 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8473–8488 RSC .
F. Deng, X. Lu, F. Zhong, X. Pei, X. Luo, S. Luo, D. D. Dionysiou and C. Au, Nanotechnology, 2015, 27, 065701 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Di, J. Xia, M. Ji, B. Wang, S. Yin, Q. Zhang, Z. Chen and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 20111–20123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, Y. Liang, W. Li, Y. Tian, X. Chen, D. Yin and Q. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 52614–52620 RSC .
Z. Zhang, T. Zheng, J. Xu, H. Zeng and N. Zhang, NANO, 2017, 12, 1750082 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, D. Yue, Z. Tian, M. Reng, Y. Zhu, M. Kan, T. Zhang and Y. Zhao, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 16–21 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhuo, M. Shao and S.-T. Lee, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 1059–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Di, J. Xia, Y. Ge, H. Li, H. Ji, H. Xu, Q. Zhang, H. Li and M. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168–169, 51–61 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, M.-Q. Yang, S. Liu, Y. Sun and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 10307–10377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shaikh, S. K. Singh, S. Khilari, M. Sahu and K. V. S. Ranganath, Catal. Commun., 2018, 106, 64–67 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Moon, E. H. Gwag and J. Y. Park, Energy Technol., 2018, 6, 459–469 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, S. Ray, A. B. Ghosh, P. K. Samanta, S. Samanta, B. Adhikary and P. Biswas, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2018, 32, e4199 CrossRef .
J. Low, S. Cao, J. Yu and S. Wageh, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10768–10777 RSC .
X.-Y. Dong, R. Wang, J.-Z. Wang, S.-Q. Zang and T. C. W. Mak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 641–647 RSC .
P. Niu, L. Zhang, G. Liu and H.-M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 4763–4770 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiang and J. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 753–759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054–11057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Min and G. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 19644–19652 CrossRef CAS .
E. Singh, Z. Chen, F. Houshmand, W. Ren, Y. Peles, H.-M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Small, 2013, 9, 75–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, W. Ren, L. Gao, B. Liu, S. Pei and H.-M. Cheng, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen and L. Yan, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3132–3137 RSC .
Z.-L. Wang, D. Xu, J.-J. Xu, L.-L. Zhang and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3699–3705 CrossRef CAS .
H.-P. Cong, X.-C. Ren, P. Wang and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2693–2703 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Hu, Z. Zhao, W. Wan, Y. Gogotsi and J. Qiu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2219–2223 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Worsley, P. J. Pauzauskie, T. Y. Olson, J. Biener, J. H. Satcher and T. F. Baumann, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 14067–14069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-Q. Yang, N. Zhang, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 8240–8254 RSC .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5852–5855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Wang, K.-Q. Lu, F. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang and Y.-J. Xu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 233, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, L. Si, J. Geng, Y. Su, Y. Li, X. Yan and L. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 204, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wu, S. Yang, Y. Sun, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9082–9085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Velický and P. S. Toth, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 8, 68–103 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, N. R. Monahan, Z. Gong, H. Zhu, K. W. Williams and C. A. Nelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8313–8320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pirsaheb, A. Asadi, M. Sillanpää and N. Farhadian, J. Mol. Liq., 2018, 271, 857–871 CrossRef CAS .
P. Döll, T. Trautmann, D. Gerten, H. M. Schmied, S. Ostberg, F. Saaed and C.-F. Schleussner, Environ. Res. Lett., 2018, 13, 044038 CrossRef .
M. G. Grillakis, A. G. Koutroulis, K. D. Seiradakis and I. K. Tsanis, Clim. Serv., 2016, 1, 30–38 CrossRef .
J. Hong, W. Zhang, J. Ren and R. Xu, Anal. Methods, 2013, 5, 1086–1097 RSC .
X. Y. Kong, W. L. Tan, B.-J. Ng, S.-P. Chai and A. R. Mohamed, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 1720–1731 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang and K. Qiu, Chem. Eng. J., 2010, 165, 209–217 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and Z. Yang, Industrial water pollution, water environment treatment, and health risks in China, Environ. Pollut., 2016, 218, 358–365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yu, J. Liu, Y. Yu, S. Zuo and B. Li, Carbon, 2014, 68, 718–724 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fan, S. Liu and J. Yu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 17027–17036 RSC .
A. Ajmal, I. Majeed, R. N. Malik, H. Idriss and M. A. Nadeem, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 37003–37026 RSC .
T. Paul, P. L. Miller and T. J. Strathmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 4720–4727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Guo, W. Shi, W. Guan, H. Huang and Y. Liu, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2017, 173, 295–303 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hong, Y. Meng, G. Zhang, B. Yin, Y. Zhao, W. Shi and C. Li, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2016, 171, 229–237 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Xu, L. Dong and J. Ren, Chapter 2 - Introduction of Hydrogen Routines, in Hydrogen Economy, ed. A. Scipioni, A. Manzardo and J. Ren, Academic Press,  2017, pp. 35–54 Search PubMed .
M. Matsuoka, M. Kitano, M. Takeuchi, K. Tsujimaru, M. Anpo and J. M. Thomas, Catal. Today, 2007, 122, 51–61 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Y.-Q. Zhong, B.-Q. Yu, S.-Y. Cai, L.-Z. Wu and Y. Zhou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 20338–20344 RSC .
Y. Sui, L. Wu, S. Zhong and Q. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 480, 810–816 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Jiang, E. Sharman, L. Yang, X. Li, G. Zhang, J. Zhao, Y. Luo and J. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 6143–6148 RSC .
J. Pan, M. You, C. Chi, Z. Dong, B. Wang, M. Zhu, W. Zhao, C. Song, Y. Zheng and C. Li, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 6586–6593 CrossRef CAS .
L. Kuang and W. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 2479–2488 RSC .
J. Lasek, Y.-H. Yu and J. C. S. Wu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2013, 14, 29–52 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tao, S. Zhu, T. Feng, C. Xia, Y. Song and B. Yang, The polymeric characteristics and photoluminescence mechanism in polymer carbon dots: A review, Mater. Today Chem., 2017, 6, 13–25 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
Sue Jiun Phang	Sue Jiun Phang received her MEng degree in Chemical Engineering with Oil and Gas Technology from the School of Engineering and Physical Science (EPS), Heriot-Watt University, in 2018. She is currently pursuing a Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering at Heriot-Watt University Malaysia under the supervision of Dr. Tan Lling-Lling. Her research work focuses on the design and development of carbon quantum dots (CQDs) and two-dimensional hybrid nanocomposites for photocatalytic applications in energy and environmental-related fields.
Lling-Lling Tan	Lling-Lling Tan received her Ph.D. degree in Chemical Engineering from the School of Engineering, Monash University, in 2015. She is currently an assistant professor at the School of Engineering and Physical Sciences (EPS) at Heriot-Watt University Malaysia. She is an early career researcher who is active in the areas of advanced materials, nanotechnology and catalysis. Her research interests include the design and development of two-dimensional hybrid nanocomposites (e.g., graphene- and graphitic carbon nitride-based materials) for energy and environmental-related applications. In 2017, she received the Young Researcher Award from IChemE Malaysia, in recognition of her work in the field of photocatalysis.

 	Fig. 1  (A) The number of publications relating to CQDs for photocatalytic applications from 2009–2018. (B) The number of citations relating to CQDs for photocatalytic applications from 2009–2018.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) A schematic representation of the photocatalysis mechanism of semiconductors. (B) The band structures of common 2D semiconductors.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) The absorption and luminescence spectra of PPEI-EI CQDs from 400–800 nm (inset: normalized spectral peaks at different wavelengths); adapted with permission;49 copyright: 2006, American Chemical Society. (B) PL spectra of CQDs at different excitation wavelengths of 300–460 nm; adapted with permission;53 copyright: 2008, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) A schematic representation of three photoactive species at different temperatures. As the temperature increases, the PL component associated with the carbogenic cores (black bars) increases at the expense of the component that arises from the fluorophores (blue bars); adapted with permission;58 copyright: 2012, American Chemical Society. (B) The UCPL properties of CQDs dispersed in water at excitation wavelengths from 805 nm to 1035 nm; adapted with permission;59 copyright: 2012, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Dm(nm) = 0.3w	(1)

 	Fig. 5  TEM images of CQDs synthesized under (A) and (B) subcritical; (C) and (D) near critical; and (E) and (F) supercritical conditions; insets: the size distributions of the CQDs. Adapted with permission;71 copyright: 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  A schematic illustration of the surface functionalization and surface passivation of CQDs.	 
CCl4 + NaNH2 → N-CQDs + NaCl + N2 + NH3 + by-products	(2)

 	Fig. 7  (A) The PL emission spectra of Gd3+-CQDs obtained at different excitation wavelengths (inset: the normalized PL spectra); adapted with permission;131 copyright: 2016, Elsevier. (B) The PL emission spectra of Cu-CQDs; adapted with permission;120 copyright: 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) PL spectra (λex = 320 nm) of CQDs, GO and CQD/GO in aqueous solution at room temperature. (B) PL spectra of the CQD/GO hybrid at different excitation wavelengths. Adapted with permission;53 copyright: 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  The synthesis of the carbon dots (CDs)/g-C3N4 composite: (A) melamine; (B) bulk g-C3N4; (C) an L-ascorbic acid/bulk g-C3N4 complex; and (D) CDs/g-C3N4. Adapted with permission;155 copyright: 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  The characterization of the CQDs/MoS2 composite: (A) low and (B) high magnification TEM images. Adapted with permission;169 copyright: 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) The advantages of 2D layered materials in comparison with 0D and 1D materials. (B) An illustration of 0D/0D, 0D/1D and 0D/2D composites. Adapted with permission;185 copyright: 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 12  (A) The mechanism of the indirect dye degradation process. (B) The mechanism of the direct dye degradation process. Adapted with permission;214 copyright: 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  The photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants in the presence of pure Bi2WO6 and CQDs/Bi2WO6 hybrid materials under visible light irradiation: (A) RhB; (B) CIP; (C) BPA; and (D) TC-HCl. Adapted with permission;180 copyright: 2018, Elsevier.	 
H2O → H2 + 1/2O2, ΔG = 237 kJ mol−1	(6)

 	Fig. 14  (A) The photocatalysis process for hydrogen production; adapted with permission;224 copyright: 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (B) The separation of H2 and O2 molecules by a C3N4 layer; adapted with permission;222 copyright: 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) The mechanism of hydrogen production with CQD-decorated TiO2/g-C3N4 nano-heterojunctions; adapted with permission;223 copyright: 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  A schematic illustration of the mechanism for the CQDs/CdS photocatalytic process; adapted with permission;1 copyright: 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


CQDs/2D g-C3N4	3 wt%	Electrostatic attraction at 120 °C for 4 h	Vis: >400, 500 W Xe lamp	Reduction of CO2	Yield: 29.23 and 58.82 μmol gcatalyst−1 of CH4 and CO, respectively	
145

0.5 wt%	Mechanical mixing for 12 h	Vis: 420, 250 W Xe lamp	Degradation of RhBa and TC-HCLb	
k = 0.01438 min−1 (RhB) and 0.00642 min−1 (TC-HCl)	
208

CQDs/2D g-C3N4	10 wt%	Hydrothermal at 180 °C for 4 h	UV: 365, 3 W LED lamp, 80 mW cm−2	Production of H2	2.2 μmol h−1	
146

Pt-CQDs/2D g-C3N4	10 wt%	Hydrothermal at 180 °C for 4 h	UV: 365; vis: 420, 3 W LED lamp, 80 mW cm−2	Production of H2	183 μmol h−1	
146

48.1 μmol h−1
CQDs/2D g-C3N4/2D ZnO	4 wt%	Mechanical mixing for 2 h	Vis: >420 nm, Xe lamp, 18 mW cm−2	Degradation of TC-HCl	
k = 0.082 min−1	
207

CQDs/2D Fe3O4/2D WO3	10 wt%	Co-precipitation at 220 °C for 4 h	Vis: λ not specified	Degradation of RhB	65.56% in 240 min	
147

CQDs/2D TiO2	0.2 M	Hydrothermal at 160 °C for 4 h	Vis: >420, 300 W Xe lamp, 25.6 mW cm−2	Reduction of chromium Cr(VI)	
k = 0.027 min−1	
151

10 mL	Vis: >420, 500 W Xe lamp	Degradation of RhB	95.4% in 60 min	
203, 204
0.5 wt%	Hydrothermal at 140 °C for 4 h	500 W Hg lamp, λ not specified	Production of H2	79.3 μmol g−1 h−1	
211

10 mL g−1	300 W Xe lamp, λ not specified	7.9 μmol h−1	
212

CQDs/2D g-C3N4/2D TiO2	6.7 wt%	Oven drying at 85 °C for 12 h	Vis: >400, 300 W Xe lamp	Production of H2	6.497 μmol g−1 h−1	
214

CQDs/2D ZnO	0.3 mol	Hydrothermal at 90 °C for 24 h	UV: 365, 300 W Hg lamp	Degradation of RhB	95% in 30 min	
154, 155
CQDs/2D ZnS	16 wt%	Chemical precipitation at 160 °C for 3 h	Vis: 400–520, 150 W lamp	Degradation of ARSc dye	89% in 250 min	
163

CQDs/2D BiOCl	150 mL	Template free co-precipitation at room temperature for 12 h	Vis: >400 nm, 300 W Xe lamp	Degradation of 2-NPd	∼100% in 120 min	
165

5 wt%	Solvothermal method at 160 °C for 3 h	Vis: 400, 300 W Xe lamp	Degradation of RhB and BPAe	89% (RhB) and 92% (BPA) in 40 min	
166

CQDs/2D BiOBr/2D BiOCl	4 wt%	Solvothermal method at 180 °C for 2 h	UV: 400, 300 W Xe lamp	Degradation of RhB	
k = 0.0609 min−1	
167

CQDs/2D Bi2WO6	3 wt%	Hydrothermal at 160 °C for 20 h	500 W Xe lamp, λ not specified	Degradation of RhB	Degradation efficiency of 97.0% in 10 min	
168

2 wt%	Hydrothermal at 140 °C for 24 h	Vis: >400; NIR: >700, 500 W Xe lamp	Reduction of CO2	CH4 yields: 7.19 and 0.41 μmol gcatalyst−1 in 8 h under vis and NIR, respectively	
200

2 wt%	Hydrothermal at 140 °C for 24 h	Vis: 400, 300 W Xe lamp	Degradation of RhB, CIP,f BPA and TC-HCl	Degradation efficiencies of 90% (RhB), 95% (BPA), 90% (CIP) and 80% (TC-HCl) in 120 min	
171

CQDs/2D Bi2WO6	2 wt%	Wet-impregnation and ultrasonication	Vis: >420; UV-vis: λ not specified, 500 W Xe lamp, ∼400 mW cm−2	Removal of gaseous VOCsg	CO2 production: under vis: 47 ppm h−1 (acetone); under UV-vis: 10 μmol h−1 (acetone); 1.5 μmol h−1 (toluene)	
169

CQDs/2D CdS	8.25 mmol	Electrophoretic and chemical bath deposition method	Vis: >420, 3 W LED lamp	Reduction of nitrobenzene derivatives	Reduction efficiency: 72% (p-NAh); 90% (4-NCBi 90% (BNBj) in 150 min	
218

CQDs/2D GO	8 vol%	One-step electrochemical at 30 V for 120 h	UV: 340	Photonic logic and light conversion devices	Significant decrease in the emission peak (1750000 a.u.) upon excitation at 340 nm	
45


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
