Graphene based catalysts  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE22238H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE22238H
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8848-8868Graphene based catalysts

        
          
            Cancan 
            Huang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chun 
            Li
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Gaoquan 
            Shi
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, People’s Republic of China. E-mail: gshi@tsinghua.edu.cn;  Fax: +86-6277-1149;   Tel: +86-62773743
Received 
      15th May 2012
    , Accepted 20th August 2012First published on 20th August 2012AbstractGraphene has a unique atom-thick two-dimensional (2D) structure, high conductivity and charge mobility, huge specific surface area, excellent mechanical, thermal and electrical properties. Thus, it has been regarded as an important component for functional materials, especially for developing a variety of catalysts. In this review, we summarize the recent advancements in synthesizing graphene based new catalysts, and their applications in organic synthesis, sensors, environmental protection and energy related systems.Cancan HuangMiss Cancan Huang received her B.Eng. from the Department of Materials at Beijing Institute of Technology in 2010. She is currently a M.Sci. candidate in Prof. Gaoquan Shi’s Laboratory at the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University. Her research interests focus on graphene based catalysts.Chun LiDr Chun Li received his PhD in 1998 from Nanjing University under the supervision of Prof. Yingqiu Liang. He then joined Nanjing University as a lecturer. From 2001 to 2003 he was a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Toyoko Imae at Nagoya University. In 2003 he moved to Kyushu University as a postdoctoral research associate with Prof. Seiji Shinkai for 2 years. Now he is an associate professor at Tsinghua University. His research interests focus on conjugated polymers and supramolecular chemistry.Gaoquan ShiProf. Gaoquan Shi received his BS degree (1985) and PhD degree (1992) at the Department of Chemistry, Nanjing University. Then he joined Nanjing University and was promoted to full professor in 1995. In 2000, he moved to Tsinghua University as a Professor of Chemistry. His research interests are focused on synthesis and applications of graphene materials and conducting polymers. He received the 2nd Grade Award of Natural Science of China and the Youth Knowledge Innovation Prize of the Chinese Chemical Society and BASF Company in 2004.

Broader context
Catalysts are widely used in organic synthesis, environmental protection and energy related systems. The conventional catalysts are noble metals, metal oxides, enzymes, etc. The practical applications of these catalysts are frequently limited by their high costs, low efficiency, toxicity, or environmental issues. To address these problems, recently, graphene has been widely explored to replace conventional catalysts or as supporting material for improving the performance of catalysts. The atom-thick 2D structure of graphene provides it with an extraordinarily large specific surface area for loading catalysts. The high conductivity and optical transparency of graphene sheets are propitious to the charge generation and transportation in catalyzation processes, making it attractive for developing new electrocatalysts or photocatalysts. Graphene also has high chemical, thermal, optical and electrochemical stability, which can possibly improve the lifetime of catalysts. This review paper summarizes the different methods of producing graphene based catalysts for applications in organic reactions, fuel cells, electrochemical sensors, photo-degradation of organic pollutants and photodecomposition of water. This review addresses the current limitations, technical and economical viability of these new catalysts, and indicates their potentials in environmental and energy technologies.

1. Introduction
Catalysts are substances that can accelerate chemical reactions and/or improve reaction selectivity without consuming themselves.1 In comparison with non-catalytic counterparts, the catalyzed reactions perform through more energy efficient routes, in which reactants are able to be used more efficiently, and undesired products and pollutants are possible to be reduced.1,2 Hence, the applications of catalysts are important for using our limited resources in an environmentally responsible manner, impacting heavily on our daily lives.3 For example, catalysts have been used in synthesizing new pharmaceuticals that improve our health.4 Catalysts are widely applied in systems related to generating, converting or storing energies, such as oil refinery, new fuel productions, batteries, solar and fuel cells.5–8 Catalysts are also essential to environmental protections, reducing emissions of modern cars, monitoring and removing pollutants from air, soil or water, etc.9,10
Catalysts can be natural or synthetic materials such as enzymes, organic compounds, metals and metal oxides.11–13 Carbon nanomaterials including Carbon Black, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), graphene and their derivatives are important components of many synthetic catalysts. They have been used as effective catalysts or as supports of other catalysts.14–19 Among the carbon materials described above, graphene has recently attracted the most intensive attention.20–22 This is mainly due to the fact that graphene has several genuine advantages over other carbon allotropes for developing new catalysts. First, graphene has a theoretical specific surface areas as high as ∼2600 m2 g−1, being twice that of single walled CNTs and much higher than those of most Carbon Black and activated carbons. This structure characteristics makes graphene highly desirable for potential application as a 2-D support for loading catalyst.23–25 Moreover, the locally conjugated structure endows graphene with enhanced adsorption capacities towards substrates in the catalytic reaction.26 Second, graphene materials, especially chemically modified graphene (CMG), can be obtained at relatively low cost on a large scale by using graphite, graphite oxide and its derivatives as the starting materials.22–25 The graphene materials are free from the nearly inevitable metallic impurities present in CNTs, which would impede the CNT performance in catalytic reactions.27,28 Third, the superior electron mobility of graphene facilitates the electron transfer during the catalytic reactions, improving its catalytic activity.29,30 Finally, graphene also has high chemical, thermal, optical and electrochemical stabilities, which can possibly improve the lifetime of catalysts.31
High-quality graphene materials prepared by micromechanical exfoliation, epitaxial growth and chemical vapour deposition (CVD) have band gaps equal or close to zero.32–34 Thus, they have weak catalytic activities.35 However, their catalytic performances can be improved by doping with heteroatoms such as nitrogen, boron or sulfur because of providing more active sites and tuning their band gaps.36 On the other hand, the graphene materials prepared through chemical approaches, CMGs, have structural defects and residual functional groups.37–40 Their conductivities are in the range of insulators to conductors, and most of them are semiconductors.41 They can form stable dispersions in aqueous or organic media, and can be blended with other nanomaterials to form functional composites.41 Therefore, CMGs are promising catalysts and also attractive components for developing new catalysts. Actually, CMGs, such as graphene oxide (GO), reduced graphene oxide (rGO) have been widely explored as catalysts for chemical, electrochemical or optical reactions, or as carbonaceous supports for loading catalysts of metals, oxides, enzymes or other carbon nanomaterials.42 In this review, we will summarize the recent advancements on the synthesis and applications of graphene based catalysts.
2. Synthesis of the catalysts
Graphene based catalysts can be simply classified into two types: inherent and composite catalysts. The inherent catalysts are made of pure graphene materials and typical examples are GO, rGO and heteroatom doped graphene. A graphene based composite catalyst is a graphene material blended with one or more other catalysts.24,25,41,43 In this catalyst, graphene usually acts as a conductive substrate for immobilizing the second catalytic component. The catalytic activities of inherent catalysts are mainly associated with the compositions and structures of graphene sheets. However, the performance of a graphene based composite catalyst depends on the intrinsic properties and interfacial interaction and/or synergistic effect of its components.44 In some cases, inherent catalysts are dispersible in reaction media and behave like homogenous polymer catalysts,45 while the composite catalysts are usually insoluble and act as heterogeneous catalysts.46 The lifetimes of inherent catalysts rely on the morphological and structural stability of graphene materials, while those of the composite catalysts were mainly controlled by the stability of the catalyst immobilized on graphene sheets.47 Inherent graphene catalysts can be synthesized through a wet chemical approach, CVD, or post-treatment of graphene sheets. The composite catalysts are usually prepared by mixing and in situ growth. In this section, the methods of synthesizing graphene based catalysts are outlined.
2.1 Inherent catalysts

2.1.1 GO. 
GO is usually synthesized by exfoliation of graphite oxide obtained by the oxidation of natural graphite powder with various oxidants in acidic media.48–51 A typical method of synthesizing graphite oxide was developed by Hummers and Offeman.40 In this case, graphite was oxidized by KMnO4 and NaNO3 in concentrated H2SO4 to form graphite oxide. Then, graphite oxide was exfoliated into single-layered GO sheets in water by ultrasonication to form a stable aqueous dispersion. The GO product can be purified by centrifugation and dialysis to remove aggregates and various inorganic impurities such as metal ions and acids. The thickness of a GO sheet was measured to be around 1 nm.41 This value is about 3 times that of a clean graphene sheet, mainly due to the presence of a variety of oxygenated groups. Therefore, GO sheets are dispersible in water or polar organic solvents such as propylene carbonate (PC), N-methylpyrrolidone (NMP) and N,N-dimethylformide (DMF).52
Introducing oxygenated groups greatly destroyed the conjugated structure of graphite. Therefore, a heavily oxidized GO is an insulator. To modulate the size, composition and properties of GO sheets, several modified Hummers' methods were developed.31,42,53–56 For example, Kovtyukhova and co-workers increased the productivity of GO by pre-oxidation of graphite with K2S2O8 and P2O5 in H2SO4.54 Marcano et al. used KMnO4 as the only oxidant and a 9:1 mixture of concentrated H2SO4–H3PO4 as the acidic medium to prepare GO.55 The GO produced by this method is more heavily oxidized than that prepared by Hummers' method. Furthermore, during the preparation process, there were no toxic gases (such as NO2 and N2O) released from the reaction system. More recently, mildly oxidized GO was prepared by reducing the weight ratio of KMnO4 to graphite from 3:1 (Hummers' method) to 1:1.56 The mildly oxidized GO has a larger π-conjugated structure, fewer oxygenated functionalities than those of the GO prepared by the typical Hummers' method.


2.1.2 rGO. 
rGO is usually prepared by reducing GO in a solid or dispersing state. Chemical reduction is the most widely used technique. A variety of inorganic or organic compounds such as hydrazine monohydrate, hydroiodic acid, sodium borohydride, hydroquinone, bovine serum albumin and vitamin C have been used as reducing agents.52,57–69 rGO sheets have much more conjugated domains and more hydrophobic property than their GO precursors.52,62 Therefore, they are usually aggregated as irregular precipitates because of strong π-stacking and hydrophobic interactions. Chemical modifications or controlling the pH values of their solutions can improve the dispersibility of rGO sheets.22,39,70–73 For instance, Li and co-workers developed an effective technique for producing processible rGO by adjusting the pH value of the reaction solution with ammonia to be around 10.72 The ionization of residual carboxyl groups of rGO sheets enhanced their repulsion force, leading to increase of dispersibility. Heating GO in alkaline medium (8 M NaOH or KOH) at moderate temperature can also produce a stable rGO suspension.74
Most of the reducing agents described above are toxic or difficult to handle for large scale production. To avoid utilizing harmful chemicals or introducing additional functional groups to rGO sheets, reductive metals such as iron and zinc have been explored as the reducing agents for the reduction of GO.75–77 This approach involves use of reductive metals and mineral acid at room temperature, providing a facile, rapid, green and effective method to rGO. Green tea was also tested to be capable of reducing GO into rGO. The aromatic tea polyphenol has a strong interaction with rGO sheets. As a result, the resulting rGO can form stable dispersions in both aqueous and a variety of organic solvents.63
GO can also be converted to rGO by thermal, microwave-assisted thermal, hydrothermal or solvothermal reduction.74,78–81 These techniques have been widely used to produce highly conductive rGO with few residual oxygenated groups on a large scale. Electrochemical reduction of GO is also an effective and clean route to rGO.82,83 Particularly, it provides a unique controllable method for depositing thin rGO films with desired shapes or patterns. Treating GO films with a light flash or laser beam can produce patterned rGO films.84,85 Recently, an infrared laser inside a commercially available LightScribe CD/DVD optical drive has been applied to reduce GO, and a highly conductive rGO film (1738 S m−1) was obtained.85


2.1.3 Heteroatom doped graphene. 
2.1.3.1 
              In situ growth. 
The in situ growth strategy is a typical “bottom-up” method. In this method, heteroatoms are doped in graphene during its growth process. Doping graphene with heteroatoms such as nitrogen, sulfur, boron or iodine can not only keep the intrinsic physical/chemical properties of graphene, but can also provide graphene with new catalytic properties.86–88 CVD is a promising technique for this purpose.89–92 For example, an N-doped graphene was prepared by CVD using a gaseous mixture of NH3, CH4, H2 and Ar, in which CH4 and NH3 acted as the carbon and nitrogen sources, respectively. It was demonstrated that nitrogen existed as pyridine N and pyrrolic N, and was incorporated into the graphene hexagon rings.92
A solvothermal process has also been developed for the synthesis of N-doped graphene following the “bottom-up” strategy.93 For example, the reaction of lithium nitride (1 g) and tetrachloromethane (20 mL) was carried out at 250 °C for 5–10 h in a 40 mL stainless steel autoclave in nitrogen. After washing sequentially with 18 wt% HCl aqueous solution, water and ethanol, clean N-doped graphene was obtained. Another method known as detonation reaction could also be used for the preparation of N-doped graphene. The detonation reaction of cyanuric chloride and trinitrophenol was carried out at a high temperature of 320 °C and under a high pressure of 60 MPa. The N/C atomic ratio of the resulting N-doped graphene was measured to be as high as 12.5%.94
2.1.3.2 Post-treatment. 
The post-treatment strategy is introducing heteroatoms into graphene frameworks by treating graphene materials with compounds containing heteroatoms through chemical or physical approaches. For example, annealing GO in an NH3 flow over a wide range of temperatures from room temperature to 1100 °C can produce N-doped graphene.95 It was confirmed that the N states in the graphene sheets are dependent on annealing temperature, indicating the presence of different reaction active sites in GO sheets at different temperatures. Similarly, N-doped graphene nanoribbons can also be prepared by thermal annealing or electrochemical reaction of graphene nanoribbons in an ammonia atmosphere.88
Except ammonia, nitrogen-rich organic compounds including melamine, dicyanodiamide, pyrrole, pyrimidine-2,4,5,6-tetramine-sulfuric acid hydrate (PTAm) were also used as sources of nitrogen atoms.71,96–98 In these cases, a typical process is divided into two steps: mixing (or modification) and post-treatment. Melamine is an ideal nitrogen source with nitrogen content of about 66 wt%.96,97 We mixed melamine and GO in deionized water with a pH value of 10, and the mixture was reduced by hydrazine monohydrate, followed by filtering into a film.97 Finally, the melamine molecules absorbed on rGO sheets were polymerized at 450 °C to yield N-doped graphene material with a sandwich structure. Polypyrrole was reported as one of the starting materials to carbon–nitrogen (CNx)/rGO composite.99 The pyrrole monomer was mixed with thermally reduced GO and polymerized by using ammonium peroxydisulfate as the oxidant. The polypyrrole/rGO composite was then subjected to annealing under Ar at 600 or 800 °C, to yield CNx/rGO composites. In the case of using dicyanodiamide as the source of N atoms, GO was blended with dicyanodiamide via an electrostatic interaction. Successively, the composite was hydrothermally reacted at 180 °C to form N-doped graphene.71 Jeon et al. synthesized edge-functionalized graphite (EFG) by the reaction of 4-aminobenzoic acid and pristine graphite to afford 4-aminobenzoyl-functionalized graphite.100 Then, EFG was dispersed in NMP and dip-coated on a glassy carbon electrode. After the treatment at 900 °C for 3 h under argon atmosphere, edge N-doped graphite was obtained.
The post-treatment methods described above usually decrease the specific areas of the resulting catalysts, due to aggregation of graphene sheets. To overcome this problem, Müllen and co-workers prepared nanoporous N-doped graphene by using a template method (Fig. 1A).101 First, GO sheets coated by porous silica were synthesized by hydrolysis of tetraethyl orthosilicate with the help of a cationic surfactant (cetyltrimethyl ammonium bromide, CTAB). Then, GO component was converted to rGO by heating under argon. Further pyrolysis of rGO-based silica nanosheets impregnated with ethylenediamine and carbon tetrachloride was carried out at different temperatures (600, 800 and 1000 °C) to yield carbon nitride (CN). CN layers were coated on the surfaces of rGO sheets. Finally, silica was removed by etching with a 2 M NaOH solution to get the porous nitrogen-doped graphene. The specific surface areas of these porous N-doped graphene materials (Fig. 1B) were measured to be 542 m2 g−1, much higher than that of the nonporous carbon nitride (5 m2 g−1). Unfortunately, in this method, the porous silica was used as the solid template and the template had to be etched after the formation of the carbon nitride. To avoid complex multiple steps, our group reported a simple soft template method. We used a triblock copolymer (Pluronic F127) as the soft template and a phenol-melamine-formaldehyde pre-polymer (PMF) as the precursor of carbon nitride to prepare nanoporous CN/rGO composite.102 Pluronic F127 guided the assembly of PMF prep-polymer chains on the surfaces of rGO sheets to form a nanoporous structure. After hydrothermal and carbonizing treatments, nanoporous N-doped carbon modified graphene (G-PMF) sheets were obtained (Fig. 1C). They have a large specific surface area of 190 to 630 m2 g−1 and their morphology and nitrogen contents can be modulated by adjusting the volume ratio of GO to PMF precursors.
 Fig. 1  (A) Fabrication of porous graphene-based carbon nitride (G-CN). (B) TEM images of G–CN nanosheets, reproduced with permission from ref. 101 © 2011 Wiley-VCH. (C) TEM images of nanoporous N-doped carbon modified graphene (G-PMFs), reproduced with permission from ref. 102 © 2012 Royal Society Chemistry. 
Other approaches of converting GO to N-doped graphene include a hydrothermal reaction and plasma treatment. Yoon’s group developed a simple hydrothermal reaction of GO, hydrazine hydrate and ammonia to produce N-doped graphene.103 The hydrothermal process has the advantages of a simple operation, mild synthesis conditions, and capability to deliver relatively large quantities. Shao et al. prepared N-doped graphene by plasma treatment of GO in nitrogen atmosphere. The N atoms are in the states of pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, quaternary-N and N-oxides of pyridinic-N.104
Except nitrogen, sulfur, boron and iodine are rarely used as doping atoms.60,105–108 Sulfur-doped graphene (S-graphene) was prepared by direct annealing of a mixture of graphene oxide and benzyl disulfide (BDS) in argon.109,110 Se-doped graphene can also be obtained through the same procedure by replacing BDS with diphenyl diselenide. Iodine-doped graphene was prepared by annealing GO and iodine at 500–1100 °C in argon.111 The iodine-bonding states were examined to be triiodide (I3−) and pentaiodide (I5−). Boron doped graphene was prepared by CVD technique and using triisopropylborate (C9H21BO3) as a source of carbon and boron atoms.112

2.2 Composite catalysts

2.2.1 Graphene/metal nanoparticle composites. 
To prepare graphene/metal nanoparticle composites, GO and metal salt were usually used as the precursors of both components.113 A composite based on metal ions and GO is usually prepared first, followed by reduction treatment. A variety of graphene/metal nanoparticle composites could be prepared through this procedure. Typically, Pd/rGO can be prepared by reducing the mixture of GO and palladium acetate in water.47 In this case, a uniform Pd2+/GO composite was prepared by mixing both components in water, and then the mixture was kept undisturbed overnight for ion exchange after a 5 min sonication. Successively, this composite was converted to Pd/rGO by reduction with hydrogen gas or hydrazine hydrate, or heating treatment at 500–600 °C. In the case of preparing Au/rGO, Zhang et al. used NaOH reduced GO (rGO) as one of the starting materials.114 Chloroauric acid (HAuCl4) was dissolved in the aqueous dispersion of rGO sheets stabilized by dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and then refluxed at 100 °C with magnetic stirring for 6 h to reduce the salt to Au nanoparticles. A Pd/rGO composite has also been synthesized analogously.115
The morphology and properties of metal/rGO composite catalysts depend strongly on their preparation conditions. Here, take Pt/rGO catalyst as an example. Li and co-workers mixed the aqueous solutions of GO and H2PtCl6 solution and adjusted the pH value of the mixture to 10 with 1 M NaOH.116 Then, NaBH4 was added slowly to the mixture as the reducing agent. The reduction reaction was carried out at room temperature under stirring for 24 h to get a solid Pt/rGO with Pt nanoclusters of 5–6 nm (Fig. 2A). Ruoff’s group prepared a Pt/rGO composite through a modified polyol process.117 They used H2PtCl6 as the Pt source, and ethylene glycol and NaBH4 as the reducing agents. The sizes of Pt nanoparticles in the resulting Pt/rGO showed a narrow distribution in the range of 2–3 nm (Fig. 2B). Honma and co-workers used Pt (NO2)2(NH3)2 as the precursor of Pt nanoparticles for producing Pt/rGO composites.118 In this case, they treated a mixture of Pt (NO2)2(NH3)2 and GO by annealing at 400 °C for 2 h. Extremely small Pt clusters (0.5–2 nm) without aggregation were formed and uniformly loaded on rGO sheets (Fig. 2C). On the other hand, when the graphene prepared by exfoliating bulk graphite in NMP was used as the starting material, the average Pt particles sizes can be controlled to be around 2.2 nm.119
 Fig. 2  (A) TEM image of Pt/rGO composite, reproduced with permission from ref. 116 © 2009 Elsevier B.V. (B) TEM image of Pt/rGO composite, reproduced with permission from ref. 117 © 2011 The Electrochemical Society. (C) HRTEM image of a Pt/graphene nanosheet composite, reproduced with permission from ref. 118 © 2009 American Chemical Society. 
To further improve the number density and distribution uniformity of metal nanoparticles on rGO sheets, graphene sheets have to be frequently modified with ionic moieties or polymers.10,120–124 A typical example is functionalizing GO or rGO sheets with poly(diallyldimethyl-ammonium chloride) (PDDA) via a non-covalent strategy. The PDDA component increased the surface positive charges of graphene sheets and enhanced their electrostatic interaction with the anions of the metal precursor. A Pt–PDDA-rGO was prepared following this strategy by reducing the mixture of PtCl62− and PDDA modified GO sheets with NaBH4.120 In this composite, Pt nanoparticles with uniform sizes (ca. 4.6 nm) were homogenously decorated on both sides of rGO sheets and they effectively prevented the aggregation of graphene sheets. Moreover, the loading density of Pt nanoparticles can be modulated by adjusting the mass ratio of both precursors. 1-Pyrenebutyrate functionalized rGO sheets were applied as support of positively charged Au nanoparticles.125 The negative charges provided by pyrenebutyrate moieties make rGO sheets capable of loading Au nanoparticles with diameters of 2–5 nm up to about 300 times that of rGO own weight. The Au nanoparticles were immobilized on both surfaces of an rGO sheet as monolayers and they successfully prevented the aggregation of graphene sheets. As a result, the composite can be re-dispersed in water upon sonication. More recently, Yang et al. introduced CNT onto graphene sheets and used the hybrid as support material of Pd nanoparticles.126 They demonstrated that CNT could also inhibit the agglomeration of graphene sheets.
Electrochemical deposition has been widely applied for the preparation of graphene/metal nanoparticle composites.127–129 For example, an rGO film coated ITO acted as the substrate for electrodepositing Pt nanoparticles from an aqueous solution of H2PtCl6. It was found that Pt nanoparticles were uniformly immobilized on graphene film.127
A hybrid electrode based on freestanding rGO paper and gold nanoparticles was fabricated by a combination of self-assembly and electrochemical reduction.130 In this case, Au nanoparticles (about 14 nm) were modified with poly(ethylene glycol) and a copolymer of methyl methacrylate and 4-vinyl pyridine and then assembled onto a GO film by dip-coating. Finally, the GO paper in the composite was reduced to rGO at −1.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl, PBS). In this case, Au nanoparticles were pre-prepared; thus, their sizes, morphology, amount, and distribution on the substrate are controllable.


2.2.2 Graphene/metal oxide composites. 
Many metal salts in their composites with graphene materials can be converted to metal oxides to form rGO/metal oxide composites. A typical example is using Co2+ ions as one of the starting materials.131 The reaction of cobalt acetate and anhydrous ethanol suspension of mildly oxidized GO (mGO) at 80 °C can form a composite of mGO and amorphous Co3O4. Further treatment of this composite hydrothermally at 150 °C not only converted amorphous Co3O4 into Co3O4 nanocrystals, but also reduced mGO, forming a Co3O4/rmGO composite. A composite of Co3O4 and N-doped rmGO composite (Co3O4/N-rmGO) was prepared through the same procedures by adding NH4OH into the mixture in the first step to provide a nitrogen source (Fig. 3A). This controlled two-step method can be extended to synthesize the composite of rGO and other nanocrystals of metal oxide. Recently, Dai’s group used the same two-step solvothermal method to synthesize MnCo2O4/rGO composite.132 Cu2O/rGO was also prepared by using Cu2+ and GO as the starting materials and diethylene glycol as the reducing agent.133
 Fig. 3  (A) TEM image of Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, reproduced with permission from ref. 131 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) Top-view SEM image of mesoporous anatase TiO2 nanospheres on graphene sheets, reproduced with permission from ref. 136 © 2011 Wiley-VCH. (C) SEM image of graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs, reproduced with permission from ref. 140 © 2012 Wiley-VCH. 
Hydrolysis of metal salts in the systems containing graphene materials is another route to graphene/oxide composites. For example, TiF4 can be hydrolyzed in an aqueous dispersion of GO (or rGO) to form a TiO2/GO (or TiO2/rGO) composite.134 This method yielded highly faceted anatase nanocrystals with petal-like morphology. It was found that the concentration of GO and mechanical stirring have a strong influence on the process of assembling TiO2 nanoparticles on GO sheets. TiCl4 was also used as the precursor for the preparation of TiO2/rGO nanocomposite.135 In another case, Li et al. treated the mixture of GO and titanium sulfate (Ti(SO4)2) at 100 °C in a sealed container to get TiO2/rGO composite.136 This is an effective method to form uniform mesoporous anatase TiO2 nanospheres on graphene sheets via a template-free self-assembly process (Fig. 3B). The residual epoxy and hydroxyl functional groups on graphene sheets acted as heterogeneous nucleation sites for anchoring anatase nanoparticles.
When a reductive metal ion such as Sn2+ or Ti3+ was used, rGO/metal oxide composite can be prepared via a one-step reaction. In this process, GO was reduced to rGO, while Sn2+ or Ti3+ were oxidized to SnO2 or TiO2.137
Graphene/metal oxide composites can also be prepared by simply mixing two components. A typical example is mixing TiO2 (P25, 80% anatase + 20% rutile) catalyst with GO dispersion (H2O:ethanol = 2:1).138 Successively, the mixture was treated hydrothermally at 120 °C for 3 h to convert GO to rGO. The reduction of GO can also be carried out by annealing at high temperatures or through a microwave-hydrothermal approach. TiO2–GO hybrids with a core–shell structure were reported.139–141 The simplest technique to obtain the core–shell structure composite is to blend TiO2 nanoparticles and GO sheets in aqueous medium. The GO sheets were spontaneously exfoliated and reorganized on the surfaces of TiO2 particles. No chemical regents or thermal treatment is needed. For example, Lee et al. modified TiO2 nanoparticles with positively charged 3-aminopropytriethoxysilane, and then put them into a GO dispersion under stirring. Upon electrostatic interaction, GO sheets wrapped the functionalized TiO2 nanoparticles to form a core–shell structure (Fig. 3C).140


2.2.3 Other graphene based composite catalysts. 
Except metals and their oxides, a variety of other catalysts can also be immobilized onto graphene materials to form composite catalysts. Self-assembly is an effective technique to prepare these composites. For example, Dai and co-workers prepared PDDA-functionalized/adsorbed graphene as a catalyst like N-doped graphene by reducing GO with sodium borohydride (NaBH4) in the presence of PDDA.142 In this case, the electrostatic interaction between positively charged PDDA and negatively charged rGO sheets was the dominating driving force for self-assembly. In another case, we incorporated hemoglobin (Hb) into GO through π–π stacking and electrostatic interactions to form a GO/Hb composite hydrogel.143 In this hydrogel, GO sheets acted as 2D building blocks for constructing the frameworks and Hb molecules acted as crosslinkers. Analogously, pyridine capped CdSe QDs were self-assembled onto the surfaces of rGO sheets via a π–π stacking interaction between the conjugated domains of rGO sheets and the aromatic rings of pyridine moieties.144 Zhu et al. prepared a Ag/AgX/GO (X = Br and Cl) three-component composite by assembling the building blocks at a water/oil interface.145 They added an aqueous solution of GO and AgNO3 dropwise into a chloroform solution of surfactant (CTAB or cetyltrimethylammonium chloride). Ag/AgX component was formed at the water/chloroform interface and assembled on graphene sheets at room temperature.
A one-step hydrothermal or solvothermal reaction can also be used for the same purpose. For example, an N-doped graphene/ZnSe nanocomposite was prepared by hydrothermal treatment of the mixed solution of GO and ZnSe-(diethylenetriamine)0.5 [ZnSe(DETA)0.5].146 In this case, ZnSe(DETA)0.5 nanobelts acted as the sources of ZnSe and nitrogen atoms. After hydrothermal treatment, DETA was consumed, and the residual ZnSe particles were in a shape of nanorod. One-step solvothermal reaction of (NH4)2MoS4 and hydrazine in an DMF solution of mGO at 200 °C can produce a MoS2/rGO composite.147 Similarly, ZnFe2O4/rGO composite was obtained by a one-step hydrothermal reaction in ethanol solution of GO, Zn(NO3)2, and Fe(NO3)3 at 180 °C for 12 h.139,148 CdS/rGO composite was prepared by a solvothermal reaction of cadmium acetate in a DMSO dispersion of GO at 180 °C.149,150

3. Applications
As discussed above, graphene materials can be used to synthesize inherent and composite graphene-based catalysts. These catalysts have or combine the advantageous electrical, mechanical, optical and thermal properties of graphene materials with the abundant functions of the other catalysts.151 As a result, they have been explored for catalyzing organic, electrochemical and photochemical reactions. Table 1 lists the most catalysts and their applications discussed in the following sections.
Table 1 Graphene based catalysts and their applications




Inherent catalyst
Application
Ref.
Composite catalyst
Application
Ref.





a ORR-Oxygen oxidation reaction.
b MOR-Methanol oxidation reaction.
c PDP-Photo-degradation of pollutants.
d OER-Oxygen evolving reaction.
e HER-Hydrogen evolving reaction.





GO
Oxidation reaction

156, 157, 161

Pd/rGO
C–C coupling reaction

47, 115, 168



C–C coupling reaction

157, 162

Au/rGO
Suzuki coupling reaction

114



Polymerization

158–160

CaO/GO
Transesterification

169



Mimic peroxidase

19

Hb/GO
Peroxidatic reaction

143



Photoreaction

29, 284

Pt/rGO
MORb

116, 118, 127, 197



Glucose sensor

19

Pt-Ru/rGO
MORb

196



Graphene/g-C3N4
Selective oxidation

163

Pt/PDDA-rGO
MORb

120



LC-GO
Matrine sensor

236

PtAu/PDDA-rGO
HCOOH oxidation reaction

121



rGO
DNA, H2O2 sensor

235, 238

Pt/N-rGO
MORb and ORRa

198–200



NADH, APAP, DA, UA and AA sensors

226, 234, 235

PtRu/NCNT-GHN
MORb

201



IL-rGO
NADH sensor

240

Co3O4/rmGO or N-rmGO
ORRa and OERd

131



SPANI-rGO
AA sensor

242

MnCo2O4/rmGO or N-rmGO
ORRa and OERd

132



S-rGO
H2O2, NaNO2 sensor

243

Fe-N-rGO
ORRa

209



N-doped graphene
ORR in fuel cells

92, 94, 212, 213

Mn3O4/rGO-IL
ORRa

210



H2O2 sensor

239

Pt/TiO2/rGO
MORb

211



N-EFG
ORRa

100

MoS2/rGO
HERe

147



G-CN
ORRa

101

TiN/NG
NADH, lactate sensor

245



G-GCN
ORRa

97

Au/rGO
Cocaine, UA sensor

125, 229



G-PMF
ORRa

102

Pt/rGO
H2O2, DA, APAP, and TNT sensor

246, 247



N-GQD
ORRa

214

Au-rGO foil
Glucose, AA, DA, and UA sensor

130



CNx/CMG
ORRa

99

TiO2/graphene
PDPc

136, 140, 266–268



PDDA/graphene
ORRa

142



Water splitting

135, 136, 141, 277, 278



S-doped graphene
ORRa

109, 110

SnO2/rGO
PDPc

137



I-doped graphene
ORRa

111

ZnO/rGO
PDPc

137, 274









ZnFe2O4/rGO
PDPc

148









Ag/AgX/rGO
PDPc

145









ZnSe/NG
PDPc

146









CdS/rGO
PDPc and selective oxidation

149, 150









Pt/EY-rGO
Water splitting

279









CdS/rGO
Photocatalyt

150, 280









Sr2Ta2O7/rGO
Photocatalyt

281









BiVO4/rGO
Water splitting

282









Pt-GCN/rGO
Water splitting

284









PDDA-rGO-CdSe
Protein detection

244





3.1 Catalysts for organic reactions

3.1.1 Inherent catalysts. 
Perfect graphene is a material with zero band gap and few functional groups. Thus, it has weak catalytic activity. In contrast, CMGs such as GO and rGO are insulators or semiconductors.152–154 As a result, they are potential catalysts for various organic reactions. The catalysts widely used for incorporation of oxygen into organic substrates are transition-metal-based materials, which are usually expensive, difficult to remove, toxic and limited in their resources. Thus, non-toxic and metal-free heterogeneous catalysts are required for these reactions. GO has been explored as a carbonaceous catalyst for this purpose.155 Actually, GO catalyst not only showed high catalytic activities for various chemical reactions, but can also be conveniently removed or reused by filtering it from the reaction systems. For instance, GO was tested to be capable of catalyzing the oxidation reaction from benzyl alcohol to benzaldehyde with a high yield (>92%) and good selectivity. GO is also able to catalyze the oxidation of cis-stilbene and hydration of various alkynes (Fig. 4).156
 Fig. 4  Chemical reactions catalyzed by GO. Oxidation of benzyl alcohol and cis-stilbene, hydration of various alkynes and a coupling reaction of arylalkynes to benzyl alcohols. R1, R2 = Ph, p-NO2C6H4, p-CH3OC6H4, reproduced with permission from ref. 156 © 2010 Wiley-VCH. 
Methyl ketones and aldehydes are often used for the synthesis of chalcones through Claisen–Schmidt coupling reaction, and chalcones are important precursors of flavonoids and isoflavonoids. GO was found to be an effective catalyst for Claisen–Schmidt coupling reactions.156,157 Moreover, GO can act as an auto-tandem catalyst, catalyzing multiple mechanistically distinct reactions in a single reaction vessel, without involving additional reagents or isolation steps. For example, GO was used as a dehydrative polymerization catalyst for producing carbon–reinforced poly(phenylenemethylene) composites through a one-step reaction.158–160
Carboxyl–modified GO (GO–COOH) has intrinsic peroxidase-like activity, which can catalyze the reaction of peroxidase substrate, 3,3,5,5-tetramethylbenzidine (TMB), in the presence of H2O2.19 The activity of GO as a mimic peroxidase depends on the pH value, temperature and reagent concentration of the reaction system. GO showed a catalytic activity comparable to or even higher than that of natural horseradish peroxidase. Moreover, the GO catalyst has several advantages including ease of preparation, low-cost, high stability and high surface–to–volume ratio. Therefore, it is promising for the applications in detecting glucose in real systems, such as in the buffer solution of diluted blood and fruit juice (Fig. 5A and B). In this case, the oxygen containing groups, especially carboxyl groups, were the catalytic reaction sites. On the basis of its large amount of acidic functional groups anchored on graphene sheets, sulfonated rGO was used as a solid acid catalyst for industrial hydrocarbon chemistry, such as the hydrolysis of ethyl acetate.109 Liu and co-workers reported that GO foams had high adsorption capacity for SO2 gas and could convert it to SO3 by reacting with oxygen.161 GO acted not only as an oxidant in the reaction, but also as a catalyst for the reaction of SO2 and O2. GO has also been used as a solid acid catalyst for the preparation of dipyrromethane and calix-4-pyrroles in various solvents at room temperature.162 A graphene/g-C3N4 nanocomposite was used as a metal-free catalyst for selective oxidation of saturated hydrocarbons.163 Selectivity was ascribed to the fact that the HOMO level of g-C3N4 was shifted to lower energies via a π–π* or charge-transfer interaction with graphene sheets.
 Fig. 5  (A) Time-dependent absorbance changes at 652 nm in absence or presence of glucose in phosphate buffer (25 mM Na2HPO4, pH 4.0) at 35.8 °C. (B) Dose-response curves for glucose detection using glucose oxidase and GO. Inset: linear calibration plot for glucose. The error bars represent standard deviation of three measurements, reproduced with permission from ref. 19 © 2010 Wiley-VCH. 


3.1.2 Composite catalysts. 
Typical C–C coupling reactions, such as Mizoroki–Heck, Suzuki–Miyaura and Suzuki reactions can be catalyzed by noble metals such as palladium.9,164–167 The immobilization or stabilization of metal nanoparticles on a carbon substrate is favourable for improving their catalytic activity. The presence of functional groups and the high specific surface areas of CMGs provide them with the capability of loading metal ions or nanoparticles through hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions. In a typical case, Mulhaupt and co-workers prepared Pd/rGO composites and used them as the catalysts for Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction (Fig. 6A).47 They demonstrated that these composite catalysts are not only stable in air and easy to handle, but also have extraordinarily high activities with turnover frequencies (TOF) up to 39000 h−1. Furthermore, the catalysts showed weak leaching, making them an attractive alternative to commercially available Pd catalysts (e.g. Pd on charcoal). However, the recycling test of Pd/GO catalyst revealed that the Pd particles were agglomerated into clusters, which strongly decreased its catalytic activity (Fig. 6B). Zhang et al. prepared Pd/rGO hybrid catalyst with Pd sizes of around 4 nm.115 This kind of composite catalyst showed excellent catalytic activity in the Suzuki reaction carried out in water under aerobic conditions with a yield of 100%. Furthermore, the Pd/rGO catalyst can be reused for 10 cycles with high yields (>80%), providing a low-cost and environmentally friendly route to biaryls. Analogously, they also reported an Au/graphene hybrid catalyst for the Suzuki coupling reaction.114 A 3D macroassembly cylinder based on rGO containing Pd nanoparticles also exhibited strong catalytic activity and selectivity for the Heck reaction.168
 Fig. 6  (A) Catalyst screening in the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction. Comparison of Pd-GO/CDG catalysts 2–5 and Pd/C, taking the coupling reaction of 4-methoxyphenylboronic acid and 4-bromo-1,2-difluorobenzene (1 mol%) as examples. (B) TEM images of Pd2+-GO after the first run (left) and fourth run (right) of the catalytic reaction. Agglomeration of the particles can be observed, reproduced with permission from ref. 47 © 2009 American Chemical Society. 
Except graphene/metal composites, a few other composites are also effective catalysts for organic synthesis. For example, CaO/GO composite can catalyze the transesterification of soybean oil with methanol to produce biodiesel.169 This composite catalyst can be readily regenerated for repeated use. Thus, it is a promising commercial catalyst for the production of biodiesel from soybean oil. Hb/GO composite hydrogel was used for peroxidatic reaction in organic solvents.143 It was shown that the composite hydrogel could immobilize the enzyme effectively and exhibited higher catalytic activity than that of GO or bare enzyme for the enzymatic reaction.

3.2 Catalysts for electrochemical reactions

3.2.1 Catalysts for fuel cells. 
Fuel cell is an important device for energy conversion and storage, which generates electricity via the reaction between a fuel and an oxidant in its electrodes.129,170–177 The typical fuel cells, especially low-temperature fuel cells such as hydrogen/oxygen or methanol/oxygen cells can electrochemically convert hydrogen into water or methanol into water and carbon dioxide. The oxidation reaction usually needs a catalyst immobilized on the electrode.15,178–182 Pt-based materials are the most efficient catalysts for fuel cells.183 However, the practical application of these catalysts has been greatly hindered by the high cost of noble platinum, CO poisoning and agglomeration of catalysts. Furthermore, the use of platinum-based electrocatalysts in direct methanol fuel cells (DMFC) is blocked by the methanol crossover effect. Up to date, extensive efforts have been devoted to overcoming these problems by using supported Pt, Pt-based alloys, non-noble metals and enzymes for replacing Pt based electrocatalysts.184–191 On the other hand, nitrogen doped carbon materials have also been reported to have high electrocatalytic activities and long lasting time.192–194 Among them, nitrogen doped graphene (N-graphene) is attractive because of its atom-thick 2D structure and high conductivity. Therefore, the graphene based catalysts for fuel cells can be classified into the following three types: composite catalysts with noble metals, composite catalysts with non-noble metals and inherent catalysts.
3.2.1.1 Composite catalysts with noble metals. 
One of the most widely used techniques for improving the activity and efficiency of Pt catalyst is immobilizing Pt nanoparticles onto a substrate with a large specific surface area, high conductivity and electrochemical stability. CMGs satisfy these requirements and have been extensively explored for this purpose.195 Honma and co-workers investigated the electrocatalytic activity of Pt/rGO for methanol oxidation reaction and compared its catalytic activity with those of Pt/Carbon Black and Pt-Ru/Carbon Black.118 As shown in Fig. 7A, in the cyclic voltammogram (CV) of methanol oxidation reaction (MOR) on Pt/rGO, the current density ratio (If/Ib) of the forward peak (If) to the reverse anodic peak (Ib) was calculated to be 1.47. This value is higher than that calculated from the CV on Pt/Carbon Black (1.27), reflecting a higher efficiency of oxidizing methanol to carbon dioxide during the anodic scan and weaker accumulation of carbonaceous residues on the catalyst surface. The adsorption rate of CO on Pt/rGO was measured to be 40 times slower than that on Pt/Carbon Black (Fig. 7B). The efficiency of releasing CO-like carbonaceous species can be further improved by adding Ru into Pt/rGO to form a Pt-Ru/rGO three-component composite catalyst.196 Li and Tang reported a rGO-supported Pt composite catalyst with enhanced electrocatalytic activity in methanol oxidation as compared to the commercial Pt/vulcan.116 The CV tests showed that the potential of the forward peak of MOR at Pt/rGO is lower than that at Pt/vulcan, and the forward peak current density at Pt/rGO is nearly twice that at Pt/vulcan. Kamat’s group prepared a Pt/rGO catalyst with an electrochemically active surface area comparable to that of a Pt/Carbon Black catalyst.197 The former electrocatalyst was constructed into proton exchange membrane assemblies and evaluated in a hydrogen fuel cell. The Pt/rGO based fuel cell delivered higher power (161 mW cm−2) than that of an unsupported Pt based fuel cell (96 mW cm−2).
 Fig. 7  (A) CV curves for methanol oxidation reaction on (a) 20 wt% Pt/Carbon Black, (b) 20 wt% Pt/rGO and (c) 20 wt% Pt-10 wt% Ru/Carbon Black in 1 mol L−1 CH3OH + 0.05 mol L−1 H2SO4 at room temperature; (B) rates of CO adsorption at various catalysts, reproduced with permission from ref. 118 © 2009 American Chemical Society. 
It is well known that the performance of a catalyst in fuel cells depends strongly on the distributing state and stability of catalyst nanoparticles on the surface of support material. Therefore, finding a facile method to prepare homogenous distribution of nanoparticles on the surface of support material is a critical issue for application in practical fuel cells. Electrodeposition was found to be a “green” and effective technique for immobilizing Pt nanoparticles uniformly on graphene sheets. Liu et al. showed that the Pt/rGO film exhibited high activity and stability for catalyzing methanol oxidation. The high-performance of this catalyst is partially attributed to the high uniformity and controlled number densities of Pt nanoparticles.127
Another typical method is introducing a third component to improve the distributing state of metal particles on graphene sheets. Positively charged PDDA is a good choice for this purpose.142 For example, PtAu/PDDA-rGO electrocatalysts showed high electrocatalytic activity towards HCOOH oxidation, which is associated with the preferred dehydrogenation pathway to the formation of CO2.121 In this catalyst, Au nanoparticles facilitate the first electron transfer from HCOOH to HCOOads and Pt nanoparticles catalyze the oxidation of HCOOads to CO2. A Pt/PDDA-rGO catalyst was synthesized by a one-step chemical reduction of H2PtCl6 in the dispersion of PDDA-functionalized GO with NaBH4.120 In the CV of oxidizing methanol at the catalyst modified electrode, the If/Ib ratio (about 1.92) is higher than those at several other counterparts, including Pt/rGO (0.83), 3-D Pt-on-Pd bimetallic nanodendrites supported on graphene nanosheets (1.25), Pt/carbon nanotube catalyst (1.4), and the commercial E-TEK catalyst (0.74). Accordingly, it is reasonable to conclude that Pt/PDDA-rGO is much more tolerant toward CO poisoning, and most of the intermediates were oxidized to CO2 in the forward scan.
Modifying rGO sheets with PPy was also tested to be favourable for homogeneous distribution of nanoparticles.122,198 Gao and co-workers showed that the PPy component could inhibit the agglomeration of graphene sheets, and increase the electrical conductivity of the resulting catalyst.122 Therefore, a Pd/rGO-PPy catalyst showed superior catalytic activity and stability as compared to Pd/rGO. Doping graphene with nitrogen atoms provides the catalyst not only with more chemically active sites for reaction, but also with more anchoring sites for metal particles.198–200 Zhang et al. used N-doped rGO as the support for Pt nanoparticles.200 The amino groups and pyridinic species in N-doped graphene sheets acted as the attaching sites for Pt nanoparticles, being favourable for uniform distributing Pt nanoparticles on graphene basal planes (Fig. 8A). A composite catalyst of Pt and N-rGO treated by annealing at 800 °C showed excellent electrocatalytic activity for MOR. The cyclic voltammetric test indicates that the current of methanol oxidation at Pt/N-rGO (130 mA mg−1) is three times higher than that at Pt/rGO catalysts (Pt/G-300 and Pt/G-800) (Fig. 8B) or Pt/Carbon Black. The good performance of the former catalyst was attributed to its increased conductivity upon thermal treatment at 800 °C and the uniform dispersion of Pt nanoparticles because of nitrogen doping. Recently, an open-ended N-doped carbon nanotube-graphene hybrid nanostructure (NCNT-GHN) with high purity was synthesized through a water-assisted CVD route and used as highly efficient support material for PtRu nanoparticles (Fig. 8C).201 A direct methanol fuel cell (DMFC) based on PtRu/NCNT-GHN exhibited much higher cell voltage, enhanced power density, and better long-term stability than those of the cell based on conventional PtRu/CNT. In a single-cell test at 60 °C, the peak power density of the cell with PtRu/NCNT-GHN was measured to be 120 mW cm−2, which is much higher than that of a cell with PtRu/CNT (90 mW cm−2) (Fig. 8D). The superiority of PtRu/NCNT-GHN was attributed to both the incorporation of nitrogen atoms and the construction of a 3D electrically conductive network between N-doped carbon nanotubes and graphene sheets.
 Fig. 8  (A) TEM image of Pt/NG-800. (B) Cyclic voltammogram of methanol oxidation on Pt/NG-800, PT/NG-300 or Pt/G-800, reproduced with permission from ref. 200 © 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Well-dispersed PtRu nanoparticles on NCNT-GHN; (D) DMFC single-cell properties of different catalysts at 60 °C, reproduced with permission from ref. 201 © 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
3.2.1.2 Composite catalysts with non-noble metals. 
In comparison with noble metals, the non-noble metal catalysts, especially oxides are particularly attractive candidates due to their high abundance, low cost and little environmental issues. However, the applications of metal compounds, especially the oxides, such as CoOx, MnOx, FeOx, CuOx are limited by their intrinsically low electrical conductivity.202–204 Therefore, blending the metal compounds with CMGs can greatly improve their catalytic performance.58,202,205–208 The electrocatalytic performance of Co3O4/rmGO and Co3O4/N-rmGO was studied by Dai and co-workers.131 Both catalysts have stronger catalytic activities for ORR in an alkaline solution through a 4-electron process as compared to that of commercial Pt/C catalyst. Actually, the CV curve of ORR at Co3O4/N-rmGO exhibits a more positive peak potential and stronger peak current than those at Co3O4/rmGO. When an N-doped mGO was used as the support of catalyst, the particle sizes of Co3O4 (∼4–8 nm) were smaller than those grown on mGO (∼12–25 nm) (Fig. 3). Dai et al. demonstrated that Co3O4/rmGO or Co3O4/N-rmGO was one of the rare and highest performance bi-functional catalysts for ORR and water oxidation (Fig. 9A). They also found that MnCo2O4/N-rmGO showed the higher catalytic activity for ORR, due to the increased catalytic sites of the spinel oxide hybrid (Fig. 9B).132 Byon et al. reported a Fe–N-rGO electrocatalyst with high ORR activity and stability in acid for the applications in proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs).209 Additionally, they indicated that both the pyridinic N and the integration of Fe–Nx (pyridinic N) moieties in rGO sheets provide active sites and enhance the catalytic activity.
 Fig. 9  (A) Oxygen electrode activities within the ORR and OER potential window of Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, Co3O4 nanocrystal and Pt/C catalysts (catalyst loading 0.24 mg cm−2 for all samples) dispersed on carbon fibre paper in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH, reproduced with permission from ref. 131 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) CV curves of MnCo2O4–N-rmGO hybrid, MnCo2O4–N-rmGO mixture, Co3O4–N-rmGO hybrid, and N-rmGO on glassy carbon electrodes in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH. The peak position of Pt/C was shown as a dashed line for comparison, reproduced with permission from ref. 132 © 2012 American Chemical Society. 
Ionic liquids (ILs) have various excellent properties such as high ion conductivities, wide electrochemical windows. Thus, they have been widely applied as electrolytes for electrochemical reactions. IL molecules were modified to rGO sheets for anchoring catalysts to increase their distributing uniformity, without decreasing their electrochemical stability. A Mn3O4/rGO-IL composite catalyst was applied to a Zn-air battery for catalyzing ORR.210 The IL moieties on rGO sheets played a key role in improving the performance of this catalyst. Electrochemical measurement showed that the ORR catalyzed by this hybrid catalyst is a one-step, quasi-4-electron transfer pathway. Furthermore, the maximum peak power density of the Zn-air battery based on Mn3O4/rGO-IL was tested to be much higher than that of the battery based on commercial catalysts.
A three-component catalyst of Pt/TiO2/rGO was also reported as an electrocatayt for methanol oxidation.211 The catalytic activity of Pt/TiO2/rGO was tested to be 1.81 times higher than that of Pt/rGO. Its superior performance was ascribed to the 3-phase junction structure of Pt/TiO2/rGO, leading to a synergetic effect between Pt, TiO2 and rGO. A MoS2/rGO electrocatalyst was explored for catalyzing the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER).147 The onset potential of HER at the catalyst modified glassy carbon electrode and in 0.5 M H2SO4 was measured to be around −0.1 V (vs. RHE), which is more positive than that at pure MoS2 particles or rGO.
3.2.1.3 Inherent catalysts. 
Heteroatom-doped graphenes are usually used in fuel cells as inherent graphene catalysts. Among them, N-doped graphene was mostly studied for electrocatalyzing ORR.212,213 For example, an N-doped graphene prepared by CVD technique showed better catalytic performance than the widely used platinum based catalyst for ORR.92 Chen and co-workers also reported that N-doped graphene showed excellent electrocatalytic activity and stability for ORR in a neutral phosphate buffer (PBS).94 They applied the N-doped graphene as a metal-free cathode catalyst for microbial fuel cells (NG-MFCs) (Fig. 10A). In this case, acetate synthetic waste water was used as the fuel, and the performance of the NG-MFCs was comparable to that of Pt/C-MFC. Moreover, after 35 operation cycles, the decrease in maximum power density of NG-MFC was 8.8 ± 0.8%, whereas it was 17.1 ± 0.6% for Pt/C-MFC, reflecting that the NG-MFC was more stable in the real application system (Fig. 10B). Very recently, nitrogen–doped graphene quantum dots (N-GQD) were synthesized via an electrochemical approach.214 The N-GQDs emit blue luminescence and could catalyze ORR in an alkaline medium like other N-doped CMGs (Fig. 10C). The ORR onset potential at N-GQD electrode in 0.1 M KOH was measured to be −0.16 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), and this value is close to the one observed at commercial Pt/C electrode. Edge-functionalized graphene (EFG) was synthesized by functionalizing the “pristine” graphite with nitrogen containing material.100 This method did not introduce any oxygen-containing groups onto graphene basal planes, similar to the CVD method. Therefore, the resulting nitrogen-doped graphene showed catalytic performance for ORR similar to that of CVD grown N-doped graphene. The catalytic activity of EFG was partially attributed to the wrinkles of graphene sheets for providing a large surface area.
 Fig. 10  (A) Schematic of a membrane-free single-chamber air-cathode MFC showing the basic mechanism of current generation; (B) standard deviations of duplicate tests, reproduced with permission from ref. 94 © 2011 American Chemical Society. (C) CVs of N-GQDs in N2 or O2 saturated 3 M KOH, reproduced with permission from ref. 214 © 2011 American Chemical Society. 
According to literature, there are pyridinic-N, pyrrolic-N, quaternary-N, and N-oxides of pyridinic-N in an N-doped graphene.97,99,101,215 However, the assignments of “electrocatalytic sites” for ORR are still controversial. Quantum mechanical calculations reveal that pyridinic or graphitic nitrogen plays the most important role in electrocatalysis.216,217 A variety of experiments have also been carried out for getting the real facts.218 Müllen and co-workers used a nanoporous carbon nitrate modified graphene (G-CN) as electrocatalyst for ORR.101 They studied the electrocatalytic performance of G-CNs treated at various temperatures in the range from 600 to 1000 °C (Fig. 11A). The catalysts are nominated as G-CN600, G-CN800 and G-CN1000 according to their pyrolysis temperatures. The pyrolysis temperature could influence the amounts of N-bonding configurations in G-CN, which assisted the understanding of the catalysis mechanism. The G-CN800 catalyst has high electrical conductivity and the largest amount of pyridinic N, and exhibited a one-step, four-electron transfer pathway of ORR with stronger catalytic activity than that of G-CN600 or G-CN1000 (Fig. 11B). It was suggested that the pyridinic and graphite N are the main electrocatalysis sites. Especially, pyridinic N atoms possess electron-accepting ability, which is favourable for the adsorption of oxygen atoms and can readily attract electrons from the anode. A study on the catalytic properties of the CNx/CMG composite prepared by annealing PPy/rGO also demonstrated that pyridinic and graphite N rather than pyrrolic N contributed significantly to its catalytic activity for ORR.99 The electron number involved in ORR was measured to be about 3, which is inferior to the inherent N-doped CMGs. A graphitic carbon nitride modified graphene (G-GCN) was also used as the electrocatalyst for ORR.97 The CVs showed that G-GCN had a strong oxygen reduction wave at −0.3 V (vs. SCE), about 0.15 V higher than that observed at GCN electrode. The catalytic activity of G-GCN is decreased with the decrease in nitrogen content of G-GCN. Both the GCN component and the high conductivity of G-GCN enhanced its electrocatalytic because of a synergetic effect. We also prepared nanoporous carbon nitride modified graphene (G-PMF) for ORR. This G-PMF also showed high electrocatalytic activity, notable durability and significant selectivity for ORR. The experimental results demonstrated that both the content of pyridinic N and the nanoporous structure of the catalyst had strong effect on its electrocatalytic performance.102 On the other hand, N-doped graphene prepared by annealing of GO in ammonia has been used as an electrocatalyst for ORR, which indicated that quaternary nitrogen seemed to be the most important species for ORR.215
 Fig. 11  (A) The content of three nitrogen species (N1, N2, and N3) in G-CN nanosheets. (B) Electrochemical activity given as the kinetic-limiting current density (JK) at −0.40 V for all G-CN and CN nanosheets, reproduced with permission from ref. 101 © 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
The catalytic properties of N-doped graphene have also been explained by the charge rearrangement in its basal plane.104 The carbon atoms adjacent to a nitrogen atom held a substantially higher positive charge density to counterbalance the strong electronic affinity of nitrogen, which enhanced the adsorption of O2, H2O2 or reactive intermediates. PDDA modified graphene (PDDA/graphene) was reported to be a good electrocatalyst, showing an onset potential for ORR at around −0.21 V (vs. SCE) and following a nearly four-electron process (3.5–4.0).142 The electrocatalytic property of this catalyst is attributed to the intermolecular charge-transfer from the graphene sheet to polyelectrolyte (PDDA), creating net positive charges on carbon atoms in graphene sheets for the adsorption of oxygen.
Nitrogen has larger electronegativity than carbon, which could change the charge distribution of graphene to increase its catalytic activity. Similarly, the incorporation of sulfur atoms into graphene sheets can also play this role. Actually, S-doped graphene exhibited excellent catalytic activity, long-term ability, and high methanol tolerance for ORR, similar to N-doped graphene (Fig. 12A).110 It was confirmed that sulfur existed in the composite in two forms, sulfide S and oxidized sulfur S, and the C–S bonds provided more contribution to the enhancement of electrocatalytic activity. Different from N-doped graphene, the improved catalytic property of S-doped graphene is mainly due to the change in spin density of graphene caused by S-atoms, according to a density functional theoretical analysis. Iodine-doped graphene has also been explored as the electrocatalyst for ORR in alkaline medium (Fig. 12B).111 The iodine atoms presented in this composite are in the states of I3− and I5− and they induced electron transfer from the graphene sheet to the iodine atoms. The positively charged graphene is very favourable for adsorbing O2 onto the surface of graphene and then promoting ORR.
 Fig. 12  (A) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) for various graphenes and a Pt/C catalyst on a glass carbon rotating disk electrode saturated in O2 at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm, reproduced with permission from ref. 110 © 2011 American Chemical Society. (B) LSV curves for various graphenes and a Pt/C catalyst on a glassy carbon rotating disk electrode saturated in O2 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm, reproduced with permission from ref. 111 © 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.2 Catalysts for electrochemical sensors. 
Graphene based electrocatalysts have also been widely applied for fabricating electrochemical sensors.28,37,219–225 The catalysts can increase the electron transfer rate, electrochemical stability and/or selectivity of the sensing electrodes. Electrodes modified with a graphene based electrocatalyst have been used for detecting various inorganic or organic electroactive compounds, such as hydrogen peroxide (H2O2), β-nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH), acetaminophen (APAP), dopamine (DA), ascorbic acid (AA), uric acid (UA) and matrine.219,221,226–237
A typical electrocatalyst for this purpose is rGO and the simplest sensing electrode is an rGO modified glassy carbon electrode (rGO-GC). The rGO-GC electrode has been explored for sensing DNA, H2O2, NADH, APAP, DA, UA or AA. DNA can be detected based on the oxidation waves of its four-type bases.238 At rGO-GC electrode, the oxidation peaks of the bases moved to more negative potentials with enhanced peak current densities as compared to those at GC or graphite-GC, and these phenomena can be used to distinguish the types of bases. The high performance of the rGO-GC sensor is mainly attributed to the remarkably increased electron transfer rate between the target molecule and rGO-GC.235 rGO-GC based H2O2 sensor is another example. The reduction wave of H2O2 at rGO-GC electrode was measured to be about −0.2 V (vs. Ag/AgCl), and this value is much higher that at GC or graphite-GC electrode. At the latter two electrodes, the currents associated with H2O2 reduction were negligible as a −0.2 V potential was applied (Fig. 13A and B). The current response increased linearly versus the concentration of H2O2 in the range of 0.05–1500 μM. This scale is much wider than that of the sensor based on a carbon nanotube modified GC electrode (16.7–740 μM). N-Doped graphene is also an active electrocatalyst for the reduction reaction of H2O2.239 The onset potential of H2O2 at an N-doped graphene modified GC electrode (0 V vs Ag/AgCl) is much lower that at a thermally reduced GO (TrGO) modified GC electrode. The sensor showed a linear response in the concentration range of 0.01 μM–2.8 mM, which is much wider than that of the sensor based on thermally reduced GO (0.1 μM–1.8 mM) or on chemically reduced GO (0.05–1500 μM).
 Fig. 13  (A) Background-subtracted CVs for 4 mM H2O2 at Cr-GO/GC(a1), graphite/GC (b1), and GC electrode (c1). Electrolyte: 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS. Scan rate: 50 mV s−1. (B) Current–time curves for CR-GO/GC (d1), graphite/GC (e1), and GC electrodes (f1) at 0.20 V with successive addition of 0.1 mM H2O2. Inset: calibration curves for H2O2 at CR-GO/GC (g1), graphite/GC (h1), and GC electrodes (i1). Electrolyte: magnetically stirred 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS, reproduced with permission from ref. 235 © 2011 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic representation of the bioelectrocatalytic sensing of ethanol using IL-graphene/chitosan/ADH modified electrode, reproduced with permission from ref. 240 © 2009 Elsevier B.V. (D) Current responses of the Pt/rGO/GCE to the sequential addition of 0.05 M H2O2, 0.1 nM AA, and 0.1 mM UA into 0.1 M PBS, reproduced with permission from ref. 246 © 2010 American Chemical Society. 
Chemical modification of graphene is also an effective route to improve its performance in an electrochemical sensor. An ionic liquid functionalized graphene (IL-rGO) modified GC electrode has been applied for sensing NADH.240 The oxidation wave of NADH at IL-rGO-GC electrode was shown at about 0.33 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). This value is lower than that at GC (0.77 V), GO-GC (0.48 V), or IL-GO-GC (0.51 V). The excellent electrocatalytic properties of IL-rGO are attributed to the high electrical conductivity of rGO and high ionic conductivity of IL. Furthermore, the response of IL-rGO-GC sensor exhibited good linearity in the concentration range of 0.25–2 mM and high sensitivity of 37.43 μA mM−1 cm−2 at a working potential of 0.45 V. IL-rGO catalyst was also applied in fabricating an alcohol sensor by blending it with alcohol dehydrogenase, and the sensor also showed a high sensitivity of 6.91 nA μM−1 cm−2 at a working potential of 0.45 V (vs. Ag/AgCl). The bioelectrocatalytic sensing mechanism of this sensor is shown in Fig. 13C. In the system of IL-rGO-GC, the encapsulated alcohol dehydrogenase catalyzed the oxidation of ethanol with the help of NAD+ and NAD+ acted as a cofactor during the reaction.
Graphene materials have been utilized as support materials for immobilizing organic catalysts such as conjugated polymers, enzymes for fabricating electrochemical sensors.241,242 An AA sensor based on the rGO non-covalently modified with sulfonated polyaniline (SPANI) was reported by our group.242 The CV of AA at SPANI-rGO/GC electrode showed a narrow anodic wave (0.095 V) at 0.10 V (vs. SCE) and this potential is much lower than that at a bare GC electrode (0.44 V). This result indicated that SPANI/rGO increased the electron transfer rate and catalyzed AA oxidation reaction. Furthermore, the rGO component increased the stability of SPAN modified electrode. Water soluble sulfonated graphene (S-rGO) was used to load horseradish peroxidase (HRP).243 The HRP/S-rGO modified GC electrode showed electrocatalytic properties toward H2O2 or NaNO2 reduction. The CV of the HRP/S-rGO/GC showed new reduction of NO in the aqueous solution of NaNO2 at a potential of −0.8 V (vs Ag/AgCl), while there was no significant peak in the CV of S-rGO/GC at the same potential. The reduction peak current showed a linear relationship with the concentration of NaNO2 over 58.6 to 488.6 mM. Moreover, the HRP/S-rGO/GC is very stable and showed less than 5% variation of the peak current after storage for 30 days. Li et al. linked antibody onto PDDA-rGO-CdSe QDs to form an electrode for the detection of human IgG (immunoglobulin G).244 In this case, the specific immunoreaction between antibody and human IgG gave the sensing currents. This sensor exhibited good reproducibility, and long-term stability with a linear range of 0.02–2000 pg mL−1 and a detection limit of 0.005 pg mL−1, implying it is a promising technique for protein detection. L-Cysteine functionalized GO (LC-GO) can enhance the oxidation of matrine, and a LC-GO-GC electrode can detect matrine in a concentration range of 4 μmol L−1 to 0.1 mmol L−1.236
A variety of electrochemical sensors based on the graphene composite catalysts containing metals have also been developed. Titanium nitride/nitrogen-doped graphene (TiN/NG) provided a reliable platform for the determination of NADH with a linear dynamic range of 2.0–687 μM at a working potential of 0.1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl).245 Similar to rGO-IL, the TiN/NG-LDH (lactate dehydrogenase) modified electrode can be used for the detection of lactate. An Au/rGO modified GC showed strong electrocatalytic activity and high electrochemical stability for sensing UA.125 The Au/rGO catalyst decreased the oxidation potential of UA with a higher current than that at a bare GC. Furthermore, during the amperometric test, the responding current could increase dramatically and reached a steady state within 2 s after an injection of UA, indicating a rapid response and high sensitivity to UA. Pt/rGO catalyst has also been explored for electrochemical sensing of several electroactive compounds including H2O2, DA, APAP, and TNT.246,247 CV tests demonstrated that the electrochemical reactions of the analytes occurring at Pt/rGO modified GC electrode exhibited higher currents and lower overpotentials than those observed at rGO/GC electrode. These phenomena can be explained by the favourable electron transfer kinetics and much enhanced electrocatalytic activity of Pt/rGO. Particularly, the sensor based on Pt/rGO showed high selectivity for the detection of H2O2 in the presence of AA and UA (Fig. 13D). Xiao et al. prepared a hybrid electrode based on freestanding rGO paper and gold nanoparticles.130 The hybrid integrated the unique structural and electrical properties of graphene paper and the large active surface areas of catalytic nanoparticles with well-defined surface coating. In contrast to Au-foil electrode, the CVs at Au-rGO electrode had a remarkably higher current density of glucose oxidation at lower onset potential. The Au-rGO electrode could detect glucose at a relatively negative working potential (0.08 vs. Ag/AgCl). More importantly, the low operation potential of the sensor could eliminate the interference of some common electroactive materials such as AA, DA, and UA. The amperometric test showed a good linear dependence of the current on glucose concentration in the range of 0.01–46 mM with a sensitivity of 52.36 μA cm−2.

3.3 Catalysts for photoreactions
In recent years, a variety of semiconductors have been prepared as photocatalysts in the systems related to solar energy conversion and environmental protection.248–263 However, experiments demonstrated that the rapid recombination rate of photogenerated electron–hole pairs within the photocatalysts greatly decreased their catalytic activities. The carbon based semiconductors and their composites are explored as a new class of photocatalysts. Particularly, since the discovery of an effective and reliable method for producing high quality CMGs, graphene-based photocatalysts have been widely applied for the photo-degradation of pollutants, photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and photocatalytic disinfection. There are a series of excellent reviews on graphene based photocatalysts.23,29,264,265 Herein, in this part, we briefly review the latest progress in this field.

3.3.1 Photo-degradation of organic compounds. 
Semi-conducting TiO2 nanocrystals are well known photocatalysts and have been extensively studied. Combining the properties of both components, TiO2/CMG composites134–136,141,266–273 were tested to be effective photocatalysts for photo-degradation of organic compounds. For example, TiO2/GO or rGO nanocomposite was reported to be a high performance photocatalyst for the reduction of GO and the degradation of Methylene Blue (MB), benzene, Methyl Orange (MO) or Rhodamine B (RhB). Mechanism studies revealed that the graphene sheets in the composites can promote charge separation and increase the adsorption of pollutants. Cheng and co-workers studied the performance of TiO2/graphene sheet (GS) as photocatalysts for decomposing organic pollutants, and hydrogen evolution through splitting of water.136 TiO2/GS with a mesoporous structure showed stronger adsorption ability for the azo dye RhB than bare TiO2 or GS. RhB can be decomposed upon 30 min UV irradiation. Moreover, the TiO2/CMG has a 2.3 times higher hydrogen evolution rate than TiO2 with methanol as a scavenger. The enhanced photocatalytic properties are attributed to the transfer of photoexcited electrons from the TiO2 conduction band to graphene, increasing the efficiency of electron–hole separation. TiO2/GO was explored as the photocatalyst for photodegradation of MB dye under either UV or visible light irradiation. The graphene component in TiO2/GO not only promoted charge separation and increased the adsorption of dye molecules, but also extended the light adsorption to visible light. Xu et al. made a thoughtful comparison between graphene and CNT-semiconductors as photocatalysts, taking the selective oxidation of alcohols to the corresponding aldehydes as an example.273 The TiO2-5%-rGO catalyst showed the highest photocatalytic activity under visible light irradiation with the highest photocurrent density and the most stable photocurrent (Fig. 14A). In the case of oxidizing benzyl alcohol to benzyl aldehyde under visible light irradiation, the yield of the reaction catalysed by TiO2-5% rGO is much higher than that catalyzed by TiO2-5% CNT in the same time period (Fig. 14B). Lee et al. prepared graphene wrapped TiO2 nanoparticles as a photocatalyst.140 The rate constant of MB degradation in the system with graphene wrapped TiO2 catalyst was measured to be of 3.41 × 10−2 min−1. This value is about one order of magnitude higher than that measured in the system with a hydrothermally produced graphene-TiO2 (4.73 × 10−3 min−1) or anatase TiO2 (3.28 × 10−3 min−1) (Fig. 15A). The superior performance of the graphene wrapped TiO2 catalyst is attributed to its narrower bandgap of 2.8 eV than that of TiO2 (3.2 eV). As a result, the energy level difference between TiO2 and graphene was changed and allowed electrons to flow from the excited MB to the conduction band of TiO2via graphene (Fig. 15B).
 Fig. 14  (A) Photocurrent transient response of the samples in a 0.2 M of Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. (B) Time online profile of the yield of benzyl aldehyde over the optimal TiO2-5% GR and TiO2-5% CNT nanocomposites, reproduced with permission from ref. 273 © 2011 American Chemical Society. 
 Fig. 15  (A) Photodegradation of Methylene Blue (MB) under visible light (λ > 420 nm) by (a) P25, (b) bare anatase TiO2 NPs, (c) graphene–TiO2 NPs (two-step hydrothermal), and (d) graphene–TiO2 NPs. The weight ratio of graphene to TiO2 in the graphene–TiO2 hybrid materials was 0.02:1. (B) Suggested mechanism for photocatalytic H2-production under UV light irradiation, reproduced with permission from ref. 140 © 2011 Wiley-VCH. 
Apart from TiO2/rGO, other semiconductor hybrid photocatalysts, such as SnO2/rGO,137 ZnO/rGO,137,274 ZnFe2O4/rGO,148,275 Ag/AgX/rGO (X = Br, Cl),145 CdS/rGO149 have also been studied for the applications in the decomposition of organic pollutants. For instance, ZnFe2O4/rGO was used as a magnetic photocatalyst for the decomposition of MB. It was found that MB can be decomposed for 88% within 5 min under visible-light irradiation as in the presence of H2O2.148 In this case, ZnFe2O4/rGO served dual functions: a catalyst for photoelectrochemical degradation of MB and a generator of strong oxidative hydroxyl radicals from the photoelectrochemical decomposition of H2O2 upon the excitation of visible light. Furthermore, ZnFe2O4 nanoparticles have a magnetic property; thus, a magnetic field could make the ZnFe2O4/rGO catalyst separable in a suspension system. N-Doped graphene/ZnSe showed photocatalytic activities for bleaching Methyl Orange dye under visible light irradiation.146 The two semiconductors in this catalyst created p–n junctions and promoted charge collection and separation at their interfaces. Another catalyst, CdS/rGO, has been used as a visible-light-driven photocatalyst not only for the degradation of MB but also for the selective oxidation of benzyl alcohol.149,150


3.3.2 Water splitting. 
Hydrogen is regarded as an ultimate clean fuel. Catalytic decomposing water into hydrogen and oxygen with sunlight is the most convenient and desirable route to hydrogen. In the last decades, a variety of semiconductors have been explored for photocatalytic splitting of water.249,255,257,260 To improve their performances, recently, graphene was used to modify semiconductors for increasing their charge separation efficiencies and absorptions of sunlight.23,265,276 For example, TiO2/rGO is a better catalyst than TiO2 for photodecomposing water.277,278 The proposed mechanism for photocatalytic H2-production under UV light irradiation is shown in Fig. 16. Under UV irradiation, the photogenerated electrons on TiO2 were transferred to graphene sheets, generating graphene−. Then the hole–electron separation could be achieved efficiently. The graphene/graphene− acted as a co-catalyst to reduce a proton efficiently, due to the redox potential of graphene/graphene− (−0.08 V vs. SHE, pH = 0) is close to that of H+/H2 (0 V vs. SHE, pH = 0).
 Fig. 16  Proposed mechanism for photocatalytic H2-production under UV light irradiation, reproduced with permission from ref. 278 © 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Modifying a graphene based catalyst with a dye can increase its light absorption and the efficiency of photon-electron conversion. Pt/Eosin Y modified rGO composite (Pt/EY-rGO) was reported to be a photocatalyst for highly efficient visible-light-driven water reduction.279Fig. 17A shows that both bare rGO and EY-rGO had no photocurrent response under visible light irradiation and EY-rGO/Pt showed noticeable photocurrent. The photocurrent response of EY-rGO/Pt is possibly attributed to the synergetic effect of EY, rGO and Pt. The suggested photocatalytic mechanism for hydrogen evolution over EY-RGO/Pt photocatalyst under visible light irradiation is shown in Fig. 17B. The rGO component increased the efficiency of electron transfer from the photo-sensitizer, Eosin Y, to Pt catalyst and retarded the recombination of photoexcited charge pairs. The electrons accumulated on Pt nanoparticles reduced protons to hydrogen gas. rGO has also been applied for improving the photocatalytic performance of CdS,150,280 Sr2Ta2O7,281 BiVO4.282,283 In a Z-scheme potocatalysis system, mimicking natural photosynthesis, rGO was used as a solid electron mediator for water splitting.282 This system has two photocatalysts, one for the production of H2 and another for generating O2. A typical case is using photoreduced GO for transferring the photo-generated electrons from BiVO4 to Ru/SrTiO2 accompanied by evolving O2 and H2 gases.
 Fig. 17  (A) Photocurrent transient response of rGO, EY-rGO, and EY-rGO/Pt (7%) in the mixed solution of TEOA (triethanolamine) and 0.1 M Na2SO4 at pH 7. (B) Suggested photocatalytic mechanism for hydrogen evolution over EY-RGO/Pt photocatalyst under visible light irradiation, reproduced with permission from ref. 279 © 2011 American Chemical Society. 
The composites of graphene and graphitic carbon nitride (GCN) are metal-free photocatalysts. Xiang et al. prepared a co-catalyst of Pt and GCN/rGO for water splitting under visible-light irradiation.284 The Pt-GCN/rGO catalyst showed higher H2-production activity than that of Pt-GCN. During the photoreaction process, the photogenerated electron on the conduction band of GCN transferred to the graphene sheets, leading to hole–electron separation. Then the electrons were accumulated on the Pt nanoparticles to produce hydrogen, while the holes reacted with methanol as a sacrificial reagent.
Recently, Kim and Amano found that GO possessed intrinsic photocatalytic activity.29,285 The photocatalytic activity of GO was monitored by measuring the reduction rate of resazurin into resorufin upon UV irradiation.29 A photoreaction of GO and water under UV irradiation produced hydrogen and carbon dioxide.285 Simultaneously, the GO sheets were reduced, forming porous rGO sheets because of releasing CO2 from GO basal planes.

4. Conclusions and perspective
In summary, graphene materials can be applied to fabricating various unique catalysts. They not only have intrinsic catalytic properties, but can also improve the performance of other catalysts by forming functional composites. The superior properties of graphene based catalysts are mainly ascribed to the atom-thick 2D structure, functional groups, high specific surface area and electrical conductivity of graphene sheets. A variety of methods such as in situ growth, post-treatment, mixing, CVD and hydrothermal or solvothermal reactions have been developed for preparing graphene based catalysts. The catalysts have promising applications in various fields including chemical reactions, fuel cells, sensor degradation of pollutants and splitting of water.
Graphene based catalysts are attractive because of their potential in replacing conventional catalysts. Although considerable progress has been achieved, the following challenges are still remaining. First, the performance of CMGs in catalysts strongly depends on their composition and structure. However, the relationship between the intrinsic catalytic activities of CMGs and their functional groups, conjugated domains and defective sites has not yet been clearly revealed. Second, CMGs are mostly prepared by chemical exfoliation, leading to the formation of defective graphene sheets with low electrical conductivity. Therefore, effective strategies of synthesizing highly conductive graphene materials with controllable nanostructures are required for developing high-performance electrocatalysts and photocatalysts. Third, composite catalysts with uniform morphologies and controllable nanoparticle sizes are still unachievable through convenient approaches. This is mainly due to the fact that the techniques used for synthesizing processible CMGs are limited and the assembly behaviour of CMG sheets and other functional building blocks (e.g., macromolecules and inorganic nanoparticles) requires more clear investigation. Fourth, the catalyzation mechanisms of graphene catalysts are partly unclear. For example, the explanations for the electrocatalytic properties of N-doped graphene are controversial. Finally, ideal graphene-based catalysts should be made from single-layer graphene sheets. Thus, new approaches that can extensively prevent restacking of graphene sheets are desirable. Furthermore, the conventional techniques of producing single-layer graphene sheets are complicated and expensive, and possibly have pollutants as byproducts. After fully addressing these issues, the practical applications of graphene-based catalysts in industrial scale will be realized.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Basic Research Program of China (973 Program, 2012CB933402), the Natural Science Foundation of China (91027028, 51161120361) and the Open Research Fund of the State Key Laboratory of Bioelectronics (Southeast University).
Notes and references

          P. Ball, Designing the Molecular World, Princeton University Press,  1994 Search PubMed .
C.-J. Li and L. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 68–82 RSC .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
T. Y. Lee and J. Suh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1949–1957 RSC .
G. C. Bond and D. T. Thompson, Catal. Rev. Sci. Eng., 1999, 41, 319–388 CAS .
P. Du and R. Eisenberg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6012–6021 CAS .
W. A. Herrmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1290–1309 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, M. Yin, L. Ma, L. Liang, C. Liu, J. Liao, T. Lu and W. Xing, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2736–2753 CAS .
M. Kimura, J. Synth. Org. Chem. Jpn., 2012, 70, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wasserscheid and W. Keim, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3772–3789 CrossRef CAS .
U. Hanefeld, L. Gardossi and E. Magner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 453–468 RSC .
P. R. Schreiner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2003, 32, 289–296 RSC .
F. Jiao and H. Frei, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 1018–1027 CAS .
E. Antolini, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 365, 1–24 CrossRef CAS .
P. Serp, M. Corrias and P. Kalck, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 253, 337–358 CrossRef CAS .
R. Singh, T. Premkumar, J. Y. Shin and K. E. Geckeler, Chem.–Eur. J., 2010, 16, 1728–1743 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. White, R. Luque, V. L. Budarin, J. H. Clark and D. J. Macquarrie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 481–494 RSC .
G. L. Che, B. B. Lakshmi, C. R. Martin and E. R. Fisher, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 750–758 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Song, K. G. Qu, C. Zhao, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2206–2210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Allen, V. C. Tung and R. B. Kaner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 132–145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Jariwala, A. Srivastava and P. M. Ajayan, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2011, 11, 6621–6641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. P. Loh, Q. Bao, P. K. Ang and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 2277–2289 RSC .
X. An and J. C. Yu, RSC Adv., 2011, 1, 1426–1434 RSC .
S. Bai and X. Shen, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 64–98 RSC .
X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, F. Boey and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 666–686 RSC .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang and Y.-J. Xu, Nanoscale, 2012 10.1039/c1032nr31480k .
M. Pumera, Langmuir, 2007, 23, 6453–6458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Kauffman and A. Star, Analyst, 2010, 135, 2790–2797 RSC .
K. Krishnamoorthy, R. Mohan and S. J. Kim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 244101–2441013 CrossRef .
P. D. Tran, L. H. Wong, J. Barber and J. S. C. Loo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5902–5918 CAS .
Y. Zhu, S. Murali, W. Cai, X. Li, J. W. Suk, J. R. Potts and R. S. Ruoff, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3906–3924 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das Sarma, S. Adam, E. H. Hwang and E. Rossi, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2011, 83, 407–470 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Mkhoyan, A. W. Contryman, J. Silcox, D. A. Stewart, G. Eda, C. Mattevi, S. Miller and M. Chhowalla, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1058–1063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Biswas and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3806–3826 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Liu, Y. Q. Liu and D. B. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3335–3345 RSC .
A. Ambrosi, A. Bonanni, Z. Sofer, J. S. Cross and M. Pumera, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 10763–10770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Ambrosi, S. Y. Chee, B. Khezri, R. D. Webster, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 500–503 Search PubMed .
D. R. Dreyer, S. Park, C. W. Bielawski and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 228–240 RSC .
W. S. Hummers and R. E. Offeman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1958, 80, 1339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1089–1115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. C. Compton and S. T. Nguyen, Small, 2010, 6, 711–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 10737–10743 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sharma and B. G. Pollet, J. Power Sources, 2012, 208, 96–119 CrossRef CAS .
A. Schaetz, M. Zeltner and W. J. Stark, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1267–1284 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer and C. W. Bielawski, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1233–1240 RSC .
G. M. Scheuermann, L. Rumi, P. Steurer, W. Bannwarth and R. Mulhaupt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8262–8270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Cui, C. Zhang, R. Hao and Y. Hou, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 2118–2126 RSC .
M. Hirata, T. Gotou, S. Horiuchi, M. Fujiwara and M. Ohba, Carbon, 2004, 42, 2929–2937 CAS .
S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 217–224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhao, M. Fang, F. Wu, H. Wu, L. Wang and G. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5817–5819 RSC .
S. Park, J. H. An, I. W. Jung, R. D. Piner, S. J. An, X. S. Li, A. Velamakanni and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1593–1597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda, J. Ball, C. Mattevi, M. Acik, L. Artiglia, G. Granozzi, Y. Chabal, T. D. Anthopoulos and M. Chhowalla, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 11217–11223 RSC .
N. I. Kovtyukhova, P. J. Ollivier, B. R. Martin, T. E. Mallouk, S. A. Chizhik, E. V. Buzaneva and A. D. Gorchinskiy, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 771–778 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Marcano, D. V. Kosynkin, J. M. Berlin, A. Sinitskii, Z. Sun, A. Slesarev, L. B. Alemany, W. Lu and J. M. Tour, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 4806–4814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xu, K. Sheng, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7376–7380 RSC .
S. Gilje, S. Han, M. Wang, K. L. Wang and R. B. Kaner, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3394–3398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. C. Luo, G. X. Zhang, J. F. Liu and X. M. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11327–11335 CAS .
X. Shen, L. Jiang, Z. Ji, J. Wu, H. Zhou and G. Zhu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 354, 493–497 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Shin, K. K. Kim, A. Benayad, S. M. Yoon, H. K. Park, I. S. Jung, M. H. Jin, H. K. Jeong, J. M. Kim, J. Y. Choi and Y. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1987–1992 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, X. Zhang, M. Sun, X. Cui and Y. Lin, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 1168–1173 RSC .
S. Stankovich, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner, K. A. Kohlhaas, A. Kleinhammes, Y. Jia, Y. Wu, S. T. Nguyen and R. S. Ruoff, Carbon, 2007, 45, 1558–1565 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Z. Shi and J. Yin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1127–1133 CAS .
F. J. Zhang, W. K. Jang and W. C. Oh, Asian J. Chem., 2012, 24, 371–376 CAS .
J. L. Zhang, H. J. Yang, G. X. Shen, P. Cheng, J. Y. Zhang and S. W. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1112–1114 RSC .
X. Zhou, J. Zhang, H. Wu, H. Yang, J. Zhang and S. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11957–11961 CAS .
J. Zhao, S. Pei, W. Ren, L. Gao and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 5245–5252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. F. Pei, J. P. Zhao, J. H. Du, W. C. Ren and H. M. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4466–4474 CrossRef CAS .
I. K. Moon, J. Lee and H. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 9681–9683 RSC .
C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, K. Fugane, T. Mori, L. Niu and J. Ye, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6575–6580 RSC .
D. Li, M. B. Muller, S. Gilje, R. B. Kaner and G. G. Wallace, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 101–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, T. P. McNicholas, C.-J. Shih, Q. H. Wang, G. L. C. Paulus, A. J. Hilmer, S. Shimizu and M. S. Strano, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3362–3370 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Fan, W. C. Peng, Y. Li, X. Y. Li, S. L. Wang, G. L. Zhang and F. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4490–4493 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Dey, S. Hajra, R. K. Sahu, C. R. Raj and M. K. Panigrahi, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1787–1789 RSC .
Z. J. Fan, W. Kai, J. Yan, T. Wei, L. J. Zhi, J. Feng, Y. M. Ren, L. P. Song and F. Wei, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 191–198 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, Z. Mou, Y. Du and P. Yang, Acta Chim. Sin., 2011, 69, 2379–2384 CAS .
C. Nethravathi and M. Rajamathi, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1994–1998 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, G. Q. Qi, K. Ke, Y. Luo, W. Yang, B. H. Xie and M. B. Yang, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 5097–5105 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Shen, T. Li, Y. Long, M. Shi, N. Li and M. X. Ye, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2134–2140 CrossRef CAS .
V. K. Singh, A. Shukla, M. K. Patra, L. Saini, R. K. Jani, S. R. Vadera and N. Kumar, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2202–2208 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Guo, X. F. Wang, Q. Y. Qian, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 2653–2659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. X. Sheng, Y. Q. Sun, C. Li, W. J. Yuan and G. Q. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 247 Search PubMed .
L. J. Cote, R. Cruz-Silva and J. X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 11027–11032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. El-Kady, V. Strong, S. Dubin and R. B. Kaner, Science, 2012, 335, 1326–1330 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. O. Wehling, K. S. Novoselov, S. V. Morozov, E. E. Vdovin, M. I. Katsnelson, A. K. Geim and A. I. Lichtenstein, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 173–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wunsch, T. Stauber, F. Sols and F. Guinea, New J. Phys., 2006, 8, 318–16 CrossRef .
X. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhang, Y. Yoon, P. K. Weber, J. Guo and H. Dai, Science, 2009, 324, 768–771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Brenner, Y. X. Yang and R. Murali, Carbon, 2012, 50, 637–645 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. de Heer, C. Berger, X. S. Wu, P. N. First, E. H. Conrad, X. B. Li, T. B. Li, M. Sprinkle, J. Hass, M. L. Sadowski, M. Potemski and G. Martinez, Solid State Commun., 2007, 143, 92–100 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Wei, Y. Q. Liu, Y. Wang, H. L. Zhang, L. P. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. T. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. M. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321–1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, X. Pan, L. Yu, Y. Cui, Y. Jiang, J. Qi, W.-X. Li, Q. Fu, X. Ma, Q. Xue, G. Sun and X. Bao, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 1188–1193 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Y. Chen and L. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 9611–9618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. H. Sheng, L. Shao, J. J. Chen, W. J. Bao, F. B. Wang and X. H. Xia, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4350–4358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, C. Li, Y. Xu, H. Bai, Z. Yao and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 4740–4742 RSC .
J. Y. Choi, D. Higgins and Z. W. Chen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, B87–B90 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Ma, L. R. Zhang, J. J. Li, H. T. Ni, M. Li, J. L. Zhang, X. M. Feng, Q. L. Fan, Z. Hu and W. Huang, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2011, 56, 3583–3589 CrossRef CAS .
I. Y. Jeon, D. S. Yu, S. Y. Bae, H. J. Choi, D. W. Chang, L. M. Dai and J. B. Baek, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3987–3992 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Yang, X. L. Feng, X. C. Wang and K. Mullen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5339–5343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sun, C. Li and G. Shi, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12810–12816 RSC .
D. Long, W. Li, L. Ling, J. Miyawaki, I. Mochida and S. H. Yoon, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 16096–16102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, S. Zhang, M. H. Engelhard, G. Li, G. Shao, Y. Wang, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7491–7496 RSC .
W. H. Brito, R. Kagimura and R. H. Miwa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 0354041–0354046 CrossRef .
L. S. Panchakarla, K. S. Subrahmanyam, S. K. Saha, A. Govindaraj, H. R. Krishnamurthy, U. V. Waghmare and C. N. R. Rao, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4726–4730 CAS .
Z. S. Wu, W. Ren, L. Xu, F. Li and H. M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5463–5471 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Yu and W. T. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 1069–1082 RSC .
J. Ji, G. Zhang, H. Chen, S. Wang, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 484–487 RSC .
Z. Yang, Z. Yao, G. Li, G. Fang, H. Nie, Z. Liu, X. Zhou, X. A. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 205–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yao, H. Nie, Z. Yang, X. Zhou, Z. Liu and S. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1027–1029 RSC .
S. Suzuki and H. Hibino, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2012, 177, 233–238 CrossRef CAS .
X. Z. Zhou, X. Huang, X. Y. Qi, S. X. Wu, C. Xue, F. Y. C. Boey, Q. Y. Yan, P. Chen and H. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 10842–10846 CAS .
Y. Li, X. B. Fan, J. J. Qi, J. Y. Ji, S. L. Wang, G. L. Zhang and F. B. Zhang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2010, 45, 1413–1418 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, X. Fan, J. Qi, J. Ji, S. Wang, G. Zhang and F. Zhang, Nano Res., 2010, 3, 429–437 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, L. Tang and J. Li, Electrochem. Commun., 2009, 11, 846–849 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Ha, I. Y. Kim, S. J. Hwang and R. S. Ruoff, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, B70–B73 CrossRef CAS .
E. Yoo, T. Okata, T. Akita, M. Kohyama, J. Nakamura and I. Honma, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2255–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Huang, H. Q. Chen, D. P. Sun and X. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2012, 204, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Qiu, G. C. Wang, R. P. Liang, X. H. Xia and H. W. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15639–15645 CAS .
S. Wang, X. Wang and S. P. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6883–6891 RSC .
S. Yang, C. Shen, Y. Liang, H. Tong, W. He, X. Shi, X. Zhang and H.-J. Gao, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3277–3284 RSC .
Y. Y. Shao, S. Zhang, C. M. Wang, Z. M. Nie, J. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. H. Lin, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4600–4605 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, C. G. Tian, L. Wang, T. X. Tan, J. Yin, B. Wang and H. G. Fu, ChemPlusChem, 2012, 77, 301–307 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Hong, H. Bai, Y. X. Xu, Z. Y. Yao, Z. Z. Gu and G. Q. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 1822–1826 CAS .
S. D. Yang, C. M. Shen, X. J. Lu, H. Tong, J. J. Zhu, X. G. Zhang and H. J. Gao, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 62, 242–249 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, J. Q. Wang, J. Zeng, J. F. Ou, Z. P. Li, X. H. Liu and S. R. Yang, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 4628–4633 CrossRef CAS .
T. Maiyalagan, X. C. Dong, P. Chen and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5286–5290 RSC .
H. C. Gao, Y. X. Wang, F. Xiao, C. B. Ching and H. W. Duan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 7719–7725 CAS .
F. Xiao, J. Song, H. Gao, X. Zan, R. Xu and H. Duan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 100–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, Y. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhou, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. Dai, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 780–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liang, H. L. Wang, J. G. Zhou, Y. G. Li, J. Wang, T. Regier and H. J. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 3517–3523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yan, X. L. Tong, Y. F. Zhang, X. D. Han, Y. Y. Wang, G. Q. Jin, Y. Qin and X. Y. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1892–1894 RSC .
T. N. Lambert, C. A. Chavez, B. Hernandez-Sanchez, P. Lu, N. S. Bell, A. Ambrosini, T. Friedman, T. J. Boyle, D. R. Wheeler and D. L. Huber, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19812–19823 CAS .
X. Y. Zhang, Y. J. Sun, X. L. Cui and Z. Y. Jiang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 811–815 CrossRef CAS .
N. Li, G. Liu, C. Zhen, F. Li, L. Zhang and H. M. Cheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Z. Xiong and X. S. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3634–3640 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. Lv, Y. Li, Y. Wang and J. Li, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 380–386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-I. Kim, G.-H. Moon, D. Monllor-Satoca, Y. Park and W. Choi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 1535–1543 CAS .
J. S. Lee, K. H. You and C. B. Park, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1084–1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Park, S.-H. Kang and W. Choi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 9425–9431 RSC .
S. Wang, D. Yu, L. Dai, D. W. Chang and J.-B. Baek, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 6202–6209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Huang, H. Bai, C. Li and G. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 4962–4964 RSC .
X. Geng, L. Niu, Z. Xing, R. Song, G. Liu, M. Sun, G. Cheng, H. Zhong, Z. Liu, Z. Zhang, L. Sun, H. Xu, L. Lu and L. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 638–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, P. Chen and M. Liu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4529–4536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Chen, T.-Y. Xiao, H.-H. Li, J.-J. Yang, Z. Wang, H.-B. Yao and S.-H. Yu, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 712–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, H. Wang, L. Xie, Y. Liang, G. Hong and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7296–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Fu and X. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2011, 50, 7210–7218 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Wang, H. W. Tian, Y. Yang, H. Wang, S. M. Wang, W. T. Zheng and Y. C. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 524, 5–12 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, Y. Zhang, X. Pan, X. Fu, S. Liu and Y.-J. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23501–23511 CAS .
B. F. Machado and P. Serp, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 54–75 CAS .
C. Gomez-Navarro, R. T. Weitz, A. M. Bittner, M. Scolari, A. Mews, M. Burghard and K. Kern, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3499–3503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Luo, P. M. Vora, E. J. Mele, A. T. C. Johnson and J. M. Kikkawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 94, 1119091–1119093 Search PubMed .
I. Jung, D. A. Dikin, R. D. Piner and R. S. Ruoff, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4283–4287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cheng, G. Zhang, J. Du, L. Tang, J. Xu and J. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3485–3494 RSC .
D. R. Dreyer, H.-P. Jia and C. W. Bielawski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 6813–6816 CAS .
H. P. Jia, D. R. Dreyer and C. W. Bielawski, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2011, 353, 528–532 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Dreyer, K. A. Jarvis, P. J. Ferreira and C. W. Bielawski, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7659–7667 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Huang, Y. Qin, Y. Zhou, H. Niu, Z. Z. Yu and J. Y. Dong, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4096–4102 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, Y. J. Kim, D. H. Kim, B. C. Ku and H. I. Joh, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2012, 73, 741–743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Long, C. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Gao, W. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 13934–13941 RSC .
S. M. S. Chauhan and S. Mishra, Molecules, 2011, 16, 7256–7266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Li, J. S. Chen, X. C. Wang, J. H. Sun and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8074–8077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kotha, K. Lahiri and D. Kashinath, Tetrahedron, 2002, 58, 9633–9695 CrossRef CAS .
K. C. Majumdar, S. Samanta and B. Sinha, Synthesis, 2012, 44, 817–847 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimizu and A. Satsuma, J. Jpn. Pet. Inst., 2011, 54, 347–360 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Wang and N. Liu, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2012, 901–911 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, S. Shen, J. Zhuang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 4603–4607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Zu, J. Y. Tang, W. C. Zhu, M. Zhang, G. Liu, Y. Liu, W. X. Zhang and M. J. Jia, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 8939–8944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. C. Brownson, D. K. Kampouris and C. E. Banks, J. Power Sources, 2011, 196, 4873–4885 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng and J. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2172–2192 RSC .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2834–2860 CAS .
B. E. Logan, B. Hamelers, R. A. Rozendal, U. Schrorder, J. Keller, S. Freguia, P. Aelterman, W. Verstraete and K. Rabaey, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2006, 40, 5181–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Mehta and J. S. Cooper, J. Power Sources, 2003, 114, 32–53 CrossRef CAS .
N. Q. Minh, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1993, 76, 563–588 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Q. Wu and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1113–1132 CAS .
E. Yoo and H. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3020–3026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J.-M. Tarascon and W. van Schalkwijk, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 366–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Basri, S. K. Kamarudin, W. R. W. Daud and Z. Yaakub, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7957–7970 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Liu, C. J. Song, L. Zhang, J. J. Zhang, H. J. Wang and D. P. Wilkinson, J. Power Sources, 2006, 155, 95–110 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Pena, J. P. Gomez and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., A, 1996, 144, 7–57 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wasmus and A. Kuver, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1999, 461, 14–31 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Paulus, T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger and R. J. Behm, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 495, 134–145 CrossRef CAS .
R. Awasthi and R. N. Singh, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 2103–2110 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bong, Y. R. Kim, I. Kim, S. Woo, S. Uhm, J. Lee and H. Kim, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 129–131 CrossRef CAS .
C. Flox, J. Rubio-Garcia, R. Nafria, R. Zamani, M. Skoumal, T. Andreu, J. Arbiol, A. Cabot and J. R. Morante, Carbon, 2012, 50, 2372–2374 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Huang, D. P. Sun and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19405–19412 CAS .
S. Kang, S. Lim, D. H. Peck, S. K. Kim, D. H. Jung, S. H. Hong, H. G. Jung and Y. Shul, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 4685–4693 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Liao, C. T. Liao, C. Y. Tso and H. J. Shy, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 130, 270–274 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Paulus, A. Wokaun, G. G. Scherer, T. J. Schmidt, V. Stamenkovic, V. Radmilovic, N. M. Markovic and P. N. Ross, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 4181–4191 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, X. Q. Xu, P. Gu, C. Y. Li, P. Wu and C. X. Cai, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 7064–7070 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Dicks, J. Power Sources, 2006, 156, 128–141 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jha, R. I. Jafri, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2011, 36, 7284–7290 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, Y. Jiao, J. Chen, J. Liu, J. Liang, A. Du, W. M. Zhang, Z. H. Zhu, S. C. Smith, M. Jaroniec, G. Q. Lu and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20116–20119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Li, W. Gao, L. J. Ci, C. M. Wang and P. M. Ajayan, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1124–1130 CrossRef CAS .
L. F. Dong, R. R. S. Gari, Z. Li, M. M. Craig and S. F. Hou, Carbon, 2010, 48, 781–787 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 7990–7995 CAS .
Y. C. Zhao, L. Zhan, J. N. Tian, S. L. Nie and Z. Ning, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1967–1972 CrossRef CAS .
R. Imran Jafri, N. Rajalakshmi and S. Ramaprabhu, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 7114–7117 RSC .
L. S. Zhang, X. Q. Liang, W. G. Song and Z. Y. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 12055–12059 RSC .
R. T. Lv, T. X. Cui, M. S. Jun, Q. Zhang, A. Y. Cao, D. S. Su, Z. J. Zhang, S. H. Yoon, J. Miyawaki, I. Mochida and F. Y. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 999–1006 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tributsch, U. I. Koslowski and I. Dorbandt, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53, 2198–2209 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, Q. He, C. Zhou, X. Qi, X. Huang, Z. Yin, Y. Yang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2478–2483 RSC .
X. Y. Li, X. Wang, S. Y. Song, D. P. Liu and H. J. Zhang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7601–7607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qian, S. B. Lu and F. L. Gao, Mater. Lett., 2011, 65, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Wu, D. Zhang, Y. Wang, Y. Wan and B. R. Hou, J. Power Sources, 2012, 198, 122–126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Zhang, G. Q. Mo, X. W. Li and J. S. Ye, J. Power Sources, 2012, 197, 93–96 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Lu, M. Zhou, C. Zhang and Y.-P. Feng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 20156–20160 CAS .
H. R. Byon, J. Suntivich and Y. Shao-Horn, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3421–3428 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Lee, T. Lee, H. K. Song, J. Cho and B. S. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4148–4154 CAS .
B. Y. Xia, H. Bin Wu, J. S. Chen, Z. Y. Wang, X. Wang and X. W. Lou, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 473–476 RSC .
K. R. Lee, K. U. Lee, J. W. Lee, B. T. Ahn and S. I. Woo, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 1052–1055 CrossRef CAS .
Y. W. Ma, L. Y. Sun, W. Huang, L. R. Zhang, J. Zhao and Q. L. Fan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24592–24597 CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, G. Shi, L. Dai and L. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 15–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Geng, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Li, R. Li, X. Sun, S. Ye and S. Knights, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 760–764 CAS .
L. Yu, X. L. Pan, X. M. Cao, P. Hu and X. H. Bao, J. Catal., 2011, 282, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang and Z. Xia, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 11170–11176 CAS .
L. F. Lai, J. R. Potts, D. Zhan, L. Wang, C. K. Poh, C. H. Tang, H. Gong, Z. X. Shen, L. Y. Jianyi and R. S. Ruoff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7936–7942 CAS .
K. R. Ratinac, W. R. Yang, J. J. Gooding, P. Thordarson and F. Braet, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 803–826 CrossRef CAS .
S. Roy, N. Soin, R. Bajpai, D. S. Misra, J. A. McLaughlin and S. S. Roy, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14725–14731 RSC .
Y. Y. Shao, J. Wang, H. Wu, J. Liu, I. A. Aksay and Y. H. Lin, Electroanalysis, 2010, 22, 1027–1036 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, S. Cai, Q.-Q. Ren, W. Wen and Y.-D. Zhao, Analyst, 2012, 137, 49–58 RSC .
O. Leenaerts, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 77, 1254161–1254166 CrossRef .
H. L. Poh and M. Pumera, Chem.–Asian J., 2012, 7, 412–416 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, X. Dong and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2283–2307 RSC .
J. Chen, L. Zhao, H. Bai and G. Q. Shi, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2011, 657, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gan and S. S. Hu, Microchim. Acta, 2011, 175, 1–19 CrossRef CAS .
E. W. Hill, A. Vijayaragahvan and K. Novoselov, IEEE Sens. J., 2011, 11, 3161–3170 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Jiang, M. Wang, Y. Chen, J. Q. Xie and Y. Xiang, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2012, 32, 305–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Li, D. Z. Kuang, Y. L. Feng, F. X. Zhang, Z. F. Xu and M. Q. Liu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 201, 250–259 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Liu, K. S. Choi, T. J. Park, S. Y. Lee and T. S. Seo, BioChip J., 2011, 5, 123–128 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qi, Y. Wan, D. Zhang and J. J. Wu, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 2796–2801 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Song, Z. F. He, H. Z. Zhu, H. Q. Hou and L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 58, 757–763 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Shao, D. W. Matson, J. Li and Y. Lin, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1790–1798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, Y. Zhai and S. Dong, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 5603–5613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Zhao, L. Wang, Y. L. Liu, G. Song, F. Wang and B. X. Ye, Electroanalysis, 2012, 24, 691–698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, D. Zhang and J. J. Wu, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2012, 664, 111–116 CrossRef CAS .
O. Akhavan, E. Ghaderi and R. Rahighi, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2904–2916 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Fan, Y. Li, D. Wu, H. M. Ma, K. X. Mao, D. W. Fan, B. Du, H. Li and Q. Wei, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2012, 711, 24–28 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Shan, H. F. Yang, D. X. Han, Q. X. Zhang, A. Ivaska and L. Niu, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2010, 25, 1504–1508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. D. Zhou and G. F. Wang, Micro Nano Lett., 2012, 7, 60–63 CAS .
H. Bai, Y. X. Xu, L. Zhao, C. Li and G. Q. Shi, Chem. Commun., 2009, 1667–1669 RSC .
Q. Zhang, Y. Qiao, L. Zhang, S. Wu, H. Zhou, J. Xu and X.-M. Song, Electroanalysis, 2011, 23, 900–906 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Li, K.-P. Liu, G. H. Yang, C. M. Wang, J. R. Zhang and J. J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 869–878 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Wen, S. M. Cui, H. H. Pu, S. Mao, K. H. Yu, X. L. Feng and J. H. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 5445–5450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, D. Wen, Y. Zhai, S. Dong and E. Wang, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 3959–3968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lu, I. Do, L. T. Drzal, R. M. Worden and I. Lee, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1825–1832 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Linic, P. Christopher and D. B. Ingram, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 911–921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sivula, F. Le Formal and M. Gratzel, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 432–449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Melo and L. A. Silva, J. Braz. Chem. Soc., 2011, 22, 1399–1406 CAS .
E. C. Garnett, M. L. Brongersma, Y. Cui and M. D. McGehee, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 269–295 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Xu and Q. Q. Qiao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2700–2720 CAS .
K. Q. Peng and S. T. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 198–215 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Boucle and J. Ackermann, Polym. Int., 2012, 61, 355–373 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chattopadhyay, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, NPG Asia Mater., 2011, 3, 74–81 CrossRef .
A. Reynal and E. Palomares, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2011, 4509–4526 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Warren and E. Thimsen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5133–5146 CAS .
J. Shi and X. D. Wang, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B: Nanotechnol. Microelectron.: Mater., Process., Meas., Phenom., 2011, 29, 060801 CrossRef .
A. Mishra and P. Bauerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2020–2067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2011, 12, 237–268 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin and X. H. Tang, Solid-State Electron., 2007, 51, 6–15 CrossRef CAS .
M. I. Litter, Appl. Catal., B, 1999, 23, 89–114 CrossRef CAS .
S. Baruah and J. Dutta, Environ. Chem. Lett., 2009, 7, 191–204 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bajpai, S. Roy, P. Kumar, P. Bajpai, N. Kulshrestha, J. Rafiee, N. Koratkar and D. S. Misra, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3884–3889 CAS .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 41, 785–796 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, W. Cai, M. Long, B. Zhou, Y. Wu, D. Wu and Y. Feng, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6425–6432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Farhangi, R. R. Chowdhury, Y. Medina-Gonzalez, M. B. Ray and P. A. Charpentier, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 110, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and K. Zhang, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2012, 12, 346–352 CrossRef .
R. Wang, G. Jiang, Y. Ding, Y. Wang, X. Sun, X. Wang and W. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 4154–4158 CAS .
G. Williams, B. Seger and P. V. Kamat, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 1487–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang and C. Pan, J. Mater. Sci., 2010, 46, 2622–2626 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 7303–7314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z.-R. Tang, X. Fu and Y.-J. Xu, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7426–7435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, R. K. Singh, J. Singh, R. S. Tiwari and O. N. Srivastava, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 526, 129–134 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, P. Xiong, H. Chen, X. Sun and X. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 725–731 CrossRef .
M.-C. Wu, J. Hiltunen, A. Sápi, A. Avila, W. Larsson, H.-C. Liao, M. Huuhtanen, G. Tóth, A. Shchukarev, N. Laufer, A. Kukovecz, Z. Kónya, J.-P. Mikkola, R. Keiski, W.-F. Su, Y.-F. Chen, H. Jantunen, P. M. Ajayan, R. Vajtai and K. Kordás, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5025–5030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Neppolian, A. Bruno, C. L. Bianchi and M. Ashokkumar, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2012, 19, 9–15 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3670–3678 RSC .
S. X. Min and G. X. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13938–13945 CAS .
L. Jia, D. H. Wang, Y. X. Huang, A. W. Xu and H. Q. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 11466–11473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mukherji, B. Seger, G. Q. Lu and L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3483–3492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, Y. Ishiguro, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 11054–11057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Ng, A. Iwase, A. Kudo and R. Amal, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2607–2612 CrossRef CAS .
Q. J. Xiang, J. G. Yu and M. Jaroniec, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7355–7363 CAS .
Y. Matsumoto, M. Koinuma, S. Ida, S. Hayami, T. Taniguchi, K. Hatakeyama, H. Tateishi, Y. Watanabe and S. Amano, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19280–19286 CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Cancan Huang	Miss Cancan Huang received her B.Eng. from the Department of Materials at Beijing Institute of Technology in 2010. She is currently a M.Sci. candidate in Prof. Gaoquan Shi’s Laboratory at the Department of Chemistry, Tsinghua University. Her research interests focus on graphene based catalysts.
Chun Li	Dr Chun Li received his PhD in 1998 from Nanjing University under the supervision of Prof. Yingqiu Liang. He then joined Nanjing University as a lecturer. From 2001 to 2003 he was a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Toyoko Imae at Nagoya University. In 2003 he moved to Kyushu University as a postdoctoral research associate with Prof. Seiji Shinkai for 2 years. Now he is an associate professor at Tsinghua University. His research interests focus on conjugated polymers and supramolecular chemistry.
Gaoquan Shi	Prof. Gaoquan Shi received his BS degree (1985) and PhD degree (1992) at the Department of Chemistry, Nanjing University. Then he joined Nanjing University and was promoted to full professor in 1995. In 2000, he moved to Tsinghua University as a Professor of Chemistry. His research interests are focused on synthesis and applications of graphene materials and conducting polymers. He received the 2nd Grade Award of Natural Science of China and the Youth Knowledge Innovation Prize of the Chinese Chemical Society and BASF Company in 2004.

Broader context
Catalysts are widely used in organic synthesis, environmental protection and energy related systems. The conventional catalysts are noble metals, metal oxides, enzymes, etc. The practical applications of these catalysts are frequently limited by their high costs, low efficiency, toxicity, or environmental issues. To address these problems, recently, graphene has been widely explored to replace conventional catalysts or as supporting material for improving the performance of catalysts. The atom-thick 2D structure of graphene provides it with an extraordinarily large specific surface area for loading catalysts. The high conductivity and optical transparency of graphene sheets are propitious to the charge generation and transportation in catalyzation processes, making it attractive for developing new electrocatalysts or photocatalysts. Graphene also has high chemical, thermal, optical and electrochemical stability, which can possibly improve the lifetime of catalysts. This review paper summarizes the different methods of producing graphene based catalysts for applications in organic reactions, fuel cells, electrochemical sensors, photo-degradation of organic pollutants and photodecomposition of water. This review addresses the current limitations, technical and economical viability of these new catalysts, and indicates their potentials in environmental and energy technologies.


 	Fig. 1  (A) Fabrication of porous graphene-based carbon nitride (G-CN). (B) TEM images of G–CN nanosheets, reproduced with permission from ref. 101 © 2011 Wiley-VCH. (C) TEM images of nanoporous N-doped carbon modified graphene (G-PMFs), reproduced with permission from ref. 102 © 2012 Royal Society Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) TEM image of Pt/rGO composite, reproduced with permission from ref. 116 © 2009 Elsevier B.V. (B) TEM image of Pt/rGO composite, reproduced with permission from ref. 117 © 2011 The Electrochemical Society. (C) HRTEM image of a Pt/graphene nanosheet composite, reproduced with permission from ref. 118 © 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) TEM image of Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, reproduced with permission from ref. 131 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) Top-view SEM image of mesoporous anatase TiO2 nanospheres on graphene sheets, reproduced with permission from ref. 136 © 2011 Wiley-VCH. (C) SEM image of graphene-wrapped anatase TiO2 NPs, reproduced with permission from ref. 140 © 2012 Wiley-VCH.	 


GO	Oxidation reaction	
156, 157, 161
	Pd/rGO	C–C coupling reaction	
47, 115, 168

C–C coupling reaction	
157, 162
	Au/rGO	Suzuki coupling reaction	
114

Polymerization	
158–160
	CaO/GO	Transesterification	
169

Mimic peroxidase	
19
	Hb/GO	Peroxidatic reaction	
143

Photoreaction	
29, 284
	Pt/rGO	MORb	
116, 118, 127, 197

Glucose sensor	
19
	Pt-Ru/rGO	MORb	
196

Graphene/g-C3N4	Selective oxidation	
163
	Pt/PDDA-rGO	MORb	
120

LC-GO	Matrine sensor	
236
	PtAu/PDDA-rGO	HCOOH oxidation reaction	
121

rGO	DNA, H2O2 sensor	
235, 238
	Pt/N-rGO	MORb and ORRa	
198–200

NADH, APAP, DA, UA and AA sensors	
226, 234, 235
	PtRu/NCNT-GHN	MORb	
201

IL-rGO	NADH sensor	
240
	Co3O4/rmGO or N-rmGO	ORRa and OERd	
131

SPANI-rGO	AA sensor	
242
	MnCo2O4/rmGO or N-rmGO	ORRa and OERd	
132

S-rGO	H2O2, NaNO2 sensor	
243
	Fe-N-rGO	ORRa	
209

N-doped graphene	ORR in fuel cells	
92, 94, 212, 213
	Mn3O4/rGO-IL	ORRa	
210

H2O2 sensor	
239
	Pt/TiO2/rGO	MORb	
211

N-EFG	ORRa	
100
	MoS2/rGO	HERe	
147

G-CN	ORRa	
101
	TiN/NG	NADH, lactate sensor	
245

G-GCN	ORRa	
97
	Au/rGO	Cocaine, UA sensor	
125, 229

G-PMF	ORRa	
102
	Pt/rGO	H2O2, DA, APAP, and TNT sensor	
246, 247

N-GQD	ORRa	
214
	Au-rGO foil	Glucose, AA, DA, and UA sensor	
130

CNx/CMG	ORRa	
99
	TiO2/graphene	PDPc	
136, 140, 266–268

PDDA/graphene	ORRa	
142
	
	Water splitting	
135, 136, 141, 277, 278

S-doped graphene	ORRa	
109, 110
	SnO2/rGO	PDPc	
137

I-doped graphene	ORRa	
111
	ZnO/rGO	PDPc	
137, 274


	
	
	ZnFe2O4/rGO	PDPc	
148


	
	
	Ag/AgX/rGO	PDPc	
145


	
	
	ZnSe/NG	PDPc	
146


	
	
	CdS/rGO	PDPc and selective oxidation	
149, 150


	
	
	Pt/EY-rGO	Water splitting	
279


	
	
	CdS/rGO	Photocatalyt	
150, 280


	
	
	Sr2Ta2O7/rGO	Photocatalyt	
281


	
	
	BiVO4/rGO	Water splitting	
282


	
	
	Pt-GCN/rGO	Water splitting	
284


	
	
	PDDA-rGO-CdSe	Protein detection	
244


 	Fig. 4  Chemical reactions catalyzed by GO. Oxidation of benzyl alcohol and cis-stilbene, hydration of various alkynes and a coupling reaction of arylalkynes to benzyl alcohols. R1, R2 = Ph, p-NO2C6H4, p-CH3OC6H4, reproduced with permission from ref. 156 © 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (A) Time-dependent absorbance changes at 652 nm in absence or presence of glucose in phosphate buffer (25 mM Na2HPO4, pH 4.0) at 35.8 °C. (B) Dose-response curves for glucose detection using glucose oxidase and GO. Inset: linear calibration plot for glucose. The error bars represent standard deviation of three measurements, reproduced with permission from ref. 19 © 2010 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Catalyst screening in the Suzuki–Miyaura reaction. Comparison of Pd-GO/CDG catalysts 2–5 and Pd/C, taking the coupling reaction of 4-methoxyphenylboronic acid and 4-bromo-1,2-difluorobenzene (1 mol%) as examples. (B) TEM images of Pd2+-GO after the first run (left) and fourth run (right) of the catalytic reaction. Agglomeration of the particles can be observed, reproduced with permission from ref. 47 © 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) CV curves for methanol oxidation reaction on (a) 20 wt% Pt/Carbon Black, (b) 20 wt% Pt/rGO and (c) 20 wt% Pt-10 wt% Ru/Carbon Black in 1 mol L−1 CH3OH + 0.05 mol L−1 H2SO4 at room temperature; (B) rates of CO adsorption at various catalysts, reproduced with permission from ref. 118 © 2009 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) TEM image of Pt/NG-800. (B) Cyclic voltammogram of methanol oxidation on Pt/NG-800, PT/NG-300 or Pt/G-800, reproduced with permission from ref. 200 © 2010 Royal Society of Chemistry. (C) Well-dispersed PtRu nanoparticles on NCNT-GHN; (D) DMFC single-cell properties of different catalysts at 60 °C, reproduced with permission from ref. 201 © 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Oxygen electrode activities within the ORR and OER potential window of Co3O4/N-rmGO hybrid, Co3O4 nanocrystal and Pt/C catalysts (catalyst loading 0.24 mg cm−2 for all samples) dispersed on carbon fibre paper in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH, reproduced with permission from ref. 131 © 2011 Macmillan Publishers Limited. (B) CV curves of MnCo2O4–N-rmGO hybrid, MnCo2O4–N-rmGO mixture, Co3O4–N-rmGO hybrid, and N-rmGO on glassy carbon electrodes in O2-saturated (solid line) or N2-saturated (dash line) 1 M KOH. The peak position of Pt/C was shown as a dashed line for comparison, reproduced with permission from ref. 132 © 2012 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (A) Schematic of a membrane-free single-chamber air-cathode MFC showing the basic mechanism of current generation; (B) standard deviations of duplicate tests, reproduced with permission from ref. 94 © 2011 American Chemical Society. (C) CVs of N-GQDs in N2 or O2 saturated 3 M KOH, reproduced with permission from ref. 214 © 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (A) The content of three nitrogen species (N1, N2, and N3) in G-CN nanosheets. (B) Electrochemical activity given as the kinetic-limiting current density (JK) at −0.40 V for all G-CN and CN nanosheets, reproduced with permission from ref. 101 © 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (A) Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) for various graphenes and a Pt/C catalyst on a glass carbon rotating disk electrode saturated in O2 at a rotation rate of 1600 rpm, reproduced with permission from ref. 110 © 2011 American Chemical Society. (B) LSV curves for various graphenes and a Pt/C catalyst on a glassy carbon rotating disk electrode saturated in O2 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a rotation rate of 1600 rpm, reproduced with permission from ref. 111 © 2012 Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (A) Background-subtracted CVs for 4 mM H2O2 at Cr-GO/GC(a1), graphite/GC (b1), and GC electrode (c1). Electrolyte: 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS. Scan rate: 50 mV s−1. (B) Current–time curves for CR-GO/GC (d1), graphite/GC (e1), and GC electrodes (f1) at 0.20 V with successive addition of 0.1 mM H2O2. Inset: calibration curves for H2O2 at CR-GO/GC (g1), graphite/GC (h1), and GC electrodes (i1). Electrolyte: magnetically stirred 0.1 M pH 7.0 PBS, reproduced with permission from ref. 235 © 2011 American Chemical Society. (C) Schematic representation of the bioelectrocatalytic sensing of ethanol using IL-graphene/chitosan/ADH modified electrode, reproduced with permission from ref. 240 © 2009 Elsevier B.V. (D) Current responses of the Pt/rGO/GCE to the sequential addition of 0.05 M H2O2, 0.1 nM AA, and 0.1 mM UA into 0.1 M PBS, reproduced with permission from ref. 246 © 2010 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (A) Photocurrent transient response of the samples in a 0.2 M of Na2SO4 aqueous solution under visible light irradiation. (B) Time online profile of the yield of benzyl aldehyde over the optimal TiO2-5% GR and TiO2-5% CNT nanocomposites, reproduced with permission from ref. 273 © 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (A) Photodegradation of Methylene Blue (MB) under visible light (λ > 420 nm) by (a) P25, (b) bare anatase TiO2 NPs, (c) graphene–TiO2 NPs (two-step hydrothermal), and (d) graphene–TiO2 NPs. The weight ratio of graphene to TiO2 in the graphene–TiO2 hybrid materials was 0.02:1. (B) Suggested mechanism for photocatalytic H2-production under UV light irradiation, reproduced with permission from ref. 140 © 2011 Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Proposed mechanism for photocatalytic H2-production under UV light irradiation, reproduced with permission from ref. 278 © 2011 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (A) Photocurrent transient response of rGO, EY-rGO, and EY-rGO/Pt (7%) in the mixed solution of TEOA (triethanolamine) and 0.1 M Na2SO4 at pH 7. (B) Suggested photocatalytic mechanism for hydrogen evolution over EY-RGO/Pt photocatalyst under visible light irradiation, reproduced with permission from ref. 279 © 2011 American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
