Design, synthesis, and application of metal sulfides for Li–S batteries: progress and prospects  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA06220K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA06220K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17848-17882Design, synthesis, and application of metal sulfides for Li–S batteries: progress and prospects

        
          
            Bo 
            Yan
          
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Xifei 
            Li
          
          
        
      *bd, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Xiao
          
        
      bd, 
      
        
          
            Junhua 
            Hu
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Lulu 
            Zhang
          
        
      ac and 

        
          
            Xuelin 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *ac
aCollege of Materials and Chemical Engineering, Key Laboratory of Inorganic Nonmetallic Crystalline and Energy Conversion Materials, China Three Gorges University, Yichang 443002, China. E-mail: xlyang@ctgu.edu.cn
bXi'an Key Laboratory of New Energy Materials and Devices, Institute of Advanced Electrochemical Energy, School of Materials Science and Engineering, Xi'an University of Technology, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710048, China. E-mail: xfli2011@hotmail.com
cCollaborative Innovation Center for Microgrid of New Energy, Yichang, Hubei 443002, China
dShaanxi International Joint Research Center of Surface Technology for Energy Storage Materials, Xi'an 710048, Shaanxi, China
eState Center for International Cooperation on Designer Low-carbon & Environmental Materials (CDLCEM), Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, Henan, China
Received 
      24th June 2020
    , Accepted 6th August 2020First published on 10th August 2020AbstractLithium–sulfur batteries have low material costs and high energy densities, which have attracted considerable research interest for application in next-generation energy-storage systems. However, the practical applications of Li–S batteries face challenges owing to their poor sulfur utilization, service lifetimes, and rate capability. Recently, great progress has been made in the design, synthesis, and application of micro/nanostructured metal sulfides to address obstacles facing Li–S batteries. This review aims to highlight valuable concepts from the latest reports. Major approaches to improve sulfur cathodes and strategies for preparing metal sulfide-based materials are first summarized with a particular focus on their main functions and useful properties. Then, the electrochemical activities of metal sulfides are classified and their applications in Li–S batteries are introduced to provide a fundamental understanding of the material interactions involved. In parallel, advancements in the use of interlayers, modification of separators, and protection of lithium anodes that involve metal sulfides are surveyed. Finally, special attention is paid to the general design principles, future prospects, and challenges facing metal sulfides for high-energy-density Li–S batteries.Bo YanBo Yan is currently an associate professor in the College of Materials and Chemical Engineering at China Three Gorges University. He received his PhD degree (2017) from the School of Materials Science and Technology at the China University of Geosciences (Beijing). His current research interests focus on the controllable preparation of micro/nanostructures and their applications in lithium–sulfur batteries and lithium/sodium ion batteries.Xifei LiXifei Li is currently a full professor at the Xi'an University of Technology and Tianjin Normal University. Prof. Li's research group is currently working on the design, synthesis and performance improvement of anodes and cathodes with various structures for high performance lithium ion batteries, lithium sulfur batteries, sodium ion batteries, and supercapacitors. He has authored and co-authored over 240 refereed journal articles with more than 12000 citations and two invited book chapters and hold 13 patents.Xuelin YangXuelin Yang received his PhD from the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. Since 2007 he has been working at the China Three Gorges University (CTGU) for new energy storage materials as a project leader. He is currently a professor at CTGU, and his research interests focus on novel electrode materials and their applications in energy-storage areas.
1. Introduction
Rechargeable lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have revolutionized portable electronics owing to their compact size, environmental friendliness, competitive energy density, and affordable prices.1–4 However, after decades of intensive efforts, the main limiting factor of LIBs today is the low theoretical capacity of insertion-compound cathodes, which leads to an inadequate specific energy density (420 W h kg−1 or 1400 W h L−1).5–10 The demand for long-range electric vehicle propulsion and/or grid-scale energy storage has triggered the search for alternative battery technologies with higher energy densities than the charge-storage limitations of insertion compounds.11–15 Lithium–sulfur (Li–S) batteries that combine Earth-abundant and high-capacity sulfur cathodes with lithium anodes are considered to be among the most promising candidates to provide a high-energy-density system (Fig. 1a). The Li–S battery has an ultrahigh theoretical energy density (2600 W h kg−1 or 2800 W h L−1),12,16–18 which is much greater than that of typical LIBs. This performance is based on the overall reaction of 16Li + S8 → 8Li2S.8,11,17,19–21 In this case, a unique solid–liquid–solid conversion occurs, involving the generation of soluble intermediate lithium polysulfides (LiPSs).10,17,22–25 Currently, fundamental challenges impeding the practical applications of Li–S batteries originate from (i) the insulating nature of the reactant (S8) and product (Li2S) and the 80% volume fluctuation accompanying their conversion;12,26–29 (ii) the unmanageable shuttling of soluble LiPSs, which results in the loss of active materials, passivation of both electrodes, and unwanted self-discharge or recharge;23–25,30 and (iii) the unstable structure of the Li anode, which leads to dendrite formation and related safety issues.9,15,31–33
 Fig. 1  (a) Typical configurations of the Li–S battery, composed of an anode, cathode, separator, and electrolyte. (b) Schematic diagram of the modified components/structures involved in a Li–S battery. (c) Binding energy metrics for chemical interactions between lithium polysulfides and sulfur hosts. Reproduced with permission from: (c) ref. 17. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
To address the challenges facing Li–S batteries, considerable efforts have been made to develop sulfur-based cathode composite materials, modify separators, protect Li anodes, and use conductive interlayers and/or novel electrolyte additives (Fig. 1b).8,9,12,25,29,34–36 These approaches have all yielded certain encouraging results. However, the above strategies often have variable effects on the performance of Li–S batteries, owing to the specificity and interdependency of the S8–Li2Sn–Li2S (solid–liquid–solid) multistage transformation.11,18,23,28 For example, the conductive interlayer introduced between the separator and cathode suppresses the migration of LiPSs, which also offers additional electron pathways that cover the top surface of the cathode. This performance enhances the use of active materials and reduces random deposition of Li2S on the surface of the Li anode, thereby restraining dendrite formation and improving the anode stability to a certain degree.11,37–44
A major breakthrough was achieved in 2009 when Nazar and colleagues introduced a highly ordered mesoporous carbon material to encapsulate sulfur, resulting in a Li–S battery with a high capacity and stable cycling.45 A series of carbon hosts have since been successively developed to improve the performance of Li–S batteries, including zero-dimensional (0D) carbon quantum dots,46 one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanotubes/carbon nanofibers,47–51 two-dimensional (2D) graphene/carbon nanosheets,52–56 and three-dimensional (3D) porous carbon/hybrid carbon.57–63 However, the physical confinement of LiPSs based on carbonaceous materials has not been completely successful, partly because carbon hosts have nonpolar surfaces, which adsorb polar LiPSs and due to the weak nature of Li2S redox.8,11,16,17,64 The use of chemical adsorption such as polar–polar interactions,65–79 Lewis acid–base interactions,80–84 and chemical bonding within polymer chains85–91 has been widely used for active sulfide binding as an effective strategy to minimize the loss of LiPSs. A theoretical screening based on density functional theory (DFT) has indicated that metal oxides and sulfides have higher binding energies for LiPSs (2.6–3.5 eV)71–73,92–96 than those of functional polymers (0.5–1.3 eV)17,64,97 and heteroatom-doped carbons (1.3–2.6 eV)76,98–102 (Fig. 1c). In particular, the main goal for active sulfide binding is to promote their conversion to decrease the total amount of soluble LiPSs in the electrolyte and achieve shuttle suppression and ensure a high capacity.44,103–105 Compared with metal oxides, therefore, metal sulfides have better prospects owing to the following advantages: (i) metal sulfides have a remarkable but not excessively strong binding strength, which preserves the intact configuration of LiPSs. Excessively strong binding such as that of metal oxides can destroy LiPSs;93,106,107 (ii) metal sulfides have higher room-temperature electronic conductivities than their oxide counterparts owing to the more covalent nature of soft basic S2−/S22− ions rather than hard basic O2− ions, some of which even exhibit half-metallic or metallic bonding;96,104,108–110 (iii) metal sulfides, which serve as reaction mediators, are conducive to conversion of polar LiPSs, which markedly accelerates the redox reaction kinetics;104,105,108,111 and (iv) metal sulfide reactions with lithium have a high electrochemical activity and thus make a large contribution to the capacity of Li–S batteries.43,109,111–114 Recently, extensive research has focused on the design and synthesis of micro/nanostructured metal sulfides and their composites with conductive matrices for high-performance Li–S batteries;10,23,25,111,115,116 however, there is still a need for a general overview to systematically summarize these recent advances.
Herein, the aim of this review is to extract valuable concepts from the latest progress reports. Together with the major challenges facing sulfur cathodes, strategies for preparing various micro/nanostructured metal sulfide-based materials are summarized with a particular focus on their main functions or attractive properties. Electrochemical activities/stabilities and theoretical ab initio calculation results of metal sulfide reactions with Li/LiPSs are discussed to provide a fundamental understanding of the material applications involved. Furthermore, advances in the use of interlayers, modification of separators, and protection of lithium anodes involving metal sulfides are also surveyed. On the basis of progress to date, special attention is paid to the general design principles of metal sulfides and/or other related mediators for high-energy-density Li–S batteries. We also provide our personal insights into the prospects and challenges associated with metal sulfides for commercially viable Li–S batteries.
2. Design and synthesis of metal sulfides for Li–S batteries
Metal sulfides having various micro-/nanostructures and compositions (Fig. 2),107,117–142 such as spherical/non-spherical hollow materials, high surface area/porosity/selectivity structures, hierarchical carbon-based hybrids, and unique functional materials, have been successfully prepared in recent years through various synthetic approaches. These material systems offer the possibility to study the influence of these features on the electrochemical properties of Li–S batteries. Generally, there are two typical strategies to building metal sulfides and sulfur cathode composites: (i) one-step in situ fabrication and (ii) stepwise synthesis, which often involves injection of sulfur into a host via melt/solution-diffusion methods. Synthetic strategies involving the use of metal sulfides to protect Li anodes, modify separators, and engineer interlayers, are more flexible than those related to the use of metal sulfides and sulfur cathode composites, owing to the removal of the sulfur injection process.143–148 We consider the fundamental challenges facing Li–S batteries and discuss synthetic strategies to highlight their attractive features. Accordingly, the methods can be broadly categorized into five groups: (i) building buffer space to accommodate volume fluctuations; (ii) enhancing the binding ability for LiPSs; (iii) improving the electronic conductivity of the active material; (iv) increasing the sulfur loading; and (v) designing other specialized functions.
 Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of diverse types of micro-/nano-structured metal sulfides as well as their composites for Li–S batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
2.1 Building buffer space for volume fluctuations
The conversion of the reactant S8 to the lithiation product Li2S is accompanied by a volume change of nearly 80%, which would lead to the deterioration of the original electrode structure, and thus lower the cycle lifetime of Li–S batteries. To address this tough issue, the design of metal sulfides with a large space and/or internal void, such as hollow materials with spherical or non-spherical structures, is considered as a highly effective strategy for accommodating the volume fluctuations of active elemental sulfur and manipulating the cycling stability. Up to now, three typical approaches, including conventional hard templating, sacrificial templating, and soft templating syntheses, have been developed to construct this kind of unique texture in the field of Li–S batteries.
Starting with SiO2 as a hard template, for example, Qiao's group demonstrated the formation of a unique sulfur host hybrid material comprising nanosized nickel sulfide (NiS) uniformly distributed on 3D carbon hollow spheres (C-HS).117 As illustrated in Fig. 3a, the highly dispersed and uniform SiO2 nanospheres are initially prepared by Stober's method (Fig. 3b). After reacting with an aqueous solution of nickel nitrate and being coated with resorcinol formaldehyde (RF) resin, SiO2@Ni-silicate@RF spheres are obtained (Fig. 3c). Subsequently, Ni nanoparticles are incorporated into the carbon shell after carbonized in a N2 atmosphere, forming SiO2@Ni@C (Fig. 3d). NiS@C-HSs with a well-maintained spherical morphology and high specific surface area of 241 m2 g−1 are fabricated by a sulfidation process using Na2S (Fig. 3e). Impressively, the Na2S not only functions as a sulfurizing agent, transforming Ni particles into NiS, but also generates hollow structures by providing an alkaline environment to remove the SiO2 template. Finally, the S/NiS@C-HS composite is synthesized through the impregnation of sulfur using a melting–diffusion method. Similarly, a sulfur/SnS2@hollow carbon nanosphere composite has been prepared by Li and coworkers using direct HF etching of a SiO2–C core–shell precursor, followed by chemical vapor deposition employing SnCl4 and H2S as reactants to introduce SnS2 nanoparticles and a wet-impregnation approach with CS2 as solvent to load sulfur.118 Notably, after loading with SnS2 and S, the N2 sorption isotherm of the final product maintains a type IV isotherm with a pore volume of approximately 0.55 cm3 g−1 and Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area to 72.8 m2 g−1, which adequately offers free space for the volume change of S/Li2S during charge and discharge cycling. Conventional hard templating synthesis is the most direct and effective approach to construct unique structures with a large space and/or internal void.149,150 However, this method is usually time consuming and costly caused by the processes of preparing, utilizing, and removing templates. Also, special care is required to prevent the collapse of the space/void during template removal.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of NiS@C-HS. (b–e) TEM images of SiO2 (b), SiO2@Ni-silicate@RF (c), SiO2@Ni@C (d), and NiS@C-HS (e), and the inset shows the HRTEM image of NiS. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the S@Co9S8 composite. (g and h) FESEM and TEM images of the as-prepared precursor (g) and honeycomb-like Co9S8 (h). (i and j) FESEM image (i) and TEM image (j) of the S@Co9S8 composite. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the MoS2-encapsulated hollow sulfur sphere. (l and m) STEM image (l) and high-resolution TEM image (m) of the MoS2-encapsulated hollow sulfur sphere. Inset of (l) indicates the line scan EDX signal of sulfur. Reproduced with permission from: (a–e) ref. 117. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (f–j) ref. 120. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (k–m) ref. 124. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In a way, the sacrificial templating and soft templating methods are more subtle and gentle strategies. For instance, a novel sulfur host of Co3S4 nanotubes has been fabricated by the use of a nano-needle intermediate phase as the self-sacrificial template.119 The nano-needle template is first synthesized by hydrothermal treatment of an aqueous urea and CoCl2 solution. After a second hydrothermal treatment with thioacetamide (TAA), the nano-needle template is consumed completely and converted to nanotubes due to the Kirkendall effect. Clearly, sacrificial template synthesis is inherently advantageous because the large internal void space formation is guaranteed by a chemical reaction, and thus the composition, morphology, and properties of parent are more likely to be inherited.151,152 As demonstrated by another example, Dai et al. presented the synthesis of a honeycomb-like spherical host consisting of hollow Co9S8 tubules from a Co-based precursor as the sacrificial template.120 As shown in Fig. 3f, the precursor, with an urchin-like structure constructed from nanorods, is initially prepared via a one-pot reaction of Co2+ ions, NH4F, and urea (Fig. 3g). Afterward, the nanorod is converted into a hollow structure of Co9S8 through a sulfidation reaction with Na2S as the S source (Fig. 3h). The nitrogen sorption measurement of honeycomb-like Co9S8 spheres shows a specific surface area of 43 m2 g−1 and the existence of pores with diameters below 10 nm. Finally, sulfur is steamed into the nanotubes by a melting–diffusion process (Fig. 3i). The boundaries between the cavity and the shell become blurry (Fig. 3j), indicating the successful diffusion of sulfur into the tubule. In recent years, furthermore, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) have been widely adopted as the self-sacrificial templates for the synthesis of hollow metal sulfides and have exhibited promising applications in Li–S batteries, such as Co9S8/C hollow nanopolyhedra,121 Co3S4 hollow nanoboxes,122 Co3S4 hollow polyhedra,123 and Co9S8 hollow nanocages153 derived from various ZIFs (ZIFs: zeolite imidazole frameworks). It is worth mentioning here that, in general, metal sulfides constructed by sacrificial templating methods require post-treatment to load sulfur, and thus there is almost no room for the design and manipulation of the structure and functionality of active sulfur.
In comparison to sacrificial templating, soft templating synthesis is capable of achieving the sophisticated assembly of metal sulfides and sulfur active materials, particularly for assembling the available sulfur with a specially shaped structure. As a typical example, Tang et al. reported a soft templating approach to prepare crumpled MoS2-encapsulated hollow sulfur spheres using a highly dispersed suspension of MoS2 nanoflakes and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) modified hollow sulfur spheres (Fig. 3k).124 To obtain the aqueous suspension of MoS2 nanoflakes, commercial MoS2 powder is first intercalated with lithium to form LixMoS2 in butyllithium solution, which is then readily exfoliated through forced hydration with the assistance of sonication. The monodispersed PVP-decorated hollow sulfur spheres are prepared via a facile coprecipitation reaction using sodium thiosulfate, PVP, and hydrochloric acid. Upon mixing with the PVP–sulfur suspension, the MoS2 nanoflakes can self-assemble and adhere to the surface of the hollow sulfur spheres due to interaction with the PVP (Fig. 3l and m). It is revealed that the crinkled MoS2 cage generated from the restacking of flexible flakes provides internal space to accommodate the volumetric change of the sulfur particles upon lithiation. This work also demonstrates that the unique properties of 2D materials can be exploited to address some of the material encapsulation challenges with the use of a soft templating strategy.
2.2 Enhancing the binding ability for LiPSs
The intermediate LiPSs generated from charge/discharge processes can spontaneously dissolve into the electrolyte and freely migrate between the cathode and the anode through the separator, resulting in the loss of active materials, passivation of both the electrodes, and unavoidable self-discharge/recharge. So far two typical strategies covering physical confinement and chemical adsorption have been proven and generally accepted as an effective solution to address this issue. Physical confinement often relies on the high surface area or pore structure of the host materials, while chemical adsorption depends on the strong interaction between the host materials and LiPS species.64 Accordingly, rationally creating metal sulfides with a desired surface area, well-designed porosity, enhanced surface polar/selectivity, and tailored crystalline form has been achieved by a variety of approaches, e.g. solvothermal/hydrothermal methods, ball-milling technology, coprecipitation method, and innovative heat treatment technology.
Unique graphene-like metallic Co9S8 with a morphology comprised of interconnected porous nanosheets that form a 3D network has been successfully synthesized by Nazar's group through a microwave solvothermal approach based on the reaction of cobalt chloride and TAA in a mixed solvent of water and triethylenetetramine at 160 °C for 1.5 h.125 Microwaves utilize a solvent dipole–microwave interaction that leads to rapidly superheated regions, triggering rapid nucleation and growth of particles. These distinctive synthesis conditions result in the formation of a long-range nanosheet structure of Co9S8 with a broad pore size distribution. N2 adsorption/desorption analysis indicates a high BET surface area of 108 m2 g−1 and a very large pore volume of 1.07 cm3 g−1 with the majority of pores in the range of 1.2–10 nm and the remainder distributed over 10–80 nm, indicating a texture incorporating micro-, meso-, and macro-pores. This high surface area and pore volume along with hierarchical porosity are vital to induce high intrinsic LiPS adsorptivity and enhance electrolyte penetration across thick electrodes. Li et al. presented the preparation of a S/C–SnS2 composite by ball milling sublimed sulfur, Ketjen Black, and ultrathin SnS2 nanosheets, where the 2D ultrathin nanosheets, fabricated by a one-pot reaction of SnCl4, TAA, and acetic acid, bring about a remarkably large surface area to enhance immobilization capability for LiPSs.126 In addition to those conventional methods, some innovative technologies can also delicately control the surface area, porosity, and/or polarity of metal sulfides. As an example, Xiao et al. demonstrated a green water-steam-etched approach for the fabrication of H- and O-incorporated porous TiS2 (HOPT) via heat treatment of a commercial TiS2 ball-milling product.127 During heat treatment, a mist of droplets from ultrapure water is passed into a quartz tube containing the ball-milled TiS2 using Ar-carrier gas. Interestingly, the time and temperature of water steam etching play pivotal roles in modulating the porosity of HOPT. Increasing the temperature from 100 to 500 °C, the specific surface area and pore volume of HOPT increase from 12.7 to 47 m2 g−1 and from 0.075 to 0.25 cm3 g−1, respectively, resulting from the perforation of TiS2 caused by the introduction of hydrogen and oxygen into the S–Ti–S framework during etching. Note that the hydroxyl and thiol groups in HOPT significantly enhance the surface polarity of TiS2, which are also favorable for adsorbing the LiPSs, suppressing the shuttle effect. More laudably, this method possesses excellent generality and can be extended to other TMDs such as CoS2 and NbS2.127,128 As reported in a follow-up study, Xiao et al. presented another extremely similar multistep approach to construct sandwich-type NbS2@S@I-doped graphene, which also brings about enhanced polarity and binding affinity for layered NbS2 to ensnare LiPSs.128
Except for manipulating surface polarity to enhance chemical adsorption, deftly tuning the preferred crystal faces of metal sulfides is also a very promising tactic, but still deserves more attention. To date, numerous first-principles calculations based on DFT indicate that the nature of crystallographic surfaces significantly influences the binding energy of LiPSs.72,92,93,96 Taking Co9S8 for example, the binding energy of 2.22 eV for Li2S2 on the (002) surface (Co/S = 1:4) increases to 3.24 eV for the (202) surface (Co/S = 5:4) and further to 6.06 eV for the purely Co-terminated (008) plane.125 In spite of this consensus, unfortunately, few groups have actually considered to effectively utilize this superiority due to synthesis challenges, apart from the Cui's research group.110,129 Well-defined edge-exposed (layer vertically aligned nanofilms) and terrace-exposed (horizontal nanocages) MoS2 has been creatively fabricated to demonstrate high electrochemical selectivity of edge versus terrace sites for lithium sulfide (Li2S) electrochemical deposition in Li–S batteries.129 In its synthesis procedures, a carbon nanofiber (CNF) matrix is first synthesized by electrospinning, which is then treated with O2–plasma to make it hydrophilic and dipped into a 20 wt% ammonium heptamolybdate solution. Subsequently, the dried substrate is heated at 600 °C for 1.5 h under an Ar atmosphere, under which the ammonium heptamolybdate decomposes to produce MoO3 followed by a rapid sulfurization process to become layer vertically aligned MoS2. MoS2 horizontal nanocages can be obtained by increasing the reaction temperature to 800 °C and the growth time to 5 h. It is revealed that the S particles also tend to be decorated along the edges, which further confirms the strong binding energies between S/Li2S and the edge sites and effectually guides the improved electrode design for Li–S batteries.
Moreover, the formation of metal sulfides with a non-crystalline structure also reveals enhanced adsorption/bonding of LiPSs owing to abundant defects and dangling bonds. For example, amorphous TiS4 has been successfully prepared by Sakuda et al. through a mechanical milling process using crystalline TiS2, sulfur, and acetylene black.130 When used as the cathode in a Li–S battery, the dissolution of LiPSs into the electrolyte is significantly suppressed because amorphization reduces the symmetry of the lattice, leading to the possibility of overlapping electron clouds between sulfur and titanium atoms, resulting in chemical bonding between the elements. Liu et al. reported the synthesis of a S@amorphous NiS2 composite via a coprecipitation reaction using Na2S8 and NiCl2 ethanol solution.131 Here the soluble sulfide ions can permeate into the loose amorphous structure, and thus the S particle would nucleate and grow in the inner space of NiS2, ensuing the high immobilization of S species. Very recently, Yu et al. meticulously designed hollow-amorphous N-doped carbon/MoS3 nanoboxes (NC/MoS3 NBs) as an advanced sulfur host for Li–S batteries.154 In a typical synthesis, crystalline α-Fe2O3 nanocubes are first coated with a layer of polydopamine, which are then calcined in a N2 atmosphere and etched in HCl solution to obtain N-doped carbon (NC) shells and hollow NC nanoboxes, respectively. Finally, the NC/MoS3 NB host is prepared through heterogeneous nucleation using CTAB as the surfactant and (NH4)2MoS4 as the precursor. Here, the amorphous MoS3 with unsaturated coordination Mo and electron-rich S not only has strong binding capability to LiPSs but also exhibits a catalytic effect on polysulfide conversion, which are verified by both experimental investigations and theoretical calculations. More interestingly, this synthesis strategy can be generalized to fabricate other amorphous metal chalcogenides nanoboxes such as CoSx and WSx, which is also promising to be applied in the fields of energy storage and conversion.
2.3 Improving the electronic conductivity of the active material
One of the major obstacles to utilizing elemental sulfur as an electrochemically active material is the inherently low electronic conductivity (5 × 10−30 S cm−1 at 25 °C). Benefitting from the high room-temperature electronic conductivity, metal sulfides serve as auxiliary materials in Li–S batteries, which is beneficial to improve the utilization of active sulfur, but occasionally the improvement is feeble when using only metal sulfides.117,123,124,128 In such cases, employing a circuitous way and/or additional conductive substrate is of vital importance for high-performance Li–S batteries. One smart and simple way is to incorporate metal elements or their alloys with the sulfur cathode to enhance electroconductivity, where metal sulfides can be uniformly produced by electrochemical reactions of metals/alloys with LiPSs during charge/discharge processes. Another common way of improving the conductivity of metal sulfides is combining with a highly conductive substrate, such as carbon nanotubes (CNTs), reduced graphene oxide (rGO), or pyrolysis carbon.
For the former, metal Ni and Cu are the common conductivity improvers and can be introduced into the sulfur cathode through a straightforward addition and/or interfusion. For example, Manthiram's group presented a pie-like electrode that consists of nickel foam as a “filling” and an outer carbon shell as a “crust” for facilitating the utilization of sulfur cathodes.132 Copper powder was introduced into the sulfur cathode by Jia et al. through partially replacing the sulfur contained active material with Cu during the manufacture procedure of the working electrode.133 Very similarly, Guo and coworkers recently reported the preparation of a CNT/graphene–S–Al3Ni2 cathode with a 3D network structure using 10 wt% Al3Ni2 powder to displace the CNT/graphene–S active material, where the Al in the Al3Ni2 provides an efficient channel for fast electron and ion transfer in the three dimensions, especially along the vertical direction of the cathode.134 Furthermore, Zheng et al. demonstrated a copper-stabilized sulfur–microporous carbon composite synthesized by uniformly dispersing 10% highly electronically conductive Cu nanoparticles into microporous carbon (MC), followed by wet-impregnation of S.135 To obtain highly dispersed Cu, commercial MC with a high surface area is first selected as the matrix and carrier. An ultrasonic-assisted multiple wetness impregnation and synchro-dry method is then applied to load 50% Cu(NO3)2 ethanol alcohol solution in MC and evaporate the solvent. This process is repeated until a certain amount of Cu(NO3)2 is added to MC. Finally, Cu nanoparticles anchored in the MC are gained by the reduction of the dry precursor at 200 °C for 1 h under an argon mixed with 5% hydrogen environment. Interestingly, the Cu content in MC can be easily adjusted by controlling the amount of Cu(NO3)2 addition via impregnation times.
To build metal sulfides/carbon composite materials, as for the latter, diversified methods have been developed and can be broadly classified into three categories: (i) in situ nucleation and growth of metal sulfides and/or their precursors on carbonaceous materials; (ii) independent synthesis of metal sulfides and subsequently merging with carbon-based materials, and (iii) formation of metal–carbon composites followed by sulfidation treatment. For example, Chen et al. reported a novel sulfur host material based on interlaced CNT threaded hollow Co3S4 nanoboxes (CNTs/Co3S4-NBs), where the interlaced CNTs inserted/threaded into Co3S4-NBs can provide an integrative conductive network that facilitates the electron transport all-over the electrode (especially the sulfur species encapsulated in Co3S4-NBs), thus greatly improving the sulfur utilization rate and rate capability.122 The S@CNTs/Co3S4-NB composite is prepared using CNT threaded ZIF-67 (CNTs/ZIF-67) as the precursor via a facile self-templated approach, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 4a. Briefly, uniform ZIF-67 nanocubes are in situ nucleated and grown on well-dispersed CNTs functionalized with carboxyl groups (–COOH) to form the CNTs/ZIF-67 precursor (Fig. 4b). Afterward, CNTs/ZIF-67 is chemically transformed into a CNTs/Co3S4-NB hybrid structure via a solvothermal reaction of the precursor and TAA in ethanol at 120 °C for 4 h (Fig. 4c). It can be clearly observed in Fig. 4d that many CNTs are successfully filled/inserted in Co3S4-NBs. Here the formation of hollow Co3S4-NBs is mainly ascribed to the Kirkendall effect that originated from the different diffusion rates of cobalt and sulfur species. Finally, sulfur is filled into CNTs/Co3S4-NBs via a melt-diffusion method to obtain S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs (Fig. 4e). In another example, Lee's group demonstrated the preparation of rGO decorated with few-layer MoS2 nanoflakes with a controlled amount of sulfur deficiency to improve the utilization of the sulfur cathode through independent synthesis of MoS2−x and subsequently merging with rGO (Fig. 4f).136 In the proposed approach, few-layer MoS2 nanoflakes are first prepared by the sonication-assisted liquid phase exfoliation of commercial MoS2 powder in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (Fig. 4g and h). Then, MoS2−x nanoflakes are formed by heating the MoS2/GO composite prepared above in a 10% H2/Ar mixture. To obtain the MoS2−x/rGO composite (Fig. 4i and j), rGO is dispersed into a MoS2−x stock solution at a rGO/MoS2−x mass ratio of 8:2, and recovered by vacuum filtration after ultrasonic treatment for 5 h. Finally, MoS2−x/rGO/S is obtained by the conventional melt-diffusion method at 155 °C for 5 h. Note that MoS2 with sulfur deficiencies possesses higher electronic conductivity, LiPS binding ability, and polysulfide conversion catalytic capability than the pristine one, implying the significant structural advantages of the MoS2−x/rGO/S composite cathode. Besides these typical approaches, the formation of metal–carbon composites followed by sulfuration is also considered as a promising method.106,137,138,155 As shown in Fig. 4k, for example, Seo et al. recently presented a “brain-coral-like” mesoporous hollow carbon hybrid host consisting of an in situ-grown N-doped graphitic carbon nanoshell (NGCN) matrix and embedded CoS2 nanoparticles.155 The formation procedure consists of four main steps for (i) spherical hollow ZIF-67 by the room-temperature solution method using SO42− anions and methanol (Fig. 4l), (ii) Co@NGCNs from the ZIF-67 hollow spheres by carbonization (Fig. 4m), (iii) Co/CoS2@NGCNs by sulfidation (Fig. 4n), and (iv) final mesoporous hollow CoS2@NGCNs by the removal of cobalt by chemical etching (Fig. 4o). As expected, the mesoporous NGCNs with high conductivity can not only facilitate electrolyte/Li ion penetration but also ensure efficient Li–S redox reactions. This simple strategy for the creation of a mesoporous hollow structure with multiscale pores will open a new avenue for constructing effective inorganic–carbon hybrid frameworks.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs. (b–e) TEM images of the CNTs/ZIF-67 precursor (b), CNTs/Co3S4-NBs (c and d), and S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs (e). (f) Schematic of the synthesis of MoS2−x/rGO. (g–j) TEM and HRTEM images of MoS2 nanoflakes (g and h) and MoS2−x/rGO (i and j). (k) Schematic of the synthesis of CoS2@NGCNs. (l–o) TEM and HRTEM images of ZIF-67 hollow spheres (l), mesoporous hollow Co@NGCNs (m), mesoporous hollow Co/CoS2@NGCNs (n), and mesoporous hollow CoS2@NGCNs (o). Reproduced with permission from: (a–e) ref. 122. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (f–j) ref. 136. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (k–o) ref. 155. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
2.4 Increasing the areal sulfur loading and/or lower the electrolyte/sulfur ratio
The original motivation for using rechargeable Li–S batteries originates from their high energy density, as a competitive candidate for on-board power systems.20,30 Up to now, a high sulfur utilization (>90%),47,63,156 high weight percentage of sulfur (>90%),53,55,62 extraordinary high-rate capability (>10C, 1.0C = 1672 mA g−1),49,50,54,56,60,157,158 and long service life (>1000 cycles)84,98,104,159–162 have been realized with the remarkable progress in material chemistry and electrochemistry. Nevertheless, most of these achievements are obtained with relatively low areal loadings of sulfur (<2.0 mg cm−2). A high areal loading of sulfur is essential to pave the way to practically viable Li–S batteries.18,163–169 However, the potential issues would stand out with the increase of sulfur loading, including the uncombined soluble LiPSs, the inacceptable electronic conduction pathway, the inaccessible electrolyte, and the uncoordinated electrolyte/sulfur (E/S) ratio.164,166,170–172 Metal sulfides possessing relatively high electroconductivities and binding abilities for LiPSs are promising host materials to achieve a high sulfur loading without sacrificing rate capacities and cycling stabilities. Currently, the two most regnant configurations of 3D free-standing and sandwich-type cathodes have been proposed to achieve this purpose.107,139,141,173 Based on the reaction mechanism, the synthetic method of 3D free-standing structures is mainly based on the following three strategies: (i) in situ growth of metal sulfides and/or their precursors on carbon matrices, (ii) direct sulfuration of porous metal foam, and (iii) the electroplating of metal sulfides on 3D current collectors. To construct a sandwich-type structure, as for the latter, multistep processing seems essential.
Beginning with rGO, CNTs, and (NH4)2WS4, for example, Huang et al. first reported the preparation of a novel free-standing aerogel host comprising dense polar WS2 nanopetals embedded in a 3D rGO–CNT network through a one-step solvothermal reaction, followed by freeze drying (Fig. 5a).173 The 3D interconnected WS2–rGO–CNT aerogel shows macroporous quasiperiodic channels with a channel of approximately 10 μm in diameter (Fig. 5b and c). The WS2 nanopetals are homogeneously embedded in the rGO–CNT aerogel network with an average size of 400 nm (Fig. 5d). The obtained aerogel here is laminated into plates for direct use as a host material for the Li–polysulfide battery without any metallic current collector, binder, or conductive additives, and thus, the areal sulfur loading in the WS2–rGO–CNT electrode is easily adjusted to 5.12, 7.68, or even 11.62 mg cm−2, by increasing the amount of catholyte. Similarly, Manthiram's group recently presented the fabrication of a novel sulfur host consisting of a MOF-derived Co9S8 array anchored onto chemical vapor deposition (CVD)-grown 3D graphene foam (Fig. 5e).139 First, a facile solution method is used to grow cobalt-based MOF solid nanowall arrays on a piece of 3DGF via an immersion of 3DGF into a mixture of 2-methylimidazole and Co(NO3)2·6H2O for 3 h (Fig. 5f). Then, through a subsequent solvothermal reaction with TAA in ethanol at 120 °C for 6 h, the Co-MOF solid nanowall arrays are transformed into hollow Co9S8 arrays (Fig. 5g), which can be attributed to the Kirkendall effect. Finally, the obtained Co9S8–3DGF is mixed with an appropriate amount of sulfur, and the sulfur is impregnated into Co9S8–3DGF by a melt-diffusion strategy (Fig. 5h). Without polymeric binders and conductive additives, the sulfur loading of the free-standing Co9S8–3DGF/S cathode can reach up to 10.4 mg cm−2. Furthermore, Archer's group has demonstrated that co-generation of interconnected S8/TiS2 hybrid foam through a thermal reaction of Ti precursor foam and S8 at 780 °C for 6 h yields 3D free-standing hybrid cathode structures in which sulfur is infused into porous TiS2 foam.140 By systematically adjusting the Ti/S8 ratio, it is easy to achieve a relatively large areal mass loading of ∼40 mg sulfur per cm2, approximately 20 times higher than that used in most reports. It should be noted that the drawback of the use of metal foam is its higher density than common substrates (like CNFs), which will partly lead to a low energy density of the Li–S cell, and however, the high porosity and conductivity of metal foam make it an efficient host to store the active material and promote electron transfer during cycling. More importantly, unlike the commonly used carbon substrates with large micro- and meso-porosity, the metal foam will not consume a large amount of electrolyte to be sufficiently wetted, which is beneficial to lower the E/S ratio and thus improve the energy density of the Li–S cell.167,170–172,174 In another example, Sörgel et al. presented the preparation of a composite layer of nickel and polythiophene functionalized sulfur on a nickel foam substrate with surface coated with a very thin NiSx alloy layer via a composite electroplating method.141 In the proposed procedure, the nickel foam is first pretreated by cathodic degreasing with a voltage of 5 V for 5 min, subsequent pickling in 10 vol% H2SO4 for 3 min and further activating in 12 vol% HCl for 3 min to obtain a defined and active surface. In order to ensure wettability and to induce partial conductivity on the particle surface, polythiophene functionalization is then applied to the sulfur particles' surface via an in situ chemical oxidative polymerization method with chloroform as a solvent, thiophene as a reagent, and iron chloride as an oxidant at 0 °C. Afterwards, the composite electroplating of nickel and polythiophene functionalized sulfur (Ni/SPTh) is performed using a half-diluted additive free Watts nickel electrolyte containing 20 g L−1 SPTh particles with a current density of 4 or 8 A dm−2 for 20 min. Finally, NiSx coating is obtained on the Ni/SPTh cathode by another electroplating process at a current density of 0.08 A dm−2 for 10 min at 60 °C in a half-diluted Watts type electrolyte containing 75 g L−1 thiourea. The method of composite electroplating ensures a relatively high sulfur loading for a cathode containing 3.68 mg cm−2 sulfur with additional surface structuring, while keeping all pores accessible to the battery electrolyte, cutting down the E/S ratio. Obviously, this innovative approach not only improves the electrical conductivity and mechanical integrity of the cathode due to the dependence of the 3D substrate, but also has the potential of increasing the energy density of the battery, as the free-standing cathode is organic binder and conductive carbon free.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of WS2–rGO–CNT. (b–d) Low- and high-magnification SEM images of WS2–rGO–CNT aerogel. (e) Schematic of the synthesis of Co9S8–3DGF/S. (f–h) SEM images of Co-MOF–3DGF (f), Co9S8–3DGF (g), and Co9S8–3DGF/S (h). (i) Schematic of the synthesis of sandwich-like TiS2@NSC, and its application in Li–S batteries. (j) TEM image of TiS2@NSC. (k) SEM image of the cotton derived carbon fibers with TiS2@NSC. Reproduced with permission from: (a–d) ref. 173. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (e–h) ref. 139. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (i–k) ref. 175. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
In addition to the application of free-standing textures, the design of sandwich-type composite materials is also a commonly and extremely effective strategy to promote the areal loading of sulfur and/or lower the E/S ratio.123,128,142,175 Employing a multistep approach, for instance, Xiao et al. demonstrated the integration of porous NbS2 and iodine-doped graphene (IG) into a ternary sulfur cathode system, NbS2@S@IG, composed of sandwich-type NbS2@S enveloped by IG.128 In a typical procedure, NbS2 nanosheets are initially synthesized readily by annealing niobium nanoparticles and sulfur powder in the presence of small amounts of iodine at 750 °C for 24 h. Afterwards, chemical etching of as-synthesized NbS2 using nebulized water steam at 550 °C for 0.5 h gives rise to porous NbS2. Sulfur is then coated on the surface of porous NbS2 using the conventional melt-impregnation method, generating sandwich-type NbS2@S. As for the synthesis of NbS2@S@IG, IG is prepared thorough thermal annealing of GO and iodine at 900 °C for 0.5 h under argon. Finally, the slurry of NbS2 and sulfur powder in CS2 is mixed with IG, followed by freeze drying, and melt diffusion of sulfur produced NbS2@S@IG, in which NbS2@S is fully enveloped by IG. This sandwich-type NbS2@S@IG structure provides an interconnected conductive network and plane-to-point intimate contact between layered NbS2 (or IG) and sulfur particles, and thus the areal sulfur loading is able to reach 3.25 mg cm−2 or even higher. Very recently, Huang et al. reported for the first time the successful conversion of Ti3C2Tx MXene to sandwich-like ultrathin TiS2 nanosheets confined by N, S co-doped porous carbon (TiS2@NSC) via an in situ polydopamine-assisted sulfuration process (Fig. 5i).175 Here, delaminated Ti3C2Tx nanosheets are prepared by selectively etching Al from a commercial Ti3AlC2 MAX phase, followed by a mild delamination process in water by handshaking. Subsequently, dopamine and Tris-buffer are added to the above suspension, generating single- or few-layer Ti3C2Tx nanosheets sandwiched by two thin layers of polydopamine (PDA) after being stirred for 24 h at room temperature. Finally, the Ti3C2Tx@PDA precursor is freeze dried and annealed under a H2S/Ar (1:9) atmosphere, forming ultralight fluffy TiS2@NSC (Fig. 5j). When TiS2@NSC is used as a sulfur host, a sulfur loading of 2.5 mg cm−2 with a low E/S ratio of 6 is easily achieved, and more strikingly, by integrating TiS2@NSC with cotton-derived carbon fibers as a freestanding electrode (Fig. 5k), the sulfur loading can be further increase to 7.7 mg cm−2 at an E/S of 8. Furthermore, Manthiram's group presented the fabrication of a ternary composite paper electrode consisting of hollow Co3S4 polyhedra, activated carbon nanofibers (ACNFs), and pure sulfur powder via a facile vacuum-filtered method, where hollow Co3S4 is fabricated by a self-sacrificing template method involving an in situ transformation of Co-based MOFs in TAA solution and post-heat treatment in a N2 atmosphere, and the ACNF is prepared by the activation of the CNF sheets in a CO2 atmosphere at 875 °C for 2 h.123 During the vacuum filtration, ACNFs, hollow Co3S4, and sulfur powder are suspended in a mixture of water and isopropanol, followed by probe ultrasonication for 25 min. As a result, large sulfur-rich areas with a size of 2–10 μm are entangled by ACNFs, and these sulfur particles along with small Co3S4 nanoparticles could effectively prevent the compact stacking of ACNFs. Therefore, the composite paper with a thickness of ∼60 μm still preserves a porous structure that effectively facilitates the penetration of the electrolyte. For all these finer qualities, the obtained film with a sulfur loading of ∼2.5 mg cm−2 shows good flexibility without cracking under bent conditions. More importantly, a high sulfur loading of 7.5 and even 13.5 mg cm−2 could also be achieved by simply increasing the thickness of the composite paper.
2.5 Customize the specialized functions for modifying other components
Despite the significant research progress made on the cathode of Li–S batteries, the improvement of other components in the Li–S system, including the protection of Li anodes, the decoration of separators, and the excogitation of interlayers, has long been a major concern. Recently, increasing efforts have been devoted to the use of metal sulfides with specialized functions for modifying other components in the Li–S system.
Taking the anode as an example, creating a reliable lithium metal foil is of utmost importance for the success of Li–S batteries due to the potential safety hazard.9,15,31,33 Cha et al. developed a scalable method to coat ∼10 nm-thick 2D MoS2 on Li metal to suppress Li dendrite growth and/or to enhance the stability of Li metal via sputtering.143 In the proposed synthesis, a Li-metal ribbon (120 μm thickness) is initially stored and prepared for sputtering deposition in an Ar-filled glove box with the atmospheric conditions of <0.5 ppm oxygen and humidity (H2O). Then, the prepared Li metal is directly transferred over to the ultrahigh-vacuum chamber of a radiofrequency magnetron sputtering system. The sputtering depositions are carried out with a MoS2 target, and the base pressure in the sputtering chamber is maintained below 10−6 torr. Finally, the deposition is carried out at 10 mTorr with Ar gas (99.99%) plasma at room temperature. Note that the thickness of the deposited MoS2 can be easily regulated by controlling the deposition time and can be effectively determined by atomic force microscopy measurements on a blank SiO2 wafer retrieved from the same sputtering batch. This synthetic strategy is expected to shed new light on the application of other 2D materials for the development of high-performance Li-metal based rechargeable batteries and beyond.
As for the separator, a routine one without functional modification layers can freely allow the transportation of ions, which may not be an ideal one for introduction into Li–S batteries.11,20,35 Engineering a metal sulfide coating to enhance the ion selectivity of the separator is undoubtedly an extremely effective approach for suppressing the LiPS shuttle. For example, Ghazi et al. reported the synthesis of a high lithium conductive flexible MoS2/Celgard separator by filtering a mixture of MoS2 monolayers and ethanol onto a conventional Celgard separator, where the MoS2 nanosheets are first prepared by the sonication-assisted liquid phase exfoliation of lithium intercalated MoS2.144 The polarized surface of the as-synthesized MoS2 nanosheets makes them highly dispersible in aqueous solvents and affordable to be easily processed into ultrathin membranes. Meanwhile, the thickness of the MoS2 membrane can be controlled by varying the concentration and volume of MoS2 solution. The strategy demonstrated in this work will open the door toward developing efficient separators with flexible 2D materials beyond graphene for energy-storage devices.
An interlayer, a layered porous texture with high electrical conductivity possessing the ability to trap and reactivate LiPSs, is firstly proposed by Manthiram's group and now the relevant research has spread to devising various metal sulfide-based interlayers.11,37,40 As a typical example, Ma et al. presented an interlayer of hierarchically porous CoS2 anchored on hydrophilic carbon paper through electrochemically deposition followed by sulfidation.145 Utilizing a carbon paper substrate and Co(NO3)2 solution, an electrodeposited Co(OH)2 nanosheet array precursor with a uniform thickness is first obtained at −1.0 V (vs. SCE) for 5–10 min with a Ti sheet as the counter electrode and a saturated calomel electrode as the reference electrode, and then the 3D porous structure of CoS2 is loosely piled up by a large number of nanoparticles with nanometer pores/gaps and finally forms curly leaf-like CoS2 with a thickness of tens of nanometers during the sulfidation process with the heat treating of sublimed sulfur at 400 °C for 2 h. Besides that, Park et al. have recently reported tungsten disulfide catalysts supported on a carbon cloth (CC) interlayer fabricated by using simple ultrasonication treatment of CC and WS2 powder in ethanol solvent at 1 h.146 The high polarity of WS2 allows a uniform dispersion on the CC without aggregation in a solvent with a low polarity like ethanol. Conversely, a high-polar medium like water results in the aggregation of WS2 particles.
3. Applications of metal sulfides for Li–S batteries
To date, the mechanism of Li reactivity involved in LIBs has involved two stages: one is classical Li insertion/deinsertion or Li-alloying processes, which can be traced back to the 1970s.176 The second stage was proposed in 2000 when transition metal compounds were revealed to have high capacities associated with conversion reactions.176,177 Metal sulfides, a huge family of energy storage materials, have drawn interest as high-performance electrode materials for LIBs. Generally, the electrochemical behaviors of metal sulfides depend on the testing electrochemical window. For example, the lithiation of SnS2 involves three steps in the voltage range of 0.01–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+: SnS2 + xLi+ + xe− → LixSnS2 (intercalation reaction at 1.6–1.9 V), LixSnS2 + (4−x)Li+ + (4−x)e− → Sn + 2Li2S (conversion reaction at 1.3–1.5 V), and Sn + 4.4Li+ + 4.4e− ↔ Li4.4Sn (alloying reaction at 0.01–1.3 V).178 In fact, lithium can electrochemically insert into most metal sulfides within a certain voltage range. Even for the well-known conversion type materials like MSx (M = Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu), for lithium-inserted interphases LiyMSx have also been confirmed to be present in the lithiation processes.177,178 In such cases, the electrochemical activity of metal sulfides should be considered in their applications in Li–S batteries. Considering the widely used electrochemical window of 1.5–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+ in Li–S batteries, metal sulfides can be intentionally classified into three types on the basis of their reaction activities (Fig. 6). The high activity here indicates that the sulfides undergo complete intercalation or conversion reactions before 1.5 V, whereas low activity corresponds to a moderate lithium intercalation and inactivation leading to lithiation below 1.5 V. On the basis of this classification, in the following section, we focus on the emerging applications of metal sulfides in Li–S batteries.
 Fig. 6  Schematic of the electrochemical reaction of metal sulfides based on the intercalated-Li potentials in the typical voltage window of Li–S batteries. 
3.1 Metal sulfides with high lithiation activity for sulfur cathodes
Titanium disulfide (TiS2) is well known as a cathode material used in the first generation of lithium cells and it delivers a high reversible specific capacity of 200 mA h g−1 at potentials between 1.6 and 2.6 V upon Li+ intercalation/deintercalation.179 In 2012, Garsuch et al. first introduced TiS2 as a second active component into sulfur/carbon cathodes, which is also the pioneering work on using metal sulfides for Li–S batteries.179 According to their results, the capacity of TiS2/sulfur/carbon cathodes depends on the amount of TiS2 used, and the most favorable trade-off between the cycle life and obtained capacity is a composite cathode containing sulfur and TiS2 (with a ratio of 80/20) as well as 30% carbon black and 10% binder. It was inferred that TiS2 improved both the ionic and electronic conductivity within the cathode structure, but no direct evidence was obtainable on that point. In another follow-up study, Manthiram and coworkers have demonstrated that the S/C/TiS2 cathode offers 252 mA h g−1 more than that of the pristine S/C cathode (1334 mA h g−1vs. 1082 mA h g−1), and importantly, the increased capacity exceeds the maximum value that TiS2 is expected to contribute, implying that the addition of TiS2 improved the sulfur utilization.180 Four-point probe resistivity measurements indicate that the S/C/TiS2 cathode (2.3 × 103 μΩ × cm) is more conductive than the pristine S/C cathode (4.5 × 103 μΩ × cm). Furthermore, the morphological characterization of both electrodes before and after cycling suggests that the existence of TiS2 promotes active-material dispersion and stabilizes the cathode structure. Thus, it is speculated that the cell performance could be further improved by designing state-of-the-art TiS2 with a porous structure to accommodate the active sulfur and enhance LiPS adsorption. Coincidentally, Archer's group reported the co-generation of interconnected S8/TiS2 hybrid foam, confirming the performance of the composite cathode dominated by structure configuration.140 Different sulfur loadings of 4.6 mg cm−2 (TSF5), 21 mg cm−2 (TSF10), and 40 mg cm−2 (TSF15) within TiS2-coated Ti foam deliver initial specific capacities of 20, 25, and 30 mA h cm−2 respectively at 2.0 mA cm−2. A capacity of up to ≈6 mA h cm−2 is achieved with a TSF15-based cathode after 100 cycles at a high current density of 10 mA cm−2. The porous 3D metal foam here facilitates good access of the electrolyte to the active materials and also provides free space for the volume change of sulfur. The theoretical calculations on the interactions between TiS2 and Li2S demonstrate that 0.9 electrons are transferred from the Li (Li2S) to S (TiS2) atoms implying robust ionic bonding, and the binding energy is determined to be 2.60 eV, nearly three-times greater than that of LiPSs and polyacrylonitrile, supporting the superior performance of the composite cathodes. In fact, identical results have also been obtained by Cui's group, where they applied TiS2 as a capsule coating for a Li2S electrode.109 The binding energy between Li2S and a single layer of TiS2 is 2.99 eV, while only 0.29 eV is calculated between Li2S and a single layer of carbon-based graphene. Meanwhile, the electronic conductivity of the Li2S@TiS2 core–shell structures is measured to be 5.1 × 10−3 S cm−1, which is ten orders of magnitude higher than that of bare Li2S (10−13 S cm−1). Compared to the bare Li2S cathodes, therefore, the Li2S@TiS2 cathodes exhibit a high initial specific capacity of 806 mA h g−1 and stable cycling performance at 0.2C. Even at a high C-rate of 4C, a reversible specific capacity of 503 mA h g−1 could be attained under high mass-loading conditions (5.3 mgLi2S cm−2).
Beyond building a porous texture of TiS2, Xiao et al.'s work demonstrated that the surface functionalization of TiS2 with hydroxyl and thiol groups displayed attractive advantages in Li–S batteries when used as a substitute for conductive agents and/or an additive of interlayer materials: (i) enhanced electrical and ionic conductivities for improving reaction kinetics; (ii) enhanced porosity for fast ion transport and electrolyte accessibility; (iii) enhanced polarity and heteropolar surface active sites for alleviating the shuttle effect.127 Therefore, the optimal electrode with a sulfur loading of 0.8 mg cm−2 delivers discharge capacities of 950 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 0.5C and 374 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 10C. Impressively, an unprecedented reversible capacity of 172 mA h g−1 is achieved after 2500 cycles at 30C, and the average capacity fading rate per cycle is as low as 0.015%. Moreover, four half-cells based on this electrode in series could drive 60 light-emitting diode indicator modules (the nominal power 3 W) after 20 s of charging. The instantaneous current and power of this device on reaching 275 A g−1 and 2611 W g−1, respectively, indicate outstanding high-power discharge performance and potential applications in electric vehicles and other large-scale energy storage systems. Furthermore, Bugga et al. studied the redox behavior of the TiS2 additive during charge/discharge cycling of sulfur cathodes.113 The X-ray power diffraction (XRD) data of baseline sulfur cathodes after cycling indicate that the peaks corresponding to crystalline orthorhombic sulfur disappear after the first discharge and cannot grow back during charge. Interestingly, the XRD patterns of TiS2-blended sulfur electrodes reveal that the reversible oxidation and reduction of titanium sulfide species via lithiation are identified, and importantly, sulfur most likely re-forms in the orthorhombic crystalline modification upon charging these electrodes. This potentially reflects a greater degree of interaction between LixTiS2 and S, resulting in preferential growth of sulfur in a phase more compatible with the hexagonal TiS2 crystals. Namely, TiS2 lithiation (LixTiS2) may mediate the electrochemical cycling of sulfur. This conclusion is indeed confirmed by another research study that is performed by Liu and coworkers,181 who explored the dynamic variations of the TiS2 host by in situ XRD and cryogenic scanning transmission electron microscopy. The results reveal that lithium ions first react with TiS2 to form LixTiS2 (0 < x < 1), and subsequently, LiPSs are formed. As a result, LiPSs are likely adsorbed on the surface of LixTiS2, not TiS2, during the discharge process. During the charging process, the discharge product of LiTiS2 is converted to LixTiS2 (0 < x < 1), not TiS2. Therefore, it is believed that LixTiS2 (0 < x ≤ 1) catalytically decomposes Li2S. Undoubtedly, these observations indicate that it is LixTiS2 (0 < x ≤ 1), rather than TiS2, that effectively traps LiPSs and catalytically decomposes Li2S.
Similarly to TiS2, NbS2 also shows a high electrochemical activity upon Li+ intercalation/deintercalation at potentials between 1.5 and 3.0 V, presenting a specific capacity of about 100 mA h g−1.128,182,183 Xiao et al. systematically investigated the reaction kinetics and electrochemical performance of a ternary hybrid sulfur cathode consisting of sandwich-type NbS2@S enveloped by iodine-doped graphene (IG).128 As an exhilarating discovery, the active sulfur species can be intercalated in the interlayers of NbS2, which further enhances the intrinsic conductivity and polarity of NbS2. Therefore, the introduction of NbS2 and IG into a Li–S cell cathode shows a synergistic effect for LiPS fixation and utilization. Adsorption experiments indicate that NbS2 and NbS2–IG visibly decolorize the Li2S6 solution, while G and IG only change the solution color from tawny to yellow, suggesting that NbS2 possesses much stronger affinity to LiPSs than G and IG. CV tests using symmetrical cells that are fabricated by sandwiching a Li2S6-containing electrolyte between two identical electrodes reveal that the G and IG electrodes only show a small current density, while the current density in NbS2 is significantly increased, and further improvement is observed in the NbS2–IG electrode. These results suggest that NbS2 is conducive to providing access for electric charge to the NbS2–LiPS interface and synchronously triggers the redox reactions of LiPSs. Consequently, reversible capacities of 195, 107, and 74 mA h g−1 (1.05 mg cm−2) are achieved after 2000 cycles at ultrahigh rates of 20, 30, and 40C, respectively, and a high discharge capacity of 405 mA h g−1 (3.25 mg cm−2) is maintained after 600 cycles at 1C.128 This work sheds light on the promising application of 2D layered metal sulfides in high-energy, high-power, and long-life Li–S batteries.
Copper sulfides (CuxS, x = 1, 2) have long been studied as promising cathode materials for LIBs because of their flat discharge curves and high electrical conductivities (10−3 to 10−4 S cm−1).178 CuxS can provide the stable specific capacities of nearly 300 mA h g−1 at potentials between 1.5 and 3.0 V accompanied by the reversible conversion of CuxS into Li2S and Cu.184,185 Given the high reaction activity, therefore, adding copper powder into a sulfur cathode can be considered as the equivalent of CuxS to some extent. Except for electrochemical stabilities, in fact, the chemical stabilities of CuxS or Cu may also be an intriguing factor affecting Li–S battery performance. A copper-stabilized sulfur–microporous carbon cathode (MC–Cu–S) for Li–S batteries was first reported by Zheng et al. in 2014.135 Unexpectedly, the MC–Cu–S cathodes show stable, high and reversible capacities together with good rate and cycling capabilities even in a conventional Li-ion battery electrolyte (1.0 M LiPF6 + EC/DEC (1:1 v/v)). With a sulfur loading of 1 mg cm−2, the reversible capacities of 420, 360, and 300 mA h g−1 are obtained at 1.0, 2.0, and 4.0 A g−1, respectively, and a capacity of 200 mA h g−1 can still be delivered even at a high rate up to 10.0 A g−1. Similarly, Zeng et al. demonstrated that a free-standing Cu-immobilized sulfur–porous carbon nanofiber cathode (S content of 52 wt%) displayed high reversible capacity (680 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.05 A g−1) and excellent rate capability (680 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1) in a carbonate-based electrolyte.186 After that, Jia et al. revealed that copper powder, as a LiPS trap introduced into the sulfur cathode slurry, turned into CuxS (x = 1 or 2) species in ether-based electrolytes depending on the chain length of LiPSs.133 To be specific, copper can be oxidized to CuS by Li2Sx (x ≥ 6), and a mixture of Cu2S and CuS is obtained when x ranges from 3 to 6. Importantly, Cu2S is eventually formed in the presence of Li2S3. In the case of Cu2S generation, a high specific sulfur capacity of 1300 mA h g−1 is delivered, corresponding to 77.6% sulfur utilization at 1.3 mg cm−2 sulfur areal loading, while the coulombic efficiency is approximately around 100%. More interestingly, no polysulfides would be generated in the cell when sulfur is transferred to Cu2S. Very recently, Lu's group has revisited the unique sulfiphilic nature of metallic Cu, and confirmed that Cu foam/foil is able to directly react with Li2S8 (Fig. 7a), resulting in the formation of hexagonal Cu2S (Fig. 7b–d), when soaked in ether-based electrolytes.187 A 2 cm2 circular disk of Cu foam could readily take up >2 mg of equivalent sulfur. When the sulfidized Cu foam is assessed as a cathode, it exhibits improved electrochemical reversibility with a small polarization voltage of ≈160 mV (Fig. 7e), and thus delivers a high specific capacity of ≈1200 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 (Fig. 7f). In addition, a large specific capacity of ≈1090 mA h g−1 is achieved with no obvious sign of capacity decay for at least 1400 cycles at a discharge current of 1.5 A g−1 (charge current: 0.5 A g−1) (Fig. 7g). Particularly, once the soluble polysulfide is chemically immobilized on the Cu foam, it is never released back to the electrolyte, which is highly consistent with that reported by Jia and coworkers.133 Although outstanding specific capacity and cycling stability are obtained, unfortunately, the detailed electrochemical reaction mechanism between sulfidized Cu and Li upon long-term cycling in ether-based electrolytes has been left unexplored. Hopefully, more sophisticated studies devoted to this related realm will be available in the near further.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the PS fixation process on Cu foam. (b–d) SEM image (b) and EDS elemental maps (c and d) of the sulfidized Cu foam. (e–g) CV curve (e), charge/discharge profile (f), and cycling performance (g) of the sulfur-equivalent cathode in a Li–S battery. Inset of (g) shows the photographs of bottle batteries at various states. (h and i) SEM image (h) and TEM image (i) of CuxS@NC/S-F. (j and k) CV curves of CuxS@NC/S-F at 0.1 mV s−1 (j) and charge/discharge profiles of CuxS@NC/S-F at 0.1C (k). (l) Binding energy of Li2S6 on Cu and N sites. (m) Charge/discharge curves of CuxS@NC/S-F at 2C. (n) CV curves of 66S/Bi2S3/C at 0.1 mV s−1 with the binding geometries of a Li2S4 molecule on the (001) plane of Bi2S3 shown in the inset. (o and p) Charge/discharge curves (o) and cycling performances (p) of the 66S/Bi2S3/C composite. Reproduced with permission from: (a–g) ref. 187. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (h–m) ref. 190. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (n–p) ref. 138. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. 
CuS as a capacity-contributing conductive additive to the sulfur cathode was first proposed by Sun et al. in 2015.188 It is surprising to find that the conductive CuS additive enhances the utilization of the sulfur cathode at a 1C discharge rate, and however, at a C/10 discharge rate, S/CuS hybrid electrodes exhibit lower sulfur utilization in the first discharge and faster capacity decay in later cycles than a pure sulfur electrode due to the dissolution of CuS changing the insulating properties of the lithium anode surface passivation layer. Additionally, the CuS dissolution is found to be the result of strong interaction between the soluble low order polysulfide Li2S3 and CuS. Although the electrochemical characteristics of CuS are not available in the charge/discharge profiles, this work unequivocally implies that the chemical stability of CuS could significantly affect the Li–S battery performance. In another study performed by He et al., the CuxS/S composite, containing highly dispersed CuS, Cu2S and sulfur, has been investigated as a cathode for Li–S batteries, and impressive electrochemical behavior is demonstrated.189 A typical feature observed from the initial two discharge/charge curves of the CuxS/S composite cathode is the three obvious discharge plateaus located at 2.20, 2.06, and 1.63 V, respectively. Different from the conventional sulfur cathode and previous CuS/S composite cathode,188 the discharge plateau appearing at 1.63 V is related to the generation of Cu and Li2S from LixCuS,189 suggesting the reversible reaction activity of CuxS. Moreover, a high initial capacity of 782 mA h g−1 with a sulfur loading of 2 mg cm−2 is obtained, and after 50 cycles, the discharge capacity can still be retained at 580 mA h g−1. It is concluded that the improved electrochemical performance can be attributed to the tri-functional copper sulfide in the composite, which is electroactive to offer additional energy storage and highly conductive to enhance the sulfur utilization and have strong chemical interactions with LiPSs to prohibit the shuttle effect. Nevertheless, the detailed chemical interactions of CuxS for LiPSs bonding are not confirmed and still pending. Employing a novel sulfur host consisting of a 3D copper, nitrogen dual-doped hierarchically porous graphitic carbon network (Cu@NC-F) (Fig. 7h and i), very recently, Yu et al. revealed the strong chemical adsorption ability of Cu/CuxS to LiPSs.190 Note that the electrochemical measurements of the sulfidized host (CuxS@NC/S-F) also demonstrate the reversible reaction activity of CuxS (Fig. 7j and k), which matches well with that reported by He and coworkers.189 Importantly, adsorption experiments by adding the as-prepared samples into a Li2S6 solution prove that Cu and CuxS have a strong chemical adsorption ability to LiPSs, especially that the Li2S6 solution with a Cu@NC-F composite first becomes lighter. DFT calculations further indicate that the binding energies of Li2S6 and Li2S4 on CuS are 1.25 and 1.91 eV, and strong binding strengths (2.16 and 2.47 eV) are obtained for short-chain species (Li2S2 and Li2S), implying an increasing binding tendency of S-related species on CuS with the progress of lithiation. Essentially, this does not reflect the evolutionary relationship of binding energy due to the electrochemical instability of CuS, but certainly, the binding energy of Li2S6 on Cu is 3.15 eV (Fig. 7l), which is much higher than that on N-doped carbon (1.33 eV), further confirming the results of adsorption experiments. At a high current density of 2C, therefore, the CuxS@NC/S-F electrode with a sulfur loading of 3.2–3.5 mg cm−2 exhibits a high initial capacity of up to 932 mA h g−1 with a coulombic efficiency of ≈100% over 200 cycles accompanied by a capacity decay of 0.13% per cycle (Fig. 7m).
In addition to CuxS, bismuth sulfide (Bi2S3) is also a high activity host for lithium storage in particular due to its unique laminar structure.178 Normally, the electrochemical storage of Li in Bi2S3 proceeds via two successive steps in the voltage range of 0.01–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+: a conversion step occurring at a potential of around 1.73 V followed by a Li alloying process at 0.73 V.178,191 Qian's group systematically studied the performance of hybrid S/Bi2S3/C cathodes for Li–S batteries.138 DFT analysis shows that the chemical interaction or anchoring effect between Li2S4 and Bi2S3 comes from the two Li atoms from Li2S4 and four S atoms on the surface of Bi2S3 (inset of Fig. 7n), with an elevated total binding energy of 2.52 eV generated. Adsorption experiments and self-discharge assessments further confirm that such a kind of chemical interaction is critical for the electrode to achieve stable cycling behavior, by anchoring the LiPS intermediate to inhibit the shuttle effect during cycling. Thus, the obtained S/Bi2S3/C cathode (sulfur loading: 1.0–1.5 mg cm−2) exhibits good electrochemical performance (Fig. 7n and o), delivering a capacity of ∼825 mA h g−1 at 0.5C over 400 cycles at potentials between 1.8 and 2.8 V (Fig. 7p), with 91% capacity retention and high coulombic efficiency. Moreover, it should be noted here that the cutoff voltage of the cathodes is set at 1.8 V with the purpose of avoiding the conversion reaction of Bi2S3 at a lower potential. In fact, at a current density of 0.5C, the cell discharged to 1.7 V suffers from steady capacity decay when compared with the cell discharged to 1.8 V (Fig. 7p), showing a relatively low discharge capacity of 674 mA h g−1 by the 400th cycle. This result convincingly proves that the chemical interaction between Bi2S3 and LiPSs would be damaged due to the electrochemical instability of Bi2S3, which in this case is harmful for its application in Li–S batteries.
In summary of this part, the use of high lithiation activity metal sulfides should be carefully considered in Li–S batteries, because this kind of material cannot effectively maintain its original composition during cycling in trapping and catalyzing LiPSs, and their own volume effect may also be a potential disadvantage. Furthermore, the trapping ability and catalytic activity of metallic elements derived from the conversion reaction of metal sulfides may also play a vital role in regulating the performance of Li–S batteries, but still deserve more attention. In rare cases, particularly, the active sulfur species can be intercalated in the interlayers of metal sulfides. In fact, the performance evolution studies on high activity metal sulfides for Li–S batteries are still in the very early state. It can be anticipated that increasing research efforts will be devoted to this field in near future. Following efforts will be attempted to further improve the comprehensive performance of Li–S batteries.
3.2 Metal sulfides with a low lithiation activity for sulfur cathodes
Cobalt sulfides (CoSx: Co9S8, CoS, Co3S4, CoS2, etc.), a class of high conductivity energy storage materials, have been extensively investigated and exhibited Li-ion storage capacities within the range of ∼300–800 mA h g−1 at potentials between 0.01 and 3.0 V.178 In the typical Li–S voltage range, however, the reaction activities of CoSx are largely restricted, and the limited capacities are delivered upon CoSx/LiyCoSx two-phase transformation. As already reported, the reversible specific capacities are found to be about 35, 80, and 120 mA h g−1, respectively, for Co9S8,120,125,192 Co3S4,119 and CoS2 (ref. 104 and 155) in the corresponding Li–S system. In addition to capacity contribution, more inescapably, the repeated lithiation/delithiation of CoSx/LiyCoSx upon cycling may irreversibly change their pristine structures and properties, and thus influence their functions in Li–S batteries, which should be paid enough attention, though this kind of effect is inconspicuous and also highly dependent on the original existing forms of CoSx.
In 2015, unique graphene-like Co9S8 with a high surface area and hierarchical porosity was first proposed by Nazar's group to afford superior LiPS adsorptivity for high-performance Li–S batteries.125 The Co9S8/S composite cathode not only manifests up to a factor of 10 increase of cycling stability (0.045% fading per cycle over 1500 cycles at C/2 at a sulfur loading of 1.5 mg cm−2) compared to standard porous carbons but also, more importantly, enables a high-loading sulfur electrode with up to 75 wt% sulfur and up to 4.5 mg cm−2 areal sulfur loading. First-principles calculations and spectroscopic studies consistently demonstrate that a synergistic dual interaction based on Sn2− → Coδ+ and Li+ → Sδ− exists between the metal sulfide-based host material and LiPSs. In particular, it is revealed that the nature of the crystallographic surface plays a very crucial role. The binding energy of 2.22 eV for Li2S2 on the (002) surface (Co/S = 1:4) increases to 3.24 eV for the (202) surface (Co/S = 5:4) and further to 6.06 eV for the purely Co-terminated (008) plane. This finding enables a better understanding of the interaction mechanism for metal sulfides and provides guidance for fabricating host materials with preferred crystal faces, but unfortunately, the mechanism by which the polar surface accelerates LiPS redox has not been clearly revealed yet. Soon after, Yuan et al. demonstrated that simply introducing half-metallic CoS2 microparticles into graphene electrodes largely amplified the electrochemical current response and reduced charge transfer resistance in LiPS symmetrical cells.104 More importantly, it is found that CoS2 serves as a mediator to provide strong CoS2–polysulfide interaction and to facilitate the liquid–liquid redox of polysulfides, further affecting the correlated liquid–solid transformation, viz., the prior formation of Li2S nuclei. With a sulfur loading of 0.4 mg cm−2, a high initial capacity of 1368 mA h g−1 at 0.5C, an increase of 10% in energy efficiency, and a low decay rate of 0.034% per cycle for 2000 cycles at 2.0C are realized through the incorporation of mechanically milled CoS2 with a low specific surface area. These observations suggest that manipulating the redox reactivity of polysulfides upon a conducting surface is a more effective strategy for improving the Li–S battery performance, in comparison to tuning the dissolvability and transport behavior of polysulfides in aprotic electrolytes. Given that the metal sulfide herein employed is in the bulk form, therefore, the performance enhancement can be further achieved by optimizing its structure and properties, including engineering the crystal facets to mediate the adsorbate–adsorbent interaction, reducing the dimension to maximize the exposed polar surface and introducing a strong coupling effect between substrates and supported metal sulfides for intriguing modulation of material properties.
Following this direction, a series of CoSx with a high surface area, such as hollow Co9S8 or Co3S4 polyhedra,121,123 hollow Co3S4 nanotubes,119 honeycomb-like spheres constructed from hollow Co9S8 tubules,120 mesoporous hollow CoS2@NGCNs,155 and Co9S8 nanocrystal decorated carbon NBs,193 have been consecutively investigated as polar hosts in Li–S batteries and exhibited encouraging performance in terms of areal capacity, long life, and rate capability. For example, a composite paper electrode consisting of hollow Co3S4 polyhedra, activated carbon nanofibers, and pure sulfur powder has been fabricated by Manthiram's group,123 and a high capacity of 953 mA h g−1 at 1C is achieved in a sulfur loading of 2.5 mg cm−2, and the capacity remains at 610 mA h g−1 after 450 cycles. Even with a high sulfur loading of 13.5 mg cm−2, the composite electrode also delivers a high areal capacity of 957 mA h g−1 (13 mA h cm−2) at 0.3C. Seo et al. have demonstrated that the brain-coral-like mesoporous hollow CoS2@NGCNs/S electrode facilitates s high sulfur loading (75 wt%), outstanding rate capability (about 600 mA h g−1 at 1C), and stable cycle performance (519.4 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 1C), derived from the synergetic effects of the dual hollow features, chemically active CoS2, and the conductive and mesoporous N-doped carbon matrix.155 Very recently, a battery employing the encapsulation of S into a polar Co9S8 inlaid carbon NB cathode (sulfur loading: 1.6 mg cm−2) has also revealed to have good electrochemical performance (1066 mA h g−1 at 0.5C in the 100th cycle and 761 mA h g−1 at 1C in the 400th cycle).193 Despite these improvements, such a kind of core–shell structure with the encapsulation of S into hollow CoSx hosts still faces certain potential limitations. Previous studies revealed that when sulfur is filled into a hollow host it prefers diffusing into the cavity of the host rather than aggregating in/on the porous wall of the host,88 and thus the aggregated sulfur core during cycling cannot receive electrons smoothly only from the conductive shell.48 Also, the repeated volume fluctuations of sulfur during cycling may further deteriorate the electrical contact between the core and shell,48 leading poor sulfur utilization and capacity fading. To overcome these issues, Jin and coworkers proposed an efficient sulfur host composed of interlaced CNT inserted/wired hollow Co3S4 nanoboxes (Co3S4-NBs) (Fig. 8a).122 In this unique nanostructure, the polar Co3S4-NBs provide effective confinement of LiPSs and serve as nanosized electrochemical reaction chambers to restrict the outward diffusion (Fig. 8b). The CNTs embedded in Co3S4-NBs form a highly conductive network for rapid charge transfer (Fig. 8c), resulting in high utilization of internal S species. Benefiting from the above advantages, the S@CNTs/Co3S4-NB cathode shows a significantly improved electrochemical performance including high reversible capacity, good rate performance, and long-term cyclability (Fig. 8d and e). More remarkably, even at an elevated temperature of 50 °C, the discharge capacities of S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs cycled at 0.1, 0.2, and 0.5C over 60 cycles are measured to be 1058, 765, and 446 mA h g−1 (sulfur loading: 1.2 mg cm−2), respectively, showing a high-temperature stability much superior to that of S@Co3S4-NB and S@CNT cathodes (Fig. 8f and g). Similarly, a freestanding and highly flexible sulfur host comprising a crisscrossed network of CNT reinforced CoS nanostraws (CNTs/CoS-NSs) has been designed by the same research group (Fig. 8h and i).194 Note that the high local and overall conductivity and the crisscrossed 3D conductive network here can effectively decrease the inner resistance and improve the sulfur utilization (Fig. 8j), ensuring high cycling reversibility and rate capability (Fig. 8k and l). Intriguingly, the soft-packed Li–S batteries based on the sulfur-encapsulated CNTs/CoS-NS cathode (sulfur loading mass of 3.8 mg cm−2) show good flexibility and stability. The discharge capacity reaches 1154 mA h g−1 (4.38 mA h cm−2) in the 10th cycle at 0.1C, and thereafter keeps almost stable after 200 cycles (1060 mA h g−1 and 4.03 mA h cm−2) under continuous bending–unbending (Fig. 8m). Also, the soft-packed Li–S batteries are used to light a series of light-emitting diodes upon bending–unbending with almost no visual disparity. This work provides favorable inspiration for integrating energy storage devices for smart wearable electronics.
 Fig. 8  (a and b) TEM images of CNTs/Co3S4-NBs (a) and S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs (b). (c) Structural advantages of the S@CNTs/Co3S4-NB cathode during cycling. (d and e) Charge/discharge curve (d) and cycling performance (e) of S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs at 0.2C. (f and g) Voltage profile (f) and rate capacity (g) of S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs at 50 °C. (h and i) TEM (h) and magnified TEM (i) images of CNTs/CoS-NSs. (j) Formation and reversible cycling mechanism of S@CNTs/CoS-NSs. (k and l) CV curves of S@CNTs/CoS-NSs at 0.2 mV s−1 (k) and its charge/discharge profiles (l). (m) Cycling performance of S@CNTs/CoS-NS based soft-packed Li–S batteries at 0.1C under continuous bending–unbending operations as shown in the inset. (n and o) TEM images of NiS@C-HS (n) and S/NiS@C-HS (o). (p) Schematic of NiS@C-HS as a sulfur host for Li–S batteries. (q and r) Charge/discharge curves (q) and cycling performance (r) of S/NiS@C-HS. Reproduced with permission from: (a–g) ref. 122. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (h–m) ref. 194. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (n–r) ref. 117. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. 
Tin disulfide (SnS2), a layered structural metal sulfide, possesses a nearly identical Li intercalation potential to cubic Co9S8 in the Li–S voltage range.178 Li et al. first demonstrated that the ultrasmall SnS2 particles filled in activated hollow carbon nanospheres can effectively improve the stabilization and utilization of sulfur.118 Benefitting from the structural advantage, a high initial special capacity of about 1237 mA h g−1 is delivered, and remains at 924 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.2C for the composite cathode containing 51 wt% S. After that, Qian's group systematically investigated the performance of SnS2-stabilized sulfur in porous carbon (SnS2/S/C) in comparison to that of SnO2.106 Remarkably, the adsorption energy of a Li2S4 molecule on the (001) plane of SnS2 is 1.26 eV, slightly lower than that of SnO2 (3.25 eV), but the rate capability and cycling stability of SnS2/S/C are much higher than those of the SnO2/S/C electrode with the same sulfur loading. This suggests that an appropriate, but not too strong, binding force is better for host materials, in consideration of not inducing the destruction of LiPS species during cycling. On the other hand, the faster electron transfer within the SnS2/S/C electrode is important for the efficient redox reaction of the adsorbed LiPS intermediates during cycling, thus inducing a facilitated solid–liquid/liquid–solid electrochemical reaction in Li–S battery systems. As a result, the SnS2/S/C cathode with a sulfur loading of 1.5 mg cm−2 delivers a reversible capacity of 780 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 0.5C with coulombic efficiency near 100%. When further coupled with a Ge/C anode, the highest capacity of the SnS2/S/C–Ge/C full cell is approximately 743.5 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and remains at 613 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles, showing good cycling stability and efficiency. In fact, the performance of the SnS2/S/C composite can be further enhanced by optimizing the structure and properties of SnS2 used, as reported in a follow-up study by the same group.126
Nickel sulfides (NiSx: NiS2, NiS, Ni3S2, etc.), another wealthy family consisting of compounds with disparate combinations of N and S ratios, have gained much interest for lithium storage.67,70,178 The initial lithiation of NiSx often follows a two-step reaction: an intercalation reaction occurring before 1.5 V and a conversion reaction occurring below 1.5 V.178 Obviously, NiSx possesses a low reaction activity in the Li–S voltage window. More notably, NiSx can be carelessly generated via electrochemical reactions between a Ni current collector and LiPSs, and thus some potential impacts of using Ni foil or foam should be regarded highly. The electrochemical properties of a sulfur cathode with a Ni foam current collector were first investigated by Liu et al. in 2016.195 It is interesting to find that the Ni foam reacts with sulfur at 1.35 V, and is gradually transformed into NiS upon cycling between 1.0 and 2.7 V. Meanwhile, the resultant NiS/Ni foam electrode delivers excellent cycling stability and coulombic efficiency with redox peaks at 1.95 V/1.35 V. After that, Raguzin et al. further studied the effect of the Ni current collector on the performance of Li–S batteries and revealed that setting the cutoff voltage within 1.5–2.8 V still could not rule out the possibility of NiS redox activity (namely implying the formation of NiS), although this phenomenon appeared slower than that in the battery cycled between 1 and 3 V, for instance, for 150 cycles as clearly seen in the cyclic voltammetric scan.196 This suggests that the corrosion rate of Ni is controlled by the operating voltage. Particularly, the narrowing of the cycling range between 1.9 and 2.5 V allows avoiding the generation of NiS and also increases cycling stability.196 In 2017, Manthiram's group demonstrated that a pie-like Ni-foam@carbon core–shell electrode architecture was conducive to facilitating high-loading sulfur cathodes with superior electrochemical and structural stabilities.132 Benefiting from the synergy of the electrocatalytic Ni foam and the conductive carbon shell, such a structure enables the cathode to host an ultrahigh sulfur loading of 40 mg cm−2 and attains a high areal capacity of over 40 mA h cm−2 (1024 mA h g−1) at a C/5 rate with a low electrolyte/sulfur ratio of 7. Importantly, it also achieves good rate capability up to a 2C rate as well as remarkable cycling stability with a high remaining areal capacity of 25 mA h cm−2 after 120 cycles at a C/2 rate. Note that the potential impacts of NiS are not considered in this work when considering that the limited cycles may not produce an enough amount of NiS due to the sluggish erosion of Ni by LiPSs.
Employing amorphous NiS2 as the host material for the S cathode, Liu et al. revealed a certain special sulfur-retained phenomenon that the soluble polysulfides could permeate into the loose amorphous structure, and during charging, the S particle would nucleate, grow, and restrain in the inner space of amorphous NiS2.131 With a sulfur content of 50 wt% (sulfur loading: 1.0 mg cm−2), therefore, this novel composite cathode shows a very high initial specific capacity of 1540 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 in the voltage range of 1.8–3.0 V and retains 77% of the initial capacity after 1200 cycles at 0.5 A g−1. It should be noted here that the first discharge platform of the NiS2 battery existed below 1.8 V, and thus charge and discharge between 1.8 V and 3.0 V may not destroy amorphous NiS2, avoiding the effect of NiS2 on the Li–S cell performance. As a contrasting case, Qian's group investigated the influence of the crystal NiS2 host on the performance of the S cathode via the fabrication of a S/NiS2–C composite.137 It is found that the crystal NiS2 not only stabilizes but also alleviates impedance during the electrochemical conversion of S. Meanwhile, the binding energy between the (111) plane of NiS2 and Li2S4 is 2.06 eV, which strongly corresponds to the moderate LiPS anchoring to the host. When the elemental sulfur content in the composite cathode is 38.4 wt% (sulfur loading: ≈1.0 mg cm−2), it displays good cyclic performance and delivers a specific capacity of 730 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.5C and 544 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 2C within 1.9–2.8 V. From these observations, it can be concluded that the function of the crystal host is more embodied in the acceleration of redox kinetics relying only on the surface site, while the amorphous host can provide more positions for the redeposition of insoluble S active materials. In addition to NiS2, NiS is also an efficient stabilizer for S species and has also been designed for high performance Li–S batteries. As a typical example, Ye et al. proposed a unique sulfur host hybrid material comprising nanosized NiS uniformly distributed on 3D carbon hollow spheres (NiS@C-HS) in which the strong interaction between NiS and C existed (Fig. 8n).117 In the hybrid material, apparently, the nanosized NiS with uniform distribution improves the chemical adsorption capability to LiPSs and the C-HS serves as a physical confinement for LiPSs and also a 3D electron transfer pathway (Fig. 8o). In fact, the strong coupling interaction has been proved to effectively enhance the conductivity, charge transfer, redox kinetics, and operating stability of the sulfur cathode (Fig. 8p). When cycled at 0.1 and 2C, the discharge capacities of S/NiS@C-HS (1.0 mg cm−2) are about 1196 and 674 mA h g−1, respectively (Fig. 8q). With a sulfur loading of up to 2.3 mg cm−2, this hybrid material-based Li–S battery offers a capacity decay as low as 0.013% per cycle and a capacity of 695 mA h g−1 at 0.5C after 300 cycles in the voltage of 1.7–2.8 V (Fig. 8r). Note that no obvious redox reaction of NiS in NiS@C-HS occurs and NiS@C-HS contributes less than 20 mA h g−1 to the capacity, implying that the electrochemical stability of low activity metal sulfides can be effectively regulated by setting the cutoff voltage. Finally, similarly to the core–shell structures discussed earlier, the conductivity and utilization of internal S species may need to be treated carefully in future work, but here the strong chemical coupled hybrid incontrovertibly exhibits appealing advantages when used as a cathode host for Li–S batteries.
Various other low activity metal sulfides, such as FeS2,197,198 VS2,142,199,200 and WS2,105,107,146,173 have also been investigated as polar hosts in Li–S batteries. The intercalated-Li potentials of FeS2, VS2, and WS2 are located at about 1.7,201 1.97,142 and 1.95 V,173,202 respectively. In particular, the reaction activity of FeS2 varies a lot from natural (poor activity) to synthetic (high activity) materials,201 and FeS2 is normally able to retain its original structure as long as the cell is not discharged to or below 1.5 V.197 Clearly, the reaction activities of FeS2 can be restricted by setting the cutoff voltage, while the electrochemical activity of VS2 and WS2 should not be ignored when used in Li–S batteries due to its high intercalated-Li potential. For example, Zhang et al. took advantage of commercial FeS2 powder to investigate pyrite FeS2 as an efficient adsorbent of LiPSs for improved Li–S batteries.197 The FeS2–Li2Sn interactions by the S–S covalent bonds are found to substantially reduce the out-diffusion of dissolved Li2Sn from the sulphur cathode. Utilizing a hybrid sulfur cathode with a 62 wt% sulfur content at a sulfur loading of 2.0 mg cm−2, the Li–S cell delivers an initial capacity of 1129 mA h g−1 at 0.15C, which declines to 940 and 881 mA h g−1 in the second and third discharges, respectively, exhibiting normal behaviors without any contributions of FeS2 to the discharge capacity in a voltage window of 1.7–2.8 V.197 Cheng and coworkers have revealed that sandwich-type rGO–VS2/S with a sulfur content of 89 wt% exhibits a high tap density of 1.84 g cm−3, which is almost three times higher than that of rGO/S with the same sulfur content (0.63 g cm−3), and the volumetric specific capacity (sulfur areal loading: 2.56 mg cm−2) is as high as 1182 mA h cm−3 (1013.4 mA h g−1) in 1.5–3.0 V, comparable with the state-of-the-art reported for energy storage devices, demonstrating the potential for application of sandwich-type composites in high-energy-density Li–S batteries.142 Unfortunately, the chemical reaction and bonding between VS2/LixVS2 and LixS are not mentioned in this work. Building a 3D free-standing host comprising dense polar WS2 nanopetals embedded in a porous rGO–CNT aerogel, Huang et al. have demonstrated that the resulting WS2–rGO–CNT aerogel accommodating the polysulfide catholyte exhibits a stable cycling performance (90.7% capacity retention after 100 cycles at 0.1C), high coulombic efficiency (>98% at 0.1C), excellent rate capability (614 mA h g−1 at 2C), and high areal capacity (6.6 mA h cm−2 at 0.5C) in 1.7–2.8 V.173 Particularly, in situ XRD results reveal that WS2 itself could be lithiated/delithiated during the cycling, making the lithiated WS2 (LixWS2, 0 ≤ x ≤ 0.3) a real host material in trapping and catalyzing the LiPSs. This encouraging finding offers important guidance to design a better host material for high-performance Li–S batteries. Coincidentally, Xue et al. reported a dense intercalation–conversion hybrid cathode by combining intercalation-type Mo6S8 with conversion-type sulfur (Fig. 9a), realizing a pouch Li–S full cell with jointly superior gravimetric and volumetric energy densities of 366 W h kg−1 and 581 W h L−1.203 The extremely low electrical resistance of Mo6S8 (0.102 Ω sq−1) effectively decreases the usage of high-surface-area carbons, reducing cathode porosity from ∼70 to 55 vol%, and therefore, an extremely low electrolyte to active material ratio of 1.2 μL mg−1 is achieved. Furthermore, the intercalative reaction in zero-strain Mo6S8 (LixMo6S8) provides a fast Li-ion transport channel that unlocks the gravimetric capacity of S8. More importantly, the in situ XRD results demonstrate that the transition from S8 to LiPSs occurs along with the transformation of Li1Mo6S8 into Li3Mo6S8 (Fig. 9b),203 suggesting that Li1Mo6S8/Li3Mo6S8 dominates the adsorption of LiPSs (Fig. 9c). The DFT calculations further demonstrate that, compared to pristine Mo6S8, the binding energies of Li1Mo6S8 towards Li2S4, LiS4−, and S42− are greatly enhanced via in situ electrochemical lithiation (Fig. 9d and e). This work will undoubtedly be an exceedingly valuable example which shows that the performance of Li–S batteries is significantly influenced by the electrochemical activity of metal sulfides, which also in turn proves a feasible avenue for developing practically workable high-energy-density Li–S batteries. Very recently, bimetallic sulfides or mixed monometal sulfides have also been developed as polar hosts to enhance the electrochemical performance of Li–S batteries,204–210 resulting from a unique synergistic effect, such as the combination of strong adsorption ability and excellent conductivity and the consolidation of abundant heterojunctions (active interface) to realize the smooth trapping–diffusion–conversion of LiPSs. For example, the NixCo3−xS4/N-doped carbon hybrid material exhibits a high reversible capacity of 1122 mA h g−1 at 0.5C after 100 cycles with a sulfur loading of 2.45 mg cm−2, and can maintain good areal capacities of 724 and 612 mA h g−1 at 0.2C after 100 cycles with high areal sulfur loadings of 10 and 12 mg cm−2, respectively.205 Moreover, CNF@WS2@Co9S8 (2D hexagonal WS2-rimmed Co9S8 heterostructure nanoflakes grown on carbon nanofiber) based sulfur cathodes with 1.5 mg cm−2 sulfur loading show a high capacity (1175 mA h g−1 at 0.1C), an excellent rate capability (keep 77.85% at 2.0C), and a superior cycling stability (a low decay rate of 0.061% per cycle at 2.0C, even lower at 7.0C and 12.0C).208
 Fig. 9  (a) CV plot of a Li|HMSC cell (HMSC here stands for the hybrid Mo6S8/S8 cathode with graphene, carbon nanotubes and carbon black included). (b) In situ XRD of a Li|HMSC cell. (c) The roles of Mo6S8 in the HMSC. Step I is a pre-lithiation step, proceeding before the reduction of sulfur. Step II is the post-lithiation step, in which the lithiated Mo6S8 induces two functions, including enhanced LiPS adsorption and fast Li-ion transport channel. (d) Relaxed structures of LiS4− and S42− adsorbed on the Mo6S8 (100) and LiMo6S8 (100) surfaces. (e) Comparison of different binding energies between LiPSs and Mo6S8/LiMo6S8. Reproduced with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. 
In a brief summary, some exciting progress has been made in the use of low lithiation activity metal sulfides for Li–S batteries, though this kind of material only has a low capacity contribution. In particular, the electrochemical behavior of low-activity sulfides can be effectively manipulated by setting the cut-off voltage, and thus, their pristine structures and properties are relatively more stable during cycling. In other words, even partial lithiated products can still perform their functions steadily with enhanced trapping and catalyzing abilities. Despite these advantages, efforts should be further attempted to develop more sophisticated textures (e.g. heterostructures and/or heteroepitaxial structures) for driving this application to the extreme.
3.3 Metal sulfides without lithiation activity for sulfur cathodes
Molybdenum disulfide (MoS2), a typical layered transition metal sulfide, has an analogous structure to graphene, which is composed of three stacked atom layers (S–Mo–S) held together by van der Waals forces.178,211 This layered structure enables the convenient intercalation and extraction of Li+ ions. Earlier reports using MoS2 as active materials in various LIBs typically employed a large potential window for charge/discharge cycling (0.01–3.0 V vs. Li/Li+) with reversible Li+ intercalation occurring at ∼1.1 V during discharge followed by decomposition upon further lithiation generating Li2S and Mo(0) in situ at ∼0.6 V.178,212,213 Using MoS2 as a polar host material for LiPSs was first proposed by Cui's group in 2014.129 Both simulation and experimental results consistently demonstrate that MoS2 edge sites have much higher electrochemical selectivity and activity for S/Li2S deposition than its terrace surface, which provides a clear guidance for 2D MoS2 design for improved Li–S batteries. In 2016, Dirlam et al. developed a facile thermal ring opening polymerization method to build promising composites with a sulfur-rich matrix and MoS2 particulate inclusions as Li–S cathode materials.214 Importantly, this formation methodology is amenable to larger scale processes with composites easily prepared in 100 g batches. Meanwhile, the composite prepared with 50 wt% of MoS2 and 50 wt% of sulfur (MolyS50) as the cathode with a sulfur loading of 1.5 mg cm−2 affords Li–S cells that exhibit extended cycle lifetimes of up to 1000 cycles with low capacity decay (0.07% per cycle) and demonstrate exceptional rate capability with the delivery of reversible capacity of up to 500 mA h g−1 at 5C. Interestingly, the cathode with the ball-milling S8/MoS2 blend exhibits more pronounced capacity loss and a shorter cycle lifetime relative to that of the MolyS50 composite prepared in situ via molten elemental sulfur. This suggests that the intimately mixed state of sulfur and MoS2 facilitates more optimal utilization of both electrochemically active sulfur and access to the LiPS anchoring sites on the surface of MoS2. Therefore, it is concluded that further improvements are needed to focus on the effects of tuning the MoS2 particle size, morphology, and even the crystal structure to reduce the MoS2 loading and maximize the sulfur content while retaining the benefits of maximal LiPS anchoring. As a typical example, Yang et al. designed hierarchical nitrogen-doped carbon nanotubes/ultrathin molybdenum disulfide nanosheets in a core–shell architecture (denoted as NC@MoS2) to alleviate the shuttle effect and propel redox reaction kinetics (Fig. 10a–c).215 The theoretical studies reveal that MoS2 nanosheets can chemically immobilize LiPSs and catalyze their conversion (Fig. 10d). The experimental investigations further indicate that the desired S–NC@MoS2 cathodes (sulfur loading of 1.5 mg cm−2) exhibit excellent rate capability (516 mA h g−1 at 5C) (Fig. 10e) and superior cycle stability (only 0.049% capacity decay per cycle up to 1000 cycles at 2C) (Fig. 10f). Furthermore, Wu et al. proposed a concept of built-in catalysis to accelerate LiPS conversion in confined nanoreactors, i.e., laterally stacked ordered crevice pores encompassed by MoS2-decorated carbon thin layers.216 The integrated function of adsorption–catalysis–conversion endows the sulfur-infused C@MoS2 electrode with a considerable capacity release and reversibility under high sulfur loading (6 mg cm−2) and lean electrolyte (E/S ratio of 5 μL mg−1) conditions. More remarkably, Lin et al. have demonstrated that sulfur deficiencies in the 2H phase MoS2−x nanoflakes are found to be the catalytic centers that reversibly participate in the LiPS conversion and catalyze the kinetics of LiPS redox reactions via the parallel study of the catalytic effectiveness of MoS2−x/rGO and MoS2/rGO.136 The fast conversion of LiPSs decreases their accumulation in the sulfur cathode and their loss from the cathode by diffusion. Benefiting from these merits, in the presence of a small amount of MoS2−x/rGO (4 wt% of the cathode mass), the high rate (8C) performance of the sulfur cathode with a sulfur loading of 1.5 mg cm−2 is improved from a capacity of 161.1 mA h g−1 to 826.5 mA h g−1. In addition, MoS2−x/rGO also enhances the cycle stability of the sulfur cathode from a capacity fade rate of 0.373% per cycle (over 150 cycles) to 0.083% per cycle (over 600 cycles) at a typical 0.5C rate. Note that the electron coupling (strong coupling) between MoS2−x and rGO is also confirmed and expected to contribute positively to the charge transfer at the MoS2−x/rGO interface, which partially explains its high rate and cycling performance. Commendably, the study here not only presents a promising catalyst candidate which is still unchanged after the reaction, but it also provides experimental evidence and some new insights into the origin of the catalytic effects. Besides that, a phase engineering strategy for fabricating MXene/1T–2H MoS2–C nanohybrids was proposed by Guo's group for boosting the performance of Li–S batteries (Fig. 10g).217 The as-made MXene/1T–2H MoS2–C integrates distinct S vacancy defects, 1T metallic phase MoS2, and N-doped carbon (Fig. 10h and i), making it more effective for trapping LiPSs and accelerating redox kinetics. As a consequence, it exhibits excellent reversible capacity (1194.7 mA h g−1 at 0.1C), improved rate capability (677.2 mA h g−1 at 2C), and superior cycling stability (799.3 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles at 0.5C) at a sulfur loading of 1 mg cm−2. More interestingly, the soft package Li–S battery with the MXene/1T–2H MoS2–C cathode still displays good properties even after bending to various shapes (Fig. 10j and k). In addition to the manipulation of the morphology, deficiency, and phase, the ionic conduction properties of MoS2 have also attracted enough attention. Using a MoS2 hermetically encapsulated hollow sulfur sphere cathode (Fig. 10l and m), for example, Tang et al. carefully characterized the structural change of sulfur during lithiation/delithiation with in situ transmission electron microscopy (TEM).124 It is found that in the absence of an organic electrolyte, reversible lithiation and delithiation of sulfur is possible with the conductive MoS2 coating. The total lithium diffusivity in the encapsulated sulfur is estimated to be 10−17 to 10−16 m2 s−1, implying that with proper nanoscale sizing and conductive coating the rate capabilities of the sulfur cathode could be comparable to that of the olivine electrode. Particularly, the semiconducting 2H-MoS2 is partially transformed into the metallic 1T′ phase upon the transmission of Li+ ions (Fig. 10n and o), and would have a high electrical conductivity of 10–100 S cm−1. Such a change in conductivity may facilitate the electrochemical reaction of the insulating sulfur and its lithiated intermediate. Furthermore, the synergistic effect of the hollow construction and encapsulation layer is confirmed to limit the volume expansion of sulfur particles. The increase in the particle size is observed to be around 33 to 48%, which is smaller than the theoretical value of 80%. Composite electrodes made from the MoS2-encapsulated sulfur spheres (sulfur loading: 1.5 mg cm−2) deliver outstanding electrochemical performance, showing an initial capacity of 1660 mA h g−1 at 0.1C (Fig. 10p) and long cycle life of more than 300 cycles with an impressive discharge capacity of up to 956 mA h g−1 at 0.5C (Fig. 10q). This study demonstrates that the unique properties of 2D materials can be exploited to address some worrisome challenges in Li–S batteries and beyond.
 Fig. 10  (a–c) TEM (a), high-resolution TEM (b), and elemental mapping (c) images of S–NC@MoS2. (d) Schematic of the polysulfide immobilization and conversion processes on the surface of NC@MoS2. (e and f) Charge/discharge profiles (e) and cycling performance (f) of the S–NC@MoS2 cathode. (g–i) TEM (g), high-resolution TEM (h), and elemental mapping (i) images of MXene/1T–2H MoS2–C. (j and k) Charge/discharge curve (j) and cycling performance (k) of the soft package Li–S battery at 0.2C under bending. (l and m) STEM (l) and high-resolution TEM (m) images of the MoS2-encapsulated hollow sulfur sphere. (n and o) Atomic STEM images of the 2H MoS2 phase before lithiation (n) and the 1T′ MoS2 phase after lithiation (o). (p and q) Charge/discharge plots (p) and cycling performance (q) of the MoS2-encapsulated hollow sulfur sphere. Reproduced with permission from: (a–f) ref. 215. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g–k) ref. 217. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (l–q) ref. 124. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Zinc sulfide (ZnS), an important inorganic semiconducting material with non-toxic and low-cost virtues, has been widely used in displays, sensors, solar cells, and lasers for a long time, and however, its application in LIBs with high theoretical capacity has seldom been studied to date. In essence, ZnS is an extremely stable phase in the Li–S reaction system when considering that the lithiation of ZnS suffers from a conversion step occurring in a low potential range of 1.0–0.6 V followed by a Li alloying process at 0.6–0.05 V.218,219 On the basis of DFT methods, Zhang's group analyzed the binding energy to Li2S and lithium diffusion barrier on various transition-metal sulfide (TMS) surfaces.96 The strong S binding induced by charge transfer between transition-metal atoms in TMS slabs and S atoms in Li2S is confirmed to be of great significance in TMS composite cathodes over a Li-binding configuration (Li in Li2S binds to S in TMSs). More importantly, ZnS has relatively strong anchoring effects on Li2S immobilization in compassion to that of CoS, NiS, and CuS. The binding energy of Li2S on the ZnS (100) surface is −2.8 eV. Such a moderate binding strength could effectively facilitate the deposition and utilization of LiPSs rather than their decomposition.93,96 Very recently, Hua et al. reported a novel sulfur host composed of ZnS crystals (3 nm) in situ uniformly distributed in porous carbon aerogels (ZnS–CA).220 Originating from the unique nanocomposite, the ZnS–CA/S cathode with 2.2–2.5 mg cm−2 sulfur loading achieves an initial capacity of 1352 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and maintains a high capacity of 1119 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles. Even at 1C it remains at 730 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles. DFT theoretical calculation shows that the adsorption energies of Li2S8, Li2S6 and Li2S4 on the surface of the ZnS (220) substrate are −3.17, −3.07, and −2.68 eV, respectively, showing effectively stronger interaction between ZnS and LiPSs with increasing lithiation, which supports the excellent electrochemical performance of ZnS–CA/S for Li–S batteries.
In this section, one can clearly observe that inactive metal sulfides are promising hosts for Li–S batteries, especially that the morphology, deficiency, and phase engineering strategies have been well applied in the synthesis of unique functionalized hosts, leading to various remarkable achievements. More strikingly, the inactive properties of these materials, excluding their electrochemical transformation during cycling in Li–S batteries, make them be excellent media to probe the functional principles of binding LiPSs and catalytic mechanism regulating reaction kinetics. Unfortunately, in existing studies, the application of inactive metal sulfides to reveal the underlying mechanism of Li–S batteries is extraordinarily rare. Predictably, more endeavors focused on this meaningful field will be reported in the near future.
3.4 Metal sulfides used in separators, interlayers, and the anode in Li–S cells
Despite the significant progress achieved on the cathode of Li–S batteries (Table 1), other components, like separators, interlayers, and anodes, are also excellent scaffolds for improving the performance of Li–S batteries, which should be given sufficient emphasis. Particularly, a stable Li metal anode is of vital importance to build a safe Li–S cell with high energy density. Herein, the representative applications with respect to metal sulfides, involving the decoration of separators, the excogitation of interlayers, and the protection of Li anodes, will be surveyed. We sincerely hope that this effort will arouse increasing interests devoted to the relevant field.
Table 1 Recent progress on the use of metal sulfide-based materials for lithium–sulfur batteriesa




Material
Structure
Synthesis method
Sulfur contentb & sulfur loading mass
Electrochemical performancec (initial capacity and degradation rate)
Voltage window (vs. Li+)
Ref.





a The electrolyte of the tested batteries is made up of 1 M lithium bis(trifluoromethanesulphonyl)imide (LiTFSI) in a 1:1 volume of 1, 2-dimethoxyethane (DME):1,3-dioxolane (DOL) with varied amounts of 0–5 wt% LiNO3 in different articles.
b The sulfur content is calculated based on the weight of sulfur in the cathode.
c The current density at 1C used for statistics is equal to 1675 mA g−1.





TiS2
Commercial product
Direct substitution of active S
48 wt% & N/A
1020 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 0.15% for 40 cycles
1.65–2.5 V

179



TiS2
3D porous foam
Thermal reaction of Ti precursor foams
34 wt% & 40 mg cm−2
225 mA h g−1 at 0.15C and 0.33% for 100 cycles
1.6–2.6 V

140



TiS2
H- and O-incorporated porous texture
Ball milling and water steam etching method
58 wt% & 2.8 mg cm−2
813 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.095% for 200 cycles
1.5–3.0 V

127



TiS2
Sandwich-type confined by N, S co-doped carbon

In situ polydopamine assisted sulfuration
64 wt% & 7.7 mg cm−2
1025 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 0.25% for 100 cycles
1.8–2.8 V

175



NbS2
Sandwich-type enveloped by iodine-doped graphene
Water steam etching, freeze drying, and annealing method
65 wt% & 3.25 mg cm−2
542 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.042% for 600 cycles
1.5–3.0 V

128



Cu2S
Nanoflake arrays
Cu foam soaked in electrolyte
N/A & 5.0 mg cm−2
800 mA h g−1 at 1.5 mA cm−2 and No fading for 200 cycles
1.3–2.6 V

187



CuxS
Nanoparticles with a Cu, N co-doped carbon network
Salt template, freeze drying, and annealing
64 wt% & 3.2–3.5 mg cm−2
932 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.058% for 500 cycles
1.5–3.0 V

190



Bi2S3
Particles with porous carbon
Ball milling and baked-in-salt method
46 wt% & 1.0–1.5 mg cm−2
907 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.023% for 400 cycles
1.8–2.8 V

138



Co9S8
Graphene-like nanosheets
Microwave solvothermal method
60 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2
863 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.064% for 400 cycles
1.8–3.0 V

125



Co9S8
Embedded in hollow carbon nanoboxes
Sacrificial template and hydrothermal method
67 wt% & 1.6 mg cm−2
920 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.043% for 400 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

193



CoS2
Micro-particles with graphene
Hydrothermal and ball milling method
60 wt% & 2.9 mg cm−2
1000 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.60% for 30 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

104



CoS2
Mesoporous hollow structure with N-doped graphitic carbon
Co-precipitation and thermal treatment
75 wt% & 1.4 mg cm−2
670 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.075% for 300 cycles
1.5–2.8 V

155



Co3S4
Hollow polyhedra with carbon nanofibers
Sacrificial template and vacuum filtration
50–55 wt% & 13.5 mg cm−2
957 mA h g−1 at 0.3C and 0.43% for 100 cycles
1.8–2.8 V

123



Co3S4
Nanotubes
Hydrothermal method
59 wt% & 2.0 mg cm−2
517 mA h g−1 at 5.0C and 0.041% for 1000 cycles
1.6–2.6 V

119



Co3S4
CNT inserted hollow nanoboxes
Co-precipitation and sacrificial template
49 wt% & 3.5 mg cm−2
1012 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.13% for 150 cycles
1.8–2.6 V

122



CoS
CNT reinforced nanostraws
Electrospinning, solvothermal, and annealing method
61 wt% & 1.0–1.5 mg cm−2
841 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.032% for 1000 cycles
1.8–2.8 V

194



SnS2
Nanoparticles in hollow carbon nanospheres
Hard template and CVD method
51 wt% & N/A
1237 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.13% for 200 cycles
1.8–3.0 V

118



SnS2
Nanosheets with porous carbon
Ball milling and baked-in-salt method
62 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2
1276 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.058% for 1000 cycles
1.8–2.8 V

106



NiS2
Amorphous micro-structure
Chemical co-precipitation method
50 wt% & 1.0 mg cm−2
1238 mA h g−1 at 0.3C and 0.019% for 1200 cycles
1.8–3.0 V

131



NiS2
Crystalline nanoparticles with porous carbon
Hydrothermal and annealing method
45 wt% & 0.8–1.3 mg cm−2
650 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.081% for 500 cycles
1.9–2.8 V

137



NiS
Nanoparticles on hollow carbon spheres
Hard template and annealing method
50 wt% & 1.0 mg cm−2
1002 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.14% for 200 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

117



Ni3S2
Nanoparticles on a N/S co-doped rGO matrix
Hydrothermal and calcination method
57.4 wt% & 5.8 mg cm−2
572 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.14% for 200 cycles
1.8–2.6 V

67



FeS2
Commercial product
Direct substitution of active S
62 wt% & 2.0 mg cm−2
1129 mA h g−1 at 0.15C and 0.19% for 200 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

197



FeS
3D flowerlike structure with carbon
Hydrothermal method
49 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2
360 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.07% for 250 cycles
1.7–3.0 V

66



VS2
Sandwich-type enveloped by rGO
Hydrothermal method
51 wt% & 1.15 mg cm−2
831 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.017% for 1200 cycles
1.5–3.0 V

142



VS2
3D flower-like aggregates
Hydrothermal method
46.7 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2
872 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.26% for 200 cycles
1.5–3.0 V

199



VS2
3D hierarchical porous structure
Template assisted hydrothermal method
60 wt% & 1.2–1.4 mg cm−2
808 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.09% for 500 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

200



WS2
Nanosheets on carbon cloth
Hydrothermal method
11 wt% & 1.0–1.2 mg cm−2
563 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.0072% for 1500 cycles
1.7–2.7 V

107



WS2
Nanopetals embedded in rGO–CNT
Solvothermal and freeze drying method
— & 7.68 mg cm−2
960 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.1% for 100 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

173



Mo6S8
Micro-particles with CNTs and graphene
Solid-state reaction and ball milling
41 wt% & 6.2 mg cm−2
967 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 0.18% for 100 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

203



MoS3
Amorphous nanoboxes with N-doped carbon
Hard template and co-precipitation method
49 wt% & 5.5 mg cm−2
818 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.21% for 100 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

154



MoS2
Commercial product
Direct dispersion in molten S
37.5 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2
1270 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.07% for 1000 cycles
1.7–2.6 V

214



MoS2
Nanosheets on N-doped CNTs
Hydrothermal and annealing method
56 wt% & 3.6 mg cm−2
936 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.10% for 300 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

215



MoS2
Nanosheets decorated on ladder-like carbon
Hydrothermal, calcination, and etching method
56 wt% & 4.0 mg cm−2
890 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 0.03% for 260 cycles
1.8–2.7 V

216



MoS2
S-defect nanoflakes with rGO
Lithiated exfoliation and annealing method
60 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2
1236 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.083% for 600 cycles
1.8–2.6 V

136



MoS2
S-defect nanosheets on MXene and carbon
Hydrothermal and annealing method
56 wt% & 1.0 mg cm−2
1014 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.07% for 300 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

217



MoS2
Flakes assembled hollow cages
Lithiated exfoliation and soft template
46 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2
1062 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.045% for 1000 cycles
1.8–2.6 V

124



ZnS
Nanoparticles with porous carbon aerogels
Sol–gel and annealing method
45 wt% & 2.2–2.8 mg cm−2
1080 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.11% for 300 cycles
1.8–3.0 V

220



MoS2 (Celgard)
Monolayers
Lithiated exfoliation and filtration method
65 wt% & N/A
808 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.083% for 600 cycles
1.5–3.0 V

144



Co9S8 (Celgard)
Vertical hollow nanowall arrays
Co-precipitation and sacrificial template
70 wt% & 5.6 mg cm−2
868 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.039% for 1000 cycles
1.8–2.8 V

221



CoS2 (interlayer)
Porous nanosheets on carbon paper
Electrochemical deposition
56 wt% & 1.5–2.0 mg cm−2
1240 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.17% for 200 cycles
1.8–2.7 V

145



WS2 (interlayer)
Micro-particles on carbon cloth
Sonication method
70 wt% & 2.7–3.8 mg cm−2
1379 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.055% for 500 cycles
1.7–2.8 V

146



Co9S8 (interlayer)
S-defect nanoparticles on CNTs
Hydrothermal and annealing method
70 wt% & 2.0 mg cm−2
1272 mA h g−1 at 0.3C and 0.049% for 1000 cycles
1.7–2.6 V

222



MoS2 (anode)
2D ultrathin film
Sputtering deposition method
64 wt% & 6.13 mg cm−2
955 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.031% for 1200 cycles
1.5–3.0 V

143





Attributed to the high lithium-ion diffusion rate in MoS2, a sub-micrometer-scale layer composed of closely stacked MoS2 nanosheets on a conventional Celgard separator has been created by Ghazi et al. and it serves as a cation selective separator that is both lithium-ion conductive and soluble-polysulfide impeditive (Fig. 11a).144 Amazingly, the lithium ion conductivity of the MoS2/Celgard separator (2.0 × 10−1 mS cm−1) is similar to that of the pure Celgard separator (3.3 × 10−1 mS cm−1), which is around one order higher than that of the GO/Celgard separator (3.1 × 10−2 mS cm−1), and meanwhile, the diffusion coefficient for MoS2/Celgard at the reduction peak of low voltage (2.4 × 10−8 cm2 s−1) is higher than both pristine Celgard (6.5 × 10−9 cm2 s−1) and GO/Celgard (9.1 × 10−10 cm2 s−1), suggesting a high lithium conductivity, fast lithium diffusion, and facile lithium transference of the MoS2 modified separator. When used in Li–S batteries, the composite separator is proven to be highly efficient for depressing LiPS shuttle, leading to high and long cycle stability. With a sulfur content of 65%, the device with the MoS2/Celgard separator delivers an initial capacity of 950 mA h g−1 at 0.2C (Fig. 11b) and retains a substantial capacity of 401 mA h g−1 after 600 cycles at 0.5C (Fig. 11c), corresponding to only 0.083% capacity decay per cycle. In addition, the coulombic efficiency remains at more than 99.5% during all 600 cycles, disclosing an efficient ionic sieve preventing polysulfide migration to the anode while having negligible influence on Li+ ion transfer across the separator. Obviously, this work opens the door toward developing efficient separators with flexible 2D materials beyond graphene for advanced Li–S batteries. Despite these striking results, theoretically, the transport of lithium ions will be inevitably limited by the closely stacked modified layer, which is not desirable for high rate capacity. On the other hand, the stacked thick layer, as an inactive material, will decrease the overall cell energy density. In this regard, it is crucial to engineer the structure of the modified layer on a separator. Very recently, a novel MOF-derived Co9S8 nanowall array with a vertical hollow nanoarchitecture and high electrical conductivity grown in situ on a Celgard separator (Co9S8–Celgard) was proposed by Manthiram's group, as an efficient barrier for LiPSs in Li–S batteries.221 Benefiting from the well-designed structure, the Co9S8–Celgard separator possesses a large surface area, excellent mechanical stability, and particularly strong LiPS-trapping ability via chemical and physical interactions. With these advantages, even with a pure sulfur cathode in a high sulfur loading of 5.6 mg cm−2, the Li–S cells with the Co9S8–Celgard separator exhibit outstanding electrochemical performance: the initial specific capacity is as high as 1385 mA h g−1 with a retention of 1190 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles. The cells deliver a high capacity of 530 mA h g−1 at a 1C rate even after an impressive number of 1000 cycles with an average capacity fade of only 0.039% per cycle, which is promising for long-term cycling application at high charge/discharge current densities, and importantly, pouch-type Li–S cells with the Co9S8–Celgard separator display excellent cycling performance, showing a high initial capacity of 1185 mA h g−1 (sulfur loading: 2 mg cm−2). This study presents a strategy to grow on the separator a multifunctional polar layer with a unique nanoarchitecture and high conductivity to chemically and physically trap LiPSs, thus significantly enhancing the performance of Li–S batteries.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of Li–S batteries using the MoS2/Celgard separator. (b and c) Charge/discharge profiles (b) and cycling performance (c) of the Li–S battery with the MoS2/Celgard separator. (d and e) Schematic of the fast kinetics of WS2 supported on the CCI (d) and four cathode structures (e). (f and g) Charge/discharge curve (f) and cycling performance (g) of WS2/S–WS2/CCI. (h) Schematic of the fabrication method for a MoS2-coated Li anode via sputtering and subsequent lithiation. (i and j) Charge/discharge curves (i) and cycling performance (j) of the Li–MoS2/CNT–S cell measured at 0.5C. Reproduced with permission from: (a–c) ref. 144. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (d–g) ref. 146. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (h–j) ref. 143. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
Similarly to permselective separators, the introduction of interlayers can also contribute to an outstanding enhancement in the Li-ion storage performance of a Li–S cell. Ma et al. adopted hydrophilic carbon paper (CP) anchored by hierarchically porous CoS2 as the interlayer for capturing LiPSs in a Li–S cell.145 Hierarchical pores here can physically adsorb LiPSs, while CoS2 can trap LiPSs by forming a strong chemical interaction. Moreover, the CoS2/CP interlayer with excellent electronic conductivity provided not only an upper current collector for increasing the electron conductive area for the mediate LiPSs, but also an extra space for alleviating the volume expansion of the sulfur electrode during cycling. Adding such an interlayer, the sulfur–graphene cathode with a sulfur loading of 1.5–2.0 mg cm−2 delivers a higher initial capacity of 1239.5 mA h g−1 at 0.2C in contrast to 950.0 mA h g−1 for the S/rGO electrode with a CP interlayer and retains a reversible capacity of 818 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles. Over 200 cycles, interestingly, the morphology of CoS2 is rearranged into an interconnected network matrix with a hierarchical pore structure similar to that of the pristine one, which ensures a larger surface to form Li–S bonds with Li2Sn/Li2S, further supporting the cycle durability. Goodenough and coworkers demonstrated a Li–S cell with excellent cycle life and rate performance by using tungsten disulfide (WS2) supported on an interlayer of carbon cloth (CC) connected to the cathode current collector (Fig. 11d and e).146 The vial cell setup and the adsorption test reveal that the CC interlayer (CCI) and WS2 act, respectively, as a physical barrier for sulfide loss and as a trap for soluble sulfide adsorption with access to electrons from the cathode current collector. Particularly, the adsorbed sulfides on the WS2 with access to electrons are crucial to reuse them when considering that the WS2/S electrode without the interlayer shows a cell performance no better than that of the S electrode. The WS2/S–WS2/CCl electrode shows a high reversible capacity of ≈1400 mA h g−1 at 0.05C (Fig. 11f) and an excellent cycling stability and rate capability (≈1000 mA h g−1 at 0.5C in the 500th cycle and ≈750 mA h g−1 at a 5.0C rate) (Fig. 11g). Very recently, a catalytic material (Co9S8−x/CNT, nanoparticles with a metallic Co9S8 core and a sulfur-deficient shell on a CNT support) was designed by Lin and coworkers, as an interlayer on the sulfur cathode to retain migratory LiPSs and promote their reutilization.222 The Co9S8−x/CNT catalyst is highly effective for the conversion of LiPSs to insoluble end products (S or Li2S/Li2S2), and its deployment as a cathode-integrated interlayer is able to retain the LiPSs in the cathode for reuse. As a consequence, a host-free sulfur cathode (sulfur loading of 2.0 mg cm−2) with the Co9S8−x/CNT interlayer retains a high discharge capacity of 648.5 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at 0.3C (or a capacity fade rate of 0.049% per cycle), showing a significant improvement of the capacity fade rate without it (0.28% per cycle for 200 cycles). Undoubtedly, the introduction of polysulfide traps connected electronically to the cathode current collector represents a promising strategy for a high-performance Li–S cell.
In fact, the success of Li–S batteries depends in large part on the utilization of metallic Li as the anode material. When Li-metal foil is applied, an unstable solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) is formed in an ether-based electrolyte with LiPSs. This induces low utilization of the Li metal with low coulombic efficiency and continuous decomposition of the organic electrolyte.11,169 The formation of Li dendrites even induces safety issues. In particular, the uneven current distributions resulting from the inhomogeneous metal surface and/or fractured SEI layer can facilitate preferential nucleation of Li, and therefore, dendrite growth is a self-amplifying phenomenon.20,33 Obviously, controllable guided deposition of Li ions onto Li metal is a very critical issue. Cha et al. have demonstrated that ∼10 nm-thick 2D MoS2 served as a protective layer for Li-metal anodes can effectively modulate the electrochemical interfacial properties, greatly improving the performances of Li–S batteries (Fig. 11h).143 The MoS2 layer exhibits tight adhesion to the surface of Li metal and facilitates a uniform flow of Li+ into and out of bulk Li metal. Interestingly, the Li+ migration through the protective layer can effectively induce the MoS2 phase transition from 2H to 1T, and thus enhances the conductivity of the MoS2 interlayer. Unlike other carbon-, composite-, or ceramic-based protective layers, the unique atomically layered structure and its phase-change characteristics (semiconductor to metallic trait) circumvent the issues of high impedance and/or poor interfacial contact. Thus, stable Li electrodeposition is realized with dendrite formation effectively suppressed. The deposition and dissolution processes of a symmetric MoS2-coated Li-metal cell operate at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 with low voltage hysteresis and a threefold improvement in cycle life compared with using bare Li metal. The full-cell assembly of Li–S batteries with a Li–MoS2 anode and a CNT–S cathode with a sulfur loading of 3.44 mg cm−2 demonstrates high specific energy and power densities of 589 W h kg−1 and 295 W kg−1, respectively; it also exhibits a high capacity retention of 84% for up to 1200 cycles at 0.5C with a coulombic efficiency of nearly 100% (Fig. 11i and j). These results indicate that the major challenge encountered in the development of Li–S batteries can be effectively resolved. Importantly, this strategy can be applied with other metal sulfides to provide a route for the realization of high energy density and safe Li-metal-based batteries.
4. Conclusions and prospects
In this review, we have provided a comprehensive overview of the design, synthesis, and application of metal sulfides in rechargeable Li–S batteries. We aimed to summarize important concepts to boost the practical development of high-energy-density Li–S batteries. As a promising polar substrate, metal sulfides have considerable benefits, including a moderately strong affinity for active sulfide binding, high electronic conductivity, the ability to modulate redox reaction kinetics, and a high activity capacity contribution. Through the use of metal sulfides, great progress has been made in improving sulfur cathodes, design of interlayers, modification of separators, and protection of lithium anodes. Despite these achievements, challenges remain in terms of developing affordable large-scale synthesis techniques, elucidating an in-depth mechanism of binding LiPSs, enhancing the rationality and reliability of theoretical simulations, and building stable high-energy-density Li–S batteries over routine LIBs. We hope that this review will inspire greater interest in the use of metal sulfides and other related materials with similar effects as polar substrates for the exploitation of advanced Li–S batteries.
4.1 Design principles of metal sulfide mediators for high-performance Li–S batteries
Considering the universality and importance of metal sulfides, there is a need to determine relationships between the current limited and scattered data. This analysis might help to develop generalized design principles for aspects such as the buffer space needed to accommodate volume fluctuations, methods of enhancing LiPS adsorption, improving electronic conductivity, ensuring a high sulfur loading, and maintaining excellent chemical/electrochemical stability.
• Building a buffer space to alleviate the volume change of S8/Li2S redox reactions prevents the deterioration of the original electrode structure and thus leads to long-term cycle performance, which is often achieved by hard templating, sacrificial templating, and soft templating methods.
• Enhancing affinity toward LiPSs promotes surface conversion to decrease the total amount of soluble LiPSs in the electrolyte, thereby ensuring shuttle suppression and high capacity. Metal sulfides with a high surface area, well-designed porosity, enhanced surface polar (functional or defective surface), desired surface selectivity (exposed crystal faces), and tailored crystalline form are a high-priority target.
• Improving conductivity facilitates fast electron transport and reaction kinetics, especially under high-loading and/or high-rate conditions. Incorporating metal elements or their alloys with a sulfur cathode is smart and simple, where metal sulfides are produced by in situ electrochemical reactions. The combination of carbonaceous substrates with metal sulfides has also been widely accepted, and a variety of strategies have been applied, including: (i) in situ nucleation and growth of metal sulfides and/or their precursors on carbonaceous materials; (ii) independent synthesis of metal sulfides and subsequent merging with carbon; and (iii) formation of metal–carbon composites followed by sulfidation.
• A high sulfur loading is essential to produce practical Li–S batteries. The metal sulfides for the design of 3D free-standing and sandwich-type cathodes contribute to a high sulfur loading without sacrificing rate capacities and cycling stability.
• Excellent chemical/electrochemical stability of metal sulfides is of vital importance to maintain the original structural advantages and guarantee the desired design purpose. Rare cases such as Cu/CuxS and Ni/NixS have been found to be chemically unstable in conventional ether-based Li–S batteries. The use of high-activity metal sulfides should be carefully considered, whereas the electrochemical stability of low-activity sulfides can be potentially manipulated by setting the cut-off voltage. The inactive metal sulfides (e.g., MoS2 and ZnS) are excellent mediators for probing the functional principles of binding LiPSs and catalytic mechanism regulating reaction kinetics.
In addition to the abovementioned considerations, the simplicity of synthesis methods and economy of production costs are also important considerations. Other factors, such as structural design flaws, need to be avoided. For example, sulfur (core) encapsulated into hollow metal sulfides (shell) cannot receive electrons smoothly from the conductive shell. In particular, the repeated volume fluctuation of sulfur during cycling may further deteriorate the electrical contact between the core and shell. The conductive carbon inserted/embedded hollow sulfide hosts are therefore the preferred choice under such circumstances.
4.2 Prospects and challenges of metal sulfide mediators for high-performance Li–S batteries
There is tremendous potential for metal sulfide-based devices, based on progress in their selection, design, synthesis, optimization, and application in boosting the development of Li–S batteries. As shown in Fig. 12, we put forward here several critical issues for future research:
 Fig. 12  Prospects and challenges of metal sulfide mediators for high-performance Li–S batteries. 
The synthesis of metal sulfide-based blends for practically viable high-energy-density Li–S batteries:
• Prospect: metal sulfides are excellent scaffolds for achieving high sulfur loading without compromising the volumetric and gravimetric energy densities of Li–S batteries. Considerable efforts have been devoted to the design, preparation, and optimization of materials which commonly realize high energy density Li–S batteries.
• Challenge: low-cost and large-scale synthesis methods to build stable high-energy-density Li–S batteries are still required and these factors depend on technological breakthroughs and innovation. In the practical applications of Li–S batteries, the trade-off between product performance and manufacturing costs is a contradiction that should be carefully considered.
The construction of in/ex situ characterization systems monitoring the electrode surface/interfaces to elucidate the detailed operating mechanism:
• Prospect: essentially, metal sulfide binding to LiPSs and promotion of redox kinetics are achieved by regulating electrode surface/interface reaction processes. Metal sulfides have excellent chemical/electrochemical stability and provide potential solutions to addressing the underlying mechanism by means of in/ex situ spectroscopic characterization. The aspects of interest include the LiPS binding principle, kinetic regulatory mechanism, and detailed reaction pathways or charge/discharge behaviors.
• Challenge: in situ characterization often involves complex experimental procedures, impractical cell design, and tedious data analysis. In situ testing techniques are limited to certain synchrotron light sources. Ex situ characterization is more comprehensive and developed but suffers from problems associated with serious contamination and deviation from actual operating conditions. Particularly, the charging process of Li–S batteries is not simply the reverse of discharge but is also considerably influenced by the choice of electrolyte, which will significantly exacerbate these issues.
The optimization of the rationality and reliability of the theoretical model for promoting the research and understanding of Li–S batteries:
• Prospect: first-principles modeling only relies on the basic laws of physics such as quantum mechanics and statistical mechanics; hence, there is no experimental input beyond the nature of the constituent elements. First-principles calculations are a powerful tool for screening materials, interpreting mechanisms, and predicting outcomes to accelerate the development of Li–S batteries.
• Challenge: reality often deviates from theory. Because most metal sulfides are electrochemically active, lithium-inserted products are LiyMSx rather than pristine MSx. These materials strongly influence the behaviors of Li–S batteries but have long been overlooked in theoretical calculations. Solvation also plays an important role in triggering the ionization of LiPSs into solvated Li+ (electrolyte) cations and Sn2− (electrolyte) anions. Therefore, relying on the calculated binding energies of Li2Sx species rather than solvated Li+ (electrolyte) cations might lead to misleading results. There remains a need to optimize theoretical models to enhance the rationality and reliability of computation results.
In conclusion, various scientific and engineering issues remain to be resolved in the field of Li–S batteries. Although many challenges remain, we believe that by taking advantage of the latest experimental and computational techniques, we will increase our fundamental understanding of Li–S electrochemistry. Thus, the use of sulfides and related mediators with similar effects in Li–S batteries and exploration of the Li–S reaction thermodynamics and kinetics will ultimately lead to widespread application of high-energy-density Li–S batteries.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (2018YFB0905400), the National Science Foundation of China (51802261, 51772169 and 51572151) and the Major Technological Innovation Project of Hubei Science and Technology Department (2019AAA164).
Notes and references
M. Armand and J.-M. Tarascon, Nature, 2008, 451, 652–657 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Kang and G. Ceder, Nature, 2009, 458, 190–193 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Chiang, Science, 2010, 330, 1485–1486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Dunn, H. Kamath and J. M. Tarascon, Science, 2011, 334, 928–935 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Yin, S. Xin, Y. G. Guo and L. J. Wan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13186–13200 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rosenman, E. Markevich, G. Salitra, D. Aurbach, A. Garsuch and F. F. Chesneau, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500212 CrossRef .
L. Ma, K. E. Hendrickson, S. Wei and L. A. Archer, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 315–338 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Seh, Y. Sun, Q. Zhang and Y. Cui, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5605–5634 RSC .
D. Wang, W. Zhang, W. Zheng, X. Cui, T. Rojo and Q. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600168 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Zhang, H. Huang, J. Bae, S.-H. Chung, W. Zhang, A. Manthiram and G. Yu, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700279 CrossRef .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S. H. Chung, C. Zu and Y. S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Pope and I. A. Aksay, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500124 CrossRef .
J. W. Choi and D. Aurbach, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16013 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cao, C. Tan, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2660–2677 RSC .
B. Liu, J.-G. Zhang and W. Xu, Joule, 2018, 2, 833–845 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, S. H. Chung and C. Zu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1980–2006 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16132 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang, X.-B. Cheng and Q. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700260 CrossRef .
B. Philippe, M. Hahlin, K. Edstrom, T. Gustafsson, H. Siegbahn and H. Rensmo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 163, A178–A191 CrossRef .
B. Yan, X. Li, Z. Bai, X. Song, D. Xiong, M. Zhao, D. Li and S. Lu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 338, 34–48 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yu and A. Manthiram, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700217 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, Z.-W. Zhang, H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang and Q. Zhang, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700134 CrossRef .
H. Wang, W. Zhang, J. Xu and Z. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707520 CrossRef .
G. Li, S. Wang, Y. Zhang, M. Li, Z. Chen and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705590 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Li, Z. Xi, D. Guo, X. Chen and L. Yin, Small, 2018, 14, 1701986 CrossRef .
G. Xu, B. Ding, J. Pan, P. Nie, L. Shen and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 12662–12676 RSC .
W. Kang, N. Deng, J. Ju, Q. Li, D. Wu, X. Ma, L. Li, M. Naebe and B. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 16541–16588 RSC .
S. Rehman, K. Khan, Y. Zhao and Y. Hou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3014–3038 RSC .
S. Li, B. Jin, X. Zhai, H. Li and Q. Jiang, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3, 2245–2260 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, T. Zhao and F. Wu, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 18–33 RSC .
R. Cao, W. Xu, D. Lv, J. Xiao and J.-G. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402273 CrossRef .
J. Qian, W. A. Henderson, W. Xu, P. Bhattacharya, M. Engelhard, O. Borodin and J. G. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6362 CrossRef CAS .
D. Lin, Y. Liu and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 194–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, K. Ueno, K. Dokko and M. Watanabe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500117 CrossRef .
J.-Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, Energy Storage Mater., 2015, 1, 127–145 CrossRef .
W. Chen, T. Lei, T. Qian, W. Lv, W. He, C. Wu, X. Liu, J. Liu, B. Chen, C. Yan and J. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702889 CrossRef .
Y. S. Su and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 1166 CrossRef .
Z. Xiao, Z. Yang, L. Wang, H. Nie, M. Zhong, Q. Lai, X. Xu, L. Zhang and S. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2891–2898 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhang, X. B. Cheng, C. Z. Zhao, H. J. Peng, J. L. Shi, J. Q. Huang, J. Wang, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2155–2162 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Chung, C. H. Chang and A. Manthiram, Small, 2016, 12, 939–950 CrossRef CAS .
W. Kong, L. Yan, Y. Luo, D. Wang, K. Jiang, Q. Li, S. Fan and J. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1606663 CrossRef .
W. Hua, Z. Yang, H. Nie, Z. Li, J. Yang, Z. Guo, C. Ruan, X. Chen and S. Huang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2209–2218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, Q. Li, X. Qin, G. Liang, W. Han, D. Zhou, Y. B. He, B. Li and F. Kang, Small, 2017, 13, 1602539 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Liu, C. Zhang, G. Zhou, W. Lv, G. Ling, L. Zhi and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700270 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Ji, K. T. Lee and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 500–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, J. Moon, C. Kim, J. H. Kang, E. Lim, J. Park, K. J. Lee, S.-H. Yu, J.-H. Seo, J. Lee, J. Heo, N. Tanaka, S.-P. Cho, J. Pyun, J. Cabana, B. H. Hong and Y.-E. Sung, NPG Asia Mater., 2016, 8, e272 CrossRef CAS .
K. Cai, M. K. Song, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6474–6479 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zheng, Q. Zhang, J. J. Cha, Y. Yang, W. Li, Z. W. Seh and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1265–1270 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moon, Y. H. Jung, W. K. Jung, D. S. Jung, J. W. Choi and D. K. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 6547–6553 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, M. Li, Y. Jiang, W. Kong, K. Jiang, J. Wang and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4044–4049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-C. Yu, J.-W. Jung, K. Park and J. B. Goodenough, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 86–90 RSC .
L. Ji, M. Rao, H. Zheng, L. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Duan, J. Guo, E. J. Cairns and Y. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 18522–18525 CrossRef CAS .
S. Evers and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 1233–1235 RSC .
M. Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, J. Q. Huang, G. L. Tian, J. Q. Nie, H. J. Peng and F. Wei, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3410 CrossRef .
X.-B. Cheng, J.-Q. Huang, Q. Zhang, H.-J. Peng, M.-Q. Zhao and F. Wei, Nano Energy, 2014, 4, 65–72 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. Shi, C. Tang, H. J. Peng, L. Zhu, X. B. Cheng, J. Q. Huang, W. Zhu and Q. Zhang, Small, 2015, 11, 5243–5252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, S. Evers, R. Black and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 325 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Jayaprakash, J. Shen, S. S. Moganty, A. Corona and L. A. Archer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5904–5908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schuster, G. He, B. Mandlmeier, T. Yim, K. T. Lee, T. Bein and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3591–3595 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Huang, M.-Q. Zhao, Q. Zhang, X.-B. Cheng, X.-Y. Liu, W.-Z. Qian and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2772–2781 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, J. Sun, W. Hou, S. Jiang, Y. Huang and J. Geng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 10601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. C. Du, Y. X. Yin, X. X. Zeng, J. L. Shi, S. F. Zhang, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3584–3590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-J. Peng, J. Liang, L. Zhu, J.-Q. Huang, X.-B. Cheng, X. Guo, W. Ding, W. Zhu and Q. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11280–11289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Pang, X. Liang, C. Y. Kwok and L. F. Nazar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 164, A2567–A2576 CrossRef .
D. Wang, S. Zhao, F. Li, L. He, Y. Zhao, H. Zhao, Y. Liu, Y. Wei and G. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 4671–4678 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yuan, Y. Chen, A. Li, Y. Li, X. Chen, M. Jia and H. Song, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 508, 145286–145294 CrossRef .
D. Guo, Z. Zhang, B. Xi, Z. Yu, Z. Zhou and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3834–3844 RSC .
G. Zhou, Y. Zhao, C. Zu and A. Manthiram, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 240–249 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, J. Zhu, W. Ai, X. Wang, Y. Wang, C. Zou, W. Huang and T. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Lin, L. He, V. Murugesan, G. Pawar, B. M. Sivakumar, H. Ding, D. Ding, B. Liaw, E. J. Dufek and B. Li, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4173–4179 CrossRef .
X. Wang, G. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhang, A. Wook, A. Yu and Z. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2533–2538 RSC .
Q. Zhang, X. Zhang, M. Li, J. Liu and Y. Wu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 487, 452–463 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, D. Zhao, L. Li, L. Zhou, X. Liang, Z. Wu and Z. Jiang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 12259–12268 CrossRef .
D. Su, M. Cortie and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602014 CrossRef .
M. Fang, X. Liu, J. Ren, S. Yang, G. Su, Q. Fang, J. Lai, S. Li and W. Liu, npj Comput. Mater., 2020 DOI:10.1038/s41524-020-0273-1 .
W. Ai, W. Zhou, Z. Du, Y. Chen, Z. Sun, C. Wu, C. Zou, C. Li, W. Huang and T. Yu, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 6, 112–118 CrossRef .
J. D. Liu, X. S. Zheng, Z. F. Shi and S. Q. Zhang, Ionics, 2013, 20, 659–664 CrossRef .
D.-A. Zhang, Q. Wang, Q. Wang, J. Sun, L.-L. Xing and X.-Y. Xue, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 173, 476–482 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, X. Liu, L. Zhu, J. Zhou, Y. Guan, L. Chen, S. Niu, J. Cai, D. Sun, Y. Zhu, J. Du, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Joule, 2018, 2, 2681–2693 CrossRef CAS .
R. Demir-Cakan, M. Morcrette, F. Nouar, C. Davoisne, T. Devic, D. Gonbeau, R. Dominko, C. Serre, G. Ferey and J. M. Tarascon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16154–16160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, R. Li, X. Fan, Y. Chen, R. Han, W. Li, J. Zheng, B. Wang and X. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2715–2724 RSC .
X. Liang, A. Garsuch and L. F. Nazar, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3907–3911 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, W. T. Xu, X. Chen and Q. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16223–16227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Bao, L. Liu, C. Wang, S. Choi, D. Wang and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702485 CrossRef .
L. Yin, J. Wang, F. Lin, J. Yang and Y. Nuli, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6966–6972 RSC .
G.-C. Li, G.-R. Li, S.-H. Ye and X.-P. Gao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1238–1245 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Y. Yu, H. Chen, F. J. DiSalvo and H. D. Abruna, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 16736–16743 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, X. Xiao, M. Cai and L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5250–5256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Lee, H. Ahn, O. Kim and M. J. Park, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yan, B. Li and X. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 18, 245–252 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, E. Zhao, D. Gordon, Y. Xiao, C. Hu and G. Yushin, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6365–6371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tao, J. Wang, Z. Ying, Q. Cai, G. Zheng, Y. Gan, H. Huang, Y. Xia, C. Liang, W. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5288–5294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, Y. Wang, Z. W. Seh, Z. Fu, R. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3780–3786 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, S. H. Xiao, Z. Zhang, Y. Chen, Y. Xiang, X. Liu, J. S. Chen and P. Chen, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5114–5124 RSC .
Z. Li, J. Zhang, B. Guan, D. Wang, L.-M. Liu and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13065 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, H.-J. Peng, R. Zhang, T.-Z. Hou, J.-Q. Huang, B. Li and Q. Zhang, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 795–801 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Q. Zhang, G. Zheng, Z. W. Seh, H. Yao and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5534–5540 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Qiu, W. Li, W. Zhao, G. Li, Y. Hou, M. Liu, L. Zhou, F. Ye, H. Li, Z. Wei, S. Yang, W. Duan, Y. Ye, J. Guo and Y. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4821–4827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Y. Dong, H. Li, Z. Zhao, H. B. Wu, C. Hao, S. Liu, J. Qiu and X. W. Lou, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, E. Paek, G. S. Hwang and A. Manthiram, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7760 CrossRef CAS .
T. Z. Hou, X. Chen, H. J. Peng, J. Q. Huang, B. Q. Li, Q. Zhang and B. Li, Small, 2016, 12, 3283–3291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Yu, J. Ma, H. Song, A. Wang, F. Tian, Y. Wang, H. Qiu and R. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1495–1503 RSC .
H. Al Salem, G. Babu, C. V. Rao and L. M. Arava, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11542–11545 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yuan, H. J. Peng, T. Z. Hou, J. Q. Huang, C. M. Chen, D. W. Wang, X. B. Cheng, F. Wei and Q. Zhang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 519–527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Thangavel, D. Gopalakrishnan and L. M. R. Arava, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 12718–12725 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Lu, Z. Hou, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Y. Qian, J. Liang and Y. Qian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19550–19557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lei, W. Chen, J. Huang, C. Yan, H. Sun, C. Wang, W. Zhang, Y. Li and J. Xiong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601843 CrossRef .
M. S. Faber, M. A. Lukowski, Q. Ding, N. S. Kaiser and S. Jin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 21347–21356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. H. Yu, W. Li, P. C. Hsu, H. Wang, Y. Sun, H. Yao, Q. Zhang and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5017 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Z. Lu, S. Xu, D. Kong, J. J. Cha, G. Zheng, P. C. Hsu, K. Yan, D. Bradshaw, F. B. Prinz and Y. Cui, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 19701–19706 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liu, J. Q. Huang, Q. Zhang and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1601759 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Douglas, R. Carter, L. Oakes, K. Share, A. P. Cohn and C. L. Pint, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11156–11165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. V. Bugga, S. C. Jones, J. Pasalic, C. S. Seu, J.-P. Jones and L. Torres, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 164, A265–A276 CrossRef .
A. Eftekhari and D.-W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 17734–17776 RSC .
Z. Zeng and X. Liu, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1701274 CrossRef .
M. Liu, F. Ye, W. Li, H. Li and Y. Zhang, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 94–116 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ye, L. Zhang, C. Guo, D. Li, A. Vasileff, H. Wang and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702524 CrossRef .
X. Li, L. Chu, Y. Wang and L. Pan, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2016, 205, 46–54 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pu, Z. Shen, J. Zheng, W. Wu, C. Zhu, Q. Zhou, H. Zhang and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2017, 37, 7–14 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dai, J.-M. Lim, M. Wang, L. Hu, Y. Chen, Z. Chen, H. Chen, S.-J. Bao, B. Shen, Y. Li, G. Henkelman and M. Xu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704443 CrossRef .
T. Chen, L. Ma, B. Cheng, R. Chen, Y. Hu, G. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Liang, Z. Tie, J. Liu and Z. Jin, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 239–248 CrossRef CAS .
T. Chen, Z. Zhang, B. Cheng, R. Chen, Y. Hu, L. Ma, G. Zhu, J. Liu and Z. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 12710–12715 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu and A. Manthiram, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 124–129 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, Z. Chen, B. Tian, H.-W. Lee, X. Zhao, X. Fan, Y. Fan, K. Leng, C. Peng, M.-H. Kim, M. Li, M. Lin, J. Su, J. Chen, H. Y. Jeong, X. Yin, Q. Zhang, W. Zhou, K. P. Loh and G. W. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10133–10141 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pang, D. Kundu and L. F. Nazar, Mater. Horiz., 2016, 3, 130–136 RSC .
M. Li, J. Zhou, J. Zhou, C. Guo, Y. Han, Y. Zhu, G. Wang and Y. Qian, Mater. Res. Bull., 2017, 96, 509–515 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xiao, Z. Yang, L. Zhou, L. Zhang and R. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 18845–18855 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, Z. Yang, L. Zhang, H. Pan and R. Wang, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 8488–8498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, Q. Zhang, H. Yao, Z. Liang, H. W. Lee, P. C. Hsu, G. Zheng and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 7138–7144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Sakuda, N. Taguchi, T. Takeuchi, H. Kobayashi, H. Sakaebe, K. Tatsumi and Z. Ogumi, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 31, 71–75 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Zheng, S.-L. Luo, S.-Q. Xu, N.-Y. Yuan and J.-N. Ding, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13395–13399 RSC .
L. Luo, S.-H. Chung, C.-H. Chang and A. Manthiram, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15002–15007 RSC .
L. Jia, T. Wu, J. Lu, L. Ma, W. Zhu and X. Qiu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30248–30255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, H. Nie, Z. Yang, W. Hua, C. Ruan, D. Chan, M. Ge, X. a. Chen and S. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800026 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zheng, F. Yi, Z. Li, Y. Zhu, Y. Xu, C. Luo, J. Yang and C. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4156–4163 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lin, L. Yang, X. Jiang, G. Li, T. Zhang, Q. Yao, G. W. Zheng and J. Y. Lee, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1476–1486 RSC .
Y. Lu, X. Li, J. Liang, L. Hu, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17616–17622 RSC .
X. Li, J. Liang, Y. Lu, Z. Hou, W. Zhang, Y. Zhu and Y. Qian, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 379–386 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Chen and A. Manthiram, iScience, 2018, 4, 36–43 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, S. Wei, H. L. Zhuang, K. E. Hendrickson, R. G. Hennig and L. A. Archer, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19857–19866 RSC .
Ş. Sörgel, O. Kesten, A. Wengel and T. Sörgel, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 223–232 CrossRef .
Z. Cheng, Z. Xiao, H. Pan, S. Wang and R. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702337 CrossRef .
E. Cha, M. D. Patel, J. Park, J. Hwang, V. Prasad, K. Cho and W. Choi, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 337–344 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. A. Ghazi, X. He, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, B. Liang, A. Iqbal, J. Wang, H. Sin, L. Li and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606817 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Ma, Z. Li, K. Hu, D. Liu, J. Huo and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 71–78 CrossRef .
J. Park, B.-C. Yu, J. S. Park, J. W. Choi, C. Kim, Y.-E. Sung and J. B. Goodenough, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602567 CrossRef .
R. Wang, J. Li, Y. Zhang, P. Li, J. Duan, M. Tang and C. Yuan, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 19408–19415 CrossRef .
Y. Huang, D. Lv, Z. Zhang, Y. Ding, F. Lai, Q. Wu, H. Wang, Q. Li, Y. Cai and Z. Ma, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 387, 124122 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
P. Strubel, S. Thieme, T. Biemelt, A. Helmer, M. Oschatz, J. Brückner, H. Althues and S. Kaskel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 287–297 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yuan, H. B. Wu, Y. Xie and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1488–1504 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, W. Lv, S. Niu, Y. He, G. Zhou, G. Chen, B. Li, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, Chem.–Asian J., 2016, 11, 1343–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen, J. Luo, N. Li, X. Han, J. Wang, Q. Deng, Z. Zeng and S. Deng, Energy Storage Mater., 2020, 30, 187–195 CrossRef .
J. Yu, J. Xiao, A. Li, Z. Yang, L. Zeng, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhu and L. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 2–10 CrossRef .
S. Seo, D. Park, S. Park and D. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903712 CrossRef .
H. Chen, C. Wang, W. Dong, W. Lu, Z. Du and L. Chen, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 798–802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Q. Huang, X.-F. Liu, Q. Zhang, C.-M. Chen, M.-Q. Zhao, S.-M. Zhang, W. Zhu, W.-Z. Qian and F. Wei, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 314–321 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, Y. Zhou, Q. Zhao, Y. Dou, S. Chou, F. Cheng, J. Chen, H. K. Liu, L. Jiang and S. X. Dou, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 205–212 CrossRef CAS .
X.-B. Cheng, J.-Q. Huang, H.-J. Peng, J.-Q. Nie, X.-Y. Liu, Q. Zhang and F. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2014, 253, 263–268 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wu, Y. Ye, R. Chen, J. Qian, T. Zhao, L. Li and W. Li, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7431–7439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, T. Qian, M. Wang, J. Zhou, N. Xu and C. Yan, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 4598–4605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Fan, Y.-P. Zheng, X.-H. Zhang, Y.-H. Shi, S.-Y. Liu, H.-C. Wang, X.-L. Wu, H.-Z. Sun and J.-P. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703638 CrossRef .
J.-S. Kim, T. H. Hwang, B. G. Kim, J. Min and J. W. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5359–5367 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ding, S. W. Chien, T. S. A. Hor, Z. Liu and Y. Zong, J. Power Sources, 2014, 269, 111–116 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hagen, D. Hanselmann, K. Ahlbrecht, R. Maça, D. Gerber and J. Tübke, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1401986 CrossRef .
D. Eroglu, K. R. Zavadil and K. G. Gallagher, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A982–A990 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qie and A. Manthiram, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1694–1700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Qie and A. Manthiram, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qie, C. Zu and A. Manthiram, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502459 CrossRef .
J. Zheng, D. Lv, M. Gu, C. Wang, J. G. Zhang, J. Liu and J. Xiao, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2013, 160, A2288–A2292 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hagen, P. Fanz and J. Tübke, J. Power Sources, 2014, 264, 30–34 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Chung and A. Manthiram, Joule, 2018, 2, 710–724 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Y. Wang, J. Hu, Y. V. Lim, D. Kong, Y. Zheng, M. Ding, M. E. Pam and H. Y. Yang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9504–9512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Chen, H. Zhou and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 678–686 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, J. Tang, B. Luo, R. Knibbe, T. Lin, H. Hu, M. Rana, Y. Hu, X. Zhu, Q. Gu, D. Wang and L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901872 CrossRef .
M. R. Palacin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2565–2575 RSC .
J. Cabana, L. Monconduit, D. Larcher and M. R. Palacin, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E170–E192 CrossRef CAS .
X. Rui, H. Tan and Q. Yan, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9889–9924 RSC .
A. Garsuch, S. Herzog, L. Montag, A. Krebs and K. Leitner, ECS Electrochem. Lett., 2012, 1, A24–A26 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Su and A. Manthiram, J. Power Sources, 2014, 270, 101–105 CrossRef CAS .
X. C. Liu, Y. Yang, J. Wu, M. Liu, S. P. Zhou, B. D. A. Levin, X. D. Zhou, H. Cong, D. A. Muller, P. M. Ajayan, H. D. Abruña and F. S. Ke, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1325–1330 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liao, K.-S. Park, P. Singh, W. Li and J. B. Goodenough, J. Power Sources, 2014, 245, 27–32 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. R. Arava, D. Gopalakrishnan and A. Lee, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2018, 15, 011005 Search PubMed .
F. Han, W.-C. Li, D. Li and A.-H. Lu, ChemElectroChem, 2014, 1, 733–740 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Zhang, P. Chen, H. Liao and S. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 80, 264–268 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, Y. Jiang, J. Xu, M. Wang, W. Li and Y. Yu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 10940–10949 RSC .
P. Li, L. Ma, T. Wu, H. Ye, J. Zhou, F. Zhao, N. Han, Y. Wang, Y. Wu, Y. Li and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800624 CrossRef .
K. Sun, D. Su, Q. Zhang, D. C. Bock, A. C. Marschilok, K. J. Takeuchi, E. S. Takeuchi and H. Gan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2834–A2839 CrossRef CAS .
D. He, P. Xue, D. Song, J. Qu and C. Lai, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1499–A1502 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yu, Y. Lu, R. Luo, X. Liu, K. Huo, J.-K. Kim, J. He and Y. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804520 CrossRef .
J. Ni, Y. Zhao, T. Liu, H. Zheng, L. Gao, C. Yan and L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400798 CrossRef .
Y. Xi, N. Angulakshmi, B. Zhang, X. Tian, Z. Tang, P. Xie, G. Z. Chen and Y. Zhou, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 826, 154201–154209 CrossRef CAS .
W. Sun, Y. Li, S. Liu, Q. Guo, Y. Zhu, X. Hong, C. Zheng and K. Xie, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 2143–2148 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ma, W. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Hu, G. Zhu, Y. Wang, R. Chen, T. Chen, Z. Tie, J. Liu and Z. Jin, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4868–4876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-J. Liu, Y. Chen, Z.-F. Zhang, X.-L. You, M. D. Walle, Y.-J. Li and Y.-N. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 301–305 CrossRef CAS .
I. Raguzin, S. Choudhury, F. Simon, M. Stamm and L. Ionov, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1600811 CrossRef .
S. S. Zhang and D. T. Tran, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4371–4374 RSC .
K. Sun, C. A. Cama, R. A. DeMayo, D. C. Bock, X. Tong, D. Su, A. C. Marschilok, K. J. Takeuchi, E. S. Takeuchi and H. Gan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 164, A6039–A6046 CrossRef .
X. Chen, G. Du, M. Zhang, A. Kalam, S. Ding, Q. Su, B. Xu and A. G. A. Sehemi, Energy Technol., 2020, 8, 1901163 CrossRef CAS .
T. Guo, Y. Song, Z. Sun, Y. Wu, Y. Xia, Y. Li, J. Sun, K. Jiang, S. Dou and J. Sun, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 42, 34–42 CrossRef .
Y. Shao-Horn, S. Osmialowski and Q. C. Horn, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1547–A1555 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chen, T. Zhao, W. Wu, F. Wu, L. Li, J. Qian, R. Xu, H. Wu, H. M. Albishri, A. S. Al-Bogami, D. A. El-Hady, J. Lu and K. Amine, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5899–5904 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xue, Z. Shi, L. Suo, C. Wang, Z. Wang, H. Wang, K. P. So, A. Maurano, D. Yu, Y. Chen, L. Qie, Z. Zhu, G. Xu, J. Kong and J. Li, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 374–382 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, S. Tang and R. Qu, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2019, 30, 189–199 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liao, Z. Li, Q. He, L. Xia, Y. Li, S. Zhu, M. Wang, H. Wang, X. Xu, L. Mai and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 9181–9189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Lin, Y. Zhong, J. Ren, Z. Wang, T. Han and J. Li, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 14056–14063 CrossRef .
Y. Li, T. Jiang, H. Yang, D. Lei, X. Deng, C. Hao, F. Zhang and J. Guo, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 330, 135311 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Zhang, Z. W. Lu, Y. H. Wang, Z. Dai, H. Zhao, G. Z. Sun, W. Lan, X. J. Pan, J. Y. Zhou and E. Q. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123734 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Z. Gong, X. Yan, D. Wang, J. Liu, X. Guo, Z. Zhang and G. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 433–442 RSC .
B. Zhang, C. Luo, Y. Deng, Z. Huang, G. Zhou, W. Lv, Y. He, Y. Wan, F. Kang and Q. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 200091 Search PubMed .
X. Li, K. Zhao, L. Zhang, Z. Ding and K. Hu, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 692, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, D. Choi, L. Cosimbescu, P. Koech, J. Liu and J. P. Lemmon, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 4522–4524 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hwang, H. Kim and J. Cho, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 4826–4830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Dirlam, J. Park, A. G. Simmonds, K. Domanik, C. B. Arrington, J. L. Schaefer, V. P. Oleshko, T. S. Kleine, K. Char, R. S. Glass, C. L. Soles, C. Kim, N. Pinna, Y.-E. Sung and J. Pyun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 13437–13448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, W. Yang, L. Dong, X. Gao, G. Wang and G. Shao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13103–13112 RSC .
Q. Wu, Z. Yao, X. Zhou, J. Xu, F. Cao and C. Li, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3365–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Z. Mu, C. Yang, Z. Xu, S. Zhang, X. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Lai, Z. Sun, Y. Yang, Y. Chao, C. Li, X. Ge, W. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707578 CrossRef .
L. He, X.-Z. Liao, K. Yang, Y.-S. He, W. Wen and Z.-F. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 1213–1218 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mao, L. Jiang, L. Wu, M. Zhang and T. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13384–13389 RSC .
Y. Hua, X. Li, X. Zhang, L. Zhang, Y. Shu, H. Sheng, H. Fang, H. Wei and Y. Ding, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 2570–2577 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, Y. Chen and A. Manthiram, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2560–2568 RSC .
H. Lin, S. Zhang, T. Zhang, S. Cao, H. Ye, Q. Yao, G. W. Zheng and J. Y. Lee, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7073–7082 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Bo Yan	Bo Yan is currently an associate professor in the College of Materials and Chemical Engineering at China Three Gorges University. He received his PhD degree (2017) from the School of Materials Science and Technology at the China University of Geosciences (Beijing). His current research interests focus on the controllable preparation of micro/nanostructures and their applications in lithium–sulfur batteries and lithium/sodium ion batteries.
Xifei Li	Xifei Li is currently a full professor at the Xi'an University of Technology and Tianjin Normal University. Prof. Li's research group is currently working on the design, synthesis and performance improvement of anodes and cathodes with various structures for high performance lithium ion batteries, lithium sulfur batteries, sodium ion batteries, and supercapacitors. He has authored and co-authored over 240 refereed journal articles with more than 12000 citations and two invited book chapters and hold 13 patents.
Xuelin Yang	Xuelin Yang received his PhD from the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2007. Since 2007 he has been working at the China Three Gorges University (CTGU) for new energy storage materials as a project leader. He is currently a professor at CTGU, and his research interests focus on novel electrode materials and their applications in energy-storage areas.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Typical configurations of the Li–S battery, composed of an anode, cathode, separator, and electrolyte. (b) Schematic diagram of the modified components/structures involved in a Li–S battery. (c) Binding energy metrics for chemical interactions between lithium polysulfides and sulfur hosts. Reproduced with permission from: (c) ref. 17. Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic illustration of diverse types of micro-/nano-structured metal sulfides as well as their composites for Li–S batteries. Reproduced with permission from ref. 107. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; reproduced with permission from ref. 129. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society; reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of NiS@C-HS. (b–e) TEM images of SiO2 (b), SiO2@Ni-silicate@RF (c), SiO2@Ni@C (d), and NiS@C-HS (e), and the inset shows the HRTEM image of NiS. (f) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the S@Co9S8 composite. (g and h) FESEM and TEM images of the as-prepared precursor (g) and honeycomb-like Co9S8 (h). (i and j) FESEM image (i) and TEM image (j) of the S@Co9S8 composite. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of the MoS2-encapsulated hollow sulfur sphere. (l and m) STEM image (l) and high-resolution TEM image (m) of the MoS2-encapsulated hollow sulfur sphere. Inset of (l) indicates the line scan EDX signal of sulfur. Reproduced with permission from: (a–e) ref. 117. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (f–j) ref. 120. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (k–m) ref. 124. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs. (b–e) TEM images of the CNTs/ZIF-67 precursor (b), CNTs/Co3S4-NBs (c and d), and S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs (e). (f) Schematic of the synthesis of MoS2−x/rGO. (g–j) TEM and HRTEM images of MoS2 nanoflakes (g and h) and MoS2−x/rGO (i and j). (k) Schematic of the synthesis of CoS2@NGCNs. (l–o) TEM and HRTEM images of ZIF-67 hollow spheres (l), mesoporous hollow Co@NGCNs (m), mesoporous hollow Co/CoS2@NGCNs (n), and mesoporous hollow CoS2@NGCNs (o). Reproduced with permission from: (a–e) ref. 122. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (f–j) ref. 136. Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry; (k–o) ref. 155. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of WS2–rGO–CNT. (b–d) Low- and high-magnification SEM images of WS2–rGO–CNT aerogel. (e) Schematic of the synthesis of Co9S8–3DGF/S. (f–h) SEM images of Co-MOF–3DGF (f), Co9S8–3DGF (g), and Co9S8–3DGF/S (h). (i) Schematic of the synthesis of sandwich-like TiS2@NSC, and its application in Li–S batteries. (j) TEM image of TiS2@NSC. (k) SEM image of the cotton derived carbon fibers with TiS2@NSC. Reproduced with permission from: (a–d) ref. 173. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (e–h) ref. 139. Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (i–k) ref. 175. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic of the electrochemical reaction of metal sulfides based on the intercalated-Li potentials in the typical voltage window of Li–S batteries.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of the PS fixation process on Cu foam. (b–d) SEM image (b) and EDS elemental maps (c and d) of the sulfidized Cu foam. (e–g) CV curve (e), charge/discharge profile (f), and cycling performance (g) of the sulfur-equivalent cathode in a Li–S battery. Inset of (g) shows the photographs of bottle batteries at various states. (h and i) SEM image (h) and TEM image (i) of CuxS@NC/S-F. (j and k) CV curves of CuxS@NC/S-F at 0.1 mV s−1 (j) and charge/discharge profiles of CuxS@NC/S-F at 0.1C (k). (l) Binding energy of Li2S6 on Cu and N sites. (m) Charge/discharge curves of CuxS@NC/S-F at 2C. (n) CV curves of 66S/Bi2S3/C at 0.1 mV s−1 with the binding geometries of a Li2S4 molecule on the (001) plane of Bi2S3 shown in the inset. (o and p) Charge/discharge curves (o) and cycling performances (p) of the 66S/Bi2S3/C composite. Reproduced with permission from: (a–g) ref. 187. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (h–m) ref. 190. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (n–p) ref. 138. Copyright 2016, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a and b) TEM images of CNTs/Co3S4-NBs (a) and S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs (b). (c) Structural advantages of the S@CNTs/Co3S4-NB cathode during cycling. (d and e) Charge/discharge curve (d) and cycling performance (e) of S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs at 0.2C. (f and g) Voltage profile (f) and rate capacity (g) of S@CNTs/Co3S4-NBs at 50 °C. (h and i) TEM (h) and magnified TEM (i) images of CNTs/CoS-NSs. (j) Formation and reversible cycling mechanism of S@CNTs/CoS-NSs. (k and l) CV curves of S@CNTs/CoS-NSs at 0.2 mV s−1 (k) and its charge/discharge profiles (l). (m) Cycling performance of S@CNTs/CoS-NS based soft-packed Li–S batteries at 0.1C under continuous bending–unbending operations as shown in the inset. (n and o) TEM images of NiS@C-HS (n) and S/NiS@C-HS (o). (p) Schematic of NiS@C-HS as a sulfur host for Li–S batteries. (q and r) Charge/discharge curves (q) and cycling performance (r) of S/NiS@C-HS. Reproduced with permission from: (a–g) ref. 122. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society; (h–m) ref. 194. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society; (n–r) ref. 117. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) CV plot of a Li|HMSC cell (HMSC here stands for the hybrid Mo6S8/S8 cathode with graphene, carbon nanotubes and carbon black included). (b) In situ XRD of a Li|HMSC cell. (c) The roles of Mo6S8 in the HMSC. Step I is a pre-lithiation step, proceeding before the reduction of sulfur. Step II is the post-lithiation step, in which the lithiated Mo6S8 induces two functions, including enhanced LiPS adsorption and fast Li-ion transport channel. (d) Relaxed structures of LiS4− and S42− adsorbed on the Mo6S8 (100) and LiMo6S8 (100) surfaces. (e) Comparison of different binding energies between LiPSs and Mo6S8/LiMo6S8. Reproduced with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a–c) TEM (a), high-resolution TEM (b), and elemental mapping (c) images of S–NC@MoS2. (d) Schematic of the polysulfide immobilization and conversion processes on the surface of NC@MoS2. (e and f) Charge/discharge profiles (e) and cycling performance (f) of the S–NC@MoS2 cathode. (g–i) TEM (g), high-resolution TEM (h), and elemental mapping (i) images of MXene/1T–2H MoS2–C. (j and k) Charge/discharge curve (j) and cycling performance (k) of the soft package Li–S battery at 0.2C under bending. (l and m) STEM (l) and high-resolution TEM (m) images of the MoS2-encapsulated hollow sulfur sphere. (n and o) Atomic STEM images of the 2H MoS2 phase before lithiation (n) and the 1T′ MoS2 phase after lithiation (o). (p and q) Charge/discharge plots (p) and cycling performance (q) of the MoS2-encapsulated hollow sulfur sphere. Reproduced with permission from: (a–f) ref. 215. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry; (g–k) ref. 217. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH; (l–q) ref. 124. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 


TiS2	Commercial product	Direct substitution of active S	48 wt% & N/A	1020 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 0.15% for 40 cycles	1.65–2.5 V	
179

TiS2	3D porous foam	Thermal reaction of Ti precursor foams	34 wt% & 40 mg cm−2	225 mA h g−1 at 0.15C and 0.33% for 100 cycles	1.6–2.6 V	
140

TiS2	H- and O-incorporated porous texture	Ball milling and water steam etching method	58 wt% & 2.8 mg cm−2	813 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.095% for 200 cycles	1.5–3.0 V	
127

TiS2	Sandwich-type confined by N, S co-doped carbon	
In situ polydopamine assisted sulfuration	64 wt% & 7.7 mg cm−2	1025 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 0.25% for 100 cycles	1.8–2.8 V	
175

NbS2	Sandwich-type enveloped by iodine-doped graphene	Water steam etching, freeze drying, and annealing method	65 wt% & 3.25 mg cm−2	542 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.042% for 600 cycles	1.5–3.0 V	
128

Cu2S	Nanoflake arrays	Cu foam soaked in electrolyte	N/A & 5.0 mg cm−2	800 mA h g−1 at 1.5 mA cm−2 and No fading for 200 cycles	1.3–2.6 V	
187

CuxS	Nanoparticles with a Cu, N co-doped carbon network	Salt template, freeze drying, and annealing	64 wt% & 3.2–3.5 mg cm−2	932 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.058% for 500 cycles	1.5–3.0 V	
190

Bi2S3	Particles with porous carbon	Ball milling and baked-in-salt method	46 wt% & 1.0–1.5 mg cm−2	907 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.023% for 400 cycles	1.8–2.8 V	
138

Co9S8	Graphene-like nanosheets	Microwave solvothermal method	60 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2	863 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.064% for 400 cycles	1.8–3.0 V	
125

Co9S8	Embedded in hollow carbon nanoboxes	Sacrificial template and hydrothermal method	67 wt% & 1.6 mg cm−2	920 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.043% for 400 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
193

CoS2	Micro-particles with graphene	Hydrothermal and ball milling method	60 wt% & 2.9 mg cm−2	1000 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.60% for 30 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
104

CoS2	Mesoporous hollow structure with N-doped graphitic carbon	Co-precipitation and thermal treatment	75 wt% & 1.4 mg cm−2	670 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.075% for 300 cycles	1.5–2.8 V	
155

Co3S4	Hollow polyhedra with carbon nanofibers	Sacrificial template and vacuum filtration	50–55 wt% & 13.5 mg cm−2	957 mA h g−1 at 0.3C and 0.43% for 100 cycles	1.8–2.8 V	
123

Co3S4	Nanotubes	Hydrothermal method	59 wt% & 2.0 mg cm−2	517 mA h g−1 at 5.0C and 0.041% for 1000 cycles	1.6–2.6 V	
119

Co3S4	CNT inserted hollow nanoboxes	Co-precipitation and sacrificial template	49 wt% & 3.5 mg cm−2	1012 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.13% for 150 cycles	1.8–2.6 V	
122

CoS	CNT reinforced nanostraws	Electrospinning, solvothermal, and annealing method	61 wt% & 1.0–1.5 mg cm−2	841 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.032% for 1000 cycles	1.8–2.8 V	
194

SnS2	Nanoparticles in hollow carbon nanospheres	Hard template and CVD method	51 wt% & N/A	1237 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.13% for 200 cycles	1.8–3.0 V	
118

SnS2	Nanosheets with porous carbon	Ball milling and baked-in-salt method	62 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2	1276 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.058% for 1000 cycles	1.8–2.8 V	
106

NiS2	Amorphous micro-structure	Chemical co-precipitation method	50 wt% & 1.0 mg cm−2	1238 mA h g−1 at 0.3C and 0.019% for 1200 cycles	1.8–3.0 V	
131

NiS2	Crystalline nanoparticles with porous carbon	Hydrothermal and annealing method	45 wt% & 0.8–1.3 mg cm−2	650 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.081% for 500 cycles	1.9–2.8 V	
137

NiS	Nanoparticles on hollow carbon spheres	Hard template and annealing method	50 wt% & 1.0 mg cm−2	1002 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.14% for 200 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
117

Ni3S2	Nanoparticles on a N/S co-doped rGO matrix	Hydrothermal and calcination method	57.4 wt% & 5.8 mg cm−2	572 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.14% for 200 cycles	1.8–2.6 V	
67

FeS2	Commercial product	Direct substitution of active S	62 wt% & 2.0 mg cm−2	1129 mA h g−1 at 0.15C and 0.19% for 200 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
197

FeS	3D flowerlike structure with carbon	Hydrothermal method	49 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2	360 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.07% for 250 cycles	1.7–3.0 V	
66

VS2	Sandwich-type enveloped by rGO	Hydrothermal method	51 wt% & 1.15 mg cm−2	831 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.017% for 1200 cycles	1.5–3.0 V	
142

VS2	3D flower-like aggregates	Hydrothermal method	46.7 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2	872 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.26% for 200 cycles	1.5–3.0 V	
199

VS2	3D hierarchical porous structure	Template assisted hydrothermal method	60 wt% & 1.2–1.4 mg cm−2	808 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.09% for 500 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
200

WS2	Nanosheets on carbon cloth	Hydrothermal method	11 wt% & 1.0–1.2 mg cm−2	563 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.0072% for 1500 cycles	1.7–2.7 V	
107

WS2	Nanopetals embedded in rGO–CNT	Solvothermal and freeze drying method	— & 7.68 mg cm−2	960 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.1% for 100 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
173

Mo6S8	Micro-particles with CNTs and graphene	Solid-state reaction and ball milling	41 wt% & 6.2 mg cm−2	967 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 0.18% for 100 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
203

MoS3	Amorphous nanoboxes with N-doped carbon	Hard template and co-precipitation method	49 wt% & 5.5 mg cm−2	818 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.21% for 100 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
154

MoS2	Commercial product	Direct dispersion in molten S	37.5 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2	1270 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.07% for 1000 cycles	1.7–2.6 V	
214

MoS2	Nanosheets on N-doped CNTs	Hydrothermal and annealing method	56 wt% & 3.6 mg cm−2	936 mA h g−1 at 2.0C and 0.10% for 300 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
215

MoS2	Nanosheets decorated on ladder-like carbon	Hydrothermal, calcination, and etching method	56 wt% & 4.0 mg cm−2	890 mA h g−1 at 0.1C and 0.03% for 260 cycles	1.8–2.7 V	
216

MoS2	S-defect nanoflakes with rGO	Lithiated exfoliation and annealing method	60 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2	1236 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.083% for 600 cycles	1.8–2.6 V	
136

MoS2	S-defect nanosheets on MXene and carbon	Hydrothermal and annealing method	56 wt% & 1.0 mg cm−2	1014 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.07% for 300 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
217

MoS2	Flakes assembled hollow cages	Lithiated exfoliation and soft template	46 wt% & 1.5 mg cm−2	1062 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.045% for 1000 cycles	1.8–2.6 V	
124

ZnS	Nanoparticles with porous carbon aerogels	Sol–gel and annealing method	45 wt% & 2.2–2.8 mg cm−2	1080 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.11% for 300 cycles	1.8–3.0 V	
220

MoS2 (Celgard)	Monolayers	Lithiated exfoliation and filtration method	65 wt% & N/A	808 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.083% for 600 cycles	1.5–3.0 V	
144

Co9S8 (Celgard)	Vertical hollow nanowall arrays	Co-precipitation and sacrificial template	70 wt% & 5.6 mg cm−2	868 mA h g−1 at 1.0C and 0.039% for 1000 cycles	1.8–2.8 V	
221

CoS2 (interlayer)	Porous nanosheets on carbon paper	Electrochemical deposition	56 wt% & 1.5–2.0 mg cm−2	1240 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 0.17% for 200 cycles	1.8–2.7 V	
145

WS2 (interlayer)	Micro-particles on carbon cloth	Sonication method	70 wt% & 2.7–3.8 mg cm−2	1379 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.055% for 500 cycles	1.7–2.8 V	
146

Co9S8 (interlayer)	S-defect nanoparticles on CNTs	Hydrothermal and annealing method	70 wt% & 2.0 mg cm−2	1272 mA h g−1 at 0.3C and 0.049% for 1000 cycles	1.7–2.6 V	
222

MoS2 (anode)	2D ultrathin film	Sputtering deposition method	64 wt% & 6.13 mg cm−2	955 mA h g−1 at 0.5C and 0.031% for 1200 cycles	1.5–3.0 V	
143


 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of Li–S batteries using the MoS2/Celgard separator. (b and c) Charge/discharge profiles (b) and cycling performance (c) of the Li–S battery with the MoS2/Celgard separator. (d and e) Schematic of the fast kinetics of WS2 supported on the CCI (d) and four cathode structures (e). (f and g) Charge/discharge curve (f) and cycling performance (g) of WS2/S–WS2/CCI. (h) Schematic of the fabrication method for a MoS2-coated Li anode via sputtering and subsequent lithiation. (i and j) Charge/discharge curves (i) and cycling performance (j) of the Li–MoS2/CNT–S cell measured at 0.5C. Reproduced with permission from: (a–c) ref. 144. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (d–g) ref. 146. Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH; (h–j) ref. 143. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Prospects and challenges of metal sulfide mediators for high-performance Li–S batteries.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
