Strategies for stable water splitting via protected photoelectrodes   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CS00918B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CS00918B
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1933-1954Strategies for stable water splitting via protected photoelectrodes†

        
          
            Dowon 
            Bae
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Brian 
            Seger
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Peter C. K. 
            Vesborg
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ole 
            Hansen
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Ib 
            Chorkendorff
          
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark. E-mail: ibchork@fysik.dtu.dk;  Fax: +45 45 93 23 99;   Tel: +45 45 25 31 70
bDepartment of Micro- and Nanotechnology, Technical University of Denmark, DK-2800 Kgs. Lyngby, Denmark
Received 
      15th December 2016
    First published on 1st March 2017AbstractPhotoelectrochemical (PEC) solar-fuel conversion is a promising approach to provide clean and storable fuel (e.g., hydrogen and methanol) directly from sunlight, water and CO2. However, major challenges still have to be overcome before commercialization can be achieved. One of the largest barriers to overcome is to achieve a stable PEC reaction in either strongly basic or acidic electrolytes without degradation of the semiconductor photoelectrodes. In this work, we discuss fundamental aspects of protection strategies for achieving stable solid/liquid interfaces. We then analyse the charge transfer mechanism through the protection layers for both photoanodes and photocathodes. In addition, we review protection layer approaches and their stabilities for a wide variety of experimental photoelectrodes for water reduction. Finally, we discuss key aspects which should be addressed in continued work on realizing stable and practical PEC solar water splitting systems.
Dowon Bae
Dowon Bae received his BSc and MSc (Honors) from the Russian State Technological University named after K. E. Tsiolkovsky in 2006 and 2008, respectively. After research activities in Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells at the LG Innotek, he joined the Danish National Research Foundation “CINF” (Center for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), where he completed his PhD in 2012 under the supervision of Prof. Ib Chorkendorff. Presently, he is a postdoctoral researcher at the VILLUM Center for the Science of Sustainable Fuels and Chemicals at the DTU Physics. His research concerns PEC device design and fabrication for solar-fuel production.
Brian Seger
Prof. Brian Seger completed his PhD from Notre Dame under Prof. Prashant Kamat in 2009. He has since completed a postdoc at the University of Queensland under Lian Zhou Wang and joined the “CINF” at DTU under Prof. Ib Chorkendorff. Since 2014, he has been an assistant professor at DTU Physics. His research interests include understanding semiconductor–electrolyte interfaces, discovering new photoactive materials, and modeling photoelectrochemical devices.
Peter C. K. Vesborg
Peter C. K. Vesborg received his PhD degree in Applied Physics from the DTU in 2010. He then went to the department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University as a postdoc under Prof. Thomas Jaramillo before returning to DTU to join the faculty of the department of Physics in 2012, where he has been an associate professor since 2015. His research concerns catalysis (thermal, electro-, and photocatalysis), photoelectrodes, MEMS-based device development for catalyst benchmarking, and global resource availability and management for sustainable technologies.
Ole Hansen
Prof. Ole Hansen received his MSc degree in micro-technology from the DTU in 1977. Since 1977 he has worked with micro- and nano-technology and applications of the technology within electronics, metrology, sensing, catalysis and energy harvesting. Currently, he is Professor at DTU Nanotech, where he is heading the Silicon Microtechnology group. His current research interests include sustainable energy, photocatalysis and tools for characterizing catalytic processes. From 2005 to 2016 he was part of the ‘CINF’, and presently, he is part of ‘V-SUSTAIN’ (VILLUM Center for the Science of Sustainable Fuels and Chemicals).
Ib Chorkendorff
Prof. Ib Chorkendorff got his PhD from Odense University (1985). After working as a post-doc with Prof. John T. Yates Jr. at the University of Pittsburgh, he was employed at DTU (1987) to establish experimental activity investigating fundamental aspects of heterogeneous catalysis. He was the Director of the ‘CINF’ (2005–2016) and the subsequent Director of the ‘V-SUSTAIN’. He has been the author of close to 300 scientific papers and 17 patents. His research activities focus on surface reactions and finding new materials to improve energy production/conversion and environmental protection. He is the co-founder of the start-up companies RENCAT APS, HPNOW APS and Spectroinlets APS.
1. Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting is a promising approach to provide clean and storable chemical fuel (e.g. hydrogen) directly from sunlight, whereas photovoltaic (PV) solar cell technology directly converts solar energy into electricity, which must be consumed immediately or converted to a storable form of energy (e.g., using batteries or capacitors (with limited storage capacity)). The overall PEC water splitting process consists of three parts: (i) light absorption resulting in charge carrier generation, (ii) transportation of charge to the surfaces, and (iii) the utilization of excited photo-carriers to drive catalytic reactions at the surfaces.1–3 Thus it is essential to transport the photo-generated carriers from a photo-absorber to a solid/liquid interface, where catalytic sites can oxidise or reduce the water. The reductive reaction leads to chemical fuel production, i.e., the hydrogen (H2) evolution reaction (HER) from H+ (in acid) or H2O (in base), whereas the oxidative half-reaction produces O2 from H2O (in acid) or OH− (in base) (oxygen evolution reaction – OER).3,4 The products of the overall reaction may be formed in a single compartment via suspensions of photocatalyst particles,5,6 resulting in a system that produces a mixture of chemical products which subsequently should be collected separately to mitigate back reactions.5 Alternatively, both oxidation (at the photoanode) and reduction reactions (at the photocathode) can be carried out in separate compartments, such as on wired7 or monolithic photoelectrodes;8 which eliminates the need for a separate gas separation step. However, this approach often requires high ionic strength to minimize Ohmic losses and localized pH gradient overpotentials (η)9 while minimizing product-crossover. Thus it is likely that either strongly acidic (low pH) or alkaline (high pH) conditions are necessary,9,10 but such harsh conditions may potentially lead to corrosion of the photoabsorber materials. This work will thus focus on analysing how to protect these photoelectrodes in separate compartments.
To date, there has been tremendous effort put into demonstrating efficient and chemically stable photoelectrodes for both the HER and the OER at various pH levels. By characterizing photoanodes and photocathodes independently, the expected performance of an integrated system without an external bias voltage can be directly estimated. The intersection of the overlapped linear sweeping voltammetry (LSV) or cyclic voltammetry (CV) data (see Fig. 1a) for each photocathode/photoanode indicates the maximum operating current density (JOP) for the overall water splitting system. Metal oxides are materials that are often stable under water oxidation conditions, and typically provide the necessary band bending to allow charge separation for efficient photo-generated carrier transport in contact with the electrolyte. However, the optical transitions for many of the materials with optimal band gaps for water splitting are usually forbidden d–d transitions, and thus they have very small optical absorption coefficients.11 In addition, carriers in metal oxide semiconductor d-bands are known to have poor mobilities, resulting in very short carrier diffusion lengths,11,12 which remain a major obstacle to achieve a high solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (STH%). As shown in Fig. 1, simple combinations of previously demonstrated LSV curves2,13–24 from the state-of-the-art photoelectrodes are still inadequate to form any highly efficient tandem water splitting system. In contrast, a combination of experimental low band-gap (Eg) photocathodes with a modelled ideal half-cell25 with an Eg of 1.8 eV results in a JOP above 17 mA cm−2 which corresponds to a solar-to-hydrogen efficiency (STH%) above 20% (note that JOP values were estimated without considering Ohmic loss between the two photoelectrodes and parasitic optical loss caused by the high Eg top-cell semiconductor). For instance, a BiVO4-based water splitting device combined with a multi-junction a-Si PV cell has shown only a modest efficiency (4.9%)26 due to the low photocurrent output from the BiVO4 photoanode layer. An earth-abundant low-cost iron-oxide (hematite, a-Fe2O3) based photoanode coupled with a perovskite solar cell has demonstrated barely above 4 mA cm−2 under alkaline conditions.27 The opposite case of high Eg photocathodes16,18,19 with low Eg photoanodes14,21,24 (Fig. 1b) shows essentially the same picture: the only pair of experimentally demonstrated photoelectrodes which results in a meaningful JOP (∼1.4 mA cm−2) is a nanowire p-GaP-based photocathode19 in combination with a buried np+-junction GaAs-based photoanode.14 Both Fig. 1a and b indicate that the use of proven high-performance solar cell materials with charge-separation structures (e.g., a buried junction), and appropriate corresponding protective materials is essential, in order to obtain a true practical and simple tandem PEC water splitting system for solar-fuel generation. Recent progress in nitrogen-doped BiVO4 with the band gap reduced by 0.2 eV over pure BiVO422 brightened the prospects for its practical application to PEC water splitting, but it still has a large band gap (∼2.27 eV), which means that the photocurrent will never exceed above 10 mA cm−2 under AM 1.5 condition, indicating that oxide materials with a lower Eg and reasonable photovoltage should be investigated.
 Fig. 1  Overlaid current density–potential (J–V) behaviors for state-of-the-art half cells: combination of small Eg (SBG in inset) photocathodes with large Eg (LBG in the inset) photoanodes (a), and for the case of LBG photocathodes with SBG photoanodes (b). Schematic drawings for tandem water splitting devices for each case are illustrated in the inset. The drawings were reproduced with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. The modelled J–V curve for the photoanode and the photocathode (dashed dark grey) is projected to estimate the theoretical maximum JOP of the overall water splitting system. Note that the modelled J–V curve for the ideal photoelectrode was drawn using a web-based simulation program.25 Details of overlayers and catalysts can be found in ref. 2, 13 and 14. 
This review covers the fundamental aspects of protection strategies for tandem PEC water splitting devices, focusing on inorganic thin film materials. First, we review the strategies for protecting photoelectrodes, particularly for devices with buried junctions, and the photo-excited carriers transport mechanisms across photoelectrode/electrolyte interfaces through the protection layers upon PEC water splitting reaction (i.e., the HER and the OER) are described. Secondly, we review various approaches (from the literature) for protecting photoelectrodes and how they impact stability and PEC performance. Finally, key aspects which should be addressed for practical tandem PEC water splitting systems are given, along with technical remarks.
2. Background of protection strategies
2.1. Origin of semiconductor instability
Whether the semiconductor is stable under PEC conditions depends on the alignment of the material's self-reduction potential (Φred) relative to E(H2O/H2) for the photocathode, and the material's self-oxidation potential (Φox) relative to E(O2/H2O) for the photoanode, as described in early research by Allen Bard and others.28–30 A material is thermodynamically unstable when the Φred and Φox are placed below or above of E(H2O/H2) and E(O2/H2O), respectively (Fig. 2a and b). Alternatively, when Φred is placed between the conduction band (CB) and E(H2/H2O) under the HER, the material stability depends on the relative split between the electron consumption rates for material reduction and for the HER (kHER), which is also called the branching ratio. Similarly, the oxidation reaction competes with the consumption rates of photo-generated carriers for water oxidation (kOER).
 Fig. 2  Stability change of the photocathode (a) as its reduction potential Φred shifts down from above the CB of the p-type semiconductor to below E(H2O/H2). Similarly for the photoanode case (b), the stability of n-type material changes as its oxidation potential Φox increases. Note that the illustration is not to scale. (c) Calculated reduction potential Φred (black bars) and oxidation potential Φox (red bars) relative to the NHE and the vacuum level for a series of semiconductors in solution at pH = 0, the ambient temperature of 298.15 K, and a pressure of 1 bar. (c) Is reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society. 
Most photoelectrodes with relatively high photocurrents, such as Si, III–V and chalcopyrite semiconductors, etc., are prone to be corroded quickly when in contact with an electrolyte of high ionic strength and, in general, these materials have a very narrow window of stability based on Pourbaix diagrams.29,31,32 The photocorrosion of the material can be reduced by the use of relevant catalysts which improves charge transfer kinetics (i.e., kHER or kOER) at the solid/liquid interface, and consequently reduce the surface oxidation.31–33 However, this strategy cannot prevent photoelectrodes from degradation during the night time, where the materials do not have the benefits of photovoltage to provide a stabilizing anodic or cathodic bias.34 Kinetic enhancement via morphology modifications can also be an approach for improving the stability of photoelectrodes. For instance, non-planar geometries, such as a rod or pillar array can reduce the distance that minority carriers must travel, and thus the charge transfer kinetics can be significantly improved as shown in previous studies.3,19 However, this approach also has the fundamental issue that it does not resolve the problem of degradation in the dark. In the case of Si – one of the most frequently used photoelectrodes, a Si surface exposed to an acidic electrolyte deactivates by forming oxide or silicic acid, i.e. SiO2 and H2SiO3, etc., whereas it decomposes into H2SiO42− under strong alkaline conditions.33 III–V semiconductors (GaAs, GaInP2 and others) – photo-absorber materials for the most efficient solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiencies (STH%) reported so far (>14%), are also prone to chemical decomposition in strong acid, but this process takes place much more slowly.35 Using metal oxides with high intrinsic chemical stability is also a widely used strategy, however, as described earlier, the relatively low PEC performance of those metal oxides restrict their application in practical water splitting systems.
We now turn to the use of high performance non-oxide materials with e.g. Si. Si has a suitable Eg (1.12 eV) for the bottom cell of a tandem water splitting device, and is technologically mature despite the fact that it has an indirect band gap and thus at least a 50 μm-thick absorber is needed in order to achieve substantial optical absorption.2 Since Bockris et al. demonstrated a meaningful stability report using a crystalline n-Si photoanode protected by a Pt thin film under strongly acidic (pH 0) conditions for water oxidation (i.e., OER) in 1984,36 several protected Si devices with metallic protective catalyst films, including Ni (for OER)37 and Ti (for HER)38 have been demonstrated. However, losses due to parasitic light absorption by metallic layers cause a problem when this strategy is applied for the front cell in a tandem device structure. Alternatively, metal oxide semiconductors have been successfully used as protection layers for PEC electrodes owing to their relatively high intrinsic chemical stability and minimal parasitic light absorption.
In the light of the aforementioned approaches, using a protection layer with a high chemical stability for efficient photoactive semiconductors may provide an appropriate strategy to secure stable water splitting reaction of PEC electrodes. When the protection layer material has a Φred which is more negative than the CB of the photocathode, the system is thermodynamically stable under HER conditions. Similarly, a protective material with a more positive Φox than the VB of the photoanode can be applied for the OER case. For instance, TiO2 has a very negative Φred (relative to RHE) compared to the HER potential29 indicating that TiO2 can be an effective protection material for photocathodes, as shown in Fig. 2c.
2.2. Protection strategies and the charge transport mechanism
Since Kohl et al. demonstrated the first reliable HER and OER in 0.5 M Na2SO4 (pH ∼ 7) using TiO2 protected photoelectrodes in 1977,39 stable kinetics for various photoelectrodes with a metal oxide protection layer have been identified. Paracchino et al. coated a p-Cu2O/n-Al:ZnO photocathode with a thin TiO2 (∼10 nm) film which shows quite stable PEC activity at a relatively low pH (∼5).40 Starting from this work, Lee et al. demonstrated a stable HER using TiO2 protected p-InP at pH 0.41 Chorkendorff and co-workers have also shown stable HER operation using a buried junction crystalline Si (c-Si) for both in strongly acidic (1 M HClO4)42,43 and strongly alkaline electrolytes (1 M KOH).34 For the photoanode case, McIntyre and co-workers have demonstrated a stable OER both in strong acid (pH 0) and alkali (pH 14) using TiO2/Ir protected c-Si with a metal–insulator–semiconductor charge separation junction which showed a photovoltage (Vph) of 550 mV.44 Lewis and co-workers have shown an outstanding stability of 2200 hours (>90 days) using TiO2/Ni protected buried np+-junction c-Si45 and GaAs14 under OER conditions in 1 M KOH. Studies have shown that multiple properties of the protection layer should be optimized for efficient charge transport under PEC conditions, including, but not limited to the conductivity type, and band bending across the thickness. In general, metal oxide layers with n-type conductivity have been investigated as cathodic protection layers for the HER.16,40,43,46 It has been widely accepted that electrons separated by a buried junction migrate to the solid/liquid interface through the CB of n-type protection materials,2,13,40,43,46,47 as shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  A schematic illustration of the band diagram of a photocathode with a buried pn+-junction protected by an n-type metallic oxide passivation layer. HEC stands for the hydrogen evolution catalyst, and EF,n and EF,p stand for the quasi-Fermi level of the electron and the hole, respectively, the difference of which gives the photovoltage (Vph) under illumination. 
Inversely, metal oxide layers with p-type conductivity coupled with photoanodes can transport holes via the VB of the protection layer to the solid/liquid interface for the OER (see Fig. 4a). In the case of very thin (less than 2 nm thick) oxide insulators, such as SiO2 and Al2O3, direct tunnelling of charge carriers across the protection layers have also been reported,43,48 as illustrated in Fig. 4b. Interestingly, Hu et al.14 reported that a thick amorphous TiO2 protection layer is applicable for the protection of photoanodes for the OER due to hole transport through the bulk and a surface barrier of a “leaky” TiO2 owing to defects in the bulk of the protection layer, which is also known as a state-mediated transport (see also Fig. 4c), as introduced by Campet et al. in 1989.49 In the case of a highly-doped n-type protection layer for photoanodes, electrons created by the OER are injected into the CB of the protection layer and transported inwards toward the underlying photoabsorber. The electrons in the protection layer's CB then recombine with holes at the interface between the photoanode and the protection layer. The holes to recombine with electrons from the CB of the protection layer are the photogenerated holes transported through the VB of the photoabsorber (which is aligned with the CB of the protection layer (see Fig. 4d)), as shown by Mei et al. using c-Si and TiO2.50 In other words, this form of a photoanode protection layer transports electrons in – instead of transporting holes out. Besides the above mentioned TiO2 and other insulating oxides, various types of transition metal oxides, including NiOx, and CoOx, have been shown to be applicable depending on the operating conditions and chemical reaction type. Further details for each case will be reviewed in the following sections.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of band diagrams for a protected buried np+-junction photoanode with various charge transport mechanisms: (a) hole-transport via the VB of the p-type protection layer; (b) hole-tunneling through the thin insulating oxide; (c) hole-injection via state-mediate transport; (d) electron consumption by recombination at the interface between the photoanode and the n-type protection layer. Note that OEC stands for the oxygen evolution catalyst. 
3. Protection of photocathodes
Early experiments in solar-assisted hydrogen evolution emphasized the use of low band-gap solar cell materials, such as p-type Si51 and InP,52,53 by having a HER catalyst (e.g. Pt51 and Rh53) at the surface of those semiconductors. In these early studies of PEC electrodes for the HER, not much effort was devoted to the protection of the semiconductor surface from degradation, because those photocathodes materials were covered by an oxide phase, such as SiO2, which is formed during cathodic reaction under oxygen contamination, or they have very slow decomposition reaction kinetics under such conditions. However, this kind of self-oxidation cannot be categorized as a protection layer in regards to the negative effect, i.e., that oxidized surface hinders efficient charge transport leading to the deactivation of the photoelectrode.

Fig. 5 summarizes the reported stability for many HER photocathode materials plotted versus the pH level during the test. Note that for reported stabilities of the overall water splitting from tandem or multi-junction devices the origin of degradation (HER or OER part) cannot be specified. Experimental details and device structures of the collected data from ref. 13, 16, 18, 19, 23, 34, 38, 40–43, 46, 48 and 53–85 in Fig. 5 can be found in Table S1 in the ESI.† As shown in Fig. 5, most stability studies on the HER are done under acid conditions, particularly near pH 0, because many photoabsorber semiconductors are relatively stable under such conditions as stated previously. Notwithstanding this nature of photocathode semiconductors, the importance of having long-term stable HER kinetics has to be emphasized. Since Maier et al. demonstrated a 60-day long-term HER at pH 0 using p-type c-Si coupled with a photo-electrochemically deposited Pt layer,54 various types of metallic layers have been applied as protective HER catalysts. However, these metallic layers often limit the efficient photocurrent output, even though they can isolate the photo-absorber effectively from the corrosive electrolyte, due to parasitic light absorption/reflection of the metallic elements. Nevertheless, they can be used for bottom cell applications, as described previously. The photocurrent output of most of the metallic HEC (hydrogen evolution catalyst) coated c-Si based photoelectrodes (∼10 mA cm−2)53,59 is far below both the theoretical limit as well as experimentally obtained values from commercial c-Si PV cells, which exceeds 40 mA cm−2 under full AM 1.5G illumination.2,86
 Fig. 5  Chart visualizing data on reported stabilities of photocathodes for the HER, versus tested pH condition, with resulting photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. Device structures for the photocathode with reported stability longer than a day are noted. Jint. is the initial photocurrent at the start of the stability test. Degradation rates are calculated using the ratio of the measured photocurrent at the end of the stability test (Jend) to Jint.. Detailed information on device structures and working conditions can also be found in Table S1 in the ESI.† 
Transparent metal oxides are widely used as protection layers of photocathode materials. As described in the previous section, many metallic oxides are stable under water reducing conditions.33 In addition, the relatively high intrinsic chemical stability of these metal oxide semiconductors under dark conditions34 paves the way for their practical application in PEC water splitting devices. Furthermore, some metal oxides, such as TiO2, which has a band gap of around 3.2 eV,50,87 provide excellent optical transmittance in the visible light region. Alternatively, thin metallic oxide insulators, such as SiOx and Al2O3, can be used as protection layers. Depending on the semiconductor type and reducing conditions, these insulating layers can be formed naturally when the photocathode material has direct contact with the electrolyte. In 1982, Heller et al. reported the formation of a thin ‘native’ oxide on a p-InP surface by 16 hours of exposure to humid air,53 which allowed for a quite stable PEC hydrogen production for 24 hours. In an attempt to seek more uniform metal oxide formation approaches, several groups have reported the use of an ultra-thin Al2O3 layer on p-Si,67,88 deposited using ALD (atomic layer deposition) which provides a compact layer with sub-nanometer (usually sub-angstrom) precision.89 In various device designs, TiO2 protected photocathodes are widely used over a wide pH range from acid to alkaline. Narrowing the pH range to near 0, Mo-based sulphide semiconductors (e.g., MoS2) are also widely used as protective HEC layers. The following sections discuss recent progress in the stabilization of PEC hydrogen production, and both the limitations and prospects towards practical water splitting devices.
3.1. Metallic layers
Despite the parasitic light absorption issue, metals have been employed as protection layers for photocathodes without hindering charge transfer owing to their outstanding intrinsic conductive properties. Maier et al. demonstrated 60 days of stable PEC hydrogen production using Pt coated p-type c-Si with 0.3 V onset potential (Von) in 1 M HCl (pH 0).54 Generally, noble metals are widely used as protection layers, but some non-noble metallic elements may also be used depending on their working condition and device configuration. Moreover, the metals with a lower work-function than the photoabsorber, e.g., Ti with p-Si,90 lead to the formation of a Schottky junction between the metal and the semiconductor and introduce a built-in electric field, which promotes charge separation as shown in Fig. 6. In a recent report by Feng et al., a 5 nm Ti layer coupled with a 2 nm Ni catalytic layer showed a Von around 0.3 V vs. RHE with a quite stable HER under illumination for 12 hours in both in 1 M KBi (pH 9.5) and 1 M KOH.91 A demerit of this approach is that there is generally significant carrier recombination at the metal/semiconductor Schottky junction interface, which results in very limited photovoltage. Seger et al.38 used a thin Ti protection layer for the HER in 1 M HClO4 (pH 0) between a pn+-Si photoelectrode and the MoSx layer, which had a Von of 0.33 V vs. RHE (0.47 V with Pt) with a relatively high fill factor owing to the buried pn+ junction. Unlike the previously mentioned semiconductor/metal direct contact which forms a Schottky junction, the contact of a metallic layer with a highly-doped semiconductor surface shows an Ohmic behaviour.
 Fig. 6  Proposed band diagrams for a pristine p-type semiconductor (a) and a metal-protected semiconductor with a Schottky junction (b) in equilibrium with the H2O/H2 redox couple in contact with the electrolyte. Vbi stands for the built-in potential. Band positions of widely used non-oxide photoabsorbers with an approximate work function (φmetal) of selected metals are also shown in (c). The potential values in (c) are reported in the literature29,90 and relative to the NHE (normal hydrogen electrode). 
Despite the simplicity of the fabrication process of the metal protection layer, its application has been limited due to parasitic light absorption/reflection by these metallic layers. However, there should be no issues with light absorption/reflection for the case of the bottom cell in a tandem device configuration, since protection layers only need to be transparent when the illuminated side and the reaction side are coincident.10 As shown in recent works by Bae et al.2 and Urbain et al.,78 HEC acts under pure dark electrocatalytic conditions when the light is incident from the opposite side, thus indicating that bottom cell photoelectrodes in the tandem water splitting device can be protected using a metallic layer regardless of its thickness. Recently, Crespo-Quesada et al.76 demonstrated a quite stable photocurrent output (∼7.7 mA cm−2) under back-side illumination for 1.5 hours in a 0.1 M borate electrolyte (pH 8.5) using an organometallic halide perovskite-based device (FTO/PEDOT:PSS/CH3NH3PbI3/PCBM) coupled with thick Ag and Field's Metal (FM; InBiSn alloy), indicating that even water-sensitive semiconductors, such as lead halide type perovskites, can be used for the PEC purpose with an appropriate protection strategy.
3.2. Metallic oxides
Many of the metal oxides are excellent protection layers for the HER; however, as described in the previous section, TiO2 is the most widely used protective metallic oxide material over the full pH range. At the same time, owing to their excellent optical transmittance (Eg ≥ 3.0 eV)28,50 and good electron conductivity, most low band-gap photocathodes coupled with TiO2 show a relatively high photocurrent above 20 mA cm−2 under illumination.23,41,43,82 Compared to other types of protection layers, TiO2 protected photocathodes show relatively long-term stable operation with a high photocurrent output. It has been shown that a TiO2 protected c-Si(100) with a buried pn+-junction delivered a current density over 21 mA cm−2 at 0.3 V vs. RHE with a relatively low photocurrent loss (∼14%) for 30 days under red-light (38.6 mW cm−2; λ ≥ 635 nm) filtered, simulated sunlight.42 More recently, a TiO2 protected MOS-based Si photocathode (c-Si/SiOx/nc-Si) also delivered 41 days of stable HER operation under the same PEC conditions (Fig. 7),82 indicating that not only c-Si, but also chemically deposited thin-film Si can be successfully protected by TiO2 under water reduction conditions in an acidic environment. The interface between the photoabsorber and the protection layer is a critical factor for efficient charge transfer for high catalytic activity. The direct deposition of metal oxides may lead to surface oxidization of the photocathode (e.g. SiOx) that builds an energy barrier which hinders photo-generated electron transport. A metallic and/or conducting interlayer applied between the metal oxide protection layer and the photoanode can prevent the formation of an insulating layer during the subsequent deposition process. It has been shown that a thin Ti (5–10 nm) metallic interlayer can protect the Si surface against deactivation by sacrificial oxidation of the Ti interlayer during the high temperature TiO2 deposition process.2,13,34,43,50
 Fig. 7  Long-term stability (chromoamperometry – CA) test of the forming-gas (5% H2/Ar) treated carrier-selective c-Si photocathode (c-Si/SiOx/nc-Si at both front & back contacts) with a 100 nm-thick sputtered TiO2 protection layer. Photocurrent was measured at 0.4 V vs. RHE in 1 M HClO4 (pH 0). Initial CV prior to the CA measurement (black), CV after 3 weeks (blue), after 41 days (red), and CV from a re-platinized sample after the long-term CA test (grey) are shown in the inset. The figure is reprinted from ref. 82 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016. 
The doping level of the metal oxide layer is also a key parameter for efficient charge transport through the oxide protection layer. High doping levels generally result in thin depletion layers, where tunnelling of the electrons at the CB of the oxide protection layer through the Schottky barrier and at the oxide/liquid interface is possible. When the doping level is extremely high, this interface shows Ohmic-like behaviour as described earlier in Section 2. In the case of TiO2, the doping level can easily be adjusted in an annealing process in a vacuum which results in oxygen vacancies, and consequently increased dopant density. Seger et al.47 revealed experimentally the importance of having a high doping level in the metal oxide protection layer by using photocathodes with two different doping levels. As shown in Fig. 8, low-doped TiO2 (unannealed) has a relatively long depletion width that electrons cannot tunnel through, while highly-doped TiO2 (vacuum annealed) exhibits a quite thin depletion width and with the donor density an order of magnitude higher than that of the unannealed film so that electrons can be injected into the electrolyte at a lower potential than required for the low-doped TiO2 case. Similarly, Liang et al.79 also demonstrated in their recent work that the H-doping via deposition of TiO2 under the H2/Ar gas mixture flow can increase carrier density leading to the enhancement of electron transport in TiO2 films and a shorter depletion layer barrier.
 Fig. 8  These band diagrams show the location of the TiO2 conduction band of both the unannealed (blue lines) and vacuum annealed (red lines) samples as a function of depth into TiO2 at the following electrochemical potentials: (a) +0.77 V, (b) +0.2 V and (c) 0.0 V vs. RHE. Note that the conduction band (CB) pinning at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. Electrons can tunnel through the TiO2 only at the low potential range due to the relatively wide depletion width, which hinders efficient carrier transport. This figure was reproduced with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In general, protective metal oxides, including TiO2, are poor HER catalysts, and thus coupling with a co-catalyst, such as Pt and Ru, is preferred for efficient HER kinetics. Taking into account the parasitic light absorption of the metallic layer, a metal oxide protected photocathode coupled with a thin covering of the co-catalyst film loses the merit of using a metal oxide protection layer. For this reason, catalysts in the form of nanoparticles or small islands are preferred. Uniformly distributed Pt nanoparticles (∼5 nm) formed on the TiO2 surface by the (photo)electro-deposition method2,34,43,82 can support an efficient catalytic HER and allow sufficient light transmission through the protective layer at the same time. However, this approach cannot prevent the simultaneous loss of Pt nanoparticles by the potential separation from the TiO2 during long-term experiments. To solve this problem, the use of a mixed phase of TiO2 and Pt (5%) has been demonstrated to protect a chalcopyrite photocathode (p-Cu(In,Ga)Se2) under acidic conditions (0.5 M H2SO4, pH ∼ 0.3) in recent work by Azarpira et al.,92 where Pt particles are well distributed in the bulk TiO2 layer so that the photoelectrode could operate a stable HER without significant degradation regardless of TiO2 loss. It has also been demonstrated that earth-abundant catalysts, such as MoSx, can also be applied as additives for the photocathode protection layer under acidic conditions. Bourgeteau et al.61 spin-coated mixed TiO2 and MoS3 nanoparticles and formed a thick TiO2:MoS3 protection layer (90 nm) onto a hetero-junction organic solar cell (ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PCBM), which shows a Von above 0.5 V under low pH conditions (0.5 M H2SO4, pH 0.3). Although its photocurrent is quite low (∼0.23 mA cm−2 @ 0 V vs. RHE), it is noteworthy that it was a first time demonstration of quite stable HER operation using an organic solar cell under such conditions upon continuous illumination (45 min).
The use of an n-type Nb2O5 protection layer also deserves serious consideration since its protective properties under acidic conditions have also been shown,85 using a planar type p-GaP/n-Nb2O5/np-Pt with a quite high Von of 710 mV and stable photocurrent for 8 hours in 1 M HClO4. Despite the subsequent slow degradation after the 8 hours, Nb-based metal oxide may prove to be one of the promising materials for the protection of p-type materials, since it has a wide stability window in the Pourbaix diagram from pH 0.5 to 6.5.33 Standing et al.19 also demonstrated a Von above 0.75 V with significantly increased photocurrent (∼9 mA cm−2 @ 0 V vs. RHE) using nanowire (NW) Pt-coupled p-GaP, whose surface was chemically oxidized. Despite this encouraging PEC activity, state-of-the-art PEC GaP’s photovoltage lags behind the state-of-the-art GaP PV cell (1.56 V), and thus there is still plenty of room for improvement.
Among the various metal oxide protected photocathodes with reported stability at the mid-pH range, SnO2 is noteworthy. Azevedo et al. demonstrated a SnO2 (50 nm) protected p-Cu2O photocathode in their recent work,80 where the RuO2 coupled photocathode showed a Von ∼ 0.34 V with quite stable cathodic photocurrent for more than 2.3 days at pH 5. In addition, a Cu2O photocathode with a ZnO/SnO2 dual protection layer increased Von (∼0.55 V vs. RHE) and stability such that the system operated under the same conditions for 28 hours with only a relatively minimal PEC activity.
However, unlike under acidic conditions, where the corrosion rate of the photocathode is generally slow due to the self-limiting passivation of the Si interface to SiO2,34 many photocathode semiconductors dissolve quite easily in alkaline electrolytes. When Si interacts with alkaline solution it corrodes via dissolution into HSiO4− (rather than SiO2). The wide stability window of TiO2 in the Pourbaix diagram implies that TiO2 can be applied in the alkaline electrolyte as demonstrated in recent studies.34,79 Though irrespective of the ‘intrinsic’ stability of the TiO2 semiconductor, the lack of a self-limiting passivation entails that the underlying Si will corrode continuously under any pinhole in the protection layer, as shown in Fig. 9. Kast et al.13 demonstrated the best performance c-Si based photocathode using a commercial textured pn+-Si solar cell device protected by a complex multi-layer configuration of Ti/FTO/TiO2/Ir (10/50/50/2 nm). Ti and FTO layers were used as Ohmic contact layers between a sprayed TiO2 protection layer and a textured c-Si solar cell to provide a lateral electron pathway which can reduce the effect of locally deactivated regions by oxidation. As shown in Fig. 10, the sample showed a significant decrease in activity after 2 days operation in 1 M KOH, which was recovered after cleaning in acid. This indicates that the degradation may be attributed to catalyst poisoning. However, an unrestored CV after 3 days revealed physical damage on c-Si, which was proven by cross-sectional microscopic analysis. Bae et al. in ref. 34 have also proved that p-type c-Si (100) can be protected for 24 hours under highly alkaline conditions (pH 14) using high power impulse magnetron sputtering (HiPIMS) that provides a TiO2 protection layer with relatively high packing density, thus reducing pinhole density and the aforementioned issues accompanying them.
 Fig. 9  SEM images of a (100) oriented c-Si substrate with and without sputter deposited TiO2 at 400 °C after immersion in an 1 M KOH electrolyte (pH 14) for 3 days in the dark (a), and illustrations of the etch profiles of a (100) oriented Si through the pin-holes of the TiO2 protection layer during the etching process in KOH solution (b). The figures were adapted from ref. 34, Copyright 2016 with permission from Elsevier. 
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of protected textured cells with a catalyst and Ohmic-contact layers demonstrated in ref. 12. A solution processed TiO2 layer has been applied as a protection layer, and both Ti and FTO (F-doped tin oxide) are used as Ohmic-contact layers for efficient lateral charge transport. (b) J–V curves from CVs of the photocathode after various times and treatments of stability testing at 300 mV vs. RHE (near maximum power point) in 1 M KOH (pH 14). The photocathode was then cleaned in acid (1 M HClO4) via cycling from reducing to oxidizing potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. 
The fabrication method, in this sense, is of great importance. Conformal ALD coatings with outstanding step-coverage have also been applied for the protection of photocathodes in alkaline media. Recently, a relatively thin (25 nm) ALD TiO2 was deposited on a p–i–n a-SiC photocathode and PEC hydrogen production was performed in 1 M KOH (pH 14).75 Unlike the previously mentioned cases in ref. 13 and 34, ALD TiO2 coated a-SiC shows a stable photocurrent for only 40 minutes, followed by a rapid deactivation, which leaves only 35% of the initial photocurrent after 1 hour. This was attributed mainly to uncovered pinholes in TiO2 that exposed a-SiC to the highly corrosive electrolyte, which subsequently etched the a-SiC. This may be related closely with the fabrication conditions during protection layer deposition. Pinholes on the protection layer can be reduced or minimized by forming a dense and compact layer, but contamination, such as dust particles or debris adsorbed on the surface, cannot be removed simply by changing the deposition technique. Considering the fact that the above mentioned experiments were not carried out under cleanroom conditions, much more stable PEC activities may be obtained if deposition is done under dust-free conditions. Deposition of a metal oxide protection layer with a larger thickness will certainly reduce pinhole density; however, thicker films will also increase the series resistance and could additionally build a tunnelling barrier. The thickness-dependency of metal oxide resistance is noticeable, particularly, in the case of metallic oxides with low doping levels. As shown in Fig. 8, a highly-doped metal oxide is required for efficient electron transfer across the TiO2/electrolyte interface. Alternatively, the thickness of the protection layer should be thin enough to tunnel through (<2 nm) as described in Section 2.2.
Except for the previously mentioned works of Heller et al. from the early 1980s,52,53 the protection properties of several insulating metal oxides have also been verified recently. Al2O3 is a well reported insulator, which can protect photoelectrodes from corrosion in electrolytes, while photo-induced free carriers can tunnel through and then react with protons to produce hydrogen. Choi et al.67 demonstrated a nanoporous (Np) Si photocathode protected by a thin Al2O3 (2.3 nm), which performed a 12 hour-long stable cathodic current output in 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0.3). An interesting feature is that the long-term stability test was performed at a fixed negative potential at −0.3 V vs. RHE in pH 0.3, where Al2O3 is reduced to Al+. The stability of the Al2O3 protection layer after the long-term stability test is doubtful, because Al is prone to be reduced and the Si surface tends to oxidize (i.e., SiOx) under such conditions as demonstrated by Maier et al. and others.54,57,59 Ji et al.48 demonstrated a metal–insulator–semiconductor (MIS) PEC cell, where a thin SrTiO3 (STO) (1.6 nm) layer was used as a protective insulator, and very stable PEC activity (>31 mA cm−2 @ 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl under 1 Sun) was performed with a Pt co-catalyst for 1.5 days. Interestingly, it has been claimed that electrons can be injected through the conduction-band of c-Si and through the MBE-grown STO on Si due to the small band offset between these two materials (see Fig. 11a, inset). However, a detailed description or calculation of the low band-offset at the c-Si/STO interface was not provided. Although Pt is an excellent HEC, its large work function is similar to that of p-Si, which cannot explain the photovoltage obtained in that work (∼460 mV). Detailed calculation of the band alignment after equilibrium with H+/H2 reaction should be supported considering the doping concentration and the Fermi level of the STO layer to describe an exact charge transport mechanism.
 Fig. 11  Stabilities as indicated by the steady-state photocurrent characterization with c-Si/STO/Ti/Pt (a) (reprinted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group) and pn+-Si/Mo/MoS2 (b) (adapted with permission from ref. 69, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim) held at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl and RHE, respectively. Both tests were measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination in 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0.3). Schematic structures of the photocanode are also shown in the inset. 
Besides the above described silicon and III–V based photocathodes, chalcopyrite-based thin film photocathodes, e.g. p-type AgxCu1−xGaSe2 (ACGSe), CuGaSe2 (CGSe), Cu(In,Ga)Se2 (CIGSe), have also shown good HER stability, but mostly in weakly acidic and alkaline media (Fig. 5), because most chalcopyrite-based photocathodes are covered with a CdS layer,18,56,68 which is soluble in highly acidic and alkaline media. The CdS layer, which is typically n-type, plays a role as an electron transfer layer by forming the pn-junction with the chalcopyrite layer, but not as a protection layer. Direct contact with a n-type TiO2 protection layer typically struggles to provide an efficient charge separation as shown by Azarpira et al.72 On the other hand, Ros et al.70 have coated a TiO2 overlayer as a protection layer on a CIGSe/CdS/i-ZnO/AZO multilayer structure and demonstrated an efficient photocurrent output (>40 mA cm−2) with a relatively high Von of 0.6 V vs. RHE in 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0.3). Despite the recent progress in acidic electrolytes, continued work on protection properties of TiO2 for the chalcopyrite-based photocathodes in highly alkaline media is also needed, similar to the TiO2-protected silicon photocathode cases in highly alkaline media.13,34,79
3.3. Other layers
Other protection layer candidates include carbon62 and the MoSx family16,61,63,66,69,77,81 of materials. In this section, we focus on the latter group since this has shown some success when applied as cathode protection layers. MoS2 and some other dichalcogenides have outstanding stability in strongly acidic electrolytes – even under above band-gap illumination. A recent study measured finite corrosion rates of MoS2 edges, but only under extremely intense laser illumination (corresponding to 107 times the solar irradiance), and only when the photon energy was above the band-gap, and only when oxygen was present.93 In general though, MoS2 is an extremely durable material in a cathodic environment in very strong acid electrolytes as shown experimentally in some studies (also shown in Fig. 11b),63,69,81 but so far its use has been less widespread. Perhaps this is due to its two main disadvantages: (i) limited conductivity perpendicular to the MoS2 planes and (ii) significant optical absorption. MoS2 is a semiconductor with a band gap in the red part of the spectrum such that optical absorption is an important consideration which means that the thickness of the MoS2 film should be minimized in any design where the MoS2-protected photocathode is facing the light source. If MoS2 is used on the backside with respect to the illumination, optical absorption is of course a non-issue, as mentioned earlier.2,10 Another reason to limit the thickness of an MoS2-based protection layer is that its electrical conductivity perpendicular to the 2D planes of MoS2 – i.e. its conductivity through the protection layer out to the electrolyte – is low. This means that the use of a thick (i.e. 50 nm) MoS2 layer for electrode protection of the underlying photoabsorber would probably result in unacceptable loss of photovoltage due to the series resistance imparted by the protection layer. However, heavy doing (or strongly cathodic conditions) could shift the chemical potential enough to achieve much better electron transport, and we speculate that is why MoS2 protection layers work, but a detailed mechanism has not been studied fully.
MoS2 itself (if structured correctly) has the advantage of also being an excellent hydrogen evolution catalyst.94–97 This offers the compelling prospective of combining the function of protecting the photoabsorber from corrosion in the electrolyte with the function of providing electrocatalytically active sites for the HER in the same, non-noble material. In conclusion, a thin MoS2 layer should be able to simultaneously achieve great chemical corrosion stability, moderate optical loss and Ohmic resistance, and comparatively good HER catalytic performance for a non-noble material in a concentrated acidic electrolyte.
In 2012, MoS2 (including amorphous MoSx98) was used on a buried-junction (pn+-Si) silicon photocathode in conjunction with a metallic titanium protection layer.38 This system showed promising performance, but its stability was erratic. Samples would run without apparent degradation on the order of a few hours (between 1 and 8 hours) before failing abruptly. The first use of MoS2 as a protection layer on a photocathode to achieve multi-day stability was in 2013.63 In this case, an MoS2- (or WS2) layer, grown by sputtering 10 nm Mo (or W) directly on a buried-junction (pn+-Si) silicon photocathode was converted by treatment with H2S/H2, and resulted in photocathodes where both protection and HER activation are derived from the resulting MoS2 (or WS2) layer.63 While the WS2-protected photoelectrodes showed less than 20 hours stability and low photovoltage, the MoS2-protected photoelectrodes worked remarkably well and showed no degradation after operating for 5 days. Besides the MoS2 protection and catalytic layer, a MoSx overlayer was also tested as a co-catalyst.63 Almost exactly the same protection approach was taken by another group the following year with the main difference being a thinner sputtered Mo layer (3.6 nm instead of 10 nm) and a correspondingly lower sulfurization temperature.69 In this case, the durability was tested for 100 hours – again with no signs of degradation, and with similar photoelectrode performance. In addition to the MoS2 protection layer, a Mo3S132− cluster co-catalyst was also investigated in this work.69 Very recently the same group used the same method of sulfurizing a 3.6 nm sputtered Mo film to protect a p-GaInP2 photocathode.81 In this case they achieved ∼6 mA cm−2 of photocurrent (partially due to an estimated 40% of the photons above the band-gap of GaInP2 being absorbed in the MoS2 film) and a stability of 60 hours followed by a decay, which they ascribe to pinholes in the protection layer.
In a tandem water splitting device design where the photoanode is facing irradiation (top cell), the optical absorption of the cathodic protection layer is irrelevant as previously mentioned so the relevant questions are: can the stability be increased to 1000s of hours – e.g., by the elimination of pinholes; and whether ultra-thin MoS2 layers with low Ohmic resistance can be stable for such a long term operation. It seems that the obvious research direction would be to make conformal coatings of MoS2 (for instance via ALD). While there are a large amount of oxides for protection layers that are currently being deposited with ALD,99 to the best of our knowledge, there is yet to be tested an ALD-grown MoS2 or other sulfide protection layer on a photoelectrode.
4. Protection of photoanodes
Since Contractor et al. reported a reliably stable PEC water oxidation reaction for more than 4 days using n-type c-Si coupled with Pt in 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0.3),36 a variety of photoelectrodes have been used to develop photoelectrochemically stable water oxidizing photoanode systems as a counterpart to the photocathode for the water splitting reaction. Just as in the photocathode case, considerable efforts have been made, as shown in Fig. 12, where data was collected from ref. 14, 15, 17, 21, 22, 24, 27, 36, 37, 44, 45, 50 and 100–133. While there are many excellent HER catalysts (e.g., Pt, MoS2, CoP), in contrast, there has been a serious struggle to find acceptable OER catalysts in acidic environments.95 The majority of non-noble catalysts for the OER suffer from deleterious degradation side reactions, particularly in the low pH region,134 where the bleaching of the electrocatalyst and the loss of OER kinetics result. Unprotected non-oxide photoanode materials, in contrast, oxidize under OER conditions by forming an insulating layer that potentially prevents the decomposition of semiconductors during an OER.44 Only a few OER catalysts, including IrOx and RuOx, are proven to be stable under acidic OER conditions,117,135 and thus, significant attention has been devoted to the protection of photoanodes in alkaline media as shown in Fig. 12.
 Fig. 12  Chart visualizing data on the reported stabilities of photocathodes for the OER versus pH of the test condition, illustrating photocurrent and the degradation rate. Device structures for the photoanode with reported stability longer than a day are noted. Detailed information on device structures' working conditions can also be found in Table S2 in the ESI.† 
Just as in the photocathode case shown in Fig. 5, TiO2 has been widely used as an anodic protection layer. For instance, stable water oxidation reaction of TiO2 protected c-Si simply coupled with metallic OER catalysts, such as Ni and Ir, was demonstrated in the pH range from 0 to 14.14,44,112 However, the charge transport mechanism is quite different from that of the cathodic protection case, where the photo-induced carriers generally are injected through the conduction band of the n-type metal oxide protection layer. Several recent works have claimed hole-transfer via state-mediated (defect-state) transport (see also Fig. 4c) through a thick metal oxide layer from the photoanodes,14,107 while a majority of the works claimed hole injection via tunnelling for ultra-thin metal oxide cases.36,44,124 The detailed case study will be discussed in this section focusing on thin film protection materials for stable OER activity.
However, above all, p-type metal oxides, including NiOx and CoOx, are most widely investigated, because they act as excellent hole-conducting protection layers, particularly under high pH conditions. This is because of their excellent hole-transfer and electron-blocking properties due to relatively high CB edge positions.24,136–138 In addition, these transition metal oxides act as active OER catalysts by forming oxyhydroxides with higher oxidation states (via surface hydroxylation of nickel or cobalt, e.g. NiOOH and CoOOH), which easily incorporate Fe during anodic reaction that reduces the overpotential for OER activity significantly.24,139,140 Thin metallic OER catalysts, including Ni and Co, will also be discussed. Owing to the relative simplicity of the fabrication process compared to metal oxide, the protection strategy using a metallic layer is also widely used. However, unlike the HER cases, where the metallic layers tend to be reduced to metallic ions under cathodic conditions, at high potentials, metallic OER catalysts form oxides and/or oxyhydroxides which are OER active sites.105,114,141
4.1. Metals
As opposed to the photocathode case for PEC hydrogen production in Section 3.1, metals with a higher work function than photoanode semiconductors can form a built-in potential by introducing a Schottky junction at the interface between the metal and the n-type semiconductor (see Fig. 6), which promotes the separation and transport of photo-induced charge carriers (holes in this case) to the electrolyte for the water oxidation reaction.105 Kenny et al. reported in ref. 105 quite stable water oxidation performance using a 2 nm-thick Ni coating on n-type c-Si in both aqueous 1 M KOH and a K-borate + Li-borate electrolyte (pH 9.5) for more than 12 hours and 3 days, respectively. The key feature is the formation of a MIS charge-separation structure by forming a native SiO2 insulating layer between the n-type c-Si and the Ni metallic layer that provides a relatively high photovoltage of ∼500 mV. In addition, oxidized Ni species are formed at the Ni metal surface in contact with the electrolyte at oxidative potentials; they act as OER active sites as mentioned earlier. A higher photovoltage is also obtainable without losing its PEC stability by adding a metal with high work function, such as Pt and Pd.100,101 In particular, Kainthla et al.100 demonstrated outstanding OER stability under illumination for more than 600 hours using a Pd coated n-type c-Si coupled with Mn2O3 as a co-catalyst. Although it showed a low photocurrent output (∼1.4 mA cm−2 @ 1.3 V vs. NHE), the relatively high photovoltage (∼550 mV) performance is worthy of notice considering its publication time (1986) and relatively moderate pH condition (∼4.5). As described in the previous section, most metallic protection layers form metal oxides or oxyhydroxides under OER conditions, and thus further details are discussed in the following Metal oxides section for conciseness.
4.2. Metal oxides
When dealing with semiconductor protection layers they need to conduct charge, typically holes, with a minimal resistive barrier. The resistive barrier includes both bulk resistance and resistance at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface due to band bending.
NiO is a Mott insulator, which means its band gap is primarily derived from a splitting between the d-orbitals. Thus both the VB and the CB are a function of the temperature, and this makes NiO different from many other common oxides (TiO2, WO3, etc.) whose band gaps are primarily derived from a VB based on the O2p orbital and a CB based on the metallic s-orbital. Since the VB of NiO is based on a d-orbital rather than the typical O2p orbital, it will typically be more reductive in potential. This is born out in experiments where NiO typically shows a valence band around 1.0 V vs. RHE136 whereas oxides such as TiO2 and WO3 show a valence band near 3.0 V vs. RHE.87
Since NiO naturally acts as a p-type semiconductor, this material typically transfers charge through its valence band. Since the VB is located at a potential more reductive than the actual O2 evolution potential (thermodynamic potential + overpotential), there should be no resistance due to band bending since at these potentials there will actually be an accumulation layer or band de-pinning at the surface. However since NiO has a bulk resistance of 1.4 × 10−4 Ω cm,142 it can produce noticeable resistance if the thickness is significantly large.
However with a wide band gap of 3.4–3.7 eV,109,137,143 a NiO protection layer basically does not absorb visible light from solar irradiation, and correspondingly, thin Ni-based oxide layers (30–50 nm) show high optical transmittance above 90% in the visible light region.104,110,119 In addition, NiO is quite stable in base (though unstable in acid), and is also one of the best O2 evolution catalysts if doped with Fe, as shown in Fig. 13a–c.110,139
 Fig. 13  CV scans of Ni1−xFex(OH)2/Ni1−xFexOOH films (a) and CV taken during 1 hour aging of Ni(OH)2 film (b) under dark conditions in 1 M KOH containing low-ppm Fe (<36 ppm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) CV curves of PEC measurements of Fe-treated NiO thin films on np+-Si photoanodes after various treatments under 38.6 mW cm−2 (λ ≥ 635 nm). Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 114). (d) CVs of n-Si/SiOx/CoOx/NiOx, n-Si/SiOx/NiOx, and n-Si/NiOx and (e) chronoamperometry (CA) of n-Si/SiOx/CoOx/NiOx photoanodes measured at 1.63 V vs. RHE. Both experiments were carried out under AM 1.5G solar illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122, published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In 2012 Sun et al. started investigating NiO on n-Si for PEC devices.104 In this work they used NiO for three purposes, a protection layer, an O2 evolution catalyst (via forming NiOOH) and as a material to create band bending and hence photovoltage within the Si. Unfortunately, the onset potential for O2 evolution was very near the H2O/O2 redox potential and currents were tested only up to 1 mA cm−2. The photovoltage provided by n-Si/NiOx was found to be on the order of 300 mV under AM 1.5 conditions. The PEC experiments were done at neutral pH, and there was little in-depth work into its durability. Further work using a NiO/RuOx on n-Si nanowires provided slightly better performance but showed significant degradation after 500 cycles.109 While low in photocurrent and photovoltage, these initial works unveiled the great potential of using NiO as a protection layer.
In 2014 Mei et al. investigated a pn+-Si/Ni/NiOx structure for use in PEC O2 evolution under alkaline conditions (1 M KOH).110 Unlike the previous approach by Sun et al.,104 they used a built-in Si homojunction to create band bending within the Si. Since NiOx was sputter deposited, a thin Ni layer was pre-sputtered onto the Si before the NiO to prevent silicon oxidation. When NiOOH is used as an O2 evolution catalyst (OEC), oftentimes researchers allow very minute concentrations of Fe contaminants found naturally in their electrolyte (from impurities in NaOH or KOH) to intercalate into the NiOOH to form the highly active NiFeOx catalyst (Fig. 13c). In ref. 110, however, they intentionally pre-intercalated Fe into their electrode before actual O2 evolution, which allowed them to achieve optimal performance directly from the beginning of their water splitting experiments. This approach allowed for an anodic photocurrent of 10 mA cm−2 at a potential of 1.15 V vs. RHE. Furthermore they showed this material to be stable in a basic environment for 2 weeks with only minimal signs of degradation. Through analysis of the electrolyte after 24 hours of testing, they determined (through inductively coupled plasma (ICP) analysis) that their NiOx was corroding at a rate between 0.06 and 0.08 monolayers per day, which corresponds to approximately 2800 days or 7.6 years of continuous operation to fully corrode.
Very shortly after the Mei work, Sun et al. showed a very similar system and demonstrated its stability for 50 days.119 They compared their NiO protection layer to a thin Ni metal layer, and showed that NiO acts as an anti-reflection layer in addition to a protection layer. Following the same approach NiO was shown also to work as an excellent protection layer for an InP photoelectrode comprising a np+-InP/NiO electrode.21 This device produced 10 mA cm−2 O2 evolution current at a potential of 1.0 V vs. RHE and was shown to be stable for at least 48 hours.
While the work by Sun et al. that used a NiO to induce band bending in Si only produced ∼300 mV of photovoltage, switching to CoOx led to 560 mV photovoltage during O2 evolution (and 640 mV photovoltage when using a ferrocene redox couple) (see also Fig. 13a).122 This work used only 2–3 nm of CoOx to induce a MIS-like charge separation by forming c-Si/SiOx/CoOx and they were still able to deposit a thick NiO layer (∼85 nm) on top of it with no detrimental effects to its transparency or its ability to protect for more than 70 days under continuous light-illumination.
Besides the c-Si cases described above, recent studies have revealed that the protection strategy using Ni-based metal oxides can be applied effectively to various thin-film semiconductors, such as a-Si:H, CdTe120 and Ta3N5.128 Thin film metal oxide photoanodes, particularly BiVO4-based photoelectrodes, also showed noteable OER stability. Various oxyhydroxides, e.g. electrodeposited NiOOH and FeOOH,17,22,118,125 have been applied to BiVO4 as protecting OER catalysts; however, most of those studies are limited to neutral pH (Fig. 12), mainly due to the photoelectrochemical corrosion of BiVO4 in highly alkaline media.114 Lichterman et al.106 demonstrated that a thin ALD CoOx coated BiVO4 shows significantly improved OER stability in 0.1 M KOH (pH 13) indicating that the fabrication method is of great importance just as in the case of the photocathode described above in Section 3.2.
Cobalt-based oxide materials are also widely used protection layers for photoanodes with a quite high resistance to photocorrosion. Similar to Ni-based oxide materials, CoOx is also known to be oxidized and form oxyhydroxides, for instance CoOOH, that easily incorporates Fe from the electrolyte.140 Interestingly, time-dependent behaviour in OER activity varies with reports. Bae et al. and other groups reported a gradual decrease of OER activities of CoOx (CoO, Co2O3, and Co3O4 mixed phase) coupled c-Si photoanodes in their recent works,24,122 while Yang et al.111 reported very stable OER activities under the same conditions (1 M KOH, pH 14) using an np+-Si/CoOx photoanode. In regard to this, several works on pure electrochemical stabilities of cobalt oxide can provide a clue to understand this discrepancy. Burke et al.140 demonstrated a gradual enhancement of OER activity in a KOH electrolyte due to the iron-incorporation in CoOOH formed by the electrodeposition method. Jiang et al.144 also reported a quick decrease in overpotential for the OER of the electrodeposited CoOOH for the first 2 min, followed by stable OER activity for more than 10 hours. Tung et al.145 revealed in their recent work that Co3O4 tends to decompose gradually under water oxidation conditions, whereas CoO supported Co3O4 showed very stable OER activity for 1000 hours under the same conditions, indicating that the stability of the CoOx phase is related to volume expansion during the phase transformation into CoOOH.
While there has been great interest in using TiO2 as a photoanodic protection layer since the work of Hu et al. in 2014,14 there has actually been some very significant works investigating TiO2 in a photoanodic environment before the Hu work. In 1977 Tomkiewicz et al.146 investigated the corrosion protection ability of TiO2 on n-type semiconductors; however they only investigated the mechanical degradation and did not focus on the electrical conduction through TiO2. In 2011 Chen et al. used TiO2 as a corrosion protection layer for a Si photoanode with a thin film of Ir as a catalyst.44 The Chen work used an MIS structure to create photovoltage from their Si photoanode. They used the difference between the Fermi level in the n-Si and the Ir work function to induce band bending within the Si. The insulator in the MIS structure was a combination of thin SiO2 and the aforementioned TiO2 protection layer. The authors hypothesized that charge was transferring through the TiO2via a trap assisted tunneling (Frenkel–Poole conduction)147,148 and in a later work showed a more detailed verification of this mechanism using various types of c-Si based photoanodes, including hybrid type MIS with a buried pn+ junction (Fig. 14), which showed a photovoltage above 600 mV.154
 Fig. 14  Three types of photoanode junctions have been employed in ref. 156: (a) semiconductor–liquid junction protected by SiO2 and TiO2, (b) MIS structure with metallic OEC, and (c) MIS with a buried np+-junction. Here, the holes are transported via defect states of TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156, Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group. 
In the 2013 work by Seger et al.43 where they showed TiO2 as a cathodic protection layer, they also showed that it worked as a protection layer in an anodic environment.43 While the anodic reactions in this work were H2 oxidation, and oxidation of Fe2+ to Fe3+ the science discovered in this work provided the fundamental basis for further studies in anodic O2 evolution (Fig. 15). There were three interesting discoveries from ref. 43: the first was that while pn+ Si electrodes have a band bending that favours electrons diffusing to the surface for reductive reactions, this work showed that these types of electrodes can also achieve oxidative reactions. Simply put, at oxidative potentials the anodic charge coming from oxidized reactants dominated any potential cathodic charge that would have occurred from band bending. The actual electrons that were oxidized from the reactants travelled through a TiO2 and Ti layer into the Si conduction band where they recombined with holes in the silicon valence band. It should be noted that these holes were not primarily generated by photons, but rather by valence band electrons that were extracted via the electrode (for use in the counter electrode). This allowed the device to maintain its photovoltage even as the oxidation reaction was occurring.
 Fig. 15  CV scans of a pn+-Si/Ti/TiO2/np-Pt electrode in an argon-purged 1 M HClO4 electrolyte with 10 mM each of Fe(III) and Fe(II). The scan rate was 20 mV s−1 and the samples were irradiated with the red part (λ > 635 nm) of the AM 1.5 spectrum. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
The second interesting issue is related to TiO2's band position. Given that TiO2's band position is near the H+/H2 redox couple, the authors showed that H2 could be oxidized whereas band bending issues prevented Fe2+/Fe3+ oxidation (unless the TiO2 was so highly doped it allowed for tunnelling).47 However it was shown that the H2 oxidation could continually occur even at potentials more oxidative than the Fe2+/Fe3+ redox couple. The fact that H2 could oxidize at highly oxidative potentials, whereas Fe2+ could not was attributed to the fact that the band bending within TiO2 caused a large potential drop within the semiconductor and that the actual oxidative potential of the TiO2 at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface was only slightly more oxidative than the TiO2 flat band potential.
The third interesting discovery from this work was the effects of sputtering a Pt film on top of the TiO2 protected Si photoelectrode. In doing so, this completely isolated the TiO2 from the electrolyte. This in turn eliminated any band bending due to the TiO2–electrolyte interface. However the TiO2–electrolyte interface was replaced by a TiO2–Pt interface, and it was unknown whether this would act as a Schottky barrier or an ohmic contact. When this Pt covered electrode was tested, it showed results similar to a Pt wire (except for the photovoltage shift) with the ability to both reduce Fe3+ and oxidize Fe2+, thus indicating that this was an ohmic contact. Typically the TiO2–Pt interface forms a Shottky barrier; however the high dopant density of TiO2 and the high energy of Pt sputtering into the TiO2 could be potential reasons for this Ohmic contact. The practical results of these oxidation tests showed that one can basically bury a solar cell and 100 nm of TiO2, and it would behave equivalently as a solar cell in series with a conductive electrode. However, this was only the case when two very important conditions were met: (1) the semiconductor–electrolyte interface was removed and (2) TiO2–Pt formed an ohmic contact.
With this in mind, it was straightforward to apply this principle to using TiO2 as an anodic protection layer for O2 evolution. After the Hu et al. work demonstrated that “leaky” TiO2 could be used as a photoanodic protection layer for O2 evolution (vide infra), in the work by Mei et al. they used the same approach as in the Seger et al.43 work, with this time using a np+-Si with a sputtered Ti/TiO2/Pt film, and they could indeed oxidize water to O2.50 It should be noted that only sputtered Pt worked using this approach whereas evaporated Pt failed. This was hypothesized to be due to the high energy impact from the sputtering process creating interfacial states thus allowing it to act more as an Ohmic contact rather than a Schottky barrier.150,151 This work also investigated the n+Si/Ti (or more probably n+Si/TiSix/Ti)152 interface and showed both theoretically and experimentally that at high Si dopant levels charge could tunnel through the barrier created by the Si-TiSix Schottky barrier, whereas at low dopant densities charge could not tunnel through this barrier. This charge transport mechanism is well illustrated in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  Band diagrams of an np+-Si/5 nm Ti/100 nm TiO2/Pt film photoelectrode: (a) overall band diagram at an applied bias of 1.4 V versus RHE under illumination; (b) zoom in of the p+-Si/Ti interface; (c) zoom in of the TiO2/Pt/electrolyte interface from the overall band diagram shown in (a). Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society. 
While using a Pt film/TiO2 worked as an anodic protection layer, the Pt was actually interfacing with the electrolyte and was the primary protection layer. Creating a continuous film is an inefficient use of a catalytic material, especially one as expensive as Pt, but using a nanoparticle catalyst will typically not work due to semiconductor band bending issues. However the case of small diameter islands of catalysts provides a very useful intermediate case. To understand how catalyst islands perform, one needs to understand the fundamental concepts developed by Tung et al. and the work Robert Rossi and Nathan Lewis did applying this principle to mixed barrier heights at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface.153–155 In the Rossi and Lewis work they investigated the semiconductor/electrolyte interface of Si with evaporated Ni islands on the surface. In this situation there was a partial Si/electrolyte interface, which produced band bending, and a partial Si–Ni interface, which had a Schottky barrier. Through careful analysis they discussed the interaction between the semiconductor–electrolyte interface and the semiconductor–metal interface as a function of varying sizes of Ni islands. They showed that with very large Ni islands the Si/Ni interface behaved as a Schottky barrier; however as the size of the islands decreased, the effects of band bending from the Si/electrolyte interface actually started to creep in on the edges of the Ni islands. They showed that when Ni islands were below a certain diameter, the band bending would creep in from all sides and deep within the bulk the band bending potential would completely dominate, thus effectively ‘pinching-off’ the Schottky-barrier. Theoretical modeling allows one to determine the radius below which the pinch-off effect occurs as: (1)where Ro is the radius of the island, ΦElec and ΦIsland are the potential barriers between Si and the electrolyte and the island, respectively. W is the depletion width and VBB is the potential barrier due to band bending.
The pinch-off effect is also very useful because it is a very straightforward explanation of why co-catalysts attached to photocatalysts almost never show any effects of a Schottky barrier. Hill et al. has recently found a way to exploit this concept by using it to greatly enhance the photovoltage of n-Si-/Co interfaced devices.156 In their work they showed that by electrodepositing Co islands they could pinch off the Si/Co electronic effects, and still use the dominant Si/electrolyte interface to achieve band bending and thus a high photovoltage. They followed this experiment up by showing that if the electrodeposited Co became a film this mitigated the Si–electrolyte interface and thus creating a Schottky barrier, which in turn, lowered the photovoltage.
On the other hand, however, eqn (1) shows that if the depletion width is small (as in the case of a highly doped semiconductor), the metal islands can actually be quite small and still maintain the electronic effects of the semiconductor–metal interface. This approach of creating small catalyst islands has been used in many instances including the aforementioned work by Mei et al.50 Since the Mei work had already shown that a TiO2/sputtered Pt film formed an Ohmic contact (see Fig. 16c), when they sputtered Pt catalyst islands on TiO2, the catalysts still maintained the Ohmic contact thus allowing for O2 evolution to occur. Interestingly, the Pt nanoparticle (∼5 nm) coated electrode case (Fig. 16c) showed a significant resistance in the Mei work50 when it is used for the OER, while there were no problems for the TiO2 coated Si photocathodes which were coated by Pt nanoparticles with similar sizes.2,34,50,157 This can be explained by the aforementioned Schottky barrier at Pt–TiO2 due to the pinch-off effect.
Of recent works, the McIntyre group was the first to investigate TiO2 as an O2 evolution protection layer,44 the Chorkendorff group was the first to investigate conduction through TiO2 in anodic environments,43 but the Lewis group was the first to actually show conduction through thick (>10 nm) TiO2 for photoanodic O2 evolution.14 Additionally their method for transferring charge through TiO2 was much more groundbreaking that the aforementioned approach was used by the Chorkendorff group.
In the work by Hu et al., the Lewis group worked to create defect states throughout the amorphous TiO2 which they referred to as ‘leaky TiO2’.14 These defect states were located midway between the valence and conduction bands and thus provided a path to allow charge to transfer at potentials near the O2 evolution potential, as described earlier in Section 2.2. This charge was then transferred to small catalytic islands on which O2 was evolved. The semiconductor–catalyst interface appeared to be Ohmic for both evaporated and sputtered Ni, but there appeared to be significant resistance, possibly from a Schottky barrier when Ir was deposited. The “leaky” TiO2 has been shown to be effective on a wide variety of semiconductors such as planar and microwire Si, GaAs, GaP, and CdTe.14,45,112 In particular, a “leaky” TiO2 protected NW np+-Si with a NiCrOx OEC layer demonstrated in ref. 45 has shown a record long-term stability in the OER so far (Fig. 17). The ‘leaky TiO2’ was quite an unusual result, and thus there were many questions regarding that. The 2016 follow up work by Hu et al. investigated the energy locations of the various states in a Si/leaky TiO2 heterojunction and did a thorough job of investigating many of these questions.158 Through a variety of techniques they showed a comprehensive energy band diagram of the n-Si/leaky TiO2 heterojunction with either a SiO2 or a SixTiyOz interface. They also showed that this n-Si/leaky TiO2 could induce a 390 mV open circuit voltage. Man et al. investigated a very similar system using both n-Si/amorphous TiO2 as well as p-Si/amorphous TiO2 for photovoltaic applications.159 In their study the TiO2 did not act as a hole conducting layer, but rather a hole blocking layer. However they deposited TiO2via a CVD method at 100 °C rather than an ALD at 150 °C, which strongly hints that the exact deposition procedure is essential to create this “leaky” TiO2.
 Fig. 17  (a) CA for an np+-Si/TiO2/NiCrOx microwire-array photoelectrode under 1 Sun simulated illumination in 1.0 M KOH (pH 14) at 0.36 V vs. E(OH−/O2). Schematic of a structure with the fabrication procedure is added as the inset. (b) SEM image of a fully processed microwire array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
One of the more interesting follow up works on the “leaky” TiO2 was the work by McDowell et al., where they showed that a sputtered TiO2 without significant mid gap defect states could also achieve anodic conductivity to evolve O2.121 The McDowell et al. work by the Lewis group and the Mei et al. work by the Chorkendorff group used the same sputtering TiO2 technique for anodic conductivity, but unfortunately both were published at almost the same time, thus neither of these works could mimic and compare to the other approach. However there are still some unresolved issues with “leaky” TiO2 such as exactly how charge conducts through the TiO2. Both DFT calculations160 and experimental results161 have shown that oxygen vacancies can allow for deep level trap sites as those found in the “leaky” TiO2. However calculations by Lewerenz show that the charge transfer was probably not due to a Poole–Frenkel type mechanism.162 While the Lewis group has shown amorphous ‘Leaky’ TiO2 to be highly conductive to charge, the McIntyre's group has shown that their amorphous TiO2 creates a barrier for conduction of charge.148,149 While both their ALD processes appear quite similar, a small difference must account for the discrepancies and further studies are needed to clarify this question.
With the exception of the previously described Si-based photoanodes, very limited number of studies has reported meaningful OER stabilities in acidic solutions.14,131,134 Li et al. coated a thin IrOx on the hematite (Fe2O3) photoanode and showed a stable PEC activity under OER conditions in adjusted HNO3 with 0.1 M KNO3 (pH 1.01) for 5 hours. Although IrOx coated Fe2O3 showed 5% photocurrent loss after the stability test, this is of significance because it was the first demonstration of OER using hematite in highly acidic solutions. Recently, Sarnowska et al.129 also demonstrated a stable OER in 1 M CH3SO3H (pH ≈ 0) for 20 hours using sodium doped WO3 without any co-catalyst and protection layer. However, as described above in the introduction part, the high Eg of WO3 (∼2.5 eV) fundamentally limits the light absorption and leads to poor photocurrent performance (∼3 mA cm−2). On the other hand, this implies that n-WO3 could potentially be used as a protection layer for highly acidic conditions rather than as a light absorber material.
4.3. Other layers
In general, tantalum oxynitride (TaON) has a sufficiently wide band gap (∼2.4 eV)163 with suitable band alignment for both water oxidation and reduction, but it is also known to undergo deterioration in the highly oxidative environments, e.g., under water oxidation conditions by self-oxidation of nitrogen.164 Higashi et al.164 showed a modified TaON with IrO2, which is an excellent OER catalyst, but it could maintain only 50% of the Jint. in less than 10 min (@1.2 V vs. RHE). Recently, Hou et al.165 reported a non-metallic graphitic C3N4 coated 3D structured n-TaON with a CoOx co-catalyst that shows significantly enhanced photoelectrochemical stability (3 hours) under OER conditions at pH 13.6 (1 M NaOH). In addition, negative band offsets for both the CB and the VB (−1.0 eV and −0.5 eV, respectively) toward the TaON promote an effective charge separation for the water oxidation reaction. 3D WO3/C3N4 hetero-junctions decorated with nanoparticle CoOx also exhibited enhanced PEC water oxidation performance and stability compared to the unprotected WO3.166 However, the efficiency of the TaON is limited by a wide band gap that excludes photo-excitation by most of the solar spectrum leading to a maximum theoretical photocurrent of 7.5 mA cm−2 based on the Schottky–Queisser limit.167
Carbon-based protection layers for high performance low band-gap photoanodes, e.g. Si, can be an appropriate example for comparison with other inorganic protection materials listed previously. Recently, Yoon et al.168 coated n-type c-Si with a carbon-based protective multi-layer structure, which is composed of graphene-oxide (GO), single-walled carbon nanotubes, and graphene on top (i.e. n-Si/GO/SWCNT/graphene) that showed stable water oxidation in 1 M KOH (pH 14) for 15 min. This study revealed the protection ability of the CNT layer for the n-Si photoanode for the first time; however, the origin of poor OER kinetics even at a relatively high potential (∼0.5 mA cm−2 @ 1.4 V vs. RHE) was not studied in detail.
5. Concluding remarks and outlooks
PEC stability and protection are critically important for the solar-fuel systems to be accepted as reliable energy systems, which can compete with other stability-proven renewable energy sources, such as PV and solar-thermal. Making tandem devices with stable oxide photocatalysts that have appropriate optoelectronic properties and options where this might not require protective layers (e.g., Fe2O3, BiVO4) in neutral pH can be a simple solution. However, as shown in the first Section of this work, it is essential to have protective films which can enable the use of technologically well-proven high-performing non-oxide solar cell materials, and the development of robust protection thin films has become an emerging research field from early 2010 as demonstrated in Tables S1 and S2 (ESI†).
So far, various types of protection layers have been evaluated, and among them, TiO2 has been proven for both photocathodes and photoanodes in a wide range of pH levels from acidic to alkaline, owing to its intrinsic chemical stability. Depending on its operating conditions, the NiOx family can also be a promising candidate. In particular, oxidation during OER activity makes the NiOx a protective layer and an efficient OEC layer in the high pH region. Self-enhancement in overpotential with iron-incorporation and simplicity in fabrication make this strategy attractive. In addition, recent developments with bi-polar membranes,169 which can enable the operation of the photocathode and the photoanode at different pH conditions, increase the degree of freedom in material selection for making full water splitting systems.
In addition to this technological development in the demonstration of long-term stable PEC water splitting systems, there have also been many scientific studies to understand the fundamentals of charge carrier transport, and to make more efficient PEC systems. In this review we introduced representative carrier path mechanisms: electron transport via the conduction band (for photocathodes) and hole transport – via valence band (for photoanodes), tunneling via very thin insulating oxide, via defect states (‘(defect) state-mediated transport’ for photoanodes), and via hole–electron recombination at the photoanode/metal-oxide interface.
Despite significant progress, continued work on the protection strategies for PEC systems is needed, particularly, the following aspects should be addressed for practical tandem PEC water splitting systems: (i) stability and corrosion in the dark considering day/night operation in practical systems; (ii) development of minimally damaging deposition processes for the sensitive PV materials, including, but not limited to organohalide perovskite semiconductors; (iii) in-depth studies on new interfaces created by adding protection or other functional layer(s) for minimizing carrier-loss and maximizing photovoltage; (iv) the dependency of OER kinetics on fabrication conditions.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the support from the VILLUM Center for Science of Sustainable Fuels and Chemicals which is funded by the VILLUM Fonden research grant (9455).
References
S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 100–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bae, T. Pedersen, B. Seger, M. Malizia, A. Kuznetsov, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 650–660 CAS .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. Mckone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Burke, L. J. Enman, A. S. Batchellor, S. Zou and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7549–7558 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. Lu, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5858–5868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
J. Hofkens and M. Roefaers, Nature, 2016, 530, 36–37 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Rongé, T. Bosserez, D. Martel, C. Nervi, L. Boarino, F. Taulelle, G. Decher, S. Bordiga and J. A. Martens, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7963–7981 RSC .
J. Jin, K. Walczak, M. R. Singh, C. Karp, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3371 CAS .
B. Seger, I. E. Castelli, P. C. K. Vesborg, K. W. Jacobsen, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2397–2413 CAS .

          R. van de Krol, Photoelectrochemical Hydrogen Production, in Electronic Materials: Science & Technology, ed. R. van de Krol and M. Grätzel, Springer Science+Business Media, Boston, vol. 102, ch. 2, pp. 13–67 Search PubMed .
H. S. Park, H. W. Ha, R. S. Ruoff and A. J. Bard, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2014, 716, 8–15 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Kast, L. J. Enman, N. J. Gurnon, A. Nadarajah and S. W. Boettcher, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 22830–22837 CAS .
S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, J. A. Beardslee, M. Lichterman, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Science, 2014, 344, 1005–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hilaire, M. J. Suess, N. Kranzlin, K. Bienkowski, R. Solarska, J. Augustynski and M. Niederberger, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20530–20537 CAS .
C. G. Morales-Guio, S. D. Tilley, H. Vrubel, M. Grätzel and X. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3059 Search PubMed .
T. W. Kim and K.-S. Choi, Science, 2014, 343, 990–994 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, Y. Suzuki, K. Seki, N. Shibata, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 894–901 RSC .
A. Standing, S. Assali, L. Gao, M. A. Verheijen, D. van Dam, Y. Cui, P. H. L. Notten, J. E. M. Haverkort and E. P. A. M. Bakkers, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Gurudayal, D. Sabba, M. H. Kumar, L. H. Wong, J. Barber, M. Grätzel and N. Mathews, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3833–3839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, Y. Kuang, E. Verlage, B. S. Brunschwig, C. W. Tu and N. S. Lewis, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402276 CrossRef .
T. W. Kim, Y. Ping, G. A. Galli and K.-S. Choi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8769 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, R. Kapadia, J. Yang, M. Zheng, K. Chen, M. Hettick, X. Yin, C. Battaglia, I. D. Sharp, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 2308–2313 CAS .
D. Bae, B. Mei, R. Frydendal, T. Pedersen, B. Seger, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorff, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 1546–1552 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger, O. Hansen and P. C. K. Vesborg, Sol. RRL, 2016, 1600013 Search PubMed .
F. F. Abdi, L. Han, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman, B. Dam and R. van de Krol, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2195 Search PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, G. Magesh, D. H. Youn, J.-W. Jang, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2681 Search PubMed .
A. J. Bard, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 59–75 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and L.-W. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 3659–3666 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, Z. Zheng, J. Spurgeon and X. Yang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2504–2517 CAS .
O. Savadogo, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 1998, 52, 361–388 CrossRef CAS .
K. Walczak, Y. Chen, C. Karp, J. W. Beeman, M. Shaner, J. Spurgeon, I. D. Sharp, X. Amashukeli, W. West, J. Jin, N. S. Lewis and C. Xiang, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 544–551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. Takeno, Atlas of Eh-pH diagrams: Intercomposition of thermodynamics database, National Institute of Advanced Industrial Science and Technology, Tokyo,  2005 Search PubMed .
D. Bae, S. Shayestehaminzadeh, E. B. Thorsteinsson, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, B. Seger, P. C. K. Vesborg, S. Ólafsson and I. Chorkendorff, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 758–765 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. May, H.-J. Lewerenz, D. Lackner, F. Dimroth and T. Hannappel, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Q. Contractor and J. O. Bockris, Electrochim. Acta, 1984, 29, 1427–1434 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li and S. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1987, 227, 213–221 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, S. Dahl and I. Chorkendorff, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9128–9131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Kohl, S. N. Frank and A. J. Bard, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 225–229 CrossRef CAS .
A. Paracchino, V. Laporte, K. Sivula, M. Grätzel and E. Thimsen, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 456–461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Lee, K. Takei, J. Zhang, R. Kapadia, M. Zheng, Y.-Z. Chen, J. Nah, T. S. Matthews, Y.-L. Chueh, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2012, 51, 10760–10764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Seger, S. D. Tilley, T. Pedersen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, M. Graetzel and I. Chorkendorff, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 25902–25907 RSC .
B. Seger, T. Pedersen, A. B. Laursen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 1057–1064 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. W. Chen, J. D. Prange, S. Dühnen, Y. Park, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 539–544 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Shaner, S. Hu, K. Sun and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 203–207 CAS .
S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, J. Azevedo, M. Stefik and M. Grätzel, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 303–311 CrossRef CAS .
B. Seger, S. D. Tilley, T. Pedersen, P. C. K. Vesborg, O. Hansen, M. Graetzel and I. Chorkendorff, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15089–15094 CAS .
L. Ji, M. D. McDaniel, S. Wang, A. B. Posadas, X. Li, H. Huang, J. C. Lee, A. A. Demkov, A. J. Bard, J. G. Ekerdt and E. T. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 10, 84–90 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Campet, C. Puprichitkun and Z. W. Sun, Act. Passive Electron. Compon., 1985, 13, 175–189 CrossRef .
B. Mei, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, D. Bae, R. Frydendal, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 15019–15027 CAS .
H. D. Abruna and A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1981, 103, 6898–6901 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller and R. G. Vadimsky, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1981, 46, 1153–1156 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heller, E. Aharon-Shalom, W. A. Bonner and B. Miller, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1982, 104, 6942–6948 CrossRef CAS .
C. Maier, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1996, 21, 859–864 CrossRef CAS .
B. Marsen, B. Cole and E. L. Miller, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1054–1058 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yokoyama, T. Minegishi, K. Maeda, M. Katayama, J. Kubota, A. Yamada, M. Konagai and K. Domen, Electrochem. Commun., 2010, 12, 851–853 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hou, B. L. Abrams, P. C. K. Vesborg, M. E. Björketun, K. Herbst, L. Bech, A. M. Setti, C. D. Damsgaard, T. Pedersen, O. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, S. Dahl, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 434–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Paracchino, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Stefik, S. D. Tilley and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8673–8681 CAS .
E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, H. a. Atwater, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9653–9661 CAS .
J. Kim, T. Minegishi, J. Kobota and K. Domen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6368–6374 CAS .
T. Bourgeteau, D. Tondelier, B. Geffroy, R. Brisse, C. Laberty-Robert, S. Campidelli, R. de Bettignies, V. Artero, S. Palacin and B. Jousselme, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2706–2713 CAS .
Z. Zhang, R. Dua, L. Zhang, H. Zhu, H. Zhang and P. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 1709–1717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Laursen, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, B. Seger, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorff, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 20000–20004 RSC .
Y. Lin, C. Battaglia, M. Boccard, M. Hettick, Z. Yu, C. Ballif, J. W. Ager and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5615–5618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-Y. Lin, Y.-H. Lai, D. Mersch and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 3482–3487 RSC .
Q. Ding, F. Meng, C. R. English, M. Cabán-Acevedo, M. J. Shearer, D. Liang, A. S. Daniel, R. J. Hamers and S. Jin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8504–8507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Choi, J.-Y. Jung, M.-J. Park, J.-W. Song, J.-H. Lee and J. H. Bang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2928–2933 CAS .
L. Zhang, T. Minegishi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 6167–6174 RSC .
J. D. Benck, S. C. Lee, K. D. Fong, J. Kibsgaard, R. Sinclair and T. F. Jaramillo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1400739 CrossRef .
C. Ros, T. Andreu, S. Giraldo, Y. Sánchez and J. R. Morante, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 158, 184–188 CrossRef CAS .
J. Feng, M. Gong, M. J. Kenney, J. Z. Wu, B. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 1577–1583 CrossRef CAS .
A. Azarpira, M. Lublow, A. Steigert, P. Bogdanoff, D. Greiner, C. A. Kaufmann, M. Krüger, U. Gernert, R. Van De Krol, A. Fischer and T. Schedel-Niedrig, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1402148 CrossRef .
R. Fan, W. Dong, L. Fang, F. Zheng, X. Su, S. Zou, J. Huang, X. Wang and M. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 13902 CrossRef .
H. Kumagai, T. Minegishi, N. Sato, T. Yamada, J. Kubota and K. Domen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8300–8307 CAS .
I. A. Digdaya, P. P. Rodriguez, M. Ma, G. W. P. Adhyaksa, E. C. Garnett, A. H. M. Smets and W. A. Smith, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6842–6852 CAS .
M. Crespo-Quesada, L. M. Pazos-Outón, J. Warnan, M. F. Kuehnel, R. H. Friend and E. Reisner, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Li, M. Zheng, M. Zhong, L. Ma, F. Wang, L. Ma and W. Shen, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 29738 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Urbain, V. Smirnov, J.-P. Becker, A. Lambertz, F. Yang, J. Ziegler, B. Kaiser, W. Jaegermann, U. Rau and F. Finger, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 145–154 CAS .
J. Liang, H. Tan, M. Liu, B. Liu, N. Wang, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhao, A. H. M. Smets, M. Zeman and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16841–16848 CAS .
J. Azevedo, S. D. Tilley, M. Schreier, M. Stefik, C. Sousa, J. P. Araújo, A. Mendes, M. Grätzel and M. T. Mayer, Nano Energy, 2016, 24, 10–16 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Britto, J. D. Benck, J. L. Young, C. Hahn, T. G. Deutsch and T. F. Jaramillo, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2044–2049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bae, T. Pedersen, B. Seger, B. Iandolo, O. Hansen, P. C. K. Vesborg and I. Chorkendorff, Catal. Today, 2016 DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2016.11.028 .
O. Khaselev and J. A. Turner, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 1999, 2, 310–312 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. McKone, A. P. Pieterick, H. B. Gray and N. S. Lewis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 223–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Malizia, B. Seger, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 6847–6853 CAS .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Prog. Photovoltaics, 2016, 24, 905–913 Search PubMed .
M. Gratzel, Nature, 1995, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Fan, W. Dong, L. Fang, F. Zheng, X. Su, S. Zou, J. Huang, X. Wang and M. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 2–6 Search PubMed .
J. R. Bakke, K. L. Pickrahn, T. P. Brennan and S. F. Bent, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3482–3508 RSC .

CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physcis, 97th edition (Internet Version 2017), ed. W. M. Haynes, CRC Press/Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, FL,  2016 Search PubMed .
J. Feng, M. Gong, M. J. Kenney, J. Z. Wu, B. Zhang, Y. Li and H. Dai, Nano Res., 2015, 1, 1–4 Search PubMed .
A. Azarpira, M. Lublow, A. Steigert, P. Bogdanoff, D. Greiner, C. A. Kaufmann, M. Krüger, U. Gernert, R. Van De Krol, A. Fischer and T. Schedel-Niedrig, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1–9 Search PubMed .
E. Parzinger, B. Miller, B. Blaschke, J. A. Garrido, J. W. Ager, A. Holleitner and U. Wurstbauer, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11302–11309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Benck, T. R. Hellstern, J. Kibsgaard, P. Chakthranont and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 3957–3971 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 951–957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Jaramillo, K. P. Jørgensen, J. Bonde, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch and I. Chorkendorff, Science, 2007, 317, 100–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hinnemann, P. G. Moses, J. Bonde, K. P. Jorgensen, J. H. Nielsen, S. Horch, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 5308–5309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Merki, S. Fierro, H. Vrubel and X. Hu, Chem. Sci., 2011, 2, 1262–1267 RSC .
A. G. Scheuermann and P. C. McIntyre, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 2867–2878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Kainthla, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1986, 133, 248–253 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Kainthla, B. Zelenay and J. O. Bockris, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 841–845 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Reece, J. A. Hamel, K. Sung, T. D. Jarvi, A. J. Esswein, J. J. H. Pijpers and D. G. Nocera, Science, 2011, 334, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liao, J. Feng, W. Luo, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Li, T. Yu and Z. Zou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 3066–3074 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, N. Park, Z. Sun, J. Zhou, J. Wang, X. Pang, S. Shen, S. Y. Noh, Y. Jing, S. Jin, P. K. L. Yu and D. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7872–7877 CAS .
M. J. Kenney, M. Gong, Y. Li, J. Z. Wu, J. Feng, M. Lanza and H. Dai, Science, 2013, 342, 836–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Lichterman, M. R. Shaner, S. G. Handler, B. S. Brunschwig, H. B. Gray, N. S. Lewis and J. M. Spurgeon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 4188–4191 CrossRef CAS .
N. C. Strandwitz, D. J. Comstock, R. L. Grimm, A. C. Nichols-Nielander, J. Elam and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 4931–4936 CAS .
M. Higashi, K. Domen and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10238–10241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, X. Pang, S. Shen, X. Qian, J. S. Cheung and D. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2064–2072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mei, A. A. Permyakova, R. Frydendal, D. Bae, T. Pedersen, P. Malacrida, O. Hansen, I. E. L. Stephens, P. C. K. Vesborg, B. Seger and I. Chorkendorff, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3456–3461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Yang, K. Walczak, E. Anzenberg, F. M. Toma, G. Yuan, J. Beeman, A. Schwartzberg, Y. Lin, M. Hettick, A. Javey, J. W. Ager, J. Yano, H. Frei and I. D. Sharp, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6191–6194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, M. T. McDowell, S. Hu, H. B. Gray, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3334–3337 CAS .
G. Liu, J. Shi, F. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Han, C. Ding, S. Chen, Z. Wang, H. Han and C. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7295–7299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, M. F. Lichterman, J. M. Spurgeon, S. Hu, I. D. Sharp, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19618–19624 CAS .
K. Sun, S. Shen, J. S. Cheung, X. Pang, N. Park, J. Zhou, Y. Hu, Z. Sun, S. Y. Noh, C. T. Riley, P. K. L. Yu, S. Jin and D. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 4612–4625 RSC .
E. S. Kim, H. J. Kang, G. Magesh, J. Y. Kim, J. W. Jang and J. S. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 17762–17769 CAS .
B. Mei, B. Seger, T. Pedersen, M. Malizia, O. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff and P. C. K. Vesborg, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1948–1952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Shi, I. Y. Choi, K. Zhang, J. Kwon, D. Y. Kim, J. K. Lee, S. H. Oh, J. K. Kim and J. H. Park, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, M. T. McDowell, A. C. Nielander, S. Hu, M. R. Shaner, F. Yang, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 592–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sun, F. H. Saadi, M. F. Lichterman, W. G. Hale, H.-P. Wang, X. Zhou, N. T. Plymale, S. T. Omelchenko, J.-H. He, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 3612–3617 CAS .
M. T. McDowell, M. F. Lichterman, A. I. Carim, R. Liu, S. Hu, B. S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 15189–15199 CAS .
X. Zhou, R. Liu, K. Sun, D. Friedrich, M. T. McDowell, F. Yang, S. T. Omelchenko, F. H. Saadi, A. C. Nielander, S. Yalamanchili, K. M. Papadantonakis, B. S. Brunschwig and N. Lewis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2644–2649 CAS .
L. Chen, J. Yang, S. Klaus, L. J. Lee, R. Woods-Robinson, J. Ma, Y. Lum, J. K. Cooper, F. M. Toma, L. W. Wang, I. D. Sharp, A. T. Bell and J. W. Ager, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9595–9603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, T. Wang, Z. Luo, D. Zhang and J. Gong, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 7290–7293 RSC .
M. Zhong, T. Hisatomi, Y. Kuang, J. Zhao, M. Liu, A. Iwase, Q. Jia, H. Nishiyama, T. Minegishi, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, R. Niishiro, C. Katayama, H. Shibano, M. Katayama, A. Kudo, T. Yamada and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5053–5060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Li, S. W. Sheehan, D. He, Y. He, X. Yao, R. L. Grimm, G. W. Brudvig and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11428–11432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Kim, Y. Jo, J. H. Kim, J. W. Jang, H. J. Kang, Y. H. Lee, D. S. Kim, Y. Jun, J. S. Lee and K. I. M. E. T. Al, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11820–11829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Narkeviciute, P. Chakthranont, A. J. M. Mackus, C. Hahn, B. A. Pinaud, S. F. Bent and T. F. Jaramillo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7565–7572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sarnowska, K. Bienkowski, P. J. Barczuk, R. Solarska and J. Augustynski, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–6 Search PubMed .
S. Akiyama, M. Nakabayashi, N. Shibata, T. Minegishi, Y. Asakura, M. Abdulla-Al-Mamun, T. Hisatomi, H. Nishiyama, M. Katayama, T. Yamada and K. Domen, Small, 2016, 12, 5468–5476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Kwong, C. C. Lee and J. Messinger, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10941–10950 CAS .
T. Yao, R. Chen, J. Li, J. Han, W. Qin, H. Wang, J. Shi, F. Fan and C. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13664–13672 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Kim, N. Nishimura, G. Magesh, J. Y. Kim, J. Jang, H. Jun, J. Kubota, K. Domen and J. S. Lee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5375–5383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Spurgeon, J. M. Velazquez and M. T. McDowell, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 3623–3631 RSC .
S. Cherevko, S. Geiger, O. Kasian, N. Kulyk, J. P. Grote, A. Savan, B. R. Shrestha, S. Merzlikin, B. Breitbach, A. Ludwig and K. J. J. Mayrhofer, Catal. Today, 2016, 262, 170–180 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, M. Cao, Y. Jin, X. Dai, X. Liang, Z. Ye, M. Li, J. Cheng, X. Xiao, Z. Wu, Z. Xia, B. Sun, E. Wang, Y. Mo, F. Gao and F. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1–6 Search PubMed .
M. D. Irwin, D. B. Buchholz, A. W. Hains, R. P. H. Chang and T. J. Marks, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 2783–2787 CrossRef CAS .
E. Nurlaela, H. Wang, T. Shinagawa, S. Flanagan, S. Ould-Chikh, M. Qureshi, Z. Mics, P. Sautet, T. Le Bahers, E. Cánovas, M. Bonn and K. Takanabe, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 4117–4126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Burke, M. G. Kast, L. Trotochaud, A. M. Smith and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 3638–3648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li and S. Wang, J. Electroanal. Chem. Interfacial Electrochem., 1987, 227, 213–221 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sato, T. Minami, S. Takata and T. Yamada, Thin Solid Films, 1993, 236, 27–31 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Nail, J. M. Fields, J. Zhao, J. Wang, M. J. Greaney, R. L. Brutchey and F. E. Osterloh, ACS Nano, 2015, 5135–5142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, X. Li, T. Wang and C. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 9667–9675 RSC .
C.-W. Tung, Y.-Y. Hsu, Y.-P. Shen, Y. Zheng, T.-S. Chan, H.-S. Sheu, Y.-C. Cheng and H. M. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tomkiewicz and J. M. Woodall, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1436 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nelson and R. E. Chandler, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1181–1194 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. D. Prange, M. Gunji, C. E. D. Chidsey and P. C. McIntyre, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2487–2496 CAS .
A. G. Scheuermann, J. P. Lawrence, K. W. Kemp, T. Ito, A. Walsh, C. E. D. Chidsey, P. K. Hurley and P. C. McIntyre, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 99–105 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. K. Kirner, K. D. Schierbaum and W. Göpel, Fresenius' J. Anal. Chem., 1991, 341, 416–420 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cerchez, H. Langer, M. El Achhab, T. Heinzel, D. Ostermann, H. Lüder and J. Degenhardt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 033522 CrossRef .
W. De Bosscher, R. Van Meirhaeghe, A. De Laere, W. Laflere and F. Cardon, Solid-State Electron., 1988, 31, 1629–1634 CrossRef .
R. T. Tung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1991, 58, 2821–2823 CrossRef CAS .
R. T. Tung, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1992, 45, 13509–13523 CrossRef .
R. C. Rossi and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 12303–12318 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hill, A. T. Landers and J. A. Switzer, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1150–1155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Kemppainen, A. Bodin, B. Sebok, T. Pedersen, B. Seger, B. Mei, D. Bae, P. C. K. Vesborg, J. Halme, O. Hansen, P. D. Lund and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2991–2999 CAS .
S. Hu, M. H. Richter, M. F. Lichterman, J. Beardslee, T. Mayer, B.
S. Brunschwig and N. S. Lewis, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 3117–3129 CAS .
G. Man, J. Schwartz, J. C. Sturm and A. Kahn, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. H. Pham and L.-W. Wang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 541–550 RSC .
P. Reckers, M. Dimamay, J. Klett, S. Trost, K. Zilberberg, T. Riedl, B. A. Parkinson, J. Brötz, W. Jaegermann and T. Mayer, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 9890–9898 CAS .
H. J. Lewerenz, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, H3117–H3129 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chun, A. Ishikawa, H. Fujisawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, M. Kawai, Y. Matsumoto and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1798–1803 CrossRef CAS .
M. Higashi, K. Domen and R. Abe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 6968–6971 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, H. Cheng, O. Takeda and H. Zhu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1348–1357 CAS .
Y. Hou, F. Zuo, A. P. Dagg, J. Liu and P. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5043–5049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Shockley and H. J. Queisser, J. Appl. Phys., 1961, 32, 510–519 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yoon, J.-H. Lee, J. Kang, J. Kang, M. J. Moody, M. C. Hersam and L. J. Lauhon, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 7370–7375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, D. A. Vermaas, D. Bi, A. Hagfeldt, W. A. Smith and M. Grätzel, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600100 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Tables S1 and S2. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cs00918bThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Dowon Bae
	Dowon Bae received his BSc and MSc (Honors) from the Russian State Technological University named after K. E. Tsiolkovsky in 2006 and 2008, respectively. After research activities in Cu(In,Ga)Se2 solar cells at the LG Innotek, he joined the Danish National Research Foundation “CINF” (Center for Individual Nanoparticle Functionality) at the Technical University of Denmark (DTU), where he completed his PhD in 2012 under the supervision of Prof. Ib Chorkendorff. Presently, he is a postdoctoral researcher at the VILLUM Center for the Science of Sustainable Fuels and Chemicals at the DTU Physics. His research concerns PEC device design and fabrication for solar-fuel production.

Brian Seger
	Prof. Brian Seger completed his PhD from Notre Dame under Prof. Prashant Kamat in 2009. He has since completed a postdoc at the University of Queensland under Lian Zhou Wang and joined the “CINF” at DTU under Prof. Ib Chorkendorff. Since 2014, he has been an assistant professor at DTU Physics. His research interests include understanding semiconductor–electrolyte interfaces, discovering new photoactive materials, and modeling photoelectrochemical devices.

Peter C. K. Vesborg
	Peter C. K. Vesborg received his PhD degree in Applied Physics from the DTU in 2010. He then went to the department of Chemical Engineering at Stanford University as a postdoc under Prof. Thomas Jaramillo before returning to DTU to join the faculty of the department of Physics in 2012, where he has been an associate professor since 2015. His research concerns catalysis (thermal, electro-, and photocatalysis), photoelectrodes, MEMS-based device development for catalyst benchmarking, and global resource availability and management for sustainable technologies.

Ole Hansen
	Prof. Ole Hansen received his MSc degree in micro-technology from the DTU in 1977. Since 1977 he has worked with micro- and nano-technology and applications of the technology within electronics, metrology, sensing, catalysis and energy harvesting. Currently, he is Professor at DTU Nanotech, where he is heading the Silicon Microtechnology group. His current research interests include sustainable energy, photocatalysis and tools for characterizing catalytic processes. From 2005 to 2016 he was part of the ‘CINF’, and presently, he is part of ‘V-SUSTAIN’ (VILLUM Center for the Science of Sustainable Fuels and Chemicals).

Ib Chorkendorff
	Prof. Ib Chorkendorff got his PhD from Odense University (1985). After working as a post-doc with Prof. John T. Yates Jr. at the University of Pittsburgh, he was employed at DTU (1987) to establish experimental activity investigating fundamental aspects of heterogeneous catalysis. He was the Director of the ‘CINF’ (2005–2016) and the subsequent Director of the ‘V-SUSTAIN’. He has been the author of close to 300 scientific papers and 17 patents. His research activities focus on surface reactions and finding new materials to improve energy production/conversion and environmental protection. He is the co-founder of the start-up companies RENCAT APS, HPNOW APS and Spectroinlets APS.

 	Fig. 1  Overlaid current density–potential (J–V) behaviors for state-of-the-art half cells: combination of small Eg (SBG in inset) photocathodes with large Eg (LBG in the inset) photoanodes (a), and for the case of LBG photocathodes with SBG photoanodes (b). Schematic drawings for tandem water splitting devices for each case are illustrated in the inset. The drawings were reproduced with permission from ref. 10, Copyright 2014 The Royal Society of Chemistry. The modelled J–V curve for the photoanode and the photocathode (dashed dark grey) is projected to estimate the theoretical maximum JOP of the overall water splitting system. Note that the modelled J–V curve for the ideal photoelectrode was drawn using a web-based simulation program.25 Details of overlayers and catalysts can be found in ref. 2, 13 and 14.	 

 	Fig. 2  Stability change of the photocathode (a) as its reduction potential Φred shifts down from above the CB of the p-type semiconductor to below E(H2O/H2). Similarly for the photoanode case (b), the stability of n-type material changes as its oxidation potential Φox increases. Note that the illustration is not to scale. (c) Calculated reduction potential Φred (black bars) and oxidation potential Φox (red bars) relative to the NHE and the vacuum level for a series of semiconductors in solution at pH = 0, the ambient temperature of 298.15 K, and a pressure of 1 bar. (c) Is reprinted with permission from ref. 29. Copyright (2012) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 3  A schematic illustration of the band diagram of a photocathode with a buried pn+-junction protected by an n-type metallic oxide passivation layer. HEC stands for the hydrogen evolution catalyst, and EF,n and EF,p stand for the quasi-Fermi level of the electron and the hole, respectively, the difference of which gives the photovoltage (Vph) under illumination.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of band diagrams for a protected buried np+-junction photoanode with various charge transport mechanisms: (a) hole-transport via the VB of the p-type protection layer; (b) hole-tunneling through the thin insulating oxide; (c) hole-injection via state-mediate transport; (d) electron consumption by recombination at the interface between the photoanode and the n-type protection layer. Note that OEC stands for the oxygen evolution catalyst.	 

 	Fig. 5  Chart visualizing data on reported stabilities of photocathodes for the HER, versus tested pH condition, with resulting photocurrent and degradation rate indicated. Device structures for the photocathode with reported stability longer than a day are noted. Jint. is the initial photocurrent at the start of the stability test. Degradation rates are calculated using the ratio of the measured photocurrent at the end of the stability test (Jend) to Jint.. Detailed information on device structures and working conditions can also be found in Table S1 in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 6  Proposed band diagrams for a pristine p-type semiconductor (a) and a metal-protected semiconductor with a Schottky junction (b) in equilibrium with the H2O/H2 redox couple in contact with the electrolyte. Vbi stands for the built-in potential. Band positions of widely used non-oxide photoabsorbers with an approximate work function (φmetal) of selected metals are also shown in (c). The potential values in (c) are reported in the literature29,90 and relative to the NHE (normal hydrogen electrode).	 

 	Fig. 7  Long-term stability (chromoamperometry – CA) test of the forming-gas (5% H2/Ar) treated carrier-selective c-Si photocathode (c-Si/SiOx/nc-Si at both front & back contacts) with a 100 nm-thick sputtered TiO2 protection layer. Photocurrent was measured at 0.4 V vs. RHE in 1 M HClO4 (pH 0). Initial CV prior to the CA measurement (black), CV after 3 weeks (blue), after 41 days (red), and CV from a re-platinized sample after the long-term CA test (grey) are shown in the inset. The figure is reprinted from ref. 82 with permission from Elsevier, Copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 8  These band diagrams show the location of the TiO2 conduction band of both the unannealed (blue lines) and vacuum annealed (red lines) samples as a function of depth into TiO2 at the following electrochemical potentials: (a) +0.77 V, (b) +0.2 V and (c) 0.0 V vs. RHE. Note that the conduction band (CB) pinning at the TiO2/electrolyte interface. Electrons can tunnel through the TiO2 only at the low potential range due to the relatively wide depletion width, which hinders efficient carrier transport. This figure was reproduced with permission from ref. 47, Copyright 2013 The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  SEM images of a (100) oriented c-Si substrate with and without sputter deposited TiO2 at 400 °C after immersion in an 1 M KOH electrolyte (pH 14) for 3 days in the dark (a), and illustrations of the etch profiles of a (100) oriented Si through the pin-holes of the TiO2 protection layer during the etching process in KOH solution (b). The figures were adapted from ref. 34, Copyright 2016 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of protected textured cells with a catalyst and Ohmic-contact layers demonstrated in ref. 12. A solution processed TiO2 layer has been applied as a protection layer, and both Ti and FTO (F-doped tin oxide) are used as Ohmic-contact layers for efficient lateral charge transport. (b) J–V curves from CVs of the photocathode after various times and treatments of stability testing at 300 mV vs. RHE (near maximum power point) in 1 M KOH (pH 14). The photocathode was then cleaned in acid (1 M HClO4) via cycling from reducing to oxidizing potentials. Reprinted with permission from ref. 12. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  Stabilities as indicated by the steady-state photocurrent characterization with c-Si/STO/Ti/Pt (a) (reprinted with permission from ref. 48, Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group) and pn+-Si/Mo/MoS2 (b) (adapted with permission from ref. 69, Copyright 2014 WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim) held at 0 V vs. Ag/AgCl and RHE, respectively. Both tests were measured under 100 mW cm−2 illumination in 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 0.3). Schematic structures of the photocanode are also shown in the inset.	 

 	Fig. 12  Chart visualizing data on the reported stabilities of photocathodes for the OER versus pH of the test condition, illustrating photocurrent and the degradation rate. Device structures for the photoanode with reported stability longer than a day are noted. Detailed information on device structures' working conditions can also be found in Table S2 in the ESI.†	 

 	Fig. 13  CV scans of Ni1−xFex(OH)2/Ni1−xFexOOH films (a) and CV taken during 1 hour aging of Ni(OH)2 film (b) under dark conditions in 1 M KOH containing low-ppm Fe (<36 ppm). Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (c) CV curves of PEC measurements of Fe-treated NiO thin films on np+-Si photoanodes after various treatments under 38.6 mW cm−2 (λ ≥ 635 nm). Reprinted with permission from the American Chemical Society (ref. 114). (d) CVs of n-Si/SiOx/CoOx/NiOx, n-Si/SiOx/NiOx, and n-Si/NiOx and (e) chronoamperometry (CA) of n-Si/SiOx/CoOx/NiOx photoanodes measured at 1.63 V vs. RHE. Both experiments were carried out under AM 1.5G solar illumination. Reprinted with permission from ref. 122, published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Three types of photoanode junctions have been employed in ref. 156: (a) semiconductor–liquid junction protected by SiO2 and TiO2, (b) MIS structure with metallic OEC, and (c) MIS with a buried np+-junction. Here, the holes are transported via defect states of TiO2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 156, Copyright 2016 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 15  CV scans of a pn+-Si/Ti/TiO2/np-Pt electrode in an argon-purged 1 M HClO4 electrolyte with 10 mM each of Fe(III) and Fe(II). The scan rate was 20 mV s−1 and the samples were irradiated with the red part (λ > 635 nm) of the AM 1.5 spectrum. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. Copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  Band diagrams of an np+-Si/5 nm Ti/100 nm TiO2/Pt film photoelectrode: (a) overall band diagram at an applied bias of 1.4 V versus RHE under illumination; (b) zoom in of the p+-Si/Ti interface; (c) zoom in of the TiO2/Pt/electrolyte interface from the overall band diagram shown in (a). Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright (2015) American Chemical Society.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 17  (a) CA for an np+-Si/TiO2/NiCrOx microwire-array photoelectrode under 1 Sun simulated illumination in 1.0 M KOH (pH 14) at 0.36 V vs. E(OH−/O2). Schematic of a structure with the fabrication procedure is added as the inset. (b) SEM image of a fully processed microwire array. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright (2015) The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Tables S1 and S2. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cs00918b

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
