General synthesis of single atom electrocatalysts via a facile condensation–carbonization process   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA08115A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA08115A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 25959-25969General synthesis of single atom electrocatalysts via a facile condensation–carbonization process†

        
          
            Weiming 
            Chen
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xuanli 
            Luo
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Thomas J. A. 
            Slater
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yongfang 
            Zhou
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sanliang 
            Ling
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Bao
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Jesum 
            Alves Fernandes
          
        
      f, 
      
        
          
            Jianshe 
            Wang
          
        
      g and 

        
          
            Yi 
            Shen
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Food Science and Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510641, China. E-mail: feyshen@scut.edu.cn
bOverseas Expertise Introduction Center for Discipline Innovation of Food Nutrition and Human Health (111 Center), Guangzhou, 510641, China
cAdvanced Materials Research Group, Faculty of Engineering, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, NG7 2RD, UK
dElectron Physical Sciences Imaging Centre, Diamond Light Source Ltd., Oxfordshire OX11 0DE, UK
eFaculty of Materials Science and Engineering, Kunming University of Science and Technology, Kunming 650093, China
fSchool of Chemistry, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK
gSchool of Chemical Engineering and Energy, Zhengzhou University, Zhengzhou 450001, China
Received 
      18th August 2020
    , Accepted 19th November 2020First published on 20th November 2020AbstractThe general and cost-effective synthesis of single atom electrocatalysts (SAECs) still remains a great challenge. Herein, we report a general synthetic protocol for the synthesis of SAECs via a simple condensation–carbonization process, in which furfural and cyanamide were condensation polymerized in the presence of polystyrene nanospheres and metal ions, followed by a pyrolysis to N-doped carbon nanosheet (NCNS) supported SAECs. Six types of SAECs containing platinum, palladium, gold, nickel, cobalt and iron were synthesized to demonstrate the generality of the synthesis protocol. This methodology affords a facile solution to the trade-off between support conductivity and metal loading of SAECs by optimizing the ratio of carbon/nitrogen precursors, i.e., furfural and cyanamide. The presence of single metal atoms was confirmed by high-angle annular dark field scanning transmission electron microscopy and X-ray absorption fine structure measurements. The three-dimensional distribution of single platinum atoms was vividly revealed by depth profile analysis using a scanning transmission electron microscope. The resulting SAECs showed excellent performance for glycerol electro-oxidation and water splitting in alkaline solutions. Notably, Pt/NCNSs possessed an unprecedent mass-normalized current density of 5.3 A per milligram of platinum, which is 32 times that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst. Density functional theory calculations were conducted to reveal the adsorption behavior of glycerol over the SAECs. Using Ni/NCNSs and Co/NCNSs as anodic and cathodic electrocatalysts, we constructed a solar panel powered electrolytic cell for overall water splitting, leading to an overall energy efficiency of 8.8%, which is among the largest solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiencies reported in the literature.
Introduction
Electrocatalysis plays a central role in energy conversion and storage, and chemical synthesis.1,2 The search for high-performance electrocatalysts has drawn tremendous attention from the research community in the last decade.3–5 Recently, single atom electrocatalysts (SAECs) have been of particular interest because of their maximum atomic utilization and unique electronic and geometric configurations.6,7 So far, many SAECs based on nickel,8 cobalt,9 iron,10 copper,11 zinc,12 platinum,13 gold2 and ruthenium14 have been reported for electrochemical processes such as the hydrogen evolution reaction,15 oxygen evolution reaction,16 oxygen reduction reaction,5 CO2 reduction reaction17 and nitrogen reduction reaction.18 These reported SAECs generally displayed superior catalytic performance relative to their counterparts (nanoparticles or clusters) because of a greater number of active sites per mass and prominent size effects, which give rise to the distinctive adsorption and desorption behavior of reactants/intermediates, thereby leading to enhanced activity and selectivity.19–21
Owing to the prominent merits, many studies have been devoted to developing efficient methods for the preparation of SAECs.22,23 To date, many synthetic strategies have been reported to fabricate SAECs such as atomic layer deposition,24 mass-selected soft-landing,25 ball milling,26 coprecipitation,27 defect/vacancy confinement,28 high-temperature pyrolysis,29 wetness impregnation,30 iced-photochemical reduction31 and ultra-low-temperature synthesis.32 Among the reported methods, pyrolysis of metal–organic-frameworks (MOFs) represents the most feasible approach for the production of SAECs.33–35 The SAECs resulting from the pyrolysis of MOFs show outstanding catalytic performance owing to the strong coordination interaction of single atoms with the nitrogen-doped carbon matrix.36,37 Unfortunately, the synthesis of MOFs can be complicated and costly, involving many expensive and toxic moieties, and therefore remains an obstacle for scalable production.38 In addition, the choices of metal type and ligands are limited, making it challenging to fabricate SAECs bearing various metal atoms.23,38 Furthermore, being ideal electrocatalysts, they should possess excellent conductivity to facilitate the transport of electrons. On the other hand, the presence of abundant nitrogen atoms in the catalyst supports is indispensable to stabilize the single metal atoms, which could inevitably compromise the conductivity of the supports.20 This trade-off between catalyst conductivity and metal loading represents another obstacle for the synthesis of SAECs. Therefore, despite great progress in SAEC synthesis, a general synthesis protocol is highly desirable, but unfortunately still lacking. More recently, exciting results have been reported by several groups.39–42 Serendipitously, the authors found that the condensation product of furfural and cyanamide offers a general matrix for stabilizing single atoms. The prominent advantages of using furfural and cyanamide as chelating agents of metal ions lie in their low cost and low toxicity. The solvent for the condensation reaction is water, which makes the synthetic process highly sustainable. In addition, this synthetic protocol affords a facile solution to address the trade-off between catalyst conductivity and metal loading by optimizing the ratio of cyanamide/furfural. Six types of SAECs containing platinum, palladium, gold, nickel, cobalt and iron supported by nanoporous nitrogen doped carbon nanosheets (M/NCNSs, M = Pt, Pd, Au, Ni, Co, Fe) were synthesized to demonstrate the generality of the synthesis protocol. The distribution of the single metal atoms in the catalyst was revealed via scanning transmission electron microscopy, including three-dimensional reconstruction via a focal-series. The resulting SAECs showed excellent performance for glycerol electro-oxidation and water splitting. Notably, Pt/NCNSs possessed an unprecedent mass-normalized current density of 5.3 A per milligram of platinum for glycerol electro-oxidation, which is 32 times that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst. To explore the reason for such an outstanding activity, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were conducted. Ni/NCNSs exhibited better activity toward the oxygen evolution reaction (OER), while Co/NCNSs exhibited superior activity toward the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). Using Ni/NCNSs and Co/NCNSs as anodic and cathodic electrocatalysts, we constructed a solar panel powered electrolytic cell for overall water splitting, leading to a remarkable overall energy efficiency of 8.8%.
Results and discussion
The synthetic procedures are schematically shown in Fig. 1a. Furfural, which is employed as a typical carbon source, and cyanamide, which is employed as a nitrogen source, were in situ polymerized in the presence of PS nanospheres. The nitrogen and oxygen groups in the polymeric matrix serve as efficient chelating sites for metal cations, while the PS nanospheres were utilized as a sacrificial template to increase the surface area of the sample. After a simple pyrolysis process, the mixture was converted into single metal atoms supported by nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheets. Fourier-transform infrared spectroscopy analysis (Fig. S1a, ESI†) was conducted to reveal the changes in the surface groups of the samples. The FTIR profiles of the polymer precursors are relatively complicated owing to the large number of groups in the sample. In contrast, after pyrolysis, only N–H (3660 cm−1), CC (N) (1560 cm−1), and C–C (N) (1190 cm−1) groups are observed in the samples, suggesting the transformation of the polymers into carbonaceous materials.43 The Pt/NCNSs sample was first fabricated as a proof-of-concept example. Fig. 1b shows the overall view of the Pt/NCNSs sample in the form of a HAADF-STEM image. More TEM images of samples are shown in Fig. S1b–d (ESI†). The sample consists of aggregates of nanosheets. Notably, few nanoparticles can be found within the aggregates. High-resolution TEM images, as shown in Fig. 1c, confirmed the layered structure of the Pt/NCNSs sample. Fig. 1d shows a representative high-resolution HAADF-STEM image. It clearly reveals numerous single Pt atoms, as denoted by bright dots, which were highly dispersed on the nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheets. Since HAADF-STEM images only afford two-dimensional atom distribution, a focal series was performed on the Pt/NCNSs sample to reveal the three-dimensional dispersion of single metal atoms on the carbon matrix. The focal series allows reconstruction of the Pt atom locations as a function of depth through the sample. Pt atoms were observed throughout the support material, as indicated by the red dots in Fig. 1e and f. Based on this depth profile analysis, the volume density of platinum atoms is estimated to be 0.04 Pt per nm3, which is close to the theoretical value of 0.11 Pt per nm3. We note that while the focal steps were matched to the nominal depth of field and therefore Pt atoms should have been accurately counted, the volume density could vary by a factor of two. The corresponding elemental mapping, obtained through STEM-EDX (Fig. 1g), demonstrates that carbon, nitrogen and platinum are evenly distributed throughout one of the nanosheets.
 Fig. 1  Structural characterization of Pt/NCNSs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process, (b) HAADF-STEM image, (c) high-resolution TEM image, (d) high-resolution HAADF-STEM image, the inset of the enlarged area, (e and f) three-dimensional distribution of platinum atoms reconstructed from a HAADF-STEM focal series, (g) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding elemental mapping of carbon, nitrogen and platinum, respectively. 
The structure of the Pt/NCNSs was also studied by XRD, a representative spectrum of which is shown in Fig. S2a (ESI†). Compared with NCNSs, Pt/NCNSs exhibited two sharper diffraction peaks that can be related to graphitized carbon. It is noteworthy that no peaks associated with metallic platinum are observed in the XRD profiles. The structures of the samples were further characterized by Raman spectroscopy, as shown in Fig. S2b (ESI†). Two typical peaks related to carbon materials including D and G bands are noted. The intensity ratio (ID/IG) of Pt/NCNSs was determined to be 1.00, which is similar to that of NCNSs (1.03). Fig. S2c (ESI†) displays the N2 adsorption–desorption isotherm of Pt/NCNSs. It reveals a typical type IV isotherm with a distinct hysteresis loop, suggesting the presence of mesopores in the sample. Based on the isotherm, the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of Pt/NCNSs was calculated to be 552.4 m2 g−1. Such a large BET value is attributed to the thin-layered structure and presence of a number of mesopores. The pore size distribution of the Pt/NCNSs was also determined based on the adsorption branch of the isotherm, as shown in the inset of Fig. S2c (ESI†). The average diameter of the pores was determined to be 4.8 nm. It should be pointed out that the large surface area and abundant mesopores are favorable for the dispersion and exposure of single Pt atoms. The electronic structures of Pt/NCNSs were investigated by XPS. Fig. S2d† shows the survey spectrum. It reveals the presence of carbon, oxygen, nitrogen and platinum elements. No other elements are noted from the spectrum, indicating the high purity of the sample. Fig. S2e and f (ESI†) show the high-resolution N 1s and Pt 4f spectra, respectively. The N 1s spectrum was carefully decomposed. Five N states including pyridinic-N, Pt–Nx, pyrrolic-N, graphitic-N and oxidized-N were found, corresponding to the binding energies of 397.8, 398.9, 399.9, 400.8, and 402.0 eV, respectively. The Pt 4f spectrum consists of two peaks with binding energies of 75.4 and 72.1 eV, corresponding to the doublets of 4f5/2 and 4f7/2, respectively. Moreover, the binding energy of the Pt 4f spectrum is located between that of Pt0 and Pt2+, indicating that the valence state of platinum in Pt/NCNSs is 0–+2.
The chemical states and the coordination environment of Pt species at the atomic level were further investigated by using element-selective X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) measurements. The normalized X-ray absorption near edge structure (XANES) spectra of the Pt L3-edge for Pt/NCNSs along with Pt foil and PtO2 references are shown in Fig. 2a. The white-line intensities in the normalized XANES spectra reflect the oxidation state of Pt species.44 It can be seen that the white-line intensities of Pt/NCNSs are higher than those of Pt foil but much lower than those of PtO2, indicating that the oxidation state of Pt in Pt/NCNSs is between Pt0 and Pt4+,45 which is consistent with the results of XPS (Fig. S2f, ESI†). The unique electronic structure of Pt species with positive charges is mainly due to the coordination of Pt with N atoms in the support which results in electron transfer from Pt to N atoms.46 Such an electron transfer could also be present in other SAECs reported in this study. The k3-weighted Fourier transform spectra in the R space of the Pt L3-edge extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) for Pt/NCNSs and references are shown in Fig. 2b. Only one distinct peak (1.56 Å), which is ascribed to the backscattering between Pt and light atoms, can be observed in the EXAFS curve of Pt/NCNSs, and is shorter than the Pt–O peak (1.63 Å) in PtO2. So, the peak at 1.56 Å corresponds to the Pt–N/C first coordination shell in this system. No other appreciable peak can be observed in the 2.0–4.0 Å interval, indicating that most of the Pt atoms in Pt/NCNSs are atomically dispersed. In order to gain the elemental nature and radial distance resolution, wavelet transform (WT) analysis (Fig. 2c) in the k space of Pt L3 edge EXAFS was performed. The WT contour plot of Pt/NCNSs presents only one maximum intensity at ∼5.5 Å−1, which is assigned to the Pt–N/C coordination. An intensity maximum at ∼11 Å−1 associated with the Pt–Pt coordination is not detected, and the shape of the intensity maximum for Pt/NCNSs is different from that of Pt–O coordination in PtO2. These results suggest that no obvious Pt nanoparticles or PtO2 is present in Pt/NCNSs. Quantitative EXAFS curve fitting (Fig. 2d and e) was performed to reveal the coordination structure of Pt species in Pt/NCNSs. The fitting results lead to a prominent peak at 1.56 Å, which can be assigned to the Pt–N first shell coordination. The average coordination number for Pt–N species was estimated to be 3.0, and the average bond distance of Pt–N is 2.0 Å. Based on the experimental spectral results and EXAFS curve fitting, it can be concluded that each single Pt atom in Pt/NCNSs is coordinated to three nitrogen atoms and that the resulting Pt–N3 species is stabilized by the nitrogen doped carbon matrix. The structure of the Pt–N3 site is shown in the inset of Fig. 2e.
 Fig. 2  Synchrotron XAFS measurement of Pt/NCNSs. (a) XANES spectra, (b) k3-weighted FT-EXAFS of Pt/NCNSs and references at the Pt L3 edge, (c) WT for the EXAFS signal of Pt/NCNSs and references, and (d and e) the corresponding EXAFS fitting curves in k and R space, respectively. 
The synthesis protocol was extended to fabricate other single-metal catalysts by varying the metal precursors. Fig. 3 shows the HAADF-STEM images of Pt/NCNSs, Au/NCNSs, Pd/NCNSs, Ni/NCNSs, Co/NCNSs, and Fe/NCNSs. It can be seen that similar to single Pt/NCNSs, single Au, Pd, Ni, Co and Fe atoms supported by NCNSs are also successfully prepared by the synthetic procedures. The structures of the resulting single-atom catalysts were also characterized. Fig. S3 (ESI†) shows the XRD patterns of the single-atom catalysts. Notably, in contrast to other samples, the XRD profile of the Pd/NCNSs exhibited several small peaks, which can be assigned to metallic Pd nanoparticles. The Raman spectra of the samples shown in Fig. S4 (ESI†) display typical peaks of carbon materials, confirming the formation of the nitrogen-doped carbon nanosheet support in the samples. The nitrogen adsorption–desorption isotherms of the samples are shown in Fig. S5–S10 (ESI†). Similar to the Pt/NCNSs, all the samples possess a type IV isotherm with average pore sizes of 4–6 nm. To investigate the effects of pyrolysis temperature on the physiochemical properties of the samples, the isotherms of Ni/NCNSs-800 and Ni/NCNSs-1000 are also shown in Fig. S11 and S12 (ESI†), respectively. It was found that the Ni/NCNSs exhibited the largest BET surface area. The XPS spectra of the Au/NCNSs, Pd/NCNSs, Co/NCNSs, Fe/NCNSs and Ni/NCNSs are shown in Fig. S13, S14, S15, S16 and S17 (ESI†), respectively. It can be seen that the oxidation states of the metal in samples were higher than those of the corresponding foil. The unique electronic structure of metal species with positive charges is mainly due to the coordination of the metal and support. The corresponding analysis results are summarized in Table S1 (ESI†). To gain the exact loading of metal in samples, inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-AES) was performed. It can be seen that the metal loadings determined from the XPS results are consistent with those determined from ICP-AES results (Table S2, ESI†). Since the nitrogen species play a critical role in stabilizing the single atoms, the N 1s spectra were thoroughly analyzed. The results are included in Table S3 (ESI†). Fig. S18 (ESI†) shows the N 1s spectra of Ni/NCNSs prepared at 800, 900, 1000 and 1100 °C. The total N content decreases with increasing the pyrolysis temperature. To further verify the formation of single atoms in the samples, XAFS measurements were conducted, as shown in Fig. S19–S21 (ESI†). The corresponding fitting results are listed in Table S4 (ESI†). Interestingly, in the Co/NCNSs, Fe/NCNSs and Ni/NCNSs samples, each metal atom was coordinated by four nitrogen atoms. In contrast, in the Pt/NCNSs and Pd/NCNSs, each precious metal atom was surrounded by three nitrogen atoms.
 Fig. 3  Morphological structures of the SAECs. High-resolution HAADF-STEM images of (a) Pt/NCNSs, (b) Au/NCNSs, (c) Pd/NCNSs, (d) Ni/NCNSs, (e) Co/NCNSs, and (f) Fe/NCNSs. 
The resulting Pt/NCNSs, Pd/NCNSs, and Au/NCNSs catalysts were employed as electrocatalysts for glycerol oxidation in alkaline solutions. Glycerol electro-oxidation is of great significance in terms of application to direct glycerol fuel cells. In addition, electro-oxidation provides a totally green and efficient approach for the conversion of glycerol into value-added products.
For comparison, the single atom catalysts were benchmarked against the corresponding commercial catalysts based on nanoparticles. Fig. 4a comparatively shows the CV curves of glycerol electro-oxidation over Pt/C and Pt/NCNSs catalysts. The mass-normalized current density of Pt/NCNSs is up to 5300 mA mgPt−1, which is 31.7 times that of the commercial Pt/C catalyst (167 mA mgPt−1). As shown in Fig. 4b, the current density of Au/NCNSs (3640 mA mg−1) is 271 times that of Au nanoparticles. In contrast, the Pd/NCNSs possessed a peak current density of 729.3 mA mg−1, which is only 2.6 times that of a Pd/C catalyst (Fig. S22, ESI†). This could be attributed to the presence of Pd nanoparticles in the Pd/NCNSs, as suggested by evidence from the XRD and EXAFS results. To further highlight the performance of the single atom catalysts, the current densities of Pt/NCNSs and Au/NCNSs were compared with those of the electrocatalysts reported in the literature, as shown in Fig. 4c and Table S5 (ESI†). It can be seen that the Pt/NCNSs and Au/NCNSs outperformed all reported electrocatalysts, which makes them the most active catalysts for glycerol electro-oxidation. To explore the origin of the excellent catalytic activity, density functional theory (DFT) calculations were performed. Fig. 4d–f show the optimized adsorption configurations of glycerol molecules on the single Pt, Au and Pd atom electrocatalysts. Two additional adsorption configurations of glycerol on the Au/NCNSs were considered, see the optimized geometries in Fig. S23 (ESI†), and it turns out that both configurations are less stable than the configuration shown in Fig. 4e. Therefore, we did not explore other adsorption configurations of glycerol molecules on single Pt/Pd atom electrocatalysts. The adsorption energies are shown in Fig. 4d–f. The adsorption energy of glycerol on Pt/NCNSs was calculated to be −2.22 eV, which is larger than those on Au/NCNSs (−2.05 eV) and Pd/NCNSs (−1.76 eV). Note that the adsorption energy is well correlated with the catalytic activity, indicating that the adsorption of glycerol is the critical step for glycerol electro-oxidation. Further inspection reveals that the adsorption energy of glycerol on the SAEC is larger than that on the corresponding nanoparticles. For instance, the adsorption energies of glycerol on Pt(111), Pt(110) and Pt(100) were reported (using the same DFT method that was used in the current study) to be −1.29, −1.71 and −1.31 eV, respectively,47 all of which are lower than that on the Pt/NCNSs. In addition, the adsorption energy of glycerol on the Pd/NCNSs (−1.76 eV) is also larger than that on Pd(111), i.e. −1.21 eV, as reported in a previous computational study using the same DFT method.48 These results manifest that the outstanding catalytic activity of the SAECs is possibly attributed to the atomic distribution and their unique electronic structures.
 Fig. 4  Electrochemical performance of the samples for glycerol oxidation. CV curves of glycerol electro-oxidation over (a) Pt/C and Pt/NCNSs and (b) Au nanoparticles and Au/NCNSs, and (c) comparison of mass activity of the electrocatalysts toward glycerol oxidation. DFT optimised adsorption geometries and calculated adsorption energy (Ead) of glycerol molecules on single (d) Pt, (e) Au and (f) Pd atom catalysts. Color code: hydrogen – white, carbon – grey, oxygen – red, nitrogen – blue, gold – yellow, and platinum/palladium – navy blue. 
The effects of pyrolysis temperature and metal loading on the catalytic performance of Au/NCNSs were also investigated. Fig. S24a (ESI†) shows the CV curves of glycerol oxidation over the Au/NCNSs samples obtained by varying the pyrolysis temperature. It reveals that the Au–NCNSs-900 has a larger peak current density than Au–NCNSs-800 and Au–NCNSs-850. The loading of Au also affects the catalytic performance, as shown in Fig. S24b (ESI†). The Au–NCNSs with an Au weight percentage of 0.4% exhibited the largest peak current density. These findings indicate that the pyrolysis temperature and metal loading affected the formation of single atoms. The stability of the catalysts was investigated as shown in Fig. S25 (ESI†). The current density of Au/NCNSs shows negligible decline after 500 cycles, indicating the excellent cycling performance.
Electrochemical water splitting represents a sustainable approach for hydrogen production. Developing high-performance and cost-effective HER and OER electrocatalysts is of paramount importance for the widespread application of water splitting techniques. SAECs based on nickel, cobalt and iron were promising candidates for OER and HER catalysts by rational design.23 The general synthetic protocol afforded a facile solution to the trade-off between N/C ratio (support conductivity) and metal loading of SAECs by optimizing the ratio of furfural and cyanamide, which provides an avenue to improve the catalytic performance. To ensure that metal ions were converted into single atoms successfully, pyrolysis temperature was optimized first. As shown in Fig. S26 (ESI†), the single nickel atom catalyst showed the best OER activity with a pyrolysis temperature of 900 °C. Then, the effects of the volumetric ratio of cyanamide and furfural in the feedstock, in addition to metal loading, on the OER activity of the single nickel atom catalyst were investigated, as shown in Fig. S27 and S28 (ESI†). It was found that the single nickel atom catalyst prepared with a cyanamide/furfural ratio of 1:1 and a metal loading (metal in feedstock) of 0.5 wt% (Ni/NCNSs) showed the best OER activity. By optimizing the preparation conditions, the Ni/NCNSs showed excellent OER activity, better than the IrO2 catalyst that is regarded as a benchmark for the OER.
In addition to the Ni-based catalyst, SAECs based on cobalt and iron were also synthesized under optimized preparation conditions. The resulting single transition metal atom catalysts were studied as both HER and OER electrocatalysts. Fig. 5a shows the OER polarization curves. For comparison, the results of NCNSs and a precious IrO2 catalyst are also included. It indicates that the Ni/NCNSs catalyst shows the highest current density. The Co/NCNSs possessed lower current density at low overpotentials but outperformed the IrO2 catalyst at high overpotentials. Specifically, as shown in Fig. 5c, to yield a current density of 10 mV cm−2, the overpotentials of the samples follow the sequence of Ni/NCNSs (297 mV) < IrO2 (322 mV) < Co/NCNSs (345 mV) < Fe/NCNSs (429 mV) < NCNSs (466 mV). In contrast, to obtain a current density of 50 mV cm−2, the sequence changes to Ni/NCNSs (335 mV) < Co/NCNSs (392 mV) < IrO2 (404 mV) < Fe/NCNSs (485 mV) < NCNSs (702 mV).
 Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of the samples for water splitting. (a) OER polarization curves recorded in a solution of 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, (b) EIS spectra recorded at an applied potential of 200 mV, (c) comparison of overpotentials at OER current densities of 10 and 50 mA cm−2, (d) Tafel slopes of the catalysts for the OER, (e) digital photos of a solar panel powered set-up after electrolysis for 2130 seconds, (f) energy density of sunlight during the electrolysis process, and the inset shows the power density of sunlight in real time. 

Fig. 5d shows the Tafel slope of the catalysts for the OER. It reveals that the Ni/NCNSs catalyst exhibits a Tafel slope of 42.7 mV dec−1, which is smaller than those of IrO2 (45.6 mV dec−1), Co/NCNSs (62.7 mV dec−1), Co–NCNSs (75.3 mV dec−1) and NCNSs (134.6 mV dec−1). Fig. S29 (ESI†) shows the TOF values of the catalysts. Compared to the IrO2 catalyst, the single atom catalysts possessed much larger TOF values. In particular, the Ni/NCNSs exhibited the best intrinsic OER activity. To further highlight the OER activity of the single atom catalysts, the performances of Ni/NCNSs and Co/NCNSs are compared with those of electrocatalysts reported in the literature, shown in Table S6 (ESI†). This clearly reveals that the Ni/NCNSs and Co/NCNSs prepared here are among the best reported OER electrocatalysts so far.
The stability of the single atom catalysts was investigated by chronoamperometric measurements, as shown in Fig. S30 and S31 (ESI†). The results indicate that all the catalysts are highly stable for the OER. To recover the metal distribution of single atoms after the stability test, high-resolution HAADF-STEM tests were performed on the spent samples. Fig. S32 (ESI†) shows the HAADF-STEM images of fresh and spent Co/NCNSs. Isolated cobalt atoms are anchored on the carbon matrix uniformly before the chronoamperometric measurements (Fig. 3e and S32a, ESI†). However, some raft-like cobalt clusters are observed after a 12 h chronoamperometric measurement (Fig. S32d–f, ESI†), indicating that migration and aggregation occurred during the test. Although single cobalt atoms migrated, the current density of Co/NCNSs shows limited decline during the testing time (Fig. S32b, ESI†). This is mainly because there are still a large number of single atoms anchored on the support (Fig. S32g and h, ESI†), and the raft-like cobalt clusters are highly exposed. Expectedly, the spent Au/NCNS catalyst shows similar characteristics to the spent Co/NCNS catalyst (Fig. S33, ESI†). To explore the reason for the superior activity of the Ni/NCNSs, ESI measurements were conducted, as shown in Fig. 5b. Based on the Nyquist plots, the values of series resistance (Rs) and charge transfer resistance (Rct) were determined. All three single atom and pure NCNS catalysts exhibited smaller Rs values than IrO2. This could be attributed to the better electronic conductivity of the carbonaceous materials than that of the oxide. The Ni/NCNSs and Co/NCNSs possessed Rct values of 0.21 and 0.38 Ω, respectively, which are smaller than those of IrO2 (0.74 Ω), Fe/NCNSs (1.2 Ω) and NCNSs (4.4 Ω), indicating faster kinetics of the OER over the Ni/NCNSs and Co/NCNSs, which is consistent with the polarization results.
In addition, since the electrochemically active surface area is closely related to the double-layer capacitance (Cdl) of the catalyst, cyclic voltammetry curves were recorded in the potential range of 0.15–0.25 V at scan rates of 10, 20, 40, 60, 80 and 100 mV s−1 to determine the Cdl values of the catalyst, as shown in Fig. S34 (ESI†). A good linear relationship between the scan rate and (ja − jc)/2 was obtained, as shown in Fig. S35 (ESI†), and the Cdl value was determined using the slope of the curve accordingly. The Co/NCNSs, Ni/NCNSs, Fe/NCNSs and NCNSs had Cdl values of 14.4, 11.5, 4.7 and 10.2 mF cm−2, respectively, which cannot be well correlated with the HER or OER activity of the samples. This suggests that the intrinsic activity of M–Nx moieties is highly dependent on the metal atoms.
The HER performance of the single atom catalysts was also evaluated and further benchmarked against the precious Pt/C catalyst. Fig. S36 (ESI†) shows the HER polarization curves. It shows that the current densities of the single atom catalysts are much larger than that of NCNSs, but lower than that of the Pt/C catalyst. Specifically, as shown in Fig. S37 (ESI†), to obtain a current density of 10 mA cm−2, the Ni/NCNSs, Co/NCNSs and Fe/NCNSs require overpotentials of 258, 221 and 311 mV, respectively, which are lower than that of NCNSs (415 mV), but higher than that of Pt/C (53 mV). Based on the polarization curves, the Tafel slopes of the catalysts are determined, as shown in Fig. S38 (ESI†). The Ni/NCNSs, Co/NCNSs and Fe/NCNSs had Tafel slopes of 162, 134 and 240 mV dec−1, which are smaller than that of the NCNCs (425 mV dec−1), but larger than that of the Pt/C catalyst (35.1 mV dec−1). To reveal the intrinsic HER activity, TOF values of the samples are calculated, as shown in Fig. S39 (ESI†). At lower overpotentials, the transition metal single atom catalysts possessed lower TOF values than the Pt/C. However, with increasing overpotential, the TOF values of the transition metal single atom catalysts exceeded those of the Pt/C. Notably, among the three single atom catalysts, the Co/NCNSs exhibited the best HER activity.
Inspired by the remarkable performance of the single-atom catalysts, the Ni/NCNSs and Co/NCNSs were utilized as anodic and cathodic electrocatalysts for overall water splitting. Continuous hydrogen and oxygen bubbles were generated from an electrolysis cell powered by a 2.0 V solar panel (see video†). The digital photos of the experimental setup before and after the electrolysis process are shown in Fig. 5e and S40 (ESI†). After 2130 s, 5.2 mL of oxygen and 10.1 mL of hydrogen were obtained from the cathode and anode, respectively. The volume ratio of oxygen to hydrogen is close to the theoretical value of 1:2. To calculate the overall energy efficiency of solar-to-hydrogen conversion, the power density of sunlight was recorded using a power meter as shown in the inset of Fig. 5f, and the energy density was determined accordingly as shown in Fig. 5f. The overall energy efficiency of the solar–hydrogen transformation process was calculated to be 8.8%. Such a solar-to-hydrogen conversion energy efficiency is among the largest values reported in the literature as shown in Table S7 (ESI†).
Conclusions
In summary, a versatile condensation–carbonization synthetic methodology was reported for the synthesis of a series of SAECs containing platinum, palladium, gold, nickel, cobalt and iron. Furfural and cyanamide were used as both ligands to stabilize metal ions and carbon/nitrogen sources while polystyrene nanospheres were utilized as a template to increase the surface area. This method could well address the trade-off between N/C ratio (support conductivity) and metal loading by optimizing the ratio of furfural and cyanamide. HAADF-STEM and XAFS measurements unambiguously confirmed the presence of abundant single atoms supported by NCNSs. Depth profile analysis using a HAADF-STEM focal series was performed on Pt/NCNSs to uncover the three-dimensional distribution of single platinum atoms. The resulting Pt/NCNSs, Pd/NCNSs and Au/NCNSs were examined as electrocatalysts for glycerol electro-oxidation while Ni/NCNSs, Co/NCNSs and Fe/NCNSs were studied as electrocatalysts for the HER and OER. The Pt/NCNSs possessed the largest current density of 5.3 A per milligram of platinum, which is 32 times that of commercial Pt/C and is larger than any value we could find in the literature. The Co/NCNSs exhibited superior HER activity while Ni/NCNSs had superior OER activity. Using Ni/NCNSs and Co/NCNSs as anodic and cathodic electrocatalysts, we constructed a 2.0 V solar panel powered electrolytic cell for overall water splitting, leading to a remarkable overall energy efficiency of 8.8%. The synthetic protocol reported in this work could pave a new route to high-performance SAECs.
Experimental
Synthesis of polystyrene nanospheres
Polystyrene nanospheres were synthesized via a method reported in the authors' previous work.49
Synthesis of M/NCNSs (M = Ni, Co, Fe, Pt, Au, and Pd)
Typically, 8 mL of PS suspension (16 wt%), 2 mL of cyanamide solution, 2 mL of furfural, 0.4 mL of 0.1 M HCl solution and a predetermined volume of metal solution with a concentration of 10 g L−1 were introduced into a sealed 50 mL tube. The metal precursors were NiCl2·6H2O, CoCl2·6H2O, FeCl3·6H2O, H2PtCl6·6H2O, HAuCl4·3H2O and PdCl2 for the synthesis of Ni/NCNSs, Co/NCNSs, Fe/NCNSs, Pt/NCNSs, Au/NCNSs and Pd/NCNSs, respectively. The mixture was magnetically stirred at 60 °C for 36 h. Afterwards, the stopper of the tube was removed and the solvent in the mixture, that is, water, was slowly evaporated in 48 h. Subsequently, the mixture was first dried at 100 °C for 48 h using an oven and then transferred into a tube furnace and pyrolyzed in a nitrogen atmosphere. The furnace was heated to a given temperature at a heating rate of 4 °C min−1, held at the temperature for 3 h, and then cooled to ambient temperature at a rate of 6 °C min−1. The resulting powder was ground using an agate mortar. For convenience, the resulting samples were denoted as M/NCNSs-T, where M is the metal type and T is the pyrolysis temperature. For comparison, nitrogen doped carbon nanosheets free of any metal were also prepared.
Structural characterization
The morphology of the samples was studied by field emission scanning electron microscopy (FESEM) (JSM-7600F, JEOL) and transmission electron microscopy (JEM2010, JEOL). To observe the single atoms in the samples, high-angle annular dark field STEM images were obtained using an alternative microscope (ARM200F JEOL) at the electron Physical Sciences Imaging Centre (ePSIC) at Diamond Light Source. An acceleration voltage of 200 kV was used, with a convergence semi-angle of 23 mrad and an ADF inner collection angle of 67 mrad. The beam current was 13 pA. For the focal series, a convergence semi-angle of 32 mrad was used, to give a depth of field of approximately 3 nm. A focal step of 3 nm was used to match the step to the nominal depth of field. An energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) analyzer equipped in the TEM and an axis-ultra X-ray photoelectron spectrometer (Kratos-Axis Ultra System) with monochromatized Al-Kα radiation were used to analyze the elemental composition of the samples. The X-ray absorption fine structure spectra were recorded from beamline B18 at Diamond Synchrotron Irradiation Facility with a stored electron energy of 2.2 GeV using transmission mode. The spectra were processed following the conventional procedure using the IFEFFIT package. X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns were obtained using a diffractometer (PW1830, Philips) equipped with Cu-Kα radiation of 1.54 Å. Raman spectra were recorded with a LabRAM Aramis microscope using 532 nm excitation at room temperature. The nitrogen isotherms were recorded using a WBS-820 analyzer. FTIR measurements were performed using a VERTEX 33 spectrometer.
Electrochemical measurements
Electrochemical measurements were performed on an electrochemical station (CHI 660E) connected to a typical three-electrode cell. Catalyst powder was dispersed in a mixture of distilled water, ethanol, isopropanol, ethylene glycol and Nafion solution (5 wt%) with a volumetric ratio of 1000:750:150:95:5 by ultrasonication for at least 30 minutes. The weight percentage of the catalyst powder in the resulting suspension was 1.6 mg mL−1. For water splitting, 80 μL of the suspension was deposited onto a piece of carbon paper with a geometric area of 10 × 10 mm. For glycerol electro-oxidation, 10 μL of the suspension was deposited onto a glassy-carbon electrode with a diameter of 3 mm. These electrodes were thoroughly dried before the electrochemical measurements. A carbon rod and Hg/HgO electrode were used as counter and reference electrodes, respectively. The electrolyte solutions were 1 M KOH and 0.5 M KOH + 0.5 M GLY for the OER/HER and glycerol electro-oxidation reaction, respectively. The scanning rates were 2 mV s−1 and 50 mV s−1 for the LSV curve of the OER/HER and the CV curve of the glycerol electro-oxidation reaction, respectively.
Computational details
All density functional theory calculations, including structural optimization and total energy calculations, were performed using the Vienna Ab initio Simulation Package50 with periodic boundary conditions. We used a plane-wave basis set with a kinetic energy cutoff of 400 eV to expand the wave functions. The Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof functional51 in combination with the projector augmented wave method52,53 was used to solve the Kohn–Sham equations. The Grimme's D3 van der Waals correction54 with the Becke–Johnson damping55 was included to account for possible dispersion interactions between glycerol molecules and our single atom electrocatalysts. A first-order Methfessel–Paxton smearing56 with a width of 0.2 eV was used to improve the convergence of electronic self-consistent field calculations. All DFT calculations were spin-unpolarized, and have been performed in the Γ-point approximation for sufficiently large cells; we used a 6 × 6 supercell of single layer graphene, with a vacuum slab of ∼15 Å thickness. An energy convergence threshold of 10−4 eV was used for all total energy calculations, and the structural optimizations, including cell parameters and atomic positions, were considered converged if all interatomic forces fell below 0.01 eV Å−1. Following the EXAFS curve fitting (see Fig. 2 and Table S4, ESI†), which demonstrates that both Pt and Pd atoms are coordinated to three nitrogen atoms, we considered a structural model where a single Pd/Pt/Au metal atom is stabilized by three pyridinic nitrogen atoms (see Fig. 2e). The optimised structure of a glycerol molecule adsorbed on a supported single Pd/Pt/Au atom is shown in Fig. 4d–f. For Au, two additional configurations (see Fig. S23, ESI†) were considered, which are higher in energy than the minimum energy structure (see Fig. 4e) by 11.1 and 13.4 kJ mol−1, respectively. These two configurations are not considered in the discussions.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The project was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 21706081) and 111 Project (B17018). The authors thank Diamond Light Source for the support from the electron Physical Science Imaging Centre for the use of Instrument E01 under proposal number MG23723. The authors thank Professors Alan Chadwick and Giannantonio Cibin for the XAS measurements, and Diamond Light Source for provision of beam time through the Block Allocation Group (BAG) for Energy Materials under proposal sp17198. Dr Luo acknowledges the support of the Leverhulme Trust Early Career Fellowship. Dr Fernandes thanks the Nottingham Research Fellowship - Beacons of Excellence: Propulsion Futures, University of Nottingham for financial support. We acknowledge the use of Athena at HPC Midlands+, which was funded by the EPSRC under grant EP/P020232/1, as part of the HPC Midlands+ consortium. We are also grateful for access to the University of Nottingham's Augusta HPC service.
Notes and references
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, 6321 CrossRef .
S. Cao, M. Yang, A. O. Elnabawy, A. Trimpalis, S. Li, C. Wang, F. Goltl, Z. Chen, J. Liu, J. Shan, M. Li, T. Haas, K. W. Chapman, S. Lee, L. F. Allard, M. Mavrikakis and M. Flytzani-Stephanopoulos, Nat. Chem., 2019, 11, 1098–1105 CrossRef CAS .
X. Su, X. F. Yang, Y. Huang, B. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 656–664 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, T. Ling, S. Chen, B. Jin, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, L. Song, J. Luo and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12252–12257 CrossRef CAS .
D. Iglesias, A. Giuliani, M. Melchionna, S. Marchesan, A. Criado, L. Nasi, M. Bevilacqua, C. Tavagnacco, F. Vizza, M. Prato and P. Fornasiero, Chem, 2018, 4, 106–123 CAS .
Y. Chen, S. Ji, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Joule, 2018, 2, 1242–1264 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, G. Sun, S. Ding, H. Asakura, J. Zhang, P. Sautet and N. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 8185–8197 CAS .
H. B. Yang, S.-F. Hung, S. Liu, K. Yuan, S. Miao, L. Zhang, X. Huang, H.-Y. Wang, W. Cai, R. Chen, J. Gao, X. Yang, W. Chen, Y. Huang, H. M. Chen, C. M. Li, T. Zhang and B. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 140–147 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Du, X. Chen, W. Hu, C. Chuang, S. Xie, A. Hu, W. Yan, X. Kong, X. Wu, H. Ji and L. J. Wan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 3977–3985 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, J. Li, S. Xi, Y. Du, X. Hai, J. Wang, H. Xu, G. Wu, J. Zhang, J. Lu and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14871–14876 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, C. Min, F. Tan, Z. Li, B. Zhang, R. Si, M. Xu, W. Liu, L. Zhou, Q. Wei, Y. Zhang and X. Yang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3177–3187 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. Chen, N. Yang, M. Deng, S. Ibraheem, J. Deng, J. Li, L. Li and Z. Wei, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7035–7039 CrossRef CAS .
L. DeRita, J. Resasco, S. Dai, A. Boubnov, H. V. Thang, A. S. Hoffman, I. Ro, G. W. Graham, S. R. Bare, G. Pacchioni, X. Pan and P. Christopher, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 746–751 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lai, L. F. Zhang, W. B. Hua, S. Indris, Z. C. Yan, Z. Hu, B. Zhang, Y. Liu, L. Wang, M. Liu, R. Liu, Y. X. Wang, J. Z. Wang, Z. Hu, H. K. Liu, S. L. Chou and S. X. Dou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 11868–11873 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, F. Luo, Q. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Xu, Q. Wang, D. He, L. Guo, Y. Zhang, C. He, X. Ouyang, M. Gu, J. Liu and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1000–1007 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Guo, C. Chen, C.-L. Dong, R.-S. Liu, C.-P. Han, Y. Li, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 985–992 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jiang, S. Siahrostami, A. J. Akey, Y. Li, Z. Lu, J. Lattimer, Y. Hu, C. Stokes, M. Gangishetty, G. Chen, Y. Zhou, W. Hill, W.-B. Cai, D. Bell, K. Chan, J. K. Nørskov, Y. Cui and H. Wang, Chem, 2017, 3, 950–960 CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Cui, J. Zhao, G. Jia, L. Gu, Q. Zhang, L. Meng, Z. Shi, L. Zheng, C. Wang, Z. Zhang and W. Zheng, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 336–344 CrossRef .
M. Liu, L. Wang, K. Zhao, S. Shi, Q. Shao, L. Zhang, X. Sun, Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2890–2923 RSC .
Y. Wang, J. Mao, X. Meng, L. Yu, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 1806–1854 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Lei, D. Wang and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1730–1750 RSC .
L. Zhang, K. Doyle-Davis and X. Sun, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 492–517 RSC .
H. Fei, J. Dong, D. Chen, T. Hu, X. Duan, I. Shakir, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5207–5241 RSC .
H. Yan, Y. Lin, H. Wu, W. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Cheng, W. Liu, C. Wang, J. Li, X. Huang, T. Yao, J. Yang, S. Wei and J. Lu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1070 CrossRef .
S. Abbet, A. Sanchez, U. Heiz and W.-D. Schneider, J. Catal., 2001, 198, 122–127 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, H. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, L. Hua, H. Li, X. Han, Q. Liu, F. Yang, L. He, X. Chen, Q. Li, J. Xiao, D. Deng and X. Bao, Chem, 2018, 4, 1902–1910 CAS .
B. Qiao, A. Wang, X. Yang, L. F. Allard, Z. Jiang, Y. Cui, J. Liu, J. Li and T. Zhang, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 634–641 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Y. Jia, G. Gao, X. Yan, N. Chen, J. Chen, M. T. Soo, B. Wood, D. Yang, A. Du and X. Yao, Chem, 2018, 4, 285–297 CAS .
H. Zhang, P. An, W. Zhou, B. Y. Guan, P. Zhang, J. Dong and X. W. D. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 6657 CrossRef .
Q. Shen, C. Cao, R. Huang, L. Zhu, X. Zhou, Q. Zhang, L. Gu and W. Song, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 1216–1219 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wei, K. Huang, D. Wang, R. Zhang, B. Ge, J. Ma, B. Wen, S. Zhang, Q. Li, M. Lei, C. Zhang, J. Irawan, L.-M. Liu and H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1490 CrossRef .
K. Huang, L. Zhang, T. Xu, H. Wei, R. Zhang, X. Zhang, B. Ge, M. Lei, J. Y. Ma, L. M. Liu and H. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 606 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Hou, H.-F. Wang, C. Li and Q. Xu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1658–1693 RSC .
Q. Zuo, T. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Ji, X. Gong, Y. Mai and Y. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 10198–10203 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pan, C. Zhang, Z. Liu, C. Chen and Y. Li, Matter, 2020, 2, 78–110 CrossRef .
J. Wu, L. Xiong, B. Zhao, M. Liu and L. Huang, Small Methods, 2019, 4, 1900540 CrossRef .
T. He, S. Chen, B. Ni, Y. Gong, Z. Wu, L. Song, L. Gu, W. Hu and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 3493–3498 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Wei, M. Zhang, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 12089–12174 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, L. Shang, Q. Zhang, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, L. Gu and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4585 CrossRef .
X. He, Q. He, Y. Deng, M. Peng, H. Chen, Y. Zhang, S. Yao, M. Zhang, D. Xiao, D. Ma, B. Ge and H. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3663 CrossRef .
L. Zhao, Y. Zhang, L. B. Huang, X. Z. Liu, Q. H. Zhang, C. He, Z. Y. Wu, L. J. Zhang, J. Wu, W. Yang, L. Gu, J. S. Hu and L. J. Wan, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1278 CrossRef .
G. Zhang, Y. Jia, C. Zhang, X. Xiong, K. Sun, R. Chen, W. Chen, Y. Kuang, L. Zheng, H. Tang, W. Liu, J. Liu, X. Sun, W.-F. Lin and H. Dai, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1317–1325 RSC .
Y. Xiong, J. Dong, Z. Q. Huang, P. Xin, W. Chen, Y. Wang, Z. Li, Z. Jin, W. Xing, Z. Zhuang, J. Ye, X. Wei, R. Cao, L. Gu, S. Sun, L. Zhuang, X. Chen, H. Yang, C. Chen, Q. Peng, C. R. Chang, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 390–397 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jorissen and J. Rehr, J. Phys.: Conf. Ser., 2013, 430, 012001 CrossRef .
X. Li, X. Huang, S. Xi, S. Miao, J. Ding, W. Cai, S. Liu, X. Yang, H. Yang, J. Gao, J. Wang, Y. Huang, T. Zhang and B. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12469–12475 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, W. Sun, J. Luo, W. Chen, T. Cao, L. Zheng, J. Dong, J. Zhang, M. Zhang, Y. Han, C. Chen, Q. Peng, D. Wang and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3861 CrossRef .
P. Tereshchuk, A. S. Chaves and J. L. F. Da Silva, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 15251–15259 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. D. Mendes, R. Costa-Amaral, J. F. Gomes and J. L. F. Da Silva, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21, 8434–8444 RSC .
B. Gong, Y. Peng, Z. Pan, W. Chen, Y. Shen, K. Xiao and L. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 12766–12769 RSC .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmuller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS .
P. E. Blochl, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 17953–17979 CrossRef .
D. Hobbs, G. Kresse and J. Hafner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2000, 62, 11556–11570 CrossRef CAS .
S. Grimme, J. Antony, S. Ehrlich and H. Krieg, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 132, 154104 CrossRef .
S. Grimme, S. Ehrlich and L. J. Goerigk, Comput. Chem., 2011, 32, 1456–1465 CrossRef CAS .
M. Methfessel and A. T. Paxton, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1989, 40, 3616–3621 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta08115aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structural characterization of Pt/NCNSs. (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process, (b) HAADF-STEM image, (c) high-resolution TEM image, (d) high-resolution HAADF-STEM image, the inset of the enlarged area, (e and f) three-dimensional distribution of platinum atoms reconstructed from a HAADF-STEM focal series, (g) HAADF-STEM image and the corresponding elemental mapping of carbon, nitrogen and platinum, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synchrotron XAFS measurement of Pt/NCNSs. (a) XANES spectra, (b) k3-weighted FT-EXAFS of Pt/NCNSs and references at the Pt L3 edge, (c) WT for the EXAFS signal of Pt/NCNSs and references, and (d and e) the corresponding EXAFS fitting curves in k and R space, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  Morphological structures of the SAECs. High-resolution HAADF-STEM images of (a) Pt/NCNSs, (b) Au/NCNSs, (c) Pd/NCNSs, (d) Ni/NCNSs, (e) Co/NCNSs, and (f) Fe/NCNSs.	 

 	Fig. 4  Electrochemical performance of the samples for glycerol oxidation. CV curves of glycerol electro-oxidation over (a) Pt/C and Pt/NCNSs and (b) Au nanoparticles and Au/NCNSs, and (c) comparison of mass activity of the electrocatalysts toward glycerol oxidation. DFT optimised adsorption geometries and calculated adsorption energy (Ead) of glycerol molecules on single (d) Pt, (e) Au and (f) Pd atom catalysts. Color code: hydrogen – white, carbon – grey, oxygen – red, nitrogen – blue, gold – yellow, and platinum/palladium – navy blue.	 

 	Fig. 5  Electrochemical performance of the samples for water splitting. (a) OER polarization curves recorded in a solution of 1 M KOH at a scan rate of 2 mV s−1, (b) EIS spectra recorded at an applied potential of 200 mV, (c) comparison of overpotentials at OER current densities of 10 and 50 mA cm−2, (d) Tafel slopes of the catalysts for the OER, (e) digital photos of a solar panel powered set-up after electrolysis for 2130 seconds, (f) energy density of sunlight during the electrolysis process, and the inset shows the power density of sunlight in real time.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta08115a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
