High throughput screening of promising lead-free inorganic halide double perovskites via first-principles calculations   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1CP04976C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1CP04976C
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2022, 24, 3460-3469High throughput screening of promising lead-free inorganic halide double perovskites via first-principles calculations†

        
          
            Zhengyang 
            Gao
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Guangyang 
            Mao
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Shengyi 
            Chen
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Bai
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Gao
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Chongchong 
            Wu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Ian D. 
            Gates
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Weijie 
            Yang
          
        
      *abc, 
      
        
          
            Xunlei 
            Ding
          
        
      *ef and 

        
          
            Jianxi 
            Yao
          
        
      *gh
aDepartment of Power Engineering, North China Electric Power University, Baoding 071003, Hebei, China. E-mail: yangwj@ncepu.edu.cn
bHebei Key Laboratory of Low Carbon and High Efficiency Power Generation Technology, North China Electric Power University, Baoding 071003, Hebei, China
cBaoding Key Laboratory of Low Carbon and High Efficiency Power Generation Technology, North China Electric Power University, Baoding 071003, Hebei, China
dDepartment of Chemical and Petroleum Engineering, University of Calgary, T2N 1N4, Calgary, Alberta, Canada
eSchool of Mathematics and Physics, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China. E-mail: dingxl@ncepu.edu.cn
fInstitute of Clusters and Low Dimensional Nanomaterials, School of Mathematics and Physics, North China Electric Power University, Beijing, People's Republic of China
gState Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China. E-mail: jianxiyao@ncepu.edu.cn
hBeijing Key Laboratory of Energy Safety and Clean Utilization, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
Received 
      31st October 2021
    , Accepted 14th January 2022First published on 14th January 2022AbstractPerovskite solar cells (PSCs) have been intensively investigated and made great progress due to their high photoelectric conversion efficiency and low production cost. However, poor stability and the toxicity of Pb limit their commercial applications. It is particularly important to search for new non-toxic, high-stability perovskite materials. In this study, 760 Cs2B2+B′2+X6 (X = F, Cl, Br, I) inorganic halide double perovskites are screened based on high-throughput first-principles calculations to obtain an ideal perovskite material. The band gaps of this type of double perovskite are mainly determined by the elements X and B2+, decreasing monotonously with the increase in the atomic number of X (from F to I). We obtain 14 optimal and unreported materials with suitable band gaps as potential alternative materials for Pb-based photovoltaic absorbers in PSCs. This theoretical investigation can provide theoretical guidance for developing novel lead-free PSC materials.
1 Introduction
Solar energy, as a kind of clean and renewable energy, has the advantages of large reserves and no geographical restrictions. However, traditional solar energy utilization devices have relatively high costs and low efficiencies and are less economical than conventional energy sources, which severely restricts the use of solar energy.1–6 As the third-generation solar cell, the photoelectric conversion efficiency of perovskite solar cells (PSCs) has increased rapidly in the past decade.7–10 Moreover, PSCs are rich in synthetic raw materials with a relatively low preparation cost, providing a more feasible approach for low-cost and high-efficiency solar energy utilization.11–14
Compared with traditional solar cells, PSCs are ideal candidates for a new generation of photovoltaic absorbing materials. However, poor thermal stability and the toxic component of Pb in PSCs severely limit their development and application.15–20 According to the type of composition, PSCs can be divided into two broad categories: (1) organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites and (2) pure inorganic perovskites. The inherent instability of organic components severely limits the large-scale application of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites.21–23 Compared with organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, pure inorganic perovskites exhibit excellent thermal stability. Pure inorganic perovskites are expected to make up for the shortcomings of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites becoming high-performance solar cell materials.24,25 Therefore, looking for pure inorganic perovskites with excellent stability and wide band gap adjustment has become the key for solving the above problems.
The general formula of the classic all-inorganic ternary single perovskite is ABX3, where A represents a monovalent cation, B is a divalent cation and X is a halogen anion. Although this type of perovskite has strong thermal stability, its photoelectric conversion efficiency is poor.24,26–28 To improve the photoelectric conversion efficiency, a series of perovskite materials with different band gaps can be obtained by controlling the ratio of different halogen ions in the perovskite material.29 Protesescu et al.,26 through halogen doping, achieved the band gap tunability of the ABX3 structure ranging from 1.15 to 3.06 eV, which is still much higher than the ideal band gap of the perovskite. To obtain the ideal band gap, Eperon et al.30 replaced Cs+ with MA+ or FA+ organic groups in addition to halogen doping. The introduction of the organic A site caused the stability to decrease and the toxic element Pb was used at the B site. Therefore, it is very meaningful to look for alternative halide perovskites composed of completely inorganic components with strong stability and at the same time composed of non-toxic or low-toxic elements. However, classic all-inorganic ternary perovskites cannot simultaneously meet these requirements. Therefore, the A2BB′X6 quaternary perovskite with higher chemical freedom obtained by the cation-transmutation principle is expected to be an ideal material for pure inorganic perovskite solar cells.
The cation-transmutation principle enables the replacement of elements by keeping the total number of valence electrons unchanged at the B site. For example, Zhao et al.31 and Zhang et al.32 systematically screened the replacement of the B site elements with different valences, i.e. 2Pb2+ → B++ B′3+. Because of the high degree of chemical freedom of double perovskites compared to single perovskites, some lead-free structures with good optical properties are obtained, for example, Cs2InSbCl6 and Cs2InBiCl6. However, the trivalent element at the B site reduces the defect tolerance of the A2B+B′3+X6 double perovskite. Therefore, this paper systematically researched a replacement of the B site elements with identical valence, i.e. 2Pb2+ → B2+ + B′2+, and carried out a systematic high-throughput screening of the A2B2+B′2+X6 quaternary perovskites derived from the equivalent replacement via cation-transmutation.
In this study, to search for new and stable Cs2B2+B′2+X6 (B and B′ can be the same element) perovskites with potentially superior photovoltaic performance, the stability and photovoltaic-related properties of pure inorganic Cs2B2+B′2+X6 halide perovskites were studied through systematic first-principles calculations. The design principle, element selection, and screening steps are shown in Fig. 1. The cation-transmutation principle is the basis to obtain the abundant Cs2B2+B′2+X6 type quaternary double perovskite, as shown in Fig. 1a. The B or B′ site is composed of 19 elements including 5 alkaline metals (Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, and Ba), 10 transition metals (Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, Zn, Pd, Cd, Ir, and Pt), 2 other metals (Sn and Pb), and 2 metalloids (Ge and Te), as shown in Fig. 1c. These 19 B-site elements and 4 X-site halogens combine to form 760 different double perovskites (note that 76 of them are actually common single perovskites with B = B′). First, 597 stable structures were selected from the 760 combinations by using the Goldschmidt tolerance factor and the octahedral factor.33,34 Then, the band gap was determined based on high-throughput first-principles calculations at different precisions, and the absorption coefficient is calculated to further evaluate the optical performance. Finally, based on the screening procedure (Fig. 1b) described above, 14 double perovskites with a suitable band gap and excellent optical performance are predicted. The analysis of the influence of the constituent elements of the double perovskite on the band gap may provide theoretical guidance for the band gap adjustment of all-inorganic double perovskites.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the cation-transmutation principle. (b) Diagram of the screening steps. (c) Elemental compositions of the double perovskite A, B, and X positions. 
2 Methods
2.1 Computational details
For density functional theory (DFT) calculations of the A2B2+B′2+X6 double perovskites, all calculations were performed by using the Vienna ab initio simulation package (VASP).35,36 Here, among the inorganic cations at the A site of the perovskite, cesium ions are more conducive for obtaining a stable perovskite structure because of their radius.37 Therefore, cesium ions are used for the A site of the inorganic double perovskite studied in this paper. To obtain a wider range of band gap values, all possible combinations of 19 types of B and 4 types of X are tested because both B and X directly affect the band gap values.38 The A2B2+B′2+X6 double perovskite model uses the 3D crystal structure with a Fmm space group, and the calculated lattice parameters are a = b = c = 8.665 Å. The unit cell model used in the calculation is shown in Fig. 1a, where B and B′ are alternately arranged. The cubic phase has excellent optical properties, so our work is only for the cubic double perovskite. The equation of the exchange–correlation energy is obtained under the condition of the generalized-gradient approximation (GGA) formulated by the Perdew–Burke–Ernzerhof (PBE) functional39 with a plane-wave cutoff energy of 520 eV as the expansion of the wave functions. We used 0.02 eV Å−1 as the break condition for the ionic relaxation loop. A 6 × 6 × 6 gamma-centered K-point grid was used for sampling during geometric structure optimization (the K-point test data are shown in Fig. S1 of the ESI†), while a denser k-mesh of 10 × 10 × 10 was used for density of states (DOS) and optical calculations. The Heyd–Scuseria–Ernzerhof (HSE)40 hybrid functional was used to obtain an accurate band gap value closer to the experiment. Considering that the B site contains heavy metal elements such as Pb and the heavy computational cost of HSE + spin–orbit coupling (SOC) effect calculations for a large number of candidate materials, we performed calculations of HSE + SOC for the 14 structures finally obtained. We set ISPIN = 2 (spin polarized calculations are performed) for the calculation of all materials and set LNONCOLLINEAR = TRUE to perform fully non-collinear magnetic structure calculations for certain structures containing heavy metals. The number of empty conduction band states is three times the number of valence bands and CSHIFT = 0.1 for optical calculations. The Gaussian smearing method is used in the calculation of joint density of states (JDOS).
2.2 Goldschmidt tolerance factor, octahedral factor and a new tolerance factor τ
The Goldschmidt tolerance factor t was proposed by Victor Goschmidt in 1926.33 The octahedral factor μ describes the stability of octahedral BX6 in the perovskite. For inorganic double perovskites, their t and μ values are given by: (1)and (2)
As shown in Fig. 2a, rA is the radius of the A site cation (the cesium cation), rB and rB′ are the radii of the B site cation, and rX is the radius of the halogen anion (as in Table S1 of the ESI†).41 The tolerance and octahedral factors can be used to judge the stability of the perovskite only by obtaining the value of the ionic radius. (3)where nA is the oxidation state of A, rA (rB) is the ionic radius of ion A (B), rA > rB by definition, and τ < 4.18 indicates the perovskite.42
 Fig. 2  (a) Cubic double perovskite crystal structure. (b) The (t, μ) map for 760 double perovskites; the yellow area in the figure is the stable region. 
2.3 Optical absorption coefficient
To obtain more accurate optical absorption spectra with the lowest computational cost, we adopted the PHS (PBE + HSE06 + sum rule) method.43 The optical absorption coefficient is then computed as follows: (4)where α is the absorption coefficient, ω is the frequency, c is the speed of light, and ε1 and ε2 represent the real part of the dielectric function and the imaginary part of the dielectric function, respectively. ε2 is calculated in the random phase approximation, and ε1 is evaluated from ε2via the Kramers–Kronig relation.
Photovoltaic materials must have a strong light absorption coefficient to convert as much sunlight energy as possible. The light absorption of semiconductor materials is determined by the transition matrix and the joint density of states (JDOS). When a photonic energy ħω is absorbed, the light absorption can be written as:  where the first term represents the transition matrix from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB), which determines the transition probability of the photoelectron. The latter term represents the JDOS of photoelectrons produced by absorbing the photonic energy ħω. JDOS determines the total number of photoelectrons that undergo transition when the photonic energy is ħω.
3 Results and discussion
3.1 Room temperature stability screening
For ternary double perovskites such as ABX3, the size of the ionic radius of the A site will cause the shrinkage or expansion of the crystal lattice, thereby affecting the stability of the perovskite. According to Saliba et al.,44 when monovalent cation alkali metals (Li, Na, K, Ru, and Cs) with oxidation stability can be selected for the A site, only Cs ions can constitute the cubic phase perovskite. The A2BB′X6 quaternary double perovskite is converted from the ABX3 ternary perovskite by the cation-transmutation principle, and they have similar properties. Therefore, only Cs was selected as the A site to make A2BB′X6 still have black phase structures.45
We studied the most favorable spatial distributions of BX6 and B′X6 in Cs2B2+B′2+X6 perovskites. We have constructed a standard cubic perovskite of 2 × 2 × 2 supercells, which considered the different arrangements of FeBr6 and ZnBr6. Fig. S2 (ESI†) shows the total energy of the six configurations of Cs2FeZnBr6, and the most stable is configuration 6.
The ligands of the halide double perovskite octahedral structure are all weak-field ligands, and octahedrons are high-spin complexes formed by the weak field. The ligand field stabilization energy (LFSE) with an octahedral structure can be obtained by the number of electrons in the d orbital of the central atom (listed in Table S2 of the ESI†). If the electrons on the d orbital of the central ion are filled with different numbers of electrons on the two orbitals of t2g and eg*, LFSE ≠ 0, the coordination compound will appear degenerate and cause Jahn–Teller deformation. The Jahn–Teller effect causes the bond length between the central atom and the ligand to be stretched or compressed, which makes some structures deviate from the regular octahedron after relaxation is completed.
To screen the phase stability of the perovskite at room temperature, two empirical quantities t and μ are usually considered (as in Table S3 of the ESI†). It was concluded based on the existing perovskites that the stable regions for halide perovskites are 0.813 < t < 1.107 and 0.377 < μ < 0.895 with the (t, μ) map shown in Fig. 2b.46
Using the two empirical factors of t and μ as the preliminary screening criterion of the perovskite phase stability (stability descriptor), double perovskites with good phase stability can be screened out efficiently and quickly for a large number of perovskite samples. Because the distribution of the two central metal ions in a perovskite lattice may not be uniform, we calculated the range of the tolerance factor (listed in Table S4 of the ESI†). The tolerance factor range of most structures is in the stable region (0.813 < t < 1.107). Although the edge value (tmin and tmax) of some structures exceeds the stable region (listed in Tables S5 and S6 of the ESI†), their edge value is close to the stable region and the portion in the stable region accounts for a larger proportion. Finally, 597 stable structures were obtained. For the Cs2B2+B′2+X6 double perovskite, the four halogens (F, Cl, Br, and I) correspond to the same combination of elements at the B site (composed of 19 elements listed in Fig. 1c). As X becomes lighter (from I to F), the number of stable perovskites increases monotonically, as shown in Fig. 2b. Therefore, the stability of these double perovskites increases gradually as X becomes lighter. The cause of this trend is the F, Cl, Br and I electronegativity decrement, and the high electronegativity of the halogen by forming strong hydrogen bonds and ionic bonds to stabilize the surface of the material perovskite lattice.47 However, the accuracy of this empirical formula is insufficient. Therefore, a new tolerance factor τ was calculated for the final predicted 14 double perovskite structures (listed in Table S7 of the ESI†) along with ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) simulations of some materials to further confirm their stabilities.
3.2 Chemical trends in the band gaps
The band gap is one of the most important characterization values of the optical properties of the perovskite, and it is also an important factor affecting the application of the perovskite in optoelectronic devices. Compared with organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites, pure inorganic perovskites have excellent thermal stability.27,28 Therefore, to look for inorganic perovskites suitable for photoelectric materials, the main task is to screen the band gap. In the process of band gap calculation and screening, a large amount of data was obtained listed in Tables S8 and S9 of the ESI.†
The PBE functional used in the band gap calculation can effectively increase the screening speed and reduce the calculation amount,39 so it is suitable for the preliminary screening of large amounts of data. However, due to the limitations of the PBE functionals, the band gap value is often underestimated.48 Therefore, the preliminary screening results need to be verified by HSE hybrid functionals. The indirect band gap perovskite is directly excluded in the PBE calculation, which can save a lot of computing resources. However, some studies on double perovskites have shown that an appropriate adjustment of the element ratio can achieve an indirect to direct transition from the band gap. The feasibility of this transformation has been proved theoretically and experimentally by T. Thao Tran et al.49 Therefore, it is also meaningful to retain perovskite materials suitable for the band gap, which may inspire other studies to prepare direct band gap materials on this basis.
To clearly observe the influence of element changes on the band gap value, we selected 236 structures from the band gap data of 597 PBE functionals whose band gap values are greatly affected by element changes and plotted them into a color map, as shown in Fig. 3a. With the changes of the constituent elements A, B, and X, the band gap shows a clear trend. From the color change of the heat map, we can easily find that, for double perovskites such as Cs2B2+B′2+X6, the halogen atom at the X position with the element types of F, Cl, Br, and I, the band gap value gradually decreases; this follows the same trend as the A2B1+B′3+X6 double perovskites studied by Zhao et al.31 and Zhang et al.32 The band gap value is distributed uniformly in each interval, showing the advantage of the wide-range adjustable band gap of all-inorganic double perovskites, as shown in Fig. 3b.
 Fig. 3  (a) Color map of the GGA-calculated band gaps of 236 A2B2+B′2+X6 double perovskites. Since the GGA usually underestimates the band gaps, the calculated values are generally lower than the experimental values. The cross in the figure is the structure rated as unstable by the tolerance factor. (b) Band gap range profile. The dashed area is the band gap screening range. (c) Statistical chart of the band gap distribution for different elements. 
From the violin diagram, as shown in Fig. 3c, the influence rules of the B site element on the band gap are complicated. For Sn and Ge, which belong to group IVA (Ge, Sn, and Pb) together with Pb, the band gap range has small fluctuations. When B is a group IIA metal (Be, Mg, Ca, Sr, and Ba) or transition metal (Mn, Zn, and Cd), the band gap has a larger fluctuation range. The median and average band gap values of group IIA are much higher than the ideal band gap of PSCs, while those of group IVA and transition metals are closer. Therefore, the ideal replacement element for the B site of the Cs2B2+B′2+X6 halide perovskite is expected to appear in the group IVA and transition metals.
Since PBE tends to underestimate the band gap of periodic systems, it is used as a pre-screening criterion to find materials with band gaps in the range of 0.5 eV–1.75 eV. There are 82 structures that passed the band gap pre-screening and proceeded to the next final screening by HSE hybrid functionals. Finally, 14 materials (listed in Table S10 of the ESI†) with direct band gaps in the range of 1.0 eV–2.5 eV are obtained through the hybrid functional calculation. Based on high-throughput first-principles screening at the PBE and HSE levels of theory, 14 double perovskite materials with suitable direct band gaps were determined. The 14 structures include six weak lead perovskites and eight lead-free perovskites, as shown in Fig. 5a, the structures in the red circle. The difference between the PBE and HSE band gaps of the fluoride perovskite is generally large, whereas the difference between the iodide and bromide perovskites is generally small, and the band gap difference among Pb, Sn, and Ge is small for the B site. The organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites studied by Kar et al. have similar laws.4
To further explore the influence of the B site and X site elements on the band gap, we have drawn the band structure diagrams and orbital-projected density of states (PDOS) diagrams of the six double perovskites. Two representative materials Cs2MnPtF6 (B = transition metals) and Cs2PbSnBr6 (B = group IVA) were selected for electronic structure analysis, as shown in Fig. 4, and the diagrams of the other four structures were placed in the supporting file (Fig. S3 and S4 in the ESI†).
 Fig. 4  Band structure and orbital-projected density of states (PDOS) of Cs2MnPtF6 (a) and Cs2PbSnBr6 (c). Ion valence electron arrangements (b and d). These data are calculated by the HSE functional. 
The band gap is the difference between the energy of the conduction band minimum value (CBM) and the valence band maximum value (VBM), that is, the respective difference between the high symmetry points X and Γ in Fig. 4a and c. For the halide double perovskite, the A site element has almost no contribution to the CBM and VBM; rather, it indirectly affects the band gap by affecting the overall structure of the perovskite.50 The B site is generally a metal element, and as such, it has greater ability to lose outer electrons and become metal cations. Due to the loss of electrons occupying the outer orbital, the outer layer often forms a half-full or empty orbital. These half-full or empty orbitals can be used as empty orbitals required for electronic transitions. Therefore, metal cations at the B site generally have a greater contribution to the CBM.51 When the B site is transition metal elements, such as in Cs2MnPtF6, the half-full d orbitals of Pt2+ contribute greatly to the CBM. Because the d orbital is in a half-full state, it also contributes to the VBM. As shown in Fig. 4a and b, the relatively high d orbital energy of Pt2+ contributes to the CBM and the lower energy Mn2+ contributes to the VBM.49 The difference between the orbits of the VBM and CBM affects the band structure near the Fermi level. As shown in Fig. 4a on the left, the CBM and VBM of Cs2MnPtF6 are both composed of d orbitals. Because the d orbital is petal-shaped and the space is evenly stretched, its VBM and CBM are relatively gentle.
For the elements of group IVA where the B site is Pb and Sn, such as Cs2PbSnBr6, they lose two electrons and the outermost layer appears as a full s orbital and a completely empty p orbital. The empty p orbital contributes to the CBM, and the full s orbital contributes to the VBM, as shown in Fig. 4c and d. As for the VBM and CBM of Cs2PbSnBr6 where the p orbital dominates because the p orbital is dumbbell-shaped, the space is not evenly stretched, so the VBM and CBM have undulating slopes.
For halogen elements at the X-position, the easily available electrons become negative monovalent anions. The p orbital of F− and the p orbital of Br− and the unfilled orbitals in the outer layer are filled with the obtained electrons and become full orbitals below the Fermi level. Therefore, the halogen anion at the X position strongly contributes to the VBM. In the classic inorganic CsPbX3 perovskite, the 6p orbital of Pb mainly contributes to the CBM and the p orbital of X mainly contributes to the VBM.52 These rules are also features of the Cs2BB′X6 quaternary double perovskite. Combining Fig. 4a and c, we can see that the VBM is composed of the p orbital of the X site element and the s or d orbital of the B site element. However, the p orbital contribution of the X site element is dominant. When the X position changes from F to I, the energy of the p orbital also increases, so the VBM is enlarged. The minimum conduction band CBM is mainly composed of the p or s orbital of X and cation p or d orbital hybridization. As the atomic number of the X position increases, the energy of the p or s orbitals provided by the X position also increases, resulting in a larger energy gap between the atomic orbitals of the halogen and the cation, and the hybridization is weakened, resulting in the downward shift of the CBM. These two together lead to the reduction of the band gap from F to I.

Fig. 5b shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) diagrams of Cs2MnPtF6 and Cs2PbSnBr6 at 800 K simulated by AIMD and the XRD diagrams of the other four structures are placed in the supporting file (Fig. S5 in the ESI†). The initial and final state curves of Cs2MnPtF6 in the XRD diagram have similar peak positions, while the differences of the other five materials are huge. The system formation energy changes are shown in Fig. 5c, and Cs2MnPtF6 has the lowest energy and the least overall energy fluctuation. XRD comparison and energy fluctuation analysis both show that the stability of Cs2MnPtF6 is better than the other five structures. Compared with the other five materials predicted, the B site of Cs2MnPtF6 does not contain easily oxidized elements such as Sn and Ge, and the electronegativity of F is much greater than that of Cl, Br, and I. The high electronegativity of halogens can stabilize the surface of the material perovskite lattice by forming strong hydrogen bonds and ionic bonds. Therefore, Cs2MnPtF6 is the most stable of the predicted structures.
 Fig. 5  (a) The band gap (HSE and PBE) map for 82 double perovskites, and the yellow area in the figure is the band gap (HSE) screening threshold. (b) The X-ray diffraction evolution of the cubic structure with a temperature of 800 K. (c) Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) energy variation under 800 K for Cs2PbSnI6, Cs2PbGeBr6, Cs2PbGeI6, Cs2SnGeCl6, Cs2PbSnBr6, and Cs2MnPtF6. 
3.3 Optical absorption
In addition to the band gap, optical absorption is another important property for solar cell absorbers. Strong optical absorption can harvest enough sunlight with extremely thin layers so that the photoexcited carriers do not have to travel too far to be collected by the contacts.
The PHS method used in this paper was proposed by Nishiwaki et al.43,53,54 The PHS method uses the absorption coefficient calculated by the PBE functional, and then accurately predicts the absorption coefficient through the energy difference (the band gap difference between the PBE functional and HSE functional) while performing the amplitude correction simultaneously based on the sum rule. The accuracy of the absorption coefficient is determined by the number of K points and the use of functionals. The PHS method avoids the use of HSE functionals for optical calculations, so a higher k-mesh density can be used. Therefore, the PHS method can obtain a more accurate absorption curve with a moderate computational cost.
For the 14 predicted materials with potential optical properties, six materials with gaps ranging from 1.0 to 1.75 eV were selected for comparative analysis, and the other materials were placed in the supporting file (Fig. S6 in the ESI†). Cs2PbGeI6 has the highest absorption coefficient at a wavelength of 300 nm, as shown in Fig. 6a. Efficient light absorption conditions are the p–p transition and the direct band gap,37 and the p–p transition only occurs in cationic semiconductors containing the s orbital lone pairs of electrons, such as Ge (2), Sn (2), Pb (2), etc., as shown in Fig. 4b and d. The double perovskite obtained by using Sn, Ge, and Pb to replace the B site of the traditional CsPbI3 has similar optical properties to CsPbI3. The absorption peaks all appear at around 300 nm and the peak size fluctuates around 7 × 105 cm−1. For Cs2MnPtF6 with the d–d transition, even if it is the same direct band gap, the absorption coefficient is only half of CsPbI3, but the right shift of the absorption peak to the visible light range facilitates the absorption of light. The number of electronic transitions from VBM to CBM of these predicted structures is much greater than CsPbI3, as shown in Fig. 6b. Cs2PbGeI6 has the highest absorption peak and the maximum slope of the JDOS curve. The absorption peak of Cs2MnPtF6 is in the visible light range. So, Cs2PbGeI6 and Cs2MnPtF6 have higher photoelectric conversion currents. Moreover, according to the research of Zhao et al., both the electron and hole effective masses of materials with excellent optical properties are smaller than 1.0 m0.31 Cs2MnPtF6 shows small carrier effective masses (the effective masses of electrons and holes are 0.38 and 0.71 m0, respectively) which are beneficial to the migration of carriers. Overall, it is concluded from the comprehensive comparison of optical absorption characteristics and stability that Cs2MnPtF6 is a photovoltaic material with great potential for solar cells.
 Fig. 6  Calculated optical properties for Cs2PbSnI6, Cs2PbGeI6, Cs2PbSnBr6, Cs2PbGeBr6, and Cs2SnGeCl6: (a) absorption coefficient and (b) joint density of states (JDOS). 
4 Conclusions
The band gap and optical properties of 760 all-inorganic cesium chloride double perovskites (Cs2B2+B′2+X6) were studied using high-throughput calculations based on first-principles. We obtained 597 double perovskites from the set of 760 options using the tolerance and octahedral factors. According to the screening data, it is found that the stable double perovskite is obtained by selecting the X anion with a low atomic number which led to a larger band gap. The band gaps are mainly determined by B and X elements. As X becomes heavier (from F to I), the gap decreases monotonously, but changes non-monotonously as B changes. Due to the high degree of chemical freedom, the all-inorganic double perovskite has a wide range of adjustable band gaps. Finally, the direct band gaps of 14 all-inorganic perovskite materials are obtained based on high-throughput first-principles calculations at the PBE and HSE levels of theory. These predicted materials have similar absorption coefficients to CsPbI3; however, the number of electronic transitions of these materials is higher than that of CsPbI3. Among them, a lead-free direct gap material, Cs2MnPtF6, with gap values of around 1.6 eV, has outstanding optical performance, and is expected to become an ideal material for pure inorganic PSCs. These band gap laws of Cs2B2+B′2+X6 double perovskites can provide clear instructions on how to search for ideal double perovskites.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Key Research and Development Program of China (2016YFA0202401), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (91545122 and 61704054), and the Fundamental Research Fund for the Central Universities (JB2015RCY03, JB2019MS052, and JB2017MS056). This work was also supported by the Beijing Natural Science Foundation (No. 2214064). IDG and CW acknowledge support from the Canada First Research Excellence Program, the University of Calgary′s Global Research Initiative in Sustainable Low-Carbon Unconventional Resources.
References
I. Infante and L. Manna, Are there good alternatives to lead halide perovskite nanocrystals?, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 6–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Daskeviciene, S. Paek, Z. Wang, T. Malinauskas, G. Jokubauskaite, K. Rakstys, K. T. Cho, A. Magomedov, V. Jankauskas, S. Ahmad, H. J. Snaith, V. Getautis and M. K. Nazeeruddin, Carbazole-based enamine: low-cost and efficient hole transporting material for perovskite solar cells, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 551–557 CrossRef CAS .
K. Galkowski, A. Mitioglu, A. Miyata, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, G. E. Eperon, J. T.-W. Wang, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Determination of the exciton binding energy and effective masses for methylammonium and formamidinium lead tri-halide perovskite semiconductors, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 962–970 RSC .
Z.-Y. Gao, H.-W. Zhang, G.-Y. Mao, J.-R. Ren, Z.-H. Chen, C.-C. Wu, I. D. Gates, W.-J. Yang, X.-L. Ding and J.-X. Yao, Screening for lead-free inorganic double perovskites with suitable band gaps and high stability using combined machine learning and DFT calculation, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 568, 150916 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mahapatra, N. Parikh, P. Kumar, M. Kumar, D. Prochowicz, A. Kalam, M. Tavakoli and P. J. M. Yadav, Changes in the electrical characteristics of perovskite solar cells with aging time, Molecules, 2020, 25, 2299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Simsek, M. J. Williams and L. Pilon, Effect of dew and rain on photovoltaic solar cell performances, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 222, 110908 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Islam, M. Yanagida, Y. Shirai, Y. Nabetani and K. Miyano, NiOx hole transport layer for perovskite solar cells with improved stability and reproducibility, ACS Omega, 2017, 2, 2291–2299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Han, X. Zhang, X. Mao, B. Yang, S. Yang, Z. Feng, D. Wei, W. Deng, T. Pullerits and K. Han, Size effect of lead-free halide double perovskite on luminescence property, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 1405–1413 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Kim, J.-W. Lee, H. Jung, H. Shin and N.-G. Park, High-efficiency perovskite solar cells, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 7867–7918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-Y. Gao, M. Wang, H.-W. Zhang, S.-Y. Chen, C.-C. Wu, I. D. Gates, W.-J. Yang, X.-L. Ding and J.-X. Yao, Design of (C3N2H5)(1−x)CsxPbI3 as a novel hybrid perovskite with strong stability and excellent photoelectric performance: a theoretical prediction, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 233, 111401 CrossRef CAS .
T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, K. A. Bush, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Raiford, A. Gold-Parker, E. J. Wolf, S. A. Swifter, C. C. Boyd, H.-P. Wang, M. F. Toney, S. F. Bent and M. D. McGehee, Tin–lead halide perovskites with improved thermal and air stability for efficient all-perovskite tandem solar cells, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 2450–2459 RSC .
B. Li, Y. Li, C. Zheng, D. Gao and W. Huang, Advancements in the stability of perovskite solar cells: degradation mechanisms and improvement approaches, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 38079–38091 RSC .
K. Suwa, T. Suga, K. Oyaizu, H. Segawa and H. Nishide, Phenolic antioxidant-incorporated durable perovskite layers and their application for a solar cell, MRS Commun., 2020, 10, 312–316 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Wang, T. Zhang, S. Yoriya, P. Kumnorkaew, S. Chen, X. Guo and Y. Zhao, Li dopant induces moisture sensitive phase degradation of an all-inorganic CsPbI2Br perovskite, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9809–9812 RSC .
B. Conings, J. Drijkoningen, N. Gauquelin, A. Babayigit, J. D’Haen, L. D’Olieslaeger, A. Ethirajan, J. Verbeeck, J. Manca and E. Mosconi, Intrinsic thermal instability of methylammonium lead trihalide perovskite, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1500477 CrossRef .
J.-H. Yang, W.-J. Yin, J.-S. Park and S.-H. Wei, Fast self-diffusion of ions in CH3NH3PbI3: the interstiticaly mechanism versus vacancy-assisted mechanism, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13105–13112 RSC .
R. H. Ahangharnejhad, J. Friedl, A. Phillips and M. Heben, Understanding VOC and performance deficit in wide bandgap perovskite photovoltaic devices, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 225, 111015 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Gao, S.-Y. Chen, Y. Bai, M. Wang, X.-S. Liu, W.-J. Yang, W. Li, X.-L. Ding and J.-X. Yao, A new perspective for evaluating the photoelectric performance of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskites based on the DFT calculations of excited states, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2021, 23, 11548–11556 RSC .
A. Wincukiewicz, J. Jasinski, M. Tokarczyk, R. Pietruszka, M. Godlewski, M. J. S. E. M. Kaminska and S. Cells, The effects of doping and coating on degradation kinetics in perovskites, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 230, 111142 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shahivandi, M. Vaezzadeh and M. Saeidi, Study of the effect of temperature on light-induced degradation in methylammonium lead iodine perovskite solar cells, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 218, 110770 CrossRef CAS .
W. Rehman, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, R. L. Milot, M. B. Johnston, H. J. Snaith and L. M. Herz, Photovoltaic mixed-cation lead mixed-halide perovskites: links between crystallinity, photo-stability and electronic properties, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 361–369 RSC .
G.-D. Niu, X.-D. Guo and L.-D. Wang, Review of recent progress in chemical stability of perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8970–8980 RSC .
M. Kulbak, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, How important is the organic part of lead halide perovskite photovoltaic cells? Efficient CsPbBr3 cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2452–2456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-Q. Fan, G. V. Biesold-McGee, Q. Xu, S. Pan, J. Peng, J. Ma and Z. J. A. C. Lin, Lead-free halide perovskite nanocrystals: crystal structures, synthesis, stabilities, and optical properties, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 1030–1046 CrossRef PubMed .
Q.-D. Tai, K.-C. Tang and F. Yan, Recent progress of inorganic perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 2375–2405 RSC .
L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, F. Krieg, R. Caputo, C. H. Hendon, R. X. Yang, A. Walsh and M. V. Kovalenko, Nanocrystals of cesium lead halide perovskites (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, and I): novel optoelectronic materials showing bright emission with wide color gamut, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3692–3696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Bandgap-tunable cesium lead halide perovskites with high thermal stability for efficient solar cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502458 CrossRef .
I. Infante and L. Manna, Are there good alternatives to lead halide perovskite nanocrystals?, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 6–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Y. Zhang, L.-N. Li, Z.-H. Sun and J.-H. Luo, Rational chemical doping of metal halide perovskites, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 517–539 RSC .
G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, C. Menelaou, M. B. Johnston, L. M. Herz and H. J. Snaith, Formamidinium lead trihalide: a broadly tunable perovskite for efficient planar heterojunction solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 982–988 RSC .
X.-G. Zhao, J.-H. Yang, Y.-H. Fu, D.-W. Yang, Q.-L. Xu, L.-P. Yu, S.-H. Wei and L.-J. Zhang, Design of lead-free inorganic halide perovskites for solar cells via cation-transmutation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 2630–2638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, Z. Cai and S. Chen, Chemical trends in the thermodynamic stability and band gaps of 980 halide double perovskites: a high-throughput first-principles study, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20680–20690 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. Goldschmidt, Die gesetze der krystallochemie, Sci. Nat., 1926, 14, 477–485 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X.-G. Lu, W.-Z. Ding, L.-M. Feng, Y.-H. Gao and Z.-M. Guo, Formability of ABX3 (X = F, Cl, Br, I) halide perovskites, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Sci., Cryst. Eng. Mater., 2008, 64, 702–707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Efficiency of ab initio total energy calculations for metals and semiconductors using a plane-wave basis set, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 54, 11169–11186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T.-T. Shi and Y.-F. Yan, Superior photovoltaic properties of lead halide perovskites: insights from first-principles theory, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 5253–5264 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, G. Hodes, Z. Jin and S. F. Liu, All-inorganic CsPbX3 perovskite solar cells: progress and prospects, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15596–15618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. M. Henderson, J. Paier and G. E. Scuseria, Accurate treatment of solids with the HSE screened hybrid, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2011, 248, 767–774 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Shannon, Revised effective ionic radii and systematic studies of interatomic distances in halides and chalcogenides, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. A: Cryst. Phys., Diffr., Theor. Gen. Crystallogr., 1976, 32, 751–767 CrossRef .
C. J. Bartel, C. Sutton, B. R. Goldsmith, R. H. Ouyang, C. B. Musgrave, L. M. Ghiringhelli and M. Scheffler, New tolerance factor to predict the stability of perovskite oxides and halides, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav0693 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nishiwaki and H. Fujiwara, Highly accurate prediction of material optical properties based on density functional theory, Comput. Mater. Sci., 2020, 172, 109315 CrossRef CAS .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, K. Domanski, J.-Y. Seo, A. Ummadisingu, S. M. Zakeeruddin, J.-P. Correa-Baena, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. J. S. Grätzel, Incorporation of rubidium cations into perovskite solar cells improves photovoltaic performance, Science, 2016, 354, 206–209 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. T. Umedov, D. B. Khadka, M. Yanagida, A. V. Grigorieva and Y. Shirai, A-site tailoring in the vacancy-ordered double perovskite semiconductor Cs2SnI6 for photovoltaic application, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2021, 230, 111180 CrossRef CAS .
C.-h. Li, K. K. Soh and P. Wu, Formability
of ABO3 perovskites, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 372, 40–48 CrossRef CAS .
N.-X. Li, S. Tao, Y.-H. Chen, X.-X. Niu, C. Onwudinanti, C. Hu, Z.-W. Qiu, Z.-Q. Xu, G. Zheng, L.-G. Wang, Y. Zhang, L. Li, H.-F. Liu, Y.-Z. Lun, J. Hong, X.-Y. Wang, Y.-Q. Liu, H.-P. Xie, Y.-L. Gao, Y. Bai, S.-H. Yang, G. Brocks, Q. Chen and H.-P. Zhou, Cation and anion immobilization through chemical bonding enhancement with fluorides for stable halide perovskite solar cells, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 408–415 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew and K. Schmidt, Density functionals for non-relativistic coulomb systems in the new century, AIP Conf. Proc., 2003, 620, 1–55 CAS .
T. T. Tran, J. R. Panella, J. R. Chamorro, J. R. Morey and T. M. McQueen, Designing indirect–direct bandgap transitions in double perovskites, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 688–693 RSC .
J. Gong, P.-J. Guo, S. E. Benjamin, P. V. Patten, R. Schaller and T. Xu, Cation engineering on lead iodide perovskites for stable and high-performance photovoltaic applications, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 27, 1017–1039 CrossRef .
R. P. Singh, P. Basera, S. Bhattacharya and S. Sapra, Band gap engineering in Cs2(NaxAg1−x)BiCl6 double perovskite nanocrystals, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 17, 5173–5181 Search PubMed .
V. K. Ravi, G. B. Markad and A. Nag, Band edge energies and excitonic transition probabilities of colloidal CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite nanocrystals, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 665–671 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fujiwara, M. Kato, M. Tamakoshi, T. Miyadera and M. Chikamatsu, Optical characteristics and operational principles of hybrid perovskite solar cells, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2018, 215, 1700730 CrossRef .
E. M. Chen, L. Williams, A. Olvera, C. Zhang, M.-F. Zhang, G.-S. Shi, J. T. Heron, L. Qi, L. J. Guo, E. Kioupakis and P. F. P. Poudeu, Sustainable p-type copper selenide solar material with ultra-large absorption coefficient, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 5405–5414 RSC .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp04976cThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic diagram of the cation-transmutation principle. (b) Diagram of the screening steps. (c) Elemental compositions of the double perovskite A, B, and X positions.	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Cubic double perovskite crystal structure. (b) The (t, μ) map for 760 double perovskites; the yellow area in the figure is the stable region.	 
	(4)

 		 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Color map of the GGA-calculated band gaps of 236 A2B2+B′2+X6 double perovskites. Since the GGA usually underestimates the band gaps, the calculated values are generally lower than the experimental values. The cross in the figure is the structure rated as unstable by the tolerance factor. (b) Band gap range profile. The dashed area is the band gap screening range. (c) Statistical chart of the band gap distribution for different elements.	 

 	Fig. 4  Band structure and orbital-projected density of states (PDOS) of Cs2MnPtF6 (a) and Cs2PbSnBr6 (c). Ion valence electron arrangements (b and d). These data are calculated by the HSE functional.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The band gap (HSE and PBE) map for 82 double perovskites, and the yellow area in the figure is the band gap (HSE) screening threshold. (b) The X-ray diffraction evolution of the cubic structure with a temperature of 800 K. (c) Ab initio molecular dynamics (AIMD) energy variation under 800 K for Cs2PbSnI6, Cs2PbGeBr6, Cs2PbGeI6, Cs2SnGeCl6, Cs2PbSnBr6, and Cs2MnPtF6.	 

 	Fig. 6  Calculated optical properties for Cs2PbSnI6, Cs2PbGeI6, Cs2PbSnBr6, Cs2PbGeBr6, and Cs2SnGeCl6: (a) absorption coefficient and (b) joint density of states (JDOS).	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1cp04976c

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2022
