Effects of the acceptor unit in dyes with acceptor–bridge–donor architecture on the electron photo-injection mechanism and aggregation in DSSCs   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP04662B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP04662B
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 24239-24251Effects of the acceptor unit in dyes with acceptor–bridge–donor architecture on the electron photo-injection mechanism and aggregation in DSSCs†

        
          
            Ximena 
            Zarate
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Francisca 
            Claveria-Cadiz
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            David 
            Arias-Olivares
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Angela 
            Rodriguez-Serrano
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Natalia 
            Inostroza
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Eduardo 
            Schott
          
        
      *d
aInstituto de Ciencias Químicas Aplicadas, Facultad de Ingeniería, Universidad Autónoma de Chile. Av. Pedro de Valdivia 641, Santiago, Chile. E-mail: jazminac@gmail.com
bDoctorado en Fisicoquímica Molecular, Facultad de Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Andres Bello, Ave. Republica 275, Santiago, Chile
cGrupo de Fotodinámica Molecular, Universidad de los Andes, Carrera 1E No. 19A - 40, Bogotá D. C., Colombia
dDepartamento de Química Inorgánica, Facultad de Química, Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile. Avda. Vicuña Mackenna 4860, Santiago, Chile
Received 
      4th July 2016
    , Accepted 2nd August 2016First published on 2nd August 2016AbstractDye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are devices that convert light to electrical energy. Nowadays, researchers have focused on the understanding of the performance of dyes in solar cells. In this way, new efficient dyes have been obtained which can act as efficient light-harvesting compounds where the combination and the balance of acceptor(A)–bridge–donor(D) architectures confer suitable attributes and properties to the dye. Herein, we have carried out a DFT study on the optical and electronic properties of eight different A motifs and their influence on the electron photo-injection (PI) mechanisms through type I (indirect) or type II (direct) pathways in A–bridge–D dyes in DSSCs. The models consisted of thiophene as a bridge and triphenylamine as a D anchored to a TiO2 anatase cluster. All geometry optimizations were calculated using the B3LYP, CAM-B3LYP and BHandHLYP functionals combined with the 6-31G(d,p) basis set for C, H, N, O and S and the LANL2DZ pseudopotential for Ti atoms. Most of the A dyes display optoelectronic properties consistent with a type-I (indirect) mechanism except for the A5 dye where the results suggest a type-II (direct) PI pathway. In addition, molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have been carried out in order to describe the formation of dye dimers and analyze the stability of the aggregates due to intermolecular interactions. The observed trends indicate that dyes with A2 and A5 anchoring groups have less tendency to dimerize due to weaker intermolecular interactions resulting in less stable dimer complexes. Specifically, we found that the A motif influences the PI by a dye and the dimerization profiles.
Introduction
Dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) are devices that convert light to electrical energy, which makes them excellent green alternatives for the increasing energy demand that we are currently experiencing.1,2 DSSCs work under low light conditions, i.e. cloudy or indirect sunlight, which makes them an attractive technology in applications such as rooftop or window solar collectors. The cells are composed of a transparent conducting glass electrode covered with a film of porous nanocrystalline semiconductor (TiO2) where dye molecules are adsorbed. These dyes act as sensitizers by absorbing photons from the sun radiation and injecting electron charge to the semiconductor. The oxidized dye is regenerated to its ground state by an electrolyte containing a redox couple (commonly I−/I3− or CoIII/II) which is immersed between the glasses. Finally, a potential difference is obtained and the circuit is completed by a counter-electrode glass covered with platinum.
Nowadays, researchers have focused on going further into the understanding of the performance of different dyes in solar cells. In this sense, it has been reported that the DSSCs can display type I or II electron photo-injection (PI) mechanisms (Fig. 1a). The type I (indirect) pathway involves, in the first place, photon absorption by the dye which induces its excitation from the ground state to the excited state followed by an electron transfer to the conduction band of the semiconductor. On the other hand, the type II (direct) mechanism is referred to as one-step electron injection from the ground state of the dye to the semiconductor upon photo-absorption. In both cases, an oxidized dye results from the electron injection which is regenerated by the electrolyte.3 Both PI pathways generate an interfacial TiO2(e−)/Dye+ state but some advantages of type II over type I have been observed such as type II could show a wider spectral range of absorption and exploit in a better way the sunlight since it is able to show a new band because of the direct charge transfer upon adsorption of the dye to the semiconductor. Therefore, dyes that may display a type II PI mechanism in a DSSC could present the advantage of absorbing in the UV region and when the solar cell is constructed, the absorption can be red shifted to use the wide sun radiation spectrum. Then, the absorption in the visible range will not be a concern for the design of dyes. Moreover, for type I the LUMO energy has to be higher than the conduction band (CB) edge of the semiconductor, whereas the LUMO energy has no restriction for dyes displaying a type II mechanism.
 Fig. 1  (a) Scheme describing the PI mechanism in a DSSC. (b) Acceptor–bridge–donor (A–bridge–D) molecular structure. Donor and bridge motifs are not varied while A is changed by different motifs. 
Theoretical investigations have revealed that small structural differences in the chemical structure of the dye can induce a change of the PI mechanism in a DSSC, e.g. naphthalenediol and catechol display a type II mechanism and alizarin shows a type I mechanism.4,5 Dyes containing a catechol have shown a direct PI pathway and exhibit the new absorption band in the visible region upon anchoring to the semiconductor TiO2 corresponding to a dye-to-TiO2 charge transfer.6–8 One exception to the latter fact is the Ti-phthalocyanine with catechol–COOH as the anchoring group bound in a perpendicular way to the macrocycle and to the TiO2. This system displays an indirect path whose charge transfer process was studied under DFTB formalism.4 This could indicate that not all dyes containing catechol show type II (direct) PI and that a search for type II dyes can be carried out.
Currently, the acceptor–bridge–donor (A–bridge–D) arrangement constitutes a common strategy in the architecture of dyes for improving the energy-to-electricity conversion yield with high molar extinction coefficients and low cost of production.2 The main idea is that, when the dye absorbs light, intramolecular charge transfer occurs from the D to the A motifs through the π-bridge. The balance of the electronic properties of fragments that may give suitable attributes to the A–bridge–D dye for DSSC devices is a valuable aspect that influences their charge transfer performance and charge separation after photoexcitation, among others. In this framework, experiments suggest that the most of the organic A–bridge–D dyes are type I (indirect) injectors, but the mechanistic behavior of the dyes could depend on the chemical structure of the motifs constituting the D, bridge and A fragments.
In the design of DSSCs, there is a huge concern about avoiding the possibility of the recombination of the injected electron TiO2(e−) with the oxidized dye (dye+) which is in part supported by the high driving force for the recombination process and due to the rate of recombination being negligible compared to the rate at which electrons are supplied by the electrolyte.2 After electron photo-injection, lateral intermolecular electron transfer can also occur from one dye to another dye in its oxidized state.9 This complication is attributed to dye aggregation due to intermolecular interactions mainly forming dimers that do not lead to electron injection and hence reduced overall conversion efficiency.10,11
In our previous work we had analyzed the effects of varying the D-fragment which may lead to a specific PI pathway in a family of eleven donors with different electronic properties.12 In the present theoretical study we focus on investigating the effects on the PI mechanisms of eight (8) A–bridge–D dyes, with an architecture displayed in Fig. 1b, differing in the A-fragment by the motifs presented in Fig. 2. The structure of the studied A–bridge–D systems (Fig. 1b) consists of thiophene as a bridge and triphenylamine as a D. Triarylamine-based dyes are widely investigated due to their prominent electron-donating ability and hole-transport properties giving good power conversion efficiencies in DSSCs and, on the other hand, thiophene is one of the most used π-bridges.2 The family of acceptors A1–A8 (the complete A–bridge–D systems will be named the same), the subject of this study, has been chosen due to their reported characteristic structural and electronic properties. On the other hand, even though a lot of efforts have been made in obtaining organic dyes to enhance the efficiency, a highlighted subject that has been much less investigated is dye aggregation which plays an important role when a dye is chosen as a sensitizer in a DSSC.
 Fig. 2  Family of the studied acceptor fragments. 
Herein, our study focuses on analyzing (i) the effects of varying the A-fragment and the subsequent effects on the PI mechanism by means of density functional theory (DFT) methods and (ii) the aggregation effects on the structural stability of the studied systems through the formation of dimers by molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The analyses of the physical–chemical aspects, free energy of injection (−ΔGinj), driving force for charge recombination (ΔG0rec), light-harvesting efficiencies (LHEs), dipole moments (μ), open circuit voltage (eVOC), frontier molecular orbitals (FMOs) and electron density difference maps (EDDMs) that govern the light absorption process and the efficiency of the systems in a DSSC have also been performed in detail.12,13
Computational methods
Composition of the family of acceptors (A)
A set of eight (8) acceptor fragments were selected in order to analyze their effect on the PI mechanisms and the photoelectronic properties in free metal dyes of the type A–bridge–D. To avoid confusion, the acceptor motifs and the whole dyes were labelled as A.
Cyanoacrylic acid (A1) is considered as a small and promising electron acceptor due to the strong electron withdrawing ability of the cyano and carboxylic groups,14,15 which makes it the most famous anchoring fragment since more than 50% of the organic dyes contain carboxylic acid as the binding group.16,17 The synthesis of A1 has been reported and experiments to evaluate the sensitizer behavior in DSSCs have been carried out showing an efficiency of 2.75%.18 Arakawa et al. developed a family of A–bridge–D dyes by using coumarin dyes as donors and A1 as an acceptor linked with vinylene, isophorone or thienyl groups.19–21 By adding this acceptor into the design, the systems showed wider absorption spectra and improved efficiencies.
Most efficient porphyrin and metallo-porphyrin dyes with efficiencies higher than 10% contain the common benzoic acid (A2) as an acceptor.22,23 When this acceptor is modified to obtain 4-(cyanomethyl)benzoic acid, the dyes displayed decreased efficiencies.24 On the other hand, it has been observed that an ortho-substitution with a cyano group in the benzoic acid sometimes leads to a more stable configuration of the dye–TiO2 systems due to the interaction of the cyano substituent with the semiconductor.25
Rhodanine-3-acetic acid (A3) has been part of dyes containing diethylaniline as a donor fragment. When the dye contains a thienothiophene core which is an excellent π-conjugated system, it provides an efficiency of about 6.2%.26 Other examples with this acceptor are the indoline-based dyes that have presented efficiencies around 6%.27
(Carboxymethyl)benzothiazolium (A4) was included in the studied family in order to assess the properties of an ionic dye. This class of dyes have also been tested in DSSCs, such as the hemicyanine based-dye containing A4 as an acceptor and a dialkylamino phenyl donor unit showing an efficiency of 4.6%.28
Catechol (A5) has been known to bind to the TiO2 surface through bidentate mononuclear chelating and/or bidentate binuclear bridging linkages.6 The studied dye A5 including methoxy substituents in the TPA donor has been reported.7 In this context, ruthenium(II) polypyridyl complexes, with catechol as the anchoring fragment, have shown significant slow charge recombination processes in experimental interfacial electron-transfer dynamics studies on TiO2.29
Grätzel and Nazeeruddin have worked on the molecular engineering of acceptor and anchoring groups based on the 2-quinolinone moiety.30 They studied (chlorotetrahydroquinolinyl)cyanoacrylic acid (A6) and (oxotetrahydroquinolinyl)cyanoacrylic acid (A7), which have in common a cyanoacrylic acid type anchoring moiety in which the 2-chloro-substituent in the former is replaced with an oxo group in the latter. Quinolinylbipyridine anchoring groups have also been employed in the design of ruthenium sensitizers obtaining highly efficient DSSCs.31
To assess the DSSC performance and the absorption profile of a dye with an additional rhodamine to the acceptor A3, the A8 framework was introduced in this study. This acceptor motif has been used in indoline-based dyes which showed a prominent efficiency of 9.0%, under AM 1.5 G irradiation.32,33
QM calculations
The geometry optimizations of the electronic ground states of isolated dyes and the dyes anchored to a (TiO2)15 cluster have been performed at the level of density functional theory (DFT), without symmetry constrains. The Becke-3-parameter-Lee–Yang–Parr (B3LYP) hybrid functional,34,35 its long-range corrected version (CAM-B3LYP),36 and the BHandHLYP were evaluated.37 The basis set composed of Gaussian-type orbitals, 6-31G(d,p), was used for C, H, N, O and S and the LANL2DZ pseudopotential for Ti atoms.38–40 During the computations, the dyes were bonded onto the TiO2via bidentate mononuclear chelating which has been as well documented as the preferred binding mode.12,41 The A–bridge–D dyes were anchored to the (TiO2)15 cluster by deprotonating the carboxylic acid substituent of the dye and protonating the (TiO2)15 cluster surface. Harmonic vibrational frequencies were calculated to ensure that all the optimized geometries were minima on their corresponding potential energy surfaces. The computations of the oxidized states of the dyes were carried out using unrestricted DFT (UDFT)/PCM and the three functionals. The Gaussian 09 program package42 was employed for all the QM computations.
The absorption spectra of the systems were also computed by means of time-dependent DFT (TD-DFT) using the theoretical levels mentioned above.43 Implicit solvation effects were incorporated using the polarized continuum model (PCM, ε = 35.7) for acetonitrile.44 These computations provided the type of transitions occurring after photoexcitation of the dyes together with important electronic properties such as vertical excitation energies, (transition) dipole matrix elements and oscillator strengths.
In the framework of the PI mechanism of DSSCs, the electron transfer speed is studied via general classical Marcus theory, where ΔGinj (the free energy of injection) and λ (the reorganization energy of the system) play an important role. The charge transfer process (CT) can be, therefore, associated with the free-energy change for electron injection (ΔGinj) which influences the electron injection rate. Negative values of ΔGinj imply that the electron injection from the dyes to the semiconductor is spontaneous:12,45 ΔGinj = Edye* − ECB(1)ECB is the reduction potential of the conduction band of TiO2, which has an experimental value of −4.00 eV. Edye* is the excited-state oxidation potential of the dye, which is determined by the redox potential of the ground state of the dye. This quantity can be estimated by the difference between the ionization potential energy (Koopman's theorem) and the vertical energy of the lowest singlet excited state.
For describing the electronic transition nature and the corresponding changes of the electron density, the electron density difference maps (EDDMs) were computed and plotted using GaussSum (v. 2.2.6).46
On the other hand, the light absorbance of the dye-sensitized TiO2 film known as the light-harvesting efficiency (LHE in eqn (2)) of the dye should be as high as possible to maximize the photocurrent response. LHE is influenced by the oscillator strength (f) at a given maximum wavelength (λmax). LHE = 1 − 10−A = 1 − 10−f(2)When f is large, LHE is strong. A (or f) is the absorption (or oscillator strength) of the dye related to λmax. These data are also obtained from the TD-DFT calculations of the vertical absorption spectra of the dyes.47
The relationship between the open circuit voltage (VOC) and the energy of the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) of the dyes has been calculated based on the fact that the electron transfer occurs from the LUMO to the conduction band of the semiconductor (ECB) using eqn (3). It is stated that when the energy of the LUMO (ELUMO) is high, the VOC will be high as well. Besides, the enhancement of electron dipole moment (μ) will also improve VOC, which benefits higher efficiency. eVOC = ELUMO − ECB(3) On the other hand, an important parameter that affects the performance of the cell is the driving force for charge recombination ΔG0rec, which is obtained as48 ΔG0rec = ECB − EHOMO(4)
MD calculations
CHARMM force fields were developed and written down using the fftk plugin49 in VMD50 along with Gaussian 0942 to carry out molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. The MP2/6-31G* level of theory was used for the geometry optimization, for the calculation of the Hessian used to optimize bonds, and for scanning for torsions within the relaxed potential energy. In addition, the HF/6-31G* level of theory was utilized for optimizing the distance and orientation of water molecules with respect to all atoms present in the dyes. The systems were minimized using NAMD51 through 10000 time steps (TSs). A canonical NVT ensemble was used during the MD simulations for 1 ns at a constant temperature of 298 K. The force field has two terms which include the van der Waals repulsive form and for dispersion the attractive form of the Lennard-Jones 12-6 potential and finally the Coulomb electrostatic potential. The molecular dynamics force fields include long-range electrostatic and dispersion interactions for all non-bonded pairs.51
Once all calculations were finished, the energies and root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) analysis of the atomic positions for each system were analyzed. The interaction energy ΔE for the structures obtained from the minimization and the MD was calculated as follows: ΔE = Edim − 2Emon(5)where Edim is the energy of the dimer and Emon is the energy of the monomer. Two kinds of ΔE values were obtained. The first one refers to minimization and equilibration processes, and the second one to MD simulation over time. Besides, the difference between minimization and MD simulation energies was calculated in order to assess the behaviour of non-bonded interactions. Thus, ΔEnb indicates the change of non-bonded energies over time: ΔEnb = |ΔEDynamic − ΔEMinimization|(6)
Results and discussion
Ground state optimization
To analyze the role of the acceptor motif (A) in dyes with D–bridge–A architecture in the electron injection processes in solar cells, we started by computing the ground state of the isolated dyes and of the dyes anchored to a semiconductor constituted of a cluster of fifteen units of TiO2 in the anatase form (dye–(TiO2)15). Studies suggest that the cluster with fifteen (15) TiO2 units is a small and optimal cluster that can reproduce the electronic and energetic features of the system as good as the cluster with thirty-eight (38) TiO2 units.12,52 Therefore, the spherical structure model of (TiO2)15 used in this work has been chosen as an equilibrium between a suitable form of the semiconductor and the computational cost.
The dyes consist of the A fragment, thiophene as a bridge and triphenylamine (TPA) as a donor motif (D) which has been employed and optimized to design highly efficient DSSCs. Fig. 3 displays three of the studied systems. As the dyes are connected to the semiconductor through the carboxylic acid group, a bidentate bond of the dye with the cluster is proposed with one proton transferred to an oxygen atom of the cluster. The exception is A5 which contains catechol as an acceptor group; therefore the anchoring groups are two hydroxyl groups which are deprotonated and these protons are transferred to the cluster. It is observed that the acceptor fragments of A3, A4 and A8 have the –COOH anchoring group rather perpendicular to the body of the dye, which induces an almost horizontal position of the dye with respect to the cluster depicted by a narrow angle between the TiO2 and the dye when it is compared to the other dyes.
 Fig. 3  Molecular structure of A4, A5 and A6 adsorbed to the (TiO2)15 cluster. 
To get a deeper insight into the electronic properties of the systems, the calculated energy levels of the molecular orbitals of the free and adsorbed dyes were analyzed. For four of the dyes (A2, A4, A5 and A6), the energy levels are displayed in Fig. 4, while for the other systems the energy levels are provided in the ESI† (Fig. S1–S3). A common trend found for all the employed functionals is that the energies of the HOMO and the LUMO of the free and adsorbed dyes lie above the valence band (∼7.0 eV) and the conduction band (CB, ∼4.0 eV) of the TiO2, respectively.1 In fact, the LUMO levels are placed within the conduction band of the TiO2 and the HOMOs are immersed in the band gap of the TiO2. As the free dyes' LUMOs are higher in energy than the CB edge of the semiconductor, an efficient thermodynamic driving force for charge generation via charge injection from the excited state of the dye to the TiO2 is viable. This suggests that electron injection from the LUMO levels should be possible for all the studied dyes. Moreover, a closer look at Fig. 4 shows that the energies of the HOMO are maintained at almost the same energy before and after they bind onto the (TiO2)15 cluster. Besides, the LUMOs of the adsorbed systems are strongly stabilized after binding to the TiO2 lying close to the conduction band edge due to the coupling between the dye and the semiconductor states.
 Fig. 4  Energy level diagram of A2, A4, A5 and A6 dyes, free and adsorbed to the TiO2 cluster (Dye-(TiO2)15) calculated at the CAM-B3LYP theoretical level. 
The results clearly show a dependency of the energy level distribution with respect to the functional employed in the calculations (B3LYP, CAM-B3LYP or BHandHLYP). If a comparison is made between the computed (−1. 43 eV) and the experimental energy of the LUMO for A1,18 it is observed that B3LYP is the functional that provided the highest deviated value with respect to BHandHLYP and CAM-B3LYP. The latter yields the nearest value, about −1.57 eV, to the experimental data, followed by BHandHLYP with −1.68 eV (see Fig. S1–S3 in the ESI†). The HOMO–LUMO (H–L) gaps for the eight studied compounds calculated at the three levels of theory are also presented in Fig. 4. The H–L gap between these structures changed when the family of 8 acceptor fragments were modified. It is noticed that the free A5 (having two terminal −OH anchoring groups) shows the major H–L gap using the three functionals. In this sense, it is worth mentioning that A5 shows the highest LUMO energy compared with the other dyes.
Oxidized state
After charge photo-injection from the dye to the semiconductor, the dye reaches its oxidized state and for its regeneration up to the ground state, this has to be reduced by an electron donation from the immersed electrolyte. The most employed electron donors in DSSCs are the I−/I3− (4.60 eV)53 and the CoIII/II (5.0 eV) redox couples. In the case of iodide, it provides very good regeneration efficiency (ϕreg), achieving unity.
The driving force for the regeneration process represented by the potential energy difference between the oxidized species and the redox couple is related to ϕreg.54 Therefore, the oxidation potential of the sensitizers, which in a theoretical approximation is obtained by the negative of the HOMO energy (−HOMO), must be more positive than the redox couples. In this context, our results show that all the dyes are in good agreement with this parameter since the −HOMO energies are more positive than the most employed redox couples (I−/I3− and CoIII/II), see Fig. S1–S3 in the ESI,† which leads to a convenient regeneration of the ground state of the studied dyes by the electrolytes.
Using the B3LYP functional, the observed trend consists in the fact that all the −HOMO energies are very close to those of the redox couples. In contrast, with the CAM-B3LYP and BHandHLYP functionals, the −HOMO energies present on average a difference of 1 eV with the redox potentials of the donors. For A2 with the three DFT functionals, the −HOMO level shows the smallest energy difference with respect to the redox potentials, which probably results in the loss of driving force and hence low efficiency of the dye regeneration.
The computations of the oxidized states of all dyes using the three functionals were performed and the isosurface of the lowest empty orbital in each case after the electron removal was plotted (see Fig. S4 in the ESI†). These MOs are a qualitative prediction of the hole generated in the oxidized systems after the photoinduced electron injection to the semiconductor. In this sense, it is stated that the hole localized over the donor motif, which is the fragment that most of the times is further from the negatively charged semiconductor after the injection, leads to a charge separation which is favorable to decrease the probability of the interfacial back electron transfer between the semiconductor and the oxidized compound holding a positive charge, Dye+/TiO2(e−).9 Dyes A6, A7 and mainly A4 (presented in Fig. 5) show the best charge separation upon photoexcitation and electron injection into the CB of the TiO2, these dyes being the ones that display the hole significantly located over the TPA. As all systems have the same bridge motif, the difference in the hole distribution could be attributed to the structural and electronic effect of the acceptor fragments.
 Fig. 5  LUMO (hole) of the oxidized states of the free A4, A6, and A7 dyes. 
With regard to the regeneration process, it was also found that the energy of these lowest empty MOs computed for the oxidized sensitizers lies under the I−/I3− and CoIII/II redox couple potentials, which ensures efficient regeneration of the cationic form of the dyes by an electron transfer from the electrolyte, avoiding in this way the charge recombination as it was also assessed using the −HOMO energy approximation.
Dipole moments
Electrochemical studies suggest that the interfacial dipole moment (μ) contributes to the measured open-circuit photo-voltage.9 This is an important parameter that refers to the deviation of charge distribution and points from negative to positive charge, and then dipole moments might be very sensitive to the structure of the dyes. Therefore, the ground state dipole moments of the isolated dyes and the dyes anchored to the cluster were analyzed. It is expected that the dyes display dipole moments perpendicular to the semiconductor surface and the difference in the dipole moments will reflect the significant charge transfer trends in the systems.
The magnitudes of the dipole moments (μ) for the isolated dyes and dyes bound to the TiO2 cluster are displayed in Fig. 6 (also see Table S4 in the ESI†). Compared to the other A–bridge–D dyes, the A2, A6 and A5 dyes display a lower μ value. The A4 dye with the benzothiazonium ring showed the largest μ of the family. The differences in the calculated values between B3LYP and the other two functionals are significant but not extreme, with the values calculated with BHandHLYP and CAM-B3LYP being similar. The plots of the dipole moment vectors for all the dyes are reported in the ESI† (Fig. S5). One representative example is presented in Fig. 6 for the A6 dye. As expected, all systems display the direction of the vectors pointing towards the A unit and the cluster semiconductor in a perpendicular orientation. These ground state dipole moment vectors point from negative to positive charge indicating a tendency of charge transfer after photoexcitation of the systems.
 Fig. 6  Effects of the DFT functional on the calculated negative free energy of the injection (−ΔGinj), light-harvesting efficiency (LHE) for the lowest singlet excited state, the open-circuit voltage (eVOC), dipole moments (μ) and the plot of the dipole moment vectors for a selected A–bridge–D, A6, free and anchored to the TiO2 cluster. 
Spectral properties
For understanding the energy transfer processes that lead to a specific PI mechanism it is essential to understand the energetic and electronic properties of the low-lying excited states of the dyes. In order to get insight into the performance of the chosen functional in the treatment of charge transfer excitations, TD-DFT calculations of the electronic vertical spectrum of the A–bridge–D dyes in acetonitrile were performed using the CAM-B3LYP, BHandHLYP and B3LYP functionals. The vertical excitation energies of the electronic states corresponding to the λmax in the absorption spectra of the free dyes and anchored in (TiO2)15 are displayed in Table 1. Fig. S6–S8 (ESI†) depict the topologies of selected molecular orbitals as a guide to the description of the low-lying CT excitations. The simulated UV-vis absorption spectra of some selected A–bridge–D using the TD-CAM-B3LYP functional are presented in Fig. 7. More details about the results obtained for all the dyes and functionals are presented in Tables S1–S3 in the ESI.†
Table 1 Calculated maximum absorption wavelengths λmax [nm(eV)], oscillator strengths (f(L)), and the corresponding dominant contributions of the electronic transitions at the TD-CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) theoretical level




Dyes

λ
max Dye

f

MOs
Contr. %

λ
max Dye@TiO2

f

MOs
Contr. %





a 404 nm (3.07 eV) in acetonitrile, ref. 18.
b 404 nm (3.07 eV) in acetonitrile, ref. 18.






A1

415(2.99)a
1.360
H → L
80
471(2.63)b
1.851
H → L+2
50


H−1 → L
14
H → L+3
19



A2

349(3.55)
1.498
H → L
70
381(3.25)
1.400
H → L+1
20


H−1 → L
15
H → L+5
37


H → L+1
13







A3

438(2.83)
1.390
H → L
72
467(2.66)
1.437
H−1 → L+2
15


H−1 → L
10
H → L+2
78



A4

439(2.83)
1.320
H → L
79
473(2.62)
1.238
H−1 → L+2
12


H−1 → L
14
H → L+2
82



A5

332(3.73)
1.410
H → L
85
426(2.91)
0.209
H → L+3
13






H → L+4
20



A6

400(3.10)
1.630
H → L
56
450(2.76)
2.031
H−1 → L+2
20


H−1 → L
24
H → L+2
58



A7

425(2.92)
1.737
H → L
46
469(2.64)
2.211
H−1 → L+2
30


H−1 → L
39
H → L+2
50



A8

436(2.84)
1.934
H → L
61
486(2.55)
1.964
H−1 → L+2
18


H−1 → L
27
H → L+2
47




 Fig. 7  UV-vis absorption spectra simulated through TD-CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) (acetonitrile) for (a) A2, (b) A4, (c) A5, and (d) A6. The blue lines correspond to the results for free dyes, and the red lines correspond to the dye–TiO2 systems. The bar graphics (e) and (f) reflect the effects of the DFT functional on the calculated vertical excitation energies (ΔEv). 
According to the CAM-B3LYP calculations, the lowest singlet excited states of the dyes are computed between 2.83 and 3.73 eV. Bathochromic shifts of these excitation energies are observed after dye adsorption onto the (TiO2)15 surface to range between 2.55 and 3.25 eV. Comparing these excitation energies with those obtained with the other functionals (see Fig. 7(e and f)), it is observed that the B3LYP functional underestimates the CAM-B3LYP values with deviations around >0.7 eV as this functional incorporates a small percentage (20%) of HF-like exchange. In contrast, the BHandHLYP functional (50% HF-like exchange) yields excitation energies with the same precision of CAM-B3YLP where the largest deviation within the evaluated systems was 0.1 eV for the A6 dye (free and anchored) while for the other systems it is close to zero. The BHandHLYP functional has previously been found to describe CT interactions well55 but giving poor results for other molecular properties such as total energy (and therefore not conventionally used).56 Both functionals (CAM-B3LYP and BHandHLYP) display a reasonable agreement with the experimental report for the A1 dye when compared with B3LYP (Table 1), as this value represents the only available estimate for comparison in the family of chosen A–bridge–D dyes. Nevertheless, the CAM-B3LYP functional was chosen as reference in this study, which incorporates 19% of HF-like exchange at short-range and 65% of such exchange at long interelectronic separations. It is important to mention here that implicit solvation interactions were modeled through a PCM environment where explicit solvation interactions were not taken into account, which may be affecting the accuracy of the calculated excitation energies.
Insights into the photoinjection mechanism can be rationalized by comparing the UV-vis spectra of the dye–TiO2 systems and those of the free dyes (Fig. 7). A type II (direct) pathway is often identified by the appearance of a new band in the UV-vis spectrum of the dye-semiconductor system compared to the absorption spectrum of the isolated dye. For these organic dyes, the new band may correspond to a donor-to-particle charge transfer state.4,57 Besides, the type-I (indirect) pathway does not exhibit any new band upon adsorption, but a shift of the λmax band is commonly observed.
The simulated TD-DFT absorption spectra of A2, A4 and A6 dyes display a bathochromic shift of the maximum absorption band (λmax) after adsorption onto the TiO2 layer. On the other hand, the A5 dye spectral profile is characterized by the formation of a new band at higher wavelengths upon adsorption to the semiconductor cluster. According to these results, A2, A4 and A6 dyes exhibit a type-I (indirect) photoinjection mechanism as also exhibited by A1 and A3 (see the ESI†), while A5 is found to be the only dye of the group that follows a type-II (direct) pathway. This conclusion is also obtained when using the BHandHLYP and B3LYP functionals in the calculation of the absorption spectra of the dyes. Recently, Ooyama et al. reported a series of three dyes using a catechol (A5) as an acceptor unit designing them as photosensitizers for type-II DSSCs.6 The computed trends (for a type-I mechanism) obtained for the rest of the dyes are in agreement with experimental reports for dyes using similar acceptors.18,24,27,31,33
The nature of the corresponding excited states involved in the maximum absorption band (λmax) for most of the free A–bridge–D dyes displays a mixture of single electronic transitions from the HOMO and HOMO−1 to the LUMO, with a dominant contribution of the HOMO → LUMO excitation. The amplitudes of the wavefunctions corresponding to the HOMO are mainly localized in the D fragment while for the LUMO these are localized in the A fragments. This behavior is expected because of the D–A charge transfer state character of these transitions. On the other hand, for the dyes anchored within the TiO2 framework (Fig. S6–S8, ESI†), the electronic transitions start either from the HOMO or from the HOMO−1 and end in several LUMOs of high energies from LUMO+1 to LUMO+5. Besides, for most of the type I dyes, the amplitudes of the unoccupied MOs are mostly localized in the A unit with a small localization in the TiO2 cluster. Exceptionally, for the A5 dye the distribution of the LUMO involved in the electronic transitions is mostly located at the semiconductor layer with no amplitude localized in the dye. These are composed mainly of p and d orbitals of the oxygen and titanium atoms of the TiO2 cluster. According to these analyses, the electronic density in A5 may be transferred from the dye (HOMO) directly to the semiconductor (LUMO+3, +4), which is an appropriate behavior of a type II PI process.
The electron density difference maps (EDDMs) calculated between the ground state and the first singlet excitation of the dyes anchored onto the TiO2 cluster are presented in Fig. 8 for A2, A4, A5 and A6 dyes using the CAM-B3LYP functional. For the dyes and DFT functionals, the results are collected in Fig. S9 and S10 in the ESI.† The EDDMs have become very useful to evidence the charge separation via photon absorption as it resumes the charge migration in the adsorbed dyes which may generate D–A systems. These plots show the localization of the occupied MOs that depopulate, and the densities of the unoccupied MOs which would be populated after photoexcitation.
 Fig. 8  EDDMs for some selected Dye–(TiO2)15 systems upon photoexcitation to the first singlet excited state calculated using the CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) wavefunctions. The blue densities represent the source of electrons, and the orange densities represent the target location after electron transfer. 
The observed trends in the EDDMs for all the dyes are equivalent when comparing the three functionals. For the A5 dye, the EDDMs reveal that the source of electrons is coming from the dye molecule while the region that receives this charge is located over the (TiO2)15 cluster. Confirming the MO analysis, this result describes the character of the new absorption band at low energies observed in the UV-vis spectrum and occurring after binding of A5 to the semiconductor. On the other hand, the EDDMs observed for the other dyes as represented by the A2, A4 and A6 dye exemplars display a distribution of the orbital delocalization initially extended over the dye through π orbitals and directed mainly to the acceptor motif (with some localization in the semiconductor) during the charge transfer process. This collection of results enables us to propose that the A5 dye exhibits a direct PI mechanism while for the other dyes the charge transfer process may occur via an indirect pathway. The unique electronic properties of the acceptor (A5) made the chosen A–bridge–D system (with the bridge and D invariable) to switch from the indirect route, as seen for the other dyes, to a direct mechanism.
Photovoltaic performance
All the photovoltaic parameters obtained with the employed functionals are reported in Table S4 in the ESI.†A5 that leads to a type II PI mechanism has an impact on the evaluated properties such as ΔGinj, ΔG0rec, LHE and the considerable increase of the magnitude of the dipole moment after adsorption to the semiconductor. In general, the assessed parameters for this dye follow the same trend, when calculated using the B3LYP, CAM-B3LYP and BHandHLYP functionals. In the case of eVoc, this value was not obtained for A5 as the theory involves an injection from the LUMO of the dye. For the remaining dyes, the type I PI mechanism is the predominant pathway and the photoelectronic properties can be evaluated and analyzed in a systematic manner. All type I dyes show similar light harvesting character given by LHE, with A6 and A7 having the lowest values for this parameter and for the eVoc calculated series. This eVoc parameter reaches its largest value in compound A2.
With respect to ΔGinj, it is common knowledge that the greater the ΔGinj value is, the greater the electron-injection efficiency will be expected. A5 and A2 dyes represented the best electron injection performance along the sequence. In terms of the ΔGinj results, there are no major changes between all functionals, but the magnitude of the values increases in the order CAM-B3LYP, BHandHLYP and finally B3LYP (Fig. 6). For the other dyes, A1, A3 and A7 have shown (with CAM-B3LYP and BHandHLYP) similar ΔGinj at all levels of theory. Moreover, A6, which differs from A7 in having a chlorine atom instead of an oxygen atom substituent in the acceptor motif, presents a small increase in the ΔGinj with respect to A7, which agrees with the slight variation of the efficiency percentages of 1.3 to 0.77 for A6 and A7, respectively.30
On the other hand, A4 exhibits the worst performance in its series, with a very low ΔGinj value and with the most probable electron recombination from the TiO2 as can be stated from the large driving force for electron back transfer to the dye (ΔG0rec). The behavior of A4 is expected to be due to the presence of sulfur at the meta-position of the carboxymethyl anchoring group. Strong evidence exists of the close relationship between the chemical structure, the physical properties and the reactivity of many substituents in the –ortho, -meta and -para positions addressing the complex interplay between the competing electron-donor and electron-acceptor effects of some substituents.58,59
MD simulations
Seven (7) different configurations, shown in Fig. 9, were selected as the initial position to compute molecular dynamics calculations. The arrowhead refers to the A motif and the arrow tail refers to the molecular donor side. Each configuration was evaluated at two different moments: the minimization and through MD simulation. Examples of such dimer configurations obtained through minimization and the MDs of A1 are displayed in Fig. 10 and for the other dyes they can be found in Fig. S11–S17 (ESI†). Dimer interaction energies (ΔE) for A1, A2 and A4 dyes are reported in Fig. 11 and a full collection of them is presented in Table S5 (ESI†).
 Fig. 9  Initial proposed spatial configurations for the MD analysis. 
 Fig. 10  Dimer configurations of A1. Structures after minimization and at the end of the MD. 
 Fig. 11  Dimer interaction energies (ΔE) for A1, A2, A4 and A5 dyes calculated using eqn (5). Yellow bars refer to interaction energies calculated from MD structures while blue bars correspond to the minimized geometries. 
The study of the A1 dimer starting from Conf1 shows that the minimization process holds on the face-to-face arrangement and that through MD simulation there is a smooth displacement of one dye with respect to the other. The non-bonded interaction energy between the dyes (Fig. 10) which stabilizes the system ranges up to −20 kcal mol−1 (see Fig. 11 and Table S5, ESI†). The RMSD analysis shows a change in the spatial positions of the dyes with an average value of ∼4.5 Å (Fig. S19a, ESI†). The minimized structure of the A1 dimer from Conf2 (head-to-tail) is close to the proposed initial arrangement, but a slight change occurs through the MD simulation since the bridge and one donor ring of one of the dyes experience a rotation. The interaction energy through the MD is lower by about 2 kcal mol−1 than the minimization energy. This change does not represent a significant spatial displacement evidenced by the RMSD analysis which indicates a short-range deviation in the atomic positions (Fig. S19b, ESI†).
The geometries Conf3 and Conf5 correspond to tail-to-tail and head-to-head arrangements over the same plane, respectively. No significant change is observed from Conf3 neither in the minimization nor in the MD simulation for A1 (Fig. 10) and it is placed alongside the minimal value of RMSD in Fig. S20 and S21 (ESI†). This type of stabilization of the geometry at the dimer is supported by the formation of hydrogen bonds between the carboxylic groups in the anchor sites, which has been recently reported by Jiang et al. in their MD study replacing the COOH anchoring group by CSSH in the dyes.10 In contrast, Conf5 shows no substantial change in the spatial configuration under minimization, but a substantial displacement was observed during the MD simulation: one of the dyes was moved forward to a plane parallel to the other dye where the final spatial configuration looks similar to Conf2 (Fig. 10). This change of spatial configuration from the Conf5 minimized system of the A1 dimer through the MD structure requires a mean-value energy of 5.11 kcal mol−1 (see Fig. 11).
The dimer Conf4 of A1 displays a geometry that forms a cross with the two dyes. This configuration shows a small spatial change at the equilibrium structure. Through the MD simulation the final molecular positions are similar to those obtained from Conf1 and Conf7 (Fig. 10). The difference between the interaction energies comparing the equilibrium with the MD is in the order of 0.5 kcal mol−1, which implies a minimal energy barrier to exchange from the cross to the almost face-to-face arrangement. This result is described by fluctuations in the RMSD profile (Fig. S20, ESI†).
Taking into account the side-by-side geometries of Conf6 and Conf7 of A1, there is no appreciable distortion after minimization of the Conf7 dimer, whereas Conf6 rapidly reaches the parallel head-to-tail arrangement. After MD simulations, both systems achieve similar configurations to Conf1 (Fig. 10). In this sense, these new spatial dispositions over time have a difference of interaction energy (compared with the minimized structures) equal to 0.21 kcal mol−1 for Conf6 and a larger change of about 3.5 kcal mol−1 for Conf7 (Fig. 11). The detailed changes are consistent with the RMSD analysis (Fig. S21 and S22, ESI†).
In the case of A2 dimers, the minimized and MD structures of Conf1 do not exhibit considerable changes over time, even when they presented a change of interaction energy (|ΔEnb|) of 1.75 kcal mol−1. This is related to the RMSD analysis showing the lowest RMSD compared to the other dyes for most of the assessed time (Fig. S19a, ESI†).
The head-to-tail arrangement is still present after the minimization of the A2 dimer in Conf2. It is interesting to note here a strong change in the RMSD profile (Fig. S19b, ESI†) at 0.75 ns where the system turns head-to-head and the energy requirements are around 3 kcal mol−1 (Fig. 11). The analysis from the Conf3 geometry of A2 does not display substantial changes in the RMSD values through the MD simulation due to the presence of hydrogen bonds between the COOH groups (Fig. S11, ESI†) as it was also observed for A1 (Fig. 10). The same fact applies for A6 and A7 (Fig. S15 and S16, ESI†). In these cases, the change in the interaction energy (|ΔEnb|) is also low by around 0.82 and 0.39 kcal mol−1, respectively.
The final spatial distribution of the A2 dimer at Conf4 once the MD run is completed is similar to that at Conf1. The RMSD analysis shows a large movement of atoms, especially in the very first steps due to the interaction between the two structures. Finally, this process calls for use of energy in the order of 1.76 kcal mol−1. The spatial arrangement of Conf5 for A2 remains almost the same after geometry minimization, a result observed for the other studied dyes as well. On the other hand, in general after the MD analysis, almost all dyes interact parallel with each other (Fig. S11–S17, ESI†) and the dynamics over time starting from the minimized structures lead to stabilization which is, the largest |ΔEnb| by 15.38 kcal mol−1 (see Table S5, ESI†), found for A4.
These analyses show a high RMSD due to the new configurations obtained over time, with A6 and A7 being the dimers with the largest RMSD over 10 Å (Fig. S21a, ESI†). The side-by-side Conf6 and Conf7 dimers for A2 show that the obtained minimized and dynamic spatial structures are also similar to Conf1 unlike the MD structure from Conf7 that resulted in a head-to-tail position even when the initial proposed disposition was set to heads in the same direction. The last described change is clearly observed in the RMSD profile where a pronounced change appears at around 0.38 Å.
The A3 and A4 dye dimers show a particular structural feature as they have the COOH group out of the plane of the molecule. The minimization and MD simulation of these dyes show that the hydrogen bonds stabilize the observed conformations mainly involving the carboxylic groups from the anchoring part and display similar RMSD values for all the configurations over time. Specifically, results from Conf1 and Conf7 show for both dyes the largest RMSDs compared to all the other dyes (Fig. S19a and S22, ESI†). Interestingly for the A3 and A4 dimers, after the MD simulation of Conf7, the geometry of the dimer resembles that of Conf2. In spite of this result, a significantly more stable dimer was obtained for the dimers through Conf7, correspondingly (Table S5, ESI†). The minimized structures obtained for the geometries Conf3 to Conf7 are very similar. In the case of the structures obtained through the MD simulations, there are substantial differences in the spatial distribution of the dimer that can be attributed to the presence of the voluminous acceptor fragment of A4. The largest stabilization over time from the minimized structures is obtained from Conf5 in the case of A3 and from Conf3 and Conf7 for A4 (Fig. 11).
The A5 dye presents stable configurations due to the non-bonded interactions involving the –OH groups. From Conf2 to Conf4, there is a large RMSD from the equilibrium structure through the dynamics which evidences the changes observed in the resulted spatial distributions (Fig. S14, ESI†). The dimers from Conf1 to Conf4 tend to get a parallel disposition of the dyes. However, from Conf5 to Conf7 the geometries display a form of a cross and a low |ΔEnb|. The interaction energy values obtained through the MD simulations are below the average compared to all the other dyes.
The change of the oxygen atom substituent in A7 by a chlorine atom in A6 does not promote significant changes in the profiles observed for the RMSD analysis, except for Conf5 and Conf6 which show a preference for the head-to-tail configuration after the MD simulation. On the other hand, the results of the MD for Conf1 of A7 turn out to be similar to those obtained for A1. These dyes (A6 and A7) show large interaction energies and the largest change in the |ΔEnb|. This allows these structures to reach a stabilized structure like that observed for Conf5. The results also show that dyes prefer to lie over parallel planes instead of over the same planes when the donors start the simulation positioned in front of each other.
Finally, the RMSD analysis of A8 shows the highest deviation (around 12 Å) for Conf3 and Conf6 and similar interaction energies despite their different structures. In contrast, the MD of A8 in Conf4 shows the lowest RMSD with high interaction energies. Taking into account the RMSD profiles for Conf2 and Conf5, they are similar to A4, as also observed in the case of the observed spatial dispositions of the dimers over time.
Conclusions
The optoelectronic properties of a group of eight dyes with acceptor–bridge–donor (A–bridge–D) architecture have been analyzed in order to get insights into the effects of the molecular structure of A on the electron photoinjection (PI) mechanism in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs). Computations in the framework of (time dependent-) density functional theory ((TD-)DFT) were performed to access the geometrical minima, absorption spectra and a number of electronic descriptors such as free energy of injection (−ΔGinj), driving force for charge recombination (ΔG0rec), light-harvesting efficiencies (LHEs), dipole moments (μ), open circuit voltage (eVOC), and electron density difference maps (EDDMs). The structures of the modeled systems consist of thiophene as a bridge and triphenylamine as a D which are considered for all the dyes, which differ by the A unit (see Fig. 2). The systems were also anchored to a (TiO2)15 cluster. The aggregation effects of these dyes were studied through molecular dynamics (MD) simulations by analyzing the structural stability in terms of interaction energies upon dimer formation and root-main square deviation (RMSD) values.
Our results show that the molecular and electronic properties of the A fragment influence the observed PI mechanism in a DSSC device. Most of the designed dyes exhibited optical and electronic properties which are consistent with a type-I (indirect) mechanism. The absorption spectra of the dyes showed a bathochromic shift of the maximum absorption band (λmax) when comparing the isolated dyes and the dyes adsorbed to the TiO2. Here, the molecular orbitals and EDDMs depict a D–A charge transfer in the dyes. For A1, A7 and A8, the dyes show improved spectral properties (with CAM-B3LYP and BHandHLYP) such as observable redshift with high intensity in the lower energy bands compared to the dyes with other A groups. On the other hand, the UV-vis absorption spectral profile of A5 displays a new absorption band with low oscillator strength with a dye-to-semiconductor charge transfer character at higher wavelengths upon adsorption to the semiconductor. In this case, the PI mechanism is exceptionally (for the eight studied dyes) considered as a type-II (direct) and confirmed by the analysis of the dipole moments, molecular orbitals and EDDM plots.
The frontier MOs of the oxidized dyes were analyzed to assess the hole generated after the photo-induced electron injection to the semiconductor in the system Dye+/TiO2(e−). The A6, A7 and A4 dyes show the best charge separation as the hole is significantly located over the donor TPA, which is favorable to decrease the probability of the interfacial back electron transfer to the semiconductor. But in terms of ΔG0rec, this parameter indicates that A4 possesses a high driving force for charge recombination in contrast to A6, A7 and A2 which show the lowest values.
Moreover, A2 and A5 acceptor-containing molecules gave the highest ΔGinj value with respect to the whole family of dyes. The HOMO energies and the redox potentials of the electrolytes (I−/I−3 and CoIII/II) were also compared (in the energy level diagrams). The cationic form of the dyes presents potential regeneration by the oxidized species of the redox couple after the injection which might also avoid or decrease charge recombination with the semiconductor. Overall, the results provided rationalize the differences in the photovoltaic performance, paving the way for the design of new and more efficient organic dye photosensitizers.
Finally, we have also investigated the possibility of dimer formation for the designed dyes with the different acceptor units. The geometrical stability was explored through seven types of configurations (spatial dispositions) of the dimers and by analyzing the resulting interaction energies. A comparison between minimized geometries of the dimers and structures obtained by MD profiles together with their corresponding interaction energies was made in order to get details about stability and most possible conformations. There isn’t a very significant spatial disposition change throughout minimization of the dimers at each configuration. Nonetheless, there are changes over time which were studied using the RMSD values and the corresponding interaction energies. These results give an idea on the elucidation of the dye aggregation while designing the efficient sensitizers for the practical application of DSSCs. In this sense, it was observed that dyes containing A2 and A5 acceptor units display relatively low interaction energies (seen for all configurations) for the generated dimers, and therefore less strong aggregation with respect to the other dyes.
Acknowledgements
The financial support of Fondecyt 11140563, Fondecyt 1161416 and CONICYT-Programa de Cooperación Internacional-REDES150042 is gratefully acknowledged. The authors thanks Dr. Edgardo Rojas Mancilla for the graphical abstract.
References
B. O’Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737–740 CrossRef .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Oviedo, X. Zarate, C. F. A. Negre, E. Schott, R. Arratia-Perez and C. G. Sánchez, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 2548–2555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Huber, S. Spörlein, J. E. Moser, M. Grätzel and J. Wachtveitl, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 8995–9003 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ooyama, T. Yamada, T. Fujita, Y. Harima and J. Ohshita, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 8500–8511 CAS .
S. Li, X. Yang, D. Qu, W. Wang, Y. Wang and L. Sun, Chin. J. Chem., 2012, 30, 2315–2321 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, K. Hang, N. A. Anderson and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 9434–9440 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hu, K. C. D. Robson, E. E. Beauvilliers, E. Schott, X. Zarate, R. Arratia-Perez, C. P. Berlinguette and G. J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1034–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Nachimuthu, W.-C. Chen, E. G. Leggesse and J.-C. Jiang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 1071–1081 RSC .
N. J. Cherepy, G. P. Smestad, M. Grätzel and J. Z. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 9342–9351 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zarate, S. Schott-Verdugo, A. Rodriguez-Serrano and E. Schott, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2016, 120, 1613–1624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-H. Gavin Tsai, C.-J. Tan and W.-H. Tseng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 4431–4443 Search PubMed .
Z. S. Wang, Y. Cui, K. Hara, Y. Dan-Oh, C. Kasada and A. Shinpo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1138–1141 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Wang, Y. Cui, Y. Dan-Oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo and K. Hara, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 17011–17017 CAS .
A. Mishra, M. K. Fischer and P. Bäuerle, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. P. Hagberg, T. Marinado, K. M. Karlsson, K. Nonomura, P. Qin, G. Boschloo, T. Brinck, A. Hagfeldt and L. Sun, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 9550–9556 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hara, Z. S. Wang, T. Sato, A. Furube, R. Katoh, H. Sugihara, Y. Dan-Oh, C. Kasada, A. Shinpo and S. Suga, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 15476–15482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Hara, T. Sato, R. Katoh, A. Furube, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpo, S. Suga, S. Sayama, H. Sugihara and H. Arakawa, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 597–606 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hara, K. Sayama, Y. Ohga, A. Shinpo, S. Suga and H. Arakawa, Chem. Commun., 2001, 569–570 RSC .
Y. Xie, Y. Tang, W. Wu, Y. Wang, J. Liu, X. Li, H. Tian and W.-H. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14055–14058 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tang, Y. Wang, X. Li, H. Ågren, W.-H. Zhu and Y. Xie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27976–27985 CAS .
A. Gupta, V. Armel, W. Xiang, A. Bilic and R. A. Evans, Dyes Pigm., 2015, 113, 280–288 CrossRef CAS .
M. Katono, T. Bessho, S. Meng, R. Humphry-Baker, G. Rothenberger, S. M. Zakeeruddin, E. Kaxiras and M. Grätzel, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 14248–14252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-L. Li, K.-J. Jiang, K.-F. Shao and L.-M. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2792–2794 RSC .
T. Horiuchi, H. Miura and S. Uchida, Chem. Commun., 2003, 3036–3037 RSC .
Y. Chen, Z. Zeng, C. Li, W. Wang, X. Wang and B. Zhang, New J. Chem., 2005, 29, 773–776 RSC .
S. Verma, P. Kar, A. Das and H. N. Ghosh, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1561–1568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ganesan, A. Chandiran, P. Gao, R. Rajalingam, M. Grätzel and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16896–16903 CAS .
C.-C. Chou, F.-C. Hu, H.-H. Yeh, H.-P. Wu, Y. Chi, J. N. Clifford, E. Palomares, S.-H. Liu, P.-T. Chou and G.-H. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 178–183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Liska, R. Charvet, P. Comte, M. K. Nazeeruddin, P. Pechy, M. Takata, H. Miura, S. Uchida and M. Grätzel, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 1202–1205 CrossRef CAS .
A. El-Zohry, A. Orthaber and B. Zietz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 26144–26153 CAS .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 5648–5652 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Stephens, F. J. Devlin, C. F. Chabalowski and M. J. Frisch, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 11623–11627 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yanai, D. Tew and N. Handy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2004, 393, 51–57 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Becke, J. Chem. Phys., 1993, 98, 1372–1377 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Wadt and P. J. Hay, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 284–298 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Hay and W. R. Wadt, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 299–310 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Hay and W. R. Wadt, J. Chem. Phys., 1985, 82, 270–283 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hagfeldt, G. Boschloo, L. Sun, L. Kloo and H. Pettersson, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6595–6663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. J. Frisch, G. W. Trucks, H. B. Schlegel, G. E. Scuseria, M. A. Robb, J. R. Cheeseman, G. Scalmani, V. Barone, B. Mennucci, G. A. Petersson, H. Nakatsuji, M. Caricato, X. Li, H. P. Hratchian, A. F. Izmaylov, J. Bloino, G. Zheng, J. L. Sonnenberg, M. Hada, M. Ehara, K. Toyota, R. Fukuda, J. Hasegawa, M. Ishida, T. Nakajima, Y. Honda, O. Kitao, H. Nakai, T. Vreven, J. A. Montgomery, Jr., J. E. Peralta, F. Ogliaro, M. Bearpark, J. J. Heyd, E. Brothers, K. N. Kudin, V. N. Staroverov, R. Kobayashi, J. Normand, K. Raghavachari, A. Rendell, J. C. Burant, S. S. Iyengar, J. Tomasi, M. Cossi, N. Rega, J. M. Millam, M. Klene, J. E. Knox, J. B. Cross, V. Bakken, C. Adamo, J. Jaramillo, R. Gomperts, R. E. Stratmann, O. Yazyev, A. J. Austin, R. Cammi, C. Pomelli, J. W. Ochterski, R. L. Martin, K. Morokuma, V. G. Zakrzewski, G. A. Voth, P. Salvador, J. J. Dannenberg, S. Dapprich, A. D. Daniels, Ö. Farkas, J. B. Foresman, J. V. Ortiz and J. Cioslowski and D. J. Fox, Gaussian 09, Revision E.01, Gaussian, Inc., Wallingford CT,  2009 Search PubMed .
M. A. L. Marques and E. K. U. Gross, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2004, 55, 427–455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Cossi, N. Rega, G. Scalmani and V. Barone, J. Comput. Chem., 2003, 24, 669–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Sang-aroon, S. Saekow and V. Amornkitbamrung, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2012, 236, 35–40 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. O’Boyle, A. L. Tenderholt and K. M. Langner, J. Comput. Chem., 2008, 29, 839–845 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Qi and J. Jiang, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2013, 113, 2605–2610 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, Y. Jiao and S. Meng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16447–16457 CAS .
C. G. Mayne, J. Saam, K. Schulten, E. Tajkhorshid and J. C. Gumbart, J. Comput. Chem., 2013, 34, 2757–2770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Humphrey, A. Dalke and K. Schulten, J. Mol. Graphics, 1996, 14, 33–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Phillips, R. Braun, W. Wang, J. Gumbart, E. Tajkhorshid, E. Villa, C. Chipot, R. D. Skeel, L. Kale and K. Schulten, J. Comput. Chem., 2005, 26, 1781–1802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Gomez, G. Hermann, X. Zarate, J. Pérez-Torres and J. C. Tremblay, Molecules, 2015, 20, 13830–13853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Zhang, Y. Bai, R. Z. Li, D. Shi, S. Wenger, S. M. Zakeeruddin, M. Gratzel and P. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 92–95 CAS .
C. Teng, X. C. Yang, S. F. Li, S. M. Cheng, A. Hagfeldt, L. Z. Wu and L. C. Sun, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 13127–13138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao and D. G. Truhlar, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2005, 1, 415–432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. Magyar and S. Tretiak, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2007, 3, 976–987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sánchez-de-Armas, M. A. San-Miguel, J. Oviedo and J. F. Sanz, Comput. Theor. Chem., 2011, 975, 99–105 CrossRef .
N. Inostroza, F. Mendizabal, R. Arratia-Pérez, C. Orellana and C. Linares-Flores, J. Mol. Model., 2016, 22, 25 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Linares-Flores, F. Mendizabal, R. Arratia-Perez, N. Inostroza and C. Orellana, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2015, 639, 172–177 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Dipole moment vectors, energy level diagrams and vertical spectra of all dyes and dye–(TiO2)15 systems using the TD-B3YP, BHandHLYP and CAM-B3LYP functionals with their corresponding EDDMs. Structures obtained from the minimized dimer dyes and from the MD simulations, dimer interaction energies and RMSD profiles. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp04662bThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) Scheme describing the PI mechanism in a DSSC. (b) Acceptor–bridge–donor (A–bridge–D) molecular structure. Donor and bridge motifs are not varied while A is changed by different motifs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Family of the studied acceptor fragments.	 
ΔGinj = Edye* − ECB	(1)
LHE = 1 − 10−A = 1 − 10−f	(2)
eVOC = ELUMO − ECB	(3)
ΔG0rec = ECB − EHOMO	(4)
ΔE = Edim − 2Emon	(5)
ΔEnb = |ΔEDynamic − ΔEMinimization|	(6)

 	Fig. 3  Molecular structure of A4, A5 and A6 adsorbed to the (TiO2)15 cluster.	 

 	Fig. 4  Energy level diagram of A2, A4, A5 and A6 dyes, free and adsorbed to the TiO2 cluster (Dye-(TiO2)15) calculated at the CAM-B3LYP theoretical level.	 

 	Fig. 5  LUMO (hole) of the oxidized states of the free A4, A6, and A7 dyes.	 

 	Fig. 6  Effects of the DFT functional on the calculated negative free energy of the injection (−ΔGinj), light-harvesting efficiency (LHE) for the lowest singlet excited state, the open-circuit voltage (eVOC), dipole moments (μ) and the plot of the dipole moment vectors for a selected A–bridge–D, A6, free and anchored to the TiO2 cluster.	 



A1
	415(2.99)a	1.360	H → L	80	471(2.63)b	1.851	H → L+2	50
H−1 → L	14	H → L+3	19

A2
	349(3.55)	1.498	H → L	70	381(3.25)	1.400	H → L+1	20
H−1 → L	15	H → L+5	37
H → L+1	13	
	


A3
	438(2.83)	1.390	H → L	72	467(2.66)	1.437	H−1 → L+2	15
H−1 → L	10	H → L+2	78

A4
	439(2.83)	1.320	H → L	79	473(2.62)	1.238	H−1 → L+2	12
H−1 → L	14	H → L+2	82

A5
	332(3.73)	1.410	H → L	85	426(2.91)	0.209	H → L+3	13

	
	H → L+4	20

A6
	400(3.10)	1.630	H → L	56	450(2.76)	2.031	H−1 → L+2	20
H−1 → L	24	H → L+2	58

A7
	425(2.92)	1.737	H → L	46	469(2.64)	2.211	H−1 → L+2	30
H−1 → L	39	H → L+2	50

A8
	436(2.84)	1.934	H → L	61	486(2.55)	1.964	H−1 → L+2	18
H−1 → L	27	H → L+2	47

 	Fig. 7  UV-vis absorption spectra simulated through TD-CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) (acetonitrile) for (a) A2, (b) A4, (c) A5, and (d) A6. The blue lines correspond to the results for free dyes, and the red lines correspond to the dye–TiO2 systems. The bar graphics (e) and (f) reflect the effects of the DFT functional on the calculated vertical excitation energies (ΔEv).	 

 	Fig. 8  EDDMs for some selected Dye–(TiO2)15 systems upon photoexcitation to the first singlet excited state calculated using the CAM-B3LYP/6-31G(d,p) wavefunctions. The blue densities represent the source of electrons, and the orange densities represent the target location after electron transfer.	 

 	Fig. 9  Initial proposed spatial configurations for the MD analysis.	 

 	Fig. 10  Dimer configurations of A1. Structures after minimization and at the end of the MD.	 

 	Fig. 11  Dimer interaction energies (ΔE) for A1, A2, A4 and A5 dyes calculated using eqn (5). Yellow bars refer to interaction energies calculated from MD structures while blue bars correspond to the minimized geometries.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Dipole moment vectors, energy level diagrams and vertical spectra of all dyes and dye–(TiO2)15 systems using the TD-B3YP, BHandHLYP and CAM-B3LYP functionals with their corresponding EDDMs. Structures obtained from the minimized dimer dyes and from the MD simulations, dimer interaction energies and RMSD profiles. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cp04662b

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
