Selective electroreduction of CO 2 to carbon-rich products with a simple binary copper selenide electrocatalyst   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11518E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11518E
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7150-7161Selective electroreduction of CO2 to carbon-rich products with a simple binary copper selenide electrocatalyst†

        
          
            Apurv 
            Saxena
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wipula 
            Liyanage
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jahangir 
            Masud
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Shubhender 
            Kapila
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Manashi 
            Nath
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Missouri University of Science & Technology, Rolla, MO 65409, USA. E-mail: nathm@mst.edu
bEnergy and Environmental Research Centre, University of North Dakota, Grand Forks, USA
Received 
      26th November 2020
    , Accepted 9th February 2021First published on 9th February 2021AbstractIn this article solvothermally synthesized copper selenide nanostructures have been reported as highly efficient electrocatalysts for carbon dioxide reduction under ambient conditions with high selectivity for carbon-rich C2 products at a low applied potential. In addition to electrochemical measurements, density functional theory calculations were also performed to investigate the adsorption energy of the key intermediate carbon monoxide on the catalyst surface. The authors proposed that CO adsorption energy on the surface can be a critical component to determine the extent of CO2 reduction on the surface, whereby a low CO adsorption energy was expected to yield primarily C1 products while a very large adsorption energy leads to catalyst poisoning. In this article the authors have shown that by carefully designing the catalyst surface to optimize the CO adsorption energy and dwell time, selenide based electrocatalysts can indeed show more efficient CO2 reduction compared to the base metal, leading to carbon-rich products. This is one of the first reports where the Cu2Se surface has been studied in detail with experimental as well as DFT studies for CO2 reduction. Interestingly, the reduction products showed dependence on the applied potential forming exclusively formic acid at a high applied potential (1.2 V and higher vs. RHE), while ethanol and acetic acid were produced in high yield at potentials lower than 0.8 V vs. RHE. The applied potential required for CO2 with copper selenide was as low as 100 mV vs. RHE and is one of the lowest reported to date. The CO2 reduction products were analyzed through NMR and GC TCD spectroscopy which showed ethanol and acetic acid production in excess of 80% faradaic efficiency at a low applied potential.
Introduction
While fossil fuel combustion continues to supply power to meet the majority of global energy needs, Achilles heel of the entire process is the production of copious quantities of carbon dioxide, CO2, as a natural by-product. CO2, representing the highest oxidation state of carbon, is a linear molecule containing sp-hybridized carbon doubly bonded to two O atoms. CO2 is a thermodynamically stable product and hence keeps enriching the atmosphere with increasing concentration. The natural escape route for atmospheric CO2 is provided through sequestration by forest cover on the Earth's surface, which over the past several decades has been depleted significantly making way for the industrial landscape. While the effect of atmospheric CO2 on global warming is a controversial topic in the current socio-political scenario, the undisputed fact is that atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration is at an all-time high and is projected to rise in the next several years with a steeper slope.1,2 The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) in its 2018 report has indicated a strong risk of crisis as early as 2040 due to rising CO2 levels in the atmosphere, which includes worsening food shortages and wildfires, and a mass die-off of coral reefs.3–7 Currently the CO2 level in the atmosphere exceeds 400 ppm,2 and CO2 sequestration and storage will simply not be enough to combat this problem.8 Hence a clever solution is direly needed whereby this huge amount of atmospheric CO2 can be converted back to valuable chemical products, thereby closing the loop. However, the CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR) is a kinetically slow, energy intensive uphill reaction, which necessitates the use of suitable catalysts that can lower the activation barrier and bring CO2 out of the potential well. CO2 is an extremely stable molecule with a high bond strength (∼532 kJ mol−1) and needs a high electrical potential to be activated in an electrochemical environment. Hence electrocatalysts, which lower this activation barrier, play a predominant role in the CO2RR and are considered to be the backbone of the entire process.9–12 Although a tremendous amount of research has been done for the catalytic CO2RR,13–22 catalyst design still presents a significant challenge in terms of product selectivity, lowering the constraints of operating conditions (such as high voltage, pressure and temperature), and finally economic feasibility.
Over the last several decades, a significant amount of research has been conducted on converting CO2 to other carbonaceous products through homogeneous13–16 as well as heterogeneous catalysis.17–22 Among the various catalysts reported for the CO2RR, a major chunk includes precious metal based catalysts, such as Pt, Pd, Ru, Au, Ag and their alloys.23–25 Recently, intensive research has led to the identification of several non-precious transition metal based CO2RR catalysts based on Cu and Ni.26–29 While this is definitely exciting from a practical point of view, the hindrance lies in the range and selectivity of reduction products obtained. Typically, CO2RR products are categorized into C1 or C2 products depending on the formation and extent of C–C linkage. In most cases, the CO2RR with Cu- and Ni-based catalysts leads to a mixture of predominantly C1 reduction products primarily composed of carbon monoxide (CO), formate ion and formic acid, with trace amounts of formaldehyde or methanol.28–30 While the lack of selectivity is a serious issue, the more detrimental fact is that CO, a toxic gas, is not a desirable product to be released into the atmosphere and hence must be reduced/processed further (typically through syn gas conversion) making the whole process tedious, cumbersome and less efficient. Rather, direct electroreduction of CO2 to alcohols or other value-added hydrocarbons with a higher carbon content (C2 or higher) is more desirable.
Among the various transition metals studied for CO2RR, Cu has attracted the most attention due to the range of reduction products formed under ambient conditions as well as feasible electroreduction of CO2 at a low applied potential.31 Bulk Cu as well as Cu nanoparticles have been shown to primarily produce CO and CH4.26 Hori et al.32 reported an extensive study of CO2 electroreduction using Cu electrodes and described the product distribution at different applied potentials. C1–C3 products were produced when the CO2RR was carried out in the presence of Cu.31 It has been claimed that the size of Cu nanoparticles also has an effect on CO2 reduction products.33 Even the morphology and surface roughness of Cu can affect the faradaic efficiency and selectivity of the reduction products.34 Cu films oxidized on the surface gives some C2 products.35 Cu nanocrystals produce formic acid (HCO2H) at −0.5 V (vs. RHE) with a faradaic efficiency of 28%.36 Cu fibers and Cu nanowires also showed selectivity at different applied potentials.26 The variation of crystal dimensions also led to selectivity for different products. Fe porphyrin on CNTs showed CO2RR activity producing CO at 0.5 V overpotential.37 It was observed that doping can also influence the electrocatalytic properties with respect to the CO2RR. For example, the products of CO2 reduction with a boron doped diamond vary in amount as a function of boron content and maximum faradaic efficiency (75%) for producing formic acid was obtained with a boron content of 0.1%. The faradaic efficiency decreased with increasing boron content.38 Multiphase systems like Cu on TiO2, Ag on TiO2 or In(OH)3 were also observed to be photocatalytically active for the CO2RR with a 97% conversion to CH4 under normal solar illumination.39 Cu2O has also been reported as a electrocatalyst for the CO2RR.40 In addition, WSe2 and MoSe2 have also shown good activity for the CO2RR.41 Although Cu has proved to be a cheap and energy efficient electrocatalyst for CO2 reduction, the lack of product selectivity at room temperature under ambient conditions has been less than ideal, leaving plenty of room for improvement in catalyst performances.42 Although the faradaic efficiency of CO2RR products formed with metal-based electrocatalysts (Cu, Ni, Au, Ag, and Pd) is reasonable, they suffer from several major drawbacks, the most concerning being the poisoning of the catalyst surface by CO and other reaction intermediates, and the deactivation of the catalysts within a short time.25 These metallic electrocatalysts also have very low faradaic efficiency for C2 or higher carbon-rich products.43–45 Surface modification of metal catalysts by forming oxide layers could reduce the catalyst poisoning and deactivation problems slightly. However, with a CuO electrode, the faradaic efficiency of hydrocarbon products was also reduced compared to Cu, and CO became one of the major products again.46 Hence, while CuO showed sustained catalytic activity for CO2 reduction compared to Cu, lower faradaic efficiency and less product selectivity lead to the application of CuO as a practical CO2RR electrocatalyst being very challenging.46 In a study by Ramirez and coworkers, experimental and theoretical study of chalcogen modified copper for CO2 electroreduction was performed, which resulted in selective electroreduction of CO2 to formate. This study concluded that formate generation occurs because of the presence of basic sites where CO2 was secured preventing its dissociation into CO.47,48
Previously it has been reported that reducing anion electronegativity around a catalytically active transition metal site leads to better modulation of the electrochemical redox of the catalytic site leading to lowering of the activation energy for electrocatalytic activity.58 Hence, we propose that Cu-based chalcogenides will show better electrocatalytic activity for the CO2RR at a lower applied potential compared to oxides and the base metal. Moreover, we further propose that reducing anion electronegativity will also lead to the enrichment of electron density around the transition metal center, which will influence the binding energy of the CO intermediate on the surface, which becomes crucial for preferential formation of C1 and C2 reduction products. Specifically, we have proposed that optimal CO adsorption energy on the catalyst site is required to maximize dwell time of the CO intermediate on the surface, enough for further reduction to form carbon-rich products, while weak CO adsorption energy leads to ready desorption of C1 products (CO and formic acid). High CO adsorption energy, on the other hand, leads to catalyst surface poisoning. We have applied this concept to design a selenide based electrocatalyst surface as an optimal catalyst for the CO2RR producing carbon-rich products.
In this article we have reported the highly efficient electrocatalytic activity of copper selenide (Cu2Se) nanostructures obtained via a solvothermal method. Cu2Se nanoparticles exhibited enhanced CO2RR activity at a low applied potential ranging from −0.1 to −1.3 V vs. RHE with high product selectivity, high faradaic efficiency, and functional stability for a prolonged period of time. At very low negative potentials, C2 products like ethanol and acetic acid were obtained selectively, whereas at high negative potentials, C1 product such as formic acid was obtained almost exclusively. Interestingly, no CO was detected in the product composition. We have also performed density functional theory (DFT) calculations to estimate CO binding energy on the catalyst surface and correlate that with typical CO2RR products obtained with various catalyst systems (Cu2Se, Cu2O, Cu, etc.) and validate our hypothesis regarding the CO adsorption energy and preferential formation of C1/C2 products. Interestingly the CO2RR with this electrocatalyst could be performed under ambient conditions at room temperature with a slow stream of CO2 as the feedstock. This will be ideal to reduce CO2 at various sources including diffuse sources as well as points of generation such as coal or gas-fired power plants.
Experimental methods
Materials
Cuprous oxide (Cu2O, 99%), selenium, hydrazine (99.5%) and NaHCO3 (99.7%) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich and used without purification. Deionized water was used to prepare all solutions and to rinse samples and glassware.
Solvothermal synthesis of Cu2Se
1.0 mmol Cu2O was mixed in 5.0 mL of H2O and stirred for 15 minutes. Then 1.0 mmol Se powder was added to the reaction mixture and stirred for another 30 minutes. 2.0 mL of hydrazine (N2H4·H2O) was added dropwise to the mixture with continuous stirring for 10 minutes. The resulting solution was transferred to a polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) lined stainless-steel autoclave. The autoclave was sealed and maintained at 185 °C for 24 h, and then cooled naturally to room temperature. The product formed was washed and centrifuged several times with DI water and then with a mixture of ethanol and water to remove impurities and unreacted precursors. Finally, the product was dried in a vacuum oven at 35 °C for 24 h.
Preparation of electrodes
To check the electrocatalytic activity of copper selenide powder, the working electrodes were prepared by drop-casting catalyst ink on carbon fiber paper (CFP). Typically, catalyst ink was prepared by dispersing 5 mg of catalyst (copper selenide) powder in 100 μL Nafion solution (50 μL of 1% Nafion solution in 50 μL of 50% IPA in water). After 30 minutes of ultrasonication, 50 μL of the dispersion was drop cast on a confined area (2 cm2) on a carbon fiber paper substrate. The drop-casted Cu2Se@CFP film was then dried at room temperature and further heated at 130 °C for 30 minutes in an oven.
Preparation of the electrolyte
NaHCO3 aqueous solution was used as the electrolyte for the CO2RR. 0.3 M NaHCO3 electrolyte solution was prepared from stock solutions of higher concentration in DI water, which were then diluted to the target molarity.
Methods of characterization
Powder X-ray diffraction
The crystalline phase of the as-synthesized catalyst powder was identified through powder X-ray diffraction (PXRD) with a Philips X-Pert diffractometer utilizing CuKα (1.5418 Å) radiation. The PXRD pattern was collected from the pristine product with no further treatments.
Scanning electron microscopy (SEM)
SEM images of the Cu2Se-modified electrode surfaces were obtained using a FEI Helios NanoLab 600 FIB/FESEM at an acceleration voltage of 10 kV and a working distance of 4.8 mm. Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) along with line scan analysis was also performed with a SEM microscope.
X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
The oxidation states of the elements in copper selenide samples were investigated by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) using a KRATOS AXIS X-ray Photoelectron Spectrometer with a monochromatic Al X-ray source. All XPS measurements of the catalyst surface were performed as is without sputtering. The C 1s signal at 284.5 eV was used as a reference to calibrate all the XPS binding energies.
Electrochemical characterization and electrocatalytic studies
An electrochemical H-cell was used in this study consisting of separate cathode and anode compartments with a volume of 30 mL each, separated by an anion exchange Nafion (115) membrane. Linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) was performed in a N2-saturated and CO2-saturated 0.3 M NaHCO3 electrolyte with a scan rate of 10 mV s−1. In this study a carbon rod was used as the counter electrode, and Cu2Se@CFP and Ag|AgCl|KCl(sat.) were used as working and reference electrodes, respectively. The Ag|AgCl reference electrode was calibrated using open circuit potential (OCP, −0.199 V) measured with a Pt wire in H2-saturated H2SO4 solution. The potential measured in Ag|AgCl was converted to the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) using eqn (1): ERHE = EAg|AgCl + 0.059pH + E0Ag|AgCl(1)where ERHE is the converted potential vs. RHE, EAg|AgCl is the experimentally obtained potential, E0Ag|AgCl is the standard potential of Ag|AgCl (0.199 V), and the pH of CO2 saturated 0.3 M NaHCO3 was measured to be 6.8. 0.3 M NaHCO3 in the cathode compartment was saturated with CO2 through continuous purging at a rate of 10 sccm using a mass flow controller during the experiments.
Tafel plots
For explaining the kinetics of a reaction and electrocatalytic activity, the Tafel slope is an important parameter and the Tafel equation can be expressed as follows: η = α + (2.3RT)logj/αnF(2)where η is the overpotential, α is the transfer coefficient, n is the number of electrons involved in the reaction, F is the Faraday constant, j is the current density and the slope is given by 2.3RT/αnF.
The Tafel equation as shown in eqn (2) is a fundamental equation, which acquires from the kinetically controlled region of the CO2RR and correlates the overpotential η with current density j, where the Tafel slope is given by 2.3RT/αnF. To calculate Tafel slopes, LSV plots were obtained with a slow scan speed (10 mV s−1) in non-stirred solution.
Results and discussion
Structure and morphology of Cu2Se
The composition and phase of the hydrothermally synthesized product were ascertained with XPS and PXRD, respectively. The PXRD pattern as shown in Fig. 1 confirmed that the as-synthesized product was primarily composed of crystalline Cu2Se and the diffraction lines could be well-matched with that of the standard Cu2Se phase (PDF #00-006-0680).
 Fig. 1  PXRD pattern of hydrothermally synthesized Cu2Se compared with the standard Cu2Se reference pattern (PDF #00-006-0680). 
The morphology of the product was studied through SEM which showed that the hydrothermally synthesized Cu2Se formed nanocubes (Fig. 2a and b) with sizes in the range of 100 nm to 1 μm and exhibited considerable surface roughness. These granular nanocubes were composed of Cu and Se with a relative atomic ratio of approximately 2:1, respectively, as shown in Fig. 2c. The EDS measurements were typically performed in several different regions of the catalyst surface to confirm the uniformity of composition. While EDS confirmed the presence of Cu and Se uniformly throughout the sample, it also confirmed the absence of even trace amounts of oxygen, confirming that the sample composition was indeed pure Cu2Se.
 Fig. 2  SEM images of the Cu2Se nanoparticles at (a) low and (b) high magnification showing the formation of nanocubes and surface roughness, respectively. (c) EDS analysis of the catalyst confirming the presence of Cu and Se in a 2:1 relative atomic ratio. (d) Cu 2p and (e) Se 3d XPS spectra of as-synthesized Cu2Se. 
The composition of the catalyst was also confirmed through XPS studies. Fig. 2d represents the deconvoluted Cu 2p XPS peak for the as-synthesized Cu2Se catalyst, where the peaks at 932.8 and 953.1 eV for Cu1+ 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 peaks and 934.1 and 954.8 eV for Cu2+ 2p3/2 and 2p1/2 peaks, confirmed the presence of Cu in +1/+2 mixed oxidation states.49 The coexistence of +1 and +2 mixed valence states for Cu has been reported previously in Cu2Se.49 The deconvoluted Se 3d XPS spectra (Fig. 2e) showed peaks at 54.5 and 55.3 eV corresponding to Se 3d5/2 and Se 3d3/2, respectively, in accordance with previously reported spectra for Cu2Se.49 The oxidation state of Se was estimated to be Se2− by comparison with previously reported literature.49 The relative ratio of Cu2+ and Cu+ was also estimated from the deconvoluted XPS spectra as shown in Fig. 2 using area under the peaks. A Cu2+:Cu+ ratio of 1.07 was obtained for the pristine catalyst. These XPS results along with PXRD confirmed that the predominant phase of these solvothermally synthesized catalyst powder was Cu2Se. The comparison of XPS spectra collected before and after long-term electrolysis shows that Cu and Se XPS peaks do not change positions indicating no change in oxidation states and/or coordination geometry. The Cu+:Cu2+ ratio after prolonged CO2RR activity shows minimal change (Cu2+:Cu+ = 1.07) compared to the pristine sample. The selenium oxidation state remains −2, the same as before activity (Fig. S2c–f†).
Electrochemical performance and CO2RR catalytic activities
The solvothermally synthesized Cu2Se powder was assembled onto a CFP electrode following the method as described in the Methods section. A typical catalyst loading of 1.25 mg cm−2 was used for most electrochemical measurements reported in this manuscript. To investigate the electrocatalytic properties of Cu2Se towards CO2 reduction, electrochemical studies were performed in 0.3 M NaHCO3 solution (pH = 6.8) with continuous purging of CO2 gas at room temperature under ambient pressure. The electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) of the catalyst composite was calculated from electrochemical double layer capacitance as a function of scan rate measured in the non-faradaic region (Fig. 3), and this capacitance was compared with the specific capacitance (CS) obtained from the literature.49 The double layer capacitance (CDL) was estimated by using eqn (3), wherein iDL is the measured current and ν is the scan rate. iDL = CDL × ν(3) ECSA = CDL/Cs(4)
 Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammograms recorded for the Cu2Se catalyst in 0.3 M NaHCO3 under continuous N2 purging at different scan rates from 2.5 to 40 mV s−1. Inset shows the plot of anodic and cathodic current measured at 0.044 V vs. Ag|AgCl as a function of scan rate. 

C
DL estimated from the i vs. ν plot as shown in the inset of Fig. 3 had a value of 0.49 mF. The ECSA estimated as the ratio between CDL and CS (eqn (4)) was calculated to be 12.25 cm2 using a CS value of 40 μF cm−2, typical of the electrolyte as reported in previous literature.49 The roughness factor (RF) of the electrode composite estimated from the ratio between ECSA and geometric area was calculated to be 153.12. A high ECSA and roughness factor typically signify a rough catalyst surface, which facilitates electrolyte access to the catalytically active sites and hence is expected to enhance electrocatalytic activity.
The CO2RR activity of the Cu2Se modified CFP electrode was checked by recording the current–voltage polarization curves in 0.3 M NaHCO3 solution in the presence and absence of dissolved CO2 introduced in the solution by purging. Similar measurements were also performed with a blank CFP electrode to study the effect of the substrate only as shown in Fig. 4a. It was observed that the blank CFP did not show much current response in the absence of CO2. Purging the solution with CO2 changed the polarization curve for the CFP very slightly. The Cu2Se@CFP electrode on the other hand showed a significant change in the polarization curve in the presence of dissolved CO2 in a bicarbonate-based electrolyte as can be seen in Fig. 4a. A significant reduction current was observed between 0.2 and −0.4 V vs. RHE for the Cu2Se@CFP electrode in the presence of CO2 similar to those reported previously for other CO2RR systems such as organically doped palladium.23 This reduction current can be due to either direct carbon dioxide reduction on the electrode surface or indirect reduction of the bicarbonate anion (HCO3−) to formate/formic acid. It has been reported previously that as pH decreases near the electrode surface with decreasing potential due to continuous hydrogen evolution,24in situ conversion of CO2 to HCO3− occurs. However, such spontaneous conversion occurs at a high concentration of nascent hydrogen and consequently at a higher applied potential. From the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) studies as shown in Fig. 4a, it was confirmed that although CFP was minimally responsive towards the CO2RR, the Cu2Se-modified CFP has high catalytic activity towards the CO2RR and can exhibit a high current density in excess of 50 mA cm−2 at a low applied potential.
 Fig. 4  (a) LSVs recorded in 0.3 M NaHCO3 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in the presence and absence of CO2 with different electrodes. (b) Tafel plots recorded in 0.3 M NaHCO3. 
The kinetics of CO2 electrochemical reduction on Cu2Se@CFP was also studied through Tafel plots as shown in Fig. 4b. The Tafel slope was estimated to be 126.8 mV dec−1 for the CO2 electroreduction on the Cu2Se@CFP electrode which is much smaller than the Tafel slope of the only CFP substrate indicating that electron transfer from the Cu2Se modified electrode surface is much faster. It should also be noted that the Tafel slope of the CO2RR (126.8 mV dec−1) on Cu2Se is different than that of protonation (134.2 mV dec−1), which was calculated from the polarization curve of the Cu2Se@CFP electrode without CO2 purging. Tafel slopes typically provide insight into reaction kinetics as well as information about the rate determining step. The Tafel slope obtained for the Cu2Se catalyst was comparable to those of other CO2RR electrocatalyst systems.50,51
To analyze the composition of different products being formed through CO2RR on Cu2Se@CFP electrodes, CO2 electroreduction was performed at different applied potentials (−1.3 V, −1.2 V, −0.9 V, −0.6 V, −0.25 V, and −0.1 V vs. RHE) held constant for 1 h in 0.3 M NaHCO3 under constant purging with CO2 gas at a low flow rate (20 sccm). The gaseous products from CO2 reduction were examined with a gas chromatograph equipped with a thermal conductivity detector (GC-TCD) (Fig. S1†), while the liquid products were quantified by 1H NMR spectroscopy (Table S1†). It was observed that the CO2RR product chemistry was dependent on the applied potential and exhibited a significant product selectivity as can be seen in the NMR plots (Fig. 5a) collected at different applied potentials. Interestingly, it was observed that at a low applied potential the reduction products consisted of exclusively higher carbon-content compositions such as ethanol and acetic acid. As the applied potential was increased, the yield of these carbon-rich products (ethanol and acetic acid) increased, while above −0.6 V (vs. RHE) minute quantities of the C1 product such as formic acid could be detected along with ethanol and acetic acid. As the applied potential was increased even further, the amount of formic acid production increased along with decrease in the relative quantities of ethanol and acetic acid. At a significantly higher applied potential (−1.2 V vs. RHE), the product formed was exclusively formic acid as detected through NMR (Fig. 5a). The relative product yields at different potentials were estimated by quantifying the NMR plots as mentioned in the ESI (Table S2).†Fig. 5b shows the product selectivity at different applied potentials. It was observed that at a lower applied potential C2 products formed more preferably, while the C1 products formed exclusively at a higher applied potential. Such product selectivity is extremely important for the practical implementation of catalytic CO2RR as a viable technology. More importantly, the formation of higher carbon-rich fuels such as ethanol with high selectivity at a low applied potential and consequently with less energy expenditure will also have significant implication in the practical application of CO2RR. The gaseous products formed at different applied potentials were also investigated by collecting the head space gas after 1 h of the CO2RR. Interestingly no carbon monoxide (CO) was detected, while there was minimal production of H2 at a high applied potential. The production of H2 increased considerably at a higher applied potential (−0.9 V vs. RHE and above). The HER is known to compete with the CO2RR and it has been a challenge to design catalyst surfaces that will suppress the HER while favoring the CO2RR. For Cu2Se-modified electrodes, since the CO2RR can occur at a much lower applied potential than required for the HER, the production of hydrogen is inhibited, while hydrocarbon production is enhanced at low potentials. The total faradaic efficiency for the CO2RR was calculated by considering both liquid and gas phase products quantified through NMR and GC-TCD analysis, resepctively, performed on the same experimental set-up and taking into account all the products that were detected. Typically, the faradaic efficiency was calculated by using the electron mole fraction required for each product formation along with the product mole fraction estimated from GC-TCD (gaseous products) or NMR spectra (liquid products) and total charge consumed for each period of time. The total product percentage at any specific potential was obtained by adding the product quantification data from GC-TCD and NMR experiments. Fig. 6 shows the faradaic efficiency and relative percentages of all reduction products detected (through combined GC-TCD and NMR analysis) at each applied potential. It was observed that while H2 was generated at a high negative potential, there was no production of CO within the detectable range of GC-TCD. Hydrocarbons such as methane, ethane etc. were also absent from the products possibly due to less availability of reactive hydrogen at such low applied potentials. As mentioned above, faradaic efficiency for CO2 reduction was calculated by considering the total charge consumed and quantifying products detected in NMR and GC-TCD. Optimal conditions were observed for C1 products at an applied potential of −1.2 V vs. RHE, wherein formic acid was produced with 98.33% product selectivity after 1 h of electrolysis with high faradaic efficiency. For potentials higher than −1.2 V vs. RHE, the maximum faradaic efficiency (for formic acid) decreased to 94% (−1.3 V vs. RHE), which also showed deactivation over time (Table S4†). For lower applied potentials (−0.9, −0.6, and −0.25 V vs. RHE), C1 products showed a decrease in faradaic efficiency (25.26%, 0.5%, and 0%, for formic acid at −0.9, −0.6, and −0.25 V, respectively), while the relative yield of C2 products increased. The details of estimation of the faradaic efficiency for each reduction product at various applied potentials are provided in the ESI (Tables S2 and S3).† At −0.6 V, faradaic efficiency in excess of 84% was observed for ethanol. It must be noted here that such a high faradaic efficiency for a C2 product such as ethanol has been observed very rarely. Hence the novelty of this simple binary copper selenide based electrocatalyst lies in its ability to produce carbon rich fuels with high selectivity and faradaic efficiency at low energy expense. Moreover, this Cu2Se-based catalyst also exhibits a high current density exceeding 50 mA cm−2 at a moderately low applied potential.
 Fig. 5  (a) NMR spectra identifying reduction products in reaction aliquots collected at different potentials. (b) Bar plot depicting the relative concentrations of liquid products quantified from NMR spectra at different stationary applied potentials. 
 Fig. 6  Bar plot depicting the relative faradaic efficiency of liquid as well as gas products at different applied potentials. 
The stability of the Cu2Se electrocatalyst for long-term CO2RR activity was also investigated by carrying out electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction under a constant applied potential for an extended period of time, typically 12, 24 or 100 h. This is typically referred to as chronoamperometry measurement, where potential is kept constant for an extended period of time, while current density is measured. Typical chronoamperometry plots recorded at different applied potentials are shown in Fig. S2a† (12 h at −0.1 V, −0.6 V, and −0.9 V vs. RHE), Fig. S3† (24 h at −0.9 V vs. RHE) and Fig. S4† (100 h at −0.6 V vs. RHE).† As can be seen from these plots, the reduction current density did not show any change for an extended period of time, indicating that the catalyst was functionally stable under the conditions of a continuous CO2RR at an applied potential. The product composition analyzed by NMR after chronoamperometry studies showed similar relative percentages as shown in Fig. 5. The catalyst composition after long-term electrolysis at an applied potential was also investigated through PXRD and XPS analysis. The PXRD pattern of the catalyst film after 24 h of the CO2RR at −0.9 V was superimposable with that of pristine Cu2Se as shown in Fig. S2b,† indicating that there was no change in the crystalline phase of the catalyst. XPS analysis of the catalyst film after chronoamperometry studies is shown in Fig. S2c–f,† which shows Cu 2p and Se 3d peaks which are exactly superimposable with that of the pristine catalyst, with no change in peak positions indicating no change in oxidation states and/or coordination geometry. The Cu2+:Cu+ ratio estimated from the deconvoluted XPS spectra was obtained as 1.07, similar to the pristine catalyst composition. Hence, PXRD and XPS analysis confirmed that the catalyst was also compositionally stable after an extended period of catalytic activity.
It must be noted here that Cu2Se has also been reported recently as an efficient electrocatalyst for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) in alkaline medium with an onset potential of 1.42 V (vs. RHE) and an overpotential of 310 mV at 10 mA cm−2.49 Hence Cu2Se can be ideally used as a bifunctional catalyst that can reduce atmospheric CO2 while simultaneously enriching the air with oxygen produced through water electrolysis. The bifunctionality of this catalyst was probed by constructing an electrochemical H-cell containing an alkaline electrolyte (1 M KOH) in the anodic chamber and bicarbonate solution in the cathodic chamber. The two electrolyte chambers were separated by a Nafion membrane and it was confirmed that there was no enrichment of OH− in the cathodic chamber. CO2 was purged in the cathodic chamber. The inset in Fig. 7 shows the schematic representation of the electrochemical cell along with the LSV plot obtained from the CO2RR-OER combined experiment. Potential was scanned in the anodic direction, whereby O2 evolution was observed in the anode concurrent with the rise in oxidation current. The reduction products in the catholyte were analyzed by collecting an aliquot from the cathode chamber after 12 hours of a continuous CO2RR–OER at 2 V. NMR analysis of the catholyte showed that they contained primarily formic acid, acetic acid, and ethanol analogous to the product composition observed previously in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 7  Polarization curve with the cathodic CO2RR and anodic OER with Cu2Se@CFP as both the cathodic and the anodic electrocatalyst. The inset shows the schematic of the electrochemical setup for a combined CO2RR and OER. 
Exploring CO adsorption energies on catalyst surfaces
The excellent activity of Cu2Se was also investigated using density functional theory (DFT) to further understand the enhanced performance of the catalyst and selectivity towards carbon-enriched reduction products. Details of the DFT calculation are provided in the ESI.† Previously it has been shown that amongst numerous pathways to electrochemically reduce CO2 to various hydrocarbon products on the catalyst surface, one of the key intermediates is CO.52 The reduction of CO2 to CO is a two electron transfer process as schematically illustrated in Fig. S5 in the ESI.† First, a proton–electron pair (H+/e−) is transferred to the CO2 adsorbed on the electrocatalyst which is then reduced to a carboxyl intermediate *COOH (where * denotes adsorbed species on the catalyst surface). Then a second H+/e− pair participate in further reduction of *COOH to *CO and H2O.52 Although the conversion of *COOH to *CO takes place readily, the conversion of CO2 to *COOH was found to be limited by the weak binding of COOH to the catalyst surface.53 This elementary reaction step of CO2 adsorption on the Cu2Se surface was simulated as shown in Fig. S5b,† and it was observed that the *COOH intermediate can form a stable configuration with the formation of Cu–C and Cu–O bonds with adjacent Cu atoms on the surface of Cu2Se, which is similar to stable *COOH configurations previously reported by other researchers.53,54 Hence, favorable binding of *COOH on Cu2Se accelerates the formation of the *CO intermediate on the catalyst surface.
A primary hypothesis is being proposed in this manuscript regarding catalyst design to promote the preferential formation of carbon-rich (C2 and C3) reduction products. It can be expected that the *CO dwell time on the catalyst surface is a key parameter for the preferential formation of C1 or C2/C3 reduction products. The *CO dwell time can be directly related to the CO adsorption energy on the catalyst site. If *CO is weakly bound to the catalyst surface, it can desorb readily forming carbon monoxide (CO) as the major product.52 Hence, a moderately higher *CO adsorption energy is essential for retaining *CO on the catalyst surface long enough for facilitating the continuous reduction of *CO to higher hydrocarbons such as methanol and ethanol. We proposed that the CO adsorption on the catalytically active site can be optimized by increasing ligand to metal back-bonding possibilities. In this case, increasing the oxidation state of Cu from 0 (Cu metal) to +1/+2 is expected to favor ligand to metal back bonding due to the availability of partially filled d-orbitals at a comparable energy level. Moreover, decreasing the electronegativity of the anions also facilitates such ligand-to-metal back-bonding by increasing electron density around the transition metal centers. Hence, it was hypothesized that Cu2Se will show larger CO adsorption energy compared to Cu. It was also hypothesized that smaller *CO adsorption energy on the specific catalyst surface will lead to the preferential formation of C1 products (CO and HCO2H), while larger *CO adsorption energy will lead to more C2 products. However, it was also realized that very large *CO adsorption energy can potentially passivate the catalyst surface and will lead to catalyst poisoning. A series of DFT calculations were carried out for comparing the CO adsorption energy on various known catalyst surfaces along with Cu2Se and the results are shown in Fig. 8. It was observed that metals such as Ag and Au show low CO adsorption energy and they almost exclusively produce CO as has been reported previously by various research groups.55,56 On the other hand, catalysts such as Pt, Pd and Ni showed high CO binding energy. It is well known that these catalysts also have a high binding energy for *H and starts the hydrogen evolution reaction instead of reduction of CO2 in aqueous medium and the catalyst is deactivated due to CO passivation by the small amounts of CO produced during continuous electroreduction of CO2.57 Cu metal showed a moderately larger CO adsorption energy compared to other noble metals such as Au and Ag, as shown in Fig. 8. It has been reported previously that Cu is capable of producing a wide range of hydrocarbons with considerable faradaic efficiency, which nicely corroborates with higher CO adsorption energy indicating a longer *CO dwell time on the surface.57 Interestingly, Cu2Se has a moderately strong CO adsorption energy which is slightly higher than that of Cu (the higher the negative value, the higher the binding energy), which is favorable for further reduction of CO to carbon-rich hydrocarbon products such as ethanol and acetic acid. In addition, CO binding energy on Cu2Se was also lower than that of the passivation level observed with other metal catalysts keeping Cu2Se in an ideal position for CO2 reduction. CO adsorption energy was calculated on various lattice planes of Cu2Se and interestingly it was observed that CO adsorption energy showed minimal lattice plane dependence showing a value of −1.26 eV, for both (220) and (001) lattice planes, at ∼11% surface coverage. We propose that the presence of Se influences the electrocatalytic activity in multiple ways: (i) indirect effect on electron density at the catalytically active Cu center that increases the CO dwell time. This has also been confirmed by DFT studies, which show higher CO adsorption energy on the Cu2Se surface compared to bare Cu. (ii) The presence of less electronegative Se also increases the electrochemical activity of Cu, thereby decreasing the overpotential. Such an effect of enhanced electrocatalytic activity as a function of decreasing anion electronegativity has also been observed previously.58 (iii) The presence of Se also leads to more adsorption of hydrogen in the vicinity through Lewis acid–base interaction that can lead to the formation of more hydrocarbon based reduction products.
 Fig. 8  Comparison of calculated CO adsorption energy on known catalyst materials with Cu2Se. (a) CO adsorption on Cu2Se was calculated on the (001) surface and (220) surface, while for the metals it was calculated on (111) surfaces. Reported values were selected from data that were obtained by using the same functional as the present study for calculation of adsorption energies.52,53 Adsorption configurations used for the calculation of (b) CO on the (001) surface (c) CO on the (220) surfaces. 
As illustrated in Fig. S6,† the atom projected local density of states (DOS) was also calculated on surface Cu atoms before and after binding with CO for getting further insight into the changes of the electronic structure of the surface-active sites as a function of intermediate binding. It can be seen from Fig. S6† that an overall stabilization of Cu 3d orbitals has taken place by moving to lower energy upon binding with CO molecules. The adsorption of CO on transition metals occurs through two mechanisms contributing to the coordination bond: CO to metal σ donation through the HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbitals) located on C; and metal (d-) to CO (π*) back donation. In Fig. S6,† Cu 3d to CO π* back donation can be identified from the contribution of CO pDOS as a low intensity peak near the −3.7 eV energy range, which is comparable to previously reported results.59 While it is imperative to do a thorough DFT study involving all the mechanistic steps of the reaction pathway and also using other possible lattice surfaces of Cu2Se to fully understand the role of the catalyst in the selective formation of specific reduction products, the present DFT results indicate that the Cu2Se catalyst surface has beneficial properties for the electroreduction of CO2 to carbon-rich products by facilitating intermediate CO adsorption, which agrees with our experimental observations.
Conclusions
Copper selenide nanostructures synthesized through one-pot solvothermal synthesis were found to be highly active for electrocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction at a range of applied potentials. The reduction products showed selectivity between C1 and C2 products depending on the applied potential. At a high applied potential (−1.3 V), the product was identified as exclusively formic acid with a faradaic efficiency of 94.2%. At more anodic potentials (<−1.2 V), the preferential formation of C2 products such as acetic acid and ethanol was observed. A maximum faradaic efficiency for ethanol production was observed at a low applied potential of −0.6 V vs. RHE. It must be noted that these are among the lowest applied potentials, at which C2 products have been obtained with a high relative yield. The reduction products were characterized through NMR and GC-TCD spectroscopy by performing time-dependent measurements. It was also observed that H2 was produced at a high cathodic potential (>−1.2 V), indicating that Cu2Se has reduced HER catalytic activity. This is significant since the HER poses as a commendable competitor and inhibits the CO2RR on the catalyst surface. Interestingly it was observed that no detectable amount of CO was formed as the reduction product even at high negative potential. The electrocatalyst surface was further studied through DFT calculations specifically to estimate CO adsorption energy on the catalyst site, which showed moderate adsorption energy which suggests longer dwell time of the adsorbed CO on the catalyst surface leading to preferential reduction to C2 products. As mentioned above, this Cu2Se catalyst surface can effectively reduce CO2 to ethanol and acetic acid with high faradaic efficiency at one of the lowest applied potentials reported to date. This result along with the correlation of catalytic activity with CO adsorption energy will lead to optimal catalyst design for forming carbon-rich high-value products through CO2 reduction.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge the Materials Research Center for equipment usage. JM and WPL would like to acknowledge financial support from NSF (DMR-1710313).
References
J. P. Gattuso, A. Magnan, R. Bille, W. W. L. Cheung, E. L. Howes, F. Joos, D. Allemand, L. Bopp, S. R. Cooley, C. M. Eakin, O. Hoegh-Guldberg, R. P. Kelly, H.-O. Portner, A. D. Rogers, J. M. Baxter, D. Laffoley, D. Osborn, A. Rankovic, J. Rochette, U. R. Sumaila, S. Treyer and C. Turley, Contrasting futures for ocean and society from different anthropogenic CO2 emission scenarios, Science, 2015, 349, aac4722 CrossRef  , 1–10.
C. Le Quéré, R. M. Andrew, P. Friedlingstein, S. Sitch, J. Pongratz, A. C. Manning, J. I. Korsbakken, G. P. Peters, J. G. Canadell and R. B. Jackson, Global carbon budget 2017, Earth Syst. Sci. Data Discuss., 2017, 1–79 Search PubMed .
S. Solomon, G.-K. Plattner, R. Knutti and P. Friedlingstein, Irreversible climate change due to carbon dioxide emission, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 1704–1709 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mikkelsen, M. Jorgensen and F. C. Krebs, The tetraton challenge: a review of fixation and transformation of carbon dioxide, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 43–81 RSC .
O. S. Bushuyev, P. De Luna, C. T. Dinh, L. Tao, G. Saur, J. Lagemaat, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, What should we make with CO2 and how can we make it?, Joule, 2018, 2, 825–832 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Zhu, J. L. Liu and S. Z. Qiao, Recent advances in inorganic heterogeneous electrocatalysts for reduction of carbon dioxide, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(18), 3423–3452 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, A review of catalysts for the electroreduction of carbon dioxide to produce low-carbon fuels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(2), 631–675 RSC .
S. Choi, J. H. Drese and C. W. Jones, Adsorbent Materials for Carbon Dioxide Capture from Large Anthropogenic Point Sources, ChemSusChem, 2009, 2(9), 796–854 CrossRef CAS .
S. Nitopi, E. Bertheussen, S. B. Scott, X. Liu, A. K. Engstfeld, S. Horch, B. Seger, I. E. L. Stephens, K. Chan, C. Hahn, J. S. Norskov, T. F. Jaramillo and I. Chorkendorf, Progress and perspectives of electrochemical CO2 reduction on Copper in aqueous electrolyte, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 7610–7672 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qiao, Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. Zhang, A review of catalysts for the electroreduction of carbon dioxide to produce low-carbon fuels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
Y. Li, S. H. Chan and Q. Sun, Heterogeneous catalytic conversion of CO2: a comprehensive theoretical review, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8663–8683 RSC .
R.-Z. Zhang, B.-Y. Wu, Q. Li, L.-L. Lu, W. Shi and P. Cheng, Design strategies and mechanism studies of CO2 electroreduction catalysts based on coordination chemistry, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 422, 213436 CrossRef CAS  , 1–28.
I. Azcarate, C. Costentin, M. Robert and J.-M. Savéant, Through-space charge interaction substituent effects in molecular catalysis leading to the design of the most efficient catalyst of CO2-to-CO electrochemical conversion, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16639–16644 CrossRef CAS .
R. Francke, B. Schille and M. Roemelt, Homogeneously catalyzed electroreduction of carbon dioxide – methods, mechanisms, and catalysts, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 4631–4701 CrossRef CAS .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Electrocatalytic and homogeneous approaches to conversion of CO2 to liquid fuels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .
E. S. Rountree, B. D. McCarthy, T. T. Eisenhart and J. L. Dempsey, Evaluation of homogeneous electrocatalysts by cyclic voltammetry, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 9983–10002 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, J. Xiao, H. Peng, X. Hong, K. Chan and J. K. Norskov, Understanding trends in electrochemical carbon dioxide reduction rates, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15438 CrossRef CAS  , 1–7.
A. Wuttig, M. Yaguchi, K. Motobayashi, M. Osawa and Y. Surendranath, Inhibited proton transfer enhances Au-catalyzed CO2-to-fuels selectivity, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, E4585–E4593 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Appel, J. E. Bercaw, A. B. Bocarsly, H. Dobbek, D. L. DuBois, M. Dupuis, J. G. Ferry, E. Fujita, R. Hille, P. J. A. Kenis, C. A. Kerfeld, R. H. Morris, C. H. F. Peden, A. R. Portis, S. W. Ragsdale, T. B. Rauchfuss, J. N. H. Reek, L. C. Seefeldt, R. K. Thauer and G. L. Waldrop, Frontiers, opportunities, and challenges in biochemical and chemical catalysis of CO2 fixation, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 6621–6658 CrossRef CAS .
K. Malik, S. Singh, S. Basu and A. Verma, Electrochemical reduction of CO2 for synthesis of green fuel, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2017, 6, e244,  DOI:10.1002/wene.244  , 1–17.
K. Ogura, Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide to ethylene: mechanistic approach, J. CO2 Util., 2013, 1, 43–49 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, K. Kikuchi and S. Suzuki, Production of CO and CH4 in electrochemical reduction of CO2 at metal electrodes in aqueous hydrogencarbonate solution, Chem. Lett., 1985, 14, 1695–1698 CrossRef .
H.-P. Yang, S. Qin, H. Wang and J.-X. Lu, Organically doped palladium: a highly efficient catalyst for electroreduction of CO2 to methanol, Green Chem., 2015, 17(12), 5144–5148 RSC .
Y. Chen, C. W. Li and M. W. Kanan, Aqueous CO2 reduction at very low overpotential on oxide-derived Au nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(49), 19969–19972 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Lim, M. Xie, M. A. Sk, J.-M. Lee, A. Fisher, X. Wang and K. Hwa Lim, A review on the electrochemical reduction of CO2 in fuel cells, metal electrodes and molecular catalysts, Catal. Today, 2014, 233, 169–180 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Birhanu, M.-C. Tsai, A. W. Kahsay, C.-T. Chen, T. S. Zeleke, K. B. Ibrahim, C.-J. Huang, W.-N. Su and B.-J. Hwang, Copper and Copper-Based Bimetallic Catalysts for Carbon Dioxide Electroreduction, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5(24), 1800919 CrossRef .
A. Kudo, S. Nakagawa, A. Tsuneto and T. Sakata, Electrochemical reduction of high pressure CO2 on Ni electrodes, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 1541–1545 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reske, M. Duca, M. Oezaslan, K. J. P. Schouten, M. T. M. Koper and P. Strasser, Controlling catalytic selectivities during CO2 electroreduction on thin Cu metal overlayers, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2410–2413 CrossRef CAS .
S. Rasul, D. H. Anjum, A. Jedidi, Y. Minenkov, L. Cavallo and K. Takanabe, A highly selective copper–indium bimetallic electrocatalyst for the electrochemical reduction of aqueous CO2 to CO, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 54, 2146–2150 CrossRef .
S. Ohya, S. Kaneco, H. Katsumata, T. Suzuki and K. Ohta, Electrochemical reduction of CO2 in methanol with aid of CuO and Cu2O, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 329–334 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Kuhl, E. R. Cave, D. N. Abram and T. F. Jaramillo, New insights into the electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide on metallic copper surfaces, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(5), 7050–7059 RSC .
Y. Hori, H. Wakebe, T. Tsukamoto and O. Koga, Electrocatalytic process of CO selectivity in electrochemical reduction of CO2 at metal electrodes in aqueous media, Electrochim. Acta, 1994, 39(11–12), 1833–1839 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reske, H. Mistry, F. Behafarid, B. Roldan Cuenya and P. Strasser, Particle size effects in the catalytic electroreduction of CO2 on Cu nanoparticles, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(19), 6978–6986 CrossRef CAS .
W. Tang, A. A. Peterson, A. S. Varela, Z. P. Jovanov, L. Bech, W. J. Durand, S. Dahl, J. K. Nørskov and I. Chorkendorff, The importance of surface morphology in controlling the selectivity of polycrystalline copper for CO2 electroreduction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14(1), 76–81 RSC .
R. Kas, R. Kortlever, A. Milbrat, M. T. Koper, G. Mul and J. Baltrusaitis, Electrochemical CO2 reduction on Cu2O-derived copper nanoparticles: controlling the catalytic selectivity of hydrocarbons, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16(24), 12194–12201 RSC .
D. T. Whipple and P. J. Kenis, Prospects of CO2 utilization via direct heterogeneous electrochemical reduction, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1(24), 3451–3458 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maurin and M. Robert, Noncovalent immobilization of a molecular iron-based electrocatalyst on carbon electrodes for selective, efficient CO2-to-CO conversion in water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(8), 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, K. Natsui, S. Naoi, K. Nakata and Y. Einaga, Effect of doping level on the electrochemical reduction of CO2 on boron-doped diamond electrodes, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2018, 86, 167–172 CrossRef CAS .
S. t. Neaţu, J. A. Maciá-Agulló, P. Concepción and H. Garcia, Gold–copper nanoalloys supported on TiO2 as photocatalysts for CO2 reduction by water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(45), 15969–15976 CrossRef .
J. Albo, A. Sáez, J. Solla-Gullón, V. Montiel and A. Irabien, Production of methanol from CO2 electroreduction at Cu2O and Cu2O/ZnO-based electrodes in aqueous solution, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176, 709–717 CrossRef .
M. Asadi, K. Kim, C. Liu, A. V. Addepalli, P. Abbasi, P. Yasaei, P. Phillips, A. Behranginia, J. M. Cerrato and R. Haasch, Nanostructured transition metal dichalcogenide electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction in ionic liquid, Science, 2016, 353(6298), 467–470 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Ahn, I. Abu-Baker and G. T. R. Palmore, Electroreduction of CO2 on polycrystalline copper: effect of temperature on product selectivity, Catal. Today, 2017, 288, 24–29 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hori, I. Takahashi, O. Koga and N. Hoshi, Selective formation of C2 compounds from electrochemical reduction of CO2 at a series of copper single crystal electrodes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106(1), 15–17 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and M. W. Kanan, Tin oxide dependence of the CO2 reduction efficiency on tin electrodes and enhanced activity for tin/tin oxide thin-film catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(4), 1986–1989 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jitaru, D. Lowy, M. Toma, B. Toma and L. Oniciu, Electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide on flat metallic cathodes, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1997, 27(8), 875–889 CrossRef CAS .
P. Huang, S. Ci, G. Wang, J. Jia, J. Xu and Z. Wen, High-activity Cu nanowires electrocatalysts for CO2 reduction, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 20, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
R. García-Muelas, F. Dattila, T. Shinagawa, A. J. Martín, J. Pérez-Ramírez and N. López, Origin of the Selective Electroreduction of Carbon Dioxide to Formate by Chalcogen Modified Copper, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9(24), 7153–7159 CrossRef .
T. Shinagaya, G. O. Larrazabai, A. J. Martin, F. Krumeich and J. Perez-Ramirez, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 827–844 Search PubMed .
J. Masud, W. P. R. Liyanage, X. Cao, A. Saxena and M. Nath, Copper Selenides as High-Efficiency Electrocatalysts for Oxygen Evolution Reaction, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1(8), 4075–4083 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, X. Sun and D. Yang, 
            et al., Carbon dioxide electroreduction to C2 products over copper–cuprous oxide derived from electrosynthesized copper complex, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3851 CrossRef .
Z. Chen, K. Mou, S. Yao and L. Liu, Highly selective electrochemical reduction of CO2 to formate on metal-free nitrogen-doped PC61BM, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 11236–11243,  10.1039/c8ta03328e. .
Z. Sun, T. Ma, H. Tao, Q. Fan and B. Han, Fundamentals and challenges of electrochemical CO2 reduction using two-dimensional materials, Chem, 2017, 3(4), 560–587 CAS .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, Understanding trends in the electrocatalytic activity of metals and enzymes for CO2 reduction to CO, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(3), 388–392 CrossRef CAS .
D. Yang, Q. Zhu, C. Chen, H. Liu, Z. Liu, Z. Zhao and B. Han, Selective electroreduction of carbon dioxide to methanol on copper selenide nanocatalysts, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 1–9 CrossRef .
J. Rosen, G. S. Hutchings, Q. Lu, S. Rivera, Y. Zhou, D. G. Vlachos and F. Jiao, Mechanistic insights into the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CO on nanostructured Ag surfaces, ACS Catal., 2015, 5(7), 4293–4299 CrossRef CAS .
S. Back, M. S. Yeom and Y. Jung, Active sites of Au and Ag nanoparticle catalysts for CO2 electroreduction to CO, ACS Catal., 2015, 5(9), 5089–5096 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chatterjee, C. Griego, J. L. Hart, Y. Li, M. L. Taheri, J. Keith and J. D. Snyder, Free standing nanoporous palladium alloys as CO poisoning tolerant electrocatalysts for the electrochemical reduction of CO2 to formate, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(6), 5290–5301 CrossRef CAS .
U. De Silva, J. Masud, N. Zhang, Y. Hong, W. P. R. Liyanage, M. Asle Zaeem and M. NATH, Nickel telluride as a bifunctional electrocatalyst for efficient water splitting in alkaline medium, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018,(6), 7608–7622 RSC .
A. Soon, T. Söhnel and H. Idriss, Plane-wave pseudopotential density functional theory periodic slab calculations of CO adsorption on Cu2O (1 1 1) surface, Surf. Sci., 2005, 579(2–3), 131–140 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: GC-TCD spectra, product quantification details from NMR spectra, calculation of faradaic efficiency, structural models for DFT calculations, and band structure analysis. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta11518eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
ERHE = EAg|AgCl + 0.059pH + E0Ag|AgCl	(1)
η = α + (2.3RT)logj/αnF	(2)

 	Fig. 1  PXRD pattern of hydrothermally synthesized Cu2Se compared with the standard Cu2Se reference pattern (PDF #00-006-0680).	 

 	Fig. 2  SEM images of the Cu2Se nanoparticles at (a) low and (b) high magnification showing the formation of nanocubes and surface roughness, respectively. (c) EDS analysis of the catalyst confirming the presence of Cu and Se in a 2:1 relative atomic ratio. (d) Cu 2p and (e) Se 3d XPS spectra of as-synthesized Cu2Se.	 
iDL = CDL × ν	(3)
ECSA = CDL/Cs	(4)

 	Fig. 3  Cyclic voltammograms recorded for the Cu2Se catalyst in 0.3 M NaHCO3 under continuous N2 purging at different scan rates from 2.5 to 40 mV s−1. Inset shows the plot of anodic and cathodic current measured at 0.044 V vs. Ag|AgCl as a function of scan rate.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) LSVs recorded in 0.3 M NaHCO3 at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 in the presence and absence of CO2 with different electrodes. (b) Tafel plots recorded in 0.3 M NaHCO3.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) NMR spectra identifying reduction products in reaction aliquots collected at different potentials. (b) Bar plot depicting the relative concentrations of liquid products quantified from NMR spectra at different stationary applied potentials.	 

 	Fig. 6  Bar plot depicting the relative faradaic efficiency of liquid as well as gas products at different applied potentials.	 

 	Fig. 7  Polarization curve with the cathodic CO2RR and anodic OER with Cu2Se@CFP as both the cathodic and the anodic electrocatalyst. The inset shows the schematic of the electrochemical setup for a combined CO2RR and OER.	 

 	Fig. 8  Comparison of calculated CO adsorption energy on known catalyst materials with Cu2Se. (a) CO adsorption on Cu2Se was calculated on the (001) surface and (220) surface, while for the metals it was calculated on (111) surfaces. Reported values were selected from data that were obtained by using the same functional as the present study for calculation of adsorption energies.52,53 Adsorption configurations used for the calculation of (b) CO on the (001) surface (c) CO on the (220) surfaces.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: GC-TCD spectra, product quantification details from NMR spectra, calculation of faradaic efficiency, structural models for DFT calculations, and band structure analysis. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta11518e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
