High opto-electronic quality n-type single-crystalline-like GaAs thin films on flexible metal substrates  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC02443F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC02443F
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7919-7926High opto-electronic quality n-type single-crystalline-like GaAs thin films on flexible metal substrates

        
          
            M. 
            Rathi†
*a, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Dutta†
*a, 
      
        
          
            N. 
            Zheng
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Y. 
            Yao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            D. 
            Khatiwada
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            A. 
            Khadimallah
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Y. 
            Gao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Y. 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            S. 
            Pouladi
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            P. 
            Ahrenkiel
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            J.-H. 
            Ryou
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            V. 
            Selvamanickam
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Advanced Superconductor Manufacturing Institute, Texas Center for Superconductivity, University of Houston, Houston, TX 77204, USA. E-mail: mrathi@uh.edu; pdutta2@uh.edu
bSouth Dakota School of Mines and Technology, Rapid City, SD 57701, USA
Received 
      2nd June 2017
    , Accepted 12th July 2017First published on 18th July 2017AbstractIn this report, we present a detailed study of the microstructural and opto-electronic properties of single-crystalline-like n-type GaAs thin films directly grown on inexpensive flexible metal substrates by metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD). The ion-beam-assisted deposition technique (IBAD) was used to obtain highly oriented single-crystalline-like buffer templates on polycrystalline metal substrates. Single-crystalline-like n-type GaAs films were achieved with sharp biaxial texture and strong (00l) crystallographic orientation. Controllable n-doping from 1016–1019 cm−3 was achieved using silane (SiH4) as the dopant precursor. The GaAs films were granular with a wide distribution of grain sizes ranging from 1 to 4 μm. Strong optical photoluminescence at room temperature was obtained and the peak intensity increased with increasing doping level. Electron mobility values as high as 1320 cm2 V−1 s−1 were obtained, one of the highest reported so far for GaAs films grown directly on unconventional substrates. Unlike GaAs on wafer substrates, the electron mobility of single-crystalline-like GaAs films significantly increased with doping which appears to be controlled by the electrical properties of the grain boundaries. High-mobility n-GaAs films on low-cost metal substrates are promising for flexible electronic and photonic device applications.
Introduction
Owing to their ideal direct-band gap, efficient light absorption, high carrier mobility, and stability, single-crystalline GaAs-based optoelectronic devices perform significantly better than crystalline Si-based devices. GaAs-based field effect transistors (FETs) exhibit faster switching speed, low noise, higher break-down voltage, and high-power/high-frequency (GHz) operation.1–3 Similarly, the photo-conversion efficiency and long-term performance of GaAs solar cells are significantly higher than those of Si solar cells.4–6 However, III–V GaAs devices are considerably expensive compared to Si devices. Highly expensive, lattice-matched single-crystalline Ge and GaAs wafers needed to grow the epitaxial GaAs active layers for the devices contribute to the majority of the cost. Moreover, these wafers are also highly brittle, rigid, and thick, resulting in high material consumption and low yield. As a result, despite superior performance, III–V GaAs microelectronics and solar cells have not gained widespread use like that of Si and are limited to a few high-end niche applications. If single-crystalline GaAs with high opto-electronic quality can be grown on low-cost alternative substrates, high-performance and inexpensive GaAs optoelectronic devices can be achieved which can be potentially game-changing in the photonic and electronic devices market.
The challenge of growing single-crystalline GaAs on alternative flexible substrates lies in the unavailability of low-cost lattice-matched substrates which can also endure the high process temperatures (>600 °C) needed to grow epitaxial III–V films. Deposition of GaAs on polycrystalline Mo metal substrates resulted in polycrystalline GaAs films with poor optoelectronic quality.7,8 Efforts to grow III–V InP thin films by MOCVD on flexible Mo substrates also resulted in poly-InP films.9 Epitaxial lift-off processes have been developed where the III–V films are transferred from a wafer to an alternative substrate by layer transfer.10–12 However, the feasibility of the epitaxial lift-off process in high-throughput, low-cost processing is yet to be proven. To directly grow single-crystalline III–V films on alternative substrates, we have previously demonstrated a technique to deposit epitaxial single-crystalline-like GaAs films on flexible Ge templates on inexpensive flexible metal foils.13,14 The epitaxy-enabling template was made by the ion-beam-assisted deposition (IBAD) technique, a method to obtain highly biaxially oriented films on non-crystalline substrates.15–19 The standard and industrially popular MOCVD technique was used to grow the GaAs films. The metal substrates were light-weight, inexpensive, and flexible (∼50 μm thick), enabling roll-to-roll large-scale processing of flexible III–V epitaxial films. The preliminary results of the epitaxial GaAs films revealed single-crystalline-like nature, strong biaxial texture, and good photoluminescence at room temperature with room for further improvement in quality.
In this paper, we demonstrate hetero-epitaxial growth and controllable doping of n-type GaAs films by MOCVD on flexible, low-cost metal substrates for possible applications as active layers for high-performance flexible transistors (as a channel layer) and solar cells (as an emitter, base, or back-surface-field). A wide range of carrier concentrations (1016–1019 cm−3) were achieved and the films exhibited electron mobility exceeding 1300 cm2 V−1 s−1. Substantially improved structural, electrical, and optical properties were obtained compared to that reported earlier,13 indicating a significant improvement in the quality of the films. High-resolution X-ray Diffraction (HRXRD), photoluminescence and Raman spectroscopy, Transmission Electron Microscopy (TEM), and low-temperature electrical measurements were used to conduct a comprehensive characterization of the films. Electrical transport appears to closely resemble the grain-boundary-trapping (GBT) model previously reported for poly-Si and GaAs films.20,21 Detailed structure–property relationships will be presented in this report to assess the suitability of these high-mobility, flexible n-GaAs films on low-cost metal substrates for device applications.
Experimental
MOCVD growth of n-doped GaAs thin films on flexible metal substrates was conducted in the stationary reactor of a dual reactor MOCVD tool at the University of Houston (UH). The tool has a traditional horizontal wafer-based quartz deposition chamber that accommodates 2′′ wafers with a load lock and glove box for sample transfer. Single-crystalline-like Ge templates were grown in a roll-to-roll radiofrequency (RF) sputtering system with a length of a few meters17 and then, the tapes were cut into short pieces of 4–5 cm each to use for GaAs growth. A custom-designed graphite susceptor was used to hold the cut pieces and to yield uniform heating of the samples in the MOCVD reactor. Trimethylgallium (TMGa, Ga(CH3)3) and arsine (AsH3) were used as Ga and As sources, respectively, and silane (SiH4) was used as an n-type dopant due to its low memory effect, with H2 as the carrier gas purified by a palladium cell. The chamber pressure was fixed at 20 Torr. The GaAs films were grown at temperatures ranging from 575 °C to 700 °C, with a constant V/III ratio and were optimized using analyses by Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM), optical microscopy and HRXRD. Once high-quality, shiny mirror-like epitaxial GaAs films were obtained on flexible metal tapes at 650 °C, Si-doped n-type GaAs was deposited by changing the SiH4 flow to achieve a wide range of doping concentrations. Secondary Ion Mass Spectrometry (SIMS) and Hall measurements were conducted to confirm the carrier concentration to be in the range 1016–1019 cm−3.
Results
1. X-ray diffraction

Fig. 1(a) shows the X-ray diffraction (XRD) theta-2theta (θ − 2θ) scan of a representative GaAs:Si n-type film on a flexible metal substrate with a carrier concentration of 1 × 1018 cm−3. For reference, the θ − 2θ scan of the underlying Ge template is also shown. A strong GaAs (004) peak at 2θ ∼ 65.91° and a weaker (002) peak at 2θ ∼ 31.57° were observed from the GaAs:Si film. No other diffraction peak of GaAs was observed. The location of the selected peaks corresponding only to (00l) diffractions matched the zinc blende structure of GaAs and indicates a strong out-of-plane c-axis alignment. The Ge template exhibited a strong peak at 2θ ∼ 65.74° which corresponds to the (004) Ge peak. The significant increase in the (004) peak intensity after GaAs deposition indicates a preferential growth of GaAs crystals along the (004) plane with an epitaxial relationship with Ge. Also, diffraction peaks associated only with the out-of-plane (00l) orientations for the buffer layers consisting of CeO2, MgO, LaMnO3, and Ge were observed, suggesting good epitaxial relationships between the GaAs layer and underlying buffer layers. It was noted that the GaAs and Ge(004) peaks were slightly shifted to lower 2theta angles from the relaxed peak positions of crystalline bulk Ge and GaAs (∼66.06°). The peak-shift suggested a residual strain in the layers which might have originated from the complex multi-layered processes and the combined effect of lattice and thermal-mismatch between the underlying layers.
 Fig. 1  (a) XRD theta-2theta (θ − 2θ) scan of a representative GaAs:Si thin film. (b) and (c) Rocking curves of the out-of-plane (004) peak and the in-plane (224) peak of Ge substrate and doped GaAs:Si layer on metal substrates respectively. (d) XRD (111) pole figure of the GaAs:Si thin film on a metal substrate. 

Fig. 1(b) shows the rocking curves of the (004) peaks of the Ge template and the doped GaAs:Si layer (1 × 1018 cm−3) on metal substrates. The out-of-plane spread (Δω) values in terms of full width at half maximum (FWHM) are 1.18 and 0.51 degrees for Ge and GaAs:Si films, respectively. This significant decrease (by over 50%) in Δω of the MOCVD-grown GaAs:Si film compared to the sputtered Ge film indicates substantial improvement in the crystalline quality. Fig. 1(c) shows the asymmetric rocking curves of the (224) plane of the same Ge and GaAs:Si layers. The (224) rocking curve provides information about the in-plane texture and has also been used to study the near-surface crystalline quality of GaAs. Since the angle of incidence for the (224) plane is shallow at 3–6 degrees, (2theta = 83.11°), the penetration depth of the X-rays is expected to be significantly reduced and more information of the top GaAs layer is revealed compared to the underlying Ge layer. A similar decrease in the in-plane FWHM (Δϕ) of GaAs was observed relative to Ge, with the FWHM values of the Ge and GaAs:Si layers being 0.85 and 0.54 degrees, respectively. The sharpening of the in-plane texture indicates a substantial improvement in the in-plane alignment of the GaAs:Si layer over Ge, as observed in the out-of-plane width measurements. Furthermore, it is to be noted that the rocking curve widths (both in-plane and out-of-plane) reported here for GaAs:Si (∼0.5 degrees) are significantly lower than the values reported before13 which indicates a marked improvement in the quality of the crystalline structure and the biaxial texture of the GaAs:Si films. Moreover, the texture spreads of GaAs films reported here are the narrowest reported so far for any biaxially textured semiconductor thin films (including Si, Ge, etc.) deposited on IBAD textured and NiW metal substrates.22–25
To further investigate the in-plane texture, the X-ray pole figure measurements were conducted using a Bruker 2D General Area Detector Diffraction System. Fig. 1(d) shows the XRD (111) pole figure of the GaAs:Si thin film doped at 1 × 1018 cm−3. A four-fold symmetry is observed confirming the biaxial texture in the films. A similar four-fold symmetry in the pole figure maps was observed in all GaAs:Si layers from low to high carrier concentration levels. The additional spots in the pole figure indicated by the arrows correspond to the primary and secondary twins located at the GaAs/Ge and Ge/CeO2 interfaces. The Phi (ϕ) scans extracted from the pole figures were used to determine the in-plane texture. The (111) in-plane spread of the GaAs:Si film shown here is 0.85 degrees. Likewise, the (111) in-plane spreads of the GaAs:Si films were well within 1 degrees which is considerably lower than reported previously (∼3 degrees in ref. 13), signifying a substantial improvement in the microstructural and crystalline quality of the GaAs:Si films grown with Ge templates on metal foils.
A series of GaAs:Si films with varying doping concentrations (6 × 1016–1 × 1019 cm−3) and the same thickness (2 μm) were grown and the out-of-plane (004) and in-plane (224) XRD rocking curve widths were measured. The FWHM values of the peaks in the rocking curves were less than one degree and ranged between 0.7 and 0.8 degrees for all the samples in both the (004) and (224) planes. Both the out-of-plane and in-plane FWHM values increased marginally with doping which could be attributed to the structural defects caused by higher doping. All the GaAs:Si films were grown on a Ge template with the rocking curve widths of the (004) and (224) peaks of 1.66 and 1.52 degrees respectively. Therefore, over 50% reduction in the texture spread was observed after GaAs film growth. It was also observed that the final texture and crystalline quality of the GaAs layers were strongly dependent on the original texture of the starting Ge template. Thus, it is critical to use Ge templates with a low-texture spread to obtain GaAs films of high crystalline quality.
2. Scanning electron microscopy
SEM microstructural studies were conducted to determine the surface morphology and grain structure of the films. Fig. 2(a) shows the surface morphology of the Ge template on metal foil used as a substrate for GaAs growth. The surface morphology of the Ge template consisted of distinct grains with grain sizes ranging from 200 to 300 nm. Fig. 2(b)–(d) show the surface morphology of GaAs:Si films (grown on the Ge template) with doping levels of 6 × 1016, 7 × 1017 and 1.0 × 1018 cm−3 respectively. The GaAs films exhibited a faceted surface morphology with significantly larger grains compared to that of the Ge template, some as large as 5 μm as seen in Fig. 2(d). Steps or layer-like grain perimeters were observed with flatter and smoother intra-granular regions. A wide distribution of grain sizes, ranging from 500 nm to 5 μm, was observed on all the GaAs:Si films. Due to the large standard deviations in the average grain size calculation, it was deemed inappropriate to assign grain sizes to the samples to avoid misrepresentation. Only significant changes in average grain sizes and overall surface morphology differences between GaAs:Si films were noted and considered in the discussion. Moreover, the GaAs:Si films reported here appeared to be substantially less rough compared to the poly-GaAs films grown on Mo metal foils reported previously.7 Additionally, the average grain size appeared to increase with doping (addition of Si atoms in the lattice) leading to a relative surface smoothening effect. The mechanism could be similar to the surfactant-induced surface roughness modification which has been reported for highly doped GaAs films on wafers.26 Scanning TEM (STEM) images were conducted to study the details of the grain boundary (GB) regions. Fig. 3(a) and (b) show the STEM and corresponding SEM images of the GaAs:Si film with a doping density of 1 × 1018 cm−3. The grain boundary regions and threading dislocations are distinct and clearly visible in the STEM image compared to the SEM image. The defects appeared to be more concentrated at the grain boundaries than the grain interiors, a common trend for all the GaAs:Si films.
 Fig. 2  (a) Surface morphology of the Ge template on metal foil used as a substrate for GaAs growth. (b)–(d) Surface morphology of n-type GaAs films with varying doping levels of 6 × 1016, 7 × 1017, and 1.1 × 1018 cm−3 respectively. 
 Fig. 3  (a) and (b) STEM and the corresponding SEM image respectively of the GaAs film with a doping density of 1 × 1018 cm−3. 
3. Transmission electron microscopy
High-resolution TEM (HRTEM) imaging was carried out using a JEOL JEM2100 LaB6 microscope at 200 keV. Focused Ion Beam milling was used to prepare cross sectional samples. Fig. 4(a) shows the (220) bright field image of a cross-section of a GaAs sample with a doping concentration of 1 × 1018 cm−3. The complete architecture of the film including the GaAs, Ge template, buffer oxide layers and metal substrate has been shown. The GaAs film appeared to be relatively cleaner near the surface compared to the regions closer to the Ge or CeO2 interface. Threading dislocations were evidently higher in the GaAs:Si layer. Average threading dislocation densities (TDD), calculated using plan-view TEM images, were typically in the range of 8 × 107–2 × 108 cm−2 in the GaAs:Si films. No trend was observed in defect densities with doping. However, compared to the sputtered Ge template which typically contained more than 1010 cm−2 dislocations, the GaAs layer was relatively less defective. Grain boundaries were observed in the GaAs layer running vertically through the cross-section, as indicated. Energy-dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) mapping (attached with TEM) was employed to identify the GaAs/Ge interface and to study the elemental composition of the individual layers and interfaces. A cross-sectional EDS map is shown in Fig. 4(b). The interfaces of the layers appeared to be relatively abrupt with no major intermixing of elements (within the detection limit of EDS) at the interfaces. The HRTEM image (Fig. 4c) of the GaAs–Ge interface revealed lattice fringes across a continuous interface, largely free of defects. The selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern acquired from the GaAs layer (Fig. 4(d)) revealed a spotty diffraction pattern characteristic of the zinc blende structure, confirming epitaxial growth and the single-crystalline nature of the GaAs film. A high density of defects was observed near the Ge/CeO2 interface (as indicated in Fig. 4a), which originated due to the large lattice mismatch of 4.2% between the layers, consistent with what was observed before.13
 Fig. 4  (a) (220) bright field image of a cross-section of the GaAs sample. (b) Cross-sectional EDS map. (c) High-resolution HRTEM image of the GaAs–Ge interface. (d) Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the GaAs layer. 
4. Photoluminescence
Room temperature steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of a reference GaAs wafer, and undoped and n-GaAs (1 × 1018 cm−3) films on flexible metal substrates are shown in Fig. 5(a). All the samples were measured under the same conditions using a fixed excitation wavelength (700 nm) and incident power (15 mW). A strong PL intensity with narrow linewidths was obtained from the n-type GaAs film on the flexible metal substrate which indicates high opto-electronic quality. Additionally, the peak intensity was significantly stronger in n-GaAs in comparison with the undoped GaAs film. The inset shows the normalized PL spectra of the undoped GaAs film on the metal substrate and the reference wafer. The undoped GaAs film on the metal substrate exhibited a peak position at 1.41 eV and a FWHM of 37 meV, closely matching the peak position (1.42 eV) and FWHM (30 meV) of the reference bulk GaAs wafer which reveals comparable quality. The marginal red-shift in the peak of flexible GaAs (∼10 meV) may be the result of grain boundaries, strain or defects in the film. Fig. 5(b) shows the PL spectra of n-GaAs films on flexible metal substrates with varying levels of doping densities. It was observed that the PL intensity significantly increased with the increase in doping concentration. This may be attributed to the enhancement in radiative recombination due to the availability of free carriers at higher doping concentrations. Furthermore, electrical experiments have indicated the role of GBs in trapping of free charges at low doping, saturation of trap states with increased doping and release of carriers at higher doping.17,18 Therefore, the increase in PL intensity may also correlate with the mechanism of GB saturation in the films. The widths of the PL peaks of the n-GaAs films with doping concentrations of 6 × 1016, 2 × 1017, 1.1 × 1018 and 1 × 1019 cm−3 were 37, 38, 46 and 60 meV respectively. The broadening of the PL linewidths with the increase in doping concentration can be attributed to the enhancement in the dopant atoms in the films. It is to be noted that the PL linewidths reported here are significantly narrower compared to those reported previously for poly-GaAs films on alternate substrates,7,8 confirming the substantially improved optical quality of the flexible GaAs films reported in this paper.
 Fig. 5  (a) Room temperature steady-state PL spectra of a reference GaAs wafer, and undoped and n-type GaAs (1 × 1018 cm−3) films on metal substrates. (b) PL spectra of n-type GaAs films on metal substrates with varying levels of doping densities. 
5. Secondary ion mass spectrometry
The dopant concentration of Si in the GaAs matrix, the background concentration and the diffusion of elements across the interfaces as a function of depth in the flexible GaAs:Si samples were investigated using secondary ion mass spectrometry (SIMS). A specific sample for the SIMS study was prepared on the Ge template which consisted of an initial 2 μm-thick undoped GaAs layer and a 3 μm-thick GaAs:Si layer comprising four layers of GaAs:Si made with different SiH4 flows (or doping concentrations). Fig. 6 shows the SIMS depth profile with counts of As and Ga (right axis) and the carrier concentration of Si, O and Ge in the GaAs matrix (left axis). The SIMS profile indeed showed four distinct levels of Si doping with the carrier concentration ranging from 1018 to 1015 cm−3 up to a depth of ∼3 μm beyond which the concentration dropped to the 1014 cm−3 level in the undoped GaAs layer. An excellent match between the SIMS doping profile and the targeted doping concentration shows that controllable n-type doping with SiH4 has been achieved in flexible GaAs:Si films. Additionally, the doping profile of a similar GaAs:Si sample on the GaAs wafer substrate, as shown in Fig. 6(b), closely matched that of the flexible GaAs:Si on flexible metal substrates, suggesting that the mechanism of doping is similar in both biaxially textured GaAs thin films and bulk GaAs.
 Fig. 6  (a) and (b) SIMS depth profile with counts of As and Ga (right axis) and the carrier concentration of Si, O, and Ge in the GaAs matrix (left axis) grown on metal substrates and reference wafer substrates, respectively. 
A significant out-diffusion of Ge into the GaAs matrix was observed which extended up to ∼2 μm from the GaAs/Ge interface. The substantial out-diffusion of Ge may be promoted by grain-boundaries in this sample. Oxygen also appeared to diffuse significantly into the GaAs (up to ∼2 μm) before dropping down to a constant 1016 cm−3 level in the GaAs:Si layers which was the background O level in flexible GaAs films. The oxygen background (∼5 × 1015 cm−3) was comparatively lower in the GaAs:Si wafer sample. The high amount of O in the vicinity of the GaAs/Ge interface and the elevated O background level may be attributed to the high O content in the sputtered Ge substrate and the trapped O in the GBs of flexible GaAs:Si films respectively. O in sputtered Ge films could be due to a high background of O in the chamber and O diffusion from the underlying CeO2 layer. This result suggests that a 2–3 μm undoped buffer GaAs layer may be necessary to block the Ge and O penetration into a doped GaAs layer and over-compensate the dopants. Therefore, all the doped GaAs layers are deposited by first growing an undoped GaAs buffer layer on an IBAD Ge template.
6. Electrical properties
Four-probe current–voltage (I–V) and Hall mobility measurements were performed (Ecopia HMS5000) from 77 to 350 K to investigate the temperature-dependent carrier mobility, bulk concentration, and electrical resistivity of the doped n-GaAs films on flexible substrates. Fig. 7 shows the variation of electron mobility and carrier concentration of a series of doped GaAs films both on the GaAs wafer and the flexible substrate. Remarkably high carrier mobility of 1320 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 300 K was obtained in n-GaAs films doped at 1.0 × 1019 cm−3 grown on flexible metal substrates, which is substantially higher than that reported before on flexible substrates by direct deposition.13,17 Interestingly, it was observed that in the case of n-GaAs films on flexible metal substrates, the electron mobility substantially increased with the increase in doping, contrary to that observed in the case of n-GaAs films deposited on the bulk GaAs wafer where the carrier mobility decreased with doping.27 The decrease in carrier mobility with doping of crystalline GaAs can be attributed to the increase in scattering from the added impurities. However, the increase in carrier mobility with doping of flexible GaAs films on metal substrates cannot be explained from the point of view of alloy scattering of carriers by ionized donors. Instead, the mechanism appears to resemble the GBT model, as previously reported in the case of poly-crystalline GaAs and Si films, where GBs played a critical role in the electrical transport.20,21 Per this model, at low doping concentrations, the free carriers are trapped at the GBs resulting in low carrier mobility and high resistivity. With the increase in doping, the trap states at the GBs get filled resulting in the decrease in the GB barrier height. Eventually, the trap states get saturated at higher doping levels and the GBs no longer limit the carrier conduction. The carrier transport at this point (high doping) was determined by the individual crystallites that resulted in the increase in the mobility and electrical conductivity, which seems to be similar in the case of our n-GaAs films on metal substrates. Further nanoscale electrical and structural characterizations of the grains and GBs are in progress to understand the mechanism of electrical transport in these granular biaxially textured films.
 Fig. 7  Variation of electron mobility and carrier concentration of a series of doped GaAs:Si samples on GaAs wafer and flexible metal substrates. 

Fig. 8(a) shows the dependence of electron mobility on temperature for the n-GaAs films on flexible metal substrate with carrier concentration levels of 1.0 × 1018, 7 × 1017, and 5.7 × 1016 cm−3. In all these samples, the mobility increased initially with a decrease in temperature, reached a peak and finally decreased with further decrease in temperature toward 77 K. At higher temperature, the mobility was limited by optical phonon scattering by the lattice and the temperature dependence followed the form of T−1.5. The electron mobility reached a maximum at a certain transition temperature To, which was related to the doping concentration. The GaAs films with higher doping concentration and mobility exhibited a lower To, as indicated in Fig. 8(a). Below To, the electron mobility is dominated by ionized-impurity scattering and the temperature dependence of mobility was T1.5. Overall, though we observe contrasting behavior of carrier mobility with carrier concentration, the temperature dependence of electron mobility of flexible GaAs on metal substrates agrees with the mechanism observed in n-GaAs grown on bulk wafer substrates which is generally applicable to all crystalline semiconductors.
 Fig. 8  (a) Dependence of electron mobility on temperature for n-GaAs films on flexible metal substrates with different carrier concentrations. (b) Variation of resistivity with temperature of flexible n-GaAs films on metal substrates doped at different carrier concentrations. 

Fig. 8(b) shows the variation of resistivity with temperature of flexible n-GaAs films on metal substrates doped with the carrier concentration levels of 1.0 × 1018, 7 × 1017, and 5.7 × 1016 cm−3. A linear dependence of lnρ vs. 1/kT (where k is the Boltzmann constant and T is temperature) was observed in the temperature range of 270–350 K, for all the samples. The electrical activation (Eb) energy was determined from the exponential dependence of resistivity with temperature ραexp (Eb/kT). The electrical activation energies were found to be 4, 9, 12, and 42 meV for the corresponding carrier concentrations of 1.0 × 1018, 7 × 1017, 5.7 × 1017, and 6 × 1016 cm−3 respectively. The low values of activation energies (4–9 meV) at higher doping levels indicate a significantly shallow level of donor atoms in the films, particularly at higher doping levels. At temperatures below 280 K, the resistivity increased gradually at a slower rate eventually saturating near 80 K. Additionally, the electrical resistivity decreased as the carrier concentration increased, which can be attributed to the saturation of trap states, decrease in GB barrier height, and enhanced carrier conduction, as previously explained using the GBT model.18 It is apparent that grain boundaries play a critical role in determining carrier transport in GaAs films on flexible metal substrates. Further studies need to be conducted and are underway to understand the mechanism of carrier transport in these single-crystalline-like GaAs films on metal substrates.
Conclusions
In summary, single-crystalline-like n-GaAs films with a zinc blende crystal structure have been successfully deposited directly on IBAD-textured inexpensive and flexible Ge templates on metal foils using MOCVD. Controllable doping using silane as the dopant source was achieved in the flexible GaAs films with a wide range of carrier concentrations of 1016–1019 cm−3. A high electron mobility of 1320 cm2 V−1 s−1 was achieved, the highest reported so far by direct growth on flexible substrates. Unlike n-GaAs on wafer substrates, the electron mobility of textured n-GaAs on metal substrates sharply increased with an increase in carrier concentration. This anomalous behavior appeared to closely resemble a similar phenomenon observed in poly-Si films and may be related to the electrical properties of the grain boundaries of the films. Low-temperature electrical measurements revealed lattice- and impurity-dominated electron mobility regimes, whereas the electrical activation energy decreased with the increase in electrical conductivity and doping. A strong room temperature PL was obtained with the PL intensity and FWHM increasing with doping. Overall, the structural, electrical, and optical properties of the n-GaAs films on the Ge templates on the metal foils are highly promising for high-performance and low-cost opto-electronic device applications.
Conflict of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work is supported by funding from the U. S. Department of Energy (DOE) SunShot Initiative program (Award #: DEEE0006711), Advanced Superconductor Manufacturing Institute, and Texas Center for Superconductivity at the University of Houston.
References
P. D. Ye, G. D. Wilk, B. Yang, J. Kwo, S. N. G. Chu, S. Nakahara, H.-J. L. Gossmann, J. P. Mannaerts, M. Hong, K. K. Ng and J. Bude, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 180–182 CrossRef CAS .
E. I. Chen, N. Holonyak and S. A. Maranowski, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 2688–2690 CrossRef CAS .
L. Petti, N. Münzenrieder, C. Vogt, H. Faber, L. Büthe, G. Cantarella, F. Bottacchi, T. D. Anthopoulos and G. Tröster, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2016, 3, 021303 Search PubMed .
M. A. Steiner, J. F. Geisz, I. Garcia, D. J. Friedman, A. Duda, W. J. Olavarria, M. Young, D. Kuciauskas and S. R. Kurtz, IEEE J. Photovoltaics, 2013, 3, 1437–1440 CrossRef .

          L. S. Mattos, S. R. Scully, M. Syfu, E. Olson, L. Yang, C. Ling, B. M. Kayes and G. He, Proceedings of the 38th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, (2012) 3187-3190.
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Solar cell efficiency tables (version 46). Prog. Photovoltaic: Res Appl., 2015, 23, 805–812 CrossRef .

          D. M. Wilt, M. A. Smith, W. Maurer, D. Scheiman and P. P. Jenkins, Conference Record of the 2006 IEEE 4th World Conference, 2006, 2, 1891–1894.

          S. J. Polly, C. R. Plourde, C. G. Bailey, C. Leitz, C. Vineis, M. P. Brindak, D. V. Forbes, J. S. McNatt, S. M. Hubbard and R. P. Raffaelle, Proceedings of the 34th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, (2009) 001377–001380.
M. Zheng, Z. Yu, T. J. Seok, Y. Chen, R. Kapadia, K. Takei, S. Aloni, J. W. Ager, M. Wu, Y. Chueh and A. Javey, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 111, 123112 CrossRef .
S. Moon, K. Kim, Y. Kim, J. Heo and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–6 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Lee, D. R. Kim and X. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2014, 8(9), 8746–8756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Yablonovitch, T. Gmitter, J. P. Harbison and R. Bhat, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 2222–2226 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dutta, M. Rathi, N. Zheng, Y. Gao, Y. Yao, J. Martinez, P. Ahrenkiel and V. Selvamanickam, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 092104 CrossRef .

          M. Rathi, P. Dutta, Y. Yao, Y. Gao, M. Asadirad, N. Zheng, P. Ahrenkiel, J. Ryou and V. Selvamanickam, Proceedings of the 42nd IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference, (2015) 2824–2828.
P. N. Arendt and S. R. Foltyn, MRS Bull., 2004, 29, 543–546 CrossRef CAS .
V. Selvamanickam, H.-G. Lee, Y. Li, J. Reeves, Y. Qiao, Y. Y. Xie, K. Lenseth, G. Carota, M. Funk, K. Zdun, J. Xie, K. Likes, M. Jones, L. Hope and D. W. Hazelton, IEEE Trans. Appl. Supercond., 2003, 13, 2492–2495 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, S. N. Sambandam, G. Majkic, E. Galstyan and V. Selvamanickam, Thin Solid Films, 2013, 9, 527–532 Search PubMed .
V. Matias and R. H. Hammond, Surf. Coat. Technol., 2015, 264, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Groves, J. B. Li, B. M. Clemens, V. LaSalvia, F. Hasoon, H. M. Branz and C. W. Teplin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6905–6908 CAS .
J. J. J. Yang, P. D. Dapkus, R. D. Dupuis and R. D. Yingling, J. Appl. Phys., 1980, 51, 7–9 CrossRef .
Y. John and W. Seto, J. Appl. Phys., 1975, 46, 5247–5250 CrossRef .
S. H. Wee, C. Cantoni, T. R. Fanning, C. W. Teplin, D. F. Bogorin, J. Bornstein, K. Bowers, P. Schroeter, F. Hasoon, H. M. Branz, M. P. Paranthamana and A. Goyal, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6052–6055 CAS .
P. Dutta, M. Rathi, Y. Yao, Y. Gao, G. Majkic, M. Iliev, J. Martinez, B. Holzapfel and V. Selvamanickam, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 21042–21048 RSC .
A. T. Findikoglu, W. Choi, V. Matias, T. G. Holesinger, Q. X. Jia and D. E. Peterson, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1527–1531 CrossRef CAS .

          Y. Gao, R. Wang, P. Dutta and V. Selvamanickam, Proceedings of 39th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialist Conference, (2013) 2420–2424.
B. Paquette, B. Ilahi, V. Aimez and R. Arès, J. Cryst. Growth, 2013, 383, 30–35 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tang, H. G. M. Lochs, P. R. Hageman, M. H. J. M. de Croon and L. J. Giling, J. Cryst. Growth, 1989, 98(4), 827–837 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors equally contributed to the work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (a) XRD theta-2theta (θ − 2θ) scan of a representative GaAs:Si thin film. (b) and (c) Rocking curves of the out-of-plane (004) peak and the in-plane (224) peak of Ge substrate and doped GaAs:Si layer on metal substrates respectively. (d) XRD (111) pole figure of the GaAs:Si thin film on a metal substrate.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Surface morphology of the Ge template on metal foil used as a substrate for GaAs growth. (b)–(d) Surface morphology of n-type GaAs films with varying doping levels of 6 × 1016, 7 × 1017, and 1.1 × 1018 cm−3 respectively.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) and (b) STEM and the corresponding SEM image respectively of the GaAs film with a doping density of 1 × 1018 cm−3.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) (220) bright field image of a cross-section of the GaAs sample. (b) Cross-sectional EDS map. (c) High-resolution HRTEM image of the GaAs–Ge interface. (d) Selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of the GaAs layer.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Room temperature steady-state PL spectra of a reference GaAs wafer, and undoped and n-type GaAs (1 × 1018 cm−3) films on metal substrates. (b) PL spectra of n-type GaAs films on metal substrates with varying levels of doping densities.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) and (b) SIMS depth profile with counts of As and Ga (right axis) and the carrier concentration of Si, O, and Ge in the GaAs matrix (left axis) grown on metal substrates and reference wafer substrates, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  Variation of electron mobility and carrier concentration of a series of doped GaAs:Si samples on GaAs wafer and flexible metal substrates.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Dependence of electron mobility on temperature for n-GaAs films on flexible metal substrates with different carrier concentrations. (b) Variation of resistivity with temperature of flexible n-GaAs films on metal substrates doped at different carrier concentrations.	 
Footnote
† These authors equally contributed to the work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
