Thermocatalytic CO 2 conversion by siliceous matter: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA07613F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA07613F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 1593-1633Thermocatalytic CO2 conversion by siliceous matter: a review

        
          
            Mohammadreza 
            Kosari
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Alvin M. H. 
            Lim
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yu 
            Shao
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bowen 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kelvin M. 
            Kwok
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Abdul Majeed 
            Seayad
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Armando 
            Borgna
          
        
      *b and 

        
          
            Hua Chun 
            Zeng
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, Faculty of Engineering, National University of Singapore, 10 Kent Ridge Crescent, Singapore 119260. E-mail: armando_borgna@isce2.a-star.edu.sg; chezhc@nus.edu.sg
bInstitute of Sustainability for Chemicals, Energy, and Environment (ISCE2), Agency for Science, Technology and Research in Singapore (A*STAR), 1 Pesek Road, Jurong Island, Singapore 627833
Received 
      28th September 2022
    , Accepted 1st December 2022First published on 6th December 2022AbstractSolid siliceous (silica/silicate) materials can substantially contribute to the strategic decarbonization and defossilization efforts based on carbon capture and utilization (CCU), where CO2 footprint is mitigated by its capture and conversion into a wide variety of value-added chemical commodities. Targeting CO2 utilization in particular, siliceous catalysts are widely utilized for thermal conversion of CO2 due to their tunable porosity and morphology, ideal physiochemical properties such as high thermal resistivity, and ease of preparation by green protocols. In terms of catalytic performance and reactivity (activity, selectivity, and stability), thermocatalytic CO2 conversion using siliceous-based catalysts is comparable to that with non-precious and precious pure metal–metal oxide catalysts, considering the inert nature of siliceous materials. Hence, in the current review, we focus on the recent advances in CO2 conversion facilitated by conventional and advanced silica/silicate-based catalysts by reviewing and comparing proof-of-principle experiments on catalyst activity and stability for thermocatalytic CO2 transformations. From this perspective, initially, we summarize the gas-phase thermocatalytic CO2 reduction pathways (mainly reforming and hydrogenation) to produce C1 and C2+ chemicals. Thereafter, we specifically outline the advanced design and synthesis techniques for silica/silicate-based catalysts having diverse focal, compositional, and structural features for these reactions. The categorized CO2 reactions are then examined with respect to different subdivisions including conventional, morphology-defined, structurally-defined, and atomically-defined siliceous-based catalysts. Furthermore, after highlighting their hierarchical and porosity merits for CO2 transformations, three important routes including CO2 conversion to hydrocarbons, alcohols, and fine/specialty organic substances using siliceous-based catalysts are exclusively emphasized. Finally, based on our personal perspective, potential areas for improvement and further research opportunities will be proposed.
1 Introduction
With the rapid global transition to a carbon-neutral clean-energy economy and the electrification of major infrastructure, the carbon cost associated with the perpetual release of greenhouse gases (GHGs) such as carbon dioxide (CO2) by major sectors (infrastructure, construction, transportation, and industries) has shifted to the power generation sector.1 However, although this green transformation will enable onsite carbon capture, resulting in less atmospheric CO2 emissions, it does not drastically reduce the total amount of carbon dioxide (CO2) that is generated and can create a CO2 storage problem. Therefore, carbon capture/storage/utilization (CCSU or CCUS) is often considered as the most feasible technology to attain the established goal of net-zero carbon emission by many countries, with CO2 utilization as the key process in achieving a circular carbon economy by providing a closed-loop carbon cycle through which the recycled carbonaceous gaseous waste can be used as a secondary carbon feedstock to replace fossil fuel.2,3 With the increasing global demand for energy, it is urgent to adopt the maximum CO2 utilization in vital carbon-intensive industries to transition towards a sustainable future.4 In this scenario, it is recommended to stop exploiting fossil fuels from the “underground” and instead extract chemicals from the “air”, considering the abundance of human-propagated CO2 as the only carbon-containing motif in the atmosphere.
Conspicuously, catalysis research efforts have been devoted to CO2 utilization in recent decades, wherein CO2 valorization to chemical and energy products is experiencing a research boom due to the fact that it is an important step towards a zero carbon emission framework.5–26 Currently, various industrially relevant processes with technology readiness level (TRL) have been developed. Among them, the most important processes include CO2 methanation (known as Sabatier reaction or SR), CO2 hydrogenation to methanol (CO2-to-MeOH) and higher alcohols (CO2-to-HAs), reverse water–gas shift (RWGS), dry-reforming of methane (DRM), tri-reforming of methane (TRM), CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons (HCs) and light olefins and paraffins (via modified Fischer–Tropsch reaction, known as CO2-MFT), and CO2-involved organic synthesis (Scheme 1). However, some of these pathways, as suggested by their names, rely entirely on the reaction between the relatively inert CO2 and the expensive hydrogen and are technologically challenging due to the well-known stability of CO2. Furthermore, the hydrogen supply is an issue, which should be economically sourced from green sources (e.g., via direct photocatalysis and electrolysis from renewables) instead of the grey hydrogen that is currently dominating the hydrogen market. In this case, acquiring hydrogen sources is another major bottleneck; however, if a moderately expensive but an endurable hydrogen production route is devised, the H2 consumption should be directed towards the production of more value-added chemicals.
 Scheme 1  Essential catalytic metals and metal–oxide interfaces for the respective thermocatalytic CO2 conversion pathways. 
The main products of CO2 valorization discussed in this review are categorized into C1 products, i.e., CO, CH4, CH3OH, HCOOH, and C2+ products including dimethylether (DME), HAs (ethanol, propanol, butanol, pentanol, etc.), and HCs (olefins, gasoline, and aromatics).19,27–33 Furthermore, C1 or single-carbon derivatives such as CO and methanol can be used to deliver downstream products via the Fischer–Tropsch (FT) and methanol-to-olefin (MTO) reactions, respectively. Achieving the cost-effective and green production of C1 and C2+ chemicals from CO2 conversion with thermodynamic efficiency requires the use of effective catalysts with fine-tuned chemical properties. Considering the catalyst evolution for the distinct CO2 conversion pathways, compositional variation/optimization is the common method employed for the preparation of conventional catalysts. Given that conventional heterogeneous catalysts (such as Pt-group metals and transition metals) typically exhibit different performance and stability issues arising from detrimental phenomena (e.g. aggregation, agglomeration, and coking), active catalysts deposited or dispersed on catalyst support materials, which are known as “nanostructured or integrated heterogeneous catalysts”, are often found to exhibit boosted catalytic performances or alleviated undesirable descriptors during CO2-involved chemical reactions. This can be attributed to their better dispersion, increased surface area, tunable porosity (micro, meso, and microporosity),34 controllable morphology, and smaller particle size.35–39 Among the various support materials (e.g., alumina, titania, and carbonaceous), siliceous materials consisting of silica, silicate or zeolite-based materials are primarily studied due their low cost, earth abundance, myriad of synthesis routes, non-toxicity and stability upon storage under a wide range of conditions, with well-documented inherently inert properties.7,11,17,40 These characteristic advantages enable intrinsic studies and their rapid, feasible and worldwide industrial use.41
Siliceous materials including silicon (Si), silica (SiO2), and silicates play a major role in the production of catalysts and development of novel nanocatalysts for thermocatalytic CO2 conversion. In general, SiO2 is considered nearly inert in this type of application,42 while some of its surface and structural chemical motifs have merits for CO2 conversion. The surface hydroxyls or silanol groups of SiO2 were reported to promote the hydrogenation of adsorbed CO2 into the important CO or formate intermediates.43,44 The silanol groups also enable surface functionalization with the corresponding silane-containing moieties including –R, –SH, –NH2, –COOH, –CN, and –SO3H. Moreover, surface defects were reported to be catalytically active independently.45 Thus, compared to other metal oxides, the structural merits of SiO2 are superior. The specific surface area of some mesoporous silica supports can reach up to 2370 m2 g−1, which can facilitate the fine dispersion of active metal and metal oxide species.34 The adjustable pore structures and morphologies of siliceous material were also found to influence CO2 conversion. The nanoscale confinement effect exerted by the meso/micropores of silica supports effectively attenuates the metal sintering in many CO2 conversion processes. For instance, a shattuckite-like structure was found to be more effective than conventional phyllosilicate in stabilizing Cu+ species.46 Lastly, several porous hollow siliceous supports were reported to improve the fluid dynamics inside packed-bed reactors, which is often overlooked for gas-phase reactions.47,48
To the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of comprehensive reviews in the literature that adequately address the fabrication and functionality of silica/silicate-based catalysts for thermocatalytic CO2 conversion, encompassing various CO2 reaction niches in either gas, liquid, or mixed phases. Specifically, the existing reviews are either focused on the merits of silica-based catalysts (both conventional and advanced) for various heterogeneous catalysis34,49,50 or purely consider various conceivable features of catalytic CO2 utilization (thermal, plasma, photochemical, and electrochemical).7,22,51,52 Hence, in this review, we comprehensively present the recent advances in thermocatalytic CO2 conversion using intricate nanostructured siliceous-based catalysts. Principally, various siliceous-based catalysts are covered including conventional and advanced, silica and silicate-based, rigid and porous (micro/meso/macroporous), and uniform and non-uniform morphologically-, atomically-, and structurally-defined catalysts including one-, two-, and three-dimensional (1D, 2D, and 3D) variants. Accordingly, this review is divided into three main parts. Firstly, thermocatalytic CO2 conversion and its derived products including C1 and C2+ chemicals are briefly elaborated and their corresponding catalysts are categorized based on the desired products, as depicted in Scheme 1. Secondly, the current advances in pertinent siliceous frameworks and the synthesis/utilization of Si-containing catalysts for CO2 conversion are reviewed by presented the research snapshots from our research group and the wider literature to provide scientific insights. Finally, we present our conclusion on the limitations of the present research and our personal perspectives and recommendations for future research directions.
2 Thermocatalytic CO2 conversion
2.1 Differences in CO2 conversion via thermocatalysis versus electrocatalysis and photocatalysis routes
The thermocatalytic conversion of CO2 is the most widely adopted method for the conversion of CO2 to valuable products. Most of the thermocatalytic CO2 reactions are carried out at elevated temperatures, where catalyst deactivation due to the formation of coke is the main challenge, hindering the large-scale application of nanocatalysts for these reactions. Also, the formation of coke in these reactions due to the high temperature is another challenge. The formation of coke can also accelerate the sintering of the metal particles, where the carbon whiskers uproot the metal particles from the catalyst support. Consequently, the uprooted particles can easily be merged and sintered. Thus, these challenges are being solved via the engineering of the catalyst structure. For example, by using core–shell or hollow spheres, the metal nanoparticles are trapped or embedded in their structure, which prevents or lessen coke formation and metal sintering, resulting in improved stability, yield, selectivity, and efficiency of the processes.53
In photocatalytic CO2 conversion, semiconductor materials such as TiO2 and ZnO with large bandgaps (43 eV) are being used to harvest solar energy or artificial light from solar simulators to convert CO2 to other compounds such as CH3OH, CH4, and CO.54,55 This process can operate under mild conditions without introducing other external energies; however, the poor energy efficiency of the available methods, low product yields and selectivity, complexity and cost of available reactor systems, design challenges, and separation of the catalyst from the product are some of the main challenges associated with this method. These challenges are the main barriers for the commercial exploitation of photocatalytic CO2 conversion, which need to be solved. Accordingly, bandgap engineering of photocatalysts, changing the design of the reactor, integration of the used semiconductors with plasmonic materials, etc. are some of the ongoing works devoted to solving the challenges facing the adoption of this solar-powered process; however, its efficiency is still much lower than thermocatalytic CO2 conversion.53
The electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to fuels and chemical compounds powered by renewable energy resources is another method for the reduction of carbon emissions.56 In this electrocatalysis method, the electrode potential is used for water oxidation at the anode to produce electrons, which can be used to reduce CO2 at the cathode to a wide range of products including CO, CO, formic acid, methanol, methane, formaldehyde, ethanol, and ethylene. The product distribution can be adjusted according to the applied electrode potential and the type of electrocatalyst used. This method has several advantages over the thermocatalytic reduction of CO2. In contrast to the thermocatalytic method, electrochemical water splitting and CO2 hydrogenation can be concurrently carried out in a single process to produce chemical compounds at a lower pressure. Furthermore, the main advantages of the electrocatalysis setup used for this method are that it is compact, modular, and operates at near-ambient temperature and pressure; however, its high overpotential, low faradaic efficiency due to the competitive hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), poor energy efficiency, and poor selectivity are some of its main challenges, which should be solved before its large-scale application and industrial scale-up.57
2.2 Reaction pathways in thermocatalytic CO2 conversion
Thermocatalytic CO2 conversion can be subcategorized into hydrogenation and reforming (and/or reduction) routes. In the hydrogenation reaction, H2 is used to activate and convert CO2 to other products. In reforming reactions, CO2 is reduced to CO to produce other chemicals. These reactions can be summarized as follows:

RWGS. 
The reverse water–gas shift reaction (RWGS) describes the reaction of carbon dioxide and hydrogen to form carbon monoxide and steam. This reaction and its reverse process are common side reactions in many CO2 conversion processes. CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O|ΔH298 K = 41.2 kJ mol−1(1)


CO2 to methanol. 
The methanol synthesis reaction from CO2 is an equilibrium system. CO2 and CO hydrogenation (eqn (2) and (4)) are the main reactions linked with the water–gas shift reaction (eqn (2)), as follows:58 CO2 + 3H2 ↔ CH3OH + H2O|H298 K,5 MPa = −40.9 kJ mol−1(2) CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = 49.8 kJ mol−1(3) CO + 2H2 ↔ CH3OH|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = −90.7 kJ mol−1(4)
Other possible side reactions such as methanol decomposition can also occur, as follows: CH3OH ↔ 2H2 + CO|ΔH298 K = 91 kJ mol−1(5)


CO2 to DME. 
CO2 can be directly converted to dimethyl ether (DME) in a single process. This process uses a bifunctional catalyst consisting of methanol synthesis and methanol dehydration catalyst components. On this catalyst, methanol is initially produced from CO2. Then, the produced methanol is dehydrated to DME. The reactions of this process are as follows:59 CO2 + 3H2 ↔ CH3OH + H2O|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = −40.9 kJ mol−1(6) 2CH3OH ↔ CH3OCH3 + H2O|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = 256.6 kJ mol−1(7) CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = 49.8 kJ mol−1(8)


CO2 to higher alcohols (HAs). 
Higher alcohols (ethanol, propanol, butanol, pentanol, hexanol, and propanol) with large volumes can be used as chemical energy carriers and are considered some of the most promising products for large-scale CO2 conversion, according to the following overall reaction: nCO2 + (3n)H2 → CH3(CH2)n−1OH + (2n − 1)H2O(9)
Firstly, CO2 is converted to CO via the RWGS, after which it undergoes some tandem reactions with hydrogen to produce HAs. Then, the produced alcohols can be separated from water.60 3CO + 6H2 → CH3CH2CH2OH + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −407 kJ mol−1(10) 4CO + 8H2 → CH3(CH2)2CH2OH + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −558 kJ mol−1(11) 4CO + 8H2 → CH3(CH2)3CH2OH + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −710 kJ mol−1(12) 4CO + 8H2 → CH3(CH2)4CH2OH + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −862 kJ mol−1(13)


CO2 methanation. 
CO2 methanation (Sabatier reaction or SR) is an exothermic reaction that is thermodynamically feasible at lower temperatures; however, due to the inactive nature of CO2 to reach an acceptable reaction rate, a suitable catalyst is required. Accordingly, CO2 methanation reaction is typically performed between 200–400 °C. However, at this reaction temperature, other side reactions such as carbon formation (eqn (16)) and RWGS (eqn (18)) can also occur.61 CO2 + 4H2 ↔ CH4 + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −165 kJ mol−1(14)
Other possible side reactions that may also occur, as follows: CO + 3H2 ↔ CH4 + H2O|ΔH298 K = −206 kJ mol−1(15) CO2 + 2H2 ↔ C + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −90.1 kJ mol−1(16) CO2 + C ↔ 2CO|ΔH298 K = 172.4 kJ mol−1(17) CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O|ΔH298 K = 41.2 kJ mol−1(18) CO2 + CH4 ↔ 2CO + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = 247.3 kJ mol−1(19)


CO2 Fischer–Tropsch (CO2 FT) to hydrocarbons (HCs). 
In direct CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons, generally two main reactions occur in series (eqn (20) and (21)). The small amount of hydrocarbon formed by the direct hydrogenation of CO2 can be neglected.51 nCO2 + nH2 ↔ nCO + nH2O|ΔH298 K = 41 kJ mol−1(20) nCO + 2nH2 ↔ (–CH2–)n + nH2O|ΔH298 K = −166 kJ mol−1(21)
The other possible side reactions are as follows:62 CO +2H2 → –CH2– + H2O|ΔH298 K = −165.0 kJ mol−1(22) 2CO + H2 ↔ –CH2– + CO2|ΔH298 K = −204.7 kJ mol−1(23) CO + H2O ↔ H2 + CO2|ΔH298 K = −39.8 kJ mol−1(24) 3CO + H2 ↔ –CH2– + 2CO2|ΔH298 K = −244.5 kJ mol−1(25) CO2 + 3H2 ↔ –CH2– + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −125.2 kJ mol−1(26)


DRM. 
In this reaction, two major greenhouse gasses are consumed to produce syngas. However, given that DRM is performed at high temperatures, methane cracking (eqn (29)) and the Boudouard reaction (eqn (30)) can also occur, which causes carbon deposition and catalyst deactivation.63 CH4 + CO2 ↔ 2CO + 2H2|ΔH298 K = 247.3 kJ mol−1(27)
Potential side reactions are as follows: H2 + CO2 ↔ CO + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = 41 kJ mol−1(28) CH4 ↔ Cads + 2H2|ΔH298 K = 75 kJ mol−1(29) 2CO ↔ Cads + CO2|ΔH298 K = −172 kJ mol−1(30)


TRM. 
Tri-reforming of methane (TRM) is another method to convert CO2 to syngas. TRM consists of three main reactions, i.e., dry reforming of methane (DRM), steam reforming of methane (SRM), and partial oxidation of methane (POX), which occur simultaneously in a catalytic reactor, as follows:64
DRM: CH4 + CO2 ↔ 2CO + 2H2|ΔH298 K = 247.3 kJ mol−1(31)
SRM: CH4 + H2O ↔ CO + 3H2|ΔH298 K = 206.3 kJ mol−1(32)
POX: CH4 + 0.5O2 ↔ CO + 2H2|ΔH298 K = −35.6 kJ mol−1(33)
Due to the stability of the reactants, TRM is also carried out at high temperatures in the range of 700–900 °C. However, at this reaction temperature, a wide range of endothermic and exothermic side reactions such as RWGS reaction (eqn (1)), water–gas shift (WGS) reaction (eqn (24)), and methane cracking (eqn (29)) can also occur.


CO2 to fine/specialty chemicals. 
Carbon dioxide can also be converted to various value-added fine/specialty chemicals such as epoxides (ethylene oxide, epoxy butene, and epoxy propylbenzene), ethers, aldehydes/ketones, and carboxylic acids. Some of these overall general reactions are as follows:60
Ethers: nCO2 + 3nH2 ↔ CnH2n+2O + (2n − 1)H2O(34)
Aldehydes/ketones: nCO2 + (3n − 1)H2 ↔ CnH2nO + (2n − 1)H2O(35)
Carboxylic acids: nCO2 + (3n − 2)H2 ↔ CH3(CH2)n−2COOH + (2n − 2)H2O(36)

2.3 Products by thermocatalytic CO2 reactions
As mentioned above, several reactions are associated with thermocatalytic CO2 utilization, which include SR, RWGS, CO2-to-MeOH, DRM, TRM, and CO2 FT/MFT. Among them, RWGS, DRM, and TRM are the chief CO2 reforming pathways to produce syngas, while SR, CO2-to-MeOH, and CO2 FT/MFT are the CO2 hydrogenation pathways to produce C1 and C2+ hydrocarbons. In all cases, the required hydrogen for the CO2 hydrogenation reactions should be obtained from various renewable resources (e.g., biomass gasification, wind power, geothermal energy and solar water-splitting) or from industrial waste heat to alleviate environmental concerns, although this still may not be economical. Catalytic CO2 conversion can afford a range of products spanning from light gas-phase species (such as CO, CH4, and CH3OH) to heavy wax-like residues (such as paraffins), which are also categorized as C1 and C2+ chemicals. C1 products include carbon monoxide (CO), methane (CH4), and methanol (CH3OH), while C2+ products refer to higher alcohols, petrochemicals, and hydrocarbon fuels. In the following section, each subfield will be explained further.

Carbon monoxide (CO). 
Carbon monoxide (CO) is produced via partial CO2 reduction through the well-known endothermic RWGS reaction at medium temperature (450–700 °C). Also, CO is one of the main products of syngas synthesis from CO2 and CH4 (i.e., DRM reaction) at elevated temperature. The RWGS is a promising reaction with high potential for large-scale CO2 conversion to CO and co-production of renewable hydrogen (H2).24 Coupling with other processes, for example, RWGS-chemical looping (RWGS-CL) method, is considered to be even more viable than the conventional RWGS in transforming CO2 to CO over oxygen-deficient catalytic perovskite materials (represented in the form of ABO3−δ).65,66 Furthermore, silica-supported perovskite oxides demonstrate an excellent opportunity for enhanced CO2 conversion and large-scale implementation by RWGS-CL.67 With better improved catalysts and processes, C1 chemicals can undergo C1 catalysis to synthesize value-added products (hydrocarbons and oxygenated products). Accordingly, CO2 and/or CO-derived CO2 can also be consumed directly in the form of syngas feedstock (CO + H2) through the industrially relevant Fischer–Tropsch (FT) reaction to produce linear paraffins and α-olefins.68


Methane (CH4). 
As one of the C1 chemicals, methane (CH4) is exothermically produced from CO2 hydrogenation reaction or CO2 methanation, which is known as the Sabatier reaction, SR, and developed in 1902.52 In the case of CO2 methanation, only wall-cooled fixed-bed reactors have been commercialized thus far.6 However, a multichannel mini-reactor showing a superior performance compared to the fixed-bed reactor was reported recently.69 SR normally proceeds via either an associative or dissociative mechanistic scheme.70 The associative pathway involves the formation of oxygenate intermediates (i.e., CO3, HCO3, HCOO, CHOOH, H2CO, and H3CO) before methane is produced. The dissociative pathway is mainly involved in CO formation, which transforms into carbonyl intermediates and their further hydrogenation leads to the formation of methane. Regardless of the pathway, CO and formate species are reported as the main detected intermediates in the reaction.22 Shape-defined and highly porous silica materials carefully supported with tailored Ni nanoparticles have been found to propel this reaction at a good rate.71,72 CO2 methanation has attracted attention for the production of synthetic natural gas (SNG), paving the way for novel and ambitious power-to-gas (P2G) processes for chemical energy storage, which is aimed at reducing emissions.52,73 Furthermore, besides the utilization of methane as an energy vector as SNG, it is also consumed as an auxiliary C1 feedstock together with CO2 abatement and utilization in the DRM reaction to produce syngas, in which CO2 also functions as a soft oxidant.
Two green and effective pathways for direct methane utilization with the help of CO2 are dry-reforming of methane (DRM) and tri-reforming of methane (TRM).74 The DRM is an endothermic reaction, occurring at high temperatures (with 600 °C being industrially preferable), at which catalysts are prone to sintering and coking. However, the core disparity between the DRM and TRM is the presence of water vapor and oxygen as additional reactants in the latter.75


Methanol (CH3OH). 
Methanol (CH3OH, MeOH), which is known as an attractive energy vector and hydrogen carrier (for use in liquid organic hydrogen carrier or LOHC technology),76 is normally synthesized via the pressurized hydrogenation of CO2.77 The synthesis of methanol is extensively and actively being researched employing versatile and conventional copper-based catalysts and other novel catalyst systems (e.g., precious metal oxides), especially in recent years.46,78–95 As a zero-emission liquid organic hydrogen carrier (LOHC), methanol converted from CO2 is also currently regarded as one of important C1 catalysis pathways for CO2 utilization, requiring at-least three-fold molar ratio of hydrogen to CO2 at low-to-medium temperature (200–350 °C) and elevated pressure (20–50 bar).


C2+ hydrocarbons (olefins and paraffins) and alcohols. 
Normally, C2+ products are produced via C1 catalysis. C1 catalysis, referring to the use of C1-based compounds to produce C2+ hydrocarbons and oxygenates, has had tremendous advances.26 For example, a wide range of C2+ compounds including higher alcohols (ethanol, propanol, etc.), lower olefins (ethylene, propylene and butylene, C2=–C4=), liquefied petroleum gas (LPG, C30–C40), gasoline (C5–C11), and aromatics can now be produced by C1 catalysis.96 Compared to CO2 with thermodynamic stability, CO is highly reactive, and thus preferable for use in the well-established Fischer–Tropsch (FT) reaction. However, due to environmental concerns and the cost of the operation, it is necessary to forgo CO utilization and shift to CO2 instead. Considering CO2 utilization, it still needs to be reduced to CO before it can be converted into other intermediates and products. This pathway is known as the modified Fischer–Tropsch (MFT or FT*) reaction, which normally proceeds via syngas route.19 Through either the FT or FT* pathway, the C–C coupling between CHx monomers leads to the propagation of the carbon chain, resulting in the formation of CnHm intermediates with different carbon numbers. Chain growth competes with chain termination by hydrogenation, hydrogen abstraction, or insertion of non-dissociatively adsorbed CO to produce paraffins, olefins, or oxygenates as the final products, respectively.97 The indirect production of C2+ hydrocarbons can also occur via methanol synthesis and subsequent methanol-to-hydrocarbon (MTH) pathways including methanol-to-olefin (MTO).

2.4 Thermodynamics and mechanisms of thermocatalytic CO2 reactions
A major challenge in the conversion of CO2 to C1 and C2+ products is the equilibrium constraint, which necessitates operation at specific temperature-pressure conditions, and thus there is a classic thermodynamic–kinetic tradeoff. For instance, in the case of the RWGS, the methanation side reaction is dominant at low temperatures below 600 °C, whereas for the CO2-to-MeOH process, higher pressure results in an increased yield. These challenges can be addressed by analyzing the thermodynamic equilibrium curves or models of product distribution for each of these reactions, as shown in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  Thermodynamic equilibrium at various temperatures for (a) product composition in RWGS reaction at 1 bar of molar H2/CO2 (inlet ratio of 3:1), (b) conversion–selectivity values for CO2-to-MeOH pathway at various pressures, and (c) CO2/CH4 conversion and H2/CO (syngas) ratio in DRM reaction at 1 bar of molar CH4/CO2 (inlet ratio of 1:1). (d) Anderson–Schulz–Flory (ASF) model for product distribution through FT/MFT pathways. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 98 Copyright 2013, Wiley, (b) ref. 10 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry, (c and d) ref. 96 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
According to the RWGS thermodynamic equilibrium composition curve (Fig. 1a), at a pressure of 1 bar, if the target is maximizing the CO and H2 production, 700 °C is the preferable temperature to perform the reaction, whereas if the RWGS is considered as a parasitic reaction producing CO, the reaction temperature should be lower than 500 °C.98 At higher reaction pressures, the RWGS becomes activated at lower temperatures. At the same temperature of 150 °C, elevated pressure can significantly shift the reaction kinetics towards the thermodynamic limitation for achieving higher CO2 conversion, while completely stopping the RWGS. However, in the case, the paramount challenge is to find catalysts that are active at lower temperatures.
Higher reaction pressures can enhance the yield of CO2-to-MeOH at certain pressures (e.g., 30–50 bar). However, this is not favorable at higher temperatures (Fig. 1b).10 For example, at a pressure of 10 bar and temperature of 150 °C, where the RWGS is still sluggish, higher methanol selectivity is achievable but at the expense of conversion. It is noteworthy that if high methanol selectivity is desired for working temperatures above 300 °C, increasing the working pressure only exacerbates the difficulty of the reaction operation but will not improve the methanol production. It has been suggested that in situ water sorption is a solution to overcome the equilibrium barriers in the CO2-to-MeOH process and can increase the yield up to 130% of the theoretical limit and higher.99
In comparison, the DRM reaction is not rigorous in terms of thermodynamic condition given that atmospheric pressure is sufficient for its completion in the medium to high temperature range, given that the reactants and products have the same stoichiometry. Obviously, the higher the temperature, the better the conversion (Fig. 1c). However, considering syngas production as the main objective, the reaction performance can be hindered by the occurrence of coking at high temperatures, even if both reactants are completely used up. Therefore, the preferred reaction condition is 1 bar and 600 °C, which is still not the usual practice, according to literature reports.
The Anderson–Schulz–Flory (ASF) model is unanimously the most accepted model for hydrocarbon distribution from either CO or CO2 hydrogenation (Fig. 1d) based on the chain growth probability.96 C2–C4 hydrocarbons are the most desirable products from the Fischer–Tropsch to olefin, so-called FTO, process, which include lower olefins (C2=–C4=, ethylene, propylene and butylene) and paraffins (C20–C40, ethane, propane, and butane). Based on the ASF model, the maximum 56.7% of the FTO products can be C2–C4 hydrocarbons.100
The thermodynamic equilibrium was also analyzed in detail for both gas-phase and vapor–liquid conditions for the production of methanol, dimethyl ether (DME) and higher alcohols from CO2 hydrogenation.101 At higher temperatures, the catalytic turnover frequency (TOF) generally increases and the kinetics improves, but the equilibrium CO2 conversion decreases, reaching approximately 30% at 300 °C under the typical conditions of 50 bar and H2/CO2 ratio of 3 (Fig. 2a). Alternatively, full conversion of CO2 can be achieved at 150 °C under high pressures. However, a pressure of 50 bar at this temperature will typically cause water to be condensed out (dashed lines), likely causing a high and undesirable pressure drop in the reactor, causing hydrodynamic issues associated with trickle-bed-type reactors. Hence, most catalytic studies are performed in fully gas-phase mode. A combination of kinetic and thermodynamic modeling showed that for CO + CO2 hydrogenation to methanol (with CO:CO2 ratio close to 1 at 50 bar), the kinetic model was close to the thermodynamic model above 250 °C under isothermal conditions, suggesting that the thermodynamic limits start to become significant above this temperature.102 Similar thermodynamic studies have also been reported for CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons.103,104
 Fig. 2  Effect of pressure on (a) CO2 conversion and (b) selectivity to DME and methanol at H2/CO2 ratio of 3. Effect of H2/CO2 ratio at 50 bar on (c) CO2 conversion and (d) methanol selectivity. Solid lines indicate gas–liquid thermodynamics, while dashed lines represent gas-phase thermodynamics. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
Additionally, two methanol molecules can condense to form a DME compound and one water molecule as the by-product, without affecting the overall conversion given that the dehydration is stoichiometric 2:2. At equilibrium, DME formation is preferred over methanol at lower temperatures and higher pressures (Fig. 2b). However, it should be noted that DME formation typically requires a catalyst with acid sites to catalyze the dehydration reaction.
In contrast to changing the temperature, which causes a thermodynamic–kinetic tradeoff, increasing either the pressure (Fig. 2a and b) or H2/CO2 ratio (Fig. 2c and d) always increases both the CO2 conversion and DME/methanol selectivity. Interestingly, a minimum point in conversion is observed at 250–275 °C at 50 bar at various H2/CO2 ratios above 1 (Fig. 2c). However, running the reaction at a high H2/CO2 of 10 also significantly increases the real-world reactor operation cost given that some 300% excess of H2 has to be separated, compressed and recycled back into the reactant stream.
In addition, this study also examined ethanol production from CO2 hydrogenation. With a simulated product mixture of methanol, ethanol and CO, no methanol was observed and over 90% ethanol selectivity was predicted at 300 °C and below, with CO as the only other carbon product. Furthermore, the equilibrium gas-phase CO2 conversion is significantly higher at higher temperatures, at about 65% at 350 °C or 90% at 225 °C (50 bar), compared to less than 45% in the case of DME/methanol production. Intuitively, this is because ethanol production involves C–C coupling, which decreases the product stoichiometry in the reaction, thereby pushing forward the conversion of CO2 as the pressure increases.
Multiple studies have attempted to “overcome” the thermodynamic limits of CO2 hydrogenation under conventional conditions, which is a bit of a misnomer given that the thermodynamic limits cannot be physically exceeded. Rather, these studies push the CO2 reaction forward using Le Chatelier's principle by removing the main side-product of water. These studies mainly target CO2 to hydrocarbon or CO reactions, given that water can be more readily separated from hydrocarbons than alcohols. A thermodynamic study on water sorption for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol showed that the methanol yield could be more than doubled (in the range of 220–270 °C and 50–70 bar) in a sorption-enhanced process compared to direct hydrogenation, although it also resulted in a decrease in methanol selectivity and corresponding increase in CO selectivity.99 Water removal can also be done in situ on the catalyst bed using hydrophilic membranes, whereby a blend of zeolites and/or polymers are used to withstand the moderate temperatures and pressures of CO2 hydrogenation.105,106 A CO2-to-hydrocarbon reactor with H-SOD membrane was modelled and showed that an increase in sweep gas ratio and pressure ratio increases the total hydrocarbon yield, in particular ethylene and ethane, but decreases the propylene and butylene yields.107 However, to-date, we have not been able to find any real-world studies using membrane reactors with in situ water removal for CO2 hydrogenation, which is likely due to the challenging reaction conditions.
Lastly, water can also be removed ex situ in a multi-pass fashion with a series of packed bed reactors. This can be done by condensing the water in between each reactor. This was shown in one study for CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons using a combination of gas–liquid separators and liquid–liquid separators, where the latter were used to separate organic and aqueous phases.108 Using three reactors in series at moderate conditions of 300–320 °C and 10 bar (with H2/CO2 ratio = 4/1), one reactor could only reach 48% CO2 conversion, while three reactors could reach a total of 89% conversion. This configuration of series reactors also has the advantage of increasing the product yield without requiring expensive recycle processes for unreacted compounds.
2.5 Coupling thermocatalytic CO2 conversion reactions with other chemical reactions and physical mechanisms

Coupling with different chemical reactions. 
Due to the intrinsic thermodynamic limits of the single CO2 conversion reaction at low temperatures, it can be coupled with other reactions. As inferred from Fig. 1, the RWGS reaction to CO can be coupled with the FT reaction to form hydrocarbons, and the methanol synthesis pathway can also be combined with the MTH reaction to form hydrocarbons. According to Le Chatelier's principle, the equilibrium of the CO2 conversion reaction can be pushed forward by the second reaction occurring in tandem.
The other coupled reactions with CO2 conversion that are less studied include DFT studies of methanol carbonylation to acetic acid coupled with CO2-to-MeOH,109 selective reduction of nitric oxide in chemical looping coupled with DRM110 and methane partial oxidation coupled with DRM (i.e., TRM).110
Beyond coupling with other reactions, the excess heat from the exothermic reactions of CO2 to methanol or hydrocarbons can be recovered as heat or steam to save energy and increase the process efficiency in a large-scale plant. The use of CO2 as a soft oxidant in the newly emerged oxidative alkane dehydrogenation coupled with chemical looping is another meaningful application for coupling CO2 with chemical reactions.111


Coupling with physical mechanisms such as membrane. 
Due to the intrinsic thermodynamic limits of many CO2 conversion reactions, removing one of the products can push the reaction conversion forward and break the thermodynamic limitations. As an example, the CO2 hydrogenation to methanol, which is an effective way to convert CO2 to value-added products, is strictly limited by the thermodynamic equilibrium. Removing the by-product of water from the reaction environment can overcome the limitation of this reaction and increase the methanol yield and CO2 conversion.112 As another example, the continuous removal of produced steam via a zeolitic membrane reactor (Cu–ZnO–Pt@HZSM-5) from CO2 hydrogenation to dimethyl ether (DME) can break the limitation of thermodynamic equilibrium and increase the CO2 conversion from 24.9% to 41.1% and DME selectivity from 53.7% to 100% while preventing steam-induced catalyst degradation.113 In general, most CO2 hydrogenation reactions are controlled by thermodynamic equilibrium, and water is a common by-product. Removing water from the reaction can break the thermodynamic equilibrium and also deters the catalyst deactivation caused by steam.114
From an engineering perspective, it will be more efficient to use the removed product from the reaction environment in another reaction happening on another site. Using a membrane reactor can help couple reactions in a very efficient way. One of the produced products (e.g., H2) of the reaction will be removed by the membrane and consumed in the other reaction happening at the other side of the membrane, creating a large potential difference across the membrane and driving both reactions forward. Coupling reactions are a category of process intensification (PI) and besides breaking the thermodynamic limitations, have other benefits such as reduction in equipment size, lower capital cost, intrinsic safety improvement, and reducing environmental effects.115
To further elaborate on the physical coupling mechanism for process intensification, the integration of CO2 methanation with a dehydrogenation reaction (e.g., propane dehydrogenation or cyclohexane dehydrogenation) in a membrane reactor can be exemplified.116,117 The main limitation of CO2 methanation is the supply of pure hydrogen and hot-spot formation due to the exothermic nature of the onsite reaction. Alternatively, dehydrogenation is an endothermic equilibrium-limited reaction that produces hydrogen. Thus, by integrating these two reactions in a membrane reactor, a synergistic effect on the performance of both processes can be attained. The hydrogen produced at the dehydrogenation side will permeate through the membrane and can be consumed at the methanation side. This coupling has substantial benefits for the methanation reaction including eliminating hydrogen production unit from fossil fuels, omitting the required energy for compressing and transporting the hydrogen, and eliminating equipment and utility costs for hydrogen separation. Moreover, due to the uniform hydrogen supply across the catalyst bed by the membrane, the temperature for CO2 methanation will be controlled, thus reducing the hotspot formation in this exothermic reaction.117 Moreover, the produced heat at the methanation side will be transferred to the dehydrogenation reaction, causing heat balance and making the reaction temperature uniform at both sides of the membrane reactor. Similarly, coupling an endothermic dehydrogenation reaction with the exothermic Fischer–Tropsch reaction in a heat exchanger membrane reactor has also been proposed as an efficient PI method to increase the selectivity and yield of the produced gasoline.118

3 Design of advanced nanocatalysts for thermocatalytic CO2 conversion
Obviously, choosing a catalyst for a reaction needs thoughtful considerations in terms of adjusting catalytically active sites, composition, promoter, structure, and morphology, among others. How to carefully constrain all these features has been succinctly projected in a recent survey.119 Building on the hierarchy concepts for the design and synthesis of nanocatalysts, critical parameters and commensurate factors should be thoroughly considered including support type, location and type of catalytically active sites, addition of promoter, and hierarchical facade of overall assemblage and structural morphology. In this section, we aim to review the fabrication and application of various types of catalysts toward thermal CO2 conversion, namely encapsulated/supported metal nanocatalysts, core–shell nanocatalysts, hollow nanocatalysts, single-atom catalysts and integrated nanocatalysts. By reviewing the advantages and limitations of these catalysts, we can conclude on some design principles and guidelines in developing new catalysts for better CO2 conversion and utilization.
3.1 Encapsulated/supported nanocatalysts
Encapsulated or supported nanocatalysts are arguably one of the most explored catalyst types for thermal CO2 conversion.120 These catalysts typically consist of an active metal phase (single metal or alloys) supported or encapsulated by an oxide support. A broad range of metals, including both precious metals (e.g., Pt, Pd, Rh, Ag, Au, Ru, and Ir),121–126 rare-earth metals (e.g., Ce, La, Y, Eu, Gd, and Er), group 3A metals (e.g., Al, In, and Ga),83,127–132 and transition metals (e.g., Cu, Zn, Ni, Fe, and Co)91,133–138 has been found to be active for the conversion of CO2 toward different products. The support materials can be classified as porous supports (e.g., MCM-41, SBA-15, and γ-Al2O3) and nonporous supports (e.g., CeO2, ZrO2, and TiO2).27,139–142
In general, the majority of the encapsulated/supported nanocatalysts for the thermal conversion of CO2 to C1 products, including CO, CH4 and methanol, obey a combined pathway of RWGS and CO hydrogenation or the formate pathway. The reactive intermediates, and hence the products selectivities, are collectively determined by the active sites, support material and reaction conditions. For example, the synthesis of methanol usually requires high pressure and moderate temperature, while reactions at high temperatures usually favor the formation of CH4 or CO, depending on the catalyst composition. By employing different combinations of metals and support materials, the reactant/intermediate bound strength and their reaction/activation energies can be tuned to produce the desired products. When a reducible metal–oxide support is used with metal nanoparticles loaded on its surface, the reducibility of the support can significantly influence the catalyst activity and the metal/oxide interface plays a critical role in determining the catalyst activity and product selectivity.17 In particular, CeO2- or ZrO2-supported catalysts are most common examples in this category. At the same metal loading, these reducible supports usually yield better performances compared to irreducible supports such as Al2O3 and SiO2.143–146 The advantage of using an Al2O3 or SiO2 support is based on the fact that it is much easier to achieve a porous structure using this type of irreducible support. When the active metals are encapsulated in these porous supports, there is a significant increase in the travelling pathway and retention time of the reactants, leading to higher reactant conversion when mass transport limitations are critical.93,147
Although most of the encapsulated/supported catalysts have been developed for C1 products, progress has been achieved in converting CO2 directly to hydrocarbons.148,149 In this regard, Fe is the most studied metal for the direct hydrogenation of CO2 to hydrocarbons and the reaction is carried out in a way similar to the Fischer–Tropsch process with CO replaced by CO2.136,150–152 However, it is still very difficult to achieve a desirable product yield with a single active phase (e.g., nanoparticles of Fe or its alloys) due to the complex reaction/intermediate network and the fact that these Fe-based catalysts are still in their initial phase of development.
3.2 Core–shell nanocatalysts
Core–shell nanocatalysts typically consist of a functional core covered with another layer of shell material.153 The addition of a coating shell can help prevent the aggregation of the catalytic nanoparticles, and hence their deactivation.154 Especially in the case of thermal CO2 conversion, the formation and deposition of carbon during the FT reaction and dry reforming reaction are common problems, which poisons to catalyst.136,155 Accordingly, the addition of a coating shell can significantly reduce the deposition of carbon and provide better catalyst stability.156 Depending on the structure and composition of the coating shell, unique advantages can be obtained under certain circumstances. As previously discussed, the introduction of porosity can increase the reactant retention time and help to improve the overall conversion. In the case of nonporous catalysts, coating with a layer of porous shell can help in improving the catalyst performance. Shells with precisely engineered pore structure and pore size can also provide unique product selectivity, especially for CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons, where long chain hydrocarbons with a large molecular size cannot escape from the core–shell catalysts.157,158 The addition of a shell made with catalytically active components can also help to improve the catalytic performance. Firstly, the shell material can be used as a secondary catalyst for tandem reactions, as commonly adopted for CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons. The conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbons over tandem catalysts, with CO or methanol as an intermediate product, has yielded promising results given that the tandem approach allows better control over product selectivity compared to the simpler Fe-catalyzed CO2-FT process.149,159 The core–shell nanocatalysts used for these tandem reactions usually consist of a core material responsible for the conversion of CO2 to the intermediate (CO or methanol) and a shell material responsible for the conversion of the intermediate to hydrocarbons.160 Secondly, the addition of catalytically active shell components can be used for the modification of the local catalytic environment in the core–shell catalysts.158 For CO2 hydrogenation to C1 or C2+ products, in most cases, having CO in the feed stream can improve the catalytic performance for many catalysts.161,162 Consequently, by adding a shell that is active for CO2 hydrogenation to CO, we can produce a localized environment with an enriched CO concentration, and hence achieve better product yields.
3.3 Hollow nanocatalysts
Hollow catalysts are defined as catalysts with internal cavities, which can be viewed as a special variation of encapsulated/supported catalysts.163 Owing to the rapid growth in the synthesis of hollow functional materials over the past few decades, numerous synthetic protocols have been developed with and without templates to produce hollow materials with different compositions.164–168 Additional functionalization and/or further modification of these hollow materials with various active metals has also been extensively studied in the literature.80,169–171 With these powerful techniques at hand, it is possible to transform many encapsulated/supported catalysts to the corresponding hollow counterparts without any significant change in their composition.
The endowment of a hollow morphology to conventional encapsulated/supported catalysts can be beneficial for thermal CO2 conversion in the following aspects. Firstly, catalysts supported on hollow materials give better support utilization over conventional supported catalysts.172,173 In the case of the CO2 hydrogenation, for instance, the catalyst performance is largely dependent on the metal/oxide interface, which implies that the inner part of support bulk does not interact with the loaded metal nanoparticles, and hence does not contribute to the actual catalyst performance. From this point of view, the supported catalysts with hollow support morphology removes the catalytically inactive and non-interacting interior bulk phase, achieving better material utilization of the support. Secondly, catalysts with active metals encapsulated in hollow shells can provide shorter and more uniform and highly accessible paths, resulting in better catalyst reactivity and selectivity.80,174 For instance, the encapsulation of active catalytic sites such as NPs with hollow shells results in intensified reactant accumulation around the catalyst sites, which is beneficial for the conversion of the reactants. In comparison, metal nanoparticles or clusters encapsulated deeply inside conventional supports will face a much steeper concentration gradient of reactants, and hence deteriorate their catalytic functionality because they are poorly accessible.
3.4 Single-atom catalysts (SACs)
In the field of heterogeneous catalysis, low-coordinated metal atoms usually contribute most to the observed catalyst activity.175,176 Amongst them, single-atom catalysts (SACs), which was comprised of highly dispersed metal atoms (or specifically ions) with atomically-defined properties and low metal concentration on various supports play a major role in cleanly unveiling the underlying science involved in chemical reactions arising from the metal–support interface and expediting their kinetics.177 When metals are anchored as single atoms, highest possible metal utilization could be achieved. The common forms of SACs are metals supported on metal oxides or nitrogen-doped carbon-based materials.177–179 In the case of thermal CO2 conversion, the metal–support interface also exerts a key impact on the reactivity and selectivity.17,143,180 Thus, a research focus is the synthesis of atomically dispersed nanoparticles with a particle size of less than 1 nm, eventually leading to the exciting discovery of single-atom catalysts suitable for thermocatalytic CO2 transformation. Due to the drastic change in the surface free energy of SACs with a decrease in metal particle size, the aggregation of metal atoms is thermodynamically favored. Thus, SACs used for thermal CO2 conversion usually operate at a relatively low temperature to prevent their undesirable aggregation and deactivation.181,182 One particular example of a silica-based SAC for thermal CO2 conversion at low temperature was reported recently.183 Generally, strong metal–support interaction is required to prevent the aggregation of SACs, and in many cases, the maximum metal loading is limited to prevent formation of nanoparticles.184–186
3.5 Integrated nanocatalysts (INCs)
The extensive research works demonstrated previously have provided numerous catalysts with different compositions, morphologies, and dimensions toward thermal CO2 conversion applications. Considering all these important factors, integrated nanocatalysts (INCs) aim to bridge the advantages of different catalysts via various design and integration strategies to achieve even better catalytic performances, though they may be compositionally and structurally complex.172,187
Concerning the industrial application of thermal CO2 conversion, it should be reiterated that the reports in the literature are usually only wet-chemistry based lab-scale proof-of-concepts.27,140,141,160 The scaling-up from lab-scale to pilot plant, and eventually to industrial scale still requires much research effort. Accordingly, in particular for gas-phase reactions, the further integration of nanocatalysts toward the fabrication of macroscopic supracatalysts is also critical. To achieve this goal, new synthetic and integrative strategies are required to scale up the production of nanocatalysts to sizes comparable to that of current commercial catalysts.80,172
4 Thermocatalytic CO2 conversion catalyzed by siliceous matter
4.1 Merits, synthesis methods, and utilization of siliceous (silica/silicate) materials in CO2 conversion reactions

Merits. 
The popularity of solid siliceous matter (or silica-based nanomaterials) for many heterogeneous catalysis applications including gas-phase CO2 conversion is ascribed to the fact that silicon is their major structure-constituent element and an essential building block.188 Furthermore, the low-cost and naturally abundant silicon (Si) element can be widely used for large-scale applications, hence attracting significant attention. Solid siliceous materials, mainly in the form of silica (SiO2) and silicates, are vastly regarded as popular supports or precursors for the preparation of catalysts in the field of heterogeneous catalysis. As is known, the principle of heterogeneous catalysis is that a chemical reaction occurs at the solid–gas or solid–liquid interface.189 Therefore, features of the solid phase can have a significant effect on the catalytic performance. Silica/silicate-based materials with hierarchical porosity (mesoporous and microporous) are suitable as catalytic materials owing to their merits including thermal stability, chemical inertness, low cost, ease of synthesis and preparation, non-toxicity, high surface area (up to 1000 m2 g−1), tunable pore size (2–50 nm), large pore volume, controllable pore geometries, and manipulatable morphology.190–192 In particular, hierarchical siliceous materials hold a prominent position as effective neutral supports in essential applications. One of these applications is heterogeneous thermocatalytic CO2 conversion in both the gas-phase and liquid-phase, which has been a hot research topic in the past two decades and is gaining significant research momentum nowadays.


Synthesis methods. 
The protocols for the synthesis of siliceous materials can be categorized into bottom-up and top-down approaches.193 The bottom-up approaches usually start with molecular precursors to obtain well-defined nanostructures with a high atom economy. A typical example is the Stöber process to fabricate monodisperse silica spheres. The co-precipitation of several silane and metal precursors can generate an integrated siliceous-organometallic phase. Hard or soft templates are often involved in the generation of nanostructures such as mesopores during the synthesis. Other bottom-up methods include spray drying and flame spray pyrolysis. In contrast, top-down approaches start from primary siliceous matter such as silica gel or nanospheres. By etching the original silica substrate into monomers, followed by a templated polycondensation, mesoporous silica adopting the original particle contour can be prepared.194 By performing identical dissolution–regrowth processes together with the involvement of a structure-directing agent, other classes of porous catalysts or substrates such as zeolites can be obtained.195 Precipitation, encapsulation, self-assembly, co-assembly, infusion, immobilization–encapsulation, and deposition–precipitation are commonly employed for loading or embedding various active phase metals during or after the synthesis stage of siliceous materials.193
In transitioning from the utilization of conventional catalytic structures to advanced materials, the controlled synthesis of siliceous materials can be executed morphologically, architecturally, atomically, and structurally (Scheme 2) by virtue of the advanced catalyst design techniques explained in the previous section.
 Scheme 2  Schematic overview of four conceivable types (conventional, morphology-defined, atomically-defined, and structurally-defined) of nanocatalysts based on siliceous matter containing essential catalytic metals for catalytic CO2 conversion pathways. Inset figures are reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: ref. 93 Copyright 2021, Wiley. Ref. 147 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. Ref. 89 Copyright 2020, Nature. Ref. 196 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Utilization of siliceous materials in CO2 conversion reactions. 
Generally, the most exploited catalysts for a wide range of heterogeneous catalysis are stalled at using conventional supported catalysts with a focus on altering the active sites or adding promoters. In recent years, the investigation on the morphological nuances of catalytic supports has gained significant attention, wherein nanoreactors with different focal features, hollow nanostructures, and multi-shelled composites with or without centric core and/or yolk nanoparticles are attracting the most research interest. In all the mentioned cases, the material composition can be altered facilely, spanning from carbonaceous to siliceous nature and single-phase metallic to multi-phase oxide nature. Thus, in the case of silica/silicate-based materials, Scheme 2 schematically classifies siliceous materials into four essential categories, namely, conventional, morphology-defined, structurally-defined, and atomically-defined derivatives. This scheme also specifies some general reactions frequently reported using this class of siliceous-based catalysts. In the following sections of the current review, we intensively expand the scientific aspects of some studies in which CO2 utilization/conversion was carried out using siliceous-based (i.e., silica/silicate-based) catalysts, where the presence of the silica or silicate substrate triggered a meaningful difference in the reaction performance.

Scheme 2 depicts the important catalytic CO2 conversion reactions together with versatile siliceous derivatives, while Table 1 lists the common silica/silicate-based catalyst structures and operating conditions for various CO2 conversion pathways. Among the many silica-based catalysts, for the SR reaction, MCM-41, mesostructured silica nanoparticles (MSN), and bicontinuous lamellar silica (KCC-1) have been reported as suitable supports for high-performance catalysts.197–199 For both the DRM and TRM, many highly active silica-based catalysts have also been reported.200–202 Considering copper as a well-known and inexpensive catalytically active element for the CO2-to-MeOH reaction on an industrial scale,91 a number of successful siliceous-based catalyst systems containing copper or other elements has also been reported for the synthesis of methanol.82,92–95
Table 1 Literature data on different silica-based catalysts for different catalytic CO2 conversion routes




Reaction
Catalyst, ref.

T (°C), P (bar)
Reaction
Catalyst, ref.

T (°C), P (bar)




SR
1.6%Ru@mSiO2-A206
400, 1
DRM
Ni–SiO2@CeO2 (ref. 203)
750, 1


Ni/m-SiO2 (m: microspheres)207
400, 1
Ni/CeO2–SiO2 (ref. 208)
750, 1


5 wt.%Ni-MCM-41 (ref. 199)
400, 1
Ni@SiO2 (ref. 204)
750, 1


70 wt% NiO/SBA-15 (ref. 198)
400, 1
Ni@Ni–SiO2 yolk–shell209
800, 1


Ni/MSN (mesostructured silica nanoparticle)197
400, 1
Ni@SiO2 nanocapsule210
700, 1


15%Ni/MCM-41 (ref. 211)
250, 1
SiO2@Ni@SiO2 multicore–shell212
800, 1


3D networked Ni-phyllosilicate213
250, 1
Ni/SBA15-EG214
800, 1


ZnCoSiOx-0h hollow nanoreactor215
330, 2
Ni/SBA16 Ce-doped202
700, 1


Ni/3D-SBA-15 (ref. 213)
250, 1
Ni/SiO2@SiO2 (ref. 201)
800, 1


RWGS
0.3% Fe/SiO2 (ref. 216)
600, 1
Ni–SiO2 (10% Ni)217
800, 1


10% Cu/SiO2 (ref. 216)
600, 1
Ni@SiO2 (ref. 218)
750, 1


Cu–Fe/SiO2 (Cu/Fe = 10:0.3)216
600, 1
Ni/SiO2 nanofiber219
700, 1


Cu–Fe/SiO2 (Cu/Fe = 10:0.8)216
750, 1
Ni@SiO2 core–shell (14.6% Ni)220
750, 1


(1 wt% NiO/CeO2)/50% wt% SBA-15 (ref. 221)
750, 1
Ni@SiO2 core–shell (6.1% Ni)220
750, 1


(3 wt% NiO/CeO2)/50 wt% SBA-15 (ref. 221)
750, 1
Pt–NiCe@SiO2 SAC183
500, 1


SiO2@Pt147
320, 30
TRM
NiCe@SiO2 (ref. 222)
750, 1


SiO2@Pt@mSiO2 (ref. 147)
320, 30
Ni@SiO2 & Ni/zeolite L200
750 or 550, 1


ZIF-67@mSiO2 (CSN) maze-like nanoreactor147
320, 1
Ni/SBA-15 (ref. 223)
800, 1


1.6%Ru@mSiO2-N206
400, 1
Ni/SBA-15@400 (ref. 224)
800, 1


2.7%Ru@mSiO2-N206
400, 1
Ni–SiO2 (ref. 225)
750, 5 or 10


Pt@mSiO2 (28 nm)226
400, 1
FT, MFT
Fe/hsZSM-5 (ref. 136)
370, 20


Pt@mSiO2 (66 nm)226
400, 1
Fe@h-ZSM5 (ref. 136)
370, 20


ZnCoSiOx-12h hollow nanoreactor215
350, 2
FeMnK/hsZSM-5 (ref. 227)
280, 5


NiCo@SiO2 yolk–shell nanoreactor228
350 & 700, 1
Co@SiO2 (ref. 229)
210, 20


CO2-to-MeOH
CuO/ZnO/ZrO2@SBA-15 (ref. 82)
250, 30
Fe/SiO2 (ref. 230)
220, 10


Cu@m-SiO2 core–shell92
250, 30
Co/SBA-15 & Co/SiO2 (ref. 231)
190, 1


Cu–ZnO@m-SiO2 core–shell (m: mesoporous)92
250, 30
Co/silica aerogel232
265, 6 or 8


CZ/mSiO2 (ref. 93)
280, 30






CZZ/MVmSiO2 maze-like nanoreactor93
280, 30
Direct CO2-to-HCs
CeO2–Pt@mSiO2–Co tandem catalyst160
250, 6.2


Cu/SiO2 nanotubes hollow spheres134
240, 30
Fe–Zn–Zr@zeolite core–shell catalyst233
340, 50


Pd–Cu/SBA-15 (ref. 94)
250, 40
hZ5-CuZn (hZ5: hollow ZSM-5)158
360, 30


CuZnO/SiO2 stable catalyst95
250, 30
hZ5-CuZn@Pt158
240, 30


Co-phyllosilicate (Co@Si0.9)89
250, 30
Co@hsZSM5@Pt (5 wt%)135
400, 20


CuIn@mSiO2 core–shell205
280, 30




As concisely illustrated in Schemes 1 and 2, the above-mentioned major CO2 conversion pathways are categorized into hydrogenation to hydrocarbons (encompassing production of CH4, olefins, and paraffins), hydrogenation to alcohols (encompassing production of CH3OH and higher alcohols), RWGS and DRM/TRM reforming (encompassing production of CO and H2), and organic synthesis (encompassing CO2 cycloaddition). For each respective pathway, the chemical elements acting as suitable catalyzing agents are also listed. Not considering organic synthesis as a major gas-phase thermocatalytic CO2 conversion route, the following discussion briefly covers the crucial features of the main products from the first three major categories illustrated in this scheme, followed by emphasizing the inherent thermodynamic and kinetics necessities involved in the reaction.
Based on the data provided in Table 1, catalysts are the key to facilitate various CO2 conversion routes. According to this table, a wide range of reactions has been carried out on different Si-based support materials, embedded with metal elements or metal-based compounds as the catalytic phases. The active catalysts used in these reactions are usually the key determinants in the final products, with temperature and pressure as controlled factors in providing optimized reaction conditions for enhanced conversion and selectivity. For example, for both the DRM and TRM reactions, nickel is the crucial active metal responsible for the conversion of methane and carbon dioxide to syngas. Another factor is the temperature in the modified FT (MFT) reaction, where Fe and Co are subjected to high temperature and low temperature respectively, similar to their corresponding typical Fischer–Tropsch reaction conditions.
Similarly, steam reforming is mostly dominated by Ni-based catalysts,202–204 while for CO2 to methanol reactions, Cu-based catalysts are commonly utilized,82,205 given that copper is cost-effective, earth-abundant and feasible compared to other noble metals such as Pd.94
However, this trend differs in both the RWGS reaction and direct CO2 to HC reaction, where a myriad of active catalysts are still being investigated, such as Pt, Cu, Co and Fe, which are used frequently in multicomponent active catalysts on nanostructured silica or silicate-based supports. Hence, it is expected that there will be more future works dedicated to the exploration of Si-based catalysts to fill the knowledge gap, especially in for the conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbons.

4.2 Conventional siliceous supports and catalysts

SBA-15, MCM-41, and mesoporous silica (mSiO2). 
Supported catalysts with high metal dispersion on large surface area supports, which can be catalytically active or inert, have been widely used in heterogeneous catalysis. As conventional precursors, important inert supports can be traced in the realm of siliceous materials, including natural and synthetic phyllosilicate clays such as Si-containing kaolinite, montmorillonite, and illite (some of which will be discussed further in Section 4.5). In recent decades, amorphous fumed silica and mesostructured silica nanoparticles (MSN) including SBA-15,234 MCM-41 and MCM-48,235,236 and mesoporous silica (mSiO2)237 are the most widely investigated because of the new possibility in morphological control and porosity manipulation introduced in the 1990s.235 The advantages of these materials include their facile preparation, high surface area (1024 m2 g−1), thermal stability, ordered hexagonal structure of MSNs, and tunable pore size ranging from 5–30 nm.
SBA-15, a member of the SBA family (SBA-11, SBA-12, and SBA-16) can be made by using the common silicon source of tetraethoxysilane (TEOS), a mixture of ionic and non-ionic surfactants, and P123 (EO20PO70EO20) as the common structure-directing agent or organic template, often under strong acidic conditions.238 The organic template can be removed via simple calcination, reflux extraction, H2O2 treatment, microwave digestion, or washing with pure solvents, e.g., ethanol or acetone. SBA-15 has large hexagonal pores (up to 30 nm) in a 2D array with long 1D channels (P6mm plane group). The micropores in the wall of SBA-15 originate from the more hydrophilic EO chains of the surfactant such as P123 or other EOxPOyEOx chemicals. SBA-15 can form different morphologies, e.g., fiber-shaped, donut-like, and micrometer-size mesoporous SBA-15 were synthesized by following a general procedure.239 Other interesting morphologies of SBA-15 such as gyroids,239 ropes,239,240 and towers241 were also prepared.
MCM-41 is a member of the M41S family having different structures, namely, hexagonal (MCM-41), cubic (MCM-48), and lamellar (MCM-50), which mimics well-known liquid-crystal phases. A general procedure for the synthesis of MCM-41 has been reported.242 It normally involves a combination of silicon precursor (e.g., sodium silicate and TEOS) and an alkaline solution of micelle-forming surfactant (cetrimonium bromide, i.e., CTAB, cetrimonium chloride, i.e., CTAC, C16TMAOH or quaternary ammonium halides) in the pH range of 8–11 adjusted by the addition of an acid or a base such as sodium hydroxide or TMAOH. The product is filtered and washed, and removal of organic template is similar to that of SBA-15. Two different methods for the synthesis of MCM-41 were compared in a report by Kumar et al.243 To control the pore size of MCM-41, the general procedure of changing the alkyltrimethylammonium bromide (ATAB) surfactant has been suggested.244
Mesoporous silica (mSiO2) is commonly synthesized either as an encapsulating shell or as a core template. For its synthesis, the first step is preparing the solvent in most cases, which is usually a mixture of water and ethanol or methanol. The commonly adopted surfactant, which is responsible for the formation of 1D mesopores in the guest channels, is CTAC, with CTAB, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), and tetradecyltrimethylammonium bromide (TTAB) employed as alternatives. The next component is the precipitating agent, which is usually NH4OH (aq) but can be substituted with triethanolamine (TEA) or 2-methylimidazole (2-MeIM). Subsequently, this solution should be well-mixed before adding the final ingredient, which is usually TEOS as the silicon precursor, before aging for up to 16 h. The organic templates can be easily removed by calcination under N2 or washing with alcohol or acidic solution.245 There are reports on a procedure for the synthesis of mesoporous silica nanospheres246via a modified Stöber method and hollow mesoporous silica via Ostwald ripening.247 Generally, mSiO2 is widely utilized for coating many nanoparticles, where there are two general techniques for encapsulating with an mSiO2 shell. The first method is encapsulating with a non-porous silica shell through the Stöber method without the use of surfactants.248 In this synthesis, an mSiO2 shell can also be obtained via a reverse (water-in-oil) microemulsion-based method.248 The second method is to introduce mesoporous silica directly, whereby the core–shell structure with mSiO2 shell is prepared via a modified Stöber method.249
In recent years, many highly stable and high-performance non-uniform silica-based catalysts using mesoporous SBA-15, MCM-41, and mSiO2 have been developed for various thermocatalytic CO2 conversion pathways (Table 1). Normally, catalyst particles are formed, grown, and housed in the pores of SBA-15 or MCM-41 through the impregnation method.250 However, there are cases in which non-uniform SBA-15/MCM-41/mSiO2 are grown on premade catalytic particles.160,206,226 To fabricate morphologically uniform catalysts, mSiO2 can be utilized in a modified Stöber method as a coating layer to encapsulate catalytically active premade particles to obtain a well-defined, well-dispersed, well-separated, and well-protected catalyst. Therefore, core–shell catalysts can be considered as a major structural configuration for the encapsulation of catalytic nanoparticles with mSiO2.
Employing SBA-15/MCM-41/mSiO2 structures, the catalyst preparation procedures and post-preparation treatments were found to have an enormous influence on the metal dispersion, catalytic activity, and catalyst stability during CO2 conversion. In the following paragraphs, several recently developed materials constructed using the above-mentioned silica supports with distinct structural features will be further elaborated. Given that they are established mesoporous materials widely utilized as catalyst carriers, any effective method to take advantage of their physicochemical properties for boosted performance can make a significant difference in the ultimate economic feasibility of their applications.
Due to the facile preparation procedure of SBA-15, is the perfect support material for many catalytic reactions including CO2 conversion82 and even many non-catalytic but highly important applications such as CO2 capture.251 For CO2 capture, SBA-15 with its large macropores is highly favorable for significant CO2 uptake.252 However, for catalytic applications, micro- and mesoporous SBA-15 are usually adopted and loaded with catalytic NPs. Nonetheless, this approach normally leads to a random distribution of NPs across their structures. Considering the long-channels of SBA-15, the ordered placement and maximized intra-NP spacing are vital to secure a perfect metal dispersion, while circumventing diffusivity problems. Prieto et al. addressed these important issues associated with CO2 conversion, catalyst preparation, and underlying science.91,253,254 For example, in one of their works, achieving near-maximum intraparticle spacings in supported SBA-15 catalysts was reported comprehensively for MeOH synthesis using a hybrid CO2/CO/H2 feedstock and loaded CuZnO particles.250 As shown in Fig. 3a, the 3D nanospatial distribution could pose a strong hindrance against particle sintering owing to the compartmented nature of the well-ordered hexagonal pores of the SBA-15 support. Furthermore, late-stage calcination pretreatment prior to catalyst activation by the reduction of metallic NPs can significantly help in properly positioning individual particles to be well-distanced. On the one hand, for a non-calcined/non-reduced CuZn/SBA-15 sample, when calcination was performed under 2% NO/N2 flow followed by reduction under a 20% H2/N2 flow, a sample with nearest-neighbor metallic Cu particles was produced (Fig. 3a(1 and 2)). On the other hand, performing calcination under pure N2, while keeping the reduction condition the same led to the maximum intra-NP spacing for metallic Cu (Fig. 3a(3 and 4)). It was reported that the latter particle distribution topology controlled the “collective properties” of the supported NPs and slowed down catalyst deactivation during methanol synthesis by up to an order of magnitude compared with the sample having a non-uniform nanoparticle distribution.250 This synthetic protocol also paves the way toward the fabrication of other advanced catalysts with enhanced performance.82,93
 Fig. 3  (a) 2D/3D combined view of hexagonal arrangement of SBA-15 mesopore showing a detailed internal corrugation of the silica pore walls, 3D view of isolated nanospatial distribution of metal NPs in the support mesopores. TEM images from top view of two samples including (a: 1 and 2) nearest-neighbour (calcined under a flow of 2% NO/N2) and (a: 3 and 4) maximized intra-NPs spacing (calcined under a flow of N2) of metallic Cu NPs in CuZn/SBA-15, where both samples were reduced in 20% H2/N2. (b) Schematic overview of modified Stöber method for the synthesis of Ru@mSiO2 by encapsulating Ru NPs (1–3 nm) in the mesoporous channels of silica nanowires and subsequent calcination effect under N2 or air. TEM images of calcined samples after reduction with H2/CO2 mixture at 400 °C for 2 h including (b: 1 and 2) 1.6% Ru@mSiO2-N, which was N2-calcined and retained its 1–3 nm NPs and (b: 3 and 4) Ru@mSiO2-A, which was air-calcined, resulting in NP sintering and subsequent size increment to 5–20 nm. (c) Schematic overview of the synthesis of Pt/mSiO2 by coating mesoporous silica spheres (mSiO2) around premade and free-standing Pt NPs (1–3 nm) synthesized by polyol-assisted method. TEM images of (c: 1 and 2) diameter alteration of final Pt/mSiO2 spheres to 48 and 66 nm. (d) Schematic overview of synthesis of dual-metal core–shell CeO2–Pt@mSiO2–Co tandem catalyst for FT reaction. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 250 Copyright 2013, Nature, (b) ref. 206 Copyright 2017, Elsevier, (c) ref. 226 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry, (d) ref. 160 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society. 
CO and CH4 are the two main products of CO2 hydrogenation by the RWGS and CO2 methanation reactions, respectively. Different types of catalysts are required for their selective synthesis (Table 1). In an interesting work by Dou et al., free-standing Ru NPs with a size range of 1–3 nm obtained by polyol-assisted synthesis were encapsulated and supported on MCM-41-like or mesoporous silica (mSiO2) nanowires (Fig. 3b).206 Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and hexadecyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC, 25% aq. solution) were used to synthesize silica nanowires with a bimodal pore structure by employing a modified Stöber method. Triethanolamine (TEA, as a medium-strength organic base) was mixed with CTAC in ethanol–water solution to trigger a slow silica condensation phase, and subsequently both TEOS and Ru colloidal suspension were simultaneously added. Depending on the calcination atmosphere of either N2 or static air, slow heating (1 °C min−1, 400 °C, 6 h) of the resultant Ru@mSiO2 resulted in the formation of different-size Ru NPs in each resultant powder material. Specifically, 1–3 nm Ru NPs were retained under N2 calcination, while 5–20 nm Ru NPs were the result of air calcination (Fig. 3b(1, 2) and (3, 4)). Both calcination methods were effective in removing the organic template, leaving behind openly accessible mesopores (∼4.1 nm in size) as determined by the nonlocal density functional theory (NLDFT) method. The mesopores were large enough to accommodate the small Ru NPs, whereas the larger Ru NPs were protruded out of the 4 nm mesopores. The two resultant Ru@mSiO2 catalysts led to an alteration in selectivity for either CO or CH4 during CO2 hydrogenation, merely by virtue of the Ru NP size difference. Although air calcination impaired the size uniformity of the pristine Ru NPs, it altered the CO2 hydrogenation route toward methane formation via enlarged particles, while CO was the main product with 1–3 nm Ru NPs kept under N2 heat-treatment.
Protecting metal and noble metal NPs using silica/silicate materials is a common procedure for the preparation of effective nanocatalysts and to quench the sintering tendency of the active NPs. In a recent work, a polyol-assisted synthetic protocol was utilized to produce free-standing small-sized noble metal NPs such as Pt, Ru, Rh and their alloys (e.g., Pt–Ru)226 using a previously reported.255 These noble metal NPs (NMPs in Fig. 3c) were then immobilized and integrated into a mesoporous silica structure via the in situ growth of mSiO2 around the nanoparticles. During this self-assembly coating process, CTAC was utilized as the structure-directing agent (SDA). Specifically, the obtained Pt/mSiO2 particles were tunable in terms of the final mSiO2 matrix diameter. Accordingly, three wormhole-like Pt/mSiO2 samples (28, 48, and 66 nm) were made by simply varying the amount of ethanol added to the reaction medium, where the 48 and 66 nm samples are shown in Fig. 3c(1 and 2). Employing these highly monodispersed Pt/mSiO2 catalysts for CO2 hydrogenation, it was found that the smaller the matrix diameter, the higher the CO2 conversion. This is simply because of the limited CO2 diffusion to the hardly accessible Pt NPs located at the center of mSiO2 as the mSiO2 matrix diameter increased. Accordingly, 25.9% CO2 conversion was measured for the 28 nm Pt/mSiO2 sample. Interestingly, at high processing temperatures, the size of the encapsulated NPs remained almost unchanged. Besides the remarkable performance achieved in the hydrogenation reaction, this work paved the way for the effective utilization of precious metals by reducing the size of the catalytic particles and optimizing the structure of the mesoporous carrier matrices.
Xie et al. also demonstrated the dual role of an mSiO2 shell-coating as a protector and support in the case of a well-defined CeO2–Pt@mSiO2–Co core–shell catalyst (scheme and TEM images of the step-wise process are shown in Fig. 3d).160 The premade CeO2–Pt core was coated with mSiO2, on which Co NPs were supported via wet-impregnation. Thereafter, the reduced black CeO2–Pt@mSiO2–Co powder was used as a tandem catalyst for CO2 hydrogenation to produce C2–C4 hydrocarbons. According to the results, the separation of the Pt NPs from Co NPs by the nano-sized mSiO2 layer in this tandem catalyst was beneficial to enhance the reaction performance compared with its other catalytic counterparts. The two-step RWGS followed by FTS process is thought to occur during the tandem reaction, wherein the CeO2/Pt interface converts CO2 to CO through the RWGS, while the formed CO subsequently reacts with H2 through the FT at the mSiO2/Co interface. Therefore, by controlling the separation CeO2–Pt and Co NPs in a well-defined core–shell structure, a selectivity of 60% toward C2–C4 hydrocarbons at a H2/CO2 ratio of three was obtained. Therefore, this rational design of multifunctional catalysts for tandem catalytic conversions with high performance provides further incentive to expand this field.
Silica in any form (solution or solid) is also the main precursor for the preparation of zeolites, which is an important class of catalytic materials for clean CO2 conversion processes.135,136,158 The coated silica layer in core–shell or yolk–shell nanostructured materials can be used as a seed to prepare versatile zeolites simply by either using silica as a binder on which the zeolite is cladded/crystallized or as precursor to react with a commensurate quantity of SDAs required for preparing specific zeolites. For instance, a an Fe–Zn–Zr@zeolite core–shell catalyst was also prepared via a simple cladding method, wherein a silica layer was bound on the surface of Fe–Zn–Zr prior to physically depositing premade HZSM-5 or H-beta zeolites.233 The Fe–Zn–Zr@zeolite core–shell catalyst exhibited a significantly improved confinement effect on the promotion of the direct synthesis of isoalkanes from CO2, and the selectivity to isoalkanes in the yielded hydrocarbons reached up to 81.3%. Other analogous representatives of this type of tandem catalyst will be also elaborated in next sections.
Supported silica-based catalysts are also important for other CO2 conversion pathways. Ni–La2O3/SiO2,256 Ni/Ce-SBA-16,202 Ni/SiO2(OAm),257 and Ni/Al-SBA-15 (ref. 258) are a few more instances of catalysts for the DRM reaction. Moreover, supported nanocatalysts with a much more structurally defined architecture were also devised, with some examples such as Ni–yolk@Ni@SiO2,259 Ni–Mg phyllosilicate nanotubes@SiO2,260 NiCo@SiO2,261 multi-Ni-core@Ni-phyllosilicate@CeO2.262

4.3 Morphologically-defined siliceous supports and catalysts

Stöber SiO2 spheres (silica beads) and spherical silicates. 
In the field of material synthesis, siliceous-based materials such as Stöber silica spheres (commonly known as SiO2 spheres) have given birth to a whole range of new structures such as core–shell and yolk–shell architectures,147,203,263 hollow topologies,133,136 and transition metal-silicates with specific shapes (e.g., copper-silicate, nickel-silicate, and manganese-silicate).134,173 Among them, the core–shell configuration is a special class of catalytic structures with broad use in heterogeneous catalysis, where Stöber SiO2 spheres are employed as the support or core. In this arena of research associated with catalyst technology, spherical Stöber SiO2 is one of the most important and versatile components because its bead size can be facilely tuned and its mass production can be easily achieved. In addition to working as a neutral catalyst support, Stöber SiO2 has been employed initially as an important solid precursor in many advanced processes for the fabrication of nanostructured catalysts through structural and compositional transformations.193
In pursuit of clean energy, well-defined core–shell catalysts with a precisely controlled spatial arrangement of interfaces (either catalytic components, surface functional groups, or structural porosity) are significant. By utilizing the established protocol of SiO2 synthesis, similarly mechanistic insights and enhanced performances have been achieved for CO2 conversion pathways in recent years.
Core–shell structures such as SiO2-supported single-metal nanocatalyst (SiO2@metal) and SiO2@metal coated with a thickness-adjustable protective mSiO2 layer (i.e., SiO2@metal@mSiO2) are general configurations for utilization in a vast number of catalytic applications. In a study by Zhan et al.,147 SiO2 spheres were firstly decorated in situ by Pt NPs via three steps, as follows: (i) amino-functionalization of SiO2 by amination reaction between SiO2 spheres with 3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane (APTES) at room temperature, (ii) grafting [PtCl4]− ions on NH2 pendant functional groups on SiO2 surface using a methanolic H2PtCl6 solution (10 mM), and (iii) precipitation–deposition of Pt ions into metallic Pt by gentle reduction in the presence of a methanolic ammonium borohydride (R-NBH4) solution (0.25 M). Afterward, a modified Stöber method to coat an mSiO2 layer over SiO2@Pt was employed in which the mSiO2 layer thickness could be tuned by varying the quantities of CTAC, TEA, and TEOS. Consequently, a series of SiO2@Pt@mSiO2 with different mSiO2 shell thickness were obtained. Based on the catalytic performances for CO2 hydrogenation at elevated pressure of the corresponding samples (Fig. 4a), while retaining the same Pt weight percentage exposed to the reaction, a disparity was seen in CO2 conversion among the different samples, which arose from the increased reactant residence time within the elongated mSiO2 channels.147
 Fig. 4  (a) CO2 hydrogenation (at 320 °C and 30 bar) conversion results for SiO2@Pt and SiO2@Pt@mSiO2 with different mSiO2 thicknesses. (b) Schematic overview of maze-like nanoreactor created from multivoid mesoporous SiO2 (MVmSiO2) of SiO2 sphere loaded with metal nanoparticles and CO2 hydrogenation to methanol stability for 150 h time on line for CZZ/MVmSiO2 catalytic sample. (c-i) Schematic overview of the utilization of SiO2 sphere for the preparation of Ni/SiO2 and sandwiched silica–ceria with intercalated Ni NPs (Ni–SiO2@CeO2) for dry-reforming of methane (DRM) reaction and (c-ii and iii) CH4 and CO2 specific activity (converted mol min−1 gNi−1) for three tested samples including Ni–SiO2@CeO2, Ni–SiO2, and Ni–CeO2. (d-i) SEM of mesoporous silicate (MSS) and mesoporous aluminosilicate (MASS) with varying alumina content including MASS-7.5, MASS-15, and MASS-30, (d-ii) Rod-to-sphere transformation scheme by [Al(OH)4]− utilization together with CTA+ micelles, which changed the pore structure from [P6mm] to [Pm3n] unit cell. Catalytic results of CZMSS and CZMASS-15 during 30 bar CO2 hydrogenation: (d-iii) CO2 specific activity (normalized by total amount of Cu + Zn in catalyst) and (d-iv) mole ratio between dimethyl ether (DME) and methanol in product stream. Note: MSS: mesoporous silicate sphere, MASS: mesoporous aluminosilicate sphere, and CZ: CuZnO. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 147 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society, (b) ref. 93 Copyright 2021, Wiley, (c) ref. 203 Copyright 2018, Elsevier, (d) ref. 264 Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society. 
In another work by Kosari et al., methanol synthesis via CO2 hydrogenation was evaluated by varying the porosity of the spherical silica support.93 Firstly, by endowing core–shell porosity to Stöber silica (SiO2), a low-density maze-like nanoreactor decorated with well-engineered porosity including multitude cavity carved within its core connected to peripheral one-dimensional (1D) MCM-41-like pores was fabricated (Fig. 4b). By employing a self-etching co-structural directing agent (SDA) technique, the resultant MVmSiO2 possessed two types of void size. Other similar counterparts including mSiO2 and pristine SiO2 spheres were also utilized to evaluate the performance of the novel maze-like nanoreactor. After subjecting all the supports (SiO2, mSiO2, and MVmSiO2) with identically-loaded Cu–ZnO (CZ) catalytic particles, CZ/MVmSiO2 demonstrated a better CO2-to-MeOH performance owing to its well-connected porous nature. Subsequently, CO2-to-MeOH synthesis was further investigated by combining the synergistic effect of structural superiority with compositional optimization, wherein trimetallic NPs were anchored on the MVmSiO2 support. The loading process negatively affected the support surface area. For example, compared to bimetallic CZ NPs, the incorporation of CZ-ZrO2 (CZZ) trimetallic NPs reduced the surface area even further. Nonetheless, an improved performance was attained when CZZ/MVmSiO2 was utilized. It was demonstrated in this study that inter-connected multi-voids and 1D peripheral pores facilitate the smooth entry and exit of the reaction species, hence improving the reactivity through an easy diffusion and transport processes (support morphology-dependent activity). Ultimately, the developed methodology rendered a silica-based “maze-like nanoreactor” with a stable catalytic activity for CO2 to methanol conversion (Fig. 4b).
Due to the fact that Stöber SiO2 spheres are a solid-phase silicon reservoir with a relatively rigid structure, they can be used to fabricate workable catalysts via chemical transformation routes or physical loading approaches.193 Commonly, the preparation of supported metal/metal oxide NPs has been reported using SiO2 spheres or their derivatives (e.g., hollow SiO2 spheres and mesoporous SiO2 spheres),265 and this only a few will be presented in this review.147,201 Smaller Stöber SiO2 spheres, which are harder to harvest than normal 300 nm Stöber spheres, were found to play a special role in the fast-pace growing research on upcycling high-density plastics.266 As demonstrated by Das et al., a core–shell catalyst was proposed for DRM reaction, which was synthesized using Stöber spheres used as the support, namely, sandwiched-like Ni–SiO2@CeO2 (Fig. 4c(i)).203 The catalyst function was attested to be much better in the DRM compared to its simpler counterparts such as Ni/SiO2 and Ni/CeO2 in the instant conversion of CO2 to molecular surface oxygen to react with released carbon by CH4 pyrolysis on the catalyst surface via a bifunctional pathway. The core–shell sandwiched-like catalyst yielded specific activity values (converted mol min−1 gNi−1) equal to 0.12 molCH4 min−1 gNi−1 and 0.17 molCO2 min−1 gNi−1 for CH4 and CO2, respectively, without facing reactor blockage problem due to coke formation (Fig. 4c(ii and iii)). Based on the DRM performance, this SiO2 sphere-derived core–shell catalyst is among the few reported high-performance catalysts, in terms of CO2 and CH4 specific activity, with decent CO/H2 production and outstanding stability.201,209 It also deserves attention due to its stable performance at a lower temperature (600 °C) under a fairly high weight hourly gas velocity (WHSV = 200 L h−1 gcat−1) of CO2/CH4 feedstock with no coke detected after a 72 h catalytic run, wherein many catalysts fail to function flawlessly.
Concerning spherical mesoporous silica/silicate supports, a novel single-step method to synthesize silicate spheres was reported by adding an organic-phase mixture of toluene–ethanol–CTAB–TEOS to an aqueous-phase mixture of water–ammonia.264 Using this so-called CTAB-stabilized oil-in-water microemulsion, monodispersed mesoporous silicate spheres (MSS) can be obtained. If a proportionate amount of sodium aluminate (NaAlO2) is added to the aqueous-phase mixture (i.e., to make water–ammonia–NaAlO2) followed by mixing with organic-phase, the resultant monodispersed mesoporous spheres will transform into an aluminosilicate framework, named mesoporous aluminosilicate spheres (MASS). This marks a significant development given that the two-step method of hydrothermal Al incorporation in premade silica is the conventional method employed for the preparation of partially uniform aluminosilicates.267 An increase in the portion of NaAlO2 in the aqueous-phase mixture resulted in an increase in the rigidity of MASS and decrease in its pore size (Fig. 4d-i). The SEM images of their pores confirmed that indentations are discontinuous ellipsoidal voids having openings to the surface. In comparison to the 1D small pores of mSiO2 (mesopores) constructed as a result of the formation of micelles by CTA+ adducts, the MSS and MASS pores were not fully uniform and were very large (macropore and micropore), especially when no or few aluminum-containing moieties were present. As shown in Fig. 4d(ii), this is thought to have arisen from the [Al(OH)4]− adducts, by changing the nature of the formed micelles from rod-like to sphere-like, leading to a different pore unit cell for MSS and MASS compared to MCM-41/mSiO2 ([P6mm] versus [Pm3n]). MSS and MASS were used as a support and loaded with catalytic phase Cu–ZnO (i.e., CZ) for CO2 hydrogenation reaction at 30 bar (Fig. 4d(iii and iv)). Surprisingly, CZ/MSS showed higher CO2 conversion than CZ/MASS-15 (Fig. 4d(iii)). However, DME/methanol ratio was found to be higher for CZ/MASS-15 compared to CZ/MSS (Fig. 4d(iv)). Considering both its pore structure and Al3+-induced acidity property, MSS has no Al3+ site involved but has larger pores, while MASS-15 has smaller pores but higher acidity due to the abundant Al3+ sites present in its aluminosilicate structure. Nevertheless, although it is obvious that support acidity leads to the formation of DME from the synthesized methanol by CO2 hydrogenation, as seen for CZ/MASS-15, it cannot be fully concluded that maximizing CO2 hydrogenation conversion requires large pores as seen for CZ/MSS because the low CO2 conversion for CZ/MASS-15 is due to its acidic sites, influencing and lowering the Cu–ZnO activity, whereas in CZ/MSS, this bottleneck does not exist to impede the activity of the Cu–ZnO catalytic phase.


Hollow silica/silicate/zeolites. 
Hollow functional materials have found a special place among desirable structures for catalytic applications. Nanostructured hollow materials are particularly promising owing to their low density, enclosed nanosized shell, defined cavity, and favorable catalytic functionality.193,268 Given that a wide range of pragmatically synthesizable silica-based materials has already been established, silica-driven hollow structures have become important for the synthesis of catalysts and catalytic reactions. Various design concepts and synthetic strategies such as rigid hard template and soft surfactant template,245 Kirkendall diffusion and Ostwald ripening,163 and selective etching process263 have been utilized to fabricate hollow silica-based structures with various types of pores, void spaces, holes, and cavities.
As is known, a range of metal silicate hollow spheres can be obtained via the sacrificial templating of Stöber silica spheres.193 For instance, hollow spheres in the form of sandwiched mSiO2@ NiSiO@mSiO2 were recently prepared using nickel silicate (NiSiO) hollow spheres, which were derived from Stöber silica spheres.133 The reduction treatment of the sample under hydrogen led to the formation of spatially confined and intercalated Ni NPs in the final catalytic sample mSiO2@Ni/SiO2@mSiO2, whose TEM image is shown in Fig. 5a(iii). Furthermore, metal-doped mSiO2@Ni-metal/SiO2@mSiO2 samples can also be produced by introducing dopant metals in NiSiO hollow spheres in the first stage of the hollowing process. Due to the small particle size of Ni and its confinement between two mSiO2 layers, this catalyst was tested in the DRM reaction for syngas production in the temperature range of 300 °C to 850 °C (Fig. 5a(i)). A nearly 90% CH4 conversion was attained at 850 °C, while at the industrially preferable reaction temperature (i.e., 600 °C), a lower CH4 conversion of 30% was obtained. However, an improved performance was observed upon the introduction of metal dopants (Fig. 5a(ii)). For example, the cobalt-doped sample (i.e., mSiO2@CoNi/SiO2@mSiO2) was shown to exhibit the initial CH4 conversion of 70%, which dropped to 60% after 35 h. However, as stated elsewhere,210 it is important for spatially confined Ni NPs to have sufficient free space around them, meaning higher Ni dispersion and larger number of active Ni sites, which facilitate carbon gasification. This offers better catalytic performance in the DRM by endowing more reaction space and letting smooth carbon accumulation-gasification in the case of coking. However, a closer look at mSiO2@Ni/SiO2@mSiO2 reveals that very limited reaction space is available to Ni sites (or smaller inner cavity existing around the entrapped Ni NPs, as shown in Fig. 5a(iii)), which was reported to be detrimental to the DRM reaction. These clamped Ni NPs with less reaction space may explain the low activity of the catalyst during the DRM. Although this work was mainly focused on material development, unfortunately it did not report the syngas ratio and characterization of the deposited coke.
 Fig. 5  (a-i and ii) DRM reaction result (CH4 conversion and catalyst-stability) for hollow mSiO2@Ni/SiO2@mSiO2 spheres doped with Co and Rh and (a-iii) TEM image of the mSiO2@Ni/SiO2@mSiO2 hollow sphere catalyst. (b-i) DRM reaction results (specific activity of CH4 and CO2) for nickel-phyllosilicate (NiPhy) hollow spheres and core–shell NiPhy@SiO2 hollow spheres (HS) and (b-ii and iii) TEM images of NiPhy HS and core–shell NiPhy@SiO2 HS. (c-i and ii) FT reaction results (time on stream CO conversion and normalized hydrocarbon selectivity (CH4, C2, C3, C4, and C5+)) using zeolite-based catalysts including Fe/ZSM5, Fe@ZSM5, and hollow Fe@h-ZSM5 (condition: 500 mg of catalyst, 370 °C, 20 bar, CO:H2:N2 gas flow of 7.5:7.5:1.32 mL min−1) and (c-iii) TEM image of Fe@h-ZSM5. (d-i) Catalytic performance of dual-metal Co@hZSM-5@Pt hollow nanocatalyst and its pristine and comparable counterparts for direct CO2 hydrogenation to light olefins (condition: 200 mg of catalyst, 400 °C, 20 bar, CO2:H2:N2 = 24:72:4, gas flow = 15 mL min−1). (d-ii) TEM image of tested hsZSM5-supported/confined catalyst of Co@hZSM-5@Pt. (e-i) Schematic overview of chemical transformation and hollowing strategy (e.g., sacrificial templating) for transforming SiO2 Stöber spheres to solid ZSM-5 (sZ5), hollow zeolitic ZSM-5 (hZ5), and its derivative nanocatalysts including hZ5-CuZn and hZ5-CuZn@Pt. CO selectivity and hydrocarbon distribution of (e-ii) hZ5-CuZn and (e-iii) hZ5-CuZn@Pt. Comparison of the performance of hZ5-CuZn and hZ5-CuZn@Pt catalysts in terms of (e-iv) CO2 conversion and (e-v) C2–C4 specific yield. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 133 Copyright 2018, The American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 269 Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (c) ref. 136 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 135 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (e) ref. 158 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society. 
Phyllosilicates (Phy) are another effective cohort of siliceous-derived solids that can meet the stability and durability criteria required for catalytic reactions. Li et al. reported the preparation of Ni-based silicate core–shell hollow spheres (Ni@NiPhy@SiO2) via the sacrificial templating of Stöber SiO2 and a nickel salt precursor during the hydrothermal process.269 Initially, the silica nanospheres were transformed into nickel-phyllosilicate hollow spheres (NiPhy HS, Fig. 5b(ii)), which were comprised of needle-like structures, and then coated with a protective silica shell (NiPhy@SiO2 HS, Fig. 5b(iii)). Pre-reaction reduction precipitated the nickel nanoparticles from the nickel phyllosilicate layer into Ni@NiPhy@SiO2, which was found to have superior carbon resistance to the other configurations explored in this work. The nature of the protective silica shell promotes stronger Ni and NiPhy material interaction, and thus inhibits or prevents the detachment of Ni NP from the NiPhy interface, improving the performance stability, as denoted in black in Fig. 5b(i). The detachment of these Ni NP is typically attributed to the growth of carbon nanotubes (CNT), which leads to the faster degradation of the DRM catalytic performance, as seen with NiPhy HS without a protective silica shell and denoted in red (Fig. 5b(i)). Likewise, an excessive thick silica shell also impeded the performance, as denoted in blue in Fig. 5b(i). Lastly, the Ni@NiPhy@SiO2 core shell hollow sphere catalyst showed excellent stability and coke resistance in the DRM for 600 h at 700 °C.
Other structurally defined catalysts for the DRM and TRM reactions, as listed in Table 1, also have the active catalytic components (Ni or Ni-based) in SBA or protected with a layer of mesoporous silica. The uniform narrow pores or crevices present in SBA-15 help restrict both the detachment of the Ni NPs and the growth of the CNT, as discussed in the previous paragraph. In most works on DRM and TRM reactions, Ni is usually the sole active material, which is capable of providing a good catalytic performance. In addition, Ni can be easily doped with cerium or other metals to improve its resistance to coking and sintering during the reactions, as demonstrated in long-term stability investigations.270
Hierarchical hollow zeolites are attractive siliceous-based materials, which require special care during their design and synthesis.271 Empowered by their micropores and cage-like structures, they are favorable for catalytic applications and use in other fields such as gas separation due to their molecular sieving capability. Being mainly consisting of aluminum and silicon elements, various zeolites can be synthesized by adjusting the incorporated aluminum/silicon ratio, adding heteroatoms such as phosphorous, and varying the type of structure-directing agent (SDA) and surfactant. Therefore, zeolite-based catalysts, a subsidiary of silica-derived materials, have been proven to be useful in a wide range of applications. Specifically, the major clean catalytic applications for zeolites include Friedel–Crafts,272 Beckmann rearrangement,273 Fischer–Tropsch (FT),274 hydroconversion,275 oxidation reactions,276 catalytic cracking,277 methanol-to-olefin (MTO),195,278 and biomass conversion.279 Besides, the applicability of zeolites has also demonstrated for other important environmental applications such as CO2 capture and wastewater treatment.280,281
Benefitting from sacrificial templating, in a recent work, solid Stöber SiO2 was utilized as a silicon reservoir to be converted to single crystals and morphologically-uniform hexagonal ZSM-5 with an aluminum-deficient core.136 Hydrothermal treatment of silica in a tetrapropylammonium hydroxide solution (TPAOH, 1.0 M in H2O or 20 wt% in H2O) together with the utilization of aluminum salt precursors was reported in that work. After the successful synthesis of solid ZSM-5, another hydrothermal treatment using low-concentration TPAOH solution (0.25 M in H2O) resulted in the formation of hollow ZSM-5 (hZSM-5). During the hollowing process, nitrate salt precursor of metal species could be utilized to encapsulate the final metal NPs inside the formed hollow pores and cavities (e.g., Fe@h-ZSM5, as shown in Fig. 5c(iii)). It is worth noting that the Fe@h-ZSM5 sample was made by chemical transformation of Stöber SiO2 to ZSM-5 followed by the encapsulation of Fe NPs (Fe@ZSM-5) and final hollowing of Fe@ZSM-5 (via sacrificial templating) to fabricate hollow Fe@h-ZSM-5. Fischer–Tropsch reaction utilizing CO:H2 feedstock was chosen to test Fe@h-ZSM5 together with other simpler counterparts such as Fe@ZSM5 and Fe/ZSM5 (Fig. 5c(i and ii)). Although offering an initial high and increasing conversion rate, Fe@h-ZSM5 suddenly lost its activity after 50 h time on stream, performing much better than Fe@ZSM5 but not as stable as the simpler supported Fe/ZSM5 sample. It also did not offer a high chain growth probability (α) for C2–C4 hydrocarbons given that the weight percent of produced methane and C5+ hydrocarbons outweighed other detected moieties.
Inspired by the synthesis of hexagonal hollow ZSM-5 produced from premade Stöber spheres, as shown in Fig. 5c(iii), in another work by Kwok et al.,135 their synthetic approach was further modified to produce spherical hollow ZSM-5. In contrast to their previous report utilizing only concentrated TPAOH for the hydrothermal treatment of SiO2 spheres,136 in this work, the authors utilized a mixture of TPAOH and tetrapropylammonium bromide (TPABr, 98%) solution, where the latter was employed to decelerate the crystallization rate of ZSM-5. The low crystallization rate also hampered the morphological deviation from the original spherical shape of the SiO2 precursor. Moreover, by synthesizing core–shell metal@SiO2, small NPs of the metal core could be evenly spread on the whole inner wall of the hollow zeolite, thus delivering metal NPs in the interior space and forming the final metal@hsZSM5 in a stepwise manner. Given that the cobalt nanocubes were the only premade NPs utilized for the core–shell metal@SiO2,282 Co@hsZSM5 remained the main precursor together with pristine hsZSM5 for the rest of synthetic protocol. As reported elsewhere,255 premade Pt NPs prepared via a polyol-assisted method were also utilized as the second metal to be deposited on the outer surface of the Co@hsZSM5 spheres, resulting in the formation of a dual-layer metal Co@hsZSM5@Pt. Among the various samples tested for direct CO2 hydrogenation to hydrocarbons (Fig. 5d(i)), Co@hsZSM5@Pt with fixed 8 wt% Co NPs and 7.5 wt.%-loaded Pt NPs showed the highest CO2 conversion, while the same sample with 5 wt.%-loaded Pt NPs yielded the highest selectivity for C2+ hydrocarbons. The TEM image of Co@hsZSM5@Pt is shown in Fig. 5d(ii). Other single- (i.e., M1@hsZSM5 and hsZSM5@M2) and dual-layer M1@hsZSM5@M2 samples were also fabricated, demonstrating a successful synthetic protocol for the preparation of complicated zeolitic catalysts. More importantly, given that Pt is responsible for RWGS and Co is responsible for FT, it was found that compared with the single-layer Pt–Co/comZSM5 sample, the tandem mechanism will be enhanced once Pt and Co are separated in two layers.
As another recent investigation on hollow ZSM-5 (hZSM5) produced from premade Stöber spheres, Li et al. showcased the usability of the derived hZSM5 crystallites for tandem CO2 conversion into light olefins by implanting heterogeneous catalytic NPs on the inner and outer sides of hZSM5 particles.158 As demonstrated in Fig. 5c(iii), the synthesis of hZSM5 via the controlled dissolution of solid ZSM-5 (derived from solid Stöber spheres) has been shown to be a versatile approach to prepare hZSM5 with different metal loadings. In the previous case, Fe was introduced in hZSM5 support and the resulting integrated nanocatalyst could catalyze the Fischer–Tropsch reaction, which converts CO to hydrocarbons. In view of the current research interest toward CO2 capture and utilization, it is desirable to develop catalysts that can directly convert CO2 into value-added hydrocarbon products. Thus, to achieve this target, as exhibited in (Fig. 5e(i)), Cu or CuZn mixed metal nanoparticles were introduced in the hZSM-5 support (denoted as hZ5-Cu or hZ5-CuZn, depending on the metal loaded) using a similar synthetic route to that for the Fe@hZSM-5 catalyst (Fig. 5c(iii)). In addition, Pt nanoparticles could be further deposited on the catalyst surface by mixing the hZ5-CuZn catalyst with pre-synthesized Pt nanoparticles. These hZ5-CuZn and hZ5-CuZn@Pt catalysts were subjected to CO2 hydrogenation reaction at 30 bar pressure and various temperatures (Fig. 5e(ii–v)). Despite having CO as the main product, the catalysts could produce light hydrocarbons in significant yield. A methanol mediated route was assumed for these catalysts, in which the CuZn metal nanoparticles were responsible for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol in the interior cavities and the hZSM5 shell was responsible for converting methanol to light hydrocarbons. The addition of Pt on the catalyst surface resulted in higher CO2 conversion and better hydrocarbon yield by creating a localized environment with increased CO concentration inside the hZSM5 catalyst (Fig. 5e(ii–v)). This catalyst was used as a proof-of-concept to demonstrate the practicability of directly converting CO2 to hydrocarbons via the integration of zeolites and metal nanoparticles. Also, both the composition and concentration of these integrated catalysts could be further tuned toward better production yields.
Besides the advanced methods to prepare morphologically uniform zeolites from premade silica materials (i.e., Stöber SiO2 as exemplified in Fig. 5c(iii) and d(ii)), the conventional method to prepare zeolites is the use of a silica solution to obtain architecturally advanced hollow constructs.284,285 Herein, the liquid phase precursor of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) as the silicon source can be used directly to procure zeolites. Encouragingly, a combination of suitable zeolites and conducive iron-based catalysts for Fischer–Tropsch reaction is usually employed for the transformation of syngas (CO + H2) or direct CO2 hydrogenation (via CO pathway) into light olefins.20 Among the iron-based catalysts, recently, FeMnK nanomaterials were found to be effective for the conversion of CO and CO2 feedstocks to useful hydrocarbons suitable as jet fuels.286 In an experimental setting, several TEOS-derived hexagonal zeolites encapsulating FeMnK NPs with subtle morphological variations were synthesized via the sol–gel process and hydrothermal method.227 As seen in the TEM images in Fig. 6a–f, the hexagonal morphology of the zeolite-containing NPs and the NPs loading setting were varied as rigid with supported FeMnK (denoted as FeMnK/S-1), rigid with encapsulated FeMnK (denoted as FeMnK@S-1), hollow with encapsulated FeMnK (denoted as FeMnK@Hol-S-1), and mesoporous hollow with encapsulated FeMnK (denoted as FeMnK@HM-S-1). Subsequently, the bifunctional catalysts were utilized in the CO-based Fischer–Tropsch reaction (Fig. 6g and h) and have potential to be employed in direct CO2 hydrogenation. Among them, the FeMnK@HM-S-1 catalyst exhibited the highest olefin selectivity and superior catalytic stability (CO conversion: 18.2%, C2=–C4= selectivity: 41.3%, C20–C40 selectivity: 13.2%, and C5+ selectivity: 20.5%), highlighting the notion of structure–performance relationship for configurational catalysts. However, the FeMnK/S-1 catalyst displayed the highest selectivity towards the formation of heavy hydrocarbon (C5+) and the lowest selectivity towards CH4 (Fig. 6g). Interestingly, the FeMnK@HM-S-1 catalyst could not suppress the WGS reaction as effectively as the other studied catalysts, resulting in 19.9% CO2 formation (Fig. 6g). The olefin to paraffin (O/P = C2=–C4=/C20–C40) molar ratio was found to be ca. 3.12 for the FeMnK@HM-S-1 catalyst under the mentioned conditions and could have been increased to 10.41 if reaction pressure was decreased to 0.1 MPa. According to the ASF plot (Fig. 6h), the chain growth probability (α) was found to be the highest for the FeMnK/S-1 catalyst (i.e., α = 0.61) and the lowest for the FeMnK@S-1 catalyst (i.e., α = 0.37), while it was α = 0.47 for the FeMnK@HM-S-1 catalyst.
 Fig. 6  TEM images of zeolite-based catalysts including (a) FeMnK/S-1, (b) FeMnK@S-1, (c and d) FeMnK@Hol-S-1, and (e and f) FeMnK@HM-S-1. Insets in (a, b, d, and f) show the metal particle size distribution. Fischer–Tropsch performance result of different configurational catalysts including (g) product distribution and (h) Anderson-Schulz-Flory (ASF) plots (reaction conditions: 280 °C, 4000 h−1, 2 MPa, and H2/CO = 1.9). (i) Synthesis scheme of Ni@S-1, (j) STEM-HAADF images of Ni@S-1 catalysts with different loading. (k) Catalytic performance of various Ni@S-1 catalysts in DRM reaction. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a–h) ref. 227 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society, (i–k) ref. 283 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
A recent study by Liu et al. proposed the use of hollow zeolite similarly made from a solution Si precursor for DRM reaction (Fig. 6i–k).283 These zeolite-based nanoreactors contain Ni NPs embedded inside their shell (i.e., shell-embedded) for catalyzing the DRM reaction. Here, uniform Ni NPs (ca. 4–5 nm) were embedded at a low to high loading (from 3% to 20%) in the shell of hollow silicate-1 (HS-1) zeolite through a controlled “dissolution–recrystallization” method, as shown in Fig. 6i. After calcination and reduction, the STEM-HAADF (high-angle annular dark field) images, as displayed in Fig. 6j, strongly indicate that highly dispersed metallic particles concentrated along the zeolite periphery, where the average particle diameter is around 4.2 nm, with normal distribution graphs evaluated from 1 to 8 nm. According to the experimental results of the DRM reaction (Fig. 6k), the CH4 conversion increased greatly (30% to 80%) with an increase in temperature (600 to 800 °C) but only improved marginally (less than 10%) with a higher Ni loading per catalyst weight loading (from 3% to 20%). Specifically, the 15% Ni@S-1 catalyst maintained a high conversion (∼80%) with excellent stability over a period of 150 h compared to the catalytic performance of the wet-impregnated HS-1 zeolite, which dropped from 70% to 50% over the reaction course of 40 h. These findings support the notion of the confinement effect by hollow structures, effect of internal cavity on the reaction performance and carbon gasification during the DRM, and a high density of small active metal NPs can achieve better TOFs and better stability under harsh reaction conditions (e.g., coking).


Nanoreactors of silica/silicate: core–, yolk–, and hollow–shell. 
Nanoreactors of any type and composition are mostly produced via template-mediated approaches given that at least, two different-phase matters should be kept together in a well-defined structure. Therefore, templates of various natures, i.e., organic/inorganic or solid/liquid/gas or premade/in situ-made, are needed to neighbor the two phases before it can be removed fully. Besides the template-mediated approaches for fabricating nanoreactors, the development of self-assembled nanoreactors is another arena of research in this realm.287 It is now known that from macro to nano, nanoreactors present some unique chemical reactivity that macro-reactors do not own. Generally, peculiar structures and performances are seen when researchers aim to produce and utilize nanoreactors.288,289
The popularity of silica-based nanoreactors has been well-received and has found a broad audience. Many prevalent constructs consist of either core–shell, hollow–shell, yolk–shell, or other derivatives, where the shell is typically used to shield the active catalysts from the external environment or encapsulating the active catalysts to limit undesirable effects such as sintering, coking and agglomeration.290 Unlike organic nanoreactors (such as viruses, cells, and protein cages), synthetic nanoreactors made from silica can be easily designed via the bottom-up and top-down approaches, providing flexibility in the selection of the functions, size, thickness and other properties of the silica-based shell.288,291 Besides existing as an inert support material, silica can be intentionally transformed into metal-silicate or aluminosilicate to provide additional synergy with the active catalyst materials or endow the shell with intricate features such as perpendicular pore channels.292
Recently, Price et al. proposed a facile way for the fabrication of a coke-resistive yolk-thin-shell Ni-based nanocatalyst for the RWGS reaction.228 Due to the silica shell surrounding the Co-doped precipitated Ni nanoparticles, the NiCo@SiO2 catalyst with 1.1% Ni was resistant to deactivation (primarily sintering and coking) under prolonged reaction time and severe temperature changes (Fig. 7a). This also presents an option to switch back and forth from purely RWGS reaction producing CO at high temperature, to catering concurrent Sabatier and RWGS reactions producing CO and CH4 at low temperature, while retaining the initial performance (Fig. 7a).
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of nanoreactor structure of 1% NiCo@SiO2 yolk@shell material and its cyclability study for the RWGS reaction at gas hourly space velocity (GHSV) of 15000 mL gcat−1 h−1. (b) Schematic illustration of ZIF-67-driven nanoreactor structure of ZIF-67@Pt@mSiO2 (denoted as Pt@CSN) and the TOF plot calculated for it performance in CO2 hydrogenation versus other morphologically-comparable Pt catalysts. (c) Schematic illustration of UiO-66-driven nanoreactor structure of M/YSZ@mSiO2 nanoreactors (YSZ: yttrium stabilized zirconia), where UiO-66 is encapsulated by a mesoporous silica shell and doped with yttrium, and then calcined before the metal loading together with the CO2 conversion and CO selectivity for Pt/YSZ@mSiO2 and Pt/ZrO2@mSiO2 catalysts at different temperature points. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 228 Copyright 2020, Elsevier, (b) ref. 147 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society, (c) ref. 293 Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
In the study by Wang et al., the ZnCo-ZIF@SiO2 core–shell structure was transformed either by pyrolysis to the ZnCo-ZnCoSiOx yolk–shell structure or by hydrothermal-calcination to ZnCoSiOx hollow double-shelled nanoreactors.215 They concluded that the yolk–shell catalysts mainly produced CH4, while the double-shelled nanoreactor presented higher CO selectivity, demonstrating the effect and impact of metal dispersion, shell configuration and metal location on the overall catalytic performance in their CO2 hydrogenation experiments. Likewise, ZSM-5, MCM-41 and SBA-15 support materials can also be considered as siliceous-based nanoreactors, given that they provide micropores and mesopores that can be used in an assortment of CO2 reactions, as tabulated in Table 1.94,135,136,158,199,202,211,213,214,221,223,224,227
As another possibility for making nanoreactors, coupling metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) with rigid siliceous substrates can give rise to double-phase catalytic devices as a new landscape for catalytic applications.50,294 As is known, MOFs generally have weak mechanical strength, high moisture sensitivity, and are susceptible to thermal treatment (up to 550 °C). Thus, to overcome these issues, a recently developed method is to coat a tunable layer of mSiO2 around MOFs (e.g., ZIF-8, ZIF-67, UiO-66, and HKUST-1) and its derivatives in their native morphology, acting as a suit of armor (or sheath). Notably, the synthetic generalization of these armored MOFs has been experimentally proven. These armored MOFs in a core–shell configuration enable the excellent accessibility of reactants to both gas and liquid reaction to occur within the interior space, while still possessing structural integrity of hard mSiO2 and retaining their original shape.295 Besides, this core–shell configuration can also be easily transformed into a yolk–shell structure with controlled core-etching.296 Although the mSiO2 shell discussed herein typically have pores, generally in the range of 2 to 4 nm, these pores can be further modulated, where an idea is to fill the pores with other MOF–metal combinatorial composites to function as co-catalysts or as a sieve barrier for size selection to the interior core.294 Also, importantly, MOF@mSiO2 can be employed as a solid precursor for the fabrication of metal-silicate-based nanocatalysts through chemical transformations.147 All these techniques greatly expand the degree of customizability of these silica and silicate-based nanoreactors, where several examples will be elaborated below. A well-defined system of nanoreactors can present advantages such as high surface area, hollow cavity, new catalyst-support synergy, enhanced performance, improved activity and stability with time and temperature.295 However, some fabrication challenges remain unexplored to date, where the size, configuration, morphology, porosity, interior space, stability and other properties have to be simultaneously investigated, aiming at a higher degree of controllability. Hopefully, through better design and synthesis with the aid of high-throughput simulation and catalyst screening, these challenges can be addressed effectively, allowing for the development of a greener, safer and commercially viable class of advanced nanoreactors.
In an effort to synthesize efficient MOF-based nanoreactors, a silicate maze-like nanoreactor was derived from a nanocomposite consisting of a MOF (ZIF-67) and mesoporous silica (Fig. 7b).147 After synthesizing ZIF-67 nanocubes, noble and transition metals nanoparticles were grown in situ on the exterior surfaces of the nanocubes (ZIF-67@M). Afterwards, mSiO2 was coated on ZIF-67@M to form ZIF-67@M@mSiO2, followed by transformation into M@CSN (CSN = cobalt silicate nanocubes) by weakened hydrothermal reaction in deionized water at 60 °C. The TEM images revealed a well-defined silica shell having a thickness of ca. 60 nm, coated on ZIF-67 nanocubes deposited with Pt, where two crucial features were retained. The first feature allows cobalt silicate (CSN) to retain the original morphology of the parent ZIF-67@Pt@mSiO2, while the second feature is the added metal (Pt) embedded in the silicate shell. Pt@CSN had a higher surface area and porosity compared to its counterparts such as SiO2@Pt@mSiO2 and SiO2@Pt (Fig. 7b). In terms of catalytic activity, the TOF of Pt@CSN is also several times better than that of other similar catalysts (Fig. 7b). An important point to note is that the molecular sizes of H2 and CO2 are 0.29 nm and 0.33 nm, respectively, which are much smaller than the average window size of the shell in the Pt@CSN sample (2.6 nm). Therefore, the nanoscale diffusion pathways of Pt@CSN will not cause any transport limitations of the reactant gases, but will provide more and longer courses for gases throughout the catalyst bed.
As depicted in Fig. 7c, uniform octahedrons of UiO-66 nanocrystals were initially synthesized, where their nominal size could be tuned based on the initial concentration of reactants and the reaction time. A protective shell of mesoporous silica was formed around each UiO-66 nanocrystals, with yttrium subsequently added through wet-impregnation, helping it to slip through the mesoporous silica shell into the core, forming Y-UiO66@mSiO2. Subsequently, this intermediate product was calcined at high temperature to produce thermally stable pseudo-fluorite-type tetragonal and cubic mixed structures of the solid superacid YSZ phase in the shell. Then, Pd was loaded via wet-impregnation, theoretically loading in both the YSZ interior and mSiO2 shell exterior. However, based on the reported HRTEM-EDX elemental mapping, the majority of Pd was loaded in the interior space, which can be attributed to the chemical differences between YSZ and mSiO2 in terms of surface hydrophilicity and chelating ability to metal precursors during the impregnation process. In the case of the as-synthesized YSZ@mSiO2 nanoreactors, more importantly, a micro/mesoporous structure was confirmed based on N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms and pore size distribution. Subsequently, the nanoreactor was utilized for CO2 conversion. Application-wise, the yttrium ion permeability in the mesoporous silica shell was exploited, resulting in improved CO selectivity and CO2 conversion by Pt/YSZ@mSiO2 compared to Pt/ZrO2@mSiO2 more significantly at higher temperature (Fig. 7c). The good stability reported for Pt/YSZ@mSiO2 at 400 °C for 30 h is attributed to the formation of some tetragonal YSZ, which was created at a lower temperature, with a mesoporous silica shell, preventing particle aggregation, and high YSZ surface area without requiring the removal of the template.

4.4 Structurally-defined siliceous catalysts

Siliceous catalysts with varied pore size and shell thickness. 
Well-geometric porous materials are of technological interest given that they can not only interact with atoms, ions and molecules at their surfaces, but also throughout the whole material. The pores of solids are categorized into 3 classes based on their sizes, i.e., micropores (<2 nm), mesopores (2–50 nm) and macropores (>50 nm). Porosity can ease the migration of chemical reactants across the catalyst structure, paving the way for a complete reactant transformation to products, besides preventing the sintering of the metals and coke formation in high-temperature reactions such as the CO2 reforming of methane. Siliceous matter can also be utilized for developing a coating layer (or shell) either to protect other components or its own structures for miscellaneous purposes. Either considered as a protection suit or a screening port, the imposed shell may induce diffusion and mass transport challenges when catalyzing a chemical reaction. Therefore, optimization of the shell thickness size considering its intrinsic porosity to facilitate the reaction progression should be carefully considered.
As reported by Wang et al. in 2019,210 the importance of a mouldable silica shell and hollow cavity for encapsulating and packing NPs (Ni@SiO2 nanocapsule) was appraised in the DRM reaction. Firstly, a reverse micelle approach using a water-in-oil system was employed to synthesize yolk–shell structured capsules containing Ni NPs.299 In that work, different three cavity samples and one sample without any cavity were prepared, out of which three are represented in Fig. 8a including Ni@SNS (with no cavity space around Ni NPs), Ni@SNC-A3 (with a small cavity space around Ni NPs), and Ni@SNC-A6 (with a larger cavity space around Ni NPs), and their TEM images are shown in Fig. 8b(1–3), respectively. However, another sample, namely Ni@SNC-A12, whose TEM image is presented in Fig. 8b(4) (with the largest cavity space around Ni NPs), was also prepared, in which the aging time in the sol–gel synthesis was the longest (i.e., 12 h). According to the reaction results, it was inferred that sufficient inner space can enhance the dispersion of the Ni NPs and increase the number of active Ni sites, facilitating the gasification of carbon species. However, the lack of sufficient reaction spaces or narrow spaces surrounding the metal sites led to the over-accumulation of carbon intermediates, thus exacerbating the aggregation of the inner Ni NPs and leading to coking. However, there is an optimal cavity volume for these Ni-based catalysts in the DRM reaction, as shown by the DRM performance results of the three cavity-different samples (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the alteration in cavity space and the ultimate shape of the coated shell of silica-encapsulated Ni NPs by varying the aging time of the synthesis process (i.e., reverse micelle approach in water-in-oil system). Three possible types of no cavity space (Ni@SNS), small cavity space (Ni@SNC-A3), and large cavity space (Ni@SNC-A6) around the encapsulated Ni NPs. (b) TEM images of (1) Ni@SNS, (2) Ni@SNC-A3, (3) Ni@SNC-A6, and (4) Ni@SNC-A12. (c) Examining the importance of cavity space in the three types of Ni@silica catalyst in DRM reaction. The effect of shell thickness of nanocapsule on the DRM reaction performance: (d) schematic of the yolk–shell Ni@SiO2 nanocapsule (NSNC) and its working principle including (A) mass transfer across the shell, (B (B1 and B2)) gas diffusion and transport mechanisms over the shell with thick and dense structure, and (C (C1, C2, and C3)) diffusant transport mechanism over the shell mesopore with normal transport without interruption, gas-wall effect, and hard-blocker effect. (e) Schematic illustration of three modes of porosity within the nanocapusle shell (model I: supermicropore, model II: small mesopore, and model III: capsule internal voids or macropore). TEM images of NSNC catalysts and their shell thickness size including (f) NSNC-T5, (g) NSNC-T10, (h) NSNC-T15, (i) NSNC-T20. (j) Shell diffusion effect simulation by Weisz–Prater model and (k) validation of the NSNC-Tx nanoreactors by the Weisz–Prater criterion as a function of their shell thickness and porosity. (l) Synthetic procedure scheme of nickel-silicate hollow spheres (NHS) with varying shell-thickness by altering the silica templates, base source, and nickel precursor. HRTEM images of shell-varied nickel-silicate hollow spheres (NHS) with shell-embedded Ni derived from SiO2, SCSx, and MSS in the form of (m) as-synthesized and (n) hydrogen-reduced forms. In (m & n): (a) NHS–SiO2–S, (b) NHS-SCS0.1-S, (c) NHS-SCS0.3-S, (d) NHS-SCS0.1-S, (e) NHS-MSS-A, (f) NHS-MSS-AS0.3, and (g) NHS-MSS-S. Note: For both reduced and spent forms, average nanoparticle size of Ni is inserted in each image. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission: (a–c) ref. 210 Copyright 2019, Elsevier, (d–k) ref. 297 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society, (l–n) ref. 298 Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
In continuation of the work reported by Wang et al.,210 they extended their research by investigating yolk–shell Ni@SiO2 nanocapsules (NSNC) and their reaction performance via the essential diffusion effect as a function of shell structure (Fig. 8d–k).297 Presenting new insights into the modified Weisz–Prater criterion and point-particle/blocker models (Fig. 8d and e), they investigated the relationship among mass diffusion (Fig. 8d(A)), thick and dense shell diffusion types (Fig. 8d(B)), and interrupted and normal gas diffusivity (Fig. 8d(C)). NSNC yolk–shell structure with different shell thicknesses between 2.9 nm to 8.5 nm were synthesized (Fig. 8e and f). Three modes of porosity were found for the NSNC samples (Fig. 8d). Firstly, a super-micropore was found at 1.3 nm, which is due to the ubiquitous breathing (worm-like; model I) holes in the silica wall. Secondly, a small mesopore at 3.4 nm was also identified, which is ascribed to the cylindrical-like shell pore or spontaneous gap or tearing wall defect from the overlapped nanochamber, which can represent as an important shell channel for gas diffusion during catalysis (model II). Thirdly, the existence of macropores arising from the inner voids of the capsule (whose size is consistent with the cavity length in the TEM images, model III) or the stack of nanocapsules. In fact, they concluded that the relation between the shell thickness and porosity of their NSNC nanoreactors with the shell diffusion effects is strongly correlated with their modified Weisz–Prater model by incorporating the apparent shell porosity in their proposed Weisz–Prater criterion under normal flow conditions. This modified model on the shell diffusion effect was evaluated with reasonable assumptions on geometric effect and other diffusion terms to be negligible. It was found that a very thin shell thickness is not beneficial given that the overall sturdiness of the nanocapsule can be highly compromised (Fig. 8f) or cross-linking of adjacent capsule shells may occur due to the lack of sufficient electrostatic repulsion (Fig. 8g). Although the catalysts with intermediate shell thickness (NSNC-T10 and NSNC-T15) demonstrated good catalytic activity and stability, only a small drop in performance was reported when the reaction is switched from a low to a high feed flow rate. However, before switching back to a low flow rate, the same was not observed for the other two catalysts (NSNC-T5 and NSNC-T20). To account for this reversible catalytic performance across all the catalysts, the blocker or gas wall model (Fig. 8d(C2)) was suggested to justify the temporary deactivation, caused by the increase in shell mass transfer resistance. However, NSNC with the thinnest shell (NSNC-T5) and NSNC with the thickest shell (NSNC-T20), both with low apparent shell porosity, experienced significant permanent catalyst deactivation after reverting to low flow conditions. To address the irreversible performance drop for NSNC-T20, a hard blocker model (Fig. 8d(C3)) was proposed, with it being attributed to water or collapsed pores formed during the reactions, resulting in permanent deactivation. NSNC-T5 with the thinnest shell and lowest fraction of micropores and mesopores experienced prominent Ni sintering and coking behavior after the reaction, which are supported by the TEM and XRD results. Lastly, based on the shell properties of the NSNC nanoreactors, the shell diffusion effect (C′WP) versus shell thickness was simulated by the modified Weisz–Prater model (Fig. 8j and k) by considering both the internal diffusion among the catalyst pellets and the mass transport over the individual capsule-structured nanoreactors. By assuming negligible pellet diffusions and identical reaction rates for all the tested catalysts, the shell thickness increased and/or shell porosity decreased, leading to an increase in shell diffusion.
In contrast to the previously reported different-shell Ni@SiO2 nanocapsules (NSNC) with cavity-confined Ni NPs (Fig. 8b)297 but similar to shell-embedded Ni NPs of Ni@S-1 supported hollow zeolites (Fig. 6j),283 different shell-thickness nickel-silicate hollow spheres by varying the silica templates and alkaline sources were also reported recently (Fig. 8l).298 As shown in Fig. 8m, two sets of nickel-silicate hollow spheres derived from Stöber silica spheres and silica-coated SiO2 (SiO2 and SCS, Fig. 8m(a–d)) and mesoporous silica spheres (MSS, Fig. 8m(e and f)) are presented. For both sets of samples, specific procedures were applied to vary their shell thickness,298 in which the former (i.e., SiO2 and SCSx), altering the shell-thickness relied on the focal morphology of the initial template precursors, while for the latter (i.e., MSS), alkaline variation (sodium acetate denoted as “S”, ammonia denoted as “A”, and sodium acetate/ammonia mixture denoted as “AS”) during the nickel-silicate formation was responsible for the variation in shell thickness. According to Fig. 8m, the thinnest shell thickness was reported to be 12 nm (NHS–SiO2–S) and the thickest one was 180 nm (NHS-MSS-A). As shown in Fig. 8n, hydrogen-reduction of the as-synthesized NHS products generated an Ni/SiO2 sample with an overall similar morphology and shell-embedded Ni NPs. Small-sized Ni NPs in these hollow spheres were generated in the range of 2.5 nm to 6.8 nm, depending on the NHS shell thickness. These materials were investigated for their shell thickness effect during the DRM reaction. Quite surprisingly, some of the resulting hollow Ni/SiO2 spheres with thinnest shell thickness containing a high Ni content (∼30 wt%) gave rise to a high CO2 and CH4 conversion with little or no coking observed. In comparison, for many other reported catalysts with a lower Ni content (i.e., lower than 30 wt%), the catalyst suffered from high coking and lower conversion.209,219 According to this study and another similar report,210 the internal empty space of these Ni-based catalysts is highly likely beneficial for coking inhibition through instant carbon gasification.

4.5 Atomically-defined siliceous catalysts

Nanoarchitectured and single-atom catalysts (SACs). 
Although use of silica-based single-atom catalysts has rarely been reported for CO2 conversion reactions, there is a growing number of well-designed catalysts containing precisely incorporated Si element together with other transition metals (e.g., Co and Cu) to form phyllosilicates or atomically coordinated metal-Si (MSix) structures with a defined atomic-scale architecture.
In a recent review by Bian and Kawi, the synthesis and characterization of phyllosilicates are discussed.300 Phyllosilicates are lamellar silicates that contain tetrahedral sheets and octahedral sheets in a 2D mesh pattern in their distinctive repeating patterns. Different layered structures result in the formation of different phyllosilicates. For example, kaolinite is formed via the repetition of one tetrahedral sheet and one octahedral sheet, whereas smectite is formed by the repetition of one octahedral sheet between two tetrahedral sheets. The cation in the tetrahedral sheet typically has high valency, such as Si4+, Al3+ and Fe3+, while the cation in octahedral sheets usually has a lower valency, such as Mg2+, Mn2+, Ni2+, Cu2+, Zn2+, and Co2+ and others.
The hydrothermal synthesis of phyllosilicate can be performed by using either the ammonia, urea or sodium method. Zhan and Zeng demonstrated that the sodium method was capable of transforming the silica support into silica-supported M-phyllosilicate (where M = Mn, Ni, Co, and Fe).302 In another report, Sheng and Zeng grew long hollow Cu phyllosilicate nanotubes on silica nanospheres, resulting in the formation of an urchin-like hollow sphere morphology.134 The catalyst material after doping with Ni and Zn was reduced, producing Cu-based nanoparticles evenly distributed along the length of the nanotubes, which were evaluated for CO2 hydrogenation to methanol and CO. In the study by Loaiza-Gil et al., they prepared cobalt phyllosilicate catalysts via the ammonia method and tested them for CO hydrogenation.303 It was found that the as-synthesized catalyst achieved a CO conversion of around 35%, with an initial transient CO2 selectivity of 25% for the first 5000 s before dropping to 0%. The stable reaction after 5000 s obtained around 60% alcohol selectivity and 40% hydrocarbons. Among the alcohols, methanol and ethanol were the main products, in a ratio of 2:1. Longer chain alcohols such as 2-propanol, 1-propanol, 1-butanol and 1-pentanol were also found as minor products.
Several samples of Co@Six with locally controllable Si atoms were synthesized via the hydrolysis of TEOS and cobalt nitrate, which formed cobalt phyllosilicates as intermediates, followed by late-stage catalyst activation including calcination and reduction of the solid materials (Fig. 9a). Co NPs (ca. 3.9 nm) were embedded throughout the silica nanosheet support. At different temperatures, the MeOH selectivity was plotted against CO2 conversion for different classes of catalysts to reveal the probable interdependence, where an increment in temperature typically resulted in higher CO2 conversion but with lower MeOH selectivity (Fig. 9b). Furthermore, for the stability test of the Co@Si0.95 catalyst with the best MeOH selectivity was run for 100 h in a flow reactor, revealing high stability with negligible change CO2 conversion and MeOH selectivity after a temperature step change from 320 °C to 380 °C for 30 h before stepping down back to 320 °C (Fig. 9c).
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic overview of synthesis of Co@Six with cobalt phyllosilicates as intermediates, (b) CO2 conversion and MeOH selectivity of Co@Six catalysts at 260–320 °C, and (c) stability test of Co@Si0.95 catalyst operated for 100 h in a flow reactor. (d) Schematic overview of silica-based nanorods of Pt–NiCe@SiO2 yolk–shell single atom catalyst (SAC) with atomically dispersed Pt on Ni–Ce nanoparticles (as yolk) encapsulated inside tubular silica (as shells) for low temperature dry reforming of methane (DRM) and (e and f) HRTEM images and HRTEM-EDX elemental mappings of Pt–NiCe@SiO2 SAC. (g) Schematic overview of the procedure for the preparation for 3D network of silica nanowires (Si–RNH2–Cu) containing coordinated Cu sites from Cu2O spheres and Si–RNH2 sites from APTMS, as well as the derived Cu–ZnO catalyst, (h) 72 h timeline of Cu2O growth into the silica nanowire network demonstrated by 3D schemes and TEM images, and (i) stability test for time on stream during CO2 hydrogenation to methanol using silica-based nanowire network with reduced Cu/ZnO (Cu0/ZnO/SiO2). Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission: (a–c) ref. 89 Copyright 2020. Nature; (d–f) ref. 183 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society; (g–i) ref. 301 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society. 
Single-atom catalysts (SACs) are usually reported using relatively simple silica-based substrates. However, recently, the preparation of a more complicated system of Pt–NiCe@SiO2 SAC with Pt single-atom-alloy (Pt SAA) species was reported.183 Pt–NiCe yolk nanoparticles, with Pt single-atom decorated on the external surfaces of Ni–Ce alloy nanoparticles, were successfully prepared via a one-pot synthesis (Fig. 9d). Subsequently, the Pt–NiCe nanoparticles were coated with a silica shell, as illustrated by the TEM image in Fig. 9e, with the evenly distributed Pt SAC across its structure confirmed by HRTEM-EDX elemental mapping (Fig. 9f). The Pt–NiCe@SiO2 catalyst exhibited outstanding resistance toward coking when applied in the DRM at low temperatures. The confined space of the yolk–shell structures promoted facile CO desorption, suppressing the Boudouard reaction (CO disproportionation). Meanwhile, the Pt–Ni SAA enhanced the reducibility of Ni. The bifunctional catalyst hampered both CH4 decomposition and CO disproportionation. It demonstrated decent catalytic stability for over 120 h of DRM at 500 °C. Nevertheless, Pt contents higher than 0.25 wt% led to the formation of Pt nanoparticles and oligomerization of carbohydrates.
A recent study reported an alternative synthetic approach for the preparation of a CuZn/SiO2 catalyst from a single solid precursor with atomically defined structure (Fig. 9g).301 Starting with Cu2O nanospheres as the sacrificial copper precursor, nanowire networks of copper-organosilicate could be prepared via a dissolution–polycondensation process (Fig. 9h). The material characterization suggested a metal–alkylamine–silicate hybrid architecture with atomically dispersed Cu2+ ions, where the organosilicate layers originated from the polycondensation of silanes and the Cu-containing gallery space was derived from the complexation process between the amine and copper. Being abundant in alkylamine ligands, Zn species could be introduced with tailorable proportions, which enabled the fine-tuning of the catalyst composition. The obtained CuZn-organosilicate could then be transformed into silica-supported catalysts with small Cu nanoparticles (5 nm) and CuZn alloy was observed at the metal interface. The metal-organosilicate nanowire networks not only served as a structural support, but also served as a single solid precursor, enabling precise engineering of the active components. The obtained catalyst exhibited stable activity over a week-long stability test owing to the confinement of the Cu nanoparticles (Fig. 9i).

5 Importance of meso- and micro-porosity for gas-phase CO2 conversion
One fundamental approach to minimize the diffusion limitation is to shorten the transport path length, which can be realized by developing hierarchically porous materials that integrate porosities of multiple levels in a single solid body.35 This conceptual notion, theoretically corroborated by the Thiele modulus for similar materials,304 has been experimentally showcased by several studies, as will be elaborated below. The type of studies explored herein are fall into two categories, as follows: (i) studies that support the observed experimental reaction performances of their porous structures by theoretical/simulation data and (ii) studies that experimentally correlate dependent parameters (e.g., Cu NP size or support pore size relation to catalytic activity) to account for the porosity effect (by facilitating diffusion or controlling the active sites) on reaction performance.
By virtue of computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulations, the importance of well-ordered porosity for solid materials was demonstrated during gas–solid catalytic reactions.93 Accordingly, four common utilized spherical morphologies including rigid sphere (e.g., SiO2), mesoporous sphere with a rigid core (e.g., mSiO2), mesoporous sphere with a hollow core (or porous hollow sphere, e.g., hSiO2), and a multi-void mesoporous sphere with a maze-like structure (e.g., MVmSiO2) were examined against a gas flow. Among them, the precisely-engineered MVmSiO2 has been shown to take advantage of combined hierarchical and structural superiority over its analogous counterparts in dealing with the incoming gas flow (Fig. 10). As can be seen, the more porous and compartmented the sphere, the higher the flow segregation and wetness of the interior/exterior spaces. According to the streamline profiles, the gas flow is mainly split into two general upward and downward flow for both the rigid sphere and mesoporous sphere with a rigid core (Fig. 10a and b). Based on the model results, mSiO2 with a rigid core may be more practical and suitable for liquid medium compared to gas-phase media, owing to the fact that liquid molecules have equal opportunity to enter all the pores, while the gas-phase reaction performed in one-way tubes will not provide the possibility for full utilization of the whole surface area of the structure. However, when the internal rigidity is either removed or replaced with a well-arranged porosity with appropriate pore connectivity and openness, complete wetness of both internal and external surfaces is achieved for both hollow sphere with a single-void core and highly mesoporous sphere with a multi-voids core (Fig. 10c and d). Owing to the higher material utilization and presence of a mazelike structure, the multi-void mesoporous sphere or MVmSiO2 was proposed to enhance the catalytic performance by promoting purely transport processes.93 Recent advances due to the facile and pragmatic preparation of complicated maze-like structures particularly promise further improvements in a wide range of applications.305
 Fig. 10  Results of computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulation for (a) rigid sphere, (b) mesoporous sphere with rigid core, (c) mesoporous hollow sphere, and (d) multi-voids mesoporous sphere against gas flow (i.e., air with flow rate at 0.01 m s−1). Left panels show streamline plots and right panels show velocity vector plots. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 93 Copyright 2021, Wiley. 
Calcination testing under a nitric oxide (NO) atmosphere to grow copper nanoparticles (Cu NPs) in either ordered cage-like or disordered mesoporous silica support material (SBA-16 and SiO2-gel respectively) was performed by Prieto et al.253 The catalyst stability of the resultant CuZnO/SiO2 material has an inverse relationship with the Cu particle size grown in the cage-confinement domains (Fig. 11a). After 240 h on stream, the surface average Cu particle size increased from 15% to 31% for the catalysts supported on SBA-16 and SiO2-gel, but not exceeding the pore dimensions of the silica supports (Fig. 11b–g). This indicates that the pore size of the silica support is capable of mechanically restricting Cu particle growth, leading to better catalyst stability. In relation to catalyst stability, the second order deactivation rate constant was found to have a linear relation to the pore descriptor of the support materials, with the ordered SBA-16 silica support having a deactivation rate constant two to four times lower than that of the disordered SiO2-gel silica support, indicating that an ordered silica support structure offers better catalyst stability compared to a disordered porous substrate (Fig. 11h and i).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic overview depicting the relation between catalyst stability and support pore descriptor, HAADF-STEM micrographs for (b) CuZnO/SBA_5 unreacted, (c) CuZnO/SBA_5 reacted, (d) CuZnO/SBA_8 unreacted, (e) CuZnO/SBA_8 reacted, (f) CuZnO/SG_9 unreacted, (g) CuZnO/SG_9 reacted after stability test of 240 h, and graphs depicting relation between (h) the cage and pore size for CuZnO/SiO2 catalysts supported on SBA-16 and (i) entrance and pore size of CuZnO/SiO2 supported on SiO2-gel. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 253 Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society. 
Homogenously distributed Cu NPs supported on various N2-calcined CuZn/mSiO2 catalysts were achieved after reduction even at high temperature (Fig. 12a–c).254 However, this was not the case for the NO-calcined CuZn/mSiO2 catalysts after H2 reduction, where bright patches distributed throughout the silica support were observed at low magnifications (Fig. 12d), corresponding to regions with a high local metal content. The size of these high-metal-density domains (HMDD) ranged from ca. 20 nm to a few micrometers (Fig. 12e), and their average size increased with an increase in overall Cu pore volumetric loading, with these HMDDs comprised of individual Cu nanoparticles in close proximity (Fig. 12c). With an increase in support pore size from ca. 5 nm to 23 nm, the average local metal surface loading increased in almost a linear manner by a factor of 4.5, while the local surface density of Cu NPs decreased exponentially, despite the consequent increment in Cu surface loading (Fig. 12g). In summary, NO-calcined mesoporous silica-based catalysts produce Cu nanoparticles that are grouped in high-metal-density domains, with the deactivation rate strongly sensitive to the support pore size, but not for the N2-calcined mesoporous silica-based catalyst with an even distribution of the resultant Cu NPs (Fig. 12h). Hence, there is a possible interplay between these different structural properties of support materials, which requires a plausible mechanistic interpretation of how the particle growth rate is dependent on the support pore size, which ultimately affects the overall catalyst stability as one of the key factors to consider in nanocatalyst design.
 Fig. 12  HAADF-STEM micrographs for (a) CuZn/SG11(4)-N2, (b) CuZn/SG5(2)-N2, and (c) CuZn/SG5(2)-N2 at high magnification, (d) CuZn/SG11(4)-NO, (e) CuZn/SG15(6)-NO, and (f) CuZn/SG7(2)-NO after reduction, where bright patches correspond to high-metal-density domains, and (g) support pore size plotted against local Cu surface loading and nanoparticle surface density for reported catalysts. (h) Second-order deactivation rate constant plotted against support pore diameter for both N2-calcined and NO-calcined catalysts. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 254 Copyright 2013, Elsevier. 
The significance of shell thickness in diffusion was also projected by C. Wang et al., which was explained previously in Fig. 8a–c and d–k.210,297 In one work,297 they specifically evaluated the shell diffusion effect (C′WP) versus shell thickness by using a modified Weisz–Prater model considering both the internal diffusion and the intraparticle mass transport. It was thus revealed that shell diffusion can be increased by an optimal shell thickness increase and/or shell porosity decrease.
Therefore, the porosity of siliceous matter is of great importance not only in the CO2 conversion reactions showcased above, but in other related applications such as CO2 capture applications.306
6 Important CO2 conversion routes using silica/silicate-based materials
6.1 CO2 hydrogenation to olefins and hydrocarbons (HCs)
With fruitful research endeavours toward FT synthesis for the conversion of syngas to valuable hydrocarbons,307 it is of great interest to researchers across the globe to develop strategies that can directly convert chemically inert CO2 to hydrocarbons and other value-added chemicals. However, although emerging technologies demonstrate promising results on the lab scale, the direct CO2 conversion to valorized hydrocarbons and chemicals is still in its infancy. Besides, it is necessary to address scientific problems and economic aspects regarding product yield and selectivity as well as catalyst mass production toward industrial-scale application.
Depending on the active component and intermediate species, CO2 conversion toward hydrocarbons can be broadly classified into two categories, namely, CO-mediated modified FT route and methanol-mediated tandem reaction route. Silica is generally inert for both routes, while zeolites synthesized from silica precursors are the most commonly used catalyst supports for CO2 conversion to hydrocarbons. In the case where the active metal is suitable for FT reaction (e.g., Fe and Co), zeolites can be used simply as the catalyst support.135,136,161 The role of zeolite is to provide strong metal–support interaction to minimize particle aggregation during the course of reactions. With active metals confined in the zeolite support, carbon deposition and catalyst deactivation can be prevented. The microporous channels of zeolites can restrict the growth of the hydrocarbon chains, and thus the product is selective to light hydrocarbons (C2 to C5). When the active metal is loaded on the surface of zeolites, the zeolite support can also promote olefin oligomerization and there is no restriction on hydrocarbon chain growth. Consequently, the product distribution is selective toward C5 to C11 hydrocarbons.308
In the case of methanol-mediated tandem reaction routes, zeolites are used as both the support and active catalyst for methanol to hydrocarbon conversion. Typically, zeolites are loaded with metals that are active for converting CO2 to methanol. This in situ formed methanol intermediate is then converted to hydrocarbons by the zeolite support (i.e., MTH, MTO, and MTA). By engineering the pore structure and chemical properties of the zeolite support, it is possible to convert methanol to saturated alkanes and olefins (i.e., MTH and MTO).131,158,309–313 By increasing the operating pressure to 50 bar, it is possible to achieve aromatics products from these methanol-mediated pathways (i.e., MTA).314,315 A list of the different reported siliceous-based catalysts or CO2 conversion to valuable hydrocarbons (HCs) except methane (CH4) is compiled in Table 2 as further information for readers.
Table 2 Literature data on advanced silica-derived catalysts for converting CO2 mixture (CO2/H2) and/or syngas to valuable hydrocarbons (HCs) except CH4a




Entry
Catalyst, ref.
Reaction route
Role of silica/siliceous material

T (°C), P (bar)
Feed
Major HCs





a FT, RWGS, MTH, MTO, and MTA stand for Fischer–Tropsch, reverse water–gas shift, methanol to hydrocarbon, methanol to olefin, and methanol to aromatics, respectively.





1
ZnCrOx/MSAPO307
CO activation – C–C coupling
Mesoporous SAPO zeolite as C–C coupling catalyst
350 °C, 25 bar
CO/H2
C2=, C3=, C4=


2
In2O3/HZSM5 (ref. 131)
Methanol synthesis – MTH
HZSM5 as MTH catalyst
340 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
C5+


3
ZnZrO/SAPO310
Methanol synthesis – MTO
Zn modified SAPO as MTO catalyst
360–400 °C, 20 bar
CO2/H2
C2=, C3=, C4=


4
Na–Fe3O4/HZSM5 (ref. 308)
FT together with olefin oligomerization
HZSM5 as olefin oligomerization catalyst
320 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
C5–C11


5
CeO2–Pt@mSiO2–Co160
RWGS – FT
Mesoporous SiO2 as coating shell and Co support
250 °C, 6.2 bar
CO2/H2
C2, C3, C4


6
In–Zr@SAPO-34 (ref. 309 and 311)
Methanol synthesis – MTH
SAPO-34 as MTH catalyst
380 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
C2=, C3=, C4=


7
Fe@h-ZSM5 (ref. 136)
FT
ZSM-5 hollow shell as catalyst support
370 °C, 20 bar
CO/H2
C2, C3, C4, C5+


8
Co@hsZSM5@Pt135
RWGS – FT
ZSM-5 hollow sphere as catalyst support
200–500 °C, 0–30 bar
CO2/H2
C2+


9
hZ5-CuZn@Pt158
Methanol synthesis – MTH
ZSM-5 hollow shell as catalyst support and MTH catalyst
200–400 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
C2, C3, C4


10
Co/SAPO-34 (ref. 161)
FT
SAPO-34 as catalyst support
220 °C, 20 bar
CO/CO2/H2
C5+


11
ZnGa2O4/SAPO-34 (ref. 312)
Methanol synthesis – MTO
SAPO-34 as MTO catalyst
250–450 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
C2=, C3=, C4=


12
ZnAl2O4/SAPO-34 (ref. 313)
Methanol synthesis – MTO
SAPO-34 as MTO catalyst
370 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
C2=, C3=, C4=


13
ZnCrOx/Zn-ZSM5 (ref. 314)
Methanol synthesis – MTA
Zn-ZSM5 as MTA catalyst
330 °C, 50 bar
CO2/H2
C5+ aromatics


14
Cr2O3/HZSM5 (ref. 315)
Methanol synthesis – MTA
HZSM5 as MTA catalyst
350 °C, 50 bar
CO2/H2
C5+ aromatics




6.2 CO2 hydrogenation to methanol and higher alcohols (HAs)
Methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation (known as CO2-to-methanol) is a plausible approach for thermal CO2 conversion and a futuristic pathway toward bringing net-zero carbon into reality.316 Although the reaction mechanism is still controversial, two reaction pathways are commonly accepted, depending on the active components and determined by in situ characterization (e.g., in situ DRIFTS), namely, the formate pathway and the RWGS + CO hydrogenation pathway (Fig. 13).
 Fig. 13  Overview of possible reaction pathways of CO2 hydrogenation to CO, CH3OH, CH4 and other hydrocarbons. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 17 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In the case of the formate pathway, an initial hydrogen atom transfer to CO2 molecule leads to the formation of a surface-bound formate (*HCOO) species, which then undergoes a series of hydrogenation and dissociation processes to end up as CH3OH and CH4 (Fig. 13), respectively.42,141,317–320 In particular, for the prevailing CuZn system adopted from the commercial Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst for syngas-to-MeOH, both the in situ operando DRIFTS experiment and DFT computational results suggest the favorable formate formation and stabilization of the CuZn alloy.93 CO species are mainly detected as a side product due to the RWGS reaction on the Cu0 sites in similar systems. In particular, a recent study revealed that for a commercial Cu/ZnO/Al2O3 catalyst dispersed on a silica support, CO is produced in large quantities from the RWGS reaction occurring on the silica surface, owing to the hydrogen spillover effect of the supported Cu nanoparticles.44 Thus, by tuning the interparticle distance of the supported Cu, the spilled hydrogen concentration could be reduced and the RWGS reaction could be effectively suppressed, leading to an improved MeOH selectivity from 35.5 to 88.9 mol%.44 A recent study categorized the process into artificial polyenzymatic cascade reaction by encapsulating four enzymes (formate dehydrogenase denoted as FateDH, formaldehyde dehydrogenase denoted as FaldDH, alcohol dehydrogenase denoted as YADH, and phosphite dehydrogenase denoted as PTDH) into silica nanocapsules.321
The alternative pathway is the tandem reaction of RWGS followed by CO hydrogenation (Fig. 13). It is initiated by the formation of the carboxyl (*HOCO) intermediate species via CO2 hydrogenation and the dissociation of this intermediate to form *CO and *OH. Subsequent hydrogenation of *CO without cleavage of the C–O bond leads to the formation of CH3OH and otherwise CH4.42,141 The formate pathway is preferred over RWGS + CO-hydrogenation (RWGS + CO-Hydro) for Cu/ZnO catalysts given that the stability of *HCOO is expected to be higher than *HOCO, while the energy barrier for the formation of *HCOO is also expected to be lower. Nevertheless, DFT calculations and kinetic Monte Carlo (KMC) simulations suggested the dominance of the formate pathway on clean or Au-doped Cu(111) surface, while the RWGS + CO-Hydro pathway is much faster than the formate pathway on Pd, Rh, Pt, and Ni-doped Cu(111).322 Pd, Rh, Pt, and Ni-doped Cu(111) were estimated to have a higher methanol yield than the conventional Cu(111) following the formate pathway.322 Both DFT and KMC computations and in situ DRIFTS measurements confirmed the carboxyl intermediates and RWGS pathway on Cu/ZrO2 and Cu/TiO2 catalysts, while due to the overly strong binding of formate species, they did not participate in the reaction.323 A similar conclusion was drawn for Cu supported on ceria (CeO2).324 In general, silica supports are usually observed to be inactive and the hydrogenation ceases after RWGS (e.g., Pt/SiO2).325 However, in a Cu+-rich Cu/SiO2 catalyst exhibiting a shattuckite-like structure, the *CO species were stabilized and MeOH synthesis via the RWGS + CO-Hydro pathway was enhanced.46 The coexistence of formate and RWGS + CO-Hydro pathways was observed on a Pd–Cu/SiO2 catalyst.94 In contrast, if the RWGS-active metal is coupled with a methanation-promoting metal, the produced CO will be hydrogenated to CH4.147
Besides various products from C1 chemistry (CH3OH, CH4, CO, etc.), more research attention has been directed toward higher alcohols (HAs), especially in recent years.326 The most widely accepted reaction route is the CO-mediating mechanism proposed by Arakawa et al. (Ru/SiO2).327 CO was generated via the RWGS, followed by CO hydrogenation and CO insertion to form C2+ alcohols. The CO-mediated pathway was also reported for other silica-supported catalysts (Co2C/SiO2, VOx-Rh/MCM-41).328,329 Alternatively, the *CHx species may arise from the C–O bond scission in methoxy moieties from the formate pathway mentioned above, and hence this mechanism is termed the formate/methoxy-mediated pathway. This mechanism has rarely been reported for silica-supported catalysts, given that one of the reports points out that the surface hydroxyls of the support (e.g., TiO2) are crucial in stabilizing the formate intermediate.330 Other reaction routes including formyl-methanol-coupling and alkylformate-coupling were also proposed in tank reactors for the synthesis of higher alcohols.326 A list of different siliceous-based catalysts reported or CO2 hydrogenation to methanol and higher alcohols (HAs) is compiled in Table 3 as further information for readers.
Table 3 Literature data on silica-derived catalysts for converting CO2 mixture (CO2/H2) to methanol and higher alcohols (HAs)




Entry
Catalyst, ref.
Reaction route
Role of silica/siliceous material

T (°C), P (bar)
Feed
Major products




1
Au/mSiO2 (ref. 317)
Formate pathway
mSiO2 as catalyst support
100 °C, 16 bar
CO2/H2
MeOH, formate, formamide


2
Co-phyllosilicate (Co@Si0.9)318
Formate pathway
Phyllosilicate as catalyst support and promoter
250 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
MeOH, CH4, CO


3
Ga3Ni5/SiO2 (ref. 319)
Formate pathway
SiO2 as catalyst support
150–250 °C, 1 bar
CO2/H2
MeOH, CO


4
Ga2O3–Pd/SiO2 (ref. 320)
Formate pathway
SiO2 as catalyst support
235–265 °C, 10–40 bar
CO2/H2
MeOH, CO


5
CuZnZr/MVmSiO2 (ref. 48)
Formate pathway
Multivoid mSiO2 as support, improved the fluid dynamics and catalyst wetting, constrained metal particle agglomeration
240–280 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
MeOH, CO


6
CuZnAl/SiO2 (ref. 44)
Formate pathway
SiO2 as catalyst support
210 °C, 34 bar
CO2/H2
MeOH, CO


7
Polyenzymes/SiO2 (ref. 321)
Formate pathway
SiO2 capsules as catalyst support, stabilized the enzymes
37 °C, 5 bar
CO2/NADH
MeOH


8
Cu/SiO2(shattuckite-like)46
RWGS + CO-Hydro
SiO2 as catalyst support and enriched Cu+ species
190–250 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
MeOH, CO


9
Pd–Cu/SiO2(aSiO2, MCM-41, SBA-15, MSU-F)94
Formate pathway & RWGS + CO-Hydro
aSiO2, MCM-41, SBA-15, MSU-F as catalyst supports
250 °C, 41 bar
CO2/H2
MeOH, CO


10
Rh/SiO2 (ref. 327)
CO-mediated HAs
SiO2 as catalyst support
240 °C, 50 bar
CO2/H2
EtOH, MeOH, CH4


11
Co2C/SiO2 (ref. 328)
CO-mediated HAs
SiO2 as catalyst support and stabilized Co2C
250 °C, 50 bar
CO2/H2
C1–C5, C1–C5–OH


12
VOx-Rh/MCM-41 (ref. 329)
CO-mediated HAs
SiO2 as catalyst support and confined Rh nanoparticles
250 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
CH4, CO, MeOH, EtOH




6.3 CO2 hydrogenation to fine/specialty value-added chemicals
Besides the abovementioned H2-involving thermal CO2 conversion processes that utilize CO2 as the sole or major carbon source, CO2 can be employed as a soft-oxidant in several H2-free processes to produce fine/specialty value-added chemicals.331 Herein, we shed light on some of these advances made by silica-based catalysts. A typical example is the DRM process, where other biomass-derived feedstocks (ethanol, glycerol, bio-oil, etc.) can be used as well to produce syngas. Ni supported on SiO2 with a CeO2 shell and Ni supported on cement clinker (calcium silicate) were demonstrated to be active catalysts for the dry reforming of biogas (CH4, CO2) and bio-glycerol, respectively.203,332 A list of other chemical reactions different from that reported early on to use CO2 for producing other valuable organic chemicals using silica/silicate-based catalysts is compiled in Table 4 as further information for readers.
Table 4 Literature data on silica-derived catalysts for converting CO2-based mixtures to fine/specialty value-added chemicals




Entry
Catalyst, ref.
Reaction route
Role of silica/siliceous material

T (°C), P (bar)
Feed
Major products




1
Ni–SiO2@CeO2 (ref. 203)
DRM
Silica as catalyst support
600 °C, 1 bar
Biogas (CO2/CH4)
H2, CO


2
Ni-cement clinker332
Dry reforming of glycerol
Cement clinker (calcium silicate) as catalyst precursor and support
650–750 °C, 1 bar
CO2/glycerol
H2, CO


3

nV-MSNSs333
Dry reforming of propane
Mesoporous silica nanospheres as catalyst support and stabilized the active component
600 °C, 1 bar
CO2/propane
Propylene


4
SixCeO2 (ref. 334)
Dry reforming of ethane
SiO2 coating promoted desorption of ethylene and prevented deep oxidation
700 °C, 1 bar
CO2/ethane
Ethylene


5
Cr/MOS335
Dry reforming of ethane
Mesoporous organosilica (MOS) as catalyst support, promoted catalyst stability
700 °C, 1 bar
CO2/ethane
Ethylene


6
SiBx (ref. 336)
Dry reforming of alkane
Silicon boride employed as the active component
450–595 °C, 1 bar
CO2/C2–C4
C2=–C4=


7
Ammonium salt/SiO2 (ref. 337)
Cycloaddition
Silica gel as support and provided mechanical strength during recycle
90 °C, 10 bar
CO2/epoxides
Cyclic carbonates


8
Zn-BDI/SBA-15 (ref. 338)
Copolymerization
SBA-15 as catalyst support and prevention of Zn–silanol interaction via pore curvature
50 °C, 6.9 bar
CO2/cyclohexene oxide
Polymer


9
Sn-SBA-CH3 (ref. 339)
Direct DMC synthesis
SBA-15 as catalyst support
150 °C, 200 bar
CO2/MeOH
Dimethyl carbonate


10
Dy2Ce2O7/SiO2 (ref. 340)
Nucleophilic addition
Dendritic fibrous nanosilica as catalyst support
100 °C, 30 bar
CO2/aniline/olefin
2-Oxazolidinone


11
MCM-41 (ref. 341)
Nucleophilic addition
MCM-41 was directly employed as the catalyst
120 °C, 30 bar
CO2/propargylic amine
2-Oxazolidinone


12
MCM-41 (ref. 342)
Nucleophilic addition
MCM-41 was directly employed as the catalyst
40 °C, 50 bar
CO2/aziridines
2-Oxazolidinone


13
Ru/MCM-41 (ref. 343)
Nucleophilic addition
MCM-41 as catalyst support to achieve SAC
90 °C, 30 bar
CO2/H2
Formic acid


14
PdAg/SBA-15 (ref. 344)
Nucleophilic addition
SBA-15 as catalyst support
100 °C, 20 bar
CO2/H2
Formic acid


15
Alkylammonium formate/SiO2 (ref. 345)
Hydrosilylation
Amorphous silica as catalyst support


CO2/silane
Silylformate


16
Rh–I–N/SiO2 (ref. 346)
Hydrosilylation–cycloaddition
Silica as catalyst support
100 °C, 10–30 bar
CO2/silane
Cyclic carbonates


17
FLP/SiO2 (ref. 347)
Frustrated Lewis Pair (FLP) facilitated nucleophilic addition
SiO2 as catalyst support
60 °C, 2 bar
CO2/FLP
Formic acid




The oxidative dehydrogenation (ODH) of light alkanes to higher value alkenes is considered another prospective approach in neutralizing the carbon footprint. Compared to the conventional O2-ODH, CO2-ODH achieves the simultaneous dehydrogenation of light alkanes and hydrogenation of CO2.333,348,349 A SiO2 coated layer exhibited the ability to fine tune the reaction selectivity of the CeO2 active phase in the dry reforming of ethane, preventing the deep oxidation of ethane.334 A mesoporous organosilica support was employed to host and stabilize Cr for ethane dry reforming.335 In another study, silicon boride was directly employed as the active component for the dry reforming of ethane, propane, and isobutane.336
Similar to the ODH of light alkanes, CO2 can be employed as an oxidant, while as a carbon source to produce ethylene via C–C coupling with methane. However, it is very challenging to develop highly active catalysts for this application given that the formation of CO and CO2 is preferred. Unfortunately, due to the overwhelming energy barrier, few silica-supported catalysts for this application have been reported. Various commodity chemicals (acetone, acetic acid, acrylic acid, etc.) can be synthesized from the C–C coupling between alkanes and CO2.
Although less studied, substituting O2 with CO2 in the epoxidation of ethylene and propylene may significantly alleviate the GHG emission of the chemical industry. Epoxides can react with CO2 to produce cyclic carbonates and polymers, further reducing the carbon footprint. A silica-gel supported ammonium salt was found to be an effective and stable catalyst for the reaction between various epoxides and CO2 to produce cyclic carbonates.337 An SBA-15-immobilized Zn β-diiminate catalyst was applied in the copolymerization of epoxides (cyclohexane oxide) and CO2.338 The direct synthesis of dimethyl carbonate from CO2 and MeOH was also reported to be facilitated with SBA-15-supported organotin species.339
Besides utilizing CO2 as a soft oxidant in certain organic reactions to produce commodities, the nucleophilic addition of CO2 can give rise to cyclic and other fine chemicals.31 For instance, 2-oxazolidinones can be produced via the nucleophilic addition of nitrogen nucleophiles with CO2.340 In fact, MCM-41 can be directly employed as a catalyst for the synthesis of 2-oxazolidinones.341,342 Besides, formate/formic acid can be produced via the selective reduction of CO2via hydride (H−) transfer. A single-atom Ru catalyst supported on MCM-41 was proven to be effective in the water-free hydrogenation of CO2 to formic acid, which was facilitated by Ru-hydride.343 This strategy was also demonstrated to be effective with silica-supported bimetallic nanoparticles (PdAg).344
Moreover, the chemical reduction of CO2 with boranes, silanes, and ylidic olefins was found to be successful.31 The hydrosilylation of CO2 was facilitated by an alkylammonium formate catalyst supported on amorphous silica.346 The one-pot tandem reaction of hydrosilylation–CO2-cycloaddition was reported with a silica-supported Rh–I complex to produce cyclic carbonate from CO2 and silanes.346
Lastly, the nucleophilic activation of CO2 with frustrated Lewis pair (FLP) technology has recently emerged as a metal-free strategy for CO2 conversion. A nanoscale silica powder-supported FLP system was recently demonstrated to be successful in CO2 capture and conversion to formic acid.347
7 Conclusions and perspectives
Innovative developments in researching silica- and silicate-based materials (or siliceous solid matter in general) to tackle top-priority environmental concerns such as CO2 mitigation, CO2 fixation, and CO2 utilization under the worldwide effort of carbon capture and utilization (CCU) are incessantly ongoing. This has been reinforced by recent research attempts and environmental dialogue revolved around the “circular economy”. In this scenario, catalytic CO2 conversion is attracting tremendous attention because it is an environmentally preferred alternative route to procure commodity chemicals from atmospheric “air” instead of relying on dwindling crude oil resources extracted beneath “ground soil”. This field, although still in its infancy, is constantly flourishing due the huge demand currently and will probably grow exponentially in the near future.
In this review, we discussed the most rampant thermocatalytic CO2 reactions and their products, while unravelling their underlying kinetic and thermodynamic behaviors. Regardless of the catalytic CO2 conversion pathway, three main influential factors affect the process efficacy, as follows: catalyst design, mechanistic insight, and operating condition. From the standpoint of catalyst design, a detailed elaboration of designing advanced nanocatalysts was provided, covering encapsulated/supported, core–shell, hollow, and integrated nanocatalysts (INCs) as well as single-atom catalysts (SACs). In this case, we focused on siliceous-based catalysts and further classified them into four divisions including conventional, morphology-defined, structurally-defined, and atomically-defined catalysts. Subsequently, recent efforts were surveyed in utilizing these siliceous-based catalysts, spanning from conventional to new or advanced silica-based structures for various CO2 utilization pathways. As one of key aspects of high-throughput catalysts in gas-phase reactions, the mesoporosity and microporosity of silica/silicate-based catalysts were analyzed for gas-phase CO2 reactions by scrutinizing the scientific reports and research works in the literature. However, we noticed that although there is a limited number of these reports at the moment, this subject is currently gaining momentum given that these chemical processes deal with the heterogenous “gas–solid” interface.
Lastly, we highlighted three of the most important CO2 transformation reactions with substantial significance for both academia and industry (i.e., CO2 hydrogenation to olefins and hydrocarbons, CO2 hydrogenation to methanol and higher alcohols, and CO2 transformation to fine/specialty chemicals). Although every reaction deserves in-depth research, some of them may not be worthwhile toward industrial applications. With regards to olefin production from direct CO2 hydrogenation, advanced silica-derived catalysts including zeolitic SAPO-35 and ZSM-5 molecular sieves or mesoporous SiO2 structures with conditioned transition metals are suitable for the production of C2= to C5=, C2 to C5, and even aromatics. For this cohort of CO2 hydrogenation, the reaction route using the siliceous-based catalysts was also highlighted to vary depending on the catalyst structure. For methanol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation, the formate pathway dominates in the prevalent CuZn-based nanocatalysts, including silica-based catalysts. Nevertheless, the RWGS + CO-hydrogenation (RWGS + CO-Hydro) pathway may also be prospective for siliceous material-supported catalysts, given that it has been reported that the silica surface can promote the RWGS reaction facilitated by the hydrogen spillover from the supported metal nanoparticles. Thus far, higher alcohol synthesis from CO2 hydrogenation with siliceous material-supported nanocatalysts has been inadequately explored, although siliceous supports can accommodate multiple metal species and favor longer retention times with complex structures. Lastly, thermocatalytic CO2 conversion to other valuable chemicals (i.e., fine/specialty chemicals) has scarcely been studied and mostly remain at the theoretical level. Given that siliceous materials are proven to be versatile and functional supports, the derived catalysts may fill the gap between theory and practice for these CO2-derived organics.
Future research in this field should be continuously carried out towards the above-mentioned ongoing directions. In addition to compositional and structural explorations for the bulk and surface phases in conventional catalysts, more attention should be directed to the following aspects of siliceous matter towards catalytic CO2 conversion:
(i) Support – silica and silicates are low-cost materials with high specific areas, and thus are very suitable for acting as a catalyst support. Furthermore, metal silicates are in general layered materials and their two-dimensional openness should be better utilized for the preparation of highly accessible catalyst carriers. Similarly, the better organization of these 2D materials should be investigated.
(ii) Coating shell or sheath – many methods have been reported for the preparation of microporous and mesoporous silica and zeolitic materials as a coating, which can act either as a protective shell or molecular sieving layer. This type of tunable siliceous material can be employed as a shell or sheath phase in the advanced catalysts to achieve various desirable functionalities specifically for multi-shelled catalyst configurations.
(iii) Active catalysts – with more tandem reactions being introduced in the hydrogenation of CO2 and general CO2 utilization, higher requirements for active catalytic phase are anticipated. In this regard, it is likely that single-component metals have to be replaced by multiple metals to facilitate a specific reaction along the course of multiple reactions. Herein, silica can play a great role in keeping the active metals away from each other for a prolonged performance. To this end, nanoparticles of alloy metals and other nanocomposites will be targeted for these novel active catalyst phases, and related synthetic protocols should be devised with high efficiency utilization of metal elements in mind.
(iv) Architecture and integration hierarchy – because of the increasing compositional and structural complexities in this class of nanostructured catalysts, better architectural designs and newer synthetic integration methods of their various components must be developed. Together with all the above-mentioned efforts, cost analysis, activity evaluation, mechanistic investigation, and long-term stability testing of the developed catalysts are indispensable for their practical applications in the field of CO2 capture and utilization.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The first author cordially acknowledges the discussion received from Dr Sajjad Rimaz regarding CO2 conversion mechanisms and physical coupling routes. The authors gratefully acknowledge the financial support provided by Institute of Sustainability for Chemicals, Energy, and Environment (ISCE2) and National University of Singapore (NUS). H. C. Zeng also gratefully acknowledges the financial support by the National Research Foundation (NRF), Prime Minister's Office, Singapore under its Campus for Research Excellence and Technological Enterprise (CREATE; C4T Program). The authors also acknowledge a partial financial support provided by A*STAR under its CDA grant (C210112017).
Notes and references
S. J. Davis, N. S. Lewis, M. Shaner, S. Aggarwal, D. Arent, I. L. Azevedo, S. M. Benson, T. Bradley, J. Brouwer and Y.-M. Chiang, Science, 2018, 360, eaas9793 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Goeppert, M. Czaun, J.-P. Jones, G. S. Prakash and G. A. Olah, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7995–8048 RSC .
U. Mondal and G. D. Yadav, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 8361–8405 RSC .
J. Artz, T. E. Müller, K. Thenert, J. Kleinekorte, R. Meys, A. Sternberg, A. Bardow and W. Leitner, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 434–504 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Ma, N. Sun, X. Zhang, N. Zhao, F. Xiao, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Today, 2009, 148, 221–231 CrossRef .
S. Saeidi, S. Najari, V. Hessel, K. Wilson, F. J. Keil, P. Concepción, S. L. Suib and A. E. Rodrigues, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2021, 85, 100905 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, J. Wei, M. S. Duyar, V. V. Ordomsky, A. Y. Khodakov and J. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2337–2366 RSC .
J. Wang, G. Zhang, J. Zhu, X. Zhang, F. Ding, A. Zhang, X. Guo and C. Song, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 1406–1423 CrossRef .
K. B. Tan, G. Zhan, D. Sun, J. Huang and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 5197–5231 RSC .
J. Zhong, X. Yang, Z. Wu, B. Liang, Y. Huang and T. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1385–1413 RSC .
X. Zhao, J. K. Babu Joseph and S. Ozcan, iScience, 2020, 23, 101082 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Das, J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Gong, N. Dewangan, K. Hidajat, B. C. Gates and S. Kawi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2937–3004 RSC .
R.-P. Ye, J. Ding, W. Gong, M. D. Argyle, Q. Zhong, Y. Wang, C. K. Russell, Z. Xu, A. G. Russell and Q. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–15 CrossRef .
S. Kar, A. Goeppert and G. S. Prakash, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 2892–2903 CrossRef PubMed .
I. U. Din, M. S. Shaharun, M. A. Alotaibi, A. I. Alharthi and A. Naeem, J. CO2 Util., 2019, 34, 20–33 CrossRef .
X. Su, X.-F. Yang, Y. Huang, B. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 52, 656–664 CrossRef .
S. Kattel, P. Liu and J. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9739–9754 CrossRef .
S. Saeidi, N. A. S. Amin and M. R. Rahimpour, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 5, 66–81 CrossRef .
G. Centi, E. A. Quadrelli and S. Perathoner, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1711–1731 RSC .
X. Pan, F. Jiao, D. Miao and X. Bao, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 6588–6609 CrossRef .
S. Roy, A. Cherevotan and S. C. Peter, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1938–1966 CrossRef .
A. Jangam, S. Das, N. Dewangan, P. Hongmanorom, W. M. Hui and S. Kawi, Catal. Today, 2020, 358, 3–29 CrossRef .
G. Singh, J. Lee, A. Karakoti, R. Bahadur, J. Yi, D. Zhao, K. AlBahily and A. Vinu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4360–4404 RSC .
Y. A. Daza and J. N. Kuhn, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 49675–49691 RSC .
E. V. Kondratenko, G. Mul, J. Baltrusaitis, G. O. Larrazábal and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3112–3135 RSC .
J. Bao, G. Yang, Y. Yoneyama and N. Tsubaki, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 3026–3053 CrossRef .
W. Wang, S. Wang, X. Ma and J. Gong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 3703–3727 RSC .
S.-T. Bai, G. De Smet, Y. Liao, R. Sun, C. Zhou, M. Beller, B. U. Maes and B. F. Sels, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 4259–4298 RSC .
J. Zhong, X. Yang, Z. Wu, B. Liang, Y. Huang and T. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 1385–1413 RSC .
H. T. Luk, C. Mondelli, D. C. Ferré, J. A. Stewart and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1358–1426 RSC .
A. Modak, P. Bhanja, S. Dutta, B. Chowdhury and A. Bhaumik, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 4002–4033 RSC .
S. A. Chernyak, M. Corda, J.-P. Dath, V. V. Ordomsky and A. Y. Khodakov, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2022, 51, 7994–8044 RSC .
P. Sharma, J. Sebastian, S. Ghosh, D. Creaser and L. Olsson, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11, 1665–1697 RSC .
X. Yu and C. T. Williams, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2022, 12, 5765–5794 RSC .
V. Meynen, P. Cool and E. Vansant, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2007, 104, 26–38 CrossRef CAS .
S.-B. Tsai and H. Ma, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Xie, M. A. Van Huis and A. Van Blaaderen, Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 10925–10932 RSC .
Q. Q. Yang, X. L. Chen, Y. He, J. Q. Lai, Y. Xiong, Q. Shen, X. C. Zhou, B. Shao, Y. L. Ma and D. L. Guo, J. Dispersion Sci. Technol., 2021, 42, 1146–1151 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pal, J.-H. Lee and E.-B. Cho, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 2122 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li and J. G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 7840–7861 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hepburn, E. Adlen, J. Beddington, E. A. Carter, S. Fuss, N. Mac Dowell, J. C. Minx, P. Smith and C. K. Williams, Nature, 2019, 575, 87–97 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kattel, P. Liu and J. G. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9739–9754 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jangam, P. Hongmanorom, M. Hui Wai, A. Jeffry Poerjoto, S. Xi, A. Borgna and S. Kawi, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 12149–12162 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cui, S. Chen, H. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, H. Zhang, Y. Xue, G. Wang, Y. Niu and T. Deng, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120590 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Mishra, R. Belgamwar, R. Jana, A. Datta and V. Polshettiwar, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 6383–6390 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, M. Yang, J. Zhang, Q. Ge, A. Zimina, T. Pruessmann, L. Zheng, J.-D. Grunwaldt and J. Sun, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 14694–14706 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, T. Wang, Q. Le, R. Qin, Y. Zhang and H. C. Zeng, Nano Mater. Sci., 2022 DOI:10.1016/j.nanoms.2022.05.001 .
M. Kosari, U. Anjum, S. Xi, A. M. Lim, A. M. Seayad, E. A. Raj, S. M. Kozlov, A. Borgna and H. C. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2102896 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, C. R. Bowers and W. Huang, Acc. Mater. Res., 2021, 2, 1190–1202 CrossRef CAS .
N. Yuan, X. Zhang and L. Wang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 421, 213442 CrossRef CAS .
C. Panzone, R. Philippe, A. Chappaz, P. Fongarland and A. Bengaouer, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 38, 314–347 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sreedhar, Y. Varun, S. A. Singh, A. Venugopal and B. M. Reddy, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2019, 9, 4478–4504 RSC .
S. Das, J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Gong, N. Dewangan, K. Hidajat, B. C. Gates and S. Kawi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2937–3004 RSC .
K. Li, B. Peng and T. Peng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 7485–7527 CrossRef CAS .
M. Marszewski, S. Cao, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 261–278 RSC .

          W. Li, in Advances in CO2 Conversion and Utilization, ACS Publications,  2010, pp. 55–76 Search PubMed .
D. Gao, H. Zhou, J. Wang, S. Miao, F. Yang, G. Wang, J. Wang and X. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 4288–4291 CrossRef CAS .
A. González-Garay, M. S. Frei, A. Al-Qahtani, C. Mondelli, G. Guillén-Gosálbez and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3425–3436 RSC .
S. P. Naik, T. Ryu, V. Bui, J. D. Miller, N. B. Drinnan and W. Zmierczak, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 167, 362–368 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Vo, J. Pérez-Ramírez, S. Farooq and I. A. Karimi, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2022, 10, 11875–11884 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ashok, S. Pati, P. Hongmanorom, Z. Tianxi, C. Junmei and S. Kawi, Catal. Today, 2020, 356, 471–489 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Kim, K.-W. Jun, H. Joo, C. Han and I. K. Song, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 155, 427–432 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, S. Bhattar, L. Liu, Z. Wang, S. Xi, J. J. Spivey and S. Kawi, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 12466–12486 CrossRef CAS .
S. Soleimani and M. Lehner, Energies, 2022, 15, 7159 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Wenzel, Reverse water-gas shift chemical looping for syngas production from CO2, PhD thesis, Otto-von-Guericke-Universität Magdeburg,  2018 .
F. Li, H. R. Kim, D. Sridhar, F. Wang, L. Zeng, J. Chen and L.-S. Fan, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4182–4189 CrossRef CAS .
B. J. Hare, D. Maiti, Y. A. Daza, V. R. Bhethanabotla and J. N. Kuhn, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3021–3029 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jahangiri, J. Bennett, P. Mahjoubi, K. Wilson and S. Gu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 2210–2229 RSC .
S. Pérez, J. J. Aragón, I. Peciña and E. J. Garcia-Suarez, Top. Catal., 2019, 62, 518–523 CrossRef .

          C. Mebrahtu, F. Krebs, S. Abate, S. Perathoner, G. Centi and R. Palkovits, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, Elsevier,  2019, vol. 178, pp. 85–103 Search PubMed .
S. Kuhaudomlap, P. Praserthdam, M. Shirai and J. Panpranot, Catal. Today, 2020, 358, 30–36 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hongmanorom, J. Ashok, G. Zhang, Z. Bian, M. H. Wai, Y. Zeng, S. Xi, A. Borgna and S. Kawi, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119564 CrossRef CAS .
M. Momeni, M. Soltani, M. Hosseinpour and J. Nathwani, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 227, 113613 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Minh, T. J. Siang, D.-V. N. Vo, T. S. Phan, C. Ridart, A. Nzihou and D. Grouset, Hydrogen Supply Chains, 2018, 111–166 Search PubMed .
C. Song and W. Pan, Catal. Today, 2004, 98, 463–484 CrossRef CAS .
M. Niermann, A. Beckendorff, M. Kaltschmitt and K. Bonhoff, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 6631–6654 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Frei, C. Mondelli, M. I. Short and J. Pérez-Ramírez, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6330–6337 CAS .
J. Wang, G. Li, Z. Li, C. Tang, Z. Feng, H. An, H. Liu, T. Liu and C. Li, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701290 CrossRef PubMed .
M. M.-J. Li, C. Chen, T. Ayvalı, H. Suo, J. Zheng, I. F. Teixeira, L. Ye, H. Zou, D. O'Hare and S. C. E. Tsang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4390–4401 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Frei, C. Mondelli, R. García-Muelas, K. S. Kley, B. Puértolas, N. López, O. V. Safonova, J. A. Stewart, D. C. Ferré and J. Pérez-Ramírez, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–11 CrossRef .
E. S. Gutterød, A. Lazzarini, T. Fjermestad, G. Kaur, M. Manzoli, S. Bordiga, S. Svelle, K. P. Lillerud, E. Skúlason and S. Øien-Ødegaard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 142, 999–1009 CrossRef .
M. Mureddu, F. Ferrara and A. Pettinau, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117941 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, C. Tang, G. Li, Z. Han, Z. Li, H. Liu, F. Cheng and C. Li, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 10253–10259 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, X. Hong and G. Liu, ACS Catal., 2019, 10, 93–102 CrossRef .
E. S. Gutterød, S. H. Pulumati, G. Kaur, A. Lazzarini, B. G. Solemsli, A. E. Gunnæs, C. Ahoba-Sam, M. E. Kalyva, J. A. Sannes and S. Svelle, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 17105–17118 CrossRef .
S. Dang, B. Qin, Y. Yang, H. Wang, J. Cai, Y. Han, S. Li, P. Gao and Y. Sun, Sci. Adv., 2020, 6, eaaz2060 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, C. Pei, R. Luo, S. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19523–19531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Laudenschleger, H. Ruland and M. Muhler, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–10 CrossRef .
L. Wang, E. Guan, Y. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Gong, Y. Cui, X. Meng, B. C. Gates and F.-S. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–9 CrossRef .
J. Hu, L. Yu, J. Deng, Y. Wang, K. Cheng, C. Ma, Q. Zhang, W. Wen, S. Yu and Y. Pan, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 242–250 CrossRef CAS .
R. Van Den Berg, G. Prieto, G. Korpershoek, L. I. Van Der Wal, A. J. Van Bunningen, S. Lægsgaard-Jørgensen, P. E. De Jongh and K. P. De Jong, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, P. Gao, C. Zhang, L. Zhong, X. Li, S. Wang, H. Wang, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Commun., 2016, 84, 56–60 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kosari, U. Anjum, S. Xi, A. M. Lim, A. M. Seayad, E. A. Raj, S. M. Kozlov, A. Borgna and H. C. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2170345 CrossRef .
X. Jiang, N. Koizumi, X. Guo and C. Song, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 170, 173–185 CrossRef .
K. Chen, J. Yu, B. Liu, C. Si, H. Ban, W. Cai, C. Li, Z. Li and K. Fujimoto, J. Catal., 2019, 372, 163–173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, C. Zhang, P. Gao, H. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhong, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 4580–4598 RSC .
Q. Zhang, K. Cheng, J. Kang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1251–1264 CrossRef CAS .
P. Kaiser, R. B. Unde, C. Kern and A. Jess, Chem. Ing. Tech., 2013, 85, 489–499 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zachopoulos and E. Heracleous, J. CO2 Util., 2017, 21, 360–367 CrossRef CAS .
H. M. Torres Galvis and K. P. de Jong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2130–2149 CrossRef CAS .
K. Stangeland, H. Li and Z. Yu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2018, 57, 4081–4094 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Iyer, T. Renganathan, S. Pushpavanam, M. V. Kumar and N. Kaisare, J. CO2 Util., 2015, 10, 95–104 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yao, W. Ma, S. Gonzalez-Cortes, T. Xiao and P. P. Edwards, Greenhouse Gases: Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 942–957 CrossRef CAS .
L. Torrente-Murciano, D. Mattia, M. Jones and P. Plucinski, J. CO2 Util., 2014, 6, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
N. Diban, A. T. Aguayo, J. Bilbao, A. Urtiaga and I. Ortiz, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 10342–10354 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dragomirova and S. Wohlrab, Catalysts, 2015, 5, 2161–2222 CrossRef CAS .
S. Najari, G. Gróf and S. Saeidi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44, 24759–24781 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Landau, R. Vidruk and M. Herskowitz, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 785–794 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, C. Cui, J. Han, H. Wang, X. Zhu and Q. Ge, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 10191–10198 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, V. V. Galvita, H. Poelman, Z. Wang, G. B. Marin and S. Kawi, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 297, 120472 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Q. Imtiaz, F. Donat, C. R. Müller and F. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 772–804 RSC .
Y. Deng, Z. Li, T. Chen, Z. Bian, K. Lim, N. Dewangan, K. G. Haw, Z. Wang and S. Kawi, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 435, 133554 CrossRef CAS .
W. Yue, Z. Wan, Y. Li, X. He, J. Caro and A. Huang, J. Membr. Sci., 2022, 660, 120845 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Deng, N. Dewangan, J. Hu, Z. Wang, X. Tan, S. Liu and S. Kawi, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 420, 129834 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zanfir and A. Gavriilidis, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2001, 56, 2671–2683 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bian, H. Xia, W. Zhong, B. Jiang, Y. Yu, Z. Wang and K. Yu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2021, 235, 113989 CrossRef CAS .
S. Pati, J. Ashok, N. Dewangan, T. Chen and S. Kawi, J. Membr. Sci., 2020, 595, 117496 CrossRef .
H. Nouryzadeh and D. Iranshahi, Pet. Coal, 2014, 56, 231–248 Search PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 5303–5311 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gao, F. Lyu and Y. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2020, 121, 834–881 CrossRef PubMed .
M. U. Khan, L. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Gao, S. Wang, H. Li, W. Zhang, M. Wang, Z. Wang, C. Ma and J. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 9548–9552 CrossRef PubMed .
B. P. Vinayan and S. Ramaprabhu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 5109–5118 RSC .
Y. Hartadi, D. Widmann and R. J. Behm, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 456–465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, H. Shi, J. H. Kwak and J. Szanyi, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6337–6349 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bahruji, M. Bowker, G. Hutchings, N. Dimitratos, P. Wells, E. Gibson, W. Jones, C. Brookes, D. Morgan and G. Lalev, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 133–146 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sugawa, K. Sayama, K. Okabe and H. Arakawa, Energy Convers. Manage., 1995, 36, 665–668 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, S. Chansai, Y. Shao, S. Xu, Y.-c. Wang, S. Haigh, Y. Mu, Y. Jiao, C. E. Stere, H. Chen, X. Fan and C. Hardacre, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 268, 118752 CrossRef CAS .
K. Chen, H. Fang, S. Wu, X. Liu, J. Zheng, S. Zhou, X. Duan, Y. Zhuang, S. C. E. Tsang and Y. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 251, 119–129 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, L. Huang, B. Su, J. Xu, Z. Ding and S. Wang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2020, 26, 517–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Heyl, U. Rodemerck and U. Bentrup, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 6275–6284 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, S. Li, X. Bu, S. Dang, Z. Liu, H. Wang, L. Zhong, M. Qiu, C. Yang, J. Cai, W. Wei and Y. Sun, Nat. Chem., 2017, 9, 1019 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Richard and M. Fan, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 5679–5692 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li and H. C. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 29435–29447 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sheng and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 658–667 CrossRef CAS .
K. M. Kwok, L. Chen and H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 12757–12766 RSC .
K. M. Kwok, S. W. D. Ong, L. Chen and H. C. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 14774–14785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-S. Li, G. Melaet, W. T. Ralston, K. An, C. Brooks, Y. Ye, Y.-S. Liu, J. Zhu, J. Guo, S. Alayoglu and G. A. Somorjai, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6538 CrossRef .
F. Studt, I. Sharafutdinov, F. Abild-Pedersen, C. F. Elkjær, J. S. Hummelshøj, S. Dahl, I. Chorkendorff and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Chem., 2014, 6, 320–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. D. Suppiah, W. M. A. W. Daud and M. R. Johan, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 17261–17278 CrossRef CAS .
A. Álvarez, A. Bansode, A. Urakawa, A. V. Bavykina, T. A. Wezendonk, M. Makkee, J. Gascon and F. Kapteijn, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 9804–9838 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Porosoff, B. Yan and J. G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 62–73 RSC .
W. K. Fan and M. Tahir, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 105460 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shyam, Y. Weiting, Y. Xiaofang, Y. Binhang, H. Yanqiang, W. Weiming, L. Ping and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 7968–7973 CrossRef .
A. Trovarelli, C. Deleitenburg, G. Dolcetti and J. L. Lorca, J. Catal., 1995, 151, 111–124 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cárdenas-Arenas, A. Quindimil, A. Davó-Quiñonero, E. Bailón-García, D. Lozano-Castelló, U. De-La-Torre, B. Pereda-Ayo, J. A. González-Marcos, J. R. González-Velasco and A. Bueno-López, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 265, 118538 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, Y. Su, J. Chai, V. Muravev, N. Kosinov and E. J. M. Hensen, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 11532–11544 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhan and H. C. Zeng, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 7509–7519 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Do and J. Kim, Energy Convers. Manage., 2020, 214, 112866 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gao, L. Zhang, S. Li, Z. Zhou and Y. Sun, ACS Cent. Sci., 2020, 6, 1657–1670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, A. Zhang, X. Jiang, M. Liu, Y. Sun, C. Song and X. Guo, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10182–10190 CrossRef CAS .
S.-M. Hwang, C. Zhang, S. J. Han, H.-G. Park, Y. T. Kim, S. Yang, K.-W. Jun and S. K. Kim, J. CO2 Util., 2020, 37, 65–73 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yang, A. Skrypnik, A. Matvienko, H. Lund, M. Holena and E. V. Kondratenko, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 282, 119554 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, I. Lee, J. B. Joo, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1816–1824 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Joo, J. Y. Park, C.-K. Tsung, Y. Yamada, P. Yang and G. A. Somorjai, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 126–131 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, J. Liu, H. Liu and D. He, Fuel, 2019, 235, 868–877 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Han, C. Kim, J. S. Park and H. Lee, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 451–456 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Deng, Y. Dong, G. Wang, K. Sun, X. Shi, L. Zheng, X. Li and S. Liao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9699–9709 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, K. M. Kwok and H. C. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 20524–20538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ma and M. D. Porosoff, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2639–2656 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xie, C. Chen, Y. Yu, J. Su, Y. Li, G. A. Somorjai and P. Yang, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3798–3802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. D. Kim, H. T. Song, A. Fazeli, A. Alizadeh Eslami, Y. S. Noh, N. Ghaffari Saeidabad, K.-Y. Lee and D. J. Moon, Catal. Today, 2020, 388, 410–416 Search PubMed .
H.-t. Song, A. Fazeli, H. D. Kim, A. Alizadeh Eslami, Y. S. Noh, N. Ghaffari Saeidabad and D. J. Moon, Fuel, 2021, 283, 118987 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li and H. C. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801104 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Sun, B. He, X.-Q. Zhang and A.-H. Lu, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8504–8513 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. El-Toni, M. A. Habila, J. P. Labis, Z. A. Alothman, M. Alhoshan, A. A. Elzatahry and F. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2510–2531 RSC .
L. Zhou, Z. Zhuang, H. Zhao, M. Lin, D. Zhao and L. Mai, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602914 CrossRef .
G. Prieto, H. Tüysüz, N. Duyckaerts, J. Knossalla, G.-H. Wang and F. Schüth, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 14056–14119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7511–7526 RSC .
Y. Li and J. Shi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3176–3205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. W. Lou, L. A. Archer and Z. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 3987–4019 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Feng, Y. Bai, Q. Zhang and Y. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10983–11060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 226–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhan, C. C. Yec and H. C. Zeng, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 1882–1887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Galeano, J. C. Meier, V. Peinecke, H. Bongard, I. Katsounaros, A. A. Topalov, A. Lu, K. J. J. Mayrhofer and F. Schüth, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20457–20465 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-F. Yang, A. Wang, B. Qiao, J. Li, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1740–1748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Huabin, L. Guigao, S. Li and Y. Jinhua, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701343 CrossRef .
R. Lang, X. Du, Y. Huang, X. Jiang, Q. Zhang, Y. Guo, K. Liu, B. Qiao, A. Wang and T. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11986–12043 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Rivera-Cárcamo and P. Serp, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 5058–5091 CrossRef .
M. B. Gawande, P. Fornasiero and R. Zbořil, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2231–2259 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rodriguez, P. Liu, D. J. Stacchiola, S. D. Senanayake, M. G. White and J. G. Chen, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6696–6706 CrossRef CAS .
X. Ye, C. Yang, X. Pan, J. Ma, Y. Zhang, Y. Ren, X. Liu, L. Li and Y. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19001–19005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yang, X. Mao, Y. Zhang, X. Wu, L. Wang, M. Chu, C.-W. Pao, S. Yang, Y. Xu and X. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 6022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim, J. Lauterbach and E. Sasmaz, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 8247–8260 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801649 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Corma, P. Concepción, M. Boronat, M. J. Sabater, J. Navas, M. J. Yacaman, E. Larios, A. Posadas, M. A. López-Quintela, D. Buceta, E. Mendoza, G. Guilera and A. Mayoral, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 775–781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wei, X. Liu, A. Wang, L. Zhang, B. Qiao, X. Yang, Y. Huang, S. Miao, J. Liu and T. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Gawande, R. Zboril, V. Malgras and Y. Yamauchi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8241–8245 RSC .
A. Nayl, A. Abd-Elhamid, A. A. Aly and S. Bräse, RSC Adv., 2022, 12, 13706–13726 RSC .
F. Tao and P. A. Crozier, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3487–3539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du and J. He, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3984–4002 RSC .
F. Hoffmann, M. Cornelius, J. Morell and M. Fröba, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 3216–3251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Thomas and R. Raja, J. Organomet. Chem., 2004, 689, 4110–4124 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kosari, A. Borgna and H. C. Zeng, ChemNanoMat, 2020, 6, 889–906 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, H. Chen, L. Guo, Q. He, F. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Feng and J. Shi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 529–539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rimaz, M. Kosari, M. Zarinejad and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Sci., 2022, 1–39 Search PubMed .
K. Koh, J.-E. Seo, J. Lee, A. Goswami, C. Yoon and T. Asefa, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 20444–20449 RSC .
M. Aziz, A. Jalil, S. Triwahyono and S. Sidik, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 486, 115–122 CrossRef CAS .
E. Febriyanti, V. Suendo, R. Mukti, A. Prasetyo, A. Arifin, M. Akbar, S. Triwahyono and I. Marsih, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 5802–5811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Aziz, A. Jalil, S. Triwahyono, R. Mukti, Y. Taufiq-Yap and M. Sazegar, Appl. Catal., B, 2014, 147, 359–368 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Majewski and J. Wood, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014, 39, 12578–12585 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Han, J. S. Park, M. S. Choi and H. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 203, 625–632 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, S. Muratsugu, N. Ishiguro and M. Tada, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1855–1864 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, J. Ashok, Z. Bian, N. Dewangan, M. Wai, Y. Du, A. Borgna, K. Hidajat and S. Kawi, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 230, 220–236 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang and F. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176, 513–521 CrossRef .
Z. Shi, Q. Tan and D. Wu, AIChE J., 2019, 65, 1047–1058 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dou, Y. Sheng, C. Choong, L. Chen and H. C. Zeng, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 219, 580–591 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gac, W. Zawadzki, G. Słowik, A. Sienkiewicz and A. Kierys, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2018, 272, 79–91 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yan, T. Hu, P. Liu, S. Li, B. Zhao, Q. Zhang, W. Jiao, S. Chen, P. Wang and J. Lu, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 246, 221–231 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Y. Kathiraser and S. Kawi, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 160–168 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, X. Jie, Y. Qiu, Y. Zhao, H. A. Al-Megren, S. Alshihri, P. P. Edwards and T. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118019 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bacariza, I. Graça, S. Bebiano, J. Lopes and C. Henriques, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2018, 175, 72–83 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bian and S. Kawi, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 320–328 CrossRef CAS .
H. Dong and Q. Liu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 6753–6766 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xie, L. Shi, J. Zhang and D. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7250–7253 RSC .
X. Wang, R. Ye, M. S. Duyar, C. A. H. Price, H. Tian, Y. Chen, N. Ta, H. Liu and J. Liu, Nano Res., 2021, 1–9 Search PubMed .
C.-S. Chen, W.-H. Cheng and S.-S. Lin, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 257, 97–106 CrossRef CAS .
E. C. Lovell, A. Fuller, J. Scott and R. Amal, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 199, 155–165 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang, B. Han, L. Zhang, L. Xu, H. Yu and W. Shi, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 235, 26–35 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wen, M. Liang, J. Zou, S. Wang, X. Zhu, L. Liu and Z.-j. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13299–13307 RSC .
F. Wang, L. Xu and W. Shi, J. CO2 Util., 2016, 16, 318–327 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lu and K. Kawamoto, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 53, 70–78 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, B. S. Crandall, M. J. Lance, N. Cordonnier, J. Lauterbach and E. Sasmaz, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 259, 118037 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, K. Kumar, N. Choudary and K. Pant, Fuel Process. Technol., 2019, 186, 40–52 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, K. Kumar, K. Pant and N. Choudary, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1911–1929 CrossRef CAS .

          H.-P. Ren, Y.-H. Song, Z.-T. Liu and Z.-W. Liu, in Advances in CO2 Capture, Sequestration, and Conversion, ACS Publications,  2015, pp. 155–169 Search PubMed .
B. Sun, T. Fu and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 7030–7033 RSC .
C. Zhu, M. Zhang, C. Huang, Y. Han and K. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 57950–57962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. H. Price, L. Pastor-Perez, T. R. Reina and J. Liu, Catal. Today, 2020, 383, 358–367 CrossRef .
X. Sun, A. I. O. Suarez, M. Meijerink, T. Van Deelen, S. Ould-Chikh, J. Zečević, K. P. De Jong, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Rodemerck, M. Holeňa, E. Wagner, Q. Smejkal, A. Barkschat and M. Baerns, ChemCatChem, 2013, 5, 1948–1955 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Khodakov, R. Bechara and A. Griboval-Constant, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 254, 273–288 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Dunn, P. Cole, D. Covington, M. C. Webster, R. J. Pugmire, R. D. Ernst, E. M. Eyring, N. Shah and G. P. Huffman, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 278, 233–238 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, G. Yang, J. Zhang, S. Chen, Y. Wu, Q. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Han and Y. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7352–7355 RSC .
D. Zhao, J. Feng, Q. Huo, N. Melosh, G. H. Fredrickson, B. F. Chmelka and G. D. Stucky, Science, 1998, 279, 548–552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Beck, J. C. Vartuli, W. J. Roth, M. E. Leonowicz, C. Kresge, K. Schmitt, C. Chu, D. H. Olson, E. Sheppard and S. McCullen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1992, 114, 10834–10843 CrossRef CAS .
B. Boote, H. Subramanian and K. T. Ranjit, Chem. Commun., 2007, 4543–4545 RSC .
A. Shimojima and K. Kuroda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 4057–4060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Stevens, K. Lebeau, M. Mertens, G. Van Tendeloo, P. Cool and E. F. Vansant, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 9183–9187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhao, J. Sun, Q. Li and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 275–279 CrossRef CAS .
M.-C. Chao, H.-P. Lin, H.-S. Sheu and C.-Y. Mou, Stud. Surf. Sci. Catal., 2002, 141, 387–394 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Y. Fahn, A.-C. Su and P. Shen, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 431–436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Selvam, S. K. Bhatia and C. G. Sonwane, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2001, 40, 3237–3261 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kumar, K. Schumacher, C. d. F. von Hohenesche, M. Grün and K. Unger, Colloids Surf., A, 2001, 187, 109–116 CrossRef .
M. Kruk, M. Jaroniec and A. Sayari, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 583–589 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhan and H. C. Zeng, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 320, 181–192 CrossRef .
L. Bai, S. Duan, W. Jiang, M. Liu, S. Wang, M. Sang, X. Gong, J. Li and S. Xuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 426, 1121–1132 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Wang and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 4886–4899 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pak and H. Yoo, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2014, 185, 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. He, Y. Song, J. Zhao, W. Ji and C.-T. Au, J. Catal., 2012, 288, 54–64 CrossRef CAS .
G. Prieto, J. Zečević, H. Friedrich, K. P. De Jong and P. E. De Jongh, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 34–39 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Yue, Y. Chun, Y. Cao, X. Dong and J. H. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lashaki and A. Sayari, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 1260–1269 CrossRef .
G. Prieto, M. Shakeri, K. P. De Jong and P. E. De Jongh, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2522–2531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Prieto, J. D. Meeldijk, K. P. de Jong and P. E. de Jongh, J. Catal., 2013, 303, 31–40 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, J. Ren, K. Deng, L. Gui and Y. Tang, Chem. Mater., 2000, 12, 1622–1627 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mo, K. K. M. Leong and S. Kawi, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 2107–2114 RSC .
X. Gao, H. Liu, K. Hidajat and S. Kawi, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 4188–4196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. Peng, X. You, C. Peng, X. Xu, W. Liu, X. Fang, Z. Wang and N. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 224, 488–499 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Mo, Y. Kathiraser and S. Kawi, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1526–1536 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Bian, I. Y. Suryawinata and S. Kawi, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 195, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, H. Li and H. Li, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 101–108 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li and K. Sibudjing, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 2994–3001 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, C. Chen, Z. Liu, P. Liu and N. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 1632–1639 RSC .
Y. Sheng and H. C. Zeng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13578–13589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-Y. Song, L.-Y. Du, W.-W. Wang and C.-J. Jia, Langmuir, 2019, 35, 8658–8666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Tennakoon, X. Wu, A. L. Paterson, S. Patnaik, Y. Pei, A. M. LaPointe, S. C. Ammal, R. A. Hackler, A. Heyden and I. I. Slowing, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 893–901 CrossRef CAS .
Y. SikáYun and D. SungáPark, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 7652–7655 RSC .
B. Li and H. C. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1801104 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, B. Jiang, Z. Wang and S. Kawi, J. CO2 Util., 2018, 27, 238–246 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, H. Li, J. Zhang, L. Shi and D. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 2447–2456 CrossRef CAS .
L.-H. Chen, M.-H. Sun, Z. Wang, W. Yang, Z. Xie and B.-L. Su, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 11194–11294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chiche, A. Finiels, C. Gauthier, P. Geneste, J. Graille and D. Pioch, J. Org. Chem., 1986, 51, 2128–2130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Röseler, G. Heitmann and W. Hölderich, Appl. Catal., A, 1996, 144, 319–333 CrossRef .
L. E. Iton, R. B. Beal and D. T. Hodul, J. Mol. Catal., 1983, 21, 151–171 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Martens and P. A. Jacobs, Zeolites, 1986, 6, 334–348 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Tagiev and K. M. Minachev, Russ. Chem. Rev., 1981, 50, 1009 CrossRef .

          A. Corma, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, Elsevier,  1989, vol. 49, pp. 49–67 Search PubMed .
J. Nováková, L. Kubelková and Z. Dolejšek, J. Catal., 1987, 108, 208–213 CrossRef .
T. A. Milne, R. J. Evans and N. Nagle, Biomass, 1990, 21, 219–232 CrossRef CAS .
R. Krishna and J. M. van Baten, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 360, 323–333 CrossRef CAS .
S. Robinson, W. Arnold and C. Byers, AIChE J., 1994, 40, 2045–2054 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xu and H. C. Zeng, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 9780–9790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Z. Gao, X. Zhang, L. Zhang, M. Wang, B. Chen, Y. Diao, Y. Li and D. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 307, 121202 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, A. Tuel, D. Laprune, F. Meunier and D. Farrusseng, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 276–282 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, M. Lopez-Haro, C. W. Lopes, C. Li, P. Concepcion, L. Simonelli, J. J. Calvino and A. Corma, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 866–873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yao, T. Xiao, O. A. Makgae, X. Jie, S. Gonzalez-Cortes, S. Guan, A. I. Kirkland, J. R. Dilworth, H. A. Al-Megren and S. M. Alshihri, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
D. M. Vriezema, M. Comellas Aragonès, J. A. Elemans, J. J. Cornelissen, A. E. Rowan and R. J. Nolte, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1445–1490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Syah, M. Zahar and E. Kianfar, Int. J. Chem. React. Eng., 2021, 19, 981–1007 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Petrosko, R. Johnson, H. White and C. A. Mirkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 7443–7445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Ye, X. Wang, C. A. H. Price, X. Liu, Q. Yang, M. Jaroniec and J. Liu, Small, 2021, 17, 1906250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Deraedt and D. Astruc, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 324, 106–122 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fang, Z. Liu, M.-F. Hsieh, M. Chen, P. Liu, C. Chen and N. Zheng, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4434–4444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Qin and H. C. Zeng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903264 CrossRef .
H. C. Zeng, Matter, 2020, 3, 332–334 CrossRef .
Z. Li and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5631–5639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bao, J. Li, B. Guan, M. Jia, O. Terasaki and J. Yu, Matter, 2020, 3, 498–508 CrossRef .
C. Wang, H. Wu, X. Jie, X. Zhang, Y. Zhao, B. Yao and T. Xiao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 31699–31709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kosari, S. Askari, A. M. Seayad, S. Xi, S. Kawi, A. Borgna and H. C. Zeng, Appl. Catal., B, 2022, 310, 121360 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, Y. Qiu, X. Zhang, Y. Zhang, N. Sun and Y. Zhao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 4877–4890 RSC .
Z. Bian and S. Kawi, Catal. Today, 2020, 339, 3–23 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shao, M. Kosari, S. Xi and H. C. Zeng, ACS Catal., 2022, 12, 5750–5765 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhan and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 4572–4582 CrossRef CAS .
A. Loaiza-Gil, J. Arenas, M. Villarroel, F. Imbert, H. del Castillo and B. Fontal, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 228, 339–344 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pérez-Ramírez, C. H. Christensen, K. Egeblad, C. H. Christensen and J. C. Groen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 2530–2542 RSC .
H. J. Bae, S. Bae, J. Yoon, C. Park, K. Kim, S. Kwon and W. Park, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700071 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Vittoni, G. Gatti, G. Paul, E. Mangano, S. Brandani, C. Bisio and L. Marchese, ChemistryOpen, 2019, 8, 719–727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Jiao, J. Li, X. Pan, J. Xiao, H. Li, H. Ma, M. Wei, Y. Pan, Z. Zhou, M. Li, S. Miao, J. Li, Y. Zhu, D. Xiao, T. He, J. Yang, F. Qi, Q. Fu and X. Bao, Science, 2016, 351, 1065–1068 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wei, Q. Ge, R. Yao, Z. Wen, C. Fang, L. Guo, H. Xu and J. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dang, P. Gao, Z. Liu, X. Chen, C. Yang, H. Wang, L. Zhong, S. Li and Y. Sun, J. Catal., 2018, 364, 382–393 CrossRef CAS .
H. Su, K.-X. Zhang, B. Zhang, H.-H. Wang, Q.-Y. Yu, X.-H. Li, M. Antonietti and J.-S. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 811–818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Gao, S. Dang, S. Li, X. Bu, Z. Liu, M. Qiu, C. Yang, H. Wang, L. Zhong and Y. Han, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 571–578 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, M. Wang, C. Zhou, W. Zhou, K. Cheng, J. Kang, Q. Zhang, W. Deng and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 140–143 RSC .
X. Liu, M. Wang, H. Yin, J. Hu, K. Cheng, J. Kang, Q. Zhang and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 8303–8314 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, S. Chen, X. Wang, Z. Zhou, Y. Wu, T. Zhang, G. Yang, Y. Han and Y. Tan, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 973–976 RSC .
Y. Wang, L. Tan, M. Tan, P. Zhang, Y. Fang, Y. Yoneyama, G. Yang and N. Tsubaki, ACS Catal., 2018, 9, 895–901 CrossRef .
A. Urakawa, Nat. Catal., 2021, 4, 447–448 CrossRef .
S. Ni, J. Zhu, R. Roy, C.-J. Li and R. B. Lennox, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 3740–3749 RSC .
L. Wang, E. Guan, Y. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Gong, Y. Cui, X. Meng, B. C. Gates and F. S. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ahmad and S. Upadhyayula, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2020, 45, 1140–1150 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Chiavassa, S. E. Collins, A. L. Bonivardi and M. A. Baltanás, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 150, 204–212 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cazelles, J. Drone, F. Fajula, O. Ersen, S. Moldovan and A. Galarneau, New J. Chem., 2013, 37, 3721–3730 RSC .
Y. Yang, M. G. White and P. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 116, 248–256 CrossRef .
S. Kattel, B. Yan, Y. Yang, J. G. Chen and P. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12440–12450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Graciani, K. Mudiyanselage, F. Xu, A. E. Baber, J. Evans, S. D. Senanayake, D. J. Stacchiola, P. Liu, J. Hrbek, J. Fernandez Sanz and J. A. Rodriguez, Science, 2014, 345, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kattel, B. Yan, J. G. Chen and P. Liu, J. Catal., 2016, 343, 115–126 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, Y. Wang, M. Ding, X. Hong, G. Liu and S. C. E. Tsang, Chem, 2021, 7, 849–881 CAS .
H. Kusama, K. Okabe, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Catal. Today, 1996, 28, 261–266 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, X. Liu, Z. Shao, H. Wang and Y. Sun, J. Catal., 2020, 382, 86–96 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, R. Luo, C. Yang, J. Song, C. Xiong, H. Tian, Z.-J. Zhao, R. Mu and J. Gong, Sci. China: Chem., 2019, 62, 1710–1719 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, R. Mu, G. Wang, J. Song, H. Tian, Z. J. Zhao and J. Gong, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10, 3161–3167 RSC .
L. Tao, T. S. Choksi, W. Liu and J. Perez-Ramirez, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6066–6089 CAS .
H. C. Lee, K. W. Siew, J. Gimbun and C. K. Cheng, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 255, 245–256 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Xue, W. Z. Lang, X. Yan and Y. J. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15408–15423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, L. Li, W. Sun, C. Chen, S. Luo, J. Shen, C. Jiang and F. Jing, ChemCatChem, 2021, 13, 3501–3509 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Al-Awadi, A. M. El-Toni, J. P. Labis, A. Khan, H. Ghaithan, A. A. Al-Zahrani, A. E. Abasaeed and S. M. Al-Zahrani, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 642 CrossRef CAS .
B. Yan, W.-C. Li and A.-H. Lu, J. Catal., 2019, 369, 296–301 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kohrt and T. Werner, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 2031–2034 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Yu and C. W. Jones, Organometallics, 2003, 22, 2571–2580 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ballivet-Tkatchenko, F. Bernard, F. Demoisson, L. Plasseraud and S. R. Sanapureddy, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1316–1322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, X. Li, C. Xu and S. M. Sadeghzadeh, Catal. Lett., 2019, 150, 1729–1740 CrossRef .
H. Matsuo, J. C. Choi, T. Fujitani and K. Fujita, Tetrahedron Lett., 2020, 61, 152557 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Nale, S. Rana, K. Parida and B. M. Bhanage, Appl. Catal., A, 2014, 469, 340–349 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, S. Santos, C. A. Urbina-Blanco, W.
Y. Hernández, M. Impéror-Clerc, E. I. Vovk, M. Marinova, O. Ersen, W. Baaziz and O. V. Safonova, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 290, 120036 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mori, S. Masuda, H. Tanaka, K. Yoshizawa, M. Che and H. Yamashita, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 4677–4680 RSC .
R. A. Pramudita, C. Nakagawa, Y. Manaka and K. Motokura, Chem. Lett., 2019, 48, 1417–1420 CrossRef CAS .
K. Usui, Y. Manaka, W. J. Chun and K. Motokura, Chemistry, 2022, 28, e202104001 CAS .
K. Mentoor, L. Twigge, J. W. H. Niemantsverdriet, J. C. Swarts and E. Erasmus, Inorg. Chem., 2021, 60, 55–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Yun, J. Baek, Y. Choi, W. Kim, H. J. Lee and J. Yi, ChemCatChem, 2012, 4, 1952–1959 CrossRef CAS .
M. Botavina, G. Martra, Y. A. Agafonov, N. Gaidai, N. Nekrasov, D. Trushin, S. Coluccia and A. Lapidus, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 347, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Essential catalytic metals and metal–oxide interfaces for the respective thermocatalytic CO2 conversion pathways.	 
CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O|ΔH298 K = 41.2 kJ mol−1	(1)
CO2 + 3H2 ↔ CH3OH + H2O|H298 K,5 MPa = −40.9 kJ mol−1	(2)
CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = 49.8 kJ mol−1	(3)
CO + 2H2 ↔ CH3OH|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = −90.7 kJ mol−1	(4)
CH3OH ↔ 2H2 + CO|ΔH298 K = 91 kJ mol−1	(5)
CO2 + 3H2 ↔ CH3OH + H2O|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = −40.9 kJ mol−1	(6)
2CH3OH ↔ CH3OCH3 + H2O|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = 256.6 kJ mol−1	(7)
CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O|ΔH298 K,5 MPa = 49.8 kJ mol−1	(8)
nCO2 + (3n)H2 → CH3(CH2)n−1OH + (2n − 1)H2O	(9)
3CO + 6H2 → CH3CH2CH2OH + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −407 kJ mol−1	(10)
4CO + 8H2 → CH3(CH2)2CH2OH + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −558 kJ mol−1	(11)
4CO + 8H2 → CH3(CH2)3CH2OH + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −710 kJ mol−1	(12)
4CO + 8H2 → CH3(CH2)4CH2OH + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −862 kJ mol−1	(13)
CO2 + 4H2 ↔ CH4 + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −165 kJ mol−1	(14)
CO + 3H2 ↔ CH4 + H2O|ΔH298 K = −206 kJ mol−1	(15)
CO2 + 2H2 ↔ C + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −90.1 kJ mol−1	(16)
CO2 + C ↔ 2CO|ΔH298 K = 172.4 kJ mol−1	(17)
CO2 + H2 ↔ CO + H2O|ΔH298 K = 41.2 kJ mol−1	(18)
CO2 + CH4 ↔ 2CO + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = 247.3 kJ mol−1	(19)
nCO2 + nH2 ↔ nCO + nH2O|ΔH298 K = 41 kJ mol−1	(20)
nCO + 2nH2 ↔ (–CH2–)n + nH2O|ΔH298 K = −166 kJ mol−1	(21)
CO +2H2 → –CH2– + H2O|ΔH298 K = −165.0 kJ mol−1	(22)
2CO + H2 ↔ –CH2– + CO2|ΔH298 K = −204.7 kJ mol−1	(23)
CO + H2O ↔ H2 + CO2|ΔH298 K = −39.8 kJ mol−1	(24)
3CO + H2 ↔ –CH2– + 2CO2|ΔH298 K = −244.5 kJ mol−1	(25)
CO2 + 3H2 ↔ –CH2– + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = −125.2 kJ mol−1	(26)
CH4 + CO2 ↔ 2CO + 2H2|ΔH298 K = 247.3 kJ mol−1	(27)
H2 + CO2 ↔ CO + 2H2O|ΔH298 K = 41 kJ mol−1	(28)
CH4 ↔ Cads + 2H2|ΔH298 K = 75 kJ mol−1	(29)
2CO ↔ Cads + CO2|ΔH298 K = −172 kJ mol−1	(30)
CH4 + CO2 ↔ 2CO + 2H2|ΔH298 K = 247.3 kJ mol−1	(31)
CH4 + H2O ↔ CO + 3H2|ΔH298 K = 206.3 kJ mol−1	(32)
CH4 + 0.5O2 ↔ CO + 2H2|ΔH298 K = −35.6 kJ mol−1	(33)
nCO2 + 3nH2 ↔ CnH2n+2O + (2n − 1)H2O	(34)
nCO2 + (3n − 1)H2 ↔ CnH2nO + (2n − 1)H2O	(35)
nCO2 + (3n − 2)H2 ↔ CH3(CH2)n−2COOH + (2n − 2)H2O	(36)

 	Fig. 1  Thermodynamic equilibrium at various temperatures for (a) product composition in RWGS reaction at 1 bar of molar H2/CO2 (inlet ratio of 3:1), (b) conversion–selectivity values for CO2-to-MeOH pathway at various pressures, and (c) CO2/CH4 conversion and H2/CO (syngas) ratio in DRM reaction at 1 bar of molar CH4/CO2 (inlet ratio of 1:1). (d) Anderson–Schulz–Flory (ASF) model for product distribution through FT/MFT pathways. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 98 Copyright 2013, Wiley, (b) ref. 10 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry, (c and d) ref. 96 Copyright 2017, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 2  Effect of pressure on (a) CO2 conversion and (b) selectivity to DME and methanol at H2/CO2 ratio of 3. Effect of H2/CO2 ratio at 50 bar on (c) CO2 conversion and (d) methanol selectivity. Solid lines indicate gas–liquid thermodynamics, while dashed lines represent gas-phase thermodynamics. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 101 Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Scheme 2  Schematic overview of four conceivable types (conventional, morphology-defined, atomically-defined, and structurally-defined) of nanocatalysts based on siliceous matter containing essential catalytic metals for catalytic CO2 conversion pathways. Inset figures are reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: ref. 93 Copyright 2021, Wiley. Ref. 147 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society. Ref. 89 Copyright 2020, Nature. Ref. 196 Copyright 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

SR	1.6%Ru@mSiO2-A206	400, 1	DRM	Ni–SiO2@CeO2 (ref. 203)	750, 1
Ni/m-SiO2 (m: microspheres)207	400, 1	Ni/CeO2–SiO2 (ref. 208)	750, 1
5 wt.%Ni-MCM-41 (ref. 199)	400, 1	Ni@SiO2 (ref. 204)	750, 1
70 wt% NiO/SBA-15 (ref. 198)	400, 1	Ni@Ni–SiO2 yolk–shell209	800, 1
Ni/MSN (mesostructured silica nanoparticle)197	400, 1	Ni@SiO2 nanocapsule210	700, 1
15%Ni/MCM-41 (ref. 211)	250, 1	SiO2@Ni@SiO2 multicore–shell212	800, 1
3D networked Ni-phyllosilicate213	250, 1	Ni/SBA15-EG214	800, 1
ZnCoSiOx-0h hollow nanoreactor215	330, 2	Ni/SBA16 Ce-doped202	700, 1
Ni/3D-SBA-15 (ref. 213)	250, 1	Ni/SiO2@SiO2 (ref. 201)	800, 1
RWGS	0.3% Fe/SiO2 (ref. 216)	600, 1	Ni–SiO2 (10% Ni)217	800, 1
10% Cu/SiO2 (ref. 216)	600, 1	Ni@SiO2 (ref. 218)	750, 1
Cu–Fe/SiO2 (Cu/Fe = 10:0.3)216	600, 1	Ni/SiO2 nanofiber219	700, 1
Cu–Fe/SiO2 (Cu/Fe = 10:0.8)216	750, 1	Ni@SiO2 core–shell (14.6% Ni)220	750, 1
(1 wt% NiO/CeO2)/50% wt% SBA-15 (ref. 221)	750, 1	Ni@SiO2 core–shell (6.1% Ni)220	750, 1
(3 wt% NiO/CeO2)/50 wt% SBA-15 (ref. 221)	750, 1	Pt–NiCe@SiO2 SAC183	500, 1
SiO2@Pt147	320, 30	TRM	NiCe@SiO2 (ref. 222)	750, 1
SiO2@Pt@mSiO2 (ref. 147)	320, 30	Ni@SiO2 & Ni/zeolite L200	750 or 550, 1
ZIF-67@mSiO2 (CSN) maze-like nanoreactor147	320, 1	Ni/SBA-15 (ref. 223)	800, 1
1.6%Ru@mSiO2-N206	400, 1	Ni/SBA-15@400 (ref. 224)	800, 1
2.7%Ru@mSiO2-N206	400, 1	Ni–SiO2 (ref. 225)	750, 5 or 10
Pt@mSiO2 (28 nm)226	400, 1	FT, MFT	Fe/hsZSM-5 (ref. 136)	370, 20
Pt@mSiO2 (66 nm)226	400, 1	Fe@h-ZSM5 (ref. 136)	370, 20
ZnCoSiOx-12h hollow nanoreactor215	350, 2	FeMnK/hsZSM-5 (ref. 227)	280, 5
NiCo@SiO2 yolk–shell nanoreactor228	350 & 700, 1	Co@SiO2 (ref. 229)	210, 20
CO2-to-MeOH	CuO/ZnO/ZrO2@SBA-15 (ref. 82)	250, 30	Fe/SiO2 (ref. 230)	220, 10
Cu@m-SiO2 core–shell92	250, 30	Co/SBA-15 & Co/SiO2 (ref. 231)	190, 1
Cu–ZnO@m-SiO2 core–shell (m: mesoporous)92	250, 30	Co/silica aerogel232	265, 6 or 8
CZ/mSiO2 (ref. 93)	280, 30	
	

CZZ/MVmSiO2 maze-like nanoreactor93	280, 30	Direct CO2-to-HCs	CeO2–Pt@mSiO2–Co tandem catalyst160	250, 6.2
Cu/SiO2 nanotubes hollow spheres134	240, 30	Fe–Zn–Zr@zeolite core–shell catalyst233	340, 50
Pd–Cu/SBA-15 (ref. 94)	250, 40	hZ5-CuZn (hZ5: hollow ZSM-5)158	360, 30
CuZnO/SiO2 stable catalyst95	250, 30	hZ5-CuZn@Pt158	240, 30
Co-phyllosilicate (Co@Si0.9)89	250, 30	Co@hsZSM5@Pt (5 wt%)135	400, 20
CuIn@mSiO2 core–shell205	280, 30

 	Fig. 3  (a) 2D/3D combined view of hexagonal arrangement of SBA-15 mesopore showing a detailed internal corrugation of the silica pore walls, 3D view of isolated nanospatial distribution of metal NPs in the support mesopores. TEM images from top view of two samples including (a: 1 and 2) nearest-neighbour (calcined under a flow of 2% NO/N2) and (a: 3 and 4) maximized intra-NPs spacing (calcined under a flow of N2) of metallic Cu NPs in CuZn/SBA-15, where both samples were reduced in 20% H2/N2. (b) Schematic overview of modified Stöber method for the synthesis of Ru@mSiO2 by encapsulating Ru NPs (1–3 nm) in the mesoporous channels of silica nanowires and subsequent calcination effect under N2 or air. TEM images of calcined samples after reduction with H2/CO2 mixture at 400 °C for 2 h including (b: 1 and 2) 1.6% Ru@mSiO2-N, which was N2-calcined and retained its 1–3 nm NPs and (b: 3 and 4) Ru@mSiO2-A, which was air-calcined, resulting in NP sintering and subsequent size increment to 5–20 nm. (c) Schematic overview of the synthesis of Pt/mSiO2 by coating mesoporous silica spheres (mSiO2) around premade and free-standing Pt NPs (1–3 nm) synthesized by polyol-assisted method. TEM images of (c: 1 and 2) diameter alteration of final Pt/mSiO2 spheres to 48 and 66 nm. (d) Schematic overview of synthesis of dual-metal core–shell CeO2–Pt@mSiO2–Co tandem catalyst for FT reaction. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 250 Copyright 2013, Nature, (b) ref. 206 Copyright 2017, Elsevier, (c) ref. 226 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry, (d) ref. 160 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) CO2 hydrogenation (at 320 °C and 30 bar) conversion results for SiO2@Pt and SiO2@Pt@mSiO2 with different mSiO2 thicknesses. (b) Schematic overview of maze-like nanoreactor created from multivoid mesoporous SiO2 (MVmSiO2) of SiO2 sphere loaded with metal nanoparticles and CO2 hydrogenation to methanol stability for 150 h time on line for CZZ/MVmSiO2 catalytic sample. (c-i) Schematic overview of the utilization of SiO2 sphere for the preparation of Ni/SiO2 and sandwiched silica–ceria with intercalated Ni NPs (Ni–SiO2@CeO2) for dry-reforming of methane (DRM) reaction and (c-ii and iii) CH4 and CO2 specific activity (converted mol min−1 gNi−1) for three tested samples including Ni–SiO2@CeO2, Ni–SiO2, and Ni–CeO2. (d-i) SEM of mesoporous silicate (MSS) and mesoporous aluminosilicate (MASS) with varying alumina content including MASS-7.5, MASS-15, and MASS-30, (d-ii) Rod-to-sphere transformation scheme by [Al(OH)4]− utilization together with CTA+ micelles, which changed the pore structure from [P6mm] to [Pm3n] unit cell. Catalytic results of CZMSS and CZMASS-15 during 30 bar CO2 hydrogenation: (d-iii) CO2 specific activity (normalized by total amount of Cu + Zn in catalyst) and (d-iv) mole ratio between dimethyl ether (DME) and methanol in product stream. Note: MSS: mesoporous silicate sphere, MASS: mesoporous aluminosilicate sphere, and CZ: CuZnO. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 147 Copyright 2017, The American Chemical Society, (b) ref. 93 Copyright 2021, Wiley, (c) ref. 203 Copyright 2018, Elsevier, (d) ref. 264 Copyright 2015, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a-i and ii) DRM reaction result (CH4 conversion and catalyst-stability) for hollow mSiO2@Ni/SiO2@mSiO2 spheres doped with Co and Rh and (a-iii) TEM image of the mSiO2@Ni/SiO2@mSiO2 hollow sphere catalyst. (b-i) DRM reaction results (specific activity of CH4 and CO2) for nickel-phyllosilicate (NiPhy) hollow spheres and core–shell NiPhy@SiO2 hollow spheres (HS) and (b-ii and iii) TEM images of NiPhy HS and core–shell NiPhy@SiO2 HS. (c-i and ii) FT reaction results (time on stream CO conversion and normalized hydrocarbon selectivity (CH4, C2, C3, C4, and C5+)) using zeolite-based catalysts including Fe/ZSM5, Fe@ZSM5, and hollow Fe@h-ZSM5 (condition: 500 mg of catalyst, 370 °C, 20 bar, CO:H2:N2 gas flow of 7.5:7.5:1.32 mL min−1) and (c-iii) TEM image of Fe@h-ZSM5. (d-i) Catalytic performance of dual-metal Co@hZSM-5@Pt hollow nanocatalyst and its pristine and comparable counterparts for direct CO2 hydrogenation to light olefins (condition: 200 mg of catalyst, 400 °C, 20 bar, CO2:H2:N2 = 24:72:4, gas flow = 15 mL min−1). (d-ii) TEM image of tested hsZSM5-supported/confined catalyst of Co@hZSM-5@Pt. (e-i) Schematic overview of chemical transformation and hollowing strategy (e.g., sacrificial templating) for transforming SiO2 Stöber spheres to solid ZSM-5 (sZ5), hollow zeolitic ZSM-5 (hZ5), and its derivative nanocatalysts including hZ5-CuZn and hZ5-CuZn@Pt. CO selectivity and hydrocarbon distribution of (e-ii) hZ5-CuZn and (e-iii) hZ5-CuZn@Pt. Comparison of the performance of hZ5-CuZn and hZ5-CuZn@Pt catalysts in terms of (e-iv) CO2 conversion and (e-v) C2–C4 specific yield. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 133 Copyright 2018, The American Chemical Society; (b) ref. 269 Copyright 2018, Elsevier; (c) ref. 136 Copyright 2019, the American Chemical Society; (d) ref. 135 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry; (e) ref. 158 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  TEM images of zeolite-based catalysts including (a) FeMnK/S-1, (b) FeMnK@S-1, (c and d) FeMnK@Hol-S-1, and (e and f) FeMnK@HM-S-1. Insets in (a, b, d, and f) show the metal particle size distribution. Fischer–Tropsch performance result of different configurational catalysts including (g) product distribution and (h) Anderson-Schulz-Flory (ASF) plots (reaction conditions: 280 °C, 4000 h−1, 2 MPa, and H2/CO = 1.9). (i) Synthesis scheme of Ni@S-1, (j) STEM-HAADF images of Ni@S-1 catalysts with different loading. (k) Catalytic performance of various Ni@S-1 catalysts in DRM reaction. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a–h) ref. 227 Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society, (i–k) ref. 283 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of nanoreactor structure of 1% NiCo@SiO2 yolk@shell material and its cyclability study for the RWGS reaction at gas hourly space velocity (GHSV) of 15000 mL gcat−1 h−1. (b) Schematic illustration of ZIF-67-driven nanoreactor structure of ZIF-67@Pt@mSiO2 (denoted as Pt@CSN) and the TOF plot calculated for it performance in CO2 hydrogenation versus other morphologically-comparable Pt catalysts. (c) Schematic illustration of UiO-66-driven nanoreactor structure of M/YSZ@mSiO2 nanoreactors (YSZ: yttrium stabilized zirconia), where UiO-66 is encapsulated by a mesoporous silica shell and doped with yttrium, and then calcined before the metal loading together with the CO2 conversion and CO selectivity for Pt/YSZ@mSiO2 and Pt/ZrO2@mSiO2 catalysts at different temperature points. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from: (a) ref. 228 Copyright 2020, Elsevier, (b) ref. 147 Copyright 2017, the American Chemical Society, (c) ref. 293 Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the alteration in cavity space and the ultimate shape of the coated shell of silica-encapsulated Ni NPs by varying the aging time of the synthesis process (i.e., reverse micelle approach in water-in-oil system). Three possible types of no cavity space (Ni@SNS), small cavity space (Ni@SNC-A3), and large cavity space (Ni@SNC-A6) around the encapsulated Ni NPs. (b) TEM images of (1) Ni@SNS, (2) Ni@SNC-A3, (3) Ni@SNC-A6, and (4) Ni@SNC-A12. (c) Examining the importance of cavity space in the three types of Ni@silica catalyst in DRM reaction. The effect of shell thickness of nanocapsule on the DRM reaction performance: (d) schematic of the yolk–shell Ni@SiO2 nanocapsule (NSNC) and its working principle including (A) mass transfer across the shell, (B (B1 and B2)) gas diffusion and transport mechanisms over the shell with thick and dense structure, and (C (C1, C2, and C3)) diffusant transport mechanism over the shell mesopore with normal transport without interruption, gas-wall effect, and hard-blocker effect. (e) Schematic illustration of three modes of porosity within the nanocapusle shell (model I: supermicropore, model II: small mesopore, and model III: capsule internal voids or macropore). TEM images of NSNC catalysts and their shell thickness size including (f) NSNC-T5, (g) NSNC-T10, (h) NSNC-T15, (i) NSNC-T20. (j) Shell diffusion effect simulation by Weisz–Prater model and (k) validation of the NSNC-Tx nanoreactors by the Weisz–Prater criterion as a function of their shell thickness and porosity. (l) Synthetic procedure scheme of nickel-silicate hollow spheres (NHS) with varying shell-thickness by altering the silica templates, base source, and nickel precursor. HRTEM images of shell-varied nickel-silicate hollow spheres (NHS) with shell-embedded Ni derived from SiO2, SCSx, and MSS in the form of (m) as-synthesized and (n) hydrogen-reduced forms. In (m & n): (a) NHS–SiO2–S, (b) NHS-SCS0.1-S, (c) NHS-SCS0.3-S, (d) NHS-SCS0.1-S, (e) NHS-MSS-A, (f) NHS-MSS-AS0.3, and (g) NHS-MSS-S. Note: For both reduced and spent forms, average nanoparticle size of Ni is inserted in each image. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission: (a–c) ref. 210 Copyright 2019, Elsevier, (d–k) ref. 297 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society, (l–n) ref. 298 Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic overview of synthesis of Co@Six with cobalt phyllosilicates as intermediates, (b) CO2 conversion and MeOH selectivity of Co@Six catalysts at 260–320 °C, and (c) stability test of Co@Si0.95 catalyst operated for 100 h in a flow reactor. (d) Schematic overview of silica-based nanorods of Pt–NiCe@SiO2 yolk–shell single atom catalyst (SAC) with atomically dispersed Pt on Ni–Ce nanoparticles (as yolk) encapsulated inside tubular silica (as shells) for low temperature dry reforming of methane (DRM) and (e and f) HRTEM images and HRTEM-EDX elemental mappings of Pt–NiCe@SiO2 SAC. (g) Schematic overview of the procedure for the preparation for 3D network of silica nanowires (Si–RNH2–Cu) containing coordinated Cu sites from Cu2O spheres and Si–RNH2 sites from APTMS, as well as the derived Cu–ZnO catalyst, (h) 72 h timeline of Cu2O growth into the silica nanowire network demonstrated by 3D schemes and TEM images, and (i) stability test for time on stream during CO2 hydrogenation to methanol using silica-based nanowire network with reduced Cu/ZnO (Cu0/ZnO/SiO2). Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission: (a–c) ref. 89 Copyright 2020. Nature; (d–f) ref. 183 Copyright 2021, the American Chemical Society; (g–i) ref. 301 Copyright 2022, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  Results of computational fluid dynamic (CFD) simulation for (a) rigid sphere, (b) mesoporous sphere with rigid core, (c) mesoporous hollow sphere, and (d) multi-voids mesoporous sphere against gas flow (i.e., air with flow rate at 0.01 m s−1). Left panels show streamline plots and right panels show velocity vector plots. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 93 Copyright 2021, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic overview depicting the relation between catalyst stability and support pore descriptor, HAADF-STEM micrographs for (b) CuZnO/SBA_5 unreacted, (c) CuZnO/SBA_5 reacted, (d) CuZnO/SBA_8 unreacted, (e) CuZnO/SBA_8 reacted, (f) CuZnO/SG_9 unreacted, (g) CuZnO/SG_9 reacted after stability test of 240 h, and graphs depicting relation between (h) the cage and pore size for CuZnO/SiO2 catalysts supported on SBA-16 and (i) entrance and pore size of CuZnO/SiO2 supported on SiO2-gel. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 253 Copyright 2014, The American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  HAADF-STEM micrographs for (a) CuZn/SG11(4)-N2, (b) CuZn/SG5(2)-N2, and (c) CuZn/SG5(2)-N2 at high magnification, (d) CuZn/SG11(4)-NO, (e) CuZn/SG15(6)-NO, and (f) CuZn/SG7(2)-NO after reduction, where bright patches correspond to high-metal-density domains, and (g) support pore size plotted against local Cu surface loading and nanoparticle surface density for reported catalysts. (h) Second-order deactivation rate constant plotted against support pore diameter for both N2-calcined and NO-calcined catalysts. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 254 Copyright 2013, Elsevier.	 


1	ZnCrOx/MSAPO307	CO activation – C–C coupling	Mesoporous SAPO zeolite as C–C coupling catalyst	350 °C, 25 bar	CO/H2	C2=, C3=, C4=
2	In2O3/HZSM5 (ref. 131)	Methanol synthesis – MTH	HZSM5 as MTH catalyst	340 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	C5+
3	ZnZrO/SAPO310	Methanol synthesis – MTO	Zn modified SAPO as MTO catalyst	360–400 °C, 20 bar	CO2/H2	C2=, C3=, C4=
4	Na–Fe3O4/HZSM5 (ref. 308)	FT together with olefin oligomerization	HZSM5 as olefin oligomerization catalyst	320 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	C5–C11
5	CeO2–Pt@mSiO2–Co160	RWGS – FT	Mesoporous SiO2 as coating shell and Co support	250 °C, 6.2 bar	CO2/H2	C2, C3, C4
6	In–Zr@SAPO-34 (ref. 309 and 311)	Methanol synthesis – MTH	SAPO-34 as MTH catalyst	380 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	C2=, C3=, C4=
7	Fe@h-ZSM5 (ref. 136)	FT	ZSM-5 hollow shell as catalyst support	370 °C, 20 bar	CO/H2	C2, C3, C4, C5+
8	Co@hsZSM5@Pt135	RWGS – FT	ZSM-5 hollow sphere as catalyst support	200–500 °C, 0–30 bar	CO2/H2	C2+
9	hZ5-CuZn@Pt158	Methanol synthesis – MTH	ZSM-5 hollow shell as catalyst support and MTH catalyst	200–400 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	C2, C3, C4
10	Co/SAPO-34 (ref. 161)	FT	SAPO-34 as catalyst support	220 °C, 20 bar	CO/CO2/H2	C5+
11	ZnGa2O4/SAPO-34 (ref. 312)	Methanol synthesis – MTO	SAPO-34 as MTO catalyst	250–450 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	C2=, C3=, C4=
12	ZnAl2O4/SAPO-34 (ref. 313)	Methanol synthesis – MTO	SAPO-34 as MTO catalyst	370 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	C2=, C3=, C4=
13	ZnCrOx/Zn-ZSM5 (ref. 314)	Methanol synthesis – MTA	Zn-ZSM5 as MTA catalyst	330 °C, 50 bar	CO2/H2	C5+ aromatics
14	Cr2O3/HZSM5 (ref. 315)	Methanol synthesis – MTA	HZSM5 as MTA catalyst	350 °C, 50 bar	CO2/H2	C5+ aromatics

 	Fig. 13  Overview of possible reaction pathways of CO2 hydrogenation to CO, CH3OH, CH4 and other hydrocarbons. Figures reproduced and/or reprinted with permission from ref. 17 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

1	Au/mSiO2 (ref. 317)	Formate pathway	mSiO2 as catalyst support	100 °C, 16 bar	CO2/H2	MeOH, formate, formamide
2	Co-phyllosilicate (Co@Si0.9)318	Formate pathway	Phyllosilicate as catalyst support and promoter	250 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	MeOH, CH4, CO
3	Ga3Ni5/SiO2 (ref. 319)	Formate pathway	SiO2 as catalyst support	150–250 °C, 1 bar	CO2/H2	MeOH, CO
4	Ga2O3–Pd/SiO2 (ref. 320)	Formate pathway	SiO2 as catalyst support	235–265 °C, 10–40 bar	CO2/H2	MeOH, CO
5	CuZnZr/MVmSiO2 (ref. 48)	Formate pathway	Multivoid mSiO2 as support, improved the fluid dynamics and catalyst wetting, constrained metal particle agglomeration	240–280 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	MeOH, CO
6	CuZnAl/SiO2 (ref. 44)	Formate pathway	SiO2 as catalyst support	210 °C, 34 bar	CO2/H2	MeOH, CO
7	Polyenzymes/SiO2 (ref. 321)	Formate pathway	SiO2 capsules as catalyst support, stabilized the enzymes	37 °C, 5 bar	CO2/NADH	MeOH
8	Cu/SiO2(shattuckite-like)46	RWGS + CO-Hydro	SiO2 as catalyst support and enriched Cu+ species	190–250 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	MeOH, CO
9	Pd–Cu/SiO2(aSiO2, MCM-41, SBA-15, MSU-F)94	Formate pathway & RWGS + CO-Hydro	aSiO2, MCM-41, SBA-15, MSU-F as catalyst supports	250 °C, 41 bar	CO2/H2	MeOH, CO
10	Rh/SiO2 (ref. 327)	CO-mediated HAs	SiO2 as catalyst support	240 °C, 50 bar	CO2/H2	EtOH, MeOH, CH4
11	Co2C/SiO2 (ref. 328)	CO-mediated HAs	SiO2 as catalyst support and stabilized Co2C	250 °C, 50 bar	CO2/H2	C1–C5, C1–C5–OH
12	VOx-Rh/MCM-41 (ref. 329)	CO-mediated HAs	SiO2 as catalyst support and confined Rh nanoparticles	250 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	CH4, CO, MeOH, EtOH

1	Ni–SiO2@CeO2 (ref. 203)	DRM	Silica as catalyst support	600 °C, 1 bar	Biogas (CO2/CH4)	H2, CO
2	Ni-cement clinker332	Dry reforming of glycerol	Cement clinker (calcium silicate) as catalyst precursor and support	650–750 °C, 1 bar	CO2/glycerol	H2, CO
3	
nV-MSNSs333	Dry reforming of propane	Mesoporous silica nanospheres as catalyst support and stabilized the active component	600 °C, 1 bar	CO2/propane	Propylene
4	SixCeO2 (ref. 334)	Dry reforming of ethane	SiO2 coating promoted desorption of ethylene and prevented deep oxidation	700 °C, 1 bar	CO2/ethane	Ethylene
5	Cr/MOS335	Dry reforming of ethane	Mesoporous organosilica (MOS) as catalyst support, promoted catalyst stability	700 °C, 1 bar	CO2/ethane	Ethylene
6	SiBx (ref. 336)	Dry reforming of alkane	Silicon boride employed as the active component	450–595 °C, 1 bar	CO2/C2–C4	C2=–C4=
7	Ammonium salt/SiO2 (ref. 337)	Cycloaddition	Silica gel as support and provided mechanical strength during recycle	90 °C, 10 bar	CO2/epoxides	Cyclic carbonates
8	Zn-BDI/SBA-15 (ref. 338)	Copolymerization	SBA-15 as catalyst support and prevention of Zn–silanol interaction via pore curvature	50 °C, 6.9 bar	CO2/cyclohexene oxide	Polymer
9	Sn-SBA-CH3 (ref. 339)	Direct DMC synthesis	SBA-15 as catalyst support	150 °C, 200 bar	CO2/MeOH	Dimethyl carbonate
10	Dy2Ce2O7/SiO2 (ref. 340)	Nucleophilic addition	Dendritic fibrous nanosilica as catalyst support	100 °C, 30 bar	CO2/aniline/olefin	2-Oxazolidinone
11	MCM-41 (ref. 341)	Nucleophilic addition	MCM-41 was directly employed as the catalyst	120 °C, 30 bar	CO2/propargylic amine	2-Oxazolidinone
12	MCM-41 (ref. 342)	Nucleophilic addition	MCM-41 was directly employed as the catalyst	40 °C, 50 bar	CO2/aziridines	2-Oxazolidinone
13	Ru/MCM-41 (ref. 343)	Nucleophilic addition	MCM-41 as catalyst support to achieve SAC	90 °C, 30 bar	CO2/H2	Formic acid
14	PdAg/SBA-15 (ref. 344)	Nucleophilic addition	SBA-15 as catalyst support	100 °C, 20 bar	CO2/H2	Formic acid
15	Alkylammonium formate/SiO2 (ref. 345)	Hydrosilylation	Amorphous silica as catalyst support	
	CO2/silane	Silylformate
16	Rh–I–N/SiO2 (ref. 346)	Hydrosilylation–cycloaddition	Silica as catalyst support	100 °C, 10–30 bar	CO2/silane	Cyclic carbonates
17	FLP/SiO2 (ref. 347)	Frustrated Lewis Pair (FLP) facilitated nucleophilic addition	SiO2 as catalyst support	60 °C, 2 bar	CO2/FLP	Formic acid

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
