Fabrication of Cu 2 ZnSnS 4 solar cells with 5.1% efficiency via thermal decomposition and reaction using a non-toxic sol–gel route   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3TA13533K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3TA13533K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 500-509Fabrication of Cu2ZnSnS4 solar cells with 5.1% efficiency via thermal decomposition and reaction using a non-toxic sol–gel route†

        
          
            Zhenghua 
            Su
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kaiwen 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zili 
            Han
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hongtao 
            Cui
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Fangyang 
            Liu
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Yanqing 
            Lai
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xiaojing 
            Hao
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            Yexiang 
            Liu
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Martin A. 
            Green
          
        
      b
aSchool of Metallurgy and Environment, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China. E-mail: liufangyang@csu.edu.cn
bSchool of Photovoltaic and Renewable Energy Engineering, University of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia. E-mail: xj.hao@unsw.edu.au
Received 
      4th September 2013
    , Accepted 15th October 2013First published on 16th October 2013AbstractEarth-abundant Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) has been confirmed as a promising semiconductor material for thin film solar cells. To meet the requirements of high-efficiency and low-cost for photovoltaic technologies, a modified thermal decomposition sol–gel method with low-cost and low-toxicity for CZTS thin film preparation is presented, and the detailed formation mechanism of the thin film is investigated to obtain an optimized process. By introducing non-aqueous thiourea–metal–oxygen sol–gel processing, as well as applying extrinsic dopants and chemical etching, high-quality and phase-controlled CZTS thin films with homogeneous elemental distribution and a low impurity content have been synthesized. Based on the modified sol–gel method, solar cells with a structure of Ni:Al/ZAO/i-ZnO/CdS/CZTS/Mo/glass have been fabricated, and a power conversion efficiency of 5.10% is obtained, indicating its potential for high-throughput and high power conversion efficiency photovoltaic devices.
Introduction
Determining how to utilize widespread solar energy with efficient, low-cost and sustainable methods has been one of the most important scientific and technological challenges of this century. Despite considerable progress in photovoltaic technologies based on silicon and compound semiconductors being made, high energy-consumption and the utilization of scarce resources will become the great obstacles to meeting the global energy demand.1 Specifically, for Cu(In,Ga)(S,Se)2 (CIGS) and CdTe systems, although they exhibit high conversion efficiencies, they have not produced a satisfying market impact due to the need for expensive fabrication equipment, and more importantly, the involvement of scarce or toxic elements.2,3 Recently, another chalcogenide material, the Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) semiconductor, has been confirmed as a promising alternative for thin film solar cells because it not only exhibits suitable optical and electronic properties similar to CIGS, but also consists of earth-abundant and non-toxic elements.4–7 As a result, CZTS materials have attracted increasing attention and remarkable progress has been made over the past few years by many groups, using different fabrication approaches and theoretical studies. As for vacuum-based deposition methods such as evaporation and sputtering, power conversion efficiencies (PCE) of CZTS(e) devices between 8 and 9.3% have been achieved by several groups.8–10 However, suffering from relatively low throughput and material utilization, these costly vacuum deposition methods will face many difficulties in large-scale production. In this regard, various solution-based approaches, such as sol–gel, electrodeposition, nanocrystal dispersion, milling-dispersion and hydrazine-based deposition, have been developed due to their advantages of low-cost and high throughput compared with the vacuum-based methods.11–18 In contrast to the CIGS system, to date, the highest power conversion efficiency of CZTS (CZTSSe) cells has been achieved by the solution-particle process.18 Nevertheless, there is no convincing proof that the solution-based approaches can replace the vacuum-based methods to fabricate the CZTS absorber layer due to the intrinsic limitations (toxic additives and residual organic impurities such as carbon and oxygen) involved. Moreover, the inherent narrow composition region for single phase CZTS and the facile volatilization of the elements in CZTS have also made it extremely difficult to obtain stoichiometric, impurity free and phase controlled CZTS films by both the vacuum and non-vacuum methods.19,20 Therefore, developing low-cost high-throughput production technologies suitable for the synthesis of high-quality and single phase CZTS material is critical to reach the same 15+% efficiency levels comparable to the CIGS system. Here we report a facile chemical route to fabricate CZTS thin films via a modified thermal decomposition sol–gel solution process.
Among the solution methods typically used, the sol–gel solution method is a quite simple and low-cost non-vacuum chemistry solution route based on hydrolysis and polycondensation reactions.21 First and foremost, the main advantage of the sol–gel method is that the elemental constituents can be mixed on a molecular level in a precursor colloidal solution. Secondly, the precursor gel thin film is made up of nanoparticles after polycondensation, thus thin films with better crystallinity can be obtained under a lower annealing temperature.22,23 Therefore, the sol–gel method is simple and inexpensive for the deposition of nanocrystal thin films. In the process of forming thin films via the sol–gel method, the precursor sol solution is firstly coated on the substrates and then annealed preliminarily to form a dense nanocrystal thin film after polycondensation; therefore, the dispersing and washing procedures used in the hot-injection or hydrothermal methods can be omitted. Thirdly, highly controlled extrinsic doping, which is typically adopted in the preparation of semiconductor materials to obtain desired properties, such as Na or Sb doping in CIGS films,24,25 can be achieved easily in the sol–gel approach by incorporating the extrinsic dopants into the precursor sol solution to the desired composition level rather than by diffusion doping with poor controllability, which is used in the other vacuum-based methods.
Conventional aqueous or non-aqueous sol–gel processes entail the formation of metal–O–metal bonds in a precursor solution, so that the metal oxide materials can be synthesized easily by this approach.22,23 As for the formation of sulfides by the sol–gel method, the process is generally highly active but toxic H2S is used in sulfurizing oxides into sulfides,26,27 which makes the prepared thin films not only contain secondary phases such as binary sulfides or oxides, but also show poor surface morphology and weak adhesion with substrates. Additionally, in the process of depositing CZTS thin films, the content of sulfur in the precursor thin films plays a very important role in forming high-quality thin films because the presence of sufficient sulfur in the precursor thin film can avoid the deterioration of the morphology (such as cracks and holes) caused by volume expansion during the sulfurization process.28,29 Moreover, sufficient sulfur can thermodynamically decrease the volatilization of Zn or Sn (or SnS) during the formation of the CZTS thin film.20 In order to incorporate enough sulfur into the precursor thin films, recently some researchers have reported that excess thiourea can be added into the organic solvent to form M–S or M–S–M complexes with metal ions, and then the complexes were thermally decomposed into the expected metal sulfides.30–32 By this method, CZTSSe thin films and relevant solar cell devices have been prepared in which a highest conversion efficiency of 4.10% was reported for the CZTSSe solar cell.33 Although the decomposition metal–thiourea complex method provides a facile, low-cost and low-toxic way to synthesize CZTS thin films, its potential application in photovoltaic devices with high power conversion efficiency remains unclear compared with other solution methods, such as electrodeposition and hydrazine-based deposition. Moreover, few people have reported the detailed formation mechanism of CZTS nanocrystal thin films in the thiourea–metal complex sol–gel system. In this study, we report a modified sol–gel method based on the thiourea–metal–oxygen mechanism to prepare pure Cu2ZnSnS4 (no Se) thin films. Also, we have demonstrated the best conversion efficiency of 5.10% for CZTS to date, based on the sol–gel method.
To prepare the CZTS precursor sol solution, appropriate concentrations of Cu(CH3COO)2·H2O, Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O, SnCl2·2H2O and SC(NH2)2 were dissolved in 2-methoxyethanol. The concentration of each metal ion coincides with the generally reported data for high efficiency cells, meanwhile excess thiourea was used to complex metal ions and alleviate the loss of sulfur during the annealing process. To avoid cracks forming in the precursor thin film during the polycondensation reaction, additives are necessary in the precursor solution. In the meantime, an additional Na-doped (NaOH as dopant) precursor solution was prepared to show the different properties of the CZTS thin films. Scheme 1 illustrates the main experimental processes, and the detailed methods are shown in the ESI.†
 Scheme 1  Illustration of the formation of the CZTS thin films via thermal decomposition and reaction by the sol–gel route. 
Results and discussion
Generally, in non-aqueous sol–gel processes, metal salts react with alcohols to form metal alkoxides. Then, nanoparticles are formed with an average size of several nm after alcoholysis and polycondensation between the metal salt and metal alkoxides. In this sol–gel experiment, excess thiourea firstly reacts with metal ions to form thiourea–metal complexes, and these complexes are subsequently subjected to alcoholysis and condensation reactions with 2-methoxyethanol to form CZTS nanoparticles. Detailed reaction equations are shown as follows: M–X + Tu → [M(Tu)m]–X(1) [M(Tu)m]–X + ROH → [M(Tu)m]–OR + H–X(2) [M(Tu)m]–X + [M(Tu)m]–OR → [M(Tu)m]–O–[M(Tu)m] + R–X(3) [M(Tu)m]–O–[M(Tu)m] + R–X → CuxS + ZnS + SnxS + SnO2 + volatile matter(4) CuxS + ZnS + SnxS → Cu2ZnSnS4(5) CuxS + ZnS + SnO2+ S → Cu2ZnSnS4(6)
In these equations, the symbols (M, X, Tu and R) represent metal ions (Cu2+, Zn2+, Sn2+), anions (CH3COO− or Cl−), thiourea and organic molecular chains of 2-methoxyethanol, respectively. The volatile matter is the gases generated during the annealing process, such as CS2, CO2, NO2, SO2, H2O and NH4Cl. Eqn (1) displays the complexing process between thiourea (Tu) and the metal ions. In aqueous or organic solvents, thiourea–metal complexes are easily generated from thiourea and metal ions, such as copper(II), zinc(II) and tin(II), and several complexes with different stoichiometries have been reported.34–36 Within the metal–thiourea complexes, SC(NH2)2 is coordinated to the metal atom through the sulfur atom.37Eqn (2) and 3 are the processes of alcoholysis and polycondensation between the thiourea–metal complexes and 2-methoxyethanol. In traditional non-aqueous sol–gel routes, the oxygen in the formation of a metal–oxygen–metal bond is provided by the solvent or by the organic constituent of the precursor.22 Specifically in the thiourea–metal complex sol–gel system, metal–O bonds, metal–S bonds and O–metal–S bonds will coexist in the precursor sol–gel.35 Therefore, besides most metal sulfides, a few metal oxides would inevitably exist in the precursor thin film, which can be converted into sulfides by appropriate sulfurizing annealing. In general, sol films can be obtained by spin coating or dipping procedures with the sol. Afterwards, the sol films are converted into xerogel films during a gelation and drying process, where small nanoparticles gradually grow into large clusters of nanoparticles and finally form a three-dimensional network structure. In order to remove organic residues and obtain a dense precursor thin film, the xerogel film should be preliminarily annealed at low temperature. In the meantime, the thermal decomposition of the thiourea–metal–oxygen complexes (eqn (4): the formation of binary metal sulfides and oxides) and the formation of CZTS nanocrystals (eqn (5)) are also involved in this process. Therefore, many important parameters, such as the concentration of solution, heating rate, heating temperature, additives and substrates, are critical for this process to obtain high-quality films without cracks and cavities.
At a certain temperature, thiourea–metal complexes will be decomposed into metal salts and thiourea. Again, thiourea will subsequently react with the metal salts or metal oxides during thermal decomposition.38 To gain the decomposition data, the CZTS precursor sol solution was dried at 80 °C for several hours and the obtained powder was subjected to Thermogravimetric Analysis (TGA) and Differential Scanning Calorimetry (DSC). The TGA and DSC data in Fig. 1 show the first weight-loss (WL) stage from 180 °C to 300 °C, which indicates the thermal decomposition of metal–thiourea–oxygen complexes and other organic solvents. Above 300 °C, the weight loss is relatively slower due to the oxidation of sulfides. Meanwhile, across almost the whole temperature range, the DSC curve reflects an endothermic process in which there is a turning point at about 300 °C. Therefore, the preliminary annealing temperature should be set suitably in order to achieve the complete thermal decomposition of the metal–thiourea–oxygen complexes without too much oxidation during the annealing in air. Although the thermal decomposition of the metal–thiourea–oxygen complexes under an inert atmosphere contributes to the reduction of oxides, decomposition under an oxygen atmosphere is more favorable to decrease the content of carbon or nitrogen in the thin films by breaking and oxidizing the C–H or C–N bonds in the organic solvent.37
 Fig. 1  Thermogravimetric analysis and differential scanning calorimetry of the CZTS precursor powder. 

Fig. 2A shows the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the precursor thin film obtained by annealing the xerogel film at 200 °C in air. The surface of the thin film sample is very smooth and compact without any cracks and cavities brought about from the process of annealing the xerogel film. Additionally, from the cross-section SEM (Fig. 2B) and Atomic Force Microscopy images (Fig. 3), it can be seen that the precursor thin film sample is made up of uniform nanoparticles with average grain sizes of 50–100 nm. These results also demonstrate that this modified sol–gel method has great advantages in the preparation of CZTS nanocrystal thin films.
 Fig. 2  The surface (A) and cross-section (B) SEM images of the CZTS precursor thin film. 
 Fig. 3  The surface atomic force micrograph of the CZTS precursor thin film. 
The XRD pattern of the precursor thin film sample on Mo/glass is shown in Fig. 4A. The three main peaks at 28.5°, 47.3° and 56.1° reflect the (112), (220) and (312) planes of kesterite CZTS (JCPDS 26-0575). The width of the main peak is considerable, indicating a small grain size. According to the Scherrer equation, D = Kλ/βcosθ (where K, λ, β and θ stand for the constant, the X-ray wavelength, full width at half maximum and diffraction angle, respectively), the average crystallite size (D) of the precursor sample can be estimated in the range of 50–80 nm, which is consistent with the results of AFM and SEM. Besides, some weak peaks appear in the XRD pattern, which can be assigned to the characteristic peaks of SnO2 and sulfur.
 Fig. 4  The XRD (A) and Raman spectroscopy ((B) 532 nm excitation wavelength, and (C) 325 nm excitation wavelength) patterns of the CZTS precursor thin film. 
The theoretical analysis and experimental results show that the existence region of single phase kesterite CZTS is rather small, therefore secondary phases such as CuxS, ZnS, SnxS or Cu2SnS3 appear readily in CZTS thin films prepared by various methods.39,40 Generally, Raman scattering spectroscopy is adopted to find the co-existing secondary phases which cannot be identified effectively by X-ray diffraction (XRD). Nevertheless, ordinary Raman spectroscopy (with 532 nm or 488 nm excitation wavelengths) can just distinguish these phases which have significantly different main peaks, such as CZTS, CuxS and Cu2SnS3. As for the ZnS phase, which has a similar main peak to CZTS (338 cm−1 for CZTS and 348 cm−1 for ZnS), especially for a trace of ZnS, Raman spectroscopy can do nothing to help. Fortunately, recently resonant Raman scattering has been used to analyze and characterize the Raman spectrum of ZnS, because the band gap energy of ZnS (about 3.7 eV) is very close to the energy of the excitation light source (325 nm He–Cd laser).41–43 By using resonant Raman scattering, three resonant Raman lines of ZnS (R1LO, R2LO and R3LO) can be detected, and even traces of ZnS will excite very strong Raman signals.
Owing to having similar diffraction patterns to tetragonal Cu2SnS3, cubic ZnS and CuxS, the structural properties of the precursor thin film were further investigated by Raman spectroscopy (532 nm and 325 nm excitation wavelengths) in Fig. 4B and C. In Fig. 4B, within the accuracy and limited depth of Raman radiation, the Raman results present the main peaks of 336 cm−1 and 285 cm−1, which match the well-defined Raman spectrum of the kesterite CZTS structure, and no other peaks were found belonging to Cu2SnS3 (303 cm−1 and 351 cm−1) or ZnS (348 cm−1).44 However, when using 325 nm as the excitation wavelength in Fig. 4C, a small amount of ZnS is found in the precursor thin film. Those minor phases, such as CuxS, SnO2 and sulfur, can also be found in the Raman spectra. Therefore, the results of XRD and Raman scattering indicate that the precursor thin film consists of the major phase of kesterite CZTS + ZnS, and minor phases of CuxS, SnO2 and sulfur.
The grain sizes of the precursor thin film shown in Fig. 2 are below the requirement for solar cells with high efficiency, hence precursor thin films prepared by the sol–gel method should be annealed at high temperature (above 540 °C) to achieve the desired crystallinity, and additionally, the small quantities of metal oxides and sulfides in the precursor thin film need to be sulfurized into CZTS during the high temperature annealing (eqn (6)). Fig. 5 presents the cross-section SEM images of two annealed thin film samples with and without Na doping. Clearly, the two thin film samples consist of crystallites with sizes of 0.5–1 μm without any obvious voids. Moreover, the presence of a carbon layer and thick MoS2 layer are not observed between the CZTS absorber layer and the Mo back contact interface.
 Fig. 5  The cross-section SEM images for two CZTS thin film devices with the structure of Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZAO, (A) no Na doping; (B) with 1% Na doping. 
The improvement of crystallinity of CZTS thin films can be observed after Na doping in our study, while an apparent enhancement in grain size has also been found in most investigations on Na doping CIGS thin films.24 This phenomenon is further verified in the XRD patterns of the two annealed thin film samples with and without Na doping, as can be seen in Fig. 6. The XRD peaks of the two samples are identifiable as kesterite CZTS (JCPDS 26-0575), with a preferred orientation in the (112) direction, and no other secondary phases are found. Compared with the thin film sample without doping, the thin film sample with Na doping has not only a systematic shift of peaks toward smaller 2θ values but also a stronger intensity of the main peaks, indicating better crystallinity or larger grain sizes. In fact, although very little Na can be obtained by the diffusion of Na from the soda-lime glass (SLG) through Mo back contact, the extrinsic Na doping used in the sol–gel approach provides more highly controlled and uniform Na incorporation, which is essential for the improvement of the properties of the CZTS thin film. As far as we know, very few researches on Na-doped CZTS have been reported, thus how Na doping affects the properties of the CZTS thin films should be further studied systematically.
 Fig. 6  XRD patterns of the two annealed CZTS thin film samples without (black) and with Na doping (red). 
In order to observe secondary phases (such as Cu2SnS3, CuxS and ZnS) and their in-depth distribution in our CZTS samples (with Na doping), Raman scattering spectroscopy with two excitation wavelengths of 532 nm and 325 nm (Fig. 7) was used to measure the surfaces of the CZTS samples at different depths. From the Raman scattering spectra with a 532 nm excitation wavelength (Fig. 7A), it can be seen that only CZTS and MoS2 exist in the thin film samples at different depths, with corresponding main Raman peaks of 337 cm−1 and 410 cm−1 respectively, and Raman peaks of the other secondary phases can not be seen. However, the Raman spectrum of the same sample is totally different when using an excitation wavelength of 325 nm, as shown in Fig. 7B and C, in which the main strong Raman peaks corresponding to the R1LO, R2LO and R3LO lines of ZnS are observed, yet the characteristic peaks of CZTS are very weak. Comparing each Raman spectrum of the CZTS sample at different depths, it can be found that the intensity (∼5000 a.u. in Fig. 7B) of the Raman peaks on the surface of the CZTS sample (0 min) is much stronger than that of the inner section of the CZTS sample (∼200 a.u. in Fig. 7C). Ignoring the effect of Surface-Enhanced Raman Scattering (SERS), it can be concluded that the secondary phases (ZnS) exist mainly in the surface of the CZTS thin film sample, rather than in the region close to the CZTS/Mo interface.42,45,46 Research has shown that the sulfur in the CZTS thin film will distribute non-uniformly if the CZTS thin film is synthesized via the diffusion of sulfur from the surface to the bottom of the film, for example by sulfurizing the metal precursor thin film.12,42 This in-diffusion of sulfur can lead to the formation of secondary phases, in particular close to the back contact interface. However, in our experiments, sufficient sulfur incorporated into the precursor thin films can weaken the diffusion of sulfur. In addition, the multi-interfaces of the nanoparticles and the sulfurization of oxides in the precursor thin films both contribute to the reduction of excessive sulfur in-diffusion. Therefore, for our CZTS thin films, this secondary phase ZnS exists mainly in the surface of the CZTS thin film, rather than close to the back contact interface.
 Fig. 7  Raman spectroscopy of the CZTS thin films (without Na doping) measured with 532 nm (A) and 325 nm (B and C) excitation wavelengths at different depths (see ESI†): surface (0 min sputter time), 200 nm (30 min sputter time), 400 nm (60 min sputter time), 600 nm (90 min sputter time) and 800 nm (120 min sputter time). 
Now that the generation of secondary phases is a unavoidable problem involved in the formation of CZTS thin films under Cu-poor and Zn-rich conditions, the selective removal of secondary phases such as ZnS will become an effective method to improve device performance.43 Compared with the secondary phases inside the CZTS thin film, the superficial secondary phases can be removed more easily by chemical etching.8,43Fig. 7B clearly shows that after chemical etching with a solution of HCl, the intensity of the ZnS Raman peaks is drastically reduced to the level of ZnS inside the CZTS samples, indicating that the secondary phases in the CZTS thin films prepared by the sol–gel method can be removed conveniently and effectively by chemical etching.
As shown in Table S1 (ESI†), Energy Dispersive Spectrometry (EDS) and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) were used to check the elemental composition and the concentration of impurity elements for annealed CZTS thin films respectively. The metal composition of the two annealed thin film samples with and without Na doping are very close to the concentration of metal ions in the precursor solution, and the elemental mapping from EDS (Fig. S1†) also presents a uniform distribution of the composition elements in the CZTS thin film. As mentioned above, one of the advantages of the sol–gel method is that each element can be mixed on a molecular level in the precursor colloidal solution, thus the final elemental constituents can be adjusted precisely to the desired ratios. This advantage reduces the possibility of the formation of secondary phases and the volatilization of elements from the subsequent annealing procedure in the process of preparing the CZTS thin films. The metal compositions (Cu/Zn + Sn, Zn/Sn) for the two annealed samples are also consistent with the composition requirements for high efficiency CZTS solar cells.6,15
Unlike vacuum-based methods, the solution-phase processing of metal chalcogenides will inevitably lead to residual impurities, such as C, O and Cl, in CZTS thin films due to the usage of organic solvent and metal salt precursors. In order to reduce the influence of organic impurities on the performance of the device, we used a volatile and low molecular weight organic solvent with a certain viscosity to facilitate the subsequent spin coating. Meanwhile, low-cost metal acetate with a low decomposition temperature was chosen as the sol–gel precursor material. As shown in Fig. 8, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) was also employed, mainly to verify the valence states of Cu, Zn, Sn and S in the annealed CZTS thin films, as well as to check the concentration of impurity elements such as C, O, Cl and Na. From the XPS results of the annealed CZTS samples, it can be seen that all of the binding energies (Table S1†) of Cu (Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2), Zn (Zn 2p3/2 and Zn 2p1/2), Sn (Sn 3d5/2 and Sn 3d3/2) and S (2p) correspond well with the valence states of Cu+, Zn2+, Sn4+ and S2− respectively, and no other valence states, such as Cu2+ and Sn2+, can be found in CZTS thin films.47 Furthermore, Fig. 8B demonstrates the high-resolution XPS scan of the trace elements in the CZTS thin film samples with and without Na doping. Clearly, the intensities of the impurities (such as Cl, C, O) are much lower than that of Cu (2p3/2), suggesting a low impurity concentration. The atomic percentages of Cl, C, O and Na are 0.74%, 5.25%, 0.73% and 0.65% respectively for the sample without Na doping, and 0.64%, 1.13%, 1.17% and 1.91% respectively for sample with Na doping. The significant change of the impurity content is that the content of carbon decreased from 5.25% to 1.13%, while the content of oxygen increased from 0.73% to 1.17% after Na doping. One of the possible reasons for this phenomenon is that in our experiments, NaOH acts not only as a provider of Na doping, but also as a peptizer which can make nanoparticles uniformly dispersed to form a colloidal system. The H+ or OH− charge in the sol–gel solution is adsorbed on the surface of the particles so that the sol system will become more stable. Therefore, the addition of an appropriate amount of NaOH could be beneficial to the decomposition and volatilization of organic solvent via forming a more stable and dispersed uniformly sol–gel system. Meanwhile, a possible reason for the slightly increased content of oxygen after Na doping is the catalysis of Na which can induce the formation of Sn(Zn)–O bonds and S–O bonds.24 Another possible reason for the change in oxygen content is that Na in the CZTS thin film distributes in the form of Na-containing oxides, such as Na2MoO4 and Na–O–CZTS complexes.24 Additionally, although SnCl2 was used as the metal salt material in the precursor sol–gel, Cl is barely found in the annealed CZTS thin films, indicating the easy volatilization of the Cl− ion via gaseous NH4Cl (eqn (4)).
 Fig. 8  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analyses on two annealed thin film samples with and without Na doping. (A) Fast scan of the CZTS thin film surface. (B) High-resolution scan of impurities in the two CZTS thin film samples with and without Na doping (compared with the signal from main element Cu). 
The fabrication of a completed solar cell device is generally used to assess any film formation method. To test the performance of CZTS thin film solar cells based on this modified sol–gel method, we fabricated a complete solar cell device with the commonly employed structure of Ni:Al/ZAO/i-ZnO/CdS/CZTS/Mo/glass (Fig. 5 and S2†). Similar to the reported CZTS thin films prepared by vacuum-based and solution-processed approaches, a copper-poor and zinc-rich (Cu/Zn + Sn = 0.85, Zn/Sn = 1.2) stoichiometry was adopted in the formation of CZTS thin films for device fabrication. Fig. 9 displays the illuminated (AM 1.5) current–voltage (I–V) curves for sample 1# (no doping), sample 2# (1% Na doping) and sample 3# (1% Na doping and HCl etching) respectively. The device parameters are calculated based on the total device area (0.25 cm2) which includes areas shaded by Ni:Al fingers (Fig. S2†). The cell containing sample 1# achieves the best power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 4.21% for the pure CZTS thin film solar cell prepared by the sol–gel method, with open-circuit (VOC), short-circuit current (JSC) and fill factor (FF) values of 558 mV, 14.10 mA cm−2 and 53% respectively, in which the JSC coincides with the integral result of the absolute quantum efficiency of sample 1# (Fig. S3†). The PCE of sample 2# with Na doping was improved to 5.01%, with VOC, JSC and FF values of 650 mV, 12.90 mA cm−2 and 59% respectively. After HCl etching, the PCE of sample 3# increased slightly to 5.10%, with VOC, JSC and FF values of 610 mV, 14.82 mA cm−2 and 56% respectively. Relevant investigations on Na doping in CIGS thin films demonstrated that the most evident function of Na doping was the improvement in the effective p-type doping in the CIGS film, which consequently directly increases the VOC of the device.48,49 Similarly, in our study, CZTS thin films were prepared with copper-poor and low oxygen compositions, in which favorable NaCu and OS substitutional point defects increased while ZnCu or SnCu donor defects decreased. These factors worked together to increase the effective hole density so that the VOC of sample 2# with Na doping was improved from 558 mV to 650 mV, and the FF increased from 53% to 59% (mainly due to the lower series resistance), which both contributed to the improvement of the PCE after Na doping.48,50,51 Moreover, taking into account the effect of carbon in the CZTS thin film, as a peptizer in sol solutions, NaOH evidently decreased the content of carbon in the CZTS thin film, which can also improve the performance of the device to some degree.
 Fig. 9  Current–voltage characteristics of three CZTS devices under air mass 1.5 illumination. 1#: no Na doping, 2#: 1% Na doping, 3#: 1% Na doping and HCl etching. 
Some work has reported that the removal of secondary phases (superficial oxides or ZnS) in CZTS thin films by H2O or HCl etching can improve the PCE dramatically,8,43 but in our experiments the PCE of device 3# was improved only slightly after HCl etching (from 5.01% to 5.10%). In addition, the VOC decreased from 650 mV to 610 mV, while the JSC increased from 12.90 mA cm−2 to 14.82 mA cm−2. The common function of chemical etching is to improve the JSC and lower the series resistance (RS) of the CZTS thin film device. The decrease of RS is easily explained by the fact that chemical etching can remove oxides or ZnS with high resistance. However, the reported work seldom explains the reasons for the improvement of the JSC. Regarding the issue of the ZnS/CZTS structure, theories and experiments have demonstrated that there is a positive large conduction band offset (∼1.1 eV) at the ZnS/CZTS interface, so a substantial barrier is formed to block electron transport across the interface, which is the key reason why ZnS is not suitable for acting as the buffer layer in CZTS devices.52 This reasonably explains why the JSC of the CZTS thin film device can be improved after etching superficial ZnS. The chemical etching of ZnS on the surface of the CZTS thin film can improve the JSC but drag down the VOC, therefore the PCE of the device increases only slightly. To some extent, trace amounts of ZnS on the surface of the CZTS thin film may play a similar role as CdS, in increasing depletion width and establishing a higher contact potential and hence increasing the VOC.53 Perhaps by a tunneling current, an extremely thin ZnS layer (several nm) on the surface of the CZTS thin film can enhance the VOC through decreasing the interfacial defects at the CdS/CZTS interface without affecting the JSC too much. The PCE would be improved significantly once the superficial ZnS can be removed partially or selectively. In other words, both impact the performance of the device, and whether ZnS can partially substitute CdS as the buffer layer is worth further study in the future.
Although the best power conversion efficiency of the CZTS thin film solar cell based on the sol–gel method was achieved, the PCE of 5.10% is still at a low level compared with the high PCEs of pure CZTS cell devices based on the evaporation method, let alone the highest PCE of 11.1% obtained from a hydrazine-based CZTSSe absorber.9,18 Investigations on the CZTS(Se) thin film solar cell have indicated that some key factors, such as the VOC deficit caused by dominant recombination at the CdS/CZTS interface, low minority-carrier lifetime and the large series resistance at the CZTSSe/Mo interface, have been regarded as the main reasons for the currently relatively low PCE of CZTSSe devices compared with that of CIGS devices.54 Specifically to our CZTS thin film solar cells, the FF and JSC still have much room for improvement. Firstly, from Fig. 5 it can be seen that the average grain size of the annealed CZTS thin film is smaller than 1 μm (generally the grain size is 1–2 μm in CZTS thin films with high PCE) and there are still some gaps or voids caused by the volatilization of the organic solvent during the annealing process, which all boost the recombination of the photocurrent and the increase of RS (the RS is ∼40 Ω cm2, about an order of magnitude higher than that of previously reported results).9,12 In addition, the sputtered ZAO thin film is still very thick (800–1000 nm) and with high resistivity (∼100 Ω □−1), which not only parasitically partially absorbs incident light but also accounts for the high RS. The next work we need to do is optimize the annealing process to enhance the crystallinity of the CZTS thin film, and improve the AZO performance so that the PCE of the CZTS thin film solar cell based on the sol–gel method increases.
To analyse the photoresponses of the CZTS cells from different wavelengths of light, external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra were measured for the CZTS thin film solar cells with and without Na doping, which are shown in Fig. 10. Firstly, near the blue spectrum region (beyond 2.4 eV), the EQE data show a steep decay, indicating the light losses in the CdS buffer layer owing to the relative thickness of the CdS layer, as shown in Fig. 5. In addition, between 300–350 nm, the photoresponses of the two cell samples exhibit an abnormal increase, which has also been found in other reports.7,9,12 Secondly, at the red portion of the spectrum (λ > 600 nm), the EQE curves display a decreasing response for the two cell samples, which can be attributed to high recombination losses in the bulk and depletion regions. In this region, comparing the two cell samples, it can be seen that the photoresponse of the sample with Na doping is stronger than that of the sample without Na doping. This may be interpreted by the fact that Na doping decreases the ZnCu or SnCu donor defects, consequently reducing the recombination of minority carriers. However, the band gap of the CZTS thin film increases slightly after Na doping, which leads to a few absorption losses in the IR region (the band gap can be estimated from the dEQE/dE curve18). Furthermore, owing to the considerable difference in the band gaps for CZTS (∼1.5 eV) and CZTSSe (∼1.1 eV), in the near-infrared region, the ranges of the photoresponse of our CZTS cells are far smaller than that of the CZTSSe cell with high PCE, which contributes mainly to the lower JSC of the CZTS cells. To summarize, if the PCE of the CZTS thin film solar cell is expected to be improved significantly, firstly, CdS should be substituted with other Cd-free buffer layer materials with higher band gaps, such as Zn(S, O), to reduce the blue light losses. Although the ZnS/CZTS interface presents a very positive CBO (conduction band offset), the Zn(S, O) buffer layer containing partial oxygen (generally deposited by CBD) has almost achieved a matched PCE with CdS in the CIGS system,55 indicating the possible application of Zn(S, O) in the CZTS system. Secondly, the further optimization of the CZTS absorber layer and its interfaces with the buffer layer and the Mo back contact is needed to increase the minority carrier lifetime as well as to decrease the recombination losses and the series resistance. Thirdly, to enhance the light absorption in the near-infrared region, the band gap of CZTS should be adjusted, which can be realized by doping with other low-cost elements.
 Fig. 10  Normalized external quantum efficiency of two CZTS cells with and without Na doping. The blue dashed curve and magenta dashed dotted curve are derived from the QEs of CIGS (ZnS as buffer layer) and CZTSSe respectively.15,55 
Conclusions
The modified thermal decomposition and reaction by the sol–gel method is introduced to prepare pure Cu2ZnSnS4 (CZTS) thin film solar cells, and the highest power conversion efficiency of 5.10% is obtained. To obtain optimal technologies for the synthesis of CZTS thin films, the detailed formation mechanism of CZTS nanocrystal thin films based on the thermal decomposition and reaction of thiourea–metal–oxygen complexes prepared by a non-aqueous sol–gel process have been demonstrated. By analyzing the secondary phases and impurities in the annealed CZTS thin films, it is found that slightly enriched ZnS on the surface of the CZTS thin films can be removed facilely by HCl etching. In addition, the content of carbon in the CZTS thin films can be reduced to a very low level by NaOH doping. The tests of complete CZTS solar cell devices indicate that Na doping can improve the power conversion efficiency significantly through enhancing the VOC and FF values of the device. Besides, traces of secondary phases, such as ZnS, can increase the VOC, while the JSC deteriorates to some degree. With properties including low-cost, high-throughput and homogeneous elemental distribution on a molecular level, the non-aqueous sol–gel method can be employed to produce high-quality single-phase CZTS thin films by introducing the thermal decomposition and reaction of metal–thiourea–oxygen complexes and extrinsic dopants. Moreover, this thermal decomposition sol–gel route can be easily expanded to fabricating other metal chalcogenide materials such as CIGS systems. Nevertheless, the improvement of the crystallinity of CZTS thin films based on the sol–gel process, the optimization of the buffer layer/CZTS interface and the adjustment of the band gap with low-cost materials should be studied further so that higher power conversion efficiencies can be achieved in the future.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National High Technology Research and Development Program of China (863 Program, Grant no. 2011aa050529) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 51204214 and 51222403).
Notes and references
D. Butler, Nature, 2008, 454, 558 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. A. Andersson, Prog. Photovoltaics: Res. Appl., 2000, 8, 61–76 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wadia, A. P. Alivisatos and D. M. Kammen, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2009, 43, 2072–2077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Ito and T. Nakazawa, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., Part 1, 1988, 27, 2094 CrossRef CAS .
H. Katagiri, K. Saitoh, T. Washio, H. Shinohara, T. Kurumadani and S. Miyajima, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2001, 65, 141–148 CrossRef CAS .
H. Katagiri, K. Jimbo, W. S. Maw, K. Oishi, M. Yamazaki, H. Araki and A. Takeuchi, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2455–2460 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Mitzi, O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov, K. Wang and S. Guha, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 1421–1436 CrossRef CAS .
H. Katagiri, K. Jimbo, S. Yamada, T. Kamimura, W. S. Maw, T. Fukano, T. Ito and T. Motohiro, Appl. Phys. Express, 2008, 1, 041201–041202 CrossRef .
B. Shin, O. Gunawan, Y. Zhu, N. A. Bojarczuk, S. J. Chey and S. Guha, Prog. Photovoltaics: Res. Appl., 2013, 21, 72–76 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Chawla and B. Clemens, in The 38th IEEE Photovoltaics Specialists Conference (PVSC38), Austin, Texas,  2012 Search PubMed .
K. Tanaka, N. Moritake and H. Uchiki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1199–1201 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmed, K. B. Reuter, O. Gunawan, L. Guo, L. T. Romankiw and H. Deligianni, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 253–259 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Guo, G. M. Ford, W.-C. Yang, B. C. Walker, E. A. Stach, H. W. Hillhouse and R. Agrawal, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 17384–17386 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Q. Guo, Y. Cao, J. V. Caspar, W. E. Farneth, A. S. Lonkin, L. K. Johnson, M. Lu, I. Malajovich, D. Radu, K. R. Choudhury, H. D. Rosenfeld and W. Wu, in The 38th IEEE Photovoltaics Specialists Conference (PVSC38), Austin, Texas,  2012 Search PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, K. B. Reuter and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, E156–E159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Woo, Y. Kim and J. Moon, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 5340–5345 CAS .
W. Yang, H.-S. Duan, B. Bob, H. Zhou, B. Lei, C.-H. Chung, S.-H. Li, W. W. Hou and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 6323–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Todorov, J. Tang, S. Bag, O. Gunawan, T. Gokmen, Y. Zhu and D. B. Mitzi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 34–38 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, X. G. Gong, A. Walsh and S.-H. Wei, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 79, 165211 CrossRef .
A. Redinger, D. M. Berg, P. J. Dale and S. Siebentritt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3320–3323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. J. P. Corriu and D. Leclercq, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1996, 35, 1420–1436 CrossRef .
M. Niederberger, Acc. Chem. Res., 2007, 40, 793–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. G. Kwon and T. Hyeon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 1696–1709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kronik, D. Cahen and H. W. Schock, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 31 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, D. B. Mitzi, W. Liu, A. J. Kellock, S. J. Chey and V. R. Deline, Chem. Mater., 2009, 22, 285–287 CrossRef .
K. Tanaka, M. Oonuki, N. Moritake and H. Uchiki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2009, 93, 583–587 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, K. Tanaka, Y. Fukui and H. Uchiki, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2011, 95, 2855–2860 CrossRef CAS .
H. Katagiri, Thin Solid Films, 2005, 480, 426–432 CrossRef .
Z. Su, K. Sun, Z. Han, F. Liu, Y. Lai, J. Li and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 16346 RSC .
M. Y. Yeh, C. C. Lee and D. S. Wuu, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2009, 52, 65–68 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Chaudhuri and D. Tiwari, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2012, 101, 46–50 CrossRef CAS .
J. Madarasz, P. Bombicz, M. Okuya and S. Kaneko, Solid State Ionics, 2001, 141, 439–446 CrossRef .
W. Ki and H. W. Hillhouse, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 732–735 CrossRef CAS .
W. A. Spofford III and E. L. Amma, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. B: Struct. Crystallogr. Cryst. Chem., 1970, 26, 1474–1483 CrossRef .
K. Smolander, M. Ahlgren, M. Melnik, J. Skorsepa and K. Gyoryova, Acta Crystallogr., Sect. C: Cryst. Struct. Commun., 1994, 50, 1900–1902 CrossRef .
P. G. Harrison, B. J. Haylett and T. J. King, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 1983, 75, 259–264 CrossRef CAS .
M. Krunks, J. Madarasz, L. Hiltunen, R. Mannonen, E. Mellikov and L. Niinistö, Acta Chem. Scand., 1997, 51, 294–301 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, Q. Gao and J. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 17281–17289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. D. Olekseyuk, I. V. Dudchak and L. V. Piskach, J. Alloys Compd., 2004, 368, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walsh, S. Chen, S.-H. Wei and X.-G. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 400–409 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-M. Yu, S. Nam, B. O, K.-S. Lee, Y. D. Choi, M.-Y. Yoon and P. Y. Yu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 78, 149–153 CrossRef .
X. Fontane, L. Calvo-Barrio, V. Izquierdo-Roca, E. Saucedo, A. Perez-Rodriguez, J. R. Morante, D. M. Berg, P. J. Dale and S. Siebentritt, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 181905 CrossRef .
A. Fairbrother, E. Garcia-Hemme, V. Izquierdo-Roca, X. Fontane, F. A. Pulgarin-Agudelo, O. Vigil-Galan, A. Perez-Rodriguez and E. Saucedo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8018–8021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. A. Fernandes, P. M. P. Salome and A. F. da Cunha, Thin Solid Films, 2009, 517, 2519–2523 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, B. Shin, K. B. Reuter, T. Todorov, D. B. Mitzi and S. Guha, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 051912 CrossRef .
J. J. Scragg, J. T. Watjen, M. Edoff, T. Ericson, T. Kubart and C. Platzer-Bjorkman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19330–19333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Singh, H. Geaney, F. Laffir and K. M. Ryan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 2910–2913 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-H. Wei, S. B. Zhang and A. Zunger, J. Appl. Phys., 1999, 85, 7214 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Erslev, W. N. Shafarman and J. D. Cohen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98, 062105 CrossRef .
A. Walsh, S. Y. Chen, S. H. Wei and X. G. Gong, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 400–409 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Contreras, B. Egaas, J. Webb, J. Granata, K. Ramanathan, S. E. Asher, A. Swartzlander and R. Noufi, in The 26th IEEE Photovoltaic Specialists Conference,  1997 Search PubMed .
D. A. R. Barkhouse, R. Haight, N. Sakai, H. Hiroi, H. Sugimoto and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 100, 193904 CrossRef .
M. A. Contreras, M. J. Romero, B. To, F. Hasoon, R. Noufi, S. Ward and K. Ramanathan, Thin Solid Films, 2002, 403(C404), 204–211 CrossRef .
O. Gunawan, T. K. Todorov and D. B. Mitzi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 233506 CrossRef .
A. Ennaoui, M. Bär, J. Klaer, T. Kropp, R. Sáez-Araoz and M. C. Lux-Steiner, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2006, 14, 499–511 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13533kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Illustration of the formation of the CZTS thin films via thermal decomposition and reaction by the sol–gel route.	 
M–X + Tu → [M(Tu)m]–X	(1)
[M(Tu)m]–X + ROH → [M(Tu)m]–OR + H–X	(2)
[M(Tu)m]–X + [M(Tu)m]–OR → [M(Tu)m]–O–[M(Tu)m] + R–X	(3)
[M(Tu)m]–O–[M(Tu)m] + R–X → CuxS + ZnS + SnxS + SnO2 + volatile matter	(4)
CuxS + ZnS + SnxS → Cu2ZnSnS4	(5)
CuxS + ZnS + SnO2+ S → Cu2ZnSnS4	(6)

 	Fig. 1  Thermogravimetric analysis and differential scanning calorimetry of the CZTS precursor powder.	 

 	Fig. 2  The surface (A) and cross-section (B) SEM images of the CZTS precursor thin film.	 

 	Fig. 3  The surface atomic force micrograph of the CZTS precursor thin film.	 

 	Fig. 4  The XRD (A) and Raman spectroscopy ((B) 532 nm excitation wavelength, and (C) 325 nm excitation wavelength) patterns of the CZTS precursor thin film.	 

 	Fig. 5  The cross-section SEM images for two CZTS thin film devices with the structure of Mo/CZTS/CdS/i-ZnO/ZAO, (A) no Na doping; (B) with 1% Na doping.	 

 	Fig. 6  XRD patterns of the two annealed CZTS thin film samples without (black) and with Na doping (red).	 

 	Fig. 7  Raman spectroscopy of the CZTS thin films (without Na doping) measured with 532 nm (A) and 325 nm (B and C) excitation wavelengths at different depths (see ESI†): surface (0 min sputter time), 200 nm (30 min sputter time), 400 nm (60 min sputter time), 600 nm (90 min sputter time) and 800 nm (120 min sputter time).	 

 	Fig. 8  X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analyses on two annealed thin film samples with and without Na doping. (A) Fast scan of the CZTS thin film surface. (B) High-resolution scan of impurities in the two CZTS thin film samples with and without Na doping (compared with the signal from main element Cu).	 

 	Fig. 9  Current–voltage characteristics of three CZTS devices under air mass 1.5 illumination. 1#: no Na doping, 2#: 1% Na doping, 3#: 1% Na doping and HCl etching.	 

 	Fig. 10  Normalized external quantum efficiency of two CZTS cells with and without Na doping. The blue dashed curve and magenta dashed dotted curve are derived from the QEs of CIGS (ZnS as buffer layer) and CZTSSe respectively.15,55	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c3ta13533k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
