Identification of effective exciton–exciton annihilation in squaraine–squaraine copolymers  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CP01780K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CP01780K
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 13368-13374Identification of effective exciton–exciton annihilation in squaraine–squaraine copolymers

        
          
            Kilian 
            Hader
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Volkhard 
            May
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Christoph 
            Lambert
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Volker 
            Engel
          
        
      *a
aUniversität Würzburg, Institut für Physikalische und Theoretische Chemie, Am Hubland, Campus Nord, Emil-Fischer-Str. 42, 97074 Würzburg, Germany. E-mail: volker.engel@uni-wuerzburg.de;  Fax: +49 931 3185331;   Tel: +49 931 3186376
bInstitut für Physik, Humboldt Universität, Newtonstr. 15, D-12489 Berlin, Germany
cUniversität Würzburg, Institut für Organische Chemie, Am Hubland, 97074 Würzburg, Germany
Received 
      16th March 2016
    , Accepted 22nd April 2016First published on 22nd April 2016AbstractUltrafast time-resolved transient absorption spectroscopy is able to monitor the fate of the excited state population in molecular aggregates or polymers. Due to many competing decay processes, the identification of exciton–exciton annihilation (EEA) is difficult. Here, we use a microscopic model to describe exciton annihilation processes in squaraine–squaraine copolymers. Transient absorption time traces measured at different laser powers exhibit an unusual time-dependence. The analysis points towards dynamics taking place on three time-scales. Immediately after laser-excitation a localization of excitons takes place within the femtosecond time-regime. This is followed by exciton–exciton annihilation which is responsible for a fast decay of the exciton population. At later times, excitations being localized on units which are not directly connected remain so that diffusion dominates the dynamics and leads to a slower decay. We thus provide evidence for EEA tracked by time-resolved spectroscopy which has not been reported that clearly before.
1 Introduction
The photo-excitation of molecular aggregates or polymers with laser-sources working at moderate intensities initiates excited state energy transfer processes. The dynamics of such processes critically determines the efficiency of organic solar cells.1,2 Within a localized picture, excitation of a single monomer within the aggregate creates an electron–hole pair, i.e. an exciton.3,4 This quasi-particle can move through the system until a characteristic distance (exciton diffusion length) is reached where perturbations hinder the motion and the exciton is trapped. The dynamics of exciton motion is often described by Förster exciton theory if the weak coupling regime applies.5–7
An increase in laser power makes other processes more likely to occur because, with increasing intensity, multiple excitations become possible. Adopting again a localized picture, this means that more than one exciton is produced by photo-excitation. Also multi-photon transitions within a single monomer can take place. As a consequence, different energy transfer dynamics are triggered. One of such processes is exciton–exciton annihilation (EEA).8–14 Briefly, this means that two excitons residing on monomers (n) and (m) interact such that one monomer takes the entire excitation energy and is promoted to a higher excited state whereas the other is de-excited to the ground state. Afterwards, the doubly excited monomer decays via a non-radiative transition to its first excited state so that in the new configuration one exciton is missing, i.e. is annihilated. Such annihilation processes were investigated, e.g., in conjugated polymers such as P3HT11 or MEH-PPV12 in the solid state, or in perylene bisimide aggregates in the liquid phase.15–17
Recently, we studied singlet–singlet annihilation in copolymers based on two different squaraine chromophores SQA and SQB in toluene and chloroform solution.18 A sketch of the geometry of the copolymer is shown in Fig. 1. In these dilute solutions we assume exciton movement to occur exclusively along the polymer chains opposed to the case of conjugated polymers in the solid state, where three-dimensional diffusion of excitons may take place.
 Fig. 1  Structure of the copolymer consisting of SQA and SQB units. 
Transient absorption spectra were obtained by pumping dilute samples of the polymer in toluene solution at 15000 cm−1 and probed by a white light supercontinuum. The maximum intensity of the ground state bleaching signal at 12600 cm−1 is plotted vs. time for different pump power-intensities in Fig. 2. It is obvious that the dynamics are strongly power dependent which points towards annihilation processes. Because of the high absorption cross section of the squaraine polymer and at the laser fluences employed in these experiments it is likely that multiple excitons are generated within one polymer strand. It is to be noted that the time-dependence of the transient absorption signals is rather striking. They exhibit a characteristic S-shape at all intensities, a behavior which usually is not seen.
 Fig. 2  Measured absorption traces of [SQA–SQB]n copolymers. Three pulse energies are used, as indicated. The experiments are performed with a photon energy of 15000 cm−1 in toluene. 
In our earlier work a preliminary analysis of the femtosecond transient-absorption traces taken at different laser powers pointed at an efficient exciton–exciton annihilation at shorter times whereas at later times, this process is slowed down. The data suggests that there is a fast process which leads to a localization of excitons. This is followed by a much slower diffusion controlled motion. In the present theoretical work we provide a more fundamental insight into the underlying dynamics using a microscopic model which takes a distribution of excitons into account. In particular, we aim at the identification of exciton–exciton annihilation leading to the particular S-shaped time-dependence of the measured intensity-dependent absorption traces. Such a description which is based on molecular Hamiltonians is in need because diffusion equations, as often used to describe EEA,16 cannot reproduce the measured population dynamics. The theoretical description of the various energy transfer processes needs an extension of the one-exciton Hamiltonian which describes exciton energy transfer.6 It is necessary to include at least one higher excited monomer state and also, non-radiative transitions in the presence of dissipation.19,20
The paper is organized as follows: the essential equations derived in ref. 21 are given in Section 2. The numerical results are presented in Section 3 which is finished with a summary.
2 Theory
For the description of the exciton annihilation process we adapt the formulation of ref. 21 and 22. Details on the derivation of the rate equations can be found in ref. 21. An improvement due to the consideration of intramolecular vibrations is given in ref. 22. We here summarize only the central ideas and provide the working equations used in the simulations.
We regard a polymer consisting of M monomers (m) which are either of SQA or SQB type. Each of the monomers has three electronic states: the electronic ground state |g,m〉, a first excited state |e,m〉 and an additional excited state |f,m〉 with energies Egm, Eem and Efm, respectively. Neglecting exchange effects, the electronic wave functions of the aggregate are taken as products of the monomer electronic functions. Defining the transition operators: B†m = |e,m〉 〈g,m|, Bm = |g,m〉 〈e,m|,(1) D†m = |f,m〉 〈e,m|, Dm = |e,m〉 〈f,m|,(2)the aggregates Hamiltonian is written as: (3) In order to remain on a less complex level we here ignore vibrational contributions (cf.ref. 22). Note, further, that we have neglected terms which couple configurations (|e,n〉 |f,m〉) and (|f,n〉 |e,m〉). This is motivated by the large value chosen for the relaxation rate from the |f,n〉 to the |e,n〉 states which results in a de-population being faster than excited state exciton transfer. The interpretation of the single terms contributing to the Hamiltonian is as follows. The first three terms correspond to the energy representation of the uncoupled monomer Hamiltonians. The couplings between different excited state aggregate configurations are collected in the terms containing the coupling elements Jmn and Kmn. In more detail, the notation is such that the operator B†mBn de-excites monomer (n) from the first excited state to the ground state and simultaneously promotes monomer (m) to its first excited state. The probability for this process to take place is determined by the matrix element Jmn. Likewise, the operator D†mBn initiates a transition of monomer (n) from the first excited to the ground state, and monomer (m) is excited from the first to the second excited state |f,m〉. Here, the coupling strength is given by the matrix element Kmn. Fig. 3 illustrates the effects of the transition operators which are responsible for the energy-transfer processes.
 Fig. 3  Excitation energy transfer processes between monomer m and n considered in the simulations (both molecules are represented by the energetic position Eg of the ground-state, Ee of the first excited state, and Ef of a higher excited state; the red spheres label the actual excitation). Upper panel: transfer of a single excitation from monomer m to n (term in eqn (3) proportional to Jmn; reverse process is governed by Bn+Bm). Decay from the higher excited state and the first excited state are labeled by rates r and k, respectively. Lower panel: transfer of two single excitations at monomer m and n to a higher excitation at monomer m (term in eqn (3) proportional to Kmn; reverse process is governed by Bn+Dm; alternatively, the higher excitation may be placed at monomer n via the term Dn+Bm). 
The populations in the first and second excited monomer states can be expressed as the expectation values: Pm(t) = 〈B†mBm〉, Nm(t) = 〈D†mDm〉,(4)and the ground state population is just Πm(t) = 1 − Pm(t) − Nm(t). Thus, normalization is such that the populations within a single monomer add up to a value of one. Using several approximations, rate equations for the populations Pm(t) and Nm(t) of the system interacting with an environment can be derived.21 They read: (5)and (6) Here, the constant k is the decay-rate from the first excited state to the ground state and r is the decay-rate from the second to the first excited state. These rates are assumed to be equal for the SQA and SQB monomers. Moreover, the rates mn refer to the transfer of energy between the first excited states of coupled monomers, whereas the rates mn describe higher excitation of monomer m and decay of monomer n into its ground-state (process of exciton fusion). For an interpretation of the different terms appearing in the rate equations we focus on the first one on the right hand side of eqn (5). It is a loss term regarding Pm with four contributions (cf. also Fig. 3). The first contribution describes internal conversion determined by the rate k and the second one exciton transfer to monomer n (note the appearance of the related ground-state population Πn). The term mn refers to the excitation of monomer m into the second excited state accompanied by an de-excitation of monomer n while the term nm describes the same process but with monomer m de-excited and monomer n moved into the higher excited state. The positive gain terms can be visualized in the same way in going from the right hand to the left hand configurations in Fig. 3.
The derivation of rate equations also results in explicit expressions for the rates mn and mn. We obtain: (7)and (8)with the detuning terms ΔEJmn = Eem − Een and ΔEKmn = Efm − Eem − Een.
The simple dephasing model used in ref. 21 results in a Lorentzian-type of broadening of the energy conserving δ-functions (second factors of the rate expressions). Consequently forward and backward rates become identical. Such a defect of the theory is not so serious if the energies of the initial and final state of the transition are nearly identical. However, it is not the case for the investigated polymeric system where the SQA and SQB monomer first excited state energies differ by 0.15 eV. To address this situation we improved the description of ref. 21 by including, for every monomer, the relevant set of vibrational degrees of freedom. For example, Bm+, eqn (1), is replaced by |e,μ,m〉 〈g,ν,m| where the electronic ground and first excited state are extended by their vibrational state (μ and ν label the related set of vibrational quantum numbers). At the same time the electronic energies are replaced by electron-vibrational energies (the blue shaded areas in the energy level schemes of Fig. 3 can be identified with these energies), and the coupling elements Jmn are augmented by vibrational overlap expressions (for more details see ref. 22). Concentrating on the limit of fast intramolecular vibrational energy redistribution (IVR) we can derive rate equations where the vibrational equilibrium is reached at every step of the kinetic evolution. Finally, we turn to the high-temperature limit and obtain a rate expression similar to eqn (7) but with the Lorentzian type of broadening replaced by: (9) Obviously the rate fulfills detailed balance. The Stokes shift SJmn combines those of molecules m and n (both referring to the transitions connecting ground and first excited state; see also ref. 6). A similar formula is also valid for the fusion process.
We numerically solve the coupled rate equations (eqn (5) and (6)) for fixed values of the parameters k, r, mn and mn. In doing so, the initial conditions for the various monomer populations are varied to account for excitation with different laser powers, see Section 3.
3 Results
In what follows, we concentrate on the transient absorption traces measured in toluene at an excitation energy of 15000 cm−1, see Fig. 2. Several assumptions are needed to set up the numerical model. For the solution of the rate equations we need estimates for the relaxation rates k and r and furthermore numbers for the energy transfer mn and exciton fusion rates mn. The latter are taken as constants and only next-neighbor interactions are included. A detailed study of the influence of all parameters on the population dynamics is out of the scope of this work and will not be reported here. A global target fit to the measured transient absorption maps was given in ref. 18. The estimated lifetimes are collected in Table 1, last column. Different relaxation processes were postulated which are associated with lifetimes ranging from 600 to 2600 ps. The processes having longer lifetimes influence only the tail of the transient absorption signals at long times. Here, we mostly concentrate on the time-interval up to 1000 ps and, accordingly, we fix the relaxation rate k (decay of first excited state) such that a lifetime of 806 ps is obtained. No experimental input is available for the rate r (decay of second excited state) and we assume that this relaxation is much faster and is associated with a lifetime of 81 fs. Choosing a smaller value for r results in a better agreement between theory and experiment but only in the femtosecond time-regime. For the de-population due to exciton–exciton coupling we use a value of  yielding a lifetime of 60 ps which is in the range estimated by the data analysis. Finally, for the annihilation process a lifetime around 0.6 ps was extracted from the data. Here we employ a value which corresponds to the slightly smaller lifetime of 0.32 ps.
Table 1 Input parameters for the rate equations. Given are the rates and corresponding lifetimes. The range of values obtained by a global target fit of the measured absorption maps18 are given in the last column




 
Rate [ps−1]
Lifetime [ps] (th.)
Lifetime [ps] (exp.)





k

1.24 × 10−3
806
[600, 2600]



r

12.4
8.06 × 10−2
—





1.65 × 10−2
60.5
[42, 54]





3.10
3.2 × 10−1
[0.56, 0.66]




In order to control the number of parameters we start our analysis with Lorentzian-like broadened rates, eqn (7) and (8). A value of J = 59.5 meV (480 cm−1) for the electronic coupling element was extracted from the measured absorption and emission spectra in ref. 18. Regarding eqn (7) this means that, for the given value of k, a detuning of ΔEJmn of 23.05 meV (185.9 cm−1) has to be introduced to arrive at the value for  given in Table 1. From experiment, the difference in the absorption peaks of the SQA and SQB monomers is determined as 0.15 eV (1200 cm−1). The spectra, however, show a vibrational progression (which is often seen in such systems23) with a vibrational energy quantum being in the same order of magnitude as the peak difference. We therefore use the much smaller value for the detuning (see also the comment on the influence of vibrations at the end of Section 3). For the second excited state, being in a range with a higher density of electronic states, we assume zero detuning, i.e., set ΔEKmn = 0 so that K = 2.04 meV.
We note that the numbers obtained from the global fitting of the measured signals have to be considered as a guide for the choice of the parameters set used in the calculation and not as absolute numbers. It should be clear that the chosen parameter set is by no means unique. However, we emphasize that the energy transfer rate  has to be much smaller than the rate  which determines the annihilation, in order to obtain calculated signals in agreement with experiment, and in particular to reproduce the characteristic S-shape of the transient signals.
Once the initial conditions for the different populations are specified, the solutions of the rate equations reveal the time-dependence of all occupations. Thus, we have to make a reasonable guess for the initial conditions. We assume that laser excitation does not populate the second excited monomer states so that, in all calculations, we set Nm(0) equal to zero. By numerical analysis, we find that agreement with experiment does not improve if this assumption is dropped. From experiment, the field-dependent probabilities for the excitation of a single monomer within the polymer can be deduced. This probability P(0;Fj) (where Fj is the pulse energy) depends on the number of photons per area and the absorption cross section of the chromophore and can be calculated,24 for detailed pulse characteristics and cross sections see ref. 18. The extinction coefficients of SQA and SQB at 15000 cm−1 are different but, to simplify the situation, we use an average value of ε = 1.05 × 10−8 cm2 mol−1 so that both units are assumed to be excited with equal probability. Regarding the pulse energies of F1 = 100 nJ, F2 = 200 nJ and F3 = 400 nJ, one obtains, taking saturation effects into account, values of P(0;F1) = 0.10, P(0;F2) = 0.19 and P(0;F3) = 0.34, respectively (the numbers are calculated from eqn (6) of ref. 18 using the therein specified pulse parameters). These values provide reliable numbers for the populations Pm(0) at time t = 0.
We next discuss different initial configurations. One possibility to sample such configurations is to imagine that the excitations are distributed randomly over the aggregate.18 In our numerical calculations we found that under this assumption the experimental curves cannot be reproduced, and therefore we are in need for an alternative approach. As mentioned in the introduction, it was deduced from experiment that there are ‘slow’ and ‘fast’ excitons moving through the oligomer. The slow ones correspond to a diffusion process and are determined by the coupling . The ‘fast’ excitons we here associate with the process of localization of excitons on smaller, neighboring sites of the aggregate. Such a localization might be due to defects in the aggregate but also are caused by interactions with the solvent. The time-scale for the latter process can be in the femtosecond range as it was shown in recent theoretical studies.25,26 Furthermore, there is experimental evidence for such ultrafast processes, see, e.g.ref. 27–29. We use this scenario to arrive at a signal which is decomposed into several contributions. Because our model does not include any localization process, we just assume the localization. This also excludes the improbable situation that the excitons are de-localized over the whole polymer directly after the optical excitation.
In a first step, we calculate the averaged one-exciton population for the case that in a M-mer all populations Pm(0) = P(0;Fj) are equal. Thus, e.g. for a trimer, we set all monomer populations at time zero to the same value. This corresponds to the most likely situation where the pulse excitation or an afterwards proceeding ultrafast localization produces an equal monomer population in the sub-unit. The averaged populations, which are normalized to a value of one at the starting time, are (10) The latter functions are displayed in Fig. 4 for the chain lengths of M = 1–6 and different pulse energies. In the monomer case (M = 1), the decay is purely due to relaxation determined by the rate k. For the dimer (M = 2), exciton–exciton annihilation sets in. This leads to a much faster decay than is caused by a pure relaxation process. With increasing pulse energy, when annihilation becomes more effective, the decay proceeds faster. An interesting effect is found for the trimer (M = 3). As in the dimer case, an initial decay is seen which proceeds slightly faster until times of about 10 ps. Afterwards, and independent of the pulse energy, the population decreases much more slowly. This effect is due to the boundary conditions, being important for this finite size system, and it can be understood by inspection of Fig. 5. The figure shows the trimer populations Pm(t) (and also their average 3(t;F3)) for the pulse energy F3. Clearly, the population of the middle monomer, having two neighbors and thus a higher probability to decay via annihilation, decreases much faster than the populations of the outer monomers (which, due to symmetry, are equal). When P2(t) settles to an almost constant but small value, the decay of the other populations is slowed down which is exemplified by the shoulder in the curves. Afterwards, diffusion becomes effective so that, via diffusion mediated annihilation, the signal finally decays to zero. The described influence of the boundaries is also present for larger values of M but is less important and it vanishes in the limit of infinite chains.
 Fig. 4  Averaged exciton population for aggregates with different lengths M. The initial excited state population for each monomer within the aggregates is equal but depends on the pulse energy Fj. Curves for the values of F1 = 100 nJ, F2 = 200 nJ and F3 = 400 nJ, are displayed, as indicated. 
 Fig. 5  Exciton population dynamics for a trimer. Shown are the single monomer populations Pm(t) and their average, as indicated. The calculation is performed for the pulse energy F3, where the initial excited state population of all monomers is Pm(0) = 0.34. 
The population curves shown in Fig. 4 result from initially equally populated isolated M-mers. We find that one may place these sub-units (monomers, dimers, trimers,…) arbitrarily at different positions in larger aggregates without seeing an appreciable effect in the population dynamics. Note, however, that this is only valid for the coupling parameters employed (and in particular the small diffusion rate). Thus, in our case, it is possible to decompose the signal to be compared to experiment into a sum over the contributions M(t;Fj): (11)with factors wM(Fj). The latter determine the relative weight of the single multi-excitons contributing to the signal. In a straight forward way one can try to find a best fit to the measured data in varying the weights. In doing so, we find that it is not necessary to include the contributions with M = 5 and 6 in the fitting procedure. This can be motivated by a direct comparison of the decay curves for the different M-mers. They are shown in Fig. 6 for the pulse energy F1. It is seen that, whereas the populations for the dimer and trimer-configurations are rather different from each other and also from the M = 4, 5 and 6 curves, the latter are very similar. The same is also found for the other pulse energies.
 Fig. 6  Averaged exciton population for aggregates with different lengths M. The pulse energy is F1 = 100 nJ. 
The strategy to arrive at a reasonable choice for the weights is as follows. First, the short-time behavior of the transient-time signals is regarded, and the rates r and  are determined such that agreement with experiment is obtained. In a second step, the weights for the M = 1 and 2 contributions are adjusted. The long-time dynamics, which is determined by the configurations M = 3 and 4, is then analyzed and the rate k and the rate  are adjusted together with the weights w3 and w4. Finally, the weights are varied slightly to account for the dynamics resulting form excitation with different pulse energies.
Applying the above described strategy, we arrive at one possible choice of coefficients (w1(Fj),…,w4(Fj)) with values of (0.37, 0.33, 0.27, 0.03) for F1, (0.35, 0.31, 0.30, 0.04) for F2 and (0.30, 0.35, 0.30, 0.05) for F3, respectively. The weights for the single contributions do not depend strongly on the energies. As a trend, for larger intensities the maximum of the distributions shifts towards larger sub-units. This can be understood because an increase in the pulse energy results in the preparation of more excitons. It is then more likely that two or more of them reside on neighboring monomers. Performing the calculation with a single set of weights we found that the curves do not change dramatically. However, the agreement with experiment then is less satisfying which supports our choice of the weights.
In Fig. 7 we compare the such calculated curves to experiment. For times larger than one ps, the agreement is excellent. In particular, the shoulders which, according to our analysis, mark the transition from annihilation-determined to diffusion-mediated annihilation/relaxation-determined decay, are reproduced. At short times the agreement is less satisfying and deviations are largest for times smaller than 500 fs. Note, however, that the measured absorption traces contain effects due to the overlap of pulses which have an autocorrelation function with approximately 150 fs temporal width. Furthermore, we emphasize that the localization process taking place on a femtosecond time-scale during or shortly after laser excitation is not included in the model so that the deviations between theory and experiment in this temporal range are to be expected.
 Fig. 7  Comparison of measured (chain dotted curves) absorption traces and calculated signals (solid curves). From above to below the pulse energies are F1 = 100 nJ, F2 = 200 nJ and F3 = 400 nJ. The signals are determined as the weighted sum over different M-mer contributions (eqn (11), M = 1–4). 
With the results in mind which have been obtained in using rate expressions with a Lorentzian-type of broadening we apply the more complex description also mentioned in Section 2. Due to the use of eqn (9) forward and backward rates of diffusion are distinguished by a Boltzmann factor so that BA = exp(−ΔEJAB/kT)AB which results in a ratio of ≈2.7 for the diffusion rates. The fusion rates are kept the same, as before. In Fig. 8 we compare the M-mer population dynamics of the equal rate case (e.g. the results depicted in Fig. 4) to the case of the different rates. It is seen that only smaller deviations are present for all values of M and all pulse energies. They occur only at longer times which is due to the small values of the diffusion rates. We note, that the trimer is a particular interesting case. There, the two possible configurations (SQA–SQB–SQA and SQB–SQA–SQB) yield a rather different decay behavior. Here, the boundary effects is enhanced in one configuration and diminished in the other so that the average population, as shown in the middle panels of Fig. 8, resembles very much the case where equal rates enter.
 Fig. 8  Averaged exciton population for aggregates with different lengths M. Calculations for equal diffusion rates (s) are compared to the case of different rates for the forward and backward direction (a). Curves for the pulse energies of F1 = 100 nJ, F2 = 200 nJ and F3 = 400 nJ, are displayed, as indicated. 
To conclude, it is found that the experimental signal, which clearly has multiple components, can be reproduced within the model adopted and thus allows for an interpretation of the complicated population dynamics taking place after strong-field excitation of squaraine–squaraine copolymers. Roughly 95% of the decay signal can be attributed to exciton population residing initially on monomer, dimer and trimer sub-units, i.e., mono- bi- and tri-excitons dominate the decay dynamics. This hints at a perturbation which favors localization on smaller subunits of the polymer. The resulting microscopic picture is as follows: ultrafast initial exciton migration leads to the formation of clusters of multiple-excitons on the sub 100 fs time-scale. Then, the decay in the sub-ps range is governed by direct exciton–exciton annihilation in the configurations M = 2, 3, 4, where the dimer (M = 2) and timer (M = 3) contributions are dominant. The decay then slows down mainly due to boundary effects in the trimer configuration. In contrast to isolated monomers and dimers, the additional decay pathway of diffusion meditated annihilation is present in the trimer.
We emphasize again that the input parameters entering into the calculation can be varied within certain ranges while maintaining agreement with experiment. For example, calculations including non next-neighbor couplings and modified values for the coupling strengths yield very similar population dynamics. Also, different sets for the coefficients wM(Fj) can be used which determine the relative contribution of the different multi-excitons to the signal. Nevertheless, the picture behind the excited state population dynamics which emerges from our analysis does not rely on finer details of the employed parameters. Finally, one might wonder if the here developed picture can be transferred to other polymers. The main reason which makes the decomposition of the signals possible, is the small value of the rate  which does not allow for a fast exciton diffusion. It is then reasonable to assume that hetero-polymers with larger de-tunings will behave as the squaraine-system we studied here. The aim of future studies will be to test this prediction.
Acknowledgements
We acknowledge financial support by the German Science Foundation within the FOR 1809.
References
J.-L. Brédas, D. Beljonne, V. Coropceanu and J. Cornil, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 4971–5003 CrossRef PubMed .
M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. S. Knox, Theory of Excitons, Solid State Physics, Advance in Research and Applications, Academic Press, New York,  1963, vol. 5 Search PubMed .

          A. S. Davydov, Theory of Molecular Excitons, Plenum, New York,  1971 Search PubMed .
M. Kasha, Radiat. Res., 1963, 20, 55–70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          V. May and O. Kühn, Charge and Energy Transfer Dynamics in Molecular Systems, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, 3rd edn,  2011 Search PubMed .
G. de Miguel, M. Ziolek, M. Zitnan, J. A. Organero, S. S. Pandey, S. Hayase and A. Douhal, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 9379–9389 CAS .
Y. Zaushitsyn, K. G. Jespersen, L. Valkunas, V. Sundström and A. Yartsev, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75, 195201 CrossRef .
D. C. Dai and A. P. Monkman, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 045308 CrossRef .
M. A. Stevens, C. Silva, D. M. Russell and R. H. Friend, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 165213 CrossRef .
S. Cook, H. Liyuan, A. Furube and R. Katoh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10962–10968 CAS .
A. Lewis, A. Ruseckas, O. Gaudin, G. Webster, P. Burn and I. Samuel, Org. Electron., 2006, 7, 452–456 CrossRef CAS .
D. Peckus, A. Devižis, D. Hertel, K. Meerholz and V. Gulbinas, Chem. Phys., 2012, 404, 42–47 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gòlinas, J. Kirkpatrick, I. A. Howard, K. Johnson, M. W. B. Wilson, G. Pace, R. H. Friend and C. Silva, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2013, 117, 4649–4653 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Marciniak, X.-Q. Li, F. Würthner and S. Lochbrunner, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 648–654 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wolter, J. Aizezers, F. Fennel, M. Seidel, F. Würthner, O. Kühn and S. Lochbrunner, New J. Phys., 2012, 14, 105027 CrossRef .
F. Fennel and S. Lochbrunner, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 140301 CrossRef .
S. F. Völker, A. Schmiedel, M. Holzapfel, K. Renziehausen, V. Engel and C. Lambert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 17467–17482 Search PubMed .
T. Renger and V. May, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 3406–3409 CrossRef CAS .
B. Brüggemann, J. L. Herek, V. Sundström, T. Pullerits and V. May, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 11391–11394 CrossRef .
V. May, J. Chem. Phys., 2014, 140, 054103 CrossRef PubMed .
V. May, K. Hader and V. Engel, J. Chem. Phys. Search PubMed  , to be published.
F. C. Spano, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 429–439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          N. V. Tkachenko, Optical Spectroscopy, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  2006 Search PubMed .
J. Wehner, A. Schubert and V. Engel, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2012, 541, 49–53 CrossRef CAS .
C. Brüning, J. Wehner, J. Hausner, M. Wenzel and V. Engel, Struct. Dyn., 2016, 3, 043201 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Banerji, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 302–3066 RSC .
I. S. G. D. Hwang, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 610–620 CrossRef CAS .
E. Collini and G. D. Scholes, Science, 2009, 323, 369–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Structure of the copolymer consisting of SQA and SQB units.	 

 	Fig. 2  Measured absorption traces of [SQA–SQB]n copolymers. Three pulse energies are used, as indicated. The experiments are performed with a photon energy of 15000 cm−1 in toluene.	 
B†m = |e,m〉 〈g,m|, Bm = |g,m〉 〈e,m|,	(1)
D†m = |f,m〉 〈e,m|, Dm = |e,m〉 〈f,m|,	(2)
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Excitation energy transfer processes between monomer m and n considered in the simulations (both molecules are represented by the energetic position Eg of the ground-state, Ee of the first excited state, and Ef of a higher excited state; the red spheres label the actual excitation). Upper panel: transfer of a single excitation from monomer m to n (term in eqn (3) proportional to Jmn; reverse process is governed by Bn+Bm). Decay from the higher excited state and the first excited state are labeled by rates r and k, respectively. Lower panel: transfer of two single excitations at monomer m and n to a higher excitation at monomer m (term in eqn (3) proportional to Kmn; reverse process is governed by Bn+Dm; alternatively, the higher excitation may be placed at monomer n via the term Dn+Bm).	 
Pm(t) = 〈B†mBm〉, Nm(t) = 〈D†mDm〉,	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)
	(9)


k
	1.24 × 10−3	806	[600, 2600]

r
	12.4	8.06 × 10−2	—


	1.65 × 10−2	60.5	[42, 54]


	3.10	3.2 × 10−1	[0.56, 0.66]
	(10)

 	Fig. 4  Averaged exciton population for aggregates with different lengths M. The initial excited state population for each monomer within the aggregates is equal but depends on the pulse energy Fj. Curves for the values of F1 = 100 nJ, F2 = 200 nJ and F3 = 400 nJ, are displayed, as indicated.	 

 	Fig. 5  Exciton population dynamics for a trimer. Shown are the single monomer populations Pm(t) and their average, as indicated. The calculation is performed for the pulse energy F3, where the initial excited state population of all monomers is Pm(0) = 0.34.	 
	(11)

 	Fig. 6  Averaged exciton population for aggregates with different lengths M. The pulse energy is F1 = 100 nJ.	 

 	Fig. 7  Comparison of measured (chain dotted curves) absorption traces and calculated signals (solid curves). From above to below the pulse energies are F1 = 100 nJ, F2 = 200 nJ and F3 = 400 nJ. The signals are determined as the weighted sum over different M-mer contributions (eqn (11), M = 1–4).	 

 	Fig. 8  Averaged exciton population for aggregates with different lengths M. Calculations for equal diffusion rates (s) are compared to the case of different rates for the forward and backward direction (a). Curves for the pulse energies of F1 = 100 nJ, F2 = 200 nJ and F3 = 400 nJ, are displayed, as indicated.	 

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2016
