Solar self-powered wireless charging pavement—a review on photovoltaic pavement and wireless charging for electric vehicles  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1SE00739D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1SE00739D
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2021, 5, 5139-5159Solar self-powered wireless charging pavement—a review on photovoltaic pavement and wireless charging for electric vehicles

        
          
            Bochao 
            Zhou
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Jianzhong 
            Pei
          
        
      *b, 
      
        
          
            John Kaiser 
            Calautit
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jiupeng 
            Zhang
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Fucheng 
            Guo
          
        
      b
aCollege of Metropolitan Transportation, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China
bKey Laboratory for Special Area Highway Engineering of Ministry of Education, Chang'an University, Xi'an, Shaanxi 710064, China. E-mail: peijianzhong@126.com
cDepartment of Architecture and Built Environment, University of Nottingham, Nottingham, England NG7 2RD, UK
Received 
      13th May 2021
    , Accepted 22nd September 2021First published on 23rd September 2021AbstractThe world today is facing an energy crisis, which has promoted the development and utilization of renewable energy, of which solar energy has the greatest potential. Due to the harsh environmental impact of fuel vehicle exhaust emissions, the development of electric vehicles (EVs) has been promoted, but its popularization and application have been restricted due to the charging mileage. Based on this, this article reviewed solar photovoltaic (PV) pavement and EV wireless charging technology, mainly from academic research and commercial achievements, and their strength, weakness, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) were analysed. In addition, an attempt was made to propose solar self-powered wireless charging pavement and to carry out a conceptual design, extending its connotation and further propose the road energy internet. This article intends to provide new ideas for the construction of intelligent transportation and to provide solutions for promotion.
1. Introduction
Fossil fuel energy is the lifeblood of the economy of many countries. The British Petroleum (BP) statistical review of world energy shows the proven reserves of primary energy in various regions as of 2019. As shown in Tables 1 and 2, the world's two main traditional energy reserves of oil and coal are 244.6 thousand million tonnes and 1069.636 thousand million tonnes, respectively.1 According to the R/P ratio data, with the proven primary energy reserves, oil and coal can only be exploited for about 49.9 and 132 years. The world is facing a serious energy shortage crisis, and the development of renewable energy is an effective way to solve the energy crisis.
Table 1 Traditional energy-oil reserves




Region
Proved reserves (109 t)
Share of total

R/P ratio




Canada
27.3
9.8%
82.3


Mexico
0.8
0.3%
8.3


US
8.2
4.0%
11.1


North America
36.3
14.1%
27.2


South & Centre America
50.9
18.7%
143.8


Europe
1.9
0.8%
11.6


CIS
19.8
84%
27.3


Middle East
112.9
48.1%
75.3


Africa
16.6
7.2%
41.0


Asia Pacific
6.1
2.6%
16.4



Total world


244.6


100%


49.9





Table 2 Traditional energy-coal reservesa




Region
Proved reserves (109 t)
Share of total

R/P ration





a CIS: the abbreviation for Commonwealth of Independent States. R/P ratio: the reserves remaining at the end of any year are divided by the production in that year, the R/P ratio presents the length of time that those remaining reserves would last if production were to continue at that rate.





Canada
6.528
0.6%
130


Mexico
1.211
0.1%
108


US
249.537
23.3%
390


North America
257.33
24.1%
367


South & Centre America
13.689
1.3%
152


Europe
135.109
12.6%
244


CIS
190.655
17.8%
338


Middle East & Africa
16.04
1.5%
57


Asia Pacific
456.813
42.7%
77



Total world


1069.636


100%


132





Renewable energy includes solar, water, wind, biomass, wave, tidal, geothermal energy, etc.2–4 Among them, solar energy is the most abundant renewable resource. Compared with traditional fossil fuel energy sources, solar energy has many obvious and incomparable advantages. In addition, the research indicated that the total proven reserves of fossil fuels account for only 1.4% of the annual solar energy received on the earth's surface.5 Therefore, the development and utilization of solar energy are imperative. At present, the application of solar energy in the road field mainly includes converting it into thermal energy or electricity.6–9 The former is usually used for snow melting and ice melting on winter roads to replace traditional chemical snow melting agents, providing heating to pedestrians along the road, etc. The latter can provide electricity along the road, or used for wireless charging and unmanned smart roads.
In addition, with the continuous increase in car ownership, traditional fuel vehicles produce a large amount of exhaust gas, which seriously affects air quality. Hence the increased usage of electric vehicles (EVs) can alleviate air pollution.10–12 However, the promotion of EVs still faces many difficulties such as the recharge mileage which is one of the main bottlenecks restricting its development.13,14 Due to the limitation of on-board battery capacity, EVs need to be charged regularly to meet mileage requirements.
The charging method can be classified into wireless and wired charging, of which is more common.15 However, wired charging has some limitations, such as the time required to charge and manual intervention, and the exposed wire can be dangerous and easy to age. Therefore, wireless charging can be more convenient for EV drivers than wired charging.16,17 EV wireless charging is mainly divided into stationary and dynamic wireless charging. The former is appropriate to parking lots, shopping malls, residential areas, etc., the latter is appropriate to EV charging while driving, which can solve the capacity issues of the battery.
Wireless charging is the most promising method to achieve dynamic wireless charging for EVs, but it needs to overcome the electricity supply problem. If the electricity for wireless charging is from the grid, it could increase the burden on the grid.18 Considering the above issues, there is some research on integrating the wireless charging pavement with the photovoltaic pavement, which can help solve the additional electricity burden.19,20 Therefore, the solar powered wireless charging pavement was proposed, but there is little research on it currently. In this article, the academic research and commercial examples of PV pavement and EV wireless charging technology were reviewed, and their strength, weakness, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) were analysed. Based on our analysis, we proposed the conceptual design of a self-powered wireless charging pavement, which integrates PV and EV wireless charging pavement.
2. Photovoltaic (PV) pavement
Solar energy is a clean, increasingly cheap, and renewable energy source that can be used almost anywhere in the world. Roads occupy large areas and can be used to provide sustainable energy without increasing the land load. For example, PV pavements combine PV power generation with roads. It can provide sustainable and clean energy on the premise of meeting driving needs.
2.1 Solar energy resource
Solar energy is sufficient to meet the energy needs of the world. The radiation energy emitted by the sun is 3.8 × 1023 kW, and around 1.8 × 1014 kW is intercepted by the earth, of which 60% can reach the surface of the earth.21 The land area (1.5 × 108 km2) of the Earth's surface accounts for one-third of the total, and it can be calculated that the power intensity is 200 W m−2.22 Take China as an example, the solar resource maps of China are shown in Fig. 1. As shown in Fig. 1, DNI is the most important parameter for energy yield calculation and performance assessment of concentrating solar power (CSP) and concentrator solar photovoltaic (CSP) technologies. DNI is also important for the calculation of global irradiation received by tilted or sun-tracking photovoltaic modules. GHI is the most important parameter for energy yield calculation and performance assessment of flat-plate photovoltaic (FPV) technologies. The land area of China is 9.6 × 106 km2.24 Assuming the average efficiency of solar conversion is 10%, just working 1 h every day, less than 10% land area used for the photovoltaic generation would generate about 7000 TW h, which can fully cover the electricity consumption of China.25
 Fig. 1  Solar resource maps of China.23 Note: direct normal irradiance (DNI) is the amount of solar radiation received per unit area by a surface that is always held perpendicular (or normal) to the rays; global horizontal irradiance (GHI) is the total amount of shortwave radiation received from above by a surface horizontal to the ground. 
2.2 Principle
PV power generation directly converts solar radiation into electricity by the photoelectric effect. The photoelectric effect is an important and magical phenomenon in physics, which is commonly studied in fields of electronic physics and chemistry.26–28 Under an electromagnetic irradiation higher than a certain frequency (threshold frequency), the electrons or other free carriers absorb energy and escape to form a current, that is, photoelectricity.29 The photoelectric phenomenon was discovered by the German physicist Hertz in 1887, but the correct definition was proposed by Einstein.30,31
The photoelectric effect is divided into: external photoelectric effect and internal photoelectric effect.32 Under the effect of light, the phenomenon in which electrons inside an object escape from the surface of the object and are emitted outward is called the external photoelectric effect; the phenomenon in which the electrical conductivity of the object changes or generates photoelectric electromotive force is called the internal photoelectric effect, which is divided into photoconductive effect and photovoltaic effect. Electricity generation by PV cells is based on the photovoltaic effect.33 The schematic diagram of the solar cell energy band model is shown in Fig. 2, of which Eg is bandgap value, Vd is diffusion voltage.
 Fig. 2  The schematic diagram of the solar cell energy band model.33 
2.3 PV pavement review
PV pavement is a novel functional pavement proposed by the Brusaw couple in 2006, that can collect solar energy by embedding solar cells and generate power.34 By combining the road for traffic and power generation function, PV pavement can help electrify roads and make transportation intelligent. The development and implementation of PV pavements will turn roads into large energy collection platforms, thus providing clean energy and making electrified highways possible.

2.3.1 Academic research. 
Although PV pavement is very promising and has been proposed for more than 10 years, there is still little academic research. According to the timeline, the published studies related to PV pavements are summarised in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of PV pavement research




Time & country
Structure schematic
Highlights




2009, U.S.34



1. Hexagonal solar panel


2. Surface is specially treated with ultra-wear-resistant


3. Bearing capacity up to 125 t


2012, Canada35–37



1. Square solar panel


2. Grid structure


3. Higher lifespan


2016, China38



1. Hollow slab structure


2. Optimal size: 50 cm × 50 cm × 2 cm PMMA plate, 50 cm × 50 cm × 23 cm base plate, thickness of side walls and base plate 10 cm


2016, Greece39



1. Field test


2. The surface temperature decreased 2–5 K


3. The ambient temperature decreased 0.5–1 K


2016, U.S.40



1. Modifying test standards


2. Rigid pavement standards for advanced loading


3. Structural adhesive standards for shear loading


4. Structure-specific standards for moisture conditioning


5. Application-specific standards for freeze/thaw cycling


2017, Iran41



1. Compared two prototypes: (a) solar panel and (b) solar pavement


2. Solar pavement provides better structural performance


3. Solar panel provides better electrical performance


2017, Ukraine42



1. “Smart Roads” combined PV and piezoelectric technology


2. An area of 112.5 m2 (7.5 × 15 m) is capable of generating 10 kW h−1


3. Paving smart roads will consume 71.25% of the total generating


2018, Netherlands43



1. Data were from the 70 m Netherlands solar bike path


2. Measured annual yields were 78 kW h m−2, 16% lower than expected


3. The annual yields can be 150 kW h m−2 at a specific location


2018, Estonia44



1. Surface treatment imitated asphalt pavement texture


2. Under the load of 1000 kg cm−2, it can work properly


3. It can generate power up to 47 W


2019, China45



1. Developed a walkable PV floor tile


2. Size: 500 mm × 500 mm × 20 mm


3. It performed well in compressive strength, skid resistance, heat resistance and durability


2020, China46



1. Analysed the mechanical properties of structure (a) and (b)


2. Optimal size (a): 120 cm length × 120 cm width × 8 cm bottom plate thickness × 2 cm grid thickness


3. Optimal size (b): 60 cm length × 60 cm width × 6 cm bottom plate thickness × 10 cm sidewall thickness


2020, U.S.47



1. Conducted four different tests


2. It can resist moisture environments and extreme weather


3. There is no physical damage under 989457 equivalent single axle loads


4. It can resist deformation under shear loading




As shown in Table 3, it can be found that the structure of PV pavement can be roughly divided into two categories: separate structure and integrated structure. The separate structure includes the grid and the hollow structures, which protects the PV cells with a light-transmitting protective layer and the base from the vehicle load. Although the integrated structure also has a protective layer, the vehicle load can be transmitted to the PV cells through the protective layer. In theory, considering the poor mechanical properties of PV cells, the separate structure is more effective in protecting photovoltaic cells from damage. Since PV pavement is a novel functional pavement, its structure and materials are different from the conventional pavement, such as cement and asphalt. Therefore, it is very important to develop standards and specifications to promote the application of PV pavement.


2.3.2 Commercial achievements. 
There are some companies focus on researching and developing PV pavement, such as Solar Roadways Incorporated (U.S.: SR panels), SolaRoad (Netherlands: SolaRoad), Colas Group (France: Wattway), Qilu Transportation Development Group (China) and Hanergy Group (China: HanRoad).48–50 As a novel pavement, the promotion and application need these commercial companies, and some PV pavement in small scales are being tested currently.
2.3.2.1 Solar Roadways. 
Solar Roadways Incorporated is in Sandpoint, Idaho, developing solar-powered road panels that can be driven and walked upon.51 The goal is to modernize the pavement with intelligent, modular panels, meanwhile producing renewable and clean energy for businesses and homes. Solar Roadways® (SR) contains LED lights, heating elements, and microprocessors, which guide traffic in the night, prevent ice and snow accumulation, and communicate with vehicles. The development journey of SR is shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  The development journey of SR. 
In 2014, the prototype car park was installed with SR2, in Sagle, Idaho, as shown in Fig. 4. The Solar Roadways panel weighs 110 pounds, which is easy to maintain by replacing a broken panel with a new one. According to the test result, it can withstand a 250000-pound vehicle load, and it allows vehicles to drive on a wet surface at 80 mile per h. In addition, it also can provide good visibility at night by the LEDs and improve driving safety.
 Fig. 4  The prototype car park and night light show. 
2.3.2.2 SolaRoad. 
SolaRoad was developed by a Dutch consortium consisting of the Netherlands Organisation for Applied Scientific Research (TNO), road engineering construction company Ooms Civiel, and Imtech (Dynniq). SolaRoad is 2.5 m × 3.5 m prefabricated concrete slabs, and compared with SR; it only generates electricity without integrating LED lighting. In the SolaRoad module, crystalline silicon PV cells are used, protected by placing between two slabs of 1 cm tempered glass. The structure of the SolaRoad is shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Structure of the SolaRoad.52 
In 2014, the world's first PV bike path was constructed and opened for testing in Krommenie, Netherlands, the 72 m-long PV bike path cost €3.5 million. It is reported that the test result was better than expected after 6 months, and the PV bike path produced 9800 kW h in one year. However, the original anti-slip coating was in poor condition, which peeled away because of the temperature fluctuations and long-term sun exposure.
2.3.2.3 Wattway. 
Colas Group is an international leader in the transport infrastructure, which proposed the innovative solar road ‘Wattway’.53 Wattway panels consist of PV cells and the multilayer substrate, of which PV cells are polycrystalline silicon thin film, the multilayer substrate are mixtures of resins and polymers, as shown in Fig. 6. It has good transmittance, which can guarantee enough solar energy that can be absorbed, and it has good strength and can withstand the vehicle load. The thickness of Wattway panels is only 7 mm, and the Wattway panels can be directly placed on the top of the road surface. In addition, the glass resin coating is applied to improve frictional performance without reducing the generating efficiency significantly.
 Fig. 6  Structure schematic of Wattway.54 
After 5 years of research conducted in France by the world's leading Colas and the National Institute of Solar Energy (INES), 2 patents have been granted for the Wattway technology.55,56 By combining road construction technology with PV production technology, Wattway provides clean and renewable energy, while allowing any type of vehicle. In 2016, the first solar road Wattway was constructed in Tourouvre, Normandy, France, which is 1 km-long and 2800 m2, as shown in Fig. 7. It is reported that the cost of the construction was €5 million.
 Fig. 7  The world's first solar road ‘Wattway’. 
2.3.2.4 Qilu Transportation Development Group. 
Qilu Transportation Development Group and Tongji University developed a “highway + photovoltaic” model and opened a new format of cross-field integration and development of ‘super highway’. In December 2017, the world's first PV highway test section constructed by the group was completed and opened to traffic at the Jinan South Ring Highway G2001, as shown in Fig. 8. The test section is 1120 m length, and the PV pavement is 1080 m length and the area is 5874 m2, with a total installed capacity peak power of 817.2 kW. It is estimated that the annual power generation can reach about 1 million kW h. The cost is less than ¥3000 (about €400)/m2. The PV pavement is a three-layer structure, of which the top layer is transparent concrete (transmittance over 86%), the medium layer is PV power generation components, and the bottom layer is the insulation layer. It is reported that its overall bearing capacity, flatness, durability and weather resistance, and anti-skid safety exceed conventional asphalt pavement. However, under the fact road condition, some problems still need to be solved, such as the joints damage in PV pavement.
 Fig. 8  The world's first PV highway. 
2.3.2.5 Hanergy Group. 
Hanergy Group is a global clean energy multinational company internationally known for its thin-film solar technology. At present, Hanergy has many thin-film solar products. Among them, Hanbrick is a revolutionary breakthrough product, and its components adopt Hanergy's flexible copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS) thin-film solar chips, including many functions such as power generation (including monitoring), energy storage, lighting control, intelligent display system, etc. Hanbrick adopts a componentized design, is lightweight and low cost, does not occupy public space, and can be quickly installed.
In 2018, the first HanRoad project was completed in Beijing Longhu G-PARK Science Park, as shown in Fig. 9. During the day, HanRoad absorbs sunlight and converts it into electricity and stores. At night, the stored electricity can be used as a glowing night scene. In winter, it can also melt ice and snow through self-heating controlled by sensors.
 Fig. 9  Beijing Longhu G-PARK Science Park HanRoad project. 
At present, there are very few enterprises and scholars devoted to the research and development of PV pavement, which makes it challenging to promote the development of PV pavement. A major problem facing colleges and universities when researching PV pavements is the high cost. The technology is not yet mature, it is difficult and high-cost to further carry out a test to verify the feasibility under real road conditions. While enterprises are profitable organizations, the development of PV pavement technologies can take a long time and will have low returns. Based on this, cooperation between universities and enterprises is necessary to complete the research and development of PV pavement.

2.4 SWOT analysis
According to the present research on PV pavement and the limited commercial achievement, to further develop the PV pavement technology, its strength, weakness, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) are analysed, as shown in Table 4.
Table 4 SWOT analysis of PV pavement




Strength
Weakness




• Rich, clean and renewable solar resource
• High initial construction cost


• No increase in land occupation
• Weather and environment-dependent


• Mature photovoltaic technology
• High repair and maintenance costs


• Prefabricated road construction
• Research still in the initial stage


• Multi-scenario application (light etc.)
• Lack of standards and specifications






Opportunities
Threats




• Shortage of fossil fuel
• Environmental pollution of photovoltaic cells


• Advocacy for sustainable development
• Potential safety hazards like fire


• Construction needs of smart transportation
• Pavement surface reflection


• Rapid development of electric vehicles


• Solution for electricity supply in remote areas




3. Wireless charging pavement
Vehicles can be classified based on the type of its power source; traditional internal combustion engine vehicle (ICEV), natural gas vehicle (NGV), hybrid electric vehicle (HEV) powered by the internal combustion engine and motor, plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (PHEV) powered by the internal combustion engine, motor, and rechargeable battery, and battery electric vehicle (BEV) fully powered by a rechargeable battery.57 Although electric vehicles are gaining greater global interest as a viable component in the search for alternatives to sustainable mobility, the technology is still facing some challenges such as the charging of its batteries which is an important factor restricting its adoption. At present, electric vehicles mainly use fixed charging piles for charging, and charging at a fixed charging point with a long-time charging is inconvenient for drivers. Therefore, more researchers are working on dynamic wireless charging for electric vehicle,58,59 and wireless charging pavement could be an effective method to achieve dynamic charging.
3.1 Principle
Magnetic resonance coupling is based on the concept of strong resonance in-arrival resonators. The rationale is that efficient energy exchange can be achieved between two objects with the same frequency, whereas energy exchange between non-magnetic resonances is weak. The schematic of magnetic resonance coupled with wireless charging for EVs is shown in Fig. 10.60 The magnetic field is generated by the resonant transmitting coil, the resonant receiving coil and the magnetic field have the same oscillation frequency to generate magnetic resonance, and the energy in the resonant receiving coil is continuously collected, and then it can be supplied to the load through the high-frequency rectifier circuit. The radio frequency amplifier (RF Amp.) and the power factor correction (PFC) converter are used to improve the overall efficiency.
 Fig. 10  Schematic of magnetic resonance coupled with wireless charging for EVs.60 
3.2 EV wireless charging technology
With the increasing urbanization and world's population, it is estimated that by 2050, 70% of people will live in urban areas.61 Therefore, it is critical for these regions to ease urban traffic congestion, and promote the development of autonomous driving and electric vehicles. The wireless charging revolution is shaping the future of transportation. The deployment of wireless charging infrastructure can support the wide-scale adoption of electric vehicles and autonomous vehicles and address the range anxiety of drivers.

3.2.1 Academic research. 
There are some universities and research institutes researching wireless charging of electric vehicles, including the University of Auckland (New Zealand), Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology (KAIST), Oak Ridge National Laboratory (ORNL), Institution of Wireless Power Transfer Technology, Chongqing University (China), etc.
3.2.1.1 University of Auckland, New Zealand. 
As early as 1988, the University of Auckland began to engage in wireless charging technology research and successfully developed a 30 kW bus wireless charging system in 1996. Halo IPT is a department established by the University of Auckland to develop wireless charging products for electric vehicles. After Qualcomm acquired Halo IPT in 2011, it has invested heavily in and promoted wireless charging technology for electric vehicles. Besides, the research group led by John Boys of the University of Auckland has carried out research on magnetic coupling coils and conducted in-depth analysis of the magnetic field characteristics of circular, double rectangular and double rectangular orthogonal coils.62–66 In recent years, they have also conducted in-depth research on double D topology and bipolar track (BPT) topology.67–70
3.2.1.2 Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology, Korea. 
The Wireless Power Transfer Technology Research Centre group led by Professor Dong-Ho Cho developed a Shaped Magnetic Field in Resonance (SMFIR) technique, which can deliver a large amount of energy safely to EVs with a stationary or movable state.71–75 With only 17 cm surface clearance required and 80% efficiency produced in 2009, KAIST led the field of wireless power-transfer technology development for electric buses. For the current commercial service, the wireless electric vehicle technology can meet the requirement of the air gap up to 20 cm and the power transfer efficiency of 75% on the average. KAIST's wireless-charging electric bus system has been used at Seoul Grand Park (March 2010), Yeosu Expo (August 2012), KAIST shuttle bus (October 2012) and Gumi City (August 2013.) The online electric vehicle (OLEV) bus was launched commercially in Gumi on March 25, 2014,76 and OLEV bus receives wireless power based on the SMFIR technology. Two OLEV buses run for a total of 24 km roundtrip with an inner-city route between Gumi Train Station and In-dong district. According to the calculation data, 20 kHz and 100 kW electricity at an 85% maximum power transmission efficiency rate were received by the bus while maintaining a 17 cm air gap between the underbody of the vehicle and the road surface. As of today, the SMFIR technology supplies 60 kHz and 180 kW of power remotely to transport vehicles at a stable, constant rate.
3.2.1.3 Oak Ridge National Laboratory, U.S. 
Oak Ridge National Laboratory is the largest US department of energy science and energy laboratory, conducting basic and applied research to deliver transformative solutions to compelling problems in energy and security.77 The research group led by Omer Onar has done many researches on dynamic wireless charging technology.78–82 In 2016, the first 20 kilowatt wireless charging system on a light-duty passenger vehicle was demonstrated by ORNL researchers, and the technology has since been scaled up to 120 kilowatts. In 2020, a 20 kilowatt, bi-directional wireless charging system on a medium-class hybrid electric delivery truck, was demonstrated. The project is perceived as the first of its kind to achieve power transfer at this rate across an 11-inch (27.94 cm) air gap and more than 92% efficiency, advancing the technology to a new class of larger vehicles with higher ground clearance.83 The bi-directional design, coupled with the function of energy storage by using the vehicle's batteries, helps the better management for on-site energy generation such as solar. The technology is undergoing further testing and analysis.
3.2.1.4 Institution of Wireless Power Transfer Technology (WPTCQU), Chongqing University, China. 
Institute of Wireless Power Transmission Technology of Chongqing University was established in 2005, which is devoted to the theoretical research, technology development and engineering realization of wireless power transmission technology and systems. The researchers of WPTCQU have published many research articles on wireless charging, and there is also some application.84–87 In 2013, WPTCQU developed a parking stationary wireless charging system with a vertical distance of 40 cm for power transmission, a 360° lateral offset of up to 20 cm, a maximum output power of 30 kW, and an overall system efficiency greater than 90%. In 2015, a multi-level power supply cascade mode developed the non-stop real-time dynamic wireless charging system. The speed is 60 km h−1, and the traveling power supply efficiency is 75–90%. The charging system has many functions, such as biomagnetic field protection, metal foreign object detection, real-time billing, high-efficiency control of full power range, omni-directional deviation control, vehicle off-track standby control, and full system safety protection, etc.88 After half a year of testing, the system has been proven to have stable performance and high reliability. In 2018, the world's first “three-in-one” electronic highway was unveiled in Tongli New Energy Town, Jiangsu, China. It realizes the integrated application of the three technologies of road photovoltaic power generation, dynamic wireless charging and unmanned driving first in the world. Its dynamic wireless output power is 11 kW (the entire demonstration road can reach MW level), the highest efficiency is more than 90%, and the vehicle speed exceeds 120 km h−1. The external magnetic field strength is less than 10 μT. The internal magnetic field strength is less than 1 uT (the international standard requires less than 27 μT), and the comprehensive performance index of the system has reached world advanced level.89
The wireless charging technology, especially the dynamic type, represents an integrated, holistic solution for vehicle electrification that advances the next-generation smart grid. The successful development of the demonstration system has laid a solid foundation for the industrial development of wireless charging for EVs.


3.2.2 Commercial achievement. 
Besides the above universities and research institutes, there are also some commercial technology companies dedicated to developing EV wireless charging technology, including WiTricity, Momentum Dynamics, Evatran, HEVO, Easelink, ZTE New Energy Vehicle Corporation, etc.
3.2.2.1 WiTricity. 
WiTricity is an American technology company that is devoted to wireless charging solutions using patented technology invented by a team of physicists from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. The power transfer of WiTricity's system (as shown in Fig. 11) is as efficient and fast as conventional plug-in charging (90–93%), and the power transfer rate is from 3.6 to 22 kW. Its charging distance is 10–25 cm, which can be applied to sports cars, sedans and SUVs. Every EV, regardless of ride height, will be interoperable with a common ground pad. It can be placed on a surface or in-ground placement covered by asphalt, cement, snow, ice. It is also smart and safe, with the function of position allowance corrects (or compensates) for parking misalignment, and detection of foreign object, live object and position. These functions can offer advanced protection and ease of use. In addition, its bi-directional power transfer (wireless V2G) can help utility companies stabilize the grid or even power our home.90 Besides, in 2019, WiTricity acquired a veteran wireless charging company-Qualcomm Halo, and a 300-foot (about 90 m) test track has been built in France to charge cars driving on highways.
 Fig. 11  Introduction of WiTricity's system.91 
3.2.2.2 Momentum Dynamics. 
Momentum Dynamics is also an American company that develops high power inductive charging technologies for applications in the automotive and transportation industries. Momentum Dynamics' wireless, high-power charging systems can provide an unlimited range to fleets with set routes. Its power transfer rate is up to 450 kW, and automatic charging is greater than 90% efficiency.92 In March of 2018, Momentum Dynamics' system was installed at a transit stop at Columbia Station in Wenatchee. With the characteristics of unlimited driving range under all weather conditions, this system is regarded as the first 200+ kW automatic inductive charging system in the United States. Its power transfer distance is not announced, but their website presents that it can allow any type of vehicle to be connected to the electrical power grid without wires, which is similar to WiTricity's system.
3.2.2.3 Evatran. 
Evatran is another technology company in U.S. which has developed the Plugless Power EV charging system, including 1st generation Plugless 3.6 kW and 2nd generation Plugless 7.2 kW, as shown in Fig. 12.93 The first-generation charging system is compatible for LEAF & Gen 1 Volt with 3.3–7.2 kW continuous charging power output; the second-generation charging system is compatible for BMW i3 and Tesla Model S with 7.2 kW continuous charging power output. The Plugless System includes three components: the vehicle adapter, the parking pad, and the control panel, where the maximum wheel load of parking pad is over 1500 lbs (680 kg). The ground clearance of the wireless charging system is 7 in (17.8 cm), and it is similar to WiTricity's system with the function of foreign object detection, that is automatic detection and charging lockout if there is metallic materials on the parking pad. In addition, the vehicle interface used J1772 EVSE emulation, which can interlock to prevent the user from attempting to charge the vehicle both inductively and conductively at the same time. Charging begins automatically every time parking over the system, and no dirty cords to untangle and no chance of forgetting to charge.94
 Fig. 12  Plugless EV charging system, (a) 1st generation Plugless 3.6 kW, (b) 2nd generation Plugless 7.2 kW.93 
3.2.2.4 Easelink. 
Easelink is a start-up company in Austria that is devoted to industrializing Matrix Charging®-an automated conductive charging technology. It can achieve conductive fast charging with 22 kW AC, high-power DC, and the transfer efficiency is up to 99%.95 Cars with Matrix Charging® Systems charge automatically when parked over a Matrix Charging® Pad. Connector communicates with Pad by a secure wireless connection. The vehicle will automatically connect to the Matrix Charging® Pad after a system check and an authentication process. The charging process is controlled and permanently monitored by an intelligent charging management system. It also has 400 × 400 mm positioning tolerance as shown in Fig. 13 and resistance to moisture, water, ice, dust, small stones, and corrosion. Besides, its ground clearance is up to 25 cm and more.95
 Fig. 13  Diagram of Matrix Charging®.95 
3.2.2.5 HEVO Power. 
HEVO Power is a company that created a wireless charging ecosystem for electric vehicles. The wireless charging system consists of App & Cloud Sync, power station, and wireless receiver, as shown in Fig. 14.96 A nearby charging station can be reserved through an App, and the best route for navigation is chosen. As the driver approaches within 25 ft (7.62 m) of the selected power station, the App will automatically display audible and visual directions to assist drivers with vehicle alignment. Charging is as simple as a tap of a button. Charging can start or stop remotely anytime, anywhere, while the real-time charging data can be accessed via the App. Auto start functionality can also be selected through the App settings. When the charging process is complete, the information will be informed to drivers by the App. Furthermore, the App can also be used to pay the bill, monitor the receipts and evaluate the charging statistics wirelessly on the fly.
 Fig. 14  Diagram of HEVO Power.96 
3.2.2.6 ZTE New Energy Vehicle Corporation. 
ZTE New Energy Vehicle Corporation is a Chinese company dedicated to becoming the world's leading new energy vehicle charging solution company, and developing wireless charging for EVs. The power transfer rate of its smart wireless charging technology is 3.3/6.6 kW, 20/40 kW and 30/60 kW, the charging distance is 5–11 cm, 10–16 cm, 15–23 cm, and the efficiency is up to 90%.97 At present, ZTE New Energy Vehicle has cooperated or signed cooperation agreements with more than 30 demonstration provinces and cities.
The specifications of these commercial companies, including WiTricity, Momentum Dynamics, Evatran, HEVO, Easelink, and ZTE are summarized in Table 5. These commercial companies focus more on EVs or stationary wireless charging, rather than roads or dynamic wireless charging. However, if we want to truly eliminate the driver's mileage anxiety and realize intelligent transportation, more effort is required in the development of dynamic wireless charging.
Table 5 Summary of EV wireless charging commercial companies




Company
Country
Power transfer rate/kW
Distance/cm
Efficiency




WiTricity
U.S.
3.6–22
10–25
90–93%


Momentum Dynamics
U.S.
Up to 450
N/A
>90%


Evatran
U.S.
3.3–7.2
17.8 cm
N/A


Easelink
Austria
22
25 cm
90%


HEVO Power
U.S.
N/A
N/A
N/A


ZTE
China
3.3/6.6, 20/40, 30/60
5–11, 10–16, 15–23
90%




Electreon is an Israeli start-up company developing and implementing wireless electric roads (ERS), which intends to build a platform for charging EVs on the go.98 The wireless ERS combines static, semi-dynamic, and dynamic charging together, providing the optimal solution to any use case. The Dynamic Wireless Power Transfer (DWPT) system includes the road infrastructure with coils placed under the road at the centre of the traffic lane, a receiver located under the vehicle chassis, and management and power unit to provide real-time communication with each vehicle and transmit the energy from the grid to the infrastructure under the road. Electreon provides a complete solution for the future E-city and E-highway, and has been applied in a 1 km electric road between Tel Aviv University and the train station, as shown in Fig. 15.99
 Fig. 15  The application of wireless ERS.99 

3.3 Standards and specifications
The dynamic wireless charging technology can eliminate driver's mileage anxiety and overcome the issue with large volume batteries, which can accelerate the application of EVs. However, there is no unified standards and specifications, which hinders itswidespread adoption. Therefore, the formulation of standards plays a vital role in the practical application and commercialization of EV dynamic wireless charging technology.
There are three main organizations in the world that are developing wireless charging standards for electric vehicles, namely the International Organization for Standardization (ISO), the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC), and the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE). ISO currently has 165 member states (including countries and regions), and IEC has 81 member states. The standards developed by SAE are widely adopted in the United States and become the basis for many national industrial departments and government agencies in preparing standards. The currently main standards of EV wireless charging are shown in Table 6.
Table 6 Currently main standards of EV wireless charging




Standard no.
Publication date
Standard title




ISO 19363 (ref. 100)
2020.04
Electrically propelled road vehicles – magnetic field wireless power transfer – safety and interoperability requirements


IEC 61980 (ref. 101–103)
2015.07
Electric vehicle wireless power transfer (WPT) systems – part 1: general requirements


2019.06
Electric vehicle wireless power transfer (WPT) systems – part 2: specific requirements for communication between electric road vehicle (EV) and infrastructure with respect to wireless power transfer (WPT) system


2019.06
Electric vehicle wireless power transfer (WPT) systems – part 3: specific requirements for the magnetic field wireless power transfer systems


SAE J2954 (ref. 104)
2019.04
Wireless power transfer for light-duty plug-in/electric vehicles and alignment methodology




The above three standards ISO-19363, IEC-61980 and SAE-J2954 are widely used by EV manufacturers and companies devoted to EV wireless charging technology. Besides, China, as the potential biggest EV market, is co-developing standards with WiTricity. In the past four years, WiTricity has actively participated in the standardization process of EV wireless charging in China through cooperation with China Electric Power Research Institute (CEPRI), China Automotive Technology and Research Centre (CATARC) and China Electricity Council (CEC).105 However, these standards all focus on stationary wireless charging, the development of standards on dynamic wireless charging is worthy of more attention.
3.4 SWOT analysis
According to the present academic research on dynamic wireless charging technology for EVs and some commercial achievements, a SWOT analysis is carried out and shown in Table 7, in order to propose adequate research, deployment and policy and support measures for developing the dynamic wireless charging roads.
Table 7 SWOT analysis of dynamic wireless charging roads




Strength
Weakness




• Elimination of driver's mileage anxiety
• High installation cost in the infrastructure


• Vehicle lightweighting and battery downsizing
• Lack of unified standards and specifications


• No need for extra time-consuming
• Need for the collaboration of electric vehicle manufacturers


• No need for manual intervention
• Not convenient for maintenance


• No exposed wire, increasing its life






Opportunities
Threats




• Worldwide trend towards the greening of transport
• Potential risk for physical harm


• Need for smart transportation
• Public fear about electric magnetic field


• Boost EV market penetration


• Potential application of on-site power generation, such as solar




4. Solar self-powered wireless charging pavement
4.1 Conceptual design
There usually takes full-span layout of solar cells in PV pavement. However, according to the study of driving behaviour, the driver is more willing to drive in the middle of the lane without other exceptional circumstances.106 Therefore, for full-span layout, a large part of the solar cell will be shadowed by vehicle from sunlight, which decreases the energy conversion efficiency. Besides, there are some requirements for the wireless charging technology such as the distance between EVs. It is found that the smaller the vertical distance between the transmitting and receiving coils, the higher the charging efficiency.107 In order to overcome the above problems, it is recommended to take a non-full-span layout for solar cells and embed the transmit coil only in the middle of the lane, forming the solar self-powered wireless charging pavement, as shown in Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of solar self-powered wireless charging pavement. 
As shown in Fig. 16, for PV generation, as the probability of vehicles traveling on both sides of the lane is small, the non-full-span layout can ensure the maximum number of solar cells that can fully receive solar radiation. Besides, there will be less concern regarding the damage of solar cells and failure due to load bearing, which can reduce the surface protection of PV pavement material requirements. For wireless charging, embedding the coil in this way can prevent ineffective charging as the driver prefers the middle of the lane for driving. Conclusion and also allow the vehicle to travel at a lower speed for part of the time (similar to static wireless charging when traffic congestion), thereby improving the charging efficiency of EVs.
Besides, for non-motorized lane, as there was no traffic jam and no necessary for wireless charging, the solar cell layout should be full-span. In addition to urban roads, for roads with side slopes and median, it is also considered to install solar cells across the entire length of both sides of the road and the central divider, making full use of road resources and obtaining more clean energy through PV power generation.
4.2 System design
In this paper, the collection of electricity is conducted through solar cells embedded in the pavement. PV generation systems are classified into independent PV generation (also known as off-grid photovoltaic power generation) systems, grid-connected PV generation systems, and distributed PV generation systems. The grid-connected PV generation is the direct-current generated by the PV modules directly connected to the public power grid after the grid-connected inverter converts the alternating-current power in line with the requirements of the municipal power grid. The distributed PV generation system refers to the small PV supply system to meet the needs of specific users to support the economic operation of the existing distribution network. Although these two types of systems have their own advantages, there is a common drawback if applied in solar wireless charging pavement, that is, the charging cannot be reasonably distinguished when the EVs are wirelessly charged by the power generated by the PV generation. Therefore, it is recommended to adopt an independent photovoltaic power generation system to store electric energy, that is, the electricity generated by PV is separately stored in an independent power supply system, and the grid is used as the power replenishment, which provides the wireless charging service for EVs. It will not only reduce the transmission loss of electricity, but also reduce the driver's wireless charging costs.
The wireless charging is conducted via magnetic resonance coupling, i.e., the electricity is released by the primary coil (transmitting coil) laid in the pavement structure, and is transmitted to the secondary coil (receiving coil) installed in the EVs through electromagnetic resonance. The energy released by the primary coil is provided by the solar PV cells. The secondary coil receives the electrical energy stored in the battery of the EVs. In order to improve the utilization of electricity, it released by the primary coil will be controlled by the control end of the triggering device, and the signal sent by the EVs determine the opening and closing of the charging channel.
The wireless charging system consists of a charging module and signal module. The charging module comprises a power converter, a wireless charging transmitting device on the road, a wireless charging receiving device at the bottom and a central processing core module. The road surface wireless charging transmitting device is buried under the road surface in the road and is a transmitting coil which is spirally wound by wires. The wireless charging receiving device at the bottom of the vehicle is located at the upper part of the chassis of the electric vehicle and is a receiving coil that is spirally wound by wires. The power converter is located below the road surface of the road, its function is to achieve power conversion, the electrical signals provided by the large accumulator into high-frequency square wave AC signal and then transmitted to the road surface wireless charging transmitter; central processing module located on the road.
The signal module consists of the infrared receiver, infrared transmitter, and central processing core module. The infrared receiving device is arranged at the roadside to receive the infrared signal emitted by the electric vehicle. The infrared transmitting device is arranged on the electric vehicle to provide the infrared signal to achieve the condition of starting the wireless charging device. The main function of the central processing core module in the signal module is that when the infrared receiving device receives the infrared signal emitted by the electric vehicle, the charging module is controlled to be turned on, and the wireless transmission of the electric energy starts. After three seconds, the charging module is automatically shut down until the next infrared signal. The flow chart of the solar self-powered wireless charging pavement system is shown in Fig. 17.
 Fig. 17  Flow chart of solar self-powered wireless charging pavement system. 
4.3 Circuit configuration and overall control design
In this section, the circuit configuration and overall control were briefly designed. As shown in Fig. 18, PV cells convert solar energy into electricity, and maximum power point tracking (MPPT) converter is used to make full use of PV cells to make them run at the maximum power point. When the storage battery is not full, the PV cells power generation is given priority to charge the storage battery; when the storage battery is full, the PV cells power generation is transmitted to the grid by inverter, that is, the grid-connected PV power generation system is adopted. For the EVs charging module, when the storage battery with electricity, the primary coil first obtains electricity from the storage battery, wirelessly inductively transmits it to the secondary coil, and then the EVs are charged; otherwise, when the storage battery is empty, the EVs charging power are taken from the grid. This network forms a microgrid that can operate in the islanded mode when the battery state of charge (SoC) is between 5–95%. It also can minimize the impact of grid-connected PV power generation on the original grid.
 Fig. 18  Circuit configuration of solar self-powered wireless charging system. 
The overall control and communication structure of the solar self-powered wireless charging system is shown in Fig. 19. When the storage battery is not full, it stores the electricity generated by PV power generation. On the contrary, the electricity generated by PV power generation is stored in the grid. When an EV is driving on a solar self-powered wireless charging road and if it needs to be charged, it will send a charging signal. After the storage battery receives the charging signal, it judges its remaining power. If the remaining power is greater than 5%, the storage battery will supply power to the primary coil for wireless charging; if the remaining power is less than 5%, it will send a replenishment signal to the grid, the grid will supply power to the primary coil. Finally, it is determined if the EV is fully charged or not.
 Fig. 19  Overall control of solar self-powered wireless charging system. 
4.4 Structure design
For motorized lane, the structural design should meet the traveling requirements and meet the needs of photovoltaic power generation. For the middle of the motorized lane, the charging function is performed by embed wireless coils coated by the asphalt mixtures layer, and the structure design is similar to conventional asphalt pavement.
The structural design of motorized lane edges comprises three layers, which to achieve power generation. The upper layer is a transparent protective layer, bearing loading and collects solar energy and convert into electric energy; the middle layer is an integrated electric layer, which embeds solar cells, electric systems, connectors, etc.; the bottom layer is a surface porous layer for drainage. For the non-motorized lane, as there are not many loading requirements, it should concentrate more on the high light-transmission performance layer, whose structure is the same to motorized lane edges. As shown in Fig. 20, it is an overall schematic diagram of solar self-powered wireless charging pavement.
 Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of solar self-powered wireless charging pavement. 
4.5 Road energy internet
In 2011, the concept of ‘Energy Internet’ was proposed by Jeremy Rifkin, as a distributed, open shared network based on renewable energy.108 ‘Energy Internet’ is the combination of internet technology and renewable energy, from the traditional centralized to intelligent decentralized in energy collection, distribution, and utilization, thereby turning the global power grid into an energy sharing network. This is a new energy utilization system that deeply integrates new energy technology and information technology. Jeremy Rifkin has also predicted that the third industrial revolution will be the impact of the internet on the energy industry.
‘Energy Internet’ uses advanced sensors, controls, and software applications to connect hundreds of millions of devices, machines, and systems at the energy production end, energy transmission end, and energy consumption end, forming the ‘Internet of Things foundation’ of the energy internet. By analogy, if the self-powered wireless charging pavement comes true, the roads can be regarded as the local area energy network, namely, the energy can be produced, transmitted, and consumed within roads, which can realize the roads internal on-demand transmission of energy and dynamic balanced use, forming the “road energy internet”.
5. Conclusions and recommendations
As one of the smart highway system concepts, the research of solar asphalt pavement systems with wireless charging function is emerging and significant for popularizing EV and environment protection. In this paper, a new conceptual design of solar asphalt pavement with wireless charging function “solar self-powered wireless charging pavement” was proposed and optimized the layout of solar cells, wireless charging coils, the collection, storage, and application of electric energy, and structural design according to the motorized lane and non-motorized lane, respectively. The promotion of that technology will bring great changes to our modern life and environment, such as reducing the greenhouse gas, reducing the pollution in the traditional power generation process, using solar energy to easily get access to electricity, provide driving while charging services for EV.
With the coming of the new energy vehicle era, the combination of solar photovoltaic technology and electric vehicle wireless charging technology will greatly contribute to the era's development. As there still exist many challenges such as high cost, maintenance difficulty, and operation safety, it would be a hotspot for research and industrialization.
For these challenges, several suggestions are given as follow:
(1) Improve the research and development of solar cells to reduce the cost of road reconstruction;
(2) Select a distributed system to store the energy, when photovoltaic power can fully supply the road wireless charging and still surplus electric energy, to solve the supply of rest areas, long tunnels, toll plazas, city squares, and so on along the road;
(3) Cooperate with the manufacturers of EV to improve the wireless charging technology;
(4) Provide the technical standards for further research by establishing an assessment system for solar pavement and wireless charging pavement as soon as possible.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that there are no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgements
This study was supported by the National Key R&D Program of China (No. 2018YFE0103800), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51978068), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, CHD (No. 300102210402, 300102219308). The authors gratefully acknowledge their financial support.
References

          B. Looney, BP Statistical Review of World Energy,  2020 Search PubMed .

          J. Twidell and T. Weir, Renewable Energy Resources, Routledge,  2015 Search PubMed .

          D. Infield and L. Freris, Renewable Energy in Power Systems, John Wiley & Sons,  2020 Search PubMed .
B. Zhang, B. Wang and Z. Wang, Role of renewable energy and non-renewable energy consumption on EKC: evidence from Pakistan, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 156, 855–864,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2017.03.203 .

          C. Chen, Physics of Solar Energy, John Wiley & Sons, New Jersey,  2011 Search PubMed .
B. Xiang, X. Cao, Y. Yuan, M. Hasanuzzaman, C. Zeng, Y. Ji and L. Sun, A novel hybrid energy system combined with solar-road and soil-regenerator: Sensitivity analysis and optimization, Renewable energy, 2018, 129, 419–430,  DOI:10.1016/j.renene.2018.06.027 .
H. Wang, A. Jasim and X. Chen, Energy harvesting technologies in roadway and bridge for different applications–A comprehensive review, Appl. Energy, 2018, 212, 1083–1094,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.12.125 .
B. Xiang, Y. Yuan, Y. Ji, X. Cao and J. Zhou, Thermal and electrical performance of a novel photovoltaic-thermal road, Sol. Energy, 2020, 199, 1–18,  DOI:10.1016/j.solener.2020.02.021 .

          K. W. Lee and S. Kohm, Cool Pavements, Chapter 16, Climate Change, Energy, Sustainability and Pavements, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2014, pp. 439–453,  DOI:10.1007/978-3-662-44719-2_16 .
K. Zhang and S. Batterman, Air pollution and health risks due to vehicle traffic, Sci. Total Environ., 2013, 450, 307–316,  DOI:10.1016/j.scitotenv.2013.01.074 .
H. Zhang, S. Wang, J. Hao, X. Wang, S. Wang, F. Chai and M. Li, Air pollution and control action in Beijing, J. Cleaner Prod., 2016, 112, 1519–1527,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2015.04.092 .
J. Barnes, T. Chatterton and J. Longhurst, Emissions vs. exposure: Increasing injustice from road traffic-related air pollution in the United Kingdom, Transp. Res. D, 2019, 73, 56–66,  DOI:10.1016/j.trd.2019.05.012 .
F. Un-Noor, S. Padmanaban, L. Mihet-Popa, M. Mollah and E. Hossain, A comprehensive study of key electric vehicle (EV) components, technologies, challenges, impacts, and future direction of development, Energies, 2017, 10(8), 1217,  DOI:10.3390/en10081217 .
M. Schücking, P. Jochem, W. Fichtner, O. Wollersheim and K. Stella, Charging strategies for economic operations of electric vehicles in commercial applications, Transp. Res. D, 2017, 51, 173–189,  DOI:10.1016/j.trd.2016.11.032 .
K. Mude, Battery charging method for electric vehicles: From wired to on-road wireless charging, Chin. J. Electr. Eng., 2018, 4(4), 1–15,  DOI:10.23919/CJEE.2018.8606784 .
D. Patil, M. McDonough, J. Miller, B. Fahimi and P. Balsara, Wireless power transfer for vehicular applications: Overview and challenges, IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrification, 2017, 4(1), 3–37,  DOI:10.1109/TTE.2017.2780627 .
A. Ahmad, M. Alam and R. Chabaan, A comprehensive review of wireless charging technologies for electric vehicles, IEEE Trans. Transp. Electrification, 2017, 4(1), 38–63,  DOI:10.1109/TTE.2017.2771619 .
Z. Bi, L. Song, R. De Kleine, C. Mi and G. Keoleian, Plug-in vs. wireless charging: Life cycle energy and greenhouse gas emissions for an electric bus system, Appl. Energy, 2015, 146, 11–19,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2015.02.031 .
P. Venugopal, A. Shekhar, E. Visser, N. Scheele, G. Mouli, P. Bauer and S. Silvester, Roadway to self-healing highways with integrated wireless electric vehicle charging and sustainable energy harvesting technologies, Appl. Energy, 2018, 212, 1226–1239,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2017.12.108 .
P. Joseph and D. Elangovan, A review on renewable energy powered wireless power transmission techniques for light electric vehicle charging applications, Journal of Energy Storage, 2018, 16, 145–155,  DOI:10.1016/j.est.2017.12.019 .
N. Panwar, S. Kaushik and S. Kothari, Role of renewable energy sources in environmental protection: A review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15(3), 1513–1524,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2010.11.037 .
G. Nasti and A. Abate, Tin Halide Perovskite (ASnX3) Solar Cells: A Comprehensive Guide toward the Highest Power Conversion Efficiency, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(13), 1902467,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201902467 .

          World Bank Group (US), “Solar Atlas China,” World Bank Group (US), https://globalsolaratlas.info/download/china, accessed on 14 May 2020 Search PubMed.
Y. Yuan, X. Chuai, R. Zhao, Q. Lu, X. Huang, C. Xiang and X. Yuan, 
            et al. Tracing China's external driving sources and internal emission hotspots of export-driven PM10 emission, J. Cleaner Prod., 2020, 253, 119867,  DOI:10.1016/j.jclepro.2019.119867 .

          Enerdata, Global Energy Statistical Yearbook 2019, https://yearbook.enerdata.net/electricity/electricity-domestic-consumption-data.html, accessed on 14 May 2020 Search PubMed.
M. Ossiander, J. Riemensberger, S. Neppl, M. Mittermair, M. Schäffer, A. Duensing and M. Wagner, 
            et al. Absolute timing of the photoelectric effect, Nature, 2018, 561(7723), 374–377,  DOI:10.1038/s41586-018-0503-6 .
N. Gedik and I. Vishik, Photoemission of quantum materials, Nat. Phys., 2017, 13(11), 1029–1033,  DOI:10.1038/nphys4273 .
C. Guo, L. Zhang, M. M. Sartin, L. Han, Z. W. Tian, Z. Q. Tian and D. Zhan, Photoelectric effect accelerated electrochemical corrosion and nanoimprint processes on gallium arsenide wafers, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10(23), 5893–5897,  10.1039/C9SC01978B .

          R. Jin, Theory and Application of Solar Cell, Peking University Press,  2011 Search PubMed .

          R. J. Wakulat, Photovoltaics (PV), Salem Press,  2016 Search PubMed .

          B. R. Wheaton, Photoelectric Effect. Compendium of Quantum Physics, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2009, pp. 472–475.  DOI:10.1007/978-3-540-70626-7_143 .
G. Wang, B. Chang, X. Li, R. Fu, L. Yang and K. Wang, Solar energy conversion through thermally enhanced external photoelectric emission from NaCsSb photocathodes, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 159, 73–79,  DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2016.08.028 .

          I. S. Amiri and M. Ariannejad, Development of Solar Cell Photovoltaics: Introduction and Working Principles, Introducing CTS (Copper-Tin-Sulphide) as a Solar Cell by Using Solar Cell Capacitance Simulator (SCAPS), Springer, Cham,  2019, pp. 1–14.  DOI:10.1007/978-3-030-17395-1_1 .

          S. D. Brusaw and J. A. Brusaw, Solar roadway panel, US Pat. Application 29/452723,  2014-9-9 .

          A. B. Northmore and S. L. Tighe, Developing Innovative Roads Using Solar Technologies, Canadian Society for Civil Engineering, Edmonton, Canada,  2012, pp. 1348–55 Search PubMed .

          A. B. Northmore. Canadian Solar Road Panel Design: A Structural and Environmental Analysis. University of Waterloo,  2014 Search PubMed .
A. B. Northmore and S. L. Tighe, Performance modelling of a solar road panel prototype using finite element analysis, Int. J. Pavement Eng., 2016, 17, 449–457,  DOI:10.1080/10298436.2014.993203 .
X. Zha, C. Zhang, Z. Wu and Q. Zhang, Mechanical analysis and model preparation for hollow slab element of solar pavement, Acta Energ. Sol. Sin., 2016, 37, 136–141 Search PubMed .
C. Efthymiou, M. Santamouris, D. Kolokotsa and A. Koras, Development and testing of photovoltaic pavement for heat island mitigation, Sol. Energy, 2016, 130, 148–160,  DOI:10.1016/j.solener.2016.01.054 .

          J. H. Nussbaum, R. A. Lake and R. A. Coutu, Standardized testing of non-standard photovoltaic pavement surfaces, 2016 IEEE National Aerospace and Electronics Conference (NAECON) and Ohio Innovation Summit (OIS), IEEE,  2016, pp. 1–8.  DOI:10.1109/NAECON.2016.7856766 .
A. S. Dezfooli, F. M. Nejad, H. Zakeri and S. Kazemifard, Solar pavement: A new emerging technology, Sol. Energy, 2017, 149, 272–284,  DOI:10.1016/j.solener.2017.04.016 .

          A. Gnatov, S. Argun and N. Rudenko, Smart road as a complex system of electric power generation, 2017 IEEE First Ukraine Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (UKRCON), IEEE,  2017, pp. 457–461,  DOI:10.1109/UKRCON.2017.8100531 .

          A. Gnatov, S. Argun and N. Rudenko, Smart road as a complex system of electric power generation, 2017 IEEE First Ukraine Conference on Electrical and Computer Engineering (UKRCON), IEEE,  2017, p. 8100531,  DOI:10.1109/UKRCON.2017.8100531 .

Nordic e-pavement teadus- ja arendusprojekt, https://www.mnt.ee/sites/default/files/survey/nordic_e-pavement_aruanne_27102017_v2.pdf, accessed on 16 May 2020 Search PubMed.
T. Ma, H. Yang, W. Gu, Z. Li and S. Yan, Development of walkable photovoltaic floor tiles used for pavement, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 183, 764–771,  DOI:10.1016/j.enconman.2019.01.035 .
B. Zhou, J. Pei, B. R. Hughes, D. S. Nasir and J. Zhang, Analysis of mechanical properties for two different structures of photovoltaic pavement unit block, Constr. Build. Mater., 2020, 239, 117864,  DOI:10.1016/j.conbuildmat.2019.117864 .
D. Newman, M. Munna, J. H. Tschida and S. Brusaw, Engineering Tests to Evaluate the Feasibility of an Emerging Solar Pavement Technology for Public Roads and Highways, Technologies, 2020, 8(1), 9,  DOI:10.3390/technologies8010009 .

          J. Scheffe, Integrated Solar Lighting for Pedestrian Crosswalk Visibility, A Report Written for the Florida, Department of Transportation,  2016, pp. 1–19 Search PubMed .
J. Pei, B. Zhou and L. Lyu, e-Road: the largest energy supply of the future?, Appl. Energy, 2019, 241, 174–183,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.03.033 .
B. Zhou, J. Pei, B. Xue, F. Guo, Y. Wen, J. Zhang and R. Li, Solar/road from ‘forced coexistence’ to ‘harmonious symbiosis’, Appl. Energy, 2019, 255, 113808,  DOI:10.1016/j.apenergy.2019.113808 .

          Solar Roadways, https://solarroadways.com/, accessed on 17 May 2020.

          SolaRoad, https://www.solaroad.nl/, accessed on 18 May 2020.

          Colas, https://www.colas.com/, accessed on 18 May 2020.

          Wattway, https://www.wattwaybycolas.com/la-route-solaire.html, accessed on 19 May 2020.

          F. Barruel, E. Coquelle, J. L. Gautier and E. Pilat, Photovoltaic structure for a roadway, US Pat. 10141460,  2018-11-27 .

          P. Harelle, System for producing electrical energy by photovoltaic slabs forming a circulation surface, adapted connection rail, France Patent No. FR3073106A1,  2019-05-03 .
M. A. Hannan, M. M. Hoque, A. Mohamed and A. Ayob, Review of energy storage systems for electric vehicle applications: Issues and challenges, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 69, 771–789,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2016.11.171 .
K. A. Kalwar, M. Aamir and S. Mekhilef, Inductively coupled power transfer (ICPT) for electric vehicle charging–A review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 47, 462–475,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2015.03.040 .
N. Shinohara, The wireless power transmission: inductive coupling, radio wave, and resonance coupling, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2012, 1(3), 337–346,  DOI:10.1002/wene.43 .

          C. Qiu, K. T. Chau, C. Liu and C. C. Chan, Overview of wireless power transfer for electric vehicle charging, in 2013 World Electric Vehicle Symposium and Exhibition (EVS27), IEEE, Barcelona,  2013, pp. 1–9,  DOI:10.1109/EVS.2013.6914731 .

          O. Dogan and O. F. Gurcan, Applications of big data and green
IoT-enabling technologies for smart cities, in, Handbook of Research on Big Data and the IoT, IGI Global,  2019, pp. 22–41 Search PubMed .
M. Budhia, G. Covic and J. Boys, Design and optimization of circular magnetic structures for lumped inductive power transfer systems, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2011, 26(11), 3096–3108,  DOI:10.1109/TPEL.2011.2143730 .
M. Budhia, J. Boys, G. Covic and C. Huang, Development of a single-sided flux magnetic coupler for electric vehicle IPT charging systems, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2011, 60(1), 318–328,  DOI:10.1109/TIE.2011.2179274 .
A. Kamineni, G. Covic and J. Boys, Analysis of coplanar intermediate coil structures in inductive power transfer systems, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2014, 30(11), 6141–6154,  DOI:10.1109/TPEL.2014.2378733 .
F. Lin, G. Covic and J. Boys, Evaluation of magnetic pad sizes and topologies for electric vehicle charging, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2015, 30(11), 6391–6407,  DOI:10.1109/TPEL.2015.2419592 .
S. Kim, G. Covic and J. Boys, Tripolar pad for inductive power transfer systems for EV charging, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2016, 32(7), 5045–5057,  DOI:10.1109/TPEL.2016.2606893 .
W. Chen, F. Lin, G. Covic and J. Boys, Evaluation of a Meandering Track Primary Topology for EV Roadway Charging, IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Industrial Electronics, 2020, 1(1), 26–35,  DOI:10.1109/JESTIE.2020.3004761 .
M. Pearce, G. Covic and J. Boys, Robust ferrite-less double D topology for roadway IPT applications, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2018, 34(7), 6062–6075,  DOI:10.1109/TPEL.2018.2883129 .

          W. Chen, F. Lin, G. Covic and J. Boys, Design Considerations of a Bipolar Track for Dynamic Electric Vehicle Charging, IEEE Energy Conversion Congress and Exposition (ECCE), IEEE,  2019, pp. 1188–1194,  DOI:10.1109/ECCE.2019.8912242 .

          W. Chen, F. Lint, G. Covic and J. Boys, Dual-phase IPT Track Primary Evaluation Using Normalized Coupling Factor, 2019 IEEE PELS Workshop on Emerging Technologies: Wireless Power Transfer (WoW), IEEE,  2019, pp. 308–312,  DOI:10.1109/WoW45936.2019.9030632 .
S. Ahn, Y. Chun, D. Cho and J. Kim, Wireless power transfer technology in on-line electric vehicle, Journal of the Korean Institute of Electromagnetic and Science, 2011, 11(3), 174–182,  DOI:10.5515/JKIEES.2011.11.3.174 .
S. Ahn, N. Suh and D. Cho, Charging up the road, IEEE Spectrum, 2013, 50(4), 48–54,  DOI:10.1109/MSPEC.2013.6481699 .
K. Lee and D. Cho, Diversity analysis of multiple transmitters in wireless power transfer system[J], IEEE Trans. Magn., 2012, 49(6), 2946–2952,  DOI:10.1109/TMAG.2012.2234132 .
J. Kim, J. Kim, S. Kong, H. Kim, I. Suh and N. Suh, 
            et al. Coil design and shielding methods for a magnetic resonant wireless power transfer system[J], Proc. IEEE, 2013, 101(6), 1332–1342,  DOI:10.1109/JPROC.2013.2247551 .
J. Shin, S. Shin, Y. Kim, S. Ahn, S. Lee and G. Jung, 
            et al. Design and implementation of shaped magnetic-resonance-based wireless power transfer system for roadway-powered moving electric vehicles[J], IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2013, 61(3), 1179–1192,  DOI:10.1109/TIE.2013.2258294 .

KAIST's wireless Online Electric Vehicle, OLEV, runs inner city roads, https://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2013-08/tkai-kwo080513.php, accessed on 12 September 2020 Search PubMed.

          Oak Ridge National Laboratory, https://www.ornl.gov/, accessed on 12 September 2020.
J. Miller, O. Onar, C. White, S. Campbell, C. Coomer and L. Seiber, Demonstrating dynamic wireless charging of an electric vehicle: The benefit of electrochemical capacitor smoothing, IEEE Power Electronics Magazine, 2014, 1(1), 12–24,  DOI:10.1109/MPEL.2014.2300978 .
J. Miller, O. Onar and M. Chinthavali, Primary-side power flow control of wireless power transfer for electric vehicle charging, IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Power Electronics, 2014, 3(1), 147–162,  DOI:10.1109/JESTPE.2014.2382569 .
J. Miller, P. Jones, J. Li and O. Onar, ORNL experience and challenges facing dynamic wireless power charging of EV's, IEEE Circ. Syst. Mag., 2015, 15(2), 40–53,  DOI:10.1109/MCAS.2015.2419012 .

          S. Debnath, A. Foote, O. Onar and M. Chinthavali, Grid impact studies from dynamic wireless charging in smart automated highways, 2018 IEEE Transportation Electrification Conference and Expo (ITEC), IEEE,  2018, pp. 950–955,  DOI:10.1109/ITEC.2018.8450149 .

          M. Mohammad, S. Anwar, O. Onar, J. Pries, V. Galigekere and E. Asa, et al. Sensitivity Analysis of an LCC-LCC Compensated 20 kW Bidirectional Wireless Charging System for Medium-Duty Vehicles, 2019 IEEE Transportation Electrification Conference and Expo (ITEC), IEEE,  2019, pp. 1–7,  DOI:10.1109/ITEC.2019.8790620 .

Successful delivery: ORNL demonstrates bi-directional wireless charging on hybrid UPS truck, https://www.ornl.gov/news/successful-delivery-ornl-demonstrates-bi-directional-wireless-charging-hybrid-ups-truck, accessed on 13 September 2020 Search PubMed.
Z. Liao, Y. Sun, Z. Ye, C. Tang and P. Wang, Resonant analysis of magnetic coupling wireless power transfer systems, IEEE Trans. Power Electron., 2018, 34(6), 5513–5523,  DOI:10.1109/TPEL.2018.2868727 .
X. Dai, J. Jiang and J. Wu, Charging area determining and power enhancement method for multiexcitation unit configuration of wirelessly dynamic charging EV system, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2018, 66(5), 4086–4096,  DOI:10.1109/TIE.2018.2860537 .
W. Zhou, Y. Su, L. Huang, X. Qing and A. Hu, Wireless power transfer across a metal barrier by combined capacitive and inductive coupling, IEEE Trans. Ind. Electron., 2018, 66(5), 4031–4041,  DOI:10.1109/TIE.2018.2849991 .
C. Hu, Y. Sun, X. Lv, Z. Wang and Q. Xiong, Magnetic coupler design procedure for IPT system and its application to EVs' wireless charging, Int. J. Appl. Electromagn. Mech., 2015, 47(3), 861–873,  DOI:10.3233/JAE-140146 .

Wireless Powered Electric Vehicle, http://www.wptchina.com.cn/ReadNews.asp?rid=1367, accessed on 13 September 2020 Search PubMed.

Dynamic Wireless Power Transmission Demonstration System We Institute Developed for Electric Vehicles Displayed in Suzhou, http://www.wptchina.com.cn/ReadNews.asp?rid=1797, accessed on 13 September 2020 Search PubMed.

          WiTricity, https://witricity.com/, accessed on 9 September 2020.

WiTricity Products, https://witricity.com/products/why-magnetic-resonance/, accessed on 9 September 2020 Search PubMed.

          Momentum Dynamics, https://momentumdynamics.com/, accessed on 15 September 2020.

          Plugless Power, https://www.pluglesspower.com/, accessed on 15 September 2020.

          Plugless Power Tech Specs, https://www.pluglesspower.com/tech-spec-gateway/, accessed on 11 September 2020.

          Easelink, https://easelink.com/, accessed on 18 September 2020.

          HEVO Power, http://www.hevopower.com/, accessed on 18 September 2020.

          ZTE New Energy Vehicle Corporation, http://www.zxnenergy.com/wireless_charging_technology.html, accessed on 18 September 2020.

          Electreon, https://www.electreon.com/, accessed on 20 September 2020.

Electreon Project, https://www.electreon.com/projects, accessed on 20 September 2020 Search PubMed.

          ISO19363, Electrically propelled road vehicles – Magnetic field wireless power transfer – Safety and interoperability requirements, https://www.iso.org/standard/64700.html, accessed on 20 September 2020 Search PubMed.

          IEC 61980-1, Electric Vehicle Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) Systems –Part 1: General Requirements,  2015 Search PubMed.

          IEC 61980-2, Electric Vehicle Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) Systems - Part 2: Specific Requirements for Communication between Electric Road Vehicle (EV) and Infrastructure with Respect to Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) System,  2019 Search PubMed.

          IEC 61980-3, Electric Vehicle Wireless Power Transfer (WPT) Systems - Part 3: Specific Requirements for the Magnetic Field Wireless Power Transfer Systems,  2019 Search PubMed.

          SAE J2954, Wireless Power Transfer for Light-Duty Plug-In/electric Vehicles and Alignment Methodology,  2019 Search PubMed .

China is
preparing to introduce EV wireless charging technology and co-produce standards with an American company, https://www.sohu.com/a/394156847_522084, accessed on 20 September 2020 Search PubMed.
R. Satzoda and M. Trivedi, Drive analysis using vehicle dynamics and vision-based lane semantics, IEEE Trans. Intell. Transport. Syst., 2014, 16(1), 9–18,  DOI:10.1109/TITS.2014.2331259 .
K. Kalwar, M. Aamir and S. Mekhilef, Inductively coupled power transfer (ICPT) for electric vehicle charging–A review, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 47, 462–475,  DOI:10.1016/j.rser.2015.03.040 .

          J. Rifkin, The Third Industrial Revolution: How Lateral Power Is Transforming Energy, the Economy, and the World, Macmillan,  2011 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Canada	27.3	9.8%	82.3
Mexico	0.8	0.3%	8.3
US	8.2	4.0%	11.1
North America	36.3	14.1%	27.2
South & Centre America	50.9	18.7%	143.8
Europe	1.9	0.8%	11.6
CIS	19.8	84%	27.3
Middle East	112.9	48.1%	75.3
Africa	16.6	7.2%	41.0
Asia Pacific	6.1	2.6%	16.4

Total world
	
244.6
	
100%
	
49.9



Canada	6.528	0.6%	130
Mexico	1.211	0.1%	108
US	249.537	23.3%	390
North America	257.33	24.1%	367
South & Centre America	13.689	1.3%	152
Europe	135.109	12.6%	244
CIS	190.655	17.8%	338
Middle East & Africa	16.04	1.5%	57
Asia Pacific	456.813	42.7%	77

Total world
	
1069.636
	
100%
	
132


 	Fig. 1  Solar resource maps of China.23 Note: direct normal irradiance (DNI) is the amount of solar radiation received per unit area by a surface that is always held perpendicular (or normal) to the rays; global horizontal irradiance (GHI) is the total amount of shortwave radiation received from above by a surface horizontal to the ground.	 

 	Fig. 2  The schematic diagram of the solar cell energy band model.33	 

2009, U.S.34	

	1. Hexagonal solar panel
2. Surface is specially treated with ultra-wear-resistant
3. Bearing capacity up to 125 t
2012, Canada35–37	

	1. Square solar panel
2. Grid structure
3. Higher lifespan
2016, China38	

	1. Hollow slab structure
2. Optimal size: 50 cm × 50 cm × 2 cm PMMA plate, 50 cm × 50 cm × 23 cm base plate, thickness of side walls and base plate 10 cm
2016, Greece39	

	1. Field test
2. The surface temperature decreased 2–5 K
3. The ambient temperature decreased 0.5–1 K
2016, U.S.40	

	1. Modifying test standards
2. Rigid pavement standards for advanced loading
3. Structural adhesive standards for shear loading
4. Structure-specific standards for moisture conditioning
5. Application-specific standards for freeze/thaw cycling
2017, Iran41	

	1. Compared two prototypes: (a) solar panel and (b) solar pavement
2. Solar pavement provides better structural performance
3. Solar panel provides better electrical performance
2017, Ukraine42	

	1. “Smart Roads” combined PV and piezoelectric technology
2. An area of 112.5 m2 (7.5 × 15 m) is capable of generating 10 kW h−1
3. Paving smart roads will consume 71.25% of the total generating
2018, Netherlands43	

	1. Data were from the 70 m Netherlands solar bike path
2. Measured annual yields were 78 kW h m−2, 16% lower than expected
3. The annual yields can be 150 kW h m−2 at a specific location
2018, Estonia44	

	1. Surface treatment imitated asphalt pavement texture
2. Under the load of 1000 kg cm−2, it can work properly
3. It can generate power up to 47 W
2019, China45	

	1. Developed a walkable PV floor tile
2. Size: 500 mm × 500 mm × 20 mm
3. It performed well in compressive strength, skid resistance, heat resistance and durability
2020, China46	

	1. Analysed the mechanical properties of structure (a) and (b)
2. Optimal size (a): 120 cm length × 120 cm width × 8 cm bottom plate thickness × 2 cm grid thickness
3. Optimal size (b): 60 cm length × 60 cm width × 6 cm bottom plate thickness × 10 cm sidewall thickness
2020, U.S.47	

	1. Conducted four different tests
2. It can resist moisture environments and extreme weather
3. There is no physical damage under 989457 equivalent single axle loads
4. It can resist deformation under shear loading

 	Fig. 3  The development journey of SR.	 

 	Fig. 4  The prototype car park and night light show.	 

 	Fig. 5  Structure of the SolaRoad.52	 

 	Fig. 6  Structure schematic of Wattway.54	 

 	Fig. 7  The world's first solar road ‘Wattway’.	 

 	Fig. 8  The world's first PV highway.	 

 	Fig. 9  Beijing Longhu G-PARK Science Park HanRoad project.	 

• Rich, clean and renewable solar resource	• High initial construction cost
• No increase in land occupation	• Weather and environment-dependent
• Mature photovoltaic technology	• High repair and maintenance costs
• Prefabricated road construction	• Research still in the initial stage
• Multi-scenario application (light etc.)	• Lack of standards and specifications

• Shortage of fossil fuel	• Environmental pollution of photovoltaic cells
• Advocacy for sustainable development	• Potential safety hazards like fire
• Construction needs of smart transportation	• Pavement surface reflection
• Rapid development of electric vehicles
• Solution for electricity supply in remote areas

 	Fig. 10  Schematic of magnetic resonance coupled with wireless charging for EVs.60	 

 	Fig. 11  Introduction of WiTricity's system.91	 

 	Fig. 12  Plugless EV charging system, (a) 1st generation Plugless 3.6 kW, (b) 2nd generation Plugless 7.2 kW.93	 

 	Fig. 13  Diagram of Matrix Charging®.95	 

 	Fig. 14  Diagram of HEVO Power.96	 

WiTricity	U.S.	3.6–22	10–25	90–93%
Momentum Dynamics	U.S.	Up to 450	N/A	>90%
Evatran	U.S.	3.3–7.2	17.8 cm	N/A
Easelink	Austria	22	25 cm	90%
HEVO Power	U.S.	N/A	N/A	N/A
ZTE	China	3.3/6.6, 20/40, 30/60	5–11, 10–16, 15–23	90%

 	Fig. 15  The application of wireless ERS.99	 

ISO 19363 (ref. 100)	2020.04	Electrically propelled road vehicles – magnetic field wireless power transfer – safety and interoperability requirements
IEC 61980 (ref. 101–103)	2015.07	Electric vehicle wireless power transfer (WPT) systems – part 1: general requirements
2019.06	Electric vehicle wireless power transfer (WPT) systems – part 2: specific requirements for communication between electric road vehicle (EV) and infrastructure with respect to wireless power transfer (WPT) system
2019.06	Electric vehicle wireless power transfer (WPT) systems – part 3: specific requirements for the magnetic field wireless power transfer systems
SAE J2954 (ref. 104)	2019.04	Wireless power transfer for light-duty plug-in/electric vehicles and alignment methodology

• Elimination of driver's mileage anxiety	• High installation cost in the infrastructure
• Vehicle lightweighting and battery downsizing	• Lack of unified standards and specifications
• No need for extra time-consuming	• Need for the collaboration of electric vehicle manufacturers
• No need for manual intervention	• Not convenient for maintenance
• No exposed wire, increasing its life

• Worldwide trend towards the greening of transport	• Potential risk for physical harm
• Need for smart transportation	• Public fear about electric magnetic field
• Boost EV market penetration
• Potential application of on-site power generation, such as solar

 	Fig. 16  Schematic diagram of solar self-powered wireless charging pavement.	 

 	Fig. 17  Flow chart of solar self-powered wireless charging pavement system.	 

 	Fig. 18  Circuit configuration of solar self-powered wireless charging system.	 

 	Fig. 19  Overall control of solar self-powered wireless charging system.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of solar self-powered wireless charging pavement.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
