Nanopatterning of silicon nanowires for enhancing visible photoluminescence   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2NR30165B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2NR30165B
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2863-2866Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsNanopatterning of silicon nanowires for enhancing visible photoluminescence†

        
          
            Emanuele Francesco 
            Pecora
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Nate 
            Lawrence
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Patrick 
            Gregg
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jacob 
            Trevino
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pietro 
            Artoni
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Alessia 
            Irrera
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Priolo
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Luca Dal 
            Negro
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Electrical and Computer Engineering and Photonics Center, Boston University, 8 Saint Mary's Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA. E-mail: dalnegro@bu.edu
bMATIS IMM-CNR and Dipartimento di Fisica e Astronomia, Universitá degli Studi di Catania, via S. Sofia 64, 95123 Catania, Italy
Received 
      19th January 2012
    , Accepted 27th February 2012First published on 2nd March 2012AbstractSilicon Nanowires prepared by Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching have been nanopatterned into periodic and aperiodic array geometries displaying functionality at visible wavelengths using top-down planar processing techniques. Broadband photoluminescense enhancement up to approximately one order of magnitude is measured from golden-angle spiral arrays over a wide parameter space.
The use of optical data processing has already revolutionized long-haul data communications but has not yet impacted chip-scale technology due to the lack of efficient Si-based light sources. Porous silicon and silicon nanostructures (nanoclusters and nanowires) have been demonstrated as a viable pathway for the engineering of optoelectronic devices due to the possibility of efficient light emission within the cost-effective silicon technology.1–4 Very recently, Si nanowires (NWs) have been proposed as building blocks for future circuits,5,6 LEDs,7 solar cells,8,9 sensors,10 and batteries11 because of their high surface/volume ratio and bio-compatibility.12 NWs can be prepared through a bottom-up Vapor-Liquid-Solid mechanism using different metals as catalysts.13–16 Unfortunately, this approach requires high temperature processing and features a low production yield. Alternatively, a room-temperature top-down approach (Metal-Assisted Chemical Etching) has been proposed and has permeated literature rapidly17–20 since it promises full compatibility with the VLSI paradigm and because the nanostructure doping levels are uniquely determined by substrate dopant type and concentration. In the most common method, the catalyst metal is added to an HF/H2O2 solution as a salt (typically AgNO3). Alternatively, utilizing the low-cost and industrially vialable electron beam evaporation technique, a thin metal layer deposited on the oxide-free substrate can act as an oxidation catalyst. Many groups have reported photoluminescence21–23 and even electroluminescence7 from NWs produced by this method. However, the light emission efficiency requires improvement before being a feasible addition to the field of silicon-based optoelectronics. One of the most promising approaches to increasing emission efficiency is the engineering of photonic structures on the active layers. Thanks to the integration of 2D photonic crystals (PhC), light extraction enhancement can be achieved.24,25 Recently, Er emission in the IR wavelength region has been enhanced via omni-directional extraction from aperiodic lattices with circularly symmetric Fourier space.26 Theoretically, these arrays are capable of extracting light emitted in any direction of the array plane, thus improving the overall external efficiency.27 Some attempts of NW patterning have been recently reported,28,29 mostly consisting of nanostructuring the metal catalyst by the use of nanosphere lithography. This approach leads to a very limited designability of the geometry of the architecture with no ability to implement arbitrary array patterns. More importantly, the Gibbs-Thompson effect, when the VSL growth mechanism is used,28 or the size of the polystyrene microspheres29 limit the size of the NW to hundreds of nanometers. Indeed, the ability to pattern nanoscale pillars made of single NWs with sizes less or comparable to the Bohr exciton radius is crucial to perform and control optical (absorption and emission) processes.
In this paper, we propose an innovative approach, based on the combination of standard Electron Beam Lithography (EBL) and reactive ion etching (RIE), for nanopatterning Metal-Assisted Chemical Etched Si Nanowires. In particular, to demonstrate the versatility of the approach, we show successful fabrication of periodic and aperiodic array structures of optically active NW with controlled morphology and position of the active material. The optical properties of these structures have been investigated using photoluminescence (PL) spectroscopy and a maximum enhancement of the visible emission from nanopatterned Si NWs of approximately one order of magnitude has been demonstrated. These findings open the way for the reliable design and engineering of the optical properties of silicon-based NW arrays under both optical and electrical pumping for light emission, absorption and sensing applications.
(100)-oriented Si wafers, p-type, 1–5 Ω · cm resistivity were used as a substrate. Oxide-free samples were loaded into a CHA Solution electron beam evaporator, where a 2 nm-thin Au layer, monitored in situ through a quartz microbalance, was evaporated at room temperature as a catalyst for the chemical etching. Afterwards, samples were immersed in an aqueous solution of HF (5 M) and H2O2 (0.44 M) at room temperature for 120 s for NW growth and then rinsed and dried in flowing N2 gas. The sample is then spin coated with PMMA 950 (poly(methyl methacrylate)) and baked at 180 C for 75 s. After development in a 1:3 MIBK:IPA (methyl isobutyl ketone:isopropyl alcohol) solution, 60 nm of Cr is deposited by electron beam evaporation and a lift-off process in acetone is used to remove unwanted metal. With Cr as a mask, RIE is used to transfer the pattern to the NWs layer chemistry with flow rates of 42/4.2 sccm respectively, 100 W RF power and a pressure of 100 mT. The Cr layer on top of the pillars is removed with a standard selective wet chemical etching. Structural characterization was performed using a Zeiss Supra 55 Field Emission Scanning Electron Microscope (FE-SEM), while Electron Beam Litography (EBL) was performed using an FE-SEM Zeiss Supra 40VP equipped with Raith beam blanker and NPGS for nanopatterning. RIE was performed in a Plasma-Therm 790 system. For optical characterization, samples were excited via the 488 nm line of an Ar+ laser focused on the sample, with an optical power of about 50 mW. The photoluminescence (PL) signal was collected using a 50X microscope objective, with numerical apertures NA = 0.75, coupled to an Ocean Optics spectrometer after filtering the pump with a 520 nm long pass filter. We have verified using other objectives with different NAs that the measured trends in light extraction are not affected by the collection efficiency. The same set-up was used also for imaging and aligning the sample in order to ensure overlap between the laser beam-illuminated area and the patterned structures. For this purpose, the output of the objective was sent also to a camera sensitive to visible light and the alignment was verified before every measure. Since NWs prepared via Metal Assisted Chemical Etching exhibit a PL quenching effect (as reported and discussed in the literature23), all PL measurements have been recorded after 120 s of illumination in order to ensure the stabilization of the emitted signal and equivalency between data.
In Fig. 1 we show a schematic (a–c) and SEM images (d–f) of the process flow developed to nanopattern NWs. The first step is the preparation of the NWs by Metal Assisted Chemical Etching (Fig. 1(a,d)), wherein the etching time and etchant concentrations have been chosen in order to obtain a NW length of approximately 2.5 μm. NW prepared by this method typically11,23 possess diameter less than 10 nm, and an areal density greater than 1010 cm−2. The NW samples are then coated with a thick (approximately 200 nm) resist layer which provides a homogeneous coverage of the sample due to the high NW density, as demonstrated in Fig. 1(e). Arbitrary nanopatterns can then be written using EBL (Fig. 1(b)) and the exposed areas are removed after development. Cr is then evaporated on the sample as a hard etch mask and the excess metal and resist are removed by a standard lift-off process. RIE is then used to transfer the metal pattern to the NWs, fully etching the NW layer. Commercial Cr etch is then used to remove the remaining metal layer before optical testing. Fig. 1(c) shows a schematic of the final sample and a cross-view SEM image of a representative sample is provided in Fig. 1(f). After patterning, the sample results in groups of NWs arrayed in air into active nanopillars at locations precisely determined by the lithographic process. Given the NW size and density, one estimates that every pillar is composed of 10–50 NWs depending on the actual pillar size. The RIE time has been tuned in order to anisotropically etch the given NW length. However, this results in a large surface roughness as shown in the Fig. 1(f), which is a consequence of the fact that the initial NW layer was not a continuous film but rather an inhomogeneous layer of silicon wires and holes. However, we have ascertained that the roughness of the substrate does not play any active role in light emission in the following optical study.
 Fig. 1  Schematic (a, b, c) and SEM images (d, e, f) of the Si nanowires nanopatterning flow chart. 
As a proof of the reliability of our NW nanopatterning process and ability to enhance light emission properties of NWs for photonic devices, we have written various structures with periodic and aperiodic nanopatterning, investigating different geometries, pillar spacing (in the range between 500 and 900 nm), and filling fractions. The spacing is defined by pillar separation for periodic structures and by the average first-neighbor pillar separation for aperiodic patterns. In Fig. 2(a), a representative image of a periodic structure is shown. NW pillars are well ordered, equally spaced, and repeated over the patterned area with high fidelity. Fig. 2(b) contains a low magnification image of the same periodic structure shown in panel (a), while a representative aperiodic golden angle spiral (GA-spiral) pattern30 is provided in Fig. 2(c).
 Fig. 2  (a) Representative SEM image of a periodic geometry. Low magnification image of the same periodic structure (b) and of one of the GA-spiral pattern (c). 
In order to investigate the role of the nanoscale patterning on the NW emission, we have prepared a set of samples with periodic, Pinwheel31 and GA-spiral geometries. These geometries have been recently introduced in the context of aperiodic optical systems with enhanced light-matter coupling over broad frequency and angular spectra.32 The Pinwheel tiling is generated by iterative decomposition and inflation of a right triangular prototile into 5 congruent copies. When the operations are repeated ad-infinitum they cover a plane with triangular elements lacking rotational or translational symmetry. A point pattern is defined from the vertices of these triangles having a diffuse Fourier space with circular symmetry.30 The GA-spiral is a Vogel spiral that was first proposed to describe the arrangements of florets in a sunflower head and recently engineered for omnidirectional diffraction and optical angular momentum (OAM) transfer on a planar plasmonic structure.30,33,34 In polar coordinates, the position vectors of successive points in a GA-spiral are given by (1) θ = nα(2)where n is the particle number, a is a constant scaling factor and α = 137.508° is an irrational number known as the “golden angle”.
The GA-spiral lacks translational and rotational symmetry and can be decomposed into Fibonacci number of clockwise and counter clockwise spiral families resulting in a Fourier spectrum that does not exhibit Bragg peaks and shows diffuse circular rings giving rise to omnidirectional light extraction.30
In Fig. 3 we show representative PL spectra measured from each nanopatterned structure, along with the reference emission collected from an unpatterned area, where data have been normalized by the array filling fractions. We note that no PL emission was detected from the rough surface where NWs were etched away. On the contrary, an intense signal with peak wavelength 590 nm has been detected for all samples, indicating that nanopatterning does not spectrally shift the reference emission and provides a broadband PL enhancement. More importantly, we show that the signal intensity detected under identical experimental conditions depends on the array geometries, and in particular the unpatterned area yields weaker luminescence.
 Fig. 3  Representative PL spectra from periodic (red line), Pinwheel (green line) and GA-spiral (blue line) geometries. Emission from an unpatterned area is included as a reference (black line). 
The quantitative analysis reported in Fig. 4 shows PL enhancement with respect to emission from the unpatterned area for the different geometries as a function of spacing (top panel) and filling fraction (bottom panel). First, we fabricated structures with pillar spacing between 500 and 900 nm and identical filling fractions, 0.356. Regardless of geometry, all patterns exhibit an optimization with maximum PL enhancement at spacing of 700 nm. The maximum enhancement obtained with a periodic patterning, approximately a factor of 3.5, is surpassed by that of the aperiodic geometries. In particular, the Pinwheel pattern features an enhancement factor of 5.5 which is further improved by the GA-spiral geometry up to a factor 6.5 for the same spacing and filling fraction. We notice that keeping the filling fraction constant ensures that the pumping efficiency remains the same for all the structures that have been engineered for optimal extraction at the emission wavelength.
 Fig. 4  PL enhancement with respect to emission from the unpatterned area for the different geometries (periodic, Pinwheel and GA-spiral) as a function of spacing for a fixed filling fraction of 0.356 (a), and filling fraction with a fixed spacing of 700 nm (b). 
In order to explore the role of all design parameters, we have chosen the best GA-spiral geometry, corresponding to a spacing of 700 nm, and have written several samples with the same geometry and spacing, but different filling fractions ranging between 0.029 and 0.589 (corresponding to feature sizes between 280 nm and 630 nm, respectively) in order to find the condition for best enhancement. We stress that in decreasing the filling fraction, we are decreasing the quantity of active material in the illuminated area of the sample. Consequently, we have normalized the detected peak signal by the filling fraction, to obtain an effective value that corresponds to the light emitted by a normalized volume of active material. Results are shown in Fig. 4(b). The best enhancement corresponds to a filling fraction of 0.182, which yields a PL enhancement factor of about 9. Deviations from this filling fraction yield a PL emission still higher than the reference, but with decreased enhancement.
The observed PL enhancement arises from the interaction between the emitted light and the array geometry. Periodic lattices display well-defined Bragg peaks causing strong interaction with light travelling only along certain directions that satisfy the Bragg diffraction condition.27 However, Pinwheel and GA-spiral arrays possess a denser Fourier space with circular symmetry which guarantees efficient interaction with randomly oriented light emitted by the NWs. In particular, the intensity of the GA-spiral reciprocal space vectors is much larger than for the Pinwheel geometry, leading to enhanced vertical extraction of light, as observed experimentally.26
In conclusion, we have successfully developed a novel and simple method to nanopattern Si NWs prepared by Metal Assisted Chemical Etching to form arbitrary pattern. Top-down planar processing techniques have been applied to control the optical emission properties of Si NWs. Periodic and aperiodic (Pinwheel and GA-spiral) geometries have been investigated due to their potential for broadband and omni-directional extraction with circularly symmetric k-space. Several samples have been prepared in order to explore the role of all structural parameters and show process repeatability. The visible emission from the nanostructures can be enhanced by approximately an order of magnitude. These findings can be easily implemented to improve the power efficiency of electrically driven silicon-based light sources (such as NW-based Light Emitting Devices recently reported in literature), photodetectors, optical sensors, and engineered NW arrays for solar energy conversion.
Notes and references
A. G. Cullis, L. T. Canham and P. D. J. Calcott, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 909 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pavesi, L. Dal Negro, C. Mazzoleni, G. Franzò and F. Priolo, Nature, 2000, 408, 440 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Morales and C. M. Lieber, Science, 1998, 279, 208 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, R. Yan and M. Fardy, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1529 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Chung, J. Y. Yu and J. R. Heath, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2068 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Z. Zhong, D. Wang, W. U. Wang and C. M. Lieber, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 149 CrossRef CAS .
A. Irrera, P. Artoni, F. Iacona, E. F. Pecora, G. Franzò, M. Galli, B. Fazio and F. Priolo, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 075204 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa, Y. Fang, N. Yu, G. Yu, J. Huang and C. M. Lieber, Nature, 2007, 449, 885 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tian, T. J. Kempa and C. M. Lieber, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 16 RSC .
Y. Cui, Q. Wei, H. Park and C. M. Lieber, Science, 2001, 293, 5533 CrossRef .
C. K. Chan, H. Peng, G. Liu, K. McIlwrath, X. F. Zhang, R. A. Huggins and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2007, 3, 31 CrossRef .
A. K. Shaleka, J. T. Robinsona, E. S. Karpa, J. S. Lee, D. Ahnb, M. Yoona, A. Suttona, M. Jorgolli, R. S. Gertner, T. S. Gujral, G. MacBeatha, E. G. Yanga and H. Park, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 1870 CrossRef .
R. S. Wagner and W. C. Ellis, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1964, 4, 89 CrossRef CAS .
B. A. Wacaser, K. A. Dick, J. Johansson, M. T. Borgstrom, K. Deppert and L. Samuelson, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 153 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hayden, R. Agarwal and W. Lu, Nano Today, 2008, 3, 12 CrossRef CAS .
A. Irrera, E. F. Pecora and F. Priolo, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 135601 CrossRef CAS .
K. Peng, Y. Wu, H. Fang, X. Zhong, Y. Xu and J. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 2737 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, T. Shimizu, S. Senz, Z. Zhang, N. Geyer and U. Gosele, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 10683 CAS .
Z. Huang, N. Geyer, P. Werner, J. de Boor and U. Gösele, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 285 CrossRef CAS .
N. Megouda, T. Hadjersi, G. Piret, R. Boukherroub and O. Elkechai, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2009, 255, 6210 CrossRef CAS .
L. H. Lin, X. Z. Sun, R. Tao, Z. C. Li, J. Y. Feng and Z. J. Zhang, J. Appl. Phys., 2011, 110, 073109 CrossRef .
V. A. Sivakov, F. Voigt, A. Berger, G. Bauer and S. H. Christiansen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2010, 82, 125446 CrossRef .
P. Artoni, A. Irrera, F. Iacona, E. F. Pecora, G. Franzò and F. Priolo, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 1483 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boroditsky, T. F. Krauss, R. Coccioli, R. Vrijen, R. Bhat and E. Yablonovitch, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1999, 75, 1036 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gong, M. Makarova, S. Yerci, R. Li, M. J. Stevens, B. Baek, S. W. Nam, R. H. Hadfield, S. N. Dorenbos, V. I. Zwiller, J. Vuckovic and L. Dal Negro, Opt. Express, 2010, 18, 2601 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Lawrence, J. Trevino and L. Dal Negro, submitted.
C. Wiesmann, K. Bergenek, N. Linder and U. T. Schwarz, Laser Photonics Rev., 2009, 3, 262 CrossRef CAS .
B. Fuhrmann, H. S. Leipner, H. Hoche, L. Schubert, P. Werner and U. Gosele, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2524 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bechelany, E. Berodier, X. Maeder, S. Schmitt, J. Michler and L. Philippe, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3866 Search PubMed .
J. Trevino, H. Cao and L. Dal Negro, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5–2008 CrossRef .
S. Y. Lee, C. Forestiere, A. J. Pasquale, J. Trevino, G. Walsh, P. Galli, M. Romagnoli and L. Dal Negro, Opt. Expr., 2011, 19, 23819 Search PubMed .
L. Dal Negro and S. V. Boriskina, Laser Photonics Rev., 2011, 1–41,  DOI:10.1002/lpor.201000046 .
J. Trevino, S. F. Liew, H. Noh, H. Cao and L. Dal Negro, Opt. Express, 2012, 20, 3015–3033 CrossRef .
S. F. Liew, H. Noh, J. Trevino, L. Dal Negro and H. Cao, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, 23631 CrossRef .

Footnote† This work was supported by the Air Force program “Deterministic Aperiodic Structures for On-chip Nanophotonic and Nanoplasmonic Device Applications” under Award FA9550-10-1-0019, and by the NSF Career Award No. ECCS-0846651.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematic (a, b, c) and SEM images (d, e, f) of the Si nanowires nanopatterning flow chart.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Representative SEM image of a periodic geometry. Low magnification image of the same periodic structure (b) and of one of the GA-spiral pattern (c).	 
	(1)
θ = nα	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Representative PL spectra from periodic (red line), Pinwheel (green line) and GA-spiral (blue line) geometries. Emission from an unpatterned area is included as a reference (black line).	 

 	Fig. 4  PL enhancement with respect to emission from the unpatterned area for the different geometries (periodic, Pinwheel and GA-spiral) as a function of spacing for a fixed filling fraction of 0.356 (a), and filling fraction with a fixed spacing of 700 nm (b).	 
Footnote
† This work was supported by the Air Force program “Deterministic Aperiodic Structures for On-chip Nanophotonic and Nanoplasmonic Device Applications” under Award FA9550-10-1-0019, and by the NSF Career Award No. ECCS-0846651.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
