Design of an organic redox mediator and optimization of an organic counter electrode for efficient transparent bifacial dye -sensitized solar cells   - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2CP43078A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2CP43078A
(Paper)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 14383-14390Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsDesign of an organic redox mediator and optimization of an organic counter electrode for efficient transparent bifacial dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Xiong 
            Li
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhiliang 
            Ku
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yaoguang 
            Rong
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Guanghui 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Linfeng 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Tongfa 
            Liu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Min 
            Hu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ying 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Heng 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mi 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Xiang
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Hongwei 
            Han
          
        
      *
      Michael Grätzel Center for Mesoscopic Solar Cells, Wuhan National Laboratory for Optoelectronics, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan 430074, Hubei, P. R. China. E-mail: hongwei.han@mail.hust.edu.cn;  Fax: +86 027 877 930 27;   Tel: +86 027 877 930 27
Received 
      3rd September 2012
    , Accepted 5th September 2012First published on 25th September 2012AbstractA new thiolate/disulfide mediator was designed and synthesized by employing DFT calculations as a guide. It possesses high transparency to visible light, a very attractive feature for bifacially active transparent DSCs that require a highly transparent counter electrode (CE). Compared to the reported and most promising thiolate/disulfide mediator T−/T2, this new analogous mediator produced a major enhancement in open circuit potential (VOC) by about 40 mV and correspondingly a higher power conversion efficiency (η) for DSCs. Furthermore, a highly uniform and transparent (transmittance > 91%) poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOTBE) CE was prepared and could efficiently catalyze the reduction of the disulfide. Based on the novel transparent redox couple and PEDOTBE CE, a new type of iodine-free and Pt-free transparent bifacial DSC was successfully fabricated. This new bifacial device could not only yield a promising front-illuminated η of 6.07%, but also produce an attractive η as high as 4.35% for rear-side irradiation, which exceeds the rear-illuminated η of 3.93% achieved for the same type of device, employing the dark-colored I−/I3− electrolyte.
1. Introduction
Due to their intrinsic characteristics of slow charge recombination and rapid dye regeneration, the thiolate/disulfide mediators, which have been recently proven to be promising candidates to replace the iodide/triiodide (I−/I3−) system in DSCs,1–7 are attracting more attention from scientists, compared to the other iodine-free redox couples.8,9 The best efficiency of 6.4% at full solar intensity for thiolate/disulfide based DSCs has been achieved with the T−/T2 redox couple derived from 5-merrcapto-1-methyltetrazole.1 However, the substantially negative redox potential (E1/2) of T−/T2 relative to the HOMO levels of commonly employed ruthenium-based photosensitizers leads to the reduction in open circuit potential (VOC), posing a major obstacle to further enhancement of power conversion efficiencies (η) of the DSCs based on this redox couple. In this work, we illustrated how to design an organic sulfide redox couple analogous to T−/T2 for enhancement of the VOC and thus improvement of the η. Correspondingly, based on our design strategy of tuning the E1/2 as well as the steric bulk of the redox couple, a novel thiolate/disulfide redox couple AT−/BAT, which consists of the thiolate form (AT−) and disulfide dimer (BAT) derived from 1-aryltetrazol-5-thiol (AT) (Scheme 1), was synthesized and displayed more desirable thermodynamic properties (more positive redox potential but slower charge recombination) than T−/T2. On the other hand, as well as the other reported thiolate/disulfide redox couple,1 this structure-optimized thiolate/disulfide mediator AT−/BAT was also found to be optically transparent in the visible region. It is well known that the optical transparency of electrolytes is one of the main issues for the further development of transparent bifacial DSCs which can efficiently generate electricity when illuminated from either front or rear side of the devices and thus help bring down the cost of solar energy production.10,11 Thus, compared to the conventional I−/I3− system with dark color, the thiolate/disulfide couples (especially the AT−/BAT mediator) characteristic of optical transparency should possess even more potential for transparent bifacial DSCs. However, there has been no report on transparent bifacial DSCs with this kind of redox couple till now. The reason is that, both transparent and highly catalytic CEs for the thiolate/disulfide redox reaction, which should be another prerequisite for thiolate/disulfide based bifacial DSCs,12 have not yet been obtained.1–7,13,14
 Scheme 1  Structures of the organic redox couples T−/T2 and AT−/BAT. 
Currently, the highly porous poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOT), which is called PEDOTHP for short here, has been widely investigated as a promising candidate for CE material due to its extremely low cost-availability and excellent electrocatalytic activity towards various redox couples including the thiolate/disulfide mediators.5,15,16 However, all these reported PEDOTHP films should be thick enough to get the desired catalytic activity, which makes it difficult for them to be transparent. Here we also report on our striking observation that a novel PEDOT CE, prepared by electropolymerization of 2,2′-bis(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (bis-EDOT) as the monomer on FTO glass, not only shows efficient catalytic activity for disulfide reduction, but also exhibits excellent transparency in the visible spectrum. Eventually, by the conjugation of the colorless structure-optimized thiolate/disulfide mediator AT−/BAT and this novel transparent PEDOT (named PEDOTBE) CE, a bifacially active transparent DSC was successfully fabricated and characterized.
2. Experimental
2.1 Materials
The solvents and salts used in this study (puriss. grade) were purchased from Fluka. The 2,2′-bis(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (bis-EDOT) dimer was synthesized according to a previous report.17 The ruthenium sensitizers cis-di(isothiocyanato)-bis(2,2′-bipyridine-4,4′-dicarboxylic acid)ruthenium(II) bistetrabutyl-ammonium (N719) were synthesized according to reported procedures.18
2.2 Preparation of electrodes and fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells
Preparation of the two kinds of ordinary poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) CEs (PEDOTHP and PEDOTUT CEs) and the Pt CE is described in detail in the ESI.† In contrast to the conventional PEDOTHP and PEDOTUT CEs which are based on polymerization of the monomer of EDOT, the bis-EDOT was employed as the monomer for preparation of the novel transparent poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (PEDOTBE) CE: based on the same three-electrode system as utilized in the preparation of the PEDOTHP and PEDOTUT CEs, the PEDOTBE film was obtained through electropolymerization using a bath solution consisting of 0.01 mol L−1 bis-EDOT and 0.1 mol L−1 LiTFSI in acetonitrile at a constant potential (0.6 V vs. Ag/AgCl). The charge capacity for the preparation of the PEDOTBE film was at 1 mC cm−2. Then the conducting polymer electrode was washed by ethanol for three times, and dried in a vacuum oven for 30 min. In addition, the detailed processes for preparation of working electrode and fabrication of dye-sensitized solar cells are also given in the ESI.†
2.3 Characterizations and measurements
The NMR spectra were recorded at 298 K in CDCl3 or CD3CN at 300 MHz on a Varian Mercury-VX300 spectrometer. The chemical shifts were recorded in parts per million (ppm) with TMS as the internal reference. The molecular structures and microstructures of PEDOT film were investigated by ATR-FTIR (Vertex 70, Germany) and SEM (Sirion, 200, Netherlands), respectively. ESI mass spectra were determined using a Finnigan LCQ Advantage mass spectrometer. Elemental analyses were performed with Thermo Quest Flash EA1112. UV-vis spectra were obtained using a Perkin Elmer Lambda 950 spectrophotometer. Cyclic voltammetry for the measurement of electrochemical redox potentials was conducted on ZAHNER ENNIUM Electrochemical Workstations with a conventional three-electrode system: the working electrode was a glassy carbon (0.0707 cm2), the counter electrode was a Pt wire, the reference electrode was a non-aqueous Ag+/Ag electrode (0.1 M AgNO3 in acetonitrile) protected by a glass frit, and the supporting electrolyte was 0.1 M TBAP in anhydrous acetonitrile. The electrolyte solution was prepared by dissolving 20 mM of the reduced species, 10 mM of the oxidized species, 20 mM 18-crown-6 (18-C-6) and 0.1 M TBAP in anhydrous acetonitrile. A scanning rate of 100 mV s−1 was typically used for cyclic voltammetrical measurements unless specified. The potential of the reference electrode was adjusted by recording the cyclic voltammogram for 0.01 M ferrocene in anhydrous acetonitrile containing 0.1 M TBAP. Cyclic voltammetry for the symmetric cell was carried out from −1.2 V to 1.2 V with a 5 mV s−1 scan rate.
Current–voltage (I–V) characteristics were measured using a Keithley 2400 source/meter and a Newport solar simulator (model 91192-1000) giving light with AM 1.5 G spectral distribution, which was calibrated using a certified reference solar cell (Fraunhofer ISE) with an intensity 100 mW cm−2. A black mask with a circular aperture (0.159 cm2) slightly smaller than the active area of the square solar cell (0.25 cm2) was applied on top of the cell.
The incident photon conversion efficiency (IPCE) was measured using a 150 W xenon lamp (Oriel) fitted with a monochromator (Cornerstone 74004) as a monochromatic light source. The illumination spot size was chosen to be slightly smaller than the active area of the DSC test cells. IPCE photocurrents were recorded under short-circuit conditions using a Newport 2931-C power meter. The monochromatic photon flux was quantified by means of a calibrated silicon photodiode.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of the symmetric cell was carried out on ZAHNER ENNIUM Electrochemical Workstations in the frequency range 0.1 to 105 Hz with 10 mV AC amplitude. The electrolyte used was the same as that used for the fully functional DSCs. The distance between two electrodes was 45 μm and the active area was 0.25 cm2.
A charge extraction setup identical to that in the work of Duffy et al.19 was used to determine the charge stored in the films. The solar cell was illuminated for 5 s under open-circuit conditions, and the voltage was left to decay for a certain period in the dark to a voltage VOC. Then the cell was short-circuited, and the current was measured and integrated over 10 s to obtain QOC (VOC).
An intensity-modulated photovoltage spectroscopy (IMVS) experiment was carried out using high-intensity green LEDs (530 nm) driven by a ZAHNER Xpot frequency response analyzer. The LED provided both the dc and ac components of the illumination. The ac light intensities were modulated (±8%) by modulating the voltage applied to the LED with sinusoidal waves in the frequency range from 0.02 to 200 Hz for IMVS. The dc illumination intensity was varied by controlling the voltage applied to the LED. The dc and ac light intensities were measured with a calibrated photodiode. All experiments were performed in an earthed Faraday dark-box to eliminate electrical noise at low light intensities. Photocurrents were measured using a battery powered current preamplifier (Stanford SR570) and photovoltages measured using a purpose built battery powered high impedance voltage follower (input impedance 1012 Ω). The phase and amplitude of the resultant AC photocurrent (or photovoltage) were captured using the lock-in amplifier (SR810) under computer control (Labview).
3. Results and discussion
In an effort to surpass the VOC and the η achieved with T−/T2, which was reported as the most promising thiolate/disulfide couple, a novel organic sulfide redox couple analogous to T−/T2, 1-aryltetrazole-5-thiolate (AT−)/bis(1-aryltetrazol-5-yl) disulfide (BAT) (Scheme 1), was designed based on a strategy of tuning the E1/2 of redox mediator towards more positive as well as properly increasing its steric bulk. The detailed synthesis route and characterization of AT− and BAT are provided in the ESI.† It is obvious that the size of AT−/BAT is bulkier than that of T−/T2. Furthermore, based on DFT calculations, the calculated redox potential Ec1/2 for AT−/BAT is more positive than that of T−/T2 (Table S1, ESI†), which was validated by the cyclic voltammetry (CV) measurements (Fig. S1, ESI†) showing that the experimental redox potential (E1/2) for AT−/BAT is −0.27 V versus Ag/Ag+ and more positive by about 0.1 V than that of T−/T2 (−0.37 V versus Ag/Ag+). Since the difference between the quasi Fermi level of TiO2 (EF,n) and E1/2 of the electrolyte determines the maximum obtainable VOC for a DSC,20 using a novel analogous thiolate/disulfide redox couple with more positive E1/2 could help to maximize the photovoltage. On the other hand, the driving force for charge recombination at the TiO2/electrolyte interface, which could be determined by the difference between the conduction band edge position (EC) of the TiO2 and E1/2 of redox couple, will become higher with more positive E1/2 and correspondingly the charge recombination faster, thus decreasing the photocurrent and photovoltage.21 In contrast, properly increasing the steric bulk of redox couples can help to hinder the recombination and accordingly enhance both photovoltage and IPCE performance.22,23 Therefore, for design of redox couple in the interest of increasing the VOC and η of DSCs, besides tuning the redox couple's potential towards more positive, properly increasing its steric bulk should also be considered.
In order to investigate whether selecting AT−/BAT with a more positive potential and a bigger molecular size than T−/T2 could translate into an increase of the VOC and correspondingly a higher η, the influence of these two analogous redox couples on DSC performance was evaluated. The electrolytes EA and EB, prepared from AT−/BAT and T-/T2, respectively, both contained 0.4 M of the reduced species and 0.1 M of the oxidized species together with 0.4 M 18-crown-6 (18-C-6), 0.05 M LiClO4 and 0.5 M 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) in acetonitrile. The reported high-porous PEDOT CE (PEDOTHP CE),5,24 fabricated by potentiostatic electropolymerization of the 3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene (EDOT) monomer on FTO glass until a charge capacity of 100 mC cm−2 was reached, was utilized for the AT−/BAT and T−/T2 based DSCs.
As shown in Fig. 1, compared to T−/T2, AT−/BAT gave a higher η of 6.27% with a JSC of 13.76 mA cm−2, a VOC of 670 mV and a fill factor (FF) of 0.68 under AM 1.5 illumination of 100 mW cm−2. The improved VOC of the AT−/BAT based DSC was the main reason for its efficiency enhancement. Although the redox potential of AT−/BAT is more positive by 100 mV than that of T−/T2, the VOC of the DSC containing AT−/BAT was just about 40 mV higher than that of the DSC based on T−/T2. This is not surprising as Voc can also be influenced by other parameters besides E1/2 of the redox couple, such as EC of the TiO2 and charge recombination rate at the TiO2/electrolyte interface.25
 Fig. 1  Current density versus applied potential curves of AT−/BAT or T−/T2 based DSCs using PEDOTHP CEs. 
The quasi Fermi level (EF,n) depends on both the EC of the TiO2 and the extracted charge density (QOC) in TiO2 film. Therefore, the lower and higher EF,n at the same QOC means a negative (upward) and positive (downward) shift of the band edge of TiO2.26,27 From charge extraction measurement (Fig. 2a), it could be seen that AT−/BAT causes the EC to move toward about 75 mV more positive than T−/T2 does, contributing about 25 mV to the Voc enhancement for AT−/BAT based DSC. Concomitantly, as reflected by the IMVS experiment (Fig. 2b), AT−/BAT was found to cause the recombination to become slower by a factor of about 2, conceivably producing the additional Voc enhancement by about 15 mV. This is possibly due to the increased steric bulk of BAT, which might completely offset the effect of the increased driving force for charge recombination.21–23 Collectively, compared to T−/T2, the AT−/BAT with a bigger size (responsible for 40% of the net voltage increase) and a more positive redox potential (60%) could not only suppress the surface recombination but also induce the unfavorable positive shift of EC, resulting in a net photovoltage gain of about 40 mV and a slightly higher efficiency for the DSCs.
 Fig. 2  (a) Extracted charge density as a function of quasi-Fermi level (EF,n) of TiO2, (b) electron lifetime as a function of extracted charge density for DSCs based on different redox couples AT−/BAT and T−/T2. EF,n is calculated as follows: EF,n=Eredox − VOC. Eredox, denoting the redox potential of an actual electrolyte solution, is calculated from the E1/2 of the redox couple using the Nernst equation. 
The above experiments demonstrate that the novel organic sulfide mediator AT−/BAT possesses more desirable thermodynamic properties (more positive redox potential but slower charge recombination) than T−/T2 and accordingly resulted in an improvement in both VOC and η for AT−/BAT based DSCs, indicating that the strategy of tuning the E1/2 towards more positive as well as properly increasing the steric bulk is a good way to optimize the molecular structure of redox mediator. On the other hand, in common with the T−/T2 couple, the AT−/BAT possesses almost negligible visible light absorption at the concentrations and path lengths relevant to functioning DSC, offering the prospect of great application for AT−/BAT in the transparent bifacial DSCs.10,11 As shown in Fig. 3, in contrast to a strong absorption of the standard I−/I3− based electrolyte (electrolyte EI) up to 500 nm, the AT−/BAT based electrolyte EA is optically transparent in the visible region, where the electrolyte EI consists of 0.45 M sodium iodide (NaI), 0.45 M 18-C-6, 0.05 M I2, 0.05 M LiClO4 and 0.5 M TBP in acetonitrile.
 Fig. 3  Adsorption spectra of a thin layer of AT−/BAT based electrolytes A (EA) and I−/I3− based electrolyte I (EI) confined between two conducting glass substrates. 
Besides the optical transparency of electrolyte, the transparent CE with highly catalytic activity is another essential requirement for the operation of bifacially active DSCs.12 Despite the fact that the standard Pt electrode prepared by thermal vapour deposition is transparent, the FF of the AT−/BAT based DSCs using Pt CE was very low because of a large reduction resistance (RCT ≈ 160 Ω cm2) of the disulfide BAT on the standard platinized CE, leading to a big decrease in the overall conversion efficiency (η ≈ 1.53) of the DSCs (Fig. S2, ESI†). On the other hand, as suggested by the extremely low RCT (≈ 2 Ω cm2) derived from EIS measurements of AT−/BAT based symmetric cells employing PEDOTHP as CEs (Fig. S2, ESI†), the PEDOTHP CE exhibits excellent electrochemical activity for BAT reduction. However, it is obviously nontransparent to visible light (Fig. S3, ESI†). The amount of the deposits, which can be deduced from the accumulated charges, is considered as the main factor to determine the transparency of the electrodes.28 Thus, when utilizing the conventional electropolymerization condition the same as the preparation of PEDOTHP CE, a significant drop in the deposition charge capacity from 100 to 2 mC cm−2 resulted in ultra thin PEDOT films (named PEDOTUT here), exhibiting the desirable characteristic of high optical transparency. However, it is visible that the PEDOTUT deposits onto the FTO glass in a fairly inhomogeneous texture (Fig. S3, ESI†), and unfortunately, when replacing PEDOTHP by PEDOTUT as electrocatalyst at CE we observed a pronounced reduction of FF and JSC to 0.56 and 12.1 mA cm−2, respectively, eventually leading to a remarkable decrease of η to 4.6% (Fig. 4). This suggests that the transparent PEDOTUT is much less effective than the nontransparent PEDOTHP for the redox reaction of AT−/BAT. Hence, it is difficult to obtain PEDOT films with high optical transparency and high catalytic activity using the conventional electropolymerization method.
 Fig. 4  Current density versus applied potential curves of AT−/BAT based DSCs using PEDOTBE or PEDOTUT CEs. 
In an effort to overcome this problem, we have developed a new PEDOT film formation process. In contrast to the conventional method which is based on polymerization of the monomer EDOT, the bis-EDOT was employed as the monomer for electropolymerization in our novel technique. As shown in Fig. 5, by electropolymerizing the same amount of the deposits as the above-mentioned PEDOTUT film, a novel PEDOT film with a high uniformity and possessing an excellent transmittance better than 91% in the visible spectrum, denoted PEDOTBE here, was achieved at the charge capacity of 1 mC cm−2 based on this new technique. The ATR-FTIR and UV-vis spectra (Fig. S4, ESI†) of the PEDOTBE coated FTO glass demonstrate that the PEDOT was successfully deposited onto the FTO substrate. The microstructure morphology of the PEDOTBE electrode was characterized by SEM. As shown in Fig. 6, in contrast to the PEDOTUT film with a fairly inhomogeneous texture (Fig. S3, ESI†), the potentiostatic deposition based on the bis-EDOT monomer resulted in a homogeneous and porous film with uniform grain size around 100 nm. However, each of these grains does not have a smooth surface. A detailed image presented in Fig. 6b further reveals that all of these grains are composed of small granules with diameters of about 5–10 nm and exhibit similar cauliflower-like shapes. Consequently, this type of morphology may be favorable for a porous PEDOTBE film with high surface area, which might render the PEDOTBE film with higher catalytic activity than the PEDOTUT film.12
 Fig. 5  (a) Optical transmittance spectra, (b) digital photograph of transparent PEDOTBE film deposited on FTO glass. 
 Fig. 6  SEM micrographs of PEDOT electrodes prepared by potentiodynamic deposition on FTO glass, (a) top view, low magnification; (b) top view, high magnification. 
The red photocurrent–voltage (I–V) curve illustrated in Fig. 4 originates from a device where the PEDOTUT CE has been replaced by a PEDOTBE CE. Under standard AM 1.5 reporting conditions, the latter yields a striking increase both in FF and JSC, leading to a remarkable improvement of η from 4.57% to 6.07%. The dramatic enhancement in the photovoltaic parameters resulting from replacing PEDOTUT by PEDOTBE as electrocatalyst at the CE suggests that an alteration of the charge transfer resistance RCT plays a key role here, which could be determined by electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) of the symmetrical dummy cell constructed by two identical PEDOTBE or PEDOTUT electrodes. EIS of the symmetrical dummy cell can be fitted to a Randles-type circuit.13 The Nyquist plots are shown in Fig. 7a, there are two well-defined semicircles for the plots, where the semicircles in the high-frequency region are assigned to impedance related with charge transfer processes occurring at the CE/electrolyte interface. Based on this approach, it could be deduced that PEDOTBE/FTO displayed an average RCT of about 5 Ω cm2 at the electrolyte/CE interface. This was considerably lower than that of the PEDOTUT CE, giving an RCT of about 25 Ω cm2. The lower RCT of PEDOTBE electrode implies that this novel transparent PEDOTBE film exhibits a higher catalytic activity for AT−/BAT.
 Fig. 7  (a) Impedance spectra, (b) Tafel plots of AT−/BAT based symmetric cells using PEDOTBE or PEDOTUT CEs with 0 V bias voltage. 
To elucidate the results more accurately, the Tafel measurement of symmetrical dummy cells was also performed. As observed from Fig. 7b, in the curve at high potential (horizontal part), we could obtain the limiting diffusion current density, Jlim. The current density, which is measured at a slow scan rate (5 mV s−1), is representative of the diffusion of the ionic carriers in the electrolyte between two electrodes of the symmetric cell. In fact, the diffusion coefficient D is proportional to Jlim as demonstrated in the following equation:29  Here, l is the interelectrode distance; n is the number of electrons contributing to the charge transfer; F is Faraday's constant; and C is the concentration of the oxidized state species BAT in the electrolyte. The estimated diffusion coefficient values of BAT at the PEDOTUT and PEDOTBE CEs are 1.73 × 10−6 cm2 s−1 and 3.07 × 10−6 cm2 s−1, respectively. From the difference in D, it can be inferred that diffusivity of the PEDOTBE electrode is apparently better than that of the PEDOTUT electrode. Therefore, the diffusion coefficient of the BAT at the CE/electrolyte interface increases with the increasing catalytic activity of the PEDOTBE for AT−/BAT.30
Besides Jlim, the exchange current density, Jo, calculated from the intersection of the linear anodic and cathodic curves for different electrodes, is another parameter closely connected with the activity of the catalysts. An apparently higher cathodic slope was found in the dummy cells of PEDOTBE as compared to that of PEDOTUT, which indicates a higher Jo on the PEDOTBE electrode surface than that on the PEDOTUT.13 This result implies that PEDOTBE had higher interfacial charge-transfer activity towards the oxidized state species BAT.
As confirmed by both the EIS and Tafel measurements, the PEDOTBE CE not only shows highly optical transparency but also exhibits promising electrocatalytic activity toward the structure-optimized and light-colored mediator AT−/BAT. Thus, the combination of AT−/BAT and PEDOTBE allowed us to fabricate efficient iodine-free and Pt-free transparent bifacial DSCs which might produce excellent photovoltage performance especially in the case of rear-side irradiation. The bifacial devices A and I were completed by filling AT−/BAT based electrolyte EA and I−/I3− based electrolyte EI through pre-drilled holes in the transparent PEDOTBE CEs, respectively. The incident photon-to-electron conversion efficiency (IPCE) spectra corresponding to front and rear illumination of these two devices are shown in Fig. 8a. When irradiated from the front side, the IPCE spectrum of device A roughly matches that of device I in the longer wavelength region (between 475 and 750 nm), on the contrary, in the shorter wavelength region (between 350 and 475 nm), the IPCE is higher for device A than for device I. Thus, the integrated current of device A from wavelengths 350 nm to 475 nm increased by 21% compared to that of device I. This effect can most likely be ascribed to the weak light absorption of electrolyte EA in this spectral region. This advantage of optical transparency for the electrolyte EA is particularly evident in the case of the rear side irradiation. Under rear side irradiation, the incident light is filtered by the thin layer of bulk electrolyte between two electrodes, thus, compared to the electrolyte EI with dark color, the light yellowish electrolyte EA could increase the amount of incident light for the rear-side irradiation of the dye-sensitized mesoporous TiO2 layer.10,11 Accordingly, replacement of electrolyte EI by electrolyte EA produced a rather considerable increase in IPCE corresponding to rear side irradiation, leading to a remarkable improvement by 127% of integrated current in the shorter wavelength region, as validated in Fig. 8a.
 Fig. 8  (a) Spectra of incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE), (b) current density versus applied potential curves for DSCs using PEDOT CEs based on AT−/BAT based electrolyte EA or I−/I3− based electrolyte EI. 

Fig. 8b shows the I–V curves of the devices A and I corresponding to front- and rear-side irradiation with the intensity of 100 mW cm−2. Due to the more negative redox potential of AT−/BAT (−0.27 V versus Ag/Ag+) than that of I−/I3− (−0.18 V vs. Ag/Ag+), device A exhibits no predominance of VOC over device I. However, from the perspective of photocurrent, we find that device A is distinctly superior. For device I, when irradiated from the rear side, the device exhibited an η of 3.93%, just approaching 59% that of front illumination. Magnitude of the reduction in JSC was 58%, which was the main reason for the efficiency loss. This should be ascribed to the fact that the thin layer of the bulk I−/I3− based electrolyte between two electrodes could absorb most of the light up to the 500 nm region. In the case of device A, due to the transparency of electrolyte EA, the η for front- and rear-side irradiation are much closer in comparison to that of device I. Especially, the η corresponding to rear-side irradiation of device A is as high as 4.35%, which largely exceeds the efficiency achieved for device I under rear-side irradiation. These results obviously reveal the great potential of the colorless redox couple AT−/BAT and transparent PEDOTBE film in future transparent bifacial DSCs applications. The large-area bifacially active transparent DSC fabricated by the conjugation of AT−/BAT and PEDOTBE is demonstrated in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Digital photograph of a large-area bifacially active transparent DSC based on the new colorless AT−/BAT mediator and the novel transparent PEDOTBE CE. 
4. Conclusions
In conclusion, our measurements taken in this paper for the further optimization of bifacially active transparent DSCs were summarized by two major points: (1) searching for new and transparent redox couples with desirable thermodynamic properties, and (2) exploiting novel and highly transparent CEs with excellent catalytic activity, which are also two of the main issues for the operation of this type of DSCs. Firstly, based on the strategy of tuning the E1/2 together with the steric bulk of T−/T2 which was reported as a light-colored and the most promising thiolate/disulfide couple, a novel analogous mediator AT−/BAT with more desirable thermodynamic properties and high transparency in the visible light was designed and synthesized. Accordingly there was a major enhancement in VOC by about 40 mV when utilizing AT−/BAT instead of T−/T2 as the redox couple, producing a higher η for DSCs using PEDOTHP CEs. Secondly, a novel PEDOT CE (named PEDOTBE for short) with high optical transparency and excellent catalytic activity toward the reduction of BAT was prepared by electropolymerization of 2,2′-bis(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) (bis-EDOT) as the monomer on FTO glass. Eventually, by taking advantage of the transparent AT−/BAT redox couple and PEDOTBE CE, we successfully fabricated an efficient bifacially active transparent DSC. This kind of iodine-free and Pt-free device could not only yield a promising front-illuminated η of 6.07%, but also produce an attractive η as high as 4.35% for rear-side irradiation, which exceeds the rear-illuminated η of 3.93% achieved for the same type of device employing the dark-colored I−/I3− electrolyte. The combination of these two approaches to optimize the bifacially active transparent DSCs is promising, and will contribute to further lowering the cost of the DSCs, fostering large-scale applications of this type of device as electricity-generating window.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61106056), the Nature Science Foundation of Hubei Province (2008CDA042), Scientific Research Foundation for Returned Scholars, Ministry of Education of China and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (Hust, 2011TS020). We also thank the Analytical and Testing Center of Huazhong University of Science and Technology [HUST] for field emission scanning electron microscopy [FE-SEM].
References
M. K. Wang, N. Chamberland, L. Breau, J. E. Moser, R. Humphry-Baker, B. Marsan, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 385–389 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Li, H. Li, Y. H. Luo, K. X. Li, Q. B. Meng, M. Armand and L. Q. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3358–3365 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Tian, X. A. Jiang, Z. Yu, L. Kloo, A. Hagfeldt and L. C. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7328–7331 CrossRef CAS .
Y. R. Liu, J. R. Jennings, M. Parameswaran and Q. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 564–571 CAS .
H. N. Tian, Z. Yu, A. Hagfeldt, L. Kloo and L. C. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 9413–9422 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ning, H. Tian, C. Yuan, Y. Fu, L. Sun and H. Ågren, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 6330–6333 CrossRef CAS .
H. N. Tian, E. Gabrielsson, Z. Yu, A. Hagfeldt, L. Kloo and L. C. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 10124–10126 RSC .
T. W. Hamann, R. A. Jensen, A. B. F. Martinson, H. Van Ryswyk and J. T. Hupp, Energy Environ. Sci., 2008, 1, 66–78 CAS .
H. Tian and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10592–10601 RSC .
S. Ito, S. M. Zakeeruddin, P. Comte, P. Liska, D. B. Kuang and M. Grätzel, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 693–698 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bisquert, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 648–649 CrossRef CAS .
Q. D. Tai, B. L. Chen, F. Guo, S. Xu, H. Hu, B. Sebo and X. Z. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3795–3799 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. X. Wu, Y. R. Gao and T. L. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2011, 98 CAS .
H. W. Wu, Z. B. Lv, Z. Z. Chu, D. Wang, S. C. Hou and D. C. Zou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 14815–14820 RSC .
S. A. Sapp, C. M. Elliott, C. Contado, S. Caramori and C. A. Bignozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 11215–11222 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahmad, J. H. Yum, Z. Xianxi, M. Grätzel, H. J. Butt and M. K. Nazeeruddin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 1654–1658 RSC .
G. A. Sotzing, J. R. Reynolds and Peter I. Steel, Adv. Mater., 1991, 9, 795–798 CrossRef .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, R. Humphry-Baker, M. Jirousek, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos, V. Shklover, C. H. Fischer and M. Grätzel, Inorg. Chem., 1999, 38, 6298–6305 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hauch and A. Georg, Electrochim. Acta, 2001, 46, 3457–3466 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Frank, N. Kopidakis and J. van de Lagemaat, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1165–1179 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. DeVries, T. W. Pellin and J. T. Hupp, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9082–9087 CrossRef .
B. M. Klahr and T. W. Hamann, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 14040–14045 CAS .
S. M. Feldt, E. A. Gibson, E. Gabrielsson, L. Sun, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 16714–16724 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Yeh, C. P. Lee, L. Y. Lin, P. C. Nien, P. Y. Chen, R. Vittal and K. C. Ho, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 6157–6164 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kopidakis, N. R. Neale and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12485–12489 CrossRef CAS .
G. Boschloo, L. Häggman and A. Hagfeldt, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 13144–13150 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kopidakis, N. R. Neale and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 12485–12489 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Sun, D. Qin, S. Q. Huang, X. Z. Guo, D. M. Li, Y. H. Luo and Q. B. Meng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2630–2637 CAS .
P. J. Cameron, L. M. Peter, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1447–1453 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, P. Sudhagar, V. Verma, D. Song, E. Ito, S. Y. Lee, Y. S. Kang and W. Choi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3729–3736 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp43078aThis journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Structures of the organic redox couples T−/T2 and AT−/BAT.	 

 	Fig. 1  Current density versus applied potential curves of AT−/BAT or T−/T2 based DSCs using PEDOTHP CEs.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Extracted charge density as a function of quasi-Fermi level (EF,n) of TiO2, (b) electron lifetime as a function of extracted charge density for DSCs based on different redox couples AT−/BAT and T−/T2. EF,n is calculated as follows: EF,n=Eredox − VOC. Eredox, denoting the redox potential of an actual electrolyte solution, is calculated from the E1/2 of the redox couple using the Nernst equation.	 

 	Fig. 3  Adsorption spectra of a thin layer of AT−/BAT based electrolytes A (EA) and I−/I3− based electrolyte I (EI) confined between two conducting glass substrates.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current density versus applied potential curves of AT−/BAT based DSCs using PEDOTBE or PEDOTUT CEs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Optical transmittance spectra, (b) digital photograph of transparent PEDOTBE film deposited on FTO glass.	 

 	Fig. 6  SEM micrographs of PEDOT electrodes prepared by potentiodynamic deposition on FTO glass, (a) top view, low magnification; (b) top view, high magnification.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Impedance spectra, (b) Tafel plots of AT−/BAT based symmetric cells using PEDOTBE or PEDOTUT CEs with 0 V bias voltage.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Spectra of incident photon to current efficiency (IPCE), (b) current density versus applied potential curves for DSCs using PEDOT CEs based on AT−/BAT based electrolyte EA or I−/I3− based electrolyte EI.	 

 	Fig. 9  Digital photograph of a large-area bifacially active transparent DSC based on the new colorless AT−/BAT mediator and the novel transparent PEDOTBE CE.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c2cp43078a

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2012
