Unassisted visible solar water splitting with efficient photoelectrodes sensitized by quantum dots synthesized via an environmentally friendly eutecti ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA05901B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA05901B
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 22566-22579Unassisted visible solar water splitting with efficient photoelectrodes sensitized by quantum dots synthesized via an environmentally friendly eutectic solvent-mediated approach†

        
          
            Uma V. 
            Ghorpade‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Mahesh P. 
            Suryawanshi‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Seung Wook 
            Shin
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jihun 
            Kim
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Soon Hyung 
            Kang
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Jun-Seok 
            Ha
          
        
      e, 
      
        
          
            Sanjay S. 
            Kolekar
          
        
      *af and 

        
          
            Jin Hyeok 
            Kim
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Materials Science and Engineering, Optoelectronics Convergence Research Center, Chonnam National University, 300, Yongbong-Dong, Buk-Gu, Gwangju 500-757, South Korea. E-mail: jinhyeok@chonnam.ac.kr
bDepartment of Physics and Astronomy, Wright Center for Photovoltaic Innovation and Commercialization, University of Toledo, Toledo, Ohio 43606, USA
cSchool of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Gwangju Institute of Science and Technology, 123 Cheomdangwagi-ro, Buk-gu, Gwangju 61005, South Korea
dDepartment of Chemistry Education, Optoelectronics Convergence Research Center, Chonnam National University, 61186, South Korea
eDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Chonnam National University, Gwangju 61186, Republic of Korea
fAnalytical Chemistry and Material Science Research Laboratory, Department of Chemistry, Shivaji University, Kolhapur 416-004, India. E-mail: ssk_chem@unishivaji.ac.in
Received 
      20th June 2018
    , Accepted 30th July 2018First published on 3rd August 2018AbstractDeep eutectic solvents (DESs) based on choline chloride/ethylene glycol have been explored as synthetic media for recently introduced Cu–Sb–S based colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) decorated on NiO/fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) and TiO2/FTO photoelectrodes for unassisted solar water splitting for hydrogen generation. The feasibility of the use of an environmentally benign solvent-based synthetic process is demonstrated herein by preparing the earth-abundant Cu–Sb–S-based CQDs and utilizing them in a solar energy harvesting material for photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting while avoiding the use of sacrificial agents. The band alignment between CQDs and NiO or TiO2 clearly suggests that the CQD-modified NiO and TiO2 electrodes act as a potential photocathode (NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS) and photoanode (TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS) with faradaic efficiencies of up to 74 and 86%, respectively, which allows us to construct an efficient PEC cell to split water at an overall solar-to-hydrogen (STH) efficiency of ∼0.28%. The tandem photoelectrode configuration in an unassisted mode of solar-driven water splitting based on a wire-linked system shows ∼0.97 mA cm−2 of current density, and can split water under zero-bias conditions. Enhancement of the PEC device by accelerating electron and hole transport and broadening the diffusion length using photosensitizer materials while avoiding typical recombination with a thin passivation layer was achieved. The charge transport mechanism through combining experimental results in half and overall water splitting reactions is proposed. The success of such efficient multi-layered heterojunction photoelectrodes is essential for the future development of green energy harvesting devices.
Introduction
Photoelectrochemical (PEC) water splitting has emerged as an ideally clean, renewable, and reliable alternative for converting solar energy into chemical fuels to develop sustainable energy; however, challenges remain to improve the performance, cost-effectiveness and safety.1 The pioneering work on PEC water splitting was first reported by Honda and Fujishima in the 1970s by using TiO2 as a photoanode in the oxygen evolution reaction (OER).2 Since then, great attention has been paid to developing various semiconducting transition metal oxides for PEC water-splitting devices.3,4 In order to avoid the energy loss and the majority of the photons to be absorbed, tandem photoelectrode systems with two different photo-absorbers in a sandwich configuration have been popularized. These systems have been established to acquire the requisite working voltage with combined open-circuit voltage of both semiconductors and have potential to yield PEC water splitting efficiencies of up to 29%.5 In spite of such convincing points of interest, their practical application in PEC water splitting has been restricted fundamentally by the restrictively high expenses, low performance and poor stability. Successful visible light-driven water splitting under neutral pH conditions was reported by Fan et al.6 using a Pt-free tandem PEC cell with molecular Ru- and Co-catalysts immobilized on the photoanode and photocathode, respectively. In addition, a tandem PEC cell comprising a dye-sensitized NiO photocathode and a BiVO4 photoanode with a stable and well-sustained photocurrent response was also reported.7 A tandem system comprising an InP photocathode combined with a nanoporous BiVO4 photoanode generated an unassisted solar water splitting efficiency of 0.5%.8 Then again, multijunction silicon or heterojunction III–V semiconductors as photoelectrodes significantly increase the visible light conversion efficiency, yet they increase the cost while shortening the lifetime of the entire gadgets.9 Along with this, the efficiency of conventional PEC frameworks ordinarily experiences an absence of photovoltage from usually utilized photocathodes and insufficient photocurrent from typical photoanodes.8 Similar observations were made by Yang et al.10 for their tandem cell based on highly toxic CdS and CdSe colloidal quantum dots (CQDs) based photoelectrodes and they reported a significantly lower photocurrent density value of 0.125 mA cm−2. Inspired by these considerations, the present work focuses on a wire-linked design of photo-absorber materials and potential inorganic semiconductors that could work in a tandem system to generate H2 and O2 to overcome the previously mentioned impediments.
Here, we pursue to achieve successful results by surface modifications with CQDs by development of an improved light-absorbing photoelectrode constituent. On the way to develop a suitable photosensitizer based on a ternary compound material, we have chosen newly reported CQDs of Cu–Sb–S-based compounds as a photosensitizer among the various chalcogenides comprising sustainable and non-toxic earth-abundant elements.11,12 Moreover, the ionic radius and oxidation state of Sb are comparable to those of In and Ga, which may contribute to accessing the beneficial properties required in solar energy harvesting devices.13 Ternary Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 compounds have emerged as attractive potential light absorbers due to their high absorption coefficient (105 cm−1) and suitable optical band gap, which varies between 0.8 and 1.7 eV.14–16 However, most synthetic studies investigating the synthesis of high-quality CQDs use highly toxic, hazardous, unstable, and expensive solvents and generally require stringent inert conditions, which may increase the overall manufacturing costs and limit the mass production.17 The lack of adequate preparation methods and the use of highly toxic solvents such as oleylamine (OLA), dodecanethiol (DDT), tert-DDT, trioctylphosphine (TOP), and trioctylphosphine oxide (TOPO) have proved challenging in preparing high-quality CQDs and may effectively prohibit their massive-scale synthesis. These deficiencies have led researchers to seek alternative green chemistry approaches that eliminate the utilization of dispensable toxic raw materials and the formation of side products while affording CQDs with similar features to those obtained via conventional methods.18,19 Accordingly, there is a need for a distinct and straightforward synthetic process involving a coordinating solvent with the necessary physical properties but without toxicity that affords high-quality and pristine CQDs.20 One promising approach is the use of deep eutectic solvents (DESs) as synthetic media, which avoids the use of highly toxic solvents and allows control of the size of the CQDs produced.21 DESs possess many advantages because of their low-cost components, safety, easy preparation, low or negligible toxicity, low vapor pressure, non-flammability, environmental friendliness, rapid biodegradability, etc., making them attractive alternative solvents for the synthesis of various CQDs.22
As described above, the conventional methods adopted for synthesizing the Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 that utilize one-pot heating processes without vacuum are generally inexpensive, allowing the manufacturing cost to be reduced and thus facilitating their wider use as improved photosensitizers. Sensitization of these narrow band-gap materials is of particular importance because (i) it covers a broad range of the solar spectrum for visible absorption and (ii) it permits easy diffusion of electrons and holes through the resulting semiconductor interface via multiple excitations, causing photocurrent enhancement.23 To the best of our knowledge, despite the promise of such materials, their utilization as a sensitizer for solar water splitting has been sparsely studied. An earth-abundant core–shell nanowire array photoanode based on ZnO/CdS/CuSbS2 has been reported to achieve a photocurrent density of 6.48 mA cm−2 at 0 VAg/AgCl with an incident photon-to-current efficiency (IPCE) value of approximately 52% at 480 nm.24 On the other hand, a photocathode based on CuSbS2/CdS/Pt with a photocurrent density of 4.2 mA cm−2 at 0 Vreversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) and an onset potential of 0.46 VRHE with near-unity faradaic efficiency in a neutral electrolyte has opened a new avenue in PEC studies; however, the toxicity of CdS remains an issue.16 Choi et al.25 and Liu et al.26 have also reported the use of only CuSbS2 as a CQD sensitizer over TiO2 and ZnO nanoarchitectures in CuSbS2/TiO2 and CuSbS2/ZnO structured electrodes for quantum dot-sensitized solar cells, where photocurrent densities of ∼0.012 and 0.100 mA cm−2 have been produced in PEC studies.14 The above evidence suggests that CQDs prepared by DES-mediated synthesis could be used as a sensitizer to validate the importance of earth-abundant CuSbS2 and Cu3SbS4 for application in a two-electrode PEC water-splitting device.
Herein, we sought to design CQD-sensitized photoelectrodes for efficient solar water splitting for the generation of H2 and O2, where CQDs of earth-abundant Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 semiconductor materials are decorated onto directly grown two-dimensional (2D) NiO nanosheets and one dimensional (1D) TiO2 nanorods covering most of the active surface of the photocathode and photoanode, respectively.27 The experimentally grown nanoarchitectures of NiO and TiO2 are beneficial over nanoparticulates because of (i) the rapid charge migration and separation as randomly oriented nanoparticles (NPs) may lead to an increased charge recombination rate, and (ii) the large number of charge-trap sites in the surface region in NPs.9 Hence the nanoarchitecture of PEC candidate materials is typically a key factor in photocatalysis, as it can facilitate easy and fast transfer of electron and hole pairs, thereby accelerating charge carrier collection and separation at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface in the water-splitting reaction.28,29 These semiconductor Cu–Sb–S CQD materials along with NiO and TiO2 as a host for the sensitization of CQDs are chosen in such a way that they possess suitable band gaps and form proper band alignment with each other and with water redox potential.27 A schematic illustration of the photoelectrodes along with the principle of the PEC reaction is shown in Scheme 1.
 Scheme 1  Overall unassisted water-splitting mechanism of PEC H2 and O2 generation using the NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS photocathode and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS photoanode along with their respective energy levels and electron–hole-transfer processes occurring in a tandem configuration. 
Thus, the environmentally benign eutectic mediated solvent-based synthetic process is revealed herein by preparing the earth-abundant Cu–Sb–S-based CQDs. A Cu3SbS4 CQD-modified NiO nanosheet photocathode and a CuSbS2 CQD-modified TiO2 nanorod photoanode for the water reduction and water oxidation reactions, respectively, that allow maximum solar energy harvesting under visible light illumination, yielding effective water-splitting performance have been developed.10 Additionally, surface passivation with a thin ZnS coating was used to considerably facilitate the stability of the system. Our work represents the first example of unassisted solar water splitting using NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS as the light-absorbing materials for effective photoelectrodes. Finally, we demonstrated a material platform with a charge transfer mechanism for semiconductor photoelectrodes that can help overcome the limitations of water-splitting systems.
Results and discussion
Characterization of Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs as photosensitizers
The morphology of the Cu–Sb–S-based CQDs was studied using transmission electron microscopy (TEM) analysis. Fig. 1a and b show the representative high-resolution (HR)-TEM images of Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs. In the HR-TEM images, the observed lattice spacings of 0.181 and 0.298 nm could be assigned to the (222) and (103) planes of tetragonal Cu3SbS4, respectively, and those of 0.301 and 0.319 nm could be assigned to the (200) and (111) planes of orthorhombic CuSbS2, respectively.30–32 The CQDs are spherical with a diameter of ∼6–7 nm for Cu3SbS4 and ∼10–12 nm for CuSbS2, as shown in the insets of Fig. 1a and b. Accordingly, the synthesized DES by using specific H-bond donor and acceptor moieties contribute further to controlling the size of the as-synthesized NCs. Furthermore, the crystal structure and phase purity of the samples were confirmed by using X-ray diffraction (XRD). Fig. S1† shows the representative XRD patterns of the as-synthesized CQDs, where the XRD patterns for the Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs can be assigned to a tetragonal phase in the famatinite crystal structure and an orthorhombic phase in the chalcostibite crystal structure, respectively. From the HR-TEM and XRD analyses, it is concluded that the synthesized Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs are phase pure and free from any impurities. The formation of phase pure CQDs using DES solvent could be explained via the proposed reaction mechanism as follows. The CQD synthesis in DES solvent occurs via reaction of the metal precursor with an ethaline (HOC2H4N+(CH3)3) complex, which is formed between the choline chloride (ChCl) as the H-bond donor and ethylene glycol as the H-bond acceptor. The present hydroxyl (HO−) group of ChCl makes it easily react with metallic ions through a covalent linkage and the cholinium cationic polar head group (–N+(CH3)3) of ChCl can provide a uniform positively charged surface with a suitable density facilitating the steric hindrance which further assists in sidestepping the accumulation of CQDs.33 Thus it promotes the exchange of carriers by avoiding the physical limitations for compelling charge transport. As a result, the above evidence concluded the potential of DES as better solvent media for the functionalized materials.
 Fig. 1  (a) and (b) HR-TEM images of the as-synthesized Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs along with low-magnification TEM images in the insets, respectively. (c)–(f) Surface and cross-sectional FE-SEM images and (g) and (h) TEM images of the NiO nanosheets and TiO2 nanorods, respectively. The insets of (g) and (h) are the SAED patterns of the corresponding materials. 
Fabrication of photoelectrodes
The growth of NiO and TiO2 thin films with the desired thickness and morphology was optimized to obtain uniformity and good adhesion to the fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrate without peeling after deposition, which inhibits competition between their respective crystal growth and dissolution.34 A thin, compact NiO seed layer (Fig. S2†) was deposited on the FTO substrate prior to the chemical bath deposition growth of NiO nanosheets to avoid direct electrolyte contact between the Cu3SbS4 CQDs and the FTO electrode.10Fig. 1 depicts the field emission scanning electron microscopy (FE-SEM) images of pure NiO (c and d) and TiO2 (e and f), which revealed the formation of vertically aligned nanosheets and nanorods with almost uniform size, respectively. FE-SEM images of NiO show faceted crystals, revealing that the nanosheets with a length of ∼2 μm are interconnected with each other. This interconnected nanosheet-like geometry along with the mesoporous structure may help increase the surface area and hence shows effectiveness as a pathway for carrier transport which is ideal for light harvesting and charge separation, particularly for H2 photogeneration.35 The morphology and crystal structure of the faceted NiO nanosheets were further characterized by TEM and selective area electron diffraction (SAED) analysis (Fig. 1g and its inset), which reveal the mesoporous microstructure of the sheets consisting of nano-sized pores and typical SAED patterns with rings from the center-to-edge direction to the cubic phase assigned to the (111)/(200)/(220)/(311)/(222) planes.36 Along with the pristine NiO, Fig. 1e and f also reveal a uniform and perpendicular growth of TiO2 nanorods with a length of ∼2 μm and a diameter of ∼200 nm throughout the surface of FTO with nearly square top facets. The TEM image in Fig. 1h illustrates the sharp edges of the TiO2 nanorods with their actual shape. The inset of Fig. 1h shows the corresponding SAED pattern of bare TiO2 with a zone axis of [10], which is consistent with the literature for its rutile phase.37 Vertically grown 2D mesoporous NiO and 1D TiO2 nanoarchitectures are advantageous because they reduce the recombination rate at the interface and facilitate the transportation of charge carriers towards their respective current collectors providing good physical support.38,39 While most research has been done on utilizing p- or n-type semiconductor materials in solar hydrogen production, further material development is also essential to improve the PEC performance, stability and cost-effectiveness for practical water splitting applications.40
In this regard, NiO and TiO2 were ex situ sensitized with the corresponding Cu–Sb–S-based CQDs prepared via DES-mediated synthesis to access the wide range of the solar energy spectrum. The characterization results are depicted in Fig. 2. The FE-SEM images of Cu3SbS4 on the NiO nanosheets (Fig. 2a and b) and CuSbS2 on the TiO2 nanorods (Fig. 2e and f) show a coarse surface after the optimized sensitization of 5 h compared to those of bare NiO and TiO2 and reveal the uniform coverage of CQDs on each material. The difference between the CQDs and NiO nanosheets or TiO2 nanorods was clearly observed, indicating that the CQDs on the surface provide uniform sensitization. TEM and HR-TEM images indicated that the original size of the CQDs was well retained on NiO (Fig. 2c and d) and TiO2 (Fig. 2g and h), clearly showing the nanoarchitectured NiO and TiO2 supports. The significant CQD engineering on the anchoring surfaces is further confirmed by their well-resolved interplanar spacings of 0.297 and 0.183 nm, which correspond to the (222) and (103) planes of tetragonal Cu3SbS4, respectively, 0.239 nm, which corresponds to the (111) plane of cubic NiO (Fig. 2d), and those of 0.317 nm and 0.326 nm, which correspond to the (111) plane of chalcostibite CuSbS2 and the (110) plane of rutile TiO2, respectively.30–32,41–43 The SAED patterns were recorded to investigate and confirm the typical crystal structure of the sensitized photoelectrode system, and the corresponding patterns are shown in the insets of Fig. 2c and g. The SAED pattern of Cu3SbS4 on the NiO surface shows only the ring pattern of the (112)/(004)/(006)/(224) planes from the center-to-edge direction, which corresponds to the Cu3SbS4 structure (inset of Fig. 2c). On the other hand, the yellow and white rings in the SAED pattern at the interface between TiO2 and CuSbS2 shown in the inset of Fig. 2g are caused by TiO2 and CuSbS2, respectively. In particular, no intermediate layer is observed between (i) NiO and Cu3SbS4 or (ii) TiO2 and CuSbS2, which suggests that the interfacial properties may allow fast charge transport in the PEC device.44,45 As a result 2D NiO and 1D TiO2 provide a strong backbone network for the Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQD sensitizers, respectively, functioning as high surface area supports for uniform sensitization since the morphology and porosity significantly affect the PEC performance by controlling the charge transport process.46 Moreover, to study the effect of controlled mass loading, the sensitization of CQDs on NiO nanosheets and TiO2 nanorods was carried out for 10 h. Analogous TEM images after 10 h of sensitization are shown in Fig. S3.† The NiO material displayed a high loading of Cu3SbS4, whereas TiO2 exhibits the aggregation of CQDs throughout various regions rather than uniform sensitization, which can be clearly shown by the red mark in Fig. S3.†
 Fig. 2  (a) Surface (top view) and (b) cross-sectional FE-SEM images of the Cu3SbS4 CQD-sensitized NiO photocathode. (c) and (d) TEM and HR-TEM images of the Cu3SbS4 CQD-sensitized NiO photocathode. The inset of (c) is the SAED pattern of the interface between the Cu3SbS4 CQDs and the NiO photocathode. (e) Surface (top view) and (f) cross-sectional FE-SEM images of the CuSbS2 CQD-sensitized TiO2 photoanode. (g) and (h) TEM and HR-TEM images of the CuSbS2 CQD-sensitized TiO2 photoanode. The inset of (c) is the SAED pattern of the interface between the CuSbS2 CQDs and the TiO2 photoanode. 
Our approach involves enhancing the PEC performance by accelerating the electron and hole transport and broadening the diffusion length using photosensitizer materials while avoiding typical recombination with a thin passivation layer covering the sensitizer material. Since the minority carrier transfer at the semiconductor–electrolyte junction in PEC cells is of considerable importance, photogenerated electron and hole transfer at the CQD surface needs to be emphasized, and therefore, a thin ZnS layer is deposited on both photoelectrodes to protect against recombination and corrosion processes.40 Based on the goal of enhancing the photocurrent density and stability of photoelectrodes as mentioned above, we performed further surface modification with a thin ZnS layer over the optimized electrode materials using the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR) method. The surface and cross sectional FE-SEM images of the ZnS passivation layer on FTO grown by the SILAR method with ∼13 nm thickness determined using an ellipsometer are depicted in Fig. S4† for a better understanding. The uniform thin coating of the ZnS layer, which covers all of the Cu–Sb–S CQDs, exhibits good optical transparency, which is better for PEC performance. Thus, homogeneous coverage of Cu3SbS4/ZnS and CuSbS2/ZnS on NiO and TiO2 was enabled by uniform CQD sensitization and thin ZnS coating deposition to passivate the CQDs from corrosion for consistent carrier transportation and absorption.
To study the absorption from CQDs sensitized on NiO and TiO2, the samples were characterized with a commonly used absorption spectroscopy technique. Fig. 3a and b show the absorption spectra of bare NiO and TiO2 and their sensitized/passivated NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS heterostructures, respectively. The NiO and TiO2 films mostly absorb only in the UV range (λ ∼ <400 nm), whereas the absorption edge redshifted after decoration with the CQDs. The NiO/Cu3SbS4 and TiO2/CuSbS2 films exhibit absorbance in the visible region with an onset at ∼1000 nm and ∼860 nm, respectively (Fig. S5†). The resultant absorption spectra after ZnS modification indicate little decreased absorption in the visible region since ZnS deposition was carried out keeping in mind to inhibit absorption rather passivation only. Yet, the results reveal a bit difference in the absorption of sensitized photoelectrodes before and after ZnS passivation, slightly disrupting the energy harvesting ability of the photoelectrodes. Since band alignment is the critical factor which affects the PEC device performance, we envision that Cu3SbS4 CQDs with a more negative valence band (VB) potential (Evac) have the ability to inject holes into NiO, whereas CuSbS2 CQDs with a more positive conduction band (CB) potential (Evac) have the ability to inject electrons into TiO2, allowing us to fabricate a photocathode and a photoanode, respectively. To confirm the band configuration between the CQD modified NiO or TiO2 photoelectrodes, the band positions and the band alignment of the NiO/Cu3SbS4 and TiO2/CuSbS2 heterojunction were also investigated by ultraviolet photoelectron spectroscopy (UPS) as well as UV-Vis absorption spectroscopy. Fig. 3c shows the UPS spectra of the NiO, TiO2, Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 materials. The CB edge positions of each material were estimated from the VB edge positions and their respective band gaps. The inset of Fig. 3c displays the semi-logarithmic plots of the secondary cut-off (SECO) regions to measure the work function (ϕ) with He I excitation energy (21.22 eV). ϕ = hυ − (SECO − Ef)(1)where h, υ and Ef are the Planck constant, the frequency of the ionizing light and the Fermi level, respectively. The calculated work functions of the NiO, TiO2, Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 materials are 4.52, 4.18, 5.10 and 4.67 eV, respectively, and are found to be in good agreement with the reported values.15,47,48Fig. 3d shows the semi-logarithmic plots of the UPS spectra near the Fermi level (EF = 0) to further determine the VB edge with respect to the EF; the VB edge is calculated by considering the point of intersection of two tangent lines along the peak and background, and the corresponding values are used to calculate the VB maximum (VBM).49 Thus, the equivalent positions of EF with regard to EVBM suggest the p-type conductivity of NiO, Cu3SbS4, and CuSbS2 and the n-type conductivity of TiO2. The band-gap values of each material were calculated by extrapolation of the Tauc plots from the absorption spectra (Fig. 3a and b) and are directly determined to be 3.25, 3.10, 1.23 and 1.44 eV for NiO, TiO2, Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2, respectively. From the value of the frequently cited EF calculated from Fig. 3d, the VBM displayed its position 0.43 eV below and 3.34 eV above for NiO and TiO2, respectively. Here, Cu3SbS4 forms a type II heterojunction upon sensitization on the NiO photocathode with a valence band offset of 0.44 eV (vacuum level: 5.39 eV/4.95 eV) and 2.46 eV (vacuum level: 4.16 eV/1.70 eV) at the VB and CB, respectively. Similarly, CuSbS2 also generates a type II heterojunction upon sensitization on the TiO2 photoanode with a band offset of 2.31 eV (vacuum level: 7.52 eV/5.21 eV) and 0.65 eV (vacuum level: 4.42 eV/3.77 eV) at the VB and CB, accordingly. Thus, the NiO/Cu3SbS4 and TiO2/CuSbS2 heterojunctions exhibit a type II band alignment with a considerable cliff-like VB alignment and a spike-like CB alignment for NiO and TiO2, respectively. An estimated band energy diagram of the obtained CQD-sensitized NiO and TiO2 photoelectrodes based on the UPS measurements and band-gap energy values from absorbance is presented graphically in Scheme 1, which shows a clear difference in the electronic structures of the heterostructure materials. The band positions of the materials in the schematic are given with respect to Evac.
 Fig. 3  UV-Vis absorption spectra of (a) NiO and TiO2 and (b) NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS. (c) UPS spectra of the NiO, TiO2, Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 materials. The inset of (c) shows the semi-logarithmic plots of the cut-off of the secondary photoelectron regions with He I excitation energy (21.22 eV). (d) Semi-logarithmic plots of UPS spectra near the Fermi level and each VB edge position. 
In addition to the morphological and optical results, a structural investigation was also performed to study the effect on the crystal properties before and after sensitization. Fig. S6† shows the XRD patterns of NiO, Cu3SbS4-sensitized NiO, TiO2 and CuSbS2-sensitized TiO2. The XRD pattern of NiO exhibits all the diffraction peaks corresponding to cubic symmetry, whereas the XRD pattern of TiO2 reveals its rutile crystal structure, both of which are consistent with the SAED results (insets of Fig. 2c and g). Due to the nanocrystalline nature of CQDs, the diffraction patterns corresponding to the Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs on the surface of NiO or TiO2 were unable to detect; however, slightly decreased intensities of the crystalline planes of cubic NiO and rutile TiO2 were observed.10
In addition to these data, the XPS spectra of the NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS heterostructures were recorded to identify the chemical states of Ni, O, Ti, Cu, Sb, Zn and S and are shown in Fig. S7 and S8.† The spin–orbit components (2p3/2 and 2p1/2) of the Ni 2p and Ti 2p peaks were well deconvoluted into peaks at 874.95/855.69 eV and 458.58/464.35 eV corresponding to the binding energies due to the presence of the Ni(II) and Ti(IV) oxidation states.50,51 The peaks from Cu 2p3/2 and Cu 2p1/2 and from S 2p3/2 and S 2p1/2 from NiO/Cu3SbS4 and TiO2/CuSbS2 were attributed to Cu1+ and S2− in the Cu–Sb–S CQDs.52 The Sb from NiO/Cu3SbS4 displayed peaks at 529.83 eV (Sb 3d5/2) and 539.64 eV (Sb 3d3/2) corresponding to its Sb(V) valence state, whereas the Sb from TiO2/CuSbS2 displayed peaks at 531.03 eV (Sb 3d5/2) and 540.58 eV (Sb 3d3/2) corresponding to its Sb(III) valence.53 The O 1s region is overlapped by peaks from Sb that can be seen clearly in the Sb and O XPS spectrum (Fig. S7 and S8†). Furthermore, the presence of the XPS peaks of Zn 2p3/2 at their expected position also reveals the presence of Zn after the ZnS deposition.40 Thus, XPS analysis provided support for the existence of elements such as Ni, Ti, O, Cu, Sb, S and Zn in the photoelectrodes. However, the signals from Cu, Sb, S and Zn were suppressed due to the dominance of Ni, Ti and O and hence were plotted with lower intensity values for further amplification. Furthermore, the effects of the Cu–Sb–S CQDs and the passivation layer on the PEC properties and photostabilities of NiO and TiO2 were analyzed and studied, along with the charge transfer mechanism hereafter.
PEC performance
Chronoamperometry measurements were carried out at a 0 V and 1.23 V (vs. RHE) potential of the working electrode.54 Photocurrent stability was tested under chopped light irradiation at a fixed electrode potential. Optically transparent NiO and TiO2 photoelectrodes generated comparatively insignificant photocurrent density values of – 0.23 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE and 0.58 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE, respectively (Fig. 4a and b). Compared to the photoanode, the photocathode exhibited relatively lower performance, which is attributed to the slow kinetics of charge carriers within NiO due to its very low hole mobility.10 On the other hand, the PEC performance contributed by the photocathode prepared in the present work significantly overcame those contributed by previously reported p-type oxide semiconductor heterojunction photoelectrodes.55,56 The significant improvement in photocurrent density of the NiO and TiO2 photoelectrodes was observed after sensitization with the Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs, respectively. The improved results could be attributed to the improved absorption due to the visible light active Cu–Sb–S based photosensitizer and also due to type II band alignment (Scheme 1) which causes enhanced charge separation along with the decreased recombination rate at the interface. Specifically, the onset potential and cathodic photocurrent of the NiO/Cu3SbS4 photocathode were found to be 0.78 VRHE and −0.59 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, respectively. On the other hand, the TiO2/CuSbS2 photoanode exhibited an onset potential of – 0.21 VRHE and a photocurrent density of 1.39 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE. The sensitized photocathode and photoanode show an over 2.3-fold greater photocurrent density than the pristine photoelectrodes. Since the quantitative sensitization of CQDs on photoelectrodes affects the PEC performance, the PEC results for longer sensitization times were also measured (Fig. S9†). The longer sensitization time of Cu3SbS4 CQDs on NiO photocathodes was observed to decrease the photocurrent density values, and the CuSbS2-sensitized TiO2 photoanode also showed a decreased performance, although it shows a different tendency in CQD loading from the photocathode. The high recombination rate in the device could be attributed to the aggregation of CQDs, which disturbs the contact points by forming clusters at the grain boundary of each CQD. Thus, it is concluded that for better photocurrent density, there should be controlled mass loading of the photosensitizer onto the photoelectrodes.
 Fig. 4  PEC performance of the corresponding photocathode and photoanode materials with an ohmic metal contact with a Pt plate as a counter electrode, a Ag/AgCl electrode as a reference electrode and a 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte under a 100 W m2 Xe lamp. (a) and (b) LSVs under chopped on/off conditions, (c) and (d) IPCE, (e) and (f) Nyquist plots derived from the EIS spectra of both the photocathode and photoanode materials in a three-electrode configuration under the same conditions. All of the potential values were plotted vs. RHE. 
Because CQDs sensitized on photoelectrodes generally suffer from photodecomposition and/or photocorrosion in an aqueous electrolyte under light illumination, a facile SILAR method was used to deposit ultrathin ZnS onto the CQD-sensitized photoelectrodes.57 ZnS can act as a passivation layer to protect the CQDs and improve the water-splitting performance.40 As a result, the ZnS-passivated CQD-sensitized photocathode and photoanode exhibited significantly improved photocurrent densities. The NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS photocathode showed a photocurrent density of – 0.89 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE, whereas the TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS photoanode exhibited an enhanced photocurrent density of 2.05 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE. Besides, the lower onset potential in TiO2/CuSbS2 could be due to type II band alignment between CuSbS2 and TiO2. Here type II band alignment between TiO2 and CuSbS2 allows easy transfer and injection of charge carriers (Scheme 1 and Fig. S11†). On the other hand, ZnS recovers the stability and hence assists in improving the PEC performance, which originated from the defect passivation of Cu–Sb–S based CODs causing reduced recombination and improved charge carrier lifetime. Surface passivation can decrease the onset photocurrent potential, reducing the Fermi level pinning effect at the Helmholtz layer and the combined effect leads to the improvement in the photocurrent density via suppressing the recombination loss in the space charge region.58
The photocurrent contributed by the collected carriers vs. the fraction of photon flux is quantitatively determined from the IPCE. Fig. 4c and d shows the IPCE spectra of bare and sensitized photoelectrodes, which are used to study the photoresponse as a function of incident light wavelength. The IPCE spectra obtained for the two photoelectrodes indicate that the resultant photoresponse is especially due to the CQDs; moreover, the results closely resemble the corresponding UV-Vis spectra of the respective CQDs.35 The bare NiO and TiO2 photoelectrodes showed IPCE values of 8% at 385 nm and 15% at 405 nm respectively, presenting a strong photoresponse in the near-UV region. The modified photoelectrodes demonstrated considerable IPCE over the broad visible region (from 400 to 650 nm) in addition to a strong photoresponse in the near-UV region, where the NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS electrodes show maximum IPCE values of 28% at 385 nm and 37% at 405 nm and increases in the IPCE values at 550 nm of ∼10% and 8%, respectively. The loss in IPCE values over a wavelength of ∼700 nm is attributed to the lower mass loading of Cu–Sb–S QDs onto the photoelectrodes as well as inefficient absorption of photons with energies close to the bandgap.4 The obtained IPCE values are consistent with the trends observed in the UV-Vis absorption spectra (Fig. 3a and b), demonstrating that the holes and electrons photogenerated by the excitation of the Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs contribute to better photocurrent generation. The improved absorption for wavelengths in the spectral region of 300 nm < λ < 600 nm led to increased photoactivity in each electrode and consequently that of photogenerated electrons towards the corresponding NiO and TiO2 photoelectrodes.
Since numerous other factors, such as series resistance (Rs) and charge transfer resistance (Rct), can also affect the PEC performance of photoelectrodes, electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) was used to analyze each photoelectrode. The obtained Nyquist plots, which are shown in Fig. 4e and f, were adequately fitted with an equivalent circuit comprising the electrolyte resistance connected in series with an RC circuit that describes the Rct at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface and the constant phase element (CPE). The equivalent circuit model was best-fitted to Rs and an RC-circuit model, as shown in Fig. S10.† The parameters such as Rs and Rct obtained from the EIS spectra are summarized in Table S1.† As electron–hole (e−–h+) transfer plays a major role to assess the recombination appearing in photoelectrodes, the corresponding charge injection and separation efficiencies are measured (Fig. S11†) and the corresponding values are plotted in Table S2.† The optimized photoelectrodes exhibit higher e−–h+ transfer than the bare material meaning that the sensitization and passivation efficiently enhance the separation efficiency. The CQD-sensitized NiO photocathode and TiO2 photoanode were observed to exhibit smaller Rs and Rct values than the bare NiO and TiO2 photoelectrodes. The CQDs sensitized on the vertically aligned NiO nanosheets and TiO2 nanorod arrays could contribute to the enhanced charge transport properties, which result from the direct charge-diffusion pathways, compared to the nanoparticulate films possessing numerous grain boundaries, which increase the interfacial charge recombination and thus retard the electron transfer to the back-contacted conductive substrate.59 In addition, the mesoporous morphology of NiO is highly beneficial for PEC performance because it not only helps to boost the charge transport but also allows easy permeation of the electrolyte towards the photocathode, thereby enabling a longer electron diffusion length to the electrolyte and efficient electron–hole separation.59 Thus, it is concluded that the CQD-sensitized NiO nanosheet photocathode and TiO2 nanorod photoanode showed predominant charge separation and electron transport pathways due to the favorable band alignment between the CQDs and photoelectrodes.
CQDs possess a shorter distance for the photogenerated electrons and holes to migrate to the active reaction sites on the surface due to their smaller particle size, thereby lowering the recombination probability before water splitting.59 Additionally, the mesoporosity of NiO might be helpful in achieving better PEC performance by increasing the CQD loading on its dynamic surface area.60 The outer layer CQDs could not only segregate the respective carriers but also lower the overall barrier for the corresponding OER and hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) through negative and positive shifts of the onset potential, respectively.35 The decreased PEC performance of the CQD-sensitized photocathode compared to the CQD-sensitized photoanode could also be ascribed to its higher defect density and lower electrical mobility.61 Additionally, H2 and O2 evolution was detected with an in situ gas chromatograph (GC) equipped with a MEMS-based micro thermal conductivity detector (μTCD) using Ar at a pressure of 0.2 MPa as the carrier gas. H2 and O2 were evolved over a period of 150 min, where the collected H2 was about 1.52 μmol at the photocathode and O2 was about ∼5.8 μmol at the photoanode (Fig. 5a). The corresponding faradaic efficiencies were calculated to be ∼74 and 86% for the photocathode and photoanode, respectively. The results show the good capability of the current photoelectrodes in productive water splitting applications.
 Fig. 5  (a) H2 and O2 gas evolution performance of the NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS photocathode and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS photoanode, respectively. (b) Crossover in the current vs. potential curves obtained from a three-electrode system with optimized photoelectrode materials, which shows 0.97 mA cm−2 of current density, corresponding to an STH efficiency of ∼0.28% calculated from the obtained current density and potential values. (c) PEC performance of the tandem electrode system in a two-electrode configuration. The photocurrent density of 1.26 mA cm−2 was generated in unassisted water splitting. (d) Stability measurements of the multi-layered system during unassisted water splitting for 50 min of operation in a two-electrode configuration. Approximately 21% decay in the current density was observed over 50 min. 
Wire-linked photoelectrodes
With the interest and purpose mentioned earlier, we also prepared a wire-linked photoelectrolysis cell based on Z-scheme photoelectrodes consisting of the optimized NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS photocathode and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS photoanode and evaluated it under simulated sunlight. The photocurrent results from light-induced hole transfer from the CQDs into the VB of the p-type NiO photocathode, which is wire-linked to a CuSbS2 CQD-sensitized TiO2 photoanode operating in an inverse mode of light-induced electron transfer from the CQDs into the CB of the n-type TiO2 photoanode. The Z-scheme system introduced here is only to validate the capability of the current electrode design.54 The crossover in the LSV curves obtained by the overlap of the absolute J–V curves for the optimized photoelectrodes measured in a three-electrode system is shown in Fig. 5b. A current density intersection of ∼0.97 mA cm−2 from the measurement of individual photoelectrodes overlaid to each other illustrates a corresponding STH efficiency of ∼0.28% calculated from the obtained current density and potential value and suggests the potential of this system in water-splitting applications.10,62 Furthermore, the J–V curve of the wire-linked photoelectrolysis cell in a tandem configuration was measured by illuminating it from different sides of the photoelectrodes. When the J–V curve was measured by illumination from the photoanode side, the photoelectrolysis cell showed a short-circuit current density (Jsc) of 0.84 mA cm−2 and an open-circuit voltage (Voc) of 0.55 V, which may be obtained from the sum of the individual photovoltages from the photocathode and photoanode, as presented in Fig. 5c. On the other hand, the lower PEC performance with a Jsc of ∼0.29 mA cm−2 and a Voc of 0.26 V obtained, when light is illuminated from the photocathode side is solely attributed to the absorption losses as well as poor transparency of the CQD sensitized NiO photocathode, which could have affected the PEC performance (Fig. S12†).
Finally, the film stability was tested by illuminating with light with an intensity of 100 mW cm2 from an AM 1.5G filter. The stability could be improved with the application of the ZnS passivation layer, which effectively insulates the photoelectrode surface. Fig. 5d shows the stability of the same tandem device measured under short-circuits for a prolonged time of 50 min. A drastic decrease in photocurrent density was observed initially, and then it stabilized at ∼0.69 mA cm−2, retaining ∼82% of its original performance under simulated 1 sun illumination which could be due to slow activation of the ZnS passivation layer during the stability measurements. On the other hand, the device exhibits almost double decay performance devoid of the use of ZnS (Fig. S13†). This indicates that the passivation with a ZnS layer can significantly avoid the corrosion of CQDs sensitized on photoelectrodes and stabilize their performance even under prolonged light illumination.
Charge transport mechanism
Upon illumination, each material in the photocathode and photoanode absorbs photon energy higher than or equal to their respective bandgaps, leading to the separation of photogenerated carriers. NiO/Cu3SbS4 and TiO2/CuSbS2 structured photoelectrodes have shown suitable band alignment, allowing efficient transfer of holes and electrons, as determined by UPS and absorption spectroscopy. Here, the Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs respond to visible light because their band gaps are narrower than those of the corresponding NiO and TiO2 owing to the shallower VBs formed by the S 3p orbitals than those formed by the O 2p orbitals.63 When the photoelectrodes were irradiated with light, the photogenerated electrons and holes are transferred to water molecules, where the electrons reduce water to form H2 at the NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS photocathode and the holes oxidize water to form O2 at the TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS photoanode for water splitting, as described in Scheme 1.
The enhanced performance of each heterostructure is attributed to the VB and CB of Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2, which are ideally placed for efficient charge-pair separation in comparison to those of NiO and TiO2. The band gaps of Cu3SbS4 (1.23 eV) and CuSbS2 (1.44 eV) are narrow enough to absorb a substantial portion of the visible light of the solar spectrum. The hole and electron transfer from CQDs to a wide band-gap semiconductor is sensitively influenced by the difference in VB and CB edge potentials. In this case, Cu3SbS4 with a more negative VB potential has the ability to inject holes into NiO for fabricating a photocathode, and CuSbS2 with a more positive CB potential has the ability to inject electrons into TiO2 for fabricating a photoanode, both of which are due to the improved absorption observed from the absorption and IPCE spectra, leading to higher current density for water redox reactions. Because of the type II band alignment, photo-excited carriers in Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 may effectively dissociate at the NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS interface, whereas the HER, which proceeds through downward band bending, and the OER, which proceeds through upward band bending, occur at the semiconductor–electrolyte interface. It is well known that the Fermi level should be as negative as possible relative to the water reduction potential and as positive as possible relative to the water oxidation potential vs. Evac to achieve the maximum photovoltage.64
The junction between two bilayered semiconductor materials in each electrode causes easy transport of carriers due to the effect of the heterojunction interface and built-in field.27 Moreover, holes from NiO/Cu3SbS4 and electrons from TiO2/CuSbS2 diffuse through NiO and TiO2 to the respective semiconductor surface (back contact), which is typically glass-coated with FTO where it is utilized in the external circuit.50 Then, the accumulation of these majority carriers results in fast recombination with minority carriers, i.e., VB holes and CB electrons, which reduces the overall PEC performance.65 The overall water-splitting efficiency achieved may be due the more favourable charge transfer energy because the bottom of the CB is more positive (vs. Evac) than the reduction potential of H+ to H2 (0.0 V) and the top of the VB is more negative (vs. Evac) than the oxidation potential of H2O to O2 (1.23 V).35 Regarding this two-photon system, in such a Z-scheme water-splitting system, minority carriers, i.e., holes from TiO2/CuSbS2 photoelectrode and electrons from the NiO/Cu3SbS4 photoelectrode, move towards the semiconductor–electrolyte interface to carry out individual half-reactions, whereas the majority carriers, i.e., electrons from TiO2/CuSbS2 and holes from NiO/Cu3SbS4, recombine at the ohmic contact between the semiconductors.66 These individual half-reactions are accompanied by the HER (photoreduction) and OER (water oxidation), whereas Z-schematic water splitting proceeds along with electron transfer from an O2-evolving photocatalyst, i.e., TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS, to a H2-evolving photocatalyst, i.e., NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS. The engineered interface and surface modification help enhance the PEC performance compared to bare NiO and TiO2.
The recombination with the opposite charges, which significantly lowers the water-splitting efficiency, has been avoided using a thin ZnS passivation layer. After ZnS modification, the photoelectrodes maintained their stability and exhibited improved PEC performances compared to those without ZnS. Since the oxidizing power of holes often destabilizes the semiconductor material itself, metal chalcogenides may not be stable in water. Thus, the S2− anion could be more susceptible to oxidation than water, and Cu3SbS4 and/or CuSbS2 themselves could be oxidized and degraded in the water oxidation reaction rather than water, resulting in less O2 and H2 evolution and more photocorrosion. Hence, to achieve photostability and long-term durability, the carrier transportation is controlled by forming a ZnS barrier on the electrode surface, thereby facilitating the charge separation and retarding the charge recombination. The improved performance may depend on numerous factors, including the nanostructures of NiO and TiO2, wide absorption of Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 and suitable band alignment.67 The more positive CB of CQD-sensitized NiO (1.70 eV) and more negative VB of CQD-sensitized TiO2 (7.52 eV) relative to Evac make this photocatalytic H2 and O2 evolution reaction thermodynamically favorable, as discussed above.10
Because of the advantages of the nanomaterials used and their synthetic methods, as well as the advantages of NiO and TiO2, the photoelectrode materials chosen make this system cost-effective and environmentally benign. However, there is much room to improve PEC performance, including photoreaction conditions and environment, overpotential, and photogenerated carrier separation/mobility/lifetime and which is underway.68
Conclusions
The use of DESs as environmentally friendly solvents in a Cu–Sb–S-based CQD synthesis strategy is discussed, and no adverse effects of these DESs can be expected. A synthetic protocol to produce controlled Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs is highly advantageous, providing new opportunities for the use of low-cost and earth-abundant semiconductor materials. In summary, we have established innovative types of sensitized photoelectrodes by grafting DES-mediated synthesized Cu3SbS4 CQDs onto the p-type semiconductor NiO and CuSbS2 CQDs onto the n-type semiconductor TiO2. Further improvement in the photocurrent was achieved by coating a ZnS layer on the CQDs, which acted as a passivation layer by inhibiting the recombination rate at the interface. The PEC investigations revealed improved PEC behavior with corresponding photocurrent densities of approximately 0.89 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE and 2.18 mA cm−2 at 1.23 VRHE for the photocathode and photoanode, respectively. The tandem photoelectrode configurations in an unassisted mode of solar-driven water splitting based on a wire-linked tandem system show ∼0.97 mA cm−2 current density and can split water under zero-bias conditions with an STH efficiency of ∼0.28%. The designed and engineered photoelectrodes exhibit better photocurrent performance and higher stability after visible light exposure for water splitting than other reported photoelectrodes, and we believe that the design and fabrication concepts of the current materials could be applied to a variety of materials in solar energy harvesting.
Experimental details
DES preparation for CQD synthesis
The eutectic mixture of ethaline as a DES was prepared by stirring the two components, choline chloride (ChCl, HOC2H4N+(CH3)3Cl−, 13.96 g) and ethylene glycol (EG, C2H6O2, 13.82 g), in a molar ratio of 1:2 at 60 °C until a homogeneous colourless liquid was formed. This liquid was allowed to cool down and then was used during the next step of CQD synthesis as a solvent media.
Colloidal quantum dot (CQD) synthesis
The reaction mixture was prepared by stirring and heating the above prepared DESs at 80 °C in a three neck round bottom flask along with copper(II) acetate (3 mmol, 0.5449 g), antimony(III) acetate (1 mmol, 0.2989 g) and thioacetamide (4 mmol, 0.3005 g) for Cu3SbS4 CQD synthesis. The flask was formerly evacuated and further kept under argon gas throughout the reaction. The temperature of the reaction was increased up to 120 °C and the reaction mixture was allowed to age for 15 min. After completion of the reaction, the resulting solution was cooled to room temperature, and ethanol was added to collect CQDs, which were then separated by centrifugation. After washing 3 times with the mixture of ethanol and isopropanol, the collected CQDs were allowed to dry in a vacuum oven. The above-mentioned experimental procedure was also followed for the synthesis of CuSbS2 CQDs, except that Cu(II) acetate (1.66 mmol, 0.3015 g) and Sb(III) acetate (1.66 mmol, 0.4962 g) and thioacetamide (4.33 mmol, 0.3253 g) were used and allowed to react at 140 °C for 15 min. The details of the formation of the NiO seed layer, mesoporous 2D NiO nanosheets and 1D TiO2 nanorod thin films, sensitization, passivation and characterization are provided in the ESI.†
During PEC measurement of the two-electrode configuration, the electrodes were kept parallel to each other and illuminated from different sides as per the requirement. A small band gap material is covered by a large band-gap material deposited on FTO in such a manner that solar radiation passes through the large band gap material deposited on FTO towards the small band gap material for further redox reaction. Samples were used as working electrodes with an active area of 0.2 cm2. Detailed information has been provided in the ESI.†
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by a Human Resources Development grant (No. 20164030201310) from the Korea Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) funded by the Korean Government Ministry of Trade, Industry and Energy and was partially supported by the Brain Pool Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT (NRF-2018H1D3A2002154).
References
C. H. Liao, C. W. Huang and J. Wu, Catalysts, 2012, 2, 490–516 CrossRef .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Nature, 1972, 238, 37–38 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Chen, S. Shen, L. Guo and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6503–6570 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Weng, C. R. Grice, J. Ge, T. Poudel, X. Deng and Y. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701655 CrossRef .
B. Seger, I. E. Castelli, P. C. Vesborg, K. W. Jacobsen, O. Hansen and I. Chorkendorff, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2397–2413 RSC .
K. Fan, F. Li, L. Wang, Q. Daniel, E. Gabrielsson and L. Sun, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 25234–25240 RSC .
L. Tong, A. Iwase, A. Nattestad, U. Bach, M. Weidelener, G. Götz, A. Mishra, P. Bäuerle, R. Amal and G. G. Wallace, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9472–9475 RSC .
N. Kornienko, N. A. Gibson, H. Zhang, S. W. Eaton, Y. Yu, S. Aloni, S. R. Leone and P. Yang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5525–5535 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Peerakiatkhajohn, J.-H. Yun, S. Wang and L. Wang, J. Photonics Energy, 2016, 7, 012006 CrossRef .
H. B. Yang, J. Miao, S. F. Hung, F. Huo, H. M. Chen and B. Liu, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10403–10413 CrossRef PubMed .
G. H. Albuquerque, K. J. Kim, J. I. Lopez, A. Devaraj, S. Manandhar, Y. S. Liu, J. Guo, C. H. Chang and G. S. Herman, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8682–8692 RSC .
S. Suehiro, K. Horita, M. Yuasa, T. Tanaka, K. Fujita, Y. Ishiwata, K. Shimanoe and T. Kida, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 7840–7845 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Vinayakumar, S. Shaji, D. Avellaneda, T. D. Roy, G. Castillo, J. Martinez and B. Krishnan, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 164, 19–27 CrossRef .
R. B. Balow, C. K. Miskin, M. M. Abu-Omar and R. Agrawal, Chem. Mater., 2016, 29, 573–578 CrossRef .
C. L. McCarthy, P. Cottingham, K. Abuyen, E. C. Schueller, S. P. Culver and R. L. Brutchey, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6230–6233 RSC .
L. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Li, C. Li, R. Zhang, J. J. Delaunay and H. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2016, 28, 135–142 CrossRef .
U. Ghorpade, M. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, K. Gurav, P. Patil, S. Pawar, C. W. Hong, J. H. Kim and S. Kolekar, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 11258–11273 RSC .
M. Suryawanshi, S. W. Shin, U. Ghorpade, D. Song, C. W. Hong, S.-S. Han, J. Heo, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4695–4709 RSC .
D. V. Wagle, H. Zhao and G. Baker, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2299–2308 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Querejeta-Fernández, J. C. Hernández-Garrido, H. Yang, Y. Zhou, A. Varela, M. Parras, J. J. Calvino-Gámez, J. M. González-Calbet, P. F. Green and N. A. Kotov, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3800–3812 CrossRef PubMed .
O. S. Hammond, K. J. Edler, D. T. Bowron and L. Torrente-Murciano, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14150 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Cvjetko Bubalo, S. Vidović, I. Radojčić Redovniković and S. Jokić, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2015, 90, 1631–1639 CrossRef .
D. Wang, H. Zhao, N. Wu, M. A. El Khakani and D. Ma, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1030–1035 CrossRef .
R. R. Su, Y.-X. Yu, Y.-H. Xiao, X. Yang and W.-D. Zhang, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43, 6040–6048 CrossRef .
Y. C. Choi, E. J. Yeom, T. K. Ahn and S. I. Seok, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4005–4009 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Liu, J. Huang, J. Han, T. Hong, J. Zhang and Z. Liu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 16615–16620 RSC .
S. Choudhary, S. Upadhyay, P. Kumar, N. Singh, V. R. Satsangi, R. Shrivastav and S. Dass, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2012, 37, 18713–18730 CrossRef .
J. Zhang, M. Zhang, C. Yang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4121–4126 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Weng, W. Wei, H. Wu, A. M. Alenizi and G. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15353–15360 RSC .
J. van Embden and Y. Tachibana, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11466–11469 RSC .
K. Ramasamy, H. Sims, W. H. Butler and A. Gupta, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 1587–1598 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ramasamy, H. Sims, W. H. Butler and A. Gupta, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 2891–2899 CrossRef .
S. Bahrani, Z. Razmi, M. Ghaedi, A. Asfaram and H. Javadian, Ultrason. Sonochem., 2018, 42, 776–786 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu and E. S. Aydil, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3985–3990 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, X. B. Li, Y. J. Gao, Z. J. Li, Q. Y. Meng, C. H. Tung and L. Z. Wu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1443–1449 RSC .
M. El-Kemary, N. Nagy and I. El-Mehasseb, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2013, 16, 1747–1752 CrossRef .
H. Wu, H. Li, J. Li, B. Lu, Y. Yang, W. Yuan, Y. Wang and Z. Zhang, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 7254–7257 RSC .
A. Eftekhari, V. J. Babu and S. Ramakrishna, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 11078–11109 CrossRef .
J. Li and N. Wu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 1360–1384 RSC .
S. Y. Chae, S. J. Park, S. G. Han, H. Jung, C. W. Kim, C. Jeong, O. S. Joo, B. K. Min and Y. J. Hwang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15673–15681 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Rakshit, S. Ghosh, S. Chall, S. S. Mati, S. Moulik and S. C. Bhattacharya, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 19348–19356 RSC .
L. Liu, J. Qian, B. Li, Y. Cui, X. Zhou, X. Guo and W. Ding, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 2402–2404 RSC .
C. Yan, Z. Su, E. Gu, T. Cao, J. Yang, J. Liu, F. Liu, Y. Lai, J. Li and Y. Liu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 10481–10484 RSC .
S. W. Shin, M. Suryawanshi, H. K. Hong, G. Yun, D. Lim, J. Heo, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 219, 470–481 CrossRef .
M. P. Suryawanshi, U. V. Ghorpade, S. W. Shin, U. P. Suryawanshi, H. J. Shim, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, Small, 2018, 14, 1801226 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Dini, Y. Halpin, J. G. Vos and E. A. Gibson, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2015, 304, 179–201 CrossRef .
A. Imanishi, E. Tsuji and Y. Nakato, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2128–2132 CrossRef .
P. Schulz, S. R. Cowan, Z. L. Guan, A. Garcia, D. C. Olson and A. Kahn, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 701–706 CrossRef .
T. G. Kim, H. Choi, S. Jeong and J. W. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 27884–27889 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, Y. Chen, P. Jiang, G. Wang, X. Wu, R. Wu and C. Zhang, Chem.–Asian J., 2015, 10, 1660–1667 CrossRef PubMed .
M. P. Suryawanshi, U. V. Ghorpade, S. W. Shin, M. G. Gang, X. Wang, H. Park, S. H. Kang and J. H. Kim, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 8077–8089 CrossRef .
J. van Embden, K. Latham, N. W. Duffy and Y. Tachibana, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11562–11571 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhang, L. Li, D. Li and Q. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 1496–1499 CrossRef .
D. Kang, J. L. Young, H. Lim, W. E. Klein, H. Chen, Y. Xi, B. Gai, T. G. Deutsch and J. Yoon, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 17043 CrossRef .
Y. Dong, R. Wu, P. Jiang, G. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Wu and C. Zhang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2015, 3, 2429–2434 CrossRef .
P. Meng, M. Wang, Y. Yang, S. Zhang and L. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18852–18859 RSC .
J. Su, Y. Wei and L. Vayssieres, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 5228–5238 CrossRef PubMed .
T. H. Wang, Y.-J. Cheng, Y.-Y. Wu, C.-A. Lin, C.-C. Chiang, Y.-K. Hsieh, C. F. Wang and C. Huang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 29300–29307 RSC .
S. Y. Tee, K. Y. Win, W. S. Teo, L. D. Koh, S. Liu, C. P. Teng and M. Y. Han, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600337 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. B. Zhang and Z. G. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 3443–3446 RSC .
C. J. Flynn, S. M. McCullough, E. Oh, L. Li, C. C. Mercado, B. H. Farnum, W. Li, C. L. Donley, W. You, A. J. Nozik, J. R. McBride, T. J. Meyer, Y. Kanai and J. F. Cahoon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 4754–4761 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Dotan, N. Mathews, T. Hisatomi, M. Grätzel and A. Rothschild, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3330–3334 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Iwashina, A. Iwase, Y. H. Ng, R. Amal and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 604–607 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Jang, C. Du, Y. Ye, Y. Lin, X. Yao, J. Thorne, E. Liu, G. McMahon, J. Zhu, A. Javey, J. Guo and D. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7447 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Park, H.-i. Kim, G.-h. Moon and W. Choi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 411–433 RSC .
A. J. Nozik, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1977, 30, 567–569 CrossRef .
P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 908–918 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhang, T. Peng and S. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 2365–2402 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta05901b‡ U. V. Ghorpade and M. P. Suryawanshi contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Overall unassisted water-splitting mechanism of PEC H2 and O2 generation using the NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS photocathode and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS photoanode along with their respective energy levels and electron–hole-transfer processes occurring in a tandem configuration.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) and (b) HR-TEM images of the as-synthesized Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 CQDs along with low-magnification TEM images in the insets, respectively. (c)–(f) Surface and cross-sectional FE-SEM images and (g) and (h) TEM images of the NiO nanosheets and TiO2 nanorods, respectively. The insets of (g) and (h) are the SAED patterns of the corresponding materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Surface (top view) and (b) cross-sectional FE-SEM images of the Cu3SbS4 CQD-sensitized NiO photocathode. (c) and (d) TEM and HR-TEM images of the Cu3SbS4 CQD-sensitized NiO photocathode. The inset of (c) is the SAED pattern of the interface between the Cu3SbS4 CQDs and the NiO photocathode. (e) Surface (top view) and (f) cross-sectional FE-SEM images of the CuSbS2 CQD-sensitized TiO2 photoanode. (g) and (h) TEM and HR-TEM images of the CuSbS2 CQD-sensitized TiO2 photoanode. The inset of (c) is the SAED pattern of the interface between the CuSbS2 CQDs and the TiO2 photoanode.	 
ϕ = hυ − (SECO − Ef)	(1)

 	Fig. 3  UV-Vis absorption spectra of (a) NiO and TiO2 and (b) NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS. (c) UPS spectra of the NiO, TiO2, Cu3SbS4 and CuSbS2 materials. The inset of (c) shows the semi-logarithmic plots of the cut-off of the secondary photoelectron regions with He I excitation energy (21.22 eV). (d) Semi-logarithmic plots of UPS spectra near the Fermi level and each VB edge position.	 

 	Fig. 4  PEC performance of the corresponding photocathode and photoanode materials with an ohmic metal contact with a Pt plate as a counter electrode, a Ag/AgCl electrode as a reference electrode and a 0.1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte under a 100 W m2 Xe lamp. (a) and (b) LSVs under chopped on/off conditions, (c) and (d) IPCE, (e) and (f) Nyquist plots derived from the EIS spectra of both the photocathode and photoanode materials in a three-electrode configuration under the same conditions. All of the potential values were plotted vs. RHE.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) H2 and O2 gas evolution performance of the NiO/Cu3SbS4/ZnS photocathode and TiO2/CuSbS2/ZnS photoanode, respectively. (b) Crossover in the current vs. potential curves obtained from a three-electrode system with optimized photoelectrode materials, which shows 0.97 mA cm−2 of current density, corresponding to an STH efficiency of ∼0.28% calculated from the obtained current density and potential values. (c) PEC performance of the tandem electrode system in a two-electrode configuration. The photocurrent density of 1.26 mA cm−2 was generated in unassisted water splitting. (d) Stability measurements of the multi-layered system during unassisted water splitting for 50 min of operation in a two-electrode configuration. Approximately 21% decay in the current density was observed over 50 min.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta05901b
‡ U. V. Ghorpade and M. P. Suryawanshi contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
