Nanostructured materials for photocatalysis  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00102F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00102F
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3868-3902Nanostructured materials for photocatalysis

        
          
            Chunping 
            Xu†
a, 
      
        
          
            Prasaanth 
            Ravi Anusuyadevi†
*b, 
      
        
          
            Cyril 
            Aymonier
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rafael 
            Luque
          
          
        
      cd and 

        
          
            Samuel 
            Marre
          
          
        
      *b
aSchool of Food and Biological Engineering, Zhengzhou University of Light Industry, Dongfeng Road 5, Zhengzhou, Henan 450002, P. R. China
bCNRS, Univ. Bordeaux, Bordeaux INP, ICMCB, UMR5026, 33600 Pessac, France. E-mail: ranu.prasaanth@gmail.com; samuel.marre@icmcb.cnrs.fr
cDepartamento de Quimica Organica, Universidad de Cordoba, Campus de Rabanales, Edificio Marie Curie (C-3), Ctra Nnal IV-A, Km 396, E14014, Cordoba, Spain. E-mail: rafael.luque@uco.es
dPeoples Friendship University of Russia (RUDN University), 6 Miklukho Maklaya str., 117198, Moscow, Russia
Received 
      1st February 2019
    First published on 7th June 2019AbstractPhotocatalysis is a green technology which converts abundantly available photonic energy into useful chemical energy. With a rapid rise of flow photoreactors in the last decade, the design and development of novel semiconductor photocatalysts is happening at a blistering rate. Currently, developed synthetic approaches have allowed the design of diverse modified/unmodified semiconductor materials exhibiting enhanced performances in heterogeneous photocatalysis. In this review, we have classified the so far reported highly efficient modified/unmodified semiconductor photocatalysts into four different categories based on the elemental composition, band gap engineering and charge carrier migration mechanism in composite photocatalysts. The recent synthetic developments are reported for each novel semiconductor photocatalyst within the four different categories, namely: pure semiconductors, solid solutions, type-II heterojunction nanocomposites and Z-scheme. The motivation behind the synthetic upgrading of modified/unmodified (pure) semiconductor photocatalysts along with their particular photochemical applications and photoreactor systems have been thoroughly reviewed.
Chunping Xu
Chunping Xu obtained his bachelor's degree in 2000 from the Department of Life Science, Henan Normal University, China, and master's degree in 2003 from the Department of Biotechnology, Daegu University, Korea. After his graduation, he worked as a researcher in the Department of Biological Functions and Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan. In 2005, he joined the University of Groningen, Faculty of Medicine, The Netherlands, where he finished his PhD studies in 2008 from the Department of Biomedical Engineering. Then, he went to work as a scientist in Philip Morris International R&D, Switzerland. Since 2010, he has been working in the School of Food and Biological Engineering, Zhengzhou University of Light Industry, China, as a professor. Dr Xu has a wide experience in natural products, biotransformation and food processing. He has produced more than 150 publications in journals with high impact factors.
Prasaanth Ravi Anusuyadevi
Prasaanth Ravi Anusuyadevi was a PhD research Fellow and Marie Curie Early Stage Researcher in the field of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering. He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Bordeaux in 2018. Formerly, finished his Masters in Chemical Engineering at Technical University of Delft (TUD), Netherlands, with specialization in Molecular Engineering in 2015. He received his Bachelors in Chemical Engineering from Anna University, India in 2012. His research work focuses on the synthesis of luminescent colloidal nanocrystals (Quantum Dots (QDs)), multifunctional nanocomposites and transition metal complexes and their applications in lighting devices, heterogeneous photocatalysis, catalysis and new type of colorants based on structural color.
Cyril Aymonier
Cyril Aymonier is CNRS senior researcher at the “Institut de Chimie de la Matière Condensée de Bordeaux (ICMCB)”. He obtained his PhD in chemical engineering from the University of Bordeaux (2000) where he focused on supercritical water oxidation of wastewater. He did a postdoctoral stay in Freiburg (2000–2002, Germany) where he developed novel approaches to design hybrid organic/inorganic nanoparticles. Now he is the head of the Supercritical Fluids department of ICMCB. His current research interests are in the chemistry and processes in supercritical fluids applied to materials science and environment.
Rafael Luque
Rafael Luque (Dpt. Quimica Organica, Universidad de Cordoba) has a significant experience on biomass and waste valorisation practises to materials, fuels and chemicals as well as nanoscale chemistry and green engineering. Prof. Luque has published over 400 research articles (>20000 citations, h-index 70), filed 4 patent applications and edited 10 books as well as numerous contributions to book chapters and invited, guest, keynote and plenary lectures in scientific events worldwide. Prof. Luque is Editor-in-chief of Molecular Catalysis (Elsevier) and also member of the Editorial Advisory Board of prestigious International Journals (>10). Prof. Luque was named 2018 Highly Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics, being currently Director of the Center for Molecular Design and Synthesis of Innovative Compounds for Medicine from RUDN University in Moscow, Russia.
Samuel Marre
Samuel Marre is a CNRS researcher at the Institute of Condensed Matter Chemistry of Bordeaux (ICMCB). He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Bordeaux in 2006, before joining the Jensen Lab at MIT as a postdoctoral associate from 2006 to 2008, working on high pressure microsystems. His researches focus on developing and using high pressure microreactors for various applications including confined compressible fluid thermo-hydrodynamics, materials syntheses, and micromodels investigation of CO2 geological storage and bio-geo-conversion for its valorization.
Introduction
Photocatalysis is a multidisciplinary field combining physics, chemistry, materials science and chemical engineering pushing the boundaries for many decades for more effective light utilisation and harvesting to promote chemical reactions. The amalgamation of various research fields within photocatalysis spurred exponentially due to the synthesis of multitudinous products, environmental reforming and production of clean hydrogen (H2) fuel and CO2 conversion among others.1–4 Photocatalysis exhibits several key advantages over conventional catalytic processes involving tedious steps, high temperatures and pressures and using transition metal catalysts.5,6
The implementation of process engineering strategies into photocatalysis pointed out that heterogeneous photocatalysis is preferable to homogeneous in most cases, due to the facile separation of products, higher stability and easier recyclability of photocatalysts. Heterogeneous photocatalysis typically involves photoinduced chemical reaction on the surface of semiconductor materials (photocatalyst) upon exposure to photons.
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) stood as the main facet of heterogeneous photocatalysis during the past decades, among all semiconductor photocatalysts available.7,8 This was mainly due to its high photocatalytic efficiency and several advantages: stability under extreme conditions, appropriate band edge potentials, etc. The pivotal motive of our work is to provide an overview of various alternative semiconductor heterogeneous photocatalysts, considered so far and to categorize them into groups depending on their composition and methodology of application. The different classes of photocatalysts – along with their applications in photochemical reactions – mentioned in this review start with binary and ternary semiconductors (SCs) and end up in detailing more prominent aspects of nanocomposite photocatalysts, generated by the conjunction of binary, ternary and other semiconductor materials. This contribution aims to consolidate the different semiconductor systems, the rationale behind their design or indicate the particular photochemical reactions for which their performances were higher compared to other SCs, along with the type of photoreactor systems in which the photocatalysts were implemented. Obviously, we did not aim to address all the semiconductors here, but a rather intensive focus is made on the most efficient systems. Alternatively, this review addresses the current updated synthetic routes for obtaining such requisite SCs and furnish the description of the polyphasic photocatalytic reactors in which they have been studied. In the past decades manifold of synthetic strategies were reported in modifying the photocatalysts for performing different photochemistries or rendering them active in visible region/any part of the electromagnetic spectrum. These novel attempts emanated into wide range of photocatalytic systems. The progressive motif in the development of semiconductor materials in the regime of sensitized photoreactions has led us to classify them into four different families or categories (see Fig. 1).
 Fig. 1  Classification of semiconductor photocatalysts into four different families. 
Binary semiconductor photocatalysts
Synthetic methods of binary SCs have enhanced their photocatalytic performances by achieving monodispersity and unique morphologies with high specific surface area. Diverse nanomaterials with well-defined surface properties are present in different binary SCs, as described in Fig. 2. The intrinsic parameters of the synthesis, nature of the nanomaterials synthesized as result of such reactive domains along with their corresponding photocatalytic applications have been summarized in Table 1.
 Fig. 2  Flowchart summarizing the various binary semiconductor nano photocatalysts reported in this review. 
Table 1 Summary of binary SC photocatalysts’ synthetic strategies with the background of photochemical reactions studied. PC: photocatalyst




PC
Synthetic methods
Precursors
Size of PC
Photochemical reaction
Illumination source
Photoreactor
Ref.




TiO2
Flame spray pyrolysis
C12H28O4Ti, C8H10 and C2H3N.
11–21 nm (3.1–3.3 eV)
Mineralization of sucrose
Blue lamp (15 W), (λ = 300–400 nm)
Spiral slurry flow photoreactor

9



ZnO
Precipitation and calcination
ZnC4H6O4, C2nH4n+2On+1 and (NH4)2CO3.
20 nm
Degradation of methyl orange (MO)
UV lamp (λ = 250–400 nm)
Hollow cylindrical batch reactor

16



ZrO2
Hydrothermal and calcination yielding nanoflowers of ZrO2
Zr(SO4)2 and CH3COONa
400 nm and petal thickness about 20 nm.
Degradation of rhodamine B (RhB)
300 W high pressure mercury lamp (λ > 365 nm)
Cylindrical vessel, with inner irradiation system

12



CeO2
Hydrothermal reaction followed by calcination
CeCl2 and NH4OH
15–36 nm (4.16 eV)
Degradation of amido black and acridine orange
250 W high pressure mercury lamp (UV range)
Glass vessel

18



ZnS
Thermal decomposition route
ZnC4H6O4, CH4N2S, C2H6O2 and (C6H9NO)n.
60 nm (3.6 eV)
Photodegradation of eosin B
125 W high pressure mercury lamp
Cylindrical pyrex cell

24



CdS
Thermal sulfidation process
Cd(CH3COO)2 and dry H2S gas.
100–300 nm (2.38 eV)
Hydrogen evolution from water splitting
350 W xenon lamp (λ > 430 nm)
Pyrex vessel with side irradiation

28



CdSe
Solvothermal method
Cd2Cl2O8, C2H6OS and NaHSe.
1.75–4.81 nm (3.11–1.89 eV)
Hydrogen production from water splitting
300 W xenon arc lamp (λ > 320 nm)
Borosilicate flask

31



GaN
Metal organic chemical vapour deposition yielding nanowires
Ga(CH3)3 and NH3
20–50 nm in diameter, 4–6 μm in length. (3.4 eV)
Decolouration of orange II
200 W mercury lamp (λ ≥ 300 nm)
Batch reactor

34



Ta3N5
Alkali metal treatment coupled with ammonolysis
Ta2O5, NaCl, NH3, KCl and K2CO3
Average size: 80 nm (2.1 eV)
Oxygen evolution from water oxidation
300 W xenon lamp visible (λ > 420 nm)
Pyrex reactor with top irradiation type arrangement

40



CuS
Chemical dealloying method yielding nanoporous globular clusters
Ti–Cu amorphous ribbon and H2SO4
Clusters of 500 nm size and 40 nm thickness (1.6–1.7 eV)
Degeneration of methylene blue (MB) and MO
500 W xenon lamp, illumination intensity was 0.01 W cm−2
Quartz cell

27





Oxides-based binary photocatalysts
Teoh et al. synthesized TiO2 nanoparticles by Flame Spray Pyrolysis (FSP) method (Fig. 3a and b), which displayed higher activity for sucrose photo-mineralization than the commercially available Degussa P25.9
 Fig. 3  (a) FSP reactor utilized for the continuous synthesis of TiO2 photocatalyst,11 more active than the commercial Degussa P25 synthesized by flame aerosol technique. (b) HR-TEM image of TiO2 Nanocrystals (NCs) synthesized using the FSP reactor.9 ((a) Reprint with permission from L. Mädler, H. K. Kammler, R. Mueller, and S. E. Pratsinis, Controlled synthesis of nanostructured particles by flame spray pyrolysis, J. Aerosol Sci., 2002, 33, 369–389 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reprint with permission from W. Y. Teoh, L. Mädler, D. Beydoun, S. E. Pratsinis and R. Amal, Direct (one-step) synthesis of TiO2 and Pt/TiO2 nanoparticles for photocatalytic mineralisation of sucrose, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 5852–5861, Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
Direct FSP technique yielded nanomaterials with well-regulated specific surface area and morphology; high purity of crystallite phases without the requirement of post treatment processes (precipitations and centrifugations, etc.). Different particle sizes were obtained by varying the flow rate of precursors to the flame spray reactor, portrayed in Fig. 2a. Subsequently, Teoh et al. published a detailed review on the successful attempt of FSP for synthesizing diverse binary nanophotocatalysts (ZnO, WO3, etc.), doped binary SCs, noble metal loaded systems and mixed complex metal oxide nanocomposites (NCs).10
Zhanxia et al. synthesized peculiar nano-flower (stratified 3D-flower like nanostructures with 2D building block) shaped zirconia (ZrO2). Their precursor selection (ZOS – zirconium oxide sulphate & sodium acetate) and their synthetic strategy (hydrothermal + calcination) furnished the required 3D-nanoflowers. This peculiar ZrO2 nanoflower (with a lower specific surface area than the ZrO2 nanoparticles) discloses enhanced photocatalytic performance for dye degradation than the tetragonal ZrO2 nanoparticles (NPs) with higher surface area. The higher activity observed was due to their superior absorbance of photons, as depicted in the absorption spectrum of Fig. 4b.
 Fig. 4  (a) FE-SEM image of nanoflower shaped ZrO2. (b) UV-vis absorption spectrum depicting the enhanced absorption behaviour of the flower shaped nanostructures of ZrO2 compared to the tetragonal ZrO2 NPs.12 ((a and b) Reprint with permission from Z. Shu, X. Jiao and D. Chen, Synthesis and photocatalytic properties of flower-like zirconia nanostructures, CrystEngComm., 2012, 14, 1122–1127, Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry). 
The enhanced absorption behaviour stems from the specially exposed facets (100) of the petals present in the graded nanoflower structures.12 Nano-ZrO2 outperforms several binary nanophotocatalysts (zinc oxide (ZnO) and cerium oxide (CeO2)) for disparate chemical reactions due to its high negative conduction band (CB) edge potential and wider optical band gaps for different crystalline phases, cubic (3.8 eV), tetragonal (4.11 eV) and monoclinic (4.51 eV).13–15 The photochemistry explored so far on both ZnO and CeO2 were carried out on nanomaterials synthesized in batch mode by hydrothermal process or by simple precipitation techniques.16–18 However, due to the rapid development of supercritical fluid flow processes, the synthesis yielded ZnO and CeO2 nanomaterials with well-defined properties for photocatalysis.19,20
Chalcogenides-based binary photocatalysts
Across the realm of heterogeneous photocatalysts, binary chalcogenides were assessed on equal intensity as binary oxide SCs. Zinc sulfide (ZnS) and cadmium sulfide (CdS) nanophotocatalysts were tremendously researched in the last four decades for their successful applications, not only in environmental purification reactions but also for the reduction of carbon dioxide (CO2), aldehydes, water splitting and reductive dehalogenation of benzene derivatives. Especially, ZnS was focused a lot, due to their wider energy band gap of about 3.2–4.4 eV21 (largest among the binary chalcogenides of group II–VI22) and its facile phase control of ZnS nanocrystals.23 A simple, robust production of ZnS nanoporous nanoparticles (NPNPs) via the solution phase thermal decomposition technique in the presence of N-vinylpyrrolidinone (PVP) was reported by Hu et al. These ZnS NPNPs photocatalysts outperformed commercial TiO2 in degrading eosin B dye.24 They do not require any post treatment process as required by ZnS photocatalyst (synthesized by continuous process) for improving their activity.25 The higher photocatalytic activity of ZnS NPNPs, stems from their high monodispersity and spherically uniform shape. Each sphere of ZnS is an aggregate of hexagonal ZnS nanocrystals (NCs) of 3–5 nm formed as a result of self-assembly process as depicted in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of ZnS NPNPs. (b) SEM image of spherical nanoporous ZnS. (c) HR-TEM of ZnS NPNPs with electron diffraction of nanostructures in the inset of the figure. (d) HR-TEM depicting the lattice fringes of ZnS NCs, which undergoes self-assembly process to form the nanoporous ZnS spheres.24 ((a, b, c and d) Reprint with permission from J.-S. Hu, et al., Mass Production and High Photocatalytic Activity of ZnS Nanoporous Nanoparticles, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1269–1273, Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Son). 
Identically, the synthesis of hollow spherical CdS and hollow nanoporous copper sulfide (CuS) were reported by Luo et al.26 and Xu et al.,27 respectively. Jing et al. introduced the thermal sulfidation technique replacing the traditional synthetic methodology of precipitation and subsequent heat treatment for obtaining nanosized CdS photocatalysts. The thermal sulfidation technique lowers the phase transformation and crystallization temperature of CdS compared to the other synthetic routes.28 CdS from this technique possesses nano-step arrangement on its surface, exhibited enhanced stability against both air oxidation and photocorrosion during the photocatalytic process. It manifested larger activity for H2 generation than the conventionally synthesized CdS nanomaterial. CdS-based photocatalytic systems profoundly displayed exalted performances for the production of solar-fuel and environmental remediation processes because of its narrow band gap (2.38 eV) and higher negative conduction potential than the reduction potential of H2O/H2.26,28,29 Likewise, cadmium selenide (CdSe) based nanophotocatalytic system was also acutely implemented in water splitting for hydrogen (H2) production, inspite of its narrow bulk band gap (1.74 eV). Enhanced photocatalysis of nano CdSe for H2 generation stems from its high magnitude of surface electron charge density and strong quantum confinement behaviour. Wherein precise variation of size of CdSe NCs tunes the energy band gaps providing the appropriate band edge (redox) potentials for photocatalysis.30 A strong relationship between the photocatalytic H2 production and various size of CdSe NCs (1.75–4.81 nm) synthesized by solvothermal method was reported by Holmes et al.31
Nitrides-based binary photocatalysts
Compared to binary oxides/chalcogenides, the exploration of binary nitrides as photocatalysts emerged only in the last two decades. Gallium nitride (GaN) inspection as a photocatalyst started after its immense success in sensing fields due to high mechanical strength and chemical stability (at various pH) compared to other binary SCs.32 The first case of GaN photocatalysis for water splitting reaction implementing powdered GaN was reported by Kida et al.33 Following which, the synthesis of GaN SC in the form of nanowires exhibiting higher activity for photodegradation of organic dyes compared to the submicron GaN dot arrays and thin films was reported by Jung et al.34 Tantalum nitride (Ta3N5) is an interesting, auspicious, transition metal binary nitride SC used for solar water splitting, due to its narrow direct band gap (2.1 eV) and suitable band edge potentials.35–38 For the degradation of dye (methylene blue) under visible light, Ta3N5 exhibits higher photocatalytic activity than visible light active nitrogen doped titania nanomaterials.39 Ma et al. developed a synthetic strategy where they coupled alkali metal treated tantalum oxide precursor with ammonolysis process yielding highly crystallized Ta3N5 nanomaterials, which evinces six times higher photocatalytic activity for water oxidation reaction than Ta3N5 nanomaterials synthesized by other techniques.40
Graphite-like carbon nitride (g-C3N4) is also a direct visible light active SC (2.7 eV).41 Unlike other SCs, g-C3N4 is a non-metallic conjugated stable polymer, n-type organic SC composed of earth abundant compounds (carbon and nitrogen). It possesses distinctive optical, structural and electronic properties optimum for photocatalytic processes.42 g-C3N4 implementation in photocatalysis was first demonstrated by Wang et al. for water splitting under visible light irradiation.43 A number of additional studies were subsequently carried out on the synthesis and development of g-C3N4-based photocatalysts for applications in solar fuel generation, bacterial disinfection, pollutants degradation and organic transformations.44–53 Dong et al. recently reported the synthesis of novel g-C3N4via thermal polymerization using sodium nitrate as oxidizing agent. As-synthesized g-C3N4 were able to degrade tylosin (TYL) (antibiotics) within 30 min under simulated sunlight irradiation. The activity was several times higher as compared to conventional g-C3N4 photocatalysts. The increase in activity was attributed to the alteration of the g-C3N4 crystal structure (induced by sodium nitrate) and a red shift in the visible light absorption range.54 To conclude, we have briefly exposed in this section some notable binary photocatalysts and their recent synthetic improvements. For traditional photocatalysts, the synthetic methodologies have been developed rapidly and now continuous synthetic techniques are available to synthesize photocatalysts at very high yield, as seen in the cases of TiO2 or ZnO. Concerning the unconventional binary photocatalysts like GaN or CuS, the synthetic methodologies55 are specially studied to tune their photocatalytic activities not as deeply investigated to date as compared to conventionally synthesized systems.
Ternary photocatalysts
Ternary oxide/chalcogenide SCs comprise two different metallic cations and a single anion. These have been significantly studied in the heterogeneous photocatalytic field because of their stable nature and ability to promote various chemistries as compared to binary SCs. The photocatalysts reviewed in this section can be grouped into different categories according to their composition and crystalline structure as depicted in Fig. 6. Table 2 summarizes the synthesis and details of photocatalytic process of ternary SCs which are reported here.
 Fig. 6  Flow chart of the diverse ternary semiconductor photocatalysts reviewed in this article. 
Table 2 Summary of nano-ternary semiconductor photocatalysts’ synthetic strategies with the background of photochemical reactions studied. TS: photocatalyst (ternary semiconductor)




TS
Synthetic methods
Precursors
Size of TS
Photochemical reaction
Illumination source
Photoreactor
Ref.




SrTiO3
Hydrothermal method
[CH3CH(O-)CO2NH4]2Ti(OH)2, [Sr(OH)2·8H2O] and NaOH
20–40 nm in diameter (3.2 eV)
Degradation of nitric oxide (NO) gas
UV light source: 450 W high pressure mercury lamp
Continuous flow sealed opaque reactor with glass plate

66



LiTaO3
Hydrothermal (nanorods) and solvothermal (nanoparticles (NPs)) methods
TaCl5, LiOH·H2O, H2O2, NH3, CH3OH and C3H6O
Nanorods 20 nm diameter and length of 2–10 μm. NPs of 10–50 nm (4.6–4.7 eV)
Water splitting reaction
450 W high pressure mercury lamp, UV light source
Inner radiation cell made up of quartz

69



NaTaO3
Hydrothermal method
Ta2O5, NaOH and deionized water
About 200 nm (3.96 eV)
Decomposition of gaseous formaldehyde and RhB solution under UV irradiation
8 W bactericidal lamp, (λ > 254 nm, 2.5 mW cm−2)
Cylindrical quartz cell

77



KTaO3
Solvothermal method
KOH, Ta2O5, C6H14, H2O and C2H5OH
15–50 nm (3.7 eV)
Photoreduction of CO2 in water
300 W xenon arc lamp (λ = 280–350 nm)
Borosilicate glass reactor

84



AgNbO3
Molten salt flux synthesis method
Ag2O, Nb2O5 and Na2SO4
100–5000 nm (2.75–2.81 eV)
H2 production from aqueous methanol solution
External 400 W xenon arc-lamp equipped with a long pass cut off filter (λ > 420 nm)
Outer irradiation type fused-silica reaction cell with 90 mL volume

89



CaIn2O4
Combustion synthesis
Ca(NO3)2, InN3O9 and C2H5NO2
Approximately 90 nm
Decomposition of MB, toluene oxidation and water decomposition
300 W xenon arc lamp fitted with UV cut off filter
Pyrex cell

97



α-AgGaO2
Cation exchange method
NaGaO2, AgNO3 and KNO3
200–1000 nm (2.4 eV)
Decomposition of isopropanol (IPA) under UV or visible light.
Xenon lamp with glass filters
Glass vessel with a quartz lid

108



BiVO4
Hydrothermal method
NH4VO3, Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and HNO3
49–490 nm (2.39–2.47 eV)
O2 evolution from an aqueous AgNO3 solution
300 W xenon lamp with cut off filter for visible light (λ > 420 nm)
Closed gas circulation system fitted with pyrex made reaction cell

116



AgInS2
Co-precipitation strategy
AgNO3, C2H6O2, Na2SO4, C3H7OH and InCl3·4H2O
Avg. pore size 14.79 nm (1.61 eV)
Degradation of 2-nitrophenol (2NP) under visible irradiation.
(λ > 420 nm)
Batch vessel with magnetic stirring

149



CuGaS2
Colloidal synthesis method using hot injection technique
Cu(S2CNEt2)2 and Ga(S2CNEt2)3
Nanorods with length about 189 nm and width around 8 nm (2.52 eV)
Degradation of RhB
500 W halolite lamp (λ > 430 nm)
Glass vial

152





Ternary oxide photocatalysts

Perovskite photocatalysts (ABO3 types). 
Perovskite oxide (cubic crystal structure) SCs, with the general formula ABO3 are most propitious photocatalysts studied in the field. Here the terms A & B refer to different metallic cations. Predominantly, the ‘A’ cation is either alkali or alkaline or rare earth metal element whereas the ‘B’ cation is regularly a transition metal element, whose size is smaller than the A cation. Strontium titanate (SrTiO3) finds immense application in heterogeneous photocatalysis & thermoelectric fields due to their thermal stability, high photocorrosion resistance and facile capacity to precisely tune its physical & chemical properties depending on its composition.56 Such tunability makes SrTiO3 a nice n-type semiconductor at room temperature via simple electrodonation or doping strategies. SrTiO3 (3.2 eV)57 photocatalyst works effectively for absolute mineralization or degradation of organic pollutants under UV irradiation,58–61 enhanced water splitting reaction with a metal co-catalyst loaded on its surface57,62 and ammonia production/decomposition reactions.63 The standard solid state synthetic method of nano SrTiO3 photocatalysts requires elevated temperature but it suffers from polydispersed size distribution and reduced specific surface area. In the last decade, this synthetic process was replaced by hydrothermal,59 sol–gel64 and solvothermal method.65 Mariko et al. reported that SrTiO3 NPs synthesized by the lower temperature hydrothermal technique exhibited enhanced degradation of nitric oxide (NO) gas (58.70% in 22 min) compared to the SrTiO3 photocatalysts synthesized by conventional solid state method (56% in 22 minutes) due to the high specific area of (33.1 m2 g−1) in the former and lower value (2.88 m2 g−1) in the latter case under UV irradiation.66
Unlike titanates, tantalates exhibit photocatalytic water splitting activity without the addition of reduction (NiO or Pt) or oxidation (IrO2 or MnOx) co-catalysts due to the higher CB and VB edge of tantalates as compared to the redox potential of water (CB consists of Ta 5d orbital and VB consists of O 2p orbital). CB and VB edge potentials are more negative and positive with respect to reductive and oxidative band edge potentials of the co-catalysts, respectively. The high delocalization of excitons energy is due to corner sharing crystal arrangement.67 Lithium tantalate (LiTaO3) exhibits the highest activity for water splitting under UV light without co-catalyst due to its wide band gap of 4.6–4.7 eV.68 The common synthetic methods of LiTaO3 (solid state synthesis, spray drying methods and polymerizable complex route) yielding large particles with small surface area were replaced by solvothermal and hydrothermal routes. Takasugi et al. synthesized LiTaO3 by both solvothermal and hydrothermal routes. LiTaO3 obtained by their solvothermal route shows highly enhanced H2 production rate (600 μmol h−1) compared to their activity of LiTaO3 obtained from the hydrothermal route which gave very low H2 production rate (8 μmol h−1). Significant specific surface area (23.7 m2 g−1) and very small particle size (10–30 nm) were the reasons for better performance of LiTaO3 obtained from the solvothermal route.69
Sodium tantalate (NaTaO3), contrary to LiTaO3, exhibits low activity for water splitting without co-catalyst loading.70 The study of co-catalyst loaded NaTaO3 system led to the development of lanthanide (La) doped NiO/NaTaO3 highly active photocatalytic system which yielded tremendous H2 evolution at a rate of 5.9 mmol h−1 under UV irradiation without any sacrificial agent(s).71 Currently, La-doped NaTaO3 photocatalysts has been successfully employed for the decomposition of refractory organic compounds,72,73 reduction of CO2,74 photocatalytic steam reforming of methane74 and ammonia synthesis.75 Regarding the synthetic prospective of NaTaO3 photocatalysts, direct band gap NaTaO3 (4.1 eV) with orthorhombic structure are obtained from the traditional solid state route displaying low activity for water splitting. Replacing the typical solid state by sol–gel technique, NaTaO3 with a monoclinic structure possessing an indirect band gap (3.9 eV) with high density of states near the band edges are produced, evincing a higher activity compared to solid state synthesized NaTaO3.76 He et al. synthesized NaTaO3 (3.96 eV) nanopowders through a hydrothermal route exhibiting high photoactivity under UV light for both gas (complete photodegradation of formaldehyde, within 35 minutes of irradiation) and liquid (complete photodegradation of rhodamine B (RhB), within 3 hours of irradiation) phase reaction.77 Recently, Nguyen et al. extended the optical absorption of NaTaO3 photocatalyst into visible region by co-doping it with La/Bi (Bismuth) through hydrothermal synthesis.78 Within the alkali tantalates (ATaO3, A = Li, Na or K), potassium tantalate (KTaO3) can be a fascinating alternative for binary TiO2 photocatalyst due to its low band gap (3.6 eV), appropriate band edge potentials (bottom of CB at −0.7 eV and top of VB at 2.9 eV vs. NHE at pH 0) and proportionately low excitation energy to tap solar energy.79,80 Like the above mentioned tantalates, the synthesis of nano KTaO3 photocatalysts through conventional techniques (solid state or alkoxide method) suffers from large size and defect structure resulting from the hindrance in meticulous control of morphology or size of the nanoparticles due to very high temperature (>1000 °C).81–83
Li et al. reported that the size and morphology of KTaO3 have strong influence on the photoreduction of CO2 and protons in water. Here, KTaO3 synthesized by solvothermal method exhibited conjoined nanoflake morphology with low size (15–50 nm) and large surface area (43 m2 g−1), displayed an outstanding 20 and 7 times exalted yield for H2 and CO compared to the conventional cubic morphology attained in solid state synthesis with large size (200–500 nm) and low surface area (<5 m2 g−1); without additional sacrificial electron donors and electrical bias.84 To conclude, tantalate perovskites have received considerable focus compared to titanate and niobate active oxides due to the appropriate requisite conduction band edge (consisting of Ta 5d orbitals) for the generation of solar fuels.85–87 However, the compounds of above mentioned ABO3 types are active under UV light and Silver Niobate (AgNbO3) (2.8 eV) has drawn some attention in photocatalysis due to its visible light response.88 Such perovskite structured photocatalysts are composed of Ag 4d orbitals, far below the oxidation potential of water and therefore employed to split water under visible light in the presence of sacrificial agents.89–92 Arney et al. reported the replacement of the synthetic solid state route of AgNbO3 by means of a molten salt flux synthetic route. This newly developed flux method resulted in materials which exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity for H2 generation (5.9 μmol h−1 g−1) from aqueous methanol solution under visible light with respect to the activity displayed by AgNbO3 synthesized via solid state route (3.4 μmol h−1 g−1).89

Ternary oxide (AB2O4 types) photocatalysts
The second set of ternary oxide photocatalysts elucidated in this review are AB2O4 type like calcium indate (CaIn2O4). Which contain p-block indium (In) metal with a d10 configuration. Such SC have evinced to form a new set of photocatalysts compared to the platitudinous binary/ternary systems containing d0 configuration transition metal ions (Ta, Nb and Ti). CaIn2O4 have demonstrated the photodegradation of organic pollutants under visible light.93–95 Similarly, the synthesis of nano CaIn2O4via conventional Solid State reaction (SSR) suffers from high temperature (>1000 °C) and long calcination time (up to 12 h).93–96 In 2009, Ding et al. reported a solution-combustion synthetic route replacing the traditional route for producing CaIn2O4 nanorods with large specific surface area and high crystallinity. As-synthesized CaIn2O4 photocatalyst exhibits 66% mineralization of toluene in gas phase within 360 min of irradiation under visible light, which is four times higher than the activity disclosed by CaIn2O4 nanomaterials synthesized by traditional SSR route. Similarly, platinum (Pt) dispersed CaIn2O4 nanorods for water splitting, disclosed a hydrogen generation rate of 1.23 μmol h−1 g−1, which is 24 times higher than the photocatalytic activity displayed by Pt dispersed CaIn2O4 (synthesized by SSR route).97 Still, the solution-combustion methodology suffered from high temperature annealing and calcination (>1000 °C) and varying calcination time (12–24 h). To eliminate such difficulty in the synthesis of CaIn2O4, several techniques were rapidly developed in the subsequent years: optimized solid-state involving sequential calcination,98 solvothermal,99 co-precipitation100 and sol–gel.101,102 Newly, Tavares et al. promulgated the synthesis of CaIn2O4 NCs continuously through ultrasonic spray pyrolysis technique, utilizing laminar flow aerosol reactor as depicted in Fig. 7; exhibiting a precise control of mean particle size. The as-developed continuous system yielded CaIn2O4 NCs in short production time (residence time of 1 min) with well resolved spherical morphology (avg. diameter 511 nm and surface area of 24 m2 g−1) and good crystallinity, which exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity for MB degradation under UV-visible irradiation compared to CaIn2O4 nanophotocatalysts produced by SSR and solution-combustion routes.103
 Fig. 7  Pictorial representation of the experimental setup and continuous formation of CaIn2O4 NCs via one pot ultrasonic spray pyrolysis.103 (Reprint with permission from M. T. S. Tavares, M. M. Melo, V. D. Araujo, R. L. Tranquilin, C. R. R. Almeida, C. A. Paskocimas, M. R. D. Bomio, E. Longo and V. F. Motta, Enhancement of the photocatalytic activity and white emission of CaIn2O4 nanocrystals, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 658, 316–323, Copyright 2019 Elsevier). 
Ternary oxide (ABO2 types) photocatalysts
The previously discussed ternary SCs illuminate the influence of surface area on the photocatalytic activity, whereas the SCs discussed here and in the subsequent section details the effect of electronic structure on the photocatalytic activity. The third set of ternary oxide SCs discussed here are visible light active, silver containing group III oxides of AgMO2 types (M = Al, Ga, In).104–107 This family includes: α-AgGaO2 (2.38 eV), α-AgInO2 (1.90 eV), β-AgGaO2 (2.18 eV) and β-AgAlO2 (2.95 eV) which are indirect SCs. ‘α’ refers to the delafossite structure and ‘β’ to the cristobalite related structure. Maruyama et al. reported the use of a cation-exchange technique for the synthesis of this AgMO2 (M = Al, Ga, In) SCs. Ouyang et al. performed the photocatalytic evaluation of α-AgGaO2, α-AgInO2 β-AgGaO2 and β-AgAlO2 SCs by studying the gas phase decomposition of isopropanol (IPA) under visible light.107,108 The hierarchy of photocatalytic activity was found to be α-AgGaO2 > β-AgAlO2 > β-AgGaO2 > α-AgInO2. AgGaO2 possessing delafossite crystal structure impart the highest activity (88.8 ppm h−1 of acetone produced from IPA decomposition) with respect to other members of AgMO2 SCs.
Delafossite crystal structure exists in two different polytypes, 3-R (rhombohedral) and 2-H (hexagonal), as depicted in Fig. 8. AgGaO2 and AgInO2 synthesized here were crystallized in the 3-R polytype form. In both polytypes, there are two individual layers, providing a separate path for electron (BO6 layers) and hole conduction (O–A–O dumbbell layer) upon excitation by photons. The repulsion existing between the oxygen anions in the dumbbell (O–A–O) bonds shortens the bond distance between the ‘A’ cation and the oxygen anion, which increases the interaction between the metallic (A) cation and the oxygen anion, resulting in the formation of highly dispersed VB. Due to such a dispersion, effective mass of the holes decreases and mobility increases leading to increased separation of charges upon excitation, resulting in superior photocatalytic activity. This dispersed VB characteristic is not seen in cristobalite structure (β-AgAlO2 and β-AgGaO2) which explains the reasons for a lower photocatalytic activity (5.3 ppm h−1 and 2.2 ppm h−1 of acetone produced, respectively) compared to α-AgGaO2. The very low photocatalytic activity of α-AgInO2 (1.3 ppm h−1 of acetone production) for IPA decomposition can be solely attributed to its very low band gap (1.9 eV), not possessing appropriate band edge potentials for oxidation.108 Regarding α-AgGaO2 synthesis, Akhtar et al. also reported for the first time the high pressure (∼10 GPa) direct synthesis of nano α-AgGaO2 (3R-polytype) using resistively-heated diamond anvil cell, through solid state reaction for which photocatalytic applications are yet to be explored.109
 Fig. 8  (a) 3-R polytype of delafossite crystal structure. (b) 2-H polytype of delafossite crystal structure, redrawn based on the images.106 ((a and b) Reprint with permission from Y. Maruyama, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, Visible light sensitive photocatalyst, delafossite structured α-AgGaO2, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23274–23278 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Ternary oxide (ABO4 types) photocatalysts
Bismuth vanadate, BiVO4 (2.4 eV) is a visible light active SC, of high interest due to its polymorphic nature, ferroelastic and electronic properties. Such fascinating properties strongly depend on its crystalline structure. The three polymorphic forms of BiVO4 are scheelite-monoclinic (SM), scheelite-tetragonal (ST) and zircon-tetragonal (ZT).110–112 Among the crystalline forms of BiVO4, SM exhibits the highest activity for photocatalytic O2 evolution from aqueous silver nitrate solution and photocatalytic degradation of endocrine compounds, especially alkylphenol groups under visible light irradiation.113–115 SM outperforms ST in photocatalysis. In the SM–BiVO4 structure, a variety of bond lengths between Bi–O atoms are observed, unseen in ST–BiVO4 structures. The presence of such different bond lengths in Bi–O atoms leads to distortion of the crystal structure caused by the 6s2 lone pairs of Bi3+ cations. Specifically, VO43− tetrahedrons are distorted (Fig. 9a). Due to the SM structure distortion, the overlap of VB orbitals occurs. The overlapping extent of O 2p and Bi 6s orbitals in VB increases with the increase of the extent of distortion in the crystal structure and results in the increase of charge separation upon photoexcitation, due to the delocalization of electrons and holes. These resulted in enhanced migration of holes to the surface of the SC, leading to superlative photocatalytic activity. Such intensified migration of holes is absent in ST–BiVO4 (Fig. 9b) semiconductor due to the absence of distortion in the scheelite crystal structure.110,116 Traditionally, SM–BiVO4 are synthesized by solid state reaction at high temperature. Kudo et al. prepared BiVO4 photocatalysts for O2 evolution via room temperature aqueous process, which resulted in nanomaterials with well-defined crystallinity.115 Yu and Kudo reported the hydrothermal route to synthesize SM–BiVO4 with enhanced surface texture and morphology as compared to nano BiVO4 synthesized via aqueous process route. They successfully enhanced the photocatalytic activity for O2 evolution from aqueous silver nitrate solutions by varying the pH of the synthetic medium. The variation of the pH (1, 4 and 9) of the synthetic medium successfully changed the electronic band gap (2.39, 2.46 and 2.47 eV) of the resultant nanomaterials, thus positively influencing the activity of photocatalysis.116 The synthesis of highly crystalline SM–BiVO4 nanopowders (avg. size 20 nm) with spherical like morphology was more recently optimized under mechanochemical synthesis. Due to the practical issues associated with separation of photocatalysts from the reactant/product streams in large scale implementations, BiVO4 syntheses have been intensively focused on SM–BiVO4 thin films in this decade. SM–BiVO4 thin films exhibited efficient separation, stable monoclinic scheelite structure and pre-eminent light absorption capability.117–122 Lately in 2017, Venkatesan et al. combined mechanochemical synthesis and Rf-sputtering for the synthesis of BiVO4 films with nano-structural islands which displayed good activity for the degradation (complete degradation in 240 min) of rhodamine-6G (Rh6G) under visible light.123
 Fig. 9  (a) SM structure of BiVO4 compound. (b) ST structure of BiVO4 compound.124 (Reproduced from Schwarz, et al., Eur. Coat. J., 2016, 9, 26–31, Copyright 2018 Vincentz Network). 
Besides the above mentioned SC oxides, aurivillius compounds, Bi2An−1BnO3n+3 (A = Ca, Sr, Ba, Pb, Na, K; B = Ti, Nb, Ta, Mo, W, Fe) have also been considered. This particular group possesses a unique special layer structure where (Bi2O2)2+ layers are interleaved with perovskite-like (An−1BnO3n+1) units.125 Ternary SC, bismuth tungstate (Bi2WO6) is one of the simplest member (n = 1) of aurivillius oxides. Bi2WO6 possesses interesting physicochemical properties and was extensively explored in photocatalysis in the last decade. Such an intensive study is attributed to its unique structure ((Bi2O2)2+ layers sandwiched with perovskite-like [WO4]2− layers) favouring efficient separation of photogenerated charge carriers upon excitation, leading to exalted photocatalytic activity.126 Advanced photocatalytic systems employing Bi2WO6 SC are reported in the last part of this review (see section on Z-Scheme photocatalysts).
Ternary chalcogenide photocatalysts
The final set of ternary SCs addressed in this review are ternary chalcogenides of the type ABxCy (where A = Cu, Ag, Zn or Cd; B = Ga or In; C = S or Se or Te). These compounds exhibit high absorption coefficient over a wide spectral range and are effectively feasible for solar photon absorption. Due to their excellent optoelectronic and catalytic properties, they have been successfully implemented in solar cells, light emitting diodes, radiation detection devices and photocatalysis.127–137 Among these highly functional chalcogenides, SCs of the group I–III–VI (silver–indium–sulfide (AgInS2), copper–gallium–sulfide (CuGaS2) and copper–indium–sulfide (CuInS2)) and group II–III–VI (cadmium–indium–sulfide (CdIn2S4) and zinc–indium–sulfide (ZnIn2S4)) have been studied in photocatalysis. Within these two groups, group I–III–VI semiconductors: AgInS2, CuGaS2 and CuInS2 are highly preferred due to their negligible toxicity, high photoconductivity, high stability, environmental benign composition and visible light activity for many novel reactions.135–143 The course of studies on group I–III–VI photocatalysts have specifically focused on the control of morphology and physicochemical properties, thereby influencing its photocatalytic activity. In this perspective, AgInS2 (1.87–2.14 eV)144,145 photocatalysts were synthesized by optimized novel techniques in recent times including hydrothermal methods,146 one-step aqueous synthesis,147 microwave hydrothermal techniques148 and microwave heating processes with short reaction times (ca. 5 min).149 Strikingly, Hu et al. synthesized AgInS2 nanoplates and nanotubes through convenient co-precipitation low-temperature (70–190 °C) strategy where the morphology and physicochemical properties of AgInS2 photocatalysts were altered by varying (In/Ag) molar ratio of precursors. Synthesized AgInS2 with (In/Ag) molar ratio of 9 exhibited a nanotube-like morphology, low photoluminescence value and maximum photocurrent density (0.011 mA cm−2). The maximum photocurrent implies the most efficient separation of electron–hole pairs upon excitation. This novel AgInS2 nanotube displayed regeneration ability and highest visible light activity for complete 2-nitrophenol degradation (within 120 min) as compared to other AgInS2 nanoplates/nanotubes due to the narrow band gap and highest charge separation efficiency.150
Similar synthetic studies have been reported for CuGaS2 photocatalysts. Classic synthetic methods (hydrothermal,150 solvothermal151 and hot injection route151) suffered from drawbacks including polydispersion and limited scale-up production capabilities. Regulacio et al. introduced a facile non-injection route based on thermal decomposition. This synthesis presented several advantages including high reproducibility, mass production of samples and convenient control of the synthetic domain. As-synthesized nano CuGaS2 (2.52 eV) exhibited promising photocatalytic activity for RhB dye degradation (63% of dye was degraded in 270 min) under visible light irradiation.152 Additionally, Liu et al. reported a non-injection route based one-step heating process for the synthesis of one-dimensional (1D) or two-dimensional (2D) CuGaS2 NCs. Here, the morphology tuning could be achieved through the appropriate choice of ligands and precursors. These NCs displayed prominent activity for H2 evolution in the presence of hole scavengers (Na2S and Na2SO3) under simulated solar irradiation.153 Most reported ternary SCs to date have not been synthesized under continuous conditions. In addition to this, the only ternary SCs synthesized under continuous supercritical processes have not been explored in heterogeneous photocatalysed processes to date.154,155
Solid solution photocatalysts
The optical properties of SCs are a reflection of their inherent electronic structure, related to their VB to CB transition. In the case of wide bandgap SCs, their optical gap circumscribes many redox potentials but their implementation is limited due to their activity in the UV region. Certain ternary SCs possess narrow band gap (active in the visible region) but no appropriate band edge potentials to perform diverse reactions. Consequently, the inherent electronic structure in both binary and ternary SCs pure materials does not regulate an optimum balance between visible light activity and required redox potential.
In the heterogeneous photocatalytic field, meticulous modulation of band gap via preparation of solid solution SC are generally more beneficial as compared to doped or loaded SCs (binary or ternary). Optimum formulations of solid solution systems can be successfully accomplished by combining a wide band gap binary/ternary SC with very narrow band gap binary/ternary SC, i.e. ZnS–CdS solid solution.156 The resultant solid solution (Zn1−xCdxS (0.2 ≤ x ≤ 1)) does not only exhibit activity under visible light but also maintains its suitable band edge potentials to perform the required reactions. Apart from the band gap position, other properties, which have to be considered while synthesizing the solid solutions include similarities in the crystal structure, electronegativity and valence state of the two end members with which the solid solution is fabricated.157 Generally, the hybridized CB or VB promotes faster charge transfer due to its dispersed nature and increases the photocatalytic activity. This phenomenon is more pronounced in solid solutions than in ternary or binary photocatalysts. According to IUPAC, solid solution is defined as, “a crystal containing a second constituent, which fits into and is distributed in the lattice of the host crystal. (The term ‘solid solution’ is not referred for amorphous materials)”.158 The diverse solid solution photocatalysts reviewed here (see Fig. 10), can be divided into three different categories, depending on the strategy employed for engineering the band gap:
 Fig. 10  Different modes of band gap engineering for attaining optimum balance between visible light activity and redox potential of semiconductor band edge. 
1. Solid solution through continuous modulation of CB,
2. Solid solution through continuous modulation of VB,
3. Solid solution through continuous modulation of both CB and VB.
Solid solutions through continuous modulation of CB
Ternary SCs of the family AgMO2 (M = Al, Ga, In) have attracted significant attention in the photocatalytic field due to their dispersed VB (see section ternary oxides (ABO2 types) photocatalysts). The solid solution fabricated with AgMO2 SCs can effortlessly extend into the entire spectrum of the visible light and still retains the VB potential. It displays photocatalytic decomposition of various organic compounds due to the strong oxidizing potential. Shuxin et al. improved the visible light activity of β-AgAlO2 (2.83 eV) for IPA decomposition through continuous tuning of the CB edge of β-AgAlO2, by combining it with narrow band gap β-AgGaO2 (2.18 eV) SC, resulting in a β-AgAl1−xGaxO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) solid solution.159 They synthesized β-AgAl1−xGaxO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) through two-step (sol–gel followed by cation exchange) method. The linear band gap variation of the compound with respect to the composition (see Fig. 11a UV-vis absorption spectrum) indicates that continuous solid solution through precise tuning of CB was obtained in this system. Among the various compositions, β-AgAl0.6Ga0.4O2 (2.58 eV) exhibited highest photocatalytic activity for IPA decomposition.
 Fig. 11  (a) UV-vis absorption spectrum of β-AgAl1−xGaxO solid solution fabricated from β-AgAlO2 and β-AgGaO2 ternary oxide SCs by precise tuning of CB from 2.83 eV to 2.19 eV.159 (b) Photocatalytic activity for acetone production.159 ((a and b) Reprint with permission from S. Ouyang and J. Ye, β-AgAl1−xGaxO2 Solid-Solution Photocatalysts: Continuous Modulation of Electronic Structure Toward High-Performance Visible-Light Photoactivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7757–7763, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
The rate of acetone production (photo-decomposed product of IPA) by β-AgAl0.6Ga0.4O2 photocatalyst was 35 and 63 times higher than its end components β-AgAlO2 and β-AgGaO2, respectively. The high activity is attributed to the novel band gap which customizes an optimum balance between the visible light activity and appropriate redox potential. The colour of the solid solutions with different compositions and acetone evolution rates with respect to band gaps of continuous CB modulated solid solution is depicted in Fig. 11b.159 A similar CB modulation was achieved recently in the family of AM2O6 (A = Sn and M = Nb or Ta) ternary SCs by fabricating the series of Sn(Nb1−xTax)2O6 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) solid solutions. Sn(Nb0.8Ta0.2)2O6 photocatalyst was proved to provide excellent activity and stability for the complete mineralization of MB dye (98.9% mineralization efficiency in 120 min) under visible light irradatiation as compared to other members of the Sn(Nb1−xTax)2O6 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) solid solutions.160
Solid solutions through continuous modulation of VB
Niobium-based perovskite SCs were extensively explored in photocatalysis, since they suffice the requirement of intensified stability. As their CB edge potential is far more negative than the potential of O2/O2˙−.90,161 Silver niobate (AgNbO3) (2.8 eV) is one such SC with enhanced stability. It possesses narrow band gap (2.8 eV) due to its hybridized VB, composed of Ag 4d and O 2p orbitals and exhibits visible light active activity for producing O2 from silver nitrate solution. Its oxidation potential was however not sufficient to decompose several organic compounds.162
Li et al. improved the photo oxidizing ability of AgNbO3 by combination with NaNbO3 (3.4 eV) perovskite SC through solid state synthetic method, resulting in AgxNa1−xNbO3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) solid solution. The CB edge potential of both AgNbO3 and NaNbO3 are pinned at the same level (−0.4 eV vs. NHE).90 A decrease in lattice parameters and Nb–O bond length in NbO6 occurs by increasing NaNbO3 content in the solid solution, resulting a decrease of particle size. Simultaneously, the hybridization ratio of Ag 4d and O 2p decreases resulting in the continuous modulation of VB, shifting the VB top from AgNbO3 (+2.39 eV) to VB top of NaNbO3 (+3 eV). These findings indicate that the oxidation potential of the solid solution system is comparatively more positive to that of AgNbO3. Among the continuous range of AgxNa1−xNbO3 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) solid solutions, Ag0.6Na0.4NbO3 photocatalyst evidenced enhanced activity for gaseous IPA decomposition under visible light (activity three times higher with respect to AgNbO3) due to an optimum state achieved between oxidation potential, visible light absorption ability and particle size.163 Continuous VB modulation without CB alteration was also reported on d10-(oxy) nitride (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25) solid solution by Maeda et al.164 fabricated from d10-ZnO (3.2 eV) whose CB bottom is composed of hybridized s and p metallic cation. The resultant solid solution has heavily dispersed CB with increased mobility from photogenerated electrons, thus intensifying the photocatalytic activity. GaN (3.4 eV) was chosen as another constituent here, as N 2p orbitals possess higher potential energy than O 2p orbitals and similar CB with respect to ZnO. (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25) was designed for overall water splitting under visible light irradiation. Such solid solution formation featuring requirements of narrow band gap below 3 eV, appropriate band edge potential and stability for overall water splitting could provide an upliftment of the VB, leading to narrow band gap SCs (see Fig. 12b, decrease of band gap with increase of ZnO content). The upraise of VB potential to CB (without any changes) was hypothesized due to the repulsion existing between O 2p and Zn 3d orbitals165 (Fig. 12a). The authors performed the synthesis of this solid solution through nitridation of oxide precursors (Ga2O3 & ZnO) at high temperatures (>850 °C) under ammonia flow. As-synthesized solid solution exhibited negligible activity for overall water splitting with co-catalysts including 1 wt% Rh (rhodium) and 1.5 wt% Cr (chromium) on (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) (0 ≤ x ≤ 0.25) system. Solid solution with a very low Zn quantity (Zn/Ga = 0.14) exhibited enhanced photocatalytic H2 and O2 production of 360 μmol h−1 and 162 μmol h−1, respectively.165 The above conventional nitridation method suffered from several drawbacks including long nitridation times, high temperature (>850 °C) and large (micron) sized particles. Recently, Menon et al. replaced the conventional nitridation by solution combustion method,166 which yields particles in the nanoscale (40 nm), the resultant (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) possessed high zinc content (Zn/Ga = 20, 30 and 40). The solid solution with (Zn/Ga = 20) exhibited overall water splitting under visible light without the aid of a co-catalyst, with apparent quantum yield of H2 production at 0.048%.166 Dharmagunawardhane et al. developed a high pressure (1 GPa) and high temperature (1150–1200 °C) synthetic methodology to synthesize (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) solid solutions over the entire compositional range (x = 0.07 to 0.9) using a talc pressure cell via solid state reaction. They observed the smallest band gap (2.65 eV) and highest photocatalytic activity of H2 evolution (2.3 μmol h−1) from water in the absence of co-catalysts, pH-modifiers and sacrificial agents for (Ga0.49Zn0.51)(N0.49O0.51) solid solution under visible light.167
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic depiction of band structure of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) solid solution (redrawn based on the article165). (b) Variation of band gap with respect to ZnO content in the solid solution.165Fig. 11(a and b) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Solid solutions via continuous modulation of both CB and VB
Simultaneous regulation of equilibrium between absorption extension into visible region and redox abilities of photocatalysts was achieved in this type of solid solutions prepared via synchronous precise tuning of both VB and CB. Due to the favourable inclination of partial substitution of comprehensive metallic cations and valences at the position of A and B elements in ABO3 perovskites, these materials stand as highly promising photocatalysts. Wang et al. performed the precise tuning of both CB and VB in Ag1−xSrx(NbO3)1−x(TiO3)x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) solid solutions, formed by combining visible active AgNbO3 (450 nm) and UV active SrTiO3 (380 nm) perovskites.168 The solid solution was synthesized via solid state reaction method. The resultant solid solution's CB is composed of hybridized Nb 4d and Ti 3d orbitals. As Nb 4d is more positive than Ti 3d, an increase of AgNbO3 content brings the bottom of CB band downwards. Similarly, VB of this system was composed of hybridized Ag 4d and O 2p orbitals where Ag 4d is more positive than O 2p and it pushes the top VB upwards thus favouring perfectly engineered SC active in the visible region with an optimum balance between redox potentials. The presence of such hybridized CB and VB in this solid solution with continuous dispersion favors enhanced charge carrier transportation upon excitation, leading to increased photocatalytic activity. The solid solution obtained here exhibited continuous modulated CB and VB for the composition (0 ≤ x < 0.95) and discontinuous CB and VB for the composition (0.95 ≤ x ≤ 1).168 Discontinuous interbands (dopant levels) are due to very low concentration AgNbO3 in the solid solution. Among the continuous series of solid solutions, Ag0.75Sr0.25(NbO3)0.75(TiO3)0.25 evidenced the highest photocatalytic activity for O2 production from silver nitrate solution (162 μmol h−1), with an apparent quantum efficiency of about 16.4% under visible light, compared to its two end members. The same photocatalyst displayed the highest activity for IPA decomposition, where it completely mineralize IPA to CO2 within 22 h of visible light irradiation.168
As previously mentioned for perovskite oxides ABO3 type (see section on perovskite photocatalysts), ‘A’ site is occupied by a cation larger in size than the cation at the ‘B’ site. This smaller cation on the ‘B’ site has a stronger interaction with oxygen than the larger cation at ‘A’ site. Possibly, perovskites may manifest different optical and electronic properties depending on the electronegativity and ionic radius of the smaller cations at the ‘B’ site.169 The confirmation reported by Grinberg et al. that narrow band gap perovskites can be achieved by using two different transition-metal cations on the ‘B’ site170 led to the synthesis of perovskites like Ba2FeNbO6 (BFNO) with mixed Fe3+ and Nb5+ cations on the ‘B’ site. In Ba2FeNbO6 (2.29 eV), the VBM composed of Ni 3d and O 2p orbitals while CBM comprised Fe 3d and Nb 4d. This VB and CB straddles the water oxidation and reduction potential, respectively, however leading to low photocatalytic activity due to poor charge separation efficiency. The photocatalytic performance of Ba2FeNbO6 was improved via preparation of SrTiO3–Ba2FeNbO6 solid solution NCs through a simple one-step molten salt route.170 Here the band gap was precisely tuned from 3.31 eV of SrTiO3 to 2.29 eV of Ba2FeNbO6 through simultaneous modulation of CB and VB edges (Fig. 13). Among the series of solid solutions synthesized, SrTiO3–Ba2FeNbO6-0.5 (SrTiO3 to Ba2FeNbO6 optimal molar ratio is 10:0.5) exhibited the highest photocatalytic H2 production (7.15 μmol h−1) from aqueous methanol solution under visible light irradiation.170 This SrTiO3–Ba2FeNbO6-0.5 solid solution exhibited maximum photocurrent signal indicating that its high photocatalytic activity is attributed to efficient separation of electron–hole pairs. Simultaneous regulation of redox potential and visible light activity is achieved facilely in this system.170
 Fig. 13  Depiction of energy level diagram of SrTiO3, SrTiO3–Ba2FeNbO6 solid solutions (ratio 10:0.25, 10:0.5 and 10:1 corresponds to the molar ratio of SrTiO3 to Ba2FeNbO6).170 (Reprint with permission from G. Zhang, S. Sun, W. Jiang, X. Miao, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, D. Qu, D. Zhang, D. Li, Z. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(2), 1600932. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Son). 
Sulfide-based solid solution photocatalysts have been extensively reported to be synthesized by continuous tuning of both CB and VB for efficient hydrogen production.171–174 Binary sulfides including CdS found to be moderately active photocatalysts for H2 production (see section on binary photocatalysts), with inherent issues related to quick recombinations of photogenerated charge carriers and photo-corrosion under visible light (essentially limiting their use at a large scale175–178).
The formulation of highly crystalline solid solutions combining wide band gap ZnS with CdS can solve the photostability issues of CdS under visible light irradiation. The synthesis of CdxZn1−xS solid solutions was achieved employing several techniques such as co-precipitation,179,180 cation-exchange181 and hydrothermal methods.182,183 Such conventional techniques possessed several drawbacks including high deviation of elemental composition of solid solutions compared to theoretical synthesis values, minimum control over band structure and long reaction times to obtain highly crystallized solid solutions. Li et al. circumvented the above mentioned drawbacks via facile thermolysis of complex zinc–cadmium–thiourea to synthesize CdxZn1−xS (0 < x < 1) solid solution NPs at short times of reaction (ca. 30 min).184 As synthesized CdxZn1−xS (0 < x < 1) (2.3–3.1 eV) solid solutions were found to be aggregates of small crystallized NPs (avg. size = 10 nm) (Fig. 14a and b). The continuous red shift of steep absorption band edge with increasing CdS content confirmed the precise engineering of both CB and VB for these solid solutions (Fig. 14d).184
 Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of Zn0.5Cd0.5S solid solution, average diameter of aggregates (50–100 nm). (b) HR-TEM image of Zn0.5Cd0.5S solid solution, diameter of each NP is about 10 nm. (c) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of CdxZn1−xS solid solutions (x = 0, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 0.9). (d) Band gap variation with respect to the composition. (e) H2 production rate with respect to the composition in CdxZn1−xS solid solution.184Fig. 13(a–d) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Among the different ranges of solid solution, Cd0.5Zn0.5S (2.45 eV) exhibited a superior balance between CB and VB potentials as well as visible light absorption. This photocatalyst exhibited maximum H2 production (7.42 mmol h−1 g−1) from water in the presence of sacrificial agents (Na2S & Na2SO3) in the absence of a co-catalysts (Pt).184 This photocatalytic activity exceeded the activities of CdS and ZnS by 24 and 54 times, respectively, being much higher than the activity displayed by co-catalyst (Pt) loaded CdS photocatalysts (Fig. 14e).184
Fu et al. successfully incorporated the Cd0.5Zn0.5S solid solution (synthesized by the previously disclosed thermolysis route184) into PAN (polyacrylonitrile) nanofibers and developed leaf-like, bio-inspired flexible mat-shaped Cd0.5Zn0.5S@PAN photocatalysts.185 This hierarchically porous leaf-like solid solution exhibited a remarkable photocatalytic activity for H2 production from water splitting (475 μmol h−1 of H2 per 50 mg) at an apparent quantum efficiency of 27.4% at 420 nm. Cd0.5Zn0.5S@PAN photocatalytic activity was reported to be superior to that of Cd0.5Zn0.5S solid solution NPs due to the enhancement of mass transfer kinetics, multiple reflection and scattering effect of incident light as result of the porous structure.185
Ternary chalcogenide SCs of the group I–III–VI (I = Cu, Ag; III = Al, Ga, In; VI = S, Se, Te) have received increasing attention as a new class of materials in the field of solar cells and also for solar driven H2 production (water splitting).186 In ternary sulfide SCs including AgInS2 or CuInS2, the VB is composed of d-states of Ag or Cu assorted with p-states of sulfur,187,188 resulting in a VB far more negative to that of ZnS or CdS.
In these ternary compounds, the VB is precisely tuned by monovalent cations of Ag or Cu and the CB is modulated via Indium doping (Fig. 15a and b). These ternary SCs were combined with wide band gap ZnS for the synthesis of solid solution photocatalysts for optimized H2 evolution.
 Fig. 15  (a) Band gap modulation in (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2.189 (b) Band gap engineering attained in (CuIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 solid solutions190Fig. 14. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. Fig. 14(b) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Tsuji et al. reported the synthesis of (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.55–1.8 eV) solid solution through the heat treatment of complex greyish Ag–In–Zn sulfide precursor.189 Here, they attempted several different heat treatment strategies, from which an improvement of the photocatalytic activity for the resultant solid solutions was observed. (AgIn)0.22Zn1.58S2 (2.33 eV) synthesized via heat treatment under N2 flow exhibited a relevant H2 production (72 μmol h−1) from aqueous solutions of K2SO3 and Na2S under visible light irradiation.189
The same photocatalyst when synthesized via heat treatment, under sealed quartz ampule tube without N2 flow, provided a remarkably superior activity for H2 production (328 μmol h−1).189 The photocatalytic activity was 4.5 times higher than the material synthesized under N2 flow, as the newly proposed heat treatment methodology prevents the volatilization of metallic cations during synthesis. On loading 3 wt% of co-catalyst (Pt) on the (AgIn)0.22Zn1.58S2 photocatalyst (synthesized by heat treatment in sealed quartz tube), the rate for H2 production under visible light was further enhanced three times (944 μmol h−1) with a highest apparent quantum yield of 20%.189 Subsequently, the same authors employed the above newly modified heat treatment process (850 °C for 5 h) in sealed quartz tube for the synthesis of (CuIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.5–1.4 eV) solid solutions.190 For very low CuInS2 content (x < 0.05), discontinuous discrete energy levels were formed in the system (Fig. 15b). Above this composition, continuous VB is formed and monotonous red shift to visible region occurs.190 Among the solid solutions synthesized, (CuIn)0.09Zn1.82S2 evidenced moderate photocatalytic activity for H2 production (7 μmol h−1) from aqueous solutions containing sacrificial agents (K2SO3) under visible light irradiation.190 The same photocatalyst with 0.5 wt% of co-catalysts (Pt) loading displayed an enhanced activity for H2 production (684 μmol h−1) with an apparent quantum yield of 12.5%.190
Following the successive visible light activity for H2 production using the above two different chalcopyrite (Ag or CuInS2)–ZnS photocatalysts, Tsuji et al. developed further the heat treatment technique for solid solution synthesis.138 They reduced the heat treatment temperature from 850 °C down to 600 °C and increased the heat treatment duration of complex single source solid solution precursor from 5 h to 20 h.138 ZnS–CuInS2–AgInS2 solid solutions were synthesised through improved heat treatment (reduced temperature and prolonged heat treatment) and compared in terms of photocatalytic activity to ZnS–CuInS2 and ZnS–AgInS2 solid solution photocatalysts. Prior to photocatalytic studies, all three different solid solutions were loaded with 0.75 wt% of ruthenium (Ru) co-catalysts on their surfaces. The (CuAg)0.15In0.3Zn1.4S2 solid solution with the aid of co-catalysts (Ru) exhibited the maximum photocatalytic activity for H2 production (2.3 mmol h−1) from aqueous solution containing sacrificial agents (K2SO3 & Na2S).138
Most of the solid solution nanomaterials synthesized so far have specifically targeted the control of the physicochemical properties by the variation of chemical composition. More specifically, the photoinduced electron transfer rate was heavily altered in these ternary-based solid solution by the electronic energy levels through the composition of the solid solution. Concurrent control of size and composition is a preferable strategy to obtain optimum photochemical properties in ternary based solid solutions. The first synthesis of size controlled solid solution (ZnS–AgInS2) was reported by Gabka et al. for the production of NCs of ZnS–AgInS2 solid solution photocatalysts of ca. 2–10 nm in size. These NCs displayed color tunable photoluminescence (PL) by simultaneous modulation of NC's size, shape and composition.191 Subsequently, Tatsuya et al. reported the size controlled synthesis of ZnS–AgInS2 solid solution NCs with a fixed composition without changing their particle shape via thermal reaction of the metal acetate with thiourea.192 Due to quantum size effect, the difference in H2 evolution potential (E[H+/H2], −0.76 V vs. NHE) and the CB edge potential of NCs increased with a decrease in particle size.192 Each composition of ZnS–AgInS2 solid solution NCs with decreased particle size provided an enhanced H2 evolution rate. However, the H2 production rate decreased with a further decrease in particle size due to the formation of defect sites/deeper trap sites.192 The highest photocatalytic activity was observed for (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 (0≤ x ≤ 1) solid solutions having both optimum sizes of about 4.2–5.5 nm and energy gap of 2.3–2.4 eV.192
In conclusion, solid solution photocatalysts can exhibit very high activity under visible/UV irradiation as optimum balance between required redox potentials and absorption band edge. Simultaneous modulation of size and composition has now gained importance for a more precise tuning of the electronic levels depending on the required photochemical properties. The main drawbacks or limiting steps in the synthesis of solid solution photocatalysts include (i) the precursor preparation step and (ii) the cost of the single source precursor. An overview of the synthetic methodologies and synthesis conditions of solid solution photocatalysts along with heterogeneous photochemical systems is reported in Table 3.
Table 3 Overview of the synthetic methodologies, conditions and precursors used in the synthesis of solid solution (SS) photocatalysts and their photocatalytic applications




SS
Synthetic methods
Precursors
Photochemical reaction
Illumination source
Photoreactor
Ref.




β-AgAl1−xGaxO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (2.8–2.19 eV)
Cation exchange method
CH3COONa, Al(NO3)3·9H2O, Ga(NO3)3·nH2O and AgNO3
Decomposition of IPA gas, first into acetone then to CO2
300 W xenon arc lamp and blue LEDs (400 nm < λ < 500 nm)
500 mL reactor equipped with a pyrex glass lid window

159



(AgNbO3)1−x(NaNbO3)x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.4–2.79 eV)
Solid state reaction method
Ag2O, Na2CO3 and Nb2O5
Decomposition of IPA into acetone and CO2 under visible light
Blue-LEDs (BLEDs) with light intensity of 0.01 mW cm−2 (λ = 400–550 nm)
Glass reactor of volume 500 mL

163



(Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) with and without RuO2 loading (2.6–2.8 eV)
Nitridation of powdered precursor mixture
Ga2O3, ZnO and NH3
Water splitting under visible light
High pressure mercury lamp 450 W
Pyrex inner irradiation type reaction vessel

165



Ag1−xSrx(NbO3)1−x(TiO3)x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.2–2.7 eV)
Solid state reaction method
Ag2O, SrCO3, Nb2O5 and TiO2
O2 evolution from AgNO3 solution and decomposition of IPA
300 W xenon arc lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 410 nm)
Closed gas circulation system containing pyrex vessel, with a flat side window for light irradiation

168



SrTiO3–Ba2FeNbO6-n (n = 0.25, 0.5 and 1) (3.31–2.29 eV)
One-step molten salt route
TiO2, BaCO3, SrCO3, Nb2O5, Fe2O3 and NaCl
H2 evolution from aqueous methanol solution
300 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)
Closed gas circulation system fixed batch reactor

171



CdxZn1−xS (0 < x < 1) (2.3–3.10 eV)
Thermolysis of zinc–cadmium–thiourea (Zn–Cd–Tu) complex
CH4N2S, C4H6O4Zn·2H2O and C4H10CdO6
H2 production from aqueous solution with sacrificial agents
350 W xenon arc lamp with UV cut off filter (λ ≥ 400 nm)
10 mL pyrex flask, with openings of flask are sealed with silicone rubber septum

184



CdxCuyZn1−x−yS Cd0.1Cu0.01Z0.89S (2.33 eV)
Co-precipitation method
Zn(NO3)2, Cu(NO3)2, Cd(NO3)2 and Na2S
H2 from aqueous solution with sacrificial agents
350 W xenon lamp with optical filter (λ ≥ 430 nm)
Side window fixed pyrex cell

317



(AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.55–1.8 eV)
Heat treatment of Ag–In–Zn sulfide complex precursor
AgNO3, In(NO3)·3.9H2O and Zn(NO3)2·6H2O
H2 evolution from aqueous solution with sacrificial agents
Solar Simulator (AM 1.5) and 300 W xenon lamp
Gas closed circulation system with a side or top window pyrex cell.

189



(CuIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.55–1.8 eV) Pt or Ru loaded as co-catalyst on the solid solution
Heat treatment of Cu–In–Zn sulfide complex precursor and photo deposition for co-catalysts loading
Zn(NO3)·6H2O, In(NO3)·3.6H2O, CuCl2H2PtCl6·6H2O and RuCl3·nH2O
H2 evolution form aqueous solution with sacrificial agents
300 W xenon lamp with a cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)
Gas closed circulation system fitted pyrex cell with window for illumination fixed to the sides of the cell

190



ZnS–CuInS2–AgInS2 Ru co-catalyst
Heat treatment of single source complex sulfide precursor. Loaded by photo-deposition method
Zn(NO3)·6H2O, AgNO3, In(NO3)·3.6H2O and CuCl2·2H2O (NH4)2RuCl6
H2 evolution from an aqueous solution containing sacrificial agents.
300 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)
Closed gas circulation fixed pyrex cell

138





Nanocomposite photocatalysts
An advanced photocatalyst must exhibit two critical features: (i) an ameliorated light absorption capacity and (ii) an enhanced photocatalytic performance. These crucial features provide insights for design of composite photocatalysts by coupling two or three different SCs together, the coupling based on the energy exchange between SCs with different electronic structures. Unlike SC–metal composite systems, SC–SC coupled systems feature a composite in which both materials individually absorb the photonic radiation, resulting in harvesting more photonic energy. The first crucial requirement of enhanced light absorption is satisfied here.
Whenever a SC is coupled to a different SC, it results in a heterostructure with three possible different types of heterojunctions depending on the respective position of CB & VB levels of each SC: (i) straddling gap (type I) (ii) staggered gap (type II) and (iii) broken gap (type III) (Fig. 16).
 Fig. 16  Schematic representation of energy gap of three types of SC–SC heterojunctions. 
The vectorial transfer of electrons and holes in these SC–SC coupled heterostructured junctions are determined by the band gap, the electron affinity (bottom edge of CB) and the work function (top edge of the VB) of the coupled semiconductors.
Within the three types of heterojunctions SCs, type-II hetero-composite system is most desirable for photocatalysis. The difference in chemical potential (arising from the appropriate position of band edge potentials) (VB & CB of semiconductor 2 > VB & CB of semiconductor 1) between the two different SCs in type II system results in band bending at the interface of the SCs. Band bending phenomenon instigates an electric field, which drives the electrons and holes of SCs upon photoexcitation in the opposite direction, leading to spatial separation of photon generated charge carriers consequently enhancing their photocatalytic activity.193,194
Regularly, such type-II systems are designed in such a way that it results in photocatalyst possessing enhanced light absorption and efficient charge separation. To have an enhanced light absorption, heterojunction composite materials are generally composed of one SC active in the UV region (TiO2 or ZnO) while the other material is active in the visible region (CdS, CdSe, etc.). When type-II composite materials are activated by UV radiation, both the band gaps are excited, electrons migrate from the CB2 to CB1, holes migrate from the VB1 to VB2, thus resulting in efficient separation of charge carriers (Fig. 17a).
 Fig. 17  Band gap diagram of type-II heterojunctions illustrating the photo-generation of charge carriers and efficient separation of them upon (a) UV excitation and (b) visible light excitation. 
In the case of visible light excitation, only the narrow band gap material is excited, the electrons from CB2 migrate to CB1 and holes remain within the VB2, resulting in efficient charge separation (see Fig. 17b). Thus in these SC–SC coupled systems having type-II heterojunction, two critical conditions are satisfied, enhanced light absorption and efficient charge separation resulting in higher photocatalytic performance.
Considerations of type-II nanocomposite photocatalytic systems

Importance of SC 1/SC 2 ratio. 
The light absorption limit of type-II composites is determined by the band gap of the narrower SC, active in the visible region. The absorption intensity of the composite can be increased by increasing the amount of narrow SC. Nevertheless, this does not necessarily enhance the photocatalytic performance of the composite system, as it has been seen in examples, including AgI–BiOI composite systems.195 Consequently, determining the optimal composition of both SCs in type-II systems is crucial to reach an appropriate balance between the intensity of light absorption and photocatalytic performance.


Importance of interfaces. 
In SC–SC nanocomposite systems formed between diverse SCs, there are possibilities for the presence of defects at the material interface due to lattice mismatch. These defects can trap the photogenerated electrons or holes leading to recombination. This prevents the optimum use of photogenerated electrons and holes for redox reactions. In contrast, the lattice mismatch can lead to an electric field at the interface between the two materials, which separates the charges further leading to higher photocatalytic activity. The quality of the heterogeneous interface stands to be another crucial factor influencing the photocatalytic performance.193 In order to obtain high quality interfaces with less number of defects, high temperature annealing is usually employed in the synthetic methodologies. The annealing temperature is critical and determines the quality of the interface, which ultimately affects the photocatalytic performance, as exemplified in the case of Bi2O3–SrTiO3.196 The quality of the heterojunction interfaces in various nanocomposites can also be improved by careful selection of appropriate synthetic methods.

p–n type junction composite systems
Apart from conventional type-II heterojunctions, basically made up of n-type SCs, another type of type-II system has been extensively reported formed by coupling n-type and p-type SCs, resulting in a heterojunction called p–n type junction. This is an exceptional type of heterojunction which possesses the previously mentioned advantages of composite systems (i.e. increased light absorption limit and effective charge carrier separation). Additionally, these p–n type junction composites possess an internal electric field at the interface formed between the SCs. This field further intensifies the charge separation process, leading to an enhancement of photocatalytic performance. Specifically, reported p–n junction type-II photocatalysts exhibit a higher reductive activity as compared to its individual constituents, with a lower oxidative activity. This is because under equilibrium conditions, when an internal electric field is formed at the interface of the p–n junction composite material, the p-type becomes negatively charged and the n-type becomes positively charged. Upon excitation, the holes start moving towards the negative side and electrons towards the positive side, where the p-type semiconductor behaves as a hole trap and scavengers, unfavourable for photocatalytic oxidation reactions.
These NCs include Cu2O/TiO2, NiO/TiO2, p-ZnO/n-TiO2, CuBi2O4/Bi2WO6, Co3O4/ZnO and Cu2O/In2O3.197–201
TiO2-Based nanocomposite photocatalysts
TiO2 photocatalysts have been tremendously studied for several decades due to their very high oxidation ability, high photostability and low cost.202,203 Still, the use of titania systems is hindered due to its wide band gap (3.2 eV) of anatase phase, requiring UV irradiation (λ < 380 nm) for photocatalytic activation.204 On other hand, CdS is a relatively narrow band gap SC (2.4 eV), extensively researched and modified (see section on solid solution photocatalysts) for H2 production from water splitting reactions under visible light irradiation. The growth of CdS on TiO2 results in a TiO2/CdS type II heterojunction, where upon illumination by visible light, photo-generated electrons from CB of CdS are transferred to CB of TiO2 and holes remain within CdS (Fig. 18b), resulting in a more efficient charge separation as compared to that of the two individual SCs, which ultimately increases photocatalytic efficiency.205 Different types of TiO2/CdS nanocomposites have been synthesized by different techniques including (i) CdS QDs sensitized in ordered mesoporous titania through ion-exchange route205 and (ii) CdS NPs coated on TiO2 nanotubes via wet chemical methods.205 Vu et al. additionally reported a non-noble co-catalyst loaded TiO2/CdS NCs (Ni–TiO2/CdS).206 This system comprised TiO2 nanorods, NPs of CdS and Ni clusters. Capped TiO2 were synthesized through a solvothermal route featuring surfactant-controllable nanorod lengths. On these nanorods, CdS NPs were grown using a colloidal synthesis, resulting in hybrid TiO2/CdS nanocomposites. Subsequently, co-catalyst (Ni) clusters were selectively deposited on NCs via a photodepositon route. A schematic illustration of the synthetic route for Ni–TiO2/CdS nanocomposites is shown in Fig. 18. Ni–TiO2/CdS exhibited high photocatalytic activity for H2 production (151 μmol g−1) from aqueous solutions containing sacrificial agents (ethanol), compared to the activity of CdS (3.4 μmol g−1) under visible light irradiation. Such activity (44 times higher than CdS) was reported to be achieved due to the enhancement of charge separation upon photoexcitation by charge transfers from CdS to TiO2 nanorods and then to the co-catalyst (Fig. 18b). Besides traditional nanocomposites prepared by coupling UV (wide band gap) and visible light (narrow band gap) active SCs, nanocomposites synthesized by combining two wide band gap SCs were also found to be active under visible light irradiation. Such visible light activity is due to the introduction of impurities and defect levels in the forbidden gap of the nanocomposite. TiO2/ZnO is an example of such visible light active systems, formed by combining two wide band gap UV active SCs (TiO2 (3.32 eV) and ZnO (3.37 eV)). Zhang et al. synthesized TiO2/ZnO nanocomposites via a two-step method consisting of homogeneous hydrolysis and low temperature crystallization.207
 Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of synthetic methodology for obtaining Ni–TiO2/CdS photocatalysts.206 (b) Charge transfer pathway in Ni–TiO2/CdS nanocomposite upon visible light irradiation for H2 production from aqueous ethanol solution.206 (c) TEM image of TiO2 nanorods.206 (a, b and c) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
The observed absorption red shift of the TiO2/ZnO nanocomposite system into the visible region was claimed to be due to the introduction of dopant energy levels in the TiO2 forbidden band gaps by the Zn2+ cations.207 Importantly, TiO2/ZnO composite exhibited an improved photocatalytic efficiency with respect to TiO2/ZnO nanocomposites successfully synthesized through hydrothermal, spin coating and atomic layer deposition techniques (where these strategies were also found to be economically unfavourable in the long run208–210). Hussein et al. synthesized mesoporous coupled TiO2/ZnO composite with varying composition (TiO2: ZnO) employing a facile and cheap sol–gel route. As synthesized materials with 30 and 50 wt% of ZnO coupled with TiO2 exhibited high photocatalytic activity for H2 production (770 μmol g−1 and 739 μmol g−1, respectively) from aqueous solutions containing methanol as an electron acceptor, under UV irradiation as compared to the moderate activity of commercially available TiO2, Degussa P25 (356 μmol g−1).211 Prasannalakshmi et al. reported the synthesis of rod shaped TiO2/ZnO NCs via sol–gel method, which exhibited a high activity for the photocatalytic degradation of organic dyes (brilliant green (BG) and methylene blue (MB)) under solar irradiation compared to the activity exhibited by their corresponding individual SCs.212 Similar to the TiO2/ZnO system, TiO2/ZnS photocatalyst is yet another interesting visible light active system composed of two different UV active SCs: TiO2 (3.2 eV) and ZnS (3.6 eV). The visible light activity is due to the formation of new energy levels as a result of sulphur doping within the forbidden band gap of TiO2.
Štengl et al. synthesized spherical agglomerates of TiO2/ZnS nanocomposites consisting of alternate nanosized titania and sphalerite crystalline islands via homogeneous hydrolysis route.213 The resultant TiO2/ZnS (2.9 eV) nanocomposite displayed the highest activity for photocatalytic degradation of orange II dye under visible irradiation (λ = 400 nm) (degradation constant for nanocomposite, k = 0.0069 min−1) as compared to the activities of commercially available Degussa P25 (3.1 eV) (k = 0.0022 min−1) and pure anatase (3.2 eV) (k = 0.0009 min−1). The enhanced photocatalytic activity was attributed to the reduced charge transfer resistance and increased surface area for the reactant adsorption.213 NPs of TiO2 and TiO2/ZnS nanocomposites were also recently reported to be synthesized via sol–gel method, where the TiO2/ZnS system exhibited enhanced activity for the degradation of organic dyes (BG and MB) under solar irradiation compared to TiO2 NPs.214
ZnO-Based nanocomposite photocatalysts
ZnO SCs in nanosize regime possesses certain advantageous features including (i) a high exciton binding energy of 60 meV (as comparison TiO2 has 4 meV), (ii) a high electron mobility of 200 cm2 V−1 s−1 (TiO2 has 30 cm2 V−1 s−1), (iii) a facile adaptation/tuneability of the structure, (iv) an anisotropic growth and (v) an simplicity of crystallization.215–220
In spite of such distinct features, both ZnO and TiO2 suffer from low photocatalytic efficiency due to higher rate of recombination of photoinduced electrons and holes compared to the rate of charge transfer to the surface bound redox reactions.221 Additionally, they exhibit very low visible light activity due to their wide band gaps. Coupling SC to ZnO resulting in type-II band offset is generally of two types. ZnO can either be coupled to similar binary oxide wide band gap SC (as seen in the case of TiO2/ZnO NC). The second type of coupling involves growing of lattice matched photosensitizer inorganic crystals on ZnO surface, which ensures a maximum harvesting of visible light and consequently an enhanced photocatalytic activity.222 The sensitizers should possess a narrow band gap and appropriate band edge potentials for the transfer of the photogenerated electrons from its CB to ZnO CB under visible light activity, leading to enhanced separation of charge carriers.223 Among various inorganic sensitizers, the coupling of In2S3 to ZnO has been recently reported of interest as In2S3 possesses a narrow band gap (2–2.3 eV) with higher carrier mobility and good stability in photocatalysis.224 Khanchandani et al. reported the synthesis of ZnO/In2S3 core/shell nanorods array employing a soft chemistry approach consisting of surface functionalization route by using citric acid as functionalization agent (Fig. 19).225 ZnO nanorods and In2S3 NPs were synthesized via solvothermal method. ZnO nanorods were subsequently successfully coated with In2S3 employing a surface functionalization route (see Fig. 19). The one-dimensional ZnO nanorods structure is preferred here as it provides an optimum geometrical structure facilitating effective transport of charge carries and reduces the charge recombination to a certain extent within the ZnO nanostructures.226
 Fig. 19  (a) FESEM image of ZnO/In2S3 core/shell nanorod arrays. (b and c) TEM and HRTEM of ZnO/In2S3 core/shell NCs. (d) Illustration of charge transfer and separation in NC systems.225 (a, b, c and d) (Reproduced with permission ref. 225. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
As synthesized core/shell composites exhibited a type-II band offset as its absorption band edge shifted to the visible region (due to the incorporation of In2S3) and exhibited high photocatalytic activity (degradation constant, k = 0.0174 min−1) for RhB dye degradation under visible light irradiation, compared to ZnO nanorods (k = 0.00039 min−1) and In2S3 NPs (k = 0.0042 min−1). The enhanced photocatalytic activity of ZnO/In2S3 core/shell NCs (56 times higher than that of ZnO nanorods and 5 times higher with respect to In2S3 NPs) was due to the effectual separation of photoinduced charge carries, attributed to the type-II heterojunction formed between the two different SCs.225
Similarly to In2S3, CdS was used to form a type-II heterojunction nanocomposite with ZnO. As CdS possesses a narrow band (2.4 eV) gap for visible light activation, similar lattice constant to ZnO and high optical absorption coefficient. Khanchandani et al. extended the same surface functionalization route employed for ZnO/In2S3 nanocomposites to the synthesis of ZnO/CdS nanorods core/shell array systems. Citric acid (CA) was used as the surface functionalization agent (Fig. 20).227 By varying the CA amount, the shell thickness of CdS was successfully tuned. The influence of the shell thickness on the photocatalytic activity of the nanocomposite was also reported. The authors synthesized ZnO/CdS (core/shell) materials with three different shell thickness: 10 nm, 20 nm and 30 nm. The absorption band edge of ZnO nanorods was red shifted to visible region when they are coated with CdS shell. The monotonous red shift to the visible region increased with an increase in the shell thickness. As compared to ZnO nanorods and CdS NPs, the core/shell nanocomposites displayed high activity for the photocatalytic degradation of RhB under simulated solar radiation.227 Within all nanocomposites with varying shell thickness, ZnO/CdS with maximum shell thickness exhibited optimum photocatalytic activity due to an extended absorption in the visible region.
 Fig. 20  Schematic depiction of the surface functionalization route for the synthesis of ZnO/CdS core/shell NCs.227 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 (2012) Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
The degradation rate constant (k (min−1)) of ZnO nanorods, CdS NPs, ZnO/CdS (10 nm shell thickness), ZnO/CdS (20 nm shell thickness) and ZnO/CdS (30 nm shell thickness) are 0.011, 0.0035, 0.019, 0.025 and 0.039 min−1, respectively.
SnO2-Based nanocomposite photocatalysts
Tin(IV) oxide (SnO2) is also an ideal constituent in nanocomposite systems due to its wide band gap (3.6 eV) and CB edge potential (ECB = 0 V vs. NHE, at pH = 7), lower than the CB potential of most SCs implemented in photocatalytic organic mineralization/degradation reactions. Additionally, SnO2 is largely available at a low cost, possesses excellent chemical stability, high optical transparency in the visible range (97%) and good electrical properties.228–232
Wang et al. fabricated SnO2/TiO2 nanocomposites by hydrothermally growing SnO2 on TiO2 nanofibers (synthesized by electrospinning technique).228 In contrast to this two-step synthesis (electrospinning + hydrothermal), Zhang et al. synthesized SnO2/ZnO nanocomposites via direct electrospinning technique.233 Both SnO2/TiO2 and SnO2/ZnO nanocomposites exhibited high photocatalytic activity for the degradation of RhB under UV light as compared to the reduced activities of their individual constituent SCs.
Iron oxide (α-Fe2O3) phases are frequently coupled to SnO2 and studied in the heterojunction domain for applications in photocatalysis, gas and liquid sensors.234–237 α-Fe2O3 is a n-type semiconductor with a narrow band gap (2.2 eV) exhibiting poor photocatalytic performance due to small diffusion length of holes (2–4 nm). The efficient separation of photogenerated charges are observed when α-Fe2O3 is coupled to SnO2.
Kang et al. synthesized necklace-like hierarchical SnO2/Fe2O3 nanocomposites employing a chemical vapour deposition route (CVD), growing hierarchically Fe2O3 hexagonal disks on nanocables consisting of SnO2 as core and epitaxial Fe2O3 as shell (Fig. 21a and b). As synthesized novel hierarchical SnO2/Fe2O3 system exhibited high photocatalytic activity (complete degradation in 2.5 h) for the degradation of MB under visible light as compared to pure SnO2 (synthesized by CVD, exhibited 83% degradation within 2.5 h) and commercially available Fe2O3 (58% degradation of MB within 2.5 h).238
 Fig. 21  (a and b) SEM image of hierarchical SnO2/Fe2O3 NCs synthesized by CVD technique.238 Reprint with permission from J. Kang, Q. Kuang, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, Fabrication of the SnO2/α-Fe2O3 hierarchical heterostructure and its enhanced photocatalytic property, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7874–7879, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. 
Xia et al. synthesized a non-core/shell SnO2/Fe2O3 nanocomposite through a co-precipitation technique, where the resultant composite reveals exalted activity for the degradation of acid blue 62 dye under visible light. These SnO2/Fe2O3 NCs degraded 98% of the dye within one hour, which is 3.6 times higher than the activity revealed (27% degradation of dye in one hour) by commercially available titania (Degussa P25) photocatalyst.234
SnO2/SnS2 is yet another visible light active nanocomposite system developed and studied especially for photocatalytically mediated environmental remediation applications. Tin sulfide (SnS2) is a n-type narrow band gap SC (2.18–2.44 eV), standing as an ideal compound for dye sensitization studies due to the absence of surface states associated with dangling bonds. These dangling bonds act as traps for the photogenerated electrons.239 Tin sulphide has been therefore employed as photocatalyst in the visible light region due to its thermal, oxidative stability in air and stable existence without corrosion in acidic and neutral solutions.240 Zhang et al. synthesized non-core/shell type SnO2/SnS2 nanocomposites with a firm interface contact via in situ oxidation of SnS2 under hydrothermal (in the presence of H2O2) conditions.241 By varying the duration of oxidation and the amount of H2O2, the SnO2 content in the nanocomposite was successfully varied (see HR-TEM image, Fig. 22). As-resultant SnO2/SnS2 (18.1 mass% of SnO2) exhibited high photocatalytic activity (degradation constant, k = 9.260 min−1) for MO degradation under visible light as compared to the activity of SnS2 (k = 5.941 min−1) (synthesized by hydrothermal reactions) and physical mixture of SnO2/SnS2 (7.094 min−1).241
 Fig. 22  (a) HR-TEM of SnS2/SnO2 (18.1 wt% of SnO2). (b) Enlargement of the interface observed in figure.241 (a and b) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society). 
Magnetically separable nanocomposite photocatalysts (Fe3O4-based systems)
Photocatalysts with magnetic supports or magnetically separable materials (Fe3O4) coupled to SCs forming a nanocomposite can be easily separated from the liquid phase by applying an external magnetic field. This allows overcoming the limitations associated with separation techniques, resulting in high recovery and reusability of the photocatalysts.242 Importantly, iron oxide (Fe3O4) undergoes phase transition, when subjected to heat treatment at higher temperature (400 °C). This phase transition leads to a loss of the magnetic properties. Since most of the magnetic nanocomposites were synthesized via sol–gel process (where heat treatment is crucial) the preparation of highly and stable photoactive titania–magnetic nanocomposite with enhanced magnetic properties is rather challenging.243 The essential criteria to design highly photocatalytic active magnetic nanocomposite system using Fe3O4 (0.1 eV) SC involves the construction of nanocomposites with special structures or the development of special types of interface phase junction (e.g. insertion of an insulation layer) between the magnetic materials and the active photocatalysts.
In the perspective of active SC photocatalysts, bismuth oxyhalides BiOX (X = Cl, Br or I) of the group V–VI–VII ternary SCs have attracted significant attention in recent times due to their optical and crystalline properties. BiOX SCs possess tetragonal matlockite structures in which [Bi2O2] layers are interleaved between halogen layers, resulting in a unique open layered structure and complex band structure. Such crystalline structure possesses large space between the layers ([Bi2O2] and halogen layers), which facilitates the separation of photo-induced electron–hole pairs. Additionally, it exhibits low recombination probability of photo induced electron–hole pairs due to its indirect band gap, thus resulting in a significantly improved photocatalytic activity.244–246 Extensive reviews have been published on BiOX (X = Cl, BR, I) SCs, detailing their recent synthetic developments and photocatalytic applications: organic pollutants degradation, fuel production and removal of heavy metals.247–250
Amongst BiOX (X = Cl, BR, I) SCs, BiOCl exhibits the highest photocatalytic activity under UV irradiation, with comparably higher activity to that of TiO2 for the degradation of dyes. Its activity under visible light irradiation can be additionally improved via preparation of heterojunction nanocomposites.251 Zhang et al. synthesized a Fe3O4/BiOCl nanocomposite via colloidal synthesis, where BiOCl (bismuth oxychloride) flakes are inlaid with Fe3O4 NPs (see Fig. 23b and TEM image in Fig. 24b).
 Fig. 23  (a) Illustration of conventional core shell Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs with charge transfer route. (b) Coupled structure of Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs, where Fe3O4 NPs are inlaid in the BiOCl nanoflakes.252 Reproduced with permission from ref. 252. (Copyright 2018 Elsevier). 
 Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of conventional core/shell Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs. (b) TEM image of coupled Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs.252 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2018 Elsevier). 
The as-obtained Fe3O4/BiOCl structure exhibited similar photocatalytic activity for the degradation of RhB dye under visible light as compared to the activity of BiOCl nanoflakes. Here, facile separation of photocatalysts could be achieved using an external magnetic field and the recycled catalysts maintained their photocatalytic activity even after five consecutive runs.252 In this particular system, the photocatalytic activity of BiOCl was preserved upon combination with the magnetic semiconductor due to the special type of coupled heterostructure, where the rate of charge transfer to redox reactions is higher than the rate of recombination, despite this being a type-I heterojunction.252
Chalcogenide nanocomposite photocatalysts (CdS/ZnS nanocomposites)
Similar to TiO2/Fe3O4 and Fe3O4/BiOCl possessing type-I heterojunction, CdS/ZnS nanocomposites are another type of hybrid heterostructures with type-I phase junction extensively employed in heterogeneous photocatalysis.
CdS/ZnS nanocomposite was successfully synthesized using metal organic chemical vapour deposition (MOCVD)253,254 and wet chemical synthetic methods consisting of surface functionalization routes.255,256 Wang et al. synthesized 1-D (dimensional) CdS/ZnS nanocomposite with nanowire morphologies through a two-step mild solution method consisting in a solvothermal reaction.257 This synthetic strategy did not require any pre-treatment of the core's surface (CdS) to introduce any functional groups prior to shell growth. As synthesized CdS/ZnS core/shell nanowires (Fig. 25b) exhibited good photocatalytic activities for the degradation of 4-chlorophenol (4CP) (89% of 4CP was degraded in 12 h) under visible light compared to the activity of CdS nanowires (74% degradation in 12 h) and anatase-TiO2 (30% degradation in 12 h of irradiation).257 Additionally, CdS/ZnS core/shell exhibited maximum photocatalytic activity for the degradation of MB dye under visible light irradiation (complete degradation in 6 h of irradiation) with respect to uncoated CdS nanowires (63% of degradation in 6 h) and anatase-TiO2 (68% degradation in 6 h).257 Despite being a type-I heterojunction, the present CdS/ZnS core/shell system exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity because of the passivation of surface states in the CdS cores by the ZnS shell, which acts as surface traps for the photogenerated charge carriers.257
 Fig. 25  (a) SEM image of CdS nanowires with 45 nm diameter. (b) SEM of CdS/ZnS core/shell NCs with 60 nm diameter and shell thickness of 5–10 nm. The inset figure depicts the surface of the shell, which consists of ZnS NPs.257 (a and b) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 257 OPEN ACCESS, Copyright 2018 Springer). 
Mesoporous In2O3/Ta2O5 nanocomposite systems
Mesoporous tantalum oxide derived photocatalysts can exhibit fascinating mass transport properties. Intrinsically, they possess large surface, thin walls and good light harvesting capabilities. Potentially, they stand as ideal candidates for photocatalytic H2 production from water splitting reactions. Takahara et al. synthesized mesoporous Ta2O5 through a ligand-assisted templating method, which unveils photocatalytic activity for overall water decomposition.258 In contrast to mesoporous Ta2O5 materials, highly crystallized Ta2O5 materials provided negligible H2 production and no O2 production. The high photocatalytic activity of the mesoporous material is due to the efficient migration of electrons and holes through the thin walls of mesoporous Ta2O5, where the rate of migration of photogenerated charge carriers is higher in mesoporous Ta2O5 than the migration occurring in highly crystallized Ta2O5 samples, from the lattice to the surface.258 Even though the mesoporous structure possesses such advantageous features, it is highly limited because of the collapse of the porous structure and the decrease of the specific surface area during the template removal process, due to its very low thermal stability.258 Such limitation could be resolved by the introduction of a second component into the mesoporous structure.259,260
Xu et al. synthesized mesoporous heterostructured In2O3/Ta2O5 NCs via one-step sol–gel process using pluronic (P123), triblock copolymer surfactant, as structural directing agent. The incorporation of In2O3 (2.7 eV)261 into the mesoporous Ta2O5 (3.9–4 eV)261 resulted in the formation of a type-II system with reduced band gap energy, rendering the photocatalyst active in the visible region. Subsequently, the thermal stability of mesoporous Ta2O5 was greatly enhanced after the formation of the nanocomposite. The as synthesized mesoporous In2O3/Ta2O5 exhibited a relevant photocatalytic activity for H2 generation (189 μmol h−1 g−1) from aqueous methanol solution under simulated solar irradiation as compared to the activity of non-porous In2O3/Ta2O5 NCs synthesized without template (54 μmol h−1 g−1) and pure crystalline Ta2O5 (84 μmol h−1 g−1).261 Compared to non-mesoporous In2O3/Ta2O5 nanocomposites, mesoporous systems exhibited high activity due to their large specific surface area, which provides more active sites for H2 production. The photogenerated electrons and holes have to travel short distance in mesoporous structure due to very thin walls, which is not observed in the other two photocatalysts.261 The same authors further investigated the three dimensional mesoporous In2O3/Ta2O5 NC systems as a function of the wt% of In2O3 incorporation and the calcination temperature employed in the heat treatment.262 A thin doping layer was found to be formed at the interface of the mesoporous In2O3/Ta2O, due to the substitution of In3+ by Ta5+, resulting in the formation of p-type conduction. Contrastingly the doping of Ta5+ in In2O3 results in the formation of n-type conduction.262 A p–n junction type-II heterostructure is thus formed in this mesoporous composite system (Fig. 26a). The heterojunction area in the nanocomposite increased with an increasing amount of In2O3 (wt%).262 The maximum area of heterojunction was observed for 20 wt% of In2O3, beyond which the heterojunction area decreased together with the photocatalytic performance in the materials. Regardless, the mesoporous nanocomposite with varying In2O3 (wt%) still provided a comparatively higher activity to that of pure crystalline Ta2O5 photocatalysts.262 The mesoporous In2O3/Ta2O5 NCs with 20 wt% of In2O3 was synthesized at varying calcination temperature (450, 550, 650, 750 °C).262 An increase in calcination temperature from 450 °C resulted in a decrease in specific surface area and pore volume, with a complete destruction of the mesoporous structure observed at 750 °C leading to the formation of crystallized NCs with very low photocatalytic activity (Fig. 26b).262
 Fig. 26  (a) Illustration of charge transfer route in mesoporous In2O3/Ta2O5 NCs with p–n junction type II heterojunction. (b) HR-TEM image of the interface region between In2O3 and Ta2O5 materials in In2O3/Ta2O5 NCs (with 20 wt% In2O3) calcined at 750 °C.262 (a and b) (Reproduced from ref. 262. Copyright 2018 Elsevier). 
Results confirmed that the onset of destruction of the mesoporous structure started from 650 °C, below which the three dimensional novel structure was retained.262
To conclude, differing from other families of photocatalysts, the synthesis of nanocomposite generally takes place in two consecutive steps. The first step involves the synthesis of base SC materials as “support” and the second step involves the growth of a different SC material on the denoted support material. The transformation of two consecutive steps into a direct single step method is now under intensive research in the field of photocatalysis, in order to tune the interface of two different semiconductor materials to enhance the photocatalytic activity. Nanocomposite system fabrication can be considered as essential in the future design of advanced photocatalytic systems. Such design mostly involves surface passivation (elimination of trap states) of core and creation of type-II heterojunction for efficient charge separation. Table 4 summarizes a number of relevant photocatalytic nanocomposite systems with their synthetic approaches along with their photochemical applications. The diverse modified/unmodified SCs reported in the field of heterogeneous photocatalysis have been segregated and the synthetic development within each family was specifically rationalized.
Table 4 Summary of synthetic methodologies, precursors and dimensions of most relevant photocatalytic systems along with their photochemical applications. N: nanocomposite




N
Synthetic methods
Precursors
Size of the nanomaterials
Photochemical reaction
Illumination source
Photoreactor
Ref.




TiO2 nanorods
Solvothermal method
C16H40O4Ti, C18H34O2, C6H13NO2 and C2H5OH
Nanorods: 10–40 nm
H2 generation from an aqueous ethanol solution
320 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ > 420 nm)
Septum sealed gas vials with a 420 nm cut off filter

206



TiO2/CdS
Colloidal synthesis of TiO2/CdS
NOBF4-capped-TiO2, C4H10CdO6 and C2H5NS
CdS nanoparticles (NPs) aggregate to form hollow nano spheres with uniform diameter of 150 nm on nanorods


Ni–TiO2/CdS
Ni–TiO2/CdS synthesis by photo-deposition
Ni(NO3)2




TiO2/ZnO
Sol–gel method
C16H40O4Ti and Zn(NO3)2·6H2O
6–14 nm
H2 evolution from an aqueous methanol solution
300 W xenon lamp with UV filter, (240 nm < λ < 400 nm)
5 mL semi batch reactor

211



TiO2/ZnS
Homogeneous hydrolysis
TiOSO4, ZnSO4 and C2H5NS
Spherical agglomerates consisting of alternate anatase (∼6 nm) and sphalerite crystalline islands (∼15 nm)
Degradation of aqueous solution of Orange II dye
Florescent lamp (254 nm, 365 nm and 400 nm) with 8 W power
Quartz tube with stainless steel cover

213



ZnO nanorods
Solvothermal method
C4H6O4Zn·2H2O, C6H8O7, In(NO3)3·5H2O and Na2S·9H2O
Average diameter of ZnO nanorods: 100 ± 6 nm and average length: 500–600 nm. Thickness of In2S3 shell is 15 ± 2 nm
Degradation of RhB
500 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)
Beaker with top covered with glass plate

225



ZnO/In2S3 core/shell nanorods arrays
Surface functionalization route


ZnO nanorods
Solvothermal method
C4H6O4Zn·2H2O, CdCl2, CH4N2S, C6H8O7, and C2H6O2
ZnO nanorods with average diameter 100 nm and CdS shell thickness 10–30 nm
Degradation of RhB, under simulated solar irradiation
No information in the article
Glass beaker immersed in ice-cold water bath

226



ZnO/CdS nanorods core/shell arrays
Surface functionalization route


SnO2/Fe2O3
Co-precipitation
SnCl4·5H2O, FeCl3·6H2O, deionized H2O and NH3
6–24 nm
Degradation of acid blue 62 dye
1000 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ > 400 nm)
Quartz jacketed reactor

234



SnS2
Hydrothermal synthesis
SnCl4·5H2O, C2H5NS, CH3COOH and H2O2
12–26 nm
Degradation of MO
1000 W xenon lamp (λ > 420 nm)
Two layer pyrex bottles with water circulation at the middle of the bottles.

241



SnS2/SnO2

In situ oxidation of SnS2 NPs under hydrothermal conditions


Fe3O4 NPs
Colloidal synthesis
FeCl3·6H2O, FeCl3·7H2O, NH4OH, deionized H2O, C18H34O2, Bi(NO3)3, HNO3, CHCl3 and NaC12H25SO4.
Fe3O4 NPs of size 7–10 nm have aggregated on large BiOCl flakes of size 200–500 nm
Photocatalytic degradation of RhB dye in water under visible light.
500 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)
No info mentioned in the article

252



Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs


CdS nanowires
Solvothermal method
Cd(S2CNEt2)2, C2H5OH, Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O and (NH2)2CS
CdS nanowires diameter of 45 nm and length of several μm. Shell was composed of ZnS nanoparticles with diameter of about 4 nm
Degradation of MB and 4-chlorophenol (4CP)
300 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ > 420 nm)
Jacketed quartz reactor

257



1D CdS/ZnS core/shell NCs


In2O3/Ta2O5
Sol–gel process
Ta(OC2H5)5, HCL, In(NO3)3·nH2O and triblock copolymer surfactant (pluronic P123)
Average pore diameter of the NCs is 5.9 nm
H2 production from aqueous methanol solution
300 W xenon lamp was used a simulated sunlight
External irradiated pyrex cell with closed gas circulation system

261





Z-Scheme photocatalysts
1st generation Z-scheme photocatalytic systems
Heterogeneous photocatalysis for overall water splitting process can be achieved via two different systems, namely (1) a conventional type consisting of a single SC (modified/unmodified) material which carries out the overall water splitting to produce H2 and O2via one-step excitation upon exposure to photons (Fig. 27) and (2) two different photocatalytic active SCs activated via a two-step photoexcitation mechanism under light irradiation. The latter system is denoted as Z-scheme photocatalytic system as it mimics the naturally occurring Z-scheme process in photosynthesis of plants, where H2O and CO2 are converted to carbohydrates and O2 under solar irradiation.263–265
 Fig. 27  Schematic representation of one-step photoexcitation system using single semiconductor material for overall water splitting266 (Reprint with permission from K. Maeda, K. Domen, Photocatalytic water splitting: recent progress and future challenges, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). 
From the one-step photoexcitation system (Fig. 27), it is obvious that reduction and oxidation sites on the SC refers to the active sites generated by specifically co-catalysts loaded to perform the water redox reactions. Irrespective of the system employed for overall water splitting, the loading of co-catalysts (Pt, NiOx or Rh) on the SC is the main pre-requisite to promote water splitting even in the presence of SCs able to perform overall water splitting without co-catalysts.267
The two-step photoexcitation system (Z-scheme) was first instigated and explored by Bard et al. in 1979268 in which a dual photocatalytic system was reported where one SC is used specifically for H2 generation and the other one for O2 generation, simultaneously, from water splitting. The utility of photons is more efficient in Z-scheme systems as the Gibbs free energy change required to activate the different SCs is reduced with respect to the energy required for a one-step photoexcitation system.268 This provides highly efficient photocatalysts with stronger oxidation and reduction capabilities on either side of the system.266,269 Upon irradiation to photons, both SCs are excited resulting in the generation of electrons and holes (Fig. 28). The photogenerated electrons remain on the H2 photocatalyst with higher reduction potential and the holes remain on the O2 photocatalyst with higher oxidation potential, resulting in the optimization of the redox potential of the system. The interaction between these two SCs takes place via transfer of electrons from the CB of the O2 photocatalyst to VB of the H2 photocatalyst through a pair of reversible redox mediators (A and D).270 The photocatalysis in such system takes place in the liquid phase and it is designated as liquid-phase Z-scheme photocatalytic system, belonging to the 1st generation of Z-scheme systems.271,272
 Fig. 28  Schematic depiction of Z-scheme two-step photoexcitation route for overall water splitting reaction; Eg is the energy band gap; D is the electron donating species and A is the electron accepting species.270 (reprint with permission from K. Maeda, K. Domen, Photocatalytic water splitting: recent progress and future challenges, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society). 
The main downside of this Z-scheme is the occurrence of the reduction of ‘A’ and oxidation of ‘D’ molecules on the surface of the photocatalyst where the oxidation and the reduction of water is taking place, respectively. Optimum selectivity control is the key factor for these systems due to which the number of liquid phase Z-scheme systems displaying optimum photocatalytic activity is highly limited.
Thermodynamically, the reaction of electron donor (A) and electron acceptor (D) with the photogenerated electrons in the CB of the H2 photocatalyst and holes in the VB of the O2 photocatalyst is more favourable to occur as compared to the water splitting reaction.273 These backward reactions must be suppressed in order to increase the effective number of photogenerated electrons and holes for water splitting reaction. Domen et al. reported a Z-scheme system consisting of Pt-loaded ZrO2/TaON and Pt-loaded WO3 as H2 and O2 photocatalysts respectively, with IO3−/I− as redox mediator.274 In this system, the backward reactions with redox mediators were significantly minimized displaying a high quantum efficiency of 6.3% at 420 nm.274 The photocatalytic activity of the 1st generation Z-scheme system is predominantly dependent on the concentration of the redox mediators,270,275 the side reactions of the redox system (i.e. pH-dependent of the reactant solution)276 and the interactions of the redox mediators with co-catalysts.277 Additionally, the redox mediators absorb the visible light and reduce the light absorption of the SCs. Besides, the liquid redox mediators suffer from lack of long-term stability and activity.
In order to eliminate the drawbacks associated with the above system and to render the Z-scheme photocatalysis viable for gas and solid-phase reaction, liquid redox mediated-free Z-scheme systems became an important prerequisite for an efficient system in the photocatalytic field. This led to the beginning of 2nd generation Z-scheme photocatalytic systems.
2nd generation Z-scheme photocatalytic systems
Z-Scheme systems without liquid redox mediators (A and D) and with spatial fixation of SCs form all-solid-state (ASS) Z-scheme photocatalytic systems which constitute 2nd generation Z-scheme systems. These systems’ applications are viable for gas-phase as they eliminate the drawbacks of the 1st generation Z-scheme systems. Noble metal nanoparticles (Ag or Au) are generally employed as electron mediators for an efficient charge-carrier separation by transport through the interface between SC2 and SC1278,279 (Fig. 29). Primarily, these noble metal nanoparticles (Ag or Au) act as photosensitizers due to localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect. This system was firstly introduced by Tada et al. which reported the design of anisotropic CdS–Au–TiO2 nanojunctions by a facile photo-deposition technique for the reduction of methylviolgen (MV2+).280 Both SCs (CdS and TiO2) were photoexcited upon exposure to UV irradiation. The electrons from the CB of TiO2 were transferred to Au then to the VB of CdS and subsequently recombined with photogenerated holes in the VB of CdS. This results in the generation of electrons and holes with high reduction and oxidation potential on CdS and TiO2 photocatalyst, respectively.280 The vectorial electron transfer (TiO2 → Au → CdS, similar to the electron pathway in Fig. 29) not only improved the photocatalytic activity but also the photostability of CdS SC.280
 Fig. 29  Schematic depiction of charge carrier pathway in ASS-Z-scheme photocatalytic system (2nd generation Z-scheme photocatalytic systems). 
Cheng et al. synthesized Ag3PO4/Ag/SiC ASS Z-scheme photocatalysts by a simple in situ precipitation technique at room temperature.281 As synthesized photocatalysts with Ag NPs as charge transmission bridges (electron mediators) exhibited a similar vectorial electron transfer (Ag3PO4 → Ag → SiC) as compared to that reported in the previous system and provided a higher photocatalytic activity for the degradation methyl orange and phenol under visible light irradiation with respect to Ag3PO4/Ag and SiC/Ag nanocomposites due to the efficient separation of electron–hole pairs in the Z-scheme system.281 The localized surface plasmon resonance (SPR) effect of Au/Ag on these systems led to the development of plasmonic ASS Z-scheme photocatalytic systems under visible light irradiation.282–284
Cheng et al. synthesized plasmonic Z-scheme α/β-Bi2O3–Ag–AgCl photocatalysts utilising a deposition–precipitation technique coupled with a photo-reduction process.285 In the case of this plasmonic photocatalyst, only Bi2O3 (Eg of α-Bi2O3 = 2.71 eV and β-Bi2O3 = 2.48 eV) was excited, while AgCl (3.25 eV) is not activated under visible light irradiation (λ > 420 nm). At the same time, the photogenerated electron–hole pairs appeared in Ag NPs due to the plasmonic effect. Here, the vectorial electron transfer was reported to take place from the CB of Ag NPs to the CB of AgCl, where the reduction reaction occurs and the photogenerated electrons from the CB of Bi2O3 recombined with the plasmon-induced holes of Ag NPs.285 α/β-Bi2O3–Ag–AgCl exhibited enhanced photocatalytic activity as compared to α/β-Bi2O3 nanowires for the degradation of Rhodamine B and acid orange 7 dyes. The higher photodegradation activity was attributed to the hierarchical nanostructures with large surface area, the profuse interfacial active sites, the enhanced absorption of visible light due to SPR effect of Ag NPs and the efficient separation of electron–hole pairs.285
In essence, only one SC is generally activated in plasmonic Z-scheme systems, while the SPR effect of the noble metal NPs always plays a significant role. When both SCs are excited, the noble metal particles primarily act as electron mediators. However, ASS Z-scheme systems are composed of costly noble metals which also reduce the light absorption capability of SCs. These drawbacks have limited their large scale implementation and alternatives for redox mediators-free Z-scheme systems have been sought, resulting in the development of third-generation Z-scheme systems, detailed hereafter.
3rd generation Z-scheme photocatalytic systems
3rd generation of Z-scheme photocatalysts (direct Z-scheme photocatalysts) do not require any redox medium for charge migration, generally comprising two different SCs. Structurally, a direct Z-scheme photocatalyst is analogous to a type-II SC–SC coupled heterojunction system (see section on nanocomposites), but the charge-carrier migration mechanism is rather different to that disclosed in type-II systems.
In a classical type-II heterojunction photocatalyst, the CB and the VB levels of SC2 are comparatively higher to the CB and VB levels of SC1. Upon exposure to photons irradiation, the photogenerated electrons transfer from the CB of SC2 to the CB of SC1, while the holes move from the VB of SC1 to the VB of SC2 (Fig. 30b). This results in a spatial separation of electron–hole pairs. However, the electrons and holes accumulated in the CB of SC1 and the VB of SC2, respectively, possess low reduction and oxidation potentials. In this regard, the redox ability of the overall photocatalyst is largely reduced.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of charge carrier separation in direct Z-scheme photocatalytic system (3rd generation Z-scheme system). (b) Charge carrier migration mechanism in type-II heterojunction photocatalysts. 
In contrast, the photogenerated electrons in SC2 with low reduction potential combine with the photogenerated holes in the VB of SC1 with low oxidation potential in direct Z-scheme photocatalytic systems. This results in the accumulation of electrons and holes with higher reduction and oxidation potentials, respectively, in SC1 and SC2 (Fig. 30a). The spatial separation of charge carriers takes place in direct Z-scheme photocatalysts, facilitating the system to achieve optimum redox capabilities.286–288
The charge carrier's migration mechanism in direct Z-scheme is homogeneous (similarly to both ASS Z-scheme and liquid-phase Z-scheme systems) but in the absence or need for any redox mediator (liquid or solid NPs). Direct Z-scheme systems hence avoid the backward reactions taking place in 1st generation Z-scheme photocatalysts. Additionally, direct Z-scheme systems facilitate the migration of the charge carriers directly across the interface of two SCs, thereby reducing the transformation distance with respect to 2nd generation Z-scheme photocatalysts, eventually ending up in avoiding unfavourable reactions. Direct Z-scheme systems also avoid the light shielding effect of noble metal NPs-based redox mediators.
Due to structural similarities between Z-scheme and type-II heterojunctions photocatalysts, the charge transfer mechanism in SC–SC coupled systems has been investigated in detail to differentiate between direct Z-scheme and type-II heterojunctions. Currently, several characterization techniques have been employed to obtain deep insights into the charge carrier migration process, namely internal electric field simulation, effective-mass calculation, X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, radical species trapping test and photocatalytic reduction tests.272
Direct Z-scheme photocatalysts were firstly reported by Yu et al. by demonstrating the high photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4/TiO2 nanocomposites under UV irradiation for the degradation of formaldehyde in air.289 The contact interface between SCs (g-C3N4 and TiO2) was directly achieved by coupling g-C3N4 with TiO2 NPs by calcination (550 °C for 60 min) of mixtures of TiO2 NPs and urea. After this seminal study, additional research efforts were reported on direct Z-scheme photocatalysts by several researchers across the globe. Li et al. employed a similar calcination technique (600 °C, 120 min) on the mixture of bulk g-C3N4 and nanotube titanic acid (NTA) to successfully synthesize visible light active direct Z-scheme g-C3N4/TiO2 nanocomposites.290 During thermal treatment, bulk g-C3N4 was oxidized to g-C3N4 nanosheets and NTA got dehydrated, resulting in the formation of novel-anatase TiO2 NPs. The thin nanosheets of g-C3N4 provided high surface area and short bulk diffusion length for the spatial separation of charge carriers.290 The visible light activity originated from the doping of TiO2 NPs during the heat treatment. As synthesized direct Z-scheme scheme photocatalyst 30%-g-C3N4/TiO2 (prepared from the precursor mixture containing 30 wt% of bulk g-C3N4) exhibited high activity for the photo-oxidation of propylene under visible light (λ ≥ 420 nm). This activity was attributed to the large surface area of the nanocomposite, the effective spatial separation of charge carriers and the morphology of photocatalysts (conjunction of thin nanosheets g-C3N4 and TiO2 nanoparticles).290
The contact interfaces between two SCs described in the above two cases were established via chemical interactions, which resulted in firm interfaces. A similar type of intimate interface contact has been also achieved and reported in two-dimensional (2D) composites consisting of 2D/2D g-C3N4/MnO2 heterostructured direct Z-scheme photocatalysts, directly synthesized via wet-chemical approach.291 As-synthesized photocatalysts exhibited higher photocatalytic activity for the degradation of phenol and rhodamine B dye as compared to individual g-C3N4 and MnO2 photocatalysts.291 The interface formation between two different SCs in direct Z-scheme photocatalytic system can also be accomplished via physical interactions based on the electrostatic attractions generated by opposite charges.
Xu et al. constructed 2D/2D α-Fe2O3/g-C3N4 direct Z-scheme photocatalysts via electrostatic self-assembling of g-C3N4 nanosheets with hematite α-Fe2O3 nanoplates.292 The resultant α-Fe2O3/g-C3N4 (10 wt% α-Fe2O3) heterostructures possessed intimate contact interfaces and displayed 13 times higher H2 evolution rate from water containing triethanolamine (hole scavenger) with respect to g-C3N4 photocatalysts under visible light irradiation.292 This high activity was attributed to the firm interface achieved through physical contact, where spatial separation charge carries occurred through Z-scheme mechanism.
Direct Z-scheme photocatalysts can provide three relevant advantages including (1) an efficient spatial separation of charge carriers upon excitation, (2) the generation (accumulation) of charge carriers with high redox ability and (3) and affordable and potentially cost-competitive fabrication cost. As a result, these materials display high photocatalytic activities for a wide range of applications (water splitting, degradation of pollutants, etc.).
With regards to the current development of direct Z-scheme photocatalytic systems, the construction of 2D/2D heterostructures is highly preferred due to the generation of contact interfaces between SCs over a large surface. Very recently, Hu et al. constructed a 2D/2D heterojunction of black phosphorus (BP)/Bi2WO6 (bismuth tungstate) monolayer nanosheets by the decoration of sandwich structure-like Bi2WO6 on the surface of BP nanoflakes through a simple wet chemical approach.125 The resultant nanocomposite material possessed intimate interfaces in contact and a homogeneous distribution of Bi2WO6 nanosheets on the BP surface. 12 wt% BP/Bi2WO6 nanocomposite displayed an outstanding photocatalytic rate for H2 evolution (21042 μmol g−1) from water splitting and removal nitric oxide (up to 67%), comparably 9.15 times and 2.15 times to that of monolayer BP nanosheets. The high photocatalytic activity was attributed to the novel heterojunction interfaces established between monolayers of Bi2WO6 nanosheets and BP flakes, enhanced light absorption and the efficient separation of charge carriers.125
Miscellaneous
Apart from the above discussed four categories of photocatalysts, there has been recently an increasing attention on piezoelectric semiconductors in photocatalysis.293–297 Conventionally, the term “piezoelectric” represents a group of materials (i.e. certain metal oxides) featuring non-centrosymmetric structures, that is, materials which do not possess centre of symmetry in their crystal structure. Such material possess the ability to enhance the rate of photochemical processes upon mechanical deformation by exhibiting spontaneous polarization by the induction of an electric field throughout the crystal. Due to such polarization potential, free charge carriers or photogenerated electrons or holes are spatially separated resulting in the observed enhancement in photocatalytic activity. Piezophotocatalysis (based on piezoelectric semiconductor photocatalysts) involves the synergy of photonic energy and mechanical energy to achieve enhanced photocatalytic rates.297 Within the perspective of synthetic approaches, such piezophotocatalysts can be designed via tailored synthesis of pure semiconductor possessing both piezoelectric and photonic properties and hybrid nanocomposites involving the conjunction of two different materials featuring piezo and photonic properties. The former case includes some recently reported materials including zinc tin oxide (ZTO–ZnSnO3) nanowire arrays,298 ZnO nanowires,299 sodium niobate (NaNbO3) and nanostructured films.300 The latter case involves hybrid system such as barium titanate/silver phosphate (BaTiO3/Ag3PO4) nanocomposites where the piezo properties of BaTiO3 is combined with the photochemical properties of Ag3PO4, resulting in novel nanocomposite piezophotocatalysts.301
In most of the cases, the mechanical energy required for piezophotocatalysis is provided by ultrasonic irradiation. The pros of such mechanical forces relies in the generation of periodic compression stress, which prevents the screening of piezoelectric generated charges by photogenerated charge carriers.302 Even though these novel piezophotocatalysts provide enhanced separation of charge carriers leading to enhanced photocatalytic activity, the photocatalytic applications of piezophotocatalysts are mostly limited to date to pollutant removal reactions and not extended – for instance – to CO2 reduction, novel organic molecules synthesis, etc. The field of piezophotocatalysis is still in its infancy and needs intensive fundamental research and engineering efforts to unleash its full potential.
Mechanical forces provided by ultrasonic waves and/or reactive extrusion (e.g. mechanochemistry) can result in the generation of defects on the surface of semiconductor materials.303 Nevertheless, there is still a need for more fundamental studies in such processes for elucidating the reasons behind the enhanced activity and the relationship between the mechanical force and the generated defects. Additionally, the development of reactor systems for an optimum input of mechanical energy (ultrasonic vibration, reactive extrusion-mechanochemistry-) and light energy is still far from being practical, as currently, no continuous flow photoreactor system involving both energies simultaneously has been reported to date.
Challenges & future prospects
Challenges for continuous synthesis of nanophotocatalysts
Concerning the four different families of photocatalytic materials, continuous synthetic processes have been successfully reported for conventional pure semiconductor photocatalysts (TiO2 and ZnO). Several studies are ongoing to improve the yield of the reported process and concurrently new synthetic techniques using supercritical medium are rapidly reported for synthesizing unconventional photocatalysts (GaN and CeO2) by several research groups. In the perspective of ternary SCs, synthetic explorations (continuous flow synthesis) has not spurred as seen in binary photocatalysts. Currently, the implementation of single source precursor and facilely operated flow systems has been studied for continuous synthesis of ternary SCs. Regarding solid solution photocatalysts, tremendous research is carried out in reducing the cost of single source precursors by elucidating or creating new synthetic strategies. Continuous synthetic shift from batch to flow, for solid solution lies completely in the dormant phase because of the non-availability of ready-made, stable and oxidation free single source precursors. Finally, for type-II and direct Z-scheme photocatalysts continuous consecutive synthesis of core (base SC) and shell using a dual reactor set up is the current area of focus.
Implementation of photocatalysts in heterogeneous photocatalysis
Heterogeneous photocatalysis involves a multiphase system involving the interaction between different phases (solid–gas, solid–liquid and solid–liquid–gas) through mass transfer (adsorption) upon mixing and charge transfer (redox reactions) upon exposure to light. Therefore, the design of a reactor for heterogeneous photocatalysis extensively depends on the photochemistry to which the system is subjected and the source of electromagnetic radiations. The design of the photoreactor is always targeted to achieve high photocatalytic activity by ensuring efficient illumination of the solid photocatalytic SC along with the synchronous enhancement of both mass transfer rate from photocatalysts surface and heat transfer rate from the reaction vessel. The composition and chemistry of phases involved in such systems determine the compatible materials for the construction of the photoreactor.303–308 The different multiphasic systems employed in heterogeneous photocatalysis are: (i) the solid-gas (organic/inorganic) system, (ii) the solid–liquid system and (iii) the solid–liquid–gas system. Broadly the photoreactors studied are of two types: batch and flow reactors. The batch reaction vessel used in this multiphasic systems are made up of either quartz, pyrex and sometimes stainless steel materials. The position of the irradiation source can be either internal or external irradiation.12,24,64,297 The effective utilization of photocatalysts within batch and flow reactors are achieved by two different methods: suspension and immobilization. In the former system, the photocatalytic material is suspended in the fluid (especially liquid) phase with the help of magnetic stirring, toroidal or non-toroidal agitation promoted by gas molecules. This suspension of the photocatalytic materials in the liquid phase (aqueous or non-aqueous) is called “slurry system”. In the immobilized system, the photocatalysts are bonded to inert surfaces, either through a physical or a chemical bonding.
Strategies for efficient implementation of photocatalysts in flow reactors
Flow reactors have been developed in the last two decades due to the attainment of higher throughput, enhanced mass and photon transfer. Comparatively, flow photoreactors provide reduction of safety hazards and simplify operation compared to batch reactors.309,310 Flow systems based on solid–gas (diphasic) or solid–fluid (liquid and/or gas) (diphasic or triphasic) initially progressed in the direction of immobilized system due to a simple separation of photocatalysts from the reactive mixture. The solid photocatalysts immobilized/mobilized on glass beads could be packed into Pyrex or borosilicate/glass tube in case of packed bed reactors (PBR)310,311 or successfully fluidized in the annular space between two tubes in fluidized bed reactors312 (Fig. 31a). Solid photocatalysts could be perfectly immobilized through various techniques on the walls of the reactor (see Fig. 31b), in case of an annular reactor,313–315 honeycomb monolith reactors294 and uniformly coated or dispersed in plate reactor.316,317 Behnajady et al. reported a continuous flow tubular photocatalytic reactor with immobilized photocatalysts for the degradation of acid red 27 (AR27) (an anionic monoazo dye).318 Commercially available TiO2 (Degussa P25) was herein immobilized on a glass plate and inserted inside the tubular reactor. The immobilization was carried out using a heat attachment methodology.
 Fig. 31  Strategies applied for the efficient implementation of photocatalysts in flow reactors redrawn, based on the artice.325 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 325. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons). 
Li et al. also reported the use of double cylindrical shell (DCS) photoreactor with an immobilized monolayer of TiO2 coated on silica gel beads.319 The design of this photoreactor was similar to the annular reactor. Another relevant reported immobilized system was denoted as labyrinth bubble photoreactor, studied by Hao et al. in which TiO2 photocatalysts was immobilized on quartz glass particles and a labyrinth fluid flow arrangement was achieved by the arrangement of parallel baffle plates within the reaction vessel.320
Effective utilization of photons under flow conditions can be achieved via optimum positioning of the irradiation source either internally within the reaction vessel (annular and PBR system) or externally with respect to the reaction vessel (plate reactor or fluidized bed reactor).
In both solid–liquid (diphasic) and solid–liquid–gas (triphasic) systems, slurry reactors are highly advantageous as compared to immobilized photocatalytic reactor systems due to enhanced higher photocatalytic activity. This enhanced behaviour of slurry systems is due to the intrinsic furnishing of high total surface area of photocatalysts per unit volume. The implementation of immobilized systems at large scale still remains a significant challenge. The complex design of the irradiation source, according to the requisite length of the upscale system has limited research from developing further these systems. Even though the slurry system is highly economical in terms of fabrication and operation, its major and only limitation is the requirement for downstream separation of the photocatalytic materials from the product/liquid stream.321
Priya and Kanmani developed a two different novel batch slurry (BG) and batch slurry recycle reactors fitted with continuous supply of inert gas (BRRwCG) for water splitting reaction under solar irradiation.322 Both reactor materials were made up of plexiglas material, transparent to the solar spectrum wavelength (290–700 nm). The photocatalytic material was successfully suspended in BG through magnetic stirring. Analogously, the suspension was achieved in BRRwCG through continuous bubbling of the reactant solution by an inert gas. Simultaneously, a part of the reactant solution was recirculated using a peristaltic pump (Fig. 31d). The catalyst composition in both reactors was kept identical and it was found that BRRwCG exposed higher photocatalytic activity as compared to BG due to the enhanced mass transfer and photon distribution.322 Slurry rectors with continuous single phase (no gas promoted agitation, Fig. 31c) suffer from severe limitations of photon and mass transfer when they are upscaled to achieve higher throughput.
McCullagh et al. developed a novel continuous flow slurry reactor for the degradation of MB dye under UV irradiation.323 This novel system coupled the usage of ‘Drum Reactor’ design and pelletized titania photocatalytic particles. The commercially available Hombikat pellet titania catalyst was employed which avoids any downstream processing to separate the photocatalysts from the liquid phase.
Challenges for effective flow photoreactors
Research for novel photoreactors and effective utilization of photocatalysts has pushed scientists more into microreactor fabrication and design. These microreactors provide enhanced mass transfer compared to the conventionally mentioned large scale photocatalytic reactors. Due to high surface-to-volume ratio achieved in this system, as a result of their small dimensions.324–326 Simultaneously, they provide the opportunity for low catalyst loading, enhanced heat transfers and homogeneous photon distribution.326–328
Concerning slurry reactors, there is currently a rapid research effort going on to replace the mechanically attained suspension by air or reactive gas agitation attained suspension. These systems are currently given preference because of the rapid development of microreactors which leads to low catalyst loading. Similarly, advanced progress in downstream separation equipment have also motivated researchers to switch towards continuous flow slurry reactors without any immobilization. As example, Rakhshaee et al. designed a plug flow reactor (PFR) in which nano-hematite (α-Fe2O3) photocatalysts were successfully suspended in the liquid phase with air promoted suspension.329
Conclusions
Several modified/unmodified SCs studied to date in heterogeneous photocatalytic field have been described in this work. These highly efficient photocatalysts were classified into four different categories depending on their composition, band gap engineering and charge carrier migration mechanisms. Currently developed synthetic strategies for each photocatalyst have been reviewed along with the rationale behind the new synthetic approach and its advantages over conventional synthetic routes. Their photocatalytic performance was also discussed and compared with conventional systems, finding significant advantages in the interface engineered systems as compared to traditional photocatalysts. Importantly, photoreactor systems (nature of photons source used and type of reaction vessel, types of reactor) were also briefly covered in the future prospects section, with a particular emphasis on flow photochemical processes and reactors, believed to the way forward in the field. We hope the proposed overview can provide a comprehensive compilation of key studies to progress the state-of-the-art in the field and look forward to additional advances in the design of advanced versatile (nano)photocatalysts in the future with several relevant applications.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work has received funding from the European Union's Horizon 2020 research and innovation program under the Marie Sklodowska-Curie grant agreement No 641861: Photo4Future project. The publication has been prepared with support from RUDN University Program 5-100.
Notes and references
M. A. Rauf and S. S. Ashraf, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 151, 10–18 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Herrmann, Catal. Today, 1999, 53, 115–129 CrossRef CAS .
C. Acar, I. Dincer and C. Zamfirescu, Int. J. Energy Res., 2014, 31, 135–147 Search PubMed .
Z. Zhang and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5520–5551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, J. Wang, H. Xu and Y. Xiong, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2799–2823 RSC .
J. Kou, C. Lu, J. Wang, Y. Chen, Z. Xu and R. S. Varma, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 1445–1514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Linsebigler, G. Lu and J. T. Yates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 735–758 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schneider, M. Matusoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Teoh, L. Mädler, D. Beydoun, S. E. Pratsinis and R. Amal, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 5852–5861 CrossRef CAS .
W. Y. Teoh, Materials, 2013, 6, 3194–3212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Mädler, H. K. Kammler, R. Mueller and S. E. Pratsinis, J. Aerosol Sci., 2002, 33, 369–389 CrossRef .
Z. Shu, X. Jiao and D. Chen, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 1122–1127 RSC .
M. V. Carević, N. D. Abazovic, M. N. Mitric, G. Ciric-Marjanovic, M. D. Mojovic, S. P. Ahrenkiel and M. I. Comor, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 205, 130–137 CrossRef .
S. N. Basahel, T. T. Ali, M. Mokhtar and K. Narasimharao, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 1–13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zandiehnadem, R. A. Murray and W. Y. Ching, Physica B+C, 1988, 150, 19–24 CrossRef CAS .
R. Y. Hong, J. H. Li, L. L. Chen, D. Q. Liu, H. Z. Li, Y. Zheng and J. Ding, Powder Technol., 2009, 189, 426–432 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhai, S. Zhang and H. Pang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 1863–1866 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Khan, M. Faisal, M. M. Rahman and A. Jamal, Sci. Total Environ., 2011, 409, 2987–2992 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Roig, S. Marre, T. Cardinal and C. Aymonier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 12071–12074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Slostowski, S. Marre, J. M. Bassat and C. Aymonier, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2013, 84, 89–97 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ye, L. Kong, F. Chen, Z. Chen, Y. Lin and C. Liu, Optik, 2018, 164, 345–354 CrossRef CAS .
E. Monroy, F. Omnès and F. Calle, Wide-bandgap semiconductor ultraviolet photodetectors, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2003, 18, R33 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Banerjee, L. Yu and H. Matsui, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 16002–16003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-S. Hu, L.-L. Ren, Y.-G. Guo, H.-P. Liang, A.-M. Cao, L.-J. Wan and C.-L. Bai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1269–1273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, H. Zhang and M. T. Swihart, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 235603 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Luo, Y. Liu, J. Hu, H. Liu and J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 1813–1821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Xu, S. Zhu, Y. Liang, Z. Li, Z. Cui, X. Yang and A. Inoue, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1–11 Search PubMed .
D. Jing and L. Guo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11139–11145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, Q. Xiang, Y. Liao and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1362–1391 RSC .
F. Qiu, Z. Han, J. J. Peterson, M. Y. Odoi, K. L. Sowers and T. D. Krauss, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 5347–5352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Holmes, T. K. Townsend and F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 371–373 RSC .
I. Yonenaga, Phys. B, 2001, 308–310, 1150–1152 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kida, Y. Minami, G. Guan, M. Nagano, M. Akiyama and A. Yoshida, J. Mater. Sci., 2006, 41, 3527–3534 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jung, Y. J. Hong, Y. Li, J. Cho, Y.-J. Kim and G.-C. Yi, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 637–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Tabata, K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. Lu, T. Takata, R. Abe and K. Domen, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 9161–9165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Chun, A. Ishikawa, H. Fujisawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara, M. Kawai, Y. Matsumoto and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 1798–1803 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hitoki, A. Ishikawa, T. Takata, J. N. Kondo, M. Hara and K. Domen, Chem. Lett., 2002, 736–737 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, J. E. Thorne, C. H. Wu, P. Ma, C. Du, Q. Dong, J. Guo and D. Wang, Chem, 2016, 1, 640–655 CAS .
Q. Zhang and L. Gao, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 9821–9827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. K. Ma, T. Hisatomi, K. Maeda, Y. Moriya and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 19993–19996 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, J. Low, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2150–2176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wen, J. Xie, X. Chen and X. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 391, 72–123 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Dong, Y. Zhang, Q. Pan and J. Qiu, J. Photochem. Photobiol., C, 2014, 20, 33–50 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chu, K. Hu, J. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Ali, C. Qin and L. Jing, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 57–65 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ye, R. Wang, M. Wu and Y. Yuan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 358, 15–27 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yin, J. Han, T. Zhou and R. Xu, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2015, 5, 5048–5061 RSC .
Z. Zhao, Y. Sun and F. Dong, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 15–37 RSC .
Y. Zheng, L. Lin, B. Wang and X. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 12868–12884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Wang and M. Antonietti, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2308–2326 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-T. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ding, D. Yang, Z. Tong, Y. Nan, Y. Wang, X. Zou and Z. Jiang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2017, 4, 1455–1469 RSC .
A. Naseri, M. Samadi, A. Pourjavadi, A. Z. Moshfegh and S. Ramakrishna, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23406–23433 RSC .
H. Dong, X. Guo, C. Yang and Z. Ouyang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 230, 65–76 CrossRef CAS .
B. Giroire, S. Marre, A. Garcia, T. Cardinal and C. Aymonier, React. Chem. Eng., 2016, 1, 151–155 RSC .
K. Fujinami, K. Katagiri, J. Kamiya, T. Hamanaka and K. Koumoto, Nanoscale, 2010, 2, 2080–2083 RSC .
T. Ohno, T. Tsubota, Y. Nakamura and K. Sayama, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 288, 74–79 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ahuja and T. R. N. Kutty, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1996, 97, 99–107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, G. Xu, Z. Ren, C. Xu, W. Weng, G. Shen and G. Han, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2010, 93, 1297–1305 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Huynh and V. Minh, AIP Conf. Proc., 2017, 1878, 020012 CrossRef .
G. Wu, P. Li, D. Xu, B. Luo, Y. Hong, W. Shi and C. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 333, 39–47 CrossRef CAS .
K. Domen, A. Kudo and T. Onishi, J. Catal., 1986, 102, 92–98 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, K. Domen, S. Naito, T. Onishi and K. Tamaru, Chem. Lett., 1983, 321–324 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, S. Zhang, L. Wang, D. Xue and S. Yin, J. Cryst. Growth, 2009, 311, 746–748 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Lee, I. S. Cho, D. K. Yim, J. H. Noh, K. S. Hong and D. W. Kim, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2010, 118, 876–880 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kobayashi, Y. Suzuki, T. Goto, S. H. Cho, T. Sekino, Y. Asakura and S. Jin, J. Ceram. Soc. Jpn., 2018, 126, 135–138 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, Catal. Surv. Asia, 2003, 7, 31–38 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 4285–4292 CrossRef CAS .
S. Takasugi, K. Tomita, M. Iwaoka, H. Kato and M. Kakihana, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 5638–5643 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Hu, H.-H. Huang and Y.-C. Huang, J. Energy Chem., 2017, 26, 515–521 CrossRef .
A. Kudo and H. Kato, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 331, 373–377 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li and J. Zang, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 1380–1383 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sudrajat, S. Babel, I. Thushari and K. Laohhasurayotin, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 775, 1277–1285 CrossRef CAS .
V. Jeyalakshmi, S. Tamilmani, R. Mahalakshmy and P. Bhyrappa, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2016, 420, 200–207 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tong, Y. Wang, Y. Liu, M. Li, Z. Zhang, H. Huang, T. Sun, J. Yang, F. Li and X. Wang, J. Catal., 2018, 361, 303–312 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Hu and H. Teng, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 331, 44–50 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, Y. Zhu and N. Wu, J. Solid State Chem., 2004, 177, 3868–3872 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ben Ali, F. Barka-Bouaifel, H. Elhouichet, B. Sieber, A. Addad, L. Boussekey, M. Ferid and R. Boukherroub, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2015, 457, 360–369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Paulauskas, J. E. Katz, N. S. Lewis, L. Boatner and G. M. Brown, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2009, 156, 580–587 CrossRef .
B. Modak and S. K. Ghosh, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 6920–6929 CrossRef CAS .
T. Su, H. Jiang and H. Gong, J. Solid State Chem., 2011, 184, 2601–2604 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shao, X. Yin and J. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 512, 466–473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Modeshia and R. I. Walton, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4303–4325 RSC .
K. Li, A. D. Handoko, M. Khraisheh and J. Tang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 9767–9773 RSC .
O. A. Carrasco-Jaima, L. M. Torres-Martínez and E. Moctezuma, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2018, 358, 167–176 CrossRef .
X. Xu, G. Liu and A. K. Azad, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40, 3672–3678 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takashima, T. Sano and H. Irie, Electrochemistry, 2016, 84, 784–788 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, S. Yan, Z. Wang, X. Wang, Z. Li, J. Ye and Z. Zou, Dalton Trans., 2009, 8519–8524 RSC .
D. Arney, C. Hardy, B. Greve and P. A. Maggard, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 214, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 12441–12447 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 197–202 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, G. Li, Y. Bai, N. Yang and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2011, 72, 1457–1461 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Z. Zou, J. Yin and J. Ye, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 382, 175–179 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Z. Zou, M. Katagiri, T. Kako and J. Ye, Catal. Today, 2004, 93–95, 885–889 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Chang, K. K. Rao, H. C. Kuo, J. F. Cai and M. S. Wong, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 321, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tang, Z. Zou and J. Ye, Chem. Mater., 2004, 4, 1644–1649 CrossRef .
J. Ding, S. Sun, J. Bao, Z. Luo and C. Gao, Catal. Lett., 2009, 130, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
W.-K. Chang, D.-S. Sun, H. Chan, P.-T. Huang, W.-S. Wu, C.-H. Lin, Y.-H. Tseng, Y.-H. Cheng, C.-C. Tseng and H.-H. Chang, Nanomedicine, 2012, 8, 609–617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ding, W. Yan, S. Sun, J. Bao and C. Gao, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 39, 119–126 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, R. Selvaraj, M. Sillanpää, Y. Kim and C.-W. Tai, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 11720–11726 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, C. Guo, Y. Yang, L. Li and N. Zhang, Acta Mater., 2013, 61, 7481–7487 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, C. Guo, H. Jiao, L. Li and D. K. Agrawal, Opt. Commun., 2014, 312, 284–286 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. S. Tavares, M. M. Melo, V. D. Araujo, R. L. Tranquilin, C. R. R. Almeida, C. A. Paskocimas, M. R. D. Bomio, E. Longo and F. V. Motta, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 658, 316–323 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Maruyama, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23274–23278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ouyang, H. Zhang, D. Li, T. Yu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11677–11682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Maruyama, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23274–23278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ouyang, Z. Li, Z. Ouyang, T. Yu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 3134–3141 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ouyang, N. Kikugawa, D. Chen, Z. Zou and J. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 1560–1566 CrossRef CAS .
M. Akhtar, M. Menon, M. Sunkara, G. Sumanasekera and A. Durygin, J. Alloys Compd., 2015, 641, 87–92 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tokunaga, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4624–4628 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Bierlein and A. W. Sleight, Solid State Commun., 1975, 16, 69–70 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Bodart, Y. Dumazy, J. P. Amoureux and C. Fernández, Magn. Reson. Chem., 1999, 37, 223–226 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kohtani, J. Hiro, N. Yamamoto, A. Kudo, K. Tokumura and R. Nakagaki, Catal. Commun., 2005, 6, 185–189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kohtani, M. Koshiko, A. Kudo, K. Tokumura, Y. Ishigaki, A. Toriba, K. Hayakawa and R. Nakagaki, Appl. Catal., B, 2003, 46, 573–586 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo, K. Omori and H. Kato, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 11459–11467 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu and A. Kudo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2006, 16, 2163–2169 CrossRef CAS .
M. R. da Silva, L. H. Dall’Antonia, L. V. A. Scalvi, D. I. dos Santos, L. O. Ruggiero and A. Urbano, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2012, 16, 3267–3274 CrossRef .
B. Zhou, J. Qu, X. Zhao and H. Liu, J. Environ. Sci., 2011, 23, 151–159 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sarkar, N. S. Das and K. K. Chattopadhyay, Solid State Sci., 2014, 33, 58–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, L. Zhao and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 7127–7133 CrossRef CAS .
B. Xie, C. He, P. Cai and Y. Xiong, Thin Solid Films, 2010, 518, 1958–1961 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, Z. Wang, L. Wan, Z. Li, T. Yu and Z. Zou, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 405402 CrossRef .
R. Venkatesan, S. Velumani, K. Ordon, M. Makowska-Janusik, G. Corbel and A. Kassiba, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 205, 325–333 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Schwarz, H. Wirth and O. Schmidt-Park, Eur. Coat. J., 2016, 9, 26–31 Search PubMed .
J. Hu, D. Chen, Z. Mo, N. Li, Q. Xu, H. Li, J. He, H. Xu and J. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 131, 2095–2099 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, R. Ciriminna, M. Pagliaro and Y.-J. Xu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5276–5287 RSC .
Z. Chen, D. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Shao, T. Chen, M. Sun and X. Fu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 4433–4440 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, T.-W. Ng, W.-K. Ho, J. Huang, S. Liang, T. An, G. Li, J. C. Yu and P. K. Wong, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 129, 482–490 CrossRef CAS .
F.-Y. Lee, K.-Y. Yang, Y.-C. Wang, C.-H. Li, T. R. Lee and T.-C. Lee, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 35215–35223 RSC .
M. Dai, S. Ogawa, T. Kameyama, K.-I. Okazaki, A. Kudo, S. Kuwabata, Y. Tsuboi and T. Torimoto, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 12851–12858 RSC .
S. K. Apte, S. N. Garaje, R. D. Bolade, J. D. Ambekar, M. V. Kulkarni, S. D. Naik, S. W. Gosavi, J. O. Baeg and B. B. Bale, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6095–6102 RSC .
T. A. Kandiel, D. H. Anjum, P. Sautet, T. Le Bahers and K. Takanabe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8896–8904 RSC .
N. Xiao, L. Zhu, K. Wang, Q. Dai, Y. Wang, S. Li, Y. Sui, Y. Ma, J. Liu, B. Liu, G. Zou and B. Zou, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7443–7447 RSC .
M. Tabata, K. Maeda, T. Ishihara, T. Minegishi, T. Takata and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 11215–11220 CrossRef CAS .
C. Coughlan, M. Ibañez, O. Dobrozhan, A. Singh, A. Cabot and K. M. Ryan, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 5865–6109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kolny-Olesiak and H. Weller, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12221–12237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. D. Regulacio and M.-Y. Han, Acc. Chem. Res., 2016, 49, 511–519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tsuji, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 3565–3568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nanu, J. Schoonman and A. Goossens, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 1716–1719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tsuji, H. Kato and A. Kudo, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 1969–1975 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Erwin and I. Žutić, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 410–414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Aldakov, A. Lefrançois and P. Reiss, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3756–3776 RSC .
H. Zhong, Z. Bai and B. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 3167–3175 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu and E. Hua, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2015, 40, 446–452 CrossRef CAS .
D. Huang and C. Persson, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2014, 591, 189–192 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, T. Chen, Y. Xu, M. Wang, W. Jiang and W. Jiang, J. Lumin., 2018, 200, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, H. Zhang, J. Huang and X. Zhong, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 27–33 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, D. Li, Z. Chen, M. Su, W. Li, Q. Lin and X. Fu, Mater. Res. Bull., 2011, 46, 975–982 CrossRef CAS .
A. Hossein, C. Khavar and M. Jafarisani, Int. J. Heal. Stud., 2017, 3, 19–25 Search PubMed .
J. Q. Hu, B. Deng, C. R. Wang, K. B. Tang and Y. T. Qian, Solid State Commun., 2002, 121, 493–496 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhong, Y. Zhao, H. Yang, J. Wang, X. Liang and W. Xiang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 10188–10194 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Regulacio, C. Ye, S. H. Lim, Y. Zheng, Q.-H. Xu and M.-Y. Han, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 5214–5217 RSC .
Z. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Huang, J. Li, Y. Yuan, H. Ye, D. Zhu, Z. Wang and A. Tang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 158–169 RSC .
G. Philippot, M. Albino, U.-C. Chung, M. Josse, C. Elissalde, M. Maglione and C. Aymonier, Mater. Des., 2015, 86, 354–360 CrossRef CAS .
G. Philippot, C. Elissalde, M. Maglione and C. Aymonier, Adv. Powder Technol., 2014, 25, 1415–1429 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Mei, M. Zhang, J. Schneider, W. Wang, N. Zhang, Y. Su, B. Chen, S. Wang, A. L. Rogach and F. Pan, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 982–987 RSC .
S. Guo and C. T. Liu, Prog. Nat. Sci. Mater. Int., 2011, 21, 433–446 CrossRef .

IUPAC. Compendium of Chemical Terminology 2nd ed. (the ‘Gold Book’). Blackwell Sci. Publ., Oxford,  2014 Search PubMed .
S. Ouyang and J. Ye, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7757–7763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ren, S. Ouyang, H. Chen, N. Umezawa, D. Lu, D. Wang, H. Xu and J. Ye, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 168–169, 243–249 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Scaife, Sol. Energy, 1980, 25, 41–54 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. Liu, H. Chang and S. Tang, RSC Adv., 2015, 1, 59970–59975 RSC .
G. Li, T. Kako, D. Wang, Z. Zou and J. Ye, J. Solid State Chem., 2007, 180, 2845–2850 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, T. Takata, M. Hara, N. Saito, Y. Inoue, H. Kobayashi and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 8286–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 612–623 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Menon, R. Anitha, B. Gupta, K. Baskar and S. Singh, AIP Conf. Proc., 2016, 1731, 50025 CrossRef .
H. A. N. Dharmagunawardhane, A. James, Q. Wu, W. R. Woerner, R. M. Palomino, A. Sinclair, A. Orlov and J. B. Parise, RSC Adv., 2018, 8, 8976–8982 RSC .
D. Wang, T. Kako and J. Ye, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 3785–3792 CrossRef CAS .
W. F. Zhang, J. Tang and J. Ye, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 418, 174–178 CrossRef CAS .
I. Grinberg, D. V. West, M. Torres, G. Gou, D. M. Stein, L. Wu., G. Chen, E. M. Gallo, A. R. Akbashev, P. K. Davies, J. E. Spanier and A. M. Rappe, Nature, 2013, 503, 509–512 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Han, G. Chen, C. Li, Y. Yu and Y. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 1696–1702 RSC .
Y.-Y. Hsu, N.-T. Suen, C.-C. Chang, S.-F. Hung, C.-L. Chen, T.-S. Chan, C.-L. Dong, C.-C. Chan, S.-Y. Chen and H.-M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 22558–22569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kaga, Y. Tsutsui, A. Nagane, A. Iwasea and A. Kondo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 5, 21815 RSC .
S. Zhao, J. Huang, Q. Huo, X. Zhou and W. Tu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 193–199 RSC .
M. Matsumura, S. Furukawa, Y. Saho and H. Tsubomura, J. Phys. Chem., 1985, 89, 1327–1329 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, B. Chang, Y. Tian, F. Xi and X. Dong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 3083–3090 RSC .
Y.-L. Min, G.-Q. He, Q.-J. Xu and Y.-C. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2578–2584 RSC .
J. Zhang, Y. Wang, J. Jin, J. Zhang, Z. Lin, F. Huang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 10317–10324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, Y. Zhang, W. Yan and L. Guo, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2006, 31, 2018–2024 CrossRef CAS .
F. del Valle, A. Ishikawa, K. Domen, J. A. Villoria de la Mano, M. C. Sanchez-Sanchez, I. D. Gonzalez, S. Herreras, N. Mota, M. E. Rivas, M. C. Alvarez Galvan, J. L. G. Fierro and R. M. Navarro, Catal. Today, 2009, 143, 51–56 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Zhang and M. Jaroniec, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1611–1614 RSC .
Q. Nie, Q. Yuan, Q. Wang and Z. Xu, J. Mater. Sci., 2004, 39, 5611–5612 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, B. Yang and B. Cheng, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2670–2677 RSC .
Q. Li, H. Meng, P. Zhou, Y. Zheng, J. Wang, J. Yu and J.-R. Gong, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 882–889 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fu, B. Zhu, W. You, M. Jaroniec and J. Yu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 148–160 CrossRef CAS .
J. Klaer, J. Bruns, R. Henninger, K. Siemer, R. Klenk, K. Ellmer and D. Braeunig, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 1998, 13, 1456–1458 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Rashkeev and W. R. L. Lambrecht, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 165212 CrossRef .
A. A. Lavrentiev, B. V. Gabrel’yan and I. Y. Nikiforov, J. Struct. Chem., 2000, 41, 418–426 CrossRef CAS .
I. Tsuji, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 13406–13413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Tsuji, H. Kato, H. Kobayashi and A. Kudo, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 7323–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gabka, P. Bujak, K. Giedyk, A. Ostrowski, K. Malinowska, J. Herbich, B. Golec, I. Wielgus and A. Pron, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 5002–5012 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Kameyama, T. Takahashi, T. Machida, Y. Kamiya, T. Yamamoto, S. Kuwabata and T. Torimoto, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 24740–24749 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Q. Wang, X. Zhan, F. Wang and M. Safdar, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 8326–8339 RSC .
H. McDaniel, P. E. Heil, C. L. Tsai, K. Kim and M. Shim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7677–7683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Cheng, B. Huang, Y. Dai, X. Qin and X. Zhang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 6618–6624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, S. Ouyang, Z. Li, L. Liu, T. Yu, J. Ye and Z. Zou, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2006, 67, 2501–2505 CrossRef CAS .
L. Huang, F. Peng, H. Wang, H. Yu and Z. Li, Catal. Commun., 2009, 10, 1839–1843 CrossRef CAS .
C. Shifu, Z. Sujuan, L. Wei and Z. Wei, J. Hazard. Mater., 2008, 155, 320–326 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Dong, X. Xiao, G. Chen, H. Guan and Y. Wan, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2016, 155, 1–8 CrossRef .
L. Wei, C. Shifu, Z. Huaye and Y. Xiaoling, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2011, 6, 102–120 CrossRef .
L. Wei and C. Shifu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2010, 157, H1029 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares, R. Luque, J. M. Campelo, F. Colmenares, Z. Karpinski and A. A. Romero, Materials, 2009, 2, 2228–2258 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen and S. S. Mao, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2891–2959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Gole, J. D. Stout, C. Burda, Y. Lou and X. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 1230–1240 CrossRef CAS .
K. R. Gopidas, M. Bohorquez and P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 6435–6440 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. D. Vu, F. Mighri, A. Ajji and T.-O. Do, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 3888–3897 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, T. An, X. Liu, X. Hu, G. Sheng and J. Fu, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 1883–1886 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-Z. Gu, H.-L. Lu, Y. Geng, Z.-Y. Ye, Y. Zhang, Q.-Q. Sun, S.-J. Ding and D. W. Zhang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 107 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Liu, H. Ye, X. Xiong and H. Liu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2010, 121, 432–439 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Potlog, V. Botnariuc, S. Raevschi, M. Dobromir and D. Luca, 3rd International Conference on Nanotechnologies and Biomedical Engineering, 2016.
A. M. Hussein, L. Mahoney, R. Peng, H. Kibombo, C.-M. Wu, R. T. Koodali and R. Shende, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2013, 5, 1–13 Search PubMed .
P. Prasannalakshmi and N. Shanmugam, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2017, 61, 114–124 CrossRef CAS .
V. Štengl, S. Bakardjieva, N. Murafa, V. Houšková and K. Lang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2008, 110, 370–378 CrossRef .
P. Prasannalakshmi and N. Shanmugam, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2017, 175, 1–10 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Kaidashev, M. Lorentz, H. von Wenckstern, A. Rahm, H.-C. Semmelhack, K.-H. Han, G. Benndorf, C. Bundesmann, H. Hochmuth and M. Grundmann, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 3901–3903 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Chopra and S. R. Das, Thin-Film Sol. Cells, 1983, 414, 457–481 Search PubMed .
J. B. Asbury, Y. Wang and T. Lian, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 6643–6647 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shen, X. Zhao, S. Zhou, W. Hou and J.-J. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 17958–17964 CrossRef CAS .
T. P. Chou, Q. Zhang, G. E. Fryxell and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2588–2592 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, T. P. Chou, B. Russo, S. A. Jenekhe and G. Cao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 2402–2406 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Xu, L. Zhang, H. Cheng and Y. Zhu, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 382–387 CrossRef CAS .
J. Nayak, H. Lohani and T. K. Bera, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2011, 11, 93–97 CrossRef .
H. Zhou, Y. Qu, T. Zeid and X. Duan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 6732–6743 RSC .
X. Gan, X. Li, X. Gao, J. Qiu and F. Zhuge, Nanotechnology, 2011, 22, 305601 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Khanchandani, S. Kundu, A. Patra and A. K. Ganguli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5558–5567 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, P. Diao, X. Wang and S. Cai, J. Solid State Chem., 2005, 178, 3210–3215 CrossRef CAS .
S. Khanchandani, S. Kundu, A. Patra and A. K. Ganguli, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 23653–23662 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, C. Shao, X. Zhang and Y. Liu, Inorg. Chem., 2009, 48, 7261–7268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wu, H. Cao, S. Yin, X. Liu and X. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 17893–17898 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Kuang, C. Lao, Z. L. Wang, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6070–6071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, C. Wang, Y. Zhou, M. Ge, X. Xu, Z. Zhang and J. Z. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 46–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Law, H. Kind, B. Messer, F. Kim and P. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 2405–2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, C. Shao, X. Li, L. Zhang, H. Xue, C. Wang and Y. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 7920–7925 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xia, H. Zhuang, T. Zhang and D. Xiao, Mater. Lett., 2008, 62, 1126–1128 CrossRef CAS .
N. Hayashi, S. Muranaka, S. Yamamoto, M. Takano, D.-F. Zhang, L.-D. Sun and C.-H. Yan, J. Solid State Chem., 2008, 181, 3283–3286 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rumyantseva, V. Kovalenko, A. Gaskov, E. Makshina, V. Yuschenko, I. Ivanova, A. Ponzoni, G. Faglia and E. Comini, Sens. Actuators, B, 2006, 118, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Chen, C.-L. Zhu, L.-J. Wang, P. Gao, M.-S. Cao and X.-L. Shi, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 45502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang, Q. Kuang, Z.-X. Xie and L.-S. Zheng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7874–7879 CrossRef CAS .
N. Takeda and B. A. Parkinson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 5559–5571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Zhang, Z.-N. Du, S.-Y. Li and M. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 95, 153–159 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Zhang, Z.-N. Du, K.-W. Li, M. Zhang and D. D. Dionysiou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 1528–1537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Beydoun, R. Amal, G. K.-C. Low and S. McEvoy, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4387–4396 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, W. Shangguan, J. Yuan, J. Shi and M. Chen, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2007, 8, 40–46 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Cao, H. Liu, P. Li, F. Wei, Y. Jiang and W. Song, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1677–1681 RSC .
Y. Liu, W.-J. Son, J. Lu, B. Huang, Y. Dai and M.-H. Wangbo, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 9342–9349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Ye, in BiOX (X = Cl, Br, and I) Photocatalysts, Semiconductor Photocatalysis, ed. W. Cao, Intechopen, 2016, https://www.intechopen.com/books/semiconductor-photocatalysis-materials-mechanisms-and-applications/biox-x-cl-br-and-i-photocatalysts.
Y. Yang, C. Zhang, C. Lai, G. Zeng, D. Huang, M. Cheng, J. Wang, F. Chen, C. Zhou and W. Xiong, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2018, 254, 76–93 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ye, Y. Su, X. Jin, H. Xie and C. Zhang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2014, 1, 90–112 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Yu and L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8473–8488 RSC .
H. Cheng, B. Huang and Y. Dai, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2009–2026 RSC .
W. Lin, X. Yu, Y. Zhu and Y. Zhang, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Zhang, W. Wang, L. Zhou, M. Shang and S. Sun, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 90, 458–462 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Hsu, S.-Y. Lu and Y.-F. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1350–1357 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Hsu, S.-Y. Lu and Y.-F. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2004, 2102–2103 RSC .
M. R. Kim, Y. M. Kang and D. J. Jang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 18507–18511 CrossRef CAS .
A. Datta, S. K. Panda and S. Chaudhuri, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 17260–17264 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, H. Wei, Y. Fan, X. Liu and J. Zhan, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2009, 4, 558–564 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Takahara, J. N. Kondo, T. Takata, D. Lu and K. Domen, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 1194–1199 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Pan and W. I. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 847–853 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 35–54 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, J. Guan, L. Gao and Z. Sun, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 548–552 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, J. Guan, W. Shi and L. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 377, 160–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Herek, W. Wohlleben, R. J. Cogdell, D. Zeidler and M. Motzkus, Nature, 2002, 417, 533–535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Umena, K. Kawakami, J. Shen and N. Kamiya, Nature, 2011, 473, 55–60 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
A. J. Bard, J. Photochem., 1979, 10, 59–75 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Suzuki, A. Iwase, H. Tanaka, S. Sato, A. Kudo and T. Morikawa, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13283–13290 RSC .
K. Maeda, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1486–1503 CrossRef CAS .
K. Qi, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. W. Ho, Chin. J. Catal., 2017, 38, 1936–1955 CrossRef CAS .
J. Low, C. Jiang, B. Cheng, S. Wageh, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and J. Yu, Small Methods, 2017, 1, 1700080 CrossRef .
H. Li, W. Tu, Y. Zhou and Z. Zou, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500389 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Maeda, M. Higashi, D. Lu, R. Abe and K. Domen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 5858–5868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abe, M. Higashi and K. Domen, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 228–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Abe, K. Sayama and H. Sugihara, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16052–16061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Sasaki, A. Iwase, H. Kato and A. Kudo, J. Catal., 2008, 259, 133–137 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, S. K. Cushing, P. Zheng, T. Senty, F. Meng, A. D. Bristow, A. Manivannan and N. Wu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8438–8449 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Yun, H. Lee, N. D. Kim, D. M. Lee, S. Yu and J. Yi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4084–4090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Tada, T. Mitsui, T. Kiyonaga, T. Akita and K. Tanaka, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 782–786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Cheng, F. Bing, Q. Liu, Z. Zhang and X. Fang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4652–4658 RSC .
J. Li, Y. Xie, Y. Zhong and Y. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 5474–5481 RSC .
J. Hou, Z. Wang, C. Yang, W. Zhou, S. Jiao and H. Zhu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 5132–5141 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kobayashi, S. Tanigawa, T. Takashima, B. Ohtani and H. Irie, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 22450–22458 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, J. Hou, H. Zhu and X.-M. Guo, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 41622–41630 RSC .
S. Liu, J. Chen, D. Xu, X. Zhang and M. Shen, J. Mater. Res., 2018, 33, 1391–1400 CrossRef CAS .
N. Subha, M. Mahalakshmi, M. Myilsamy, B. Neppolian and V. Murugesan, Appl. Catal., A, 2018, 553, 43–51 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiong, S. Jiang, S. Song, X. Wu, J. Li and Z. Le, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 10905–10913 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, S. Wang, J. Low and W. Xiao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 16883–16890 RSC .
J. Li, M. Zhang, Q. Li and J. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 391, 184–193 CrossRef .
P. Xia, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu and J. Xu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 965–973 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xu, B. Zhu, C. Jiang, B. Cheng and J. Yu, Sol. RRL, 2018, 2, 1800006 CrossRef .
M. B. Starr and X. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 14, 296–311 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, B. Wang, F. Huang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(23), 7526–7536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, J. Briscoe and S. Dunn, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 4215–4223 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, H. Huang, L. Guo, Y. Zhang and T. Ma, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019 DOI:10.1002/anie.201901361 .
Z. Liang, C. F. Yan, S. Rtimi and J. Bandara, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 256–269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Wang and K. S. Chang, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2016, 99, 2593–2600 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xue, W. Zang, P. Deng, Q. Wang, L. Xing, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 414–422 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh and N. Khare, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 335–341 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lan, X. Zeng, R. A. Rather and I. M. C. Lo, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2019, 6, 554–564 RSC .
H. Li, Y. Sang, S. Chang, X. Huang, Y. Zhang, R. Yang, H. Jiang, H. Liu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2372–2379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gomollon-Bel, Chem. Int., 2019, 41, 12–17 CAS .
J. M. Herrmann, Catal. Today, 1995, 24, 157–164 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Mazierski, B. Bajorowicz, E. Grabowska and A. Zaleska-Medynska, in Photoreactor Design Aspects and Modeling of Light, ed. J. Colmenares and Y.-J. Xu, Heterogeneous Photocatalysis. Green
Chemistry and Sustainable Technology, Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg,  2016 Search PubMed .
M. Bouchy and O. Zahraa, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2003, 5, 191–197 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Cassano, C. A. Martin, R. J. Brandi and O. M. Alfano, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1995, 34, 2155–2201 CrossRef CAS .
B. Bajorowicz, A. Cybula, M. J. Winiarski, T. Klimczuk and A. Zaleska, Molecules, 2014, 19, 15339–15360 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Cambié, C. Bottecchia, N. J. W. Straathof, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10276–10341 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Bottecchia, N. Erdmann, P. M. A. Tijssen, L.-G. Milroy, L. Brunsveld, V. Hessel and T. Noël, ChemSusChem, 2016, 9, 1781–1785 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Boyjoo, H. Sun, J. Liu, V. K. Pareek and S. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 310, 537–559 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hajaghazadeh, V. Vaiano, D. Sannino, H. Kakooei, R. Sotudeh-Gharebagh and P. Ciambelli, Catal. Today, 2014, 230, 79–84 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tomašić, F. Jović and Z. Gomzi, Catal. Today, 2008, 137, 350–356 CrossRef .
G. E. Imoberdorf, A. E. Cassano, H. A. Irazoqui and O. M. Alfano, Catal. Today, 2007, 129, 118–126 CrossRef CAS .
G. Vincent, P. M. Marquaire and O. Zahraa, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2008, 197, 177–189 CrossRef CAS .
T. N. Obee and S. O. Hay, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 2034–2038 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mohseni and F. Taghipour, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2004, 59, 1601–1609 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Behnajady, N. Modirshahla, N. Daneshvar and M. Rabbani, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 127, 167–176 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, H. Zheng, Q. Wang, X. Wang, W. Jiang, Z. Zhang and Y. Yang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2014, 123, 130–138 CrossRef CAS .
X.-G. Hao, H.-H. Li, Z.-L. Zhang, C.-M. Fan, S.-B. Liu and Y.-P. Sun, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2009, 87, 1604–1611 CrossRef CAS .
D. Arney, C. Hardy, B. Greve and P. A. Maggard, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 214, 54–60 CrossRef CAS .
R. Priya and S. Kanmani, Sol. Energy, 2009, 83, 1802–1805 CrossRef CAS .
C. McCullagh, P. K. J. Robertson, M. Adams, P. M. Pollard and A. Mohammed, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2010, 211, 42–46 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pieber, M. Shalom, M. Antonietti, P. H. Seeberger and K. Gilmore, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 9976–9979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Su, N. J. W. Straathof, V. Hessel and T. Noël, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20, 10562–10589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Van Gerven, G. Mul, J. Moulijn and A. Stankiewicz, Chem. Eng. Process., 2007, 46, 781–789 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Elvira, X. Casadevall i Solvas, R. C. R. Wootton and A. J. deMello, Nat. Chem., 2013, 5, 905–915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Noël, J. Flow Chem., 2017, 7, 87–93 CrossRef .
R. Rakhshaee and J. Darvazeh, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 356, 61–72 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These two authors equally contributed to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Chunping Xu
	Chunping Xu obtained his bachelor's degree in 2000 from the Department of Life Science, Henan Normal University, China, and master's degree in 2003 from the Department of Biotechnology, Daegu University, Korea. After his graduation, he worked as a researcher in the Department of Biological Functions and Engineering, Kyushu Institute of Technology, Japan. In 2005, he joined the University of Groningen, Faculty of Medicine, The Netherlands, where he finished his PhD studies in 2008 from the Department of Biomedical Engineering. Then, he went to work as a scientist in Philip Morris International R&D, Switzerland. Since 2010, he has been working in the School of Food and Biological Engineering, Zhengzhou University of Light Industry, China, as a professor. Dr Xu has a wide experience in natural products, biotransformation and food processing. He has produced more than 150 publications in journals with high impact factors.

Prasaanth Ravi Anusuyadevi
	Prasaanth Ravi Anusuyadevi was a PhD research Fellow and Marie Curie Early Stage Researcher in the field of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering. He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Bordeaux in 2018. Formerly, finished his Masters in Chemical Engineering at Technical University of Delft (TUD), Netherlands, with specialization in Molecular Engineering in 2015. He received his Bachelors in Chemical Engineering from Anna University, India in 2012. His research work focuses on the synthesis of luminescent colloidal nanocrystals (Quantum Dots (QDs)), multifunctional nanocomposites and transition metal complexes and their applications in lighting devices, heterogeneous photocatalysis, catalysis and new type of colorants based on structural color.

Cyril Aymonier
	Cyril Aymonier is CNRS senior researcher at the “Institut de Chimie de la Matière Condensée de Bordeaux (ICMCB)”. He obtained his PhD in chemical engineering from the University of Bordeaux (2000) where he focused on supercritical water oxidation of wastewater. He did a postdoctoral stay in Freiburg (2000–2002, Germany) where he developed novel approaches to design hybrid organic/inorganic nanoparticles. Now he is the head of the Supercritical Fluids department of ICMCB. His current research interests are in the chemistry and processes in supercritical fluids applied to materials science and environment.

Rafael Luque
	Rafael Luque (Dpt. Quimica Organica, Universidad de Cordoba) has a significant experience on biomass and waste valorisation practises to materials, fuels and chemicals as well as nanoscale chemistry and green engineering. Prof. Luque has published over 400 research articles (>20000 citations, h-index 70), filed 4 patent applications and edited 10 books as well as numerous contributions to book chapters and invited, guest, keynote and plenary lectures in scientific events worldwide. Prof. Luque is Editor-in-chief of Molecular Catalysis (Elsevier) and also member of the Editorial Advisory Board of prestigious International Journals (>10). Prof. Luque was named 2018 Highly Cited Researcher by Clarivate Analytics, being currently Director of the Center for Molecular Design and Synthesis of Innovative Compounds for Medicine from RUDN University in Moscow, Russia.

Samuel Marre
	Samuel Marre is a CNRS researcher at the Institute of Condensed Matter Chemistry of Bordeaux (ICMCB). He received his PhD in Chemical Engineering from the University of Bordeaux in 2006, before joining the Jensen Lab at MIT as a postdoctoral associate from 2006 to 2008, working on high pressure microsystems. His researches focus on developing and using high pressure microreactors for various applications including confined compressible fluid thermo-hydrodynamics, materials syntheses, and micromodels investigation of CO2 geological storage and bio-geo-conversion for its valorization.

 	Fig. 1  Classification of semiconductor photocatalysts into four different families.	 

 	Fig. 2  Flowchart summarizing the various binary semiconductor nano photocatalysts reported in this review.	 

TiO2	Flame spray pyrolysis	C12H28O4Ti, C8H10 and C2H3N.	11–21 nm (3.1–3.3 eV)	Mineralization of sucrose	Blue lamp (15 W), (λ = 300–400 nm)	Spiral slurry flow photoreactor	
9

ZnO	Precipitation and calcination	ZnC4H6O4, C2nH4n+2On+1 and (NH4)2CO3.	20 nm	Degradation of methyl orange (MO)	UV lamp (λ = 250–400 nm)	Hollow cylindrical batch reactor	
16

ZrO2	Hydrothermal and calcination yielding nanoflowers of ZrO2	Zr(SO4)2 and CH3COONa	400 nm and petal thickness about 20 nm.	Degradation of rhodamine B (RhB)	300 W high pressure mercury lamp (λ > 365 nm)	Cylindrical vessel, with inner irradiation system	
12

CeO2	Hydrothermal reaction followed by calcination	CeCl2 and NH4OH	15–36 nm (4.16 eV)	Degradation of amido black and acridine orange	250 W high pressure mercury lamp (UV range)	Glass vessel	
18

ZnS	Thermal decomposition route	ZnC4H6O4, CH4N2S, C2H6O2 and (C6H9NO)n.	60 nm (3.6 eV)	Photodegradation of eosin B	125 W high pressure mercury lamp	Cylindrical pyrex cell	
24

CdS	Thermal sulfidation process	Cd(CH3COO)2 and dry H2S gas.	100–300 nm (2.38 eV)	Hydrogen evolution from water splitting	350 W xenon lamp (λ > 430 nm)	Pyrex vessel with side irradiation	
28

CdSe	Solvothermal method	Cd2Cl2O8, C2H6OS and NaHSe.	1.75–4.81 nm (3.11–1.89 eV)	Hydrogen production from water splitting	300 W xenon arc lamp (λ > 320 nm)	Borosilicate flask	
31

GaN	Metal organic chemical vapour deposition yielding nanowires	Ga(CH3)3 and NH3	20–50 nm in diameter, 4–6 μm in length. (3.4 eV)	Decolouration of orange II	200 W mercury lamp (λ ≥ 300 nm)	Batch reactor	
34

Ta3N5	Alkali metal treatment coupled with ammonolysis	Ta2O5, NaCl, NH3, KCl and K2CO3	Average size: 80 nm (2.1 eV)	Oxygen evolution from water oxidation	300 W xenon lamp visible (λ > 420 nm)	Pyrex reactor with top irradiation type arrangement	
40

CuS	Chemical dealloying method yielding nanoporous globular clusters	Ti–Cu amorphous ribbon and H2SO4	Clusters of 500 nm size and 40 nm thickness (1.6–1.7 eV)	Degeneration of methylene blue (MB) and MO	500 W xenon lamp, illumination intensity was 0.01 W cm−2	Quartz cell	
27


 	Fig. 3  (a) FSP reactor utilized for the continuous synthesis of TiO2 photocatalyst,11 more active than the commercial Degussa P25 synthesized by flame aerosol technique. (b) HR-TEM image of TiO2 Nanocrystals (NCs) synthesized using the FSP reactor.9 ((a) Reprint with permission from L. Mädler, H. K. Kammler, R. Mueller, and S. E. Pratsinis, Controlled synthesis of nanostructured particles by flame spray pyrolysis, J. Aerosol Sci., 2002, 33, 369–389 Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Reprint with permission from W. Y. Teoh, L. Mädler, D. Beydoun, S. E. Pratsinis and R. Amal, Direct (one-step) synthesis of TiO2 and Pt/TiO2 nanoparticles for photocatalytic mineralisation of sucrose, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2005, 60, 5852–5861, Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) FE-SEM image of nanoflower shaped ZrO2. (b) UV-vis absorption spectrum depicting the enhanced absorption behaviour of the flower shaped nanostructures of ZrO2 compared to the tetragonal ZrO2 NPs.12 ((a and b) Reprint with permission from Z. Shu, X. Jiao and D. Chen, Synthesis and photocatalytic properties of flower-like zirconia nanostructures, CrystEngComm., 2012, 14, 1122–1127, Copyright 2018 Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) TEM image of ZnS NPNPs. (b) SEM image of spherical nanoporous ZnS. (c) HR-TEM of ZnS NPNPs with electron diffraction of nanostructures in the inset of the figure. (d) HR-TEM depicting the lattice fringes of ZnS NCs, which undergoes self-assembly process to form the nanoporous ZnS spheres.24 ((a, b, c and d) Reprint with permission from J.-S. Hu, et al., Mass Production and High Photocatalytic Activity of ZnS Nanoporous Nanoparticles, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 1269–1273, Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Son).	 

 	Fig. 6  Flow chart of the diverse ternary semiconductor photocatalysts reviewed in this article.	 

SrTiO3	Hydrothermal method	[CH3CH(O-)CO2NH4]2Ti(OH)2, [Sr(OH)2·8H2O] and NaOH	20–40 nm in diameter (3.2 eV)	Degradation of nitric oxide (NO) gas	UV light source: 450 W high pressure mercury lamp	Continuous flow sealed opaque reactor with glass plate	
66

LiTaO3	Hydrothermal (nanorods) and solvothermal (nanoparticles (NPs)) methods	TaCl5, LiOH·H2O, H2O2, NH3, CH3OH and C3H6O	Nanorods 20 nm diameter and length of 2–10 μm. NPs of 10–50 nm (4.6–4.7 eV)	Water splitting reaction	450 W high pressure mercury lamp, UV light source	Inner radiation cell made up of quartz	
69

NaTaO3	Hydrothermal method	Ta2O5, NaOH and deionized water	About 200 nm (3.96 eV)	Decomposition of gaseous formaldehyde and RhB solution under UV irradiation	8 W bactericidal lamp, (λ > 254 nm, 2.5 mW cm−2)	Cylindrical quartz cell	
77

KTaO3	Solvothermal method	KOH, Ta2O5, C6H14, H2O and C2H5OH	15–50 nm (3.7 eV)	Photoreduction of CO2 in water	300 W xenon arc lamp (λ = 280–350 nm)	Borosilicate glass reactor	
84

AgNbO3	Molten salt flux synthesis method	Ag2O, Nb2O5 and Na2SO4	100–5000 nm (2.75–2.81 eV)	H2 production from aqueous methanol solution	External 400 W xenon arc-lamp equipped with a long pass cut off filter (λ > 420 nm)	Outer irradiation type fused-silica reaction cell with 90 mL volume	
89

CaIn2O4	Combustion synthesis	Ca(NO3)2, InN3O9 and C2H5NO2	Approximately 90 nm	Decomposition of MB, toluene oxidation and water decomposition	300 W xenon arc lamp fitted with UV cut off filter	Pyrex cell	
97

α-AgGaO2	Cation exchange method	NaGaO2, AgNO3 and KNO3	200–1000 nm (2.4 eV)	Decomposition of isopropanol (IPA) under UV or visible light.	Xenon lamp with glass filters	Glass vessel with a quartz lid	
108

BiVO4	Hydrothermal method	NH4VO3, Bi(NO3)3·5H2O and HNO3	49–490 nm (2.39–2.47 eV)	O2 evolution from an aqueous AgNO3 solution	300 W xenon lamp with cut off filter for visible light (λ > 420 nm)	Closed gas circulation system fitted with pyrex made reaction cell	
116

AgInS2	Co-precipitation strategy	AgNO3, C2H6O2, Na2SO4, C3H7OH and InCl3·4H2O	Avg. pore size 14.79 nm (1.61 eV)	Degradation of 2-nitrophenol (2NP) under visible irradiation.	(λ > 420 nm)	Batch vessel with magnetic stirring	
149

CuGaS2	Colloidal synthesis method using hot injection technique	Cu(S2CNEt2)2 and Ga(S2CNEt2)3	Nanorods with length about 189 nm and width around 8 nm (2.52 eV)	Degradation of RhB	500 W halolite lamp (λ > 430 nm)	Glass vial	
152


 	Fig. 7  Pictorial representation of the experimental setup and continuous formation of CaIn2O4 NCs via one pot ultrasonic spray pyrolysis.103 (Reprint with permission from M. T. S. Tavares, M. M. Melo, V. D. Araujo, R. L. Tranquilin, C. R. R. Almeida, C. A. Paskocimas, M. R. D. Bomio, E. Longo and V. F. Motta, Enhancement of the photocatalytic activity and white emission of CaIn2O4 nanocrystals, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 658, 316–323, Copyright 2019 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) 3-R polytype of delafossite crystal structure. (b) 2-H polytype of delafossite crystal structure, redrawn based on the images.106 ((a and b) Reprint with permission from Y. Maruyama, H. Irie and K. Hashimoto, Visible light sensitive photocatalyst, delafossite structured α-AgGaO2, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23274–23278 Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) SM structure of BiVO4 compound. (b) ST structure of BiVO4 compound.124 (Reproduced from Schwarz, et al., Eur. Coat. J., 2016, 9, 26–31, Copyright 2018 Vincentz Network).	 

 	Fig. 10  Different modes of band gap engineering for attaining optimum balance between visible light activity and redox potential of semiconductor band edge.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) UV-vis absorption spectrum of β-AgAl1−xGaxO solid solution fabricated from β-AgAlO2 and β-AgGaO2 ternary oxide SCs by precise tuning of CB from 2.83 eV to 2.19 eV.159 (b) Photocatalytic activity for acetone production.159 ((a and b) Reprint with permission from S. Ouyang and J. Ye, β-AgAl1−xGaxO2 Solid-Solution Photocatalysts: Continuous Modulation of Electronic Structure Toward High-Performance Visible-Light Photoactivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7757–7763, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic depiction of band structure of (Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) solid solution (redrawn based on the article165). (b) Variation of band gap with respect to ZnO content in the solid solution.165Fig. 11(a and b) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  Depiction of energy level diagram of SrTiO3, SrTiO3–Ba2FeNbO6 solid solutions (ratio 10:0.25, 10:0.5 and 10:1 corresponds to the molar ratio of SrTiO3 to Ba2FeNbO6).170 (Reprint with permission from G. Zhang, S. Sun, W. Jiang, X. Miao, Z. Zhao, X. Zhang, D. Qu, D. Zhang, D. Li, Z. Sun, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7(2), 1600932. Copyright 2019 John Wiley and Son).	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) TEM image of Zn0.5Cd0.5S solid solution, average diameter of aggregates (50–100 nm). (b) HR-TEM image of Zn0.5Cd0.5S solid solution, diameter of each NP is about 10 nm. (c) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of CdxZn1−xS solid solutions (x = 0, 0.3, 0.5, 0.7 and 0.9). (d) Band gap variation with respect to the composition. (e) H2 production rate with respect to the composition in CdxZn1−xS solid solution.184Fig. 13(a–d) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Band gap modulation in (AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2.189 (b) Band gap engineering attained in (CuIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 solid solutions190Fig. 14. (a) Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society. Fig. 14(b) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

β-AgAl1−xGaxO2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (2.8–2.19 eV)	Cation exchange method	CH3COONa, Al(NO3)3·9H2O, Ga(NO3)3·nH2O and AgNO3	Decomposition of IPA gas, first into acetone then to CO2	300 W xenon arc lamp and blue LEDs (400 nm < λ < 500 nm)	500 mL reactor equipped with a pyrex glass lid window	
159

(AgNbO3)1−x(NaNbO3)x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.4–2.79 eV)	Solid state reaction method	Ag2O, Na2CO3 and Nb2O5	Decomposition of IPA into acetone and CO2 under visible light	Blue-LEDs (BLEDs) with light intensity of 0.01 mW cm−2 (λ = 400–550 nm)	Glass reactor of volume 500 mL	
163

(Ga1−xZnx)(N1−xOx) with and without RuO2 loading (2.6–2.8 eV)	Nitridation of powdered precursor mixture	Ga2O3, ZnO and NH3	Water splitting under visible light	High pressure mercury lamp 450 W	Pyrex inner irradiation type reaction vessel	
165

Ag1−xSrx(NbO3)1−x(TiO3)x (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.2–2.7 eV)	Solid state reaction method	Ag2O, SrCO3, Nb2O5 and TiO2	O2 evolution from AgNO3 solution and decomposition of IPA	300 W xenon arc lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 410 nm)	Closed gas circulation system containing pyrex vessel, with a flat side window for light irradiation	
168

SrTiO3–Ba2FeNbO6-n (n = 0.25, 0.5 and 1) (3.31–2.29 eV)	One-step molten salt route	TiO2, BaCO3, SrCO3, Nb2O5, Fe2O3 and NaCl	H2 evolution from aqueous methanol solution	300 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)	Closed gas circulation system fixed batch reactor	
171

CdxZn1−xS (0 < x < 1) (2.3–3.10 eV)	Thermolysis of zinc–cadmium–thiourea (Zn–Cd–Tu) complex	CH4N2S, C4H6O4Zn·2H2O and C4H10CdO6	H2 production from aqueous solution with sacrificial agents	350 W xenon arc lamp with UV cut off filter (λ ≥ 400 nm)	10 mL pyrex flask, with openings of flask are sealed with silicone rubber septum	
184

CdxCuyZn1−x−yS Cd0.1Cu0.01Z0.89S (2.33 eV)	Co-precipitation method	Zn(NO3)2, Cu(NO3)2, Cd(NO3)2 and Na2S	H2 from aqueous solution with sacrificial agents	350 W xenon lamp with optical filter (λ ≥ 430 nm)	Side window fixed pyrex cell	
317

(AgIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.55–1.8 eV)	Heat treatment of Ag–In–Zn sulfide complex precursor	AgNO3, In(NO3)·3.9H2O and Zn(NO3)2·6H2O	H2 evolution from aqueous solution with sacrificial agents	Solar Simulator (AM 1.5) and 300 W xenon lamp	Gas closed circulation system with a side or top window pyrex cell.	
189

(CuIn)xZn2(1−x)S2 (0 ≤ x ≤ 1) (3.55–1.8 eV) Pt or Ru loaded as co-catalyst on the solid solution	Heat treatment of Cu–In–Zn sulfide complex precursor and photo deposition for co-catalysts loading	Zn(NO3)·6H2O, In(NO3)·3.6H2O, CuCl2H2PtCl6·6H2O and RuCl3·nH2O	H2 evolution form aqueous solution with sacrificial agents	300 W xenon lamp with a cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)	Gas closed circulation system fitted pyrex cell with window for illumination fixed to the sides of the cell	
190

ZnS–CuInS2–AgInS2 Ru co-catalyst	Heat treatment of single source complex sulfide precursor. Loaded by photo-deposition method	Zn(NO3)·6H2O, AgNO3, In(NO3)·3.6H2O and CuCl2·2H2O (NH4)2RuCl6	H2 evolution from an aqueous solution containing sacrificial agents.	300 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)	Closed gas circulation fixed pyrex cell	
138


 	Fig. 16  Schematic representation of energy gap of three types of SC–SC heterojunctions.	 

 	Fig. 17  Band gap diagram of type-II heterojunctions illustrating the photo-generation of charge carriers and efficient separation of them upon (a) UV excitation and (b) visible light excitation.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Illustration of synthetic methodology for obtaining Ni–TiO2/CdS photocatalysts.206 (b) Charge transfer pathway in Ni–TiO2/CdS nanocomposite upon visible light irradiation for H2 production from aqueous ethanol solution.206 (c) TEM image of TiO2 nanorods.206 (a, b and c) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) FESEM image of ZnO/In2S3 core/shell nanorod arrays. (b and c) TEM and HRTEM of ZnO/In2S3 core/shell NCs. (d) Illustration of charge transfer and separation in NC systems.225 (a, b, c and d) (Reproduced with permission ref. 225. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic depiction of the surface functionalization route for the synthesis of ZnO/CdS core/shell NCs.227 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 227 (2012) Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 21  (a and b) SEM image of hierarchical SnO2/Fe2O3 NCs synthesized by CVD technique.238 Reprint with permission from J. Kang, Q. Kuang, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, Fabrication of the SnO2/α-Fe2O3 hierarchical heterostructure and its enhanced photocatalytic property, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 7874–7879, Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) HR-TEM of SnS2/SnO2 (18.1 wt% of SnO2). (b) Enlargement of the interface observed in figure.241 (a and b) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2018 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Illustration of conventional core shell Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs with charge transfer route. (b) Coupled structure of Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs, where Fe3O4 NPs are inlaid in the BiOCl nanoflakes.252 Reproduced with permission from ref. 252. (Copyright 2018 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) TEM image of conventional core/shell Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs. (b) TEM image of coupled Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs.252 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 252. Copyright 2018 Elsevier).	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) SEM image of CdS nanowires with 45 nm diameter. (b) SEM of CdS/ZnS core/shell NCs with 60 nm diameter and shell thickness of 5–10 nm. The inset figure depicts the surface of the shell, which consists of ZnS NPs.257 (a and b) (Reproduced with permission from ref. 257 OPEN ACCESS, Copyright 2018 Springer).	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Illustration of charge transfer route in mesoporous In2O3/Ta2O5 NCs with p–n junction type II heterojunction. (b) HR-TEM image of the interface region between In2O3 and Ta2O5 materials in In2O3/Ta2O5 NCs (with 20 wt% In2O3) calcined at 750 °C.262 (a and b) (Reproduced from ref. 262. Copyright 2018 Elsevier).	 

TiO2 nanorods	Solvothermal method	C16H40O4Ti, C18H34O2, C6H13NO2 and C2H5OH	Nanorods: 10–40 nm	H2 generation from an aqueous ethanol solution	320 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ > 420 nm)	Septum sealed gas vials with a 420 nm cut off filter	
206

TiO2/CdS	Colloidal synthesis of TiO2/CdS	NOBF4-capped-TiO2, C4H10CdO6 and C2H5NS	CdS nanoparticles (NPs) aggregate to form hollow nano spheres with uniform diameter of 150 nm on nanorods
Ni–TiO2/CdS	Ni–TiO2/CdS synthesis by photo-deposition	Ni(NO3)2	

TiO2/ZnO	Sol–gel method	C16H40O4Ti and Zn(NO3)2·6H2O	6–14 nm	H2 evolution from an aqueous methanol solution	300 W xenon lamp with UV filter, (240 nm < λ < 400 nm)	5 mL semi batch reactor	
211

TiO2/ZnS	Homogeneous hydrolysis	TiOSO4, ZnSO4 and C2H5NS	Spherical agglomerates consisting of alternate anatase (∼6 nm) and sphalerite crystalline islands (∼15 nm)	Degradation of aqueous solution of Orange II dye	Florescent lamp (254 nm, 365 nm and 400 nm) with 8 W power	Quartz tube with stainless steel cover	
213

ZnO nanorods	Solvothermal method	C4H6O4Zn·2H2O, C6H8O7, In(NO3)3·5H2O and Na2S·9H2O	Average diameter of ZnO nanorods: 100 ± 6 nm and average length: 500–600 nm. Thickness of In2S3 shell is 15 ± 2 nm	Degradation of RhB	500 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)	Beaker with top covered with glass plate	
225

ZnO/In2S3 core/shell nanorods arrays	Surface functionalization route
ZnO nanorods	Solvothermal method	C4H6O4Zn·2H2O, CdCl2, CH4N2S, C6H8O7, and C2H6O2	ZnO nanorods with average diameter 100 nm and CdS shell thickness 10–30 nm	Degradation of RhB, under simulated solar irradiation	No information in the article	Glass beaker immersed in ice-cold water bath	
226

ZnO/CdS nanorods core/shell arrays	Surface functionalization route
SnO2/Fe2O3	Co-precipitation	SnCl4·5H2O, FeCl3·6H2O, deionized H2O and NH3	6–24 nm	Degradation of acid blue 62 dye	1000 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ > 400 nm)	Quartz jacketed reactor	
234

SnS2	Hydrothermal synthesis	SnCl4·5H2O, C2H5NS, CH3COOH and H2O2	12–26 nm	Degradation of MO	1000 W xenon lamp (λ > 420 nm)	Two layer pyrex bottles with water circulation at the middle of the bottles.	
241

SnS2/SnO2	
In situ oxidation of SnS2 NPs under hydrothermal conditions
Fe3O4 NPs	Colloidal synthesis	FeCl3·6H2O, FeCl3·7H2O, NH4OH, deionized H2O, C18H34O2, Bi(NO3)3, HNO3, CHCl3 and NaC12H25SO4.	Fe3O4 NPs of size 7–10 nm have aggregated on large BiOCl flakes of size 200–500 nm	Photocatalytic degradation of RhB dye in water under visible light.	500 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ ≥ 420 nm)	No info mentioned in the article	
252

Fe3O4/BiOCl NCs
CdS nanowires	Solvothermal method	Cd(S2CNEt2)2, C2H5OH, Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O and (NH2)2CS	CdS nanowires diameter of 45 nm and length of several μm. Shell was composed of ZnS nanoparticles with diameter of about 4 nm	Degradation of MB and 4-chlorophenol (4CP)	300 W xenon lamp with cut off filter (λ > 420 nm)	Jacketed quartz reactor	
257

1D CdS/ZnS core/shell NCs
In2O3/Ta2O5	Sol–gel process	Ta(OC2H5)5, HCL, In(NO3)3·nH2O and triblock copolymer surfactant (pluronic P123)	Average pore diameter of the NCs is 5.9 nm	H2 production from aqueous methanol solution	300 W xenon lamp was used a simulated sunlight	External irradiated pyrex cell with closed gas circulation system	
261


 	Fig. 27  Schematic representation of one-step photoexcitation system using single semiconductor material for overall water splitting266 (Reprint with permission from K. Maeda, K. Domen, Photocatalytic water splitting: recent progress and future challenges, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic depiction of Z-scheme two-step photoexcitation route for overall water splitting reaction; Eg is the energy band gap; D is the electron donating species and A is the electron accepting species.270 (reprint with permission from K. Maeda, K. Domen, Photocatalytic water splitting: recent progress and future challenges, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2655–2661. Copyright 2019 American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 29  Schematic depiction of charge carrier pathway in ASS-Z-scheme photocatalytic system (2nd generation Z-scheme photocatalytic systems).	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic illustration of charge carrier separation in direct Z-scheme photocatalytic system (3rd generation Z-scheme system). (b) Charge carrier migration mechanism in type-II heterojunction photocatalysts.	 

 	Fig. 31  Strategies applied for the efficient implementation of photocatalysts in flow reactors redrawn, based on the artice.325 (Reproduced with permission from ref. 325. Copyright 2018 John Wiley and Sons).	 
Footnote
† These two authors equally contributed to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
