The value of enzymes in solar fuels research – efficient electrocatalysts through evolution  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8CS00546J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8CS00546J
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2039-2052The value of enzymes in solar fuels research – efficient electrocatalysts through evolution

        
          
            Rhiannon M. 
            Evans
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Bhavin 
            Siritanaratkul
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Clare F. 
            Megarity
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kavita 
            Pandey
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Thomas F. 
            Esterle
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Selina 
            Badiani
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Fraser A. 
            Armstrong
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry, Inorganic Chemistry Laboratory, University of Oxford, Oxford, OX1 3QR, UK. E-mail: fraser.armstrong@chem.ox.ac.uk
Received 
      5th July 2018
    First published on 14th November 2018AbstractThe reasons for using enzymes as tools for solar fuels research are discussed. Many oxidoreductases, including components of membrane-bound electron-transfer chains in living organisms, are extremely active when directly attached to an electrode, at which they display their inherent catalytic activity as electrical current. Electrocatalytic voltammograms, which show the rate of electron flow at steady-state, provide direct information on enzyme efficiency with regard to optimising use of available energy, a factor that would have driven early evolution. Oxidoreductases have evolved to minimise energy wastage (‘overpotential requirement’) across electron-transport chains where rate and power must be maximised for a given change in Gibbs energy, in order to perform work such as proton pumping. At the elementary level (uncoupled from work output), redox catalysis by many enzymes operates close to the thermodynamically reversible limit. Examples include efficient and selective electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO or formate – reactions that are very challenging at the chemistry level, yet appear almost reversible when catalysed by enzymes. Experiments also reveal the fleeting existence of reversible four-electron O2 reduction and water oxidation by ‘blue’ Cu oxidases, another reaction of great importance in realising a future based on renewable energy. Being aware that such enzymes have evolved to approach perfection, chemists are interested to know the minimal active site structure they would need to synthesise in order to mimic their performance.
Rhiannon M. Evans
Rhiannon ‘Non’ Evans graduated from Cardiff University in 2010 with a PhD in Chemistry under the supervision of Prof Rudolf K. Allemann. She immediately joined the Armstrong group as a post-doctoral research associate. Her research interests are in enzyme function and adaptations to different environments. Her work has been at the forefront of the genetic engineering of [NiFe]-hydrogenases and their electrochemical characterisation, the aims being to determine mechanisms of hydrogen activation, oxygen tolerance and electron–proton transfer.
Bhavin Siritanaratkul
Bhavin Siritanaratkul received his DPhil under the supervision of Prof. Fraser Armstrong at the University of Oxford, where he studied enzyme–inorganic material hybrids for light-driven reactions and cofactor regeneration. Prior to this, he received his bachelor's and master's degrees from the University of Tokyo, working with Prof. Kazunari Domen on semiconductor materials for solar water splitting. Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher in the Armstrong group, with his main interest being the “Electrochemical Leaf”, an NADP(H) regeneration system based on ferredoxin–NADP+ reductase (FNR).
Clare F. Megarity
Clare Megarity obtained her PhD from Queen's University Belfast in 2014 where she studied the molecular basis of negative cooperativity in oxidoreductase flavo-enzymes. Clare then joined the Armstrong group at the University of Oxford. She is using protein film electrochemistry to study and exploit two terminal enzymes of photosynthetic electron-transfer chains, an [FeFe]-hydrogenase known as HydA1 which produces hydrogen, and ferredoxin NADP+ reductase (FNR) which produces NADPH. Her current focus is on the “Electrochemical Leaf”, an electrochemical NADP(H) recycling electrode which exploits the close confinement of FNR and downstream enzymes in nano-sized electrode pores to carry out ‘green’ organic syntheses.
Kavita Pandey
Kavita Pandey holds a Master's (2011) and PhD degree (2016) in Physics, both obtained in India. During her PhD she spent six months as a Newton Bhabha Fellow in Fraser Armstrong's group at University of Oxford. She re-joined the Armstrong group in 2018 as awardee of an SERB Overseas Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Indian Government. Her project in the Armstrong group brings together enzymology, catalysis and electronics, specifically by exploiting the power of impedance spectroscopy to investigate the internal charge-transfer properties of enzymes that enable them to be such highly efficient and reversible electrocatalysts.
Thomas F. Esterle
Thomas Esterle is an experienced electrochemist spanning over a large breadth of research activities. He completed his PhD in electrochemistry at the University of Southampton studying mesoporous materials. He moved to the University of Oxford to work on protein film electrochemistry used in biofuel cells with Prof. Fraser Armstrong. He later took a position, still at the University of Oxford, to assist in the coordination of the Energy Storage Supergen project. He is now a senior research scientist at ZapGo Ltd in the research and development of supercapacitors.
Fraser A. Armstrong
Fraser Armstrong is a Professor of Chemistry at Oxford University and a Fellow of St Johns College. His group has developed protein film electrochemistry – a powerful suite of electrochemical techniques for unravelling complex, biological electron-transfer reactions and quantifying the efficiency of redox enzymes, one goal being to inspire and direct development of the best chemical catalysts for renewable energy. Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2008, he has since received the RSC Joseph Chatt Award (2010), the Barker Medal (2012), the Davy Medal of the Royal Society (2012) and the Bailar Medal of the University of Illinois (2015).
Introduction
Artificial photosynthesis flourishes as a field because it applies creative and intellectually rich science to deal with the major challenge of securing renewable energy for the future. Many groups worldwide are carrying out research into the production of solar fuels, splitting water to make H2 or directly reducing CO2 to make CO or hydrocarbons.1–6 The research brings together photovoltaics and electrocatalysis in ways that must focus on optimising rates and yield from a limited resource, i.e. sunlight. The scientific principles can be summed up in a simple diagram (Fig. 1) depicting the energy and electron transfers in a colloidal photosynthesising system, in which the functions of energy capture and catalysis are separated, and product separation is ignored. Timewise, the energy absorbed by a semiconductor which results in electron–hole separation must be captured through chemical reactions before recombination occurs. In terms of energy, the bandgap must be accessible to the energy of the light source and the conduction and valence band energies must be thermodynamically appropriate for the electrochemical processes of fuel production and donor oxidation, respectively.7–9 Two different semiconductors can be combined if this leads to better use of band energies. Producing solar fuels efficiently requires that these reactions are carried out by catalysts that are optimised for their respective tasks: the best electrocatalysts should achieve high rates with minimal driving force, limiting the wastage from excess driving energy requirements and recombination.
 Fig. 1  The principles of a colloidal light-driven reductive fuel generating system – solar energy is absorbed by a semiconductor (light absorber, orange), and band-gap excitation of an electron from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB) results in electron–hole separation (electron transfer 2). The hole is quenched by an electron (electron transfer 1) from an oxidative catalyst (ideally from water splitting). The excited electron in the conduction band must be captured through chemical reactions before recombination occurs (shown here as kr or kr′, where the latter reaction occurs from within the reductive catalyst). An efficient reductive catalyst will immediately utilise the excited electron (electron transfer 3), thus limiting recombination with the semiconductor. 
The interest in the use of isolated enzymes in solar fuels research arises not because they offer any practical solution but because many examples are excellent electrocatalysts and they serve as benchmarks for what is possible. Referring to Fig. 1, it is important to ensure that driving the chemical reactions at a high rate does not consume a major fraction of the light energy that was captured. Over more than a decade, numerous papers have appeared that describe experiments in which enzymes work in conjunction with semiconducting materials to which they are attached. These articles have reported H2 evolution rates that are very high on a per-active-site basis10–28 as well as CO2 reduction reactions with very high faradaic efficiency.29–32 Such studies have already been documented in several specialist reviews.9,10,33–39 However, the detailed connections between photoelectrocatalysis, electrochemical kinetics and enzymology are not obvious, and this article is largely concerned with laying out the principles that an electrochemist might use to explain enzyme electrocatalysis to a non-specialist.
As a special field lying at the boundary where chemistry meets electricity, electrochemistry provides an important foundation for understanding the flow of energy in living organisms. Enzyme-catalysed redox reactions such as the oxidation of an alcohol by NAD+ are usually written in the full form:Alcohol + NAD+ → NADH + ketone + H+
In terms of electrochemistry, the thermodynamics of this reaction and the relationship with numerous other processes are understood by writing them in terms of half-cell equations, each of which is quantified by a reduction potential E, measured using a suitable electrode and referenced to a standard, such as the standard hydrogen electrode (SHE).40ketone + 2e− + 2H+ → alcoholNAD+ + 2e− + H+ → NADH2H+ + 2e− → H2O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2OCO2 + H+ + 2e− → HCO2−CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O + COLargely because most enzymes do not interact directly with electrode materials, it is not widely appreciated that the reactions catalysed by oxidoreductases can be considered in terms of half-cells; all involve protons as well as electrons, and use or produce electrons in a reaction with an electron-transfer (ET) partner. Biological electron-transfer chains (ETCs) comprise half-cell reactions that occur at active sites connected by long-range ET, and it is useful to consider the overall process in terms of power – the rate of electron flow multiplied by the overall potential difference across the ETC, analogous to a fuel cell. Evolution appears to have optimised use of pathways and building blocks, the modular organisation of ETCs into confined zones, and the catalytic efficiency of individual enzymes.41–47
A good example of catalytic efficiency in biology is the mitochondrial ETC represented in Fig. 2. Electrons are carried by several electron-transport enzymes and other agents, quinols (Q) and cytochrome c, between NADH and O2. The half-cell reactions and their reduction potentials (pH 7.0) are shown. At certain points the ETC is tapped to perform work, i.e. drive proton translocation across the membrane, through NADH:quinone oxidoreductase(I), quinol:cytochrome oxidoreductase(III) and cytochrome c oxidase(IV). The free energy difference (ΔG) set up by the resulting proton gradient is utilised by ATP synthase to produce ATP. All the components of the ETC must work efficiently in order to draw maximum work from the available potential difference of just over 1 V. For example, cytochrome c oxidase operates at a rate of several hundred O2 molecules per second.
 Fig. 2  The mitochondrial electron transport chain. The enzymes and mobile electron carriers are labelled as follows: complex I (NADH:quinone oxidoreductase, I, brown), complex II (succinate:quinone oxidoreductase, II, green), quinone pool (Q, orange), complex III (quinol:cytochrome c oxidoreductase, III, pink), cytochrome c (C, cyan), and complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase, IV, purple). The reduction potentials of relevant half-cell reactions are shown. Energy made available across several steps is used to pump protons from the matrix to the intermembrane space. The stoichiometries refer to electrons transported per NADH, noting that complex II can provide an additional two electrons from succinate to the Q pool. 
For many years now, the efficiency of many enzymes that catalyse electron-transfer reactions has been revealed through experiments in which they are specifically treated as electrocatalysts.48 The concept of protein film electrochemistry (PFE) is depicted in Fig. 3A. The enzyme is attached directly, usually by strong physical adsorption or covalent linkage to an electrode surface49 such that electrons can transfer easily between the electrode material and redox sites in the enzyme, thereby producing a catalytic current. Most often, membrane-bound enzymes are studied as their resolved membrane-extrinsic components. Electron-transferring enzymes are very large molecules, but this is not necessarily a problem as they have evolved to achieve fast and efficient electron transfer between one active site and another, or to a region of the protein surface that binds a reaction partner. Consequently, a rough, unreactive electrode surface, typically made of pyrolytic graphite and cut so that the edge face contacts the electrolyte (a ‘PGE’ electrode), usually enables a good electronic contact to be made at the protein–electrode interface.49 Unlike conventional methods for running reactions, the thermodynamics can always be made favourable; thus, provided the kinetics are fast, electrons flow across the interface once the appropriate potential is applied to drive oxidation or reduction. In the presence of small substrates in solution, the resulting faradaic current is proportional to the turnover frequency of the enzyme at the specific electrode potential being applied. To determine the actual turnover frequency, we need to know how many enzyme molecules are involved in the catalysis, i.e. the electroactive coverage: the latter can be obtained using a characteristic signal from a redox centre in the enzyme, but these are usually too weak to observe.50
 Fig. 3  Key concepts in protein film electrochemistry and the criteria for establishing enzyme efficiency. (A) Cartoon depiction of an enzyme attached to the working electrode in a PFE experiment. (B) The electrode potential is scanned and the resulting current is monitored. Two examples are shown: one is an efficient, reversible catalyst (blue trace) where the maximal turnover rate is established with minimal driving potential; the other is an example of an inefficient, irreversible catalyst (red trace) where the same maximal current is only achieved upon application of a large driving potential. The overpotential η shown compares the energy cost of the two catalysts in achieving the same rate: sometimes η is taken to be the onset potential relative to the equilibrium potential. 
The long-established alternative way to study enzymes electrochemically involves the use of electron mediators, small molecules/metal complexes that carry electrons between the electrode and the enzyme, the active site of which is usually inaccessible to an electrode surface. The mediator may be present in solution or immobilised, typically within a hydrogel.51,52 Mediated electron transfer is particularly valuable in equilibrium potentiometry and applications in biosensors, such as for glucose. However, the potential profile across which catalysis occurs depends greatly on the choice of mediator, and valuable information on the inherent properties of the enzyme, including regulation of internal electron flow and oxidation state-dependent inhibition, can be obscured.

Fig. 3B shows two extreme cases of results from experiments in which the potential is cycled back and forth between two limiting values, with oxidised and reduced forms of a substrate present in solution at equal concentrations. The net current should be zero when the electrode potential matches that of the substrate redox couple (Esubstrate). Reversibility refers to the current–potential relationship close to the equilibrium potential: only a minuscule shift in potential is required to change the direction of current. The blue trace signifies the reversible case: relative to the equilibrium potential, the oxidation current increases immediately as the electrode potential is changed in a positive direction, and the reduction current increases immediately when the electrode potential is changed in a negative direction. Changing the scan direction once the potential limit is reached simply retraces the faradaic current. The red trace signifies the irreversible case: as the potential is scanned to positive values, no faradaic response is observed until a sizeable electrode potential has been applied. Both blue and red traces may reach the same limiting value, due to diffusion of substrate or a limiting step in the enzyme mechanism (only the oxidation direction is shown for the irreversible case), but they differ greatly in their ability to use the free energy that is provided by the electrode. The irreversible case is characterised by having a large overpotential requirement, represented as η, measured either as the excess onset potential or the value at a particular potential for which the reversible case shows the same current. The concept of turnover frequency (directly proportional to current on the vertical axis) is well known to enzymologists as a measure of enzyme efficiency45 but the concept of overpotential (on the horizontal axis) is not. An efficient enzyme is also one that produces a high rate at minimal overpotential: it must optimise operating potential and ET rates, harmonise proton-coupled electron transfer (PCET) and stabilise bound intermediates to exactly the right degree.48
The reversible case is very rare and exemplified by the classic electrocatalysis of 2H+/H2 interconversion at platinum, which is responsible for the universal use of Pt in low-temperature fuel cells. Platinum would be too expensive to use in practical, large-scale solar fuel systems. Renewable energy is faced with formidable challenges in discovering active, reversible electrocatalysts for key reactions, particularly the O2 reduction reaction (ORR), the O2 evolution reaction (OER), selective CO2 reduction to CO, formate and other organic compounds, as well as inexpensive, scaleable electrocatalysts for the hydrogen evolution and hydrogen oxidation reactions (HER, HOR).53 Optimised catalysts would have important consequences for the device shown in Fig. 1, in that light energy would be used more efficiently. When we turn to enzymes, we find a very different picture: the evolutionary requirement to avoid wasting energy in ETCs has led to enzymes for which redox catalysis operates close to the reversible limit.
The efficiency of some mitochondrial enzymes

Fig. 4 shows two examples that have direct relevance for the mitochondrial ETC, where fast and efficient electron transport is of utmost importance. The NADH dehydrogenase is the membrane-extrinsic subcomplex of NADH:quinone oxidoreductase (complex I): it contains the flavin mononucleotide (FMN) active site at which NADH is oxidised, along with FeS clusters that relay electrons to the large membrane-intrinsic domain containing the site at which quinones react.54 Succinate dehydrogenase is the water-soluble membrane-extrinsic subcomplex of succinate:quinone oxidoreductase (complex II) and contains a covalently bound flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) site at which succinate is converted to fumarate, along with electron-transferring FeS clusters.55 The cyclic voltammograms show that both enzymes are reversible electrocatalysts, although their forms differ from the simple shapes shown in Fig. 3B. The voltammograms are unstable and include a large, non-faradaic component that is due to electrode double-layer charging (capacitance).49 The catalytic activity decays quite rapidly, seen as a loss in current with each subsequent scan, so the potential is cycled at a sufficiently high rate to minimise distortions; consequently, the central capacitance component of the current, which increases with scan rate, becomes comparable with the steady-state faradaic signal. All is not lost, however, because the successive voltammograms trace out isosbestic points at the potentials of zero faradaic current, the average value of which corresponds to Esubstrate, in these cases, the reduction potentials of NAD+/NADH and fumarate/succinate, respectively. With NADH-dehydrogenase, we see that most of the energy provided by NADH oxidation will be available to drive proton pumping coupled to quinone reduction (+45 mV). Succinate dehydrogenase, also, gives little energy away in its oxidation of succinate: furthermore, the voltammetry reveals an unusual property in that fumarate reduction activity reaches a maximum value then drops sharply as the driving force is increased. Experiments with the inhibitor oxaloacetate show that this effect, likened to that of an electronic component known as a tunnel diode, originates at the FAD cofactor;55 it is possible that it has a physiological role by restricting reverse electron flow, like a ratchet.56 Enzyme evolution may well have introduced such subtle feedback control.
 Fig. 4  (A) Successive electrocatalytic cyclic voltammograms of NADH dehydrogenase (subcomplex Iλ of mammalian complex I) at pH 7.8, 20 °C. The enzyme is adsorbed on a rotating pyrolytic graphite electrode and the solution contains 1 mM NADH and 1 mM NAD+. Scan rate = 10 mV s−1; electrode rotation rate = 1000 rpm. Reprinted with permission, from Y. Zu, R. J. Shannon, J. Hirst, Reversible, Electrochemical Interconversion of NADH and NAD+ by the Catalytic (Iλ) Subcomplex of Mitochondrial NADH:Ubiquinone Oxidoreductase (Complex I), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6020–6021. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society, ref. 54. (B) Successive electrocatalytic cyclic voltammograms of succinate dehydrogenase (membrane-extrinsic domain of mammalian complex II) at pH 8.0, 38 °C. The enzyme is adsorbed on a rotating pyrolytic graphite electrode and the solution contains 0.59 mM succinate and 0.59 mM fumarate. Scan rate = 10 mV s−1; electrode rotation rate = 500 rpm. Reprinted with permission, from J. Hirst, A. Sucheta, B. A. C. Ackrell and F. A. Armstrong, Electrocatalytic Voltammetry of Succinate Dehydrogenase: Direct Quantification of the Catalytic Properties of a Complex Electron-Transport Enzyme, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5031–5038. Copyright 1996 American Chemical Society, ref. 55. 
How microbes can use hydrogen reversibly, like a Pt electrode
Hydrogenases catalyse the oxidation or evolution of molecular H2 in microbes, at rates comparable with Pt:57–59 chemists have long been interested to learn how such high activity is achieved without using precious metals, but only comparatively recently have quantitative data become available from PFE. There are two main classes of hydrogenase known as ‘[NiFe]’ and ‘[FeFe]’, signifying the metals present in the active site responsible for binding and activating H2.60–62 Both classes of enzyme have been investigated in solar fuel systems, so it is relevant to see what they offer, electrochemically, in terms of rates and efficiency. Fig. 5 shows some of the detail and cyclic voltammograms obtained for two [NiFe]-hydrogenases produced in E. coli.63,64
 Fig. 5  Examples of reversible and irreversible electrocatalysis of H2 activation by [NiFe]-hydrogenases, Hyd-1 and Hyd-2, from E. coli. (A) The general protein structure for membrane-bound [NiFe]-hydrogenases is represented by Hyd-1. The dimer of heterodimers contains the NiFe active site in the ‘large’ subunit of each heterodimer, and a chain of 3 Fe–S clusters in the ‘small’ subunit. The FeS clusters relay electrons from the surface of the protein to the active site. (B) Electrocatalytic cyclic voltammograms for Hyd-1 and Hyd-2 attached to a rotating pyrolytic graphite electrode, operating under 10% H2, pH 6.0, at 30 °C with electrode rotation rate = 8500 rpm. Data reproduced from Lukey et al.64 The voltammogram obtained for Hyd-2 (black) cuts cleanly through the zero-current axis at the equilibrium potential, hence it is a reversible electrocatalyst. In contrast, the ‘O2-tolerant’ Hyd-1 is not a reversible catalyst under these conditions, the principal reason being that the reduction potentials of the FeS clusters, one of which serves as the electrochemical control site, are too positive relative to the potential of the 2H+/H2 couple. This research was originally published in the Journal of Biological Chemistry. M. J. Lukey, A. Parkin, M. M Roessler, B. J. Murphy, J. Harmer, T. Palmer, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, How Escherichia coli is equipped to oxidize hydrogen under different redox conditions, J. Biol. Chem., 2010, 285, 3928–3938. Copyright 2010 the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology. 
Hydrogenase-1 (Hyd-1) and Hydrogenase-2 (Hyd-2) are bound at the cytoplasmic membrane of Escherichia coli, and Fig. 5A shows the structure of the membrane-extrinsic (water-soluble) subcomplex and redox-active components of Hyd-1, that is solubilised with detergents and adsorbs spontaneously at a pyrolytic graphite (PGE) electrode.49,64 The structure of water-soluble Hyd-2 is very similar to Hyd-1.65 The voltammograms (Fig. 5B) show that Hyd-2 behaves as a reversible electrocatalyst, whereas Hyd-1 displays a marked overpotential requirement for H2 oxidation and cannot catalyse H2 evolution at neutral pH. The two enzymes also differ in that, whereas Hyd-2 is inactivated when O2 is present, Hyd-1 is able to operate under aerobic conditions.64,66 Entry of O2 into the active site of [NiFe]-hydrogenases usually results in the production of reactive, partially-reduced oxygen species that attack the S-ligands to the Ni atom,67–69 rendering the enzyme inactive until the damage is slowly repaired by reduction. Full conversion of O2 into harmless water or OH−70,71 requires rapid supply of four electrons, most of which must transfer back from the FeS clusters.66,72 Hydrogenase-1 can operate in air because the full complement of electrons is guaranteed from a modified FeS chain that (a) consists of centres having more positive reduction potentials (therefore tending to have an electron already resident), (b) contains an unusual [4Fe–3S] cluster proximal to the active site that is able to release an extra electron. Both Hyd-1 and Hyd-2 are inactivated at high potential as they convert to a Ni(III)–OH resting state, which is reactivated during the scan to more negative potential – the effect being quite similar to that noted earlier for succinate dehydrogenase. The lack of electrocatalytic reversibility with Hyd-1 implies that its biological role is to catalyse H2 oxidation, albeit with some loss of efficiency that can be traced to the high potentials of its FeS relay centres, particularly the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster. One factor determining the catalytic bias of an electron-transport enzyme, i.e. its ability to operate preferentially in one particular direction, is how close the reduction potential of the substrate is matched to the reduction potential of the ‘control centre’, the redox site that controls the flow of electrons which may be remote from the active site.73–78 This aspect, as it relates to Hyd-1 and leads to an interesting further prediction, is discussed further later. A genetically modified form of Hyd-2, in which a cysteine residue has been introduced very close to the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster, produces H2 under visible-light irradiation in the presence of Ag nanoclusters: these quantum dots bind tightly to the cysteine-S and are able to inject electrons directly into the FeS relay system.79 A subclass known as [NiFeSe]-hydrogenases, which contain a selenocysteine as one of the ligands to the Ni atom, are more active for H2 evolution. One such [NiFeSe]-hydrogenase was the first enzyme to exhibit high activity in a solar fuel device: in that case, the enzyme was attached to colloidal TiO2 nanoparticles sensitised to visible light, yielding H2 at a per-site rate of approximately 50 s−1,16,17 a benchmark that has been greatly surpassed as research has progressed.20 This hydrogenase has more recently been integrated into photoelectrochemical (PEC) systems, e.g. a p-Si photocathode with a TiO2 protective layer13,18 In2S3,20 or a templated indium tin oxide (ITO) electrode coupled to a PSII photoanode for overall water splitting.26
The [FeFe]-hydrogenases are generally considered more active than their [NiFe] counterparts. The active site, known as the H-cluster, consists of a special ‘organometallic’ cofactor [Fe2[μ-(SCH2)2NH](CN)2(CO)3] (Fig. 6A) which is joined to a [4Fe–4S] cluster by a cysteine-S atom. The sole relationship to the [Ni(μ-SR)2Fe(CN)2(CO)] active site of [NiFe]-hydrogenases (Fig. 5A) is the presence of a minimal [Fe(SR)(CO)(CN)] motif: in all other structural aspects the two classes of hydrogenase are unrelated, the need to catalyse rapid H2 activation being a very strong driver of convergent evolution.61,74 Two well-characterised examples of [FeFe]-hydrogenases are CrHydA1 from the photosynthetic green alga, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and CpI from the fermentative aerobe Clostridium pasteurianum. Fig. 6A shows that CpI has a FeS electron relay chain to transport electrons from a cytochrome redox partner to its active site, whereas CrHydA1 contains only the H-cluster.75 The redox partner for CrHydA1 is a [2Fe–2S]-ferredoxin that supplies electrons one at a time from Photosystem I. The CrHydA1 hydrogenase has been electrically connected to either Photosystem I or an organic dye, either through a short covalent linker80 or through its associated electron transfer protein PetF.81,82 Additionally, photoproduction of H2 by an [FeFe]-hydrogenase from Clostridium acetobutylicum (similar to CpI) attached to CdS nanorods/nanoparticles has been extensively investigated, and the electron-transfer kinetics between the two components have been measured and analysed using transient absorption spectroscopy.11,19,22,24
 Fig. 6  Structures of two [FeFe]-hydrogenases and electrocatalytic experiments. (A) Structures of CpI from Clostridium pasteurianum (pdb 4XDC, left), and CrHydA1 from Chlamydomonas reinhardlii (apo-enzyme, pdb 3LX4, right) along with a representation of the active-site H-cluster. CpI contains an ET relay system comprising three [4Fe–4S] clusters and an additional distal [2Fe–2S] cluster but CrHydA1 lacks such a relay. (B) Electrocatalytic cyclic voltammograms for CpI (grey) and CrHydA1 (black) attached to a pyrolytic graphite electrode, operating under 100% H2, pH 6, 5 °C with electrode rotation rate = 1000 rpm, scan rate 30 mV s−1. (C) Cyclic voltammograms showing the activation of apo-CrHydA1 attached to a pyrolytic graphite electrode following injection of 2FeMIM into the solution (final concentration 0.2 μM) after cycle shown in grey. Conditions 5 °C, 100% H2, pH 6. Scan rate: 30 mV s−1. Broken arrows show direction of cycling. Reprinted with permission from: C. F. Megarity, J. Esselborn, S. V. Hexter, F. Wittkamp, U.-P. Apfel, T. Happe and F. A. Armstrong, Electrochemical Investigations of the Mechanism of Assembly of the Active-Site H-Cluster of [FeFe]-hydrogenases, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15227–15233. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society, ref. 85. 
The electron relay in CpI allows for very efficient electron transfer to the H-cluster, as evidenced in its characteristic cyclic voltammogram (Fig. 6B): the steep cut through the zero current axis shows that it is a reversible electrocatalyst, although H2 oxidation reaches an unexpectedly low limiting rate as the potential is increased. In contrast, the cyclic voltammogram for CrHydA1 does not cut so cleanly through the zero-current axis; it exhibits a shallow inflection which suggests that the lack of an electron relay in this hydrogenase results in inefficient electron transfer, at least when a graphite electrode is the redox partner. Like [NiFe]-hydrogenases, an inactive ‘resting’ state is formed under oxidising conditions, which is particularly evident with CrHydA1.
It is important to realise that the intersection through the zero-current axis does not correspond to zero activity, but zero net activity. At Esubstrate, the enzyme is catalysing the reversible reaction at an equal rate in either direction. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy has been used to measure this ‘electrocatalytic exchange rate’, and at 0 °C, the values are 78 molecules H2 s−1 and 12 molecules H2 s−1 for CpI and CrHydA1, respectively.83 This unusual experiment offers a unique numeric of the rate of an electron-transferring enzyme, akin to the ‘idle’ speed of a car. On a more practical note, use of Butler–Volmer theory to extrapolate the turnover frequency of CpI to different HER conditions gave a predicted value of 5000 s−1 at an overpotential of 0.2 V.83
The difficulty in chemically synthesising complexes with elaborate and optimised outer-shell structure is a major factor holding back the progress of small molecular electrocatalysts. Likewise, investigators looking for ‘platinum-standard’ electrocatalytic properties among the more abundant metals and alloys are rapidly exhausting their options. How much of an enzyme could be trimmed away to leave a catalyst that still retains most of the activity? Heterolytic cleavage or formation of H2 occurs at the unusual [Fe2[μ-(SCH2)2NH](CN)2(CO)3] ‘2Fe’ subcomplex, so it is significant that a water-soluble chemical analogue ([Fe2[μ-(SCH2)2NH](CN)2(CO)4]2−) known as ‘2FeMIM’ is catalytically inactive.84 The experiment shown in Fig. 6C is one of many examples that demonstrate the difference between chemical analogues that reconstruct only the inner coordination shell of a cofactor, and the actual enzyme-bound cofactor that is surrounded by second-sphere and outer-shell structure. Starting with a graphite electrode upon which is adsorbed an ‘apo’ form of CrHydA1 that contains only the [4Fe–4S] component of the H-cluster (Fig. 6A), introduction of 2FeMIM into the solution causes the characteristic catalytic activity to develop over several cycles. During this time, the H-cluster is assembled in its native environment, as 2FeMIM enters the apo-enzyme and binds to the [4Fe–4S] component, one of the CO ligands being replaced by cysteine-S.85–87
Enzymologists have long been aware that catalytic activity depends on the detailed protein fold surrounding a cofactor, flavins being a prime case. All too often, however, coordination chemists, often inspired by strain-based concepts such as the entatic state, have sought to synthesise ‘active site’ mimics that show high catalytic activity, yet with only the inner-coordination shell being considered. The best functional analogues of hydrogenases, displaying reversible electrocatalysis, do not resemble the enzymes at all; instead, they consist of a Ni atom coordinated by four phosphorus atoms from two complex chelating ligands that position a ‘second-shell’ nitrogen-base above the Ni but too far away for a direct interaction.88,89 Cleavage of H2 occurs by a ‘frustrated Lewis pair’ mechanism90 in which one hydrogen atom is bound by the Ni as a hydrido (H−) ligand while the other is captured as H+ by the pendant N-base. In [FeFe]-hydrogenases, the distal iron atom (Fed, Fig. 6A) on the 2Fe subcomplex binds H− whereas the central N-atom of the bridging ligand binds H+.84 In [NiFe]-hydrogenases, it has recently been proposed that the base that accepts H+ is the transiently deprotonated guanidine headgroup of a conserved arginine, located just over 4 Å from the Ni atom: this hypothesis67,68 contrasts with a more established (but not experimentally evidenced) proposal that the base is one of the cysteine-S ligands, where activity would be entirely due to the inner coordination shell. The main argument against such a role for arginine is the high pK value expected for the guanidinium headgroup, which would make deprotonation difficult. Other residues in the active sites of both types of hydrogenase have been identified as being crucial for proton transfer.74,91,92
The electrochemistry behind efficient CO2 reduction by microorganisms
Direct formation of fuels from CO2 that has been concentrated from flue waste is an important target for solar fuels research.93 The two most straightforward electrochemical conversions of aqueous CO2, either to CO or formate, pose serious challenges in terms of efficiency and selectivity (hydrogen evolution being thermodynamically favoured over CO2 reduction). As made clear by Nørskov and colleagues,94 the fact that enzymes have no such difficulty in performing these interconversions reversibly proves that catalysts for these reactions do exist, although they may be difficult to reproduce and manufacture chemically. Carbon monoxide dehydrogenases (CODHs, see below) and formate dehydrogenases (FDHs95,96) are remarkable enzymes that catalyse rapid, direct reduction of CO2 to CO or formate, respectively. They have each been investigated in solar fuel systems, via both direct and mediated electron transfer from light absorbers.29–31,97–99
The reversible interconversion of CO2 and CO by a CODH attached to a graphite electrode is shown in Fig. 7B.100 The biological role of CODH-I, one of several produced by Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans, is to couple CO oxidation to proton reduction via a membrane-bound [NiFe]-hydrogenase (see above).101 The reduction potential for the 2H+/H2 half-cell reaction is about 0.1 V more positive than for CO2/CO, so efficiency (and hence reversibility) is important to avoid wastage due to water reduction. In the CO2 reduction direction, CO is produced at the exclusion of H2 with minimal overpotential.100
 Fig. 7  Structure and electrocatalytic action of carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH) (A) The structure of carbon monoxide dehydrogenase is represented here by CODH-II from Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans (CODH-IICh) and shows the C-cluster active site with a CO2 intermediate bound (pdb 1SU7). (B) Electrocatalytic cyclic voltammogram of CODH-ICh recorded under an atmosphere of 50% CO and 50% CO2 at 25 °C, pH 7.0, electrode rotation rate = 3500 rpm, scan rate 2 mV s−1. Data reproduced with permission from V. C.-C. Wang, S. W. Ragsdale, and F. A. Armstrong, Investigations of Two Bidirectional Carbon Monoxide Dehydrogenases from Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans by Protein Film Electrochemistry, ChemBioChem, 2013, 14, 1845–1851. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons, ref. 100. 
Based on the crystal structure of CODH-II which is a very similar enzyme,102–104 CODH-I is a homodimer containing five FeS clusters (Fig. 7A). The deeply buried active site known as the C-cluster comprises a special [Ni4Fe–4S] cluster, with a ‘dangling’ Fe atom. The proposed mechanism (considered in the direction of CO oxidation) starts with binding of CO to the Ni atom in the oxidised state of the C-cluster.101 A OH− ligand coordinated to the dangling Fe then attacks the C atom in a 2e−/1H+ reaction that effectively transfers a O-atom to CO. The resulting CO2 then dissociates. The PCET step is coordinated by lysine and histidine residues that form H-bonds to the dangling Fe–OH.
At the limit: a fleeting glimpse of reversible O2/water interconversion
The four-electron reduction of O2 to H2O (the ORR) is very demanding, kinetically, and the large overpotential requirement of even the best electrocatalysts has long been a major factor limiting the efficiency of low-temperature fuel cells for vehicles.105 Likewise, artificial photosynthesis requires rapid evolution of O2 (the OER) at low overpotential, as occurs biologically at the active site of Photosystem II.9,106 Although there have been important advances in establishing OER catalysts that approach the activity of the enzyme, most notably compounds of Ru and Co, a reversible electrocatalyst for O2/H2O interconversion has yet to be identified. Many ‘blue’ Cu oxidases display very high rates and efficiency for the ORR, with overpotential requirements much lower than observed with Pt under similar conditions,107 and two apparently unrelated observations suggested an experiment to prove the existence of a reversible O2/H2O catalyst.
A basic equation to account for electrocatalytic reversibility equates the ratio of oxidation vs. reduction rates exponentially to the difference in reduction potentials for the substrate and that of the so-called ‘control site’ (ECS)76 which is usually the redox centre at which electrons enter or leave the enzyme, provided intramolecular electron transfer is fast and reversible and there is not an electron bottleneck within. In this equation, kred and kox are turnover frequencies for the substrate-saturated enzyme and n is the number of electrons involved in the overall reaction.73,108  
Returning to [NiFe]-hydrogenases, it was noted that Hyd-1 displays a marked overpotential requirement for H2 oxidation at pH 6 and does not catalyse H2 evolution, unlike Hyd-2 (Fig. 5). During evolution of O2-tolerant [NiFe]-hydrogenases,109 some catalytic efficiency was sacrificed by raising the reduction potentials of the FeS relay.110 In Hyd-1, the control site is probably the distal [4Fe–4S] cluster, and its potential (earlier estimated as −0.19 V108 and recently measured as −0.16 V at pH 677) is much more positive than the 2H+/H2 couple at pH 6. Knowing that the pH dependence of reduction potentials of [4Fe–4S] clusters is usually small, whereas it is −0.06 V pH−1 unit for 2H+/H2, led directly to the prediction that Hyd-1 should become a reversible electrocatalyst as the pH is lowered.111Fig. 8A compares the pH dependences of the reversible 2H+/H2 potentials at 100% H2 with the onset potential for H2 oxidation estimated from voltammograms. The gap closes as the pH is decreased and the voltammetry of Hyd-1 becomes reversible as for Hyd-2, the effect being enhanced under low (1%) H2 levels where product inhibition is decreased.111
 Fig. 8  How enzymes displaying irreversible electrocatalysis can be transformed into reversible catalysts by pH-induced convergence of Esubstrate and ECS. The onset potential for catalysis is estimated from voltammograms and lies between ECS and Esubstrate. (A) For [NiFe]-hydrogenase Hyd-1, decreasing the pH causes Esubstrate (solid lines), and onset potential (circles) to converge whereupon Hyd-1 becomes a reversible catalyst. Temperature = 37 °C. The onset potential is determined primarily by the potential of the distal Fe–S cluster, which is relatively pH-independent. Data reproduced from B. J. Murphy, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, Transforming an oxygen-tolerant [NiFe] uptake hydrogenase into a proficient, reversible hydrogen producer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1426–1433 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 111 (B) The same concept can be applied to bilirubin oxidase where the onset potential for O2 reduction decreases with increasing pH. The graph shows several estimates of onset potential collected at each pH under 100% O2. There is an approximate error of 10–20 mV for each data point. Temperature = 25 °C. 
Blue Cu oxidases, shown in Fig. 9A, contain four Cu atoms: the Type 1 ‘blue’ copper site is the site of electron entry into the protein by one-electron oxidation of organic substrates, and a trinuclear Cu centre is the active site at which O2 is reduced to water.112 A triad of amino acids links the active site to the Type 1 Cu, which should serve as the electrochemical control site.113
 Fig. 9  Structure and function of bilirubin oxidase, a ‘blue’ Cu oxidase. (A) The structure of bilirubin oxidase (BOD) from Myrothecium verrucaria (pdb 2XLL) showing the T1 electron-transfer site and the T2/T3 copper centres that form the active site for four-electron O2 reduction. The primary influence on the onset potential for BOD is the potential of the T1 copper site. (B) Successive cyclic voltammograms of BOD attached to a carbon-nanotube-modified pyrolytic graphite electrode, under 100% O2, temperature = 0 °C, electrode rotation rate = 2500 rpm, scan rate = 5 mV s−1. Data reproduced from L. dos Santos, V. Climent, C. F. Blanford and F. A. Armstrong, Mechanistic studies of the ‘blue’ Cu enzyme, bilirubin oxidase, as a highly efficient electrocatalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13962–13974 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 107. (C) Successive voltammograms obtained at pH 10.5 generate isosbestic points averaging at +0.58 V (+1.23 V vs. RHE), thereby demonstrating reversible catalysis of the 4-electron O2/H2O redox reaction. Experimental conditions: temperature = 40 °C, electrode rotation rate = 1500 rpm, scan rate = 50 mV s−1. 
Blue Cu oxidases are excellent electrocatalysts of four-electron O2 reduction under neutral-to-weakly acidic conditions. Although they are not reversible electrocatalysts they display smaller overpotential requirements than Pt and are superior on a per-site basis. The pH dependence of electrocatalytic O2 reduction by bilirubin oxidase is shown in Fig. 9B, where the markers on the upper axis indicate the reduction potentials of the O2/H2O couple under 100% O2.107 The gap between the onset potential (approximate) and Esubstrate (−0.06 V pH−1) closes up as the pH is increased, which is reasonable if the reduction potential of the Type 1 Cu has only a mild pH dependence: reference to Fig. 8B leads to the prediction that bilirubin oxidase should become a reversible electrocatalyst of the O2/H2O reaction at a pH value between 10 and 11. The reality of locating this ‘sweet spot’ in practice is marred not only by the fact that the enzyme activity decreases as the pH is raised, but also because the electrochemistry is very unstable above pH 9; nevertheless, using a graphite electrode modified to give a very large enzyme coverage,114 the voltammetry shown in Fig. 9C is obtained at pH 10.5, under 100% O2. As with the voltammograms shown in Fig. 4, the instability traces out an isosbestic potential at +0.58 V vs. SHE, close to that expected for EO2/H2O, at pH 10.5 (E vs. RHE (reversible hydrogen electrode) = 1.23 V). The conclusion is (although neither very fast nor stable) a reversible electrocatalyst for the four-electron O2/H2O couple does exist.
Efficiency of electron transport from photosystem I to the Calvin cycle
A final example of reversible electrocatalysis once again involves a flavoenzyme in nicotinamide recycling, and it demonstrates the importance of optimising one-electron potentials to catalyse a two-electron reaction. In the chloroplast, electrons transferred from Photosystem I to ferredoxin are passed on one at a time to ferredoxin−NADP+ reductase (FNR), a small enzyme (Fig. 10A) containing a single FAD that catalyses the recycling of NADP+ to NADPH, thus feeding the Calvin cycle.115 The interest in this enzyme for solar fuels research is that it allows light-energised electrons to be directed into a variety of organic synthetic reactions. Brown and colleagues constructed a light-driven NADPH regeneration system by attaching FNR to CdSe quantum dots, however the cofactor turnover number was limited to 3–4, possibly due to Cd2+ leaching into the solution and inhibiting FNR.116 Before the era of studying enzyme direct electrocatalysis using PFE had become established, opportunities had already been realised for using FNR as part of photo-activated systems employing soluble electron mediators. For example, CO2 was incorporated into pyruvate to form malate, in a reaction catalysed by malate dehydrogenase.34,117,118
 Fig. 10  Ferredoxin–NADP+ reductase (FNR) reduction potential and reversible NADP+/NADPH catalysis. (A) Structure of FNR (PDB 1GJR), with FAD (yellow) and NADP+ (red). (B) Stationary cyclic voltammograms of an FNR-adsorbed ITO electrode (black, baseline subtracted) and after adding NADP+ (red, 67 μM final concentration). The dotted line indicates the NADP+/NADPH reduction potential. Other conditions: pH 8.0, 20 °C, scan rate 5 mV s−1. Figure adapted from B. Siritanaratkul, C. F. Megarity, T. G. Roberts, T. O. M. Samuels, M. Winkler, J. H. Warner, T. Happe and F. A. Armstrong, Transfer of photosynthetic NADP+/NADPH recycling activity to a porous metal oxide for highly specific, electrochemically-driven organic synthesis, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4579–4586 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 119. 
It is fortunate that FNR has a very high affinity for ITO deposited as a porous layer on a conducting support.119 The coverage of FNR is so high that the two-electron half-cell reaction of the FAD cofactor is directly visible as a narrow pair of mirrored reduction and oxidation peaks, as shown in Fig. 10B. The peak shapes can be analysed to obtain the two-electron reduction potential and (from the width) an estimate of the component one-electron potentials, which is shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Relationship of the reduction potentials of Photosystem I (PSI, FeS centre B, see ref. 121), ferredoxin (Fd, approximate potential range), FNR, and NADP+ (at pH 7 for FNR119 and NADP+122). E1 is the potential of the oxidized/semiquinone couple of FNR, E2 is the potential of semiquinone/hydroquinone, and Em is the average of these two potentials. 
Addition of NADP+ causes a change in the voltammetry to reflect that of the NADP+/NADPH couple, and the electrochemistry is effectively reversible. The experiment shown was carried out with a stationary electrode – the lack of rotation resulting in reduction and oxidation peaks, due to depletion of incoming substrates NADP+ or NADPH, the average value of which gives the NADP+/NADPH reduction potential. Unlike the electrocatalysis of NAD+ reduction by NADH dehydrogenase shown in Fig. 4A, the FNR-catalysed electrochemical recycling of NADP+ is stable, and can be exploited to carry out controlled, continuously monitored organic synthesis.119,120Fig. 11 shows how the relevant reduction potentials line up at pH 7.0. Not only is the two-electron reduction potential of the active-site FAD more negative than for NADP+/NADPH (and much more so than for free FAD) but the two one-electron potentials are mildly ‘crossed’ (adding the second electron is slightly easier than adding the first, and the radical state has some stability): the resulting ‘redox tuning’ has evolved to provide a perfect mechanism for converting reducing equivalents between two separate long-range one-electron transfers from a ferredoxin and concerted two-electron (hydride) transfer. The way that biology has developed the ability to trap two consecutive excited electrons in the form of a C–H bond, hence leading to organic conversions, is another source of inspiration for solar fuels research.
Final comments
The results we have highlighted in this article prompt two conclusions. First, the superiority of enzymes as electrocatalysts is highly inspirational for the development of molecular and surface electrocatalysts by chemists, which can be used in light-driven test systems and real-world applications. Although enzymes prove the importance of the second and outer coordination shells that are frequently ignored by chemists (and the 3D structures of these shells are very well defined by X-ray crystallography) the protein fold is difficult to mimic chemically. Enzymes are analogous to ‘pop up shops’ in commerce – they stay in business only as long as required by the organism and do not require long-term stability, but they can be re-established quickly as conditions change. Second, the visibility of efficiency through minuscule overpotential requirement is an immediate testimony to the role of catalytic electron transfer efficiency in evolution. Systems such as the mitochondrial ETC or the discharge of electrons from PSI into the Calvin cycle would not work unless enzymes were reversible electrocatalysts: PFE allows us to observe this very important subtlety. Another aspect that we have not mentioned, but which remains very likely, is that the reorganisation energies of electron relay centres in enzymes are sufficiently low that the recombination rate constant kr′ (Fig. 1) may be much retarded owing to the reaction energetics lying in the Marcus inverted region. The special properties of enzymes make them valuable tools in solar fuels research.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research has been funded by grants from the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC), most recently BB/N006321/1 and BB/M005720/1) and by the Engineering and Physical Sciences Research Council (EPSRC, Supergen V). F. A. A. is a Royal Society Wolfson Research Merit Award holder. Kavita Pandey greatly acknowledges support from the British Council for a Newton Bhabha PhD Placement Award, and the Science and Engineering Research Board (SERB) for an Overseas Postdoctoral Fellowship.
References
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2006, 103, 15729–15735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 253–278 RSC .
M. G. Walter, E. L. Warren, J. R. McKone, S. W. Boettcher, Q. Mi, E. A. Santori and N. S. Lewis, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 6446–6473 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tachibana, L. Vayssieres and J. R. Durrant, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 511–518 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 2294–2320 RSC .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
M. Grätzel, Nature, 2001, 414, 338–344 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sivula and R. Van De Krol, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–16 Search PubMed .

          A. Bachmeier, B. Siritanaratkul and F. A. Armstrong, in From Molecules to Materials – Pathways to Artificial Photosynthesis, ed. E. A. Rozhkova and K. Ariga, Springer International Publishing,  2014, pp. 99–123 Search PubMed .
P. W. King, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2013, 1827, 949–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5627–5636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Utterback, M. B. Wilker, K. A. Brown, P. W. King, J. D. Eavesa and G. Dukovic, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 5538–5542 RSC .
C. Y. Lee, H. S. Park, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5971–5974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Polliotto, S. Morra, S. Livraghi, F. Valetti, G. Gilardi and E. Giamello, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 10547–10556 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chica, C. H. Wu, Y. Liu, M. W. W. Adams, T. Lian and R. B. Dyer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 2245–2255 RSC .
E. Reisner, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2009, 550–552 RSC .
E. Reisner, D. J. Powell, C. Cavazza, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 18457–18466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. H. Nam, J. Z. Zhang, V. Andrei, N. Kornienko, N. Heidary, A. Wagner, K. Nakanishi, K. P. Sokol, B. Slater, I. Zebger, S. Hofmann, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, C. B. Park and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 10755–10759 CrossRef .
M. B. Wilker, J. K. Utterback, S. Greene, K. A. Brown, D. W. Mulder, P. W. King and G. Dukovic, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 741–750 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tapia, S. Zacarias, I. A. C. Pereira, J. C. Conesa, M. Pita and A. L. D. Lacey, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 5691–5698 CrossRef CAS .
B. L. Greene, C. A. Joseph, M. J. Maroney and R. B. Dyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11108–11111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, Q. Song, D. W. Mulder and P. W. King, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10790–10798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hamon, A. Ciaccafava, P. Infossi, R. Puppo, P. Even-Hernandez, E. Lojou and V. Marchi, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 4989–4992 RSC .
M. B. Wilker, K. E. Shinopoulos, K. A. Brown, D. W. Mulder, P. W. King and G. Dukovic, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4316–4324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Caputo, L. Wang, R. Beranek and E. Reisner, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 5690–5694 RSC .
D. Mersch, C. Y. Lee, J. Z. Zhang, K. Brinkert, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. W. Rutherford and E. Reisner, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8541–8549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Morra, F. Valetti, V. Sarasso, S. Castrignanò, S. J. Sadeghi and G. Gilardi, Bioelectrochemistry, 2015, 106, 258–262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Caputo, M. A. Gross, V. W. Lau, C. Cavazza, B. V. Lotsch and E. Reisner, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11538–11542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Chaudhary, T. W. Woolerton, C. S. Allen, J. H. Warner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 58–60 RSC .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Pierce, W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2393–2399 RSC .
L. Zhang, M. Can, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2789–2795 CrossRef CAS .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, E. Reisner, E. Pierce, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2132–2133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Barber and P. D. Tran, J. R. Soc., Interface, 2013, 10, 20120984 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Amao, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2018, 2, 1153–1169 RSC .
T. W. Woolerton, S. Sheard, Y. S. Chaudhary and F. A. Armstrong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7470–7490 RSC .
A. Bachmeier and F. A. Armstrong, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2015, 25, 141–151 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, D. F. Harris, M. B. Wilker, A. Rasmussen, N. Khadka, H. Hamby, S. Keable, G. Dukovic, J. W. Peters, L. C. Seefeldt and P. W. King, Science, 2016, 352, 448–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2015, 25, 18–26 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Fukuzumi, Y.-M. Lee and W. Nam, ChemPhotoChem, 2017, 121–135 Search PubMed .

          A. J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical methods, Wiley, New york,  2001 Search PubMed .
B. K. Davis, Prog. Biophys. Mol. Biol., 2002, 79, 77–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Szilágyi, Á. Kun and E. Szathmáry, Biol. Direct, 2012, 7, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
S. C. G. Rison and J. M. Thornton, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2002, 12, 374–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Raanan, D. H. Pike, E. K. Moore, P. G. Falkowski and V. Nanda, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2018, 115, 1280–1285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Albery and J. R. Knowles, Biochemistry, 1976, 15, 5631–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. G. Falkowski, T. Fenchel and E. F. Delong, Science, 2008, 320, 1034–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Kim, S. Senn, A. Harel, B. I. Jelen and P. G. Falkowski, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, 2013, 368, 20120257 CrossRef PubMed .
F. A. Armstrong and J. Hirst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 14049–14054 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. M. Evans and F. A. Armstrong, in Metalloproteins – Methods and Protocols, ed. J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and Y. Nicolet, Humana Press, New York,  2014, pp. 73–94 Search PubMed .
J. M. Hudson, K. Heffron, V. Kotlyar, Y. Sher, E. Maklashina, G. Cecchini and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6977–6989 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mano, V. Soukharev and A. Heller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 11180–11187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Heller and B. Feldman, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 2482–2505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Bard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7559–7567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zu, R. J. Shannon and J. Hirst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6020–6021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hirst, A. Sucheta, B. A. C. Ackrell and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5031–5038 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sucheta, B. A. C. Ackrell, B. Cochran and F. A. Armstrong, Nature, 1992, 356, 361–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Jones, E. Sillery, S. P. J. Albracht and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2002, 866–867 RSC .
T. W. Woolerton and K. A. Vincent, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54, 5011–5017 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hambourger, M. Gervaldo, D. Svedruzic, P. W. King, D. Gust, M. Ghirardi, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 2015–2022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Greening, A. Biswas, C. R. Carere, C. J. Jackson, M. C. Taylor, M. B. Stott, G. M. Cook and S. E. Morales, ISME J., 2015, 10, 1–17 Search PubMed .
J. W. Peters, G. J. Schut, E. S. Boyd, D. W. Mulder, E. M. Shepard, J. B. Broderick, P. W. King and M. W. W. Adams, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Mol. Cell Res., 2015, 1853, 1350–1369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Vignais and B. Billoud, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4206–4272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Sargent, Adv. Microb. Physiol., 2016, 68, 433–507 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Lukey, A. Parkin, M. M. Roessler, B. J. Murphy, J. Harmer, T. Palmer, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, J. Biol. Chem., 2010, 285, 3928–3938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Beaton, R. M. Evans, A. J. Finney, C. M. Lamont, F. A. Armstrong, F. Sargent and S. B. Carr, Biochem. J., 2018, 475, 1353–1370 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Evans, A. Parkin, M. M. Roessler, B. J. Murphy, H. Adamson, M. J. Lukey, F. Sargent, A. Volbeda, J. C. Fontecilla-Camps and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 2694–2707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Evans, E. J. Brooke, S. A. M. Wehlin, E. Nomerotskaia, F. Sargent, S. B. Carr, S. E. V. Phillips and F. A. Armstrong, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2016, 12, 46–50 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. J. Brooke, R. M. Evans, S. T. A. Islam, G. M. Roberts, S. A. M. Wehlin, S. B. Carr, S. E. V. Phillips and F. A. Armstrong, Biochemistry, 2017, 56, 132–142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Volbeda, L. Martin, E. Barbier, O. Gutiérrez-Sanz, A. L. De Lacey, P.-P. Liebgott, S. Dementin, M. Rousset and J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, JBIC, J. Biol. Inorg. Chem., 2015, 20, 11–22 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wulff, C. C. Day, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 6606–6611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lauterbach and O. Lenz, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 17897–17905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Lukey, M. M. Roessler, A. Parkin, R. M. Evans, R. A. Davies, O. Lenz, B. Friedrich, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 16881–16892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. V. Hexter, T. F. Esterle and F. A. Armstrong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 11822 RSC .
J. C. Fontecilla-Camps, A. Volbeda, C. Cavazza and Y. Nicolet, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 4273–4303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. A. Armstrong, R. M. Evans and C. F. Megarity, in Methods in Enzymology, ed. S. S. David, Academic Press, 599th edn,  2018, pp. 387–408 Search PubMed .
C. Léger, S. J. Elliott, K. R. Hoke, L. J. C. Jeuken, A. K. Jones and F. A. Armstrong, Biochemistry, 2003, 42, 8653–8662 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Adamson, M. Robinson, J. J. Wright, L. A. Flanagan, J. Walton, D. Elton, D. J. Gavaghan, A. M. Bond, M. M. Roessler and A. Parkin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 10677–10686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abou Hamdan, S. Dementin, P. P. Liebgott, O. Gutierrez-Sanz, P. Richaud, A. L. De Lacey, M. Roussett, P. Bertrand, L. Cournac and C. Léger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8368–8371 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, S. Beaton, S. B. Carr and F. A. Armstrong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018 10.1039/c8ee02361a .
C. E. Lubner, P. Knörzer, P. J. N. Silva, K. A. Vincent, T. Happe, D. A. Bryant and J. H. Golbeck, Biochemistry, 2010, 49, 10264–10266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Winkler, S. Kawelke and T. Happe, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 8493–8500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Adam, L. Böche, L. Castñeda-Losada, M. Winkler, U. P. Apfel and T. Happe, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 894–902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Pandey, S. T. A. Islam, T. Happe and F. A. Armstrong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 3843–3848 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Esselborn, N. Muraki, K. Klein, V. Engelbrecht, N. Metzler-Nolte, U.-P. Apfel, E. Hofmann, G. Kurisu and T. Happe, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 959–968 RSC .
C. F. Megarity, J. Esselborn, S. V. Hexter, U. Apfel, T. Happe and F. A. Armstrong, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15227–15233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Esselborn, C. Lambertz, A. Adamska-Venkatesh, T. Simmons, G. Berggren, J. Noth, J. Siebel, A. Hemschemeier, V. Artero, E. Reijerse, M. Fontecave, W. Lubitz and T. Happe, Nat. Chem. Biol., 2013, 9, 607–609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Berggren, A. Adamska, C. Lambertz, T. R. Simmons, J. Esselborn, M. Atta, S. Gambarelli, J. M. Mouesca, E. Reijerse, W. Lubitz, T. Happe, V. Artero and M. Fontecave, Nature, 2013, 499, 66–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ginovska-Pangovska, A. Dutta, M. L. Reback, J. C. Linehan and W. J. Shaw, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 2621–2630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. P. Boralugodage, R. J. Arachchige, A. Dutta, G. W. Buchko and W. J. Shaw, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2017, 7, 1108–1121 RSC .
D. W. Stephan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 10018–10032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Dementin, B. Burlat, A. L. De Lacey, A. Pardo, G. Adryanczyk-Perrier, B. Guigliarelli, V. M. Fernandez and M. Rousset, J. Biol. Chem., 2004, 279, 10508–10513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lubitz, H. Ogata, O. Rüdiger and E. Reijerse, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 4081–4148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. E. Benson, C. P. Kubiak, A. J. Sathrum and J. M. Smieja, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 89–99 RSC .
H. A. Hansen, J. B. Varley, A. A. Peterson and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 388–392 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bassegoda, C. Madden, D. W. Wakerley, E. Reisner and J. Hirst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 15473–15476 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Reda, C. M. Plugge, N. J. Abram and J. Hirst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2008, 105, 10654–10658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Yadav, J. O. Baeg, G. H. Oh, N. J. Park, K. J. Kong, J. Kim, D. W. Hwang and S. K. Biswas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11455–11461 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Noji, T. Jin, M. Nango, N. Kamiya and Y. Amao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 3260–3265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, S. Y. Lim, D. Seo, J. Y. Lee and T. D. Chung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1502207 CrossRef .
V. C.-C. Wang, S. W. Ragsdale and F. A. Armstrong, ChemBioChem, 2013, 14, 1845–1851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Can, F. A. Armstrong and S. W. Ragsdale, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 4149–4174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Jeoung and H. Dobbek, Science, 2007, 318, 1461–1464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Dobbek, V. Svetlitchnyi, L. Gremer, R. Huber and O. Meyer, Science, 2001, 293, 1281–1285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. L. Drennan, J. Heo, M. D. Sintchak, E. Schreiter and P. W. Ludden, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2001, 98, 11973–11978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. K. Nørskov, J. Rossmeisl, A. Logadottir, L. Lindqvist, J. R. Kitchin, T. Bligaard and H. Jónsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 17886–17892 CrossRef .
D. J. Vinyard and G. W. Brudvig, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2017, 68, 101–116 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. dos Santos, V. Climent, C. F. Blanford and F. A. Armstrong, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13962–13974 RSC .
S. V. Hexter, F. Grey, T. Happe, V. Climent and F. A. Armstrong, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2012, 109, 11516–11521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-E. E. Pandelia, W. Lubitz and W. Nitschke, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Bioenerg., 2012, 1817, 1565–1575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Parkin and F. Sargent, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2012, 16, 26–34 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Murphy, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1426–1433 RSC .
J. A. Cracknell, T. P. McNamara, E. D. Lowe and C. F. Blanford, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40, 6668–6675 RSC .
A. Shimizu, J. H. Kwon, T. Sasaki, T. Satoh, N. Sakurai, T. Sakurai, S. Yamaguchi and T. Samejima, Biochemistry, 1999, 38, 3034–3042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Krishnan and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1015–1023 RSC .
N. Carrillo and E. A. Ceccarelli, Eur. J. Biochem., 2003, 270, 1900–1915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Brown, M. B. Wilker, M. Boehm, H. Hamby, G. Dukovic and P. W. King, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2201–2204 CrossRef CAS .
H. Inoue, M. Yamachika and H. Yoneyama, J. Chem. Soc., Trans., 1992, 88, 2215–2219 RSC .
I. Willner, D. Mandler and A. Riklin, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1986, 1022–1024 RSC .
B. Siritanaratkul, C. F. Megarity, T. G. Roberts, T. O. M. Samuels, M. Winkler, J. H. Warner, T. Happe and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4579–4586 RSC .
L. Wan, C. F. Megarity, B. Siritanaratkul and F. A. Armstrong, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 972–975 RSC .
V. V. Ptushenko, D. A. Cherepanov, L. I. Krishtalik and A. Y. Semenov, Photosynth. Res., 2008, 97, 55–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. L. Rodkey and J. A. Donovan Jr, J. Biol. Chem., 1958, 234, 677–680 Search PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

Rhiannon M. Evans
	Rhiannon ‘Non’ Evans graduated from Cardiff University in 2010 with a PhD in Chemistry under the supervision of Prof Rudolf K. Allemann. She immediately joined the Armstrong group as a post-doctoral research associate. Her research interests are in enzyme function and adaptations to different environments. Her work has been at the forefront of the genetic engineering of [NiFe]-hydrogenases and their electrochemical characterisation, the aims being to determine mechanisms of hydrogen activation, oxygen tolerance and electron–proton transfer.

Bhavin Siritanaratkul
	Bhavin Siritanaratkul received his DPhil under the supervision of Prof. Fraser Armstrong at the University of Oxford, where he studied enzyme–inorganic material hybrids for light-driven reactions and cofactor regeneration. Prior to this, he received his bachelor's and master's degrees from the University of Tokyo, working with Prof. Kazunari Domen on semiconductor materials for solar water splitting. Currently, he is a postdoctoral researcher in the Armstrong group, with his main interest being the “Electrochemical Leaf”, an NADP(H) regeneration system based on ferredoxin–NADP+ reductase (FNR).

Clare F. Megarity
	Clare Megarity obtained her PhD from Queen's University Belfast in 2014 where she studied the molecular basis of negative cooperativity in oxidoreductase flavo-enzymes. Clare then joined the Armstrong group at the University of Oxford. She is using protein film electrochemistry to study and exploit two terminal enzymes of photosynthetic electron-transfer chains, an [FeFe]-hydrogenase known as HydA1 which produces hydrogen, and ferredoxin NADP+ reductase (FNR) which produces NADPH. Her current focus is on the “Electrochemical Leaf”, an electrochemical NADP(H) recycling electrode which exploits the close confinement of FNR and downstream enzymes in nano-sized electrode pores to carry out ‘green’ organic syntheses.

Kavita Pandey
	Kavita Pandey holds a Master's (2011) and PhD degree (2016) in Physics, both obtained in India. During her PhD she spent six months as a Newton Bhabha Fellow in Fraser Armstrong's group at University of Oxford. She re-joined the Armstrong group in 2018 as awardee of an SERB Overseas Postdoctoral Fellowship from the Indian Government. Her project in the Armstrong group brings together enzymology, catalysis and electronics, specifically by exploiting the power of impedance spectroscopy to investigate the internal charge-transfer properties of enzymes that enable them to be such highly efficient and reversible electrocatalysts.

Thomas F. Esterle
	Thomas Esterle is an experienced electrochemist spanning over a large breadth of research activities. He completed his PhD in electrochemistry at the University of Southampton studying mesoporous materials. He moved to the University of Oxford to work on protein film electrochemistry used in biofuel cells with Prof. Fraser Armstrong. He later took a position, still at the University of Oxford, to assist in the coordination of the Energy Storage Supergen project. He is now a senior research scientist at ZapGo Ltd in the research and development of supercapacitors.

Fraser A. Armstrong
	Fraser Armstrong is a Professor of Chemistry at Oxford University and a Fellow of St Johns College. His group has developed protein film electrochemistry – a powerful suite of electrochemical techniques for unravelling complex, biological electron-transfer reactions and quantifying the efficiency of redox enzymes, one goal being to inspire and direct development of the best chemical catalysts for renewable energy. Elected a Fellow of the Royal Society in 2008, he has since received the RSC Joseph Chatt Award (2010), the Barker Medal (2012), the Davy Medal of the Royal Society (2012) and the Bailar Medal of the University of Illinois (2015).

 	Fig. 1  The principles of a colloidal light-driven reductive fuel generating system – solar energy is absorbed by a semiconductor (light absorber, orange), and band-gap excitation of an electron from the valence band (VB) to the conduction band (CB) results in electron–hole separation (electron transfer 2). The hole is quenched by an electron (electron transfer 1) from an oxidative catalyst (ideally from water splitting). The excited electron in the conduction band must be captured through chemical reactions before recombination occurs (shown here as kr or kr′, where the latter reaction occurs from within the reductive catalyst). An efficient reductive catalyst will immediately utilise the excited electron (electron transfer 3), thus limiting recombination with the semiconductor.	 
Alcohol + NAD+ → NADH + ketone + H+
ketone + 2e− + 2H+ → alcohol
NAD+ + 2e− + H+ → NADH
2H+ + 2e− → H2
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O
CO2 + H+ + 2e− → HCO2−
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → H2O + CO

 	Fig. 2  The mitochondrial electron transport chain. The enzymes and mobile electron carriers are labelled as follows: complex I (NADH:quinone oxidoreductase, I, brown), complex II (succinate:quinone oxidoreductase, II, green), quinone pool (Q, orange), complex III (quinol:cytochrome c oxidoreductase, III, pink), cytochrome c (C, cyan), and complex IV (cytochrome c oxidase, IV, purple). The reduction potentials of relevant half-cell reactions are shown. Energy made available across several steps is used to pump protons from the matrix to the intermembrane space. The stoichiometries refer to electrons transported per NADH, noting that complex II can provide an additional two electrons from succinate to the Q pool.	 

 	Fig. 3  Key concepts in protein film electrochemistry and the criteria for establishing enzyme efficiency. (A) Cartoon depiction of an enzyme attached to the working electrode in a PFE experiment. (B) The electrode potential is scanned and the resulting current is monitored. Two examples are shown: one is an efficient, reversible catalyst (blue trace) where the maximal turnover rate is established with minimal driving potential; the other is an example of an inefficient, irreversible catalyst (red trace) where the same maximal current is only achieved upon application of a large driving potential. The overpotential η shown compares the energy cost of the two catalysts in achieving the same rate: sometimes η is taken to be the onset potential relative to the equilibrium potential.	 

 	Fig. 4  (A) Successive electrocatalytic cyclic voltammograms of NADH dehydrogenase (subcomplex Iλ of mammalian complex I) at pH 7.8, 20 °C. The enzyme is adsorbed on a rotating pyrolytic graphite electrode and the solution contains 1 mM NADH and 1 mM NAD+. Scan rate = 10 mV s−1; electrode rotation rate = 1000 rpm. Reprinted with permission, from Y. Zu, R. J. Shannon, J. Hirst, Reversible, Electrochemical Interconversion of NADH and NAD+ by the Catalytic (Iλ) Subcomplex of Mitochondrial NADH:Ubiquinone Oxidoreductase (Complex I), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 6020–6021. Copyright 2003 American Chemical Society, ref. 54. (B) Successive electrocatalytic cyclic voltammograms of succinate dehydrogenase (membrane-extrinsic domain of mammalian complex II) at pH 8.0, 38 °C. The enzyme is adsorbed on a rotating pyrolytic graphite electrode and the solution contains 0.59 mM succinate and 0.59 mM fumarate. Scan rate = 10 mV s−1; electrode rotation rate = 500 rpm. Reprinted with permission, from J. Hirst, A. Sucheta, B. A. C. Ackrell and F. A. Armstrong, Electrocatalytic Voltammetry of Succinate Dehydrogenase: Direct Quantification of the Catalytic Properties of a Complex Electron-Transport Enzyme, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1996, 118, 5031–5038. Copyright 1996 American Chemical Society, ref. 55.	 

 	Fig. 5  Examples of reversible and irreversible electrocatalysis of H2 activation by [NiFe]-hydrogenases, Hyd-1 and Hyd-2, from E. coli. (A) The general protein structure for membrane-bound [NiFe]-hydrogenases is represented by Hyd-1. The dimer of heterodimers contains the NiFe active site in the ‘large’ subunit of each heterodimer, and a chain of 3 Fe–S clusters in the ‘small’ subunit. The FeS clusters relay electrons from the surface of the protein to the active site. (B) Electrocatalytic cyclic voltammograms for Hyd-1 and Hyd-2 attached to a rotating pyrolytic graphite electrode, operating under 10% H2, pH 6.0, at 30 °C with electrode rotation rate = 8500 rpm. Data reproduced from Lukey et al.64 The voltammogram obtained for Hyd-2 (black) cuts cleanly through the zero-current axis at the equilibrium potential, hence it is a reversible electrocatalyst. In contrast, the ‘O2-tolerant’ Hyd-1 is not a reversible catalyst under these conditions, the principal reason being that the reduction potentials of the FeS clusters, one of which serves as the electrochemical control site, are too positive relative to the potential of the 2H+/H2 couple. This research was originally published in the Journal of Biological Chemistry. M. J. Lukey, A. Parkin, M. M Roessler, B. J. Murphy, J. Harmer, T. Palmer, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, How Escherichia coli is equipped to oxidize hydrogen under different redox conditions, J. Biol. Chem., 2010, 285, 3928–3938. Copyright 2010 the American Society for Biochemistry and Molecular Biology.	 

 	Fig. 6  Structures of two [FeFe]-hydrogenases and electrocatalytic experiments. (A) Structures of CpI from Clostridium pasteurianum (pdb 4XDC, left), and CrHydA1 from Chlamydomonas reinhardlii (apo-enzyme, pdb 3LX4, right) along with a representation of the active-site H-cluster. CpI contains an ET relay system comprising three [4Fe–4S] clusters and an additional distal [2Fe–2S] cluster but CrHydA1 lacks such a relay. (B) Electrocatalytic cyclic voltammograms for CpI (grey) and CrHydA1 (black) attached to a pyrolytic graphite electrode, operating under 100% H2, pH 6, 5 °C with electrode rotation rate = 1000 rpm, scan rate 30 mV s−1. (C) Cyclic voltammograms showing the activation of apo-CrHydA1 attached to a pyrolytic graphite electrode following injection of 2FeMIM into the solution (final concentration 0.2 μM) after cycle shown in grey. Conditions 5 °C, 100% H2, pH 6. Scan rate: 30 mV s−1. Broken arrows show direction of cycling. Reprinted with permission from: C. F. Megarity, J. Esselborn, S. V. Hexter, F. Wittkamp, U.-P. Apfel, T. Happe and F. A. Armstrong, Electrochemical Investigations of the Mechanism of Assembly of the Active-Site H-Cluster of [FeFe]-hydrogenases, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15227–15233. Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society, ref. 85.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structure and electrocatalytic action of carbon monoxide dehydrogenase (CODH) (A) The structure of carbon monoxide dehydrogenase is represented here by CODH-II from Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans (CODH-IICh) and shows the C-cluster active site with a CO2 intermediate bound (pdb 1SU7). (B) Electrocatalytic cyclic voltammogram of CODH-ICh recorded under an atmosphere of 50% CO and 50% CO2 at 25 °C, pH 7.0, electrode rotation rate = 3500 rpm, scan rate 2 mV s−1. Data reproduced with permission from V. C.-C. Wang, S. W. Ragsdale, and F. A. Armstrong, Investigations of Two Bidirectional Carbon Monoxide Dehydrogenases from Carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans by Protein Film Electrochemistry, ChemBioChem, 2013, 14, 1845–1851. Copyright 2013, John Wiley and Sons, ref. 100.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 8  How enzymes displaying irreversible electrocatalysis can be transformed into reversible catalysts by pH-induced convergence of Esubstrate and ECS. The onset potential for catalysis is estimated from voltammograms and lies between ECS and Esubstrate. (A) For [NiFe]-hydrogenase Hyd-1, decreasing the pH causes Esubstrate (solid lines), and onset potential (circles) to converge whereupon Hyd-1 becomes a reversible catalyst. Temperature = 37 °C. The onset potential is determined primarily by the potential of the distal Fe–S cluster, which is relatively pH-independent. Data reproduced from B. J. Murphy, F. Sargent and F. A. Armstrong, Transforming an oxygen-tolerant [NiFe] uptake hydrogenase into a proficient, reversible hydrogen producer, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1426–1433 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 111 (B) The same concept can be applied to bilirubin oxidase where the onset potential for O2 reduction decreases with increasing pH. The graph shows several estimates of onset potential collected at each pH under 100% O2. There is an approximate error of 10–20 mV for each data point. Temperature = 25 °C.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure and function of bilirubin oxidase, a ‘blue’ Cu oxidase. (A) The structure of bilirubin oxidase (BOD) from Myrothecium verrucaria (pdb 2XLL) showing the T1 electron-transfer site and the T2/T3 copper centres that form the active site for four-electron O2 reduction. The primary influence on the onset potential for BOD is the potential of the T1 copper site. (B) Successive cyclic voltammograms of BOD attached to a carbon-nanotube-modified pyrolytic graphite electrode, under 100% O2, temperature = 0 °C, electrode rotation rate = 2500 rpm, scan rate = 5 mV s−1. Data reproduced from L. dos Santos, V. Climent, C. F. Blanford and F. A. Armstrong, Mechanistic studies of the ‘blue’ Cu enzyme, bilirubin oxidase, as a highly efficient electrocatalyst for the oxygen reduction reaction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 13962–13974 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 107. (C) Successive voltammograms obtained at pH 10.5 generate isosbestic points averaging at +0.58 V (+1.23 V vs. RHE), thereby demonstrating reversible catalysis of the 4-electron O2/H2O redox reaction. Experimental conditions: temperature = 40 °C, electrode rotation rate = 1500 rpm, scan rate = 50 mV s−1.	 

 	Fig. 10  Ferredoxin–NADP+ reductase (FNR) reduction potential and reversible NADP+/NADPH catalysis. (A) Structure of FNR (PDB 1GJR), with FAD (yellow) and NADP+ (red). (B) Stationary cyclic voltammograms of an FNR-adsorbed ITO electrode (black, baseline subtracted) and after adding NADP+ (red, 67 μM final concentration). The dotted line indicates the NADP+/NADPH reduction potential. Other conditions: pH 8.0, 20 °C, scan rate 5 mV s−1. Figure adapted from B. Siritanaratkul, C. F. Megarity, T. G. Roberts, T. O. M. Samuels, M. Winkler, J. H. Warner, T. Happe and F. A. Armstrong, Transfer of photosynthetic NADP+/NADPH recycling activity to a porous metal oxide for highly specific, electrochemically-driven organic synthesis, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 4579–4586 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, ref. 119.	 

 	Fig. 11  Relationship of the reduction potentials of Photosystem I (PSI, FeS centre B, see ref. 121), ferredoxin (Fd, approximate potential range), FNR, and NADP+ (at pH 7 for FNR119 and NADP+122). E1 is the potential of the oxidized/semiquinone couple of FNR, E2 is the potential of semiquinone/hydroquinone, and Em is the average of these two potentials.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
