Engineering 3D ordered molecular thin films by nanoscale control  - Physical Chemistry Chemical Physics (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C0CP01012J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C0CP01012J
(Perspective)
Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 14848-14860Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsEngineering 3D ordered molecular thin films by nanoscale control

        
          
            Simone 
            Fabiano
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Bruno 
            Pignataro
          
          
        
      *
      Dipartimento di Chimica Fisica, Università degli studi di Palermo, V. le delle Scienze - Parco D'Orleans II, ed. 17-90128 Palermo, Italy. E-mail: bruno.pignataro@unipa.it
Received 
      28th June 2010
    , Accepted 20th August 2010First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      15th October 2010
    AbstractThis perspective aims to report on experimental preparation and investigation tools for engineering molecular thin films with a three-dimensional (3D) nanoscale control that is of relevant interest for different emerging applications as well as for the development of calibration standards. Such thin films may be obtained by man-made methods, self-assembly or spatio-temporal self-organization and/or by the combination of these last approaches with external tools. Understanding the main features and the physical-chemistry underlying the related ordering phenomena is in due course and a theoretical framework is under development. In this respect it is of fundamental importance to achieve the ability to get 3D structural images with a nanoscale detail. This issue is at the early stage and novel techniques like electron tomography and scanning transmission X-ray microscopy are very promising.Simone FabianoSimone Fabiano (b. 1985) received his MS in chemistry with honors from the University of Catania (2008). In 2009 he joined the group of Prof. Pignataro at the University of Palermo, where he is currently studying for a PhD in chemistry. His main research topic concerns the development of ordered molecular thin films for applications in electronics.Bruno PignataroBorn in 1972, Bruno Pignataro is a Professor of Physical Chemistry at the University of Palermo. He received with honors both his degree in chemistry (1995) and PhD in materials science (2000). His research group works in the fields of nanoscience, soft nanotechnology and the physical chemistry of molecular thin films.
1. Introduction
The advancement of nanotechnology and soft-matter research has been tremendous in the last two decades.1–3 Nanotechnology and soft-matter have a big overlaps wherever functional nanostructures made of organic and/or biological materials are employed.4–6 On the other hand, in order to develop advanced functional materials and devices it is frequently important to cross the above fields with that of surface science.7–9
In this context, engineering solid supported 2D supramolecular and molecular superstructures is of particular interest since they offer great potential for several applications.10–13 Among those, electron confinement for light emission, modification of surface wettability, microlitre chromatography and substrates for biological recognition processes have been demonstrated.14–16 Also, the achievement of 2D laterally ordered superstructures allowed for the development of a new platform of knowledge dealing with new theoretical approaches and nanoscale laws.10,17 Finally, such systems may be of interest as standards for innovative investigation tools, including scanning probes18 and other surface sensitive techniques like surface enhanced Raman scattering,19 time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry20etc. To date a number of methods and strategies are available to generate extensive lateral ordered molecular structures and their investigation may be easily followed by scanning probes and/or other related tools.21
A natural extension of 2D nanopatterning concerns the achievement of a nanoscale 3D control in solid supported molecular films. This issue has been found to be quite difficult and only recently nice results have been reached.22 The importance of achieving a molecular thin films with 3D nanostructural control concerns several emerging applications where the materials properties and/or the performance of the related devices have been found to be enhanced by the order within the film phase.23,24 For instance, as to organic and hybrid photovoltaics it has been found that the probability that an exciton reaches the donor/acceptor (D/A) interface and dissociates is high when the length scale of the D and A phases is similar to the exciton diffusion length (5–20 nm). Moreover in order to have an efficient photocurrent collection both the D and the A systems must provide a continuous path for the transport of separated charge to the contacts since isolated domains can trap charges causing unwanted recombination.25–27 Accordingly, the development of nanostructured bulk heterojunctions (BHJs) was an important improvement in terms of power conversion efficiency with respect to the planar heterojunctions. As a further example, the ferroelectric polarization of some organic materials such as random copolymers can be used as two binary levels for non-volatile organic memories.28 However, the destructive read-out of the polarization charge in ferroelectric capacitors hinders their practical application. A breakthrough in this field has been represented by a phase-separated blend with ordered interpenetrating networks of ferroelectric and semiconducting polymers showing non-volatile memory functionality based on resistive switching.29 Also, it is well-known that the molecular order in organic semiconductors is responsible for the field-effect charge transport properties. By controlling the organization of functional materials in molecularly ordered domains, the mobility of the molecular transistors can be widely enhanced.24 Several other examples may be given dealing with the importance of nanoscale 3D order in molecular thin films and Scheme 1 reports some related fields.
 Scheme 1  Fundamental role of 3D nanoscale ordering of molecular thin films in different research fields. 
Different strategies may lead to 3D nanopatterning including self-assembly or self-organization, man-made laser- or electron-based irradiation tools, molecular growth on 2D templates, and the combination of self-assembly/self-organization with external tools. Self-assembly and self-organization are very attractive since they may involve processes allowing for the realization of large scale and low-cost devices. As an example, by considering the growing field of plastic electronics, the employment of low temperature processes by molecular self-ordering, printing and other solution methods, possibly compatible with roll-to-roll manufacturing, are of great interest and deserve increased effort for their investigation and optimization.30 On the other side, radiation-dependent processes may allow for better control and/or structural definition. Thus, depending on the application and/or on particular issues one has to find the right compromise between the above different approaches.
Furthermore, in order to understand the physics at the basis of 3D nanoscale structuring of thin films, the development of the above approaches has to be accompanied by the progress in innovative investigation tools. The ability to get 3D images on the nanoscale must be widely improved, with electrons, lasers and X-rays being the best probes to date.
In this scenario, the engineering of solid supported nanoscale 3D ordered films is under development and this perspective intends to propose a critical review of selected contributions on fabrication approaches (chapter 2) and relevant investigation tools (chapter 3) along with some future prospects.
2. Fabrication of nanostructured molecular films with 3D order
This section is focused on the preparation/modification of molecular architectures by employing both man-made and/or self-assembly, self-organization approaches to generate 3D ordered nanostructures in thin films. In this case, man-made approaches refer mainly to miniaturization by irradiation tools. On the other side, as is well known, self-assembly consists of a bottom-up approach where the ordered state forms as a result of its free energy minimization. More specifically, the term self-organization is here used as a sort of “dynamic self-assembly” where ordered nanostructures are generated by thermodynamic systems away from equilibrium, thus a condition where the variation of the main thermodynamic parameters occurs in time scales much faster than that of reaction–diffusion processes and the systems are frozen at a given point along their transformation pathway.
2.1 Writing of thin films by irradiation tools
The most direct way for writing 3D nanostructures in molecular thin films involves irradiation tools employing wavelengths and spot sizes compatible with the nanoscale. For this purpose electrons are the right pens, and few examples of nanolithography on molecular materials have been already reported.
In particular, electron beam lithography (EBL) allows nanometre scale resolution thanks to the use of high-energy electrons ensuring small wavelength and spot size.31 The electron irradiation modifies the chemical structure of the target by a series of elastic and inelastic scattering events. The momentum transfer produces secondary electrons with kinetic energy larger than their binding energy. By considering the irradiation of polymeric systems, scattering induces cross-linking (negative tone) or depolymerization (positive tone) depending on the polymer chemical nature and/or on the electron beam dose. The resulting structures are usually obtained by dissolving the low molecular weight material in a selective solvent. EBL resolution is therefore limited by electron scattering both in the molecular film and in the substrate, with the energy dissipation occurring far from the original point of entry.32 In forward scattering, small-angle deviations of the primary electrons lead to a broadening of the incident beam into the resist material. At low beam energy, the penetration of electrons and hence the energy release is limited to the lone resist layer. Thus the substrate is not involved and the final resolution is negatively affected. At the same time, a thicker resist layer would increase not only the number of forward scattering events but also that of the generated secondary electrons in the resist. For thinner resist film and/or high energy electrons, the forward scattering becomes negligible allowing one to reach sub-10 nm resolution.33 On the other hand, large-angle backscattering induces electrons back out of the substrate into and through the resist, causing an uniform background exposure over a length-scale of several microns.34 Due to their considerably thin nature when compared with polymer resists, the employment of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) would allow the realization of uniform and defect-free patterns with high resolution. For ultrathin films indeed, the electron scattering is minimized both in the resist and in the substrate.35,36
For non-isolated elements of the pattern, the backscattering gives rise to a non uniform distribution of the exposure at any point of the patterned area. Such a phenomenon, known as the proximity effect, further affects the resolution.37
In order to build-up functional nanostructured thin films, one can employ the direct replication of 3D nanostructures obtained by EB lithography. On this respect, Vlad and co-workers38 presented a hierarchical approach to generate highly ordered arrays of polyaniline structures with nanoscopic dimensionality by surface-catalyzed electroless polymerization coupled with resist- and dose-modulated electron beam lithography. Nanofabricated templates of standard poly(methylmethacrylate) (PMMA) positive resist have been generated by EBL directly on catalyst substrates, i.e. platinum films deposited on flexible or rigid supports. Sophisticated internal structuring of the templates has been obtained by modulating the resist composition via sequential coating of PMMA and the most electron sensitive PMMA8.5MAA (methacrylic acid). A modulation of the dose allows the selective removal of one of the two resists. Thus for instance, a dose around 40 μC cm−2 allowed for the selective removal of PMMA8.5MAA without altering PMMA. Subsequently, platinum-catalyzed polymerization of aniline has been performed inside the internal structures of the template, leading to the well-defined 3D nanostructures shown in Fig. 1. Accordingly, ordered nanodots (a), nanopillars (b) nanowires (c) and complex interconnected architectures (d) ranging from sub-10 nm to several hundreds of nanometres have been obtained with high patterning density after the resist removal.38
 Fig. 1  High-resolution scanning electron microscopy of (a) circular PANI dots with an average diameter of ca. 22 nm and 0.25 teradot inch−2 patterning density. (b) Highly ordered nanowires array and line defect in a photonic crystal-like structure. (c) Ultrahigh-resolution SEM images of fabricated sub-15-nm diameter polyaniline nanowires. (d) Cubic-symmetry lattice (500 nm × 500 nm unit cell, scale bar of 500 nm), obtained by matching the thickness of resist layers (250 nm) with the exposure pitch (500 nm) and suspended chess board planes [adapted from A. Vlad et al., Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2838–2843. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society]. 
As a different irradiation strategy, patterning of 3D nanostructures can be achieved by lasers with the employment of two-photon lithography (TPL).39 In a TPL process, photochemical changes of a sensitive material are induced by two-photon absorption (TPA) into the focal region of the laser beam, resulting in a confined photopolymerization. By moving the tightly focused laser along the in-plane (x,y-axis) and the out-of-plane (z-axis) direction, 3D structures can be fabricated with a resolution depending on the diffraction limit of the light. Because of the quadratic dependence of the TPA probability on the photon fluence density, the lateral resolution of the smallest three-dimensional volumetric pixel (voxel) has been reduced up to 120 nm through dose modulation of the laser.40 Unfortunately higher resolution (≤100 nm) cannot be achieved by dose modulation alone. The spatial definition of the voxel can be improved by using special agents such as highly sensitive initiator41 and/or radical quenchers.42 Accordingly, the two-photon polymerization process may start with the excitation of a photoinitiator molecules (PI) followed by the decomposition to radicals (R·). Photoinitiators with high initiating efficiency result in a low polymerization threshold. This allows a drastic decrease in the laser power and exposure time, leading to an ultralocalized polymerization. The short exposure time in fact contributes to reduce the radical diffusion on the outside of the focal region.41 The generated radical species react with the monomers (M) and the oligomers to produce long polymer chains. The presence of radical quenchers (Q) breaks off the polymerization reactions leading to deactivated polymer chains and energy release (see the scheme below for a better understanding).      Just to give an example, in Fig. 2 a sub-100 nm line pattern is reported. Park et al.43 investigated the limits of the TPL lateral resolution using resins incorporated with 2,6-di-tert-butyl-4-methylphenol (DBMP) as radical quencher. By optimizing the fabrication conditions, the authors obtained a line pattern with sub-diffraction limit features (∼96 nm). However, although the presence of radical quenchers contributes to the improvement of the lateral features, it leads to a short chain length, reducing the mechanical strength of the polymerized structures. Alternatively, re-polymerization techniques44 have been performed to reduce the lateral feature of the voxel. During the polymerization process, three different polymerized regions can be distinguished: (i) a higher-degree polymerized zone into the focal region of the laser beam; (ii) a lower-degree polymerized zone in the outer side of the laser focus; (iii) an unpolymerized region. By re-exposure of (ii), fine 3D nanostructures with sub-25 nm lateral size vertically extending less than 200 nm can be realized whereas (iii) is generally removed by washing.45
 Fig. 2  SEM image of a sub-100 nm line pattern built-up by two-photon lithography of resins added with 5 wt% of DBMP radical quencher. The structures are less than 200 nm tall [adapted from S. H. Park et al., Macromol. Res., 2006, 14, 559–564 with permission from the Polymer Society of Korea]. 
2.2 Self-assembled monomolecular and blend thin films
At variance with irradiation top-down/miniaturization tools, bottom-up approaches may be governed by the spontaneous association of molecules under energy minimization conditions into stable, structurally well-defined supramolecular architectures joined by non-covalent bonds through self-assembly phenomena.46 The engineering processes of the molecular nanostructures at the surfaces should take account, therefore, critical parameters like the lateral interactions of molecules and their coupling to the surface in order to guide the assembly towards the desired structure.47–50 In this respect, molecule–surface covalent interactions could play an important role in developing 3D nanoscale order. This happens especially when covalent approaches are developed by employing anisotropic nanostructures (see for instance the case of functionalized carbon nanotubes below) as well as when these are combined with lithographic nanopatterning methods51 such as those merging self-assembly with scanning probe lithography (see below paragraph 2.4).
In this paragraph we mainly focus on non-covalent interaction forces. In particular, depending on the nature of the molecules and the substrates, the molecule/molecule and molecule/surface interactions may induce a well-defined 3D growth of the nanostructures.52 In this scenario, one has to distinguish between 3D ordered nanostructures in monomolecular and molecular-blend thin films.
As far as self-assembled monomolecular thin films are concerned, their 3D morphology may be distinguished by considering three possible different situations, namely the layer-by-layer, layer-plus-island and island growth modes. A theoretical framework on this subject is already available including the dependence on surface energy, the application of heterogeneous nucleation theory, the nucleation dependence on substrate temperature and deposition rate, and the morphological stability of strained layers.53 Lattice mismatch in combination with film and substrate surface energy (γ) may be considered to differentiate the stability regions of the above three thin film growth modes, thus for instance enabling us to understand the transition from 2D layers to 3D islands film growth. In particular, by defining the lattice mismatch strain as f = [a0(s) − a0(f)]/a0(f), where a0 is the lattice parameter and s and f refer respectively to the substrate and the film, and the relative surface energy ratio as W = (γs − γf)/γs, it results that island growth dominates with γf > γs (W < 0) and that its range of dominance is even expanded for large f values. On the other hand, positive values of W leads to layer-by-layer structures for small f values, whereas additional misfit may result in a layer-plus-island growth mode.53
As a well known system, it has been observed that pentacene self-assembles on dielectric surface via a Stranski–Krastanov (layer-plus-island) growth, in which 3D islands form spontaneously above a continuous thin film phase of critical thickness. Such a growth mode facilitates the charge transport parallel to the substrate, promoting high carrier field effect mobility.54 Indeed, for transistor applications it has been observed that just the thin film phase in direct contact with the dielectric is responsible for the field effect modulation of charge transport. Well oriented thin layers consisting of pentacene molecules vertically arranged with respect to the dielectric plane (like SiO2) showed field-effect mobilities of the order of 1 cm2 V−1 s−1, comparable to that of amorphous silicon.55 An important point in this field is to maintain this morphology also at the electrode interface and this has been shown to be possible by using organic derivatized gold56–58 as well as printed polymer electrodes,59–61 thus moving towards the employment of solution processes or fully organic transistors generating high mobility at very low cost.
Recently, an interesting method based on the area-selective growth on pre-patterned substrates has been used to control the self-assembly of perylene-based functional thin films. In this case, the edge of the pattern acts as the preferential site of nucleation, inducing a lateral order in the following growth due to the strong molecule/molecule interactions. Such a method allows the improvement of the organic field-effect transistor (OFET) performance for N,N-dioctyl-3,4,9,10-perylene tetracarboxylic diimide (PTCDI-C8) by almost one order of magnitude (μe = 1 cm2 V−1 s−1) with respect to the unpatterned one because of crack-removal in the active layer.62
As a further example, the effect of the active layer thickness and morphology as well as of the transistor channel length on the organic thin film transistor (OTFT) sensor response has been reported.63 Thin films ranging from 90 to 400 nm have been deposited on an SiO2 dielectric surface by thermal evaporation of α,ω-dihexyl-hexathiophene (DHα6T), showing a 3D growth characterized by screw dislocations (Fig. 3). These structures typically arise by a defect-assisted self-assembly where the initial layer-by-layer growth is interrupted by the occurrence of a dislocation. Such defective regions provide minimum energy binding sites on which the molecules can aggregate with a self-perpetuating step.64,65 Laterally interconnected planes with nanoscopic dimensionality have been observed for 90 nm (a) and 200 nm (b) thick films, with a surface square mean roughness (RMS) of ca. 3.2 nm. The planes were parallel to the dielectric substrate (a) or randomly oriented in space (b) and shown step heights of about 4.5 nm, which is consistent with the simulated full length of a DHω6T. For the thickest sample (400 nm, c), tip-structures of ca. 60–80 nm along with a loss of planes interconnection have been observed. The step heights were still of molecular size, whereas the RMS roughness increased to 5.2 nm. This 3D growth characterized by screw dislocations provides a significant surface area gradient along the bulk depth profile leading to an absorption gradient of the analyte. The thicker the film, the larger is the structural interconnection, but the lower are the analyte amounts reaching the two dimensional transport channel, that is the first few layers at the interface with the dielectric. In this scenario, the highest response for the transfer characteristics of DHα6T OTFT was achieved with the 200 nm thick film due to a considerable surface area along with a suitable thickness.63
 Fig. 3  High-resolution scanning force microscopy (SFM) images of DHα6T films with thickness of 90 nm (a), 200 nm (b) and 400 nm (c). The screw-mode growth leads to tip-structures for the thicker samples [adapted from M. D. Angione et al., Interface Controlled Organic Thin Films, ed. S. P. i. Physics, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, vol. 129, pp. 217–224]. 
The above refers to monomolecular thin films generated by both solution or vapour phase methods. However, several applications deal with molecular blends, as their self-assembly is governed by the film thickness and composition, including the presence of copolymers as crystallization agents. The self-assembly of two or more components, as it occurs in polymer-blend thin films, is often driven by the tendency to phase-separate with an isotropic morphology. Such a behaviour is ascribed to a low entropy of mixing per unit volume (ΔSmix), that in a lattice model is given by (1)where ρ, M and ϕ are the density, molecular weight and volume fraction of the two components, respectively. Thus, the free energy change is importantly directed by the interaction energy between the molecules (Flory–Huggins χ-parameter), which for a polymer blend is usually also small.66,67 The resulting phase separation induces the formation of structures on a mesoscopic scale, determining the final performance of the material. A further important aspect concerns the self-assembly of polymer blends by increasing the confinement of the thin films. Indeed, it has been observed that a reduction of the film thickness leads to an increased miscibility of the mixture along with the formation of columnar domains extending through the film.68
As a very important emerging field, that of organic bulk heterojunction solar cells deals with the realization of interpenetrating networks of D and A materials along with a phase separation of less than 5–20 nm (i.e. exciton diffusion length in organic materials). Indeed, such a condition allows for an efficient exciton separation. At the same time, D/A bicontinuous pathways through the thin film are necessary for the charge transport between the electrodes.26,69,70 As an example, in a recent paper we reported on the 3D growth of a spin coated thin film bulk heterojunction of poly[(1,4-divinylenephenylene)(2,4,6-triisopropylphenylborane)] (PDB) in combination with the poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT), showing the photovoltaic behaviour of such a blend.71 The Fig. 4a–c shows the SFM analysis of the P3HT:PDB (1:1) thin film. Domains larger than 100 nm are visible both in the topography (a) and in the corresponding phase-lag (b) images along with a fine phase separation similar in size to the typical exciton diffusion length in organic materials (c). Although we cannot state that this is the final equilibrium state of the system, here the morphology of the thin films recalls self-assembly process that is supposed to be mainly governed by intermolecular forces and free energy minimization. This morphology has been easily modulated by changing the blend composition ratio in order to control the polymer phase separation. In particular, an increase of sub-20 nm domains percentage has been obtained by reducing the amount of PDB in the blend. The best photovoltaic performances have been obtained for the device with 1:1 composition ratio, ascribing this to a compromise between the lateral size of donor and acceptor domains and their vertical morphological continuity along the thin film.71
 Fig. 4  SFM topography (a) and phase-lag (b) images of 50:50 wt% P3HT:PDB thin film BHJ. The magnification image in (c) refers to the marked area [S. Cataldo et al., Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1281–1286. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission]. 
More generally, for organic photovoltaics the best performances demonstrated so far has been obtained by blending polymers with small molecules like soluble derivatized-fullerenes (e.g. [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester, PC60BM or [6,6]-phenyl-C71-butyric acid methyl ester, PC70BM).72–74 This has been ascribed to the excellent intrinsic photoelectric properties of the soluble fullerenes along with the morphology of the resulting heterojunctions, with a phase separation length-scale of a size within the exciton diffusion length.27,75
Among the vertically aligned organic systems on surfaces, of big interest is also the possibility to growth vertically aligned carbon nanotubes (VACNTs). VACNTs can be directly realized on substrates without any template, like for instance by chemical pyrolysis of precursors.76 The pyrolysis of ferrocene (FePc) for example leads to VACNTs with good uniformity in length (∼10 μm) and diameter (∼20 nm) via a growth mechanism in which small iron particles segregated on the substrate surface are catalytically active for the nucleation of the nanotubes whereas larger Fe particles on the tops of growing CNTs provide carbon atoms for their growth.76 In addition, post-synthesis method like self-assembling end-functionalized CNTs can provide nice versatility.77 In this respect, thiol-derivatized single-walled carbon nanotubes have been organized in perpendicularly oriented self-assembled monolayers on gold surfaces through a nucleation adsorption mechanism, with a length of less than 10 nm and diameter of ca. 1–2 nm.77 Other methods concern the template-based materials synthesis78 and the use of templates that have a vertical porous structure.79 The quality of the structures obtained by these last methods is of course limited by the quality of the template and nanorods/nanotubes of the order of tens of nanometres have been obtained. The electrochemical deposition of concentric layers of an appropriate conducting polymer uniformly distributed onto each of the constituent aligned nanotubes can be also used to make conducting polymer–CNTs coaxial nanowires.80 Semiconducting properties of such a structures have been suggested by these authors to be potentially reached by doping the polymeric phase, thus allowing for a wide range of applications in electronics. In this respect, the deposition of semiconducting polymers into VACNTs networks might be an important strategy with a great potential for the development of high efficiency thin film bulk heterojunction solar cells.
2.3 Self-organization of molecular thin films
Recently, some papers focused on the possibility to exploit spatio-temporal dynamic conditions to get 2D (x,y-directions) ordered super-structures on the nanoscale.10 This has been explained as a result of the action of competitive forces. To get order in an out-of-equilibrium condition is of course of great stimulus since, due to the wide number of possible pathways, it may allow for the generation of a much larger spectrum of ordered systems with respect to those obtainable by free energy minima. Indeed, contrary to self-assembly, the structural features of these patterns are induced by instability effects that may vary significantly with kinetic factors (dissipative structures) like evaporation rate, transfer speed and importantly by the sequence of operations of the experimental protocol.
On this respect, by employing the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) technique different laterally ordered patterns have been achieved via meniscus oscillations with an accurate control of the periodic structure (Fig. 5a).14,81,82 In particular, speed-dependent anisotropy has been shown for LB regular patterns demonstrating even the possibility to switch the orientation of these structures in a controllable way. Such experimental results have been interpreted by a non-equilibrium model based on the stability of surfactant concentration and film thickness coupled fluctuations near the meniscus of a surfactant-covered receding thin film.83 In particular, at low transfer speed (U) the surfactant concentration near the meniscus is large but it becomes small if the transfer speed increases because of diffusive/hydrodynamics effects. At low U, the normal pressure has a maximum localized near the meniscus. Because of the small averaged film height, the thickness-concentration coupled fluctuations become unstable, forming small surfactant aggregates of higher concentration and leading to strips parallel to the transfer direction. At high U, the normal pressure is small near the meniscus, reaches a maximum and then decreases. In this case the fluctuations result into stripes of dense surface-bound surfactant perpendicular to the transfer direction.83 Based on the above concepts, building-up out-of-equilibrium systems via layer-by-layer depositions with different in-plane orientations may allow one to obtain 3D ordered grids along the z-direction. Recently, a mixed multilayer of stearic acid (SA) and octadecylamine (ODA) on a basic subphase have been deposited by LB with different in-plane orientations by 90° rotation of the support after the transfer of each subsequent bilayer, resulting in substrate-induced phase separation of the SA/ODA system and formation of orthogonally ordered 2D–3D patterns (Fig. 5b).84
 Fig. 5  A schematic mechanism for the formation of 3D templates by multiple out-of-equilibrium depositions. (a) Dimyristoyl-phosphatidylcholine (DMPC) channels transferred on mica at ca. 30 mN m−1 [adapted from B. Pignataro, et al., Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2002, 22, 177–181. Copyright with permission from Elsevier]. (b) Non-equilibrium 15-layer LB template of SA/ODA alternating bilayers of different in-plane orientations (the transfer direction is indicated by arrows). The scale bar is 60 μm [adapted with permission from E. Lomova et al., J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 8581–8587. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society]. 
Three-dimensional ordered self-organized structures may be alternatively frozen by anisotropic wetting/dewetting processes.85–87 Although dewetting is an undesirable phenomenon for the preparation of homogenous films, it represents an attractive method to engineer nanoscale patterns over large areas. It proceeds indeed with the rupture of the thin liquid film in a discontinuous one, leading to small aggregates. The rupture phenomena are governed by attractive/repulsive long- and short-range intermolecular interactions expressed by the total excess of free energy per unit area (ΔG): (2)where A is the effective Hamaker constant, h is the film thickness, l is a correlation length for the polar fluid and Sp is the polar component of the spreading coefficient.† When ∂2ΔG/∂h2 < 0, film instability occurs leading to spontaneous dewetting in accord with the spinodal mechanism. Local film thickness is in turn strongly dependent on dynamic parameters like evaporation rate and spreading time, so that whenever one is able to modulate the dynamics (i.e. by changing surface chemistry, the solute concentration in the drop, the geometrical configuration of the system, etc.) this would affect the morphology of the structures.88,89 Typically, dewetting on a flat defect-free surfaces leads to randomly distributed droplets with a shape depending on the van der Waals interactions between the substrate and the spread material. The length-scale of the spinodal instability is a function of the initial film thickness and is given by [−4π2γ/(∂2ΔG/∂h2)]1/2.90 Rubbed91,92 or pre-patterned93–97 surfaces as well as mold-assisted vertical confinement techniques24,98–100 have been used to impose a preferential orientation on the dewetting processes in order to control the morphology of the final aggregates. Theoretical and experimental investigations have shown that a necessary condition to get ordered templates on periodic wettable and less-wettable stripes is that λh ≤ Lp ≤ 2λh, i.e. the periodicity interval of the patterned surface (center-to-center distance between two consecutive stripes, Lp) has to be greater than a characteristic length-scale of the instability (λh) but less than an upper cut-off scale (2λh). Furthermore, the less-wettable stripes width (W) has to be larger than a critical width (Wc), below which no heterogeneous rupture occurs, and smaller than a transition one (Wt) above which disordered complex morphological features are formed.101,102 Recently, Mukherjee et al.103 have shown that a perfect array of polymeric droplets with height of about 113 nm, can be obtained within the interstitial spaces of pillar patterns from a thin film (∼24 nm) conformally adhering to the substrate (Fig. 6). The droplets can be reduced in size by thinning the film, although this affects also the order of the array, or by using a substrate with smaller patterns. The lateral confinement forced by the substrate patterns reduces the length-scale of the dewetted structures as compared to those obtained on the same homogeneous surface.103
 Fig. 6  Perfectly ordered droplets array for a ∼24 nm thick PS film conformally adhering to a physically heterogeneous substrate [adapted from R. Mukherjee et al., Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 2086–2097. Reproduced by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry]. 
Spatio-temporal dynamics of out-of-equilibrium structures deal of course also with deposition techniques that are routinely used for applications, like spin-coating. There, the rapid solvent evaporation may produce local fluctuations of composition. Such fluctuations may in turn determine a film instability and their wavelength would guide the final morphology of the segregated structures (vertical and/or lateral).104 By using time-resolved small-angle light scattering and light reflectivity during the spin-coating process of a pair of immiscible polymer blend like PS and PMMA, Heriot et al.105 have demonstrated that phase-separation can proceed through a multistage mechanism. Accordingly, at first self-stratification would occur into the thin film, leading to a bilayer structure. Subsequently, film instability takes place at the interface between the two layers. When the instabilities grow, secondary phase segregation may occur, producing lateral domains.105 Although the resulting structures are not necessarily of the order of nanometres, a modulation of the solvent diffusion and evaporation rate may be able to influence the final morphology of the films on the nanoscale.105 Furthermore, the surface may alter significantly the phase-separation processes. It is well-known that, by tuning the polymer/substrate interactions through a modification of the surface energy, it is possible to generate order in the film structure.106
2.4 Combining self-assembly/self-organization with external tools
Combining bottom-up self-assembly/self-organization with external tools (e.g. UV rays, solvent treatments, tip-writing, heat, etc.) could be an useful strategy to create well-ordered 3D nanostructures in molecular thin films.
On this respect, block copolymers (BCP) have attracted significant interest.107 Block copolymers may self-assemble in periodic nanostructures with a precise control of shape, size and orientation of the domains;108 the molecular weight, composition ratio, interfacial interactions with the underlying substrate and the free surface along with the films thickness dictating the BCP morphology and orientation of the domains leading to cylindrical,107,109,110 hexagonal111 and spherical112 nanostructures with parallel or perpendicular orientation of the blocks.113 Note that for thin films less than 50 nm, the substrate nature is the main parameter that controls the domains’ orientation.
In a recent work, Han et al.107 reported the fabrication of perpendicular cylindrical nanopores in PS-b-PMMA thick films on substrates modified by cross-linked random copolymer. The authors investigated the effects of the annealing temperature, composition of the random copolymer and BCP film thickness on the morphology of PMMA domains. The Fig. 7a shows the SEM image of a ca. 300 nm thick film of PS-b-PMMA on substrate-modifying random copolymer layer composed of styrene, methyl methacrylate and glycidyl methyl methacrylate with a styrene fraction of 0.70 (PG4-70) and at an annealing temperature of 230 °C. Perpendicularly oriented nanopores were achieved as shown in the cross-section TEM image of Fig. 7b, after removal of PMMA phase by UV exposure and acetic acid washing. Both the substrate-modifying random copolymer and the annealing temperature act on the interfacial interactions of the BCP with the substrate and the free surface, inducing the perpendicular propagation of the PMMA domains. At the free interface, the segregation is driven by the difference in the surface energy of PS (γS) and PMMA (γM). For annealing temperatures higher than 225 °C, this surface energy difference (Δγ) goes to zero, reducing the PS segregation.114,115
 Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of a 300 nm thick film of PS-b-PMMA on substrate modified by cross-linked random copolymer (PG4-70) and corresponding cross-section TEM image (b). The PMMA phase was removed prior to imaging by UV exposure and acetic acid washing [adapted with permission from E. Han et al., Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4896–4901. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society]. 
In addition to the block copolymer lithography, a combination of photocrosslinkable polymer nanosheets transferred by LB on photoreactive modified-substrates and photolithography has been used to create 3D nanostuctures.116 These authors showed that photocrosslinking reactions induced by UV irradiation through photomask led to the formation of immobilized and well-defined patterns (40 layers approximately 20 nm) with polymer–polymer and polymer–substrate covalent bondings. A multiple repetition of the photopatterning process allowed the vertical growth of multilayers.
In a different approach, 3D nanostructuring can be achieved by developing 2D nanoscale templates that can be achieved by scanning probe lithography (SPL) and growing the structures by molecular self-assembly along the z-axis (Fig. 8a). In particular, a tip-oxidation process can be applied to several self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) to realize functionalized 2D molecular surfaces with lateral features of few tens of nanometres and a high vertical resolution depending on the exclusive modification of the terminal moieties of the SAM. Such a tip-oxidation process has also been demonstrated by TOF-SIMS imaging, supporting the hypothesis of the formation of oxdized terminal moieties.20 Accordingly, highly ordered 3D architectures of both organic and inorganic materials can be built-up by a hierarchical approach of layer-by-layer self-assembly on tip-modified underlying surfaces. Just to give an example, a trilayer pyramid of n-octadecyltrichlorosilane (OTS) on silicon is shown in Fig. 8b.117 The authors report on the local modification of a OTS monolayer by tip-induced oxidation of the terminal vinyl function to –COOH and subsequent self-assembly of OTS molecules on the lyophilic domains. The layers were shown to be highly ordered with dense packing.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of a tip-induced modification process followed by 3D self-assembly. (b) Trilayer pyramid of n-octadecyl-trichlorosilane (OTS) on Si (left) and relative contact-mode SFM image (right) [adapted with permission from A. Zeira et al., Langmuir 2009, 25, 13984–14001. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society]. 
3. Investigation of thin films with 3D nanoscale resolution
In order to reveal the physics at the basis of the above fabrication approaches as well as to control in detail the morphology of 3D nanoscale ordered molecular thin films, several efforts have been made on the development of novel investigation tools. Several techniques are now emerging which hold the promise to provide at least some information for thin film materials and structures. These includes electrical AFM,118,119 atom probe or electron holography,120,121 TOF-SIMS,20 confocal and/or two photon microscopy,122,123etc. However, widespread use on different organic and inorganic semiconductor materials is still limited due to incomplete understanding of the underlying physics, instrumental limitations and the absence of appropriate reference procedures and calibration standards. Cross-comparison between different methods is especially important, because, with the increased complexity and reduced dimensionality of the structures, a single technique will not be able to fulfil all the characterization requirements.
The control of the morphological structures is in this respect very important. X-Ray photoelectron spectroscopy can be conveniently used for the investigation of phase segregation in organic BHJs.124 Moreover, conventional morphology analysis techniques such as transmission electron microscopy (TEM),75 scanning electron microscopy (SEM)125 and scanning probe microscopy (SPM)21 have been successfully applied to the characterization of surfaces and section profiles; but these do not allow for the simultaneous information within a bulk phase of the morphological features along the x, y and z axes. Importantly, the nanoscopic properties of a molecular thin-film, e.g. charge carrier transport, exciton separation, and so on, strongly depend on its 3D organization.
In this scenario, it has been recently demonstrated that a complete 3D reconstruction (topography taken simultaneously along the x,y,z axes) of the objects might be performed by employing electrons and X-rays as probes. The ability to get 3D “bulk” images of thin films or 3D topography in a single view with a nanoscale resolution by employing lasers is at the very early stages.126
3.1 Electron tomography
Electron tomography (ET) has been shown to be a very promising tool for the study in 3D of the molecular thin films organization.127 In ET analysis, the nanostructured objects are reconstructed in three-dimensions essentially from two-dimensional projections of electron transmission microscopy images taken at different tilt angles with respect to the electron beam.128 Each projection is aligned to a common coordinate system and corresponds to a central slice of thickness 1/d in the Fourier space (with d size of the object). The acquired images are then back-projected to form a 3D reconstruction in a direct back-projection.128,129 However, due to the uneven data sampling in the Fourier space, the 3D information is collected finely at low-frequency, leading to a distorted reconstruction of the object. Therefore, the three-dimensional reconstruction is commonly performed by a weighted back-projection of the different images. This is achieved by using a weighting filter in the Fourier space to enhance the higher frequencies and/or by iterative reconstruction methods. The resolution of the reconstructed object is then governed by the number of projections comprising the tilt series and it is estimated by the Crowther criterion to be equal to the angular increment of the tilt series multiplied by the size of the object. Accordingly, the ET resolution scales with the size of the object and for data sampling of 1–2°, it is approximately 1/100 of the object size. One of the factors limiting the ET resolution is the missing wedge in Fourier space caused by restrictions of the tilt range. Such a missing information leads to a non-isotropic resolution, with the onset of aberrations on the reconstructed objects. An increase in the tilt angle of the specimen may be one possible way to overcame the problem. In alternative, by recording a second tilt series along an axis perpendicular to the first (dual-axis ET), it is possible to reduce the missing wedge. In this case in fact only a pyramid-shaped region in the Fourier space remains unsampled, leading to a more isotropic resolution. The widest use of ET has concerned mostly biological structures,130–132 but it has been also suited to study amorphous materials such as polymers.133
Just to give an example, the electron tomography analysis of APFO-3/PCBM (1:4) blend thin films is reported in Fig. 9. These materials are of interest for the development of BHJs for organic photovoltaics. The images have been reconstructed using filtered back-projection and show bright and dark volumes corresponding to better- and less-scattering materials, respectively. The reconstruction relative to the blend shows bright domains of PCBM rich volumes surrounding by APFO-3 rich volumes, taking account of the major scattering behaviour of PCBM. The result is a representation of the nanoscale percolating network responsible for the performance of corresponding solar cell devices.134
 Fig. 9  Filtered back projection reconstruction of APFO-3/PCBM (1:4) blend films. Well scattered domains are seen as light volume [adapted with permission from B. V. Andersson et al., Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 853–855. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society]. 
3.2 Scanning transmission X-ray microscopy
Scanning transmission X-ray microscopy, also known as synchrotron-based soft X-ray spectromicroscopy (STXM), is a powerful tool to characterize the 3D morphological features of a molecular thin-film blend. Differences in the near-edge X-ray absorption fine-structure (NEXAFS) spectra of the organic components can be used to provide excellent composition contrast.135 For organic materials with similar elemental composition for example, the chemical contrast is provided by the difference in the unoccupied electronic structure resulting from the carbon K-edge NEXAFS spectra of the constituent materials. The carbon K-edge NEXAFS spectra consist in fact of resonant electronic transitions from the occupied 1s orbital to unoccupied π* and σ* states superimposed on an ionization step due to the excitation of 1s electrons to the ionization continuum. The high chemical sensitivity of STXM, combined with the excellent spatial resolution of the variable-energy X-ray beam (the spot-size is less than 50 nm), allows for quantitative chemical mapping of bulk blend composition. Films with thicknesses ranging from a few to several hundred of nanometres can be studied by STXM technique using a transmission geometry.
The morphological features of insulating136 and conjugated137,138 polymer blends have been studied by STXM, providing information on their nanoscale organization. In a recent work McNeill et al.139 reported on the structure characterization by STXM of phase-separated ferroelectric/semiconducting polymer blends for organic non-volatile memories. Thin films of ferroelectric random copolymer poly(vinylidene fluoride-trifluoroethylene) (P(VDF-TrFE)) in blend with regio-irregular poly(3-hexylthiophene) (rir-P3HT) as semiconducting polymer have been obtained, showing an interpenetrating network of both materials.29 In particular, in Fig. 10a–b the STXM images of thin films with blend ratio of 2 wt% (a) and 1 wt% (b) rir-P3HT acquired at 287.2 eV are reported. They show a phase separated morphology of P3HT-rich columns (bright spots) with a lateral dimension of 100–200 nm surrounded by an interconnected P(VDF-TrFE)-rich matrix. At this energy, the NEXAFS analysis is P3HT-sensitive due to 1s to σ*C–S C–H transitions observed for the pristine rir-P3HT films in the NEXAFS spectra.139
 Fig. 10  STXM images at 287.2 eV of annealed rir-P3HT/P(VDF-TrFE) thin films with blend ratio of 2 wt% (a) and 1 wt% (b) rir-P3HT and relative cross-section X-ray optical density [C. R. McNeill et al., Small 2010, 6, 508–512. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission]. 
4. Conclusions and outlooks
While the field of laterally ordered organic surfaces is to date almost consolidated, the development of 3D nanostructural order is only at the early stages.
Man-made fabrication tools are in general accurate but these may be applied only to a limited number of systems. Complex structures with 3D nanoscale order can be more easily generated by self-assembly and self-organization approaches and advanced chemical approaches, new thermodynamical and kinetic-dependent tools are under development.
Unfortunately there are no well established characterization tools enabling the simultaneous characterization of the structures in the three dimensions which would help the development of high quality 3D nanoscale order. However, in this respect recent advancements in nanoscale tomography provide important perspectives for the development of this field and related important applications.
However, the preparation and characterization techniques discussed above, including their possible combinations, constitute as a whole a tremendous framework for the development of new technologies for nanoengineering in 3D. In this context, the enhancement of important properties, like carrier mobilities or overall current transport of organic solar cells, could be more likely reached by optimizing those techniques for the fabrication of vertically aligned anisotropic nanostructures.
All techniques based on self-assembly/self-organization are, of course, welcome since these are easy to be apply and used worldwide at low cost, but these are in general more surface-sensitive than man-made tools and, in the case of solution processes, are in most cases limited to systems that are soluble in the same solvents.
The self-assembly of vertically aligned derivatized CNTs of selected optical and electronical properties with semiconducting polymers would be an important strategy for thin film functional architectures like those of organic solar cells and the recent advances in the separation of CNTs with different structure/properties140 as well as in the functionalization of CNTs by both solubilizing agents and functional conjugated molecules141 make this approach very promising.
Other interesting, simple and low cost approaches may be designed by the employment of controlled solution deposition tools with successive reorganization processes. For instance, in our group we are currently working on methodologies directed at first at the realization of thin films consisting of layers of nanoscopic thickness (one on top of the other) by alternating p- and n-type organic materials. This can be achieved by using techniques like Langmuir–Blodgett, Langmuir–Schäfer, ink-jet printing etc. and is of relevant interest for instance to develop ambipolar transistors with comparable high mobility of electrons and holes. Moreover, we are using such a well-defined layered architectures to generate 3D ordered vertical percolation paths through reorganization processes in the thin film induced by thermal or solvent annealing.142
This review mainly deals with experimental tools, but we believe that computational approaches would be also of extreme interest for this subject especially since new methods in computation are emerging on the understanding/prediction of 3D growth processes including coarse-grained methods or computing with spatio-temporal dynamics, and suitable molecular descriptors from the methodological machinery developed for the standard molecular systems may help for the understanding of order-induced properties.
Acknowledgements
Italian MiUR (PRIN 2008 prot. 20088L3BP3_003, FIRB “Futuro in Ricerca” RBFR08DUX6) and University of Palermo (Cofinanziamento d'ateneo ex-60%) are acknowledged for financial support.
Notes and references
L. Torsi, G. M. Farinola, F. Marinelli, M. C. Tanese, O. H. Omar, L. Valli, F. Babudri, F. Palmisano, P. G. Zambonin and F. Naso, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 412–417 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Coffey and D. S. Ginger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4564–4565 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, M. Hirtz, W. Wang, C. Du, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1374–1378 CAS .
M. Mathieu, D. Schunk, S. Franzka, C. Mayer, E. Hasselbrink and N. Hartmann, Small, 2009, 5, 2099–2104 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Whitesides and D. J. Lipomi, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 143, 373–384 RSC .
C. M. Niemeyer, Int. J. Environ. Anal. Chem., 2005, 85, 639–643 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Tanese, G. M. Farinola, B. Pignataro, L. Valli, L. Giotta, S. Conoci, P. Lang, D. Colangiuli, F. Babudri, F. Naso, L. Sabbatini, P. G. Zambonin and L. Torsi, Chem. Mater., 2006, 18, 778–784 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pignataro, G. Grasso, L. Renna and G. Marletta, Surf. Interface Anal., 2002, 33, 54–58 CrossRef CAS .
C. Musumeci, C. Cascio, A. Scandurra, G. F. Indelli, C. Bongiorno, S. Ravesi and B. Pignataro, Surf. Sci., 2008, 602, 993–1005 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pignataro, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 3338–3350 RSC .
C. Niemeyer, M. Adler, B. Pignataro, S. Lenhert, S. Gao, L. F. Chi, H. Fuchs and D. Blohm, Nucleic Acids Res., 1999, 27, 4553–4561 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sirringhaus, N. Tessler and R. H. Friend, Science, 1998, 280, 1741 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Reed, C. Zhou, C. J. Muller, T. P. Burgin and J. M. Tour, Science, 1997, 278, 252–254 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gleiche, L. F. Chi and H. Fuchs, Nature, 2000, 403, 173–175 CrossRef CAS .
E. Delamarche, A. Bernard, H. Schmid, B. Michel and H. Biebuyck, Science, 1997, 276, 779–781 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Chou, M. S. Wei, P. R. Krauss and P. B. Fischer, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 76, 6673–6675 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Ball, Design the Molecular World, Princeton University Press, Princeton,  1994 Search PubMed .
B. Pignataro, L. Sardone and G. Marletta, Nanotechnology, 2003, 14, 245 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pignataro, A. D. Bonis, G. Compagnini, P. Sassi and R. S. Cataliotti, J. Chem. Phys., 2000, 113, 5947 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pignataro, A. Licciardello, S. Cataldo and G. Marletta, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2003, 23, 7–12 CrossRef .
J. K. Hobbs, N. Mullin, C. H. M. Weber, O. E. Farrance and C. Vasilev, Mater. Today, 2009, 12, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
K. Galatsis, K. L. Wang, M. Ozkan, C. S. Ozkan, Y. Huang, J. P. Chang, H. G. Monbouquette, Y. Chen, P. Nealey and Y. Botros, Adv. Mater., 2009, 22, 769–778 .
S. D. Oosterhout, M. M. Wienk, S. S. v. Bavel, R. Thiedmann, L. J. A. Koster, J. Gilot, J. Loos, V. Schmidt and R. A. J. Janssen, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 818–824 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cavallini, P. Stoliar, J.-F. Moulin, M. Surin, P. Leclere, R. Lazzaroni, D. W. Breiby, J. W. Andreasen, M. M. Nielsen, P. Sonar, A. C. Grimsdale, K. Mullen and F. Biscarini, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 2422–2425 CrossRef CAS .
D. Veldman, O. Ipek, S. C. J. Meskers, J. Sweelssen, M. M. Koetse, S. C. Veenstra, J. M. Kroon, S. S. v. Bavel, J. Loos and R. A. J. Janssen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 7721–7735 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yu, J. Gao, J. C. Hummelen, F. Wudl and A. J. Heeger, Science, 1995, 270, 1789–1791 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barrau, V. Andersson, F. Zhang, S. Masich, J. Bijleveld, M. R. Andersson and O. Inganas, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4646–4650 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Scott and L. D. Bozano, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 1452–1463 CrossRef CAS .
K. Asadi, D. M. D. Leeuw, B. D. Boer and P. W. M. Blom, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 547–550 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2004, 428, 911–918 CrossRef CAS .
A. E. Grigorescu and C. W. Hagen, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 292001 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Hawryluk, A. M. Hawryluk and H. I. Smith, J. Appl. Phys., 1974, 45, 2551–2566 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Craighead, J. Appl. Phys., 1984, 55, 4430–4435 CrossRef CAS .
B. Cord, J. Yang, H. Duan, D. C. Joy, J. Klingfus and K. K. Berggren, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2009, 27, 2616–2621 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Lercel, C. S. Whelan, H. G. Craighead, K. Seshadri and D. L. Allara, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 1996, 14, 4085–4090 CrossRef CAS .
W. Geyer, V. Stadler, W. Eck, A. Golzhauser, M. Grunze, M. Sauer, T. Weimann and P. Hinze, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 2001, 19, 2732–2735 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. P. Chang, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1975, 12, 1271–1275 CrossRef .
A. Vlad, C. A. Dutu, P. Guillet, P. Jedrasik, C. Fustin, U. Sodervall, J. Gohy and S. Melinte, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2838–2843 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Park, D.-Y. Yang and K.-S. Lee, Laser Photonics Rev., 2009, 3, 1–11 Search PubMed .
S. Kawata, H.-B. Sun, T. Tanaka and K. Takada, Nature, 2001, 412, 697–698 CrossRef CAS .
J.-F. Xing, X.-Z. Dong, W.-Q. Chen, X.-M. Duan, N. Takeyasu, T. Tanaka and S. Kawata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 131106 CrossRef .
K. Takada, H.-B. Sun and S. Kawata, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 071122 CrossRef .
S. H. Park, T. W. Lim, D.-Y. Yang, R. H. Kim and K.-S. Lee, Macromol. Res., 2006, 14, 559–564 Search PubMed .
S. H. Park, T. W. Lim, D.-Y. Yang, N. C. Cho and K.-S. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 173133 CrossRef .
D. Tan, Y. Li, F. Qi, H. Yang, Q. Gong, X. Dong and X. Duan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 071106 CrossRef .
G. M. Whitesides, J. P. Mathias and C. T. Seto, Science, 1991, 254, 1312–1319 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Barth, G. Costantini and K. Kern, Nature, 2005, 437, 671–679 CrossRef CAS .
J. V. Barth, J. Weckesser, C. Cai, P. Gunter, L. Bürgi, O. Jeandupeux and K. Kern, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 1230–1234 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, A. Mourran, U. Beginn, M. Moller, D. V. Anokhind and D. A. Ivanov, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 1444–1452 RSC .
O. Crespo-Biel, B. J. Ravoo, D. N. Reinhoudt and J. Huskens, J. Mater. Chem., 2006, 16, 3997–4021 RSC .
S. Onclin, B. J. Ravoo and D. N. Reinhoudt, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6282–6304 CrossRef CAS .
M. Surin, P. Leclere, S. D. Feyter, M. M. S. Abdel-Mottaleb, F. C. D. Schryver, O. Henze, W. J. Feast and R. Lazzaroni, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7898–7908 CrossRef CAS .

          M. Ohring, Materials Science of Thin Films, Academic Press, San Diego, CA,  2002 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Yang, K. Shin and C. E. Park, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1806–1814 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Anthony, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 452–483 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ihm, B. Kim, T. Kang, K. Kim, M. H. Joo, T. H. Kim, S. S. Yoon and S. Chung, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 033504 CrossRef .
B. H. Hamadani, D. A. Corley, J. W. Ciszek, J. M. Tour and D. Natelson, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1303–1306 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kymissis, C. D. Dimitrakopoulos and S. Purushothaman, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2001, 48, 1060–1064 CrossRef CAS .
M. Halik, H. Klauk, U. Zschieschang, G. n. Schmid, W. Radlik and W. Weber, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1717–1722 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hong, S. Y. Yang, C. Yang, S. H. Kim, D. Choi and C. E. Park, Org. Electron., 2008, 9, 864–868 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Luzio, C. Musumeci, A. Facchetti, T. J. Marks and B. Pignataro, submitted.
W. Wang, C. Du, D. Zhong, M. Hirtz, Y. Wang, N. Lu, L. Wu, D. Ebeling, L. Li, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4721–4725 CAS .

          M. D. Angione, F. Marinelli, A. Dell'Aquila, A. Luzio, B. Pignataro and L. Torsi, in Interface Controlled Organic Thin Films, S. P. i. Physics, Springer, Berlin–Heidelberg,  2009, pp. 217–224 Search PubMed .
F. C. Frank, Discuss. Faraday Soc., 1949, 5, 48 RSC .
R. Ruiz, D. Choudhary, B. Nickel, T. Toccoli, K.-C. Chang, A. C. Mayer, P. Clancy, J. M. Blakely, R. L. Headrick, S. Iannotta and G. G. Malliaras, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4497–4508 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Flory, J. Chem. Phys., 1942, 10, 51–61 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. L. Jones, Phys. World, 1995, 8, 47–51 Search PubMed .
S. Zhu, Y. Liu, M. H. Rafailovich, J. Sokolov, D. Gersappe, D. A. Winesett and H. Ade, Nature, 1999, 400, 49–51 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. E. Kimber, A. B. Walker, G. E. Schroder-Turkc and D. J. Cleaverd, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 844–851 RSC .
M. Campoy-Quiles, T. Ferenczi, T. Agostinelli, P. G. Etchegoin, Y. Kim, T. D. Anthopoulos, P. N. Stavrinou, D. D. C. Bradley and J. Nelson, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 158–164 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cataldo, S. Fabiano, F. Ferrante, F. Previti, S. Patanè and B. Pignataro, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1281–1286 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Y. Chen, J. Hou, S. Zhang, Y. Liang, G. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Yu, Y. Wu and G. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 649–653 Search PubMed .
J. Peet, A. J. Heeger and G. C. Bazan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1700–1708 CrossRef CAS .
G. Li, V. Shrotriya, J. Huang, Y. Yao, T. Moriarty, K. Emery and Y. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 864–868 CAS .
W. Ma, C. Yang, X. Gong, K. Lee and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1617–1622 CrossRef CAS .
D.-C. Li, L. Dai, S. Huang, A. W. H. Mau and Z. L. Wang, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 316, 349–355 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, Z. Shen, T. Zhu, S. Hou, L. Ying, Z. Shi and Z. Gu, Langmuir, 2000, 16, 3569–3573 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hulteen and C. R. Martin, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1075–1087 RSC .
K. Kim and J.-I. Jin, Nano Lett., 2001, 1, 631–636 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, S. Huang, L. Dai, G. Wallace, R. Gao and Z. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2000, 39, 3664–3667 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, N. Lu, H. Zhang, M. Hirtz, L. Wu, H. Fuchs and L. Chi, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 8039–8046 CrossRef CAS .
B. Pignataro, L. Sardone and G. Marletta, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2002, 22, 177–181 CrossRef .
A. Raudino and B. Pignataro, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 9189–9192 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Lomova, D. S. Turygin, A. A. Ezhov, V. V. Arslanov and M. A. Kalinina, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 8581–8587 CrossRef CAS .
J. Z. Wang, Z. H. Zheng, H. W. Li, W. T. S. Huck and H. Sirringhaus, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 171 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cavallini, F. Biscarini, S. Leon, F. Zerbetto, G. Bottari and D. A. Leigh, Science, 2003, 299, 531 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai and B.-m. Z. Newby, Langmuir, 2008, 24, 5202 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xu, T. Shi and L. An, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 184903 CrossRef .
S.-C. Luo, V. Craciun and E. P. Douglas, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2881–2886 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sharma, Langmuir, 1993, 9, 861–869 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Higgins and R. A. L. Jones, Nature, 2000, 404, 476–478 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, F. Xie and O. K. C. Tsui, Polymer, 2005, 46, 8416–8421 CrossRef CAS .
R. Xing, C. Luo, Z. Wang and Y. Han, Polymer, 2007, 48, 3574–3583 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mukherjee, M. Gonuguntla and A. Sharma, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 2069–2075 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sehgal, V. Ferreiro, J. F. Douglas, E. J. Amis and A. Karim, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 7041–7048 CrossRef CAS .
D. Julthongpiput, W. Zhang, J. F. Douglas, A. Karim and M. J. Fasolka, Soft Matter, 2007, 3, 613–618 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Tvingstedt and O. Inganas, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 437–443 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cavallini, C. Albonetti and F. Biscarini, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1043–1053 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, T. Nyberg and O. Inganas, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1373–1377 CrossRef CAS .
D. H. Kim, M. J. Kim, J.-Y. Park and H. H. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 1445–1450 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kargupta and A. Sharma, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 1893–1903 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kargupta and A. Sharma, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 4536–4539 CrossRef CAS .
R. Mukherjee, D. Bandyopadhyay and A. Sharma, Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 2086–2097 RSC .
R. A. L. Jones, L. J. Norton, E. J. Kramer, F. S. Bates and P. Wiltzius, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 1326 CrossRef CAS .
S. Y. Heriot and R. A. L. Jones, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 782–786 CrossRef CAS .
M. Boltau, S. Walheim, J. Mlynek, G. Krausch and U. Steiner, Nature, 1998, 391, 877–879 CrossRef CAS .
E. Han, K. O. Stuen, M. Leolukman, C.-C. Liu, P. F. Nealey and P. Gopalan, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4896–4901 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giacomelli, V. Schmidt, K. Aissou and R. Borsali, Langmuir, 2010 DOI:10.1021/la100641j .
L. Wan and X. Yang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 12408–12413 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, S. Park, J.-Y. Wang and T. P. Russell, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 7213–7216 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Tung and T. Xu, Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 5761–5765 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, H. Liang and A.-C. Shi, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8938–8943 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Welander, H. Kang, K. O. Stuen, H. H. Solak, M. Müller, J. J. d. Pablo and P. F. Nealey, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 2759–2761 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mansky, Y. Liu, E. Huang, T. P. Russell and C. Hawker, Science, 1997, 275, 1458–1460 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mansky, T. P. Russell, C. J. Hawker, J. Mays, D. C. Cook and S. K. Satija, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 79, 237–240 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kado, M. Mitsuishi and T. Miyashita, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 1857–1861 CrossRef CAS .
A. Zeira, D. Chowdhury, S. Hoeppener, S. Liu, J. Berson, S. R. Cohen, R. Maoz and J. Sagiv, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 13984–14001 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kumaran, P. A. Veneman, B. A. Minch, A. Mudalige, J. E. Pemberton, D. F. O'Brien and N. R. Armstrong, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 2491–2501 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xin, O. G. Reid, G. Ren, F. S. Kim, D. S. Ginger and S. A. Jenekhe, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1861–1872 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gabor, Nature, 1948, 161, 777–778 CrossRef CAS .
T. Matsushita, F. Matsui, H. Daimon and K. Hayashi, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2010, 178–179, 195–220 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Loi, E. d. Como, F. Dinelli, M. Murgia, R. Zamboni, F. Biscarini and M. Muccini, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 81–85 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brewer, C. Maibohm, L. Jozefowski, L. Bagatolli and H.-G. Rubahn, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2396–2401 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. Felicissimo, D. Jarzab, M. Gorgoi, M. Forster, U. Scherf, M. C. Scharber, S. Svensson, P. Rudolf and M. A. Loi, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4899–4901 RSC .
H. Hoppe, M. Niggemann, C. Winder, J. r. Kraut, R. Hiesgen, A. Hinsch, D. Meissner and N. S. Sariciftci, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2004, 14, 1005–1011 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Raines, S. Salha, R. L. Sandberg, H. Jiang, J. A. Rodríguez, B. P. Fahimian, H. C. Kapteyn, J. Du and J. Miao, Nature, 2010, 463, 214–217 CrossRef CAS .
G. Möbus and B. J. Inkson, Mater. Today, 2007, 10, 18–25 CrossRef CAS .
M. Weyland and P. A. Midgley, Mater. Today, 2004, 7(12), 32–40 CrossRef CAS .
J.-J. Fernandez, C. O. S. Sorzano, R. Marabini and J.-M. Carazo, IEEE Signal Process. Mag., 2006, 23, 84–94 CrossRef .
W. Baumeister, Biol. Chem., 2004, 385, 865–872 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, S. Ryazantsev, R. Sun and Z. H. Zhou, Structure, 2010, 18, 47–58 CrossRef CAS .
V. Lucic, F. Forster and W. Baumeister, Annu. Rev. Biochem., 2005, 74, 833–865 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jinnai and R. J. Spontak, Polymer, 2009, 50, 1067–1087 CrossRef CAS .
B. V. Andersson, A. Herland, S. Masich and O. Inganas, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 853–855 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ade and H. Stoll, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
C. Morin, H. Ikeura-Sekiguchi, T. Tyliszczak, R. Cornelius, J. L. Brash, A. P. Hitchcock, A. Scholl, F. Nolting, G. Appel, D. A. Winesett, K. Kaznacheyev and H. Ade, J. Electron Spectrosc. Relat. Phenom., 2001, 121, 203 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, W. J. Belcher, N. C. Greenham and P. C. Dastoor, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 1202–1206 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill, B. Watts, L. Thomsen, W. J. Belcher, A. K. D. Kilcoyne, N. C. Greenham and P. C. Dastoor, Small, 2006, 2, 1432–1435 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. McNeill, K. Asadi, B. Watts, P. W. M. Blom and D. M. d. Leeuw, Small, 2010, 6, 508–512 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tanaka, H. Jin, Y. Miyata, S. Fujii, H. Suga, Y. Naitoh, T. Minari, T. Miyadera, K. Tsukagoshi and H. Kataura, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1497–1500 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cordella, M. D. Nardi, E. Menna, C. Hébert and M. A. Loi, Carbon, 2009, 47, 1264–1269 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Cataldo, C. Sartorio, S. Fabiano, A. Scandurra, F. Giannazzo and B. Pignataro, unpublished work.

Footnote† The spreading coefficient S is defined as the balance of the surface tensions (S = γsv − γsl − γ) at the substrate/vapour (γsv), substrate/film (γsl) and film/vapour (γ) interfaces. Negative values of the spreading constant lead to instability of the liquid film which self-organizes into small aggregates to minimize the energy.This journal is © the Owner Societies 2010
Table Content:
Simone Fabiano	Simone Fabiano (b. 1985) received his MS in chemistry with honors from the University of Catania (2008). In 2009 he joined the group of Prof. Pignataro at the University of Palermo, where he is currently studying for a PhD in chemistry. His main research topic concerns the development of ordered molecular thin films for applications in electronics.
Bruno Pignataro	Born in 1972, Bruno Pignataro is a Professor of Physical Chemistry at the University of Palermo. He received with honors both his degree in chemistry (1995) and PhD in materials science (2000). His research group works in the fields of nanoscience, soft nanotechnology and the physical chemistry of molecular thin films.

 	Scheme 1  Fundamental role of 3D nanoscale ordering of molecular thin films in different research fields.	 

 	Fig. 1  High-resolution scanning electron microscopy of (a) circular PANI dots with an average diameter of ca. 22 nm and 0.25 teradot inch−2 patterning density. (b) Highly ordered nanowires array and line defect in a photonic crystal-like structure. (c) Ultrahigh-resolution SEM images of fabricated sub-15-nm diameter polyaniline nanowires. (d) Cubic-symmetry lattice (500 nm × 500 nm unit cell, scale bar of 500 nm), obtained by matching the thickness of resist layers (250 nm) with the exposure pitch (500 nm) and suspended chess board planes [adapted from A. Vlad et al., Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2838–2843. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society].	 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 2  SEM image of a sub-100 nm line pattern built-up by two-photon lithography of resins added with 5 wt% of DBMP radical quencher. The structures are less than 200 nm tall [adapted from S. H. Park et al., Macromol. Res., 2006, 14, 559–564 with permission from the Polymer Society of Korea].	 

 	Fig. 3  High-resolution scanning force microscopy (SFM) images of DHα6T films with thickness of 90 nm (a), 200 nm (b) and 400 nm (c). The screw-mode growth leads to tip-structures for the thicker samples [adapted from M. D. Angione et al., Interface Controlled Organic Thin Films, ed. S. P. i. Physics, Springer Berlin Heidelberg, 2009, vol. 129, pp. 217–224].	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 4  SFM topography (a) and phase-lag (b) images of 50:50 wt% P3HT:PDB thin film BHJ. The magnification image in (c) refers to the marked area [S. Cataldo et al., Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2010, 31, 1281–1286. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission].	 

 	Fig. 5  A schematic mechanism for the formation of 3D templates by multiple out-of-equilibrium depositions. (a) Dimyristoyl-phosphatidylcholine (DMPC) channels transferred on mica at ca. 30 mN m−1 [adapted from B. Pignataro, et al., Mater. Sci. Eng. C, 2002, 22, 177–181. Copyright with permission from Elsevier]. (b) Non-equilibrium 15-layer LB template of SA/ODA alternating bilayers of different in-plane orientations (the transfer direction is indicated by arrows). The scale bar is 60 μm [adapted with permission from E. Lomova et al., J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 8581–8587. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society].	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 6  Perfectly ordered droplets array for a ∼24 nm thick PS film conformally adhering to a physically heterogeneous substrate [adapted from R. Mukherjee et al., Soft Matter, 2008, 4, 2086–2097. Reproduced by permission of The Royal Society of Chemistry].	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) SEM image of a 300 nm thick film of PS-b-PMMA on substrate modified by cross-linked random copolymer (PG4-70) and corresponding cross-section TEM image (b). The PMMA phase was removed prior to imaging by UV exposure and acetic acid washing [adapted with permission from E. Han et al., Macromolecules, 2009, 42, 4896–4901. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of a tip-induced modification process followed by 3D self-assembly. (b) Trilayer pyramid of n-octadecyl-trichlorosilane (OTS) on Si (left) and relative contact-mode SFM image (right) [adapted with permission from A. Zeira et al., Langmuir 2009, 25, 13984–14001. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 9  Filtered back projection reconstruction of APFO-3/PCBM (1:4) blend films. Well scattered domains are seen as light volume [adapted with permission from B. V. Andersson et al., Nano Lett. 2009, 9, 853–855. Copyright 2009 American Chemical Society].	 

 	Fig. 10  STXM images at 287.2 eV of annealed rir-P3HT/P(VDF-TrFE) thin films with blend ratio of 2 wt% (a) and 1 wt% (b) rir-P3HT and relative cross-section X-ray optical density [C. R. McNeill et al., Small 2010, 6, 508–512. Copyright Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission].	 
Footnote
† The spreading coefficient S is defined as the balance of the surface tensions (S = γsv − γsl − γ) at the substrate/vapour (γsv), substrate/film (γsl) and film/vapour (γ) interfaces. Negative values of the spreading constant lead to instability of the liquid film which self-organizes into small aggregates to minimize the energy.

This journal is © the Owner Societies 2010
