2001 Green Chemistry Challenge Awards The following are this year’s recipients of the major US awards in green chemistry European teaching on renewabl ...  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B105777B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B105777B
(News)
Green Chem., 2001, 3, G47-G592001 Green Chemistry Challenge AwardsThe following are this year’s recipients of the major US awards in
green chemistryEuropean teaching on renewable resourcesTowards a metabolic society: a thermodynamic viewA greener future with biodieselChemical companies take energy management to heart2001 Green Chemistry Challenge AwardsThe following are this year’s recipients of the major US awards in
green chemistryAcademic categoryProfessor Chao-Jun Li, Tulane University, was selected for designing a
wide variety of transition metal mediated and catalyzed reactions that can
be accomplished in air and water. Traditionally, these reactions have been
carried out in an organic solvent under an inert atmosphere. Li has
developed a novel [3 + 2] cycloaddition reaction to generate 5-membered
carbocycles in water; a synthesis of beta-hydroxyl esters in water; a
chemoselective allylation and pinacol coupling reaction mediated by
manganese in water; and a novel alkylation of 1,3-dicarbonyl type compounds
in water. In addition, a number of Barbier–Grignard type reactions in
water have been developed. Water offers many advantages as a solvent. Water
is readily available and inexpensive, and is not flammable, explosive, or
toxic.Protection/deprotection steps can be avoided, and products may be
isolated by simple phase separation rather than by energy-intensive and
organic-emitting processes involving distillation of organic solvent.
Several reactions also demonstrate unprecedented chemoselectivity that
eliminates byproduct formation and separation. The open-air feature offers
convenience in operations of chemical synthesis involving small-scale
combinatorial synthesis, large-scale manufacturing, and catalyst recycling.
The catalytic reactions developed by Professor Li have widespread
applications in the synthesis of pharmaceuticals, fine chemicals,
petrochemicals, agricultural chemicals, polymers and plastics. Through his
development of transition metal mediated and catalyzed reactions in air and
water, Professor Li provides an attractive alternative to the inert
atmosphere and organic solvents traditionally used in many synthetic
reactions. For more information on the work of Professor Li see
http://www.tulane.edu/∼ chemistry/ Li.htmlSmall business categoryEDEN Bioscience Corporation was selected for developing harpin
technology that, when applied to crops, increases plant biomass,
photosynthesis, nutrient uptake and root development, and ultimately leads
to greater crop yield and quality. Harpins are nontoxic, naturally
occurring proteins that trigger a plant’s natural defence systems to
protect against disease and pests and simultaneously activate certain plant
growth systems without altering the plant’s DNA. EDEN discovered that
once a harpin protein binds to a receptor molecule on the plant surface,
several biochemical events are induced. First, production of hydrogen
peroxide, an important mechanism of plant defense, is induced in plant
cells, followed by stimulation of a series of ion exchanges in the cell
membrane. A series of signal transduction events leads to several
beneficial plant responses. The result of this technology is an EPA-
approved product called Messenger®, that has been
demonstrated on more than 40 crops to effectively stimulate plants to
defend themselves against a broad spectrum of viral, fungal, and bacterial
diseases, including some for which there currently is no effective
treatment. In addition, Messenger® has been shown through an
extensive safety evaluation to have virtually no adverse effect on any of
the organisms tested, including mammals, birds, honey bees, plants, fish,
aquatic invertebrates and algae. In addition, harpin-based products are
produced in a water-based fermentation system that uses no harsh solvents
or reagents, requires only modest energy inputs, and generates no hazardous
chemical wastes. As with most proteins, harpin is a fragile molecule that
is degraded rapidly by UV and natural microorganisms and has no potential
to bioaccumulate or to contaminate surface or groundwater resources. Using
environmentally benign harpin protein technology, growers for the first
time in the history of modern agriculture will be able to harness the
innate defence and growth systems of crops to substantially enhance yields,
improve crop quality, and reduce reliance on conventional agricultural
chemicals. For more information on Eden Biosciences and Messenger®
see http://www.edenbio.comAlternative synthetic pathwaysBayer Corporation and Bayer AG were selected for their synthesis of a
biodegradable chelating agent. Most classic chelating agents are poorly
biodegradable; some are quite persistent and have been detected in the
surface waters of rivers and lakes and in make-up water processed for
drinking water. Bayer Corporation manufactures a readily biodegradable and
environmentally friendly chelating agent,
DL-aspartic-N-(1,2-dicarboxyethyl) tetrasodium salt, an
aminocarboxylate also known as sodium iminodisuccinate. This agent is
characterized by excellent chelation capabilities, especially for
iron(III), copper(II), and calcium, and is both
readily biodegradable and benign from a toxicological and ecotoxicological
standpoint. It is also produced by a 100% waste-free and environmentally
friendly manufacturing process. Nearly all aminocarboxylates in use today
are acetic acid derivatives produced from amines, formaldehyde, sodium
hydroxide, and hydrogen cyanide. The industrial use of thousands of tons of
hydrogen cyanide is an extreme toxicity hazard. In contrast, Bayer’s
sodium iminodisuccinate is produced from maleic anhydride (a raw material
also produced by Bayer), water, sodium hydroxide, and ammonia. The only
solvent used in the production process is water, and the only side product
formed, ammonia dissolved in water, is recycled back into sodium
iminodisuccinate production or used in other Bayer processes. Because
sodium iminodisuccinate is a readily biodegradable, non-toxic, and
non-polluting alternative to other chelating agents, it can be used in a
variety of applications that employ chelating agents, including detergents,
agricultural nutrients, and household and industrial cleaners. For more
information see http://www.bayerus.com and http://www.bayer.deAlternative reaction conditionsNovozymes North America, Inc., was selected for designing an enzymatic
process for treating cotton textiles that provides an economical and
environmentally friendly alternative to alkaline scour systems currently
used in the textile industry today. Conventional chemical preparation
processes involve treatment of the cotton substrate with hot solutions of
sodium hydroxide, chelating agents, and surface active agents, often
followed by a neutralization step with acetic acid. This series of various
treatments and rinsing steps generates large volumes of wastes, including
large amounts of salts, acids, and alkali. The BioPreparation™
technology developed by Novozymes is an alternative to sodium hydroxide
that offers many advantages for textile wet processing, including reduced
BOD/COD, and decreased water use. Pectate lyase is the main scouring agent
that degrades pectin to release the entangled waxes and other contaminants
from the cotton surface. This enzyme is also compatible with other
enzymatic preparations (amylases, cellulases) used to improve the
performance properties of cotton fabrics. Because BioPreparation™
uses fewer chemicals and rinsing steps than required during a traditional
caustic scour, textile mills may save as much as 30–50% in water
costs by replacing caustic scours or by combining the usually separate
scouring and dyeing steps into one. A recent statistical survey determined
that 162 knitting mills used 89 million m3 per year of water in
processing goods from scouring to finishing; the BioPreparation™
approach would save from 27 to 45 million m3 per year of water.
In addition, field trials established that BOD and COD loads are decreased
by 25 and 40%, respectively, when compared to conventional sodium hydroxide
treatments. Furthermore, costs savings of 30% or more per mill can be
realized. For more information on Novozymes North America and
BioPreparation® see http://www.novozymes.comDesigning safer chemicalsPPG Industries was selected for its discovery that yttrium can be used
as a substitute for lead in cationic electrocoatings without any sacrifice
in corrosion performance. Although much less studied that lead, the
available data on yttrium indicate orders of magnitude lower hazard. As a
dust hazard, yttrium is 100 times safer than lead at typical levels of use.
In electrocoat applications, yttrium is twice as effective as lead on a
weight basis, allowing the formulation of commercial coatings that contain
half the yttrium by weight relative to lead in comparably performing
lead-containing products. It has been found that yttrium is deposited as
the hydroxide in an electrocoat, then converted to the oxide during normal
baking of the electrocoat. The oxide is extraordinarily non-toxic by
ingestion as indicated by the LD50 of >10 g
kg–1 in rats, which is in stark contrast to lead. The
ubiquitous nature of yttrium in the environment and the insoluble
ceramic-like nature of the oxide combine to make it an unlikely cause of
future environmental or health problems. An environmental side benefit of
yttrium is its performance over low nickel and chrome-free metal
pretreatments. By using yttrium in the electrocoat step, chrome can be
completely eliminated using standard chrome-free rinses and low nickel or
possibly nickel-free pretreatments, both of which are commercially
available today. For PPG pretreatment customers, this should result in the
elimination of up to 25,000 lb of chrome and 50,000 lb of nickel (annually)
from PPG products. As PPG customers implement yttrium over the next several
years, approximately one million lb of lead (as lead metal) will be removed
from the electrocoat applications of PPG automotive customers. For more
information on PPG Industries and their electrocoatings see
http://www.ppg.coHighlightsDuncan Macquarrie reviews the latest research in green
chemistryImino-aldol reactionsThe imino-aldol reaction is a very useful method for the formation of
amino acid derivatives. Obviously, enantioselective versions of this
reaction are vitally important in the development of novel amino acids, and
chiral amines. William Wulff and co-workers from Michigan State University,
USA, have recently published work relating to two different ligand systems
for the zirconium- catalysed reaction of imines with silyl acetals
(Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40, 2271).Their work involves the use of
6,6-dibromo-1,1’:2,2’-binaphthyl (diBrBINOL) and the related
VAPOL ligands, which form 2:1 complexes with Zr(OtBu)4.
These complexes allow high levels of enantioselection to be obtained, with
the VAPOL system yielding ee’s of >98% even at 100 oC
in some cases. Scheme 1 Ethylbenzene → styreneOne of the most important industrial processes is the oxidative
dehydrogenation of ethylbenzene to styrene. Currently K-promoted iron
catalysts are used in this process, which run at temperatures around 900 K.
The process is thus energy intensive, and novel catalyst systems which can
reduce the energy burden are welcome. Robert Schlögl and his group at
the Max Planck Institute in Berlin, Germany, have published a new catalyst
based on carbon nanofilaments, which allows the reaction to proceed
efficiently at 830 K (Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2001, 40,
2066). Their initial idea came from the potential role of carbon deposits
on various catalysts, and was developed by examining a series of carbons.
They found that nanofilaments of carbon were both the most active and the
most stable under the oxidative reaction conditions, something that
precludes most carbon sources. Under their conditions, excellent activity
could be sustained for several hours, indicating considerable promise for
this new material. Scheme 2 PolymerisationThe production of resins based on petrochemical feedstocks is a major
area of polymerisation technology. James Clark and his group at York
University, UK, have developed a heterogeneous AlCl3-based
catalyst system which is very effective at polymerising these monomer
mixes, and avoids the need for an aqueous quench reaction to remove the
catalyst (Org. Proc. Res. Dev., 2001, 5, 249). Their
catalyst is also very effective at increasing polymer yield and
importantly, controlling the molecular weight distribution, critical to the
successful application of the polymer. Scheme 3 Immobilised Lewis acidsAn interesting route to immobilised Lewis acids has been published by
the group of M. V. Landau at the Ben Gurion University in Beer-Sheva,
Israel (Chem. Commun., 2001, 992). Their approach utilises
quaternary ammonium species immobilised on mesoporous high surface area
silicas. These are present in the form of chlorides, and it is the chloride
which behaves as a Lewis base to complex the acidic component. They have
shown that quaternary supported tin tetrachloride is active in the Prins
condensation of formaldehyde and isobutene to isoprenol. Interestingly, it
is significantly more active than the same Lewis acid directly adsorbed on
the silica support. This may provide a useful general method for the
immobilisation of Lewis acid, complementary to the direct attachment
route. Scheme 4 Arylamines and diarylaminesThe synthesis of arylmines and diarylamines is required for the
synthesis of many bioactive compounds, as well as antioxidants (see
Green Chem., 1999, 1, G41 for an alternative clean synthesis
of a diarylamine). Jon Antilla and Stephen Buchwald at Massachusetts
Institute of Technology (MIT), USA, have now developed a method for the
coupling of amines with arylboronic acids, which relies on a copper acetate
catalyst (Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 2077). This reaction
proceeds under air, which appears to be vital for the re-oxidation of the
copper, and myristic acid, which helps to solubilise the catalyst system.
Even under non-optimal conditions for oxygen transport, the reaction
proceeds very well, giving high yields of product. Functional group
tolerance is excellent, and appears to be better than with Pd-based
couplings, with amides and alcohols reacting smoothly. Aliphatic amines
also give reasonable results. Scheme 5 EnzymesImmobilised enzymes represent an interesting class of asymmetric
catalysts, combining the advantages of an efficient reaction under mild
conditions with the ease of separation of heterogeneous catalysts (in
optimally designed systems). The group led by Harald Gröger at Degussa
and the Institut für Technoligie und Biosystemtechnik in Braunschweig,
Germany, have published details of such a system, consisting of
(R)-oxynitrilase entrapped in a poly(vinyl alcohol) matrix
(Org. Lett., 2001, 3, 1969). They have found that this
immobilised enzyme can catalyse the addition of HCN to benzaldehyde in
excellent yield and ee to give (R)-mandelonitrile at room
temperature and slightly acidic pH. Yields in the best solvent system were
higher than with free enzyme, and ee’s were always above 90%, some as
high as 99%. Leaching was not found, and the catalyst could be recovered
and recycled. Scheme 6 A further interesting paper on enzyme-catalysed reactions comes from
Keichi Watanabe and Shin-ichi Ueji from Kobe University, Japan (J.
Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 1, 2001, 1386). They have found that the
simple addition of around 50% DMSO to the aqueous buffer system has an
enormous positive effect on the enantioselectivity. For example, the
lipase-catalysed hydrolysis of various phenoxypropionates gives an
enantiomeric excess of 25–49%, depending on the structures, when no
DMSO is present. Addition of DMSO to the reaction medium causes the ee to
rise to 100%, at the cost of a slower reaction (ca. 5–6
times longer reaction time). Various lipases gave similar effects. Scheme 7 Heck reactionsHeterogeneous Heck catalysts continue to be of interest. Laurent
Djakovitch and Klaus Koehler of the Technishce Universität in Munich,
Germany, have now described a Pd–NaY zeolite catalyst which shows
excellent activity in the coupling of aryl halides with alkenes (J. Am.
Chem. Soc., 2001, 123, 5990). They exchanged Na–Y
zeolites with Pd species and then used them in the Heck reaction of a
series of reaction partners. Their results indicated that the catalyst was
highly active, converting activated substrates rapidly and in high yields,
and even showing some activity for aryl chlorides. The catalysts could be
recovered and reused with almost identical activity. No leached Pd could be
detected. Scheme 8 Functionalisation of siliconesFunctional silicones are interesting materials for a wide range of
applications, including advanced electronic and optical devices. However,
the functionalisation of simple polysiloxanes, carried out by oxidative
addition of the Si–H groups on the backbone to alcohol groups, is
plagued by problems of selectivity—several side-products are formed,
and control over the exact nature of the product is difficult. Philip
Boudjouk and his group at the Center for Main Group Chemistry at North
Dakota State University, USA, have now provided an effective Rh catalysed
route to these important materials (Organometallics, 2001,
20, 2725). They used RhCl(PPh3)2 to effect the
alcoholysis of the Si–H bond with a range of alcohols, leading to
high levels of functionalisation, without the problems of crosslinking and
isomerisation generally seen with existing systems. Many different
functionalities can be introduced, making the method versatile. The only
solvent used in the paper was d6-benzene, as the reactions were
all monitored in situ by NMR, but it seems likely that other
solvents could easily replace benzene in a more practical system. Scheme 9 Cascade reactionsCascade reactions are making a significant impact in organic synthesis,
due to their advantages of minimising the number of isolation stages that
have to be carried out, simplifying multi-step synthetic strategies, and
eliminating wasteful purification of intermediates. Andrew McCorrel and
John Walton of St Andrews University, UK, have published an excellent
review on radical cascade processes (Angew. Chem., Int. Ed.,
2001, 40, 2224) in which they discuss a wide range of radical
based one-pot multistep synthetic methods, many of which have potential for
minimising environmental impact. Scheme 10 Supramolecular assembliesSupramolecular assemblies with defined architecture are proving to be
very versatile and popular in the field of new materials and
nanotechnology. While the vast majority of the materials prepared are
derived from petroleum-based feedstocks, relatively little has been done in
the field of renewable raw materials in this are. The group led by George
John and Toshimi Shimizu of the CREST of Japanese Science and Technology
and the AIST in Ibaraki, Japan, has now published a route to nanotubes
based on cardanol, a product derived from cashew nuts (Adv.
Mater., 2001, 13, 715). A mixture of four glycosides (the one
shown and the corrsponding diene, monoene and saturated equivalents,
saturation beginning from the terminal double bond and progressing towards
the aryl group) were dissolved in hot water and allowed to cool. This
produced supramolecular assemblies, with the pure saturated glycoside
giving nanotubes. Such nanotubes could have a range of applications in
catalysis, electronics and separation technology amongst others. Scheme 11 Alkene hydroformylationHydroformylation of alkenes is a key process for the functionalisation
of alkenes. Biphasic systems with water soluble metal complexes have shown
promise, but have some drawbacks, especially in the case of internal
alkenes. Progress in this respect has recently been described by Shoichi
Shimizu and co-workers from Nihon University in Chiba, Japan (New J.
Chem., 2001, 25, 777). They used a calixarene-based ligand
system for a rhodium complex as a water-soluble catalyst, and found that
excellent conversions could be attained over several cycles, overcoming the
drawbacks seen with other methods. Isomerisation of the alkene double bond
leads to all four possible aldehydes from trans-4-octene, although
the quantity of the most desirable product, the terminal aldehyde does not
exceed 24%; work is ongoing to improve this. Scheme 12 Diels–Alder reactionsThe combination of ionic liquids and scandium salts has been found to be
a very powerful method for the Diels–Alder reaction. Choong Eui Song,
Jung Hoon Choi and their groups at Korea Institute of Science and
Technology and Hangyang University, Seoul, South Korea, have found that the
use of scandium triflate in very small amounts in ionic liquids allows the
Diels–Alder reaction to be performed much more rapidly than in many
organic solvents, with quantitative yields (Chem. Commun, 2001,
1122). The endo : exo ratio is also excellent at 99 : 1.
An additional bonus is that the catalyst can be recovered easily and reused
several times by simple phase separation. No loss in activity or yield was
noted after 11 cycles. Scheme 13 Fluorous biphase catalystsFluorous biphase catalysis is another innovative way to effect reactions
and utilise phase behaviour to isolate reaction components, this time by
the temperature-dependent miscibility of certain perfluorinated solvents
and hydrocarbon solvents. One of the difficulties associated with this
technique is the need to functionalise catalysts with fluorous
‘pony-tails’ to solubilise them in the reaction medium, which
is typically much less polar than even a hydrocarbon. Shannon Vinson and
Michel Gagné of the University on North Carolina, USA, have now
demonstrated that a polymer- supported hydrogenation catalyst (based on a
Rh-diphosphine copolymerised with ethylene glycol dimethacrylate) works
extremely well under fluorous biphasic conditions (Chem. Commun.,
2001, 1130). They found that hydrogenation of methyl cinnamate was complete
2–3 times faster than in conventional solvent systems. Surprisingly,
they also observed that reaction rates increased with increasing perfluoro
content of the solvent mixture. While separation of a heterogeneous
catalyst does not require a biphasic solvent system, the observation that
there may be potential benefits of using fluorous solvent systems (and
possibly much more so for oxygen- based oxidations) is an
importantobservation. Scheme 14 European teaching on renewable resourcesIn the framework of a European Curriculum Development
Programme, a group of European universities are collaborating in order to
create a European masters programme on renewable resources. The CDA
(Curriculum Development Advanced) programme aims at starting the master
studies in 2004, if approved by the EU at that timeIn response to the trend to promote and utilise more renewable
resources based products in industry, the need to translate this trend in
education became urgent. Further, the need to train people in an European
environment in order to prepare them for the challenges of global thinking
and acting, supported the idea to create a think tank for the organisation
of a European masters programme. Several European universities active in
the domain of renewable resources became involved in the CDA programme and
are developing a practical system for the masters programme. Among the
universities involved are:• Akademia Rolnizca (Wroclaw, Poland)• Institut National Polytechnique de Toulouse (Toulouse,
France)• Joensuun Yliopisto (Joensuu, Finland)• Justus-Liebig-Universität Giessen (Giessen,
Germany)• Kauno Technologijos Universitetas (Kaunas,
Lithuania)• Sveriges Lantbruksuniversitet (Uppsala, Sweden)•  Universität für Bodenkultur Wien (Vienna,
Austria)• University of York (York, UK)•  Westfälische Wilhelms-Universität Münster
(Münster, Germany) and • Ghent University (coordinator, Ghent, Belgium).The aim of the programme is to educate young academics with the ideas of
the use of renewable resources, sustainable development and green
chemistry. Within the programme, special attention will be paid to topics
related to:• European policy and socio-economical aspects of the use
of renewable resources • the production of renewable resources• downstream processing• non-food applications of saccharides, proteins, oils and
fats• renewable energy• green chemistry• wood and fibres• high-value added materials etc.On top of the technical and technological aspects of the programme the
students will benefit from the international environment and the experience
offered by the master programme since the courses of this two-year
programme are planned to be given in a modular system in at least three (or
four) different universities. This means that students will need to move to
different countries, thus accumulating major cultural, lingual and
international experience which will be of major importance for a job career
in a unified European market.The cost of the master programme is planned to be supported strongly by
the European Community and the student and staff mobility programmes of the
EU. In this way students will be in touch with European experts of the
different topics included in the programme. Within the programme, much
attention will also be paid to practical work and case studies, as well as
to a research period in a university of choice within the programme.
Flexibility and tailor made programmes for students with a certain
background will be a major concern of the organisation. Therefore, the
programme will be suitable for agricultural engineers, chemists, foresters,
biochemists, bio-engineers etc. In view of the development of the
educational system within Europe, the programme might become a preferred
education option in a 3 + 2 education system as proposed in the Bologna and
Prague declarations of the EU.Universities and institutes interested in the further development
and organisation of this master programme on renewable resources may
contact: Prof. Dr. ir. Christian Stevens, Department of Organic Chemistry,
Faculty of Agricultural and Applied Biological Sciences, Ghent University,
Coupure links 653, B-9000 Gent, Belgium, e-mail: Chris.Stevens@rug.ac.be;
Fax : 0032 (0)9 264 62 43.Towards a metabolic society: a thermodynamic viewJakob de Swaan Arons and Hedzer J. van der Kooi of the
Laboratory of Applied Thermodynamics and Phase Equilibria, at Delft
University of Technology in The Netherlands†
 present a thermodynamic argument that our society should develop to become
a metabolic society,1,2 involving more
efficient conversion and disposal of energy and material. Most living
systems fulfill the requirements of a metabolic society, directly (plants)
or indirectly (animals).3 The notorious
exception is man as from the moment that he got involved in what is called
‘the industrial society’. How can this unfortunate exception be
repaired?IntroductionThe 20th century showed the full development of an industrial society
characterized by mass production, mass consumption and mass waste
disposal.1 For many countries this has
produced prosperity and an unprecedented economic growth with, in many
respects, an improved quality of life. But gradually less attractive
consequences of this development became apparent, like the dependency on
fossil fuels and the impact on the environment that seem to have taken
global proportions. So on the way to the 21st century we began to realize
that this posed us for a Trilemma, where we are challenged to devise a way
to harmonize economic growth, resource supply and preservation of the
environment.4Prominent representatives of industry, government and academia,
recognizing this Trilemma, therefore have called for ‘sustainable
development’, often with a less precise description albeit with the
best of intentions. Sawa for example proposes that the 21st century should
see the development of a post-industrial society, the metabolic
society, characterized by viable consumption levels, limited waste,
active recycling, energy savings and longer product lives.1 This is a very interesting proposal and we felt
the need to try and identify the characteristics of such a society.
Therefore we have turned to living systems and identified some of their
basic requirements with regard to the conversion of energy and
matter.3 Next we tried to analyze the way we
‘manage our house’ by starting from a simple economic picture
and by extending it to what we believe is a picture of a self-sustaining,
rather than of a self-exhausting society. Finally we present a perspective
of the global industrial society from how it is to how it should
develop.The metabolic societyWhen Sawa launched the term ‘metabolic society’ he may have
had in mind a society that lives in dynamic equilibrium with its
environment, producing enough food and materials to sustain its passive and
active life and absorbing in a natural way all its waste produced, like a
cow living on a pasture of sufficient area, the total system powered by the
sun. This is what many believe to be a sustainable society. Angela Merkel,
physicist and former German Minister of the Environment defines sustainable
development as ‘Using resources no faster than they can regenerate
themselves and releasing pollutants to no greater extent than natural
resources can assimilate them’.5 This
was of course the situation before the industrial revolution and man fitted
quite nicely in such a society. But then he got engaged in the industrial
society, and by doing so stepped out of the metabolic society. A point was
reached that ‘nature could not keep up with us any longer’, as
Yoda puts it.4Morowitz has summarized some characteristics of living systems.3 They prevail in a permanent non-equilibrium with
respect to their environment. This state is sustained by a permanent energy
source. They display structure and prevail in an active or passive mode.
The energy source needs a sink for disposal of its degraded form, while
stripping energy from its useful part requires at least one material cycle.
Fig. 1 shows schematically the metabolic
society. Radiation from the sun is stripped from its useful component and
transformed into mechanical, electrical or chemical energy. Overall, solar
radiation is converted into the same amount of useless heat to the
environment while sustaining a structured, non-equilibrium system of plants
and animals, requiring at least one material cycle of synthesis and
respiration involving CO2, H2O and O2. In
this cycle the smallest living systems, the microbes, are most numerous and
essential. They keep matter in cycles and are also responsible for the
final degradation step to CO2 and H2O, thus assuring
‘waste’ disposal. Fig. 1 The industrial societyEcology is the study and economy in the management of ‘the
house’. So let us see how we manage the house in which we live, the
industrial society. Fig. 2 and Fig. 3a picture the classical way of thinking in
economics in which capital, production and consumption stand out. However
environmental economists pointed to what is missing in this picture: the
environment. In thermodynamics we know all too well that we should always
look at the system and its environment. Aware of this,
environmental economists emphasize the importance of the interaction with
the environment via extraction and emission (Fig. 3b). This picture expresses somehow the less
favourable aspects of an industrial society. Ishikawa condemns this by
stating that ‘we contaminate the environment by squandering natural
resources’.6 In this respect the
industrial society is markedly different from the metabolic society and
much more primitive. At one time man stepped out of nature′s cycles.
We may now have reached a state in which we are called back to order.
Fig. 3 also allows us to point to what it
takes to make the transition back from industrial to metabolic. Fig. 2  Fig. 3 We realized that Fig. 3b can be further extended by closing the cycle
between emissions and extraction. The amount of work that this requires
necessarily has to be paid for by a renewable source of work, Fig. 3c.
Otherwise other non-closed cycles would be introduced. This picture helped
us to arrive at a possible thermodynamic definition of
sustainability:• close all product cycles• drive all cycles with renewable energy• do it efficientlyThermodynamic parameters can now be defined7 to calculate and measure to what extent a society
is sustainable. It may not make sense to make use of renewable energy while
this is done inefficiently, nor might it suffice to use renewable energy
efficiently when material cycles are not closed. By the way, an interesting
consequence of this analysis is that the generating cost of a fossil fuel
must always be higher than that of a corresponding amount of a renewable
energy source.Thermodynamic perspectiveThermodynamics has provided us with two very useful concepts, both
originating in the two fundamental laws: available work and
lost work.8 Both concepts
can be calculated and easily communicated to non-experts as we hope to
demonstrate.Fig. 4 pictures the fate of work, as
available in ‘methane’ (natural gas), in the chain from gas
production to utilization. The picture clearly shows the transformations
that take place in time and allows some important observations. First and
foremost it visualizes the first and second law. Although energy is
conserved, its quality, i.e. its available work content,
diminishes and finally disappears while the amount of lost work increases
in time. Secondly it makes us aware that a material resource of energy has
depleted and that its transformation is accompanied by emissions due to the
law of mass conservation: mass stored underground and mass extracted from
the atmosphere are transformed and sent into the atmosphere. Thirdly the
application, electricity consumption, does not need a material source of
energy. An immaterial source of energy as solar radiation can also provide
electricity. Finally, if we make a life cycle analysis of this process, we
notice that the process is not a closed cycle. Fig. 4 Fig. 5 tries to picture that the work
originally available in fossil fuel is used to pay for global
energy needs, is lost in time and that the mass in which this work was
stored is conserved and emitted. The overall conclusion is that as most
(>90%) of the fossil fuel is used for ‘energy’ purposes,
i.e. not requiring a material resource for the work required, a
massive flow of matter is generated, unnecessarily. Fig. 5 At the same time we should realize that the work available in the
incident solar radiation is orders of magnitude greater than what the world
in its human activities transforms into lost work.2 The fate of this available work however is the
same as that in most of the consumed fossil fuel: lost work. The work is
dissipated and although the radiation from the earth is still valuable for
bodies at a lower temperature than the earth, it has lost its power for the
benefit of the earth (Fig. 6). Fig. 6 The challenge is now to tap the work available in the incident radiation
and thereby to eliminate largely the massive material emissions associated
with the consumption of fossil fuel: the dematerialization of energy
sources. Fig. 7 tries to picture this. In
contrast to Fig. 5 the required work is now
available in an immaterial resource and consequently no net flow of matter
is associated with it: ‘the solar fueled globe’ where the
dissipation of the work available in solar radiation (Fig. 6), is now delayed for the benefit of the
globe′s industrial activities. However, here is a point of concern.
There is strong evidence2 that the globe′s ecological
capacity is no longer sufficient to fulfill our energy needs by
photosynthesis. This then asks for alternative extraction of the work
available in solar radiation and, possibly, for a further reduction in
human material needs. Fig. 7 ConclusionIn comparing characteristics of a metabolic society with those of an
industrial society one cannot help but conclude that the latter is far more
primitive in terms of access to, and conversion and disposal of energy and
matter. Man can learn much from the study of natural processes and may have
to conclude that he should become part again of natural cycles much as he
did before the industrial revolution. This may imply a simultaneous
reduction of his material needs.AcknowledgementWe express our appreciation to economists/physicists Professor Robert
Ayres (INSEAD, France) and Dr. Stefan Baumgärtner (University of
Heidelberg, Germany) for all we learned from them at the Gordon Research
Conference on Thermodynamics, Pisa, Italy, April 1999.ReferencesT. Sawa (ed.).
Creating an Affluent Society. In Harmony with the Earth. Proposals
for Japan, CRIEPI, Tokyo,
Japan,  1996. Search PubMed.M. Wackernagel and
W. Rees. Our
Ecological Footprint. Reducing Human Impact on the Earth, The New
Catalyst,  1996. Search PubMed.H. J. Morowitz.
Energy Flow in Biology, Oxbow Press,
 1979. Search PubMed.Yoda (Ed.). Trilemma. Three Major Problems
threatening World Survival. Central Research Institute of Electric Power
Industry, Tokyo, Japan,
 1995. Search PubMed.A. Merkel. The
Role of Science in Sustainable Development, Science,
281, 17 July  1998. Search PubMed.E. Ishikawa.
Energy Recycling in the Edo Period. Editorial in the Asahi
Shimbun, Dec. 17,  1996. Search PubMed.J. Dewu1f, J. M. Mulder, M. M. D. Van den Berg, H. Van Langenhove, H. J. Van der Kooi and J. De Swaan, Arons, J. Illustrations Towards Quantifying the Sustainability of
Technology. Green Chem, 2000, 2, 108–114 Search PubMed.J. D. Seader,
Thermodynamic Analysis of Chemical Processes, MIT
Press,  1982. Search PubMed.A greener future with biodieselJeffrey Hardy, a Green Chemistry Teaching Associate at the
Clean Technology Centre at the University of York, UK, describes the
sources and production of this renewable transport fuel, and argues the
case for its wider acceptanceUK case studyAlthough significant progress regarding the introduction of biodiesel
has been made in several European countries in the UK there still remain
several hurdles to overcome. The major obstacles are clearly outlined by
examining the case of Martin Steele.10,11 Using his ingenuity Mr. Steele has developed a
transesterification process to turn used chip pan fat into perfectly
functional biodiesel. In fact he has successfully run his Volvo car on his
biodiesel fuel (produced in his Manchester back garden) for over 18,000
miles. The car engine was examined after 15,000 miles and was found to be
virtually corrosion and carbon deposit free. This proves the validity of
the fuel, and at a small scale production cost of 12p per litre it would
appear to be competitive with regular diesel. The major problem arises when
Customs and Excise demand he pays around 50p per litre in road fuel tax.
Mr. Steele comments on this by saying ‘The Government talks about
saving the environment and cutting down on emissions, buttaxes biodiesel at
the highest rate in the world. It’s daft!’ He also claims that
the problem arises from a ‘wrong calculation’ by MAFF in a
report to the government back in 1996 ‘One wrong figure in the report
has set biodiesel production in the UK back by 5 years’. Furthermore,
Mr. Steele attacks the UK Government on the subject of road tax ‘The
Chancellor last year took £55 off road tax on small cars with no
measurable benefit in terms of greenhouse gas savings. That cost the
Exchequer £110 million. For the same amount of cash, we could have a
brand new biodiesel industry in the UK, creating 2000 new jobs. It would
have supported the production of 500 million litres of biodiesel, saving in
round terms, half a million tonnes of carbon emissions’.Mr. Steele continues his campaign to have the duty on biodiesel reduced.
He is also involved in trying to set a larger scale production plant in
collaboration with other biodiesel enthusiasts.IntroductionBiodiesel is a renewable transport fuel made mainly from vegetable oils.
It is not a new fuel; in fact Rudolf Diesel ran his original engine on
peanut oil in 1900. The reason why people are not familiar with biodiesel
is that because mineral oil derived diesel has been cheaper and more
available for the majority of this century. The oil crisis in 1973
reawakened interest in biofuels when mineral oil prices skyrocketed. Now,
even though the oil prices have fallen again the interest in biofuels has
not diminished due to the environmental advantages of biodiesel.Biodiesel is quite simply a fuel made from vegetable oil. More precisely
it is defined as the mono alkyl esters of long chain fatty acids derived
from renewable lipid sources. The processing required to produce biodiesel
is minimal, firstly oil has to be extracted from the crop and secondly a
very simple chemical modification of the oil has to be carried out.
Biodiesel can be used in an unmodified diesel engine as either pure
biodiesel or as a mixture of biodiesel and conventional mineral oil based
diesel. A tractor fuelled by biodiesel derived from sunflower oil has been
successfully driven from Lands End to John o’ Groats (Fig. 1). Fig. 8  Tractor fuelled by biodiesel.1 The source of oil for biodiesel production depends on the agriculture of
the country where it is produced. For instance in Europe it is produced
from oilseed rape and sunflower oil, in North America from soya oil and in
South East Asia from palm oil.There are several key advantages biodiesel possesses over conventional
diesel. Perhaps first and foremost is the fact that biodiesel is neutral
with regard to carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions and consequently
it does not add to global warming. This is in stark contrast to
conventional diesel, which produces three tonnes of CO2 for
every tonne of diesel burnt. Biodiesel is also non-toxic (less toxic than
table salt according to the EPA) and degrades quickly in the environment
leaving innocuous products. Unlike mineral oil diesel, biodiesel has a
negligible sulfur content and consequently it does not add to acid rain.
Biodiesel is a much better lubricant than conventional diesel fuel and
extends engine life—a German truck won an entry in the Guinness Book
of Records by travelling more than 1.25 million km (780,000 miles) on
biodiesel with its original engine.2
Biodiesel is also the only alternative fuel to have passed the stringent
health effects testing requirements of the US Clean Air Acts Amendments of
1990.3Methods of producing biodieseVegetable oils can be used directly as diesel fuels, but the inherent
viscosity of the oils is often a problem. This can be solved by the
formation of micro-emulsions with solvents such as methanol and ethanol.
However, neat vegetable oils and the emulsions both cause coking and valve
blocking in engines due to problems deriving from oil deterioration and
incomplete combustion.The most widespread method for production of biodiesel is through a
transesterification process. Natural fats and oils exist as glycerides, a
triester of fatty acid and glycerol, which are naturally viscous by nature.
The transesterification process involves the reaction of a fat or oil with
an alcohol to form esters and glycerol (both of which are commercially
saleable products).4 A general reaction is
shown below in Scheme 1.5 Scheme 15  Transesterification of triglycerides with alcohol. A catalyst is generally used to improve the reaction rate and yield.
Because the reaction is reversible, excess alcohol is used to shift the
equilibrium to the product side (the alcohol is recycled). Methanol is the
most commonly used alcohol because of its low cost and physical and
chemical advantages (polar, shortest chain alcohol and sodium hydroxide, a
basic catalyst, is soluble in it).The ratio of alcohol to glyceride required for reaction is dependent on
whether the reaction is catalysed by acid or base. An acid catalysed
reaction needs a ratio of 30∶1, whereas a base catalysed reaction
(ca. 1% w/w for both acid and base) requires a ratio of 6∶1.
A major point is that the base catalysed system is intolerant to water
content in the vegetable oil, whereas acid catalysis can tolerate water.
Enzyme catalysts have also been used.6A typical continuous reactor used in the production of biodiesel from
various sources is shown below in Fig. 2.
The oil is added separately to the alcohol and catalyst. The reagents are
passed through a heated column where reaction takes place. The esters are
then separated from glycerine by gravity. Fig. 9  A continuous transesterification reactor.7 Other countries producing biodieselBiodiesel is seen as an important tool for the EU to meet its emission
reduction target (Kyoto agreement). Specific legislation to promote and
regulate the use of biodiesel is in force in various countries (including
Austria, France, Germany, Italy and Sweden). Europe currently produces
700,000 tonnes/year of biodiesel and has set production targets of 2.3
Mtonnes by 2003 and 8.3 Mtonnes by 2010 to reduce greenhouse and air
polluting gas emissions.8 Germany is on
course to produce 1 Mtonnes/year by 2003 thanks to a zero duty rate on the
fuel. There are several excellent examples of European countries increasing
their usage of biodiesel:• Germany has been producing biodiesel since 1992, does not
tax the fuel and has plans for an annual production of 400,000 tonnes.
There are over 700 filling stations in Germany selling biodiesel. • Many French towns have buses running on a mixture of
biodiesel and fossil diesel. It is distributed, amongst others by Elf and
Total. In fact most fossil fuel diesel in France is mixed with biodiesel
today.• In Sweden it is sold in a mixture with fossil diesel.
Also in Stockholm they have greatly cut pollution by using ethanol as a
fuel additive.• Public transport in Rotterdam, Copenhagen, Olso, Zurich,
Luxembourg, Lisbon and Barcelona has used biodiesel with excellent
results.Biodiesel in the UKRoad transport is now the UK’s third largest source of
CO2 emissions. The Governments Climate Change Programme sets out
an ambitious package of measures across all sectors, which is expected to
reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 23% by 2010 relative to 1990. This will
include a substantial reduction in the use of carbon rich fuels in the
transport sector. In the UK over 500,000 ha of land are set aside yearly;
it is feasible that much of this land could be used for oilseed rape
production. Surprisingly, much of the oilseed rape production in the UK is
actually used in other European states.Biodiesel has been tested by several organisations in the UK, all of
which demonstrated the suitability of biodiesel for general use. In the
most recent budget the Chancellor of the Exchequer, Gordon Brown, announced
that biodiesel would qualify for a 20p per litre tax rebate. This will mean
a tax on biodiesel of about 25p per litre to come into effect after
approximately one year. Although this was widely considered a step in the
right direction pressure groups have indicated that they would prefer the
duty on biodiesel to be more like 10p per litre (in some EU countries there
is no duty on biodiesel). With a reasonable duty on biodiesel it is
predicted that farming industry could provide between 5 and 10% of the UK
diesel needs over the coming years.9The futureThe UK is perceived within the EU as dragging its heels behind the
biodiesel programmes in other member states. However slowly, it seems that
the political mood is changing, with recent announcements of the lowering
of the fuel duty on biodiesel and other more positive signs regarding
future use of biofuels.The amount of farmland set aside yearly could be used to grow crops such
as oilseed rape. Through calculation it has been estimated that up to 10%
of the UK’s diesel consumption could be accounted for by biodiesel
derived from homegrown crops, which is a significant amount in terms of
saving fossil fuels and CO2 emissions.Referenceshttp://www.newtonrigg.ac.uk/agric_ forestry/millennium.html.http://journeytoforever.org/biodiesel.html.http://www.biofuels.fsnet.co.uk/.D. S. Bradin, US
patent 5,578,090, Biodiesel fuel..http://www.newtonrigg.ac.uk/Agric_ Forestry/Chemistry.htm.K. Ban, M. Kaieda, T. Matsumoto, A. Kondo and H. Fukuda, Biochem. Eng. J., 2001, 8, 39 CrossRef CAS.
Picture adapted from W. R. Trent, US Patent 2, ( 1945),
383–632..http://www.biodiesel.co.uk/press_ release/labour_applies_brakes.htm.http://www.biodiesel.co.uk/press_ release/biodiesel_gets_a_start.htm.R. Cave, The Big Issue in the North, 2001, 366, 5 Search PubMed. Mendick and
J. Champkin,
The Independent, 22nd October  2000. Search PubMed.Chemical companies take energy management to heartThis article from the Energy Efficiency Best Practice
Programme discusses the importance of chemical companies to take energy
management to heartGETTING STARTEDGPG 200 A Strategic Approach to Energy & Environmental
ManagementGPG 190 Energy Efficiency Action PackVideo VI
014 The Bottom LineInteractive software The Energy ManageMent
Advisor - EMMA″ Focus - The Manager′s Guide to
Reducing Energy BillsACBE 001 Energy Saving Guide for Small
Businesses Institute of Director′s Making Savings by
Managing Energy - a Director′s Pocket BookPLANNING &
ORGANISINGGPG 119 Organising Energy Management - Corporate Approach
GPG 186 Developing an Effective Energy PolicyGPG 167
Organisational Aspects of Energy ManagementGPG 200 Assessing
Energy ManagementGPG 119 Energy Management MatrixIntroductionThe advent of the climate change levy (CCL) in April 2001 has provided
the impetus for many chemical companies to look again at how much energy is
used on site. The chemical sector has now finalised the Negotiated
Agreement with the Government and this means that chemical companies will
benefit from an 80% discount on the CCL. However, to retain this discount
in future years, chemical companies must make the agreed energy
savings.As many chemical manufacturing organisations are re-launching their
energy management strategies, there is an increasing requirement for
support and guidance. Managers must use both time and financial resources
as effectively as possible and energy management should now be part of any
good management system. Energy and utility costs are frequently viewed as
an ‘overhead’ but they are actually a controllable cost. As
with any commodity, energy cannot be managed effectively unless it can be
closely measured. It is not enough to just have a meter at the site
boundary. Fortunately larger companies, with sites that have several plants
and other buildings, have extra meters for cost allocation purposes. This
data can be used as a key part of the energy management process.Energy management is also not just about one person doing all the work.
It is important to educate the whole workforce, starting at management
level. Information is the key. Making sure everyone gets the message will
make the energy manager’s job a lot easier. There is a host of
information available within the Government’s Energy Efficiency Best
Practice Programme (EEBPP), to help energy managers make the best use of
energy inputs. The EEBPP is pioneering a new scheme that will provide
specific support to larger chemical manufacturing sites. This takes the
form of ‘Partnerships’ between the site and EEBPP, who provide
energy audits, training seminars, literature and technical help. The
partnership approach is based on discussions between the site and
specialists from the EEBPP who ensure that the events are ‘tailor
made’ to suit the site’s specific requirements. This advice,
when combined with the company’s own expertise, turns potential
energy savings into improved profits as well as reducing environmental
impact.Solutia takes free adviceSolutia UK Ltd. operates a chemical manufacturing plant at Newport,
South Wales, with seven production plants using organic and/or inorganic
processes. Techniques used at the plant include pyrolysis, esterfication
and hydrogenation, and the plant operates on a 24-hour shift pattern. The
company produces several chemicals such as organic phosphonates, rubber
chemicals, phosphate esters and a plasticiser used as the safety interlayer
in car windscreens. Solutia recognised that there was plenty of scope for
energy reductions at its Newport site. So, the company called on the EEBPP
to help them form an energy management team and disseminate the necessary
information factory-wide. Fig. 10  Solutia, a chemical company working for energy efficiency. David Lloyd, an EEBPP energy consultant worked with Solutia and created
a tailor made programme of talks and discussions. ‘Since the seminar
in December, with full attendance of a wide cross section of personnel, we
have initiated an Energy Steering Group. The first meeting has been held
and over 180 items have been prioritised for investigation or
action,’ Keith Agnew, who heads the group, explained. He is
encouraged to have such a wide cross- section of support.The Steering Group has drawn up a long-term plan and set a timescale for
actions. ‘Following the seminar, I have ensured that energy
efficiency is an area that appears in each line production manager’s
goals,’ said Keith Agnew. ‘This is not a one-off event, though,
we must deliver energy reductions year-on-year, and make sure we have
continuous sustainable improvement’. Keith Agnew is encouraged that
managers are so willing to take the energy efficiency message on board.
‘Solutia greatly values the EEBPP’s support and guidance,
especially after the success of the seminar last December,’ he
said.Solutia created an inventory and database of the 506 motors in use on
site, and defined a motors strategy. As a result, the company will either
rewind or replace motors at the appropriate time. If motors are over sized,
they will be replaced with a smaller motor. Process optimisation is also an
important factor and some improvements were identified. However, as major
changes were made a few years ago, the potential for further savings is not
as great as in other areas, such as reducing the amount of compressed air
used on site.Solutia uses a large amount of compressed air and the Energy Steering
Group carried out a basic leak survey at the end of 2000. The leak rate for
the site was considered to be the industry average, and the industry
average is high. This means that any energy used to produce leaked
compressed air is wasted. ‘To date £60,000 per year of leaks
have been identified and the majority have been fixed, with the remainder
in a plan to address them when there is an opportunity,’ said Keith.
‘It is important to keep up general good housekeeping measures of
tightening valves and turning the air supply off when not in use. We must
be able to sustain this improvement into the future,’ he said.The benefits of having a company-wide Energy Steering Group cannot be
over-emphasised. Having managers from all areas gives a true site
perspective. Savings that can be made in one place may have cost
implications elsewhere. It is important to be able to consider all these
aspects together and to have everyone involved. Having gained the
commitment of the management team, Keith is now very keen to get the
message across to all site staff. ‘This year I will be creating a
special topic for line manager meetings that will raise awareness and the
importance to us all of energy efficiency. Ultimately, I would like to
think we could have 250 energy managers here at Solutia,’ he
said.The EEBPP is able to help chemical companies set up an energy management
strategy and support managers in implementing it. Free site-specific advice
is provided through dedicated energy efficiency advisers. Several free
publications are also available through the Environment and Energy Helpline
Tel: 0800 585794, and the most relevant are listed in the box.
Alternatively, visit the EEBPP website http://www.energy- efficiency.gov.uk for more details of the services offered.For more information please contact: Kathryn Stubbing, IMS Public
Relations (Tel. 01672 520788; Fax 01672 520789) or Elena Stewart, ETSU
(Tel. 01235 433967; Fax 01235 433906).Footnote† Delft University of
Technology, Julianalaan 136, 2628 BL Delft, The Netherlands; email:
a.m.c.barrow@tnw.tudelft.nlThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1	 

 	Scheme 2	 

 	Scheme 3	 

 	Scheme 4	 

 	Scheme 5	 

 	Scheme 6	 

 	Scheme 7	 

 	Scheme 8	 

 	Scheme 9	 

 	Scheme 10	 

 	Scheme 11	 

 	Scheme 12	 

 	Scheme 13	 

 	Scheme 14	 

 	Fig. 1	 

 	Fig. 2	 

 	Fig. 3	 

 	Fig. 4	 

 	Fig. 5	 

 	Fig. 6	 

 	Fig. 7	 
UK case studyAlthough significant progress regarding the introduction of biodiesel
has been made in several European countries in the UK there still remain
several hurdles to overcome. The major obstacles are clearly outlined by
examining the case of Martin Steele.10,11 Using his ingenuity Mr. Steele has developed a
transesterification process to turn used chip pan fat into perfectly
functional biodiesel. In fact he has successfully run his Volvo car on his
biodiesel fuel (produced in his Manchester back garden) for over 18,000
miles. The car engine was examined after 15,000 miles and was found to be
virtually corrosion and carbon deposit free. This proves the validity of
the fuel, and at a small scale production cost of 12p per litre it would
appear to be competitive with regular diesel. The major problem arises when
Customs and Excise demand he pays around 50p per litre in road fuel tax.
Mr. Steele comments on this by saying ‘The Government talks about
saving the environment and cutting down on emissions, buttaxes biodiesel at
the highest rate in the world. It’s daft!’ He also claims that
the problem arises from a ‘wrong calculation’ by MAFF in a
report to the government back in 1996 ‘One wrong figure in the report
has set biodiesel production in the UK back by 5 years’. Furthermore,
Mr. Steele attacks the UK Government on the subject of road tax ‘The
Chancellor last year took £55 off road tax on small cars with no
measurable benefit in terms of greenhouse gas savings. That cost the
Exchequer £110 million. For the same amount of cash, we could have a
brand new biodiesel industry in the UK, creating 2000 new jobs. It would
have supported the production of 500 million litres of biodiesel, saving in
round terms, half a million tonnes of carbon emissions’.Mr. Steele continues his campaign to have the duty on biodiesel reduced.
He is also involved in trying to set a larger scale production plant in
collaboration with other biodiesel enthusiasts.

 	Fig. 8  Tractor fuelled by biodiesel.1	 

 	Scheme 15  Transesterification of triglycerides with alcohol.	 

 	Fig. 9  A continuous transesterification reactor.7	 
GETTING STARTEDGPG 200 A Strategic Approach to Energy & Environmental
ManagementGPG 190 Energy Efficiency Action PackVideo VI
014 The Bottom LineInteractive software The Energy ManageMent
Advisor - EMMA″ Focus - The Manager′s Guide to
Reducing Energy BillsACBE 001 Energy Saving Guide for Small
Businesses Institute of Director′s Making Savings by
Managing Energy - a Director′s Pocket BookPLANNING &
ORGANISINGGPG 119 Organising Energy Management - Corporate Approach
GPG 186 Developing an Effective Energy PolicyGPG 167
Organisational Aspects of Energy ManagementGPG 200 Assessing
Energy ManagementGPG 119 Energy Management Matrix

 	Fig. 10  Solutia, a chemical company working for energy efficiency.	 
Footnote
† Delft University of
Technology, Julianalaan 136, 2628 BL Delft, The Netherlands; email:
a.m.c.barrow@tnw.tudelft.nl

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001
