Defect tolerance in CsPbI 3 : reconstruction of the potential energy landscape and band degeneracy in spin–orbit coupling   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TA08995A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TA08995A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 3018-3024Defect tolerance in CsPbI3: reconstruction of the potential energy landscape and band degeneracy in spin–orbit coupling†

        
          
            Chen 
            Ming
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Wang
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Damien 
            West
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Shengbai 
            Zhang
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Yi-Yang 
            Sun
          
        
      *a
aState Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructure, Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai, 201899, China. E-mail: yysun@mail.sic.ac.cn
bChemical Sciences Division, Lawrence Berkeley National Laboratory, Berkeley, California 94720, USA
cDepartment of Physics, Applied Physics & Astronomy, Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute, Troy, New York 12180, USA
Received 
      19th October 2021
    , Accepted 16th December 2021First published on 16th December 2021AbstractLead halide perovskites have been intensively developed to be high-performance photovoltaic and optoelectronic materials, where the unique defect tolerance properties are believed to contribute to their excellence. However, defect tolerance, especially for the donors, has not been conclusively understood yet. Using hybrid functional calculations including spin–orbit coupling (SOC), we study the intrinsic defects of γ-CsPbI3. With a sufficiently large supercell and full structural relaxation, we show that most of the donor levels are deep in hybrid functional calculations, but become shallow due to the strong SOC effect, which reconstructs the potential energy surfaces of the donors by eliminating the large structural distortions. By quantifying the variation of electronic and elastic energies associated with defects, we show how the SOC effect changes the energy balance and reconstructs the defect structures. We reveal the decisive role of degeneracy of electronic states in the SOC effect, which significantly downshifts the conduction band minimum due to the quasi-three-fold degeneracy of Pb 6p orbitals, but has little effect on the non-degenerate defect states.
Introduction
Lead halide perovskite (LHP) materials, represented by MAPbI3 (MA = CH3NH3), have attracted enormous attention in the past several years because of their excellent performance in photovoltaic (PV) applications.1–3 Solar cells made with LHPs have been quickly approaching the highest efficiency achieved by silicon-based devices.4 Different from other high-efficiency PV materials, low-cost methods, such as spin-coating and blade coating,5,6 can be used to prepare the perovskite layer in solar cells without sacrificing the high efficiency. Defect tolerance has been proposed to understand the unexpected high performance of the relatively “low-quality” films.7–9 Theoretical calculations indeed demonstrated that the defect transition levels in LHPs are mostly shallow,10–19 which effectively makes the material free of carrier recombination centers. Experiments also provided relevant evidence of such an understanding.20
Several mechanisms have been proposed to explain the shallowness of intrinsic defects. One refers to the unusual electronic structure of the halide perovskites, as the valence band maximum (VBM) of MAPbI3 exhibits an antibonding character between I 5p and Pb 6s orbitals.8,21–23 This differs from common compound semiconductors, where the VBM is typically a bonding state dominated by anion p orbitals. The antibonding nature makes the acceptor levels resonance states within the valence band (i.e., shallow acceptors), instead of being located in the band gap as deep localized states,7 which has been widely accepted for the acceptors in LHPs. An analogous argument has been applied to explain the shallowness of the donors, i.e., the conduction band minimum (CBM) is composed of an unconventional bonding state.22 However, the bonding nature of the CBM has not been clearly demonstrated.8,21 Spin–orbit coupling (SOC) has also been proposed as a key factor accounting for defect tolerance in LHPs. As the edge of the conduction band was significantly pushed down due to the strong SOC effect of Pb 6p orbitals,15,17,24,25 the defect level turns to be shallow.
Notably, the studies of defects in LHPs to date were mainly based on the defect structures relaxed using the local functional of Perdew, Burke, and Ernzerhof (PBE),26 while the defect electronic structures were evaluated using the hybrid functional including SOC in a single-point calculation. However, as indicated by Meggiolaro et al., PBE is insufficient to reproduce the accurate defect structures in LHPs.25 Based on the single-point calculations, they showed that the structures of iodine interstitials (Ii) and vacancies (VI) obtained by PBE are not energetically favorable when the hybrid functional including SOC was used. Kang also showed the importance of the hybrid functional and SOC for studying the defect structures taking VBr in CsPbBr3 as an example.19,27
It is worth noting that the defects in LHPs exhibit strong covalent features, such as I trimers and Pb dimers,12,25 which give rise to deep defect transition levels. Such features are associated with the softness of the LHP lattice. Whether these features appear in the calculations or not depends on the competition of elastic and electronic energies. Thus, the hybrid functional including SOC to obtain accurate electronic structures is necessary for obtaining correct defect structures in LHPs, which in turn provide the starting points for understanding the behaviors of defects in carrier recombination. Such calculations, however, are still limited due to the high computational cost, which renders the mechanism of defect tolerance in LHPs still inconclusive.
In this work, we studied CsPbI3 as a model system to examine the defect tolerance in LHPs. CsPbI3 exhibits strong SOC similar to MAPbI3,28–31 but it avoids the issue associated with the uncertainty in atomic structures incurred by the rotations of A-site organic cations, which in principle should be studied by molecular dynamics for sampling the configuration space. Moreover, CsPbI3 by itself is recently emerging as a competitive candidate for PV with its power conversion efficiency exceeding 20%.32–35 With a large supercell and full structure relaxation using the hybrid functional including SOC, we demonstrated that how SOC reconstructs the potential energy surface (PES) of the donor defects. Whether such reconstruction occurs or not was explained by quantifying the competition between the electronic and elastic energies associated with the defect structures. Then, regarding the puzzle why the defect level and CBM are of the same origin in terms of atomic orbitals, but respond differently to SOC, we clearly showed that the magnitude of the SOC effect highly depends on the band degeneracy and as a result the CBM is significantly pushed down by SOC, while the defect level is nearly unaffected.
Computational methods
The density functional theory (DFT) calculations employed the HSE hybrid functional.36 Following the previous studies on LHPs,22,25 we used a Hartree–Fock mixing parameter (α) of 0.43. The ion-cores were described within the projector augmented wave (PAW) method,37 as implemented in the VASP program.38 The SOC effect was included in both the electronic calculation and structure relaxation of defects. Plane-wave basis sets with kinetic energy cutoff values of 30 Ry and 17.5 Ry were used for bulk and defect calculations, respectively. A 3 × 2 × 3 k-point grid was used in bulk calculations. The lattice constants of γ-CsPbI3 (space group Pnma) were relaxed to be a = 9.008 Å, b = 12.525 Å and c = 8.632 Å. A 160-atom supercell was constructed from the unit cell using a conversion matrix of (2 0 0; 0 1 1; 0 2 2). In the defect calculations, the Γ point was used to represent the Brillouin zone. The atomic structures were relaxed until the residual forces on all atoms were smaller than 0.01 eV Å−1.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1 shows the calculated ε(0/−) and ε(+/0) for 12 intrinsic defects using the hybrid HSE functional and HSE + SOC calculations.36 The corresponding Kohn–Sham (KS) levels of the intrinsic defects are shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI.† It has been pointed out that only neutral and singly charged defects can effectively recombine photoexcited carriers.12,39 In this work, we only considered (0/−) and (+/0) transitions. The defect transition levels, ε(0/−) and ε(+/0), were calculated using ε(0/−) = ED− − E0D − EVBM and ε(+/0) = E0D − E+D − EVBM, where EqD is the total energy of the supercell containing a defect in the charge q state and EVBM is the energy of the VBM. The alignment of the band edges from the two methods is automatic to within a small error, as explained in the ESI.† It is seen that SOC pushes the CBM down by 0.88 eV, while the VBM is only slightly lifted by 0.14 eV. Clearly, HSE calculations yield deep (+/0) levels for most donor defects, while they turn to be shallow after including SOC. In contrast, the effect of SOC on the (0/−) levels is weak and only makes some of the levels (e.g., IPb) slightly shallower.
 Fig. 1  Transition levels of the intrinsic defects in CsPbI3 without (left) and with (right) inclusion of SOC. 
For donors, we found that Pbi is a deep donor as its (+/0) level is 0.37 eV even including SOC, which is different from that in MAPbI3.15,25 On the acceptor side, Ii, ICs and IPb are found to be deep due to the formation of the I trimer as illustrated previously.12,25 By calculating the formation energy of defects in CsPbI3, we found that these deep defects are difficult to form, as their formation energies at the neutral state are larger than 1.2 eV in the allowed chemical potential region (Fig. S2†). The only exception is Ii, which has a formation energy of about 1 eV within the I-rich region and may act as the main recombination center in CsPbI3. I-poor condition during synthesis could be effective for avoiding the formation of Ii.
Regarding the significant difference in the donor defects in Fig. 1 before and after switching on SOC, one may straightforwardly attribute it to the fact that the deep defects are all associated with Pb 6p orbitals, which are subject to the strongest SOC effect. In contrast, the deep levels on the acceptor side are related to the I 5p orbitals, as compared in Fig. S3 in the ESI.† While this argument might be valid, a more quantitative explanation is necessary, e.g., why Pbi behaves differently from the other deep-level defects in the HSE calculations. Therefore, to explain the shallowness of the donors, we examined the SOC effects on the defect structures. We found that SOC completely changes the PES of donors in CsPbI3. Taking VI as an example, Fig. 2a shows the PES of V0I and VI+ by HSE calculations without SOC, where the stable structures for the two charge states are denoted by Q0 and Q+, respectively. The defect structure in Fig. 2a is typical for a deep-level defect, i.e. Q0 and Q+ are far separated in the configuration space. In Q0, the two neighboring Pb atoms near the iodine vacancy get close to each other to form a Pb dimer, leading to a distorted structure (Fig. 2c) while Q+ has negligible distortion from the perfect lattice. The distortion in Q0 leads to a mid-gap KS state as shown in Fig. 2b, with its wavefunction exhibiting a strong localization feature (Fig. 2c). After including SOC, the PES of VI is totally reconstructed. Instead of being stabilized at two distinct structures, SOC yields the same structure Q+ for both neutral and 1+ charge states (Fig. 2d). The KS state of the neutral defect moves from the mid-gap to the edge of the CB (Fig. 2e) compared with the case without SOC, with its wavefunction delocalized (Fig. 2f). This comparison suggests that SOC changes the structure of the neutral defect V0I by reducing the local structural distortion. To quantify this structural change, we introduced a quantity ΔE as ΔE = EHSE(Q+) − EHSE(Q0), where EHSE(Q+) and EHSE(Q0) are the total energies obtained by single-point HSE calculations based on two different V0I structures, which are obtained with (Q+) and without SOC (Q0), respectively. The calculated ΔE of V0I is 0.19 eV, which is in accord with the observed large structure difference.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of potential energy surfaces, (b) diagram of Kohn–Sham levels, and (c) charge density of the defect states of the iodine vacancy as calculated using the HSE functional. The circles denote the Pb atoms near the iodine vacancy. (d–f) correspond to (a–c), respectively, but including SOC. 
In a similar way, we evaluated ΔE for all the neutral defects in CsPbI3 as summarized in Fig. 3. It is seen that the SOC effect is consistently weak for acceptors, as their ΔE values are all less than 20 meV, which is in accord with the negligible effect on the transition level of acceptors as in Fig. 1. In contrast, the SOC effect is strong for donors, particularly for VI, PbCs and CsI as their ΔE values are larger than 0.2 eV, suggesting substantial structure relaxation after SOC is included. Similar to VI, the SOC effect tends to reduce the local distortion in these defects. To the best of our knowledge, the study of SOC effects on the structural relaxation is still limited in the literature. Instead, it is usually assumed that SOC does not affect the PES significantly compared with its strong effect on the electronic structures. However, our results above show that the SOC effect is essential in determining the defect structures in CsPbI3.
 Fig. 3  Energy difference between the stable defect structures obtained with and without inclusion of SOC in CsPbI3. 
To further understand the strong SOC effect on the donor structures in CsPbI3, one could resort to the balance between the electronic and elastic energy. A distorted defect structure induces a mid-gap KS state as shown in V0I above, which lowers the electronic energy, while simultaneously increases the elastic energy. If the electronic energy gain is larger than the elastic energy cost, then the local distortion will be stable. Clearly, the inclusion of SOC may change this balance. To analyze this change, we attempted to quantify the electronic and elastic energy associated with the structural distortion. Taking V0I as an example, we compared two structures: one is optimized without SOC (denoted as Q0), which features a Pb-dimer, and the other is optimized with SOC (denoted as Q+), where nearly no distortion from the defect-free structure appears (Fig. 4a). The electronic energy gain by the formation of the Pb-dimer (denoted by ΔEele) with respect to the non-distorted structure (Q+) is evaluated as the KS level difference between the mid-gap state and the CBM (see the left part of Fig. 4b), as the lowest unoccupied state for Q+ is at the CBM. The elastic energy cost (denoted by ΔEela) is evaluated as ΔEela = ΔE + ΔEele, here ΔE is the total energy difference between the structures of Q0 and Q+, which is calculated as ΔE = E(Q0) − E(Q+). The energy can be evaluated with either HSE or HSE + SOC, where one of the total energies of the two structures has to be obtained by a single-point calculation without further relaxation. For HSE without SOC, ΔEele and ΔEela for V0I were calculated to be 1.25 and 0.96 eV, respectively. Because ΔEele is larger than ΔEela, the Q0 structure is stable. When SOC is included, the mid-gap state still appears in Q0 (right part of Fig. 4b), but the positions of the CBM and mid-gap state are all downshifted by SOC. Importantly, the shift magnitude of the two states is rather different: it is large for the CBM (0.88 eV), but rather small for the defect state (0.23 eV). Accordingly, ΔEele is substantially reduced to 0.6 eV, much smaller than that of 1.25 eV without SOC. We found that the elastic energy ΔEela is insensitive to SOC, i.e., the calculated ΔEele values using HSE and HSE + SOC are nearly the same, which justifies the calculation method of elastic energy that we used. As ΔEela is calculated to be 0.86 eV, which cannot be offset by ΔEele when SOC is included, the local distortion is no longer energetically favorable and thus Q+ becomes the stable structure.
 Fig. 4  (a) Stable structures of neutral iodine vacancies (V0I) obtained without (left, with a Pb-dimer) and with (right, undistorted) SOC. (b) Comparison of the positions of the CBM, VBM and defect Kohn–Sham level without and with SOC; both calculations were based on the relaxed V0I structure without SOC. The electronic energy gain ΔEele by forming the Pb-dimer was also compared. (c) Stable structures of lead interstitials (Pbi) of neutral (left, with split-interstitial) and 2+ charge state (right, less distorted). (d) Similar to (b) but calculated based on the Pbi structure. (e) The change of electronic and elastic energy induced by forming a distorted defect structure for all the intrinsic defects in CsPbI3, which were calculated without (upper) and with (lower) inclusion of SOC, respectively. The shift of the Kohn–Sham level associated with the local distortion is also shown. 
Following the approach above, we analyzed the change of the PES for all the neutral donors. We found that PbCs, CsI and PbI (see details in Fig. S4–S6†) are similar to VI, where SOC reduces the local distortion. Note that the energy difference between Q0 and Q+ is small for PbI, though the structures are different. However, Pbi is a different case, which exhibits a split-interstitial structure regardless of whether SOC is included or not (Fig. 4c). To understand this, we used the structure of Pbi2+ as Q+ because it has the least distortion from the perfect lattice (Fig. 4c). We found that SOC reduces ΔEele substantially from 3.58 to 2.06 (Fig. 4d) by comparing Q0 with Q+. But as ΔEela is only about 1.6 eV, ΔEele could still offset ΔEela even after including SOC so that the split-interstitial structure is unchanged. Fig. 4e summarizes the comparison of ΔEele and ΔEelafor all the donors calculated using HSE and HSE + SOC. It is seen that SOC significantly reduces ΔEele for all the donors. Whether the SOC changes the defect structure depends on the detailed energy competition. This analysis well explains the magnitude of structure relaxations in Fig. 2.
From the analysis above, it can be seen that the different effect of SOC on the shifting magnitude of the CBM and defect state is the source of PES reconstruction and the shallowness of the donors in CsPbI3. However, as these two states are both derived from Pb 6p orbitals, it is intriguing why they behave so differently after including SOC. The localization of defect states could be a straightforward argument, as the defect states of donors are highly localized compared to the highly dispersed state of the CBM. However, we noted that the localized defect states can also be strongly split with SOC if they are degenerate.40 Thus, the different degeneracy of the CBM and defect state should be essential here. For the ideal cubic structure of CsPbI3 as illustrated in Fig. 5a, its CBM is three-fold-degenerate, which splits into two sets of degenerate states after including SOC.28,31
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic showing the SOC effect on CB splitting and the Kohn–Sham level shift of the defect state. (b) Magnitude of CB splitting and the CBM shift by SOC versus the degeneracy of the CBM as evaluated by the splitting of p orbitals originating from the low structural symmetry. 
To understand the different shifting behaviors of the CBM and defect level and explain the DFT results, we employed a simple SOC model for an isolated atom and compared it with DFT calculations. This model simplifies the electronic states of CBM at the Γ point and defect state as atomic p orbitals. According to the perturbation Hamiltonian HSOC = l·s(1)where l (s) is the orbital (spin) angular momentum operator, the CB splitting energy is calculated to be 1.5λ (see the ESI† for details), which is 1.37 eV by taking the SOC constant λ for 0.91 eV for the neutral Pb atom.41 The corresponding energy shift (δE) of the CBM is −0.91 eV (−λ) as denoted in Fig. 5a. This estimated value agrees well with our DFT calculation (−0.88 eV) considering the slight splitting of the CBM induced by the octahedral rotations in γ-phase CsPbI3. In contrast, the defect state (e.g. VI) in the mid-gap is composed of a single spin-polarized Pb p state (pz) (Fig. 2c). Its energy shift by SOC to the first order of perturbation is zero as δE(1) = 〈pz|l·s|pz〉 = 0(2)
The shift from the second order perturbation from the inter-orbital interaction is (3)where the wavefunction |pi〉 belongs to the other p orbitals of the same Pb atom (see the ESI† for details). Since the defect state is at least 1.28 eV away from the other p orbitals (buried in conduction bands) (see Fig. 4b), δE(2) is estimated to be larger than −0.32 eV (−0.39 λ2), which also agrees well with our DFT result (−0.23 eV). The good agreement of the estimation by the simple model with the DFT results suggests that the energy shift of the defect state is resulted from a second order SOC effect due to the lack of degeneracy and is much smaller compared with the shift of the CBM.
According to the mechanism discussed above, we could obtain higher defect tolerance by increasing the degeneracy of the CBM or VBM, which as a prerequisite, should be derived from heavy ions to introduce strong SOC effects. One way of increasing the orbital degeneracy is by enhancing the symmetry of crystal structures. For CsPbI3, there are three phases reported, namely α-, γ- and δ-phases, whose crystal symmetry decreases in order. The α-phase exhibits a perfect perovskite structure with the highest symmetry. The symmetry is lowered by the octahedral rotation in the γ-phase. The δ-phase is a non-perovskite structure with edge-shared Pb–I octahedra (see details in Fig. S7†). When the crystal symmetry decreases, the degeneracy of p orbitals decreases. The CBM of the α-phase exhibits a perfect three-fold degeneracy. However the CBM of the δ-phase is composed of a Pb py orbital only, and the px and pz orbitals are 0.84 and 1.07 eV above the CBM (see details in Fig. S8†). As shown in Fig. 5b, the spin–orbit splitting of the p bands indeed weakens with decreasing orbital degeneracy. It decreases from 1.43 (α-phase) to 0.69 eV (δ-phase), and the downshift of the CBM changes from 0.96 to 0.47 eV accordingly. Thus, it is expected that α-phase CsPbI3 should exhibit higher defect tolerance than the δ-phase. This prediction needs to be verified by defect calculations with HSE + SOC in future.
Conclusion
In summary, we systematically studied the SOC effect on the intrinsic defects in γ-CsPbI3 based on the HSE functional with full structure relaxation. We found that SOC could reconstruct the PES of the donors giving rise to shallow donor levels. We explained this effect by quantifying the competition between the electronic and elastic energies, where SOC substantially reduces the electronic energy gain and thus tends to eliminate the distortion in defect structures. We further identified the source of the different SOC effects on the CBM and defect state to be their different band degeneracy. We discussed the approach to enhancing this effect, namely, a high-symmetry crystal structure could be beneficial for improving the degeneracy of band edge states by comparing the splitting magnitude of the CBMs of CsPbI3 in different phases. Our study shows the importance of SOC effects in determining defect levels and defect structures in CsPbI3, and the method proposed in this work can be used to understand the SOC effects in other materials.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Y.-Y. S. acknowledges support from National Key Research and Development Program of China under Grant No. 2019YFE0103500 and National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 11774365. C. M. acknowledges support from Natural Science Foundation of Shanghai under Grant No. 19ZR1421800 and Science Foundation for Youth Scholar of State Key Laboratory of High Performance Ceramics and Superfine Microstructures under Grant No. SKL 201804. H. W. acknowledges Stampede supercomputer resources at TACC made available by XSEDE through allocation TG-DMR180114, which is supported by NSF Grant Number ACI-1548562.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Burschka, N. Pellet, S.-J. Moon, R. Humphry-Baker, P. Gao, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nature, 2013, 499, 316–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Best research cell efficiency certified by National Renewable Energy Laboratory, https://www.nrel.gov/pv/cell-efficiency.html Search PubMed.
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, T. R. Klein, D. H. Kim, M. Yang, J. J. Berry, M. F. A. M. van Hest and K. Zhu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18017 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Kovalenko, L. Protesescu and M. I. Bodnarchuk, Science, 2017, 358, 745–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Brandt, V. Stevanović, D. S. Ginley and T. Buonassisi, MRS Commun., 2015, 5, 265–275 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Grätzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Science, 2017, 358, 739–744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4653–4658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Agiorgousis, Y.-Y. Sun, H. Zeng and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14570–14575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shi and M.-H. Du, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 90, 174103 CrossRef .
W.-J. Yin, J.-H. Yang, J. Kang, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8926–8942 RSC .
M. H. Du, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 1461–1466 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, W.-J. Yin and Y. He, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 1345–1350 CrossRef CAS .
D. Meggiolaro, S. G. Motti, E. Mosconi, A. J. Barker, J. Ball, C. Andrea Riccardo Perini, F. Deschler, A. Petrozza and F. De Angelis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 702–713 RSC .
S. G. Motti, D. Meggiolaro, S. Martani, R. Sorrentino, A. J. Barker, F. De Angelis and A. Petrozza, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901183 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2020, 4, 085405 CrossRef CAS .
K. X. Steirer, P. Schulz, G. Teeter, V. Stevanovic, M. Yang, K. Zhu and J. J. Berry, ACS Energy Lett., 2016, 1, 360–366 CrossRef CAS .
F. Brivio, A. B. Walker and A. Walsh, APL Mater., 2013, 1, 042111 CrossRef .
J. Kang and L.-W. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 489–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. E. Brandt, J. R. Poindexter, P. Gorai, R. C. Kurchin, R. L. Z. Hoye, L. Nienhaus, M. W. B. Wilson, J. A. Polizzotti, R. Sereika, R. Žaltauskas, L. C. Lee, J. L. MacManus-Driscoll, M. Bawendi, V. Stevanović and T. Buonassisi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4667–4674 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Du, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9091–9098 RSC .
D. Meggiolaro and F. De Angelis, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2206–2222 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77, 3865–3868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, J. Li and S.-H. Wei, Appl. Phys. Rev., 2021, 8, 031302 CAS .
J. Even, L. Pedesseau, J.-M. Jancu and C. Katan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2999–3005 CrossRef CAS .
F. Brivio, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and M. van Schilfgaarde, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2014, 89, 155204 CrossRef .
P. Umari, E. Mosconi and F. De Angelis, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4467 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Gao, X. Gao, T. A. Abtew, Y.-Y. Sun, S. Zhang and P. Zhang, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 93, 085202 CrossRef .
S. M. Yoon, H. Min, J. B. Kim, G. Kim, K. S. Lee and S. I. Seok, Joule, 2021, 5, 183–196 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Liu and Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2103688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. J. Guo, M. Gratzel and Y. X. Zhao, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1700841 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wang, M. I. Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Qi, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Science, 2019, 365, 591–595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Heyd, G. E. Scuseria and M. Ernzerhof, J. Chem. Phys., 2003, 118, 8207–8215 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and D. Joubert, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1999, 59, 1758–1775 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kresse and J. Furthmüller, Comput. Mater. Sci., 1996, 6, 15–50 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, W. Gao, J. Chai, C. Ming, M. Chen, H. Zeng, P. Zhang, S. Zhang and Y.-Y. Sun, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64(12), 2976–2986 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schuler, D. Y. Qiu, S. Refaely-Abramson, C. Kastl, C. T. Chen, S. Barja, R. J. Koch, D. F. Ogletree, S. Aloni, A. M. Schwartzberg, J. B. Neaton, S. G. Louie and A. Weber-Bargioni, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2019, 123, 076801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wittel and R. Manne, Theor. Chim. Acta, 1974, 33, 347–349 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta08995aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Transition levels of the intrinsic defects in CsPbI3 without (left) and with (right) inclusion of SOC.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of potential energy surfaces, (b) diagram of Kohn–Sham levels, and (c) charge density of the defect states of the iodine vacancy as calculated using the HSE functional. The circles denote the Pb atoms near the iodine vacancy. (d–f) correspond to (a–c), respectively, but including SOC.	 

 	Fig. 3  Energy difference between the stable defect structures obtained with and without inclusion of SOC in CsPbI3.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Stable structures of neutral iodine vacancies (V0I) obtained without (left, with a Pb-dimer) and with (right, undistorted) SOC. (b) Comparison of the positions of the CBM, VBM and defect Kohn–Sham level without and with SOC; both calculations were based on the relaxed V0I structure without SOC. The electronic energy gain ΔEele by forming the Pb-dimer was also compared. (c) Stable structures of lead interstitials (Pbi) of neutral (left, with split-interstitial) and 2+ charge state (right, less distorted). (d) Similar to (b) but calculated based on the Pbi structure. (e) The change of electronic and elastic energy induced by forming a distorted defect structure for all the intrinsic defects in CsPbI3, which were calculated without (upper) and with (lower) inclusion of SOC, respectively. The shift of the Kohn–Sham level associated with the local distortion is also shown.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic showing the SOC effect on CB splitting and the Kohn–Sham level shift of the defect state. (b) Magnitude of CB splitting and the CBM shift by SOC versus the degeneracy of the CBM as evaluated by the splitting of p orbitals originating from the low structural symmetry.	 
HSOC = l·s	(1)
δE(1) = 〈pz|l·s|pz〉 = 0	(2)
	(3)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1ta08995a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
