Metallic active-site engineering: a bridge between covalent triazine frameworks and high-performance catalysts  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA08840A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA08840A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2023, 11, 2070-2091Metallic active-site engineering: a bridge between covalent triazine frameworks and high-performance catalysts

        
          
            Yixia 
            Li
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Cui 
            Lai
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Shaobo 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Yukui 
            Fu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Qin
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Mengyi 
            Xu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dengsheng 
            Ma
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xuerong 
            Zhou
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Fuhang 
            Xu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hongda 
            Liu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Ling 
            Li
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Qian 
            Sun
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Neng 
            Wang
          
        
      ab
aCollege of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, Changsha, 410082, PR China. E-mail: laicui@hnu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Environmental Biology and Pollution Control, Hunan University, Ministry of Education, China
cSchool of Architecture and Art, Central South University, Changsha 410083, China. E-mail: liushaobo@csu.edu.cn
Received 
      12th November 2022
    , Accepted 12th December 2022First published on 13th December 2022AbstractCovalent triazine frameworks (CTFs) with structure designability and multifunctionalities have aroused increasing attention in conventional thermocatalysis and modern photocatalysis/electrocatalysis. However, many obstacles still exist on the road to simultaneously achieving high activity, selectivity, and operation durability when employing sole CTFs in specific catalytic applications. Among numerous modification approaches of CTFs, engineering metallic active sites (low-coordination/nano-scale/isolated metal active sites active metal oxide/sulfide sites) into as-prepared CTFs has been confirmed to be an effective strategy. In this review, state-of-the-art research and evolution history over metallic active-site engineering of CTFs in catalysis are summarized and analyzed from the perspectives of structure–function correlations. Eventually, the present technical limitations of metallic active-site engineering of CTFs and future development in practical catalytic applications are presented. This review may inspire the forthcoming exploration and in-depth perceptions towards high-efficiency and applicative CTF-based catalysts and further extension to the industrial scale.Yixia LiYixia Li received her bachelor's degree from Hunan University in 2020. She is currently a graduate student at Hunan University, under the supervision of Prof. Cui Lai. Her research interest focuses on the controlled synthesis of metal/covalent triazine framework composites for photoelectrocatalysis.Cui LaiAssociate Prof. Cui Lai joined Professor Guangming Zeng's group at Hunan University after completing her PhD degree at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering of Hunan University. She has been actively working in the environmental treatment area, particularly in the synthesis of functional nanomaterials for environmental detection and the treatment of organic pollutants, and solid waste.Shaobo LiuAssociate Prof. Shaobo Liu graduated from Hunan University in 2015. After graduation, he did postdoctoral research at the School of Metallurgy and Environment, Central South University from 2015 to 2018. He has been active in the fields of environmental remediation, landscape ecology, and in particular biochar nanomaterials for the treatment of heavy metal pollutants and water pollution.Yukui FuYukui Fu received her PhD degree from Hunan University in 2022. She is currently a Postdoctoral research associate at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering at Hunan University. Her research interest focuses on the development of advanced nanomaterials for organic catalytic transformation and photocatalytic applications.
Introduction
Catalysis, as an interdisciplinary area of physics and chemistry, counts for a great deal in chemical manufacture, energy storage and conversion, and environmental remediation.1 The critical demand in catalytic chemistry is to search for high-performance catalysts with high efficiency, chemoselectivity, and sustainability. In other words, the catalysts need to possess characteristics including high density, amount, and activity of active sites, appropriate pore structure for molecular diffusion and migration, rigid skeleton and chemical stability simultaneously. Generally, it is difficult to satisfy all these requirements in a single-component catalyst.
Considering the synergistic effect induced by the interplay among diverse components, assembling the second active species into the pristine support materials has been widely developed for high-performance and large-scale industrial catalysis. Among them, covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs), covalently bonded by chemical bonds and embodied with abundant triazine groups, have shown increasing potential as catalytic supports in thermocatalysis, photocatalysis, and electrocatalysis since their first invention in 2008.2–5 The applicability of CTFs as catalytic supports can be briefly described as follows: (a) physical and chemical stability of their inherent periodical network and triazine functionalities protect CTFs from collapsing during the reaction process; (ii) abundant heteroatom-containing linkages and groups allow CTFs to be grafted with the second active species via covalent or non-covalent interactions; (iii) a pre-designed definite structure provides convenience for understanding the structure–performance correlation.
As the second active species, metallic active sites, containing low-coordination/nano-scale/isolated metal active sites and active metal oxide/sulfide sites, are registered as good candidates to integrate with CTFs for catalytic performance improvement. Engineering metallic active sites into CTFs for catalysis has been widely investigated. One representative research of metallic active-site engineering in CTFs published in 2019 anchored coordinatively unsaturated atomic-scale NiN4 sites into porphyrin-based CTFs (NiPor-CTF) for electrocatalytic CO2 reduction reaction (CO2RR).6 Catalyzed by NiPor-CTF, the reaction energy barrier of key intermediate transformation ( to COOH*) declined, leading to a maximum faradaic efficiency of 97% at −0.9 V with a current density of 52.9 mA cm−2, which exceeded that of the pristine Ni/N-rich porous carbon and porphyrin-based CTFs by 21% and 87%, respectively. Kamiya et al. atomically dispersed Cu atoms into CTFs hybridized with carbon nanoparticles and obtained an exceptionally high onset potential in the oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) (810 mV versus the reversible hydrogen electrode; pH 7), attributed to the formation of high-ORR activity Cu–N organometallic complexes and efficient adsorption of oxygen intermediates onto CuII species.7 Yang's group engineered the electronic structure of CTFs with BiVO4 and constructed a built-in electric field to promote charge migration and separation, leading to a gratifying photocurrent density of 4.05 mA cm−2 and well-maintained stability in photocatalytic water splitting.8 In 2017, utilizing electron donation from N-enriched CTFs to Co/Ni, active metals could strongly bond with H2O and –OH and thus gained a total turnover frequency of 42.3 molH2 molCo−1 min−1 at ambient temperature in catalytic hydrolysis of ammonia borane.9
To date, some excellent reviews have reported CTF modification by using metals, metal oxide, and metal sulfide, with emphasis on the synthesis and characterization of metal-CTF composites for a wide range of applications.10–13 Another relevant review centered on the breakthroughs of metal single atoms stabilized by CTFs for heterogeneous and homogeneous catalysis.14 Therefore, discussions targeting the understanding of interactions and structure–performance correlations for metallic active-site engineering of CTFs in the area of catalysis are both necessary and important. In this review, we do not propose to be exhaustive but emphasize the latest breakthroughs in metallic active-site engineering of CTFs for high-performance catalysis. We outline the structural modification and performance enhancement in CTFs by metallic active-site engineering, including (1) modulating the electronic structure and redox microenvironment of active sites by constructing interplays between low-coordination or charged metals and π electrons of CTFs; (2) promoting light absorption, and accelerating electron and energy transfer, and surface redox reaction by introducing metallic photo-active and electro-active sites; (3) increasing the number and distribution of active sites by physical fixation and chemical anchoring by functionality-enriched CTFs. Combining the above-mentioned statements, challenges and perspectives are illustrated regarding the future development towards metallic active-site engineering of CTFs in thermocatalysis, photocatalysis, and electrocatalysis. We hope that this review will lay out a roadmap for the oriented structural design of metallic active site engineering of CTF catalysts, ultimately obtaining high-performance and large-scale catalytic application.
Engineering active metals into CTFs for catalysis
Based on the interconnected porosity, large surface area and heteroatom-containing functional groups of CTFs, it is possible to engineer active metals into CTFs, which can modulate their physiochemical properties and microelectronic structure.15,16 The intrinsic triazine linkages have strong binding strength with metal species, from NPs to single atoms to ions, with potential for many applications, including thermocatalysis,17,18 photocatalysis,19–23 and electrocatalysis.24–26 Besides triazine units on CTFs, other heteroatom-containing groups can be introduced for strong coordination and stabilization of metal ions or particles, with the aim of highly efficient performance. For instance, bipyridine groups,27 porphyrinic groups,28 imine,29 bipyrimidine,30 N-heterocyclic carbene,31 and acetylacetone32 on CTFs have been used as docking sites of various metals.
Typically, in metal/CTF (briefly called M/CTFs) catalysts, metals function as a kind of active center to transfer electron and energy, reduce the energy barrier and accelerate reaction rates in production and transformation of intermediates, and thus achieve high activity, selectivity and reusability.33 Thus, several inorganic metallic ions have been incorporated into CTFs via post-modification strategies of CTFs taking advantage of metal–ligand interactions, including using Pd/Ir@CTFs for direct hydrogenation of carbon dioxide into formic acid,34 using Ru@CTFs for solvent-free hydroformylation of 1-octene,35 and using PtNP encapsulated thioether-CTFs for nitroaromatic reduction and the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction.36 In the following part, we focus on the integration form between the metal and CTFs as well as analyzing how active metal incorporation reinforces the catalytic properties of CTFs from the viewpoint of the structure–property correlation.
Engineering active metals into CTFs for thermocatalysis
Thermocatalysis, involving coupling reactions, water–gas shift reactions and selective hydrogenation/oxidation reactions, is a significant branch of conventional catalytic chemistry.37–39 A wide range of catalysts has been applied in thermocatalysis for large-scale industrial manufacture owing to the advantages of high efficiency and applicable production. As a novel combination, M/CTFs are extensively developed in thermocatalysis, which can be classified into CTFs with low-coordination metal active sites, CTFs with nano-scale metal active sites, and CTFs with isolated metal active sites. By introducing the second metallic active species, the structural modification and performance enhancement towards the pristine CTFs can be achieved. In the following section, we will discuss the conventional thermocatalysis application from the viewpoint of the structure–property correlation.

Engineering CTFs with low-coordination metal active sites for thermocatalysis. 
Among the numerous M/CTF composites for conventional thermocatalysis, CTFs engineered with low-coordination metal active sites have been investigated most widely. With the assistance of chemical bonding or charge transfer between coordinatively unsaturated metal centers and the electron-enriched functionalities in CTFs, some positive changes will take place in the catalytic system.40–42 First, different overlap degrees of electron cloud density between them induce charged metal active centers with various valences, acting as catalytically active sites for oxidation reactions and hydrogenation reactions.29 The final effect of engineering low-coordination metal active sites into CTFs represents decreased active energy barriers, hastening reaction kinetics, and improved catalytic behavior. Thus, surveying the coordination environment, valence, the loading amount of metals as well as the functional groups, surface or pore properties of CTFs count for a great deal in scientific research. The details of present metal complexes/CTFs in thermocatalysis are presented in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the structure–performance correlation of metal complexes/CTFs in thermocatalysis




Metal complexes/CTFs
Coordination environment analogs
Valence
Metal loading
Groups of CTFs

S
BET



Pore volume or size
Applications
Performance
Ref.





a 
S
BET: surface area measured by the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) method.
b Bpy/bipy: 2,2′-bipyridyl.
c Cp*: pentamethylcyclopentadienyl.
d TOF: Turnover frequency.
e TON: Turnover number.
f acac: acetylacetonate.





[bpy-CTF(IrCp*Cl)Cl]b
(IrCp*Cl)Clc
—
4.7 wt%
Bipyridine groups
170.24 m2 g−1
0.095 cm3 g−1
CO2 hydrogenation into formate
TOFd: 5300 h−1; TONe: 5000 (120 °C, 8 MPa) (H2/CO2 = 1)

43



[bpy-CTF(MCp*Cl)Cl] (M = Ir or Rh)
(MCp*Cl)Cl
—
4.7 wt% (Ir); 1.72 wt% (Rh)
Bipyridine groups
170.24 m2 g−1; 151.8 m2 g−1
0.095 cm3 g−1 (Ir-CTF); 0.126 cm3 g−1 (Rh-CTF)
Transfer hydrogenation of carbonyl compounds
TOF: 5300 h−1

44



[bpy-CTF-Ru(acac)2]Clf
[Ru(bpy)(acac)2]Cl
∼3
1.68 wt%
Acetylacetonate
502 m2 g−1
0.29 cm3 g−1
CO2 hydrogenation into formate
TOF: 22700 h−1; TON: 21200 (120 °C, 8 MPa, H2/CO2 = 1)

45



[bpy-CTF-RuCl3]
[Ru(bpy)Cl3(CH3CN)]
∼3
2.1 wt%
Bipyridine
477 m2 g−11
0.17 cm3 g−1
CO2 hydrogenation into formate
TOF: 38800 h−1

46



Transfer hydrogenation (TH) of carbonyl compounds into alcohols in water
TOF: 44.8 h−1; TON: ∼990

47



Ru/bpyTN-30-CTF
Ru–Cl3-bpy
∼3
3.03 wt%
Bipyridine; terephthalonitrile
1251 m2 g−1
0.57 cm3 g−1; 1.81 nm
CO2 hydrogenation into formate in a trickle-bed reactor system
TON: 524000; 669.0 gform. gcat−1 day−1 of formate with a CO2 conversion of 44.8% for a gas velocity of 72 cm s−1

48



Ir3.5-NHC-CTF
[IrCp*(N^C)Cl]Cl
∼3
3.5 wt%
Triazine; pyridine; imidazolium
693 m2 g−1
0.38 cm3 g−1
CO2 hydrogenation into formate
TOF: 16000 H−1; TON: 24300

31



Ir11.3@bpy-CTF400
[IrCp*(bpy)Cl]Cl
∼3
11.3 wt%
Bipyridine
686 m2 g−1
0.38 cm3 g−1; 2.23 nm
Catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid into H2/CO2
TOF: 7930X h−1

49



Ir(I)@bpy-CTF
IrN2(BPin)3
∼3
8.26 wt%
Bipyridine
494 m2 g−1
0.27 cm3 g−1
C–H borylation of aromatic compounds
95% 1,2-dichlorobenzene was degraded in 8 h

50



V@acacCTF
VO(acac)2
∼4
1.6 wt%
Acetylacetone
900 m2 g−1
0.65 cm3 g−1
Mannich reaction
>90% in 8 h

32



IrIIICp*Cl@bipy-CTF
IrIIICp*Cl
∼3
0.2 wt%
Bipyridine
527 m2 g−1
0.27 cm3 g−1
Aerobic oxidation of benzylic alcohols
TON: 237.5

51



Cu@HATN-CTF
Cu(OAc)2-N2
1–2
5.5 wt%
Hexaazatrinaphthylene (HATN)
1351 m2 g−1
0.51 cm3 g−1
Henry reaction of aromatic aldehydes and nitromethane
TON: 63; TOF: 22.3 h−1

52



Pt-CTF

η

2
-(2,2′-bipyrimidyl)dichloroplatinum(II) (Pt(bpym)Cl2)
∼2
15 wt%
Bipyrimidine groups
1667 m2 g−1
0.75 cm3 g−1
Selective oxidation of methane in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid
TOF = 174 h−1

30



DCP-CTF@Pd-MC
Pd(OAc)2-N3
∼2
5 mol%
Pyridine
1216 m2 g−1
0.5–3 nm
Styrene transformation into benzaldehyde
>95% conversion; recycled at least 5 times

53



Cp*Ir@CTF
[Cp*Ir(bpy)Cl]Cl
∼3
3.22 wt%
Bipyridine
395 m2 g−1
0.13 cm3 g−1

N-methylation of amines with methanol
Nearly > 80% yield; reused > 6 runs

54





Yoon's group carried out extensive research studies on low-coordination metals and CTFs, especially for transfer hydrogenation of organic compounds. One representative work inserted (MCp*Cl)Cl (M = Ir or Rh) moieties into bipyridine-functionalized CTFs [bpy-CTF(MCp*Cl)Cl].44 Both [bpy-CTF(IrCp*Cl)Cl] and [bpy-CTF(RhCp*Cl)Cl] exhibited an extremely fast catalytic rate and good recyclability towards the transfer hydrogenation of carbonyl compounds with formic acid/sodium formate as the hydrogen source. The coordination environment of Ir and Rh species was considered as homogeneous [bpyMCp*Cl]Cl counterparts and the transfer hydrogenation reaction of [bpy-CTF(MCp*Cl)Cl] followed the same mechanism as that of [bpyMCp*Cl]Cl. However, the hydrogenation reaction proceeded faster over Rh-complexes than over Ir-complexes, owing to more stably formed Ir-hydride intermediates which are difficult to hydrogenate. For the reverse dehydrogenation reaction of formic acid, it was observed that Ru(III) implanted onto bpy-CTF behaved better than Ir(III)@bpy-CTF complexes as expected.49 Meanwhile, [bpy-CTF(IrCp*Cl)Cl] achieved unprecedented CO2 conversion efficiency with a TOF value of 5300 h−1 to produce formate.43 Ru-coordinated bpy-CTF has been validated to very efficiently catalyze CO2 hydrogenation into formate in a fixed bed reactor, exhibiting a remarkable productivity of 669.0 gform. gcat−1 day−1 with 44.8% CO2 transformation for a gas velocity of ∼72 cm s−1.48 Another research study by the group outlined how the incorporation of electron-contributing N-Heterocyclic Carbene (NHC) ligands into bpy-CTF could promote an additional electron transfer pathway from the carbene ligand to Ir centers and thus improve CO2 conversion efficiency and selectivity.31 Despite the high CO2 conversion efficiency of [bpy-CTF(MCp*Cl)Cl], one serious limitation was that the competitive proton transfer pathway towards the bipyridine-N sites of bpy-CTFs during H2 hydrolysis would destruct the interaction between metal centers and bipyridine-functionalized CTFs, thus causing leaching of metal elements.
In practical applications, the decomposition or leaching of functional sites in CTFs occurs because of their high reaction activity, which will shorten the lifetime of M/CTF catalysts. One promising protocol is coordinating metals with the functional sites in CTFs. The introduction of ligands into the metal coordination sphere can make the reaction follow the desirable pathways and reduce the side reactions. Taking hydrogenation as an illustration, the protons are prone to migrating into N-containing sites in CTFs, leading to CTF leaching. Acac ligands, a typical oxyanionic ligand, were incorporated into the coordination spheres of bipyridine-modified CTFs to form [bpy-CTF-Ru(acac)2]Cl.45 Acac ligands in [bpy-CTF-Ru(acac)2]Cl could preferentially abstract protons from H2 with the positive alternation of coordination mode, from bidentate to monodentate, leading to rapid formation of Ru-hydride intermediates (Fig. 1A). As the key rate-determining step, the hydrolysis of H2, namely, the Ru–H bond formation would be promoted after incorporating acac ligands. Consequently, [bpy-CTF-Ru(acac)2]Cl exhibited a TOF value nearly 4.3 times that of (27300 h−1vs. 5300 h−1) the analogs [bpy-CTF(RuCp*Cl)Cl], showing wider application potential in the field of CO2 conversion hydrogenation. In this research study, incorporating oxyanionic ligands into the Ru coordination sphere suppressed the proton migration into the ligated bipyridine sites and promoted the desirable hydrolysis of H2. This study provides a useful direction to resolve the catalyst leaching issues associated with the coordination interactions between metal complexes and CTFs.
 Fig. 1  (A) The reaction mechanism diagram over [bpy-CTF-Ru(acac)2]Cl for CO2 conversion into formate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (B) Evolution of the Ir coordination environment after adding B2Pin2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Later on, this group inserted RuCl3·xH2O containing Ru(III) coordination spheres into the same bpy-CTF (denoted as [bpy-CTF-RuCl3]) and obtained higher reactivity, selectivity and reusability of Ru-coordinated catalysts for further scale-up industrialization.46 From a different mechanistic perspective, the HCO3− generated by CO2 and H2O would replace the Ru-bound Cl anions and yield HCO3− chelated Ru spheres, with subsequent Ru–H formation and CO2 attack. When applying [bpy-CTF-RuCl3] into aqueous-phase transfer hydrogenation of carbonyl compounds, a pH-dependent activity was observed.47 Ru(III) coordination spheres as reaction centers accounted for the chelation of carbonyl compounds and the reducing agent (HCOONa), heading for Ru-hydride intermediate formation and transfer hydrogenation. In a pH range from 3.0 to 5.0, [bpy-CTF-RuCl3] displayed almost no reactivity because HCOONa would combine with H+ to generate nonreactive formic acid. On increasing the pH further, hydrogenation proceeded rapidly owing to active forms of formate. At the critical values of pH 7.0, Ru centers would weakly integrate with H2O molecules and dissociate simultaneously for coordination with substrates and formate. Further increasing the pH would cause a reactivity decline ascribed to competitive adsorption of OH−.
Van Der et al. post-metalated Ir(I) complexes onto bpy-CTF and tested their catalytic performance in C–H borylation of aromatic compounds.50 Combining experimental and theoretical details, coordination structure changes before and after reaction were identified and Ir(III) was confirmed to be a reaction active center (Fig. 1B). Initially, the mostly stable configuration should be Ir(I) coordinatively connected with two N atoms of bipyridine groups, methoxy anions and 1,5-cyclooctadiene moieties. After adding a boron source (B2Pin2), the ligands except for two pyridinic N atoms were replaced by three BPin species to form active Ir(III) complexes for C–H borylation. This kind of redox state alternation of coordinative metallic centers can occur during the reaction. Furthermore, a transition of NiII-intermediates to NiI-intermediates over a CTF was observed as catalytic activity start-up signals in the visible-light-induced dual-catalytic sulfur-carbon cross-coupling reaction, thus achieving superior photoactivity to that of related homogeneous catalysts.55
The synergistic effect between metal centers and CTF supports has been illustrated in many publications.56–58 One representative example reported in 2017 introduced copper iodide (CuI) into a triazine-phosphite porous organic polymer (TP-POP).59 Active Cu(I) species coordinatively anchored onto the P,N-ligation sites of TP-POP led to efficient heterogeneous C–O bond formation of phenolic substrates and aryl halides. Van Der's group integrated the molecular activation effect of bipyridine-based CTFs (bipy-CTF) and electron transmitting effect of Ir centers and accomplished aerobic oxidation of benzyl alcohols.51 The molecular oxygen tended to adsorb onto the graphic N sites of a bipy-CTF to generate superoxide radicals for alcohol oxidation. During this process, intermediate conversion occured over Ir center accompanied with the IrI/IrIII cycle.
The correlation of metal oxidation sites and reaction performance can be reflected in some oxidation reactions, such as glycerol oxidation.60 Even for the same metal, its active oxidation states can be different in a specific reaction. Also, the active metal states can be derived from the very start of adding as-prepared metal/CTF materials or the redox cycles between differently charged metals. For example, Thomas's group developed incipient wetness impregnation (IMP) and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) protected-sol approaches to synthesize PdIMP/CTF and PdPVA/CTF.60 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis implied that the proportion of Pd2+ species was 100% and 35% in PdIMP/CTF and PdPVA/CTF, respectively. Given that the active species was Pd0 in glycerol oxidation, the selectivity of ideal C3 products and initial rate of PdIMP/CTF were rather lower than those of PdPVA/CTF. However, PdHx species in PdIMP/CTF reacted with molecular oxygen to produce Pd0 and H2O2, which were rewarding for C–C cleavage. Consequently, nearly 100% glycerol conversion was achieved over PdIMP/CTF, almost the same as that over PdPVA/CTF. This research study provides a nice example about how oxidation states of metals affect activity and selectivity in an oxidation reaction.


Engineering CTFs with nano-scale metal active sites for thermocatalysis. 
The host–guest catalysis chemistry of metal nanoparticle-based composites have been well reviewed and widely summarized in recent years.61–66 Therefore, the focus of this part lay on the impacting factors of thermocatalysis performances, ranging from the respective physical or chemical features of metal nanoparticles (M NPs) and CTFs to the interaction between M NPs and CTFs, including the heteroatom content in CTFs, the M NP sizes and content, and the M NP–CTF interactions. The impact of the heteroatom content in CTFs on the reaction performance of M NPs/CTFs can be considered from two aspects: (i) impact on the physical properties of metals: CTFs with a higher heteroatom content will bind metals more strongly, downsizing metal species; (ii) impact on the chemical properties of metals: CTFs with a higher heteroatom content will change the oxidation state of metal centers. Besides, the metal size can impart a great influence on the catalytic activity of M NPs through changing the combination forms and strength of CTFs. Mondal and co-workers employed two different methods to encapsulate palladium NPs with different sizes (3 nm & 8 nm) into two novel CTFs (TRIA-1/2) to fabricate Pd@TRIA-1/2.67 Consequently, smaller-sized Pd0 in Pd@TRIA-1 interacted strongly with oxygen atoms of allyloxy groups while larger-sized Pd0 with Pd@TRIA-2 was more inclined to coordinate with lone pair electrons of pyridine nitrogen in the triazine units. On testing by stilbene hydrogenation, the negative correlation between the Pd0 size and catalytic efficiency was described using two aspects: (i) stilbene and intermediates (bibenzyl) bonded with smaller Pd NPs, which made the desorption of products more difficult and decreased the overall productivity; (ii) both steps of hydrogenation exhibited a lower activation barrier over smaller-sized Pd0 and showed a higher hydrogenation rate (Fig. 2A). Palkovits et al. verified these two effects and emphasized that a CTF enriched by hetero-N elements can reduce the Ru oxidation state from +2 to 0 by electron donation. Applying selective conversion of xylitol to glycols, this change would bring about the decrease of adsorption energy and ease of product desorption, thus suppressing the side reaction (namely xylitol decarbonylation).68
 Fig. 2  (A) Energy profile for stilbene hydrogenation on Pd0 in Pd@TRIA-1 and Pd@TRIA-2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (B) A DMol3 (DFT-D corrected) energy and geometry optimization of the Pd-trzn-COF. Several starting models with different Pd positions were attempted and they yielded two low energy configurations. (a) Interaction view of Pd and triazine units. (b) Interplay configuration of Pd and Schiff bonds with minimized energy (Pd: green; O: red; N: blue; C: grey and H: white). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group. 
The impact trend of the metal content on the catalytic rate could be concluded as follows: below a certain threshold, the catalytic efficiency increased on enhancing the metal loading capacity; but after saturation of metallic sites, further increasing the metal content would cause a decrease of catalytic activity.69,70 An excessive loading amount of metals would act as re-combination centers of electron–holes pairs and hold back electron migration or energy transmission,71 or simply block the CTF channels and decrease the accessibility of active sites. Both of the effects cause a negative influence on the reaction performances.
The functionalities on CTFs can stabilize the M NPs through electron donor–acceptor interactions, coordination interactions and so on. This type of metal–ligand interaction will enhance the catalytic performances from the kinetic and thermodynamic perspectives. Mullangi et al. loaded Pd NPs onto amphiphilic triazine-based COFs to fabricate a Pd-trzn-COF and applied it to multi-fold Heck and C–C coupling as well as CO oxidation.72 Preliminary modeling analysis suggested that –CN– bonds and little cracks around triazinyl groups and ether units interacted with Pd0, leading to Pd-trzn-COF composite formation (Fig. 2B). As a consequence, the Pd-trzn-COF obtained highly selective synthesis and separation of target products in the multi-fold Heck coupling reaction and exhibited outstanding sintering resistance and stability in industrial CO oxidation. Using a typical impregnation-reduction approach, Pd0 was supported on CTF-1 to fabricate Pd/CTF-1 hybrids and showcased intriguing catalytic performances towards N-heterocyclic substrate hydrogenation, including N-methylpyrrole and 1,10-phenanthroline.73 Close integration with Pd0 arose from anchoring and stabilization of abundant sp2-hybridized N atoms with lone electron pairs in CTF-1. Also, Pd was stabilized by the unsaturated nitrogen groups at the edges of the support or triazine-enriched planes. Besides the good dispersity of Pd on CTF-1, electron transfer from N of CTF-1 to Pd and correlated electron density around Pd centers contributed jointly to superior hydrogenation properties of Pd/CTF-1 relative to those of Pd supported on active carbons. Splitting activation of N-heterocyclic substrates and desorption of hydrogenated products became easier on electron-rich Pd sites. This investigation elaborated the enhanced mechanism of M/CTF composites from the perspective of metal-CTF interaction again. An analogous mechanism explanation was given for Ru/CTF-1 over ammonia decomposition,74 Ag@TATF-COM for nitroaromatics hydrogenation,75 Ir-TPA-POP for aldehyde hydrogenation,76 Pd-TA-COF for dehydrogenation of formic acid,77 and Pt/Pd NPs@COF for the Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction.36 However, interaction between metal centers and CTFs as well as an enhanced mechanism in one specific reaction remain unclear, which inspires further research interest. More mechanistic investigations are still needed to understand the structure-property correlation of M/CTF hybrids.


Engineering CTFs with isolated metal active sites for thermocatalysis. 
Engineering CTFs with isolated metal active sites has been verified as an effective strategy to improve thermocatalytic performance. Isolated metal active sites can be obtained by steric separation of CTF pores or chemical fixation of functional groups on CTFs. The resulting ultrafine atomic dispersion of metal active sites and metal–ligand covalent or non-covalent interactions collectively improve the electronic features and catalytic properties of CTFs. Compared to photocatalysis and electrocatalysis, CTFs implanted with metal single atoms are less involved but application-valuable in thermocatalysis.78 By implanting metal single atoms into CTFs, the process of intermediate evolution and conversion happens more smoothly and the energy barrier will decrease because of the electron transfer and orbital overlaps between the d electrons of metals and the molecular orbitals of substrates.79–82 As a representative work, Liang's group applied triazine COF supported Pd single atoms (Pd1/trzn-COF) in CO oxidation and illustrated the detailed roles of Pd single atoms and the trzn-COF as well as the corporative catalysis based on their chemical interactions.14 The d–π interactions between Pd d orbitals and π electron centers in the trzn-COF (including sp2 phenyl C atoms and imine (CN linker) N and O atoms) with electronegativity were ensured. The authors first studied the adsorption sites of Pd single atoms onto the trzn-COF, by comparing the Pd binding energy on nine different positions of CTFs, corresponding to nine optimized structures (W1 to W9) (Fig. 3A). As a conclusion, Pd single atoms favorably adsorb bridge sites of C–C bonds in phenyl rings, constructing d–π interactions. The projected density of states (PDOS) of CO, O2, and CO2 adsorbed onto Pd atoms are illustrated in Fig. 3B; consequently, relatively stronger CO adsorption on the Pd1/trzn-COF caused Pd–C bond generation and adsorbed CO and O2 species enabled the transfer transfer of electrons to Pd single atoms. This type of electron transfer impacted the intermediate varieties in CO oxidation. Furthermore, as the rate-determining step, O–O bond scission took place in an easier manner owing to the reduced energy barrier on Pd1/trzn-COF. The integrated thermocatalyst of metal single atoms and CTFs hold great promise for high-efficiency catalysis and vast space exists in the technical and mechanistic insights towards this field.
 Fig. 3  (A) The optimized geometry of Pd1/trzn-COF with different adsorption sites of Pd SAs (Sn, Ln and Wn; n = 1, 2, and 3). The letters of S, L and W refer to the surface, interlayer and wall of the straight channel in the c-direction of Pd1/trzn-COF. The Pd SAs are marked with fluorescent green balls. (B) The PDOS of CO, O2 and CO2 adsorbed on Pd1/trzn-COF, where blue represents the states of Pd 4d while green and red represent non-adsorbed and adsorbed Pd1/trzn-COF. The Fermi level is plotted by using a green short-dash line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2021, Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany. 

Engineering active metals into CTFs for photocatalysis
Photocatalysis, as a critical subclass of conversion and storage of solar energy, has gained huge popularity in the scientific fraternity.83–85 In general, the complete photocatalysis procedure contains the absorption of solar light, production of electrons and holes, and separation of charge carriers to execute the subsequent surface redox reactions.86–88 CTFs with light absorption structural units can capture solar light, usually containing ultra-violet light and partially visible light, and generate photo-oxidative holes and photo-reductive electrons to complete the redox reaction cycles.89,90 The drawbacks of most CTFs in photocatalysis are represented by wide band gaps, insufficient photoactivity, and incomplete electron–hole separation. Incorporating metals into CTFs can accelerate the transfer rate of electrons and energy, promoting the electron–hole separation efficiency and reducing the reaction barriers. Therefore, engineering active metals into CTFs is beneficial for photocatalysis performance enhancement of M/CTF synergistic catalysis systems. In this section, the roles of metal centers and CTF supports and their synergistic effects on photocatalytic HER, N2 fixation, and CO2RR are emphasized. The details of present active metals engineering CTFs in photocatalysis are presented in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of the structure–performance correlation of active metals engineering CTFs in photocatalysis




M/CTFs
Structure or Geometry of CTFs
Groups of CTFs
Surface properties
Metal size – content
Metal binding sites
Reaction active sites
Applications
Performance
Ref.




Au/TTR-COF
Sea cucumber-like morphology
Thioether
138 m2 g−1; 2.95 nm
3.4 nm
Au–S bonds
Thioether (main); Au
HER
430 μmol g−1 h−1

91



Bpzn-COP
Sheet-like morphology
Bipyridine
354 m2 g−1; ∼1.3–1.6 nm
3–4 nm; 5.6 wt%
Zn coordinated with bipyridine
Zn
HER
162 μmol g−1 h−1

69



Pt@CTF-HC6
—
Pyridine
602 m2 g−1; 1.2–1.4 nm
2.9 nm; 1 wt%
Pd coordinated with pyridinic nitrogen
Pd
HER
330.95 μmol g−1 h−1

70



Pt-SACs/CTF
2D nanosheets
Triazine
—
0.343 nm; 1.02 wt%
Pt–N3 coordination bonds (partially positively charged Pt1.45+)
Single-atom Pt–N3 sites
N2 fixation
171.40 μmol g−1 h−1

92



Ni(OH)2-CTF-1
Layered nanostructure
Benzene; triazine
7.1 m2 g−1; 33.1 nm
0.5 wt%
Ni2+
Reduced Ni atoms or clusters
CO2RR
38.66 μmol g−1 h−1

93





The mostly reported feature of M/CTF composites in photocatalysis was the electron excitation from the HOMO to the LUMO of light-responsive CTFs and subsequent electron injection to metal active sites, which separated photogenerated electron–holes and promoted the photoreduction process, including the CO2RR,93,94 the HER,69,91 and N2 fixation.92 Besides electron transfer, the significance of metal–CTF interaction could also be reflected by the reduced size dimension of metal particles and uniformly dispersed metals.69 For example, Pd@CTF-HC6 exhibited a smaller metal size (2.9 nm vs. 4.3 nm) and much faster HER rate than Pt@CTF-HC6, owing to stronger interactions between pyridinic nitrogen and Pd particles.70 Huang's group anchored Pt single-atom catalysts onto CTFs (Pt-SACs/CTF) and found that photocatalytic N2 fixation was energetically favorable over the single-atom Pt–N3 sites using DFT calculations.92
On the so-called metal active sites engineered within CTFs, the breaking and generation of chemical bonds take place constantly. Nevertheless, metals with different valence electrons exhibit distinct electronic properties and catalytic activity, thus showing great difference in the aspects of changing the free energy, the activation energy during the catalytic process, and the kinetic activity of the catalysts. On application in different reaction systems, the catalytically active forms of metals can be different, depending on the concrete reaction mechanism in a certain specific reaction. Moreover, the metal active species can achieve regeneration through the redox cycles between metals with different valence electrons, prompting the catalytic reaction to proceed continuously. In another investigation, Ni atoms or clusters were determined to be active sites in photocatalytic CO2RR by Ni(OH)2 reduction.93 The group supported Ni(OH)2 on CTF-1 (denoted as Ni(OH)2-CTF-1) and found that electron transition from CTF-1 to Ni2+ led to a Ni atom or cluster with more active sites, which conduced to following CO2 photoreduction. Moreover, the CO2RR rates of Ni(OH)2-CTF-1 exceeded 33 times in the photocatalytic CO2RR than that of the original CTF-1, suggesting the imporatnt role of active Ni species. Unlike the above study, the active form of iron trivalent ions (Fe3+) doped onto CTF-1 was referred to as “electron delay” in photocatalytic HER.71 In detail, Fe3+ accepted electrons or holes to convert into Fe2+ or Fe4+, while the half-filled d orbitals of Fe3+ as the most stable existing form of iron would regenerate. The fast iron-based electron cycles contributed to the enormous HER activity of 1460 μmol h−1 g−1, 28-fold greater than that of pristine CTF-1.
CTFs with functional groups can be applied to coordinate with metals in a practical water body and obtain solar energy conversion. Specially, Yu's group synthesized a thioether-functionalized covalent organic framework (TTR-COF) and successfully produced H2 from sea water.91 A TTR-COF with a suitable energy band structure and enriched thioether groups which can chelate with Au ions in sea water led to good HER performance. Interestingly, the existence of Mg2+ in sea water would suppress HER efficiency and induce side reactions because of competitive adsorption with Au. For more details, the authors used a TTR-COF to coordinate with Mg2+ to produce a Mg-TTR-COF and compared their DOS and ESP images. An enlarged band gap and dispersed DOS peaks near the Fermi energy level of the Mg-TTR-COF indicated a more difficult electron transition from the VB to the CB of the Mg-TTR-COF and worse electron–hole separation (Fig. 4A). Furthermore, negative charge positions and planar conjugated morphology of the TTR-COF explained the highly efficient HER (Fig. 4B).
 Fig. 4  (A) Band structure (left) and the corresponding total DOS and partial DOS (right). (B) ESP map of the TTR-COF and Mg-TTR-COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Engineering active metals into CTFs for electrocatalysis
Electrocatalysis is registered as an effective promoting strategy to accelerate the charge transfer at the interface of the electrode and electrolyte, holding great promise in sustainable and environmentally begin energy conversion and storage.95–98 Among the many functional materials in the electrocatalysis field, M/CTF composites showed an eye-catching performance no matter the reactivity, selectivity, and sustainability.99–101 Typically, atomically dispersed or low-coordination metallic centers usually serve as the electrocatalytically active sites for catalytic transformation of substrates or intermediates,102–105 whereas the heteroatom-containing functional groups as metal-anchoring sites influence the chemical states of metals and reaction performance of M/CTFs. This section emphasizes the important functions of metals and the issue of how CTFs alter the metal activity and electrocatalytic performances of M/CTFs. The present achievements of active metal engineering of CTFs in electrocatalysis are illustrated in Table 3.
Table 3 Summary of the structure–performance correlation of active metal engineering of CTFs in electrocatalysis




M/CTFs
Groups of CTFs
Surface properties
Metal size; dispersity; content
Metal binding sites
Reaction active sites
Applications
Performance
Ref.




CTF-Cu-4.8%
Bipyridine
488 m2 g−1; 1.5–2.2 nm
0.2 nm; atomically dispersed; 4.8 wt%
Tetracoordinated Cu–N2Cl2 coordination bonds
Low-coordination sites of confined Cu clusters
CO2RR
FE of 30.6% for C2H4 and FE of 72.0% for CH4

106



Co-CTF/KB
Pyridine
734.2 m2 g−1; 0.71 cm3 g−1
<1 nm; atomically dispersed; 4 wt%
Co–N–C
Single-atomic Co sites
OER/ORR
Half-wave potential (E1/2 = 0.830 V); limiting current density (6.14 mA cm−2)

101



Ag/Ag2O@MCOF(Co)
Bipyridine
145.76 m2 g−1; 28.07 nm
5–15 nm
Co coordinated with pyridinic N and Ag2O
Co–N; Co–O
OER/ORR
Maximum peak power density (170.8 mW cm−2) and a specific discharge capacity of 829 mA h g−1

107



Ru@COF-1
Triazine
972 m2 g−1; 1.70 nm
Ru ion
Tetracoordinated Ru–N2Cl2 coordination bonds
Ru2+ complexes
HER
Overpotential of 200 mV at 10 mA cm−2

108



NiPor-CTF
Triazine; porphyrin
815 m2 g−1; 0.2–8 nm; (micropores–mesopores)
0.2 nm; 2.40 wt%; atomically dispersed
Ni–N bonds
NiN4 centers
CO2RR
Maximum faradaic efficiency of 97% at −0.9 V with a current density of 52.9 mA cm−2

6



Ru-CTF
Triazine; bipyridine
888 m2 g−1; micropores
<0.5 nm; 0.43 atom%; individually isolated
Ru–N3Cl3
RuIVO or RuVO
Oxidation of gaseous ethylbenzene to acetophenone
0.78 μmol h−1 for acetophenone production

109



Pt-CTF/CP
Triazine
555 m2 g−1; 0.79 cm3 g−1
<0.5 nm; 1.0 atom%; individually isolated
Pt–N2Cl2
Pt–N; Pt–Cl
ORR



110



Cu-CTF/CPs
Triazine
491 m2 g−1; 1–2 nm and 2.5–4 nm
<1 nm; atomically dispersed
Coordinatively unsaturated Cu–N2
Cu–N bonds
ORR
Onset potential of 800 mV (RHE; pH 7)

7



Pt-CTF
Triazine
973 m2 g−1; 2.55 cm3 g−1
<1 nm; 2.8 wt%; atomically dispersed


Pt–N; Pt–Cl
HOR and ORR in a PEFC
High oxygen tolerance identical to that of 20 wt% Pt/C

111



Cu-CTF
Triazine
—
—
—
—
NRR
Onset potential of −50 mV versus RHE; FE for N2O formation: 18% at −200 mV versus RHE

112



M-CTF (M = Co, Ni, Cu)
Triazine
—
—
—
—
CO2RR
90% at 0.8 V versus RHE during CO formation




Ru-CTF
Triazine


<0.5 nm; 0.4 atom%; atomically dispersed
Ru(tptz)Cl3 (tptz = 2,4,6-tris(2-pyridyl)-s-triazine)
RuO species
Selective alcohol oxidation in aqueous electrolytes
Combined FE for benzoic acid and benzaldehyde reached 95%

113



Cu-bpy-COF
Bipyridine
1270 m2 g−1; 1–1.2–2.1 nm
1.1 atom%; atomically dispersed
Di-coordinated Cu–N2 structure
Cu(II)/Cu(I)
Photoelectrochemical ORR
Onset potential of 0.15 V vs. Ag/AgCl

114





In 2014, metal single atom modified CTFs for electrocatalytic application were first reported. Hashimoto and Kamiya's group combined CTFs with highly conductive carbon nanoparticles (CPs) and isolated Pt atoms to form Pt-CTF/CP composites.110 Pt-CTF/CP showcased intriguing electrocatalytic ORR activity with strong tolerance towards methane. Later in 2018, this group modified a CTF with three transition metals (Co, Ni or Cu) and investigated the impact of coordination numbers and species of metals on the electrochemical CO2RR performance.115 Metal centers with lower coordination numbers held more accessible d-orbitals and steric hindrance, thus possessing higher CO adsorption energy and binding with CO more strongly. Among three transition metal engineered CTFs, the CO2RR performance followed the order of Co-CTFs < Ni-CTFs < Cu-CTFs over the potential range from −0.8 V to −1.1 V. The Cu center incorporation had no apparent effect on the FE of the CO2RR, while Ni with more d-electrons (catalytically active centers) in 3d orbitals than Co, improved CO2RR performance more significantly, reflected by the higher Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) during COOH* generation. As an extensive research, Kamiya's group studied the impacts of metal species, coordination numbers, as well as intermediate adsorption on ORR performance.116 They anchored five 3d metals (Mn, Fe, Co, Ni, and Cu) onto CTFs to obtain various metal centers with different coordination numbers. The positive correlation between coordination numbers of transition metals and intermediate adsorption energy was the same as that in the CO2RR (Fig. 5). Moreover, as the number of 3d-electrons of transition metals increased (Mn < Fe < Co < Ni < Cu), adsorption energy of O atoms (ΔEO), OH (ΔEOH), and OOH (ΔEOOH) linearly increased (i.e., the adsorption weakened).
 Fig. 5  (A) Adsorption energy profiles of ORR intermediates to metal centers ((A) O, (B) OH, and (C) OOH). CN means coordination number. The colored dotted lines reflect the changing tendency of the adsorption energies of ORR intermediates as guide lines. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
In 2019, Lu and co-workers prepared a Ni porphyrin-based covalent triazine framework (NiPor-CTF) with atomical NiN4 sites.6 A NiPor-CTF exhibited a highly efficient electrochemical CO2RR, with the maximum faradaic efficiency of 97% at −0.9 V with a current density of 52.9 mA cm−2. The adsorption configuration of three key intermediates (, COOH*, and CO*) on Ni-coordinated centers are shown in Fig. 6A. According to the calculated Gibbs free energy, it was ensured that the kinetic energy barriers of the rate-limiting step after incorporating NiN4 active sites, namely, the  transition to COOH*, were reduced remarkably (Fig. 6B). The basic triazine moieties on the NiPor-CTF simultaneously promoted high CO2 capture capability (2.4 mmol g−1 at 298 K) for CO2 activation and high selectivity in the electrochemical CO2RR.
 Fig. 6  (A) Three models of NiPor-CTF with , COOH*, and CO*, respectively. (B) Gibbs free energy profile for the CO2RR on the three models (pH = 7.2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and sons. 
In 2020, Ma et al. synthesized CTFs with bipyridine groups to anchor Cu species for the electrochemical CO2RR.106 Pyridinic N on bipyridine groups was confirmed to be coordinated sites for Cu aggregation rather than triazine N, which brought about a decrease of charge density of pyridinic N sites. Low-coordination Cu sites (Cu–N2Cl2) acted as catalytic active sites for the CO2RR, leading to a maximum faradaic efficiency (FE) 30.6% for C2H4 at −1.47 V versus the standard hydrogen electrode (vs. SHE) and an FE of 72.0% for CH4 at −1.55 V vs. SHE.
The highly active coordinated metal sites can also promote the HER efficiency of CTF catalysts by enhancing the adsorption and activation of hydrogen atoms onto metallic sites. Ru–N2Cl2 was considered to be active sites of Ru anchored COF-1 (Ru@COF-1) in the electrocatalytic HER.108 The free energy of atomic hydrogen adsorption (ΔGH*) (−0.44 eV or −0.49 eV) and adsorption energies of a hydrogen atom (ΔEH*) (−0.68 eV or −0.73 eV) on the fcc and hcp sites of the Ru(002) surface were known, indicating strong electrostatic interaction between the H atom and electronegatively charged Ru (Fig. 7B–F). Furthermore, via DFT calculations, three Ru coordination models were shown, including a di-coordinated Ru–N2 structure, hexacoordinated Ru–N2C4 structure, and tetracoordinated Ru–N2Cl2 structure (Fig. 7A). As a result, Ru–N2Cl2 was verified to be the most stable and reasonable structure for redistributing charge with COF-1 and catalyzing the HER. In addition, the protonation of triazine N atoms during the HER process enhanced the conductivity of Ru@COF-1, thus contributing to an overpotential of 200 mV at 10 mA cm−2.
 Fig. 7  (A) Structures of model-1, model-2, and model-3. (B) Calculated ΔGH* of H2 adsorption; H2 adsorption geometries of (C) model-1, (D) model-2, and (E) model-3; (F) charge density distinction in model-3. Negative and positive iso-surfaces are colored with green and blue, separately. The iso-surface is calculated to be 0.02 e bohr−3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2022, John Wiley and sons. 
In 2021, Zhang's group combined Ag/Ag2O metal/oxide nanohybrids with Co-containing metallo-covalent organic frameworks (denoted as Ag/Ag2O@MCOF(Co)) and applied Ag/Ag2O@MCOF(Co) in rechargeable Zn–air batteries.107 MCOF(Co) displayed a graphene-like structure, bearing some edge defects as electron transfer centers. The main OER/ORR active centers were on the Co–O and Co–N coordination sites formed by unsaturated Co sites and Ag2O/bipyridine groups in an MCOF. Active Co–N sites enabled a decrease in oxygen adsorption energy and extension of the O–O bond length, significantly affecting the initial O2 activation in the ORR. Furthermore, Ag/Ag2O pairs could not only reduce the binding energy of intermediates and water moieties but also improve the conductivity properties of MCOF(Co) to promote electron transfer. The increased electrochemical active surface area (ECSA) and extra empty d-band orbital of Ag for electron filling endowed Ag/Ag2O@MCOF(Co) with incredible peak power density (170.8 mW cm−2) and a huge specific discharge capacity of 829 mA h g−1. Another group supported Co single atoms onto CTFs and further combined them with Ketjen Black (KB) to form Co-CTF/KB.101 The as-prepared Co-CTF/KB exhibited superior electrochemical performance and strong methanol resistance in the ORR, because OH* intermediates hydrogenated faster over single-atomic Co–N–C active sites.
Differently in Park's research, pyridine and triazine moieties on a pyridine-linked triazine covalent organic framework (PTCOF) functioned as catalytically centers for bifunctional OER and ORR in Zn–air batteries.117 Co NPs were incorporated to modulate the p-band centers of the pristine PTCOF by charge donation. Consequently, the electron density of the carbon skeleton was enhanced and the position of the p-band centers downshifted to a negative value (from −4.0 eV to −6.91 eV) (Fig. 8A). The more negatively charged p-band center of carbon sites exhibited an appropriate OH* binding strength, thus accelerating OH*-related OER/ORR processes (Fig. 8B).
 Fig. 8  (A) The polarization curves of the PTCOF and CoNP-PTCOF for the ORR/OER in O2-saturated KOH solution. The inset shows the reversibility of the ORR and OER catalysis, ΔE = (overpotential at 10 mA cm−2) − E1/2 (half-wave potential). (B) DFT calculation results of the electrochemical ORR and OER performances. (a) The ORR/OER mechanism over the CoNP-PTCOF and the potential-determining steps (PDSs). Free energy diagrams for the (b) OER and (c) ORR on the pyridinic N active site of the CoNP-PTCOF in KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2021, John Wiley and sons. 
Meantime, in the design principles of metal-supported catalysts, constructing coordinatively unsaturated metallic sites is a crucial issue. For partial redox reactions, by choosing CTFs with appropriate organic ligands or heteroatom varieties and contents, the electronic states of coordinated metallic species can be tailored, which will have an impact on the reaction activity or selectivity.118 In detail, substrates or intermediates tend to adsorb onto or bind with metallic sites of diverse redox states. Kamiya and co-workers located isolated Cu atoms onto CTFs/carbon nanoparticles (denoted as Cu-CTF/CPs) and employed them as electronic catalysts in the ORR (Fig. 9A).7 The as-formed Cu-CTF/CPs exhibited outstanding ORR activity with high onset potential (810 mV) versus the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE; pH 7) and exceeding stability. The corresponding electrochemical characterization showed that Cu(I) reduced from Cu(II) functioned as the main Cu species to mediate the ORR process and reacted with O2. As for the highly efficient ORR, two possible mechanisms were advanced: (i) CuI/CuII redox potential and related ORR onset potential increased owing to low dielectric states of CTF/CPs; (ii) coordinatively unsaturated Cu(I) exhibited enriched available d orbitals with lower O2 binding energy and weaker steric hindrance, which benefitted O2 molecule integration and subsequent O–O bond cleavage.114
 Fig. 9  (A) Structural presentation of Cu-CTF/CPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (B) Top and (C) side views of the NO adsorption configuration of the Cu-CTF. The pristine NO location is shown in panel (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
In 2016, individually dispersed Pt atoms were inserted into CTFs for the electrochemical hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR) in polymer electrolyte fuel cells (PEFCs).111 When the Pt loading reached 2.8 wt%, the resulting electrode displayed a comparative electrochemical HOR activity to that of 20 wt% Pt/C and apparent oxygen tolerance. The dissociative adsorption of H2 following the bridge-type adsorption model was ensured to be the rate-determining step, which was promoted by a huge number of electrocatalytically active Pt atoms on a Pt-CTF.
In 2016, this group continued to apply a Cu-CTF to electrochemical nitrate reduction reaction (NRR) and obtained highly selective reductive dimerization from NO to N2O.112 As for the reasons, the author stated that Cu coordination sites with a valency below +2 on Cu-CTFs exhibited a moderate adsorption energy of nitrous oxide (NO) (ΔENO) of 140.1 kJ mol−1 (Fig. 9B and C). Afterwards, reductive dimerization of both solvated and surface-bound NO proceeded to form nitrous oxide (N2O) because Cu sites could accelerate N–N bond formation. Combining the oxidation capacity of the Pt-CTF and reduction capacity of the Cu-CTF, co-loading the Pt-CTF and Cu-CTF onto a one conductive matrix (CP) was considered to be a promising methodology to promote the simultaneous HOR and NRR in a local catalytic cell.100
When C–H oxidation was conducted by active RuO species, electrochemical oxidation of alcohol completed over Ru-CTF with ignorable ORR competition.113 Later, as another pioneering work, Ru-CTF was loaded onto a gas diffusion electrode (GDE) for electrooxidation of gaseous ethylbenzene to acetophenone in the aqueous electrolyte.109 By targeting the two main challenges facing aqueous electrochemical oxidation reactions, namely, requiring highly active moieties in C–H bond activation and accessible passageways for hydrocarbon transportation, this case provided effective strategies which resulted in: (i) high-valent RuIVO or RuVO moieties behaving as active centers for C–H bond activation and O insertion into the C–H of ethylbenzene (EB) to form 1-phenylethanol; (ii) 3D architecture of CTF embodied Ru-CTF with an effective diffusion pathway of water-insoluble carbonyl compounds to the electrode surface in a gaseous form. The collaborative work between high-valent Ru–oxygen bonding active species and the CTF structure contributed to highly efficient electrochemical alcohol oxidations.
Engineering active metal oxide sites into CTFs for catalysis
As a category of inorganic solids, metal oxides with earth-abundant and easily affordable elements have been functionalized with various organic porous materials. In contrast with other metal-containing compounds, metal oxides with flexible structures and various performances are appropriate for combination with CTFs for thermocatalysis, photocatalysis, and electrocatalysis.119–121 In metal oxide/CTF composites, metal oxides are developed to behave as thermocatalytic active units, and photo-active, and electro-active units whereas CTFs function as supports, metal oxide anchoring sites, and reaction sites in functional groups. This synergistic effect enhances the catalytic performance of metal oxide/CTFs enormously. Considering the limited amount of the present articles on metal oxide/CTFs, we classify this section according to the functions of metal oxides. The structure–performance correlation of metal oxide engineering CTFs in diverse catalytic applications are briefly summarized in Table 4.
Table 4 Summary of the structure–performance correlation of metal oxide engineering CTFs in diverse catalytic applications




Metal oxide/CTFs
Interactions
Functions of metal oxides in reactions
Functions of CTFs in reactions
Applications
Performance
Ref.





a BP-COP: bipyridine functionalized covalent organic polymers.





Co3O4/CTF
Co–N–C and Co–O–C bonds
Favoring the O–O bond cleavage and improving ORR activity
Providing mass transfer channels; active sites and anchoring sites
Electrochemical ORR
Half-wave potential (E1/2) of 0.84 V

122



CTFs@TiO2
S-scheme heterojunction
Forming IEF with CTFs to promote charge carrier separation and improve photocatalytic efficiency
Adsorbing visible light and generating electrons to mineralize TC
Photocatalytic TC degradation
Complete degradation within 90 min; strong anti-fouling ability; 87% performance maintained in the tenth cycle

123



Cu-CTF/TiO2
Forming an electrical circuit by coupling photoreduction-photooxidation
Reaction sites for methanol photooxidation, a sacrificial reagent to provide electrons to the electrical circuit
Reaction sites for the catalytic reduction of HNO2
Photocatalytic reduction of HNO2
HNO2 reduction exhibited a light-intensity dependent product selectivity, namely, productivity of N2O decreased with the increase in light intensity

20



TiO2@Bp-COPa
Bp-COP transferred electrons to the CB of TiO2 and accumulated at the COP/TiO2 interface for water reduction to produce H2
Charge transferring medium to suppress the electron–hole recombination through fluorescence emission
Capturing visible light and exciting electrons from the HOMO to the LUMO, and further to TiO2, leaving holes in VB
Visible light-driven HER
1333 μmol g−1 h−1; AQE: >2.5% at an input wavelength of 420 nm

69





Engineering CTFs with thermocatalytic active units
Thermocatalysis, namely, thermal-driven catalysis, involves a wide scope of liquid phase and gas phase reactions. The core of the thermocatalysis field points to thermocatalytic active units, where adsorption and activation of substrates, evolution of intermediates, and production of the final reactants take place. In metal oxide/CTF composites, electron-enriched or electron-deficient heteroatoms in CTFs as well as metal–oxygen bonds in metal oxide can be thermocatalytic active units to mediate those reactions. Therefore, engineering CTFs with thermocatalytic active units has been registered as a promising approach to reinforce the catalytic activity, selectivity, and durability in thermocatalysis.
Co3O4, the earliest reported CTF supporting metal oxide, was first used for aerobic oxidation of alcohols in the liquid phase.124 With CTFs as oxidative hosts, almost complete aerobic oxidation was obtained over Co3O4/CTF and the heterogeneous catalysts could be recycled over 4 times. Another research study on the PdO/CTF hybrid in heterogeneous carbonylation manifested that PdO acted as catalytically active sites to mediate the intermediate transformation via old bond cleavage and new bond formation, thus improving transformation of aryl halides.125 Further detailed mechanistic insights are needed for for metal oxide/CTFs, especially for the roles of metal oxides and reaction active sites when applied in solid-phase microextraction,126 sensitive determination of perfluorinated compounds,127 C–C homo coupling reaction,128 and a high-flux organic solvent nanofiltration membrane.129
Iron oxides have been widely applied in catalysis because of their magnetic characteristics, making composite catalysts easy to separate from the reaction system.123,130,131 The first example of incorporating magnetic metallic oxides into CTFs (CTF/Fe2O3) was reported by Qiu's group.132 Consequently, CTF/Fe2O3 composites displayed adequate adsorption capacity (0.889 mmol g−1) and high kinetic constants (4.31 m2 mg−1 min−1) in MO degradation. Their study opens a promising avenue for extensive environmental or industrial applications and related mechanism analysis.133 After then, magnetic iron oxide (Fe3O4) supported on the quaterphenyl-modified CTF surface was reported to enhance the conversion rate and selectivity in CO2 cycloaddition, by boosting the hydrogen bond formation between hydroxyl groups on Fe3O4 and epoxy O2.134
Engineering CTFs with photo-active or electro-active units
TiO2, as a representative of the family of photoactive metal oxides, has been employed in photocatalysis because of its structural stability, nontoxicity, and photoactivity. The semiconductor characteristics of TiO2 allow it to capture light in a wide wavelength range, excite electrons from the VB to CB, and drive the surface redox reactions. Nevertheless, some limitations appear in TiO2-based photocatalysis, ranging from the wide band gap and sluggish charge carriers transfer rate to insufficient photocatalytic activity. Thereby to overcome this bottleneck, CTFs function as supports to assemble TiO2 as photo-active units, and are widely applied in various photoelectrochemical applications.135–138 For example, Cu-CTF/TiO2 was utilized in photoreduction of HNO2 to explore the correlation between the UV light (350–400 nm) intensity and reaction pathways in HNO2 reduction.20 The results suggested that with the light intensities increasing from 1 mW cm−2 to 9 mW cm−2, the operating potential of Cu-CTF/TiO2 varied towards the negative side, bringing about the product shift from N2O to NH4+. It was noted than the negative shift of operating potential originated from the ongoing photooxidation of methanol as sacrificial reagents over TiO2. TiO2 was enabled to accept the photoinduced electrons from Bp-COP, thus suppressing the electron–hole recombination and making more electrons participate in the HER for higher photocatalytic efficiency.69 In another case, a well matched energy band structure made 2D/2D CTFs@TiO2 heterogenous membranes possible for photocatalytic tetracycline (TC) degradation.123 The Fermi level (EF) of CTFs was more negative than that of TiO2, leading to the initial interfacial electron transfer from CTFs to TiO2 until their EF reached the same level. Consequently, an internal electric field (IEF) would built with energy band bending to form step-scheme (S-scheme) heterojunctions, accompanied with electron injection from the CB of TiO2 to the VB of CTFs (Fig. 10A). During this period, active species including ·O2−, ·OH, and h+ are generated to mineralize TC in wastewater.
 Fig. 10  (A) Electron transfer pathway illustration of CTFs@TiO2 S-scheme heterojunctions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. Diagrams of the relative band positions and charge transfer pathways of T-COF and CdS (B) before contact, (C) after contact and (D) under light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The metal oxides can also function as electro-active units to accelerate the electrochemical reactions.139,140 As an instance, Co3O4 anchored onto the pyridinic N sites on CTFs was found to boost the rate-limiting step of O–O bond cleavage in the electrochemical ORR and thus improved ORR rates.122 For the role of CTFs, pyridinic N on it acted as ORR active sites and many accessible pores embodied O2 molecules to diffuse towards active sites through shorter pathways.
Engineering active metal sulfide sites into CTFs for catalysis
Another pronounced division of CTF-based composites deals with the hybridization of metal or non-metal sulfides, which is popular in photoelectrochemical fields. The critical progress of metal sulfide engineering CTFs for catalysis is shown in Table 5. The significant role of metal sulfides in CTF-based composites in the photocatalytic reaction can be reflected by the typical volcano-curve-like correlation between the sulfide content and photocatalytic performance. Initially increasing the loading amount of MoS2 quantum dots (from 0 wt% to 0.6 wt%) on CTFs brought about an improved photocatalytic HER rate, even though further loading of MoS2 (up to 1.2 wt%) would cause a negative impact owing to blocking of active sites.141 The size-related performance has been figured out in sulfides/CTF composites when applied in the photocatalysis field, by downsizing CdS nanoparticles to CdS QDs142 or synthesizing different sized CdS particles.143 Generally, reducing the particle size of sulfides incurs a higher exposure area of active sites, thus showing more efficient photocatalysis. Simultaneously, as the reaction proceeds, metal sulfide particles would aggregate into larger-sized bulk particles, leading to the blocking of catalytic active sites and slowing down of reaction kinetics.144
Table 5 Summary of the structure–performance correlation of metal sulfide engineering CTFs in diverse catalytic applications




Metal sulfide/CTFs
Interactions
Functions of metal oxides in reactions
Functions of CTFs in reactions
Applications
Performance
Ref.





a TEOA: triethanolamine.





CdS-CTF-1
Electron transfer from the LUMO of CTF-1 to the CB of CdS; hole injection from the VB of CdS to the HOMO of CTF-1
Accept electrons from CTF-1 and transfer to Pt active sites for water reduction and H2 production
Supporter; electron donor
Photocatalytic HER
AQE of 16.3% under 420 nm irradiation; HER rate of 11.43 mmol g−1 h−1

143



MoS2/CTF
Interfacial charge transfer
Charge carrier migration and separation promoter
Light absorption units
Photocatalytic HER
H2 production rate of ∼23 μmol h−1 when the MoS2 loading amount reached 0.6 wt%

141



CTF@MoS2
Coordination between CTF triazine units and Mo atoms
Exposed defects (sulfur edges) as catalytically active sites for the HER; increased electrochemical active area
Channels for electron transmission and mass transport; provide active sites
Photocatalytic HER
Overpotential of 93 mV and Tafel slope of 43 mV dec−1

144



CdS-3@CTF
Z-scheme heterojunction C–S chemical bonding interaction
Accumulate electrons for water reduction
Water oxidation active sites—remained holes in the VB of CTF; protect CdS from deactivation and photocorrosion
Photocatalytic water splitting
AQE: 37.8% (365 nm); 12.25 mmol g−1 h−1

145



SnS2/S-CTFs
Z-scheme heterojunction electron transfer from the CB of SnS2 to the VB of S-CTFs
Complete the oxidation of TEOAa
The electrons accumulated in the CB were responsible for CO2 reduction to yield CO and CH4
Photocatalytic CO2RR
CO evolution rate of 123.6 μmol g−1 h−1; CH4 evolution rate of 43.4 μmol g−1 h−1

146



CdS–P/ACTF
Photo-induced electron transfer from CdS to ACTFs
Light-harvesting units; transfer electrons to ACTFs
Allow electrons to be accepted from CdS to fast transfer for TC decontamination; adsorb TC molecules efficiently
Photocatalytic TC degradation
Removal rate reached 99.7% for 20 mg L−1 initial TC under 90 min visible light irradiation; maintained 80% degradation rate in successive 300 min after 5 cycles

147



COF–F–SeS2
C–S chemical bonds; charge transfer
Improve the electronic conductivity and boost the charge migration
Encapsulating polysulfides and polyselenides via physical and chemical interactions; hampering the “shuttling effect”
Cathode material for lithium-sulfur batteries (LSBs)
Discharge capacity of 1633 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, and C-rate of 1163 mA h g−1 at 1C

148





The performance enhancement after introducing metal sulfides into CTFs has been reported. As a proof of concept, CdS modified CTFs exhibited nearly 55 times enhancement than the pristine CTFs, with respect to photocatalytic H2 evolution rates, implying the performance enhancement brought by CdS introduction.142
Primarily in 2019, a CdS-CTF-1 composite was formed via a photo-deposition approach and it exhibited a high AQE of 16.3% at 420 nm in photo-driven HER.143 The interfacial charge transfer between CdS and CTF-1 was ensured by the band position difference. Briefly, electrons flowed from the LUMO of CTF-1 to the CB of CdS and then to Pt co-catalysts to execute water reduction and H2 formation, while holes of the VB in CdS injected to the HOMO of CTF-1 to protect CdS against photocorrosion. As another mechanistic statement, a Z-scheme heterojunction was constructed between the CdS core and CTF shell to accelerate the visible-light-driven HER efficiency with an AQE up to 37.8%.145 Given that the work function of CdS (4.68 eV) laid below that of CTF (4.89 eV), electron injection from EF of CdS to CTF EF would happen, accompanied with a built-in electric field directed from CdS to CTF and energy band bending to form a Z-scheme hetero-structure (Fig. 10B and C). Driven by the potential energy difference, photogenerated electrons in the VB of CTF would be stimulated first into the CB of CTF, and then head to the VB of CdS (Fig. 10D). As a result, electron-enriched CdS became the primary active sites for water reduction whilst the water oxidation half-reaction occurred over CTF to complete the whole water splitting process.
Another Z-scheme heterojunction was investigated when initially employing SnS2/S-CTF composites in the photocatalytic CO2RR.146 Because the Fermi energy of S-CTFs was more positive than that of a SnS2 semiconductor, S-CTFs bent upward while SnS2 bent downward to achieve the Fermi energy level equilibrium. Different from the above investigations, the CB of S-CTFs turned out to be reduction sites for CO2 conversion into CO and CH4, whilst the oxidation of sacrificial agents occurred in the hole-enriched VB of SnS2. Beyond that, the ·OH generated in the VB of SnS2 and ·O2− yielded in the CB of S-CTFs synergistically promoted the CO2RR process for a higher evolution rate.
Among numerous sulfides/CTF composite application examples, sulfides used for photooxidants and electron donors are far beyond those in the above research studies. For instance, Wang et al. assembled 2D sheet-like CdS (CdS–P) onto alkali-activated CTFs (ACTFs) and employed CdS/ACTFs in photocatalytic TC degradation.147 The outstanding light-harvesting capacity of CdS induced excited electron appearance, leading to oriented electron transfer to ACTFs. Therefore, thermoelectrons not only combined with adsorbed O2 molecules to yield active ·O2− species but CdS also finally acted as photo-oxidants, directing TC decontamination and mineralization.
Beyond the photocatalysis area, sulfides/CTFs have also shown huge potential in energy storage. Recently, SeS2 was fixed onto one fluoro-substituted CTF (COF–F–SeS2) as a promising cathode material for lithium–sulfur batteries (LSBs).148 Polysulfide-philic triazine rings and F atom covalently or electrostatically anchored sulfur on the COF–F were the keys to hamper the “shuttling effect”, essential for improving the cycle performance. Besides, the superb electronic conductivity of selenium (1 × 10−3 S cm−1) and high capacity of sulfur led to an enormous capacity of 1633 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, and an inspiring C-rate behavior of 1163 mA h g−1 at 1C of COF–F–SeS2.
Conclusion
CTFs with customizable structural topologies and robust thermal/chemical stability serve as a site-inserting platform for high-performance catalysis. Multiple interplays existing in CTF skeletons, such as interplanar π–π interactions, covalent bonding interactions, and coordination forces, allow tailored CTFs to possess good catalytic activity, selectivity, and robustness. By post-engineering metallic active sites into CTFs, the energy barriers of the vested reaction pathways can be reduced, ultimately speeding up the catalytic reaction. We outline the fundamental aspects of metallic active sites in CTFs, providing straightforward guidelines for the design of next-generation catalysts. We have recounted some pioneering research studies on engineering high-active and long-lasting metallic sites into CTFs, influential in the history of thermocatalysis, photocatalysis, and electrocatalysis chemistry. Notwithstanding, the research in this field is still at the early stage especially for practical applications so the issues and challenges relevant to metallic active-site engineering of CTFs are elaborated. Below we extend our horizon to the future directions of metallic active-site engineering of CTFs for high-performance catalysis.
(1) One major less-explored subject is integrating metal-single-atom and CTFs for catalysis, ranging from thermocatalysis to photoelectrocatalysis. The excellent characteristics of metal single atoms, such as isolated dispersion, 100% atom-utilization efficiency, and quantized orbital of active sites offer great promise in interacting with CTFs to obtain high catalytic reactivity, chemoselectivity, and long-term durability.
(2) The metallic active-site engineering awaits further extension to a larger family of designable CTFs with grafted functional groups and an enriched pore microenvironment. Constructing novel highly catalytically active CTFs for metallic active-sites engineering, such as incorporating photo-active/electro-active/thermocatalytic active functional groups, should be considered for addressing the issues during practical processing.
(3) Enormous efforts should be devoted in fundamental science towards the mechanistic understanding of active-site engineering of CTFs, especially for the structure–function correlation between the active structure in modified CTFs and catalytic behaviors. Theoretical and kinetic studies are unignorable when identifying metallic active sites and ruling out the reaction pathways, using DFT calculations to determine activation energy, metal binding energy, adsorption/desorption energy, and the energy barriers.
(4) For large-scale industrial applications, improving the mature of present techniques and controlling the cost of CTFs hybridized with metals, metal oxide, and metal sulfide have to be targeted, as well.
(5) Considering that most current studies involving metallic active-site engineering CTFs are still in the bench scale, gradually enlarging the test scenario from pilot-plant-scale experiments to engineering development and then to final industrial applications is valuable and necessary. We encourage future explorers to work in this direction, transforming high-application-value research achievements into applicative products.
Although huge progress has been gained in engineering of molecular catalytic active sites in CTFs, there are still formidable limitations towards yielding economically viable, highly active and chemoselective catalysts on the basis of the combined scheme. The further evolvement of this area calls for the collaborations of scientists from different disciplines and engineers, domestic and international, to bridge the well-developed technology in metallic active-site engineering of CTFs with industrial catalysis applications.
Author contribution
All the authors contributed to the paper. Yixia Li wrote the initial manuscript and made subsequent modifications. Cui Lai and Shaobo Liu acquired the funding and directed the writing. Yukui Fu proposed the conceptualization and modified the structures of this article. Lei Qin, Fuhang Xu, Mengyi Xu, and Xuerong Zhou performed the reviewing. Ling Li, Hongda Liu, and Dengsheng Ma made further modification; Qian Sun and Neng Wang polished the paper.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This study was financially supported by the Program for the National Natural Science Foundation of China (52170161, 52100183, and 42177072), the Hunan Natural Science Foundation (2020JJ3009 and 2022JJ40044), the Hunan Researcher Award Program (2020RC3025), the Project funded by the China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2021M700041), and the National Natural Science Foundation of Changsha (kq2202166).
Notes and references
J. Hwang, R. R. Rao, L. Giordano, Y. Katayama, Y. Yu and Y. Shao-Horn, Science, 2017, 358, 751–756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kuhn, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 3450–3453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, L. Guo, S. Jin and B. Tan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5153–5172 RSC .
Z. Qian, Z. J. Wang and K. A. I. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33, 1909–1926 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, D. Jiang, D. Huang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, C. Lai, M. Chen, M. Cheng, C. Zhang and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22848–22870 RSC .
C. Lu, J. Yang, S. Wei, S. Bi, Y. Xia, M. Chen, Y. Hou, M. Qiu, C. Yuan, Y. Su, F. Zhang, H. Liang and X. Zhuang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806884 CrossRef .
K. Iwase, T. Yoshioka, S. Nakanishi, K. Hashimoto and K. Kamiya, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11068–11072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Pan, T. Chen, L. Ma, G. Wang, W. B. Hu, Z. Zou, K. Wen and H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 8062–8068 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, T. He, L. Liu, W. Chen, M. Zhang, G. Wu and P. Chen, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 781–788 RSC .
J. Huang, X. Liu, W. Zhang, Z. Liu, H. Zhong, B. Shao, Q. Liang, Y. Liu, W. Zhang and Q. He, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 404, 127136 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yusran, X. Guan, H. Li, Q. Fang and S. Qiu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2020, 7, 170–190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, W. Zhou, W. L. Teo, K. Wang, L. Zhang, Y. Zeng and Y. Zhao, Chem, 2020, 6, 3172–3202 CAS .
D.-G. Wang, T. Qiu, W. Guo, Z. Liang, H. Tabassum, D. Xia and R. Zou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 688–728 RSC .
Y.-J. Chen, H.-Y. Zhuo, Y. Pan, J.-X. Liang, C.-G. Liu and J. Li, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 1939–1951 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, Science, 2017, 355, eaal1585 CrossRef PubMed .
A. V. Bavykina, A. I. Olivos-Suarez, D. Osadchii, R. Valecha, R. Franz, M. Makkee, F. Kapteijn and J. Gascon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 26060–26065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, G. Zhang, L. He, Y. Shi, R. Miao, Y. Zhu and Q. Guan, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 570, 150881 CrossRef CAS .
M. Siebels, C. Schluesener, J. Thomas, Y.-X. Xiao, X.-Y. Yang and C. Janiak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 11934–11943 RSC .
D. Kong, J. Xie, Z. Guo, D. Yang and J. Tang, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 2708–2712 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kamiya, R. Sugimoto, T. Tatebe, T. Harada and S. Nakanishi, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 3462–3468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. He, X. Chen, C. Huang, L. Li, C. Yang and Y. Yu, Chin. J. Catal., 2021, 42, 123–130 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao, Y.-j. Gao, S.-q. Li, J. Yang, G.-l. Zhuang, S.-w. Deng, Z.-H. Yao, X. Zhong, Z.-z. Wei and J.-g. Wang, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 50, 135–142 CrossRef .
R. Xu, X.-S. Wang, H. Zhao, H. Lin, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8, 2224–2230 RSC .
Y. Zhu, J. Li, Y. Chen, J. Zou, Q. Cheng, C. Chen, W. Hu, L. Zou, Z. Zou, B. Yang and H. Yang, ACS Catal., 2021, 11, 13020–13027 CrossRef CAS .
C.-P. Wan, J.-D. Yi, R. Cao and Y.-B. Huang, Chin. J. Struct. Chem., 2022, 41, 2205001–2205014 CAS .
C. Li, Z. Qiu, H. Sun, Y. Yang and C.-P. Li, Chin. J. Struct. Chem., 2022, 41, 2211084–2211099 CAS .
S. Hug, M. E. Tauchert, S. Li, U. E. Pachmayr and B. V. Lotsch, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 13956–13964 RSC .
H. Ma, H. Ren, S. Meng, F. Sun and G. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2611 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lin, Y. Hou, X. Deng, H. Wang, S. Sun and X. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 41017–41024 RSC .
M. Soorholtz, L. C. Jones, D. Samuelis, C. Weidenthaler, R. J. White, M.-M. Titirici, D. A. Cullen, T. Zimmermann, M. Antonietti, J. Maier, R. Palkovits, B. F. Chmelka and F. Schüth, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 2332–2340 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Gunasekar, K. Park, V. Ganesan, K. Lee, N.-K. Kim, K.-D. Jung and S. Yoon, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6740–6748 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Jena, C. Krishnaraj, G. Wang, K. Leus, J. Schmidt, N. Chaoui and P. Van Der Voort, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 4102–4111 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xu, C. Lai, X. Liu, B. Li, M. Zhang, F. Xu, S. Liu, L. Li, L. Qin, H. Yi and Y. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 24148–24174 RSC .
A. V. Bavykina, E. Rozhko, M. G. Goesten, T. Wezendonk, B. Seoane, F. Kapteijn, M. Makkee and J. Gascon, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8, 2217–2221 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pilaski, J. Artz, H.-U. Islam, A. M. Beale and R. Palkovits, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 227, 219–227 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lu, Y. Hu, S. Wan, R. McCaffrey, Y. Jin, H. Gu and W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17082–17088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gao, F. Lyu and Y. Yin, Chem. Rev., 2021, 121, 834–881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, Y. Zhu, Q. Lin, L. Zhang, X. Zhang and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 2954–3009 RSC .
C. Lai, H. Yan, D. Wang, S. Liu, X. Zhou, X. Li, M. Zhang, L. Li, Y. Fu, F. Xu, X. Yang and X. Huo, Chemsophere, 2022, 293, 133472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Segura, S. Royuela and M. Mar Ramos, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3903–3945 RSC .
V. Hasija, S. Patial, P. Raizada, A. A. P. Khan, A. M. Asiri, L. Quyet Van, N. Van-Huy and P. Singh, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 452, 214298 CrossRef CAS .
A. Wagner, C. D. Sahm and E. Reisner, Nat. Catal., 2020, 3, 775–786 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park, G. H. Gunasekar, N. Prakash, K.-D. Jung and S. Yoon, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3410–3413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Sudakar, G. H. Gunasekar, I. H. Baek and S. Yoon, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 6456–6461 RSC .
G. H. Gunasekar, J. Shin, K.-D. Jung, K. Park and S. Yoon, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4346–4353 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Gunasekar, K.-D. Jung and S. Yoon, Inorg. Chem., 2019, 58, 3717–3723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Padmanaban, G. H. Gunasekar, M. Lee and S. Yoon, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 8893–8899 CrossRef CAS .
K. Park, G. H. Gunasekar, S.-H. Kim, H. Park, S. Kim, K. Park, K.-D. Jung and S. Yoon, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 1639–1649 RSC .
G. H. Gunasekar, H. Kim and S. Yoon, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1042–1047 RSC .
N. Tahir, F. Muniz-Miranda, J. Everaert, P. Tack, T. Heugebaert, K. Leus, L. Vincze, C. V. Stevens, V. Van Speybroeck and P. Van Der Voort, J. Catal., 2019, 371, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
S. Abednatanzi, P. Gohari Derakhshandeh, P. Tack, F. Muniz-Miranda, Y.-Y. Liu, J. Everaert, M. Meledina, F. Vanden Bussche, L. Vincze, C. V. Stevens, V. Van Speybroeck, H. Vrielinck, F. Callens, K. Leus and P. Van Der Voort, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118769 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tahir, G. Wang, I. Onyshchenko, N. De Geyter, K. Leus, R. Morent and P. Van der Voort, J. Catal., 2019, 375, 242–248 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, M. Di, Y. Zhang, B. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Zhang, A. Li and S. Qiao, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2022, 4, 1047–1054 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, J. Yang, Y. Ai, S. Hao, X. Chen and F. Li, J. Catal., 2021, 396, 281–290 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, W. Liu, A. Laemont, C. Krishnaraj, X. Feng, F. Rohman, M. Meledina, Q. Zhang, R. Van Deun, K. Leus and P. Van Der Voort, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 10820–10827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jose Corral-Perez, A. Billings, D. Stoian and A. Urakawa, ChemCatChem, 2019, 11, 4725–4730 CrossRef .
P. Puthiaraj, K. Yu, S. E. Shim and W.-S. Ahn, Mol. Catal., 2019, 473, 15–22 Search PubMed .
H. Vardhan, Y. Pan, Z. Yang, G. Verma, A. Nafady, A. M. Al-Enizi, T. M. Alotaibi, O. A. Almaghrabi and S. Ma, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 101111 CrossRef .
N. Iranpoor, F. Panahi, F. Roozbin, S. Rahimi and M. G. Haghighi, Mol. Catal., 2017, 438, 214–223 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Chan-Thaw, A. Villa, D. Wang, V. D. Santo, A. Orbelli Biroli, G. M. Veith, A. Thomas and L. Prati, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 2149–2154 CrossRef CAS .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 5262–5284 RSC .
A.-M. Alam and Y.-S. Shon, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 3294–3318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Davidson, Y. Ji, G. J. Leong, N. C. Kovach, B. G. Trewyn and R. M. Richards, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2018, 1, 4386–4400 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ohtaka, Catalysts, 2021, 11, 1266 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, L. Wang, L. Wang and F.-S. Xiao, Acc. Chem. Res., 2021, 54, 2579–2590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fu, Z. Yin, L. Qin, D. Huang, H. Yi, X. Liu, S. Liu, M. Zhang, B. Li, L. Li, W. Wang, X. Zhou, Y. Li, G. Zeng and C. Lai, J. Hazard. Mater., 2022, 422, 126950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mondal, Q. T. Trinh, A. Jana, W. K. H. Ng, P. Borah, H. Hirao and Y. Zhao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 15307–15319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Beine, A. J. D. Krüger, J. Artz, C. Weidenthaler, C. Glotzbach, P. J. C. Hausoul and R. Palkovits, Green Chem., 2018, 20, 1316–1322 RSC .
J. Chen, X. Tao, L. Tao, H. Li, C. Li, X. Wang, C. Li, R. Li and Q. Yang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 461–470 CrossRef CAS .
M. Liu, X. Wang, J. Liu, K. Wang, S. Jin and B. Tan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 12774–12782 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, P. Zhang, G. Huang, Q. Chen, J. Bi and L. Wu, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 3850–3857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mullangi, S. Nandi, S. Shalini, S. Sreedhala, C. P. Vinod and R. Vaidhyanathan, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10876 CrossRef PubMed .
T. He, L. Liu, G. Wu and P. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16235–16241 RSC .
F. Chang, J. Guo, G. Wu, L. Liu, M. Zhang, T. He, P. Wang, P. Yu and P. Chen, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 3605–3610 RSC .
D. Subodh, K. Prakash and D. T. Masram, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 3, 310–318 CrossRef .
F. Panahi, F. Haghighi and A. Khalafi-Nezhad, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2020, 34, e5880 CrossRef CAS .
N. Nouruzi, M. Dinari, N. Mokhtari, M. Farajzadeh, B. Gholipour and S. Rostamnia, Mol. Catal., 2020, 493, 111057 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iemhoff, M. Vennewald and R. Palkovits, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, e202212015 Search PubMed .
J. Sun, H. Zhao, X. Fang, S. Zhai, D. Zhai, L. Sun and W. Deng, Mol. Catal., 2021, 508, 111581 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Bulushev, F. S. Golub, S. V. Trubina, V. V. Zvereva, L. G. Bulusheva, E. Y. Gerasimov, M. Navlani-Garcia, A. D. Krot and H. S. Jena, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2022, 5, 12887–12896 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fang, G. Gou, J. Shang, M. Liu, Q. Gu and L. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 627, 931–941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Huang, Q. Niu, Y. He, J. Tian, M. Gao, C. Li, N. An, J. Bi and J. Zhang, Nano Res., 2022, 15, 8001–8009 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, M. Cheng, Y. Liu, J. Wang, G. Zhang, L. Li, L. Du, G. Wang, S. Yang and X. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2022, 15, 3722–3749 RSC .
D. M. Schultz and T. P. Yoon, Science, 2014, 343, 1239176 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Ravelli, D. Dondi, M. Fagnoni and A. Albini, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1999–2011 RSC .
M. Zhang, C. Lai, B. Li, F. Xu, D. Huang, S. Liu, L. Qin, X. Liu, H. Yi, Y. Fu, L. Li, N. An and L. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 422, 130120 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, C. Lai, M. Zhang, B. Li, S. Liu, M. Chen, L. Li, Y. Xu, L. Qin, Y. Fu, X. Liu, H. Yi and X. Yang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 601, 196–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lai, Z. An, H. Yi, X. Huo, L. Qin, X. Liu, B. Li, M. Zhang, S. Liu, L. Li, Y. Fu, X. Zhou, Z. Wang, N. An and X. Shi, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 600, 161–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lin, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, L. Ling, H. Huang, Q. Li, L. Cheng, Y. Li, J. Zhou, K. Wu, J. Zhang and T. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202214142 CAS .
H. Lin, C. Chen, T. Zhou and J. Zhang, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000458 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Z. Zhou, L. Li, Z. Zhuang, J. Bi, J. Chen, Y. Yu and J. Yu, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 18574–18581 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, P. Liu, Y. Tang, H. Huang, H. Cui, D. Mei and C. Zhong, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 2431–2442 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhao, Q. Niu, G. Huang, Q. Chen, Y. Gao, J. Bi and L. Wu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 602, 23–31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Yadav, A. Kumar, N.-J. Park, K.-J. Kong and J.-O. Baeg, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9413–9418 RSC .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. B. Chorkendorff, J. K. Norskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J.-P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhu, S. Fu, Q. Shi, D. Du and Y. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 13944–13960 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamiya, R. Kamai, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamiya, T. Tatebe, S. Yamamura, K. Iwase, T. Harada and S. Nakanishi, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2693–2698 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhou, Z. Xiao, Q. Yang, X. Huang, Y. Niu, Y. Ma and L. Zhi, Sci. China Mater., 2021, 64, 2221–2229 CrossRef CAS .
Kamiya, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 8339–8349 RSC .
L. Kong, M. Liu, H. Huang, Y. Xu and X.-H. Bu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12, 2100172 CrossRef CAS .
T. Sun, S. Mitchell, J. Li, P. Lyu, X. Wu, J. Perez-Ramirez and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2003075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800438 CrossRef .
L. Ma, W. Hu, B. Mei, H. Liu, B. Yuan, J. Zang, T. Chen, L. Zou, Z. Zou, B. Yang, Y. Yu, J. Ma, Z. Jiang, K. Wen and H. Yang, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 4534–4542 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, C. Wang, J. Liu, F. Rong, L. He, Y. Lou, Z. Zhang and M. Du, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2021, 9, 5872–5883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, Y. Liang, D. Wu, H. Tian, T. Xia, W. Wang, W. Xie, X.-M. Hu, X. Tian and Q. Chen, Small, 2022, 18, 2107750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kato, K. Iwase, T. Harada, S. Nakanishi and K. Kamiya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 29376–29382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kamiya, R. Kamai, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kamai, K. Kamiya, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 13184–13188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yoshioka, K. Iwase, S. Nakanishi, K. Hashimoto and K. Kamiya, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 15729–15734 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yamaguchi, K. Kamiya, K. Hashimoto and S. Nakanishi, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53, 10437–10440 RSC .
T. Hosokawa, M. Tsuji, K. Tsuchida, K. Iwase, T. Harada, S. Nakanishi and K. Kamiya, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 11073–11080 RSC .
P. Su, K. Iwase, T. Harada, K. Kamiya and S. Nakanishi, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 3941–3947 RSC .
K. Iwase, S. Nakanishi, M. Miyayama and K. Kamiya, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 1644–1652 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Park, C. H. Lee, J.-M. Ju, J.-H. Lee, J. Seol, S. U. Lee and J.-H. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2101727 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, C. Lai, F. Xu, D. Huang, S. Liu, Y. Fu, L. Li, H. Yi, L. Qin and L. Chen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 466, 214592 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. Liu, M. Cheng, C. Lai, G. Zeng, L. Qin, X. Liu, B. Li, W. Zhang, Y. Yi, M. Zhang, Y. Fu, M. Li and M. Long, J. Hazard. Mater., 2021, 406, 124333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, K. T. Tan, Y. Gong, Y. Chen, Z. Li, S. Xie, T. He, Z. Lu, H. Yang and D. Jiang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 120–242 RSC .
M. Lu, M. Zhang, J. Liu, Y. Chen, J.-P. Liao, M.-Y. Yang, Y.-P. Cai, S.-L. Li and Y.-Q. Lan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202200003 CAS .
S. Chen, Y. Zhu, D. Xu, W. Peng, Y. Li, G. Zhang, F. Zhang and X. Fan, ChemElectroChem, 2018, 5, 717–721 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Xue, J. Liu, J. Yang, H. Song and X. Zhu, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 424, 129829 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, K. Kailasam, A. Fischer and A. Thomas, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 342–347 CrossRef CAS .
V. Sadhasivam, R. Balasaravanan and A. Siva, Appl. Organomet. Chem., 2019, 33, e4994 CrossRef .
M. Heydari, M. T. Jafari, M. Saraji, R. Soltani and M. Dinari, Microchim. Acta, 2021, 188, 4 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-Y. Ren, X.-L. Wang, X.-L. Li, M.-L. Wang, R.-S. Zhao and J.-M. Lin, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2018, 410, 1657–1665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Das, B. K. Chandra, R. A. Molla, M. Sengupta, S. M. Islam, A. Majee and A. Bhaumik, Mol. Catal., 2020, 480, 110650 CrossRef CAS .
M. Amirilargani, G. N. Yokota, G. H. Vermeij, R. B. Merlet, G. Delen, L. D. B. Mandemaker, B. M. Weckhuysen, L. Winnubst, A. Nijmeijer, L. C. P. M. de Smet and E. J. R. Sudholter, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 136–140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Shylesh, V. Schuenemann and W. R. Thiel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3428–3459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Rossi, N. J. S. Costa, F. P. Silva and R. Wojcieszak, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2906–2933 RSC .
W. Zhang, F. Liang, C. Li, L.-G. Qiu, Y.-P. Yuan, F.-M. Peng, X. Jiang, A.-J. Xie, Y.-H. Shen and J.-F. Zhu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2011, 186, 984–990 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Leus, K. Folens, N. R. Nicomel, J. P. H. Perez, M. Filippousi, M. Meledina, M. M. Dirtu, S. Turner, G. Van Tendeloo, Y. Garcia, G. Du Laing and P. Van Der Voort, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 353, 312–319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ravi, P. Puthiaraj, D.-W. Park and W.-S. Ahn, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 12429–12436 RSC .
X. Chao, Y. Xu, H. Chen, D. Feng, J. Hu and Y. Yu, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 6943–6951 RSC .
H. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, L. Tang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, M. Chen, T. Xiong, C. Zhou, X. Li, D. Huang, Y. Zhu, Z. Wang and J. Tang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4135–4165 RSC .
H. Chen, H. S. Jena, X. Feng, K. Leus and P. Van Der Voort, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202204938 CAS .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Mondal, N. Karjule, C. Singh, R. Shimoni, M. Volokh, I. Hod and M. Shalom, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2101858 CrossRef CAS .
O. Ola, H. Ullah, Y. Chen, K. Thummavichai, N. Wang and Y. Zhu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 6409–6417 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Sun, J. Bi, S. Liang, L. Li, Y. Yu and L. Wu, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 1108–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, B. Xu, Z. Tan, Q. Jiang, S. Fang, L. Li, J. Bi and L. Wu, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 833, 155057 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, H. Zeng, X. Xiong, M.-F. Wu, M. Xia, M. Xie, J.-P. Zou and S.-L. Luo, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 113–122 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qiao, B. Zhang, Q. Li, Z. Li, W. Wang, J. Zhao, X. Zhang and Y. Hu, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 5032–5040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Z. Hu, W. Wang, H. He, L. Deng, Y. Zhang, J. Huang, N. Zhao, G. Yu and Y.-N. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12, 16065–16073 RSC .
S. Guo, P. Yang, Y. Zhao, X. Yu, Y. Wu, H. Zhang, B. Yu, B. Han, M. W. George and Z. Liu, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 6278–6283 CAS .
X. Yang, X. Bai, Y. Ma, D. He, X. Wang and Y. Guo, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 255, 117696 CrossRef CAS .
D.-G. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Song, G.-C. Kuang and K. Han, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 13247–13250 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Yixia Li	Yixia Li received her bachelor's degree from Hunan University in 2020. She is currently a graduate student at Hunan University, under the supervision of Prof. Cui Lai. Her research interest focuses on the controlled synthesis of metal/covalent triazine framework composites for photoelectrocatalysis.
Cui Lai	Associate Prof. Cui Lai joined Professor Guangming Zeng's group at Hunan University after completing her PhD degree at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering of Hunan University. She has been actively working in the environmental treatment area, particularly in the synthesis of functional nanomaterials for environmental detection and the treatment of organic pollutants, and solid waste.
Shaobo Liu	Associate Prof. Shaobo Liu graduated from Hunan University in 2015. After graduation, he did postdoctoral research at the School of Metallurgy and Environment, Central South University from 2015 to 2018. He has been active in the fields of environmental remediation, landscape ecology, and in particular biochar nanomaterials for the treatment of heavy metal pollutants and water pollution.
Yukui Fu	Yukui Fu received her PhD degree from Hunan University in 2022. She is currently a Postdoctoral research associate at the College of Environmental Science and Engineering at Hunan University. Her research interest focuses on the development of advanced nanomaterials for organic catalytic transformation and photocatalytic applications.


[bpy-CTF(IrCp*Cl)Cl]b	(IrCp*Cl)Clc	—	4.7 wt%	Bipyridine groups	170.24 m2 g−1	0.095 cm3 g−1	CO2 hydrogenation into formate	TOFd: 5300 h−1; TONe: 5000 (120 °C, 8 MPa) (H2/CO2 = 1)	
43

[bpy-CTF(MCp*Cl)Cl] (M = Ir or Rh)	(MCp*Cl)Cl	—	4.7 wt% (Ir); 1.72 wt% (Rh)	Bipyridine groups	170.24 m2 g−1; 151.8 m2 g−1	0.095 cm3 g−1 (Ir-CTF); 0.126 cm3 g−1 (Rh-CTF)	Transfer hydrogenation of carbonyl compounds	TOF: 5300 h−1	
44

[bpy-CTF-Ru(acac)2]Clf	[Ru(bpy)(acac)2]Cl	∼3	1.68 wt%	Acetylacetonate	502 m2 g−1	0.29 cm3 g−1	CO2 hydrogenation into formate	TOF: 22700 h−1; TON: 21200 (120 °C, 8 MPa, H2/CO2 = 1)	
45

[bpy-CTF-RuCl3]	[Ru(bpy)Cl3(CH3CN)]	∼3	2.1 wt%	Bipyridine	477 m2 g−11	0.17 cm3 g−1	CO2 hydrogenation into formate	TOF: 38800 h−1	
46

Transfer hydrogenation (TH) of carbonyl compounds into alcohols in water	TOF: 44.8 h−1; TON: ∼990	
47

Ru/bpyTN-30-CTF	Ru–Cl3-bpy	∼3	3.03 wt%	Bipyridine; terephthalonitrile	1251 m2 g−1	0.57 cm3 g−1; 1.81 nm	CO2 hydrogenation into formate in a trickle-bed reactor system	TON: 524000; 669.0 gform. gcat−1 day−1 of formate with a CO2 conversion of 44.8% for a gas velocity of 72 cm s−1	
48

Ir3.5-NHC-CTF	[IrCp*(N^C)Cl]Cl	∼3	3.5 wt%	Triazine; pyridine; imidazolium	693 m2 g−1	0.38 cm3 g−1	CO2 hydrogenation into formate	TOF: 16000 H−1; TON: 24300	
31

Ir11.3@bpy-CTF400	[IrCp*(bpy)Cl]Cl	∼3	11.3 wt%	Bipyridine	686 m2 g−1	0.38 cm3 g−1; 2.23 nm	Catalytic dehydrogenation of formic acid into H2/CO2	TOF: 7930X h−1	
49

Ir(I)@bpy-CTF	IrN2(BPin)3	∼3	8.26 wt%	Bipyridine	494 m2 g−1	0.27 cm3 g−1	C–H borylation of aromatic compounds	95% 1,2-dichlorobenzene was degraded in 8 h	
50

V@acacCTF	VO(acac)2	∼4	1.6 wt%	Acetylacetone	900 m2 g−1	0.65 cm3 g−1	Mannich reaction	>90% in 8 h	
32

IrIIICp*Cl@bipy-CTF	IrIIICp*Cl	∼3	0.2 wt%	Bipyridine	527 m2 g−1	0.27 cm3 g−1	Aerobic oxidation of benzylic alcohols	TON: 237.5	
51

Cu@HATN-CTF	Cu(OAc)2-N2	1–2	5.5 wt%	Hexaazatrinaphthylene (HATN)	1351 m2 g−1	0.51 cm3 g−1	Henry reaction of aromatic aldehydes and nitromethane	TON: 63; TOF: 22.3 h−1	
52

Pt-CTF	
η

2
-(2,2′-bipyrimidyl)dichloroplatinum(II) (Pt(bpym)Cl2)	∼2	15 wt%	Bipyrimidine groups	1667 m2 g−1	0.75 cm3 g−1	Selective oxidation of methane in the presence of concentrated sulfuric acid	TOF = 174 h−1	
30

DCP-CTF@Pd-MC	Pd(OAc)2-N3	∼2	5 mol%	Pyridine	1216 m2 g−1	0.5–3 nm	Styrene transformation into benzaldehyde	>95% conversion; recycled at least 5 times	
53

Cp*Ir@CTF	[Cp*Ir(bpy)Cl]Cl	∼3	3.22 wt%	Bipyridine	395 m2 g−1	0.13 cm3 g−1	
N-methylation of amines with methanol	Nearly > 80% yield; reused > 6 runs	
54


 	Fig. 1  (A) The reaction mechanism diagram over [bpy-CTF-Ru(acac)2]Cl for CO2 conversion into formate. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (B) Evolution of the Ir coordination environment after adding B2Pin2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) Energy profile for stilbene hydrogenation on Pd0 in Pd@TRIA-1 and Pd@TRIA-2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 67. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (B) A DMol3 (DFT-D corrected) energy and geometry optimization of the Pd-trzn-COF. Several starting models with different Pd positions were attempted and they yielded two low energy configurations. (a) Interaction view of Pd and triazine units. (b) Interplay configuration of Pd and Schiff bonds with minimized energy (Pd: green; O: red; N: blue; C: grey and H: white). Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2015, Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 3  (A) The optimized geometry of Pd1/trzn-COF with different adsorption sites of Pd SAs (Sn, Ln and Wn; n = 1, 2, and 3). The letters of S, L and W refer to the surface, interlayer and wall of the straight channel in the c-direction of Pd1/trzn-COF. The Pd SAs are marked with fluorescent green balls. (B) The PDOS of CO, O2 and CO2 adsorbed on Pd1/trzn-COF, where blue represents the states of Pd 4d while green and red represent non-adsorbed and adsorbed Pd1/trzn-COF. The Fermi level is plotted by using a green short-dash line. Reproduced with permission from ref. 14. Copyright 2021, Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany.	 

Au/TTR-COF	Sea cucumber-like morphology	Thioether	138 m2 g−1; 2.95 nm	3.4 nm	Au–S bonds	Thioether (main); Au	HER	430 μmol g−1 h−1	
91

Bpzn-COP	Sheet-like morphology	Bipyridine	354 m2 g−1; ∼1.3–1.6 nm	3–4 nm; 5.6 wt%	Zn coordinated with bipyridine	Zn	HER	162 μmol g−1 h−1	
69

Pt@CTF-HC6	—	Pyridine	602 m2 g−1; 1.2–1.4 nm	2.9 nm; 1 wt%	Pd coordinated with pyridinic nitrogen	Pd	HER	330.95 μmol g−1 h−1	
70

Pt-SACs/CTF	2D nanosheets	Triazine	—	0.343 nm; 1.02 wt%	Pt–N3 coordination bonds (partially positively charged Pt1.45+)	Single-atom Pt–N3 sites	N2 fixation	171.40 μmol g−1 h−1	
92

Ni(OH)2-CTF-1	Layered nanostructure	Benzene; triazine	7.1 m2 g−1; 33.1 nm	0.5 wt%	Ni2+	Reduced Ni atoms or clusters	CO2RR	38.66 μmol g−1 h−1	
93


 	Fig. 4  (A) Band structure (left) and the corresponding total DOS and partial DOS (right). (B) ESP map of the TTR-COF and Mg-TTR-COF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

CTF-Cu-4.8%	Bipyridine	488 m2 g−1; 1.5–2.2 nm	0.2 nm; atomically dispersed; 4.8 wt%	Tetracoordinated Cu–N2Cl2 coordination bonds	Low-coordination sites of confined Cu clusters	CO2RR	FE of 30.6% for C2H4 and FE of 72.0% for CH4	
106

Co-CTF/KB	Pyridine	734.2 m2 g−1; 0.71 cm3 g−1	<1 nm; atomically dispersed; 4 wt%	Co–N–C	Single-atomic Co sites	OER/ORR	Half-wave potential (E1/2 = 0.830 V); limiting current density (6.14 mA cm−2)	
101

Ag/Ag2O@MCOF(Co)	Bipyridine	145.76 m2 g−1; 28.07 nm	5–15 nm	Co coordinated with pyridinic N and Ag2O	Co–N; Co–O	OER/ORR	Maximum peak power density (170.8 mW cm−2) and a specific discharge capacity of 829 mA h g−1	
107

Ru@COF-1	Triazine	972 m2 g−1; 1.70 nm	Ru ion	Tetracoordinated Ru–N2Cl2 coordination bonds	Ru2+ complexes	HER	Overpotential of 200 mV at 10 mA cm−2	
108

NiPor-CTF	Triazine; porphyrin	815 m2 g−1; 0.2–8 nm; (micropores–mesopores)	0.2 nm; 2.40 wt%; atomically dispersed	Ni–N bonds	NiN4 centers	CO2RR	Maximum faradaic efficiency of 97% at −0.9 V with a current density of 52.9 mA cm−2	
6

Ru-CTF	Triazine; bipyridine	888 m2 g−1; micropores	<0.5 nm; 0.43 atom%; individually isolated	Ru–N3Cl3	RuIVO or RuVO	Oxidation of gaseous ethylbenzene to acetophenone	0.78 μmol h−1 for acetophenone production	
109

Pt-CTF/CP	Triazine	555 m2 g−1; 0.79 cm3 g−1	<0.5 nm; 1.0 atom%; individually isolated	Pt–N2Cl2	Pt–N; Pt–Cl	ORR	
	
110

Cu-CTF/CPs	Triazine	491 m2 g−1; 1–2 nm and 2.5–4 nm	<1 nm; atomically dispersed	Coordinatively unsaturated Cu–N2	Cu–N bonds	ORR	Onset potential of 800 mV (RHE; pH 7)	
7

Pt-CTF	Triazine	973 m2 g−1; 2.55 cm3 g−1	<1 nm; 2.8 wt%; atomically dispersed	
	Pt–N; Pt–Cl	HOR and ORR in a PEFC	High oxygen tolerance identical to that of 20 wt% Pt/C	
111

Cu-CTF	Triazine	—	—	—	—	NRR	Onset potential of −50 mV versus RHE; FE for N2O formation: 18% at −200 mV versus RHE	
112

M-CTF (M = Co, Ni, Cu)	Triazine	—	—	—	—	CO2RR	90% at 0.8 V versus RHE during CO formation	

Ru-CTF	Triazine	
	<0.5 nm; 0.4 atom%; atomically dispersed	Ru(tptz)Cl3 (tptz = 2,4,6-tris(2-pyridyl)-s-triazine)	RuO species	Selective alcohol oxidation in aqueous electrolytes	Combined FE for benzoic acid and benzaldehyde reached 95%	
113

Cu-bpy-COF	Bipyridine	1270 m2 g−1; 1–1.2–2.1 nm	1.1 atom%; atomically dispersed	Di-coordinated Cu–N2 structure	Cu(II)/Cu(I)	Photoelectrochemical ORR	Onset potential of 0.15 V vs. Ag/AgCl	
114


 	Fig. 5  (A) Adsorption energy profiles of ORR intermediates to metal centers ((A) O, (B) OH, and (C) OOH). CN means coordination number. The colored dotted lines reflect the changing tendency of the adsorption energies of ORR intermediates as guide lines. Reproduced with permission from ref. 116. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (A) Three models of NiPor-CTF with , COOH*, and CO*, respectively. (B) Gibbs free energy profile for the CO2RR on the three models (pH = 7.2). Reproduced with permission from ref. 6. Copyright 2019, John Wiley and sons.	 

 	Fig. 7  (A) Structures of model-1, model-2, and model-3. (B) Calculated ΔGH* of H2 adsorption; H2 adsorption geometries of (C) model-1, (D) model-2, and (E) model-3; (F) charge density distinction in model-3. Negative and positive iso-surfaces are colored with green and blue, separately. The iso-surface is calculated to be 0.02 e bohr−3. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2022, John Wiley and sons.	 

 	Fig. 8  (A) The polarization curves of the PTCOF and CoNP-PTCOF for the ORR/OER in O2-saturated KOH solution. The inset shows the reversibility of the ORR and OER catalysis, ΔE = (overpotential at 10 mA cm−2) − E1/2 (half-wave potential). (B) DFT calculation results of the electrochemical ORR and OER performances. (a) The ORR/OER mechanism over the CoNP-PTCOF and the potential-determining steps (PDSs). Free energy diagrams for the (b) OER and (c) ORR on the pyridinic N active site of the CoNP-PTCOF in KOH. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright 2021, John Wiley and sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (A) Structural presentation of Cu-CTF/CPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 7. Copyright 2015, John Wiley and Sons. (B) Top and (C) side views of the NO adsorption configuration of the Cu-CTF. The pristine NO location is shown in panel (b). Reproduced with permission from ref. 112 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 


Co3O4/CTF	Co–N–C and Co–O–C bonds	Favoring the O–O bond cleavage and improving ORR activity	Providing mass transfer channels; active sites and anchoring sites	Electrochemical ORR	Half-wave potential (E1/2) of 0.84 V	
122

CTFs@TiO2	S-scheme heterojunction	Forming IEF with CTFs to promote charge carrier separation and improve photocatalytic efficiency	Adsorbing visible light and generating electrons to mineralize TC	Photocatalytic TC degradation	Complete degradation within 90 min; strong anti-fouling ability; 87% performance maintained in the tenth cycle	
123

Cu-CTF/TiO2	Forming an electrical circuit by coupling photoreduction-photooxidation	Reaction sites for methanol photooxidation, a sacrificial reagent to provide electrons to the electrical circuit	Reaction sites for the catalytic reduction of HNO2	Photocatalytic reduction of HNO2	HNO2 reduction exhibited a light-intensity dependent product selectivity, namely, productivity of N2O decreased with the increase in light intensity	
20

TiO2@Bp-COPa	Bp-COP transferred electrons to the CB of TiO2 and accumulated at the COP/TiO2 interface for water reduction to produce H2	Charge transferring medium to suppress the electron–hole recombination through fluorescence emission	Capturing visible light and exciting electrons from the HOMO to the LUMO, and further to TiO2, leaving holes in VB	Visible light-driven HER	1333 μmol g−1 h−1; AQE: >2.5% at an input wavelength of 420 nm	
69


 	Fig. 10  (A) Electron transfer pathway illustration of CTFs@TiO2 S-scheme heterojunctions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. Diagrams of the relative band positions and charge transfer pathways of T-COF and CdS (B) before contact, (C) after contact and (D) under light irradiation. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


CdS-CTF-1	Electron transfer from the LUMO of CTF-1 to the CB of CdS; hole injection from the VB of CdS to the HOMO of CTF-1	Accept electrons from CTF-1 and transfer to Pt active sites for water reduction and H2 production	Supporter; electron donor	Photocatalytic HER	AQE of 16.3% under 420 nm irradiation; HER rate of 11.43 mmol g−1 h−1	
143

MoS2/CTF	Interfacial charge transfer	Charge carrier migration and separation promoter	Light absorption units	Photocatalytic HER	H2 production rate of ∼23 μmol h−1 when the MoS2 loading amount reached 0.6 wt%	
141

CTF@MoS2	Coordination between CTF triazine units and Mo atoms	Exposed defects (sulfur edges) as catalytically active sites for the HER; increased electrochemical active area	Channels for electron transmission and mass transport; provide active sites	Photocatalytic HER	Overpotential of 93 mV and Tafel slope of 43 mV dec−1	
144

CdS-3@CTF	Z-scheme heterojunction C–S chemical bonding interaction	Accumulate electrons for water reduction	Water oxidation active sites—remained holes in the VB of CTF; protect CdS from deactivation and photocorrosion	Photocatalytic water splitting	AQE: 37.8% (365 nm); 12.25 mmol g−1 h−1	
145

SnS2/S-CTFs	Z-scheme heterojunction electron transfer from the CB of SnS2 to the VB of S-CTFs	Complete the oxidation of TEOAa	The electrons accumulated in the CB were responsible for CO2 reduction to yield CO and CH4	Photocatalytic CO2RR	CO evolution rate of 123.6 μmol g−1 h−1; CH4 evolution rate of 43.4 μmol g−1 h−1	
146

CdS–P/ACTF	Photo-induced electron transfer from CdS to ACTFs	Light-harvesting units; transfer electrons to ACTFs	Allow electrons to be accepted from CdS to fast transfer for TC decontamination; adsorb TC molecules efficiently	Photocatalytic TC degradation	Removal rate reached 99.7% for 20 mg L−1 initial TC under 90 min visible light irradiation; maintained 80% degradation rate in successive 300 min after 5 cycles	
147

COF–F–SeS2	C–S chemical bonds; charge transfer	Improve the electronic conductivity and boost the charge migration	Encapsulating polysulfides and polyselenides via physical and chemical interactions; hampering the “shuttling effect”	Cathode material for lithium-sulfur batteries (LSBs)	Discharge capacity of 1633 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, and C-rate of 1163 mA h g−1 at 1C	
148


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
