An ultraweak mechanical stimuli actuated single electrode triboelectric nanogenerator with high energy conversion efficiency   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2NR01530G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2NR01530G
(Paper)
Nanoscale, 2022, 14, 7906-7912An ultraweak mechanical stimuli actuated single electrode triboelectric nanogenerator with high energy conversion efficiency†

        
          
            Yi 
            Lv‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Tianzhao 
            Bu‡
ab, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Zhou
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Guoxu 
            Liu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yunkang 
            Chen
          
        
      ad, 
      
        
          
            Zhaozheng 
            Wang
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xianpeng 
            Fu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Lin
          
        
      ac, 
      
        
          
            Jie 
            Cao
          
        
      ae and 

        
          
            Chi 
            Zhang
          
        
      *abd
aCAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, Beijing Key Laboratory of Micro-nano Energy and Sensor, Beijing Institute of Nanoenergy and Nanosystems, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 101400, China. E-mail: czhang@binn.cas.cn
bSchool of Nanoscience and Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
cSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, China
dCenter on Nanoenergy Research, School of Physical Science and Technology, Guangxi University, Nanning 530004, China
eSchool of Mechanical Engineering, Jiangsu University, Jiangsu 212013, China
Received 
      20th March 2022
    , Accepted 4th May 2022First published on 5th May 2022AbstractTriboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) as a new energy harvester has attracted significant attention due to its excellent output performance and high energy conversion efficiency at low-frequency, small-amplitude and weak-force compared with a traditional electromagnetic generator. Here, an ultraweak mechanical stimuli actuated single electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (UMA-TENG) has been studied with an atomic force microscope. The electrical output and force curve of UMA-TENG were studied at first, as well as the maximum output performance and highest energy conversion efficiency. Then the influence of the driving frequency, separation distance and motion amplitude was investigated, respectively. Moreover, by introducing an external switch to reach a cycle of maximized energy output, the maximum energy conversion efficiency of the UMA-TENG was up to 73.6% with an input mechanical energy of 48 pJ. This work demonstrates that the TENG shows excellent performance in ultraweak mechanical stimuli and could broaden the applications of the TENG in sensors, actuators, micro-robotics, micro-electro-mechanical-systems, and wearable electronics.
Introduction
With the approaching of the era of the Internet of Things (IoTs),1 the energy demands2 for powering the enormous, widely distributed micro-electronics3–5 are getting more urgent. However, chemical batteries,6 solar cells7 and line charging were not appropriate owing to their own limitations; thus harvesting ambient environment energy8,9 would be a more efficient way. The triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) as a new energy harvester was invented in 2012,10 and it could convert mechanical stimuli into electrical energy by combining contact electrification with electrostatic induction. Due to the excellent output performance, high robustness, long lifetime, simple structure and low-cost,11–14 the TENG has become a significant application in IoTs to power micro-electronics by harvesting high entropy energy from the environment. In recent years, the TENG has been used in various self-power sensing systems for applications in marine environmental monitoring,15 wind speed sensing,16 smart home17 and wearable electronics,18–21etc. It could be summarized into four main applications of micro/nanoenergy,22 self-powered sensors,23,24 blue-energy25,26 and high-voltage power sources.27–29
Compared with the traditional electromagnetic generator (EMG), the TENG is parallel and symmetric in theoretical mode, working mechanism and governing equations, which demonstrates that the TENG and EMG are equally important for mechanical energy harvesting.30 Moreover, the TENG has remarkable merits of low frequency,31 small amplitude32 and weak force.33 For example, the TENG could actuate a micromotor rotating and reaching over 1000 r min−1 at an ultraweak driving frequency of 0.1 Hz.34 The TENG could also harvest well the water wave energy35 and breeze wind energy at a small amplitude and gentle-triggering,36 which are hardly harvested by the EMG. However, in all of these research studies, the size of the TENG, the input mechanical energy and output electrical energy were all on the macro-scale. To understand whether the TENG would show excellent performance when the input mechanical energy is scaled down, it is highly expected to investigate the potential application of low quality environmental mechanical energy harvesting.
In this work, an ultraweak mechanical stimuli actuated single electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (UMA-TENG) was studied with an atomic force microscope (AFM). The working principle of the UMA-TENG was studied at first, in which the UMA-TENG was actuated with the AFM tip. When the AFM tip approached and separated from the UMA-TENG, there was a current flow in the external circuit. Secondly, the electrical output and force curve of the UMA-TENG were studied, as well as the maximum output performance and highest energy conversion efficiency. Thirdly, the influence of the driving frequency, separation distance and motion amplitude was investigated, respectively. Moreover, by introducing an external switch to reach a cycle of maximized energy output, the maximum energy conversion efficiency of the UMA-TENG reaches up to 73.6% with an input mechanical energy of 48 pJ. This work demonstrated that the TENG shows excellent performance with ultraweak mechanical stimuli and could broaden the applications of the TENG in sensors, actuators, micro-robotics, micro-electro-mechanical-systems, and wearable electronics.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a illustrates a 3D schematic of the UMA-TENG, which is composed of three functional layers. The bottom layer was an acrylic substrate which had a thickness of 3 mm, and the copper layer which had a thickness of 50–60 μm was stuck on the surface of the acrylic substrate and was connected to the external circuit and the ground. The top fluorinated ethylene propylene (FEP) layer had a thickness of 12 μm as a frictional layer and the FEP as an electronegative material could easily accumulate electrons by contact electrification or charge injection as shown in Fig. S1.† The AFM tip of the UMA-TENG was controlled by an external trigger in force curve mode, and the scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of the AFM tip is shown in Fig. 1c.
 Fig. 1  Overview of the single electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (UMA-TENG). (a) 3D schematic of the UMA-TENG. (b) Working mechanism of the UMA-TENG. (c) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of conductive atomic force microscope (CAFM) tips. (d) Open-circuit voltage of the UMA-TENG. (e) Short-circuit transferred charges of the UMA-TENG. 
The working mechanism of the UMA-TENG is illustrated in Fig. 1b. At the initial state as shown in Fig. 1b(I), the FEP surface was negatively charged and the AFM tip was far away from the FEP surface. The positive charges on the copper film were in a relatively equilibrium state and no current existed in the external circuit. When the AFM tip approached the FEP film surface, the positive charges were inducted on the AFM tips, while equal amount positive charges flew to the ground through an external circuit as shown in Fig. 1b(II). When the AFM tip came in contact with the FEP surface, there was an equilibrium state among the charges of the AFM tip, the copper film and the FEP film, while no charge flew through the external circuit as shown in Fig. 1b(III). When the AFM tip separated from the FEP film as shown in Fig. 1b(IV), the inducted positive charges on the AFM tip decreased, while equal amount positive charges flew through the external circuit getting back to the copper film, until the AFM tip returned to the initial state. Therefore, a continuous alternating current could be generated by the reciprocating motion of the AFM tips. Fig. 1d and e show the basic electrical characteristics of the UMA-TENG, and the open-circuit voltage reached 288 mV and short-circuit transferred charges reached 114 pC, which demonstrated that the UMA-TENG showed stable performance when actuated by periodic stimuli. Then, we used the UMA-TENG to control a simulated switch as shown in Movie S1.†
To better understand the mechanism and improve the output performance of the UMA-TENG, it is necessary to investigate the complete energy flow during the working process.37 Thus, the input mechanical energy, the electrical output performance and the energy conversion efficiency should be evaluated at the same time. In this work, we measured both the electrical and mechanical characteristics, and calculated the energy conversion efficiency of the UMA-TENG which is illustrated in Fig. 2. As illustrated in Fig. 2a, the load voltage increased with the increase of the external load, whereas the transferred charges decreased. Fig. 2b illustrates the voltage–charge curves at different loads and a complete period formed the CEO which represented the output electrical energy. The area of the CEO increased with an increase in the external load at first and reached the maximum at an external load of 400 MΩ, and then decreased, showing a matching impedance of 400 MΩ, as shown in Fig. 2e.
 Fig. 2  Electrical output and force measurements of the UMA-TENG. (a) Voltage and transferred charges of the UMA-TENG. (b) Cycle of electrical output (CEO) curve under different loads. (c) Force curve and electrostatic force curve of UMA-TENG. (d) Two procedures during the processes of extending and retracting. (e) Input energy, output energy and energy conversion efficiency under different loads. 
Then we investigated the input mechanical energy of the UMA-TENG with the force–displacement (F–x) curve. The minimum input mechanical force of the TENG was equal to the electrostatic force, which converted the electrostatic potential energy into an electrical output. In our experiment, the F–x curve of the input mechanical force was measured in the contact force curve mode of the AFM as shown in Fig. 2c, and the cantilever driven by a piezoelectric transducer was in uniform motion which means that the input mechanical force was equal to the electrostatic force.
During the working process, the cantilever approached the FEP surface at first, and the force exerted on the cantilever is represented by a solid blue line in Fig. 2c. There were two procedures during the process of extension, as shown in Fig. 2d. In procedure (i), the AFM tip was not in contact with the FEP surface and the force exerted on the cantilever was only electrostatic force which increased with the AFM tip approaching the FEP surface. In procedure (ii), the AFM tip was in contact with the FEP surface, and the force exerted on the cantilever was the resultant force consisting of electrostatic force, reaction force, adhesive force, etc., in which the electrostatic force and the reaction force were dominant. The resultant force increased sharply, and then it was out of range, which had little influence on our analysis, and we calculated the electrostatic force of this part. When the AFM tip got the maximum displacement, it started separating from the FEP surface, and this process is represented by a solid red line in Fig. 2c. The working process of retracting was opposite to extension.
Because the amplitude of the UMA-TENG was diminutive and was only 12 μm, it could be supposed that the electrostatic force was linearly related to the displacement of the cantilever from previous work,37 which was also confirmed by procedure (i) in Fig. 2c. The dashed blue line of procedure (i) was the electrostatic force after approximation by linear fitting, and it was consistent with the solid blue line. The dashed blue line of procedure (ii) was a linearly fitting line of electrostatic force. Thus, the minimum input mechanical energy was equal to the electrostatic energy which was labelled with a grey dashed line as shown in Fig. 2c. Especially, at the retracting part, the electrostatic force made negative work which was usually dissipated as the heat energy; hence the effective input mechanical energy was only take the part of extending into account.
The input mechanical energy, the output electrical energy and the energy conversion efficiency are illustrated in Fig. 2e. The input mechanical energy was approximately constant with the external load changing, while the output electrical energy reached the maximum output of 5.57 pJ at an external load of 400 MΩ, which was the matching impedance, and the energy conversion efficiency also reached the maximum of 14.2%. This demonstrated that there was also maximum energy conversion efficiency at the matching impedance.
Based on the AFM results, we systematically investigated the output performances of the TENG dependent on working parameters. We evaluated the influence effect of amplitude as shown in Fig. 3, the amplitude was the motion distance of the tip. In this experiment, the tip was controlled by a piezoelectric transducer with a fixed driving frequency of 1 Hz. As shown in Fig. 3a and b, the voltage on load and transferred charges increased with a constant external load of 400 MΩ. This demonstrated that the effective capacitance value increased, which was consistent with previous work. The CEO curves at different amplitudes are illustrated in Fig. 3c, and the area of the CEO represented the output electrical energy of the UMA-TENG, which increased with the increasing amplitude. The input mechanical energy, the output electrical energy and the energy conversion efficiency at different amplitudes are illustrated in Fig. 3d. The input mechanical energy increased in a quadratic relationship with the increase in amplitude, which indicated that the electrostatic force increased linearly with the displacement. Meanwhile, the output electrical energy also increased with the increase in amplitude, and the energy conversion efficiency increased at first until the amplitude reached 10.6 μm and then decreased.
 Fig. 3  The effect of different amplitudes on the electrical and force characteristics of the UMA-TENG. (a) Voltage of the UMA-TENG at different amplitudes. (b) Transferred charges of the UMA-TENG at different amplitudes. (c) CEO of the UMA-TENG. (d) Input energy, output energy and efficiency at different amplitudes. 
After that, we evaluated the influence of the separation distance of the UMA-TENG which was at the starting position of the AFM tip, as shown in Fig. 4. In this experiment, we fixed the movement with a constant amplitude of 5 μm and a constant driving frequency of 1 Hz. With the increase of the separation distance, the voltage on load and the transferred charges both decreased as shown in Fig. 4a and b, and the area of CEO curves decreased with the separation distance increasing as shown in Fig. 4c. The input mechanical energy, the output electrical energy and the energy conversion efficiency at different separation distances are illustrated in Fig. 4d. The input mechanical energy decreased linearly with the increase of the separation distance, and the output electrical energy also decreased. But the energy conversion efficiency was almost the same with the change of the separation distance. When the AFM tip moved at a larger separation distance, the input mechanical energy was smaller because the electrostatic force on the cantilever was smaller. The variable capacitance value between the copper electrode and the ground would also be smaller, so that the output electrical energy is also smaller.
 Fig. 4  The effects of different separation distances on the electrical and force characteristics of the UMA-TENG. (a) Voltage of the UMA-TENG at different separation distances. (b) Transferred charges of the UMA-TENG at different separation distances. (c) CEO curve of the UMA-TENG. (d) Input energy, output energy and efficiency at different separation distances. 
Another important parameter that influenced the output performance was the driving frequency of the AFM tip. The influence of different frequencies on the electrical and mechanical characteristics of the UMA-TENG is illustrated in Fig. 5. In this experiment, the movement amplitude was fixed at 12 μm, and the external load was fixed at 400 MΩ. As shown in Fig. 5a, the voltage on load increased at first and then tended to saturate with the increase in driving frequency. In contrast to the voltage on load, the transferred charges decreased with the increase in driving frequency, as shown in Fig. 5b. The CEO curves of one cycle at different driving frequencies are illustrated in Fig. 5c, which demonstrates that the output electrical energy increased and reached the maximum output at a frequency of 1 Hz and then decreased. As for the input mechanical energy of one cycle as shown in Fig. 5d, it was almost the same with the increasing driving frequency. Thus, the relationship between the energy conversion efficiency of one cycle and the driving frequency was consistent with the relationship of output electrical energy, which reached the maximum energy conversion efficiency of 25.7%. Previous work demonstrated that the voltage at the open-circuit state and the transferred charges at the short-circuit state were constant with the change of driving frequency, but the matching impedance changed with the changes of the driving frequency and movement amplitude. In this experiment, the external load of 400 MΩ was the matching impedance at a movement amplitude of 12 μm and a driving frequency of 1 Hz, which explained the energy conversion efficiency reaching the maximum at an external load of 400 MΩ. When the driving frequency was lower than 1 Hz, the matching impedance was larger than 400 MΩ; thus the voltage on load decreased, and the limitation effect of the transferred charges of the resistor was smaller which demonstrated the increase of transferred charges. In contrast, when the driving frequency was larger than 1 Hz, the matching impedance was less than 400 MΩ, which led to the increase of voltage on load and decrease of transferred charges. Although the output electrical energy and energy conversion efficiency were up to the maximum at an external load of 400 MΩ, the average output power increased with the increase of the driving frequency, due to more electrical energy output at the same work time.
 Fig. 5  The effects of different frequencies on the electrical and force characteristics of the UMA-TENG. (a) Voltage of the UMA-TENG at different frequencies. (b) Transferred charges of the UMA-TENG at different frequencies. (c) CEO curve of the UMA-TENG. (d) Input energy, output energy and efficiency at different frequencies. 
The CMEO curve of the TENG greatly enlarged the output performance compared with the CEO curve and the energy conversion efficiency was already theoretically evaluated which was up to 100% without considering energy dissipation, but it was not investigated experimentally. In this experiment, by introducing an external switch to reach the CMEO, the maximum energy conversion efficiency of the UMA-TENG was up to 73.6% with an input mechanical energy of 48 pJ, which was a high value.
The working principle of the UMA-TENG to reach the CMEO is illustrated in Fig. 6a. At the initial state, the AFM tip was far away from the FEP film surface, as shown in Fig. 6a(I), while the voltage on load and transferred charges were zero, as shown in Fig. 6b(I). When the AFM tip approached the FEP film surface, the switch was off, as shown in Fig. 6a(II). There was no current flow to the external circuit and no charge was transferred from the copper electrode to the ground, while the open-circuit voltage increased, as shown in Fig. 6b(II). When the AFM tip achieved the maximum displacement, the open-circuit voltage also reached up to maximum, as shown in Fig. 6b(III) and then the switch was closed as shown in Fig. 6a(III). The positive charges quickly flew through the external circuit and the transferred charges reached up to maximum immediately with the voltage down to zero, which was illustrated from state III to IV, Fig. 6b. At state IV, the charges at the AFM tip, the FEP film surface and the copper electrode were at an equilibrium state and then the switch was turned off; the AFM tip separated from the FEP film surface as shown in Fig. 6a(V), the open-circuit voltage increased toward the opposite direction and the transferred charges through the load were still at the maximum, Fig. 6b(V). When the AFM tip reached the initial position, Fig. 6a(VI), the open-circuit voltage reached up to the reverse maximum, as shown in Fig. 6b(VI), then the switch was turned on, the positive charges quickly flew from the ground to the copper electrode, and the transferred charges and the voltage were down to zero.
 Fig. 6  The comparison of the electrical and force characteristics between CEO and CMEO curves. (a) Working principle of the UMA-TENG to reach the CMEO. (b) Voltage and transferred charges of the CMEO curve. (c) Voltage and transferred charges of the CEO curve. (d) The U–Q curves of the CEO and CMEO. (e) Input energy, output energy and efficiency of CEO and CMEO curves. 
The voltage on load and the transferred charges are illustrated in Fig. 6c; the maximum voltage and transferred charges were both smaller compared with the output performance of reaching the CMEO, Fig. 6b. The CEO and CMEO curves are illustrated in Fig. 6d, and states I–VI are shown in Fig. 6a, which shows that the output electrical energy of CMEO is much larger than the output electrical energy of CEO. The input mechanical energy, the output electrical energy and the energy conversion efficiency are illustrated in Fig. 6e. Because no charge flew through the external circuit before the switch was turned on, the open-circuit voltage was larger than the voltage of CEO while the AFM tip was at the same position, and the transferred charges increased due to the increase of the open-circuit voltage.
Conclusions
In summary, this work studied an UMA-TENG actuated by ultraweak mechanical stimuli with an AFM. The working principle of the UMA-TENG was studied at first. When the AFM tip approached and separated periodically from the UMA-TENG, there was a stable output in the external circuit. Secondly, the electrical output performance and force curve were studied, which exhibited the maximum output performance and energy conversion efficiency at a matching impedance of 400 MΩ. Thirdly, the influence of the driving frequency, separation distance and motion amplitude, respectively, was investigated. Moreover, by introducing an external switch to reach a cycle of maximized energy output, the maximum energy conversion efficiency of the UMA-TENG was up to 73.6% with an input mechanical energy of 48 pJ. This work demonstrated that the TENG shows excellent performance with ultraweak mechanical stimuli and could broaden the applications of the TENG in sensors, actuators, micro-robotics, micro-electro-mechanical-systems, and wearable electronics.
Experimental
Fabrication of UMA-TENG
The UMA-TENG consists of three layers; the bottom layer is an acrylic base with a size of 30 mm × 70 mm. A copper film and an FEP film are stuck on the base. The copper film was grounded with a copper line.
Characterization of UMA-TENG
The conductive AFM tips were purchased from Olympus (AC240TM-R3). In contact mode, the spring constant was 1.85 nN nM−1 and the sensitivity of the optical lever was 465.77 nm V−1. The measurement of the UMA-TENG was performed with an MFP-3D AFM from Oxford Instruments in ambient environment. The electrical output performance was characterized with a Keithley 6517 system electrometer.
Author contributions
Y. Lv: conceptualization, methodology, measurement, data curation, formal analysis, writing – original draft, and writing – review and editing; T. Bu: data curation, writing – review and editing; H. Zhou: investigation and data curation; G. Liu: SEM characterization; Y. Che: investigation and movie editing; Z. Wang: investigation; X. Fu: investigation; Y. Lin: investigation; J. Cao: programming; C. Zhang: conceptualization, resources, supervision, and writing – review and editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors are grateful for the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51922023, 61874011, and 52105569), and Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (E1EG6804, E1E46803).
References
E. Borgia, Comput. Commun., 2014, 54, 1–31 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 669–672 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Today, 2016, 11, 521–536 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xue, L. Chen, L. Wang, Y. Pang, J. Chen, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2104–2109 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Yang, Y. Pang, L. Zhang, C. Lu, J. Chen, T. Zhou, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 10912–10920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Evans, Smart Power Distrib. Syst. Control. Commun. Optim,  2011, pp. 267–283 Search PubMed .
W. El-Khattam and M. M. A. Salama, Electr. Power Syst. Res., 2004, 71, 119–128 CrossRef .
Y. Gao, C. Yan, H. Huang, T. Yang, G. Tian, D. Xiong, N. Chen, X. Chu, S. Zhong, W. Deng, Y. Fang and W. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Guo, Z. Wen, Y. Zi, M. H. Yeh, J. Wang, L. Zhu, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
F. R. Fan, Z. Q. Tian and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Lin, Y. Xie, Q. Jing, S. Niu and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2226–2233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Xie, S. Niu, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2818–2824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, Q. Gao and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, L. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 6339–6346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xi, Y. Pang, G. Liu, S. Wang, W. Li, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Cao, X. Yu, Y. Xu, Y. Yang, S. Liu, T. Cheng and Z. L. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2022, 306, 117977 CrossRef .
W. Li, G. Liu, D. Jiang, C. Wang, W. Li, T. Guo, J. Zhao, F. Xi, W. Liu and C. Zhang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2018, 3, 1–7 CrossRef .
Y. Tang, H. Zhou, X. Sun, N. Diao, J. Wang, B. Zhang, C. Qin, E. Liang and Y. Mao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–9 Search PubMed .
C. Li, D. Liu, C. Xu, Z. Wang, S. Shu, Z. Sun, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Guan, G. Lin, Y. Gong, J. Wang, W. Tan, D. Bao, Y. Liu, Z. You, X. Sun, Z. Wen and Y. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13948–13955 RSC .
W. Yuan, C. Zhang, B. Zhang, X. Wei, O. Yang, Y. Liu, L. He, S. Cui, J. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2021, 2101139, 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, B. Zhang, J. Chen, L. Jin, W. Deng, J. Tang, H. Zhang, H. Pan, M. Zhu, W. Yang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 1650–1656 CrossRef CAS .
L. Jin, W. Deng, Y. Su, Z. Xu, H. Meng, B. Wang, H. Zhang, B. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Xiao, M. Zhu and W. Yang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
U. Khan, T. H. Kim, H. Ryu, W. Seung and S. W. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 2–8 Search PubMed .
G. Zhu, Y. Su, P. Bai, J. Chen, Q. Jing, W. Yang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6031–6037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pang, Y. Feng, J. An, P. Chen, J. Han, T. Jiang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 1–10 CrossRef .
Z. Wang, Y. Shi, F. Liu, H. Wang, X. Liu, R. Sun, Y. Lu, L. Ji, Z. L. Wang and J. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104910 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Li, Y. Zi, H. Guo, Z. L. Wang and F. M. Fernández, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 481–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, W. Tang, Y. Pang, C. Han and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 719–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, W. Tang, C. Han, F. Fan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3580–3591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zi, H. Guo, Z. Wen, M. H. Yeh, C. Hu and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 4797–4805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, G. Zhen, G. Liu, T. Bu, W. Liu, X. Fu, P. Zhang, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2019, 61, 111–118 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, X. Fu, G. Liu, T. Tong, T. Bu, Z. L. Wang and C. Zhang, iScience, 2021, 24, 4 Search PubMed .
H. Yang, Y. Pang, T. Bu, W. Liu, J. Luo, D. Jiang, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Zhang, C. Qin, T. Feng, J. Li, Z. Yang, X. Sun, E. Liang, Y. Mao and X. Wang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 1903–1907 CrossRef CAS .
X. Fu, S. Xu, Y. Gao, X. Zhang, G. Liu, H. Zhou, Y. Lv, C. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6, 2343–2350 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xu, X. Li, X. Xia, J. Fu, W. Ding and Y. Zi, Nano Energy, 2019, 59, 154–161 CrossRef CAS .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nr01530g‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Overview of the single electrode triboelectric nanogenerator (UMA-TENG). (a) 3D schematic of the UMA-TENG. (b) Working mechanism of the UMA-TENG. (c) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of conductive atomic force microscope (CAFM) tips. (d) Open-circuit voltage of the UMA-TENG. (e) Short-circuit transferred charges of the UMA-TENG.	 

 	Fig. 2  Electrical output and force measurements of the UMA-TENG. (a) Voltage and transferred charges of the UMA-TENG. (b) Cycle of electrical output (CEO) curve under different loads. (c) Force curve and electrostatic force curve of UMA-TENG. (d) Two procedures during the processes of extending and retracting. (e) Input energy, output energy and energy conversion efficiency under different loads.	 

 	Fig. 3  The effect of different amplitudes on the electrical and force characteristics of the UMA-TENG. (a) Voltage of the UMA-TENG at different amplitudes. (b) Transferred charges of the UMA-TENG at different amplitudes. (c) CEO of the UMA-TENG. (d) Input energy, output energy and efficiency at different amplitudes.	 

 	Fig. 4  The effects of different separation distances on the electrical and force characteristics of the UMA-TENG. (a) Voltage of the UMA-TENG at different separation distances. (b) Transferred charges of the UMA-TENG at different separation distances. (c) CEO curve of the UMA-TENG. (d) Input energy, output energy and efficiency at different separation distances.	 

 	Fig. 5  The effects of different frequencies on the electrical and force characteristics of the UMA-TENG. (a) Voltage of the UMA-TENG at different frequencies. (b) Transferred charges of the UMA-TENG at different frequencies. (c) CEO curve of the UMA-TENG. (d) Input energy, output energy and efficiency at different frequencies.	 

 	Fig. 6  The comparison of the electrical and force characteristics between CEO and CMEO curves. (a) Working principle of the UMA-TENG to reach the CMEO. (b) Voltage and transferred charges of the CMEO curve. (c) Voltage and transferred charges of the CEO curve. (d) The U–Q curves of the CEO and CMEO. (e) Input energy, output energy and efficiency of CEO and CMEO curves.	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2nr01530g
‡ These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
