Solar light harvesting by energy transfer: from ecology to coherence  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE23013E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE23013E
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9374-9393Solar light harvesting by energy transfer: from ecology to coherence

        
          
            Gregory D. 
            Scholes
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Tihana 
            Mirkovic
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Daniel B. 
            Turner
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Francesca 
            Fassioli
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Andreas 
            Buchleitner
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Chemistry, University of Toronto, 80 St. George Street, Toronto, Ontario, M5S 3H6 Canada. E-mail: greg.scholes@utoronto.ca;   Tel: +1 416 946 7532
bPhysikalisches Institut, Albert-Ludwigs Universität Freiburg, Herman-Herder-Straße 3a, 79104 Freiburg, Germany. E-mail: abu@uni-freiburg.de
Received 
      30th July 2012
    , Accepted 24th September 2012First published on 25th September 2012AbstractOver billions of years, evolutionary pressure has facilitated the development of sophisticated and diverse light-harvesting systems in photosynthetic organisms, enabling them to adapt to a variety of habitats and light conditions. Today, driven by the need for cheap and efficient solar power, we turn to photosynthetic organisms and their light-active supramolecular assemblies for bio-inspiration. By studying natural systems, we can learn more about the basic principles behind the fine-tuned functionalities of light capture and energy transfer on the molecular level. In this review, we use ideas from evolutionary ecology and quantum mechanics to elucidate the parameters that underpin the efficient and robust light-harvesting machinery of natural light-harvesting systems. The family of antenna proteins of cryptophyte algae serves as an example to illustrate the evolutionary diversification process on a structural and consequently a photophysical level. Two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy experiments reveal the existence of coherence among vibronic levels in the initial response of light-harvesting proteins to femtosecond optical excitation. We discuss what implications quantum transport processes might have for light harvesting.

Broader context
We suggest that expanding the scope of bio-inspiration has the potential to yield paradigm shifts for the design of energy-conversion systems. To explore this idea we speculate on the limits for controlling excitation energy flow in supramolecular assemblies and we ask whether examination of biological ecosystems—rather than solely isolated proteins like reaction centers—suggests strategies for beating the thermodynamic limit of solar power conversion. In a sense, photosynthetic ecosystems function like dynamic multijunction solar cells. Zooming in to the length scales on which molecules interact with each other during the transfer of excitation energy, we examine the limits for rapid energy transfer and long exciton diffusion lengths. We discuss recent experiments that reveal a potential role played by coherence, possibly quantum mechanical in nature, in light harvesting. While coherence effects may not profoundly change energy migration efficiencies in large light harvesting antenna systems, they likely influence the underlying distribution of energy trapping times. Understanding and controlling these distributions may provide opportunities for quantum engineering in chemistry and biology.

Introduction
Plants turn sunlight into energy using abundant ingredients like water and carbon dioxide.1–3 This living solar cell is the energy hub for life on Earth. Despite such global impact, these are not highly efficient solar cells4,5—but photosynthetic systems exhibit such diversity and agility in adapting to ambient conditions that they serve as inspiration.6 Identifying and examining some of these inspirations in the context of solar energy conversion using organic materials are the goals of this article. This paper has two main points. First, we suggest that expanding the scope of bio-inspiration has the potential to yield paradigm shifts for the design of energy-conversion systems. To explore this idea we speculate on the limits for controlling excitation energy flow in supramolecular assemblies and we ask whether examination of biological ecosystems—rather than solely isolated proteins like reaction centers—suggests strategies for beating the thermodynamic limit of solar power conversion. In parallel, we investigate the impact of evolutionary processes on the diversification of light-harvesting machinery, where changes to the composition and architecture of photosynthetic proteins can dramatically alter the mechanism of light capture. Second, we discuss recent experiments that reveal a potential role played by coherence,7 possibly quantum mechanical in nature,8 in light harvesting. We discuss how to think about quantum mechanical effects in light harvesting and how they might help light harvesting and capture of excitation energy at a trap.
The architectures of photosynthetic systems have motivated the design of light-active supramolecular assemblies.9–11 Using the principles of natural light harvesting may help inspire ways of increasing the capture of solar energy, for example, by materials used for solar fuel production.9,10,12–17 It is worth emphasizing that bio-inspiration is much more interesting than searching for an optimized ‘machine’. Studies of how the photosynthetic apparatus has evolved over the course of the past 3 billion years in a variety of organisms has yielded a compelling picture of how the machinery has been not only refined, but also diversified.18–21 Despite possible optimization by evolution, a challenge for elucidating key design principles by studying natural systems is that details can be obscured by accumulated complexity.22 Dutton and co-workers argue that parallel bottom-up design is needed to avoid such excess complexity.23 They argue that atomic level mimics of natural systems are unnecessary, but the challenge is to identify the key features of minimal functional units.
Bio-inspiration is evidently a complicated aim. Comparisons have been made between biological functions and engineering systems.24,25 Studies like these clearly indicate an element missing from current organic photovoltaic designs—our solar cells are docile. In contrast, photosynthetic systems use a range of active mechanisms for regulating excitation transport to reaction centers and ensuring the system is photoprotected.26–28 Imagine a solar panel that rewired itself in response to changing conditions of sun and cloud during the day using feedback and control loops.29 The engineering principles to achieve that are well known, but the requisite design elements at the molecular level have not yet been developed. They have, however, been discovered by nature and are utilized in many photosynthetic light-harvesting complexes.
The present paper focuses on light harvesting. Light harvesting is the process whereby excitation energy is captured by an assembly of molecules, the antenna, and subsequently transferred by Förster-type energy transfer to an acceptor (schematically illustrated in Fig. 1a). The acceptor is usually a chromophore with lower excitation energy than the donor molecules in the antenna. The result is a greatly enhanced spectral and spatial absorption cross-section for the acceptor. A synthetic and a naturally occurring light-harvesting assembly are presented in Fig. 1b–d respectively. Fig. 1b shows a dendrimer macromolecule designed so that the peripheral chromophores are the primary light absorbers. Excitation energy is efficiently transferred to the core chromophore via a number of possible pathways. Thus the effective absorption cross-section for the core chromophore is increased substantially. Fig. 1c and d shows the organization of chlorophyll chromophores in photosystem I from the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus. The reaction center at the core of this complex is photosensitized by the surrounding 100 or more chromophores.30
 Fig. 1  The antenna effect. (a) Schematic illustration of light-harvesting principles, where accessory pigments are utilized for energy capture. After capture, energy is transferred by Förster-type energy transfer from the accessory pigments to the reaction centre (the acceptor), the unique protein that converts energy into charge separation. (b) Synthetically prepared snowflake-shaped Zn–porphyrin dendritic light-harvesting system, where the mutual arrangement and the chemical nature of the dendron moieties (BE (benzyl ether) branches and/or oligo(ethynylenepheylene)s (EtPh) chains) and the Zn–porphyrin core enable efficient energy transfer between the periphery and the core.36 The crucial role in the manifestation of the dendrimer effect is played by the EtPh conjugated chain, which acts as the mediator in energy-transfer processes in the dendritic antenna system. (c and d) The architecture of the pigment protein complex, photosystem I (PSI) (from Synechococcus), is based on a network of pigment antennae surrounding the reaction centre. The two stereoviews are as seen (c) from the side and (d) from the top, with respect to the cell membrane. The chlorophyll tails have been omitted for clarity. The numerous chlorophylls on the periphery of the complex harvest light and then transfer that excitation energy to the “special pair” of chlorophylls in the reaction centre, where charge separation occurs. The charge separation across the cell membrane is later utilized for ATP synthesis. The length scales are approximate. 
The efficiency or distance range (diffusion length) of energy transfer and trapping via a random walk of excitation ‘jumps’ depends on the excited state lifetime compared to the average time scale for a jump. For example, Pearlstein31 and Montroll32 have found that for N molecules arranged in a square lattice, where one of those molecules is a trap, it takes on average (1/π)NlogN jumps to reach the trap. Considering the relatively short excited state lifetime of a typical molecule (say ∼2 ns) and an antenna comprising 400 molecules (meaning it is about 20 nm in length) an energy transfer ‘jump’ time of ∼300 fs is required to attain a 90% quantum efficiency of trapping at a trap site. Energy transfer on this kind of time scale often involves mechanisms beyond those accommodated by Förster theory.33,34 Thinking beyond Förster theory opens up interesting opportunities for the control of energy transfer using molecular arrangements of molecules or perturbation of electronic interactions.35 For example, a remarkable recent finding has been the detection of coherence involving the excited chromophores in biological light-harvesting complexes, although—as we will discuss in a later section of this article—it remains to be seen what new opportunities the coherence provides.
Available light utilization in nature
Light-harvesting complexes are not optimized to a standard set of metrics in isolation, like an absorption cross-section that perfectly complements the AM1.5 solar spectrum at one sun irradiance, for example. Like other living systems, local habitat, prevailing weather, and competing organisms in the habitat all need to be accounted for in the optimization of an antenna. Consequently, there is vast compositional and architectural variation in light-harvesting antennae of photosynthetic complexes, schematically depicted in Fig. 2a. The modification of the chemical nature of pigment molecules associated with light-harvesting complexes, as well as their number and mutual arrangement within the antenna structure allowed photosynthetic organisms to evolve to optimize their light-harvesting capabilities to particular regions of the visible and near-infrared spectrum. The challenge in bio-inspiration from photosynthetic organisms therefore is to find the rules guiding optimization. There may also be something to be gained by thinking about bio-inspiration differently. Perhaps there are alternatives to the goal of designing a single perfect device optimized for the perfect operating conditions. Naturally, the parameters defining an optimal solar cell are well defined, but are discoveries of new paradigms unduly constrained by the benchmarks characterizing a certified solar cell?
 Fig. 2  (a) Variation in light-harvesting antennae commonly encountered in photosynthetic organisms, which vary widely in their protein structure and the number and arrangement of pigments utilized. The molecular structures (with parent organisms in brackets) from left to right are: peridinin-chlorophyll-protein or PCP (of Amphidinium carterae), phycoerythrin 545 (of Rhodomonas CS24), light harvesting complex LHCII (of Spinacia olearia), schematic representation of a chlorosome (of Chloroflexus aurantiacus), and light harvesting complex LH2 (of Rhodopseudomonas acidophila). Their respective absorption spectra, shown in matching colours, illustrate how different organisms have evolved to optimize their light-harvesting capabilities in different regions of the visible spectrum. Figure adapted from ref. 44. (b) Schematic of microbial layers in microbial mats from Great Sippewissett Salt Marsh, Massachusetts and (c) selected solar irradiance spectra during transmission through the mat, see text for explanation. Data reported in ref. 43. 
Photosynthesis has been optimized for plant survival, not light harvesting. Many factors, collectively, lead to the success of an organism, and the challenge is to determine the crucial parameters that have been selected for in evolution. For example, it is impractical to draw conclusions about relative optimization of photosynthetic light harvesting in gymnosperms versus angiosperms starting from the observation that gymnosperms (primitive seed-producing plants, like conifers, Ginkgo, etc.) are outnumbered ∼800 to 250000 by angiosperms (flowering plants). That marked difference in species diversity is due to the mode of reproduction and growth form, allowing flowering plants to master an incredible diversity of environments.37,38 Their photosynthetic apparatus is about the same. Similarly, it is clear that the bottom line on photosynthetic solar energy conversion is not the ratio of chemical energy produced to incident solar energy, but is more closely tied to survival fitness. For example, in one documented case, researchers discovered purple bacteria that deliberatively ‘short-circuit’ light harvesting complexes to reduce photosynthetic efficiency.39 These bacteria inhabit the South Andros Black Hole, Bahamas. The carotenoids in the light harvesting complexes of these bacteria are modified so that most of the light absorbed by the carotenoids is transduced into heat. That allows these bacteria to control the temperature of their surroundings, making it inhospitable for competing organisms. In this example, light harvesting is used to fend off the opposition.
We believe it is important to keep an ecological perspective when trying to elucidate design principles by studying the properties and performance of isolated photosynthetic light harvesting complexes. For instance, the nature of the light environment is crucial for phototrophic microorganisms and has significant impact on their light-dependent metabolic activities. The presence of these pigment rich phototrophs themselves can greatly alter the light quality in a certain environment,40 and therefore, in order to cope with rapidly changing light quality and spectrum, photosynthetic species are often stratified in the aquatic environment. We think of the levels of perspective ranging from the physical functionality of isolated light-harvesting complexes (biophysics) to the function of those complexes in the organism (biology) to the interplay of various organisms cohabitating a community (ecology). The overall picture can be compared to a solar farm, where different parts of the sun's spectrum are harvested by different devices—a similar idea to tandem cells.
Microbial mats are examples of stratified light harvesting. They are model communities that have been studied to gain insight into the interplay of photosynthetic organisms.41 Pierson and co-workers have reported a striking example of complementary light harvesting in microbial mats found in the intertidal zone of Great Sippewissett Salt Marsh, Massachusetts.42,43 In Fig. 2b, a schematic depiction of the depth profile in a microbial mat is shown. Five distinct layers of phototrophic organisms were identified.
The incident solar irradiance spectrum and its attenuation through these layers was characterized.43 The incident solar irradiance spectrum is shown in the plot in Fig. 2c. Dramatic attenuation of the irradiance is observed in the subsequent spectrum, measured beneath the first two layers, the gold layer (diatom rich) and the green layer of cyanobacteria. The notable troughs in the transmitted spectrum can be attributed to chlorophyll-a (670–680 nm), phycocyanin (620–630 nm) and phycoerythrin (580–590 nm). The strong absorption of carotenoids, chlorophylls (Soret peaks) and other pigments contribute to the dramatic decrease of irradiance below 500 nm. Below the pink layer (predominantly purple bacteria), the characteristics of the solar spectrum become washed out (Fig. 2c third spectrum), and the transmitted light is mainly in the near-infrared region because these purple bacteria harvest light in the 800–850 nm range. The next layer of purple bacteria utilize bacteriochlorophyll-b in place of bacteriochlorophyll-a in their antenna complexes, and thus they can harvest the transmitted near infrared light (900–1000 nm). The green sulfur bacteria at the bottom of the mat photosynthesize using the trickle of photons in the ∼750 nm region. They are living under conditions equivalent to a moonlit night, where each bacterium receives only about 300 photons per second!
Cryptophyte antenna complexes and light-harvesting innovation
Cryptophyte algae
Algae are plants lacking roots, stems, and leaves (thallophytes) and are found mainly in water.45 In most habitats, they are the primary producers in the food chain and “fix” about the same quantity of CO2 annually as higher plants.20 Our recent work has focused on cryptophytes, a family of motile, unicellular algae that occur in a variety of aquatic environments, both marine and freshwater. The cryptophyceae have a couple of notable features that make them interesting models for learning about light-harvesting design. First, they come in several colours, Fig. 3, as we will examine below. The marked colour variation stems from a remarkable range of chemical types of chromophores (bilins) that are found in the antenna complexes of cryptophytes. Second, cryptophytes derived from a secondary endosymbiosis, whereby the genetic information encoding photosynthesis was obtained by a non-photosynthetic protist from an enslaved red alga.21,46–51 A striking observation here is that many of the genes for the phycobilisome antenna system of red algae (and cyanobacteria) were lost. Glazer and Wedermeyer highlighted why that is surprising: why would a sophisticated multi-subunit antenna that incorporates a highly effective spatial gradient of chromophore types and the ability to modify itself to adapt to local light quality reduce to an apparently much more primitive light-harvesting complex in cryptophytes? That question remains unanswered, but the cryptophyte antenna complexes are now known to function very efficiently.52
 Fig. 3  The variation in colour among the different algal species is reflective of their specific light-harvesting antennae that they carry. The species with their respective phycobiliproteins starting in the top left corner and going clockwise are: Cryptomonas pyrenoidifera (CCMP 1177 with PE566), Rhodomonas minuta (CPCC 344 with PE545), Hemiselmis pacifica (CCMP 706 with PC577), Chroomonas mesostigmatica (CCMP 269 with PC645) and Proteomonas sulcata (CCMP 705 with PE545). 
To make clear the varying length scales relevant for energy transfer in cryptophyte photosynthesis, in Fig. 4 we provide increasingly closer views of the light-harvesting machinery. The general structure of a photosynthetic cryptophyte, Proteomonas sulcata, is depicted in Fig. 4a by a scanning electron micrograph. In the transmission electron micrographs in Fig. 4b and c, the light-harvesting proteins, phycoerythrin PE545, appear as the dark areas in the intrathylakoid space. The schematic representation of the thylakoid membrane and the excitation energy flow in the photosynthetic pigment system in Fig. 4d gives an idea of the light-capture processes in cryptophyte algae. Phycoerythrin PE545 is the antenna pigment involved in the initial energy-capture step, from which the excitation is funneled to membrane bound antenna systems and then to the core of photosystem I (PS I) or PS II.53 Zooming in on phycoerythrin PE545 (Fig. 4e and f) reveals the architectural details of the eight chromophores and the protein backbone. The light-harvesting mechanism is based on a model where the four highest-energy pigments direct their excitation energy first to the central pair. Subsequent steps involve the transfer of that excitation to the two lowest-energy pigments, in this case the 15,16-dihydrobiliverdin, or DBV, chromophores. In isolated protein samples, the DBVs emit light; in vivo, the energy is transferred from the DBVs to other proteins as discussed above.
 Fig. 4  Cryptophyte views, from a cell to an antenna complex. Red rectangles in (b)–(d) represent areas that are zoomed-in in subsequent figure panels. (a) SEM micrograph of a flagellated cryptophyte alga, Proteomonas sulcata. (b) The fine structural details and the large network of thylakoid membranes within the chloroplast are visible in this cross-sectional view of the transmission electron micrograph. (c) In this magnified view, the light-harvesting phycobiliproteins appear as the dark, electron-rich regions located in the intrathylakoid space. (d) A simplified schematic model of the cryptophyte thylakoid membrane illustrating that the phycobiliproteins are located in the intrathylakoid space, while the PS II and PS I core complexes as well as the Chl a/c2 antenna are located in the membrane. A scheme showing the energy migration flow among the constituents of the light-harvesting apparatus is depicted in the top left corner with white arrows. (e) A structural model of phycoerythrin 545 (PE545) from the 0.1 nm resolution X-ray crystal structure. The ribbon diagram shows the four subunits of the protein in different colours and the embedded chromophores are shown in black. (f) Same view as (e), but apoprotein is removed from view. The eight chromophores are distributed throughout the protein subunits: each β subunit carries three phycoerythrobilins (PEBs), and each α subunit carries one 15,16-dihydrobiliverdin (DBV). The arrows indicate the energy flow in PE545 when the four highest-energy chromophores capture the light. The energy is then channelled (black arrows) to the central dimer and subsequently transferred (grey arrows) to the lowest-energy bilins (the DBVs). 
Chromophore diversity in cryptophyte light harvesting complexes
There are approximately 200 known species of cryptophyte algae.45 Each species contains only a single phycobiliprotein antenna complex; multiple species can produce the same or very similar phycobiliproteins. In Fig. 5 we elaborate on the diversity of the bilin chromophores in the phycobiliproteins. All cryptophyte phycobiliproteins are structurally similar in that they are based on an αα′β2 tetramer complex, where each α subunit carries one bilin chromophore, each β subunit carries three bilins, and the attachment positions are completely conserved: α-Cys 18 (or 19), β-Cys 50,61(di-linked bilin), β-Cys 82, and β-Cys 158. The two classes of phycobiliproteins encountered in cryptophytes are phycoerythrins (red coloured) and phycocyanins (blue coloured), with subclassification being primarily based on their absorption spectrum maximum. Three types of cryptophyte phycoerythrins (Cr-PE) and five types of cryptophyte phycocyanins (Cr-PC) have been reported: PE 545, PE 555, two types of PE 566 (see discussion below), PC 569, PC 577, PC 612, PC 630 and PC 645.
 Fig. 5  Compositional and chromic variation in cryptophycean phycobiliproteins.54,55,59 Variance of the absorption region of different phycobiliproteins is attributed to numerous combinations of constituent bilins. The first column denotes the phycobiliprotein type (PE, phycoerythrin; PC, phycocyanin) and position of the absorption maximum of the native protein. Each phycobiliprotein contains four subunits, two α and two β. The bilin composition and their binding sites of each of the subunits are denoted in the second and third columns. The right panel shows the structure and the position of the absorption maximum of chromophores that tend to be integrated in cryptophycean phycobiliproteins. The bilin legend is shown at the bottom of the diagram. Abbreviations used: DBV: 15,16-dihydrobiliverdin; PEB: phycoerythrobilin; PCB: phycocyanobilin; MBV: mesobiliverdin. Number in parenthesis indicate the red absorption maxima of solutions of bilin peptides. 
The absorption of phycobiliproteins is ultimately linked to the bilin composition and content, where bilins have evolved to absorb light efficiently in the green, yellow, orange, or red portion of the visible spectrum—the spectral window where chlorophyll a absorption is very weak. Those chromophores are not all isomers; variation in the oxidation state is also observed. From the list of bilins in Fig. 5, variations in the number of double bonds (e.g. eight for phycocyanobilin (PCB) and phycoerythrobilin (PEB), nine in bilin 584 and 10 in bilin 618) and degree of conjugation are evident in the bilin library. Only PCBs and PEBs are present on cyanobacterial and rhodophytan biliproteins, whereas the others have only been detected in cryptomonads.
Determination of cryptophycean phycobiliprotein classification solely on absorption maximum is not efficient, as demonstrated by the case of PE566. Wedemeyer et al.54 have shown that two strains of PE566, the Bernani strain and the CBD strain, both exhibit an absorption maximum at 566 nm. However these phycobiliproteins differ in their bilin composition, specifically the chromophores attached to the α subunit, where the Bernani strain has bilin 584 and the CBD strain binds bilin 618 instead. Bilin 584 has been noted to have an additional double bond between C-12′ and C-12′′ compared to PEB.55 The difference in the bilin composition has led to further photophysical differences between these PE566 strains, where the distinction is made based on the absorbance ratio A600nm:Apeak (>0.23 for CBD, and <0.18 for Bernani) and the location of the fluorescence emission maximum (616 ± 3 nm for CBD, and 601 ± 1 nm for Bernani).54
The absorption spectra of photosynthetic pigments are affected by their local environment in the protein ‘scaffold’. Attachment of phycobilins to the apoprotein leads to several changes compared to free phycobilins in solution: attachment may alter the wavelength of their absorption maximum, narrow their absorption line width, and increase their fluorescence amplitude. The differences in absorption spectra among different phycobiliproteins arise owing to the nature of the chromophores that are bound to these proteins, their chemical environment, and the number and ratio of the pigments bound to the apoprotein. Phycoerythrins (PE545 and PE555) typically have only one maximum in their absorption spectrum and an absorption bandwidth of approximately 0.24–0.29 eV (FWHM of spectrum), as PEBs dominate the composition. The case of PE545 and PE555 is also a good example illustrating why the absorption spectrum of a phycobiliprotein is not equivalent to the sum of all the spectra of constituent chromophores. The two proteins both contain three PEBs and one dihydrobiliverdin (DBV), but the variation in the local environment of the bilins, arising as a result of folding of protein subunits and the variation of amino acid residues in the vicinity of phycobilins, significantly modifies the overall absorption spectrum.
From an evolutionary aspect, phylogenic analyses have shown that the origin of the β subunits of cryptophyte biliproteins (both phycoerythrins and phycocyanins) can be traced back to red algal phycoerythrins (with respect to the apoprotein).56 It is believed that PEB is the ancestral character state of the cryptophyte biliprotein.47,57 As such, it is often suggested that the basalmost lineage often contains PE545, whose β subunit presumably has retained some of the ancestral character state.57 To date there are no clues on the evolutionary origin of the α subunit in cryptomonad phycobiliproteins, as this subunit does not appear to be compatible with the assembly of the trimeric structure exhibited by phycobilisomes in red algae and cyanobacteria. Cryptomonads synthesize a greater number of bilins than are known to occur in cyanobacterial and red algal species, but at the same time only produce one phycobiliprotein polypeptide, which in all cases is closely homologous to B-phycoerythrin β subunit. The spectral variation in cryptomonad phycobiliproteins ultimately has resulted from their bilin diversity.
Some clues to the evolution of different bilins might lie in the biosynthetic pathways of these pigments as was proposed by Beale and Cornejo58 for the atypical acidophilic red alga Cyanidium caldarium:heme → biliverdin IXα → 15,16 dihydrobiliverdin IXα (DBV) → 3(Z)-phycoerythrobilin (PEB) → 3(Z)-phycocyanobilin (PCB) → 3(E)-phycocyanobilin (PCB)
From this scheme, it is evident that three of the cryptomonad phycobiliproteins (15,16-DBV, PCB and PEB) occur as intermediates in this pathway, whereas mesobiliverdin (MBV) can potentially be attained through a single step from the intermediates.59 The acryloyl bilins, bilin-618 and bilin-584, which occur exclusively in cryptomonads, might be generated through an alternative pathway based on acrylo-protoporphyrin. The evolution of PE545 can then be envisioned to have occurred as one PEB on the α subunit was exchange for a DBV bilin, a precursor in the biosynthetic pathway of PEB and PCB as shown above. Further substitutions on different sites have lead to the formation of the bilin diversity in phycobiliproteins encountered in cryptophyte species. What factors drive changes in bilin type and how an organism ‘iterates’ to a new antenna type are interesting questions. Another question that arises is whether small differences—such as the ones observed for the two types of PE566—tend to be strain specific or environmentally induced.
Antenna diversity and innovation
How species are selected for or against during evolution is a complex and fundamental biological question.60–65 Driving forces for speciation can be adaptation or migration to new environments owing to the development of new traits. The diversity of cryptophyte light-harvesting spectra could be an example of speciation that enables habitation of aqueous strata or niches of varying light quality, or it may enable complementary habitation of an environment. It is unknown how the selection of species drives ‘design’ of organisms,61 so it is difficult to draw conclusions about optimal light-harvesting antenna systems from surveying the extant species. Nevertheless, by examining the emergence of species richness, using the evolutionary tree for cryptophytes reported by Hoef-Emden,66 it is evident that antenna design represents an innovation. By innovation we mean an attribute that significantly contributes to diversification and serves as a branching point in evolution. For example, in Fig. 6 we plot the cumulative number of cryptophyte species with various antenna types. Notice that each new antenna type has spurred species diversification, suggesting that the antenna absorption spectrum is an innovation. It is also worth emphasizing that such innovations are non-trivial; it is not the result of a few random base mutations, but involves significant gene evolution.67
 Fig. 6  Speciation of cryptophytes. Cumulative frequency of the number of cryptophyte species with various light-harvesting antenna types—PE555, PE545, PC630, PC645, and PE566—as a function of time up to the present day. Data was taken from the maximum likelihood tree based on nuclear small subunit rDNA sequences.66 The insets show photographs of aqueous-buffer suspensions of light harvesting complexes isolated from cryptophytes. From left: PC645 (Chroomonas mesostigmatica, CCMP 269), PC577 (Hemiselmis pacifica, CCMP 706), PE545 (Proteomonas sulcata, CCMP 705), PE566 (Cryptomonas pyrenoidifera, CCMP 1177). 
The analysis reported in Fig. 6 suggests that antenna type—determined mainly by chromophore variety—is an innovation. Precisely what advantage is conferred by each of these differently coloured antenna types in different habitats is unknown. It could be that there is no distinct advantage, since the diversity of light-harvesting complexes in photosynthesis suggests there are many good solutions for light harvesting. Alternatively, the advantage could be that other organisms in the ecosystem are somehow disadvantaged, like the case of the purple bacteria in the South Andros Black Hole, mentioned earlier in this article. Plants only absorb a relatively narrow spectral range, and it is likely that differently coloured antenna—complementing chlorophyll absorption—allow other photosynthetic species to competitively occupy the same environment as higher plants and green algae. In any case, the range of cryptophyte light-harvesting complexes is decided mainly by the selection of bilin chromophores incorporated in the complex. A secondary ‘control knob’ is the degree of excitonic coupling between the central pair of bilins. The coupling ranges from strong in the case of PC645 to weak amongst the phycobiliproteins of the Hemiselmis clade. Electronic interactions between the two bilins positioned at the center of light-harvesting complex lead to quite large splitting of the absorption band, thus modifying the absorption spectrum quite significantly.68,69 In principle, the exciton splitting can help bridge large energy gaps caused by chromophore type mismatches.
There is a vast range of length scales and time scales for photosynthesis in cryptophyte algae. The architectural and compositional elements of light-harvesting antenna seem to be optimized not only for a particular colour of light but also for adaptability, meaning that the complex interconnectedness of the light-harvesting elements allows organisms to adapt to different light intensities.
Light scavenging
Oftentimes photosynthesis is not light-limited. For example, throughout most of the day, plants dissipate absorbed excitation energy using ingenious photoprotection circuits (see ref. 6 for a brief review and relevant references). Indeed, it is likely that an innovation that makes the major light-harvesting complex of higher plants and green algae, LHCII, so ubiquitous is its ability to ‘undo’ light harvesting by dissipating excess excitation energy effectively, as mentioned in the introduction to this article and described in detail elsewhere.6,27,28,70,71 However, where there is light, there is photosynthesis—even if the light is dim!
It is common to find that the main difference between a photosynthetic organism adapted for low-light conditions versus one grown in high-light conditions is the antenna size. More precisely, the ratio of antenna-bound molecules to reaction centers increases as light becomes scarcer. For example, in Fig. 7 we show micrographs and absorption spectra recorded for cryptophyte cells cultivated under three different light conditions. We studied the cryptophyte Proteomonas sulcata (CCMP705), which utilizes the light-harvesting complex PE545 depicted in pink in Fig. 2a, 4e and f. Chlorophylls a and c are found in membrane-bound proteins associated with the reaction centers, photosystems I and II, which give rise to the absorption band at about 680 nm. We grew the algae under three different light conditions: high light (20 μEm−2 s−1), medium light (5 μEm−2 s−1) and low light (1 μEm−2 s−1). To put these irradiances in perspective, higher plants on land normally grow under 100–1000 μEm−2 s−1 irradiance sunlight. It has been found that optimum photosynthetic production for cryptophytes is at an irradiance of ∼40 μEm−2 s−1, though this likely depends on the species. The micrographs presented in Fig. 7 suggest the highest loading of pigment is in algae grown under light-limited growth conditions, while those organisms grown at higher light intensities appear much lighter in colour because they carry a smaller load of pigment/organism. The absorption spectra of the three samples, normalized at 545 nm (the absorption maximum of PE545), illustrate the highest chlorophyll-to-PE545 ratio for algae grown at high light, while cryptophytes grown at lower light intensities utilize the phycobiliprotein antenna complex for light absorption to a much larger degree.
 Fig. 7  Effect of light intensity on pigment composition of photosynthetic algae. Cryptophytes, in particular Proteomonas sulcata (CCMP 705), utilize chlorophylls and phycoerythrin-containing light harvesting complex PE545 in their light harvesting machinery. Proteomonas sulcata was grown under three different light conditions: high light (20 μEm−2 s−1), medium light (5 μEm−2 s−1), and low light (1 μEm−2 s−1). The micrographs suggest that the algae grown under low-light conditions contain the highest load of pigments, while the algae grown at higher light intensities appear much lighter as a result of carrying a smaller load of pigments/organism (right panel). The absorption spectra of the three samples, normalized at 545 nm (the absorption maximum of phycoerythrin PE545) illustrate the way that the chlorophyll:PE545 ratio depends on light conditions during growth. 
1 μEm−2 s−1 is generally considered the lower limit to sustain net primary production, though photosynthesis does occur at even lower light levels. How low can these light levels be, and what factors are particularly limiting? The photosynthetically active radiation from starlight on a moonless night is 9 orders of magnitude less than the limit for photosynthetic primary production, only ∼1 fEm−2 s−1; quite insufficient for photosynthesis.72 Nevertheless, there are reports of eukaryotic photosynthetic organisms that can grow under extremely low light conditions. For example, coralline algae from Arctic and Antarctic waters have been documented to inhabit depths of 15–50 m, even during months of ice coverage.73 Light levels here must be substantially less than 1 μEm−2 s−1, but significant primary production seems to be limited in these habitats to irradiances of 7–30 μEm−2 s−1. It is not solely light that limits photosynthetic activity of these algae—physiology, nutrients (including phosphate, nitrate, iron), salinity, ecosystem, temperature, and habitat all have a major influence.74,75 Green sulfur bacteria have been documented to grow in even more extreme conditions, with irradiance in the nEm−2 s−1 range.76 An especially bizarre example are those green sulfur bacteria identified to live in the vicinity of a hydrothermal vent, deep in the ocean.77 They are thought to photosynthesize using the visible tail of black body radiation emitted by the vent. Recently Dubinsky and Schofield have reported a fascinating account of extreme low-light photosynthesis in the oceans.78
Photosynthetic organisms can be found in almost all places where there is light. Yet the light quality is not the same in every location. Photosynthetic organisms therefore must contain light-harvesting assemblies that have been adapted for the light quality of their habitat. Light-harvesting proteins also appear to have built-in mechanisms allowing them to modulate their activities depending on light quantity. Natural light-harvesters thus have a clear advantage over man-made solar cells because natural systems combine optimization of the light-harvesting architectures leading to long-term adaptation with the built-in flexibility that allows for short-term acclimation to lighting conditions.
Energy transfer: from Förster theory to coherence
Förster theory and exciton diffusion
Förster derived an expression for the rate of pairwise energy transfer, wF, valid for any donor–acceptor separation, R, that is substantially smaller than the wavelengths of visible radiation but larger than the size of the molecules. For systems where the donor and acceptor are embedded in a medium of refractive index n, at the optical frequency corresponding to the mean transferred energy, the Förster result is:79–82 (1)where (2)In this expression, J represents an integral of the product of the donor emission spectrum with the acceptor absorption spectrum and is known as the spectral overlap – one of the key determinants of energy transfer efficiency. Also in eqn (1), τD0 is the donor molecule's radiative decay lifetime in the absence of transfer. The latter is related to the measured fluorescence lifetime τfl through the fluorescence quantum yield ΦD = τfl/τD0. The κ factor in eqn (2) depends on the relative orientations of the donor and acceptor with respect to their mutual displacement unit vector , as follows: κ = (D·A) − 3(·D)(·A).(3)
For each chromophore (D and A),  designates a unit vector in the direction of the molecular transition dipole moment. Eqn (1) may also be represented explicitly in a Fermi Golden Rule form, which is described in ref. 83.
In light-harvesting systems, exciton diffusion mainly occurs by a random walk of excitation ‘jumps’; each jump being governed approximately by eqn (1). Therefore three key factors decide exciton diffusion lengths and therefore limit the size of an antenna for practical purposes: The absorption strength of the chromophores, the chromophore excited-state lifetimes, and the rate of energy transfer. In this regard it is interesting to consider the limits of ultrafast energy-transfer rates. First let's consider energy transfer from one molecule to another when excitation starts localized on the donor. When electronic coupling is very small (compared to spectral line widths) the rate of energy transfer is directly proportional to the square of the electronic coupling between donor and acceptor, as is clear from the Fermi Golden Rule limit assumed in Förster theory. Assuming the dipole approximation for electronic coupling83 the energy transfer rate depends on 1/R6. In the limit of strong electronic coupling, the initial condition we assumed leads to coherent resonance hopping of excitation from donor to acceptor, with a rate scaling directly proportional to the electronic coupling, i.e. 1/R3 in the dipole approximation. Energy transfer is predicted to become faster as intermolecular separation diminishes according to the red curve in Fig. 8a.
 Fig. 8  (a) The electronic coupling dependence of energy transfer, assuming localized initial conditions, predicted by Förster theory (red line) compared to the correction to this picture that accounts for the change of basis from localized to delocalized states. In this modified picture, blue line, energy transfer from molecule to molecule happens in the small electronic coupling regime, but the excited state dynamics are more realistically described as relaxation through a manifold of exciton states when electronic coupling is large. (b) The concentration of chlorophyll in the higher plant (and green algae) light-harvesting complex LHCII is a remarkable 0.25 M. At such a high concentration, we expect concentration quenching to occur based on experiments of chlorophyll in solution.95 Since concentration quenching does not occur in LHCII, we conclude that the positions and orientations of the chlorophyll molecules are optimized to avoid this undesirable effect. 
However, when electronic coupling is much larger than the spectral line broadening—that is, when the electronic system is weakly coupled to the environment such that electronic couplings are much larger than environment-induced energy fluctuations—exciton states are photoexcited. Excitation relaxation is often then modeled using a theory formulated in the exciton (or relaxed exciton: polaron) basis.84–89 The rate of population relaxation among the exciton (or polaron) basis states depends on the extent that wavefunction amplitudes overlap and the availability of bath or intramolecular vibrational frequencies that bridge the electronic energy differences between initial and final states. For instance, the exciton state labeled ν is expressed as a linear combination of excitation on each molecule (site) n as90 (4)
The rate of relaxation from state μ to ν is approximately91,92 (5)where  = [exp(ΔE/kBT) − 1]−1 is the mean thermal occupation, D(E) is the bath spectral density, and Oμν is the probability overlap of the exciton states defined by eqn (6): (6)
As electronic coupling increases, only the tail of the bath spectral density can permit transfer of population from one exciton state to another, hence making relaxation slow. This is indicated schematically as the blue line in Fig. 8a.
What conditions optimize the energy transfer rate at this inevitable turnover, the peak of the blue curve? It appears that energy transfer is optimized when electronic couplings lie in the intermediate coupling regime, meaning that electronic coherence therefore likely plays a role in an optimal regime of electronic coupling compared to the energy scales of the environment.93,94 What has not been deeply explored yet is what is the limit for the energy-transfer rate at this optimal balance of coherence and dephasing—how fast can energy transfer be in absolute terms?
While the density of chromophores in photosynthetic light-harvesting complexes is remarkably high, Fig. 8b, generally chromophores are spaced far enough apart to avoid significant orbital-overlap dependent coupling.96,97 This spacing prevents the adverse effects of ‘concentration quenching’ associated with chromophore aggregation.95,98,99 The effects of concentration quenching are widely recognized—for example, the phenomenon is selected against in the choice of conjugated polymers for organic LED applications—but the microscopic mechanism is only vaguely understood. Ironically, the first experiments (by e.g. Vavilov, Galanin, Förster) to reveal energy transfer used concentration quenching. The usual explanation is that excitation energy migrates to molecular dimers, statistically present in solution. Dimers with a ‘sandwich’ structure (so called H-aggregates) have forbidden lower exciton states and are therefore non-fluorescent.69,100 What is not clear is what processes rapidly deactivate the excited dimers, because there are common examples, including excimers, where sandwich dimers (formed in the excited state) have very long lifetimes, but not particularly low fluorescence quantum yields.101
Quantum transport and interference
When Förster formulated his famous theory for energy transfer he made several assumptions that are generally useful. One specification he discussed at length was his assumption of very weak electronic coupling between the donor and acceptor.102 Taken together with the fact that spectral lines are homogeneously broadened, the very weak coupling approximation means that we can specify that one chromophore absorbs the incident radiation, leading to localized electronic excitation. The very weak coupling of that state to the acceptor means that transfer of excitation can be modeled as a decay of the initially excited state into a continuum of final states. In other words, the Fermi Golden Rule allows a rate to be defined and calculated. Researchers have often wondered what would happen if this approximation were to fail, in which case interference effects would modify the rate expression for multi-chromophoric systems in rather interesting ways.103–105 It is only recently that experiments have been developed to detect evidence that such effects, referred to generally as electronic coherence, might be sufficiently long lived that they can affect energy transfer. At present we do not know quantitatively how significantly coherence modifies energy migration in disordered molecular assemblies. Future work is needed to ascertain how coherence could be exploited for man-made energy conversion systems.
Energy migration and trapping at reaction centers is a transport problem. Modeling such a process therefore calls for a treatment in the framework of transport theory.106,107 Transport theory can be formulated in various ways, including in (classical) probabilistic terms, as a (quantum) dynamical theory which describes and characterizes the propagation of wave packets, or from a scattering perspective. Probabilistic and dynamical treatments follow the specific paths excitation takes from the donor to the acceptor, in classical phase space or in quantum mechanical state space, while the scattering picture provides a mapping from all possible initial to all possible final states, and defines the associated transition amplitudes.† The big question is whether quantum probability laws matter. The crucial quantum ingredient is that classically mutually exclusive alternatives—for example, distinct paths to get from the donor to the acceptor, along a sequence of molecular sites or, alternatively, a ladder of energy levels—can be simultaneously realized in the quantum world, and therefore need to be superimposed coherently, by proper account of the amplitudes and phases accumulated along the associated paths. This modulates classical transport coefficients by quantum interference, and can suppress or enhance classical transport, depending on the distribution of amplitudes and relative phases.
The paradigmatic double-slit experiment illustrates quantum interference in a minimalistic setting,108,109 with only one relative phase and equal amplitudes. The situation of course becomes considerably more complicated when transport occurs via many paths, in which case the quantum mechanical corrections to the dynamics are very sensitive to disorder and noise. That is much like the case of an interference grating or a high-quality Fabry–Perot interferometer, where the cost associated with the sharper interference structures, arising from interference effects, is that the patterns are more sensitive to small perturbations. Multi-path interference effects can give rise to phenomena with no classical analog. For example it can lead to resonant tunneling in extended potentials,110 as well as to localization107 in the presence of disorder—which is generic in nature. While constructive quantum interference enhances transport in the former case, destructive quantum interference may totally halt transport in the latter. We thus witness quantum transport characteristics that are fundamentally different from the corresponding classical picture, where transport is either fully suppressed by potential barriers, or unbounded and diffusive even in the presence of disorder.
In the context of transport in light-harvesting antenna complexes, interference phenomena may be more subtle to detect. Let's say there are two pathways for transferring excitation from molecule A to B in a light harvesting complex. Classically, the probability of the energy transfer is simply the sum of the probability of taking each path. In quantum mechanics, however, that probability law is modified, resulting in the common explanation that both paths are taken simultaneously. What happens is that the probability of energy transfer from A to B is calculated differently: we assign a probability ‘amplitude’ to each path, sum those amplitudes, then convert the sum to probability by taking the modulus squared. For example, quantum coherence as corrections to the classical transfer rates from donor to acceptor due to multi-path interference has been considered.111,112 When it is weak, we can treat the electronic coupling perturbatively, thereby adding corrections to the Fermi Golden Rule expression for energy transfer. Our approach was to elucidate successive terms in the Dyson series of time-dependent coefficients, then the time-dependent probability that excitation has transferred from an initial state labeled i to a final state labeled f in a multichromophoric system is: Pij(t) = |c(1)if(t) + c(2)if(t) + …|2(7)
Expansion of eqn (7) leads to terms with a classical interpretation, like |c(1)if(t)|2, which yields the lowest order Fermi Golden Rule rate for excitation jumping directly from i to f. In addition, we obtain cross-terms that are uniquely quantum mechanical.
If there are many possible paths connecting i to f, and each is represented by a wave with slightly different phase, then the sum of the waves will vanish by destructive interference. The result is loss of the cross terms and only the classical probability terms remain. That argument suggests the coherent effects should be unimportant over long length and time scales. A way of convincing ourselves that this prediction makes sense is to think about the requirements of spectral overlap for coherent energy transfer. In the case of coherent energy transfer we require a more sophisticated treatment of spectral overlap. Nevertheless the idea is easily shown by extending the Förster spectral overlap principle. To investigate that we defined memory kernels associated with each term in the expansion of eqn (7), Gif(t), where103 (8)
Then successive terms for energy transfer in a multichromophoric assembly were specified according to pathways of interaction: Gif(t) = G(1)if(t) + G(1,2)imf(t) + G(2)imf(t) + …,(9)where m denotes an intermediate state and the superscript (1) means excitation jumps directly from state i to f, whereas (2) means excitation jumps from state i to f via m, which could lie on an intervening chromophore. The superscript (1,2) denotes the cross-term (interference) between the pathway (1) and (2). These terms contain the electronic coupling factors and a spectral overlap. See Sec. II.D of ref. 103 for details.
Essentially this multichromophore overlap quantity is a joint probability function for the energy match between the donor and acceptor electronic transitions. Thus, to estimate the energy conservation requirements of three molecules interacting simultaneously (to accommodate the possibility of coherence), we should multiply three normalized spectral lineshape functions to estimate the interference term. It is easily seen that magnitudes of successively higher order terms diminish rapidly.
Multi-path interference is very sensitive to perturbations in the scattering potential. For instance, if we sample over different, possibly continuously parameterized realizations of the scattering potential that defines the relative path amplitudes and phases, we will find strong fluctuations in the transport coefficients, as well as in analogously defined cross-sections. Therefore, if we sample over different realizations of the energy landscape of a quantum system, transport properties will exhibit large fluctuations from one realization to another. Such fluctuations are the characteristic hallmark of coherent quantum transport in complex systems.106,107,113 The fluctuations arise as a consequence of the cross terms in a coherent sum over many transmission paths. In a transport scenario defined by a disordered energy landscape, the fluctuations can be interpreted as due to the accidental shifting of the system's site energies into and out of resonance under different realizations of disorder. “Different realizations” may be considered as an expression of randomness if no correlations or residual symmetries can be detected; the phrase may also be interpreted as a reflection of the deterministic dynamics of some background degrees of freedom.
Two-dimensional spectroscopy reveals coherence in antenna complexes
Typical studies of ultrafast dynamics in the condensed phase focus on measuring rates of decay of states photo-excited by a short laser pulse, and concomitant growth of other excited-state populations. As such, these kinds of studies are restricted to the realm of classical probability laws and are not well suited for providing strong tests of mechanisms promoting the dynamics. Indeed, it is even difficult to discriminate different kinetics models from the analysis of population transients.114–117 It is moreover very difficult to resolve questions concerning the significance of coherence and deviations from the classical probability laws owing to interference effects because resolution of such questions really requires access to information about probability amplitudes.118 Multidimensional electronic spectroscopy and related methods have played an important role addressing these issues.7,119–129 Such experiments, typically two-dimensional electronic spectroscopy (2D ES), record signal amplitudes that correlate the energies of states that are photo-excited with those involved in radiating the signal after a waiting time (the population time T or t2) that is the same delay time variable in pump–probe experiments.130–137 While 2D ES does not reveal directly the properties of coherent dynamics, it can show the existence of superpositions of vibronic states after femtosecond excitation. This inspires deeper theoretical studies to predict the role coherence plays in energy transfer.
2D ES is similar to one-dimensional four-wave-mixing measurements like transient absorption (often called pump–probe spectroscopy). In a formal description of transient-absorption measurements based in the framework of nonlinear optics, the pump beam electric field interacts twice with the sample to photo-excite a fraction of the chromophores into electronic excited states. These two interactions simply represent the product of the transition dipole (μ) connecting the ground state (0) to an excited state (α) with its complex conjugate to give the probability of pump absorption, proportional to |μα0|2. A probe pulse arrives after a variable delay t2 to stimulate a signal field that is detected as a change in transmission of the probe. 2D ES can be understood in a similar way, except that both the spectrum of states photo-excited as well as the spectrum of states probed after t2 are recorded and correlated. This can be accomplished138,139 by first separating the two pump electric-field interactions into distinct laser beams and then scanning the delay time between them. The pump pulse sequence now has a time period, t1 (often known as the coherence time τ), which is scanned for each value of t2. Time period t1 is scanned over negative as well as positive time delays (a negative time delay means that the ordering of pulses 1 and 2 is reversed). At every t1 value, the spectrum of the signal radiated during the final time period, t3, is measured, Fig. 9a. This provides the signal as a function of frequency, ν3, for each t1 value for each specified waiting time. Fourier transformation with respect to t1 of the t1versus ν3 spectral interferogram, Fig. 9b, at each waiting time t2 produces a 2D spectrum that correlates signal as a function of ν1 with signal as a function of ν3, Fig. 9c and d.
 Fig. 9  Details and examples of 2D ES measurements. (a) A set of spectral interferograms collected for many coherence times. It is just possible to see the ripples diagonally across the plot. A 2D spectrum is created by Fourier transformation of this signal over the t1 time period. (b) A single spectral interferogram—meaning the signal as a function of emission frequency—collected at a coherence time t1 = 0 fs and a waiting time t2 = 0 fs along the dashed line drawn in part a (with the background signal contributions subtracted, see ref. 139). (c) Real part of the total 2DES recorded for the donor–acceptor conjugated copolymer PBDTTPD in chloroform,141 see text for details. ‘Pump–probe’ waiting times are indicated in the top left of each panel. (d) Real part of the total 2DES recorded for a suspension of ∼6 nm mean diameter CdSe nanocrystals in toluene at a waiting time of 50 fs,145 see text for details. 
Although 2D ES is a difficult experiment and the nonlinear processes leading to signal generation are reasonably complicated,140 its value is that it yields a kind of map providing information about how optical transitions are coupled and details of the dynamics ensuing after photo-excitation. The dynamics extracted from the corresponding transient-absorption measurement will be present in the 2D ES, but 2D ES also reveals other time-dependent signal parameters that cannot be obtained from transient absorption. In other words, useful features apparent in the evolution of these ‘maps’ as a function of waiting time t2 include resolution of the kinetic pathways for the evolution of excited state populations. For example, Fig. 9c shows a selection of 2D spectra recorded for the conjugated polymer poly((4,8-diethylhexyloxyl) benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene)-2,6-diyl-alt-((5-octylthieno[3,4-c]pyrrole-4,6-dione)-1,3-diyl) (more simply known as PBDTTPD) in chloroform solvent (at 294 K).141 The waiting time t2 is indicated in the top left of each panel. The blue features (negative in sign) are excited state absorptions, while the red (positive in sign) are predominantly ground state ‘bleach’ contributions. The bleach signal has a physical interpretation as the contribution to the ground state absorption spectrum that is removed (bleached) by the action of the pump pulse taking some of the ensemble to the electronic excited state. Notice how the bleach at early population times is elongated along the diagonal, in this case reflecting mainly the distribution of conjugated subunits.142
Although this is a very complicated example because conjugated polymer spectroscopy is greatly affected by disorder, it can be seen that as t2 progresses, more bleach appears in the lower diagonal region of the 2D spectrum, indicating that the signal is radiated from states of lower energy than those initially photo-excited. The coordinates of such cross peaks, if clearly resolved, can reveal pathways of energy relaxation. In the case of conjugated polymers the lower diagonal signal can show the relaxation, via energy transfer, of electronic excitation to the longest conformational subunits (effective chromophores) along the π-conjugated chain.143,144 In the case of PBDTTPD, the relaxation on a fast timescale, as seen in Fig. 9c, is due to the formation and relaxation of charge transfer excitons.
Electronic and vibrational coherence
The 2D spectra also display information relevant for investigating quantum-mechanical phenomena in energy-transfer dynamics. In particular, cross peaks can show the relationships among electronic states, often called ‘coupling’. These kinds of features are apparent in the 2D spectrum shown in Fig. 9d. In this experiment the two lowest-energy exciton bands of zinc-blende structure CdSe nanocrystals (solution sample, 298 K) were coherently excited by 11 fs laser pulses.145 Bleach features of the pair of exciton bands are seen along the diagonal. The cross peaks in the upper and lower antidiagonal positions show that these exciton bands involve common orbitals. Indeed, while electrons are excited from different valence bands in each case, they are promoted to a common conduction band. Thus photo-excitation of the lower-energy exciton produces not only a bleach on the diagonal, but also a bleach at an energy corresponding to the upper exciton transition (because of Pauli blocking), and vice versa. In spectroscopic terminology, the two electronic transitions share a common ground state. In the plot shown the diagonal peaks do not lie exactly on the diagonal, which is partly related to the position of underlying excited state absorption bands.
One of the highly interesting applications of 2D ES has been to monitor the time evolution of electronic coherences produced by photo-exciting a superposition of two vibronic transitions. When a femtosecond laser pulse excites a coherent superposition comprising two excited states, |α〉 and |β〉, the 2D spectrum contains a signal contribution originating from the off-diagonal density |α〉〈β|. The result is a cross peak positioned at (vβ,vα) in the 2D spectrum that oscillates as a function of waiting time t2. This signal amplitude oscillates with frequency vβ − vα, because of a phase accumulated during the waiting time period (t2).146 That phase, exp[−2πi(vβ − vα)t2] in one cross-peak and exp[−2πi(vα − vβ)t2] in the complementary cross-peak, derives from the time-dependent Schrödinger equation. It directly indicates that the signal comes from off-diagonal density matrix elements and therefore reveals how long they survive decoherence. Cross-peaks in the 2D spectrum can oscillate at frequencies other than this difference frequency as well; below we show an example of this effect.
The discovery by Fleming and co-workers in 2007 that electronic coherence (observed in oscillating cross-peaks) can persist for hundreds of femtoseconds at 77 K in biological systems has stimulated great interest in electronic coherence and its implications. It has subsequently been found that this kind of electronic coherence is not limited to systems at cryogenic temperature, but can persist for remarkable timescales even at ambient temperature, see Fig. 10 and 11.121–123 The experimental results show that superpositions of vibronic states can be produced by femtosecond laser excitation and that, in certain cases, those coherences can last for an extraordinary time compared to the anticipated dephasing time of these systems. The experiments, however, do not reveal directly a role played by those coherences in energy transfer. That issue is currently under scrutiny.
 Fig. 10  (a) Electronic absorption spectrum of PC645 from the cryptophyte Chroomonas sp. strain CCMP270 in aqueous buffer at room temperature. The vertical lines illustrate the approximate absorption energies of the excitonic bilin chromophore bands. (b) Structure of PC645 with the eight chromophores labeled and colour-coded equivalently to the coloured, vertical lines in part (a). (c) 2D ES real part of the total spectra recorded for PC645 (298 K) for two representative t2 values. See ref. 148 for details. These data are plotted using a normal linear contour scale where red (blue) indicates positive (negative) values. The blue contour regions show a remarkably clear cross-peak indicating a vibronic superposition whose amplitude oscillates with t2 time. 
 Fig. 11  (a) Plot of the amplitude of the cross peak in Fig. 10e located at an excitation energy of 2.14 eV and a signal energy of 2.06 eV as a function of the waiting time period. The oscillation is a superposition of multiple frequency components. (b) Both the rephasing (red trace) and nonrephasing (black trace) signal contributions oscillate. The oscillations in the nonrephasing component are evidence that vibrational coherences are present. (c) Fourier transformation of the oscillations in part (b) leads to the conclusion that the 26 THz component is present in both signal contributions and is therefore assigned to be a vibrational coherence. The 21 THz component, since it is only present in the rephasing component, is assigned to be an electronic coherence. See ref. 148 for details. 
Half Fourier transformation of 2D ES data is often helpful for analysis. The half Fourier transform over negative t1 (the photon-echo pulse ordering) yields the ‘rephasing’ spectrum, while that over positive t1 yields the ‘non-rephasing’ spectrum. Although the two spectra are similar, small differences can yield valuable insights. In our first 2D ES experiments122 on the PC645 antenna complex isolated from the cryptophyte Chroomonas sp. strain CCMP270 (294 K), we compared qualitatively the oscillations of cross peaks in the rephasing spectra with those on the diagonal of the non-rephasing spectra.146 In recent work we have capitalized on significant improvements in the experimental setup,147 enabling much more detailed analysis of the response of this light harvesting complex to excitation by femtosecond laser pulses. Considering the different experimental conditions such as laser pulse spectrum and laboratory setup, the original spectra are consistent with the new spectra.
The new data are rapidly acquired and are completely reproducible, thereby enabling error estimates to be reported as error bars indicating one standard deviation, Fig. 11. Data are now of sufficient quality to enable detailed quantitative analyses. As a result, Turner and co-workers have established that the coherent oscillations at the cross peak location shown in Fig. 11 is composed of at least 8 frequency components.148 Within the approximations of the analysis, the two dominant frequencies were established to be a vibrational coherence with frequency 25.6 ± 0.1 THz (860 cm−1) and 300 fs dephasing time constant (assuming exponential damping) and an electronic coherence with frequency 21.1 ± 0.3 THz (709 cm−1) having a dephasing time constant of 150 ± 50 fs at ambient temperature. Based on model energy-level schemes for the two phenomena, vibrational coherences can be distinguished from electronic coherences using the separated signal contributions. A signature of vibrational coherence is oscillations in both the rephasing and nonrephasing components of the cross peak while a signature of electronic coherence is oscillations in only the rephasing component of the cross peak.
It is apparent from our most recent 2D ES studies that electronic and vibrational coherences can appear hand-in-hand.148 This is also suggested in an independent study of this same light harvesting complex by Davis and co-workers.126 Recent 2D ES studies from the Engel group on the FMO complex from green sulfur bacteria also reveal multi-frequency beating patterns associated with electronic coherence,125,149 and the Moran group has previously identified strong vibrational effects that possibly accompany electronic coherences in components of phycobilisome antenna systems from cyanobacteria.150–154 Some years ago Cina and Fleming examined the possibility that vibrational coherences were transferred from donor to acceptor in energy transfer in order to explain unusual quantum beats on measurements of LH1 from purple bacteria.155 Recently, Cina and Biggs have examined in some detail how vibrational wavepackets can be used to control energy transfer.156,157 Very new, unpublished work has focused on the role of high-frequency molecular vibrations in coherent energy transfer.158,159 These studies reveal that energy gaps arising from chemically different chromophores in an assembly together with vibrations that bridge these gaps enable directional control of ultrafast energy transfer when the dynamics involve coherence. This is precisely the power of the Förster spectral overlap principle,79,80,160 but in the coherent limit. All of this work points to the importance of vibronic effects, and future work must resolve these issues with more realistic exciton models, such as those evidently required for understanding high resolution spectra in the frequency domain.161,162
Substantial evidence suggests that electronic coherence is involved in the excited state evolution of photosynthetic light-harvesting complexes after photoexcitation with femtosecond pulses. There are some important questions that have yet to be resolved: (a) Do coherent dynamics play a role in energy transfer initiated by incoherent light (e.g. sunlight)? (b) How should we think about what coherence brings to excitation transfer and transport in the weak-intermediate electronic coupling regime; how could we detect its role? (c) What role does coherence play that matters for biological function?
Quantum engineering in chemistry and biology?
Perspective on the physics of complex quantum systems
The coupling of electronic transitions to vibrational modes as well as other ‘background’ degrees of freedom is an important issue for theories of quantum-coherent dynamics because it is the timescales and strength of this coupling which may cause dephasing in the electronic degrees of freedom. Furthermore, the microscopic and heterogeneous nature of the system–bath interactions in proteins are little understood.163–166 Changes that are slow relative to the timescale for energy transfer are referred to as static disorder and translate into a statistical distribution of site energies and electronic couplings. This disorder, usually assumed to be random, manifests itself as inhomogeneous broadening in spectral line shapes and energy transfer rates.167 However, vibrational dynamics of the macromolecular backbone may be deterministic, at least to some extent.168,169
The perspective from quantum chaos theory has not been deeply explored for this problem. It is well known from the theory of quantum chaos170,171 that the non-perturbative coupling of very few degrees of freedom (at least two in autonomous systems, one in the presence of periodic driving) can induce large-scale fluctuations of matrix elements. To quote a well-understood example, the photoionization cross-section of atomic Rydberg states in strong, static magnetic fields exhibits quasi-erratic, large-scale fluctuations under small changes of the field, while the underlying, effectively 2D dynamics are perfectly deterministic.172 In some sense, the quasi-random fluctuations of the photoionization cross-section express the sensible dependence of the Rydberg wave functions' localization properties in the decay channel on the precise value of the magnetic field (which strongly distorts the Rydberg wave function).173,174
Under rather general conditions, fluctuations such as those underpinning the examples mentioned above can be described by ensembles of random matrices, that is, they look “random” on certain scales, though actually they are a unique and unambiguous fingerprint of the underlying, non-integrable (in the sense of nonlinear dynamics) deterministic Hamiltonian.170,171 In other words, the distinctive properties of such complex quantum systems are encoded in these fluctuations, rather than in their smooth, average behavior which is determined by coarse grained properties like the accessible phase space volume. These connections have been elucidated for the exemplary case of Rydberg states in static magnetic fields, which, in some sense, as effectively two degrees of freedom system, define a minimal scenario.175,176 In our present context, one could imagine the electronic degree of freedom—for example modeled by a one dimensional double-well potential—strongly coupled to a vibrational degree of freedom. The only ingredient that is required to realize the quantum-chaos scenario is that the coupling of both degrees of freedom be non-integrable.177
If we were to transfer and validate the above scenarios to light-harvesting molecular networks that mediate excitation transfer, we first wish to identify the different pathways along which transport can occur.178,179 Identifying and measuring the associated phases and amplitudes, however, is a formidable exercise in systems where the number of actively involved degrees of freedom is not precisely known, and one is—by construction—bound to work with effective degrees of freedom on a level that cannot be absolutely gauged. In multichromophoric systems, generally only electronic degrees of freedom and one or more strong localized vibrational modes can be probed. Furthermore, the separation between the electronic and vibrational degrees of freedom is not always clear or possible.180 A loss of interference contrast in certain experimental observables may therefore be due to an implicit average over unresolved degrees of freedom,109,181 while the actual dynamics are coherent, or protected from actual (dynamical) environmental noise. Again, probing the statistics of the molecular response to a well-defined probe (in terms of the preparation of the initial condition) under variations of the specific realization might allow one to determine unambiguously the quantum versus classical character of the underlying dynamics, since quantum interference can induce fluctuations which cannot be reproduced by classical stochastic processes,106 and ambient noise needs finite time to make this interference fade away.182 Alternatively, an efficiency that depends on the phase relations embedded in the initial electronic state could also provide a clear signature of quantum transport even in the presence of static disorder.183,184
The picture outlined above is largely inspired by the phenomenology of coherent quantum dynamics on a finite number of strongly coupled degrees of freedom, and may suffice to elucidate, at least qualitatively, a large part of the collected experimental evidence on quantum coherence in light-harvesting complexes. However, the current debate in the literature also suggests an important role of ambient noise in the excitonic transport process.93,111,185–188 Whether quantum coherence can play a functional role on the level of macromolecular dynamics depends on the comparison of the functionally relevant time scales with the time scales on which the noise can intervene and effectively destroy quantum coherence.182,189 Asymptotically, noise will always win, and the role of quantum coherence, if any, must therefore be associated with transient time scales (i.e. ultrafast nonequilibrium energy transfer).
Challenges for quantum engineering in chemistry and biology
One of the fascinating and largely open questions is to understand the design principles which were developed by nature to achieve the required balance of time scales for electronic resonance versus dephasing. In a quantum-engineering language, how did nature enter the strong coupling (between the transporting degrees of freedom, as opposed to those of the detrimental part of the environment) regime190,191in a really complex system? That is, at effectively high spectral densities—in contrast to the quantum engineering scenario, where low spectral densities (ideally two-level systems) are machined. In stark contrast to the quantum engineer, nature has ample resources and typically builds multipurpose machines. Under competition, these machines need not be optimal, but just better than the competition and they must be robust. Therefore, when it comes to controlling the function of complex systems, statistical192,193—rather than deterministic—optimization in the sense briefly sketched above may be the route to success. This observation may suggest a route for robust quantum technologies in complex environments.
On longer length and time scales compared to the workings of a single light-harvesting complex, biological functionality very often requires the response to external stimuli which need to be gauged against physiologically defined thresholds, and that these activation processes are intrinsically nonlinear.194,195 Consider a paradigmatic example of threshold activation, the non-perturbative coupling of a simple double-well potential to a second degree of freedom. This model can display large-scale fluctuations needed for a small control signal to be amplified to a response, if quantum coherence prevails. This could be a way to implement a highly sensitive “quantum switch”.177,196,197
Given the stunning degree of molecular organization on various scales as observed in light-harvesting complexes, one may speculate that exciton dynamics as carried by electronic and/or vibrational degrees of freedom could be orchestrated with the molecular backbone's dynamics, allowing some control in response to the environmental boundary conditions. However, one may also argue that such fine-tuning on the level of single light-harvesting complexes is unlikely given the disorder in site energies.198 Nevertheless, since biological functionality is frequently stabilized by some level of redundancy, it may suffice that a certain molecular configuration, associated with a certain transfer efficiency, have a sufficient statistical weight within the different realizations which are assembled in a single organism. In such a perspective, (multi-)functionality could be hardwired in statistical distributions rather than in unique molecular architectures and would automatically obtain the advantage of robustness.113 However, it hitherto remains unclear how the relevant parts of such distributions are “activated” under specific environmental stimuli to inhibit or activate the desired function. An interesting experiment would be a vast set of single-molecule experiments to search for subsets that have consistent site energies and energy-transfer dynamics.198–200
Conclusions for solar energy technologies
The need for cheap and efficient solar power motivates us to look at natural light-harvesting systems for inspiration, keeping in mind that our photovoltaic goals and nature's photosynthesis goals are parallel but not identical. Despite more than a century of research, there is still much to learn about how plants and other photosynthetic organisms gather energy from the sun. In this work we discussed two contemporary areas in photosynthesis research that may represent excellent avenues for photovoltaic research. We have endeavored to discuss improvements organisms have made to photosynthetic light-harvesting machinery over time and provide some perspectives on how to think about the driving forces behind those improvements and diversifications.
The first event in solar energy conversion is absorption of light. The conversion of the energy carried by the incident photons to stored energy is first limited by how effectively the incident spectrum is captured and the energy lost from that spectrum during relaxation of excited electronic states and conversion to charge separated states. In photosynthesis the incident spectrum is harvested by a community of organisms, often with complementary absorption spectra. The key to the complementary absorption is variation in the apparatus specializing in light harvesting—the primary light harvesting complexes. Often organisms are stratified, for example in the water column, and therefore function in the spirit of a tandem solar cell. Those organisms found deeper in the column must function under lower average irradiance, and hence light harvesting optimizations are important.
Light harvesting complexes tend to direct excitation energy to reaction centers via a rather disordered energy landscape—that is, the excitation energies of chromophores in the antenna are not uniform. Sometimes the process is facilitated by an energy gradient, or funnel, most notably in purple bacteria and cyanobacteria. This allows excitation energy to be directed, and therefore has a significant influence on maximizing the exciton diffusion length while maintaining high efficiency of trapping. Experiments have recently provided evidence that coherent effects can modify energy transfer mechanisms in natural light harvesting complexes, but it is not clear whether such phenomena profoundly range the mechanism of long-range exciton diffusion. Nevertheless, they can bring energy transfer into a regime where energy jumps are as rapid as possible (cf.Fig. 8a).
The energetic and structural disorder that characterizes natural light harvesting complexes in combination with quantum mechanical delocalization of excitation and coherence challenges traditional ways of thinking about energy transfer. It is likely that key opportunities lie not in designing systems based on their average performance (exciton diffusion time or efficiency). Instead, we should work out how to utilize the tails of distributions, where quantum effects are predominant. It is not clear at present what opportunities may be presented, but it will be fruitful to pursue this idea in two ways. First, it is imperative to develop experiments capable of detecting the edge of distributions rather than focusing on the mean. That might be accomplished by filtering an ensemble to register and characterize the fastest energy transfer events. Note that single molecule/complex experiments are likely not the solution, at least not directly, because dynamic disorder renders the systems ergodic. Second, theories can explore how to utilize quantum effects in complex, noisy environments. The crucial breakthrough will be to discover how subtle quantum mechanical effects at the level of few interacting molecules can lead to new kinds of emergent phenomena in a highly complex system.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, the United States Air Force Office of Scientific Research (FA9550-10-1-0260), and DARPA (QuBE) to G.D.S. G.D.S. and A.B. acknowledge financial support from the state of Baden-Württemberg and the Wissenschaftliche Gesellschaft of the University of Freiburg.
Notes and references

          R. E. Blankenship, Molecular Mechanisms of Photosynthesis, Blackwell, Oxford,  2002 Search PubMed .
G. F. Moore and G. W. Brudvig, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys., 2011, 2, 303–327 CrossRef CAS .
J. Barber, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 2007, 365, 1007–1023 CrossRef CAS .
R. E. Blankenship, D. M. Tiede, J. Barber, G. W. Brudvig, G. R. Fleming, M. Ghirardi, M. R. Gunner, W. Junge, D. M. Kramer, A. Melis, T. A. Moore, C. C. Moser, D. G. Nocera, A. J. Nozik, D. R. Ort, W. W. Parson, R. C. Prince and R. T. Sayre, Science, 2011, 332, 805–809 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. D. Larkum, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 271–276 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, G. R. Fleming, A. Olaya-Castro and R. van Grondelle, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 763–774 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2–8 CrossRef CAS .
W. Miller, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 210901 CrossRef .
M. R. Wasielewski, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1910–1921 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1890–1898 CrossRef CAS .
V. Balzani, A. Credi and M. Venturi, ChemSusChem, 2008, 1, 26–58 CrossRef CAS .
J. L. McHale, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 587–597 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gust, T. A. Moore and A. L. Moore, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 9–26 RSC .
Y. Terazono, G. Kodis, P. A. Liddell, V. Garg, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and D. Gust, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 7147–7155 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Crabtree and N. S. Lewis, Phys. Today, 2007, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Vullev, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 503–508 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Ruban, M. P. Johnson and D. P. Duffy, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1643–1650 CAS .

Light-Harvesting Antennas in Photosynthesis, ed. B. R. Green and W. W. Parson, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  2003 Search PubMed .

          J. Brodie and J. Lewis, Unravelling the Algae: The Past, Present, and Future of Algal Systematics, CRC Press, New York,  2007 Search PubMed .
P. G. Falkowski, M. E. Katz, A. H. Knoll, A. H. Quigg, J. A. Raven, O. Schofield and F. J. R. Taylor, Science, 2004, 305, 354–360 CrossRef CAS .

          P. G. Falkowski and A. H. Knoll, Evolution of the Primary Producers in the Sea, Elsevier, San Diego,  2007 Search PubMed .
W. F. Doolittle, Nature, 2012, 481, 270–271 CAS .
R. Koder, J. Anderson, L. Solomon, K. Reddy, C. Moser and P. Dutton, Nature, 2009, 458, 305–309 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Csete and J. C. Doyle, Science, 2002, 295, 1664–1669 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Doyle and M. E. Csete, PLoS Biol., 2005, 3, 1868–1872 CAS .
A. A. Boghossian, M.-H. Ham, J. H. Choi and M. S. Strano, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 3834–3843 CAS .
K. Niyogi, Curr. Opin. Plant Biol., 2000, 3, 455–460 CrossRef CAS .
B. Demmig-Adams and W. Adams, Annu. Rev. Plant Physiol. Plant Mol. Biol., 1992, 43, 599–626 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Fleming, G. S. Schlau-Cohen, K. Amarnath and J. Zaks, Faraday Discuss., 2012, 155, 27–41 RSC .
A. N. Melkozernov, J. Barber and R. E. Blankenship, Biochemistry, 2006, 45, 331–345 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Pearlstein, Brookhaven Symp. Biol., 1967, 19, 8–15 Search PubMed .
E. W. Montroll, J. Math. Phys., 1969, 10, 753–764 CrossRef CAS .
D. Beljonne, C. Curutchet, G. D. Scholes and R. Silbey, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 6583–6599 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Andrews, C. Curutchet and G. D. Scholes, Laser Photonics Rev., 2011, 5, 114–123 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Andrews and R. G. Crisp, J. Fluoresc., 2006, 16, 191 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kozaki, K. Akita, K. Okada, D.-M. S. Islam and O. Ito, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2010, 83, 1223–1237 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. Dodd, J. Silvertown and M. W. Chase, Evolution, 1999, 732–744 CrossRef .
G. L. Stebbins, BioScience, 1981, 31, 573–577 CrossRef .
R. A. Herbert, A. Gall, T. Maoka, R. J. Cogdell, B. Robert, S. Takaichi and S. Schwabe, Photosynth. Res., 2008, 95, 261–268 CrossRef CAS .
D. Krause-Jensen and K. Sand-Jensen, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1998, 43, 96–407 CrossRef .
D. M. Ward, M. J. Ferris, S. C. Nold and M. M. Bateson, Microbiol. Mol. Biol. Rev., 1998, 62, 1353–1370 CAS .
B. Pierson, A. Oesterle and G. L. Murphy, FEMS Microbiol. Ecol., 1987, 45, 365–376 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Pierson, V. M. Sands and J. L. Frederick, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1990, 56, 2327–2340 CAS .

          E. Collini, C. Curutchet, T. Mirkovic and G. D. Scholes, in Energy Transfer Dynamics in Biomaterial Systems, ed. I. Burghardt, V. May, D. A. Micha and E. R. Bittner, Springer Verlag, Heidelberg/Berlin,  2009, vol. 93 Search PubMed .

          R. E. Lee, Phycology, Cambridge University Press, Camridge, U.K.,  1989 Search PubMed .
S. E. Douglas and S. L. Penny, J. Mol. Evol., 1999, 48, 236–244 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Apt, J. L. Collier and A. R. Grossman, J. Mol. Biol., 1995, 248, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Archibald, BioEssays, 2007, 29, 392–402 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Archibald, Curr. Biol., 2009, 19, R81–R88 CrossRef CAS .
F. W. Spiegel, Science, 2012, 335, 809–810 CrossRef .
J. N. Timmis, M. A. Ayliffe, C. Y. Huang and W. Martin, Nat. Rev. Genet., 2004, 5, 123–135 CrossRef CAS .
C. D. van der Weij-De Wit, A. B. Doust, I. H. M. van Stokkum, J. P. Dekker, K. E. Wilk, P. M. G. Curmi, G. D. Scholes and R. van Grondelle, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25066–25073 CrossRef CAS .
M. Mimuro, N. Tamai, A. Murakami, M. Watanabe, M. Erata, M. M. Watanabe, M. Tokutomi and I. Yamazaki, Phycol. Res., 1998, 46, 155–164 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Wedemayer, D. G. Kidd, D. E. Wemmer and A. N. Glazer, J. Biol. Chem., 1992, 267, 7315–7331 CAS .
G. J. Wedemayer, D. E. Wemmer and A. N. Glazer, J. Biol. Chem., 1991, 266, 4731–4741 CAS .

          W. Sidler and H. Zuber, in Photosynthetic Light-Harvesting Systems, ed. H. Scheer and S. Schneider, Walter de Gruyter & Co., Berlin,  1988, pp. 49–60 Search PubMed .
K. Hoef-Emden, B. Marin and M. Melkonian, J. Mol. Evol., 2002, 55, 161–179 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Beale and J. Cornejo, J. Biol. Chem., 1991, 266, 22341–22345 CAS .
A. N. Glazer and G. J. Wedemayer, Photosynth. Res., 1995, 46, 93–105 CrossRef CAS .

          D. J. Futuyma, Evolution, Sinauer Associates Inc., Sunderland, MA, 2nd edn,  2009 Search PubMed .
D. L. Rabosky and A. R. McCune, Trends Ecol. Evol., 2009, 25, 68–74 CrossRef .
D. Jablonski, Annu. Rev. Ecol. Evol. Systemat., 2008, 39, 501–524 CrossRef .
T. G. Barraclough and S. Nee, Trends Ecol. Evol., 2001, 16, 391–399 CrossRef .
T. G. Barraclough, A. P. Vogler and P. H. Harvey, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., B, 1998, 353, 241–249 CrossRef .
U. Dieckmann and M. Doebell, Nature, 1999, 400, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hoef-Emden, J. Phycol., 2008, 44, 985–993 CrossRef .
R. M. Alvey, A. Biswas, W. M. Schluchter and D. A. Bryant, J. Bacteriol., 2011, 193, 1663–1671 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes and G. Rumbles, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 683–696 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kasha, Radiat. Res., 1963, 20, 55 CrossRef CAS .
K. Niyogi, O. Björkman and A. R. Grossman, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 1997, 94, 14162–14167 CrossRef CAS .
B. Demmig-Adams and W. Adams, Planta, 1996, 198, 460–470 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Raven and C. S. Cockell, Astrobiology, 2006, 6, 668–675 CrossRef CAS .
R. D. Roberts, M. Kühl, R. N. Glud and S. Rysgaard, J. Phycol., 2002, 38, 273–283 CrossRef .
G. O. Kirst and C. Wiencke, J. Phycol., 1995, 31, 181–199 Search PubMed .
F. M. M. Morel and N. M. Price, Science, 2003, 300, 944–947 CrossRef CAS .
J. Overmann, H. Cypionka and N. Pfennig, Limnol. Oceanogr., 1992, 37, 150–155 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Beatty, J. Overmann, M. Lince, A. Manske, A. Lang, R. Blankenship, C. Van Dover, T. A. Martinsson and F. G. Plumley, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2005, 102, 9306–9310 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Dubinsky and O. Schofield, Hydrobiologia, 2010, 639, 153–171 CrossRef CAS .
T. Förster, Ann. Phys., 1948, 2, 55–75 CrossRef .
S. E. Braslavsky, E. Fron, H. B. Rodriguez, E. S. Román, G. D. Scholes, G. Schweitzer, B. Valeur and J. Wirz, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2008, 7, 1444–1448 CAS .
D. L. Andrews and J. Rodriguez, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 084509 CrossRef .
D. L. Andrews, Can. J. Chem., 2008, 86, 855–870 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 57–87 CrossRef CAS .

          V. May and O. Kühn, Charge and Energy Transfer Dynamics in Molecular Systems: A Theoretical Introduction, Wiley-VCH, Berlin,  2000 Search PubMed .
S. Rackovsky and R. Silbey, Mol. Phys., 1973, 25, 61–72 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ishizaki, T. R. Calhoun, G. S. Schlau-Cohen and G. R. Fleming, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 7319–7337 RSC .
A. Nazir, D. P. S. McCutcheon and A. W. Chin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2012, 85, 224301 CrossRef .
A. Kolli, A. Nazir and A. Olaya-Castro, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 154112 CrossRef .
S. Jang, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 034105 CrossRef .
H. Fidder, J. Knoester and D. A. Wiersma, J. Chem. Phys., 1991, 95, 7880–7890 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bednarz, V. A. Malyshev and J. Knoester, J. Chem. Phys., 2002, 117, 6200–6213 CrossRef CAS .
C. Didraga, V. A. Malyshev and J. Knoester, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 18818–18827 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rebentrost, M. Mohseni, I. Kassal, S. Lloyd and A. Aspuru-Guzik, New J. Phys., 2009, 11, 033003 CrossRef .
M. B. Plenio and S. F. Huelga, New J. Phys., 2008, 10, 113019 CrossRef .
R. Livingston, J. Phys. Chem., 1957, 61, 860–864 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes and K. P. Ghiggino, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 4580–4590 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes, I. R. Gould, R. J. Cogdell and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 2543–2553 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Vavilov and M. D. Galanin, Dokl. Akad. Nauk SSSR, 1949, 67, 811–818 Search PubMed .
G. S. Beddard and G. Porter, Nature, 1976, 260, 366–367 CrossRef CAS .
F. C. Spano, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 429–439 CrossRef CAS .

          J. B. Birks, in Organic Molecular Photophysics, ed. J. B. Birks, Wiley, London,  1973, vol. 1 Search PubMed .

          T. Förster, in Modern Quantum Chemistry: Instanbul Lectures. Part III. Action of Light and Organic Crystals, ed. O. Sinanoglu, Academic, New York,  1965, pp. 93–137 Search PubMed .
H. Hossein-Nejad, A. Olaya-Castro and G. D. Scholes, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 024112 CrossRef .
J. Cao and R. J. Silbey, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 13825–13838 CrossRef CAS .
G. D. Scholes and K. P. Ghiggino, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 1994, 80, 355–362 CrossRef CAS .

          T. Dittrich, P. Hänggi, G.-L. Ingold, B. Kramer, G. Schön and W. Zwerger, Quantum Transport and Dissipation, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  1998 Search PubMed .

          Y. Imry, Introduction to Mesoscopic Physics, Oxford University Press, Oxford,  2002 Search PubMed .
M. Arndt, K. Hornberger and A. Zeilinger, Phys. World, 2006, 18, 35 Search PubMed .
K. Hornberger, S. Gerlich, P. Haslinger, S. Nimmrichter and M. Arndt, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2012, 84, 157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sias, Z. Zenesini, H. Lignier, S. Wimberger, D. Ciampini, O. Morsch and E. Arimondo, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 120403 CrossRef CAS .
F. Fassioli and A. Olaya-Castro, New J. Phys., 2010, 12, 085006 CrossRef .
A. Kimura, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130, 154103 CrossRef .
T. Scholak, F. Mintert, T. Wellens and A. Buchleitner, Semicond. Semimetals, 2010, 83, 1 CrossRef .
K. P. Ghiggino and T. A. Smith, Prog. React. Kinet., 1993, 18, 375–436 CAS .
A. Siemiarczuk, B. D. Wagner and W. R. Ware, J. Phys. Chem., 1990, 94, 1661–1666 CrossRef CAS .
C. Khurmi and M. A. Berg, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 3364–3375 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kalyanasis, S. J. Kern and M. A. Berg, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 7984–7993 CrossRef .

          R. P. Feynman and A. R. Hibbs, Quantum Mechanics and Path Integrals, McGraw-Hill, New York,  1965 Search PubMed .
T. Brixner, J. Stenger, H. M. Vaswani, M. Cho, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2005, 434, 625–628 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Engel, T. R. Calhoun, E. L. Read, T.-K. Ahn, T. Mancal, Y.-C. Cheng, R. E. Blankenship and G. R. Fleming, Nature, 2007, 446, 782–786 CrossRef CAS .
E. Collini and G. D. Scholes, Science, 2009, 323, 369–373 CrossRef CAS .
E. Collini, C. Y. Wong, K. E. Wilk, P. M. G. Curmi, P. Brumer and G. D. Scholes, Nature, 2010, 463, 644–648 CrossRef CAS .
G. Panitchayangkoon, D. Hayes, K. A. Fransted, J. R. Caram, E. Harel, J. Z. Wen, R. E. Blankenship and G. S. Engel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 12766–12770 CrossRef CAS .
I. P. Mercer, Y. C. El-Taha, N. Kajumba, J. P. Marangos, J. W. G. Tisch, M. Gabrielsen, R. J. Cogdell, E. Springate and E. Turcu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 057402 CrossRef .
G. Panitchayangkoon, D. V. Voronine, D. Abramavicius, J. R. Caram, N. H. C. Lewis, S. Mukamel and G. S. Engel, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2011, 108, 20908–20912 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Richards, K. E. Wilk, P. M. G. Curmi, H. M. Quiney and J. A. Davis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 272–277 CrossRef CAS .
G. S. Schlau-Cohen, T. R. Calhoun, N. S. Ginsberg, E. L. Read, M. Ballottari, R. Bassi, R. van Grondelle and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 15352–15363 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Wong, R. M. Alvey, D. B. Turner, K. E. Wilk, D. A. Bryant, P. M. G. Curmi, R. J. Silbey and G. D. Scholes, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 396–404 CrossRef CAS .
F. Milota, J. Sperling, A. Nemeth, D. Abramavicius, S. Mukamel and H. F. Kauffmann, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 054510 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Jonas, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2003, 54, 425–463 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Gallagher, A. W. Albrecht, T. D. Hybl, B. L. Landin, B. Rajaram and D. M. Jonas, J. Opt. Soc. Am. B, 1998, 15, 2338–2345 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukamel, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2000, 51, 691–729 CrossRef CAS .
D. Abramavicius, B. Palmieri, D. V. Voronine, F. Sanda and S. Mukamel, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 2350–2408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Cheng and G. R. Fleming, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2009, 60, 241–262 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cho, Chem. Rev., 2008, 108, 1331–1418 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Hochstrasser, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 14190–14196 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Cundiff, T. H. Zhang, A. D. Bristow, D. Karaiskaj and X. C. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2009, 42, 1423–1432 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brixner, T. Mancal, I. V. Stiopkin and G. R. Fleming, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 121, 4221–4236 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Y. Wong and S. S. Lo, in Dynamics of Interfacial Electron and Excitation Transfer in Solar Energy Conversion: Theory and Experiment, ed. P. Piotrowiak, Royal Society of Chemistry, London,  2012 Search PubMed .

          S. Mukamel, Principles of Nonlinear Optical Spectroscopy, Oxford University Press, New York,  1995 Search PubMed .
I. Hwang, S. Beaupré, M. Leclerc and G. D. Scholes, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 2270 RSC .
T. E. Dykstra, E. Hennebicq, D. Beljonne, J. Gierschner, G. Claudio, E. R. Bittner, J. Knoester and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 656–667 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bassler and B. Schweitzer, Acc. Chem. Res., 1999, 32, 173–182 CrossRef .
E. Collini and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2009, 113, 4223–4241 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Turner, Y. Hassan and G. D. Scholes, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 880–886 CrossRef CAS .
Y. C. Cheng and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2008, 112, 4254–4260 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Turner, K. E. Wilk, P. M. G. Curmi and G. D. Scholes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1904–1911 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Turner, R. Dinshaw, K. K. Lee, M. S. Belsley, K. E. Wilk, P. M. G. Curmi and G. D. Scholes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2012, 14, 4857–4874 RSC .
J. R. Caram and G. S. Engel, Faraday Discuss., 2011, 153, 93–104 RSC .
J. M. Wormick, H. Liu and A. M. Moran, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2011, 115, 2471–2482 CrossRef .
J. M. Wormick, S. A. Miller and A. M. Moran, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133, 024507 CrossRef .
J. M. Wormick and A. M. Moran, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 15747–15759 CrossRef .
J. M. Wormick and A. M. Moran, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2009, 113, 15771–15782 CrossRef .
J. M. Wormick and A. M. Moran, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2011, 115, 1347–1356 CrossRef .
J. A. Cina and G. R. Fleming, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 2004, 11196–11208 CrossRef .
J. D. Biggs and J. A. Cina, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 224101 CrossRef .
J. D. Biggs and J. A. Cina, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 224302 CrossRef .

          A. W. Chin, J. Prior, R. Rosenbach, F. Caycedo-Soler, S. F. Huelga and M. B. Plenio, arXiv:1203.0776v1,  2012.

          A. Kolli, E. J. O'Reilly, G. D. Scholes and A. Olaya-Castro, arXiv:1203.5056,  2012.
A. Olaya-Castro and G. D. Scholes, Int. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2011, 30, 49–77 CrossRef CAS .
C. G. Heid, P. Ottiger, R. Leist and S. Leutwyler, J. Chem. Phys., 2011, 135, 154311 CrossRef .
P. Ottiger, S. Leutwyler and H. Köppel, J. Chem. Phys., 2012, 136, 174308 CrossRef .
C. Curutchet, J. Kongsted, A. Munoz-Losa, H. Hossein-Nejad, G. D. Scholes and B. Mennucci, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 3078–3084 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shim, P. Rebentrost, S. Valleau and A. Aspuru-Guzik, Biophys. J., 2012, 102, 649–660 CrossRef CAS .
V. Serguei, M. Abdullah and D. Bruce, Photosynth. Res., 2011, 110, 25–38 CrossRef .
C. Olbrich, J. Strumpfer, K. Schulten and U. Kleinekathofer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 1771–1776 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Fleming, S. A. Passino and Y. Nagasawa, Philos. Trans. R. Soc., A, 1998, 356, 389 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lee, Y.-C. Cheng and G. R. Fleming, Science, 2007, 316, 1462–1465 CrossRef CAS .
F. Muh, M. Madjet, J. Adolphs, A. Abdurahman, B. Rabenstein, H. Ishikita, E. Knapp and T. Renger, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 16862–16867 CrossRef .

Chaos and Quantum Physics: Proceedings of the Les Houches Summer School, Course LII, ed. M. J. Giannoni, A. Voros and J. Zinn-Justin, Elsevier,  1991 Search PubMed .

          H.-J. Stöckmann, Quantum Chaos, An Introduction, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1999 Search PubMed .
C. Iu, G. R. Welch, M. M. Kash, D. Kleppner, D. Delande and J. C. Gay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 145 CrossRef CAS .
A. Delande, A. Bommier and J. C. Gay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 141 CrossRef .
A. Buchleitner, B. Grémaud and D. Delande, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys., 1994, 27, 2663 CrossRef CAS .
A. Holle, J. Main, G. Wiebusch, H. Rottke and K. H. Welge, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1988, 61, 161 CrossRef CAS .
H. Held, J. Schlichter, G. Raithel and H. Walther, Europhys. Lett., 1998, 43, 392 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tomsovic and D. Ullmo, Phys. Rev. E: Stat. Phys., Plasmas, Fluids, Relat. Interdiscip. Top., 1994, 50, 145 CrossRef .
P. Nalbach, A. Ishizaki, G. Fleming and M. Thorwart, New J. Phys., 2011, 13, 063040 CrossRef .
J. Ray and N. Makri, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1999, 103, 9417–9422 CrossRef CAS .
T. Mancal, N. Christensson, V. Lukes, F. Milota, O. Bixner, H. Kauffmann and J. Hauer, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2012, 3, 1497–1502 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hornberger, Lect. Notes Phys., 2009, 768, 221 CrossRef .
R. Blümel, A. Buchleitner, R. Graham, L. Sirko, U. Smilansky and H. Walthe, Phys. Rev. A: At., Mol., Opt. Phys., 1991, 44, 4521 CrossRef .
F. Fassioli, A. Nazir and A. Olaya-Castro, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2139–2143 CrossRef CAS .
A. Olaya-Castro, C. F. Lee, F. F. Olsen and N. F. Johnson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2008, 78, 085115 CrossRef .
F. Caruso, A. W. Chin, A. Datta, S. F. Huelga and M. B. Plenio, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 131, 105106 CrossRef .
M. Thorwart, J. Eckel, J. H. Reina, P. Nalbach and S. Weiss, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2009, 478, 234 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sarovar, A. Ishizaki, G. R. Fleming and K. B. Whaley, Nat. Phys., 2010, 6, 462 CrossRef CAS .
I. Sinayskiy, A. Marais, F. Petruccione and A. Ekert, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 020602 CrossRef CAS .
T. Scholak, T. Wellens and A. Buchleitner, J. Phys. B: At., Mol. Opt. Phys., 2011, 44, 184012 CrossRef .
A. Wallraff, D. I. Schuster, A. Blais, L. Frunzio, H. Majer, M. H. Devoret, S. M. Girvin and R. J. Schoelkopf, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 060501 CrossRef CAS .
F. de Melo and A. Buchleitner, Lect. Notes Phys., 2010, 808, 253 CrossRef .

          T. Zech, R. Mulet, T. Wellens and A. Buchleitner,  2012, unpublished.

          M. Walschaers, R. Mulet and A. Buchleitner,  2012, unpublished.
P. Hänggi, P. Talkner and M. Borkovec, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1990, 62, 251 CrossRef .
T. Wellens, V. Shatokhin and A. Buchleitner, Rep. Prog. Phys., 2004, 67, 45 CrossRef .
A. Buchleitner, D. Delande and J. Zakrzewski, Phys. Rep., 2002, 368, 409 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Mestayer, W. Zhao, J. C. Lancaster, F. B. Dunning, C. O. Reinhold, S. Yoshida and J. Burgdörfer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 183003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baier, M. Gabrielson, S. Oellerich, H. Michel, M. van Heel, R. J. Cogdell and J. Kohler, Biophys. J., 2009, 97, 2604–2612 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hildner, D. Brinks and N. F. van Hulst, Nat. Phys., 2011, 7, 172–177 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Cogdell, A. Gall and J. Köhler, Q. Rev. Biophys., 2006, 39, 227–324 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Note that phase and state space define the most general “scenery” for transport. For the efficient description of a specific transport problem, in particular when of a certain degree of complexity, it is crucial to choose the appropriate coordinate system or representation – think, e.g., of transport problems in real space, formulated in the site or in the energy basis. While, on the one hand, the proper choice of a coordinate system is a practically very important ingredient of the art of high performance computing, it almost always relies, on the other hand, on a good degree of a priori intuition (ideally aided by some systematic use of group theory) of which are the dominant transporting modes.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:

Broader context
We suggest that expanding the scope of bio-inspiration has the potential to yield paradigm shifts for the design of energy-conversion systems. To explore this idea we speculate on the limits for controlling excitation energy flow in supramolecular assemblies and we ask whether examination of biological ecosystems—rather than solely isolated proteins like reaction centers—suggests strategies for beating the thermodynamic limit of solar power conversion. In a sense, photosynthetic ecosystems function like dynamic multijunction solar cells. Zooming in to the length scales on which molecules interact with each other during the transfer of excitation energy, we examine the limits for rapid energy transfer and long exciton diffusion lengths. We discuss recent experiments that reveal a potential role played by coherence, possibly quantum mechanical in nature, in light harvesting. While coherence effects may not profoundly change energy migration efficiencies in large light harvesting antenna systems, they likely influence the underlying distribution of energy trapping times. Understanding and controlling these distributions may provide opportunities for quantum engineering in chemistry and biology.


 	Fig. 1  The antenna effect. (a) Schematic illustration of light-harvesting principles, where accessory pigments are utilized for energy capture. After capture, energy is transferred by Förster-type energy transfer from the accessory pigments to the reaction centre (the acceptor), the unique protein that converts energy into charge separation. (b) Synthetically prepared snowflake-shaped Zn–porphyrin dendritic light-harvesting system, where the mutual arrangement and the chemical nature of the dendron moieties (BE (benzyl ether) branches and/or oligo(ethynylenepheylene)s (EtPh) chains) and the Zn–porphyrin core enable efficient energy transfer between the periphery and the core.36 The crucial role in the manifestation of the dendrimer effect is played by the EtPh conjugated chain, which acts as the mediator in energy-transfer processes in the dendritic antenna system. (c and d) The architecture of the pigment protein complex, photosystem I (PSI) (from Synechococcus), is based on a network of pigment antennae surrounding the reaction centre. The two stereoviews are as seen (c) from the side and (d) from the top, with respect to the cell membrane. The chlorophyll tails have been omitted for clarity. The numerous chlorophylls on the periphery of the complex harvest light and then transfer that excitation energy to the “special pair” of chlorophylls in the reaction centre, where charge separation occurs. The charge separation across the cell membrane is later utilized for ATP synthesis. The length scales are approximate.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Variation in light-harvesting antennae commonly encountered in photosynthetic organisms, which vary widely in their protein structure and the number and arrangement of pigments utilized. The molecular structures (with parent organisms in brackets) from left to right are: peridinin-chlorophyll-protein or PCP (of Amphidinium carterae), phycoerythrin 545 (of Rhodomonas CS24), light harvesting complex LHCII (of Spinacia olearia), schematic representation of a chlorosome (of Chloroflexus aurantiacus), and light harvesting complex LH2 (of Rhodopseudomonas acidophila). Their respective absorption spectra, shown in matching colours, illustrate how different organisms have evolved to optimize their light-harvesting capabilities in different regions of the visible spectrum. Figure adapted from ref. 44. (b) Schematic of microbial layers in microbial mats from Great Sippewissett Salt Marsh, Massachusetts and (c) selected solar irradiance spectra during transmission through the mat, see text for explanation. Data reported in ref. 43.	 

 	Fig. 3  The variation in colour among the different algal species is reflective of their specific light-harvesting antennae that they carry. The species with their respective phycobiliproteins starting in the top left corner and going clockwise are: Cryptomonas pyrenoidifera (CCMP 1177 with PE566), Rhodomonas minuta (CPCC 344 with PE545), Hemiselmis pacifica (CCMP 706 with PC577), Chroomonas mesostigmatica (CCMP 269 with PC645) and Proteomonas sulcata (CCMP 705 with PE545).	 

 	Fig. 4  Cryptophyte views, from a cell to an antenna complex. Red rectangles in (b)–(d) represent areas that are zoomed-in in subsequent figure panels. (a) SEM micrograph of a flagellated cryptophyte alga, Proteomonas sulcata. (b) The fine structural details and the large network of thylakoid membranes within the chloroplast are visible in this cross-sectional view of the transmission electron micrograph. (c) In this magnified view, the light-harvesting phycobiliproteins appear as the dark, electron-rich regions located in the intrathylakoid space. (d) A simplified schematic model of the cryptophyte thylakoid membrane illustrating that the phycobiliproteins are located in the intrathylakoid space, while the PS II and PS I core complexes as well as the Chl a/c2 antenna are located in the membrane. A scheme showing the energy migration flow among the constituents of the light-harvesting apparatus is depicted in the top left corner with white arrows. (e) A structural model of phycoerythrin 545 (PE545) from the 0.1 nm resolution X-ray crystal structure. The ribbon diagram shows the four subunits of the protein in different colours and the embedded chromophores are shown in black. (f) Same view as (e), but apoprotein is removed from view. The eight chromophores are distributed throughout the protein subunits: each β subunit carries three phycoerythrobilins (PEBs), and each α subunit carries one 15,16-dihydrobiliverdin (DBV). The arrows indicate the energy flow in PE545 when the four highest-energy chromophores capture the light. The energy is then channelled (black arrows) to the central dimer and subsequently transferred (grey arrows) to the lowest-energy bilins (the DBVs).	 

 	Fig. 5  Compositional and chromic variation in cryptophycean phycobiliproteins.54,55,59 Variance of the absorption region of different phycobiliproteins is attributed to numerous combinations of constituent bilins. The first column denotes the phycobiliprotein type (PE, phycoerythrin; PC, phycocyanin) and position of the absorption maximum of the native protein. Each phycobiliprotein contains four subunits, two α and two β. The bilin composition and their binding sites of each of the subunits are denoted in the second and third columns. The right panel shows the structure and the position of the absorption maximum of chromophores that tend to be integrated in cryptophycean phycobiliproteins. The bilin legend is shown at the bottom of the diagram. Abbreviations used: DBV: 15,16-dihydrobiliverdin; PEB: phycoerythrobilin; PCB: phycocyanobilin; MBV: mesobiliverdin. Number in parenthesis indicate the red absorption maxima of solutions of bilin peptides.	 
heme → biliverdin IXα → 15,16 dihydrobiliverdin IXα (DBV) → 3(Z)-phycoerythrobilin (PEB) → 3(Z)-phycocyanobilin (PCB) → 3(E)-phycocyanobilin (PCB)

 	Fig. 6  Speciation of cryptophytes. Cumulative frequency of the number of cryptophyte species with various light-harvesting antenna types—PE555, PE545, PC630, PC645, and PE566—as a function of time up to the present day. Data was taken from the maximum likelihood tree based on nuclear small subunit rDNA sequences.66 The insets show photographs of aqueous-buffer suspensions of light harvesting complexes isolated from cryptophytes. From left: PC645 (Chroomonas mesostigmatica, CCMP 269), PC577 (Hemiselmis pacifica, CCMP 706), PE545 (Proteomonas sulcata, CCMP 705), PE566 (Cryptomonas pyrenoidifera, CCMP 1177).	 

 	Fig. 7  Effect of light intensity on pigment composition of photosynthetic algae. Cryptophytes, in particular Proteomonas sulcata (CCMP 705), utilize chlorophylls and phycoerythrin-containing light harvesting complex PE545 in their light harvesting machinery. Proteomonas sulcata was grown under three different light conditions: high light (20 μEm−2 s−1), medium light (5 μEm−2 s−1), and low light (1 μEm−2 s−1). The micrographs suggest that the algae grown under low-light conditions contain the highest load of pigments, while the algae grown at higher light intensities appear much lighter as a result of carrying a smaller load of pigments/organism (right panel). The absorption spectra of the three samples, normalized at 545 nm (the absorption maximum of phycoerythrin PE545) illustrate the way that the chlorophyll:PE545 ratio depends on light conditions during growth.	 
	(1)
	(2)
κ = (D·A) − 3(·D)(·A).	(3)

 	Fig. 8  (a) The electronic coupling dependence of energy transfer, assuming localized initial conditions, predicted by Förster theory (red line) compared to the correction to this picture that accounts for the change of basis from localized to delocalized states. In this modified picture, blue line, energy transfer from molecule to molecule happens in the small electronic coupling regime, but the excited state dynamics are more realistically described as relaxation through a manifold of exciton states when electronic coupling is large. (b) The concentration of chlorophyll in the higher plant (and green algae) light-harvesting complex LHCII is a remarkable 0.25 M. At such a high concentration, we expect concentration quenching to occur based on experiments of chlorophyll in solution.95 Since concentration quenching does not occur in LHCII, we conclude that the positions and orientations of the chlorophyll molecules are optimized to avoid this undesirable effect.	 
	(4)
	(5)
	(6)
Pij(t) = |c(1)if(t) + c(2)if(t) + …|2	(7)
	(8)
Gif(t) = G(1)if(t) + G(1,2)imf(t) + G(2)imf(t) + …,	(9)

 	Fig. 9  Details and examples of 2D ES measurements. (a) A set of spectral interferograms collected for many coherence times. It is just possible to see the ripples diagonally across the plot. A 2D spectrum is created by Fourier transformation of this signal over the t1 time period. (b) A single spectral interferogram—meaning the signal as a function of emission frequency—collected at a coherence time t1 = 0 fs and a waiting time t2 = 0 fs along the dashed line drawn in part a (with the background signal contributions subtracted, see ref. 139). (c) Real part of the total 2DES recorded for the donor–acceptor conjugated copolymer PBDTTPD in chloroform,141 see text for details. ‘Pump–probe’ waiting times are indicated in the top left of each panel. (d) Real part of the total 2DES recorded for a suspension of ∼6 nm mean diameter CdSe nanocrystals in toluene at a waiting time of 50 fs,145 see text for details.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Electronic absorption spectrum of PC645 from the cryptophyte Chroomonas sp. strain CCMP270 in aqueous buffer at room temperature. The vertical lines illustrate the approximate absorption energies of the excitonic bilin chromophore bands. (b) Structure of PC645 with the eight chromophores labeled and colour-coded equivalently to the coloured, vertical lines in part (a). (c) 2D ES real part of the total spectra recorded for PC645 (298 K) for two representative t2 values. See ref. 148 for details. These data are plotted using a normal linear contour scale where red (blue) indicates positive (negative) values. The blue contour regions show a remarkably clear cross-peak indicating a vibronic superposition whose amplitude oscillates with t2 time.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Plot of the amplitude of the cross peak in Fig. 10e located at an excitation energy of 2.14 eV and a signal energy of 2.06 eV as a function of the waiting time period. The oscillation is a superposition of multiple frequency components. (b) Both the rephasing (red trace) and nonrephasing (black trace) signal contributions oscillate. The oscillations in the nonrephasing component are evidence that vibrational coherences are present. (c) Fourier transformation of the oscillations in part (b) leads to the conclusion that the 26 THz component is present in both signal contributions and is therefore assigned to be a vibrational coherence. The 21 THz component, since it is only present in the rephasing component, is assigned to be an electronic coherence. See ref. 148 for details.	 
Footnote
† Note that phase and state space define the most general “scenery” for transport. For the efficient description of a specific transport problem, in particular when of a certain degree of complexity, it is crucial to choose the appropriate coordinate system or representation – think, e.g., of transport problems in real space, formulated in the site or in the energy basis. While, on the one hand, the proper choice of a coordinate system is a practically very important ingredient of the art of high performance computing, it almost always relies, on the other hand, on a good degree of a priori intuition (ideally aided by some systematic use of group theory) of which are the dominant transporting modes.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
