A review of advanced metal-free carbon catalysts for oxygen reduction reactions towards the selective generation of hydrogen peroxide  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA07900F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA07900F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 20849-20869A review of advanced metal-free carbon catalysts for oxygen reduction reactions towards the selective generation of hydrogen peroxide

        
          
            Yue 
            Zhou
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ge 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jiujun 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *b
aBeijing Key Laboratory for Green Catalysis and Separation, College of Environmental & Energy Engineering, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing, 100124, PR China. E-mail: chenge@bjut.edu.cn
bInstitute for Sustainable Energy, College of Sciences, Shanghai University, Shanghai, 200444, PR China. E-mail: jiujun@i.shu.edu.cn
Received 
      12th August 2020
    , Accepted 30th September 2020First published on 30th September 2020AbstractHydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is a versatile and environmentally friendly oxidant with a wide range of industrial and household applications. In recent years, the decentralization of H2O2 production through the two-electron oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) has emerged as an attractive alternative to the well-established anthraquinone process. And of the many electrocatalysts developed for the two-electron ORR to produce H2O2, metal-free carbon catalysts (MFCCs) have received extensive attention due to their cost-effectiveness and natural abundance. Based on this, this review will provide an in-depth overview into MFCC design and fabrication with an emphasis on porosity control, heteroatom doping, oxygen functionalization, defect engineering and organic–inorganic interface engineering. This review will also discuss and analyze the interplays between these factors in terms of MFCC catalytic activity and selectivity towards H2O2 production. Furthermore, major technical challenges are presented, and future research directions are proposed to guide further development towards practical application.Yue ZhouYue Zhou, a post-graduate student come from Beijing University of Technology, her current research interest focuses on electrochemical production of hydrogen peroxide. Her motto is that Stay Hungry, Stay foolish.Ge ChenGe Chen received his B.S., M.S. from University of Science & Technology, Beijing in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and PhD from Beijing University of Technology in 2010. He is now a full professor in College of Environmental and Energy Engineering, Beijing University of Technology. His research group interests are focused on developing novel electrocatalysts towards energy conversion.Jiujun ZhangDr. Jiujun Zhang is a professor in College of Sciences/Institute for Sustainable Energy at Shanghai University, a former Principal Research Officer (Emeritus) at National Research Council of Canada (NRC). Dr Zhang received his B.S. and M.Sc. in Electrochemistry from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and his PhD in Electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988. Dr Zhang's expertise areas are electrochemistry, electrocatalysis, fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors, water/CO2 electrolysis.
1. Introduction
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) is one of the most important chemicals in the world and will reach an annual global production value of ∼5.5 billion US dollars by 2023, greatly emphasizing its growing importance.1,2 In addition, H2O2 is a versatile and environmentally friendly oxidant with a wide range of industrial and household applications, including use in first-aid kits and detergents for disinfection and virus elimination as well as for pulp and textile bleaching, wastewater treatment, chemical synthesis, semiconductor cleaning and exhaust air treatment.
Currently, the major production (about 95%) of H2O2 relies on the anthraquinone process in an alkaline solution environment.3 To avoid the decomposition of H2O2, some stabilizers are often used to increase the stability of H2O2 during storage and transport. The removal of these stabilizers before practical applications needs extra cost and time. To mitigate this drawback, developing decentralized and low-cost H2O2 production methods is highly desirable. Here, the direct synthesis of H2O2 from hydrogen (H2) and oxygen (O2) is a potential alternative involving the partial hydrogenation of O2 through the passing of gas mixtures over metal catalysts such as palladium (Pd) at low temperatures.4 An essential obstacle to the industrial application of this method is the need to work with mixtures of H2 and O2, which are explosive over a wide composition range. Fortunately, the electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) can provide a facile and safe solution for the decentralization of H2O2 production that can be carried out under mild conditions.5 With the development of renewable energy resources (e.g. solar, wind, waterfall, geothermal, sea-wave), the use of electricity from renewable sources to produce H2O2 through ORR is meaningful and environmentally friendly, particularly in rural or remote areas without essential infrastructure. Overall, ORR catalysis can proceed through two pathways, including the four-electron pathway to produce H2O and the two-electron pathway to produce H2O2. Here, catalyst development for the four-electron pathway has received more attention due to its vital role in fuel cells and metal–air batteries in which the two-electron pathway is undesirable.6–10 Besides the two-electron ORR pathway, the two-electron water oxidation reaction (WOR) is also an attractive electro-synthesis pathway for H2O2; however, the two-electron WOR is only thermodynamically feasible at potentials above 1.76 V (at standard conditions). Few catalyst materials are stable at such highly oxidizing conditions, and the competing four-electron oxygen evolution reaction (OER) puts additional requirements on the catalyst in terms of selectivity toward H2O2 production. Recent studies have demonstrated preferential 2e-WOR over several metal oxides such as ZnO, TiO2, BiVO4, and CaSnO3.11–14
As for the electrochemical production of H2O2, Berl firstly reported the synthesis through two-electron ORR process in 1930s,15 Dow and Huron Technologies, Inc. then adopted the method for the on-site production of dilute alkaline H2O2 for the pulp and paper bleaching in the 1980s followed by commercialization in 1991.16 Otsuka and Yamanaka further pioneered the use of a proton exchange membrane (PEM) device to produce pure H2O2.17 Highly active, stable and selective electrocatalysts are necessary to achieve highly efficient H2O2 production through two-electron ORR and in the past decades, various electrocatalysts have been explored. To date, optimal practical performances have been obtained using noble metals (e.g. gold, platinum, palladium) and corresponding alloys;18,19 however, the associated high costs and low abundance of these noble metals greatly limit large-scale application. Alternatively, metal-free carbon catalysts (MFCCs) hold great promise as cheap, abundant and durable electrocatalysts for many reactions such as ORR, hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), OER, carbon dioxide reduction reaction (CO2 RR), etc. and have therefore attracted increasing attention as two-electron ORR electrocatalysts in H2O2 production.20–23 And to design and synthesize more effective MFCCs, the elucidation of the origin of catalytic performance is vital in terms of their complex inhomogeneous structure/morphology, composition, electron/ion conductivity, reaction mechanism, synergetic effect between components as well as other factors such as electrolyte type, solution pH and mass transport in electrolysis devices.24–28
Based on all of this, this review will comprehensively present recent progresses in the development of MFCCs for two-electron ORR to produce H2O2 in terms of catalyst design, synthesis, characterization, functional mechanism, and performance validation/optimization. And by excluding metal-based electrocatalysts previously reviewed for the electro-generation of H2O2 in recent years,29–37 this review is possibly the first review into MFCCs for two-electron ORR towards H2O2 production with a focus on important factors affecting catalytic performance, including the porous structures and active sites of MFCCs as well as corresponding defects and organic–inorganic interfaces along with electrolyte pH effects and practical device designs (Fig. 1). Furthermore, this review will analyze major technical challenges and propose future research directions for practical application.
 Fig. 1  Factors affecting two-electron oxygen reduction (ORR) to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) electrochemically catalyzed using metal-free carbon catalysts (MFCCs). 
2. Fundamental aspects
The electrochemical oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) at the cathode of an electrochemical cell can proceed through two pathways in aqueous media, including the two-electron ORR and the four-electron ORR. These half-cell reactions in acid media can be expressed by eqn (1) and (2) respectively:38 O2 + 4H+ + 4e− ↔ 2H2O, E0 = 1.23 V vs. RHE(1) O2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2O2, E0 = 0.70 V vs. RHE(2)
In basic media, these reactions can be expressed by eqn (3)–(5) respectively: O2 + 2H2O + 4e− ↔ 4OH−, E0 = 1.23 V vs. RHE(3) O2 + 2H2O + 2e− ↔ H2O2 + 2OH−, E0 = 0.70 V vs. RHE(4)at pH > 11.7 O2 + H2O + 2e− ↔ HO2− + OH−, E0 = 0.76 V vs. RHE(5)
Produced H2O2 can also undergo further reduction/decomposition to form H2O to complete the four-electron pathway as expressed by eqn (6). H2O2 + H+ + e− ↔ H2O + OH, E0 = 0.79 V vs. RHE(6)
In the above equations, E0 is the standard equilibrium potential and RHE is the reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE). And because the four-electron ORR is more thermodynamically exoergic than the two-electron ORR, selective catalysts are required to catalyze ORR to H2O2 rather than H2O if H2O2 is the desired product.
In terms of electrode kinetics, the free energies of adsorbed intermediates in the reduction steps of ORR are potential dependent, which determine the over-potential for the catalyzed electrode. The plot of over-potential versus intermediates (HOO* or OH*) binding energy can form a volcano profile which could be used effectively to predict the ORR activity.9 The peak of volcano profile corresponds to parameters of theoretical optimum catalysts. For example, the Pd–Hg alloy sits are close to the volcano peak, suggesting the optimal strengths for HOO* binding. Experimental results confirmed the enhanced two-electron ORR performance of Pd–Hg alloy, which displayed the lowest overpotential among alloy surfaces examined.39 This volcano profile can also be used to predict the two-electron ORR activity of many catalyst materials including MFCCs (Fig. 2a and b).
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of ORR to H2O2 on a model Pd2Hg5 (001) surface; Pd (green), Hg (blue), O (red), H (yellow). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 39 copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) A plot of theoretical limiting potential (UL) against Gibbs free energies of binding HOO* (ΔGHOO*) for the electroreduction of O2 to hydrogen peroxide. UL is the least negative potential at which electron transfer is downhill in free energy. The dashed lines represent the theoretical Sabatier volcanoes, the peaks of which correspond to parameters of theoretical optimum catalysts. Catalysts are categorized as pure metals (grey), metal alloys (yellow), MFCCs (black). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 32 copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic of a RRDE setup in a three-electrode electrochemical cell. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 9 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) A hermetically sealed electrochemical H-cell and an in-line pressure transducer to quantify O2 pressure decay during ORR. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 86 copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. 
Overall, two-electron ORR in the production of H2O2 is a two-step process involving proton-coupled electron transfer and the generation of HOO− intermediates on active sites. These reactions can be expressed by eqn (7) and (8) respectively: O2 + * + H+ + e− → HOO*(7) HOO* + H+ + e− → H2O2 + *(8)in which asterisk denotes the active site. In two-electron ORR, an O2 molecule is adsorbed onto an active site at the catalyst surface and reacts with an H+ ion and an electron to form an HOO* intermediate. This HOO* intermediate subsequently reacts with another H+ ion to complete the two-electron path to form H2O2. As for the four-electron ORR pathway, the *OOH intermediate proceeds through two different dissociation steps to form OH* and O* intermediates that leads to H2O as the product.19,40–42 Based on this, the cleavage of O–O bonds should be avoided in the production of H2O2 and therefore, ideal two-electron ORR catalysts should strongly adsorb O2 molecules to induce the formation of HOO* and adsorption on active sites should be weak enough to allow HOO* to easily desorbed to produce H2O2, meaning that longer stay times of HOO* on catalyst surfaces will lead to increased HOO* dissociation to form O* and OH* intermediates and enhanced H2O production.
As for the study of ORR mechanisms, the use of the rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) is an effective method to quantitatively evaluate the generation of H2O2 from ORR in which during testing, O2 molecules first undergo a reduction reaction on the disk electrode to produce both H2O and H2O2.43,44 The obtained H2O2 is subsequently thrown by the rotating disk electrode out onto a platinum ring electrode and oxidized to O2 to produce a ring current from which the amount of H2O2 formed can be measured (Fig. 2c). Here, high disk currents are indicative of high ORR activities whereas high ring currents are indicative of high levels of H2O2 production and high H2O2 production activities. In addition, the ratio of ring current to disk current is representative of the extent of H2O2 selectivity, which can be quantified in terms of the faradaic efficiency (%) of H2O2 production or the average number of transferred electrons (n) as expressed by eqn (9) and (10) respectively: (9) (10)in which iR and iD represent ring and disk currents respectively and N represents the collection efficiency of the RRDE, which is based on the geometries of the ring and disk electrodes. Here, calculated n values close to 2 suggest reactions that are dominated by a two-electron pathway to produce H2O2 whereas n values closer to 4 suggest a four-electron pathway to produce H2O. O2 efficiency in terms of the fraction of O2 used for H2O2 can also be used to represent selectivity as expressed by eqn (11). (11)
In a practical electrochemical device, the catalyst is often located on the gas diffusion electrode (GDE) or the membrane electrode assembly (MEA) and therefore, faradaic efficiency can be calculated based on eqn (12): (12)in which Q, F, V and C represent the total Coulomb passed in terms of measured time period (C), Faraday constant (96500 C mol−1), electrolyte volume (L) and H2O2 concentration (mol L−1) in the collected solution. The concentration of accumulated H2O2 is typically quantified by three methods: ultraviolet-visible (UV-vis) spectrophotometry, titration, and colorimetric strips.45 These methods have become common because of their ease of use and they provide quantification within the typical concentration ranges and time scales applicable to electrochemical systems. The cerium sulfate (Ce (SO4)2) method and potassium permanganate (KMnO4) method are the commonly used titration methods, while the potassium titanium oxalate method can be used in UV-vis spectrophotometry.45,46 Yang et al.9 compared the faradaic efficiencies of catalysts applied on RRDE, submerged gas diffusion electrode (GDE) and membrane electrode assembly (MEA) to observe large differences in selectivity between the RRDE and the practical devices and attributed this to the mass transport of H2O2 away from the catalyst surface. Kim et al.27 also provided accurate determinations of ORR selectivity expressed as total electrons consumed per oxygen molecule (e−/O2) in which these researchers employed a modified hermetically sealed electrochemical H-cell and an in-line pressure transducer to quantify O2 pressure decay during ORR (Fig. 2d), from which oxygen consumption was directly and precisely measured, allowing for the estimation of e−/O2 to be 2 for a two-electron pathway. In addition, these researchers used peroxide titration to determine the ratio of O2/H2O2 (or HO2−) to be 1 for the two-electron pathway. In a further study, Sánchez et al.47 measured the number of transferred electrons using scanning electrochemical microscopy (SECM) to investigate H2O2 generation at electrodes under substrate generation tip collection (SG/TC) mode. And because this quantification method involves only the diffusion and not convection of H2O2, higher collection efficiency values can be obtained as compared with RRDE, thus allowing for improved measurement precision. These researchers were also able to measure the number of transferred electrons by calculating the effective rate constants of ORR and determining the concentration profiles of H2O2.
3. Strategies to enhance two-electron ORR performance in MFCCs
3.1 Porosity control
The engineering of porosity and microarchitecture in catalysts is crucial in the maximization of active site performance because porous structures play a key role in regulating active site exposure and electrolyte diffusion.48–51 In terms of MFCCs, the control of porosity is also an important and effective strategy to enhance performance in which conventional nano-casting methods have been adapted to fabricate pores using templates to improve mass transport and increase active site numbers.25,52,53 Recently, template-free methods based on the direct pyrolysis of organic–organic assemblies or biomasses have also attracted increasing attention due to simpler processes without the need for template removal.54–56 In addition, obtained mesoporous carbons, macro/mesoporous carbon monoliths and hollow mesoporous nanospheres have all demonstrated high ORR activities towards H2O2 production.57,58 For example, Park et al.25 prepared a N-doped mesoporous carbon with well-ordered mesopores 3.4–4.0 nm in diameter using KIT-6 (mesoporous SiO2) as a template in which ORR testing presented remarkably high selectivity towards H2O2 (over 90%) in acidic media. Here, these researchers attributed this high selectivity to the ordered mesoporous structure (Fig. 3a) in which due to the ease of mass transport in the mesoporous catalyst, generated H2O2 can be released within relatively short contact times to lead to high H2O2 selectivity. Alternatively, generated H2O2 residing for longer time periods in micropore-dominant activated carbon catalysts can further be reduced or decompose to result in lower H2O2 production. In another study, Chen et al.59 investigated two different porous carbon-based electrocatalysts (i.e. mesoporous carbon and microporous carbon) for two-electron ORR under alkaline conditions and reported that although electrochemical results showed that both porous carbon materials exhibited high H2O2 selectivity >70%, the mesoporous carbon demonstrated greater electrochemical accessibility, activity, selectivity and stability than the microporous carbon. This is because micropores can delay H2O2 mass transport and prolong H2O2 remaining times on catalyst surfaces to enhance the possibility of further reduction to H2O, leading to a dominate four-electron ORR pathway in microporous materials as confirmed by many experimental results. For example, Sun et al.60 observed decreases in H2O2 production with increases in micropore ratio as annealing temperatures were further increased to 900 °C (Fig. 3b). Despite this, Čolić et al.61 also demonstrated that carbon catalysts with large microporous volumes can display high selectivity towards H2O2 production and that in particular, produced H2O2 amounts positively correlated with microporous volume, indicating that micropores can act as additional active sites to improve the ORR activity of both two- and four-electron pathways (Fig. 3c). Iglesias et al.62 further observed reductions in two-electron ORR selectivity for N-doped graphitized carbon nanohorns (g-N-CNHs) under acidic conditions if the microporous volume reduced, suggesting that microporosity favored two-electron ORR. Here, these researchers suggested that the competition between H2O2 and O2 molecules for active sites can be exacerbated by the smaller size of pores in which smaller pores can cause enhanced relative concentrations of smaller O2 around active sites and decrease the availability of H2O2 for further reduction.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematics of ORR in mesoporous carbon catalysts (left) and microporous carbon catalysts (right). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 25 copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Pore size distributions of IL-derived N-doped CMK-3 at different temperatures (600, 700, 800 and 900 °C) together with H2O2 selectivity as a function of the electrode potential of N-doped CMK-3 at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 60 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Faradaic efficiency and partial current density for O2 reduction normalized per geometric surface area as a function of micropore volume in carbon materials. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 61 copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
In terms of hierarchical porous carbon (HPC) materials, these are comprised of micropores, mesopores and macropores that are interconnected and freely accessible. In particular, the micropores of HPCs can provide an abundance of surface-active sites to increase ORR activity whereas the larger meso- and macropores can provide the more facile transport of H2O2 from catalyst surfaces to reduce residence time and increase H2O2 selectivity. For example, Liu et al.56 prepared a HPC through the carbonization of a metal organic framework (MOF-5) at 1100 °C for 5 hours under H2 atmosphere and reported good selectivity for two-electron ORR in a wide pH range in which this HPC catalyst not only produced high-yield H2O2 with production rates of 395.7–110.2 mmol h−1 g−1 (pH 1–7, −0.5 V vs. SCE), but also provided high current efficiencies of 70.8–81.8% (pH 1–7, −0.5 V vs. SCE).
3.2 Active sites regulation

3.2.1 Controlled doping. 
In general, pristine carbon is inert to the adsorption/activation of O2 and ORR intermediates and regulation is required to create active sites or activate sp2 carbon. And among various regulation strategies, controlled doping has received the most attention with many nonmetal elements being successfully doped into sp2 carbon in which due to differences in electronegativity, atomic size and binding state, heteroatom doping can refine the spin and charge distribution, improve the hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity and tune the absorbability of key ORR intermediates, leading to enhanced H2O2 production performances.63
Nitrogen doping. 
As recognized, nitrogen is the earliest element used for doping in the preparation of heteroatom-doped MFCCs for four-electron ORR in fuel cells64 and many nitrogen-doping methods have been developed, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD), nano-casting, electrochemical doping and the heat treatment of carbon and nitrogen sources.25,65 In terms of MFCCs, due to the high electronegativity of doped nitrogen species, the integrity of the π conjugate system in sp2 carbon can be broken, allowing for charge redistribution and leading to the altered adsorption of intermediates on MFCCs. In addition, doped nitrogen related active sites may enhance two-electron ORR activity and selectivity and heteroatom doping is believed to be able to enhance MFCC surface areas by forming pores to provide more active sites.
For example, Fellinger et al.54 prepared a mesoporous nitrogen-doped carbon catalyst from ionic liquid which displayed high ORR activity and two-electron selectivity. Also, the researchers investigated the relevant parameters determining two-electron ORR pathways. Here, these researchers reported that H2O2 production depended on the content and type of doping N atoms in which higher N content often led to higher selectivity towards H2O2. These researchers also found that pyrrolic N species favored the two-electron ORR pathway but that further increases in pyrolysis temperature led to higher graphitization, which can cause decreases in pyrrolic N species content and lower H2O2 production. Li et al.66 also reported the critical role of pyrrolic N species on H2O2 production in which these researchers fabricated porous N-rich few-layered graphene (N-FLG) with tunable contents of pyrrolic-N. Here, electrochemical testing demonstrated that high pyrrolic N species content positively corelated with H2O2 selectivity (Fig. 4d) and that by measuring C and N K-edge XANES spectra before and after OOH* and O* intermediate adsorption, pyrrolic-N was confirmed to be the active site.
 Fig. 4  (a) Top: schematic synthesis of core–shell CNHs/graphitized PDA (g-N-CNHs); middle: TEM images of the nanostructured material at each stage of synthesis. Bottom: faradaic efficiencies (FEs) towards H2O2 at three different pHs and potentials using a g-N-CNH modified electrode. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 62 copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) H2O2 selectivity as a function of surface N content in the electrochemical ORR of N-doped CMK-3 carbon catalyst at 0.1 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 63 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Inherent kinetic rate constants calculated using the Nabae model and based on a N-doped carbon electrocatalyst at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm, a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a loading of 120 μg cm−2. The values of ,  and  correspond to the inherent kinetic rate constants for the four-electron pathway, two-electron pathway and H2O2 reduction processes, respectively. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 73 copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Model structure of N-FLG together with a high-resolution bright-field TEM image. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 66 copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
Iglesias et al.62 further prepared g-N-CNHs through the templated polymerization of dopamine with successive annealing (Fig. 4a). The resulting N species exclusively involved pyrrolic and pyridinic N atoms and the relative ratio between the two types of nitrogen was believed to be decisive for H2O2 selectivity, allowing the obtained material to retain high selectivity in a wide pH range. These researchers also suggested that O species in the material can play an important role in two-electron ORR, which is interesting because many N-doped carbon materials also contain O species, meaning that the synergistic effect between N and O species may play an important role in promoting H2O2 production.
As for the effects of MFCC N content on H2O2 selectivity, Sun et al.60 found that H2O2 selectivity followed a volcano trend with N content (Fig. 4b) in which low and high N contents were not beneficial to H2O2 selectivity. Here, these researchers suggested that low H2O2 selectivity at high N-functionals may be due to decreases in isolated active sites, which is beneficial to O–O bond breakage and will lead to the four-electron ORR pathway, meaning that balanced surface N content is important for H2O2 production. In a subsequent study,57 these researchers investigated N species changes in N-doped carbon before and after catalysis using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analysis and observed that both pyridinic-N and graphitic-N experienced different changes. Specifically, pyridinic-N content decreased under acidic conditions and graphitic-N content decreased under neutral and alkaline conditions whereas pyrrolic-N content increased in all pH conditions after catalysis. These researchers also reported that during ORR, adsorbed oxygenated intermediates can influence the chemical environment of N active sites and result in binding energy shifts in the XPS spectra. For example, the binding energy of pyridinic-N shifted to 400.0 eV, which was the characteristic position of pyrrolic-N, whereas the original signal of pyridinic-N decreased, suggesting that pyridinic-N can act as an active site under acidic conditions. As for decreases in graphitic-N signals, this indicates its role as active sites in two-electron ORR under neutral and alkaline conditions.
It is well known that nitrogen doping is also an effective method to improve the four-electron ORR performance.67 Thus, the difference of nitrogen doping effect between four-electron ORR and two-electron ORR should be elucidated. Different N configurations, doping at specific positions and the change of pH value might all impact on the ORR activity and selectivity.68,69 By correlating the four-electron ORR catalytic performance with the chemical compositions of N-doped carbon samples, the catalytic activity order of different N species of pyridinic-N > pyrrolic-N > graphitic-N > oxidized-N > C (carbon) was revealed.70 On the other hand, the pyrrolic-N species seemed to prefer the two-electron ORR pathway. In many previous studies, pyridinic-N sites were believed to be favorable for four-electron ORR in alkaline conditions, in which pyridinic-N atoms possessed the delocalized lone pair electrons that could transfer to anti-bonding orbitals in O2 and weaken O–O bonds.71 In acidic conditions however, pyridinic-N could be protonated through the formation of N–H bonds, allowing lone pair electrons to be occupied, which could hinder the weakening of O–O bonds and turn ORR to the two-electron pathway for production of H2O2.72 Nevertheless, an in-depth and comprehensive understanding of the nitrogen doping effect on two-electron ORR requires to be further investigated.
Through a Nabae model and a modified Damjanovic model, Wu et al.73 also investigated the ORR kinetics of N-doped carbon by calculating kinetic rate constants for two-electron pathway, four-electron pathway and H2O2 reduction processes. Here, these researchers reported that the calculated  corresponding to the kinetic rate constant for the two-electron pathway was higher than the calculated  corresponding to the kinetic rate constant for the four-electron pathway, indicating a high selectivity for two-electron ORR (Fig. 4c). These researchers also suggested that the negligible  value and kinetic rate constant for the H2O2 reduction process meant that H2O2 reduction rarely occurred on the catalyst.
Fluorine doping. 
Aside from nitrogen, fluorine (F) has also been used as a doping heteroatom to tune the electronic structure of MFCCs. For example, Zhao et al.74 reported that their F-doped porous carbon catalyst can exhibit high ORR activity and H2O2 selectivity and that in particular, H2O2 production positively correlated with F content in which at a F content of 3.41 at%, their F-doped carbon catalyst demonstrated a high H2O2 selectivity of 83.0–97.5% in acidic media (Fig. 5a). Corresponding density functional theory (DFT) calculations further indicated that –CF2 and –CF3 species in the sp2 carbon framework can activate adsorbed O2 molecules and promote the desorption of *OOH intermediates, both of which are important for the generation of H2O2 (Fig. 5b).
 Fig. 5  (a) H2O2 production ratio with F content for F-doped carbon. (b) Computational models for the adsorption of O2 and *OOH on CF2 and CF3 doping. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 74 copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic of the types of doping motifs and ORR reaction mechanisms on active sites in B, N co-doped samples in basic media with H2O as the proton source. Color code: C, gray; N, blue; B, red; O, white. (d) Theoretical activity volcano maps for 2e− (red) and 4e− (black) reduction of O2 to H2O2 and H2O, respectively. Both volcano plots are based on the RHE scale. The equilibrium potentials for 2e− and 4e− ORR are shown as dashed red and black lines, respectively. Triangles and diamonds represent the activity of N or B dopants in pristine (N-Gr or B-Gr) and defect (N-Gr-D or B-Gr-D) graphene, respectively. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 78 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding elemental maps of a broken hollow nanosphere observed from N, F doped nanocages. (f) Long-term stability of N, F doped nanocage and N doped nanocage electrodes in alkaline media. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 77 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
Dual doping. 
In addition to single element doping, dual heteroatom doping in MFCCs can further enhance catalytic performances towards H2O2 generation in which synergetic interactions within doped non-metal atoms can further improve the efficiency of MFCCs for H2O2 generation. Based on this, the design and fabrication of dual heteroatom doped MFCCs is a promising strategy to obtain high electrocatalytic performances for H2O2 production. For example, researchers reported that COOH terminated N-doped carbon aerogels can show extremely high selectivity for H2O2 generation because of the synergetic effect between doped N atoms and –COOH groups.75 Chen et al.76 also reported that N and O co-doped porous carbon can display high ORR activity and selectivity for H2O2 production because N species can activate the catalytic properties of oxygen species in corresponding carbon materials. In addition, Jia et al.77 synthesized nitrogen, fluoride co-doped carbon nanocages (NF-Cs) that showed excellent electrocatalytic performances for H2O2 production in both alkaline and acidic media over a large potential range (Fig. 5e and f) and suggested that the synergistic effect between doped N and F atoms can facilitate H2O2 production, which was further confirmed by both experimental and theoretical results. Specifically, these researchers reported that N atoms can enhance O2 molecule adsorption whereas F atoms can promote *OOH intermediate desorption. Chen et al.78 further investigated the effects of different concentrations of N and B co-doping in carbon and found that hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) domains that are more energetically favorable than N and B-doped moieties can form in the graphitic structure of carbon and yield higher selectivity and activity towards two-electron ORR (Fig. 5c and d).


3.2.2 Oxygen functionalization. 
Similar to controlled doping, oxygen functionalization can also enhance the electrocatalytic performance of MFCCs by promoting active sites and in general, the innovative design and fabrication of oxygen functionals in MFCCs can result in high performance electrocatalysts for ORR and H2O2 production.79–81 Because of this, oxygen functional groups and their role in the catalytic activity of MFCCs have been extensively studied with early works suggesting that the hydrophilicity of catalyst surfaces can be enhanced for ORR. For example, Moraes et al.82 showed that nitric acid-treated carbon black (Printer L6) is a suitable material for two-electron ORR because it contains the largest concentration of oxygenated acid species due to the increased hydrophilic characteristic of the carbon material.
In a recent example, Lu et al.83 developed a facile and general method to significantly enhance both ORR activity and selectivity for H2O2 generation using commercial carbon nanotubes (CNTs) oxidized by nitric acid and reported that the resulting oxidized CNTs showed significant decreases in overpotential and enhanced selectivity in comparison with pristine CNTs in both basic and neutral media (Fig. 6a and b). Here, further characterizations revealed that the presence of CO and C–O species on the oxidized CNTs can act as active sites for H2O2 production and that both ORR activity and selectivity for H2O2 generation positively correlated with oxygen content in the catalyst, demonstrating the importance of oxygen functional groups (Fig. 6c). The stability of the oxidized CNTs was also demonstrated in this study through long-term testing (∼10 hours) in which negligible changes in activity or selectivity were detected and based on DFT calculations, these researchers attributed the origins of the high activity of the oxidized carbon material to the –COOH functional group in the armchair edge and the C–O–C functional group in the basal plane of graphene. Subsequently, Wang et al.84 prepared partially oxidized multiwall CNTs with oxidized outer layers and intact inner layers and reported that with appropriate degrees of oxidation, their oxidized MWCNTs possessed good conductivity as well as sufficient catalytic active sites for enhanced selectivity towards H2O2 generation.
 Fig. 6  (a) Oxygen reduction performance of CNTs and O-CNTs. Polarization curves at 1600 rpm (solid lines) and simultaneous H2O2 detection currents at the ring electrode (dashed lines) in 0.1 M KOH. (b) Calculated selectivity of these two catalysts at various potentials in 0.1 M KOH. (c) Plot of H2O2 current and selectivity at 0.6 V as a function of oxygen content for O-CNTs with various oxidation times, demonstrating that both activity and selectivity correlate linearly with oxygen content. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 83 copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Kinetic currents of H2O2 (JK,H2O2) compared at 0.65 and 0.75 V together with corresponding H2O2 yield ratios for different graphitic nanoplatelets (GNP) and partially reduced graphene oxides (pRGO). Reproduced form ref. 85 Nature Publishing Group. 
In the industrial anthraquinone process, oxygen functional groups in quinone are catalytically active sites for H2O2 generation in which Han et al.85 demonstrated the role of quinone groups in the dangled edges of graphitic materials with targeted groups (ether, carboxyl and quinone). Here, electrochemical testing showed that quinone-enriched materials can provide excellent ORR activity and high H2O2 selectivity (97.8% at 0.75 V vs. RHE) (Fig. 6d). These researchers also conducted DFT calculations to understand the activity trends of different possible quinone functional groups in carbon materials to determine the most active motif. Kim et al.86 further developed an easily scalable method involving the mild thermal reduction of a graphene oxide (mrGO) catalyst to produce H2O2 from ORR and reported that the prepared few-layered mrGO (F-mrGO) exhibited highly selective and stable peroxide formation activities at low overpotentials (<10 mV) under basic conditions to outperform current state-of-the-art alkaline catalysts (Fig. 7a and b). To further identify active sites in their F-mrGO catalyst for HO2− formation, these researchers used in situ Raman Spectro-electrochemistry to probe transient adsorbate–catalyst interactions occurring during oxygen reduction. And through further thermal treatment to modify the mrGO oxygen defect composition along with characterizations using other spectrum techniques (e.g. XPS, FTIR, NEXAFS), these researchers found strong evidence that sp2-hybridized carbon near-ring ether defects and sheet edges were the most active sites for peroxide production, shedding new insights into MFCC catalysis for peroxide production (Fig. 7c). In a subsequent study, these researchers used a combination of XPS, NEXAFS and direct 13C and 1H–13C CP-MAS NMR to elucidate the role of carbon defects involving oxygen species in N-rGO catalysts87 in which obtained data suggested that certain carbon defects associated with epoxy or ether groups possessed more pivotal roles in the promotion of peroxide formation activity under alkaline media than other functionalities. These researchers also found no correlation between N species concentrations and onset potentials, indicating that carbon defects involving N functional groups had less impact on peroxide formation activity.
 Fig. 7  (a) Electrochemical O2 reduction behaviors of as-prepared mrGO and annealed mrGO measured through cathodic LSV (2.0 mV s−1) in O2-saturated (∼800 Torr O2) 0.1 M KOH solution. (b) Mass activity of different electrocatalysts for H2O2 production. Mass activity is calculated using electrochemical data and catalyst loading values from literature. (c) Schemes of proposed low-overpotential active sites on F-mrGO and F-mrGO (600). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 86 copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Calculated UL for the H2O2 production of various oxygen functional group structures as a function of ΔGHOO*. Blue solid lines represent the theoretical Sabatier volcano. Empty squares are data adapted from reported state-of-the-art electrocatalysts with η = 0.10 V. The equilibrium potential for H2O2 production, U0 O2/H2O2 = 0.69 V, is shown as the dotted line. 1EP and 1ET denote single EP group and single ring ET group located close to the mrGO sheet edge respectively. 2EP denotes the structure with two EP groups located close to the mrGO sheet edge. 1ET + 1EP denotes the structure consisting of an EP group and an ET group located close to the mrGO sheet edge. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Through DFT calculations, Tan et al.88 also examined the H2O2 formation activities of F-mrGO active sites and found that calculated activities were low, contrary to experimental results. To explain this difference, these researchers studied the H2O2 formation activity of catalyst structures with different oxygen functional groups using DFT calculations and identified two highly active 1ET + 1EP (ring ether (ET) defects + epoxy (EP) groups) structures that can exhibit superior H2O2 formation activities (Fig. 7d) with computed values of ΔGHOO* for these two structures after HOO* adsorption at the active sites being 4.23 and 4.20 eV respectively, corresponding to negligible overpotentials of less than 0.03 V.
The oxygen content of MFCCs can also affect its electron transfer (ET) ability and H2O2 production. For example, Sa et al.89 used the Nicholson equation to determine heterogenous ET rate constants (kobs0) and observed a linear relationship between kobs0 and H2O2 production activity, indicating a positive correlation between catalytic activity and ET ability (Fig. 8). Similar trends were also observed between kobs0 and O-doping levels for MFCCs. These researchers also observed a positive correlation between the reciprocal of charge transfer resistance (Rct − 1) as a function of both O-doping level and kobs0 and based on this, the oxygen content of MFCCs has an apparent effect on ET ability in which enhanced ET ability can improve H2O2 production activity.
 Fig. 8  (a) Trends of observed heterogenous ET rate constant (k0obs) (top) and mass activity (bottom) as a function of O-doping level at 0.75 VRHE. (b) Relationship between observed heterogenous ET rate constant (k0obs) and mass activity at 0.75 vs. RHE. (c) Nyquist plot of oxidized GOMC, non-oxidized GOMC and carbon nanotubes measured at 0.75 V vs. RHE and electrode rotation of 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH (inset: trend of the reciprocal of charge transfer resistance as a function of O-doping level). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 89 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 


3.2.3 Defect engineering. 
Structural or edge defects in non-doped carbon materials can enhance charge transfer and alter electronic effects to provide active sites for two-electron ORR. Due to many different fabrication methods for creating defects in carbon materials however, the controlled synthesis and precise identification of active sites is challenging.90
For example, Liu et al.56 successfully introduced defect sites (sp3-C) into hierarchical porous carbon through the pyrolysis of a metal organic framework (MOF-5) under a reducing atmosphere in which sp3-C in the carbon material was believed to be the active sites for reactant and intermediate adsorption, thus improving catalytic activity towards two-electron ORR. Here, these researchers reported that H2O2 generation rates increased with increasing ID/IG values of carbon, demonstrating that sp3-C defects indeed greatly improved catalytic performances (Fig. 9a), and as a result, their catalyst displayed high faradaic efficiencies and H2O2 generation rates in both neutral and acidic media. The hierarchical porous structure and high surface area of this MFCC may also interplay with defects to synergistically contribute to high activity for two-electron ORR.
 Fig. 9  (a) H2O2 production rates (normalized by BET surface area, −0.3 V vs. SCE, pH 1) of HPC with different defects together with H2O2 selectivity of HPC at pH 1–7 and −0.1 to −0.5 V vs. SCE. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 56 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Different defect configurations: D1–D8 are double-vacancy defect types with non-hexagonal ring members. (c) Two-electron (red) and four-electron (black) ORR-related volcano plots for the electroreduction of O2 to hydrogen peroxide and water respectively displayed with limiting potential plotted as a function of ΔGOH. Both volcano plots are based on the RHE scale. Equilibrium potentials for both two- and four-electron ORR are shown as dashed red and black lines respectively. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 59 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) NT-3DFG flake size and edge density tunability. (e) Representative SEM image of NT-3DFG treated for 30 minutes at 1100 °C, scale bar: 3 μm. Inset represented by a red dashed box shows out-of-plane graphene on Si NW. Inset scale bar: 300 nm. (f) Representative rotating disk electrode linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves for polished glassy carbon (black) and NT-3DFG synthesized in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and rotational speed of 1600 rpm. (g) Number of flake edges along 1 μm length of nanowire of radius, r, for all synthesis conditions. Results presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) with sample size (n) of 3. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 91 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Statistical Raman spectroscopy (SRS) of samples deposited on 300 nm SiO2/Si wafer. This plot shows the functionalization of the reduction of oxo-G, oxo-G/H2O2, GO and GO/H2O2 by hydrogen iodine and trifluoroacetic acid (HI/TFA). Γ2D represents the fullwidth at half-maximum of the 2D band. Insert: scheme of the preparation procedure of GO precursors with different densities of in-plane lattice defects. (i) Calculated H2O2 selectivity (%) as a function of electrode potential for four samples. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 92 copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Aside from sp3-C defects, sp2-C type defects have also been investigated as active sites for two-electron ORR. For example, Chen et al.59 investigated defects in microcarbon and mesocarbon catalysts and their effects on ORR performance in which spectroscopic characterizations revealed that both microcarbon and mesocarbon catalysts contained sp2-C defects and that both catalysts demonstrated high activities for H2O2 generation. Here, theoretical calculations were used to identify the roles of various defect configurations to reveal that all defects tended to preserve O–O bonds through weak interactions with intermediates to contribute to the final formation of H2O2. These researchers also found that certain defects showed favorable binding energies with intermediates, with observed activities being higher than those of state-of-the-art noble metal catalysts (Fig. 9b and c).
Edge sites have also been investigated for two-electron ORR. For example, Roman et al.91 reported a graphene edge-based electrocatalyst that demonstrated high efficiencies towards H2O2 production in which the onset potential was ∼0.79 V vs. RHE and H2O2 selectivity reached as high as ∼94%. These researchers also reported that the tuning of graphene edge site densities can allow for the manipulation of ORR activity (Fig. 9d–g). Through surface characterizations, these researchers further revealed that edge sites can readily be functionalized by hydroxyl and carbonyl groups under ORR conditions and corresponding DFT calculations suggested that various configurations at both the zigzag edges and armchair sites can tune local coordination environments to be more suitable for two-electron ORR.
Less attention has been paid to the influence of in-plane carbon lattice defects because of the poor control of such defects. In one example however, Han et al.92 prepared a series of graphene precursors from oxo-functionalized graphene (oxo-G) and graphene oxide (GO) with H2O2 hydrothermal treatment and found that the density of these in-plane carbon lattice defects followed the order: oxo-G/H2O2 > GO > GO/H2O2. These researchers subsequently treated these graphene precursors hydrothermally using ammonium hydroxide to produce nitrogen-doped graphene materials (Fig. 9h and i) in which rotating ring-disk electrode (RRDE) measurements revealed that the resulting nitrogen-doped graphene with the lowest in-plane carbon lattice defects exhibited an optimal H2O2 selectivity of >82% among samples and a H2O2 generation rate of 224.8 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 at 0.2 V vs. RHE in a H-cell with faradaic efficiencies >43.6%.


3.2.4 Organic–inorganic interface engineering. 
Normally, electrochemical ORR occurs at the three-phase interface (TPI) of an electrode in which the solid catalyst layer is the solid phase providing the electron transfer medium, the diffused O2 is the gas phase providing the reactant and the electrolyte solution is the liquid phase supplying protons and allowing for product transport. As for the stable generation of H2O2, an ideal balance between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity is desired for the TPI.93–95 Based on this, Zhao et al.96 regulated the amount of polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) in a graphite/carbon black/PTFE hybrid catalyst layer to control the meso-structure and hydrophilicity/hydrophobicity of their catalyst with the aim of enhancing two-electron ORR activity (Fig. 10a). As a result, these researchers found that a PTFE0.57 catalyst layer can exhibit superhydrophobic properties with an initiating contact angle of 141.11° to demonstrate an optimal H2O2 production rate of 3005 ± 58 mg L−1 h−1 at a current density of 25 mA cm−2 (Fig. 10b).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the less PTFE content in CLs resulting in less electrons transferred and better selectivity towards two-electron ORR. (b) H2O2 yields and CEs as a function of current density for PTFE0.57, PTFE1.14, PTFE2.28, PTFE3.42 and PTFE4.56 at different current densities. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 96 copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
By combining a metal-free carbon black electrode with a positively charged surfactant (cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, CTAB), Wu et al.97 also designed organic–inorganic hybrids for the electro-synthesis of H2O2 through two-electron ORR and achieved a high selectivity of over 95% across a wide potential window (∼0.80 V) in an alkaline medium. Here, these researchers suggested that the resulting high selectivity was based on in situ coulombic interactions between the CTAB layer and carbon black in which upon peroxide formation, CTAB can pull adsorbed species from the surface of carbon black. Characterization and kinetic model analyses further showed that the high H2O2 selectivity can be attributable to surface carboxylates (–COO) with weak peroxide binding under coulombic pull as imposed by the CTAB layer. The roles of the charged surfactant (CTAB) and surface oxygen groups at the selectivity-determining step were also elucidated in this study through prior and post-reaction characterization and kinetic model analyses (Fig. 11a–c).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of in situ selectivity modulation using surface-acting cations at the carbon surface. Surface oxygen groups (hydroxyl, carbonyl and carboxyl) can act as peroxide generation sites. (b) Corresponding %HO2− profiles of carbon black (CB) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH containing 1.0 mM CTAB or SDS. (c) Analytical evaluation of oxidized CBs at different ф ratios in the presence and absence of CTAB in the system at 0.33 V vs. RHE with best fitting (dashed lines). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 97 copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) SEM image of the rGO/PEI aerogel. (e) H2O2 faradaic efficiencies of rGO and rGO/PEI aerogel-modified glassy carbon electrodes at different applied potentials. (f) Schematic of the steric hindrance effect on a PEI/rGO interface. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 98 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Compared with the side-on adsorption of O2, the hydrodynamic diameter of end-on adsorption is smaller and adsorbed O2 in the end-on configuration will more likely preserve O–O bonds to favor the two-electron pathway to H2O2. Based on this, Xiao et al.98 functionalized reduced graphene oxide (rGO) aerogels with polyethyleneimine (PEI) as an effective catalyst towards two-electron ORR for H2O2 production (Fig. 11d–f). Here, these researchers suggested that the PEI on the rGO aerogels can lead to a steric hindrance effect on the rGO/PEI interface to induce an end-on adsorption configuration and increase the selectivity of H2O2 generation. As a result, the rGO/PEI material in this study showed a high selectivity of 90% and a high H2O2 generation rate of 106.4 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1, both of which were superior to pristine rGO aerogels in alkaline media.
The presence of redox modifiers such as quinone and azobenzene on carbon catalyst surfaces can also improve the production rate of H2O2 by reducing functional groups in quinone and azobenzene structures.99–101 In addition, these modifiers may reduce the overpotential required for two-electron ORR. Based on this, Moreira et al.102 investigated different redox organic molecules as modifiers of carbon black to increase H2O2 production rates in which different amounts of modifiers including methyl-p-benzoquinone (MPB), anthraquinone-2-carboxylic acid (A2CA), anthraflavic acid (AA) and Sudan Red 7B (SR7B) were added to carbon black and found that carbon black with 5.0% MPB, 2.0% A2CA, 0.5% AA or 0.5% SR7B presented high efficiencies in the electro-synthesis of H2O2. Performances of recently reported MFCCs for ORR to H2O2 are summarized in the Table 1.
Table 1 Performances of recently reported MFCCs for ORR to H2O2




Type
Catalyst
Electrolyte
Performance
Cell configuration
Ref.




Control doping
g-N-CNHs
0.1 M H2SO4
Onset potential 0.40 VRHE, 54 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 cm−1 at 0.3 VRHE, after 1 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >98%
RRDE/glassy carbon supporting electrode

62



0.1 M PBS
Onset potential 0.53 VRHE, 42 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 cm−1 at 0.45 VRHE, after 1 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >90%


0.1 M KOH
Onset potential 0.71 VRHE, 73 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 cm−1 at 0.65 VRHE, after 1 h chronoamperometry test, the HO2− faradaic selectivity >63%


NCMK3IL
0.5 M H2SO4
RRDE: H2O2 selectivity >95% 0.3 VRHE. H type cell: 159.9 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 at 0.1 VRHE after 6 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >70%
RRDE/H type cell

60



0.1 M K2SO4
RRDE: H2O2 selectivity >83% 0.4 VRHE. H type cell: 547.07 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 at 0.2 VRHE after 6 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >50%


0.1 M KOH
RRDE: HO2− selectivity >85% 0.4 VRHE. H type cell: 561.7 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 at 0.1 VRHE after 6 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >55%


N-FLG
0.1 M KOH
RRDE: HO2− selectivity >95% 0.4 VRHE. H type cell: 20 mA cm−2 over 50 h. Flow cell devices: 9.66 mol h−1 gcat−1 under a cell voltage of 1.8 V
RRDE/H type cell/flow cell devices

66



FPC
0.05 M H2SO4
RRDE: H2O2 selectivity >95% 0.4 VRHE. H type cell: 537.1 mmol h−1 g−1 at −0.1 VRHE after 3 h chronoamperometry test
RRDE/H type cell

74



BCN
0.1 M KOH
RRDE: HO2− selectivity >80% 0.5 VRHE, both the ring and disk currents were stable over 50 h
RRDE

78



Oxygen functionalization
F-mrGO (600)
0.1 M KOH
H Type cell: onset potential 0.80 VRHE, 6.6 mA cm−2 at 0.45 VRHE HO2− selectivity >95% 0.775 VRHE, 100 A g−1 at 0.72 VRHE
H type cell

86



O-CNTs
0.1 M KOH
RRDE: HO2− selectivity >85% 0.5 VRHE, Teflon coated carbon fiber paper: 40 mA cm−2 at 0.68 V, HO2− selectivity >90% in a 1 M KOH electrolyte. H type cell: HO2− production rate 3950 mg L−1 h−1 at a constant current of 50 mA in 30 minutes
RRDE/Teflon coated carbon fiber paper/H type cell

83



GNPco
0.1 M KOH
RRDE: H2O2 selectivity >85% 0.6 VRHE, Tafel plot of the kinetic current of H2O2 (JK,H2O2) 25.1 mA cm−2 at 0. 65 V
RRDE

85



Defect engineering
HPC
0.05 M H2SO4 + 0.05 M Na2SO4 (pH 1)
H2O2 selectivity (80% at −0.5 V VSCE), production rate (395.7 mmol h−1 g−1 at −0.5 VSCE)
RDE/H type cell

56



0.1 M Na2SO4 + 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 4)
H2O2 selectivity (78% at −0.3 V VSCE), production rate (219.3 mmol h−1 g−1 at −0.5 VSCE)


0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 7)
H2O2 selectivity (70% at −0.5 V VSCE), production rate (110.2 mmol h−1 g−1 at −0.5 VSCE)


NT-3DFG
0.1 M KOH
HO2− selectivity (94% at 0.5 V vs. RHE)
RDE in a three-electrode system

91



Defective MesoC
0.1 M KOH
HO2− selectivity (>70% at 0.5 V VRHE)
RRDE

59



OXO-G/NH3·H2O
0.1 M KOH
RRDE: HO2− selectivity (>80% at 0.5 VRHE) H type cell: production rate (224.8 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 at 0.2 VRHE, faradaic efficiency >43.6%)
RRDE/H type cell

92



Interface
CB/CTAB
0.1 M KOH
HO2− selectivity (>90% 0.7 VRHE ∼ −0.1 VRHE, across a >0.8 V window)
RRDE

97



rGO aerogel/PEI
0.1 M KOH
RRDE: HO2− selectivity >90% 0.74 VRHE. H type cell: production rate (106.4 mmol gcat−1 h−1 at 0.74 VSCE in 30 minutes)
RRDE/H type cell

98






3.3 Electrolyte pH effect
Although electrolyte pH plays a major role in the ORR activity and selectivity of different catalysts, most investigations into pH effects currently involve item-by-item analysis and a comprehensive understanding of pH effects is highly desirable for the enhancement of catalytic performance. For example, Gorlin et al.103 demonstrated that annealed glassy carbon possessed high activity for H2O2 production in 0.1 M KOH but was inactive in acid media, suggesting that weak-binding surfaces show strong pH dependency. In another study, Yang et al.9 studied pH dependent H2O2 production using Pt-, Ag- and glassy carbon-based catalysts in which in 0.1 M KOH, the metal-based catalysts demonstrated lower selectivity towards H2O2 production and higher activity towards four-electron ORR than those in 0.1 M HClO4 whereas the glassy carbon catalyst showed higher ORR current densities in 0.1 M KOH than in 0.1 M HClO4 without significant change in selectivity (Fig. 12a). These researchers also reported that the kinetic barriers for O–O bond dissociation in *H2O2 and *OOH were lower in alkaline conditions than in acidic ones, resulting in four-electron ORR, which can explain the improved two-electron ORR performance of metal-based catalysts under acidic conditions. As for the glassy carbon catalyst, formed intermediates also tended to desorb from the catalyst to preserve O–O bonds from dissociation because of inherently poor *OOH interactions with catalyst surfaces, which may be why selectivity is less affected by electrolyte pH for carbon-based catalysts.
 Fig. 12  (a) Oxygen reduction on GC using a rotating ring-disk electrode. Measurements in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M KOH. All data taken at 50 mV s−1 and 1600 rpm at room temperature. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 9 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematics of different ORR behaviors for catalysts possessing different conductivities in terms of both selectivity and underlying mechanism, which proceeds through either coupled proton−electron transfer (CPET) or non-CPET. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 27 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematics of double-layer interfaces containing IHP and OHP during ORR in acidic (left) and alkaline (right) conditions. Inset (a) illustrates the ISET process and (b) illustrates the OSET process. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 105 copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. 
Other researchers have also suggested that the pH dependent activity of catalysts may be related to different ET mechanisms, which mainly involve inner-sphere electron transfer (ISET) and outer-sphere electron transfer (OSET) processes (Fig. 12c)104–106 in which four-electron ORR is favored in the ISET process in which O2 molecules are directly adsorbed on catalyst surfaces and reduced whereas two-electron ORR is promoted in the OSET process in which O2 can be reduced through long-range electron transfer at the outer Helmholtz plane (O2/O2− redox couple). Based on this, Bukas et al.107 prepared a carbon paper consisting of mildly reduced graphene oxide/P50 (mrGO/P50) as an ORR catalyst and obtained >99% selectivity for H2O2 in both acidic and alkaline media. Here, these researchers reported that although the mrGO/P50 catalyst showed superior catalytic H2O2 activities in basic media, it demonstrated large overpotentials in acidic media. To explain this difference, these researchers conducted both experimental and theoretical analyses to identify the potential-limiting step as an OSET process for O2 in solution to produce O2− (aq). Ramaswamy et al.105 also observed much lower overpotentials for the electron-transfer step (O2/O2−) in basic medium (0.7 V vs. RHE) as compared with in acidic medium (1.53 V vs. RHE), which may be the reason why the mrGO/P50 catalyst was ORR active in alkaline solution. These researchers also suggested that the mrGO/P50 catalyst was inactive for two-electron ORR in acidic solution due to high overpotentials for O2/O2− redox couple as well as the inertness of O2 chemisorption on the catalyst surface. These researchers further indicated that the semi-conductive property of mrGO can lead to a non-coupled proton electron transfer (non-CPET) mechanism based on the OSET of O2/O2− with the source of electrons being the conducting support.
In another study, Kim et al.27 prepared three types of nitrogen doped rGO catalysts (NrGOs) and found that the electrical conductivity of the NrGOs strongly correlated with the pH dependency of ORR activity in which the total electrons consumed per oxygen molecule (e−/O2) indicated that NrGO-2 (low-conductivity catalyst) can undergo two-electron ORR at all pH ranges whereas NrGO-4 (high-conductivity catalyst) undergoes four-electron ORR. As a result, the NrGO-2 onset potential was nearly constant with pH at ∼0 V vs. SHE, suggesting negligible overpotentials in a pH = 13 medium for two-electron ORR but ∼1 V overpotential in a pH = 1 medium. Conversely, the onset potential for NrGO-4 remained invariant (at ∼0.8 V vs. RHE) with pH or equivalently a shift of 59 mV per pH. Here, these researchers suggested a non-CPET mechanism for NrGO-2 and a CPET mechanism for NrGO-4 (Fig. 12b) in which in the non-CPET process, possible ORR is initiated by OSET from O2 (aq) to O2− (aq) whereas in the case of sufficient catalyst electrical conductivity, CPET can dominate the ORR process because ORR kinetic barriers are generally lower for coupled proton-electron steps than uncoupled steps.
Wan et al.108 further observed the strong pH dependence of ORR activity in N-doped carbon catalysts in which N-doped carbon catalysts possess various functional groups with enriched reversible redox couples on surfaces that can act as bridges for charge transfer to adsorbed oxygen. Here, these researchers reported that at high potentials, ORR proceeded through a surface-confined redox mediated catalysis mechanism to yield four-electron ORR in both acidic and alkaline media whereas at lower potentials, a parallel charge transfer process through OSET was promoted in alkaline media, leading to two-electron ORR. Based on an interfacial solvation model, Noffke et al.109 also proposed that pH-dependent selectivity was related to the hydrophobic environment around catalytic sites, which can restrict the access of water and destabilize small ionic species such as peroxide to mitigate the chance for two-electron ORR. This model, if applied to acidic media, suggests that ORR prefers the two-electron pathway, which is consistent with well-known pH-dependent ORR selectivity as catalyzed by graphitic carbon materials.
Despite efforts to rationalize the pH dependence of ORR activity and selectivity, fundamental reasons remain elusive and require further investigation. Furthermore, although excellent two-electron ORR activities catalyzed by MFCCs have often been observed in alkaline media, cost-effective catalysts that can effectively catalyze H2O2 production in acidic media are more desirable. This is because although H2O2 produced in alkaline media can be directly used in the pulp bleaching industry, its use is more common in natural or acidic than alkaline solutions. In addition, high pH environments can often accelerate the decomposition of produced H2O2 and hydroxide conducting membranes used in electrolysis cells are less stable and mature than proton conducting polymeric membranes.
4. Electrochemical devices for H2O2 production
Aside from the design and modification of MFCCs, the design of corresponding electrochemical devices is another important factor in the production of H2O2 in which due to the mass transport effect, the performance of real devices is often lower that measured by RRDE. As a result, high two-electron ORR performances tested by RRDE do not necessarily translate to high H2O2 production rates in actual electrochemical devices. More importantly, both the ORR activity and H2O2 selectivity of catalysts may decline over time in devices. Based on this, the following section will summarize and review different electrochemical devices for H2O2 production.
The Dow–Huron process is the first commercial implementation of electrochemical H2O2 production and involves highly alkaline media for the paper industry.16 In a typical process, two-electron ORR occurs within a trickle-bed electrolyzer with graphite chips coated with a fluorocarbon binder as the cathode material (Fig. 13a). Here, a fluorocarbon binder is used for the absorption of O2 molecules and can improve gas–liquid mass transport, allowing to produce 2–4 wt% H2O2 solutions in 1 M NaOH that can be used for direct pulp bleaching. The electro-Fenton process is a variant of the Dow–Huron process in which H2O2 is produced in situ through an electrochemical process with Fe2+ species being added to produce hydroxyl radicals for the removal of persistent organic pollutants.110 Typical electro-Fenton processes can be carried out in undivided or divided cells with aqueous Na2SO4 electrolyte at a pH of 3. The most frequently used cathode catalysts involve carbon-based materials such as carbon felt, activated carbon fiber, reticulated vitreous carbon, etc. (Fig. 13b). The anode materials such as graphite, Pt, metal oxides, and BDD are usually preferred. Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) is also commonly used with carbon materials as a binder to provide hydrophobicity.
 Fig. 13  (a) A trickle-bed electrolyzer adopted in the Dow–Huron process. Reproduced with permission, ref. 16 copyright 1995, Elsevier. (b) Divided cell used in electron-Fenton treatments of organics from wastewaters. The main reactions at the electrodes are given. H2O2 is electrogenerated at the cathode from O2 or air feeding. An iron catalyst (Fe2+ or Fe3+) or strictly Fe2+ is added to the solution. A saturated calomel electrode (SCE) is the reference electrode. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 110 copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (c) A proton exchange membrane fuel cell setup with O2 and H2 as the reactants. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 113 copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. (d) A proton exchange membrane electrolyzer setup with O2 and H2O as the reactants. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 114 copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. (e) Neutral H2O2 solution production from a H2–O2 fuel cell setup with a solid-state electrolyte. Reproduced from permission. Ref. 115 copyright 2019, AAAS. (f) Schematic of a H2O2 generation device in the membrane-free electrolyzer mode. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Using an alkaline fuel cell (AFC), Alcaide et al.111 also proposed a novel electrochemical method for the generation of HO2− in which a H2 anode and an O2 cathode in a KOH solution was used to form an undivided cell, allowing for operation in batch or continuous modes and the simultaneous generation of electricity and HO2−. And although performance declines were observed in the AFC with time as attributed to the adsorption of intermediates on the cathode surface, relatively stable performances can be obtained if fresh KOH solution was added in the electrolyte solution.112 As a result, this proposed device can achieve a high current density of 100 mA cm2 with faradaic efficiencies close to 100%. Here, these researchers also noted that flow processes were more portable and cheaper than batch processes, allowing for the easy and effective on-site production of HO2−.
Yamanaka and Murayama further reported the electrochemical production of H2O2 using a proton exchange membrane (PEM) fuel cell apparatus (Fig. 13c) in which due to PEM (Nafion®) possessing a highly acidic pH value, selected catalysts should be active and stable in acidic media.113 Here, these researchers modified their PEM fuel cell into a PEM electrolyzer in which water oxidation at the anode provided the source of protons and O2 was reduced to H2O2 at the cathode (Fig. 13d),114 allowing this PEM electrolyzer to generate H2O2 and avoid the use of H2 (including production, transport and handling). In addition, both the cathode and anode catalysts used in this electrolyzer were hot-pressed onto Nafion® membrane and immersed in liquid water, allowing for the generation of H2O2 in pure water and negating the need for neutralization or distillation, which is key in the reduction of practical application costs. These researchers further reported that viable cathode catalysts included vapor-grown carbon fiber (CF), activated carbon with CF, oxidized activated carbon with CF and various metal–carbon composites and that a concentration of 18.7 wt% H2O2 with a current efficiency of 55% can be achieved using this PEM electrolyzer device. Based on these results, this PEM electrolyzer may be particularly suitable for the small-scale and on-site synthesis of dilute and neutral H2O2.114
Although PEM electrolyzers can produce pure H2O2 in pure water, required catalysts need to be active and stable in acidic media. However, many MFCCs show high activity for H2O2 generation in basic media but poor performance in acidic media. To address this, Xia et al.115 recently proposed a porous solid electrolyte design to realize the generation of pure H2O2 solution in basic media at the cathode in which the key design of this device involves a three-in-one unit. Here, the cathode and anode are “sandwiched” with an anion exchange membrane (AEM) and a cation exchange membrane (CEM) respectively along with a porous solid electrolyte in the center to recombine produced H+ from the anode and HO2− from the cathode (Fig. 13e) in which flowing deionized water is confined to the porous layer to dissolve produced H2O2 and oxidized carbon black is used as the cathode catalyst for two-electron ORR. As a result, a high H2O2 selectivity of 90% at a current density of ∼200 mA cm−2 was obtained, leading to a production rate of 3.4 mmol cm−2 h−1 along with catalyst activity and selectivity retention for 100 hours.
A membrane-free electrolyzer was further developed by Chen et al.116 that consisted of two carbon paper electrodes in which the cathode was coated by mesoporous carbon (CMK-3) as the two-electron ORR catalyst whereas the anode was coated by an OER catalyst. This electrolyzer was composed of three parts, including a cathode chamber, a product storage chamber and an anode chamber (Fig. 13f) in which for the cathode, a two-electron ORR catalyst (CMK-3) was coated onto the side of the carbon paper facing the product storage chamber to meet O2 flow, allowing produced H2O2 to dissolve into the electrolyte of the product storage chamber. On the anode of this electrolyzer, the OER catalyst was coated onto the side of the carbon paper facing the anode chamber. And because the back of the carbon paper was hydrophobic, the diffusion of produced H2O2 in the production storage chamber into the other two chambers can be hindered, allowing for relatively high concentrations of H2O2 in the product storage chamber.
Zinc−air batteries can also be used to generate electricity and H2O2 simultaneously using oxidized carbon black (XC-72) as the catalyst, allowing for the non-energy consuming and self-powered generation of H2O2.117 For example, a Zn–air battery at a voltage of 0.8 V was able to achieve a high H2O2 production rate of 5.93 mol mgeo−2 h−1 with a power density of 360 W mgeo−2. Wang et al.118 also used polyterthiophene (pTTh) as a photo-enhanced electrocatalyst on carbon paper as the electrode in a Zn–air battery and reported that under light illumination, this system was able to provide a high power density of 253.5 mW cm−2 at 195.0 mA cm−2 and a high H2O2 production rate of 34.8 mg L−1 h−1. These researchers also integrated a pollutant degradation system into the battery because produced H2O2 can often decompose into superoxide (O2˙) and hydroxyl (˙OH) radicals, thus allowing for an almost 100% removal rate of RhB. And unlike the electron-Fenton process, this system can generate electricity and treat wastewater.
5. Summary and outlook
H2O2 is a versatile and nontoxic commodity chemical and the decentralization of H2O2 production through two-electron ORR presents an attractive alternative to the well-established anthraquinone process in which H2O2 can be produced at the cathode from an electrolyzer setup powered by renewable energy, which is useful in rural and remote areas without essential infrastructure. As electrocatalysts for H2O2 production from ORR, MFCCs have received extensive attention due to their low costs and abundance. And to enhance corresponding catalytic activity, stability and selectivity, several strategies have been explored, including porosity control, heteroatom doping, oxygen functionalization, defect engineering and organic–inorganic interface engineering, all of which can interplay and synergistically act to improve catalytic properties. In addition, electrolyte pH, MFCC conductivity and device mass transport play important roles in H2O2 generation. Despite numerous efforts in the exploration of MFCCs towards H2O2 production however, challenges remain. Here, several challenges are summarized, and possible research strategies are proposed to overcome these challenges towards practical application.
(1) Currently, the identification of active sites often relies on DFT calculations with insufficient experiments being carried out for the direct identification of corresponding structures and compositions. And although theoretical calculations can provide meaningful information into possible active sites, operando characterization techniques (e.g. operando Raman, operando XAS) need to be developed to provide direct evidence and identify active sites.
(2) The effect of MFCC conductivity on H2O2 selectivity is an important aspect that has not been sufficiently studied or fully understood. For example, if a catalyst is semi-conductive, it is possible that the initial ORR process is based on the outer-sphere reduction of O2 to O2−, which favors the two-electron pathway towards H2O2 through the formation of *OOH intermediates. Because of this, both theoretical and experimental investigations are needed to fundamentally understand the effects of MFCC conductivity towards H2O2 production selectivity.
(3) The porosity control plays an important role in enhancing two-electron ORR activity and selectivity. Although the mesopores in MFCCs are believed to be beneficial to two-electron ORR, the role of micropores remains elusive. An in-depth and comprehensive understanding of the porosity effect requires further investigation. In addition, the interplay of porosity with other factors may be more dominant in overall catalytic performance, including factors such as different heteroatom functionals, location of active sites, type of electrolytes and pH value of solutions.
(4) Although organic–inorganic interface engineering is recognized as an effective method to improve two-electron ORR performance in the production of H2O2, the balance between hydrophilicity and hydrophobicity in the three-phase interface of MFCC layers has yet been fully explored. For example, catalyst layer-induced effects such as coulombic pull and steric hindrance need to be further promoted to enhance H2O2 production and selectivity.
(5) There is insufficient fundamental understanding of the reaction mechanisms catalyzed by MFCCs towards H2O2 production activity, stability and selectivity. Because of this, theoretical research such as DFT calculations need to be combined with experimental validation to elucidate electron-/molecular-level mechanisms of catalyst functionality for performance optimization and new catalyst design and synthesis.
(6) Both the activity and selectivity of MFCCs for H2O2 production degrade over time and current insights into this factor remain limited. Because of this, future studies should focus on the understanding of catalyst degradation mechanisms and the development of effective strategies to mitigate degradation.
(7) Most pH-dependent ORR activity and selectivity investigations have involved item-by-item studies. However, in-depth and comprehensive understandings of pH effects on selective H2O2 production are highly desirable. And although most MFCCs can exhibit higher two-electron ORR activity in basic media, future research efforts should be focused on the MFCC catalysis of H2O2 production in acidic media.
(8) Thus far, only a few implementations of practical devices for H2O2 production and water treatment exist, all of which involve low efficiencies and complex designs. Because of this, improvements to catalyst and reactor designs are necessary for future commercialization. Here, the use of renewable energy for H2O2 production is a major strategy towards practical application.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Science Foundation of China (NSFC 12075015, U1607110), the Beijing Municipal Commission of Education Foundation (KZ 204610005002) and the Beijing Municipal High-Level Innovative Team Building Program (No. IDHT20180504).
References

          R. L. Myers, The 100 Most Important Chemical Compounds: A Reference Guide, Greenwood, 1st edn,  2000, p. 352 Search PubMed .

          https://www.researchandmarkets.com/reports/4662683/hydrogen-peroxide-market-global-industry-trends, accessed July 25th, 2020.

          G. Goor, W. Kunkel and O. Weiberg, in Ullmann's Encyclopedia of Industrial Chemistry, ed. B. Elvers, S. Hawkins, M. Ravenscroft and G. Schulz, VCH, Weinheim,  1989, vol. A13, p. 443 Search PubMed .
Y. Yi, L. Wang, G. Li and H. Guo, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 1593 RSC .

          P. C. Foller, R. J. Allen, R. T. Bombard and R. Vora, Proceedings of the 5th International Forum on Electrolysis in the Chemical Industry, Electrosynthesis Inc., Fort Lauderdale, FL,  1991 Search PubMed .
H. Shen, T. Thomas, S. A. Rasaki, A. Saad, C. Hu, J. Wang and M. Yang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 252 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Q. Li, H. Wang, L. Zhang, D. Wilkinson and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2019, 2, 518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Wang, B. Fang, D. Zhang, A. Li, D. P. Wilkinson, A. Ignaszak, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Electrochem. Energy Rev., 2018, 1, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, L. Arnarson, L. Silvioli, V. Čolić, R. Frydendal, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and I. E. L. Stephens, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 4064 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Yu, E. Nagelli, F. Du and L. M. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 2165 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Kelly, X. J. Shi, S. Back, L. Vallez, S. Y. Park, S. Siahrostami, X. L. Zheng and J. K. Nørskov, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4593 CrossRef CAS .
V. Viswanathan, H. A. Hansen and J. K. Nørskov, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4224 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shi, S. Siahrostami, G. L. Li, Y. R. Zhang, P. Chakthranont, F. Studt, T. F. Jaramillo, X. L. Zheng and J. K. Nørskov, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 701 CrossRef .
J. H. Baek, T. M. Gill, H. Abroshan, S. Park, X. Shi, J. Nørskov, H. S. Jung, S. Siahrostami and X. L. Zheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 352 CrossRef .
E. Berl, Trans. Electrochem. Soc., 1939, 76, 359 CrossRef .
P. C. Foller and R. T. Bombard, J. Appl. Electrochem., 1995, 25, 613 CrossRef CAS .
K. Otsuka and I. Yamanaka, Electrochim. Acta, 1990, 35, 319 CrossRef CAS .
S. Siahrostami, A. Verdaguer-Casadevall, M. Karamad, D. Deiana, P. Malacrida, B. Wickman, M. Escudero-Escribano, E. A. Paoli, R. Frydendal, T. W. Hansen, I. Chorkendorff, I. E. L. Stephens and J. Rossmeisl, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 1137 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Jirkovsky, I. Panas, E. Ahlberg, M. Halasa, S. Romani and D. J. Schiffrin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19432 CrossRef CAS .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11736 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Lu, W. L. Yim, B. H. R. Suryanto and C. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2901 CrossRef CAS .
M. Melchionna, P. Fornasiero and M. Prato, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 180290 CrossRef .
X. C. Duan, J. T. Xu, Z. X. Wei, J. M. Ma, S. J. Guo, S. Y. Wang, H. K. Liu and S. X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701784 CrossRef .
G. L. Chai, Z. F. Hou, T. Ikeda and K. Terakura, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 14524 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, Y. Nabae, T. Hayakawa and M. A. Kakimoto, ACS Catal., 2014, 3749, 4 Search PubMed  , https://pubs.acs.org/doi/full/10.1021/cs5008206.
J. F. Pérez, J. Llanos, C. Sáez, C. López, P. Cañizares and M. A. Rodrigo, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 71, 65 CrossRef .
H. W. Kim, V. J. Bukas, H. Park, S. Park, K. M. Diederichsen, J. K. Lim, Y. H. Cho, J. Kim, W. Kim, T. H. Han, J. Voss, A. C. Luntz and B. D. McCloskey, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 852 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Murray, S. Voskian, M. Schreier, T. A. Hatton and Y. Surendranath, Joule, 2019, 3, 2942 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, P. Ni, C. Chen, Y. Lu, P. Yang, B. Kong, A. Fisher and X. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 5, 1801909 CrossRef .
K. Jiang, J. J. Zhao and H. T. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2003321 Search PubMed .
S. Siahrostami, S. J. Villegas, A. H. B. Mostaghimi, S. Back, A. B. Farimani, H. T. Wang, K. A. Persson and J. Montoya, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7495 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Perry, D. Pangotra, L. Vieira, L.-I. Cseoei, V. Siber, L. Wang, C. P. León and F. C. Walsh, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2019, 3, 442 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gao and B. Liu, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 1008 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Zhang, M. J. Cheng and Q. Lu, Small, 2020, 16, 1902845 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, X. Zeng, Y. Liu, J. Lu and X. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 16008 RSC .
E. Jung, H. Shin, W. H. Antink, Y. E. Sung and T. Hyeon, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1881 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhang, W. Xu, Z. Lu and J. Sun, Transactions of Tianjin University, 2020, 26, 188 CrossRef CAS .

          C. G. Zoski, Handbook of Electrochemistry, Elsevier Science,  2007 Search PubMed .
A. Verdaguer-casadevall, D. Deiana, M. Karamad, S. Siahrostami, T. W. Hansen, J. Rossmeisl, I. Chorkendorff and I. E. L. Stephens, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1603 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fukuzumi, Y. Yamada and K. D. Karlin, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 82, 493 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen and A. Kucernak, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 3262 CrossRef CAS .
Y. E. Seidel, A. Schneider, Z. Jusys, B. Wickman, B. Kasemo and R. J. Behm, Faraday Discuss., 2009, 140, 167 RSC .
T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger, G. D. Stäb, P. M. Urban, D. M. Kolb and R. J. Behm, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2354 CrossRef CAS .
U. A. Paulus, T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger and R. J. Behm, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2001, 495, 134 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Gill and X. Zheng, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 6285 CrossRef CAS .
R. M. Sellers, Analyst, 1980, 105, 950 RSC .
C. M. Sánchez-Sánchez and A. J. Bard, Anal. Chem., 2009, 81, 8094 CrossRef .
S. Chen, J. Bi, Y. Zhao, L. Yang, C. Zhang, Y. Ma, Q. Wu, X. Wang and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5593 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Dai, Y. H. Xue, L. T. Qu, H. J. Choi and J. B. Baek, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 4823 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tang, H. Wang and Q. Zhang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 881 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yang, J. Shui, L. Du, Y. Shao, J. Liu, L. Dai and Z. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804799 CrossRef .
R. Silva, D. Voiry, M. Chhowalla and T. Asefa, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7823 CrossRef CAS .
X. Sheng, N. Daems, B. Geboes, M. Kurttepeli, S. Bals, T. Breugelmans, A. Hubin, I. F. J. Vankelecom and P. P. Pescarmona, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 176, 212 CrossRef .
T. P. Fellinger, F. Hasché, P. Strasser and M. Antonietti, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lee, F. Li, K. H. Chang, C. C. Hu and T. Ohsaka, Appl. Catal., B, 2012, 126, 208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Liu, X. Quan, X. F. Fan, H. Wang and S. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 6837 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Li, Z. P. Jovanov, D. Bernsmeier, H. Wang, B. Paul, X. Wang, S. Kühl and P. Strasser, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 3388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pang, K. Wang, H. Xie, Y. Sun, M. M. Titrici and G. L. Chai, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 7434 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Z. Chen, S. Siahrostami, T. R. Kim, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, S. Nowak, J. W. F. To, D. Higgins, R. Sinclair, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and Z. Bao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 311 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, I. Sinev, W. Ju, A. Bergmann, S. Dresp, S. Kühl, C. Spöri, H. Schmies, H. Wang, D. Bernsmeier, B. Paul, R. Schmack, R. Kraehnert, B. R. Cuenya and P. Strasser, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2856 Search PubMed .
V. Čolić, S. Yang, Z. Révay, I. E. L. Stephens and I. Chorkendorff, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 272, 192 CrossRef .
D. Iglesias, A. Giuliani, M. Melchionna, S. Marchesan, A. Criado, L. Nasi, M. Bevilacqua, C. Tavagnacco, F. Vizza, M. Prato and P. Fornasiero, Chem, 2018, 4, 106 CAS .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804672 CrossRef .
K. Gong, F. Du, Z. Xia, M. Durstock and L. Dai, Science, 2009, 323, 760 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qu, Y. Liu, J. B. Baek and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1321 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, C. Tang, Y. Zheng, B. Xia, X. Zhou, H. Xu and S. Z. Qiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000789 CrossRef CAS .
A. Z. Yazdi, E. P. L. Roberts and U. Sundararaj, Carbon, 2016, 100, 99 CrossRef .
G. Tian, Q. Zhang, B. Zhang, Y. Jin, J. Huang, D. S. Su and F. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5956 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Wan, H. Yao, L. Zhang, K. Lin, L. Wang, N. Yang, D. Liu, L. Song, J. Zhu, L. Gu, L. Liu, H. Zhao, Y. Li and D. Wang, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10, 924 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, P. Song and W. Xu, Carbon, 2017, 115, 763 CrossRef CAS .
H. Deng, Q. Li, J. Liu and F. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 112, 219 CrossRef CAS .
S. I. Yamazaki, Y. Yamada, T. Ioroi, N. Fujiwara, Z. Siroma, K. Yasuda and Y. Miyazaki, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2005, 576, 253 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, A. Muthukrishnan, S. Nagata and Y. Nabae, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 4590 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhao, Y. Su, X. Quan, Y. Liu, S. Chen and H. Yu, J. Catal., 2018, 357, 118 CrossRef .
H. Zhao, X. Shen, Y. Chen, S. N. Zhang, P. Gao, X. J. Zhen, X. H. Li and G. H. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 6173 RSC .
E. Chen, M. Bevilacqua, C. Tavagnacco, T. Montini, C. M. Yang and P. Fornasiero, Catal. Today, 2019 DOI:10.1016/j.cattod.2019.06.034 .
N. Jia, T. Yang, S. Shi, X. Chen, Z. An, Y. Chen, S. Yin and P. Chen, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 2883 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, Z. Chen, S. Siahrostami, D. Higgins, D. Nordlund, D. Sokaras, T. R. Kim, Y. Liu, X. Yan, E. Nilsson, R. Sinclair, J. K. Nørskov, T. F. Jaramillo and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 7851 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu, X. Xiao, K. Zheng, F. Li, G. Ma, H. C. Yao, X. Wang and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2019, 153, 6 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khataee, S. Sajjadi, S. R. Pouran, A. Hasanzadeh and S. W. Joo, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 244, 38 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Wang, S. S. Li, X. H. Yang, G. Y. Xu, Z. C. Zhu, P. Chen and S. Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21329 RSC .
A. Moraes, M. H. M. T. Assumpção, F. C. Simões, V. S. Antonin, M. R. V. Lanza, P. Hammer and M. C. Santos, Electrocatalysis, 2016, 7, 60 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lu, G. Chen, S. Siahrostami, Z. Chen, K. Liu, J. Xie, L. Liao, T. Wu, D. Lin, Y. Liu, T. F. Jaramillo, J. K. Nørskov and Y. Cui, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 156 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Yi, K. Wang and S. Song, Chin. J. Catal., 2019, 40, 523 CrossRef CAS .
G. F. Han, F. Li, W. Zou, M. Karamad, J. P. Jeon, S. W. Kim, S. J. Kim, Y. Bu, Z. Fu, Y. Lu, S. Siahrostami and J. B. Baek, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2209 CrossRef CAS .
H. W. Kim, M. B. Ross, N. Kornienko, L. Zhang, J. Guo, P. Yang and B. D. McCloskey, Nat. Catal., 2018, 1, 282 CrossRef .
H. W. Kim, H. Park, J. S. Roh, J. E. Shin, T. H. Lee, L. Zhang, Y. H. Cho, H. W. Yoon, V. J. Bukas, J. Guo, H. B. Park, T. H. Han and B. D. McCloskey, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3967 CrossRef CAS .
X. Tan, H. A. Tahini and S. C. Smith, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1409 RSC .
Y. J. Sa, J. H. Kim and S. H. Joo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1100 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhu and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001097 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Roman, D. Krishnamurthy, R. Garg, H. Hafiz, M. Lamparski, N. T. Nuhfer, V. Meunier, V. Viswanathan and T. Cohen-Karni, ACS Catal., 2020, 10, 1993 CrossRef .
L. Han, Y. Sun, S. Li, C. Cheng, C. E. Halbig, P. Feicht, J. L. Hübner, P. Strasser and S. Eigler, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 1283 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, M. Zhou, G. Ren, Y. Li, Y. Li and X. Du, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1731 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Pérez, C. Sáez, J. Llanos, P. Cañizares, C. López and M. A. Rodrigo, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2017, 56, 12588 CrossRef .
Y. Sheng, S. Song, X. Wang, L. Song, C. Wang, H. Sun and X. Niu, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 8651 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhao, J. An, S. Wang, Y. Qiao, C. Liao, C. Wang, X. Wang and N. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35410 CrossRef CAS .
K. H. Wu, D. Wang, X. Lu, X. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Liu, B. J. Su, J. M. Chen, D. S. Su, W. Qi and S. Guo, Chem, 2020, 6, 1443 CAS .
X. Xiao, T. Wang, J. Bai, F. Li, T. Ma and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 42534 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Forti, J. A. Nunes, M. R. V. Lanza and R. Bertazzoli, J. Appl. Electrochem., 2007, 37, 527 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhu, Z. Pan, S. Hu and J. H. Kim, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7972 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Forti, R. S. Rocha, M. R. V. Lanza and R. Bertazzoli, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2007, 601, 63 CrossRef CAS .
J. Moreira, V. B. Lima, L. A. Goulart and M. R. V. Lanza, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 248, 95 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gorlin, C. J. Chung, D. Nordlund, B. M. Clemens and T. F. Jaramillo, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2687 CrossRef CAS .
F. Hasché, M. Oezaslan, P. Strasser and T.-P. Fellinger, J. Energy Chem., 2016, 25, 251 CrossRef .
N. Ramaswamy and S. Mukerjee, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 18015 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ramaswamy, U. Tylus, Q. Jia and S. Mukerjee, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15443 CrossRef CAS .
V. J. Bukas, H. W. Kim, R. Sengpiel, K. Knudsen, J. Voss, B. D. McCloskey and A. C. Luntz, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 11940 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wan, Z. Yu, X. Li, M. Liu, G. Yang, J. Piao and Z. Liang, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 4325 CrossRef CAS .
B. W. Noffke, Q. Li, K. Raghavachari and L. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 13923 CrossRef CAS .
E. Brillas, I. Sirés and M. A. Oturan, Chem. Rev., 2009, 109, 6570 CrossRef CAS .
F. Alcaide, E. Brillas, P. L. Cabot and J. Casado, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 3444 CrossRef CAS .
E. Brillas, F. Alcaide and P. L. Cabot, Electrochim. Acta, 2002, 48, 331 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yamanaka, S. Tazawa, T. Murayama, R. Ichihashi and N. Hanaizumi, Chemsuschem, 2008, 1, 988 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yamanaka and T. Murayama, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1900 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xia, Y. Xia, P. Zhu, L. Fan and H. Wang, Science, 2019, 366, 226 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Chen, S. Chen, S. Siahrostami, P. Chakthranont, C. Hahn, D. Nordlund, S. Dimosthenis, J. K. Nørskov, Z. Bao and T. F. Jaramillo, React. Chem. Eng., 2017, 2, 239 RSC .
W. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. Liu, Z. Zheng and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 31855 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, Z. Mo, S. Tang, M. Li, H. Yang, B. Long, Y. Wang, S. Song and Y. Tong, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14129 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Yue Zhou	Yue Zhou, a post-graduate student come from Beijing University of Technology, her current research interest focuses on electrochemical production of hydrogen peroxide. Her motto is that Stay Hungry, Stay foolish.
Ge Chen	Ge Chen received his B.S., M.S. from University of Science & Technology, Beijing in 1997 and 2000, respectively, and PhD from Beijing University of Technology in 2010. He is now a full professor in College of Environmental and Energy Engineering, Beijing University of Technology. His research group interests are focused on developing novel electrocatalysts towards energy conversion.
Jiujun Zhang	Dr. Jiujun Zhang is a professor in College of Sciences/Institute for Sustainable Energy at Shanghai University, a former Principal Research Officer (Emeritus) at National Research Council of Canada (NRC). Dr Zhang received his B.S. and M.Sc. in Electrochemistry from Peking University in 1982 and 1985, respectively, and his PhD in Electrochemistry from Wuhan University in 1988. Dr Zhang's expertise areas are electrochemistry, electrocatalysis, fuel cells, batteries, supercapacitors, water/CO2 electrolysis.

 	Fig. 1  Factors affecting two-electron oxygen reduction (ORR) to hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) electrochemically catalyzed using metal-free carbon catalysts (MFCCs).	 
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− ↔ 2H2O, E0 = 1.23 V vs. RHE	(1)
O2 + 2H+ + 2e− ↔ H2O2, E0 = 0.70 V vs. RHE	(2)
O2 + 2H2O + 4e− ↔ 4OH−, E0 = 1.23 V vs. RHE	(3)
O2 + 2H2O + 2e− ↔ H2O2 + 2OH−, E0 = 0.70 V vs. RHE	(4)
O2 + H2O + 2e− ↔ HO2− + OH−, E0 = 0.76 V vs. RHE	(5)
H2O2 + H+ + e− ↔ H2O + OH, E0 = 0.79 V vs. RHE	(6)

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic of ORR to H2O2 on a model Pd2Hg5 (001) surface; Pd (green), Hg (blue), O (red), H (yellow). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 39 copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) A plot of theoretical limiting potential (UL) against Gibbs free energies of binding HOO* (ΔGHOO*) for the electroreduction of O2 to hydrogen peroxide. UL is the least negative potential at which electron transfer is downhill in free energy. The dashed lines represent the theoretical Sabatier volcanoes, the peaks of which correspond to parameters of theoretical optimum catalysts. Catalysts are categorized as pure metals (grey), metal alloys (yellow), MFCCs (black). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 32 copyright 2019, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic of a RRDE setup in a three-electrode electrochemical cell. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 9 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) A hermetically sealed electrochemical H-cell and an in-line pressure transducer to quantify O2 pressure decay during ORR. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 86 copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group.	 
O2 + * + H+ + e− → HOO*	(7)
HOO* + H+ + e− → H2O2 + *	(8)
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
	(12)

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematics of ORR in mesoporous carbon catalysts (left) and microporous carbon catalysts (right). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 25 copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) Pore size distributions of IL-derived N-doped CMK-3 at different temperatures (600, 700, 800 and 900 °C) together with H2O2 selectivity as a function of the electrode potential of N-doped CMK-3 at different temperatures. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 60 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Faradaic efficiency and partial current density for O2 reduction normalized per geometric surface area as a function of micropore volume in carbon materials. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 61 copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Top: schematic synthesis of core–shell CNHs/graphitized PDA (g-N-CNHs); middle: TEM images of the nanostructured material at each stage of synthesis. Bottom: faradaic efficiencies (FEs) towards H2O2 at three different pHs and potentials using a g-N-CNH modified electrode. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 62 copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) H2O2 selectivity as a function of surface N content in the electrochemical ORR of N-doped CMK-3 carbon catalyst at 0.1 V vs. RHE. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 63 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Inherent kinetic rate constants calculated using the Nabae model and based on a N-doped carbon electrocatalyst at a rotation speed of 1600 rpm, a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and a loading of 120 μg cm−2. The values of ,  and  correspond to the inherent kinetic rate constants for the four-electron pathway, two-electron pathway and H2O2 reduction processes, respectively. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 73 copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (d) Model structure of N-FLG together with a high-resolution bright-field TEM image. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 66 copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) H2O2 production ratio with F content for F-doped carbon. (b) Computational models for the adsorption of O2 and *OOH on CF2 and CF3 doping. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 74 copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic of the types of doping motifs and ORR reaction mechanisms on active sites in B, N co-doped samples in basic media with H2O as the proton source. Color code: C, gray; N, blue; B, red; O, white. (d) Theoretical activity volcano maps for 2e− (red) and 4e− (black) reduction of O2 to H2O2 and H2O, respectively. Both volcano plots are based on the RHE scale. The equilibrium potentials for 2e− and 4e− ORR are shown as dashed red and black lines, respectively. Triangles and diamonds represent the activity of N or B dopants in pristine (N-Gr or B-Gr) and defect (N-Gr-D or B-Gr-D) graphene, respectively. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 78 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) HAADF-STEM image and corresponding elemental maps of a broken hollow nanosphere observed from N, F doped nanocages. (f) Long-term stability of N, F doped nanocage and N doped nanocage electrodes in alkaline media. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 77 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Oxygen reduction performance of CNTs and O-CNTs. Polarization curves at 1600 rpm (solid lines) and simultaneous H2O2 detection currents at the ring electrode (dashed lines) in 0.1 M KOH. (b) Calculated selectivity of these two catalysts at various potentials in 0.1 M KOH. (c) Plot of H2O2 current and selectivity at 0.6 V as a function of oxygen content for O-CNTs with various oxidation times, demonstrating that both activity and selectivity correlate linearly with oxygen content. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 83 copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Kinetic currents of H2O2 (JK,H2O2) compared at 0.65 and 0.75 V together with corresponding H2O2 yield ratios for different graphitic nanoplatelets (GNP) and partially reduced graphene oxides (pRGO). Reproduced form ref. 85 Nature Publishing Group.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Electrochemical O2 reduction behaviors of as-prepared mrGO and annealed mrGO measured through cathodic LSV (2.0 mV s−1) in O2-saturated (∼800 Torr O2) 0.1 M KOH solution. (b) Mass activity of different electrocatalysts for H2O2 production. Mass activity is calculated using electrochemical data and catalyst loading values from literature. (c) Schemes of proposed low-overpotential active sites on F-mrGO and F-mrGO (600). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 86 copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (d) Calculated UL for the H2O2 production of various oxygen functional group structures as a function of ΔGHOO*. Blue solid lines represent the theoretical Sabatier volcano. Empty squares are data adapted from reported state-of-the-art electrocatalysts with η = 0.10 V. The equilibrium potential for H2O2 production, U0 O2/H2O2 = 0.69 V, is shown as the dotted line. 1EP and 1ET denote single EP group and single ring ET group located close to the mrGO sheet edge respectively. 2EP denotes the structure with two EP groups located close to the mrGO sheet edge. 1ET + 1EP denotes the structure consisting of an EP group and an ET group located close to the mrGO sheet edge. Reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Trends of observed heterogenous ET rate constant (k0obs) (top) and mass activity (bottom) as a function of O-doping level at 0.75 VRHE. (b) Relationship between observed heterogenous ET rate constant (k0obs) and mass activity at 0.75 vs. RHE. (c) Nyquist plot of oxidized GOMC, non-oxidized GOMC and carbon nanotubes measured at 0.75 V vs. RHE and electrode rotation of 1600 rpm in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH (inset: trend of the reciprocal of charge transfer resistance as a function of O-doping level). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 89 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) H2O2 production rates (normalized by BET surface area, −0.3 V vs. SCE, pH 1) of HPC with different defects together with H2O2 selectivity of HPC at pH 1–7 and −0.1 to −0.5 V vs. SCE. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 56 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Different defect configurations: D1–D8 are double-vacancy defect types with non-hexagonal ring members. (c) Two-electron (red) and four-electron (black) ORR-related volcano plots for the electroreduction of O2 to hydrogen peroxide and water respectively displayed with limiting potential plotted as a function of ΔGOH. Both volcano plots are based on the RHE scale. Equilibrium potentials for both two- and four-electron ORR are shown as dashed red and black lines respectively. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 59 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) NT-3DFG flake size and edge density tunability. (e) Representative SEM image of NT-3DFG treated for 30 minutes at 1100 °C, scale bar: 3 μm. Inset represented by a red dashed box shows out-of-plane graphene on Si NW. Inset scale bar: 300 nm. (f) Representative rotating disk electrode linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves for polished glassy carbon (black) and NT-3DFG synthesized in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 and rotational speed of 1600 rpm. (g) Number of flake edges along 1 μm length of nanowire of radius, r, for all synthesis conditions. Results presented as mean ± standard deviation (SD) with sample size (n) of 3. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 91 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (h) Statistical Raman spectroscopy (SRS) of samples deposited on 300 nm SiO2/Si wafer. This plot shows the functionalization of the reduction of oxo-G, oxo-G/H2O2, GO and GO/H2O2 by hydrogen iodine and trifluoroacetic acid (HI/TFA). Γ2D represents the fullwidth at half-maximum of the 2D band. Insert: scheme of the preparation procedure of GO precursors with different densities of in-plane lattice defects. (i) Calculated H2O2 selectivity (%) as a function of electrode potential for four samples. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 92 copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the less PTFE content in CLs resulting in less electrons transferred and better selectivity towards two-electron ORR. (b) H2O2 yields and CEs as a function of current density for PTFE0.57, PTFE1.14, PTFE2.28, PTFE3.42 and PTFE4.56 at different current densities. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 96 copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of in situ selectivity modulation using surface-acting cations at the carbon surface. Surface oxygen groups (hydroxyl, carbonyl and carboxyl) can act as peroxide generation sites. (b) Corresponding %HO2− profiles of carbon black (CB) in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH containing 1.0 mM CTAB or SDS. (c) Analytical evaluation of oxidized CBs at different ф ratios in the presence and absence of CTAB in the system at 0.33 V vs. RHE with best fitting (dashed lines). Reproduced with permission. Ref. 97 copyright 2020, Elsevier. (d) SEM image of the rGO/PEI aerogel. (e) H2O2 faradaic efficiencies of rGO and rGO/PEI aerogel-modified glassy carbon electrodes at different applied potentials. (f) Schematic of the steric hindrance effect on a PEI/rGO interface. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 98 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

Control doping	g-N-CNHs	0.1 M H2SO4	Onset potential 0.40 VRHE, 54 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 cm−1 at 0.3 VRHE, after 1 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >98%	RRDE/glassy carbon supporting electrode	
62

0.1 M PBS	Onset potential 0.53 VRHE, 42 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 cm−1 at 0.45 VRHE, after 1 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >90%
0.1 M KOH	Onset potential 0.71 VRHE, 73 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 cm−1 at 0.65 VRHE, after 1 h chronoamperometry test, the HO2− faradaic selectivity >63%
NCMK3IL	0.5 M H2SO4	RRDE: H2O2 selectivity >95% 0.3 VRHE. H type cell: 159.9 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 at 0.1 VRHE after 6 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >70%	RRDE/H type cell	
60

0.1 M K2SO4	RRDE: H2O2 selectivity >83% 0.4 VRHE. H type cell: 547.07 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 at 0.2 VRHE after 6 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >50%
0.1 M KOH	RRDE: HO2− selectivity >85% 0.4 VRHE. H type cell: 561.7 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 at 0.1 VRHE after 6 h chronoamperometry test, the H2O2 faradaic selectivity >55%
N-FLG	0.1 M KOH	RRDE: HO2− selectivity >95% 0.4 VRHE. H type cell: 20 mA cm−2 over 50 h. Flow cell devices: 9.66 mol h−1 gcat−1 under a cell voltage of 1.8 V	RRDE/H type cell/flow cell devices	
66

FPC	0.05 M H2SO4	RRDE: H2O2 selectivity >95% 0.4 VRHE. H type cell: 537.1 mmol h−1 g−1 at −0.1 VRHE after 3 h chronoamperometry test	RRDE/H type cell	
74

BCN	0.1 M KOH	RRDE: HO2− selectivity >80% 0.5 VRHE, both the ring and disk currents were stable over 50 h	RRDE	
78

Oxygen functionalization	F-mrGO (600)	0.1 M KOH	H Type cell: onset potential 0.80 VRHE, 6.6 mA cm−2 at 0.45 VRHE HO2− selectivity >95% 0.775 VRHE, 100 A g−1 at 0.72 VRHE	H type cell	
86

O-CNTs	0.1 M KOH	RRDE: HO2− selectivity >85% 0.5 VRHE, Teflon coated carbon fiber paper: 40 mA cm−2 at 0.68 V, HO2− selectivity >90% in a 1 M KOH electrolyte. H type cell: HO2− production rate 3950 mg L−1 h−1 at a constant current of 50 mA in 30 minutes	RRDE/Teflon coated carbon fiber paper/H type cell	
83

GNPco	0.1 M KOH	RRDE: H2O2 selectivity >85% 0.6 VRHE, Tafel plot of the kinetic current of H2O2 (JK,H2O2) 25.1 mA cm−2 at 0. 65 V	RRDE	
85

Defect engineering	HPC	0.05 M H2SO4 + 0.05 M Na2SO4 (pH 1)	H2O2 selectivity (80% at −0.5 V VSCE), production rate (395.7 mmol h−1 g−1 at −0.5 VSCE)	RDE/H type cell	
56

0.1 M Na2SO4 + 0.5 M H2SO4 (pH 4)	H2O2 selectivity (78% at −0.3 V VSCE), production rate (219.3 mmol h−1 g−1 at −0.5 VSCE)
0.1 M Na2SO4 (pH = 7)	H2O2 selectivity (70% at −0.5 V VSCE), production rate (110.2 mmol h−1 g−1 at −0.5 VSCE)
NT-3DFG	0.1 M KOH	HO2− selectivity (94% at 0.5 V vs. RHE)	RDE in a three-electrode system	
91

Defective MesoC	0.1 M KOH	HO2− selectivity (>70% at 0.5 V VRHE)	RRDE	
59

OXO-G/NH3·H2O	0.1 M KOH	RRDE: HO2− selectivity (>80% at 0.5 VRHE) H type cell: production rate (224.8 mmol gcatalyst−1 h−1 at 0.2 VRHE, faradaic efficiency >43.6%)	RRDE/H type cell	
92

Interface	CB/CTAB	0.1 M KOH	HO2− selectivity (>90% 0.7 VRHE ∼ −0.1 VRHE, across a >0.8 V window)	RRDE	
97

rGO aerogel/PEI	0.1 M KOH	RRDE: HO2− selectivity >90% 0.74 VRHE. H type cell: production rate (106.4 mmol gcat−1 h−1 at 0.74 VSCE in 30 minutes)	RRDE/H type cell	
98


 	Fig. 12  (a) Oxygen reduction on GC using a rotating ring-disk electrode. Measurements in 0.1 M HClO4 and 0.1 M KOH. All data taken at 50 mV s−1 and 1600 rpm at room temperature. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 9 copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematics of different ORR behaviors for catalysts possessing different conductivities in terms of both selectivity and underlying mechanism, which proceeds through either coupled proton−electron transfer (CPET) or non-CPET. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 27 copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematics of double-layer interfaces containing IHP and OHP during ORR in acidic (left) and alkaline (right) conditions. Inset (a) illustrates the ISET process and (b) illustrates the OSET process. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 105 copyright 2011, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) A trickle-bed electrolyzer adopted in the Dow–Huron process. Reproduced with permission, ref. 16 copyright 1995, Elsevier. (b) Divided cell used in electron-Fenton treatments of organics from wastewaters. The main reactions at the electrodes are given. H2O2 is electrogenerated at the cathode from O2 or air feeding. An iron catalyst (Fe2+ or Fe3+) or strictly Fe2+ is added to the solution. A saturated calomel electrode (SCE) is the reference electrode. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 110 copyright 2008, American Chemical Society. (c) A proton exchange membrane fuel cell setup with O2 and H2 as the reactants. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 113 copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. (d) A proton exchange membrane electrolyzer setup with O2 and H2O as the reactants. Reproduced with permission. Ref. 114 copyright 2008, Wiley-VCH. (e) Neutral H2O2 solution production from a H2–O2 fuel cell setup with a solid-state electrolyte. Reproduced from permission. Ref. 115 copyright 2019, AAAS. (f) Schematic of a H2O2 generation device in the membrane-free electrolyzer mode. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
