Manipulation of exciton distribution for high-performance fluorescent/phosphorescent hybrid white organic light-emitting diodes  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7TC01477E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7TC01477E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 7668-7683Manipulation of exciton distribution for high-performance fluorescent/phosphorescent hybrid white organic light-emitting diodes

        
          
            Baiquan 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiang-Long 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Tao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jianhua 
            Zou
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Miao 
            Xu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Lei 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Junbiao 
            Peng
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Cao
          
          
        
      
Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China. E-mail: zou1007@gmail.com; psjbpeng@scut.edu.cn
Received 
      6th April 2017
    , Accepted 7th June 2017First published on 7th June 2017AbstractWhite organic light-emitting diodes (WOLEDs) are now approaching the lighting markets and also being aggressively investigated for display applications. In this review, the recent development of fluorescent/phosphorescent hybrid WOLEDs is highlighted. Since the key for the high performance is how to effectively harvest excitons (singlet and triplet), the manipulation of exciton distribution in hybrid WOLEDs is overviewed. In particular, the device structures, design strategies, working mechanisms and electroluminescent processes of the representative high-performance hybrid WOLEDs are systematically reviewed. It begins with the fundamental introduction of the types of hybrid WOLEDs, and next discusses how to manage the excitons for different types of high-performance hybrid WOLEDs. Then, it introduces the doping-free technology to realize hybrid WOLEDs. Lastly, the challenges and opportunities for further enhancement of the device performance are presented.
Baiquan Liu
Baiquan Liu received his BS degree in Electronics Science and Technology from the Shaanxi University of Science and Technology in 2011, his PhD degree from Materials Physics and Chemistry at South China University of Technology in 2016. Now, he is working at Nanyang Technological University. He has published more than 40 research papers and applied more than 10 patents. His current scientific interest is focused on the physics and chemistry of organic light-emitting diodes and quantum-dot light-emitting diodes.
Xiang-Long Li
Xiang-Long Li is a PhD student at the State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials, South China University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Shi-Jian Su. His current research interests mainly focus on blue fluorescent and white organic light-emitting devices.
Jianhua Zou
Jianhua Zou is currently an Associate Professor (2013) in the School of Material Science and Engineering at South China University of Technology (SCUT). He received his Bachelor's degree in Materials Physics from North East University (China) in 2005, and his PhD degree from the Physics Department at SCUT in 2010. His current research interests include Organic electronics and optoelectronics, including LEDs, thin film transistors and solar cell devices. He has also published more than 50 papers on high-impact journals in these topics.
Junbiao Peng
Junbiao Peng received a BS degree in physics at Jilin University in 1984 and MS and PhD degrees respectively in 1987 and 1993 in Changchun Institute of Physics (CIP), Chinese Academy of Sciences. In the subsequent years, he did his postdoc work in the Korea Institute of Science and Technology and the National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research (NIMC), Japan. In 2001, he joined the Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, as a full professor. His current research interests include design, characterization, and application of organic optoelectronic devices such as OLEDs, OPVs and TFTs.
Yong Cao
Yong Cao, physical chemist, is a Professor of South China University of Technology since 1999. He received his BS from the Department of Chemistry, Leningrad (now St Petersburg) University and his PhD degree from Tokyo University, Japan. He was a visiting senior researcher at the University of California, Santa Barbara from 1988 to 1990 and a senior scientist of UNIAX Corporation from 1990 to 1998. His current research interests include polymer optoelectronic materials and devices.
1. Introduction
Since the pioneering work of C. W. Tang and his co-worker,1 organic light-emitting diodes (OLEDs) have been the subject of intense research for more than 30 years owing to their extraordinary characteristics, such as high efficiency, low power consumption, fast switching, wide viewing angle, light weight, long lifetime and flexibility.2–4 Nowadays, the OLED field has evolved to the extent that commercial applications for cell phones, televisions and lamps are available. To satisfy the requirements of energy-saving lighting and high-quality displays, white OLEDs (WOLEDs) have been considered as one of the most promising candidates. In 1994, Kido et al. reported the first WOLED.5,6 Although the maximum power efficiency (PE) and luminance of the first WOLED were only 0.83 lm W−1 and 3400 cd m−2, respectively, this groundbreaking achievement sheds light on the development of the WOLED technology.
For the lighting application, WOLEDs should meet the demand of bright luminance, high efficiency and long lifetime simultaneously. More specifically, WOLEDs require standard fluorescent tube efficiency (40–70 lm W−1) and ≥10000 h of lifetime at the luminance of ≥1000 cd m−2.7–10 Besides, the color rendering index (CRI), an indication of how well the light source will render colors of an object it illuminates must be considered in addition to the Commission Internationale de l'Eclairage (CIE) chromaticity coordinates of near white light equal-energy point (0.33, 0.33) when designing WOLEDs for lighting.11–14 For the indoor lighting, a WOLED with a CRI above 80 is required.15–17 To further enhance the quality, other characterization parameters (i.e., CCT, color stability and driving voltage) of WOLEDs are also needed to be taken into account.18–23 Over the last two decades, the performance of WOLEDs has been step-by-step enhanced owing largely in part to the synthesis of elegant materials and the enhancement of device engineering. To date, the PE of WOLEDs has already exceeded 100 lm W−1 in both laboratory and industry, surpassing that of conventional fluorescent lamps (40–70 lm W−1).24 The lifetime of fluorescent WOLEDs can be as long as 150000 h at 1000 cd m−2 in the revealed literature.25 Besides, WOLEDs can show ultrahigh CRI (≥90), sunlight-like emission (2500–8000 K) and extremely stable color (i.e., the color shift ΔCIE = (0.00, 0.00)).26–30 Therefore, their superior performance makes WOLEDs have a bright prospect in the near future.
According to the employed emissive materials, WOLEDs can be generally classified into three types, including all-fluorescent WOLEDs, all-phosphorescent WOLEDs and fluorescent/phosphorescent hybrid WOLEDs.31,32 Among WOLEDs, the use of phosphorescent emitters is desirable since they can allow for a conversion of up to 100% of injected charges into emitted photons (both singlet and triplet excitons are harvested), resulting in a theoretical internal quantum efficiency of unity.33–36 Unfortunately, there is no ideal blue phosphorescent emitter in terms of lifetime and color-stability until now since blue phosphors (i.e., iridium(III)bis[(4,6-difluorophenyl)-pyridinato-N,C2] (FIrpic)) easily suffer chemical degradation during device operation, restricting the development of all-phosphorescent WOLEDs. To loosen the bottleneck, the utilization of hybrid WOLEDs, which usually combine stable blue fluorescent emitters with efficient green-red/orange phosphorescent emitters, is believed to be an alternative way due to their merits, like high efficiency, stable color, high CRI and long lifetime.37–40 Since the first hybrid WOLED reported in 2003,41 the performance of hybrid WOLEDs has been gradually enhanced. So far, hybrid WOLEDs can exhibit an external quantum efficiency (EQE) > 20%, PE > 100 lm W−1, ΔCIE = (0.00, 0.00), CRI > 95, wide correlated color temperature (CCT) span and lifetime >30000 h at 1000 cd m−2,7,10,31,32 showing that they are promising for solid-state lighting and displays.
In this review, we would like to focus on the development of hybrid WOLEDs. As exciton harvesting is critical to their high performance, we overview the manipulation of exciton distribution in hybrid WOLEDs. In particular, we comprehensively review the device structures, design strategies, working mechanisms and electroluminescent processes of the representative high-performance hybrid WOLEDs. We begin with the fundamental introduction of the types of hybrid WOLEDs. Next, we discuss how to manage the excitons for different types of high-performance hybrid WOLEDs. Then, we introduce the doping-free technology to realize hybrid WOLEDs. Lastly, the challenges and opportunities for further enhancement of the performance are presented, which is expected to stimulate more interest in the hybrid WOLED field.
2. Types of hybrid WOLEDs
In 2003, Li et al. reported the first hybrid WOLED.41 They obtained the white emission by mixing the blue fluorescence from N,N′-di-1-naphthyl-N,N′-diphenylbenzidine (NPB, emission peak at 436 nm) and yellow phosphorescence from a Re-complex (emission peak at 557 nm), achieving a maximum luminance of 2410 cd m−2, current efficiency (CE) of 5.1 cd A−1 and CIE coordinates of (0.36, 0.43). The device structure is indium tin oxide (ITO)/NPB (40 nm)/Re-complex: (4,4′-N-N′-dicarbazole)biphenyl (CBP, x nm)/2,9-dimethyl-4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (BCP, 60–x nm)/LiF/Al and the emission mechanism can be summarized as follows. The blue emission might have resulted from the interlayer energy transfer from CBP to NPB or the direct recombination of holes and electrons on NPB, while the yellow emission has originated from the energy transfer from the host CBP to the Re-complex. In 2004, Che et al. reported a single-emitting-layer (single-EML) hybrid WOLED with the configuration of ITO/NPB (50 nm)/Pt-complex:bis(2(2′-hydroxyphenyl)pyridine)beryllium (Bepp2, 50 nm)/LiF/Al, achieving a maximum luminance of 3045 cd m−2, PE of 0.79 lm W−1 and CIE coordinates of (0.33, 0.35).42 The white emission has originated from the Bepp2 host (emission peak at 448 nm) and the Pt-complex dopant (emission peak at 552 nm) simultaneously. Later, Qin et al. reported a hybrid WOLED comprising blue fluorescence and red phosphorescence from tris(1-phenylisoquinolinolato-C2,N) iridium(III) (Ir(piq)3), achieving a maximum luminance of 1076 cd m−2 and CE of 2.45 cd A−1.43 However, the white emission can only be generated at 10–15 V. At the same time, Xie et al. fabricated a three-color hybrid WOLED with the structure of ITO/4,4′,4′′-tris(3-methylphenylphenylamino)-triphenylamine (m-MTDATA, 30 nm)/NPB (20 nm)/2,2′,2′′-(1,3,5-phenylene) tris(1-phenyl-1H-benzimidazole) (TPBi): fac(2-phenylpyridine) iridium (Ir(ppy)3): bis (1-(phenyl)isoquinoline)iridium(III)acetylacetonate (Ir(piq)2(acac)) (30 nm)/tris(8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminium (Alq3, 20 nm)/LiF/Al, achieving a maximum luminance of 33012 cd m−2, CE of 15.3 cd A−1 and PE of 10.7 lm W−1.44 The white emission has originated from the blue fluorescence of NPB (emission peak at 440 nm), green phosphorescence of Ir(ppy)3 (emission peak at 512 nm) and red phosphorescence of Ir(piq)2(acac) (emission peak at 620 nm). Li et al. also used a similar structure to that used by Xie, achieving a maximum luminance of 6389 cd m−2 and CE of 6.4 cd A−1.45 Although some hybrid WOLEDs were developed, their performance is relatively low. As a result, negligible attention has been paid to this kind of WOLED until Sun's work.37 In 2006, Sun et al. designed a novel hybrid WOLED, achieving a maximum total EQE of 18.7%, PE of 37.6 lm W−1 and CRI of 85. After this milestone work, hybrid WOLEDs have aroused great research interest.
To obtain high-performance hybrid WOLEDs, the main issue is how to harvest singlet excitons and triplet excitons by fluorophores and phosphors, respectively. By designing rational device structures, the mutual quenching between singlets and triplets can be prevented, particularly for triplet quenching which is mainly referred to the energy transfer from the phosphorescent triplet state of phosphors to a lower lying, nonradiative triplet state of blue fluorophores by Dexter transfer. Among hybrid WOLEDs, the triplet energy (T1) of blue fluorophores plays a key role in the device performance, since it determines how to maximize the exciton-harvesting efficiency.46–56 Therefore, hybrid WOLEDs can be classified into two types according to the T1 of blue fluorophores. On the one hand, hybrid WOLEDs can be constitutive of blue fluorophores with low triplet energies, which means that the T1 of blue fluorophores is lower than that of their complementary phosphors in this class of hybrid WOLEDs. A critical feature of preparing this class of devices is utilizing a spacer or interlayer, located between the blue fluorophores and the complementary phosphors, which can (i) prevent Förster energy transfer from blue fluorophores to red-green/orange phosphors (singlet excitons are typically transferred following Förster transfer), (ii) eliminate the Dexter energy transfer from red-green/orange phosphors to blue fluorophores (triplet excitons are usually transferred following Dexter transfer), (iii) tune the emission colors, and (iv) prolong the lifetime.57–60 On the other hand, hybrid WOLEDs can be composed of blue fluorophores with high triplet energies, which means that the T1 of blue fluorophores is higher than that of their complementary phosphors in this class of hybrid WOLEDs.61–64 As a result, the internal quantum efficiency (IQE) can be 100% since both singlet and triplet excitons can be harvested by dint of smart device structures, although no spacer or interlayer is required. For this class of hybrid WOLEDs, the blue fluorophores are usually placed at the main exciton generation zone. Hence, singlets can be harvested by blue fluorophores to furnish blue emission. For the unused triplets, they can be diffused into the adjacent phosphorescent EMLs and then harvested by phosphors, since the lifetime and diffusion distance of triplets are much longer than that of singlets. Therefore, the exciton-harvesting efficiency can be 100% by manipulating charges and exciton distribution.
3. Hybrid WOLEDs with low-triplet-energy blue fluorophores
3.1 Hybrid WOLEDs with single-molecular bipolar interlayers
For hybrid WOLEDs with low-triplet-energy blue fluorophores, the introduction of single-molecular bipolar interlayers is one of the most effective ways to prohibit exciton quenching between fluorophores and phosphors, guaranteeing high performance. As a result, single-molecular bipolar interlayers usually satisfy at least two requirements: (i) the hole mobility is almost similar to the electron mobility and (ii) high T1, which would not quench the excitons.
So far, CBP has been one of the most widely used interlayers due to (i) its bipolar properties (i.e., 10−3 and 10−4 cm2 (V s)−1 for the hole and electron mobility, respectively) and (ii) a high T1 of 2.56 eV, higher than those of green/yellow/red phosphors, which would not quench the excitons.37,65–70 By using CBP as the bipolar interlayer between blue fluorophores and phosphors, Sun et al. built the first high-performance hybrid WOLED, the configuration of which is ITO/4,4′-bis[N-(1-naphthyl)-N-phenyl-amino]-biphenyl (NPD, 40 nm)/CBP:5% 4,4′-bis(9-ethyl-3-carbazovinylene)-1,1′-biphenyl (BCzVBi, blue EML)/CBP (4 nm, interlayer)/CBP:4% iridium(III) bis(2-phenyl quinolyl-N,C2′)acetylacetonate (PQIr, red EML)/CBP:5% Ir(ppy)3 (green EML)/CBP (6 nm, interlayer)/CBP:5% BCzVBi (blue EML)/electron transport layers (ETLs)/LiF/Al, as shown in Fig. 1a.37 The working mechanism of the device is as follows: (i) singlets and triplets are formed on the CBP host with a ratio of 1:3, and then singlets are transferred onto the blue fluorophore BCzVBi following a resonant Förster process; (ii) due to the long diffusion lengths (∼100 nm), the non-radiative host triplets can migrate into the center of the EML where they transfer onto the phosphors, which can avert the exchange energy losses (∼0.8 eV); (iii) since the thickness of the CBP interlayer is thicker than that of the Förster radius (∼3 nm), the direct energy transfer from the blue dopant BCzVBi to the green and red phosphors is prevented, as shown in Fig. 1b. As a result, the singlet and triplet excitons are harvested along completely independent channels, where singlets are harvested by the two blue EML to produce blue emission and triplets are harvested by the phosphorescent EMLs to give off green and red emission. Therefore, the transfer from the host to the dopant for both species can be separately optimized to be nearly resonant, thereby minimizing energy losses while maintaining a unity IQE. Thus, this unique device can show a maximum total EQE of 18.7%, PE of 37.6 lm W−1 and CRI of 85, a significant step in hybrid WOLEDs.
 Fig. 1  (a) Device structure and efficiency of WOLEDs. (b) Diagrams of electroluminescence processes in devices. Reproduced from ref. 37. 
To some extent, NPB can also be a promising bipolar interlayer, considering that its electron mobility is as high as 10−4 cm2 (V s)−1 (similar to its hole mobility).71 However, NPB is usually used in two-color hybrid WOLEDs, since its T1 (2.3 eV) is lower than that of green phosphors (i.e., 2.4 eV).72 In 2007, Yan et al. reported a simplified yet high-performance hybrid WOLED, where only two EMLs and one interlayer NPB are required.73 The device structure is ITO/NPB (30 nm)/CBP:5% Pt-complex (yellow phosphorescent EML)/NPB (2 nm, interlayer)/DNA (1 nm, blue fluorescent EML)/BCP (4 nm)/Alq3 (30 nm)/LiF/Al, as shown in Fig. 2. The WOLED with Pt complex 1 can show a maximum PE of 12.6 lm W−1 and a high CRI of 88 at 10 V with CIE coordinates of (0.323, 0.366). The WOLED with Pt complex 2 can show a maximum PE of 18.4 lm W−1 and CRI of 73 at 7 V with CIE coordinates of (0.30, 0.32). The origin of high performance is (i) the use of thin EMLs for low-voltage operation, improving the PE (i.e., 1 and 10 nm for the blue and yellow EML, respectively) since the voltage across the EMLs is shown to linearly decrease with thickness; (ii) the utilization of the charge/exciton confining structure (i.e., 4 nm BCP is functioned as the hole/exciton blocking layer), increasing the residence time of excitons and recombination probability in the EML, which can concomitantly enhance the efficiency; (iii) the introduction of a 2 nm NPB interlayer, preventing the exciton quenching and ensuring the blue emission since DNA and the Pt-complex cannot contact each other and enough excitons can be recombined in the blue region; (iv) the synthesis of novel Pt complexes with broad spectra, ensuring the high CRI since two emission peaks can come from the triplet excited states of the Pt complexes; and (v) the high exciton-harvesting efficiency, since singlets are harvested by the fluorophore DNA to generate blue emission while triplets are harvested by the Pt complexes to form yellow emission. In particular, the triplets in the phosphorescent EML may be quenched by the lower lying, nonradiative triplet state of DNA if no interlayer is adopted, which is detrimental to their performance. In other words, the exciton distribution is manipulated by the NPB interlayer. Therefore, efficient hybrid WOLEDs have been developed.
 Fig. 2  Device architecture of the presented WOLEDs and chemical structures of emitters. Reproduced from ref. 73. 
3.2 Hybrid WOLEDs with codoping bipolar interlayers
To make the bipolar interlayers more flexible, codoping bipolar interlayers have been developed by mixing p-type and n-type materials. With various codoping ratios, the device color and efficiency can be effectively tuned. Besides, since there are a large number of p-type and n-type materials with high T1, it is very flexible to obtain the suitable interlayers. For example, the p-type materials can be 1-bis[4-[N,N-di(4-tolyl)amino]phenyl]-cyclohexane (TAPC), N,N,N-tris-(4-(9-carbazolyl)phenyl)amine (TCTA), N,N′-di(naphthalen-1-yl)-N,N′-diphenylbenzidine (α-NPD) and 1,3-bis(9H-carbazol-9-yl)-benzene (mCP), while the n-type materials can be TPBi, Bepp2, bis(10-hydroxybenzo[h]quinolinato)beryllium complex (Bebq2), bis(2-methyl-8-quinolinato)-4-phenylphenolate aluminum (BAlq), BCP, 4,7-diphenyl-1,10-phenanthroline (Bphen) and 3-(1,10-biphenyl-4-yl)-5-(4-tert-butylphenyl)-4-phenyl-4H-1,2,4-triazole (TAZ).74–84
Schwartz et al. established a hybrid WOLED by codoping 4,4′,4′′-tris(N-carbazolyl)-triphenylamine (TCTA) and TPBi as the bipolar interlayer between the phosphorescence and fluorescence regions, achieving 17.4 lm W−1 at 100 cd m−2 and a CRI of 85 with CIE coordinates of (0.47, 0.42).85 The device structure is ITO/N,N,N′,N′-tetrakis(4-methoxyphenyl)-benzidine (MeO-TPD):2,3,5,6-tetrafluoro-7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane (F4-TCNQ)/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-diphenylamino)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-TAD)/NPB:iridium(III)bis(2-methyldibenzo-[f,h]quinoxaline)(acetylacetonate) (Ir(MDQ)2(acac), red EML)/TCTA:Ir(ppy)3(green EML)/TCTA:TPBi (interlayer)/2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(2,2-diphenylyinyl) spiro-9,9′-bifluorene (Spiro-DPVBi, blue EML)/Bphen/Bphen:Cs/Al, as shown in Fig. 3. The key factor for the high performance is the use of a TCTA:TPBi interlayer since phosphorescence quenching is avoided and phosphorescent red/green EMLs can be combined with a fluorescent blue EML, even if the T1 of the blue emitter is low. Thus, both singlet and triplet excitons are confined efficiently, whereas charge carriers still pass easily this interlayer. Besides, the interlayer suppresses Dexter transfer of the phosphorescent excitons to the nonradiative triplet state of Spiro-DPVBi.
 Fig. 3  Device architecture of the presented WOLEDs and chemical structures of the emitters and interlayer materials. Reproduced from ref. 85. 
Recently, Liu et al. organized aggregation-induced emission (AIE) based hybrid WOLEDs by mixing TCTA and 1,3,5-tri(m-pyrid-3-yl-phenyl)benzene (TmPyPB) as the interlayer.86 Firstly, the best deep-blue AIE OLED has been developed by enhancing the device engineering, achieving low voltage (i.e., 2.75 V at 1 cd m−2), high luminance (17721 cd m−2), high efficiency (4.3 lm W−1) and low efficiency roll-off (3.6 lm W−1 at 1000 cd m−2). Then, blue AIE fluorophores have been demonstrated to achieve high-performance hybrid WOLEDs. The configuration of two-color hybrid WOLEDs is ITO/HAT-CN (100 nm)/NPB (15 nm)/1-bis[4-[N,N-di(4-tolyl)amino]phenyl]-cyclohexane (TAPC, 5 nm)/NPB:Bepp2: bis(2-phenyl-4,5-dimethylpyridinato)[2-(biphenyl-3-yl)pyridinato] iridium(III) (Ir(dmppy)2(dpp), 25 nm, yellow EML)/interlayer (4 nm)/9,10-bis[4-(1,2,2-triphenylvinyl)phenyl]anthracene (BTPEAn, 10 nm, blue EML)/Bepp2 (40 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (200 nm), where the interlayer is TAPC:TmPyPB with various codoping ratios. By changing the ratio, the two-color WOLEDs exhibit (i) stable colors and the highest efficiency among pure-white hybrid WOLEDs (32.0 lm W−1); (ii) stable colors, high efficiency (38.9 lm W−1) and very low efficiency roll-off (i.e., the maximum forward-viewing CE of 24.8 cd A−1 remains stable during 200–450 cd m−2, which can be as high as >80% of the maximum value even at a high luminance of 4300 cd m−2); or (iii) unprecedented efficiencies at high luminances (i.e., 70.2 cd A−1, 43.4 lm W−1 at 10000 cd m−2). To reveal the origin of high performance, the effect of the interlayer has been firstly investigated. For the WOLED with the codoping ratio of TAPC:TmPyPB = 1:0 (device W21), since TAPC is a hole-transporting material, holes can easily pass through this interlayer to reach the blue EML, ensuring blue emission, while only a portion of electrons can transport across this interlayer to reach the yellow EML via the tunneling behavior, as shown in Fig. 4a. Therefore, a pure-white emission can be produced owing to the balanced blue and yellow emissions. For the WOLED with the codoping ratio of TAPC:TmPyPB = 0.8:0.2 (device W22), more electrons can pass through the interlayer to meet holes and then generated excitons in the yellow region, indicating that more yellow emissions can be given off, as shown in Fig. 4b. Since Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) can harvest both singlet and triplet excitons, the efficiency of W22 is higher than that of W21. For the WOLED with the codoping ratio of TAPC:TmPyPB = 0.5:0.5, less holes can pass through the interlayer, leading to the fact that most of the excitons are consumed in the yellow EML, as shown in Fig. 4c. Therefore, almost no blue emission can be observed at low luminances. However, holes can reach the blue EML at high luminances since holes can obtain enough energy at high voltages, leading to yellowish-white colors. By further increasing the ratio of TmPyPB, virtually no holes can arrive at the blue EML even at high luminances, leading to no white emission in the WOLED with the codoping ratio of TAPC:TmPyPB = 0.2:0.8 or 0:1. These results also suggest that the TAPC:TmPyPB is an effective interlayer to manipulate the charge and exciton distribution, which is essential to achieve white emissions.
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms of the hybrid WOLEDs. The effect of the interlayer in the WOLED with the codoping ratio of TAPC:TmPyPB = 1:0 (a), 0.8:0.2 (b) and 0.5:0.5 (c). The charge trapping procedure in the phosphorescent EML (d). Reproduced from ref. 86. 
Then, in addition to the fact that the thickness of the yellow EML is much thicker than that of the blue EML, another reason for the stronger yellow intensity can be attributed to the charge trapping effect of Ir(dmppy)2(dpp). As the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) levels of NPB and Bepp2 are 5.4 and 5.7 eV, respectively, deeper than that of Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) (5.05 eV), while the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) levels of NPB and Bepp2 are 2.4 and 2.6 eV, respectively, higher than that of Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) (2.8 eV), both holes and electrons can be trapped nicely by this guest. Thus, holes are difficult to escape from the yellow EML to reach the blue EML when the ratio of TmPyPB is high in the mixed interlayer, leading to poor blue emission. Hence, both holes and electrons can be trapped by Ir(dmppy)2(dpp), improving the yellow intensity. These results also suggest that the direct charge trapping on Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) molecules is the mechanism for exciton formation and emission, as shown in Fig. 4d. Moreover, by adding a deep red phosphor tris(1-phenylisoquinolinolato-C2,N) iridium(III) (Ir(piq)3) to complement the blue and yellow emissions, a three-color WOLED exhibits wide CCTs (10690–2328 K), which is the first hybrid WOLED showing sunlight-style emission (8000–2500 K).
3.3 Hybrid WOLEDs with p-type interlayers
In order to achieve high performance, the charge and exciton distribution of hybrid WOLEDs is required to be manipulated according to the device structures. As a consequence, bipolar interlayers may not be suitable for some hybrid WOLEDs with low-triplet-energy blue fluorophores when the devices have hole or electron-dominating transport EMLs, while unipolar interlayers can be effective. Since p-type and n-type interlayers can facilitate hole and electron transport, respectively, the charge and exciton distribution can be manipulated to the desirable performance.
Liu et al. built a hybrid WOLED by using TCTA as the p-type interlayer, simultaneously realizing high efficiency, high CRI, low efficiency roll-off, low voltage and stable color.87 For example, the device exhibits maximum total efficiencies of 29.8 cd A−1 and 20.9 lm W−1, slightly decreasing to 28.6 cd A−1 and 16.5 lm W−1 even at a high luminance of 5000 cd m−2. Besides, a slight color-shift and a CRI of 85 at 100 cd m−2 (3.65 V) are obtained. The device structure is ITO/MeO-TPD:F4-TCNQ (100 nm, 4%)/NPB (15 nm)/TCTA (5 nm)/2-methyl-9,10-di(2-naphthyl)anthracene (MADN):p-bis(p-N,N-di-phenyl-aminostyryl) (DSA-ph, 9 nm, blue EML)/TCTA (3 nm, interlayer)/Bepp2:Ir(ppy)3:Ir(piq)3, (25 nm, 1:6%:1%)/Bepp2 (25 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (200 nm), as shown in Fig. 5. For high performance, the introduction of the p-type interlayer has been demonstrated to play a critical role. To further demonstrate the superiority of the p-type interlayer, the TCTA interlayer is replaced with the CBP interlayer because CBP is the most popular/efficient interlayer owing to its high T1 and bipolar conducting properties. However, it is found that (i) the device with a 3 nm CBP interlayer cannot realize a balanced white emission and (ii) the device with an optimized 5 nm CBP interlayer exhibits a low efficiency (i.e., maximum forward-viewing CE of 16.8 cd A−1) and a low CRI (i.e., 71 at 1000 cd m−2). Therefore, the p-type interlayer is essential for high performance.
 Fig. 5  Top: Schematic layer structure of the WOLED and the chemical structure of emissive dopants. Bottom: Proposed energy-level diagram. Reproduced from ref. 87. 
3.4 Hybrid WOLEDs with n-type interlayers
The n-type interlayers, which are usually overlooked, have also been demonstrated to develop high-performance hybrid WOLEDs.40,88–90 Liu et al. explored the effect of various n-type interlayers and found that Bepp2 was more effective to be the n-type interlayer, achieving the first hybrid WOLED with a long lifetime.40 As shown in Fig. 6a, the device structure is ITO/MeO-TPD:F4-TCNQ (100 nm, 4%)/NPB (20 nm)/MADN:DSA-ph (20 nm, 7%)/interlayers (0 or 3 nm)/Bebq2:(Ir(MDQ)2(acac), 9 nm, 5%)/Bebq2 (25 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (200 nm), where the interlayers correspond to no, Alq3, BAlq, Bebq2, TPBi and Bepp2, respectively. To appropriately investigate the effects of n-type interlayers, several strategies are employed: (i) to simplify structures, two complementary colors (blue/red) are utilized to give off white emission and only double EMLs are needed; (ii) Bebq2 is selected as an ETL since its electron mobility is as high as ∼10−4 cm2 (V s)−1, which can effectively enhance the electron injection and then make the carriers balanced; (iii) Bebq2 is also used as the host of the red emitter, which can not only prevent reverse energy transfer from the dopants to the host as well as confining triplet excitons in the EML since the T1 of Bebq2 (2.25 eV) is higher than that of Ir(MDQ)2(acac) (2.0 eV), but also eliminate the structural heterogeneity that exists between the ETL and the EML, boosting the efficiency and lifetime; (iv) since the Dexter transfer requires spatial overlap of the donor/acceptor molecular orbitals and only occur significantly within a range of 1–2 nm, 3 nm thick interlayers are used to prevent this energy transfer; and (v) a device without an interlayer is also developed for comparison, which is better to deeply understand the effect of n-type interlayers. Based on these considerations, five devices with no, Alq3, BAlq, Bebq2 and TPBi interlayers have been firstly developed. It is found that only the device with a TPBi interlayer can show white emission, while others furnish blue emission. This is because TPBi possesses a high T1 of 2.74 eV, higher than other interlayers, which can prevent the exciton quenching between fluorescent and phosphorescent EMLs. Besides, it is found that the thickness of n-type interlayers has a great influence on the performance. For example, when the thickness of TPBi is >6 nm, the red emission disappeared, resulting in no white emission. Therefore, to achieve high performance, the thickness of unipolar interlayers should not be too thick. To further verify the finding that T1 rather than the electron mobility or hole-blocking ability of n-type interlayers plays a crucial role in device performances and to further improve the properties of WOLEDs with n-type interlayers, another n-type material Bepp2 was explored as the interlayer because of its high T1 (2.6 eV), which can also be expected to avoid the mutual quenching between the fluorescent and phosphorescent emitters.40 By using the Bepp2 interlayer to manipulate the exciton distribution, both blue and red emission can be obtained, leading to a white color. As a result, the hybrid WOLED can possess a lifetime of >30000 h at an initial luminance of 1000 cd m−2, as shown in Fig. 6b.
 Fig. 6  (a) Device architecture of the WOLED, chemical structures of the interlayers, and the energy level diagram. (b) Lifetime of the device. Reproduced from ref. 40. 
3.5 Hybrid WOLEDs without interlayers
For hybrid WOLEDs with low-triplet-energy blue fluorophores, interlayers are usually needed. If the interlayer is avoided, the device structure can be more simplified. However, it is challenging to achieve high performance for this class of hybrid WOLEDs. To alleviate this difficulty, novel structures may be conducive.91–93
Sun et al. reported an interlayer-free hybrid WOLED with low-triplet-energy blue fluorophores, achieving a maximum forward-viewing PE of 41.7 lm W−1.94 Even at 1000 cd m−2, a PE of 34.3 lm W−1, CIE coordinates of (0.43, 0.43) and a CRI of 82 can be obtained, representing one of the best hybrid WOLEDs. The EML structure is TCTA:4% Ir(MDQ)2(acac) (3.5 nm, red EML)/TCTA:8% bis(2-phenylpyridine)iridium acetylacetonate (Ir(ppy)2(acac), 5 nm, green EML)/TCTA:TmPyPB:N,N′-di-1-naphthalenyl-N,N′-diphenyl-[1,1′:4′,1′′:4′′,1′′′-quaterphenyl]-4,4′′′-diamine (4P-NPD, 73%:25%:2%, 7 nm, blue EML), where the T1 of 4P-NPD (2.3 eV) is lower than that of the green phosphor Ir(ppy)2(acac) (2.4 eV), as shown in Fig. 7. The core of the concept is to introduce mixed hosts with bipolar transport to construct the fluorescent blue EML. Compared with the devices with a unipolar host TCTA or TmPyPB, the device with a bipolar host exhibits much higher performance. The emission mechanism of this high-performance hybrid WOLED is as follows: (i) the low concentration of 4P-NPD (2%) can harvest most of the singlets to produce blue emission, since the average distance between 4P-NPD molecules to be 3.7 nm at a 2 mol% doping level (beyond the Förster transfer radius 3 nm), resulting in an energetically unfavorable singlet excited state transition between guest molecules; (ii) the maximum EQE of 19% corresponds to an almost unity internal quantum efficiency, which indicates that the number of triplets lost to nonradiative decay on 4P-NPD is negligible, ensuring red and green emission; (iii) the direct exciton formation on guest sites also contributes to the green and red emission, which not only decreases the density of triplet excitons in the main exciton generation zone, but reduces the charge carrier accumulation in that region, suppressing both triplet–triplet annihilation and triplet–polaron quenching; and (v) the bipolar transport properties in the blue EML that helps in broadening the exciton formation, further reducing the efficiency roll-off.
 Fig. 7  Device architecture of the WOLEDs, the energy level diagrams and the electroluminescent processes. The gray filled rectangle represents the main exciton generation zone. R, G, B, and m represents Ir(MDQ)2(acac), Ir(ppy)2(acac), 4P-NPD, and TmPyPB, respectively. Solid lines and dashed lines correspond to HOMO and LUMO energy levels, respectively; circles and diamonds refer to the exciton (S0, S1, and T1) energies, respectively. S0 is the ground state. Reproduced from ref. 94. 
4. Hybrid WOLEDs with high-triplet-energy blue fluorophores
One common structural element for hybrid WOLEDs with low-triplet-energy blue fluorophores is an interlayer between the fluorophore and the phosphor, preventing the mutual exciton transfer and quenching processes. However, the introduction of interlayers also shows some disadvantages, including (i) the increase of the fabrication difficulty and cost; (ii) the enhancement of driving voltage, leading to low PE; (iii) the generation of more heterojunctions; and (iv) the formation of an exciplex, which may impair their efficiency. As alternatives, hybrid WOLEDs can be developed via high-triplet-energy blue fluorophores, which can not only avert the consideration of interlayers, but harvest all of the excitons, leading to 100% IQE.
4.1 Multi-emitting-layer hybrid WOLEDs
For multi-emitting-layer hybrid WOLEDs with high-triplet-energy blue fluorophores, the critical factor is the use of phosphors to effectively harvest the triplets of blue fluorophores by manipulating the different diffusion length of singlets and triplets.95–97 As a consequence, a total IQE of almost unity can be obtained.
In 2007, Schwartz et al. proposed the triplet-harvesting hybrid WOLEDs, achieving the total PE of 57.6 and 37.5 lm W−1 at 100 and 1000 cd m−2, respectively, which is the best WOLED at that time.98 The EML structure is α-NPD:Ir(MDQ)2(acac) (orange EML)/4P-NPD (blue EML)/TPBi:Ir(ppy)3 (green EML), as shown in Fig. 8. The key for high performance is the selection of 4P-NPD as the blue fluorophore, since 4P-NPD not only possesses a high T1 of 2.3 eV, but a high photoluminescence quantum efficiency of 92%, which is >2-fold higher than the conventional α-NPD (42%). The emission mechanism of the WOLED is as follows: (i) since α-NPD and 4P-NPD are p-type materials while TPBi is an n-type material, the main recombination zone is situated close to the 4P-NPD/TPBi:Ir(ppy)3 interface; (ii) all excitons created in the TPBi:Ir(ppy)3 layer are transferred to triplets of the green phosphor, decaying radiatively, potentially without losses; (iii) singlets created in the 4P-NPD layer may either undergo a direct radiative decay or be transferred via Förster transfer to the TPBi:Ir(ppy)3 layer leading to an increase in green emission; and (iv) since the T1 of 4P-NPD is higher than that of Ir(MDQ)2(acac) (2.0 eV) and triplets have large diffusion lengths, triplets may easily diffuse into the orange EML where they can again decay radiatively, although the radiative decay of triplets in the blue emitter is a forbidden transition. As a result, three-color white emission can be achieved.
 Fig. 8  Device architecture of the WOLEDs, the energy level diagrams and the electroluminescence processes. Reproduced from ref. 98. 
Recently, Liu et al. fabricated ultrasimplified hybrid WOLEDs by exploiting double multifunctional EMLs, achieving total PE values of 89.3 and 65.1 lm W−1 at 100 and 1000 cd m−2, respectively, which is the first report that the efficiencies of hybrid WOLEDs are comparable to those of the best all-phosphorescent WOLEDs.99 In addition, the device exhibits the lowest voltages among hybrid WOLEDs (i.e., 2.4, 2.7 and 3.1 V for 1, 100 and 1000 cd m−2, respectively). The device structure is ITO/HAT-CN (100 nm)/NPB (20 nm)/NPB:Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) (35 nm, 15%)/NPB (4.5 nm)/Bepp2 (35 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (200 nm), as shown in Fig. 9. The crucial feature is the exploitation of double multifunctional blue EMLs, which can simplify the structure, guarantee the blue emission, boost the efficiency and reduce the efficiency roll-off. One of the blue EMLs—4.5 nm NPB—functions as a bridge (B-E-I), allowing a portion of electrons to flexibly pass through to reach the orange EML and then form excitons with holes in the orange guest molecules via the charge trapping process, broadening both the charge and exciton distributions. Additionally, the other blue EML—Bepp2—also functions as an ETL (B-E-II), reducing the heterojunction between the ETL and the EML. Thus, all generated excitons can be effectively harvested. The working mechanism is as follows: (i) because NPB and Bepp2 are p-type and n-type materials, respectively, coupled with the existing energy barriers, the main exciton generation zone is located at the B-E-I/B-E-II interface, leading to singlets and triplets with a ratio of 1:3; (ii) singlets are harvested by NPB and Bepp2, whereas the unused triplets are diffused to the orange region and then harvested by Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) because the diffusion lengths of singlets and triplets are ∼3 and 100 nm, respectively; (iii) the T1 values of NPB and Bepp2 are 2.3 and 2.6 eV, respectively, higher to meet the call for Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) (T1 < 2.25 eV), ensuring that triplets can be effectively used; (iv) B-E-I confines the majority of electrons injected from the cathode to meet holes at the B-E-I/B-E-II interface, ensuring that excitons are mainly generated at this interface; otherwise no blue emission can be furnished; (v) B-E-I functions as a bridge because it can allow the unconfined electrons to flexibly pass through B-E-I to reach the orange EML and then form excitons with holes injected from the anode at the orange guest molecules, resulting in high efficiency and reduced efficiency roll-off; (vi) B-E-II functions as an ETL because of the high electron mobility of Bepp2 (10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1), which can simplify the structures and reduce the heterojunction; (vii) by dint of double multifunctional blue EMLs, the exciton generation zone is greatly widened, beneficial to the high performance; and (viii) since the hole mobility and T1 of NPB are high enough, there is no need to adopt other materials as the hole transport layer (HTL) and host of Ir(dmppy)2(dpp), leading to a simplified structure (i.e., only three organic layers) and less heterojunctions. Therefore, although less than 25% of the singlets are consumed for the blue emission due to the bridge-like NPB blue EML, all excitons can be harvested via the smart device engineering mentioned above, leading to an extremely high-efficiency hybrid WOLED with an ultrasimplified structure.
 Fig. 9  Top: The structure of the WOLEDs and schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms. The sky-blue filled region is the main exciton generation zone. Bottom: Chemical structures of emitters. Reproduced from ref. 99. 
4.2 Single-emitting-layer hybrid WOLEDs with low guest concentrations
For multi-emitting-layer hybrid WOLEDs with high-triplet-energy blue fluorophores, their structures are usually not simplified. Alternatively, single-EML hybrid WOLEDs have been the research interest since they only need one EML, offering many advantages, such as simpler structures, shorter fabrication processes, less structural heterogeneities inherent in the multiple-color band architectures, lower voltages and lower cost.100–102 As a matter of fact, many endeavors about single-EML hybrid WOLEDs have been made. For example, in 2011, Peng et al. reported a high-performance single-EML hybrid WOLED, achieving a peak EQE and PE of 27.8% and 48.8 lm W−1, respectively, which is also the highest for WOLEDs with a HTL-EML-ETL architecture.103
The greatest motivation of single-EML hybrid WOLEDs is the introduction of an appropriate material functioning as both the blue fluorescent emitter and the host of the complementary color phosphor. If the blue material has a low T1, triplet excitons can transfer from the phosphor to the fluorophore, resulting in the non-radiative decay. That is, triplets in the phosphor can be quenched by the fluorophore, leading to no white emission. Therefore, the introduction of blue fluorescent emitters with relatively high triplet energies is a key feature of designing this class of WOLEDs, in which triplets in the blue fluorophore can be harvested using the complementary color phosphor.
In 2012, Ye et al. reported a single-EML hybrid WOLED with a low doping concentration of 0.1%, yielding the peak total EQE and PE of 26.6% and 67.2 lm W−1, respectively.104 The device structure is ITO/NPB (30 nm)/TCTA (10 nm)/0.1 wt% tris(2-phenylquinoline)iridium(III) (Ir(2-phq)3):2,8-di[4-(diphenylamino)phenyl] dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide (DADBT, 30 nm, EML)/TPBI (30 nm)/LiF (1.5 nm)/Al. The working mechanism is as follows: (i) since DADBT is bipolar, the whole EML could be the exciton generation zone, and excitons would be mainly located at the blue fluorophore molecules for their preponderant amount; (ii) excitons could have different utilizations under varying doping concentrations, considering the different diffusion lengths of singlets, (RS, ∼3 nm) and triplets (RT, ∼100 nm), as shown in Fig. 10a; and (iii) when concentrations remain within a range that some fluorophore molecules would find no phosphor within the vicinity of 3 nm while the phosphor exists within 100 nm (i.e., 0.1%), singlets generated can be used for blue emission and other excitons will transfer for the phosphorescence emission, achieving 100% IQE (Fig. 10b and e). Therefore, it is possible to achieve the separation and respective utilization of singlet and triplet excitons in the single EML and finally obtain the warm-white emission. In particular, (i) when the concentration is too low, some of the host fluorophore molecules would find no phosphor molecule within the vicinity of 100 nm, leading to the fact that singlets can radiatively decay to emit blue light while triplets would decay non-radiatively (Fig. 10d) and (ii) when the concentrations reach a high level (i.e., 10%), the fluorophores are surrounded by phosphorescent dopants within 3 nm distances, and all excitons generated on these fluorophores would transfer their energy to the dopant molecules for phosphorescence emission (Fig. 10c and f), resulting in the fact that singlet and triplet excitons could not be separated. Therefore, for these two situations, no white emission can be obtained.
 Fig. 10  The decay ways of the singlet and triplet excitons on host molecules at different doping concentrations in the EML. Reproduced from ref. 104. 
4.3 Single-emitting-layer hybrid WOLEDs with high guest concentrations
For single-emitting-layer hybrid WOLEDs with low guest concentrations, although the efficiencies can be respectable, the guest concentrations are difficult to control and reproduce in the coevaporation process. Therefore, single-EML hybrid WOLEDs with high guest concentrations (>1%) are desperately needed. Besides, the working mechanisms of single-EML hybrid WOLEDs with high guest concentrations are not the same as those of devices with low concentrations.
Liu et al. developed a single-EML hybrid WOLED with high guest concentration (1.5%), achieving a maximum total PE of 65.3 lm W−1.105 The configuration is ITO/HAT-CN (100 nm)/NPB (20 nm)/NPB:Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) (35 nm, 1.5%)/Bepp2 (35 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (200 nm). The working mechanism is as follows: (i) a portion of fluorophore molecules inevitably meet phosphorescent guest molecules within the vicinity of 3 nm due to their high concentration (15 times larger than Ye's device104), resulting in the fact that the Förster energy transfer from fluorophores to phosphors is possible, as shown in Fig. 11c; (ii) such energy transfer is not wasted, because the orange emission will be enhanced via the following intersystem crossing (ISC) process, although it can decrease the blue emission; (iii) Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) can harvest triplets generated in the NPB host via the Dexter energy transfer, giving off the orange emission; (iv) the fluorophore molecules which cannot meet phosphorescent guest molecules within the vicinity of 3 nm would guarantee the singlets on the fluorophores for blue emission; and (v) because Ir-complex guests usually have a strong hole/electron-capture ability when high concentrations are used, direct charge trapping on the guest occurs in hybrid WOLEDs with high guest concentration, although this emission mechanism is not considered in the host–guest system with low concentration (Fig. 11d). In other words, this hybrid WOLED with high guest concentration can smartly allow the utilization of both the fluorescence from the NPB host itself (deep-blue emission), and the complementary phosphorescence from the triplet Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) guest (orange emission) by incomplete Förster energy transfer, Dexter energy transfer as well as direct exciton formation on this guest, leading to warm-white emission.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms. (a) The diffusion lengths of singlets and triplets. (b) Excitons decay in single-EML hybrid WOLEDs with low concentrations. (c) Excitons decay in hybrid WOLEDs with high concentrations. (d) The direct charge trapping process in hybrid WOLEDs with high concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
4.4 Thermally activated delayed fluorescent (TADF) hybrid WOLEDs
In 2012, Adachi's group made a breakthrough in the TADF material, which has been considered as the third-generation OLED emitter.106–108 Since blue TADF materials (i) are naturally advantageous to achieve high triplet energies due to their reduced singlet–triplet splits, (ii) can possess high efficiency, and (iii) can harvest the triplets, a novel kind of hybrid WOLED with blue TADF materials has the potential to realize high performance.109–116
Zhang et al. reported the first hybrid WOLEDs by using blue TADF materials, achieving a maximum forward-viewing PE of 47.6 lm W−1.117 The device structure is ITO/HATCN (5 nm)/NPB (40 nm)/TCTA (10 nm)/mCP:4,5-bis(carbazol-9-yl)-1,2-dicyanobenzene (2CzPN, 11 nm, blue EML)/TAZ:4 wt% (acetylacetonato)bis[2-(thieno[3,2-c]pyridin-4-yl)phenyl]iridium(III) (PO-01, 4 nm, orange EML)/TAZ (40 nm)/LiF (0.5 nm)/Al (150 nm), as shown in Fig. 12. The factors for high performance are as follows: (i) mCP is chosen to be the host for 2CzPN due to the wide energy gap and a high T1 of 3.0 eV, since the host of the TADF material plays an important role in determining the efficiency; (ii) 2CzPN is placed nearest to the main recombination zone, ensuring that excitons can diffuse throughout the emissive region to produce a desired color-balanced output; (iii) triplets formed on 2CzPN can be harvested by either energy transfer to the low-lying triplet states of the phosphor PO-01 (2.2 eV) or thermal upconversion to the emissive singlet states, eliminating the energy loss; and (iv) the recombination zone is fixed as the voltage increases for 2CzPN due to its charge trapping ability, achieving stable white emission.
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms. The gray filled rectangle represents the main exciton generation zone. PF is the prompt fluorescence while DF is the delayed fluorescence. RISC indicates the reverse ISC, and ET denotes the energy transfer. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Doping-free hybrid WOLEDs
To accomplish high-performance hybrid WOLEDs, the doping technique is quite necessary, as mentioned above. However, there are some demerits for the doping technique, including: (i) it needs a careful selection of appropriate hosts for different-color dopants, (ii) controlling the codeposition rate and the dopant concentration in the fabrication procedure is not easy; and (iii) regardless of single-EML or multi-EML WOLEDs, the effect of additional functional layers needs to be considered for both the host and the guest. To loosen the bottlenecks, the doping-free technology is practically helpful, for it can avoid the use of a host, shorten the fabrication process and simplify the structures.118–125
Liu et al. developed simplified doping-free hybrid WOLEDs by exploiting ultrathin emitting nanolayers (<1 nm), achieving a series of high-performance devices.126 For example, a two-color doping-free hybrid WOLED can exhibit high efficiency (∼40 lm W−1), stable color, low voltage and high luminance. Three-color doping-free hybrid WOLEDs exhibit (i) a wide CCT span (2325–8011 K), the first doping-free WOLED showing sunlight-like emission or (ii) a CRI of 91.3, the first three-color doping-free WOLED with ultrahigh CRI (>90). The configuration of the two-color devices is ITO/HAT-CN (100 nm)/NPB (15 nm)/TAPC (5 nm)/EMLs/TmPyPB (35 nm)/LiF (1 nm)/Al (200 nm), where EMLs are Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) (0.9 nm)/TAPC (3.5 nm)/DSA-ph (0.5 nm) and DSA-ph (0.5 nm)/Bepp2 (3.5 nm)/Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) (0.9 nm) for devices W21 and W22, respectively.
The device strategies include the following steps: (i) an effective doping-free charge/exciton confining structure is formed and applied to all devices (i.e., HAT-CN for the hole injection layer, NPB/TAPC for the step-wise HTL, TmPyPB for the ETL), guaranteeing high performance; (ii) since there are two possible ways to locate the two emitters for the two-color EMLs according to which one is closer to the anode, two types of devices with ultrathin emitting nanolayers (<1 nm) have been developed; (iii) the new role of interlayers in doping-free hybrid WOLEDs is explored; and (iv) to better comprehend the novel concept, previous design concepts for doping-free WOLEDs have also been applied to the doping-free hybrid WOLEDs.
The emission mechanism of two-color doping-free hybrid WOLEDs can be summarized as follows. For W21, (i) the main exciton generation zone is located at the blue EML and partially at the TAPC/DSA-ph and DSA-ph/TmPyPB interface, resulting in both singlet and triplet excitons (Fig. 13a); (ii) singlets on DSA-ph can be directly recombined for the blue emission; (iii) since the DSA-ph layer can partially penetrate the adjacent layers coupled with S1/T1 of DSA-ph, which is lower than those of TAPC and TmPyPB, singlets and triplets on TAPC and TmPyPB can be easily transported to DSA-ph via the Förster and Dexter energy transfer, respectively, leading to the fact that the transferred singlets can further increase the blue emission; (iv) a portion of electrons can transport across the thin TAPC IL to reach the yellow EML and then meet holes to form excitons and then recombined for the yellow emission; and (v) since the T1 values of TAPC, TmPyPB and DSA-ph are higher than that of Ir(dmppy)2(dpp) together with the fact that the interlayer is only 3.5 nm which is not sufficient to prevent the diffusion of excitons, the unused triplets in the main exciton generation zone can diffuse into the yellow EML and then be harvested by Ir(dmppy)2(dpp), further increasing the yellow emission. For W22, (i) the main exciton generation zone is located at the blue EML and partially at the TAPC/DSA-ph and DSA-ph/Bepp2 interface; (ii) singlets on DSA-ph can be directly recombined for the blue emission, while excitons on TAPC and Bepp2 can be effectively transported to DSA-ph since S1/T1 of DSA-ph is lower than those of TAPC and Bepp2, further ensuring blue emission; (iii) a portion of holes can transport across the thin Bepp2 interlayer to reach the yellow EML and then meet electrons to form excitons, generating a yellow emission; and (iv) the unused triplets in the main exciton generation zone can diffuse into the yellow EML and then be harvested by Ir(dmppy)2(dpp), further increasing the yellow emission.
 Fig. 13  Schematic diagrams of the emission mechanisms of doping-free hybrid WOLEDs. The gray filled rectangles are the main exciton generation zones. Charge transport in W21 (a) and W22 (b). Excitons decay in W21 (c) and W22 (d). IL is the interlayer, P-EML is the phosphorescent EML, F-EML is the fluorescent EML. Reproduced from ref. 126. 
In other words, owing to the p-type and n-type interlayers of W21 and W22, respectively, the blue emission is guaranteed by the combined mechanism of the direct exciton recombination on DSA-ph and effective energy transfer from the adjacent layers, while the yellow emission is generated by the combined mechanism of the direct exciton recombination and the triplet diffusion from the main exciton generation zone, leading to the white emission, as shown in Fig. 13c and d.
6. Summary and outlook
Exciton distribution is a determining factor for the performance of hybrid WOLEDs. Therefore, careful manipulation of their behavior is significant to achieve high-performance devices. In this review, the focus is the development of hybrid WOLEDs. In particular, the device structures, design strategies, working mechanisms and electroluminescence processes of the representative high-performance hybrid WOLEDs are reviewed. The representative device structures and their detailed performance at each class of hybrid WOLEDs are shown in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of the performances of hybrid WOLEDs with representative device structures




Devicesa

V
on/V1000b (V)
EQEmax/EQE1000c (%)
CEmax/CE1000d (cd A−1)
PEmax/PE1000e (lm W−1)
CIE1000f
CRIg





a The structures are mentioned before.
b The turn-on voltage (1 cd m−2) and the voltage at 1000 cd m−2.
c Maximum total EQE and the EQE at 1000 cd m−2.
d Maximum total CE and the CE at 1000 cd m−2.
e Maximum total PE and the PE at 1000 cd m−2.
f CIE coordinates at about 1000 cd m−2.
g Maximum CRI.






Ref. 37

—/—
18.7/—
—/—
37.6/—
(0.40, 0.41)
85



Ref. 40

2.8/—
—/—
20.6/19.0
20.9/11.9
(0.277, 0.354)
73



Ref. 73

3.9/8.5
11/7.3
23/—
12/6.0
(0.323, 0.366)
88


3.8/7.4
11.8/4.2
26.4/—
18.4/3.7
(0.30, 0.32)
73



Ref. 85

—/∼3.4
—/8.0
—/∼15
—/13.7
(0.47, 0.42)
85



Ref. 86

—/—
—/—
70.2/—
43.4/—
(0.44, 0.50)
46



Ref. 87

2.95/4.45
—/—
29.8/—
20.9/—
(0.337, 0.440)
85



Ref. 94

3.1/—
32.3/28.9
76.8/68.9
70.9/58.3
(0.43, 0.43)
83



Ref. 98

∼2.5/3.46
—/16.1
—/—
—/37.5
(0.44, 0.47)
86



Ref. 99

2.4/3.1
—/—
84.5/—
106.3/65.1
(0.43, 0.48)
47



Ref. 104

2.4/—
26.6/21.2
53.5/42.6
67.2/33.5
(0.46, 0.44)
—



Ref. 105

2.4/3.45
—/—
51.9/—
65.3/18.2
(0.39, 0.42)
77



Ref. 117

—/—
38.4/26.2
—/—
80.1/37.5
(0.45, 0.48)
—



Ref. 126

2.5/—
11.6/—
32.5/—
39.3/18.2
(0.42, 0.48)
—




Although the performance of hybrid WOLEDs has been enhanced over the last decade, there are still many challenges, such as the efficiency, lifetime and cost, before they can be large-scale commercialized. For the efficiency of hybrid WOLEDs, although it can be comparable to that of all-phosphorescent WOLEDs, there is still much room to the theoretical limit of 248 lm W−1 (standard light source (D65) from 400 to 700 nm wavelength).127 Since the efficiency is determined by the photoluminescence quantum efficiency of the emissive materials, the charge balance and outcoupling efficiency, the enhancement of these factors is of importance. In the case of emissive materials, the management of singlet and triplet excitons on blue fluorophores plays a key role in their performance, regardless of hybrid WOLEDs with high-triplet-energy or low-triplet-energy blue fluorophores. Hence, by designing rational device structures to manage the efficient blue emitters, the exciton utilization efficiency can be 100%, toward achieving unity IQE. Besides, since the power consumption is directly proportional to the operating voltage, the use of smart materials and device engineering is helpful for lowering the voltage (i.e., using p–i–n technology, introducing high charge mobility materials), which is also beneficial to the charge balance. Additionally, the outcoupling efficiency is only ∼20% owing to losses due to the wave-guiding effect, indicating that the introduction of outcoupling technology can be vitally useful.128 By dint of internal and external outcoupling technology (i.e., using scattering medium, micro-lens arrays, microcavity effect, photonic crystals, nanoparticles and nanostructures), the enhancement factor of WOLEDs can be >200%.129
For the lifetime of hybrid WOLEDs, although it has been demonstrated to possess a lifetime of >30000 h at an initial luminance of 1000 cd m−2,40 it is challenging to simultaneously accomplish high efficiency, high CRI and long lifetime. Thus, aside from the above mentioned endeavor to lower the voltage and synthesize stable materials, the use of tandem structures is an alternative, which can effectively prolong the lifetime.130 Besides, since OLEDs are sensitive to moisture and oxygen, the devices without isolating from the environment by encapsulation are easily degraded, an advanced encapsulation technique can be used to enhance the lifetime, toward obtaining ideal encapsulating barriers (10−6 g m−2 day−1), such as using multilayers fabricated by Al2O3 and rapid SiO2 atomic layer deposition and organic–inorganic multilayer structures.131
In terms of cost, it is still not perfect for mass production. Compared with the liquid crystal displays, the cost of OLED displays is relatively high (>150%). In particular, for the large-scale displays, the product yield of LCD is >90%, while the yield of OLED displays is usually <30%, further increasing the cost. For lighting applications, the OLED market can be 14 billion dollars in 2020 according to the prediction of DisplaySearch.32 However, the price should be <20 $ per m2 in order to satisfy the demand of consumers. For hybrid WOLEDs, since it is challenging to simultaneously realize high performance and simple structure, the doping-free technology may be conducive. Besides, by using solution processing instead of vacuum evaporation technology, the cost can also be promisingly reduced, although it is not easy to achieve high-performance solution-processed hybrid WOLEDs. In addition, novel fabrication approaches, low-cost yet efficient materials and simple structures are deserved to be considered. With the endeavor of academic and industrial researchers to enhance the materials design and device engineering, we believe that hybrid WOLEDs can play a significant role in the marketplace in the near future, which is beneficial to our human society.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Key Basic Research and Development Program of China (973 program, Grant No. 2015CB655004), the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant No. 61401156, U1601651 and U1301243), the Pearl River S&T Nova Program of Guangzhou (No. 201710010066, 201610010052, 201506010015), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (2017MS008) and the Tiptop Scientific and Technical Innovative Youth Talents of Guangdong Special Support Program (No. 2015TQ01C777, 2016TQ03C331).
References
C. W. Tang and V. A. VanSlyke, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1987, 51, 913 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Burroughes, D. D. C. Bradley, A. R. Brown, R. N. Marks, K. Mackay, R. H. Friend, P. L. Burns and A. B. Homes, Nature, 1990, 347, 539 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Baldo, D. F. O'brien, Y. You, A. Shoustikov, S. Sibley, M. E. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 1998, 395, 151 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. Helander, Z. B. Wang, J. Qiu, M. T. Greiner, D. P. Puzzo, Z. W. Liu and Z. H. Lu, Science, 2011, 332, 944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kido, K. Hongawa, K. Okuyama and K. Nagai, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 64, 815 CrossRef CAS .
J. Kido, M. Kimura and K. Nagai, Science, 1995, 267, 1332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sasabe and J. Kido, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 1699 RSC .
S. Chen, Q. Qu, M. Kong, X. Zhao, Z. Yu, P. Jia and W. Huang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 3508 RSC .
J.-H. Jou, S. Kumar, A. Agrawal, T. Li and S. Sahoo, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 2974 RSC .
Q. Wang and D. Ma, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2387 RSC .
S. J. Su, E. Gonmori, H. Sasabe and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4189 CAS .
H. Sasabe, J. Takamatsu, T. Motoyama, S. Watanabe, G. Wagenblast, N. Langer, O. Molt, E. Fuchs, C. Lennartz and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. T. Kamtekar, A. P. Monkman and M. R. Bryce, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Pan, B. Wang, Y. Wang, P. Xu, L. Wang, J. Chen and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2466 RSC .
L. Yu, J. Liu, S. Hu, R. He, W. Yang, H. Wu, J. Peng, R. Xia and D. D. C. Bradley, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4366 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, Y. Shi, Y. Zhao, Y. Meng and W. Hu, Displays, 2008, 29, 327 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-C. Chang, K.-C. Tang, H.-A. Pan, S.-H. Liu, I. O. Koshevoy, A. J. Karttunen, W.-Y. Hung, M.-H. Cheng and P.-T. Chou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 9623 CAS .
Y. Li, W. Zhang, L. Zhang, X. Wen, Y. Yin, S. Liu, W. Xie, H. Zhao and S. Tao, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 3201 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Chang, C. C. Chen, C. C. Wu, S. Y. Chang, J. Y. Hung and Y. Chi, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 266 CrossRef CAS .
F. So and D. Kondakov, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Fleetham, H. Liang and J. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 6066 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, L. Wang, M. Xu, H. Tao, X. Xia, J. Zou, Y. Su, D. Gao, L. Lan and J. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 5870 RSC .
M. C. Gather, A. Kohenen and K. Meerholz, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Reineke, F. Lindner, G. Schwartz, N. Sidler, K. Walzer, B. Lussem and K. Leo, Nature, 2009, 459, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Duan, D. Zhang, K. Wu, X. Huang, L. Wang and Y. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3540 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Jou, M.-H. Wu, S.-M. Shen, H.-C. Wang, S.-Z. Chen, S.-H. Chen, C.-R. Lin and Y.-L. Hesieh, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2009, 95, 013307 CrossRef .
J.-H. Jou, S.-M. Shen, C.-R. Lin, Y.-S. Wang, Y.-C. Chou, S.-Z. Chen and Y.-C. Jou, Org. Electron., 2011, 12, 865 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Jou, C.-Y. Hsieh, J.-R. Tseng, S.-H. Peng, Y.-C. Jou, J. H. Hong, S.-M. Shen, M.-C. Tang, P.-C. Chen and C.-H. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 2750 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiong, W. Zhu, N. Wei, J. Li, W. Sun, X. Wu, J. Cao and Z. Wang, Org. Electron., 2013, 14, 32 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, L. Wang, D. Gao, M. Xu, X. Zhu, J. Zou, L. Lan, H. Ning, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 536 RSC .
J. Chen, F. Zhao and D. Ma, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 175 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, D. Gao, J. Wang, X. Wang, J. Zou, H. Ning and J. Peng, Acta Phys.-Chim. Sin., 2015, 31, 1823 CAS .
E. Mondal, W. Y. Hung, H. C. Dai and K. T. Wong, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3096 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Son, Y. J. Kim, M. J. Park, H. Oh, J. S. Park, J. H. Yang, M. C. Suh and J. H. Kwon, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2013, 1, 5008 RSC .
C.-L. Liu, C.-J. Zheng, X.-K. Liu, Z. Chen, J. P. Yang, F. Li, X.-M. Ou and X.-H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 1068 RSC .
B. Liu, M. Xu, H. Tao, L. Ying, J. Zou, H. Wu and J. Peng, J. Lumin., 2013, 142, 35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, N. Giebink, H. Kanno, B. Ma, M. Thompson and S. R. Forrest, Nature, 2006, 440, 908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, C. L. Ho, Y. Zhao, D. Ma, W. Y. Wong and L. Wang, Org. Electron., 2010, 11, 238 CrossRef CAS .
H. You and D. Ma, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2008, 41, 155113 CrossRef .
B. Liu, L. Wang, M. Xu, H. Tao, J. Zou, D. Gao, L. Lan, H. Ning, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7198 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Li, G. Cheng, Y. Zhao, J. Feng, S. Liu, M. Zhang, Y. Ma and J. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 4716 CrossRef CAS .
C. Che, S. Chan, H. Xiang, M. C. W. Chan, Y. Liu and Y. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1484–1485 RSC .
D. Qin and Y. Tao, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 86, 113507 CrossRef .
W. Xie, Y. Zhao, C. Li and S. Liu, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2005, 20, 326 CrossRef CAS .
J. F. Li, S. F. Chen, S. H. Su, K. S. Hwang and M. Yokoyama, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2006, 153, H195 CrossRef CAS .
N. Sun, Q. Wang, Y. Zhao, D. Yang, F. Zhao, J. Chen and D. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 7494 RSC .
N. Sun, Y. Zhao, F. Zhao, Y. Chen, D. Yang, J. Chen and D. Ma, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 013303 CrossRef .
X.-L. Li, X. Ouyang, D. Chen, X. Cai, M. Liu, Z. Ge, Y. Cao and S.-J. Su, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 124001 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-L. Li, X. Ouyang, M. Liu, Z. Ge, J. Peng, Y. Cao and S.-J. Su, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 9233 RSC .
X. Ouyang, X.-L. Li, Y. Bai, D. Mi, Z. Ge and S.-J. Su, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 32298 RSC .
B. Liu, M. Xu, L. Wang, X. Yan, H. Tao, Y. Su, D. Gao, L. Lan, J. Zou and J. Peng, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 926 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, H. Tao, Y. Su, D. Gao, L. Lan, J. Zou and J. Peng, Chin. Phys. B, 2013, 22, 077303 CrossRef .
B. Liu, M. Xu, L. Wang, Y. Su, D. Gao, H. Tao, L. Lan, J. Zou and J. Peng, Appl. Phys. Express, 2013, 6, 122101 CrossRef .
L. Wang, G. T. Lei and X. H. Yi, Prog. Chem., 2008, 20, 1050 CAS .
S. Hofmann, M. Furno, B. Lussem, K. Leo and M. C. Gather, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2013, 210, 1467 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, X. Yang, W. Y. Wong, Q. Wang, S. Suo, D. Ma, J. Feng and L. Wang, ChemPhysChem, 2011, 12, 2836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang, S.-J. He, D.-K. Wang, N. Jiang and Z.-H. Lu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 20517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, J. Zou, Z. Zhou, L. Wang, M. Xu, H. Tao, D. Gao, L. Lan, H. Ning and J. Peng, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 30, 85 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, M. Xu, H. Tao, Y. Su, D. Gao, J. Zou, L. Lan and J. Peng, Chin. Sci. Bull., 2014, 59, 3090 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, M. Xu, L. Wang, H. Tao, Y. Su, D. Gao, L. Lan, J. Zou and J. Peng, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2014, 8, 719 CrossRef CAS .
A. Poloek, C.-T. Chen and C.-T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 1376 RSC .
A. Poloek, C.-W. Lin, C.-T. Chen and C.-T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 10343 RSC .
B. Liu, M. Xu, L. Wang, J. Zou, H. Tao, Y. Su, D. Gao, H. Ning, L. Lan and J. Peng, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2616 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schwartz, S. Reineke, T. C. Rosenow, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 1319 CrossRef CAS .
P. Chen, W. Xie, J. Li, T. Guan, Y. Duan, Y. Zhao, S. Liu, C. Ma, L. Zhang and B. Li, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 023505 CrossRef .
L. Zhang, Y. Hua, X. Wu, Y. Wang and S. Yin, Chin. Phys. B, 2008, 17, 3097 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Ho, W.-Y. Wong, Q. Wang, D. Ma, L. Wang and Z. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 928 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, G. Tan, W.-Y. Wong and H.-S. Kwok, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 3785 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Peng, P. Chen, J. Sun and F. Li, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 3040 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, J. Zou, Y. Su, D. Gao, L. Lan, H. Tao and J. Peng, J. Lumin., 2014, 151, 161 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Tse, K. C. Kwok and S. K. So, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 262102 CrossRef .
S. W. Liu, Y. Divayana, A. P. Abiyasa, S. T. Tan, H. V. Demir and X. W. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 093301 CrossRef .
B. P. Yan, C. C. C. Cheung, S. C. F. Kui, H. F. Xiang, V. A. L. Roy, S. J. Xu and C. M. Che, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3599 CrossRef CAS .
D.-S. Leem, J. W. Kim, S. O. Jung, S.-O. Kim, S. H. Kim, K. Y. Kim, Y.-H. Kim, S.-K. Kwon and J.-J. Kim, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2010, 43, 405102 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, N. Sun, H. Zhang, J. Chen and D. Ma, J. Appl. Phys., 2012, 112, 084504 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, Y. Dai, J. Chen and D. Ma, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 1049 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, Y. Chen, Q. Wang and D. Ma, Sci. Sin.: Chim., 2013, 43, 398 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schwartz, T. H. Ke, C. C. Wu, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 073304 CrossRef .
G. Schwartz, S. Reineke, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 053311 CrossRef .
S. Reineke, M. Thomschke, B. Lussem and K. Leo, Rev. Mod. Phys., 2013, 85, 1245 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, Y. Hua, X. Wu, L. Zhang, Q. Hou, N. Zhang, L. Ma, X. Cheng and S. Yin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 113302 CrossRef .
K. S. Yook, S. O. Jeon, C. W. Joo and J. Y. Lee, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2009, 15, 420 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, L. Wang, J. Zou, H. Tao, Y. Su, D. Gao, M. Xu, L. Lan and J. Peng, Synth. Met., 2013, 184, 5 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, M. Xu, L. Wang, H. Tao, Y. Su, D. Gao, J. Zou, L. Lan and J. Peng, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2013, 2, R258 CrossRef CAS .
G. Schwartz, K. Fehse, M. Pfeiffer, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2006, 89, 083509 CrossRef .
B. Liu, H. Nie, X. Zhou, S. Hu, D. Luo, D. Gao, J. Zou, M. Xu, L. Wang, Z. Zhao, A. Qin, J. Peng, H. Ning, Y. Cao and B. Z. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 776 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Z. Xu, J. Zou, H. Tao, M. Xu, D. Gao, L. Lan, L. Wang, H. Ning and J. Peng, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2015, 27, 240 CrossRef CAS .
C.-L. Ho, M. F. Lin, W.-Y. Wong, W. K. Wong and C. H. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 083301 CrossRef .
Z. Y. Xia, J. H. Su, C. S. Chang and C. H. Chen, J. Lumin., 2013, 135, 323 CrossRef CAS .
D. Luo, Y. Yang, Y. Xiao, Y. Zhao, Y. Yang and B. Liu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2017, 9, 37 CrossRef .
B. Liu, M. Xu, L. Wang, H. Tao, Y. Su, D. Gao, L. Lan, J. Zou and J. Peng, Nano-Micro Lett., 2014, 6, 335 CrossRef .
M. V. M. Rao, Y. K. Su, T. S. Huang and Y. C. Chen, Nano-Micro Lett., 2010, 2, 242 CrossRef CAS .
X. Du, S. Tao, Y. Huang, X. Yang, X. Ding and X. Zhang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 183304 CrossRef .
N. Sun, Q. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Chen, D. Yang, F. Zhao, J. Chen and D. Ma, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 1617 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, S. Tao, M. Chen, H. W. Mo, T. W. Ng, X. Liu, X. Zhang, W. Zhao and C. S. Lee, Dyes Pigm., 2013, 97, 273 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, Y. Yin, W. Liu, W. Zhang, L. Zhang, W. Xie and H. Zhao, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 2817 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, Z. Chen, C.-J. Zheng, X.-K. Liu, K. Wang, F. Li, Y.-P. Dong, X.-M. Ou and X.-H. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 8817 RSC .
G. Schwartz, M. Pferffer, S. Reineke, K. Walzer and K. Leo, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3672 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, L. Wang, Y. Gao, J. Zou, H. Ning, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Light: Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16137 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, F. Zhao, Y. Zhao, J. Chen and D. Ma, Org. Electron., 2012, 13, 2807 CrossRef CAS .
C.-J. Zheng, J. Wang, J. Ye, M.-F. Lo, X.-K. Liu, M.-K. Fung, X.-H. Zhang and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-Y. Hung, L.-C. Chi, W.-J. Chen, Y.-M. Chen, S.-H. Chou and K.-T. Wong, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 10113 RSC .
T. Peng, Y. Yang, H. Bi, Y. Liu, Z. Hou and Y. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3551 RSC .
J. Ye, C.-J. Zheng, X.-M. Ou, X.-H. Zhang, M.-K. Fung and C.-S. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, D. Luo, J. Zou, D. Gao, H. Ning, L. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 6359 RSC .
H. Uoyama, K. Goushi, K. Shizu, H. Nomura and C. Adachi, Nature, 2012, 492, 234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, D. Tsang, H. Kuwabara, Y. Hatae, B. Li, T. Takahashi, S. Y. Lee, T. Yasuda and C. Adachi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2096 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Nishimoto, T. Yasuda, S. Y. Lee, R. Kondo and C. Adachi, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 264 RSC .
H. Wang, L. Meng, X. Shen, X. Wei, X. Zheng, X. Lv, Y. Yi, Y. Wang and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-L. Li, G. Xie, M. Liu, D. Chen, X. Cai, J. Peng, Y. Cao and S.-J. Su, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kim and J. Y. Lee, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 24, 3970 CrossRef .
B. S. Kim, K. S. Yook and J. Y. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6019 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Cho, K. S. Yook and J. Y. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Song and J. Y. Lee, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2015, 48, 365106 CrossRef .
Z. Wu, J. Luo, N. Sun, L. Zhu, H. Sun, L. Yu, D. Yang, X. Qiao, C. Yang and D. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3306 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, L. Duan, Y. Zhang, M. Cai, D. Zhang and Y. Qiu, Light: Sci. Appl., 2015, 4, e232 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhang, L. Duan, Y. Li, D. Zhang and Y. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8191 RSC .
Q. Wang, I. W. H. Oswald, X. Yang, G. Zhou, H. Jia, Q. Qiao, Y. Chen, J. H. Halbert and B. E. Gnade, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, I. W. H. Oswald, M. R. Perez, H. Jia, B. E. Gnade and M. A. Omary, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 5420 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, I. W. H. Oswald, M. R. Perez, H. Jia, A. A. Shahub, Q. Qiao, B. E. Gnade and M. A. Omary, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 4746 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, J. Chen and D. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 965 CAS .
D. Luo, Y. Xiao, M. Hao, Y. Zhao, Y. Yang, Y. Gao and B. Liu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2017, 110, 061105 CrossRef .
K. Xue, R. Sheng, Y. Duan, P. Chen, B. Chen, X. Wang, Y. Duan and Y. Zhao, Org. Electron., 2015, 26, 451 CrossRef CAS .
K. Xue, G. Han, Y. Duan, P. Chen, Y. Yang, D. Yang, Y. Duan, X. Wang and Y. Zhao, Org. Electron., 2015, 18, 84 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, J. Yu, H. Cao, L. Zhang, H. Sun and W. Xie, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6754 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Liu, H. Tao, L. Wang, D. Gao, W. Liu, J. Zou, M. Xu, H. Ning, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 26 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohno, Proc. SPIE, 2004, 5530, 88 CrossRef .
K. Saxena, V. K. Jain and D. S. Mehta, Opt. Mater., 2009, 32, 221 CrossRef CAS .
Q. D. Ou, L. Zhou, Y. Q. Li, S. Chen, J. D. Chen, C. Li, Q. K. Wang, S. T. Lee and J. X. Tang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7249 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, Y. Sun, H. Chen, F.-S. Zu, Z.-K. Wang and L.-S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 10403 RSC .
B. Liu, L. Wang, M. Xu, H. Tao, D. Gao, J. Zou, L. Lan, H. Ning, J. Peng and Y. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 9836 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Baiquan Liu
	Baiquan Liu received his BS degree in Electronics Science and Technology from the Shaanxi University of Science and Technology in 2011, his PhD degree from Materials Physics and Chemistry at South China University of Technology in 2016. Now, he is working at Nanyang Technological University. He has published more than 40 research papers and applied more than 10 patents. His current scientific interest is focused on the physics and chemistry of organic light-emitting diodes and quantum-dot light-emitting diodes.

Xiang-Long Li
	Xiang-Long Li is a PhD student at the State Key Laboratory of Luminescent Materials, South China University of Technology under the supervision of Prof. Shi-Jian Su. His current research interests mainly focus on blue fluorescent and white organic light-emitting devices.

Jianhua Zou
	Jianhua Zou is currently an Associate Professor (2013) in the School of Material Science and Engineering at South China University of Technology (SCUT). He received his Bachelor's degree in Materials Physics from North East University (China) in 2005, and his PhD degree from the Physics Department at SCUT in 2010. His current research interests include Organic electronics and optoelectronics, including LEDs, thin film transistors and solar cell devices. He has also published more than 50 papers on high-impact journals in these topics.

Junbiao Peng
	Junbiao Peng received a BS degree in physics at Jilin University in 1984 and MS and PhD degrees respectively in 1987 and 1993 in Changchun Institute of Physics (CIP), Chinese Academy of Sciences. In the subsequent years, he did his postdoc work in the Korea Institute of Science and Technology and the National Institute of Materials and Chemical Research (NIMC), Japan. In 2001, he joined the Institute of Polymer Optoelectronic Materials and Devices, South China University of Technology, as a full professor. His current research interests include design, characterization, and application of organic optoelectronic devices such as OLEDs, OPVs and TFTs.

Yong Cao
	Yong Cao, physical chemist, is a Professor of South China University of Technology since 1999. He received his BS from the Department of Chemistry, Leningrad (now St Petersburg) University and his PhD degree from Tokyo University, Japan. He was a visiting senior researcher at the University of California, Santa Barbara from 1988 to 1990 and a senior scientist of UNIAX Corporation from 1990 to 1998. His current research interests include polymer optoelectronic materials and devices.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Device structure and efficiency of WOLEDs. (b) Diagrams of electroluminescence processes in devices. Reproduced from ref. 37.	 

 	Fig. 2  Device architecture of the presented WOLEDs and chemical structures of emitters. Reproduced from ref. 73.	 

 	Fig. 3  Device architecture of the presented WOLEDs and chemical structures of the emitters and interlayer materials. Reproduced from ref. 85.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms of the hybrid WOLEDs. The effect of the interlayer in the WOLED with the codoping ratio of TAPC:TmPyPB = 1:0 (a), 0.8:0.2 (b) and 0.5:0.5 (c). The charge trapping procedure in the phosphorescent EML (d). Reproduced from ref. 86.	 

 	Fig. 5  Top: Schematic layer structure of the WOLED and the chemical structure of emissive dopants. Bottom: Proposed energy-level diagram. Reproduced from ref. 87.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Device architecture of the WOLED, chemical structures of the interlayers, and the energy level diagram. (b) Lifetime of the device. Reproduced from ref. 40.	 

 	Fig. 7  Device architecture of the WOLEDs, the energy level diagrams and the electroluminescent processes. The gray filled rectangle represents the main exciton generation zone. R, G, B, and m represents Ir(MDQ)2(acac), Ir(ppy)2(acac), 4P-NPD, and TmPyPB, respectively. Solid lines and dashed lines correspond to HOMO and LUMO energy levels, respectively; circles and diamonds refer to the exciton (S0, S1, and T1) energies, respectively. S0 is the ground state. Reproduced from ref. 94.	 

 	Fig. 8  Device architecture of the WOLEDs, the energy level diagrams and the electroluminescence processes. Reproduced from ref. 98.	 

 	Fig. 9  Top: The structure of the WOLEDs and schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms. The sky-blue filled region is the main exciton generation zone. Bottom: Chemical structures of emitters. Reproduced from ref. 99.	 

 	Fig. 10  The decay ways of the singlet and triplet excitons on host molecules at different doping concentrations in the EML. Reproduced from ref. 104.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms. (a) The diffusion lengths of singlets and triplets. (b) Excitons decay in single-EML hybrid WOLEDs with low concentrations. (c) Excitons decay in hybrid WOLEDs with high concentrations. (d) The direct charge trapping process in hybrid WOLEDs with high concentrations. Reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagrams of the working mechanisms. The gray filled rectangle represents the main exciton generation zone. PF is the prompt fluorescence while DF is the delayed fluorescence. RISC indicates the reverse ISC, and ET denotes the energy transfer. Reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Schematic diagrams of the emission mechanisms of doping-free hybrid WOLEDs. The gray filled rectangles are the main exciton generation zones. Charge transport in W21 (a) and W22 (b). Excitons decay in W21 (c) and W22 (d). IL is the interlayer, P-EML is the phosphorescent EML, F-EML is the fluorescent EML. Reproduced from ref. 126.	 



Ref. 37
	—/—	18.7/—	—/—	37.6/—	(0.40, 0.41)	85

Ref. 40
	2.8/—	—/—	20.6/19.0	20.9/11.9	(0.277, 0.354)	73

Ref. 73
	3.9/8.5	11/7.3	23/—	12/6.0	(0.323, 0.366)	88
3.8/7.4	11.8/4.2	26.4/—	18.4/3.7	(0.30, 0.32)	73

Ref. 85
	—/∼3.4	—/8.0	—/∼15	—/13.7	(0.47, 0.42)	85

Ref. 86
	—/—	—/—	70.2/—	43.4/—	(0.44, 0.50)	46

Ref. 87
	2.95/4.45	—/—	29.8/—	20.9/—	(0.337, 0.440)	85

Ref. 94
	3.1/—	32.3/28.9	76.8/68.9	70.9/58.3	(0.43, 0.43)	83

Ref. 98
	∼2.5/3.46	—/16.1	—/—	—/37.5	(0.44, 0.47)	86

Ref. 99
	2.4/3.1	—/—	84.5/—	106.3/65.1	(0.43, 0.48)	47

Ref. 104
	2.4/—	26.6/21.2	53.5/42.6	67.2/33.5	(0.46, 0.44)	—

Ref. 105
	2.4/3.45	—/—	51.9/—	65.3/18.2	(0.39, 0.42)	77

Ref. 117
	—/—	38.4/26.2	—/—	80.1/37.5	(0.45, 0.48)	—

Ref. 126
	2.5/—	11.6/—	32.5/—	39.3/18.2	(0.42, 0.48)	—

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
