Offshore renewable energy resources and their potential in a green hydrogen supply chain through power-to-gas  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8SE00544C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8SE00544C
(Paper)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1468-1489Offshore renewable energy resources and their potential in a green hydrogen supply chain through power-to-gas

        
          
            Irfan Ahmad 
            Gondal
          
        
      *
      US-Pakistan Centre for Advanced Studies in Energy, National University of Sciences & Technology, Islamabad, Pakistan. E-mail: irfan@uspcase.nust.edu.pk
Received 
      6th November 2018
    , Accepted 24th March 2019First published on 26th March 2019AbstractOffshore renewable energy resources have great potential to contribute to the global energy supply chain; however the LCOE of offshore power is still higher as compared to conventional power generation. With a growing interest in offshore resources and considering the capacity of offshore renewable resources, they are anticipated to contribute a larger share of electric power in the next decade. The existing dispatch of offshore wind electricity through offshore substation and sub-sea cables increases the cost of offshore electricity manifold. The offshore wind electricity can be dispatched by conversion into hydrogen and transportation through existing offshore gas pipeline infrastructure. The study presents a novel idea of performing the methanation process entirely offshore by utilizing CCS in conjunction with electrolysis. A proposal of an artificial island that hosts the complete offshore power-to-gas is also presented. It has been found that the proposed arrangement can handle the offshore generated energy seamlessly and transport it to onshore demand centers through traditional natural gas pipeline infrastructure.
1. Introduction
The potential of various off-shore and onshore renewable energy resources is astounding; however a great disparity exists in the realization of offshore potential in comparison with onshore resources. According to the 2018 Global Renewable Energy report 2018, the share of renewable resources (for the year 2016) in the total final energy consumption is still only 10.4% (including hydel energy), while the so-called modern renewables that include wind, solar, geothermal, biomass and ocean resources together contribute merely 1.7%, as shown in Fig. 1.1 Thus even if all the modern renewables are considered to contribute equally (which is not a valid estimation considering that wind, biomass and solar resources have gained extensive penetration in recent years), the contribution to offshore renewable energy is best estimated at 0.4% (of total final energy consumption). Considerable literature exists on the potential of the various forms of offshore energy resources and hence would be touched briefly in the ensuing writing about their current status.
 Fig. 1  Share of renewable energy in the total final energy consumption for 2016.1 
1.1. Offshore energy resources
Onshore wind energy has seen considerable growth in recent years reaching a total power generation of 539 GW against 18.8 GW from off-shore wind energy resources;1 however the added advantage for off-shore wind energy as compared to on-shore wind is its higher speed and consistency resulting in higher power production. The variation in off-shore wind energy is relatively less and considering the expansiveness of oceans, a lot of space is available for installation of off-shore wind farms.2,3 The advent of floating wind turbines has further enhanced the potential given their ease of installation at the most feasible locations with the highest consistency and speed.
The literature contains a number of assessment methods for determining the off-shore wind energy potential. Table 1 summarizes the offshore potential of the more recent significant studies in this regard.
Table 1 Offshore wind potentials in the literature




Study
Offshore wind potential (MW km−2)




NREL4
5.00


Lu et al.5
5.84


Archer et al.6
9.00


Dupont et al.7
6.40


Bosch et al.8
3.14




The year 2017 has seen a drop in off-shore wind costs mainly due to technology modernization, up scaling of wind turbines, prospects of steady innovation in technology, and decreased costs of financing because of lower risk, in addition to the healthy competition amid the wind industry.1
In recent years, wind turbines increased in size. Larger machines imply greater hub height, with larger rotor size and longer blades. As turbines grow in size, the requirement of auxiliary equipment such as foundations, cables, converters and other accessories is reduced for an equivalent output. The rotor diameters have increased in size from 127 m in 2012 to 164 min 2017. Recent developments include an unveiling of a new platform for 6 MW offshore turbines by Goldwind.9 Similarly Vestas Offshore Wind has launched an upgraded model of its 8 MW turbine that is able to provide 9 MW rated power.10 A German firm namely Senvion has announced plans for a 10 MW turbine while GE has planned an investment of USD 400 million to develop a 12 MW wind turbine.11
Offshore wind farms (OWFs) have gradually moved to farther distances from shores and deeper waters reaching 43.5 km and 29.2 metres respectively.12 As off-shore wind turbines are moving to deeper waters and consequently to farther distances from the shore, the sustainability of OWFs implies a shift from fixed foundations to floating supporting structures.13
The arrival of floating turbines has opened a vast new field for the establishment of distant off-shore wind farms that can take advantage of the higher wind power density available in deep waters.
In 2017, the levelized cost of energy (LCOE) for onshore wind was recorded at a minimum level of US $30 MW h−1 while the world average was recorded at US $60 MW h−1.1 In comparison, the offshore wind power which is still considered to be in early stages of development has a LCOE at US $140 MW h−1. A WindEurope14 report has forecasted a declining trend of LCOE for off-shore projects suggesting a reduction of up to 25–30% by the year 2030.
In regard to tidal energy, one estimate of the total global tidal resource is 3.7 TW, out of which 1 TW is technically exploitable.15 Tidal energy has higher energy density as compared to off-shore wind energy. Moreover tides are relatively predictable in relation to offshore wind; hence tidal energy is more deterministic.16 Tidal energy is however largely location dependent for the tidal range or the tidal current speed and is not feasible to be extracted at all locations.
Tidal stream energy, much like off-shore wind farms, is moving towards arrayed installations, and it is anticipated that with the current pace of development tidal stream energy may be able to achieve economic competitiveness by 2050.17 76% of all R&D efforts in tidal energy are directed towards horizontal axis turbines.18
Wave energy is also a significant offshore resource. Waves contain enormous hydrokinetic energy and are a potential source of unending renewable energy. The harvesting of wave energy is dependent on a number of important wave characteristics including the wave energy period and wave height. Theoretically wave energy potential is assessed at 32 PW h per year, which is almost double the worldwide electricity supply for the year 2008 i.e. 17 PW h per year.19 The mid to high latitudes of northern and southern hemispheres carry the most abundant wave energy.
Wave energy has a number of advantages that put it ahead of other marine energy resources in the following ways:20
-Highest energy density in comparison with other offshore energy resources.
-Persistent availability.
-Concentrated at specific locations.
Despite the advantages, the biggest challenge remains the development of an efficient device with the highest wave power take-off. A number of studies have estimated the global wave power source with different assessment parameters and methods. One study that took into account the mean direction of sea-state propagation, excluding ice sheets and low-energy level areas, arrived at a value of 15270 TW h per year.21 Another study that disregarded the direction of the sea state estimated the global wave potential at 3167 GW.22
Although the installed capacity of wave energy projects is not very significant in relation to other marine renewable energy resources, the forthcoming projects are very encouraging. In Belgium, 20 MW of wave energy projects have materialized out of the planned 838 MW. The projects under development in Sweden and Ghana are projected to deliver 9.5 MW and 14 MW respectively.
The type of wave energy converter to be employed is dependent upon the local bathymetry, geographical considerations, technical maturity, the wave energy level and consumer demands. Table 2 draws a comparison of the range of power output from various types of wave energy converters.
Table 2 Power output range for different WECs




Type
Power output range




Wave attenuators
200 kW to 2.5 MW23


Point absorbers
20 kW to 6 MW24


Oscillating water columns
300 kW to 1 MW25


Overtopping device
4–11 MW26




As far as funding is concerned, 40% of the R&D funds are being spent on point absorbers while 23% on attenuators and 19% on oscillating wave surge type wave energy converters.27 The immaturity of wave energy technologies is because of this multi-focus approach that has split the R&D effort on various device types rather than concentrating on a single device.
1.2. Co-located ocean energy technologies
Also known as hybrid ocean energy, it stems from the concept of harnessing ocean energy from two different resources: most commonly offshore wind and wave energy. The idea is to have an integrated platform that supports a wind turbine on the top and its subsea component houses the wave energy converter. The arrangement saves upon the dual installation, operational and maintenance expenditures while increasing the overall energy output. A schematic of the combined wind-wave hybrid system is shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Combined offshore wind wave energy system. 
Co-located hybrid power generation systems exhibit bright prospects for the production of affordable renewable energy. However, the modeling of these wave-wind energy systems is challenging because of the strong interactions with forces induced by both wind and wave energy.28
The theoretical potential of offshore energies is of the TW scale; however it has been seen in the preceding writing that only offshore wind can be considered as a commercially mature technology feasible to be considered for any future energy supply chain. Wave energy and tidal energy would reach the technology readiness level respectively; however the downstream energy supply chain as developed for offshore wind can be replicated for wave and tidal energy as well.
The published literature indicates that offshore renewable energy resources are likely to play a major role in future green energy supply chains.29,30 Irrespective of the offshore energy harvesting technology employed, all offshore energy devices are deployed in arrayed formations resulting in wind/tidal/wave farms. Furthermore as previously mentioned, higher extraction of energy requires deployment of these farms farther from the shore and in deeper waters. As the distance of the farms from the shore increases, logistical issues arise and consequently the cost of energy extraction increases. Among other infrastructural issues, the economical dispatch of generated electric power to onshore demand centers is one that is addressed in this study.
2. Dispatch of offshore energy
In the current scenario, electricity generated by offshore resources, mainly wind farms, is dispatched in the form of electric current to onshore consumers through a complex transmission system. The power generated by wind turbines is dispatched to an offshore substation through a network of medium voltage (MV) cables bringing power from each individual turbine. A number of issues arise as wind farms grow in size and number; and as wind farms move in deeper waters to farther distances from the shore. The offshore substation steps up the voltage to the transmission level in order to transmit the entire power to the onshore substation. The size of the cable has to be selected carefully because the cable size limits the current carrying capacity31 and is also a determinant of the cost of the offshore electrical infrastructure. The locations of the substation and investment in electrical systems are hence the more significant issues involved in the conventional dispatch of offshore electricity. Moreover the investment for the establishment of offshore wind farms is large; however 15% of the total costs are attributed to the electrical system.32
The offshore conversion of wind energy to hydrogen is considered as one of the feasible alternatives, if a sustainable demand for hydrogen grows in those regions that have a significant number of installed and planned offshore wind farms. This is because of two main reasons:
-Considerably lower investment costs for pipelines to the coast compared to electricity cables.33
-The existing oil and gas infrastructure in many areas of the world such as empty gas reservoirs, platforms and pipelines can possibly be reused for conversion, transport and storage of hydrogen generated from offshore renewable energy.
As many as 600 oil and gas installations are scheduled to be decommissioned in the North Sea only.34 In addition there are approximately 10000 km of offshore pipelines, nearly 5000 wells and several buildups of drill cuttings. Thus opportunity exists for the transportation of offshore wind electricity in a medium (oil/gas) feasible for transport through existing gas pipelines, hydrogen gas being the most likely candidate in this regard.
In parallel therefore, a need also arises to assess the current and projected demand for hydrogen that can provide another justification for the conversion of offshore wind electricity into hydrogen or a product thereof. A number of studies conclude that hydrogen would be the replacement fuel in future for two reasons: one to mitigate the effects of climate change and secondly to substitute fossil fuels that are likely to cross the peak value by the midst of this century.35 One study forecasts that by 2050, petroleum would be replaced by hydrogen especially in the most populated countries i.e. China and India.36 Another study by the NREL37 projects the hydrogen demand to rise from a modest 1 MMT per year to 4 MMT per year in 2030 and by 2040 it is anticipated to reach 20 MMT per year. Europe's CertifHY program report38 suggests a demand of 1.7 million tons of hydrogen by 2030 in the European Union. The demand for hydrogen is thus likely to grow worldwide as environmental regulations get more stringent and the supplies of hydrocarbons diminish with depleting resources.
3. Aspects – offshore energy to hydrogen
The idea of a wind hydrogen system was one of the first among various renewable energy sources. A number of research studies have been carried out over the last two decades to assess the production of hydrogen from wind energy.39,40 Paynter et al.39 were the pioneers in suggesting that a combination of hydrogen and wind could lead to an innovative solution for the energy sector especially in areas that have good wind potential (at least 12 ms−1 wind speed) and are connected with an electrical grid.
The conversion of offshore energy resources into hydrogen is not a novel concept; however the subject has not been frequently discussed by many researchers until recently and in fact only a limited number of studies have been found on this subject. Most of the studies, prototypes and realized projects have taken place in the European Union with the Netherlands and Norway pioneering research in offshore production of hydrogen. At the national level Italy and Japan have also made some contributions to the field of offshore hydrogen production. Table 3 lists the published literature studies that have discussed the conversion of offshore energies into hydrogen over the past ten years i.e. 2008–2018. Taking advantage of the experience in onshore wind and successful operation of a good number of wind farms, offshore wind is noted to be the most progressive offshore hydrogen production technology. Only a handful studies are related to wave hydrogen production, while research in tidal energy conversion to hydrogen has been found to be almost negligible.
Table 3 Published literature regarding offshore energy conversion to hydrogen




Study
Type of study
Offshore resource
Offshore operations
Output
H2 storage
H2 transport




1. Offshore hydrogen production from wave energy. 2014 (ref. 41)
Practical
Wave energy
PEM electrolysis
1595 Nm3 H2 per Day
Lead batteries
Ships (barges)


Reverse osmosis


Compression plant


2. Conversion of excess wind energy into H2 for fuel cell application.42
Theoretical
Wind energy
Electrolysis
Excess 4.5 TWH can generate 80000 tons of H2 per year
20000 tons are anticipated with 2 options; geological storage, empty gas fields, salt caverns or LH2 containers
H2 pipelines and LH2 trucks


3. Hydrogen production from sea wave for alternative energy vehicles for public transport in Trapani (Italy).43
Theoretical
Wind energy
Electrolysis
106054 kg per year for 100% transport needs
Inside the buoy-point absorber
Not specified; wire or boat transport


Sea wave


4. An inertial system for the production of electricity and hydrogen from sea wave energy.44
Prototype
Sea wave
Electrolysis
1 kW
Onboard
Onboard


5. Hydrogen production with sea water electrolysis using Norwegian offshore wind energy potentials.45
Theoretical techno-economic assessment
Wind
SO and PEM electrolysis
PEM: 8023902 kg
Not specified
Ships or subsea pipelines


SO: 7903266 kg


6. Hydrogen production from renewables: marine and hydrokinetic energy systems.46
Theoretical
Hydrokinetic
Emission reduction
Not specified
Not specified
Not specified


7. Green H2 economy in North Netherlands.47
Analytical
Wind
Electrolysis
160000 tons by 2030
Thermally insulated storage as cryogenic gas
Electrical cables


H2 as a mixture in existing gas pipelines


Ships


Inland vessels


8. Renewable H2 production using sailing ships48
Practical/prototype
Wind propulsive ship power
On-ship electrolyser
1.5 kW
Onboard storage
Ships


9. Introduction to a liquefied hydrogen carrier for a pilot. Hydrogen Energy Supply Chain (HESC) project in Japan49
Practical
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not applicable
Not specified
Liquid H2 carrier


10. Preliminary design of a wind driven vessel dedicated to hydrogen production50
Prototype
Wind
Electrolysis
200 kW
Onboard
Ships


11. Hydrogen generating sailing ship: conceptual design and feasibility study51
Prototype
Wind/water turbines
Electrolysis
Not specified
Not specified
Methyl cyclohexane onboard reactor




One unique offshore hydrogen production concept presents a ship generating hydrogen while sailing. All studies have used electrolysers for the production of hydrogen from water electrolysis. It is pertinent to mention here that the majority of these studies do not specify the storage of produced hydrogen gas and its subsequent transmission from the offshore platform/facility to the onshore consumers. Storage and distribution of the energy vector (hydrogen in this case) in whichever form (gas/liquid) are two equally significant elements of any proposed future supply chain.
The conversion of offshore renewable energies and its subsequent conversion to hydrogen through electrolysers has been the main technique in all literature cited in Table 3. It can be seen from Table 3 that the prototypes developed in these studies indicate a laboratory scale production of hydrogen that can be scaled up to achieve economies of scale. Studies48,50,51 that propose a ship platform have onboard storage to store the generated hydrogen. In other studies the authors have suggested batteries,39 geologic storage,42 cryogenic storage tanks47 and liquefied hydrogen tanks.84 Apart from the studies presenting hydrogen generating ships,48,50,51 the other studies do not specifically discuss the transportation medium of the produced hydrogen. Kraaij et al.41 and Meier et al.44 have suggested the use of pipelines for the transportation of hydrogen onshore. Wijk46 has proposed to deliver the offshore energy through electrical cables or in the form of hydrogen to be transported as a mixture with natural gas in the existing NG pipeline infrastructure or in ship-boarded tanks.
3.1. Hydrogen – storage & transmission medium
Considering another aspect, the majority of published literature assessing alternatives to electric transmission of off-shore wind energy envisions hydrogen as the energy carrier for the storage and transmission of offshore energy. Table 4 lists the literature studies, published over the last decade 2008–2018, that discuss the conversion of offshore energy into transmission alternatives other than electrical power.
Table 4 Studies on storage of offshore energy




Study
Year




1. Economics of producing hydrogen as transportation fuel using offshore wind energy systems52
2008


2. Transmission alternatives for offshore electrical power53
2009


3. Renewable energy carriers: hydrogen or liquid air/nitrogen?54
2010


4. Current developments and future prospects of offshore wind and ocean energy55
2012


5. Conceptual design of ocean compressed air energy storage system56
2013


6. Energy storage against interconnection as a balancing mechanism for a 100% renewable UK electricity grid57
2014


7. Multiple regression analysis in the development of NiFe cells as energy storage solutions for intermittent power sources such as wind or solar58
2016


8. Optimizing investments in coupled offshore wind-electrolytic hydrogen storage systems in Denmark59
2017


9. Hydrogen generation by electrolysis and storage in salt caverns: potentials, economics and systems aspects with regard to the German energy transition60
2017


10. Re-energizing energy supply: electrolytically-produced hydrogen as a flexible energy storage medium and fuel for road transport61
2017


11. Modelling of a novel hydro-pneumatic accumulator for large-scale offshore energy storage applications62
2017




The majority of works considered in this study, listed in Table 4, favor the conversion of offshore energy into hydrogen for dispatch and use onshore. An earlier study carried out by Li et al.53 in 2010 has suggested the conversion of offshore energy into a physical vector i.e. nitrogen rather than a chemical vector i.e. hydrogen, till the time hydrogen production and fuel cells reach an economically competitive value. Similarly Lim et al.55 have drawn a comparison of ocean compressed air energy storage (OCEAS) and deep water electrolysis. The study concluded that due to the higher pressure at deep under water locations, the efficiency of electrolysis also increases. As a result of this enhanced efficiency of electrolysis, the overall energy storage process is also made more efficient. Since no compressor or generator is employed, an added advantage of deep water electrolysis is that the electricity consumption is only for electrolysis. In an OCAES system, compression is achieved by the conversion of electrical power to mechanical power. With an electrolysis process, hydrogen and oxygen are obtained by taking the electricity directly from the source and thereafter storing it. Another divergent study carried out by Posada et al.57 found that NiFe cells can store large amounts of energy; however they are far from achieving technological maturity in near future. Finally Buhagiar et al.61 have modeled a novel hydro-pneumatic accumulator that can facilitate offshore energy transmission. Both the latter studies58,62 demonstrate practicability; however a commercial implementation is unlikely to be realized in near future. Based on the above discussion, it is inferred that hydrogen is currently the most feasible energy carrier (derived from offshore energy resources) that can be transported and stored conveniently among the other alternatives presented here.
Table 5 MW-scale electrolyser specifications (Hylyzer-3000-30)




Parameter
Value




Output pressure
30 bar


Nominal hydrogen flow
3000 Nm3 h−1


Nominal input power
15 MW


AC power consumption
5–5.4 kW h Nm−3


Footprint
600 m2




It can be summarized here that as offshore electrical energy increases in scale, the offshore energy system would gradually become an offshore hydrogen supply system. Electrolysis would be the preferred hydrogen production method as suggested by Katherine.62 Large amounts of hydrogen have to be transported onshore to be integrated with the conventional energy supply chain. Although alternative means are under various stages of development, the existing offshore gas pipelines provide a feasible means of transportation of hydrogen over large distances. The writing hereafter discusses the conversion of offshore wind to hydrogen and its prospects in a power-to-gas scenario for transportation to onshore energy infrastructure.
3.2. Power-to-gas – a sustainable approach
The conversion of hydrogen into methane or methanol (power-to-gas/power-to-liquid) has three significant aspects that affect its large scale availability, transmission and distribution specifically in relation to the hydrogen economy. They are discussed as follows:

3.2.1. Availability. 
The transition to a hydrogen economy has long been debated as a chicken-and-egg problem63,64 meaning whereby that mass scale hydrogen production cannot be commenced unless a substantial demand for hydrogen exists. On the other hand, the demand for hydrogen is unlikely to rise with wide scale availability of hydrogen fuel. In this regard a classic example of hydrogen application is a hydrogen fuel cell vehicle (FCV). Customers would only buy FCVs when sufficient refueling stations are available while in contrast hydrogen refueling stations would only be established when enough FCVs are on roads that justify the investment cost of a refueling station.65 Studies have indicated that natural gas can act as a possible “bridge” fuel to the eventual use of hydrogen in FCVs.66–68 It can be well appreciated that natural gas pipeline infrastructure is well developed in all inhabited parts of the world and can assist in transition to a hydrogen economy.69 The power-to-gas technology is being seen as the means for making wide spread availability of low-carbon fuels. As methane, power-to-gas allows its continued use in CNG vehicles without the need for a changeover of the existing vehicles to FCVs; as hydrogen, power-to-gas also affords on-site hydrogen generation at the refueling stations.70 In such a situation the problem associated with the driving range of FCVs and the refueling stations in a transition scenario (of fuel shift-over from natural gas to SNG/hydrogen) is circumvented. The power-to-gas approach thus helps in making wide scale availability of low carbon fuels in any future energy infrastructure.


3.2.2. Infrastructure. 
Infrastructure represents a major component of any energy supply chain. Renewable energy resources are widely available; however their economical harvesting continues to be a challenge for the energy planners. Offshore renewable energy resources are in the terawatt range; however its delivery to the end user is economically uncompetitive as yet, in comparison with conventional fossil fuels.71 Currently offshore energy is converted into electricity and delivered through a complex electrical network including expensive cables whose cost is up to 15% of the entire project cost.32 As more and more offshore energy projects are developed, the infrastructural requirements become more complex resulting in a higher degree of complexity and thereby leading to an increased cost of energy for the consumer.72 Correspondingly, the conversion of offshore power into hydrogen is also an uneconomic option.73 Firstly, the process of hydrogen production is a power-intensive process taking place in the electrolysers. Onshore production of hydrogen from offshore power does not address the problem of the dispatch of offshore electric power. On the other hand, delivery of offshore produced hydrogen through a dedicated hydrogen pipeline infrastructure (to onshore consumers) is infeasible due to a number of material and energetic issues as encountered in the case of onshore hydrogen pipeline networks.74,97 Offshore energy resources especially offshore wind have the potential of becoming a significant extension of the existing infrastructure and transforming existing energy system configurations.75,76 Thus, in comparison to the construction of a complex offshore electric grid or an exclusive hydrogen pipeline infrastructure, power-to-gas technology allows the use of existing natural gas pipeline infrastructure for the transmission of offshore power to onshore consumers.


3.2.3. Economic. 
The transmission of offshore power in the form of synthetic natural gas in existing natural gas infrastructure is seemingly a feasible process in the light of the current study. Historically, all new technical developments are expensive at the outset; however with innovation and development the prototypes achieve commercial stature. Hydrogen fuel cell cars initially considered an expensive proposition in 1981 (ref. 77) eventually commenced production with the launch of Toyota MIRAI in 2012. The published literature contains several studies that investigate the economic feasibility of power-to-gas systems. The use of power-to-gas for transporting energy via pipelines has 4.5 times more energy transport capacity than high voltage transmission lines and has 4 times lower transmission losses (4% in T&D versus 1% in pipelines).78 The enhanced energy transmission capability and minimal losses result in substantial economic benefits. Techno-economic studies on power-to-gas systems indicate promising results with a clear indication of a significant share in future energy systems.79–81 As discussed in the preceding writing, the cost of laying down dedicated hydrogen pipelines is as much as 6–10%82 higher than conventional natural gas pipelines. The pipelines used to transport hydrogen must have a larger diameter than the current ones used for natural gas or an increased pressure to supply the same amount of energy. For the equal-energy capacity of the transport line, the total cost of a gas-pipeline for hydrogen is hence more than that for natural gas. Moreover, specialized compressors with a comparatively higher cost are required for hydrogen pipeline networks83 which is again a contributing factor to the high cost of hydrogen transportation. To top it all, the submarine conditions further multiply not only the material costs but also the operating and maintenance costs.84 It may be argued here that the same escalation costs are applicable to conventional sub-sea pipelines as well; however a dedicated hydrogen infrastructure would increase the cost of pipeline networks twofold owing to specialized infrastructural requirements as well as the cost increase due to subsea conditions.
As far as the transmission of offshore renewable energy in the form of electricity (to onshore consumers) is concerned, it has previously been mentioned that specialized cables and offshore substations increase the overall cost of electricity.32 In addition, as wind farms and other offshore renewable energy resources move into deeper waters and farther from the shore, the electric network becomes more complex. Other limitations include the cable sizing that limits the amount of electricity that can be transmitted. Hence an anticipated increase in the number of offshore wind farms should be backed with a robust transmission system, which although can be supported by an electrical network as well as a hydrogen pipeline network, the use of existing or natural gas pipeline networks is likely to reduce the overall cost of delivered energy.
In view of the above aspects of energy transmission in terms of availability, infrastructure and economic factors, the power-to-gas approach is considered a favorably feasible approach for the transmission of offshore energy to onshore demand centers.

3.3. Offshore electrolysis
Commercial mega-scale electrolysers have been in operation for a variety of industrial and commercial applications. The challenge in view of the large scale introduction of offshore renewable energies lies in the coupling of electrolysers with the offshore energy resources. Other aspects in offshore electrolysis include the sizing of the systems, development of platforms and storage of the generated hydrogen.
Offshore electrolysis has been discussed ever since the large scale offshore energies have been considered for inclusion in the energy supply chain; however offshore electrolysis has not been taken up discreetly in the published literature. In this regard an overview of selected studies addressing various issues is presented here. Serna et al.40 concludes that PEM technology is one of the most promising water electrolysis technologies for direct coupling with renewable electrical sources. The study further proposed a control system and guidelines for sizing the electrolysers and the system. Blanco et al.84 have calculated the average power consumption of an off-shore platform that houses an electrolyser. The study assumed that for a daily theoretical hydrogen production facility of 50000 kg per day, the platform would need a power of 104 MW. The calculation however does not include the electrical consumption of the electrolyser. Kraaij et al.41 have discussed the operation of an electrolyser in terms of ‘load factor’ and stated that initially high hydrogen costs are encountered because of a low load factor for the electrolysers which is caused by the production of hydrogen for the transport sector from excess wind electricity. Konrad44 has drawn a comparison of PEM and SO electrolysers and stated that due to a lower power consumption of auxiliary systems of a PEM electrolyser, a greater amount of hydrogen is obtained in any given scenario.
Amongst other aspects, one of the foremost concerns in offshore electrolysis is the spatial requirement of any hydrogen production unit. In order to produce a sizable amount of hydrogen, an ‘electrolyser farm’ would therefore be required alongside the wind farm that is able to utilize the power generated from off-shore wind turbines and its subsequent conversion into hydrogen. The arrangement is depicted in Fig. 3. Although the published literature does not explicitly propose any platform for housing a large number of electrolysers or an ‘electrolyser farm’ there have been studies that model a multi-purpose offshore platform for varying applications. Quevedo et al.85 have presented a modular multi-use platform for use in deep waters, with three different platform configurations, which have been designed to show the synergies and compatibilities among the platform uses of transport, energy and aquaculture. In a similar approach Sie et al.86 have discussed a platform that among other uses also houses a facility for the provision of energy through ocean thermal energy conversion. Nevertheless large scale production of hydrogen would entail an offshore platform similar to that described above.
 Fig. 3  Independent offshore wind farm and electrolyser farm. 
Another arrangement could be that each wind turbine has an integral electrolyser with it, thus forming a stand-alone offshore hydrogen generation (SOHG) plant, as depicted in Fig. 4. An off-shore wind farm thus turns into a SOHG farm, with a combined output of hydrogen. The offshore wind turbines are generally rated in the range of 1–10 MW.87 The MHI Vestas V164 9.5 MW is the biggest wind turbine in serial production today and manufactured by Danish firm Vestas.88 Off-shore wind turbines are always part of some wind farm with several wind turbines arranged in an array for obtaining sizable power generation.
 Fig. 4  Farm with multiple stand-alone integrated wind turbine and electrolyser. 
A survey of wind farms reveals that the average offshore wind farm is sized at 300 MW.89 A continuous operation of the wind farm for one week would result in 50000 MW h of power generation. If hydrogen is to be produced from this wind farm, then matching sized hydrogen storage must be provisioned onsite.
MW-scale industrial electrolysers are used for the mass scale conversion of surplus offshore energy into hydrogen. A number of commercial models are available; however for the purpose of this study, we select the Hylyzer-3000-30 manufactured by Hydrogenics90 and based on PEM technology. The salient features of the electrolyzer are given in Table 5.
Considering the output of an average 5 MW wind turbine, it can be seen that with the above mentioned electrolysers and a conversion factor of 11.1 Nm3 hydrogen equivalent to 1 kg of hydrogen, 240 metric tons of hydrogen is obtained from a single turbine over the course of a week. Thus the farm output can be equivalent to approximately 7500 metric tons, assuming that the wind turbine and the electrolysers operate at the rated power and output (100% capacity factor).
Considering a week's output of 300 MW wind farm as input for the above mentioned electrolyser (Hylyzer-3000-30) results in 20 electrolysers with a cumulative footprint of at least 12000 m2. This area is much larger than the main deck area of even large offshore oil platforms. It can be appreciated that these electrolysers will also have with them a network of electrical and gas fittings which further enhance the overall area requirement. The spatial aspect of the electrolysers will be discussed further in the subsequent writing.
3.4. Offshore hydrogen storage and transmission
Hydrogen economy's greatest challenge still lies in large scale storage of hydrogen, the low energy density of hydrogen being the prime reason for lack of economical storage solutions. Table 6 gives the characteristics of hydrogen with respect to the storage medium.
Table 6 Hydrogen storage methods91




Medium
Weight (kg)
Volume (litres)
Density (% H2 by weight)




Compressed gas@35 MPa
45
145
6.7


Compressed gas@70 MPa
50
100
6.0


Cryogenic H2 liquid
40
90
7.5


H2 solid in metal hydrides
215
55
1.4




Offshore renewable energies have the potential to generate large amounts of hydrogen; however on the other hand the storage options although available are not economically feasible to handle the quantum of produced hydrogen from offshore renewable resources. Transition storage facilities have to be developed for hydrogen that is due to be shipped onshore. Furthermore, the storage and transportation systems both have to conform to the same medium either gaseous H2, cryogenic liquids or solids (as metal hydrides). The main problems in gaseous storage are the low volumetric density of hydrogen, the high filling pressures and the high release temperature of hydrogen. Liquefied hydrogen stored as a cryogenic medium has comparatively higher energy density; however it is extremely susceptible to evaporation losses. Moreover, a lot of primary energy is required to keep hydrogen under cryogenic conditions (−253 °C). Hydrogen stored in solids (carbon nanotubes, metal hydrides and chemical hydrides) allow more hydrogen per volume unit to be stored than with liquid hydrogen. However, the weight of the solid storage system is a limiting factor due to low hydrogen retention levels (<2.5% wt).
Practically offshore storage of hydrogen in large quantities in either the gaseous, liquid or solid form is infeasible (in the current state of the art) due to large scale infrastructural requirements in the form of compressors, liquefying equipment and the associated auxiliary apparatus. While the development of novel onshore hydrogen storage technologies continues to progress, the focus on offshore storage of hydrogen has shifted to alternative options mainly concerned with transportation of the produced hydrogen.
Transportation of gaseous and liquefied hydrogen in ship mounted tankers is already in operation. Solutions for bulk carriage of hydrogen are in the developmental stage. The Japanese company Kawasaki is building a liquid hydrogen bulk carrier to ship hydrogen from Australia to Japan by 2020.92 Norway is trying to compete with Australia and is offering to produce green hydrogen from renewables – mainly hydropower and then convert it into liquid and ship it to Japan.93
3.5. Pipeline transport of hydrogen
The anticipated quantities of hydrogen from offshore renewables are quite large and hence the pipeline transportation of hydrogen would assure a continuous and secure supply of hydrogen. Hydrogen pipelines have been in operation in Germany since 1939 supplying hydrogen gas at 2 MPa pressure over a distance of 210 km. This pipeline measuring 0.25 m in diameter carries 8900 kg h−1 of hydrogen.94 However for delivering the output of deep offshore wind farms, pipelines with a much larger diameter are required for transporting an equal amount of energy or an enhanced pressure to deliver an equivalent quantity of energy.95 Hydrogen transported in a high-pressure transmission network means that the volume of hydrogen to be transported has to be thrice that of natural gas. This results in an increase in compression capability as much as twice that of the conventional capacity for natural gas. Increased compression would require higher rotational velocities to achieve a mass flow rate. Increased velocities are however limited by the material strengths of the compressors; therefore, it may be concluded that the compressors installed in the existing infrastructure are insufficient to handle hydrogen in the same quantum as that of natural gas.96 Apart from the infrastructural issues the cost for laying an equal-energy hydrogen pipeline is six times that for natural gas.97
Dedicated hydrogen pipelines and the layout of a new pipeline infrastructure for transport of offshore generated hydrogen for onshore demand centers are uneconomical as yet in comparison with the natural gas pipeline network. The cost of laying a hydrogen pipeline is as much as 40–50% more as compared to the conventional gas pipelines.98 Another study99 indicated that the cost of hydrogen transmission is substantially higher than the cost of oil and natural gas transportation. A comparison of the energy transportation options, shown in Fig. 5, specifies hydrogen pipeline transport as one of the most expensive option.
 Fig. 5  Cost of transportation of energy in different forms. 
Resultantly, one of the options for transporting in existing gas pipeline infrastructure is to transport hydrogen as a mixture with natural gas. It has been found that hydrogen can be mixed with natural gas up to 17% by volume.100 However transmission of hydrogen as a mixture with natural gas would only be possible at locations where offshore natural gas fields and infrastructure are already present. Moreover, the constraint of 17% by volume would limit the hydrogen volume that might be required at the destined demand center. Furthermore, it cannot be considered as a long-term solution because offshore gas fields may have to be abandoned on depletion of the gas wells. In order to use the natural gas infrastructure it thus becomes imperative that any proposed offshore wind farm be situated near gas fields. Such siting of the wind farm may compromise the output of the wind turbine because of the possible reduced wind speed and consistency as compared to an appropriate offshore location with a higher wind speed and consistency. Recently offshore wind farms have started to move to farther and deeper locations in oceans to maximize the output of wind turbines.101
Power-to-gas (P2G) technology has long been considered as a feasible way to harvest the far-fetched renewable energy resources where grid transmission of electricity is not available.102 The issues concerning the transportation of large quantities of hydrogen can be effectively addressed by the use of power-to-gas technology. Conversion of hydrogen into synthetic natural gas (SNG) would enable the transportation of SNG either in conventional ships or the existing natural gas pipeline infrastructure at both on-land and offshore locations.
4. Power to gas – offshore scenario
In recent years P2G has been identified as one of the most mature technologies for the storage of intermittent renewables that can also address the issues of transmission and distribution.103 Gas infrastructure is more or less in place in almost all inhabited places of the world in some form i.e. small and large pipeline networks. The gas pipeline network is however confined to mainly onshore locations, towns and cities.
Power-to-gas along with CCS has been discussed frequently in recent literature. Synthetic methane is only regarded as renewable when two conditions are fulfilled. First, the electricity used in the production process should be carbon neutral. Second, the CO2 produced when using the synthetic methane should be recycled to produce new methane or should be captured and stored. Simulation carried out by Belderbos et al.103 indicates that P2G can play a significant role in scenarios with a high imposed share of renewable end-energy. Miguel et al.104 carried out a thermodynamic analysis regarding the hydrogenation of CO2 into CH4 or CH3OH. The analysis supports that, from the thermodynamic point of view, the conversion of CO2 into CH4 is favoured in comparison to the CH3OH valorisation strategy. Reiter and Lindorfer105 evaluated different CO2 sources concerning their potential utilization within the power-to-gas energy storage technology with regard to capture costs, specific energy requirement and CO2 penalties. The results of an Austrian case study indicate that there is enough CO2 available from point sources to store all of the electricity produced from fluctuating renewable power sources (wind power plants and photovoltaics) via power-to-gas. Due to low capture costs, low CO2 penalties, biogenic origins, and short distances to wind power plants, biogas upgrading facilities and a bioethanol plant were determined to be the CO2 sources best suited for utilization in novel power-to-gas plants. Tsupari et al.106 have carried out a study on the economic feasibility of power-to-gas integrated with a biomass fired CHP plant. Country feasibility studies for long term power-to-gas projects have been carried out for Italy,107 South and Central America,108 Alpine region109 and Germany.110 Frontera et al.111 carried out an analysis of various catalysts including metal hydrides and bio-compounds for enhancing the Sabatier reaction. The injection of power-to-gas into the gas grid has taken up by Quarton et al.112 to consider real-life projects, economic assessments and system modelling studies, and compared them based on the scope, assumptions and outcomes. Ogden et al.113 have proposed natural gas as a bridge to hydrogen transportation fuel.
A power-to-gas system has with it an integrated system for the provision of carbon sources to carry out the methanation process as well as a Sabatier reactor where this chemical process takes place. Thus in order to carry out the methanation process entirely offshore, sources of carbon should be provided to the Sabatier reactor on the same platform that houses the electrolysers. A schematic of such an arrangement is shown in Fig. 6, where an offshore wind park generates renewable electricity which is used to run the electrolysers and subsequently oxygen and hydrogen is obtained. Hydrogen is fed to a Sabatier reactor along with CO2 to form synthetic natural gas (SNG) along with some water according to the following chemical reaction.CO2 + 4H2→CH4 + 2H2O (methanation process/Sabatier reaction)
 Fig. 6  Off-shore energy to gas network. 
The water in this case can be used for the electrolyser and eliminates the need for a RO plant to obtain desalinated water as discussed in the preceding writing. Moreover, the Sabatier reaction is exothermic and the heat released from the reaction can be used for evaporation to generate more desalinated water. Oxygen released from electrolysis can be used as an input for an oxyfuel plant being run for generating CO2 for the Sabatier process. Oxyfuel combustion takes place in pure oxygen resulting in formation of CO2. An oxyfuel plant requires an air separation unit (ASU) for inducing pure oxygen in the combustion process.114 The requirement for an ASU in this case is eliminated and hence a lower energy input cost for the oxyfuel plant is achieved. Finally the SNG is liquefied and transported through LNG tankers to the onshore terminal for injecting into the gas pipeline network. The SNG can also be transported in the gaseous form through the existing infrastructure of offshore gas pipelines. Fig. 6 also shows the flow of oxygen from the offshore electrolyser to the onshore oxyfuel plant where CO2 is obtained and is transported to an offshore methanation plant. The transport of oxygen and CO2 to and from distant offshore locations is an additional infrastructural deployment that has economic and operational consequences as well.
4.1. Offshore renewable energies and synergy with NG pipeline infrastructure
A confluence of processes exists between the production of hydrogen from offshore renewable resources and natural gas infrastructure. A prospect for synergy that needs to be investigated pertains to carbon sequestration and storage (CSS) technologies being employed in the context where oceans are being considered for storage. While the IEA (International Energy Agency) has emphasized the need for CCS to combat climate change, oil exploration and production companies are looking towards the oceans for storing carbon dioxide in the continental shelves deep into the oceans. Environmentalists believe that storing and subsequent possible pilferage of carbon dioxide is likely to affect the pH level of the ocean and hence threaten the marine life.115,116 Recently a Norwegian energy company ‘Statoil’ announced that the company intends to capture carbon dioxide from the industrial facilities in Norway and store the same in the continental shelf. The project would be coordinated with two other Norwegian subsidiaries namely French Total and Royal Dutch Shell. The first phase involves the transportation of CO2 captured from industries and injecting it near the Troll oil field.117,118
Keeping in view the above, carbon dioxide that is to be injected into the ocean beds can be diverted towards wind farms for generating SNG. In such a situation, the oxyfuel (Fig. 6) plant is eliminated and the entire process of producing SNG can take place offshore.
In another scenario of synergy, by mutual sharing of offshore pipeline networks, SNG can be transported to onshore terminals without the need for LNG/L-SNG/CNG tankers. Thus the cost of offshore production of SNG can be lowered considerably if the following costs are dispensed with:
-Transportation of oxygen from off-shore electrolysers to an onshore oxyplant.
-Offshore sources of carbon dioxide (from oil/gas exploration) are utilized.
-CO2 destined for ocean bed storage is used for offshore methanation.
-Off-shore pipeline networks are shared between offshore gas fields and wind farms for delivering the SNG.

Fig. 7 shows a completely integrated arrangement for the production of SNG through an off-shore power-to-gas arrangement. A number of synergies have been incorporated (in the arrangement of Fig. 7), which are feasible with existing off-shore oil and gas exploration, drilling and extraction processes. An enormous amount of GHGs is produced as a result of offshore oil and gas processes. A large portion of the GHG emissions is composed of carbon dioxide besides methane. The 2017 Environment report of oil and gas of UK119 cites a figure of 14.6 million tons of CO2 equivalent that has been released into the atmosphere. It may be pertinent to mention that the figure has decreased from the preceding year by 1%; the figure however still hovers at over 13 million tons of CO2. The GHG emissions of offshore oil and gas operations are quite high; however great potential exists for its utilization in off-shore renewable power generation.
 Fig. 7  An offshore power-to-gas system synergized with offshore oil & gas industry. 
At this point it is pertinent to indicate the global scale of CO2 emissions which is currently estimated to be around 34 billion metric tons. The same is projected to reach to 44 billion metric tons by 2040 according to the Energy Information Administration report.120 It can be seen that (CO2) emissions are projected to increase by one-third between 2012 and 2040, as depicted in Fig. 8.
 Fig. 8  Energy related carbon dioxide emissions in billion metric tons (2012–2040). 
A number of carbon capture and storage (CCS) methods have been developed and discussed in the literature, of which some of the latest techniques are briefly presented here:

4.1.1. Membrane separation technology. 
As the name indicates, this technique involves gas separation by using a membrane and is industrially an attractive method because of its characteristic continuous operation. The continuous operation allows a feeding of the mixed gas and dispatch of purified gas can occur at the same time, in contrast to the conventional batch systems involving adsorption and absorption. Membrane selectively permeates the desired components and retains the unwanted, resulting in separation of gas mixtures. In CCS processes, CO2 has to be separated from exhaust gas streams before the subsequent transportation and storage. Membrane separation technology is one of the efficient solutions for carbon capture. Table 7 presents the types of membranes employed in this CCS method along with the corresponding application and benefits accrued from each type.121
Table 7 Types of membranes and points of application




Membrane type
Application
Advantages




Metal
Pre-combustion
Infinite H2/CO2 selectivity


Carbon
Pre-combustion
High H2/CO2 selectivity


Alumina
Pre-combustion
Low cost; chemical & physical stability


Zeolite
Pre-combustion and post-combustion
Low cost; chemical & physical stability


MOF
Pre-combustion and post-combustion
Large pore volume & surface area


Silica
Pre-combustion
Low cost; high thermal stability


Polymeric
Post-combustion
Low cost; high N2/CO2 selectivity


Fluorite
Oxy-fuel combustion
High N2/CO2 selectivity


Perovskite
Oxy-fuel combustion
High N2/CO2 selectivity






4.1.2. Absorbents for CC. 
Absorbents are employed for the post-combustion CC method and are associated with a relatively higher level of technology readiness, lower energy penalty, and favorable cost compared to other carbon capture technologies. Conventional aqueous alkanol-amine-based carbon capture adsorbents were developed over half a century ago for natural gas/CO2 separation as well as syngas/CO2 separation, and both work at high absorption pressures. Research is currently pursued on a number of variants including liquid–liquid biphasic, liquid–solid biphasic, enzymatic, and encapsulated absorbents, which exhibit promising results in terms of improved energy efficiency, enhanced CO2 absorption kinetics, increased cyclic CO2 loading, or reduced regeneration temperature.122


4.1.3. Bio-inspired systems for CCS. 
Biological, enzymatic and bio-molecular systems have also been developed for carbon dioxide capture and further sequestration or even utilization. Bio-inspired systems include compounds from the chiral pool, such as amino acids, saccharides and related bio-polymers utilized for the physical and chemical capture, sequestration and/or utilization of CO2. Others include enzymatic systems in the form of solid carbonates. Carbonic anhydrase is by far the most studied enzyme, as it catalyses the inter-conversion between CO2 and hydrogen carbonate in an effective mode. Biological option comprises the utilization of methanogens, acetogens and other organisms leading to the formation of value-added compounds.123


4.1.4. Binary solvent systems. 
Conventional post-combustion capture technology uses liquid solvents to make efficient contact with CO2-containing flue gas, during which CO2 interacts and reacts with the solvent and is removed from the flue gas stream. After absorption, the CO2-laden solvent undergoes a regeneration operation, releasing pure CO2 which is then compressed, transported, and sequestered. The regenerated solvent, now in a lean state, is returned to start the next cycle of CO2 capture. The whole operation is a continuous process. The same or similar technologies have been applied for decades for natural gas purification and syngas CO2 separation. For greenhouse gas CO2 mitigation applications, commercial solvents such as amine, potassium carbonate, and methanol are currently being tested; however, improved solvents are required to reduce the cost and increase the efficiency of post-combustion capture systems. At the moment, solvents that are being developed for CO2 capture include nonconventional amines, aqueous ammonia, amino acids, ionic liquids, and mixtures of two or more solvents, i.e., hybrid systems.124


4.1.5. Costs of CCS. 
CCS is not a cheap process. CCS projects basically involve two interconnected processes, first being “carbon capture” and second “carbon storage” and can be carried out in a variety of ways. CC from industrial processes focus on “end-of-pipe-technologies” that remove CO2 from industrial emissions. Chemical absorption is the best available technology in the current scenario. Once removed, the CO2 is liquefied and then transported and stored. Thus the costs include equipment such as scrubbers and absorption chemicals, which can be termed fixed costs and variable costs respectively. Variable costs vary with the level of production, for instance as more electricity is produced in a coal fired power plant, more emissions are produced and hence a larger quantity of absorption chemicals is required. After carbon is captured at a point source such as a power plant, it must be transported to and stored at a long-term storage site. Currently, the most practical long-term storage sites appear to be various forms of natural underground geologic cavities.125 An exhaustive discussion on CCS is beyond the scope of this study; however Fig. 9 presents the cost of adding CCS to a power plant.
 Fig. 9  Cost impacts of adding CCS to a power plant.126 
It can be seen that the cost of capturing CO2 is typically the greatest of CCS projects, while in the power sector CCS is estimated to cost US $70–100 per tonne of abated CO2. The transportation and storage cost has been approximated at $15/MtCO2, as reported by the Global CCS Institute.126
The method to be employed for CCS for use in the proposed approach has to be determined by the type and number of industrial units as well as the quantity of emissions generated by each of these industrial units. Similarly the transportation and storage of CO2 are also dependent upon the implementing agency. Accordingly, the length of pipelines and the infrastructural requirements are based on how distant an offshore farm is from the mainland, which again is retrospectively based on the electric power demand of the region. The green arrows in Fig. 7 indicate the CO2 utilization pathways in an off-shore energy system that can be supported by the established offshore oil and gas industry.
Developing and maintaining synergy between offshore renewable energy systems and offshore oil & gas production companies can go a long way in complementing each other for provisioning of clean energy as required by the Paris Agreement. The Environment Report states that the degree to which oil and gas are maintained as a critical energy source over the coming decades will be determined by how far GHG emissions resulting from exploration, production and conversion (use) of hydrocarbon products can be reduced, captured and stored.
A balance has to be maintained between meeting GHG emission reduction targets with a measured, cost-effective approach and delivering an affordable, secure domestic supply of energy required for economic growth. In a scenario where a healthy synergy is developed between the two industries, the oil and gas industry lowers its CO2 emissions by diverting the same towards the production of synthetic natural gas. The positive economic effect (energy price) is also anticipated to be substantial since the oil and gas production is not capped due to limitations on GHG emissions. On the other hand, offshore energy cost may recede given that oxyplant costs and transportation costs are eliminated.

4.2. Offshore infrastructure for SNG production
The concept of offshore production of hydrogen and subsequent production of synthetic natural gas is feasible theoretically. The infrastructural requirements for such an industrial scale process, taking place offshore, have also to be kept in mind for its materialization. The theoretical footprint calculated for electrolysers (in Para 3.3) was 12000 m2, which is much larger than that of any conventional offshore gas platform. Correspondingly if we consider the cumulative footprint of the industrial methanation reactors required for the conversion of entire output of a wind farm, the total area required for such a large infrastructure would be substantial. The installation of offshore platforms for a large number of electrolysers, Sabatier reactors and CCS plants in deep oceans is a formidable task requiring a large amount of space and expertise. Multi-storied platforms can be employed for housing the complete arrangement of all the components of the proposed power-to-gas supply chain utilizing packing efficiency as practically seen in a variety of offshore industrial and military superstructures. However the harsh offshore conditions, the psychological effects on human nature and prevalent safety issues for technical manpower urge the development of new solutions.127,128 In addition as more offshore energy harvesting devices are added to enhance the generating capacity it is also desirable that offshore energy systems are kept modular in nature. Thus to add more turbines, electrolysers and methanation plants to an existing platform a redesigning and restructuring of the offshore platform may be required.
One innovative approach to address the human factor and to introduce a modular feature is the idea of artificial islands being discussed among the countries surrounding the North Sea that can act as an energy hub for all countries of the region and named the “North Sea Wind Power Hub”.129
The vision is based on the idea of building an artificial island at a central location with good potential for wind, as depicted in Fig. 10. Offshore wind farms are located nearby the island which forms a large connection point for thousands of wind turbines. The island not only receives the power output from the wind farms but is a base for personnel to carry out construction and maintenance for the wind farms. The North Sea Wind Power Hub is currently focused on the idea of a central location and installation of electrical infrastructure on the artificial island. However if the domain is expanded, the island can house the electrolyser farm, the Sabatier reactor for conversion of electricity into natural gas and a liquefaction plant for the conversion of SNG into LNG. Similarly CCS plants as suggested in the preceding writing can also be co-located on the island. It however needs to be investigated that the location of such an island should be deep offshore, near existing oil & gas fields, or at a compromised location that can develop synergy between all the desired locations.
 Fig. 10  Impression of an artificial island to support the offshore energy and its conversion infrastructure. 
The existing installed offshore wind energy capacity in the North Sea is estimated at 9 GW and is anticipated to reach 70–150 GW by 2040 and may reach up to 180 GW by 2050. Although the cost of offshore wind energy has receded significantly in recent years, the increase in its cost is expected as off-shore wind projects move farther offshore in deeper waters. Deep offshore sites have greater wind speeds and the yield is relatively on the higher side; however the associated infrastructural costs such as foundations, cables and operational and maintenance costs are greatly enhanced at farther offshore locations.
The presented offshore SNG generation model has the potential for leading to a number of very tangible direct and indirect benefits including:
-Production of green SNG that can.
-Be reformed onshore to release H2 for hydrogen-enabled applications.
-Aid in transition to a hydrogen economy.
-Be used in existing appliances operating on natural gas.
-Reduction of imported fossil fuel use.
-Alternative route for carbon capture and storage (CCS) thereby facilitating the.
-Protection of the ocean environment by reduction of carbon dumping in the continental shelves.
-Climate change mitigation efforts.
-Reduced cost of infrastructure by.
-Evasion of hydrogen pipeline networks.
-Use of existing pipeline networks both onshore and offshore.
-Elimination of special carriers required for the transport of hydrogen.
5. Sizing and methodology for implementation
The thesis of the current study is based on two practical manifestations faced by energy managers in view of the dwindling fossil fuel resources:
-Provision of inexpensive energy from alternative resources.
-Pollution free energy to conform to environmental regulations.
The production of SNG from offshore renewable energy resources has been proposed as a means for fulfilling both the above conditions in this study. While all the stakeholders, starting from wind turbine producers to gas pipeline companies, have a prescribed methodology for fulfilling their individual goals, a standard methodology however needs to be derived for developing a realistic and effective energy supply chain. It is also pertinent to mention that most of the technologies under discussion in this study have achieved technology convergence and are under commercial production. A comprehensive and all-encompassing methodology is beyond the scope of the current study; nevertheless an overview of the essential steps involved is discussed here and presented in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Implementation methodology for offshore SNG production from OWFs. 
Offshore wind farms have been in operation since the 1990s and many of them have completed more than 2 decades of power generation.130 Now as OWFs move into deeper waters, the need for an assessment of wind resources is even more important since the investment costs of deep OWFs is considerably higher. The success of any wind development project is based to some extent on the accurate assessment of wind resources; however since in situ installation and operation of meteorological masts is expensive, the prospective wind development sites must be selected carefully. Resource assessment is generally a two phase process: (i) a regional resource assessment to determine prospective wind sites followed by (ii) site specific assessment of wind climatology.
As the output of the OWF in the proposed scenario has to be converted into SNG and transported preferably through existing offshore gas pipelines, the siting of the OWF would additionally be required to consider the location of (i) offshore oil/gas fields and the (ii) quantity of GHG emissions mainly carbon oxides for use in the off-shore methanation process. In a situation where an oil/gas field is located in near vicinity, the decision for siting the OWF would be weighed as the best compromise between the wind resource potential and the distance of the proposed OWF site from the oil/gas field. In the case where the prospective OWF site has no oil/gas field in the near vicinity, the decision of siting the WF is independent of any constraints; however the cost of SNG is expected to increase proportionately as an exclusive sub-marine gas pipeline would have to be laid out in addition to the cost of offshore CCS. Offshore CCS would further include a pipeline network for the transport of onshore carbon to the offshore facility. A number of software tools such as GIS applications131,132 have been discussed in the literature that can assist in site selection for OWFs. Once the site for OWFs is finalized another detailed methodology would define the linking of the offshore oil/gas companies with the OWF operators.
Sequel to the island site selection, the size of the island has to be assessed to match the requirements. The concept of the artificial island has arisen from the spatial requirement of the large amount of equipment necessary for the offshore production of SNG. It can be regarded as an extended version of the platform concept discussed in the literature. Multi-use platforms have been proposed in a number of studies that combine offshore renewable energies with other allied activities such as fish farming133,134 and tourist and recreational activities.135 Platforms can be modular in design and additional platforms can be appended as more offshore wind turbines are added to an existing wind farm to accommodate the enhanced quantity of equipment. However the trend in deep offshore wind farms136 has been seen to reflect an enhanced power generation capacity due to an increase in name plate capacity. Thus with larger turbine blades, the same number of wind turbines in a specific OWF would generate a greater amount of energy. Hence instead of the installation of several platforms it is more convenient to house all the equipment on one island. The artificial island however has to be justified by the presence of a good number of wind farms to warrant the island's building cost. The methodology thus must also include any OWFs planned for the future.
In order to assess the size of the required artificial island, one has to make an estimation of the individual components that are to be housed on the island. Industrial electrolysers, Sabatier reactors and electric sub-stations have all achieved commercial production and can be integrated with the offshore systems in the same manner as being done in analogous onshore systems. One of the fundamental questions related to conversion of offshore wind energy into gas with the help of electrolysis is according to what ratio electrolysis capacity in MW would relate to the underlying capacity of the wind farm that is assumed to deliver all its power to the electrolyser. This is a crucial figure for sizing the artificial island and on which the size of the auxiliary equipment would depend. Studies carried out in this respect indicate that the optimal ratio between the electrolyser and offshore wind capacity is a matter of economic optimization and turns out to be 78%.137 In order to make a safe estimation for the sizing of the electrolyser, we consider the average OWF to fall in a range of 500–700 MW. Taking a crude figure of 80% as the optimal electrolyser size in comparison with the OWF, the electrolyser capacity would range in 400–560 MW which require a space of 8000–10000 m2 as shown in Fig. 12. The future electrolyser models being developed by SIEMENS would require a minimum of 4000 m2 for servicing the same (500–700 MW) capacity of OWFs.
 Fig. 12  Electrolyser capacity versus the area required in m2. 
The need for a separate island is further strengthened by the space requirements of the electric sub-station. The size of the substation currently in operation with the existing offshore wind farms, for instance the Buitengaats substation, a 300 MW substation near Gemini Windpark (Netherlands), is 26.4 ×31.65 metres (835.5 m2). In addition, hydrogen storage would also be required to contain the hydrogen obtained from the electrolysers.
Electrolysis of sea water requires prior demineralization. In order to carry out the desalination process through reverse osmosis, a pressurized supply of water is required to ensure proper feeding to the electrolyser. A desalination unit is not significantly voluminous and has a surface area of up to 2–3 m2. Oxygen, also obtained from the electrolyser is conventionally and efficiently stored in the form of cylinder bundles. In this process, the output oxygen stream is directed to an oxygen storage tank. From the regulated storage tank, oxygen is compressed to a high pressure in a compressor and then fed into the manifold leading to high pressure cylinders. From a practical point of view, the industrial oxygen compressors for instance those manufactured by Oxywise, Slovakia138 require a floor space of 20 m2 for 10 MW wind capacity feeding the electrolysers. This translates into an 800–1000 m2 surface area that would be required for facilitating 400–500 MW OWFs.
The stored oxygen is reacted with the stream of CCS plants for generating carbon dioxide for subsequent use in the Sabatier process. The Sabatier process is a well-known commercial process and has been in use for considerable time. The Sabatier or the methanation reactor is commercially a well-developed technology; one such reactor manufactured by MAN, Germany139 is cylindrical in shape, with a diameter of 8–10 m and a height of 21 m resulting in a surface area of approximately 20 m2. The number of reactors required for the production of synthetic natural gas would mainly be dictated by the capacity of the natural gas pipelines used for onshore transportation of SNG. A technical and economic assessment of feasibility of CO2 valorization through direct methanation of flue gas and renewable hydrogen has been made in ref. 140. It may be pertinent to mention here that the SNG injection into the NG grid would also require some additional equipment as well such as compressors and control equipment for which some additional space may be catered for also. Furthermore, all the equipment as described above has auxiliary fittings and requires space for necessary operational and maintenance tasks.
The size of the proposed artificial island is defined by the size estimations of the equipment required for the offshore production of synthetic natural gas. It is however clear that the major determinant of the island size is the electrolyser size which in turn is dependent on the number of turbines in the OWF. Taking into account the equipment sizes discussed above, the artificial island would approximately measure 15000 m2 to house the equipment only. A number of studies141–143 that suggest the formation of an artificial island have based their reasoning on certain other aspects as well that pertain to the development of offshore wind energy. The foremost being the reduction of the system cost to facilitate large scale offshore wind integration and interconnection capacity deployment. The island is thus envisaged to provide a base for all wind farm installation and operational and maintenance activities in terms of accommodation, assembly, transport and storage. Also, the island is expected to reduce the travel times to the individual wind farm assets. Moreover these studies further reflect that the cost saving potential for construction and O&M activities may change considerably when considering an artificial island significantly further from the shore (250–300 km). At the scale envisaged at this location (about 350–500 hectares) and considering the increased travel times and more severe metrological environmental conditions, alternative installation practices and O&M strategies may become more attractive and economically viable using an artificial island. Once the siting and sizing of the island have been completed, the next steps include a number of analyses that pertain to the cash flow and environmental and life cycle analysis.
The cost of developing an artificial island has been cited in the literature with varying topologies and assumptions. A comprehensive discussion on the economic aspects of the implementation and operation of the artificial island is beyond the scope of this study; however the figures cited in the literature are quoted here for reference purposes. The design and hence cost of an artificial island are dependent on multiple things even at the preliminary stages. Among all island types, the reclamation type is the preferred option because of its cost-efficiency144 and because of its global recognition in terms of construction reliability exhibited at artificial islands in Japan,145 UAE146 and Hong Kong.147 Recently, the Netherlands have proposed the development of a power link island in the North Sea and named the North Sea Energy Hub (NSEH).148 The artificial island will cover 6 km2 and it will cost approximately 1.5 billion EUR only in sand and stone.149 One of the studies in this regard has suggested the construction of a power link island (NSEH) in a modular fashion.150 A modular work island would allow an efficient logistics chain to be set up. Staff, components and assembly workshops could be stationed on the island and operate based on intelligent organizational plans. The study further proposes the roll out to be carried out in stages and is estimated to cost 2.63 billion euros over a period of eleven years.148
The current study proposes the integration of offshore oil/gas companies and their pipeline network with off-shore wind energy operators under a broad framework. The concept of artificial islands in this particular scenario takes its strength from the successful execution of the mega-engineering projects mentioned above. The cited projects have been in service for more than two decades. Furthermore, the power-to-gas technology has also seen successful implementation in several onshore projects mainly in Europe.151 Offshore methanation can be carried out in a similar manner; however the required sources of carbon dioxide need to be managed either from onshore CCS projects or from offshore oil/gas extraction operations. The transportation of carbon dioxide via pipelines and tankers is an established commercial technology owing to growing interest in CO2 storage in saline aquifers, due to their enormous potential storage capacity.108 The published literature demonstrates that the existing CCS technologies are not cost-effective especially when no useful product can be obtained at the end of the process; in this context the conversion of CO2 into SNG through electrolysis and methanation delivers a valuable product that can offset the cost of CCS. In view of the foregoing, the offshore generation of SNG from OWFs is technically a feasible process and the economic feasibility is envisaged in view of the established technologies required for its implementation.
6. Conclusion
The potential of offshore renewable energy is immense; however the technology to harness this energy efficiently and in an economical fashion is a challenge. Offshore wind energy has made great progress in the last decade and the levelised cost of energy has also reached a competitive level. There still exists room for improvement as wind turbines move farther away from the shore. While deep ocean wind has a higher wind class and consistency, the transmission of this energy to demand centres in the form of electricity is expensive. It has been found that the conversion of offshore wind into hydrogen and subsequently methane is possible offshore with existing technology. In order to meet the spatial requirement of such a conversion infrastructure, the idea of an artificial island is presented that houses the electrolysers, oxyfuel plant, and methanation reactors – all industrial sized. It has also been noted that the existing CCS technique to dump carbon dioxide in continental shelves can be diverted and instead used in methanation reactors for the production of synthetic natural gas. This technique would not only help in evading the environmental degradation of oceans but also assist in lowering the cost of producing SNG. The study highlights that by adopting this method the problem of transmission of electricity or energy in the form of hydrogen can be circumvented. Hydrogen pipeline costs which are as much as six times the costs of natural gas pipelines are avoided and multiple benefits are achieved.
Conflicts of interest
There is no conflict of interest.
Funding information
No funding has been received for this study.
References

          F. Appavou, A. Brown, B. Epp, A. Leidreiter, C. Lins, H. E. Murdock, E. Musolino, K. Petrichenko, T. C. Farrell, T. T. Krader and A. Tsakiris, Renewables 2017 global status report, Tech. Rep., Renewable Energy Policy Network for the 21st Century (REN21),  2018 Search PubMed .

          F. Abuzaid, Offshore Wind Energy. PH240, Stanford University,  2010 Search PubMed .
B. Alonzo, H. K. Ringkjob, B. Jourdier, P. Drobinski, R. Plougonven and P. Tankov, Modelling the variability of the wind energy resource on monthly and seasonal timescales, Renewable Energy, 2017, 113, 1434–1446 CrossRef .

          D. Arent, P. Sullivan, D. Heimiller, A. Lopez, K. Eurek, J. Badger, H. E. Jorgensen, M. Kelly, L. Clarke and P. Luckow, Improved offshore wind resource assessment in global climate stabilization scenarios, National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United States),  2012 Oct 1 Search PubMed .

          X. Lu and M. B. McElroy, Global Potential for Wind-Generated Electricity, in Wind Energy Engineering, Academic Press,  2017 Jan 1, pp. 51–73 Search PubMed .
C. L. Archer and M. Z. Jacobson, Evaluation of global wind power, J. Geophys. Res.: Atmos., 2005, 110(D12), 14–33 CrossRef .
E. Dupont, R. Koppelaar and H. Jeanmart, Global available wind energy with physical and energy return on investment constraints, Appl. Energy, 2018, 209, 322–338 CrossRef .
J. Bosch, I. Staffell and A. D. Hawkes, Temporally explicit and spatially resolved global offshore wind energy potentials, Energy, 2018, 163, 766–781 CrossRef .
Renewables Now website accessed from, https://renewablesnow.com/news/goldwind-unveils-6-mw-plus-offshore-wind-platform-591288/, accessed on 21 July 2018.
Clean Tecnica website, https://cleantechnica.com/2017/06/08/mhi-vestas-offshore-unveils-9-5-mw-wind-turbine/, accessed on 21 July 2018.
General Electric website, https://www.genewsroom.com/press-releases/ge-announces-haliade-xworlds-most-powerful-offshore-wind-turbine-284260, accessed on 21 July 2018.

          I. Pineda, K. Ruby, A. Ho, A. Mbistrova and G. Corbetta, The European Offshore Wind Industry-Key Trends and Statistics 2016, European Wind Energy Association, Tech. Rep.,  2016 Feb Search PubMed .
M. Borg, M. Collu and A. Kolios, Offshore floating vertical axis wind turbines, dynamics modelling state of the art. Part II: Mooring line and structural dynamics, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 39, 1226–1234 CrossRef .
Driving cost reductions in offshore wind, WindEurope report accessed from, https://windeurope.org/about-wind/reports/driving-cost-reductions-offshore-wind/.
C. M. Johnstone, D. Pratt, J. A. Clarke and A. D. Grant, A techno-economic analysis of tidal energy technology, Renewable Energy, 2013, 49, 101–106 CrossRef .

          K. A. Samo, A. R. Rigit and A. Baharun, Mapping of Tidal Energy Potential based on High and Low Tides for Sabah and Sarawak, in MATEC Web of Conferences, EDP Sciences,  2017, vol. 87, p. 02007 Search PubMed .
D. Magagna and A. Uihlein, Ocean energy development in Europe: current status and future perspectives, International Journal of Marine Energy, 2015, 11, 84–104 CrossRef .

          G. Mork, S. Barstow, A. Kabuth and M. T. Pontes. Assessing the global wave energy potential., in ASME 2010 29th International conference on ocean, offshore and arctic engineering, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,  2010 Jan 1, pp. 447–454 Search PubMed .
C. Zheng, L. Shao, W. Shi, Q. Su, G. Lin, X. Li and X. Chen, An assessment of global ocean wave energy resources over the last 45 a, Acta Oceanol. Sin., 2014, 33(1), 92–101 CrossRef .

          G. Mork, S. Barstow, A. Kabuth and M. T. Pontes. Assessing the global
wave energy potential, in ASME 2010 29th International conference on ocean, offshore and arctic engineering, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,  2010 Jan 1, pp. 447–454 Search PubMed .
B. G. Reguero, I. J. Losada and F. J. Méndez, A global wave power resource and its seasonal, interannual and long-term variability, Appl. Energy, 2015, 148, 366–380 CrossRef .
L. Rusu and F. Onea, The performance of some state-of-the-art wave energy converters in locations with the worldwide highest wave power, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 75, 1348–1362 CrossRef .
A. Sinha, D. Karmakar and C. G. Soares, Performance of optimally tuned arrays of heaving point absorbers, Renewable energy, 2016 Jul 1, 92, 517–531 Search PubMed .
A. D. Falcão, J. C. Henriques and L. M. Gato, Rotational speed control and electrical rated power of an oscillating-water-column wave energy converter, Energy, 2017, 120, 253–261 CrossRef .
L. Margheritini, D. Vicinanza and P. Frigaard, SSG wave energy converter: design, reliability and hydraulic performance of an innovative overtopping device, Renewable Energy, 2009, 34(5), 1371–1380 CrossRef .
D. Lande-Sudall, T. Stallard and P. Stansby, Co-located offshore wind and tidal stream turbines: assessment of energy yield and loading, Renewable Energy, 2018, 118, 627–643 CrossRef .

          D. Magagna and A. Uihlein, JRC Ocean energy status report—technology, market and economic aspects of ocean energy in Europe, European Commission, Brussels,  2015 Search PubMed .

          P. Hou, W. Hu and Z. Chen, in Offshore substation locating in wind farms based on prim algorithm, 2015 IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting, IEEE,  2015 Jul 26, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .

          H. Jessen, Sustainable Energy Generation from the Oceans, in Sustainable Ocean Resource Governance,  2018 Jan 3, pp. 76–83 Search PubMed .

          J. Colton, F. Conway, B. Wiersma, J. Carlson and P. Devine-Wright, Consultation in ocean energy development, in Ocean Energy, ROUTLEDGE in association with GSE Research,  2018 Jan 1, vol. 205, No. 228, pp. 205–228 Search PubMed .

          P. Hou, W. Hu, Z. Chen, Offshore substation locating in wind farms based on prim algorithm, IEEE Power & Energy Society General Meeting 2015, IEEE,  2015 Jul 26, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
D. Ahn, S. C. Shin, S. Y. Kim, H. Kharoufi and H. C. Kim, Comparative evaluation of different offshore wind turbine installation vessels for Korean west–south wind farm, International Journal of Naval Architecture and Ocean Engineering, 2017 Jan 1, 9(1), 45–54 Search PubMed .
R. C. Zeuschner, Pipelines and cables-the offshore transportation of oil, gas and renewable energy, International Energy Law Review, 2011, 29(8), 311–326 Search PubMed .
D. D. Ahiaga-Dagbui, P. E. Love, A. Whyte and P. Boateng, Costing and technological challenges of offshore oil and gas decommissioning in the UK North Sea, Journal of Construction Engineering and Management, 2017, 143(7), 05017008 CrossRef .

          S. K. Mohapatra, T. Swarnkar, S. K. Kamilla and S. K. Mohapatra, Forecasting Hydrogen Fuel Requirement for Highly Populated Countries Using NARnet, in International Conference on Next Generation Computing Technologies, Springer, Singapore,  2017 Oct 30, pp. 349–362 Search PubMed .

          M. Melaina, M. Penev, E. Connelly, D. Heimiller, A. Milbrandt. Resource Availability for Hydrogen Production,  2017 Search PubMed.

          D. Fraile, A. Torres, A. Rangel and P. Maio, in Generic estimation scenarios of market penetration and demand forecast for “premium” green hydrogen in short, mid and long term, CertifHy Project,  2015 Search PubMed .
A. G. Dutton, J. A. Bleijs, H. Dienhart, M. Falchetta, W. Hug, D. Prischich and A. J. Ruddell, Experience in the design, sizing, economics, and implementation of autonomous wind-powered hydrogen production systems, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2000, 25(8), 705–722 CrossRef CAS .

          R. J. Paynter, N. H. Lipman, J. E. Foster, The potential of hydrogen and electricity production from wind power, Energy Research Unit, Science and Engineering Research Council,
Rutherford Appleton Laboratory,  1991 Sep 19 Search PubMed .
Á. Serna and F. Tadeo, Offshore hydrogen production from wave energy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2014 Jan 16, 39(3), 1549–1557 Search PubMed .

          G. Kraaij, M. Weeda, Conversion of excess wind energy into hydrogen for fuel cell applications,  2008 Search PubMed.
V. Franzitta, D. Curto, D. Rao and A. Viola, Hydrogen production from sea wave for alternative energy vehicles for public transport in Trapani (Italy), Energies, 2016 Oct 21, 9(10), 850 Search PubMed .

          A. Colucci, V. Boscaino, G. Cipriani, D. Curto, V. Di Dio, V. Franzitta, M. Trapanese and A. Viola. in An inertial system for the production of electricity and hydrogen from sea wave energy, OCEANS 2015-MTS/IEEE, IEEE, Washington,  2015 Oct 19, pp. 1–10 .
K. Meier, Hydrogen production with sea water electrolysis using Norwegian offshore wind energy potentials, Int. J. Energy Environ. Eng., 2014 Jul 1, 5(2–3), 104 Search PubMed .

          G. Raut and N. Goudarzi. Hydrogen Production From Renewables: Marine and Hydrokinetic Energy Systems, in ASME 2017 International Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,  2017 Nov 3, pp. V006T08A094–V006T08A094 Search PubMed .

          A. van Wijk, The green hydrogen economy in the Northern Netherlands, Noordelijke Innovation Board,  2017 Search PubMed .
M. F. Platzer, N. Sarigul-Klijn, J. Young, M. A. Ashraf and J. C. Lai, Renewable hydrogen production using sailing ships, J. Energy Resour. Technol., 2014, 136(2), 021203 CrossRef .

          Y. Takaoka, H. Kagaya, A. Saeed and M. Nishimura, Introduction to a Liquefied Hydrogen Carrier for a Pilot Hydrogen Energy Supply Chain (HESC) project in Japan, Kawasaki Heavy Industries, Ltd.,  2017 Search PubMed .

          J. C. Gilloteaux and A. Babarit, Preliminary design of a wind driven vessel dedicated to hydrogen production, in ASME 2017 36th International Conference on Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engineering, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,  2017 Jun 25, pp. V010T09A065–V010T09A065 Search PubMed .

          K. Ouchi and J. Henzie, Hydrogen generation sailing ship: conceptual design and feasibility study, in OCEANS 2017-Aberdeen, IEEE,  2017 Jun 19, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
J. Mathur, N. Agarwal, R. Swaroop and N. Shah, Economics of producing hydrogen as transportation fuel using offshore wind energy systems, Energy Policy, 2008, 36(3), 1212–1222 CrossRef .
I. M. de Alegría, J. L. Martín, I. Kortabarria, J. Andreu and P. I. Ereño, Transmission alternatives for offshore electrical power, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13(5), 1027–1038 CrossRef .
Y. Li, H. Chen, X. Zhang, C. Tan and Y. Ding, Renewable energy carriers: hydrogen or liquid air/nitrogen?, Appl. Therm. Eng., 2010 Oct 1, 30(14–15), 1985–1990 Search PubMed .
M. Esteban and D. Leary, Current developments and future prospects of offshore wind and ocean energy, Appl. Energy, 2012, 90(1), 128–136 CrossRef .
S. D. Lim, A. P. Mazzoleni, J. K. Park, P. I. Ro and B. Quinlan, Conceptual design of ocean compressed air energy storage system, Mar. Technol. Soc. J., 2013, 47(2), 70–81 CrossRef .
M. J. Alexander, P. James and N. Richardson, Energy storage against interconnection as a balancing mechanism for a 100% renewable UK electricity grid, IET Renewable Power Generation, 2014, 9(2), 131–141 CrossRef .
J. O. Posada, A. H. Abdalla, C. I. Oseghale and P. J. Hall, Multiple regression analysis in the development of NiFe cells as energy storage solutions for intermittent power sources such as wind or solar, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41(37), 16330–16337 CrossRef .
P. Hou, P. Enevoldsen, J. Eichman, W. Hu, M. Z. Jacobson and Z. Chen, Optimizing investments in coupled offshore wind-electrolytic hydrogen storage systems in Denmark, J. Power Sources, 2017, 359, 186–197 CrossRef CAS .
J. Michalski, U. Bünger, F. Crotogino, S. Donadei, G. S. Schneider, T. Pregger, K. K. Cao and D. Heide, Hydrogen generation by electrolysis and storage in salt caverns: potentials, economics and systems aspects with regard to the German energy transition, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42(19), 13427–13443 CrossRef CAS .
B. Emonts, S. Schiebahn, K. Görner, D. Lindenberger, P. Markewitz, F. Merten and D. Stolten, Re-energizing energy supply: electrolytically-produced hydrogen as a flexible energy storage medium and fuel for road transport, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 320–326 CrossRef CAS .
D. Buhagiar and T. Sant, Modelling of a novel hydro-pneumatic accumulator for large-scale offshore energy storage applications, Journal of Energy Storage, 2017, 14, 283–294 CrossRef .
K. Ayers, Gigawatt-scale renewable hydrogen via water splitting as a case study for collaboration: The need to connect fundamental and applied research to accelerate solutions, MRS Energy & Sustainability, 2017, 4, 13 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, F. Cui and L. Li, An integrated optimization model for the location of hydrogen refueling stations, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43(42), 19636–19649 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alaswad, A. Baroutaji, H. Achour, J. Carton, A. Al Makky and A. G. Olabi, Developments in fuel cell technologies in the transport sector, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41(37), 16499–16508 CrossRef CAS .

          U. Bünger, H. Landinger, E. Pschorr-Schoberer, P. Schmidt, W. Weindorf, J. Jöhrens, U. Lambrecht, K. Naumann and A. Lischke, Power-to-gas (PtG) in transport status quo and perspectives for development, German Federal Ministry of Transport and Digital Infrastructure, Tech. Rep, 2014 Jun 11, p. 6.

          S. Clegg, L. Zhang and P. Mancarella, The role of power-to-transport via hydrogen and natural gas vehicles in decarbonising the power and transportation sector, in 2017 IEEE PES Innovative Smart Grid Technologies Conference Europe (ISGT-Europe), IEEE,  2017 Sep 26, pp. 1–6 Search PubMed .
B. Emonts, S. Schiebahn, K. Görner, D. Lindenberger, P. Markewitz, F. Merten and D. Stolten, Re-energizing energy supply: electrolytically-produced hydrogen as a flexible energy storage medium and fuel for road transport, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 320–326 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fan, A. Lee, N. Parker, D. Scheitrum, A. M. Jaffe, R. Dominguez-Faus and K. Medlock III, Geospatial, Temporal and Economic Analysis of Alternative Fuel Infrastructure: The Case of Freight and US Natural Gas Markets, The Energy Journal, 2017, 38(6), 199–230 Search PubMed .
A. Maroufmashat and M. Fowler, Transition of future energy system infrastructure; through power-to-gas pathways, Energies, 2017, 10(8), 1089 CrossRef .
J. Stentoft, R. Narasimhan and T. Poulsen, Reducing cost of energy in the offshore wind energy industry: the promise and potential of supply chain management, Int. J. Energy Sect. Manag., 2016, 10(2), 151–171 CrossRef .

Offshore Energy and Marine Spatial Planning, ed. Yates K. L. and Bradshaw C. J., Routledge,  2018 Mar 29 Search PubMed .
A. Babarit, J. C. Gilloteaux, G. Clodic, M. Duchet, A. Simoneau and M. F. Platzer, Techno-economic feasibility of fleets of far offshore hydrogen-producing wind energy converters, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43(15), 7266–7289 CrossRef CAS .

          G. G. Leeth
          Transmission of gaseous hydrogen
          Hydrogen: Its technology and implications, CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group,  2018 Apr 17, pp. 3–10 Search PubMed .
M. D. Esteban, J. J. Diez, J. S. López and V. Negro, Why offshore wind energy?, Renewable Energy, 2011, 36(2), 444–450 CrossRef .
R. Künneke, D. C. Mehos, R. Hillerbrand and K. Hemmes, Understanding values embedded in offshore wind energy systems: toward a purposeful institutional and technological design, Environ. Sci. Policy, 2015, 53, 118–129 CrossRef .
C. A. Kukkonen, Hydrogen as an alternative automotive fuel, SAE Trans., 1981, 1425–1461 Search PubMed .
B. Zakeri and S. Syri, Electrical energy storage systems: a comparative life cycle cost analysis, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 42, 569–596 CrossRef .
M. Götz, J. Lefebvre, F. Mörs, A. M. Koch, F. Graf, S. Bajohr, R. Reimert and T. Kolb, Renewable Power-to-Gas: A technological and economic review, Renewable Energy, 2016, 85, 1371–1390 CrossRef .
W. L. Becker, M. Penev and R. J. Braun, Production of Synthetic Natural Gas From Carbon Dioxide and Renewably Generated Hydrogen: A Techno-Economic Analysis of a Power-to-Gas Strategy, J. Energy Resour. Technol., 2019, 141(2), 021901 CrossRef .
F. Salomone, E. Giglio, D. Ferrero, M. Santarelli, R. Pirone and S. Bensaid, Techno-economic modelling of a Power-to-Gas system based on SOEC electrolysis and CO2 methanation in a RES-based electric grid, Chem. Eng. J., 2018 DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2018.10.170 .

          Argonne National Lab, National Renewable Energy Laboratory and Pacific Northwest National Laboratory, Hydrogen Delivery Scenario Analysis Model. 2., Fuel Cell Technology Office, DOE, 3 edn,  2010 Search PubMed .

          G. Parks, R. Boyd, J. Cornish and R. Remick, Hydrogen station compression, storage, and dispensing technical status and costs: Systems integration, National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United States),  2014 May 1 Search PubMed .
M. J. Kaiser, Offshore pipeline construction cost in the US Gulf of Mexico, Mar. Pol., 2017, 82, 147–166 CrossRef .
P. Blanco-Fernández and F. Pérez-Arribas, Offshore Facilities to Produce Hydrogen, Energies, 2017, 10(6), 783 CrossRef .

          E. Quevedo, M. Cartón, E. Delory, A. Castro, J. Hernández, O. Llinás, J. De Lara, N. Papandroulakis, P. Anastasiadis, J. Bard and H. Jeffrey, Multi-use offshore platform configurations in the scope of the FP7 TROPOS Project, in 2013 MTS/IEEE OCEANS-Bergen, IEEE,  2013 Jun 10, pp. 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Sie, P. A. Château, Y. C. Chang and S. Y. Lu, Stakeholders Opinions on Multi-Use Deep Water Offshore Platform in Hsiao-Liu-Chiu, Taiwan, Int. Res. J. Public Environ. Health, 2018, 15(2), 281 CrossRef PubMed .
Wind Power monthly website, https://www.windpowermonthly.com/10-biggest-turbines.

          G. W. GWEC, Global wind report. 2015, GWEC, Brussels,  2017 Search PubMed .
Hydrogenics website, http://www.hydrogenics.com/wp-content/uploads/Renewable-Hydrogen-Brochure.pdf, accessed on 7 Aug 2018.
S. Niaz, T. Manzoor and A. H. Pandith, Hydrogen storage: materials, methods and perspectives, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 50, 457–469 CrossRef CAS .

          https://www.abo.net/en_IT/topics/Australia-Hydrogen-en.shtml
        .

          http://www.reuters.com/article/us-japan-hydrogen-race-idUSKBN17U1QA
        .

          J. L. Gillette and R. L. Kolpa, Overview of interstate hydrogen pipeline systems, Argonne National Lab.(ANL), Argonne, IL (United States),  2008 Feb 1 Search PubMed .

          I. A. Gondal, Infrastructure analysis for renewable hydrogen production in Pakistan,  2012 Search PubMed.

          I. A. Gondal, Hydrogen transportation by pipelines, in Compendium of Hydrogen Energy, Woodhead Publishing,  2016 Jan 1, pp. 301–322 Search PubMed .
A. Witkowski, A. Rusin, M. Majkut and K. Stolecka, Comprehensive analysis of hydrogen compression and pipeline transportation from thermodynamics and safety aspects, Energy, 2017, 141, 2508–2518 CrossRef .
I. A. Gondal and M. H. Sahir, Prospects of natural gas pipeline infrastructure in hydrogen transportation, Int. J. Energy Res., 2012, 36(15), 1338–1345 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Ogden, Prospects for building a hydrogen energy infrastructure, Annu. Rev. Energy Environ., 1999 Nov, 24(1), 227–279 Search PubMed .
C. Yang and J. Ogden, Determining
the lowest-cost hydrogen delivery mode, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2007, 32(2), 268–286 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xu, R. Stuhlmeier and M. Stiassnie, Harnessing wave power in open seas II: very large arrays of wave-energy converters for 2D sea states, Journal of Ocean Engineering and Marine Energy, 2017, 3(2), 151–160 CrossRef .
L. D. Barbosa, D. Bogdanov, P. Vainikka and C. Breyer, Hydro, wind and solar power as a base for a 100% renewable energy supply for South and Central America, PLoS One, 2017, 12(3), e0173820 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Bailera, P. Lisbona, L. M. Romeo and S. Espatolero, Power to Gas projects review: lab, pilot and demo plants for storing renewable energy and CO2, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 69, 292–312 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Belderbos, E. Delarue and W. D'haeseleer, Possible role of power-to-gas in future energy systems, in 2015 12th International Conference on the European Energy Market (EEM), IEEE,  2015 May 19, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
C. V. Miguel, M. A. Soria, A. Mendes and L. M. Madeira, Direct CO2 hydrogenation to methane or methanol from post-combustion exhaust streams – a thermodynamic study, J. Nat. Gas Sci. Eng., 2015, 22, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
G. Reiter and J. Lindorfer, Evaluating CO2 sources for power-to-gas applications – a case study for Austria, J. CO2 Util., 2015, 10, 40–49 CrossRef CAS .
E. Tsupari, J. Kärki and E. Vakkilainen, Economic feasibility of power-to-gas integrated with biomass fired CHP plant, Journal of Energy Storage, 2016, 5, 62–69 CrossRef .
G. Guandalini, M. Robinius, T. Grube, S. Campanari and D. Stolten, Long-term power-to-gas potential from wind and solar power: a country analysis for Italy, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42(19), 13389–13406 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mesfun, D. L. Sanchez, S. Leduc, E. Wetterlund, J. Lundgren, M. Biberacher and F. Kraxner, Power-to-gas and power-to-liquid for managing renewable electricity intermittency in the Alpine Region, Renewable energy, 2017, 107, 361–372 CrossRef .
L. D. Barbosa, D. Bogdanov, P. Vainikka and C. Breyer, Hydro, wind and solar power as a base for a 100% renewable energy supply for South and Central America, PLoS One, 2017, 12(3), e0173820 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Leonzio, Design and feasibility analysis of a Power-to-Gas plant in Germany, J. Cleaner Prod., 2017, 162, 609–623 CrossRef .
P. Frontera, A. Macario, M. Ferraro and P. Antonucci, Supported catalysts for CO2 methanation: a review, Catalysts, 2017, 7(2), 59 CrossRef .
C. J. Quarton and S. Samsatli, Power-to-gas for injection into the gas grid: What can we learn from real-life projects, economic assessments and systems modelling?, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 98, 302–316 CrossRef .
J. Ogden, A. M. Jaffe, D. Scheitrum, Z. McDonald and M. Miller, Natural gas as a bridge to hydrogen transportation fuel: insights from the literature, Energy Policy, 2018, 115, 317–329 CrossRef CAS .

Oxy-fuel combustion for power generation and carbon dioxide (CO2) capture, ed. Zheng L., Elsevier,  2011 Feb 26 Search PubMed .
C. Halsband and H. Kurihara, Potential acidification impacts on zooplankton in CCS leakage scenarios, Mar. Pollut. Bull., 2013, 73(2), 495–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Lee and E. C. Choi, CO2 leakage environmental damage cost – a CCS project in South Korea, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 93, 753–758 CrossRef .

          https://www.upi.com/Statoil-Shell-and-Total-to-store-CO2-offshore-Norway/6561506941998/ accessed on 8 Aug 2018.
2017 Environment Report. UK oil and Gas Industry Association website accessed on 9th Aug 2018, https://oilandgasuk.co.uk/wp-content/uploads/2017/12/Environment-Report-2017.pdf.

          J. Conti, P. Holtberg, J. Diefenderfer, A. LaRose, J. T. Turnure and L. Westfall, International energy outlook 2016 with projections to 2040, USDOE Energy Information
Administration (EIA), Office of Energy Analysis, Washington, DC (United States),  2016 May 1 Search PubMed .

          G. Ji and M. Zhao, Membrane separation technology in carbon capture, in Recent Advances in Carbon Capture and Storage, InTech,  2017 Search PubMed .

          Q. Zhuang, B. Clements and B. Li, Emerging new types of absorbents for postcombustion carbon capture, in Recent Advances in Carbon Capture and Storage, InTech,  2017 Search PubMed .

          G. V. Carrera, L. C. Branco and M. N. da Ponte, Bio-inspired Systems for Carbon Dioxide Capture, Sequestration and Utilization, in Recent Advances in Carbon Capture and Storage, InTech,  2017 Search PubMed .

          Q. Zhuang and B. Clements, Synergistic Effect on CO2 Capture by Binary Solvent System, in Recent Advances in Carbon Capture and Storage, InTech,  2017 Search PubMed .

          J. C. Bergstrom and D. Ty. Economics of Carbon Capture and Storage, in Recent Advances in Carbon Capture and Storage, InTech, 2017 Search PubMed .

          P. Brinckerhoff, Accelerating the uptake of CCS: industrial use of captured carbon dioxide, Global CCS Institute,  2011, p. 260 Search PubMed .
N. Norazahar, F. Khan, B. Veitch and S. MacKinnon, Prioritizing safety critical human and organizational factors of EER systems of offshore installations in a harsh environment, Saf. Sci., 2017, 95, 171–181 CrossRef .
M. Scheu, D. Matha, M. A. Schwarzkopf and A. Kolios, Human exposure to motion during maintenance on floating offshore wind turbines, Ocean Eng., 2018, 165, 293–306 CrossRef .
M. Kristiansen, M. Korpås and H. Farahmand, Towards a fully integrated North Sea offshore grid: An engineering-economic assessment of a power link island, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Energy Environ., 2018, 7(4), e296 Search PubMed .
M. Bilgili, A. Yasar and E. Simsek, Offshore wind power development in Europe and its comparison with onshore counterpart, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2011, 15(2), 905–915 CrossRef .
L. Castro-Santos, G. P. Garcia, T. Simões and A. Estanqueiro, Planning of the installation of offshore renewable energies: A GIS approach of the Portuguese roadmap, Renewable Energy, 2019, 132, 1251–1262 CrossRef .
S. Cavazzi and A. G. Dutton, An Offshore Wind Energy Geographic Information System (OWE-GIS) for assessment of the UK's offshore wind energy potential, Renewable Energy, 2016, 87, 212–228 CrossRef .

          E. Mikkola, J. Heinonen, M. Kankainen, T. Hekkala and J. Kurkela, Multi-Platform Concepts for Combining Offshore Wind Energy and Fish Farming in Freezing Sea Areas: Case Study in the Gulf of Bothnia, in ASME 2018 37th International Conference on Ocean, Offshore and Arctic Engineering, American Society of Mechanical Engineers,  2018 Jun 17, pp. V006T05A029–V006T05A029 Search PubMed .

          P. Koundouri, A. Giannouli, L. Airoldi, B. Bas, S. Broszeit, N. Elginoz, E. Giannakis, F. Zagonari, Y. Krontira, A. Moussoulides and S. Tsani,Socio-economic Analysis of a Selected Multi-use Offshore Site in the Mediterranean Sea, in The Ocean of Tomorrow, Springer, Cham,  2017, pp. 85–101 Search PubMed .
Y. T. Sie, P. A. Château, Y. C. Chang and S. Y. Lu, Stakeholders Opinions on Multi-Use Deep Water Offshore Platform in Hsiao-Liu-Chiu, Taiwan, Int. Res. J. Public Environ. Health, 2018, 15(2), 281 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Rodrigues, C. Restrepo, E. Kontos, R. T. Pinto and P. Bauer, Trends of offshore wind projects, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 49, 1114–1135 CrossRef .

          C. J. Jepma and M. V. Schot, On the economics of offshore energy conversion: smart combinations, Converting Offshore Wind Energy into Green Hydrogen on Existing Oil and Gas Platforms in the North Sea, Energy Delta Institute (EDI),  2017 Feb 3, p. 3 Search PubMed .
Oxyfuel website, https://www.oxywise.com/uploads/files/o2-compressor.pdf, accessed on 24 Jan 2019.
MAN website, https://dwe.man-es.com/chemical-reactors/methanation-reactors-(sng), accessed on 25 Jan 2019.
G. Iaquaniello, S. Setini, A. Salladini and M. De Falco, CO2 valorization through direct methanation of flue
gas and renewable hydrogen: A technical and economic assessment, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2018, 43(36), 17069–17081 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. van der Meijden, Future North Sea Infrastructure based on Dogger Bank modular island,  2016 Search PubMed.

          TenneT, North Sea Wind Power Hub, Arnhem, TenneT,  2017 Search PubMed .

          J. Østergaard, T. Weckesser, D. E. Bondy, P. Nørgaard and P. Pinson, Smart grids innovation challenge, DTU International Energy Report 2018,  2018 May, p. 37 Search PubMed .

          D. J. Zwemmer, Guidelines for design and construction of artificial islands,  1998 Search PubMed.
G. Mesri and J. R. Funk, Settlement of the Kansai international airport islands, J. Geotech. Geoenviron. Eng., 2014, 141(2), 04014102 CrossRef .
R. E. De Jong, M. H. Lindo, S. A. Saeed and J. Vrijhof, Execution methodology for reclamation works Palm Island 1, Terra et Aqua, 2003, 92, 14–25 Search PubMed .

          G. W. Plant and D. E. Oakervee, HONG KONG INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT-CIVIL ENGINEERING DESIGN, in Proceedings of the Institution of Civil Engineers-Civil Engineering, Thomas Telford,  1998 May, vol. 126, No. 5, pp. 15–34 Search PubMed .

          A. Monclus Abadal, E. Dornhelm, M. Mohamed Khaled Aly Mohamed Elakel, C. Feys and N. Naderi, Energy Hub in the North Sea,  2017 Search PubMed.

          E. Solli, Assessing the economic benefits and power grid impacts of the power link island project, Master's thesis, NTNU,  2017 .

          M. van der Meijden, Future North Sea Infrastructure based on Dogger Bank modular island, Wind Integration Workshop (WIW),  2016 Search PubMed .
I. A. Gondal, Hydrogen integration in power-to-gas networks, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2019, 44(3), 1803–1815 CrossRef CAS .
D. Y. Leung, G. Caramanna and M. M. Maroto-Valer, An overview of current status of carbon dioxide capture and storage technologies, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 39, 426–443 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Share of renewable energy in the total final energy consumption for 2016.1	 

NREL4	5.00
Lu et al.5	5.84
Archer et al.6	9.00
Dupont et al.7	6.40
Bosch et al.8	3.14

Wave attenuators	200 kW to 2.5 MW23
Point absorbers	20 kW to 6 MW24
Oscillating water columns	300 kW to 1 MW25
Overtopping device	4–11 MW26

 	Fig. 2  Combined offshore wind wave energy system.	 

1. Offshore hydrogen production from wave energy. 2014 (ref. 41)	Practical	Wave energy	PEM electrolysis	1595 Nm3 H2 per Day	Lead batteries	Ships (barges)
Reverse osmosis
Compression plant
2. Conversion of excess wind energy into H2 for fuel cell application.42	Theoretical	Wind energy	Electrolysis	Excess 4.5 TWH can generate 80000 tons of H2 per year	20000 tons are anticipated with 2 options; geological storage, empty gas fields, salt caverns or LH2 containers	H2 pipelines and LH2 trucks
3. Hydrogen production from sea wave for alternative energy vehicles for public transport in Trapani (Italy).43	Theoretical	Wind energy	Electrolysis	106054 kg per year for 100% transport needs	Inside the buoy-point absorber	Not specified; wire or boat transport
Sea wave
4. An inertial system for the production of electricity and hydrogen from sea wave energy.44	Prototype	Sea wave	Electrolysis	1 kW	Onboard	Onboard
5. Hydrogen production with sea water electrolysis using Norwegian offshore wind energy potentials.45	Theoretical techno-economic assessment	Wind	SO and PEM electrolysis	PEM: 8023902 kg	Not specified	Ships or subsea pipelines
SO: 7903266 kg
6. Hydrogen production from renewables: marine and hydrokinetic energy systems.46	Theoretical	Hydrokinetic	Emission reduction	Not specified	Not specified	Not specified
7. Green H2 economy in North Netherlands.47	Analytical	Wind	Electrolysis	160000 tons by 2030	Thermally insulated storage as cryogenic gas	Electrical cables
H2 as a mixture in existing gas pipelines
Ships
Inland vessels
8. Renewable H2 production using sailing ships48	Practical/prototype	Wind propulsive ship power	On-ship electrolyser	1.5 kW	Onboard storage	Ships
9. Introduction to a liquefied hydrogen carrier for a pilot. Hydrogen Energy Supply Chain (HESC) project in Japan49	Practical	Not applicable	Not applicable	Not applicable	Not specified	Liquid H2 carrier
10. Preliminary design of a wind driven vessel dedicated to hydrogen production50	Prototype	Wind	Electrolysis	200 kW	Onboard	Ships
11. Hydrogen generating sailing ship: conceptual design and feasibility study51	Prototype	Wind/water turbines	Electrolysis	Not specified	Not specified	Methyl cyclohexane onboard reactor

1. Economics of producing hydrogen as transportation fuel using offshore wind energy systems52	2008
2. Transmission alternatives for offshore electrical power53	2009
3. Renewable energy carriers: hydrogen or liquid air/nitrogen?54	2010
4. Current developments and future prospects of offshore wind and ocean energy55	2012
5. Conceptual design of ocean compressed air energy storage system56	2013
6. Energy storage against interconnection as a balancing mechanism for a 100% renewable UK electricity grid57	2014
7. Multiple regression analysis in the development of NiFe cells as energy storage solutions for intermittent power sources such as wind or solar58	2016
8. Optimizing investments in coupled offshore wind-electrolytic hydrogen storage systems in Denmark59	2017
9. Hydrogen generation by electrolysis and storage in salt caverns: potentials, economics and systems aspects with regard to the German energy transition60	2017
10. Re-energizing energy supply: electrolytically-produced hydrogen as a flexible energy storage medium and fuel for road transport61	2017
11. Modelling of a novel hydro-pneumatic accumulator for large-scale offshore energy storage applications62	2017

Output pressure	30 bar
Nominal hydrogen flow	3000 Nm3 h−1
Nominal input power	15 MW
AC power consumption	5–5.4 kW h Nm−3
Footprint	600 m2

 	Fig. 3  Independent offshore wind farm and electrolyser farm.	 

 	Fig. 4  Farm with multiple stand-alone integrated wind turbine and electrolyser.	 

Compressed gas@35 MPa	45	145	6.7
Compressed gas@70 MPa	50	100	6.0
Cryogenic H2 liquid	40	90	7.5
H2 solid in metal hydrides	215	55	1.4

 	Fig. 5  Cost of transportation of energy in different forms.	 
CO2 + 4H2→CH4 + 2H2O (methanation process/Sabatier reaction)

 	Fig. 6  Off-shore energy to gas network.	 

 	Fig. 7  An offshore power-to-gas system synergized with offshore oil & gas industry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Energy related carbon dioxide emissions in billion metric tons (2012–2040).	 

Metal	Pre-combustion	Infinite H2/CO2 selectivity
Carbon	Pre-combustion	High H2/CO2 selectivity
Alumina	Pre-combustion	Low cost; chemical & physical stability
Zeolite	Pre-combustion and post-combustion	Low cost; chemical & physical stability
MOF	Pre-combustion and post-combustion	Large pore volume & surface area
Silica	Pre-combustion	Low cost; high thermal stability
Polymeric	Post-combustion	Low cost; high N2/CO2 selectivity
Fluorite	Oxy-fuel combustion	High N2/CO2 selectivity
Perovskite	Oxy-fuel combustion	High N2/CO2 selectivity

 	Fig. 9  Cost impacts of adding CCS to a power plant.126	 

 	Fig. 10  Impression of an artificial island to support the offshore energy and its conversion infrastructure.	 

 	Fig. 11  Implementation methodology for offshore SNG production from OWFs.	 

 	Fig. 12  Electrolyser capacity versus the area required in m2.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
