Optimization of bio-diesel production from oils, cooking oils, microalgae, and castor and jatropha seeds: probing various heating sources and catalyst ...  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C2EE03530H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C2EE03530H
(Perspective)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 7460-7469Optimization of bio-diesel production from oils, cooking oils, microalgae, and castor and jatropha seeds: probing various heating sources and catalysts

        
          
            Miri 
            Koberg
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Aharon 
            Gedanken
          
          
        
      *
      Department of Chemistry and Kanbar Laboratory for Nanomaterials at the Bar-Ilan University Center for Advanced Materials and Nanotechnology, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan 52900, Israel. E-mail: Aharon.Gedanken@biu.ac.il;  Fax: +972-3-7384053;   Tel: +972-3-5318315
Received 
      22nd December 2011
    , Accepted 26th March 2012First published on 26th March 2012AbstractThe optimization of bio-diesel production depends on numerous parameters such as renewable biological triglyceride sources, type of catalyst and alcohol for the transesterification reaction, molar ratio of oil–alcohol, and heating sources. In this review we will highlight the use of microwave (MW) radiation for bio-diesel production and its advantage over other heating sources, starting with a comparison between the two-stage method consisting of oil extraction (the first step) and bio-diesel production by transesterification (the second step), with a one-stage method that provides direct transesterification of a feed-stock without the extraction step. A comparison will be made for the one- and two-stage methods performed under microwave heating, sonication, and reflux using SrO, KOH, and NaOH catalysts for bio-diesel production. The various feed-stocks reviewed in this perspective are triolein, soybean oil, microalgae biomass of Nannochloropsis, and castor and jatropha seeds. The extension of the microwave-heating methodology to continuous-flow processing has been used to scale up the reaction. Moreover, the presented continuous-flow bio-diesel preparation is done via a novel laminar flow reactor–separator. This instrument not only enables to scale up the reaction, but also allows glycerol as a byproduct to phase separate and settle from the reacting flow.Miri KobergMiri Koberg is a Ph.D. student in Gedanken's group. She got her B.Sc. degree at the Chemistry Department of Bar-Ilan University, specializing in Materials Chemistry. Her current research is centered on the catalytic synthesis of bio-diesel from renewable energy sources by microwave and sonochemistry. She was recently awarded the prestigious Ashkol scholarship by the Israel Ministry of Science.Aharon GedankenEmeritus Prof. Aharon Gedanken obtained his M.Sc. from Bar-Ilan University, and his Ph.D. degree from Tel Aviv University, Israel. After his postdoctoral research at USC in Los Angeles, he returned to Bar-Ilan in 1975 as a senior faculty. He was a visiting scientist at AT&T Bell Laboratories in 1980–8l, 1984 and 1987–88, and at NIDDK, NIH in the summers of 1989, 1990 and 1991. His synthetic specialties are in sonochemistry, microwave superheating, sono-electrochemistry, and reactions under autogenic pressure at elevated temperatures. Gedanken has published 610 peer-reviewed manuscripts in international journals, and has applied for 33 patents.

Broader context
This review presents the superiority of the MW (microwave) technique over conventional and sonochemical methods for producing bio-diesel from various feed-stocks. This superiority was demonstrated for two-stage as well as for the one-step transesterification reaction. The SrO catalyst is shown to be an ideal catalyst for the transesterification reaction, which can be easily separated from the reaction mixture and reused in many cycles with no decrease in the bio-diesel yield. Microalgae biomass of Nannochloropsis, and castor and jatropha seeds have a high content of oil and therefore are suitable as feed-stocks for bio-diesel production. Carrying out a one-stage direct transesterification of the feed-stock without the extraction step in MW is not only a short process, but it also yields more bio-diesel than the two-stage process. The results reveal that using the MW oven for bio-diesel production from castor and jatropha seeds, or Nannochloropsis in one stage with SrO, yields a 100% conversion to bio-diesel in 5 minutes. It is evident that while the energy consumption of the batch process may be on the order of that of the conventional methodology, the continuous-flow processes are more energy efficient.

1. Introduction
The demand for energy and its resources continues to rise due to increases in industrialization and population growth. The basic sources of energy are supplied through petrochemical sources, coal and natural gas, with the exception of hydroelectricity and nuclear energy. All of these sources are finite, and at current usage rates will be consumed shortly.1 As a result, there is increasing interest in developing alternative energy resources, which include hydrogen cells,2 solar energy,3 and wind power.4 However, these technologies are still at the developing stage and the cost of applying them is high. Petroleum diesel is considered a major conventional source of energy with a global consumption of 934 million tons of diesel fuel per year.5 Using petroleum as a source for fuel has significant disadvantages. The major disadvantage of petroleum-based fuel is that, unfortunately, it is on the verge of becoming extinct. It is estimated that petroleum will be depleted by 2050.6 Another disadvantage is the atmospheric pollution created by the use of petroleum diesel, including NOx, SOx, CO, particulate matter, and volatile organic compounds.7 As a result, there is an increasing interest in developing alternative fuels. An alternative fuel must be economically competitive, technically feasible, and environmentally acceptable. One possible alternative to fossil fuel is the use of bio-diesel. This fuel, which is made from renewable biological sources such as vegetable oil, has gained importance as an alternative fuel. Bio-diesel can replace diesel in vehicles, with little or no modifications of their engines. When considering the pollution caused by the combustion of conventional petroleum-based diesel,8,9 a shift to non-conventional sources such as bio-diesel is inevitable. Bio-diesel, which consists of fatty acid alkyl esters (FAAEs), has lower CO and hydrocarbon emissions, and particulate matter. NOx emissions are usually increased with bio-diesel. In addition, it is nontoxic and biodegradable.10,11 As an alternative fuel, bio-diesel will allow a balance to be sought among environmental, agricultural, and economic development.
The most common way to produce bio-diesel is to transesterify triglycerides of vegetable oil with alcohol in the presence of an alkali or acid catalyst.12–14 Chemically, bio-diesel consists of fatty acid alkyl ester (FAAE) molecules that differ by the length of the carbon chains, and the nature and position of double bonds in these chains. The type of carbon chains in FAME determines the bio-diesel quality, such as oxidation resistance and viscosity. A high percentage of saturated fatty acids is known to impart good oxidation resistance to bio-diesel.15 FAME samples consisting of carbon chains of not more than 18 carbons guarantee a viscosity within the ranges prescribed in bio-diesel standards. Transesterification is the displacement of alcohol from an ester by another one in a process similar to hydrolysis, except that alcohol is used instead of water.16 This process has been widely used to reduce the high viscosity of triglycerides. Transesterification is one of the reversible reactions and a little excess of alcohol is used to shift the equilibrium towards the formation of fatty acid alkyl esters and glycerol. The glycerol layer settles down at the bottom of the reaction vessel. Diglycerides and monoglycerides are the intermediates in this process (Fig. 1).17
 Fig. 1  The transesterification reaction. 
This review will show important parameters that should be taken into consideration in order to optimize and reduce considerably the cost of bio-diesel production, when MW is used as the heating source. The first parameter is related to renewable biological sources for triglycerides. The most common source for bio-diesel production is vegetable oil. These are edible oils such as soybean, sunflower and rapeseed oil.18 In order to overcome the problem of using edible oils, there are several non-edible oils extracted from microalgae biomass, and castor and jatropha seeds, which could be used as feed-stocks for bio-diesel production.19,20 Moreover, using the wastes of cooking oil could be another option as a replacement for fresh vegetable oil. The second parameter that must be considered in bio-diesel production is the type of catalyst for the transesterification reaction. The present review deals with a comparison between different types of catalysts such as base catalysts, the most commonly used, acidic catalysts, and alkaline earth metal oxide catalysts. These have been explored recently and were found to compare well with the catalysts mentioned above.21,22 Furthermore, a comparison between different alkaline earth metal oxide catalysts showed SrO to be the most suitable catalyst for transesterification from economical and technical aspects. The third parameter that should be taken into account is the heating source. The ideal heating source for the transesterification reaction should be efficient enough to complete the reaction in the shortest time on the one hand, but should be energy efficient, on the other hand. Moreover, in order to move from laboratory to industrial quantities, the heating source should be suitable for industrial applications. We will discuss different methods that have been applied as a heating source for bio-diesel production, such as conventional reflux, sonication, microwave irradiation, continuous-flow preparation of bio-diesel using microwave heating, and a novel laminar flow reactor separator. The last parameters that must be considered in bio-diesel production and will be discussed are the type of alcohol and the molar ratio of oil–alcohol which are the most suitable for bio-diesel production. Finally, we will present recent techniques for bio-diesel production, including a two-stage and a one-stage method. The two-stage method consists of oil extraction and bio-diesel production by transesterification from feed-stock. The one-stage method provides a direct transesterification of feed-stock without the extraction step using the combination of microwave or sonochemical irradiation as a heating source and SrO as a catalyst. These techniques were explored using different feed-stocks such as vegetable oil, cooking oil waste, microalgae and castor and jatropha seeds.
2. Discussion
2.1 Renewable biological sources for triglycerides
Renewable energy sources are expected to replace fossil fuels and reduce the greenhouse gas emissions that contribute not only to global warming, but also to other impacts on the environment and human life. Human activities can cause an increase in CO2 emission to the atmosphere; the amount of CO2 dissolved in the ocean will cause the pH of the water to gradually become more acidic. This pH decrease may cause a quick loss of the coral reefs and the rapid deterioration in the marine ecosystem biodiversity, with huge implications on marine life, and consequently, on life on earth.23 Thanks to the environmental benefits of bio-diesel, the alternative fuel should compete economically with diesel in order to survive on the market. The end cost of bio-diesel mainly depends on the price of the feed-stock, which accounts for 60–75% of the total cost of bio-diesel fuel.24 Since vegetable oils, the most common source for bio-diesel, may also be used for human consumption, this can lead to an increase in the price of edible vegetable oils, causing the cost of bio-diesel to increase and prevent its usage, even with its advantages over diesel fuel.25 In addition, the need for land for bio-fuel production from vegetable oils may lead to competition over territory and biodiversity loss, due to the cutting of existing forests and the utilization of ecologically important areas.26 In order to avoid competition with edible vegetable oils, the low cost and profitable bio-diesel should be produced from low cost feed-stocks. Non-edible feed-stocks such as castor and jatropha seeds, and the waste from cooking oil are known to be low cost, renewable sources for bio-diesel production.
The benefit of castor and jatropha seeds for bio-diesel production resulted from their fast growth rate and high oil content. For example, castor seeds can reach an oil content of up to about 55% and 35% for jatropha seeds. In addition, the extracted oil is non-toxic, and the growing of these seeds can adapt to various climates, soil type, and water, and have a high resistance to pests and disease. Moreover, the extracted oil from castor seeds is viscous, pale yellow in color and non-volatile. The main component of castor oil is ricinoleic acid (80–90%). It also contains small amounts of linoleic acids (3–6%), oleic acid (2–4%), and saturated fatty acids (1–5%). Castor oil contains peculiar chemical compositions, as listed above, which make it attractive as a raw material for the preparation of several compounds for pharmaceutical and chemical industries.27,28 Bio-diesel produced from castor oil has a much higher viscosity than that prepared from more conventional oil sources. Despite its high viscosity it can still be mixed with fossil diesel or less viscous bio-diesels.29,30 Ricinoleic acid contains both a double bond and a hydroxyl group and can afford an increase in lubricity, as compared to conventional vegetable oils, and thus become a prime candidate as an additive for diesel fuel.31–33 In addition, bio-diesel from castor oil has a low cetane number. Using the wastes from cooking oil as a source of bio-diesel is not only economical, but also will affect positively the quality of the environment, because nowadays most of the used cooking oil is poured into the city sewage system. This practice contributes to the pollution of oceans, lakes, and underground water, and is very harmful to both the environment and human health.
However, the available quantities of edible oils and waste cooking oil are not enough to match today's demands for bio-diesel. Thus, the transition to bio-fuels, such as microalgae, has certain advantages compared to other energy crops: (1) microalgae do not require freshwater and can grow in salt or even contaminated water, in the ocean or in ponds, thus preserving freshwater that is becoming an ever more rare and valuable natural resource. (2) Furthermore, algae can be cultivated on land that is unsuitable for food production. The cultivation of maize as a biomass fuel source has caused the significant erosion of arable land, whereas microalgae cultivation does not require arable land, and thus does not displace food crops. (3) Moreover, compared to other bio-fuel crops, microalgae grow much more quickly and contain more energy per unit weight. They can generate as much as 40 times more oil per acre than other plants used for biofuels.34 (4) In addition, microalgae can produce both bio-fuel and valuable co-products such as omega 3 fatty acids and several metabolites of economic interest, such as carotenoids (e.g. astaxanthin and lutein), vitamin E (α-tocopherol), and polyunsaturated fatty acids (arachidonic and γ-linoleic).35 Thus, they have a large potential for animal feed, food, cosmetics, and the pharmaceutical industry, which makes their conversion to bio-diesel cost effective. The presence of a high percentage of saturated fatty acids in the microalgae biomass of Nannochloropsis is known to impart good oxidation resistance to bio-diesel. Low percentage of methyl esters have a carbon chain of >18 carbons. This guarantees a low viscosity of the bio-diesel. Bio-diesel from microalgae has also some disadvantages: certain species of microalgae produce unstable bio-diesel with many polyunsaturates, and more research is needed in order to produce economically efficient technology for the harvesting of microalgae with a high content of oil.36
2.2 Catalysts for a transesterification reaction
A catalyst is needed to speed up the transesterification reaction and its yield. Sulfuric acid (H2SO4) is the commonly used catalyst for acid transesterification, whereas sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and potassium hydroxide (KOH) are the catalysts used for alkaline transesterification.37 However, the above-mentioned catalysts have many drawbacks. The hydroxides, the base catalysts, lead to the saponification reaction, which is an undesirable side reaction. Saponification complicates the separation of the FAME (bio-diesel) phase from other phases, decreases the bio-diesel yield, and makes catalyst recycling more difficult.38–40 It should be mentioned that alkoxides are preferred over hydroxides in alkaline transesterification. Saponification, as discussed in the first paragraph, is reduced when using alkoxides. In addition, using an acidic catalyst increases the bio-diesel yield on the one hand, but slows down the transesterification under high temperature and pressure, on the other hand.41,42 Acid catalysis is commonly applied to lower the acid content of high free fatty acid feed-stocks prior to conventional transesterification. In order to prevent these drawbacks, many types of alkaline earth metal oxide catalysts have been explored for the transesterification reaction, such as BaO, SrO, CaO, and MgO.43–45 MgO and CaO have a low activity in the transesterification of vegetable oils to bio-diesel and the reaction has a slow reaction rate. Peterson reported that a mixture of CaO and MgO provided a higher catalytic activity than that of only CaO in the transesterification of vegetable oils to bio-diesel, but MgO caused soap formation in the reaction process.46 BaO is noxious and can be dissolved by methanol. Therefore, BaO is not a suitable catalyst for bio-diesel production.47 SrO can catalyze many chemical reactions, such as the oxidative coupling of methane, nitroaldol reactions, mixed Tishchenko reactions and the selective oxidation of propane.48–50 SrO is insoluble in vegetable oil, methanol, and fatty acid methyl ester, and, most important, accelerates the transesterification reaction from hours to seconds.51,52 Despite the lower surface area of SrO as reported elsewhere,53 there are other factors that cause its high activity. The factors that determine the catalytic activity of alkaline earth metal oxide are the surface area, alkalinity, and acid–base sites. However, SrO tends to absorb water vapor in the presence of air and Sr(OH)2 is formed as a result of this reaction. In addition, SrO in the presence of air absorbs CO2 to form SrCO3. In order to prevent the formation of SrCO3 and Sr(OH)2 which cause undesirable saponification, SrO should undergo a thermal decomposition process before bio-diesel production. Additionally, transesterification in the presence of SrO should occur under argon atmosphere.51 Moreover, recycling the SrO catalyst is essential for economic reasons. Therefore, we reused the catalyst for 10 cycles and studied its activity in each cycle. Before recycling, the SrO catalyst was treated for the elimination of Sr(OH)2, as described above. Each cycle occurred under the optimal conditions for bio-diesel production from castor and jatropha seeds, namely, direct transesterification using microwave as a source of heating for 5 min, as will be explained below. The activity of SrO was studied by calculating the bio-diesel conversion of seed oils and the bio-diesel yield of the seeds' biomass in each cycle. Fig. 2 presents the effect of the repeated use of SrO with the castor or jatropha biomass on the bio-diesel conversion, and its yield with respect to the weight of the biomass. According to Fig. 2a, the oil conversion to FAME is high and quite stable for the first six recycles. From the seventh recycle the bio-diesel conversion slightly decreases from 99.5% and 98.8% to 97.8% and 96.9% for the castor and jatropha seeds, respectively. Even after ten cycles the bio-diesel conversion is still 97.8% and 96.9% for castor and jatropha seeds, respectively. The results confirm the stability and the sustained activity of SrO, which is of great importance for industrial application. The reason for the loss of 2–3% in conversion might be due to the loss of the catalyst during SrO recycling. Fig. 2b shows an increase in bio-diesel yield with an increase in the recycle number. After ten cycles the bio-diesel yield increases from 57.2% and 41.1% to 63.2% and 44.8% for castor and jatropha seeds, respectively. The increase in the yield during the recycling resulted from the fact that during direct transesterification oil was extracted not only from the biomass of the fresh seeds, but also from the residues of the biomass related to previous recycles.
 Fig. 2  Effect of repeated use of SrO and castor/jatropha biomass on (a) bio-diesel conversion and (b) bio-diesel yield = the percentage obtained from the seeds. Reaction conditions: direct transesterification; microwave heating; reaction time was 5 min. 
2.3 Type of alcohol and molar ratio of oil–alcohol
The use of methanol as the alcohol in the transesterification reaction is more common than ethanol because of its low cost. However, several researchers prefer using ethanol derived from sugarcane in the transesterification reaction.54,55 Another reason for using methanol is because the base catalyzed formation of methyl ester is simple compared to the formation of ethyl esters. Specifically, the formation of a stable emulsion during transesterification using ethanol is a problem. Methanol and ethanol are not miscible with triglycerides at ambient temperature, and the reaction mixtures are usually mechanically stirred to enhance mass transfer. During the course of the reaction, emulsions usually form. In the case of transesterification using methanol, these emulsions quickly and easily break down to form a glycerol phase at the bottom and a FAME phase at the top. In transesterifications using ethanol, these emulsions are more stable and severely complicate the separation and purification of fatty acid ethyl ester.56
The molar ratio of triglyceride to alcohol is one of the most important variables affecting the yield of FAME.57 The stoichiometric ratio for transesterification requires one mole of triglyceride and three moles of alcohol to yield three moles of FAME and one mole of glycerol. However, transesterification is an equilibrium reaction in which a large excess of alcohol is required to drive the reaction to products. For the optimal conversion of triglyceride to FAME, a 1:6 molar ratio of oil–alcohol should be used. However, the high molar ratio of alcohol to vegetable oil interferes with the separation of glycerin because there is an increase in solubility. When glycerin remains in solution, it helps to reverse the equilibrium back to the reactant, lowering the yield of esters.1 The transesterification of 9-octadecenoic acid (Z) 1,2,3-propanetriyl ester (triolein) as a substrate, because this is a good single-component model for vegetable oil with methanol, was studied at different molar ratios. Transesterification occurred using potassium or sodium hydroxide as a base catalyst, in a microwave apparatus in sealed tubes at 50 °C. Optimal reaction conditions involved using a 1:6 triolein–methanol ratio (1:2 stoichiometric ratio), 5 wt% KOH, heating the reaction mixture to 50 °C, and holding at this temperature for 1 min. These conditions yielded a 98% conversion of the triolein to methyl oleate. An increased triolein–methanol ratio, reaction time, and reaction temperature or KOH loading did not increase the yield. The 1:6 molar ratio of oil–methanol used under MW conditions is lower than that reported when conventional heating is applied. Under conventional heating a ratio varying from 1:9 up to 1:30 is more common.58
2.4 Heating sources
Transesterification is usually conducted by conventional heating for introducing energy into reactions. Recently, various alternative heating sources to conventional heating were used for driving the transesterification reaction, such as the microwave dielectric heating technique and the sonochemical method.55 Heating up the reaction mixture in MW is faster than in the conventional reflux. MW acceleration of chemicals is strongly dependent on the reaction mixture or the solvent having a dipole moment. It was found that MW radiation is more effective in the destruction of feed-stocks containing oil into smaller particles, in order to extract the oil efficiently. Additionally, MW radiation accelerates the transesterification reaction better than the other techniques. There are two mechanisms by which microwave energy can interact with a sample. If a molecule possesses a dipole moment, then, when it is exposed to microwave irradiation, the dipole tries to align with the applied electric field. Because the electric field is oscillating, the dipoles constantly try to realign to follow this. At 2.45 GHz, molecules have time to align with the electric field but not to follow the oscillating field exactly. This continual reorientation of the molecules results in friction, and thus, heat. If a molecule is charged, then the electric field component of the microwave irradiation moves the ions back and forth through the sample while they also collide with each other. This movement again generates heat. Because the mixture of vegetable oil, methanol, and the catalyst contains both polar and ionic components, rapid heating is observed upon microwave irradiation, and because the energy interacts with the sample on a molecular level, very efficient heating can be obtained. In addition, because the energy interacts with the molecules at a very fast rate, the molecules do not have time to relax and the heat generated can be, for short times, much greater than the overall recorded temperature of the bulk reaction mixture. In essence, there will be instantaneous localized superheating.59,60 Thus, the bulk temperature may not be an accurate measure of the temperature at which the actual reaction is taking place. Microwave heating compares very favorably over conventional methods, where heating can be relatively slow and inefficient, because transferring energy into a sample depends upon convection currents and the thermal conductivity of the reaction mixture.61 The reason for the short reaction time under MW is due to the higher temperature obtained under MW of the super heated liquids.
The bio-diesel yield and conversion of the triglyceride to bio-diesel of the sonochemical process is much higher than regular reflux. The efficiency of the sonochemical process is due to the effect of the collapsing bubbles that causes a local, very high temperature leading to the breaking of more feed-stock structures into smaller clusters, to oil release, and to a fast transesterification reaction.62 In order to move from laboratory to industrial amounts, the heating source should be suitable for industrial needs. As a result, several techniques have been conducted at the continuous-flow preparation of bio-diesel using microwave heating and a novel laminar flow reactor–separator, as described below.
3. Recent methods for bio-diesel production
This review advocates the MW method and the advantages of its use. However, to emphasize the strengths of MW, we have presented for comparison the transesterification under other conditions as well. Below we list some of the more important methods for bio-diesel production.
3.1 Two-stage method for bio-diesel production using microwave/sonication/reflux and a SrO/KOH/NaOH catalyst
The most popular methods for bio-diesel production consist of two separate stages, the first being oil extraction from relevant biomass/seeds and the second being bio-diesel production by the transesterification of oil. Table 1 demonstrates the conversion and percentage yields of different reactions for bio-diesel production. The conversion percentage is the measure of the amount of bio-diesel obtained from a known amount of oil in the biomass/seeds. The conversion percentage is defined as the percent of bio-diesel obtained from a known amount of extracted oil. The conversion is calculated in our studies by 1H NMR measurements, and by integration over the signals representing the reactants and the products. The relevant signals chosen for integration were those of the methoxy groups in the FAME (3.66 ppm, singlet) and those of the α-methylene protons present in all the triglyceride derivatives (2.3 ppm, triplet) of the oil. The decision to use the described signals resulted from the fact that the selected NMR signals are distinct, compared to other signals in the spectrum. As a result, the integration value can be estimated with a low percentage error.
Table 1 Screening reactions for bio-diesel production using different methods




Entry no.
Feed-stock sort
Methodb
Conversion (%)
Yield (%)





a All reactions conducted with SrO catalyst except the first reaction there KOH/NaOH was used in place of SrO.
b Trans = transesterification; Ex = extraction; MW = microwave; Sono = sonification.





1a
Triolein
Trans MW
98
—


2
Soybean oil
Trans MW
97
—


3
Wastes of cooked oil
Trans MW
99.8
—


4

Nannochloropsis

Ex-Trans MW
99.7
32.8


5

Nannochloropsis

Direct MW
99.9
37.1


6

Nannochloropsis

Ex-Trans Sono
91
18.9


7

Nannochloropsis

Direct Sono
93
20.9


8

Nannochloropsis

Direct Reflex
74.6
6.95


9
Castor seeds
Ex-Trans MW
99.5
52.7


10
Castor seeds
Direct MW
99.95
57.2


11
Castor seeds
Ex-Trans Sono
92.1
46.7


12
Castor seeds
Direct Sono
93.6
48.2


13
Castor seeds
Ex-Trans Reflex
80.15
24


14
Castor seeds
Direct Reflex
80.9
24.7


15
Jatropha seeds
Ex-Trans MW
98.1
39.7


16
Jatropha seeds
Direct MW
99.7
41.1


17
Jatropha seeds
Ex-Trans Sono
92.6
31.5


18
Jatropha seeds
Direct Sono
93.7
32.9


19
Jatropha seeds
Ex-Trans Reflex
78.1
19.25


20
Jatropha seeds
Direct Reflex
78.4
19.9




Entry 1 in Table 1 shows a transesterification reaction with 98% conversion of triolein to methyl oleate. The heating source for this reaction mixture was a commercially available monomode microwave unit (CEM Discover) using an initial microwave power of 25 W. The reaction conditions involved using a 1:6 triolein–methanol ratio (1:2 stoichiometric ratio), 5 wt% KOH, heating the reaction mixture to 50 °C, and maintaining this temperature for 1 min. An increased triolein–methanol ratio, reaction time, and reaction temperature or KOH loading were not necessary. Changing the base from potassium hydroxide to sodium hydroxide had no significant effect on product conversion. For the large-scale reactions, a commercially available multimode microwave apparatus was used (CEM MARS). The instrument consists of a continuous microwave power delivery system with an operator selectable power output from 0 to 1200 W. This instrument is capable of conducting batch experiments of up to 3 kg of oil at a time. On this large scale, it was possible to decrease the KOH loading to 1 wt% with no noticeable effect on conversion. Using NaOH in place of KOH gives the same results.58 Entries 2 and 3 in Table 1 relate to a transesterification reaction from soybean oil and wastes of cooking oil, respectively. A domestic microwave oven (DMO) operating at 2.45 GHz with stirring was used for the transesterification reactions, in a batch mode under argon atmosphere. The reactions were conducted using a SrO catalyst and a molar ratio of 1:6 between the oil and methanol. A 97% conversion of soybean oil to bio-diesel was obtained after 40 s for an unstirred reaction, and a 99.8% conversion of the cooking oil waste was achieved after only 10 s for a stirred reaction.51 Moreover, we performed the two-stage method for bio-diesel production, namely, extraction and transesterification from the microalgae biomass of Nannochloropsis and castor and jatropha seeds using microwave heating, sonication, and reflux. The extraction stage was performed using a mixture of methanol–chloroform (1:2 v/v) for 5 min. The use of a chlorinated solvent for extraction is not very attractive under the environmental and other aspects; as a result all reactions were performed under argon atmosphere. Table 1 shows that the best results for the two-stage reactions are obtained when using a MW. The transesterification step using a SrO catalyst was completed in 2 min. Using microwave heating, a conversion of 99.7%, 99.5%, and 98.1% and yields of 32.8%, 52.7%, and 39.7% were obtained from Nannochloropsis and castor and jatropha seeds, respectively (Entries 4, 9, and 15 in Table 1).62
3.2 One-stage method for bio-diesel production using microwave/sonication/reflux and a SrO catalyst
Recently, a one-stage method has been reported that provides the direct transesterification of a microalgae biomass without the extraction step using conventional heating at 90 °C for 40 min with sulfuric acid as a catalyst.63 Moreover, a one-stage method has been reported that involves direct transesterification of castor seeds using conventional heating for 1 h with KOH as a catalyst.64 The described method resulted in a conversion of only 65.9%. The current work demonstrates the optimization of a one-stage method using the combination of microwave or sonochemical irradiation as the heating source and SrO as the catalyst.62 This combination improves considerably the direct conversion of the microalgae biomass of Nannochloropsis and castor and jatropha seeds to bio-diesel. Microwave and sonochemical irradiation accelerate both the release of oil and the subsequent transesterification reaction. SrO as a base catalyst, together with seeds containing oil residue, can be separated from the reaction mixture and reused. Table 1 shows different one-stage methods, including microwave, sonication, and reflux, as a heating source for bio-diesel production from the above-mentioned feed-stocks. All the one-stage methods occurred in a mixture of methanol–chloroform (1:2 v/v) for 5 min using a SrO catalyst. The temperature was 60 °C for the direct transesterification conducted by microwave and reflux, and 50 °C for sonication. The most efficient one-stage method similar to the two-stage method was found to be microwave irradiation as the heating source. Using microwave heating, conversions of 99.9%, 99.95%, and 99.7% and yields of 37.1%, 57.2%, and 41.1% were obtained for Nannochloropsis and castor and jatropha seeds, respectively (Entries 5, 10, and 16 in Table 1). A schematic presentation of the bio-diesel production is presented in Fig. 3. The scheme summarized the one- and two-stage methods for bio-diesel production.
 Fig. 3  Schematic presentation of the bio-diesel production. The scheme illustrates the two-stage reaction, namely, extraction and transesterification, and a one-stage direct transesterification. Each process is conducted using microwave, sonochemistry, and reflux. 
3.3 Continuous-flow bio-diesel preparation via microwave heating
The extension of the microwave-heating methodology to continuous-flow processing has been used to scale up the reaction. A prototype reaction vessel, of approximately a volume of 2 L/4 L, was placed inside the microwave cavity with tubing attached to the vessel, with the objective of passing material into the reactor at the bottom and out through the top. A thermowell was also inserted into the reactor through a fiber-optic probe, so that the temperature of the reaction mixture could be measured. The probe was located in the upper quadrant of the reactor. A mixture of vegetable oil, methanol, and catalyst was made (1:6 ratio of vegetable oil–methanol and 1 wt% KOH as a catalyst) and placed into a holding tank. A quantity of this mixture was pumped into the reaction vessel to fill it completely. The flow was then stopped, and the mixture was heated to 50 °C using a commercially available multimode microwave apparatus (CEM MARS). After 1 min at this temperature, the reagent stream was restarted and the remainder of the contents of the holding tank was pumped through the reactor at a different rate in each experiment. Analysis of the product stream showed that bio-diesel was being formed. This was also evident by the buildup of a significant glycerin layer at the bottom of the reactor. The extent of transesterification was determined by a 1H NMR solution, spectroscopy, and gas chromatography (GC) analysis.
A conversion of 98% to bio-diesel was obtained after the reaction involved using an initial microwave power of 1600 W, and passing material through the reactor at a rate of 2 L min−1 in a 2 L/4 L vessel. Using a maximum flow rate of 7.2 L min−1 in a 4 L vessel resulted in a 99% conversion to bio-diesel. The energy consumption was monitored during the course of the reactions using conventional heating, microwave heating, and continuous-flow via microwave heating. Table 2 summarizes the energy consumption values of each reaction. It is evident that while the energy consumption of the batch process may be in the order of the conventional methodology, the continuous-flow processes are more energy efficient with an energy consumption of 26.0 kJ L−1 at a 7.2 L min−1 feed-stock flow.65
Table 2 Energy consumption estimations for the preparation of bio-diesel using conventional and microwave heating




Entry no.
Reaction conditions
Energy consumptiona (kJ L−1)





a Normalized for energy consumed per litre of bio-diesel prepared.
b On the basis of values from the joint U.S. Department of Agriculture and U.S. Department of Energy 1998 study into the life cycle inventory of bio-diesel and petroleum diesel for use in an urban bus.
c Assuming a power consumption of 1700 W and a microwave input of 1045 W.
d Assuming a power consumption of 2600 W and a microwave input of 1600 W.
e Assuming a power consumption of 1300 W, a microwave input of 800 W, a time to reach 50 °C of 3.5 min, and a hold time at 50 °C of 1 min.





1
Conventional heatingb
94.3


2
Microwave, continuous flow at a 7.2 L min−1 feedstock flow
26.0


3
Microwave, continuous flow at a 2 L min−1 feedstock flowc
60.3 (92.3)d


4e
Microwave heating, 4.6 L batch reaction
90.1




In addition, another reaction was conducted using a continuous-flow mode where methanol was replaced by butanol. The advantage of using butanol is that it is a biorenewable resource in vegetable oil, while methanol is not. The disadvantage of using butanol derives from its influence on the reaction rate. Leadbeater and his colleagues wanted to develop a process for the rapid, easy preparation of bio-diesel derived from vegetable oil and butanol, both of which would now be biorenewable feed-stocks. There have been previous efforts directed at preparing bio-diesels using 1-butanol as the alcohol component. However, the relative rate of reaction of butanol, as compared to methanol, makes it a more difficult prospect. Leadbeater and his colleagues wanted to see if the issues associated with the slow transesterification reaction between butanol and vegetable oil could be overcome by a continuous-flow mode using microwave heating. The base-catalyzed preparation of bio-diesel is known to be significantly faster than using an acid catalysed technique. Our objective was to see whether the reaction rate of the acid-catalyzed route could be accelerated using microwave irradiation, thus expanding the range of possible feed-stocks that could be processed. For the methyl ester reactions Leadbeater and his colleagues were able to flow the reactants at 7.2 L min−1 as opposed to the 2.3 L min−1 in the preparation of butyl esters (bio-diesel derived from vegetable oil and butanol). In addition, because of its increased molecular weight, the required volume of butanol is higher than that of methanol for the bio-diesel prepared per unit time. This would suggest that the process to generate butyl esters is not as energy efficient as that of methyl ester formation. However, there are no figures available for the conventional preparation of butyl esters to perform a complete comparison. The methodology allows for the reaction to be run under atmospheric conditions in a continuous-flow mode via a microwave power of 1600 W. The process can be performed at flow rates up to 2.3 L min−1 using a 4 L reaction vessel. It can be utilized with new or used vegetable oil with 1-butanol and a 1:6 molar ratio of oil to alcohol. Sulfuric acid or potassium hydroxide can be used as the catalyst.66
Another continuous flow MW system (Con-Flow) was built. The system consists of a domestic microwave oven (SHARP model R-390f). The pump used is a laboratory-available pump, Divac 1.2, which allows a solvent flow of approximately 1 L min−1. The bio-diesel reaction was carried out using commercially available canola and sunflower oil. The reaction is a transesterification of triglycerides with methanol using KOH as the catalyst. In different experiments, 500 mL of oil (460 g) was mixed with 135 mL of methanol containing 5 g of KOH, which was previously dissolved. The methanol–oil (triglyceride) molar ratio was 6:1, as mentioned above. The product yield in the Con-Flow system was 92% for canola and 89% for sunflower oil. To compare the product yield of the Con-Flow system with a batch oven, several batch reactions were conducted. Although the batch reaction with one-tenth of the materials (50 mL of oil) gave a good 97% yield, the reaction with the same amount of reagents (500 mL of oil) resulted in only a 64% yield. This proves the inability of batch domestic microwave ovens to conduct large-scale reactions, and emphasizes the advantage of the Con-Flow method. While operating the Con-Flow system for the bio-diesel reaction the electricity consumption was measured, and it was found that 930 W were consumed for the completion of the reaction (7 min).67
3.4 Continuous-flow bio-diesel preparation via a novel laminar flow reactor–separator
The majority of current bio-diesel production methods employ batch reactor technology using small amounts. In order to produce bio-diesel in larger amounts in industry, a continuous flow processes are needed. Owing to the immiscibility of vegetable oil, triglycerides and methanol (reactants), and also bio-diesel and glycerol (products), the synthesis of bio-diesel takes place as a two-phase reaction. Batch reactors utilize intense mixing to create and maintain a stable emulsion in order to minimize mass transfer limitations and to allow the reaction to reach kinetic equilibrium. Under batch operation, subsequent separation stages are required to remove the co-products, glycerol and methanol, from the bio-diesel product. There are several existing bio-diesel reactor technologies that are capable of simultaneously removing the glycerol phase and driving the reaction to conversions exceeding 99%. These are generally very energy intensive and may require highly elevated temperature and pressure. Two strategies that have been employed to-date to achieve continuous bio-diesel production coupled with glycerol removal are continuous centrifuge technology and reactive distillation.69,70 The former requires additional equipment and the energy costs associated with their operation, and the latter introduces substantial energy costs for the vaporization of lighter components.
The present study analyzes the performance of a novel laminar flow bio-diesel reactor/separator for which a static mixing unit was exploited as an injector to a reaction chamber with no moving parts. Reaction conditions took place at slightly elevated temperatures (40–50 °C) and atmospheric pressure. The reaction chamber was composed of a small static mixing unit encompassed by a much larger reaction vessel; reactants flow through tortuous pathways in the static mixer before entering the main reaction vessel. When the emulsified reactants are released into the main reaction vessel, bulk velocity in the axial direction is decreased due to a large increase in column diameter. By operating under laminar flow conditions, the glycerol that is formed settles down, and is phase separated as long as the upward flow velocity is slower than the settling velocity of glycerol. The reactor was operated using pretreated waste canola oil as a feed-stock; potassium hydroxide dissolved in methanol was used as a catalyst. The reactor performance was assessed by computing a conversion of vegetable oil triglycerides to bio-diesel, as well as the subsequent separation of the co-product glycerol stream. Using an overall feed of 1.2 L min−1, a 6:1 molar ratio of methanol to vegetable oil triglycerides and a 1.3 weight% catalyst loading, the reactor was able to achieve a greater than 99% conversion of pretreated waste canola oil to bio-diesel and remove 70–99% of the produced glycerol.68
4. Conclusions
This review presents the superiority of the MW technique over conventional and sonochemical methods for producing bio-diesel from various feed-stocks. This superiority was demonstrated for two-stage methods as well as for the one-step transesterification reaction. The SrO catalyst was shown as an ideal catalyst for the transesterification reaction, which can be easily separated from the reaction mixture and reused in many cycles with no decrease in the bio-diesel yield. Microalgae biomass of Nannochloropsis and castor and jatropha seeds have a high content of oil and therefore are suitable as feed-stocks for bio-diesel production. Carrying out a one-stage direct transesterification of the feed-stock without the extraction step in MW is not only a shorter process than the two-stage process, but it also yields more bio-diesel than in the two-stage process. The results reveal that using the MW oven for bio-diesel production from castor and jatropha seeds or Nannochloropsis in one stage with SrO can achieve a 100% conversion to bio-diesel in 5 minutes.
The extension of the microwave-heating methodology to continuous-flow processing has been used to scale up the reaction. Using a maximum flow rate of 7.2 L min−1 in a 4 L vessel resulted in a 99% conversion to bio-diesel. It is evident that while the energy consumption of the batch process may be on the order of that of the conventional methodology, the continuous-flow processes are more energy efficient. Moreover, the invention of continuous-flow bio-diesel preparation via a novel laminar flow reactor–separator ideally achieves the high conversion of vegetable oil triglycerides to bio-diesel, while simultaneously allowing glycerol to phase separate and settle from the reacting flow.
References
L. C. Meher, D. Vidya Sagar and S. N. Naik, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2006, 10, 248–268 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Penner, Energy, 2006, 31, 33–43 CrossRef CAS .
O. Kruse, J. Rupprecht, J. R. Mussgnug, G. C. Dismukes and B. Hankamer, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2005, 4, 957–969 CAS .
T. Blackler and M. T. Iqbal, Renewable Energy, 2006, 31, 489–502 CrossRef .
M. G. Kulkarni and A. K. Dalai, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2006, 45, 2901–2913 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Goyal, D. Seal and R. C. Saxena, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2008, 12, 504–517 CrossRef CAS .

          L. D. Klass, Biomass for Renewable Energy, Fuels and Chemicals, Academic Press, New York,  1998, pp. 1–2 Search PubMed .
J. Lü, C. Sheahan and P. Fu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2451–2466 Search PubMed .
G. Knothe, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 759–766 CAS .
M. Verziu, B. Cojocaru, J. Hu, R. Richards, C. Ciuculescu, P. Filip and V. I. Parvulescu, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 373–381 RSC .
A. P. Abbott, P. M. Cullis, M. J. Gibson, R. C. Harris and E. Raven, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 868–872 RSC .
G. Vicente, M. Martinez and J. Aracil, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc., 2005, 82, 899–904 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Serio, R. Tesser, M. Dimiccoli, F. Cammarota, M. Nastasi and E. G. Santacesaria, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2005, 239, 111–115 CrossRef .
L. T. Peiro, G. V. Mendez and X. G. Durany, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4977–4981 CrossRef .
N. Kondamudi, J. Strull, M. Misra and S. K. Mohapatra, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2009, 57, 6163–6166 CrossRef CAS .
A. Srivastava and R. Prasad, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2000, 4, 111–133 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Refaat, S. T. El Sheltawy and K. U. Sadek, Int. J. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 5, 315–322 CAS .
H. J. Berchmans and S. Hirata, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 1716–1721 CrossRef CAS .
L. Soh and J. Zimmerman, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1422–1429 RSC .
C. Martín, A. Moure, G. Martín, E. Carrillo, H. Domínguez and J. C. Parajó, Biomass Bioenergy, 2010, 34, 533–538 CrossRef .
T. Issariyakul, M. G. Kulkarni, A. K. Dalai and N. N. Bakhshi, Fuel Process. Technol., 2007, 88, 429–436 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Singh and S. D. Fernando, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 2067–2069 CrossRef CAS .

          W. G. Ormerod, P. Freund, A. Smith and J. Davison, IEA greenhouse gas R&D programme, UK: International Energy Agency,  2002.
M. Canakci and J. H. Sanli, J. Ind. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 35, 431–441 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Mata, A. A. Martins and N. S. Caetano, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 217–232 CrossRef CAS .

          Renewable Fuel Agency (RFA), The Gallagher review of the indirect effects of biofuels production,  2008.
D. S. Ogunniyi, Bioresour. Technol., 2006, 97, 1086–1091 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. P. Meneghetti, M. R. Meneghetti, C. R. Wolf, E. C. Silva, G. E. S. Lima, M. A. Coimbra, J. I. Soletti and S. H. V. Carvalho, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc., 2006, 83, 819–822 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. S. Santana, P. F. Martins, N. da Silva, C. B. Batistella, R. Maciel-Filho and M. R. Wolf-Maciel, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2010, 88, 626–632 CrossRef CAS .
D. da Costa Barbosa, T. M. Serra, S. M. P. Meneghetti and M. R. Meneghetti, Fuel, 2010, 89, 3791–3794 CrossRef .
J. Goodrum and D. Geller, Bioresour. Technol., 2005, 96, 851–855 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ramezani, S. Rowshanzamir and M. H. Eikani, Energy, 2010, 35, 4142–4148 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hincapié, F. Mondragón and D. López, Fuel, 2011, 90, 1618–1623 CrossRef .
P. M. Schenk, S. R. Thomas-Hall, E. Stephens, U. C. Marx, J. H. Mussgnug, C. Posten, O. Kruse and B. Hankamer, BioEnergy Res., 2008, 1, 20–43 CrossRef .
S. A. Scott, M. P. Davey, J. S. Dennis, I. Horst, C. J. Howe, D. J. Lea-Smith and A. G. Smith, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2010, 21, 277–286 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demirbas and M. F. Demirbas, Energy Convers. Manage., 2011, 52, 163–170 CrossRef .
Y. C. Sharma, B. Singh and S. N. Upadhyay, Fuel, 2008, 87, 2355–2373 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wenlei, P. Hong and C. Ligong, Appl. Catal., A, 2006, 300, 67–74 CrossRef .
F. X. Yang, Y. Q. Su, X. H. Li, Q. Zhang and R. C. Sun, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56, 7891–7896 CrossRef CAS .
U. Rashid and F. Anwar, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 1306–1312 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Serio, M. Cozzolino, M. Giordano, R. Tesser, P. Patrono and E. Santacesaria, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2007, 46, 6379–6384 CrossRef .
M. M. R. Talukder, J. C. Wu, S. K. Lau, L. C. Cui, G. Shimin and A. Lim, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 1–4 CrossRef CAS .
T. Seki, H. Kabashima and K. Akutsu, J. Catal., 2001, 204, 393–401 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Cantrell, L. J. Gillie, A. F. Lee and K. Wilson, Appl. Catal., A, 2005, 287, 183–190 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xuejun, H. Huayang, W. Yujun and Z. Shenlin, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 1107–1111 CrossRef .
G. R. Peterson and W. P. Scarrah, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc., 1984, 61, 1593–1597 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Buyevskaya and M. Baerns, Catal. Today, 1998, 42, 315–323 CrossRef CAS .
K. Akutu, H. Kabashima and T. Seki, J. Catal., 2003, 217, 117–126 Search PubMed .
T. Iizuka, H. Hattori, Y. Ohno, J. Sohma and K. Tanabe, J. Catal., 1971, 22, 130–139 CrossRef .
Y. Ono, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 406–415 CrossRef CAS .
M. Koberg, R. Abu-Much and A. Gedanken, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 1073–1078 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Patil, V. G. Gude, L. M. Camacho and S. Deng, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 1298–1304 CrossRef .
D. P. Patil and S. Deng, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4619–4624 CrossRef .
F. Ma and M. Hanna, Bioresour. Technol., 1999, 70, 1–15 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zagonel, P. Peralta-Zamora and L. Ramos, Talanta, 2004, 63, 1021–1025 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, S. K. Konar and D. G. V. Boocock, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc., 2003, 80, 367–371 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Tomasevic and S. S. Marinkovic, Fuel Process. Technol., 2003, 81, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Leadbeater and L. M. Stencel, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 2281–2283 CrossRef CAS .

          D. Stuerga, in Microwaves in Organic Chemistry, ed. A. Loupy, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2006, ch. 1 Search PubMed .

          D. M. P. Mingos, in Microwave-Assisted Organic Synthesis, ed. P. Lidström and J. P. Tierney, Blackwell, Oxford, U.K.,  2004, ch. 1 Search PubMed .

          A. Loupy, in Topics in Current Chemistry, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg,  1999, vol. 206, pp. 153–207 Search PubMed .
M. Koberg, M. Cohen, A. Ben-Amotz and A. Gedanken, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 4265–4269 CrossRef CAS .
M. B. Johnson and Z. Wen, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 5179–5183 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hincapié, F. Mondragón and D. López, Fuel, 2011, 90, 1618–1623 CrossRef .
T. M. Barnard, N. E. Leadbeater, M. B. Boucher, L. M. Stencel and B. A. Wilhite, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 1777–1781 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Leadbeater, T. M. Barnard and L. M. Stencel, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 2005–2008 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Groisman and A. Gedanken, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 8802–8808 CAS .
M. B. Boucher, C. Weed, N. E. Leadbeater, B. A. Wilhite, J. D. Stuart and R. S. Parnas, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 2750–2756 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Peterson, J. L. Cook, J. C. Thompson and J. S. Taberski, Appl. Eng. Agr., 2002, 18, 5–11 Search PubMed .
A. A. Kiss, A. C. Dimian and G. Rothenberg, Energy Fuels, 2008, 22, 598–604 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
Table Content:
Miri Koberg	Miri Koberg is a Ph.D. student in Gedanken's group. She got her B.Sc. degree at the Chemistry Department of Bar-Ilan University, specializing in Materials Chemistry. Her current research is centered on the catalytic synthesis of bio-diesel from renewable energy sources by microwave and sonochemistry. She was recently awarded the prestigious Ashkol scholarship by the Israel Ministry of Science.
Aharon Gedanken	Emeritus Prof. Aharon Gedanken obtained his M.Sc. from Bar-Ilan University, and his Ph.D. degree from Tel Aviv University, Israel. After his postdoctoral research at USC in Los Angeles, he returned to Bar-Ilan in 1975 as a senior faculty. He was a visiting scientist at AT&T Bell Laboratories in 1980–8l, 1984 and 1987–88, and at NIDDK, NIH in the summers of 1989, 1990 and 1991. His synthetic specialties are in sonochemistry, microwave superheating, sono-electrochemistry, and reactions under autogenic pressure at elevated temperatures. Gedanken has published 610 peer-reviewed manuscripts in international journals, and has applied for 33 patents.

Broader context
This review presents the superiority of the MW (microwave) technique over conventional and sonochemical methods for producing bio-diesel from various feed-stocks. This superiority was demonstrated for two-stage as well as for the one-step transesterification reaction. The SrO catalyst is shown to be an ideal catalyst for the transesterification reaction, which can be easily separated from the reaction mixture and reused in many cycles with no decrease in the bio-diesel yield. Microalgae biomass of Nannochloropsis, and castor and jatropha seeds have a high content of oil and therefore are suitable as feed-stocks for bio-diesel production. Carrying out a one-stage direct transesterification of the feed-stock without the extraction step in MW is not only a short process, but it also yields more bio-diesel than the two-stage process. The results reveal that using the MW oven for bio-diesel production from castor and jatropha seeds, or Nannochloropsis in one stage with SrO, yields a 100% conversion to bio-diesel in 5 minutes. It is evident that while the energy consumption of the batch process may be on the order of that of the conventional methodology, the continuous-flow processes are more energy efficient.


 	Fig. 1  The transesterification reaction.	 

 	Fig. 2  Effect of repeated use of SrO and castor/jatropha biomass on (a) bio-diesel conversion and (b) bio-diesel yield = the percentage obtained from the seeds. Reaction conditions: direct transesterification; microwave heating; reaction time was 5 min.	 


1a	Triolein	Trans MW	98	—
2	Soybean oil	Trans MW	97	—
3	Wastes of cooked oil	Trans MW	99.8	—
4	
Nannochloropsis
	Ex-Trans MW	99.7	32.8
5	
Nannochloropsis
	Direct MW	99.9	37.1
6	
Nannochloropsis
	Ex-Trans Sono	91	18.9
7	
Nannochloropsis
	Direct Sono	93	20.9
8	
Nannochloropsis
	Direct Reflex	74.6	6.95
9	Castor seeds	Ex-Trans MW	99.5	52.7
10	Castor seeds	Direct MW	99.95	57.2
11	Castor seeds	Ex-Trans Sono	92.1	46.7
12	Castor seeds	Direct Sono	93.6	48.2
13	Castor seeds	Ex-Trans Reflex	80.15	24
14	Castor seeds	Direct Reflex	80.9	24.7
15	Jatropha seeds	Ex-Trans MW	98.1	39.7
16	Jatropha seeds	Direct MW	99.7	41.1
17	Jatropha seeds	Ex-Trans Sono	92.6	31.5
18	Jatropha seeds	Direct Sono	93.7	32.9
19	Jatropha seeds	Ex-Trans Reflex	78.1	19.25
20	Jatropha seeds	Direct Reflex	78.4	19.9

 	Fig. 3  Schematic presentation of the bio-diesel production. The scheme illustrates the two-stage reaction, namely, extraction and transesterification, and a one-stage direct transesterification. Each process is conducted using microwave, sonochemistry, and reflux.	 


1	Conventional heatingb	94.3
2	Microwave, continuous flow at a 7.2 L min−1 feedstock flow	26.0
3	Microwave, continuous flow at a 2 L min−1 feedstock flowc	60.3 (92.3)d
4e	Microwave heating, 4.6 L batch reaction	90.1

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2012
