Pulsed radiofrequency glow discharge optical emission spectrometry for the direct characterisation of photovoltaic thin film silicon solar cells   - Journal of Analytical Atomic Spectrometry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B923884K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B923884K
(Paper)
J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2010, 25, 370-377Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsPulsed radiofrequency glow discharge optical emission spectrometry for the direct characterisation of photovoltaic thin film silicon solar cells†

        
          
            Pascal 
            Sánchez
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Beatriz 
            Fernández
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Armando 
            Menéndez
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Rosario 
            Pereiro
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Alfredo 
            Sanz-Medel
          
        
      a
aDepartment of Physical and Analytical Chemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, University of Oviedo, Julian Clavería, 8, 33006, Oviedo, Spain. E-mail: fernandezbeatriz@uniovi.es;   Tel: +34 985 1034 76
bDepartment of Nanomaterials - ITMA Foundation, Calafates s/n (Parcela L.3.4), 33417, Avilés, Spain
Received 
      13th November 2009
    , Accepted 17th December 2009First published on 
      
      
      
      
      
      8th January 2010
    AbstractThe increasing demand for photovoltaic devices has created a silicon supply shortage, providing a great opportunity for hydrogenated amorphous silicon (a-Si:H) used in thin film technology. The potential of continuous and pulsed radiofrequency glow discharge optical emission spectrometry (rf-GD-OES) for the characterisation of thin film solar cells (TFSC), based on a-Si:H, has been investigated in this work. Qualitative in-depth profiles of TFSC obtained by both GD modes were carefully compared, in terms of signal intensity, penetration rate, emission yield, and depth resolution. The influence of rf-GD parameters operating in continuous mode was studied using three types of samples: B doped, P doped and the complete photovoltaic TFSC device based on a-Si:H. Moreover, the effect of different roughness of the Zn substrate on the depth resolution of the a-Si:H layer was evaluated, along with plasma cleaning conditions optimisation. Additionally, intensity signals and relative depth resolution were investigated for different pulsed GD experimental conditions, such as the pulse frequency (from 500 Hz to 10 kHz), duty cycle (in the range of 0.1875-0.5) and rf forward power (from 25 W to 75 W). 450 Pa and 25 W were selected as the optimum conditions for continuous rf-GD-OES analysis, whereas 450 Pa, 75 W, 1000 Hz and a duty cycle of 0.5 were selected for pulsed rf-GD-OES work. Results show that rf-GD-OES is a powerful tool for direct depth-profiling analysis of a-Si:H TFSC, allowing to discriminate the different parts of the photovoltaic devices: the first contact layer with ZnO2 and Al2O3, the a-Si:H layer (where it can be distinguished between the B doped, the intrinsic a-Si:H and the P doped films), the back contact layer and, finally, the Zn substrate. Moreover, diffusion processes between the coating layers, which could have an important influence on the final efficiency of photovoltaic devices, can be identified and could be studied by rf-GD-OES.
Introduction
Nowadays, the main energy supply for human activity is from fossil and mineral fuels, nuclear and hydroelectric sources. Nevertheless, such sources can be very harmful to our environment because they cause global warming, biosphere and geosphere destruction and eventual ecological devastation. In contrast, solar energy is considered today a non-contaminating, free and renewable source, available in many parts around the world.1
Photovoltaic (PV) solar cells are devices which produce electricity out of the sun radiation by means of the photoelectric effect. Bulk mono- and multi-crystalline silicon (c-Si) solar cells, based on a p-n junction onto electronic quality Si wafers, account for about 91% of the total PV production.2 However, due to the recent supply shortage and cost increase of Si raw materials (the base of traditional solar cells), a new approach of PV devices based on growing thin film Si onto a given substrate, has appeared in the last years.3,4 The thin film solar cells (TFSC) technology allows the reduction in semiconductor thickness because of the capacity of certain materials to absorb most of the incident sunlight within a few microns (even hundreds of nanometers) of thickness, in contrast to the several hundred microns needed in wafer technology. In addition, TFSC have an enormous potential in terms of cost reduction (based on the easiness to make robust, large, and monolithic modules) and easy structural integration.
Important TFSC devices are based on thin-film-Si, cadmium telluride, and copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS).5 However, solar cells based on hydrogenated amorphous Si (a-Si:H) dominate the TFSC solar energy production by taking 9% of the global PV market.6 Due to the high absorption of the visible range of the solar spectrum in a-Si:H, this type of cells needs less raw materials (Si layers below 1 μm) and less energy for their production. Additionally, this technology can take advantage of the flexibility of thin film materials, and a-Si:H can be deposited on a wide variety of substrates, including glasses, ceramics, conductors such as stainless steel, and plastics. The main limitation of a-Si:H solar cells is, however, their lower conversion efficiency (5–10%) in comparison with c-Si wafer solar cells (15–20%).7 Therefore, increasing research efforts are currently directed towards a-Si:H final efficiency enhancements.
The active device of a single junction a-Si:H solar cell consists of three principal layers which form a p-i-n junction: a “p type” layer doped with B and C (p-a-SiC:H), an intrinsic layer (i-a-Si:H), and a “n type” layer doped with P (n-a-Si:H). The final efficiency of PV solar cells is defined by three main electrical properties: the short circuit current, the open circuit voltage, and the fill factor.8 These electrical properties are strongly dependent on parameters such as the thickness of the layers, hydrogen concentration, doping elements concentration on the “p and n type” layers, etc.
Traditional methods of analysis of solar cells are based on their optical and electrical characterisation by using indirect measurements of single layers and/or involving long procedures (e.g. H content is determined by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy,9 doping elements concentration is evaluated through the conductivity and energy gap of each individual layer,9 and layers thickness is obtained from profilometry measurements). However, the use of direct solid analysis spectrometric techniques10 may offer great interest for the characterisation of photovoltaic devices, because they provide elemental information of major and trace constituents of great value to better understand the processes occurring at nanometer-length dimensions, such as distribution of doping elements through the solar cell films, possible diffusion processes, presence of impurities and, eventually, elemental concentration and thickness of the layers, that have a direct influence on the final efficiency of PV devices for energy production.
The combination of glow discharges with optical emission and mass spectrometry (GD-OES/MS) is nowadays a well-established approach for direct determinations of major and trace elements and for direct depth profiling analysis of solids. The application of GD devices as primary spectrochemical sources for such purposes is increasing because they offer several advantages, including high depth resolution, fast sputtering rate, multielemental capability, low limits of detection, and ease of use.11–13 The advantageous features of GDs for depth profiling analysis of coatings arise from the nature of the sputtering mechanism, in which solid samples are stably and reproducibly sputtered with Ar ions of very low energy (<50 eV).14 The low Ar+ energies ensure that the sputtering proceeds without significant formation of altered layers, a very important prerequisite for successful depth profiling analysis of thin films at high depth resolution. The potential of GD-OES for the characterisation of solar cells has not been explored yet, however.
Although the most common operation mode in GD spectrometry is the application of direct current or radiofrequency voltages in continuous mode,15 one of the most interesting developments of GDs in recent years has been the introduction of pulsed GDs.16,17 A pulsed GD is created by periodically applying a signal of high power with milli- or microseconds duration. The pulsed mode gives high instantaneous power without inducing thermal degradation of the sample.18 Considering that analytical performance of pulsed rf-GD-OES has been very little investigated up to now, a critical comparison between continuous and pulsed GDs for depth profiling analysis of photovoltaic TFSC based on a-Si:H was carefully carried out here, in terms of signals intensity, penetration rates, crater shapes, emission yields, and depth resolution. The influence of the sample substrate roughness on the relative depth resolution and the use of a plasma cleaning approach to improve the quality of depth profiles were also studied.
Experimental
1. Sample preparation: Photovoltaic TFSC based on amorphous silicon
Three different samples containing a-Si:H layers were prepared using Zn as the sample substrate. Dimensions of the Zn substrate were always kept constant (4.5 cm in diameter and 0.5 mm thickness). Fig. 1 shows a diagram for each sample type: the B doped sample with a p-a-SiC:H layer (350 ± 18 nm) deposited on Zn, the P doped sample with a n-a-Si:H layer (280 ± 12 nm) deposited on Zn and, finally, the real photovoltaic TFSC device based on a-Si:H which consists of the following stack (from back to up): Zn substrate/back contact consisting of an Al layer/n-a-Si:H layer/intrinsic a-Si:H layer/p- a-SiC:H layer/front contact AZO (ZnO2 doped with 2% Al2O3). Both, front and back contacts, were deposited using a magnetron sputtering physical vapour deposition equipment manufactured by AJA International (Boston, USA). The thickness of the layers was determined by profilometry measurements on cross-sectioned witness samples by using a mechanical step profilometer (Model Ambios XP1, AmbiosTechnology, USA).
 Fig. 1  Schematics with the profiles of samples for rf-GD-OES analysis. a) B and C doped hydrogenated amorphous silicon layer (p-a-SiC:H). b) P doped hydrogenated amorphous silicon layer (n-a-Si:H). c) Complete photovoltaic a-Si:H TFSC device. 
The a-Si:H layers were deposited by using a commercial rf plasma enhanced chemical vapour deposition instrument manufactured by Elettrorava (Torino, Italy). This equipment has a multichamber cluster configuration consisting of three independent deposition chambers in order to avoid cross contaminations. The samples are loaded in a load-lock chamber and driven to each chamber through a robot installed in a central transfer compartment. Each deposition chamber has their own heater, gas lines, very high frequency rf generator (frequency range from 10 MHz up to 100 MHz), and turbomolecular and rotary pumps. Deposition processes are carried out in ultrahigh-vacuum conditions (∼10−8 Torr), with a forward power to the electrodes of 1.8 W, fix frequency of 13.56 MHz, and the substrate temperature and pressure during deposition varied from 170–130 °C and 500–700 mTorr, respectively, depending on the layers. Furthermore, the Si deposition process was carried out by means of a gas reaction in the plasma using SiH4 as the plasma gas. The dopants are added by different gas mixtures: the p-a-SiC:H layer was deposited by mixing SiH4 (10 sccm), B2H6 (12 sccm) and CH4 (10 sccm), and the n-a-Si:H layer by mixing SiH4 (15 sccm) and PH3 (15 sccm). Concerning the B doped and the P doped samples, the thickness of the a-Si:H layers was higher than that deposited on the complete solar cells (350 nm vs. 20 nm and 280 nm vs. 30 nm). The whole thickness of the a-Si:H layer in the real photovoltaic TFSC devices was around 400 nm, whereas the thickness of the individual n-a-Si:H (P doped) and p-a-SiC:H (B doped) layers was only 20–30 nm. Therefore, in order to easily investigate the relative depth resolution and sensitivity in such thin doped layers, preliminary studies were carried out by using similar samples (same composition and sample substrate) but only with one layer of higher thickness, that is similar to the thickness of the whole a-Si:H layer in the real solar cells (∼400 nm).
2. Instrumentation: Glow discharge optical emission spectrometry
GD-OES analysis was performed with a JY 5000 RF instrument manufactured by HORIBA Jobin Yvon (Longjumeau Cedex, France). This instrument is equipped with a rf generator, able to provide continuous and pulsed mode operation, a standard HJY GD source with an anode of 4 mm internal diameter, two optical spectrometers (a monochromator and a polychromator), and with the Quantum™ XP software. The instrument is equipped with an impedance matching system between the rf generator and the GD source, which also enables continuous monitoring of the dc-bias voltage. High-purity Ar (99.999% minimum purity) from Air Liquide (Oviedo, Spain) was employed as discharge gas.
One of the spectrometers consists of a 0.5 m Paschen Runge polychromator (110–800 nm of wavelength range, and a concave grating of 2400 lines mm−1) with the optical path purged with nitrogen. The system is also equipped with a Czerny–Turner monochromator (0.64 m focal length, and a planar holographic grating of 2400 lines mm−1) which allows the increase of instrument's capabilities and, therefore, the detection of emissions at any desired wavelength within its spectral range (200–800 nm). Further details of the GD-OES instrument are described elsewhere.19,20 The emission lines selected (corresponding all of them to atomic transitions) were 121.57 nm for H, 130.22 nm for O, 149.26 nm for N, 156.14 nm for C, 178.29 nm for P, 249.77 nm for B (measured with the monochromator), 288.16 nm for Si, 334.50 for Zn, and 396.15 for Al. The voltage applied to the photomultiplier tubes (PMT) was optimised for each wavelength of interest to obtain maximum sensitivity and, finally, PMT voltages were fixed at 930 V for Si, 900 V for B, and 999 V for the other elements.
The operational method “constant pressure-constant forward power” was used throughout the experiments in continuous mode, with a reflected power always lower than 1 W. Discharge conditions varied in the range of 400–700 Pa for the Ar discharge pressure and between 20–30 W for the rf forward power. For the pulsed GD mode, apart from the Ar discharge pressure and rf forward power, three additional parameters have to be controlled and optimised: the pulse frequency, the pulse width, and the duty cycle.17 Pulse frequency is understood here as pulse repetition frequency, pulse width is the duration of the power-on time for a single pulse, and the duty cycle is the ratio of the pulse-width to the sum of power-on and power-off time. The three values are not independent of each other as the duty cycle is the product of pulse width and pulse frequency. The software of the JY 5000 RF allows the pulse frequency to be varied from 0 Hz to 20 kHz and the duty cycle can be changed from 50% to 6.25%.
The shape and depth of the craters as well as the roughness of the samples were measured by using a mechanical profilometer (Ambios Technology, USA). Penetration rates were calculated by measuring the penetration depths per unit time and the mean of three sputtered replicates was always used to calculate each penetration depth.
Results and discussion
The ability of rf-GD-OES for depth profile analysis of TFSC based on a-Si:H should be carefully investigated, evaluating the possibility to obtain information about the presence of impurities (e.g. the performance of thin film a-Si:H solar cells deteriorates severely by impurity incorporation such as high concentration levels of oxygen or nitrogen),21 diffusion processes, and distribution of doping elements through the p-i-n layers. In this line, we studied first the influence of the sample substrate roughness, the use of a plasma cleaning approach and the optimisation of rf-GD experimental conditions (in continuous mode). Next, the comparison between continuous and pulsed GDs was carried out. The B doped and the P doped samples were employed for the optimisation studies of GD parameters.
1. Analysis of a-Si:H TFSC by RF-GD-OES operated in continuous mode

Influence of sample substrate roughness on rf-GD-OES measurements. 
The depth resolution is an important issue in thin multilayer coatings analysis and, according to the Mixing, Roughness and Information depth model,22 the surface roughness is thought to be the main factor contributing to the loss of resolution in GD-OES depth profiles. In contrast to Si wafers used in crystalline Si solar cells, a-Si:H layers employed in TFSC devices can be deposited on a wide variety of substrates. In this sense, although glass substrates have been traditionally employed for the preparation of solar cells, the charm of thin film solar cells is their low thickness, which enables processing on flexible lightweight substrates like metal foils or polyimide films. In our case, a conductive substrate of Zn was selected for the synthesis of solar cells based on a-Si:H. The influence of the Zn substrate roughness on the depth resolution was investigated using three polishing conditions for the substrate. Therefore, Zn substrate was polished using different metallographic grinding papers of SiC (120, 600, and 1200 grits) and a final step of diamond suspension (6 μm particle size). Then, the samples were cleaned with ethanol prior to the deposition of the p-a-SiC:H or the n-a-Si:H layers (B doped and P doped samples, respectively). Table 1 shows the values of the average surface roughness (Ra) and the maximum peak-to-valley roughness (Rt) for the Zn substrate before and after the polishing process. As can be seen in the Table, the roughness of Zn substrate decreased up to one order of magnitude from the original (i.e. non polished) substrate to the mirror-finish polished substrate.
Table 1 Average surface roughness (Ra) and maximum peak-to-valley roughness (Rt) for the Zn substrate at the assayed polishing conditions. Standard deviation values are calculated from the mean of three measurements using independent samples




Zn Substrate: Polishing Conditions
Ra (μm)
Rt (μm)




Original (Non Polished)
0.180 ± 0.017
1.306 ± 0.156


Low Polished
0.097 ± 0.012
0.772 ± 0.072


Intermediate Polished
0.023 ± 0.003
0.409 ± 0.092


Mirror-finish Polished
0.017 ± 0.001
0.136 ± 0.028




To investigate the effect of such substrate roughness on the GD-OES depth resolution of thin layers, the relative depth resolution (RDR) was evaluated for the B, P and Si emission intensity profiles using the B doped and P doped samples. The RDR is commonly calculated as the ratio of the difference in sputtering time necessary for the emission intensity to fall from 84% to 16% of the maximum intensity obtained during the sputtering of the layer to the sputtering time at which the emission intensity decreases to 50% of its maximum value.23,24Fig. 2 shows the influence of Ra and Rt of the Zn substrate on the RDR of Si and B in the B doped sample. Although similar RDRs, taking into account the given uncertainties (average values in the range of 0.07–0.08), were observed for B and Si in the intermediate and mirror-finish polished substrates, almost a factor of 2 poorer depth resolution was observed for the B and Si RDRs in the low polished substrate (RDRs showed values up to 0.128) compared to the intermediate and mirror-finish polished substrates. These experiments were also performed with the P doped sample and similar results were obtained for the RDR of P and Si signals. As expected, the lower the roughness of the Zn substrate, the better the observed RDR of Si, P and B (a high roughness of the sample substrate generates a non clear interface). Therefore, since better RDRs as well as a better final efficiency of the solar cells were obtained for our studies using higher polishing conditions, the mirror-finish polished substrate was selected for the preparation of the solar cells in all the subsequent measurements.
 Fig. 2  Influence of the zinc substrate roughness on the relative depth resolution of B and Si in the B doped sample by rf-GD-OES analysis (500 Pa and 25 W). Standard deviation values are calculated from the mean of three independent measurements. a) Effect of the average surface roughness (Ra) on the RDR. b) Effect of the maximum peak-to-valley roughness (Rt) on the RDR. 


Optimisation of GD operating conditions. 
To investigate the effect of the rf-GD operating conditions on the relative depth resolution working in continuous mode, the optimisation of Ar discharge pressure and rf forward power was carried out using the B doped sample and an abbreviated approach: the influence of rf forward power (in the range of 20–30 W) was investigated keeping the discharge pressure at 500 Pa, and the effect of discharge pressure was studied in the range of 400–700 Pa (using 25 W). Although possible interdependencies between pressure and rf power parameters could give rise to slightly different optimum GD conditions, the univariant approach described above is the typical procedure used in GD optimizations. In any case, the pressure and power intervals investigated are those typically used for rf-GDs depth profiles for semiconductor and conducting materials. B and Si RDRs were found to be similar for 20 and 25 W although an increase, especially for B, both in the RDR and standard deviation values was observed at 30 W. Concerning the discharge pressure, better RDRs were observed using lower Ar pressures (in the order of 400–500 Pa). Therefore, 450 Pa and 25 W were selected as the optimum conditions for such GD analysis. Fig. 3 shows the crater profile obtained at the selected experimental conditions. As can be seen, and taking into account the depth of the crater (∼300 nm), it can be stated that a rather convenient crater shape for GD depth profiling analysis was obtained.
 Fig. 3  Crater profile obtained for a B doped Si sample by rf-GD-OES in continuous mode at the optimized experimental conditions (450 Pa and 25 W). 


Optimisation of plasma cleaning conditions. 
To achieve reliable depth profiling of thin layers using GDs, it is crucial to provide conditions for stable plasma generation at the beginning of the sputtering. This can be done through minimising contaminations from the carrier gas and from the sample and anode surfaces. Molchan et al.25 have recently reported a plasma cleaning approach as an excellent procedure to improve the quality of depth profiles of thin films. Such plasma cleaning process, based on the generation of a soft plasma using a discharge at reduced pressure and power conditions to avoid the sputtering of the sample, was tested here.

Fig. 4a shows our results on the qualitative in-depth profile of the B doped sample in the absence of plasma cleaning (normalised intensity signals, with respect to Ar intensity, were used to correct for instrumental instabilities, e.g. signal drift). As can be observed, a high C signal is evident at the beginning of the sputtering and, also, an increase in the H intensity is observed (although both H and C signals can be originated from different contamination sources, including impurities on the discharge carrier gas and vacuum pumps, they are mainly originated from contamination of the sample and the internal anode surfaces). However, the generation of a low energy plasma before GD analysis using 2 W and 600 Pa during 4 min led to a significant reduction of the C signal and to a slight decrease in the H response at the beginning of the sputtering (Fig. 4b). The Ar flush time, i.e. the time between mounting the sample and application of rf power, was selected to be 60 s. As can be observed in Fig. 4a and 4b, the interface a-Si:H layer/Zn substrate was achieved at the same sputtering time in both cases (∼15 s), indicating that the plasma cleaning process did not produce any measurable modification of the sample composition and depth in the a-Si:H layer. The experiments above demonstrate that for our investigated samples, a correct selection of the plasma cleaning conditions allows a rapid stabilisation of the plasma together with efficient removal of contaminants from the sample surface, improving the quality of observed depth profiles.
 Fig. 4  Qualitative in-depth profile of the B doped sample using rf-GD-OES in continuous mode (450 Pa and 25 W). a) Without plasma cleaning process. b) After plasma cleaning process at 600 Pa and 2 W during 4 min. 


Qualitative in-depth profiles of a-Si:H thin film solar cells. 
After the optimisation of GD experimental conditions, the capability of rf-GD-OES in continuous mode for depth profiling analysis of photovoltaic a-Si:H TFSC was investigated. First, the analysis of the B doped and P doped samples was performed using 450 Pa and 25 W (after a plasma cleaning process at 600 Pa and 2 W during 4 min in both cases). Fig. 5a and 5b show the qualitative in-depth profiles obtained for the B doped and the P doped samples, respectively. A good depth resolution between the a-Si:H layers and the Zn substrate was observed in both cases and doping elements were well discriminated: B, H, and C (for the B doped sample), and P and H (for the P doped sample). Fig. 5c shows the qualitative in-depth profile obtained for the real TFSC. As can be seen, it was possible to discriminate the different parts of the photovoltaic device: the first layer of the coating with ZnO2 and Al2O3, the a-Si:H layer (where we can distinguish between the B doped, the intrinsic a-Si:H, and the P doped films), the back contact layer and, finally, the Zn substrate. In brief, in-depth rf-GD-OES profiles give rapid information which complements classical electrical measurements which just provide information about electrical parameters (e.g. short circuit current, open circuit voltage, and fill factor) and final efficiency of the solar cells.26,27
 Fig. 5  Qualitative in-depth profiles obtained by rf-GD-OES in continuous mode using the optimized experimental conditions (plasma cleaning process and GD analysis at 450 Pa and 25 W). a) B doped sample. b) P doped sample. c) Complete photovoltaic TFSC based on a-Si:H. 

2. Analysis of a-Si:H thin film solar cells by pulsed RF-GD-OES

Influence of pulse frequency and duty cycle. 
Using pulsed GDs, apart from the Ar discharge pressure and rf forward power, three additional parameters have to be controlled and optimised: the pulse frequency, the pulse width and the duty cycle. The influence of the pulse frequency and the duty cycle on the intensity signals and relative depth resolution was investigated using the optimum discharge pressure and rf power conditions selected in continuous mode (i.e. 450 Pa and 25 W). Pulse frequency was studied in the range of 500–10000 Hz and three duty cycles were evaluated (0.1875, 0.375 and 0.5). Fig. 6a and 6b show the normalised intensity signals of Si and B for the B doped sample at the different pulse frequencies and duty cycles investigated. As can be seen, intensity signals in pulsed mode were always lower than signals obtained in continuous mode and, in general, both for Si and B better sensitivities were found at higher duty cycles and lower pulse frequencies. It should be highlighted that intensity values in pulsed mode were an average of the signals obtained when the discharge was switched on and switched off (the GD-OES instrument used only allows time resolved measurements in the order of tenth of seconds and resolution for GDs pulses with a duration of microseconds is needed). The use of GDs with appropriate time discrimination (e.g. using time gated detection with a charge-coupled device) could allow us to increase the observed sensitivity in the pulsed mode.
 Fig. 6  Influence of the pulse frequency and the duty cycle on the intensity signals and RDR of Si and B in the B doped sample obtained by rf-GD-OES analysis in pulsed mode (450 Pa and 25 W). Standard deviation values are calculated from the mean of three independent measurements. a) Si intensity signals. b) B intensity signals. c) Si RDR. d) B RDR. 

Fig. 6c and 6d show the influence of the pulse frequency and duty cycle on the relative depth resolution of Si and B, respectively. Using a duty cycle of 0.5 the observed RDR was always better (for all the pulse frequencies investigated) than that obtained in continuous mode. Therefore, the optimum experimental conditions selected for the pulsed mode were a pulse frequency of 1000 Hz and a duty cycle of 0.5.
Emission yields of Si and B were evaluated in continuous and pulsed mode. It is well known that analyte emission intensity depends upon two factors: the sputtering rate (density of analyte atoms in the plasma) and the excitation efficiency of those atoms (emission yield).28 Thus, the emission yield, R, for a given emission line (λ) of an element X in a given matrix M, can be expressed as: RM,X,λ = IM,X,λ/(q [X])(Equation 1)where I is the background-corrected analyte emission intensity, q is the sputtering rate of the matrix M, and [X] the concentration of the element X in the sample M. However, in our studies which are just for comparison purposes, considering that the material is always the same, we used depth units instead of mass units for the calculation (denoted as “emission yields”).
The penetration rate for the B doped sample was measured in continuous and pulsed mode at the optimised experimental conditions. Penetration rates were found to be 9.2 ± 1.1 μm min−1 in continuous mode (450 Pa and 25 W) and 4.4 ± 0.5 μm min−1 in pulsed mode (450 Pa, 25 W, 1000 Hz, and 0.5 as duty cycle). Therefore, in pulsed mode the intensity signals as well as the measured penetration rates were lower than those obtained in continuous mode (because rf average power used is comparatively lower). “Emission yields”, expressed as V/(μm/min), in pulsed mode for Si and B emission lines were always higher than those obtained in continuous mode (3.3 vs. 2.2 for Si and 2.5 vs. 1.6 for B, respectively). In other words, the better “emission yields” for the analysis of a-Si:H films in pulsed mode could be attributed to a higher excitation efficiency of the atomic transitions in the discharge. Moreover, the lower penetration rates and good RDRs observed warrant the further application of pulsed GDs for in-depth profile analysis of thin layers.


Qualitative in-depth profiles of thin film a-Si solar cells. 
After the previously detailed evaluation of the experimental parameters, the analytical performance of our pulsed rf-GD-OES was investigated for depth profiling of photovoltaic a-Si:H TFSC. Fig. 7 shows the qualitative in-depth profiles obtained for the real photovoltaic devices at three different pulse rf forward powers: 25 W, 50 W (which corresponds to an averaged power of 25 W, considering that the duty cycle is 0.5), and 75 W. Fortunately, in all cases, it was possible to discriminate the different parts of the photovoltaic device: the first contact layer, the a-Si:H layer (where we can distinguish between the B doped, the intrinsic a-Si:H, and the P doped films), the back contact layer and, finally, the Zn substrate. As can be seen, however, a better sensitivity as well as a better depth resolution (sharply defined interfaces) were observed with increasing rf power pulse (from 25 W to 75 W). This effect is especially noticeable for the a-Si:H layers where a better identification of B and P doping elements can be achieved at higher rf pulse powers, specially at 75 W. Although B signal can be observed in the first nanometers of the a-Si:H layer using 25 W, P signal is hardly distinguishable from the background signal. By using 75 W, P signal can be perfectly discriminated at the end of the a-Si:H layer. Furthermore, Si signal intensities showed a slight increase at the beginning of the a-Si:H layer at 25 W and 50 W pulsed powers, but using 75 W a higher stabilisation of the Si signals and a longer plateau (throughout the a-Si:H layer) can be obtained. On the other hand, if we compare the qualitative in-depth profiles obtained for the real a-Si:H TFSC in continuous and pulsed mode at the same rf average power (Fig. 5c and 7b, respectively), it can be observed that although penetration rates were rather similar in both cases, signal intensities were significantly higher in pulsed mode for all the elements studied in the photovoltaic devices.
 Fig. 7  Qualitative in-depth profiles of the photovoltaic TFSC device obtained by pulsed rf-GD-OES (plasma cleaning process and GD analysis at 450 Pa, 1000 Hz, and 0.5 as duty cycle) at different pulse rf forward powers. a) 25 W. b) 50 W. c) 75 W. 
Finally, it should be highlighted that qualitative in-depth profiles obtained by rf-GD-OES would facilitate getting important information about the diffusion processes between the adjacent coating layers of photovoltaic devices. As can be seen in Fig. 7, the a-Si:H/Al interface, as well as the Al/Zn interface, are not sharply defined and Al and Zn seem to be spread to the a-Si:H layer and the Al contact layer, respectively. The sample substrate roughness and the weakness of the interfaces (due to the manufacturing stage) could be main factors accounting for such diffusion processes.

Conclusions
The direct characterisation of photovoltaic devices using glow discharge optical emission spectrometry has been investigated here and the results obtained confirm the potential of rf-GD-OES, both in continuous and pulsed mode, for direct depth profiling analysis of a-Si:H thin film solar cells. Qualitative in-depth profiles obtained by rf-GD-OES have shown to offer good depth resolution of the different coating layers. It was possible to discriminate the key parts of the photovoltaic device: the first layer of the coating with ZnO2 and Al2O3, the a-Si:H layer (where the B doped, the intrinsic a-Si:H, and the P doped films can be well differentiated), the back contact layer and, finally, the Zn substrate. Additionally, the use of pulsed GDs provided a better stabilisation of the Si signal intensity throughout the a-Si:H layer. In this way, diffusion processes between the a-Si:H/Al interface and the Al/Zn interface can be studied in detail.
These preliminary studies are of great interest because they pave the way for further investigations addressed to better understand and control the effect of the contact layers of the a-Si:H film, interdiffusion processes, etc, on the performance of the TFSC. The obtained promising qualitative results obtained with rf-GD-OES call for further investigations to develop proper in-depth quantification methodologies (to know both, layer composition and possible concentration gradients of non-matrix elements) which will be of great practical importance for the evaluation of final energy conversion efficiency of TFSC and for quality control of photovoltaic devices production at an industrial level.
The information obtained of TFSC from qualitative in-depth rf-GD-OES profiles complements that provided by classical electrical measurements and allow for a more complete characterisation of such solar cell devices by other direct solid analysis techniques. In particular, although sensitivity is not as high as that achieved with other “traditional” techniques such as Secondary ion mass spectrometry, rf-GD-OES allows rapid analysis with nanometer in-depth resolution and typically less matrix effects and lower cost. Thus, it is probably that the photovoltaic industry can found an application niche for the technique here investigated.
Acknowledgements
Financial support from “Plan Nacional de I + D + I” (Spanish Ministry of Science and Innovation, and FEDER Programme) through the project MAT2007-65097-C02-01 and from Acciona and ArcelorMittal through CETICA project (CENIT Programme) is gratefully acknowledged. Also, B. Fernández and A. Menéndez gratefully acknowledge financial support from the “Juan de la Cierva” and “Torres Quevedo” Research Programs of the Ministry of Science and Innovation of Spain, respectively (both programs are co-financed by the European Social Fund).
References
E. Serrano, G. Rus and J. García-Martínez, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2009, 13, 2373–2384 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Chopra, P. D. Paulson and V. Dutta, Progr. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2004, 12, 69–92 Search PubMed .
J. Cárabe and J. J. Gandía, Opto-Electronics Review, 2004, 12, 1–6 Search PubMed .

          T. Markvart and L. Castañer, “Solar Cells: Materials Manufacture and Operation”, Elsevier Science & Technology, Oxford,  2005 Search PubMed .

          X. Deng and E. A. Schiff, “Handbook of Photovoltaic Science and Engineering”, A. Luque, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2003 Search PubMed .

          M. Zeman, “Thin Film Solar Cells: Fabrication, Characterization and Applications”, J. Poortmans and V. Arkhipov, John Wiley & Sons, Chichester,  2006 Search PubMed .
M. A. Green, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2007, 18, 15–19 CrossRef .
D. Pysch, A. Mette and S. W. Glemz, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 1650–1706 .

          R. E. I. Schropp and M. Zeman, “Amorphous and Microcrystalline Silicon Solar Cells: Modeling, Materials and Device Technology”, Kluwer Academic Publishers, Massachusetts,  1998 Search PubMed .
J. Pisonero, B. Fernández and D. Günther, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24, 1145–1160 RSC .
R. Escobar-Galindo, R. Gago, A. Lousa and J. M. Albella, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2009, 28, 494–505 CrossRef .
V. Hoffmann, M. Kasik, P. K. Robinson and C. Venzago, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2005, 381, 173–188 CrossRef .
J. Pisonero, B. Fernández, R. Pereiro, N. Bordel and A. Sanz-Medel, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2006, 25, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .

          R. K. Marcus and J. A. C. Broekaert, “Glow Discharge Plasmas in Analytical Spectroscopy”, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., England,  2003 Search PubMed .
R. Winchester and R. Payling, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2004, 59, 607–666 CrossRef .
Ph. Belenguer, M. Ganciu, Ph. Guillot and Th. Nelis, Spectrochim. Acta, Part B, 2009, 64, 623–641 CrossRef .
Th. Nelis, M. Aeberhard, M. Hokl, L. Rohr and J. Michler, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2006, 21, 112–125 RSC .
C. Yang, K. Ingenieri, M. Mohill and W. W. Harrison, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2000, 15, 73–78 RSC .
B. Fernández, N. Bordel, R. Pereiro and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20, 462–466 RSC .
A. Menéndez, N. Bordel, R. Pereiro and A. Sanz-Medel, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2005, 20, 233–235 RSC .
J. Woerdenweber, T. Merdzhanova, R. Schmitz, A. Mück, U. Zastrow, L. Niessen, A. Gordijn, R. Carius, W. Beyer, H. Stiebig and U. Rau, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104, 094507 CrossRef .
S. Hofmann and K. Yoshihara, Surf. Interface Anal., 1990, 21, 673–680 .
S. Hofmann, Surf. Interface Anal., 1999, 27, 825–834 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shimizu, H. Habazaki, P. Skeldon, G. E. Thompson and R. K. Marcus, Surf. Interface Anal., 2001, 31, 869–873 CrossRef CAS .
I. S. Molchan, G. E. Thompson, P. Skeldon, N. Trigoulet, P. Chapon, A. Tempez, J. Malherbe, L. Lobo Revilla, N. Bordel, Ph. Belenguer, T. Nelis, A. Zahri, L. Therese, Ph. Guillot, M. Ganciu, J. Michler and M. Hohl, J. Anal. At. Spectrom., 2009, 24, 734–741 RSC .
D. Arai, M. Kondo and A. Matsuda, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2006, 90, 3174–3178 CrossRef CAS .
P. Singh, S. N. Singh, M. Lal and M. Husain, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 1611–1616 CrossRef CAS .

          R. Payling, D. Jones and A. Bengtson, “Glow Discharge Optical Emission Spectrometry”, John Wiley & Sons Ltd., Chichester,  1997 Search PubMed .

Footnote† This article is part of a themed issue devoted to highlighting the work of outstanding young analytical scientists (YAS) working in the area of analytical atomic spectrometry. This 3rd YAS issue has been guest edited by Professor Spiros Pergantis.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Schematics with the profiles of samples for rf-GD-OES analysis. a) B and C doped hydrogenated amorphous silicon layer (p-a-SiC:H). b) P doped hydrogenated amorphous silicon layer (n-a-Si:H). c) Complete photovoltaic a-Si:H TFSC device.	 

Original (Non Polished)	0.180 ± 0.017	1.306 ± 0.156
Low Polished	0.097 ± 0.012	0.772 ± 0.072
Intermediate Polished	0.023 ± 0.003	0.409 ± 0.092
Mirror-finish Polished	0.017 ± 0.001	0.136 ± 0.028

 	Fig. 2  Influence of the zinc substrate roughness on the relative depth resolution of B and Si in the B doped sample by rf-GD-OES analysis (500 Pa and 25 W). Standard deviation values are calculated from the mean of three independent measurements. a) Effect of the average surface roughness (Ra) on the RDR. b) Effect of the maximum peak-to-valley roughness (Rt) on the RDR.	 

 	Fig. 3  Crater profile obtained for a B doped Si sample by rf-GD-OES in continuous mode at the optimized experimental conditions (450 Pa and 25 W).	 

 	Fig. 4  Qualitative in-depth profile of the B doped sample using rf-GD-OES in continuous mode (450 Pa and 25 W). a) Without plasma cleaning process. b) After plasma cleaning process at 600 Pa and 2 W during 4 min.	 

 	Fig. 5  Qualitative in-depth profiles obtained by rf-GD-OES in continuous mode using the optimized experimental conditions (plasma cleaning process and GD analysis at 450 Pa and 25 W). a) B doped sample. b) P doped sample. c) Complete photovoltaic TFSC based on a-Si:H.	 

 	Fig. 6  Influence of the pulse frequency and the duty cycle on the intensity signals and RDR of Si and B in the B doped sample obtained by rf-GD-OES analysis in pulsed mode (450 Pa and 25 W). Standard deviation values are calculated from the mean of three independent measurements. a) Si intensity signals. b) B intensity signals. c) Si RDR. d) B RDR.	 
RM,X,λ = IM,X,λ/(q [X])	(Equation 1)

 	Fig. 7  Qualitative in-depth profiles of the photovoltaic TFSC device obtained by pulsed rf-GD-OES (plasma cleaning process and GD analysis at 450 Pa, 1000 Hz, and 0.5 as duty cycle) at different pulse rf forward powers. a) 25 W. b) 50 W. c) 75 W.	 
Footnote
† This article is part of a themed issue devoted to highlighting the work of outstanding young analytical scientists (YAS) working in the area of analytical atomic spectrometry. This 3rd YAS issue has been guest edited by Professor Spiros Pergantis.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2010
