Emerging beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials for energy and catalysis applications  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00821G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00821G
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 10983-11031Emerging beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials for energy and catalysis applications

        
          
            Feng Ru 
            Fan†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Ruoxing 
            Wang†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Hua 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      *cde and 

        
          
            Wenzhuo 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *abf
aSchool of Industrial Engineering, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA. E-mail: wenzhuowu@purdue.edu
bFlex Laboratory, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA
cDepartment of Chemistry, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China. E-mail: hua.zhang@cityu.edu.hk
dHong Kong Branch of National Precious Metals Material Engineering Research Center (NPMM), City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China
eShenzhen Research Institute, City University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen, 518057, China
fBirck Nanotechnology Center, Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana 47907, USA
Received 
      24th September 2020
    First published on 13th August 2021AbstractElemental two-dimensional (2D) materials have emerged as promising candidates for energy and catalysis applications due to their unique physical, chemical, and electronic properties. These materials are advantageous in offering massive surface-to-volume ratios, favorable transport properties, intriguing physicochemical properties, and confinement effects resulting from the 2D ultrathin structure. In this review, we focus on the recent advances in emerging energy and catalysis applications based on beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials. First, we briefly introduce the general classification, structure, and properties of elemental 2D materials and the new advances in material preparation. We then discuss various applications in energy harvesting and storage, including solar cells, piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators, thermoelectric devices, batteries, and supercapacitors. We further discuss the explorations of beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials for electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and heterogeneous catalysis. Finally, the challenges and perspectives for the future development of elemental 2D materials in energy and catalysis are discussed.
Feng Ru Fan
Dr Feng Ru Fan is currently an associate professor of Chemistry at Xiamen University. He received his BS (2006) and PhD degree (2013) in Physical Chemistry from Xiamen University under the joint supervision of Prof. Zhongqun Tian and Prof. Zhong Lin Wang. He worked as a postdoctoral research associate in Profs Galen Stucky's group from 2016 to 2019 at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and in Wenzhuo Wu's group for 2019–2020 at Purdue University. His current research interest focuses on the design and synthesis of 2D nanomaterials for energy related applications such as nanogenerators and self-powered systems and electrocatalysis.
Ruoxing Wang
Ruoxing Wang received her BS degree in Chemistry in 2015 from University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). She is currently a PhD student in Industrial Engineering at Purdue University under the supervision of Prof. Wenzhuo Wu. Her research interests mainly focus on nanomanufacturing, including the design of functional nanomaterials and fabrication of nanodevices for energy and human-health related applications.
Hua Zhang
Dr Hua Zhang received his PhD in Peking University in 1998. After he worked at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven in 1999–2001 and then Northwestern University in 2001–2003 as a Postdoctoral Fellow, NanoInk Inc. (USA) in 2003–2005, and Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (Singapore) in 2005–2006, he joined Nanyang Technological University and became a full professor in 2013. Currently, he is the Herman Hu Chair Professor of Nanomaterials in City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on the phase engineering of nanomaterials (PEN) and controlled epitaxial growth of heterostructures, including synthesis of 2D, unconventional-phase, amorphous and heterophase nanomaterials for various applications.
Wenzhuo Wu
Dr Wenzhuo Wu is the Ravi and Eleanor Talwar Rising Star Assistant Professor in the School of Industrial Engineering at Purdue University. He received his BS degree in Electrical Engineering from University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2005, and MS degree in Electrical Engineering from National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2008. Dr Wu received his PhD from Georgia Tech in Materials Science and Engineering in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Zhong Lin Wang. Dr Wu's research interests include the design, manufacturing, and integration of nanomaterials for applications in energy, electronics, optoelectronics, and wearable devices.
1. Introduction
The rise of graphene has inspired rapid advances in the fundamental exploration of 2D materials and the technological implementation of atomically thin devices with unprecedented functionalities. During the past decade, a broad range of 2D nanomaterials has been prepared and evaluated in different applications, including graphene-based materials, metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), transition metal carbides/nitrides (MXenes), layered oxides and hydroxides, layered metal–organic frameworks, elemental 2D materials, and their derivative structures.1–21 Among them, elemental 2D materials are emerging with immense interests for the exploration of novel physical and chemical phenomena as well as for enabling applications ranging from electronics, photonics to energy conversion and catalysis at the nanoscale.22–29 Here, elemental 2D materials in a broad sense refer to all monoelemental materials with 2D morphology and structure, including 2D main group elements and 2D elemental transition metals. Despite the simplicity in their chemical compositions, 2D elemental materials exhibit rich crystal structures, phases, physical and chemical properties. The successful experimental realization of beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials such as silicene and phosphorene sparked an ever-expanding list of elements that have been predicted or synthesized in atomically thin form, which usher in a plethora of emerging opportunities for both scientific and technological explorations.23,24,30–34
The advances in fundamental physics/chemistry, synthetic capability, and device prototypes of 2D materials have driven the fast-pacing development of energy applications based on 2D elemental materials. The capability of future-generation unattended devices to efficiently scavenge and store their operational power from the working environment through sustainable pathways would enable self-powering schemes in numerous societally pervasive applications, e.g., pervasive computing, advanced healthcare, human–machine interfaces (HMIs), robotics, and the internet of things (IoT).35–38 To this end, a broad spectrum of new energy technologies has been pursued harvesting the otherwise wasted environmental energies, e.g., mechanical vibrations, light illuminations, thermal fluctuations, etc. These technologies leverage fundamental processes such as triboelectric,39–41 piezoelectric,42,43 photovoltaic,44–46 thermoelectric,47,48 pyroelectric,49,50 and other effects. Such harvested energies could also be stored in rechargeable batteries51–53 and supercapacitors54,55 for asynchronous applications. In this context, 2D elemental materials with atomically thin structures and high specific surface areas appeal for improved energy absorption, carrier transport, charge storage, etc. Moreover, the superior mechanical strength and flexibility of these materials, together with high electronic or ionic conductivities, allow the implementation of ultrathin and flexible energy harvesting and storage solutions. For example, 2D black phosphorus (BP) has been widely studied for photovoltaics, nanogenerators, batteries, supercapacitors, and other energy fields.56–59
Developing catalysts with high activity and stability is critical for catalysis, including electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, and heterogeneous catalysis. Atomically thin materials, especially those of noble metals, have drawn increased attention for catalysis because of their high surface-area-to-volume ratio and the abundant unsaturated atoms exposed on the surface, which can significantly enhance the catalytic activities.2,3,60,61 For instance, platinum-group metal nanosheets with atomic-thin layers are efficient catalysts for water splitting and CO2 reduction.62–66 Tremendous progress has also been achieved in designing and implementing highly efficient catalysts with 2D core–shell and alloy metal nanostructures, taking advantage of the recent advances in processing capability that enable the precise control of the compositions, structures, and defects in these materials.
To date, several reviews have discussed the recent progress in the synthesis and chemistry of elemental 2D materials and their applications in electronics and biomedical fields.24,28,67 In this review, we mainly focus on the recent progress related to the development of beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials and their use in energy and catalysis related applications. Fig. 1a illustrates the elements discussed in this article, including 12 beyond-graphene elemental main group 2D materials and several typical 2D transition metals that have been experimentally realized. A timeline has also been summarized in Fig. 1b to illustrate a chronicle (to our best knowledge) for the experimental debut of related materials. In the first section of this review, we will summarize the major types of elemental 2D materials and their properties and the progress in preparing these materials. In the subsequent sections, we intend to update the readers with the advances in applying these elemental 2D materials for energy harvesting and storage technologies, focusing on their principles and performance metrics. We will cover a spectrum of related technologies, including photovoltaic cells for collecting solar energy, piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators for converting mechanical energy, thermoelectric devices for recovering thermal energy, batteries, and supercapacitors for storing electrical energy, and some novel forms of energy harvesting. The following section is devoted to reviewing the progress made in catalysis based on elemental 2D materials. We will first discuss several major electrocatalytic applications, such as hydrogen evolution, oxygen reduction and evolution, CO2 conversion, and other electrochemical reactions, including nitrogen fixation. Subsequently, we will review the applications of photocatalysis and heterogeneous catalysis based on elemental 2D materials. Since the elemental 2D materials are emerging with much of their technological potential largely unexplored, we will provide our perspectives and discuss the challenges and opportunities for the future exploration of elemental 2D materials for energy and catalysis applications.
 Fig. 1  Overview of elemental 2D materials. (a) Distribution of the corresponding elemental 2D materials in the periodic table. (b) Historical timeline of the experimental realization of 2D main group elements and transition metals with atomically thin form.8,68–87 
2. Classification, structure, and property of elemental 2D materials
Elemental 2D materials include 2D main group elements and 2D transition metals. 2D main group elements are distributed in the III, IV, V, and VI groups of the periodic table. This class of materials exhibits the characteristics of metals and semiconductors with unique electronic, optical, and magnetic properties. The materials that will be introduced here include borophene and gallenene in group III; silicene, germanene, stanene, and plumbene in group IV; phosphorene, arsenene, antimonene, and bismuthene in group V; selenene and tellurene in group VI. 2D elemental transition metals mainly include noble metal nanosheets (i.e., Au, Pd, Ru, Rh) and other metal nanosheets (i.e., Co, Ni, Cu, Fe). In this section, we introduce the research progress of these materials, including their structures, properties, synthesis processes, characterizations, etc.
2.1 Group III elements

2.1.1 Borophene. 
Boron is an electron-deficient nonmetallic element in group III. The boron atom has three valence electrons, which result in complex chemical properties. Some of the boron's properties are similar to those of carbon. In a bulk phase, boron is a light-atomic-mass solid that exhibits surprising thermal stability with a melting point up to 2400 °C, and hardness close to that of the diamond. More importantly, similar to carbon, boron possesses a short covalent radius and the ability to adopt sp2 hybridization, facilitating the formation of various low-dimensional allotropes, such as boron nanotubes, cage-like boron fullerenes, and 2D boron nanosheets.88,89 For the sake of simplicity, we hereby consider borophene as the general terminology for 2D boron nanosheets. Borophene is the lightest 2D material and has several unique characteristics that are different from bulk boron.90 For instance, borophene is predicted to be metallic or semimetallic, while the bulk boron is a semiconductor. The rich physical and chemical properties of the boron element combined with the structural characteristics of 2D morphology, e.g., flexibility, high specific surface area, and quantum confinement, make borophene attractive for various potential applications ranging from electronics, superconductors, catalysts, batteries to many other areas.91
It should be noted, though, unlike other 2D materials (e.g., graphene, MoS2) where the layers are naturally stacked in the ground-state 3D forms, 2D borophene has far higher energy compared to its 3D forms. Such a thermodynamic disadvantage of 2D borophene, together with its intrinsic polymorphism, imposes significant challenges for the reliable and reproducible synthesis of borophene. The theoretical prediction of the borophene structure preceded its experimental realization.92 In 2015, two parallel studies simultaneously reported the synthesis of borophene on the Ag(111) substrate. Mannix et al. synthesized atomically thin, crystalline borophene with anisotropic electronic properties and metallic characteristics through an ultrahigh-vacuum electron-beam evaporation process.78 Atomically clean Ag(111) was used as the growth substrate, and borophene was deposited through the electron-beam evaporation of a high-purity solid boron source (Fig. 2a). During the growth, the silver substrate was maintained between 450 °C to 700 °C with a deposition rate between ∼0.01 to ∼0.1 monolayers per minute. When the substrate temperature stably reached 550 °C, scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) revealed two distinct boron phases: a homogeneous phase and a more corrugated “striped” phase. A series of detailed characterization results indicated the possibility of at least two well-defined long-range structural relationships (rhombohedral and honeycomb symmetries) between borophene and Ag(111). The borophene superstructure is more complicated than planar 2D materials such as boron nitride (BN), which can form a well-defined nanomesh on transition metals.
 Fig. 2  Borophene and gallenene. (a) Schematic diagram of borophene growth on an Ag(111) surface through evaporation. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (b) Atomic structure for proposed monolayer borophene models. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (c) STM images of borophene growth due to the transformation of some boron islands during the annealing. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) A series of potential unique properties of borophene, such as metallicity and transparency. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Optical image of gallenene formed on SiO2 wafer showing regions with uniform ultrathin layers. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, AAAS. (f and g) Structure model, TEM image along with SAED pattern and HRTEM image for the gallenene b010 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, AAAS. (h) I–V characteristics of two devices indicating ohmic contacts to gallenene. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, AAAS. 
In an independent study, Feng et al. reported the growth of 2D boron sheets on an Ag(111) surface using molecular beam epitaxy in an ultrahigh vacuum.79 Two types of borophene sheets, β12 (S1 phase) and χ3 (S2 phase) sheets, were obtained. Both types exhibited a triangular lattice but with different arrangements of the periodic holes. The atomic structures for these two monolayer borophene phases are shown in Fig. 2b. The proposed models of β12 and χ3 phases give rise to simulated STM images in agreement with the experimental data. Also, the authors observed in the experiment that the β12 phase transformed into an ordered χ3 phase when the sample was annealed to 380 °C (Fig. 2c). Both the β12 and χ3 borophene sheets maintain their triangular lattices on the Ag surface, implying that their interactions with the substrate are not strong. The borophene sheets are inert to oxidation, which is promising for future device applications. Inspired by these early explorations, researchers have recently demonstrated the growth of large-area (e.g., up to 100 μm2 in size) single-crystal borophene on Cu(111) surfaces by chemical vapor deposition (CVD).93 The synthesis results on both Cu and Ag substrates suggest that the formation of an atomically thin borophene sheet is a self-limiting process that facilitates the synthesis of complex heterostructures based on atomically thin layers. In order to understand the fundamental characteristics of 2D borophene, researchers have also obtained the electron structure, chemical bond, optical, electronic, and thermodynamic properties of borophene by first-principles calculations, which will expand the broader application of borophene in energy, catalysis, and many other areas.


2.1.2 Gallenene. 
Gallium, with its low melting point (below 30 °C), is a liquid metal at room temperature and highly deformable, which displays potential for spreading as a 2D thin film. Gallium alloys are among the most widely used liquid metals due to their non-toxicity, environmental friendliness, and low melting temperatures. Gallium is also used as a dopant in silicon for fabricating modern electronics. Monolayer crystalline Ga films epitaxially grown on GaN substrates exhibit superconductivity with an elevated superconducting transition temperature and critical field. Before the successful experimental preparation of gallenene, the discovery of ultra-thin gallium oxide and gallium sulfide (GaS) sheets had attracted attention since it provides a new exfoliation approach for preparing atomically thin materials using liquid instead of solid metal. In 2018, Kochat et al. demonstrated a similar technique to produce atomically thin gallium (gallenene) through exfoliating the solid layers from molten droplets of the bulk crystal near room temperature.85 The optical image in Fig. 2e reveals a millimeter-sized thin layer of gallenene around a bulk Ga droplet. The continuous gallenene layer is free of crack or aggregation. The thickness of gallenene is about 4 nm, around four to six atomic layers thick. As shown in Fig. 2f and g, gallenene sheets originate from the (010) lattice of orthorhombic Ga and possibly contain strain, which gives rise to lattice distortion in the exfoliated gallenene. The exfoliated gallenene has another distinct structure with (100) crystallographic orientation, which agrees with the structures predicted by DFT calculations. The electrical measurement of two-terminal gallenene devices (Fig. 2h) suggests the formation of ohmic contacts between gallenene and the metal electrodes (e.g., Au). Recently, Tao et al. reported the epitaxial growth of gallenene with a thickness of 0.25 nm on a Si(111) surface through a UHV thermal evaporation.94 The authors used in situ low-temperature scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) and scanning tunneling spectroscopy (STS) to reveal that the first Ga layer deposited on the silicon substrate functions buffer layer and has a 4 × √13 reconstruction, which is dictated by the substrate lattice. Subsequently, the second layer of Ga atoms deposited form into a hexagonal honeycomb structure. The corresponding STS result shows that the formed gallenene is metallic. All these experimental results suggest that ultrathin gallium films can offer interesting physics and possible electronic applications.

2.2 Group IV elements

2.2.1 Silicene. 
Silicon is the most commonly used material in the modern semiconductor industry. The importance of silicon in microelectronics has motivated considerable interest in exploring two-dimensional single-atomic-layer silicon, namely silicene, even long before the discovery and rise of graphene. In 1994, Takeda and Shiraishi predicted the buckled honeycomb structure of 2D Si and Ge based on minimizing the total energy.95 Later, Cahangirov et al. predicted that silicon could have a stable two-dimensional honeycomb structure when it is buckled in a “chair conformation” with a small buckling distance (0.044 nm) and reduced nearest neighbor Si–Si distance (0.225 nm).96 The calculated band structures of two-dimensional silicon exhibit the semimetallic characteristics and the massless Dirac Fermion behavior. In bulk silicon, the sp3 hybridization is more stable and energetically favorable than sp2 hybridization, leading to a tetrahedral configuration in silicon instead of the layered phase like graphite.97 Such a structural configuration is because the weak π bonds in Si cannot stabilize the threefold sp2 coordination. Theoretical studies suggest that the interaction of Si with a substrate could effectively change the bonding configuration and may favor the stabilization of a structural configuration with the threefold sp2 coordination (e.g., silicene).27,98,99
Inspired by these early theoretical predictions, Aufray et al. reported in 2010 the epitaxial growth of silicene nanoribbons with a honeycomb, graphene-like structure on silver(111) surface.69 This study is considered as the first experimental evidence proving the physical existence of silicene. The authors observed a highly ordered honeycomb lattice in the grown silicene monolayer. The distance between the adjacent Si–Si atoms is 0.19 ± 0.01 nm, which is shorter than that in bulk Si (which is 0.235 nm), suggesting that the Ag substrate may work as a catalyst and stabilization of the silicene sheet. It should be noted, though, some researchers raised concerns regarding whether the obtained monolayer material is indeed silicene, mainly due to the much smaller Si–Si distance and the lack of more sophisticated chemical characterization of the sample. Various short-range Si superstructures formed on Ag(111) substrates have later been reported. Each superstructure corresponds to a specific rotation of the silicene layer with respect to the silver substrate. For instance, Lay and co-workers provided compelling experimental evidence from both structural and electronic characterizations to demonstrate the existence of the epitaxial silicene on Ag(111) substrate through combining the STM and angular-resolved photoemission spectroscopy (ARPES) in conjunction with DFT calculations.100 The comparison images for the constructed STM and atomic structure models of bare Ag surface and silicene sheet with a honeycomb lattice are shown in Fig. 3a. The measured Si–Si distance is 0.22 nm, which is in agreement with the theoretical predictions for silicene. The STM and ARPES results demonstrate that the structural and electronic properties of silicene are close to those of graphene. The synthesis of silicene has opened up immense opportunities for theoretical and experimental explorations of this emerging material. For example, silicene is predicted to exhibit a nontrivial electronic structure and a strong spin–orbit coupling much larger than that of graphene, which could potentially lead to accessible quantum spin Hall phenomena at an elevated temperature for enabling practical silicon-based quantum electronics.
 Fig. 3  Silicene and germanene. (a) Filled-states STM images and the atomic structure model of silicene nanosheet on Ag(111). Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2012, American Physical Society. (b) The buckled honeycomb structure of silicene. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) Schematics of the synthesis–transfer–fabrication process of silicene to enable a back-gated transistor. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (d) Raman spectra of silicene before and after two months of storage in 30 mbar rough vacuum at room temperature. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) I–V curve of silicene device displays ambipolar electron–hole symmetry expected from silicene. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (f and g) STM images of germanene grown on Pt(111) and Au(111). The atomic structure of germanane on each metal substrate is highlighted in the magnified insets. Reproduced with permission.75,108 Copyright 2014, IOP Publishing Ltd and Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH. (h) Schematic representation of a germanane monolayer, optical image, and room temperature conductance of the germanane-based FET device. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2017, IOP Publishing Ltd. 
Nevertheless, the preparation of substrate-free silicene nanosheets, which could enable more versatile characterization and device integration, remains a significant challenge. To this end, synthetic methods such as chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and wet chemical processes were employed to prepare free-standing 2D Si nanosheets. In 2011, Kim et al. produced single-crystalline 2D Si nanosheets with a thickness smaller than 2 nm using a CVD process, where the authors focused on controlling the high flow rate of the hydrogen gas due to the kinetic and chemical impacts of H2 on the growth rate of Si in different crystal directions.101 H2 and SiCl4 were used in the synthesis. In the course of H2 passivation and chlorination, the 〈100〉 and 〈110〉 surfaces of Si became very rough, while the 〈111〉 surfaces kept smooth. The smooth planes had a slower growth rate than the rough planes because of the difficult incorporation of Si atoms on smooth surfaces. As a result, the growth along the stacking axis [111] was suppressed during the growth along the 〈110〉 direction, leading to the growth of 2D films. The photoluminescence (PL) measurements indicate an enhanced direct interband transition and optical activity in Si nanosheets, suggesting the potential of the products for optoelectronics applications. 2D Si can also be fabricated using solution-based methods. Nakano et al. prepared 2D Si with a thickness of 0.37 nm by chemical exfoliation of Mg-doped CaSi2 with propylamine hydrochloride.102 The addition of Mg reduced the negative charges on the silicon layer in the layered precursor. When the bulk precursor was immersed in the propylamine hydrochloride (PA·HCl) solution, the calcium ions were deintercalated with the evolution of hydrogen; thus, the layered precursor was exfoliated to silicon sheets.
Taking advantage of the integration compatibility with the state-of-the-art Si technology platform, silicene shows great potential for future atomically thin electronic devices.10331For instance, Tao et al. reported a silicene field-effect transistor (FET) with carrier mobility of ∼100 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature.33 Such an excellent performance is enabled by a growth-transfer-fabrication process, which includes the silicene synthesis on Ag substrate, the encapsulated delamination transfer of silicene sandwiched between Al2O3 and the Ag substrates, and the reuse of underneath Ag film as contact electrodes. The buckled honeycomb lattice structure of silicene is shown in Fig. 3b. The manufacturing process for fabricating the silicene back-gated silicene transistors is shown in Fig. 3c. The air stability issue of silicene was overcome through the encapsulated delamination fabrication process with bottom Ag electrodes. The Raman characteristics of silicene phases with Al2O3 capping and a native Ag layer show no changes when stored in a rough vacuum (∼30 mbar) at room temperature even for two months (Fig. 3d). The transfer curve of the silicene device displays ambipolar characteristics (Fig. 3e), as expected for silicene, which is a gapless semiconductor with Dirac cones in its electronic structure. This work demonstrated the first proof-of-concept silicene device, which provides important knowledge in both the fundamental materials properties and processing know-how for future device prototyping of silicene based electronics.


2.2.2 Germanene. 
Germanene is the two-dimensional single-atomic-layer germanium (Ge) with a buckled honeycomb structure. Theoretical models of single-layer germanium have been studied for a long time. For instance, Cahangirov et al. proposed in 2009 that germanium atoms would prefer to form a corrugated sheet structure.96 The larger ionic radius of Ge atom makes it even more in favor of sp3 hybridization compared to Si, suggesting that 2D Ge is more stable with a buckled structure.104 It should be noted that the bottom-up synthesis is more feasible to derive 2D Si and Ge since the 3D layered bulk structures for both materials do not naturally exist. The stabilization from substrates or surface modification would be effective for obtaining stable 2D Ge structures.105–107 Several studies have pursued such efforts for deriving germanene. Li et al. demonstrated the first experimental isolation of germanene in 2014 through a UHV MBE synthesis on metal surfaces.108 Pt(111) was chosen as the substrate because its hexagonal symmetry can serve as the template to initiate the formation of the buckled honeycomb lattice of germanene. The interfacial interaction between Pt(111) and the deposited 2D honeycomb sheets (i.e., germanene) is weaker than those cases where other metals are used. In Li's work, after the deposition of germanium at room temperature in a UHV environment, the sample was annealed at a temperature range of 327–477 °C for 30 minutes. A continuous 2D layer of germanium was formed with a buckled conformation. The as-synthesized germanene film was characterized by low-energy electron diffraction (LEED) and STM, and a √19 × √19 superstructure was observed (Fig. 3f). In the same year, Lay et al. successfully prepared a monolayer germanene film with ordered multiple phases on Au(111) substrate using an MBE process.75 One of these phases displaying a clear honeycomb structure was observed in the STM image (Fig. 3g). This phase was identified as a √3 × √3 reconstructed germanene layer consistent with the DFT calculations. In 2015, Derivaz et al. reported the growth of 2D germanene with a thickness of 0.27 nm on Al(111) through a UHV MBE synthesis.109 The 2D germanene layer uniformly covering the substrate was characterized to exhibit a 3 × 3 superstructure with respect to the substrate lattice. Furthermore, the authors performed first-principles calculations and revealed that the Ge atoms could be accommodated in a buckled conformation. Also, on the Al(111) substrate, Endo et al. derived a novel germanene structure through the Ge deposition in a UHV environment at nearly room temperature.110 The STM, STS, and DFT results show that the atomic structure of germanene possesses a √3 × √3 periodic honeycomb lattice of Ge atoms, which is different from the previously reported structures of germanene on Al(111). 2D Ge can also be grown on nonmetallic substrates.111 For instance, Zhang et al. demonstrated the first growth of buckled germanene on semiconducting MoS2 substrates.112 They performed STS to reveal the signatures of the Dirac fermion in the band structure of the obtained germanene, with a linear-like energy-momentum dispersion and large Fermi velocity derived in the superstructure. This study demonstrated a feasible way to fabricate germanene-based Dirac electronic material for high-speed, energy-efficient nanoelectronics. All these attempts to produce high-quality germanene accelerate the progress in understating of its material properties and development of applications.
Germanene's electronic, optical, and structural properties have also been determined from ab initio calculations.113–115 These studies suggest that germanene is appealing for high-performance nanoelectronics.116 However, germanene is a zero-gap semimetal. Therefore, the development of efficient approaches for opening a bandgap in germanene monolayer is highly desired for implementing germanene-based FET operating at room temperature. Hydrogenation has been shown as an effective method to tune the electronic structure of 2D nanomaterials. The first germanane FET was demonstrated by Madhushankar et al. in 2017, based on multilayer single-crystal germanane flakes (Fig. 3h).117 The device showed ambipolar transport in both the electron and hole-doped regimes with a current on/off ratio up to 105 and carrier mobilities of 70 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature.


2.2.3 Stanene. 
Bulk tin has two stable homogeneous structures: gray tin (α-Sn) with a face-centered-cubic diamond structure and white tin (β-Sn) with a body-centered tetragonal structure. Stanene is the single atomic layer allotrope of Sn with a graphene-like structure. Stanene consists of a biatomic layer of α-Sn(111), in which two triangular sublattices stack together and form a buckled honeycomb lattice. Fig. 4a summarizes the electronic configuration for the group IV elements, which all share a similar outer shell configuration but with different spin–orbit coupling (SOC) strengths. The monolayers of these elements are expected to exhibit the typical structural and electrical characteristics of graphene. The energy bandgaps in graphene, silicene, germanene, stanene, and plumbene are 10−3 meV, 8 meV, 23 meV, 300 meV, and 400 meV, respectively. The large bandgap of stanene makes it promising for implementing room temperature quantum electronics and spintronics.118 For example, stanene has been predicted to host the quantum spin Hall (QSH) effect at room temperature, offering an exciting platform to study low-dimensional topological physics.119,120 Stanene was also predicted to be a 2D topological insulator with tunable QSH states.121,122 Zhang et al. predicted that 2D stanene was a QSH insulator with sizable bulk gaps of 0.3 eV based on the first-principles calculations, sufficiently large for practical applications at room temperature.119 Moreover, these QSH states can be effectively tuned by chemical functionalization or by external strains. These results have aroused great interests for the potential applications in spintronics, magnetoelectronics and optoelectronics.
 Fig. 4  Stanene and plumbene. (a) Group IV elements’ electron configuration and energy gap for the corresponding 2D materials. (b) Schematic preparation of ultraflat stanene on Cu(111). Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Representative stanene flake with a hexagonal shape and zoom-in STM image showing the zigzag type edge. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) STM topography image of monolayer stanene grown on Bi2Te3. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) Illustration of stanene lattice and Sn/PbTe/Bi2Te3 sandwich structure showing the superconductive properties of a few-layer stanene. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic illustration of the growth of plumbene through the alloy and annealing process on the Pd surface. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (g) Large-scale and atomic-scale STM images of a plumbene overlayer on Pd(111). Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. 
It should be noted that the experimental growth of stanene remains elusive. In 2015, Jia et al. reported the successful fabrication of 2D stanene with a thickness of 0.12 nm on of Bi2Te3 substrate by molecular beam epitaxy.77 The atomic and electronic structures of epitaxial stanene films were characterized by STM and ARPES, which agree well with the first-principles calculations. About 90% of the Bi2Te3 substrate is covered by stanene, and about 10–15% of Sn atoms stay on the substrate as small islands. The triangular lattice of the stanene is clearly revealed in the atomic-resolved STM image (Fig. 4d). The surface of the stanene film is not perfectly flat on the nanometre scale. The height profile shows a random height modulation of about 0.06 nm, which may be caused by the in-plane compressive stress or hydrogen adsorption. Since then, there have been more reports on the experimental epitaxial growth of monolayer stanene on different substrates, such as Sb(111), InSb(111), and Ag(111) surfaces.123–125 However, the experimental evidence supporting topological states in stanine is still lacking due to the unfavorable substrate effects. In 2018, Deng et al. demonstrated the growth of high-quality stanene on Cu(111) by low-temperature molecular beam epitaxy.126 Cu(111) substrate not only stabilizes the ultraflat structure but also causes significant lattice stretching in stanene. The Cu(111) substrate also functions as an ‘orbital filter’, which selectively filters out the pz orbitals of stanene. The resultant epitaxial stanene can be viewed as a honeycomb lattice of in-plane pxy orbitals, which is of great interest in topological physics. The schematic setup for sample preparation is shown in Fig. 4b. Sn atoms were evaporated from an effusion cell onto a Cu(111) surface, which was held at ∼200 K in ultrahigh vacuum. The apparent height of the Sn film is 0.18 nm, indicating a single-atomic-layer thickness. The ultraflat honeycomb structure of stanene was resolved with single-atomic precision by STM, which allows the direct observation of various topological structures, including edge termination and defect structures. As shown in Fig. 4c, the edges of stanene are mostly zigzag-terminated, similar to that in graphene. A more in-depth study by ARPES spectra revealed that the ultraflat stanene exhibited an in-plane s–p band inversion and a spin–orbit-coupling-induced topological gap (∼0.3 eV), which represents the initial experimental observation of group-IV graphene-like material displaying topological features.
Similar to the case of graphene, the layer number of stanine dictates its material properties. For example, superconductivity was surprisingly observed in stanene when its thickness is varied from monolayer to a few layers. Xue et al. found the superconductivity can be hosted in few-layer stanene flakes grown on PbTe when the sample thickness ranges from bilayer to ∼20 layers.127Fig. 4e schematically illustrates the device structure used for probing the superconducting properties, with a trilayer Sn on top of a PbTe/Bi2Te3/Si(111) substrate. By increasing the number of Sn layers, the superconducting transition temperature (Tc) increased. The results open up novel strategies for experimentally realizing two-dimensional topological superconductors. In a later study, Ma et al. established a facile dealloying strategy to fabricate few-layer stanene samples.128 2D stanene nanosheets were fabricated at a large scale by dealloying lithium metal in a layered Li5Sn2 alloy. The lithium metal was etched in deionized water under an ambient atmosphere. 2D stanene nanosheets with a thickness of 4 nm and a lateral size of several micrometers were obtained through sonication and filtration. The obtained 2D stanene nanosheets displayed outstanding performance in potassium storage for potassium ion battery, with a high capacity of 300 mA h g−1 at 74.4 mA g−1.


2.2.4 Plumbene. 
Plumbene is the atomically thin lead (Pb) with a graphene-like honeycomb lattice. Previous theoretical calculations showed that plumbene has the largest spin–orbit interaction and energy bandgap among the group IV monolayers due to the orbital electron structure of lead.129 Zhang et al. further predicted a novel class of 2D QSH insulators based on halogen-decorated plumbene monolayers (PbX; X = H, F, Cl, Br, I), which possess giant bulk gaps from 1.03 eV to a record value of 1.34 eV. These novel plumbnene-based QSH insulators with giant gaps present a promising platform for exploring intriguing topological phenomena and expand potential applications at high temperatures.
In 2019, J. Yuhara et al. reported the first experimental deposition of plumbene with single-atomic-layer thickness by molecular beam epitaxy with a segregation method on a Pd(111) surface.87Fig. 4f shows the schematic diagram of the related growth process. Pb was first deposited onto a clean Pd(111) surface at room temperature in an ultrahigh-vacuum chamber The Pd(111) substrate with deposited Pb film was then annealed up to 600 °C. Finally, Pb atoms are segregated on the surface of the Pd–Pb alloy to form monolayer 2D plumbene during the cooling. STM characterization revealed a nearly flat honeycomb structure in the formed plumbene, which exhibited a unique surface morphology resembling the famous Weaire–Phelan bubble structure of the Olympic “WaterCube” in Beijing. The foam-like “bubbles” have average sizes from 15 to 80 nm, which are related to the Pb concentration (x < 0.2) and the corresponding lattice parameter of the Pd1−xPbx(111) alloy surface. The STM images resolved the unit cell size of the plumbene honeycomb structure ranging from 0.48 to 0.49 nm, which is consistent with the calculated results for free-standing plumbene (Fig. 4g). In addition to its appealing properties as a topological insulator, plumbene also exhibits attractive characteristics for applications in batteries, electronic devices, wearable radiation protection, etc.

2.3 Group V elements

2.3.1 Phosphorene. 
Phosphorene, the monolayer black phosphorus (BP), is the first and most investigated 2D group VA material. Bulk BP, a layered semiconducting allotrope of phosphorus, was initially derived from white phosphorus at high pressure and moderate temperature by Bridgman in 1914.130 Compared with white, red, and violet phosphorus, BP is the most thermodynamically stable allotrope of elemental phosphorus. The layered structure of bulk BP is similar to that of graphite, where individual atomic layers are stacked together by van der Waals interactions (Fig. 5a).131 Phosphorene is an emerging 2D p-type semiconductor with a tunable direct bandgap from 0.3 to 2.0 eV (bulk to monolayer), and high carrier mobilities (∼10000 cm2 V−1 s−1), which are appealing for potential applications in high-performance electronics, optical devices, catalysis, and energy use.59,132–136 Phosphorene also exhibits an intriguing anisotropy in its material properties (e.g., optical absorption, carrier mobility, etc.), due to the reduced symmetry in phosphorene's crystal structure.99,137–139
 Fig. 5  Phosphorene and arsenene. (a) The layered and anisotropic crystal structure of elemental black phosphorus. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic of the first device structure of a few-layer phosphorene FET. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (c) AFM image and photoluminescence spectra of a single-layer phosphorene crystal compared to bulk black phosphorus sample. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) AFM and surface roughness characterization of the chemical functionalized BP morphology before and after ambient exposure. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (e) Comparison of the layered structures of black and blue phosphorus in top and side view. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2014, American Physical Society. (f) Large scale STM images of single layer blue phosphorus epitaxially grown on Au(111). Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (g) Calculated electronic band structures of arsenene. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. (h) TEM image and theoretical atomic model of multilayer arsenene/InN/InAs layer structure. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i) Schematic illustration of the predicted light-assisted exfoliation of multilayered arsenene by the photo-isomerization of 4-(decyloxy) azobenzene. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The first experimental isolations of 2D BP were independently reported by Zhang et al. and Ye et al. in 2014, both adopting a scotch-tape method similar to that used for graphene. Zhang and co-workers fabricated and characterized the few-layer BP FETs (Fig. 5b).74 Ye and co-workers fabricated monolayer BP (phosphorene) based FET.140 According to Ye et al., the thickness of monolayer phosphorene was found to be about 0.85 nm (Fig. 5c).140 A significant photoluminescence response was observed in the visible range for the exfoliated phosphorene. In contrast, no photoluminescence was observed for the 10 nm-thick BP flakes. Later in the same year, several other studies further explored the mechanical, electrical, and optical properties of 2D BP, which excited intensive interest in exploring phosphorene.134,137,138,141,142
The mechanical exfoliation could produce pristine monolayer and few-layer black phosphorus, enabling the fabrication of high-quality individual devices for fundamental explorations. However, this method is inherently unscalable. Liquid shear exfoliation of bulk black phosphorus has proven successful in producing isolated multilayer black phosphorous with high throughputs in various organic solvents. One of the earliest demonstrations of high-yield preparation of a few-layer phosphorene (thickness ranging from three to five layers) was reported by Brent et al. using liquid exfoliation in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone (NMP).143 Since then, various solvents have been used in the liquid shear exfoliation of phosphorene, including dimethylformamide (DMF), dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), and N-cyclohexyl-2-pyrrolidone (CHP).144–146 Other top-down methods have also been developed to produce large-area phosphorene samples, such as sonication-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation, electrochemical exfoliation, etc.147–151 For the bottom-up method, it is still a challenge to directly grow phosphorene because the stability of black phosphorene is highly sensitive to the substrate.152
Although BP is the most stable form of elemental phosphorus, phosphorene is prone to rapid degradation in ambient conditions. The air-instability of phosphorene imposes significant challenges for device fabrication/characterizations and adversely hinders the potential applications of phosphorene. It is believed that water, oxygen, and visible light all play a role in the degradation of phosphorene. The primary strategy to stabilize 2D BP flakes is the encapsulation of the BP nanosheets with insulating capping layers. To this end, Al2O3 and hexagonal boron nitride (BN) was utilized as the protective layers, which provide a barrier to oxygen and moisture ingress. Such encapsulation structures are generally applicable to phosphorene-based electronics and optoelectronics. For the phosphorene flakes produced from the liquid exfoliation process, the dispersing medium, which is typically an organic solvent for maintaining the colloidal stability of BP nanosheets, can also provide a barrier to oxidation. Hersam and co-workers found that covalent aryl diazonium functionalization could suppress the chemical degradation of exfoliated phosphorene even after three weeks of ambient exposure (Fig. 5d).153 In addition to providing airtight protection, the chemical functionalization can also engineer the material properties (e.g., doping levels) of the exfoliated BP nanosheets for enhancing their performance in various applications.
Other atomically thin phosphorus allotropes have also been reported. In 2014, blue phosphorus was predicted by Zhu and Tománek as a new allotrope of black phosphorus, sharing a similar layered honeycomb structure but better stability.154 The comparison between the structures of black and blue phosphorus is shown in Fig. 5e.154 Unlike the armchair configuration in the black phosphorus layers, blue phosphorus has a well-defined zigzag-puckered structure. The bandgap of blue phosphorus was theoretically computed as 1.2 eV (for the bulk) and 2 eV (for the monolayer), ideal for applications in electronics and optoelectronics. In 2016, Zhang et al. successfully synthesized single layer blue phosphorus on Au(111) substrate by MBE (Fig. 5f).155 The realization of epitaxial growth of large-scale and high-quality atomically thin blue phosphorus could enable the development of novel electronic and optoelectronic devices based on this emerging 2D material.


2.3.2 Arsenene. 
Bulk arsenic is a semimetal with good electron conductivities, and its layered structure is stable under environmental conditions. Arsenic (As) has several allotropes that exist in two stable phases, the orthorhombic As (ε-As) and the gray bulk As (β-As). ε-As has a structure similar to that of monolayer black phosphorus, while β-As has a buckled honeycomb similar to that of germanene. DFT calculations showed that gray As preserves its metallic character even when the layer number is reduced to three. Single-layer and bilayer gray As (β-As) are semiconductors and were calculated to show a bandgap of 2.49 eV and 0.37 eV.
In 2015, Zeng and co-workers predicted an abrupt transition from semimetallic or metallic As bulk crystals to wide-band-gap semiconductor arsenene monolayers with band gaps of 2.49 eV based on first-principles calculations (Fig. 5g).156 The authors also found that arsenene and antimonene can transition from indirect bandgap semiconductors to direct bandgap semiconductors with tensile strains. Bulk crystals of natural or synthetic As could be processed into a few-layer arsenene using the plasma-assisted thinning treatment. Tsai et al. successfully prepared multilayer arsenene (thickness ∼14 nm) on an InAs substrate using the plasma-assisted process. The sample thickness could be controlled by the plasma exposure time.157 The bandgap of multilayer arsenene is estimated to be ∼2.3 eV (Fig. 5h). Similar to other elemental 2D materials, approaches such as mechanical exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoliation, and MBE epitaxial growth have been demonstrated to prepare 2D arsenene. Chen et al. prepared arsenene with a range of layer thickness through mechanical exfoliation. The thickness of the monolayer arsenene exfoliated from natural minerals is 0.6 nm, consistent with the DFT results. Zhong et al. used mechanical exfoliation to prepare a few-layer arsenene based FET, whose electrical properties strongly depend on the sample thickness.158 A flake with a thickness of ∼4.6 nm showed carrier mobilities ∼59 cm2 V−1 s−1 and on/off ratios ∼103. Zhao et al. proposed a novel exfoliation-based approach to efficiently transform multilayered arsenene into single or few-layered arsenene by the conformational change associated with the photoisomerization of azobenzene-based molecules.159 DFT calculations on the arsenene–azobenzene–arsenene composite show that the trans- to cis-conformational change can effectively control the interlayer distance of multilayered arsenene to promote the exfoliation of multilayered arsenene (Fig. 5i). Pumera and co-workers demonstrated that As crystals can be easily exfoliated in various solvents with a wide range of boiling points and surface tensions to yield highly concentrated few-layered nanosheets with controllable sizes. The thickness range of the exfoliated arsenene nanosheets is 5 to 12 nm. It is also shown that arsenene nanosheets provide a sensitive and selective platform for vapor sensing. The surface of arsenene is susceptible to oxygen and humidity under ambient conditions, which severely hinders the fundamental exploration and device prototyping of arsenene. Recently, Hu et al. report the epitaxial growth of single-crystalline few-layer gray As nanoflakes with hexagonal and half-hexagonal shapes via a van der Waals epitaxy method.160 The as-prepared gray As nanoflakes did not get oxidized and had a diagonal length up to 20 μm and thickness as small as 4 nm. The as-synthesized flakes can also be easily transferred to other substrates. The surface of arsenene is susceptible to oxygen and humidity under ambient conditions, which severely hinders the fundamental exploration and device prototyping of arsenene. The stability test results showed that the prepared gray As nanoflakes passivated by polymer polyethylene glycol (PEG) coating exhibited significantly improved air-stability for at least 50 days, which is conducive to further characterizations and device applications.


2.3.3 Antimonene. 
As the buckled honeycomb monolayer of element Sb, antimonene is predicted to exhibit unique properties, including high carrier mobility, good thermal conductivity, and an indirect bandgap of 2.28 eV.161 Zeng et al. first predicted that among several possible allotropes of monolayer antimonene, the rhombohedral phase with an ABC stacking of monolayer antimonene (β-phase) has the best stability.156 In contrast to the widely reported phosphorene, antimonene possesses robust environmental stability appealing for long-term applications. The experimental results prove that at room temperature, antimonene was not significantly contaminated upon exposure to ambient conditions and do not react with water.81,162 However, the strong binding energy, and small layer distance render the preparation of high-quality antimonene challenging. Up to now, mechanical exfoliation, liquid-phase exfoliation, and epitaxial growth have been used to prepare antimonene. In 2016, Zamora and co-workers demonstrated the micromechanical exfoliation of antimony down to the single-layer antimonene by combining a controlled double-step transfer procedure.163 AFM characterization results showed that the thickness of single-layer antimonene is around 0.4 nm. DFT calculations confirmed the experimental observations and predicted a bandgap of 1.2–1.3 eV for single-layer antimonene. These results suggest the potential of antimonene as a stable 2D material for relevant applications in optoelectronics. Later, Zamora and co-workers also successfully produced few-layer antimonene through the sonication-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation of antimony crystals.164 Wang et al. prepared smooth and large antimonene by combining the pregrinding with sonication-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation (Fig. 6a).165 The obtained antimonene exhibited smooth surfaces with thicknesses ranging from 0.5 nm to 7 nm, controlled by modulating the centrifugation speeds. Furthermore, the authors demonstrated, for the first time, the use of antimonene as a hole transport layer in perovskite solar cells, showing that antimonene is promising for energy applications. In 2016, Lei et al. reported the MBE synthesis of smooth antimonene on Bi2Te3(111) and Sb2Te3(111) surfaces, enabled by the small lattice mismatch between antimonene and these substrates.166 MBE process has also been successfully applied to grow antimonene on PdTe2, Ge(111), and Ag(111) substrates.167–169 Zeng and co-workers further developed a van der Waals epitaxy method to grow high-quality antimonene single crystals on various substrates.170 HRTEM microscopy and Raman spectroscopy revealed the buckled hexagonal structure (β-phase) in the as-grown antimonene. The optical microscopy, AFM, Raman spectroscopy, and XPS characterizations also proved the excellent stability of antimonene. The surface roughness showed no apparent changes after exposure to air, even for one month (Fig. 6b). In 2019, Peng et al. successfully synthesized few-layer hexagonal-shaped antimonene nanosheets via a solution-phase method.171 The sheets were β-phase single crystals of lateral sizes ∼0.5–1.5 μm and thicknesses ∼5–30 nm (Fig. 6c). This work demonstrated the first successful solution synthesis of few-layer crystalline antimonene, providing important guidance for the future synthesis of other elemental 2D materials. The experimental realization of monolayer antimonenes facilitates the systematic characterization and comprehensive understanding of its unique properties, which may lead to the applications of antimonene in electronics, optoelectronics, electrocatalysis, and energy storage.172–174
 Fig. 6  Antimonene and bismuthene. (a) Illustration of the preparation of smooth and large antimonene by pregrinding and subsequent sonication-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Optical images, AFM images, and Raman spectra of antimonene layers before and after 30-day aging verify the stability. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) TEM images of a hexagonal antimonene nanosheet prepared by solution-phase synthesis. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) SEM and AFM images of ultrathin bismuth nanosheets prepared by liquid exfoliation technique. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Typical TEM and AFM images of freestanding bismuthene synthesized by wet chemical methods. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic diagram of bismuthene grown on a SiC(0001) substrate. Topographic STM overview map showing that bismuthene fully covers the substrate with a honeycomb pattern. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2017, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. 


2.3.4 Bismuthene. 
Bismuth is the heaviest element in group V, and its stable form (β-phase) has a layered structure. So far, monolayer bismuth (bismuthene) exhibits the largest experimentally determined bulk gap (0.8 eV), making bismuthene a promising candidate for room-temperature quantum spin Hall material. Moreover, 2D Bi exhibits high carrier mobilities for electronic applications. Bismuthene has also shown significant application potential in other fields such as energy storage, electrocatalysis, and photonics.175 For example, bismuthene was reported to be a promising anode material for high-energy-density potassium-ion batteries due to its high theoretical volumetric capacity and relatively low working potential.176
Bulk Bi with a rhombohedral structure may not adopt real van der Waals bonded layered structures. It is thus difficult to exfoliate bulk Bi into bismuthene through traditional ultrasonication or other mechanical operations. Nevertheless, some top-down methods can be used to prepare bismuthene, for instance, liquid exfoliation and hot-pressing methods. For instance, Zhang and co-workers produced a few-layer bismuthene with pregrinding and sonochemical exfoliation methods. The bulk Bi was first ground into a powder and prepared into the Bi isopropyl alcohol solution. The Bi solution was then treated with ice-bath sonication and probe sonication, followed by a centrifugation process. Zeng et al. prepared few-layer and single layer bismuthene flakes using a similar method.177 AFM image reveals a thickness of 0.65 nm for the final products, suggesting the preparation of single layer bismuthene (Fig. 6d). Also, Zhang et al. designed a wet chemistry method using sulfuric acid intercalation to successfully assist the exfoliation of bulk Bi into thin 2D Bi flakes (∼17-layer thickness).178 In another study, Wu et al. prepared highly crystalline Bi nanosheets with a thickness of about 2 nm and lateral dimensions up to several micrometers using a hot-pressing method.179 The ultrathin Bi nanosheets exhibit enhanced broadband photoemission in the visible spectrum. Wet-chemical methods can also be used to synthesize ultrathin 2D Bi through the reduction of Bi-based compounds. For example, Han et al. prepared ultrathin Bi nanosheets via the in situ topotactic transformations of Bi oxyiodide nanosheets template in cathodic electrochemical environments.180 The obtained single-crystalline Bi nanosheets possess large surface areas and exhibit excellent electrocatalytic performance to reduce CO2. Very recently, based on a simple reduction reaction using BiCl3 as the Bi precursor and NaBH4 as the reductant, 2D Bi nanosheets with different thicknesses (from monolayer to multilayers) were synthesized (Fig. 6e).181 AFM images show an average thickness of 0.65 nm for the derived Bi nanosheets, which confirms its monolayer nature. These obtained Bi nanosheets show high electrocatalytic efficiency and selectivity for formate formation through the CO2 reduction reaction. Recent studies indicate that few-layered bismuthene as cathode material also exhibits a good cyclability for Na-ion battery.182
The melting point of Bi is low, and Bi will not form molecular clusters when evaporated. Therefore, high-quality crystalline sheets of Bi could be readily deposited with the MBE method. In 2005, Nagao et al. reported the growth of high-quality bismuth thin film to form a 2D structure on a silicon surface with atomic-level surface roughness.183 Later, Hirahara et al. demonstrated the growth of bilayer Bi(111) on the Bi2Te3 substrate, leveraging the similar lattice constant of Bi and Bi2Te3.184 In 2017, Reis et al. successfully synthesized monolayer bismuthene on SiC(0001) surface using an MBE method. The bismuthene layer shows a (√3 × √3)R30° superstructure with a flat honeycomb lattice, consistent with the theoretical predictions (Fig. 6f).82 Each of the Bi atoms is located at the top of a Si atom, forming the honeycomb pattern of bismuthene. STM image shows that the whole surface is smoothly covered with flakes of typical diameter ∼25 nm. A nontrivial quantum spin Hall phase with a 0.8 eV bulk gap was experimentally determined from such fully-planar monolayer bismuthene, which is in good agreement with the theoretical predictions. Such a large gap suggests that the bulk of the monolayer bismuthene could remain topologically insulating well above room temperature.

2.4 Group VI elements

2.4.1 Selenene. 
Selenium exhibits both non-metallic and metallic properties and is an important semiconductor with intriguing physical properties, including high photoconductivity, anisotropic thermal conductivity, high piezoelectric and thermoelectric response, etc.185 Selenium has a trigonal atomic structure where the Se atoms are covalently connected in a spiral chain along the c-axis with two adjacent atoms rotated by 120°.186 The interaction between the adjacent atomic chains is weak. As a result, selenium tends to form 1D structures even when they are crystallized from an isotropic medium. Interestingly, Xian et al. theoretically predicted that a 2D selenium structure with a square unit cell, namely “square selenene”, could exist in a nonplanar configuration and shows a relatively large bulk bandgap (∼0.1 eV) (Fig. 7a).187 However, up to date, this structure has yet to be synthesized or experimentally demonstrated. In 2017, Ye and co-workers demonstrated the PVD synthesis of selenium nanoflakes with a lateral size up to 30 μm and a minimum thickness of 5 nm.84 The optical microscopy and SEM images show that most of the Se nanosheets exhibit an irregular quadrangular shape with zigzag edges on a unilateral side. The rest of the Se nanosheets have twin structures with mirror symmetry (Fig. 7b). The formation of such Se nanosheets could be understood using the vapor–solid (VS) growth mechanism. After the initial crystallization of 1D nanorod due to the distinct surface energy difference, Se2(g) molecules would seldom fall within the end cavity of a nanorod due to the large free path at high temperature, enhancing the growth along 〈110〉 direction to form selenium nanosheets. The authors further demonstrated back-gated FETs and four-terminal devices based on Se nanosheets. The intrinsic carrier mobility of the Se nanosheets was characterized to be 0.26 cm2 V−1 s−1 at 300 K (Fig. 7c). In another study, Zhang et al. demonstrated a facile liquid-phase exfoliation method to produce Se nanosheets with lateral sizes ∼40–120 nm and thicknesses ∼3–6 nm.188 The bandgap of the as-prepared Se nanosheets varied from 1.98 to 2.31 eV with a decrease in their lateral size. Additionally, such 2D Se nanosheets displayed a strong fluorescence effect, implying potential applications for bio-imaging.
 Fig. 7  Selenene and tellurene. (a) Atomic structure for Se chains and square selenene. Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright 2017, IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) Optical microscopy image, atomic structure and AFM topography image of selenene after being transferred onto the SiO2/Si substrate. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Transfer curves of a selenene phototransistor measured under various laser irradiation powers at Vds = 3 V. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Crystal structure of tellurium and 3D illustration of tellurene's structure. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Schematic illustration of 2D Te hexagonal nanoplates on flexible and transparent mica substrates by van der Waals epitaxy. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Large-area STM image of the Te films by epitaxial growth spread across the substrate (SiC) step (indicated by blue arrow). Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g) High-resolution STM image of single-layer Te film. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (h) Optical images of tellurene synthesized by wet chemical method. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (i) Transfer curves of a typical 2D tellurene transistor with a thickness of 15 nm and stability measured for 55 days. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 


2.4.2 Tellurene. 
Tellurium belongs to the chalcogen family and is chemically related to selenium and sulfur. Although Te is one of the rarest chemical elements in Earth's crust, Te and its compounds have been widely applied in many fields, including photovoltaics, infrared technologies, catalysts, thermoelectric devices, etc.189 The bulk tellurium is a p-type semiconductor with a slightly indirect bandgap of 0.35 eV. The crystal structure of Te is similar to that of selenium and consists of parallelly stacked atomic chains in a nonlayered manner. Each Te atom is covalently bonded with its two nearest neighbors on the same chain, and the interchain interaction is weaker than the covalent bond. The chains are oriented along the c-axis ([0001] direction) (Fig. 7d). This structure leads to the inherent chirality and high anisotropy in Te, which also favors the formation of 1D morphologies during the bottom-up synthesis. As a result, the products from synthetic efforts during the past two decades were dominantly 1D structures.
Recently, the atomically thin tellurium, named tellurene, has attracted increased interest because tellurene boasts attractive characteristics such as high carrier mobility, large electro-optic activity, superior air-stability, strong spin–orbit interaction, chirality-induced Weyl nodes, etc. He and colleagues reported the synthesis of 2D hexagonal Te nanoplates on chemically inert mica surface using a van der Waals epitaxy (vdWE) method.190 The obtained materials are single-crystalline nanoplates with small lateral dimensions (6–10 μm) and large thicknesses of 30–80 nm (Fig. 7e). However, the derived materials exhibit a relatively large thickness and nonuniform surface/edge roughness, which may diminish their potential relevance and interest for fundamental exploration and technological application in the 2D limit.
In 2017, Huang et al. synthesized monolayer and few-layer tellurium films by molecular beam epitaxy on a graphene/6H-SiC(0001) substrate.191 The exposed flat surface was characterized as (100) of Te crystal with a step height of 0.39 nm (Fig. 7f and g). The bandgap of Te films increases monotonically with decreased thickness from 0.33 eV (bulk) to 0.92 eV (monolayer). The authors further identified that the epitaxy Te films consist of in-plane helical Te chains, which is different from that of the Te nanoplates in the study of He and colleagues,190 and the structural models theoretically proposed for monolayer tellurene. Chen and co-authors also reported molecular beam epitaxy growth of Te thin films on highly oriented pyrolytic graphite (HOPG).192 The as-synthesized Te monolayer exhibits the in-plane lattice symmetry and constant consistent with the theoretically predicted β-Te structure. These experimental efforts attempting to produce ultrathin tellurium layers, however, are limited by the requirement for compatible substrates, high synthesis temperature, vacuum, etc., and low productivity. Moreover, it is also challenging to transfer the as-synthesized materials from the growth substrates to other substrates for diversified characterization and device prototyping.
A substrate-free wet chemical method was reported by Wu and co-workers in 2017 for producing large-area, high-quality 2D Te crystals with high throughput (Fig. 7h).193 The synthesized tellurene crystals have large lateral dimensions (∼hundreds of μm to submillimeter) and process-controlled thickness (from a monolayer to tens of nm). This is the first experimental evidence of large-area, free-standing, high-quality 2D tellurene through a low-temperature, scalable substrate-free solution process, proving an excellent platform for further device fabrication and surface engineering. All these solution-synthesized tellurene flakes grow laterally along the 〈0001〉 and 〈110〉 directions, with the vertical stacking along the 〈100〉 directions. The results from Wu and co-workers suggest that the solution-synthesized tellurene offers several critical materials and processing advantages for a broad range of applications in sensors, electronics,194–196 optoelectronics,197–199 energy devices,200,201 and quantum devices: (1) tellurene has a thickness-dependent bandgap (∼0.35–1 eV) covering mid-IR to visible bands; (2) it boasts excellent gating modulation ratio (∼105–106) and high room-temperature carrier mobilities (700–1000 cm2 V−1 s−1) (Fig. 7i); (3) tellurene is air-stable without encapsulation at ambient conditions; (4) tellurene's intriguing chain structure leads to the existence of the dangling bonds only at the (0001) ends of the molecular chains, thereby minimizing recombination at the edges and ensuring long carrier lifetime; and (5) the process reported by Wu and co-workers can scalably produce high-quality, large-area, substrate-agnostic 2D Te crystals, enabling future explorations of tellurene on diverse designer substrates. Wu and co-workers later also demonstrated the first data-driven nanomanufacturing of tellurene with controlled yield, structures, and properties for high-speed, energy-efficient electronics with optimized performance.202 Very recently, Wu et al. systematically investigated the strain-engineered anisotropic electrical and optical properties in 2D tellurene through applying a facile buckling strategy to solution-grown large area tellurene crystal.203 They further explored the feasibility of using buckled 2D tellurene for stretchable strain sensors with a high gauge factor (≈380). These work inspired more research interests and efforts in both the theoretical and experimental areas to exploring the properties and applications of 2D Te, e.g., photoresponse, optical absorption and carrier dynamics, thermal property, phase transition, quantum characteristics, device exploration, etc.204–209

2.5 2D transition metals

2.5.1 Noble metal nanosheets (NSs). 
The above-mentioned elemental 2D materials can be prepared by physical or chemical methods. It is, however, more challenging to prepare noble metals into 2D nanostructures, especially by wet chemical synthesis, mainly due to the highly isotropic lattice symmetries in noble metals.210–213 Zhang's group reported the synthesis of dispersible hexagonal close-packed (hcp) Au square sheets on graphene oxide sheets, which exhibit edge lengths of 200–500 nm and thicknesses of ∼2.4 nm (∼16 Au atomic layers) (Fig. 8a).71,80 This report demonstrated the first synthesis of a stable Au 2D structure with a pure hcp phase under ambient conditions via a solution-based procedure. In the presence of 2D templates, Au nanocrystals can be directed or confined to grow into nanoplates and nanosheets under appropriate conditions. For example, Niu et al. used a 100 nm-thick water layer sandwiched by two bilayer membranes, which were formed by self-assembly of two surfactants, to prepare free-standing, ultrathin and single-crystalline Au membranes with a thickness of 5 nm and surface area over 100 μm2.214 In another study, Wang et al. reported the facile synthesis of 2D Au NSs with thicknesses down to single or a few atomic layers by using layered double hydroxide (LDHs) as the templates.215 The obtained Au NSs exhibited exceptionally high catalytic activities in the solvent-free oxidation of C–H bonds.
 Fig. 8  2D metal nanosheets. TEM images of 2D (a) hcp Au and (b) fcc Au square sheets and the corresponding SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission.71,76 Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) TEM image and crystallographic models of 4H Au nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (d) TEM images and SAED pattern of as-prepared 2D Pd NSs with 1.8 nm thickness and the assembled structure. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. (e) TEM images and corresponded Fourier transform patterns of ultrathin Pd NSs with {110} and {111}-exposed crystal facets. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) TEM and HRTEM images of triangle Ru nanoplates with 3.0 nm thickness. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (g) Typical TEM images before and after 500 potential cycles showing high intrinsic stability. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) TEM and AFM images of the PVP-capped Rh NSs with 0.4 nm thickness. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (i) TEM image and SAED pattern of 2D Rh NSs and the cross-section with 0.9 nm thickness. Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2015, The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH. 
The prepared 2D noble metal nanostructures can be used as active templates to prepare other novel 2D materials through ligand exchange or metal coating.216,217 Zhang's group successfully applied this strategy for 2D Au nanostructures to prepare novel Au structures and bimetallic nanostructures.218 For example, they reported the crystal phase transformation of Au square NSs from hexagonal close-packed (hcp) to face-centered cubic (fcc) structures at ambient conditions via surface ligand exchange (Fig. 8b).76 Similarly, the ligand exchange-induced crystal phase transformation from 4H Au to fcc Au nanoribbon enclosed with {001} fcc facets has been demonstrated (Fig. 8c).219 The aforementioned hcp Au and 4H Au provide typical examples in phase engineering of nanomaterials (PEN).220
Noble metals, especially platinum, palladium, rhodium, and ruthenium, play important roles in catalysis. Zheng's group has made seminal contributions to the shape control of palladium nanocrystals. In 2011, they demonstrated the facile synthesis of free-standing hexagonal palladium NSs, which are less than ten atomic layers thick, using CO as a surface confining agent. The as-prepared nanosheets are blue and show a narrow size distribution (Fig. 8d).70 Pd NSs also exhibit electrocatalytic activity for the oxidation of formic acid. The maximum current density is 2.5 times greater than that of a commercial Pd black catalyst. Moreover, by changing the solvents, ultrasmall Pd NSs with a size of ∼4.4 nm were obtained, which have strong optical absorption and could be applied in photothermal cancer therapy.221 Xu et al. reported a facile synthetic approach to preparing ultrathin 2D nanosheets with selectively exposed surface facets.222 Pd NSs with a thickness of ∼2.5 nm and enclosed by the three low-index crystal facets of {100}, {110}, and {111} were controllably synthesized by tuning the surfactants (Fig. 8e). The authors found that {100}-exposed Pd NSs display higher catalytic activity and stability for hydrogen evolution reactions (HERs), compared to that of {110} and {111}-exposed ones. Recently, Zhang's group has used the PEN strategy220 to prepare the amorphous/crystalline heterophase Pd nanosheets with thicknesses of ∼1.0 nm.223 A series of heterophase Pd nanosheets with different crystallinities has been prepared, which have been used for the catalytic 4-nitrostyrene hydrogenation. The chemoselectivity and activity can be fine-tuned by controlling the crystallinity of the heterophase Pd nanosheets.
Ruthenium and rhodium, which belong to the platinum group in the periodic table, are two important rare transition metals for catalysis. Yan et al. reported the controlled synthesis of ultrathin Ru nanoplates with different morphologies and sizes by a hydrothermal approach (Fig. 8f).72 The triangular Ru nanoplates with edge lengths of 23.8 ± 4.6 nm and thicknesses of ∼3 nm were obtained with relatively low precursor concentrations. With an increasing precursor concentration, irregular-shaped Ru nanoplates with edge lengths of ∼15 nm and thicknesses of ∼1.5 nm were obtained. For CO-selective methanation, Ru nanoplates showed higher catalytic activity and selectivity due to their ultrathin characteristics and the significant portions of exposed Ru(0001) facets. In another study, Takimoto et al. studied the activity-stability relationship for Ru NSs and nanoparticles.224 They found that the Ru NSs had high stability against morphological change and high tolerance against the surface oxidation compared to those of the Ru nanoparticles. Ru NSs maintained the original 2D morphology and high catalytic activity for oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) after 500 cycles (Fig. 8g). In 2014, Li et al. reported the fabrication of single-layer Rh NSs using a nonaqueous solvothermal method.73Fig. 8h shows the TEM and AFM images of 2D Rh NSs with a thickness of less than 0.4 nm, corresponding to a planar single-atom-layer structure. The obtained single-layer 2D rhodium could expose all the surface atoms with unsaturated coordination, significantly improving its atomic efficiency of catalytic reactions and overcoming the limited reserve issue. The single-layer Rh nanosheet represents a class of metallic 2D structures, metallene, which might inspire further fundamental advances in physics, chemistry, and material science. Zheng et al. demonstrated an effective CO-confined growth strategy to prepare single-crystalline Rh NSs with atomic thickness and controllable size (Fig. 8i).225 The as-prepared Rh NSs had a fcc structure with (111) facets as the basal planes. The Rh NSs have an average long edges from 500 to 1300 nm and the average thickness of the individual Rh NSs was 0.9 ± 0.4 nm. By understanding the formation mechanism, the authors further prepared surfactant-free Rh NSs using the same strategy. The prepared materials exhibited much improved catalytic activity than the surfactant-capped Rh NSs in the hydrogenation of anthracene.


2.5.2 Other 2D metal nanosheets. 
Cobalt is an important transition metal that can be used to make high-performance alloys, rechargeable batteries, and industrial catalysts. Xie and co-workers prepared free-standing 4-atom-thick Co NSs with and without the surface Co oxide using a ligand-confined growth strategy.80 The synthesis process was depicted in Fig. 9a, with n-butylamine for enforcing a sheet-like morphology of cobalt and dimethylformamide for gradually reducing the cobalt ions. The obtained Co NSs could be partially oxidized for 3 h, during which the 2D ultrathin morphology was retained. AFM characterization showed that the average thickness of Co NSs is 0.84 nm, close to the 0.82 nm thickness of a 4-atom-thick Co slab along the [001] direction. Furthermore, the authors found that the partially oxidized Co NSs exhibited excellent activity and selectivity for the CO2 reduction reaction, producing formate in an aqueous solution with a low overpotential.
 Fig. 9  Other 2D metallene. (a) The schematic formation process of the partially oxidized and pure Co 4-atomic-layer, respectively. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (b) TEM images and SAED patterns of single-crystal Co, Ni, and Cu NSs prepared by a facile hydrothermal synthetic method. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (c) TEM image of Ni NSs and SAED pattern of a single triangular Ni nanosheet. Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for metal nanosheets via mechanical compression, TEM, and AFM image of prepared Fe NSs. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (e) TEM image and atomic structure of a monoatomic Fe layer with the square unit cell formed in a graphene pore. Reproduced with permission.230 Copyright 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In another study, Xu et al. synthesized single-crystal Co NSs based on a facile hydrothermal synthetic method.226 This strategy can also be used to successfully fabricate other 2D metallic NSs, including Ni, Cu, and Ag (Fig. 9b). The as-prepared Co NSs had the {001} crystal facets as the basal plane with a hexagonal close-packed (hcp) structure. For Ni, Cu, and Ag NSs, the exposed planes were assigned to be {111} crystal facets of the face-centered cubic Ni, Cu, and Ag crystals. The edge length of Co NSs is in the range of 100–120 nm, and the thickness is about 8 nm. Co and Ni are typical magnetic materials, and the shape-controlled synthesis of magnetic nanomaterials has attracted significant research interest due to their application prospect in optoelectronics and catalysis. Peng et al. synthesized triangular and hexagonal Ni NSs with an average edge length of 15 nm using a one-pot route (Fig. 9c).227 The thickness of Ni NSs is about 6 nm. By increasing the reaction temperature and aging time, nanosheets with larger sizes are obtained. The magnetic test shows that the prepared Ni NSs are ferromagnetic at room temperature. The shape anisotropy coming from the sheet-like structure may contribute to the enhanced magnetic anisotropy.
For another common element, iron, Wu et al. developed a general and convenient strategy for producing free-standing iron monolayers at a large scale.228Fig. 9d depicts the process to advance from thin metals toward their 2D monolayer structures. By the simple process of repeatedly folding and calendering stacked metal sheets followed by chemical etching, free-standing 2D metal (e.g., Ag, Au, Fe, Cu, and Ni) nanosheets are obtained with thicknesses as small as 1 nm and with sizes of the order of several micrometers.229 The anisotropic magnetic behavior of the Fe NSs was directly verified by experimental evidence. For instance, Rümmeli et al. fabricated free-standing crystalline single-atom-thick layers of iron (Fe) with ordered 2D lattices in the pore defects of graphene (Fig. 9e).230 The researchers found that the porous graphene prepared with electron-beam irradiation can be extended to stabilize Fe atoms and clusters. A single atomic layer of crystalline Fe could be formed. First-principles calculations confirmed the enhanced magnetic properties for single-atom-thick 2D Fe membranes. This work demonstrated the feasibility of synthesizing new 2D structures within graphene membranes.

3. Energy applications
The development of reliable and environmentally friendly approaches for energy conversion and storage would enable viable and sustainable schemes in numerous societally-pervasive applications. The application of elemental 2D materials in energy involves various aspects.231–234 In this section, we address how the exceptional properties of elemental 2D materials lead to their applications in energy conversion and energy storage systems. We will also discuss the state-of-the-art in related fields.
3.1 Energy harvesting and conversion
Energy harvesting, also called energy scavenging, is the process by which electrical energy is converted from other energy sources (e.g., solar energy, thermal energy, mechanical energy, salinity gradients, ocean tidal power, etc.)36,235,236 The harvested energy can be used/stored for powering the operations of functional systems, which could span across multiple length scales (e.g., from the macroscopic to the nanoscale) and a broad spectrum of power consumption levels (e.g., from Mega Watts to nanowatts). The capability of future functional systems to efficiently scavenge and store their operational power from the working environment through sustainable pathways would enable societally-pervasive applications (e.g., sensor networks, advanced healthcare, robotics). Energy harvesting technologies reviewed here can be classified, according to the different underlying conversion mechanisms, into photovoltaic cells, the piezoelectric/triboelectric nanogenerators, thermoelectric devices, and some emerging energy conversion devices (e.g., electrochemical stress-voltage coupling devices, photothermal conversion devices, etc.). All the technologies reviewed here in this section are based on beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials, including black phosphorus, antimonene, tellurene, and bismuthene.56,173,237,238 It should be noted that other beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials are also promising and gaining increased attention for energy harvesting and conversion.

3.1.1 Photovoltaics. 
Solar energy is by far the most abundant exploitable renewable energy resource. Photovoltaic devices (or solar cells) have been extensively investigated and widely applied for generating electric power from the sunlight through the photovoltaic effect.239 In a photovoltaic device, the absorbed photons from the incoming sunlight create electron–hole pairs in the active material, which are then separated and transported to the external electrodes for generating an electrical power output. 2D layered semiconductors with bandgaps in the visible spectrum can be used as the active materials in photovoltaics.240–242
Black phosphorus (BP) is an intrinsic p-type semiconductor with high carrier mobility and a layer-dependent direct bandgap varying from ∼0.3 eV (bulk) to ∼1.5 eV (monolayer) suitable for broadband photodetectors and photovoltaic devices.140,243 Lin and co-workers used a few-layer liquid-phase exfoliated BP in organic photovoltaics (OPVs) as the effective electron transport layer (ETL) and hole transport layer (HTL).244 It is difficult to utilize BP alone as a carrier-transport layer without using PEDOT:PSS or ZnO. For the conventional OPV structure in Fig. 10a, BP was deposited onto a thin PEDOT:PSS layer using a spin coating method to prepare the anode buffer layer. In the inverted OPV structure, BP was deposited onto a ZnO layer to test its influence in the ETL. Characterization results show that after 3 times of the BP coating with a thickness of ∼10 nm, the power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) decreased from 7.72% to 6.52% for the conventional device but increased from 7.37% to 8.25% for the inverted device (Fig. 10b). The reason for this result is that the inverted OPV had a well-matched band structure with the incorporation of BP, which is favorable for efficient electron transport and prohibiting carrier recombination near cathodes (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  Photovoltaics devices and solar cells based on black phosphorus. (a) Conventional and inverted architectures of OPVs with few layers BP as a carrier-transport layer. Reproduced with permission.244 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (b) J–V characteristics of inverted OPVs with BP incorporation under different conditions. Reproduced with permission.244 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (c) Energy band structure of inverted OPVs with BP incorporation. Reproduced with permission.244 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (d) Structure and energy levels of a bifacial DSSC with BPQDs based photocathode. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (e) Optical characterization and output performance of the bifacial DSSCs. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (f) van der Waals heterojunction p–n diode based on BP/MoS2 monolayers. Reproduced with permission.251 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) van der Waals heterostructure solar cell based on BP/h-BN p–n junctions. Reproduced with permission.252 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. 
BP can also be applied to dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSC) to enhance photovoltaic performance. Yang et al. adopted BP quantum dots (BPQDs) as the near-infrared light absorber and charge transfer layer in the photocathode of a bifacial n-type DSSC.245Fig. 10d shows the structure and the energy levels of the quasi-solid-state DSSC. The prepared BPQDs were incorporated into polyaniline (PANI) film as the photocathode. Under illumination, the NIR light is transmitted to the photocathode and absorbed by the BPQDs to produce photogenerated electrons, which are transferred to the BPQDs/electrolyte interface to oxidize the acceptor in the redox couples. After incorporating the BPQDs, the absorption of NIR light from 750 to 1100 nm is enhanced, which can be attributed to the fact that BPQDs has a bandgap of 1.22 eV favoring the absorption of the infrared light. The BPQDs-modified photocathode resulted in a short-circuit current density of 24.31 mA cm−2 and a power conversion efficiency of 6.85%, which was 20% higher than that of the pure PANI cathode device (5.82%) (Fig. 10e). Another study showed that BPQDs could enhance the hole extraction in hybrid perovskite solar cells and improve the PCEs from 14.10 to 16.69%.246 These studies provide new insights for the application of solution-processable 2D materials in photovoltaic and optoelectronic devices.
van der Waals heterostructured solar cells are devices integrating different 2D materials to form Schottky or p–n junctions.247–249 Leveraging the broadly tunable band gaps of BP, many studies have demonstrated the integration of BP with various other 2D materials to form p–n junctions in solar cells.250 Deng et al. demonstrated a gate-tunable p–n diode based on a BP/MoS2 van der Waals heterojunction (Fig. 10f).251 Upon illumination, these ultrathin p–n diodes show a maximum rectification ratio of ∼105, a maximum responsivity of 418 mA W−1, and an external quantum efficiency (EQE) of 0.3% with a back gate voltage of −30 V under 633 nm laser illumination. In parallel work, Buscema et al. fabricated p–n junctions based on BP/h-BN van der Waals heterostructures (Fig. 10g).252 They demonstrated electrostatic control of the local charge carrier type and density in the device. The optoelectronic properties of p–n diodes were characterized by measuring the output voltage and current under illumination with varying incident power. The measured current is in the order of 1 nA and voltage ∼50 mV at the highest incident power, and the maximum output power is 13 pW. These relatively low conversion efficiencies are attributed to the limited absorber thickness of monolayer 2D materials, which results in low light absorbance. Another drawback of BP for PV applications is its air instability, limiting the performance and long-term stability of the devices.
With good stability, high carrier mobility, and superior thermal conductivity, a few-layer antimonene has attracted increased interest for applications in photothermal therapy, transparent conductive electrodes, and solar cells. Song's group used liquid-phase exfoliated antimonene as the hole transport layer in perovskite solar cells, which is the first report of antimonene in practical optoelectronic devices.165 As shown in Fig. 11a, the energy level of antimonene closely matches that of MAPbI3, and the 0.1 eV energy difference between them provides the driving force for efficient hole extraction. The authors compared the PV performance of two device structures: the antimonene-free device (device 1) and the ITO/antimonene/perovskite/PCBM/Bphen/Al device (device 2). Device 1 has the same structure as device 2, except that there is no antimonene layer. The schematic diagram of the layered structure and a cross-sectional SEM image of the antimonene-based device 2 are presented in Fig. 11b. The performance comparison showed that the addition of antimonene resulted in a higher power conversion efficiency. Compared to device 1, the highest short-circuit current density (Jsc) of device 2 was increased by 30%, from 11.2 mA cm−2 for device 1 to 14.6 mA cm−2 for device 2. Moreover, the external quantum efficiency (EQE) of device 2 was 55–60% over the entire visible spectrum, and the EQE-based integrated Jsc values were 10.1 mA cm−2 and 14.8 mA cm−2 for devices 1 and 2, respectively (Fig. 11c). Later, Song's group produced 0.6 nm-thick monolayer antimonene nanosheets, which exhibited an indirect bandgap (2.33 eV).253 In antimonene-based perovskite solar cells (PSCs), the monolayer antimonene combination has better compatibility with perovskite film and the high electrical conductivity of antimonene, facilitating hole transfer between layers (Fig. 11d). The Jsc of the monolayer antimonene based device integrated from the EQE spectrum was 22.65 mA cm−2, much higher than that (20.40 mA cm−2) of the control device without antimonene nanosheets. The antimonene-based device demonstrated a significantly better photon response than the control device in the entire visible region (Fig. 11e). The performance of constructed PSCs showed improved power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) ranging from 17.58% to 20.05% (Fig. 11f). The improved efficiency of the antimonene-based devices was due to the fast and efficient hole extraction when antimonene served as an interlayer. These studies could facilitate the application of antimonene in optoelectronic and photovoltaic devices.
 Fig. 11  Photovoltaics devices and solar cells based on antimonene, tellurene, bismuthene. (a) Comparison of energy levels of each functional layer in antimonene-based perovskite solar cells. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic diagram of the layered structure and cross-sectional SEM image of PSCs. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) EQE spectra, together with EQE-based integrated short-circuit current densities for PSCs. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram of hole extraction from the perovskite to the ITO electrode. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) Steady-state power output at maximum power point for best-performing control and antimonene-based devices. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) PCE histograms of perovskite solar cells without and with antimonene nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic diagrams of charge densities of Te/WTe2 heterojunction and PCE of tellurene/TMDs heterojunction solar cells. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Schematic representation of the charge transfer process at the bismuthene/CsPbBr3 nanohybrid interface. Reproduced with permission.255 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
So far, there are few reports about the application of other elemental 2D materials in photovoltaic devices. Yang et al. used first-principles density functional theory to predict that tellurene is a promising candidate for designing highly-efficient solar cells due to its desirable optoelectronic properties.254 They found that tellurene and transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) show desirable type-II band alignment for constructing heterojunction solar cells with strong charge separation and enhanced sunlight absorption. In particular, the calculated maximum power conversion efficiency (PCE) of the designed Te/WTe2 and Te/MoTe2 heterojunction solar cells can reach as high as 22.5% and 20.1%, respectively (Fig. 11g). Wang et al. designed and synthesized a bismuthene/perovskite hybrid with the favored alignment of the energy band levels (Fig. 11h).255 The ultrafast carrier mobility of bismuthene results in an excellent charge transfer efficiency (0.53) and a significant quenching constant of 2.3 × 105 M−1. The tunable charge transfer efficiency in such a system may enable a new platform for optoelectronic applications, such as solar cells and photocatalysis. More efforts are still required to improve the performance of elemental 2D materials based solar cells, including enhancement of light absorption, charge collection, and efficient exciton dissociation.


3.1.2 Piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators. 
Piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators are the two emerging technologies for effectively harvesting ambient mechanical energy for self-powered systems.256 Piezoelectricity exists in materials with polarization domains or non-centrosymmetric structures, allowing the reversible conversion between electrical and mechanical signals.257,258 Harvesting mechanical energy by piezoelectric nanogenerators (PENGs) has received considerable attention owing to their versatility to directly convert mechanical energy into electricity for integrated applications.42,259 Most of the reported PENGs were based on traditional piezoelectric materials, such as ZnO nanowires, lead zirconate titanate (PZT), poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) and so on. Atomically thin materials with broken inversion symmetry are also piezoelectric and can interconvert mechanical and electrical energies. Recently, piezoelectricity in 2D materials such as monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) was discovered and attracted intensive interests.43,260,261 These materials’ low-dimensional geometries and superior mechanical properties enable the introduction of enormous strain (e.g., >1%) without fracture and large tunability inaccessible to bulk or thin-film piezoelectrics. However, the layer-dependent piezoelectricity in 2D transition metal dichalcogenides due to layer-dependent breaking/restore of the noncentrosymmetry impose significant challenges for practical implementation and integration of piezoelectric devices using related materials since the realization of macroscopic piezoelectric responses would require atomically precise control of the layer thickness for all the 2D materials in the integrated devices.43,264 Generally, piezoelectricity is rarely reported in elemental materials owing to crystal symmetry and the lack of ionic polarization. Most of the recent reports on elemental 2D piezoelectric materials (e.g., graphene, black phosphorus, and As, Sb, Bi) are theoretical predictions. For example, the intrinsic inversion symmetry in graphene could be broken via atom adsorption or by introducing specific in-plane defects.262 A significant electrical field (e.g., 0.5 V Å−1) or chemical functionalization is required to induce piezoelectricity in black phosphorus. Piezoelectricity could only occur, if any, for monolayer As, Sb, Bi due to the symmetry constraints. A recent study claims that few-layer black phosphorus is pyroelectric (and hence piezoelectric).263 Pan et al. reported the in-plane piezoelectricity for multilayer BP along the armchair direction due to its highly anisotropic properties and non-centrosymmetric lattice structure (Fig. 12a).264 The disappearance of piezoelectricity in multilayer 2D material generally arises from the opposite orientations of adjacent atomic layers, whereas this effect is limited in BP lattices due to their spring-shaped space structure. The authors further demonstrated a flexible PENG device with multilayer BP flakes (Fig. 12b). The piezoelectric current increased with the strain magnitude and eventually reached saturated (peak short-circuit current ∼3 pA) (Fig. 12c). However, the notorious air-instability of black phosphorus may hinder the sophisticated characterization and practical use of BP for piezoelectric applications.
 Fig. 12  Piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators based on black phosphorus and tellurene. (a) Piezoelectric dipole and field which exist in bilayer BP under strain in the armchair direction. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH. (b) Typical AFM images of multilayer BP with a thickness of 9.2 nm (18 layers) in a flexible piezoelectric device. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH. (c) Strain dependence of the piezoelectric current response. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH. (d) Cross-sectional view of Te nanowire and the dipole moment arises under tensile stress. Reproduced with permission.268 Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH. (e and f) Schematic of the fabrication and output voltage of Te nanoflake-based piezoelectric nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission.269 Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V. (g) Schematic illustration of the structure of textile triboelectric nanogenerator (textile-TENG) based on PET/BP fabrics. Reproduced with permission.271 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (h) Current densities of textile-TENG mounted on different body regions. Reproduced with permission.271 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (i) Stretchable and highly durable TENG based on gold-nanosheet electrodes. Reproduced with permission.275 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd. 
Despite being an elemental material, the trigonal Te lacks the centrosymmetry in its crystal structure and has hence been predicted to exhibit piezoelectricity.265,266 Nevertheless, few studies have been reported on exploring the fundamental piezoelectricity in Te nanostructures for potential applications.267 In 2013, Lee et al. reported a PENG made of radially strained ultrathin 1D Te nanowires (Fig. 12d).268 The assembled layers of solution-synthesized Te nanowires on a substrate could exhibit output voltage and current ∼0.1 V and ∼10 nA, respectively, with an output power density estimated to be ∼9 mW cm−3 under the 0.13% strain and 2.2% s−1 straining rates. He et al. demonstrated a flexible nanogenerator device based on 2D Te nanoflakes on textiles (Fig. 12e).269 The PENG device had a sandwich-like structure with PDMS-coated Te nanoflakes in the middle, and the Au/textile and the Au layer served as both the bottom and top electrodes, respectively. The authors reported a maximum output voltage of 125.3 V, a current density of 16.5 μA cm−2, and an output power density of 2.07 mW cm−2 (Fig. 12f). It should be noted, though, more systematic efforts are required to identify the origin of the piezoelectricity in these Te nanostructures (particularly 2D Te) and correlate the observed results with the crystal structure/symmetry of the Te nanostructures. Such fundamental knowledge is critical for discerning the observed output signals and avoiding potential misinterpretation of artifacts due to other physical causes (e.g., triboelectric process). Recently, Xiang et al. theoretically revealed the feasible pathways for several strain-induced phase transitions in 2D Te, which is expected to guide the design, characterization, and interpretation of 2D Te-based piezoelectric devices.209 Later, Cai et al. reported the phase transition of a strain-induced centrosymmetric β-phase to a non-centrosymmetric α-phase for monolayer tellurene based on density functional theory calculations.270 A high polarization of about 90 μC cm−2 can be obtained via a biaxial tensile strain of 8%, giving rise to a giant piezoelectric coefficient with two orders of magnitude higher than that of the MoS2 monolayer. This giant piezoelectric effect of tellurene, if experimentally verified, is promising for a broad range of applications such as in self-powered sensors and energy harvesting using portable electronic devices.
Since the first report of the triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) in 2012, the development of TENG has been rapid with the invention of various new models and the application of new materials and novel designs.41 In principle, any materials, including elemental 2D materials, with distinct charge affinities, can be paired to construct an efficient TENG. Lee's group reported a stretchable and washable sandwich structured all-textile-based TENG that can be readily driven by skin contact, which was directly realized on knitted PET textile (Fig. 12g).271 Black phosphorus encapsulated with hydrophobic cellulose oleoyl ester nanoparticles serves as a synergetic electron-trapping coating, leading to a textile nanogenerator with long-term reliability and high triboelectricity. The maximum instantaneous output electricity can achieve 880 V and 1.1 μA cm−2 with applied voluntary touch. In addition, Lee's group prepared a transparent and flexible TENG using few-layered phosphorene as an additive to mix with tempo-oxidized cellulose nanofibrils.272 This TENG shows an open-circuit voltage of 5.2 V with a current density of 1.8 μA cm−2, which is five and nine times higher than that of the pure cellulose nanofibrils paper device, respectively. This work reveals the role of phosphorene as a charge carrier in the hybrid paper and demonstrates a new way to attain stable functional phosphorene hybrids in ambient conditions.273
Metal nanosheets are ideal electrode materials for TENG due to its excellent conductivity and mechanical properties.274 Lim et al. reported a fully stretchable and durable TENG with Au nanosheets embedded into polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) matrix as the stretchable electrodes.275 The new design of Au nanosheet electrodes dramatically improves the mechanical flexibility and stretchability: the demonstrated TENG exhibited outstanding output stability over 10000 cycles under repeated mechanical deformations. The above-mentioned studies provide new insights to utilize elemental 2D materials in nanogenerators for harvesting mechanical energy.


3.1.3 Thermoelectric devices. 
Thermal energy is widely distributed in the environment. Thermoelectric materials can directly convert thermal energy into electrical power from temperature gradient or vice versa, which makes them important for the development of sustainable energy-efficient technologies.276–278 In general, the efficiency of a thermoelectric material to convert heat into electrical energy is characterized by the dimensionless figure of merit ZT = σα2T/κ, where σ, α, κ, and T are electrical conductivity, Seebeck coefficient, thermal conductivity, and absolute temperature, respectively.48,279–281 Although the ZT values of 2D materials are lower than that of conventional bulk thermoelectric materials, 2D materials have attracted considerable attention as efficient thermoelectric materials due to their outstanding advantages in electronic and mechanical properties especially for flexible and wearable thermoelectric devices.281 There are various strategies are available to improve their ZT values, such as chemical doping, valley engineering, and structural engineering.200 Elemental 2D materials also attract interest in forming new and novel thermoelectric devices, for example, thermoelectric generators based on BP and tellurene.282 Besides, Bi and Sb based materials have traditionally been used for thermoelectric applications, and their 2D structures could provide attractive alternatives for next-generation ultrathin thermoelectric devices.279,283
Recent studies suggest that BP retains a significant Seebeck coefficient, high carrier mobility (1000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature), and a layer-dependent bandgap (from 0.3 to 2 eV).74 Flores et al. directly measured the thermoelectric power of bulk BP in a temperature range from 300 K up to 385 K.282 They found that the Seebeck coefficient of bulk BP at room temperature is +335 ± 10 μV K−1, indicating natural p-type doping in bulk BP samples. Saito et al. investigated the gate-tuned Seebeck coefficient in 40 nm-thick BP at low temperature (210 K) (Fig. 13a and b).284 The Seebeck value reached +510 μV K−1 in the hole-deplete state, which is about 1.5 times higher than the value of a bulk single crystal (Fig. 13c). The trend of Seebeck value as a function of carrier concentration, however, was found to deviate from the first-principles calculation results. The authors attributed the large Seebeck value in 2D BP to the significant reduction of channel thickness in the depletion mode operation of the field-effect transistor. This consideration suggests that a few or monolayer BP might be capable of producing even larger thermoelectric power.
 Fig. 13  Thermoelectric devices based on black phosphorus and tellurene. (a and b) A schematic image of a BP-electric-double-layer transistor (EDLT) for thermoelectric measurement and the optical microscope image of the real thermoelectric device of a BP flake with a thickness of 40 nm. Reproduced with permission.284 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Thermoelectric power as a function of gate voltage at T = 210 K. Reproduced with permission.284 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Illustration of thermal conductivity measuring device consisting of two suspended pads and a bridging BP nanoribbon. Reproduced with permission.285 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) Schematic illustration the vertical thermoelectric generator using Au-decorated BP as a p-type leg. Reproduced with permission.286 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (f) In-plane Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity of Au-decorated BP thermoelectric material. Reproduced with permission.286 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (g) Microstructure platforms for Seebeck coefficient measurement of 2D Tellurene. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) The voltage drop across the film and the resistance change of two thermometers as functions of heater output power. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (i) Laser-induced current mappings of the real device. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The structural anisotropy in the layers of the group V elements results in an anisotropic thermal conductivity along different directions. Theoretical predictions showed that BP has an opposite anisotropy in thermal and electrical conductivities: electrical conductivity is higher along the armchair (AC) direction. In comparison, thermal conductivity is higher along the zigzag (ZZ) direction. Wu and co-workers directly measured the in-plane thermal conductivity of single-crystal BP nanoribbons along the ZZ and AC directions.285 The measurements were carried out in the condition of steady-state longitudinal heat flow, using suspended-pad micro-devices (Fig. 13d), over a wide temperature range from 30 to 350 K. At 300 K, the thermal conductivity decreases as the nanoribbon thickness is reduced from ∼300 to ∼50 nm. However, the anisotropy ratio stays around two within the thickness range. The measurement results reveal the intrinsic, orientation-dependent thermal conductivity of BP, which would be important for developing high-performance thermoelectric devices using BP, as well as for understanding fundamental physical properties of layered materials approaching the few- or monolayer limit.
BP is very reactive with oxygen even under ambient conditions, resulting in undesired compositional and physical changes. Such material instability limits the application of BP in thermoelectric devices. To address this issue, Cho and co-workers recently demonstrated highly stable and scalable preparation methods for creating BP thermoelectric generators via liquid exfoliation (Fig. 13e).286 The surfaces of exfoliated BPs can be successfully functionalized with Au nanoparticles (NPs), leading to significantly enhanced thermoelectric performance for a controlled Au NP content. The thermoelectric power factor of the Au-decorated BP increases significantly to 68.5 μV m−1 K−2, which is 2740 times that of the pristine BP (Fig. 13f). Moreover, Au nanoparticles significantly improved the ambient stability of BP flakes, which was attributed to the fact that Au nanoparticles occupy highly energetic defect sites. Leveraging these exciting and unique properties of Au-decorated BP, a vertical thermoelectric generator was prepared, which exhibited a high power output of 79.3 nW (ΔT = 2 °C).
Bulk trigonal Te has been theoretically predicted and experimentally demonstrated to be an excellent thermoelectric material with a high ZT value. Recently, Qiu et al. experimentally probed the excellent thermoelectric performance of 2D tellurene, which shows a room-temperature power factor of 31.7 μW cm−1 K−2 and ZT value of 0.63.200 The Seebeck coefficient and the electrical conductivity of 2D tellurium were measured by using the device structure and setup as shown in Fig. 13g. A He–Ne laser was employed to locally heat the 2D Te and generate a temperature gradient. A monotonic increase in the voltage drop and temperature gradient was observed as the output power increases (Fig. 13h). Laser-induced current mappings were performed to visualize the distribution of thermoelectric current. In Fig. 13i, the positive sign (red region in the plot) corresponds to the current flowing from the left end of the device toward the right end, and the negative sign (blue) is the other way around. The experiment results showed that high work function metals such as Pd could form accumulation-type contacts, facilitating the efficient collection of thermoelectrically generated carriers. This study laid the foundation for the application of 2D tellurene in thermoelectric devices. More theoretical and experimental efforts are warranted to make 2D elemental materials potential candidates for high-performance thermoelectric devices.


3.1.4 Other forms of energy harvesting. 
In this section, we will review the recent studies in using elemental 2D materials for other energy harvesting devices. For example, due to its outstanding anisotropic electronic response, BP can harvest mechanical energy through electrochemical stress-voltage coupling. Muralidharan and co-workers reported a device configuration based on BP. The mechanoelectrochemical stress–voltage coupling in BP is capable of harvesting low-frequency (e.g., as low as 0.01 Hz) mechanical vibrations (Fig. 14a).287 By combining equipotential NaxP electrodes in a sandwich configuration, the authors demonstrated stress-induced migration of sodium ions resulting from ambient mechanical inputs such as bending and pressing. Such a process generates a potential difference that originates from the different mechano-chemical responses of electrochemical systems under compressive or tensile stress (Fig. 14b). This device prototype can generate a peak power of 42 nW cm−2 and energy of 0.203 μJ cm−2 in the bending mode (0.1 Hz) and peak power of 9.1 nW cm−2 and energy of 0.792 μJ cm−2 in the pressing mode (0.01 Hz) (Fig. 14c).
 Fig. 14  Other forms of energy harvesting based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Schematic representation of the configuration of BP-based mechanical energy harvester. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the working principle of electrochemical stress-voltage coupling. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) The output performance of the energy harvester during bending and pressing modes. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the working principle of BP-based nanogenerator powered by cyclic molecular doping. Reproduced with permission.288 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (e) The calculated output power and current as a function of oscillating frequency. Reproduced with permission.288 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (f) Schematics of 3D hybrid aerogels based on GO and BP nanoflakes. Reproduced with permission.291 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photothermal behaviors of neat GO aerogel and GO/BP nanoflake aerogel at the same power density and time in the air. Reproduced with permission.291 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Schematic diagram of the Te nanoparticle layer deposited on Si substrate irradiated by sunlight. Reproduced with permission.292 Copyright 2018, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. (i) Time-dependent temperature variation of the bare Si wafer (black curve) and Te nanoparticle absorber (red curve). Reproduced with permission.292 Copyright 2018, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
In another study, Yakobson et al. proposed a novel nanogenerator powered by cyclically doping phosphorene with ambipolar organic molecules to harvest mechanical energy.288 Theoretical studies show that BP is a good electrical conductor with a high specific area ratio. Therefore, BP is suggested as a host charge collector between the donor (benzyl viologen) and acceptor (tetracyanoquinodimethane) in a concept device. In this nanogenerator device, the external forces drive the adsorption and desorption of two different molecules on the BP surface, which leads to the gain and loss of electrons in the two regions of BP to generate an electric potential and electron flow (Fig. 14d). The calculations showed that this phosphorene-based device could achieve an open-circuit voltage of ∼2.7 V. Its output power and current are a linear function of the oscillation frequency and the number of molecular pairs (Fig. 14e). Although experimental efforts are needed to validate the proposed design, the proposed device structure is simple and expected to be applied to mechanical energy harvesting and coupling with other energy conversion forms, such as photovoltaics and thermoelectricity.
2D nanomaterials have also excited considerable attention in applications such as photothermal evaporation-induced water production, steam generation, and water purification, owing to their large absorption surface, strong broadband absorption in the solar spectrum, and efficient photothermal conversion.289,290 For example, BP is an ideal photothermal material due to its tunable bandgap from 0.3 to 2 eV, which covers the solar spectrum from the visible (≈600 nm) to far-infrared range (4000 nm).252 Zhang et al. prepared 3D graphene oxide (GO)/BP nanoflake (BPNF) hybrid aerogels for photothermal applications, where the aerogels exhibited significantly enhanced photothermal and electrical properties with the addition of BP (Fig. 14f).291 Moreover, the aerogels also possessed excellent photothermal stability under ambient conditions without any protection due to the encapsulation/coverage of BP nanoflakes by GO nanosheets. Fig. 14g shows the photothermal behaviors of the pure GO aerogel and GO/BPNFs aerogel with 13.4 wt% BP at the illumination intensities of 0.2 and 0.5 W cm−2 for 5 min in air, respectively. These results reveal that the addition of BP can effectively enhance the photothermal conversion of GO at low power densities. Te is another candidate material for photothermal evaporation. However, there were few reports on tellurene-based photothermal evaporation. Recently, Yang and co-workers demonstrated that a broadband absorber made of Te nanoparticles with a wide size distribution could absorb more than 85% solar radiation in the entire spectrum (Fig. 14h).292 The temperature of the fabricated absorber irradiated by sunlight rapidly increased from 29 °C to 85 °C within 100 s (Fig. 14i). This good performance is attributed to the unique optical response of Te nanoparticles. The water evaporation rate of a Te nanoparticle solution (10 μg mL−1) can be improved by three times that of pure water under the simulated solar radiation intensity of 78.9 mW cm−2. These findings suggest that Te nanomaterials could be promising for efficient photothermal conversion in solar-enabled water evaporation. In general, many elemental 2D materials, including phosphorene, antimonene, tellurene, and borophene, are potential photothermal materials that could be used for future photothermal applications.

3.2 Energy storage
Energy storage devices such as Li-ion batteries and supercapacitors have attracted intensive research attention, driven by the rapid growth of portable electronics and the emerging development of electric vehicles, which demand high-performance mobile energy storage and supplying units. 2D materials have intriguing properties and outstanding merits, such as high surface areas, thin and low weight, fast electron or ion diffusion etc., leading to their extensive study in the past decade for energy storage applications.293–296 The beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials with different structures such as phosphorene, silicene, germanene, borophene, and antimonene, offer a broad material portfolio for designing and implementing high-performance energy storage devices.57,297,298 In this section, we will discuss the research progress in beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials for batteries and supercapacitors.

3.2.1 Batteries. 
A Li-ion battery consists of two electrodes (anode and cathode) with a separator between them. An ionic electrolyte between the two electrodes serves as the medium for the diffusion of Li ions. During charging, the electrical potential from an external power source draws the Li ions from the cathode into the ionic electrolyte, and the Li-ions diffuse toward the anodes (Fig. 15b).56 Most current Li-ion batteries employ graphite as the anode, which can be potentially replaced by elemental 2D materials to improve battery performance.
 Fig. 15  Lithium-ion batteries based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Some of the highlighted merits of 2D materials for energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission.295 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic depicting a lithium-ion battery with a phosphorene anode and a LiCoO2 cathode. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Borophene as a promising anode material offering a high theoretical specific capacity of 1860 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission.299 Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (d) Energy profile of lithium diffusion along two different pathways. Reproduced with permission.299 Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (e) Summary of theoretical Li-ion capacities for several monolayer elemental 2D materials. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (f) Silicene with a honeycomb structure becoming a promising anode for Li-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (g) Gravimetric and volumetric capacities of C (LiC6), P (Li3P), As (Li3As), Sb (Li3Sb), and Bi (Li3Bi). Reproduced with permission.308 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the BP–G hybrid paper electrode at 500 mA g−1 for 500 cycles after the rate capability test. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. 
The puckered morphology and metallic characteristics in borophene suggest its potential applications for metal ion storage with fast atomic diffusion and electric conduction. These characteristics are desirable for the anode in Li-ion batteries. Zhao et al. first investigated the potential of borophene as a suitable anode material for Li-ion batteries, using first-principles calculations and ab initio molecular dynamics simulations.299 The calculation results showed that the fully lithiated phase of borophene, Li0.75B, exhibits a theoretical specific capacity of 1860 mA h g−1, which is about four times larger than that of the commercial graphite anode (372 mA h g−1) (Fig. 15c). Furthermore, the barrier for Li-ion migration along the armchair direction is only 2.6 meV, which indicates the lithium atoms are extremely easy to diffuse along the furrow, and all sites tend to have a relatively similar lithium adsorption state (Fig. 15d). Given these advantages, borophene is expected to be a promising anode material in Li-ion batteries with high energy density and high power density. Subsequent theoretical studies have also confirmed this conclusion, although related experimental validations are still lacking.300–303
Silicene is another promising anode with a high theoretical capacity for Li-ion batteries (Fig. 15e).24 Theoretical simulations of the behavior of silicene as a Li-ion battery anode were performed even before the experimental realization of silicene (Fig. 15f).304 In 2013, Wang et al. investigated the interaction of Li with Si in model electrodes of free-standing single-layer and double-layer silicene using first-principles calculations.305 The specific charge capacity of silicene is estimated to be around 954 mA h g−1, significantly larger than that of graphite. The abundance of Si, the high Li capacity of silicene, the mechanical flexibility of its atomic layers, and the small energy barrier for Li diffusion show the promise of silicene for Li-ion batteries with high energy density and improved cycle life. In experiments, multilayer silicene dissociated from layered compound CaSi2 was applied as an anode to evaluate its electrochemical performance.306 Such silicene anode exhibited a charge capacity of 800 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles with a maximum coulombic efficiency of 99.4% and good rate performance (647 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1). In another similar work, Liu et al. demonstrated the scalable synthesis of free-standing few-layer silicene nanosheets via liquid oxidation and exfoliation of CaSi2.307 As the anodes for Li-ion batteries, these silicene nanosheets exhibited a charge capacity of 721 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1 and extraordinary cycling stability with no capacity decay after 1800 cycles. These multilayer silicene nanosheets suffer from the oxidization during the liquid preparation processes. Improved performance is expected for silicene nanosheets fabricated by other processes, e.g., MBE method. However, the MBE process has a low synthetic yield and high cost. Therefore, the scalable synthesis of high-quality silicene without oxidation is still a challenging and attractive issue for its applications in Li-ion batteries.
Due to the low molar weight and three-electron transfer mechanism, phosphorus shows an extremely high theoretical capacity (2596 mA h g−1) as anode material for Li and Na-ion batteries (Fig. 15g).296,308,309 Black phosphorus was first used as an anode in 2007 and showed a charge capacity of 1279 mA h g−1.59 However, the first cycle efficiency is only 57%, which is mainly due to the semiconducting nature of BP. Moreover, the successful application of phosphorus anodes has been impeded by the rapid capacity fading, mainly caused by the massive volume change in BP (around 300%) upon lithiation and, thus, the loss of electrical contact. To address these issues, the researchers turned their attention to the BP-based composites, such as BP/C nanocomposite.309 The electrochemical behaviors of the BP/C composite were improved compared to red P or pure BP electrodes. Ren and co-workers demonstrated clean and high-quality BP nanosheets for high-performance flexible paper-like Li-ion battery electrodes by combining them with highly conductive graphene sheets.310 Such electrode showed a high specific capacity of 501 mA h g−1, excellent rate capability, and prolonged cycling performance at a current density of 500 mA g−1 (Fig. 15h). Cui and co-workers later fabricated BP/graphite composites by high energy mechanical milling and used it for Li-ion battery. The phosphorus–carbon bonds produced in the mechanochemical process are stable during lithium insertion/extraction, maintaining an excellent electrical connection between BP and graphite. A high discharge capacity of 2786 mA h g−1 and an excellent cycle life of 100 cycles with 80% capacity retention were achieved.
Elemental 2D materials are also attractive candidates for electrodes in other next-generation battery technologies, such as Li–sulfur and Na-ion batteries.311 Li–sulfur (Li–S) battery with a theoretical energy density of ∼2600 W h kg−1 has emerged owing to its potential to reversibly store considerable electrical energy at a low cost. However, Li–S batteries suffer from several drawbacks such as the low electrical and ionic conductivities of sulfur, high volume change upon lithiation, sulfur loss due to dissolution in the electrolyte, and sulfur shuttling between the anode and cathode. Li et al. found that phosphorene acts as an electrocatalyst and polysulfide immobilizer in Li–S batteries, which could significantly improve the cycle life and capacities of Li–S batteries (Fig. 16a).312 After 500 continuous charge–discharge cycles, the specific capacity of the Li–S battery with phosphorene was retained above 660 mA h g−1 with only ∼0.053% capacity decay per cycle, much better than the baseline battery (without phosphorene), which shows ∼0.25% capacity fade per cycle in only 200 cycles under the same test condition (Fig. 16b). The presence of phosphorene also lowers the electrode polarization, accelerates the redox reaction, and improves sulfur utilization in the battery. This work demonstrated the first experimental development of high-performance Li–S batteries using phosphorene nanosheets. Besides functioning as a cathode additive, BP nanoflakes with high electron conductivity and ultrahigh Li diffusivity can be introduced to commercial polypropylene separators to trap and activate the soluble polysulfides in Li–S batteries, showing a high rate cycling performance with a reversible capacity of 820 mA h g−1 at a current rate of 0.9 A g−1.313
 Fig. 16  Next-generation batteries based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Schematic of few-layer phosphorene–carbon nanofiber matrix as a host for lithium polysulfide catholyte. Reproduced with permission.312 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge voltage profiles of Li–S batteries with phosphorene–carbon nanofiber electrode and pure carbon nanofiber electrode. Reproduced with permission.312 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of the Na-ion half-cell composed of few-layer antimonene with a thickness of about 7 nm. Reproduced with permission.316 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of few-layer antimonene and bulk Sb powder. Reproduced with permission.316 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Multistep phase transitions of bismuthene nanosheets during the sodiation process. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Cycling performance of Na-ion battery using few-layer bismuthene–graphene films as the working electrode. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. 
Similar to Li-based batteries, Na-ion batteries have the same energy storage mechanism and is attracting extensive interest owing to the relative abundance of Na and low cost associated with fabricating Na-ion batteries. Cui and co-workers reported a sandwiched phosphorene–graphene hybrid material with a few layers of BP between graphene layers, which showed a high specific capacity, rate capability, and cycle life as the anode material in Na-ion batteries.314 This Na-ion battery showed a specific capacity of 2440 mA h g−1 and can retain 85% of the capacity after 100 cycles. Antimonene is another promising anode material in Na-ion batteries because of its high theoretical capacity of 660 mA h g−1, low discharge potential of about 0.5 V, and a large amount of active surface sites. Gu et al. fabricated free-standing antimonene nanosheets via liquid-phase exfoliation and mixed them with graphene for sodium storage. The antimonene–graphene film with the optimum density displayed a high volumetric capacity of 1226 mA h cm−3, high-rate capability, and good cycle performance for sodium storage.315 Tian et al. investigated the Na-ion storage mechanism of 2D few-layer antimonene and provided guidance for the design and performance improvement of antimonene-incorporated Na-ion batteries.316Fig. 16c shows the schematic diagram of a Na-ion half-cell, in which antimonene nanosheets act as the working electrode and Na foil as the counter electrode. Considering the 660 mA h g−1 theoretical capacity of Sb, the fact that the antimonene nanosheets maintained a stable capacity of 620 mA h g−1 (for over 150 cycles) suggests that the utilization ratio of Sb atoms participating in Na storage is almost 93.9% (Fig. 16d). The anisotropic volume expansion, reversible crystalline phase, and low Na-ion diffusion barrier make antimonene nanosheets attractive for enabling Na-ion batteries with long-life-cycle, large-capacity, and high rate-capability.
2D bismuthene is expected to have excellent reversibility of ions insertion and extraction owing to its layered structure with a large interlayer spacing, leading to the intercalation of more Na ions into the crystal structure without structure pulverization.317 Zeng et al. fabricated few-layer and single-layer bismuthene via liquid exfoliation method and studied intercalation and alloying process for Na-ion storage.177 They found that multistep phase transitions from Bi → NaBi → c-Na3Bi (cubic) → h-Na3Bi (hexagonal) occurred during the alloying process when the Na ions are inserted into the interlayer or in-plane space of Bi planes (Fig. 16e). As the lateral ductility can efficiently alleviate the in-plane mechanical strain caused by the Na ions migration, the few-layer bismuthene can sustain more considerable volume expansion compared with its bulk counterpart. By combining in situ TEM and XRD technologies, Zhou et al. discovered a mechanism similar to the aforementioned sodium ion storage in 2D bismuthene (Fig. 16f).182 Ultrathin 2D bismuthene with a large aspect ratio can relieve the anisotropic volume expansion caused by the alloy reaction during the sodiumization process. By using free-standing few-layer bismuthene-graphene films as the working electrode, the Na-ion battery can deliver long-term cyclability with a reversible capacity of 317 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles at a current density of 1.2 mA cm−2, indicating the good stability of 2D bismuthene during the charge–discharge process.


3.2.2 Supercapacitors. 
Supercapacitors, also known as electrochemical capacitors (ECs), have attracted tremendous interest during the past decades, primarily due to their high power density, the capability of rapid charging/discharging, and excellent cycle stability. Owing to their size and morphological features such as high surface areas, high power densities, and high flexibility, layered 2D materials can serve as ideal electrodes for ECs. So far, ECs with three kinds of 2D materials-based electrode structures have been demonstrated and studied to enhance the electrochemical performances of devices (Fig. 17a).318 Compared with the stacked nanosheet electrodes, the vertically aligned nanosheet electrodes enable more efficient transport of the electrolyte ions through the intersheet spaces. Thus, make better use of the large specific surface of 2D materials. Among various elemental 2D materials, phosphorene was one of the first materials studied for supercapacitors (SCs). Wen and Liu's group reported a flexible all-solid-state SCs device based on liquid-exfoliated BP nanoflakes.319Fig. 17b shows the fabrication of flexible SCs with BP films and a gel electrolyte. The whole assembly process was carried out under ambient conditions, and BP films were protected against further ambient exposure. A stack capacitance up to 13.75 F cm−3 (45.8 F g−1) could be achieved at the scan rate of 0.01 V s−1. The four devices in series by charging to 3.4 V in 5 s can light the LEDs for 30 s (Fig. 17c). The capacitive retention of BP SC device can maintain 71.8% after 30000 cycles, demonstrating the excellent mechanical flexibility and cycling stability of BP electrodes.
 Fig. 17  Supercapacitors based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Electrochemical capacitors with three kinds of electrodes, stacked nanosheet electrodes, vertically aligned nanosheets electrodes, and in-plane interdigital electrodes. Reproduced with permission.318 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH. (b) Schematic of the fabrication of all-solid-state supercapacitors based on BP nanoflakes. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (c) Galvanostatic charging/discharging profiles for single and 4-series supercapacitors and bending stability tests. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (d) Illustration of the fabrication of phosphorene and graphene interdigital micro-SCs. Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Electrochemical energy storage performance of micro-SCs. Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) 2D siloxene nanosheets as high-performance supercapacitor electrode materials. Reproduced with permission.322 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Scalable production of few-layer borophene nanosheets by liquid-phase exfoliation and their supercapacitive performance. Reproduced with permission.323 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The hybrids of phosphorene with graphene can also be used to improve the performance of SCs. Xiao et al. developed high-energy micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) based on the interdigital hybrid electrode patterns of stacked phosphorene and graphene in an ionic liquid electrolyte.320 The simplified mask-assisted development of MSCs is scalable for producing a serially interconnected MSC pack and provides excellent flexibility (Fig. 17d). These MSCs displayed excellent electrochemical performance of 9.8 mF cm−2 and volumetric capacitance of 37.5 F cm−3 at 5 mV s−1 and retained 94% of their initial capacitance under different bending states (Fig. 17e).
Besides phosphorene, other elemental 2D materials such as silicene, borophene, and antimonene nanosheets can also be applied to SCs.321 As discussed in the previous section, silicene can be easily oxidized during the liquid oxidation and exfoliation of CaSi2. To address this issue, Kim and co-workers prepared siloxene sheets, a 2D material comprising silicene functionalized with oxygenated groups, and investigated their energy storage properties in a device setting of symmetric supercapacitor (SSC).322 The siloxene SSC device delivered a specific capacitance of 2.18 mF cm−2, a high energy density of 9.82 mJ cm−2, and excellent cycling stability of 98% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles boasting its potential for application in energy storage (Fig. 17f). In another study, Teo et al. fabricated few-layer borophene nanosheets via sonication-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation and used them as the SC electrode material (Fig. 17g).323 The as-prepared SC exhibited impressive electrochemical performance with a wide potential window of up to 3.0 V, excellent energy density as high as 46.1 W h kg−1 at a power density of 478.5 W kg−1, and excellent cycling stability with 88.7% retention of the initial specific capacitance after 6000 cycles.

4. Catalysis applications
Catalysis is crucial in that it can positively influence the quality of our lives and the health of our environment. Achieving high activity, selectivity, and stability is the ultimate goal for developing novel catalysts. 2D materials are proposed as ideal catalysts for various catalytic processes, owing to their unique geometric and electronic properties (e.g., ultrahigh surface area and tunable structures).21,324 In this section, we will review the progress made in exploring beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials for electrocatalysis, photocatalysis, heterogeneous catalysis, and the emerging pyro-catalysis.
4.1 Electrocatalysis
Earth's atmosphere provides a universal feedstock of water, carbon dioxide, and nitrogen, which can potentially be converted into important fuels and chemicals, including hydrogen, hydrocarbons, oxygenates, and ammonia. Such electrochemical conversion processes can be driven by renewable energy if appropriate electrocatalysts can be developed. Crucial to enabling this vision is the development of improved electrocatalysts with the desired efficiency and selectivity for the related chemical transformations.325 The intriguing structural and electronic properties of 2D nanomaterials enable significantly enhanced electrocatalytic performance and improved atomic utilization efficiency compared to their bulk counterparts.60,326 In the following sections, we will summarize the recent progress in elemental 2D materials for electrocatalysis, including hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution, and reduction reaction (OER and ORR), CO2 electroreduction reaction (CRR), and other electrocatalytic reactions.

4.1.1 Hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). 
Hydrogen, which has zero-emission and high gravimetric energy density, is an attractive energy carrier for producing clean electricity. The hydrogen fuel cell has, therefore, been considered as one of the most promising alternatives for fossil energy. Electrocatalysis of water stands for a renewable and clean method for producing high-purity hydrogen fuel. As a result, the design of high-performance HER electrocatalysts is critical for developing clean energy at both the fundamental and technology levels.327,328 Previous studies suggest that the overall reaction kinetics of HER on a range of surfaces is primarily determined by the theoretical activity descriptor ΔGH*.325 As shown in Fig. 18a, the ideal catalyst at the peak of the volcano plot would have a ΔGH* of 0 eV. Here, we summarize recent progress on the application of elemental 2D materials for HER.
 Fig. 18  Hydrogen evolution reaction based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Volcano plot showing the relationship between exchange current density j0 and calculated ΔGH* for a series of HER electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Atomically dispersed Cu–Pt dual sites on Pd nanorings as the active sites for HER. Reproduced with permission.329 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Free-standing 2D Ru NSs prepared by a solvothermal method showing high HER activity. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Single-crystalline ultrathin Ni NSs Array from in situ topotactic reductions for HER. Reproduced with permission.333 Copyright 2015, The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH. (e) Few-layer NH2-functionalized BP NSs prepared by a ball-milling method for HER. Reproduced with permission.335 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Pnictogen (As, Sb, Bi) NSs produced by shear exfoliation using kitchen blenders for HER. Reproduced with permission.336 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. 
Platinum group metals are located near the top of the hydrogen volcano plot and are well known as the best-performing catalysts for the HER. These materials require negligible overpotentials to achieve high reaction rates in acidic solutions. However, the high cost and low abundance of Pt group metals severely hinder their widespread applications in HER. In order to enable sustainable hydrogen production, alloying the Pt group metals with cheap yet catalytically active metals shows promise as a cost-effective strategy. For example, Chao et al. synthesized Cu–Pt dual sites alloyed with Pd nanorings (NRs) (Fig. 18b).329 The atomically dispersed Cu–Pt dual sites were confirmed with X-ray absorption fine structure (XAFS) measurements, which serve as the active sites for HER. This hybrid electrocatalyst exhibited excellent HER properties in acidic solution, with an onset potential close to zero and an overpotential of 22.8 mV for a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Such a high HER activity is even greater than that of commercial platinum/carbon (Pt/C) catalysts. In another study, Peng et al. synthesized free-standing 2D Ru nanosheets (NSs) with clean surfaces using the solvothermal self-decomposition of the Ru precursor (Fig. 18c).62 2D Ru NSs exhibited excellent HER activity, as well as their 2D oxide derivative exhibited excellent OER activity, respectively. For achieving a current density of 10 mA mg−1, about 20 mV overpotential was needed using the Ru NSs. The electrolytic cell constructed using the 2D Ru-based catalysts exhibited significantly improved activity and good durability compared with the commercial Pt, which demonstrates their great potential in chemical catalysis. In addition, other 2D platinum group metals and alloy nanosheets for HER catalytic reactions also include Pd NSs, PtCu alloy NSs, RuCu NSs, and PtAgCo NSs etc.63,330–332
The development of 2D non-noble metal nanomaterials would greatly expand the 2D material family and promote their applications in HER. Sun et al. prepared single-crystalline ultrathin Ni NSs through in situ topotactic reductions from Ni(OH)2 array precursors (Fig. 18d).333 TEM analysis shows that Ni NSs have lamellar structures with thicknesses as thin as 2.2 nm (10 atomic layers) and exposed (111) facet. The Ni NSs showed a high activity towards the HER after partial oxidation by exposure in the ambient atmosphere. For HER activity, an onset potential of −34 mV in 0.1 M KOH and a Tafel slope of 114 mV per decade was achieved. Besides, the Ni NSs exhibited a faster current increase and better stability than those of Pt/C because of Ni NSs’ high surface area and superaerophobic surface structure. This work opened up a way to fabricate 2D non-noble metal nanostructures that could benefit the preparation of low-cost, highly efficient, and stable electrocatalysts. Using a similar method, the same group also prepared a NiMo NSs array via an in situ topotactic reduction of NiMoO4 precursor.334 The as-synthesized NiMo NSs showed an overpotential of 35 mV to reach a current density of 10 mA cm−2, along with a Tafel slope of 45 mV per decade, demonstrating a similar intrinsic activity to commercial Pt/C catalyst.
For the 2D non-metallic materials in the periodic table, there are few reports for electrocatalytic HER. Pumera's group reported that BP nanoparticles could catalyze the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4, generating a current density of −10 mA cm−2 at −0.81 V. Shao et al. prepared NH2-functionalized few-layer BP NSs with the thickness of 2.15–4.87 nm by a ball-milling method (Fig. 18e).335 The NH2–BP NSs exhibited enhanced electrocatalytic HER performance with an overpotential of 290 mV at −10 mA cm−2, a Tafel slope of 63 mV per decade, which drastically surpasses those of the bulk BP. The enhanced intrinsic HER activity is attributed to the unique structure of the ultrathin NH2-functionalized BP NSs, which exposes more edges and dangling bonds and favors charge transfer. In general, the HER activity of BP in either bulk or nanostructure form is far lower than that of noble metal electrocatalysts. Recently, Pumera's group prepared few-layer pnictogens such as As, Sb, and Bi by shear exfoliation using kitchen blenders (Fig. 18f).336 HER measurements of the obtained pnictogens showed that Sb had the lowest onset potential of −0.68 V vs. RHE, followed by As and Bi with −0.98 and −0.91 V vs. RHE, respectively. However, the HER activities of these new 2D monoelements are not comparable to commercial Pt/C catalysts. Additionally, Wang et al. predicted that borophene is a high-performance catalyst for HER with the near-zero free energy of hydrogen adsorption, metallic conductivity, and plenty of active sites in the basal plane.337 However, borophene for HER has not been experimentally realized, probably because of the difficulty in material synthesis.


4.1.2 Oxygen reduction and evolution reaction (ORR and OER). 
Oxygen electrocatalysis is one of the most explored topics in electrochemistry and catalysis because of its importance for electrochemical energy conversion applications. The oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) is a pertinent process in many electrochemical energy conversion and storage technologies, including fuel cells and rechargeable metal–air batteries. Generally, the ORR involves either four proton–electron transfers to reduce oxygen to water, which is desirable for fuel cells to attain high efficiency and large open circuit potential, or a two-proton–electron pathway, which is attractive for the industrial production of H2O2.338,339 In acidic conditions, only platinum-based catalysts have shown sufficient activity and durability for practical purposes, although it comes at a high cost and relies on limited global platinum supplies. Some strategies that have been employed to improve the ORR activity of the platinum-based catalysts include the use of alloying, surface strain, and optimized coordination environments.340–342 Accordingly, many excellent reviews discussed the rational design and development of these kinds of electrocatalysts.20,343 Here, we mainly focus on the new development of elemental 2D materials beyond graphene, especially noble metal NSs, for the ORR.
Strain engineering has been an effective route to enhancing the electrochemical properties of nanomaterials by tailoring the surface electronic structure and chemical reactivity. Wang et al. studied the effect of intrinsic strain created by atomic-level control of the thickness on the catalytic properties of free-standing Pd NSs (Fig. 19a).63 According to the Sabatier principle, the interactions between an optimal catalyst and reaction intermediates should be neither too strong nor too weak, suggesting the presence of a maximum in catalytic activity at some point in the thickness-strain continuum. Both experimental and theoretical investigations of Pd NSs as alkaline ORR electrocatalysts showed that the ORR activity exhibited a classic volcano relationship as the thickness decreases. The most active 5 monolayers (-ML) nanosheets achieved a specific activity of 0.70 mA cm−2 at 0.95 V, representing an improvement factor of >18 versus Pd/C. Similar trends were also observed in mass activity, with enhancement factors of up to 26 and 47 for 5-ML at 0.95 V and 0.9 V, respectively, compared to commercial Pd/C. This work demonstrated that the generation and tuning of intrinsic surface strain could be a powerful strategy to engineer nanocatalysts for enhanced electrocatalytic reactions. Alloying is another extensively used strategy to enhance the ORR performance of Pd-based catalysts, which can change the oxygen adsorption energy of the top layer of the alloys. Recently, Luo et al. successfully synthesized a freestanding 4-atomic-thick PdMo bimetallene and demonstrated a record electrocatalytic ORR activity in an alkaline electrolyte (Fig. 19b).344 The obtained PdMo bimetallene was in the form of a highly curved nanosheet with an average lateral size of around 100 nm and an average thickness of 0.88 nm. Density functional theory calculations revealed that the superior electrocatalytic ORR performance of PdMo bimetallene arises from the synergistic effects of the alloying, the strain, and the quantum confinement, which could tune the electronic structure of the system for optimized oxygen binding. PdMo bimetallene catalysts have a high electrochemically active surface area of 138.7 m2 per gram of Pd. PdMo bimetallene/C delivered a mass activity of 16.37 A mgPd−1 at 0.9 V vs. RHE. This mass activity is 77.9 and 327.4 times higher than those of commercial Pt/C and Pd/C catalysts, respectively, and shows little decay after 30000 potential cycles. Another work reported by Ding et al. revealed that coating ultrathin Pd NSs with single-layered Pt could produce a specific activity of 0.438 A cmPt−2 and mass activity of 0.717 A mgPt−1 at 0.9 V (vs. RHE), which was 3.4 and 6.6 times that of the commercial Pt/C, respectively.345
 Fig. 19  Oxygen reduction and evolution reactions based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Tuning intrinsic strain in freestanding Pd NSs to optimize ORR activity. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2019, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Freestanding PdMo bimetallene with several atomic thicknesses showing promising ORR activity. Reproduced with permission.344 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Ultrathin Pt nanoplates exposing the {111} facets for enhanced ORR activity. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Biaxially strained PtPb–Pt core–shell nanoplates with exceptional ORR performance. Reproduced with permission.346 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Ultrathin free-floating Pt nanoplates from the assembly of small nanocrystals for ORR. Reproduced with permission.347 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Few-layer BP nanosheets prepared by liquid exfoliation for highly efficient OER. Reproduced with permission.349 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. 
In the development of Pt-based catalysts, considerable efforts have been devoted to shape-controlled synthesis for tailoring the ORR activities. Gao and co-workers presented the epitaxial growth of Pt on Ag nanoplates. Further, they obtained ultrathin truncated triangular Pt nanoplates with thicknesses of 1–2 nm enclosed by (111) facets after etching Ag nanoplates (Fig. 19c).64 These ultrathin Pt nanoplates exhibited high activity and durability in the ORR, with the specific (5.3 mA cm−2), and mass (1.62 A mgPt−1) activity being ∼22 and 9.5 times those of commercial Pt/C catalyst, respectively. Huang et al. reported that biaxially strained PtPb–Pt core–shell nanoplates exhibited exceptional ORR performance (Fig. 19d).346 A specific activity of 7.8 mA cm−2 and mass activity of 4.3 A mgPt−1 at 0.9 V (vs. RHE) were achieved, which are 33.9 and 26.9 times greater than those of the commercial Pt/C catalyst, respectively. The DFT calculations revealed that the stable Pt(110) facets undergo large tensile strains that help optimize the Pt–O bond strength. The stability characterization showed only a slight mass activity decay of 7.7% after 50000 sweeping cycles. Zhu et al. demonstrated the 2D anisotropic formation of ultrathin free-floating Pt nanoplates with thicknesses of ∼3.5 nm from the peptide-assisted assembly of small nanocrystals (Fig. 19e).347 They further showed that Pd atoms could be preferentially deposited at the grain boundaries to enhance the catalyst activity and durability. The Pd-enhanced (4.6%) Pt polycrystal nanoplates showed high ORR activities with specific activities of 5.76 mA cm−2 and mass activities of 3.43 mA μgPt−1 at 0.9 V, which are 15.5 times and 13.7 times higher than those of commercial Pt/C, respectively. The improved electrocatalytic performance is attributed to the 2D structural characteristics of the nanoplates, i.e., an ultrathin thickness with a large population of grain boundaries. Similarly, 2D Ru NSs showed high ORR activity and stability compared to Ru nanoparticles. The activity of Ru NSs after potential cycling was 40 times higher than that of the nanoparticles.
The oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is a four-electron transfer process and the reverse reaction of the ORR.325 The electrocatalytic water splitting process consists of HER at the cathode and OER at the anode.348 Thereby, the development of OER catalysts with high activity and good stability is attractive. Generally, the catalysts for OER are metal oxides, such as IrO2 and RuO2. Recently, research showed that BP has electrocatalytic OER activities comparable to commercial RuO2-based catalysts. Jiang et al. prepared BP on a Ti foil and carbon nanotube (CNT) matrix by a thermal-vaporization transformation and investigated their electrocatalytic activities for OER. The BP materials demonstrated highly efficient OER activities with an onset potential of about 1.48 V (vs. RHE), a required potential of 1.6 V to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2, and a Tafel slope of 72.88 mV per decade, all of which are comparable to commercial RuO2 electrocatalysts. Recently, Zhang and co-workers found that few-layer BP nanosheets prepared by facile liquid exfoliation exhibited desirable electrocatalytic OER activity with structural robustness (Fig. 19f).349 Compared to that of bulk BP, the electrochemical activity of BP NSs showed significant improvement with an onset potential of 1.45 V and a Tafel slope of 88 per decade. The authors also proposed to reduce the thickness of BP NSs to generate additional active sites and improve the specific surface area for achieving superior electrochemical OER performance.


4.1.3 Electrochemical CO2 reduction (ECR). 
Electrochemical CO2 reduction (ECR) has attracted increased attention over the past few years. It enables a sustainable pathway for producing fuel and chemical feedstocks through the electrochemical conversion of greenhouse gas (Fig. 20a).350 The focus of current research in this field is to obtain an ideal catalyst capable of electrochemical conversion of CO2 at an industrial scale with improved efficiency, low overpotential, and high selectivity.351 Despite their activity for the ECR, bulk metals possess very limited active sites and are subject to deactivation due to poisoning by impurities or strongly bound intermediates. In this regard, 2D nanomaterials are promising candidates for electrocatalysis owing to their tunable surface structures, unique electronic states, and engineered mechanical properties.352 In this section, we will discuss the recent progress in exploring elemental 2D materials, including transition metals, group V monoelemental materials, for highly efficient ECR catalysts.
 Fig. 20  Electrochemical CO2 reduction based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Schematic of electrochemical CO2 conversion by transforming waste CO2 emissions into commodity chemical feedstocks or fuels. Reproduced with permission.350 Copyright 2019, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Partially oxidized Co 4-atom-thick layers for CO2 electroreduction to liquid fuel. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (c) Hexagonal Pd nanosheets with 5 atomic thickness showing high ECR activity. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (d) Mesoporous 2D Bi NSs for selective CO2 reduction to formate. Reproduced with permission.355 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (e) Free-standing single-atom-thick 2D bismuthene for highly efficient ECR. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) Sb NSs prepared by the electrochemical exfoliation showing ECR activity. Reproduced with permission.357 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (g) Sn quantum sheets confined in graphene toward high-efficiency ECR. Reproduced with permission.358 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
The catalytic performance of a catalyst is closely related to its morphology and surface area. Recently, Xie and colleagues prepared freestanding 4-atom-thick Co sheets with and without surface Co oxide by using a ligand-confined growth strategy (Fig. 20b).80 They found that partially oxidized Co 4-atom-thick layers showed outstanding intrinsic activity and selectivity for ECR, leading to the efficient production of formate in aqueous solution with a low overpotential (0.24 V), high current density (10.59 mA cm−2), and formate selectivity (90.1%). Such metrics, exhibiting a 260-fold improvement in activity compared to bulk Co, are thought to be mainly due to the increased surface area that provides enhanced catalytically active sites. The partial oxidation further improved the intrinsic activity of the system significantly. In another study, Zheng et al. prepared ultrathin Cu/Ni(OH)2 NSs for selective ECR. The hybrid Cu/Ni(OH)2 NSs presented both excellent activity and selectivity in the electroreduction of CO2 to CO. At a low overpotential of 0.39 V, the hybrid NSs provided a current density of 4.3 mA cm−2 with a CO faradaic efficiency of 92%. Owing to the superior conductivity and favorable adsorption to intermediates, 2D Pd and Pd-based alloys NSs have exhibited excellent electrocatalytic activities for HER and ORR in the previous section. Besides, Gong et al. synthesized ultrathin Pd NSs for converting CO2 into CO (Fig. 20c).65 Hexagonal Pd nanosheets with 5 atomic layers and 5.1 nm edge length can reach a CO faradaic efficiency of 94% at −0.5 V and mass activity of 140 A g−1 at −0.9 V, without any decay after 8 h. DFT calculations suggested that edge sites contributed to the enhancement performance, as more exposed atoms with a generalized coordination number of around 5 reduce the energy barriers. Such ultrathin Pd NSs appear to be the most efficient catalyst among all of the Pd-based materials toward ECR.
2D bismuthene could be a highly efficient electrocatalyst for ECR due to its low toxicity, cost-effectiveness, and higher stability.181,353,354 Han et al. prepared ultrathin bismuth NSs with thicknesses of ∼8.7 nm (corresponding to 9–10 layers) for selective electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 to formate.180 Han's study showed that Bi NSs enabled high-performance CO2 reduction to formate with excellent selectivity (faradaic efficiency >90% over a broad potential), activity (large formate partial current density of 24 mA cm−2 at −1.74 V), and durability (no loss in activity or selectivity for at least 10 h). Another experimental study from the same group showed that 2D mesoporous Bi NSs from the cathodic conversion of atomic-thick Bi2O2CO3 NSs exhibited impressive ECR activity for selective CO2 reduction to formate (Fig. 20d).355 Mesoporous Bi NSs with thicknesses of 3.5 nm (∼two layers) possess large surface areas, and 13.4% of the total Bi sites are electrochemically accessible, leading to enhanced electrocatalytic performance. Such mesoporous Bi NSs exhibited a large cathodic current density (∼18 mA cm−2 at −1.1 V), high faradaic efficiency of nearly 100% over a wide potential window, and satisfactory stability (no activity or selectivity loss for 12 h). Similarly, liquid-phase-exfoliated ultrathin Bi NSs with thicknesses down to 1.23 nm can be used for ECR. Benefited from the high conductivity and rich edge sites, such Bi NSs exhibited a faradaic efficiency of 86.0% for formate production and a high current density of 16.5 mA cm−2 at −1.1 V (vs. RHE), and good stability after electrolysis of 10 h. Another strategy to prepare atomically thin bismuthene was demonstrated by Cao et al. where a few-layer bismuthene with a thickness of 1.28–1.45 nm was obtained from ultrathin metal–organic layers by an in situ electrochemical transformation process.354 The as-obtained few-layer bismuthine exhibited nearly 100% faradaic efficiency in a wide potential window between −0.83 to −1.18 V (vs. RHE), as well as the exceptional partial current density up to 72.0 mA cm−2 for electrochemical reduction of CO2 to formate. Very recently, Yang et al. synthesized free-standing 2D bismuthene with thicknesses of 0.65 nm (corresponding to single-atomic-layer) and demonstrated its high electrocatalytic efficiency for ECR (Fig. 20e).181 Owing to the very high atom utilization, the high surface density of intrinsically active sites, high electronic conductivity, and superior structural stability of atomic layers, monolayer bismuthene NSs exhibited an ECR performance with high faradaic efficiencies (99% at −580 mV (vs. RHE)), small onset overpotential (<90 mV), a high current density of ∼30 mA cm−2 at −1.1 V (vs. RHE), and high durability (no performance decay after 75 h and annealing at 400 °C). DFT calculations suggested that the selective formation of formate could proceed easily on the bismuthene (111) facet due to the compressive strain. Surface and strain engineering in 2D materials could provide another effective strategy for improving the performance of ECR electrocatalysts.
Other elemental 2D materials and hybrid structures have also shown promising ECR performance.356 For example, Li et al. reported the application of antimonene NSs with thicknesses of ∼3.5 nm for the selective and efficient catalysis of CO2 reduction to formate (Fig. 20f).357 The Sb NS electrode produced a lower onset potential and an enhanced catalytic current density than the bulk Sb electrode. The Sb NS electrode also generated a broad peak centered at −1.06 V in CO2-saturated solution, with the faradaic efficiency for formate reaching a maximum of about 84% at −1.06 V. The high activity was attributed to the exposure of a large number of catalytically active edge sites. Ultrathin metal NSs can be highly active for ECR but can also be prone to oxidation, which causes a rapid decay in cyclability. To address this issue, Xie et al. confined Sn NSs with thicknesses of 1.41 nm in graphene to avoid the oxidation of Sn for high-efficiency ECR (Fig. 20g).358 Such Sn NSs showed an onset potential (−0.85 V vs. SCE). The current density achieved by the Sn NSs (21.1 mA cm−2 at 1.8 V vs. SCE) is roughly 2, 2.5, and 13 times larger than that of the 15 nm Sn nanoparticles mixed with graphene, 15 nm Sn nanoparticles, and bulk Sn. The formate faradaic efficiency maintained larger than 85% during the extended test period of 50 h. Zheng et al. prepared ultrathin Cu/Ni(OH)2 nanosheets as an excellent cost-effective catalyst for the electrochemical conversion of CO2 and H2O into tunable syngas under low overpotentials. Furthermore, Cu within the nanosheets is stable against air oxidation for months because of formate on the Cu surface.359 In general, these reported results showed the promise of elemental 2D materials for high-performance selective ECR for producing CO and formate. More efforts are needed to identify deeper ECR mechanisms, achieve the stability of ultrathin 2D catalysts, and improve product selectivity.


4.1.4 Other electrocatalytic reactions. 
Besides the electrocatalytic reactions applied to the water splitting and CO2 reduction, there are many other energy conversion reactions that can be electrocatalyzed by elemental 2D materials, such as formic acid oxidation reaction (FOR), methanol oxidation reaction (MOR), and nitrogen reduction reaction (NRR).
FOR and MOR have received extensive attention owing to their distinct advantages, such as high energy density, high conversion efficiency, and safe for storage and transportation, that enable high-performance anodes in proton exchange membrane fuel cells (PEMFCs) to produce electricity.360 2D metal nanostructures can be excellent catalysts for these anodic reactions. For example, Zheng et al. demonstrated that ultrathin Pd NSs exhibited high electrocatalytic activity for FOR, which was 2.5 times greater than that of commercial Pd black catalyst (Fig. 21a).70 The maximum current densities of Pd NSs were measured to be 1380 mA mg−2 at 0.14 V (vs. SCE), owing to the high electrochemically active surface area (67 m2 g−1). To further enhance the electrocatalytic activity for the FOR, Pd nanosheets with clean surfaces were prepared, which gave a peak current density of 1.42 A mgPd−1, and a maximum current density of 1420 mA mg−1 at a more negative peak potential (0.04 V vs. SCE).361 Zhang's group prepared ultrathin PdCu alloy NSs that can be used as a highly efficient electrocatalyst for FOR.362 PdCu alloy NSs with Cu/Pd atomic ratio of 0.19 showed the highest current density of 1656 mA/mgPd at the peak potential of 0.12 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) in the FOR (Fig. 21b). 2D group metals and their alloys, such as Rh NSs, PtPb@Pt core–shell nanoplates, PdCu alloy NSs, PtBi nanoplates, PdPtAg alloy NSs, and etc., are also promising electrocatalysts for the MOR.340,346,363–365
 Fig. 21  Other electrocatalytic reactions based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Pd NSs showing higher electrocatalytic activity for FOR compared to Pd black. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. (b) Ultrathin PdCu alloy NSs used as a highly efficient electrocatalyst for FOR. Reproduced with permission.362 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Free-standing 2D Cu NSs enclosed by (111) surface for electrochemical reduction of CO to acetate. Reproduced with permission.367 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Surfactant-free atomically ultrathin Rh NSs for efficient N2 electroreduction. Reproduced with permission.371 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Borophene as an effective catalyst for NRR in neutral media. Reproduced with permission.373 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) 2D mosaic Bi NSs for highly selective ambient electrocatalytic N2 reduction. Reproduced with permission.374 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Recent studies have shown that CO can be electrochemically transformed further to multicarbon (C2+) products with high reaction rates, high C2+ selectivity, and inherently improved electrolyte stability. Such findings suggested the prospect of a two-step pathway to transform CO2.366 For example, Luc et al. synthesized free-standing triangular-shaped 2D Cu NSs that are enclosed by (111) surfaces for electrochemical reduction of CO to acetate (Fig. 21c).367 With an edge length of ∼1.7 μm and a thickness of ∼5 nm, theoretically, at least 99% of the exposed surface of the triangular Cu NSs should be (111), which is extraordinarily stable and crucial for catalysis studies. In a 2 M KOH electrolyte, Cu NSs exhibited an acetate faradaic efficiency of 48% with an acetate partial current density up to 131 mA cm−2 in electrochemical CO reduction. The enhanced acetate formation was attributed to the suppression of ethylene and ethanol formation, probably due to the reduction of exposed (100) and (110) surfaces.
The nitrogen cycle is becoming increasingly important in the modern energy cycle as ammonia (NH3) is a safer energy carrier than hydrogen. Electrochemical NRR has emerged as an attractive and eco-friendly approach for producing NH3 under mild conditions.368–370 Liu et al. fabricated surfactant-free atomically ultrathin Rh NSs with thicknesses of 1.0–1.1 nm using a cyanogel-reduction method (Fig. 21d).371 The obtained Rh NSs exhibited a high NH3 yield of 23.88 μg h−1 mgcat−1 and favorable selectivity (no N2H4 generation) at low potential (−0.2 V vs. RHE). The NH3 yield was much higher than that can be achieved by using the Rh nanoparticles. Such morphology-dependent activity enhancement is thought to be due to the ultrathin lamellar structure and large specific surface area of Rh NSs. It should be noted, though, Rh NSs suffered from a severe competing HER, which rendered a low faradaic efficiency. Recent theoretical studies suggest that borophene is a potential catalyst toward NH3 synthesis with a low overpotential of 0.77 eV vs. SHE.372 Later, Zhang et al. experimentally proved borophene as an effective catalyst for NRR with excellent selectivity (Fig. 21e).373 Borophene with an average thickness of ∼3.0 nm and a surface area of 16.38 m2 g−1 attained a high faradaic efficiency of 4.04% and a large NH3 yield of 13.22 μg h−1 mgcat−1 at −0.80 V (vs. RHE), with strong electrochemical durability. DFT calculations suggested that the oxidized and H-deactivated borophene had a greater preference to proceed via NRR than the pristine borophene. The report by Zhang et al. is the first demonstration of 2D borophene for electrocatalytic NH3 synthesis in neutral media. Other elemental 2D materials, such as 2D mosaic Bi NSs and Ni NSs array, could also work as electrocatalysts for NRR under ambient conditions (Fig. 21f).374,375 Bi NSs composed of nanoflakes with a size less than 10 nm were fabricated via an in situ electrochemical reduction process. Tested in 0.1 M Na2SO4, Bi NSs achieved an NH3 yield rate of ∼13.23 μg mgcat.−1 h−1 and faradaic efficiency of 10.46% at −0.8 V vs. RHE. Recently, Bat-Erdene et al. reported that few-layer antimonene nanosheets prepared using a liquid-phase exfoliation method could be an efficient NRR electrocatalyst for NH3 synthesis under ambient conditions.377 When tested in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte, the surface oxidized Sb NSs without any supporting catalyst delivered a high NH3 yield of 180.4 μg h−1 mgcat.−1 at a potential of −0.1 V and a faradaic efficiency of 11.6% at a potential of +0.05 V (vs. RHE). Overall, elemental 2D materials for NRR is a new research field in its infancy.376 More research efforts are necessary to advance more efficient catalysts and strategies with improved NRR performance.

4.2 Photocatalysis
Photocatalysis utilizes semiconductor materials to convert solar energy into chemical energy and has been widely regarded as a promising candidate to alleviate environmental challenges and energy crises. Although a variety of photocatalysts have been explored in recent decades, some conspicuous limitations in present systems bring down their overall performance in photocatalysis.377 2D nanomaterials possess several advantages, such as high surface-to-volume ratio, atomic thickness conducive to light harvesting and mass transport, and widely distributed unsaturated coordination active sites endowing them with promising potential for photocatalysis in renewable energy production.378,379 The recent advent in materials synthesis had also led to the preparation of a variety of 2D materials for photocatalysis, such as graphene-based materials, graphitic carbon nitride, transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), transition metal carbides/nitrides (MXenes), 2D metal oxides, and metal chalcogenides, layered double hydroxides, BP, etc. Among these materials, BP has been intensively explored for photocatalysis, including H2 evolution, hydrogenation, organic degradation, nitrogen fixation etc.57,380
H2 evolution via photocatalytic water splitting under visible light irradiation has been extensively studied and shown to be a promising solution for alleviating worldwide energy issues. For instance, Zhu et al. explored the feasibility of ball-milled BP NSs for visible-light photocatalytic H2 evolution (Fig. 22a).381 By adding LiOH as a protective agent, the –OH functional groups terminate the reactive BP NSs edges that support a stable structure for photocatalytic reaction. The visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate of BP NSs reached 512 μmol h−1 g−1 without using any cocatalyst, which is ≈18 times higher than that of the bulk BP. The improvement in catalytic activities was attributed to edge termination with hydroxyl groups, which provided spacing for exposing the catalytic surfaces. Majima's group designed a metal-free 2D hybrid catalyst composed of BP and graphitic carbon nitride (BP/g-C3N4), which enabled efficient water reduction under visible light (>420 nm) and even under NIR (>780 nm) irradiation, giving an H2 evolution rate of 427 μmol g−1 h−1 and 101 μmol g−1 h−1, respectively (Fig. 22b and c).382 Efficient charge transfer occurred due to the interfacial interaction between BP and BP/g-C3N4 that enabled a broad absorption in the visible and NIR region. As a result, the photocatalytic performance was enhanced. The same group later reported a BP/Pt/RGO (reduced graphene oxide) ternary semiconductor for photocatalytic hydrogen production.383 The amount of H2 evolution increased with the increased loading of Pt/RGO, which improved the specific surface area and restrained charges recombination. The optimum H2 evolution rate reached 5.13 and 1.26 μmol under >420 nm and >780 nm light irradiation, respectively, in the presence of Pt/RGO and EDTA (Fig. 22d). These results suggest that 2D BP can be used as a visible- and NIR-activated photocatalyst in artificial photosynthesis and renewable energy conversion. Qiao and co-workers also reported a metal-free BP/g-C3N4 van der Waals heterojunction that showed an enhanced visible-light photocatalytic H2 production activity of 571 μmol h−1 g−1 in 18 v% lactic acid aqueous solution.384 Qiu et al. designed metal-free 2D tellurium nanosheets as an elemental cocatalyst for photocatalytic hydrogen production. The few-layer 2D Te nanosheets with a thickness of 2–5 nm were rationally integrated with CdS to induce a high photocatalytic hydrogen evolution rate (234.4 μmol h−1) and apparent quantum efficiency of 11.4% at 420 nm.385
 Fig. 22  Photocatalytic reactions based on elemental 2D materials. BP and related heterostructures as an efficient photocatalyst for visible- and near-infrared light hydrogen evolution: (a) BP NSs prepared by a ball-milling method,381 (b and c) BP/g-C3N4 2D hybrid catalyst,382 (d) BP/Pt/RGO ternary semiconductor catalyst.383 Reproduced with permission.381 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017, Elsevier B.V. (e) Singlet oxygen generated by Bultrathin BP NSs for organic degradation. Reproduced with permission.386 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) Pt/BP heterostructure for solar-powered hydrogenation reaction of styrene. Reproduced with permission.387 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (g) BP–RP heterostructure with high photocatalytic activity for the degradation of organic dyes. Reproduced with permission.389 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) BP/g-C3N4 as a cocatalyst for photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. Reproduced with permission.391 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. 
Hydrogenation involves adding hydrogen molecules to another compound or element, which is commonly employed to reduce or saturate organic compounds. Xie and co-workers demonstrated that the exfoliated BP NSs were efficient photosensitizers with a high quantum yield of about 0.91 for the generation of singlet oxygen.386 The generated singlet oxygen held strong oxidation capacity and a relatively long lifetime, which enabled the efficient decomposition of organic molecules such as 1,3-diphenylisobenzofuran, and methyl orange in wastewater (Fig. 22e). Recently, Yu and co-workers proposed an efficacious heterojunction photocatalyst Pt/BP for solar-powered hydrogenation reaction.387 The Pt/BP heterostructure exhibited p-type semiconducting characteristics and efficient absorption of solar energy extending into the infrared region. The results showed that Pt/BP possessed remarkable photocatalytic performance for styrene conversion, and 100% of styrene can be converted to phenylethane within 25 minutes with the turnover frequencies (TOFs) of 5900 h−1, which was much higher than Pt/C, Pt/P25, and Pt/SiO2 (Fig. 22f). Such 2D Pt/BP photocatalyst exhibits advantages such as broadband solar light adsorption, efficient electron transfer, and accumulation and is promising for efficient solar-driven chemical reactions. For the degradation of organic pollutants, Lee's group fabricated a novel hybrid material BP@TiO2 and applied this composite to remove reactive black 5 (RB5) and rhodamine B (RhB) from wastewater.388 Shen et al. reported a black-red phosphorus heterostructure with high visible-light-driven photocatalytic activity comparable to that of CdS.389 Results showed that during the first 30 minutes' irradiation, 89% of the RhB was degraded by the BP–RP heterostructure, while only 32% of the RhB was degraded by CdS (Fig. 22g). Liu's group also reported the photocatalytic degradation of RhB using Ag/BP nanohybrids under visible-light irradiation.390 Other studies reported the photocatalytic activity of BP decorated g-C3N4 on nitrogen fixation. For example, Jiang and co-workers used BP/g-C3N4 as a cocatalyst, in which the P–C bonds were formed at the interface between BP and g-C3N4 NSs.391 Such a cocatalyst exhibited an enhanced charge transfer and air stability (Fig. 22h). The as-prepared BP/g-C3N4 also exhibited enhanced photoactivity and photostability towards nitrogen fixation under visible-light irradiation. A high photocatalytic rate of 347.5 μmol L−1 h−1 was achieved, about 8.6 times that of carbon nanotubes (CNS) and even better than that of the traditional Pt/CNS photocatalyst. This study demonstrated a promising route to construct BP-based hybrids for solar-driven photocatalytic nitrogen fixation in ambient conditions.
4.3 Other catalysis and beyond
In heterogeneous catalysis, the catalyst occupies a different phase from the reactants and products, typically involving solid-phase catalysts and gas-phase reactants. Heterogeneous catalysis is important for chemical and energy industries because it enables faster, large-scale production and selective product formation. Ultrathin 2D metals, which have high surface area-to-volume ratios and high-density unsaturated atoms exposed on the surface, have been promising candidates in various heterogeneous reactions.211
The outstanding catalytic performances of 2D metals have been demonstrated in various heterogeneous catalytic reactions. For example, Li et al. reported that single-layered Rh NSs exhibited excellent catalytic activity in the hydrogenation of phenol and hydroformylation of 1-octene.73 The best performance achieved with PVP-capped Rh NSs gave >99.9% conversion of phenol within 4 h at 30 °C under low H2 pressure (1.0 MPa), four- and seven times greater than those of commercial Rh/C and PVP-capped Rh NPs. For the hydroformylation of 1-octene, Rh NSs also exhibited both superior catalytic activity and selectivity towards the target product (e.g., aldehyde) under mild reaction conditions (Fig. 23a). Huang et al. showed that Pd NSs exhibited enhanced catalytic performance for styrene hydrogenation compared with other Pd nanostructures. In particular, for reaction periods of 30 minutes, the conversions of styrene were 88%, 82%, 63%, and 38% for the Pd nanosheets, the Pd concave tetrahedra, the Pd tetrahedra, and the Pd black, respectively (Fig. 23b).392 The enhanced performance of Pd NSs can be attributed to their ultrathin feature that provides increased active sites. Zheng et al. used C2H2 to treat the surface-clean Pd NSs and changed the surface from hydrophilic to hydrophobic (Fig. 23c).393 As a result, the C2H2-treated Pd NSs achieved 10-fold enhancements in the catalytic activity in styrene hydrogenation compared to the untreated one under the same conditions. Also, other 2D metal nanomaterials used in catalytic hydrogenation reactions include Pd@Ru NSs for 1-octyne, PtCu NSs for nitrobenzene, Rh NSs for cyclohexene, and etc.331,394,395
 Fig. 23  Heterogeneous catalysis and pyro-catalysis based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Ultrathin Rh NSs as catalysts for the hydroformylation of 1-octene. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Conversion of styrene during hydrogenation reactions catalyzed by different Pd catalysts. Reproduced with permission.392 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) C2H2 treatment for enhancing the catalytic activity of Pd NSs in styrene hydrogenation. Reproduced with permission.393 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Au NSs with the enhanced catalytic performance for the oxidation of various substrates. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) Schematic diagram for hydrogen production through the pyroelectric effect. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (f) Pyro-catalytic hydrogen production catalyzed by few-layer BP under cold–hot alternation. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
2D metal nanomaterials can also serve as highly efficient catalysts for some oxidation reactions. Xiao et al. reported that Au NSs confined in Al–Mg LDH layer templates exhibited high catalytic activities in the solvent-free oxidation of C–H bonds, which can be attributed to the exposure of the low-coordinated edge sites.215 Specifically, the Au/LDH hybrid is much more active than the AuNP/LDH in the catalytic oxidation of both ethylbenzenes (TOF: 5240, h−1versus 600 h−1) and diphenylmethane (TOF: 5100, h−1versus 685 h−1) (Fig. 23d). Moreover, the morphology of Au NSs could be well maintained after the catalytic reaction due to the confined effect of Al–Mg LDH, showing excellent catalytic stability. Examples of 2D metal nanostructures used for similar oxidation reactions also include Rh NSs for CO, AuPd nanowheels for benzyl alcohol, and etc.
Recently, the application of ferroelectric, piezoelectric, and pyroelectric effects in catalysis has emerged and attracted increased interest.396 For example, You et al. demonstrated the pyro-catalytic behavior of BP NSs in hydrogen evolution at room temperature.263 As shown in Fig. 23e, the cold–hot alternate excitation can induce a net change of the electric dipole moment in the pyro-catalyst. Such pyroelectrtically generated positive and negative charges could participate in the redox reaction. 2D BP NSs showed a high H2 production rate in splitting water of approximately 540 μmol g−1 after 24 cycles under cold–hot alternation in the range of 15–65 °C (Fig. 23f). This work opens a door for the pyro-catalytic energy harvesting, inspiring new applications of 2D piezoelectrics and ferroelectrics in energy and catalysis.
5. Conclusions and future outlook
In this review, we systematically summarized the research progress in beyond-graphene elemental 2D materials for energy and catalysis applications, including their preparation methods, intriguing properties, and unique structures for energy harvesting, storage, electrocatalysis, and photocatalysis (Fig. 24). The research of elemental 2D materials has gained increasing momentum with various new materials reported and explored (see the timeline in Fig. 1b). Despite the tremendous progress made in related fields, much work remains to be done to attain a comprehensive understanding and to realize the full potential of elemental 2D materials for energy and catalysis applications. A fundamental understanding of the process–structure–property–performance relationship still lacks in most cases, making it challenging to control and engineer material synthesis and device performance. Nonetheless, we anticipate significant advances in both the fundamental understanding and technological implementation of 2D elemental material-based energy devices and catalysts.
 Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of elemental two-dimensional (2D) materials beyond graphene with unique structures and properties and their advanced applications in energy and catalysis. Reproduced with permission.71,73,91,131,193,200,271,286,304,312,367,391 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. Copyright 2017, Elsevier B.V. 
To this end, we envision that the following research challenges need to be addressed when an abundance of research opportunities are actively explored. The scalable synthesis of related materials with high quality and reliability is critical for practical applications and fundamental characterization. The comprehensive understanding of the growth mechanism enables the researchers to tailor the size, thickness, and uniformity of 2D materials as per design. Such capability can be achieved through comprehensive understanding and careful modulation of the growth conditions, which is expected to lead to an expansive phase/structural space even for mono-elemental systems. Importantly, novel crystal phase or amorphous structure or amorphous/crystalline heterophase of 2D materials could be prepared under the strategy of phase engineering of nanomaterials (PEN),220 which is a prerequisite for exploration of phase-dependent properties and applications, especially in clean energy and catalysis.397 The development of simple and effective methods for mass production of high-quality 2D materials is also actively explored and pursued. For instance, 2D tellurene grown in solution has shown advantages for device and battery applications, compared to other methods that require high growth temperatures, matched substrates, and delicate control of the growth atmosphere.
(1) The synergy between experimental efforts and theoretical calculations is also crucial, not only for material synthesis and characterization but also for device performance and application development. The confluence of emerging disciplines, e.g., data science, with materials chemistry, energy science, catalysis, etc., is expected to lead to more theoretical and experimental advances in exploring 2D elemental materials for energy and catalysis applications.
(2) For energy-related applications, the efficiency of energy conversion/storage and device performance needs to be further improved. The comprehensive understanding of the mechanism of charge generation and transport and their relationship with the structure and properties of 2D elemental materials will facilitate the design and development of device structures/architectures with optimized performance in energy conversion and storage efficiency. In addition, developing novel energy harvesting and storage methods based on new principles and new materials is also attractive and critical. For example, a new device based on BP's layered structure and mechanoelectrochemical stress-voltage coupling has been demonstrated to convert mechanical energy into electrical energy.
(3) For catalysis-related applications, the activity and stability of the catalysts and the product selectivity are the key issues that need to be addressed. For example, the commercialization of fuel cells and electrocatalytic water splitting devices demand the successful development of a series of high-performance electrocatalysts with fast reaction kinetics and high yields. Meanwhile, new 2D catalysts with suitable compositions and functionalities are highly needed to replace the current precious metal catalysts that suffer from high cost and low stability. Furthermore, to fully utilize the unique properties of 2D materials, hybridization with other active catalysts or substrates is a promising strategy for catalytic applications.
(4) Although numerous exciting results have been reported for elemental 2D materials, they are often limited by certain aspects of their intrinsic properties and processing-related structural disadvantages. For example, some single-layered elemental 2D materials are unstable and can easily get oxidized in the air, limiting the practical applications of related materials. Another example is that catalytic properties of many 2D layered materials originate from the scarce edge sites, while basal planes with large areal portions are not utilized. Therefore, how to overcome these drawbacks in a targeted manner is an important direction for future research.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
W. Z. W. acknowledges the College of Engineering and School of Industrial Engineering at Purdue University for the Ravi and Eleanor Talwar Rising Star Assistant Professorship. H. Z. thanks the support from ITC via the Hong Kong Branch of National Precious Metals Material Engineering Research Center (NPMM), the Start-Up Grant (Project No. 9380100) and the grants (Project No. 9610478 and 1886921) from the City University of Hong Kong, and the Science Technology and Innovation Committee of Shenzhen Municipality (grant no. JCYJ20200109143412311).
References
G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. Banerjee and L. Colombo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 768–779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tan, X. Cao, X.-J. Wu, Q. He, J. Yang, X. Zhang, J. Chen, W. Zhao, S. Han, G.-H. Nam, M. Sindoro and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117, 6225–6331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9451–9469 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. Xia, Y. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xu, T. Liang, M. Shi and H. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Manzeli, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Pasquier, O. V. Yazyev and A. Kis, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 17033 CrossRef CAS .
M. Naguib, V. N. Mochalin, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 992–1005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutiérrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. Mishchenko, A. Carvalho and A. H. Castro Neto, Science, 2016, 353, aac9439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chhowalla, D. Jena and H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–15 Search PubMed .
T. Low, A. Chaves, J. D. Caldwell, A. Kumar, N. X. Fang, P. Avouris, T. F. Heinz, F. Guinea, L. Martin-Moreno and F. Koppens, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 182–194 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Schaibley, H. Yu, G. Clark, P. Rivera, J. S. Ross, K. L. Seyler, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–15 Search PubMed .
D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 170–181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–17 Search PubMed .
K. F. Mak and J. Shan, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 216–226 CrossRef CAS .
W. Choi, N. Choudhary, G. H. Han, J. Park, D. Akinwande and Y. H. Lee, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 116–130 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, A. Martinez and F. Wang, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 227–238 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Schaibley, H. Yu, G. Clark, P. Rivera, J. S. Ross, K. L. Seyler, W. Yao and X. Xu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16055 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, C. Guo, X. Liu, J. Liu, A. Vasileff, Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6337–6408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. Zheng, Z. Tian and X. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Vishnoi, K. Pramoda and C. N. R. Rao, ChemNanoMat, 2019, 5, 1062–1091 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Mannix, B. Kiraly, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0014 CrossRef CAS .
N. R. Glavin, R. Rao, V. Varshney, E. Bianco, A. Apte, A. Roy, E. Ringe and P. M. Ajayan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1904302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Fan and W. Wu, Research, 2019, 2019, 7367828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Kong, Q. Liu, C. Zhang, Z. Peng and Q. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 2127–2157 RSC .
A. Molle, J. Goldberger, M. Houssa, Y. Xu, S.-C. Zhang and D. Akinwande, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 163–169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Tao, N. Kong, X. Ji, Y. Zhang, A. Sharma, J. Ouyang, B. Qi, J. Wang, N. Xie, C. Kang, H. Zhang, O. C. Farokhzad and J. S. Kim, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2891–2912 RSC .
S. B. Mujib, Z. Ren, S. Mukherjee, D. M. Soares and G. Singh, Mater. Adv., 2020, 1, 2562–2591 RSC .
D. Geng and H. Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800865 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Balendhran, S. Walia, H. Nili, S. Sriram and M. Bhaskaran, Small, 2015, 11, 640–652 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Molle, C. Grazianetti, L. Tao, D. Taneja, M. H. Alam and D. Akinwande, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6370–6387 RSC .
L. Tao, E. Cinquanta, D. Chiappe, C. Grazianetti, M. Fanciulli, M. Dubey, A. Molle and D. Akinwande, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 227–231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, A. Rubio and G. L. Lay, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2017, 50, 053004 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 280–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang and W. Wu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11700–11721 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sengupta, M. E. Ibele and A. Sen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8434–8445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Dong, Y. Wang, Y. Zhou, Y. Bai, Z. Ju, J. Guo, G. Gu, K. Bai, G. Ouyang, S. Chen, Q. Zhang and Y. Huang, Int. J. Intell. Robot. Appl., 2018, 2, 313–338 CrossRef .
Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9533–9557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-R. Fan, L. Lin, G. Zhu, W. Wu, R. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3109–3114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. R. Fan, Z. Q. Tian and Z. L. Wang, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
Z. L. Wang and J. Song, Science, 2006, 312, 242–246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, L. Wang, Y. Li, F. Zhang, L. Lin, S. Niu, D. Chenet, X. Zhang, Y. Hao, T. F. Heinz, J. Hone and Z. L. Wang, Nature, 2014, 514, 470–474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Yang, J. H. Noh, N. J. Jeon, Y. C. Kim, S. Ryu, J. Seo and S. I. Seok, Science, 2015, 348, 1234–1237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Shah, P. Torres, R. Tscharner, N. Wyrsch and H. Keppner, Science, 1999, 285, 692–698 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 391–402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. He and T. M. Tritt, Science, 2017, 357(6358), eaak9997 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Tan, L.-D. Zhao and M. G. Kanatzidis, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 12123–12149 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, Z. L. Wang and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 2881–2887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Pandya, J. Wilbur, J. Kim, R. Gao, A. Dasgupta, C. Dames and L. W. Martin, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 432–438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Goodenough and Y. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 587–603 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Kim, D. H. Seo, X. Ma, G. Ceder and K. Kang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 710–721 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manthiram, Y. Fu, S.-H. Chung, C. Zu and Y.-S. Su, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 11751–11787 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. González, E. Goikolea, J. A. Barrena and R. Mysyk, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 1189–1206 CrossRef .
M. Salanne, B. Rotenberg, K. Naoi, K. Kaneko, P.-L. Taberna, C. P. Grey, B. Dunn and P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1–10 Search PubMed .
J. Pang, A. Bachmatiuk, Y. Yin, B. Trzebicka, L. Zhao, L. Fu, R. G. Mendes, T. Gemming, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702093 CrossRef .
H. Liu, K. Hu, D. Yan, R. Chen, Y. Zou, H. Liu and S. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800295 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Qiu, Z. T. Sun, D. K. Sang, X. G. Han, H. Zhang and C. M. Niu, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13384–13403 RSC .
C.-M. Park and H.-J. Sohn, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 2465–2468 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, Y. Yang, Y. Sun, Y. Qin, C. Li, Y. Li, M. Li, S. Zhang, D. Su and S. Guo, Mater. Today, 2019, 23, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, S. Gao, F. Lei and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 623–636 RSC .
X. Kong, K. Xu, C. Zhang, J. Dai, S. Norooz Oliaee, L. Li, X. Zeng, C. Wu and Z. Peng, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 1487–1492 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Z. Zeng, W. Gao, T. Maxson, D. Raciti, M. Giroux, X. Pan, C. Wang and J. Greeley, Science, 2019, 363, 870–874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, P. Zhong, K. Liu, L. Han, H. Zheng, Y. Yin and C. Gao, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 398–404 RSC .
W. Zhu, L. Zhang, P. Yang, C. Hu, Z. Luo, X. Chang, Z.-J. Zhao and J. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11544–11548 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, S. Xing, X. Meng, J. Zeng, S. Yin, X. Li and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 9319–9326 RSC .
Z. Meng, J. Zhuang, X. Xu, W. Hao, S. X. Dou and Y. Du, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800749 CrossRef .
G. S. Métraux and C. A. Mirkin, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 412–415 CrossRef .
B. Aufray, A. Kara, S. Vizzini, H. Oughaddou, C. Léandri, B. Ealet and G. L. Lay, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 183102 CrossRef .
X. Huang, S. Tang, X. Mu, Y. Dai, G. Chen, Z. Zhou, F. Ruan, Z. Yang and N. Zheng, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 28–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, S. Li, Y. Huang, S. Wu, X. Zhou, S. Li, C. L. Gan, F. Boey, C. A. Mirkin and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 292 CrossRef PubMed .
A.-X. Yin, W.-C. Liu, J. Ke, W. Zhu, J. Gu, Y.-W. Zhang and C.-H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 20479–20489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Duan, N. Yan, R. Yu, C.-R. Chang, G. Zhou, H.-S. Hu, H. Rong, Z. Niu, J. Mao, H. Asakura, T. Tanaka, P. J. Dyson, J. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3093 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Dávila, L. Xian, S. Cahangirov, A. Rubio and G. Le Lay, New J. Phys., 2014, 16, 095002 CrossRef .
Z. Fan, X. Huang, Y. Han, M. Bosman, Q. Wang, Y. Zhu, Q. Liu, B. Li, Z. Zeng, J. Wu, W. Shi, S. Li, C. L. Gan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F.-f. Zhu, W.-j. Chen, Y. Xu, C.-l. Gao, D.-d. Guan, C.-h. Liu, D. Qian, S.-C. Zhang and J.-f. Jia, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1020–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Mannix, X.-F. Zhou, B. Kiraly, J. D. Wood, D. Alducin, B. D. Myers, X. Liu, B. L. Fisher, U. Santiago, J. R. Guest, M. J. Yacaman, A. Ponce, A. R. Oganov, M. C. Hersam and N. P. Guisinger, Science, 2015, 350, 1513–1516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Feng, J. Zhang, Q. Zhong, W. Li, S. Li, H. Li, P. Cheng, S. Meng, L. Chen and K. Wu, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 563–568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Gao, Y. Lin, X. Jiao, Y. Sun, Q. Luo, W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Yang and Y. Xie, Nature, 2016, 529, 68–71 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Ares, F. Aguilar-Galindo, D. Rodríguez-San-Miguel, D. A. Aldave, S. Díaz-Tendero, M. Alcamí, F. Martín, J. Gómez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6332–6336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Reis, G. Li, L. Dudy, M. Bauernfeind, S. Glass, W. Hanke, R. Thomale, J. Schäfer and R. Claessen, Science, 2017, 357, 287–290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu, X. Cai, S. Yi, J. Chen, Y. Dai, C. Niu, Z. Guo, M. Xie, F. Liu, J.-H. Cho, Y. Jia and Z. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2017, 119, 106101 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Qin, G. Qiu, J. Jian, H. Zhou, L. Yang, A. Charnas, D. Y. Zemlyanov, C.-Y. Xu, X. Xu, W. Wu, H. Wang and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 10222–10229 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kochat, A. Samanta, Y. Zhang, S. Bhowmick, P. Manimunda, S. A. S. Asif, A. S. Stender, R. Vajtai, A. K. Singh, C. S. Tiwary and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, e1701373 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Chen, C. Chen, R. Kealhofer, H. Liu, Z. Yuan, L. Jiang, J. Suh, J. Park, C. Ko, H. S. Choe, J. Avila, M. Zhong, Z. Wei, J. Li, S. Li, H. Gao, Y. Liu, J. Analytis, Q. Xia, M. C. Asensio and J. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800754 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yuhara, B. He, N. Matsunami, M. Nakatake and G. Le Lay, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1901017 CrossRef PubMed .
K. C. Lau and R. Pandey, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 2906–2912 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, J. Gao, P. Cheng, J. He, Y. Yin, Y. Hu, L. Chen, Y. Cheng and J. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1904349 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Q. Wang, T.-Y. Lü, H.-Q. Wang, Y. P. Feng and J.-C. Zheng, Front. Phys., 2019, 14, 33403 CrossRef .
A. J. Mannix, Z. Zhang, N. P. Guisinger, B. I. Yakobson and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 444–450 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Peng, H. Zhang, H. Shao, Z. Ning, Y. Xu, G. Ni, H. Lu, D. W. Zhang and H. Zhu, Mater. Res. Lett., 2017, 5, 399–407 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wu, I. K. Drozdov, S. Eltinge, P. Zahl, S. Ismail-Beigi, I. Božović and A. Gozar, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2019, 14, 44–49 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Tao, Y.-B. Tu, K. Sun, Y.-L. Wang, Z.-B. Xie, L. Liu, M.-X. Shi and J.-Z. Wang, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 035009 CrossRef .
K. Takeda and K. Shiraishi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1994, 50, 14916–14922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cahangirov, M. Topsakal, E. Aktürk, H. Şahin and S. Ciraci, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 102, 236804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Matusalem, M. Marques, L. K. Teles and F. Bechstedt, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 045436 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, H. Liu, Z. Yu, R. Quhe, S. Zhou, Y. Wang, C. C. Liu, H. Zhong, N. Han, J. Lu, Y. Yao and K. Wu, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2016, 83, 24–151 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, S. Guo, Z. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Gao, J. Gómez-Herrero, P. Ares, F. Zamora, Z. Zhu and H. Zeng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 982–1021 RSC .
P. Vogt, P. De Padova, C. Quaresima, J. Avila, E. Frantzeskakis, M. C. Asensio, A. Resta, B. Ealet and G. Le Lay, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 155501 CrossRef PubMed .
U. Kim, I. Kim, Y. Park, K.-Y. Lee, S.-Y. Yim, J.-G. Park, H.-G. Ahn, S.-H. Park and H.-J. Choi, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2176–2181 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nakano, T. Mitsuoka, M. Harada, K. Horibuchi, H. Nozaki, N. Takahashi, T. Nonaka, Y. Seno and H. Nakamura, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 6303–6306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kara, H. Enriquez, A. P. Seitsonen, L. C. Lew Yan Voon, S. Vizzini, B. Aufray and H. Oughaddou, Surf. Sci. Rep., 2012, 67, 1–18 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhuang, N. Gao, Z. Li, X. Xu, J. Wang, J. Zhao, S. X. Dou and Y. Du, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3553–3559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Qin, J. Pan, S. Lu, Y. Shao, Y. Wang, S. Du, H.-J. Gao and G. Cao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606046 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fukaya, I. Matsuda, B. Feng, I. Mochizuki, T. Hyodo and S.-I. Shamoto, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 035019 CrossRef .
J. Gou, Q. Zhong, S. Sheng, W. Li, P. Cheng, H. Li, L. Chen and K. Wu, 2D Mater., 2016, 3, 045005 CrossRef .
L. Li, S.-z. Lu, J. Pan, Z. Qin, Y.-q. Wang, Y. Wang, G.-y. Cao, S. Du and H.-J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4820–4824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Derivaz, D. Dentel, R. Stephan, M.-C. Hanf, A. Mehdaoui, P. Sonnet and C. Pirri, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2510–2516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Endo, O. Kubo, N. Nakashima, S. Iwaguma, R. Yamamoto, Y. Kamakura, H. Tabata and M. Katayama, Appl. Phys. Express, 2017, 11, 015502 CrossRef .
S. Zhou and J. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 21691–21698 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, P. Bampoulis, A. N. Rudenko, Q. Yao, A. van Houselt, B. Poelsema, M. I. Katsnelson and H. J. W. Zandvliet, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 256804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ni, Q. Liu, K. Tang, J. Zheng, J. Zhou, R. Qin, Z. Gao, D. Yu and J. Lu, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 113–118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Scalise, M. Houssa, G. Pourtois, B. van den Broek, V. Afanas’ev and A. Stesmans, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 19–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Garcia, D. B. de Lima, L. V. C. Assali and J. F. Justo, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 13242–13246 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kaneko, H. Tsuchiya, Y. Kamakura, N. Mori and M. Ogawa, Appl. Phys. Express, 2014, 7, 035102 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Madhushankar, A. Kaverzin, T. Giousis, G. Potsi, D. Gournis, P. Rudolf, G. R. Blake, C. H. van der Wal and B. J. van Wees, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 021009 CrossRef .
S. K. Sahoo and K.-H. Wei, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 6, 1900752 CrossRef .
Y. Xu, B. Yan, H.-J. Zhang, J. Wang, G. Xu, P. Tang, W. Duan and S.-C. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 136804 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, S. T. Pi, J. Kim, Z. Wang, H. H. Fu and R. Q. Wu, Phys. Rev. B, 2016, 94, 035112 CrossRef .
C.-C. Liu, H. Jiang and Y. Yao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 195430 CrossRef .
A. Zhao and B. Wang, APL Mater., 2020, 8, 030701 CrossRef CAS .
J. Gou, L. Kong, H. Li, Q. Zhong, W. Li, P. Cheng, L. Chen and K. Wu, Phys. Rev. Mater., 2017, 1, 054004 CrossRef .
C.-Z. Xu, Y.-H. Chan, P. Chen, X. Wang, D. Flötotto, J. A. Hlevyack, G. Bian, S.-K. Mo, M.-Y. Chou and T.-C. Chiang, Phys. Rev. B, 2018, 97, 035122 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yuhara, Y. Fujii, K. Nishino, N. Isobe, M. Nakatake, L. Xian, A. Rubio and G. Le Lay, 2D Mater., 2018, 5, 025002 CrossRef .
J. Deng, B. Xia, X. Ma, H. Chen, H. Shan, X. Zhai, B. Li, A. Zhao, Y. Xu, W. Duan, S.-C. Zhang, B. Wang and J. G. Hou, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 1081–1086 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liao, Y. Zang, Z. Guan, H. Li, Y. Gong, K. Zhu, X.-P. Hu, D. Zhang, Y. Xu, Y.-Y. Wang, K. He, X.-C. Ma, S.-C. Zhang and Q.-K. Xue, Nat. Phys., 2018, 14, 344–348 Search PubMed .
J. Ma, J. Gu, B. Li and S. Yang, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3983–3986 RSC .
X.-L. Yu, L. Huang and J. Wu, Phys. Rev. B, 2017, 95, 125113 CrossRef .
P. W. Bridgman, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1914, 36, 1344–1363 CrossRef CAS .
H. O. H. Churchill and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 330–331 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732–2743 RSC .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z.-X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, K. S. Hui and K. N. Hui, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1700491 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang and Y. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Koenig, R. A. Doganov, H. Schmidt, A. H. C. Neto and B. Özyilmaz, Appl.
Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 103106 CrossRef .
X. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu and F. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 517–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tománek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei and X. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 251915 CrossRef .
R. Fei and L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2884–2889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Brent, N. Savjani, E. A. Lewis, S. J. Haigh, D. J. Lewis and P. O'Brien, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 13338–13341 RSC .
D. Hanlon, C. Backes, E. Doherty, C. S. Cucinotta, N. C. Berner, C. Boland, K. Lee, A. Harvey, P. Lynch, Z. Gholamvand, S. Zhang, K. Wang, G. Moynihan, A. Pokle, Q. M. Ramasse, N. McEvoy, W. J. Blau, J. Wang, G. Abellan, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, S. Sanvito, D. D. O’Regan, G. S. Duesberg, V. Nicolosi and J. N. Coleman, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Yasaei, B. Kumar, T. Foroozan, C. Wang, M. Asadi, D. Tuschel, J. E. Indacochea, R. F. Klie and A. Salehi-Khojin, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 1887–1892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, J.-H. Lee, X. Liu, K.-S. Chen and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 3596–3604 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Eswaraiah, Q. Zeng, Y. Long and Z. Liu, Small, 2016, 12, 3480–3502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, A. K. Roy, S. Jo, Y. Choi, A. Chae, B. Kim, S. Y. Park and I. In, Nanotechnology, 2017, 28, 125603 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Lin, Y. Chui, Y. Li and S. P. Lau, FlatChem, 2017, 2, 15–37 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ambrosi, Z. Sofer and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 10443–10445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, H. Hou, G. Zou, W. Shi, H. Shuai, J. Li and X. Ji, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 16–33 RSC .
J. Gao, G. Zhang and Y.-W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 4763–4771 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Ryder, J. D. Wood, S. A. Wells, Y. Yang, D. Jariwala, T. J. Marks, G. C. Schatz and M. C. Hersam, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 597–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhu and D. Tománek, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 176802 CrossRef PubMed .
J. L. Zhang, S. Zhao, C. Han, Z. Wang, S. Zhong, S. Sun, R. Guo, X. Zhou, C. D. Gu, K. D. Yuan, Z. Li and W. Chen, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4903–4908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Li, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 3112–3115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-S. Tsai, S.-W. Wang, C.-H. Hsiao, C.-W. Chen, H. Ouyang, Y.-L. Chueh, H.-C. Kuo and J.-H. Liang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 425–429 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhong, Q. Xia, L. Pan, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, H.-X. Deng, J. Li and Z. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802581 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, C. Liu, W. Guo and J. Ma, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 7006–7011 RSC .
Y. Hu, Z.-H. Qi, J. Lu, R. Chen, M. Zou, T. Chen, W. Zhang, Y. Wang, X. Xue, J. Ma and Z. Jin, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 4524–4535 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, M. Xie, F. Li, Z. Yan, Y. Li, E. Kan, W. Liu, Z. Chen and H. Zeng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 1666–1669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wu and Y. J. Song, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9671–9674 RSC .
C. Gibaja, D. Rodriguez-San-Miguel, P. Ares, J. Gómez-Herrero, M. Varela, R. Gillen, J. Maultzsch, F. Hauke, A. Hirsch, G. Abellán and F. Zamora, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 14345–14349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gibaja, M. Assebban, I. Torres, M. Fickert, R. Sanchis-Gual, I. Brotons, W. S. Paz, J. J. Palacios, E. G. Michel, G. Abellán and F. Zamora, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22475–22486 RSC .
X. Wang, J. He, B. Zhou, Y. Zhang, J. Wu, R. Hu, L. Liu, J. Song and J. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 8668–8673 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Lei, C. Liu, J.-L. Zhao, J.-M. Li, Y.-P. Li, J.-O. Wang, R. Wu, H.-J. Qian, H.-Q. Wang and K. Ibrahim, J. Appl. Phys., 2016, 119, 015302 CrossRef .
X. Wu, Y. Shao, H. Liu, Z. Feng, Y.-L. Wang, J.-T. Sun, C. Liu, J.-O. Wang, Z.-L. Liu, S.-Y. Zhu, Y.-Q. Wang, S.-X. Du, Y.-G. Shi, K. Ibrahim and H.-J. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605407 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Fortin-Deschênes, O. Waller, T. O. Menteş, A. Locatelli, S. Mukherjee, F. Genuzio, P. L. Levesque, A. Hébert, R. Martel and O. Moutanabbir, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4970–4975 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z.-L. Liu, C. Cheng, X. Wu, H. Liu, C. Liu, J.-O. Wang, S.-Y. Zhu, Y.-Q. Wang, D.-X. Shi, K. Ibrahim, J.-T. Sun, Y.-L. Wang and H.-J. Gao, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 2133–2139 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ji, X. Song, J. Liu, Z. Yan, C. Huo, S. Zhang, M. Su, L. Liao, W. Wang, Z. Ni, Y. Hao and H. Zeng, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Peng, S. Ye, J. Song and J. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 9891–9896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Niu, W. Zhou, D. Zhou, X. Hu, S. Zhang, K. Zhang, M. Zhou, H. Fuchs and H. Zeng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902606 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, J. Song and J. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1574–1584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Singh, S. K. Gupta, Y. Sonvane and I. Lukačević, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2016, 4, 6386–6390 RSC .
X. Liu, S. Zhang, S. Guo, B. Cai, S. A. Yang, F. Shan, M. Pumera and H. Zeng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 263–285 RSC .
K. Lei, C. Wang, L. Liu, Y. Luo, C. Mu, F. Li and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 4687–4691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, C. Zhu, S. Zhang, X. Hu, K. Zhang, W. Zhou, S. Guo, F. Xu and H. Zeng, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1118–1123 CrossRef PubMed .
Q.-Q. Yang, R.-T. Liu, C. Huang, Y.-F. Huang, L.-F. Gao, B. Sun, Z.-P. Huang, L. Zhang, C.-X. Hu, Z.-Q. Zhang, C.-L. Sun, Q. Wang, Y.-L. Tang and H.-L. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 21106–21115 RSC .
N. Hussain, T. Liang, Q. Zhang, T. Anwar, Y. Huang, J. Lang, K. Huang and H. Wu, Small, 2017, 13, 1701349 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Han, Y. Wang, H. Yang, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Li and Y. Li, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1320 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Yang, A. O. Elnabawy, R. Schimmenti, P. Song, J. Wang, Z. Peng, S. Yao, R. Deng, S. Song, Y. Lin, M. Mavrikakis and W. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, J. Chen, M. Chen, J. Wang, X. Liu, B. Wei, Z. Wang, J. Li, L. Gu, Q. Zhang, H. Wang and L. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807874 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Nagao, S. Yaginuma, M. Saito, T. Kogure, J. T. Sadowski, T. Ohno, S. Hasegawa and T. Sakurai, Surf. Sci., 2005, 590, 247–252 CrossRef .
T. Hirahara, G. Bihlmayer, Y. Sakamoto, M. Yamada, H. Miyazaki, S.-I. Kimura, S. Blügel and S. Hasegawa, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 107, 166801 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Lin, W. Cheng, G. Chai and H. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2018, 20, 24250–24256 RSC .
Z. Lin, C. Wang and Y. Chai, Small, 2020, 2003319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xian, A. Pérez Paz, E. Bianco, P. M. Ajayan and A. Rubio, 2D Mater., 2017, 4, 041003 CrossRef .
C. Xing, Z. Xie, Z. Liang, W. Liang, T. Fan, J. S. Ponraj, S. C. Dhanabalan, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700884 CrossRef .
W. Wu, G. Qiu, Y. Wang, R. Wang and P. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 7203–7212 RSC .
Q. Wang, M. Safdar, K. Xu, M. Mirza, Z. Wang and J. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7497–7505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Huang, J. Guan, Z. Lin, B. Liu, S. Xing, W. Wang and J. Guo, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4619–4623 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Dai, Y. Ma, X. Dai, W. Ho and M. Xie, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15945–15948 RSC .
Y. X. Wang, G. Qiu, R. X. Wang, S. Y. Huang, Q. X. Wang, Y. Y. Liu, Y. C. Du, W. A. Goddard, M. J. Kim, X. F. Xu, P. D. Ye and W. Z. Wu, Nat. Electron., 2018, 1, 228–236 CrossRef .
G. Jnawali, Y. Xiang, S. M. Linser, I. A. Shojaei, R. Wang, G. Qiu, C. Lian, B. M. Wong, W. Wu, P. D. Ye, Y. Leng, H. E. Jackson and L. M. Smith, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3991 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Niu, G. Qiu, Y. Wang, Z. Zhang, M. Si, W. Wu and P. D. Ye, Phys. Rev. B, 2020, 101, 205414 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qiu, C. Niu, Y. Wang, M. Si, Z. Zhang, W. Wu and P. D. Ye, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 585–591 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shen, Y. Liu, J. Wu, C. Xu, D. Cui, Z. Li, Q. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Wang, X. Cao, H. Kumazoe, F. Shimojo, A. Krishnamoorthy, R. K. Kalia, A. Nakano, P. D. Vashishta, M. R. Amer, A. N. Abbas, H. Wang, W. Wu and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 303–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Tong, X. Huang, P. Wang, L. Ye, M. Peng, L. An, Q. Sun, Y. Zhang, G. Yang, Z. Li, F. Zhong, F. Wang, Y. Wang, M. Motlag, W. Wu, G. J. Cheng and W. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 2308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Deckoff-Jones, Y. Wang, H. Lin, W. Wu and J. Hu, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1632–1638 CrossRef CAS .
G. Qiu, S. Huang, M. Segovia, P. K. Venuthurumilli, Y. Wang, W. Wu, X. Xu and P. D. Ye, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 1955–1962 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, M. Segovia, X. Yang, Y. R. Koh, Y. Wang, P. D. Ye, W. Wu, A. Shakouri, X. Ruan and X. Xu, 2D Mater., 2019, 7, 015008 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, R. de Souza Borges Ferreira, R. Wang, G. Qiu, G. Li, Y. Qin, P. D. Ye, A. Sabbaghi and W. Wu, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 480–491 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, S. Yao, P. Liao, S. Jin, Q. Wang, M. J. Kim, G. J. Cheng and W. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, W. Wu and W. A. Goddard, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 550–553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, C. Tan, D.-H. Lien, X. Song, M. Amani, M. Hettick, H. Y. Y. Nyein, Z. Yuan, L. Li, M. C. Scott and A. Javey, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2020, 15, 53–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Qiu, Y. Wang, Y. Nie, Y. Zheng, K. Cho, W. Wu and P. D. Ye, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 5760–5767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Amani, C. Tan, G. Zhang, C. Zhao, J. Bullock, X. Song, H. Kim, V. R. Shrestha, Y. Gao, K. B. Crozier, M. Scott and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 7253–7263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, J. Jiang, A. A. Suleiman, B. Jin, X. Hu, X. Zhou and T. Zhai, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1906585 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, S. Gao, R.-G. Xu, W. Wu and Y. Leng, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 202–210 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Fan, Z. Zhang, W. Niu, C. Li, N. Yang, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 6409–6455 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhai, J. S. DuChene, Y.-C. Wang, J. Qiu, A. C. Johnston-Peck, B. You, W. Guo, B. DiCiaccio, K. Qian, E. W. Zhao, F. Ooi, D. Hu, D. Su, E. A. Stach, Z. Zhu and W. D. Wei, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 889–895 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Ma, B. Li and S. Yang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2018, 2, 456–467 RSC .
J. Niu, D. Wang, H. Qin, X. Xiong, P. Tan, Y. Li, R. Liu, X. Lu, J. Wu, T. Zhang, W. Ni and J. Jin, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3313 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wang, Y. Zhu, J.-Q. Wang, F. Liu, J. Huang, X. Meng, J.-M. Basset, Y. Han and F.-S. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6957 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. D. Gilroy, A. Ruditskiy, H.-C. Peng, D. Qin and Y. Xia, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10414–10472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, Y. Zhu, X. Huang, Y. Han, Q. Wang, Q. Liu, Y. Huang, C. L. Gan and H. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 5672–5676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Fan, Y. Chen, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, B. Li, Y. Zong, Y. Han and H. Zhang, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 795–799 RSC .
Z. Fan, M. Bosman, X. Huang, D. Huang, Y. Yu, K. P. Ong, Y. A. Akimov, L. Wu, B. Li, J. Wu, Y. Huang, Q. Liu, C. Eng Png, C. Lip Gan, P. Yang and H. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7684 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, Z. Lai, X. Zhang, Z. Fan, Q. He, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2020, 4, 243–256 CrossRef CAS .
S. Tang, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Small, 2014, 10, 3139–3144 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xu, X. Liu, H. Lv, Y. Liu, S. Zhao, M. Han, J. Bao, J. He and B. Liu, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 4451–4455 RSC .
N. Yang, H. Cheng, X. Liu, Q. Yun, Y. Chen, B. Li, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Chen, Q. Lu, J. Huang, Y. Huang, Y. Zong, Y. Yang, L. Gu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803234 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Takimoto, W. Sugimoto, Q. Yuan, N. Takao, T. Itoh, T. V. T. Duy, T. Ohwaki and H. Imai, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 5743–5751 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, C. Xu, H. Su, J. Liang, S. Lin, L. Gu, X. Wang, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Adv. Sci., 2015, 2, 1500100 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Xu, T. Xie, Y. Zhao and Y. Li, Cryst. Growth Des., 2007, 7, 1904–1911 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Y. Chen, D. Zeng, Q. Zhang and D.-L. Peng, CrystEngComm, 2016, 18, 1295–1301 RSC .
H. Liu, H. Tang, M. Fang, W. Si, Q. Zhang, Z. Huang, L. Gu, W. Pan, J. Yao, C. Nan and H. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8170–8176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, H. Tan, W. Huang, W. Li, K. N. Dinh, C. Yan, W. Wei, L. Chen and Q. Yan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2003187 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Q. Deng, A. Bachmatiuk, G. Sandeep, A. Popov, J. Eckert and M. H. Rümmeli, Science, 2014, 343, 1228–1232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, L. Colombo, G. Yu, M. Stoller, V. Tozzini, A. C. Ferrari, R. S. Ruoff and V. Pellegrini, Science, 2015, 347, 1246501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, H. Cao, B. Jiang, Y. Xue and L. Fu, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59, 459–474 CAS .
Y. Xue, Q. Zhang, W. Wang, H. Cao, Q. Yang and L. Fu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602684 CrossRef .
H. Tao, Q. Fan, T. Ma, S. Liu, H. Gysling, J. Texter, F. Guo and Z. Sun, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2020, 111, 100637 CrossRef CAS .
F. R. Fan, W. Tang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4283–4305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, A. C. Wang, W. Ding, H. Guo and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802906 CrossRef .
S. Lin, Y. Li, J. Qian and S. P. Lau, Mater. Today Energy, 2019, 12, 1–25 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, M. Zhang, Z. Guo, L. Miao, S.-T. Han, Z. Wang, X. Zhang, H. Zhang and Z. Peng, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 997–1019 RSC .
G. Li, R. Zhu and Y. Yang, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 153–161 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bernardi, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3664–3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 257–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-L. Tsai, S.-H. Su, J.-K. Chang, D.-S. Tsai, C.-H. Chen, C.-I. Wu, L.-J. Li, L.-J. Chen and J.-H. He, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8317–8322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Batmunkh, M. Bat-Erdene and J. G. Shapter, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701832 CrossRef .
S. Lin, S. Liu, Z. Yang, Y. Li, T. W. Ng, Z. Xu, Q. Bao, J. Hao, C.-S. Lee, C. Surya, F. Yan and S. P. Lau, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 864–871 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, J. Gao, Z. Zhang, S. Xiao, H.-H. Xie, Z.-B. Sun, J.-H. Wang, C.-H. Zhou, Y.-W. Wang, X.-Y. Guo, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8937–8944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Chen, K. Li, Y. Wang, X. Feng, Z. Liao, Q. Su, X. Lin and Z. He, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 591–598 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Yu, Y. Liu, H. Zhou, A. Yin, Z. Li, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 952–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y.-J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. C. Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bai, L. Sun, Y. Wang, Z. Liu, Q. Gao, H. Xiang, H. Xie and Y. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 8280–8286 RSC .
Y. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, J. He, Y. Xiang, K. Zheng, B. Xue, S. Ye, X. Peng, Y. Hao, J. Lian, P. Zeng, J. Qu and J. Song, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803244 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wu, H. Ma, Y. Gao, W. Hu and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 7430–7436 RSC .
Y. Wang, K. Chen, H. Hao, G. Yu, B. Zeng, H. Wang, F. Zhang, L. Wu, J. Li, S. Xiao, J. He, Y. Zhang and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 2637–2643 RSC .
Z. L. Wang, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 74–82 CrossRef .
W. Wu and Z. L. Wang, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16031 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hinchet, U. Khan, C. Falconi and S.-W. Kim, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 611–630 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lee, K. Y. Lee, B. Kumar, N. T. Tien, N.-E. Lee and S.-W. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 169–175 RSC .
H. Zhu, Y. Wang, J. Xiao, M. Liu, S. Xiong, Z. J. Wong, Z. Ye, Y. Ye, X. Yin and X. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 151–155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Kim, R. Bhatia, T.-H. Kim, D. Seol, J. H. Kim, H. Kim, W. Seung, Y. Kim, Y. H. Lee and S.-W. Kim, Nano Energy, 2016, 22, 483–489 CrossRef CAS .
G. da Cunha Rodrigues, P. Zelenovskiy, K. Romanyuk, S. Luchkin, Y. Kopelevich and A. Kholkin, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7572 CrossRef PubMed .
H. You, Y. Jia, Z. Wu, F. Wang, H. Huang and Y. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2889 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Ma, J. Lu, B. Wan, D. Peng, Q. Xu, G. Hu, Y. Peng, C. Pan and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1905795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Arlt and P. Quadflieg, Phys. Status Solidi B, 1969, 32, 687–689 CrossRef CAS .
D. Royer and E. Dieulesaint, J. Appl. Phys., 1979, 50, 4042–4045 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, R. Wang, S. Wan, Q. Wang, M. J. Kim, D. Ding and W. Wu, Nano Futures, 2019, 3, 011001 CrossRef CAS .
T. I. Lee, S. Lee, E. Lee, S. Sohn, Y. Lee, S. Lee, G. Moon, D. Kim, Y. S. Kim, J. M. Myoung and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2920–2925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. He, H. Van Ngoc, Y. T. Qian, J. S. Hwang, Y. P. Yan, H. Choi and D. J. Kang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 1055–1061 CrossRef CAS .
X. Cai, Y. Ren, M. Wu, D. Xu and X. Luo, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 167–172 RSC .
J. Xiong, P. Cui, X. Chen, J. Wang, K. Parida, M.-F. Lin and P. S. Lee, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4280 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Cui, K. Parida, M.-F. Lin, J. Xiong, G. Cai and P. S. Lee, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1700651 CrossRef .
S. K. Singh, S. Muduli, D. Dhakras, R. Pandey, R. Babar, A. Singh, D. Kabra, M. Kabir, R. Boomishankar and S. Ogale, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2019, 3, 1943–1950 RSC .
G. D. Moon, G.-H. Lim, J. H. Song, M. Shin, T. Yu, B. Lim and U. Jeong, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2707–2712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G.-H. Lim, S. S. Kwak, N. Kwon, T. Kim, H. Kim, S. M. Kim, S.-W. Kim and B. Lim, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 300–306 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Bahk, H. Fang, K. Yazawa and A. Shakouri, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2015, 3, 10362–10374 RSC .
C. R. Bowen, J. Taylor, E. LeBoulbar, D. Zabek, A. Chauhan and R. Vaish, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3836–3856 RSC .
Y. Wang, N. Xu, D. Li and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604134 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Y. Chen, J. Wu and K. Hippalgaonkar, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2018, 4, 1800248 CrossRef .
K. Kanahashi, J. Pu and T. Takenobu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902842 CrossRef CAS .
D. Li, Y. Gong, Y. Chen, J. Lin, Q. Khan, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, H. Zhang and H. Xie, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Flores, J. R. Ares, A. Castellanos-Gomez, M. Barawi, I. J. Ferrer and C. Sánchez, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 022102 CrossRef .
L. Cheng, H. Liu, X. Tan, J. Zhang, J. Wei, H. Lv, J. Shi and X. Tang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 904–910 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Saito, T. Iizuka, T. Koretsune, R. Arita, S. Shimizu and Y. Iwasa, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4819–4824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Lee, F. Yang, J. Suh, S. Yang, Y. Lee, G. Li, H. Sung Choe, A. Suslu, Y. Chen, C. Ko, J. Park, K. Liu, J. Li, K. Hippalgaonkar, J. J. Urban, S. Tongay and J. Wu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8573 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. An, Y. H. Kang, C. Lee and S. Y. Cho, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1800532 CrossRef .
N. Muralidharan, M. Li, R. E. Carter, N. Galioto and C. L. Pint, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1797–1803 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Yu, Y.-W. Zhang and B. I. Yakobson, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 34–39 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, H.-Q. Liang, Z.-K. Xu and Z. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xie, Y. Duo, Z. Lin, T. Fan, C. Xing, L. Yu, R. Wang, M. Qiu, Y. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Yan and H. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1902236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xing, G. Jing, X. Liang, M. Qiu, Z. Li, R. Cao, X. Li, D. Fan and H. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 8096–8101 RSC .
C. Ma, J. Yan, Y. Huang, C. Wang and G. Yang, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaas9894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi and T. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 3735–3758 RSC .
X. Zhang, L. Hou, A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600671 CrossRef .
R. Rojaee and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 2628–2658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, Y. Wang, J. Sun and A. Chen, Trans. Tianjin Univ., 2020, 26, 104–126 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, J. Zhou, P. Yao, H. Xie, M. Zhang, M. Ji, H. Liu, Q. Liu, C. Zhu and J. Xu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902462 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xu, S. Yang and B. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 149–157 RSC .
H. R. Jiang, Z. Lu, M. C. Wu, F. Ciucci and T. S. Zhao, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 97–104 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Hu, Y. Cheng, H. Y. Yang, Y. Yao and S. A. Yang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 15340–15347 RSC .
L. Shi, T. Zhao, A. Xu and J. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2016, 61, 1138–1144 CrossRef CAS .
N. Jiang, B. Li, F. Ning and D. Xia, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1651–1654 CrossRef .
S. Banerjee, G. Periyasamy and S. K. Pati, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3856–3864 RSC .
J. Zhuang, X. Xu, G. Peleckis, W. Hao, S. X. Dou and Y. Du, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606716 CrossRef PubMed .
G. A. Tritsaris, E. Kaxiras, S. Meng and E. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2258–2263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Xu, L. Ben, H. Li and X. Huang, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 2654–2662 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Yang, P. Lyu, P. Nachtigall and Y. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800838 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-M. Park, J.-H. Kim, H. Kim and H.-J. Sohn, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 3115–3141 RSC .
J. Sun, G. Zheng, H.-W. Lee, N. Liu, H. Wang, H. Yao, W. Yang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4573–4580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, G. Zhou, Z. Liu, X. Ma, J. Chen, Z. Zhang, X. Ma, F. Li, H.-M. Cheng and W. Ren, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 510–517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, K. E. Hendrickson, S. Wei and L. A. Archer, Nano Today, 2015, 10, 315–338 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, L. Chen, S. Mukherjee, J. Gao, H. Sun, Z. Liu, X. Ma, T. Gupta, C. V. Singh, W. Ren, H.-M. Cheng and N. Koratkar, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602734 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Sun, Y. Sun, M. Pasta, G. Zhou, Y. Li, W. Liu, F. Xiong and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9797–9803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sun, H.-W. Lee, M. Pasta, H. Yuan, G. Zheng, Y. Sun, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 980–985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Gu, Z. Du, C. Zhang, J. Ma, B. Li and S. Yang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700447 CrossRef .
W. Tian, S. Zhang, C. Huo, D. Zhu, Q. Li, L. Wang, X. Ren, L. Xie, S. Guo, P. K. Chu, H. Zeng and K. Huo, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1887–1893 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. M. Beladi-Mousavi and M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 6964–6989 RSC .
T. Huang, Y. Jiang, G. Shen and D. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13, 1093–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hao, B. Yang, F. Wen, J. Xiang, L. Li, W. Wang, Z. Zeng, B. Xu, Z. Zhao, Z. Liu and Y. Tian, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3194–3201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xiao, Z.-S. Wu, L. Chen, F. Zhou, S. Zheng, W. Ren, H.-M. Cheng and X. Bao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 7284–7292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Martínez-Periñán, M. P. Down, C. Gibaja, E. Lorenzo, F. Zamora and C. E. Banks, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702606 CrossRef .
K. Krishnamoorthy, P. Pazhamalai and S.-J. Kim, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1595–1602 RSC .
H. Li, L. Jing, W. Liu, J. Lin, R. Y. Tay, S. H. Tsang and E. H. T. Teo, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1262–1272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li and Y. Wu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804736 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. W. Seh, J. Kibsgaard, C. F. Dickens, I. Chorkendorff, J. K. Nørskov and T. F. Jaramillo, Science, 2017, 355, eaad4998 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Tao, Y. Gao, N. Talreja, F. Guo, J. Texter, C. Yan and Z. Sun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 7257–7284 RSC .
J. Zhu, L. Hu, P. Zhao, L. Y. S. Lee and K.-Y. Wong, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120, 851–918 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sarkar and S. C. Peter, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2018, 5, 2060–2080 RSC .
T. Chao, X. Luo, W. Chen, B. Jiang, J. Ge, Y. Lin, G. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Z. Zhuang, Y. Wu, X. Hong and Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 16047–16051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Mahmood, H. Lin, N. Xie and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 6329–6335 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dai, Y. Zhao, Q. Qin, X. Zhao, C. Xu and N. Zheng, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 776–780 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yao, B. Huang, N. Zhang, M. Sun, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 13983–13988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuang, G. Feng, P. Li, Y. Bi, Y. Li and X. Sun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 693–697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, P. Li, D. Zhou, Z. Chang, Y. Kuang and X. Sun, Small, 2017, 13, 1701648 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shao, H. Sun, L. Miao, X. Chen, M. Han, J. Sun, S. Liu, L. Li, F. Cheng and J. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 2494–2499 RSC .
R. Gusmão, Z. Sofer, D. Bouša and M. Pumera, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14417–14422 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Shi, C. Ling, Y. Ouyang and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 533–537 RSC .
M. Shao, Q. Chang, J.-P. Dodelet and R. Chenitz, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 3594–3657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kulkarni, S. Siahrostami, A. Patel and J. K. Nørskov, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 2302–2312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Hong, Y. Kim, D. H. Wi, S. Lee, S.-U. Lee, Y. W. Lee, S.-I. Choi and S. W. Han, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 2753–2758 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Kim, F. Dionigi, V. Beermann, X. Wang, T. Möller and P. Strasser, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805617 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Wang, Y. Qin, F. Lv, M. Li, Q. Liu, F. Lin, J. Feng, C. Yang, P. Gao and S. Guo, Small Methods, 2018, 2, 1700331 CrossRef .
Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .
M. Luo, Z. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Sun, Y. Xing, F. Lv, Y. Yang, X. Zhang, S. Hwang, Y. Qin, J.-Y. Ma, F. Lin, D. Su, G. Lu and S. Guo, Nature, 2019, 574, 81–85 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, Y. Zhao and Y. Ding, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11934–11939 RSC .
L. Bu, N. Zhang, S. Guo, X. Zhang, J. Li, J. Yao, T. Wu, G. Lu, J.-Y. Ma, D. Su and X. Huang, Science, 2016, 354, 1410–1414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Zhu, X. Yan, S. Wang, M. Xu, C. Wang, H. Liu, J. Huang, W. Xue, J. Cai, H. Heinz, Y. Li and Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3730–3736 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, P. Wang, Q. Shao and X. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 3072–3106 RSC .
X. Ren, J. Zhou, X. Qi, Y. Liu, Z. Huang, Z. Li, Y. Ge, S. C. Dhanabalan, J. S. Ponraj, S. Wang, J. Zhong and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700396 CrossRef .
P. De Luna, C. Hahn, D. Higgins, S. A. Jaffer, T. F. Jaramillo and E. H. Sargent, Science, 2019, 364, eaav3506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gao, R. M. Arán-Ais, H. S. Jeon and B. Roldan Cuenya, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 198–210 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, T. Ma, H. Tao, Q. Fan and B. Han, Chem, 2017, 3, 560–587 CAS .
C. Cao, D.-D. Ma, J.-F. Gu, X. Xie, G. Zeng, X. Li, S.-G. Han, Q.-L. Zhu, X.-T. Wu and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 15014–15020 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, J. Chai, Z. Wang, Y. Xing, J. Peng and Q. Yan, Chem. Res. Chin. Univ., 2020, 36, 410–419 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yang, N. Han, J. Deng, J. Wu, Y. Wang, Y. Hu, P. Ding, Y. Li, Y. Li and J. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1801536 CrossRef .
G. Qin, Q. Cui, A. Du and Q. Sun, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12, 1483–1490 CrossRef CAS .
F. Li, M. Xue, J. Li, X. Ma, L. Chen, X. Zhang, D. R. MacFarlane and J. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 14718–14722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Lei, W. Liu, Y. Sun, J. Xu, K. Liu, L. Liang, T. Yao, B. Pan, S. Wei and Y. Xie, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12697 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dai, Q. Qin, P. Wang, X. Zhao, C. Hu, P. Liu, R. Qin, M. Chen, D. Ou, C. Xu, S. Mo, B. Wu, G. Fu, P. Zhang and N. Zheng, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, e1701069 CrossRef PubMed .
W. C. Choi, M. K. Jeon, Y. J. Kim, S. I. Woo and W. H. Hong, Catal. Today, 2004, 93-95, 517–522 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, G. Chen, H. Yang, X. Wang, J. Liang, P. Liu, M. Chen and N. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 8368–8372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yang, Z. Zhang, B. Chen, Y. Huang, J. Chen, Z. Lai, Y. Chen, M. Sindoro, A.-L. Wang, H. Cheng, Z. Fan, X. Liu, B. Li, Y. Zong, L. Gu and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700769 CrossRef PubMed .
J.-Y. Zhu, S. Chen, Q. Xue, F.-M. Li, H.-C. Yao, L. Xu and Y. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118520 CrossRef .
J. Fan, S. Yu, K. Qi, C. Liu, L. Zhang, H. Zhang, X. Cui and W. Zheng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 8531–8536 RSC .
Y. Qin, M. Luo, Y. Sun, C. Li, B. Huang, Y. Yang, Y. Li, L. Wang and S. Guo, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5581–5590 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jouny, G. S. Hutchings and F. Jiao, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 1062–1070 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luc, X. Fu, J. Shi, J.-J. Lv, M. Jouny, B. H. Ko, Y. Xu, Q. Tu, X. Hu, J. Wu, Q. Yue, Y. Liu, F. Jiao and Y. Kang, Nat. Catal., 2019, 2, 423–430 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Catal. Today, 2017, 286, 57–68 CrossRef CAS .
G.-F. Chen, S. Ren, L. Zhang, H. Cheng, Y. Luo, K. Zhu, L.-X. Ding and H. Wang, Small Methods, 2019, 3, 1800337 CrossRef .
Z. Yan, M. Ji, J. Xia and H. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1902020 CrossRef CAS .
H.-M. Liu, S.-H. Han, Y. Zhao, Y.-Y. Zhu, X.-L. Tian, J.-H. Zeng, J.-X. Jiang, B. Y. Xia and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3211–3217 RSC .
C. Liu, Q. Li, J. Zhang, Y. Jin, D. R. MacFarlane and C. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 25268–25273 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, T. Wu, H. Wang, R. Zhao, H. Chen, T. Wang, P. Wei, Y. Luo, Y. Zhang and X. Sun, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4609–4615 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, C. Tang, B. Xia, H. Jin, Y. Zheng and S.-Z. Qiao, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2902–2908 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, L. Ji, W. Kong, H. Wang, R. Zhao, H. Chen, T. Li, B. Li, Y. Luo and X. Sun, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 5263–5266 RSC .
M. Bat-Erdene, G. Xu, M. Batmunkh, A. S. R. Bati, J. J. White, M. J. Nine, D. Losic, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, T. Ma and J. G. Shapter, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 4735–4739 RSC .
T. Zhang and W. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
Y. Chen, G. Jia, Y. Hu, G. Fan, Y. H. Tsang, Z. Li and Z. Zou, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2017, 1, 1875–1898 RSC .
B. Luo, G. Liu and L. Wang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 6904–6920 RSC .
B. Li, C. Lai, G. Zeng, D. Huang, L. Qin, M. Zhang, M. Cheng, X. Liu, H. Yi, C. Zhou, F. Huang, S. Liu and Y. Fu, Small, 2019, 15, 1804565 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Zhu, T. Zhang, Z. Sun, H. Chen, J. Guan, X. Chen, H. Ji, P. Du and S. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605776 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Zhu, S. Kim, L. Mao, M. Fujitsuka, J. Zhang, X. Wang and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 13234–13242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Osakada, S. Kim, M. Fujitsuka and T. Majima, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 217, 285–292 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ran, W. Guo, H. Wang, B. Zhu, J. Yu and S.-Z. Qiao, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800128 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Qiu, C. Wang, J. Wang, Z. Lin, N. Zhang, L. Cai, X. Tao and Y. Chai, Mater. Today Energy, 2021, 100720 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Yang, W. Shao, S. Chen, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Wang and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11376–11382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bai, X. Wang, S. Tang, Y. Kang, J. Wang, Y. Yu, Z.-K. Zhou, C. Ma, X. Zhang, J. Jiang, P. K. Chu and X.-F. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803641 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Uk Lee, S. C. Lee, J. Won, B.-C. Son, S. Choi, Y. Kim, S. Y. Park, H.-S. Kim, Y.-C. Lee and J. Lee, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8691 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Shen, S. Sun, W. Wang, J. Liu, Z. Liu and J. C. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 3285–3288 RSC .
W. Lei, T. Zhang, P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, G. Liu and M. Liu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8009–8020 CrossRef CAS .
P. Qiu, C. Xu, N. Zhou, H. Chen and F. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 221, 27–35 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, M. Wang, E. Zhu, Y. Zheng, Y. Huang and X. Huang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7519–7525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, S. Liu and N. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5583–5586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, B. Chen, Y. Gong, L. Gu, Z. Fan, N. Yang, Z. Lai, Y. Chen, J. Wang, Y. Huang, M. Sindoro, W. Niu, B. Li, Y. Zong, Y. Yang, X. Huang, F. Huo, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 10282–10286 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, J. Su, Y. Yang, Y. Jia, Q. Chen, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 849–856 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Zhang, X. Li and J. Zhang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3, 1063–1079 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. Zhou, W. Zhai, S. Lu, J. Liang, Z. He, H. Long, T. Xiong, H. Sun, Q. He, Z. Fan and H. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 2002019 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this article.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Feng Ru Fan
	Dr Feng Ru Fan is currently an associate professor of Chemistry at Xiamen University. He received his BS (2006) and PhD degree (2013) in Physical Chemistry from Xiamen University under the joint supervision of Prof. Zhongqun Tian and Prof. Zhong Lin Wang. He worked as a postdoctoral research associate in Profs Galen Stucky's group from 2016 to 2019 at the University of California, Santa Barbara, and in Wenzhuo Wu's group for 2019–2020 at Purdue University. His current research interest focuses on the design and synthesis of 2D nanomaterials for energy related applications such as nanogenerators and self-powered systems and electrocatalysis.

Ruoxing Wang
	Ruoxing Wang received her BS degree in Chemistry in 2015 from University of Science and Technology of China (USTC). She is currently a PhD student in Industrial Engineering at Purdue University under the supervision of Prof. Wenzhuo Wu. Her research interests mainly focus on nanomanufacturing, including the design of functional nanomaterials and fabrication of nanodevices for energy and human-health related applications.

Hua Zhang
	Dr Hua Zhang received his PhD in Peking University in 1998. After he worked at Katholieke Universiteit Leuven in 1999–2001 and then Northwestern University in 2001–2003 as a Postdoctoral Fellow, NanoInk Inc. (USA) in 2003–2005, and Institute of Bioengineering and Nanotechnology (Singapore) in 2005–2006, he joined Nanyang Technological University and became a full professor in 2013. Currently, he is the Herman Hu Chair Professor of Nanomaterials in City University of Hong Kong. His research focuses on the phase engineering of nanomaterials (PEN) and controlled epitaxial growth of heterostructures, including synthesis of 2D, unconventional-phase, amorphous and heterophase nanomaterials for various applications.

Wenzhuo Wu
	Dr Wenzhuo Wu is the Ravi and Eleanor Talwar Rising Star Assistant Professor in the School of Industrial Engineering at Purdue University. He received his BS degree in Electrical Engineering from University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2005, and MS degree in Electrical Engineering from National University of Singapore (NUS) in 2008. Dr Wu received his PhD from Georgia Tech in Materials Science and Engineering in 2013 under the supervision of Prof. Zhong Lin Wang. Dr Wu's research interests include the design, manufacturing, and integration of nanomaterials for applications in energy, electronics, optoelectronics, and wearable devices.

 	Fig. 1  Overview of elemental 2D materials. (a) Distribution of the corresponding elemental 2D materials in the periodic table. (b) Historical timeline of the experimental realization of 2D main group elements and transition metals with atomically thin form.8,68–87	 

 	Fig. 2  Borophene and gallenene. (a) Schematic diagram of borophene growth on an Ag(111) surface through evaporation. Reproduced with permission.78 Copyright 2015, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS). (b) Atomic structure for proposed monolayer borophene models. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (c) STM images of borophene growth due to the transformation of some boron islands during the annealing. Reproduced with permission.79 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) A series of potential unique properties of borophene, such as metallicity and transparency. Reproduced with permission.91 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Optical image of gallenene formed on SiO2 wafer showing regions with uniform ultrathin layers. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, AAAS. (f and g) Structure model, TEM image along with SAED pattern and HRTEM image for the gallenene b010 nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, AAAS. (h) I–V characteristics of two devices indicating ohmic contacts to gallenene. Reproduced with permission.85 Copyright 2018, AAAS.	 

 	Fig. 3  Silicene and germanene. (a) Filled-states STM images and the atomic structure model of silicene nanosheet on Ag(111). Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2012, American Physical Society. (b) The buckled honeycomb structure of silicene. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) Schematics of the synthesis–transfer–fabrication process of silicene to enable a back-gated transistor. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (d) Raman spectra of silicene before and after two months of storage in 30 mbar rough vacuum at room temperature. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) I–V curve of silicene device displays ambipolar electron–hole symmetry expected from silicene. Reproduced with permission.33 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (f and g) STM images of germanene grown on Pt(111) and Au(111). The atomic structure of germanane on each metal substrate is highlighted in the magnified insets. Reproduced with permission.75,108 Copyright 2014, IOP Publishing Ltd and Deutsche Physikalische Gesellschaft. Copyright 2014, WILEY-VCH. (h) Schematic representation of a germanane monolayer, optical image, and room temperature conductance of the germanane-based FET device. Reproduced with permission.117 Copyright 2017, IOP Publishing Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 4  Stanene and plumbene. (a) Group IV elements’ electron configuration and energy gap for the corresponding 2D materials. (b) Schematic preparation of ultraflat stanene on Cu(111). Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) Representative stanene flake with a hexagonal shape and zoom-in STM image showing the zigzag type edge. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) STM topography image of monolayer stanene grown on Bi2Te3. Reproduced with permission.77 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) Illustration of stanene lattice and Sn/PbTe/Bi2Te3 sandwich structure showing the superconductive properties of a few-layer stanene. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic illustration of the growth of plumbene through the alloy and annealing process on the Pd surface. Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (g) Large-scale and atomic-scale STM images of a plumbene overlayer on Pd(111). Reproduced with permission.87 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 5  Phosphorene and arsenene. (a) The layered and anisotropic crystal structure of elemental black phosphorus. Reproduced with permission.131 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Schematic of the first device structure of a few-layer phosphorene FET. Reproduced with permission.74 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (c) AFM image and photoluminescence spectra of a single-layer phosphorene crystal compared to bulk black phosphorus sample. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) AFM and surface roughness characterization of the chemical functionalized BP morphology before and after ambient exposure. Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (e) Comparison of the layered structures of black and blue phosphorus in top and side view. Reproduced with permission.154 Copyright 2014, American Physical Society. (f) Large scale STM images of single layer blue phosphorus epitaxially grown on Au(111). Reproduced with permission.155 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (g) Calculated electronic band structures of arsenene. Reproduced with permission.156 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH. (h) TEM image and theoretical atomic model of multilayer arsenene/InN/InAs layer structure. Reproduced with permission.157 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i) Schematic illustration of the predicted light-assisted exfoliation of multilayered arsenene by the photo-isomerization of 4-(decyloxy) azobenzene. Reproduced with permission.159 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  Antimonene and bismuthene. (a) Illustration of the preparation of smooth and large antimonene by pregrinding and subsequent sonication-assisted liquid-phase exfoliation. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Optical images, AFM images, and Raman spectra of antimonene layers before and after 30-day aging verify the stability. Reproduced with permission.170 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) TEM images of a hexagonal antimonene nanosheet prepared by solution-phase synthesis. Reproduced with permission.171 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) SEM and AFM images of ultrathin bismuth nanosheets prepared by liquid exfoliation technique. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (e) Typical TEM and AFM images of freestanding bismuthene synthesized by wet chemical methods. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) Schematic diagram of bismuthene grown on a SiC(0001) substrate. Topographic STM overview map showing that bismuthene fully covers the substrate with a honeycomb pattern. Reproduced with permission.82 Copyright 2017, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 7  Selenene and tellurene. (a) Atomic structure for Se chains and square selenene. Reproduced with permission.187 Copyright 2017, IOP Publishing Ltd. (b) Optical microscopy image, atomic structure and AFM topography image of selenene after being transferred onto the SiO2/Si substrate. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Transfer curves of a selenene phototransistor measured under various laser irradiation powers at Vds = 3 V. Reproduced with permission.84 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Crystal structure of tellurium and 3D illustration of tellurene's structure. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Schematic illustration of 2D Te hexagonal nanoplates on flexible and transparent mica substrates by van der Waals epitaxy. Reproduced with permission.190 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (f) Large-area STM image of the Te films by epitaxial growth spread across the substrate (SiC) step (indicated by blue arrow). Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (g) High-resolution STM image of single-layer Te film. Reproduced with permission.191 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (h) Optical images of tellurene synthesized by wet chemical method. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (i) Transfer curves of a typical 2D tellurene transistor with a thickness of 15 nm and stability measured for 55 days. Reproduced with permission.193 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 8  2D metal nanosheets. TEM images of 2D (a) hcp Au and (b) fcc Au square sheets and the corresponding SAED patterns. Reproduced with permission.71,76 Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (c) TEM image and crystallographic models of 4H Au nanoribbons. Reproduced with permission.219 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (d) TEM images and SAED pattern of as-prepared 2D Pd NSs with 1.8 nm thickness and the assembled structure. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. (e) TEM images and corresponded Fourier transform patterns of ultrathin Pd NSs with {110} and {111}-exposed crystal facets. Reproduced with permission.222 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) TEM and HRTEM images of triangle Ru nanoplates with 3.0 nm thickness. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (g) Typical TEM images before and after 500 potential cycles showing high intrinsic stability. Reproduced with permission.224 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) TEM and AFM images of the PVP-capped Rh NSs with 0.4 nm thickness. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (i) TEM image and SAED pattern of 2D Rh NSs and the cross-section with 0.9 nm thickness. Reproduced with permission.225 Copyright 2015, The Authors. Published by WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 9  Other 2D metallene. (a) The schematic formation process of the partially oxidized and pure Co 4-atomic-layer, respectively. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (b) TEM images and SAED patterns of single-crystal Co, Ni, and Cu NSs prepared by a facile hydrothermal synthetic method. Reproduced with permission.226 Copyright 2007, American Chemical Society. (c) TEM image of Ni NSs and SAED pattern of a single triangular Ni nanosheet. Reproduced with permission.227 Copyright 2016, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the fabrication procedure for metal nanosheets via mechanical compression, TEM, and AFM image of prepared Fe NSs. Reproduced with permission.228 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (e) TEM image and atomic structure of a monoatomic Fe layer with the square unit cell formed in a graphene pore. Reproduced with permission.230 Copyright 2014, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 10  Photovoltaics devices and solar cells based on black phosphorus. (a) Conventional and inverted architectures of OPVs with few layers BP as a carrier-transport layer. Reproduced with permission.244 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (b) J–V characteristics of inverted OPVs with BP incorporation under different conditions. Reproduced with permission.244 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (c) Energy band structure of inverted OPVs with BP incorporation. Reproduced with permission.244 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (d) Structure and energy levels of a bifacial DSSC with BPQDs based photocathode. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (e) Optical characterization and output performance of the bifacial DSSCs. Reproduced with permission.245 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (f) van der Waals heterojunction p–n diode based on BP/MoS2 monolayers. Reproduced with permission.251 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (g) van der Waals heterostructure solar cell based on BP/h-BN p–n junctions. Reproduced with permission.252 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  Photovoltaics devices and solar cells based on antimonene, tellurene, bismuthene. (a) Comparison of energy levels of each functional layer in antimonene-based perovskite solar cells. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic diagram of the layered structure and cross-sectional SEM image of PSCs. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) EQE spectra, together with EQE-based integrated short-circuit current densities for PSCs. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic diagram of hole extraction from the perovskite to the ITO electrode. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (e) Steady-state power output at maximum power point for best-performing control and antimonene-based devices. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (f) PCE histograms of perovskite solar cells without and with antimonene nanosheets. Reproduced with permission.253 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (g) Schematic diagrams of charge densities of Te/WTe2 heterojunction and PCE of tellurene/TMDs heterojunction solar cells. Reproduced with permission.254 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Schematic representation of the charge transfer process at the bismuthene/CsPbBr3 nanohybrid interface. Reproduced with permission.255 Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Piezoelectric and triboelectric nanogenerators based on black phosphorus and tellurene. (a) Piezoelectric dipole and field which exist in bilayer BP under strain in the armchair direction. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH. (b) Typical AFM images of multilayer BP with a thickness of 9.2 nm (18 layers) in a flexible piezoelectric device. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH. (c) Strain dependence of the piezoelectric current response. Reproduced with permission.264 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH. (d) Cross-sectional view of Te nanowire and the dipole moment arises under tensile stress. Reproduced with permission.268 Copyright 2013, WILEY-VCH. (e and f) Schematic of the fabrication and output voltage of Te nanoflake-based piezoelectric nanogenerator. Reproduced with permission.269 Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V. (g) Schematic illustration of the structure of textile triboelectric nanogenerator (textile-TENG) based on PET/BP fabrics. Reproduced with permission.271 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (h) Current densities of textile-TENG mounted on different body regions. Reproduced with permission.271 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (i) Stretchable and highly durable TENG based on gold-nanosheet electrodes. Reproduced with permission.275 Copyright 2017, Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 13  Thermoelectric devices based on black phosphorus and tellurene. (a and b) A schematic image of a BP-electric-double-layer transistor (EDLT) for thermoelectric measurement and the optical microscope image of the real thermoelectric device of a BP flake with a thickness of 40 nm. Reproduced with permission.284 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Thermoelectric power as a function of gate voltage at T = 210 K. Reproduced with permission.284 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Illustration of thermal conductivity measuring device consisting of two suspended pads and a bridging BP nanoribbon. Reproduced with permission.285 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) Schematic illustration the vertical thermoelectric generator using Au-decorated BP as a p-type leg. Reproduced with permission.286 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (f) In-plane Seebeck coefficient and electrical conductivity of Au-decorated BP thermoelectric material. Reproduced with permission.286 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (g) Microstructure platforms for Seebeck coefficient measurement of 2D Tellurene. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (h) The voltage drop across the film and the resistance change of two thermometers as functions of heater output power. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (i) Laser-induced current mappings of the real device. Reproduced with permission.200 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Other forms of energy harvesting based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Schematic representation of the configuration of BP-based mechanical energy harvester. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic representation of the working principle of electrochemical stress-voltage coupling. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) The output performance of the energy harvester during bending and pressing modes. Reproduced with permission.287 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic illustration of the working principle of BP-based nanogenerator powered by cyclic molecular doping. Reproduced with permission.288 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (e) The calculated output power and current as a function of oscillating frequency. Reproduced with permission.288 Copyright 2016, Elsevier Ltd. (f) Schematics of 3D hybrid aerogels based on GO and BP nanoflakes. Reproduced with permission.291 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Photothermal behaviors of neat GO aerogel and GO/BP nanoflake aerogel at the same power density and time in the air. Reproduced with permission.291 Copyright 2017, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Schematic diagram of the Te nanoparticle layer deposited on Si substrate irradiated by sunlight. Reproduced with permission.292 Copyright 2018, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. (i) Time-dependent temperature variation of the bare Si wafer (black curve) and Te nanoparticle absorber (red curve). Reproduced with permission.292 Copyright 2018, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 15  Lithium-ion batteries based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Some of the highlighted merits of 2D materials for energy storage devices. Reproduced with permission.295 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic depicting a lithium-ion battery with a phosphorene anode and a LiCoO2 cathode. Reproduced with permission.56 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Borophene as a promising anode material offering a high theoretical specific capacity of 1860 mA h g−1. Reproduced with permission.299 Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (d) Energy profile of lithium diffusion along two different pathways. Reproduced with permission.299 Copyright 2016 Elsevier Ltd. (e) Summary of theoretical Li-ion capacities for several monolayer elemental 2D materials. Reproduced with permission.24 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH. (f) Silicene with a honeycomb structure becoming a promising anode for Li-ion batteries. Reproduced with permission.304 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (g) Gravimetric and volumetric capacities of C (LiC6), P (Li3P), As (Li3As), Sb (Li3Sb), and Bi (Li3Bi). Reproduced with permission.308 Copyright 2010, Royal Society of Chemistry. (h) Cycling stability and coulombic efficiency of the BP–G hybrid paper electrode at 500 mA g−1 for 500 cycles after the rate capability test. Reproduced with permission.310 Copyright 2015, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  Next-generation batteries based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Schematic of few-layer phosphorene–carbon nanofiber matrix as a host for lithium polysulfide catholyte. Reproduced with permission.312 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (b) Galvanostatic charge–discharge voltage profiles of Li–S batteries with phosphorene–carbon nanofiber electrode and pure carbon nanofiber electrode. Reproduced with permission.312 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (c) Schematic diagram of the Na-ion half-cell composed of few-layer antimonene with a thickness of about 7 nm. Reproduced with permission.316 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (d) Long-term cycling performance and coulombic efficiency of few-layer antimonene and bulk Sb powder. Reproduced with permission.316 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e) Multistep phase transitions of bismuthene nanosheets during the sodiation process. Reproduced with permission.177 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Cycling performance of Na-ion battery using few-layer bismuthene–graphene films as the working electrode. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2019, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 17  Supercapacitors based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Electrochemical capacitors with three kinds of electrodes, stacked nanosheet electrodes, vertically aligned nanosheets electrodes, and in-plane interdigital electrodes. Reproduced with permission.318 Copyright 2020, WILEY-VCH. (b) Schematic of the fabrication of all-solid-state supercapacitors based on BP nanoflakes. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (c) Galvanostatic charging/discharging profiles for single and 4-series supercapacitors and bending stability tests. Reproduced with permission.319 Copyright 2016, WILEY-VCH. (d) Illustration of the fabrication of phosphorene and graphene interdigital micro-SCs. Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Electrochemical energy storage performance of micro-SCs. Reproduced with permission.320 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (f) 2D siloxene nanosheets as high-performance supercapacitor electrode materials. Reproduced with permission.322 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Scalable production of few-layer borophene nanosheets by liquid-phase exfoliation and their supercapacitive performance. Reproduced with permission.323 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Hydrogen evolution reaction based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Volcano plot showing the relationship between exchange current density j0 and calculated ΔGH* for a series of HER electrocatalysts. Reproduced with permission.325 Copyright 2017, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Atomically dispersed Cu–Pt dual sites on Pd nanorings as the active sites for HER. Reproduced with permission.329 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Free-standing 2D Ru NSs prepared by a solvothermal method showing high HER activity. Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Single-crystalline ultrathin Ni NSs Array from in situ topotactic reductions for HER. Reproduced with permission.333 Copyright 2015, The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH. (e) Few-layer NH2-functionalized BP NSs prepared by a ball-milling method for HER. Reproduced with permission.335 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Pnictogen (As, Sb, Bi) NSs produced by shear exfoliation using kitchen blenders for HER. Reproduced with permission.336 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  Oxygen reduction and evolution reactions based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Tuning intrinsic strain in freestanding Pd NSs to optimize ORR activity. Reproduced with permission.63 Copyright 2019, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Freestanding PdMo bimetallene with several atomic thicknesses showing promising ORR activity. Reproduced with permission.344 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (c) Ultrathin Pt nanoplates exposing the {111} facets for enhanced ORR activity. Reproduced with permission.64 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Biaxially strained PtPb–Pt core–shell nanoplates with exceptional ORR performance. Reproduced with permission.346 Copyright 2016, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (e) Ultrathin free-floating Pt nanoplates from the assembly of small nanocrystals for ORR. Reproduced with permission.347 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) Few-layer BP nanosheets prepared by liquid exfoliation for highly efficient OER. Reproduced with permission.349 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 20  Electrochemical CO2 reduction based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Schematic of electrochemical CO2 conversion by transforming waste CO2 emissions into commodity chemical feedstocks or fuels. Reproduced with permission.350 Copyright 2019, The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. (b) Partially oxidized Co 4-atom-thick layers for CO2 electroreduction to liquid fuel. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (c) Hexagonal Pd nanosheets with 5 atomic thickness showing high ECR activity. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (d) Mesoporous 2D Bi NSs for selective CO2 reduction to formate. Reproduced with permission.355 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (e) Free-standing single-atom-thick 2D bismuthene for highly efficient ECR. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (f) Sb NSs prepared by the electrochemical exfoliation showing ECR activity. Reproduced with permission.357 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (g) Sn quantum sheets confined in graphene toward high-efficiency ECR. Reproduced with permission.358 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 21  Other electrocatalytic reactions based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Pd NSs showing higher electrocatalytic activity for FOR compared to Pd black. Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright 2010, Springer Nature. (b) Ultrathin PdCu alloy NSs used as a highly efficient electrocatalyst for FOR. Reproduced with permission.362 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. (c) Free-standing 2D Cu NSs enclosed by (111) surface for electrochemical reduction of CO to acetate. Reproduced with permission.367 Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. (d) Surfactant-free atomically ultrathin Rh NSs for efficient N2 electroreduction. Reproduced with permission.371 Copyright 2018, Royal Society of Chemistry. (e) Borophene as an effective catalyst for NRR in neutral media. Reproduced with permission.373 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (f) 2D mosaic Bi NSs for highly selective ambient electrocatalytic N2 reduction. Reproduced with permission.374 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  Photocatalytic reactions based on elemental 2D materials. BP and related heterostructures as an efficient photocatalyst for visible- and near-infrared light hydrogen evolution: (a) BP NSs prepared by a ball-milling method,381 (b and c) BP/g-C3N4 2D hybrid catalyst,382 (d) BP/Pt/RGO ternary semiconductor catalyst.383 Reproduced with permission.381 Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2017, Elsevier B.V. (e) Singlet oxygen generated by Bultrathin BP NSs for organic degradation. Reproduced with permission.386 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (f) Pt/BP heterostructure for solar-powered hydrogenation reaction of styrene. Reproduced with permission.387 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. (g) BP–RP heterostructure with high photocatalytic activity for the degradation of organic dyes. Reproduced with permission.389 Copyright 2015, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) BP/g-C3N4 as a cocatalyst for photocatalytic nitrogen fixation. Reproduced with permission.391 Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 23  Heterogeneous catalysis and pyro-catalysis based on elemental 2D materials. (a) Ultrathin Rh NSs as catalysts for the hydroformylation of 1-octene. Reproduced with permission.73 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Conversion of styrene during hydrogenation reactions catalyzed by different Pd catalysts. Reproduced with permission.392 Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (c) C2H2 treatment for enhancing the catalytic activity of Pd NSs in styrene hydrogenation. Reproduced with permission.393 Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (d) Au NSs with the enhanced catalytic performance for the oxidation of various substrates. Reproduced with permission.215 Copyright 2015, Springer Nature. (e) Schematic diagram for hydrogen production through the pyroelectric effect. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (f) Pyro-catalytic hydrogen production catalyzed by few-layer BP under cold–hot alternation. Reproduced with permission.263 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 24  Schematic illustration of elemental two-dimensional (2D) materials beyond graphene with unique structures and properties and their advanced applications in energy and catalysis. Reproduced with permission.71,73,91,131,193,200,271,286,304,312,367,391 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. Copyright 2011, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. Copyright 2018, WILEY-VCH. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. Copyright 2017, WILEY-VCH. Copyright 2019, Springer Nature. Copyright 2017, Elsevier B.V.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this article.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
