Self-assembled ultrathin titania nanosheets as blocking layers for significantly enhanced photocurrent and photovoltage of dye-sensitized solar cells  ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5TA04877J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5TA04877J
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 17042-17049Self-assembled ultrathin titania nanosheets as blocking layers for significantly enhanced photocurrent and photovoltage of dye-sensitized solar cells†

        
          
            Lu 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Sun
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhaosheng 
            Xue
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Bin 
            Liu
          
        
      bc and 

        
          
            Zhong-Sheng 
            Wang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemistry, Lab of Advanced Materials, iChEM (Collaborative Innovation Center of Chemistry for Energy Materials), Fudan University, 2205 Songhu Road, Shanghai 200438, P. R. China. E-mail: zs.wang@fudan.edu.cn
bDepartment of Chemical and Biomolecular Engineering, National University of Singapore, Singapore 117576, Singapore
cInstitute of Materials Research Engineering (A*STAR), 3 Research Link, Singapore 117602, Singapore
Received 
      1st July 2015
    , Accepted 15th July 2015First published on 15th July 2015AbstractTo retard charge recombination efficiently in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs), an ultrathin film of single-crystal titania nanosheets is pre-coated on a conductive substrate as a blocking layer through electrostatic layer-by-layer self-assembly. The marked effect of the self-assembled titania nanosheet film is the remarkable enhancements of short-circuit photocurrent by 45%, from 12.57 to 18.24 mA cm−2, and open-circuit photovoltage by 16%, from 690 to 798 mV. As a consequence, the power conversion efficiency is improved notably by 61% from 6.50% to 10.48% when a 50 nm thick titania nanosheet film is pre-coated as a blocking layer, which is also superior to that obtained by using a pyrolyzed blocking layer (7.79%) and the well-known TiCl4 treatment (efficiency of 7.98%). Controlled intensity modulated photovoltage/photocurrent spectra reveal that the self-assembled blocking layer of titania nanosheets not only retards charge recombination but also increases the charge collection efficiency, accounting for the remarkable increase in open-circuit photovoltage and short-circuit photocurrent, respectively. This finding implies that pre-deposition of an ultrathin TiO2 nanosheet layer on the conductive substrate would be an ideal strategy to remarkably increase short-circuit photocurrent and open-circuit photovoltage simultaneously and thus to enhance the power conversion efficiency of DSSCs remarkably.
Introduction
Since the milestone discovery by O'Regan and Grätzel,1 interest in dye-sensitized solar cells (DSSCs) has grown continuously as they are potential cost-effective alternatives to conventional silicon-based p–n junction solar cells. A typical DSSC device comprises a dye-sensitized nanocrystalline porous TiO2 film deposited on the conductive substrate (e.g. fluorine-doped tin oxide, FTO) as the working electrode, a Pt-coated FTO as the counter electrode, and a redox-couple-containing (e.g. I3−/I−) solution as the electrolyte filling the space between the working and counter electrodes and penetrating throughout the porous TiO2 film. To improve the solar cell performance, great efforts have been made by developing efficient dye sensitizers,2,3 redox couples,4 and electrocatalysts.5,6
Besides the optimization of photoanode structures7,8 in DSSCs, suppression of charge recombination is also necessary to achieve high efficiency. Charge recombination takes place at the FTO/electrolyte and TiO2/electrolyte interfaces, which is the main reason for performance losses.9,10 To obtain high efficiency, a barrier layer is needed to be deposited onto the FTO surface.10–13
Electron recombination losses are remarkable at the FTO/electrolyte interface particularly at the point of maximum power or at open circuit.9–11 To minimize the electron losses arising from the charge recombination at the FTO/electrolyte interface, a dense TiO2 nanoparticle blocking layer is deposited onto FTO using various techniques, such as magnetron sputtering,11,14 atomic layer deposition (ALD),15 electrochemical deposition,15 sol–gel processing16 and spray pyrolysis.9,13,15 Improvements of efficiency have been achieved by using these blocking layers. Kavan et al. electrochemically evaluated the quality of ALD, electrodeposited, and spray pyrolyzed TiO2 blocking layers by quantifying the effective area of pinholes in the blocking layer using redox probes.15 They pointed out that spray pyrolysis is the method of choice taking the blocking effect and coating procedures into account.15 However, it is very difficult for pyrolyzed TiO2 nanoparticles to fully cover the FTO surface. The effective pinhole area relative to the projected electrode area is reported to be >40% for the pyrolyzed blocking layer.15 For this reason, the efficiency enhancement resulting from the pyrolyzed blocking layer is not very notable. Therefore, it is still challenging to develop a more compact blocking layer for fabrication of high-performance DSSCs.
In this study, we report a self-assembled single-crystal titania nanosheet film on conductive glass as the blocking layer in DSSCs to suppress charge recombination. It is possible for the flat nanosheets to fully cover the surface of FTO, which is important to protect the collected electrons at the FTO from recombination with the electrolyte. Moreover, it is expected for flat nanosheets to have more and better contacts with FTO, which, in combination with the single-crystal feature of nanosheets, enables efficient electron transport from the nanocrystalline TiO2 film to the underlying TiO2 nanosheet blocking layer and then to the conductive substrate for efficient electron collection. Finally, the simple and cost-effective self-assembly technique is conducive to control the thickness of the blocking layer precisely, which is critical to optimize the blocking effect. The experimental results reveal that pre-coating of an ∼50 nm titania nanosheet layer on FTO increases short-circuit photocurrent, open-circuit photovoltage and power conversion efficiency remarkably, which also outperforms the pyrolyzed TiO2 nanoparticle blocking layer and the typical TiCl4 treatment.
Experimental
Materials
Poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA, molecular weight 1 × 105 to 2 × 105), I2, LiI, and 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP) were obtained from Acros. 1,2-Dimethyl-3-n-propylimidazolium iodide (DMPII) was available from our previous study.17 H2PtCl6 was purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., China. Conductive glass (fluorine-doped SnO2, FTO, 14 Ω per square, transmittance 85%) was purchased from Nippon Sheet Glass Co., Japan. cis-Di(isothiocyanato)-bis-(2,2′-bipyridyl-4,4′-dicarboxylato) ruthenium(II) bis-tetrabutylammonium (the so-called N719) was purchased from Lumtec Corp., Taiwan, P. R. China.
Synthesis of TiO2 nanosheets
Single-crystalline anatase titania nanosheets were synthesized by a hydrothermal method as described in a previous report18 using hydrofluoric acid as a morphology controlling agent and titanium tetrabutoxide, Ti(OC4H9)4, as the precursor. Briefly, 5 mL of Ti(OC4H9)4 was mixed with 0.6 mL of hydrofluoric acid solution (47 wt%), which was then transferred to a Teflon-lined autoclave followed by heating at 180 °C for 24 h. The yielded white powder was separated by high-speed centrifugation and washed with ethanol and distilled water three times followed by drying in an oven at 80 °C for 6 h.
Self-assembled ultrathin layer of TiO2 nanosheets on FTO
The titania nanosheets were dispersed in water (0.2 g dm−3), which was adjusted to pH9 with tetrabutylammonium hydroxide in order to induce negative charges on the nanosheet surface.19 PDDA aqueous solution (20 g dm−3, pH9) containing 0.5 M NaCl was used as the counterpart of negatively charged nanosheets due to the poly-cation characteristic. Ultrathin titania nanosheet layers were deposited on the FTO substrate with a typical electrostatic layer-by-layer self-assembly (ELSA) technique20 by sequentially dipping the substrate in PDDA solution and titania nanosheet colloid for 20 min each. Multilayer films of FTO/(PDDA/NS)n were obtained by repeating the above ELSA cycle n times, where NS represents titania nanosheets. The PDDA was burnt out by sintering the self-assembled film at 500 °C for 1 h, and the film was then converted to FTO/(NS)n.
Fabrication of DSSCs
The nanocrystalline TiO2 film (22 μm), composed of 25 nm TiO2 nanoparticles,21 was respectively screen printed onto uncoated FTO and titania nanosheet pre-coated FTO followed by sintering at 500 °C for 1 h. N719 was used as the dye sensitizer. The electrolyte was 0.6 M DMPImI, 0.1 M LiI, 0.05 M I2, and 0.5 M TBP dissolved in anhydrous acetonitrile. The counter electrode was fabricated by pyrolysis of H2PtCl6 solution in propanol on FTO. The DSSCs were assembled and sealed for this study; the fabrication methods were well documented in the literature.6 The measurements of photovoltaic performance, controlled intensity modulated photovoltage/photocurrent spectra (IMVS/IMPS) for DSSCs, and the characterizations of materials are detailed in the ESI.†
Results and discussion
Self-assembly of titania nanosheets on FTO
The TiO2 nanosheets are rectangular with a side length of 20–50 nm and a thickness of ∼5 nm as confirmed by transmission electron microscopy (TEM, Fig. S1†) and field-emission scanning electron microscopy (SEM, Fig. S2†). The sample shows an anatase phase as revealed by the X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (Fig. S3†). The high-resolution TEM image (Fig. S4a†) reveals clear lattice fringes, corresponding to the (001) planes of anatase TiO2. Diffraction spots are observed in the selected-area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern (Fig. S4b†), confirming the single crystal feature of the obtained TiO2 nanosheets. These characterization results are consistent with the previous report.18 Since the TiO2 nanosheets are negatively charged in a basic medium, we used PDDA, a polycation, for ELSA. Fig. 1 shows the UV-vis absorption spectra of the self-assembled films on the quartz substrate after sintering at 500 °C, where the absorption peak at 270 nm is characteristic of titania nanosheets.22 The relationship between the absorbance at 270 nm and the number of bilayers is plotted in the inset of Fig. 1. It is noted that the absorbance is the contribution of the bilayer as the self-assembled film can grow on both sides of the quartz substrate. The growth of multilayers is confirmed by the progressive increment of absorption with the layer number. The absorbance at 270 nm increases linearly with the number of bilayers (inset of Fig. 1), indicating that each layer contains nearly an equal amount of titania nanosheets. In contrast to spray pyrolysis and simple dip coating, in which it is difficult to control the layer thickness, the ELSA technique is able to tune the film thickness. The regular growth of the nanosheet film via ELSA is advantageous to obtain a suitable thickness.
 Fig. 1  UV-vis absorption spectra of the self-assembled titania nanosheet films sintered at 500 °C for 1 h. 
The surface morphology of the self-assembled film was examined with SEM. As compared to the bare FTO (Fig. 2a), titania nanosheets can be seen in the monolayer film (Fig. 2b), where titania nanosheets cover the FTO surface partially. The coverage of FTO with titania nanosheets increases with the number of self-assembled layers. For 10-layer nanosheet deposition, complete coverage is realized, as seen in Fig. 2c. After calcination, the nanosheet hardly changes in size, the nanosheet film has a relatively uniform size distribution in the range of 20–50 nm; and the size of most nanosheets is in the range of 30–40 nm. A flat nanosheet layer on top of FTO can be observed from the cross-sectional SEM image (Fig. 2d). For clear observation of the blocking layer, magnified cross-sectional SEM images are shown in Fig. S5.† The thickness of the 10-layer self-assembled film is determined to be in the range of 48–52 nm. The average thickness of each layer is calculated to be in the range of 4.8–5.2 nm, which is in accordance with the thickness of the titania nanosheet determined with TEM (Fig. S1†). The sheet resistance of FTO upon nanosheet deposition increases with increasing the blocking layer thickness, as listed in Table S1.† The film resistance for the ∼50 nm nanosheet layer is 60 Ω per square, which is comparable to that (∼55 Ω per square) of the dense TiO2 nanoparticle layer formed by pyrolysis.
 Fig. 2  Top views of SEM images of the bare FTO (a), monolayer titania nanosheet film (b), and 10-layer titania nanosheet film (c); side view of the SEM image of the 10-layer titania nanosheet film (d). 
Photovoltaic performance
To investigate the effect of pre-coated titania nanosheets and optimize the solar cell performance, we pre-deposited titania nanosheet films on FTO with various thicknesses, which was controlled by the cycle number of self-assembly. The uncoated and pre-coated samples are denoted as FTO/(NS)n/TiO2, where n is the layer number of nanosheets and n = 0 represents the uncoated photoanode. Fig. 3 presents the dependence of photovoltaic performance parameters on the layer number. For the untreated DSSC (n = 0), the power conversion efficiency (PCE) was 6.55 ± 0.10% with an average short-circuit photocurrent (Jsc) of 12.77 mA cm−2, an open-circuit photovoltage (Voc) of 693 mV and a fill factor (FF) of 0.74. Upon pre-coating of titania nanosheets, both Jsc and Voc increased gradually up to 10 layers and then decreased gradually with further increasing the layer number. Although the film resistance increased with film thickness, the FF varied little with increasing the blocking layer thickness up to 100 nm and then dropped more significantly for a thicker blocking layer, because there is an electron tunnelling effect for the thinner blocking layer but the thicker layer may inhibit electron transport from the photoanode to FTO. As a consequence, the PCE changed in the same trend as Jsc. Remarkably, a monolayer nanosheet achieves a PCE of >8%, which is 25% higher than that for the untreated sample. The highest PCE was achieved when 10 layers of titania nanosheets were pre-coated on FTO, and thus the 10-layer pre-coating was selected for further investigations on solar cell performance and the corresponding kinetics of charge transport and charge recombination.
 Fig. 3  Dependence of Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE on the layer number of titania nanosheets. 

Fig. 4 shows the current–voltage characteristics of the fabricated DSSCs. For the untreated photoanode, the PCE was 6.50% with a Jsc of 12.57 mA cm−2, a Voc of 690 mV, and an FF of 0.75. Upon 10-layer nanosheet pre-coating on FTO, the PCE was improved notably to 10.48% with a Jsc of 18.24 mA cm−2, a Voc of 798 mV, and an FF of 0.72. As compared to the untreated photoanode, the Jsc was enhanced by 45% and the Voc was increased by 108 mV, resulting in the improvement of PCE by 61%. As a control sample, the DSSC having the typical compact TiO2 nanoparticle blocking layer (∼50 nm) formed by pyrolysis gave a PCE of 7.79% with a Jsc of 14.02 mA cm−2, a Voc of 751 mV, and an FF of 0.74. The TiO2 nanoparticle blocking layer improved the Jsc, Voc and PCE relative to the untreated sample, but the improvements are less significant as compared to the nanosheet-blocking layer. As TiCl4 treatment is the most often used treatment for high-performance DSSCs, it is interesting to demonstrate its performance. As seen in Fig. 4, the TiCl4 treatment yielded a PCE of 7.98% with a Jsc of 16.13 mA cm−2, a Voc of 687 mV, and an FF of 0.72 (Fig. 4) which are consistent with the literature reports.23,24 The TiCl4 treatment improved the photocurrent significantly rather than the photovoltage, as compared to the untreated DSSC. By comparison, pre-coating of titania nanosheets (50 nm) is evidently superior to both the dense TiO2 nanoparticle blocking layer and the well-known TiCl4 treatment in terms of enhancements of photocurrent, photovoltage and efficiency.
 Fig. 4  Current–voltage curves for the DSSCs with and without blocking layers under illumination of simulated AM1.5G solar light (100 mW cm−2). 
As the only difference of the device structure for these DSSCs is the pre-coated titania nanosheet layer, the pre-coating of titania nanosheets on FTO should be responsible for the improved photocurrent and photovoltage. Next we will discuss the effect of pre-coated titania nanosheets on the position of the conduction band (CB) edge of TiO2, charge recombination and electron transport, which are the main factors influencing the photovoltaic performance.
Conduction band edge level
For a DSSC with a given dye and electrolyte, the CB edge level of TiO2 determines the driving force for electron injection and device photovoltage as well. It is thus important to determine the possible CB shift upon pre-coating of titania nanosheets. Fig. 5 displays the dependence of Voc on the photoinduced charge density (Q) at open circuit. For each photoanode, the Voc increases linearly with the logarithm of Q, indicating that the photoinduced charge density increases exponentially with Voc.25 The slopes, which are similar before and after pre-coating, are determined to be 215 mV by linear fitting of Voc and ln(Q). The Voc of the untreated photoanode is the same as that of the titania nanosheets or nanoparticles pre-coated photoanode at the same charge density, indicating that the pre-coating does not alter the CB edge position.25
 Fig. 5  Dependence of Voc on charge density at open circuit. 
Electron transport
The electron transport time (τd) is obtained from the IMPS measurement at short circuit. The frequency (fmin) at the minimum IMPS response determines the electron transport time following the expression τd = (2πfmin)−1. Fig. 6 presents the log–log plot of τd with Jsc. The transport time decreases with Jsc, which is ascribed to the trapping/detrapping events. At the same photocurrent, the pre-coated nanosheet or nanoparticle layer does not affect the electron transport time obviously, implying that the electron diffusion rate is not changed by the titania nanosheet or nanoparticle pre-coating. As the titania film does not change in the absence and presence of pre-coated ultra-thin titania nanosheets or nanoparticles, it is reasonable to observe comparable electron transport time constants.
 Fig. 6  Electron transport time as a function of short-circuit photocurrent. 
Charge recombination
The electron lifetime (τn) is derived from the IMVS measurement according to the expression τr = (2πfmin)−1, where fmin is the frequency at the minimum IMVS response. Fig. 7 shows the electron lifetimes as a function of charge density at open circuit in a double logarithmic plot. The electron lifetime follows a power law function of charge density at open circuit with an exponent of 3.0. The pre-coated nanosheet or nanoparticle layer has a significant effect on the electron lifetime as observed in Fig. 7. The electron lifetime at a given charge density is enhanced by 3.2-fold and 6.5-fold upon pre-coating of 50 nm titania nanoparticles and nanosheets on the FTO surface, respectively. This indicates that covering FTO with a 50 nm titania nanoparticle or nanosheet layer is effective to retard charge recombination between electrons and triiodides in the electrolyte. As compared to the pyrolyzed nanoparticle layer as a control sample, the nanosheet layer has a better blocking effect, as the electron lifetime at the same charge density for the latter is two times that of the former. The origin of such a good blocking effect will be studied in detail in the future work.
 Fig. 7  Electron lifetime as a function of charge density at open circuit. 
Charge collection and electron diffusion length
The charge collection efficiency (ηcc) is an important factor in determining photocurrent generation for a given dye/electrolyte system, which is usually estimated by the electron transport time and electron lifetime following ηcc = 1 − τd/τn.26Fig. 8a shows the charge collection efficiency as a function of light intensity. The ηcc is almost independent of light intensity for each photoanode, and it is enhanced from 71% to 87% upon pre-coating of titania nanosheets on FTO. Fig. 8b presents the electron diffusion length (Ln) as a function of light intensity. The Ln is defined as Ln = (d2 × τn/4τd)1/2, where d is the film thickness. For each photoanode, the Ln hardly changes with light intensity. Upon pre-coating of titania nanosheets, the Ln increases from 20 to 30 μm by 50%. As a control sample, the pyrolyzed nanoparticle layer gave ηcc of ∼80% and Ln of ∼25 μm (Fig. 8). Evidently, the nanosheet blocking layer is superior to the pyrolyzed nanoparticle layer in charge collection efficiency.
 Fig. 8  (a) Charge collection efficiency and (b) electron diffusion length as a function of light intensity. 
Effect on photovoltage
The Voc is dependent on the CB edge level and the accumulated charge density that relies on the photocurrent and charge recombination rate. As the untreated photoanode and the titania nanosheet pre-coated photoanode have comparable CB edges, their different Voc should arise from their different charge densities at open circuit. The increase in charge density at the same light intensity from the untreated (90 μC cm−2) to titania nanosheet pre-coated photoanode (146 μC cm−2) causes a voltage gain of 104 mV according to the relationship between Voc and Q (Fig. 5). The contribution to Voc from increased Q is close to the observed enhancement of Voc, implying that the photovoltage improvement is attributed to the retarded charge recombination caused by the pre-coated nanosheet layer. This can be understood as the complete coverage of FTO with titania nanosheets blocking collected electrons from recombination with the electrolyte. When the layer number is less than 10, the surface of FTO is partially covered, and hence the suppression of charge recombination is less efficient, resulting in a slight increase in Voc. However, for the layer number more than 10, the Voc decreases with the layer number despite the full coverage of FTO. This is ascribed to the decreased photocurrent.
Although the TiCl4 treatment is also able to retard charge recombination,24 it has negligible effect on the photovoltage according to the reported data24 and our results (Fig. 4), because the downward shift of the CB edge caused by TiCl4 treatment offsets the contribution to voltage from suppressed charge recombination.24 From the viewpoint of photovoltage enhancement, pre-coating FTO with titania nanosheets is superior to the well-known TiCl4 treatment24 and the reported TiO2 blocking layers11–14,27 as well, where smaller photovoltage enhancements were obtained.
Effect on photocurrent
The photocurrent relies upon light harvesting efficiency (LHE), electron injection efficiency and charge collection efficiency (ηcc). It is noted that the ultrathin titania nanosheet layer does not influence the LHE of the dye-loaded photoanode as the absorbance of dye-loaded 10-layer titania nanosheets is negligible as compared to that of the dye-loaded TiO2 film. In the case of the titania film with the same thickness adsorbing the same dye, the LHE should be the same for the two photoanodes. As the CB edge does not shift upon pre-coating of titania nanosheets, the change of electron injection efficiency should be excluded. Thus, the photocurrent improvement is attributed to the enhanced charge collection efficiency (Fig. 8). The presence of titania nanosheets improves the contact between FTO and TiO2 film and hence increases the charge collection efficiency.11 In addition, covering the FTO surface with flat titania nanosheets can hinder the triiodides from recombination with collected electrons at the FTO surface, which is also favorable for getting high charge collection efficiency. Increasing the thickness of the blocking layer above 50 nm leads to a decreased photocurrent. Particularly, when a 200 nm titania nanosheet layer is pre-coated on FTO, the Jsc and PCE are even much lower than those of the untreated photoanode. This implies that the thick titania nanosheet layer generates a barrier that obstructs electrons collected by the underlying FTO. For this reason, there is an optimal thickness of the nanosheet blocking layer for the best solar cell performance.
Conclusions
This work has demonstrated the self-assembled titania nanosheet film as a unique blocking layer to improve the photovoltaic performance of DSSCs. The blocking effect depends on the layer thickness, and the optimal layer thickness is determined to be 50 nm for the best solar cell performance. This novel blocking layer increases Jsc by 45%, Voc by 16% and PCE by 61%, as compared to the untreated cell. As a result, pre-coating of titania nanosheets onto FTO achieves a power conversion efficiency of 10.48% with an open-circuit photovoltage of around 800 mV. The nanosheet blocking layer is superior to the reported TiO2 nanoparticle blocking layers in enhancing efficiency. The advantage of nanosheets over nanoparticles is their flatness, due to which it is possible for nanosheets to fully cover the conductive substrate with more and better contacts. Furthermore, the employed self-assembly technique provides excellent control of layer thickness, which is critical to get the best blocking effect. Finally, the single crystal nature of flat nanosheets is favorable for fast electron transfer from the photoanode to the substrate for efficient electron collection.28,29 These results suggest that using the titania nanosheet blocking layer would be an ideal approach to optimizing the solar cell performance.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Basic Research Program (No. 2011CB933302) of China, STCSM (12JC1401500), Singapore-Berkeley Energy Research Institute (R279-000-393-592) and the Institute of Materials Research and Engineering core fund.
References
B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef PubMed .
M. K. Nazeeruddin, A. Kay, I. Rodicio, R. Humphry-Baker, E. Müller, P. Liska, N. Vlachopoulos and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 115, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
A. Yella, H.-W. Lee, H. N. Tsao, C. Yi, A. K. Chandiran, M. K. Nazeeruddin, E. W.-G. Diau, C.-Y. Yeh, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Science, 2012, 334, 629 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Wang, N. Chamberland, L. Breau, J.-E. Moser, R.-H. Baker, B. Marsan, S. M. Zakeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kavan, J.-H. Yum and M. Grätzel, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 5501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Gong, H. Wang, X. Xu, G. Zhou and Z.-S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 10953 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wu, F. Zhu, J. Li, H. Dong, Q. Li, K. Jiang and D. Xu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 11665 RSC .
D. Wu, X. Shi, H. Dong, F. Zhu, K. Jiang and D. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16276 CAS .
F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Bisquert, G. Garcia-Belmonte, G. Boschloo and A. Hagfeldt, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 87, 117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Cameron and L. M. Peter, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 14394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Góes, E. Joanni, E. C. Muniz, R. Savu, T. R. Habeck, P. R. Bueno and F. Fabregat-Santiago, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 12415 Search PubMed .
B. Yoo, K.-J. Kim, S.-Y. Bang, M. J. Ko, K. Kim and N.-G. Park, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2010, 638, 161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ito, P. Liska, P. Comte, R. Charvet, P. Pechy, U. Bach, L. Schmidt-Mende, S. M. Zakeeruddin, A. Kay, M. K. Nazeeruddin and M. Grätzel, Chem. Commun., 2005, 34, 4351 RSC .
J. Xia, N. Masaki, K. Jiang and S. Yanagida, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 25222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Kavan, N. Tétreault, T. Moehl and M. Grätzel, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16408 CAS .
M. H. Abdullah, M. J. N. Hart, D. Menzies, Y. Cheng, G. P. Simon and L. Spiccia, C. R. Chim., 2006, 9, 622 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Li, F. Gong, G. Zhou and Z.-S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Han, Q. Kuang, M. Jin, Z. Xie and L. Zheng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 3152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-S. Wang, T. Sasaki, L. Z. Wang and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2003, 15, 807 CrossRef CAS .
G. Decher, Science, 1997, 277, 1232 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-S. Wang, H. Kawauchi, T. Kashima and H. Arakawa, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2004, 248, 1381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sasaki, Y. Ebina, T. Tanaka, M. Harada and M. Watanabe, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 4661 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Barbé, F. Arendse, P. Comte, M. Jirousek, F. Lenzmann, V. Shklover and M. Grätzel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1997, 80, 3157 CrossRef PubMed .
B. O'Regan, J. Durrant, P. Sommeling and N. Bakker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 14001 Search PubMed .
G. Schlichthörl, S. Y. Huang, J. Sprague and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 8141 CrossRef .
J. van de Lagemaat, N.-G. Park and A. J. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 2044 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alberti, G. Pellegrino, G. G. Condorelli, C. B. S. Morita, A. L. Magna and T. Miyasaka, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 6576 CAS .
Q. Huang, G. Zhou, L. Fang, L. Hu and Z.-S. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 2145 CAS .
Y. Cui, L. Zhang, K. Lv, G. Zhou and Z.-S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 4477 CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04877jThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  UV-vis absorption spectra of the self-assembled titania nanosheet films sintered at 500 °C for 1 h.	 

 	Fig. 2  Top views of SEM images of the bare FTO (a), monolayer titania nanosheet film (b), and 10-layer titania nanosheet film (c); side view of the SEM image of the 10-layer titania nanosheet film (d).	 

 	Fig. 3  Dependence of Jsc, Voc, FF, and PCE on the layer number of titania nanosheets.	 

 	Fig. 4  Current–voltage curves for the DSSCs with and without blocking layers under illumination of simulated AM1.5G solar light (100 mW cm−2).	 

 	Fig. 5  Dependence of Voc on charge density at open circuit.	 

 	Fig. 6  Electron transport time as a function of short-circuit photocurrent.	 

 	Fig. 7  Electron lifetime as a function of charge density at open circuit.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Charge collection efficiency and (b) electron diffusion length as a function of light intensity.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ta04877j

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
