Algae as a source of renewable energy: opportunities, challenges, and recent developments  - Sustainable Energy & Fuels (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2SE01599D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2SE01599D
(Review Article)
Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2023, 7, 2515-2544Algae as a source of renewable energy: opportunities, challenges, and recent developments

        
          
            Javid 
            Hussain†
*a and 

        
          
            Bruce E. 
            Rittmann
          
          
        
      b
aDepartment of Biosystems and Agricultural Engineering, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, USA
bBiodesign Swette Center for Environmental Biotechnology, Arizona State University, P.O Box 875701, Tempe, AZ 85287-5701, USA
Received 
      18th November 2022
    , Accepted 5th April 2023First published on 11th May 2023AbstractSustainable production of renewable biofuels is being examined globally. First- and second-generation biofuels are not able to meet the demand. Third-generation biofuels use microalgae as the fuel feedstock and can, at least in principle, meet global demand. Microalgae can also become a carbon sink to minimize or even reverse fossil-carbon emissions. Despite their benefits, microalgae-to-fuel technologies have been stalled due to three barriers: the relatively low solar-energy-conversion efficiency of photosynthesis, substantial energy inputs for process operation, and the costs of harvesting and down-stream processing of microalgae biomass. Here, we describe the unique advantages that microalgae present based on their superior biochemical composition as fuel precursors, compared to first- and second-generation feedstocks. We review recent advancements in microalgal cultivation, harvesting, biofuel quality, and metabolic engineering. We also review non-fuel products that are promising for improving the economics of microalga cultivation via a biorefinery strategy. Taken together, these advancements lead to updated economic and environmental considerations that improve prospects for microalgal commercialization. In any case, moving microalgal-based biofuels and by-products to a large scale will require continued research and development to lower the cost of the produced feedstock and to ensure that algal biomass is acceptable for human consumption.Javid HussainDr. Javid Hussain is a PhD researcher, and he graduated in 2016 under the supervision of Dr Wei Liao, Michigan State University and Dr Iracema, Federal University of Bahia, Brazil. He received a Master's degree in Environmental Chemistry from the Institute of Chemical Sciences, University of Peshawar, Pakistan and in 2011 was admitted to the MPhil program at the same institute. During his MPhil year, he received PhD offers from three countries (Australia, South America, and South Korea). He has published over 30 international peer-reviewed journal articles. He has been the subject editor for polymer journal MDPI since 2021 and has been working as a reviewer for the peer reviewed journals Bioengineering, Polymer, Sustainability, and Foods etc. He delivered lectures at international events in four continents, particularly in the US, Spain, Switzerland, Brazil, and Canada. His research focuses on the science of microbial and algal based biofuel production which provides services to society and has great impact on climate change. Since 2020, he has been working as a manager in the food industry here in Ontario, Canada.Bruce E. RittmannDr. Bruce E. Rittmann is Regents' Professor of Environmental Engineering and Director of the Biodesign Swette Center for Environmental Biotechnology at Arizona State University. His research focuses on the science and engineering needed to “manage microbial communities to provide services to society.” Dr Rittmann is a member of the National Academy of Engineering; a Fellow of AAAS, WEF, IWA, AEESP, and NAI; and a Distinguished Member of ASCE. Dr Rittmann is the co-winner of the 2018 Stockholm Water Prize. Dr Rittmann has published over 800 journal articles, books, and book chapters, and he has 21 patents. Dr Bruce E. Rittmann has a Google Scholar citation of 61295 and an H-index of 117.
1. Introduction
By the end of the twentieth century, global climate change had been identified as the most serious challenge to the future of human civilization.1 The concentration of carbon dioxide (CO2) was ∼280 ppm before the Industrial Revolution, but it has risen steadily to more than 420 ppm as of November 2022.2–4 CO2, which exerts the greatest warming potential,5 is emitted at 22–28 billion tonnes annually from human-driven activities.5 Increasing global population, coupled with higher per-capita consumption,3 leads to the projection that worldwide energy demand will increase by 50% by 2050.3 If that energy were to continue to come primarily from fossil sources, it would lead to an unprecedented increase in atmospheric levels of CO2 and other greenhouse gases.2,6
The most direct impact of greenhouse gases is on the Earth's temperature, which is predicted to increase by an average of 2 °C by 2100.7 Higher global temperatures will lead to melting of glaciers and ice caps, an increase in ocean levels, a decrease in water levels in most inland water bodies, a decrease in ocean pH, and a greater frequency of severe weather events, such as hurricanes, flooding, and droughts.8–11
Non-fossil, renewable sources of energy are needed to replace fossil fuels and ultimately slow and then reverse the build-up of greenhouse gases.12 Renewable, non-fossil energy can be obtained directly from the sun or indirectly via wind, hydropower, and biomass. Biomass is uniquely important because it can be a feedstock for making liquid fuels for transportation and for other organic products. The United States has a target of substituting twenty percent of its transportation fossil fuels with biofuels by 2022.1,13,14
Biofuels have been classified into 1st, 2nd, 3rd, and 4th generations.1,15 First-generation feedstocks come from starches and oils in plants, such as corn, sugar cane, and palm. An advantage of these crops is that they are already grown globally, and genetically modified (GM) cultivars (e.g., soybeans, maize, and rapeseed) have been developed for improved productivity.16 However, first-generation biofuels lost favor due to serious concerns over their large nutrient and water demands, competition with food crops, and net energy inputs.17-19
Second-generation feedstocks are cellulosic and ligno-cellulosic materials not found in edible foods. Examples are forest and crop residues, bagasse and stover from sugar, municipal solid waste, and grasses.17,20 The most common second-generation feedstock is lignocellulose, which is inexpensive and abundant in the form of nonedible biomass from plants.21,22 Waste plant biomass can be used to generate heat and electricity by direct burning20,23 or as an input to anaerobic digesters that produce methane.24 The feedstock potential from waste biomass mostly comes from polysaccharides, which comprise around 75% of plant-cell walls.25 While polysaccharides are excellent for producing biofuels, they are typically mixed with lignin, which is recalcitrant to biological breakdown and usually prevents breakdown of polysaccharides.26,27 Finding ways to breakdown lignin or free the polysaccharide from lignin is a major research theme that has met with limited success.28
While 2nd generation feedstocks can solve some of the problems of 1st generation feedstocks, they introduce new barriers, particularly challenges in harvesting and expensive pre-treatment of lignocellulosic biomass.20,29 Furthermore, first- and second-generation biofuels suffer from a similar drawback: they can provide only a limited fraction of the energy needed to replace fossil-derived fuels.30
Third-generation feedstocks are derived from microalgae, which are photosynthetic prokaryotic or eukaryotic microorganisms. Microalgae can, at least in principle, overcome the weaknesses of first- and second-generation feedstocks. For example, microalgae grow in a water slurry, which means that they do not compete with land-based food crops. Microalgae also have much higher photosynthetic efficiency and can capture sunlight energy and produce biomass with productivity that is 5- to 20-fold higher than that of terrestrial plants.31-34
The fourth-generation feedstock is sourced from genetically modified (GM) microalgae, and it is targeted to overcome some of the challenges faced by third-generation feedstocks; improving photosynthetic efficiency, reducing photoinhibition, and increasing the output of desired products are strategies for genetic modification of microalgae.35,36 One example is Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, which can be engineered to have significant increases in lipid and carbohydrates content;37,38 this is valuable because lipids and carbohydrates are energy-storage materials in cells, and they can be converted to biofuels.
Besides being a source of biofuel, microalgae can also provide a good source of proteins, carbohydrates, enzymes, fiber, pigments, and many vitamins and minerals.39–42 Due to their biochemical composition, microalgae are now being consumed worldwide for their nutritional value.40–42 Microalgae can also be part of a program for CO2-fixation and sequestration.39–41 More details on microalgae anatomy, biochemistry, classification, and advantages can be found from Richmond.40,43–45
While biofuel from microalgae has been gaining increasing attention,46 commercializing microalgae technology will require sustained research and development,47 since fuel derived from microalgae is expensive compared to that from fossil sources.48 One strategy to overcome the cost barrier for biofuel is to produce other, high-value products, the so-called bio-refinery strategy, which generates multiple outputs.49 As an example, microalgal biomass can be used as feed for livestock or to produce bioethanol, if the microalgal species have a high content of proteins or carbohydrates, respectively.50 Microalgae has been utilized to produce value-added chemicals, such as hydroxy methyl furfural, levulinic acids, and terpenoids that can be used for antimicrobial, anti-inflammatory, anticancer, and antidiabetic pharmaceuticals.51 Dai and coworkers recently successfully separated three kinds of terpenoids by using chromatography, with purity above 95%.52
2. Data sources
This study reviews the major challenges to microalgae technology and recent positive steps toward algal commercialization. We collected the data for this research by using a broad search strategy, including these electronic databases: Web of Science, ScienceDirect, PubMed, and Google Scholar. Books and 304 peer-reviewed published articles were identified based on search terms such as biorefinery, different generation biofuels, genetic engineering to improve feedstock production, Department of Energy biofuel strategies regarding future renewable energy, and US National Laboratory reports, particularly from the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL).
3. Background on microalgae production
3.1. Biology of microalgae
Microalgae are single-celled microorganisms living as colonies or individual cells, and they include eukaryotes and bacteria. Through photosynthesis, microalgae convert CO2 and water (H2O) to oxygen (O2) and biomass when exposed to light. Microalgae, common in freshwater and saltwater habitats, are present in all of the Earth's ecosystems, aquatic and terrestrial. It is estimated that about 1000000 strains of algae exist, and around 4000 strains have been identified and classified into ten taxonomic groups.53,54–56 Among these, green algae (Chlorophyceae) are the largest taxonomic group. Fig. 1 provides microscopy images of some important microalgae species.
 Fig. 1  Microscopy pictures of the wide range of microalgal strains: (a) Chlorococcum sp.; (b) Chlorella vulgaris; (c) Ankistrodesmus gracilis; (d) Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata; (e) Tetraselmis chui; (f) Botryococcus braunii; (g) Chlorella sp.; (h) Scendedesmus bijugatus; (i) Nannochloropsis sp.; and (j) Skeletonema costatum. 
Photosynthesis utilizes sunlight energy and converts it into biochemical energy in a process composed of two stages.57 The first stage needs light to drive its chemical reactions. Light photons are captured and converted to biochemical energy in the form of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and to reducing power in nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH). Photosynthesis, its second stage, uses light-independent (i.e., dark) reactions to fix inorganic carbon, such as CO2 and bicarbonate (HCO3−) by converting it to glyceraldehyde-3 phosphate (G3P) using the Calvin–Benson cycle.48,58 G3P is the source for the organic molecules that constitute microalgal biomass. The process of utilizing sunlight energy and inorganic carbon is called photoautotrophy, and it is the most common metabolism of microalgae.
Simplified stoichiometry for photoautotrophy can be written as:6H2O + 6CO2 → C6H12O6 + 6O2
This overall reaction can be separated into light and dark reactions:Light reaction: 12H2O → 24[H+ + e−] + 6O2Dark reaction: 24[H+ + e−] + 6CO2 → C6H12O6 + 6H2O
The notation [H+ + e−] represents one electron equivalent carried on NADPH, and C6H12O6 represents a cellular organic material. While the light reaction occurs over a very short time frame (from femtoseconds to milliseconds), the dark reactions take place over seconds to hours.59
The photosynthetic reactions take place within the chloroplasts of eukaryotic algae. The chloroplast contains photosynthetic lamellae with chlorophyll. In contrast, cyanobacteria do not have chloroplasts, and their photosynthetic apparatus is contained in intracellular thylakoid membranes. Compared to plants, all microalgae have a simple structure that enhances their rate and efficiency of photosynthesis.
Microalgae can attain high photosynthetic growth rates, which is advantageous for producing biofuels. Furthermore, they can have large amounts of lipids that are present in thylakoid membranes for cyanobacteria or lipid inclusions in eukaryotes. Other advantages of microalgae over plants are that they do not need pesticides, can take CO2 from industrial waste gases, and can contain valuable antioxidants, pigments, and proteins as co-products. Despite all their advantages, microalgae are not in widespread commercial use due to their high production cost.36
3.2. Biochemistry of microalgae
The organic matter in algal biomass is made up of lipids, carbohydrates, proteins, and other biomolecules in varying proportions that depend on the algal strain and growth conditions. Algae grown under nutrient-replete conditions generally are composed of (by dry mass): 20–40% carbohydrates, 30–50% proteins, and 8–15% lipids.60,61 The most energy-rich components are lipids (37.6 kJ g−1), followed by proteins (16.7 kJ g−1) and carbohydrates (15.7 kJ g−1). Microalgae experiencing nutrient deprivation can have considerably different compositions, a topic explored in detail below.
Microalgae contain a range of carbohydrates that have structural and metabolic functions. Carbohydrates are formed directly from the dark reactions, in which inorganic C is reduced to glucose by the Calvin cycle,36,58,62 which takes place in the stroma of the chloroplasts in algae, but in the cytoplasm in cyanobacteria.
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the reducing power of NADPH and energy from ATP are used to produce sugars in a three-step process. In step one, the enzyme RuBisCO incorporates three molecules of CO2 into the five-carbon sugar ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate (RuBP) to form six molecules of 3-phosphoglycerate (3-PGA). In step 2, six molecules of glyceraldehyde-3-P (G3P) are produced by converting six molecules of 3-PGA, during which six molecules of ATP and six molecules of NADPH are required. In the last step, RuBP is regenerated so that the cycle can continue, and a 6-carbon sugar is produced.
 Fig. 2  The three stages of the Calvin cycle (or C3 cycle): in Stage 1, the enzyme ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) and ribulose 1,5, bisphosphate (RuBP) incorporate CO2 into an organic molecule (3-phosphoglycerate). In Stage 2, the organic molecule is reduced. In stage 3, RuBP, the molecule that starts the cycle, is regenerated so that the cycle can continue. The red circles represent carbon atoms, and the yellow circles represent phosphate. 
Carbohydrates can be subdivided into two components, i.e., structural and storage. Cell walls mainly contain structural components (e.g., pectin, cellulose, and sulfated polysaccharides), while the principal storage carbohydrate is starch.63,64 Different microalgae produce polysaccharides of specific types. For instance, green algae usually accumulate high amounts of starch under nutrient-depleted conditions, which is made up of two parts: amylose and amylopectin that are made up of glucose monomers. A carbohydrate is the starting point for biosynthesis of other biochemicals, such as proteins and lipids. Porphyridium cruentum and Spirogyra sp. are examples of microalgae rich in carbohydrates.65
Proteins also have metabolic and structural roles.66 Structurally, they provide the scaffold for chlorophyll molecules and are embedded in membranes. Metabolically, proteins are enzyme catalysts for cell metabolism. Protein synthesis involves three main steps: amino acid synthesis, polymerization of amino acids through translation, and folding of the polypeptide chain into a functional three-dimensional protein. In the first step, the backbone of different amino-acids is derived from different substrates through central carbon metabolism: photorespiration (glyoxylate and hydroxy pyruvate), photosynthesis (erythrose-4-phosphate, 3-phosphoglyceric acid, and ribose-5-phosphate), glycolysis (pyruvate and phosphoenolpyruvate), oxidative pentose phosphate pathway (ribose-5-phosphate and erythrose-4-phosphate), and TCA cycle (oxaloacetate and 2-oxoglutarate). In the second step, a polypeptide chain is formed from amino acids using the translation machinery in the ribosome. Finally, the polypeptide chain goes through post-translational modification that forms the protein's tertiary and quaternary structures.
Proteins in microalgae can provide essential amino acids that humans and animals are unable to synthesize. Green algae are widely used for protein production, because they can grow using a simple minimal medium, CO2, and light. Arthrospira maxima, Spirulina platensis, Chlorella vulgaris, and Scenedesmus obliquus are microalgae known to be rich in proteins.65
Lipids serve as structural components of cells and as energy reserves. For example, diacylglycerides are the backbone of membranes, while triacylglycerides are energy reserves in algae. Membranes are bilayers made up of phospholipids and glycolipids, also called complex lipids. Hydrophilic phosphate, sulfate, and sugar groups, along with the degree of saturation of fatty acyl chains, control the fluidity of membranes. Microalgae can adapt their membrane characteristics to a new environment through recycling and de novo synthesis of fatty acids.
Algae have long been known to be rich in lipids,67,68 but the lipids stored in algae depend on the algal species, growth phase, and growth conditions. Non-polar lipids are triglycerides (TAGs) that algae use to store reducing power and carbon when light and inorganic carbon are abundant, but are starved of a nutrient, usually nitrogen (N). Although the lipid content of algae increases during nutrient limitation, the cells' growth rate declines. Thus, lipid content and growth rate are inversely related.34,69,70Botrycococcus braunii, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, and Chlorella vulgaris are rich sources of lipids, which means that they can play a major role in renewable energy production in the future.

Table 1 summarizes the content ranges of the biomolecules (lipid, protein, and carbohydrates) among microalgal species.
Table 1 Biochemical composition (weight%) of microalgae biomass




Algae strains name
Protein (%, dry matter)
Carbohydrate (%, dry matter)
Lipid (%, dry matter)
References





Botryococcus braunii

35–41
12–16
35–40

71




Chlamydomonas sp1
39–49
23–29
13–15

71




Chlorella vulgaris

46–53
15–19
15–21

71




Chlorococcum sp2
42–49
22–24
13–18

71




Coelastrum microporum

34–49
174–33
17–19

71




Scenedesmus obliquus

47–55
14–20
17–18

71




Staurastrum sp.
40–50
29–37
8–8

71




Synechocystis aquatilis

41–50
25–32
11–11

71




Anabaena cylindrica

43–56
25–30
4–7

72




Aphanizomenon flos-aquae

57
26
2

72




Chlorella pyrenoidosa

57
26
2

72




Dunaliella salina

57
32
6

72




Euglena gracilis

39–61
14–18
14–20

72




Porphyridium cruentum

28–39
40–57
9–14

72




Spirogyra sp.
6–20
33–64
11–21

72




Arthrospira maxima

60–71
13–16
6–7

72




Spirulina platensis

42–63
15
11

72




Botryococcus terribilis

46
31
20

73




Botryococcus braunii (UTEX-572)
40
19
34

72




Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

48
17
21

74




Nannochloropsis spp.
29
36
18

74




Haematococcus pluvialis

48
27
15

74





4. Microalgae as a third-generation biofuel
As a third-generation biofuel, microalgae offer the advantages of high productivity and adaptability, and they minimize or eliminate negative impacts that first- and second-generation biofuels have on the environment and food supply.71 In 1920, research was started on microalgae in Germany. They found Chlorella strains capable of accumulating lipids up to 80% of dry weight.71 Responding to the so-called “oil crisis” in 1973, the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) established the Aquatic Species Program (ASP) in 1978. The ASP concluded that algal biofuels could be a valuable biofuel if multiple value-added co-products were produced in parallel;43,48,75,76 Assessing crude-oil prices in the early 1990s, the ASP calculated that microalgae economics were unfavorable. However, the growing crisis of global warming and climate change has rekindled interest in microalgae's potential as a pathway to replace petroleum as a feedstock for transportation of fuel and chemicals.77 Examples are bioethanol, biobutanol, biodiesel, bio-jet fuel, biohydrogen, and biogas. Relevant information on the different generations of biofuel feedstock is summarized in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Potential fuels and fuel precursors in microalgae. 
4.1. Algae as a bioethanol feedstock
Bioethanol is ethanol (C2H5OH or EtOH) derived from a biological source instead of petroleum.56 Increased use of ethanol as a biofuel is a major factor boosting demand for ethanol worldwide, particularly in Brazil, China, India, and the United States.78 Today, bioethanol is mostly produced from sugar beets, sugar cane, casava, and corn through hydrolysis and fermentation. Bioethanol can be used in its pure form as a transportation fuel or mixed with gasoline. Ethanol contains about 30% less energy per unit volume than gasoline,79 which means that the driving range per tank of fuel is lower when ethanol replaces gasoline.
In principle, microalgal starch could replace agricultural sources as the feedstock for hydrolysis and fermentation. For instance, starch accumulated by Chlorella sp. is similar in structure to starch found in cereals.80-83 Also, microalgal biomass contains cellulose in the cell wall,81,84 but without the lignin found in the lignocellulosic biomass on non-edible parts of plants.83,84 As a consequence, microalgae's cellulose can be hydrolyzed to glucose more readily than the lignocellulosic biomass of higher plants. Euglena gracilis, Porphyridium, Dunaliella, Chlamydomonas, and Scenedesmus are advantageous feedstocks for bioethanol, since they contain substantial amounts of starch.85
An alternative to bioethanol is biobutanol, which is preferred due to its advantages of higher energy density, lower volatility, high boiling point, and greater hygroscopicity. A variety of biotechnological approaches have been used to increase fermentation to butanol, including genetically modifying Clostridia sp. and constructing synthetic pathways in E. coli. Despite progress, widespread utilization of biobutanol has not occurred due to its toxicity, low yield, and high separation costs.
4.2. Algae as a biodiesel feedstock
Biodiesel, another popular option, is produced by transesterification of triglycerides from any high-lipid source: e.g., palms, soybeans, canola, sunflower, rapeseed, or microalgae. In general, biodiesel is more expensive than fossil diesel.83 Furthermore, plant sources lead to a fuel-versus-food conflict.56
Microalgae offer advantages over plants for making biodiesel: microalgae can use CO2 from combustion sources;87 can treat high-nutrient water sources, for example sewage and agricultural runoff; have higher photosynthetic efficiency;34,87 have higher areal productivity; and do not grow on arable land, but in slurries.43,75 With all these advantages, microalgae are considered an ideal candidate for biodiesel production, as long as production costs are lowered.
4.3. Algae as a biohydrogen feedstock
Hydrogen gas (H2) is a non-polluting energy carrier with high energy capacity.56 H2 is widely used in the chemical and petrochemical industries as a reductant, and almost all H2 today is produced by reforming natural gas or by electrolysis.13,86,89
Biohydrogen (BioH2) is a renewable form of H2.88 However, BioH2 is hardly used today due to its practical drawbacks, which include low yield, expense, and insufficient storage and distribution.56,89 BioH2 can be produced by fermentation, microbial electrolysis cells, and photosynthesis using algae and cyanobacteria.90
Many microalgae have the ability to generate H2 gas. For example, H2 output occurs within at least fourteen cyanobacteria genera and in a broad spectrum of culture conditions.91.Chlamydomonas reinhardtii is a green alga that has been used to produce H2.92,93
Cyanobacteria are able to generate BioH2 by using H+ as the electron acceptor during dark fermentation. Fermentative BioH2 is catalyzed by pyruvate-ferrodoxin hydrogenase or pyruvate-formate lyase, with the electron donor being an organic compound, e.g., a sugar. BioH2 is renewable, because the biomass is contemporaneously created by photosynthesis.13 Among the cyanobacteria, Anabaena sp. is the superior H2 producer (e.g., 68 μmol H2/mg chl a–h).94 This is a very low rate and novel H2-producing cyanobacteria with significantly improved productivity are sought through genetic and metabolic engineering.
4.4. Algae as a biogas feedstock
Biogas can be obtained from microalgae through anaerobic digestion (AD), which is a mature technology with a good energy return on energy invested. Biogas refers to a mixture of gases produced by the anaerobic digestion of organic solids, such as agricultural wastes, plant materials, sewage sludge, manure, food waste, and algal biomass.95 Biogas typically contains 60–70% methane (CH4), with most of the other gas being CO2. CH4 has high energy content and can be used to generate heat, electricity, or H2. One advantage of using microalgae as a feedstock for AD is that it can be used directly in its slurry form, which avoids the energy-intensive dewatering operations associated with liquid fuels.
Algal biomass has high potential to produce biogas, but yields of biogas depend on the algal strain and operating conditions, such as cultivation temperature. A typical CH4 yield is around 600 L CH4 per kg of dry weight. For example, Chlamydomonas reinhardtii produced around 580 L kg−1 at a temperature around 28–31 °C, whereas Chlorella and Scenedesmus produced around 610 L kg−1 at temperatures around 45 °C.
Anaerobic digestion occurs in four steps.88
Hydrolysis: breaking down of complex polymers into soluble monomers using water (H2O) in the presence of enzyme catalysts (hydrolases).
Acidogenesis: soluble monomers fermented into simple carboxylic acids – such as propionic, butyric, and lactic – by a wide range of bacteria, such as Bacillus, Escherichia coli, Citrobacter, Klebsiella, Clostridium, Clostridium, and Ethanoligenens.
Acetogenesis: acids produced in the acidogenesis stage are fermented to acetic acid, CO2, and H2 by acetogenic bacteria such as Syntrophobacter wolinii and Syntrophomonas wolfei.
Methanogenesis: Acetate and H2 + CO2 converted to CH4 by methanogenic archaea such as Methanobacterium, Methanobacillus, Methanothrix, and Methanococcus.
5. Fourth-generation biofuels
The production of biofuel based on first- and second-generation biomasses has serious limitations: increased food insecurity; heavy demands for water, land, pesticides, and fertilizer consumption; and expensive pre-treatment of lignocellulosic biomass.94 Although third-generation biofuels derived from microalgae have attracted attention due to their higher yield, minimized demands, the range of valuable products, and the assimilation of CO2 from industrial sources, the cost of algal biofuel is still much higher than the average fuel cost from petroleum. Oil productivity and cost comparison of different generation feedstocks are summarized in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Comparison of different-generation feedstocks regarding oil productivity (L ha−1) and prices (US$ per L). 
Looking for cost reductions, scientists have introduced fourth-generation feedstocks sourced from genetically modified microalgae. Common goals are improving photosynthetic efficiency and reducing photoinhibition.96 Another approach for fourth-generation feedstocks is having them excrete the end products, which avoids the costly processing of biomass before biofuel production. A good target is the cyanobacterium Synechocystis, whose genome of ∼3.6 million base pairs has been sequenced in its entirety.97 Two proteins involved in the export of free fatty acids (FFAs) have been added to Synechocystis, and this significantly increased the extracellular concentration of FFAs, which could be recovered without harvesting the biomass.97,98
Several genetic tools have been used to transform several microalgae to engineer genes into the cellular nucleus, chloroplast, and mitochondria of eukaryotic microalgae.99 The transformations improved photosynthetic efficiency and lipid productivity, while reducing photoinhibition in Chlamydomonas reinhardtii, Chlorella vulgaris, and marine diatoms.100Chlamydomonas reinhardtii also has potential for anaerobic biohydrogen production, and the DNA map of the chloroplast of C. reinhardtii has established successful genetic transformation.101,102
Although genetic modifications have demonstrated promise towards overcoming challenges encountered by the third generation,103 the fourth generation is far from commercial use.104
6. Systems for microalgae cultivation
Broadly, microalgae cultivation can be achieved by four mechanisms: photoautotrophic, heterotrophic, mixotrophic, and photoheterotrophic. The first is by far the most common for microalgal cultivation.105 Photoautotrophs utilize H2O as their electron source, light (sunlight or artificial light) as their energy source, and CO2 as their carbon source. Keys to success are effective means to expose the microalgal culture to its light source and to deliver CO2 as its carbon source. Photoautotrophic cultivation is the main topic of this section.
Heterotrophic growth refers to a situation in which organic carbon is the source of electrons, energy, and carbon. Readily available organic substrates, such as acetate and glucose, may be utilized. Heterotrophic growth can give higher volumetric productivity than photoautotrophic growth, but it does not utilize sunlight or CO2.106
Mixotrophic cultivation is photosynthetic, but utilizes organic compounds and CO2 as carbon sources. Microalgae that are mixotrophic can use light as the energy source and an inorganic compound as the electron source (photoautotrophy), heterotrophically an organic compound as the electron, energy, and carbon source (heterotrophy), or both (mixotrophy). Photoheterotrophic cultivation needs light for the growth of microalgae, even though they use organic chemicals as the carbon source. Mixotrophic and photoheterotrophic cultivation are uncommon.106,107
Microalgae growing photoautotrophically may be cultured in open ponds or in closed photobioreactors. Different options for algal cultivation are illustrated in Fig. 5. Table 2 compares closed photobioreactors and open raceway-ponds for microalgae cultivation. Raceways are usually the most economical for large-scale cultivation and, for this reason, are most often employed.108,109 For natural growth situations, phototrophic algae use light energy from the sun and assimilate CO2 from the air and nutrients from the aqueous medium.
 Fig. 5  Some designs of open and closed microalgal production systems. (a) Dunaliella bardwil cultivation in raceway ponds in Israel; (b) outdoor raceway pond (ORP) in operation at the AlgaePARC facility, Wageningen University and Research Centre, the Netherlands 2016; (c) outdoor raceway pond (ORP) in operation at Michigan State University, East Lansing, United States, 2018; (d) Chlorella vulgaris cultivation in pilot-scale vertical PBRs, Federal University of Bahia, Brazil, 2016; (e) flat-plate photobioreactor in operation at the Chemical Engineering Department of University of Almeria, Spain, 2017; (f) vertical tubular PBRs in operation at Arizona State University, United States, 2019; (g) pilot-scale helical PBR at Michigan State University, United States, 2018; (h) outdoor horizontal tubular PBR in operation at the AlgaePARC facility, Wageningen University and Research centre, the Netherlands 2016; (i) outdoor flat-plate PBRs in operation inside at a thermoelectric poor station, Tocopilla, Chile, 2017. 
Table 2 Factors that differ for open raceway ponds versus closed photobioreactors




Factor
Open raceway ponds
Closed photobioreactors




Space required
High
Low


Area/volume ratio
Low (5–10 m−1)
High (20–200 m−1)


Water loss
High
Low


CO2 loss
High
Low


Temperature
High variable
Requires cooling


Weather dependence
High
Low


Process control
Complicated
Uncomplicated


Shear
Low
High


Algal species
Restricted
Flexible


Population density
Lower
Higher


Light utilization efficiency
Poor
Good


Most costly parameters
Mixing
Oxygen and temperature control


Contamination control
Complicated
Less complicated


Capital investments
Low
High


Productivity
Low
3–5 times over an open system


Gas transfer control
Low
High




A raceway is an artificial channel used to culture aquatic microorganisms. It is a shallow open pond that is like a closed-loop racetrack. A raceway typically is lined with a plastic liner and filled with algal culture to a depth of 0.2–0.3 m.58,110 The culture is mixed and circulated in the pond, typically by means of a paddlewheel.110 Open ponds are normally the least expensive to build and operate, but they may use more energy to mix the contents.111 Although the water level is relatively shallow, e.g., 15 cm (or 150 L m−2), it is deep enough that light attenuation can limit exposure of the entire water column to solar energy.111
Ponds are susceptible to weather conditions, and control of water evaporation, temperature, and lighting is minimal. Moreover, contamination by predators is a regular problem in open cultivation systems. The atmosphere only contains 0.03–0.06% CO2, which means that CO2-mass transfer can slow the rate of photosynthesis. Thus, production rates in open ponds are typically low, e.g., <10 g DW m−2-d.112 Despite the many factors that lead to low biomass productivity, raceways remain preferred for large-scale cultivation of microalgae, such as Chlorella, Spirulina sp., Arthrospira, and Dunaliella salina.113
Closed photobioreactors (PBRs) can (at least in principle) be optimized in accordance with the biological and physiological properties of the algal species being cultured. PBRs have received interest due to their ability to reduce contamination, while cultivation conditions can be better controlled; hence, higher biomass productivity can be achieved.114-115. In addition, photobioreactors can be designed to require smaller space, lose little water by evaporation, and have higher efficiency in the delivery of carbon dioxide. However, cooling and heating are often needed to control the cultivation temperature,58,116 and the scale of operation of PBRs generally has been small compared to that of raceway systems.117
A major challenge associated with PBRs is accumulation of O2, which can inhibit photosynthesis at a high concentration.58,113,118,119 Other challenges are maintaining an even liquid flow through multiple tubes and the depletion of CO2 along the tubes.48,58,113,118,120 The design and characteristics of photobioreactors have been reviewed extensively.114,116,119
6.1. Cultivation of microalgae using cheap sources of water and nutrients
Factors that favor sustainability of microalgal feedstocks over plant-based feedstocks are their potential for higher areal productivity with shorter generation times, higher photosynthetic efficiency, higher lipid content, lessened water use, and lower greenhouse gas emissions,58,121,122 although microalgae systems still require water and nutrients for their growth.122 Additional advantages for microalgae are that they can be cultivated on non-arable land and can be grown in seawater or wastewater.34,123-125 For example, Scenedesmus sp. removed more than 98% of the total-N and P from wastewater. Chlorocccum, Arthrospira, and Spirulina could also be used for bioremediation of municipal wastewater, where they doubled their biomass in 24 h and accumulated 30–80% (w/w) lipids.126
Relevant information for the different microalgae is summarized in Table 3. Yang et al.,117,120 performing a life-cycle analysis (LCA) of biodiesel from microalgae, stressed the value of using it to reduce freshwater loss in open ponds. Recycling the growth medium is estimated to reduce water use by 84% and nutrient requirements by 55%.120
Table 3 Cultivation of microalgae for biofuel production using different sources of wastewater




Wastewater
Microalgae
Biomass (Dry Wt. (mg L−1 day)
Lipids (mg L−1 day−1)
Removal efficiency
References




Municipal (centrate)

Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

2000 (mg L−1)
25 (w/w)
N = 58 mg L−1 day−1 P = 17 mg L−1 day−1

136



Municipal

Scenedemsus obliquus

26
8
P = 98% in 94 h N = 100% in 188 h

137



Municipal

Botryococcus brauni

346
62
N = 91%

138



Swine manure

Botryococcus brauni

700
69
T–N = 48% NH+4 N = 98%

139



Textile wastewater

Chlorella vulgaris

730
204
N = 9.8 mg L−1 day−1

140



Swine wastewater

Chlorella vulgaris

1960 (mg L−1)
1030
COD = 60–70% NH4–N = 40–90%

141



Activated sludge

Chlorella vulgaris

40
160 (mg L−1)
98% (N removal)

133



Mercury wastewater

Chlorella vulgaris

—
10%
94% Hg

129



Textile wastewater

Chlorella vulgaris

0.0019
—
77% (dye) 69.9% (COD)

141



Landfill leachate

Chlorella vulgaris

240
46
24 mg L−1 day−1

127



Landfill leachate

Scenedesmus sp.
550


—

128





When 20 strains of Botryococcus braunii and Chlorella vulgaris were cultivated with wastewater, B. braunii was able to remove 80% of N and 100% of P after 14 days of culturing at 25 °C.121Chlorella, Scenedesmus, and Botryococcus grew well when exposed to a high concentration (10%) of CO2 from flue gas. The biomass and lipid productivities obtained with Scenedesmus sp. were 220 and 21 mg L−1 day−1, respectively.
Municipal sewage could also be an inexpensive source of water and nutrients N and P, which are otherwise pollutants that spur eutrophication.127 Effluents from municipal wastewater treatment can provide N and P to grow microalgae, which improves water quality and produced biomass for harvesting to make biofuel.128,129
Swine wastewater (SWW) has become a serious threat to the environment due to the presence of suspended solids, heavy metals, and antibiotics.130 Anaerobic digestion of SWW is the most widely used technology for treating SWW, and it converts SWW's organic matter into biogas (CH4 + CO2). However, anaerobic digestion removes little N and P.131 In the context of this review, microalgae can be used to remove N and P from the digester effluent while generating microalgae biomass.132 Due to their high environmental stress tolerance and high lipid accumulation, Chlorella and Scenedesmus are the most cultivated microalgae for treating SWW.133
Opportunities for economical production of algal biodiesel can rely on integration with other processes, such as wastewater treatment; however, siting restrictions can hamper large-scale implementation.134 Therefore, more focus has been placed on generating multiple products and utilizing every component of algae in a waste-free biorefinery.135 Multiple products are discussed more in Section 9.
6.2. CO2 delivery to large-scale microalgal cultures
Large-scale burning of fossil fuels to generate energy and the consequent CO2 release are the largest contributors to global climate change,142 but microalgae cultures show promise as CO2 sinks that are also sustainable sources of renewable fuels and valuable organic products such as carotene, astaxanthin, and long-chain fatty acids.143 No matter the product or products, economic feasibility will require high rates of productivity. Enhancing microalgae productivity requires a fast rate of CO2 delivery, and the low concentration of atmospheric carbon dioxide (∼420 ppm) constrains biomass productivity.145-146 Current microalgal production systems that deliver a gaseous CO2 source find that CO2 accounts for about 70% of material-input costs.144,147 Eustance et al.148 used membrane carbonation (MC) to deliver bubble-free CO2via diffusion through the walls of non-porous hollow-fiber membranes placed within outdoor raceway ponds. With the productivity of biomass using MC being similar to that when using traditional sparing (by experimental design), the carbon utilization efficiency (CUE) with membrane carbonation was 3-fold higher than for sparging.
Flue gas from fossil-fuel combustion, which accounts for 78% of CO2 emissions,86,149 can be used for microalgae cultivation. Flue gas mainly consists of N2, CO, NOx, SOx, and particulate matter,149-150 and their concentrations depend on the fuel. Some components of flue gas, particularly metal-bearing particles and SOx, can inhibit microalgae and slow their rate of CO2-fixation.151-152 For example, SOx's inhibition effect is through acidifying the medium, which slows the growth of the microalgae.149,153 In contrast, NOx can be used as a nitrogen source to promote algal growth when it is oxidized to nitrite or nitrate. For example, Kao et al.154 demonstrated that flue gas having <100 ppm NOx had no inhibition effect, but could be an additional nitrogen source for Chlorella sp.
Two options are available for using flue gas that contains SOx in large concentrations. One approach is to remove the SOx from the flue gas prior to microalgae delivery by desulfurization.154 Another method is to enrich SOx-tolerant strains of microalgae,155 such as Chlorella sp., Dunaliella tertiolecta, and Scenedesmus obliquus.151 According to Radmann et al.,156Chlorella vulgaris can grow when exposed to 60 ppm SOx.
Supplying gaseous CO2 requires energy inputs for compression and transport. Therefore, supplying CO2 requires that its source be near the microalgae facility.147,149
An alternative to delivering gaseous CO2 is to add NaHCO3 to the medium. For example, a 23% increase in lipid productivity was demonstrated by Pancha et al.157Scenedesmus strain CCNM 1077 grew well when supplied with 0.6 g L−1 NaHCO3 in place of BG11 medium. Nannochloropsis salina had 3-fold higher productivity with 5 g L−1 NaHCO3, compared to no NaHCO3 addition. Gaseous CO2 and NaHCO3 can be added together.158
6.3. Microalgal crop protection
Contamination with harmful microorganisms is a serious challenge.159 While short-term, laboratory-scale culturing can be performed under aseptic conditions, microalgae cultivation in large systems cannot be maintained aseptically, and unwanted microorganisms (protozoa, bacteria, fungi, and other microalgae) inevitably enter the cultures. They can change the composition of the culture, reduce biomass productivity, and even cause a complete “crash” of the culture, all of which result in major financial losses.40,160 Predators can “wipe out” the target microalgae, which greatly reduces lipid productivity. In addition, predators compete for nutrients and attenuate sunlight.159 Finally, predators are harvested with the microalgae, which lowers lipid content of the biomass.
Traditional agriculture has developed diagnostics for pests and techniques to control pests, a strategy known as crop protection. While well-recognized in the microalgae field, crop protection methods are immature for microalgae cultivation.161 Successful microalgae cultivation will require development of diagnostic techniques and mitigation measures to eliminate harmful microorganisms while maintaining beneficial microorganisms.
Analytical methodologies have been used to detect protozoa and other grazers.162,163 For instance, flow cytometry can detect grazers at low concentrations (<10 units per millilitre).163 While flow cytometry is effective, it is slow and requires specialized knowledge of the grazer's physical size.160 Alternatively, quantitative PCR (qPCR) can be used to identify grazers using their DNA sequences, although a library of primers specific to harmful grazers must be developed.160,161,162
DNA sequencing164 has been used to identify “contaminating” microorganisms. DNA sequencing after PCR amplification was 10000-fold more sensitive for detecting minor non-target constituents than was flow cytometry.164,165 The PCR and sequencing method illustrated that contamination was common, but early detection and accurate identification of grazers helped inform decision-making concerning culture selection.
Recently, a novel method was used to rapidly monitor a monoculture of Synechococcus elongatus before and after the addition of a field-isolated ciliate grazer Tetrahymena.160 The method detected a volatile organic compound present during healthy growth periods of S. elongatus: 6-methyl-5-hepten-2-one. The absence of this compound was a sign that the grazer was harming S. elongatus.
Van Ginkel et al.166 investigated how to control grazers using pesticides. Using the freshwater rotifer Brachionus calyciflorus and the ciliate Colpoda sp. as model grazers, Ginkel et al. found that quinine, niclosamid, 3-trifluoromethly-4-nitrophenol, and rotenone could suppress microalgal grazers without harming the target alga, Chlorella kessleri. Rotenone was effective when the pH was 8.4.166–168
Pickett et al.169 evaluated ICARUS, a membrane photobioreactor that floats on the surface of a body of water. The membrane bottom allows for the passage of nutrients and dissolved constituents, while protecting the algal crop from potential invasions from the atmosphere. The research work involved 18 trial runs each lasting 8 days.169-170 Proliferation of rotifers was seen in the control medium over the course of trial runs, but no rotifers were observed with the ICARUS system.
Wang et al.171 recognized 19 harmful microorganisms in Chlorella cultures in outdoor raceways using microscopic observation and denaturing gradient gel electrophoresis (DGGE) targeting the 18S rDNA. Poterioochromonas sp. was the most harmful, as it was associated with a total culture collapse. To control Poterioochromonas sp., the most effective treatment was ultrasonication for 1 h every day. The ultrasonication technique was also effective for destroying an unknown fungus, an amoeba, and ciliates.
6.4. Biotechnological tools
Biotechnological tools can be used to enhance the lipid content of microalgae. The tools include conventional, genetic, and metabolic-engineering approaches. For example, a 75% reduction in the nitrogen concentration in the medium led to a remarkable decrease in protein (∼5-fold) and a 100% increase in the total lipid content in Nannochloropsis oculate.172-173 Likewise, the total lipid content increased 2.3-fold in P. tricomutim after 4 days of dark stress.172 Conventional methods have been practised for decades, but the costs of cultivation and downstream processing to make biodiesel have remained relatively high,66,174 making the prospects of biodiesel production from microalgal lipids not optimistic.80,172,175
Genetic engineering has been gaining interest as a means to overcome a number of shortcomings using microalgae. Table 4 summarizes approaches that have been utilized. Improving photosynthetic efficiency toward lipids is one of the most important strategies, since it shows promise to lower the final product cost. A significant increase in microalgal lipids was reported with over-expression of diacylglycerol acyltransferase (DAGAT).172 The diatom species P. tricornutum183 and the green alga Chlamydomonas sp.185 had increased lipid content by transferring the gene encoding the heterologus plant Fas, a cell-surface receptor that leads to programmed cell death (apoptosis (https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Apoptosis)) to them.
Table 4 Lipid-yield improvement in wild-type microalgae species through genetic-engineering manipulations




Microalgae strains
Biochemical consequences
Codon-optimized
Transformation method
Influence on the growth rate
Results of different genetic interventions
References





Cyclotella cryptica

No enrichment of lipid content
Non optimized
Particle bombardment
No data
2-3-fold increase in ACC amounts

76 and 178



Dunaliella salina

Improved quality of oil- more resistant to oxidation
The third position of codons was optimized
Particle bombardment
No data
12% increase in total lipid content

179




Chlorella ellipsoidea

Total soluble protein and carbohydrate content was significantly decreased
Non optimized
Electroporation
No noticeable influence
46.4–52.9% increase in lipid contents

180




Phaeodactylum tricornutum

Higher quantity and modified composition of fatty acids
Optimized
Biolistic transformation
Reduced growth rate
Increase in the accumulation of shorter chain length fatty acids

181




Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

Elevated level of oleic acid (18:1 n-9) and a concurrent decrease in C18 PUFA
Optimized
Glass bead method
Negative influence on the growth was not recorded
50% higher TAG content

182




Chlamydomonas reinhardtii

The up or down regulation of PAP activities affects the content of DAG
Non optimized
Glass bead method
Increased growth rate in the early stages, days 2 to 5
Increase in lipids from 7.5% up to 21.8%

183




Phaeodactylum tricornutum

C18:0 decreased from 231% to 1.75%; monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) also showed an increase from 21.21% to 26.66% and a slight decrease in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) from 41.39% to 36.05%
Non optimized
Electroporation
Similar growth rate to that of the wild type
Total lipid content in transgenic cells markedly increased by 25-fold and reached a record 57.8%

184





Another strategy is blocking the formation of starch so that the microalgae devote more carbon and electron flow to lipids. Li et al.173,176,177 carried out the most complete analysis of how blocking starch synthesis can simultaneously increase the lipid content in a mutant strain of C. reinhardtii. The blocking occurred under autotrophic conditions as a result of photosynthesis being redirected away from starch synthesis and to lipid synthesis. The increase was considerable: mutant strains accumulated 3.5-fold more lipids, compared to wild-type strains. A similar result was observed for Chlorella pyrenoidosa.172
The enzymes responsible for TAG synthesis play a very important role in the regulation of lipid synthesis. As noted in Table 4, the cloning of GPAT-like genes from the microalga Lobosphaera incisa and transformation of this gene into a model algal species, C. reinhardtii, increased its TAG content by 50% compared to the wild-type strain. An important detail is that the increase in TAG content did not slow the growth rate.173
Technological intervention via synthetic biology has been the potential to help understand microalgal metabolism, and that knowledge can be used to enrich cells with appropriate biocomponents while developing transformation techniques that can be applied towards production of biofuels and by-products.173 Although physiological, proteomic, and transcriptomic approaches have been used to improve lipid productivity, the studies are restricted to a few species because of the lack of genomic data for the full range of relevant microalgae.185
6.5. Harvesting of biomass using various flocculation technologies
Harvesting microalgal biomass is challenging due to their small size (2–20 μm per cell), density only slightly higher than that of water, and colloidal stability. Microalgae harvesting typically comprises 20–30% (sometimes higher) of the total production cost.93,186–189 Multiple technologies have been introduced for microalgae harvesting, including gravity sedimentation, centrifugation, filtration, and flotation.190,191
Gravity sedimentation is the least expensive method when it works, but it is often unreliable for microalgae, which naturally float to the surface of the water due to their rich lipid content.191,193,196 Centrifugation is the most expensive and energy intensive.191 Filtration is more cost-effective and simpler in operation for relatively large (>70 μm) microalgae, such as Coelastrum and Spirulina, but its throughput is lowered when it must separate smaller microalgae (<3 μm), such as Chlorella, Scenedesmus, and Dunaliella.191 Flotation is based on trapping air micro-bubbles into aggregated microalgal cells. Flotation is a mature technology, but it is notoriously unreliable when the microalgae naturally float.192
Flocculation is the process by which small particles in suspension are aggregated into large clusters (flocs). This is achieved by neutralizing the cells' surface charge to minimize electrical repulsion. Aggregation produces larger flocs, which increases the effectiveness of all the separation methods.191,194,196 A variety of flocculation strategies – chemical, biological, and electroflocculation – have been developed for microalgae harvesting.196

6.5.1 Chemical flocculation. 
Flocculants are chemicals used to induce flocculation. Key requirements for flocculants for large-scale operation include reliable effectiveness, low cost, ready availability, and a lack of environmental harm. Chemical coagulation of microalgae can be induced using two main types of flocculants: inorganic (metal salts) and organic polymers.191,194-198
Aluminum sulfate (alum, (Al2SO4)·18H2O) and ferric chloride (FeCl3·6H2O) meet all these criteria and are inexpensive.191,199,200 Aluminum sulfate is an effective flocculant due to the relatively high surface charge density of the Al3+ ion. According to Chatsungnoen,191,199 aluminium sulfate is relatively nontoxic, readily available, inexpensive, and very effective, as shown in Fig. 6.
 Fig. 6  Dose dependence of flocculation. Each beaker contained 200 mL of a broth of the microalga (dry biomass concentration = 3.5 g L−1). The beakers were dosed with different concentrations of the flocculant (0–800 mg L−1 aluminium sulfate) and then treated the same way: (1) rapid mixing (impeller tip speed = 0.209 m s−1) for 2 min; (2) gentle mixing (impeller tip speed = 0.052 m s−1) for 30 min; and (3) no mixing for 30 min. 
Organic flocculants are mostly polymers that carry a cationic charge, although anionic and uncharged polymers can also be used.191,197 The polymers may be synthetic or natural.196 The effectiveness of organic flocculants is influenced by the chain length of the polymer. Organo-flocculants are extensively used for treating wastewater and in mining processes; however, one concern is that some can be toxic when applied to microalgae.194
Flocculation depends on the microalgal species, its concentration, the culture medium, and temperature; therefore, optimal dosages cannot be predicted, but must be determined experimentally. For instance, optimal concentrations were determined for FeCl3 (11 ± 4 mg L−1), alum (225 mg L−1), and Al2(SO4)3) (200 mg L–1) with Chlorella vulgaris, Isochrysis galbana, and Botryococcus braunii, respectively.191


6.5.2 Bio-based flocculation. 
A flocculation process induced by microorganisms is called bio-flocculation. Self-bio-flocculation is a staple in wastewater treatment,195,201 and it requires no added chemicals, because microorganisms naturally produce their own flocculating agents.202 In microbial bioflocculation,191,203 the flocculant is produced by microorganisms naturally in the microalgal culture or by deliberate co-culturing. For example, bio-flocculants from Pestalotiopsis sp. (KCTC8637P) yielded satisfactory biomass recovery when used to harvest Botryococcus braunii cells (at a cell density of ca 0.3 g L−1) with a dose of 100 mg L−1.191,196 Autoflocculation is a result of the microalgae producing their own flocculating agent at some stage of growth. In some cases, the stage is triggered by a pH increase due to insufficient supply of CO2. Bio- and auto-flocculation have had limited application with microalgae.191


6.5.3 Electroflocculation. 
Electroflocculation, first introduced in 1903, is attractive by virtue of its energy efficiency, safety, and cost effectiveness.194,204,205 Two electrodes immersed in a microalgal suspension are connected to an external supply of direct current.206 The anode is a sacrificial metal, such as iron or aluminium, which is the flocculant. The following reaction occurs at an aluminium anode:207,208Al → Al3+ +3e−
The cathode is an inert metal, such as stainless steel. The most common reaction occurring at the cathode is:O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O
Electroflocculation was effective for recovering the biomass of marine microalgae;207,209,210 its electrical power consumption was ∼0.3 W h kg−1 of dry algal biomass,206 which is much lower than that for centrifugation (∼2 kW h kg−1).194,207 Electro-flocculation has proven successful with Chlorella vulgaris, Phaeodactylum tricornutum,207Botryococcus braunii,211Dunaliella salina,212 and Scenedesmus acuminatus.213

6.6. Lipid extraction
After harvesting, lipids can be extracted from microalgae using methods similar to those for extracting oilseed from terrestrial plants. Chisti34 provided a detailed review of the major challenges of extraction, and he also pointed out that an inexpensive, low-energy, and environmentally friendly method of lipid extraction will be required for commercialization of microalgae production.34,36,214 Extraction involves making the sample come into contact with solvent that has a high affinity for the compounds of interest. Lipids are soluble in organic solvents, but poorly soluble in water; therefore, lipid components can be separated from more water-soluble components, such as proteins, carbohydrates, and minerals.
Depending on its pre-treatment pathway, microalgal biomass subjected to lipid extraction can be in a dried powder, a concentrated slurry, or a concentrated slurry after disruption. The first approach is called the “dry route,” and the second and third are called “wet routes”.215Fig. 7 illustrates the two pathways. In both paths, lipid extraction needs a dewatering step to attain about 15% dry weight. A subsequent thermal drying step can produce a paste whose dry weight exceeds 85%. However thermally drying the biomass may require 85% of the total energy consumption.217
 Fig. 7  The steps of the dry and wet routes of lipid extraction. 
The dry route uses solvents, but a disruption of biomass is not necessary. Folch and Bligh & Dyer methods solvent has been co-solvent mixtures well-known for high lipid-extraction efficiency,216 but involve hazardous methanol and chloroform. The wet route avoids the energy-intensive drying step by increasing lipid accessibility by including a disruption step.218,219 Less-hazardous solvents can be used after disruption, such as n-hexane.219
Lipids are composed of heterogeneous structures and properties. Due to these different attributes and distributions in cells, complete extraction is difficult to obtain using a single organic solvent. Generally, nonpolar solvents are used for lipid extraction, because lipids are hydrophobic and dissolve best in non-polar solvents. Nevertheless, the solvent should not be so non-polar that polar lipids cannot dissolve in it; thus, a combination of non-polar and polar solvents is advantageous,219 especially because some lipids are associated with other macromolecules and found in the cytoplasm or cell membrane. Polar organic solvents (such as methanol or isopropanol) disrupt lipid–protein complexes by forming hydrogen bonds with polar lipids.220,221Tables 5 and 6 summarize different extraction methods, their performance, and their limitations.
Table 5 Microalgae lipid extraction using different methods: applications and limitations




Methods
Environmental impact and limitations
Energy requirements
Industrial applications and advantages




Conventional solvents
-Toxic and not eco-friendly – use of organic solvents (flammable/volatile) and carcinogenic
-Distillation/heating of solvents
– Ease of extraction – use of dried algae to achieve desirable amounts of lipid yields


-Drying of microalgae


Super-critical CO2
-Requires CO2 (greenhouse gas)
-Distillation/heating of solvents if paired with co-solvent – high pressure conditions (20–30 MPa)
– Low toxicity – a separation step is not required -high capital cost to build and operate equipment for high-pressure conditions


-High equipment and operational cost


Ionic liquids
-Resistance to thermal degradation
-Distillation/heating of solvents
-No reports at a larger scale


-Aquatic toxicity
-High environmental and/or economic costs to synthesize and recycle ionic liquid


-Uses toxic and/or volatile reagents and solvents for their production (these solvents cause groundwater contamination)
-Production of solvents requires many synthetic steps
-Non-flammable in a wide temperature range


-Enables single solvent extraction




Switchable solvents
-Synthesis can be energy intensive or environmentally damaging
-Switching and separation of solvents could be energy intensive at a large scale
-No reports yet at a larger scale possibly high capital cost – easily recyclable – green approach


-CO2 used in switching – technical viability is yet to be studied -


Microwave-assisted extraction
-MAE itself does not poses environmental risk
-May be energy intensive at a large scale
-Capital investment and operational cost for operating a large microwave reactor may be prohibitive – environmentally friendly, reduced extraction time – reduced solvent usage – improved extraction yield


-Paired with extraction solvent that may be toxic or environmentally taxing


-Poor efficiency with volatile or non-polar solvents


-Easy to scale up but yet to be standardised


Simultaneous direct trans-esterification
-Simultaneous direct transesterification itself does not pose environmental risks
-Typically requires dry microalgae, which is energy intensive to produce
-Typically requires the use of dry microalgae, which adds to capital and operational costs


-Paired with extraction solvent that may be toxic or environmentally taxing
-Non-toxic – reduced time and solvents – saves energy – economical


-Typically requires dry biomass – viability at the commercial scale is yet to be studied and technical viability is yet to be studied


Ultrasound-assisted extraction
-UAE itself does not pose environmental risk-paired with extraction solvent that may be toxic or environmentally taxing
Ultrasonication of large volumes of microalgae may be energy intensive
-Capital investment and operational cost to operate large ultrasonication equipment may be prohibitive


Enzymatic
-Proper selection of enzymes and their combinations is important
—
-No energy consumption – non-toxic – enables wet biomass extraction


-Efficiency depends on the state of microalgae


Acid hydrolysis
-Simple
—
-Reactor design concerns -drying of biomass required




Table 6 Different lipid-extraction techniques with microalgae biomass




Solvent system
Microalgae (concentration, wet or dry phase)
Lipids (% w/w)
Extraction conditions
References




Chloroform hexane

Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)
78
Freeze dried and wet microalgae, temp 25 °C

235




Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)
30

235




Chlorella vulgaris (20 g, dry)
13

236



Nannochloropsis gaditana (20 mL, wet)
2.4

237



Chloroform:ethanol (2:1)

Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)
91
Wet microalgae

235



Chloroform:methanol (2:1)

Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)
95
Wet and dry microalgae, temp. 25 °C

235




Scenedesmus sp. (10 g/100 mL, wet)
10

238




Chlorella vulgaris (20 g, dry)
38

236



Hexane:methanol (7:3)

Chlorella vulgaris (20 g, dry)
29
Freeze dried microalgae

236



Time. 120 min


Hexane: ethanol (2:1)

Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)
61
Wet microalgae

235




n-hexane (soxhlet)

Scenedesmus sp. (100 mL, wet)
9
Dry microalgae, temp. 25–30 °C

238



Hexane:ethanol (2:1) soxhlet)

Acutodesmus obliquus (20 g, dry)
12
Dry microalgae, temp. 25–30 °C

239






(Microwave assistance)


Chloroform:methanol:water (2:2:1.9)

Chlorella vulgaris (5 g, dry)
32
700 W, 50 s

240



Chloroform:ethanol (1:1)

Scenedesmus sp. (2 g, dry)
28
100 C, 1000 W, 10 min

240



Chloroform:methanol (2:1

Nannochloropsis sp. (15 mL, wet)
8.5
65 C, 500 W, 5 min

240



Ultrasound assistance










Chloroform:methanol (2:1)

Chlorella sp. (10 g, dry)
67
20 kHz, 30 min

241



Hexane:Isopropanol (3:2)

Chlorella sp. (10 g, dry)
77
20 kHz, 60 min

240



Hexane

Nannochloropsis (20 g L−1, wet)
5.4–27
500–10000 kJ kg−1, 2.8–55.6 min

240



Chloroform:methanol (2:1)

Chlorella vulgaris (0.5 g, dry)
19
34.74 W, 40 kHz, 20 min

240



Pulsed electric field

Scenedesmus sp. (15 g, dry)
30–35
1st pass: 30.6 kW h m−3, 2nd pass: 33.7 kW h m−3

240



Chloroform:methanol (2:1)





Enzymatic lysis


Chloroform:methanol (1:1)

Scenedesmus sp. (1 g, dry)
14
Cellulase, xylanase, pectinase, cellulase, and mannanase

240




n-Hexane:propanol (3:2)
Nannochloropsis sp. (0.2 g, dry)
73
Lysozyme and cellulase

240




n-Hexane

Scenedesmus sp. (1 g, wet)
13
Lysozyme

242




n-Hexane

Scenedesmus sp. (1 g, wet)
17
Cellulase




Acid hydrolysis










Hexane, soxhlet

Chlorella vulgaris (5 g, dry)
54
HCl, 120 min

240



Chloroform: methanol (1:1)

Chlorella sorokiniana (1 g/40 mL, wet
11
HCl, 78 C, 120 min

240



Hexane

Chlorella vulgaris (20 g L−1, wet)
34
H2SO4, 120 C, 60 min

236



Halim et al., 2012.

Botryococcus braunii (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)
35–40
Homogenizer for 15 min, 52% amplitude, rotary evaporator for solvent

71



Hexane: isopropanol (3:2)

Chlamydomonas sp1. (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)
13–15



Chlorella vulgaris (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)
18–21



Chlorococcum sp2. (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)
13–18



Coelastrum microporum (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)
17–19



Scenedesmus obliquus (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)
17–18



Staurastrum sp. (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)
7.5–7.7



Synechocystis aquatilis (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)
11


Chlorella vulgaris (0.5 g/9 mL, dry)
22




6.7. Dry-route methods using conventional organic solvents
Extraction methods that use chloroform + methanol as co-solvents are rapid, and they are especially effective as analytical methods for determining total lipid content in biomass. An advantage is that methods based on chloroform and methanol do not require the complete drying of biomass.219,220 The two common methods using chloroform + methanol are Bligh & Dyer and Folch. The difference is in the solvent ratio. The Bligh & Dyer method uses chloroform: methanol = 1:2 v/v, while the Folch method uses chloroform: methanol = 2:1 v/v. Both are effective at lipid extraction, but the Folch method usually provides a slightly lower total lipid recovery because of its lower solvent polarity.219 A major disadvantage of both methods is the high toxicity of the solvents, which means that they are infeasible for large-scale use.
Many solvents have been applied to replace chloroform,219 which is toxic. n-hexane is an efficient nonpolar lipid extractant219,222-225 that avoids the toxic effects of chlorinated solvents. Alternative combinations include dichloroethane/methanol and dichloroethane/ethanol226 for lipid extraction from C. protothecoides, but they are not universally effective.170 However, their selectivity for neutral lipids may be useful for the economic production of biofuels from microalgae, because only neutral lipids are commercially desirable as a fuel feedstock.219
Hexane is a nonpolar solvent that extracts non-polar lipids from biomass. It needs to be combined with a polar solvent, such as hexane/isopropanol.227-228 This approach has the advantage over Folch and Bligh and Dyer extractions (i.e., chloroform/methanol) because the solvents are less toxic and proteolipid contamination is avoided.219,229 Selective extraction of neutral lipid with a hexane/isopropanol mixture (3/2 by volume) has been effective for a range of microalgae biomasses.216,219,229,230
A Soxhlet extractor is an apparatus that increases the effectiveness of a solvent; typically, Soxhlet extraction is used when the target does not have high solubility in the solvent.224 Prior to Soxhlet extraction, dry biomass is ground to increase its surface area. The ground biomass is placed in a thimble made of a material that allows liquid to pass through. The bottom of the extractor is connected to a round-bottom flask containing the solvent, and an extraction chamber that contains the condensed solvent is connected to a reflux condenser. When the bottom flask is heated to a boil, vapor rises, condenses, and then falls into the extractor to come into contact with the solid. Extraction continues until all extractable materials are present in the organic solvent.219,224,229
The main advantages of conventional Soxhlet extraction are: (1) repeated contact with the solvent; (2) repeated heating, vaporizing, condensing, and extraction with the solvent; (3) no filtration requirement; and (4) a small solvent volume still provides high extraction efficiency. Conventional Soxhlet extraction has some drawbacks: long drying and extraction times. Soxhlet extraction also needs more energy consumption than other solvent extraction methods such as Bligh & Dyer and Folch methods. The high temperature during extraction increases the possibilities of thermal degradation of some lipids.227
Supercritical-fluid extraction uses a super-critical fluid, most often CO2, to replace traditional organic solvents.231 The principle of this technology is that the solvent is used at a pressure and temperature combination that pushes the solvent into its supercritical phase, which greatly increases the efficiency of extraction method.232 Alternate supercritical fluids are ethene, methanol, ethanol, and water.233 Taher et al.234 investigated the extraction of lipids from dried Scenedesmus sp. using super-critical CO2, and they achieved a higher amount of total lipids, compared to conventional methods. Disadvantages of super-critical extraction are high operating costs and safety concerns.234
6.8. Wet route cell-disruption methods
Lipid recovery from microalgae is improved by cell disruption.242,243 Many disruption methods have been tried.
Enzymes can successfully degrade the cell wall and facilitate lipid extraction from microalgae,244 but they have been poorly studied for microalgae. Suitable enzymes for lipid extraction are cellulase and trypsin, as they break down the polymers present in cell-surface structures.245 Lipid-extraction efficiency increased 1.7-fold using enzymatic hydrolysis with cellulase, compared with unhydrolyzed biomass of C. vulgaris.246 Enzyme-assisted extraction at low temperatures gave improved lipid recovery with minimal damage to the lipid product.245 Enzymatic treatment of C. vulgaris yielded lipid recoveries of 22% and 24%, respectively, with lysozyme and cellulase.246 The highest extraction yield, 17%, reported by Taher et al.,245 was with lysozyme. High lipids recovery (around 35%) was achieved with snailase and trypsin.247 The main disadvantage associated with enzymes is that they are not always feasible on an industrial scale because of their expense and inability to control reaction conditions.241
Microwave-assisted extraction (MAE) of microalgae has proven effective for aiding extraction on a small scale. MAE works by making a polar material (biomass) come into contact with a rapidly oscillating microwave field, which generates inter- and intra-molecular movements and heat due to frictional forces. Water vapor begins to form within the cell and ruptures the cell wall and membrane, which makes intracellular lipids more readily available for extraction.248 Higher temperature (from longer-term MAE) results in higher lipid-extraction efficiency. MAE scale up and maintenance costs are viewed as limiting factors.249,250
Ultrasound-assisted extraction (UAE) overcomes problems associated with conventional mechanical disruption, while being fast and yielding a high-purity product. With a wet culture, a UAE shockwave disrupts the cell wall, releasing intracellular contents.251 UAE extraction using ethanol solvent improves environmental safety. UAE is advantageous over MAE, because UAE is carried out at lower temperature, reducing thermal denaturation of biomolecules.244
Electroporation is a phenomenon that increases the permeability of the microalgal-cell wall membrane. In practical application, wet biomass passes through a high-potential (∼30 kV) electric field that is rapidly pulsed.252 This form of super-electroporation not only creates pores in the cell membrane, but also disrupts the physical and chemical structures of the cell wall and membrane. Laboratory-scale electroporation achieved a higher amount of total lipid from Pseudochlorococcum sp., compared to other standard extraction methods.253 Sheng et al.,252 applying industrial-scale electroporation using pulsed electric field (PEF) technology, demonstrated improved lipid-extraction efficiency from cyanobacteria. The PEF significantly damaged the cell wall and thylakoid membranes, but without altering the composition and quality of the extracted fatty acids methyl esters.217,252 Sommerfeld et al.253 demonstrated 92% extraction of lipids in Pseudochlorococcum biomass after electroporation, while 62% of the lipids were extracted without electroporation and using the Bligh and Dyer solvent.216 Cell disruption using the PEF is an excellent industrial-scale technique for a biorefinery,254-255 The PEF is sensitive to medium conductivity, which may limit its applicability for saltwater algae, unless the biomass were washed prior to PEF treatment.252
Isotonic extraction is an alternative method for algal lipid extraction using ionic liquids,256 which are non-aqueous solutions maintained in a liquid state at temperatures up to 140 °C. The ionic liquid contains an asymmetric organic cation and an inorganic or organic anion that provide flexibility in the solvent's conductivity, polarity, and solubility.257 However, investigations on microalgal cells are limited to one on Chlorella vulgaris.258 Thus, economic and technical viability has not been worked out enough to predict that this method is viable for algal-oil extraction.
For in situ lipid hydrolysis, wet biomass is lipid extracted, followed by trans-esterification to obtain biodiesel. Concurrently, dehydration converts wet algal biomass into a solid. Upon cooling, the liquid and solids are separated using a filter (e.g., 934-AH filter paper; Whatman). In a small-scale demonstration, the resulting algal-based oil was tested for its quality, and it achieved a balanced fatty acid profile.250 However, in situ lipid hydrolysis has not yet been tested in a large-scale cultivation facility.244
6.9. Hydrothermal liquefaction
Hydrothermal liquefaction (HTL) provides an alternative process to directly convert algae biomass to biofuels. HTL can be used on wet algal biomass with a water content of around 80–95%, which lowers energy costs for drying. HTL is carried out at a temperature below 374 °C and at high pressure (10–25 MPa). HTL provides a high yield of a biocrude product formed from carbohydrates, lipids, and proteins. Biocrudes can be used as transportation fuel, but upgrading the biocrude is required. The HTL method can maximize productivity without restriction for high-lipid cultures, and it can be applied to all algae species.259-260
The biggest advantage of HTL is the potential for recovering ammonium and phosphate by separating the solids (e.g., by precipitation).259 A second advantage of HTL is that released CO2 can be sent back to the algae-cultivation process. While HTL seems to be a promising method to extract oils and other sources to produce bioenergy from algae biomasses, the economy of the process is questionable due to the need for high-pressure conditions, along with salt deposition in the reactor, particularly with marine microalgae.259–261
7. Lipid composition of multiple feedstocks and their fuel qualities
The composition of fatty acids is a key parameter that determines the suitability of microalgae as a biofuel feedstock. The quality of biodiesel is influenced by the molecular structure of fatty acid methyl ester, carbon-chain length, and the number and positions of double bonds.262–264,267-268,277,279 Furthermore, the composition of fatty acids in microalgae is affected by the nature of the strain, its life cycle, medium composition, pH, temperature, the light/dark ratio, and CO2 availability.262–263
Microalgae exposed to nutrient starvation up-regulate metabolic pathways to synthesize neutral lipids and contain more TAG. However, an increase in cellular lipids does not necessarily result in an overall increase in lipid productivity, as the biomass growth rate may decrease. The propagation of microalgae cells requires suitable light, temperature, pH, and supplies of CO2, other macronutrients (N and P), and trace elements such as manganese (Mn), cobalt (Co), zinc (Zn), and molybdenum (Mo).210,264 For instance, the addition of bicarbonate stimulated lipid accumulation in the exponential growth phase,265–268 while high pH combined with N limitation resulted in an increase in lipids in the stationary phase.266–268 Optimization of lipid production in microalgae using N stress has been broadly studied: for example, Chlorella vulgaris's lipid increased from 20 to 53% of cell dry weight during N stress, and it went from 16% to 49% of cell dry weight in Selenastrum sp. during N starvation.268,269
Phosphorus (P) is a key element for microalgae, as it is part of nucleic acids and ATP. Multiple studies noticed more lipid production in microalgae during P stress. For instance, reduction in the phosphate concentration elevated the overall lipid content of Phormidium sp. from 17% to 27% of cell dry weight.270 Mandal and Mallick271 showed elevated lipid production (∼31% of dw) during phosphate deficiency in Selenastrum sp., and a deficiency of P in the culture increased the accumulation of cellular lipids by ∼53% for Scenedesmus sp.271 Additional information is reviewed in ref. 270 and 272.
Fatty acids range from 12 to 22 carbons and can be saturated or unsaturated, although the number of double bonds never exceeds six.219-220 In terms of lipid classes, glycerides generally have a higher degree of saturation, making them better suited for biodiesel conversion.220

Table 7 summarizes fatty acid composition of microalgae. Palmitic (C16:0) and oleic (C18:1) acids were dominant in most Chlorophyta strains, while the stearic acid content (C18:0) was low (<3.3%). In contrast, mono-unsaturated fatty acids, such as oleic (C18:1) and linoleic acids (C18:2), were dominant in land-based crop oils.
Table 7 Fatty-acid composition (wt%) of different-generation feedstocks for biofuel production




Land crops


Fatty acid
Common Name
Peanut
Palm
Olive
Rapeseed
Soybean
Sunflower
Corn
Coconut
Cottonseed




C12
Lauric acid
0
0.1
0
0
0
0
0
48
0


C14
Myristic acid
0.1
0.7
0
0
0
0
0
21
0


C16
Palamitic acid
8
37
12
4.9
11
6.2
6.5
9.9
29


C18
Stearic acid
1.8
6.6
3.1
1.6
3.6
3.7
1.4
3
0.9


C18:1
Oleic acid
53
46
75
33
25
25
66
7.2
13


C18:2 w6
Linoleic acid
28
8.6
7.8
20
53
63
25
1.6
57


C18:3w6
Linolenic acid
0.3
0.3
0.6
7.9
6.1
0.2
0.1
0.6
0


C18:4
Octadecatentrienoic
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0


C20:1
Gadoleic acid
2.4
0.2
0
9.3
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0


C22:1
Erucic acid
0
0
0
23
0.3
0.1
0.1
0
0


Others
—
5.7
0.7
1.9
0
0.5
1.3
1
9.6
0






Microalgae


Fatty acid
Common names

C. vulgaris


Chlamydomonas sp.

S. obliquus


A. falcatus


A. fusiformis


C. bacillus


D. brasiliensis


B. terribilis


B. braunii





C4
Butyric acid
0
4.9
1.2
1.5
1.7
0.9
0.4
0
0


C14
Myristic acid
0.6
2.5
1.1
1.7
2.9
2.6
0.7
0
0.7


C16
Palmitic acid
40
51
52
30
26
25
28
35
7.2


C16:1
Palmitoleic
3.2
0.3
0
0.5
0.8
1.2
0
0
0


C18
Stearic acid
8
11.5
7.5
2.7
2.1
3.2
3.3
3.1
1.6


C18:1c
Oleic acid
29
7.8
22
24
19
7.1
42
40
76


C18:1t
Octadecatentrienoic acid
0.6
5.9
0
0.7
1
11
0
0
0.9


C18:2w6
Linoleic acid
8.5
3.9
4.6
2
12
14
12
5
5.2


C18:3w6
Linolenic acid
0
0.8
2.8
0.4
0.2
4.5
1
0
0


C18:3w3
α-Linolenic acid
1.6
1.9
0
27
26
22
8.5
7.2
5.3


C20:1w9
Gadoleic acid
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2.8
0


Others
—
7.9
9.7
9.2
9.7
7.1
9.9
4.1
7
2.8




The cold-filter plugging point (CFPP) is used to predict flow performance of biofuels at cold temperatures.223,229,267 At very cold temperature, the crystallization of fatty acid methyl ester molecules increases, clogging fuel lines and filters. Oleic acid is a valuable contributor that balances biofuel combustion quality and the CFPP.267Table 8 shows that C. vulgaris, Chlamydomonas sp., and S. obliquus, which had the highest levels of saturated long-chain FAME, gave acceptable CFPPs for algal biodiesel (−11.7 to −0.5 °C). For example, Yoo et al.273 indicated that C. vulgaris and Scenedesmus sp. produced especially good values of CFPPs. Biodiesel from some land crops has CFPP values within an acceptable range (−12 to −2 °C):222 For example, palm oil and peanut oil have higher CFPP values (10–17 °C, respectively) due to their high saturation contents.
Table 8 Comparison of the biofuel quality for different feedstocksa




Source
SFA (%)
MUFA (%)
PUFA (%)
CN
SV mg KOH g−1
IV g l2 100g−1
DU
LCSF
CFPP (oC)





a Source ref. 223, 229, and 274–277. S-, MU-, and PU—FAME represent saturated FAME, mono-unsaturated FAME, and poly-unsaturated FAME, CFPP represents the cold filter plugging point, CN is the cetane number, DU is the degree of unsaturation, FA represents fatty acid, FAME represents fatty acid methyl ester, IV represents the iodine value, LCSF is the long chain saturated factor, OD is optical density, OS is oxidative stability, and SV is the saponification value.






Land crops



Peanut
16
56
29
53
195
97
113
11
17


Palm
45
46
8.9
61
209
57
64
7.7
10


Olive
16
76
8.4
57
196
84
93
4.2
−6


Rapeseed
6.5
65
28
55
190
109
122
1.3
−10


Soybean
15
26
59
49
195
128
144
3.4
−5


Sunflower
11
26
63
50
193
132
152
4.2
−3


Grape seed
11
19
69
48
187
138
158
3
−6


Corn
8
66
25
53
183
101
117
1.5
−12


Coconut
90
6
2
63
255
12
10
2.3
−6


Cottonseed
26
18
52
51
192
90
122
4.7
−2






Microalgae




Chlamydomonas sp.
79
14
6.7
65
220
27
28
11
17



Scenedesmus obliquus

67
22
7.4
64
216
35
37
8.9
12



Chlorella vulgaris

50
36
10
62
199
53
5
8
8.6



Ankistrodesmus falcatus

41
28
3.2
50
202
101
89
4.4
−2.7



Ankistrodesmus fusiformis

37
22
40
48
200
113
103
3.7
−4.7



Chlamydomonas bacillus

36
23.6
41
48
197
114
105
3.9
−4.1



Coelastrum miroporum

46
38
16
53
206
88
70
4
−3.8



Desmodesmus brasiliensis

35
44
21
53
205
87
87
4.4
−2.6



Botryococcus terribilis

39
43
12
59
193
67
58
5.1
−0.5



Botryococcus branunii

9.8
80
11
53
197
95
101
1.5
−11.7



Kirchneriella lunaris

32
23
45
42
202
137
113
1.9
−9.6



Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata

3
47
1
54
208
83
82
1.95
−9.6



Botryococcus branunii (UTEX)
8
78
14
47
200
116
106
0.95
−14




Oxidation stability (OS) of oils, which plays an important role by evaluating the oil's susceptibility to deterioration, is determined using high unsaturation (double bond) content in the FAME.223,229,267,274 The oxidation of fatty acids is directly proportional to the number of double bonds in FAMEs. For instance, polyunsaturated fatty acids (C18:2, linoleic acids; C18:3 linolenic acid) are more susceptible to oxidation than FAMEs having mono-unsaturation. According to Ramos et al.,275 oils from olive, rapeseed, and corn have higher mono-unsaturated fatty acid (MUFA) contents and satisfy standards regarding cetane number (CN) and CFPP values, as summarized in Table 8. The cetane number indicates the time delay in the combustion of fuel for diesel cycle engines, and it increases with the length of the unbranched carbon chains of the FAME components.223,229,267,274

Chlorophyta
274 demonstrated a predominance of saturated and mono-saturated over polyunsaturated fatty acids overall. The well-balanced mole ratio (5:4:1) of the fatty acid C16:1, C18:1, and C14:0 produced biodiesel with a good CFPP and high CN. However, CO2 supplementation affected the degree of saturation in the algal based fuel. For instance, Botryococcus species generated more polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) at 2.5% CO2, whereas C. vulgaris showed a larger content of saturated fatty acids (SFAs) and monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs), respectively, at 5 and 10% CO2.
Oil quality is a key factor in the success of the biofuel industry.129,278 The quality of the biodiesel can be estimated using the product's quantitative/qualitative balance among the overall fatty acid compositions and not in individual fatty acids. Quality standards and guidelines have been initiated in several countries based on physical and chemical parameters for biofuels.129,223,229,267 Key parameters are the CN, OS, CFPP, iodine value (IV, which illustrates the total unsaturation), and saponification value (SV, which determines the average molecular weight of all fatty acids in the fuel).223,229,267,279
8. Life-cycle analysis of third-generation biofuels
Over the past three decades, the search for alternatives to fossil fuels has led to new fuel technologies based on renewable feedstocks.280 Initially, biodiesel and ethanol received intensive attention as potential petroleum substitutes due to their relative environmental friendliness.281 However, microalgae-based biofuel production involves multiple steps and products.282-283 Life cycle assessment (LCA) is the tool used to evaluate the environmental impacts of a technology.
Comparative LCAs demonstrated that the environmental sustainability of biodiesel production from microalgae depends on microalgae productivity, dewatering, oil extraction, oil conversion to biodiesel, and water use.283-285 When the complete process – including design, the technology, and operation – was thoroughly evaluated,286 the best economic and environmental outcomes occurred when water use was minimized. From an LCA perspective, optimizing water recycling and using available inputs (e.g., biogas from organic digestion and CO2 from power plants) enhanced sustainability.287-288 Furthermore, life-cycle analysis75 demonstrated that the overall CO2 emissions from 100% biofuel are 78% lower than those from fossil fuels; however, a more normal mix of 20% biodiesel with 80% fossil fuel reduced net CO2 emissions by only 16%.
Beal et al.288 conducted LCA based on a 100 ha production facility with multiple possible co-products, such as animal feed and ethanol. They evaluated centrifugation, solvent extraction, wet extraction, hydrothermal liquefaction, and combined heat and power generation. Facility design was optimized by co-location with a source of waste CO2, such as heat production and cement industry manufacture, and freshwater use was minimized.
Pérez-López et al.289 used a comparative LCA based on experimental data for outdoor ponds, along with horizontal and vertical tubular photobioreactors at a pilot scale at Algae PARC (The Netherlands). The utilization of energy for controlling temperature presented the largest environmental burden.217 The addition of nutrients affected some categories of closed cultivation systems. The outdoor pilot raceway (ORP) was feasible only for summer operation and demonstrated higher environmental impacts than both tubular photobioreactors.
A report by Yang et al.120 showed that 3700 kg of water was required to generate one kilogram biodiesel from microalgae if freshwater was not recycled. Using wastewater could reduce freshwater use by 90%. About 90% of the total electricity used was for cultivating the microalgae. About 76% of the energy consumed for lipid extraction was for solvent recovery. Microalgal-based biodiesel used 30% less energy per unit of co-product than land crop-based oil, and the net emission of greenhouse gases was 5% lower than for land-crop based biodiesel.290
Using non-renewable resources for algal production has huge impacts on climate change, ecosystems, and water depletion. The worst effects on human health are due to electricity utilization from the grid, because their fossil-fuel burning is a cause for significant releases of PAH, SOx, and NOx, which cause carcinogenic and respiratory effects.288
9. Economics of third-generation biofuels
At present, producing microalgal biomass as a fuel feedstock is more expensive than using biomass from land-based crops and plants.288-289 The cost of microalgal oil depends on requirements for light, CO2, water, nutrients, keeping the temperature of the reactor within a narrow range (15 to 30 °C), and power.62,288-290 Chisti6 analyzed economic constraints for large-scale implementation of biodiesel production from microalgae. The key points for economic viability has been availability of a nearby source of CO2, complete P and N recycling from processing to algal cultivation, and the availability renewable sources of water and energy.29
Davis et al.287 evaluated the cost of biodiesel from open ponds (OPs) and PBRs to be $2.25 L−1 and $4.78 L−1 of biodiesel, respectively. The most important factors were lipid productivity, growth rates, PBR tube cost (when relevant), operating up-time, nutrient recycling, and flocculant cost.287 Brownbridge et al.,291 updating the cost estimates for a 100000 t year−1 biodiesel plant (using PBRs), computed a biodiesel cost of $0.9–1.8 kg−1. Key factors influencing costs were algae oil content (64%), algae annual productivity (19%), plant production capacity (7%), CO2 price (6%), and PBR plant CAPEX (2%).
Wiffels and Barbosa et al.292 performed a techno-economic assessment for 100 hectare facilities in 6 locations. The projections gave a current low-cost estimate of $3.8 kg−1 for microalgae cultivation in Spain (excluding biorefining products), but with a possible reduction to $0.6 kg−1 in ten years.
Co-production of high-value by-products may make microalgal biomass cost-competitive with land crops in the next decade.287-288 Beal et al.288 provided encouraging results: a minimum biocrude sale price of around $0.86 L−1 ($3.9 gal−1) if co-product revenues were included.287 Co-products included omega-3-fatty-acid293-297 and fish feed.296-297
The National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL) performed a techno-economic analysis after making a number of important assumptions about future performance related to cultivation and seasonal variability, which play a critical role in the resulting minimum biomass selling price (MBSP) estimates. In summary, if the cost of microalgal biomass can be lowered to $300 per ton without GHG emissions, then microalgae biofuel can be economically viable. Getting to $300 per ton would require very large ponds, co-location with wastewater and CO2 supply, using renewable energy (wind power) and valuable co-products.
Algae can have nutritional properties, and algae have received the FDA's GRAS status, which stands for “Generally Recognized as Safe” for human consumption.298 Species approved by the FDA for human consumption include A. platensis, C. reinhardtii, A. protothecoides, C. vulgaris, Dunaliella bardawill. E. gracilis, H. pluvialis, and Schinochtrium.299,300
One drawback of using flue gas or wastewater for microalgal cultivation is the possibility of contamination due to toxic heavy metals and organic micropollutants.301,303 In this case, microalgal biomass and by-products cannot be utilized for direct human consumption or as animal feed.302-303
10. Future perspectives
Microalgal biofuel is a promising alternative to fossil fuels owing to its numerous advantages, but production costs must be lowered substantially. To make microalgal-based biofuel economically viable, a number of challenges must be overcome: high costs related to cultivation and harvesting; lack of production of feedstocks throughout the year; finding added value from co-products; and integration with wastewater treatment. Today, microalgal industries are still in an early stage, but the biorefinery process, illustrated in Fig. 8, offers a promising strategy towards commercialization. According to the “Global Forecast to 2028,” the market value for microalgal products is expected to reach a maximum of $1.8 billion by 2028.304
 Fig. 8  Microalgal biorefineries integrating a range of processes to generate multiple products and improve economic viability. 
A key to economic and sustainability success is achieving a favorable energy balance. Microalgae production and downstream processing require energy inputs that need to be minimized. For instance, microalgae harvesting faces some difficulties when employing microalgae-based processes for nutrient (nitrogen and phosphorus) removal from wastewater. Membrane-based systems have been increasingly considered for microalgae harvesting and nutrient removal. However, cost-effective strategies should be developed to avoid the loss of essential elements (i.e., Ca2+, Mg2+, and SO42−) and reduce the operation cost when employing membrane technology for microalgae harvesting. To evaluate the economic feasibility of different membrane-based systems one should concentrate on techno-economic analyses of full-scale membrane-based systems.
Likewise, innovative technologies are needed to provide concentrated sources of inorganic carbon, to harvest biomass more reliably, and to prevent culture crashes. Finally, the economics can be improved by generating multiple high-value microalgae-based products for the pharmaceutical, nutraceutical, feed, and chemical industries.
To further improve the economic feasibility of microalgal biofuels, scientists and engineers need to be joined by political leaders, economists, and environmental advocates to form coalitions that promote technical and economic feasibility of microalgal-based biofuels and co-products.
11. Concluding remarks
First- and second-generation biofuels cannot generate nearly enough biomass to meet the global energy requirement, but trying to rely on them will create environmental and food crises. Microalgae are the foundation for an emerging technology that can generate renewable and sustainable biofuels. Microalgal biomass has lipids and carbohydrates that can be used to produce renewable forms of biodiesel, bioethanol, biobutanol, and biomethane. This review highlights the potential of microalgae in bioenergy, how microalgae are cultivated, and existing challenges with biomass harvesting, processing, and conversion to biofuels. Technological advances, coupled with supportive policy actions, will be required in all aspects of microalgae technology, but overcoming these challenges presents opportunities for a more sustainable future.
Nomenclature

ADAnaerobic digestion
ANPBrazilian National Agency for Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels
ASTMAmerican Society for Testing and Materials
AZArizona
ATPAdenosine triphosphate
BioH2Biohydrogen
CFPPCold-filter plugging point
CH4Methane
Cl−Chloride ion
CNCetane number
DAGDeoxy acyl glyceride
DCDirect current
CO2Carbon dioxide
DAGATDiacylglycerol acyltransferase
DOEDepartment of Energy
DNADeoxyribonucleic acid
GMGenetically modified
EtOHEthanol
EPEutrophication
FAEEFatty acids ethyl esters
FAMEFatty acid methyl esters
FFAFree fatty acids
FTFischer–Tropsch
GHGGreenhouse gas
GWPGlobal warming potential
H 2Hydrogen
HHVHigher heat value
HTGHydrothermal gasification
HTLHydrothermal liquefaction
IEAInternational Energy Agency
ILIonic liquid
IPCCInter-governmental Panel on Climate Change
IVIodine value
LCALife cycle analysis
LCSFLong chain saturated factor
MAHsMono aromatic hydrocarbons
MAEMicrowave-assisted extraction
MBSPMinimum biomass selling price
MIMichigan
MUFAMonounsaturated fatty acids
NNitrogen
NOxNitrogen oxide
NADPHNicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NRELNational Renewable Energy Laboratory
O2Oxygen
ODPOzone depletion
OPOpen pond
OSOxidative stability
ORPOutdoor raceway pond
PAHsPoly-aromatic hydrocarbon
PBRPhotobioreactor
PEFPulsed electric field
PUFAPolyunsaturated fatty acids
SPSpecies
SOxSulfur oxides
SO42−Sulfate ion
SVSaponification value
SWWSwine wastewater
TAGTriacylglycerol
UAEUltrasound-assisted extraction
USUnited States

Author contributions
Javid: contributed to coordinating and writing the review; table and figure construction. Bruce: contributed to the editing of the original draft; tables and figures. Both authors contributed to the article and approved the submitted version.
Conflicts of interest
The authors have no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr Yan Liu (Susie) of Michigan State University for bringing several interesting references to our notice.
References
H. A. Alalwan, A. H. Alminshid and H. A. Aljaafari, Renew. Energy Focus, 2019, 28, 127–139 CrossRef .

          https://www.CO2.earth/daily-CO2
        .

EIA projects nearly 50% increase in world energy usage by 2050, led by growth in Asia – Today in Energy – U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), https://www.eia.gov/todayinenergy/detail.php?id=41433, (accessed December 25, 2021) Search PubMed.

N. G. C. Change, Carbon Dioxide Concentration | NASA Global Climate Change, https://climate.nasa.gov/vital-signs/carbon-dioxide, (accessed December 25, 2021) Search PubMed.
N. R. Moheimani, J. P. Webb and M. A. Borowitzka, Algal Res., 2012, 1, 120–133 CrossRef .

          https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Carbon_dioxide_in_Earth%27s_atmosphere#cite_note-3
        .

          IPCC, Climate Change 2013: The Physical Science Basis. Contribution of Working Group I to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. Stocker, T. F., D. Qin, G.-K. Plattner, M. Tignor, S. K. Allen, J. Boschung, A. Nauels, Y. Xia, V. Bex and P. M. Midgley, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,  2013 Search PubMed .

          IPCC, Climate Change 2007: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the 4th Assessment, in Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, ed. L. K. Kim J. M., K. Shin and J. H. Kang, Cambridge,  2007 Search PubMed .

          J. Raven, K. Caldeira, H. Elderfield, O. Hoegh-Guldberg, P. Liss, U. Riebesell, J. Shepherd, C. Turley and A. Watson, Ocean Acidification Due to Increasing Atmospheric Carbon Dioxide, The Royal Society,  2005 Search PubMed .
N. Mimura, Proc. Jpn. Acad., Ser. B, 2013, 89, 281–301 CrossRef PubMed .

          IPCC, Climate Change 2014: Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, [Core Writing Team, ed. R. K. Pachauri and L. A. Meyer. IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland,  2014, p. 151, Available online Search PubMed .

          IPCC, Special Report on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change Mitigation, ed. O. Edenhofer, R. Pichs-Madruga, Y. Sokona, K. Seyboth, P. Matschoss, S. Kadner, T. Zwickel, P. Eickemeier, G. Hansen, S. Schlömer and C. von Stechow, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY, USA,  2011 Search PubMed .
F. Saladini, N. Patrizi, F. M. Pulselli, N. Marchettini and S. Bastianoni, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 66, 221–227 CrossRef .

          O. US EPA, Economics of Biofuels, https://www.epa.gov/environmental-economics/economics-biofuels, (accessed December 25, 2021) Search PubMed.
M. V. Rodionova, R. S. Poudyal, I. Tiwari, R. A. Voloshin, S. K. Zharmukhamedov, H. G. Nam, B. K. Zayadan, B. D. Bruce, H. J. Hou and S. I. Allakhverdiev, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 8450–8461 CrossRef CAS .
B. Abdullah, S. A. F. Syed Muhammad, Z. Shokravi, S. Ismail, K. A. Kassim, A. N. Mahmood and M. M. A. Aziz, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 107, 37–50 CrossRef .
R. E. Sims, W. Mabee, J. N. Saddler and M. Taylor, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 1570–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Zabaniotou, O. Ioannidou and V. Skoulou, Fuel, 2008, 87, 1492–1502 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fairley, Nature, 2011, 474, S2–S5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Naik, V. V. Goud, P. K. Rout and A. K. Dalai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 578–597 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. H. Trabelsi, K. Zaafouri, W. Baghdadi, S. Naoui and A. Ouerghi, Renewable energy, 2018, 126, 888–896 CrossRef .
I. Nygaard, F. Dembelé, I. Daou, A. Mariko, F. Kamissoko, N. Coulibaly, R. L. Borgstrøm and T. B. Bruun, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 61, 202–212 CrossRef .

          U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA), Waste-to-energy (MSW), https://www.eia.gov/energyexplained/biomass/waste-to-energy.php, (accessed December 20, 2021) Search PubMed.
P. D. Zaks, N. Winchester, C. J. Kucharik, C. C. Barford, S. Paltsev and J. M. Reilly, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 16, 6735–6742,  DOI:10.1021/es104227y .
D. K. Westensee, K. Rumbold, K. G. Harding, C. M. Sheridan, L. D. van Dyk, G. S. Simate and F. Postma, Sci. Total Environ., 2018, 637, 132–136 CrossRef PubMed .
D. LeBauer, R. Kooper, P. Mulrooney, S. Rohde, D. Wang, S. P. Long and M. C. Dietze, GCB Bioenergy, 2018, 10, 61–71 CrossRef .
H.-T. Tan, K. R. Corbin and G. B. Fincher, Front. Plant Sci., 2016, 7, 1854 Search PubMed .

The lignin challenge | Feature | RSC Education, https://edu.rsc.org/feature/the-lignin-challenge/2000124.article, (accessed December 25, 2021) Search PubMed.
S. Saraf and B. Thomas, Environ. Prot., 2007, 85, 360 CAS .
R. A. Lee and J.-M. Lavoie, Anim. Front., 2013, 3, 6–11 CrossRef .

Predicting Dissolved Inorganic Carbon in Photoautotrophic Microalgae Culture via the Nitrogen Source | Environmental Science & Technology, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acs.est.5b01727?src=recsys&, (accessed December 25, 2021) Search PubMed.

Current research, technology and education topics in applied microbiology and microbial biotechnology(eBook, 2010) [WorldCat.org], https://www.worldcat.org/title/current-research-technology-and-education-topics-in-applied-microbiology-and-microbial-biotechnology/oclc/796998911, (accessed December 25, 2021) Search PubMed.
P. Nigam and A. Singh, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2011, 37, 52–68 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chisti, Biotechnol. Adv., 2007, 25, 294–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Abdullah, S. A. F. S. Muhammad, Z. Shokravi, S. Ismail, K. A. Kassim, A. N. Mahmood and M. M. A. Aziz, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2019, 107, 37–50 CrossRef .
Y. Chisti, J. Biotechnol., 2003, 167, 201–214 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Scranton, J. T. Ostrand, F. J. Fields and S. P. Mayfield, Plant J., 2015, 82, 523–531 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Tandon and Q. Jin, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 80, 1089–1099 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dawczynski, R. Schubert and G. Jahreis, Food Chem., 2007, 103, 891–899 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Richmond, Handbook of Microalgal Culture: Biotechnology and Applied Phycology,  2004, pp. 125–177 Search PubMed .
I. Priyadarshani and B. Rath, J. Algal Biomass Util., 2012, 3(4), 89–100 Search PubMed .
L. M. Colla, C. Oliveira Reinehr, C. Reichert and J. A. V. Costa, Bioresour. Technol., 2007, 98, 1489–1493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Eltanahy and A. Torky, Microalgal Biotechnology: Recent Advances, Market Potential, and Sustainability,  2021, pp. 1–35,  10.1039/9781839162473-00001 .

          C. Hoek, H. C. van den, D. Mann, H. M. Jahns and M. Jahns, Algae: An Introduction to Phycology, Cambridge University Press,  1995 Search PubMed .

          P. Gualtieri and L. Barsanti, Algae Anatomy Biochemistry and Biotechnology, CRC Press, Raton,  2006 Search PubMed .
A. Banerjee, R. Sharma, Y. Chisti and U. C. Banerjee, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2002, 22, 245–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, M. Sommerfeld, E. Jarvis, M. Ghirardi, M. Posewitz, M. Seibert and A. Darzins, Plant J., 2008, 54, 621–639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. B. Williams and L. M. L. Laurens, Energy Environ. Sci., 2010, 3, 554–590 RSC .
M. D. Ooms, C. T. Dinh, E. H. Sargent and D. Sinton, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–13 Search PubMed .

Handbook of Microalgae-Based Processes and Products, 1st edn, https://www.elsevier.com/books/handbook-of-microalgae-based-processes-and-products/jacob-lopes/978-0-12-818536-0, (accessed December 25, 2021) Search PubMed.
Y. Zhou, L. Liu, M. Li and C. Hu, Bioresour. Technol., 2022, 244, 126371 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Nie, D. Chen, J. Ye, Y. Lu and Z. Dai, Algal Res., 2021, 59, 102449 CrossRef .

          C. Hoek, H. C. van den, D. Mann, H. M. Jahns and M. Jahns, Algae: An Introduction to Phycology, Cambridge University Press,  1995 Search PubMed .
B. Sajjadi, W.-Y. Chen, A. A. A. Raman and S. Ibrahim, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 97, 200–232 CrossRef CAS .

          V. J. Chapman and D. J. Chapman, The Algae, Macmillan, London,  1973 Search PubMed .
S. Anto, S. S. Mukherjee, R. Muthappa, T. Mathimani, G. Deviram, S. S. Kumar, T. N. Verma and A. Pugazhendhi, Chemosphere, 2020, 242, 125079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Rubio, F. G. Camacho, J. M. F. Sevilla, Y. Chisti and E. M. Grima, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2003, 81, 459–473 CrossRef PubMed .

Raceway-based production of microalgae for possible use in making biodiesel: a thesis presented in partial fulfilment of the requirements for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy in Biotechnology at Massey University, Palmerston North, New Zealand, https://mro.massey.ac.nz/handle/10179/5621, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.

          https://www.nature.com/scitable/ebooks/essentials-of-cell-biology-14749010/122996720
        .
S. Singhasuwan, W. Choorit, S. Sirisansaneeyakul, N. Kokkaew and Y. Chisti, J. Biotechnol., 2015, 216, 169–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Bouyam – Heterotrophic production of Chlorella sp. TISTR 8990—biomass growth and composition under various production conditions – 2017 – Biotechnology Progress – Wiley Online Library, https://aiche.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/btpr.2518, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.
Y. Chisti, J. Biotechnol., 2013, 167, 201–214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liang, N. Sarkany and Y. Cui, Biotechnol. Lett., 2009, 31, 1043–1049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. M. Grima, F. G. A. Fernandez, F. G. Camacho and Y. Chisti, J. Biotechnol., 2001, 92, 113–131 CrossRef PubMed .

Second and Third Generation of Feedstocks, 1st edn, https://www.elsevier.com/books/second-and-third-generation-of-feedstocks/basile/978-0-12-815162-4, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.

          https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Protein#Structural_proteins(accessed December 21, 2021).
Y. Chisti, Trends Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 126–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Terry and L. P. Raymond, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 1985, 7, 474–487 CrossRef .

Cultivo de Microalgas Marinhas – Princípios e Aplicações, RiMa Editora, https://editorarima.com.br/?product=cultivo-de-microalgas-marinhas-principios-e-aplicacoes, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.

          M. Cunningham, C. Heim and V. Rauchenwald, Algae production in wastewater treatment: prospects for Ballen, LoCal-RE Summer Research Program,  2010, p. 15 Search PubMed.
J. Hussain, X. Wang, L. Sousa, R. Ali, B. E. Rittmann and W. Liao, Biomass Bioenergy, 2020, 141, 105711 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Chowdhury, B. Loganathan, I. Mustary, F. Alam and S. M. Mobin, in Second and Third Generation of Feedstocks, Elsevier,  2019, pp. 323–344 Search PubMed .
I. T. D. Cabanelas, S. S. I. Marques, C. O. de Souza, J. I. Druzian and I. A. Nascimento, Algal Res., 2015, 11, 43–49 CrossRef .
T. L. Chacón-Lee and G. E. González-Mariño, Compr. Rev. Food Sci. Food Saf., 2010, 9, 655–675 CrossRef PubMed .
N. S. Shifrin and S. W. Chisholm, J. Phycol., 1981, 17, 374–384 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Sheehan, T. Dunahay, J. Benemann and P. Roessler, Look Back at the U.S. Department of Energy's Aquatic Species Program: Biodiesel from Algae, Close-Out Report,  1998 Search PubMed .
P. Spolaore, C. Joannis-Cassan and A. Isambert, J. Biosci. Bioeng., 2006, 101, 87–96 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Bio-ethanol Market | 2021 – 26 | Industry Share, Size, Growth – Mordor Intelligence, https://www.mordorintelligence.com/industry-reports/bio-ethanol-market, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.

A review on sustainable microalgae based biofuel and bioenergy production: Recent developments – ScienceDirect, https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0959652618301471, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.
J. W. Moody, C. M. McGinty and J. C. Quinn, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 8691–8696 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

An overview of advances in biomass gasification – Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing), https://pubs.rsc.org/en/content/articlelanding/2016/ee/c6ee00935b, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.
M. E. Dry, Catal. Today, 2002, 71, 227–241 CrossRef CAS .
G. Duman, M. A. Uddin and J. Yanik, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 166, 24–30 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chaudhary, P. Pradhan, N. Soni, P. Singh and A. Tiwari, Int. J. ChemTech., Res., 2014, 6, 1381–1389 Search PubMed .
A. Demirbas and M. Fatih Demirbas, Energy Convers. Manage., 2011, 52, 163–170 CrossRef .
K. Kumar, D. Banerjee and D. Das, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 152, 225–233 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. L. da Silva, A. Reis, R. Medeiros, A. C. Oliveira and L. Gouveia, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2009, 159, 568–578 CrossRef PubMed .
S. V. Vassilev and C. G. Vassileva, Fuel, 2016, 181, 1–33 CrossRef CAS .
H.-S. Lee, W. F. J. Vermaas and B. E. Rittmann, Trends Biotechnol., 2010, 28, 262–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

A brief look at three decades of research on cyanobacterial hydrogen evolution– https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0360319902000897, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.
T. Happe, K. Schütz and H. Böhme, J. Bacteriol., 2000, 182, 1624–1631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Bioethanol from microalgae and cyanobacteria: A review and technological outlook– https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1359511316300289, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.
L. Brennan and P. Owende, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 557–577 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shweta, K. Malode, K. Prabhu, J. Ronald Mascarenhas, P. Nagaraj Shetti and T. M. Aminabhavi, Energy Convers. Manage.: X, 2021, 10, 100070 Search PubMed .
A. Demirbas and G. Edris, Energy Sources, Part A, 2017, 39, 827–834 CrossRef CAS .

Feeding the world: improving photosynthetic efficiency for sustainable crop production | Journal of Experimental Botany | Oxford Academic, https://academic.oup.com/jxb/article/70/4/1119/5322156, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.

          http://www.arpae-summit.com/paperclip/exhibitor_docs/<?pdb_no 13AE?>13AE<?pdb END?>/Arizona_State_University
        .

Fatty acid production in genetically modified cyanobacteria | PNAS, https://www.pnas.org/content/108/17/6899, (accessed December 21, 2021) Search PubMed.
R. Radakovits, R. E. Jinkerson, A. Darzins and M. C. Posewitz, Eukaryotic Cell, 2010, 9, 486–501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Liolios, K. Mavromatis, N. Tavernarakis and N. C. Kyrpides, Nucleic Acids Res., 2008, 36, D475–D479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Merchant, S. E. Prochnik, O. Vallon, E. H. Harris, S. J. Karpowicz, G. B. Witman, A. Terry, A. Salamov, L. K. Fritz-Laylin, L. Maréchal-Drouard, W. F. Marshall, L.-H. Qu, D. R. Nelson, A. A. Sanderfoot, M. H. Spalding, V. V. Kapitonov, Q. Ren, P. Ferris, E. Lindquist, H. Shapiro, S. M. Lucas, J. Grimwood, J. Schmutz, P. Cardol, H. Cerutti, G. Chanfreau, C.-L. Chen, V. Cognat, M. T. Croft, R. Dent, S. Dutcher, E. Fernández, H. Fukuzawa, D. González-Ballester, D. González-Halphen, A. Hallmann, M. Hanikenne, M. Hippler, W. Inwood, K. Jabbari, M. Kalanon, R. Kuras, P. A. Lefebvre, S. D. Lemaire, A. V. Lobanov, M. Lohr, A. Manuell, I. Meier, L. Mets, M. Mittag, T. Mittelmeier, J. V. Moroney, J. Moseley, C. Napoli, A. M. Nedelcu, K. Niyogi, S. V. Novoselov, I. T. Paulsen, G. Pazour, S. Purton, J.-P. Ral, D. M. Riaño-Pachón, W. Riekhof, L. Rymarquis, M. Schroda, D. Stern, J. Umen, R. Willows, N. Wilson, S. L. Zimmer, J. Allmer, J. Balk, K. Bisova, C.-J. Chen, M. Elias, K. Gendler, C. Hauser, M. R. Lamb, H. Ledford, J. C. Long, J. Minagawa, M. D. Page, J. Pan, W. Pootakham, S. Roje, A. Rose, E. Stahlberg, A. M. Terauchi, P. Yang, S. Ball, C. Bowler, C. L. Dieckmann, V. N. Gladyshev, P. Green, R. Jorgensen, S. Mayfield, B. Mueller-Roeber, S. Rajamani, R. T. Sayre, P. Brokstein, I. Dubchak, D. Goodstein, L. Hornick, Y. W. Huang, J. Jhaveri, Y. Luo, D. Martínez, W. C. A. Ngau, B. Otillar, A. Porter, L. Szajkowski, G. Werner, K. Zhou, I. V. Grigoriev, D. S. Rokhsar and A. R. Grossman, Science, 2007, 318, 245–250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Eichler-Stahlberg, W. Weisheit, O. Ruecker and M. Heitzer, Planta, 2009, 229, 873–883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fu, D. R. Nelson, A. Mystikou, S. Daakour and K. Salehi-Ashtiani, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2019, 59, 157–164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kumar, A. Shekh, S. Jakhu, Y. Sharma, R. Kapoor and T. R. Sharma, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2020, 8, 914 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Jareonsin and C. Pumas, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2021, 9, 58 Search PubMed .

Microalgae Growth under Mixotrophic Condition Using Agro-Industrial Waste: A Review, Intech Open, https://www.intechopen.com/chapters/73644, (accessed December 22, 2021) Search PubMed.
I. Branyikova, G. Prochazkova, T. Potocar, Z. Jezkova and T. Branyik, Harvesting of Microalgae by Flocculation, Fermentation, 2018, 4, 93,  DOI:10.3390/fermentation4040093 .

          Y. Chisti, in Microalgal Biotechnology: Potential and Production, De Gruyter,  2012, pp. 113–146 Search PubMed .

          M. A. Borowitzka, in Algal Culturing Techniques, ed. R. A. Andersen, Academic Press, Boston, USA,  2005, pp. 205–218 Search PubMed .

          J. C. Dodd, in CRC Handbook of Microalgal Mass Culture, CRC Press,  1986 Search PubMed .

          E. W. Becker, Microalgae: Biotechnology and Microbiology, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,  1994, vol. 295 Search PubMed .

          M. R. Tredici, in Handbook of Microalgal Culture: Biotechnology and Applied Phycology, ed. Blackwell, R., Oxford,  2004, pp. 178–214 Search PubMed .
C. Gudin and D. Chaumont, Bioresour. Technol., 1991, 38(2–3), 145–151 CrossRef .
Y.-K. Lee, Trends Biotechnol., 1986, 4, 186–189 CrossRef CAS .

          M. R. Tredici and G. Chini Zittelli, in Spirulina Platensis (Arthrospira): Physiology, Cell-Biology and Biotechnology, ed. A. Vonshak, Taylor & Francis, London,  1997, pp. 117–130 Search PubMed .
A. P. Carvalho, L. A. Meireles and F. X. Malcata, Biotechnol. Prog., 2006, 22, 1490–1506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alaswad, M. Dassisti, T. Prescott and A. G. Olabi, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 51, 1446–1460 CrossRef CAS .
M. Molazadeh, H. Ahmadzadeh, H. R. Pourianfar, S. Lyon and P. H. Rampelotto, Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol., 2019, 7, 42 CrossRef PubMed .
P. J. McGinn, K. E. Dickinson, K. C. Park, C. G. Whitney, S. P. MacQuarrie, F. J. Black, J.-C. Frigon, S. R. Guiot and S. J. B. O'Leary, Algal Res., 2012, 1, 155–165 CrossRef .
J. Yang, M. Xu, X. Zhang, Q. Hu, M. Sommerfeld and Y. Chen, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 159–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. B. Sydney, T. E. da Silva, A. Tokarski, A. C. Novak, J. C. de Carvalho, A. L. Woiciecohwski, C. Larroche and C. R. Soccol, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 3291–3294 CrossRef CAS .
A. Capodaglio, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 51, 1–48 Search PubMed .
K. Napan, K. Kumarasamy, J. C. Quinn and B. Wood, Algal Res., 2016, 19, 39–47 CrossRef .
H. Al-Jabri, P. Das, S. Khan, M. Thaher and M. Abdul Quadir, Water, 2021, 13, 27 CrossRef CAS .

Free Full-Text | Treatment of Wastewaters by Microalgae and the Potential Applications of the Produced Biomass—A Review, Water | https://www.mdpi.com/2073-4441/13/1/27 Search PubMed .
D. L. Cheng, H. H. Ngo, W. S. Guo, S. W. Chang, D. D. Nguyen, S. M. Kumar, B. Du, Q. Wei and D. Wei, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 263, 642–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Cheng, H. H. Ngo, W. S. Guo, S. W. Chang, D. D. Nguyen and S. M. Kumar, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 275, 109–122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kumar, A. K. Ghosh and P. Pal, Sci. Total Environ., 2020, 698, 134169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, A. Deng, X. Gong, X. Li and Y. Zhang, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 243, 628–633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hena, N. Abida and S. Tabassum, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 98805–98813 RSC .
R. Hasan, B. Zhang, L. Wang and A. Shahbazi, J. Pet. Environ. Biotechnol., 2014, 5, 175 CrossRef .
R. Wirth, G. Lakatos, T. Böjti, G. Maróti, Z. Bagi, G. Rákhely and K. L. Kovács, Anaerobe, 2018, 52, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-H. Leong, J.-W. Lim, M.-K. Lam, Y. Uemura, C.-D. Ho and Y.-C. Ho, J. Taiwan Inst. Chem. Eng., 2018, 87, 216–224 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bosnjakovic and N. Sinaga, Appl. Sci., 2020, 10, 8181 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Diza, K. J. Douglas, K. Kang, A. L. Kolarik, R. Malinovski, Y. Torres-Tiji, J. V. Molino, A. Badary and S. P. Mayfield, Front. Nutr., 2023, 9, 1029841 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Kong, L. Li, B. Martinez, P. Chen and R. Ruan, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2010, 160, 9–18 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Martınez, S. Sánchez, J. M. Jimenez, F. El Yousfi and L. Munoz, Bioresour. Technol., 2000, 73, 263–272 CrossRef .
R. Órpez, M. E. Martínez, G. Hodaifa, F. El Yousfi, N. Jbari and S. Sánchez, Desalination, 2009, 246, 625–630 CrossRef .
J.-Y. An, S.-J. Sim, J. S. Lee and B. W. Kim, J. Appl. Phycol., 2003, 15, 185–191 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, J. Rong, H. Chen, C. He and Q. Wang, Front. Energy Res., 2014, 2, 32 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, W. Guo, H.-W. Yen, S.-H. Ho, Y.-C. Lo, C.-L. Cheng, N. Ren and J.-S. Chang, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 198, 619–625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Langley, S. T. L. Harrison and R. P. van Hille, Biochem. Eng. J., 2012, 68, 70–75 CrossRef CAS .

          N. Moheimani, (PDF) CO2 Bioremediation by Microalgae in Photobioreactors: Impacts of Biomass and CO2 Concentrations, Light, and Temperature, Academia.edu, https://www.academia.edu/31230046/CO_2_bioremediation_by_microalgae_in_photobioreactors_Impacts_of_biomass_and_CO_2_concentrations_light_and_temperature, (accessed December 23, 2021) Search PubMed.

Direct Air Capture of CO2 by Microalgae with Buoyant Beads Encapsulating Carbonic Anhydrase | ACS Sustainable Chemistry & Engineering, https://pubs.acs.org/doi/abs/10.1021/acssuschemeng.1c01618, (accessed December 23, 2021) Search PubMed.
E. Eustance, R. D. Gardner, K. M. Moll, J. Menicucci, R. Gerlach and B. M. Peyton, J. Appl. Phycol., 2013, 25, 1663–1677 CrossRef CAS .
B. T. Nguyen and B. Rittmann, Algal Res., 2016, 19, 363–369 CrossRef .

Algae Cultivation for Carbon Capture and Utilization Workshop Summary Report Released! | Department of Energy, https://www.energy.gov/eere/bioenergy/articles/algae-cultivation-carbon-capture-and-utilization-workshop-summary-report, (accessed December 23, 2021) Search PubMed.
E. Eustance, Y.-J. S. Lai, T. Shesh and B. E. Rittmann, Algal Res., 2020, 51, 102070 CrossRef .
Q. Zheng, X. Xu, G. J. O. Martin and S. E. Kentish, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2018, 26, 2219–2228 CrossRef CAS .
S. Van Den Hende, H. Vervaeren and N. Boon, Biotechnol. Adv., 2012, 30, 1405–1424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. ManKee, L. KeatTeong and A. R. Mohamed, Int. J. Greenhouse Gas Control, 2012, 10, 456–469 CrossRef .
J.-S. Lee, D.-K. Kim, J.-P. Lee, S.-C. Park, J.-H. Koh, H.-S. Cho and S.-W. Kim, Bioresour. Technol., 2002, 82, 1–4 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nagase, K. Yoshihara, K. Eguchi, Y. Okamoto, S. Murasaki, R. Yamashita, K. Hirata and K. Miyamoto, Biochem. Eng. J., 2001, 7, 241–246 CrossRef CAS .
C.-Y. Kao, T.-Y. Chen, Y.-B. Chang, T.-W. Chiu, H.-Y. Lin, C.-D. Chen, J.-S. Chang and C.-S. Lin, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 166, 485–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Varshney, J. Beardall, S. Bhattacharya and P. Wangikar, Algal Res., 2018, 30, 28–37 CrossRef .
E. Radmann, F. Camerini, T. Duarte Santos and J. A. Costa, Energy Convers. Manage., 2011, 52, 3132–3136 CrossRef CAS .
I. Pancha, K. Chokshi, R. Maurya, K. Trivedi, S. K. Patidar, A. Ghosh and S. Mishra, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 189, 341–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nunez and A. Quigg, J. Appl. Phycol., 2016, 28, 2123–21038 CrossRef CAS .

          S. P. Fulbright, Crop protection in industrial algae farming: detecting weedy algae and charactering bacterial communities, Colorado State University,  2014 Search PubMed .
J. S. Sauer, R. Simkovsky, A. N. Moore, L. Camarda, S. L. Sherman, K. A. Prather and R. S. Pomeroy, PNAS, 2021, 118(40), e2106882118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Letcher, 
            et al.
          , PLoS One, 2013, 8, e56232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) F. Di Caprio, Algal Res., 2020, 49, 101943 CrossRef ; 
  (b) P. Deore, J. Beardall and S. Noronha, Appl. Phycol., 2020, 1, 32–43 CrossRef .
J. G. Day, N. J. Thomas, U. E. M. Achilles-Day and R. J. G. Leakey, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 114, 715–719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. P. Fulbright, M. K. Dean, G. Wardle, P. J. Lammers and S. Chisholm, Algal Res., 2014, 4, 41–51 CrossRef .
P. Antonella and G. Luca, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20, 6851–6862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Van Ginkel, W. M. M. El-Sayed, R. Johnston, A. Narode, H. J. Lee, A. Bhargava, T. Snell and Y. Chen, Algal Res., 2020, 50, 101975 CrossRef .

Taking advantage of rotifer sensitivity to rotenone to prevent pond crashes for algal-biofuel production, https://www.infona.pl/resource/bwmeta1.element.elsevier-92787b57-1df3-3942-9d15-662528563b15, (accessed December 23, 2021) Search PubMed.
W. M. M. El-Sayed, S. W. Van Ginkel, T. Igou, H. A. Ibrahim, U. M. Abdul-Raouf and Y. Chen, Algal Res., 2018, 33, 277–283 CrossRef .

          M. Pickett, D. Fulcher, I. Drexler, and D. Yeh,  2010.
J. G. Day, S. P. Slocombe and M. S. Stanley, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 109, 245–251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Gong, L. Dai, M. Sommerfeld, C. Zhang and Q. Hu, Algal Res., 2018, 31, 298–310 CrossRef .
A. Converti, A. A. Casazza, E. Y. Ortiz, P. Perego and M. Borghi, Chem. Eng. Process, 2009, 48, 1146–1151 CrossRef CAS .
E.-S. Salama, S. P. Govindwar, R. V. Khandare, H.-S. Roh, B.-H. Jeon and X. Li, Trends Plant Sci., 2019, 24, 611–624 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chisti, Trends Biotechnol., 2008, 26, 126–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. B. Draaisma, R. H. Wijffels, P. M. E. Slegers, L. B. Brentner, A. Roy and M. J. Barbosa, Curr. Opin. Biotechnol., 2013, 24, 169–177 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Han, G. Hu, D. Dauvillee, M. Sommerfeld, S. Ball and Q. Hu, Metab. Eng., 2010, 12, 387–391 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, D. Han, G. Hu, M. Sommerfeld and Q. Hu, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2010, 107, 258–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Dunahay, E. E. Jarvis and P. G. Roessler, J. Phycol., 1995, 31, 1004–1012 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Talebi, M. Tohidfar, A. Bagheri, S. R. Lyon, K. Salehi-Ashtiani and M. Tabatabaei, Biofuel Res. J., 2014, 91–97 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, Q. Hao, L. Bai, J. Xu, W. Yin, L. Song, L. Xu, X. Guo, C. Fan, Y. Chen, J. Ruan, S. Hao, Y. Li, R. R.-C. Wang and Z. Hu, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2014, 7, 128 Search PubMed .
R. Radakovits, R. E. Jinkerson, A. Darzins and M. C. Posewitz, Eukaryotic Cell, 2010, 9, 486–501,  DOI:10.1128/EC.00364-09 .
U. Iskandarov, S. Sitnik, N. Shtaida, S. Didi-Cohen, S. Leu, I. Khozin-Goldberg, Z. Cohen and S. Boussiba, J. Appl. Phycol., 2016, 2, 907–919 CrossRef .
X. Deng, J. Cai and X. Fei, J. Zhejiang Univ., Sci., B, 2013, 14, 1121–1131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xue, Y.-F. Niu, T. Huang, W.-D. Yang, J.-S. Liu and H.-Y. Li, Metab. Eng., 2015, 27, 1–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kumar, A. Shekh, S. Jakhu, Y. Sharma, R. Kappor and T. R. Sharma, Front. in Bioeng. and Biotechnol., 2020, 8, 914 CrossRef PubMed .

Manipulating Fatty Acid Biosynthesis in Microalgae for Biofuel through Protein Interactions, https://journals.plos.org/plosone/article?id=10.1371/journal.pone.0042949 Search PubMed.
A. I. Barros, A. L. Gonçalves, M. Simões and J. C. M. Pires, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 41, 1489–1500 CrossRef .
E. Molina Grima, E.-H. Belarbi, F. G. Acién Fernández, A. Robles Medina and Y. Chisti, Biotechnol. Adv., 2003, 20, 491–515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Rawat, R. Ranjith Kumar, T. Mutanda and F. Bux, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 3411–3424 CrossRef CAS .
N. Uduman, A. Hoadley, G. M. Forde and Y. Qi, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2010, 2, 012701 CrossRef .

          T. Chatsungnoen and Y. Chisti, in Biofuels from Algae, ed. A. Pandey, J.-S. Chang, C. R. Soccol, D.-J. Lee and Y. Chisti, Elsevier, 2nd edn,  2019, pp. 257–286 Search PubMed .
L. Xia, Y. Li, R. Huang and S. Song, R. Soc. Open Sci., 4, 170867 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Vandamme, I. Foubert, I. Fraeye, B. Meesschaert and K. Muylaert, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 105, 114–119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vandamme, I. Foubert and K. Muylaert, Trends Biotechnol., 2013, 31, 233–239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Branyikova, G. Prochazkova, T. Potocar, Z. Jezkova and T. Branyik, Fermentation, 2018, 4, 93 CrossRef CAS .
D. Vandamme, Trends Biotechnol., 2013, 31, 233–239,  DOI:10.1016/j.tibtech.2012.12.005 .

          G. Shelef, A. Sukenik and M. Green, Microalgae Harvesting and Processing: a Literature Review,  1984 Search PubMed .

          T. Kalaitzidis, in Algae for Biofuels and Energy,  2013, pp. 165–185 Search PubMed .
D. Vandamme, I. Foubert, B. Meesschaert and K. Muylaert, J. Appl. Phycol., 2010, 22, 525–530 CrossRef .
M. R. Granados, F. G. Acién, C. Gómez, J. M. Fernández-Sevilla and E. Molina Grima, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 118, 102–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Salim, M. H. Vermuë and R. H. Wijffels, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 118, 49–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-M. Oh, S. J. Lee, M.-H. Park, H.-S. Kim, H.-C. Kim, J.-H. Yoon, G.-S. Kwon and B.-D. Yoon, Biotechnol. Lett., 2001, 23, 1229–1234 CrossRef CAS .
A. Lee, D. Lewis and P. Ashman, Chem. Eng. Res. Des., 2010, 88, 988–996 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. F. Koren and U. Syversen, Filter. Sepr., 1995, 153–156 CrossRef CAS .
I. Kabdaşlı, I. Arslan-Alaton, T. Ölmez-Hancı and O. Tünay, Environ. Technol. Rev., 2012, 1, 2–45 CrossRef .
T. Harif, M. Khai and A. Adin, Water Res., 2012, 46, 3177–3188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Vandamme, S. C. V. Pontes, K. Goiris, I. Foubert, L. J. J. Pinoy and K. Muylaert, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2011, 108, 2320–2329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Lee, D. M. Lewis and P. J. Ashman, Appl. Energy, 2013, 108, 45–53 CrossRef .
N. Uduman, V. Bourniquel, M. Danquah and A. Hoadley, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 174, 249–257 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gao, J. Yang, J. Tian, F. Ma, G. Tu and M. Du, J. Hazard. Mater., 2010, 177, 336–343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, F. Wang, H.-Z. Li, Z.-M. Hu, C. Guo and C.-Z. Liu, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 1504–1507 CAS .
A. Zenouzi, B. Ghobadian, M. A. Hejazi and P. Rahnemoon, J. Agric. Sci. Technol., 2013, 15, 879–887 CAS .
F. Bleeke, G. Quante, D. Winckelmann and G. Klöck, Bioresour. Bioprocess., 2015, 2, 36 CrossRef .
M. Hannon, J. Gimpel, M. Tran, B. Rasala and S. Mayfield, Biofuels, 2010, 1, 763–784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, D. W. F. Wim Brilman, J. A. M. Withag, G. Brem and S. Kersten, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 5113–5122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. G. Bligh and W. J. Dyer, Can. J. Biochem. Physiol., 1959, 37, 911–917 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          L. Lardon, A. Hélias, B. Sialve, J.-P. Steyer and O. Bernard,  2009.
B. H. J. Yap, S. A. Crawford, G. J. Dumsday, P. J. Scales and G. J. O. Martin, Algal Res., 2014, 112–120 CrossRef .
R. Halim, M. K. Danquah and P. A. Webley, Biotechnol. Adv., 2012, 30, 709–732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Robles Medina, E. Molina Grima, A. Giménez Giménez and M. J. Ibañez González, Biotechnol. Adv., 1998, 16, 517–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Kates, Techniques of Lipidology: Isolation, Analysis and Identification of Lipids, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1986 Search PubMed .
S. J. Lee, B.-D. Yoon and H.-M. Oh, Biotechnol. Tech., 1998, 12, 553–556 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hussain, Z. Ruan, I. A. Nascimento, Y. Liu and W. Liao, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 169, 768–772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Miao and Q. Wu, Bioresour. Technol., 2006, 97, 841–846 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Halim, B. Gladman, M. K. Danquah and P. A. Webley, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 178–185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dayananda, R. Sarada, M. U. Rani, T. R. Shamala and G. A. Ravishankar, Biomass Bioenergy, 2007, 31, 87–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. B. Guckert, K. E. Cooksey and L. L. Jackson, J. Microbiol. Methods Search PubMed .
A. Hara and N. S. Radin, Anal. Biochem., 1978, 90, 420–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hussain, Y. Liu, W. A. Lopes, J. I. Druzian, C. O. Souza, G. C. Carvalho, I. A. Nascimento and W. Liao, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2015, 175, 3048–3057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Folch, M. Lees and G. S. Stanley, J. Biol. Chem., 1957, 226, 497–509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Baskar, G. Kalavathy, R. Aiswarya and I. Abarnaebenezer Selvakumari, in Advances in Eco-Fuels for a Sustainable Environment, ed. K. Azad, Woodhead Publishing,  2019, pp. 187–210 Search PubMed .
R. Sawangkeaw, K. Bunyakiat and S. Ngamprasertsith, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2010, 55, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Mendes, B. P. Nobre, M. T. Cardoso, A. P. Pereira and A. F. Palavra, Inorg. Chim. Acta, 2003, 356, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
H. Taher, S. Al-Zuhair, A. H. Al-Marzouqi, Y. Haik, M. Farid and S. Tariq, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2014, 86, 57–66 CrossRef CAS .
M. Munir, N. Sharif, S. Naz, F. Saleem and F. Manzoor, Sci. Technol. Dev., 2013, 32, 235–243 Search PubMed .
E. Ryckebosch, K. Muylaert and I. Foubert, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc., 2012, 89, 189–198 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, J. Yin, Z. Gao, H. Huang, X. Ji and C. Dou, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2011, 164, 1215–1224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-H. Cheng, T.-B. Du, H.-C. Pi, S.-M. Jang, Y.-H. Lin and H.-T. Lee, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 10151–10153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Lee, J. M. Cho, Y. K. Chang and Y.-K. Oh, Bioresour. Technol., 2017, 244, 1317–1328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sati, M. Mitra, S. Mishra and P. Baredar, Algal Res., 2019, 38, 101413 CrossRef .
J.-M. Roux, H. Lamotte and J.-L. Achard, Energy Procedia, 2017, 112, 680–688 CrossRef .
H. Im, H. Lee, M. S. Park, J.-W. Yang and J. W. Lee, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 152, 534–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Prabakaran and A. D. Ravindran, Lett. Appl. Microbiol., 2011, 53, 150–154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ranjith Kumar, P. Hanumantha Rao and M. Arumugam, Front. Energy Res., 2015, 2, 61 Search PubMed .
H. Taher, S. Al-Zuhair, A. H. Al-Marzouqi, Y. Haik and M. Farid, Biomass Bioenergy, 2014, 66, 159–167 CrossRef CAS .
F. G. Naghdi, L. M. G. Gonzalez, W. Chan and P. M. Schenk, Microb. Biotechnol., 2016, 9, 718–726 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Liang, Q. Zhang and W. Cong, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2012, 60, 11771–11776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Amarni and H. Kadi, Innovative Food Sci. Emerging Technol., 2010, 11, 322–327 CrossRef CAS .
S. Balasubramanian, J. D. Allen, A. Kanitkar and D. Boldor, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 3396–3403 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Quesada-Salas, G. Delfau-Bonnet, G. Willig, N. N. Préat, F. Allais and I. Ioannou, Processes, 2021, 9, 369 CrossRef CAS .
K. S. Suslick and D. J. Flannigan, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2008, 59, 659–683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Sheng, R. Vannela and B. E. Rittmann, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 3795–3802 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Sommerfeld, W. Chen, Q. Hu, D. Giorgi, T. Navapanich, M. Ingram and R. Erdman, Algae Biomass Summit, Seattle, WA, USA,  2008 Search PubMed.
B. E. Rittmann, H. Lee, H. Zhang, J. Alder, J. E. Banaszak and R. Lopez, Water Sci. Technol., 2008, 58, 1895–1901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-S. Lee, P. Parameswaran, J. M. Alder and B. E. Rittmann, Water Environ. Res., 2010, 82, 2316–2324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Klein-Marcuschamer, B. A. Simmons and H. W. Blanch, Biofuels, Bioprod. Biorefin., 2011, 5, 562–569 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cooney, G. Young and N. Nagle, Sep. Purif. Rev., 2009, 38, 291–325 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Kim, Y.-K. Choi, J. Park, S. Lee, Y.-H. Yang, H. J. Kim, T.-J. Park, Y. H. Kim and S. H. Lee, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 109, 312–315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. K. Gollakota, N. Kishore and S. Gu, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 1378–1392 CrossRef .
A. Dimitriadis and S. Bezergianni, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 68, 113–125 CrossRef CAS .

          P. Biller and A. B. Ross, in Handbook of Biofuels Production, Elsevier,  2016, pp. 509–547 Search PubMed .
H. M. Guzmán, A. de la Jara Valido, L. C. Duarte and K. F. Presmanes, Aquacult. Int., 2010, 18, 189–199 CrossRef .
M. Ota, Y. Kato, H. Watanabe, M. Watanabe, Y. Sato, R. L. Smith Jr and H. Inomata, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 5237–5242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. M. Moll, R. D. Gardner, E. O. Eustance, R. Gerlach and B. M. Peyton, Algal Res., 2014, 5, 7–15 CrossRef .
D. A. White, A. Pagarette, P. Rooks and S. T. Ali, J. Appl. Phycol., 2013, 25, 153–165 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. Li, N. Wu and C. Q. Lan, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2008, 79, 707–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Nascimento, I. T. D. Cabanelas, J. N. dos Santos, M. A. Nascimento, L. Sousa and G. Sansone, Algal Res., 2015, 8, 53–60 CrossRef .
L. Xin, H. Hong-Ying, G. Ke and S. Ying-Xue, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 5494–5500 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chakravarty and N. Mallick, Biomass Bioenergy, 2019, 126, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mallick, S. K. Bagchi, S. Koley and A. K. Singh, Front Microbiol., 2016, 7, 1019 Search PubMed .
S. Mandal and N. Mallick, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 2009, 84, 281–291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mujtaba, W. Choi, C.-G. Lee and K. Lee, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 123, 279–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yoo, S.-Y. Jun, J.-Y. Lee, C.-Y. Ahn and H.-M. Oh, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, S71–S74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. A. Nascimento, S. S. I. Marques, I. T. D. Cabanelas, G. C. de Carvalho, M. A. Nascimento, C. O. de Souza, J. I. Druzian, J. Hussain and W. Liao, BioEnergy Res., 2014, 7, 1002–1013 CAS .
M. J. Ramos, C. M. Fernández, A. Casas, L. Rodríguez and Á. Pérez, Bioresour. Technol., 2009, 100, 261–268 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Demirbas, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 1125–1130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Demirbaş, Energy Convers. Manage., 2003, 44, 2093–2109 CrossRef .
G. R. Stansell, V. M. Gray and S. D. Sym, J. Appl. Phycol., 2012, 24, 791–801 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Nascimento, S. S. I. Marques, I. T. D. Cabanelas, S. A. Pereira, J. I. Druzian, C. O. de Souza, D. V. Vich, G. C. de Carvalho and M. A. Nascimento, BioEnergy Res., 2013, 6, 1–13 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Haas, A. J. McAloon, W. C. Yee and T. A. Foglia, Bioresour. Technol., 2006, 97, 671–678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yang, C.-T. Lai and W. K. Shieh, Water Res., 2000, 34, 3303–3314 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Quinn and R. Davis, Bioresour. Technol., 2015, 184, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wu, Y.-C. Lei and J.-S. Chang, Bioresour. Technol., 2019, 288, 121492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. G. Zaimes and V. Khanna, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2013, 6, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Martin and I. E. Grossmann, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 7998–8014 CrossRef CAS .
M. Faried, M. Samer, E. Abdelsalam, R. S. Yousef, Y. A. Attia and A. S. Ali, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2017, 79, 893–913 CrossRef .

          R. Davis, J. Markham, C. Kinchin, N. Grundl, E. C. Tan and D. Humbird, Process Design and Economics for the Production of Algal Biomass, National Renewable Energy Lab.(NREL), Golden, CO (United States),  2016 Search PubMed .
C. M. Beal, L. N. Gerber, D. L. Sills, M. E. Huntley, S. C. Machesky, M. J. Walsh, J. W. Tester, I. Archibald, J. Granados and C. H. Greene, Algal Res., 2015, 10, 266–279 CrossRef .
P. Pérez-López, J. H. De Vree, G. Feijoo, R. Bosma, M. J. Barbosa, M. T. Moreira, R. H. Wijffels, A. J. Van Boxtel and D. M. Kleinegris, Appl. Energy, 2017, 205, 1151–1164 CrossRef .
H. K. Jeswani, A. Chilvers and A. Azapagic, Proc. R. Soc. A, 2020, 476, 20200351 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Brownbridge, P. Azadi, A. Smallbone, A. Bhave, B. Taylor and M. Kraft, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 151, 166–173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ruiz, G. Olivieri, J. De Vree, R. Bosma, P. Willems, J. H. Reith, M. H. Eppink, D. M. Kleinegris, R. H. Wijffels and M. J. Barbosa, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3036–3043 RSC .

          Q. H. Ltd, Qualitas Health and Valicor Renewables Announce Strategic Partnership to Commercialize Algae-Based Omega-3 Supplements, https://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/qualitas-health-and-valicor-renewables-announce-strategic-partnership-to-commercialize-algae-based-omega-3-supplements-190660351.html, (accessed January 1, 2022) Search PubMed.

          Nordic Naturals, Algae Omega Liquid, Available from: http://www.nordicnaturals.com/en/Products/Product_Details/514/?ProdID=1649,  2014 Search PubMed.

Aurora Algae, Make Way for a Better Omega-3 Source. Available from: http://www.aurorainc.com/solutions/omega-3/2014 Search PubMed .

          C. Leschin-Hoar, Why Farmed Salmon Is Losing its Omega-3 Edge, Time, http://time.com/3620869/salmon-omega-3,  2014 Search PubMed .
V. Kiron, Marine microalgae from biorefinery as a potential feed protein sourcefor Atlantic salmon, common carp and whiteleg shrimp, Aquacult. Nutr., 2012, 18(5), 521–531 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Torres-Tiji, F. J. Fields and S. P. Mayfield, Biotechnol. Adv., 2020, 41, 107536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Caporgno and A. Mathys, Front. Nutr., 2018, 5, 58 CrossRef PubMed .
C. J. Diaz, K. J. Douglas, K. Kang, A. L. Kolarik, R. Malinovski, Y. Torres-Tiji, J. V. Molino, A. Badary and S. P. Mayfield, Front. Nutr., 2023, 9, 1029841 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. Sing, R. Kothari, R. Gupta and V. V. Tyagi, J. Environ. Manage., 2019, 245, 519–539 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Miaden and S. Nazaruddin, Appl. Sci., 2020, 10, 8181 CrossRef .
N. Katerine, K. Narthik, Q. C. Jason and W. Byard, Algal Res., 2016, 19, 39–47 CrossRef .

          https://www.globenewswire.com/en/newsrelease/2021/09/13/2295918/0/en/Microalgae-Market-is-Expected-to-Reach-1-8-Billion-by-2028-Market-Size-Share-Forecasts-Trends-Analysis-Report-with-COVID-19-Impact-by-Meticulous-Research.html
        .

Footnote† Present address: 144 Bridgeport Crescent, Ancaster Ontario, L9K 1K5, Canada. Phone: 226-505-4854; E-mail: E-mail: Javid.chemist@gmail.com.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:
Javid Hussain	Dr. Javid Hussain is a PhD researcher, and he graduated in 2016 under the supervision of Dr Wei Liao, Michigan State University and Dr Iracema, Federal University of Bahia, Brazil. He received a Master's degree in Environmental Chemistry from the Institute of Chemical Sciences, University of Peshawar, Pakistan and in 2011 was admitted to the MPhil program at the same institute. During his MPhil year, he received PhD offers from three countries (Australia, South America, and South Korea). He has published over 30 international peer-reviewed journal articles. He has been the subject editor for polymer journal MDPI since 2021 and has been working as a reviewer for the peer reviewed journals Bioengineering, Polymer, Sustainability, and Foods etc. He delivered lectures at international events in four continents, particularly in the US, Spain, Switzerland, Brazil, and Canada. His research focuses on the science of microbial and algal based biofuel production which provides services to society and has great impact on climate change. Since 2020, he has been working as a manager in the food industry here in Ontario, Canada.
Bruce E. Rittmann	Dr. Bruce E. Rittmann is Regents' Professor of Environmental Engineering and Director of the Biodesign Swette Center for Environmental Biotechnology at Arizona State University. His research focuses on the science and engineering needed to “manage microbial communities to provide services to society.” Dr Rittmann is a member of the National Academy of Engineering; a Fellow of AAAS, WEF, IWA, AEESP, and NAI; and a Distinguished Member of ASCE. Dr Rittmann is the co-winner of the 2018 Stockholm Water Prize. Dr Rittmann has published over 800 journal articles, books, and book chapters, and he has 21 patents. Dr Bruce E. Rittmann has a Google Scholar citation of 61295 and an H-index of 117.

 	Fig. 1  Microscopy pictures of the wide range of microalgal strains: (a) Chlorococcum sp.; (b) Chlorella vulgaris; (c) Ankistrodesmus gracilis; (d) Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata; (e) Tetraselmis chui; (f) Botryococcus braunii; (g) Chlorella sp.; (h) Scendedesmus bijugatus; (i) Nannochloropsis sp.; and (j) Skeletonema costatum.	 
6H2O + 6CO2 → C6H12O6 + 6O2
Light reaction: 12H2O → 24[H+ + e−] + 6O2
Dark reaction: 24[H+ + e−] + 6CO2 → C6H12O6 + 6H2O

 	Fig. 2  The three stages of the Calvin cycle (or C3 cycle): in Stage 1, the enzyme ribulose-1,5-bisphosphate carboxylase/oxygenase (RuBisCO) and ribulose 1,5, bisphosphate (RuBP) incorporate CO2 into an organic molecule (3-phosphoglycerate). In Stage 2, the organic molecule is reduced. In stage 3, RuBP, the molecule that starts the cycle, is regenerated so that the cycle can continue. The red circles represent carbon atoms, and the yellow circles represent phosphate.	 


Botryococcus braunii
	35–41	12–16	35–40	
71


Chlamydomonas sp1	39–49	23–29	13–15	
71


Chlorella vulgaris
	46–53	15–19	15–21	
71


Chlorococcum sp2	42–49	22–24	13–18	
71


Coelastrum microporum
	34–49	174–33	17–19	
71


Scenedesmus obliquus
	47–55	14–20	17–18	
71


Staurastrum sp.	40–50	29–37	8–8	
71


Synechocystis aquatilis
	41–50	25–32	11–11	
71


Anabaena cylindrica
	43–56	25–30	4–7	
72


Aphanizomenon flos-aquae
	57	26	2	
72


Chlorella pyrenoidosa
	57	26	2	
72


Dunaliella salina
	57	32	6	
72


Euglena gracilis
	39–61	14–18	14–20	
72


Porphyridium cruentum
	28–39	40–57	9–14	
72


Spirogyra sp.	6–20	33–64	11–21	
72


Arthrospira maxima
	60–71	13–16	6–7	
72


Spirulina platensis
	42–63	15	11	
72


Botryococcus terribilis
	46	31	20	
73


Botryococcus braunii (UTEX-572)	40	19	34	
72


Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
	48	17	21	
74


Nannochloropsis spp.	29	36	18	
74


Haematococcus pluvialis
	48	27	15	
74


 	Fig. 3  Potential fuels and fuel precursors in microalgae.	 

 	Fig. 4  Comparison of different-generation feedstocks regarding oil productivity (L ha−1) and prices (US$ per L).	 

 	Fig. 5  Some designs of open and closed microalgal production systems. (a) Dunaliella bardwil cultivation in raceway ponds in Israel; (b) outdoor raceway pond (ORP) in operation at the AlgaePARC facility, Wageningen University and Research Centre, the Netherlands 2016; (c) outdoor raceway pond (ORP) in operation at Michigan State University, East Lansing, United States, 2018; (d) Chlorella vulgaris cultivation in pilot-scale vertical PBRs, Federal University of Bahia, Brazil, 2016; (e) flat-plate photobioreactor in operation at the Chemical Engineering Department of University of Almeria, Spain, 2017; (f) vertical tubular PBRs in operation at Arizona State University, United States, 2019; (g) pilot-scale helical PBR at Michigan State University, United States, 2018; (h) outdoor horizontal tubular PBR in operation at the AlgaePARC facility, Wageningen University and Research centre, the Netherlands 2016; (i) outdoor flat-plate PBRs in operation inside at a thermoelectric poor station, Tocopilla, Chile, 2017.	 

Space required	High	Low
Area/volume ratio	Low (5–10 m−1)	High (20–200 m−1)
Water loss	High	Low
CO2 loss	High	Low
Temperature	High variable	Requires cooling
Weather dependence	High	Low
Process control	Complicated	Uncomplicated
Shear	Low	High
Algal species	Restricted	Flexible
Population density	Lower	Higher
Light utilization efficiency	Poor	Good
Most costly parameters	Mixing	Oxygen and temperature control
Contamination control	Complicated	Less complicated
Capital investments	Low	High
Productivity	Low	3–5 times over an open system
Gas transfer control	Low	High

Municipal (centrate)	
Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
	2000 (mg L−1)	25 (w/w)	N = 58 mg L−1 day−1 P = 17 mg L−1 day−1	
136

Municipal	
Scenedemsus obliquus
	26	8	P = 98% in 94 h N = 100% in 188 h	
137

Municipal	
Botryococcus brauni
	346	62	N = 91%	
138

Swine manure	
Botryococcus brauni
	700	69	T–N = 48% NH+4 N = 98%	
139

Textile wastewater	
Chlorella vulgaris
	730	204	N = 9.8 mg L−1 day−1	
140

Swine wastewater	
Chlorella vulgaris
	1960 (mg L−1)	1030	COD = 60–70% NH4–N = 40–90%	
141

Activated sludge	
Chlorella vulgaris
	40	160 (mg L−1)	98% (N removal)	
133

Mercury wastewater	
Chlorella vulgaris
	—	10%	94% Hg	
129

Textile wastewater	
Chlorella vulgaris
	0.0019	—	77% (dye) 69.9% (COD)	
141

Landfill leachate	
Chlorella vulgaris
	240	46	24 mg L−1 day−1	
127

Landfill leachate	
Scenedesmus sp.	550	
	—	
128



Cyclotella cryptica
	No enrichment of lipid content	Non optimized	Particle bombardment	No data	2-3-fold increase in ACC amounts	
76 and 178

Dunaliella salina
	Improved quality of oil- more resistant to oxidation	The third position of codons was optimized	Particle bombardment	No data	12% increase in total lipid content	
179


Chlorella ellipsoidea
	Total soluble protein and carbohydrate content was significantly decreased	Non optimized	Electroporation	No noticeable influence	46.4–52.9% increase in lipid contents	
180


Phaeodactylum tricornutum
	Higher quantity and modified composition of fatty acids	Optimized	Biolistic transformation	Reduced growth rate	Increase in the accumulation of shorter chain length fatty acids	
181


Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
	Elevated level of oleic acid (18:1 n-9) and a concurrent decrease in C18 PUFA	Optimized	Glass bead method	Negative influence on the growth was not recorded	50% higher TAG content	
182


Chlamydomonas reinhardtii
	The up or down regulation of PAP activities affects the content of DAG	Non optimized	Glass bead method	Increased growth rate in the early stages, days 2 to 5	Increase in lipids from 7.5% up to 21.8%	
183


Phaeodactylum tricornutum
	C18:0 decreased from 231% to 1.75%; monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFAs) also showed an increase from 21.21% to 26.66% and a slight decrease in polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) from 41.39% to 36.05%	Non optimized	Electroporation	Similar growth rate to that of the wild type	Total lipid content in transgenic cells markedly increased by 25-fold and reached a record 57.8%	
184


 	Fig. 6  Dose dependence of flocculation. Each beaker contained 200 mL of a broth of the microalga (dry biomass concentration = 3.5 g L−1). The beakers were dosed with different concentrations of the flocculant (0–800 mg L−1 aluminium sulfate) and then treated the same way: (1) rapid mixing (impeller tip speed = 0.209 m s−1) for 2 min; (2) gentle mixing (impeller tip speed = 0.052 m s−1) for 30 min; and (3) no mixing for 30 min.	 
Al → Al3+ +3e−
O2 + 4H+ + 4e− → 2H2O

 	Fig. 7  The steps of the dry and wet routes of lipid extraction.	 

Conventional solvents	-Toxic and not eco-friendly – use of organic solvents (flammable/volatile) and carcinogenic	-Distillation/heating of solvents	– Ease of extraction – use of dried algae to achieve desirable amounts of lipid yields
-Drying of microalgae
Super-critical CO2	-Requires CO2 (greenhouse gas)	-Distillation/heating of solvents if paired with co-solvent – high pressure conditions (20–30 MPa)	– Low toxicity – a separation step is not required -high capital cost to build and operate equipment for high-pressure conditions
-High equipment and operational cost
Ionic liquids	-Resistance to thermal degradation	-Distillation/heating of solvents	-No reports at a larger scale
-Aquatic toxicity	-High environmental and/or economic costs to synthesize and recycle ionic liquid
-Uses toxic and/or volatile reagents and solvents for their production (these solvents cause groundwater contamination)	-Production of solvents requires many synthetic steps	-Non-flammable in a wide temperature range
-Enables single solvent extraction	

Switchable solvents	-Synthesis can be energy intensive or environmentally damaging	-Switching and separation of solvents could be energy intensive at a large scale	-No reports yet at a larger scale possibly high capital cost – easily recyclable – green approach
-CO2 used in switching – technical viability is yet to be studied -
Microwave-assisted extraction	-MAE itself does not poses environmental risk	-May be energy intensive at a large scale	-Capital investment and operational cost for operating a large microwave reactor may be prohibitive – environmentally friendly, reduced extraction time – reduced solvent usage – improved extraction yield
-Paired with extraction solvent that may be toxic or environmentally taxing
-Poor efficiency with volatile or non-polar solvents
-Easy to scale up but yet to be standardised
Simultaneous direct trans-esterification	-Simultaneous direct transesterification itself does not pose environmental risks	-Typically requires dry microalgae, which is energy intensive to produce	-Typically requires the use of dry microalgae, which adds to capital and operational costs
-Paired with extraction solvent that may be toxic or environmentally taxing	-Non-toxic – reduced time and solvents – saves energy – economical
-Typically requires dry biomass – viability at the commercial scale is yet to be studied and technical viability is yet to be studied
Ultrasound-assisted extraction	-UAE itself does not pose environmental risk-paired with extraction solvent that may be toxic or environmentally taxing	Ultrasonication of large volumes of microalgae may be energy intensive	-Capital investment and operational cost to operate large ultrasonication equipment may be prohibitive
Enzymatic	-Proper selection of enzymes and their combinations is important	—	-No energy consumption – non-toxic – enables wet biomass extraction
-Efficiency depends on the state of microalgae
Acid hydrolysis	-Simple	—	-Reactor design concerns -drying of biomass required

Chloroform hexane	
Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)	78	Freeze dried and wet microalgae, temp 25 °C	
235


Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)	30	
235


Chlorella vulgaris (20 g, dry)	13	
236

Nannochloropsis gaditana (20 mL, wet)	2.4	
237

Chloroform:ethanol (2:1)	
Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)	91	Wet microalgae	
235

Chloroform:methanol (2:1)	
Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)	95	Wet and dry microalgae, temp. 25 °C	
235


Scenedesmus sp. (10 g/100 mL, wet)	10	
238


Chlorella vulgaris (20 g, dry)	38	
236

Hexane:methanol (7:3)	
Chlorella vulgaris (20 g, dry)	29	Freeze dried microalgae	
236

Time. 120 min
Hexane: ethanol (2:1)	
Nannochloropsis sp. (3 g/10 mL, wet)	61	Wet microalgae	
235


n-hexane (soxhlet)	
Scenedesmus sp. (100 mL, wet)	9	Dry microalgae, temp. 25–30 °C	
238

Hexane:ethanol (2:1) soxhlet)	
Acutodesmus obliquus (20 g, dry)	12	Dry microalgae, temp. 25–30 °C	
239


(Microwave assistance)
Chloroform:methanol:water (2:2:1.9)	
Chlorella vulgaris (5 g, dry)	32	700 W, 50 s	
240

Chloroform:ethanol (1:1)	
Scenedesmus sp. (2 g, dry)	28	100 C, 1000 W, 10 min	
240

Chloroform:methanol (2:1	
Nannochloropsis sp. (15 mL, wet)	8.5	65 C, 500 W, 5 min	
240

Ultrasound assistance	
	
	
	

Chloroform:methanol (2:1)	
Chlorella sp. (10 g, dry)	67	20 kHz, 30 min	
241

Hexane:Isopropanol (3:2)	
Chlorella sp. (10 g, dry)	77	20 kHz, 60 min	
240

Hexane	
Nannochloropsis (20 g L−1, wet)	5.4–27	500–10000 kJ kg−1, 2.8–55.6 min	
240

Chloroform:methanol (2:1)	
Chlorella vulgaris (0.5 g, dry)	19	34.74 W, 40 kHz, 20 min	
240

Pulsed electric field	
Scenedesmus sp. (15 g, dry)	30–35	1st pass: 30.6 kW h m−3, 2nd pass: 33.7 kW h m−3	
240

Chloroform:methanol (2:1)

Enzymatic lysis
Chloroform:methanol (1:1)	
Scenedesmus sp. (1 g, dry)	14	Cellulase, xylanase, pectinase, cellulase, and mannanase	
240


n-Hexane:propanol (3:2)	Nannochloropsis sp. (0.2 g, dry)	73	Lysozyme and cellulase	
240


n-Hexane	
Scenedesmus sp. (1 g, wet)	13	Lysozyme	
242


n-Hexane	
Scenedesmus sp. (1 g, wet)	17	Cellulase	

Acid hydrolysis	
	
	
	

Hexane, soxhlet	
Chlorella vulgaris (5 g, dry)	54	HCl, 120 min	
240

Chloroform: methanol (1:1)	
Chlorella sorokiniana (1 g/40 mL, wet	11	HCl, 78 C, 120 min	
240

Hexane	
Chlorella vulgaris (20 g L−1, wet)	34	H2SO4, 120 C, 60 min	
236

Halim et al., 2012.	
Botryococcus braunii (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)	35–40	Homogenizer for 15 min, 52% amplitude, rotary evaporator for solvent	
71

Hexane: isopropanol (3:2)	
Chlamydomonas sp1. (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)	13–15

Chlorella vulgaris (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)	18–21

Chlorococcum sp2. (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)	13–18

Coelastrum microporum (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)	17–19

Scenedesmus obliquus (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)	17–18

Staurastrum sp. (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)	7.5–7.7

Synechocystis aquatilis (0.2 g/5 mL, dry)	11
Chlorella vulgaris (0.5 g/9 mL, dry)	22


C12	Lauric acid	0	0.1	0	0	0	0	0	48	0
C14	Myristic acid	0.1	0.7	0	0	0	0	0	21	0
C16	Palamitic acid	8	37	12	4.9	11	6.2	6.5	9.9	29
C18	Stearic acid	1.8	6.6	3.1	1.6	3.6	3.7	1.4	3	0.9
C18:1	Oleic acid	53	46	75	33	25	25	66	7.2	13
C18:2 w6	Linoleic acid	28	8.6	7.8	20	53	63	25	1.6	57
C18:3w6	Linolenic acid	0.3	0.3	0.6	7.9	6.1	0.2	0.1	0.6	0
C18:4	Octadecatentrienoic	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	0
C20:1	Gadoleic acid	2.4	0.2	0	9.3	0.3	0.2	0.1	0	0
C22:1	Erucic acid	0	0	0	23	0.3	0.1	0.1	0	0
Others	—	5.7	0.7	1.9	0	0.5	1.3	1	9.6	0


C4	Butyric acid	0	4.9	1.2	1.5	1.7	0.9	0.4	0	0
C14	Myristic acid	0.6	2.5	1.1	1.7	2.9	2.6	0.7	0	0.7
C16	Palmitic acid	40	51	52	30	26	25	28	35	7.2
C16:1	Palmitoleic	3.2	0.3	0	0.5	0.8	1.2	0	0	0
C18	Stearic acid	8	11.5	7.5	2.7	2.1	3.2	3.3	3.1	1.6
C18:1c	Oleic acid	29	7.8	22	24	19	7.1	42	40	76
C18:1t	Octadecatentrienoic acid	0.6	5.9	0	0.7	1	11	0	0	0.9
C18:2w6	Linoleic acid	8.5	3.9	4.6	2	12	14	12	5	5.2
C18:3w6	Linolenic acid	0	0.8	2.8	0.4	0.2	4.5	1	0	0
C18:3w3	α-Linolenic acid	1.6	1.9	0	27	26	22	8.5	7.2	5.3
C20:1w9	Gadoleic acid	0	0	0	0	0	0	0	2.8	0
Others	—	7.9	9.7	9.2	9.7	7.1	9.9	4.1	7	2.8



Land crops

Peanut	16	56	29	53	195	97	113	11	17
Palm	45	46	8.9	61	209	57	64	7.7	10
Olive	16	76	8.4	57	196	84	93	4.2	−6
Rapeseed	6.5	65	28	55	190	109	122	1.3	−10
Soybean	15	26	59	49	195	128	144	3.4	−5
Sunflower	11	26	63	50	193	132	152	4.2	−3
Grape seed	11	19	69	48	187	138	158	3	−6
Corn	8	66	25	53	183	101	117	1.5	−12
Coconut	90	6	2	63	255	12	10	2.3	−6
Cottonseed	26	18	52	51	192	90	122	4.7	−2


Microalgae


Chlamydomonas sp.	79	14	6.7	65	220	27	28	11	17

Scenedesmus obliquus
	67	22	7.4	64	216	35	37	8.9	12

Chlorella vulgaris
	50	36	10	62	199	53	5	8	8.6

Ankistrodesmus falcatus
	41	28	3.2	50	202	101	89	4.4	−2.7

Ankistrodesmus fusiformis
	37	22	40	48	200	113	103	3.7	−4.7

Chlamydomonas bacillus
	36	23.6	41	48	197	114	105	3.9	−4.1

Coelastrum miroporum
	46	38	16	53	206	88	70	4	−3.8

Desmodesmus brasiliensis
	35	44	21	53	205	87	87	4.4	−2.6

Botryococcus terribilis
	39	43	12	59	193	67	58	5.1	−0.5

Botryococcus branunii
	9.8	80	11	53	197	95	101	1.5	−11.7

Kirchneriella lunaris
	32	23	45	42	202	137	113	1.9	−9.6

Pseudokirchneriella subcapitata
	3	47	1	54	208	83	82	1.95	−9.6

Botryococcus branunii (UTEX)	8	78	14	47	200	116	106	0.95	−14

 	Fig. 8  Microalgal biorefineries integrating a range of processes to generate multiple products and improve economic viability.	 
AD	Anaerobic digestion
ANP	Brazilian National Agency for Petroleum, Natural Gas and Biofuels
ASTM	American Society for Testing and Materials
AZ	Arizona
ATP	Adenosine triphosphate
BioH2	Biohydrogen
CFPP	Cold-filter plugging point
CH4	Methane
Cl−	Chloride ion
CN	Cetane number
DAG	Deoxy acyl glyceride
DC	Direct current
CO2	Carbon dioxide
DAGAT	Diacylglycerol acyltransferase
DOE	Department of Energy
DNA	Deoxyribonucleic acid
GM	Genetically modified
EtOH	Ethanol
EP	Eutrophication
FAEE	Fatty acids ethyl esters
FAME	Fatty acid methyl esters
FFA	Free fatty acids
FT	Fischer–Tropsch
GHG	Greenhouse gas
GWP	Global warming potential
H 2	Hydrogen
HHV	Higher heat value
HTG	Hydrothermal gasification
HTL	Hydrothermal liquefaction
IEA	International Energy Agency
IL	Ionic liquid
IPCC	Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change
IV	Iodine value
LCA	Life cycle analysis
LCSF	Long chain saturated factor
MAHs	Mono aromatic hydrocarbons
MAE	Microwave-assisted extraction
MBSP	Minimum biomass selling price
MI	Michigan
MUFA	Monounsaturated fatty acids
N	Nitrogen
NOx	Nitrogen oxide
NADPH	Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate
NREL	National Renewable Energy Laboratory
O2	Oxygen
ODP	Ozone depletion
OP	Open pond
OS	Oxidative stability
ORP	Outdoor raceway pond
PAHs	Poly-aromatic hydrocarbon
PBR	Photobioreactor
PEF	Pulsed electric field
PUFA	Polyunsaturated fatty acids
SP	Species
SOx	Sulfur oxides
SO42−	Sulfate ion
SV	Saponification value
SWW	Swine wastewater
TAG	Triacylglycerol
UAE	Ultrasound-assisted extraction
US	United States
Footnote
† Present address: 144 Bridgeport Crescent, Ancaster Ontario, L9K 1K5, Canada. Phone: 226-505-4854; E-mail: E-mail: Javid.chemist@gmail.com.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
