Stabilization of CsPbBr 3 quantum dots for photocatalysis, imaging and optical sensing in water and biological medium: a review  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC00340F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC00340F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 6935-6956Stabilization of CsPbBr3 quantum dots for photocatalysis, imaging and optical sensing in water and biological medium: a review

        
          
            Sanjayan 
            C. G.
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            M. S. 
            Jyothi
          
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            R. Geetha 
            Balakrishna
          
          
        
      *a
aCentre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, Jain Global Campus, Bangalore 562112, Karnataka, India. E-mail: br.geetha@jainuniversity.ac.in
bDepartment of Chemistry, AMC Engineering College, Bannerghatta Main Rd, Bengaluru, Karnataka 560083, India
Received 
      23rd January 2022
    , Accepted 21st March 2022First published on 25th March 2022AbstractOf all the quantum dots, CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots (CPQDs) have been extensively studied for sensing and photocatalysis because of their desired photophysical properties such as optical absorption, high quantum yield and narrow emission bands. However their photo, thermal and aqueous instability has limited their use in real time applications. The review provides a fundamental understanding of this material's intrinsic behavior towards these degradation factors and discusses elaborately about the various strategies being implemented namely surface passivation through (a) ligand exchange/doping, (b) coating silica shells and (c) developing polymer encapsulations to tweak its behaviour for water related applications. A detailed track record against our focussed set of qualities for developing water stable CPQDs will help us look ahead in the right direction. It provides an assessment of the figures of merit of these tweaked or stabilized CPQDs, to check the reliability of this material for photocatalysis and biosensing in water. The insights offered here however open scope, not only for developing various other water stable, lead free and double perovskites which are environmentally more benign and useful, but would also give perspectives to validate their developed schemes towards the use of these materials for water related applications.
Sanjayan C. G.
Mr Sanjayan C. G. obtained his BSc degree from Chettinad Academy of Research and Education and his MSc from Nanoscience and Nanotechnology from the University of Madras. Presently, he is working as a Senior Research Fellow at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, and is pursuing his PhD under the guidance of Prof. R Geetha Balakrishna, and Dr Sakar Mohan. His research interests include the design and development of water stable perovskite fluorescent probes for bio sensing and bio imaging and development of lead-free perovskite quantum dots for biomedical applications.
M. S. Jyothi
Jyothi M S is an Assistant Professor, at AMC Engineering College. She received her PhD from the Center for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, Bengaluru, in 2016. She was a post-doctoral fellow for a stint of two years at Chulalongkorn University, Thailand. Her research interest lies on nanomaterials and composites for energy and environmental applications including solar cells, gas separation and water treatment. She is passionate about investigations on structure–property relationships, chemical and thermal stabilities, and micro and macro structures of membrane composites. She is presently working on use of bio-waste and natural material-incorporated polymeric membranes, organic–inorganic hybrid framework nanoparticles and nanofibre membranes of the same for various applications.
R. Geetha Balakrishna
Prof Geetha Balakrishna has gone through various stages of teaching and research in her career starting from a lecturer to Professor, to administrator, and is now a core researcher and the Director of a dedicated researcher Centre called the “Centre for Nano and Material Sciences”, at Jain University. Her aim has been to work towards establishing minimal research facilities so as to motivate faculty at the University level to take up their research seriously. She has focused her research on photochemistry and energy conversions in nanomaterials. She works on perovskites, oxide/sulphide nanocrystals and colloidal quantum dots which are active to photons and hence applicable to solar cells, water purification/disinfection/desalination and sensing technologies. She has published around 137 research papers, four patents and guided/guiding 26 students on their research projects leading to Doctoral and Post-doctoral degrees. Dr Geetha is a founder and CEO of a spin-off company from Jain University called Greenchem Nano. She is a member of many renowned professional bodies and has presently been nominated as the regional coordinator of Global Materials Network (IUMRS body) from India. She is also the commission member of the International Union of Material Research Society. She is the recipient of the Fulbright Nehru award for Academic and Professional Excellence and is also a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. She was recognised as one of the women at the forefront of energy research by American Chemical Society Energy letters. She is also listed as one of the top 2% scientists across the globe as per Stanford University data 2021.
1. Introduction
Perovskite QDs (PQDs) resemble chalcogenide QDs (CQDs) very closely but have much improved optical properties. A higher quantum yield with narrow FWHM (full width of half maximum) allows an intense fluorescence emission and the confined size range in these perovskite quantum dots results in stronger quantum confinement leading to narrow emission bands.1 These factors and the faster photoluminescence (PL) decay of CQDs that occurs at higher emission energies, all together make PQDs attractive over CQDs. The highly volatile nature of organic (A) cations in these PQDs of the ABX3 structure is known to result in faster degradation than that of the all-inorganic PQDs.2 An element such as cesium in the ‘A’ site instead of an organic cation, that forms CsPbBr3 PQDs, has shown enhanced overall lifetimes.3 In addition cesium perovskites have higher stability and improved fluorescence emission with a tunable band gap energy4 that makes these all-inorganic PQDs impressive towards photon energy conversion devices5,6 like solar cells, light emitting diodes,7 optical sensors and photodetectors.8 Subsequently the tunable cationic and anionic composition of these inorganic PQDs gives the advantage of high optoelectronic and photophysical properties.9 ‘A’ site cations are electronically inactive.10 Electronically active ‘B’ site cations form a lower conduction band from divalent metal ions, and can be replaced accordingly with cations of similar atomic radii.11 ‘X’ site anions can be oxygen or halides such as chloride, bromide, and iodide that form an upper valence band and they are also responsible for the quantum confinement.12,13 Different compositions of perovskites having different cations and halides show different electronic,14 redox15 and polarization16 properties. Through various studies, it is suggested that among the all inorganic perovskite compositions, CsPbBr3 quantum dots (CPQDs) have relatively greater luminescence, and are stable and less volatile.2 The wide bandgap of the CPQDs of around 2.3 eV, with a high absorption coefficient and high charge carrier mobility enhances the efficiency of CPQDs towards various photo applications.17 Also, the high quantum yield and sensitivity17 of these CPQDs give way for their utilization as fluorescent probes to detect various analytes. Recently environmental applications like photocatalysis18 which involves water splitting19 and bioimaging have been explored for these CPQDs.
Accordingly, enormous efforts were made to develop CPQDs with different shapes, sizes and structures by various precursors and synthesis methods such as hydrothermal methods,20 hot injection,21 chemical precipitation, spin coating22 and chemical vapor deposition.23 However, obtaining water stable and compatible CPQDs is quite challenging although one can find well established reports on the successful attempts of making chalcogenide QDs (CdS, CdTe, CdSe, and PbS) which are water stable and biocompatible. Perovskites are basically salts and can react with air, light, moisture and heat effortlessly, leading to degradation if they are not packaged well.24 Stability is the first complex challenge in the domain of these PQDs and if achieved can revolutionize their applications.
Similar strategies performed for CQDs to achieve stability and compatibility have been extended to PQDs but with little success.25 Some of the strategies are very complicated and challenging.26Fig. 1 shows the so far attempted various strategies used for different applications put into a triangle, with techniques at the edges namely coating with polymers/micelles,27–30 surface modification with ligand exchange31,32 and encapsulation within silica and other shells to make CPQDs applicable to various applications depicted at the edges of another triangle.33–35
 Fig. 1  Strategies to stabilize quantum dots for various applications. 
With all the plethora of knowledge, lead halide perovskites are yet to achieve a satisfying outcome in terms of aqueous stability and photostability which leaves huge room for improvements at the material level. CPQDs possess exceptional fluorescence properties, a longer decay time, and a higher molar extinction coefficient, which warrant their higher sensitivity in photo applications, particularly photovoltaics, photocatalysis and sensing applications that include bioimaging. The review articles published so far present diverse perspectives.36,37 Many of them focus on material synthesis and the properties of CsPbBr3.38,39 Few reviews have been covered in the field of photovoltaics of CPQDs,17 but here we wish to focus narrowly on the water related applications for which the stability of CPQDs is the qualifying parameter. Just a handful of them have dedicated only a small portion of their review on the stability on CPQDs40 or on applications namely photocatalysis41 or sensing in organic medium.42 Therefore, a review on CPQDs for applications that use water or biological medium is important. So, we believe important developments that have come about on the stabilization of CPQDs by various strategies and their utilization in the above said water related applications need elaborate assessment. Thus, we discuss the changes observed in specific intrinsic properties of these CPQDs (when these stabilizing strategies are applied) in terms of (a) figures of merit required to be qualified as a good optoelectronic material for photocatalysis and biosensing applications (b) to arrive at conclusions on the reliability of these modified CPQDs for further research and development. The insights offered here open scope for developing various other water stable lead free and double perovskites which are environmentally more benign and useful.
2. Unstable CPQDs: factors and mechanisms
2.1. Brief overview of the effect of air and water on the degradation of CPQDs
Moisture is the presence of water in diffused form and when it comes in contact with water it causes structural degradation of CPQDs.43 Water molecules penetrate into the inner inorganic framework of CsPbX3 to trigger off the intake of two hydrogen and one oxygen molecules forming lead hydroxide (Pb(OH)2).44 The formation of such lead hydroxide (Pb(OH)2) induces structural (inner phase) degradation of CPQDs.45 (Pb (OH)2) further decomposes to form lead oxide PbO and H2O molecules resulting in further hydration thereby allowing the entire crystal structure to collapse and degrade completely.
CPQDs when exposed to environmental oxygen results in the physisorption of oxygen (O2) molecules on the surface, leading to oxidation and formation of the same PbO. The adsorption of molecular oxygen on the surface of the electropositive element occurs with a weak electrostatic bond. This triggers degradation as molecular oxygen directly adsorbed on the metal ions eventually separates as metal oxide or hydroxide. The extreme electronegativity of oxygen, then bromide and chloride ions, causes the shift of higher affinity of the central metal (Pb) cations to form Pb–O chemical bonds. Oxygen (O2) interacts with the conduction band of lead and this encourages the breakage of PbBr3 bonds to form PbO.46 Due to lead oxide formation the electron from the conduction band of CPQDs is transferred to oxygen molecules, leading to the formation of superoxide anions on the surface that alters the band gap of CPQDs. This can also lead to the formation of trap states as shown in Fig. 2a leading to charge recombination and exciton decay thus causing photodegradation of CPQDs.47
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the interaction between O2 and the CPQDs, showing direct extraction of photo-excited electrons from the conduction band (grey arrow) leading to the quenching of the PL (green arrow), while surface defects (TS) placed close to the Fermi level (FL) in the absence of external potentials are essentially unaffected by oxygen (the excitation light is indicated with a blue arrow). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017 ACS. (b) Schematics of the possible degradation pathways of the CPQDs due to O2, H2O and CO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2017 ACS. 
Also, physisorption of oxygen molecules on the surface of CPQDs initiates dissolution of the ligand that induces quick degradation of CPQDs. The exposure of CPQDs to other gaseous species like CO2 on the surface also leads to surface decomposition by forming the oxide phases of PbCO3, which needs to be still studied in depth. Fig. 2b shows the decomposition of CPQDs due to O2, CO2 and H2O.48
2.2. Influence of thermal energy and light energy on the degradation of CPQDs
Thermal degradation was studied by subjecting CPQDs to different temperatures and complete degradation of CPQDs was observed at 125 °C.49 High thermal energy gained by CPQDs leads to initial degradation due to the dissolution of ligands and results in an uncovered core and this slowly causes disruption of bonds between cations and anions. Consequently, structural degradation as well as fluorescence degradation occurs, thereby resulting in loss of the entire property of the material.49,50 The change in the PL intensity of CPQDs due to applied temperature is shown in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  The PL spectra of CPQDs (498) films without illumination (a) and with illumination times of 1 h (b), 6 h (c) and 10 h (d), respectively, at various temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018 AIP Publishing. 
Photodecomposition of CPQDs initiated by photons on continuously illuminating CPQDs causes fast anionic movement of bromide ions. Light can also cause continuous and rapid transfer of electrons from the conduction band of Pb2+ ions to the valence band of Br–ions and affect the quantum yield (QY) of the fluorescent material along with the simultaneous degradation of its structure.51 Furthermore, the superoxide formation due to oxidation will trigger the degradation by the defected band structure that instigates the faster transfer of electrons even under ambient light conditions. This simultaneous action of oxide formation and illumination under ambient light results in the reduction of the overall lifetime of CPQDs and causes the complete photo-degradation.52 In addition, other substantial changes that occur during illumination includes ion migration and halide segregation due to a photon/thermal effect leading to compositional degradation. As mentioned earlier defects formed as a consequence of these processes can also lead to severe instability in CPQDs.53
A different mechanism occurs under UV irradiation. The high photon energy and momentum transferred to CPQDs facilitate ‘Ostwald ripening’ which means that small sized dots are consumed by larger dots resulting in structural and morphological changes, thus altering the optical properties.54 The photons hit the surface of CPQDs and change the arrangement of unstable surface atoms leading to structural deformation and size. However, Huang et al. have reported positive changes in the nature of CPQDs upon UV light illumination. They developed CPQDs for LED lights and the group studied facts behind the degradation of CPQDs under UV light conditions. Under UV light irradiation a positive phenomenon called photo annealing occurs and this allows reconstruction of the structure by removing the dangling bonds and unsaturated atoms on the surface. The diffraction peaks became sharp and strong signifying better crystallinity. A further increase in radiation power triggers aggregation of CPQDs and this is indicated by structure deformation to an oval shape (from the sharp cubic structures) as shown in Fig. 4a. Furthermore, the surface trap states also increase and cause PL loss as shown in Fig. 4b48 and the structural deformation from cubic to deformed CPQDs due to UV light irradiation was clearly seen in the HRTEM images shown in Fig. 4c. It is hence clear that factors and pathways that initiate and cause degradation of CPQDs shown in Fig. 4d are many and inevitable to avoid. Most of these unwanted reactions occur on the surface and surface engineering to protect this surface has tremendous potential as this opens a plethora of applications where these stabilized CPQDs can be utilized due to the obvious optoelectronic properties they possess.
 Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns and (b) PL emission spectra of the CPQDs under UV illumination (175 mW cm2, RH 60%). (c) TEM and HRTEM images of CPQDs before and after UV light illumination. (d) Samples under UV light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2018 ACS. 
3. Strategies to protect CPQDs
Considering the factors responsible for the degradation of CPQDs, various methods have been designed and developed to protect CPQDs from these factors. Surface engineering techniques essentially performed to induce chemical modifications on the surface can be categorized mainly into silica coatings, polymer encapsulation and surface passivation. These modifications may on the other hand result in undesirable crystal defects and structural changes in CPQDs. Accordingly, this section is focused on these methods and challenges addressed thereafter to upkeep their properties.
3.1. Surface passivation
Passivation of ligands or modifying ligands to protect CPQDs from degradation is well studied and is usually done by ligand exchange (Scheme 1). The other method is the direct passivation of the core, which in turn has also reflected in additional benefits like higher crystallization, and better PLQY and stability. Apart from ligand exchange techniques, oxide shell formation is also an effective strategy to develop environmentally stable CPQDs.
The effect of factors like oxygen, water, light, and temperature on CPQDs is observed to significantly reduce when ligands are appropriately engineered to resist these factors. Ligands used in the synthesis of perovskite QDs have a strong influence on the stability and dispersibility of CPQDs in various solvent media.55 Long chain ligands like oleic acid (OA) and oleyl amine (OLA) are established capping ligands that are used mostly to prepare CPQDs.56 Cubic and orthorhombic CPQDs have a rare crystallographic arrangement of cations and anions, which are interconnected and stabilized using these hydrophobic ligands. This long chain hydrophobic ligand present on CPQDs is extremely sensitive to exposed air, water, light and temperature.44,57,58 These ligands are thus easily degraded by the above-mentioned environmental factors.

3.1.1. Ligand exchange. 
Ligand engineering to achieve compatible QDs via “ligand exchange” is an established strategy among chalcogenide quantum dots.59,60 Researchers have extended this strategy to perovskite quantum dots too61,62 and have used various kinds of ligands with different functional groups to make them compatible/stable in different systems.63 Surface passivation through ligand exchange (better passivating ligands) is mainly beneficial in optoelectronic devices such as solar cells,64 LEDs65 and optical sensors.66
Ligands could be short chain-monofunctional, bidentate, bifunctional, multidentate and so on, based on the different properties and applications required. High molecular length ligands would result in larger inter particle spacing leading to lower charge/energy transfer67 and hence inducing short chain alkyl ligands68 are in demand for photo applications. Ligand exchange with short chain ligands like decanoic acid (DA),31 cinnamic acid,69 2-hexyldecanoic acid, and phosphoric acid62 allow better charge transfer, lower recombinations and better carrier lifetimes. However, they appear to enhance the stability only by a couple of hours and are not compatible in various solvent systems.
Bifunctional ligands that possess highly reactive sulfonic,70 and carboxylic acid groups donate electrons, necessary to bind with uncoordinated metal ions, in addition to providing functionalization of the core on the other hand such that it can be allowed to tag with any molecule namely analytes in sensors, and electron transport layers in solar cells, thus giving it necessary compatibility. Ligands that contain bi-carboxylic acid groups namely succinic acid (SA)71 have been found to exhibit enhanced stability and optical properties.72 However, ligand exchange with folic acid, glutamic acid, and EDTA used to substitute OLA/OA have resulted in futile efforts, since its binding energy was weaker than OA binding to CPQDs.
Bidentate ligands have resulted in both core stability and ligand stability. For example zwitterionic ligands like alpha amino butyric acid, iminodibenzoic acid,72,73 and lysine allow both functional groups in them to bind to Pb2+ ions enhancing fluorescence and stability.71 The Zhang group in 2020 reported air stable CPQDs by incorporating an L-lysine ligand via a spin coating method.74 Initially L-lysine PbBr3 was coated on the substrate and dried, and it was found to have a good porous structure with enlarged grain size and lower grain boundaries (as observed in TEM images). CsBr solution when coated on this was taken through the pores to form a good CPQD perovskite film. The XRD patterns reveal high crystallinity of L-lysine CPQDs by showing a positive shift in diffraction peaks. Also, the binding energy of L-lysine to CPQDs was much stronger than OA binding to CPQDs. L-lysine possessed two amino groups and two carboxyl groups that encouraged hydrogen bonding. This efficiently passivates the defects that arise in bonding of Pb2+ (Cs+) with Br−. This is also reflected in reduced recombinations and enhanced carrier lifetimes. The developed surface passivated L-lysine CPQD material showed good environmental stability for more than 45 days (in exposed air with high humidity) and also 500 h under illumination of daylight.
Perfluoro decanoic acid (PFDA) and decanoic acid (DA) ligands were used to increase the thermal stability and to enhance the resistivity of CPQDs towards polar solvents.31 The strong electronegativity of F− played a significant role in this. Compared to the conventional oleic acid ligand (OA) and the proposed ligand DA, PFDA ligand exchanged CPQDs showed remarkable stability due to the decrease of bromide vacancies. Vacancies on the surface were more occupied by the PFDA ligand than by OA and DA. The fluorocarbon component easily coordinates with metal ions causing reduction of surface defects. Their thermal stability study also showed good enhancement. PFDA CPQDs were subjected to 100 °C for 4 h. The PL intensity was constant at 92.1% for PFDA-CPQDs, while it showed a drastic reduction for pristine CPQDs and DA-CPQDs. Resistivity in polar solvents (ethanol) followed the same trend with PL maintained at 36.5% for PFDA-CPQDs while it reduced to 9.53% and 13.6% for the other two. Thus, surface passivation using a PFDA ligand conferred good photo and thermal stability together with solvent resistivity, helping in the construction of stable electroluminescent devices. Cao et al. in 2020 showed self-enhanced electrochemiluminescence (ECL) in tri-n-octyl phosphine (TOP) capped CPQDs.32 The TOP ligand replacing the OA ligand, which is much similar to CQDs, is expected to bind better with Pb2+ ions and this gave a beneficial morphology. The binding energy of TOP with metal ions was found to be higher than that of pristine CPQDs. Pristine CPQDs showed a PLQY of 42% and after surface passivation using TOP the PLQY was increased to 55.2%. The stability of the synthesized material was studied in air and water, and complete degradation of pristine CPQDs was observed after 8 h but the TOP capped CPQDs show 77% of PL emission for twenty days. To maintain the PL emission of TOP CPQDs, they were stored at 4 °C and storing at a much lower temperature helps in preventing aggregation. However, the acute toxicity of phosphine ligands has hindered their research and application further.
Multidentate ligand capping was implemented on the surface of SA CPQDs using N-hydroxy succinimide in water (NHS-water) to form an NHS-SA CPQD which enhances the fluorescence emission in water and the PL stability of NHS-SA CPQDs in water remained undisturbed for 7 days with a gradual reduction of fluorescence emission and complete degradation after 14 days.75 Thus, the desired functionalization on the ligand of the core on the other hand strongly helps in enhancing its stability in the corresponding solvent systems.
So, surface passivation by a ligand exchange process is a simple mechanism that helps in inducing passivation and hence enhances surface compatibility, protecting CPQDs from degradation in air, water, light and heat. It is important to note that the binding energy of the new ligand with the core must be much stronger than the existing system. Short chain ligands containing specific functional groups like COOH, NH2 and PO4 are preferred, but bifunctional, and multidentate ligands can (a) stabilize the ligand in different environments/solvent systems and also (b) stabilize the core (Pb2+ and Br−) thus reducing the density of trap states which helps in preventing non-radiative recombinations and exciton decay in the material.76 However still the possibility of such ligand capped CPQDs being exposed to light radiation thus affecting the surface atoms and loosening the surface binding ligands cannot be avoided. So, this kind of disadvantage has been overcome by complete encapsulation of CPQDs within a shell using silica precursors, polymeric beads and polymer coatings. Table 1 summarizes the ligands used for stabilizing CPQDs and the fluorescence stability attained under certain conditions.
Table 1 Summary table including the ligands used for stabilizing CPQDs and the fluorescence stability attained under certain conditions




Method used for stabilising CPQDs
Materials used for stabilization
Fluorescence stability under certain conditions
Ref.




Surface passivation using ligand molecules
L-lysine
45 days in open air and humidity

74





500 h under daylight




Perfluoro decanoic acid (PFDA)
4 h in 100 °C

31



Decanoic acid (DA)






tri-n-octyl phosphine (TOP)
20 days in open air and water

32



Succinic acid (SA)
14 days in water

75



N-Hydroxy succinimide (NHS)










3.1.2. Core–shell heterostructure. 
Developing oxide shells around quantum dots (core) is another easy strategy to enhance their stability and prevent their degradation due to environmental air and moisture.76 Strong shell growth around CPQDs by semiconductor materials like SnO2, TiO2, ZnO, and Al2O3 acts as a protective barrier and also induces new/changes in band gap properties that enhance the optoelectronics of CPQDs.77,78 The thickness of the shell around PQDs can be altered by manipulating the reaction temperature and precursors used.76 TiO2 coated CPQDs were synthesized by a wet chemical approach using titanium butoxide (TBOT)77 and the core–shell composite showed good photostability in water for 80 days while the pristine CPQDs degraded within 2 days.
Likewise, the zinc oxide shell developed around CPQDs by a non-stoichiometric solution phase method using zinc acetate and lithium hydroxide79 rendered aqueous stability for a few days in water. The shells helped in the passivation of uncoordinated sites on the CPQDs, also confining the electrons to the core and enhancing the optical emission and absorption of CPQDs and they can be referred to as type-I heterostructures. Reports on chalcogenide heterostructures indicate type-II wherein CPQDs/CdS80 and CsPbBr3/ZnS81 have staggered band alignment unlike in type-I (straddling band alignment) where the shell acts as an absorber and a passivating layer that effectively reduces free charge carriers from reaching the trap states located on the particle surface. In such a case it is very important to have a shell material with a wider bandgap than that of core PQDs to render a stable core–shell structure. This is also an alternate method to obtain a broad range of absorption with a stronger redox ability.


3.1.3. Doped CPQDs. 
Doping CPQDs with appropriate metal and non-metal ions has added to their stability. Metal ions like Ag+, Bi3+, Ce3+, Zn2+, Mn2+ and Cd2+82–86 and anions Cl2 and I287,88 have helped in the passivation of uncoordinated Pb2+ or Br− ions, thus strongly confining the atoms on the surface and electrons within the core. This not only enhances PL but also stability. Doping with anions has led to the formation of mixed halides, which undergo undesirable phase segregation with light, leading to instability of the phases they created.89 Doping of trivalent ions at the B site, e.g. in CsPbI3 done by Pradhan et al.,90,91 increases the interaction of ions with the crystal frame which may add to the stability of the perovskite structure avoiding the need for functionalization, and does not necessarily compromise the optoelectronic performance. However even cation doped CPQD modifications have only helped with little more environmental resistance in general and still possess all the undesirable properties that do not allow them to be dispersed in water or biological medium.
 Scheme 1  Flow chart that illustrates different surface passivation techniques for stabilizing CPQDs. 

3.2. Silica coatings
This section discusses the use of inorganic silica (SiO2) as a coating agent to protect the inner materials of CPQDs from degradation. Silica coatings using hydrophilic silane precursors such as tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS),92 (3-aminopropyl)trimethoxysilane (APTMS),93 tetramethoxysilane (TMOS),94 tetramethyl orthosilicate (TEOS)94 and (3-aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES)95 efficiently serve as obstructing layers to moisture and water molecules. They form shells around CPQDs via their functional groups and protect them from degradation.96 They also act as protective bags by adsorbing/absorbing CPQDs through the successive ionic layer adsorption and reaction (SILAR).97 The biggest advantage of silica precursors is that they are compatible with both toluene98 and water99 systems.
These silica coatings can be implemented through amine linkages (with cations) or by growing perovskite nanocrystals in mesoporous silica templates.100 The as-prepared composites appeared somewhat stable. These are powdery materials with more silica and are achieved by complex synthesis involving high costs. CPQDs for cell culture applications were stabilized using SiO2 wrap to form a CPQD/SiO2 composite by the Ding research group. Silica spheres were developed using the TEOS precursor and the prepared silica spheres were mixed with CPQD solution in the presence of ammonium hydroxide to prevent aggregation. The PLQY stability of the encapsulated CPQDs remains the same even after 30 days due to the rigid composite of CPQD/SiO2, but the PLQY of pristine CPQDs was reduced to 0% after 30 days.101 Sun et al. worked on developing stable CPQD LED lights using APTES in a one pot synthesis. Silane precursor APTES effectively binds with PbX3, via the amine group which helps in passivating the surface and maintaining the original PLQY even under adverse conditions. The silyl ether groups of silane precursors hydrolyzed to form a cross linked matrix to cover CPQDs in order protect them from thermal decomposition and oxidation. The silica precursors underwent hydrolysis to wrap CPQDs into the shell. Encapsulation of CPQDs enhanced the device lifetime sufficiently under atmospheric conditions.102 Since the hydrolysis reaction is water-assisted, PQDs will be decomposed by water before SiO2 generation.103 Despite the challenges, many research groups made appreciable contributions. One more amine functionalized silica precursor APTMS was used to achieve a stable emission wavelength of 512 nm for light emitting diode applications. Silica coated CPQDs were highly stable for 3 months and after 3 months the PLQY was reduced by 5% but the PLQY of pristine CPQDs was degraded and their fluorescence reduced at the rate of 10% within 6 h when exposed to high humidity and temperature.104 CPQDs passivated using TMOS encapsulation by in situ synthesis cause the enlargement of CPQD cubic crystals, which was confirmed by TEM and XRD patterns. The resulting down conversion showed red shift emission by 4.5 nm. The stability studies of the encapsulated CPQDs in water show stable fluorescence emission even after 3 h. But complete thermal degradation of these silica coated on CPQDs was observed at 120 °C. The developed material was however very stable towards a bright emission LED light for 13 h and is efficient for display devices.105 The same TMOS precursor used in toluene medium gave CPQD/SiO2 core–shells and these were well sonicated in water to show their stability. The orthorhombic crystal structure with a clear silica layer around the nanoparticle was confirmed by TEM and EDAX elemental mapping. However only 40 minutes of stability on vigorous ultra-sonication was observed for silica capped CPQDs over 16 minutes for uncapped ones indicating the role of silica as a protective layer (to some extent). The fluorescence stability range of CPQD/SiO2 and CPQD/SiO2 in water is shown in Fig. 5a.25 Similarly, CPQDs were embedded into TMOS silica shells to form a CPQD@SiO2 core shell through a wet chemical method. The overall reaction time was from 24 h and this enhanced PL emission of CPQD@SiO2 in water was due to the reduction of surface defects upon encapsulation. But the CPQDs without the SiO2 shell degraded within a few minutes in water.106 The (3-mercaptopropyl) trimethoxy silane (MPTMS) precursor was used to form a shell around CPQDs through Pb–S bonding107 and this shows a good PLQY of ≈78% with excellent structural integrity. 50% of fluorescence reduction occurs over a span of 20 days unlike pristine CPQDs which drops to 0% in water within minutes. MPTMS molecules tightly adsorb onto PQDs through Pb–S bonding. These bound molecules decrease the interfacial energy between the PQDs and silica by providing additional steric stabilization, thereby avoiding phase separation between the PQDs and silica. Different from all the above, the silane molecules first physically adsorb on the surface of PQDs, then hydrolyze and condense to form silica. The LED developed from this nano silica composite shows good operative stability in water for up to 15 days.
 Fig. 5  (a) Photographs showing the stability against water: (a–c) CPQDs and (d–f) CPQD @SiO2 core–shell NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2018 ACS. (b) Amine linkage of a silica precursor with Pb2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2018 ACS. 
The combination of two silica precursors through steric hindrance forms a dual-shell that helps in initiating the process of nucleation of CPQDs inside the silica shells, via the possible N–Pb linkages108 as shown in Fig. 5b. Thus, the dual linkages with silica and Pb2+ of CPQDs are one method to develop a surface that does not affect CPQDs upon exposure to moisture. Recently, in 2020, Qui et al. also developed stable CPQDs by a SILAR method, implementing silica coatings by combining two silica precursors APTES and TEOS thus forming a dual layered silica shell. The mesoporous structure of TEOS adsorbs CPQDs within pores and forms a complex amine linkage between the inner core of PbBr3 crystals and the shell of TEOS, which is again surrounded by an outer layer of APTES.97 PbBr3 crystals are then converted to CPQDs by a SILAR technique. Encapsulated CPQDs show 89% PL intensity and photo-stability studies under UV light show retention of the PL intensity up to 72 h, while the PL intensity of pristine CPQDs is reduced to 0% within 30 h. Even though there is an advantage in increasing the stability after encapsulation, the presence of excess amine after encapsulation causes structural defects which cause changes in the crystallinity of the material which could be detected in XRD patterns.
Introducing a polymer cover over the silica shell (formed by TMOS) using a pegylated phospholipid (PEG-DSPE) has enhanced the photostability.109 CPQD@SiO2 formed via the LARP method using TMOS was embedded in PEG-DSPE micelles through the hydrolysis process to form a CPQD/SiO2/PEG-DSPE composite. The composite showed stability for 8 h under UV irradiation with 40% of PL and PL retention at 80% for 2 weeks. The composite was also dispersed in different biological buffers with different pH values from 3 to 8 and it was noticed that the RCPQD composite was stable in the pH range from 5 to 8, which covers the intercellular and extracellular pH of normal cells and cancer cells.
Silica capped CPQDs have thus proven to protect CPQDs from water and open air and are compatible with both toluene and water systems and hence applicable to a variety of applications. Since the silyl ether groups of silane precursors hydrolyze to form that cross linked matrix cover over CPQDs and the hydrolysis reaction is water-assisted, PQDs tend to decompose by water before SiO2 generation, and this has to be taken care of. However, silane adsorption through Pb–S bonding followed by hydrolysis can seemingly be a solution to this. The thermal instability of such PQDs is however compromised.97Table 2 summarizes the silica precursors used for stabilizing CPQDs and the attained fluorescence stability under certain conditions.
Table 2 Summary table including the silica precursors used for stabilizing CPQDs and the attained fluorescence stability under certain conditions




Method used for stabilising CPQDs
Materials used for stabilization
Fluorescence stability under certain conditions
Ref.




Silica shells
(3-Aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES)
72 h at 100 °C

97



Tetramethyl orthosilicate (TEOS)


Tetramethyl orthosilicate (TEOS)
30 days in open air and water

101



(3-Aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES)
227 h under atmospheric conditions

102



(3-Aminopropyl) trimethoxysilane (APTMS)
3 months in water

104



Tetramethoxysilane (TMOS)
3 h in water

105



Tetramethoxysilane (TMOS)
40 min in water

25



Tetramethoxysilane (TMOS)
24 h in water

106



(3-Mercaptopropyl) trimethoxy silane (MPTMS)
20 days in water

107



Tetramethoxysilane (TMOS) and pegylated phospholipid (PEG-DSME)
2 weeks in water for 8 h under UV illumination

109





3.3. Polymer encapsulation
Polymers are more like gel matrices which can be hydrophobic, hydrophilic and also amphiphilic.110,111 Polymers naturally possess functional groups and can also incorporate desired functionalization112 into CPQDs through appropriate reactions with organic molecules. The introduction of a polymer ligand forms a metal complex with QDs by replacing the original ligand and the new polymer ligand covers the surface to prevent QDs from degradation.113 These polymer encapsulations are made in situ using polymer beads114 and polymer gels,115 which can engulf CPQDs in them, and act as a protective barrier towards all environmental conditions, including heat. Some selective polymers such as poly(styrene-butadiene-styrene) (SBS), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), polystyrene (PS), and poly(isobutylene-alt-maleic anhydride)116–118 can withstand very high temperatures.
Transparent and conductive polymers with good charge transport properties were tried as coatings on CPQDs and are applied in optoelectronic and photocatalysis applications. For example, a polypyrrole (PPy) conducting polymer increases the stability of CPQDs, and also simultaneously enhances the charge transport. Although there was a slight decrease in its optical fluorescence due to encapsulation, the stability remained undisturbed for 30 days in water. The photoelectric device developed with this was stable and along with benzoquinone (as an electron acceptor) the device showed large inhibition towards electron–hole recombination.119
Jiang et al. in 2019 incorporated CPQDs into polymeric nanofibers through electrospinning to develop highly stable luminescent LEDs. This group also synthesized tunable green and red CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, and I) LEDs by altering different halides and embedded them in different transparent polymers poly(styrene-butadiene-styrene) (SBS), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and polystyrene (PS), by an electrospinning method. The illustration of the biaxial electrospinning technique for fabricating core [CsPb(Br0.4I0.6)3@PS QD]/shell (CPQD@PS QD) light-emitting nanofibers is shown in Fig. 6a. The photostability of these core shells enhanced significantly after polymer coating compared to pristine CPQD QDs. The PL intensity remained undisturbed even after 3 months of storing in water96 and this opens new scope for application of these core shells in other optoelectronic applications as well.
 Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of the biaxial electrospinning technique for fabricating core [CsPb(Br0.4I0.6)3@PS QD]/shell (CPQD@PS QD) light-emitting nanofibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2020 AIP Publishing. (b) Schematic diagram of CPQDs merged in PMMA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2018 Optica Publishing Group. (c) Schematic illustration of the encapsulation of CPQDs by amphiphilic polymers to render them water-soluble. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018 European Chemical Societies Publishing. (d) Schematic representation of the CPQD embedded polystyrene polymer composite to enhance stability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016 ACS. 
Poly zwitterionic ligands were used for enhanced stability of CPQDs and also for their effective transfer into different solvents without losing their structure and properties. Zwitterions (such as sulfobetaine) possess both positive and negative charges and have the ability to coordinate with the metal and halide of CPQDs. Polymeric complexes are polymerized using different polymers namely octylamine (OCA), poly(isobutylene-alt-maleic anhydride) (PIMA), and poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) to extend their chain lengths.13 Using the above polymers, ZW-PIMA-OCA and ZW-PIMA-PEG polymer compositions were synthesized and used for ligand exchange in OA capped CPQDs (in THF solvent). Although the phase appeared unperturbed in an open environment initially, complete structural changes and loss of fluorescence were observed after a week in both the ligand exchanged ZW-PIMA-OCA CPQDs and ZW-PIMA-PEG CPQDs. These CPQDs when transferred to acetone, ethanol, 1-propanol and 1-butanol solvents showed enhanced fluorescence and stability. This was reflected as a change in the hydrodynamic radius attributed to solvent interaction with ligand exchanged CPQDs. ZW-PIMA-OCA CPQDs in 1-butanol showed the highest PL emission and stability (for three months) under normal environmental conditions. A stability study of polymeric ligand exchanged CPQDs was performed by preserving them under atmospheric conditions in open air and at room temperature and it was observed that the photo stability of CPQDs remains unchanged for 1.5 years, the highest so far. Thus appropriately engineered zwitterionic ligand capped CPQDs showed enhanced performance in display and energy conversion devices.120
Polyethylene glycol is widely used for rendering hydrophilic surfaces. But PEG coatings are susceptible to high temperatures and cause swelling in hydrophilic solvents within seconds.121 Encapsulating CPQDs with Santa Barbara Amorphous-15 (SBA) a mesoporous silicate and its embedment in PMMA polymeric gel gave water and thermally stable CPQD nanocomposites and look promising. The schematic diagram of CPQDs merged in PMMA is shown in Fig. 6b. Thermal treatment at 100 °C for 16 h and immersion in water for one month did not cause any loss of fluorescence in these encapsulated and embedded CPQDs.122 Lee et al. in 2018 reported water soluble amphiphilic polymer CPQD nanocomposites via encapsulation by a poloxamer 127/PEG (15)-hydroxy stearate polymer which formed a micelle structure with a hydrophobic end (CH3) inwards and hydrophilic end PEG (15)-hydroxy stearate outward thus giving dual shell protection towards water solubility. After encapsulation by polymers, the fluorescence stability was studied in water and the fluorescence remains the same for 8 days, after which they lost fluorescence gradually.123 A schematic illustration of the encapsulation of CPQDs by this amphiphilic polymer is shown in Fig. 6c. Rigid polymer composites polystyrene-block-poly(ethylene-ran-butylene)-block-polystyrene (PS-PEB-PS) and poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly-(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-PPG-PEG)] were mixed with hexane containing CPQDs to form polymer encapsulated CPQDs having hydroxyl groups on the surface. The quantum yield of the CPQDs after polymer encapsulation was enhanced from 83% to 88% due to the reduction of surface defects upon encapsulation. The water stability of polymer encapsulated CPQDs shows that the PL emission remains unchanged for 8 days.26 Also, 1D CPQDs capped with PEG showed 86% fluorescence emission with good water dispersibility and photostability (unchanged under UV illumination for 3 h).124
Macroscale polymer matrices with different shapes of CPQDs were developed using poly(styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene) (SEBS) poly(lauryl methacrylate) to enhance the stability and polarization. A schematic of the CsPbBr3 embedded polystyrene polymer composite (to enhance stability) is shown in Fig. 6d. CPQDs of different shapes were synthesized and encapsulated with macroscale polymers to investigate the polarization effect of the material upon exposure to light. The polarization (Pmax) of polymer capped CPQDs was found to be 0.44 against 0.36 without capping it, indicating their potential applications in polarized downshifters and optically-pumped lasers. Polymer coated nano cubes, nanowires and nanosheet structures of CPQDs show consistent PL for over four months without the loss of PLQY, after which a blue shift in PL emission occurs indicating the degradation of polymer coated nanostructures. But without polymer encapsulation the synthesized nano cubes and nanowires completely degraded within 60 min.125
While all of these approaches have provided more resistance against environmental factors, such as air, water, and temperature, most of these methods encapsulate the PQDs into bulk or thin film polymer matrices,126,127 which are not ideal for biological applications because of their restricted fluorescence stability in entailed biological medium. Notably, the synthesis of confined nanoscale polymer–perovskite composite particles has been demonstrated but is cumbersome, involves several steps128 and typically results in micron sized particles129 due to the entanglement of high molecular weight polymer chains. For example, the Ligand Assisted Reprecipitation (LARP) method, which was conducted in the presence of polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), along with the precipitation process of polystyrene (PS), resulted in the production of water-resistant micrometer scale PQD@PS microspheres, but their photoluminescence quantum yield was limited to ≈27%.130 Similarly CPQDs loaded in poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) microspheres prepared by the LARP method131 show only a PLQY of 33%. When using the highly hydrophobic PMMA with branched poly(ethylenimine) (b-PEI), a double shell-ligand formation occurs on the PQDs.132 This renders a high PLQY of 75% (and retained by 80% in water for up to 40 days) due to the strong binding of amine rich compounds (b-PEI) with CPQDs.
Apart from the LARP process, CPQDs can be packed into crosslinked polystyrene (PS) beads via a simple swelling/shrinking strategy,133 wherein the process is carried out in toluene and hexane without any polar solvent. The PL emission of the composite remains unchanged in water (with 64.7% PLQY) for nine months. The ion exchange reaction of the perovskite is successfully averted here. So, this method essentially protects PQDs in a monodisperse nano/micron scale without fluorescence quenching. The CPQD/PANI composite [formed by using a donor (aniline)–acceptor (benzoquinone) strategy, followed by polymerization] showed excellent photo stability (with 93% PL) in water for four weeks without any structural degradation. The photoelectrochemical measurement also showed an enhanced photocurrent (due to increased conductivity) suggesting the improved charge transfer efficiency. Like the PANI/CPQD composite, the charge transfer efficiency and the stability of CPQDs were also enhanced by the in situ coating of CPQDs inside the poly(3-hexylthiophene-2,5-diyl) (P3HT) polymer layer through the charge separation efficiency of the composite.134 However, compared to silica coatings and ligand exchange techniques, polymer encapsulations have yielded stable CPQDs over longer terms. Also, the rigid composition of polymers around CPQDs helps to maintain the structural and fluorescence stability of CPQDs compared to other methods. The broad choice offered by polymeric ligands is also promising for introducing the desired functional groups into CPQDs for bioconjugation and hence biosensing applications. A controlled radical photocatalyzed polymerization process is utilized to grow protective polymer brushes (carboxylate functionalized TTC oligomers) around CPQDs to render complete fluorescence emission even after immersion in water for a day and it could also withstand polar solvents and UV radiation.135Table 3 summarizes the polymers used to attain highly stable CPQDs and the stability of the developed CPQDs under environmental conditions.
Table 3 Summary table including the polymers used for stabilizing CPQDs and the fluorescence stability attained under certain conditions




Method used for stabilising CPQDs
Materials used for stabilization
Fluorescence stability under certain conditions
Ref.




Polymer encapsulation
Polymers poly(styrene-butadiene-styrene) (SBS), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and polystyrene (PS)
3 months in water

96



Octylamine (OCA), poly(isobutylene-alt-maleic anhydride) (PIMA), poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)
1.5 years in open air and at room temperature

120



Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)
16 h at 100 °C

122



Poloxamer 127/PEG (15)-hydroxy stearate
8 days in water

123



Poly(styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene) (SEBS), poly(lauryl methacrylate)
60 min in water

125



Polystyrene-block-poly(ethylene-ran-butylene)-block-polystyrene (PS-PEB-PS) and poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly-(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-PPG-PEG)]
8 days in water

26



Amine-polyethylene glycol-propionic acid
35 days in water and 3 h under UV light illumination

124



Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), poly(ethylenimine) (b-PEI)
1 month in water

131



Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), poly(ethylenimine) (b-PEI)
60 days in an ambient environment

132



Polystyrene (PS) beads
9 months in water

133





Similar to polymeric encapsulation techniques, CPQDs can be capped with a superhydrophobic aerogel inorganic matrix (S-AIM).136 CPQDs reacted with the S-AIM to form aero PQDs by the intake of CPQDs into the pores of the aerogel. The aero CPQDs show a high PLQY of 90.9% where CPQDs show only 83.2%. The PLQY of aero CPQDs was retained for 11 days in water and reduced to 50.5% after soaking it in water for 3.5 months and the oleophilic functional groups on the surface are mainly responsible for this. Also, MOF encapsulated CPQDs have been very recently reported and appear very promising. MOFs have special features like a high surface area, high structural stability and fine porosity, which can take CPQDs to the inner core of the MOFs. The fine particles of CPQDs with much smaller size can enter the micropore regime of the MOFs to avoid degradation from water, air and thermal stability.137 This opens new avenues for the design of various water stable MOF PQDs for a wide range of optoelectronic properties.
4. Property enhancements in CPQDs from an application perspective
Appropriately engineered-silica encapsulated, ligand exchanged or polymer coated CPQD perovskite nanocrystals showed sufficiently enhanced water/air stability, photostability and thermal stability, because of which they were successfully applied for a range of applications such as photovoltaics, lasing, bio-imaging, water splitting and other photocatalytic applications. But our concern was more on applications that necessitated a water/biological/natural environment as the medium.
4.1. Photocatalysis
Photocatalysis is a photochemical reaction in which light energy can accelerate the chemical reaction with the help of light sensitive semiconductor catalysts. With the required characteristics for photocatalysis,138 CPQDs qualify themselves as a good photocatalytic material with an apt electronic structure and a band gap of 2.3 eV.139
CPQDs exhibit several interesting electrical and optical properties that are best suited for the utilization of solar energy like long charge carrier diffusion lengths,140 a high absorption coefficient141 and shallow energy states from intrinsic defects. The relative positions of the CPQD conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) are depicted with the redox potentials in Fig. 7.142 This emphasizes their remarkable reduction ability, the relative positions of their CB that are negative enough for H2 generation, CO2 reduction, and superoxide radical generation. On photoexcitation (as photocatalysts) they generate an electron hole pair that induces redox reactions on the substrate.143 The excited electron engages itself in the reduction process while the holes undergo an oxidation process, thus facilitating many environmentally important processes like deodorization, antifouling, self-cleaning, conservation, sterilization, antifogging, water treatment, CO2 and air purification, etc.
 Fig. 7  Schematic of the relative position of the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) of CPQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2020 ACS. 

4.1.1. CO2 reduction. 
The photo-illumination of CPQDs generates electron–hole pairs that can be used to reduce CO2 to CO, CH4, H2, and O2. The OA ligand when replaced with tetrabutylammonium hexafluorophosphate (PF6) σ in CPQDs allows the surface to possess a negative charge that is essential to get immobilized on Ni(tpy) to form CPQD-Ni(tpy) catalysts144 and this metal complex provides sufficient catalytic sites. CPQD-Ni(tpy) catalysts result in an increase in the molar extinction coefficient and cause multi-electron transfer to significantly enhance CO2 reduction and produce CO and CH4 as presented in Fig. 8a. The resulting photocatalyst exhibits a high yield achieving 1724 μmol g−1 of CO/CH4, which is approximately 26-fold higher than that of pristine. The same group decorated CPQDs on platinum (Pt) to enhance CO2 reduction further. The Pt catalyst reduces the recombination of electron–hole pairs thus enhancing the CO2 reduction rate. CPQDs were synthesized by an anti-solvent method and platinized for 1 h under a Xe lamp using a 320 nm cut off filter.145 The ionic nature of perovskites is known to be sensitive to degradation by polar molecules; hence, Kuang et al.146 and Sun et al.147 have used low-polarity solvent (ethyl acetate) for CO2 reduction wherein the fairly weak dipole moment of the solvent does not easily allow the coordination with the CPQD crystals, causing dissociation into complexes of the ionic species. Ethyl acetate is mixed with trace amounts of water as a hole scavenger. CO2 reduction is carried out in different solvents that include toluene, ethyl acetate (EAC), isopropanol (IPA), acetonitrile (ACN), dimethyl formamide (DMF) and methanol (MeOH) proving the stability of CPQDs towards all these solvents. The orthorhombic phase of CPQDs remains undisturbed in all the above solvents. However, CO2 reduction in ethyl acetate was more effective than other solvents with an electron yield of 2.7 μmol g−1 h−1 and it gave a selectivity of 95.2%.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the CsPbBr3-Ni(tpy) photocatalyst system developed in this work: immobilizing of Ni(tpy) metal complexes onto a CsPbBr3 QD photosensitizer through electrostatic interactions.144 Copyright 2020 ACS. (b) Schematic diagram of CO2 reduction on Cu-RGO CPQD nanocomposites under simulated sunlight. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2020 ACS. 
Ethyl acetate shows high solubility of CO2 and also the low polarity facilitating CPQD stability comparatively and this together enhances CO2 reduction. Pt as a co-catalyst doubles up the electron yield to 5.6 μmol g−1 h−1. Nevertheless, retaining a polar environment, even with the presence of small numbers of polar molecules, is a positive route towards the stability and equilibrium of the process.
Reports on the formation of favourable heterojunctions between the “zero-dimensional” (0D) CPQDs nanocrystals and nanosheets through the formation of metalσhalide chemical bonds between the surface Br− ions of CPQDs and cations in nanosheets148 for CO2 appear very promising. Reduction of CO2 to CO in ethyl acetate/water solution with one order-of-magnitude higher than that of the pristine CPQDs alone was achieved, when 2D nanosheets of Bi2WO6 were used with CPQDs. Stability enhancement was considered to arise from a reduced photo corrosion of CPQDs due to the rapid extraction and subsequent recombination of photogenerated holes across the heterojunction with electrons from Bi2WO6. This can also be referred to as Z scheme photocatalysis.
Copper loaded reduced graphite oxide CPQD (Cu-RGO CPQD) photocatalyst nanocomposites prepared via an ex situ synthesis method were experimented for CO2 reduction in water under sunlight.149 Though the stability of sintered CPQDs nanosheets remained the same for two days, they completely decomposed after a week. So, CPQDs were developed into nanocomposites of copper loaded reduced graphite oxide CPQDs. The nanocomposite formation enhances the charge carrier separation and suppresses the electron–hole recombination. Cu-RGO CPQDs nanocomposites show 90% of photo catalytic reduction of CO2 in water to form CO and CH4. A schematic diagram of the photocatalytic mechanism using Cu-RGO CPQDs nanocomposites is shown in Fig. 8b. CPQD Cu-RGO possesses more hydrophobic surfaces thus suppressing water adsorption and formation of a hydrated complex, enhancing chemical stability. Hydrophobicity has been known to also boost CO2 reduction.150 A strategy such as encapsulating MAPbI3 quantum dots in an Fe metal porphyrin-based organic framework (PCN-221- 48 Fex)) by Lu et al.151 for CH4 production can be extended to CPQDs, wherein the encapsulation might render the necessary protection and environment to conduct the reaction in water.
Oxidation of styrene and many other organic transformations including C–C coupling,152 and α-alkylation of aldehydes153 have been fruitfully carried out with CPQDs. Not only C–C bond formation but also a series of organic transformations, C–O and C–N bond formation,154 can be found. But most of these impressive transformations are done in organic medium like ethyl acetate. Surface functionalization of CPQD nanosheets with Zr species and Cl doping facilitated visible light-oxidation of styrene.155 The doping causes alteration in the band structure which widens the bandgap that helps in enhancing the transport of photogenerated carriers for the photocatalytic process. The extent of photocatalytic oxidation of styrene by doped CPQDs (1098 μmol g−1 h−1) was far higher by pristine CPQDs (372 μmol g−1 h−1). The addition of ZrCl4, beyond a particular limit, expands the bandgap and reduces the surface photovoltage. However, since the medium of the reaction was organic, the CPQDs were well protected within the medium, and we have limited our discussion only to reactions carried out in water medium.
Also the adverse photocatalytic effects of solvents and sacrificial hole scavengers have been assessed and we concluded that the detected carbonaceous product and oxygen evolved significantly different from the expected quantity, and this is an outcome of solvent photolysis.156 Furthermore, this can lead to over estimation of the results achieved. These experiments when conducted using CPQDs as photocatalysts (in an acetonitrile + extremely low quantity of water mixture) for CO2 reduction and oxygen evolution too showed an over estimation of yield due to solvent photolysis which cannot be neglected during such studies. This procedure may also lack an adequate proton supply due to insufficient water in the medium. Photolysis of CH3CN, ethyl acetate, TEA, and TEOA under UV-visible light can produce CO and H2 even without catalysts156 and this further substantiates the overestimation of yield due to solvent photolysis.


4.1.2. Water splitting. 
CPQDs are semiconducting in nature and can induce photo catalysis causing water splitting157 to produce the most promising alternate energy hydrogen. Semiconductor quantum dots act as photoanodes and on light harvesting cause redox reactions with water molecules to produce oxygen and hydrogen.158,159 Graphite sheet (GS) protected CPQDs act as photoanodes to evolve oxygen from water under solar light illumination.160
Because of CPQDs’ inherent ionic nature and water instability, reports on applying the precipitation–solubility equilibrium between the soluble ionic species and perovskite phase seem successful. Saturated hydrogen iodide (HI) acid aqueous solution was used with MAPbI3 perovskite polycrystalline powder to generate H2161 by splitting HI. On visible light irradiation, roughly around 26 μmol of H2 (in 9 h) is obtained, with the photogenerated holes driving the oxidation of I− to I3−. H3PO2 was added to reduce this I3− to I− and maintain the I−concentration and equilibrium. Because of the dynamic equilibrium between the perovskite and ions in the saturated solution, MAPbI3 remained stable for 160 h under continuous irradiation, without any compromise in the activity. The same concept could however be extended to CPQDs. The stabilization strategy of these CPQDs in an aqueous solution should be based on the dynamic equilibrium between the precipitated ionic crystal and its saturated aqueous solution.
As discussed, earlier 2D sheets offered good stability to CPQDs. CPQDs were wrapped within graphene sheets (GS) to protect them from aqueous media. Due to the sealing of CPQDs with GS the potential onset of the composite for oxygen evolution was increased because of accelerated charge transfer upon formation of the composite. The IPCE efficiency of the composite was 70% (measured at 500 nm). The developed photo anode shows high oxygen evolution in water with a Faraday's efficiency measure of 70%.
A NiO/CPQD-GS/ZnO composite was synthesized by a one-step solution method, followed by deposition on an FTO glass substrate as the photoelectrode for water reduction.162 The group had adopted NiO and ZnO with CPQDs by a spin coating method as the hole and electron transport layer respectively and this architecture led to an effective charge separation to reduce electron hole recombination and realize the utilization of photogenerated electrons. The XRD pattern of CPQDs remains unchanged and the lambda max was characteristic of CPQDs at 517 nm. Under AM 1.5 G simulated sunlight conditions the onset potential of the photocathode was observed to be 1.16 VRHE with a current density of 1.2 mA cm−2 at 0 VRHE. The photocurrent remains consistent even after continuous illumination for 1 h with a faradaic efficiency of 90% thus showing good photo electrochemical stability.
Reports on the formation of seamless heterojunctions between the “zero-dimensional” (0D) CPQD nanocrystals and nanosheets through the formation of metal–halide chemical bonds between surface Br− ions of CsPbBr3 and cations in nanosheets148 appear very promising. Reduction of CO2 to CO in ethyl acetate/water solution with one order-of-magnitude higher than that of the pristine CPQDs alone was achieved, when the 2D nanosheets of Bi2WO6 were used with CPQDs. The stability enhancement was considered to arise from a reduced photo corrosion of CPQDs due to the rapid extraction and subsequent recombination of photogenerated holes across the heterojunction with electrons from Bi2WO6. This is usually referred to as the Z scheme in photocatalysis.
Wrapping of CPQDs in graphite sheets and metal oxides (as ETL/HTL) resulted in water stable photoelectrodes. However, the information on the maximum number of hours that these photoelectrodes can be used and their recyclability would have been more useful to obtain insights into the long-term stability of the material, which is to a large extent doubtful.
Thus, it can be summarised that to surpass CPQD instabilities, (a) designing systems for CO2 reduction in low-polarity solvents, (b) use of saturated halo acid solutions for H2 generation, and (c) capping and encapsulation seem to be promising solutions for CO2 reduction and photoelectrochemical water splitting using CPQDs.

4.2. Bio-sensing and bio-imaging
Bio-imaging is the process of visualizing or imaging biomolecules in biological solvents using fluorescent quantum dots for biomedical purposes.163,164 High quantum yields (up to 90%)165 of all inorganic CPQD nanocrystals have enabled them to be explored as optical probes and achieve high sensitivity166 and rapid sensing.167 However, building a compatible surface on CPQDs for applications like sensing analytes in aqueous medium is highly challenging. CPQDs are hydrophobic and are environmentally unstable in biological solvents like water and buffers of different pH. As discussed earlier various strategies namely silica shells, polymer coatings and ligand exchange have helped CPQDs become hydrophilic and biocompatible, but very limited research can be found. Pramanik et al. have used polymer capped CPQDs [using polystyrene-block-poly(ethylene-ran-butylene)-block-polystyrene (PS-PEB-PS) and poly (ethylene glycol)-block-poly-(propylene glycol)-block-poly (ethylene glycol) (PEG-PPG-PEG)] for tumor derived exosome imaging.26 Synthesized CPQDs were coated with a polymer composition that contains hydroxyl groups and were dispersed in water. Antibody anti-CD63 specific for binding with CD63 exosome tumor cells was coated on a CPQD polymer composition via hydrogen bond formation, followed by injection into tumor solution. PS-PEB-PS and PEG-PPG-PEG coated CPQDs, and anti-CD63 antibody-attached CPQDs are shown in Fig. 9a. Fluorescence imaging clearly shows the specific binding of CPQDs to tumor cells. Stability studies show that the fluorescence remains unchanged for 8 days in water.
 Fig. 9  (a) Water-Soluble PS-PEB-PS and PEG−PPG-PEG coated CPQDs, and anti-CD63 antibody-attached CPQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2018 ACS. (b) IPE fluorescence and merged images of Mia PaCa-2 cells treated with CPQD/SiO2/mPEG-DSPE/FA and CPQD/SiO2/mPEG-DSPE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2021 ACS. 
CPQD@SiO2 core shell CPQDs developed via TMOS by a wet chemical method were used for bioimaging and drug delivery applications.106 CPQD@SiO2 were allowed to react with HeLa cells for recognition. CPQD@SiO2-HeLa cells were observed under a confocal microscope to detect the fluorescence emission of HeLa cells. Along with imaging drug loading was carried out by allowing CPQD@SiO2 to react with doxorubicin drug solution and the presence of dox loaded in CPQD@SiO2 was confirmed by observing the dox absorbance peak after drug loading.
1D PEG coated CPQDs which showed 70% fluorescence emission and water stability were conjugated with anti-AXL anti-HER2 antibodies for imaging triple negative breast cancer (TNBC) and human epidermal growth factor receptor HER2.124 Conjugated CPQDs were allowed to react with TNBC cells and HER2 cells and visualized under a multiphoton microscope which clearly shows the blue emitting TNBC cells and red emitting HER2 cells evidencing the successful recognition of cancer cells by the developed material.
APTES (3-aminopropyl triethoxysilane) silica shell encapsulation on CPQDs showed good cancer cell PL recognition.168 CPQD@SiO2 were capped with human serum albumin and allowed to react with CT26 tumor cells. And these CPQD@SiO2 conjugated tumor cells were examined with a confocal microscope and high fluorescence emission of CT26 tumor cells could be noticed. Also, the photostability study of CPQD@SiO2 showed 35% of fluorescence emission even after 48 h of dispersion in water.
CPQDs capped via a ligand assisted reprecipitation method using pegylated phospholipid (PEG-DSPE) and tetramethyl orthosilicate (TMOS) were used successfully for bioimaging.109 CPQDs covered by a SiO2 shell through hydrolysis were embedded in PEG-DSPE micelles to form a CPQD/SiO2/PEG-DSPE composite. The composite was stable when dispersed in different biological buffers with pH between 3 and 8 (intercellular and extracellular pH of cells). The CPQD/SiO2/PEG-DSPE composite was further functionalized with folic acid to form CPQD/SiO2/PEG-DSPE-FA for tumor cell recognition. The CPQD composite was allowed to react with Mia PaCa-2 cells and incubated for 2 h and examined with a confocal microscope and nice oval shaped fluorescence emission allowed recognition of Mia PaCa-2 cells as shown in Fig. 9b.
Multidentate ligand (succinic acid-NHS) capped CPQDs provided the necessary hydrophilicity to bind to biomolecules and this concept was used to detect BSA and achieved an LOD up to the micromolar range.75 These NHS-SA CPQDs were stable for 14 days in water. Only a limited number of studies involve CPQDs for imaging, which may be due to the extreme complexities involved in synthesizing compatible QDs for bioconjugation. It is important to say that the focus should be more on retention of optical properties on functionalization and to achieve compatibility in aqueous/biological medium such as bioimaging and biosensing applications.
5. Summary and outlook
The intrinsic properties of “degradation of PQDs” have been tweaked by strategies namely surface passivation, silica coatings and polymer encapsulation, and the extent of enhancement in its resistance to environmental conditions has been assessed. An assessment of the figures of merit for the stabilized or modified CPQDs is presented to check the reliability of this material for photocatalysis and biosensing applications. The analysis was mainly based on its stability in aqueous and biological medium.
The ligand exchange process is a simple mechanism that helps in inducing passivation and hence enhances surface compatibility, protecting CPQDs from degradation in air, water, light and heat. It is important to note that the binding energy of a selected ligand with the core must be much stronger than the existing system. The short chain ligands containing specific functional groups like COOH, NH2 and PO4 are preferred, but bifunctional and multidentate ligands that (a) stabilize the ligand in different environments/solvent systems and also (b) stabilize the core (Pb2+, Br−) thus reducing the density of trap states are to be given priority for photocatalysis and fluorescence sensing.
Silica capped CPQDs have proven to protect CPQDs from water and open air and are compatible with both toluene and water systems and hence applicable to the said applications. Since the silyl ether groups of silane precursors hydrolyse to form this cross linked matrix cover over CPQDs and if the hydrolysis reaction is water-assisted, it needs to done with care. The thermal instability of such silica coated PQDs is however compromised and can be overcome by polymer coating. MOF encapsulated CPQDs are water stable and appear very promising. This opens new avenues for the design of other such water stable MOF PQDs for a wide range of optoelectronic properties.
Wrapping of CPQDs in graphite sheets induces hydrophobicity, facilitating suppression of water adsorption in water splitting reactions thus providing stability. However, research on the maximum number of hours that these photoelectrodes can be used and their recyclability is required to be done to gain insights of their long-term stability.
Bioimaging has only been attempted with polymer/silica capped CPQDs, while hydrophilic ligand capped CPQDs have successfully facilitated bioconjugation. Very few reports have limited or proper assessment with regard to biosensing. Based on our assessment, the answer to the question of whether these modified CPQDs are reliable as a photocatalyst and fluorescent probe in water/biological medium is positive. The insights offered here however provide scope for developing various other water stable lead free and double perovskites which are environmentally more benign and useful.
Author contributions
Sanjayan C. G: conceptualization, methodology, writing – original draft preparation; M. S. Jyothi: revision, editing; R. Geetha Balakrishna: writing, supervision, reviewing, editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors would like to acknowledge DST-SERB, Govt. of India, for financial assistance [EMR project sanction No: (CRG/2018/000942)].
References
J. Bo, X. Sun, P. Wan, D. Huang, X. Chen, M. Chen, R. Li, D. Shen, Q. Li, W. Xia, Z. Ye, Y. Chen and S. Chen, Perovskite Quantum Dots with Ultrahigh Solid-State Photoluminescence Quantum Efficiency, Superior Stability, and Uncompromised Electrical Conductivity, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12(37), 9115–9123 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Duan, H. Xu, W. E. I. Sha, Y. Zhao, Y. Wang, X. Yang and Q. Tang, Inorganic perovskite solar cells: an emerging member of the photovoltaic community, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(37), 21036–21068 RSC .
M. Kulbak, S. Gupta, N. Kedem, I. Levine, T. Bendikov, G. Hodes and D. Cahen, Cesium Enhances Long-Term Stability of Lead Bromide Perovskite-Based Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7(1), 167–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ye, W. Yang, D. Luo, R. Zhu and Q. Gong, Applications of cesium in the perovskite solar cells, J. Semicond., 2017, 38(1), 1–9 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, D. Liu, M. J. Al-Marri, L. Nuuttila, H. Lehtivuori and K. Zheng, Photo-stability of CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots for optoelectronic application, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59(9), 719–727 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, L. Kong, S. Huang and L. Li, Highly Luminescent and Ultrastable CsPbBr3 Perovskite Quantum Dots Incorporated into a Silica/Alumina Monolith., Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56(28), 8134–8138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Tseng and D. Lin, High-Quality All-Inorganic Perovskite CsPbBr3 Quantum Dots Emitter Prepared by a Simple Purified Method and Applications of Light-Emitting Diodes, Energies, 2019, 12, 18 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, Z.-F. Shi, S. Li, L.-Z. Lei, H.-F. Ji, D. Wu, T.-T. Xu, Y.-T. Tian and X.-J. Li, High-performance perovskite photodetectors based on solution-processed all-inorganic CsPbBr3 thin films, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5(33), 8355–8360 RSC .
Y. Tong, E. Bladt, M. F. Ayguler, A. Manzi, K. Z. Milowska, V. A. Hintermayr, P. Docampo, S. Bals, A. S. Urban, L. Polavarapu and J. Feldmann, Highly Luminescent Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals with Tunable Composition and Thickness by Ultrasonication, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(44), 13887–13892 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Hazarika, Q. Zhao, E. A. Gaulding, J. A. Christians, B. Dou, A. R. Marshall, T. Moot, J. J. Berry, J. C. Johnson and J. M. Luther, Perovskite Quantum Dot Photovoltaic Materials beyond the Reach of Thin Films: Full-Range Tuning of A-Site Cation Composition, ACS Nano, 2018, 10327–10337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. E. E. A. D. S. Ginger, B-Site Metal Cation Exchange in Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1190–1196 CrossRef .
G. Nedelcu, L. Protesescu, S. Yakunin, M. I. Bodnarchuk, M. J. Grotevent and M. V. Kovalenko, Fast Anion-Exchange in Highly Luminescent Nanocrystals of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, I), Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5635–5640 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Uddin, R. L. Calabro, D.-Y. Kim and K. R. Graham, Halide Exchange and Surface Modification of Metal Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals with Alkyltrichlorosilanes, R. Soc. Chem., 2012, 1–9 Search PubMed .
I. Li, M. Ji, H. Li, H. Wang, M. Xu, H. Rong, J. Wei, J. Liu, J. Liu, W. Chen, C. Zhu, J. Wang and J. Zhang, Cation/Anion Exchange Reactions toward the Syntheses of Upgraded Nanostructures: Principles and Applications, Matter, 2020, 2, 554–586 CrossRef .
D. Yang and D. Huo, Cation doping and strain engineering of CsPbBr3-based perovskite light emitting diodes, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8(20), 6640–6653 RSC .
Q. Chen, N. De Marco, Y. Yang, T.-B. Song, C.-C. Chen, H. Zhao, Z. Hong, H. Zhou and Y. Yang, Under the spotlight: The organic–inorganic hybrid halide perovskite for optoelectronic applications, Nano Today, 2015, 10(3), 355–396 CrossRef CAS .
S. Ullah, J. Wang, P. Yang, L. Liu, S.-E. Yang, T. Xia, H. Guo and Y. Chen, All-inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite: a promising choice for photovoltaics, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2(2), 646–683 RSC .
Z.-C. Kong, J.-F. Liao, Y.-J. Dong, Y.-F. Xu, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, Core@Shell CsPbBr3@Zeolitic Imidazolate Framework Nanocomposite for Efficient Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3(11), 2656–2662 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Pavliuk, M. Abdellah and J. Sá, Hydrogen evolution with CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals under visible light in solution, Mater. Today Commun., 2018, 16, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Xia, W. T. Sun and L. M. Peng, Hydrothermal synthesis of organometal halide perovskites for Li-ion batteries, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51(72), 13787–13790 RSC .
F. Zhang, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, R. He and K. Zheng, Effect of synthesis methods on photoluminescent properties for CsPbBr3 nanocrystals: Hot injection method and conversion method, J. Lumin., 2020, 220 Search PubMed .
D. Huang, P. Xie, Z. Pan, H. Rao and X. Zhong, One-step solution deposition of CsPbBr3 based on precursor engineering for efficient all-inorganic perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(39), 22420–22428 RSC .
C. Tian, F. Wang, Y. Wang, Z. Yang, X. Chen, J. Mei, H. Liu and D. Zhao, Chemical Vapor Deposition Method Grown All-Inorganic Perovskite Microcrystals for Self-Powered Photodetectors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(17), 15804–15812 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. X. Sunqi Loua, Jing Wanga.; Stability: A desiderated problem for the lead halide perovskites, Opt. Mater.: X, 2019, 100023, 1–17 Search PubMed .
Q. Zhong, M. Cao, H. Hu, D. Yang, M. Chen, P. Li, L. Wu and Q. Zhang, One-Pot Synthesis of Highly Stable CsPbBr3@SiO2 Core-Shell Nanoparticles, ACS Nano, 2018, 12(8), 8579–8587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pramanik, K. Gates, S. Patibandla, D. Davis, S. Begum, R. Iftekhar, S. Alamgir, S. Paige, M. M. Porter and P. C. Ray, Water-Soluble and Bright Luminescent Cesium–Lead–Bromide Perovskite Quantum Dot–Polymer Composites for Tumor-Derived Exosome Imaging, ACS Appl. Bio Mater., 2019, 2(12), 5872–5879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Lim, L. Ma, A. Schleife and A. M. Smith, Quantum Dot Surface Engineering: Toward Inert Fluorophores with Compact Size and Bright, Stable Emission, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 320–321, 216–237 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, S. Han, D. Ke and R. Wang, Semiconductor Quantum Dots Surface Modification for Potential Cancer Diagnostic and Therapeutic Applications, J. Nanomater., 2012, 2012, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Mazumder, R. Dey, M. K. Mitra, S. Mukherjee and G. C. Das, Review: Biofunctionalized Quantum Dots in Biology and Medicine, J. Nanomater., 2009, 2009, 1–17 CrossRef .
H. R. Chandan, M. Venkataramana, M. D. Kurkuri and R. G. Balakrishna, Simple quantum dot bioprobe/label for sensitive detection of Staphylococcus aureus TNase, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 222, 1201–1208 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sato, Y. Iso and T. Isobe, Effective Stabilization of Perovskite Cesium Lead Bromide Nanocrystals through Facile Surface Modification by Perfluorocarbon Acid, ACS Omega, 2020, 5(2), 1178–1187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cao, W. Zhu, L. Li, Z. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Lin and J. J. Zhu, Size-selected and surface-passivated CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals for self-enhanced electrochemiluminescence in aqueous media, Nanoscale, 2020, 12(13), 7321–7329 RSC .
D. V. Potapkin, D. Geißler, U. Resch-Genger and I. Y. Goryacheva, Fluorescent quantum dot hydrophilization with PAMAM dendrimer, J. Nanopart. Res., 2016, 18(5), 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
A. Sharma and A. Kakkar, Designing Dendrimer and Miktoarm Polymer Based Multi-Tasking Nanocarriers for Efficient Medical Therapy, Molecules, 2015, 20(9), 16987–17015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Chandan, J. D. Schiffman and R. G. Balakrishna, Quantum dots as fluorescent probes: synthesis, surface chemistry, energy transfer mechanisms, and applications, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 258, 1191–1214 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yu, G. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Li, M. Xu, T. Wang, G. Zhao and L. Zhang, Perovskite CsPbBr3 crystals: growth and applications, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8(19), 6326–6341 RSC .
M. Shellaiah and K. W. Sun, Review on Sensing Applications of Perovskite Nanomaterials, Chemosensors, 2020, 8(3), 1–35 CrossRef .
S. Ananthakumar, J. R. Kumar and S. M. Babu, Cesium lead halide (CsPbX3, X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite quantum dots-synthesis, properties, and applications: a review of their present status, J. Photonics Energy, 2016, 6(4), 1–18 Search PubMed .
B. Chaudhary, Y. K. Kshetri, H.-S. Kim, S. W. Lee and T.-H. Kim, Current status on synthesis, properties and applications of CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) perovskite quantum dots/nanocrystals, Nanotechnology, 2021, 32(50), 502007 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Iso and T. Isobe, Review—Synthesis, Luminescent Properties, and Stabilities of Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals, ECS J. Solid State Sci. Technol., 2017, 7(1), R3040–R3045 CrossRef .
C. Han, X. Zhu, J. S. Martin, Y. Lin, S. Spears and Y. Yan, Recent Progress in Engineering Metal Halide Perovskites for Efficient Visible-Light-Driven Photocatalysis, ChemSusChem, 2020, 13(16), 4005–4025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jesna George, V. V. Halali, C. G. Sanjayan, V. Suvina, M. Sakara and R. Geetha Balakrishna, Perovskite nanomaterials as optical and electrochemical sensors, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7(14), 2702–2725 RSC .
J. Hao, H. Liu, J. Miao, R. Lu, Z. Zhou, B. Zhao, B. Xie, J. Cheng, K. Wang and M. H. Delville, A facile route to synthesize CdSe/ZnS thick-shell quantum dots with precisely controlled green emission properties: towards QDs based LED applications, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9(1), 12048 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Sandeep, K. Y. Gopika and M. R. Revathi, Role of Capped Oleyl Amine in the Moisture-Induced Structural Transformation of CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals, Phys. Status Solidi RRL, 2019, 13(11), 1–17 CrossRef .
D. Di Girolamo, M. I. Dar, D. Dini, L. Gontrani, R. Caminiti, A. Mattoni, M. Graetzel and S. Meloni, Dual effect of humidity on cesium lead bromide: enhancement and degradation of perovskite films, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(19), 12292–12302 RSC .
C. Roda, A. L. Abdelhady, J. Shamsi, M. Lorenzon, V. Pinchetti, M. Gandini, F. Meinardi, L. Manna and S. Brovelli, O2 as a molecular probe for nonradiative surface defects in CsPbBr3 perovskite nanostructures and single crystals, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(16), 7613–7623 RSC .
M. Lorenzon, L. Sortino, Q. Akkerman, S. Accornero, J. Pedrini, M. Prato, V. Pinchetti, F. Meinardi, L. Manna and S. Brovelli, Role of nonradiative defects and environmental oxygen on exciton recombination processes in CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals, Nano Lett., 2017, 17(6), 3844–3853 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Huang, Z. Li, B. Wang, N. Zhu, C. Zhang, L. Kong, Q. Zhang, A. Shan and L. Li, Morphology Evolution and Degradation of CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals under Blue Light-Emitting Diode Illumination, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(8), 7249–7258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yuan, X. Hou, J. Li, C. Qu, W. Zhang, J. Zhao and H. Li, Thermal degradation of luminescence in inorganic perovskite CsPbBr3 nanocrystals, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2017, 19(13), 8934–8940 RSC .
C. Zhang, J. F. S. Fernando, K. L. Firestein, J. E. von Treifeldt, D. Siriwardena, X. Fang and D. Golberg, Thermal stability of CsPbBr3 perovskite as revealed by in situ transmission electron microscopy, APL Mater., 2019, 7(7), 1–6 Search PubMed .
J. Li, B. Bo and X. Gao, The degradation of structure and luminescence in CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals under UV light illumination, AIP Conf. Proc., 2018, 1–7 Search PubMed .
K. Kwak, E. Lim, N. Ahn, J. Heo, K. Bang, S. K. Kim and M. Choi, An atomistic mechanism for the degradation of perovskite solar cells by trapped charge, Nanoscale, 2019, 11(23), 11369–11378 RSC .
J. Chen, D. Liu, M. J. Al-Marri, L. Nuuttila, H. Lehtivuori and K. Zheng, Photo-stability of CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots for optoelectronic application, Sci. China Mater., 2016, 59(9), 719–727 CrossRef CAS .
D. Esparza, S. Sidhik, T. López-Luke, J. M. Rivas and E. De la Rosa, Light-induced effects on crystal size and photo-stability of colloidal CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals, Mater. Res. Express, 2019, 6(4), 1–17 Search PubMed .
S. Kumar, J. Jagielski, T. Marcato, S. F. Solari and C. J. Shih, Understanding the Ligand Effects on Photophysical, Optical, and Electroluminescent Characteristics of Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystal Solids, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10(24), 7560–7567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bi, S. Wang, W. Wen, J. Yuan, G. Cao and J. Tian, Room-temperature construction of mixed-halide perovskite quantum dots with high photoluminescence quantum yield, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122(9), 5151–5160 CrossRef CAS .
R. Wang, M. Mujahid, Y. Duan, Z. K. Wang, J. Xue and Y. Yang, A Review of Perovskites Solar Cell Stability, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29(47), 1–25 Search PubMed .
S. Lou, T. Xuan and J. Wang, (INVITED) Stability: A desiderated problem for the lead halide perovskites, Opt. Mater.: X, 2019, 1, 1–17 Search PubMed .
A. Shrestha, M. Batmunkh, A. Tricoli, S. Z. Qiao and S. Dai, Near-Infrared Active Lead Chalcogenide Quantum Dots: Preparation, Post-Synthesis Ligand Exchange, and Applications in Solar Cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(16), 5202–5224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. R. Kirmani, G. Walters, T. Kim, E. H. Sargent and A. Amassian, Optimizing Solid-State Ligand Exchange for Colloidal Quantum Dot Optoelectronics: How Much Is Enough?, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3(6), 5385–5392 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Xiong, S. Huang, J. Du, X. Tang, F. Zeng, Z. Liu, Z. Zhang, T. Shi, J. Yang, D. Wu, H. Lin, Z. Luo and Y. Leng, Surface Ligand Engineering for CsPbBr3 Quantum Dots Aiming at Aggregation Suppression and Amplified Spontaneous Emission Improvement, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8(20), 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Imran, P. Ijaz, L. Goldoni, D. Maggioni, U. Petralanda, M. Prato, G. Almeida, I. Infante and L. Manna, Simultaneous Cationic and Anionic Ligand Exchange For Colloidally Stable CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(4), 819–824 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, Y. Deng, X. Peng and Y. Jin, Quantum-dot light-emitting diodes for large-area displays: towards the dawn of commercialization, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(14), 1607022 CrossRef PubMed .
H. J. Tak, J. H. Lee, S. Bae and J. W. Jo, Surface-Passivated CsPbBr3 for Developing Efficient and Stable Perovskite Photovoltaics, Crystals, 2021, 11(12), 1–8 CrossRef .
H. Wu, Y. Zhang, M. Lu, X. Zhang, C. Sun, T. Zhang, V. L. Colvin and W. W. Yu, Surface ligand modification of cesium lead bromide nanocrystals for improved light-emitting performance, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(9), 4173–4178 RSC .
C. G. Sanjayan, M. S. Jyothi, M. Sakar and R. Geetha Balakrishna, Multidentate ligand approach for conjugation of perovskite quantum dots to biomolecules, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 603, 758–770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhao, D. Ding, F. Yang, D. Wang, J. Lv, W. Hu, C. Lu and Z. Tang, Ligand effects on electronic and optoelectronic properties of two-dimensional PbS necking percolative superlattices, Nano Res., 2016, 10(4), 1249–1257 CrossRef .
J. N. Arenas, A. Soosaimanickam, H. P. Adl, R. Abargues, P. P. Boix, P. J. Rodríguez-Cantó and J. P. Martínez-Pastor, Ligand-Length Modification in CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals and Bilayers with PbS Quantum Dots for Improved Photodetection Performance, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10(7), 1–7 Search PubMed .
H. Lu, X. Zhu, C. Miller, J. San Martin, X. Chen, E. M. Miller, Y. Yan and M. C. Beard, Enhanced photoredox activity of CsPbBr3 nanocrystals by quantitative colloidal ligand exchange, J. Chem. Phys., 2019, 151(20), 204305 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Haydous, J. M. Gardner and U. B. Cappel, The impact of ligands on the synthesis and application of metal halide perovskite nanocrystals, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(41), 23419–23443 RSC .
P. Bansal and P. Kar, Succinic acid-assisted stability enhancement of a colloidal organometal halide perovskite and its application as a fluorescent keypad lock, New J. Chem., 2019, 43(11), 4599–4604 RSC .
J. Pan, Y. Shang, J. Yin, M. De Bastiani, W. Peng, I. Dursun, L. Sinatra, A. M. El-Zohry, M. N. Hedhili, A. H. Emwas, O. F. Mohammed, Z. Ning and O. M. Bakr, Bidentate Ligand-Passivated CsPbI3 Perovskite Nanocrystals for Stable Near-Unity Photoluminescence Quantum Yield and Efficient Red Light-Emitting Diodes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(2), 562–565 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Krieg, S. T. Ochsenbein, S. Yakunin, S. Ten Brinck, P. Aellen, A. Suess, B. Clerc, D. Guggisberg, O. Nazarenko, Y. Shynkarenko, S. Kumar, C. J. Shih, I. Infante and M. V. Kovalenko, Colloidal CsPbX3 (X = Cl, Br, I) Nanocrystals 2.0: Zwitterionic Capping Ligands for Improved Durability and Stability, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3(3), 641–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, X. Liu, B. He, J. Zhu, X. Li, K. Shen, H. Chen, Y. Duan and Q. Tang, Enhanced Efficiency of Air-Stable CsPbBr3 Perovskite Solar Cells by Defect Dual Passivation and Grain Size Enlargement with a Multifunctional Additive, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(32), 36092–36101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. G. Sanjayan, M. S. Jyothi, M. Sakar and R. G. Balakrishna, Multidentate ligand approach for conjugation of perovskite quantum dots to biomolecules, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 603, 758–770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Walling, J. A. Novak and J. R. Shepard, Quantum dots for live cell and in vivo imaging, Int. J. Mol. Sci., 2009, 10(2), 441–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Li, E. H. Zhi-Jun, Jian Li, Andrew Hunter Davis, Chen-Ho Tung, Li-Zhu Wu and Weiwei Zheng, Photoelectrochemically Active and Environmentally Stable CsPbBr3/TiO2 Core/Shell Nanocrystals, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 1704288 Search PubMed .
B. Wang, S. Zhang, B. Liu, J. Li, B. Cao and Z. Liu, Stable CsPbBr3:Sn@SiO2 and Cs4PbBr6:Sn@SiO2 Core–Shell Quantum Dots with Tunable Color Emission for Light-Emitting Diodes, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2020, 3(3), 3019–3027 CrossRef CAS .
P. Song, B. Qiao, D. Song, J. Cao, Z. Shen, G. Zhang, Z. Xu, S. Zhao, S. Wageh and A. Al-Ghamdi, Enhancing the stability and water resistance of CsPbBr3 perovskite nanocrystals by using tetrafluoride and zinc oxide as protective capsules, J. Mater. Sci., 2020, 55(23), 9739–9747 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kipkorir, J. DuBose, J. Cho and P. V. Kamat, CsPbBr3-CdS heterostructure: stabilizing perovskite nanocrystals for photocatalysis, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12(44), 14815–14825 RSC .
V. K. Ravi, S. Saikia, S. Yadav, V. V. Nawale and A. Nag, CsPbBr3/ZnS Core/Shell Type Nanocrystals for Enhancing Luminescence Lifetime and Water Stability, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(6), 1794–1796 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ding, S. Liu, Z. Zhang, G. Shao, W. Xiang and X. Liang, Stable Zn-doped CsPbBr3 NCs glasses toward an enhanced optical performance for WLED, Ceram. Int., 2019, 45(17), 22699–22706 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, X. Liu, Z. Wang, W. Li, X. Gu, J. Lin, T. Yang, X. Gao and A. K. K. Kyaw, Defect Passivation of CsPbBr3 with AgBr for High-Performance All-Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 2, 6 Search PubMed .
J. Yin, G. H. Ahmed, O. M. Bakr, J.-L. Brédas and O. F. Mohammed, Unlocking the Effect of Trivalent Metal Doping in All-Inorganic CsPbBr3 Perovskite, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(3), 789–795 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Yao, J. Ge, B. N. Han, K. H. Wang, H. B. Yao, H. L. Yu, J. H. Li, B. S. Zhu, J. Z. Song, C. Chen, Q. Zhang, H. B. Zeng, Y. Luo and S. H. Yu, Ce(3+)-Doping to Modulate Photoluminescence Kinetics for Efficient CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals Based Light-Emitting Diodes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(10), 3626–3634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. D. Skurlov, W. Yin, A. O. Ismagilov, A. N. Tcypkin, H. Hua, H. Wang, X. Zhang, A. P. Litvin and W. Zheng, Improved One- and Multiple-Photon Excited Photoluminescence from Cd(2+)-Doped CsPbBr. Perovskite NCs, Nanomaterials, 2022, 12, 1 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Wang, H. Zhang, Q. Sun, A. B. Hafsia, Z. Chen, B. Zhang, Y. Xu and W. Jie, Low-Temperature Solution Growth and Characterization of Halogen (Cl, I)-Doped CsPbBr3 Crystals, Cryst. Growth Des., 2020, 20(3), 1638–1645 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heimbrook, K. Higgins, S. V. Kalinin and M. Ahmadi, Exploring the physics of cesium lead halide perovskite quantum dots via Bayesian inference of the photoluminescence spectra in automated experiment, Nanophotonics, 2021, 10(8), 1977–1989 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fang, W. Yao, Z. Hu, L. Huang, X. Liu, H. Zhang, J. Zhang and Y. Zhu, Stability in Photoinduced Instability in Mixed-Halide Perovskite Materials and Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125(39), 21370–21380 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bera, D. Ghosh, A. Dutta, S. Bhattacharyya, S. Chakraborty and N. Pradhan, Limiting Heterovalent B-Site Doping in CsPbI3 Nanocrystals: Phase and Optical Stability, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4(6), 1364–1369 CrossRef CAS .
J. T. Mulder, I. du Fosse, M. Alimoradi Jazi, L. Manna and A. J. Houtepen, Electrochemical p-Doping of CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6(7), 2519–2525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Sun, Y. Xing, Q. Wu and P. Yang, Highly Luminescent Hybrid SiO2-Coated CdTe Quantum Dots Retained Initial Photoluminescence Efficiency in Sol-Gel SiO2 Film, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2015, 15(2), 1562–1566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zou, X. Xing, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, R. Zhao, X. Zhang and Y. Wang, Water-soluble ZnO quantum dots modified by (3-aminopropyl)triethoxysilane: The promising fluorescent probe for the selective detection of Cu2+ ion in drinking water, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 825, 1–34 CrossRef .
R. Narayan, U. Y. Nayak, A. M. Raichur and S. Garg, Mesoporous Silica Nanoparticles: A Comprehensive Review on Synthesis and Recent Advances, Pharmaceutics, 2018, 10(3), 1–49 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Mura, R. Ludmerczki, L. Stagi, S. Garroni, C. M. Carbonaro, P. C. Ricci, M. F. Casula, L. Malfatti and P. Innocenzi, Integrating sol-gel and carbon dots chemistry for the fabrication of fluorescent hybrid organic-inorganic films, Sci. Rep., 2020, 10(1), 4770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Jiang, Y.-H. Tsai, L. Veeramuthu, F.-C. Liang, L.-C. Chen, C. C. Lin, T. Satoh, S.-H. Tung and C.-C. Kuo, Novel ultra-stable and highly luminescent white light-emitting diodes from perovskite quantum dots—Polymer nanofibers through biaxial electrospinning, APL Mater., 2019, 7, 11 Search PubMed .
L. Qiu, H. Yang, Z. Dai, F. Sun, J. Hao, M. Guan, P. Dang, C. Yan, J. Lin and G. Li, Highly efficient and stable CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots by encapsulation in dual-shell hollow silica spheres for WLEDs, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2020, 7(10), 2060–2071 RSC .
C. Petcu, V. Purcar, C. I. Spataru, E. Alexandrescu, R. Somoghi, B. Trica, S. G. Nitu, D. M. Panaitescu, D. Donescu and M. L. Jecu, The Influence of New Hydrophobic Silica Nanoparticles on the Surface Properties of the Films Obtained from Bilayer Hybrids, Nanomaterials, 2017, 7, 2 CrossRef PubMed .
E. C. d. O. Nassor, L. R. Ávila, P. F. d. S. Pereira, K. J. Ciuffi, P. S. Calefi and E. J. Nassar, Influence of the hydrolysis and condensation time on the preparation of hybrid materials, Mater.
Res., 2011, 14(1), 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Dirin, L. Protesescu, D. Trummer, I. V. Kochetygov, S. Yakunin, F. Krumeich, N. P. Stadie and M. V. Kovalenko, Harnessing Defect-Tolerance at the Nanoscale: Highly Luminescent Lead Halide Perovskite Nanocrystals in Mesoporous Silica Matrixes, Nano Lett., 2016, 16(9), 5866–5874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ding, D. Zhou, X. Sun, W. Xu, H. Xu, G. Pan, D. Li, S. Zhang, B. Dong and H. Song, Highly stable and water-soluble monodisperse CsPbX3/SiO2 nanocomposites for white-LED and cells imaging, Nanotechnology, 2018, 29(34), 345703 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Sun, Y. Zhang, C. Ruan, C. Yin, X. Wang, Y. Wang and W. W. Yu, Efficient and Stable White LEDs with Silica-Coated Inorganic Perovskite Quantum Dots, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(45), 10088–10094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tang, W. Chen, Z. Liu, J. Du, Z. Yao, Y. Huang, C. Chen, Z. Yang, T. Shi, W. Hu, Z. Zang, Y. Chen and Y. Leng, Ultrathin, Core-Shell Structured SiO2 Coated Mn(2+) -Doped Perovskite Quantum Dots for Bright White Light-Emitting Diodes, Small, 2019, 15(19), 1900484 CrossRef PubMed .
J. H. Yoo, S. H. Choi, S. B. Kwon, H. B. Kim, S. G. Jeong, Y. H. Song, B. K. Kang and D. H. Yoon, Synthesis of a silica coated fully-inorganic perovskite with enhanced moisture stability, New J. Chem., 2019, 43(42), 16685–16690 RSC .
F. Zhang, Z. F. Shi, Z. Z. Ma, Y. Li, S. Li, D. Wu, T. T. Xu, X. J. Li, C. X. Shan and G. T. Du, Silica coating enhances the stability of inorganic perovskite nanocrystals for efficient and stable down-conversion in white light-emitting devices, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(43), 20131–20139 RSC .
P. Kumar, M. Patel, C. Park, H. Han, B. Jeong, H. Kang, R. Patel, W. G. Koh and C. Park, Highly luminescent biocompatible CsPbBr3@SiO2 core-shell nanoprobes for bioimaging and drug delivery, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2020, 8(45), 10337–10345 RSC .
S. Li, D. Lei, W. Ren, X. Guo, S. Wu, Y. Zhu, A. L. Rogach, M. Chhowalla and A. K.-Y. Jen, Water-resistant perovskite nanodots enable robust two-photon lasing in aqueous environment, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1192), 1–8 Search PubMed .
Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, Y. Fan, Z. Chen, Z. Tang, J. Zhao, Y. Lv, J. Lin, X. Guo, J. Zhang and X. Liu, Toward Highly Luminescent and Stabilized Silica-Coated Perovskite Quantum Dots through Simply Mixing and Stirring under Room Temperature in Air, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 13053–13061 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Chan, D. Giovanni, H. He, T. C. Sum and K.-T. Yong, Water-Stable All-Inorganic Perovskite Nanocrystals with Nonlinear Optical Properties for Targeted Multiphoton Bioimaging, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4(9), 9022–9033 CrossRef CAS .
B. Schmidt, Hydrophilic Polymers, Polymers, 2019, 11(4), 1–5 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Yoon, K. P. Yang, J. Kim, K. Shin and K. Lee, Fabrication of highly transparent and luminescent quantum dot/polymer nanocomposite for light emitting diode using amphiphilic polymer-modified quantum dots, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 1–8 CrossRef .
S. B. Rizvi, S. Y. Yang, M. Green, M. Keshtgar and A. M. Seifalian, Novel POSS-PCU Nanocomposite Material as a Biocompatible Coating for Quantum Dots, Bioconjugate Chem., 2015, 26(12), 2384–2396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Du, N. A. Nosratabad, Z. Jin, C. Zhang, S. Wang, B. Chen and H. Mattoussi, Luminescent Quantum Dots Stabilized by N-Heterocyclic Carbene Polymer Ligands, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143(4), 1873–1884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O'Brien, S. S. Cummins, D. Darcy, A. Dearden, O. Masala, N. L. Pickett, S. Ryley and A. J. Sutherland, Quantum dot-labelled polymer beads by suspension polymerisation, Chem. Commun., 2003, 2532–2533 RSC .
M. Zulfajri, S. Sudewi, S. Ismulyati, A. Rasool, M. Adlim and G. G. Huang, Carbon Dot/Polymer Composites with Various Precursors and Their Sensing Applications: A Review, Coatings, 2021, 11(9), 1–31 CrossRef .
S. Feizi, H. Zare and M. Hoseinpour, Investigation of dosimetric characteristics of a core–shell quantum dots nano composite (CdTe/CdS/PMMA): fabrication of a new gamma sensor, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2018, 124(6), 1–7 CrossRef CAS .
Y. I. Derikov, G. A. Shandryuk, O. N. Karpov and R. V. Tal’rose, Composites Based on Functionalized Polystyrene and Semiconductor Quantum Dots, Polym. Sci., Ser. B, 2020, 62(2), 144–151 CrossRef CAS .
C. Grazon, M. Chern, K. Ward, S. Lecommandoux, M. W. Grinstaff and A. M. Dennis, A versatile and accessible polymer coating for functionalizable zwitterionic quantum dots with high DNA grafting efficiency, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55(74), 11067–11070 RSC .
Z. Zhang, L. Liu, H. Huang, L. Li, Y. Wang, J. Xu and J. Xu, Encapsulation of CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots into PPy conducting polymer: Exceptional water stability and enhanced charge transport property, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2020, 526, 146735 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, L. Du, Z. Jin, Y. Xin and H. Mattoussi, Enhanced Stabilization and Easy Phase Transfer of CsPbBr3 Perovskite Quantum Dots Promoted by High-Affinity Polyzwitterionic Ligands, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(29), 12669–12680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Carrillo-Carrion, A. I. Bocanegra, B. Arnaiz, N. Feliu, D. Zhu and W. J. Parak, Triple-Labeling of Polymer-Coated Quantum Dots and Adsorbed Proteins for Tracing their Fate in Cell Cultures, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(4), 4631–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Xie, Y. Yu, J. Gong, C. Yang, P. Zeng, Y. Dong, B. Yang, R. Liang, Q. Ou and S. Zhang, Encapsulated room-temperature synthesized CsPbX3 perovskite quantum dots with high stability and wide color gamut for display, Opt. Mater. Express, 2018, 8(11), 3494–3505 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. Lee, H. Jung, W. I. Park, Y. Lee, E. Koo and J. Bang, Preparation of Water-Soluble CsPbBr3 Perovskite Quantum Dot Nanocomposites via Encapsulation into Amphiphilic Copolymers, ChemistrySelect, 2018, 3(40), 11320–11325 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pramanik, S. Patibandla, Y. Gao, K. Gates and P. C. Ray, Water Triggered Synthesis of Highly Stable and Biocompatible 1D Nanowire, 2D Nanoplatelet, and 3D Nanocube CsPbBr3 Perovskites for Multicolor Two-Photon Cell Imaging, JACS Au, 2021, 1(1), 53–65 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Raja, Y. Bekenstein, M. A. Koc, S. Fischer, D. Zhang, L. Lin, R. O. Ritchie, P. Yang and A. P. Alivisatos, Encapsulation of Perovskite Nanocrystals into Macroscale Polymer Matrices: Enhanced Stability and Polarization, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8(51), 35523–35533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhou, Z. Bai, W. G. Lu, Y. Wang, B. Zou and H. Zhong, In Situ Fabrication of Halide Perovskite Nanocrystal-Embedded Polymer Composite Films with Enhanced Photoluminescence for Display Backlights, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(41), 9163–9168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. S. Cho, C. M. Evans, E. C. Davidson, M. L. Hoarfrost, M. A. Modestino, R. A. Segalman and J. J. Urban, Enhanced Water Vapor Blocking in Transparent Hybrid Polymer–Nanocrystal Films, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 4(1), 70–74 CrossRef .
Y. Wang, L. Varadi, A. Trinchi, J. Shen, Y. Zhu, G. Wei and C. Li, Spray-Assisted Coil-Globule Transition for Scalable Preparation of Water-Resistant CsPbBr3@PMMA Perovskite Nanospheres with Application in Live Cell Imaging, Small, 2018, 14(51), 1803156 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Yang, F. Zhang, J. Tai, Y. Li, Y. Yang, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Xie, B. Xu, H. Zhong, K. Liu and B. Yang, A detour strategy for colloidally stable block-copolymer grafted MAPbBr3 quantum dots in water with long photoluminescence lifetime, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(13), 5820–5826 RSC .
H. Zhang, X. Wang, Q. Liao, Z. Xu, H. Li, L. Zheng and H. Fu, Embedding Perovskite Nanocrystals into a Polymer Matrix for Tunable Luminescence Probes in Cell Imaging, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(7), 1–8 CrossRef .
Y. Cai, Y. Le, L. Wang and R.-J. Xie, A Facile Synthesis of Water-Resistant CsPbBr3 Perovskite Quantum Dots Loaded Poly(methyl methacrylate) Composite Microspheres Based on In Situ Polymerization, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 1901075, 1–9 Search PubMed .
G. Jiang, C. Guhrenz, A. Kirch, L. Sonntag, C. Bauer, X. Fan, J. Wang, S. Reineke, N. Gaponik and A. Eychmüller, Highly Luminescent and Water Resistant CsPbBr3CsPb2Br5 Perovskite Nanocrystals Coordinated with Partially Hydrolyzed Poly(methyl methacrylate) and Polyethylenimine, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(9), 10386–10396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, X. Deng, Z. Xie, X. Cai, S. Liang, P. A. Ma, Z. Hou, Z. Cheng and J. Lin, Enhancing the Stability of Perovskite Quantum Dots by Encapsulation in Crosslinked Polystyrene Beads via a Swelling-Shrinking Strategy toward Superior Water Resistance, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(39), 1–8 Search PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Zhang, C. Ding and J. Xu, Boosting charge separation and photocatalytic CO2 reduction of CsPbBr3 perovskite quantum dots by hybridizing with P3HT, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 419, 1–8 Search PubMed .
X. Jin, K. Ma, J. Chakkamalayath, J. Morsby and H. Gao, 
            In Situ Photocatalyzed Polymerization to Stabilize Perovskite Nanocrystals in Protic Solvents, ACS Energy Lett., 2022, 7(2), 610–616 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Song, J. Li, G. Liang, L. Rao, S. Yu, X. Ding, Y. Tang, B. Yu, J. Ou, U. Lemmer and G. Gomard, Highly Efficient and Water-Stable Lead Halide Perovskite Quantum Dots Using Superhydrophobic Aerogel Inorganic Matrix for White Light-Emitting Diodes, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2020, 1900941, 1–11 Search PubMed .
J. Ren, T. Li, X. Zhou, X. Dong, A. V. Shorokhov, M. B. Semenov, V. D. Krevchik and Y. Wang, Encapsulating all-inorganic perovskite quantum dots into mesoporous metal organic frameworks with significantly enhanced stability for optoelectronic applications, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 358, 30–39 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chaturvedi and P. N. Dave, Environmental Application of Photocatalysis, Mater. Sci. Forum, 2012, 734, 273–294 Search PubMed .
C. Jia, H. Li, X. Meng and H. Li, CsPbX3/Cs4PbX6 core/shell perovskite nanocrystals, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54(49), 6300–6303 RSC .
S. Gutiérrez Álvarez, W. Lin, M. Abdellah, J. Meng, K. Žídek, T. Pullerits and K. Zheng, Charge Carrier Diffusion Dynamics in Multisized Quaternary Alkylammonium-Capped CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystal Solids, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13(37), 44742–44750 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Ezzeldien, S. Al-Qaisi, Z. A. Alrowaili, M. Alzaid, E. Maskar, A. Es-Smairi, T. V. Vu and D. P. Rai, Electronic and optical properties of bulk and surface of CsPbBr3 inorganic halide perovskite a first principles DFT 1/2 approach, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11(1), 20622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhang, L. Li, L. Liu, X. Xiao, H. Huang and J. Xu, Water-Stable and Photoelectrochemically Active CsPbBr3/Polyaniline Composite by a Photocatalytic Polymerization Process, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124(40), 22228–22234 CrossRef CAS .
C. C. Yang, R. A. Doong, K. F. Chen, G. S. Chen and Y. P. Tsai, The photocatalytic degradation of methylene blue by green semiconductor films that is induced by irradiation by a light-emitting diode and visible light, J. Air Waste Manage. Assoc., 2018, 68(1), 29–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, Y. Hu, J. Wang, Q. Shen, Y. Zhang, C. Ding, Y. Bai, G. Jiang, Z. Li and N. Gaponik, Boosting Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction on CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals by Immobilizing Metal Complexes, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32(4), 1517–1525 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-X. Chen, Y.-F. Xu, X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen and D.-B. Kuang, Solvent selection and Pt decoration towards enhanced photocatalytic CO2 reduction over CsPbBr3 perovskite single crystals. Sustain, Energy Fuels, 2020, 4(5), 2249–2255 CAS .
Y.-F. Xu, M.-Z. Yang, B.-X. Chen, X.-D. Wang, H.-Y. Chen, D.-B. Kuang and C.-Y. Su, A CsPbBr3 Perovskite Quantum Dot/Graphene Oxide Composite for Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(16), 5660–5663 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hou, S. Cao, Y. Wu, Z. Gao, F. Liang, Y. Sun, Z. Lin and L. Sun, Inorganic Colloidal Perovskite Quantum Dots for Robust Solar CO2 Reduction, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23(40), 9481–9485 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jiang, H. Y. Chen, J. Y. Li, J. F. Liao, H. H. Zhang, X. D. Wang and D. B. Kuang, Z-Scheme 2D/2D Heterojunction of CsPbBr3/Bi2 WO6 for Improved Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 50 Search PubMed .
S. Kumar, M. Regue, M. A. Isaacs, E. Freeman and S. Eslava, All-Inorganic CsPbBr3 Nanocrystals: Gram-Scale Mechanochemical Synthesis and Selective Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction to Methane, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3(5), 4509–4522 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Q. Liang, S. Zhao, X.-M. Hu, M. Ceccato, T. Skrydstrup and K. Daasbjerg, Hydrophobic Copper Interfaces Boost Electroreduction of Carbon Dioxide to Ethylene in Water, ACS Catal., 2021, 11(2), 958–966 CrossRef CAS .
L. Y. Wu, Y. F. Mu, X. X. Guo, W. Zhang, Z. M. Zhang, M. Zhang and T. B. Lu, Encapsulating Perovskite Quantum Dots in Iron-Based Metal-Organic Frameworks (MOFs) for Efficient Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(28), 9491–9495 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, H. Lu, X. Zhu, Y. Lin, M. C. Beard, Y. Yan and X. Chen, Ultrafast Reaction Mechanisms in Perovskite
Based Photocatalytic C–C Coupling, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(2), 566–571 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, Y. Lin, Y. Sun, M. C. Beard and Y. Yan, Lead-Halide Perovskites for Photocatalytic alpha-Alkylation of Aldehydes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(2), 733–738 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, Y. Lin, J. San Martin, Y. Sun, D. Zhu and Y. Yan, Lead halide perovskites for photocatalytic organic synthesis, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 2843 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Qiu, Q. Wang, Y. Zhao, Y. Dai, Y. Dong, C. Chen, Q. Chen and Y. Li, Fabricating Surface-Functionalized CsPbBr3/Cs4PbBr6 Nanosheets for Visible-Light Photocatalytic Oxidation of Styrene, Front. Chem., 2020, 8(130), 1–8 Search PubMed .
R. Das, S. Chakraborty and S. C. Peter, Systematic Assessment of Solvent Selection in Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, ACS Energy Lett., 2021, 6(9), 3270–3274 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chouhan, S. Ghimire, C. Subrahmanyam, T. Miyasaka and V. Biju, Synthesis, optoelectronic properties and applications of halide perovskites, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49(10), 2869–2885 RSC .
H. Idriss, The elusive photocatalytic water splitting reaction using sunlight on suspended nanoparticles: is there a way forward?, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10(2), 304–310 RSC .
Y. Hu, C. Gao and Y. Xiong, Surface and interface design for photocatalytic water splitting, Dalton Trans., 2018, 47(35), 12035–12040 RSC .
I. Poli, U. Hintermair, M. Regue, S. Kumar, E. V. Sackville, J. Baker, T. M. Watson, S. Eslava and P. J. Cameron, Graphite-protected CsPbBr3 perovskite photoanodes functionalised with water oxidation catalyst for oxygen evolution in water, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10(1), 2097 CrossRef PubMed .
K. C. He Zhao, Petri Leukkunen, Alexey Popov, Mousumi Upadhyay Kahaly, Krisztian Kordas, and Satu Ojala, Dimethylammonium iodide stabilized bismuth halide perovskite photocatalyst for hydrogen evolution, Nano Res., 2021, 14(4), 1116–1125 CrossRef .
L. F. Gao, W. J. Luo, Y. F. Yao and Z. G. Zou, An all-inorganic lead halide perovskite-based photocathode for stable water reduction, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54(81), 11459–11462 RSC .
J. Brunetti, G. Riolo, M. Gentile, A. Bernini, E. Paccagnini, C. Falciani, L. Lozzi, S. Scali, L. Depau, A. Pini, P. Lupetti and L. Bracci, Near-infrared quantum dots labelled with a tumor selective tetrabranched peptide for in vivo imaging, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2018, 16(1), 21 CrossRef PubMed .
I. V. Martynenko, A. P. Litvin, F. Purcell-Milton, A. V. Baranov, A. V. Fedorov and Y. K. Gun'ko, Application of semiconductor quantum dots in bioimaging and biosensing, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2017, 5(33), 6701–6727 RSC .
S. Jung, J. H. Kim, J. W. Choi, J.-W. Kang, S.-H. Jin, Y. Kang and M. Song, Enhancement of Photoluminescence Quantum Yield and Stability in CsPbBr3 Perovskite Quantum Dots by Trivalent Doping, Nanomaterials, 2020, 1–10 Search PubMed .
G. J. Matt, I. Levchuk, J. Knüttel, J. Dallmann, A. Osvet, M. Sytnyk, X. Tang, J. Elia, R. Hock, W. Heiss and C. J. Brabec, Sensitive Direct Converting X-Ray Detectors Utilizing Crystalline CsPbBr3 Perovskite Films Fabricated via Scalable Melt Processing, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7(4), 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhu, F. Li, Y. Huang, F. Lin and X. Chen, Wavelength-Shift-Based Colorimetric Sensing for Peroxide Number
of Edible Oil Using CsPbBr3 Perovskite Nanocrystals, Anal. Chem., 2019, 91(22), 14183–14187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Song, Y. Wang, B. Wang, Y. Yao, W. Wang, J. Wu, Q. Shen, W. Luo and Z. Zou, Super stable CsPbBr3@SiO2 tumor imaging reagent by stress-response encapsulation, Nano Res., 2020, 13(3), 795–801 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Sanjayan C. G.
	Mr Sanjayan C. G. obtained his BSc degree from Chettinad Academy of Research and Education and his MSc from Nanoscience and Nanotechnology from the University of Madras. Presently, he is working as a Senior Research Fellow at the Centre for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, and is pursuing his PhD under the guidance of Prof. R Geetha Balakrishna, and Dr Sakar Mohan. His research interests include the design and development of water stable perovskite fluorescent probes for bio sensing and bio imaging and development of lead-free perovskite quantum dots for biomedical applications.

M. S. Jyothi
	Jyothi M S is an Assistant Professor, at AMC Engineering College. She received her PhD from the Center for Nano and Material Sciences, Jain University, Bengaluru, in 2016. She was a post-doctoral fellow for a stint of two years at Chulalongkorn University, Thailand. Her research interest lies on nanomaterials and composites for energy and environmental applications including solar cells, gas separation and water treatment. She is passionate about investigations on structure–property relationships, chemical and thermal stabilities, and micro and macro structures of membrane composites. She is presently working on use of bio-waste and natural material-incorporated polymeric membranes, organic–inorganic hybrid framework nanoparticles and nanofibre membranes of the same for various applications.

R. Geetha Balakrishna
	Prof Geetha Balakrishna has gone through various stages of teaching and research in her career starting from a lecturer to Professor, to administrator, and is now a core researcher and the Director of a dedicated researcher Centre called the “Centre for Nano and Material Sciences”, at Jain University. Her aim has been to work towards establishing minimal research facilities so as to motivate faculty at the University level to take up their research seriously. She has focused her research on photochemistry and energy conversions in nanomaterials. She works on perovskites, oxide/sulphide nanocrystals and colloidal quantum dots which are active to photons and hence applicable to solar cells, water purification/disinfection/desalination and sensing technologies. She has published around 137 research papers, four patents and guided/guiding 26 students on their research projects leading to Doctoral and Post-doctoral degrees. Dr Geetha is a founder and CEO of a spin-off company from Jain University called Greenchem Nano. She is a member of many renowned professional bodies and has presently been nominated as the regional coordinator of Global Materials Network (IUMRS body) from India. She is also the commission member of the International Union of Material Research Society. She is the recipient of the Fulbright Nehru award for Academic and Professional Excellence and is also a Fellow of the Royal Society of Chemistry. She was recognised as one of the women at the forefront of energy research by American Chemical Society Energy letters. She is also listed as one of the top 2% scientists across the globe as per Stanford University data 2021.

 	Fig. 1  Strategies to stabilize quantum dots for various applications.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic representation of the interaction between O2 and the CPQDs, showing direct extraction of photo-excited electrons from the conduction band (grey arrow) leading to the quenching of the PL (green arrow), while surface defects (TS) placed close to the Fermi level (FL) in the absence of external potentials are essentially unaffected by oxygen (the excitation light is indicated with a blue arrow). Reproduced with permission from ref. 47. Copyright 2017 ACS. (b) Schematics of the possible degradation pathways of the CPQDs due to O2, H2O and CO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2017 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 3  The PL spectra of CPQDs (498) films without illumination (a) and with illumination times of 1 h (b), 6 h (c) and 10 h (d), respectively, at various temperatures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 51. Copyright 2018 AIP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) XRD patterns and (b) PL emission spectra of the CPQDs under UV illumination (175 mW cm2, RH 60%). (c) TEM and HRTEM images of CPQDs before and after UV light illumination. (d) Samples under UV light illumination. Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2018 ACS.	 

Surface passivation using ligand molecules	L-lysine	45 days in open air and humidity	
74


	500 h under daylight	

Perfluoro decanoic acid (PFDA)	4 h in 100 °C	
31

Decanoic acid (DA)	
	

tri-n-octyl phosphine (TOP)	20 days in open air and water	
32

Succinic acid (SA)	14 days in water	
75

N-Hydroxy succinimide (NHS)	
	


 	Scheme 1  Flow chart that illustrates different surface passivation techniques for stabilizing CPQDs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Photographs showing the stability against water: (a–c) CPQDs and (d–f) CPQD @SiO2 core–shell NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 25. Copyright 2018 ACS. (b) Amine linkage of a silica precursor with Pb2+ ions. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2018 ACS.	 

Silica shells	(3-Aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES)	72 h at 100 °C	
97

Tetramethyl orthosilicate (TEOS)
Tetramethyl orthosilicate (TEOS)	30 days in open air and water	
101

(3-Aminopropyl) triethoxysilane (APTES)	227 h under atmospheric conditions	
102

(3-Aminopropyl) trimethoxysilane (APTMS)	3 months in water	
104

Tetramethoxysilane (TMOS)	3 h in water	
105

Tetramethoxysilane (TMOS)	40 min in water	
25

Tetramethoxysilane (TMOS)	24 h in water	
106

(3-Mercaptopropyl) trimethoxy silane (MPTMS)	20 days in water	
107

Tetramethoxysilane (TMOS) and pegylated phospholipid (PEG-DSME)	2 weeks in water for 8 h under UV illumination	
109


 	Fig. 6  (a) Illustration of the biaxial electrospinning technique for fabricating core [CsPb(Br0.4I0.6)3@PS QD]/shell (CPQD@PS QD) light-emitting nanofibers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2020 AIP Publishing. (b) Schematic diagram of CPQDs merged in PMMA. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2018 Optica Publishing Group. (c) Schematic illustration of the encapsulation of CPQDs by amphiphilic polymers to render them water-soluble. Reproduced with permission from ref. 123. Copyright 2018 European Chemical Societies Publishing. (d) Schematic representation of the CPQD embedded polystyrene polymer composite to enhance stability. Reproduced with permission from ref. 125. Copyright 2016 ACS.	 

Polymer encapsulation	Polymers poly(styrene-butadiene-styrene) (SBS), poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) and polystyrene (PS)	3 months in water	
96

Octylamine (OCA), poly(isobutylene-alt-maleic anhydride) (PIMA), poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG)	1.5 years in open air and at room temperature	
120

Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA)	16 h at 100 °C	
122

Poloxamer 127/PEG (15)-hydroxy stearate	8 days in water	
123

Poly(styrene-ethylene-butylene-styrene) (SEBS), poly(lauryl methacrylate)	60 min in water	
125

Polystyrene-block-poly(ethylene-ran-butylene)-block-polystyrene (PS-PEB-PS) and poly(ethylene glycol)-block-poly-(propylene glycol)-block-poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG-PPG-PEG)]	8 days in water	
26

Amine-polyethylene glycol-propionic acid	35 days in water and 3 h under UV light illumination	
124

Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), poly(ethylenimine) (b-PEI)	1 month in water	
131

Poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA), poly(ethylenimine) (b-PEI)	60 days in an ambient environment	
132

Polystyrene (PS) beads	9 months in water	
133


 	Fig. 7  Schematic of the relative position of the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) of CPQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 142. Copyright 2020 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic representation of the CsPbBr3-Ni(tpy) photocatalyst system developed in this work: immobilizing of Ni(tpy) metal complexes onto a CsPbBr3 QD photosensitizer through electrostatic interactions.144 Copyright 2020 ACS. (b) Schematic diagram of CO2 reduction on Cu-RGO CPQD nanocomposites under simulated sunlight. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2020 ACS.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Water-Soluble PS-PEB-PS and PEG−PPG-PEG coated CPQDs, and anti-CD63 antibody-attached CPQDs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2018 ACS. (b) IPE fluorescence and merged images of Mia PaCa-2 cells treated with CPQD/SiO2/mPEG-DSPE/FA and CPQD/SiO2/mPEG-DSPE. Reproduced with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2021 ACS.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
