Eco-friendly and sustainable processing of wood-based materials  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0GC04430J View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0GC04430J
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2021, 23, 2198-2232Eco-friendly and sustainable processing of wood-based materials

        
          
            Emmanuel Isaac 
            Akpan
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Bernd 
            Wetzel
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Klaus 
            Friedrich
          
        
      
Institute for Composite Materials (IVW GmbH), Kaiserslautern, 67663, Deutschland, Germany. E-mail: emmanuel.akpan@ivw.uni-kl.de;  Fax: +49 6312017198;   Tel: +49 6312017347
Received 
      31st December 2020
    , Accepted 15th February 2021First published on 15th February 2021AbstractThe hierarchical, porous, and macromolecular structures of woods provide opportunities for them to be modified and processed into structural, functional, and multi-functional materials. Chemical and thermal modifications are usually applied to adapt the wood structure and impart necessary functionalities. Most of these treatments use substantial amounts of chemicals, energy, and water. They also innocently incorporate unwanted chemically bonded structures into the wood and generate a large amount of waste products which are harmful to the environment. This brings a dilemma where an entirely sustainable and green material is converted to a non-environmentally friendly material. In this review, we provide an extensive analysis of the current modification techniques, chemicals and other raw materials from the perspective of sustainability, renewability, clean and cost-effective energy use, and overall compliance to the principles of green and sustainable chemistry. Alternative and prospective materials and methods which are environmentally sustainable, energy efficient, and cost effective are proposed.
1. Introduction
Wood is recognized as the most useful green and sustainable material on Earth. This is because wood is renewable, aesthetically comforting, highly versatile, carbon neutral, less carbon dioxide producing, durable, structurally strong, cheap, non-toxic and naturally abundant. It is the oldest structural material and has been used for thousands of years in building construction,1,2 furniture,3,4 tools, tribology5–7 and fuels.8 Recently, research and economic efforts have been directed towards the use of wood to replace non-renewable and petroleum-derived materials as lightweight structures, thermal and chemical energy storage materials, substrates for environmental remediation, ionic nanofluidic devices, electronic substrates, absorbents, battery electrodes etc. The need for zero or near zero emission processes and products, reduced carbon footprint, low energy and water consumption, and the desire for a more sustainable economy and for cost-efficient material solutions are the driving forces for this change in focus.
Wood is naturally structured to possess excellent properties such as fluid and ionic transport, load bearing, and heat insulation.9–11 Despite the excellent properties, wood could not be used in advanced engineering structures (beyond construction and furniture applications) because of its inherent disadvantages such as high water absorption, poor dimensional stability, natural existence of inhomogeneities, and inferior mechanical performance.12 In the past, pre-treatments with steam, heat, ammonia, organic and inorganic salt impregnation, chemical surface modification, coatings, and cold rolling were used to improve the properties of wood.13–20 These treatments led to improvements in dimensional stability, moisture adsorption, durability, and mechanical properties21 but with no added functionalities.
Research over the past decade has shown that optimizing the hierarchical structure of wood by chemical and physical modifications enables the addition of functionalities. Moreover, the application of nanotechnology enables the addition of properties and extended functions for advanced applications.22–26 However, these modifications use significant amounts of toxic chemicals, energy, and water, and produce substantial waste.27 Some of the processes also introduce unintentional chemically bonded structures into the wood. Moreover, some methods have substantial effects on the structure of cellulose fibrils, which are intended to be preserved for realization of the anticipated results. In this way, the sustainability of the resulting product is in doubt. To ensure environmental protection and economic sustainability, the use of green and resource-efficient materials and methods as well as clean and cost effective energy sources should be vigorously pursued. In this way, one can arrive at materials with comparable and even better performance and functionality than their synthetic counterparts.
The present review describes in a critical analysis current processes and materials used in advanced wood engineering. The processes and materials are specifically analysed from the perspective of sustainability, renewability, clean and cost effective energy use, and overall compliance to the principles of green and sustainable chemistry. First, we discuss the sustainability of wood and its structural nature, followed by a critical overview of the current modification strategies and their implications for sustainability. Then we explore the possibilities of using more environmentally friendly and eco-efficient chemicals, energy and processes. Furthermore, we discuss how modified wood can be applied in key economic areas to achieve sustainability. Finally, we present perspectives for future research in the production of engineered wood products. Review articles and book chapters in the area of modified wood and wood-based materials have been published by some researchers.11,26–32 In these articles, the structure of wood, mechanical and physico-chemical properties, current modification techniques and applications were clearly illustrated. However, issues of sustainability of the processes and raw materials employed were not critically analysed. The present article seeks to analyse current wood modification techniques, illustrate their deviation from the principles of green chemistry and sustainability, and propose potential sustainable methods and raw materials that can replace them. It goes further to link applications to sustainability and highlights how products can be made greener.
2. Wood as a sustainable bio-composite
2.1. Wood as a green sustainable material
Wood is a versatile organic material. It is the most sustainable green material on Earth. It can be called a renewable resource as it is naturally self-replenishing (i.e. it regrows when cut). It can also be artificially replenished by systematic harvesting and re-planting. Relative to metals and ceramics, wood requires minimal amounts of energy-based processing, signifying a relatively low level of embodied energy. Although processing of some wood products such as plywood and flake wood requires more energy, their embodied energy is still less than that of non-wood counterparts. Harvesting 1 kg of wood takes up approximately 1.84 kg of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Replacing steel materials with bio-energy-processed wood will lead to a substantial decrease in energy consumption, global warming, air and water pollution, and solid waste production.33,34 It can be said that wood products are carbon negative because of their low embodied energy and the fact that wood is one-half carbon by weight. If the basic rules of using wood are strictly followed, carbon in wood will not be wasted or released into the atmosphere. Carbon in wood or processed wood materials is stored within the material until it reaches its end of life, deteriorates or is incinerated. The most critical phase in the life cycle of wood products is the processing phase because it contributes the largest portion of wood's global warming potential, impact on energy use, solid waste production and pollution.35 Wood-processing areas that have a direct impact on the wood's material sustainability includes harvesting, transportation, energy, use of chemicals and water, and waste generation. In advanced wood processing, energy, chemicals and water pose the highest impact. Controlling the sustainability of the processing phase is the key to maintaining the sustainability of the final wood products. In essence, engineered wood can be kept sustainable by controlling the use of water, chemicals and energy during processing.
2.2. Sustainability in wood structure
Wood is a natural biomaterial with excellent structural formulation. It takes advantage of nature's ability of self-organization to realize massive hierarchical structures by molecular, nano- and micro-level processing. Wood has a very highly energy efficient system which gives it the capability for competitive adaptation and a long life span. The massive stem structure in wood consists basically of bulk dead cells with only about 5% of the cells having an active metabolism. The remaining 95% die at the end of their differentiation and synthesis. The dead cells serve as passive support structures. This conservative strategy makes wood a highly energy efficient and economical organism. An interesting structural aspect of wood contributing to its structural sustainability is its hierarchical formulation. Wood is structurally ordered with well-oriented microfibres and tracheids for water, ion and oxygen transportation. The tracheids allow water to be transported efficiently without any loss of energy or need for an additional energy source. Wood is made of a large proportion of hollow space which is responsible for energy absorption. Another sustainable attribute of wood is the cellular structure. The hollow cells in wood cause a low density which translates to light weight and high mechanical stiffness.36 Nano-cellulose fibrils are systematically oriented in the cell wall to fine-tune the mechanical properties while at the same time acting to allow adaptation of the materials during growth and to externally imposed deformation.
2.3. A general overview of wood structure
Wood is a vast collection of living and dead cells which are arranged, oriented and accumulated to form a massive organized hierarchical structure. This structural hierarchy can be viewed in four major orders of dimensional magnitude, including nanostructure (0.1 nm–10 nm), ultrastructure (1 nm–1 micron), microstructure (1 micron–0.1 mm), and macrostructure (0.1 mm–10 cm)30,37 (Fig. 1). Macroscopically, wood appears as concentric bands of various layers put together to form the tree trunk. Six distinct layers are easily distinguishable, namely the outer bark, inner bark, vascular cambium, sapwood, heartwood and pith (Fig. 1a). Of relevance in the functional design of wood products are the sapwood and heartwood. The heartwood is an old version of the sapwood transformed in the course of the tree growth. Structurally, both have the same organizational features but different chemical compositions and consequently differing properties. Heartwood possesses dead cells whereas sapwood cells are partly alive. A look at a part of the macrostructure in the microscopic range reveals visually observable wood grains resulting from the arrangement and directionality of various cell types, fibre bundles arranged in an ordered manner, vessels, tracheids and aligned vertical channels (Fig. 1b). The structural arrangement of the wood cells is visible in the ultrastructure (Fig. 1c). The cells generally consist of a series of layers called the wood cell walls surrounding a hollow space called the lumen. The cell walls are organized in layers forming three distinct domains: the middle lamella (ML), the primary cell wall and the secondary cell wall (Fig. 1c). The middle lamella contains a higher lignin concentration compared to the other layers. It is the layer that holds together the adjacent cells. The majority of the wood mass is found in the secondary cell wall, consisting of three distinct layers usually referred to as S1, S2 and S3. A further look at the native cell wall reveals the individual cell types of different sizes and shapes arranged as fibre bundles (Fig. 1d). A highly ordered interconnected network of pores created during the formation of the cells can also be visualized at this length scale. At the nanoscale, wood is a massive assembly of cell wall bio-macromolecules including cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin (Fig. 1d and e). The nanostructured cell wall is a high-strength/stiffness fibre reinforced nanocomposite consisting of cellulose nano-fibrils (3 nm) inter-linked with hemicellulose and embedded in a surrounding hydrogel-like lignin matrix. The cellulose fibrils are systematically oriented parallel to each other in the cell wall through a fibre-spinning process.11,26 The nano-fibrils are bound together to form micro-fibrillar structures packed primarily in the S2 layer of the secondary cell wall and arranged at different angles and axis directions.22,38 The elementary fibrils are made of cellulose chains (Fig. 1d and g) and arranged such that a crystalline region is interspaced with disordered or amorphous regions39 (Fig. 1f). The inherent porosity of wood comes from the systematic assembly of the nanoscale constituents. A short explanation of the chemical structure of each component in relation to the physico-chemical properties is presented in the next section.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of the hierarchical structure of wood: (a) macroscopic view of a wood trunk shows the outer bark, inner bark, vascular cambium, sapwood, heartwood and the pith. These are arranged as distinct concentric bands. (b) The tissue and cell structure visualizes features such as vessels, rays, resin canals, tracheids and fibre clusters, all visible at the microscopic level. The presence of specific features at this length scale can be used to differentiate the type of wood, e.g. the presence of vessel elements is peculiar to hardwood. (c) The ultra-level shows the cell wall structure consisting of the primary and secondary cell walls and the lumen. (d) In the native cell wall, cellulose fibres are packed as microfibril bundles at different levels from which single elementary fibres can be traced. (e) The elementary fibrils are arranged to form a network of interconnected nano-pores. (f) Interspaced crystalline and amorphous regions in the cellulose fibrillar structure. (g) Biochemically, cellulose elementary fibrils are linear beta(1,4)-glucan chains packed together by inter- and intra-hydrogen-bonding networks and van der Waals forces. 
2.4. Wood chemical structure and physicochemical properties
Chemically, wood is a three-dimensional biopolymer containing cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin with minor extractives and inorganics. These components are interconnected to form a robust macro-molecular structure. Excellent reviews and book chapters have been published on the current state-of-knowledge of these components. Here, attention is directed to aspects of these compositions relevant to sustainable modifications and their relation to physico-chemical properties. Cellulose is a carbohydrate polymer and the major component of all lignocellulosic materials. Its composition varies between type and species of biomass. Generally, softwood contains 40–45% cellulose, and hardwood 38–49%. Cellulose content is an important compositional parameter that affects the mechanical and physical properties of biomass.43 Tensile strength, modulus, and density are dependent on the percentage composition of cellulose in biomass. Some chemical treatments can cause changes (increases or decreases) in the composition of cellulose. An increase in cellulose content happens when lignin and/or hemicellulose are depolymerized whereas a decrease in cellulose content happens when cellulose chains are depolymerized during treatment. Kraft pulping mostly leads to a substantial reduction in cellulose content44 but alkaline hydrogen peroxide treatment mostly results in a minimal decrease.45
Structurally, cellulose is a glucan polymer consisting of thousands of D-glucan subunits connected by β-1–4 linkages (Fig. 2). The polymeric chains of glucose in cellulose are arranged in a linear manner. They do not undergo coiling, helix formation or branching like hemicellulose. The number of glucose units available in a cellulose molecule is called the degree of polymerization (DP). The DP of cellulose in untreated biomass varies depending on the origin and position in the biomass. Most physical and mechanical properties of cellulose are largely dependent on the DP. Almost all chemical treatments affect the DP of cellulose depending on the severity. The knowledge of these effects and implications for the properties is important in advanced wood modifications.
 Fig. 2  Basic structural information for a cellulose polymer. 
Cellulose molecules are randomly oriented within the unit cell with a tendency to form a robust network of intra- and intermolecular hydrogen bonding arising from the abundant hydroxyl groups. As the packing density increases, crystalline regions are formed. However, in regions where the packing density is lower, there exists a disorder or breakage in the hydrogen bonding pattern, forming an amorphous region.46 This results in a structure with interspaced crystalline and amorphous regions (Fig. 1f). Most woody biomass contains as much as 65% crystalline regions. This percentage is usually referred to as the crystallinity index (CrI). The cellulose CrI has a major effect on stiffness, rigidity, tensile strength and water adsorption of biomass. An increase in CrI is sometimes associated with increasing tensile strength of the cellulose fibres. Some treatments such as controlled hot water pretreatment are known to change the order in the amorphous regions, causing an increase in cellulose crystallinity. However, some other treatments such as alkaline hydrolysis adversely affect the cellulose CrI. Cellulose fibrils absorb water mostly in the disordered amorphous regions.47 With higher crystallinity, the contribution of cellulose to the water absorption of wood is minimized. The CrI of cellulose in wood also plays a major role in the thermal degradation of wood. Theoretically, well packed and arranged cellulose chains in the crystalline region will impede heat diffusion leading to increased thermal stability.48
A repeating unit in cellulose is composed of six (6) hydroxyl groups and three (3) oxygen atoms (Fig. 2). This means there are six hydrogen bond donors and nine hydrogen bond acceptors in a cellulose molecule, translating to several possibilities of hydrogen bond formation. Because of different ways that the pyranose rings can be arranged in the unit cell coupled with the possibility of conformational changes in the hydroxymethyl groups, cellulose chains can be packed in several different ways. This results in different cellulose crystalline polymorphs. Structural studies have identified six interconvertible polymorphs of cellulose46 namely: cellulose I, II, IIII, IIIII, IVI, and IVII. Cellulose I is the native form and can be subdivided into Iα and Iβ. The differences between the various polymorphs lie in the crystal packing and the magnitude of the hydrogen bonding resulting from the packing density. The physical, chemical and mechanical properties of cellulose are dependent on the polymorphic form. Some chemical treatments cause changes from one polymorphic form to another, e.g. cellulose II can be obtained from native cellulose by mercerization and regeneration. Understanding these changes and how they affect the final properties of the cellulose chains is important in the advanced processing of wood-based materials.
Hemicellulose is another carbohydrate polymer present in lignocellulosic materials. It is a mixture of several polysaccharides synthesized from monomers such as glucose, xylose, mannose, galacturonic acid, galactose, arabinose, 4-O-methylglucuronic acid, and rhamnose (present only in hardwood) residues. The backbones of hemicellulose polymeric forms are usually built from two or more of these monomers (Fig. 3). They are sometimes called by the prevalent sugar units they contain. The prevalent hemicelluloses in hardwood and softwood are glucuronoxylan and galactoglucomannan respectively (Fig. 3). Hemicelluloses are branched structures with lower molecular weight than cellulose. The DP of hemicellulose is determined to be between 100–200. Hemicellulose has the most accessible hydroxyl groups among the components of wood. These abundant accessible OH groups make it the major polymer responsible for water adsorption in wood.49,50 This implies that reducing the amount of hemicellulose in wood will result in improved water absorption behaviour. In some cases, the OH groups in the pyranose chains are partially substituted by O-acetyl or methyl groups. The acetyl groups in hemicellulose are readily soluble in alkali, whereas the links between the monomeric units are prone to acid hydrolysis. Similar to cellulose, hemicellulose's content and structural form differ according to the origin and species of the biomass and can be changed by chemical treatment. Softwood contains 7–14% hemicellulose whereas hardwood contains 19–26%. The content and structural form of hemicellulose differ in relation to the type (hardwood or softwood) and location in the plant cell wall. Treatments such as hot water pre-treatment, Kraft pulping, alkaline hydrolysis and alkaline hydrogen peroxide treatments are known to bring about a substantial reduction in the content of hemicellulose in woody biomass.51 Early models of wood structure portrayed hemicellulose to be intimately connected to cellulose in the wood cell wall through hydrogen bonding but connected to lignin through covalent bonds called lignin–carbohydrate complexes (LCC). Recent studies with the aid of solid-state NMR and FTIR prove that hemicellulose is intimately bound to cellulose macro-fibrils in the cell wall of softwoods through intermolecular interactions.52–56 The molecular heterogeneity of hemicellulose is the key modulating factor for these interactions.57–59 Since hemicellulose somewhat separates the cellulose microfibrils, removing the hemicellulose will give neighbouring fibrils the possibility to aggregate, bringing the cellulose microfibrils into close contact, thus favouring strong hydrogen bonding interactions.60 This is in line with the fact that the molecular structure of hemicellulose largely influences the assembly of cellulose microfibrils into higher-ordered structures.41 This could be of relevance in the advance modification of wood especially where increased hydrogen bonding in cellulose is the goal. In micro-fibrillated cellulose, tensile strength, elongation, solubility and thermal stability are to a large extent affected by the hemicellulose content.61–63 While tensile strength is negatively correlated with increase in hemicellulose content, elongation is positively correlated. This behaviour is not yet proven for modified bulk wood materials. Hemicellulose plays a major role in the thermal degradation of woody biomass. Degradation of wood below 300 °C is almost solely dependent on the degradation of hemicellulose owing to dehydration and the formation of thermally unstable intermediates from the hemicellulose structure.64
 Fig. 3  Basic structural information for a hemicellulose polymer. (a) Structural aspects of galactoglucomannan in softwood, sugar units: β-D-glucopyranose, HClO2− + ClO2− → HClO + ClO3−-galactopyranose, and β-D-mannopyranose. R = CH3CO or H. (b) Structural aspects of 4-O-methylglucuronoxylan of hardwoods. The backbone consists of β-(1–4)-linked D-xylose units with partial substitution of α-(1–2)-linked 4-O-D-methylglucuronic acids and O-acetylation at some of the C2 and C3 units. (a) is adapted from Sjostrom.40 (b) is adapted from Berglund et al.41 
Lignin is the most complex polymer present in lignocellulosic materials. It is an amorphous and heterogeneous polymer of phenylpropane units with a three-dimensional structure. The structure of lignin is very complex and varies according to biomass type and origin. Detailed descriptions of lignin's chemical structure and reactivity have been published by several researchers.42,65,66 In the most basic sense, lignin in wood is usually composed of three primary monolignols from which the macromolecule is built (Fig. 4c). The frequency of these monomers in the lignin chain differs between the biomass and their origin. These monomers are linked together through a series of linkages, namely, β-O-4, α-O-4, β-5, β-1, β–β, 4-O-5, and 5–5 (Fig. 4). In woody biomass, these linkages occur in approximate frequencies of 45–50, 6–8, 9–12, 7–10, 0–3, 4–8, and, 18–25% respectively.65 The dominant linkage in softwood and hardwood is the β-O-4.42,66 This linkage is the most liable to chemical attack making it the target linkage for most pulping and modification processes. Lignin contains some unsaturated functional groups such as conjugated carbonyl groups, aromatic rings and carbon–carbon double bonds which are responsible for light absorption in wood.67 Lignin accounts for the absorption of 80–95% UV light incident on the wood's surface. This makes lignin the major wood component that undergoes UV weathering when exposed to sunlight. Complete removal of lignin causes wood to become transparent with enhanced UV weathering resistance. In the bulk wood structure, lignin tends to self-aggregate forming hydrophobic nanodomains.54 They act as the adhesives binding the various wood components together. Like cellulose and hemicellulose, lignin composition in biomass differs according to the species, origin and part of the wood cell wall. Softwoods contains 26–34% lignin and hardwood 23–30%. Most advance wood modification techniques target lignin to modify wood properties. Studies focusing on the regulation of cellulose–hemicellulose–lignin molecular structures and interactions for the precise manipulation of chemical, mechanical and physical properties of wood materials are still lacking.
 Fig. 4  Illustration of the proposed lignin structure of wood: (a) softwood lignin structure showing various linkages; (b) hardwood lignin structure; (c) primary monolignols in the lignin structure. (a) and (c) are reprinted with permission from ACS.42 
The biomechanical performance of wood is controlled by the molecular interactions between cellulose fibrils, hemicellulose and lignin.68,69 A good understanding of these interactions is the key to efficient modification of wood for further industrial applications. Fig. 5 shows the most widely used view of the connections between cellulose, lignin and hemicellulose in the plant cell wall. Based on the model, cellulose micro-fibril bundles are wrapped together by hemicellulose and connected to lignin via covalent bonds. Lignin connects to hemicellulose through the lignin carbohydrate complex (LCC)70,71 which contributes largely to the recalcitrance of lignin to depolymerization. A recently proposed molecular architecture of softwood52,72 pictures the cell wall as having domains of cellulose microfibrils with bound galactoglucomannan and xylan as a core (Fig. 6). Lignin is localised to the surface of the core and interacts predominantly with galactoglucomannan, xylan and cellulose in a second domain. This explains the reason for cellulose fibril aggregation in the absence of hemicellulose.
 Fig. 5  Illustration of the hypothetical network structure of wood components. (a) 3D network structure of wood components. (b) Hypothetical network structure of lignin–carbohydrate connections in wood. (b) is printed with permission from Elsevier.74 
 Fig. 6  (a) Proposed model of softwood molecular architecture. (b) Model of cell wall component assembly in spruce. Reprinted with permission from Springer Nature.52 
Another relevant aspect of wood compositional structure is the distribution of these components in the wood cell wall. The bulk mass of wood is contained in the secondary cell wall (Fig. 1c). The layer is biomechanically structured to fulfil the requirements of stiffness, strength and toughness. The secondary cell wall is multi-lamellar in nature having a fully differentiated structure with a rigid and inter-locked network. Of the three secondary cell wall layers, S2 is the thickest and makes the greatest contribution to the overall macroscopic properties of wood. According to data obtained from Scots pine, lignin constitutes over 84% of the middle layer and primary cell wall. The S1 layer contains about 50% lignin, 30% cellulose and 18% hemicellulose. The S2 layer is composed of about 15% lignin, 54% cellulose and 30% hemicellulose. The S3 layer is almost totally made of hemicellulose (87%) and cellulose (13%).68,73
3. Wood modification techniques: implications for sustainability
3.1. Chemical delignification
Most of the advanced wood modification techniques are focused on modifying lignin to achieve the target properties. Ideally, liberating cellulose fibrils from the sophisticated wood structure will involve breaking the connection between cellulose and lignin. This modification technique is called delignification. Chemical delignification of wood is a subtractive wood modification technique in which chemicals or solvents are used to completely or partially remove lignin from wood in order to achieve a set objective. In some cases, lignin is partially removed so that the wood can be densified to obtain good mechanical and physical properties.44 In other cases, lignin is completely removed or reduced to the minimum possible to form a transparent wood.75 Generally, the removal of lignin with chemicals involves depolymerization of the link between lignin, hemicellulose and cellulose. After delignification, the wood maintains the aligned cellulose fibrils and pore structure but with a reduction in the amount of lignin or in some cases without residual lignin. Adverse effects of this process are evident in cellulose and hemicellulose depolymerizations. Peeling and hydrolysis are the most common undesired reactions with polysaccharides when woody biomass is treated with acids or alkali. In the case of partial delignification, the chemical structure of the residual lignin is altered depending on the depolymerization solution. Cellulose and hemicellulose are also structurally altered during the process. In bulk wood modification, the conditions are slightly different from regular pulping processes. In this case, large-sized wood samples are treated compared to the chopped fibres used in pulping processes. The structure of the delignified wood is determined by the type and concentration of the delignification solution, in addition to the temperature and time of the process. Solutions that have been used in the delignification of engineered wood include NaClO2,76,77 mixtures of NaOH and Na2SO3,12,78–82 NaOH solution,83–85 mixtures of KOH and Na2SO3,86 mixtures of NaOH and Na2EDTA,87 2ClO2˙ + HO− → HClO2 + ClO3− with CH3COOH,75,76,83,88–96 CH3CO3H solution,97 NaClO solution,98,99 mixtures of NaOH and H2O2,45,100 H2O2,101,102 eutectic solution of C5H14ClNO and C3H6O3,103 mixtures of CH3COOH and H2O2,104,105 aqueous KOH,106 and H2O2 followed by UV irradiation.107,108
Although these processes achieve interesting results giving rise to products with excellent performance, most of them pose serious implications for environmental sustainability in terms of pollution, waste creation, use of hazardous substances, and extensive use of energy. The sustainability of these processes can be better assessed by a critical overview of the type and amount of solvents/chemicals used, waste generation, energy consumed and the overall effect of the reacting solution on the structure of the wood and environment. Delignification with NaOH and Na2SO3 is a replicate of the popular Kraft pulping process109 which is an alkaline delignification process. The process is dominated by lignin degradation and condensation reactions. Depending on the reaction conditions, one of the reactions prevails over the other. Lignin degradation occurs basically by the cleavage of the β-O-4 linkages depending on the presence of phenolic and non-phenolic groups at the para-position relative to the propane side chain. To avoid condensation reactions during the process, the solution must be maintained at a pH greater than 10 and temperatures slightly above boiling temperature, resulting in high energy consumption. Reduced sulphur compounds, such as methyl mercaptan, dimethyl sulphide, and dimethyl disulphide, are produced when the solution reacts with the wood components. These products have low odour thresholds but are capable of serious adverse health effects. The production of hazardous substances is a major issue in the sustainability of chemical reactions. A reduction in the use of hazardous chemicals is one of the most important aims of green chemistry.110 The residual lignin contains chemically bonded sulphur which is introduced during the process. On the other hand, the process involves the extensive use of water to remove the chemical substance from the wood structure after delignification. For effective delignification of wood, the solution should always be 4 to 6 times more than the wood material in volume. The use of a high volume of solution is a major issue in green chemistry. Another important aspect in delignification is the effect on the cellulose structure. Modification of bulk wood with Kraft solution has been found to result in a fractional decrease of cellulose and hemicellulose composition.44,111–113 At comparatively low temperatures, peeling reactions occur, with the acetyl groups in hemicellulose completely removed. The peeling extends to cellulose but to a lesser extent because of the higher degree of crystallinity of cellulose. Studies on biomass pulping show that the use of Kraft solution changes Iα cellulose to Iβ cellulose,114 which translates to increasing structural order. This is probably due to the excessive removal of hemicellulose from the amorphous regions. As a result cellulose crystallinity increases during Kraft pulping.115 Moreover, the lateral fibre aggregate dimensions of cellulose also increase during the Kraft pulping of biomass.62,115,116 This may result in cellulose susceptibility to hydrolysis. It should be noted that these reports are for chopped wood particles subjected to pulping reactions mostly under pressurized conditions. In functional wood modifications, bulk wood with larger dimensions is treated with the aim of maintaining the aligned fibrillar structure. Additionally, pulping processes aim at removing lignin as near minimum as possible, but most functional wood treatments aim at retaining a moderate enough amount of lignin to avoid destruction of the aligned fibrillar structure. The effects produced by pulping processes may not be directly replicated under these conditions. Systematic studies under these conditions are required to better understand how the process affects the cellulose structure and correlate this to the bulk mechanical properties. It will also be interesting to understand how the changes in hemicellulose affect the resulting wood structure and properties.
Wood delignification with NaOH or KOH follows the alkaline delignification process. It is essentially like delignification with a solution of NaOH and Na2SO3 but with the absence of sulphide. Delignification proceeds by cleavage of the non phenolic β-O-4 linkages and phenolic ether bonds. The process is considered environmentally friendly compared to NaOH and Na2SO3 because of the absence of sulphide. However, the reaction is only effective at elevated temperatures (between 140–170 °C) and pressures, which translate to high energy input. Green chemistry encourages reactions under low or self-pressures. Alkaline delignification is known to induce the formation of by-products that are toxic including furfural and hydroxymethyl furfural. On the other hand, the process produces substantial amounts of waste water. A major concern for the sustainability of the process is the swelling of the cellulose internal surface leading to a decrease in the degree of polymerization. Alkaline pulping is associated with excessive degradation of hemicellulose. It sometimes results in an increasing cellulose composition with very minimal degradation. The extent of degradation is dependent on the concentration of the solution.117 Alkaline treatment of plant biomass was found to cause a change from cellulose I to cellulose II suggesting a decrease in crystal size117 depending on the concentration of the solution. The DP of cellulose is also negatively affected by alkaline pre-treatment. Specific studies on woody biomass are lacking.
Delignification with NaClO2 follows the mechanism of chlorine dioxide oxidation of pulps. The reaction proceeds initially by chlorine dioxide reacting with the phenolic and non-phenolic ends of lignin by a one-electron transfer reaction resulting in the formation of chlorite and a radical phenolic and non-phenolic intermediate (Fig. 7). This is succeeded by the addition of chlorine dioxide to the radical species leading to the formation of esters of hypochlorous acid. These esters are later hydrolysed giving rise to muconic acid and quinones.118,119 The resulting product is dependent on the leaving group. The chlorite and hypochlorous acids formed in the initial reaction are also involved in side reactions (eqn (1)–(13)). The effectiveness of this reaction is greatly dependent on the pH of the solution. At high pH values the organic reactions favour the production of chlorate which inhibits lignin oxidation and vice versa at low pH values. Delignification with NaClO2 is usually conducted in the presence of an acid buffer to maintain the pH around 3.4. Under this condition, maximum chloride formation is maintained with minimum production of chlorite and chlorate, which are required for efficient delignification.120 The efficiency of delignification with chlorine dioxide is dependent on the structure of the lignin, particularly on the phenolic end group content in the starting material. This makes the process extremely material selective. Delignification with NaClO2 leads to an increase in cellulose composition depending on the concentration of the solution23,121 but a slight decrease in hemicellulose. Cellulose crystallinity also increases minimally during regular pulping treatment, with a corresponding increase in crystallite size.122 The DP and PDI of cellulose are adversely affected by the process.123 A major sustainability issue in this process is the introduction of external structures and the formation of dioxins and dibenzofuran during the process (Fig. 8 and 9). Dioxins are considered highly toxic and can cause problems in the human reproductive system. They are also known to affect body development and compromise the immune system. They are classified as persistent environmental pollutants.124 Delignification with ClO2˙ + Free radical + H2O → ClO3− is associated with low solid yield as compared to the Kraft and hydrogen peroxide treatments. Lignin + 2ClO2 → Oxidized Lignin + HOCl + ClO2−(1) HOCl + H2O ⇌ ClO− + H3O(2) ClO2H + H2O ⇌ ClO2− + H3O(3) Cl2+H2O ⇌ HOCl + Cl1 + H+(4) ClO2 + Olefinic Carbon bonds → ClO˙(5) HOCl → HO˙ + Cl˙(6) Cl2 → 2Cl˙(7) ClO2˙ + Free radical + H2O → ClO3−(8) 2ClO2˙ + HO− → HClO2 + ClO3−(9) HClO2− + ClO2− → HClO + ClO3−(10) HClO + 2ClO2H → 2ClO2˙ + H2O + Cl− + H+(11) HClO + Lignin → HO− + Organic Chlorine(12) Cl2 + Lignin → Cl− + Organic Chlorine(13)
 Fig. 7  Mechanism of wood delignification using sodium chlorite.118,119 
 Fig. 8  Structure of dioxins formed during chlorine bleaching of wood. 
 Fig. 9  Structure of dibenzofuran formed during chlorine bleaching of wood. 
Delignification of wood with NaClO follows the bleaching mechanism of hypochlorous acid (HOCl). NaClO hydrolyses in water to form hypochlorous acid (HOCl) and hypochlorite ion (OCl−). HOCl acid reacts as a substituting agent causing electrophilic displacement reactions in the same manner as chlorine dioxide,125,126 with very minor differences. The use of chlorine-containing compounds for delignification and bleaching of wood poses some sustainability and environmental issues. Chlorine dioxide delignification produces large quantities of chlorinated organics (see eqn (1)–(12)),120 and the production of bleaching compounds is very expensive.120,127 Chlorate ions are known to be biologically active, i.e. capable of causing environmental problems.124 Chlorine dioxide is toxic and highly corrosive to metals. There is also a risk of the formation of organically bound chlorine from the reaction between lignin and hypochlorous acid during the process.128 The use of chlorine-containing compounds to bleach wood leads to the formation of dioxins which are hazardous (Fig. 8). An extensive amount of water is required to remove the chlorine-related substances from the wood sample. For example, Yang et al.90 treated delignified wood in running water for 24 hours before all the chlorine-related compounds were removed. Another report also shows that cellulose is adversely affected during the delignification process.129 Delignification with NaClO has been found to lead to only 16% yield. Moreover, delignification with NaClO leads to more voids on the surface of the wood material. Hypochlorite is known to have a very large adverse effect on the cellulose structure.125 Hemicellulose also suffers a significant decrease in composition after treatment.98
Peracetic acid (CH3CO3H) is mostly produced by treating acetic acid (CH3COOH) with hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) under a strong catalyst. Industrially, it is produced by the autoxidation of acetaldehyde. It is a slightly weaker acid than the parent acetic acid but can be highly corrosive. The reaction of peracetic acid with lignin begins with a nucleophilic addition of the peracetic acid to electron-rich aromatic structures to form intermediate quinones which are later oxidized to muconic acid structures (Fig. 10). The reaction takes place in both phenolic and non-phenolic aromatic structures but with different reaction rates. Side chain cleavage by oxidation of benzylalcohol structures is also possible with peracetic acid. Delignification with peracetic acid is very selective with almost no adverse effect on the cellulose structure.130 Hemicellulose is largely removed during the process and cellulose crystallinity is increased under controlled conditions.123 However, the DP of cellulose usually suffers a slight decrease relative to the time of treatment. The reaction can be achieved at low temperatures. However, delignification with peracetic acid occurs at a very low rate, and the manufacturing cost of peracetic acid is high.124 Moreover, the CHEM21 solvent selection guide classified acetic acid as problematic with a relatively high health risk in its ranking.131 Acetic acid in aqueous (10–20%) form is corrosive to the skin, eyes and mucous membranes.132 Long reaction times are also known to result in excessive cellulose depolymerization.
 Fig. 10  Oxidation of aromatic lignin structures using peracetic acid.124 The reaction can occur both with phenolic and non-phenolic end groups. However, the reaction rates are different. Side chain cleavage may also occur by oxidation of benzylalchohol structures. Generally delignification with peracetic acid suffers from low efficiency. 
Delignification with hydrogen peroxide is one of the safest delignification and bleaching techniques because it does not release toxic by-products into the environment.127,133 Hydrogen peroxide on its own is a very weak oxidant with very low delignification efficiency. Extensive delignification with it will require the use of elevated temperatures and long reaction times, making it energy inefficient. Secondly, since wood in contact with hydrogen peroxide encounters free radicals, destruction rather than oxidation may occur leading to excessive depolymerization of cellulose.134 The use of solely hydrogen peroxide in delignification has been found to have an 11–19% adverse effect on cellulose composition.75,101 Moreover, cellulose crystallinity decreases minimally. Hemicellulose is also adversely affected during delignification. To solve these problems, delignification with hydrogen peroxide is usually done under alkaline or acidic conditions using buffers. In alkaline conditions, hydrogen peroxide dissociates to form hydroperoxy anions (HOO−) which can subsequently react with undissociated hydrogen peroxide to form hydroxyl radicals and superoxides (O2−). These are highly reactive radicals which can further react with each other to produce oxygen and water.135 A delignification efficiency of up to 50% can be realized with hydrogen peroxide under a well-controlled pH.136 Delignification with alkaline hydrogen peroxide can preserve up to 95% of the cellulose structure under controlled conditions. The presence of heavy metals such as manganese can increase the rate of decomposition of hydrogen peroxide and will therefore be able to speed up the delignification of wood.137–140 Depolymerization of phenolic lignin structures proceeds by the formation of phenoxy radicals giving rise to a hydro-peroxide which is subsequently degraded into low molecular weight compounds (Fig. 11). Acidic hydrogen peroxide delignification has also been practised using acetic acid as the buffer. However, this is highly discouraged because of the health concerns of concentrated acetic acid. The drawbacks of hydrogen peroxide delignification can be solved if a user friendly buffer can be developed for the system. Advancements and suggestions for improvement of the method are presented in section 4.
 Fig. 11  Cleavage of a phenolic end group with alkaline hydrogen peroxide.124 The hydroxyl ions are produced via one electron or ionic decomposition reaction in alkaline solution. Under equilibrium conditions hydrogen peroxide decomposes at a pH of 11.6, producing hydroxyl and superoxide radicals. The reaction proceeds faster in the presence of transition metal ions and is independent of pH. 
3.2. Reactive functionalization
Reactive functionalization is a method of wood modification that involves covalent bonding of external chemical structures to wood cell walls or surfaces, thus introducing functional properties and/or improving the inherent properties of the wood material. This type of wood modification takes advantage of the wood's chemical and pore structure to tune its properties. Several strategies have been used in the reactive functionalization of wood. In some cases, modification is achieved by direct impregnation of the wood cell walls with the reactive monomers, followed by in situ polymerization to create covalent bonds between the monomer and the wood walls (Fig. 12a).141–158 Another strategy involves impregnation of the wood with reactive monomers and subsequent grafting of another polymer to the already impregnated monomeric groups or initiators (Fig. 12b).159–163 These are accomplished using radical polymerization methods such as (1) free radicals, (2) surface-initiated atom transfer radicals, (3) surface-initiated reversible addition fragmentation chain transfer, (4) surface-initiated ring opening, and (5) activators regenerated by electron transfer for atom transfer radical polymerization (ARGET-ATRP).145 Some of these processes require substantial amounts of transition metal catalysts to establish control over the polymerization. Moreover, they use non sustainable solvents as polymerization initiators. It is possible that some of these catalysts and solvents are retained in the product after treatment. During post-processing (e.g. machining) or end-of-life incineration, some hazardous by-products may be released into the environment.164 In addition, some of these processes are very time consuming, lasting up to 48 hours in most cases. Scale-up, cost efficiency and economic sustainability are hard to achieve in such processes. Changes in the macromolecular structure of wood by these modifications and their underlining mechanisms are still under debate.165 The after-effects of these changes when the product is exposed to service conditions, machined or incinerated at end-of-life are not well illustrated in the literature. Moreover, some of the chemical compounds used, such as acetic acid, acetic anhydride, styrene, pyridine etc., have been classified as either problematic or hazardous. Pyridine has a very low life cycle and recyclability score according to the GSK selection guide.166–168 It is ranked hazardous owing to its low occupational limit values.131,169
 Fig. 12  A selection of reactive functionalization strategies. (a) Cell walls, lumens, and/or pores are grafted directly with monomeric units; (b) cell walls, lumens and or pores are first grafted with initiators onto which monomeric units are grafted to produce polymeric units with longer chains. 
3.3. Non-reactive functionalization
In non-reactive functionalization, unreactive external structures are impregnated into the wood structure to impart specific functionalities. These external structures are not intended to react with the wood structure but fill the wood pores on the surface, inside of the cell walls, and in the lumen, thus realizing the intended properties (Fig. 13). Strategies that have been used include (1) impregnation of the internal wood structure with nano-particles either by filling the lumen or precipitation of the particles from salt solution on the cell walls,170–174 (2) impregnation of the external wood structure with nanoparticles,175,176 (3) impregnation of the internal wood structure with polymeric materials, e.g. by in situ polymerization of the polymer after infiltration,23,126,177–180 (4) impregnating the wood lumen with liquid polymers filled with nanoparticles and subsequent polymerization of the liquid polymer,89,181–183 or (5) modification of the cell walls with non-reactive functionalization substances before impregnation with a polymer.184 Most of these methods are conducted under high vacuum pressures,89 which imply high energy consumption. In some cases, non-sustainable solvents and catalysts are used. Moreover, some reactions are conducted for relatively long periods e.g. 24 hours. Scalability and economic sustainability are difficult to achieve under such conditions. The risk of generating unwanted structures in the wood material also exists in cases where highly toxic substances are used as reaction initiators. Investigations into the effect of these modifications on the chemical structure of wood will be of great relevance.
 Fig. 13  Some non-reactive functionalization strategies: (a) polymeric materials are infiltrated to fill the lumen. (b) Nano-particles are dispersed in polymeric materials and infiltrated to fill the wood lumen and pore structures. (c) Nano-particles dispersed in salt are precipitated in the wood cell walls. (d) Nano-particles are precipitated in the lumen. 
3.4. Carbonization
Carbonization is a subtractive method of wood processing that is intended to convert the wood structure into a total carbon material which can be used for energy applications.185–192 The process involves exposing wood to high temperatures under an inert atmosphere so that components such as cellulose, lignin and hemicellulose are converted to carbon without destroying the wood structure (Fig. 14). The carbonized wood is subsequently activated with activation agents such as CO2, NH4Cl, Zn(NO3)2etc.12,185,193–195 In another strategy, wood is first delignified and the lumen impregnated with a chemical substance, carbonized and subsequently activated to obtain a carbon material.78,86,196 Sol gel infusion has also been conducted on the wood template before carbonization.197 Surface carbonization is another method that has been used without further processing.198,199 This technique involves the use of an ethanol flame for surface carbonization followed by low-temperature carbonization to obtain the carbon material. The process is not entirely energy efficient because it is usually conducted at elevated temperatures (500–1000 °C). Green energy-based processing methods that will reduce the processing time, environmental pollution and energy consumption should be investigated. Moreover, the use of non-green chemicals during the activation process makes the current methods not entirely sustainable. In some cases, the wood sample is first delignified with NaOH and Na2SO3 or HCl before carbonization.113,200 A green delignification process would improve the sustainability of this method.
 Fig. 14  Some carbonization strategies for wood-based functional materials. (c) and (d) are reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.191,199 
3.5. Patterning
Patterning is a physical modification technique where external patterns are created in wood to tune the macrostructure, the microstructure, and the corresponding surface properties to impart certain functionalities (Fig. 15). Patterning can be achieved by purely physical treatment or a combination of chemical and physical treatment. An example is the direct patterning of highly conductive graphene using ultra-fast laser pulses after chemical treatment with KMNO4.201
 Fig. 15  An example of surface patterning of wood for functional applications. 
3.6. Surface coating
Surface coating is a physical method of wood modification where the wood surface structure is coated with external substances to impart functional properties or protection. Surface coating can be achieved with or without prior treatment. In direct coating, the wood surface is covered with the functional substance without prior treatment.202 Alternatively, wood is first delignified after which the surface is coated with external functional substances.203,204 The case of sustainability of the wood surface coating partly depends on the chemicals used in the initial processing of the wood (e.g. delignification). Secondly, some substances used in coatings such as CNT, graphene oxide and ruthenium are not entirely sustainable. Alternative substances capable of imparting the required properties should be sought.
3.7. Thermo-mechanical techniques of wood modification
Thermomechanical processing is one of the most important aspects in the development of wood for structural applications. It involves subjecting treated or untreated wood to simultaneous effects of temperature, steam, chemical and/or pressure to cause the cell walls to collapse with the intention of improving the mechanical and physical properties. Strategies that have been used include: (1) combined application of pressure and temperature after delignification;44,205 (2) subjecting the wood to steam and subsequent densification or vice versa;206–209 (3) densification and subsequent oil treatment at elevated temperature;210–212 (4) combined application of steam, temperature and pressure;13,207,210,213–219 (5) densification under steam pressure at elevated temperatures;21,89,182,220–222 (6) vacuum shaping of natural and delignified wood at elevated temperature;93,223 (7) microwave heating;224 (8) hot pressing after resin impregnation;225 and (9) heat treatment and subsequent densification at elevated temperatures.226 Most of these processes involve the use of elevated temperatures and pressures for extended periods. For example, Song et al.44 produced wood with superior or comparable properties to conventional structural materials (such as steel and other metallic alloys) by hot compression of partially delignified wood at 100 °C for 24 hours. Long processing times combined with high temperatures are not a cost efficient processing method for commercial materials. Secondly, some thermal processes such as hot compression consume mechanical, electrical, and thermal energy. On the other hand, some processes involve extensive use of water and production of waste effluents which is against the principles of green chemistry. Moreover, some processes make use of hazardous chemicals such as ammonia. Changes in wood structure as a result of these modifications and their behaviour when exposed to service conditions are still not well understood.
4. Prospective sustainable wood modification techniques
Sustainability of products or processes is a complex interwoven interaction between environmental, technological and economic factors. Considerations for sustainability in products and processes encompass yield, waste generation, and energy consumption. To achieve the sustainability of engineered wood materials, the processes and final wood material should possess minimum risk factors. A conceptual view of the cradle-to-grave life cycle impact of wood products (Fig. 16) shows that applying the principles of sustainability and green chemistry to the modification phase is the key to regulating the energy and emission status of the product. Green chemistry strives to achieve sustainability by reducing or eliminating the use and generation of hazardous substances in products, in product processing, and by a reduction in the use of energy.227 All stages in wood modification involve the use of solvents/chemicals, water and energy. Consequently, sustainability can only be achieved by applying the major principles of green chemistry to those specific elements in each process.228,229 We profile the sustainability of wood products or processes by accounting for energy and water consumption, relative chemical usage, release of hazardous wastes and introduction of unwanted chemical structures into the final product; e.g. the use of Na2SO3 in sulphite pulping introduces chemically bonded sulphur into the pulp. Fig. 17 shows a qualitative assessment of published wood processing methods on the basis of energy consumption, solvent/chemical toxicity, generation of unwanted structures, release of hazardous wastes and water consumption. A quick look at delignification processes shows that a high percentage of current wood delignification procedures use toxic chemicals, consume large amounts of water, have the tendency to generate hazardous wastes and incorporate unwanted chemical structures into the final product. Improving the sustainability of wood delignification processes will require focus on an elimination or reduction of the use of hazardous raw materials, promoting the use of green and renewable feedstock, limiting energy consumption and reduction in waste production. In this section, we provide an overview of prospective methods based on these deductions. Attention is paid to obtaining environmental sustainability and product safety without sacrificing the properties.
 Fig. 16  Conceptual outlook of the cradle-to-grave life cycle impact of modified wood products on health and environmental sustainability. Wood is naturally sustainable with low embodied energy and can be termed a zero or near zero emission material. The pre-processing phase involves harvesting, transportation, machining and drying. It is generally energy intensive but does not alter significantly the macromolecular structure of the wood. The emission and embodied energy status of the wood are barely changed after the pre-processing phase. The hot spot in the cycle is the modification phase because it encompasses the bulk of all input and output variables. Substantial changes in the macromolecular structure of wood is expected during modification. These changes determine the overall status and end-of-life behaviour of the product.164 This calls for a systematic assessment of the modification phase in view of sustainability, health and, environmental impact. Modification of wood should be done in such a way that the product and processes have little or no pollution potential or environmental risk but maintain economic and technological feasibility. Applying the principles of sustainability and green chemistry to the modification phase should regulate the energy/emission and end-of-life status of the wood product. 
 Fig. 17  A qualitative assessment of current wood modification processes and materials in relation to sustainability principles. Data for the assessment are based on the literature cited in this article. Each method of wood processing is assessed in terms of the following parameters: energy consumption, amount of hazardous waste released into the environment, water consumption, toxicity of chemicals and solvents, and generation of unwanted chemical structures. Firstly, all published procedures are classified as either high or low (e.g. high or low energy consumption, high or low toxicity etc.) under each of the parameters. The percentage (estimated fraction of all published procedures) of each classification in a particular process is estimated and plotted as colour bars for each parameter. Energy consumption is rated following industrially acceptable conditions and compliance to the principle of ‘design for energy efficiency’. The three most prominent forms of energy used in wood processing are electrical, thermal and mechanical energy. Because, in some cases, energy is converted from one form to another during the process, here we consider the final energy absorbed by the system. Processes conducted under vacuum, high hydraulic pressures, temperatures higher than 100 °C, and/or longer times than 6 hours are rated as high energy consumption processes. Solvents and solutions are assessed based on the CHEM21 solvent selection guide and the overall principles of green chemistry. Problematic solvents are rated as high toxicity. Toxicity of chemicals is assessed based on their GHS acute toxicity levels and the amounts of solutes in the given solution. Chemicals under categories 1–3 are rated as high in toxicity. Procedures capable of generating unwanted structures are classified as high. Finally, procedures that are capable of releasing hazardous gases and effluents are classified as high. It should be noted that the data used are not quantitative and are not statistically analysed. Therefore they may not serve as a yard stick for quality measurement. 
4.1. Enzymatic delignification
Delignification accounts for the largest chemical use in the production of engineered wood. Since the use of chemicals is an important consideration in green and sustainable chemistry, a great deal of attention should be directed towards improving the sustainability of the delignification processes. Biotechnological methods can be applied to achieve green and sustainable delignification of wood. It involves the use of biological enzymes to degrade and solubilize lignin. It is very attractive because it offers various advantages including lack of yield loss, selective degradation of lignin by avoiding side reactions, low energy consumption, lack of undesirable by-products, and low environmental impact.230 The beauty of biotechnological methods is the possibility of engineering enzymes by gene expression to increase their activity and selectivity on lignin. Enzymes that are known to be active towards lignin include laccases, lignin peroxidases, versatile peroxidases and manganese peroxidases. Among these, laccase is the most extensively studied enzyme for the delignification of biomass.231–237 Laccase is a multi-copper phenol oxidase enzyme that is capable of oxidizing both phenolic and non-phenolic structures in lignin through a radical catalytic reaction mechanism (lignin contains approximately 80% non-phenolic structures and 20% phenolic structures). It uses oxygen as the final electron acceptor, contrary to hydrogen peroxide used by the other enzymes. This makes laccase more sustainable in industrial applications. Laccases typically contain four copper atoms in their active sites that mediate the redox process (Fig. 18). Based on model compound studies, laccase can oxidize phenolic β-aryl ether linkages by initially catalysing the formation of phenoxy radicals and subsequent fragmentation through the cleavage of Cα–Cβ or alkyl–aryl linkages.238 Moreover, laccase can cleave the aromatic ring in phenolic monomers meaning that a variety of bonds in the lignin phenolic subunit can be cleaved.239 Laccase is able to acetylate, decarboxylate, demethylate and demethoxylate phenolic and methoxyphenolic acids through Cα-oxidation of the dimers. This is made possible by the presence of fully oxidized copper atoms in its native state.
 Fig. 18  Copper coordination network in laccase. Numbers in red indicate inter-atomic distances. Laccase depends on the copper atoms to perform catalytic functions. Theoretically, the type I copper is first reduced (withdraws electron from the substrate) by a reducing substrate (lignin) and thereafter transfers the electron to type II and III trinuclear clusters. Upon receiving four electrons, the cluster then supplies them to molecular oxygen to form water. 
A problem is that laccase possesses a very low redox potential (0.5–0.8 V). For this reason it is only able to oxidize phenolic structures of which the redox potentials are low enough to accept electron abstraction.240 However, in the presence of low molecular weight compounds, laccase can oxidize non-phenolic structures.241 These compounds are termed laccase mediating systems (LMS). They act as carriers of electrons between the laccase and the substrate. LMS function by being continuously oxidized by laccase enzymes to a stable intermediate having a high enough redox potential and small enough size to penetrate the plant cell walls and to reach and oxidize the target lignin. Finally, the LMS reduce to their original form (Fig. 19). In this way the steric hindrance is overcome. Delignification with LMS can either follow electron, hydrogen atom or ionic transfer mechanisms242 depending on the nature of the mediating system. Several synthetic mediators have been examined including: 1-hydroxybenzotriazole (HBT), 2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidin-1-yloxy (TEMPO), 2,2-azino-bis(3-ethylbenzothiazoline-6-sulfonic acid) (ABTS), N-hydroxyacetanilide (NHA), N-hydroxyphthalimide (HPI), violuric acid (VIO), and N-hydroxyphthalimide (NHI) with delignification efficiencies up to 35%.232,243–250 However, these compounds are mostly toxic, expensive, non-recyclable, unstable, and possess tendencies to enter side reactions leading to the formation of by-products.251 For sustainability, mediators should possess the contrary properties. Mediators from natural sources, such as syringaldehyde, acetosyringone, 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid, 2,6-dimethylphenol, 2,4,6-trimethylphenol, ethyl vanillin, acetovanillone, vanillin, vanillyl alcohol and p-coumaric acid, have also been investigated, with delignification efficiencies up to 25%.235,237,252–262 Interestingly, laccase treatment of plant waste fibres did not pose any negative effect on the cellulose's degree of polymerization and crystallinity.263 Moreover, laccase treatment of rubber wood resulted in increased cellulose crystallinity relative to treatment time.264,265 Hemicellulose was found to decrease slightly after the laccase treatment of agricultural wastes.266 Generally, reports on the use of laccases and their effects on the cellulose and hemicellulose of woody biomass are lacking. In the current state, laccase enzymes even with synthetic mediators cannot be used alone in the delignification of bulk wood because of the low efficiency and long incubation periods. Pathways towards improving the efficiency of enzymatic delignification should include the following. (1) Tuning the redox potential of laccase by protein engineering strategies. A key to this will be the understanding of how the copper oxidase modulates their redox potential at the structural level. As the catalytic ability of laccase is directly related to the redox potential, increasing it will undoubtedly result in an increase in the laccase oxidizing power. (2) Realizing an efficient environmentally friendly mediator. An effective mediator should (a) be easily oxidized by laccase, preferably with a molecular size less than 2 kDa (small or intermediate sized molecules), and (b) should be able to induce stereo-preference in lignin. An important consideration will be the design of a series process consisting of an initial hot water pre-treatment before laccase delignification. Hot water pretreatment is known to significantly remove hemicellulose from woody biomass dependent on the treatment conditions (see section 2). At the same time porosity of the biomass is largely increased translating to an increase in ease of enzyme migration into the wood cell walls. Another important consideration is the use of hemicellulose-degrading enzymes to remove a substantial amount of hemicellulose before the subsequent application of lignin-degrading enzymes.
 Fig. 19  Mode of laccase delignification in the presence of LMS. 
4.2. Hot water delignification (HWD)
Another sustainable method that could be applied for the partial removal of lignin from wood is hot liquid water or vapour pretreatment. The process uses water without added chemicals at high temperatures (140–270 °C) and pressures.109 It is an environmentally friendly, less expensive and economically viable alternative to acid and alkaline delignification methods.267 Water is a non-toxic, cheap, available, and non-flammable solvent, which makes it economically and environmentally attractive for material processing. Water is classified as the safest solvent according to the solvent selection guide.131,169,268 Water happens to be the most abundant molecule on Earth. At high temperatures water undergoes auto-ionization forming acidic hydronium ions H3O+ and basic hydroxide ions.267,269,270 The dissociation profile of water can be altered by controlling the temperature and pressure.271,272 The reactive hydronium ions cleave hemiacetal linkages in the biomass liberating acetic and other organic acids.273 In such acidic conditions, lignin de-polymerization occurs through homolytic cleavage of the aryl ether linkages. The reaction may proceed by the highly reactive nucleophilic hydronium ions attacking the lignin structure,271 leading to the formation of highly reactive carbonium ion intermediates. Further reaction of the carbonium ions leads to the cleavage of both α-O-4 and β-O-4 linkages and final dissolution of the lignin.274,275 The α-O-4 linkages are more susceptible to cleavage under acidic conditions than β-O-4 linkages. A competing condensation reaction can occur especially in cases where the lignin is not removed quickly from the reacting solution (Fig. 20). Cleavage of the glycosidic and aryl-ether linkages can be enhanced by controlling the concentration of hydronium ions or modulating the hydrogen bonding.276,277 The amount of hydronium ions and the dielectric constant of water can be controlled by controlling the temperature and pressure. The efficiency of HWD is dependent on the type of biomass and the reactor system. Herbaceous biomasses are more easily delignified with HWD than woody biomass. It has been shown that subjecting woody biomass (1 × 1 mm in size), such as silver maple, eucalyptus, and Populus wood, to liquid water pre-treatment between 200–230 °C led to 35–45% solubilization of lignin and over 77% of hemicellulose,269,278,279 with minimal effects on cellulose. Another study on birch wood chips also reported delignification as much as 80% at 240 °C and up to 40% at 180 °C.280 The low lignin degradation during HWD reported by other studies is likely due to the difference in reactor configuration. Where a flow-through reactor is used, lignin condensation is avoided278,279,281 giving rise to high removal of lignin. In the case of a single stage batch reactor,51,282,283 lignin condensation occurs leading to minimal removal of lignin. HWD efficiency also suffers from sample size limitation. For large size samples (wood chips), there is poor diffusion of hydronium ions into the wood cell walls and consequently low delignification efficiency.281 There are presently no reports on the delignification of bulk wood material using HWD. Major issues confronting HWD are the use of high temperatures, high volumes of water, cellulose degradation under critical conditions, and the problem of lignin condensation. Structural changes in cellulose during HWD include a slight increase in composition and crystallinity, and a decrease in the degree of polymerization and polydispersity index.51 An increase in cellulose crystallinity translates to an increase in strength. This may be of relevance in structural applications of modified wood. Because delignification with HWD can be achieved in a very short time (30 minutes), the energy consumption triggered by the high temperature is compensated. The problem of lignin condensation and cellulose degradation under highly acidic conditions can be solved by using a flow-through reactor so that the dissolved lignin and hemicellulose products are removed as they are formed. An interesting advantage of HWD is the selective removal of lignin and hemicellulose under controlled temperature and time. However, supercritical conditions should be avoided as they lead to excessive degradation of cellulose. HWD usually leads to total or substantial removal of hemicellulose depending on the severity. Because hemicellulose is substantially removed during HWD treatment, porosity is expected to increase substantially. This could facilitate delignification in a second step by increasing the rate of diffusion of solvents into the wood cell walls. Moreover, because the reactivity of residual lignin increases after HWD pre-treatment, subsequent delignification should attract less time and solvent consumption. Systematic studies on the use of HWD in bulk wood delignification which focus on the diffusion mechanism of hot liquid water into thick wood sections are necessary. A deep understanding of the mechanism of HWD (especially at moderate temperatures 160–180 °C) and the structural changes in the residual components (lignin, hemicellulose and cellulose) can guide the development of environmentally friendly alternatives for bulk wood delignification.
 Fig. 20  Supposed mechanism of hot water delignification.284 At high temperatures (above 100 °C), the dense hydrogen bonding network in water is weakened to produce ions which are capable of cleaving glycosidic linkages in the native lignin structure. 
4.3. Application of green solvents in wood delignification
Green chemistry advocates the use of green and sustainable solvents over synthetic counterparts. It also prefers the use of catalysts over stoichiometric reagents in a reaction.227,228 In addition, energy intensive, pressurized and vacuum processes are not encouraged.110 Application of green chemistry and sustainability principles in the partial or complete removal of lignin from wood will involve the use of green and organic solvents, and catalytic systems based on non-toxic catalysts. The reactions should possibly be conducted at ambient temperatures and atmospheric or self-pressures. A solvent or bi-solvent is considered as a green solvent when it does not pose adverse environmental impacts, hazards, large amounts of waste, discharge to the environment, and toxicity. It should be noted that it is not very likely that one can find an entirely green and sustainable solvent.285 The idea is to encourage the choice of solvents with low environmental, health and safety (EHS) impact but meet end-use requirements and discourage the use of solvents that are toxic and harmful to human health. Solvents that have been suggested as green solvents include ionic liquids, water, supercritical fluids, liquid polymers, and solvents derived from biomass.286–302 Organic solvents are the most promising alternatives to Kraft solution for the partial removal of lignin from wood. The method, which is generally referred to as the Organosolv Process (ORP), has been widely studied in terms of its application in pulp and paper processing. Solvents that have been studied and commercialized include: formic acid, acetic acids, tetrahydrofuran (THF), dioxane, ethylene glycol, glycerol, methanol, ethanol, and butanol.303,304 Some of these solvents have been classified as safe and recommended for application (e.g. ethanol, methanol, butanol, ethyl acetate, ethylene glycol etc.).131,167,169,268 However, THF and acetic acid are classified as problematic and should be avoided. THF is suspected to be carcinogenic268 and has a very high life cycle impact.166 Moreover, the synthesis of THF is energy demanding.131 In pulp processes, these solvents are usually mixed with water at varying concentrations, and the reactions are conducted under a determined temperature, time and pressure. Dissolution of lignin using organic solvent is achieved by the initial formation of hydronium ions at high enough temperatures and pressures which then proceeds to cause solvolytic cleavage of the aryl ether linkages in the lignin polymer. Because of the poor efficiency of the process, catalysed systems are mostly employed. ORP are either acid or alkali catalysed. Effectiveness of the ORP process is tied to the choice of solvent or mixture, catalyst, concentration, time, pressure and temperature. Delignifications of up to 50% have been achieved in wood pulping processes depending on the size and type of biomass.305–310 The use of organic solvents is a worthwhile delignification method that can be applied in the processing of bulk wood because of: (1) the availability of a wide range of organic solvents, (2) the availability of solvents from renewable feedstock such as bio-ethanol, bio-2-methyl THF,311–313 bio-methanol, and bio-butanol,314–316 and (3) the selective removal of lignin and hemicellulose. A recent study on the delignification of thick wood sections using 1-butanol/water solution (i.e. ORP) shows that only hemicellulose and lignin were substantially affected. The composition of cellulose was minimally changed after delignification.304 In pulping processes, strong acids such as H2SO4, HCl, oxalic acid, alkalis such as NaOH and NaHSO4, and alkali earth metal salts such as MgSO4 have been used as catalysts in small proportions. However, research efforts should be targeted on the development of environmentally friendly catalysts for the ORP system. Changes in cellulose and hemicellulose structure during ORP are strongly dependent on the solvent and catalyst used. It is difficult to establish a common trend because of the wide range of solvents and catalysts. Disadvantages of ORP include the use of relatively high temperatures and large quantities of solvent.317 Improvements in the process can be achieved by developing catalysts that will increase the efficiency of delignification at low temperatures.
Ionic liquids (IL) are another class of green solvents suitable for the partial removal of lignin from wood. Ionic liquids are low-temperature melting salts. They are non-flammable, non-volatile, inexpensive, thermally stable and easy to recover. They are polar solvents with differing degrees of hydrogen-bonding ability.318,319 Ionic liquids consist of two parts, i.e. anions and cations. Their chemical character is dependent on the strength of both parts. The behaviour of IL solvents can be tuned by changing the proportion of each component. In biomass delignification, the efficiency of IL is largely dependent on the anionic part.319 Delignification with IL follows the acid-catalysed mechanism leading to hydrolytic cleavage of the β-O-4 linkages.109 Studies on wood pulps have shown that, with a good selection of IL, temperature, fraction of anion part and time, delignification of up to 90% can be achieved.295,318,320–327 The use of IL is particularly attractive because of the possibility of designing highly selective solvents for lignin removal from the wide range of available cations and anions. Another interesting aspect of IL delignification is the possibility of running the process without the need for a reactor or with the use of only low-pressure reactors.328 The cost of delignification can be greatly reduced with appropriate design of the IL solvent.329 Treatment of delignified wood with 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium acetate was found to convert cellulose I to II accompanied by a decrease in crystallinity depending on the time of treatment.96 The trend in crystallinity has been reported on the pre-treatment of woody biomass with other ILs.325,330–332 A decrease in crystallinity may result in decreasing cellulose strength. Hemicellulose is also depolymerized during delignification with IL. Up to 66% removal of hemicellulose has been reported after pre-treatment of pine wood with IL.333 Future studies on IL delignification should focus on designing IL solutions with minimum effect on cellulose.
Deep eutectic solvents (DES) are close environmentally friendly alternatives to IL for delignification.103 DES refers to a mixture of hydrogen bond donor and hydrogen bond acceptor compound (salts) giving rise to a solution with a melting point lower than those of the mixing compounds.334 They are less volatile, water compatible, non-toxic, non-flammable, liquid over a wide temperature range, less expensive, biocompatible and in some cases biodegradable.335–338 Their physical properties can be tuned by regulating the constituents and water content.339 An interesting aspect of DES is the availability of hydrogen bond donating compounds from renewable feedstock.340–342 Like IL, DES can be designed for the effective and selective removal of lignin from biomass.343–346 For delignification, DES can be specifically designed to hydrolyse the LCC linkages leading to a disruption in the hydrogen bonding between lignin and carbohydrates. After this the DES develop a new and competing hydrogen bonding with the hydroxyl groups of hemicellulose and lignin. Delignifications of over 70% have been reported for the pulping of woody biomass (e.g. poplar).343,347–352 Delignification with DES usually results in a minimal effect on cellulose content when conducted under controlled composition and temperature. Hemicellulose is affected the same way as lignin because DES delignification targets the LCC linkages.350,353 DES delignification of biomass can result in increased cellulose crystallinity because it removes hemicellulose from the amorphous regions causing an increase in crystalline order.
Advances in pulp bleaching have seen the use of hydrogen peroxide as a delignification solution. H2O2 is environmentally friendly and does not result in hazardous waste products. The use of H2O2 in wood processing is of uttermost importance as it is the only environmentally friendly reagent used in producing transparent wood.179,354 H2O2 delignifies wood by removing the lignin chromophores. However, partial removal of lignin with H2O2 leads to a reduction in cellulose composition45 and requires high concentrations, and temperatures higher than ambient conditions. Moreover, the process requires long reaction times, meaning higher energy consumption. The process can either be performed under alkaline or acidic conditions. Alkaline H2O2 delignification is conducted under strong basic (pH = 11.5) conditions by the addition of a buffer. NaOH is the most used buffer in bulk wood delignification. In acidic conditions the pH of H2O2 is adjusted to values between 3 and 4.5 using an acidic solution. The most used acid in this case is acetic acid. Acetic acid has been classified as problematic in the CHEM21 selection guide and should be used with caution. The most efficient delignification is obtained with the use of alkaline conditions. In most cases, additional substances are required to maintain the pH and stabilize the peroxide, e.g. trisodium silicate dihydrate, and sodium silicate.45,355 Although complete delignification can be achieved with H2O2, the solution can also be designed to achieve transparent wood without complete removal of lignin, to preserve the wood’s structural integrity.355 The major problem facing H2O2 delignification is the development of environmentally friendly catalytic activators that can form peroxides which are still reactive but lignin selective.356,357
4.4. Energy efficient thermo-mechanical processing
The most energy consuming activity in the production of functional wood materials is the thermo-mechanical process. Decreasing the amount of energy used during the thermal processing of wood will lead to a significant increase in wood material sustainability. High-performance wood for structural applications is usually subjected to elevated temperatures (60–100 °C) and pressures (5–100 MPa) for extended periods (6–72 hours).44,359 In some cases curing is conducted for extended periods in an oven (12–48 hours).98 These processes are energy intensive, which does not fulfil the requirements of sustainability. Application of energy efficient and sustainable principles in the thermo-mechanical/thermal processing of wood will foster industrial scalability and the use of modified wood.
Microwave processing is an energy efficient process that can be applied in the thermo-mechanical treatment of wood with minimal or no modifications. Microwave processing is a highly efficient process with several advantages, including: short processing time, energy transfer at the molecular level, small energy requirements, efficient volumetric heating of both thin and thick sections, and good temperature distribution control. It is environmentally friendly and adaptable to metals, ceramics, polymers and their composites.360–365 In microwave processing, electromagnetic energy of a wavelength between 1–1000 mm interacts with the material components to generate heat depending on the dielectric and magnetic properties of the material.366,367 Wood is a polar dielectric in both the wet and dry state. It contains polar molecules such as –OH, –CH2OH, –CHOH, and –COOH from the various wood components and moisture. When wood is exposed to microwaves, these polar molecules move to generate heat (Fig. 21). Microwave processing of biomass may bring about structural changes in the wood components depending on the processing temperature. Structural changes in cellulose are tied to the hydrogen bonding network between cellulose chains. At temperatures below 180 °C cellulose is almost inactive to microwaves because the pendant –CH2OH in both the crystalline and amorphous regions is involved in hydrogen bonding which hinders its interaction with microwaves (Fig. 22). At temperatures above 180 °C (softening temperature), the –CH2OH in the amorphous region interacts with the microwaves and becomes free to undergo localized rotation. It could act like a molecular radiator and may allow for the transfer of microwave energy to the surrounding environment through collisions with the anomeric position leading to cleavage of the glycosidic bonds in cellulose.368,369 At temperatures above 220 °C,–CH2OH in the crystalline regions also becomes active358 and interacts with the microwaves leading to a further depolymerization of cellulose chains. Microwave processing of biomass at temperatures below 180 °C should not impart any significant degradation to the structure of cellulose. Lignin has a low dielectric loss factor making it difficult to interact with microwaves. Lignin degrades very slowly over a wide range of temperature under microwave heating. The presence of a catalyst is required for extensive degradation of lignin under microwave heating.370 With proper design and modification, the microwave process can be applied to plasticization, carbonization, densification, shaping, fixation and curing of impregnating agents.224,371–379 Concurrent, continuous heating and vacuum processing can be incorporated into the microwave process. The successful application of microwave processes in wood processing is hinged on the understanding of the interaction between electromagnetic waves and the wood components and/or the impregnated material.
 Fig. 21  Mechanism of microwave heating. 
 Fig. 22  Microwave–cellulose interaction. Adapted from Fan et al.358 
Infrared heating (IR) is another appealing energy efficient thermal process with a potential application in the thermal processing of wood-based materials. IR-heating offers advantages such as contactless and controlled heating, cost effectiveness, short response time, adaptability, rapid heating rate, good surface quality, flexibility and less energy consumption. In addition to its simplicity, IR-heating does not lead to solute migration in the heated material. When infrared radiation from a source encounters a surface, some of the energy is reflected, absorbed and transmitted. The absorbed energy causes molecular oscillations and vibrations in the material leading to heat generation (Fig. 23). The ability of a material to absorb infrared radiation is dependent on the emissivity of the material. Materials with high emissivity (0.9–0.98) heat up very fast when they encounter IR radiation. Most polymeric materials are known to readily absorb IR radiation and can therefore heat up fast under IR-heating. The emissivity of wood is approximated to be 0.924.380 Recent studies have shown that polymeric materials can be cured with IR-heating leading to a 75% reduction in curing time.381 Wood possesses very poor IR adsorption which makes it difficult to dry thick sections with IR-heating. However, IR-heating can be useful in the in situ polymerization of infiltrated polymeric materials in wood. Secondly, surface carbonization of wood can be realized using IR-heating. The variables in the control of IR-heating include emissivity, the surface nature of the material, and the IR wavelength. The complexity of the process can be resolved by a proper understanding of the interaction of IR with wood. One promising option in the use of IR in functional wood processing is infiltration of the processed wood with nano-black bodies which will serve as IR carriers during the processing. In this way uneven heating and limitations of size can be overcome. Another important study on the use of IR-heating in wood processing is the understanding of the effect of IR radiation on the structure of wood components. Analytical and numerical models that take into consideration energy consumption, cost, and efficiency would be useful in understanding the overall sustainability of these clean energy processes
 Fig. 23  Mechanism of IR-heating. 
5. Sustainability in engineered wood applications
5.1. Sustainable structural applications
Glass or carbon fibre reinforced polymers, steel and other metallic/non-metallic materials are often used in construction and transportation applications across all sectors. These materials are mostly derived from fossil sources and are generally cost, weight and energy demanding from production to application. Wood has a low embodied energy compared to all metals, and the carbon in wood is stored within it until the material reaches its end of life, making it a promising alternative. Besides, wood possesses aligned cellular, porous and macromolecular structures, and a dense hydrogen bonding network (Fig. 1) which can be manipulated to transform wood into high-performance materials. Processed wood has the potential to replace these fossil-based materials in some applications because of its high stiffness combined with low density and cost. Partial removal of lignin and hemicellulose from wood and subsequent densification affords improved specific strength, toughness, stiffness and surface hardness suitable for construction applications.14,15,44,382,383 Assembly strategies where wood veneer is stacked to form a bulk material result in decreasing anisotropy and improve the reliability of wood materials, affording the opportunity for them to be used in high-rise building constructions.384 Moreover, wood composites produced by filling its cell walls with polymeric monomers and subsequent in situ polymerization impart excellent compressive and bending strength so that wood finds extended applications. Opportunities for a combined improvement in mechanical properties and fire retardancy of wood by coating, impregnation and densification97,385–388 make it a promising sustainable replacement for metals in automotive under-the-hood components. It can also be applied in other areas of sustainable engineering if a simultaneous improvement in these properties and durability can be achieved.
5.2. Sustainable energy storage
Energy storage is a fast growing sector of the world's economy arising from the desire to replace fossil-based energy sources. On top of the list are supercapacitors and rechargeable batteries based on lithium (Li) and sodium electrolyte (Li–O2, Li–CO2, Li–ion, Li–S, Na–ion). Conventional electrodes used in super-capacitors include activated carbon, carbon nanotubes, graphene, carbon nanofibres, conductive polymers, and metal oxides. Wood possess open vertical channels and other pore structures that support ionic/electronic conduction (Fig. 24). When wood is carbonized these structures are maintained (Fig. 14c) such that they can be used as sustainable binder-free electrodes in super-capacitors. Besides, they do not require additional conducting agents and current collectors, making them cost and weight saving.86,193,200,389–392 For Li-based batteries, porous electrodes are formed using synthetic binders and conductive additives mixed and cast on a metallic current collector. With precise manipulation at the nano- and molecular-scales, wood can be made to exhibit nano-fluidic behaviour, porosity, conductivity, and tortuosity, making it suitable for applications as electrode materials, current collectors, separators, and templates/substrates for Li-based batteries. This promises a certain level of sustainability and eco-friendliness.12,66,185,188,197,200,393–404
 Fig. 24  Common features in wood structure open avenues for functionalization and sustainable applications. (a) wood tracheid showing the presence of pits and lumen, (b) wood vessel element showing the presence of pits and perforation plates, (c) cellulose microfibre showing the availability of pits and thick cell walls, (d) wood parenchyma cells showing the presence of tiny pits, (e) microscale arrangment of wood components showing the presence of microfibril clusters and nanopores, (f) enlarged wood cell wall structure showing the presence of pits and nanopores, (g) wood cell structure showing the availability of resin canal, vessel and micro-pits and (h) the inner structure of a vessel element showing internal pits and perforation plates. The presence of pits, lumen, vessels, nano- and micro-pores in the structural elements of wood provides opportunities for wood to be modified to impart extended functionalities, including fire and weather resistance. Micro-channels with charged surfaces, nano-pores and cellulose nano-fibrils are beneficial features for multi-phase transport in water-energy devices. The aligned micro-channels and the presence of perforation plates provide possibilities for wood to be used for water purification. The abundant pore structure in the micro- and nano-scales creates air–tissue interfaces which are not convenient for photon transport so that light is mostly scattered and less transmitted. The aligned nano-cellulose fibres and the presence of a hydrogen bonding network in the wood structure are key to developing structurally relevant wood materials. The presence of inter-spaced amorphous and crystalline regions in the cellulose structure is a key to tuning wood heat storage and transmittance. The presence of low-tortuosity pores coupled with the abundant nano-channels between the cellulose nano-fibrils is beneficial for rapid ion transport. 
5.3. Sustainable electronic applications
Flexible electronics are gaining attention because of their vast application areas, including: logic memories, bio- and chemical sensors, photovoltaics, light-emitting diodes, thin-film transistors, displays, lightings, light-transmitting materials, radio-frequency identification systems, electronics, and e-papers.405–412 Polyethylene terephthalate, polycarbonate, polyaryalate, polyethersulfone, high Tg polyimide, polyethylene naphthalate, polyetheretherketone, polynorbonene, and metal foils are the conventional transparent substrates used in the development of flexible electronics.413,414 Wood is a hierarchical structured material with abundant micro- and nano-channels giving it the possibilities of functionalization via polymer infiltration (Fig. 24). Systematic processing of wood can impart combined high mechanical properties, toughness, rigidity, flexibility and optical characteristics making it a promising candidate for producing electronic substrates even with extended functionalities such as heat and UV shielding.75,77,91,100,129,178,179,181,184,354,415–423
5.4. Water purification
Water scarcity and pollution are ranked as the most severe global challenges today. Conventional point-of-use water disinfection techniques, including chlorination, ultraviolet disinfection, pasteurization, and boiling, are basically inefficient and non-sustainable.424 To tackle these problems, membrane filtration and solar evaporation techniques are being developed. Membrane technology based on the use of nanoparticles has been identified as an effective means of purification with the possibility of chemical catalytic ability, stability, and antimicrobial capability of some nanoparticles.425–427 The particles have to be uniformly deposited on porous carriers such as polyurethane foams, polyamide and polysulfone membranes, woven fabric, paper, and ceramics. Wood is a natural low-tortuosity porous material with a distinct hollow structure, micro- and nano-channels, and membranes with extensive nanoscale porosity (Fig. 24), qualifying it as potential substitute for synthetic polymeric carriers for purification. Further modification of wood by functionalization and impregnation with nanoparticles will increase the applicability of wood as green and sustainable membrane filters for water purification.104,170,171,428,429 Another efficient means of water treatment is the use of solar evaporators. These evaporators are usually made of three components: (1) a light-to-heat converter material which serves as a light absorber, (2) a thermally insulating material which serves as a heat conservator, and (3) a porous material for water transport which should be hydrophilic in nature. Conventional porous materials are made from polymeric substrates deposited with nanoparticles. Wood is naturally hydrophilic with numerous micro-channels for fast water transport. It is a very poor heat conductor along the channel axis, and a fairly good light absorber over a wide range of wavelengths. Moreover, wood can be treated to improve the light absorption capability through surface carbonization. Evaporators made from wood are promising sustainable and cost effective replacements for synthetic material-based evaporators.189,198,199,202,430–436
5.5. Thermal insulation
Thermal insulation is required in applications such as residential buildings, electrical, optical, and space equipment. Conventional materials used for thermal management include wool, fossil-fuel based foams, wood cork, silica aerogels, graphene oxide, carbon nanotubes, silicon and silicate nanorods, exfoliated clays, and SiGe nano-laminates.437–440 Natural wood is composed of ligno-cellulosic materials, interspaced crystalline and amorphous regions, and oriented and almost uniformly distributed lumina at all length scales giving rise to a high-level structural anisotropy (Fig. 24). Highly aligned anisotropic cellulose material with controlled thermal conductivity can be obtained from wood via a series of green treatments. These treated woods exhibit excellent thermal insulation capability coupled with high transmittance and low haze, making them suitable for green and sustainable thermal management in various applications.101,102
5.6. Fluid transport applications
Nano-fluidic membranes are used in applications such as desalination, osmotic energy generation, ion/molecular separation, ionic heat-to-electricity conversion, and ionic circuits.441–446 Conventional materials for nano-fluidic membranes include silicon-based materials, nano-porous polymeric materials, boron nitride, graphene, complex polymers, and molybdenum disulfide.444,446–448 Wood is a natural cellulose membrane with nano-channels (Fig. 24) which can be aligned after the extraction of lignin and hemicellulose. The nano-cellulose fibres are surrounded by an interface-dominated electrostatic field which can provide ion transport. These surface charges and the charge density can also be tuned using the functional groups in the cellulose structure to enhance the ionic conductivity. These afford the possibility of replacing synthetic ionic membranes with wood-based membranes.359,449,450
6. Future perspectives
The fibrillar and porous nature of wood has enabled it to find applications in several structural and functional areas following a certain level of modification. Most of these treatments use a substantial amount of chemicals, energy, and water. They also generate a substantial amount of waste products which are harmful to the environment. Achieving sustainability in the processing of wood will disallow the dilemma of turning a completely sustainable material into an environmental polluting substance. Delignification processes that use green chemicals, water, enzymes and other biotechnological approaches should be investigated to avoid polluting the environment and introducing contaminants into the engineered wood products. Unfortunately, the removal of lignin from thick wood sections does not proceed easily as in pulping processes where wood chips are used. Although previous knowledge and techniques of pulping processes are still relevant, specific studies and optimization strategies will have to be developed for efficiency and scalability.
The efficiency of organic solvents such as ethanol, acetone, methanol, butanol etc. in the delignification of bulk wood should be systematically studied and compared with their counterparts. A very important aspect of using organic solvents is the availability of a wide range of solvents from renewable feedstock. A comprehensive overview of their viability will be of great interest to the research and industrial communities. Organic solvents in delignification usually require the use of catalysts in line with the principles of green chemistry. However, currently applied catalysts in pulping processes are not environmentally friendly. Research efforts in the development of catalysts which are environmentally friendly but maintain functionality will go a long way to improving the sustainability of the process.
Hydrogen peroxide is an environmentally friendly chemical that has been applied for the delignification of wood. The process involves the use of alkaline or acidic buffers to maintain the pH to allow for effective delignification. Developing environmentally friendly active but lignin-selective activators is a major research task if a certain level of sustainability of the process will be achieved.
Two-part solvents such as IL and DES are promising alternatives to Kraft solution in wood delignification. The beauty of these solvents is that they can be designed with purpose. Future studies on the use of these solvents should include the design of solvents with high renewable content, biodegradability, low melting temperature, low toxicity level, and selectivity for lignin.
Another interesting option is the possibility of applying the HWD process in bulk wood delignification. The low viscosity of water will allow better diffusion leading to better penetration into wood. Considering that HWD increases the chances of liquid diffusion into the wood cell walls, a sequential combination of HWD and a solvent or enzymatic process will be a promising direction in sustainable wood delignification. In this way, the needs of high energy consumption of HWD and high amount of solvents can be balanced. A successful combination will require a good understanding of the structural changes in wood components after each treatment and their susceptibility or recalcitrance to subsequent treatments. Furthermore, moderate temperature HWD is known to remove a substantial amount of hemicellulose and minimal amount of lignin, creating a large volume of pores in the wood.51 The modification of wood for structural performance depends on the creation of pores for an adequate collapse of the cell walls and a high enough amount of lignin to serve as a binder.44 Some hardwoods possess about 23% hemicellulose (e.g. birch wood). Theoretically, removing a substantial amount of hemicellulose and a small amount of lignin will create pores comparable to removing only the amount of lignin needed to attain complete collapse of the cell wall during consolidation. This could be of technical interest as HWD is known to increase cellulose crystallinity and compositional fraction. Here, understanding the distribution of wood components in the cell wall and how they change with HWD pre-treatment is needed.
The use of biotechnological methods is a promising environmentally friendly route to wood delignification and bleaching. The successful application of enzymes such as laccase requires a good understanding of their mechanism of delignification and how they modulate their redox potential at the structural level. On the other hand, the development of highly efficient bio-based LMS is an impending research area that will foster the use of laccase in wood processing. Studies that will improve understanding of the mechanism of wood delignification under the influence of LMS will pave the way for new innovations. Generally, an improved understanding of the diffusion mechanism of solvents, chemicals and enzymes into wood depending on the wood's structural characteristics and the molecular size of the diffusing solvent is necessary for successful wood delignification.
Currently, IR heating has been industrially applied for curing of fibreboard coatings, gelling, and curing of wood finishes. Microwave heating has also been successfully applied for drying wood at the industrial scale. These processes (microwave, IR and UV) are green and energy efficient systems451–453 that can be extended to various areas of engineered wood processing. Curing of resin infiltrated into wood with microwave technology will reduce defects and processing time and should be generally easier to perform than conventional heating.453 Microwave heating can easily be scaled up without a decrease in energy efficiency.454 Densification of wood can be achieved by incorporating concurrent, continuous and vacuum-based methods into the microwave process. The successful application of microwave technology in engineered wood processing requires a deep understanding of the interaction between wood components (water, lignin, hemicellulose, cellulose and impregnated resin) and microwaves. IR and UV processes will be particularly useful in the cross-linking of impregnated resin in wood. Specific studies on the use of infiltrated black bodies as IR carriers to eliminate uneven heating and size limitation are required. UV-assisted radical polymerization may find usefulness in the reactive functionalization of polymers in the wood internal structures.
Author contributions
A. E. I. conceptualized, researched data for the manuscript and wrote the original draft. W. B. and F. K. supervised and sourced the funding. F. K. reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors made contributions to the discussion of the content. All authors agreed to the content of the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors highly acknowledge the partial funding of the German Academic Exchange Organization (DAAD Project Number 1700100000) and the Thailand Research Fund for a common wood research project.
References
L. Lowden and T. Hull, Fire Sci. Rev., 2013, 2, 4 CrossRef .
A. Roos and A. Q. Nyrud, J. Wood Sci., 2008, 54, 402–407 CrossRef .
Z. H. Wu, J. Wood Sci., 1998, 44, 275–281 CrossRef .
Z. H. Wu and T. Furuno, J. Wood Sci., 1999, 45, 134–142 CrossRef .
K. Friedrich, E. I. Akpan and B. Wetzel, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 10217–10229 CrossRef CAS .
K. Friedrich, E. I. Akpan and B. Wetzel, J. Tribol., 2018, 16, 51–70 Search PubMed .
R. Sathre and T. Gorman, For. Prod. J., 2005, 55, 41–47 Search PubMed .
D. Mohan, C. U. Pittman and P. H. Steele, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 848–889 CrossRef CAS .
P. Fratzl and R. Weinkamer, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2007, 52, 1263–1334 CrossRef CAS .
J. Fahlén and L. Salmén, J. Mater. Sci., 2003, 38, 119–126 CrossRef .
L. A. Berglund and I. Burgert, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–15 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Song, S. Xu, Y. Li, J. Dai, A. Gong, M. Zhu, C. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Yao, B. Liu, J. Song, G. Pastel and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–8 CAS .
C. H. Fang, N. Mariotti, A. Cloutier, A. Koubaa and P. Blanchet, Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., 2012, 70, 155–163 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bekhta, S. Hiziroglu and O. Shepelyuk, Mater. Des., 2009, 30, 947–953 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pařil, M. Brabec, O. Maňák, R. Rousek, P. Rademacher, P. Čermák and A. Dejmal, Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., 2014, 72, 583–591 CrossRef .
M. Gong, C. Lamason and L. Li, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2010, 210, 293–296 CrossRef .
K. Laine, K. Segerholm, M. Wålinder, L. Rautkari and M. Hughes, Wood Sci. Technol., 2016, 50, 883–894 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kutnar and F. A. Kamke, Wood Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 73–88 CrossRef CAS .
C. A. Hill, J. Ramsay, B. Keating, K. Laine, L. Rautkari, M. Hughes and B. Constant, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 3191–3197 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang, S. Zhu, I. Burgert, T. Keplinger, A. Gong, T. Li, L. Berglund, S. J. Eichhorn and L. Hu, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 3191–3197 CrossRef .
B. M. Esteves and H. M. Pereira, BioResources, 2009, 4, 370–404 CAS .
F. Jiang, T. Li, Y. Li, Y. Zhang, A. Gong, J. Dai, E. Hitz, W. Luo and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703453 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Fu, F. Ansari, Q. Zhou and L. A. Berglund, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 2222–2230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, X. Guo, Y. He and R. Zheng, J. Mater. Res., 2019, 34, 932–940 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guan, Z. Cheng and X. Wang, ACS Nano, 2018, 5181–5187 Search PubMed .
H. Zhu, W. Luo, P. N. Ciesielski, Z. Fang, J. Y. Zhu, G. Henriksson, M. E. Himmel and L. Hu, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 9305–9374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang, S. Zhu, I. Burgert, T. Keplinger, A. Gong, T. Li, L. Berglund, S. J. Eichhorn and L. Hu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 19–21 CAS .
F. Asdrubali, B. Ferracuti, L. Lombardi, C. Guattari, L. Evangelisti and G. Grazieschi, Build Environ., 2017, 114, 307–332 CrossRef .
J. Wang, D. Zhang and F. Chu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2001135 CrossRef .
J. Huang, B. Zhao, T. Liu, J. Mou, Z. Jiang, J. Liu, H. Li and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–23 Search PubMed .

          D. Sandberg, A. Kutnar and G. Mantanis, iForest - Biogeosciences and Forestry,  2017, pp. 895–908 Search PubMed .
A. Sotayo, D. Bradley, M. Bather, P. Sareh, M. Oudjene, I. El-Houjeyri, A. M. Harte, S. Mehra, C. O'Ceallaigh, P. Haller, S. Namari, A. Makradi, S. Belouettar, L. Bouhala, F. Deneufbourg and Z. Guan, Dev. Built Environ., 2020, 1, 100004 CrossRef .
B. Lippke, J. Wilson, J. Perez-Garcia, J. Bowyer and J. Meil, For. Prod. J., 2004, 54, 13 Search PubMed .
J. Perez-Garcia, B. Lippke, D. Briggs, J. Wilson, J. Bowyer and J. Meil, Wood Fiber Sci., 2005, 37, 3–17 CAS .

          M. Calkins, in Materials for Sustainable Sites: A Complete Guide to the Evaluation, Selection, and Use of Sustainable Construction Materials mining the built environment, John Wiley and Sons,  2008, vol. 98, pp. 68–71 Search PubMed .
S. E. Stanzl-Tschegg, Mater. Sci. Eng., C, 2011, 31, 1174–1183 CrossRef CAS .
T. Speck and I. Burgert, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2011, 41, 169–193 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Barnett and V. A. Bonham, Biol. Rev. Cambridge Philos. Soc., 2004, 79, 461–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen and L. Hu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 3154–3165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. SJÖSTRÖM, Wood Chemistry, Academic Press, San Diego, 2nd edn,  1993, pp. 51–70 Search PubMed .
J. Berglund, D. Mikkelsen, B. M. Flanagan, S. Dhital, S. Gaunitz, G. Henriksson, M. E. Lindström, G. E. Yakubov, M. J. Gidley and F. Vilaplana, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zakzeski, P. C. A. Bruijnincx, A. L. Jongerius and B. M. Weckhuysen, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3552–3599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Komuraiah, N. S. Kumar and B. D. Prasad, Mech. Compos. Mater., 2014, 50, 359–376 CrossRef CAS .
J. Song, C. Chen, S. Zhu, M. Zhu, J. Dai, U. Ray, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, N. Quispe, Y. Yao, A. Gong, U. H. Leiste, H. A. Bruck, J. Y. Zhu, A. Vellore, H. Li, M. L. Minus, Z. Jia, A. Martini, T. Li and L. Hu, Nature, 2018, 554, 224–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wu, J. Wu, F. Yang, C. Tang and Q. Huang, Polymer, 2019, 11, 1–13 Search PubMed .
M. Rajinipriya, M. Nagalakshmaiah, M. Robert and S. Elkoun, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 2807–2828 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kulasinski, R. Guyer, D. Derome and J. Carmeliet, Biomacromolecules, 2015, 16, 2972–2978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Poletto, A. J. Zattera and R. M. Santana, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 126, 7–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, A. K. Saha, P. K. Choudhury, R. K. Basak, B. C. Mitra, T. Todd, S. Lang and R. M. Rowell, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2000, 76, 1652–1661 CrossRef CAS .
O. Hosseinaei, S. Wang, A. A. Enayati and T. G. Rials, Composites, Part A, 2012, 43, 686–694 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, S. Cao, X. Meng, M. Studer, C. E. Wyman, A. J. Ragauskas and Y. Pu, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2017, 10, 237 CrossRef PubMed .
O. M. Terrett, J. J. Lyczakowski, L. Yu, D. Iuga, W. T. Franks, S. P. Brown, R. Dupree and P. Dupree, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 4978 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Simonović, J. Stevanic, D. Djikanović, L. Salmén and K. Radotić, Cellulose, 2011, 18, 1433–1440 CrossRef .
X. Kang, A. Kirui, M. C. Dickwella Widanage, F. Mentink-Vigier, D. J. Cosgrove and T. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Simmons, J. C. Mortimer, O. D. Bernardinelli, A.-C. Pöppler, S. P. Brown, E. R. deAzevedo, R. Dupree and P. Dupree, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Wang and M. Hong, J. Exp. Bot., 2016, 67, 503–514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Busse-Wicher, T. C. F. Gomes, T. Tryfona, N. Nikolovski, K. Stott, N. J. Grantham, D. N. Bolam, M. S. Skaf and P. Dupree, Plant J., 2014, 79, 492–506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Grantham, J. Wurman-Rodrich, O. M. Terrett, J. J. Lyczakowski, K. Stott, D. Iuga, T. J. Simmons, M. Durand-Tardif, S. P. Brown, R. Dupree, M. Busse-Wicher and P. Dupree, Nat. Plants, 2017, 3, 859–865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Martínez-Abad, J. Berglund, G. Toriz, P. Gatenholm, G. Henriksson, M. Lindström, J. Wohlert and F. Vilaplana, Plant Physiol., 2017, 175, 1579–1592 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Chaker, S. Alila, P. Mutjé, M. R. Vilar and S. Boufi, Cellulose, 2013, 20, 2863–2875 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Chen, K. Wang, F. Xu and R.-C. Sun, Cellulose, 2015, 22, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Iglesias, D. Gomez-Maldonado, B. K. Via, Z. Jiang and M. S. Peresin, For. Prod. J., 2020, 70, 10–21 CAS .
S. Arola, J.-M. Malho, P. Laaksonen, M. Lille and M. B. Linder, Soft Matter, 2013, 9, 1319–1326 RSC .
K. Werner, L. Pommer and M. Broström, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2014, 110, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .

          E. I. Akpan, Sustainable Lignin for Carbon Fibers: Principles, Techniques, and Applications, Springer Nature,  2019, pp. 1–50 Search PubMed .
W.-J. Liu, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4888–4907 RSC .
H. Sadeghifar and A. Ragauskas, Polymer, 2020, 12, 1134 CAS .
D. Cosgrove and M. Jarvis, Front. Plant Sci., 2012, 3, 204 Search PubMed .
I. Burgert and T. Keplinger, J. Exp. Bot., 2013, 64, 4635–4649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Nishimura, A. Kamiya, T. Nagata, M. Katahira and T. Watanabe, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 6538 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Terashima, K. Kitano, M. Kojima, M. Yoshida, H. Yamamoto and U. Westermark, J. Wood Sci., 2009, 55, 409–416 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Lyczakowski, M. Bourdon, O. M. Terrett, Y. Helariutta, R. Wightman and P. Dupree, Front. Plant Sci., 2019, 10, 1398 CrossRef PubMed .

          A. Wiedenhoeft and R. Miller, Wood chemistry and wood composites, Taylor and Francis,  2005, pp. 18–42 Search PubMed .
P. Oinonen, L. Zhang, M. Lawoko and G. Henriksson, Phytochemistry, 2015, 111, 177–184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Wu, F. Yang, C. Tang, Q. Huang and J. Zhang, Composites, Part A, 2019, 117, 324–331 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qin, X. Li, Y. Shao, K. Shi, X. Zhao, T. Feng and Y. Hu, Vacuum, 2018, 158, 158–165 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vasileva, H. Chen, Y. Li, I. Sychugov, M. Yan, L. Berglund and S. Popov, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
L. Chen, N. Song, L. Shi and P. Ding, Composites, Part A, 2018, 112, 18–24 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, F. Berthold and L. A. Berglund, Biomacromolecules, 2018, 19, 3020–3029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, J. Song, X. Zhao, Z. Yang, G. Pastel, S. Xu, C. Jia, J. Dai, C. Dai, A. Gong, F. Jiang, Y. Yao, T. Fan, B. Yang, L. Wågberg, R. Yang and L. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, 1–10 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, Z. Li, R. Mi, J. Dai, H. Xie, Y. Pei, J. Li, H. Qiao, H. Tang, B. Yang and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5194–5202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mania, M. Wróblewski, A. Wójciak, E. Roszyk and W. Moliński, Forests, 2020, 11, 506 CrossRef .
N. Feng, Y. Liang and D. Hu, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 30, 101401 CrossRef .
J. S. Segmehl, A. Laromaine, T. Keplinger, A. May-Masnou, I. Burgert and A. Roig, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 3395–3402 RSC .
Y. Dong, E. Ma, J. Li, S. Zhang and M. Hughes, Polym. Compos., 2020, 41, 1066–1073 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tang, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, H. Li, J. Zeng, Z. Ruan, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Q. Xue, J. Yu and C. Zhi, Carbon, 2018, 130, 532–543 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Subba Rao, G. B. Nagarajappa, S. Nair, A. M. Chathoth and K. K. Pandey, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 182, 107719 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yang, J. Cao and E. Ma, Ind. Crops Prod., 2019, 135, 91–98 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, F. Zhang, H. S. Ramaswamy, S. Zhu and Y. Yu, BioResources, 2016, 11, 10497–10510 CAS .
H. Yang, W. Chao, X. Di, Z. Yang, T. Yang, Q. Yu, F. Liu, J. Li, G. Li and C. Wang, Energy Convers. Manage., 2019, 200, 112029 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Qiu, Z. Xiao, L. Gao, J. Li, H. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xie, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 172, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
A. Radomski and D. Kaźmierczak, Ann. WULS, For. Wood Technol., 2019, 108, 148–155 CrossRef .
M. Frey, M. Zirkelbach, C. Dransfeld, E. Faude, E. Trachse, M. Hannus, I. Burgert and T. Keplinger, J. Visualized Exp., 2019, 153, e60327 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, Y. Cai, F. Dong, L. Bian, H. Li, J. Wang, J. Du, X. Qi and Y. He, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2019, 411, 8063–8071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jungstedt, C. Montanari, S. Östlund and L. Berglund, Composites, Part A, 2020, 133, 105853 CrossRef CAS .
A. Khakalo, A. Tanaka, A. Korpela and H. Orelma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 23532–23542 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Fu, L. Medina, Y. Li, F. Carosio, A. Hajian and L. A. Berglund, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 36154–36163 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mi, T. Li, D. Dalgo, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, S. He, X. Zhao, W. Xie, W. Gan, J. Zhu, J. Srebric, R. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1–8 Search PubMed .
M. Zhu, Y. Wang, S. Zhu, L. Xu, C. Jia, J. Dai, J. Song, Y. Yao, Y. Wang, Y. Li, D. Henderson, W. Luo, H. Li, M. L. Minus, T. Li and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 7362–7370 Search PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Yu, J. G. Veinot, J. Linnros, L. Berglund and I. Sychugov, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 3–7 Search PubMed .
S. He, C. Chen, T. Li, J. Song, X. Zhao, Y. Kuang, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, E. Hitz, W. Kong, W. Gan, B. Yang, R. Yang and L. Hu, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 1–8 Search PubMed .
T. Li, Y. Zhai, S. He, W. Gan, Z. Wei, M. Heidarinejad, D. Dalgo, R. Mi, X. Zhao, J. Song, J. Dai, C. Chen, A. Aili, A. Vellore, A. Martini, R. Yang, J. Srebric, X. Yin and L. Hu, Science, 2019, 364, 760–763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chen, B. Dang, X. Luo, W. Li, J. Li, H. Yu, S. Liu and S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 26032–26037 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Vitas, T. Keplinger, N. Reichholf, R. Figi and E. Cabane, J. Hazard. Mater., 2018, 355, 119–127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Frey, L. Schneider, K. Masania, T. Keplinger and I. Burgert, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 35305–35311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zou, D. Sun, Z. Wang, R. Li, W. Yu and P. Zhang, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 21566–21571 RSC .
Q. Xia, C. Chen, Y. Yao, S. He, X. Wang, J. Li, J. Gao, W. Gan, B. Jiang, M. Cui and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2001588, 2001588 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Xia, C. Chen, T. Li, S. He, J. Gao, X. Wang and L. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2021, 7, eabd7342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. I. Akpan, Sustainable Lignin for Carbon Fibers: Principles, Techniques, and Applications, Springer Nature,  2019, pp. 65–150 Search PubMed .
T. Welton, Proc. R. Soc. A, 2015, 471, 20150502 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, C. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Kuang, Y. Li, F. Jiang, Y. Li, E. Hitz, Y. Zhang, B. Liu, A. Gong, H. Bian, J. Y. Zhu, J. Zhang, J. Li and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23520–23527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Gan, C. Chen, H. T. Kim, Z. Lin, J. Dai, Z. Dong, Z. Zhou, W. Ping, S. He, S. Xiao, M. Yu and L. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, J. Song, S. Zhu, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, J. Wan, D. Kirsch, L. Xu, Y. Wang, T. Gao, Y. Wang, H. Huang, W. Gan, A. Gong, T. Li, J. Xie and L. Hu, Chem, 2018, 4, 544–554 CAS .
E.-L. Hult, P. T. Larsson and T. Iversen, Holzforschung, 2002, 56, 179–184 CAS .
E.-L. Hult, P. T. Larsson and T. Iversen, Cellulose, 2000, 7, 35–55 CrossRef CAS .
A. Palme, H. Theliander and H. Brelid, Carbohydr. Polym., 2016, 136, 1281–1287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Y. Zhao and Y. Deng, Carbohydr. Polym., 2008, 72, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .

          U. Germgard, Paper technology, De Gruyter, Berlin, Boston,  2009, pp. 239–276 Search PubMed .
C. Brage, T. Eriksson and J. Gierer, Holzforschung, 1991, 45, 23–30 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Svenson, H. Jameel, H. M. Chang and J. F. Kadla, J. Wood Chem. Technol., 2006, 26, 201–213 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wang, X. Liu, Y. Tan, W. Zhang, S. Zhang and J. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 371, 769–780 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kafle, C. M. Lee, H. Shin, J. Zoppe, D. K. Johnson, S. H. Kim and S. Park, BioEnergy Res., 2015, 8, 1750–1758 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, F. Hu, C. A. Hubbell, A. J. Ragauskas and C. E. Wyman, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 130, 372–381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          G. Gellerstedt, Pulping Chemistry and Technology, Walter de Gruyter, Berlin, New York,  2009, pp. 393–438 Search PubMed .
K. V. Sarkanen, Pure Appl. Chem., 1962, 5, 219–232 CAS .
R. Wang, B. Zhou and Z. Wang, J. Chem., 2019, 1, 5493745 Search PubMed .
A. C. Puitel, A. Bordeianu and D. Gavrilescu, Cellul. Chem. Technol., 2007, 41, 219–234 Search PubMed .
Y. Ni, G. J. Kubes and A. R. Van Heiningen, J. Pulp Pap. Sci., 1993, 19, J1–J6 Search PubMed .
C. Jia, C. Chen, R. Mi, T. Li, J. Dai, Z. Yang, Y. Pei, S. He, H. Bian, S. H. Jang, J. Y. Zhu, B. Yang and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 9993–10001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Muller-Litz, 
            et al.
          , Int. Text. Bull. Dyg./Ptg./Fing., 1997, 3, 37–38 Search PubMed .
D. Prat, A. Wells, J. Hayler, H. Sneddon, C. R. McElroy, S. Abou-Shehada and P. J. Dunn, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 288–296 RSC .

Acetic acid [MAK Value Documentation, 2010a], American Cancer Society,  2012, pp. 1–9,  DOI:10.1002/3527600418.mb6419e0026a .
X. Qian, G. Yu, H. Liu and X. An, Trans. China Pulp Pap., 2002, 17, 36–39 CAS .
A. Mittal, R. Katahira, B. S. Donohoe, B. A. Black, S. Pattathil, J. M. Stringer and G. T. Beckham, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 6310–6321 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Gould, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 1984, 27, 225–231 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Gould, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 1984, 26, 46–52 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Agnemo, G. Gellerstedt, E.-L. Lindfors, U. Björkroth, S. Rosell, K. Folkers, N. Yanaihara and C. Yanaihara, Acta Chem. Scand., 1979, 33b, 154–156 CrossRef .
R. Agnemo, G. Gellerstedt, J. J. Leban, U. Björkroth, S. Rosell, K. Folkers, N. Yanaihara and C. Yanaihara, Acta Chem. Scand., 1979, 33b, 337–342 CrossRef .

          G. Gellerstedt, R. Agnemo and G. Gellerstedt, The reactions of lignin with alkaline hydrogen peroxide, Part II,  1980 Search PubMed .

          G. Gellerstedt, H.-L. Hardell, E.-L. Lindfors, T. Nishida and C. R. Enzell, The Reactions of Lignin with Alkaline Hydrogen Peroxide. Part IV. Products from the Oxidation of Quinone Model Compounds,  1980 Search PubMed .
D. V. Plackett, E. A. Dunningham and A. P. Singh, Holz Roh- Werkst., 1992, 50, 135–140 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Zhu, J. Cao and R. Liu, Holzforschung, 2014, 68, 29–36 CAS .
M. A. Ermeydan, E. Cabane, P. Hass, J. Koetz and I. Burgert, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 3313–3321 RSC .
H. Chen, Q. Lang, Z. Bi, X. Miao, Y. Li and J. Pu, Holzforschung, 2014, 68, 45–52 CAS .
H. Yu, Y. Fu, G. Li and Y. Liu, Holzforschung, 2013, 67, 455–461 CAS .
L. Emmerich and H. Militz, Holzforschung, 2020, 74, 362–371 CAS .
M. A. Ermeydan, M. Babacan and E. D. Tomak, J. Wood Chem. Technol., 2020, 40, 294–305 CrossRef CAS .
B. Meethaworn, S. Srivaro and S. Khongtong, Constr. Build Mater., 2020, 265, 120862 CrossRef CAS .
C. L'Hostis, E. Fredon, M.-F. Thévenon, F.-J. Santiago-Medina and P. Gérardin, Holzforschung, 2020, 74, 351–361 Search PubMed .
H. Pelit and F. Emiroglu, Holzforschung, 2020, 000010151520200075 Search PubMed .
C. Gusenbauer, E. Cabane, N. Gierlinger, J. Colson and J. Konnerth, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 18569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Xu, Y. Zhang and L. Lin, Polymer, 2020, 12, 1632 CAS .
D. Schorr and P. Blanchet, Materials, 2020, 13, 973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. P. Acosta, J. Labidi, H. R. Schulz, E. Gallio, K. T. Barbosa, R. Beltrame, R. de Avila Delucis and D. A. Gatto, Forests, 2020, 11, 768 CrossRef .
G. Beck, Forests, 2020, 11, 650 CrossRef .
P. Alao, K. Visnapuu, H. Kallakas, T. Poltimäe and J. Kers, Forests, 2020, 11, 642 CrossRef .
M. Schwarzkopf, Wood Mater. Sci. Eng., 2020, 1–7 Search PubMed .
I. Vujcic, S. Masic, N. Obradovic and M. D. Dramicanin, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2020, 166, 108505 CrossRef CAS .
T. Keplinger, E. Cabane, M. Chanana, P. Hass, V. Merk, N. Gierlinger and I. Burgert, Acta Biomater., 2015, 11, 256–263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Cabane, T. Keplinger, T. Künniger, V. Merk and I. Burgert, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. Ermeydan, E. Cabane, A. Masic, J. Koetz and I. Burgert, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 5782–5789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Ermeydan, E. Cabane, N. Gierlinger, J. Koetz and I. Burgert, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 12981–12988 RSC .
E. Cabane, T. Keplinger, V. Merk, P. Hass and I. Burgert, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1020–1025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Rabajczyk, M. Zielecka and D. Małozieć, Appl. Sci., 2020, 10, 6093 CrossRef CAS .
V. Ponnuchamy, A. Sandak and J. Sandak, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2020, 22, 28448–28458 RSC .
C. Jiménez-Gonzalez, A. D. Curzons, D. J. Constable and V. L. Cunningham, Clean Technol. Environ. Policy, 2004, 7, 42–50 CrossRef .
R. K. Henderson, C. Jiménez-González, D. J. Constable, S. R. Alston, G. G. Inglis, G. Fisher, J. Sherwood, S. P. Binks and A. D. Curzons, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 854–862 RSC .
C. M. Alder, J. D. Hayler, R. K. Henderson, A. M. Redman, L. Shukla, L. E. Shuster and H. F. Sneddon, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3879–3890 RSC .
D. Prat, O. Pardigon, H. W. Flemming, S. Letestu, V. Ducandas, P. Isnard, E. Guntrum, T. Senac, S. Ruisseau, P. Cruciani and P. Hosek, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2013, 17, 1517–1525 CrossRef CAS .
W. Che, Z. Xiao, Z. Wang, J. Li, H. Wang, Y. Wang and Y. Xie, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 5134–5141 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, A. S. Gong, M. Zhu, G. Chen, S. D. Lacey, F. Jiang, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Dai, Y. Yao, J. Song, B. Liu, K. Fu, S. Das and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4275–4282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hai, F. Chen, J. Su, F. Xu and B. Wang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 4909–4915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, C. Liu and J. Li, Adv. Mater. Res., 2010, 113–116, 1712–1715 CAS .
C. Tsioptsias and C. Panayiotou, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 5406–5411 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, W. Chen, Q. Xia, B. Guo, Q. Wang, S. Liu, Y. Liu, J. Li and H. Yu, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 1692–1700 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Merk, M. Chanana, N. Gierlinger, A. M. Hirt and I. Burgert, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 9760–9767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Donath, H. Militz and C. Mai, Wood Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 555–566 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, M. Zhu, Z. Yang, J. Song, J. Dai, Y. Yao, W. Luo, G. Pastel, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1174–1183 Search PubMed .
M. Zhu, T. Li, C. S. Davis, Y. Yao, J. Dai, Y. Wang, F. AlQatari, J. W. Gilman and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 332–339 CrossRef CAS .
A. Treu, S. Bardage, M. Johansson and S. Trey, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegradation., 2014, 87, 26–33 CrossRef CAS .
W. Gan, L. Gao, S. Xiao, W. Zhang, X. Zhan and J. Li, J. Mater. Sci., 2017, 52, 3321–3329 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, Y. Yao, J. Yao, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Gao and H. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6019–6024 RSC .
R. R. Devi and T. K. Maji, Wood Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 299–315 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vasileva, Y. Li, I. Sychugov, M. Mensi, L. Berglund and S. Popov, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1–6 RSC .
Y. Li, K. K. Fu, C. Chen, W. Luo, T. Gao, S. Xu, J. Dai, G. Pastel, Y. Wang, B. Liu, J. Song, Y. Chen, C. Yang and L. Hu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4801–4807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, G. Chen, Y. Pei, G. Pastel, C. Jia, J. Song, R. Mi, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–7 Search PubMed .
W. Luo, Y. Zhang, S. Xu, J. Dai, E. Hitz, Y. Li, C. Yang, C. Chen, B. Liu and L. Hu, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 3792–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, J. Song, W. Luo, Y. Wang, Y. Yao, G. Pastel, J. Xie and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 3–10 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Chen, G. Chen, Y. Kuang, X. Zhao, J. Song, C. Jia, X. Xu, E. Hitz, H. Xie, S. Wang, F. Jiang, T. Li, Y. Li, A. Gong, R. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Yuan, X. Sun, M. Yang, F. Xu, Z. Lin, X. Zhao, Y. Ding, J. Li, W. Yin, Q. Peng, X. He and Y. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 21371–21381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shen, W. Luo, J. Dai, Y. Yao, M. Zhu, E. Hitz, Y. Tang, Y. Chen, V. L. Sprenkle, X. Li and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. Xi, E. Zhou, Y. Liu, W. Gao, J. Ying, Z. Chen and C. Gao, Carbon, 2017, 124, 492–498 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Dai, J. Song, Y. Yao, Y. Gong, I. Kierzewski, J. Xie and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 538–545 RSC .
X. Peng, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, L. Zhong, D. Zhao, X. Chi, X. Zhao, L. Li, X. Lu, K. Leng, C. Liu, W. Liu, W. Tang and K. P. Loh, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhang, W. Luo, C. Wang, Y. Li, C. Chen, J. Song, J. Dai, E. M. Hitz, S. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Wang and L. Hu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 3584–3589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Garemark, X. Yang, X. Sheng, O. Cheung, L. Sun, L. A. Berglund and Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2020, 1–6 Search PubMed .
L.-L. Lu, Y.-Y. Lu, Z.-J. Xiao, T.-W. Zhang, F. Zhou, T. Ma, Y. Ni, H.-B. Yao, S.-H. Yu and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706745 CrossRef PubMed .
S. He, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, R. Mi, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, W. Kong, W. Gan, H. Xie, E. Hitz, C. Jia, X. Chen, A. Gong, J. Liao, J. Li, Z. J. Ren, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558–1567 RSC .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, G. Chen, F. Jiang, Z. Yang, X. Luo, Y. Wang, S. D. Lacey, J. Dai, C. Wang, C. Jia, J. Wan, Y. Yao, A. Gong, B. Yang, Z. Yu, S. Das and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Y. Wang, X. Lin, T. Liu, H. Chen, S. Chen, Z. Jiang, J. Liu, J. Huang and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–10 Search PubMed .
T. S. D. Le, S. Park, J. An, P. S. Lee and Y. J. Kim, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–10 CrossRef .
K. K. Liu, Q. Jiang, S. Tadepalli, R. Raliya, P. Biswas, R. R. Naik and S. Singamaneni, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 7675–7681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Chen, S. Xu, Y. Kuang, W. Gan, J. Song, G. Chen, G. Pastel, B. Liu, Y. Li, H. Huang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1–10 Search PubMed .
S. Xu, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, W. Gan, B. Liu, E. M. Hitz, J. W. Connell, Y. Lin and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 3231–3237 RSC .
J. Shi, J. Peng, Q. Huang, L. Cai and S. Q. Shi, J. Wood Sci., 2020, 66, 1–9 CrossRef .
M. Inoue, M. Norimoto, M. Tanahashi and R. M. Rowell, Wood Fiber Sci., 1993, 25, 224–235 CAS .
Y. Yin, L. Berglund and L. Salmén, Biomacromolecules, 2011, 12, 194–202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Cai, X. Yang, L. Cai and S. Q. Shi, Drying Technol., 2013, 31, 1107–1113 CrossRef CAS .
A. Pertuzzatti, A. L. Missio, P. H. de Cademartori, E. J. Santini, C. R. Haselein, C. Berger, D. A. Gatto and G. Tondi, BioResources, 2018, 13, 1576–1590 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Welzbacher, J. Wehsener, A. O. Rapp and P. Haller, Holz Roh- Werkst., 2008, 66, 39–49 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Fang, A. Cloutier, P. Blanchet and A. Koubaa, BioResources, 2012, 7, 925–935 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Fang, A. Cloutier, P. Blanchet, A. Koubaa and N. Mariotti, BioResources, 2011, 6, 373–385 CAS .
P. Navi and F. Girardet, Holzforschung, 2000, 54, 287–293 CAS .
P. N. Diouf, T. Stevanovic, A. Cloutier, C. H. Fang, P. Blanchet, A. Koubaa and N. Mariotti, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2011, 257, 3558–3564 CrossRef CAS .
J. Guo, K. Song, L. Salmén and Y. Yin, Carbohydr. Polym., 2015, 115, 207–214 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, J. Shang, X. Chen, F. A. Kamke and K. Guo, Wood Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 373–392 CrossRef CAS .
M. Bao, X. Huang, M. Jiang, W. Yu and Y. Yu, J. Wood Sci., 2017, 63, 591–605 CrossRef CAS .
N. Cruz, C. Bustos, M. G. Aguayo, A. Cloutier and R. Castillo, BioResources, 2018, 13, 2268–2282 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yin, T. Yuan, Y. Lu, K. Song, H. Li, G. Zhao and Y. Yin, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 155, 163–172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Todaro, R. Zanuttini, A. Scopa and N. Moretti, Wood Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 563–578 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tooyserkani, S. Sokhansanj, X. Bi, J. Lim, A. Lau, J. Saddler, L. Kumar, P. S. Lam and S. Melin, Appl. Energy, 2013, 103, 514–521 CrossRef .
Ł. Czajkowski, W. Olek and J. Weres, Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., 2020, 78, 425–431 CrossRef .
J. Wehsener, C. Brischke, L. Meyer-Veltrup, J. Hartig and P. Haller, Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., 2018, 76, 809–821 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dömény, P. Čermák, V. Koiš, J. Tippner and R. Rousek, Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., 2018, 76, 105–111 CrossRef .
J. Wei, F. Rao, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang, Y. Qi, W. Yu and C. Y. Hse, Adv. Polym. Technol., 2019, 2019, 809–821 Search PubMed .
M. Kariz, M. K. Kuzman, M. Sernek, M. Hughes, L. Rautkari, F. A. Kamke and A. Kutnar, Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., 2017, 75, 113–123 CrossRef .
P. Anastas and N. Eghbali, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 301–312 RSC .

          P. T. Anastas and J. C. Warner, Green chemistry: Theory and practice,  1998, pp. 29–56 Search PubMed .
S. Y. Tang, R. A. Bourne, R. L. Smith and M. Poliakoff, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 268–269 RSC .
L. P. Christopher, B. Yao and Y. Ji, Front. Energy Res., 2014, 2, 12 Search PubMed .
M. Euring, J. Trojanowski, M. Horstmann and A. Kharazipour, Wood Sci. Technol., 2012, 46, 699–708 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gutiérrez, J. Rencoret, E. M. Cadena, A. Rico, D. Barth, J. C. del Río and Á. T. Martínez, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 119, 114–122 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Rencoret, A. Pereira, J. C. del Río, A. T. Martínez and A. Gutiérrez, BioEnergy Res., 2016, 9, 917–930 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rico, J. Rencoret, J. C. del Río, A. T. Martínez and A. Gutiérrez, BioEnergy Res., 2015, 8, 211–230 CrossRef CAS .
A. Rico, J. Rencoret, J. C. Del Río, A. T. Martínez and A. Gutiérrez, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2014, 7, 1–14 Search PubMed .
J. Rencoret, A. Pereira, J. C. Del Río, Á. T. Martínez and A. Gutiérrez, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 7145–7154 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Barneto, E. Aracri, G. Andreu and T. Vidal, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 112, 327–335 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kawai, T. Umezawa, M. Shimada and T. Higuchi, FEBS Lett., 1988, 236, 309–311 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kawai, T. Umezawa and T. Higuchi, Arch. Biochem. Biophys., 1988, 262, 99–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Munk, A. K. Sitarz, D. C. Kalyani, J. D. Mikkelsen and A. S. Meyer, Biotechnol. Adv., 2015, 33, 13–24 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Rochefort, D. Leech and R. Bourbonnais, Green Chem., 2004, 6, 14–24 RSC .
M. Fabbrini, C. Galli and P. Gentili, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2002, 16, 231–240 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bourbonnais and M. G. Paice, FEBS Lett., 1990, 267, 99–102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bourbonnais, M. G. Paice, B. Freiermuth, E. Bodie and S. Borneman, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 1997, 63, 4627–4632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Bourbonnais, D. Leech and M. G. Paice, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, Gen. Subj., 1998, 1379, 381–390 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bajpai, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2004, 24, 1–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Ibarra, J. Romero, M. J. Martínez, A. T. Martínez and S. Camarero, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2006, 39, 1319–1327 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Chen, M. N. Marshall, S. M. Geib, M. Tien and T. L. Richard, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 117, 186–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zheng, H. Li, L. Li and W. Shao, Biotechnol. Lett., 2012, 34, 541–547 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Call, Patent (International) WO, 9429510,  1994 Search PubMed .
E. Srebotnik and K. E. Hammel, J. Biotechnol., 2000, 81, 179–188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Camarero, D. Ibarra, Á. T. Martínez, J. Romero, A. Gutiérrez and J. C. del Río, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2007, 40, 1264–1271 CrossRef CAS .
C. Eggert, U. Temp, J. F. Dean and K. E. L. Eriksson, FEBS Lett., 1996, 391, 144–148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Li, P. S. Horanyi, R. Collins, R. S. Phillips and K. E. L. Eriksson, Enzyme Microb. Technol., 2001, 28, 301–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gutiérrez, J. Rencoret, D. Ibarra, S. Molina, S. Camarero, J. Romero, J. C. Del Río and Á. T. Martínez, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2007, 41, 4124–4129 CrossRef PubMed .
M. J. Martínez, C. Muñoz, F. Guillen and A. T. Martínez, Appl. Microbiol. Biotechnol., 1994, 41, 500–504 CrossRef .
E. D. Babot, A. Rico, J. Rencoret, L. Kalum, H. Lund, J. Romero, J. C. del Río, Á. T. Martínez and A. Gutiérrez, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 6717–6722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Du, J. Li, G. Gellerstedt, J. Rencoret, J. C. Del Río, A. T. Martínez and A. Gutiérrez, Biomacromolecules, 2013, 14, 3073–3080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Calcaterra, C. Galli and P. Gentili, J. Mol. Catal. B: Enzym., 2008, 51, 118–120 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Cañas and S. Camarero, Biotechnol. Adv., 2010, 28, 694–705 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Moldes, M. Díaz, T. Tzanov and T. Vidal, Bioresour. Technol., 2008, 99, 7959–7965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Al-Zuhair, M. Abualreesh, K. Ahmed and A. Abdul Razak, Energy Technol., 2015, 3, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Deng, A. Xia, Q. Liao, X. Zhu, Y. Huang and Q. Fu, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2019, 12, 159 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Nasir, A. Gupta, M. D. Hossen Beg, G. K. Chua and M. Asim, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 11520–11527 RSC .
M. Nasir, A. Gupta, M. D. H. Beg, G. K. Chua and A. Kumar, Int. J. Adhes. Adhes., 2013, 44, 99–104 CrossRef CAS .
R. Chandra Rajak and R. Banerjee, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 75281–75291 RSC .
T. M. Aida, Y. Sato, M. Watanabe, K. Tajima, T. Nonaka, H. Hattori and K. Arai, J. Supercrit. Fluids, 2007, 40, 381–388 CrossRef CAS .
D. Prat, J. Hayler and A. Wells, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4546–4551 RSC .
M. Leschinsky, G. Zuckerstätter, H. K. Weber, R. Patt and H. Sixta, Holzforschung, 2008, 62, 645–652 CAS .
M. Leschinsky, G. Zuckerstätter, H. K. Weber, R. Patt and H. Sixta, Holzforschung, 2008, 62, 653–658 CAS .
L. Yan, R. Ma, L. Li and J. Fu, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2016, 39, 1759–1770 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, R. Gupta, Y. Y. Lee and R. B. Gupta, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 1337–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mosier, C. Wyman, B. Dale, R. Elander, Y. Y. Lee, M. Holtzapple and M. Ladisch, Bioresour. Technol., 2005, 96, 673–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Trajano, N. L. Engle, M. Foston, A. J. Ragauskas, T. J. Tschaplinski and C. E. Wyman, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2013, 6, 1–16 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Pu, F. Hu, F. Huang, B. H. Davison and A. J. Ragauskas, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2013, 6, 1–13 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Uematsu and E. U. Frank, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1980, 9, 1291–1306 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Marshall and E. U. Franck, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1983, 10, 295–304 CrossRef .
W. S. L. Mok and M. J. Antal, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 1992, 31, 1157–1161 CrossRef CAS .

          W. S.-L. Mok and M. J. Antal, in Biomass Fractionation by Hot Compressed Liquid Water, ed. A. V. Bridgwater, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  1993, pp. 1572–1582 Search PubMed .
M. Borrega, K. Nieminen and H. Sixta, BioResources, 2011, 6, 1890–1903 CAS .
M. Borrega and H. Sixta, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2015, 54, 6075–6084 CrossRef CAS .
C. K. Nitsos, T. Choli-Papadopoulou, K. A. Matis and K. S. Triantafyllidis, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 4529–4544 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, M. Lawoko and A. v. Heiningen, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 7812–7819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhuang, Q. Yu, W. Wang, W. Qi, Q. Wang, X. Tan and Z. Yuan, Appl. Biochem. Biotechnol., 2012, 168, 206–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pollet, E. A. Davey, E. E. Ureña-Benavides, C. A. Eckert and C. L. Liotta, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1034–1055 RSC .
Y. Gu and F. Jérôme, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1127–1138 RSC .
C. S. Pereira, V. M. Silva and A. E. Rodrigues, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2658–2671 RSC .
M. O. Simon and C. J. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1415–1427 RSC .
C. J. Clarke, W. C. Tu, O. Levers, A. Bröhl and J. P. Hallett, Chem. Rev., 2018, 118, 747–800 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Alfonsi, J. Colberg, P. J. Dunn, T. Fevig, S. Jennings, T. A. Johnson, H. P. Kleine, C. Knight, M. A. Nagy, D. A. Perry and M. Stefaniak, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 31–36 RSC .

          J. H. Clark, A. J. Hunt, C. Topi, G. Paggiola and J. Sherwood, Sustainable Solvents: Perspectives from Research, Business and International Policy, The Royal Society of Chemistry,  2017, pp. 1–34 Search PubMed .
C. J. Li and L. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 68–82 RSC .
B. Schäffner, F. Schäffner, S. P. Verevkin and A. Börner, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 4554–4581 CrossRef .
L. Lomba, B. Giner, I. Bandrés, C. Lafuente and M. R. Pino, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2062–2070 RSC .
M. J. Earle and K. R. Seddon, ACS Symp. Ser., 2002, 819, 10–25 CrossRef CAS .
H. C. Hailes, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2007, 11, 114–120 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Spear, S. T. Griffin, K. S. Granger, J. G. Huddleston and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2007, 9, 1008–1015 RSC .
N. Akiya and P. E. Savage, Chem. Rev., 2002, 102, 2725–2750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. P. Hallett and T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3508–3576 CrossRef CAS .
T. Welton, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2071–2083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. T. Horváth, Green Chem., 2008, 10, 1024–1028 RSC .
C. M. Rayner, Org. Process Res. Dev., 2007, 11, 121–132 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Kwok, J. R. Bright, M. J. Realff and A. S. Bommarius, BioResources, 2019, 14, 5988–6003 CAS .
Y. Kawamata, T. Yoshikawa, H. Aoki, Y. Koyama, Y. Nakasaka, M. Yoshida and T. Masuda, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 368, 71–78 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sannigrahi, A. J. Ragauskas and S. J. Miller, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 683–689 CrossRef CAS .
A. Romaní, H. A. Ruiz, F. B. Pereira, L. Domingues and J. A. Teixeira, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2013, 52, 14342–14352 CrossRef .
A. Moradbak, P. M. Tahir, A. Z. Mohamed, L. C. Peng and R. Halis, BioResources, 2016, 11, 5994–6005 CrossRef CAS .
M. Oliet, J. Garcia, F. Rodriguez and M. A. Gilarrranz, Chem. Eng. J., 2002, 87, 157–162 CrossRef CAS .
J. Baeza, S. Urizar, N. de Magalhães Erismann, J. Freer, E. Schmidt and N. Durán, Bioresour. Technol., 1991, 37, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
P. Sannigrahi, S. J. Miller and A. J. Ragauskas, Carbohydr. Res., 2010, 345, 965–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Pace, P. Hoyos, L. Castoldi, P. Domínguez De María and A. R. Alcántara, ChemSusChem, 2012, 5, 1369–1379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. M. A. Wan Mahmood, C. Theodoropoulos and M. Gonzalez-Miquel, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 5723–5733 RSC .
T. vom Stein, P. M. Grande, H. Kayser, F. Sibilla, W. Leitner and P. Domínguez de María, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 1772–1777 RSC .
M. Kumar and K. Gayen, Appl. Energy, 2011, 88, 1999–2012 CrossRef CAS .
M. Uyttebroek, W. Van Hecke and K. Vanbroekhoven, Catal. Today, 2015, 239, 7–10 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ndaba, I. Chiyanzu and S. Marx, Biotechnol. Rep., 2015, 8, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Borand and F. Karaosmanoğlu, J. Renewable Sustainable Energy, 2018, 10, 033104 CrossRef .
J. L. Espinoza-Acosta, P. I. Torres-Chávez, E. Carvajal-Millán, B. Ramírez-Wong, L. A. Bello-Pérez and B. Montaño-Leyva, BioResources, 2014, 9, 3660–3687 CrossRef .
A. Brandt, J. Gräsvik, J. P. Hallett and T. Welton, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 550 RSC .
A. Brandt-Talbot, F. J. Gschwend, P. S. Fennell, T. M. Lammens, B. Tan, J. Weale and J. P. Hallett, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 3078–3102 RSC .
N. Sun, M. Rahman, Y. Qin, M. L. Maxim, H. Rodríguez and R. D. Rogers, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 646–655 RSC .
I. Kilpeläinen, H. Xie, A. King, M. Granstrom, S. Heikkinen and D. S. Argyropoulos, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2007, 55, 9142–9148 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Weigand, S. Mostame, A. Brandt-Talbot, T. Welton and J. P. Hallett, Faraday Discuss., 2017, 202, 331–349 RSC .
P. Verdía, A. Brandt, J. P. Hallett, M. J. Ray and T. Welton, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 1617–1627 RSC .
S. H. Lee, T. V. Doherty, R. J. Linhardt and J. S. Dordick, Biotechnol. Bioeng., 2009, 102, 1368–1376 CrossRef CAS .
T. C. Brennan, S. Datta, H. W. Blanch, B. A. Simmons and B. M. Holmes, BioEnergy Res., 2010, 3, 123–133 CrossRef CAS .
M. Moniruzzaman, T. Ono, S. Yusup, S. Chowdhury and M. A. Bustam, J. Energy Technol. Policy, 2013, 3, 144–152 Search PubMed .
D. Diedericks, E. van Rensburg, M. Del Prado García-Aparicio and J. F. Görgens, Biotechnol. Prog., 2012, 28, 76–84 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Olivier-Bourbigou, L. Magna and D. Morvan, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 373, 1–56 CrossRef CAS .
N. Labbé, L. M. Kline, L. Moens, K. Kim, P. C. Kim and D. G. Hayes, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 104, 701–707 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Ninomiya, H. Soda, C. Ogino, K. Takahashi and N. Shimizu, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 128, 188–192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, D. Yan, Q. Li, W. Sun and J. Xing, Bioresour. Technol., 2014, 172, 283–289 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brandt, M. J. Ray, T. Q. To, D. J. Leak, R. J. Murphy and T. Welton, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2489–2499 RSC .
M. K. Alomar, M. Hayyan, M. A. Alsaadi, S. Akib, A. Hayyan and M. A. Hashim, J. Mol. Liq., 2016, 215, 98–103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Francisco, A. Van
Den Bruinhorst and M. C. Kroon, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 2153–2157 RSC .
K. Radošević, M. Cvjetko Bubalo, V. Gaurina Srček, D. Grgas, T. Landeka Dragičević and R. I. Redovniković, Ecotoxicol. Environ. Saf., 2015, 112, 46–53 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Hayyan, M. A. Hashim, A. Hayyan, M. A. Al-Saadi, I. M. AlNashef, M. E. Mirghani and O. K. Saheed, Chemosphere, 2013, 90, 2193–2195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Lobo, B. S. Singh and G. S. Shankarling, Green Chem. Lett. Rev., 2012, 5, 487–533 CrossRef CAS .
G. García, S. Aparicio, R. Ullah and M. Atilhan, Energy Fuels, 2015, 29, 2616–2644 CrossRef .
A. K. Kumar, B. S. Parikh and M. Pravakar, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2016, 23, 9265–9275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, G. J. Witkamp, R. Verpoorte and Y. H. Choi, Anal. Chem., 2013, 85, 6272–6278 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dai, J. van Spronsen, G. J. Witkamp, R. Verpoorte and Y. H. Choi, Anal. Chim. Acta, 2013, 766, 61–68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Skulcova, V. Majova, M. Kohutova, M. Grosik, J. Sima and M. Jablonsky, BioResources, 2017, 12, 6713–6722 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and T. Mu, Green Energy Environ., 2019, 4, 95–115 CrossRef .
T. Suopajärvi, P. Ricci, V. Karvonen, G. Ottolina and H. Liimatainen, Ind. Crops Prod., 2020, 145, 111956 CrossRef .
W. L. Lim, A. A. N. Gunny, F. H. Kasim, I. M. AlNashef and D. Arbain, Cellulose, 2019, 26, 4085–4098 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pan, G. Zhao, C. Ding, B. Wu, Z. Lian and H. Lian, Carbohydr. Polym., 2017, 176, 307–314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Zhang, S. Q. Xia and P. S. Ma, Bioresour. Technol., 2016, 219, 1–5 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zulkefli, E. Abdulmalek and M. B. Abdul Rahman, Renew. Energy, 2017, 107, 36–41 CrossRef CAS .
C. Alvarez-Vasco, R. Ma, M. Quintero, M. Guo, S. Geleynse, K. K. Ramasamy, M. Wolcott and X. Zhang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 5133–5141 RSC .
Z. Chen and C. Wan, Bioresour. Technol., 2018, 250, 532–537 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Jablonský, A. Škulcová, L. Kamenská, M. Vrška and J. Šíma, BioResources, 2015, 10, 8039–8047 Search PubMed .
A. Satlewal, R. Agrawal, S. Bhagia, J. Sangoro and A. J. Ragauskas, Biotechnol. Adv., 2018, 36, 2032–2050 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yu, Y. Yao, J. Yao, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y. Gao and H. Luo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 6019–6024 RSC .
Y. Li, Q. Fu, R. Rojas, M. Yan, M. Lawoko and L. Berglund, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3445–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Collins, Acc. Chem. Res., 2002, 35, 782–790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. W. Shappell, M. A. Vrabel, P. J. Madsen, G. Harrington, L. O. Billey, H. Hakk, G. L. Larsen, E. S. Beach, C. P. Horwitz, K. Ro, P. G. Hunt and T. J. Collins, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 1296–1300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Fan, M. De bruyn, V. L. Budarin, M. J. Gronnow, P. S. Shuttleworth, S. Breeden, D. J. Macquarrie and J. H. Clark, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11728–11731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Chen, T. Li, C. Chen, C. Wang, Y. Liu, W. Kong, D. Liu, B. Jiang, S. He, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–9 Search PubMed .
R. M. Rao, S. Rao and B. K. Sridhara, J. Reinf. Plast. Compos., 2006, 25, 783–795 CrossRef CAS .
E. Marand, K. R. Baker and J. D. Graybeal, Macromolecules, 1992, 25, 2243–2252 CrossRef CAS .
E. T. Thostenson and T. W. Chou, Polym. Compos., 2001, 22, 197–212 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tanrattanakul and D. Jaroendee, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2006, 102, 1059–1070 CrossRef CAS .
V. Tanrattanakul and K. Saetiaw, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2005, 97, 1442–1461 CrossRef CAS .
C. Nightingale and R. J. Day, Composites, Part A, 2002, 33, 1021–1030 CrossRef .
E. T. Thostenson and T. W. Chou, Composites, Part A, 1999, 30, 1055–1071 CrossRef .
R. R. Mishra and A. K. Sharma, Composites, Part A, 2016, 81, 78–97 CrossRef CAS .
F. Jérôme, G. Chatel and K. De Oliveira Vigier, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 3903–3913 RSC .
V. L. Budarin, J. H. Clark, B. A. Lanigan, P. Shuttleworth and D. J. Macquarrie, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 3776–3779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          H. Li, Y. Qu and J. Xu, in Microwave-Assisted Conversion of Lignin, ed. Z. Fang, R. L. Smith Jr. and X. Qi, Springer Netherlands, Dordrecht,  2015, pp. 61–82 Search PubMed .
S. Vongpradubchai and P. Rattanadecho, Chem. Eng. Process., 2009, 48, 997–1003 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hansson and A. L. Antti, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2003, 141, 41–50 CrossRef .
P. Zielonka, E. Gierlik, M. Matejak and K. Dolowy, Holz Roh- Werkst., 1997, 55, 395–398 CrossRef .
J. Dömény, V. Koiš and A. Dejmal, BioResources, 2014, 9, 372–380 CrossRef .
V. Koiš, J. Dömény and J. Tippner, BioResources, 2014, 9, 3025–3037 CrossRef .
G. Torgovnikov and P. Vinden, For. Prod. J., 2009, 59, 84–92 Search PubMed .
M. Gašparík and M. Gaff, BioResources, 2013, 8, 3372–3384 Search PubMed .
B. Ozarska and G. Daian, For. Prod. J., 2010, 60, 64–68 Search PubMed .
P. Larsson Brelid, R. Simonson and P. O. Risman, Holz Roh- Werkst., 1999, 57, 259–263 CrossRef CAS .
G. López, L. A. Basterra, L. Acuña and M. Casado, J. Nondestruct. Eval., 2013, 32, 172–176 CrossRef .
P. K. Kumar, N. V. Raghavendra and B. K. Sridhara, J. Compos. Mater., 2012, 46, 549–556 CrossRef CAS .
D. F. Mora Mendez, S. O. Olaniran, M. Rüggeberg, I. Burgert, H. J. Herrmann and F. K. Wittel, Wood Sci. Technol., 2019, 53, 447–467 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Kamke, Maderas: Cienc. Tecnol., 2006, 8, 83–92 Search PubMed .
R. Brandner, G. Flatscher, A. Ringhofer, G. Schickhofer and A. Thiel, Eur. J. Wood Wood Prod., 2016, 74, 331–351 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, M. Luković, M. Mendoza, C. M. Schlepütz, M. Griffa, B. Xu, S. Gaan, H. Herrmann and I. Burgert, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 5427–5434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, R. G. Kutty, Q. Zheng, V. Eswariah, S. Sreejith and Z. Liu, Small, 2017, 13, 1–6 CAS .
W. Gan, C. Chen, Z. Wang, J. Song, Y. Kuang, S. He, R. Mi, P. B. Sunderland and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–9 Search PubMed .
V. Merk, M. Chanana, T. Keplinger, S. Gaan and I. Burgert, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 1423–1428 RSC .
S. Teng, G. Siegel, W. Wang and A. Tiwari, ECS Solid State Lett., 2014, 3, M25–M28 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cuña, N. Tancredi, J. Bussi, V. Barranco, T. A. Centeno, A. Quevedo and J. M. Rojo, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2014, 161, A1806–A1811 CrossRef .
M. C. Liu, L. B. Kong, P. Zhang, Y. C. Luo and L. Kang, Electrochim. Acta, 2012, 60, 443–448 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, L. Zhang, X. Wang, N. Holm, K. Rajagopalan, F. Chen and S. Ma, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 113, 481–489 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, R. Luo, W. Qiao, S. H. Yoon and I. Mochida, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 1696–1700 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, R. Luo, S. H. Yoon and I. Mochida, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 74–76 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Han, D. Chung, K. Nakabayashi, J. D. Chung, J. Miyawaki and S. H. Yoon, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 213, 432–438 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Adams, A. D. Dysart, R. Esparza, S. Acuña, S. R. Joshi, A. Cox, D. Mulqueen and V. G. Pol, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2016, 55, 8706–8712 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Luo, C. Wang, Y. Li, C. Chen, J. Song, J. Dai, E. M. Hitz, S. Xu, C. Yang, Y. Wang and L. Hu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 3584–3589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Adam, P. Strubel, L. Borchardt, H. Althues, S. Dörfler and S. Kaskel, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 24103–24111 RSC .
C. Schneidermann, C. Kensy, P. Otto, S. Oswald, L. Giebeler, D. Leistenschneider, S. Grätz, S. Dörfler, S. Kaskel and L. Borchardt, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12, 310–319 CrossRef CAS .
C. Luo, H. Zhu, W. Luo, F. Shen, X. Fan, J. Dai, Y. Liang, C. Wang and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 14801–14807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Pang, J. Tang, H. Huang, X. Liang, C. Hart, K. C. Tam and L. F. Nazar, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 6021–6028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Luo, X. Yao, L. Yang, Y. Han, L. Chen, X. Geng, V. Vattipalli, Q. Dong, W. Fan, D. Wang and H. Zhu, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 4318–4326 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, L. Du, J. Luo, H. Tang, Z. Cui, H. Song and S. Liao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 14291–14298 RSC .
S. Xu, S. K. Das and L. A. Archer, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 6656–6660 RSC .
J. Zhou, Y. Gu, P. Fei, W. Mai, Y. Gao, R. Yang, G. Bao and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 3035–3040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Redinger, S. Molesa, S. Yin, R. Farschi and V. Subramanian, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2004, 51, 1978–1983 CrossRef CAS .
J. Vaillancourt, H. Zhang, P. Vasinajindakaw, H. Xia, X. Lu, X. Han, D. C. Janzen, W. S. Shih, C. S. Jones, M. Stroder, M. Y. Chen, H. Subbaraman, R. T. Chen, U. Berger and M. Renn, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 243301 CrossRef .
S. E. Burns, K. Reynolds, W. Reeves, M. Banach, T. Brown, K. Chalmers, N. Cousins, M. Etchells, C. Hayton, K. Jacobs, A. Menon, S. Siddique, P. Too, C. Ramsdale, J. Watts, P. Cain, T. von Werne, J. Mills, C. Curling, H. Sirringhaus, K. Amundson and M. D. McCreary, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2005, 13, 583 CrossRef .
R. Könenkamp, R. C. Word and C. Schlegel, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 85, 6004–6006 CrossRef .
A. Sugimoto, H. Ochi, S. Fujimura, A. Yoshida, T. Miyadera and M. Tsuchida, IEEE J. Sel. Top. Quantum Electron., 2004, 10, 107–114 CrossRef CAS .
G. Gustafsson, Y. Cao, G. M. Treacy, F. Klavetter, N. Colaneri and A. J. Heeger, Nature, 1992, 357, 477–479 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lungenschmied, G. Dennler, H. Neugebauer, S. N. Sariciftci, M. Glatthaar, T. Meyer and A. Meyer, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2007, 91, 379–384 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yakimets, D. MacKerron, P. Giesen, K. J. Kilmartin, M. Goorhuis, E. Meinders and W. A. MacDonald, Adv. Mater. Res., 2010, 93–94, 5–8 CAS .
V. Zardetto, T. M. Brown, A. Reale and A. Di Carlo, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2011, 49, 638–648 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, J. Song, T. Li, A. Gong, Y. Wang, J. Dai, Y. Yao, W. Luo, D. Henderson and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5181–5187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, Q. Fu, R. Rojas, M. Yan, M. Lawoko and L. Berglund, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 3445–3451 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, E. Vasileva, I. Sychugov, S. Popov and L. Berglund, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800059 CrossRef .
S. Fink, Holzforschung, 1992, 46, 403–408 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Q. Fu, S. Yu, M. Yan and L. Berglund, Biomacromolecules, 2016, 17, 1358–1364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, X. Yang, Q. Fu, R. Rojas, M. Yan and L. Berglund, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 1094–1101 RSC .
W. Gan, S. Xiao, L. Gao, R. Gao, J. Li and X. Zhan, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 3855–3862 CrossRef CAS .
T. Zhang, P. Yang, Y. Li, Y. Cao, Y. Zhou, M. Chen, Z. Zhu, W. Chen and X. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 11464–11473 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Tang, L. Fang, Y. Wang, M. Zou and W. Guo, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4344–4353 RSC .
M. D. Sobsey, C. E. Stauber, L. M. Casanova, J. M. Brown and M. A. Elliott, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2008, 42, 4261–4267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Park, K. H. Chu, J. Heo, N. Her, M. Jang, A. Son and Y. Yoon, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 309, 133–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Westerhoff, P. Alvarez, Q. Li, J. Gardea-Torresdey and J. Zimmerman, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2016, 3, 1241–1253 RSC .
N. Mohammed, N. Grishkewich and K. C. Tam, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 623–658 RSC .
M. Vidiella del Blanco, E. J. Fischer and E. Cabane, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 4, 1–8 RSC .
M. S. Boutilier, J. Lee, V. Chambers, V. Venkatesh and R. Karnik, PLoS One, 2014, 9, 11–21 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Xue, K. Liu, Q. Chen, P. Yang, J. Li, T. Ding, J. Duan, B. Qi and J. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15052–15057 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, H. Liu, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, H. Xie, C. Jia, S. Kronthal, X. Xu, S. He and L. Hu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3, 1800055 CrossRef .
C. Jia, Y. Li, Z. Yang, G. Chen, Y. Yao, F. Jiang, Y. Kuang, G. Pastel, H. Xie, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Joule, 2017, 1, 588–599 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang, J. Y. Zhu, B. Yang, J. Xie and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–8 Search PubMed .
T. Li, H. Liu, X. Zhao, G. Chen, J. Dai, G. Pastel, C. Jia, C. Chen, E. Hitz, D. Siddhartha, R. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–8 Search PubMed .
H. Liu, C. Chen, H. Wen, R. Guo, N. A. Williams, B. Wang, F. Chen and L. Hu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18839–18846 RSC .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, S. He, E. M. Hitz, Y. Wang, W. Gan, R. Mi and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–8 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Wicklein, A. Kocjan, G. Salazar-Alvarez, F. Carosio, G. Camino, M. Antonietti and L. Bergström, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 277–283 CrossRef CAS .
T. Borca-Tasciuc, S. Vafaei, D. A. Borca-Tasciuc, B. Q. Wei, R. Vajtai and P. M. Ajayan, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 054309 CrossRef .
J. D. Renteria, S. Ramirez, H. Malekpour, B. Alonso, A. Centeno, A. Zurutuza, A. I. Cocemasov, D. L. Nika and A. A. Balandin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 4664–4672 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guo, J. Wang, Z. Lin, S. Gacek and X. Wang, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 123526 CrossRef .
S. J. Kim, S. H. Ko, K. H. Kang and J. Han, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 297–301 CrossRef CAS .
J. Abraham, K. S. Vasu, C. D. Williams, K. Gopinadhan, Y. Su, C. T. Cherian, J. Dix, E. Prestat, S. J. Haigh, I. V. Grigorieva, P. Carbone, A. K. Geim and R. R. Nair, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 546–550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Siria, P. Poncharal, A. L. Biance, R. Fulcrand, X. Blase, S. T. Purcell and L. Bocquet, Nature, 2013, 494, 455–458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Feng, M. Graf, K. Liu, D. Ovchinnikov, D. Dumcenco, M. Heiranian, V. Nandigana, N. R. Aluru, A. Kis and A. Radenovic, Nature, 2016, 536, 197–200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. A. Baker and S. P. Bird, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2008, 3, 73–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Fan, S. Huh, R. Yan, J. Arnold and P. Yang, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 303–307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, F. Qiu and Z. Lin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1352–1361 RSC .
M. Culebras, C. M. Gómez and A. Cantarero, Materials, 2014, 6, 6701–6732 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Li, X. Zhang, S. D. Lacey, R. Mi, X. Zhao, F. Jiang, J. Song, Z. Liu, G. Chen, J. Dai, Y. Yao, S. Das, R. Yang, R. M. Briber and L. Hu, Nat. Mater., 2019, 18, 608–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Li, S. X. Li, W. Kong, C. Chen, E. Hitz, C. Jia, J. Dai, X. Zhang, R. Briber, Z. Siwy, M. Reed and L. Hu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, 1–7 Search PubMed .
S. C. Joshi and S. K. Bhudolia, J. Compos. Mater., 2014, 48, 3035–3048 CrossRef .
G. Torgovnikov and P. Vinden, For. Prod. J., 2010, 60, 173–182 Search PubMed .
J. D. Moseley and E. K. Woodman, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 5438–5447 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Bermúdez, D. Beneroso, N. Rey-Raap, A. Arenillas and J. A. Menéndez, Chem. Eng. Process., 2015, 95, 1–8 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Illustration of the hierarchical structure of wood: (a) macroscopic view of a wood trunk shows the outer bark, inner bark, vascular cambium, sapwood, heartwood and the pith. These are arranged as distinct concentric bands. (b) The tissue and cell structure visualizes features such as vessels, rays, resin canals, tracheids and fibre clusters, all visible at the microscopic level. The presence of specific features at this length scale can be used to differentiate the type of wood, e.g. the presence of vessel elements is peculiar to hardwood. (c) The ultra-level shows the cell wall structure consisting of the primary and secondary cell walls and the lumen. (d) In the native cell wall, cellulose fibres are packed as microfibril bundles at different levels from which single elementary fibres can be traced. (e) The elementary fibrils are arranged to form a network of interconnected nano-pores. (f) Interspaced crystalline and amorphous regions in the cellulose fibrillar structure. (g) Biochemically, cellulose elementary fibrils are linear beta(1,4)-glucan chains packed together by inter- and intra-hydrogen-bonding networks and van der Waals forces.	 

 	Fig. 2  Basic structural information for a cellulose polymer.	 

 	Fig. 3  Basic structural information for a hemicellulose polymer. (a) Structural aspects of galactoglucomannan in softwood, sugar units: β-D-glucopyranose, HClO2− + ClO2− → HClO + ClO3−-galactopyranose, and β-D-mannopyranose. R = CH3CO or H. (b) Structural aspects of 4-O-methylglucuronoxylan of hardwoods. The backbone consists of β-(1–4)-linked D-xylose units with partial substitution of α-(1–2)-linked 4-O-D-methylglucuronic acids and O-acetylation at some of the C2 and C3 units. (a) is adapted from Sjostrom.40 (b) is adapted from Berglund et al.41	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of the proposed lignin structure of wood: (a) softwood lignin structure showing various linkages; (b) hardwood lignin structure; (c) primary monolignols in the lignin structure. (a) and (c) are reprinted with permission from ACS.42	 

 	Fig. 5  Illustration of the hypothetical network structure of wood components. (a) 3D network structure of wood components. (b) Hypothetical network structure of lignin–carbohydrate connections in wood. (b) is printed with permission from Elsevier.74	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Proposed model of softwood molecular architecture. (b) Model of cell wall component assembly in spruce. Reprinted with permission from Springer Nature.52	 
Lignin + 2ClO2 → Oxidized Lignin + HOCl + ClO2−	(1)
HOCl + H2O ⇌ ClO− + H3O	(2)
ClO2H + H2O ⇌ ClO2− + H3O	(3)
Cl2+H2O ⇌ HOCl + Cl1 + H+	(4)
ClO2 + Olefinic Carbon bonds → ClO˙	(5)
HOCl → HO˙ + Cl˙	(6)
Cl2 → 2Cl˙	(7)
ClO2˙ + Free radical + H2O → ClO3−	(8)
2ClO2˙ + HO− → HClO2 + ClO3−	(9)
HClO2− + ClO2− → HClO + ClO3−	(10)
HClO + 2ClO2H → 2ClO2˙ + H2O + Cl− + H+	(11)
HClO + Lignin → HO− + Organic Chlorine	(12)
Cl2 + Lignin → Cl− + Organic Chlorine	(13)

 	Fig. 7  Mechanism of wood delignification using sodium chlorite.118,119	 

 	Fig. 8  Structure of dioxins formed during chlorine bleaching of wood.	 

 	Fig. 9  Structure of dibenzofuran formed during chlorine bleaching of wood.	 

 	Fig. 10  Oxidation of aromatic lignin structures using peracetic acid.124 The reaction can occur both with phenolic and non-phenolic end groups. However, the reaction rates are different. Side chain cleavage may also occur by oxidation of benzylalchohol structures. Generally delignification with peracetic acid suffers from low efficiency.	 

 	Fig. 11  Cleavage of a phenolic end group with alkaline hydrogen peroxide.124 The hydroxyl ions are produced via one electron or ionic decomposition reaction in alkaline solution. Under equilibrium conditions hydrogen peroxide decomposes at a pH of 11.6, producing hydroxyl and superoxide radicals. The reaction proceeds faster in the presence of transition metal ions and is independent of pH.	 

 	Fig. 12  A selection of reactive functionalization strategies. (a) Cell walls, lumens, and/or pores are grafted directly with monomeric units; (b) cell walls, lumens and or pores are first grafted with initiators onto which monomeric units are grafted to produce polymeric units with longer chains.	 

 	Fig. 13  Some non-reactive functionalization strategies: (a) polymeric materials are infiltrated to fill the lumen. (b) Nano-particles are dispersed in polymeric materials and infiltrated to fill the wood lumen and pore structures. (c) Nano-particles dispersed in salt are precipitated in the wood cell walls. (d) Nano-particles are precipitated in the lumen.	 

 	Fig. 14  Some carbonization strategies for wood-based functional materials. (c) and (d) are reprinted with permission from John Wiley and Sons.191,199	 

 	Fig. 15  An example of surface patterning of wood for functional applications.	 

 	Fig. 16  Conceptual outlook of the cradle-to-grave life cycle impact of modified wood products on health and environmental sustainability. Wood is naturally sustainable with low embodied energy and can be termed a zero or near zero emission material. The pre-processing phase involves harvesting, transportation, machining and drying. It is generally energy intensive but does not alter significantly the macromolecular structure of the wood. The emission and embodied energy status of the wood are barely changed after the pre-processing phase. The hot spot in the cycle is the modification phase because it encompasses the bulk of all input and output variables. Substantial changes in the macromolecular structure of wood is expected during modification. These changes determine the overall status and end-of-life behaviour of the product.164 This calls for a systematic assessment of the modification phase in view of sustainability, health and, environmental impact. Modification of wood should be done in such a way that the product and processes have little or no pollution potential or environmental risk but maintain economic and technological feasibility. Applying the principles of sustainability and green chemistry to the modification phase should regulate the energy/emission and end-of-life status of the wood product.	 

 	Fig. 17  A qualitative assessment of current wood modification processes and materials in relation to sustainability principles. Data for the assessment are based on the literature cited in this article. Each method of wood processing is assessed in terms of the following parameters: energy consumption, amount of hazardous waste released into the environment, water consumption, toxicity of chemicals and solvents, and generation of unwanted chemical structures. Firstly, all published procedures are classified as either high or low (e.g. high or low energy consumption, high or low toxicity etc.) under each of the parameters. The percentage (estimated fraction of all published procedures) of each classification in a particular process is estimated and plotted as colour bars for each parameter. Energy consumption is rated following industrially acceptable conditions and compliance to the principle of ‘design for energy efficiency’. The three most prominent forms of energy used in wood processing are electrical, thermal and mechanical energy. Because, in some cases, energy is converted from one form to another during the process, here we consider the final energy absorbed by the system. Processes conducted under vacuum, high hydraulic pressures, temperatures higher than 100 °C, and/or longer times than 6 hours are rated as high energy consumption processes. Solvents and solutions are assessed based on the CHEM21 solvent selection guide and the overall principles of green chemistry. Problematic solvents are rated as high toxicity. Toxicity of chemicals is assessed based on their GHS acute toxicity levels and the amounts of solutes in the given solution. Chemicals under categories 1–3 are rated as high in toxicity. Procedures capable of generating unwanted structures are classified as high. Finally, procedures that are capable of releasing hazardous gases and effluents are classified as high. It should be noted that the data used are not quantitative and are not statistically analysed. Therefore they may not serve as a yard stick for quality measurement.	 

 	Fig. 18  Copper coordination network in laccase. Numbers in red indicate inter-atomic distances. Laccase depends on the copper atoms to perform catalytic functions. Theoretically, the type I copper is first reduced (withdraws electron from the substrate) by a reducing substrate (lignin) and thereafter transfers the electron to type II and III trinuclear clusters. Upon receiving four electrons, the cluster then supplies them to molecular oxygen to form water.	 

 	Fig. 19  Mode of laccase delignification in the presence of LMS.	 

 	Fig. 20  Supposed mechanism of hot water delignification.284 At high temperatures (above 100 °C), the dense hydrogen bonding network in water is weakened to produce ions which are capable of cleaving glycosidic linkages in the native lignin structure.	 

 	Fig. 21  Mechanism of microwave heating.	 

 	Fig. 22  Microwave–cellulose interaction. Adapted from Fan et al.358	 

 	Fig. 23  Mechanism of IR-heating.	 

 	Fig. 24  Common features in wood structure open avenues for functionalization and sustainable applications. (a) wood tracheid showing the presence of pits and lumen, (b) wood vessel element showing the presence of pits and perforation plates, (c) cellulose microfibre showing the availability of pits and thick cell walls, (d) wood parenchyma cells showing the presence of tiny pits, (e) microscale arrangment of wood components showing the presence of microfibril clusters and nanopores, (f) enlarged wood cell wall structure showing the presence of pits and nanopores, (g) wood cell structure showing the availability of resin canal, vessel and micro-pits and (h) the inner structure of a vessel element showing internal pits and perforation plates. The presence of pits, lumen, vessels, nano- and micro-pores in the structural elements of wood provides opportunities for wood to be modified to impart extended functionalities, including fire and weather resistance. Micro-channels with charged surfaces, nano-pores and cellulose nano-fibrils are beneficial features for multi-phase transport in water-energy devices. The aligned micro-channels and the presence of perforation plates provide possibilities for wood to be used for water purification. The abundant pore structure in the micro- and nano-scales creates air–tissue interfaces which are not convenient for photon transport so that light is mostly scattered and less transmitted. The aligned nano-cellulose fibres and the presence of a hydrogen bonding network in the wood structure are key to developing structurally relevant wood materials. The presence of inter-spaced amorphous and crystalline regions in the cellulose structure is a key to tuning wood heat storage and transmittance. The presence of low-tortuosity pores coupled with the abundant nano-channels between the cellulose nano-fibrils is beneficial for rapid ion transport.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
