MXene in core–shell structures: research progress and future prospects  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA02255A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA02255A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 14247-14272MXene in core–shell structures: research progress and future prospects

        
          
            Charmaine 
            Lamiel
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Iftikhar 
            Hussain
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Olakunle Richard 
            Ogunsakin
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Kaili 
            Zhang
          
        
      *b
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, University of Wyoming, Laramie, WY 82071, USA. E-mail: clamiel@uwyo.edu
bDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong. E-mail: kaizhang@cityu.edu.hk
Received 
      21st March 2022
    , Accepted 25th May 2022First published on 2nd June 2022AbstractMXene is an emerging two-dimensional (2D) material whose properties have been well-evaluated to cater to a wide range of applications. However, there are challenges in using MXenes that may impede their further use, such as aggregation, long shelf-life stability, oxidation, thermal and mechanical properties, etc. Thus, material developments with MXenes have shown great promise in solving these limitations. In this review, the challenges and research progress in the material development of MXenes towards core–shell structures and their applications are addressed. Particularly, the preparation techniques and mechanisms involving the successful attachment of MXenes as a core or shell are evaluated and discussed, along with the discussion of the challenges and solutions that arise from using MXenes. Additionally, key findings, evaluations, and applications of the MXene core–shell in energy storage and conversion are studied and assessed. The review ends with the future direction of utilizing and functionalizing MXenes in core–shell structures in expanding their development toward hybrid core–shell structures for prospective applications.
Introduction
Ever since Yury Gogotsi and his group developed MXene,1 there has been great research interest and progress in the synthesis and application development of MXene.2–5 MXenes are a class of two-dimensional (2D) transition metal carbides, carbonitrides, and nitrides originating from their MAX phases consisting of Mn+1AXn layers, where M is an early transition metal, A is mainly a group IIIA or IVA element, X is C, and/or N, and n = 1, 2, or 3 (ref. 6) (Fig. 1). The extraction of the A-group layers through selective etching results in the retention of an accordion-like morphology, thus resulting in the preservation of few-layer Mn+1Xn which are known as MXenes. As a newly found material, various combinations of MXenes with transition metals to carbides, nitrides, and carbonitrides have been sought in the last decade.7 The blooming research opportunity in developing MXenes not only sought their probable hybrid combinations,8,9 but also aided better functionalities, understanding of their properties, and further evaluations toward suitable applications.10,11 For instance, MXenes have attracted tremendous interest for use in energy storage systems12,13 which have been traditionally explored by using metal-based,14 carbon-based,15 polymer-based,16 and hybrid metal/carbon/polymer-based materials.17,18
 Fig. 1  Periodic table of elements highlighting the components of the MAX phase. 
Scientific studies of electrode materials such as carbon nanotubes, graphene oxide (GO), metal chalcogenides, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), metal phosphides, high-entropy alloys, and layered hydroxides, and their progress in transiting towards hybrid materials and oriented structures have been significant and well investigated throughout the years.19–27 For example, transition metal oxides,28–32 sulfides,33–36 porous carbon,37 GO,38 and reduced GO (rGO) are well-known 2D materials which have been utilized and evaluated in various applications.39–41 2D structures are desirable as they can act as protective shells or coatings, and also act as substrates to further grow nanomaterials.42,43 Aside from these functions, certain 2D structures are admirable for their good functional properties that are needed when preparing nanomaterials, hybrids, or composites. For instance, GO has shown exceptional solubility and stability properties in dispersing in different solvents compared to rGO.44 This makes GO an ideal candidate when preparing hybrid materials using wet-chemical synthesis. Yet GO has poor conductivity compared with rGO.45 Similar to graphene, MXenes offer a 2D structure with superior conductivity as high as 20000 S cm−1 without losing their good water dispersibility.46 However, being 2D materials like graphene, MXenes are also susceptible to aggregation and stacking due to the strong influence of hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces. This may restrict the surface of MXenes from being fully utilized, especially in applications that require efficient interface utilization such as adsorption, catalysis, and energy storage and harvesting systems.47,48 Thus, as part of the advancement in studying MXene, surface modification and functionalization,49 incorporation of bi-functional materials as fillers and spacers,50 application as liquid-like inks,51 and transformation to a 3D structure52,53 are some of the approaches that may ultimately prevent MXene sheet stacking and agglomeration. Fig. 2 summarizes the advantageous properties and various applications as well as the challenges of using MXene.2,46,54
 Fig. 2  Challenges, properties, and applications of MXenes. 
Another challenging property of MXene is its inclination towards oxidation and thermal stability due to the presence of hydroxyl groups which may limit its further use in high-temperature applications. One effective approach is the defect passivation of MXenes with organic/inorganic ligands in preventing oxidation.55 Another effective approach is to coat MXene with an oxidation-resistant material that will safeguard MXenes from coming into contact with air. Core–shell structures promote the effective protection of inner materials by coating them with a secondary functional material while having a synergistic effect which has also shown success in supercapacitors,56 drug-delivery,57 membranes,58etc. There have been reports that MXenes as the core with secondary materials as the protective shell have exhibited better oxidation stability compared to MXene alone.59,60 Other strategies for improving the oxidation and thermal stability of MXene are discussed in the next section. Thus, the emergence of MXenes incorporated as either a core or shell will have great potential towards several applications.
In this paper, we reviewed the challenges, material development, and research progress on MXenes incorporated into core–shell structures. Throughout this review, we have discussed the challenges encountered and the evaluated solutions when using MXenes. The anchoring mechanisms, such as interactions and bond formations, of MXenes adhering to core–shell structures have also been evaluated. Different structures of the core–shell, such as fiber, encapsulated, yolk–shell, hollow, and sandwiched structures, have been discussed. Moreover, the incentives of using MXene in core–shell structures while maintaining its good properties and improving its challenging properties have been evaluated in energy storage and conversion, and other applications. Finally, directions towards addressing challenges and future studies are discussed.
Addressing the challenges of MXene
As summarized in Fig. 2, MXene provides a wide range of properties that can cater to a lot of applications. From their highly conductive nature to having a 2D structure, MXenes have been an ideal candidate for energy storage, catalysis, etc. However, the limitations anchored to MXene, such as stacking and aggregation, also hinder its full utilization in other applications. Even for wet-solution synthesis and preparation of hybrid materials incorporating MXenes, challenges arise to the colloidal suspension and storage of exfoliated MXenes. In this section, we discuss the common challenges encountered with using MXene and evaluate studies that have been providing solutions to address such limitations.
Stacking and aggregation
The common challenge associated with MXene is aggregation. Having a 2D structure like graphene, it is not a secret that MXene tends to self-aggregate due to the presence of strong van der Waals forces.61 The lateral surface area ratio between two precursor materials is essential in determining which kind of core–shell structure may be formed. Even for the 2D structure, for instance, single-layer GO has two fundamental geometries for interaction, edge-to-edge and face-to-face,62 wherein different sizes of sheets play a factor in how they assemble, coagulate, and aggregate.
Ultrasonication has shown great promise in effectively delaminating, separating, and exfoliating MXene sheets, and hindering stable interlayer bonds from forming again.63 Long-time sonication can greatly yield high production and reduce MXene's lateral flake size, but the final product may be more defective and less porous.7,64 Thus, much attention has been focused on this dramatic aspect of MXenes wherein engineering their structures has been investigated. The specific surface areas of 1D and 2D nanostructures are generally larger than those of their zero-dimensional nanoparticle counterparts, which supports applications utilizing large surface areas. For electrode materials, hierarchical structures, such as nanorods,65 nanowires,31 nanoflakes,36 and nanoneedles,66 have played roles in material integrity especially when subjecting the electrodes to long cycle tests.27,67 To avoid aggregation and restacking, preparation techniques to assemble MXenes are shown in Fig. 3 including 3D hierarchical structures,68,69 hybrids and nanoparticle/ion decoration,70–72 and surface functionalization.73 Such a restructuring of MXene may avoid restacking and aggregation by physically placing MXene sheets far from each other, thus utilizing the high surface area of 2D MXene.
 Fig. 3  Structural and functionalization approaches to prevent agglomeration in 2D MXene sheets. 
Thermal and oxidative stability
Another main drawback of MXene is related to its thermal and oxidative stability at a given range of temperatures. In an oxygen-containing atmosphere (Fig. 4a), the thermal stability of a typical MXene, Ti3C2Tx, is divided into three stages.74,75 First, the removal of trapped water molecules in between MXene sheets happens at room temperature to ∼150 °C. Second, the oxidation of MXene to TiO2 and carbon happens at ∼150 to 350 °C. Lastly, above ∼350 °C carbon oxidizes to CO2. Similarly, MXene has a three-stage decomposition under a neutral atmosphere (Fig. 4b). The first stage (room temperature to ∼200 °C) resembles the desorption of the surface hydroxyl groups and water. Second (∼200 °C to ∼400 °C), anatase TiO2 is formed upon reaction of hydroxyl groups on Ti3C2Tx and residual O2 under an argon atmosphere. During the third stage (∼400 °C to ∼900 °C), anatase TiO2 is transformed into rutile TiO2, while Ti3C2Tx is transformed into TiC. Lastly, at temperatures higher than ∼900 °C, –F and –O groups are removed from the surfaces of Ti3C2Tx.
 Fig. 4  Diagram of the transformation of Ti3C2Tx MXenes with the temperature increase in an (a) oxygen-containing and (b) neutral atmosphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry (c) Control factors for preventing oxidation of MXenes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2021, Springer. 
The oxidative degradation of MXene is affected by many factors. For instance, MXene flakes with different lateral sizes are also factored into their lifetime wherein smaller flakes tend to degrade faster than larger flakes.76 The degradation is relative to the more exposed defective sites and compounded exposure of edges for small-sized flakes compared to large flakes.7,77 Iqbal et al.77 evaluated the governing factors affecting the properties of MXene which includes the quality of the parent MAX phase, concentration and type of acid etching agents, mechanical treatments such as ultrasonication, pH, temperature, storage media, etc. For instance, the etchant HF concentration plays a critical role during MAX phase exfoliation, wherein not only Al is etched, but also the inclusion of some Ti atoms takes place.78 In MXenes, atomic defects can occur at both the X site and M site in the form of interstitial, removal or replacement of an atom.79 The strong concentration of HF causes Ti vacancies and defects, which serve as nucleation sites for the oxidation of MXenes. Defective sites are prone to oxidation reactions in the presence of water and/or oxygen, thus, deteriorating and degrading the intrinsic properties of MXenes.11 Similarly, the exposure of such defects to thermal treatment will eventually lead to the different transformations of MXene as shown in Fig. 4a and b. Fig. 4c shows the different approaches to improving the oxidation state of MXenes, wherein a lot of factors have to be considered even at the MAX phase exfoliation stage. The improvement in oxidation stability can also be addressed by passivating the defect using organic and/or inorganic ligands. This strategy blocks the reactivity of water molecules and dissolved oxygen to oxidize MXene sheets.55,80 Another strategy is by incorporating polymers into MXene, which not only improves the oxidation stability but also provides flexibility, high mechanical strength, and suppression of restacking and oxidation of MXene nanosheets.81,82
Exfoliated MXene in a colloidal suspension and its storage
MXenes tend to be hydrophilic due to the presence of water-loving polar surface terminations which makes them easy to prepare in an aqueous solution. Preparing solutions with MXenes is highly important since most of the material preparation includes wet chemical synthesis. However, suspending MXene in aerated aqueous dispersions can initiate the oxidation and degradation of delaminated MXene colloidal solutions.76 Thus, approaches to preparing a stable colloidal suspension containing MXene are explored. For instance, polar solvents showed effectivity in producing stable colloids, with the best MXene dispersion in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidone, N,N-dimethylformamide, propylene carbonate, dimethyl sulfoxide, and ethanol.83 Such stability in polar solvents can withstand aggregation and/or sedimentation of MXene sheets, support a high MXene concentration in colloidal solution, and provide shelf stability over a long time. In order not to expose MXenes to an oxygen-rich environment, storing MXene in sealed containers with argon followed by refrigeration extends the lifetime of MXene colloidal solutions.76 Additionally, the advantage of MXene stored as a colloidal solution is its ease of being redispersed and readiness for processing. On the other hand, under dry conditions, MXenes can maintain their conductivity for three weeks, while a significant drop in conductivity was observed when stored under humid conditions.84
Large-scale synthesis
Synthesis of MXene hugely deals with exfoliation of their MAX phases, wherein high amounts of acids, such as HF and HCl, are essential to selectively remove the reactive group IIIA or IVA elements, and completely oxidize each layer. Thus, exploration of safe, low-cost, and reliable procedures for the large-scale synthesis of MXenes should be carried out. For instance, green synthesis,85 fluorine-free synthesis,86,87 and using low-cost and environmentally friendly precursors88 were some of the methods evaluated to produce MXenes in a shorter time and with high purity, better oxidation properties, and prolonged shelf life. Nevertheless, the consistency and replicability of MXene's admirable properties should be considered when the production is translated into large-scale synthesis.
Mechanical properties and flexibility
The mechanical properties of MXenes are greatly dependent on the terminated functional groups (–O, –F, and –OH) present on their surface (Fig. 5a–c). Surface termination happens during the etching process, wherein the A atoms from the MAX phases are replaced by –O, –F, and –OH functional groups from the aqueous acid solution, resulting in the general formula of Mn+1XnTx, where T represents the terminated functional group.89 For instance, the presence of uniformly terminated –OH groups having an intrinsic dipole moment tends to have an ultra-low work function, compared to –O and –F termination (Fig. 5d).90,91 The work function is related to the performance of efficient field emitters and enhancing the power efficiency of light-emitting diodes and field-effect transistor applications.90 In another case, –O termination suggests a more mechanically stable form of functionalized MXene due to a higher stiffness.92,93 On the other hand, F-terminated Ti2CTx nanosheets can promote proton adsorption kinetics and reduce the charge-transfer resistance, thus increasing its efficiency in electrocatalysis.94,95
 Fig. 5  Top and side views of relaxed structures of (a) bare Ti3C2, (b) Ti3C2F2, and (c) Ti3C2O2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. (d) Work functions of both uniformly and mixed terminated Ti3C2T2 (blue bars) and V2CT2 (orange bars). The error bars on the work-function calculated for the mixed terminations represent the range of values calculated for each individual structure. Note that the work functions of bare Ti3C2 and V2C monolayers are 3.91 eV and 4.60 eV, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2019, American Physical Society (e) Schematic illustration of MXene-based functional films with adjustable properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2014, PNAS. 
Similarly, pristine MXene when used as an aerogel is reported to be too fragile to hold up.96 Even under dry conditions, the aggregation of MXene nanosheets is usually inevitable.73 These challenges, thus, limit the applications of MXenes towards flexible and wearable applications. To approach this challenge, the incorporation of additives, such as polymers,97 graphene,98 and carbon nanotubes,99 to gain flexibility while maintaining the properties of MXene is evaluated. For instance, MXene films are prepared with polymers, poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA), and polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) to evaluate their flexibility and conductivity (Fig. 5e).100 Dried MXene films synthesized from pure Ti3C2Tx resulted in a conductive film (2.4 × 105 S m−1). However, restacking of the sheets were still observed as represented in Fig. 5e. Similarly, Ti3C2Tx exhibited a tensile strength of 22 ± 2 MPa (∼3.3 μm-thick), with a Young's modulus of 3.5 ± 0.01 GPa. With PDDA, flexibility is achieved, yet the conductivity is lowered to ∼2000 S m−1. Meanwhile, by adding 10 wt% PVA, the conductivity was at 2.2 × 104 S m−1, which is comparable to the pristine Ti3C2Tx condition. Under the same condition, the tensile strength improved to 30 ± 3 MPa. Thus, incorporating polymers into MXene as composite films has shown excellent conductivities and flexibility which are admirable for flexible and wearable applications.
Preparation of core–shell structures
The fabrication methods of core–shell structures start with the choice of a core and a shell. One of the most commonly used cores is silica, having a spherical structure that can be evenly coated with a secondary material, such as metal-based materials.101 Core–shell structures have been well evaluated in advanced batteries,102 electrocatalysts,103 pharmaceutical and biomedical applications,104 sensing devices,105 and semiconductors.106 The benefit of engineering porous shells in core–shell structures is to permit free ion access in and out of the core107 that can be utilized in controlled catalytic reactions and targeted drug release activities.108
Due to their flat structure and sheet-like morphology, MXenes are one of the good candidates to be used as shells. For 2D materials such as sheets and flakes which are commonly used for shells, the formation of the core–shell is hypothesized as shown in Fig. 6. Considering a spherical substrate with a large diameter (d) acting as a core, 2D materials with lateral dimensions (l) smaller than the core prioritize covering the surface of the core until it is completely covered (case I, d > l). As a result, alongside the bonding mechanisms and forces involved in adhesion, the 2D sheets or flakes surround the core evenly, thus forming the typical core–shell structure. When the lateral size of 2D materials is in excess of the core's diameter (d < l), it is possible that the spherical structures can be embedded, encapsulated, or sandwiched between large 2D materials (case II). Still, other factors may influence and contribute to the shell or sandwich structure formation such as the concentration of MXene used, lateral size and thinness of MXene, etc.109 Likewise, aside from the typical wet-solution synthesis, hydrothermal method, template-assisted method, and spray drying process, methods of preparation that may induce preferred arrangements are also shown in Table 1. For instance, vacuum filtration was used to sandwich PMMA spheres (diameter of 2–3 μm) in between MXene nanosheets (lateral size of about 4 μm).110 Similarly, a sandwich structured film based on poly(vinylidene fluoride)–MXene/silver nanowire is prepared by vacuum filtration followed by a hot compression method.111 In another example, coaxial electrospinning with a dual-nozzle was deployed to fabricate core–shell MXene/Si@C nanofibers, where Si particles and MXene nanosheets are in the core, wrapped by a robust carbon shell.112Fig. 7 and Table 1 summarize the reported preparation techniques of MXenes in encapsulated core–shell, fiber core–shell, multi-shell, hollow, and sandwich structures.
 Fig. 6  Representative illustration of 2D materials encapsulating a spherical core. 
Table 1 Preparation methods for MXene-based core–shell structures




Structure
Composition of hybrid material
Combinatory preparation techniques
Ref.




Sandwich structured nanocomposite films
Ag-decorated BaTiO3 ceramic nanoparticles
Spin-coating

113



PVDF
Hot-press


MXene


Urchin-like 3D double core–shell
PMMA
Template-assisted method

114



Ti3C2Tx MXene
Hydrothermal method


Ni


1D hierarchical core–shell structure
Co-ZIF carbon nanotubes
Solution immersion

115



Cotton fiber
Solution-phase growth reaction


MXene


Core–shell fiber
Regenerated cellulose graphene oxide
Coaxial wet spinning assembly strategy

116



MXene


Core–shell nanofibers
MXene/Si@C
Coaxial electrospinning

112



Core–shell structure
Fe2O3
Facile ultrasonic spray pyrolysis

117



Carbon
Subsequent selenization process


MXene microspheres


1D/2D interpenetrating network architecture
MXene cellulose
Precipitation

118



Composite
Hydrothermal process


Graphene
Freeze-drying


Sandwich-like nanocomposites
NiFe2O4@SiO2@MXene
Hydrothermal method

119



Stöber process suspension-based preparation


core@shell and sandwich-like particles
Ti3C2Tx@Ni
Electroless plating technique

120



Core–shell
SnO2@MXene
Spray drying process

121



Core–shell
MXene cellulose fibers
Dip-coating

122



Multiple core–shell structure
Polydopamine (PDA) MXene
Dip-coating

123



Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)


Core–shell like delaminated structure composites
Ti3C2Tx polypyrrole (PPy)

In situ polymerization

124



Core–shell spheres
Ti3C2Tx MXene sodium alginate (SA)
Wet-solution mixing

125



Core–shell nanosheets
MXene
Water-based process

126



TiO2


Sandwich intercalation structure
Ti3C2Tx
Vacuum-assisted filtration

127



Fe3O4


PANI


Core–shell structured hybrid nanodots
MXene@carbon
Hydrothermal process

128





 Fig. 7  Summary of preparation techniques for MXenes utilized in core–shell structures. 
Mechanisms involved in anchoring MXenes in core–shell structures
Systematic studies have been conducted to explain the formation and growth of structures attributed to MXene. For instance, controllable atomistic design of 2D carbides and nitrides based on double transition-metal MXenes has been evaluated to bring different behaviors (thermoelectric, mechanical, magnetic, optical, catalytic, or electrochemical).129,130 For two or more structures, the mechanism of MXenes involved in anchoring from one structure to another is of significant importance. It is a common notion that layer-by-layer self-assembly of 2D structures can be governed by driving forces such as electrostatic interaction, hydrogen bonding, coordination bonding, π–π stacking, and hydrophobic interaction.131 Thus, understanding the properties of MXenes and their adhering and bonding capabilities is essential in realizing their placement in core–shell structures.
Electrostatic interactions
Electrostatic interactions are common mechanisms usually generated by the attraction and repulsion between charged molecules. He et al.132 explained the interaction of Ti3C2 MXene in core–shell 2D structures. First, bulk Ti3AlC2 was selectively etched with HF to produce Ti3C2 MXene (Fig. 8a). Then, a Ti3C2 MXene quantum dots (TCQDs) were prepared from Ti3C2 MXene and further functionalized through amino-hydrothermal treatment requiring passivation in ammonia solution followed by the hydrothermal reaction. This treatment produces primary and secondary amine groups through nucleophilic substitution upon the reaction between ammonia and epoxy groups. Coupled with extensive sonication, functionalized TCQDs with a lateral size of 3 nm were successfully prepared. Finally, a TiO2/C3N4/Ti3C2 MXene composite was prepared by electrostatic interactions between the TCQDs on C3N4. The electrostatic potentials were further evaluated using density functional theory to determine the work functions and charge densities between TCQDs and TiO2/C3N4 (Fig. 8b). With C3N4 having a higher Fermi level, C3N4 was compelled to transfer electrons to TCQDs and TiO2 upon satisfying their alignment. This generated an interfacial built-in electric field between C3N4 and TiO2 and between C3N4 and TCQDs. Thus, TCQDs were attached and anchored to TiO2/C3N4 core–shell structures through effective electrostatic interactions.
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of ultrathin Ti3C2 MXene quantum dot (TCQD) anchored TiO2/C3N4 core–shell nanosheets. (b) Electrostatic potentials of the TiO2(101) surface, C3N4(001) surface, and Ti3C2(001) surface along the Z-axis direction. EF and EV refer to the Fermi level and the vacuum energy level, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustrating the fabrication of Ti3C2Tx@polystyrene nanocomposites. (d) Zeta potentials of positively charged polystyrene (PS) microspheres and negatively charged Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. (e) N 1s X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) and (f) Fourier-transform infrared spectra (FTIR) of the composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
Sun et al.133 demonstrated the electrostatic assembly of MXene nanosheets on polystyrene (PS) microspheres (Fig. 8c). The zeta potentials of PS and MXene are shown in Fig. 8d, portraying positively charged PS microspheres and negatively charged Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. At low concentrations of MXene, the assembly of the core–shell structures was mainly driven by electrostatic interaction. As evidenced by the XPS analysis (Fig. 8e), the assigned peak for cationic –N(CH3)3+ from PS microspheres greatly decreased with MXene incorporation, with a new peak emerging at 400.5 eV. This suggests that MXene's electronegative –O and –F groups electrostatically coordinated on PS's –N(CH3)3+, thus neutralizing the functional groups between the two materials. The successful integration of MXene and PS is shown by FTIR (Fig. 8f), where peaks at 3434 and 1630 cm−1 were formed, with a deformation vibration peak of the Ti–O bond found at 550 cm−1. Electrostatic interaction has also been reported in the layer-by-layer self-assembly of quasi-core–shell Ti3C2@NF.134
Hydrogen bonding
The main driving force between MXene sheets is governed by its strong hydrogen bond interactions and van der Waals forces between layers.72 Due to the strong van der Waals forces, MXene is prone to aggregation and restacking which may limit the full exposure of its functional surface.135 Strategies are implemented not only to enhance the interfacial adhesion of MXene but also to improve its overall mechanical properties, such as better tensile strength and stiffness of MXene sheets.136 Thus, hydrogen bonding is utilized to deliver enhanced mechanical performance in MXenes incorporated in hydrogels137 and composites.138,139
For core–shell structures, hydrogen bonding has shown effective anchoring of MXene towards a secondary material. Li et al.140 studied the self-assembly of the core–shell based on graphene and hollow MXene spheres. Initially, Ti3C2Tx/polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) composite spheres were prepared using PMMA spheres and Ti3C2Tx flakes in an aqueous dispersion. Fig. 9a shows the schematic interaction between Ti3C2Tx and PMMA to form composite spheres. After mixing and centrifuging, the interaction involved hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces between PMMA and Ti3C2Tx. This permitted MXenes to portray a spherical structure, ensuring their wrapping around spherical PMMA as a template. GO is then wrapped around Ti3C2Tx/PMMA composite spheres which are also formed through hydrogen bonding. A hollow spherical MXene enclosed with RGO was successfully prepared and remained tightly attached after removing PMMA spheres through vacuum freezing and thermal treatment (Fig. 9b). Zhao et al.141 evaluated the hydrogen bonding formed in self-assembled core–shell polydopamine (PDA)@MXene. The MXene colloidal solution and PDA suspension showed stability in water due to their hydrophilic and electrostatic repulsive properties. When combining MXene colloidal solution with the PDA suspension, aggregates formed and appeared at the bottom of the vial while a clear supernatant was observed, suggesting that MXene and PDA have strong interaction. The well-exfoliated ultrathin MXene sheets had shown a wide range of size distribution ranging from approximately a hundred nanometers to microns. This allowed small-size MXene sheets to form hydrogen bonds on the surface of PDA, forming core–shell microspheres, while large-size sheets linked the core–shell microspheres simultaneously.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Ti3C2Tx spheres and reduced graphene oxide/Ti3C2Tx (RGO/Ti3C2Tx) foam and (b) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the interface structure between the RGO and Ti3C2TX spheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons. 
Covalent bonding
Aside from electrostatic forces and hydrogen bonding, MXene contains metal constituents that can also provide possible bonding formation. Transition metals within MXene, for example, Ti, can share chemical bonds with other materials which can provide stronger and better contact, such as Ti bonding in Ti–O–P,142 and Ti–O–C.143 For instance, the structural formation and encapsulation of SnO2 within a 3D crumpled MXene are shown in Fig. 10a. The SnO2@MXene core–shell was fabricated by employing the capillary force during spray drying. The TEM image of the SnO2@MXene composite shows that SnO2 was tightly captured inside the MXene shell (Fig. 10b). With XPS analysis (Fig. 10c), the O 1s spectra showed four peaks which can be attributed to the Sn–O bond, Ti–O bond, Ti–OH bond, and H2O. Thus, the introduction of covalent bonds from Sn–O–Ti may confirm the possible strong interaction of the SnO2 core and MXene shell.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the SnO2@MXene composite. (b) TEM images and the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of SnO2@MXene. (c) O 1s spectrum of SnO2@MXene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM image of the Ti3C2@Au nanostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. The redox mechanism of HAuCl4 solution with the Ti3C2Tx membrane. (e) XPS spectra of Ti 2p collected for the pristine Ti3C2Tx membrane and (f) XPS spectra of Ti 2p collected for Au@Ti3C2Tx. (g) Schematics of the redox mechanism of HAuCl4 solution with Ti3C2Tx MXene. (h) Optical photograph of the evolution of a HAuCl4 solution droplet on the Ti3C2Tx membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2020, Springer. 
Likewise, the potential redox activity between two metal-containing precursors – one coming from MXene precursor – has also been evaluated for the possible formation of core–shell structures. Wang et al.144 postulated the probable redox reaction between HAuCl4 and MXene (Ti3C2). With the dissolution of HAuCl4, Au3+ is dispersed in the solution and further reduced to gold particles. The gold particles are then deposited on the surface of the Ti3C2 material, thus allowing the incorporation of MXene@Au as a core–shell structure (Fig. 10d). On a similar note, Cheng et al.145 demonstrated the synthesis of noble metals using MXene as a solid reducing agent. Based on the theoretical and experimental analysis, MXene is capable of donating electrons to Au3+, thus further reducing it into metallic Au via in situ redox as shown below:145 3Ti3C2Ox(OH)yFz + δHAuCl4 → 3Ti3C2Ox+δ(OH)y−δFz + δAu + 4δHCl(1)

Fig. 10e and f show the Ti 2p spectra of pristine Ti3C2Tx and Au@Ti3C2Tx, respectively. Based from the Ti 2p spectra, the peak components under C–Ti–O greatly increased for the Au@Ti3C2Tx sample compared to its pristine conditions. The samples were acquired by releasing a droplet of HAuCl4 solution on the surface of the Ti3C2Tx membrane (Fig. 10g–h). Upon checking the high-resolution SEM image, the microstructure of Au anchored on the Ti3C2Tx membrane was revealed, with the characteristic Au(111) recognized when the contact time is over 30 min. A similar redox process on the formation of crystalline Pd on Ti3C2Tx MXene was observed when H2PdCl4 solution was used instead. Thus, the Ti3C2Tx membrane can act as a reductant and form a redox couple between chloroauric acid and MXene.
Hybrid forces
While many core–shell formation mechanisms can be individually attributed to the previously listed attractive forces, formation of MXenes core–shell heterostructures have been adduced to a combination of the attractive forces. Examples of such cases are presented when electrostatic or interfacial interactions result in the formation of heterojunction-induced core–shell heterostructures. Li et al.140 reported both hydrogen bonding and van der Waals forces as the formation mechanisms in the synthesis of a unique hollow and ultralightweight RGO/Ti3C2Tx core–shell microporous foam. Likewise, the heterojunction formed between MoS2 and Ti3C2 MXene nanosheets was attributed to electrostatic forces during the synthesis process.146 A strong interfacial Schottky junction is usually formed when an MXene nanosheet is coupled with a semiconductor and the formation has been ascribed to the attainment of equilibrium/uniformity between the Fermi levels of the semiconductor and MXene.147–149 Although responsible for the formation of the heterostructure, the formed heterojunction also plays a catalytic role by enhancing the performance of the formed device as it has been known to reduce electron–hole recombination and facilitate rapid charge carrier mobility.148–150
MXene in core–shell structures
Core–shell structures are prepared to integrate the structural assets and special properties of two materials. By engineering the structures, an outer shell is made advantageous to deal with the surface interaction, acting as a protective coating utilized in various fields.151,152 For instance, biodegradable and biocompatible polymer shell materials with defined thickness, pores, and degradation properties can act as a barrier and control the release of core compounds containing drugs and antibiotics which have been great assets in the biomedical field.153 In electrodes for energy storage, a hollow structure and void create a space to allow thermal or volumetric expansions caused by continuous ion insertion/de-insertions. For nanomaterial preparation, core materials serve as ‘templates’ for building hierarchical hollow structures.154 Aside from the respective properties of core and shell materials, the synergy between core–shell structures also proves to have exceptional properties compared to their solo counterparts.155,156 In general, core–shell structures are summarized according to their structure and morphology, namely, core–shell, yolk–shell/hollow structures, and sandwiched core–shell structures (Fig. 11).
 Fig. 11  Schematic of types of core–shell structures based on morphology. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
MXene has only been developed in the last decade and the exploitation of MXene in different structures is yet to be discovered. Moreover, due to its demand in the scientific field, some studies incorporate MXene in hybrid composites,157,158 zero to three-dimensional structures,159–162 and hierarchical structures.163,164 Working with a 2D material in engineering core–shell structures may prove to be a difficult task since 2D materials are quite challenging to restructure in nanoscale to microscale models. Nevertheless, 2D MXenes have been explored in core–shell and hollow structures which were further evaluated in various applications, as summarized in Tables 2 and 3. In this section, MXene applied as a core and shell will be discussed, including the challenges and solutions that were encountered during its preparation and further evaluations in applications.
Table 2 MXenes employed as cores and shells in various applicationsa




Hybrid core–shell materials
MXene as core or shell
Application
Key findings from MXene-based core–shell materials
Ref.





a APP – ammonium polyphosphate, AuNPs – Au nanoparticles, CS – chitosan, PAA – polyacrylic acid, PEI – polyethylene polyimide, TPU – thermoplastic polyurethane, pMXene – positively charged MXene sheets, and PTFE – polytetrafluoroethylene.





MXene@graphene oxide coaxial fibers
Core
Assessment of mechanical and electrical properties
• High tensile strength (290 MPa)

166



• Excellent electrical conductivity (2400 S m−1)


• Good temperature resistance (1800 S m−1 with a reduction of about 30% at 100 °C)


• Electromagnetic interference shielding property of 70 dB


MXene–COOH@(PEI/PAA)n@AuNP nanocomposites
Core
Catalytic properties for nitro-compounds
• Good catalytic effect on nitro compounds, such as 2-nitrophenol and 4-nitrophenol

189



• Good catalytic efficiency, stability, and repeatability


Ti3C2@Au
Core
Photoacoustic and computed tomography dual-modal imaging for cancer theranostics
• Improvement in stability and biocompatibility by the thiol modification

190



• Enhancement in optical absorption in the near-infrared region


• No obvious long-term toxicity of the nanocomposites is found at the injected dose


2D MXene–TiO2 core–shell nanosheets
Core
Data-storage medium in memory devices
• Large memory window (>35.2 V)

126



• High programming/erasing current ratio (≈106)


• Low off-current (<1 pA)


• Long retention (>104 s) and cyclic endurance (300 cycles)


Ti3C2@Au
Core
Multimodal imaging and theranostics
• Resistance of Ti3C2 reduced after the formation of the core–shell nanostructure

144



• Core–shell nanostructures showed good long-term stability due to the antioxidation effect of the gold shell nanostructure


APP@CS@Ti3C2Tx
Shell
Flame retardant
• Strong interface interaction with the TPU matrix

191



• Improved thermal stability


• V-0 rating in the UL-94 testing


• Reduction in the total heat release (73.0%) and total smoke release (77.3%)


• Decrease in the total carbon monoxide yield and total carbon dioxide yield by 75.3% and 75.3%, respectively, compared to pure TPU


Polydopamine@MXene
Shell
Photothermal composites for advanced solar-driven seawater desalination
• Achieved a wide-spectrum and highly efficient solar absorption capability

141



MXene–COOH@(PEI/PAA)n
Core
Wastewater treatment
• Adsorption of three kinds of model dyes (safranine T, methylene blue, and neutral red)

192



MXene/Si@C
Core
Anode for lithium-ion batteries
• High capacity, excellent rate performance, high Si utilization efficiency, and high initial coulombic efficiency

112



SnO2@MXene
Shell
Anode for lithium-ion batteries
• High specific capacity and excellent cycling stability

121



• MXene builds a stable protective interface and prevented further consumption of electrolyte


pMXene@PTFE
Core
Lubricating coating additive
• Excellent friction-reduction and wear-resistance properties in dry air, humid air, and vacuum environments

60





Table 3 Core–shell MXenes in energy storage and conversion




MXene-based electrode material and its structure
Applications
Results
Ref.




Sandwich-like chitosan porous carbon spheres/MXene composites
Supercapacitors
• 194.5 F g−1 (1 A g−1)

193



• Energy density of 27.8 W h kg−1 at 500.0 W kg−1 power density


Sandwich-like MXene/polyaniline film
Supercapacitors
• 695.3 mF cm−3 (147.4 F g−1) at 5 mV s−1

194



• 91.2% after 10000 cycles


• Energy density of 53.32 W h L−1 (17.45 W h kg−1) at a power density of 1923.43 W L−1 (1056.87 W kg−1)


Sandwich-like MXene/graphene oxide/nickel–manganese layered double hydroxide nanocomposite
Supercapacitors
• 69.1 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1

195



• ∼94.7% after 4000 cycles


• Specific energy of 55.3 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 800 W kg−1


MXene-wrapped ZnCo2S4 core–shell nanospheres
Supercapacitors
• 75.88 F g−1 at 1 A g−1

196



• 95.41% after 5000 cycles


• Energy density of 30.46 W h kg−1 at a power density of 850 W kg−1


Ni–Co–Fe layered double hydroxide coated on Ti3C2 MXene
Supercapacitors
• 80.2% after 5000 cycles

197



• Energy density of 54.4 W h kg−1 at a power density of 895.1 W kg−1


Sandwich-structured ordered mesoporous polydopamine/MXene hybrids
Lithium-ion batteries
• Capacity: ∼1000 mA h g−1 (50 mA g−1)

198



Carbon-coated three-dimensional MXene/iron selenide balls with a core–shell structure
Potassium-ion batteries
• Capacity: 410 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.1 A g−1

117



• 97% as calculated based on 100 cycles


Carbon additive-free crumpled Ti3C2Tx MXene-encapsulated silicon
Lithium-ion batteries
• 550 mA h gtotal−1 1.7 A gtotal−1 (or 0.5 C-rate)

199



Nanoparticles


Freestanding MXene/Si@C core–shell nanofibers
Lithium-ion batteries
• Capacity: 1083 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1

112



Sandwich-structured MXene@C/polyolefin/MXene@C
Sodium–sulfur batteries
• Capacity: 1159 mA h g−1 at 0.2C

200



• Retention: 95.8% after 650 cycles at 0.5C


Core–shell structured MXene@carbon (MX@C) nanodot hybrids
Water splitting
• Low onset potential of 134 mV and an overpotential of 200 mV at 10 mA cm−2

128



• Depressed Tafel slope of 32 mV dec−1, the lowest charge transfer


3D sandwich structure of NiFe-LDH/MXene
Oxygen evolution reaction
• Overpotential of 286 mV at 10 mA cm−2

201



• Tafel slope of 35 mV dec−1


2D sandwich structure of NiCoP on MXene layers
Water splitting
• Overpotential of 237 mV

202



• Tafel slope of 104 mV dec−1 at 10 mV cm−2


MXenes–Ti3CNCl2@CoS2 core–shell nanostructure
Hydrogen evolution
• Overpotential of 175 mV at 10 mA cm−2




• Tafel slope of 89 mV dec−1




Fiber core–shell structures
The spinning method is a process that can be controlled to prepare structured fibers, such as hollow fibers and coaxial fibers. In both cases, two solutions are utilized wherein for hollow fibers, a sacrificial core is used and is further removed through a second step, while coaxial fibers utilize a core that is deemed to be advantageous and a shell to protect the core material. Seyedin et al.165 developed Ti3C2Tx MXene with polyurethane (PU) stretchable fibers through a coaxial wet-spinning approach in producing sheath/core fibers with pure PU fiber as the inner core and MXene as the outer sheath (Fig. 12a). While pure MXene layer sheaths can be prepared, they suffered from constant cracking, thus, losing their conductive network of fibers. Hence, a mixture of PU/MXene was employed (Fig. 12b) and yielded a good adhesion between the outer shell, MXene/PU, and the inner core, PU. The optimized condition at ≈16.7 wt% of MXene allowed the preservation of high conductivity, good elasticity, a high sensing range, sensitivity, and better stability from deformations of the MXene/PU sheath and PU core coaxial fiber. Even when subjected to stress by applying repeated cyclic stretching–releasing tests, the cyclic strain sensing behavior of the coaxial fibers could sense various applied strain magnitudes of up to 150% (Fig. 12c and d). Thus, the integration of MXene into PU significantly enhanced the mechanical properties compared to pure MXene fibers.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the coaxial fiber spinning approach with an MXene/polyurethane (PU) sheath and PU core. (b) Optical microscopy and SEM image of an MXene/PU coaxial fiber. (c) Electromechanical properties of the MXene/PU coaxial fiber under cyclic stretching–releasing deformation at various applied strains. (d) 20-min sections of ΔR/R0 (e) for 50% and 100% strains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. SEM image of (e) cotton fiber (CF) and (f) MXene@CF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (g) The microstructure of the wood cell wall is made up of one primary and three secondary layers (S1, S2, and S3), with the well-aligned cellulose microfibrils arranged in the S2 layer. (h) Cross-section morphology and (i) energy-dispersive X-ray spectra (EDS) mapping of MXene@GO (MX@GO) fiber. (j) Conductivity of the MXene membrane and MX@GO-1 fiber from room temperature to 100 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright, 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Core–shell 1D fiber structures can also be synthesized through a facile self-assembly process where Wang et al.115 simply put a pre-cleaned cotton fiber (CF) in an MXene suspension. The MXene suspension consisted of few-layered Ti3C2Tx nanosheets initially prepared through selective etching of Al layers from raw Ti3AlC2 and further exfoliating through the ultrasonic process. Hydrophilic MXene nanosheets were then coated and firmly attached to the surface of CF. The pure CF structure (diameter ∼ 5–10 μm) with a coarse surface is shown in Fig. 12e. Upon the attachment of MXene nanosheets, a highly conductive and interconnected MXene shell successfully surrounded the CF (Fig. 12f) thus, preserving a 1D core–shell heterostructure. The MXene shell not only offered high conductivity and enhancement in dielectric loss, but also served as an active site for the further epitaxial growth of Co-ZIF arrays.
One of the challenges that are associated with the use of MXene is its high probability of being oxidized in humid air or aqueous environments.167 Inspired by the structure of wood (Fig. 12g), Chen et al.166 fabricated a coaxial fiber based on MXene@GO (MX@GO). Fig. 12h shows the SEM image of the core–shell MX@GO fiber. The tight layered structures of both MXene and GO showed that no gaps and voids were produced which may improve the mechanical properties of the fiber. By detecting the Ti element through EDS mapping (Fig. 12i), it was guaranteed that Ti, which represents MXene, is securely covered inside the fiber's core. With GO wrapped tightly around MXene, the dense GO sheath inhibits the exposure of MXene sheets to oxidation in air, providing better thermal stability for the MX@GO fiber. For instance, the measured electrical conductivity was 2400 S m−1 at room temperature and maintained its properties up to 70 °C. When the temperature is raised to 100 °C, only 30% of the original conductivity properties have declined compared to the MXene membrane (70% loss) (Fig. 12j). Thus, the combination of MXene@GO fiber has demonstrated better properties, with GO providing a good thermal and mechanical protective coating, and the incorporation of MXene associated with its high electrical conductivity. Other fiber-related fabrications of MXenes have shown successful core–shell and hollow structures such as MXene/Si@C core–shell nanofibers via coaxial electrospinning,112 and a coaxial wet spinning assembly strategy for hollow regenerated cellulose@GO/MXene fiber.116
Encapsulated core–shell particles
Though core–shell morphology is generally prepared using spherical structures prepared by using sphere-shaped templates as cores, such as silica,168 glucose-derived carbon spheres,169 polymers,170etc. MXenes are also effectively employed as cores and even as shells to efficiently integrate their properties for suitable applications (Table 2). In the same manner, the assembly of 2D MXene into a 3D architecture prepared as the core, at the same time, provides a solution for the stacking problems related to MXene.117 The 3D structure allows effective transformation of its high surface area, which is beneficial to applications including better ion diffusion for electrochemical energy storage,171 an efficient electrocatalyst for water splitting,68 a hydrophobic sponge for waste oil collection and purification,172etc.
Yang et al.117 proposed a novel synthetic strategy for converting 2D MXene nanosheets into 3D balls and successfully coated them with iron selenides and carbon by using ultrasonic spray pyrolysis and thermal treatment (Fig. 13a). Initially, colloidal solution droplets containing MXene nanosheets, polystyrene (PS) nanobeads, polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP), and Fe nitrate were processed using spray pyrolysis. With the formation of aerosols coupled with constant heating, the strong inward capillary force was promoted and induced by the rapid evaporation of the solvent, allowing MXene to restructure into 3D balls (MB). Simultaneously, PVP is shoved to the outer region of the dried microspheres due to the phase separation caused by its low melting point. With the presence of high heating temperature, PVP is carbonized alongside the decomposition of PS nanobeads and Fe nitrate (3D Fe2O3@C/MB). After selenization, 3D MXene balls coated with iron selenides and carbon (3D FeSex@C/MB) were formed, with MXene as the core and iron selenides/carbon as the shell (Fig. 13b). The shell thickness was approximately 70 nm and consisted of FeSex nanoparticles rooted in the amorphous carbon matrix. The 3D MXene architectures combined with iron selenides and carbon showed a larger surface area and higher mechanical strength which promoted better ion storage and enhanced the structural robustness when applied as an electrode in potassium-ion batteries.
 Fig. 13  (a) Formation mechanism of 3D balls coated with iron selenides and carbon (FeSex@C/MB) by a facile two-step strategy and their (b) TEM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright, 2022, Springer. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of 2D MXene-derived nanodots (MXDs), carbon quantum dots (CQDs), core–shell structured MXene@carbon (MX@C), and CQD-MXD, and (d) TEM images of MX@C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2020, ACS publications. 
Through a facile hydrothermal process, Nguyen et al.128 prepared N-doped carbon shells directly grown onto the surface of 2D MXene-derived nanodots (MXDs), constructing a core–shell architecture of MX@C nanodot hybrids (Fig. 13c). Initially, MXene (Ti3C2Tx) was converted into MXDs by a hydrothermal reaction in the presence of ammonia. The use of ammonia as a cutting agent allowed us to reduce MXene layers into nanodots. Then, MX@C (Fig. 13d) was prepared using one-pot hydrothermal synthesis with fumaronitrile and the delaminated MXene–ammonia solution, with the MXD as a core and carbon as a shell, providing long-term stability when applied as bifunctional catalysts for solar-assisted water splitting. The strong interaction between the interface of the MX@C core–shell structure was attributed to the chemical interaction with the amine moiety at the edge of MXDs attracting the N-terminal of the carbon precursors, fumaronitrile molecules.
Vu et al.173 prepared a hybrid shell of MXene and rGO assembled on a PMMA bead as a core (Fig. 14a). Few-layered 2D Ti3C2Tx (MXene) nanosheets were initially prepared during etching and exfoliation steps containing ample functional groups (–OH, –O, and –F). Combined with another 2D material, negatively charged MXene and GO assembled on the surface of positively charged PMMA through a series of electrostatic interactions, van der Waals interactions, and hydrogen bonding. The strong interaction between the core–shell structure of the MXGO@PMMA beads was rapidly observed upon precipitation. Likewise, the assembly of MXene on PMMA is evident through the uniform dispersion of Ti, C, and O elements on MXGO@PMMA (Fig. 14b). Even after compression molding, MXrGO@PMMA nanocomposites exhibited improvement in electrical and thermal conductivities and enhancement in electromagnetic interference shielding properties. Hollow-shell porous structures based on CoSe2 microspheres encapsulated by MXene nanosheets were prepared and evaluated by Hong et al.174 Initially, hollow CoSe2 microspheres were prepared by selenization of Co-MOFs as precursors based on the Kirkendall effect. Then, the hollow CoSe2 microspheres were functionalized using poly(diallyldimethylammonium chloride) (PDDA) to induce positive charges. With negatively charged Ti3C2Tx MXene colloidal solution, electrostatic self-assembly was promoted upon its interaction with positively charged CoSe2, allowing the spontaneous assembly of MXene on hollow CoSe2 (CoSe2@MXene hybrids) (Fig. 14c). Fig. 14d shows the TEM images of CoSe2@MXene portraying the tight coating of the MXene layer with a shell thickness of around 5 nm. The interactions between the two components of the core and shell were strengthened by the formation of Co–O–Ti covalent bonds, thus promoting better structural integrity and accelerated electron and ion transport rates which improved its electrochemical performances.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the 3D structure of MXene and rGO-based polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) nanocomposites. (b) SEM/EDX images of the MXGO@PMMA bead. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) Schematic of the preparation and (d) TEM image of CoSe2@MXene hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Yolk–shell and hollow structures
Yolk–shell and hollow structures are unique structures with tailored physicochemical properties which can be applied in versatile applications. Yolk–shell structures are composed of an interior core and a hollow shell, creating a void space in between them. On the other hand, hollow structures are composed of a shell with a defined thickness and lack the core part. Many cases showed the preparation of hollow structures in three steps. First is the preparation of a solid (non-hollow) material as the core. Second, this core is further coated with another material which will serve as a shell. Primarily in these first two steps, it resembles the formation of any core–shell mechanism retaining the two main structures of the core and shell. The core–shell structures are only converted to hollow structures when the core is finally removed as the final step. The fabrication of yolk–shell and hollow nano- and microstructures was detailed in various mechanisms involving the Kirkendall effect, Ostwald ripening, chemical etching and template-mediated approaches, thermal decomposition ion exchange, and galvanic replacement175,176 (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Mechanisms involved in the formation of hollow nano- and microstructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2022, Elsevier. 
It is known that MXenes are highly conductive materials that can be anticipated for electromagnetic shielding performance177 and supercapacitor applications.178 With laminated structures, 2D MXene can behave as a multilevel shield and conductive sheets. Yet restructuring MXene into yolk–shell and hollow structures will require advanced engineering approaches, given that one of the challenges with MXene involves aggregation. It is possible to avoid the aggregation of MXene by employing proper precursors when preparing it for a core–shell structure. For instance, a facile assembling–drying route was used to fabricate a uniform yolk–shell hydrogel core@void@MXene-shell.179 Herein (Fig. 16a), polymerization between poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) and polystyrene was first carried out to produce core–shell PNIPAM@PS microspheres. With cationic PNIPAM@PS microspheres having a positive zeta potential, negatively charged few-layered MXene nanosheets wrapped around the microspheres. The good adhesion between MXene and PNIPAM@PS in the PNIPAM@PS@Ti3C2Tx nanocomposite was driven by combinatory forces including electrostatic force, hydrogen bonds, and the van der Waals forces. When dried in a vacuum, this caused the soft core, PNIPAM, to be shrunk and lost, while mechanically stable PS remained, thus creating a void space in between them. Likewise, MXene remained as a functional shell on top of the supportive PS layer, thus finally forming the yolk–shell PNIPAM@void@PS@Ti3C2Tx microspheres (Fig. 16b). Likewise, it was observed that without PS, MXene would not form spherical structures with PNIPAM due to the inherent collapse of MXene architecture when drying. In the same line, the presence of PNIPAM@void@PS microspheres can reduce the stacking and collapse between MXene nanosheets and show efficient shielding capability from electromagnetic waves.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis and (b) TEM image of the yolk–shell hydrogel-core@void@MXene-shell (PNIPAM@void@PS@Ti3C2Tx) microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEM image of NiMoO4/V2CTx@rGO, (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms, and (e) pore-diameter distributions of NiMoO4/V2CTx@rGO, rGO, and V2CTx. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2021, American chemical society. (f) SEM image of s-MX@rGO-1. (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the s-MX@rGO composite and (h) BET curves of film MXene (f-MX), spherical MXene (s-MX), spherical rGO (s-rGO), and the s-MX@rGO composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Such preparation of MXene hybrid materials while utilizing yolk–shell and hollow structures can minimize the aggregation effect and maximize the surface area. V2AlC MAX powder was used to prepare MXene as the substrate to grow NiMoO4 and rGO.180Fig. 16c shows the resulting yolk–shell NiMoO4/V2CTx@rGO featuring distinct void spaces between the outer shell and the inner core. The preparation of hybrid materials with hollow structures revealed a high surface area (Fig. 16d) and tunable porosity (Fig. 16e) for NiMoO4/V2CTx@rGO, wherein these properties for V2CTx MXene layers and rGO with both 2D structures were compromised by stacking and aggregation. Conductive rGO has also been utilized to cross-link 3D hollow MXene nanospheres (Fig. 16f). First, the delaminated and negatively charged MXene is wrapped around positively charged polystyrene (PS) (Fig. 16g). Then, a GO dispersion was added to the solution, wherein GO adhered to PS@MX through electrostatic adsorption. By high-temperature treatment, the PS template was removed, resulting in s-MX@rGO (Fig. 16f). The importance of such a hierarchical hollow structure was further emphasized by its high surface area (Fig. 16h). By employing PS as a template, spherical structures developed from MXene and rGO were also evaluated. For instance, spherical MXene (s-MX) has a higher surface area of 69.93 m2 g−1 than the film MXene (f-MX) (3.62 m2 g−1). Meanwhile, spherical rGO (s-rGO) has the highest specific area and this property was inherited in samples containing different loadings of rGO (86.48 to 108.80 m2 g−1).
Sandwiched structures
Aside from spherical core–shell and fiber core–shell structures, sandwich structures can be categorized under core–shell architecture. Sandwich-like structures are commonly prepared by placing nanomaterials in between two planar structures. Fig. 17a shows the schematic illustration of MXene flakes decorated with NiFe2O4@SiO2 (NS) nanoparticles, forming a sandwich-like structure.119 Initially, core–shell NS was prepared with NiFe2O4 nanoparticles coated on SiO2via the Stöber process. Then, the prepared core–shell NS was mixed with MXene, anchoring the core–shell nanoparticles to form a 3D conductive network with MXene all the while preventing agglomeration. Fig. 17b shows the magnetic hysteresis loops of NiFe2O4, NS, and NiFe2O4@SiO2@MXene (NSM), with NSM having a lower saturation magnetization and higher coercivity than NiFe2O4. Such formation of heterogeneous structures in NSM resulted in a higher magneto-crystalline anisotropy which intercepts the reversible displacement of ferrite domain walls accounting for inferior thermal stability. In another way, sandwich structures can also be prepared by growing nanomaterials on a 2D flat surface which can effectively widen the interlayer distance between these two flat structures. In an example using the simple impregnation and evaporation method, Fig. 17c shows an SEM image of the layered structure of MXene with each layer loaded with Co3O4 nanoparticles. The EDS elemental mapping (Fig. 17d) shows Ti coming from MXene and Co from Co3O4 nanoparticles homogeneously and evenly dispersed.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of the NiFe2O4@SiO2@MXene (NSM) and (b) magnetic hysteresis loops of pure NiFe2O4, NiFe2O4@SiO2 (NS), and NSM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) SEM image and (d) EDS elemental mapping images of titanium, carbon, oxygen, and cobalt of the sandwich-like Co3O4/MXene (CM) composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (e) Schematic representation of the facile synthesis route of Fe&TiO2@C by the electromagnetic wave heating reaction followed by heat treatment. (f) SEM and (g) TEM images of MXene–MOF hybrids (Fe&TiO2@C composites). Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2020, Springer. 
With MXene containing metal components evenly distributed along with its planar structure, it is also possible to share such metal components to form in situ metal compounds. Engineering techniques are used to prepare nanocomposite derived products from MXene as precursors. For instance, MXene–MOF hybrids were employed to prepare sandwich-like laminated Fe&TiO2@C nanocomposites, wherein Fe and TiO2 nanoparticles were generated in situ into each MXene-derived carbon nanolayer181 (Fig. 17e). During synthesis, Fe3+ ions were absorbed into the layers of Ti3C2Tx. Then, Fe-MOF metal–ligand bonds were formed by coordinating the carboxylate groups of terephthalic acid. Lastly, Fe&TiO2@C nanocomposites with sandwich-like two-dimensional structures were achieved (Fig. 17f and g), with Fe-MOFs decomposing to Fe nanoparticles covered with carbon acquired from the carbonization of the metal–ligand.
Applications of MXenes as a core and shell
With superior properties arising from MXene, incorporation of MXene not only into hybrid materials has been explored but also in creating hierarchical structures such as the core–shell. Such importance is highlighted in Table 2 wherein key findings are acknowledged upon utilizing MXenes as either cores or shells in many applications.
Due to the high demand for MXenes in the scientific field, a lot of core–shell studies have been evaluated in energy storage and conversion. Supercapacitors, batteries, and electrocatalysis have been considered as some of the in-demand studies where MXene is employed. As discussed, MXenes have high conductivity and a large 2D surface area, yet the main drawback is persistent with the stacking challenges associated with MXenes. Thus, MXenes are employed but utilized in an architecture that will aid ions to insert and de-insert freely. For instance, micro-supercapacitors using 1D core–shell conductive bacterial cellulose (BC) at polypyrrole (PPy) (BC@PPy) nanofibers were inserted between MXene nanosheets.183 The insertion technique of adding BC@PPy as a nanospacer was utilized to increase the interlayer spacing between MXene sheets, providing a conductive network between the loose MXene layers. The compacted structure of pure MXene sheets is shown (Fig. 18a) wherein the vacuum-filtrated MXene stacked sheets resulted in a thickness of 8.5 μm. On the other hand, different weight contents from 0–51.6% showed a larger interlayer spacing (Fig. 18c), with the highest MXene/BC@PPy at 51.6% showing a thicker as-formed hybrid film (Fig. 18b). Such hybrid film formation significantly increased the areal capacitance of the MXene/BC@PPy film (388 mF cm−2) which is a 10-fold improvement from the pure MXene film (38 mF cm−2), allowing better ion transport in a widened structure (Fig. 18d). Similarly, sandwich-like MXene–polyaniline hybrids (MX@PANIs) were prepared by polymerizing aniline in situ on MXene sheets184 (Fig. 18e). The hydrophilic surface functional groups of MXene can act as nucleation sites and form strong interactions with nitrogen atoms in the aniline monomer, promoting the viable growth of PANI on its surface. Different mass loadings of aniline monomers in MX@PANI-n (n denoted as 1, 2, or 3 for 100, 200, or 300 μL, respectively) were evaluated for supercapacitor applications. Above all, MX@PANI-2 with an enhanced structure provided better ion accessibility as exhibited by its superior performance compared to pure MXene and pure PANI (Fig. 18f). Likewise, a higher amount of the aniline monomer on MXene may lead to self-polymerization, resulting in a decrease of its performance.
 Fig. 18  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) pure MXene film and (b) MXene/bacterial cellulose (BC)@polypyrrole (PPy) (MXene/BC@PPy) at 51.6%, (c) evolution of the d-spacing, and (d) comparison of CV curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2021, Wiley. (e) Schematic representation of in situ MXene surface-initiated polymerization of aniline and (f) specific capacitances of MXene (Ti3C2Tx), PANI, and MX@PANI-1–3 electrodes at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2021, Wiley. (g) TEM image of the Si p-NS@TNSs composite. (h) Cycling performance of the Si p-NS@TNSs, Si porous nanospheres (Si p-NSs), and MXene nanosheet (TNS) electrodes at 0.2 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. 
A core–shell structured composite was constructed as a stable and high-capacity anode for high-performance LIBs.185 Ti3C2Tx nanosheets (TNSs) are used as conductive shells wrapped tightly on the surface of silicon porous nanospheres (Si p-NSs). The existence of strong Si–O–Ti interaction at the Si–Ti3C2Tx interface reinforced interfacial electron transport and enhanced cycling stability. The core–shell structure of the Si p-NS@TNS composite is shown in Fig. 18g, consisting of a porous spherical core (∼500 nm in diameter) and an ultrathin crumpled shell (∼5 nm in thickness). Additionally, the tight wrapping of TNS around Si p-NSs protected p-NSs from directly coming into contact with the electrolyte and simultaneously accommodated their expansion strain to avoid pulverization/collapse of the Si anode. As a result, the core–shell structure showed better performance (capacity and cycling) compared to MXene nanosheets and Si porous nanospheres (Fig. 18h).
Compared to typical MXenes with Tx surface groups, –F, –O, –OH, and Cl-terminated MXenes have relatively weaker surface bonding energies, making them anchoring sites for further reactions with other active materials.186 Additionally, Cl-terminated MXenes prepared by the molten inorganic salt method involve a low risk from the use of hydrofluoric acid.187 For instance, Jiang et al.188 coupled CoS2 with a Cl-terminated MXene as an electrocatalyst for the hydrogen evolution reaction. The chemical bonding caused by interface-charge transfer formed between the Ti3CNCl2 core and CoS2 shell inherited the rapid charge transfer of the highly conductive Ti3CNCl2 and good catalytic activity of CoS2. The Ti3CNCl2@CoS2 core–shell nanostructure exhibited much better HER activity and a low overpotential of 175 mV than CoS2 (313 mV) and Ti3CNCl2 (478 mV). Moreover, the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA) is proportional to the Cdl, and the Cdl of the Ti3CNCl2@CoS2 core–shell nanostructure (3.52 mF cm−2) is larger than that of pristine CoS2 and Ti3CNCl2. Table 3 summarizes other core–shell-related studies that employed MXene in energy storage and conversion systems.
Future directions in research
For the past few years, research and development have catered to the exploration and applicability of MXene towards other metal–carbon/nitride combinations, and further investigations in various scientific fields. Likewise, tremendous efforts have also been devoted to studying their advantageous properties and determining their vulnerabilities which helps in fully understanding how MXenes work. Core–shell structures have shown effective integration of MXenes, not only to share their beneficial properties but also, to address their limitations. In this review, we first highlighted the efficient assembly and attachment mechanisms of MXenes in core–shell, encapsulated, yolk–shell, hollow, and sandwiched structures. We have also evaluated the encountered limitations of MXenes and the approaches to address these concerns. In summary, challenges arose in the mechanical stability of MXene, particularly, its susceptibility toward oxidation, and the possibility of aggregating and stacking.
Thus, the future direction of utilizing MXenes is summarized below:
• Utilizing metallic elements from MXene to grow secondary compounds in situ. In this case, reforming the structure of the core and shell with stronger interaction/bonds while maintaining the same metal core can be utilized. Like MOFs,203 the metal core may be further used to derive another compound which may have beneficial properties, while maintaining MXene's structure and properties.
• In addressing the aggregation and stacking challenges of MXenes, there are three approaches summarized in Fig. 3. First, the preparation of hierarchical structures is not only limited to core–shell structures but also includes tuning their morphology into 1D, 2D and 3D structures. Encapsulation of integrated electrodes and hierarchical dimensional structures, such as nanoflakes, nanorods, nanowires, etc., using MXene as an outer shell has yet to be discovered. Second, its integration with other materials to enhance its mechanical integrity, oxidation stability, etc. as an outer shell should be investigated. Avenues in using cheap carbon materials, such as coal and biomass,115,204 can be utilized as well. Third, functionalization and surface passivation of MXenes can be researched and experimented to achieve stronger bonds with the core or shell. Likewise, oxygen-bonds to bridge the metal core of MXene towards another metal-containing shell and vice versa can be utilized to form stronger bonds.
• When evaluating MXenes as shells, the edge-to-edge and face-to-face placement of the sheets should be investigated. Ways to control the lateral area of 2D MXene, such as size reduction, can be investigated to allow maximized interface handling when used as a shell.
• Theoretical and computational studies have great opportunities to predict and satisfy experimental studies on core–shell anchorage. This may aid in better understanding and prediction of functional group terminations of MXene shifting towards other chalcogenide and non-oxide/hydroxide/fluoride groups which can be a new avenue for material development.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Donations for Research Projects_RMGS (project number 9229006).
References
M. Naguib, M. Kurtoglu, V. Presser, J. Lu, J. Niu, M. Heon, L. Hultman, Y. Gogotsi and M. W. Barsoum, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 4248–4253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Szuplewska, D. Kulpińska, A. Dybko, M. Chudy, A. M. Jastrzębska, A. Olszyna and Z. Brzózka, Trends Biotechnol., 2020, 38, 264–279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, Z. Wang and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 179–197 CrossRef CAS .
L. Verger, C. Xu, V. Natu, H.-M. Cheng, W. Ren and M. W. Barsoum, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2019, 23, 149–163 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gogotsi and B. Anasori, ACS Nano., 2019, 13(8), 8491–8494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          P. V. Shinde and M. K. Singh, in Fundamentals and Sensing Applications of 2D Materials, Elsevier,  2019, pp. 91–143 Search PubMed .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 1–17 Search PubMed .
A. Rafieerad, A. Amiri, G. L. Sequiera, W. Yan, Y. Chen, A. A. Polycarpou and S. Dhingra, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2100015 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Huang, J. Cui, G. Liu, R. Bi and L. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3448–3456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C. Wyatt, A. Rosenkranz and B. Anasori, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2007973 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Saini, N. Srinivasan, V. Šedajová, M. Majumder, D. P. Dubal, M. Otyepka, R. Zbořil, N. Kurra, R. A. Fischer and K. Jayaramulu, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 18742–18776 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Jiang, N. Kurra, M. Alhabeb, Y. Gogotsi and H. N. Alshareef, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1703043 CrossRef .
U. Alli, K. McCarthy, I.-A. Baragau, N. P. Power, D. J. Morgan, S. Dunn, S. Killian, T. Kennedy and S. Kellici, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 132976 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hussain, S. Sahoo, D. Mohapatra, M. Ahmad, S. Iqbal, M. S. Javed, S. Gu, N. Qin, C. Lamiel and K. Zhang, Appl. Mater. Today, 2022, 26, 101297 CrossRef .
P. Xie, W. Yuan, X. Liu, Y. Peng, Y. Yin, Y. Li and Z. Wu, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 36, 56–76 CrossRef .
M. D. Hager, B. Esser, X. Feng, W. Schuhmann, P. Theato and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, Z. Yin, H. Guo, Z. Wang, G. Yan, Z. Yang, Y. Liu, X. Ji and J. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802878 CrossRef .
H. Peng, J. Raya, F. Richard, W. Baaziz, O. Ersen, A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 19602–19609 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hussain, S. Sahoo, C. Lamiel, T. T. Nguyen, M. Ahmed, C. Xi, S. Iqbal, A. Ali, N. Abbas and M. S. Javed, Energy Storage Mater., 2022, 47, 13–43 CrossRef .
M. Ahmad, I. Hussain, T. Nawaz, Y. Li, X. Chen, S. Ali, M. Imran, X. Ma and K. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2022, 534, 231414 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Tian, Z. Yin, C. Cui, W. Qian and F. Wei, Carbon, 2019, 141, 467–480 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hussain, S. Iqbal, C. Lamiel, A. Alfantazi and K. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 4475–4488 RSC .
I. Hussain, T. Hussain, M. Ahmad, X. Ma, M. S. Javed, C. Lamiel, Y. Chen, R. Ahuja and K. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 8025–8035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hussain, T. Hussain, S. B. Ahmed, T. Kaewmaraya, M. Ahmad, X. Chen, M. S. Javed, C. Lamiel and K. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2021, 513, 230556 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hussain, C. Lamiel, M. Ahmad, Y. Chen, S. Shuang, M. S. Javed, Y. Yang and K. Zhang, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 44, 103405 CrossRef .
I. Hussain, D. Mohapatra, C. Lamiel, M. Ahmad, M. A. Ashraf, Y. Chen, S. Gu, M. S. Javed and K. Zhang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 609, 566–574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lamiel, I. Hussain and J.-J. Shim, Energy, 2017, 140, 901–911 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Javed, T. Najim, I. Hussain, S. Batool, M. Idrees, A. Mehmood, M. Imran, M. A. Assiri, A. Ahmad and S. S. A. Shah, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 25152–25157 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hussain, T. Hussain, C. Lamiel and K. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 480, 228873 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hussain, A. Ali, C. Lamiel, S. G. Mohamed, S. Sahoo and J.-J. Shim, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 3853–3861 RSC .
I. Hussain, T. Hussain, S. Yang, Y. Chen, J. Zhou, X. Ma, N. Abbas, C. Lamiel and K. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 413, 127570 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hussain, J. M. Lee, S. Iqbal, H. S. Kim, S. W. Jang, J. Y. Jung, H. J. An, C. Lamiel, S. G. Mohamed and Y. R. Lee, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 340, 135953 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Javed, T. Najam, I. Hussain, S. S. A. Shah, S. Ibraheem, A. Mahmood, M. Imran, M. A. Assiri and S. H. Siyal, Mater. Lett., 2021, 303, 130478 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hussain, C. Lamiel, S. G. Mohamed, S. Vijayakumar, A. Ali and J.-J. Shim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 71, 250–259 CrossRef CAS .
I. Hussain, D. Mohapatra, G. Dhakal, C. Lamiel, S. G. Mohamed, M. S. Sayed and J.-J. Shim, J. Energy Storage, 2020, 32, 101767 CrossRef .
I. Hussain, D. Mohapatra, G. Dhakal, C. Lamiel, M. S. Sayed, S. Sahoo, S. G. Mohamed, J. S. Kim, Y. R. Lee and J.-J. Shim, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 36, 102408 CrossRef .
S. Khan, M. Ul-Islam, M. Sajjad, I. Hussain, M. Idrees, M. Saeed, M. Imran and M. S. Javed, Energy Fuels, 2022, 36, 2220–2227 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lamiel, D. Tuma and J.-J. Shim, Mater. Res. Bull., 2016, 83, 275–283 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lamiel, C. Roh, C. Kang and J.-J. Shim, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 210, 240–250 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lamiel, Y. R. Lee, M. H. Cho, D. Tuma and J.-J. Shim, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 507, 300–309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhao, P. Bai, W. Du, B. Liu, D. Pan, R. Das, C. Liu and Z. Guo, Carbon, 2020, 170, 302–326 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang, Z. Chen, I. Shakir, Y. Xu and H. Lu, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 951–962 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, D. Deng and X. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606967 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Konios, M. M. Stylianakis, E. Stratakis and E. Kymakis, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 430, 108–112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          E. Jaafar, M. Kashif, S. K. Sahari and Z. Ngaini, Study on Morphological, Optical and Electrical Properties of Graphene Oxide (GO) and Reduced Graphene Oxide, in Materials Science Forum,  2018, vol. 917, pp. 112–116 Search PubMed .
T. S. Mathis, K. Maleski, A. Goad, A. Sarycheva, M. Anayee, A. C. Foucher, K. Hantanasirisakul, C. E. Shuck, E. A. Stach and Y. Gogotsi, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 6420–6429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Rabiee, L. Ge, X. Zhang, S. Hu, M. Li, S. Smart, Z. Zhu, H. Wang and Z. Yuan, Appl. Catal., B, 2021, 298, 120538 CrossRef CAS .
H. Rabiee, X. Zhang, L. Ge, S. Hu, M. Li, S. Smart, Z. Zhu and Z. Yuan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 21670–21681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhou, C. Wu, Y. Wang, A. P. Tomsia, M. Li, E. Saiz, S. Fang, R. H. Baughman, L. Jiang and Q. Cheng, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhu, K. Rajouâ, S. Le Vot, O. Fontaine, P. Simon and F. Favier, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104734 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Zhang, L. McKeon, M. P. Kremer, S.-H. Park, O. Ronan, A. Seral-Ascaso, S. Barwich, C. Ó. Coileáin, N. McEvoy and H. C. Nerl, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Li, M. Liang, H. Wang, X. Wang, Y. Huang, J. Coelho, S. Pinilla, Y. Zhang, F. Qi and V. Nicolosi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2000842 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shang, Z. Lin, C. Qi, X. Liu, P. Li, Y. Tao, Z. Wu, D. Li, P. Simon and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903960 CrossRef .
A. Lipatov, H. Lu, M. Alhabeb, B. Anasori, A. Gruverman, Y. Gogotsi and A. Sinitskii, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat0491 CrossRef PubMed .
V. Natu, J. L. Hart, M. Sokol, H. Chiang, M. L. Taheri and M. W. Barsoum, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 12785–12790 CrossRef .
T. Liu, L. Zhang, W. You and J. Yu, Small, 2018, 14, 1702407 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Yang, Y. Liu, H. Wang, R. Wilson, Y. Hui, L. Yu, D. Wibowo, C. Zhang, A. K. Whittaker and A. P. Middelberg, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 14495–14502 CrossRef .
K. Huang, M. S. Khalaji, F. Yu, X. Xie, T. Zhu, Y. Morsi, Z. Jinzhong and X. Mo, Bioact. Mater., 2021, 6, 2783–2800 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Guo, Y. Fan, L. Wang and W. Jiang, Carbon, 2020, 169, 214–224 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, G. Yang, K. Hou, H. Wang, N. Wang, S. Yang and J. Wang, Carbon, 2021, 184, 12–23 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bao, C. E. Shuck, W. Zhang, X. Guo, Y. Gogotsi and G. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11500–11509 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. J. Cote, F. Kim and J. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 1043–1049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Malaki, A. Maleki and R. S. Varma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 10843–10857 RSC .
J. Halim, S. Kota, M. R. Lukatskaya, M. Naguib, M. Q. Zhao, E. J. Moon, J. Pitock, J. Nanda, S. J. May and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3118–3127 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Javed, M. Imran, M. A. Assiri, I. Hussain, S. Hussain, S. H. Siyal, M. Saleem and S. S. A. Shah, Mater. Lett., 2021, 295, 129838 CrossRef .
I. Hussain, T. Mak and K. Zhang, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 129–141 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lamiel, D. R. Kumar and J.-J. Shim, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 316, 1091–1102 CrossRef CAS .
L. Xiu, Z. Wang, M. Yu, X. Wu and J. Qiu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 8017–8028 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, L. Wang, R. Sa, C. Xu, Z. Li and L. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2022, 9, 204–213 RSC .
L. P. Yu, X. H. Zhou, L. Lu, L. Xu and F. J. Wang, ChemSusChem, 2021, 14, 5079–5111 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. T. Liu, P. Zhang, N. Sun, B. Anasori, Q. Z. Zhu, H. Liu, Y. Gogotsi and B. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707334 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, T. Shang, Y. Deng, Y. Tao and Q. H. Yang, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903077 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. He, J. Wang, B. Wang, X. Wang, X. Zhou, W. Cai, X. Mu, Y. Hou, Y. Hu and L. Song, Composites, Part B, 2019, 179, 107486 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zheng, C. Guo, E. Wang, Z. He, T. Liang, T. Yang and X. Hou, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2021, 8, 2164–2182 RSC .
C. Dall'Agnese, Y. Dall'Agnese, B. Anasori, W. Sugimoto and S. Mori, New J. Chem., 2018, 42, 16446–16450 RSC .
C. J. Zhang, S. Pinilla, N. McEvoy, C. P. Cullen, B. Anasori, E. Long, S.-H. Park, A. Seral-Ascaso, A. Shmeliov and D. Krishnan, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 4848–4856 CrossRef CAS .
A. Iqbal, J. Hong, T. Y. Ko and C. M. Koo, Nano Convergence, 2021, 8, 1–22 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, M.-W. Lin, M. Alhabeb, K. L. Van Aken, Y. Gogotsi, P. R. Kent, K. Xiao and R. R. Unocic, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9193–9200 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cui, Z.-Y. Hu, R. R. Unocic, G. Van Tendeloo and X. Sang, Chin. Chem. Lett., 2021, 32, 339–344 CrossRef CAS .
V. Natu, M. Sokol, L. Verger and M. W. Barsoum, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 27745–27753 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, E. H. Kim, S. Yu, H. Kim, C. Park, S. W. Lee, H. Han, W. Jin, K. Lee and C. E. Lee, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 8940–8952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yang, B. Huang, L. Li, K. Zhang, Y. Li, J. Huang, X. Tang, T. Hu, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, Small Methods, 2020, 4, 2000434 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maleski, V. N. Mochalin and Y. Gogotsi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 1632–1640 CrossRef CAS .
T. Habib, X. Zhao, S. A. Shah, Y. Chen, W. Sun, H. An, J. L. Lutkenhaus, M. Radovic and M. J. Green, npj 2D Mater. Appl., 2019, 3, 1–6 CrossRef .
M. Shen, W. Jiang, K. Liang, S. Zhao, R. Tang, L. Zhang and J. Q. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2021, 133, 27219–27224 CrossRef .
N. Xue, X. Li, L. Han, H. Zhu, X. Zhao, J. Zhuang, Z. Gao and X. Tao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 7960–7967 RSC .
S. Yang, P. Zhang, F. Wang, A. G. Ricciardulli, M. R. Lohe, P. W. Blom and X. Feng, Angew. Chem., 2018, 130, 15717–15721 CrossRef .
S. Jolly, M. P. Paranthaman and M. Naguib, Mater. Today Adv., 2021, 10, 100139 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gholivand, S. Fuladi, Z. Hemmat, A. Salehi-Khojin and F. Khalili-Araghi, J. Appl. Phys., 2019, 126, 065101 CrossRef .
M. Khazaei, M. Arai, T. Sasaki, A. Ranjbar, Y. Liang and S. Yunoki, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 075411 CrossRef .
N. M. Caffrey, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 13520–13530 RSC .
S. I. Yengejeh, S. A. Kazemi, W. Wen and Y. Wang, Mech. Mater., 2021, 160, 103957 CrossRef .
S. A. Kazemi and Y. Wang, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2019, 32, 11LT01 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Li, P. Tuo, J. Xie, X. Zhang, J. Xu, J. Bao, B. Pan and Y. Xie, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 512–518 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ding, J. Zhang, A. Guan, Q. Wang, S. Li, A. M. Al-Enizi, L. Qian, L. Zhang and G. Zheng, Nano Convergence, 2021, 8, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Lu, F. Jia, L. Zhuo, D. Ning, K. Gao and F. Xie, Composites, Part B, 2021, 217, 108853 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-J. Wan, X.-M. Li, P.-L. Zhu, R. Sun, C.-P. Wong and W.-H. Liao, Composites, Part A, 2020, 130, 105764 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yan, C. E. Ren, K. Maleski, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701264 CrossRef .
M. Q. Zhao, C. E. Ren, Z. Ling, M. R. Lukatskaya, C. Zhang, K. L. Van Aken, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 339–345 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Ling, C. E. Ren, M.-Q. Zhao, J. Yang, J. M. Giammarco, J. Qiu, M. W. Barsoum and Y. Gogotsi, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 16676–16681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Jankiewicz, D. Jamiola, J. Choma and M. Jaroniec, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2012, 170, 28–47 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Lu, X. Guo, Y. Luo, Q. Li, R. Zhu and H. Pang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 355, 208–237 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jiang, S. o. Tung, Z. Tang, L. Li, L. Ding, X. Xi, Y. Liu, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 12, 260–276 CrossRef .
F. M. Galogahi, Y. Zhu, H. An and N.-T. Nguyen, J. Sci.: Adv. Mater. Devices, 2020, 5, 417–435 CAS .
P. K. Kalambate, Z. Huang, Y. Li, Y. Shen, M. Xie, Y. Huang and A. K. Srivastava, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2019, 115, 147–161 CrossRef CAS .
J. Van Embden, J. Jasieniak, D. E. Gómez, P. Mulvaney and M. Giersig, Aust. J. Chem., 2007, 60, 457–471 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, I. Lee, J. B. Joo, F. Zaera and Y. Yin, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 1816–1824 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Chiozzi and F. Rossi, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 5090–5105 RSC .
M. Q. Zhao, X. Xie, C. E. Ren, T. Makaryan, B. Anasori, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702410 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Guo, D. Zhou, L. Pang, M. A. Darwish and Z. Shi, Scr. Mater., 2022, 213, 114590 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yang, D.-X. Yan, Y. Li, J. Lei and Z.-M. Li, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 9824–9832 CrossRef CAS .
R. Jiang, H. Yuan, X. Wei, H. Wang, H.-J. Shin, J. Lan, Y. Yu and X. Yang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2021, 5, 8218–8228 RSC .
J. Zhu, D. Wang, Z. Liu, C. M. Leung, J. Chen, M. Zeng, X. Lu, X. Gao and J.-M. Liu, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 19274–19282 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wen, X. Li, R. Zhang, C. Xu, W. You, Z. Liu, B. Zhao and R. Che, ACS Nano, 2021, 1150–1159 Search PubMed .
B. Wang, S. Li, F. Huang, S. Wang, H. Zhang, F. Liu and Q. Liu, Carbon, 2022, 187, 56–66 CrossRef CAS .
L.-X. Liu, W. Chen, H.-B. Zhang, Y. Zhang, P. Tang, D. Li, Z. Deng, L. Ye and Z.-Z. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 430, 133074 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Yang, Y. J. Lee, H. Kang, S.-K. Park and Y. C. Kang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2022, 14, 1–17 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Wu, Y. Xing and L. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 439, 135734 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yuan, M. Zhou and H. Fu, Composites, Part B, 2021, 224, 109178 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hu, S. Li, W. Xu, W. Yu and Y. Zhou, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 29995–30004 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Y. Yan, C. Cheng, W. Zhang, D. Zhou, L. Li, X. Yang, X.-Z. Liao, Z.-F. Ma and Y.-S. He, CrystEngComm, 2021, 23, 368–377 RSC .
S. Anwer, D. Anjum, S. Luo, Y. Abbas, B. Li, S. Iqbal and K. Liao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 126827 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, S. Gao, H. Luo, L. Wang, X. Huang, Z. Guo, X. Lai, L. Lin, R. K. Li and J. Gao, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 406, 126898 CrossRef CAS .
T. Liu, N. Liu, Q. An, Z. Xiao, S. Zhai and Z. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 802, 445–457 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shahzad, M. Nawaz, M. Moztahida, J. Jang, K. Tahir, J. Kim, Y. Lim, V. S. Vassiliadis, S. H. Woo and D. S. Lee, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 368, 400–408 CrossRef CAS .
B. Lyu, Y. Choi, H. Jing, C. Qian, H. Kang, S. Lee and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907633 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, Z. Cheng, L. Xie, X. Hou and C. Fang, Ceram. Int., 2021, 47, 5747–5757 CrossRef CAS .
D. N. Nguyen, G. S. Gund, M. G. Jung, S. H. Roh, J. Park, J. K. Kim and H. S. Park, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 17615–17625 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Sang, Y. Xie, D. E. Yilmaz, R. Lotfi, M. Alhabeb, A. Ostadhossein, B. Anasori, W. Sun, X. Li and K. Xiao, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
A. VahidMohammadi, J. Rosen and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2021, 372, eabf1581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bai, N. Wang and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2021, 2102811 Search PubMed .
F. He, B. Zhu, B. Cheng, J. Yu, W. Ho and W. Macyk, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 119006 CrossRef CAS .
R. Sun, H. B. Zhang, J. Liu, X. Xie, R. Yang, Y. Li, S. Hong and Z. Z. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702807 CrossRef .
Y. Tian, C. Yang, W. Que, Y. He, X. Liu, Y. Luo, X. Yin and L. B. Kong, J. Power Sources, 2017, 369, 78–86 CrossRef CAS .
W. Bao, L. Liu, C. Wang, S. Choi, D. Wang and G. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702485 CrossRef .
J. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Ji, Q. Liu, L. Cheng, K. Guan, M. Zhang, G. Liu, J. Xiong and J. Yang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1801511 CrossRef .
Y.-Z. Zhang, J. K. El-Demellawi, Q. Jiang, G. Ge, H. Liang, K. Lee, X. Dong and H. N. Alshareef, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 7229–7251 RSC .
S. Wan, X. Li, Y. Wang, Y. Chen, X. Xie, R. Yang, A. P. Tomsia, L. Jiang and Q. Cheng, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2020, 117, 27154–27161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Krecker, D. Bukharina, C. B. Hatter, Y. Gogotsi and V. V. Tsukruk, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2004554 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, X. Yin, C. Song, M. Han, H. Xu, W. Duan, L. Cheng and L. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1803938 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, X.-J. Zha, L.-S. Tang, J.-H. Pu, K. Ke, R.-Y. Bao, Z.-y. Liu, M.-B. Yang and W. Yang, Nano Res., 2020, 13, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, H. Liu, B. Cao, Q. Zhu, P. Zhang, X. Zhang, R. Chen, F. Wu and B. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 21766–21773 RSC .
P. Gao, H. Shi, T. Ma, S. Liang, Y. Xia, Z. Xu, S. Wang, C. Min and L. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 51028–51038 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, Q. Wen and J. Qu, Opt. Mater., 2020, 108, 110238 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cheng, T. Hu, M. Hu, C. Li, Y. Liang, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, M. Li, H. Wang and H. Lu, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2020, 40, 119–127 CrossRef .
Z. Yao, H. Sun, H. Sui and X. Liu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2020, 15, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Su, Z. D. Hood, M. Naguib, L. Bai, S. Luo, C. M. Rouleau, I. N. Ivanov, H. Ji, Z. Qin and Z. Wu, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 8138–8149 RSC .
T. Cai, L. Wang, Y. Liu, S. Zhang, W. Dong, H. Chen, X. Yi, J. Yuan, X. Xia and C. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 545–554 CrossRef CAS .
K. Huang, C. Li and X. Meng, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 580, 669–680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Zhao, D. Pan, Q. Liang, M. Zhou, C. Yao, S. Xu and Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 10207–10218 CrossRef CAS .
D. He, C. Zhang, G. Zeng, Y. Yang, D. Huang, L. Wang and H. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117957 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Faro, R. Reis, G. Saglietti, V. Oliveira, S. Zignani, S. Trocino, S. Maisano, E. Ticianelli, N. Hodnik and F. Ruiz-Zepeda, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 220, 98–110 CrossRef .
X. Zhang, Q. Qu, A. Zhou, Y. Wang, J. Zhang, R. Xiong, V. Lenders, B. B. Manshian, D. Hua and S. J. Soenen, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 299, 102568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Xiao, L. Harper, A. R. Kennedy and N. Warrior, Compos. Struct., 2017, 182, 380–390 CrossRef .
L. Zheng, T. Xing, Y. Ouyang, Y. Wang and X. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 298, 630–639 CrossRef CAS .
S. Das, J. Pérez-Ramírez, J. Gong, N. Dewangan, K. Hidajat, B. C. Gates and S. Kawi, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 2937–3004 RSC .
A. Javaid, S. Latif, M. Imran, N. Hussain, M. Bilal and H. M. Iqbal, Chemosphere, 2021, 133062 Search PubMed .
A. Zhang, R. Liu, J. Tian, W. Huang and J. Liu, Chem.–Eur. J., 2020, 26, 6342–6359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Alijani, A. R. Rezk, M. M. Khosravi Farsani, H. Ahmed, J. Halim, P. Reineck, B. J. Murdoch, A. El-Ghazaly, J. Rosen and L. Y. Yeo, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 12099–12108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wu, Z. Liu, J. Wang, T. Shah, P. Liu, Q. Zhang and B. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 130591 CrossRef CAS .
M. Iqbal, J. Fatheema, Q. Noor, M. Rani, M. Mumtaz, R.-K. Zheng, S. A. Khan and S. Rizwan, Mater. Today Chem., 2020, 16, 100271 CrossRef CAS .
F. Song, G. Li, Y. Zhu, Z. Wu, X. Xie and N. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 18538–18559 RSC .
C. Weng, G. Wang, Z. Dai, Y. Pei, L. Liu and Z. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 22804–22812 RSC .
X. Li, Z. Chen, A. Li, Y. Yu, X. Chen and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 48718–48728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Seyedin, S. Uzun, A. Levitt, B. Anasori, G. Dion, Y. Gogotsi and J. M. Razal, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910504 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, J. Jiang, G. Yang, C. Li and Y. Li, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 21325–21333 RSC .
Y. Lee, S. J. Kim, Y.-J. Kim, Y. Lim, Y. Chae, B.-J. Lee, Y.-T. Kim, H. Han, Y. Gogotsi and C. W. Ahn, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 573–581 RSC .
A. Grau-Carbonell, S. Sadighikia, T. A. Welling, R. J. van Dijk-Moes, R. Kotni, M. Bransen, A. van Blaaderen and M. A. van Huis, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2021, 4, 1136–1148 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lamiel, M. Baynosa, D. C. Huynh and J.-J. Shim, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 771, 106–113 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Yu, W.-C. Li, Y.-R. Hu, C.-Y. Ye and A.-H. Lu, Nano Res., 2021, 14, 1565–1573 CrossRef CAS .
G. Tontini, M. Greaves, S. Ghosh, V. Bayram and S. Barg, J. Phys.: Mater., 2020, 3, 022001 CAS .
M. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Zi and W. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 47302–47312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Vu, D. Mani, J.-B. Kim, T.-H. Jeong, S. Park, G. Murali, I. In, J.-C. Won, D. Losic and C.-S. Lim, Composites, Part A, 2021, 149, 106574 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hong, S. Ju, Y. Yang, J. Zheng, G. Xia, Z. Huang, X. Liu and X. Yu, Sustainable Energy Fuels, 2020, 4, 2352–2362 RSC .
I. Hussain, S. Sahoo, M. S. Sayed, M. Ahmad, M. S. Javed, C. Lamiel, Y. Li, J.-J. Shim, X. Ma and K. Zhang, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 458, 214429 CrossRef CAS .
R. Cai, Y. Si, B. You, M. Chen and L. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 28738–28749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Shahzad, M. Alhabeb, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, S. Man Hong, C. M. Koo and Y. Gogotsi, Science, 2016, 353, 1137–1140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Pacchioni, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2019, 4, 625 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, X. Ni, Y. Lei, S. Li, L. Jin and B. You, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 26839–26851 RSC .
T. Chen, C. Xiang, Y. Zou, F. Xu and L. Sun, Energy Fuels, 2021, 35, 10250–10261 CrossRef CAS .
B. Deng, Z. Xiang, J. Xiong, Z. Liu, L. Yu and W. Lu, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 1–16 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Liu, R. Luo, Y. Li, J. Qi, C. Wang, J. Li, X. Sun and L. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 347, 731–740 CrossRef CAS .
W. Cheng, J. Fu, H. Hu and D. Ho, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2100775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Seenath and B. P. Biswal, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 2101263 CrossRef CAS .
M. Xia, B. Chen, F. Gu, L. Zu, M. Xu, Y. Feng, Z. Wang, H. Zhang, C. Zhang and J. Yang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 5111–5120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Liu, Z. Zhang, J. Jiang, C. Tian, X. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Zhang, X. Wu, Y. Zheng and J. Liang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 432, 134382 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, J. Lu, K. Luo, Y. Li, K. Chang, K. Chen, J. Zhou, J. Rosen, L. Hultman and P. Eklund, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 4730–4737 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, S. Bai, M. Yang, J. Zou, N. Li, J. Peng, H. Wang, K. Xiang, S. Liu and T. Zhai, Nano Res., 2022, 1–10 Search PubMed .
K. Li, T. Jiao, R. Xing, G. Zou, Q. Zhao, J. Zhou, L. Zhang and Q. Peng, Green Energy Environ., 2018, 3, 147–155 CrossRef .
W. Tang, Z. Dong, R. Zhang, X. Yi, K. Yang, M. Jin, C. Yuan, Z. Xiao, Z. Liu and L. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2018, 13, 284–294 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Liu, A. Yao, K. Chen, Y. Shi, Y. Feng, P. Zhang, F. Yang, M. Liu and Z. Chen, Composites, Part B, 2021, 226, 109363 CrossRef CAS .
K. Li, G. Zou, T. Jiao, R. Xing, L. Zhang, J. Zhou, Q. Zhang and Q. Peng, Colloids Surf., A, 2018, 553, 105–113 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, W. Deng, S. Li, Z. Wu, J. Cai and J. Luo, J. Bioresour. Bioprod., 2022, 7, 63–72 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, S. Wang, Y. Cui, X. Wang, Z. Yong, D. Liang, Y. Chi and Z. Wang, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2022, 620, 35–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Chen, J. Chen, X. Tan, W. Yang, H. Zou and S. Chen, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 44, 103456 CrossRef .
J.-Q. Qi, C.-C. Zhang, H. Liu, L. Zhu, Y.-W. Sui, X.-J. Feng, W.-Q. Wei, H. Zhang and P. Cao, Rare Met., 2022, 1–12 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, Y. Ren, H. Zhang, J. Qi, Y. Sui and F. Wei, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2021, 562, 150116 CrossRef CAS .
T. Li, B. Ding, J. Wang, Z. Qin, J. F. Fernando, Y. Bando, A. K. Nanjundan, Y. V. Kaneti, D. Golberg and Y. Yamauchi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 14993–15001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sarang, X. Zhao, D. Holta, H. Cao, K. Arole, P. Flouda, E.-S. Oh, M. Radovic, M. J. Green and J. L. Lutkenhaus, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2021, 4, 10762–10773 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, K. Wu, J. Cui, X. Fang, J. Li and N. Zheng, Small, 2022, 2106983 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Chen, Q. Long, K. Xiao, T. Ouyang, N. Li, S. Ye and Z.-Q. Liu, Sci. Bull., 2021, 66, 1063–1072 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Yue, J. Sun, S. Chen, Y. Zhou, H. Li, Y. Chen, R. Zhang, G. Wei and Y. Kang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18570–18577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hussain, S. Iqbal, T. Hussain, W. L. Cheung, S. A. Khan, J. Zhou, M. Ahmad, S. A. Khan, C. Lamiel, M. Imran, A. AlFantazi and K. Zhang, Mater. Today Phys., 2022, 100655,  DOI:10.1016/j.mtphys.2022.100655 .
O. R. Ogunsakin, S. Holberg, X. Wang, A. Goroncy, J. Adams and P. Johnson, Fuel, 2022, 308, 121989 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Periodic table of elements highlighting the components of the MAX phase.	 

 	Fig. 2  Challenges, properties, and applications of MXenes.	 

 	Fig. 3  Structural and functionalization approaches to prevent agglomeration in 2D MXene sheets.	 

 	Fig. 4  Diagram of the transformation of Ti3C2Tx MXenes with the temperature increase in an (a) oxygen-containing and (b) neutral atmosphere. Reproduced with permission from ref. 74 Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry (c) Control factors for preventing oxidation of MXenes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 77. Copyright 2021, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 5  Top and side views of relaxed structures of (a) bare Ti3C2, (b) Ti3C2F2, and (c) Ti3C2O2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. (d) Work functions of both uniformly and mixed terminated Ti3C2T2 (blue bars) and V2CT2 (orange bars). The error bars on the work-function calculated for the mixed terminations represent the range of values calculated for each individual structure. Note that the work functions of bare Ti3C2 and V2C monolayers are 3.91 eV and 4.60 eV, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2019, American Physical Society (e) Schematic illustration of MXene-based functional films with adjustable properties. Reproduced with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2014, PNAS.	 

 	Fig. 6  Representative illustration of 2D materials encapsulating a spherical core.	 

Sandwich structured nanocomposite films	Ag-decorated BaTiO3 ceramic nanoparticles	Spin-coating	
113

PVDF	Hot-press
MXene
Urchin-like 3D double core–shell	PMMA	Template-assisted method	
114

Ti3C2Tx MXene	Hydrothermal method
Ni
1D hierarchical core–shell structure	Co-ZIF carbon nanotubes	Solution immersion	
115

Cotton fiber	Solution-phase growth reaction
MXene
Core–shell fiber	Regenerated cellulose graphene oxide	Coaxial wet spinning assembly strategy	
116

MXene
Core–shell nanofibers	MXene/Si@C	Coaxial electrospinning	
112

Core–shell structure	Fe2O3	Facile ultrasonic spray pyrolysis	
117

Carbon	Subsequent selenization process
MXene microspheres
1D/2D interpenetrating network architecture	MXene cellulose	Precipitation	
118

Composite	Hydrothermal process
Graphene	Freeze-drying
Sandwich-like nanocomposites	NiFe2O4@SiO2@MXene	Hydrothermal method	
119

Stöber process suspension-based preparation
core@shell and sandwich-like particles	Ti3C2Tx@Ni	Electroless plating technique	
120

Core–shell	SnO2@MXene	Spray drying process	
121

Core–shell	MXene cellulose fibers	Dip-coating	
122

Multiple core–shell structure	Polydopamine (PDA) MXene	Dip-coating	
123

Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
Core–shell like delaminated structure composites	Ti3C2Tx polypyrrole (PPy)	
In situ polymerization	
124

Core–shell spheres	Ti3C2Tx MXene sodium alginate (SA)	Wet-solution mixing	
125

Core–shell nanosheets	MXene	Water-based process	
126

TiO2
Sandwich intercalation structure	Ti3C2Tx	Vacuum-assisted filtration	
127

Fe3O4
PANI
Core–shell structured hybrid nanodots	MXene@carbon	Hydrothermal process	
128


 	Fig. 7  Summary of preparation techniques for MXenes utilized in core–shell structures.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of ultrathin Ti3C2 MXene quantum dot (TCQD) anchored TiO2/C3N4 core–shell nanosheets. (b) Electrostatic potentials of the TiO2(101) surface, C3N4(001) surface, and Ti3C2(001) surface along the Z-axis direction. EF and EV refer to the Fermi level and the vacuum energy level, respectively. Reproduced with permission from ref. 132. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustrating the fabrication of Ti3C2Tx@polystyrene nanocomposites. (d) Zeta potentials of positively charged polystyrene (PS) microspheres and negatively charged Ti3C2Tx nanosheets. (e) N 1s X-ray photoelectron spectra (XPS) and (f) Fourier-transform infrared spectra (FTIR) of the composites. Reproduced with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation of the Ti3C2Tx spheres and reduced graphene oxide/Ti3C2Tx (RGO/Ti3C2Tx) foam and (b) transmission electron microscopy (TEM) image of the interface structure between the RGO and Ti3C2TX spheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017, John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the preparation process of the SnO2@MXene composite. (b) TEM images and the selected area electron diffraction (SAED) pattern of SnO2@MXene. (c) O 1s spectrum of SnO2@MXene. Reproduced with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) TEM image of the Ti3C2@Au nanostructure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. The redox mechanism of HAuCl4 solution with the Ti3C2Tx membrane. (e) XPS spectra of Ti 2p collected for the pristine Ti3C2Tx membrane and (f) XPS spectra of Ti 2p collected for Au@Ti3C2Tx. (g) Schematics of the redox mechanism of HAuCl4 solution with Ti3C2Tx MXene. (h) Optical photograph of the evolution of a HAuCl4 solution droplet on the Ti3C2Tx membrane. Reproduced with permission from ref. 145. Copyright 2020, Springer.	 
3Ti3C2Ox(OH)yFz + δHAuCl4 → 3Ti3C2Ox+δ(OH)y−δFz + δAu + 4δHCl	(1)

 	Fig. 11  Schematic of types of core–shell structures based on morphology. Reproduced with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 


MXene@graphene oxide coaxial fibers	Core	Assessment of mechanical and electrical properties	• High tensile strength (290 MPa)	
166

• Excellent electrical conductivity (2400 S m−1)
• Good temperature resistance (1800 S m−1 with a reduction of about 30% at 100 °C)
• Electromagnetic interference shielding property of 70 dB
MXene–COOH@(PEI/PAA)n@AuNP nanocomposites	Core	Catalytic properties for nitro-compounds	• Good catalytic effect on nitro compounds, such as 2-nitrophenol and 4-nitrophenol	
189

• Good catalytic efficiency, stability, and repeatability
Ti3C2@Au	Core	Photoacoustic and computed tomography dual-modal imaging for cancer theranostics	• Improvement in stability and biocompatibility by the thiol modification	
190

• Enhancement in optical absorption in the near-infrared region
• No obvious long-term toxicity of the nanocomposites is found at the injected dose
2D MXene–TiO2 core–shell nanosheets	Core	Data-storage medium in memory devices	• Large memory window (>35.2 V)	
126

• High programming/erasing current ratio (≈106)
• Low off-current (<1 pA)
• Long retention (>104 s) and cyclic endurance (300 cycles)
Ti3C2@Au	Core	Multimodal imaging and theranostics	• Resistance of Ti3C2 reduced after the formation of the core–shell nanostructure	
144

• Core–shell nanostructures showed good long-term stability due to the antioxidation effect of the gold shell nanostructure
APP@CS@Ti3C2Tx	Shell	Flame retardant	• Strong interface interaction with the TPU matrix	
191

• Improved thermal stability
• V-0 rating in the UL-94 testing
• Reduction in the total heat release (73.0%) and total smoke release (77.3%)
• Decrease in the total carbon monoxide yield and total carbon dioxide yield by 75.3% and 75.3%, respectively, compared to pure TPU
Polydopamine@MXene	Shell	Photothermal composites for advanced solar-driven seawater desalination	• Achieved a wide-spectrum and highly efficient solar absorption capability	
141

MXene–COOH@(PEI/PAA)n	Core	Wastewater treatment	• Adsorption of three kinds of model dyes (safranine T, methylene blue, and neutral red)	
192

MXene/Si@C	Core	Anode for lithium-ion batteries	• High capacity, excellent rate performance, high Si utilization efficiency, and high initial coulombic efficiency	
112

SnO2@MXene	Shell	Anode for lithium-ion batteries	• High specific capacity and excellent cycling stability	
121

• MXene builds a stable protective interface and prevented further consumption of electrolyte
pMXene@PTFE	Core	Lubricating coating additive	• Excellent friction-reduction and wear-resistance properties in dry air, humid air, and vacuum environments	
60


Sandwich-like chitosan porous carbon spheres/MXene composites	Supercapacitors	• 194.5 F g−1 (1 A g−1)	
193

• Energy density of 27.8 W h kg−1 at 500.0 W kg−1 power density
Sandwich-like MXene/polyaniline film	Supercapacitors	• 695.3 mF cm−3 (147.4 F g−1) at 5 mV s−1	
194

• 91.2% after 10000 cycles
• Energy density of 53.32 W h L−1 (17.45 W h kg−1) at a power density of 1923.43 W L−1 (1056.87 W kg−1)
Sandwich-like MXene/graphene oxide/nickel–manganese layered double hydroxide nanocomposite	Supercapacitors	• 69.1 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1	
195

• ∼94.7% after 4000 cycles
• Specific energy of 55.3 W h kg−1 at a specific power of 800 W kg−1
MXene-wrapped ZnCo2S4 core–shell nanospheres	Supercapacitors	• 75.88 F g−1 at 1 A g−1	
196

• 95.41% after 5000 cycles
• Energy density of 30.46 W h kg−1 at a power density of 850 W kg−1
Ni–Co–Fe layered double hydroxide coated on Ti3C2 MXene	Supercapacitors	• 80.2% after 5000 cycles	
197

• Energy density of 54.4 W h kg−1 at a power density of 895.1 W kg−1
Sandwich-structured ordered mesoporous polydopamine/MXene hybrids	Lithium-ion batteries	• Capacity: ∼1000 mA h g−1 (50 mA g−1)	
198

Carbon-coated three-dimensional MXene/iron selenide balls with a core–shell structure	Potassium-ion batteries	• Capacity: 410 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 0.1 A g−1	
117

• 97% as calculated based on 100 cycles
Carbon additive-free crumpled Ti3C2Tx MXene-encapsulated silicon	Lithium-ion batteries	• 550 mA h gtotal−1 1.7 A gtotal−1 (or 0.5 C-rate)	
199

Nanoparticles
Freestanding MXene/Si@C core–shell nanofibers	Lithium-ion batteries	• Capacity: 1083 mA h g−1 at 0.1 A g−1	
112

Sandwich-structured MXene@C/polyolefin/MXene@C	Sodium–sulfur batteries	• Capacity: 1159 mA h g−1 at 0.2C	
200

• Retention: 95.8% after 650 cycles at 0.5C
Core–shell structured MXene@carbon (MX@C) nanodot hybrids	Water splitting	• Low onset potential of 134 mV and an overpotential of 200 mV at 10 mA cm−2	
128

• Depressed Tafel slope of 32 mV dec−1, the lowest charge transfer
3D sandwich structure of NiFe-LDH/MXene	Oxygen evolution reaction	• Overpotential of 286 mV at 10 mA cm−2	
201

• Tafel slope of 35 mV dec−1
2D sandwich structure of NiCoP on MXene layers	Water splitting	• Overpotential of 237 mV	
202

• Tafel slope of 104 mV dec−1 at 10 mV cm−2
MXenes–Ti3CNCl2@CoS2 core–shell nanostructure	Hydrogen evolution	• Overpotential of 175 mV at 10 mA cm−2	

• Tafel slope of 89 mV dec−1

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the coaxial fiber spinning approach with an MXene/polyurethane (PU) sheath and PU core. (b) Optical microscopy and SEM image of an MXene/PU coaxial fiber. (c) Electromechanical properties of the MXene/PU coaxial fiber under cyclic stretching–releasing deformation at various applied strains. (d) 20-min sections of ΔR/R0 (e) for 50% and 100% strains. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, John Wiley and Sons. SEM image of (e) cotton fiber (CF) and (f) MXene@CF. Reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (g) The microstructure of the wood cell wall is made up of one primary and three secondary layers (S1, S2, and S3), with the well-aligned cellulose microfibrils arranged in the S2 layer. (h) Cross-section morphology and (i) energy-dispersive X-ray spectra (EDS) mapping of MXene@GO (MX@GO) fiber. (j) Conductivity of the MXene membrane and MX@GO-1 fiber from room temperature to 100 °C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright, 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Formation mechanism of 3D balls coated with iron selenides and carbon (FeSex@C/MB) by a facile two-step strategy and their (b) TEM image. Reproduced with permission from ref. 117. Copyright, 2022, Springer. (c) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of 2D MXene-derived nanodots (MXDs), carbon quantum dots (CQDs), core–shell structured MXene@carbon (MX@C), and CQD-MXD, and (d) TEM images of MX@C. Reproduced with permission from ref. 128. Copyright 2020, ACS publications.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of the 3D structure of MXene and rGO-based polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA) nanocomposites. (b) SEM/EDX images of the MXGO@PMMA bead. Reproduced with permission from ref. 173. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) Schematic of the preparation and (d) TEM image of CoSe2@MXene hybrids. Reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 15  Mechanisms involved in the formation of hollow nano- and microstructures. Reproduced with permission from ref. 175. Copyright 2022, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthesis and (b) TEM image of the yolk–shell hydrogel-core@void@MXene-shell (PNIPAM@void@PS@Ti3C2Tx) microspheres. Reproduced with permission from ref. 179. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) TEM image of NiMoO4/V2CTx@rGO, (d) N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms, and (e) pore-diameter distributions of NiMoO4/V2CTx@rGO, rGO, and V2CTx. Reproduced with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2021, American chemical society. (f) SEM image of s-MX@rGO-1. (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the s-MX@rGO composite and (h) BET curves of film MXene (f-MX), spherical MXene (s-MX), spherical rGO (s-rGO), and the s-MX@rGO composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. Copyright 2021, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic diagram of the synthesis process of the NiFe2O4@SiO2@MXene (NSM) and (b) magnetic hysteresis loops of pure NiFe2O4, NiFe2O4@SiO2 (NS), and NSM. Reproduced with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. (c) SEM image and (d) EDS elemental mapping images of titanium, carbon, oxygen, and cobalt of the sandwich-like Co3O4/MXene (CM) composite. Reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (e) Schematic representation of the facile synthesis route of Fe&TiO2@C by the electromagnetic wave heating reaction followed by heat treatment. (f) SEM and (g) TEM images of MXene–MOF hybrids (Fe&TiO2@C composites). Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2020, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 18  Cross-sectional SEM images of (a) pure MXene film and (b) MXene/bacterial cellulose (BC)@polypyrrole (PPy) (MXene/BC@PPy) at 51.6%, (c) evolution of the d-spacing, and (d) comparison of CV curves. Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2021, Wiley. (e) Schematic representation of in situ MXene surface-initiated polymerization of aniline and (f) specific capacitances of MXene (Ti3C2Tx), PANI, and MX@PANI-1–3 electrodes at various current densities. Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2021, Wiley. (g) TEM image of the Si p-NS@TNSs composite. (h) Cycling performance of the Si p-NS@TNSs, Si porous nanospheres (Si p-NSs), and MXene nanosheet (TNS) electrodes at 0.2 A g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
