Surface-supported metal–organic framework thin films: fabrication methods, applications, and challenges  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7CS00315C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7CS00315C
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 5730-5770Surface-supported metal–organic framework thin films: fabrication methods, applications, and challenges

        
          
            Jinxuan 
            Liu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Christof 
            Wöll
          
          
        
      *b
aState Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Institute of Artificial Photosynthesis, Dalian University of Technology, 116024 Dalian, China. E-mail: jinxuan.liu@dlut.edu.cn
bInstitute of Functional Interfaces, Karlsruhe Institute of Technology, 76344 Eggenstein-Leopoldshafen, Germany. E-mail: christof.woell@kit.edu
Received 
      3rd May 2017
    First published on 6th July 2017AbstractSurface-supported metal–organic framework thin films are receiving increasing attention as a novel form of nanotechnology. New deposition techniques that enable the control of the film thickness, homogeneity, morphology, and dimensions with a huge number of metal–organic framework compounds offer tremendous opportunities in a number of different application fields. In response to increasing demands for environmental sustainability and cleaner energy, much effort in recent years has been devoted to the development of MOF thin films for applications in photovoltaics, CO2 reduction, energy storage, water splitting, and electronic devices, as well as for the fabrication of membranes. Although existing applications are promising and encouraging, MOF thin films still face numerous challenges, including the need for a more thorough understanding of the thin-film growth mechanism, stability of the internal and external interfaces, strategies for doping and models for charge carrier transport. In this paper, we review the recent advances in MOF thin films, including fabrication and patterning strategies and existing nanotechnology applications. We conclude by listing the most attractive future opportunities as well as the most urgent challenges.
Jinxuan Liu
Jinxuan Liu was born in Yantai, China in 1978. He received his Bachelor (2001) in Applied Chemistry from Yantai University, Master (2004) in Electrochemistry from State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surface, Xiamen University with Prof. Bingwei Mao, and PhD (2010) in Physical Chemistry from Ruhr-University Bochum under the supervision of Prof. Christof Wöll. Afterwards, he worked as postdoc in the group of Prof. Christof Wöll at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology from 2011 to 2014. Since 2015, he joined the faculty of State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology as an associate professor. His research focuses on self-assembled monolayers and surface-supported metal–organic framework thin films as regards the applications in photovoltaics, CO2 reduction and water splitting.
Christof Wöll
Christof Wöll is Director of the Institute of Functional Interfaces at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (since 2009). He studied Physics at the University of Göttingen and received his PhD in 1987 at the Max-Planck-Institute of Dynamics and Self-Organization. In 1996, he took over the chair for Physical Chemistry at the University of Bochum (until 2009) and founded the collaborative research center SFB 588. He has received several awards including the van't Hoff Prize of the German Bunsen Association. He is a member of the “Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina” and is the Spokesperson of the German Physical Society (DPG) Surface Physics Division (since 2016). His research activities focus on fundamental processes in Surface Physics and Surface Chemistry, in particular development and advancement of techniques for the characterization of molecular adsorbates and oxide surfaces as well as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs and SURMOFs).
Metal–organic frameworks (MOFs),1 also referred to as porous coordination polymers (PCPs),2 are constructed by coordinating metal or metal-oxo clusters, acting as nodes, and organic building blocks, referred to as linkers. MOFs exist as many different types. The existing MOFs, about 20000 in 20133 and more than 70000 in early 2017,4 have been obtained by combining roughly 100 different nodes with roughly 1000 different ditopic, tritopic, or quadrutopic linkers. The number of MOFs that have an associated theoretical description is roughly 1 million. Considering that more than 100 million organic compounds have been synthesized so far,5,6 which are all, in principle, suitable as MOF linkers after additional functionalization, there is virtually no upper limit to the number of possible structures.
Originally developed for applications7 in gas storage,8 gas separation,9–12 and catalysis,13 in recent years it has been shown that these porous, crystalline solids also have huge potential in completely different areas. In these novel application fields, their mechanical, electronic, optical, thermoelectric, and magnetic properties mainly provide the basis for innovative device concepts.
For many advanced applications in nanotechnology, it is mandatory that the MOFs, usually obtained in the form of powders, are deposited on solid substrates. This is particularly evident in the case of electrical applications.14 In this review, we will focus on the methods to produce such thin films. We will distinguish essentially the different types of MOF thin films: (1) SURMOFs (surface-supported metal–organic frameworks) fabricated using layer-by-layer methods, where the orientation and film thickness can be well-controlled; (2) electrochemically deposited MOF thin films; (3) MOF thin films made using chemical vapour deposition (CVD); and (4) casted MOF thin films, where essentially powders made using conventional solvothermal synthesis are cast onto a substrate. Although MOF thin films retain the intrinsic properties of the corresponding powder MOFs in principle, the possibility of also realizing multi-heteroepitaxy (in particular in connection with a layer-by-layer synthetic technique) opens up additional architectures, including the creation of well-defined organic–organic interfaces. SURMOFs thus allow for design architectures that cannot be achieved using MOF powders. In this review, these aspects will be demonstrated using examples such as photovoltaics for solar energy conversion, electrochemical/photocatalytic CO2 reduction, water splitting, the fabrication of components for information technology, including memory devices and field-effect transistors (FETs), energy storage, including supercapacitors and batteries, and thermoelectric devices.
Tremendous effort has been devoted to the development of new synthetic methods to fabricate monolithic, crystalline, and highly oriented SURMOF thin films with high structural quality and low defect density.15–24 In recent years a number of MOF thin film-related reviews focusing on the multitude of aspects exposed in this rapidly developing field were published in different journals, reflecting the substantial attention received by these new “Designer Solids”. Among these, the overview papers published more than five years ago (Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009,15 2011,17 2012;19Chem. Rev., 2012;18Sci. China: Chem., 201116) are certainly still very valuable. These earlier papers, however, do not cover the new, often unexpected applications of MOF thin films which have emerged in the past 2–3 years. These more recent developments are also not covered in the excellent reviews with a main focus on device fabrication published in 2014 by Falcaro25 and by Allendorf26 in Chem. Soc. Rev., and are also not one of the main topics in the highly valuable discussion by H. Kitagawa in APL Materials,20 with the latter mainly focusing on characterization of MOF thin films using synchrotron XRD. Very recently, two compilations of papers were published, one in 2016 by Zhuang et al. in Coord. Chem. Rev. concentrating on the growth mechanism of MOF thin films,22 and one in 2017 by Stassen et al. in Chem. Soc. Rev. with a focus on MOF applications in electronic and sensor devices.27 In view of the rapid development of the field with many unforeseen, new applications emerging we provide here an up-to-date discussion of recent, MOF-thin-film-based device applications.
This review starts with a list of supporting substrates that have, in the past, been successfully used for the deposition of MOF thin films. We will then focus on new emerging synthetic strategies and novel applications of MOF thin films. Powder MOFs and their applications are not in the scope of this review. We will conclude our overview by providing a list of challenges that must be overcome with regard to MOF-based device fabrication, e.g., thin-film quality, interface stability, electrical and thermal conductivity, charge carrier mobility, electron and hole recombination, and defect concentration.
Fabrication methods
Substrates for the fabrication of MOF thin films
The choice of an appropriate substrate and suitable surface modification is crucial for the deposition of MOF thin films. Different strategies have been developed to support the coating of planar solid (Si, Au, FTO, ITO, etc.), flexible (plastic), and nonplanar substrates (metal oxide or polymer particles, metal foams, etc.). Since spray procedures have been recently developed that allow, in principle, the realization of continuous processes, there are virtually no limitations on the dimensions and types of solid substrates that can act as a substrate for MOF thin film deposition. In many cases, however, the functionalization of the substrates is crucial, in particular for the quasi-epitaxial deposition of MOF thin films. A number of applications involving charge transfer, e.g., electrocatalytic CO2 reduction, water spitting, and photovoltaics, require conducting substrates and high quality substrate/MOF interfaces. Table 1 provides a list of solid substrates and the corresponding deposition procedures that have been used successfully to deposit MOF thin films.
Table 1 Types of substrates used for the fabrication of metal–organic framework thin films






MOFs
Fabrication method
Ref.




Planar
Au/SAM
MOF-5, ZIF-8
Solvothermal mother solutions

33 and 34



HKUST-1
Solvothermal solution

35



HUKST-1 and [M2(L)2(P)]
Layer-by-layer or liquid-phase epitaxy

36 and 37



HKUST-1 and Fe-MIL-88B-NH2
Gel-layer synthesis

38



[Zn(bdc)(4,40-bipy)0.5](MOF-508)
Liquid-phase epitaxy

39



Rho-ZMOF-1
Solvothermal growth

40



Fe(py)2[Pt(CN)4]
Liquid-phase layer-by-layer synthesis

41



Si
MIL-89
Colloidal deposition method

42



NAFS-1
Langmuir–Blodgett layer-by-layer deposition

43



ZIF-8 and [Cu(pzdc)2(pyz)]
Dip coating in mother solution

34 and 44



MIL-101(Cr)
Dip coating from colloidal solution

45



HKUST-1
Mother solution

46



DA-MOF
Layer-by-layer fabrication

47



ITO/FTO
Cu-TCPP
Drop-casting method

48



MOF-525
Solvothermal method

49



NU-1000, UiO-66, HKUST-1, Al-MIL-53
Electrophoretic deposition

50



Pd-porphyrin Zn-SURMOFs
Liquid-phase epitaxy

51



Re-SURMOF
Liquid-phase epitaxy

52



Eu-HBPTC
Electrodeposition

53



Co-TCPP
Solvothermal preparation

54



Zn(NDI-X)
Deposition

55



Polymer
HKUST-1
Mother solution

56 and 57



MIL-47
Mother solution in MW

58



Metal slice
HKUST-1
Electrochemically and mother solution

59 and 60



[Zn3(btc)2]
Mother solution

61



Cu2(bdc)2·xH2O, ZIF-8, HKUST-1
Spin-casting method

28



Alumina
MIL-101(Cr)-NH2
Dip coating

62







Non-planar
Porous metal
HKUST-1
Seeded growth

63



ZIF-8
Mother solution in MW

64 and 65



ZIF-7
Seeding, then mother solution in MW

66–68



ZIF-22
Mother solution

69



[Cu2(ndc)2(dabco)]
Stepwise dosing of reactants

70



IRMOF-3/MOF-5
Mother solution

71 and 72



[Al(bdc)]MIL-53
Seeding, then mother solution

73



MIL-96
Seeded growth

73



[Cu(hfipbb)(H2hfipbb)0.5]
Seeded growth

74



Co-H3TBTC

In situ growth

75



Si foam
HKUST-1 and ZIF-8
Layer-by-layer method

76



ZnO nanowire
ZIF-CoZn
Solution method

77



Capillary column
Cu2(D-cam)2P
Liquid-phase epitaxial growth

78



AAO
Sr/Eu-imidazolate

In situ coating

79



Fe3O4
HKUST-1
Liquid-phase epitaxy

80 and 81



Silk
TMU-4, TMU-5
Liquid-phase epitaxy

82



Polystyrene fiber
MOF-199
Electrospinning

83



TiO2
MIL-125
Single-step hydrothermal synthesis

84



SiO2
HKUST-1
Layer-by-layer method

85





Numerous synthetic strategies, including liquid-phase epitaxy (LPE), chemical vapor deposition (CVD), atomic layer deposition (ALD), substrate-seeded heteroepitaxy (SSH), bottom-up modular assembly (BMA), spin coating techniques (SCT)28 and electrochemical fabrication (ECF), have been developed for the fabrication of metal–organic framework thin films. In many cases, the formation of the thin films allowed for specific applications.29–32
Since the number of approaches developed is already fairly large, it is reasonable to divide them into two different categories: (i) solution-based fabrication of MOF thin films, a process in which the MOF thin films are fabricated on a substrate immersed in a single or different solutions containing the reactants, e.g., metal precursors and organic ligands, and (ii) vacuum-based fabrication of MOF thin films, a process in which the MOF thin films are fabricated on a substrate under vacuum conditions using gas-phase reactants.
(i) Solution-based fabrication of MOF thin films

Liquid-phase epitaxy (LPE). 
Among the well-established MOF thin-film fabrication schemes, liquid-phase epitaxy (LPE), established by Wöll and coworkers, is one of most frequently used synthetic strategies for SURMOFs.37 In the LPE process illustrated in Fig. 1(a), there are two central key issues: (i) a functionalized substrate and (ii) a deposition process where the substrates are immersed in solutions containing individual reactants instead of a mixture of reactants using a conventional solvothermal process. Because of their importance, these two steps will be discussed in more detail.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the LPE approach for the growth of SURMOF thin films on a SAM-functionalized substrate in a layer-by-layer fashion. This approach involves repeated cycles of immersion in solutions of the metal precursor and solutions of organic ligands. Between steps, the material is rinsed with solvent. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2009; (b) Cu3(BTC)2 (HKUST-1) grown on OH- and COOH-terminated SAM-modified gold surfaces with different growth orientations. Reproduced from ref. 35, with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2007. Established setups for the fabrication of SURMOF thin films by utilizing the LPE approach in a layer-by-layer fashion. (c) High-throughput spray setup, reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2011; (d) spin-coating setup, reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016; (e) dipping robot setup, reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015; flow-based automation setup, reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015, and the resulting SURMOF thin films onto various substrates with corresponding setups. 


Substrate functionalization. 
One of the most convenient ways to achieve a surface terminated by a particular functional group is the deposition of self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) on the primary substrate. SAMs expose organic surfaces terminated by, e.g., –COOH,90 –OH,91 –NH2,92 and –pyridine93 moieties. These functional groups can be used to anchor either the metal or metal-oxo nodes and organic linkers, thus nucleating the growth of MOF thin films. For more details on this aspect of SAM-induced MOF nucleation see the recent review by Zhuang et al.22 Under favorable conditions, this can lead to the formation of oriented MOF thin films with a high degree of structural perfection. In several cases, it has been demonstrated that the growth orientation of SURMOF thin films can be controlled by using different functional groups35,86 (Fig. 1(b)) or by tuning the density of functional groups.94


Separation of reactants. 
In contrast to the “one-pot” reaction scheme used for the solvothermal synthesis of powder MOFs, the reactants are separated in the LPE process. The metal or metal-oxo clusters acting as nodes and the organic linkers are deposited on the surface sequentially in a layer-by-layer fashion (Fig. 1(a)). After optimization of the reaction conditions, this process results in the formation of compact SURMOFs, which are well-defined, highly oriented MOF thin films with controllable film thickness and homogeneity. In favorable cases, the surface roughness can be reduced down to the nm scale.95
With the demand for more efficient fabrication of large-scale SURMOF thin films with good qualities for industrial applications, a lot of effort has been devoted to the design and building of fabrication setups based on the LPE process, such as high-throughput spray,87 large-area spray,96 spin coating,28 dipping robot,88 and flow-based automation.89 An overview is provided in Fig. 1(c)–(f). With these setups, large-scale, compact, and homogeneous SURMOF thin films97 on various substrates can be prepared. A number of representative examples are displayed in Fig. 1 (bottom).


MOFs suited for the fabrication of SURMOFs. 
The fabrication of high quality SURMOFs can be achieved by the layer-by-layer approach in combination with well-established setups shown in Fig. 1(c)–(f). It has to be noted that the selection of metal nodes for construction of SURMOFs is limited to the paddle-wheel structure metal linkers, like copper acetates and zinc acetates, while the use of organic linkers is unlimited by using the LPE approach in a layer-by-layer fashion. The organic linkers with either dicarboxylic acids at meta-/para-positions or a N-group at para-positions can be adopted to fabricate 2-D SURMOFs (SURMOF 2) and 3-D SURMOFs (pillared SURMOFs), respectively. The spray setup shown in Fig. 1(c) is well-suited for the fabrication of HKUST-1 and 2-D SURMOFs, while the spin coating, dipping robot and flow automation setups shown in Fig. 1(d)–(f) have been demonstrated to be appropriate tools for the fabrication of 3-D SURMOFs.

Interfacial synthesis
The interfacial synthesis of MOF thin films can take place either at the interface between two immiscible solutions or at the air–liquid interface via self-coordination of metal ions and organic linkers, which results in the formation of free-standing MOF thin films as shown in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Left: Liquid–liquid interfacial synthesis. (a) Interfacial preparation of a MOF layer using a biphasic synthesis mixture consisting of an aqueous metal-ion-containing solution (blue) and an organic ligand solution (purple). Crystallite formation takes place primarily at defects remaining in the layer, resulting in self-completing growth. Transparent lighter blue octahedra correspond to new nucleation events resulting from bond formation between metal ions and ligand molecules that meet. (b) Overview of the process. Both immiscible liquids are supplied by syringe pumps to a T-junction, where the formation of aqueous solution droplets in the continuous organic phase takes place. (c) Scanning electron micrographs of hollow [Cu3(BTC)2] capsules crushed with a needle tip showing its hollow interior. (d) Cross-sectional view of the capsule wall, showing its thin and uniform thickness. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2011. Right: Air–liquid interfacial synthesis. (e) Schematic illustration of the assembly process of PdTCPP-Cu MOF nanosheets (NAFS-13) at the air/liquid interface with the crystalline structure of NAFS-13 shown in the inset. (f) Schematic illustration of the post-injection methodology employed in the fabrication of NAFS-13 nanosheets. (g and h) Brewster angle microscopy (BAM) images obtained using a 532 nm green laser at an incident angle of 53.12° (Brewster angle) with respect to the air/water interface normal taken during the formation of the NAFS-13 nanofilms fabricated by post-injection. (e–h) Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2013. 

Liquid–liquid interface. 
The liquid–liquid interfacial synthesis of MOF thin films was first reported by Ameloot et al.98 MOF formation occurs at the 2D interface created by two immiscible phases. A key requirement is the different solubility of the organic and inorganic solvents (Fig. 2(a)). When the two solvents are brought into contact, crystallization takes place only at the liquid–liquid interface, resulting in the formation of a free-standing and uniform MOF thin film. Using this rather straightforward one-pot synthesis scheme, the growth rate of the free-standing MOF thin films is determined by the different diffusion rates of the MOF precursors in the respective solvent.
The liquid–liquid interface synthetic approach has been applied to a large variety of MOF structures, including ZIF-8,9,98–100 MOF-5 and MOF-2,101 Cu3(BTC)2,98,100,102,103 MIL-53 (Al),104 and [Cu2(ndc)2(dabco)]n (ndc = 1,4-naphthalene dicarboxylate; dabco = 1,4-diazabicyclo[2.2.2]octane).105
Moreover, the liquid–liquid interfacial synthetic approach enables the fabrication of differently formed MOF thin layers, e.g., shaped as 3D hollow capsules as in Fig. 2(b).98 In the case of Cu3(BTC)2 (BTC, 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid), an aqueous phase containing 7.2 g of cupric acetate monohydrate and 100 g of 1–4 wt% polyvinyl alcohol (liquid 1) was injected through a hollow needle in a co-flowing stream of the organic solution (liquid 2, 0.353 g BTC in 20 g of 1-octanol) flowing through polytetrafluoroethylene tubing. Nucleation and growth of [Cu3(BTC)2] occurs at the interface where the two solutions start to contact via a ligand exchange between the carboxylate groups of the bridging copper acetate ligands and the carboxylic acid groups of the BTC ligands. This leads to the formation of hollow capsules of Cu3(BTC)2 with a uniform diameter of 375 ± 15 μm and a pinhole-free capsule wall with a uniform thickness of 1.5–2 μm as shown in Fig. 2(c) and (d).


Air–liquid interface. 
Similar to the liquid–liquid interface, the air–liquid interface offers an excellent platform to assemble two-dimensional (2D) MOF nanosheets.101,106,107
Makiura and coworkers reported a new methodology for the synthesis of crystalline, uniform, and large-scale NAFS-13 nanosheets using an air–liquid interfacial synthetic approach. In this approach, first the molecular building units are pre-oriented at the water surface by spreading an ethanolic solution on a water subphase, as shown in Fig. 2(e).106 In a second step, the metal nodes present in the water subphase coordinate to the molecular linkers, thus initiating MOF formation. The synthetic procedure is schematically presented in Fig. 2(f). In this particular case, the molecular building unit was 15,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)-porphyrinato-palladium(II) (PdTCPP). A solution of PdTCPP in ethanol was then spread onto 1 mM Cu(NO3)2·3H2O aqueous solution. The tetratopic PdTCPP molecules coordinate to copper ion joints, resulting in the formation of 2D NAFS-13 (PdTCPP-Cu) nanosheets lying flat on the air/water interface. These 2D MOF plates consist of a 2D “checkerboard” motif of PdTCPP units linked by binuclear Cu2(COO)4 paddle wheels with a μm-scale domain size and a sheet thickness of 3 Å, as displayed in Fig. 2(g) and (h).

Bottom-up modular assembly (BMA)
The bottom-up modular assembly approach for the fabrication of ultrathin MOF thin films was established by H. Kitagawa and coworkers.20,43,108–111 The MOF thin films comprising metallo-porphyrin building units and metal ion struts with a well-controlled growth direction and film thickness were constructed by combining layer-by-layer growth using the Langmuir–Blodgett (LB) method.
A schematic illustration of this procedure is shown in Fig. 3. In this case, CoTCPP (5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrinato-cobalt(II)) and pyridine (py) were used as molecular building blocks or linkers. A solution of CoTCPP in chloroform/methanol was spread onto an aqueous solution containing the metal source, CuCl2·2H2O. Reaction of the subphase metal salt with the organic linkers at the interface between the two immiscible solvents, chloroform and H2O, resulted in the formation of a 2D CoTCPP thin film (CoTCPP-py-Cu), similar to the interfacial synthesis described above. In a second step, the 2D CoTCPP-py-Cu sheets were transferred onto a Si(100) (or quartz) substrate using an LB scheme. Repeating this process several times yielded stacked MOF nanofilms (NAFS-1, nanofilms of metal–organic frameworks on surface no. 1). The thickness of these structurally well-defined films is controlled by the number of deposition cycles. The crystallinity, preferred orientation, and homogeneity of the fabricated NAFS-1 films were characterized using synchrotron X-ray diffraction (XRD, λ = 1.554 Å) with two different scattering geometries: out-of-plane mode and in-plane mode. The XRD patterns yield the lattice parameters a = b = 1.6460(3) nm and c = 0.9380(3) nm, and indicate that the 2D NAFS-1 nanosheets are tidily stacked in the film with a perfect preferential [001] orientation. They are almost parallel to each other with an average tilting angle of 0.3°.
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of NAFS-1 with bottom-up modular assembly by combining a layer-by-layer growth technique with the Langmuir–Blodgett method. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2010. 
Unlike the fabrication of 2D nanofilms at an interface, including an air/liquid interface112 and a liquid/liquid interface (two immiscible solutions),113 Zhang and coworkers114,115 developed a surfactant-assisted approach for producing ultrathin 2D MOF nanosheets that can be transferred to the substrate via the Langmuir–Schäfer method for further use.
This approach allows the fabrication of ultrathin 2D bimetallic M-TCPP(Fe) MOF nanosheets (M = Co, Cu, and Zn, TCPP(Fe) = Fe(III)tetra(4-carboxyphenyl)porphine chloride) with a thickness of sub-10 nm. As an example, the synthesis of 2D Co-TCPP(Fe) nanosheets is illustrated in Fig. 4(a). The surfactant molecule, i.e., PVP (polyvinyl pyrrolidone), was introduced during the synthesis and can be selectively attached on the MOF surface, modulating the anisotropic growth of Co-TCPP(Fe). This leads to the formation of ultrathin 2D Co-TCPP(Fe) nanosheets with a thickness of sub-10 nm, as shown in Fig. 4(b) and (c). Furthermore, the resulting 2D Co-TCPP(Fe) nanosheets were dispersed into solutions, forming 2D MOF suspensions for the fabrication of MOF thin films using a bottom-up modular assembly approach, as shown in Fig. 4(d).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the surfactant-assisted synthesis of 2D Co-TCPP(Fe) nanosheets. The MOF layers are drawn in alternating blue and red to clarify the layered structures. (b) AFM and (c) TEM images of 2D Co-TCPP(Fe) nanosheets. Inset: The corresponding SAED pattern of a 2D Co-TCPP(Fe) nanosheet with the electron beam perpendicular to its basal plane. (d) Schematic illustration of the assembly process for the preparation of 2D nanosheet-based MOF thin films. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. 
Substrate-seeded heteroepitaxy (SSH)
The SSH method differs from the LPE growth of SURMOFs by directly using a solid substrate as a metal source. This contrasts with the LPE method, where both reactants (metal-containing nodes and organic linkers) are provided as a solution.
Yang, Yaghi, and coworkers first demonstrated the potential of the SSH method for the case of Ag nanocrystals (NCs) coated with a thin metal oxide.116 The thin metal oxide film was deposited onto the Ag NCs using atomic layer deposition (ALD). MOF formation was initiated by simply immersing the oxide-coated NCs into a solution of suitable organic linkers, as shown in Fig. 5. The reaction of the molecular building block with the metal ions from the oxide substrate then yielded MOF thin films.
 Fig. 5  (a) Construction of Al2(OH)2TCPP MOF from (b) rod-shaped aluminum oxide nodes connected by porphyrin linkers (H4TCPP) to give a 3D MOF. (c) SEM images of octahedral Ag NCs are subjected to ALD deposition of alumina, followed by addition of TCPP linkers to make (d) MOF-enclosed Ag NCs, OH-nano-Ag⊂MOF. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
To yield larger-area MOF thin films, the Ag NCs were first drop-cast on a silicon substrate (Fig. 5(c)). Subsequently, a conformal alumina film with controlled thickness was deposited at 60 °C by employing an ALD process. Using trimethylaluminum and water as precursors, Al2O3 films were deposited with a deposition rate of 0.1 nm per cycle. MOF deposition was then performed by immersing the alumina-coated Ag NCs into solutions of the TCPP linker in N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF)/water mixtures at 140 °C in a microwave reactor.117 After a reaction time of 10 min, the formation of OH-nano-Ag⊂MOFs was observed (Fig. 5(d)).
Using a similar approach, Falcaro and coworkers achieved a substrate-seeded heteroepitaxial growth of Cu2(BDC)2 MOF thin films using Cu(OH)2 nanotube arrays as a source for metal ions,118 as shown in Fig. 6(a) and (b).
 Fig. 6  Substrate-seeded heteroepitaxial growth of Cu2(BDC)2 on single-crystal Cu(OH)2. (a) Ligand (H2BDC)-containing solution is placed in contact with the Cu(OH)2 nanobelt. (b) Cu2(BDC)2 MOFs are heteroepitaxially grown on the Cu(OH)2 nanobelt. (c and d) Crystal structures of both Cu(OH)2 and Cu2(BDC)2 MOFs. (e) SEM images of Cu2(BDC)2 MOFs epitaxially grown on aligned Cu(OH)2 nanobelt films and (f) magnified image. (g) Cu2(BDC)2 MOF films on a SiC substrate. (h) Aligned Cu2(BDC)2 MOFs deposited on a flexible substrate (cellophane). Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2017. 
In this case, the growth was initiated by immersing the substrates in a saturated ethanolic solution of H2BDC at room temperature. After an immersion time of 5 min, aligned Cu2(BDC)2 crystals perpendicular to the nanotube surface were observed; see Fig. 6(e) and (f). Detailed X-ray diffraction (XRD) and transmission electron microscope (TEM) analyses revealed the P2 symmetry for the fabricated epitaxial Cu2(BDC)2 thin film, with lattice parameters a = 10.90 Å, b = 5.89 Å, and c = 10.90 Å. This thin film has excellent lattice match with the Cu(OH)2 nanotubes with P4 symmetry and lattice parameters a = 10.61 Å, b = 5.80 Å, and c = 10.61 Å, as shown in Fig. 6(c) and (d).
In addition, the substrate-seeded heteroepitaxy approach has been demonstrated to also permit the fabrication of large-scale epitaxial MOF thin films with unrestricted substrate size and rigidity, as displayed in Fig. 6(g) and (h). Using this approach, the fabrication of MOF thin film-based devices on flexible and large-scale substrates can be achieved.
Electrochemical deposition (ECD)
In general, three different approaches have been described for the fabrication of MOF thin films via electrochemical methods: (i) anodic deposition, (ii) electrophoretic deposition,50 and (iii) cathodic deposition. The basic concepts of these three methods are schematically illustrated in Fig. 7(a)–(c), respectively.21
 Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the electrochemical fabrication of MOF thin films with (a) anodic deposition, (b) electrophoretic deposition, and (c) cathodic deposition. (d, e and f) Structure of Zn-TPTC, NU-1000, and MOF-5 fabricated with anodic deposition, electrophilic deposition, and cathodic deposition, respectively. (g, h and i) SEM images of the resulting MOF thin films of Zn-TPTC, NU-1000, and MOF-5, respectively. (d and g) Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. (e and h) Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2014. (f and i) Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014. 
In the anodic deposition process (Fig. 7(a)),119 a metallic electrode was used by electrochemically dissolving metal anodes using high positive voltages. As described first by Müller and coworkers at BASF,120 the electrochemically generated metal ions readily react with organic linkers contained in the electrolyte, and MOF thin films grew on the anode.
Inspired by the simplicity of this approach, anodic electrochemical MOF deposition has been widely used to fabricate various types of MOF thin films on metallic substrates, including HKUST-1 (Cu2(BTC)3, BTC = benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylic acid) on Cu electrodes,59 Zn3(BTC)2 on Zn plates,121 MIL-100 (Fe) on Fe anodes,122 and Zn(TPTC) (H3TPTC=1,3,5-tris[4-(carboxyphenyl)oxamethyl]-2,4,6-trimethylbenzene) on Zn plates (Fig. 7(d) and (g)).119 In some cases, nonmetallic substrates were coated with a metallic film to provide the metal source, e.g., in the case of Cu2(BTC)3 grown on Cu-coated glass.123 Note that not all metals are suitable for anodic deposition; in some cases, the associated corrosion processes prohibit the growth of homogeneous MOF adlayers.124 Apart from the fabrication of homogenous MOF thin films on metallic anodes, more heterogeneous MOF coatings have been grown on oxide layers doped with metal ions, such as Tb-BTC on ZnO substrates doped with Tb(III) (ZnO(Tb)).125
An alternative approach is electrophoretic deposition (EPD). In this process, illustrated in Fig. 7(b), two conductive electrodes are immersed in solutions containing surface-charged MOF particles. When a voltage is applied between the two electrodes, the created electric field drives the MOF particles toward the oppositely charged electrode, thus leading to the formation of MOF thin films. The EPD process has been successfully demonstrated by Farha, Hupp, and coworkers50 to fabricate HKUST-1, Al-MIL-53, UiO-66, and NU-1000 on conductive fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) substrates, as shown in Fig. 7(e) and (h).
The cathodic deposition of MOF thin films was developed by Dincă and coworkers.124,126 In this process, schematically shown in Fig. 7(c), the inert electrodes (WE, working electrode; CE, counter electrode) are used as chemically inert separators. They only act as sources of electrons without participating in the MOF-forming reactions. The key step in cathodic deposition is to obtain a local alkaline region near the cathode where the organic ligands are deprotonated. This can be achieved by the reduction of oxoanions (NO3−) forming hydroxide or probase moieties (Fig. 7(f)). The “deprotonated” organic ligands react with metal precursors in solution and induce the crystallization of MOF particles at the cathode surface, resulting in the formation of MOF thin films (MOF-5, Zn4O(BDC)3, Fig. 7(i)).
Powder MOF-based deposition (PMD)
There are several possibilities for producing MOF thin films from powder MOFs that are obtained from standard solvothermal synthesis schemes. The following procedures have been used successfully in previous work: (i) direct deposition of as-synthesized powder MOFs onto a substrate by facial drop-casting or the spin-coating method, using a suspension of MOF particles or mixtures of such suspensions and Nafion solution;127–129 (ii) coating of a MOF particle suspension containing an additional polymeric binder to obtain MOF-based mixed matrix membranes;130,131 and (iii) in situ deposition of powder MOF thin films on substrates into the reactant solutions during the solvothermal MOF synthesis process.132
The direct deposition of as-synthesized powder MOFs on solid substrates can be achieved using an advanced technique, namely electrospray deposition, as shown in Fig. 8(a).133 For this process, an α-alumina substrate was heated to a temperature of 160 °C before electrospray deposition. The voltage was applied to the capillary-containing precursor (ZIF-7) solutions. The precursor solution was sprayed onto the hot substrate. The fast evaporation of the solvents then leads to the formation of well-defined ZIF-7 thin films. Qiu and coworkers134 developed a method which uses electrospinning to obtain a MOF-based mixed-matrix membrane, as illustrated in Fig. 8(b). The electrospinning solution was prepared by mixing a suspension of ZIF-8 seed crystals with PVP to obtain solutions with the appropriate uniformity and moderate viscosity. This suspension was then loaded into a syringe and electrospun by applying a 12 kV voltage at a distance of 15 cm to form the ZIF-8/PVP composite fiber coating. The resultant coating was then used as a seed layer for the synthesis of high-quality ZIF-8 membranes.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of (a) electrospray deposition for synthesizing ZIF-7 membranes on hot alumina (160 °C). Reproduced from Melgar et al.133 (b) Electrospinning process for ZIF-8 on a microporous SiO2 wafer. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2012. (c) Hot-pressing (HoP) method for the fabrication of ZIF-8 on glass cloth (a) and (b) and glass fiber (c)–(e). Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. 
Very recently, Wang and coworkers135 developed a solvent- and binder-free approach for producing stable MOF coatings using a unique hot-pressing (HoP) method, as schematically shown in Fig. 8(c). This method consists of hot pressing MOF precursors, metal ions, or organic linkers on the substrates, where they can rapidly react with the surface functional groups or metal sites forming the first layer. Then the MOF layer grows under the applied temperature and pressure. The process converts the MOF powder into a highly stable MOF coating. This approach has been successfully applied to various substrates (carbon cloth, anodic aluminum oxide film (AAO), nickel foam, copper foil, glass cloth, and glass fiber).
As an example, Zn(2-mIM)2 (ZIF-8)-coated carbon cloth was prepared by first spreading a powdered mixture of Zn(OAc)2, 2-methylimidazole, and polyethyleneglycol (PEG) onto a section of carbon cloth. Next, the section was covered with a piece of aluminum foil, packed, and then heated with an electric iron at 200 °C for 10 minutes. Flexible carbon cloth supporting a ZIF-8 coating with uniformly distributed ZIF-8 particles (ca. 100 nm) was thus obtained after washing with ethanol. The loading level of ZIF-8 was 7.12 g m−2 and could be tuned from 3.01 to 9.76 g m−2 by adjusting the quantity of the precursors. Using this method, other uniform MOF coatings, such as Cd-MOF, Co-MOF, ZIF-67, ZIF-9, MOF-5, and Ni-ZIF-8, were successfully fabricated on carbon cloth. Moreover, this method can be further extended to mass production using a roll-to-roll machine.

(ii) Vacuum-based fabrication of MOF thin films. 
Most of the reported protocols for the deposition of MOF thin films involve chemical reactions occurring in organic solvents. For many microelectronic manufacturing processes, however, solution-based fabrication of MOF thin films has severe disadvantages due to potential contamination from the MOF synthesis solutions.136 In this context, vacuum-based thin film deposition techniques have a number of advantages. In the following, we will present two variants of vacuum-based fabrication of MOF thin films, namely chemical vapor deposition (CVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD) as shown in Fig. 9.
 Fig. 9  Left: (a) Chemical vapor deposition of ZIF-8 thin films. The procedure consists of a metal oxide vapor deposition (Step 1) and a consecutive vapor-solid reaction (Step 2). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (b) ZIF-8 coated silicon pillar arrays and (c) manufactured ZIF-8 patterns. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. Right: (d) Schematic illustration of the ALD process to fabricate MOF thin films. The ALD process consists of a metal precursor and organic linker pulses separated by an inert gas on the substrate to yield a monolayer of the MOF thin film. The desired film thickness can be achieved by controlling the repetitions of both precursors. (e and f) The structure of fabricated Ca-BDC using ALD with different forms. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 

Chemical vapor deposition (CVD)
Chemical vapor deposition (CVD) of films and coatings involves the adsorption and subsequent chemical reaction of gases with the surface of a substrate. This deposition method can also produce coatings with tightly controlled dimensions, e.g. on curved or inner surfaces, e.g., the inside of tubes.
In 2016, Ameloot and coworkers fabricated uniform ZIF-8 MOF thin films using chemical vapor deposition137 (ZIF-8: (zinc-(2-methylimidazolate)2)) that had a controlled thickness. A substrate with a rather complicated shape, silicon pillar arrays, as well as a patterned substrate was successfully coated as shown in Fig. 9 (left).
The CVD approach employed in this work consisted of two steps: first is metal-oxide deposition, and this is followed by a vapor–solid reaction step (Fig. 9(a)). In the first step, the metal-oxide (ZnO) thin film with a thickness of 3–15 nm was deposited onto Si pillar arrays using ALD. MOF growth was then initiated by exposing the ZnO-coated Si pillar arrays to the vaporized organic linker, 2-methylimidazole (HmIM), at 100 °C for 30 min. The resulting highly crystalline and uniform ZIF-8 thin films are shown in Fig. 9(b) and (c).
Atomic layer deposition (ALD)
ALD139 is also a chemical gas phase thin-film deposition technique, but, unlike CVD, it utilizes “self-limiting” surface reactions that better control the film thickness. The ALD technique139 relies on sequential, self-saturating gas-in-surface reactions. After saturating a surface with a volatile precursor, the reactor chamber is purged with an inert gas to avoid reactions between the different precursors. Subsequently, the surface is saturated with a second, different precursor. The process for the ALD fabrication of MOF thin films is schematically illustrated in Fig. 9(d)138 and consists of two sequential steps: (1) deposition of one monolayer of volatile metal precursors on the substrate, and (2) subsequent deposition of the second layer of volatile organic linkers. Repeating steps (1) and (2) allows thin films to be grown with the desired thickness.
Crucial to successful deposition is the choice of appropriate volatile precursors.140,141 Karppinen and coworkers138 successfully fabricated a Ca-BDC MOF thin film (Fig. 9(e) and (f)) on Si using Ca(thd)2 (thd: 2,2,6,6-tetramethyl-3,5-heptanedione) and BDC (1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid) as volatile precursors. The two reactants were kept in glass crucibles inside the ALD reactor during deposition. The sublimation temperatures were set to 190 °C for Ca(thd)2 and 180 °C for BDC.
Nilsen and coworkers142 reported the fabrication of UiO-66 in an all-gas-phase process with the aid of ALD, using sequential reactions of the substrates with ZrCl4 and 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid. The intermediate product obtained using the ALD process, an amorphous organic–inorganic hybrid film, was then converted into a crystalline UiO-66 MOF thin film by exposure to acetic acid vapor.
The fabrication of MOF thin films can be also realized by using an ALD-assisted approach, where metal oxide films formed on the substrate by ALD serve as nucleation layers to promote the heterogeneous nucleation for the growth of MOF thin films (see previous paragraph).116,143
Applications
After presenting different strategies for the fabrication of MOF thin films, now we focus on the huge potential of MOF thin films for several areas of nanotechnology.
We would like to point out that applications of MOF thin films are not a mature field yet. Rather, this research area is evolving quickly and new, not previously anticipated applications are emerging. Very often, the fact that one particular growth method was used for an application did not result from a careful comparison of available methods but rather from the preferences of the laboratory where the application idea was conceived. We foresee that with time, different MOF thin film preparation methods will be used for different types of applications. At present, we feel it is too early to provide rules suggesting a particular MOF thin film deposition method for a given application. The same applies to cost efficiency – certainly, in the context of commercial products, this aspect will become important at some point.
We are convinced that the availability of such crystalline, porous, monolithic thin films will affect nanotechnology in a similar or even more pronounced way as self-assembled monolayers.144 While applications in the areas of photovoltaics, CO2 reduction, water splitting, electronic devices, and energy storage are already quite impressive, we foresee many further cases where the enormous potential of MOFs will be used for novel applications.
Photovoltaics
It has been demonstrated that photovoltaic device performance can be improved by integrating MOF powders into other materials to form composites, such as MIL-125/perovskite,84 Mg-BTC/polymer,145 Cu-BTC/carbon nanotubes,146 ZIF-8/dye,147 PPF-4/TiO2148 and UiO-67/Cu2−XS/CdS.149 Instead of discussing applications where MOFs are mixed with conventional materials, we will focus on novel device architectures based on the unique properties of MOF thin films.
One of the appealing properties of MOFs is that they offer a straightforward strategy to build up solids from molecular building units, thus allowing the unique properties of organic compounds to be exploited in constructing novel designer materials. An instructive example is the fabrication of solids from porphyrin building blocks. Porphyrins are a class of organic molecules that exhibit a number of interesting properties.150 One of them is its large efficiency for absorbing visible light. Although the potential of porphyrins to fabricate organic photovoltaic cells that capture sunlight and convert it into electricity was realized early and motivated several studies,51 the performance of the corresponding devices has been hampered by the lack of fabrication methods that yield well-ordered porphyrin thin films.
Here, the MOF-approach offers the striking advantage that, with porphyrin-based organic linkers, molecular thin films with a high structural quality can be prepared in a straightforward fashion. So far, two different concepts have been presented for MOF-based photovoltaic (PV) devices: (i) the fabrication of a dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC)-like SURMOF PV device,51,145–147,151–154 and (ii) an all-solid-state SURMOF PV,52,84,149,155,156 as illustrated in Fig. 10(b) and (d).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic drawing of the LPE approach to fabricate porphyrin-based SURMOF thin films with a series of porphyrin linkers in a layer-by-layer fashion. Reproduced from ref. 270 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2012. (b–d) Architectures of porphyrin–SURMOF thin film-based photovoltaic devices and (c)–(e) their corresponding J–V curves. (b) and (c) reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2015. (d) and (e) reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
MOF thin films and SURMOFs are well suited as photoactive layers, as demonstrated for a wide variety of MOF compounds including Ru-BTC,151 Cu-BTC,152 Al2(BDC)3,155 MIL-125(Ti),156 Co-NDC (NDC = 2,6-naphthalenedicarboxylic acid),153 and Ru(II)-polypyridyl Zr(IV).154 In all these cases, homogeneous, monolithic SURMOFs with a thickness of around 300 nm were grown on transparent, conductive substrates (FTO or TiO2/FTO) using the LPE method. Although their performance is still inferior to that reported for OPV devices using conventional organic materials,157–159 we foresee major advances in this area. In particular, it should be possible to overcome the relatively poor light absorption in the red-light region by optimizing the absorption of the organic linkers used to fabricate the SURMOFs.
A series of porphyrin-based SURMOFs prepared by the LPE approach have been assembled into functioning DSSC-like and all-solid-state photovoltaic devices by Liu, Wöll, and coworkers.51,52 These epitaxially-grown porphyrin SURMOF thin films exhibit superior absorption capability in the red part of the spectrum and thus outperform MOFs fabricated with phenyl-based organic linkers.160 Furthermore, in principle, the porphyrin-based systems exhibit the potential to enhance directional exciton transport.161,162
It is well known that the metalation of the porphyrin rings and the attachment of electron donating groups to the porphyrin skeleton can substantially enhance the efficiency of photo-induced charge carrier generation.163,164 In fact, using this strategy, record values of φ = 3.0 × 10−1 have been obtained.52 However, for this particular case, the overall power-to-electricity conversion efficiency was rather low (<1%). This poor performance most likely results from a high rate of electron–hole recombination events, possibly a result of the relatively slow charge carrier mobility. In future work, the linkers will have to be modified further to increase the charge carrier mobility.
Richards, Howard, and coworkers recently reported photon upconversion using multilayer SURMOFs fabricated using heteroepitaxy. These films are efficient in transforming low-energy light to high-energy light via photon upconversion (UC) by triplet–triplet annihilation (TTA).165
The SURMOF hetero-multilayers used in this work exhibit a (001) orientation and were prepared by the LPE approach using paddle-wheel Zn-acetate as a metal building unit and Pd(II) 5,15-diphenyl-10,20-di(4-carboxyphenyl) porphyrin (Pd-DCP) and 4,4′-(anthracene-9,10-diyl)dibenzoate (ADB) as organic linkers. The resulting hetero-SURMOF thin films thus contain a sensitizer layer, Zn-Pd-DCP (denoted as B), sandwiched by two emitter layers, Zn-ADB (denoted as A), as shown in Fig. 11(a) and (b).
 Fig. 11  (a) SEM cross section of a three-layer emitter–sensitizer–emitter (A–B–A) SURMOF heterostructure on a Si substrate. (b) Out-of-plane XRD diffractograms of A, B, and A + B. (c–e) Photographs of an encapsulated B–A structure under 532 nm laser irradiation. To exclude oxygen, this sample was encapsulated between two glass cover slips in a glovebox with an inert atmosphere. Two-component epoxy was used to seal the slides together. This is visible as the scattering, roughly circular form around the pinkish square heterostructure of the upconverting film. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. 
The chromophores within the sensitizer B layer are excited with green (532 nm) photons. At this wavelength, the emitter A layer is transparent. The singlet lifetime of the sensitizer Pd-DCP in the B layer is less than 10 ps, and almost all absorbed photons initially generate triplet states in B due to such fast intersystem crossing in the sensitizer layer. The triplets that, by diffusion, reach and cross the B–A heterojunction via Dexter electron exchange will be collected in the A layer. Once trapped in the A layer, pairs of triplets can decay via TTA-UC, as evidenced by the emission of higher-energy blue photons. Therefore, the observation of upconverted blue emission coming from the sample (Fig. 11(c)–(e)) is direct evidence that the SURMOF–SURMOF heterojunction is of sufficient quality for excitons to move across it.
The structural quality of these well-defined, crystalline heterojunctions exceeds that of normal organic/organic interfaces (e.g., between organic polymers or for interfaces prepared using PVD growth of hetero-organic layers). SURMOF heterojunctions thus offer the prospect of studying the Dexter transfer of triplet excitons over such organic/organic interfaces using theoretical methods.
CO2 reduction
The reduction of CO2 to higher-value chemical products is an energetically and kinetically challenging chemical process. Two of the most important possibilities for bringing about the individual endothermic multielectron reaction steps required for this process are electrocatalysis and photocatalysis. Depending on the final product, multiple electrons have to be transferred: two for the production of carbon monoxide and formic acid, four for formaldehyde, six for methanol, and eight for methane. Because of its huge importance, extensive effort has been devoted to the development of molecular catalysts for CO2 reduction.166,167
It has been demonstrated that MOFs acting as efficient catalysts for carbon dioxide reduction can be designed in a straightforward fashion using organic linkers containing well-established molecular catalysts. Deposition of the corresponding MOF thin film directly on a conductive electrode yields a photo/electrocatalytic device that can be characterized using established procedures. Surface-supported MOF thin films exhibit a number of advantages with regard to CO2 reduction, including a large number of catalytic sites and enhancement of the local concentration of CO2 around the catalytic active centers inside the MOF cavities. In addition, they benefit from (i) elimination of the deactivation process such as by aggregation of the highly active catalyst, (ii) separation of the catalysts from the reaction solution, and (iii) promotion of light-induced charge separation.168
Previous examples illustrating the potential of MOF thin films as efficient electro- and/or photo-catalysts for the reduction of CO2 are presented in Fig. 12(d) and (h).
 Fig. 12  Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. (a) Molecular structure of cobalt-metalated TCPP linker, (b) crystal structure of Al2(OH)2TCPP-Co MOF, (c) SEM image of the MOF catalyst film integrated in a conductive substrate with plate-like morphology, and (d) schematic illustration of the functional CO2 electrochemical reduction system. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction. (e) Zr6O4(OH)4(–CO2)12 secondary building units are combined with BPDC and ReTC linkers to form (f) a face-centered cubic Ren-MOF. (g) TEM image of Ag⊂Re3-MOF showing Re3-MOF constructed on the surface of an Ag nanocube. (h) Schematic illustration of Ren-MOF coated on an Ag nanocube for plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic conversion of CO2. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
To achieve electrocatalytic reduction of CO2, Yang, Yaghi, et al.169 deposited a novel porphyrin-containing MOF (AL2(OH)2TCPP-M, TCPP = 4,4′,4′′,4′′′-(porphyrin-5,10,15,20-terayl)tetrabenzoate, M = Zn, Co, Cu) thin film on an alumina-coated conductive carbon disk electrode using a substrate-seeded heteroepitaxy method (see the section Fabrication methods).
The electrocatalytic performance was determined using a standard three-electrode setup with a titanium counter electrode, an Ag/AgCl reference electrode, and CO2-saturated purified 0.5 M potassium carbonate as the electrolyte. In the case of AL2(OH)2TCPP-Co, a current density of 5.9 mA cm−2 was achieved. In fact, this MOF-based electrocatalytic cell exhibited excellent stability when operated at −0.7 V vs. RHE for up to 7 h. The selectivity to yield CO reached 76% (24% for H2), with a turnover frequency (TOF) ≈ 200 h−1.
A different approach to fabricate MOF thin-film heterocatalysts for the reduction of CO2 to CO was reported by Farha, Hupp, and coworkers.170 They deposited Fe-porphyrin-based MOF thin films (Fe_MOF-525) onto an FTO substrate using the electrophoretic method (see previous section). The electrolysis was performed using a 1 M CO2-saturated TBAPF6 acetonitrile solution at −1.3 V vs. NHE. They reached a maximum current density of 2.3 mA cm−2. After operating for more than 30 min, a slow degradation of the electrocatalyst was observed. The Faradaic efficiency with regard to CO production amounted to 54 ± 2% (45 ± 1% for H2) with a turnover number (TON) of 272 and an average turnover frequency (TOF) of 64 h−1 (after 4 hours of electrocatalysis).
Using a different approach, Liu, Sun, and coworkers171 found that, by controlling the orientation of the SURMOF thin film, the Faradaic efficiency for CO production can be increased substantially. Using the LPE approach, they grew a monolithic Re-SURMOF thin film with (001) orientation on an FTO substrate. For these high-quality MOF thin films, the Faradaic efficiency was found to increase to 93 ± 5% for CO (TONCO 580) at −1.6 V vs. NHE.
By appropriate selection of the MOF – in particular the organic linkers used to construct the MOF – as well as the electrolytes, the electrocatalytic reduction of CO2 can yield various products. Kulandainathan and workers172 investigated the electrocatalytic activity of HKUST-1 thin films immobilized on a glassy carbon (GC) electrode with Nafion in CO2-saturated N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) containing tetrabutylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TBATFB). These authors found that the HKUST-1/GC can reduce CO2 to yield oxalic acid with a Faradaic efficiency of 51%. For carbon paper electrodes coated with thin films of another MOF, Zn-BTC,173 again in an ionic liquid electrolyte (1-butyl-3-methylimidazolium perchlorate (BMIMClO4)), CO2 was reduced to various products including CH4, CO, and H2 at −2.2 V vs. Ag/Ag+, with Faradaic efficiencies of 88.3 ± 3.8%, 6.8 ± 2.1%, and 4.9 ± 1.0% for CH4, CO, and H2, respectively. These electrodes were stable for at least 2 h.
Several studies demonstrated that MOF materials also exhibit great potential for the photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to CO; see Fig. 12(h). Yang, Yaghi, and coworkers174 used a particular MOF built from Zr-containing nodes, Zr6O4(OH)4(–CO2)12, which are connected by BPDC and ReTC linkers (Fig. 12(a)). The resulting face-centered cubic Ren-MOF contains 12 coordinated Zr-based metal clusters which are interconnected by 21 BPDC and 3 ReTC linkers; see Fig. 12(f). The Ren-MOF film was deposited on Ag nanocubes via the solvothermal method forming Ag⊂Ren-MOF; see Fig. 12(g). The photocatalytic reduction of CO2 was carried out in a CO2-saturated acetonitrile/triethylamine mixture (MeCN/TEA = 20:1), where TEA served as a sacrificial electron donor. The highest turnover on Ag⊂Re3-MOF-16 nm resulted in 7 fold enhancement of photocatalytic activity over Re3-MOF under visible light, and there was no activity observed without Ren-MOF. This striking performance improvement in the presence of the Ag clusters was explained by the plasmonic properties of the Ag particles. Under irradiation with visible light, plasmons excited in the Ag nanocubes generate highly intensified near-surface electric fields, which are in fact substantially higher than the incident electromagnetic field. The catalytic Re3-center contained in the MOF coating of the Ag nanocubes therefore experiences highly intensified electric fields and, as a result, shows substantially higher photocatalytic activity.
The photocatalytic performance of MOFs can be substantially enhanced by MOF thin films coated on other materials. Wang and coworkers168 reported that coating graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) with Co-ZIF-9 to form a co-catalyst facilitates the adsorption of CO2 and promotes light-induced charge separation, leading to high photocatalytic activity for CO2 conversion to CO upon visible light illumination under mild reaction conditions. Ye and coworkers175 demonstrated that a UiO-66 thin film coated on nanosized carbon nitride nanosheets via the electrophoretic method can substantially suppress electron–hole pair recombination in the carbon nitride nanosheet. This occurs due to the electron transfer from the photoexcited carbon nitride nanosheet to UiO-66, which supplies long-lived electrons for the reduction of CO2 molecules captured in UiO-66. As a result, the photocatalytic activity for the CO2 conversion to CO was enhanced 1.6 fold with a UiO-66/carbon nitride nanosheet heterogeneous photocatalyst.
Water splitting
The ability to split water, a rather abundant source of hydrogen, into O2 and H2 opens up many opportunities to convert sunlight into chemical energy. Basically, the water splitting reaction can be divided into two half reactions: first, water oxidation (oxygen evolution reaction (OER)) and, second, water reduction (hydrogen evolution reaction (HER)); see Fig. 13(a).
 Fig. 13  (a) Left: Thin sheets of Ni–Co metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) as anodic oxygen evolution electrocatalysts under alkaline conditions. The inset shows the structure of the Ni–Co MOF electrocatalyst. Right: Nu-1000_Ni–S thin films as cathodic hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts under acidic conditions. The inset shows the structure of the NU-1000_Ni–S electrocatalyst. Modified based on ref. 180 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. (b) Right: TEM image of ultrathin NiCo-UMOFNs. Left: Polarization curves of NiCo-UMOFNs, Ni-UMOFNs, Co-UMOFNs, RuO2, and bulk NiCo-MOFs in an O2-saturated 1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The dotted horizontal line is a guide for the eye showing a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. (c) Left: Cross-sectional SEM image of NU-1000_Ni–S films. Right: J–V curves of four types of electrodes: bare FTO (dotted black), FTO_NU-1000 (dotted red), FTO_Ni–S (black), and NU-1000_Ni–S (red). Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2015. 
Usually, the formation of H–H and OO bonds in and from water is inherently slow or requires high electrochemical potentials.
To overcome these limitations, it is necessary to employ electrocatalysts to lower the overpotentials for driving water oxidation and proton reduction. In recent years, MOF-based thin-film electrodes have been demonstrated to exhibit great potential for promising photo- and/or electrocatalytic water splitting.176–179
To further enhance the photo- and/or electrocatalytic performances of MOF-based catalysts, a wide variety of novel linkers and nodes have been designed with the goal of optimizing the MOF catalytic activity. These approaches include (i) integration of π-conjugated organic ligands into the framework to prolong the electron–hole recombination time,128,183 (ii) incorporation of molecular catalysts,184 semiconductor quantum dots,185 metal nanoparticles,176 and metal ions132 into MOF thin films; and (iii) fabrication of ultrathin 2D MOF nanosheets (UMOFNs). This last approach offers several advantages, including rapid mass transport, superior electron transfer, and extremely high percentages of exposed catalytic active surfaces with coordinatively unsaturated metal sites to ensure high catalytic activity; and distinct surface atomic structures and bonding arrangements that are easily identifiable and tunable.181 Wang and coworkers181 reported a 2D ultrathin NiCo bimetal–organic framework (NiCo-UMOFNs), with a space group of C2/m consisting of two metal nodes, Ni and Co, connected via a benzenedicarboxylic acid (BDC) linker (Fig. 13(a), left) and a thickness of ∼3 nm (Fig. 13(b), right). In this structure, both the Co and Ni atoms are octahedrally coordinated by six O atoms, and these pseudo-octahedra are further edge/corner connected with each other along the [010]/[001] direction in the (200) crystallographic plane, forming 2D bimetal layers separated by BDC molecules.
The NiCo-UMOFNs were coated onto glassy carbon (GC) and copper foam using the powder MOF-based deposition approach, as described previously in the Fabrication methods section.
The electrocatalytic performance of NiCo-UMOFNs was characterized using a three-electrode electrochemical cell using NiCo-UMOFNs/GC or NiCo-UMOFNs/Cu as a working electrode, and Pt wire and an Ag/AgCl electrode as a counter electrode and reference electrode, respectively, in a 1 M KOH aqueous solution.
The ultrathin NiCo-UMOFNs exhibited high electrocatalytic activity for the OER. The NiCo-UMOFNs/GC showed an overpotential of only 250 mV, and the corresponding current density amounted to 110 mA cm−2. A slightly different electrode based on NiCo-UMOFNs/Cu demonstrated an even lower overpotential of 189 mV at current densities of 10 mA cm−2. Moreover, the NiCo-UMOFNs exhibited an impressive long-term stability (200 h) in alkane solutions (applied voltage of 1.48 V vs. Ag/AgCl, corresponding to an overpotential of 0.25 V). These values are clearly superior to those of commercial RuO2-based electrocatalysts, where the anodic current decay amounts to 60.3% after operation times of ∼11 h.181
The significantly higher electrocatalytic activity of NiCo-UMOFNs for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER) is attributed to coordinatively unsaturated metal sites within the porous ultrathin NiCo-UMOFN layers. Such special sites provide pronounced catalytic activity for MOFs186,187 and improve the electrocatalytic activity. Farha, Hupp, and coworkers182 reported an acid-stable proton-conducting metal–organic framework material (NU-1000) that is solvothermally grown on an FTO electrode and substantially accelerates the electrochemical hydrogen evolution. The NU-1000 MOF used in this work consists of Zr6(μ3-O)4(μ3-OH)4(OH)4(OH2)4 nodes and a TBAPy4− linker (H4TBAPy = 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(p-benzoic acid)pyrene), as shown in Fig. 13(a). After the MOF thin film formation, the Ni–S (a material comprising nickel and sulfur; its main product is Ni3S2 after 2 min electrodeposition) was electrodeposited on NU-1000/FTO. This procedure resulted in a hybrid multilayer of an NU-1000_Ni–S electrocatalytic device as shown in Fig. 13(c).
The NU-1000_Ni–S exhibits excellent electrocatalytic performance for the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER). In aqueous HCl solutions at pH 1, the hybrid material can deliver a catalytic current of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of just 238 mV – a sizable (ca. 200 mV) decrease in the overpotential relative to electrocatalysts built with MOF-free Ni–S films. The significant improvement in electrocatalytic activity for the HER has been attributed to the ability of the proton-conductive MOF to favorably modify the immediate chemical environment of the sulfide-based catalyst.
Electronic devices
The use of metal–organic frameworks for the fabrication of sensor devices involves a large area of research activities, which has been well documented in previous reviews.15,17,26,188–191 We would like to mention, however, the recent work by Stavila et al. who used a MOF thin film grown on an acoustic device surface using the layer-by-layer method for the detection of volatile hydrocarbons.192
In this context, we will mainly focus on applications where MOF thin films are used as an active component, i.e. not just as an insulating material. Certainly, the particular properties of MOFs make them attractive candidates also for taking over a passive role in conventional electronic circuits (e.g. as low dielectrics devices193–195). After it was demonstrated that MOFs can be rendered with electric conductivity, either by loading with appropriate molecules196,197 or by using appropriate linkers,198 a number of MOF-based electronic devices were presented.14,25,26 Since the presence of electrical contacts is mandatory in these applications, the deposition of thin films on conducting substrates is a key requirement. The essential properties of electronic devices, such as electric conductivity,197,199–201 thermoelectric behavior,202 and magnetism,203,204 can be improved by designing new types of MOFs or integrating guest species into MOFs. This is due to their tunable chemical and physical properties. Electronic active MOF materials can be fabricated for use in electronic devices such as a MOF-based memory device (memristor)205,206 or the MOF-based field-effect transistor (FET).207

Memristor. 
The realization of a MOF thin film-based memristor was reported by Redel, Baumgart, Wöll, and coworkers using lithographical methods.208 The performance of the SURMOF device is quite different from an earlier, MOF single-crystal based memristor as reported by Grzybowski and coworkers,205 in particular as regards switching speed, which is much higher for the crystalline HKUST-1 films prepared by LPE (see the Fabrication methods section).
The SURMOF-based nanodevice was fabricated using nm-thick HKUST-1 films sandwiched between a conductive support (SAM/Au/Si), serving as a bottom electrode, and a lithographically fabricated top-electrode (Au/Al), as schematically shown in Fig. 14(a).
 Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of a SURMOF test device structure with an Au/SURMOF/Al/Au stack and SURMOF film and measurement setup. (b) Switching cycle of 10.5 nm thick HKUST-1 SURMOF devices without ferrocene loading. (c) Schematic drawing of HKUST-1 SURMOF loaded with ferrocene and (d) corresponding switching cycles. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. 
The resistive switching of this HKUST-1 SURMOF device was characterized using a parameter analyzer. In a typical switching cycle, the device changes to a higher resistance (ROFF) state at VRESET and to a lower resistance (RON) state at VSET by applying a slow voltage ramp between −0.8 V to +0.8 V. This is typical behavior for nonvolatile resistive random access memory (RRAM).
The bipolar switching characteristics for a 10 nm thick HKUST-1 SURMOF device without ferrocene are shown in Fig. 14(b). During a slow voltage sweep from 0 to −0.8 V, there was transition to a low-resistance state. Inversely, during a slow voltage sweep from 0 to 0.8 V, a transition back to the high-resistance state is observed. After ferrocene was loaded into the pores of HKUST-1 (see Fig. 14(c)), a more regular switching behavior also occurred due to the lowered resistance within the SURMOF layer. This resistance resulted because of the increased conductivity from loading ferrocene into the pores of HKUST-1, as shown in Fig. 14(d). These results reveal the huge flexibility of MOF materials with regard to applications in SURMOF-RRAM devices.


Dielectrics. 
Because of their rather small dielectric constants, MOF materials are considered to be suitable candidates to fabricate low-k dielectrics layers.209–212 It has been demonstrated that the dielectric constant is strongly dependent on the form of the MOFs; i.e., low-k powder MOFs become high-k when they exist in the form of MOF thin films.119
Cao and coworkers reported an interpenetrated MOF thin film-based high-k dielectric device119 (Fig. 15(a)). The MOF thin film was prepared using the electrochemical deposition method (anodic deposition, see the Fabrication methods section), which contains an interpenetrated structure with 1,3,5-tris[4-(carboxyphenyl)oxamethyl]-2,4,6-trimethylbenzene (H3TBTC) as an organic building unit and Zn as the metal node (Fig. 15(b) and (c)).
 Fig. 15  Schematic drawing of (a) a MOF-based dielectric device and (b) the two-fold interpenetrated MOF architectures. (c) SEM images of MOF thin films prepared at a voltage of 3 V for 60 s. (d) Schematic of the space-charge distribution in the MOF thin film and in bulk MOFs. (e) Dielectric constant of a MOF film and powder MOFs after removal of the guest molecules during the heating process. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. 
The interpenetrated MOF thin film-based dielectrics possess a dielectric constant (k) of 19.5 at a frequency of 1 MHz, which is much larger than those of most previously reported MOFs except for ferroelectric MOFs. In contrast, the powder MOFs only exhibit a small k of 5.9, which is still substantially larger than most of the previously reported MOFs having a typical dielectric constant less than 4 (Fig. 15(e)).
The excellent dielectric properties, both of MOF thin films and powder MOFs, can be well explained due to the large density and the total polarizability of the molecules within the interpenetrated materials. The superior performance of MOF thin films over powder MOFs is attributed to the space-charge relaxation phenomenon of the polar guest molecules within MOF thin films, as shown in Fig. 15(d).


Field-effect transistors (FETs). 
Xu and coworkers reported MOF-based field-effect transistors.207 The semiconducting MOF used, Ni3(HITP)2, consisted of HITP·6HCl (HITP = 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaminotriphenylene) organic linkers and NiCl2·6H2O nodes. MOF thin films were prepared using the interfacial synthetic approach (air–liquid interface). The resulting Ni3(HITP)2 layers with a room-temperature conductivity of 40 S cm−1 were transferred onto a SiO2/Si wafer substrate by a simple stamping process. To realize the FET, top electrodes were deposited using a PVD process, while the substrate served as the gate. The device geometry is shown in Fig. 16(a) (left).
 Fig. 16  Left: (a) Schematic representation of Ni3(HITP)2-based porous FETs and electrical characteristics of FETs. (b) Output and transfer curves. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Right: (a) Obtained OFET device and schematic structure of OFET with the interfacial modification of SiO2 dielectric layers by HKUST-1 SURMOF. (b) Output characteristic and transfer characteristic of the OFET device with HKUST-1 (three cycles)/SiO2/Si. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017. 
The performance of this first MOF-based FET is demonstrated by the I/V characteristics displayed in Fig. 16(b) (left). The linear Ids–Vds curves and the gradual slope increase with Vds revealed a p-type behavior of the MOF material. They also demonstrate an impressive performance of the charge carrier transport due to the short layer distance (3.5 Å), which is short enough to create sufficient orbital overlap between adjacent layers through π–π interactions. Xu's work not only provides a good method to prepare high quality MOF thin films, but also takes a key step forward in the research of MOF-based electronic devices.
Zheng, Zhang, and coworkers reported the first application of a MOF thin film in organic field-effect transistors (OFETs).213 The OFET device was fabricated on MOF/SiO2/Si, which was coated with a semiconducting polymer of PTB7-Th (poly[4,8-bis(5-(2-ethylhexyl)thiophene-2-yl)benzo[1,2-b:4,5-b′]dithiophene-co-3-fluorothieno[3,4-b]thiophene-2-carboxylate]) and two top Au electrodes on the semiconducting film, as displayed in Fig. 16(a) (right).
The HKUST-1 SURMOF thin film was prepared by the LPE approach to modify the SiO2 dielectric layer in the OFETs. The authors found that the performance of the HKUST-1/SiO2-based OFETs, such as charge mobility, threshold voltage, and current on/off ratio, was significantly improved compared to that of the bare dielectric layer SiO2. The OFET modified with three LPE dipping cycles of HKUST-1 SURMOF exhibited a hole mobility of (1.15 ± 0.23) × 10−2 cm2 V−1 s−1 and a threshold voltage less than 10 V (Fig. 16(b) (right)). This performance is superior to that of an OFET without HKUST-1 SURMOF coating (average hole mobility of 5.17 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1 and threshold voltage larger than 13 V).
The performance enhancement of the device is mainly attributed to the highly crystalline, homogeneous, and low-k HKUST-1 SURMOF grown on the SiO2/Si substrate and the smaller interface trap density in the OFET.


Thermoelectrics. 
Talin and coworkers reported the first MOF thin film-based thermoelectric device.202 For their proof-of-principle device they used the liquid-phase epitaxy approach to deposit (111) oriented Cu3(BTC)2 films with a thickness of ∼200 nm onto a quartz substrate with pre-patterned Au contacts.85 The SURMOF-coated electrode was then partially immersed in a TCNQ/methanol solution to load TCNQ (7,7,8,8-tetracyanaoquinodimethane) molecules into the MOF pores, thus obtaining an electrically conducting TCNQ@Cu3(BTC)2 thin film device.
The thermoelectric properties of the TCNQ@Cu3(BTC)2 thin film were measured using Peltier temperature control elements to create a temperature gradient (cold and hot), and an IR camera to measure the temperature gradient as displayed in Fig. 17(a) and (b).
 Fig. 17  Thermoelectric characterization of the MOF thin film devices. (a) Schematic of the measurement. (b) Example of an IR image taken during one of the measurements. The electrical contacts appear cold in the image because of their different emissivity compared with the MOF. (c) Thermovoltage as a function of the applied temperature difference. (d–f) Seebeck coefficient, conductivity and power factor as a function of the average temperature, respectively. The dashed lines are linear fits. Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2015. 
Plots of thermovoltage versus ΔT measured at 40 °C and the Seebeck coefficient as a function of the average temperature are shown in Fig. 17(c) and (d), respectively. The obtained Seebeck coefficient of 375 μV K−1 is surprisingly large, it is comparable to that of the best organic materials214 and exceeds that of Bi2Te3.215 As shown in Fig. 17(e) and (f), the linear behavior of electrical conductivity as a function of temperature is consistent with a temperature-activated charge carrier transport with an energy barrier of 0.052 eV, and the power factor with a value of 0.057 μW m−2 K−1 at room temperature is about two orders of magnitude lower than the best organic and inorganic materials due to the relatively lower electrical conductivity of TCNQ@Cu3 (BTC)2. In combination with ab initio calculations, the observed large positive Seebeck coefficient resulted from the hole transport in the MOF valence band and the low thermal conductivity value is most likely due to the presence of disorder within the MOF thin film.

Energy storage via MOF-based capacitors and batteries

Supercapacitor. 
A supercapacitor or an electric double-layer capacitor (EDLC) is a high-capacity electrochemical device with huge capacitance values. They are of interest for applications requiring many rapid charge/discharge cycles. Supercapacitors do not use the conventional solid dielectric of ordinary capacitors. These devices instead store electrical energy either in the electrochemical double layer (EDL) formed by the electrolyte ions on the surface of the electrode, or electrochemically by redox reactions involving the surface regions of electrode materials. Research on supercapacitors has focused on achieving higher energy densities. To further increase the capacity, new electrode materials are required with good electrical conductivity, high surface area, and tailored pore sizes. Since they meet many of these criteria, MOF thin films are promising candidates for the fabrication of supercapacitors.
One of the first realizations of such MOF-based energy storage devices was reported by Dincă and coworkers, who fabricated a conductive MOF electrode to build a stable supercapacitor with high areal capacitance.216 A conductive MOF, Ni3(HITP)2, consisting of 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaaminotriphenylene linkers and Ni metal nodes, was synthesized using solvothermal methods. The bulk materials (see Fig. 18(a) and (b)) exhibited an electrical conductivity greater than 5000 S m−1 and a surface area of 630 m2 g−1.
 Fig. 18  Structural schematics of Ni3(HITP)2. (a) Molecular structure of Ni3(HITP)2. (b) Relative size of pores, electrolyte Et4N+ and BF4− ions, and acetonitrile solvent molecules, shown in a space-filling diagram of idealized Ni3(HITP)2. Green, lime, blue, gray, brown, and white spheres represent Ni, F, N, C, B, and H atoms, respectively. Performance of Ni3(HITP)2 electrodes in a symmetrical supercapacitor cell up to 1 V. (c) Cyclic voltammetry at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 at increasing cell voltage. (d) Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves at current densities of 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 216 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. 
Coating the supercapacitor electrodes was performed by manually pressing Ni3(HITP)2 powder into a Pt mesh in an electrolyte consisting of tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate (TEABF4) and acetonitrile (ACN).
Typical capacitive behaviors of Ni3(HITP)2 with nearly rectangular and triangular traces were observed in the cyclic voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge and discharge of a two-electrode symmetrical supercapacitor cell (Fig. 18(c) and (d)).
At a low discharge rate of 0.05 A g−1 the gravimetric capacitance is 111 F g−1, which is in the same range as activated carbons and higher than that for carbon nanotubes. Normalized to the specific surface area, the value obtained for Ni3(HITP)2, 18 F cm−2, is higher than that observed for any carbon material except graphene. The excellent supercapacitor performance of Ni3(HITP)2 is attributed to the improvement in the double layer capacitance from the electrolyte movement within the 1D channels of Ni3(HITP)2.
Kang, Yaghi, et al. reported that nanocrystal MOFs (nMOFs) can be doped with graphene and then used as electrode materials for supercapacitors.217 The best nMOF with the highest capacitance, nMOF-867, was synthesized from Zr6O6(CO2)12 and 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylate (BYDC) building units under solvothermal conditions, as shown in Fig. 19(a).
 Fig. 19  (a) Structure and morphology of nMOF-867 constructed with Zr6O6(CO2)12 and 2,20-bipyridine-5,50-dicarboxylate (BYDC). (b) Schematic representation of nMOF supercapacitors. (c) Areal capacitance of the highest nMOF supercapacitor (nMOF-867) and comparison to activated carbon and graphene. Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
Fabrication of nMOF films with a thickness of 2 μm occurred by spin coating a nMOF/graphene/hexane dispersion on the cleaned Ti substrates. These were assembled in a coin-shaped supercapacitor with a separator (monolayer polypropylene separator membranes) and an electrolyte (1.0 M tetraethylammonium tetrafluoroborate ((C2H5)4NBF4) in acetonitrile), as shown in Fig. 19(b). It is expected that, by charging the device, the positive and negative ions of the electrolyte move in opposite directions through the separator and into the MOF pores. During discharge, the ions migrate out of the pores because of their high porosity and the openness of their structure, which should result in high capacity for storing ions and the robust cycling of ions within the cell, respectively.
Among 23 nMOF-based supercapacitors, nMOF-867 exhibits excellent performance and properties as a supercapacitor. It has stack and areal capacitances of 0.64 and 5.09 mF cm−2, respectively, which are about six times those of supercapacitors made from benchmark commercial activated carbon and graphene materials, as shown in Fig. 19(c).


Batteries. 
The use of metal–organic frameworks for the fabrication of batteries is very appealing. In the past few years, a number of device concepts based on several different MOF materials have been proposed, including Li batteries,218–237 Li–S batteries,238–241 Li–O2 batteries,242 redox flow batteries,243 sodium batteries,244,245 and alkaline batteries.246 The use of MOF thin film electrodes for Li, Li–S, and Li–O2 batteries has been recently reviewed by Deng247 and Wang.248 Here, the use of MOF thin-film electrodes for the realization of the emerging dual-ion battery, alkaline battery, redox flow battery, and sodium ion battery, which have not been covered in previous reviews, will be presented.
Li, Liu, and coworkers reported MOF electrodes as electrocatalysts for aqueous zinc–polyiodide redox flow batteries.243 In these applications, the powder MOFs (MIL-125-NH2, UiO-66-CH3) were deposited on graphite felts (GFs) using a powder MOF-based deposition method (see the Fabrication methods section), as illustrated in Fig. 20(a).
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of the MOF-based zinc-polyiodide redox flow battery (ZIB). Electrochemical performances of the pristine GF and the MOF-modified GF electrodes. (b) Charge/discharge curves. (c) Energy efficiency with different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 243 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
The performance of MOF-based flow cells is shown in Fig. 20(b) and (c). For both UiO-66-CH3 and MIL-125-NH2-based electrodes, there was improved electrochemical activity and reversibility toward the redox couple of I−/I3− compared to pristine graphite powders. The charge/discharge curves in Fig. 20(c), recorded for MIL-125-NH2-based electrodes, demonstrated the smallest overpotentials (highest discharge voltage and lowest charge voltage) among all of the samples.
The flow cells with MIL-125-NH2-modified GFs or UiO-66-CH3-modified GFs serving as the positive electrodes both demonstrate higher energy efficiency values than those with pristine GFs. The energy efficiency values are improved by around 6.4% and 2.7%, respectively, at the current density of 30 mA cm−2, due to the Lewis acid sites in the MOFs that can act as catalytic sites to accelerate the electron transfer. These can accept electrons and facilitate the transport of electrons.
Long and coworkers reported a sodium battery based on a redox-active MOF.244 In this case, the coating of the carbon cloth electrodes was carried out using the drop-cast method applied to a suspension of a redox-active MOF, Fe2(dobpdc) (dobpdc4− = 4,4′-dioxidobiphenyl-3,3′-dicarboxylate) and Fe2(dobdc) (dobdc4− = 2,5-dioxidobenzene-1,4-dicarboxylate).249 The final device is shown in Fig. 21(a).
 Fig. 21  (a) Structure of the Fe2(dobpdc) framework. Generalized schematic of how Fe2(dobpdc) operates in an electrochemical cell. For the electrochemical reduction, the anions, A−, can be tetrafluoroborate, hexafluorophosphate, bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, or tetrakis(perfluorophenyl)borate. The cations, M+, can be lithium, sodium, or potassium. Half-cell performance of a prototype sodium battery with a 0.6 M NaPF6 electrolyte in 30:70 EC/DMC. The theoretical capacity is 140 mA h g−1. (b) Cycle-rate dependence. (c) Change in capacity with cycle number at 1C. Reproduced from ref. 244 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. 
The performance of the redox MOF-based sodium battery is impressive, as evident from an inspection of the data shown in Fig. 21(b) and (c). The dependence of the charge/discharge rate on capacity within the resulting battery indicates that the much larger pore size and significantly closer iron–iron contacts within Fe2(dobpdc) are responsible for the fast kinetics. Upon partial oxidation of Fe2(dobpdc), the electronic properties of the material changed dramatically with enhanced charge-transfer mobility. The coulombic efficiency of the sodium half-cell was larger than 99% over 50 oxidation/reduction cycles. After 10 cycles, the cell capacity plateaued at approximately 90 mA h g−1, which is more than double the capacity of other iron-based MOFs and is comparable to that of graphite intercalation compounds. The change in the discharge profile between the 10th and the 50th cycle reveals a slow decrease in the electrode kinetics for increasing cycle numbers, whereas the total capacity remained the same. The overall performance of this MOF-based battery is impressive, as the specific stored energy is comparable to that of graphite intercalation compounds.
Pei, Chen, et al. reported high-performance alkaline battery–supercapacitor hybrid devices based on a layered Ni-based MOF.246 The Ni-MOF nanosheets were synthesized using NiCl2·6H2O and p-benzenedicarboxylic acid as building units under solvothermal conditions. The resulting structure comprises stacks of 2D layers, with typical thicknesses of 20–80 nm, a surface area of 295.7 m2 g−1, and a pore size of 3.6 nm. The structure of this MOF is schematically depicted in Fig. 22(a).
 Fig. 22  (a) View of the structure of Ni-MOF along the a-axis. (b) Schematic illustration of the alkaline battery–supercapacitor hybrid device containing Ni-MOF and CNT-COOH as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. The electrochemical measurements of an Ni-MOF//CNT-COOH device in a 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6 solution: (c) CV curves of the device in different potential windows at 10 mV s−1 and (d) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the device at various current densities. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016. 
In this case, the coating of the electrodes was accomplished by drop-casting a slurry of Ni-MOF, carbon black, and polyvinylidene difluoride dissolved in N-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone onto nickel foam. A platinum foil was used as a counter electrode, a saturated calomel electrode (SCE) was the reference electrode, and the electrolyte was KOH/K4Fe(CN)6. The device architecture is displayed in Fig. 22(b).
The performance of the MOF-based alkaline battery–supercapacitor hybrid device is shown in Fig. 22(c)–(f). The CV curves are nearly rectangular and symmetric in shape, and the device is stable up to an optimal electrochemical voltage window of 1.4 V. The specific capacity values calculated were 96.7, 90.7, 85.5, and 79.8 mA h g−1 at current densities of 1, 2, 5, and 10 A g−1, respectively. The device exhibits an excellent electrochemical long-time cyclic stability for 3000 consecutive cycles at a current density of 10 A g−1, and it still retains 90.6% of its initial capacity. The device has an excellent electrochemical performance with a high-energy density of 55.8 W h kg−1 and a power density of 7000 W kg−1, which are comparable to Li batteries and supercapacitors, respectively.

Membranes
Recent reports have demonstrated that MOF thin films have the notable potential to be used as a gas-phase membrane for separating small molecules (CH4, CO2, H2, CO) and volatile organic compounds (hydrocarbons, alcohols).250–253 Compared to other materials, MOFs offer the advantages of precise tunability of pore size and flexibility of the structural backbones.9–11 Compared to thermodynamically driven separation methods such as distillation, a membrane-based process can substantially reduce the energy and capital cost of separating molecules on a large scale.254
Heinke and coworkers revealed that the permeate flux can be continuously adjusted using a photoswitchable MOF membrane, as schematically illustrated in Fig. 23(a).23
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of tunable, remote-controllable molecular selectivity by a photoswitchable MOF membrane. (b) SEM cross-section image of the SURMOF membrane on the mesoporous α-Al2O3. (c) The structure of Cu2(AzoBPDC)2(AzoBiPyB) with the azobenzene groups. The transition between trans and cis states can be tuned by irradiation with 365 nm and 455 nm light, respectively. (d) The separation of H2:CO2 and N2:CO2 mixtures. The membrane is irradiated by 365 nm and 455 nm light for 5 min each. The permeances of H2 and CO2 (left), as well as N2 and CO2 (right), are shown in black with the unit of mol s−1 m−2 Pa−1. The molecular selectivities (or separation factors) are shown in red. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. 
The photoswitchable MOF membrane containing Cu2(AzoBPDC)2(AzoBiPyB) (AzoBPDC: 2-phenyldiazenyl-4,40-biphenyldicarboxylic acid; AzoBiPyB: (E)-4,40-(2-(phenyldiazenyl)-1,4-phenylene dipyridine)) (Fig. 23(c)) was fabricated on an α-Al2O3 substrate by LPE with a thickness of ∼2 μm, as shown in Fig. 23(b).
The azobenzene moieties can be switched from the trans to the cis configuration and vice versa by irradiation with ultraviolet or visible light, resulting in a substantial modification of the membrane permeability and separation factor due to the precisely adjusted pore volume. By controlling irradiation times or by simultaneous irradiation with ultraviolet and visible light, the separation for H2:CO2 can be adjusted between 3 and 8 (N2:CO2 = 5–8), as shown in Fig. 23(d).
Challenges
The impressive number of MOF-based devices compiled in this review, most of them reported within the past five years, demonstrates the huge potential of this novel class of designer solids. The rapid increase in devices using these novel nanomaterials as active or passive components results from the unique combination of material properties of these molecular frameworks. Particularly important are their large surface areas, enormous porosity, tunable chemical properties, and physical (electrical, mechanical) properties. Crucial for many of the advanced applications is that several routes are available to produce well-defined thin films of this material with different thicknesses. We expect further rapid development of this field. Of the existing 70000 MOF materials,4 not all have been considered for applications other than gas storage and separation. Also, the number of possible MOFs is virtually infinite. Furthermore, the opportunity to load these porous nanomaterials with functional nanoclusters has only been explored in a few cases to date.255–262 Considering this huge flexibility, we expect to see rapid further improvement of the existing devices and the development of completely new devices with novel, yet unforeseen, functionalities.
Regarding the fabrication of MOF-based materials, and in particular the fabrication of high-quality structures with low defect densities, a number of challenges in fabricating MOF materials must be overcome: (i) improving the thin-film quality; (ii) understanding the thin-film growth mechanism; (iii) controlling the defects; (iv) improving the interface stability; (v) enhancing the electrical conductivity; and (vi) enhancing the charge carrier mobility, reducing recombination rates, and improving the efficiency of charge separation. We will briefly explain these individual challenges below.
(i) Thin film quality
The fabrication of compact, homogeneous, oriented, pin hole-free, smooth, and crystalline surface-supported metal–organic framework thin films with controllable film thickness and scalable dimensions is a critical step toward their broader, large-scale application. MOF thin-film properties, including film thickness, film orientation, and density of film defects, have substantial influence on the performances of electronic and photovoltaic devices using MOF thin films as an active or passive component.263 Among the existing approaches for the fabrication of MOF thin films, the LPE95 and ALD methods have been demonstrated to be the most appropriate for quality. Notably, these two methods allow the film orientation to be controlled by deposition on an appropriately functionalized substrate.
So far, only little attention has been paid to the influence of thin-film quality on the performance of MOF thin-film devices. However, a thorough characterization of defect concentrations in thin films has indicated that, e.g., the LPE method results in MOF thin films with a defect density lower than that in the corresponding bulk material.264,265 In the majority of applications discussed here, thin-film electrodes are coated with mixtures of MOF precursors and other additives, such as polymers or surfactants. For such heterogeneous systems, the morphology, homogeneity, defects, and compactness of the thin-film electrodes, as schematically represented in Fig. 24, are difficult to control; thus, it is difficult to determine the importance of these parameters on device performance. A more systematic analysis is only possible for all-MOF electrodes, e.g., those used by Yang, Yaghi, and coworkers,169 or Liu, Sun, and coworkers171 for CO2 reduction. We foresee that optimization of growth conditions will lead to further improvements in these device characteristics.
 Fig. 24  The types of defects within MOF thin films. Modified based on ref. 266 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2007. 
A number of methods are available for characterizing MOF thin film properties such as thickness, morphology, composition, structure, orientation, and defects. Several methods are available for determining structural parameters. Quartz crystal microbalance (QCM), cross-sectional scanning electron microscopy (SEM), scanning probe microscopy (SPM), or transmission electron microscopy (TEM, mainly for free-standing MOF thin films)267 are appropriate tools for determining the thickness of MOF thin films. In addition, SEM and SPM (thin film roughness) can also be used to characterize the morphology of MOF thin films. The composition of MOF thin films can be characterized by a number of analytical techniques, including infrared (IR),187 Raman spectroscopy,197,262 X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS),43 and time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (TOF-SIMS).268,269
Conventional single crystal or powder X-ray diffraction (XRD), the standard methods for characterizing single crystal and powder MOFs fabricated using conventional methods, is not suited for determining the structural parameters of MOF thin films. Most important here are the so-called out-of-plane and in-plane XRD. A schematic illustration is shown in Fig. 25(a). In brief, out-of-plane measurements are performed in the typical (θ–2θ) configuration.118 With this method, which can be performed with laboratory equipment in a straightforward manner, the periodicity of the MOF thin films perpendicular to the substrate can be determined. For in-plane measurements, which can be most conveniently obtained using a synchrotron source, the periodicity parallel to a surface can be determined.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the XRD experimental setups for MOF thin films. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2017. Selected examples of MOF thin films with the corresponding out-of-plane and in-plane XRD patterns for (b) SURMOF 2, (c) Cu2(BDC)2/Cu(OH)2, and (d) Fe(py)2[Pt(CN)4] (py: pyridine) thin films. (b, c and d) Reproduced from ref. 270, 118 and 41 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2012, 2017, and 2016, respectively. 
These two techniques have been widely used to characterize various types of MOF thin films. As an example, epitaxial SURMOF 2 thin films prepared using the LPE method270,271 and Cu2(BDC)2 fabricated on Cu(OH)2 nanobelts using the SSH approach118 are presented in Fig. 25(b) and (c), respectively. The in-plane and out-of-plane XRD patterns demonstrate that Cu2(BDC)2 thin films are epitaxially grown on Au/SAMs and Cu(OH)2 nanobelts with [001] orientation and a layer distance peak (010); these indicate the 2D structural characteristics of the Cu2(BDC)2 thin films.
Moreover, Kitagawa and coworkers demonstrated the characterization of MOF thin films by utilizing other synchrotron XRD techniques.20,41,43,97,108–111,272–274 Synchrotron X-rays are very well defined geometrically with μm-level beam sizes. Synchrotrons provide very intense beams of high energy X-rays, a million times more intense than laboratory-based X-ray systems with higher depth of penetration on the millimeter scale. As an example, synchrotron in-plane and out-of-plane XRD (λ = 1.555 Å) patterns of a highly oriented crystalline Hofmann-type porous 2D MOF, a Fe(py)2[Pt(CN)4] (py: pyridine) thin film with preferred orientation along the [001] direction, are displayed in Fig. 25(d).
For many applications, macroscale defects, such as pin holes or domain boundaries, are important (Fig. 24). They can be monitored efficiently using microscopic techniques (SEM, SPM,275 TEM,276 and confocal fluorescence microscopy277) due to their significant influence on a variety of properties,186,278–280 including catalytic performance,281–283 gas uptake,284–287 separation efficiency,288–290 electrical conductivity,291–293 and optical band gap.187
Intrinsic and artificially created atomic-scale defects inside MOFs and in MOF thin films have received a lot of attention in recent years. Such defects, e.g., lattice shrinkage of the MOF thin films273 or unsaturated coordination sites of metal nodes, may result from a break in coordination bonds between organic building units and metal nodes, a changed chemical state of metal nodes, or missing linkers294–298 or clusters.299–301
These defects are difficult to see using microscopic techniques. The type of defects (e.g. domain boundaries, vacancies, interstitials, etc.) and defect concentration can be analyzed using a sophisticated combination of diffuse scattering, electron microscopy,267 anomalous X-ray scattering, and pair distribution function measurements.276 Alternatively, spectroscopic techniques such as X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) and vibrational spectroscopy (FTIR)302 are powerful tools for detecting and characterizing local microscale defects and probing their chemical and physical environment within a MOF thin film. Further, with the help of theoretical studies,264,296,303–308 the scenarios of the structure–property relationships for MOF thin films can be established precisely.
Yang and co-workers309 confirmed the presence of Cu vacancies in MOF-505 and their concentrations using XPS in combination with extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectroscopy. Also for the HKUST-1 SURMOF thin films grown on an MHDA/Au substrate (Fig. 26(a)) defects within MOFs were characterized using XPS.264 As shown in Fig. 26(b), the XP spectra indicate the existence of Cu+ in the pristine HKUST-1 SURMOF thin film with a concentration of ∼10%. The concentration of Cu+ reaches ∼40% when the sample is annealed at 420 K. The existence and significant increase in Cu+ upon annealing indicated existing defects within the HKUST-1 SURMOF thin film, which can be further determined using vibrational spectroscopic techniques. Note, that such defects can have a pronounced influence on the diffusion of small molecules through the porous MOF materials.310
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic drawing of HKUST-1 grown on an MHDA/Au substrate. (b) XP spectra of HKUST-1/MHDA/Au at different temperatures. (c) Left: UHV-IRRAS spectra of CO adsorbed on activated HKUST-1/MHDA/Au at 110 K. The sample was annealed at 350 K and 420 K. Right: Cluster model of a MOF that is formed from Cu2+ dimers and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (BTC). Reproduced from ref. 264 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2012. (d) Top: The defective BTC-like linkers. Bottom: UHV-FTIR spectra were obtained after representative defective MOF samples with different defective linkers L1–L4 exposed to various amounts of CO at 90 K. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. 
Vibrational spectroscopic techniques with various probe molecules like CO,264,311 CO2, and CD3CN312–314 are suitable for studying the defects present in low concentrations and buried within the MOF thin films. High-resolution ultrahigh-vacuum (UHV) FTIR has been demonstrated by Wöll and coworkers264 to be a quality-control indicator for the defects that characterize the local environments of Cu2+-paddlewheel nodes, using CO as a probe molecule as shown in Fig. 26(c). In combination with density functional theory (DFT) calculations, the existence of mixed-valence Cu2+/+ paddlewheel nodes was confirmed due to the linker vacancies.
Inspired by this pioneer work, Fischer and co-workers187 designed a series of defective linkers (Fig. 26(d)) that artificially create defects within HKUST-1. The vibrational bands of CO observed in the UHV-PFIR spectra (Fig. 26(d)), together with DFT calculations, suggest that there is one CO molecule coordinating to a regular CuII2(BTC)4 unit and two CO molecules coordinating to the defective CuIICuI(BTC)3 units with linker vacancies. This indicates the presence of defective units.
(ii) Thin-film growth mechanism
While the fabrication of MOF thin films from slurries by employing drop-casting or doctor-blade techniques are straightforward, the assembly of SURMOF thin films using LPE, the method which produces the highest-quality MOF thin films, is much more complicated. To date, the LPE thin-film growth mechanism has been extensively investigated with a focus on the substrate with different functional groups86 and the density of functional groups,94 growth kinetics using a quartz crystal microbalance (QCM),85 the temperature influence using atomic force microscopy (AFM),315 the surface energy dominated growth,316 and the first-layer order of the growth using infrared spectroscopy (IR).317 However, there has been a lack of systematic investigations into solvent effects, humidity effects, and dynamic growth monitoring in combination with in situ spectroscopic techniques. While most successful LPE processes for SURMOF growth are based on ethanol as a solvent, ZIF-8 SURMOFs with high structural quality can only be obtained using methanol as a solvent.318
(iii) Role of defects
Note that defects not only have negative properties. In some cases, e.g. as discussed in connection with catalytic properties in the previous paragraph, their effect is wanted. This is also true in connection with electronic (doping), optical (color centers) and magnetic effects. Highly relevant in this context is a quotation from a recent paper on the role of defects in organic materials by K. Müllen319 “Unravelling the relationships between defects and material properties is a daunting task, but increased analysis and knowledge could be beneficial in many applications.”
We feel that MOF thin films and in particular SURMOFs are very well suited to explore such relationships for the new and rapidly growing class of the metal–organic hybrid materials described in this review, since thin films are better suited for electrical and optical characterization and, more importantly, since defect densities can be controlled in MOF thin films in a straightforward fashion. For example, in the case of SURMOF high quality films with low defect densities can be produced.322 In such high-quality films defects could then be introduced in a controlled fashion, e.g. by using “defective linkers”187 or by heating.265 Note, that with regard to the characterization of optical qualities, MOF thin films are much better suited than the powder materials available from solvothermal synthesis since scattering and refraction occurring at small particles makes the reliable recording of optical properties of powders a rather difficult task.
(iv) Interface stability
As yet, there have been no detailed investigations into the precise structure and quality of substrate/MOF or electrode/MOF interfaces. Several studies have revealed, however, that the adhesion can be very strong. For example, in the case of HKUST-1/Au(111) films, detailed investigations using XRD have not observed delamination, despite the opposite sign of the thermal expansion coefficient (positive for the substrate, negative for the deposited MOF thin film) and even after several heating/cooling cycles.320 This experiment demonstrates that the anchoring of SURMOFs to appropriately functionalized substrates can be very strong.
Although the deposited MOFs themselves may be stable under harsh conditions (such as immersion into strong acidic or alkaline solutions), the anchoring may fail in such cases, as indicated in Fig. 27. Detailed investigations of these interfaces and their influence on, e.g., charge transfer, are scarce. Without doubt, they will influence the electrical transport and govern the resistance of the corresponding contacts.
 Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the interface types of MOF thin films. (a) MOF/SAM interface, (b) MOF/MOF interface, and (c) “intercalated” interface. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014, and ref. 118 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2017, respectively. 
MOF thin-film deposition on substrates exposing functional groups results in the formation of MOF/SAM interfaces (Fig. 2(a)). Another type of interface is created within hetero-MOF multilayers. The boundary within “stacked” MOF layers results in MOF/MOF interfaces (Fig. 27(b)). Here, the defect density depends on the lattice match between the two adjacent MOF lattices, among other effects.321 In Fig. 27(c), MOF thin films constructed using the metal ion source from the substrate will lead to the formation of “intercalated” interfaces; such interfaces are expected to be rather stable. Interface stability is particularly crucial for the use of MOF thin films in electrochemical devices, e.g., for CO2 reduction and water splitting. Whereas SURMOF thin films fabricated using LPE or electrophoretic deposition methods have been observed to degrade already after two-hour electrocatalysis,170,171 MOF thin films prepared by the substrate-seeded approach showed good performance even after operating for several hours.169
(v) Electrical conductivity
Electrical conductivity is a key requirement for applications of MOFs and MOF thin films as energy storage materials in supercapacitors and batteries. Most MOFs are characterized by a sizeable HOMO–LUMO gap and, correspondingly, are medium-to-large bandgap semiconductors322 or insulators with poor electrical conductivity. To overcome this limitation and thus improve the electrical conductivity, several strategies have been proposed.
Particularly successful has been an approach, where the porosity of MOFs was utilized to load organic guest molecules (e.g. ferrocene323 or TCNQ197) into the voids of the metal–organic framework. Using this strategy, the conductivity of MOFs can be substantially enhanced. In the case of TCNQ@HKUST-1 (TCNQ = 7,7,8,8-tetracyanoquinodimethane), electrical conductivity has been increased by six orders of magnitude.197 A different strategy used to improve the electrical performance of MOFs is the synthesis of conductive polymers from suitable precursors loaded into the pores of the framework. After polymerization of the monomer EDOT (3,4-ethoxylene dioxy thiophene), the resulting PEDOT chains, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene),324 rendered a substantially higher conductivity of the MOF–polymer composite.
Instead of enhancing the conductivity via introduction of guests within the frameworks, Dincă and coworkers reported new types of MOFs with intrinsic conductive properties using highly conjugated linkers.325 This approach has been successful in fabricating a supercapacitor with excellent energy storage properties.216
(vi) Charge carrier mobility, recombination, and separation
The use of MOFs as light-harvesting materials for photovoltaics or photocatalysis326 has already been demonstrated for powder MOFs constructed with porphyrin derivatives as organic linkers. The performance was found to be superior to MOFs built from other types of organic linkers.327–331
To improve the performance of MOF-based photovoltaic devices, which is still rather low compared to that of other organic compounds,51,52,154,161 light absorption and charge carrier mobility need to be further improved. At the same time, recombination rates need to be reduced and the efficiency of charge-carrier separation must be enhanced.332 Whereas these goals call for an improvement in the organic linkers or the loading of guest molecules into the pores of MOF thin films, higher efficiencies for exciton dissociation and charge carrier separation might be achieved by creating optimized MOF/MOF heterojunctions between framework materials optimized for electron and hole transport, respectively, using hetero-epitaxy,165,321 a different strategy consists of loading donor/acceptor (D/A)333 molecules into the MOF thin films (Fig. 28).
 Fig. 28  (a) Scheme for donor/acceptor (D/A) molecule loading in MOF hetero-multilayers. Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (b) Electron and hole transport between well-defined organic/organic interfaces in MOF thin-film materials. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016. 
Conclusions and perspective
In summary, the design and fabrication of various surface-supported metal–organic framework thin films have recently resulted in a number of novel devices. The use of MOFs for such advanced applications that require the attachment of electrodes to MOF materials was not foreseen when these porous coordination polymers were first introduced about 20 years ago.334 The success in constructing devices from these materials, in areas such as photovoltaics for solar energy conversion, CO2 reduction, water splitting, electronic devices including memory devices and field-effect transistors (FETs), and energy storage including supercapacitors and batteries, now calls for a more intense investigation into the solution-based/vacuum-based processes introduced to manufacture such MOF thin films.
Although MOF thin films have demonstrated attractive performance in previous studies, there is still a long way to go before these materials can be industrialized and commercialized. Besides, several challenges must be addressed before MOF thin films can be directly applied. We believe that, with more research effort, MOF thin films will be further extended into other unexplored fields.
Author contributions
The manuscript was written through contributions from all authors. Both authors have approved the final version of the manuscript.
Competing financial interest
The authors declare no competing financial interests.
Acknowledgements
We thank Dr S. Begum, Dr H. Gliemann, Dr L. Heinke, Dr E. Redel, Dr J. Rinck and Dr O. Shekhah for a careful reading of the manuscript. Prof. Z. Tian and Prof. L. Sun have provided valuable suggestions. Financial support from the National Basic Research Program of China (973 program) (2014CB239402), the Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 21673032), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (DUT17LK21), the State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surfaces, Xiamen University (201507) as well as from the German Science council through SFB 1176 (project C4 and C6) and SPP1928 “COORNET” is gratefully acknowledged.
References
O. M. Yaghi, Reticular Chemistry-Construction, Properties, and Precision Reactions of Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 15507–15509 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Kitagawa, R. Kitaura and S. Noro, Functional porous coordination polymers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 2334–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Peplow, The Hole Story, Nature, 2015, 520, 148–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Z. Moghadam, A. Li, S. B. Wiggin, A. Tao, A. G. P. Maloney, P. A. Wood, S. C. Ward and F.-D. Jimenez, Development of a Cambridge Structural Database Subset: A Collection of Metal–Organic Frameworks for Past, Present, and Future, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(7), 2618–2625 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Wilmer and R. Q. Snurr, Large-Scale Generation and Screening of Hypothetical Metal–Organic Frameworks for Applications in Gas Storage and Separations, Prediction and Calculation of Crystal Structures: Methods and Applications, 2014, 345, 257–289 CAS .
C. E. Wilmer, M. Leaf, C. Y. Lee, O. K. Farha, B. G. Hauser, J. T. Hupp and R. Q. Snurr, Large-scale screening of hypothetical metal–organic frameworks, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 83–89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Furukawa, K. E. Cordova, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, The Chemistry and Applications of Metal–Organic Frameworks, Science, 2013, 341, 1230444 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Eddaoudi, J. Kim, N. Rosi, D. Vodak, J. Wachter, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Systematic design of pore size and functionality in isoreticular MOFs and their application in methane storage, Science, 2002, 295, 469–472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Brown, N. A. Brunelli, K. Eum, F. Rashidi, J. R. Johnson, W. J. Koros, C. W. Jones and S. Nair, Interfacial microfluidic processing of metal–organic framework hollow fiber membranes, Science, 2014, 345, 72–75 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, Y. S. Li, Y. J. Ban, H. Jin, W. M. Jiao, X. L. Liu and W. S. Yang, Metal–organic framework nanosheets as building blocks for molecular sieving membranes, Science, 2014, 346, 1356–1359 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Rodenas, I. Luz, G. Prieto, B. Seoane, H. Miro, A. Corma, F. Kapteijn, F. X. L. I. Xamena and J. Gascon, Metal–organic framework nanosheets in polymer composite materials for gas separation, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 48–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, A. Knebel, S. Grosjean, D. Wagner, S. Bräse, C. Wöll, J. Caro and L. Heinke, Tunable molecular separation by nanoporous membranes, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13872–13879 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhang and W. B. Lin, Metal–organic frameworks for artificial photosynthesis and photocatalysis, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5982–5993 RSC .
M. D. Allendorf, A. Schwartzberg, V. Stavila and A. A. Talin, A Roadmap to Implementing Metal–Organic Frameworks in Electronic Devices: Challenges and Critical Directions, Chem. – Eur. J., 2011, 17, 11372–11388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zacher, O. Shekhah, C. Wöll and R. A. Fischer, Thin films of metal–organic frameworks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 1418–1429 RSC .
B. Liu and R. A. Fischer, Liquid-phase epitaxy of metal organic framework thin films, Sci. China: Chem., 2011, 54, 1851–1866 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, J. Liu, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, MOF thin films: existing and future applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 1081–1106 RSC .
A. Betard and R. A. Fischer, Metal–Organic Framework Thin Films:
From Fundamentals to Applications, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1055–1083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bradshaw, A. Garai and J. Huo, Metal–organic framework growth at functional interfaces: thin films and composites for diverse applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 2344–2381 RSC .
K. Otsubo and H. Kitagawa, Metal–organic framework thin films with well-controlled growth directions confirmed by x-ray study, APL Mater., 2014, 2, 124105 CrossRef .
W. J. Li, M. Tu, R. Cao and R. A. Fischer, Metal–organic framework thin films: electrochemical fabrication techniques and corresponding applications & perspectives, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12356–12369 CAS .
J. L. Zhuang, A. Terfort and C. Wöll, Formation of oriented and patterned films of metal–organic frameworks by liquid phase epitaxy: A review, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 391–424 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Edler and B. Yang, Formation of mesostructured thin films at the air–liquid interface, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3765–3776 RSC .
S. L. Qiu, M. Xue and G. S. Zhu, Metal–organic framework membranes: from synthesis to separation application, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6116–6140 RSC .
P. Falcaro, R. Ricco, C. M. Doherty, K. Liang, A. J. Hill and M. J. Styles, MOF positioning technology and device fabrication, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5513–5560 RSC .
V. Stavila, A. A. Talin and M. D. Allendorf, MOF-based electronic and optoelectronic devices, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5994–6010 RSC .
I. Stassen, N. Burtch, A. Talin, P. Falcaro, M. Allendorf and R. Ameloot, An updated roadmap for the integration of metal–organic frameworks with electronic devices and chemical sensors, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 3185–3241 RSC .
V. Chernikova, O. Shekhah and M. Eddaoudi, Advanced Fabrication Method for the Preparation of MOF Thin Films: Liquid-Phase Epitaxy Approach Meets Spin Coating Method, ACS Appl. Mat. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20459–20464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Yassine, O. Shekhah, A. H. Assen, Y. Belmabkhout, K. N. Salama and M. Eddaoudi, H2S Sensors: Fumarate-Based fcu-MOF Thin Film Grown on a Capacitive Interdigitated Electrode, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 15879–15883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Sapsanis, H. Omran, V. Chernikova, O. Shekhah, Y. Belmabkhout, U. Buttner, M. Eddaoudi and K. N. Salama, Insights on Capacitive Interdigitated Electrodes Coated with MOF Thin Films: Humidity and VOCs Sensing as a Case Study, Sensors, 2015, 15, 18153–18166 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bouchaala, N. Jaber, O. Yassine, O. Shekhah, V. Chernikova, M. Eddaoudi and M. I. Younis, Nonlinear-Based MEMS Sensors and Active Switches for Gas Detection, Sensors, 2016, 16, 758–770 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Bouchaala, N. Jaber, O. Shekhah, V. Chernikova, M. Eddaoudi and M. I. Younis, A smart microelectromechanical sensor and switch triggered by gas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 109, 013502–013505 CrossRef .
S. Hermes, F. Schröder, R. Chelmowski, C. Wöll and R. A. Fischer, Selective nucleation and growth of metal–organic open framework thin films on patterned COOH/CF3-terminated self-assembled monolayers on Au(111), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 13744–13745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lu and J. T. Hupp, Metal–Organic Frameworks as Sensors: A ZIF-8 Based Fabry–Perot Device as a Selective Sensor for Chemical Vapors and Gases, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7832–7833 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Biemmi, C. Scherb and T. Bein, Oriented Growth of the Metal Organic Framework Cu3(BTC)2(H2O)3·xH2O Tunable with Functionalized Self-Assembled Monolayers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 8054–8055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, Layer-by-layer
method for the synthesis and growth of surface mounted metal–organic frameworks (SURMOFs), Materials, 2010, 3, 1302–1315 CrossRef CAS .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, S. Kowarik, F. Schreiber, M. Paulus, M. Tolan, C. Sternemann, F. Evers, D. Zacher and R. A. Fischer, Step-by-step route for the synthesis of metal–organic frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15118–15119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schoedel, C. Scherb and T. Bein, Oriented Nanoscale Films of Metal–Organic Frameworks By Room-Temperature Gel-Layer Synthesis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 7225–7228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, M. Paradinas, C. Ocal, B. Schupbach, A. Terfort, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, Controlling interpenetration in metal–organic frameworks by liquid-phase epitaxy, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 481–484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, A. Cadiau and M. Eddaoudi, Fabrication and non-covalent modification of highly oriented thin films of a zeolite-like metal–organic framework (ZMOF) with rho topology, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 290–294 RSC .
S. Sakaida, K. Otsubo, O. Sakata, C. Song, A. Fujiwara, M. Takata and H. Kitagawa, Crystalline coordination framework endowed with dynamic gate-opening behaviour by being downsized to a thin film, Nat. Chem., 2016, 8, 377–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Horcajada, C. Serre, D. Grosso, C. Boissiere, S. Perruchas, C. Sanchez and G. Férey, Colloidal route for preparing optical thin films of nanoporous metal–organic frameworks, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 1931–1935 CrossRef CAS .
R. Makiura, S. Motoyama, Y. Umemura, H. Yamanaka, O. Sakata and H. Kitagawa, Surface nano-architecture of a metal–organic framework, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 565–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Kubo, W. Chaikittisilp and T. Okubo, Oriented films of porous coordination polymer prepared by repeated in situ crystallization, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 2887–2889 CrossRef CAS .
A. Demessence, P. Horcajada, C. Serre, C. Boissiere, D. Grosso, C. Sanchez and G. Ferey, Elaboration and properties of hierarchically structured optical thin films of MIL-101(Cr), Chem. Commun., 2009, 7149–7151 RSC .
D. Zacher, A. Baunemann, S. Hermes and R. A. Fischer, Deposition of microcrystalline [Cu3(btc)2] and [Zn2(bdc)2(dabco)] at alumina and silica surfaces modified with patterned self assembled organic monolayers: evidence of surface selective and oriented growth, J. Mater. Chem., 2007, 17, 2785–2792 RSC .
M. C. So, S. Jin, H. J. Son, G. P. Wiederrecht, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Layer-by-Layer Fabrication of Oriented Porous Thin Films Based on Porphyrin-Containing Metal–Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 15698–15701 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lu, M. Zhao, J. Chen, B. Chen, C. Tan, X. Zhang, Y. Huang, J. Yang, F. Cao and Y. Yu, In Situ Synthesis of Metal Sulfide Nanoparticles Based on 2D Metal–Organic Framework Nanosheets, Small, 2016, 12, 4669–4674 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Kung, T. H. Chang, L. Y. Chou, J. T. Hupp, O. K. Farha and K. C. Ho, Post metalation of solvothermally grown electroactive porphyrin metal–organic framework thin films, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 2414–2417 RSC .
I. Hod, W. Bury, D. M. Karlin, P. Deria, C. W. Kung, M. J. Katz, M. So, B. Klahr, D. N. Jin, Y. W. Chung, T. W. Odom, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Directed Growth of Electroactive Metal–Organic Framework Thin Films Using Electrophoretic Deposition, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6295–6300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Liu, W. C. Zhou, J. X. Liu, I. Howard, G. Kilibarda, S. Schlabach, D. Coupry, M. Addicoat, S. Yoneda, Y. Tsutsui, T. Sakurai, S. Seki, Z. B. Wang, P. Lindemann, E. Redel, T. Heine and C. Wöll, Photoinduced Charge-Carrier Generation in Epitaxial MOF Thin Films: High Efficiency as a Result of an Indirect Electronic Band Gap?, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7441–7445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Liu, W. C. Zhou, J. X. Liu, Y. Fujimori, T. Higashino, H. Imahori, X. Jiang, J. J. Zhao, T. Sakurai, Y. Hattori, W. Matsuda, S. Seki, S. K. Garlapati, S. Dasgupta, E. Redel, L. C. Sun and C. Wöll, A new class of epitaxial porphyrin metal–organic framework thin films with extremely high photocarrier generation efficiency: promising materials for all-solid-state solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 12739–12747 CAS .
H. P. Liu, H. M. Wang, T. S. Chu, M. H. Yu and Y. Y. Yang, An electrodeposited lanthanide MOF thin film as a luminescent sensor for carbonate detection in aqueous solution, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 8683–8690 RSC .
S. R. Ahrenholtz, C. C. Epley and A. J. Morris, Solvothermal Preparation of an Electrocatalytic Metalloporphyrin MOF Thin Film and its Redox Hopping Charge-Transfer Mechanism, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2464–2472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Wade, M. Y. Li and M. Dinca, Facile Deposition of Multicolored Electrochromic Metal–Organic Framework Thin Films, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13377–13381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. O' Neill, H. Zhang and D. Bradshaw, Macro-/microporous MOF composite beads, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5720–5726 RSC .
M. G. Schwab, I. Senkovska, M. Rose, M. Koch, J. Pahnke, G. Jonschker and S. Kaskel, MOF@PolyHIPEs, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2008, 10, 1151–1155 CrossRef CAS .
A. Centrone, Y. Yang, S. Speakman, L. Bromberg, G. C. Rutledge and T. A. Hatton, Growth of metal–organic frameworks on polymer surfaces, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15687–15691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ameloot, L. Stappers, J. Fransaer, L. Alaerts, B. F. Sels and D. E. De Vos, Patterned Growth of Metal–Organic Framework Coatings by Electrochemical Synthesis, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 2580–2582 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, F. Sun, F. Zhang, Z. Wang, R. Zhang, C. Wang and S. Qiu, 
            In situ growth of continuous thin metal–organic framework film for capacitive humidity sensing, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 3775–3778 RSC .
X. Zou, G. Zhu, I. J. Hewitt, F. Sun and S. Qiu, Synthesis of a metal–organic framework film by direct conversion technique for VOCs sensing, Dalton Trans., 2009, 3009–3013 RSC .
D. M. Jiang, A. D. Burrows, Y. L. Xiong and K. J. Edler, Facile synthesis of crack-free metal–organic framework films on alumina by a dip-coating route in the presence of polyethylenimine, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5497–5500 CAS .
J. Nan, X. Dong, W. Wang, W. Jin and N. Xu, Step-by-step seeding procedure for preparing HKUST-1 membrane on porous α-alumina support, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 4309–4312 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Bux, C. Chmelik, R. Krishna and J. Caro, Ethene/ethane separation by the MOF membrane ZIF-8: molecular correlation
of permeation, adsorption, diffusion, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 369, 284–289 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bux, F. Liang, Y. Li, J. Cravillon, M. Wiebcke and J. r. Caro, Zeolitic imidazolate framework membrane with molecular sieving properties by microwave-assisted solvothermal synthesis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 16000–16001 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, F. Liang, H. Bux, W. Yang and J. Caro, Zeolitic imidazolate framework ZIF-7 based molecular sieve membrane for hydrogen separation, J. Membr. Sci., 2010, 354, 48–54 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Li, H. Bux, A. Feldhoff, G. L. Li, W. S. Yang and J. Caro, Controllable synthesis of metal–organic frameworks: From MOF nanorods to oriented MOF membranes, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3322–3326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Li, F. Y. Liang, H. Bux, A. Feldhoff, W. S. Yang and J. Caro, Molecular sieve membrane: supported metal–organic framework with high hydrogen selectivity, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 558–561 CrossRef .
A. Huang, H. Bux, F. Steinbach and J. Caro, Molecular-sieve membrane with hydrogen permselectivity: ZIF-22 in LTA topology prepared with 3-aminopropyltriethoxysilane as covalent linker, Angew. Chem., 2010, 122, 5078–5081 CrossRef .
A. Bétard, H. Bux, S. Henke, D. Zacher, J. Caro and R. A. Fischer, Fabrication of a CO2-selective membrane by stepwise liquid-phase deposition of an alkylether functionalized pillared-layered metal–organic framework [Cu2L2P]n on a macroporous support, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2012, 150, 76–82 CrossRef .
Y. Yoo and H.-K. Jeong, Heteroepitaxial Growth of Isoreticular Metal–Organic Frameworks and Their Hybrid Films, Cryst. Growth Des., 2010, 10, 1283–1288 CAS .
Y. Yoo, V. Varela-Guerrero and H.-K. Jeong, Isoreticular metal–organic frameworks and their membranes with enhanced crack resistance and moisture stability by surfactant-assisted drying, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 2652–2657 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Hu, X. Dong, J. Nan, W. Jin, X. Ren, N. Xu and Y. M. Lee, Metal–organic framework membranes fabricated via reactive seeding, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 737–739 RSC .
R. Ranjan and M. Tsapatsis, Microporous metal organic framework membrane on porous support using the seeded growth method, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 4920–4924 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Li, S. Y. Gao, T. F. Liu, L. W. Han, Z. J. Lin and R. Cao, In Situ Growth of Metal–Organic Framework Thin Films with Gas Sensing and Molecule Storage Properties, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 8657–8664 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, L. L. Fu, R. Sougrat, Y. Belmabkhout, A. J. Cairns, E. P. Giannelis and M. Eddaoudi, Successful implementation of the stepwise layer-by-layer growth of MOF thin films on confined surfaces: mesoporous silica foam as a first case study, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 11434–11436 RSC .
M.-S. Yao, W.-X. Tang, G.-E. Wang, B. Nath and G. Xu, MOF Thin Film-Coated Metal Oxide Nanowire Array: Significantly Improved Chemiresistor Sensor Performance, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 5229–5234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-G. Gu, W.-Q. Fu, X. Wu and J. Zhang, Liquid-phase epitaxial growth of a homochiral MOF thin film on poly(L-DOPA) functionalized substrate for improved enantiomer separation, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 772–775 RSC .
L. V. Meyer, J. Vogt, F. A. Brede, H. Schafer, M. Steinhart and K. Muller-Buschbaum, 
            In situ growth of luminescent MOF thin films of Sr/Eu(II)-imidazolate on functionalized nanostructured alumina, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 9382–9386 RSC .
F. Ke, L. G. Qiu, Y. P. Yuan, X. Jiang and J. F. Zhu, Fe3O4@MOF core–shell magnetic microspheres
with a designable metal–organic framework shell, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 9497–9500 RSC .
M. E. Silvestre, M. Franzreb, P. G. Weidler, O. Shekhah and C. Wöll, Magnetic Cores with Porous Coatings: Growth of Metal–Organic Frameworks on Particles Using Liquid Phase Epitaxy, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 1210–1213 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Abbasia, M. Yousefshahia and A. Azadbakhtba, Synthesis and characterization of azine-functionalized zinc cation metal–organic frameworks nanostructures upon silk fibers under ultrasound irradiation, study of pores effect on morphine adsorption affinity, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 498, 58–65 CrossRef .
F. Liu and H. Xu, Development of a novel polystyrene/metal–organic framework-199 electrospun nanofiber adsorbent for thin film microextraction of aldehydes in human urine, Talanta, 2017, 162, 261–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Vinogradov, H. Zaake-Hertling, E. Hey-Hawkins, A. V. Agafonov, G. A. Seisenbaeva, V. G. Kessler and V. V. Vinogradov, The first depleted heterojunction TiO2-MOF-based solar cell, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 10210–10213 RSC .
V. Stavila, J. Volponi, A. M. Katzenmeyer, M. C. Dixon and M. D. Allendorf, Kinetics and mechanism of metal–organic framework thin film growth: systematic investigation of HKUST-1 deposition on QCM electrodes, Chem. Sci., 2012, 3, 1531–1540 RSC .
O. Shekhah, H. Wang, D. Zacher, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, Growth Mechanism of Metal–Organic Frameworks: Insights into the Nucleation by Employing a Step-by-Step Route, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 5038–5041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. K. Arslan, O. Shekhah, J. Wohlgemuth, M. Franzreb, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, High-Throughput Fabrication of Uniform and Homogenous MOF Coatings, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4228–4231 CrossRef CAS .
Z. G. Gu, A. Pfriem, S. Hamsch, H. Breitwieser, J. Wohlgemuth, L. Heinke, H. Gliemann and C. Wöll, Transparent films of metal–organic frameworks for optical applications, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 211, 82–87 CrossRef CAS .
F. Maya, C. P. Cabello, S. Clavijo, J. M. Estela, V. Cerda and G. T. Palomino, Automated growth of metal–organic framework coatings on flow-through functional supports, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8169–8172 RSC .
R. Arnold, W. Azzam, A. Terfort and C. Wöll, Preparation, modification, and crystallinity of aliphatic and aromatic carboxylic acid terminated self-assembled monolayers, Langmuir, 2002, 18, 3980–3992 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Liu and Y. L. Lee, Adsorption characteristics of OH-terminated alkanethiol and arenethiol on Au(111) surfaces, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 2093–2100 RSC .
H. Wang, S. F. Chen, L. Y. Li and S. Y. Jiang, Improved method for the preparation of carboxylic acid and amine terminated self-assembled monolayers of alkanethiolates, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 2633–2636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Liu, B. Schupbach, A. Bashir, O. Shekhah, A. Nefedov, M. Kind, A. Terfort and C. Wöll, Structural characterization of self-assembled monolayers of pyridine-terminated thiolates on gold, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2010, 12, 4459–4472 RSC .
J. X. Liu, O. Shekhah, X. Stammer, H. K. Arslan, B. Liu, B. Schupbach, A. Terfort and C. Wöll, Deposition of Metal–Organic Frameworks by Liquid-Phase Epitaxy: The Influence of Substrate Functional Group Density on Film Orientation, Materials, 2012, 5, 1581–1592 CrossRef CAS .
C. Munuera, O. Shekhah, H. Wang, C. Wöll and C. Ocal, The controlled growth of oriented metal–organic frameworks on functionalized surfaces as followed by scanning force microscopy, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 7257–7261 RSC .
S. Hurrle, S. Friebe, J. Wohlgemuth, C. Wöll, J. Caro and L. Heinke, Sprayable, Large-Area Metal–Organic Framework Films and Membranes of Varying Thickness, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 2294–2298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Otsubo, T. Haraguchi, O. Sakata, A. Fujiwara and H. Kitagawa, Step-by-Step Fabrication of a Highly Oriented Crystalline Three-Dimensional Pillared-Layer-Type Metal–Organic Framework Thin Film Confirmed by Synchrotron X-ray Diffraction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 9605–9608 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ameloot, F. Vermoortele, W. Vanhove, M. B. J. Roeffaers, B. F. Sels and D. E. De Vos, Interfacial synthesis of hollow metal–organic framework capsules demonstrating selective permeability, Nat. Chem., 2011, 3, 382–387 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Yang, F. W. Wang, Q. H. Yang, Y. L. Hu, H. Yan, Y. Z. Chen, H. R. Liu, G. Q. Zhang, J. L. Lu, H. L. Jiang and H. X. Xu, Hollow Metal–Organic Framework Nanospheres via Emulsion-Based Interfacial Synthesis and Their Application in Size-Selective Catalysis, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18163–18171 CAS .
B. P. Biswal, A. Bhaskar, R. Banerjee and U. K. Kharul, Selective interfacial synthesis of metal–organic frameworks on a polybenzimidazole hollow fiber membrane for gas separation, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7291–7298 RSC .
H. Y. Lu and S. P. Zhu, Interfacial Synthesis of Free-Standing Metal–Organic Framework Membranes, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 1294–1300 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Bian, J. Xu, S. P. Zhang, X. M. Zhu, H. L. Liu and J. Hu, Interfacial Growth of Metal Organic Framework/Graphite Oxide Composites through Pickering Emulsion and Their CO2 Capture Performance in the Presence of Humidity, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 7410–7417 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Campbell, R. P. Davies, D. C. Braddock and A. G. Livingston, Improving the permeance of hybrid polymer/metal–organic framework (MOF) membranes for organic solvent nanofiltration (OSN)-development of MOF thin films via interfacial synthesis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9668–9674 CAS .
T. Tsuruoka, M. Kumano, K. Mantani, T. Matsuyama, A. Miyanaga, T. Ohhashi, Y. Takashima, H. Minami, T. Suzuki, K. Imagawa and K. Akamatsu, Interfacial Synthetic Approach for Constructing Metal–Organic Framework Crystals Using Metal Ion-Doped Polymer Substrate, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 2472–2476 CAS .
T. Tsuruoka, K. Mantani, A. Miyanaga, T. Matsuyama, T. Ohhashi, Y. Takashima and K. Akamatsu, Morphology Control of Metal–Organic Frameworks Based on Paddle-Wheel Units on Ion-Doped Polymer Substrate Using an Interfacial Growth Approach, Langmuir, 2016, 32, 6068–6073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Makiura and O. Konovalov, Interfacial growth of large-area single-layer metal–organic framework nanosheets, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2506–2514 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Peng, J. L. Zhang, J. S. Li, B. X. Han, Z. M. Xue, B. B. Zhang, J. H. Shi and G. Y. Yang, Hollow metal–organic framework polyhedra synthesized by a CO2–ionic liquid interfacial templating route, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2014, 416, 198–204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Motoyama, R. Makiura, O. Sakata and H. Kitagawa, Highly Crystalline Nanofilm by Layering of Porphyrin Metal–Organic Framework Sheets, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 5640–5643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, T. Yamada, K. Otsubo, S. Sakaida and H. Kitagawa, Facile Modular Assembly for Fast Construction of a Highly Oriented Crystalline MOF Nanofilm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16524–16527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xu, K. Otsubo, T. Yamada, S. Sakaida and H. Kitagawa, Superprotonic Conductivity in a Highly Oriented Crystalline Metal–Organic Framework Nanofilm, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 7438–7441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Haraguchi, K. Otsubo, O. Sakata, S. Kawaguchi, A. Fujiwara and H. Kitagawa, A three-dimensional accordion-like metal organic framework: synthesis and unconventional oriented growth on a surface, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6017–6020 RSC .
T. Bauer, Z. K. Zheng, A. Renn, R. Enning, A. Stemmer, J. Sakamoto and A. D. Schluter, Synthesis of Free-Standing, Monolayered Organometallic Sheets at the Air/Water Interface, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7879–7884 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Sakamoto, K. Hoshiko, Q. Liu, T. Yagi, T. Nagayama, S. Kusaka, M. Tsuchiya, Y. Kitagawa, W. Y. Wong and H. Nishihara, A photofunctional bottom-up bis(dipyrrinato)zinc(II) complex nanosheet, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6713–6722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Zhao, Y. X. Wang, Q. L. Ma, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, J. F. Ping, Z. C. Zhang, Q. P. Lu, Y. F. Yu, H. Xu, Y. L. Zhao and H. Zhang, Ultrathin 2D Metal–Organic Framework Nanosheets, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7372–7378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Wang, M. T. Zhao, J. F. Ping, B. Chen, X. H. Cao, Y. Huang, C. L. Tan, Q. L. Ma, S. X. Wu, Y. F. Yu, Q. P. Lu, J. Z. Chen, W. Zhao, Y. B. Ying and H. Zhang, Bioinspired Design of Ultrathin 2D Bimetallic Metal–Organic-Framework Nanosheets Used as Biomimetic Enzymes, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4149–4155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. B. Zhao, N. Kornienko, Z. Liu, C. H. Zhu, S. Asahina, T. R. Kuo, W. Bao, C. L. Xie, A. Hexemer, O. Terasaki, P. D. Yang and O. M. Yaghi, Mesoscopic Constructs of Ordered and Oriented Metal–Organic Frameworks on Plasmonic Silver Nanocrystals, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2199–2202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Reboul, S. Furukawa, N. Horike, M. Tsotsalas, K. Hirai, H. Uehara, M. Kondo, N. Louvain, O. Sakata and S. Kitagawa, Mesoscopic architectures of porous coordination polymers fabricated by pseudomorphic replication, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 717–723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Falcaro, K. Okada, T. Hara, K. Ikigaki, Y. Tokudome, A. Thornton, A. J. Hill, T. Williams, C. Doonan and M. Takahashi, Centimetre-scale micropore alignment in oriented polycrystalline metal–organic framework films via heteroepitaxial growth, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 342–348 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Li, J. Liu, Z. H. Sun, T. F. Liu, J. Lu, S. Y. Gao, C. He, R. Cao and J. H. Luo, Integration of metal–organic frameworks into an electrochemical dielectric thin film for electronic applications, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11830–11838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          U. Müller, H. Pütter, M. Hesse, H. Wessel, M. Schubert, J. Huff and M. Guymann, Method for electrochemical production of a crystalline porous metal organic skeleton material,  2005, BASF Search PubMed .
W. J. Li, J. Lu, S. Y. Gao, Q. H. Li and R. Cao, Electrochemical preparation of metal–organic framework films for fast detection of nitro explosives, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 19473–19478 CAS .
N. Campagnol, T. Van Assche, T. Boudewijns, J. Denayer, K. Binnemans, D. De Vos and J. Fransaer, High pressure, high temperature electrochemical synthesis of metal–organic frameworks: films of MIL-100 (Fe) and HKUST-1 in different morphologies, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 5827–5830 CAS .
R. Ameloot, L. Pandey, M. Van der Auweraer, L. Alaerts, B. F. Sels and D. E. De Vos, Patterned film growth of metal–organic frameworks based on galvanic displacement, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 3735–3737 RSC .
M. Y. Li and M. Dinca, Selective formation of biphasic thin films of metal–organic frameworks by potential-controlled cathodic electrodeposition, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 107–111 RSC .
N. Campagnol, E. R. Souza, D. E. De Vos, K. Binnemans and J. Fransaer, Luminescent terbium-containing metal–organic framework films: new approaches for the electrochemical synthesis and application as detectors for explosives, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 12545–12547 RSC .
M. Y. Li and M. Dinca, Reductive Electrosynthesis of Crystalline Metal–Organic Frameworks (N), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12926–12929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gong, Z. Hao, J. Meng, H. Shi, P. Jiang, M. Zhang and J. Lin, Two CoIIMetal–Organic Frameworks Based on a Multicarboxylate Ligand as Electrocatalysts for Water Splitting, ChemPlusChem, 2014, 79, 266–277 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-N. Gong, T. Ouyang, C.-T. He and T.-B. Lu, Photoinduced water oxidation by an organic ligand incorporated into the framework of a stable metal–organic framework, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 1070–1075 RSC .
Y. Horiuchi, T. Toyao, K. Miyahara, L. Zakary, D. D. Van, Y. Kamata, T. H. Kim, S. W. Lee and M. Matsuoka, Visible-light-driven photocatalytic water oxidation catalysed by iron-based metal–organic frameworks, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 5190–5193 RSC .
J. Campbell, G. Szekely, R. P. Davies, D. C. Braddock and A. G. Livingston, Fabrication of hybrid polymer/metal organic framework membranes: mixed matrix membranes versusin situ growth, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9260–9271 CAS .
M. S. Denny and S. M. Cohen, In Situ Modification of Metal–Organic Frameworks in Mixed-Matrix Membranes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 9029–9032 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. W. Kung, J. E. Mondloch, T. C. Wang, W. Bury, W. Hoffeditz, B. M. Klahr, R. C. Klet, M. J. Pellin, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Metal–Organic Framework Thin Films as Platforms for Atomic Layer Deposition of Cobalt Ions To Enable Electrocatalytic Water Oxidation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 28223–28230 CAS .
V. M. A. Melgar, H. T. Kwon and J. Kim, Direct spraying approach for synthesis of ZIF-7 membranes by electrospray deposition, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 459, 190–196 CrossRef .
L. L. Fan, M. Xue, Z. X. Kang, H. Li and S. L. Qiu, Electrospinning technology applied in zeolitic imidazolate framework membrane synthesis, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 25272–25276 RSC .
Y. F. Chen, S. Q. Li, X. K. Pei, J. W. Zhou, X. Feng, S. H. Zhang, Y. Y. Cheng, H. W. Li, R. D. Han and B. Wang, A Solvent-Free Hot-Pressing Method for Preparing Metal–Organic-Framework Coatings, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3419–3423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Stassen, D. De Vos and R. Ameloot, Vapor-Phase Deposition and Modification of Metal–Organic Frameworks: State-of-the-Art and Future Directions, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 14452–14460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Stassen, M. Styles, G. Grenci, H. Van Gorp, W. Vanderlinden, S. De Feyter, P. Falcaro, D. De Vos, P. Vereecken and R. Ameloot, Chemical vapour deposition of zeolitic imidazolate framework thin films, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 304–310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ahvenniemi and M. Karppinen, In Situ Atomic/Molecular Layer-by-Layer Deposition of Inorganic–Organic Coordination Network Thin Films from Gaseous Precursors, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6260–6265 CrossRef CAS .
S. M. George, Atomic Layer Deposition: An Overview, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 111–131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Ahvenniemi and M. Karppinen, ALD/MLD processes for Mn and Co based hybrid thin films, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 10730–10735 RSC .
E. Ahvenniemi and M. Karppinen, Atomic/molecular layer deposition: a direct gas-phase route to crystalline metal–organic framework thin films, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1139–1142 RSC .
K. B. Lausund and O. Nilsen, All-gas-phase synthesis of UiO-66 through modulated atomic layer deposition, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13578–13587 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. C. Lemaire, J. J. Zhao, P. S. Williams, H. J. Walls, S. D. Shepherd, M. D. Losego, G. W. Peterson and G. N. Parsons, Copper Benzenetricarboxylate Metal–Organic Framework Nucleation Mechanisms on Metal Oxide Powders and Thin Films formed by Atomic Layer Deposition, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 9514–9522 CAS .
J. C. Love, L. A. Estroff, J. K. Kriebel, R. G. Nuzzo and G. M. Whitesides, Self-assembled monolayers of thiolates on metals as a form of nanotechnology, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 1103–1169 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bella, R. Bongiovanni, R. S. Kumar, M. A. Kulandainathan and A. M. Stephan, Light cured networks containing metal organic frameworks as efficient and durable polymer electrolytes for dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 9033–9036 CAS .
D. Y. Lee, C. Y. Shin, S. J. Yoon, H. Y. Lee, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S. H. Han, Enhanced photovoltaic performance of Cu-based metal–organic frameworks sensitized solar cell by addition of carbon nanotubes, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3930–3935 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Chen, X. Sun, J. Dou and M. Wei, Metal–organic frameworks at interfaces in dye-sensitized solar cells, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 2469–2472 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. D. Spoerke, L. J. Small, M. E. Foster, J. Wheeler, A. M. Ullman, V. Stavila, M. Rodriguez and M. D. Allendorf, MOF-Sensitized Solar Cells Enabled by a Pillared Porphyrin Framework, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2017, 121, 4816–4824 CAS .
V. Nevruzoglu, S. Demir, G. Karaca, M. Tomakin, N. Bilgin and F. Yilmaz, Improving the stability of solar cells using metal–organic frameworks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 7930–7935 CAS .

The Porphyrin Handbook, Academic Press,  2003 Search PubMed .
D. Y. Lee, E. K. Kim, C. Y. Shin, D. V. Shinde, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S. H. Han, Layer-by-layer deposition and photovoltaic property of Ru-based metal–organic frameworks, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 12037–12042 RSC .
D. Y. Lee, D. V. Shinde, S. J. Yoon, K. N. Cho, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha and S. H. Han, Cu-Based Metal–Organic Frameworks for Photovoltaic Application, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 16328–16334 CAS .
D. Y. Lee, I. Lim, C. Y. Shin, S. A. Patil, W. Lee, N. K. Shrestha, J. K. Lee and S. H. Han, Facile interfacial charge transfer across hole doped cobalt-based MOFs/TiO2 nano-hybrids making MOFs light harvesting active layers in solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 22669–22676 CAS .
W. A. Maza, A. J. Haring, S. R. Ahrenholtz, C. C. Epley, S. Y. Lin and A. J. Morris, Ruthenium(II)-polypyridyl zirconium(IV) metal–organic frameworks as a new class of sensitized solar cells, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 719–727 RSC .
H. A. Lopez, A. Dhakshinamoorthy, B. Ferrer, P. Atienzar, M. Alvaro and H. Garcia, Photochemical Response of Commercial MOFs: Al-2(BDC)(3) and Its Use As Active Material in Photovoltaic Devices, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 22200–22206 CAS .
W. S. Chi, D. K. Roh, C. S. Lee and J. H. Kim, A shape-and morphology-controlled metal organic framework template for high-efficiency solid-state dye-sensitized solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 21599–21608 CAS .
K. A. Mazzio and C. K. Luscombe, The future of organic photovoltaics, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 78–90 RSC .
Y. Z. Lin, Y. F. Li and X. W. Zhan, Small molecule semiconductors for high-efficiency organic photovoltaics, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 4245–4272 RSC .
W. R. Cao and J. G. Xue, Recent progress in organic photovoltaics: device architecture and optical design, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2123–2144 CAS .
H. X. Deng, S. Grunder, K. E. Cordova, C. Valente, H. Furukawa, M. Hmadeh, F. Gandara, A. C. Whalley, Z. Liu, S. Asahina, H. Kazumori, M. O'Keeffe, O. Terasaki, J. F. Stoddart and O. M. Yaghi, Large-Pore Apertures in a Series of Metal–Organic Frameworks, Science, 2012, 336, 1018–1023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Goswami, L. Ma, A. B. Martinson, M. R. Wasielewski, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Toward Metal–Organic Framework-Based Solar Cells: Enhancing Directional Exciton Transport by Collapsing Three-Dimensional Film Structures, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 30863–30870 CAS .
H. J. Park, M. C. So, D. Gosztola, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. D. Emery, A. B. F. Martinson, S. Er, C. E. Wilmer, N. A. Vermeulen, A. Aspuru-Guzik, J. F. Stoddart, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Layer-by-Layer Assembled Films of Perylene Diimide- and Squaraine-Containing Metal–Organic Framework-like Materials: Solar Energy Capture and Directional Energy Transfer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 24983–24988 CAS .
W. Zhang, W. Lai and R. Cao, Energy-Related Small Molecule Activation Reactions: Oxygen Reduction and Hydrogen and Oxygen Evolution Reactions Catalyzed by Porphyrin- and Corrole-Based Systems, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 117(4), 3717–3797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Li and E. W. G. Diau, Porphyrin-sensitized solar cells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 291–304 RSC .
M. Oldenburg, A. Turshatov, D. Busko, S. Wollgarten, M. Adams, N. Baroni, A. Welle, E. Redel, C. Wöll, B. S. Richards and I. A. Howard, Photon Upconversion at Crystalline Organic–Organic Heterojunctions, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 8477–8482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. He, J. A. Perman, G. Zhu and S. Ma, Metal–Organic Frameworks for CO2 Chemical Transformations, Small, 2016, 12, 6309–6324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Maina, C. Pozo-Gonzalo, L. Kong, J. Schütz, M. Hillc and L. F. Dumée, Metal organic framework based catalysts for CO2 conversion, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 345–361 RSC .
S. B. Wang, J. L. Lin and X. C. Wang, Semiconductor-redox catalysis promoted by metal–organic frameworks for CO2 reduction, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2014, 16, 14656–14660 RSC .
N. Kornienko, Y. Zhao, C. S. Kley, C. Zhu, D. Kim, S. Lin, C. J. Chang, O. M. Yaghi and P. Yang, Metal–organic frameworks for electrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 14129–14135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Hod, M. D. Sampson, P. Deria, C. P. Kubiak, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, Fe-Porphyrin-Based Metal–Organic Framework Films as High-Surface Concentration, Heterogeneous Catalysts for Electrochemical Reduction of CO2, ACS Catal., 2015, 5, 6302–6309 CrossRef CAS .
L. Ye, J. Liu, Y. Gao, C. Gong, M. Addicoat, T. Heine, C. Wöll and L. Sun, Highly oriented MOF thin film-based electrocatalytic device for the reduction of CO2 to CO exhibiting high faradaic efficiency, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15320–15326 CAS .
R. Senthil Kumar, S. Senthil Kumar and M. Anbu Kulandainathan, Highly selective electrochemical reduction of carbon dioxide using Cu based metal organic framework as an electrocatalyst, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 25, 70–73 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kang, Q. Zhu, X. Sun, J. Hu, J. Zhang, Z. Liu and B. Han, Highly efficient electrochemical reduction of CO2 to CH4 in an ionic liquid using a metal–organic framework cathode, Chem. Sci., 2016, 7, 266–273 RSC .
K. M. Choi, D. Kim, B. Rungtaweevoranit, C. A. Trickett, J. T. D. Barmanbek, A. S. Alshammari, P. Yang and O. M. Yaghi, Plasmon-Enhanced Photocatalytic CO2 Conversion within Metal–Organic Frameworks under Visible Light, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(1), 356–362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Shi, T. Wang, H. B. Zhang, K. Chang and J. H. Ye, Electrostatic Self-Assembly of Nanosized Carbon Nitride Nanosheet onto a Zirconium Metal–Organic Framework for Enhanced Photocatalytic CO2 Reduction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5360–5367 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, P. Cui, H. Yang, J. Chen, F. Xiao, Y. Guo, Y. Liu, W. Zhang, F. Huo and B. Liu, Metal–Organic Frameworks as Promising Photosensitizers for Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1500243 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Wang, X. Xu, W. Zhou and Z. Shao, Recent Progress in Metal–Organic Frameworks for Applications in Electrocatalytic and Photocatalytic Water Splitting, Adv. Sci., 2017, 1600371 CrossRef PubMed .
S. B. Wang and X. C. Wang, Multifunctional Metal–Organic Frameworks for Photocatalysis, Small, 2015, 11, 3097–3112 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Meyer, M. Ranocchiari and J. A. van Bokhoven, Metal organic frameworks for photo-catalytic water splitting, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1923–1937 CAS .
E. M. Miner and M. Dincă, Metal–organic frameworks: Evolved oxygen evolution catalysts, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16186–16188 CrossRef .
S. Zhao, W. Yun, J. Dong, C.-T. He, H. Yin, P. An, K. Zhao, X. Zhang, C. Gao, L. Zhang, J. Lv, J. Wang, J. Zhang, A. M. Khattak, N. A. Khan, Z. Wei, J. Zhang, S. Liu, H. Zhao and Z. Tang, Ultrathin metal–organic framework nanosheets for electrocatalytic oxygen evolution, Nat. Energy, 2016, 184–194 Search PubMed .
I. Hod, P. Deria, W. Bury, J. E. Mondloch, C. W. Kung, M. So, M. D. Sampson, A. W. Peters, C. P. Kubiak, O. K. Farha and J. T. Hupp, A porous proton-relaying metal–organic framework material that accelerates electrochemical hydrogen evolution, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8304–8313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Usov, S. R. Ahrenholtz, W. A. Maza, B. Stratakes, C. C. Epley, M. C. Kessinger, J. Zhu and A. J. Morris, Cooperative electrochemical water oxidation by Zr nodes and Ni–porphyrin linkers of a PCN-224 MOF thin film, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 16818–16823 CAS .
B. A. Johnson, A. Bhunia and S. Ott, Electrocatalytic water oxidation by a molecular catalyst incorporated into a metal–organic framework thin film, Dalton Trans., 2016, 1382–1388 Search PubMed .
S. R. Vaddipalli, S. R. Sanivarapu, S. Vengatesan, J. B. Lawrence, M. Eashwar and G. Sreedhar, Heterostructured Au NPs/CdS/LaBTC MOFs Photoanode for Efficient Photoelectrochemical Water Splitting: Stability Enhancement via CdSe QDs to 2D-CdS Nanosheets Transformation, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 23049–23059 CAS .
Z. L. Fang, B. Bueken, D. E. De Vos and R. A. Fischer, Defect-Engineered Metal–Organic Frameworks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7234–7254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Fang, J. P. Durholt, M. Kauer, W. H. Zhang, C. Lochenie, B. Jee, B. Albada, N. Metzler-Nolte, A. Poppl, B. Weber, M. Muhler, Y. M. Wang, R. Schmid and R. A. Fischer, Structural Complexity in Metal–Organic Frameworks: Simultaneous Modification of Open Metal Sites and Hierarchical Porosity by Systematic Doping with Defective Linkers, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 9627–9636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. E. Kreno, K. Leong, O. K. Farha, M. Allendorf, R. P. Van Duyne and J. T. Hupp, Metal–Organic Framework Materials as Chemical Sensors, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 1105–1125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Gu, C. H. Zhan, J. Zhang and X. H. Bu, Chiral chemistry of metal-camphorate frameworks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 3122–3144 RSC .
Z. C. Hu, B. J. Deibert and J. Li, Luminescent metal–organic frameworks for chemical sensing and explosive detection, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5815–5840 RSC .
J. Rocha, L. D. Carlos, F. A. A. Paz and D. Ananias, Luminescent multifunctional lanthanides-based metal–organic frameworks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 926–940 RSC .
V. Stavila, C. Schneider, C. Mowry, T. R. Zeitler, J. A. Greathouse, A. L. Robinson, J. M. Denning, J. Volponi, K. Leong, W. Quan, M. Tu, R. A. Fischer and M. D. Allendorf, Thin Film Growth of nbo MOFs and their Integration with Electroacoustic Devices, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1699–1707 CrossRef CAS .
M. Usman, S. Mendiratta and K. L. Lu, Metal–Organic Frameworks: New Interlayer Dielectric Materials, ChemElectroChem, 2015, 2, 786–788 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mendiratta, C. H. Lee, M. Usman and K. L. Lu, Metal–organic frameworks for electronics: emerging second order nonlinear optical and dielectric materials, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2015, 16, 054204 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Zagorodniy, G. Seifert and H. Hermann, Metal–organic frameworks as promising candidates for future ultralow-k dielectrics, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 251905 CrossRef .
J. X. Liu, T. Wachter, A. Irmler, P. G. Weidler, H. Gliemann, F. Pauly, V. Mugnaini, M. Zharnikov and C. Wöll, Electric Transport Properties of Surface-Anchored Metal–Organic Frameworks and the Effect of Ferrocene Loading, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 9824–9830 CAS .
A. A. Talin, A. Centrone, A. C. Ford, M. E. Foster, V. Stavila, P. Haney, R. A. Kinney, V. Szalai, F. El Gabaly, H. P. Yoon, F. Leonard and M. D. Allendorf, Tunable Electrical Conductivity in Metal–Organic Framework Thin-Film Devices, Science, 2014, 343, 66–69 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Sun, M. G. Campbell and M. Dinca, Electrically Conductive Porous Metal–Organic Frameworks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3566–3579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Rubio-Gimenez, S. Tatay, F. Volatron, F. J. Martinez-Casado, C. Marti-Gastaldo and E. Coronado, High-Quality Metal–Organic Framework Ultrathin Films for Electronically Active Interfaces, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2576–2584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Campbell, S. F. Liu, T. M. Swager and M. Dinca, Chemiresistive Sensor Arrays from Conductive 2D Metal–Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13780–13783 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Campbell, D. Sheberla, S. F. Liu, T. M. Swager and M. Dinca, Cu3(hexaiminotriphenylene)2: An Electrically Conductive 2D Metal–Organic Framework for Chemiresistive Sensing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4349–4352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Erickson, F. Leonard, V. Stavila, M. E. Foster, C. D. Spataru, R. E. Jones, B. M. Foley, P. E. Hopkins, M. D. Allendorf and A. A. Talin, Thin Film Thermoelectric Metal–Organic Framework with High Seebeck Coefficient and Low Thermal Conductivity, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3453–3459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Friedlander, J. X. Liu, M. Addicoat, P. Petkov, N. Vankova, R. Ruger, A. Kuc, W. Guo, W. C. Zhou, B. Lukose, Z. B. Wang, P. G. Weidler, A. Poppl, M. Ziese, T. Heine and C. Wöll, Linear Chains of Magnetic Ions Stacked with Variable Distance: Ferromagnetic Ordering with a Curie Temperature above 20 K, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 12683–12687 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Jain, A. Stroppa, D. Nabok, A. Marino, A. Rubano, D. Paparo, M. Matsubara, H. Nakotte, M. Fiebig, S. Picozzi, E. S. Choi, A. K. Cheetham, C. Draxl, N. S. Dalal and V. S. Zapf, Switchable electric polarization and ferroelectric domains in a metal–organic-framework, NPJ Quantum Materials, 2016, 1, 16012–16017 CrossRef .
S. M. Yoon, S. C. Warren and B. A. Grzybowski, Storage of Electrical Information in Metal–Organic-Framework Memristors, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 4437–4441 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Pan, Z. H. Ji, X. H. Yi, X. J. Zhu, X. X. Chen, J. Shang, G. Liu and R. W. Li, Metal–Organic Framework Nanofilm for Mechanically Flexible Information Storage Applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 2677–2685 CrossRef CAS .
W. Guodong, H. Jiahong, Z. Ying, H. Jun and G. Xu, Porous Field-Effect Transistors Based on a Semiconductive Metal–Organic Framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 1360–1363 Search PubMed .
Z. B. Wang, D. Nminibapiel, P. Shrestha, J. X. Liu, W. Guo, P. G. Weidler, H. Baumgart, C. Wöll and E. Redel, Resistive Switching Nanodevices Based on Metal–Organic Frameworks, ChemNanoMat, 2016, 2, 67–73 CrossRef CAS .
H. Guo, M. Wang, J. Liu, S. Zhu and C. Liu, Facile synthesis of nanoscale high porosity IR-MOFs for low-k dielectrics thin films, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 221, 40–47 CrossRef CAS .
M. Usman, C. H. Lee, D. S. Hung, S. F. Lee, C. C. Wang, T. T. Luo, L. Zhao, M. K. Wueg and K. L. Lu, Intrinsic low dielectric behaviour of a highly thermally stable Sr-based metal–organic framework for interlayer dielectric materials, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 3762–3768 RSC .
E. Redel, Z. B. Wang, S. Walheim, J. X. Liu, H. Gliemann and C. Wöll, On the dielectric and optical properties of surface-anchored metal–organic frameworks: A study on epitaxially grown thin films, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 199–204 CrossRef .
S. Eslava, L. P. Zhang, S. Esconjauregui, J. W. Yang, K. Vanstreels, M. R. Baklanov and E. Saiz, Metal–Organic Framework ZIF-8 Films As Low-kappa Dielectrics in Microelectronics, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 27–33 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-G. Gu, S.-C. Chen, W.-Q. Fu, Q. Zheng and J. Zhang, Epitaxial Growth of MOF Thin Film for Modifying the Dielectric Layer in Organic Field-Effect Transistors, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(8), 7259–7264 CAS .
M. Culebras, C. M. Gomez and A. Cantarero, Review on Polymers for Thermoelectric Applications, Materials, 2014, 7, 6701–6732 CrossRef .
N. D. Lowhorn, W. Wong-Ng, Z. Q. Lu, E. Thomas, M. Otani, M. Green, N. Dilley, J. Sharp and T. N. Tran, Development of a Seebeck coefficient Standard Reference Material, Appl. Phys. A: Mater. Sci. Process., 2009, 96, 511–514 CrossRef CAS .
D. Sheberla, J. C. Bachman, J. S. Elias, C. J. Sun, Y. Shao-Horn and M. Dinca, Conductive MOF electrodes for stable supercapacitors with high areal capacitance, Nat. Mater., 2016, 220–224 CrossRef PubMed .
K. M. Choi, H. M. Jeong, J. H. Park, Y. B. Zhang, J. K. Kang and O. M. Yaghi, Supercapacitors of Nanocrystalline Metal–Organic Frameworks, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 7451–7457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. X. Li, F. Y. Cheng, S. N. Zhang and J. Chen, Shape-controlled synthesis and lithium-storage study of metal–organic frameworks Zn4O(1,3,5-benzenetribenzoate)2, J. Power Sources, 2006, 160, 542–547 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ferey, F. Millange, M. Morcrette, C. Serre, M. L. Doublet, J. M. Greneche and J. M. Tarascon, Mixed-valence Li/Fe-based metal–organic frameworks with both reversible redox and sorption properties, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 3259–3263 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Combelles and M. L. Doublet, Structural, magnetic and redox properties of a new cathode material for Li–ion batteries: the iron-based metal organic framework, Ionics, 2008, 14, 279–283 CrossRef CAS .
C. Combelles, M. Ben Yahia, L. Pedesseau and M. L. Doublet, Design of Electrode Materials for Lithium–Ion Batteries: The Example of Metal–Organic Frameworks, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 9518–9527 CAS .
X. Z. Zheng, Y. F. Li, Y. X. Xu, Z. S. Hong and M. D. Wei, Metal–organic frameworks: Promising materials for enhancing electrochemical properties of nanostructured Zn2SnO4 anode in Li-ion batteries, CrystEngComm, 2012, 14, 2112–2116 RSC .
C. Gerbaldi, J. R. Nair, M. A. Kulandainathan, R. S. Kumar, C. Ferrara, P. Mustarelli and A. M. Stephan, Innovative high performing metal organic framework (MOF)-laden nanocomposite polymer electrolytes for all-solid-state lithium batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 9948–9954 CAS .
L. Gou, L. M. Hao, Y. X. Shi, S. L. Ma, X. Y. Fan, L. Xu, D. L. Li and K. Wang, One-pot synthesis of a metal–organic framework as an anode for Li-ion batteries with improved capacity and cycling stability, J. Solid State Chem., 2014, 210, 121–124 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. Kumar, M. Raja, M. A. Kulandainathan and A. M. Stephan, Metal organic framework-laden composite polymer electrolytes for efficient and durable all-solid- state-lithium
batteries, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 26171–26175 RSC .
Z. Y. Zhang, H. Yoshikawa and K. Awaga, Monitoring the Solid-State Electrochemistry of Cu(2,7-AQDC) (AQDC = Anthraquinone Dicarboxylate) in a Lithium Battery: Coexistence of Metal and Ligand Redox Activities in a Metal–Organic Framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 16112–16115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Bai, B. B. Tu, Y. Qi, Q. Gao, D. Liu, Z. Z. Liu, L. Z. Zhao, Q. W. Li and Y. L. Zhao, Enhanced performance in gas adsorption and Li ion batteries by docking Li+ in a crown ether-based metal–organic framework, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 3003–3006 RSC .
Y. Z. Han, P. F. Qi, J. W. Zhou, X. Feng, S. W. Li, X. T. Fu, J. S. Zhao, D. N. Yu and B. Wang, Metal–Organic Frameworks (MOFs) as Sandwich Coating Cushion for Silicon Anode in Lithium Ion Batteries, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26608–26613 CAS .
H. P. Hu, X. B. Lou, C. Li, X. S. Hu, T. Li, Q. Chen, M. Shen and B. W. Hu, A thermally activated manganese 1,4-benzenedicarboxylate metal organic framework with high anodic capability for Li-ion batteries, New J. Chem., 2016, 40, 9746–9752 RSC .
X. M. Lin, J. L. Niu, J. Lin, L. M. Wei, L. Hu, G. Zhang and Y. P. Cai, Lithium-Ion-Battery Anode Materials with Improved Capacity from a Metal–Organic Framework, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 8244–8247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Maiti, A. Pramanik, U. Manju and S. Mahanty, Cu3(1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylate)2 metal–organic framework: A promising anode material for lithium–ion battery, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 226, 353–359 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peng, X. H. Yi, Z. X. Liu, J. Shang and D. Y. Wang, Triphenylamine-Based Metal–Organic Frameworks as Cathode Materials in Lithium–Ion Batteries with Coexistence of Redox Active Sites, High Working Voltage, and High Rate Stability, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14578–14585 CAS .
Q. Q. Qiao, G. R. Li, Y. L. Wang and X. P. Gao, To enhance the capacity of Li-rich layered oxides by surface modification with metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) as cathodes for advanced lithium–ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 4440–4447 CAS .
L. P. Wang, C. X. Mou, Y. Sun, W. Liu, Q. J. Deng and J. Z. Li, Structure–Property of Metal Organic Frameworks Calcium Terephthalates Anodes for Lithium–ion Batteries, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 173, 235–241 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, L. L. Liu, R. Yuan and C. S. Lee, Self-assembly of metal–organic frameworks and graphene oxide as precursors for lithium-ion battery applications, J. Nanopart. Res., 2016, 18, 313–321 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Y. B. Niu, T. Liu, Y. T. Li, M. Q. Wang, J. K. Hou and M. W. Xu, A nickel-based metal–organic framework: A novel optimized anode material for Li-ion batteries, Mater. Lett., 2015, 161, 712–715 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Zhou, X. S. Yu, X. X. Fan, X. J. Wang, H. W. Li, Y. Y. Zhang, W. Li, J. Zheng, B. Wang and X. G. Li, The impact of the particle size of a metal–organic framework for sulfur storage in Li–S batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 8272–8275 CAS .
Z. Q. Wang, X. Li, Y. J. Cui, Y. Yang, H. G. Pan, Z. Y. Wang, C. D. Wu, B. L. Chen and G. D. Qian, A Metal–Organic Framework with Open Metal Sites for Enhanced Confinement of Sulfur and Lithium-Sulfur Battery of Long Cycling Life, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 5116–5120 CAS .
W. Z. Bao, Z. A. Zhang, Y. H. Qu, C. K. Zhou, X. W. Wang and J. Li, Confine sulfur in mesoporous metal–organic framework@reduced graphene oxide for lithium sulfur battery, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 582, 334–340 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Zheng, J. Tian, D. X. Wu, M. Gu, W. Xu, C. M. Wang, F. Gao, M. H. Engelhard, J. G. Zhang, J. Liu and J. Xiao, Lewis Acid-Base Interactions between Polysulfides and Metal Organic Framework in Lithium Sulfur Batteries, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2345–2352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Zhou, R. Li, X. X. Fan, Y. F. Chen, R. D. Han, W. Li, J. Zheng, B. Wang and X. G. Li, Rational design of a metal–organic framework host for sulfur storage in fast, long-cycle Li–S batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 2715–2724 CAS .
D. F. Wu, Z. Y. Guo, X. B. Yin, Q. Q. Pang, B. B. Tu, L. J. Zhang, Y. G. Wang and Q. W. Li, Metal–Organic Frameworks as Cathode Materials for LiO2 Batteries, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3258–3262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, J. Liu, Z. Nie, W. Wang, D. Reed, J. Liu, P. McGrail and V. Sprenkle, Metal Organic Frameworks as Highly Active Electrocatalysts for High-Energy Density, Aqueous Zinc-Polyiodide Redox Flow Batteries, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 4335–4340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Aubrey and J. R. Long, A Dual-Ion Battery Cathode via Oxidative Insertion of Anions in a Metal–Organic Framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 13594–13602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Nie, L. F. Shen, G. Pang, Y. Y. Zhu, G. Y. Xu, Y. H. Qing, H. Dou and X. G. Zhang, Flexible metal–organic frameworks as superior cathodes for rechargeable sodium–ion batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 16590–16597 CAS .
Y. Jiao, J. Pei, C. S. Yan, D. H. Chen, Y. Y. Hu and G. Chen, Layered nickel metal–organic framework for high performance alkaline battery-supercapacitor hybrid devices, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 13344–13351 CAS .
F. S. Ke, Y. S. Wu and H. X. Deng, Metal–organic frameworks for lithium ion batteries and supercapacitors, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 223, 109–121 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, Y. Z. Han, X. Feng, J. W. Zhou, P. F. Qi and B. Wang, Metal–organic frameworks for energy storage: Batteries and supercapacitors, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2016, 307, 361–381 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. McDonald, J. A. Mason, X. Q. Kong, E. D. Bloch, D. Gygi, A. Dani, V. Crocella, F. Giordanino, S. O. Odoh, W. S. Drisdell, B. Vlaisavljevich, A. L. Dzubak, R. Poloni, S. K. Schnell, N. Planas, K. Lee, T. Pascal, L. W. F. Wan, D. Prendergast, J. B. Neaton, B. Smit, J. B. Kortright, L. Gagliardi, S. Bordiga, J. A. Reimer and J. R. Long, Cooperative insertion of CO2 in diamine-appended metal–organic frameworks, Nature, 2015, 519, 303–308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, M. Tu and R. A. Fischer, Metal–Organic Framework Thin Films: Crystallite Orientation Dependent Adsorption, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3402–3405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Zhang, S. Yuan, X. Feng, H. W. Li, J. W. Zhou and B. Wang, Preparation of Nanofibrous Metal–Organic Framework Filters for Efficient Air Pollution Control, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5785–5788 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Müller, A. Knebel, F. L. Zhao, D. Bleger, J. Caro and L. Heinke, Switching Thin Films of Azobenzene-Containing Metal–Organic Frameworks with Visible Light, Chem. – Eur. J., 2017, 23, 5434–5438 CrossRef PubMed .
B. A. Al-Maythalony, O. Shekhah, R. Swaidan, Y. Belmabkhout, I. Pinnau and M. Eddaoudi, Quest for Anionic MOF Membranes: Continuous sod-ZMOF Membrane with CO2 Adsorption-Driven Selectivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1754–1757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. W. Phair and S. P. S. Badwal, Materials for separation membranes in hydrogen and oxygen production and future power generation, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2006, 7, 792–805 CrossRef CAS .
I. Ahmed and S. H. Jhung, Composites of metal–organic frameworks: Preparation and application in adsorption, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 136–146 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cao, E. Ju, C. Liu, W. Li, Y. Zhang, K. Dong, Z. Liu, J. Ren and X. Qu, Encapsulation of aggregated gold nanoclusters into metal–organic frameworks for real-time monitoring of drug release, Nanoscale, 2017, 4128–4134 RSC .
P. Falcaro, A. J. Hill, K. M. Nairn, J. Jasieniak, J. I. Mardel, T. J. Bastow, S. C. Mayo, M. Gimona, D. Gomez, H. J. Whitfield, R. Ricco, A. Patelli, B. Marmiroli, H. Amenitsch, T. Colson, L. Villanova and D. Buso, A new method to position and functionalize metal–organic framework crystals, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 237–245 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Y. Guo, C. X. Xiao, R. V. Maligal-Ganesh, L. Zhou, T. W. Goh, X. L. Li, D. Tesfagaber, A. Thiel and W. Y. Huang, Pt Nanoclusters Confined within Metal Organic Framework Cavities for Chemoselective Cinnamaldehyde Hydrogenation, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1340–1348 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Liu, R. Wang, M. Y. Zhang, Y. P. Yuan and C. Xue, Dye-sensitized MIL-101 metal organic frameworks loaded with Ni/NiOx nanoparticles for efficient visible-light-driven hydrogen generation, APL Mater., 2015, 3, 104403 CrossRef .
G. Lu, S. Z. Li, Z. Guo, O. K. Farha, B. G. Hauser, X. Y. Qi, Y. Wang, X. Wang, S. Y. Han, X. G. Liu, J. S. DuChene, H. Zhang, Q. C. Zhang, X. D. Chen, J. Ma, S. C. J. Loo, W. D. Wei, Y. H. Yang, J. T. Hupp and F. W. Huo, Imparting functionality to a metal–organic framework material by controlled nanoparticle encapsulation, Nat. Chem., 2012, 4, 310–316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          F. Schröder and R. A. Fischer, Doping of Metal–Organic Frameworks with Functional Guest Molecules and Nanoparticles, in Functional Metal–Organic Frameworks: Gas Storage, Separation and Catalysis, ed. M. Schröder, Springer, Heidelberg Dordrecht London, New York,  2010, pp. 77–113 Search PubMed .
S. D. Worrall, M. A. Bissett, P. I. Hill, A. P. Rooney, S. J. Haigh, M. P. Attfield and R. A. W. Dryfe, Metal–organic framework templated electrodeposition of functional gold nanostructures, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 361–369 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Liu, M. Paradinas, L. Heinke, M. Buck, C. Ocal, V. Mugnaini and C. Wöll, Film Quality and Electronic Properties of a Surface-Anchored Metal–Organic Framework Revealed by using a Multi-technique Approach, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 713–718 CrossRef CAS .
P. St Petkov, G. N. Vayssilov, J. X. Liu, O. Shekhah, Y. M. Wang, C. Wöll and T. Heine, Defects in MOFs: A Thorough Characterization, ChemPhysChem, 2012, 13, 2025–2029 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. B. Wang, H. Sezen, J. X. Liu, C. W. Yang, S. E. Roggenbuck, K. Peikert, M. Froba, A. Mavrantonakis, B. Supronowicz, T. Heine, H. Gliemann and C. Wöll, Tunable coordinative defects in UHM-3 surface-mounted MOFs for gas adsorption and separation: A combined experimental and theoretical study, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2015, 207, 53–60 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Foltyn, L. Civale, J. L. Macmanus-Driscoll, Q. X. Jia, B. Maiorov, H. Wang and M. Maley, Materials science challenges for high-temperature superconducting wire, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 631–642 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhu, J. Ciston, B. Zheng, X. Miao, C. Czarnik, Y. Pan, R. Sougrat, Z. Lai, C.-E. Hsiung, K. Yao, I. Pinnau, M. Pan and Y. Han, Unravelling surface and interfacial structures of a metal–organic framework by transmission electron microscopy, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 532–536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. X. Liu, E. Redel, S. Walheim, Z. B. Wang, V. Oberst, J. X. Liu, S. Heissler, A. Welle, M. Moosmann, T. Scherer, M. Bruns, H. Gliemann and C. Wöll, Monolithic High Performance Surface Anchored Metal–Organic Framework Bragg Reflector for Optical Sensing, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 1991–1996 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ladnorg, A. Welle, S. Heisser, C. Wöll and H. Gliemann, Site-selective growth of surface-anchored metal–organic frameworks on self-assembled monolayer patterns prepared by AFM nanografting, Beilstein J. Nanotechnol., 2013, 4, 638–648 CrossRef PubMed .
J. X. Liu, B. Lukose, O. Shekhah, H. K. Arslan, P. Weidler, H. Gliemann, S. Brase, S. Grosjean, A. Godt, X. L. Feng, K. Mullen, I. B. Magdau, T. Heine and C. Wöll, A novel series of isoreticular metal organic frameworks: realizing metastable structures by liquid phase epitaxy, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 921–926 Search PubMed .
H. K. Arslan, O. Shekhah, D. C. F. Wieland, M. Paulus, C. Sternemann, M. A. Schroer, S. Tiemeyer, M. Tolan, R. A. Fischer and C. Wöll, Intercalation in Layered Metal–Organic Frameworks: Reversible Inclusion of an Extended pi-System, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 8158–8161 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Makiura and H. Kitagawa, Porous Porphyrin Nanoarchitectures on Surfaces, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2010, 3715–3724 CrossRef CAS .
T. Haraguchi, K. Otsubo, O. Sakata, A. Fujiwara and H. Kitagawa, Remarkable Lattice Shrinkage in Highly Oriented Crystalline Three-Dimensional Metal–Organic Framework Thin Films, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 11593–11595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Haraguchi, K. Otsubo, O. Sokota, A. Fujiwara and H. Kitagawa, Guest-Induced Two-Way Structural Transformation in a Layered Metal–Organic Framework Thin Film, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 16787–16793 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shoaee, J. R. Agger, M. W. Anderson and M. P. Attfield, Crystal form, defects and growth of the metal organic framework HKUST-1 revealed by atomic force microscopy, CrystEngComm, 2008, 10, 646–648 RSC .
M. J. Cliffe, W. Wan, X. D. Zou, P. A. Chater, A. K. Kleppe, M. G. Tucker, H. Wilhelm, N. P. Funnell, F. X. Coudert and A. L. Goodwin, Correlated defect nanoregions in a metal–organic framework, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4176–4184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ameloot, F. Vermoortele, J. Hofkens, F. C. De Schryver, D. E. De Vos and M. B. J. Roeffaers, Three-Dimensional Visualization of Defects Formed during the Synthesis of Metal–Organic Frameworks: A Fluorescence Microscopy Study, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 401–405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. S. Sholl and R. P. Lively, Defects in Metal–Organic Frameworks: Challenge or Opportunity?, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3437–3444 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Zhang, M. Kauer, O. Halbherr, K. Epp, P. H. Guo, M. I. Gonzalez, D. J. Xiao, C. Wiktor, F. X. L. I. Xamena, C. Wöll, Y. M. Wang, M. Muhler and R. A. Fischer, Ruthenium Metal–Organic Frameworks with Different Defect Types: Influence on Porosity, Sorption, and Catalytic Properties, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 14297–14307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Cheetham, T. D. Bennett, F. X. Coudert and A. L. Goodwin, Defects and disorder in metal organic frameworks, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 4113–4126 RSC .
O. Kozachuk, I. Luz, F. X. L. I. Xamena, H. Noei, M. Kauer, H. B. Albada, E. D. Bloch, B. Marler, Y. M. Wang, M. Muhler and R. A. Fischer, Multifunctional, Defect-Engineered Metal–Organic Frameworks with Ruthenium Centers: Sorption and Catalytic Properties, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7058–7062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Liu, R. C. Klet, J. T. Hupp and O. Farha, Probing the correlations between the defects in metal–organic frameworks and their catalytic activity by an epoxide ring-opening reaction, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7806–7809 RSC .
J. Canivet, M. Vandichel and D. Farrusseng, Origin of highly active metal–organic framework catalysts: defects? Defects!, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 4090–4099 RSC .
G. Barin, V. Krungleviciute, O. Gutov, J. T. Hupp, T. Yildirim and O. K. Farha, Defect Creation by Linker Fragmentation in Metal–Organic Frameworks and Its Effects on Gas Uptake Properties, Inorg. Chem., 2014, 53, 6914–6919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Jiang, H. W. Wang, Y. L. Hu, J. L. Lu and H. L. Jiang, Polar Group and Defect Engineering in a Metal–Organic Framework: Synergistic Promotion of Carbon Dioxide Sorption and Conversion, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 878–885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Thornton, R. Babarao, A. Jain, F. Trousselet and F. X. Coudert, Defects in metal–organic frameworks: a compromise between adsorption and stability?, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 4352–4359 RSC .
L. M. Rodríguez-Albelo, E. López-Maya, S. Hamad, A. R. Ruiz-Salvador, S. Calero and J. A. R. Navarro, Selective sulfur dioxide adsorption on crystal defecte sites on an isoreticular metal organic framework series, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 14457–14466 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Q. Zhang, Y. J. Zhao, Y. L. Li, X. T. Zhang, L. F. Chi and G. Lu, Defect-Controlled Preparation of UiO-66 Metal–Organic Framework Thin Films with Molecular Sieving Capability, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 207–210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Wang, C. F. Li, Y. X. Liang, T. T. Han, H. L. Huang, Q. Y. Yang, D. H. Liu and C. L. Zhong, Rational construction of defects in a metal–organic framework for highly efficient adsorption and separation of dyes, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 289, 486–493 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, X. Y. Zhu, K. L. Hu, Y. S. Li, J. F. Feng, J. L. Shi and J. L. Gu, Defect creation in metal–organic frameworks for rapid and controllable decontamination of roxarsone from aqueous solution, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 302, 57–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Montoro, P. Ocon, F. Zamora and J. A. R. Navarro, Metal–Organic Frameworks Containing Missing-Linker Defects Leading to High Hydroxide-Ion Conductivity, Chem. – Eur. J., 2016, 22, 1646–1651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Taylor, T. Komatsu, S. Dekura, K. Otsubo, M. Takata and H. Kitagawa, The Role of a Three Dimensionally Ordered Defect Sublattice on the Acidity of a Sulfonated Metal–Organic Framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 11498–11506 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Taylor, S. Dekura, R. Ikeda and H. Kitagawa, Defect Control To Enhance Proton Conductivity in a Metal–Organic Framework, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 2286–2289 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wu, Y. S. Chua, V. Krungleviciute, M. Tyagi, P. Chen, T. Yildirim and W. Zhou, Unusual and Highly Tunable Missing-Linker Defects in Zirconium Metal–Organic Framework UiO-66 and Their Important Effects on Gas Adsorption, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 10525–10532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Oien, D. Wragg, H. Reinsch, S. Svelle, S. Bordiga, C. Lamberti and K. P. Lillerud, Detailed Structure Analysis of Atomic Positions and Defects in Zirconium Metal–Organic Frameworks, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 5370–5372 Search PubMed .
M. Polozij, M. Rubes, J. Cejka and P. Nachtigall, Catalysis by Dynamically Formed Defects in a Metal–Organic Framework Structure: Knoevenagel Reaction Catalyzed by Copper Benzene-1,3,5-tricarboxylate, ChemCatChem, 2014, 6, 2821–2824 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Shearer, S. Chavan, J. Ethiraj, J. G. Vitillo, S. Svelle, U. Olsbye, C. Lamberti, S. Bordiga and K. P. Lillerud, Tuned to Perfection: Ironing Out the Defects in Metal–Organic Framework UiO-66, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 4068–4071 CrossRef CAS .
O. Karagiaridi, N. A. Vermeulen, R. C. Klet, T. C. Wang, P. Z. Moghadam, S. S. Al-Juaid, J. F. Stoddart, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Functionalized Defects through Solvent-Assisted Linker Exchange: Synthesis, Characterization, and Partial Postsynthesis Elaboration of a Metal–Organic Framework Containing Free Carboxylic Acid Moieties, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 1785–1790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Shearer, S. Chavan, S. Bordiga, S. Svelle, U. Olsbye and K. P. Lillerud, Defect Engineering: Tuning the Porosity and Composition of the Metal–Organic Framework UiO-66 via Modulated Synthesis, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 3749–3761 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Shearer, J. G. Vitillo, S. Bordiga, S. Svelle, U. Olsbye and K. P. Lillerud, Functionalizing the Defects: Postsynthetic Ligand Exchange in the Metal Organic Framework UiO-66, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 7190–7193 CrossRef CAS .
O. V. Gutov, M. G. Hevia, E. C. Escudero-Adan and A. Shafir, Metal–Organic Framework (MOF) Defects under Control: Insights into the Missing Linker Sites and Their Implication in the Reactivity of Zirconium-Based Frameworks, Inorg. Chem., 2015, 54, 8396–8400 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Kozachuk, M. Meilikhov, K. Yusenko, A. Schneemann, B. Jee, A. V. Kuttatheyil, M. Bertmer, C. Sternemann, A. Poppl and R. A. Fischer, A Solid-Solution Approach to Mixed-Metal Metal–Organic Frameworks – Detailed Characterization of Local Structures, Defects and Breathing Behaviour of Al/V Frameworks, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2013, 4546–4557 CrossRef CAS .
A. Walsh, Defect Processes in a PbS Metal Organic Framework: A Quantum-Confined Hybrid Semiconductor, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1, 1284–1287 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Zhang, C. Han, D. S. Sholl and J. R. Schmidt, Computational Characterization of Defects in Metal–Organic Frameworks: Spontaneous and Water-Induced Point Defects in ZIF-8, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 459–464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Al-Janabi, X. L. Fan and F. R. Siperstein, Assessment of MOF's Quality: Quantifying Defect Content in Crystalline Porous Materials, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1490–1494 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. D. Bennett, T. K. Todorova, E. F. Baxter, D. G. Reid, C. Gervais, B. Bueken, B. Van de Voorde, D. De Vos, D. A. Keen and C. Mellot-Draznieks, Connecting defects and amorphization in UiO-66 and MIL-140 metal–organic frameworks: a combined experimental and computational study, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 2192–2201 RSC .
S. J. Lee, C. Doussot, A. Baux, L. J. Liu, G. B. Jameson, C. Richardson, J. J. Pak, F. Trousselet, F. X. Coudert and S. G. Telfer, Multicomponent Metal Organic Frameworks as Defect-Tolerant Materials, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 368–375 CrossRef CAS .
M. Vandichel, J. Hajek, F. Vermoortele, M. Waroquier, D. E. De Vos and V. Van Speybroeck, Active site engineering in UiO-66 type metal–organic frameworks by intentional creation of defects: a theoretical rationalization, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 395–406 RSC .
L. Shen, S. W. Yang, S. C. Xiang, T. Liu, B. C. Zhao, M. F. Ng, J. Goettlicher, J. B. Yi, S. A. Li, L. Wang, J. Ding, B. L. Chen, S. H. Wei and Y. P. Feng, Origin of Long-Range Ferromagnetic Ordering in Metal–Organic Frameworks with Antiferromagnetic Dimeric-Cu(II) Building Units, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17286–17290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Heinke, Z. G. Gu and C. Wöll, The surface barrier phenomenon at the loading of metal–organic frameworks, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 1–6 Search PubMed .
A. Vimont, J. M. Goupil, J. C. Lavalley, M. Daturi, S. Surble, C. Serre, F. Millange, G. Ferey and N. Audebrand, Investigation of acid sites in a zeotypic giant pores chromium(III) carboxylate, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 3218–3227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Feyand, E. Mugnaioli, F. Vermoortele, B. Bueken, J. M. Dieterich, T. Reimer, U. Kolb, D. de Vos and N. Stock, Automated Diffraction Tomography for the Structure Elucidation of Twinned, Sub-micrometer Crystals of a Highly Porous, Catalytically Active Bismuth Metal–Organic Framework, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 10373–10376 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Guillerm, F. Ragon, M. Dan-Hardi, T. Devic, M. Vishnuvarthan, B. Campo, A. Vimont, G. Clet, Q. Yang, G. Maurin, G. Ferey, A. Vittadini, S. Gross and C. Serre, A Series of Isoreticular, Highly Stable, Porous Zirconium Oxide Based Metal–Organic Frameworks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 9267–9271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Vermoortele, B. Bueken, G. Le Bars, B. Van de Voorde, M. Vandichel, K. Houthoofd, A. Vimont, M. Daturi, M. Waroquier, V. Van Speybroeck, C. Kirschhock and D. E. De Vos, Synthesis Modulation as a Tool To Increase the Catalytic Activity of Metal–Organic Frameworks: The Unique Case of UiO-66(Zr), J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 11465–11468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Ohnsorg, C. K. Beaudoin and M. E. Anderson, Fundamentals of MOF Thin Film Growth via Liquid-Phase Epitaxy: Investigating the Initiation of Deposition and the Influence of Temperature, Langmuir, 2015, 31, 6114–6121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Yu, J. L. Zhuang, J. Scherr, T. Abu-Husein and A. Terfort, Minimization of Surface Energies and Ripening Outcompete Template Effects in the Surface Growth of Metal–Organic Frameworks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 8348–8352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Zhuang, M. Kind, C. M. Grytz, F. Farr, M. Diefenbach, S. Tussupbayev, M. C. Holthausen and A. Terfort, Insight into the Oriented Growth of Surface-Attached Metal–Organic Frameworks: Surface Functionality, Deposition Temperature, and First Layer Order, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8237–8243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Shekhah, R. Swaidan, Y. Belmabkhout, M. du Plessis, T. Jacobs, L. J. Barbour, I. Pinnau and M. Eddaoudi, The liquid phase epitaxy approach for the successful construction of ultra-thin and defect-free ZIF-8 membranes: pure and mixed gas transport study, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 2089–2092 RSC .
K. Müllen, Molecular defects in organic materials, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 15013–15014 CrossRef .
Z. B. Wang, P. G. Weidler, C. Azucena, L. Heinke and C. Wöll, Negative, anisotropic thermal expansion in monolithic thin films of crystalline metal–organic frameworks, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 222, 241–246 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Wang, J. X. Liu, B. Lukose, Z. G. Gu, P. G. Weidler, H. Gliemann, T. Heine and C. Wöll, Nanoporous Designer Solids with Huge Lattice Constant Gradients: Multiheteroepitaxy of Metal–Organic Frameworks, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 1526–1529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Gu, L. Heinke, C. Wöll, T. Neumann, W. Wenzel, Q. Li, K. Fink, O. D. Gordan and D. R. T. Zahn, Experimental and theoretical investigations of the electronic band structure of metal–organic frameworks of HKUST-1 type, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 183301 CrossRef .
A. Dragässer, O. Shekhah, O. Zybaylo, C. Shen, M. Buck, C. Wöll and D. Schlettwein, Redox mediation enabled by immobilised centres in the pores of a metal–organic framework grown by liquid phase epitaxy, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 663–665 RSC .
T. Wang, M. Farajollahi, S. Henke, T. Zhu, S. R. Bajpe, S. Sun, J. S. Barnard, J. S. Lee, J. D. W. Madden, A. K. Cheethama and S. K. Smoukov, Functional conductive nanomaterials via polymerisation in nano-channels: PEDOT in a MOF, Mater. Horiz., 2017, 4, 64–71 RSC .
D. Sheberla, L. Sun, M. A. Blood-Forsythe, S. Er, C. R. Wade, C. K. Brozek, A. Aspuru-Guzik and M. Dinca, High Electrical Conductivity in Ni-3(2,3,6,7,10,11-hexaiminotriphenylene)(2), a Semiconducting Metal–Organic Graphene Analogue, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8859–8862 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. G. Laurier, F. Vermoortele, R. Ameloot, D. E. De Vos, J. Hofkens and M. B. Roeffaers, Iron(III)-based metal–organic frameworks as visible light photocatalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 14488–14491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Foster, J. D. Azoulay, B. M. Wong and M. D. Allendorf, Novel metal–organic framework linkers for light harvesting applications, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 2081–2090 RSC .
S. Jin, H. J. Son, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht and J. T. Hupp, Energy transfer from quantum dots to metal–organic frameworks for enhanced light harvesting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 955–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. So, G. P. Wiederrecht, J. E. Mondloch, J. T. Hupp and O. K. Farha, Metal–organic framework materials for light-harvesting and energy transfer, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 3501–3510 RSC .
H. J. Son, S. Jin, S. Patwardhan, S. J. Wezenberg, N. C. Jeong, M. So, C. E. Wilmer, A. A. Sarjeant, G. C. Schatz, R. Q. Snurr, O. K. Farha, G. P. Wiederrecht and J. T. Hupp, Light-harvesting and ultrafast energy migration in porphyrin-based metal–organic frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 862–869 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Lee, E. K. Kim, N. K. Shrestha, D. W. Boukhvalov, J. K. Lee and S. H. Han, Charge Transfer-Induced Molecular Hole Doping into Thin Film of Metal–Organic Frameworks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18501–18507 CAS .
C. A. Kent, D. M. Liu, L. Q. Ma, J. M. Papanikolas, T. J. Meyer and W. B. Lin, Light Harvesting in Microscale Metal–Organic Frameworks by Energy Migration and Interfacial Electron Transfer Quenching, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 12940–12943 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Miyasaka, Control of Charge Transfer in Donor/Acceptor Metal–Organic Frameworks, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 248–257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. Davis, Ordered porous materials for emerging applications, Nature, 2002, 417, 813–821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:

Jinxuan Liu
	Jinxuan Liu was born in Yantai, China in 1978. He received his Bachelor (2001) in Applied Chemistry from Yantai University, Master (2004) in Electrochemistry from State Key Laboratory of Physical Chemistry of Solid Surface, Xiamen University with Prof. Bingwei Mao, and PhD (2010) in Physical Chemistry from Ruhr-University Bochum under the supervision of Prof. Christof Wöll. Afterwards, he worked as postdoc in the group of Prof. Christof Wöll at Karlsruhe Institute of Technology from 2011 to 2014. Since 2015, he joined the faculty of State Key Laboratory of Fine Chemicals, Dalian University of Technology as an associate professor. His research focuses on self-assembled monolayers and surface-supported metal–organic framework thin films as regards the applications in photovoltaics, CO2 reduction and water splitting.

Christof Wöll
	Christof Wöll is Director of the Institute of Functional Interfaces at the Karlsruhe Institute of Technology (since 2009). He studied Physics at the University of Göttingen and received his PhD in 1987 at the Max-Planck-Institute of Dynamics and Self-Organization. In 1996, he took over the chair for Physical Chemistry at the University of Bochum (until 2009) and founded the collaborative research center SFB 588. He has received several awards including the van't Hoff Prize of the German Bunsen Association. He is a member of the “Deutsche Akademie der Naturforscher Leopoldina” and is the Spokesperson of the German Physical Society (DPG) Surface Physics Division (since 2016). His research activities focus on fundamental processes in Surface Physics and Surface Chemistry, in particular development and advancement of techniques for the characterization of molecular adsorbates and oxide surfaces as well as metal–organic frameworks (MOFs and SURMOFs).

Planar	Au/SAM	MOF-5, ZIF-8	Solvothermal mother solutions	
33 and 34

HKUST-1	Solvothermal solution	
35

HUKST-1 and [M2(L)2(P)]	Layer-by-layer or liquid-phase epitaxy	
36 and 37

HKUST-1 and Fe-MIL-88B-NH2	Gel-layer synthesis	
38

[Zn(bdc)(4,40-bipy)0.5](MOF-508)	Liquid-phase epitaxy	
39

Rho-ZMOF-1	Solvothermal growth	
40

Fe(py)2[Pt(CN)4]	Liquid-phase layer-by-layer synthesis	
41

Si	MIL-89	Colloidal deposition method	
42

NAFS-1	Langmuir–Blodgett layer-by-layer deposition	
43

ZIF-8 and [Cu(pzdc)2(pyz)]	Dip coating in mother solution	
34 and 44

MIL-101(Cr)	Dip coating from colloidal solution	
45

HKUST-1	Mother solution	
46

DA-MOF	Layer-by-layer fabrication	
47

ITO/FTO	Cu-TCPP	Drop-casting method	
48

MOF-525	Solvothermal method	
49

NU-1000, UiO-66, HKUST-1, Al-MIL-53	Electrophoretic deposition	
50

Pd-porphyrin Zn-SURMOFs	Liquid-phase epitaxy	
51

Re-SURMOF	Liquid-phase epitaxy	
52

Eu-HBPTC	Electrodeposition	
53

Co-TCPP	Solvothermal preparation	
54

Zn(NDI-X)	Deposition	
55

Polymer	HKUST-1	Mother solution	
56 and 57

MIL-47	Mother solution in MW	
58

Metal slice	HKUST-1	Electrochemically and mother solution	
59 and 60

[Zn3(btc)2]	Mother solution	
61

Cu2(bdc)2·xH2O, ZIF-8, HKUST-1	Spin-casting method	
28

Alumina	MIL-101(Cr)-NH2	Dip coating	
62



Non-planar	Porous metal	HKUST-1	Seeded growth	
63

ZIF-8	Mother solution in MW	
64 and 65

ZIF-7	Seeding, then mother solution in MW	
66–68

ZIF-22	Mother solution	
69

[Cu2(ndc)2(dabco)]	Stepwise dosing of reactants	
70

IRMOF-3/MOF-5	Mother solution	
71 and 72

[Al(bdc)]MIL-53	Seeding, then mother solution	
73

MIL-96	Seeded growth	
73

[Cu(hfipbb)(H2hfipbb)0.5]	Seeded growth	
74

Co-H3TBTC	
In situ growth	
75

Si foam	HKUST-1 and ZIF-8	Layer-by-layer method	
76

ZnO nanowire	ZIF-CoZn	Solution method	
77

Capillary column	Cu2(D-cam)2P	Liquid-phase epitaxial growth	
78

AAO	Sr/Eu-imidazolate	
In situ coating	
79

Fe3O4	HKUST-1	Liquid-phase epitaxy	
80 and 81

Silk	TMU-4, TMU-5	Liquid-phase epitaxy	
82

Polystyrene fiber	MOF-199	Electrospinning	
83

TiO2	MIL-125	Single-step hydrothermal synthesis	
84

SiO2	HKUST-1	Layer-by-layer method	
85


 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic representation of the LPE approach for the growth of SURMOF thin films on a SAM-functionalized substrate in a layer-by-layer fashion. This approach involves repeated cycles of immersion in solutions of the metal precursor and solutions of organic ligands. Between steps, the material is rinsed with solvent. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2009; (b) Cu3(BTC)2 (HKUST-1) grown on OH- and COOH-terminated SAM-modified gold surfaces with different growth orientations. Reproduced from ref. 35, with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2007. Established setups for the fabrication of SURMOF thin films by utilizing the LPE approach in a layer-by-layer fashion. (c) High-throughput spray setup, reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2011; (d) spin-coating setup, reproduced from ref. 28 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016; (e) dipping robot setup, reproduced from ref. 88 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015; flow-based automation setup, reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2015, and the resulting SURMOF thin films onto various substrates with corresponding setups.	 

 	Fig. 2  Left: Liquid–liquid interfacial synthesis. (a) Interfacial preparation of a MOF layer using a biphasic synthesis mixture consisting of an aqueous metal-ion-containing solution (blue) and an organic ligand solution (purple). Crystallite formation takes place primarily at defects remaining in the layer, resulting in self-completing growth. Transparent lighter blue octahedra correspond to new nucleation events resulting from bond formation between metal ions and ligand molecules that meet. (b) Overview of the process. Both immiscible liquids are supplied by syringe pumps to a T-junction, where the formation of aqueous solution droplets in the continuous organic phase takes place. (c) Scanning electron micrographs of hollow [Cu3(BTC)2] capsules crushed with a needle tip showing its hollow interior. (d) Cross-sectional view of the capsule wall, showing its thin and uniform thickness. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 98 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2011. Right: Air–liquid interfacial synthesis. (e) Schematic illustration of the assembly process of PdTCPP-Cu MOF nanosheets (NAFS-13) at the air/liquid interface with the crystalline structure of NAFS-13 shown in the inset. (f) Schematic illustration of the post-injection methodology employed in the fabrication of NAFS-13 nanosheets. (g and h) Brewster angle microscopy (BAM) images obtained using a 532 nm green laser at an incident angle of 53.12° (Brewster angle) with respect to the air/water interface normal taken during the formation of the NAFS-13 nanofilms fabricated by post-injection. (e–h) Reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration of the fabrication of NAFS-1 with bottom-up modular assembly by combining a layer-by-layer growth technique with the Langmuir–Blodgett method. Reproduced from ref. 43 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2010.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the surfactant-assisted synthesis of 2D Co-TCPP(Fe) nanosheets. The MOF layers are drawn in alternating blue and red to clarify the layered structures. (b) AFM and (c) TEM images of 2D Co-TCPP(Fe) nanosheets. Inset: The corresponding SAED pattern of a 2D Co-TCPP(Fe) nanosheet with the electron beam perpendicular to its basal plane. (d) Schematic illustration of the assembly process for the preparation of 2D nanosheet-based MOF thin films. Reproduced from ref. 115 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Construction of Al2(OH)2TCPP MOF from (b) rod-shaped aluminum oxide nodes connected by porphyrin linkers (H4TCPP) to give a 3D MOF. (c) SEM images of octahedral Ag NCs are subjected to ALD deposition of alumina, followed by addition of TCPP linkers to make (d) MOF-enclosed Ag NCs, OH-nano-Ag⊂MOF. Reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 6  Substrate-seeded heteroepitaxial growth of Cu2(BDC)2 on single-crystal Cu(OH)2. (a) Ligand (H2BDC)-containing solution is placed in contact with the Cu(OH)2 nanobelt. (b) Cu2(BDC)2 MOFs are heteroepitaxially grown on the Cu(OH)2 nanobelt. (c and d) Crystal structures of both Cu(OH)2 and Cu2(BDC)2 MOFs. (e) SEM images of Cu2(BDC)2 MOFs epitaxially grown on aligned Cu(OH)2 nanobelt films and (f) magnified image. (g) Cu2(BDC)2 MOF films on a SiC substrate. (h) Aligned Cu2(BDC)2 MOFs deposited on a flexible substrate (cellophane). Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic representation of the electrochemical fabrication of MOF thin films with (a) anodic deposition, (b) electrophoretic deposition, and (c) cathodic deposition. (d, e and f) Structure of Zn-TPTC, NU-1000, and MOF-5 fabricated with anodic deposition, electrophilic deposition, and cathodic deposition, respectively. (g, h and i) SEM images of the resulting MOF thin films of Zn-TPTC, NU-1000, and MOF-5, respectively. (d and g) Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. (e and h) Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2014. (f and i) Reproduced from ref. 124 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagram of (a) electrospray deposition for synthesizing ZIF-7 membranes on hot alumina (160 °C). Reproduced from Melgar et al.133 (b) Electrospinning process for ZIF-8 on a microporous SiO2 wafer. Reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2012. (c) Hot-pressing (HoP) method for the fabrication of ZIF-8 on glass cloth (a) and (b) and glass fiber (c)–(e). Reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 9  Left: (a) Chemical vapor deposition of ZIF-8 thin films. The procedure consists of a metal oxide vapor deposition (Step 1) and a consecutive vapor-solid reaction (Step 2). Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) images of (b) ZIF-8 coated silicon pillar arrays and (c) manufactured ZIF-8 patterns. Reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. Right: (d) Schematic illustration of the ALD process to fabricate MOF thin films. The ALD process consists of a metal precursor and organic linker pulses separated by an inert gas on the substrate to yield a monolayer of the MOF thin film. The desired film thickness can be achieved by controlling the repetitions of both precursors. (e and f) The structure of fabricated Ca-BDC using ALD with different forms. Reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic drawing of the LPE approach to fabricate porphyrin-based SURMOF thin films with a series of porphyrin linkers in a layer-by-layer fashion. Reproduced from ref. 270 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2012. (b–d) Architectures of porphyrin–SURMOF thin film-based photovoltaic devices and (c)–(e) their corresponding J–V curves. (b) and (c) reproduced from ref. 51 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2015. (d) and (e) reproduced from ref. 52 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) SEM cross section of a three-layer emitter–sensitizer–emitter (A–B–A) SURMOF heterostructure on a Si substrate. (b) Out-of-plane XRD diffractograms of A, B, and A + B. (c–e) Photographs of an encapsulated B–A structure under 532 nm laser irradiation. To exclude oxygen, this sample was encapsulated between two glass cover slips in a glovebox with an inert atmosphere. Two-component epoxy was used to seal the slides together. This is visible as the scattering, roughly circular form around the pinkish square heterostructure of the upconverting film. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 12  Electrocatalytic CO2 reduction. (a) Molecular structure of cobalt-metalated TCPP linker, (b) crystal structure of Al2(OH)2TCPP-Co MOF, (c) SEM image of the MOF catalyst film integrated in a conductive substrate with plate-like morphology, and (d) schematic illustration of the functional CO2 electrochemical reduction system. Reproduced from ref. 169 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015. Photocatalytic CO2 reduction. (e) Zr6O4(OH)4(–CO2)12 secondary building units are combined with BPDC and ReTC linkers to form (f) a face-centered cubic Ren-MOF. (g) TEM image of Ag⊂Re3-MOF showing Re3-MOF constructed on the surface of an Ag nanocube. (h) Schematic illustration of Ren-MOF coated on an Ag nanocube for plasmon-enhanced photocatalytic conversion of CO2. Reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Left: Thin sheets of Ni–Co metal–organic frameworks (MOFs) as anodic oxygen evolution electrocatalysts under alkaline conditions. The inset shows the structure of the Ni–Co MOF electrocatalyst. Right: Nu-1000_Ni–S thin films as cathodic hydrogen evolution electrocatalysts under acidic conditions. The inset shows the structure of the NU-1000_Ni–S electrocatalyst. Modified based on ref. 180 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. (b) Right: TEM image of ultrathin NiCo-UMOFNs. Left: Polarization curves of NiCo-UMOFNs, Ni-UMOFNs, Co-UMOFNs, RuO2, and bulk NiCo-MOFs in an O2-saturated 1 M KOH solution at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. The dotted horizontal line is a guide for the eye showing a current density of 10 mA cm−2. Reproduced from ref. 181 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016. (c) Left: Cross-sectional SEM image of NU-1000_Ni–S films. Right: J–V curves of four types of electrodes: bare FTO (dotted black), FTO_NU-1000 (dotted red), FTO_Ni–S (black), and NU-1000_Ni–S (red). Reproduced from ref. 182 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Illustration of a SURMOF test device structure with an Au/SURMOF/Al/Au stack and SURMOF film and measurement setup. (b) Switching cycle of 10.5 nm thick HKUST-1 SURMOF devices without ferrocene loading. (c) Schematic drawing of HKUST-1 SURMOF loaded with ferrocene and (d) corresponding switching cycles. (a–d) Reproduced from ref. 208 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 15  Schematic drawing of (a) a MOF-based dielectric device and (b) the two-fold interpenetrated MOF architectures. (c) SEM images of MOF thin films prepared at a voltage of 3 V for 60 s. (d) Schematic of the space-charge distribution in the MOF thin film and in bulk MOFs. (e) Dielectric constant of a MOF film and powder MOFs after removal of the guest molecules during the heating process. Reproduced from ref. 119 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 16  Left: (a) Schematic representation of Ni3(HITP)2-based porous FETs and electrical characteristics of FETs. (b) Output and transfer curves. Reproduced from ref. 207 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. Right: (a) Obtained OFET device and schematic structure of OFET with the interfacial modification of SiO2 dielectric layers by HKUST-1 SURMOF. (b) Output characteristic and transfer characteristic of the OFET device with HKUST-1 (three cycles)/SiO2/Si. Reproduced from ref. 213 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 17  Thermoelectric characterization of the MOF thin film devices. (a) Schematic of the measurement. (b) Example of an IR image taken during one of the measurements. The electrical contacts appear cold in the image because of their different emissivity compared with the MOF. (c) Thermovoltage as a function of the applied temperature difference. (d–f) Seebeck coefficient, conductivity and power factor as a function of the average temperature, respectively. The dashed lines are linear fits. Reproduced from ref. 202 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 18  Structural schematics of Ni3(HITP)2. (a) Molecular structure of Ni3(HITP)2. (b) Relative size of pores, electrolyte Et4N+ and BF4− ions, and acetonitrile solvent molecules, shown in a space-filling diagram of idealized Ni3(HITP)2. Green, lime, blue, gray, brown, and white spheres represent Ni, F, N, C, B, and H atoms, respectively. Performance of Ni3(HITP)2 electrodes in a symmetrical supercapacitor cell up to 1 V. (c) Cyclic voltammetry at a scan rate of 10 mV s−1 at increasing cell voltage. (d) Galvanostatic charge and discharge curves at current densities of 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 A g−1. Reproduced from ref. 216 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Structure and morphology of nMOF-867 constructed with Zr6O6(CO2)12 and 2,20-bipyridine-5,50-dicarboxylate (BYDC). (b) Schematic representation of nMOF supercapacitors. (c) Areal capacitance of the highest nMOF supercapacitor (nMOF-867) and comparison to activated carbon and graphene. Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of the MOF-based zinc-polyiodide redox flow battery (ZIB). Electrochemical performances of the pristine GF and the MOF-modified GF electrodes. (b) Charge/discharge curves. (c) Energy efficiency with different current densities. Reproduced from ref. 243 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Structure of the Fe2(dobpdc) framework. Generalized schematic of how Fe2(dobpdc) operates in an electrochemical cell. For the electrochemical reduction, the anions, A−, can be tetrafluoroborate, hexafluorophosphate, bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl)imide, or tetrakis(perfluorophenyl)borate. The cations, M+, can be lithium, sodium, or potassium. Half-cell performance of a prototype sodium battery with a 0.6 M NaPF6 electrolyte in 30:70 EC/DMC. The theoretical capacity is 140 mA h g−1. (b) Cycle-rate dependence. (c) Change in capacity with cycle number at 1C. Reproduced from ref. 244 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2015.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) View of the structure of Ni-MOF along the a-axis. (b) Schematic illustration of the alkaline battery–supercapacitor hybrid device containing Ni-MOF and CNT-COOH as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. The electrochemical measurements of an Ni-MOF//CNT-COOH device in a 3 M KOH + 0.1 M K4Fe(CN)6 solution: (c) CV curves of the device in different potential windows at 10 mV s−1 and (d) galvanostatic charge–discharge curves of the device at various current densities. Reproduced from ref. 246 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic illustration of tunable, remote-controllable molecular selectivity by a photoswitchable MOF membrane. (b) SEM cross-section image of the SURMOF membrane on the mesoporous α-Al2O3. (c) The structure of Cu2(AzoBPDC)2(AzoBiPyB) with the azobenzene groups. The transition between trans and cis states can be tuned by irradiation with 365 nm and 455 nm light, respectively. (d) The separation of H2:CO2 and N2:CO2 mixtures. The membrane is irradiated by 365 nm and 455 nm light for 5 min each. The permeances of H2 and CO2 (left), as well as N2 and CO2 (right), are shown in black with the unit of mol s−1 m−2 Pa−1. The molecular selectivities (or separation factors) are shown in red. Reproduced from ref. 12 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 24  The types of defects within MOF thin films. Modified based on ref. 266 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2007.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic illustration of the XRD experimental setups for MOF thin films. Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2017. Selected examples of MOF thin films with the corresponding out-of-plane and in-plane XRD patterns for (b) SURMOF 2, (c) Cu2(BDC)2/Cu(OH)2, and (d) Fe(py)2[Pt(CN)4] (py: pyridine) thin films. (b, c and d) Reproduced from ref. 270, 118 and 41 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2012, 2017, and 2016, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic drawing of HKUST-1 grown on an MHDA/Au substrate. (b) XP spectra of HKUST-1/MHDA/Au at different temperatures. (c) Left: UHV-IRRAS spectra of CO adsorbed on activated HKUST-1/MHDA/Au at 110 K. The sample was annealed at 350 K and 420 K. Right: Cluster model of a MOF that is formed from Cu2+ dimers and 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid (BTC). Reproduced from ref. 264 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2012. (d) Top: The defective BTC-like linkers. Bottom: UHV-FTIR spectra were obtained after representative defective MOF samples with different defective linkers L1–L4 exposed to various amounts of CO at 90 K. Reproduced from ref. 187 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 27  Schematic illustration of the interface types of MOF thin films. (a) MOF/SAM interface, (b) MOF/MOF interface, and (c) “intercalated” interface. (b and c) Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014, and ref. 118 with permission from Nature publishing group, copyright 2017, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Scheme for donor/acceptor (D/A) molecule loading in MOF hetero-multilayers. Reproduced from ref. 321 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2014. (b) Electron and hole transport between well-defined organic/organic interfaces in MOF thin-film materials. Reproduced from ref. 165 with permission from John Wiley & Sons, copyright 2016.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
