Electrically conductive oxide aerogels: new materials in electrochemistry  - Journal of Materials Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B007591O View PDF VersionNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B007591O
(Feature Article)
J. Mater. Chem., 2001, 11, 963-980Electrically conductive oxide aerogels: new
materials in electrochemistryDebra R. Rolisona and Bruce DunnbaSurface Chemistry Branch, Code
6170, Naval Research Laboratory, Washington, DC 20375-5342, USA. E-mail: rolison@nrl.navy.milbDepartment of Materials Science and
Engineering, UCLA, Los
Angeles, CA 90095-1595, USA. E-mail: bdunn@ucla.eduReceived 19th September 2000, Accepted 22nd November 2000First published on 19th February 2001AbstractAerogels, which are nanoscale mesoporous materials of low density
and high surface area, have been well studied as thermal insulators, heterogeneous
catalysts, and novel particle or radiation detectors. Now, electrically conducting
oxide aerogels are being explored as new materials in electrochemistry and
for their innate ability to amplify the nature of the surfaces of technologically
relevant conducting oxides in batteries, ultracapacitors, and fuel cells.
Recent results are reviewed in which the mixed electron- and cation-conducting
transition metal oxides of vanadium, molybdenum, ruthenium, and manganese
have been prepared as low density, highly porous, and high surface area aerogels
and then studied as charge-storage electrode materials. These materials challenge
the standard ways in which electrochemically active oxides are conceived,
studied, and used.IntroductionWhat is an aerogel? And why are aerogels materials of interest?We consider aerogels to be composites of being and nothingness1,2
(with
few or no apologies to Sartre3) because
they are mesoporous materials in which nanometer-scale solid domains (the “being”)
are networked through a continuous, highly porous volume of free space (the “nothingness”),
as depicted in Fig. 1.4,5
This combination of being and nothingness is key to the unique properties
of aerogels because a number of important physical attributes are assembled
into one architecture. These properties include: (1) high
surface area; (2) stabilization of nanoscale matter to
coalescence or agglomeration; (3) low (and controllable)
densities (the ratio of being to nothingness); and (4)
accessibility of molecular reactants to the nanoscale domains throughout the
aerogel via rapid mass transport through the continuous volume of
mesopores (pores sized at >2 nm). Fig. 1  (Left) Representation
of the architectural being and nothingness of an aerogel illustrating the
innate nanoscopic character of the solid and pore components of these low
density, highly porous, sol–gel-derived materials (adapted from ref. 4). (Right)
High resolution scanning electron micrograph showing the general features
seen for silica (and silica-based composite) aerogels: 10 to 20 nm
diameter silica domains networked through mesoporous space [(ref. 5) Reprinted with
permission from M. L. Anderson, R. M. Stroud, C. A. Morris, C. I. Merzbacher
and D. R. Rolison, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2000, 2, 481. Copyright
[2000] Wiley-VCH]. This review is directed at the prospect and promise that aerogels offer
as a new direction in electrochemical materials. Aerogels have been explored,
with a focus on insulating oxide materials, for a wide range of applications
in physics, engineering, and catalysis.6 All
the attributes that make aerogels appealing materials in these fields also
offer potential contributions to electrochemistry provided the solid network
is electrically conducting, i.e., when it can transport electrons
and/or ions. To explore the possibilities for aerogels in electrochemical
applications, a context will first be created based on the wealth of information
available on the physical and chemical properties (and applications)
of aerogels in physics, engineering, and catalysis. We will then describe
the recent research on aerogels as new materials in fuel cells, batteries,
supercapacitors, and electrocatalysis.We also wish to emphasize in our discussion that aerogels offer another
contribution to electrochemical science and technology—one beyond that
of providing new materials or architectures. Because aerogels innately magnify
the surface-to-volume fraction of a material, aerogels are also tools that
amplify (and thereby offer a new way to explore and understand)
the critical phase of any electrochemical system: the interface.History and backgroundThe widespread interest in aerogels arises not only from their unique microstructural
features of low density and high surface area but also because these morphologies
can be obtained for a variety of chemical compositions. The first aerogels
were prepared in the 1930s by Kistler who used supercritical drying (SCD)
to replace the liquid phase in a wet gel with air.7
Above the critical point, the liquid phase no longer exists and formation
of liquid–vapor interfaces—and the capillary forces that subsequently
collapse the drying gel to a xerogel—are avoided. Removing the pore
liquid without collapsing the microstructure preserves both the solid and
porous networks so that the resulting solid—an aerogel—retains
the high porosity, low density and high surface area of the wet gel. Kistler
immediately recognized that the synthesis of aerogels was a property of gels
in general and not restricted to a few systems.7
He and his co-workers rapidly explored the application of aerogels as catalysts
and catalyst supports8 and determined that
silica aerogels exhibit extremely low thermal conductivity.9The Kistler method for preparing aerogels is cumbersome and for nearly
30 years these materials went largely uninvestigated. An important development
occurred in the 1960s when Teichner and Nicolaon prepared aerogels by what
is now commonly known as the sol–gel process.10
This technique eliminated the time-consuming salt removal and solvent-exchange
steps inherent to the Kistler method and enabled aerogels to be prepared in
hours rather than days. Moreover, the sol–gel method readily extends
aerogel chemistry to transition metal oxides, to binary and ternary oxide
compositions, to metal/metal oxide systems and even to organic/inorganic
hybrid materials. To some degree the development of aerogels as novel materials
parallels the emergence of sol–gel science and technology since the
1980s11 and it is evident that aerogels will
continue to benefit from the continued interest in, and variations on, sol–gel
synthetic approaches.Aerogel synthesisThe synthesis of oxides by sol–gel methods has been well reviewed,11,12 as sol–gel chemistry is one of several
liquid-phase (i.e., soft or chimie douce13)
methods to prepare inorganic materials.14
Focused reviews on the adaptation of sol–gel processing for aerogels
have appeared.15–18
Thus, only a brief overview of pertinent synthetic issues is presented here.Three routes are currently used to prepare sol–gel materials and
they are distinguished by the nature of the precursor: an inorganic salt (in
aqueous solution), an aggregate of colloidal particles in a solvent,
or a network-forming species in an organic or aqueous solution. The last route
has emerged as the most widely traveled because network-formers can be modified
to control the resulting chemistry and processing of the gel, and ultimately
its morphology. Among the different network-forming precursors, metal alkoxides
have clearly become the most important ones, although metal β-diketonates
and metal carboxylates are also used. The sol–gel route involving metal
alkoxides (M(OR)n, where M is Al, Si, Ti,
V, Cr, Mo, W, etc., and OR is an alkoxy functionality19),
may be considered as a two-step inorganic polymerization.12
Initiation occurs via hydrolysis of alkoxy ligands to yield an alcohol (ROH)
and, as new reactants, hydroxylated metal centers (M–OH): (1)Three-dimensional propagation then occurs as the hydroxylated species
condense to form oxypolymers. Polycondensation involves an oxylation reaction
which creates oxygen bridges and expels XOH species as follows: (2)The nature of the inorganic network depends upon the relative rates of
hydrolysis and condensation. Under synthetic conditions where hydrolysis is
favored and condensation is the rate-determining step, small hydroxylated
oligomers predominate ultimately yielding polymer-like gels with relatively
small pores. When high condensation rates are favored, the resulting gel network
consists of interconnected colloidal particles and large pores. These colloidal
gels are generally preferred for aerogels because the large pores make it
easier to remove the pore liquid during supercritical drying.18The chemical reactivity of metal alkoxides M(OR)n
towards hydrolysis and condensation mainly depends on the nature of the metal
atom—both its electrophilicity and its ability to undergo an increase
in coordination number.12 For example, silicon
alkoxide Si(OR)4 precursors have a low electrophilicity
and their coordination number is stable because the silicon precursor and
product oxide have the same coordination number (N = 4).
Thus, hydrolysis of Si(OR)4 is slow and the rates of
the polymerization reactions of these alkoxides are mainly controlled by acid
or base catalysis.The sol–gel chemistry of non-silicate systems is not as easily controlled,
especially for metal alkoxides in which the transition metal centers are highly
electrophilic and exhibit several coordination states.12
Most transition metal alkoxides are so reactive that precipitation occurs
as soon as water is added. One means of moderating the reaction rates is to
chemically modify the precursor.20 Since transition
metal alkoxides react with nucleophilic reagents, they can be modified by
using complexing ligands HOA (e.g., OA = acetylacetonate,
acetate): (3)In this case the alkoxy groups (OR)
are replaced by new ligands (OA) that are more stable to hydrolysis.
Thus, the alkoxy ligands are rather quickly removed upon hydrolysis while
chelating ligands act as termination agents that limit condensation reactions.21The manner in which the liquid phase is removed from a wet gel determines
whether the dried material is a highly porous aerogel or a more dense xerogel (Fig. 2). The latter is characterized by
collapse of the wet gel's structure as the pore liquid evaporates. If
the network is compliant, the gel deforms from the capillary forces generated
by the liquid phase as it recedes into the body of the gel. The capillary
pressure (Pc) is related to the liquid–vapor
interfacial energy of the solvent (γlv),
the liquid–solid contact angle (θ), and the
surface-to-volume ratio of the pores (Sp/Vp);22 (4)The Sp/Vp
ratio can be re-written in terms of the bulk density23
of the gel (ρb), its skeletal density (ρs,
which approaches that of the dense form of the oxide) and the specific
surface area, S; (5)where ρ
represents the fraction of matter in the gel volume (ρb/ρs).
For aerogels (where ρb < ρs)
ρ
is usually less than 0.1. Fig. 2  The method used to
extract the pore fluid from a wet gel creates a dry solid with variable porosity:
strong capillary forces create a xerogel, weak capillary forces create an
ambigel, and zero capillary force creates an aerogel that nominally retains
the low density framework of the wet gel. The capillary pressure can now be expressed in terms of more easily measured
parameters: (6)The issues associated with capillary pressure
and the shrinkage that results upon drying have been well developed as there
is considerable interest in obtaining crack-free xerogels for a variety of
applications.11Both supercritical and ambient-pressure routes can produce aerogels.24 The SCD methods “preserve” the porosity
of the wet gel by bringing the solvent phase into its supercritical state,
where no liquid–vapor interfaces exist, so that capillary stresses never
develop. Researchers distinguish between high temperature and low temperature
SCD.15 The former, pioneered by Kistler, removes
the alcohols produced as by-products during the sol–gel process. But
the typical SCD conditions for alcohols—250°C at 5 to 8 MPa—not
only create a safety concern but also accelerate gel-aging processes leading
to materials with little microporosity and lower surface area. The low temperature
process introduced by Hunt and co-workers25
is adapted from the biology community26 in
which liquid CO2 is taken supercritical at similar pressure levels (∼8 MPa)
but at temperatures just above room temperature (30–40°C).
Liquid CO2, however, is poorly miscible with most solvents, so
intermediate solvent exchange of the pore liquid with a more CO2(l)-miscible
solvent (e.g., acetone or amyl acetate) is generally necessary.
The advantages and disadvantages for the two SCD methods have been well discussed
in the literature.15Ambient-pressure methods for preparing aerogels are just emerging. These
approaches offer great promise to lower aerogel production costs and thus
represent an important consideration for the future development of these materials.
Ambient-pressure methods for silica aerogels include both surface modification27–29 and network strengthening.30–32 The former involves the use
of organic surface treatments in which terminal silanols (Si–OH)
are replaced by nonreactive groups via silylation27,28
or esterification.29 These surface modifications
inhibit condensation reactions (conversion of Si–OH centers to
Si–O–Si, which locks in structural collapse by sealing compressed
pores shut), so that the porous network can “spring back”
to nearly the original volume of the wet gel. Both bulk (monolithic)
and thin film silica aerogels have been prepared by the spring-back method.27,28Network strengthening involves either aging the wet gel in its mother liquor (including
thermal treatments in water30) or soaking
it in a silicon alkoxide during the washing and aging steps.31,32
Terminal silanols on the silica gel react with Si–OR moieties to coarsen
the gel network and increase the network's resistance to collapse from
the capillary forces generated during ambient-pressure drying. Low density
silica aerogels with specific surface areas of ∼700 m2 g−1
have been reported.31,32 In a recent
report, an alternative to these methods showed that aerogel-like materials
were produced by aging silica gel for three weeks in its dialkylimidazolium-based
mother liquor, followed by refluxing in acetonitrile to extract the ionic
liquid and ambient-pressure drying to remove the acetonitrile.33Ambient-pressure methods can also be realized by using pore solvents with
low surface tension,32,34 but only recently
were such solvents more thoroughly examined and extended to compositions other
than silica.35 In this approach the pore liquid
is exchanged with low surface tension, nonpolar solvents prior to ambient-pressure
drying (Fig. 2). The method
should be applicable to a wide variety of systems, as indicated from results
obtained with vanadium oxide,35,36 molybdenum
oxide,35 and manganese oxide.37,38
The ambient-dried transition metal oxides (hereby christened ambigels)
are somewhat less porous than the corresponding SCD materials (80%
vs.
90%), but exhibit comparable surface areas and pore volumes.Materials systems and applicationsThe development of aerogel materials has been closely coupled to two of
their most prominent physical properties: high surface area and low thermal
conductivity. The former is of interest in catalysis and has led researchers
to investigate a wide range of compositions. Low thermal conductivity is a
property of aerogels in general,6 but has been
studied extensively in silicate systems because of the considerable understanding
of the sol–gel process for silicates and the range of their potential
applications.Aerogel catalysts. Aerogels have been
investigated as heterogeneous catalysts since their inception in the 1930s.7 Aerogels offer more active sites per gram for gas/solid
interactions than do more dense materials. Sol–gel chemistry and processing
allow specific compositions to be developed with a highly porous morphology,
so that the solid network can be tailored to the specific catalytic reaction
while the mesoporous network serves as the equivalent of a superhighway for
molecular transport. Just as with zeolites,39
the area of the “external” surface of an aerogel is relatively
small compared to its “internal” surface area.15
Unlike zeolites, which are microporous, crystalline solids,39 the continuous mesoporous network of aerogels
facilitates the flux of reactant molecules that access the catalytically active “internal
surface” area. The rates of catalytic reactions that are transport-limited
rather than kinetically limited would be improved by what an aerogel innately
provides: ready mass transport of reactants to an increased area of catalytic
surface.Much of the work on aerogel catalysts15,17,40
draws on the many metal or metal oxide (MOx)-based catalysts that
have already been studied on traditional oxide supports.41
In addition to high surface area and mesoporosity, other benefits of the sol–gel
method for preparing catalysts include liquid-phase syntheses so that mixing
on the molecular scale can give rise to homogeneous products; the ability
to adapt the physical properties of aerogels (density, particle size,
mechanical properties) to the requirements of the catalytic application
and reactor type; and the moderate temperatures of sol–gel chemistry
and processing, which allow preparation of amorphous or metastable catalysts.The range of aerogel catalysts is extensive15,17,18,40
and includes a variety of single component, binary and ternary oxide systems
along with M/MOx compositions supported on aerogels. Similarly, a wide
range of catalytic reactions have been studied on aerogels, such as hydrogenation
and dehydrogenation reactions, hydrodesulfurization, partial oxidation, ammoxidation,
nitroxidation, and selective reduction of NO.15,17,18,40
Aerogel catalysts as prepared by high vs. low temperature SCD may
differ significantly, not only in terms of surface area40
but also in their fundamental behavior. High temperature SCD preparation of
aerogels can induce crystallization of the oxide,17
which may or may not be desirable for the specific catalytic reaction. Furthermore,
the reducing properties of alcohols at high temperature and pressure can lead
to in-situ reduction of metal ions or metal oxides. M/MOx-impregnated
aerogels dried via high temperature SCD can exhibit high catalytic
activity without thermal pre-treatment,15,17
as first seen for Ni/NiO- or Pt/PtO-impregnated SiO242 and subsequently extended to other metals and oxide
aerogels, e.g., Pd/Al2O3.43
In contrast, low temperature SCD-derived aerogels typically require thermal
activation prior to their use as catalysts.15If the number of reactant-accessible catalytic sites per gram is improved,
the number of molecules reacted (turnover number, TON) per unit
time (turnover frequency) increases, which improves the efficiency
of the reaction. However, the mechanism of the catalytic reaction effectively
does not change if surface-area normalized TONs for the aerogel catalyst are
comparable to those for its standard heterogeneous catalyst relative. Comparable
surface-area-normalized rates indicate that the rate-determining step and
the physicochemical nature of the reaction environment are unaffected. Many
examples of this comparability are found in the literature.15,17,40
A more interesting (and desired) divergence occurs when the aerogel-based
catalyst is more active than its standard heterogeneous catalyst relative,
even after normalizing for surface area differences.An interesting feature of aerogel catalysts is the inherent disorder present
in these materials. Although heterogeneous catalysis is modeled using calculations
on and experiments with well-defined single-crystal metal or metal-oxide surfaces,
such models are acknowledged as reference points for the practical systems.44 Heterogeneous catalysts are, in general, non-smooth,
high surface area, nanoscale materials. However, should the catalytic activity
derive from a disordered structure, preparations that enhance amorphous or
defective, rather than crystalline, components of the catalyst are advantageous.
Teichner reports an example in which the less-ordered form of an iron oxide
catalyst, as realized by the aerogel route, leads to improved surface area-normalized
TONs for Fischer–Tropsch chemistry to synthesize hydrocarbons:45 (7)In a recent study of alkene isomerizations and dimerizations, Sun and Klabunde
demonstrated that the activity of sol–gel-processed MgO aerogel catalyst
greatly exceeded that of more conventional MgO forms.46
Potassium-promoted MgO aerogel was shown to have a higher base strength (as
determined using indicator dyes), which derived from stronger and higher
numbers of base sites than exist in the non-aerogel MgO materials. Further,
the catalytic activity correlated with the expected surface concentration
of edge/corner sites of polycrystalline MgO and the nanoscale form of
the aerogel maximizes the number of such sites.Despite the obvious advantages aerogels bring to catalysis as either the
primary catalyst or the catalyst support, the transition of these materials
into practical catalytic processes appears to be limited, at least as reported
in the open literature. Ko discusses how one cycle of hydrotreating deleteriously
lowered the surface area of a Ni–Mo/TiO2–ZrO2
aerogel catalyst.40,47 The origin of
the effect, collapse of micropores in the nanoscale domains of the mixed-oxide
aerogel, underscores the importance of stabilizing the aerogel microstructure.One approach to stabilize the solid network of an aerogel to the chemistries,
temperatures, and pressures implicit in heterogeneous catalysis is to start
with partially densified aerogels. Fricke and co-workers have shown that the
density of SiO2 aerogels can be monotonically increased by calcining
SCD-prepared aerogels above 800°C.48
The degree of densification, which can be as modest an increase as 0.15 to
0.25 g cm−3 for silica (with a bulk density
of ∼2.2 g cm−3) is controlled by the
time spent at elevated temperatures. Partially densified aerogels have improved
mechanical integrity,48–50
and can withstand re-exposure to liquids and ambient drying without cracking50 and without loss of surface area or pore volume
upon ambient evaporation of the filling liquid.51
Partially densified aerogels have been proposed as hosts to synthesize multicomponent
materials by infusion of liquid precursors into the open volume of the aerogel:50 such an approach should offer a more durable material
for heterogeneous catalysis.Aerogel reactants. The high surface area
and enormous mesoporous volume of aerogels offer opportunities for chemical
reactivity other than in catalysis. A good example is one where the aerogel
oxide acts as a stoichiometric chemical reactant.52
Klabunde and co-workers have explored MgO and CaO aerogels for base-catalyzed
decomposition of organic molecules that are environmental hazards, particularly
chlorinated53–55 and fluorinated56 organic molecules and organophosphonates.57 Calcium oxide acts as a reagent for the thermal
destruction of CCl4 to form non-toxic products: (8)Klabunde
and co-workers found that CaO aerogels have higher decomposition efficiencies
than other forms of nanoscale CaO. The higher performance is attributed to
both higher surface area (relative to other fine powders of MgO or CaO)
and higher surface reactivity.52,55
These highly active sites are due to a large number of three- and four-coordinate
ions with a higher Lewis basicity, caused by the increased number of corner,
edge and defect sites, when compared to standard MgO samples,58
as shown in Fig. 3. The decomposition
of CCl4 on CaO aerogel is so rapid at 700 K that it cannot
be followed spectroscopically.52 Modifying
MgO or CaO aerogel cores with shells of metal oxides, including Fe2O3
and V2O5, improves the decomposition capacity so that
essentially stoichiometric reaction of the solid base with CCl4
or 1,3-dichlorobenzene occurs. The metal oxide supported on the aerogel seems
to act as a chloride ion shuttle between the organic and the MgO aerogel core.59 Fig. 3  Idealized representation
of a 4 nm crystallite of aerogel-produced MgO.58
CaO and MgO, in their aerogel-produced form, lead to higher activity for thermal
decomposition of environmentally proscribed organic compounds containing chlorine,
fluorine, phosphorus, or sulfur than nanocrystalline CaO or MgO prepared by
other approaches. Applications of aerogels based on physical properties. Silica aerogels constitute a model aerogel system11,60
because the relationships have been detailed among sol–gel chemistry,
the resulting aerogel microstructure, and the effect on physical properties.16 In particular, the ability to obtain a highly porous
microstructure with controlled pore size61,62
is of considerable importance for the physical applications of aerogels as
discussed below.Aerogels are among the best thermal insulators available on the planet63 due to their extremely low thermal conductivities.
Although all aerogels possess this property to some degree, silica aerogels
have received the most attention.64 In addition
to being non-flammable and inert, the ability to make silica aerogels as transparent
thermal insulators offers a unique opportunity in which the material effectively
transmits solar light, but strongly blocks thermal infrared radiation.65 Another promising application area is in non-evacuated
thermal insulation systems, where aerogels perform significantly better than
CFC-blown foams.16 In this case, transparency
is not important and the radiative thermal conductivity can be reduced significantly
by the addition of opacifiers such as carbon soot or TiO2.66 In general, the thermal insulation opportunities
for aerogels are extensive; the key features that limit their commercialization
for this purpose and others are cost and related manufacturing issues. Smith et
al. have pointed out that only high-value products can justify the exorbitant
expense of introducing and removing liquids, multiple times—a processing
component currently integral to the production of aerogels.67The porous morphology of aerogels leads to certain novel properties in
areas other than those based on thermal conductivity.68
In acoustics, for example, the extremely low sound velocity in SiO2
aerogels is useful for impedance-matching applications in ultrasonic sensor
systems.69 Silica aerogels are widely used
for Cerenkov detectors because they offer a critical range of low refractive
index values (1.007 to 1.024) otherwise difficult to achieve except
with compressed gases, which eases detector fabrication.16,70,71
Physicists have also used aerogels as the matrix to hold supercooled helium
to study phase transitions,72 including the
superfluid transition in 3He.73
Another exotic application for aerogels is their use in the intact capture
of cosmic dust particles (micrometeorites) traveling at hypervelocities (>3 km s−1).74 The porous morphology of the aerogel provides a
thermally stable, inert medium to dissipate the kinetic energy of the speeding
particle while its transparency enables the captured particle's final
location to be directly observed. The effectiveness of aerogels as micrometeorite
detectors has been demonstrated on several Space Shuttle missions and is the
subject of the “Stardust” mission, launched on 7 February 1999,
which is scheduled to parachute back to earth in 2004 for analysis of the
collected comet dust.75Another area where the highly porous morphology of aerogels is generating
enormous interest is in microelectronics.76
The opportunities here should have widespread impact because interlayer dielectrics (ILD)
with dielectric constants less than that of dense silica (ε ∼ 4)
are critical for high speed devices.77 As
indicated in the Semiconductor Industry Association (SIA)
“Roadmap”,
there is a vital need for a new generation of low dielectric constant materials
in order to improve device performance as smaller feature sizes in integrated
circuits are developed.78 Silica aerogels
represent one of the most promising of all materials for ILD because of their
low dielectric constant (ε < 2),
thermal and dimensional stability, and compatibility (e.g.,
spin-on methods) with semiconductor processing. The development of silica
aerogel films for ILD applications is well underway.77Tailoring the properties of aerogels. In
designing aerogels for specific physical and chemical applications, including
electrochemistry, one key advantage resides in the variety of means available
to modify the (wet and dry) gels chemically and thereby tailor the
final properties of the modified aerogels. As seen in Fig. 4,
chemical modification can be broached at multiple points in the creation of
an aerogel, by: (i) modification of the sol–gel precursor; (ii)
addition of a particulate phase during sol–gel formation; (iii)
liquid-phase modification of the wet gel; (iv) gas-phase
modification of the aerogel; and even (v) liquid-phase
modification of an annealed or strengthened aerogel. Fig. 4  Points during sol–gel
chemistry and processing at which the sol, wet gel, supercritically dried
gel (aerogel), or re-wetted aerogel may be chemically modified;
s = solution, g = gas phase. Several examples of aerogel design flexibility have been demonstrated to
date. Catalysts based on the dispersion of metals on aerogel supports have
been well investigated,15,17,79
as have aerogels to which opacifiers are added to reduce thermal transport
or that are heated at elevated temperatures to obtain partially densified
aerogels.48–50,66
Aerogels with new properties continue to be created. One recent development
involves doping aerogels by gas-phase decomposition reactions.80
This approach takes advantage of the open-pore network of the aerogel and
appears adaptable to a wide range of organic and inorganic dopants derived
from standard chemical vapor deposition precursors.80–83
A related method of deposition uses a sub-0°C decomposition of
thermally sensitive metal-based precursors to modify the surfaces of partially
densified silica aerogels.51 The ability to
fabricate conductive nanowires within silica aerogels by this approach is
discussed later.Another recent development is the synthesis of organic/inorganic hybrid
aerogels.84 The use of sol–gel methods
to prepare a wide range of organic/inorganic xerogels has emerged rapidly
over the past five years,84,85 and it
is evident that aerogels can benefit greatly from this existing work. Aerogels
with improved hydrophobic character and elastic properties have already been
reported;84 hybrid aerogels with modified
electrochemical properties are described later.Enabling results for aerogels in electrochemical
applicationsThe charge-transfer processes innate to electrochemistry require that sufficient
quantities of ion charge must be established and moved. This demand means
that most of electrochemical science occurs in media of high dielectric constant,
and much of that in the liquid phase. Traditional applications for aerogels
are “dry” as described previously and there has not been the need
to consider the energetics of wetting, rather than the energetics of drying,
the enormous quantity of nanoscopic surface. But, as we discuss in detail
below, aerogel powders and films have already been studied in both aqueous
and non-aqueous electrolytes, in which the solvents are such polar liquids
as water, acetonitrile, propylene carbonate, and dimethylformamide. Extensive
structural studies have yet to be done to verify that exposure to liquid electrolyte
does not catastrophically collapse an aerogel's pore architecture upon
immersion. However, available results indicate that when the density of the
aerogel is not ultralow, immersion even into water will not destroy an aerogel's
porous network.Merzbacher et al. used small-angle neutron scattering (SANS)
to characterize the structural integrity of a silica aerogel (ρ ∼ 0.12)
as a function of refilling the micropores and mesopores with a high surface
tension liquid.86 Within the ability of the
neutron experiment to discern structural change, no damage on the length scale
of the primary features of the aerogel's architecture (∼2–100 nm)
was observed upon replacing the air in the aerogel's pores with D2O, Fig. 5.86,87
SANS studies also show that an electrically conductive mixed-oxide aerogel
of RuO2–TiO2
(∼12% dense relative
to the bulk density of the mixture) can be immersed in H2O ∶ D2O
mixtures without damage to the aerogel.88 Fig. 5  Small-angle neutron
scattering from silica aerogels before and after filling the pores with a
high surface tension liquid (D2O) and a contrast-matching
liquid chosen to null out the scattering from the silica [(data taken
from ref. 86)
Reprinted from J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 224, C. I. Merzbacher, J. G.
Barker, K. E. Swider and D. R. Rolison, “Effect of re-wetting on silica
aerogel structure: a SANS study”, 92–96. Copyright [1998], with
permission from Elsevier Science]. Another enabling attribute required of aerogels as electrochemical objects
is process compatibility. Many practical electrodes, such as those present
in batteries and fuel cells, are composite structures containing the true
electrochemical actor (e.g., the active material in a battery;
the electrocatalyst in a fuel cell) plus other components that optimize
the performance of the practical electrode (Fig. 6a).
These additional materials can include conducting carbon blacks, polymeric
binders, and additives that affect shape changes in battery electrodes or
improve proton conductivity in fuel-cell electrodes.89
The composite nature of such electrode structures requires that the aerogel,
most likely in use as a powder, be durable in the face of grinding or pressing
and that it exhibit some stability to heating (e.g., as necessary
to remove dispersion solvents or to take polymeric binders above their glass-transition
temperatures). Fig. 6  (a) Practical
electrode structure in which the electrochemically active powder is mixed
with conductive carbon powder and polymer binders in order to cast (from
solvent) or press a conductive composite. (b) Electroanalytical
electrode structure in which the electrically conducting powder is studied
without exposure to other chemicals by hand-pressing onto the surface of a “sticky
carbon” rotating disk electrode (RDE) made of a carbon-wax
composite. Swider et al. have shown that the BET (Brunauer–Emmett–Teller)
surface area of RuO2–TiO2 aerogel (at ∼85 m2 g−1)
does not decrease when the monolithic form is pulverized to powder or pressed (at
hand pressure) into a free-standing pellet, and even appears to increase
slightly.1 In electrochemistry, current scales
with the surface area of the electrified interface,90
so it is desirable that any mechanical processing involved in fabricating
an electrode structure does not diminish any surface area capable of being
electrified. Richards et al. have also reported that the high specific
surface area of aerogel-produced MgO is retained (and, again, slightly
increases) when the powder is pressed at low-to-medium pressure into
pellets.91 Because the feature size of the
solid phase in aerogels is on the order of 10 nm, it is reasonable
that such fine domains are not damaged during moderate mechanical treatments.
In agreement with that assessment, SANS indicates that the scattering curves
for monolithic silica aerogel and powder derived from it are identical until
the length scale of the powdered particulate is reached.86Another important attribute of aerogels for electrochemical applications
is how the nanoscale matter of an aerogel resists both coarsening and agglomeration.
In electrochemistry this resistance translates to stabilizing the electroactive
surface area defined by the walls of the mesopores. The aerogel architecture
inherently lowers the number of near-neighbor domains—and their mobility—so
although these materials can coarsen under temperature and pressure (as
dependent on the energetics of the specific oxide), their ability to
do so is lessened because there simply is less matter nearby to coalesce.
Agglomeration is suppressed because the particles comprising the solid fraction
of an aerogel are held in a rigid framework.Synthesis and properties of conductive oxide aerogelsWhy should one go to the extra processing necessary to create an electrode
material from nanoscale mesoporous solids? Primarily because of the ability
we now have to control—on the nanoscale—the arrangement of electroactive
matter in space. This design and synthetic control permits exploration of
how electrochemical processes are influenced by (1) minimized
solid-state diffusion lengths; (2) effective mass transport
of ions and solvent through the mesopores to the nanoscale, networked electrode
material; and (3) amplification of the surface (and
surface defect) character of the electroactive material.We have chosen to focus this discussion just on the conductive oxides (Table 1) rather than include the other
noted type of conductive aerogel, namely, carbon aerogels formed by pyrolysis
of resorcinal–formaldehyde (or melamine–formaldehyde)
polymeric aerogels.92 Carbon aerogels join
a large, properties-related class of highly porous carbons. They have already
been studied as high surface area, porous electrodes, especially for applications
in which charge (in the form of mobile, solution-phase ions) is
stored at electrified interfaces either for energy storage93
[Energy = ½
Capacitance × (Voltage)2] or
for desalinization.94 Pt-impregnated carbon
aerogels have also been investigated as monolithic fuel-cell electrodes.95
Table 1 Physical properties for various electrically
conductive transition metal oxides as a function of their preparation as aerogels
or ambigels

SystemPreparation/drying methodaSurface area/m2 g−1Average pore diameter/nmPore volume/cm3 g−1a alk: gel synthesized
using metal alkoxide precursors; aq: gel derived from an aqueous preparation
route.b Unpublished data, J. Harreld and B.
Dunn, UCLA.c Unpublished data, W. Dong and
B. Dunn, UCLA.d Unpublished data, J.W. Long
and D.R. Rolison, Naval Research Laboratory.V2O535,36alk/supercritical CO228080.50 alk/ambient pentane185340.48 alk/acetone (xerogel)<103<0.01V2O5106aq/supercritical CO245020  aq/ambient (xerogel)<5  V2O5104alk/supercritical CO2325 1.2V2O5103alk/supercritical ethanol140–200  (PPy)2.0V2O5119alk/supercritical CO2
(pre-polymerization)140  (PPy)1.0V2O5119alk/supercritical CO2
(co-synthesis)290161.1b alk/ambient pentane (co-synthesis)190170.8bMoO335,124alk/supercritical CO2180300.6 alk/ambient pentane28070.52c alk/acetone (xerogel)<103<0.1RuO2-TiO21alk/supercritical CO275–8522d0.44dα-MnO238
(cryptomelane)aq/supercritical CO2210160.80aq/ambient hexane190211.1aq/ambient water (xerogel)18050.31MnO2132
(birnessite)aq/supercritical CO2230211.0aq/ambient hexane220140.64aq/ambient cyclohexane220251.2aq/ambient water (xerogel)210100.50What carbon aerogels have not yet offered is new insight into the nature
of carbon or the surface character of electrochemical carbons. In contrast,
even with the limited number of conductive metal oxide aerogels under study,
new phenomena are being observed when the conductive oxides are synthesized
as aerogel rather than as xerogel or as micrometer-sized polycrystalline particles.
Some of the significant issues and opportunities provided by the oxide-based
aerogel systems are described below. It should be appreciated that all of
the as-prepared aerogels described below are hydrated transition metal oxides
and that thermal processing typically does not remove all of the structural
water.Vanadium oxide aerogelsSince the ability to form aerogels is a property of gels in general,7,96 it is not surprising that the vanadium oxide
system, with its well-established sol–gel chemistry, has received the
most attention of the conductive oxides. V2O5 gels have
been known for over 50 years, but it was the research by Livage and colleagues
using sol–gel chemical synthesis that renewed interest in these materials
in the 1980s.97 The resulting xerogels were
shown to possess a variety of electrical and optical properties; however,
it is their electrochemical properties that provide the basis for the discussion
in this review.The ability of V2O5 xerogels to intercalate lithium
reversibly has been reported by several groups and it is well established
that xerogels exhibit improved capacity for lithium (i.e., moles
of Li per mole of V2O5) as compared to crystalline (orthorhombic)
V2O5.98–101
The lithium capacity of aerogels is even higher than that of xerogels, as
detailed below, so electrochemists and materials scientists now have an opportunity
to study how surface-to-volume ratios and the morphology of solid and pore (being
and nothingness!) on the nanoscale influence electrochemical behavior.Vanadium oxide aerogels have been prepared by supercritical drying at high
temperature (from ethanol)102,103
and low temperature (from CO2).104–106
Ambient-pressure methods have also been reported.35
The chemical syntheses used to form V2O5 aerogels have
been varied as well, and include hydrolysis of vanadium alkoxides102–104
and protonation of vanadates in aqueous solution.105,106
The resulting materials possess the familiar low density and high surface
areas typical of aerogels, although in light of the prior discussion, it is
not surprising that lower surface areas are observed after high temperature
SCD (see Table 1).TEM indicates that V2O5 aerogels possess the characteristic
ribbon morphology of V2O5 gels. As shown in Fig. 7, V2O5 ambigels
also exhibit this morphology, although these materials have a somewhat higher
density than SCD-derived aerogels. X-Ray diffraction studies carried out on
the aerogels indicate that the high temperature of ethanol SCD (255°C)
leads to some crystallization.102,103
Materials prepared by either SCD with CO2 or ambient methods exhibit
nanocrystalline characteristics where the 00l and hkl reflections
are consistent with the ribbon morphology.105–107
Qualitatively, the aerogel materials processed at low temperature exhibit
a substantially greater degree of amorphous character than do vanadium oxide
xerogels. Fig. 7  Transmission electron
micrographs comparing vanadium oxide gels dried by (top) supercritical
drying from CO2 to form an aerogel and (bottom) ambient-pressure
evaporation of hexane to form an ambigel. An important consideration for electrochemical properties is the pore-size
distribution. Fig. 8 compares the pore-volume
dependence on pore size for different preparations. Although Scherer questions
the interpretation of such information because of the influence of the pore-geometry
model used to analyze the resulting data,108
the data in Fig. 8 suggest that morphologies
can be obtained in which the pore volume can be either evenly distributed
over a range of pore sizes or confined within a relatively narrow distribution. Fig. 8  Dependence of incremental
pore volume on pore diameter for V2O5
(•)
aerogel—alkoxide preparation/supercritical drying from CO2;35
(–) aerogel—aqueous
preparation/supercritical drying from CO2;106
and (–) ambigel—alkoxide preparation/ambient-pressure
drying from pentane.35 The literature covering the electrochemical properties of V2O5
aerogels is not extensive, but does appear consistent. Several experiments
now indicate that the solid-pore architecture of the aerogel contributes to
the degree of lithium-ion insertion, leading one to surmise that the aerogel
represents a different host material than does a xerogel of the same nominal
composition.105–107,109
The first studies to indicate this behavior were the voltage–composition
curves from GITT (galvanostatic-interrupted titration technique110) measurements.105,106
These experiments showed that 4 Li per V2O5 could
be cycled reversibly. V2O5 xerogels also electrochemically
titrate to 4 Li per V2O5; however, the equilibrium
potential measured for this degree of lithiation is much lower for the xerogel—1.8 V (vs.
Li) in comparison to 3.0 V for the aerogel. The equilibrium potential
behavior is further supported by measurements of the open-circuit potential
for chemically lithiated V2O5 aerogel. The specific
energy calculated from these curves gives values in excess of 1600 W h kg−1,
substantially greater than that of the micrometer-sized polycrystalline intercalation
electrode materials utilized in lithium secondary batteries,105e.g.,
LiCoO2 or LiMn2O4.Recent experiments indicate that further lithiation is possible, with over
5 Li/V2O5 obtained by either chemical or electrochemical
reaction.111 Electrochemical studies demonstrate
the promising reversible and large lithium-ion capacities of V2O5
aerogels and underscore the promise of aerogels for battery applications.
Coustier et al. investigated the change in specific capacity at various
discharge rates and reported only a decrease of ∼25%, from 410
to 310 mA h g−1,112
on increasing the rate tenfold from C/40 to C/4.113,114 The latter conditions correspond to
a current density of 1.3 mA cm−2, on the basis
of geometric rather than BET surface area. Of interest for practical fabrication,
the electrode structure for these experiments was prepared by physically mixing
the wet gel with carbon and then ambiently drying the mixture. The value of
310 mA h g−1 readily exceeds the response
for electrode materials in commercial secondary lithium batteries; however,
the cycling behavior is not as good. The cycling response at the C/4
discharge rate exhibits capacity fading so that ∼20% of the specific
capacity is lost after 80 cycles, but it is likely that the fading does not
represent intrinsic behavior. In a limited study involving only 10 cycles,
no capacity fading was observed when the cell was discharged at a rate of C/8 (37 mA g−1).115 The capacity for these cells, ∼335 mA h g−1,
is reasonably consistent with the values obtained by Coustier et al.114The mechanism by which lithium is inserted in the aerogel is still not
understood—indeed, when the stoichiometry reaches 4, 5, or 6 Li
per V2O5, it is not clear that insertion (or intercalation)
is the correct description of the Li-V2O5 associative
process. In keeping with such concerns, results from X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS)
and X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) suggest that the oxidation
state of the vanadium oxide aerogel is only slightly affected as the numbers
of Li per V2O5 vary up to nearly 6 lithium.111
XAS results indicate that V2O5 xerogels exhibit a linear
shift to V(IV) oxidation state with increasing lithium
content up to 2 Li per V2O5.116,117
However, in-situ XAS studies of V2O5 xerogels
undergoing electrochemical lithiation show that the near-edge portion of the
vanadium K-edge remains at energies consistent with an oxidation state of
V(IV),118 even for Li/V2O5 > 2.117 An invariant V(IV) near-edge
energy indicates that additional Li stoichiometry beyond 2.0 cannot arise
from a coupled electron/Li+ insertion into the V2O5
lattice. We will discuss further the implications of these results and the
apparent electron–Li+ imbalance of electrically conductive
oxide aerogels as battery materials.In related experiments, cyclic voltammetry has been used to provide some
insight concerning the nature of the site(s) of lithium-ion association
in electrically conductive aerogels.119 The
results suggest that the specific synthesis route may influence the behavior
of lithium-ion association (Fig. 9).
V2O5 aerogels prepared using alkoxide precursors have
two potential sites for lithium insertion at 2.5 V and 3.0 V,
while the aqueous system exhibits only one site at 3.0 V. It is interesting
that the former material (with two voltammetric reduction peaks)
closely resembles that of xerogels prepared by the aqueous method. Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms
in 1 M LiClO4/propylene carbonate electrolyte of vanadium
oxide aerogels and xerogels derived from different synthetic routes, which
emphasizes the potentials at which lithium-ion insertion occurs. Compare an
alkoxide-prepared V2O5 aerogel [(bottom; Fig. 6 of ref. 154;
scan rate = 0.1 mV s−1).
Reprinted from Int. J. Inorg. Mater., 1, J. H. Harreld, B. Dunn and
L. F. Nazar, “Design and synthesis of inorganic–organic hybrid
microstructures”, 135–146. Copyright [1999], with permission from
Elsevier Science.], which has two distinct faradaic redox couples, with one
prepared from an aqueous route [(Fig. 6a
of ref. 106; scan
rate = 0.1 mV s−1).
D. B. Le, S. Passerini, J. Guo, J. Ressler, B. B. Owens and W. H. Smyrl, J.
Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2099—Reproduced by permission
of the Electrochemical Society.], which has one faradaic couple. Another feature of V2O5 aerogels is that the very
high ionic capacity extends to ions other than lithium. Substantial capacities
for the polyvalent cations, Mg2+, Al3+ and
Zn2+, were reported for this host material.120
V2O5 xerogels also serve as host structures for polyvalent
cations;97 however, the level of intercalation
with the xerogel, 0.33 equiv mol−1, was an
order of magnitude less than that with the corresponding aerogel where stoichiometries
of 4 Mg2+, 3.33 Al3+ and 2.75 Zn2+
per V2O5 were obtained. Equilibrium potential–composition
curves for these systems are comparable to each other and are within a few
hundred millivolts of the curve for lithium. This energetic equivalence indicates
that the feature controlling the voltages is the host structure (i.e.,
the V2O5 aerogel), with the specific cation being
less of a factor. In electrochemical tests, the polyvalent ions were transported
between the working and counter electrodes suggesting that high energy intercalation
batteries based on Mg2+, Al3+ and Zn2+
may be feasible.Molybdenum oxide aerogelsAnother transition metal oxide system that offers useful electrochemical
properties is molybdenum oxide. A number of molybdenum oxides undergo reversible
lithium intercalation–deintercalation reactions and the orthorhombic
form of MoO3 exhibits substantial lithium capacity (1.5 Li/Mo)
with good discharge properties.121 The presence
of mixed electron–proton conducting, mixed-V/VI
valent hydrous MoO3 in Pt–Mo anode electrocatalysts improves
the CO tolerance of reformate-fed fuel cells.122Although some prior work on the use of sol–gel methods to prepare
molybdenum oxides has been reported, these efforts only led to particulate
sols and powders. In order to create a three-dimensional network structure
and prepare monolithic gels, a sol–gel method involving ligand complexation
of the alkoxide precursor was developed.123
Complexation suppresses formation of terminal MoO bonds enabling Mo–O–Mo
bridges to form. Aerogels were prepared by both SCD and ambient methods, with
the latter leading to surface areas of nearly 300 m2 g−1.
The significance of this synthetic route is that it is generally applicable
to other transition metal oxide systems whose precipitous rates of hydrolysis
and condensation prevent them from being conveniently prepared as gels.12At the present time only initial measurements of the electrochemical properties
of molybdenum oxide aerogels have been made.124
Lithium can be cycled reversibly in these aerogels, with the amount dependent
upon the structural characteristics of the material. Amorphous aerogels (corresponding
to a composition of MoO3·0.8H2O) intercalate
1.1 Li/Mo while a nanocrystalline aerogel (nominally MoO3)
intercalates nearly 1.5 Li/Mo. The latter represents a rather high
value for this material.Manganese oxide aerogelsThe various crystalline structures of manganese(IV)
oxide are being actively explored as lithium-ion insertion materials as lower
cost and lower toxicity replacements for LiCoO2 in lithium-ion
batteries. Unlike V2O5 or MoO3, MnO2
offers a number of polymorphs, ranging from spinel to layered to microporous
tunnel structures, which exhibit a spectrum of Li capacities and cycle reversibility (or
irreversibility).125 A key problem with
these materials is conversion of the starting MnO2 polymorph into
a spinel structure as Mn(IV) is reduced to Mn(III)
and lithium ions are inserted into the structure. High levels of cell discharge,
which generates more and more Mn(III), create physical
changes in the lithiated mixed-valent oxide (due to a Jahn–Teller
distortion of the MnIIIO6 octahedral core126)
that effectively removes lithium capacity.125,127Sol–gel-syntheses of xerogel forms of MnO2 have also expressed
various polymorphs,128,129 and some
reports of amorphous MnO2.130,131
Recent efforts have focused on using sol–gel syntheses to form ambigels
and aerogels of MnO238,132
and ambigels of LixMnO2.37
The LixMnO2 ambigel (dried from hexane)
was derived from sol–gel reaction of LiMnO4 and lithium fumarate.
The as-dried material exhibited a sponge-like morphology and was reported
to be amorphous by X-ray diffraction. Annealing (to remove water and
residual carbonaceous species) led to broad diffraction peaks that were
possibly, but could not be definitively, assigned to Li2MnO3
rock salt or spinel Li2MnO4. Composite pellets of Li0.9MnO2.5
ambigel with carbon and binder were electrochemically cycled at slow rates
in Li+ electrolyte and shown to cycle 1.7 Li/Mn,
which is consistent with high capacity, manganese oxyiodide cathodes.133 Pelletized Li0.9MnO2.5
was also able to deliver 150 A h g−1
in a high rate discharge.37bKδMnO2 xerogels, ambigels (dried
from hexane), and aerogels have also been made using permanganate (K+)
oxidation of an organic reducing agent,38
following the sol–gel preparation of Livage and co-workers.134
In this study, Long et al. explored the effect on electrochemical
lithiation (capacity and rate) of the pore-oxide architecture of
sol–gel-derived α-MnO2
(cryptomelane) in
the various forms. Very high surface area materials were derived (>250 m2 g−1)
for all three dried gels, but the pore size distributions differed, with the
aerogel and ambigel forms of cryptomelane having pores sized >8 nm,
while the xerogel had a narrow pore distribution centered at 9 ± 3 nm.
The Li capacity trend for these materials obtained by rapid voltammetric cycling (2 mV s−1)
was: aerogel > ambigel > xerogel >> polycrystalline
cryptomelane.38 Although α-MnO2
is not a first choice as a Li-ion insertion solid among the MnO2
polymorphs, this study shows that high rate Li capacity for conductive oxide
aerogels exceeds that of the corresponding xerogel and polycrystalline materials.
This study also indicates that it is important and possible to control the
pore morphology. Control over the pore–solid architecture has also been
achieved for high-surface-area gels of birnessite, a layered MnO2
polymorph with better Li-ion insertion and deinsertion properties than cryptomelane,
and the electrochemical properties of these gels are being studied.132Mixed-phase ruthenium oxide–titanium oxide
aerogelsAnother material that demonstrates the unique electrical and electrochemical
properties of aerogels is the mixed-oxide system RuO2–TiO2.
These compositions, when expressed as fully dense phases, are used as electrocatalysts,
including as components in dimensionally stable anodes for the commodity production
of chlorine from brine.135 The ability to
form these materials as high surface area aerogels may lead to catalytic electrodes
with enhanced reaction rates, because the aerogel's high surface area
is readily accessible by reactants (i.e., catalytic substrate)
in the liquid electrolyte. RuO2 is a d-band metallic conductor (σ ∼ 2 × 104 S cm−1);136
however, for electrocatalysis, the more active form is a hydrous defective
oxide, RuOxHy,137,138
which retains electronic conductivity (σ ∼ 1 S cm−1),
but which also is a proton conductor. Hydrous RuO2 is of interest
for energy storage because the pseudocapacitance associated with proton and
electron injection leads to specific capacitances of 720 F g−1.139,140The results reported by Swider et al. provide important insight
into the ability of aerogels to serve as amplifiers of surface-dominated effects.1,141 The sol–gel synthesis of (Rux–Ti1 − x)O2
(x = 0, 0.14, 0.2,
0.32) involved modifying an alkoxide preparation for TiO2
with a ruthenium precursor, RuCl3, refluxed in ethanol. Monolithic
aerogels, formed by SCD with CO2, were characterized after annealing
treatments at ∼400°C which removed the chloride and alkoxide.
The resulting materials consisted of ∼10 nm nanocrystallites of
primarily phase-separated TiO2 and RuO2
(these
rutile phases can only form a solid solution of a few mol% RuO2
in TiO2142). These
mixed oxide aerogels exhibited surface areas of 85 m2 g−1,
comparable (once normalized for mol%) to that of the corresponding
pure TiO2 aerogel.1,143The most significant feature exhibited by the RuO2–TiO2
aerogels is that their electrical properties differ markedly from those of
the bulk material. By measuring complex impedance under different atmosphere-controlled
conditions, Swider et al. established that electrical transport in
the aerogel is from mixed conduction of electrons and protons, with proton
conduction arising from transport in the hydrous layers on the surface of
the RuO2 portion of aerogel network.1,141
Such hydrous layers are present in bulk materials;144,145
however, the bulk electronic conductivity dominates transport properties,
so that the hydrous surface, which comprises a small fraction of the total
volume, is not independently characterized. In contrast, surface transport
processes play a much larger role in aerogels because of their unique morphology
in which the material, despite its bulk dimensions, is nominally all surface.
With regard to electrochemical behavior, these results suggest that hydration
of the ruthenium oxide phase may influence electrocatalysis and even pseudocapacitance
to a far greater extent than was previously anticipated.139,140,146,147An aspect that may have significant impact in future work on aerogels is
that the authors used traditional defect solid-state chemistry to provide
insight into how specific hydration and oxidation reactions influenced aerogel
transport properties. Using Kröger–Vink notation to describe the
various chemistries in the context of mass, site, and charge balance in the
oxide,148 the authors showed that the following
equilibria (eqn. 9–11)
explained the electrical properties of the RuO2–TiO2
aerogels. In eqn. 9, a perfect rutile
RuO2 lattice is in equilibrium with a defective ruthenium oxide (containing
oxygen-ion vacancies [VO˙˙], charge balanced
by Ru3+ centers [RuRu′]) under
a partial pressure of oxygen. The highest electronic conductivity is obtained
for crystalline, non-defective RuO2, so flowing oxygen over imperfect (Ru0.32–Ti0.68)O2 aerogel improves its electronic character.1,141 (9)In eqn. 10, an oxygen vacancy
plus an O2− ion in its lattice site [OO]
equilibrate with water in the atmosphere to create protonated O2−
on the oxygen-ion site [OHO˙]. Thus, the real (i.e.,
defective) material acts as a proton conductor.1 (10)In the real material, with its proton–electron conductive
surface amplified by the high surface-to-volume ratio of the aerogel, the
influence of both water and oxygen on electrical transport is given by eqn. 11. (11)These gases
act as countering equilibria on the charge transport—an increased partial
pressure of oxygen oxidizes Ru3+ centers to Ru4+,
but dehydrates the surface and lowers the proton portion of the conductivity (Fig. 10), thereby increasing the total
impedance of the aerogel. Ionic conductivity is proportional to the number
of carriers, so when re-exposed to humidified air, the total impedance of
the RuO2–TiO2 aerogel decreased.1 Fig. 10  The impedance of
a mixed-phase RuO2–TiO2 aerogel depends on the
partial pressure of water and oxygen in the bathing atmosphere, which indicates
that mixed electron and proton conductivity occurs in this nanoscale mesoporous
material. At temperatures above 100°C, the electrical response becomes
markedly more resistive, until at temperatures above 300°C (under
dry argon), the capacitive component of the impedance disappears and
a pure electron response occurs. The pure electron response is less resistive
at higher temperatures, which indicates that thermally activated electron
transport, either a small polaron or semiconduction mechanism, is operative.141Examining the RuO2–TiO2 aerogels' electrochemical,
rather than electrical, properties highlights the difference that exists between
surface and bulk, even for nanoscale materials. (Ru0.32–Ti0.68)O2
aerogels, whose electrical transport is controlled by the mixed electron-
and proton-conducting RuOxHy surface,
exhibited low electrochemical capacitances more typical of crystalline, bulk
RuO2
(contrast 720 F g−1 for
RuO2·0.5H2O139vs. <1 F g−1
for anhydrous RuO2140).
In this respect, information on the bulk nature of the nanoscale ruthenia
domains in the mixed-oxide aerogel, such as that provided by X-ray diffraction (which
confirmed that rutile RuO2 was formed), was a better predictor
of the ability of the aerogel to store charge. Normalizing to the specific
capacitance expected for crystalline, anhydrous RuO2 indicated
that essentially all the ruthenia domains in the aerogel were electrochemically
addressable.The conjunction of the electrochemical and electrical behavior of RuO2–TiO2
aerogels underscores the difficulty in characterizing and predicting the properties
of conductive oxide aerogels. For the RuO2–TiO2
aerogels, X-ray diffraction could predict the low level of electron–proton
storage, but it mispredicted the electrical transport properties. Such structure–function
mishaps are to be expected as the electrically conductive oxides are diversified
compositionally and used as electron-ion reactive materials.Organic/inorganic hybrid aerogelsThe synthesis of organic/inorganic hybrid materials has received considerable
attention in the past several years because of the prospect of developing
materials with unique microstructures and properties.84,85
The combination of conducting polymers with transition metal oxides is of
substantial interest and the synthesis of these ‘nanocomposites’
by a variety of methods including sol–gel approaches has been reported.149 The general objective in synthesizing these hybrid
materials is to incorporate the conducting polymer within the lamellar spaces
of layered inorganic oxides. Since the layered V2O5
materials are readily prepared by sol–gel approaches, xerogels utilizing
V2O5 as the inorganic host have been investigated and
recent studies have described the electrochemical properties of polyaniline/V2O5
and polypyrrole/V2O5 xerogels,150
and a self-doped sulfonated, alkylated polyaniline/V2O5
xerogel.151 Lithium insertion in these hybrid
materials was reversible and enhanced Li+ diffusion rates
in the electrode were observed.Hybrid aerogels of conducting polymer–V2O5
have also been synthesized; however, the approach is quite different from
that of the xerogel work. With the aerogel materials, the objective is to
attain two interpenetrating networks: V2O5 to achieve
lithium intercalation and the conducting polymer to provide an electronically
conducting network.119,152 This approach
would circumvent the need to add carbon to electrode structures because of
the low electronic conductivity of the transition metal oxide. A key feature
in designing this hybrid material is the need to have a homogeneous distribution
of the conducting polymer so that good access to the vanadium oxide phase
is achieved.Nanocomposite aerogels composed of polypyrrole (PPy) and V2O5
have been synthesized by two different sol–gel-based methods. One approach
is a cosynthesis route where the organic and inorganic networks are polymerized
simultaneously from a common solvent.152–154
The second approach involves sequential polymerization of each component;
V2O5 gels are impregnated with the pyrrole monomer,
which then oxidatively polymerizes as initiated by V(V)
centers.154 Hybrid aerogels are then formed
by either low temperature SCD or ambient-drying methods.The electrochemical properties of the hybrid aerogels critically depend
on controlling the microstructure of the hybrid. The post-gelation synthesis
method leads to relatively poor electrochemical properties because the inhomogeneous
distribution of PPy limits access to the V2O5 phase.
In comparison, cosynthesis offers excellent microstructural control and a
homogeneous distribution of the PPy phase is achieved. Reversible lithium
capacity in excess of 3 Li/V2O5 is obtained, although
the hybrid does not exhibit improved macroscopic conductivity. The limitation
in developing higher conductivity is the inability to oxidize PPy into its
high conductivity state. The addition of an oxidizing agent at the necessary
concentrations inhibits V2O5 gelation. A factor that
can limit lithium capacity is that of V4+ centers created
from the polymerization of the monomer. This capacity, however, can be regained
by oxidation treatment and the resulting PPy/V2O5
aerogel hybrid materials exhibit increased lithium capacity as compared to
the V2O5 aerogel.119Recent results with a second organic/inorganic aerogel system show
that the addition of the conducting polymer can indeed lead to enhanced conductivity.
In this work, PPy/MoO3 hybrid materials were synthesized by
a co-solvent method and the electrical conductivity of the resulting material,
4 × 10−3 S cm−1
at room temperature (Fig. 11),
was approximately 100× larger than that of the pristine MoO3
gels.155 This value is also ten times greater
than that of a system in which the conducting polymer (polyaniline)
was intercalated into the crystalline MoO3 structure.156
PPy was adventitiously doped by incorporating Cl− derived
from the isopropoxide precursor, MoCl3(OiPr)2.
The doping of PPy by Cl− has been reported previously and
shown to stabilize the PPy structure.157 Fig. 11  Electrical conductivity
of V2O5 and MoO3 aerogels and polypyrrole–MoO3
hybrid aerogel. Electrically conductive composite aerogelsA conductive gel network is not the only way to make an aerogel electrically
conductive. In recent work Morris et al. showed that silica sol could
be used as a “nanoglue” to fabricate guest–silica composite
gels and aerogels.158 The guest solid can
be essentially any size (spanning six orders of magnitude from nanometers
to millimeters) or any chemical nature (metal, metal oxide, carbon,
ceramic, semiconductor, polymer). Fig. 12
shows a transmission electron micrograph of a colloidal gold–silica
composite aerogel in which the silica colloids and metal colloids are readily
differentiated. Fig. 12  Transmission electron
micrograph of a colloidal Au–silica composite aerogel showing Au colloids (brighter
circles) dispersed throughout the amorphous silica aerogel [(ref. 158) Reprinted with permission
from C. A. Morris, M. L. Anderson, R. M. Stroud, C. I. Merzbacher and D. R.
Rolison, Science, 1999, 284, 622–624. Copyright [1999]
American Association for the Advancement of Science.]. Two conditions must be met to establish charge transport paths through
the composite aerogel: (i) introduce a sufficient volume
fraction of the electrically conductive guest (either one that meets
a statistical percolation threshold159 for
the dimensionality of the gel,160,161
or one that can be lower if the guest particles self-associate in the silica
sol); and (ii) limit the exposure of the guest to
the silica sol (by controlling time of exposure or thoroughness of mixing).
Vulcan carbon, which is a highly disordered graphitic-like carbon black commonly
used in fuel cells and batteries, was chosen as the electrically conductive
guest to identify the processing and gelation conditions that would (or
would not) yield electron paths through the resulting C–SiO2
composite aerogel.The authors report that the morphology of the silica sol controls the ability
to achieve electron transport in the C–SiO2 composite aerogel.5,158 Through-aerogel conduction was obtained
with >6.4 vol.% carbon for the roughly spherical sol characteristic
of base-catalyzed silica,11 while 30 vol.%
carbon was insufficient to achieve conductive composite gels using the polymeric
sols typical of acid-catalyzed silica as the nanoglue.158
Turbulent mixing or long contact times yielded non-conductive C–SiO2
composite aerogels, even when using base-catalyzed silica sol and >6.4 vol.%
of carbon.158 These parametric influences
were recently reaffirmed for Bi2Te3–SiO2
composite aerogels, in which micrometer-sized Bi2Te3
powder (pretreated to remove insulating surface oxides) produced
either insulating composite aerogels after turbulent mixing or end-to-end
electronically conductive composite aerogels by minimal exposure of base-catalyzed
silica sol to the pretreated Bi2Te3 powder.162Another promising application of the nanoglue approach is to create TiO2–SiO2
composite aerogel monoliths or crack-free films as an eventual means to create
durable photoelectrodes. TiO2 aerogel, which is typically a mechanically
fragile solid when expressed as an aerogel,16b
can be preformed and pre-annealed to form the desired crystalline state and
doping level of TiO2 and then prepared as a composite aerogel with
sufficient connectivity established between the particles of TiO2
aerogel to ensure through-structure electron paths.163
Although TiO2 is an important photocatalyst,164
and has shown effective photocatalytic activity in aerogel form,143
it is also of interest as a photoelectrochemical material in nanoscale form,
including as a photosensitized electrode in photovoltaic devices.165
Walker et al. have reported that TiO2 aerogel was more
effective for photoelectrochemical oxidation of phenol than were anodic films
or sol–gel-derived xerogel films of anatase TiO2.166Another way to introduce electronic paths into an aerogel architecture
is to use the durable silica network as the support for conductive nanoscale
deposits. Ryan et al. have developed a sub-0°C decomposition
of RuO4 to form a massively parallel web of nanowires of crystalline
RuO2 on partially densified silica aerogels.51
Efforts to deposit RuO2 by decomposition of such Ru precursors
as ruthenocene, ruthenium(III)tris-acetylacetonate, or
Ru3CO12 at temperatures greater than 100°C
led to aerogel-supported RuO2 deposits that were not interconnected
electronically.82,83 The lack of connectivity
arose because at the reaction temperatures necessary to decompose the organometallic
Ru-based precursors, most of the precursor had volatilized out of the aerogel
structure before decomposition could occur and the RuO2 that did
deposit, coarsened, thereby separating neighboring particles.Unlike the mixed conductivity observed for RuO2–TiO2
aerogels,1,141 silica aerogel modified
with an interconnected web of nanoscale crystallites of RuO2
(∼4 nm × 30 nm)
behaves as a pure electron conductor. Although the silica-supported conductor
is nanoscopic, because it is a chemically stable, metallically conductive
oxide, it retains its electronic properties upon exposure to oxygen and water.
The deposited RuO2 nanoparticles affect neither the surface area
nor the pore volume of the partially densified silica aerogel, which permits
these electronically wired silica aerogels to be explored as durable, high
surface area mesoporous electrodes.51 Anhydrous
RuO2 is used in thick-film resistors167
and as thin-film barrier layers or bottom electrodes in DRAM devices,168 so this nanowired aerogel may also offer new
possibilities to design three-dimensional, nanoscopic electronic circuits.The electrochemistry of high surface area materialsInherent physicsThe physical nature of aerogels—nanoscale, high surface area solid
and a networked, mesoporous volume—imparts physical consequences to
their use. Just as the continuous mesoporous network of an aerogel or ambigel
serves as a superhighway for molecular reactants or analytes, so it should
for the solvent and ions that accompany (and are necessary for)
any change in surface charge at an electrified interface. Electron- and charge-transfer
reactions at an electrified interface or within an electrode material are
hindered unless ions and solvent (and usually solvated ions) can
freely approach the electrified interface.Experimental evidence indicates that the walls of micropores (i.e.,
the surfaces of pores <2 nm in diameter) do not contribute
usable electrode surface area in well-studied practical electrodes such as
porous RuO2.138 Studies with microporous
carbon electrodes showed that ion mobility into pores <1 nm was
several orders of magnitude less than in open solution.169
In an aerogel, the usable electrified interface is the outer surface of the
solid network, i.e., the walls of the mesoporous network. Ions, reactants,
and solvent molecules, as necessary, must approach the enormous nanoscopic
electrode interface through the mesoporous network.Aerogel electrodes are thus a class of through-porous electrodes, but ones
in which the pores are not macroscopic. Porous (or three-dimensional)
electrodes are well-studied objects, both empirically170
and by modeling,171 because they are a design
choice for large scale, relatively high surface area electrodes in industrial
electroreactors and because practical insertion electrodes in batteries contain
macropores. The 2 to 50 nm mesopore range that exists in an aerogel
electrode is far finer, though, than that customary in standard porous electrodes.
This pore regime, although still large on a molecular or ionic scale, again
has physical implications.Mass transport can be convective or diffusive (and for charged solutes,
electromigrational).172 Forced flow (or
transport) of material can be turbulent or laminar. Forced gas flow into
aerogels is hindered by the tortuosity imposed by the mesoporous network of
an aerogel.173 Fluidized gas-phase reactors,
which are a standard convective reactor design for heterogeneous chemistry,
function at high velocities with aerogel particles because the particles reorganize
into agglomerates that fluidize smoothly and uniformly, but which have low
permeability.174 Recent work indicates that
hydrostatic flow into silica aerogels is feasible and that the plug resistance
of the monolith or membrane is lowered markedly by vapor-phase pre-equilibration
of the silica surfaces of the aerogel with water.175
Liquid-phase reactions within aerogels, including electrochemical reactions
under flow, are therefore feasible.Diffusion of an electron-transfer reactant (redox solute) to
an electrified interface follows four profiles: (1) semi-infinite (or
planar) in which the bulk concentration of the reacting species is essentially
unaffected by the electroreaction at the electrode surface, but a linear concentration
gradient is established between bulk and the electrified interface; (2)
spherical in which the perimeter-to-surface ratio of the electrode is large
such that the initial linear flux of redox solute rapidly converts to non-linear,
drawing molecules from a larger volume of solution and effectively achieving
a steady-state flux of molecules to the electrified interface; (3)
finite diffusion in which the volume of the electrochemical cell is so small
that bulk electrolysis of all redox solutes occurs in seconds or minutes rather
than hours; and (4) surface-confined, in which the reactant
is tethered directly to the electrode surface and does not diffuse.All four of these diffusion profiles have been mathematically explored
and experimentally verified at smooth electrodes.176
The expected voltammetric responses (i.e., the current that
flows as a function of the potential applied to the electrified interface)
for three of these diffusive profiles are shown in Fig. 13.
Electrified interfaces with convoluted morphologies that are fractal and have
a dimension between two and three, demonstrate a fractal-dimension-controlled
electrochemical response to the diffusion of redox solutes to the electrified
fractal interface.177 Fractal electrode structures
can be obtained by electrodeposition, electromachining, or corrosion,178 or by lithographic fabrication of electrode surfaces
with patterns of a pre-determined fractal dimension.179
Chronoamperometry, in which the time-dependent current is monitored after
a potential step from a potential of no electroreaction to one where faradaic
electron transfer occurs, is normally used to determine if diffusion is under
fractal-dimensional control in these types of electrode interfaces.177–179 Fig. 13  Voltammetric current–potential
plots for three different diffusion profiles in which an electroactive species (redox
solute) with a formal potential of E°′ undergoes a
reversible one-electron oxidation under conditions of surface confinement (no
diffusion), semi-infinite (planar) diffusion, or steady-state (spherical)
diffusion at time t2
(at time t1,
diffusion is converting from planar to spherical); ia
represents anodic current. Xerogels and aerogels have fractal-like character as determined by scattering
experiments,161,180 so it is conceivable
that diffusive mass transport of solutes to an electrified gel interface may
be controlled by the fractal dimension of the solid. When the electrode itself
is undergoing electroreaction, as occurs during lithium-ion insertion, mass-transport
issues may become more intricate. The diffusion of Li+ to
the electrified gel network through the electrolyte solution that fills the
mesoporous network may exhibit fractal-dimensional control, while the nanoscale
transition-metal-oxide colloids that comprise the electrode may act as extremely
thin-layer electrochemical cells for Li-ion charge and discharge, and therefore
be governed by finite-diffusion control. In the first studies to explore this
behavior, the voltammetric response of α-KδMnO2
ambigels and aerogels undergoing Li-ion insertion and deinsertion exhibited
finite-diffusion characteristics.38b
The electrochemical response of these high-surface-area, high porosity gels
may, for certain electrochemical reactions, offer a time signature for mass
transport that is a blend of finite-diffusion control in the solid network
and fractal-dimensional control of diffusion of necessary electroreactants
through the pore network.Diffusive mass transport into an aerogel interior occurs at rates consistent
with diffusion in gases (for gas-phase solutes) or liquids (for
liquid-phase solutes). Leventis, Rolison, and co-workers have used the
aerogel morphology to demonstrate extremely rapid sensing of gas-phase O2
by fluorescence quenching.181 The authors
estimated that the steady-state fluorescence response of diazapyrenium-modified
silica aerogel monoliths tracked the ingress of analyte near the speed of
open-medium diffusion.182,183 The
rates of mass transport visibly evident in the fluorophore-modified aerogel,
and especially the ability of RuO2–TiO2 aerogels
to store electron–proton charge commensurate with the mass of ruthenia
domains present in the material,140 demonstrate
the feasibility of solvent-ion diffusive transport into the entire aerogel
interior on electrochemically reasonable time scales.But how fast can an electrically conductive oxide aerogel respond electrochemically?
Not only must ions and solvent move at rates near those typical of the bulk
medium, but also the ability of the electrical circuit to charge the surface
of the aerogel must be considered. Two inescapable facts of physics are (i)
the measure of how fast an electrical circuit responds is dictated by its RC
time constant and (ii) capacitance (C)
at an electrode surface (which is due to a layering of mobile ions of
opposite sign to the charge on the electrified surface: i.e., double-layer
or Helmholtz capacitance) is directly proportional to its area, see Fig. 14a. The larger the area of electrode
surface, the more sluggish is the response of the electrical system to a change
in potential. Large-surface-area electrodes in electrochemistry can approach
0.01 to 0.1 m2. Electrically conductive aerogels have areas >100 m2 g−1,
which means that aerogels unavoidably have large RC time constants.
As a consequence of the physics of an electrical circuit with a large RC
time constant, aerogel electrodes cannot change surface charge (and therefore
assume an imposed potential) at the rates expected for electrodes of
customary surface area. Fig. 14  The three types of
charge uptake at an electrified cation-insertion material; (a)
formation of a capacitive charge (double layer) at an electrified
interface poised at (in this instance) a potential negative of its
point of zero charge; (b) electrochemical intercalation
of Li+ into the cathode of a battery [(after ref. 127) Reprinted
with permission from M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M.E. Spahr and P. Novák, Adv.
Mater., 1998, 10, 725–763. Copyright [1998] Wiley-VCH.]; (c)
proposed cation vacancies, and accommodation of vacancy-balancing protons
in MnO2 [(after ref. 196)
P. Ruestchi and R. Giovanoli, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 135,
2663–2669—Reproduced by permission of the Electrochemical Society.]. These unavoidable facts of physics have real implications for battery electrodes
containing aerogels as the active material. Even when the slow solid-state
diffusion step is minimized in ion-insertion reactions due to the nanoscale
nature of the oxide, the enormous surface area of the aerogel material adds
a slow step into the charge/discharge processes due to the innate RC
time constant of the aerogel electrode.What does it mean to intercalate Li+
in an aerogel?The starting point to understand the nature of ion uptake in electrically
conductive aerogels is to first review the differences between batteries and
capacitors. These distinctions have been well discussed by Conway.184 It is necessary to distinguish between “double-layer
capacitors”, “supercapacitors”
(which are double-layer
capacitors where the electrodes have enormous surface areas approaching 1000 m2 g−1),
and ultra- or “pseudocapacitors”. The last are based on faradaic
electron insertion with accompanying cation insertion (hence the term:
pseudocapacitance) and are much more relevant for the aerogel materials.Batteries normally involve well-defined 3-D phases and, as such, have unique
chemical potentials. Ideally, the chemical reactions occur at a single potential
until one phase is converted to another. In contrast, when the battery system
involves a range of oxidation states, a unique potential does not usually
occur. Supercapacitor processes are fundamentally different from those in
batteries in that electron insertion is not involved, but 2-D surface reactions
are. Pseudocapacitance involves a continuous range of potentials and redox
processes that require successive electron transfer. The latter is well established
in the hydrous RuO2 system where there is a double-injection process
as both protons and electrons are inserted into the oxide. Double-layer capacitance
can be readily distinguished from that of pseudocapacitance on the basis of
the magnitude of the specific capacitance (F cm−2);
the specific capacitance for pseudocapacitance is 10 to 100 times larger than
that observed at carbon/H2O interfaces (ca. 10–30 µF cm−2).The intercalation of lithium into intercalation hosts has been described
as a quasi-2-D process (Fig. 14b).127,185 During discharge there is a continuous
decrease in potential, provided that phase changes do not occur. Moreover,
the amount of lithium intercalation depends directly on the amount of faradaic
charge passed. Thus, the relation between the potential and the amount of
intercalation can be differentiated enabling one to formally associate a pseudocapacitance
for intercalation processes. In this way, there is an intrinsic similarity
between intercalation-based batteries and pseudocapacitors.The initial studies of the electrochemical properties of electrically conductive
oxide aerogels suggest that these materials possess both battery-like and
capacitor-like behavior. The electrochemical studies definitively show that
V2O5 aerogels provide enhanced capacity for lithium
and polyvalent cations as compared to the corresponding xerogel (which
in turn provides enhanced capacity relative to fully dense V2O5).186 One reason for this behavior is the far greater
accessibility that the aerogel microstructure offers to molecular and ionic
reactants through the mesoporous network.An important factor associated with the porous nature of the material is
the dimension of the solid phase that represents the “pore wall”.
This dimension is rather thin, typically 10 to 50 nm, so that the diffusion
distances to be traversed by Li+
(or other ions)
are quite small. In fact, researchers contend that such short diffusion paths
lead to rapid injection and release of the intercalated ions, so that diffusion
within the solid phase is the limiting factor.105,106The results indicating the battery-like behavior of V2O5
aerogels have been described in several publications.105,106,111,114
Standard battery electrodes were prepared in which the aerogel powders were
mixed with a carbon additive and a binder, and the usual charge–discharge
experiments were performed. The first evidence of capacitor-like behavior
was shown in a coulometric titration experiment where the voltage–time (V–t)
response indicated that the V2O5 aerogels exhibited
capacitor-like behavior at short times (V ∝ t)
with a transition to a diffusion-limited process (V ∝ t1/2)
at longer time.114b This result
suggests that the aerogel material acts as a capacitor for a thin layer of
material (tens of nanometers) closest to the current collector.
Beyond that distance, the kinetics becomes diffusion-limited.Aerogel-based battery electrodes are not expected to exhibit capacitor-like
behavior. In fabricating the composite electrode structure, the aerogel particles
are likely to be aggregated (Fig. 6a)
to sizes in the micrometer range, so that only a diffusion-limited response
will be observed. Nonetheless, the coulometric titration does suggest that
a proper electrode structure, one that effectively “wires” the
aerogel to the current collector, can be expected to exhibit capacitor-like
behavior. The “sticky carbon” electrode described by Long and
Rolison140,187,188 seems to
provide such wiring (Fig. 6b).
By mixing acetylene black (a high purity carbon black) or graphite
with a wax, it is possible to prepare a conductive electrode that effectively
holds the finely dispersed, high surface area particles at the carbon–wax
surface and exposes them to the electrolyte. In a recent study employing the
sticky-carbon electrode for V2O5 aerogels and ambigels,
a strong capacitive response was observed in combination with high Li-to-V2O5
stoichiometries.36Related to the battery–capacitor response of aerogel electrodes is
the issue of how the enormous surface area contributes to the enhanced capacity
for lithium that these materials exhibit. The traditional explanation involves
intercalation, where a mobile guest species inserts into a network of empty
lattice sites of appropriate size within a rigid host lattice.189,190
The transition metal ion that is part of the host structure is reduced. The
host materials most covalent in nature, such as graphite and conjugated polymers,
are able to intercalate both anions and cations. The oxides and chalcogenides
of transition metals are more ionic in character. Owing to coulombic interactions
in these materials, only cations and electron donors (Lewis bases)
can be intercalated. One generally associates intercalation with crystalline
structures such as three-dimensional framework structures with empty lattice
sites forming channels or cavities, or two-dimensional layer structures where
intercalation takes place in van der Waals gaps. Insertion of ions into amorphous
structures has received relatively little attention, but it is expected that
these structures will have a large number of sites that adapt readily to the
size of the inserted species. Recent X-ray absorption studies with amorphous
Mn oxyiodide electrodes confirm this expectation as less dramatic structural
changes resulted for the amorphous Mn-based oxide relative to crystalline λ-MnO2,
LiMn2O4, and Li2Mn2O4
as the various materials were electrochemically discharged from Mn4+
to Mn3+.191In order to intercalate 4 Li/V2O5, as intercalation
is normally considered in the ionic oxides, the accompanying electron transfer
reactions require the formation of V3+. The XPS and XAS results
reported recently111,116,117
indicate not only that such species do not form, but that in fact, very little
change in the oxidation state of the vanadium is even observed. Another inconsistent
result with the V2O5 aerogels involves the capacity
of this form of V2O5 for polyvalent cations.120 Ion-exchange experiments with V2O5xerogels
showed that the number of intercalated ions depended upon valence such that
0.33 equiv mol−1 were obtained consistently
for various +1, +2, and +3 species.192
In contrast, the insertion levels for Mg2+, Al3+
and Zn2+ were approximately ten times greater, ranging from
2.75 to 4 equiv mol−1.Charge storage in aerogelsThe fascinating question to consider regarding the high capacity observed
for lithium and the multivalent cations in V2O5 aerogels
is the nature of charge storage in these nanoscale mesoporous materials and
whether the high surface area contributes to this effect. For traditional (low
surface area) battery electrodes, the charge held by the double-layer
capacitance is a fraction of the faradaic charge capacity of the electrode,
which, in the case of lithium batteries, arises from intercalation reactions.
Since the published work on the X-ray-determined oxidation state of vanadium
in V2O5 aerogels indicates that vanadium reduces to
V(IV) and no further, there must be another mechanism
which enables V2O5 to reversibly take-up substantially
more than the 2 Li/V2O5 associated with the vanadium
reduction process.The research on the RuO2–TiO2 system has demonstrated
that the aerogel morphology serves to amplify not just the physical amount
of the surface, but its surface character as well.1,141
These results and the wealth of research on aerogel catalysts provide a strong
indication that surface amplification is expected to be a fundamental characteristic
of all aerogels. Thus, a pertinent question that emerges is what surface chemistry
can one expect for V2O5? Although the surface chemistry
of V2O5 is of interest because of the importance of
V2O5 as an oxidation catalyst,193
unfortunately, the surface chemistry of nanoscale, mesoporous V2O5,
characteristic of aerogels, has not been explored. The analysis published
by Ruetschi on the nature of the MnO2 system provides some insight,
however.194–196 In this
work, Ruetschi explored a cation-vacancy model (Fig. 14c)
and could explain a number of mystifying electrochemical properties for MnO2,194 including a thermodynamically driven increase
in the cell voltage as the manganese oxide becomes more defective,195 and the association of protons with cation vacancies
and Mn3+ centers.196 It should
be appreciated that metal oxide surfaces are inherently defective in that
they present a truncated structure with missing atoms. Because aerogels amplify
the surface character of transition metal oxides, defects, including those
based on cation vacancies, are expected to contribute strongly to the electrochemical
properties of these types of materials.If the cation vacancy hypothesis is extended to vanadium oxide, then mechanisms
for the observed electrochemical behavior can be postulated. Vanadium vacancies
are likely to be highly charged, arising from the 5+ and 4+ valence
of the metal, and negative, because of the inherent properties of cation vacancies.
An aerogel with a high concentration of such vacancies must compensate this
charge imbalance. In keeping with Ruetschi's model in which protons associate
with both cation vacancies in the MnO2 lattice and electron-generated
Mn3+ centers,196 the accessibility
of Li+ to cation vacancies in V2O5 would
produce an ion current but no accompanying electron transfer to vanadium cations
and therefore no generation of V(IV) or lower oxidation
states. In this way, the presence of vanadium vacancies can lead to a charging,
but non-faradaic process based on the ingress and egress of lithium ions from
the aerogel. Non-faradaic processes that give rise to apparently faradaic
electrochemical current–voltage–time responses are known and include
transfer of non-redox-active ions across liquid–liquid interfaces197 and protonation/deprotonation at carboxylic-acid-terminated
alkanethiol-modified electrodes.198The above mechanisms would explain why lithium uptake goes beyond what
one expects for 2 e−/2 Li+ per V2O5
to electrogenerate V(IV) centers in Li2V2O5,
as well as explain the high capacity obtained with divalent and trivalent
ions. Other defect mechanisms without electron transfer are also possible
as oxide systems commonly exhibit defect pairs (i.e., Schottky
defects). The work with RuO2–TiO2 aerogels
also gives evidence that anion vacancies in these solids are present and are
intimately involved in the proton-conduction process,1,141eqn. 10.The key issue, however, is the innate ability of aerogels to amplify the
surface so that electrochemical properties are strongly influenced, if not
dominated, by the presence of defects. The fact that this contribution is
observed for aerogels and not V2O5 xerogels is attributed
to the far lower surface area of the latter. Definitive experiments on the
presence of defects in aerogels and xerogels—and the role these defects
play in the high cation capacitances of electrically conductive metal oxide
aerogels—are in progress.199Re-thinking electrode structuresWhy should composites of being and nothingness be used in electrochemical
devices exactly as standard bulk forms have always been? As discussed above,
the bulk oxides used as battery materials are formulated into a practical
electrode by physically mixing the active material (in powdered form)
with other structural (e.g., polymer binders) or electrical (e.g.,
conductive carbon blacks) components. The composite is then pressed or
cast onto planar current collectors to create micrometers-thick, layered composite
electrode structures. But when the active material has been deliberately created
in a nanoscopic form within a continuous mesoporous volume, should the traditional
masonry approach to electrode structure be retained?—especially when
some fraction of the active material or electrocatalyst within the composite
is inevitably occluded, becoming thereby less electron/reactant/fuel
accessible?Conformable electrochemical power sources have been a design goal for decades,
thus, accounting for much of the interest in all-polymer batteries200 based on conducting polymer electrodes and ion-conducting
polymer electrolytes.201 As microelectromechanical
devices and sensors scaled into mesoscopic ranges become more standard, electrochemical
power sources that are integral to the device environment become a design
requirement, rather than a goal. Aerogels are prepared by liquid-phase synthesis,
which means that gel and dried gel structures can be conformed to the shape
and size demands of an application. As described above, the three-dimensional
structure of aerogels with a solid network of active material enveloped by
a continuous mesoporous network provides a multifunctional platform—one
that integrates being and nothingness to facilitate ready access to electroactive
surfaces without occlusion of the active material or electrocatalyst within
a microparticulate composite structure.Challenges and opportunitiesThis review has explored the prospect that aerogels offer a new direction
in electrochemical materials. Although relatively few conductive oxide aerogel
systems have been investigated, these materials have, nonetheless, already
demonstrated unexpected and exciting electrochemical properties. The chemical
and structural considerations with these materials are rather different from
those of the thermally insulating oxide aerogels or even the aerogel catalysts.
A sufficient number of electrically conductive transition metal oxides have
now been synthesized and characterized in aerogel form that certain commonalities
in their electrochemical character are apparent. Aerogels unavoidably amplify
the surface character of electrically conductive transition metal oxides,
which has translated into new properties for cation-insertion battery materials
based on aerogels and an improved understanding of mixed-valent, mixed electron–proton
conducting oxides of interest in ultracapacitors and fuel cells.A recurring theme in this paper has been that aerogels represent nanoscale
solids whose local chemistry, structural disorder and surface defects have
the ability to dominate electrochemical properties. Because our experimental
bias lies toward synthesizing and characterizing ordered materials,202,203 the physical and chemical nature of
this new generation of electrochemical materials are poorly understood, especially
when they are present only at a surface or exhibit short range order that
extends, at most, to a dimension of 1 nanometer. The challenge with these
materials is not only to characterize their physical and chemical properties,
but also to maintain the desired local chemistry and structure in the face
of thermodynamic forces inherent to the application, whether it be the operating
temperatures of a fuel cell or electronvolts (eV) of stored (and
cycled) energy in a battery.The following areas will need to make advances singly and in concert to
improve our understanding of conductive oxide aerogel systems and to optimize
their use: computational and combinatorial exploration with respect to how
disordered chemical composition and physical structure may be stabilized (or
pinned); soft, low temperature chemical approaches (chimie douce)
that synthesize disorder to match (or prod) theory and modeling;
and greater imagination in how our experimental tools are used to characterize
partial disorder in the solid state. Conductive oxide aerogels have the opportunity
to revolutionize the electrode structures and configurations utilized for
a wide range of technologically important power generation systems.AcknowledgementsIt is a pleasure to acknowledge our research associates
and colleagues who during their sojourns at UCLA and the Naval Research Laboratory
have contributed far more than we to the creation and understanding of electrically
conductive oxide aerogels: Michele Anderson, Robert Bernstein, Veronica Cepak,
Wei Cheng, Winny Dong, John Fontanella, John Harreld, Michelle Korwin, Nicholas
Leventis, Jeffrey Long, Erik Lukas, Celia Merzbacher, John Miller, Cathy Morris,
Linda Nazar, Jeremy Pietron, Joseph Ryan, Jeffrey Sakamoto, Kurt Salloux,
Rhonda Stroud, Karen Swider-Lyons, and Henry Wong. We would especially like
to acknowledge our research sponsors (the Office of Naval Research and
the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency) for their support of these
studies and, in particular, Karen Swider-Lyons for her insights into solid-state
defect chemistry.ReferencesK. E. Swider, P. L. Hagans, C. I. Merzbacher and D. R. Rolison, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 1248 CrossRef CAS .D. R. Rolison and C.
I. Merzbacher, in 1999 NRL Review, Naval
Research Laboratory, Washington, DC,  1999, pp. 121–122. Search PubMed .J.-P. Sartre, L'Étre et le Néant, Gallimard, Paris,  1943. Search PubMed .J. Fricke, Sci. Am., 1988, 258, 92 Search PubMed .M. L. Anderson, R. M. Stroud, C. A. Morris, C.
I. Merzbacher and D. R. Rolison, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2000, 2, 481 CrossRef .The main applications of aerogel research over the past
15 years can be tracked by the contents of the five Proceedings of the International
Symposia on Aerogels:
  (a) J. Fricke, ed., Proceedings of the International Symposia on Aerogels, Springer-Verlag, Berlin,  1986, pp. 1–203 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) R. Vacher, J. Phalippou, J. Pelou and T. Woignier, eds., Rev. Phys. Appl., 1989, 24, C4-1 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) J. Fricke,
ed., J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1992, 145, 1 Search PubMed ; 
  (d) R. W. Pekala and L. W. Hrubesh, eds., J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1995, 186, 435 Search PubMed ; 
  (e) J. Phalippou and R. Vacher, eds., J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 225, 1 Search PubMed .
  (a) S. S. Kistler, Nature, 1931, 127, 741 CAS ; 
  (b) S. S. Kistler, J. Phys. Chem., 1934, 38, 52 .S. S. Kistler, S. Swann and E. G. Appel, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1934, 26, 388 Search PubMed .S.
S. Kistler and S. A. G. Caldwell, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1934, 26, 658 Search PubMed .G. A. Nicolaon and S. J. Teichner, Bull. Soc. Chim. Fr., 1968, 5, 1906 Search PubMed .C. J. Brinker and G. W. Scherer, Sol–Gel
Science: The Physics and Chemistry of Sol–Gel Processing, Academic
Press, San Diego,  1990. Search PubMed .J. Livage, M. Henry and C. Sanchez, Prog. Solid State
Chem., 1988, 18, 259 CrossRef CAS .D. M. Schleich, Solid State
Ionics, 1994, 70/71, 407 Search PubMed .D. Segal, J. Mater. Chem., 1997, 7, 1297 RSC .G.
M. Pajonk, Appl. Catal., 1991, 72, 217 CrossRef CAS .J. Fricke and A. Emmerling, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 1992, 75, 2027 Search PubMed .
  (a) M. Schneider and A. Baiker, Catal.
Rev. Sci. Eng., 1995, 37, 515 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Schneider and A. Baiker, Catal.
Today, 1997, 35, 339 CrossRef CAS .N. Hüsing and U. Schubert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 1998, 37, 22 CrossRef CAS .R. C. Mehrota, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1988, 100, 1 Search PubMed .C. Sanchez, J. Livage, M. Henry and F. Babonneau, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1988, 100, 65 Search PubMed .F. Ribot, P. Toledano and C. Sanchez, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 759 CrossRef CAS .G. W. Scherer, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1987, 92, 375 Search PubMed .The bulk density of low density materials represents the mass of
the gel network per unit volume occupied by the network (which includes
the volume occupied by pores) and is not the density of the fully dense
solid. .The quantitative limit to what is
and is not an aerogel is not rigorously defined. The pore volume of materials
deemed aerogels can range from >99% to ∼70%..P. H. Tewari, A. J. Hunt and K. D. Lofftus, Mater. Lett., 1985, 3, 363 CrossRef CAS .P. J. Lea and S.
A. Ramjohn, Microscopy Acta, 1980, 83, 291 Search PubMed .
  (a) S. S. Prakash, C. J. Brinker, A. J. Hurd and S.
M. Rao, Nature, 1995, 374, 439 CrossRef ; 
  (b) S. S. Prakash, C. J. Brinker and A. J. Hurd, J. Non-Cryst.
Solids, 1995, 190, 264 Search PubMed .D. M. Smith, D. Stein, J. M. Anderson and W. Ackerman, J. Non-Cryst.
Solids, 1995, 186, 104 Search PubMed .T. Gerber, J. Sol–Gel
Sci. Technol., 1998, 13, 323 Search PubMed .S. Hæreid, J. Anderson, M.-A. Einarsrud, D. W. Hua and D. M. Smith, J. Non-Cryst.
Solids, 1995, 185, 221 Search PubMed .
  (a) S. Hæreid, M. Dahle, S. Lima and M.-A. Einarsrud, J. Sol–Gel Sci. Technol., 1994, 3, 199 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Hæreid, M. Dahle, S. Lima and M.-A. Einarsrud, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1995, 186, 96 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) M.-A. Einarsrud, M. B. Kirkedelen, E. Nilsen, K. Mortensen and J. Samseth, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 231, 10 Search PubMed .S. Hæreid, E. Nilsen and M.-A. Einarsrud, J. Non-Cryst.
Solids, 1996, 204, 228 Search PubMed .S. Dai, Y. H. Ju, H. J. Gao, J. S. Lin, S. J. Pennycook and C.
E. Barnes, Chem. Commun., 2000, 243 RSC .B. I. Lee and K. T. Chou, Mater.
Lett., 1992, 14, 112 CrossRef CAS .J. H. Harreld, W. Dong and B. Dunn, Mater. Res. Bull., 1998, 33, 561 CrossRef CAS .W. Dong, D. R. Rolison and B. Dunn, Electrochem. Solid State Lett., 2000, 3, 457 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. Passerini, F. Coustier, M. Giorgetti and W.
H. Smyrl, Extended Abstracts of
the 196th Electrochemical Society Meeting, PV-2,  1999, Electrochemical
Society, Pennington, NJ, no. 291 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) S. Passerini, F. Coustier, M. Giorgetti and W. H. Smyrl, Electrochem.
Solid State Lett., 1999, 2, 483 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. W. Long, K. E. Swider
and D. R. Rolison, Extended
Abstracts of the 196th Electrochemical Society Meeting, PV-2,  1999, Electrochemical
Society, Pennington, NJ, no. 190 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. W. Long, K. E. Swider, R. M. Stroud and D. R. Rolison, Electrochem.
Solid State Lett., 2000, 3, 453 CrossRef CAS .D. W. Breck, Zeolite Molecular Sieves, Wiley, New
York,  1974. Search PubMed .E. I. Ko, Chemtech, 1993, 23, 31 Search PubMed .See for example:
  (a) Catalyst Handbook, 2nd edn.,
ed. M. V. Twigg, Manson Publishing, London,  1996,
ch. 4–10 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. M. Thomas and W. J. Thomas, Principles and Practice of Heterogeneous Catalysis, VCH, Weinheim,  1997, ch. 8. Search PubMed .H. D. Foster and D. B. Keyes, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1937, 29, 1254 Search PubMed .J. N. Armor, E. J. Carlson and P. M. Zambri, Appl. Catal., 1985, 19, 339 CrossRef CAS .G.
A. Somorjai, Surf. Sci., 1994, 299/300, 849 CrossRef .F. Blanchard, J. P. Reymond, B. Pommier and S.
J. Teichner, J. Mol. Catal., 1982, 17, 171 CrossRef CAS .N. Sun and K. J. Klabunde, J. Catal., 1999, 185, 506 CrossRef CAS .J. G. Weissman, E. I. Ko and S. Kaytal, Appl. Catal. A, 1993, 94, 45 CrossRef CAS .J. Cross, R. Goswin, R. Gerlach and J. Fricke, Rev. Phys. Appl., 1989, 24, C4–185 Search PubMed .J. Phalippou, T. Woignier and M. Prassas, J.
Mater. Sci., 1990, 25, 3111 CrossRef CAS .T. Woignier, J. Phalippou and M. Prassas, J. Mater. Sci., 1990, 25, 3118 CrossRef CAS .J. V. Ryan, A. D. Berry, M.
L. Anderson, J. W. Long, R. M. Stroud, V. M. Cepak, V. M. Browning, D. R. Rolison and C.
I. Merzbacher, Nature, 2000, 406, 169 CrossRef CAS .K. J. Klabunde, J. Start, O. Koper, C. Mohs, D. G. Park, S. Decker, Y. Jiang, I. Lagadic and D. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 12142 CrossRef CAS .O. Koper and K. J. Klabunde, Chem. Mater., 1993, 5, 500 CrossRef CAS .O. B. Koper, E. A. Wovchko, J. A. Glass Jr., J. T. Yates Jr. and K. J. Klabunde, Langmuir, 1995, 11, 2054 CrossRef CAS .O.
B. Koper, I. Lagadic, A. Volodin and K. J. Klabunde, Chem. Mater., 1997, 9, 2468 CrossRef CAS .E.
M. Lucas and K. J. Klabunde, Nanostruct. Mater., 1999, 12, 179 CrossRef .
  (a) Y.-X. Li and K. J. Klabunde, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 1388 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Y.-X. Li, J. R. Schlup and K. J. Klabunde, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 1394 CrossRef CAS .E. M. Lucas and K. J. Klabunde,
manuscript in preparation. .Y. Jiang, S. Decker, C. Mohs and K. J. Klabunde, J. Catal., 1998, 180, 24 CrossRef CAS .L. L. Hench and J. K. West, Chem.
Rev., 1990, 90, 33 CrossRef CAS .How controlled
are pores sizes in aerogels? The size distribution of the pores and their
average sizes in aerogels can be tuned and shifted by control of the sol–gel
chemistry and processing. The degree of control is not, however, as fine as
that achieved with surfactant-templated mesoporous silicates and other oxides.62.U. Ciesla and F. Schüth, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 1999, 27, 131 CrossRef .Silica aerogels are also
the best thermal insulators off the planet—they were used to insulate
the Martian rover, Sojourner (see http://mars.jpl.nasa.gov/
for background and updates on this mission and the plans proposed for a second
Mars rover in 2003)..J. Fricke
and A. Emmerling, in Chemical
Processing of Advanced Materials, eds. L. L. Hench
and J. K. West, Wiley, New York,  1992, pp. 3–17. Search PubMed .See for example:
  (a) A. J. Hunt and K. D. Loftus, Adv. Sol. Energy Technol., 1988, 4, 3146 Search PubMed .J. Fricke, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1990, 121, 188 Search PubMed .D. M. Smith, W. C. Ackerman, R. Roth, A. Zimmerman and F. Schwertferger, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1996, 431, 291 Search PubMed .J. Fricke and T. Tillotson, Thin
Solid Films, 1997, 297, 212 CrossRef CAS .J. Fricke and G. Reichnauer, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1986, 73, 775 Search PubMed .M. Cantin, M. Casse, L. Koch, R. Jouan, P. Mestran, D. Roussel, F. Bonnin, J. Moutel and S. J. Teichner, Nucl. Instrum. Meth., 1974, 118, 177 Search PubMed .
  (a) J. Fricke, Spektrum der Wissenschaft, 1988, 7, 60 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Bockhorst, K. Heinloth, G. M. Pajonk, R. Begag and E. Elaloui, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1995, 186, 388 Search PubMed .
  (a) M. H. W. Chan, K. I. Blum, S. Q. Murphy, G.
K. S. Wong and J. D. Reppy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1988, 61, 1950 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) G. K. S. Wong, P. A. Crowell, H. A. Cho and J.
D. Reppy, Phys. Rev. B, 1993, 48, 3558 .
  (a) J. V. Porto and J. M. Parpia, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1995, 74, 4667 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) A. Golov, J. V. Porto and J. M. Parpia, J.
Low Temp. Phys., 1998, 113, 329 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.P. Tsou, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1995, 186, 415 Search PubMed .For up-to-the-minute information on the “Stardust” mission
check http://stardust.jpl.nasa.gov/
and for further detail on NASA's use of aerogels to capture micrometeorites
check http://stardust.jpl.nasa.gov/spacecraft/aerogel.html.D. M. Smith, J. Anderson, C. C. Cho, G. P. Johnston and S.
P. Jeng, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1995, 381, 261 Search PubMed .See, for example,
  (a) MRS Bull., issue on Low Dielectric
Constant Materials, October,  1997. Search PubMed .The National Technology Roadmap for
Semiconductors (Semiconductor Industry Association, San Jose, 1997);
the international status of the roadmap can be monitored at: http://public.itrs.net/.R. J. Ayen and P. A. Iacobucci, Rev. Chem. Eng., 1988, 5, 157 Search PubMed .A. J. Hunt and W. Cao, Mater. Res.
Soc. Symp. Proc., 1994, 346, 451 Search PubMed .
  (a) J. M. Miller, B. Dunn, T. D. Tran and R. Pekala, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, L309 CAS ; 
  (b) J. M. Miller and B. Dunn, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 799 CrossRef CAS .C. I. Merzbacher, J. G. Barker, K. E. Swider, J. V. Ryan, R.
A. Bernstein and D. R. Rolison, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 225, 234 Search PubMed .C. I. Merzbacher, J. G. Barker, J. V. Ryan, R.
A. Bernstein, J. W. Long and D. R. Rolison, Nanostruct. Mater., 1999, 12, 551 CrossRef .N. Hüsing and U. Schubert, J. Sol–Gel
Sci. Technol., 1997, 8, 807 Search PubMed  , and references therein.P. Judeinstein and C. Sanchez, J.
Mater. Chem., 1996, 6, 511 RSC .C. I. Merzbacher, J.
G. Barker, K. E. Swider and D. R. Rolison, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 224, 92 Search PubMed .Refilling the aerogel's pores with water, prior to the neutron
scattering experiment, was done either in stages (e.g., by first
filling the micropores by vapor-phase equilibration with the appropriate pure
or contrast-matched fluid before immersion into the liquid) or by direct
immersion in the pure or contrast-matched liquid. Similar results were obtained
with both approaches.86.C. I. Merzbacher, J. G. Barker, K. E. Swider and D. R. Rolison, Adv. Colloid
Interface Sci., 1998, 76–77, 57 CrossRef CAS .B. Scrosati
and C. Vincent, Modern
Batteries, 2nd edn., Arnold, London,  1997. Search PubMed .K. B. Oldham and J. C. Myland, Fundamentals of Electrochemical Science, Academic, San
Diego,  1994, pp. 11–12. Search PubMed .R. Richards, W. Li, S. Decker, C. Davidson, O. Koper, V. Zaikovski, A. Volodin, T. Rieker and K. J. Klabunde, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2000, 122, 4921 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. W. Pekala, J. Mater. Sci., 1989, 24, 3221 CAS ; 
  (b) R. W. Pekala and D. W. Schaefer, Macromolecules, 1993, 26, 5487 CrossRef CAS .S. T. Mayer, R. W. Pekala and J. L. Kaschmitter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1993, 140, 446 CAS .J. C. Farmer, D. V. Fix, G.
V. Mack, R. W. Pekala and J. F. Poco, J.
Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 159 CAS .G. M. Pajonk, A. V. Rao, N. Pinto, F. Ehrburger-Dolle and M. G. Gil, Stud.
Surf. Sci. Catal., 1998, 118, 167 Search PubMed .Emphasis
must be placed on the word “gels”: metal oxide films can be created
by spin- or dip-coating viscous media containing MOx precursors, which are
then sintered and densified, so that a pre-formed network morphology need
not be created before the drying step; aerogels, however, must have network-formed
wet gels before either SCD or ambient-pressure drying is performed. Network
formation requires control over the polycondensation component of sol–gel
chemistry.18.J. Livage, Chem. Mater., 1991, 3, 578 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) R. Baddour, J. P. Pereira-Ramos, R. Messina and J. Perichon, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 314, 81 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) B. Araki, C. Mailhe, N. Baffier, J. Livage and J. Vedel, Solid State Ionics, 1983, 9/10, 439 Search PubMed .K. West, B. Zachau-Christiansen, T. Jacobsen and S. Skaarup, Electrochim.
Acta, 1993, 38, 1215 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) T. Miura, E. Sugiura, T. Kishii and T. Nagai, Denki Kagaku, 1988, 56, 413 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) T. Miura, S. Kunihiro, Y. Muranushi and T. Nagai, Denki Kagaku, 1989, 57, 393 Search PubMed .
  (a) H.-K. Park and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1994, 141, L25 CAS ; 
  (b) H.-K. Park, W. H. Smyrl and M. D. Ward, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 1995, 142, 1068 CAS .H. Hirashima and K. Sudoh, J.
Non-Cryst. Solids, 1992, 145, 51 Search PubMed .K. Sudoh and H. Hirashima, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1992, 147/148, 386 Search PubMed .F. Chaput, B. Dunn, P. Fuqua and K. Salloux, J.
Non-Cryst. Solids, 1995, 188, 11 Search PubMed .D. B. Le, S. Passerini, A. L. Tipton, B. B. Owens and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 1995, 142, L102 CAS .D. B. Le, S. Passerini, J. Guo, J. Ressler, B. B. Owens and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2099 CAS .B. Katz, W. Liu, K. Salloux, F. Chaput, B. Dunn and G. C. Farrington, Mater. Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1995, 369, 211 Search PubMed .G. W. Scherer, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1998, 202, 399 CrossRef CAS .K. Salloux, F. Chaput, H.
P. Wong, B. Dunn and M. W. Breiter, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, L191 CAS .
  (a) W. Weppner and R. A. Huggins, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1569 CAS ; 
  (b) W. Weppner and R. A. Huggins, Annu. Rev. Mater. Sci., 1978, 8, 269 Search PubMed ; 
  (c) W. Weppner and R. A. Huggins, Int. Met. Rev., 1981, 5, 253 Search PubMed .S. Passerini, D. B. Le, W. H. Smyrl, M. Berrettoni, R. Tossici, R. Marassi and M. Giorgetti, Solid State
Ionics, 1997, 104, 195 Search PubMed .C/x
is the charge rate of a battery;113e.g.,
to charge a 120 A h battery in 4 h (a C/4
rate) requires applying a current of 30 A..Handbook of Batteries and Fuel Cells,
ed. D. Linden, Mc-Graw Hill, New
York,  1984, p. A-4. Search PubMed .
  (a) F. Coustier, S. Passerini and W. H. Smyrl, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 1998, 145, L73 CAS ; 
  (b) F. Coustier, J.-M. Lee, S. Passerini and W.
H. Smyrl, Solid State Ionics, 1999, 116, 279 Search PubMed .D. Fauteux and B. Dunn,
unpublished results. .S. Passerini, W. H. Smyrl, M. Berrettoni, R. Tossici, M. Rosolen, R. Marassi and F. Decker, Solid
State Ionics, 1996, 90, 5 Search PubMed .M. Giogetti, S. Passerini, W. H. Smyrl, S. Mukerjee, X. Q. Yang and J. McBreen, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146, 2387 CrossRef CAS .J. Wong, F. W. Lytle, R. P. Messmer and D. H. Maylotte, Phys. Rev.
B, 1984, 30, 5596 CrossRef CAS .H. P. Wong, B. C. Dave, F. Leroux, J. Harreld, B. Dunn and L. F. Nazar, J. Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 1019 RSC .D. B. Le, S. Passerini, F. Coustier, J. Guo, T. Soderstrom, B. B. Owens and W. H. Smyrl, Chem.
Mater., 1998, 10, 682 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) B. Yebka and C. Julien, Mater.
Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1995, 369, 119 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) J. P. Pereira-Ramos, N. Kumagai and N. Kumagai, J. Power Sources, 1995, 56, 87 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) S. Mukerjee, S. J. Lee, E. A. Ticianelli, J. McBreen, B. N. Grgur, N. M. Markovic, P. N. Ross, J.
R. Giallombardo and E. S. DeCastro, Electrochem. Solid State Lett., 1999, 2, 12 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Zhang, Y. Wang, E. Rosim Fachini and C.
R. Cabrera, Electrochem. Solid State
Lett., 1999, 2, 437 CrossRef CAS .W. Dong and B. Dunn, J.
Mater. Chem., 1998, 8, 665 RSC .W. Dong and B. Dunn, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 225, 135 Search PubMed .M. M. Thackeray, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1997, 25, 1 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) W. I. F. David, M. M. Thackeray, L. A. de Picciotto and J. B. Goodenough, J. Solid
State Chem., 1987, 67, 316 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) T. Ohzuku, M. Kitagawa and T. Hirai, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 1990, 137, 769 CAS .M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M. E. Spahr and P. Novák, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 725 CrossRef CAS .S. L. Brock, N. G. Duan, Z. R. Tian, O. Giraldo, H. Zhou and S. L. Suib, Chem.
Mater., 1998, 10, 2619 CrossRef CAS .A. Manthiram and J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 2895 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. J. Xu, A. J. Kinser, B. B. Owens and W.
H. Smyrl, Electrochem. Solid State
Lett., 1998, 1, 1 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. J. Zu, B. B. Owens
and W. H. Smyrl, Extended
Abstracts of the 196th Electrochemical Society Meeting, PV-2,  1999, Electrochemical
Society, Pennington, NJ, no. 296. Search PubMed .F. Leroux and L. F. Nazar, Solid State Ionics, 1997, 100, 103 Search PubMed .J. W. Long, R. M. Stroud and D. R. Rolison, J. Non-Cryst.
Solids, 2001, in press Search PubMed .
  (a) J. Kim and A. Manthiram, Nature, 1997, 390, 265 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) J. Kim and A. Manthiram, Electrochem. Solid State Lett., 1999, 2, 55 CrossRef CAS .S. Bach, M. Henry, N. Baffier and J. Livage, J. Solid State Chem., 1990, 88, 325 CrossRef CAS .S. Trasatti, Electrochim. Acta, 1991, 36, 225 CrossRef CAS  , and references therein.H. Schafer, G. Schneidereit and W. Gerhardt, Z. Anorg.
Allg. Chem., 1963, 319, 372 .A. Mills, C. Lawrence and R. Enos, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1984, 1436 RSC .S. Ardizzone, A. Carugati, G. Lodi and S. Trasatti, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1982, 129, 1689 CAS .J. P. Zheng, P. J. Cygan and T.
R. Jow, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1995, 142, 2699 CAS .J.
W. Long, K. E. Swider, C. I. Merzbacher and D. R. Rolison, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 780 CrossRef CAS .K.
E. Swider, C. I. Merzbacher, P. L. Hagans and D. R. Rolison, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1998, 225, 348 Search PubMed .
  (a) Yu. E. Roginskaya, B. Sh. Galyamov, V. M. Lebedev, I. D. Belova and Yu.N. Venevtsev, Russ. J. Inorg. Chem., 1977, 22, 273 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. Valigi and D. Gazzoli, Z.
Phys. Chem. Neue Folge, 1981, 125, 89 Search PubMed .G. Dagan and M. Tomkiewicz, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 12651 CrossRef CAS .The surfaces of many oxide-based electrodes (including ion-selective
materials such as pH-sensitive glass) are described as a solid-state
reservoir (at standard state) over which a nanoscale, hydrated (gel-like)
layer intermediates the ionic (i.e., electrical) communication
between the liquid electrolyte and the bulk solid state of the oxide.145.W. E. Morf, The
Principles of Ion-Selective Electrodes and Membrane Transport, Studies in
Analytical Chemistry, Vol. 2, Elsevier, Amsterdam,  1981, pp. 362–363. Search PubMed .D. R. Rolison, P. L. Hagans, K. E. Swider and J. W. Long, Langmuir, 1999, 15, 774 CrossRef .D.
A. McKeown, P. L. Hagans, L. P. L. Carette, A. E. Russell, K. E. Swider and D. R. Rolison, J. Phys. Chem.
B, 1999, 103, 4825 CrossRef CAS .F. A. Kröger, The Chemistry
of Imperfect Crystals, Vol. 2, Elsevier,  New
York,  1974, p. 14. Search PubMed .L.
F. Nazar, in Access in Nanoporous
Materials, ed. T. Pinnavaia and M. Thorpe, Plenum
Press, New York,  1995, pp. 405–427. Search PubMed .F. Leroux, G. Goward, W. P. Power and L. F. Nazar, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 3886 CAS .F. Huguenin, M. T. do Prado Gambardella, R. M. Torresi, S. I. Córdoba de Torresi and D. A. Buttry, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 2437 CrossRef CAS .B. C. Dave, B. Dunn, F. Leroux, L. F. Nazar and H. P. Wong, Mater.
Res. Soc. Symp. Proc., 1996, 435, 611 Search PubMed .J. Harreld, H.
P. Wong, B. C. Dave, B. Dunn and L. F. Nazar, J. Non-Cryst.
Solids, 1998, 225, 319 Search PubMed .J. H. Harreld, B. Dunn and L. F. Nazar, Int. J. Inorg. Mater., 1999, 1, 135 CrossRef CAS .W. Dong and B. Dunn, Mater. Res. Soc.
Symp. Proc., 1999, 576, 269 Search PubMed .T. A. Kerr, H. Wu and L. F. Nazar, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 2005 CrossRef CAS .D. Belanger, G. Laperriere and L. Gravel, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 1990, 137, 365 CAS .C. A. Morris, M.
L. Anderson, R. M. Stroud, C. I. Merzbacher and D. R. Rolison, Science, 1999, 284, 622 CrossRef CAS .R. Zallen, The Physics of
Amorphous Materials, Wiley, New York,  1998,
ch. 4. Search PubMed .Aerogels have a dimensionality that
is less than three, but greater than two, as confirmed by X-ray and neutron-scattering
measurements.161.D. W. Schaefer and K. D. Keefer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1986, 56, 2199 CrossRef CAS .V. M. Cepak, J. V. Ryan, M.
L. Anderson, C. I. Merzbacher and D. R. Rolison, Naval Research Laboratory, unpublished
results. .J. J. Pietron and D. R. Rolison, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2001, in
press Search PubMed .For
example, see:
  (a) Photocatalysis: Fundamentals and
Applications, ed. D. F. Ollis, E. Pelizzetti
and N. Serpone, Wiley, New York,  1989 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) M. R. Hoffmann, S. T. Martin, W. Choi and D.
W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 69 CrossRef CAS .For example, see:
  (a) B. O'Regan and M. Grätzel, Nature, 1991, 353, 737 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) R. Argazzi, C. A. Bignozzi, T. A. Heimer, F. N. Castellano and G.
J. Meyer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 11815 CrossRef CAS .S. A. Walker, P. A. Christensen, K. E. Shaw and G. M. Walker, J. Electroanal.
Chem., 1995, 393, 137 CrossRef CAS .G. E. Pike and C. H. Seager, J. Appl. Phys., 1977, 48, 5152 CrossRef CAS .S. Yamamichi, P. Y. Lesaicherre, H. Yamaguchi, K. Takemura, S. Sone, H. Yabuta, K. Sato, T. Tamura, K. Nakajima, S. Ohnishi, K. Tokashiki, Y. Hayashi, Y. Kato, Y. Miyasaka, M. Yoshida and H. Ono, IEEE Trans. Elec.
Dev., 1997, 44, 1076 Search PubMed .J. Koresh and A. Soffer, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124, 1379 CAS .
  (a) D. Pletcher and F. C. Walsh, Industrial
Electrochemistry, 2nd edn., Chapman & Hall, London,  1993 Search PubMed ; 
  (b) E. Heitz and G. Kreysa, Principles
of Electrochemical Engineering, VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  1986. Search PubMed .J.
S. Newman, Electrochemical Systems,
2nd edn., Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs,
NJ,  1991, ch. 22. Search PubMed .A.
J. Bard and L. R. Faulkner, Electrochemical Methods—Fundamentals
and Applications, Wiley, New York,  1980, pp. 26–34. Search PubMed .D. Geldart, Powder Technol., 1973, 7, 285 CrossRef CAS .
  (a) J. Chaouki, C. Chavarie, D. Klvana and G. Pajonk, Powder Technol., 1985, 43, 117 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. Li, R. Legros, C. M. H. Brereton, J.
R. Grace and J. Chaouki, Powder Technol., 1990, 60, 121 CrossRef CAS .C. A. Morris and D. R. Rolison,
manuscript in preparation. .N. A. Surridge, J. C. Jernigan, E. F. Dalton, R. P. Buck, M. Watanabe, H. Zhang, M. Pinkerton, T. T. Wooster, M. L. Longmire, J.
S. Facci and R. W. Murray, Faraday Discuss. Chem. Soc., 1989, 88, 1 RSC .T. Pajkossy, J. Electroanal. Chem., 1991, 300, 1 CrossRef CAS .A. Harrison, Fractals in Chemistry, Oxford University
Press, Oxford, England,  1996. Search PubMed .T. Pajkossy and L. Nyikos, Electrochim.
Acta, 1989, 34, 171 CrossRef CAS .A. J. Jarzębski, J. Lorenc and L. Pająk, Langmuir, 1997, 13, 1280 CrossRef CAS .N. Leventis, I. Elder, D. R. Rolison, M.
L. Anderson and C. I. Merzbacher, Chem. Mater., 1999, 11, 2837 CrossRef CAS .If chemically modified aerogels are prepared as thin films,
as Hrubesh et al. have shown is feasible with pure silica,183 the response of a 10 µm thick, fluorophore-modified
aerogel film would fall in the millisecond regime for gas-phase analytes..L. Hrubesh and J. F. Poco, J.
Non-Cryst. Solids, 1995, 188, 46 Search PubMed .B. E. Conway, J.
Electrochem. Soc., 1991, 138, 1539 CAS .M. Broussely, P. Biensan and B. Simon, Electrochim. Acta, 1999, 45, 3 CrossRef CAS .B. B. Owens, S. Passerini and W. H. Smyrl, Electrochim.
Acta, 1999, 45, 215 CrossRef CAS .J. W. Long and D.
R. Rolison in New Directions in
Electroanalytical Chemistry II, ed. J. Leddy, P.
Vanýsek and M. D. Porter, PV99-5, Electrochemical
Society, Pennington, NJ,  1999, pp. 125–131. Search PubMed .J. W. Long and D. R. Rolison,
manuscript in preparation. .K. West, in Intercalation Chemistry,
ed. M. S. Whittingham and A. J. Jacobson, Academic
Press, San Diego,  1982, pp. 447–477. Search PubMed .P. G. Bruce, Chem. Commun., 1997, 1817 RSC .C. R. Horne, U. Bergmann, J. Kim, K. A. Striebel, A. Manthiram, S. P. Cramer and E. J. Cairns, J. Electrochem.
Soc., 2000, 147, 395 CrossRef CAS .J.-C. Badot and N. Baffier, J. Mater. Chem., 1992, 2, 1167 RSC .K. Hermann, M. Witko and R. Druzinic, Faraday Discuss., 1999, 114, 53 RSC .P. Ruetschi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1984, 131, 2737 CAS .P. Ruetschi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 2657 CAS .P. Ruetschi and R. Giovanoli, J.
Electrochem. Soc., 1988, 135, 2663 CAS .
  (a) P. Vanýsek, Electrochim. Acta, 1995, 40, 2841 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) H. H. Girault and D. J. Schriffin, in Electroanalytical Chemistry, ed. A.
J. Bard, vol. 15, Marcel Dekker, New
York,  1989, pp. 1–141. Search PubMed .H. S. White, J. D. Peterson, Q. Z. Cui and K. J. Stevenson, J. Phys.
Chem. B, 1998, 102, 2930 CrossRef CAS .K. E. Swider-Lyons, C.
T. Love and D. R. Rolison, manuscript in preparation. .G. B. Appetecchi and B. Scrosati, Electrochim. Acta, 1998, 43, 1105 CrossRef CAS .W. H. Meyer, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10, 439 CrossRef CAS .J. Eckert, G.
D. Stucky and A. K. Cheetham, Mater. Res. Bull., 1999, 24, 31 CAS .D. R. Rolison and C. A. Bessel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 737 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  (Left) Representation
of the architectural being and nothingness of an aerogel illustrating the
innate nanoscopic character of the solid and pore components of these low
density, highly porous, sol–gel-derived materials (adapted from ref. 4). (Right)
High resolution scanning electron micrograph showing the general features
seen for silica (and silica-based composite) aerogels: 10 to 20 nm
diameter silica domains networked through mesoporous space [(ref. 5) Reprinted with
permission from M. L. Anderson, R. M. Stroud, C. A. Morris, C. I. Merzbacher
and D. R. Rolison, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2000, 2, 481. Copyright
[2000] Wiley-VCH].	 
	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)
	(5)

 	Fig. 2  The method used to
extract the pore fluid from a wet gel creates a dry solid with variable porosity:
strong capillary forces create a xerogel, weak capillary forces create an
ambigel, and zero capillary force creates an aerogel that nominally retains
the low density framework of the wet gel.	 
	(6)
	(7)
	(8)

 	Fig. 3  Idealized representation
of a 4 nm crystallite of aerogel-produced MgO.58
CaO and MgO, in their aerogel-produced form, lead to higher activity for thermal
decomposition of environmentally proscribed organic compounds containing chlorine,
fluorine, phosphorus, or sulfur than nanocrystalline CaO or MgO prepared by
other approaches.	 

 	Fig. 4  Points during sol–gel
chemistry and processing at which the sol, wet gel, supercritically dried
gel (aerogel), or re-wetted aerogel may be chemically modified;
s = solution, g = gas phase.	 

 	Fig. 5  Small-angle neutron
scattering from silica aerogels before and after filling the pores with a
high surface tension liquid (D2O) and a contrast-matching
liquid chosen to null out the scattering from the silica [(data taken
from ref. 86)
Reprinted from J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 224, C. I. Merzbacher, J. G.
Barker, K. E. Swider and D. R. Rolison, “Effect of re-wetting on silica
aerogel structure: a SANS study”, 92–96. Copyright [1998], with
permission from Elsevier Science].	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Practical
electrode structure in which the electrochemically active powder is mixed
with conductive carbon powder and polymer binders in order to cast (from
solvent) or press a conductive composite. (b) Electroanalytical
electrode structure in which the electrically conducting powder is studied
without exposure to other chemicals by hand-pressing onto the surface of a “sticky
carbon” rotating disk electrode (RDE) made of a carbon-wax
composite.	 


V2O535,36	alk/supercritical CO2	280	8	0.50
 	alk/ambient pentane	185	34	0.48
 	alk/acetone (xerogel)	<10	3	<0.01
V2O5106	aq/supercritical CO2	450	20	 
 	aq/ambient (xerogel)	<5	 	 
V2O5104	alk/supercritical CO2	325	 	1.2
V2O5103	alk/supercritical ethanol	140–200	 	 
(PPy)2.0V2O5119	alk/supercritical CO2
(pre-polymerization)	140	 	 
(PPy)1.0V2O5119	alk/supercritical CO2
(co-synthesis)	290	16	1.1b
 	alk/ambient pentane (co-synthesis)	190	17	0.8b
MoO335,124	alk/supercritical CO2	180	30	0.6
 	alk/ambient pentane	280	7	0.52c
 	alk/acetone (xerogel)	<10	3	<0.1
RuO2-TiO21	alk/supercritical CO2	75–85	22d	0.44d
α-MnO238
(cryptomelane)	aq/supercritical CO2	210	16	0.80
aq/ambient hexane	190	21	1.1
aq/ambient water (xerogel)	180	5	0.31
MnO2132
(birnessite)	aq/supercritical CO2	230	21	1.0
aq/ambient hexane	220	14	0.64
aq/ambient cyclohexane	220	25	1.2
aq/ambient water (xerogel)	210	10	0.50

 	Fig. 7  Transmission electron
micrographs comparing vanadium oxide gels dried by (top) supercritical
drying from CO2 to form an aerogel and (bottom) ambient-pressure
evaporation of hexane to form an ambigel.	 

 	Fig. 8  Dependence of incremental
pore volume on pore diameter for V2O5
(•)
aerogel—alkoxide preparation/supercritical drying from CO2;35
(–) aerogel—aqueous
preparation/supercritical drying from CO2;106
and (–) ambigel—alkoxide preparation/ambient-pressure
drying from pentane.35	 

 	Fig. 9  Cyclic voltammograms
in 1 M LiClO4/propylene carbonate electrolyte of vanadium
oxide aerogels and xerogels derived from different synthetic routes, which
emphasizes the potentials at which lithium-ion insertion occurs. Compare an
alkoxide-prepared V2O5 aerogel [(bottom; Fig. 6 of ref. 154;
scan rate = 0.1 mV s−1).
Reprinted from Int. J. Inorg. Mater., 1, J. H. Harreld, B. Dunn and
L. F. Nazar, “Design and synthesis of inorganic–organic hybrid
microstructures”, 135–146. Copyright [1999], with permission from
Elsevier Science.], which has two distinct faradaic redox couples, with one
prepared from an aqueous route [(Fig. 6a
of ref. 106; scan
rate = 0.1 mV s−1).
D. B. Le, S. Passerini, J. Guo, J. Ressler, B. B. Owens and W. H. Smyrl, J.
Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 2099—Reproduced by permission
of the Electrochemical Society.], which has one faradaic couple.	 
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)

 	Fig. 10  The impedance of
a mixed-phase RuO2–TiO2 aerogel depends on the
partial pressure of water and oxygen in the bathing atmosphere, which indicates
that mixed electron and proton conductivity occurs in this nanoscale mesoporous
material.	 

 	Fig. 11  Electrical conductivity
of V2O5 and MoO3 aerogels and polypyrrole–MoO3
hybrid aerogel.	 

 	Fig. 12  Transmission electron
micrograph of a colloidal Au–silica composite aerogel showing Au colloids (brighter
circles) dispersed throughout the amorphous silica aerogel [(ref. 158) Reprinted with permission
from C. A. Morris, M. L. Anderson, R. M. Stroud, C. I. Merzbacher and D. R.
Rolison, Science, 1999, 284, 622–624. Copyright [1999]
American Association for the Advancement of Science.].	 

 	Fig. 13  Voltammetric current–potential
plots for three different diffusion profiles in which an electroactive species (redox
solute) with a formal potential of E°′ undergoes a
reversible one-electron oxidation under conditions of surface confinement (no
diffusion), semi-infinite (planar) diffusion, or steady-state (spherical)
diffusion at time t2
(at time t1,
diffusion is converting from planar to spherical); ia
represents anodic current.	 

 	Fig. 14  The three types of
charge uptake at an electrified cation-insertion material; (a)
formation of a capacitive charge (double layer) at an electrified
interface poised at (in this instance) a potential negative of its
point of zero charge; (b) electrochemical intercalation
of Li+ into the cathode of a battery [(after ref. 127) Reprinted
with permission from M. Winter, J. O. Besenhard, M.E. Spahr and P. Novák, Adv.
Mater., 1998, 10, 725–763. Copyright [1998] Wiley-VCH.]; (c)
proposed cation vacancies, and accommodation of vacancy-balancing protons
in MnO2 [(after ref. 196)
P. Ruestchi and R. Giovanoli, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 135,
2663–2669—Reproduced by permission of the Electrochemical Society.].	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001
