Emerging applications of porous organic polymers in visible-light photocatalysis  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA00364F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA00364F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 7003-7034Emerging applications of porous organic polymers in visible-light photocatalysis

        
          
            Tian-Xiong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Hai-Peng 
            Liang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Dejene Assefa 
            Anito
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xuesong 
            Ding
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Bao-Hang 
            Han
          
          
        
      *ab
aCAS Key Laboratory of Nanosystem and Hierarchical Fabrication, CAS Center for Excellence in Nanoscience, National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, Beijing 100190, China. E-mail: hanbh@nanoctr.cn; dingxs@nanoctr.cn;   Tel: +86 10 8254 5576  Tel: +86 10 8254 5708
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China
Received 
      9th January 2020
    , Accepted 18th March 2020First published on 18th March 2020AbstractPorous organic polymers (POPs) are emerging porous solids featuring high porosity, low density, diverse composition, facile functionalization, and high thermal/chemical stability. POPs are proven competitive candidates in various applications, such as sorption/separation, energy storage, biomedical applications, optical devices, and catalysis. Photocatalysis enables multifarious transformations of chemicals under mild conditions without enormous energy consumption and contaminant generation. Catalytically active species can be incorporated into POPs by means of covalent bonding or metal–ligand coordination, and the catalytic power of POPs can be fine tuned by modulating the electronic properties of monomers and pore structures of the solids, which make POP-based heterogeneous photocatalysts designable for task-specific applications. The outstanding performance and reusability distinguish POPs from their homogeneous analogues. As a result, their catalytic efficiency can be significantly enhanced and cost would be considerably reduced. In this review, we aim to highlight the recent research of POPs in visible-light-driven photocatalysis, including organic synthesis, hydrogen evolution, carbon dioxide reduction, and degradation of organic pollutants. Technological concerns over the hindrance of preparation, post-processing, performance optimization, cost and energy consumption are also discussed.Tian-Xiong WangTian-Xiong Wang received his B.S. degree in Materials Chemistry in 2016 from Beijing Jiaotong University, China. Presently, he is pursuing his Ph.D. degree in Professor Bao-Hang Han's group at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China. His current research work mainly focuses on the design and functionalization of porous organic polymers and their applications in sorption and heterogeneous catalysis.Hai-Peng LiangHai-Peng Liang received his B.Sc. in Materials Chemistry from South China Normal University (Guangzhou, China) in 2015 and M.Sc. in Nanoscience and Technology from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2018. He was a member of the group of Prof. Bao-Hang Han at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China, focusing on the synthesis of porous polycarbazoles for heterogeneous photocatalysis.Dejene Assefa AnitoDejene Assefa Anito obtained his bachelor's degree from Ambo University, Ethiopia, in 2007, and his master's degree from Hawassa University, Ethiopia, in 2012. After graduating from Hawassa University, he joined Arba Minch University, Ethiopia, as a lecturer in July, 2012. He is now studying for his PhD at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China, under the supervision of professor Bao-Hang Han. His research interests focus on the synthesis, characterization, and performance study of porous organic materials.Xuesong DingXuesong Ding received his BS degree from Nankai University (Tianjin, China) in 2007 and his MS degree from Tianjin University (Tianjin, China) in 2009. Then, he studied at the Institute for Molecular Science (IMS, Japan) and obtained his Ph.D. degree in 2012. In November, 2012, he joined the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China (NCNST) and is currently an associate professor. His research focuses on the synthesis and functionalization of covalent organic frameworks and conjugated microporous polymers.Bao-Hang HanDr Bao-Hang Han is a professor of functional nanoporous materials at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China (NCNST), and obtained his B.S., M.S., and Ph. D. degrees from Nankai University, Tianjin, China. Before he joined the NCNST, he worked as a post-doctoral fellow at the Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interface, Golm, Germany, Department of Chemistry, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada, and Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. His current research interests focus on the preparation of various organic porous materials and porous graphene-based carbon materials and exploring their potential application in energy and environmental fields, such as hydrogen storage, carbon dioxide capture, gas separation, heterogeneous (photo)catalysis, and electrochemical energy storage.
1 Introduction
Synthetic chemicals have made great contributions to human society, while simultaneous huge energy consumption and environment pollution are inevitable in traditional industrial production processes. The solutions to these issues necessitate the upgradation of manufacturing technologies and energy sources thereof; in this regard, photocatalysis, especially visible-light-driven catalysis, is a powerful tool for direct conversion of almost infinite solar energy into chemical energy.1
The term photocatalysis was coined as early as 1911.2 However, only sporadic examples were reported on photocatalytic applications in the presence of transition metal oxides as catalysts.3–5 The photoelectrolysis of water and photoelectrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide using TiO2 were reported by Honda and co-workers, which set off the resurge of research interest with heterogeneous photocatalysts in the context of energy crisis.6,7 Molecular photocatalysts, such as inorganic materials,8 metal complexes,9 and organic dyes,10 have been widely investigated in photocatalysis. However, the drawbacks of these catalysts, e.g., the toxicity of metal, poor stability, and tough separation, impede the advance of their catalytic ability and practical application. Various substrates are used as heterogeneous supports for molecular photocatalysts, including glass,11 fabrics,12 and polymers.13 Organic polymers have been widely employed as supports owing to their stable, nontoxic, inexpensive, and processable properties,13 while the low dispersity in solvents, interaction between catalysts and substrates, and exposure of active sites of traditional polymers are limitations for high efficiency and activity. The hierarchical porous materials constructed from monomers containing coordination sites or catalytic functional groups may possess the property of single-atom catalysis. Single-site photocatalysts with porous structures, such as metal-incorporated zeolites, metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), and porous inorganic metal oxide semiconductors, possess high performances in photocatalytic reactions.14–16
Porous organic polymers (POPs), a class of novel porous materials over the past decade, have attracted widespread interest in the fields of sorption/separation, medicine loading and delivery, energy storage, photovoltaics, (photo)catalysis and so on.17 On the basis of diversified preparative chemistry and structural peculiarity, POPs could be divided into different types, e.g., polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIMs),18,19 hyper cross-linked polymers (HCPs),20,21 conjugated microporous polymers (CMPs),22,23 covalent organic frameworks (COFs),24–26 covalent triazine frameworks (CTFs),27,28 and porous aromatic frameworks (PAFs).29,30 Among POPs, COFs and most CTFs are porous polymers with crystallinity and possess ordered structures. The morphologies of POPs are commonly presented as aggregations of particles. Through artful design of the reaction conditions, monomer structure, and synthesis strategy, polymers can be obtained in specific particle shapes, such as nanospheres,31 nanosheets,32 and nanotubes.33 The surface areas of POPs range from hundreds to thousands of square meters per gram and they are comparable with other porous materials, such as porous carbon and MOFs. For instance, PAF-1 synthesized by a Yamamoto coupling reaction possesses a marvelous Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) specific surface area of 5600 m2 g−1.29 The three-dimensional (3D) COF-103 also shows a superhigh BET specific surface area of 4210 m2 g−1.34 The merits of the high specific surface area and structural (morphological and compositional) tailorability of POPs are propitious for chemical transformation reactions in terms of locally separated catalytic sites and exclusiveness for specific reactions. POPs containing active mononuclear metal centers as single-site catalysts for synthetic organic chemistry possess enhanced efficiency as compared with molecular metal catalysts.35 Separation of target products from the reaction mixture and reclaiming of catalysts are generally arduous in homogenous reactions. The high degree of polymerization and rigid chemical bond connection make most POPs insoluble and stable in various solvents, which enables facile separation and recycling. Furthermore, POPs possess a high surface area, regularly arranged building blocks (especially for COFs), and relatively uniform pore size, which make the substances traverse and interact effortlessly within the channels and networks of POPs in the catalysis process. POPs, serving not just as heterogeneous supports for molecular catalysts, are able to obtain high catalytic efficiency of per unit mass or specific surface area. Recently, several reviews have been reported to introduce the photocatalytic applications of POPs, which indicate that POPs are a research focus in photocatalysis.36–38 However, photocatalytic POPs are developed rapidly. We will introduce the field from different scopes and perspectives and include cutting-edge research studies.
In this review, we mainly focus on the recent advancements of POPs in photocatalytic applications, especially on organic synthesis, hydrogen (H2) evolution, carbon dioxide (CO2) reduction, and degradation of organic pollutants. This review begins with the principle and superiority of POPs for photocatalysis. All kinds of POPs possess distinct characteristics in the monomer structure, preparation method, and optical properties. Therefore, the discussion is presented by the category of polymers in each photocatalytic field. We elaborate on the photocatalytic applications of specific examples and correlate the photocatalytic performance of POPs with the structural and electronic properties of compositional components. On the basis of the development status and existing challenges of POPs that we understand, several issues that should be focused on for future materials are extracted.
2 The principle and superiority of POPs for photocatalysis
2.1 The principle of photocatalysis for POPs
The brief but main principle of POPs in photocatalytic process is illustrated in Fig. 1. When intrinsically semiconductive POPs are irradiated with visible-light with energy equal to or exceeding the bandgap, the polymers will be excited to generate photoexcited charge carriers, i.e., photogenerated electrons and holes, in the conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB), respectively. A surface redox reaction occurs thenceforth between POPs and substrates by efficient charge separation/migration and appropriate band potential alignment. Meanwhile, most photogenerated electrons and holes may recombine that decreases the efficiency of photocatalysis. To prevent the recombination and promote the separation of charges, several strategies have been investigated for POPs, such as structural design with electron donor–acceptor systems, asymmetrical structures, polymers with high crystallinity and coplanarity, introduction of noble metals, and hybridization.38 Metalation of polymers with intrinsic binding sites is relatively facile to achieve. For instance, a pyridine-based CTF with anchored rhenium can catalyze the photoreduction of CO2, which exhibited enhanced catalytic activity and separation of electron–hole pairs.39 However, inevitable leaching and photobleaching occur during catalytic processes for precious-metal-loaded POPs. Metal-free POPs possess excellent photostability and maintain high activity in long-term reactions. The absence of metal reduces the cost of the material and avoids the hazard of metal contamination, but the design and optimization of structures and reaction conditions complicate the research task.
 Fig. 1  The main principle of photocatalytic processes for semiconductive POPs. 
2.2 Fundamentals of POPs for photocatalysis
The synthesis and functionalization of POPs with built-in photocatalytic capabilities are feasible through diversiform polymerization protocols and post-modifications. Covalent bond-connected POPs with semiconductive properties are active in photocatalytic reactions. The functionality and properties of POPs, such as the bandgap, light absorption region, and charge transfer efficiency, are mainly determined by the components and connecting modes. The monomers with special optical and electronic properties to construct POPs are multitudinous and various polymerization protocols have been investigated. These features make it feasible to prepare POP-based heterogeneous catalysts via a bottom-up strategy. Post-modification of POPs, on the other hand, avoids degeneration of functional monomers that are vulnerable in the synthesis procedure and poisoning catalytic sites.40,41 The chemical reactions such as click chemistry,42 Schiff-base reactions,43 and complexation with metals41 have been successfully employed to afford catalytic POPs through post-modification.
The photosensitivity or photocatalytic activities of POPs, in some cases, are derived from sensitizers that fabricate or modify POPs, such as metal complexes and organic dyes. Alternatively, the π-conjugated frameworks of POPs are semiconductive and possess befitting bandgaps. Of particular interest is the construction of metal-free π-conjugated POPs with a low optical energy bandgap. The positions of the conduction band and valence band, and their differences (bandgaps) of polymeric semiconductors can be modulated by introducing heteroatoms or varying the electronic properties of substituent groups. In a word, POPs possessing instinctive photocatalytic capability can be prepared via molecular level design.
2.3 The superiority and influence factor of POPs in photocatalysis
The photocatalytic ability of POPs is influenced by multifarious factors. The donor–acceptor (D–A) system in POPs constructed from electron-donating and electron-accepting monomers can promote the separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. The surface area and morphology impact the transfer rate of substrates. Different chemical compositions and substituents can tune the energy band structure of polymers to influence the redox ability. The chemical structure and geometry also play an important role in photocatalytic reactions.
Taking CMPs as examples, CMPs are a class of porous polymers with π-conjugated structures that endow them with semiconductive characteristics, and the band position and bandgap can be tuned to match the photocatalytic reaction by polymerization of delicately selected monomers. Generally, the units used to construct CMPs are aromatic molecules. Introducing heteroatoms, such as nitrogen (N), oxygen (O), and sulfur (S), can change the electronic properties of the monomer to compose a D–A system and induce variation of the semiconducting properties of CMPs, for instance, the positions of the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO), bandgap width, and light absorption region. The CMPs with donor–acceptor units constructed from suitable monomers with special electronic properties will endow the polymers with extraordinary photocatalytic performance.44–46 For CMPs with the same kinds of building blocks, the optical gaps and photocatalytic ability can also be tuned at will through changing the proportions of monomers.47,48 The characteristics of building blocks, such as the geometry and linker length, also play an important role in the optical properties of CMPs.49,50 As for the structure and geometry of polymers, high porosity guarantees highly efficient mass transfer and a high exposure degree of catalytic sites that promote the interaction between substrates and active sites. One-dimensional (1D)/linear51 and two-dimensional (2D)/planar structures52 possess higher charge transfer than 3D polymers.
The crystallinity of materials can prevent the recombination of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and decrease charge trapping at defect sites. COFs, as crystalline POPs with ordered structures, are primarily constructed relying on dynamic covalent chemistry in conjunction with non-covalent interaction. The defect restoration achieved from reversible chemical bonds facilitates the formation of extended lattices, which are built with vertices and edges guided by a topology diagram based on reticular chemistry.53 The growth patterns (2D or 3D) of lattices depend on the geometrical structures of selected monomers, which decide the spatial dimensions of COFs. The lattices of 3D COFs are maintained only by covalent bonds.34 In contrast, the molecular layers linked by intralayer covalent bonds stack via interlayer π–π interaction to crystallize in layered 2D COFs. Generally, it is more difficult to form ordered structures for stronger bonds in a highly dynamic condensation reaction. However, crystalline polymers linked by ultra-strong bonds can be achieved under certain conditions that provide a reversible and self-optimizing mechanism. For example, aromatic CN linked CTFs can be amorphous54 or crystalline27 based on the construction strategy. Crystalline CTFs are typically constructed via a dynamic cyclotrimerization reaction of aromatic nitriles. The triazine cores can readily form D–A structures coupling with benzene moieties. The π-conjugated structure endows CTFs with a semiconductive ability and broad absorption in the visible-light region. So it is facile to optimize the optical and photocatalytic activity by transforming aromatic units of nitriles and copolymerization of different monomers. COFs are characterized by a uniform pore size, regular channel, and ordered structure with a topological array following reticular chemistry.53 Substrate enrichment, spatial selectivity, and other favorable factors created by COF skeletons make them potential supports in catalysis. Meanwhile, the semiconductivity and photoconductivity of COFs make it possible to apply COFs to photochemistry.55,56 2D COFs possess high charge mobility and separation efficiency that ensure fantastic performance in photocatalysis.57,58 So the photochemical study of COFs increases rapidly and becomes an emerging research hotspot.
2.4 The stability of POPs
The most attractive advantage of POPs as catalysts is heterogeneity, which endows POPs with great advantages in separation and cyclic utilization after the reaction. High stability is essential for POPs to maintain the porous skeleton and catalytic activity for multiple reuse. The covalent bond as a linkage for POPs is a kind of stable chemical bond that enables the POPs to withstand the catalytic environment. The chemical reactions commonly used to synthesize POPs are enumerated in Fig. 2. CMPs with a microporous network and π-conjugated system possess high chemical stability, which are commonly synthesized by C–C coupling reactions including the Sonogashira–Hagihara reaction (Fig. 2a), Suzuki reaction (Fig. 2b), Yamamoto reaction (Fig. 2c), and oxidative coupling reaction (Fig. 2d).36,59 The CTFs that are characterized by the absence of any weak bonds can be constructed through various methods, such as ionothermal cyclotrimerization of nitriles (Fig. 2e), phosphorus pentoxide catalyzed polymerization (Fig. 2f), polycondensation between amidines and aldehydes (Fig. 2g), super-acid catalyzed reactions (Fig. 2e), Friedel–Crafts alkylation (Fig. 2h) and so on,28 while some COFs constructed by reversible bonds, such as borate esters (Fig. 2i) formed with boronic acid and catechol that were first reported by Yaghi and co-workers,24 will suffer from hydrolytic decomposition under harsh conditions. Accordingly, designing COFs with more robust linkages is significant for practical application and the research is ongoing. Functional groups in COFs have a great influence on their stability. Yaghi and co-workers reported a 3D COF (COF-202) with a borosilicate cage, which was constructed from tert-butyl silanetriol and boric acid monomers. COF-202 is more stable than other borate ester linked COFs because of the presence of the borosilicate cage.60 The imine connected COFs (Fig. 2j) that are prepared by Schiff-base reactions between amines and aldehydes are much more stable than COFs with borate ester linkages, but they still suffer from instability when exposed to a strong acid.61 To strengthen the imine bond, one strategy is to introduce protective groups such as the methoxy group (Fig. 2k)62 and hydroxyl group (Fig. 2l)63 into the frameworks that intensify the interlayer interaction and form intermolecular hydrogen bonds, respectively. Another method is to transform imine moieties into other stable structures, keto–enamine (Fig. 2m),64 amide (Fig. 2n),65 benzoxazole (Fig. 2o),66 thiazole (Fig. 2p and q),67,68 and quinoline (Fig. 2r)69 linked COFs that possess much more superior tolerance under severe conditions (strong bases, strong acids, etc.). The facile and efficient way is fabricating highly steady COFs directly. Azine (Fig. 2s),70 aza-linkage (Fig. 2t),71,72 dioxin (Fig. 2u),73 and olefin (Fig. 2v and w)74–76 connected COFs demonstrate enhanced stability; moreover, olefin-linked COFs possess full π-conjugated frameworks and enhanced semiconductive ability. With high chemical stability, COFs can be researched and applied extensively in various fields and become more advantageous because of their ordered framework and regular pores.
 Fig. 2  Illustrated chemical reactions to construct POPs and schematic diagrams of conversion of imine bonds in COFs. 
POPs also possess excellent thermal stability and photostability. Conjugated polymers (CMPs and CTFs) are thermally stable owing to their robust linked chemical bonds.77 CMP-1 constructed from 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene and 1,4-diiodobenzene doesn't show obvious mass decline until the temperature exceeds 400 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere.22 The CTF prepared from 5-(4-cyanophenyl)thiophene-2-carbonitrile exhibits high thermal stability up to about 500 °C under oxygen.78 The decomposition temperatures of COFs are normally lower than 350 °C. Benzoxazole-linked COFs are thermally stable up to 400 °C and possess extraordinary photostability. The crystalline frameworks maintain integrity after continuous exposure to visible-light (white light-emitting diode, LED) for at least 3 days.66 The ultrastability of POPs guarantees their reutilization in photocatalytic reactions without toxicity or secondary pollution, especially for sewage treatment. Furthermore, the thermal stability endows POPs with great potential to catalyze high-temperature reactions, such as ethylene oxidation79 and partial oxidation of methane.80
3 POPs for photocatalytic organic synthesis
The fact of rapid depletion of fossil fuels has brought photoredox catalysis to the forefront of synthetic chemists. Photoredox reactions driven by visible-light overcome the drawbacks that are commonly met in traditional industrial manufacture, e.g., environmental unfriendliness and prohibitive cost, since the power consumed stems solely from solar energy that is green and inexhaustible. In this section, we present the recent studies of POPs as heterogeneous catalysts in the promotion of photocatalytic oxidation, reduction, and redox reactions.
3.1 CMPs as photocatalysts
Photochemical oxidation is a green process enabling oxidation of substrates, in which singlet oxygen (1O2) and/or superoxide radical (O2˙−) play crucial roles. The oxidative species are generated via an electron-transfer or energy-transfer process between POPs and oxygen molecules. Zhang et al. designed and synthesized a series of porous phenyl-co-benzothiadiazole copolymers, obtained via a Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling reaction, as photosensitizers for the production of 1O2 under irradiation of blue light (420 nm).81 The polymers contain benzothiadiazole units (Fig. 3a) as electron-acceptors and benzene as a weak electron-donor. The surface areas of CMPs were controlled by different concentrations of the silica nanoparticle template (SiO2NP). CMP_60 with the largest BET specific surface area (660 m2 g−1) delivers the highest 1O2 production rate and the best performance in oxidizing α-terpinene to ascaridole (Fig. 4a), which highlights the importance of porosity in determining catalytic efficiency. In a follow-up study, Urakami et al. promoted the hydrophilicity of phenyl-co-benzothiadiazole copolymers via thiol–yne modification with 3-mercaptopropionic acid (MPA, Fig. 5).42 The modified WCMP_X polymers (where X stands for the equivalence of MPA to the theoretical amount of alkyne on the polymer) show fine aqueous dispersibility that the unmodified CMP doesn't possess. The BET specific surface areas of WCMP_0.1 and WCMP_0.4 (280 and 244 m2 g−1) decrease as compared to their parent CMP (285 m2 g−1), while the absorption maxima of the UV-vis spectrum (320 and 440 nm) have no obvious change before and after modification. In the oxidative transformation of furoic acid to 5-hydroxy-2(5H)-furanone in an aqueous environment (Fig. 4b), the WCMPs as photocatalysts exhibit higher conversion (∼90%) than unmodified ones (∼50%) under the same conditions.
 Fig. 3  Selected monomers employed in the synthesis of CMPs for photocatalysis. 
 Fig. 4  Illustration of photocatalytic organic synthesis using POPs as catalysts. 
 Fig. 5  Modification of alkyne-containing CMPs via a thiol–yne reaction. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The bandgaps of CMPs with donor–acceptor patterns can be finely tuned via prudent selection of electron-withdrawing and electron-donating moieties and adjusting the proportions of the two components.82–84 As an example, a series of poly(benzochalcogenadiazole) networks (B-BT, B-BO, and B-BS) were synthesized by altering the chalcogen in the electron-acceptor section (benzothiadiazole, benzoxadiazole, and benzoselenadiazole, Fig. 3a–c).44 B-BT possesses distinctive values of the valence band (+1.69 V vs. SCE) and conduction band (−1.08 V vs. SCE), the electron–hole pair with the longest lifetime, and the best photocatalytic ability in benzylamine oxidation reactions (Fig. 4c). As illustrated in Fig. 6, benzylamine is oxidized by photogenerated holes to form cationic radical intermediates under visible-light irradiation. Hydroperoxy phenylmethanamine is then afforded by a reaction between the intermediate and active oxygen species (O2˙− and 1O2), which is transformed into benzylimine after the elimination of a H2O2 molecule. Through an addition reaction with another benzylamine and elimination of ammonia sequentially, the final imine product is obtained from benzylimine. In an additional pathway, ˙OH generated from H2O2 may also react with the cationic radical of benzylamine to form benzylimine.
 Fig. 6  The proposed mechanism of the photocatalytic oxidative coupling reaction of benzylamine. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
The disparate properties of POPs are tailorable by incorporation of specifically chosen building units and functional groups. Wang et al. reported the synthesis of conjugated networks containing benzobisthiadiazole (BBT, Fig. 3d) and fluorene units.85 The BBT-containing polymer (B2-FL2-BBT) is proven to possess a much smaller optical bandgap owing to the strong electron-withdrawing effect of BBT units. B2-FL2-BBT exhibits excellent recyclability in visible-light-driven reductive dehalogenation of haloketones (Fig. 4d). The azulene-based conjugated microporous networks (Fig. 3e) obtained through protonation of hydrophobic polymer networks were investigated for sewage treatment. After protonation, the hydrophobic CMPs become hydrophilic, the ranges of UV-vis absorption spectra broaden to the infrared region (λ > 1000 nm), and the polymers exhibit a rougher morphology. The water-compatible networks possess an appropriate band structure to catalyze the reduction of CrVI to CrIII with high cycling stability under visible-light irradiation.86 A tandem synthesis strategy is applied to the construction of microporous organic networks with photocatalytic activity. A benzodifuran-containing polymer (BDF-MON) was synthesized from 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene and 2,5-diiodo-1,4-hydroquinone through a Sonogashira coupling reaction and concomitant intramolecular cyclization reaction (Fig. 7).87 BDF-MON catalyzes the oxidation of primary amines to imines (Fig. 4c) upon blue LED irradiation (λ < 460 nm) at room temperature under an oxygen atmosphere with excellent tolerance to various substrates and high conversion values. Wang et al. utilized Knoevenagel condensation between an aldehyde (Fig. 3f) and nitrile (Fig. 3g) to produce a porous conjugated polymer (PCP).88 The as-prepared polymer is an effective photocatalyst for hydroxylating various arylboronic acids (Fig. 4e) irradiated with a white LED lamp.
 Fig. 7  Tandem strategy for the synthesis of a benzodifuran containing polymer (BDF-MON). Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Carbazole and its derivatives, with extraordinary electron-donating abilities and high hole mobility, have long been investigated as chromophores for light-emitting materials.89 Carbazole-based porous organic polymers (CPOPs) as a class of porous materials with permanent porosity and intrinsic photoluminescence characteristics are promising candidates for heterogeneous photocatalysis.90 The conjugated polymer (CPOP-1) constructed from 1,3,5-tri(9-carbazolyl)-benzene (TCB, Fig. 8a) through FeCl3-promoted oxidative coupling polymerization possesses a high BET specific surface area (SBET = ∼2220 m2 g−1) and shows an excellent adsorption ability for H2 (2.80 wt%, 1.0 bar and 77 K) and CO2 (21.2 wt%, 1.0 bar and 273 K).90 This polymer can be applied to the oxidation of primary amines to imines (Fig. 4c) with high conversion (>99%), and transforming sulfides into sulfoxides (Fig. 4f) with high selectivity (≥93%).91 Luo et al. reported a porous organic framework (Cz-POF-1) constructed from 3,3′,5,5′-tetra(9H-carbazol-9yl)-1,1′-bipheny (Fig. 8b) that possesses a high BET specific surface area (SBET = 2065 m2 g−1). As indicated by cyclic voltammetry, the half wave potential (E1/2) of the Cz-POF-1+/Cz-POF-1 couple is +1.38 V vs. SCE, which suggests that the oxidative capability of Cz-POF-1+ is comparable to that of [Ru(bpy)3]3+.92 Cz-POF-1, as a multifunctional metal-free photocatalyst, not only catalyzes net reduction (dehalogenation of phenacyl bromide, Fig. 4d) or net oxidation reactions (hydroxylation of arylboronic acid, Fig. 4e), but also performs well in redox reactions, for instance, the α-alkylation of aldehydes (Fig. 4g). Luo et al. systematically investigated the influence of strong electron-withdrawing triazine cores and the distance between D–A moieties on photocatalytic activities. The introduction of triazine cores into polycarbazole networks (Fig. 8c) helps to stabilize photogenerated charges and boost the generation of 1O2.93 The intensity of charge transfer transition and photosensitization efficiency become weaker as D–A distances become longer. All of the polymers possess fantastic photocatalytic ability in aerobic oxidation reactions including sulfide oxidation (Fig. 4f), oxidative amine coupling (Fig. 4c), and Mannich reactions (Fig. 4h) with extensive substrate tolerance and high yield. Different carbazole derivatives with a mutative core (such as benzene, 4,7-diphenyl-2,1,3-benzothiadiazole, and anthraquinone, Fig. 8d–f) show adjustable D–A properties, which have a significant effect on the photocatalytic ability of polymers (DA-CMPs).94 Zhi et al. investigated the correlation between the donor–acceptor dyads of DA-CMPs and their related photoelectric properties, and photocatalytic performance in aerobiotic cross-dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) reactions (Fig. 4h). DA-CMP3 with an anthraquinone core possesses the narrowest bandgap (1.994 eV) and the best photocatalytic ability owing to enhanced charge separation and fast generation of active oxygen species. Furthermore, carbazole-based CMPs bearing various cores (1,4-dibenzyl, 1,3,5-tribenzyl, and 1,3,5-triazin-2,4,6-triyl) were also investigated to catalyze the C-3 thiocyanation (Fig. 4i) and formylation (Fig. 4j) of indole at room temperature using a 14 W LED lamp, in which CPOP-1 (or named CMP-CSU6) derived from TCB exhibits the best performance owing to the higher HOMO level.95 Ou et al. designed a cyano-substituted carbazolic conjugated polymer (CC-CMP) based on a homogeneous photocatalyst 1,2,3,5-tetrakis(carbazol-9-yl)-4,6-dicyanobenzene (4CzIPN, Fig. 8g). The CC-CMP catalyzes the 1,2-formylarylation of N-arylacrylamide for the production of bioactive alkaloids (Fig. 4k) under irradiation of a blue LED.96 A hyper cross-linked carbazole-based polymer (CF-HCP) was constructed from carbazole-fluorenone (Fig. 8h) with formaldehyde dimethyl acetal (FDA) as an external crosslinking agent. The CF-HCP possesses excellent capability in various photocatalytic chemical conversions under visible-light, such as selective oxidation of sulfides (Fig. 4f), oxidative coupling of primary amines (Fig. 4c), and dehydrogenation of secondary amines (Fig. 4l).97 Moreover, Bandyopadhyay et al. reported a soluble CPOP (CzBDP) manufactured from alkylated bicarbazole (Fig. 8i) and BODIPY monomers.98 The CzBDP is able to coat the internal surface of a reactor as a thin film to catalyze the oxidative chemical transformation of benzylamine to imine (Fig. 4c) under visible-light.
 Fig. 8  The structure of some illustrative carbazole-based monomers used to synthesize CPOPs. 
Most scientific reports on photocatalytic applications are carried out using an artificial light source of specific wavelength that only accounts for a small fraction of the full solar light spectrum. Battula et al. reported a non-heteroatomic CMP (Tx-CMP) with a truxene structure (Fig. 3h). The Tx-CMP achieves >99% conversion of benzylamine (Fig. 4c) and 90% selectivity for the oxidative product in 4 h under natural sunlight.99
3.2 Metalated and organic dye sensitized POPs
Metal coordination complexes, especially ruthenium(II) (Ru) and iridium(III) (Ir) complexes, are a class of universal catalysts employed in multitudinous reactions. Ru complexes possess numerous advantages in photocatalytic procedures, including stable and long-lived photo-excited states, mild reaction conditions (room temperature), simple irradiation sources (commercial household light bulbs), and low loading.9 POPs, featuring a high specific surface area and designability, are promising polymeric supports for the immobilization of catalytic metal complexes. POPs with metal chelating sites (e.g., N, O, S, and P) can be constructed from organic ligands with polymerizable functionalities. Xie et al. used phosphorescent monomers [(bpy)2Ru(debpy)]2+ and [(ppy)2Ir(debpy)]+ (bpy = 2,2′-bipyridine, debpy = 5,5′-diethynyl-2,2′-bipyridine, and ppy = 2-phenylpyridine) to synthesize cross-linked porous polymers (Ru-PCP and Ir-PCP) via alkyne cyclotrimerization reactions with tetra(4-ethynylphenyl)methane.100 The polymers show excellent photocatalytic performance in aza-Henry reactions (Fig. 4m) with comparable conversions to homogeneous analogues for various substrates. The Ru-PCP also efficiently catalyzes other reactions, such as R-arylation of bromomalonate (Fig. 4n) and oxyamination of an aldehyde (Fig. 4o). The recovered Ru-PCP and Ir-PCP after recycling four times show no deterioration of activity in aza-Henry reactions, and the Ir/Ru complex doesn't leach into the solution. Lin and co-workers further fabricated bipyridine-based cross-linking polymers from tetra(ethynyl) derivatives of Ru(bpy)32+, which possess an exceptionally high loading of [Ru(bpy)3]2+ at around 90 wt%.101 The polymers exhibit excellent catalytic activities in various chemical transformations including aza-Henry reactions (Fig. 4m), oxidative coupling reactions of benzylamine (Fig. 4c), and dehalogenation of benzyl bromoacetate (Fig. 4p), which are ascribed to the high loading of chromophore units.
Carbazolic building units containing intrinsic binding sites for coordination have been recently reported. Han and co-workers designed and synthesized a series of CPOPs containing fac-Ir(ppy)3 (ppy = phenylpyridine) moieties (Fig. 8j).102 The as-prepared CPOPs (CPOP-20 and CPOP-21) possess phosphorescence properties and were used as effective, stable, and reusable heterogeneous photocatalysts in aza-Henry reactions (Fig. 4m). In addition to the above work, cationic polycarbazole networks (CPOP-28 and CPOP-29) were prepared from [Ir(PPC)2(bpy)]Cl and [Ir(TfPPC)2(bpy)]Cl (Tf = trifluoromethyl, Fig. 8k) via oxidative coupling polymerization, respectively. CPOP-28 and CPOP-29 were utilized as heterogeneous catalysts for numerous oxidative chemical transformations, such as oxidation of sulfides (Fig. 4f), hydroxylation of arylboronic acids (Fig. 4e), and CDC reactions (Fig. 4h) under visible-light and aerobic conditions.103
Metallophthalocyanines (MPcs) possess excellent thermal/chemical stability and special optical properties, such as intense absorption in the red or near-infrared (IR) region and high fluorescence quantum yield.104 The catalytic properties of MPcs can be tuned by altering the metal center and structure modification.105 Immobilizing MPcs onto POPs can obtain recyclable heterogeneous catalysts with enhanced ability. The MPc-based conjugated microporous polymers (MPc-CMPs, Fig. 9) reported by Ding et al. show broadened absorption in the long-wavelength region, in contrast to their homologous analogues. MPc-CMPs were used to generate 1O2 with higher efficiency under long-wavelength illumination (700 nm).106 He et al. reported an iron(II) phthalocyanine unit-based POP (CZJ-30) by a condensation reaction. The catalytic sites are isolated and thus self-aggregation induced by intermolecular π–π self-aggregation is prohibited. CZJ-30 demonstrates high activity in photooxidation of aryl alkanes (Fig. 4q), with 95% conversion for ethylbenzene and >99% selectivity to the product of acetophenone.107 The conversion of ethylbenzene is still up to 92% in the eighth cycling reaction. The structure and morphology of CZJ-30 are retained well and the phthalocyanine unit doesn't leach from the polymer during the photocatalytic process.
 Fig. 9  Chemical structure of MPc-based conjugated microporous polymers. 
Organic dyes have been widely investigated and applied in the areas such as dye-sensitized solar cells108 and homogeneous photocatalysis.10 The incorporation of an organic dye into the networks of POPs eliminates the use of noble metals. Rose Bengal (Fig. 10a) is a low toxicity and cost-effective molecular catalyst that has been investigated in α-oxyamination reactions.10 Jiang et al. reported the preparation of photoactive CMPs obtained from Rose Bengal and an aromatic alkyne (1,4-diethylbenzene, RB-CMP1 or 1,3,5-triethylbenzene, RB-CMP2) via Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling reactions. The BET specific surface areas of RB-CMP1 and RB-CMP2 are as high as 833 and 801 m2 g−1, respectively. RB-CMP1 was demonstrated to be highly active for aza-Henry reactions (Fig. 4m) for a variety of substrates at room temperature.109 Furthermore, the CMPs are stable and recyclable. The conversion of the substrate is higher than 90% after ten reaction cycles. Other organic dye derivatives, such as BODIPY (Fig. 10b) and Eosin Y (Fig. 10c), have also been successfully incorporated for the synthesis of photoactive POPs. The combination of a strong electron-acceptor BODIPY unit and weak electron-donor benzene boosts the conversion of α-terpinene to ascaridole (Fig. 4a).110 Moreover, dipyrrin is a well-known coordination ligand, but there exist some difficulties for manipulation in the laboratory. BODIPY (4,4-difluoro-4-bora-3a,4a-diaza-s-indacene) dyes contain BF2 moieties that play the role of protection groups of dipyrrin. The dipyrrin in BODIPY-based CMPs was de-protected for the incorporation of [Ru(bpy)2]2+ (Fig. 11) to catalyze aza-Henry reactions (Fig. 4m).111 The CMP constructed from Eosin Y and 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene was proven to be an efficient photocatalyst in aza-Henry reactions (Fig. 4m) for numerous substrates.112
 Fig. 10  Illustrative organic dye molecules used for the functionalization of photoactive POPs. 
 Fig. 11  The diagram of conjugated microporous polymer preparation via post-modification. 
3.3 CTFs and COFs as photocatalysts
CTFs are usually synthesized through an ionothermal trimerization reaction of aromatic nitriles at high temperature using ZnCl2 as the catalyst, and partial carbonization of the frameworks inevitably occurs and then results in the uncertain positions of the CB and VB; furthermore, the residual ZnCl2 hampers the correlation between the structure and catalytic performances. To make the polymerization conditions mild, Huang et al. developed a solid-phase synthetic method assisted with the acid vapor of trifluoromethanesulfonic acid (TfOH) and a silica template to prepare nanoporous amorphous CTFs at lower temperature (100 °C).54 The photoactive 4,4′-(benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl)-dibenzonitrile was used to synthesize CTF-BT under these mild conditions (Fig. 12). The obtained CTF-BT catalyzes the reduction of 4-nitrophenol to 4-aminophenol (Fig. 4r) effectively upon visible-light irradiation. Thiophene-functionalized CTF-Th was prepared from 2,5-dicyanothiophene in the presence of a mesoporous SBA-15 template. The O2˙− and 1O2 generated by CTF-Th selectively oxidize alcohols to aldehydes or ketones (Fig. 4s) with blue light irradiation (λ = 460 nm).113
 Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of solid vapor synthesis and the structure of nanoporous hollow covalent triazine frameworks. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Bohra et al. adopted an arylation polymerization approach to obtain triazine-containing CMPs from 2,4,6-(tri-2-thienyl)-1,3,5-triazine and brominated arenes without the necessity of high temperature and a strong acid catalyst (Fig. 13). The geometries and electronic structures of the resulting polymeric structures were painstakingly investigated.114 The polymer containing a high loading of triazine units (P4-1 and P4-1.5) shows >99% catalytic conversion of benzylamine to imine (Fig. 4c).
 Fig. 13  Illustration of monomer molecules and the stoichiometric ratio used in arylation polymerization. 
For single-component organic photocatalysts, the recombination of photogenerated excitons is a limitation to efficiency.115 Multiple-component photocatalysts possess enhanced catalytic ability owing to the multiform transfer of charge and energy, but the design and preparation are complex. Zhang and co-workers designed an asymmetric CTF (asy-CTF) constructed by cyclotrimerization of 5-(4-cyanophenyl)thiophene-2-carbonitrile. The asy-CTF contains four kinds of donor–acceptor moieties (Fig. 14), which promote multiple successive charge/energy transfer processes.78 The fluorescence lifetime of asy-CTF (1.27 ns) is shorter than that of symmetric CTFs, CTF-Th (1.66 ns) and CTF-Th-Ph (1.57 ns), which illuminates that asy-CTF exists more nonradiative exciton recombination. In the practical photooxidation reaction (Fig. 4t), the yield of 1,2,3-triphenylphosphindole 1-oxide catalyzed by asy-CTF is 93% after 24 h that outclasses CTF-Th (22%) and CTF-Th-Ph (63%).
 Fig. 14  (a) Representative structure of asymmetric asy-CTF which contains four different D–A systems. (b) The symmetric counterparts of asy-CTF, CTF-Th, and CTF-Th-Ph. (c) HOMO and LUMO levels of the four kinds of D–A systems in asy-CTF calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
COFs are also prominent candidates for photocatalysts. The changeable molecule structure and chemical composition make it facile to tune the properties of COFs at the molecular or atomic level. Regular frameworks benefit the absorption of visible-light and separation of photogenerated electrons and holes. Zhi et al. synthesized COF-JLU5 by a condensation reaction between 1,3,5-tris-(4-aminophenyl)triazine and 2,5-dimethoxyterephthaldehyde, in which the methoxy groups can improve the stability of the frameworks and the donor–acceptor system in the layer can tune the optical properties to promote the photocatalytic performance.116 COF-JLU5 exhibits excellent thermal (stable up to 450 °C under a nitrogen atmosphere), chemical and photochemical (the crystallinity is still retained under visible-light irradiation) stability. Consequently, COF-JLU5 was found to be an efficient catalyst for CDC reactions for various substrates and nucleophiles (Fig. 4h). The CDC reactions catalyzed by COF-JLU5 exhibit a high reaction yield (99% for the reaction between N-phenyl-1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinoline and nitromethane) as compared with a TPB-DMTP COF without triazine units (44%). Liu et al. synthesized a hydrazone-linked COF (TFB-COF) from 2,5-dimethoxyterephthalohydrazide and 1,3,5-triformylbenzene, which is an effective photocatalyst for the CDC reaction of N-aryltetrahydroisoquinolines.117 COF-JLU22 built from 1,3,6,8-tetrakis(4-aminophenyl)pyrene and 4,4′-(benzothiadiazole-4,7-diyl)-dibenzaldehyde shows broad absorption ranging from the visible-light to the near infrared region with the maximum at 510 nm, which effectively catalyzes the α-alkylation of aldehydes (Fig. 4g) and dehalogenation of phenacyl bromide compounds (Fig. 4d).118 In addition, benzothiadiazole-functionalized COFs catalyze the reduction of Cr(IV) effectively under the irradiation of a xenon lamp with a 400 nm cut-off filter in the absence of sacrificial agents.119 These studies highlight the vital role of the donor–acceptor structure in the promotion of photocatalysis. Recently, Chen and co-workers designed a two-in-one strategy to construct COFs from one monomer with two kinds of functional groups (formyl and amino).120 The BBO-COF synthesized from 4,4′-(2,6-bis(4-aminophenyl)benzo[1,2-d:4,5-d′]bis-(oxazole)-4,8-diyl)dibenzaldehyde (BBO) via this method is an excellent photocatalyst for the hydroxylation reaction of arylboronic acids (Fig. 4e).121 The benzoxazole-linked LZU-190 catalyzes the aerobic reaction of 4-carboxyphenylboronic acid to 4-hydroxybenzoic acid (Fig. 4e) with a high yield of 99% when using iPr2NEt as a sacrificial agent (86% without iPr2NEt).66 The physical properties and photocatalytic activity show on obvious changes even after 20 cycles, which indicates the extraordinary photochemical stability of LZU-190 and superiority of COFs with robust linkages.
To improve the stability and optical ability of COFs, olefin-based sp2 carbon-linked COFs (sp2c-COF) with a full π-conjugated structure and enhanced stability in a harsh environment were designed and prepared through Knoevenagel condensation74,76 and Aldol condensation.75,122,123 Chen et al. constructed a sp2 carbon-conjugated COF (Por-sp2c-COF) from 5,10,15,20-tetrakis(4-benzaldehyde)-porphyrin and 1,4-phenylenediacetonitrile. The Por-sp2c-COF is extremely stable even under rigorous conditions, e.g., 9 M NaOH and 9 M HCl solutions. In UV-vis spectroscopy, the Soret band of Por-sp2c-COF exhibits a red-shift of 32 nm as compared to the imine-based Por-COF, which demonstrates that the CC linkage is more effective in transmitting π conjugation than CN bonds. As a metal-free photocatalyst, Por-sp2c-COF shows outstanding ability in aerobic oxidation of amines to imines actuated by visible-light (Fig. 4l).124 The enhanced photocatalytic conversions of Por-sp2c-COF (99%) as compared to Por-COF (44%) illustrate the merits of 2D sp2 carbon-linked COFs (i.e., full conjugated frameworks for rapid electron migration and superb stability). Zhao et al. reported a triazine-containing sp2c-COF (TP-COF) with a 2.36 eV bandgap and −3.23 eV LUMO energy that regenerates coenzyme effectively and remarkably promotes the coenzyme-assisted synthesis of L-glutamate with 97% yield in 12 minutes.125
3.4 Hybrid porous solids for organic synthesis
The hybridization of catalytic POPs and other materials can combine the advantages of original components. It is a facile and effective strategy to improve the capability of POPs and make them versatile. Combining with commercial materials will make POPs more applicable in practical use. A palladium (Pd) doped core–shell MOFs@COF composite (Pd/TiATA@LZU1) was reported by Kim and co-workers.126 Pd/TiATA@LZU1 displays prominent performance in photocatalytic tandem dehydrogenation (NH3BH3) and hydrogenation (styrene) reactions (Fig. 4u) in a continuous-flow microreactor. Huang et al. designed a type of CMPs–glass fiber hybrid by immobilizing polybenzothiadiazole on a glass fiber directly with approximate 3.2 wt% effective content of the catalyst.127 The CMP-coated glass fiber is an effective heterogeneous photocatalyst for dehalogenation of α-bromoacetophenones (Fig. 4d) and α-alkylation of aldehydes (Fig. 4g) in a fixed-bed reactor.
4 Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution
Hydrogen gas production from photocatalytic water splitting using solar energy is an extremely significant method to obtain clean energy. Nowadays, the most prominent approaches for industrial production of hydrogen gas are water electrolysis, coal gasification, and thermal reforming of fossil fuels, which inevitably necessitate a huge demand for electricity or heat input.128 In the process of photocatalytic water splitting, electrons are excited to the conduction band and holes are left behind in the valence band upon irradiation of photons with energies larger than or equal to the bandgap of semiconducting materials. Then, photogenerated excitons are separated and migrate to the surface active sites of the catalysts for the corresponding half reactions (eqn (1) and (2)). To actuate the reaction, the minimum of the CB needs to be more negative than the redox potential of H+/H2 (0 V, versus a normal hydrogen electrode (vs. NHE)), and the maximum of the VB should be more positive than the redox potential of O2/H2O (1.23 V, vs. NHE).129 Therefore, the theoretical bandgap of the catalyst should be larger than 1.23 eV. Multitudinous POPs with appropriate bandgaps have been designed and investigated in photocatalytic water splitting.130,131 2H+ + 2e− → H2(1) 2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+(2)
4.1 CMPs as photocatalysts
CMPs are thermally and chemically stable porous organic materials with a high surface area, whose bandgaps are tunable to meet the requirement in the water splitting reaction (1.23 eV, theoretically) by molecular or morphological engineering. The length of linkers, degree of planarization, and composition of building units are pivotal to structural design for high-performance catalysts.47,49 Xiang et al. investigated the effect of fluorination on the photocatalytic hydrogen production activity of D–A conjugated polymers in terms of lowering barrier activation energy of hydrogen generation.132 Yang et al. introduced a benzothiadiazole moiety (BT) into π-conjugated polymers and obtained a series of donor–acceptor type polymers with 1D or 3D structures.51 Platinum (Pt) was loaded on the surface of polymers through in situ photodeposition of H2PtCl6 and promoted the photocatalytic hydrogen generation. The 1D polymer B-BT-1,4 (50 mg, 3 wt% Pt as a co-catalyst) exhibits enhanced hydrogen production efficiency (116 μmol h−1) as compared with those with 3D networks under irradiation of a Xe lamp (λ > 420 nm), which is attributed to the superior charge mobility and separation in the 1D polymer. Planarization and rigidification of conjugated polymers are proved nontrivial for enhanced photocatalytic activity, as suggested by Cooper and co-workers.52 In their study, a conjugated polymer (P7) with dibenzothiophene sulfone planarized units has an optimal hydrogen evolution rate in comparison with those with carbazole and fluorene units. Wang et al. utilized dibenzothiophene dioxide (FSO) as an electron-withdrawing unit and arene as an electron-donating unit to construct DBTD-CMP1 with a D–π–A pattern. Without addition of an external Pt co-catalyst, DBTD-CMP1 possesses a high hydrogen evolution rate of 2460 μmol h−1 g−1 as actuated by visible-light. After Pt-loading, the hydrogen evolution rate is elevated to 9200 μmol h−1 g−1 when illuminated by UV-vis light.133 The photostability of DBTD-CMP1 with 3 wt% Pt was evaluated in a long-term reaction under visible-light with evacuation every 6 h. Although the photocatalytic activity decreases obviously in the first 36 h, a stable hydrogen evolution rate (1830 μmol h−1 g−1) is retained after 54 h. The structure of the recovered sample doesn't exhibit any significant change. Lan et al. optimized the exciton binding energy (Eb) via adjusting the transfer pathway of electrons by constructing conjugated polymers from an FSO-based monomer and different units.134 The FSO–FS (50 mg) containing FSO and dibenzothiophene (FS) moieties possesses the minimum Eb (88 meV) among four obtained polymers and exhibits the highest hydrogen evolution rate (170 μmol h−1). The heteroatoms in polymers such as N and S may act as active sites for catalytic reactions.48 The FSO with strong electron attraction can gather electrons and interact with protons just like an electron export tentacle.135 The impact of FSO was investigated by appending FSO units sequentially in CP-CMP10 (Fig. 15a) that is prepared from 1,3,6,8-tetrabromopyrene and 1,4-benzendiboronic acid. P–FSO (50 mg) with fully appended FSO units (Fig. 15e) shows the best hydrogen generation capacity (400 μmol h−1, with ∼1 wt% residual palladium in the polymer). Furthermore, it is found that the linking position of FSO units does affect the photocatalytic activities. The PyDOBT-1 constructed from 3,7-substituted FSO units (Fig. 15e) shows a much higher hydrogen evolution rate (5697 μmol h−1 g−1 without a co-catalyst) than PyDOBT-2 (2113 μmol h−1 g−1) with a 2,8-linked pattern (Fig. 15f), which is due to the accelerated charge transfer caused by the increased planarity of backbones and conjugated chain length of PyDOBT-1.136
 Fig. 15  Illustrative fragment structures of conjugated microporous polymers. 
Zhang et al. reported a library of N-containing CMPs (N-CMP) by diversifying the numbers and substituted patterns of electron donors (carbazole or diphenylamine) and acceptors (cyano group) on the benzene core (Fig. 16).137 The adjustable D–A systems achieve the modulation of charge separation efficiency and bandgaps (1.64–2.29 eV) at the molecular level. 4-CzPN with o-substituted dicyano units possesses a suitable band structure (HOMO, 1.30 V and LUMO, −0.81 V, vs. NHE) and shows the highest hydrogen evolution rate of 2103.2 μmol h−1 g−1 with Pt as the co-catalyst. Mothika et al. utilized 9-fluorenone (F) and tetraphenylethylene (TPE) as an electron acceptor and donor to synthesize CMPs (FCMP).138 F0.5CMP with 0.5 equiv. of 9-fluorenone possesses a 2.3 eV bandgap and the hydrogen evolution rate is 659.55 and 1759.92 μmol h−1 g−1 under >420 nm and >290 nm light sources, respectively. Bojdys and co-workers combined sulfur-containing units and triazine to obtain a library of S,N-included polymers (SNPs) to optimize bandgaps.139,140 SNP-BTT1 constructed from benzotrithiophene and tribromophenyl triazine exhibits the highest hydrogen evolution rate of 3158 μmol h−1 g−1 in the presence of a co-catalyst (Pt) among the synthesized SNPs.
 Fig. 16  The monomer structures with different positions (black), numbers (blue), and types (red) of substituted groups in CN-modified N-CMPs. 
Except synthesizing CMPs with heteroatom-containing monomers, post-modification is a facile way to incorporate functional groups/heteroatoms as side chains on the backbones. Click chemistry, such as thiol–yne reactions, is a versatile method to modify alkyne-containing CMPs. Amino functionalized BBT-SC2NH2 (30 mg) shows a 27.2 times higher hydrogen evolution rate (272 μmol h−1) than the parent CMP.141 As a kind of functional group without heteroatoms, alkynyl groups can increase the charge delocalization of CMPs to boost the photocatalytic activity.142 When an ethynyl group is introduced into the above mentioned polymers (B-BT-1,4 and P7), the LUMO positions of the corresponding polymers B-BT-1,4-E and P7-E have negative shifts and the intensities of photocurrent are enhanced.143 P7-E (30 mg) shows an intensive hydrogen evolution rate of 180.7 μmol h−1 without Pt as compared with P7. Considering the infinite types of building units with disparate structural and electronic features, the optimization of photocatalytic performance in an experimental manner is an arduous task. However, theoretical calculation and robot-assisted manipulation can minimize research work and cost; Cooper and co-workers reported computational design of 6354 co-polymers and synthesized more than 170 kinds of selected co-polymers through high-throughput calculation and robotic operation to investigate the relationship between the structure and properties.144 New polymers with a hydrogen evolution rate higher than 6 mmol g−1 h−1 were discovered and the four variables of the polymers (electron affinity, ionization potential, optical gap, and dispersibility) in the machine-learning model can explain 68% of the difference in hydrogen generation ability.
4.2 COFs as photocatalysts
COFs with inherent semiconductivity, photoconductivity, high carrier mobility, and charge separation can be obtained by designing the structures and components, which thus promote the lucubration of COFs as photocatalysts in hydrogen evolution.55,56,58 Stegbauer et al. used an azine-linked COF with a triazine core for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in the presence of Pt under visible-light.145 The observed hydrogen evolution rate is 1970 μmol h−1 g−1 in the first 5 h. It is reported that the thermodynamic driving force for photocatalytic hydrogen production is correlated with the number of nitrogen atoms within the network.146 The performance of azine-linked Nx-COFs (Fig. 17) built with triangular aldehyde monomers is enhanced with increased nitrogen atom numbers (Nx, x = 0, 1, 2, 3).147 The average amount of hydrogen produced by N0, N1, N2, and N3–COF during 8 h is 23, 90, 438, and 1703 μmol h−1 g−1 in the presence of Pt and triethanolamine (TEOA), respectively. The isolated COFs after photocatalysis are checked for stability, the chemical structure does not show any significant change, and the crystallinity is maintained to a great extent. Banerjee et al. reported the combination of azine-linked N2–COF photosensitizers and a chloro(pyridine)cobaloxime co-catalyst for photocatalytic hydrogen production (782 μmol h−1 g−1).148 Cooper and co-workers constructed keto–enamine linked COFs (FS–COF) with a monomer containing benzobis(benzothiophene sulfone) units. In the photocatalytic hydrogen generation test, aqueous H2PtCl6 solution was used as the precursor to load co-catalyst Pt nanoparticles (3.0 ± 0.4 nm) on COFs. The hydrogen evolution rate of FS–COF with Pt is up to 10.1 mmol h−1 g−1 that is much higher than its amorphous counterpart and isostructural framework.149 The hydrogen generation ability of FS–COF can be further enhanced to 16.3 mmol h−1 g−1 through sensitization of dye (WS5F). The high performance is attributed to high crystallinity, strong light absorption ability, and abundant mesopores. In addition, the alkynyl group influences the catalytic capacity of COFs intensely. Pachfule et al. reported (di)acetylene-functionalized COFs (TP-BDDA COF) for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution in the absence of heteronuclear molecular functionalities.150 Under visible-light irradiation (λ ≥ 395 nm) and with assistance of co-catalyst Pt, the hydrogen evolution rate of TP-BDDA COF (324 ± 10 μmol h−1 g−1) significantly outperforms that of TP-EDDA (30 ± 5 μmol h−1 g−1) and TP-DTP COFs (20 ± 5 μmol h−1 g−1), highlighting the profound advantages for charge separation and transport brought about by the diacetylene linkage. The expensive Pt as a co-catalyst in the hydrogen evolution reaction appears to be the bottleneck for economical water splitting systems. Biswal et al. reported a thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole-linked COF (TpDTz) as a photoabsorber, which possesses high porosity, crystallinity, photostability, and light absorption ability.151 Earth-abundant co-catalyst Ni-thiolate clusters can be formed in situ in water. The TpDTz exhibites a sustained high hydrogen evolution rate (941 μmol h−1 g−1) and extraordinary photostability (TONNi > 103, 70 h) with TEOA as the sacrificial electron donor.
 Fig. 17  (a) The tunable triphenylarene structure; the planarity of the platform can be varied by changing the angle between central aryl and peripheral phenyl through replacement of C–H with nitrogen atoms at green dots. (b) Synthesis of Nx-COFs with hydrazine and Nx-aldehyde. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Springer Nature. 
The sp2c-COF shows enhanced semiconductive properties and stability resulting from its fully π-conjugated backbone. The g-C40N3-COF synthesized from 3,5-dicyano-2,4,6-trimethylpyridine and 4,4′′-diformyl-p-terphenyl with trans-disubstituted CC bonds possesses semiconducting properties as a graphene analogue, which can actuate two half-reactions of water splitting separately under visible-light.152 The hydrogen evolution rate of bare g-C40N3-COF (50 mg) reaches 2.9 μmol h−1 and it is promoted to 206 μmol h−1 under optimized conditions. Yu et al. prepared a series of sp2-carbon linked conjugated POPs that bear various functional groups as side chains including methoxyl (TFPT-OCH3) and methyl (TFPT-CH3) to engineer the physical properties.153 TFPT-OCH3 (50 mg) with 3 wt% Pt possesses a superior hydrogen evolution rate (22.1 μmol h−1) to TFPT-CH3 or TFPT-PDAN that does not contain any substituents. Wei et al. reported two kinds of semiconductive olefin-linked COFs with a triazine core.154 The photocurrent of g-C18N3-COF constructed from 2,4,6-trimethyl-1,3,5-triazine (TMTA) and 1,4-diformylbenzene is up to 45 μA cm−2 at 0.2 V vs. RHE. Under visible-light irradiation and with assistance of a Pt co-catalyst, g-C18N3-COF (50 mg) possesses a higher hydrogen evolution rate (14.6 μmol h−1) than g-C33N3-COF that is prepared from TMTA and 1,3,5-tris(4-formylphenyl)benzene. The enhanced photocatalytic activity of g-C18N3-COF is attributed to the intrinsic structural characteristics and higher crystallinity that promote the separation and transfer of charge carriers.
4.3 CTFs as photocatalysts
The nitrogen atom in the triazine unit is hypothesized to strongly associate with a high hydrogen evolution ability, because the nitrogen with a free electron pair may act as an active site for interface photoredox reactions.155 When synthesized under mild conditions to avoid defects, CTFs with applicable optical properties for photocatalytic hydrogen generation are facile to obtain by polymerization of disparate monomers. CTF-T1 synthesized from terephthalonitrile via a cyclotrimerization reaction catalyzed by TfOH at room temperature shows a layered morphology like graphene. The capacity of CTF-T1 to catalyze the water splitting reaction to generate hydrogen is comparable to that of graphitic carbon nitrides (g-C3N4) under the same conditions.156 Introducing heteroatoms into the backbones of CTFs can improve the hydrogen evolution ability of CTFs. After CTF-T1 was treated by annealing with sulfur, the obtained CTFS10 has a great promotion effect on hydrogen generation capacity (2000 μmol h−1 g−1) with Pt as a co-catalyst and TEOA as an electron donor.157 The improvement in photocatalytic performance is attributed to the doping effect of sulfur that enhances the visible-light absorption extending to ∼750 nm, mitigates the recombination of charge carriers, and promotes the charge transport. The phosphorus-doped PCTF-1 demonstrates 1.5 times higher hydrogen generation efficiency than parental CTF-1.158 Guo et al. incorporated N-, O-, or S-doped fluorene as an electron-donor into CTFs to optimize the energy level and facilitate charge transfer capability.159 CTF-N (50 mg) with a carbazole unit (N-doped fluorene) that is a strong donor shows the best hydrogen production ability (538 μmol h−1 with Pt as the co-catalyst). Huang et al. reported a CTF with a molecular heterostructure (CTF-BT/Th, Fig. 18) by sequential introduction of thiophene (Th)-containing and benzothiadiazole (BT)-containing triazine oligomers. The molar proportion of BT (acceptor) to Th (donor) is controlled to optimize the optical and electronic properties to promote charge carrier separation.160 The intensity of steady-state photoluminescence (PL) spectra of CTF-BT/Th-1 (BT/Th = 1) is quenched considerably as compared with homopolymers, CTF-BT and CTF-Th. The fluorescence lifetimes of CTF-BT, CTF-BT/Th-1, and CTF-Th are 1.73, 1.85, and 0.79 ns, respectively. The decreased PL and increased fluorescence lifetime of CTF-BT/Th-1 demonstrate that the radioactive recombination of electron–hole pairs within the hybridized polymer is effectively retarded. Consequently, CTF-BT/Th-1 has a superior hydrogen production performance of 6.6 mmol h−1 g−1 to CTF-BT (1.8 mmol h−1 g−1) and CTF-Th (1.1 mmol h−1 g−1). The photochemical stability of CTF-BT/Th-1 was evaluated by a prolonged experiment (5 h per cycle). Only a slight decline of activity is observed after four cycles, which can be partially recovered by the addition of more TEOA consumed during the long-term reaction. The reclaimed CTF-BT/Th-1 reveals no discernible compositional or morphological changes.
 Fig. 18  Sequential polymerization to construct a CTF with a molecule heterostructure (CTF-BT/Th). Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Wiley-VCH. 
Structural defects in CTF-T1 (CTP-1), for instance, the terminal groups, influence the bandgap structure and hamper the photocatalytic performance. Structure rearrangement during thermal treatment is an effective way to eliminate this perplexity in CTFs (Fig. 19). CTP300 after thermal treatment at 300 °C maintains the intrinsic structures (triazine and benzene) and exhibits higher thermal stability as compared to CTP-1. The structure rearrangements, such as decarboxylation, deamination, and formation of new conjugated heterocycles, decompose the structural defect. The additional light absorption in the long-wavelength range and two bandgaps (3.02 and 2.36 eV) caused by rearrangement endow CTP300 with excellent visible-light absorption ability, efficient charge separation and transfer behavior. In the presence of a co-catalyst (Pt) and TEOA, the hydrogen evolution rate (25 μmol h−1) of CTP300 (50 mg) is three times higher than that of CTP-1 (6 μmol h−1) under visible-light (λ ≥ 420 nm). Furthermore, the activity and chemical structure of CTP300 exhibit good tolerance towards photocatalysis, and CTP300 still possesses photocatalytic activity when the wavelength of light extends to 500 nm.161 Another strategy to avert the structural defects caused by carbonization during the high temperature procedure is to prepare phenyl-triazine oligomers (PTOs) under lower temperature (300 °C) and longer time (>150 h).162 As compared with CTF-1, the PTOs possess better crystallinity and the weight ratio of carbon to nitrogen is closer to the theoretical value. The highest hydrogen generation rate of PTOs with Pt modification is 1076 (±278) μmol h−1 g−1 irradiated by simulative sunlight. Kuecken et al. performed the synthesis of a CTF via a two-step preparative method. First, the pre-CTF is prepared in CHCl3 and TfOH under ambient temperature, and then the amorphous pre-CTF is converted to ordered CTFs through heat treatment with salt melt.163 The duration of heat treatment has a significant influence on photocatalytic performance, CTF-1_10 min possesses an average hydrogen evolution rate of 1072 μmol h−1 g−1 over 20 h and outperforms pre-CTF (186 μmol h−1 g−1) and CTFs with other thermal treatment times (2.5, 5, 15, 20, and 30 min).164
 Fig. 19  The possible structural defect in CTP-1 and supposed structure reorganization in CTPT suffering from thermal annealing. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Apart from the cyclotrimerization of cyano-containing monomers, CTFs also can be prepared via a Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction. CTFs with different lengths of phenyl linkers were successfully synthesized through two approaches (Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction and TfOH catalytic polymerization).165 The hydrogen evolution rates of CTFs with the same connecting pattern from different preparation approaches are similar; however, the number of phenylene units distinguishes CTF-2 (biphenyl) from other CTFs, which shows the highest hydrogen generation ability. The structural order of CTFs is significant to their optical and electronic properties. For triazine-based graphdiyne TzGCu and TzGPd/Cu catalyzed by Cu and Pd/Cu, the combined catalytic system with a highly efficient coupling reaction prefers kinetic and disordered products. The crystalline TzGCu possesses a higher BET specific surface area (660 m2 g−1) than amorphous TzGPd/Cu (392 m2 g−1). The direct optical bandgaps of TzGCu and TzGPd/Cu are 2.04 and 1.97 eV, respectively. As an unloaded material, TzGCu shows a higher hydrogen evolution rate of 276 μmol h−1 g−1 than TzGPd/Cu (101 μmol h−1 g−1).166 TzGPd/Cu without interlayer packing can't efficiently transfer electrons from the frameworks to the reactive sites. With the assistance of Pt, the hydrogen generation ability of TzGPd/Cu is promoted to 972 μmol h−1 g−1. Qu et al. reported a kind of mesoporous amorphous polymer with a triazine structure, which was prepared from melamine and terephthalaldehyde via a catalyst-free Schiff-base reaction.167 The polymers' BET specific surface areas (217–569 m2 g−1) change with the variation of reaction conditions, such as the reaction time, concentration, and molar ratio of monomers. Under UV-vis light irradiation (λ = 380–780 nm), MT-6a (100 mg) with a moderate BET specific surface area (392 m2 g−1), the largest microporous volume and the smallest average pore size exhibits the highest hydrogen evolution rate of 18.56 μmol h−1. An enhanced hydrogen generation ability (43.58 μmol h−1) is achieved after Pd-loading.
4.4 Hybrid porous solids for hydrogen evolution
Proverbially, inorganic semiconductors, especially at the nanoscale, are a class of common photocatalysts researched in hydrogen evolution. However, there exist some bottlenecks that restrict the efficiency of inorganic semiconductors, such as harsh preparation conditions and carrier recombination.168,169 The hybridization between an inorganic catalyst and POPs with matched bandgaps not only enhances the dispersibility of the catalyst, but also makes it theoretically realizable for photogenerated charge carriers to transfer between different materials to promote the photocatalytic ability.170–172 The composite material of a triptycene-based polymer and Cd0.5Zn0.5S shows an ultrahigh hydrogen evolution rate of 50670 μmol h−1 g−1 with Na2S/Na2SO3 as the sacrificial agent, which is 11 times higher than that of Cd0.5Zn0.5S.173 Cheng et al. capsulated an anionic [Mo3S13]2– cluster into cationic COFs, and the obtained Mo3S13@EB-COF possesses a hydrogen evolution rate of 13215 μmol h−1 g−1 for 18 h.174 Zhang and co-workers combined COFs with non-precious metals to construct photocatalytic composites. MoS2/TpPa-1-COF was prepared by in situ growth of TpPa-1-COF from triformylphloroglucinol and 1,4-phenylenediamine in a MoS2 dispersion solution.175 In the composite, MoS2 is an effective co-catalyst that promotes the migration of photogenerated electrons and improves the separation of photogenerated charges. Under visible-light, MoS2/TpPa-1-COF with 3 wt% MoS2 loading exhibits an optimal hydrogen evolution rate of 55.85 μmol h−1 (10 mg photocatalyst), which is 32 times as high as that of TpPa-1-COF (1.72 μmol h−1) and a little better than the hydrogen generation ability of Pt/TpPa-1-COF (54.79 μmol h−1) with the same metal loading (3 wt%). A Z-scheme hybrid material that consists of α-Fe2O3 and TpPa-2-COF was synthesized from triformylphloroglucinol and 2,5-dimethyl-1,4-phenylenediamine in the presence of α-Fe2O3.176 The Z-scheme structure achieves the transference of electrons from the CB of α-Fe2O3 to the VB of COFs, which facilitates the efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs and significantly enhances the photocatalytic performance. The hydrogen evolution rate (3.77 mmol h−1 g−1) of α-Fe2O3/TpPa-2-COF (weight ratio, 3:7) is comparable to that of Pt-loaded TpPa-2-COF (2 wt%) and it is about 53 times higher than that of metal-free TpPa-2-COF under the same conditions. The photostability of the two hybrid materials is evaluated by cyclic experiments. The structure and morphology of isolated catalysts show great stability that is confirmed by XRD, FT-IR, and SEM measurements. A visible-light harvesting microporous organic network (VH-MON) linked by an olefin spacer was prepared by a Knoevenagel condensation reaction between tri-(4-formylphenyl)amine and [1,1′-biphenyl]-4,4′-diacetonitrile.177 A composite (8 mg) of VH-MON and TiO2–Pt is applied to hydrogen production from water under visible-light with 50 μmol output in the first 5 h. In the subsequent four successive experiments, the hydrogen production in 5 h is 47, 52, 46, and 45 μmol, which indicate that the composite possesses high photocatalytic stability. The combination of different porous materials can promote the photocatalytic performance, such as g-C3N4,178 MOFs,179 and COFs. The π-conjugated structure of COFs can improve the efficiency of charge transfer. A COF modified g-C3N4 composite (CN–COF) was synthesized via the co-condensation of g-C3N4, 4,4′,4′′-(1,3,5-triazine-2,4,6-triyl)-trianiline, and 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol.180 The highest hydrogen evolution rate is up to 10.1 mmol h−1 g−1 when using 2 wt% Pt as a co-catalyst and TEOA as a sacrificial agent. Zhang et al. grew NH2-UiO-66 onto TpPa-1-COF via covalent linkage, and NH2-UiO-66/TpPa-1-COF (4:6) shows a hydrogen evolution rate of 23.41 mmol g−1 h−1, which is 20 times higher than that of TpPa-1-COF because of efficient charge separation at the interface of the heterojunction.181 Zhou et al. used a post-synthesis strategy to construct a carbon nitrile/CTF hybrid material (CNF) by assembling carbon nitride (CN) and benzoic acid functionalized CTF-1 (B-CTF-1) via amide bonds.182 The CNF with Pt loading exhibits a 0.85 mmol h−1 g−1 hydrogen production rate, which is higher than that of CN, CTF-1, and B-CTF-1.
5 Photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction
Carbon dioxide is a kind of common greenhouse gas that exacerbates climate change. Visible-light-driven CO2 reduction to useful chemicals, such as CO, CH4, CH3OH, and HCOOH, has received great attention, which is a novel method to control the concentration of CO2 in the atmosphere and convert solar energy.183 However, the photoreduction of CO2 faces much challenge because CO2 is a stable molecule with high cleavage energy of CO bonds (∼750 kJ mol−1), and the water reduction to hydrogen occurs at −0.42 V (vs. NHE) that is a competitive reaction in the photoreduction of CO2. The POPs for CO2 reduction driven by visible-light should possess a high CO2 adsorption ability, appropriate bandgap, and photoabsorption and photosensitivity in the visible-light region. The formal redox potentials  of CO2 reduction in aqueous solution (pH = 7) and corresponding products are listed in Table 1.184
Table 1 Formal redox potentials (vs. NHE) for the reduction of CO2 in aqueous media (pH = 7)




Entry
Reaction and related compounds


vs. NHE (V)




1
CO2 + e− → CO2˙−
−1.85


2
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH
−0.61


3
CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O
−0.53


4
CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O
−0.48


5
CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O
−0.38


6
CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O
−0.24


7
2H+ + 2e− → H2
−0.42




5.1 Metalated porous polymers for CO2 reduction
Multifarious photocatalysts for CO2 reduction have been investigated, such as transition-metal complexes, metal oxides/sulfides, and metal–organic frameworks. POPs with high porosity achieve the beneficiation of CO2 and promote the reaction efficiency. A rhenium–organic complex [(bpy)Re(CO)3Cl] has been developed for many years as a homogeneous catalyst for photoreduction and electroreduction of CO2 to CO.185,186 A Re(I)-coordinated porous polymer was prepared from 1,3,5-tri(4-ethynylphenyl)benzene and 5,5′-dibromo-2,2′-bipyridine building units and post-synthesis coordination by Liang et al.187 The as-prepared 1-Re bearing the [(bpy)Re(CO)3Cl] moiety produces 5.0 mol of CO (TON = 5) and 8.9 mol of H2 (TON = 8.8) over 20 h per molar Re(I) and is slower but more stable than the homogeneous catalyst [(bpy)Re(CO)3Cl]. Yang et al. anchored Re(I) into a triazine-containing COF bearing bipyridyl binding units for CO2 photoreduction with TEOA as a sacrificial donor.188 The amount of CO produced smoothly for >20 h is up to ∼15 mmol g−1, which is 22 times higher than that of its homologous analogue. Xu et al. reported the synthesis of a nitrogen-rich CTF from 2,6-dicyanopyridine.39 In a solid–gas system driven by full light, the CO photoreduction rate of the obtained Re-CTF-py is 353.05 μmol g−1 h−1 for 10 h with a TON of 4.8. Han and co-workers designed porous polycarbazole polymers encompassing bipyridine (CPOP-30) or phenanthroline (CPOP-31) units that can immobilize Re(I) complexes.41 The Re-metalated CPOP-30-Re and CPOP-31-Re with 7.6–9.4 wt% CO2 adsorption capacity catalyze the conversion of CO2 to CO using TEOA as a sacrificial agent. The CO evolution rate of CPOP-30-Re reaches 623 μmol g−1 h−1 with high recyclability (the activity is maintained at around 83% after four cycles) and selectivity (97.8%).
Single Ni catalytic sites were chelated on a bipyridine-based COF (TpBpy) by Zhong et al. recently.189 The novel metalated Ni-TpBpy exhibits slightly enhanced CO2 capture ability as compared to TpBpy owing to the Lewis acid–base interaction between Ni ions and CO2 molecules. The Ni-TpBpy is efficient in photoreduction of CO2 to CO (96% over H2) in aqueous solution with TEOA as an electron donor and [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 as a photosensitizer (Fig. 20). In the photoreduction process of CO2 to CO under visible-light irradiation, electrons transfer from the photosensitizer to Ni sites for CO2 photoreduction. The evolution rate of CO reaches 4057 μmol g−1 in 5 h. Lu et al. designed an anthraquinone-based COF (DQTP COF) with stronger affinity to earth-abundant metals than DATP COFs constructed from 2,6-diaminoanthracene.190 The DQTP COF–Co shows high capability in CO evolution with a rate of 1020 μmol h−1 g−1, while DQTP COF–Zn is effective in generating formic acid (152.5 μmol h−1 g−1) selectively (90% over CO). A class of COF nanosheets (NSs) were reported by Liu et al. through the imine-exchange method.32 In the polymerization procedure, the added 2,4,6-trimethylbenzaldehyde (TBA) occupies the edge of NSs that expands the distance between adjacent NSs and leads to the anisotropic growth of COFs along the planar directions. The COF-367-Co NSs constructed from TBA, 5,10,15,20-tetra(p-aminophenyl)porphyrin(Co), and 4,4′-biphenyldialdehyde show excellent CO generation ability (10162 μmol g−1 h−1) in photocatalytic reduction of CO2 with [Ru(bpy)3]Cl2 as a photosensitizer. The 2D morphology of COF-367-Co NSs make abundant active sites accessible to the substrates, which promote the efficiency of photoreduction.
 Fig. 20  The schematic diagram of selective CO2 reduction with Ni-TpBpy under visible-light. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from American Chemical Society. 
Most photocatalysts request the assistance of specific sacrificial reagents for electron donation. Avoiding the use of sacrificial agents in catalysis is a hot topic of CO2 photoreduction. Wang et al. prepared an ultrathin HCP-TiO2-graphene composite via an in situ knitting strategy (Fig. 21).191 The HCP-TiO2-FG possesses a high BET specific surface area (988 m2 g−1), high CO2 adsorption ability (12.87 wt%), and outstanding performance in the photoreduction of CO2 to CH4 (27.62 μmol g−1 h−1) without the need for sacrificial reagents and noble metal co-catalyst.
 Fig. 21  The schematic diagram of constructing a well-defined porous HCP-TiO2-FG composite. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Springer Nature. 
5.2 Metal-free POPs as photocatalysts for CO2 reduction
The metal-free feature of catalysts is an extremely attractive and advantageous highlight. The cost of catalysts is reduced without the participation of noble metals. The metal-free catalysts based on POPs mainly consist of ultra-light elements (B, C, N, O, etc.), and the lower density is favorable for a higher evolution rate of the product. POPs are constructed through covalent bonding, and the multitudinous building blocks and strategies for functionalization make it facile to optimize the photocatalytic properties. Chen et al. combined pyrene-based CMPs and a ionic liquid [P4444][p-2-O] into a catalytic system that efficiently adsorbs H2O by hydrogen bonding and captures CO2 under ambient conditions. Under visible-light irradiation, the photocatalytic system with CP5 constructed from 1,3,6,8-tetrabromopyrene and 2,8-dibromodibenzothiophene reduces the atmospheric CO2 to CO with the highest rate (47.37 μmol g−1 h−1) and selectivity (98.3%) among the pyrene-based CMPs.192 Lei et al. designed and constructed a D–A COF (CT-COF) with 1,3,5-tris-(4-aminophenyl)triazine and 9-ethylcarbazole-2,7-dicarboxaldehyde.193 The CB minimum (−0.88 V, vs. NHE) of CT-COF is negative enough to reduce CO2 (CO2/CO, −0.53 V, vs. NHE). The VB maximum (1.16 V, vs. NHE) is more positive than the redox potential of H2O oxidization to O2 (0.82 V vs. NHE). Theoretically, a metal-free CT-COF can catalyze the reduction of CO2 with H2O. In the photocatalytic system with gaseous H2O, CO as the main carbonaceous product is generated at a high rate (102.7 μmol g−1 h−1) and selectivity (98%).
Yu et al. fabricated Eosin Y-functionalized conjugated organic polymers (PEosinY-N, N = 1–3) by a Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling reaction which possess good porosity (SBET = 445, 131, and 610 m2 g−1), CO2 uptake ability (39, 24, and 62 mg g−1 at 273 K and 1 bar), absorption in the visible-light region (250–750 nm), and high efficiency for separating and transferring photogenerated charge. The CB and VB positions of each PEosinY-N straddle the potentials of CO2 reduction to CO and H2O oxidation to O2. Consequently, the photocatalytic CO2 reduction is conducted with gaseous H2O rather than sacrifice reagents.194 The catalytic performance of PEosinY-1 prepared with Eosin Y and 1,4-diethynylbenzene is the best, and it produces CO as the sole carbonaceous output with a high rate (33 μmol g−1 h−1) and high selectivity (92%). Methane (CH4) is an important fuel. A N,O,P-containing covalent organic polymer (NOP–COP) constructed from hexachlorocyclo-triphosphazene and barbituric acid was reported to investigate the photoreduction ability of CO2 to CH4.195 The CO2 uptakes (273 K and 1 bar) of NOP–COP and a phosphor-free polymer, NO–COP, are 7.21 and 5.06 wt%, respectively. The conduction band and valence band position of NOP–COP is −0.81 V and 1.33 V vs. Ag/AgCl (pH = 7), respectively. As compared with the reduction potential of CO2 to CH4 (−0.46 V vs. Ag/AgCl), the CB of NOP–COP is more negative and suitable for the reduction of CO2 to CH4. In the photocatalytic process, CH4 is the sole carbonaceous product and the evolution rate is up to 22.5 μmol g−1 h−1, which is enhanced in comparison with that of NO–COP. Fu et al. applied azine-linked COFs for the reduction of CO2 to methanol upon irradiation of a Xe lamp (800 nm ≥ λ ≥ 420 nm) in the absence of a sacrificial agent.196 The N3–COF built from hydrazine hydrate and 2,4,6-tris(4-formylphenyl)-1,3,5-triazine shows a CH3OH production rate of 13.7 μmol g−1 in 24 h.
6 Photodecomposition of organic pollutants
Organic pollutants in water derived from industrial processes, agricultural medication, and domestic sewage immensely and continuously deteriorate the environment. For environmental protection and public health, wastewater treatment is a necessary and huge task, and efficient strategies are urgently desired. The light-driven method is energy efficient and promising for pollutant decomposition in which singlet oxygen (1O2), superoxide (O2˙−), photogenerated hole (h+), and OH˙ play crucial roles. In the procedure of photodegrading contaminants, only a catalytic amount of reagent is employed making the remediation process more environmentally friendly. In addition, the separation and reutilization of POP-based catalysts are effortless to achieve and secondary pollution is avoided.
6.1 Metal-free POPs as photocatalysts for the degradation of organic pollutants
The polymers containing benzothiadiazole units are extensively investigated in photocatalysis as described in previous sections. Benzothiadiazole-based polyamide polymers (PA-ABT, Fig. 22a–c) are stable in a wide range of pH (5–12) under long time irradiation. As a metal-free catalyst, PA-ABT degrades bisphenol A (BPA) and cimetidine efficiently by photosensitized 1O2 in a flow reactor with a LED lamp (420 nm).197 Ma et al. reported a series of CMPs with different bandgaps and morphologies (nanosphere, nanorod, and nanoring) by changing the combinations of the donor and acceptor.46 B-BT3-b derived from 1,3,5-triethynylbenzene (Fig. 22d) and 4,7-dibromobenzo[c]-1,2,5-thiadiazole (Fig. 22e) shows the optimal performance in degrading Rhodamine B (RhB) in water under irradiation of a household lamp. Furthermore, the POPs with semiconducting properties prepared via a Sonogashira–Hagihara coupling reaction between 1,4-diethynylbenzene (Fig. 22f) and 1,3,5-bromobenzene (POP-1, Fig. 22g) or 1,2-bis(3,5-dibromophenyl)diazene (POP-2, Fig. 22h) can photo-decompose various kinds of organic pollutants including RhB, thiazine (methylene blue, MB), and azo based dyes (Congo red, CR and methyl orange, MO), and a mixture of MB and MO.198 POP-1 generates both 1O2 and O2˙− that endow POP-1 with superior activity to POP-2. Under natural sunlight, POP-1 also catalyzes the degradation of RhB, MB, CR, and MO efficiently. The semiconducting and optical properties can be tuned by different constituents. The imine-based COF constructed from monomers with a triazine core (Fig. 22i and j) possesses an enhanced photodegradation rate (0.09 min−1) of MO as compared with an ordinary imine COF (Fig. 22i and k, 0.04 min−1).199 Pan et al. introduced heptazine units (melem, Fig. 22l) into the frameworks of COFs to construct a porous carbon nitride (PCN).200 The as-prepared PCN-2 from copolymerization of three monomers (Fig. 22j, l and m) shows advanced higher ability (0.17 min−1) to photodegrade RhB as compared with triazine-COF (Fig. 22j and m, 0.095 min−1). Wang et al. designed photocatalytic CMPs with a 9,9′-bifluorenylidene (BF) core (Fig. 22n). The Py-BF-CMP constructed from 1,3,6,8-tetrabromopyrene (Fig. 22o) possesses a maximal adsorption ability of 1905 mg g−1 for RhB and exhibits outstanding cycling performance in photodegrading RhB.201 The thiazolo[5,4-d] thiazole (TzTz) linked CMPs possess adjustable photo-properties with altering building blocks and comparable waste disintegration capacity to traditional g-C3N4.50 TZCP-3 constructed from tetra(4-formylphenyl)-benzene (Fig. 22p) and dithiooxamide (Fig. 22q) demonstrates a high first order kinetic constant (0.116 min−1) and TZCP-3 (0.05 mg mL−1) can degrade RhB solution (10 mg L−1) completely within 30 min. The ball milling strategy reported by Lv et al. to construct a COF at ambient temperature shortens the reaction time.202 TpMA prepared from 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Fig. 22m) and melamine (Fig. 22r) possesses excellent ability for photodegradation of phenol and retains a high degradation rate (87.6%) after four cycles. Liu et al. constructed a covalent organic polymer with 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (Fig. 22m) and amine (Fig. 22s).203 The undoped polymer photocatalyzed the degradation of RhB under a LED without decrease in catalytic activity in three continuous cycles. Under natural sunlight, approximately 93.3% of RhB in the test is degraded by the polymers (20 mg) with H2O2 after 3 h.
 Fig. 22  Illustrated monomer structures of POPs applied to photodegradation. 
6.2 Organic dye-sensitized and metalated POPs
Organic dyes and metal complexes are common catalyst compounds for optical applications. Incorporation with functional monomers is a facile strategy to make POPs photocatalytic. Park et al. introduced various cationic dye molecules through ionic interaction into hollow microporous organic polymers (S-HMOP) that possess sulfonic acid groups.204 The Zn-porphyrin incorporated S-HMOP exhibits both remarkable photocatalytic performance and stability in the decomposition process of 4-chlorophenol under visible-light. Furthermore, the Fe-porphyrin-based CMP is an effective photocatalyst for the degradation of CR selectively.205 Polyoxometalates (POMs) as inorganic metal oxide clusters have intriguing properties and abilities in photocatalysis.206 Li et al. incorporated two Anderson-type POMs into CMPs to degrade RhB and MB in water.207 The photocatalytic activities of both POM-CMPs are enhanced as compared to molecular POMs, while Bn-Anderson-CMP shows higher efficiency than Th-Anderson-CMP in the decomposition of both RhB and MB because of its higher specific surface area. Ma et al. reported a series of CMPs with a ferrocene (Fc) structure and studied the photodecomposition behavior.208 The Fc-TEB-CMP prepared with Fc and tetrakis(4-ethynylphenyl)ethene shows excellent ability to degrade MB and detoxicate warfare agent sulfur mustards (CEES) to nontoxic sulfoxide (CEESO).
6.3 Hybrid porous solids for photo-degradation
Hybrid materials could inherit the structural and functional properties of original ingredients and possess new features. Peng et al. assembled NH2-MIL-68 and TPA-COF to fabricate a core–shell MOF/COF hybrid material (NH2-MIL-68@TPA-COF).209 The rate constant of NH2-MIL-68@TPA-COF (0.077 min−1) for RhB decomposition is about 1.4 times that of NH2-MIL-68. The enhanced performance is on account of the smaller bandgaps (2.21 eV) and improved BET specific surface area (539 m2 g−1) after hybridization as compared to NH2-MIL-68 (2.82 eV, 451 m2 g−1). Another MOF/COF heterojunction also possesses enhanced photocatalytic ability, and the rate of NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TTB-TTA to decompose MO is 9 and 2 times higher than that of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) and TTB-TTA, respectively.210 The proposed photocatalytic mechanism for NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TTB-TTA is illustrated in Fig. 23. When NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TTB-TTA is illuminated by photons with enough energy, the heterojunction is excited to generate electron–hole pairs. The photogenerated charges are demonstrated to migrate via a Z-scheme mechanism (Fig. 23b). The electrons in the CB of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) transfer to the VB of TTB-TTA. The recombination between the electrons in the CB of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) and the holes in the VB of TTB-TTA results in effective charge separation. The electrons in the CB of TTB-TTA are captured by the dissolved O2 to form O2˙−. In addition, the holes in the VB of NH2-MIL-125(Ti) possess strong oxidizability that can generate OH˙. The formed active species, O2˙− and OH˙, efficiently decompose organic pollutants. Moreover, using TpTa-COF as a support, ultrafine Fe-doped TiO2 nanoparticles (2.3 ± 0.9 nm) were prepared to combine with COFs (Fe–TiO2@COF).211 A trace amount of 5Fe–TiO2@COF (0.4 mg) with a 5% molar ratio of Fe to Ti decomposes MB (100 mg L−1, 4 mL) as irradiated by ambient light, which outperforms single Fe–TiO2 particles and TpTa-COF.
 Fig. 23  The charge-transfer mechanisms for the NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TTB-TTA hybrid material: Type-II heterojunction (a) and Z-scheme (b). Reproduced from ref. 210 with permission from Elsevier. 
7 Conclusion and outlook
As heterogeneous photocatalysts, POPs demonstrate excellent performance in various catalytic applications driven by visible-light irradiation. To achieve high photocatalytic capabilities, several strategies have been explored to construct POPs. One facile method is to incorporate active molecules into POPs including metal complexes, organic dyes, or hybridize POPs with other photocatalysts, but a more promising and appealing one is to construct metal-free POPs with outstanding catalytic performance by facile design of monomers and frameworks. The semiconducting properties (e.g., charge separation efficiency, charge transport kinetics, and energy bandgap) are key elements for light absorption ability and photocatalytic performance. Photocatalytic frameworks, such as D–A systems, can be fabricated and tuned at molecular level by optimizing the types and proportion of building blocks that can be designed with adjustable properties. As compared with analogous homogeneous catalysts, POPs possess enhanced efficiency, selectivity, stability and fantastic reusability. However, there also exist some challenges and difficulties that are discussed briefly in the following subsections.
7.1 Preparation technology and post-processing
The synthesis procedure for almost all POPs is complicated to a certain extent. Metal catalysts, strongly acidic catalysts, long reaction times, rigorous reaction conditions (anaerobic or/and anhydrous), and purification processes (e.g., Soxhlet extraction) are all limiting factors to improve research efficiency in the laboratory and produce POPs in industry. The residual catalyst may have a negative effect on photocatalysis. Moreover, the rigid backbone, high degree of polymerization, and aggregation of POPs make it difficult for further processing. So the development of a mild and green preparation method and the improvement of processability are the difficulties and hotspots for POPs research. Kim et al. reported a reversible imine condensation reaction facilitated by acetic acid and simulated sunlight irradiation (200–2500 nm) to prepare a highly crystalline COF at room temperature within a short time (3 h).212 In addition, the water-promoted hydrothermal reaction between hydrazine and aldehyde avoids the utilization of an acid catalyst, shortens the reaction time (8–12 h), and produces COFs on a large scale.213 Porous organic membranes214 and POPs with certain solubility98,215 possess higher processability than POPs in the form of particles, which have been successfully constructed. However, the methodology has not been applied and verified widely, and it may be limited to polymers with a similar connecting pattern and constituents. A more universal technology still needs to be further explored.
7.2 Optimal combination of building monomers
As mentioned above, the optical and electronic properties of POPs are mainly determined by the characteristics of building units. However, there exist many uncertainties to construct a photocatalytic structure and confirm the optimal combination of monomers. Meanwhile, manual operation is onerous in numerous kinds of building blocks. Intelligent simulation, computational analysis, and automated operation can predict the properties of polymers constructed from different monomers and overcome the problem of heavy workload.144 Furthermore, theoretical calculation216 and experimental exploration147 can mutually confirm and deeply interpret the intrinsic relationship between the structure and performance. The further perfection of computational simulation depends on the development of calculated theory and massive experimental data.
7.3 Material cost and energy source
The use of a noble metal in photocatalytic processes increases the cost of catalysts. The combination of POPs and an earth-abundant metal (e.g., Ni) is an effective method to reduce the expense of photocatalysis.151 Metal-free POPs avoid the use of a metal and possess high photostability, but the expense of the design and synthesis of some functionalized monomers for photocatalytic POPs is non-negligible. Consequently, it is imperative to screen for POPs that possess excellent performance and abundant raw materials. As for the light source, it is well known that solar energy is nearly unlimited and free. However, the most commonly used light source in the research is powered by electricity and limited to a specific region, which consumes additional energy and can't make full use of solar energy. Several photocatalytic POPs that perform smoothly under natural sunshine have been reported,99,198 but they still can't meet the various requirements in practical production. Inexpensive POPs that possess high photocatalytic performance under natural sunshine is of great significance to improve the practicability of materials.
Although challenges still exist, POPs are still promising materials for photocatalysis. Constant efforts have been made to surmount the difficulties, and breakthrough results have been obtained such as polymers with good post-processing ability and catalysts that work under natural light. With the development of chemical science and intelligent automation technology, it will be more facile to prepare POPs with superior performance and achieve large-scale practical application finally.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
The financial support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grants 21574032 and 21674026), the Sino-German Center for Research Promotion (Grant GZ1286), and the Chinese Academy of Sciences (Grant 121D11KYSB20170031) is acknowledged.
References
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Understanding TiO2 photocatalysis: mechanisms and materials, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114(19), 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Bruner and J. Kozak, Information on the photocatalysis I the light reaction in uranium salt plus oxalic acid mixtures, Z. Elktrochem. Angew. Phys. Chem., 1911, 17(9), 354–360 CAS .
E. Baur and A. Perret, Über die einwirkung von licht auf gelöste silbersalze in gegenwart von zinkoxyd, Helv. Chim. Acta, 1924, 7, 910–915 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Braslavsky and M. B. Rubi, The history of ozone Part VIII. Photochemical formation of ozone, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2011, 10(10), 1515–1520 RSC .
C. F. Goodeve and J. A. Kitchener, The mechanism of photosensitisation by solids, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1938, 34, 902–908 RSC .
A. Fujishima and K. Honda, Electrochemical photolysis of water at a semiconductor electrode, Nature, 1972, 238(5358), 37–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Photoelectrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide in aqueous suspensions of semiconductor powders, Nature, 1979, 277(5698), 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
F. E. Osterloh, Inorganic nanostructures for photoelectrochemical and photocatalytic water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(6), 2294–2320 RSC .
C. K. Prier, D. A. Rankic and D. W. C. MacMillan, Visible light photoredox catalysis with transition metal complexes: applications in organic synthesis, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113(7), 5322–5363 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, W. Feng, C. W. Kee, Y. Zhao, D. Leow, Y. Pan and C.-H. Tan, Organic dye photocatalyzed α-oxyamination through irradiation with visible light, Green Chem., 2010, 12(6), 953–956 RSC .
B. R. Sankapal, M. Ch. Lux-Steiner and A. Ennaoui, Synthesis and characterization of anatase-TiO2 thin films, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2005, 239(2), 165–170 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yuranova, R. Mosteo, J. Bandara, D. Laub and J. Kiwi, Self-cleaning cotton textiles surfaces modified by photoactive SiO2/TiO2 coating, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 244(1–2), 160–167 CrossRef CAS .
S. Singh, H. Mahalingam and P. K. Singh, Polymer-supported titanium dioxide photocatalysts for environmental remediation: a review, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 462–463, 178–195 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zeng, X. Guo, C. He and C. Duan, Metal–organic frameworks: versatile materials for heterogeneous photocatalysis, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(11), 7935–7947 CrossRef CAS .
J.-L. Wang, C. Wang and W. Lin, Metal–organic frameworks for light harvesting and photocatalysis, ACS Catal., 2012, 2(12), 2630–2640 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wei, K.-X. Wang, X.-X. Guo and J.-S. Chen, Single-site photocatalysts with a porous structure, Proc. R. Soc. A, 2012, 468(2143), 2099–2112 CAS .
S. Das, P. Heasman, T. Ben and S. Qiu, Porous organic materials: strategic design and structure–function correlation, Chem. Rev., 2017, 117(3), 1515–1563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. McKeown, S. Makhseed and P. M. Budd, Phthalocyanine-based nanoporous network polymers, Chem. Commun., 2002,(23), 2780–2781 RSC .
N. B. McKeown, The synthesis of polymers of intrinsic microporosity (PIMs), Sci. China: Chem., 2017, 60(8), 1023–1032 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, R. Gong, W. Wang, X. Huang, W. Zhang, H. Li, C. Hu and B. Tan, A new strategy to microporous polymers: knitting rigid
aromatic building blocks by external cross-linker, Macromolecules, 2011, 44(8), 2410–2414 CrossRef CAS .
L. Tan and B. Tan, Hypercrosslinked porous polymer materials: design, synthesis, and applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46(11), 3322–3356 RSC .
J.-X. Jiang, F. Su, A. Trewin, C. D. Wood, N. L. Campbell, H. Niu, C. Dickinson, A. Y. Ganin, M. J. Rosseinsky, Y. Z. Khimyak and A. I. Cooper, Conjugated microporous poly(aryleneethynylene) networks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46(45), 8574–8578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-J. Yang, X. Ding and B.-H. Han, Conjugated microporous polymers with extended π-structures for organic vapor adsorption, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(3), 947–953 CrossRef CAS .
A. P. Côté, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Porous, crystalline, covalent organic frameworks, Science, 2005, 310(5751), 1166–1170 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li, X. Ding, Y. Feng, W. Feng and B.-H. Han, Structural and dimensional transformations between covalent organic frameworks via linker exchange, Macromolecules, 2019, 52(3), 1257–1265 CrossRef .
C. S. Diercks and O. M. Yaghi, The atom, the molecule, and the covalent organic framework, Science, 2017, 355(6328), 923–931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Kuhn, M. Antonietti and A. Thomas, Porous, covalent triazine-based frameworks prepared by ionothermal synthesis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47(18), 3450–3453 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, L. Guo, S. Jin and B. Tan, Covalent triazine frameworks: synthesis and applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(10), 5153–5172 RSC .
T. Ben, H. Ren, S. Ma, D. Cao, J. Lan, X. Jing, W. Wang, J. Xu, F. Deng, J. M. Simmons, S. Qiu and G. Zhu, Targeted synthesis of a porous aromatic framework with high stability and exceptionally high surface area, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48(50), 9457–9460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yuan and G. Zhu, Porous aromatic frameworks as a platform for multifunctional applications, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5(3), 409–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ma, Q. Zheng, Y. He, G. Li, W. Guo, Z. Lin and L. Zhang, Size-controllable synthesis of uniform spherical covalent organic frameworks at room temperature for highly efficient and selective enrichment of hydrophobic peptides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(45), 18271–18277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Liu, X. Li, C. Wang, H. Pan, W. Liu, K. Wang, Q. Zeng, R. Wang and J. Jiang, A scalable general synthetic approach toward ultrathin imine-linked two-dimensional covalent organic framework nanosheets for photocatalytic CO2 reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(43), 17431–17440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R.-R. Liang, R.-H. A, S.-Q. Xu, Q.-Y. Qi and X. Zhao, Fabricating organic nanotubes through selective disassembly of two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(1), 70–74 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. El-Kaderi, J. R. Hunt, J. L. Mendoza-Cortés, A. P. Côté, R. E. Taylor, M. O'Keeffe and O. M. Yaghi, Designed synthesis of 3D covalent organic frameworks, Science, 2007, 316(5822), 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kramer, N. R. Bennedsen and S. Kegnæs, Porous organic polymers containing active metal centers as catalysts for synthetic organic chemistry, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(8), 6961–6982 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dai and B. Liu, Conjugated polymers
for visible-light-driven photocatalysis, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13(1), 24–52 RSC .
T. Zhang, G. Xing, W. Chen and L. Chen, Porous organic polymers: a promising platform for efficient photocatalysis, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4(2), 332–353 RSC .
J. Byun and K. A. I. Zhang, Designing conjugated porous polymers for visible light-driven photocatalytic chemical transformations, Mater. Horiz., 2020, 7(1), 15–31 RSC .
R. Xu, X.-S. Wang, H. Zhao, H. Lin, Y.-B. Huang and R. Cao, Rhenium-modified porous covalent triazine framework for highly efficient photocatalytic carbon dioxide reduction in a solid–gas system, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2018, 8(8), 2224–2230 RSC .
Q. Li and Z. Li, The utilization of post-synthetic modification in opto-electronic polymers: an effective complementary approach but not a competitive one to the traditional direct polymerization process, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6(38), 6770–6791 RSC .
H.-P. Liang, A. Acharjya, D. A. Anito, S. Vogl, T.-X. Wang, A. Thomas and B.-H. Han, Rhenium-metalated polypyridine-based porous polycarbazoles for visible-light CO2 photoreduction, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(5), 3959–3968 CrossRef CAS .
H. Urakami, K. Zhang and F. Vilela, Modification of conjugated microporous poly-benzothiadiazole for photosensitized singlet oxygen generation in water, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49(23), 2353–2355 RSC .
J. Tian, L. Zhang, X. Fan, Y. Zhou, M. Wang, R. Cheng, M. Li, X. Kan, X. Jin, Z. Liu, Y. Gao and J. Shi, A post-grafting strategy to modify g-C3N4 with aromatic heterocycles for enhanced photocatalytic activity, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(36), 13814–13821 RSC .
Z. J. Wang, K. Garth, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Conjugated microporous poly(benzochalcogenadiazole)s for photocatalytic oxidative coupling of amines under visible light, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8(20), 3459–3464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, W. Lo, Z. Cai, N. Zhang and L. Yu, Donor−acceptor porous conjugated polymers for photocatalytic hydrogen production: the importance of acceptor comonomer, Macromolecules, 2016, 49(18), 6903–6909 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Ma, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester, F. Vilela and K. A. I. Zhang, Conjugated microporous polymer nanoparticles with enhanced dispersibility and water compatibility for photocatalytic applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(31), 16064–16071 RSC .
R. S. Sprick, J.-X. Jiang, B. Bonillo, S. Ren, T. Ratvijitvech, P. Guiglion, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Tunable organic photocatalysts for visible-light-driven hydrogen evolution, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(9), 3265–3270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Z. Cai, Q. Wu, W.-Y. Lo, N. Zhang, L. X. Chen and L. Yu, Rational design of porous conjugated polymers and roles of residual palladium for photocatalytic hydrogen production, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(24), 7681–7686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sprick, B. Bonillo, M. Sachs, R. Clowes, J. R. Durrant, D. J. Adamsa and A. I. Cooper, Extended conjugated microporous polymers for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from water, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52(65), 10008–10011 RSC .
Q. Huang, L. Guo, N. Wang, X. Zhu, S. Jin and B. Tan, Layered thiazolo[5,4-d] thiazole-linked conjugated microporous polymers with heteroatom adoption for efficient photocatalysis application, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(17), 15861–15868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, B. C. Ma, L. Zhang, S. Lin, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester, K. A. I. Zhang and X. Wang, Molecular engineering of conjugated polybenzothiadiazoles for enhanced hydrogen production by photosynthesis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(32), 9202–9206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Sprick, B. Bonillo, R. Clowes, P. Guiglion, N. J. Brownbill, B. J. Slater, F. Blanc, M. A. Zwijnenburg, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Visible-light-driven hydrogen evolution using planarized conjugated polymer photocatalysts, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(5), 1792–1796 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huang, P. Wang and D. Jiang, Covalent organic frameworks: a materials platform for structural and functional designs, Nature Rev. Mater., 2016, 1(10), 16068 CrossRef CAS .
W. Huang, Z. J. Wang, B. C. Ma, S. Ghasimi, D. Gehrig, F. Laquai, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Hollow nanoporous covalent triazine frameworks via acid vapor-assisted solid phase synthesis for enhanced visible light photoactivity, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(20), 7555–7559 RSC .
S. Wan, J. Guo, J. Kim, H. Ihee and D. Jiang, A belt-shaped, blue luminescent, and semiconducting covalent organic framework, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47(46), 8826–8830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding, J. Guo, X. Feng, Y. Honsho, J. Guo, S. Seki, P. Maitarad, A. Saeki, S. Nagase and D. Jiang, Synthesis of metallophthalocyanine covalent organic frameworks that exhibit high carrier mobility and photoconductivity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(6), 1289–1293 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Feng, L. Liu, Y. Honsho, A. Saeki, S. Seki, S. Irle, Y. Dong, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, High-rate charge-carrier transport in porphyrin covalent organic frameworks: Switching from hole to electron to ambipolar conduction, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51(11), 2618–2622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, M. Supur, M. Addicoat, K. Furukawa, L. Chen, T. Nakamura, S. Fukuzumi, S. Irle and D. Jiang, Creation of superheterojunction polymers via direct polycondensation: segregated and bicontinuous donor–acceptor π-columnar arrays in covalent organic frameworks for long-lived charge separation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137(24), 7817–7827 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, Z. Tang, M. Wu and Z. Zhou, Design, preparation and application of conjugated microporous polymers, Polym. Int., 2014, 63(3), 381–392 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Hunt, C. J. Doonan, J. D. LeVangie, A. P. Côté and O. M. Yaghi, Reticular synthesis of covalent organic borosilicate frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130(36), 11872–11873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-Y. Ding, J. Gao, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, W.-G. Song, C.-Y. Su and W. Wang, Construction of covalent organic framework for catalysis: Pd/COF-LZU1 in Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reaction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(49), 19816–19822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, J. Gao and D. Jiang, Stable, crystalline, porous, covalent organic frameworks as a platform for chiral organocatalysts, Nat. Chem., 2015, 7(11), 905–912 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, V. Venkatesh, D. B. Shinde, S. Kumari, A. Halder, S. Verma and R. Banerjee, Self-templated chemically stable hollow spherical covalent organic framework, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6786 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kandambeth, A. Mallick, B. Lukose, M. V. Mane, T. Heine and R. Banerjee, Construction of crystalline 2D covalent organic frameworks with remarkable chemical (acid/base) stability via a combined reversible and irreversible route, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(48), 19524–19527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Waller, S. J. Lyle, T. M. O. Popp, C. S. Diercks, J. A. Reimer and O. M. Yaghi, Chemical conversion of linkages in covalent organic frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(48), 15519–15522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P.-F. Wei, M.-Z. Qi, Z.-P. Wang, S.-Y. Ding, W. Yu, Q. Liu, L.-K. Wang, H.-Z. Wang, W.-K. An and W. Wang, Benzoxazole-linked ultrastable covalent organic frameworks for photocatalysis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(13), 4623–4631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. J. Waller, Y. S. AlFaraj, C. S. Diercks, N. N. Jarenwattananon and O. M. Yaghi, Conversion of imine to oxazole and thiazole linkages in covalent organic frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(29), 9099–9103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Haase, E. Troschke, G. Savasci, T. Banerjee, V. Duppel, S. Dörfler, M. M. J. Grundei, A. M. Burow, C. Ochsenfeld, S. Kaskel and B. V. Lotsch, Topochemical conversion of an imine- into a thiazole-linked covalent organic framework enabling real structure analysis, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2600 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, C. Zhang, S. Cai, X. Lei, V. Altoe, F. Hong, J. J. Urban, J. Ciston, E. M. Chan and Y. Liu, Facile transformation of imine covalent organic frameworks into ultrastable crystalline porous aromatic frameworks, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2998 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Dalapati, S. Jin, J. Gao, Y. Xu, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, An azine-linked covalent organic framework, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135(46), 17310–17313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kou, Y. Xu, Z. Guo and D. Jiang, Supercapacitive energy storage and electric power supply using an aza-fused π-conjugated microporous framework, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50(37), 8753–8757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, Y. Xu, S. Jin, L. Chen, T. Kaji, Y. Honsho, M. A. Addicoat, J. Kim, A. Saeki, H. Ihee, S. Seki, S. Irle, M. Hiramoto, J. Gao and D. Jiang, Conjugated organic framework with three-dimensionally ordered stable structure and delocalized π clouds, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2736 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhang, M. Wei, H. Mao, X. Pei, S. A. Alshmimri, J. A. Reimer and O. M. Yaghi, Crystalline dioxin-linked covalent organic frameworks from irreversible reactions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(40), 12715–12719 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jin, M. Asada, Q. Xu, S. Dalapati, M. A. Addicoat, M. A. Brady, H. Xu, T. Nakamura, T. Heine, Q. Chen and D. Jiang, Two-dimensional sp2 carbon-conjugated covalent organic frameworks, Science, 2017, 357(6352), 673–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Lyu, C. S. Diercks, C. Zhu and O. M. Yaghi, Porous crystalline olefin-linked covalent organic frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(17), 6848–6852 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhuang, W. Zhao, F. Zhang, Y. Cao, F. Liu, S. Bia and X. Feng, A two-dimensional conjugated polymer framework with fully sp2-bonded carbon skeleton, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7(25), 4176–4181 RSC .
Y. Xu, S. Jin, H. Xu, A. Nagai and D. Jiang, Conjugated microporous polymers: design, synthesis and application, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42(20), 8012–8031 RSC .
W. Huang, J. Byun, I. Rörich, C. Ramanan, P. W. M. Blom, H. Lu, D. Wang, L. C. da Silva, R. Li, L. Wang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Asymmetric covalent triazine framework for enhanced visible-light photoredox catalysis via energy transfer cascade, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(27), 8316–8320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. A. Westrich, K. A. Dahlberg, M. Kaviany and J. W. Schwank, High-temperature photocatalytic ethylene oxidation over TiO2, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115(33), 16537–16543 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, X. Peng, A. Yamaguchi, S. Ueda, T. Fujita, H. Abe and M. Miyauchi, Photocatalytic partial oxidation of methane on palladium-loaded strontium tantalite, Sol. RRL, 2019, 3(7), 1900076 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, D. Kopetzki, P. H. Seeberger, M. Antonietti and F. Vilela, Surface area control and photocatalytic activity of conjugated microporous poly(benzothiadiazole) networks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(5), 1432–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Z. Vobecka, K. Tauer, M. Antonietti and F. Vilela, π-Conjugated polyHIPEs as highly efficient and reusable heterogeneous photosensitizers, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49(95), 11158–11160 RSC .
Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Molecular structural design of conjugated microporous poly(benzooxadiazole) networks for enhanced photocatalytic activity with visible light, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27(40), 6265–6270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Bandgap engineering of conjugated nanoporous poly-benzobisthiadiazoles via copolymerization for enhanced photocatalytic 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroquinoline synthesis under visible light, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2016, 358(16), 2576–2582 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Wang, S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, A conjugated porous poly-benzobisthiadiazole network for a visible light-driven photoredox reaction, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(44), 18720–18724 RSC .
S. Ghasimi, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Water compatible conjugated microporous polyazulene networks as visible-light photocatalysts in aqueous medium, ChemCatChem, 2016, 8(4), 694–698 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kang, J. H. Park, K. C. Ko, J. Chun, E. Kim, H.-W. Shin, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim, T. K. Ahn, J. Y. Lee and S. U. Son, Tandem synthesis of photoactive benzodifuran moieties in the formation of microporous organic networks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52(24), 6228–6232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Wang, R. Li, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Porous conjugated polymer via metal-free synthesis for visible light-promoted oxidative hydroxylation of arylboronic acids, Polymer, 2017, 126, 291–295 CrossRef CAS .
A. van Dijken, J. J. A. M. Bastiaansen, N. M. M. Kiggen, B. M. W. Langeveld, C. Rothe, A. Monkman, I. Bach, P. Stössel and K. Brunner, Carbazole compounds as host materials for triplet emitters in organic light-emitting diodes: polymer hosts for high-efficiency light-emitting diodes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126(24), 7718–7727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, M. Luo, P. Hammershøj, D. Zhou, Y. Han, B. W. Laursen, C.-G. Yan and B.-H. Han, Microporous polycarbazole with high specific surface area for gas storage and separation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134(14), 6084–6087 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Su, R. Tandiana, B. Tian, A. Sengupta, W. Tang, J. Su and K. P. Loh, Visible-light photocatalysis of aerobic oxidation reactions
using carbazolic conjugated microporous polymers, ACS Catal., 2016, 6(6), 3594–3599 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, X. Zhang and J. Zhang, Carbazolic porous organic framework as an efficient, metal-free visible-light photocatalyst for organic synthesis, ACS Catal., 2015, 5(4), 2250–2254 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, J. Lu and J. Zhang, Carbazole–triazine based donor–acceptor porous organic frameworks for efficient visible-light photocatalytic aerobic oxidation reactions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(31), 15154–15161 RSC .
Y. Zhi, S. Ma, H. Xia, Y. Zhang, Z. Shi, Y. Mu and X. Liu, Construction of donor-acceptor type conjugated microporous polymers: A fascinating strategy for the development of efficient heterogeneous photocatalysts in organic synthesis, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 36–44 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, J. Tang, W. Yu, Q. Huang, Y. Fu, G. Kuang, C. Pan and G. Yu, Visible light-driven C-3 functionalization of indoles over conjugated microporous polymers, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(9), 8084–8091 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ou, G. Zhang, J. Wu and C. Su, Photocatalytic cascade radical cyclization approach to bioactive indoline-alkaloids over donor–acceptor type conjugated microporous polymer, ACS Catal., 2019, 9(6), 5178–5183 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhi, K. Li, H. Xia, M. Xue, Y. Mu and X. Liu, Robust porous organic polymers as efficient heterogeneous organo-photocatalysts for aerobic oxidation reactions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(18), 8697–8704 RSC .
S. Bandyopadhyay, S. Kundu, A. Giri and A. Patra, A smart photosensitizer based on a red emitting solution processable porous polymer: generation of reactive oxygen species, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54(66), 9123–9126 RSC .
V. R. Battula, H. Singh, S. Kumar, I. Bala, S. K. Pal and K. Kailasam, Natural sunlight driven oxidative homocoupling of amines by a truxene-based conjugated microporous polymer, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(8), 6751–6759 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xie, C. Wang, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, Highly stable and porous cross-linked polymers for efficient photocatalysis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(7), 2056–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-L. Wang, C. Wang, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, Cross-linked polymers with exceptionally high Ru(bipy)32+ loadings for efficient heterogeneous photocatalysis, ACS Catal., 2012, 2(3), 417–424 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, M.-Y. Xu, L.-J. Feng, Q. Chen, Y.-J. He and B.-H. Han, Conjugated microporous polycarbazole containing tris(2-phenylpyridine)iridium(iii) complexes: phosphorescence, porosity, and heterogeneous organic photocatalysis, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7(12), 2299–2307 RSC .
H.-P. Liang, Q. Chen and B.-H. Han, Cationic polycarbazole networks as visible-light heterogeneous photocatalysts for oxidative organic transformations, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(6), 5313–5322 CrossRef CAS .
G. Bottari, G. de la Torre, D. M. Guldi and T. Torres, Covalent and noncovalent phthalocyanine-carbon nanostructure systems: synthesis, photoinduced electron transfer, and application to molecular photovoltaics, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110(11), 6768–6816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. B. Sorokin, Phthalocyanine metal complexes in catalysis, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113(10), 8152–8191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding and B.-H. Han, Metallophthalocyanine-based conjugated microporous polymers as highly efficient photosensitizers for singlet oxygen generation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(22), 6536–6539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-L. He and C.-D. Wu, Incorporation of Fe-phthalocyanines into a porous organic framework for highly efficient photocatalytic oxidation of arylalkanes, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 234, 290–295 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mishra, M. K. R. Fischer and P. Bäuerle, Metal-free organic dyes for dye-sensitized solar cells: from structure: property relationships to design rules, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48(14), 2474–2499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-X. Jiang, Y. Li, X. Wu, J. Xiao, D. J. Adams and A. I. Cooper, Conjugated microporous polymers with Rose Bengal dye for highly efficient heterogeneous organo-photocatalysis, Macromolecules, 2013, 46(22), 8779–8783 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tobin, J. Liu, H. Hayes, M. Demleitner, D. Ellis, V. Arrighi, Z. Xu and F. Vilela, BODIPY-based conjugated microporous polymers as reusable heterogeneous photosensitisers in a photochemical flow reactor, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7(43), 6662–6670 RSC .
M. Liras, M. Pintado-Sierra, M. Iglesias and F. Sánchez, A deprotection strategy of a BODIPY conjugated porous polymer to obtain a heterogeneous (dipyrrin)(bipyridine)ruthenium(ii) visible light photocatalyst, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(44), 17274–17278 RSC .
C.-A. Wang, Y.-W. Li, X.-L. Cheng, J.-P. Zhang and Y.-F. Han, Eosin Y dye-based porous organic polymers for highly efficient heterogeneous photocatalytic dehydrogenative coupling reaction, RSC Adv., 2017, 7(1), 408–414 RSC .
W. Huang, B. C. Ma, H. Lu, R. Li, L. Wang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, Visible-light-promoted selective oxidation of alcohols using a covalent triazine framework, ACS Catal., 2017, 7(8), 5438–5442 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bohra, P. Li, C. Yang, Y. Zhao and M. Wang, “Greener” and modular synthesis of triazine-based conjugated porous polymers via direct arylation polymerization: structure–function relationship and photocatalytic application, Polym. Chem., 2018, 9(15), 1972–1982 RSC .
J. Chen, C.-L. Dong, D. Zhao, Y.-C. Huang, X. Wang, L. Samad, L. Dang, M. nhearer, S. Shen and L. Guo, Molecular design of polymer heterojunctions for efficient solar–hydrogen conversion, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(21), 1606198 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Zhi, Z. Li, X. Feng, H. Xia, Y. Zhang, Z. Shi, Y. Mu and X. Liu, Covalent organic frameworks as metal-free heterogeneous photocatalysts for organic transformations, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(44), 22933–22938 RSC .
W. Liu, Q. Su, P. Ju, B. Guo, H. Zhou, G. Li and Q. Wu, A hydrazone-based covalent organic framework as an efficient and reusable photocatalyst for the cross-dehydrogenative coupling reaction of N-aryltetrahydroisoquinolines, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10(4), 664–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Y. Zhi, P. Shao, H. Xia, G. Li, X. Feng, X. Chen, Z. Shi and X. Liu, Covalent organic framework as an efficient, metal-free, heterogeneous photocatalyst for organic transformations under visible light, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 334–342 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, Z. Yang, Z. Xie, Y. Li, X. Yu, F. Lu and L. Chen, Benzothiadiazole functionalized D–A type covalent organic frameworks for effective photocatalytic reduction of aqueous chromium(VI), J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(3), 998–1004 RSC .
Y. Li, Q. Chen, T. Xu, Z. Xie, J. Liu, X. Yu, S. Ma, T. Qin and L. Chen, 
            De novo design and facile synthesis of 2D covalent organic frameworks: a two-in-one strategy, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(35), 13822–13828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yan, H. Liu, Y. Li, W. Chen, T. Zhang, Z. Zhao, G. Xing and L. Chen, Ultrastable covalent organic frameworks via self-polycondensation of an A2B2 monomer
for heterogeneous photocatalysis, Macromolecules, 2019, 52(21), 7977–7983 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jadhav, Y. Fang, W. Patterson, C.-H. Liu, E. Hamzehpoor and D. F. Perepichka, 2D poly(arylene vinylene) covalent organic frameworks via aldol condensation of trimethyltriazine, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(39), 13753–13757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Acharjya, P. Pachfule, J. Roeser, F.-J. Schmitt and A. Thomas, Vinylene-linked covalent organic frameworks by base-catalyzed aldol condensation, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(42), 14865–14870 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Chen, J.-L. Shi, Y. Ma, G. Lin, X. Lang and C. Wang, Designed synthesis of a 2D porphyrin-based sp2 carbon-conjugated covalent organic framework for heterogeneous photocatalysis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(19), 6430–6434 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhao, H. Liu, C. Wu, Z. Zhang, Q. Pan, F. Hu, R. Wang, P. Li, X. Huang and Z. Li, Fully conjugated two-dimensional sp2-carbon covalent organic frameworks as artificial photosystem I with high efficiency, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(16), 5376–5381 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Sun, S. Jang, S.-J. Yim, L. Ye and D.-P. Kim, Metal doped core–shell metal–organic frameworks@covalent organic frameworks (MOFs@COFs) hybrids as a novel photocatalytic platform, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(13), 1707110 CrossRef .
W. Huang, B. C. Ma, D. Wang, Z. J. Wang, R. Li, L. Wang, K. Landfester and K. A. I. Zhang, A fixed-bed photoreactor using conjugated nanoporous polymer-coated glass fibers for visible light-promoted continuous photoredox reactions, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(8), 3792–3797 RSC .
I. Dincer and C. Acar, Review and evaluation of hydrogen production methods for better sustainability, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2015, 40(43), 11094–11111 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kudo and Y. Miseki, Heterogeneous photocatalyst materials for water splitting, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38(1), 253–278 RSC .
C. Xu, W. Zhang, J. Tang, C. Pan and G. Yu, Porous organic polymers: an emerged platform for photocatalytic water splitting, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 592 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jayakumar and H.-H. Chou, Recent advances in visible-light-driven hydrogen evolution from water using polymer photocatalysts, ChemCatChem, 2020, 12(3), 689–704 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiang, X. Wang, L. Rao, P. Wang, D. Huang, X. Ding, X. Zhang, S. Wang, H. Chen and Y. Zhu, Conjugated polymers with sequential fluorination for enhanced photocatalytic H2 evolution via proton-coupled electron transfer, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3(10), 2544–2549 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, X. Yang, T. Yang, Y. Zhao, F. Wang, Y. Chen, J. H. Zeng, C. Yan, F. Huang and J.-X. Jiang, Dibenzothiophene dioxide based conjugated microporous polymers for visible-light-driven hydrogen production, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(9), 8590–8596 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-A. Lan, G. Zhang, X. Chen, Y. Zhang, K. A. I. Zhang and X. Wang, Reducing the exciton binding energy of donor–acceptor-based conjugated polymers to promote charge-induced reactions, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(30), 10236–10240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-A. Lan, W. Ren, X. Chen, Y. Zhang and X. Wang, Conjugated donor-acceptor polymer photocatalysts with electron-output “tentacles” for efficient hydrogen evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 596–603 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, W. Ma, Y. Xu, C. Zhang, Q. Wang, T. Yang, X. Gao, F. Wang, C. Yan and J.-X. Jiang, Effect of linking pattern of dibenzothiophene-S,S-dioxide-containing conjugated microporous polymers on the photocatalytic performance, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(23), 9502–9508 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhang, W. Ou, J. Wang, Y. Xu, D. Xu, T. Sun, S. Xiao, M. Wang, H. Li, W. Chen and C. Su, Stable, carrier separation tailorable conjugated microporous polymers as a platform for highly efficient photocatalytic H2 evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 245, 114–121 CrossRef CAS .
V. S. Mothika, P. Sutar, P. Verma, S. Das, S. K. Pati and T. K. Maji, Regulating charge-transfer in conjugated microporous polymers for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Chem.–Eur. J., 2019, 25(15), 3867–3874 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Kochergin, D. Schwarz, A. Acharjya, A. Ichangi, R. Kulkarni, P. Eliášová, J. Vacek, J. Schmidt, A. Thomas and M. J. Bojdys, Exploring the “goldilocks zone” of semiconducting polymer photocatalysts by donor–acceptor interactions, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(43), 14188–14192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Schwarz, A. Acharja, A. Ichangi, P. Lyu, M. V. Opanasenko, F. R. Goßler, T. A. F. König, J. Čejka, P. Nachtigall, A. Thomas and M. J. Bojdys, Fluorescent sulphur- and nitrogen-containing porous polymers with tuneable donor–acceptor domains for light-driven hydrogen evolution, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24(46), 11916–11921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, X. Zhao, W. Dong, X. Zhang, Y. Xiang, Q. Huang and H. Chen, Integrating amino groups within conjugated microporous polymers by versatile thiol–yne coupling for light-driven hydrogen evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(27), 16277–16284 RSC .
L. Wang, Y. Wan, Y. Ding, S. Wu, Y. Zhang, X. Zhang, G. Zhang, Y. Xiong, X. Wu, J. Yang and H. Xu, Conjugated microporous polymer nanosheets for overall water splitting using visible light, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(38), 1702428 CrossRef PubMed .
X.-H. Zhang, X.-P. Wang, J. Xiao, S.-Y. Wang, D.-K. Huang, X. Ding, Y.-G. Xiang and H. Chen, Synthesis of 1,4-diethynylbenzene-based conjugated polymer photocatalysts and their enhanced visible/near-infrared-light-driven hydrogen production activity, J. Catal., 2017, 350, 64–71 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, L. Wilbraham, B. J. Slater, M. A. Zwijnenburg, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, Accelerated discovery of organic polymer photocatalysts for hydrogen evolution from water through the integration of experiment and theory, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(22), 9063–9071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Stegbauer, K. Schwinghammer and B. V. Lotsch, A hydrazone-based covalent organic framework for photocatalytic hydrogen production, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5(7), 2789–2793 RSC .
L. Stegbauer, S. Zech, G. Savasci, T. Banerjee, F. Podjaski, K. Schwinghammer, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Tailor-made photoconductive pyrene-based covalent organic frameworks for visible-light driven hydrogen generation, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(24), 1703278 CrossRef .
V. S. Vyas, F. Haase, L. Stegbauer, G. Savasci, F. Podjaski, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, A tunable azine covalent organic framework platform for visible light-induced hydrogen generation, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Banerjee, F. Haase, G. Savasci, K. Gottschling, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Single-site photocatalytic H2 evolution from covalent organic frameworks with molecular cobaloxime co-catalysts, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(45), 16228–16234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Chen, S. Y. Chong, M. A. Little, Y. Wu, W.-H. Zhu, R. Clowes, Y. Yan, M. A. Zwijnenburg, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, Sulfone-containing covalent organic frameworks for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from water, Nat. Chem., 2018, 10(12), 1180–1189 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Pachfule, A. Acharjya, J. Roeser, T. Langenhahn, M. Schwarze, R. Schomäcker, A. Thomas and J. Schmidt, Diacetylene functionalized covalent organic framework (COF) for photocatalytic hydrogen generation, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(4), 1423–1427 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. P. Biswal, H. A. Vignolo-González, T. Banerjee, L. Grunenberg, G. Savasci, K. Gottschling, J. Nuss, C. Ochsenfeld and B. V. Lotsch, Sustained solar H2 evolution from a thiazolo[5,4-d]thiazole-bridged covalent organic framework and nickel-thiolate cluster in water, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(28), 11082–11092 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bi, C. Yang, W. Zhang, J. Xu, L. Liu, D. Wu, X. Wang, Y. Han, Q. Liang and F. Zhang, Two-dimensional semiconducting covalent organic frameworks via condensation at arylmethyl carbon atoms, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 2467 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Yu, S. Bi, W. Ming, W. Wei, Y. Zhang, J. Xu, P. Qiang, F. Qiu, D. Wu and F. Zhang, Side-chain-tuned π-extended porous polymers for visible light-activated hydrogen evolution, Polym. Chem., 2019, 10(27), 3758–3763 RSC .
S. Wei, F. Zhang, W. Zhang, P. Qiang, K. Yu, X. Fu, D. Wu, S. Bi and F. Zhang, Semiconducting 2D triazine-cored covalent organic frameworks with unsubstituted olefin linkages, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(36), 14272–14279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Z.-A. Lan and X. Wang, Conjugated polymers: catalysts for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(51), 15712–15727 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Bi, W. Fang, L. Li, J. Wang, S. Liang, Y. He, M. Liu and L. Wu, Covalent triazine-based frameworks as visible light photocatalysts for the splitting of water, Macromol. Rapid Commun., 2015, 36(20), 1799–1805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, W. Fang, P. Zhang, J. Bi, Y. He, J. Wang and W. Su, Sulfur-doped covalent triazine-based frameworks for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from water under visible light, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(32), 12402–12406 RSC .
Z. Cheng, W. Fang, T. Zhao, S. Fang, J. Bi, S. Liang, L. Li, Y. Yu and L. Wu, Efficient visible-light-driven photocatalytic hydrogen evolution on phosphorus-doped covalent triazine-based frameworks, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10(48), 41415–41421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guo, Y. Niu, H. Xu, Q. Li, S. Razzaque, Q. Huang, S. Jin and B. Tan, Engineering heteroatoms with atomic precision in donor–acceptor covalent triazine frameworks to boost photocatalytic hydrogen production, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(40), 19775–19781 RSC .
W. Huang, Q. He, Y. Hu and Y. Li, Molecular heterostructures of covalent triazine frameworks
for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(26), 8676–8680 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-A. Lan, Y. Fang, X. Chen and X. Wang, Thermal annealing-induced structural reorganization in polymeric photocatalysts for enhanced hydrogen evolution, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55(54), 7756–7759 RSC .
K. Schwinghammer, S. Hug, M. B. Mesch, J. Senker and B. V. Lotsch, Phenyl-triazine oligomers for light-driven hydrogen evolution, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8(11), 3345–3353 RSC .
S. Kuecken, J. Schmidt, L. Zhi and A. Thomas, Conversion of amorphous polymer networks to covalent organic frameworks under ionothermal conditions: A facile synthesis route for covalent triazine frameworks, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(48), 24422–24427 RSC .
S. Kuecken, A. Acharjya, L. Zhi, M. Schwarze, R. Schomäcker and A. Thomas, Fast tuning of covalent triazine frameworks for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Chem. Commun., 2017, 53(43), 5854–5857 RSC .
C. B. Meier, R. S. Sprick, A. Monti, P. Guiglion, J.-S. M. Lee, M. A. Zwijnenburg and A. I. Cooper, Structure–property relationships for covalent triazine-based frameworks: the effect of spacer length on photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from water, Polymer, 2017, 126, 283–290 CrossRef CAS .
D. Schwarz, A. Acharjya, A. Ichangi, Y. S. Kochergin, P. Lyu, M. V. Opanasenko, J. Tarábek, J. V. Chocholoušová, J. Vacek, J. Schmidt, J. Čejka, P. Nachtigall, A. Thomas and M. J. Bojdys, Tuning the porosity and photocatalytic performance of triazine-based graphdiyne polymers through polymorphism, ChemSusChem, 2019, 12(1), 194–199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Qu, X. Xu, Y. Zhang, Y. Li, W. Zha, S. Wen, H. Xie and J. Wang, A nitrogen-rich mesoporous polymer for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from water, React. Funct. Polym., 2016, 102, 93–100 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hao, Z. Jin, H. Yang, G. Lu and Y. Bi, Peculiar synergetic effect of MoS2 quantum dots and graphene on metal–organic frameworks for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 210, 45–56 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, X. Li, L.-L. Zheng, L.-M. Qin, S. Li, P. Ye, Y. Li and J.-P. Zou, Size-controlled synthesis of CdS nanoparticles confined on covalent triazine-based frameworks for durable photocatalytic hydrogen evolution under visible light, Nanoscale, 2018, 10(41), 19509–19516 RSC .
Q. Jiang, L. Sun, J. Bi, S. Liang, L. Li, Y. Yu and L. Wu, MoS2 quantum dots-modified covalent triazine-based frameworks for enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11(6), 1108–1113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Thote, H. B. Aiyappa, A. Deshpande, D. Díaz Díaz, S. Kurungot and R. Banerjee, A covalent organic framework–cadmium sulfide hybrid as a prototype photocatalyst for visible-light-driven hydrogen production, Chem.–Eur. J., 2014, 20(48), 15961–15965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Tao, L. Tao, H. Li, C. Li, X. Wang, C. Li, R. Li and Q. Yang, Novel conjugated organic polymers as candidates for visible-light-driven photocatalytic hydrogen production, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 241, 461–470 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Liang, S. Cui, S. Xu, C. Yao, M. J. MacLachlan and Z. Li, A porous triptycene-based covalent polymer stabilized binary metal sulfide for enhanced hydrogen evolution under visible light, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54(27), 3391–3394 RSC .
Y.-J. Cheng, R. Wang, S. Wang, X.-J. Xi, L.-F. Ma and S.-Q. Zang, Encapsulating [Mo3S13]2− clusters in cationic covalent organic frameworks: enhancing stability and recyclability by converting a homogeneous photocatalyst to a heterogeneous photocatalyst, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54(96), 13563–13566 RSC .
M.-Y. Gao, C.-C. Li, H.-L. Tang, X.-J. Sun, H. Dong and F.-M. Zhang, Boosting visible-light-driven hydrogen evolution of covalent organic frameworks through compositing with MoS2: a promising candidate for noble-metal free photocatalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(35), 20193–20200 RSC .
Y.-P. Zhang, H.-L. Tang, H. Dong, M.-Y. Gao, C.-C. Li, X.-J. Sun, J.-Z. Wei, Y. Qu, Z.-J. Li and F.-M. Zhang, Covalent-organic framework based Z-scheme heterostructured noble-metal-free photocatalysts for visible-light-driven hydrogen evolution, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(8), 4334–4340 RSC .
J. H. Park, K. C. Ko, N. Park, H.-W. Shin, E. Kim, N. Kang, J. H. Ko, S. M. Lee, H. J. Kim, T. K. Ahn, J. Y. Lee and S. U. Son, Microporous organic nanorods with electronic push–pull skeletons for visible light-induced hydrogen evolution from water, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2(21), 7656–7661 RSC .
X. Wang, K. Maeda, A. Thomas, K. Takanabe, G. Xin, J. M. Carlsson, K. Domen and M. Antonietti, A metal-free polymeric photocatalyst for hydrogen production from water under visible light, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8(1), 76–80 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Li, D. Wang, Q.-J. Xing, G. Zhou, S.-S. Liu, Y. Li, L.-L. Zheng, P. Ye and J.-P. Zou, Design and syntheses of MOF/COF hybrid materials via postsynthetic covalent modification: an efficient strategy to boost the visible-light-driven photocatalytic performance, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 243, 621–628 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, Q. Yang, K. Liu, H. Cao and H. Yan, Boosting photocatalytic H2 evolution on g-C3N4 by modifying covalent organic frameworks (COFs), Chem. Commun., 2019, 55(41), 5829–5832 RSC .
F.-M. Zhang, J.-L. Sheng, Z.-D. Yang, X.-J. Sun, H.-L. Tang, M. Lu, H. Dong, F.-C. Shen, J. Liu and Y.-Q. Lan, Rational design of MOF/COF hybrid materials for photocatalytic H2 evolution in the presence of sacrificial electron donors, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(37), 12106–12110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhou, L.-L. Zheng, D. Wang, Q.-J. Xing, F. Li, P. Ye, X. Xiao, Y. Li and J.-P. Zou, A general strategy via chemically covalent combination for constructing heterostructured catalysts with enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55(29), 4150–4153 RSC .
J. L. White, M. F. Baruch, J. E. Pander, Y. Hu, I. C. Fortmeyer, J. E. Park, T. Zhang, K. Liao, J. Gu, Y. Yan, T. W. Shaw, E. Abelev and A. B. Bocarsly, Light-driven heterogeneous reduction of carbon dioxide: photocatalysts and photoelectrodes, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115(23), 12888–12935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Sun, N. Talreja, H. Tao, J. Texter, M. Muhler, J. Strunk and J. Chen, Catalysis of carbon dioxide photoreduction on nanosheets: fundamentals and challenges, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(26), 7610–7627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hawecker, J.-M. Lehn and R. Ziessel, Efficient photochemical reduction of CO2 to
CO by visible light irradiation of systems containing Re(bipy)(CO)3X or Ru(bipy)32+–Co2+ combinations as homogeneous catalysts, J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1983, 9, 536–538 RSC .
J. Hawecker, J.-M. Lehn and R. Ziessel, Electrocatalytic reduction of carbon dioxide mediated by Re(bipy)(CO)3Cl (bipy = 2,2′-bipyridine), J. Chem. Soc., Chem. Commun., 1984,(6), 328–330 RSC .
W. Liang, T. L. Church, S. Zheng, C. Zhou, B. S. Haynes and D. M. D'Alessandro, Site isolation leads to stable photocatalytic reduction of CO2 over a rhenium-based catalyst, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21(51), 18576–18579 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang, W. Hu, X. Zhang, P. He, B. Pattengale, C. Liu, M. Cendejas, I. Hermans, X. Zhang, J. Zhang and J. Huang, 2D covalent organic frameworks as intrinsic photocatalysts for visible light-driven CO2 reduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(44), 14614–14618 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhong, R. Sa, L. Li, Y. He, L. Li, J. Bi, Z. Zhuang, Y. Yu and Z. Zou, A covalent organic framework bearing single Ni sites as a synergistic photocatalyst for selective photoreduction of CO2 to CO, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(18), 7615–7621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lu, Q. Li, J. Liu, F.-M. Zhang, L. Zhang, J.-L. Wang, Z.-H. Kang and Y.-Q. Lan, Installing earth-abundant metal active centers to covalent organic frameworks for efficient heterogeneous photocatalytic CO2 reduction, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 254, 624–633 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, M. Xu, T. Peng, C. Zhang, T. Li, I. Hussain, J. Wang and B. Tan, Porous hypercrosslinked polymer-TiO2-graphene composite photocatalysts for visible-light-driven CO2 conversion, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Chen, G. Ji, S. Guo, B. Yu, Y. Zhao, Y. Wu, H. Zhang, Z. Liu, B. Han and Z. Liu, Visible-light-driven conversion of CO2 from air to CO using an ionic liquid and a conjugated polymer, Green Chem., 2017, 19(24), 5777–5781 RSC .
K. Lei, D. Wang, M. Kou, Z. Ma, L. Wang, L. Ye and Y. Kong, A metal-free donor-acceptor covalent organic framework photocatalyst for visible-light-driven reduction of CO2 with H2O, ChemSusChem, 2020 DOI:10.1002/cssc.201903545 .
X. Yu, Z. Yang, B. Qiu, S. Guo, P. Yang, B. Yu, H. Zhang, Y. Zhao, X. Yang, B. Han and Z. Liu, Eosin Y-functionalized conjugated organic polymers for visible-light-driven CO2 reduction with H2O to CO with high efficiency, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(2), 632–636 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Guo, H. Zhang, Y. Chen, Z. Liu, B. Yu, Y. Zhao, Z. Yang, B. Han and Z. Liu, Visible-light-driven photoreduction of CO2 to CH4 over N,O,P-containing covalent organic polymer submicrospheres, ACS Catal., 2018, 8(5), 4576–4581 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fu, X. Zhu, L. Huang, X. Zhang, F. Zhang and W. Zhu, Azine-based covalent organic frameworks as metal-free visible light photocatalysts for CO2 reduction with H2O, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 46–51 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shen, R. Steinbach, J. M. Tobin, M. M. Nakata, M. Bower, M. R. S. McCoustra, H. Bridle, V. Arrighi and F. Vilela, Photoactive and metal-free polyamide-based polymers for water and wastewater treatment under visible light irradiation, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 193, 226–233 CrossRef CAS .
I. Nath, J. Chakraborty, P. M. Heynderickx and F. Verpoort, Engineered synthesis of hierarchical porous organic polymers for visible light and natural sunlight induced rapid degradation of azo, thiazine and fluorescein based dyes in a unique mechanistic pathway, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 227, 102–113 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, B. Yin, H. Niu and Y. Cai, Targeted synthesis of visible-light-driven covalent organic framework photocatalyst via molecular design and precise construction, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 239, 147–153 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, L. Guo, S. Zhang, N. Wang, S. Jin and B. Tan, Embedding carbon nitride into a covalent organic framework with enhanced photocatalysis performance, Chem.–Asian J., 2018, 13(13), 1674–1677 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, Z. Xie, Y. Li, Z. Yang and L. Chen, Dual-functional conjugated nanoporous polymers for efficient organic pollutants treatment in water: a synergistic strategy of adsorption and photocatalysis, Macromolecules, 2018, 51(9), 3443–3449 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lv, X. Zhao, H. Niu, S. He, Z. Tang, F. Wu and J. P. Giesy, Ball milling synthesis of covalent organic framework as a highly active photocatalyst for degradation of organic contaminants, J. Hazard. Mater., 2019, 369, 494–502 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, L. Xing, H. Lin, H. Wang, Z. Zhou and Z. Su, Construction of porous covalent organic polymer as photocatalysts for RhB degradation under visible light, Sci. Bull., 2017, 62(13), 931–937 CrossRef CAS .
N. Park, D. Kang, M. C. Ahn, S. Kang, S. M. Lee, T. K. Ahn, J. Y. Jaung, H.-W. Shin and S. U. Son, Hollow and sulfonated microporous organic polymers: Versatile platforms for non-covalent fixation of molecular photocatalysts, RSC Adv., 2015, 5(58), 47270–47274 RSC .
Z. Xiao, Y. Zhou, X. Xin, Q. Zhang, L. Zhang, R. Wang and D. Sun, Iron(III) porphyrin-based porous material as photocatalyst for highly efficient and selective degradation of Congo red, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2016, 217(4), 599–604 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wu, W.-L. Chen, D. Liu, C. Liang, Y.-G. Li, S.-W. Lin and E. Wang, New class of organic–inorganic hybrid aggregates based on polyoxometalates and metal–Schiff-base, Dalton Trans., 2011, 40(1), 56–61 RSC .
Y. Li, M. Liu and L. Chen, Polyoxometalate built-in conjugated microporous polymers for visible-light heterogeneous photocatalysis, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5(26), 13757–13762 RSC .
L. Ma, Y. Liu, Y. Liu, S. Jiang, P. Li, Y. Hao, P. Shao, A. Yin, X. Feng and B. Wang, Ferrocene-linkage-facilitated charge separation in conjugated microporous polymers, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58(13), 4221–4226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Peng, M. Zhao, B. Chen, Z. Zhang, Y. Huang, F. Dai, Z. Lai, X. Cui, C. Tan and H. Zhang, Hybridization of MOFs and COFs: a new strategy for construction of MOF@COF core–shell hybrid materials, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(3), 1705454 CrossRef PubMed .
S. He, Q. Rong, H. Niu and Y. Cai, Platform for molecular-material dual regulation: A direct Z-scheme MOF/COF heterojunction with enhanced visible-light photocatalytic activity, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 247, 49–56 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, Y. Hu, J. Zhao, E. Park, Y. Jin, Q. Liu and W. Zhang, Covalent organic framework-supported Fe–TiO2 nanoparticles as ambient-light-active photocatalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(27), 16364–16371 RSC .
S. Kim and H. C. Choi, Light-promoted synthesis of highly-conjugated crystalline covalent organic framework, Commun. Chem., 2019, 2, 60 CrossRef .
J. Lu, F. Lin, Q. Wen, Q.-Y. Qi, J.-Q. Xu and X. Zhao, Large-scale synthesis of azine-linked covalent organic frameworks in water and promoted by water, New J. Chem., 2019, 43(16), 6116–6120 RSC .
P. Shao, J. Li, F. Chen, L. Ma, Q. Li, M. Zhang, J. Zhou, A. Yin, X. Feng and B. Wang, Flexible films of covalent organic frameworks with ultralow dielectric constants under high humidity, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(50), 16501–16505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-X. Fu, Z.-H. Zhang, W. Fan, S. Wang, Y. Liu and M.-H. Huang, A soluble porous organic polymer for highly efficient organic-aqueous biphasic catalysis and convenient reuse of catalysts, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7(25), 15048–15053 RSC .
Y. Wan, L. Wang, H. Xu, X. Wu and J. Yang, A simple molecular design strategy for two-dimensional covalent organic framework capable of visible-light-driven water splitting, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(9), 4508–4516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Tian-Xiong Wang	Tian-Xiong Wang received his B.S. degree in Materials Chemistry in 2016 from Beijing Jiaotong University, China. Presently, he is pursuing his Ph.D. degree in Professor Bao-Hang Han's group at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China. His current research work mainly focuses on the design and functionalization of porous organic polymers and their applications in sorption and heterogeneous catalysis.
Hai-Peng Liang	Hai-Peng Liang received his B.Sc. in Materials Chemistry from South China Normal University (Guangzhou, China) in 2015 and M.Sc. in Nanoscience and Technology from the University of Chinese Academy of Sciences in 2018. He was a member of the group of Prof. Bao-Hang Han at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China, focusing on the synthesis of porous polycarbazoles for heterogeneous photocatalysis.
Dejene Assefa Anito	Dejene Assefa Anito obtained his bachelor's degree from Ambo University, Ethiopia, in 2007, and his master's degree from Hawassa University, Ethiopia, in 2012. After graduating from Hawassa University, he joined Arba Minch University, Ethiopia, as a lecturer in July, 2012. He is now studying for his PhD at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China, under the supervision of professor Bao-Hang Han. His research interests focus on the synthesis, characterization, and performance study of porous organic materials.
Xuesong Ding	Xuesong Ding received his BS degree from Nankai University (Tianjin, China) in 2007 and his MS degree from Tianjin University (Tianjin, China) in 2009. Then, he studied at the Institute for Molecular Science (IMS, Japan) and obtained his Ph.D. degree in 2012. In November, 2012, he joined the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China (NCNST) and is currently an associate professor. His research focuses on the synthesis and functionalization of covalent organic frameworks and conjugated microporous polymers.
Bao-Hang Han	Dr Bao-Hang Han is a professor of functional nanoporous materials at the National Center for Nanoscience and Technology, China (NCNST), and obtained his B.S., M.S., and Ph. D. degrees from Nankai University, Tianjin, China. Before he joined the NCNST, he worked as a post-doctoral fellow at the Max-Planck-Institute of Colloids and Interface, Golm, Germany, Department of Chemistry, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Canada, and Department of Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada. His current research interests focus on the preparation of various organic porous materials and porous graphene-based carbon materials and exploring their potential application in energy and environmental fields, such as hydrogen storage, carbon dioxide capture, gas separation, heterogeneous (photo)catalysis, and electrochemical energy storage.

 	Fig. 1  The main principle of photocatalytic processes for semiconductive POPs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Illustrated chemical reactions to construct POPs and schematic diagrams of conversion of imine bonds in COFs.	 

 	Fig. 3  Selected monomers employed in the synthesis of CMPs for photocatalysis.	 

 	Fig. 4  Illustration of photocatalytic organic synthesis using POPs as catalysts.	 

 	Fig. 5  Modification of alkyne-containing CMPs via a thiol–yne reaction. Reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 6  The proposed mechanism of the photocatalytic oxidative coupling reaction of benzylamine. Reproduced from ref. 44 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  Tandem strategy for the synthesis of a benzodifuran containing polymer (BDF-MON). Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  The structure of some illustrative carbazole-based monomers used to synthesize CPOPs.	 

 	Fig. 9  Chemical structure of MPc-based conjugated microporous polymers.	 

 	Fig. 10  Illustrative organic dye molecules used for the functionalization of photoactive POPs.	 

 	Fig. 11  The diagram of conjugated microporous polymer preparation via post-modification.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic diagram of solid vapor synthesis and the structure of nanoporous hollow covalent triazine frameworks. Reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 13  Illustration of monomer molecules and the stoichiometric ratio used in arylation polymerization.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Representative structure of asymmetric asy-CTF which contains four different D–A systems. (b) The symmetric counterparts of asy-CTF, CTF-Th, and CTF-Th-Ph. (c) HOMO and LUMO levels of the four kinds of D–A systems in asy-CTF calculated at the B3LYP/6-31G(d) level. Reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 
2H+ + 2e− → H2	(1)
2H2O + 4h+ → O2 + 4H+	(2)

 	Fig. 15  Illustrative fragment structures of conjugated microporous polymers.	 

 	Fig. 16  The monomer structures with different positions (black), numbers (blue), and types (red) of substituted groups in CN-modified N-CMPs.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) The tunable triphenylarene structure; the planarity of the platform can be varied by changing the angle between central aryl and peripheral phenyl through replacement of C–H with nitrogen atoms at green dots. (b) Synthesis of Nx-COFs with hydrazine and Nx-aldehyde. Reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 18  Sequential polymerization to construct a CTF with a molecule heterostructure (CTF-BT/Th). Reproduced from ref. 160 with permission from Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  The possible structural defect in CTP-1 and supposed structure reorganization in CTPT suffering from thermal annealing. Reproduced from ref. 161 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

1	CO2 + e− → CO2˙−	−1.85
2	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → HCOOH	−0.61
3	CO2 + 2H+ + 2e− → CO + H2O	−0.53
4	CO2 + 4H+ + 4e− → HCHO + H2O	−0.48
5	CO2 + 6H+ + 6e− → CH3OH + H2O	−0.38
6	CO2 + 8H+ + 8e− → CH4 + 2H2O	−0.24
7	2H+ + 2e− → H2	−0.42

 	Fig. 20  The schematic diagram of selective CO2 reduction with Ni-TpBpy under visible-light. Reproduced from ref. 189 with permission from American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 21  The schematic diagram of constructing a well-defined porous HCP-TiO2-FG composite. Reproduced from ref. 191 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 22  Illustrated monomer structures of POPs applied to photodegradation.	 

 	Fig. 23  The charge-transfer mechanisms for the NH2-MIL-125(Ti)/TTB-TTA hybrid material: Type-II heterojunction (a) and Z-scheme (b). Reproduced from ref. 210 with permission from Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
