Material and device engineering for high-performance blue quantum dot light-emitting diodes  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0NR02074E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0NR02074E
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13186-13224Material and device engineering for high-performance blue quantum dot light-emitting diodes

        
          
            Haoran 
            Jia
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fuzhi 
            Wang
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Zhan'ao 
            Tan
          
          
        
      *a
aBeijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, China. E-mail: tanzhanao@mail.buct.edu.cn
bState Key Laboratory of Alternate Electrical Power System with Renewable Energy Sources, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, China
Received 
      14th March 2020
    , Accepted 20th May 2020First published on 25th May 2020AbstractColloidal quantum dots (QDs) have attracted extensive attention due to their excellent optoelectronic properties, such as high quantum efficiency, narrow emission peaks, high color saturation, high stability and solution processability. Compared with the traditional display technology, QD based light-emitting diodes (QLEDs) show broad application prospects in the field of flat-panel displays and solid-state lighting. However, for full-color displays, the efficiency and lifetime of blue QLEDs are inferior to those of their green and red counterparts. Therefore, it is urgent for us to deeply understand the device physics and improve the performance of blue QLEDs through material and device engineering. An in-depth understanding of the optoelectronic properties (such as the structure of electronic states, electron–phonon interactions, Auger processes, etc.) and material engineering (such as size distribution control, composition control, and surface engineering) of blue emission QDs is greatly helpful for their applications in other fields. Herein, we review the key progress in the area of blue QLEDs, including the compositions and nanostructures of blue quantum dots, advances in the device architectures and the improvement of the device lifetime of blue QLEDs. The key factors that influence the blue device performance, including the nanostructure design and surface modification of QDs, interface engineering and architecture design of devices are discussed, aiming to propose possible solutions for these challenges, which will help to promote the commercialization process of QLEDs.Haoran JiaHao-ran Jia is a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Zhan'ao Tan at Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). Prior to joining BUCT, he received his Ph.D. from College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University (BNU) in 2019, with focus on carbon quantum dot (CQD) based light-emitting diodes (LEDs). His current research interests are to develop novel QDs and perovskite materials, fabricate high performance LEDs and solar cells, and understand the device mechanism.Fuzhi WangFuzhi Wang is an associate professor in Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University. She received her Ph.D. in Polymer Chemistry & Physics from Peking University in 2008. Her research interests include quantum dot/organic/perovskite light-emitting diodes and polymer solar cells, especially device structure design and interface engineering.Zhan'ao TanZhan'ao Tan has been a professor in Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology since 2018, and he worked in the Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University since 2009, and currently leads the Group of Organic Optoelectronic Materials and Devices. He received his Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry in 2007 from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences and then came to Pennsylvania State University, USA, as a postdoctoral from 2007 to 2009. His present research interests include polymer solar cells, semiconductor nanocrystal based optoelectronics, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells and flow batteries.
1. Introduction
In recent years, colloidal quantum dots (QDs) have attracted significant attention due to their unique optical and electronic properties including a high photoluminescence quantum yield (PLQY), broad absorption, narrow/symmetric emission, excellent stability, solution processibility and scalability for large area production.1 Quantum dots (QDs) are composed of a certain number of atoms or molecules and have quasi-zero-dimensional nanocrystalline particles with a size at the nanometer level (1–20 nm). As shown in Fig. 1a, from the perspective of the particle size, a bulk semiconductor possesses a continuous conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB). Electrons in a bulk semiconductor move freely with an average free path of 10 nm. When the size of the bulk semiconductor is reduced to the nanometer level, especially smaller than or close to the corresponding Bohr exciton radius, the motion of the electron wave function would be bounded by boundaries and show an obvious quantum confinement effect, resulting in the energy level splitting and the band gap widening. Moreover, as the particle size is further reduced, such phenomena become more obvious (Fig. 1a). It is noted that the absorption and fluorescence spectra of QDs are directly related to the energy band structure. Therefore, the emission wavelength of QDs strongly depends on the chemical composition and particle size. Using this property, researchers can effectively adjust the bandgap, the exciton binding energy and other electronic states of QDs by reasonably controlling the composition and particle size during the synthesis process, and eventually realize continuous and adjustable full-spectrum luminescence.2,3 Up to now, II–VI (e.g., CdTe, CdSe and ZnSe, ZnS and CdS, etc.) and III–V (such as InP and InAs) group semiconductor nanocrystal materials have been well studied. In addition, IV–VI, V–VI and I–III–VI group nanocrystals have also gained widespread attention. Generally, QDs with diverse emission colors can be obtained by selecting bulk materials with different bandgaps. Fig. 1b and c show how the emission colors and wavelengths of QDs change with their sizes and chemical compositions. For instance, CdS or ZnSe QDs can generate efficient emission in the region from near ultraviolet to deep blue, and PbS QDs would be a suitable choice for near-infrared emission.
 Fig. 1  (a) Electronic states in a bulk semiconductor and QDs made of the same material with different diameters. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Co-Action Publishing, copyright 2010. (b) Size-dependent change of the emission color from the colloidal solutions of CdSe/ZnS core–shell nanocrystals. The particles with the smallest CdSe core (about 1.7 nm diameter) produce blue emission, and the particles with the largest core (about 5 nm) emit in red. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2002. (c) Reported spectral ranges of emission for different semiconductor nanocrystals. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012. 
The quantum confinement effect also results in a narrow (15–35 nm) and generally gauss-symmetric emission peak of QDs, making them superior to organic luminescent materials in color purity and saturation. In addition, QDs also have the advantages of a wide absorption range, high photoluminescence quantum yield (100% theoretically) and high chemical stability. From the perspective of the preparation method, the preparation process of colloidal quantum dots is relatively simple, using the wet synthesis strategy with low production cost, and the particle size and microscopic morphology can be well-controlled by the conditions of components, temperature, time and ligand.7 The unique and fascinating photoelectric properties and the low-cost synthesis technology endow QDs with promising commercial applications in laser devices, lighting, displays, solar cells, bioimaging, biosensors, photodetectors, etc.
Quantum dot light-emitting diodes (QLEDs) are light-emitting devices with semiconductor quantum dots as the core material, and are developed based on the structure and fabrication technology of OLEDs. Compared with OLEDs, QLEDs show better performance. As shown in Fig. 2a, the full width at half peak (FWHM) of OLEDs is usually over 50 nm, while that of conventional QLEDs is generally 20–30 nm, even reaching the ultra-monochromicity (<15 nm).8 This makes QLEDs fully meet the requirements of ultra HD displays,9 as shown in the chromatism diagram of Commission International DE l'eclairage (CIE) (Fig. 2b). In addition, a QLED display has the advantages of self-illumination, a wide angle of view, a quick reaction time, a low working voltage, etc. The solution-processible properties of QDs significantly reduce the production cost, showing wide commercial application value in the fields of large-area display screens and flexible display screens.
 Fig. 2  High color quality of QD emission. (a) Comparison of the typical electroluminescent spectra of blue, green, and red QLEDs (solid lines) with those of OLEDs emitting at similar wavelengths (dashed lines). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Materials Research Society, copyright 2013. (b) CIE chromaticity diagram showing that the spectral purity of QDs enables a color gamut larger than the HDTV standard. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2012. 
Since the birth of QLEDs in 1994, the performance of QLEDs has made a great progress after more than 20 years’ development, which is mainly attributed to the researchers’ continuous efforts in the synthesis and development of high-quality QD luminescent materials, the improvement of novel and effective device structures, and the in-depth exploration of the working mechanism. Red, green and blue primary color (RGB) QLEDs have made great breakthroughs in terms of device efficiency and lifetime. Among all the current QD materials that applied in QLEDs, II–VI group QDs show more excellent and more stable performance than other QDs, which is due to the continuous improvement of PLQY (near 100%) and the surface modification technology. The current QLED records of various performance indicators are based on II–VI group QDs. At present, the peak luminance of red and green QLEDs reaches 356000 and 614000 cd m−2, respectively, and the peak external quantum efficiency (EQE) of high luminance red and green QLEDs reaches 21.6 and 22.9%, respectively, demonstrating both high luminance and high efficiency.11 Meanwhile, the T50 lifetime (i.e., the time when the luminance drops to half of the initial luminance) of red and green QLEDs at the initial luminance of 100 cd m−2 has exceeded 1.6 million hours.11 Nevertheless, compared with red and green light devices, blue QLEDs have always been the research weakness. At present, the peak luminance of blue QLEDs is only 62600 cd m−2, which is an order of magnitude worse than the other two devices, and the lifetime is even three orders of magnitude worse.
The research on blue QLEDs is of great practical significance, that is once a breakthrough is made in luminance, efficiency or lifetime, it will dramatically change the current display and lighting field market. Many good reviews have been published on the development of QDs and their applications in QLEDs.1,9,12–19 In this review, we will focus on summarizing the efforts made by researchers in the field of blue QLEDs and the latest research progress. In the Introduction part, we briefly introduce the characteristics of QD materials and their advantages in QLEDs, and point out the primary cause for the poor performance of blue QLEDs. Next in chapter 2, we will discuss the electroluminescence principle of QDs, the research progress in the QLED structure and the key factors affecting the device performance in detail. The challenges to improve the performance of blue QLEDs are also presented. In chapter 3, we will introduce the research progress made by researchers aimed at improving the performance of blue QLEDs in detail, for instance QD materials, the charge transfer layer (CTL), the device structure and the device lifetime. Finally, we will propose our own opinions on the prospect and existing problems of blue QLEDs, providing advice for the future research on the efficient and stable blue QLEDs. We believe that with the further improvement of the performance of blue QLEDs, the application of QLEDs in solid state lighting and flat panel displays will be accelerated.
2. QD-based light emitting devices
2.1 Electroluminescence from QDs
The performance of QLEDs is related to various factors, but firstly the key factor that restricts the overall efficiency is the photoelectric properties of QDs themselves. The precise control of the photoelectric properties of QDs based on composition, structure, surface chemistry and other aspects,20 and the in-depth understanding of the photoelectric properties of QD films21,22 and the exciton recombination dynamics inside QDs23,24 would be conducive to improving the performance of QLEDs.

2.1.1 Nanostructure of QDs. 
With the decrease of the QD size, its specific surface area increases continuously, and the exposed surface atomic numbers increase as well, resulting in a large amount of unsaturated dangling bonds and surface states with diverse energy levels. The defect states within the forbidden band of QDs can capture carriers and excitons, increase the risk of the non-radiative recombination, and also cause the degeneration of the photoelectric properties of QDs.25 Therefore, chemical passivation on the surface of QDs is a very effective and necessary approach to improve the fluorescence characteristics and stability of QDs. In general, organic ligands such as aliphatic amines or acids can be introduced onto the surface of QDs, or wide bandgap semiconductor materials can be coated as shells, or both approaches can be used to reduce the influence of surface unsaturated dangling bonds of QDs. Effective surface-ligand passivation is therefore critical for colloidal QDs to keep their quantum confinement character and high luminescence quantum yield. Surface ligands play multiple roles in determining the properties of QDs. Firstly, surface ligands provide the necessary colloidal stability and solution processibility for QDs. During the purification of QDs and the fabrication of devices, the binding between ligands and the QD surface should be strong enough to avoid ligand loss. Secondly, surface ligands coordinate with the surface atoms and passivate the surface defects to reduce the surface trap assisted quenching process. Thirdly, surface ligands affect the charge transfer properties of QD films. Fourthly, ligand-induced surface dipoles can change the energy level alignment of QD films. However, pure organic ligands are not stable enough and easily affected by the surroundings of QDs, especially easy to react with water and oxygen in air, or fall off under continuous illumination to form new dangling bonds that become a non-radiative recombination channel for photogenic charge carriers, which ultimately reduces the PLQY and stability of QDs.26 In order to further improve the photoelectric properties of QDs, it is a more effective approach to passivate the surface of QDs by coating wide bandgap semiconductor materials (such as CdS, ZnS, ZnSe, etc.) on the surface and form core/shell structured QDs.
Core/shell structured QDs are composed of fluorescent nanocrystals (1–10 nm) and semiconductor shells (Fig. 3). As early as 1990, Kortan et al. successfully coated ZnS on the CdSe surface by using the reverse micelle method.27 The as-prepared QDs show a distinct band edge emission and almost suppress the surface state emission. Compared with the uncoated quantum dots, the core/shell structured QDs display a higher PLQY. This is because the wide bandgap inorganic shell material not only passivates the dangling bonds on the surface, avoiding the fluorescence quenching from the photogenic charge state, but also limits the photogenic carrier on the surface of the core, reducing the probability that it will penetrate the shell and be captured by the surface defects. In addition, the shell isolates the highly active core from the surroundings physically at the same time, avoiding the negative influence of oxygen and water, and thus improving the stability of QDs. Therefore, regardless of whether the organic ligands on the shell surface fall off or not, the shell greatly inhibits the non-radiative recombination and enhances the PLQY of QDs.
 Fig. 3  Schematic shape, energy band diagram, electron–hole wave function, and typical properties of core/shell QDs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. 
It is important to note that the shell material should be selected properly during the synthesis of core/shell structured QDs. An appropriate shell material should be judged not only by its energy level alignment, but also by whether it matches the core material in the crystal structure and lattice constant. Particularly in the case of growing thick shells, the shell material is usually required to have the same crystal form and smaller lattice mismatch as the core material. Otherwise, with the growth of the shell, stress will form at the core/shell interface, resulting in defects at the core/shell interface or inside the shell, which will capture photogenic carriers, thus reducing the PLQY of QDs.28 Taking the commonly used CdSe core as an example, CdS, ZnS and ZnSe are commonly used shell materials, among which ZnS has a relatively wide bandgap, which can well confine carriers on the surface of CdSe, and is beneficial to improve the PLQY of QDs, thus being preferred by researchers. However, the lattice mismatch between CdSe and ZnS is large, especially when in the case of thick ZnS, the lattice stress at the CdSe/ZnS interface increases significantly, resulting in lattice defects, which serve as non-radiative recombination centers, reducing the PLQY of QDs in turn. Therefore, how to balance the contradiction between the bandgap matching and lattice matching of the core and shell is very important for the preparation of high-quality core/shell QDs.
Therefore, on the basis of ensuring the carriers being effectively limited, researchers have carried out a lot of work and made great progress in reducing lattice stress and lattice mismatch between the core/shell. Based on this work, core/shell structured QDs can be roughly divided into two categories: core/multi-shell QDs and alloy structured quantum dots. The common feature of these two types is the wide bandgap ZnS as the outermost shell of QDs. For the first kind of QD, in order to reduce the interface stress caused by lattice mismatch, a semiconductor material (CdS, ZnSe) with a band gap between the CdSe core and ZnS shell can be introduced to form QDs (CdSe/CdS/ZnS or CdSe/ZnSe/ZnS) with a core/shell/shell multi-shell structure to improve the properties.29,30 This core/multi-shell structure has been widely used to improve the PLQY and stability of QDs. Compared with CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs, such core/shell/shell QDs have more uniform size distribution, better crystallinity and a higher PLQY (over 80%).30
Although in theory, the emission wavelength of QDs can be adjusted according to the quantum confinement effect, there exist large limits in adjusting the bandgap of binary component QDs. Particularly, the blue shift in emission induced by the quantum confinement effect hardly generates deep blue emission for some kinds of QDs. In terms of synthesis, the growth kinetics of nucleation, reaction time, the use of multiple ligands and additional injection of precursors need to be adjusted with complexity and precision.31,32 These issues are critical to the synthesis of blue CdSe QDs for the small sized CdSe QDs (<2 nm) difficult to obtain under conventional reaction conditions. Because of the high difficulty in synthesis, yellow and red core/shell QD materials were mainly obtained in the early process of QD synthesis.
In order to overcome the practical limitation of the bandgap that can only be regulated by the quantum confinement effect of binary component QDs, multi-component alloyed QDs have been developed and synthesized. This is mainly due to the use of various physical properties (e.g. bandgap, exciton Boer radius, lattice constant, etc.) of raw materials; for instance, the bandgap of QDs can be widened by doping wide bandgap semiconductor materials. Therefore, core/shell quantum dots with the same composition have the unique property that the bandgap can be adjusted with the composition, which reduces the dependence of the fluorescence color on the core size of QDs, and is very favorable for the synthesis of blue QDs. In addition, alloyed QDs are insensitive to the non-homogeneous spectral broadening, and thus has a narrower emission bandwidth.33 So far, by introducing wide bandgap materials into the synthesis system of binary component QDs, the ratio of reactants can be adjusted according to the activity differences in reactants, and then the ratio of different components in QDs can be adjusted to obtain different emission colors. The emission adjustment in the whole visible spectrum has been realized through designing and synthesizing alloyed core/shell QDs with diverse components, which is a great progress in the field of QD synthesis. In addition, gradient-alloyed QDs have a high PLQY and stability, and their chemical compositions change along the radial gradient, resulting in gradient changes in the energy band. This gradual localized energy barrier can increase the injection of electrons, so as to promote the availability of excitons, and effectively restrict excitons in QDs to avoid exciton transfer. Component alloying can also reduce the stress between the core and shell, lattice distortion and defect formation, thus improving the PLQY of QDs. In addition, by optimizing the growth of the epitaxial shell and using a wide bandgap shell material, the excitons can be confined into the core of QDs, so as to reduce the non-radiation recombination and improve the radiative efficiency. The PLQY of QDs with this kind of structure can approach 100%.


2.1.2 Luminescence properties of QDs. 
The luminous pathways of QDs mainly are the following two kinds. Firstly, the electron in the ground state transfers to the excited state to form an electron–hole pair after it absorbs a photon with energy greater than the bandgap; then it will radiate energy in the form of light when the excited electron falls back to the ground state, and such a process is called photoluminescence (Fig. 4a). Secondly, in QLED devices, the electrons and holes are injected from the cathode and anode, respectively, and migrate to the QD emitting layer (EML) under an electric field through the electron transporting layer (ETL) and hole transporting layer (HTL), respectively, and then recombine radiatively and emit photons, and such a process is called electroluminescence (Fig. 4a).
 Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of exciton dynamics in QDs: (a) the generation mechanism of photogenic excitons and field-induced excitons. (b) Exciton relaxation process. (c) Three pathways of exciton recombination: radiative recombination, trap-assisted recombination and auger recombination. 
Electrons in excited states, especially those in higher energy levels, are very unstable and have higher potential energy than the energy of band edge excitons in QDs. Therefore, such excitons will relax to the lowest level of excited states through phonon vibration firstly, which is called “hot exciton relaxation” (Fig. 4b). The relaxation process takes a very short time, usually at the picosecond level.34 Theoretically, as long as the selection law is satisfied, even the hot excitons have a certain probability of directly transferring to the valence band (VB) for radiative luminescence. Therefore, even QDs with very uniform particle sizes and morphology have the possibility of fluorescence spectrum broadening.35 Once the electrons and holes relax to the conduction band minimum (CBM) and valence band maximum (VBM), respectively, they can recombine radiatively or non-radiatively (Fig. 4c). But in display applications, we prefer to avoid the non-radiative recombination via defect recombination36 and auger recombination37 as far as possible.
There are three main pathways for exciton recombination: radiative recombination, trap-assisted recombination and auger recombination. Impurities or defects in the semiconductor will produce defect state energy levels, which will cause defect recombination, that is the electron from the CB relaxes to the defect state, then relaxes to the VB and recombines with the hole. Auger recombination usually involves three carriers. An electron recombines with a hole and transfers the energy to a third carrier (electron or hole), such as an electron in the CB. And after absorbing energy, this electron returns to the edge of the CB due to the thermal interaction, resulting in energy dissipation in the form of heat.
It can be assumed that “ideal” QDs without any defect states would have an intrinsic radiative recombination channel and an almost 100% PLQY. However, the fluorescence lifetime decay curve of common CdSe QDs shows that the fluorescence decay process is usually multi-exponential, indicating that the excitons in QDs have multiple recombination channels. In order to suppress the non-radiative channels that lead to a decrease in PLQY, the mechanisms of these non-radiative channels need to be understood. Generally speaking, the defect states of QDs mainly come from the surface, since most of the atoms on the surface do not reach coordination saturation, and these uncoordinated surface dangling bonds are the main reasons for surface defect states. Surface defects have a great influence on the intrinsic recombination probability of QDs, so it is necessary to eliminate these surface defects as much as possible, which can be done mainly as follows: one is to select suitable organic molecules to coordinate with the dangling bonds on the surface of QDs; the other is to passivate the surface with an epitaxial shell. Due to steric hindrance and binding properties, it is generally considered that the former method of organic coordination has limited effects. In order to maximize the PLQY, epitaxial shell growth to form a core/shell structure is considered as one of the optimal choices.27
Apparently, a single radiative recombination channel is the basic condition for maintaining a high QY in light-emitting devices. In addition, the excess energy that transfers to the non-radiative recombination channel will not only cause energy loss of emitted photons, but also lead to the luminescence of QDs into the “dark state”, that is the “blinking” of QDs. Fluorescence blinking is common in nanoparticles (NPs), including single molecules,38,39 carbon nanotubes,40 semiconductor nanorods,41etc. In 1996, the Brus group firstly identified the fluorescence intermittency or blinking phenomenon in QDs’ single particles,42 namely single QDs present an unstable, intermittent luminescence under continuous light excitation; also the luminescence of QDs presents a random variation between the “bright state” and “dark state” (“on” and “off”).
Since the discovery of QD blinking (Fig. 5a), many research groups have conducted in-depth research on it, and some groups have also conducted relevant research on how to suppress it. However, there are different theories on the mechanism of blinking, among which the most widely accepted one is that QDs are charged and discharged repeatedly (Fig. 5b).33,43–45 Efros and Rosen developed the charging/discharging theory of QD blinking.33 They suggested that QDs are charged due to the temperature change or auger assisted autoionization. The “bright state” in QD blinking is the luminescence due to the uncharged QDs being excited, while the “dark state” occurs when the positive or negative charged QDs are excited. An exciton with an extra positive charge is called a “positive trion”, while an exciton with an extra negative charge is called a “negative trion”.1 These two exciton states are not conducive to luminescence, that is to say they do not return to the ground state by the radiative transition, but by the non-radiative transition. This non-radiative transition is called auger recombination. This refers to the process when the excitons in the excited states of the “positive trion” or “negative trion” release energy and return to the ground state. Instead of emitting radiation, the released energy is transferred to the extra holes or electrons, causing them to transfer to higher excited states (Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  (a) First observation of PL blinking in single CdSe QD measurements. Upper panel: PL intensity trajectories as a function of pump intensity. Lower panel: The dependence of PL blinking on the QD structure. QDs with a ZnS shell show reduced blinking compared to core-only samples. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 1996. (b) Schematic diagram of neutral and charged nanocrystals. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2008. (c) Auger recombination of a negative trion (X−), a positive trion (X+), and a biexciton (2X). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. 
The probability of auger recombination of QDs is much higher than that of the corresponding bulk semiconductor, since the energy conservation and translational momentum conservation are required to be followed in bulk semiconductors, but in the QD system, angular momentum conservation replaces translational momentum conservation due to the strong spatial constraint. On the other hand, the strong spatial constraint will lead to a strong enhancement of Coulomb coupling among carriers, and thus exacerbate the auger recombination in QDs.46 According to the size of QDs and the diversity of exciton states, the characteristic time scale of auger recombination ranges from a few picoseconds to several hundred nanoseconds,46 which is several orders of magnitude shorter than that of radiative recombination. The auger recombination of QDs has a serious impact on the performance of QLEDs.47–49
It is well known that every QD is continuously excited in the operating QLEDs. Therefore, it is critical to study the optical properties of QDs under continuous excitation for better understanding how to fabricate high-quality QLEDs. Until now, many kinds of QDs with various compositions have been reported with high PLQYs, but only a few kinds of QDs were found to be nonblinking under continuous excitation.

2.2 Operating mechanism of QLEDs
The operation principle of QLEDs can be divided into three steps:
(1) Carrier injection: holes and electrons are injected from the anode and cathode of the device to the transport layer under the drive of bias voltage. The carrier injection efficiency is closely related to the injection barrier. At present, the description of carrier injection in QLEDs is based on the mechanism of tunneling and hot electron injection in inorganic semiconductor light-emitting diodes.
(2) Carrier transport: after the carrier injection, the carriers will transport through the transport layer and enter into the EML under the driving of the applied electric field. Because of the localization properties of the π-electrons in organic molecules, the carrier transmission in an organic solid can be regarded as “hopping” among different molecule positions. Such a carrier hopping rate is not only affected by the degree of disorder, but also strongly dependent on the applied electric field.
(3) Exciton formation and recombination: when holes and electrons meet, excitons are formed under the interaction of Coulomb forces. Excitons are generally unstable and transfer quickly to the ground state. During the returning to the ground state, energy may be released in the form of photons or heat. The former is called a radiative transition, while the latter is a non-radiative transition. In order to improve the efficiency of QLEDs, the rate of the radiative transition should be much higher than that of the non-radiative transition.
There are three electroluminescence mechanisms of QDs: charge injection, resonance energy transfer and electric field ionization. The charge injection mechanism refers to the process in which electrons and holes in the adjacent CTL are directly injected into the QD EML. This mechanism provides guidance for the selection of charge transfer materials in constructing QLEDs, that is appropriate charge transfer materials should meet two conditions: one is that the interface barrier between QDs and CTL is matching, the other is that the charge transfer material should ensure the carrier concentration injected into the device being even. When the selected charge transfer material meets the above conditions, the injected electrons and holes would achieve a balance, and then the quenching caused by QD charging is effectively suppressed, so that the device performance is improved. Energy resonance transfer, or Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET), refers to the energy transfer of excitons from adjacent donor molecules to QDs in a non-radiative form through the dipole–dipole interaction. The strength of FRET depends on the interaction distance and the overlap integral between the donor molecule and the acceptor molecule. The electric field ionization mechanism refers to the process of QDs generating free carriers, forming excitons and occurring radiative recombination under electric field assisted ionization.
It is generally believed that the electroluminescence mechanism of QLEDs is the result of direct charge injection, FRET or the combined effect of the two (Fig. 6). The specific type of mechanism depends on the structure and material of the QLED device. Although the mechanism is not fully clear, the abovementioned ones undoubtedly provide a certain direction for device construction and the improvement of performance.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of (a) a typical QLED structure and (b) charge injection and energy transfer process. 
2.3 Efficiency of QLEDs
There are various parameters to evaluate the efficiency of QLED devices, including quantum efficiency, luminous efficiency, power efficiency and current efficiency.50 Quantum efficiency is generally used to describe the ratio of the number of emitted photons to the number of injected electron–hole pairs under the applied electric field. Quantum efficiency can be divided into Internal Quantum Efficiency (ηint) and External Quantum Efficiency (ηext) according to different statistical methods of emitted photons. ηint represents the ratio of the total number of photons produced in the QD EML to the number of externally injected electron–hole pairs, and can be expressed as:ηint = γχηrwhere γ, χ and ηr are charge balance factor, fraction of excitons enabling an optically allowed transition, and the radiative recombination efficiency of QDs, respectively. To achieve efficient QLEDs, electrons and holes should be confined into the QD EML to the peak extent. γ depends on the device configuration and the nature of the CTL, and could reach 100% when electron and hole injection are balanced. χ is the proportion of excitons enabling an optically allowed transition; for instance, 25% for fluorescence and 100% for phosphorescence. For II–VI group semiconductor QDs, χ is theoretically 100% because of spin–orbit coupling.51,52ηr can be expressed as:  where kr and knr are the rate of exciton radiative recombination and exciton non-radiative recombination, respectively. ηr is related to the quenching mechanism of QDs. The specific influence factors have been discussed in section 2.1.
The ηint for an ideal QLED can be close to 100%. However, due to the layered structure of QLEDs, the optical processes such as absorption, reflection and refraction will lead to various types of optical losses when the photons generated in the QD EML propagate to the surface of the device, resulting in only a part of the light being emitted into air for effective use. Therefore, ηext, defined as a ratio of the number of photons emitted out of a device to the injected electron–hole pairs, is a key parameter to evaluate the efficiency of QLEDs. It can be expressed as:ηext = ηcouplingηintwhere ηcoupling refers to as the optical out-coupling efficiency of QLEDs. So far, the typical planar QLEDs include metal electrodes, multilayer thin film materials, transparent ITO electrodes and glass substrates. In general, the refractive index of the internal materials and transparent ITO electrode in QLEDs is higher than 1.6, greater than 1.5 of the glass substrate. Because the refractive index of the internal material inside the multilayer thin-film device greatly differs from that of air (1.0), when light propagates from a high-index material to a low-index material, a large part of the light fail to be emitted into air because of total reflection.
In brief, the energy dissipation of QD radiation can be divided into the following four modes (Fig. 7).51,53,54 (1) Direct emission, which refers to the visible light radiation emitted into air through the substrate, that is, corresponding to ηcoupling, depends on the thickness of the CTL, the refractive index of internal materials and the position of the EML relative to the electrode, and usually accounts for about 20% of the total radiation. (2) Substrate mode, refers to the fact that light can pass through the ITO/Glass substrate interface smoothly, but returns to the device due to the occurrence of total reflection at the substrate/air interface. (3) Waveguide mode. In this mode, light is restricted between ITO and the cathode and cannot enter the glass substrate due to the waveguide effect. This part of lost light energy will eventually be converted into heat energy, and greatly affect the device performance and lifetime because the whole energy conversion process occurs among the functional layers. (4) Surface plasmons, occurring at the interface between the metal and medium, refer to as a collective resonance phenomenon caused by the interaction between light-wave electromagnetic fields and free electrons. In this process, a coupling effect occurs between the free charges on the surface of the metal and the electromagnetic radiation, leading to the formation of evanescent waves of the excited state, and then causing the surface plasmas having a greater momentum or larger planar wave vector than “free” photons in organic layers. The increased momentum or planar wave vector makes the wave vector of surface plasmon polaritons (SPPs) mismatch with that of light-wave electromagnetic fields, resulting in the formed evanescent wave propagating along the metal/organic layer interface, therefore the planar SPP mode is non-radiative.
 Fig. 7  Various kinds of energy dissipation in a normal structured light-emitting device. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2011. 
2.4 The evolution of QLED architecture
After nearly 30 years of development, great progress has been made in the device performance of QLEDs. In addition to the continuous improvement of the QD quality, the continuous innovation of the device structure has also played a major role that cannot be ignored. The device structure has evolved from the initial polymer/QD double-layer structure to the organic–inorganic hybrid structure, which enables precise control of electron and hole injection through the CTL. The optimal performance reported in the current literature is also based on this kind of hybrid structure. Herein according to the development of the device structure of QLEDs, the research progress in its performance is summarized.
At the beginning of the birth of QLEDs, a polymer/QD bilayer or polymer–QD homogeneous mixture was sandwiched between two electrodes to form the most primitive QLED device, which was called type I.55,56 In 1994, Colvin et al. constructed a QLED device with a bilayer polystyrene (PPV)/CdSe structure (Fig. 8), and the ηext of the device was only 0.001–0.01%.55 In addition, as a charge transfer material, PPV would also generate electroluminescence under external electric fields, which affected the luminescence purity of the device to some extent. Soon afterwards, Dabbousi et al. constructed the device by mixing poly-n-vinylcarbazole (PVK) with CdSe homogeneously, but the peak ηext of the device was less than 0.01%.56 This was mainly due to the limitation of the synthesis method of QDs, where the PLQY of CdSe QDs with a bare core is low, and the surface insulating long chain ligands hinder the charge transport, so that the injection current is very low. Subsequently, Schlamp et al. replaced the QDs with core/shell CdSe/CdS, and the luminance and ηext reached 600 cd m−2 and 0.22% with the same device structure, respectively.57 Although Mattoussi et al. replaced the QDs with CdSe/ZnS, the device efficiency was still low, along with poor stability.58 The main reason is the imbalance between cathode and anode charge injection (i.e., the charge transfer efficiency of the QD layer is higher than that of the polymer layer), as well as the direct contact between QDs and the cathode, which increases the probability of exciton quenching of QDs.
 Fig. 8  The structure and energy level diagram of QLED devices with a polymer material as the CTL. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 1994. 
In order to improve the device performance, researchers proposed a type II device structure with small organic molecules as the CTL on the basis of OLED devices in 2002. In the type II structure, a single layer of QDs is sandwiched between two organic CTLs, effectively improving the imbalance of electron and hole injection. Coe et al. sandwiched the single-layer CdSe/ZnS QD EML between the N,N′-diphenyl-N,N′-bis(3-methylphenyl)-4,4′-diamine (TPD) HTL and tris-(8-hydroxyquinoline) aluminium (Alq3) ETL (Fig. 9a).59 This structure could ensure the holes and electrons being better injected into the QD EML, effectively avoiding the luminescence from organic layers, and the peak ηext and the peak current efficiency of the device reached 0.52% and 1.6 cd A−1, respectively. However, due to a certain mismatch in the energy level, a part of electrons and holes recombined radiatively in the Alq3 ETL. The introduction of an electron blocking layer (EBL) of 3-(4-biphenylyl)-4-phenyl-5-t-butylphenyl-1,2,4-triazole (TAZ) effectively confined the exciton recombination region to the QD EML (Fig. 9b), avoiding the luminescence of Alq3, and the luminance of the modified device reached 2000 cd m−2.
 Fig. 9  QLED device structure and EL spectrum of QLEDs (a) without and (b) with the TAZ EBL. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2002. 
Other than the small molecule charge transfer materials mentioned above, poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene/polystyrenesulfonate (PEDOT:PSS) has also been introduced as a hole injection material (HIL)60 to improve the anode work function and reduce the surface roughness of the anode as well. Organic polymers and their derivatives, such as poly-TPD60 and PS-TPD-PFCB,61 were also used as hole transport materials. Sun et al. constructed a type II QLED based on core/shell QDs with a ZnS or CdS/ZnS coating CdSe core as the EML (Fig. 10).60 After optimizing the thickness of the QD EML, the luminance of red, orange, yellow and green QLEDs reached the highest value at that time of 9064, 3200, 4470 and 3700 cd m−2, respectively. The peak current efficiency was also increased to 2.8, 1.8, 1.3 and 1.1 cd A−1, respectively.
 Fig. 10  Structures, images and HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the type II QLEDs. (a) Core/shell QD structures. (b) HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the materials involved in the QLEDs. (c) Molecular structures of PEDOT, poly-TPD and Alq3. (d) EL spectra of the red, orange, yellow and green QLEDs operating at different luminances (voltages). These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2007. 
However, the use of an organic HTL leads to a decrease in the device stability in air.62,63 In addition, the charge mobilities of organic semiconductor materials themselves are not very high, which significantly increases the internal resistance of the device, and as a result the current density of the device cannot be increased effectively, thus limiting the luminance of the device. In order to improve the device stability, researchers began to construct type III structured QLEDs by using an inorganic CTL. Caruge et al. used magnetron sputtering to prepare a HTL and ETL of QLEDs with amorphous NiO and ZnO:SnO2, respectively (Fig. 11).64 This all-inorganic QLED device exhibits a saturated photoluminescence spectrum and high stability at high operating voltages. However, during the preparation of a metal oxide layer by sputtering, the QD EML will inevitably be damaged, and the direct contact between QDs and metal oxide will increase the possibility of fluorescence quenching. In addition, different metal oxides have various impacts on electron and hole transport, resulting in charge imbalance.65 All these factors will reduce the device performance.
 Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of (a) all-inorganic QLED device structure and (b) energy level structure. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2008. 
In 2010, Mashford et al. prepared p-NiO and n-ZnO charge transfer materials via a sol–gel method, and constructed an all-inorganic QLED device through solution processing (Fig. 12a and b).66 Although the solution processing reduces the damage to the QD film, the peak luminance of the device was only 249 cd m−2. According to Sun et al., the interface injection barrier between the ITO anode and p-NiO might be one of the factors affecting the performance of the all-inorganic device.67 This is because the Fermi energy level of ITO is −4.7 eV, while the VB energy level of p-NiO is −5.4 eV, so the large interface barrier (0.7 eV) hinders effective hole injection. In order to overcome the interface barrier, in 2014, Sun et al. introduced a thin layer of MoO3 between the ITO anode and p-NiO HTL to alleviate the barrier height between the two.67 MoO3 has a shallow VB energy level of −5.3 eV and a better charge transfer ability,68 so the introduction of a MoO3 thin layer can decrease the hole injection barrier and improve the recombination efficiency of electronic–hole pairs as well. After optimizing the thickness of MoO3, the experimental results showed that when the thickness was 5 nm, the electroluminescence intensity of the device could be increased by more than 100 times. In the study on the lifetime of all-inorganic QLEDs, Wood et al. constructed n–i–n type devices by using the electric field ionization principle of QDs.69 In the absence of any encapsulation, the device performances did not show significant attenuation when they were continuously measured in air for 20 h. In 2018, Yang et al. used MoO3 NPs prepared by the solution method as the HIL, NiO as the HTL, and ZnO NPs as the ETL to prepare all-inorganic QLEDs with the best performance reported in the literature, in which the luminance of blue, green, yellow and red QLEDs reached 1160, 21630, 13500 and 8870 cd m−2, respectively (Fig. 12c and d).70 Jiang et al. used wide bandgap magnesium oxide (MgO) modified nickel oxide (NiOx) (Ni0.88Mg0.12Ox) as the HTL to prepare an all-inorganic QLED, showing an improved efficiency up to 19.5% when compared with the device with original NiOx as the HTL.71 An ultra-thin MgO layer was further inserted between Ni0.88Mg0.12Ox and QDs to improve the charge accumulation, resulting in a 35% increase in efficiency. The peak luminance of the device exceeded 40000 cd m−2.
 Fig. 12  (a) Energy level diagram and (b) luminous intensity vs. applied voltage curves of ITO/NiO/QD/ZnO/Ag QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2010. (c) Energy level diagram and (d) EQE/current efficiency vs. current density curves of ITO/MoO3/NiO/QDs/ZnO/Al QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
Both the type II and type III device structures have their own advantages and disadvantages. In the type II device, the use of organic materials as the CTL can improve the device performance through effective FRET, but the charge mobilities of such materials are generally low. In the type III device, although inorganic metal oxides have higher charge mobilities, they fail to take advantage of FRET effectively.72 However, the type IV device structure, which is composed of an n-type metal oxide ETL and organic HTL, combines the advantages of type II and type III structures respectively. Based on the type IV structure, the device performance of QLEDs has shown an unprecedented improvement.
In 2009, Cho et al. used amorphous TiO2 as the ETL to construct red QLEDs, whose peak luminance was 12380 cd m−2, the peak power efficiency was 2.41 lm W−1, and the starting voltage was only 1.9 V (Fig. 13a–c).73 The electron mobility of TiO2 (1.7 × 10−4 cm2 V−1 s−1) is improved by an order of magnitude when compared with that of the organic electron transport material Alq3 (1.0 × 10−5 cm2 V−1 s−1). In 2011, Qian et al. constructed type IV QLEDs using ZnO with good crystallinity as the ETL (Fig. 13d).74 Note that the electron mobility of ZnO is 2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is 1–2 orders of magnitude higher than that of organic electron transporting materials. Moreover, the electron affinity energy and ionization energy of ZnO are ∼4.3 eV and ∼7.6 eV, respectively.75,76 Therefore, as an ETL, ZnO can not only facilitate effective electron injection, but also block the hole flow towards the cathode, thus boosting the recombination efficiency of electron–hole pairs. At the same time, the high electron mobility of ZnO is not easy to cause the hole accumulation at the HTL/QDs interface. Based on this, the peak luminance of orange-red, green and blue QLEDs reached 31000, 68000 and 4200 cd m−2, respectively, and the peak ηext reached 1.7%, 1.8% and 0.22%, respectively (Fig. 13e). The lifetime of the device could reach 250 h (initial luminance of 600 cd m−2) when tested in low vacuum without any encapsulation (Fig. 13f).
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic structure with the associated energy band diagram, (b) efficiency and (c) EL image of QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2009. (d) Energy level diagram, (e) luminance power efficiency and EQE vs. luminance curves, and (f) operation stability of QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2011. 
Since the emergence of ZnO, researchers have made great breakthroughs in device luminance, efficiency and lifetime through further improving the device structure, regulating the balance of electron and hole injection, and surface modification on the basis of the organic–inorganic hybrid structure and obtaining high-quality QDs.77–81 Dai et al. used a bilayer poly-TPD/PVK as the HTL and promoted the balance of electron and hole injection by inserting an organic insulating layer of PMMA at the interfaces of CdSe/CdS and ZnO (Fig. 14a).77 The peak ηext of the device was 20.5% (Fig. 14b and c). The improved balance of charge injection not only boosted the efficiency of QLEDs, but also greatly improved the operation lifetime, that is the lifetime of QLEDs exceeded 1000000 h at the initial luminance of 100 cd m−2 (Fig. 14d), while the lifetime of the devices without PMMA insertion was only 5% of the result. Shen et al. used n-octanethiol modified QDs as the EML to increase the charge mobility among QDs, thus making the peak luminance and ηext of deep blue QLEDs reach 7600 cd m−2 and 12.2%, respectively.81
 Fig. 14  (a) Energy level diagram, (b) EL spectrum at an applied voltage of 3 V and a corresponding photograph, (c) EQE vs. current density and luminance curves, and (d) stability data of the QLEDs with a thin PMMA insulating layer. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014. 
In the latest report, Shen et al. synthesized a series of novel core/shell structured CdSe/ZnSe QDs with an ultra-high PLQY (Fig. 15a).11 The core/shell QDs achieved the full particle distribution of Se elements and the alloyed linking at the core/shell interface, effectively reducing the hole injection barrier, optimizing the energy level alignment between the QD EML and the CTL, and improving the carrier injection efficiency, so as to realize a significant enhancement of the overall device performance (Fig. 15b–d). Based on the core/shell CdSe/ZnSe QDs, high-performance red, green and blue primary color QLEDs are constructed, showing the highest luminance and ηext up to 356000, 614000, and 62600 cd m−2 and 21.6%, 22.9% and 8.05%, respectively. At the initial luminance of 100 cd m−2, the T50 lifetime of the red and green devices was over 1.6 million hours, and that of the blue device was over 7000 hours as well.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the device architecture and (b–d) electroluminescence performance of the red, green and blue QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
The same group adopted the “low-temperature nucleation and high-temperature shell growth” method to synthesize high luminescence red Zn1−xCdxSe/ZnSe/ZnS and green Zn1−xCdxSe/ZnS core/shell QDs by precisely controlled shell growth, which matched the energy level with the adjacent HTL in QLEDs.82 As the EML, the Zn1−xCdxSe/ZnS based QLEDs exhibit a peak ηext up to 30.9%, a peak luminance of over 334000 cd m−2, a low efficiency roll-off and long operational lifetime of about 1800000 h at the initial luminance of 100 cd m−2. These major breakthroughs are owing to the combination of an intermediate ZnSe layer with an ultrathin ZnS outer shell and surface modification with 2-ethylhexane-1-thiol, which can improve the hole injection efficiency and charge injection balance. In another work, they successfully prepared novel ZnCdSe/gi/ZnS core/shell QDs with a graded intermediate ZnSe/ZnSeS layer, showing a high PLQY (>95%) and the ability of suppressing non-radiative FERT and auger recombination, effectively improving the hole injection and the charge balance.83 The as-prepared QLEDs exhibit a peak current efficiency of 100.5 cd A−1 and a ηext of 23.9%, respectively. The T95 lifetime at the initial luminance of 1000 cd m−2 was over 2500 h. All these findings based on the use of novel core/shell structured QDs are expected to provide new opportunities in advancing the QLED technology for future industry applications.
2.5 Challenges for blue QLEDs
To sum up, although the development time of QLEDs is very short, this field has made a rapid and great progress. Both the synthesis of high-quality QDs and the design of a device structure have made great progress, which makes QLEDs occupy an important position in the field of light-emitting devices. However, compared with red and green QLEDs, there still exists a large gap in the luminance, efficiency and stability for blue QLEDs, which seriously hinders the commercialization of QLEDs.
The poor performance of blue light QLEDs can be attributed to the following reasons:
(1) compared with green and red QDs, blue QDs possess a larger bandgap, which would increase the energy loss pathways of exciton quenching. In addition, blue QDs also have a small volume, a large specific surface area and massive surface defects, leading to serious fluorescence quenching and a low PLQY. Moreover, blue QDs would display a distinct “blinking” effect under high luminous flux, which limits its stable light output and affects the luminance of blue QLEDs.
(2) The inherent structure of blue QDs creates a bottleneck in carrier injection.84 At present, the blue QDs that applied in the high performance blue QLEDs are all core/shell structured CdZnS/ZnS QDs with a thick ZnS shell. On the one hand, the use of a thick ZnS shell with a wide bandgap would effectively confine the exciton wave function, and suppress the non-radiative auger recombination and FRET among QDs, so as to make the core/shell CdZnS/ZnS QDs possess a high PLQY, which is even over 90% and comparable to that of red and green QDs.85,86 On the other hand, the use of a thick ZnS shell would widen the bandgap of QDs, make the charge injection difficult, and thus affect the overall efficiency of blue QLEDs.
(3) In terms of device structure design, blue QDs possess a large bandgap and a deep VBM, leading to a large hole injection barrier at the interface between the commonly used HTL and blue QDs. Effective hole injection cannot be achieved with the use of a conventional organic HTL. However, the electron can be smoothly injected into the EML due to the use of an inorganic electron transporting layer (e.g., ZnO).
(4) From the perspective of charge transport, the electron mobility of ZnO NPs (∼2 × 10−3 cm2 V−1 s−1) is higher than that of conventional organic ETLs. Under the influence of the double difference in carrier mobility and charge injection efficiency, the number of two charge carriers in the EML is unbalanced. The extra electrons make the QDs negatively charged, resulting in the fluorescence quenching through the non-radiative auger recombination process, which is the main reason affecting the efficiency improvement of QLEDs and the efficiency roll-off at high current.47 Moreover, the current existing in the QLEDs would cause massive Joule heat, which increases the local temperature of the device, resulting in the changes in the rates of different decay processes. For instance, a high temperature can promote the charge jump into a nearby surface trap state, thus exacerbating the trap assisted quenching process.
3. Optimization of blue QLEDs
Aiming at the problems existing in blue QLEDs, the improvement of the device performance mainly comes from the following three factors: one is the rapid development of the QD synthesis technology (core/shell QDs with a thick shell,87–89 gradient-alloyed QDs80,86,90 and organic ligand modified QDs81); the other is the rational selection of the device structure (conventional structure,2,11,81,91–93 inversed structure94–101 and tandem structure102,103). The third is interface engineering.91,92,97,98,104 In particular, the selection of an appropriate electrode modification layer (organic material, inorganic material or organic/inorganic hybrid material) can facilitate the charge injection, charge transport and exciton recombination. In addition, the working mechanism, microscopic process and quenching mechanism of blue QLEDs need to be further studied; for instance, the energy transfer inside the blue QD thin film, the interfacial charge transfer between QDs and the CTL, and the electric field induced quenching. Table 1 summarizes the recent advances in blue QLEDs, which gives a comprehensive comparison of the performances of the latest published blue QLEDs.
Table 1 Summary of the recent advances in blue QLEDs




Year
Device structure
Device performance
Ref.


Emission peak (nm)
Luminance (cd m−2)
Current efficiency (cd A−1)

η
ext (%)

T
50 (h)




2019
ITO/PEDOT/TFB:TCTA/QDs/AZO:ZrAcac/Al
464
34874
5.7
10.7
2.02

104



2019
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnxCd1−xSe/ZnSe QDs/ZnO/Al
476
62600
—
8.05
7000

11



2019
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/QDs/LiF/ZnO/Al
465
36970
7.9
9.8
—

105



2019
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/Cd0.1Zn0.9S/ZnS QDs/TBS-PBO/ZnO:Mg/Al
452
7992.5
—
17.4
—

106



2019
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al:Al2O3
453.8
27753
3.29
8.92
—

107



2018
ITO/PEI/ZnO/QDs/PVK/MoO3/Al
458
2640
2.5
5.5
—

94



2018
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/CdZnSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
468
315
4.26
6.20
—

108



2018
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CdZnSeS/ZnS QDs/ZnMgO/Al/HATCN/MoO3/PVK/CdZnSeS/ZnS QDs/ZnMgO/Al
474
26800
17.9
21.4
—

103



2018
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/ZnCdS/CdxZn1−xS/ZnS QDs/LiF/ZnO/Al
445
6768
3.4
18.0
47.4

109



2018
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/DNA/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
462
16655
2.3
5.65
—

91



2018
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CdxZn1−xSeyS1−y/ZnS QDs/ZnMgO/Al
475
29750
7.80
9.81
—

110



2018
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnMgO/Al
470
18348
11.38
12.97
—

111



2018
ITO/ZnO:CsN3/CdSe/ZnS QDs/TAPC/HAT-CN/MoO3/Al
460
—
4.1
6.6
—

95



2018
ITO/PMAH/TFB/PVK/QDs/ZnO/Al
454
4140
1.99
5.99
—

96



2018
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnCdSe/ZnS//ZnS QDs/PMMA/ZnO/Al
479
14100
11.8
16.2
355

112



2018
ITO/LZO/MLZO/QDs/TCTA:NPB:HAT-CN/Al
453
1000
0.5
2.6
—

97



2018
ITO/ZnO/CdZnSe/ZnS QDs/mCP/MoO3/Al
455
—
1.08
3.23
—

113



2017
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CdSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
468
4890
14.1
19.8
47.4

114



2017
ITO/PEIE/ZnO/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/CBP/CBP:MoO3/MoO3/Al
460
—
3.10
7.85
—

92



2017
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
445
10400
2.26
11.9
4300

48



2017
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/Al:Al2O3
457
13002
1.15
—
—

115



2016
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/PVK:ZnCdSe/ZnSe/ZnSeS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
471
13800
6.41
8.76
—

116



2016
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/EGaIn
449
1680
1.64
5.03
—

117



2016
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/CdZnSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
470
13670
5.9
8.1
376

118



2015
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/Cd1−xZnxS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
455
4000
4.4
10.7
1000

80



2015
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/ZnSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
455
2632
1.38
7.83
—

119



2015
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnCdS/ZnS-OT QDs/ZnO/Al
443
7600
2.1
12.2
—

81



2014
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS/ZnO/Al
445
4100
1.13
3.8
—

86



2013
ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
452
2624
2.2
7.1
—

84



2013
ITO/ZnO/ZnSe/ZnS QDs/TCTA/MoO3/Al
441
1170
0.51
—
—

100



2012
ITO/ZnO/CdZnS/ZnS QDs/CBP/MoO3/Al
433
2250
0.4
1.7
—

101



2011
TO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CdSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al
470
4200
0.32
0.22
—

74





3.1 Synthesis of high-quality blue QDs
From the perspective of materials, blue QDs with a high PLQY and high stability are the prerequisites for the realization of high performance blue QLEDs. These properties greatly depend on the material compositions, crystal structure, core/shell structure and ligand. “Tailored” QDs are the key to realize high performance QLEDs. Only stable and reliable high-quality QDs can lay a foundation for subsequent device research and application. In this section, we focus on the device performance improvements that have resulted from the nanoengineering efforts of blue QDs. This mainly involves optimizing the core/shell structure by changing the shell thickness, alloying, and grading the interfacial layer between the core and shell.
At present, high-quality blue QDs are mainly based on CdZnS/ZnS core/shell QDs with a thick ZnS shell, and the corresponding PLQY has already been close to 100%.48 In the QLED device, the shell thickness and the shell composition of core–shell QDs might affect the non-radiative auger recombination of QDs, fluorescence blinking under a high luminous flux, FRET among QDs, the charge transfer pathway and the carriers’ potential energy.87
The initial research on blue QDs mainly focused on CdS/ZnS core/shell QDs. Because the CdS naked core displayed a noticeable quantity of deep-trap emission, its PLQY was only 3–6%. As the ZnS shell continued to grow, the deep-trap emission was suppressed, and the PL stability was enhanced. The PLQY reached its peak value of 20–30% when the average ZnS shell is 3 monolayers (Fig. 16a).120 With the increase of ZnS shell thickness, an increase in the emission FWHM and the red shift of PL were observed (Fig. 16b). Since the PLQY of CdS/ZnS core/shell QDs was very low, only blue QLEDs with the peak value of 468 nm were constructed. With the increase of current, the EL from the organic CTL occupies an increasing proportion in the EL spectrum, and the device efficiency has not been reported. However, if the shell is too thick, the carrier injection efficiency will be affected. Without an appropriate shell thickness and shell composition, even QLEDs based on QDs with a high PLQY may exhibit poor performance. Therefore, while maintaining a high PLQY and stability of blue QDs at the same time, adjusting the shell material to design the size, structure and composition of QDs might be the key to inhibit the FRET and achieve high-quality blue core/shell QDs enabling the improvement of the charge injection efficiency, and boosting the device efficiency ultimately.80
 Fig. 16  (a) Absorption spectra of a size-series of large CdS nanocrystals ranging from 3.7 to 5.2 nm in diameter. (b) Normalized PL spectra of bare CdS nanocrystals (---) and the corresponding PL of the (CdS)ZnS core/shell nanocrystals (—). These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2004. 
With the improvement of synthesis methods, the PLQY of blue QDs has been increased, but still not more than 65%.121,122 Most research studies on blue QDs focused on the core/shell structured CdS, as well as the core/shell structured CdSe, Zn1−xCdxSe.123,124 However, the PLQY of these reported QDs was still less than 75%. Compared with the red and green QDs with a PLQY as high as 90%, blue CdSe/ZnS with a small-size CdSe core only had a PLQY of 50%,123 so the PLQY of blue QDs still had a lot of room for improvement. In order to obtain homogeneous alloyed QDs, researchers have introduced many synthetic strategies; for instance, the energy-assisted thermal diffusion; the simultaneous reaction of three or more precursors with similar activity. The energy-assisted thermal diffusion method was first proposed by Zhong et al. in the synthesis of ZnxCd1−xSe QDs.125 Because the bond energy between Zn–Se is weaker than that between Cd–Se, Zn can diffuse into the CdSe layer at high temperatures (above 270 °C) and vice versa. By changing the content of Zn, a wide range of emission from ultraviolet to infrared can be successfully obtained in ZnxCd1−xSe QDs.126–128
Although CdSe/ZnS core/shell QDs have a high PLQY in green and red light regions, it is difficult to control the uniformity of blue QDs due to lattice mismatch between CdSe and ZnS,2,72 leading to the formation of defective nanocrystals and a low PLQY.129 Alloyed QDs not only have a low Cd content, but also has the unique property that the band gap can be adjusted with the composition. At the same time, the QD interface of the alloyed core/shell structure has a smooth confined energy barrier, which inhibits the non-radiative auger recombination process and improves the PLQY. Alloyed cores are usually used to synthesize green core/shell structured QDs, such as CdZnSe/CdZnS QDs, whose fluorescence peak is at 520 nm with a PLQY of 50–60%. After covering the ZnS shell outside CdZnSe alloyed QDs, the PLQY reached 60–70%, and the fluorescence spectrum was continuously adjustable within 520–535 nm. Recently, the PLQY of multi-shell CdZnSeS QDs coated with CdSZnS has reached close to 100%, and the emission spectrum range is 502–563 nm. By controlling the ratio of raw materials in the synthesis process, the spectral range of CdSeTe and ZnxCd1−xSySe1−y QDs can cover 440–650 nm, and the PLQY is 40%–65%.130 In 2013, Lee et al.84 synthesized high-quality blue CdZnS/ZnS core/shell QDs, whose PLQY was up to 98% (Fig. 17). Based on blue QDs, QLEDs with the device structure of ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/blue QDs/ZnO NPs/Al were fabricated, exhibiting the peak luminance of 2624 cd m−2 and the peak ηext of 7.1%.
 Fig. 17  (a) Absorption and PL spectra of 3 h-shelled CdZnS/ZnS QDs and (b) variation of the PLQY of CdZnS/ZnS QDs with different shelling times of 0.5, 1, and 3 h. (c) Spectral comparison of PL of QD solution versus EL of QLEDs. (d) CIE color coordinates of (0.153, 0.027) corresponding to the blue emission spectra and EL image under an applied voltage of 7 V. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
In 2013, Shen et al. synthesized monodispersed high-quality alloyed blue-green Zn1−xCdxS1−ySey/ZnS QDs without the use of phosphine. The blue QLEDs with the QDs as the EML showed a peak luminance of 4700 cd m−2, but the peak ηext of only 0.8%.131 Then the same group proposed the aforementioned “low-temperature nucleation and high-temperature shell growth” method in 2014 (Fig. 18a).86 With this novel method, they obtained highly emissive deep blue core/shell ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS QDs. The resulting nearly monodispersed QDs showed a high PL QY (close to 100%), high color purity (FWHM < 25 nm), good color tunability from 400 nm to 470 nm, and good chemical/photochemical stability (Fig. 18b and c). More importantly, the newly established protocols can be easily applied to large-scale synthesis. About 37 g ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS QDs can be easily synthesized in a batch of reaction.
 Fig. 18  (a) The synthetic procedure of ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS core/shell QDs. (b) Evolution of the absorption and PL spectra upon consecutive growth. (c) Normalized PL spectra of ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS core/shell QDs starting from different x and representative UV-illuminated photos. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013. 
In 2015, Yang et al. obtained high-quality blue Cd1−xZnxS/ZnS QDs with the emission peak at 450 nm by regulating the proportion of each component in the synthesis process, and constructed QLEDs with the peak luminance of 4000 cd m−2 and a current efficiency of 4.4 cd A−1. For the first time, the ηext exceeded 10% (Fig. 19a and b).80 The high-quality QDs had tailored nanostructures to maximize the efficiencies of charge injection/transport and radiative charge recombination. The detailed nanostructure of Cd1−xZnxS/ZnS QDs, including the composition of the intermediate shell and the thickness of the outer shell, was found to be of great importance to achieving such high-performance QLEDs. In 2017, Shen et al. reported full-color QLEDs with a high efficiency and long lifetime by employing high PLQY core/shell QDs with thick shells.48 The increased shell thickness improves the confinement of excitons in the QD cores, and is conducive to suppressing non-radiative auger recombination and FRET among QDs (Fig. 19c). Along with optimizing the QD EML thickness and HTL, they achieved high device performance with the peak current efficiency of 2.94 cd A−1, and the peak ηext of 15.6% for blue QLEDs, which was the first report on blue QLEDs with ηext over 15% (Fig. 19d). In 2018, Bae et al. proposed the concept of “Ligand-Asymmetric Janus Quantum Dots”, aiming to improve the device performance of QLEDs.113 They designed and constructed blue QLEDs using blue CdZnS/ZnS core/shell QDs with asymmetrically modified ligands, in which the bottom ligands were in contact with the ZnO ETL and the top ligands ensured uniform deposition of the organic HTL between hole injection. Suppressed electron overflow by the bottom ligands and improved hole injection by the top ligands contributed to boost the charge injection balance in blue QDs and therefore the device performance of blue QLEDs synergistically.
 Fig. 19  (a) Normalized EL spectra and images of blue, green and red QLEDs. (b) CIE coordinates of the three QLEDs (triangles) compared to the NTSC colour standards (stars). These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (c) Comparison of the PLQY of QDs with different shell thicknesses in solution and solid-state films. (d) Current efficiency and EQE of blue QLEDs with different HTLs as a function of luminance. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. 
As mentioned before, the fluorescence blinking phenomenon of QDs is detrimental to improving the device efficiencies of QLEDs, and thus needs to be taken seriously. One way to inhibit QD blinking is to increase the shell thickness of core/shell QDs, so as to completely isolate the excited carriers from the QD surface and surroundings, for instance coating thick-shell CdS or CdS/CdZnS/ZnS (>5 nm) on the CdSe core surface. In 2013, Chen et al. synthesized non-blinking high-quality CdSe/ZnS QDs at high temperature (310 °C) with n-octyl mercaptan as the sulfur source.132 In this synthesis, high temperature and slow growth provide conditions for obtaining good QD crystal form. From the beginning of shell growth to the end of the reaction, the size distribution of QDs was very narrow, the PLQY increased to nearly 100%, and the FWHM decreased to 67.1 meV (∼20 nm). Moreover, the QD blinking was almost completely suppressed (94% in the “bright state”). The synthesis of non-blinking QDs not only improves the performance of QDs itself, but also improves the device performance of QLEDs. However, the current reports on non-blinking QDs are still about a few red QDs, and the synthesis of non-blinking blue QDs has rarely been reported. Therefore, the synthesis of non-blinking blue QDs is expected to further improve the performance of blue QLEDs. Recently, Shen et al. have made progress in the synthesis of non-blinking blue QDs.109,112 By using the “low temperature nucleation and high temperature shell growth” method, high-quality blue non-blinking (>98% “on” time) ZnCdSe/ZnS//ZnS QDs with a PLQY of 92% (λpeak = 472 nm) were developed (Fig. 20a–c).112 They constructed a blue QLED by adopting non-blinking ZnCdSe/ZnS//ZnS QDs as the EML, and a insulating layer of poly(methyl methacrylate) (PMMA) as an EBL between the ETL and EML. The corresponding blue QLEDs exhibited a high peak luminance of 14100 cd m−2, a high ηext of 16.2%, and a peak current efficiency of 11.8 cd A−1.
 Fig. 20  (a) Evolution of absorption and PL spectra of ZnCdSe cores, ZnCdSe/ZnS, and ZnCdSe/ZnS//ZnS alloy core/shell QDs. (b) Representative PL intensity time traces (1800 s) of the single ZnCdSe core, ZnCdSe/ZnS, and ZnCdSe/ZnS//ZnS core/shell QDs under continuous wave laser excitation. The binning time is 15 ms. The gray traces are the corrected background noise intensities. (c) Photon counting histograms for the fluorescence traces shown in (b). These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
3.2 Advances in charge injection and transport materials
In QLEDs, in order to achieve a better device performance, multiple functional layers with a nanometer thickness are often required to realize different functions, such as selective injection, transport or blocking of carriers (Fig. 21). Hence many interfaces are created along with the introduction of diverse functional layers. Since these materials have different photoelectric characteristics (e.g., work function, energy band structure, conductivity, optical properties, etc.), the types of these interfaces are also different and strongly affect the device performance of QLEDs. Recent studies indicate that the interfacial properties between the functional layers have a significant influence on both the device efficiency and stability of QLEDs. Among them, the electrode/CTL interface and CTL/QD interface are two interfaces that mainly affect the device performance of QLEDs.
 Fig. 21  Energy levels of various HTL and ETL materials. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. 
Firstly, semiconductor functional materials all have different energy band structures, so different potential energy fields are generated at the heterojunction of semiconductor functional materials. Many critical electrodynamic processes, such as carrier injection and transport, exciton recombination, energy transfer and dissociation, can occur at the heterojunction interfaces of QLEDs. Carrier injection needs to overcome the energy barrier, thus affecting the turn-on voltage of the device. In addition, the carrier balance also affects the probability of the exciton formation and affects the ηext of QLEDs.

3.2.1 HTL. 
Cd-Based QDs used in QLEDs usually have a large ionization potential (6–8 eV). In terms of energy level structure, blue QDs have a larger band gap and a deeper HOMO energy level compared with red and green QDs, which makes the interface between the commonly used HTL and the QD EML have a large hole injection barrier (greater than 1 eV). This makes the injected holes to be blocked at the HTL/QDs interface, which reduces the injection efficiency of the holes. In addition, the aggregation of the holes at the HTL/QDs interface can cause the quenching of excitons. The hole injection barrier can be reduced by selecting the hole transport materials with a high HOMO level.
In the early stage of blue QLEDs, as the surfactants (usually oleic acid or amine) that coated on the surface of QDs have short hydrophobic alkyl chains (∼1 nm), QDs are usually dispersed in an organic solvent such as toluene or chloroform, which are also good solvents for typical conjugated organic molecules or polymers. Therefore, the underlying organic HTL is easy to be corroded during the process of deposition of QDs by the solution method. Accordingly, QDs were usually blended with hole transporting materials, such as (4,4′-bis(N-carbazolyl)-1,1′-biphenyl (CBP)120,134 and TPD,135 to form an organic/QD bilayer by the one-step phase-segregation method in the spin-coating process (Fig. 22a and b). The phase-segregation method is one of the easiest ways to form an organic/QD bilayer, but it sometimes makes an unintended direction of phase-separation (e.g., QD/organic/QD).136 Under these conditions, each QD is partially or completely surrounded by the organic matrix, thus allowing the direct energy transfer from organic molecules to QDs and improving the device efficiency (Fig. 22c). However, the device efficiency of blue QLEDs with the same device structures are far inferior to that of red and green QLEDs. Moreover, the EL spectra are accompanied by the non-negligible parasitic EL emission from trapped states on the surfaces of adjacent conjugated organic layers or QDs. This can be attributed to a number of reasons. First of all, the deeper HOMO level of blue QDs results in a large hole injection barrier in the HTL/QD interface, while there is no energy barrier for electron injection, which leads to charge injection imbalance, QD charging, and the increase in turn-on voltage. Secondly, the FRET tends to lead the exciton to the lowest effective energy level, which is conducive to the formation of red excitons rather than blue excitons. For example, due to the better overlap between the PL of TPD and the absorption spectra of red and green QDs, excitons formed on TPD can be easily transferred to red and green QDs, while the energy transfer to blue QDs is not complete (Fig. 22d).137 The color purity and luminous efficiency of blue QLEDs are difficult to improve due to various factors.
 Fig. 22  (a) Energy level diagram of the device: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CBP:MSCs/BCP/Ca/Al. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright 2007. (b) EL spectra of CdSe/ZnS QDs embedded in an LED at different voltages. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2005. (c) Schematic diagrams of the distribution of QDs in a polymermatrix from a QD/PTPA-b-CAA hybrid film and a QD/PTPA-b-PFP blend film. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2009. (d) Absorption spectra of QDs and the PL spectra of TPD and Alq3. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2007. 
In 2007, Tan et al. improved the PLQY of QDs by optimizing the synthesis process of CdS/ZnS core/shell structure QDs.93 No more doping structures were used in the structure design of QLEDs, but poly-TPD was introduced solely as the HTL (Fig. 23a). Poly-TPD exhibits an intrinsic resistance to nonpolar organic solvents such as toluene and xylene, allowing the solution casting of QD films over poly-TPD surfaces. This type of structure reduces the injection barrier of holes into QDs. By optimizing the thickness of the QD EML and regulating the electron–hole recombination region to be confined in the QD EML, the luminescence of organic materials was effectively reduced and the saturation of the blue EL was enhanced. Compared with blue QLEDs with a blend structure, the spectral stability has been greatly improved, and the reported progress is of great significance for the development of blue QLEDs. In 2009, CBP was doped into the TPD HTL in blue QLEDs for the first time, aiming at reducing the hole injection barrier and improving the carrier balance (Fig. 23b).138 Then in 2013, Ho et al. compared the differences in the device performance brought by organic polymers and small molecules as the HTL from the molecular structure, such as band position, mobility, glass transition temperature (Tg), and other aspects.139 They found that organic small molecules with high mobility are not suitable for a HTL, but the organic polymer PVK with higher ionization potential. The ionization potential showed a greater influence on the device performance than mobility. Then they mixed CBP, TCTA and other organic small molecules into the PVK HTL, and realized the stepped injection of holes through the organic small molecules with higher ionization potentials (Fig. 23c).
 Fig. 23  Schematic of the device configuration and the energy level diagram of the blue QLEDs. (a) This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2007. (b) This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from IOP science, copyright 2009. (c) This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013. 
In 2012, Xiang et al. prepared deep blue QLEDs with the EL peak at 425 nm by using Cd-free ZnSe/ZnS core/shell QDs as the EML.129 The effects of poly-TPD and PVK HTL on the current density and luminance of QLEDs were compared. The large energy barrier (1.4 eV) between the HOMO level of poly-TPD and QDs leads to a low efficiency of hole injection. As the HOMO of PVK is 5.8 eV, the energy barrier of hole injection is reduced, which increases the hole currents, improves the charge balance, and helps to transfer the exciton recombination region from the HTL/QD interface to the inside of the QD layer. The results also showed that the thickness of the QD EML plays an important role in determining the exciton recombination efficiency. In 2015, Lin et al. demonstrated efficient deep blue QLEDs based on Cd-free ZnSe/ZnS core/shell QDs.140 By comparing different HTLs, such as poly-TPD, TFB and PVK, they found that the direct charge carrier injection into QDs and the efficient radiative exciton recombination within QDs can be enhanced (Fig. 24a). The results showed that the optimization of the HTL offers a practicable strategy for the realization of Cd-free QD-based displays and lighting. In 2016, Wang et al. mixed blue ZnCdSe/ZnSe/ZnSeS/ZnS core/multishell QDs (PLQY = 87%) with PVK as the EML to construct blue QLEDs with the highest luminance exceeding 10000 cd m−2 (reaching 13800 cd m−2) (Fig. 24b).116 The high performance was attributed to the balanced carrier injection and efficient energy transfer, which resulted from the shortened inter-particle distance and proper selection of the HTL material. To improve the hole injection, HTLs with high hole mobility and a deep HOMO level are required in blue QLEDs. In 2018, Chen et al. studied the influences of diverse HTLs on the performance of blue QLEDs.141 QLEDs with PVK as the HTL exhibited the highest ηext, while those with TFB as the HTL exhibited the lowest turn-on voltage. As a result, they combined the advantages of PVK and TFB to construct blue QLEDs with a TFB/PVK bilayered HTL, which showed a high ηext of 5.9% and a low turn-on voltage of 2.6 V (Fig. 24c).
 Fig. 24  (a) Energy level diagram of blue QLEDs based on ZnSe/ZnS core/shell QDs with different HTLs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. (b) EQE and current efficiency vs. luminance of QLEDs based on ZnCdSe core/multishell QDs without and with PVK. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. (c) Normalized EL spectra of blue QLEDs with the TFB/PVK bilayered HTL and the scheme of exciplex formation. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. 
In all-solution processed inverted QLEDs, the solvent erosion on the QD layer significantly affects the device performance. In 2018, Liu et al. employed the orthogonal solvent 1,4-dioxane for the PVK HTL to construct solution processed inverted blue QLEDs (Fig. 25a).96 The ηext was enhanced by 25 times compared to the previous devices’ records. A double-layer PVK/TFB HTL was further introduced in the QLEDs to facilitate hole injection with a stepwise energy level, which improves the device efficiency and reduces the efficiency roll-off at the same time. In 2018, our group prepared high-performance blue QLEDs by using CdZnS/ZnS core/shell QDs as the EML, poly-TPD as the HTL, and Deoxyribonucleic Acid (DNA) as the buffer layer (Fig. 25b).91 DNA can effectively improve the efficiency of hole injection. Meanwhile DNA has a high LUMO level, which helps to confine electrons in the EML, thus ensuring the charge balance and recombination efficiency (Fig. 25c).
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram of all-solution processed inverted double-layer HTL QLEDs and the operation photos. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. Reproduced/adapted with permission from American Chemical Society. (b) Energy level diagram of blue QLEDs with DNA as the buffer layer and (c) the EQE vs. current density curves of devices with different DNA concentrations. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. 
In summary, in order to enhance the hole injection, double HTLs are widely used to form hole injection steps and reduce the injection barrier. In terms of inhibiting electron transport, the electron injection rate is mainly reduced by introducing an EBL, such as inserting an ultra-thin insulating material of PMMA, PVK or TBS-PBO with a high LUMO energy level.142 Although the introduction of an EBL and double HTLs can improve the device performance, it makes the device structure more complex. For the solution processed multilayer structured devices, the preparation of each functional layer is required to realize an infiltrate with the underlying functional layer, and resist the subsequent solvent erosion, which puts forward higher requirements for the device structure design and preparation process, and is not conducive to large-scale commercial production.


3.2.2 ETL. 
An ETL is still a crucial functional layer for QLEDs, not only to transport electrons efficiently, but also to block holes and prevent them from coming in direct contact with the electrode. ETL materials commonly used in QLEDs generally have the following three characteristics:
(1) n-type materials with high electron mobility and large electron affinity potential;
(2) good chemical, electrical and thermal stability, and the ability to form dense films;
(3) a high excitation level to avoid energy transfer between QDs and the ETL.
In the early stage of QLED research, ETL materials were usually organic materials, such as Alq3, TPBi, BPhen, TNF and rare earth complexes.143,144 For an organic ETL, on the one hand, the vacuum evaporation method is often used to prepare films, which is a complicated and costly manufacture process. On the other hand, the electron mobility of organic molecules is low (10−6–10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1), which is far less than that of inorganic electron transport materials, leading to the imbalance of holes and electrons and poor device efficiency. In recent years, people have begun to pay attention to the ETL made of metal oxides, such as ZnO, TiO2, SnO2 and other n-type semiconductors with high electron mobility.145 In 2009, Cho et al. used TiO2 as the QLED ETL and TFB as the HTL to effectively inject electrons and holes into the QD layer from the electrode, and block electrons and holes from crossing the QD layer simultaneously.73 TiO2 prepared by the low-temperature solution method has a high electron mobility of 1.7 × 10−4 cm−2 V−1 s−1 and a small energy barrier of only 0.4 eV against the QDs. In 2013, Mashford et al. adopted ZnO as the ETL in QLEDs for the first time, and regulated the device performance of QLEDs by controlling the distance of the recombination region within the QD film at the QD/ZnO interface.146 The current efficiency of the device was 19 cd A−1, and the ηext was 18% (very close to the theoretical peak of 20%). In 2009, Anikeeva et al. replaced TPBi with Alq3 to prepare blue QLEDs, preventing the detrimental energy transfer from blue QDs to Alq3 (Fig. 26a and b).2 In 2011, a full-color (orange, green and blue) QLED was prepared using ZnO NPs as the ETL (CdSe/ZnS QDs with toluene as the solvent).74 The device structure of blue QLEDs was ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/blue QDs/ZnO NPs/Al. Benefitting from the high electron mobility and the matched CB level of ZnO NPs, the luminance and efficiency of blue QLEDs were significantly improved. In addition, it is difficult for ZnO NPs to quench the excitons formed in adjacent QDs, while the devices using sputtering or annealing precursor materials to form the metal oxide ETL would quench the excitons severely through non-radiative energy transfer. In 2018, Li et al. doped polyvinopyrrolidone (PVP) into the ZnO NP ETL (Fig. 26c and d).147 PVP acted as an electron blocking material and isolated ZnO NPs to reduce the excess electron injection towards QDs, thus achieving charge balance in the QD layer. Using this method, the device performance was improved significantly.
 Fig. 26  (a) Absorption spectra (solid lines) of red, orange, green, cyan, and blue QDs in chloroform and thin film PL spectra (dashed lines) of TPD, Alq3, spiroTPD, and TPBi. (b) Energy level diagram of QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (c) Device structure and (d) normalized EL spectrum at an applied voltage of 5 V of blue QLEDs with ZnO:PVP ETL. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018. 
In 2015, the PEIE layer was introduced as an electron injection/transport layer (EIL/ETL) to bind to the colloidal ZnO NP film on top of the ITO electrode.98 The PEIE surface modifier covering on top of the ZnO NP film promotes the electron injection into the CdSe/ZnS QD EML by reducing the WF of ZnO from 3.58 eV to 2.87 eV and balancing the charge in the EML. In 2017, Liao et al. used the PEIE modified ZnO NP ETL to lower the electron transport barrier, and prepared an inverted blue QLED device.92 The effective electron transport improves the exciton recombination in the QD layer, thus increasing the device efficiency. As a result, the optimized QLEDs with the emission peak at 460 nm exhibited a peak ηext of 7.85%, which is enhanced by 1.4-fold. The results showed that the interface modification of the organic polymer PEIE is helpful for the preparation of efficient blue QLEDs. In 2017, Wang et al. investigated the influence of different size ZnO NPs on the energy level and mobility properties of ZnO NPs.114 They found that using small-size ZnO NPs is conductive to reaching a better charge balance and obtaining higher device efficiencies. The blue QLEDs with the small-size ZnO NP ETL exhibited a peak current efficiency of 14.1 cd A−1 and a peak ηext of 19.8%. The color saturation blue QLEDs show great promise for use in next-generation full-color displays.
ZnO is widely used as an n-type ETL for QLEDs due to the feasible metal doping and the low-temperature processing of ZnO NPs. In red and green QLEDs, ZnO doped with other metal elements (Mg, Al, Ga, etc.) is often used as the electron transport material.148–151 Doping of these metal elements can change the energy level structure and electron mobility of ZnO, affect the electron injection and transport in QLEDs, and thus improve the EL efficiency and stability of devices. On the other hand, there is a certain potential barrier between the blue QD layer and the ZnO layer. In view of this, many groups have attempted to dope other metal elements into the ZnO NP ETL, aiming to reduce the potential barrier, improve the electron injection efficiency, and boost the device efficiency and stability of blue QLEDs.
In 2018, Kim et al. reported a Li- and Mg-doped ZnO, MLZO, which was used for the ETL to achieve high-efficiency QLEDs.97 Co-doping of Mg and Li in ZnO enlarges the bandgap and improves the electrical resistivity, thus enhancing the charge balance in the QD EML (Fig. 27a). Also found was that the O–H concentration at the oxide surface decreases and the exciton decay time of QDs on the metal oxide increases. The corresponding light-blue and deep-blue inverted QLEDs with MLZO ETLs exhibited the current efficiency of 1.9 and 0.5 cd A−1, respectively. The MLZO introduced here can be widely used as an ETL of highly efficient QLEDs. In 2018, Pan et al. reported an inverted multilayer QLED with an improved efficiency by regulating the energy band alignment between the CTL and the QD layer.95 ZnO NPs with an optimized doping concentration of cesium azide (CsN3) served as the ETL, which effectively reduced the excess electron flow and balance charge injection. This is due to the fact that the CB edge of the ETL moves up by 0.27 eV, which inhibits the exciton quenching and maintains the superior emission characteristics of the QDs due to the insulating CsN3 (Fig. 27b). The peak ηext of the blue QLEDs reached 6.6%. The novel device structures with heterogeneous energies may provide a new design strategy for high-efficiency QLED displays.
 Fig. 27  (a) Energy band alignments of ITO, ZnO, LZO, MZO, and MLZO ETLs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) Energy level diagram of QLEDs with the ZnO:CsN3 ETL. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
Balancing the charge transfer is still a challenging task for the development of blue QLEDs because the blue QDs have a deeper VB, which creates a large injection barrier that impedes hole transport. In 2019, Li et al. found that using a tertbutyldimethylsilyl chloride-modified poly(p-phenylene benzobisoxazole) (TBS-PBO) blocking layer can improve the balancing of charge transfer (Fig. 28a).106 The TBS-PBO barrier layer plays a good role in preventing excess electron injection and maintaining the PLQY of QDs. Compared with the insulating blocking layer, TBS-PBO has better conductivity, so that the current density can be kept at a high level. The corresponding blue QLEDs with the TBS-PBO blocking layer exhibited a peak ηext of 17.4% and a peak luminance of 4635 cd m−2 (Fig. 28b). In 2019, Chen et al. inserted a lithium fluoride (LiF) interlayer at the QD/ZnO interface to improve the device efficiency and stability of blue QLEDs (Fig. 28c and d).105 The LiF interfacial layer improves the electron injection into QDs through the electron tunneling effect and inhibits the exciton quenching at the QD/ZnO interface simultaneously. As a result, the blue QLED device showed a peak ηext of 9.8% and the current efficiency of 7.9 cd A−1.
 Fig. 28  (a) Energy level diagram and (b) EQE and current efficiency vs. voltage curves of the blue QLEDs with the TBS-PBO blocking layer. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (c) Current efficiency and (d) EQE as a function of current density for blue QLEDs with the LiF interfacial layer of different thicknesses. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright 2019. (e) Energy level diagram of blue QLEDs using ZrAcac doped ZnO as the ETL and (f) EQE vs. luminance curves. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
For blue QLEDs, the imbalance between charge transfer and injection greatly affects the efficiency and lifetime. Better charge balance can be achieved by improving hole injection while suppressing excess electrons. Introducing dopants into the CTL is an effective and simple strategy to modulate the charge injection barrier and mobility. In 2019, our group studied the physical process of blue QLEDs with doped CTL (ZrAcac doped ZnO) by means of optoelectronic simulation.104 We found that the charge distribution in the QD layer is more balanced and the recombination rate is greatly improved with the doped CTL (Fig. 28e). Under the guidance of theoretical simulation, a high performance blue QLED was obtained. The luminance and ηext increased from 18679 to 34874 cd m−2 and from 4.7% to 10.7%, respectively (Fig. 28f). Due to more balanced charge injection, the operation lifetime also increased by 3.5 times.

3.3 Light extraction efficiency enhancement
As mentioned in section 2.3, the ηint of a QLED can reach nearly 100% but only ∼20% of ηext is realized for a typical planar QLED without any additional light extraction technology. The unemployed 80% light energy is either trapped in the substrate and internal layers, or evanesces at the metal electrode surface. Therefore, the light extraction efficiency enhancement has been brought up and studied for the purpose of reducing power consumption and improving the device efficiency and stability (Fig. 29a–e). According to the different parts of the device interface modification, the light extraction technology can be divided into external light extraction (ELE) and internal light extraction (ILE). Among them, ELE mainly extracts the light of the substrate mode, such as the use of a microlens array,152–155 while ILE is focused on the light extraction from the waveguide made of the ITO/organic layer and SPPs mode, such as the use of a dielectric grid structure with a low refractive index,152,156,157 and sub-wavelength photonic crystals.51,158 However, these methods generally make the fabrication process of the device more complicated. Meanwhile, the effective area of the device is reduced, and the emission spectrum is angular dependent, that is different colors of light will be perceived from different angles, and the packaging is complex. All in all, it is unlikely that these structures will eventually be used as actual light sources.
 Fig. 29  (a) Schematic illustration of the QLEDs with ZnO nanopillar arrays and the fabrication process of ZnO nanopillar arrays on the ITO substrate. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (b) Surface plasmon enhanced QD emission and energy diagram for the donor–acceptor (D–A) pair energy transfer process. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic device structure of QLEDs using microlens arrays and mode distributions with microlens arrays on the PET substrate. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (d) Schematic of the grating device structure of QLEDs and schematic explanation of the out-coupling mechanism. (e) Calculated distribution of the power field intensity in the QLEDs with and without grating nanostructures at the wavelength of 525 nm. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
3.4 Tandem QLEDs
In OLEDs, the tandem structure consisting of an interconnecting layer (ICL) to connect multiple light-emitting units in series affords high device efficiency and a long lifetime, and thus has been widely accepted, although it may lead to high driving voltage and low transmittance.160,161 In principle, QLEDs could share the tandem structure with OLEDs owing to the similar device architectures and mechanism (Fig. 30a–d).78,103,162,163 But different from OLEDs mainly made from the thermal evaporation method, QLEDs are usually solution processed devices, which brings about more practical difficulties in constructing tandem QLEDs, especially for inverted QLEDs. The solution processing would easily cause the solvent erosion of the organic HTL on the QD EML due to the organic solvents used for dispersing QDs. One solution is inserting a thin insulating layer at the QD/HTL interface, but it inevitably leads to the increase in driving voltage.164 In terms of inverted QLEDs, depositing the aqueous PEDOT:PSS onto the underlying hydrophobic HTL is quite difficult.165 Consequently, it is challenging to fabricate tandem QLEDs.
 Fig. 30  (a) Schematic device structure, energy band diagram and EQE vs. current density curves of hybrid tandem LEDs with a new ICL based on ZnMgO/Al/HATCN. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic device structure, EQE and current efficiency vs. current density curves of tandem QLEDs with an ICL based on PEDOT:PSS/ZnMgO, along with PL spectra of the QD layer coated on ZnMgO before and after CB rinsing. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (c) Schematic device structure, energy band diagram and EL spectra of TWQLEDs with an ICL based on ZnO NPs and PMA. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (d) Schematic device structure, energy band diagram and EQE and current efficiency vs. current density curves of tandem QLEDs with an ICL based on ZnMgO/Al/HATCN/MoO3. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
In 2016, a new ICL based on ZnMgO/Al/HATCN was employed to connect a green QLED and a green phosphorescent OLED (Fig. 30a).162 The hybrid tandem devices exhibited a peak current efficiency and ηext of 96.28 cd A−1 and 25.90%, respectively, demonstrating the possibility of integrating QLEDs and OLEDs in one hybrid tandem structure. Then, a solution-processed ICL based on poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene)/polystyrene sulfonate/ZnMgO was developed to construct a fully solution-processed inverted tandem QLED (Fig. 30b).78 The fabricated tandem QLEDs exhibited a high current efficiency of 57.06 cd A−1 and ηext of 13.65%. With further optimization, the current efficiency and ηext of the QLEDs could even reach over 100 cd A−1 and 23%, respectively. In 2018, a novel ICL based on ZnO NPs and polyoxometalate phosphomolybdic acid (PMA) was developed for a tandem white QLED (TWQLEDs) (Fig. 30c).102 The robust ICL was processed from orthogonal solvents, which protects the underlying QD EML from the solvent erosion. Impressively, this strategy enabled over 10 functional layers being constructed in one tandem device, including red, green, and blue QD EMLs. TWQLEDs exhibited the state-of-the-art current efficiency of 60.8 cd A−1, ηext of 13.65% and luminance of over 200000 cd m−2. In a word, tandem QLEDs would be ideal candidates to bring QLEDs into the next generation full-color displays and solid-state lighting market.
3.5 Device degradation
While great efforts have been made to improve the ηext of QLEDs in recent years, it is equally crucial that sufficient spectral and operation stability over lifetime needs to be satisfied for commercial products. The integration of thick shells enables the reduction of oxidation and photo-bleaching of QD cores, which paves the way to acquire good PL spectral stability over lifetime. Therefore, it is a challenging and urgent task for realizing high operation stability over lifetime. The operation lifetime of QLEDs is quantified by measuring the change of EL intensity over time while being driven at a constant current. To date, the most commonly used operation lifetime is called T50, corresponding to the time it takes to decay to 50% of the initial luminance (usually 100 cd m−2). Other degradation points such as 95% and 90% of the initial luminance (T95 and T90) are also used in the literature. Considering the rate of device degradation greatly depending on the initial luminance, the initial luminance should be the same for comparisons. The relationship between the initial luminance and degradation point of QLEDs can be described as:166Ln0T50 = constant; 1 < n < 2where L0 and n represent the initial luminance and acceleration factor, respectively. Using the equation, the degradation time of any QLED can be calculated at any initial luminance as long as the acceleration factor is certain. A commonly used value of n is about 1.8,167 but the accurate value needs to be measured experimentally since it greatly depends on the device structure and different colored QDs. Great progress has been made to improve the operation lifetime of full-color QLEDs in recent years, and the longest T50 @100 cd m−2 for red, green, and blue QLEDs that have been reported to date is 2260000 h,168 1760000 h,11 and 32705 h,169 respectively. It is clear that the operation stability of blue QLEDs greatly lags behind that of their red and green counterparts, thus making them not yet meet the commercial demands.
In order to improve the device stability of QLEDs, especially blue QLEDs, the machenism of device degradation needs to be elucidated, but there have been a limited number of related literature studies that concern the issue. Initially, many research studies aimed at the impact of charge imbalance and the non-radiative auger recombination on device degradation.
In detail,13 there exists a large injection barrier (∼1 eV) at the organic HTL/QD interface, giving rise to a difficulty in hole injection in QLEDs. Note that in the case of blue QLEDs, the hole injection is more difficult due to the larger energy level mismatch between the VB of blue QDs and the HOMO level of the HTL. However, the commonly used inorganic ZnO NPs have a higher mobility than that of organic HTLs. Therefore, the above factors would cause the imbalance of electrons and holes and non-radiative auger recombination in QLEDs, and consequently, the QD charging. The excess electron would leak into the HTL and give rise to the severe problem of organic HTL degradation, thus reducing the lifetime. Then under the consecutive operation, the HTL degradation continues to deteriorate due to the generation of Joule heat and other non-radiative processes. In brief, the charge imbalance and the subsequent detrimental processes, such as non-radiative auger recombination, QD charging, Joule heating, etc. account for the device degradation of QLEDs. The different rate of device degradation for red, green and blue QLEDs likely resulted from the increasing energy barrier for hole injection from red to blue QDs, along with the more pronounced charge imbalance and auger recombination. In the following, various strategies involving QD engineering, improving charge balance, and suppressing auger recombination and Joule heat are discussed for improving the QLED stability.
QD engineering, especially the use of core/shell QDs with a gradient thick shell, is conductive to improving the device efficiency and stability simultaneously. Thick shells spatially separate the surface-defects on the QD core from the surroundings, thus inhibiting the detrimental energy transfer between the QD core and non-radiative recombination. In addition, gradient shells decrease the interfacial strain brought by the lattice mismatch between the core and shell, thus giving rise to a high PLQY and chemical stability. This gradient thick shell strategy has been widely adopted in most efficient QLEDs. Recently, by taking advantage of the ZnSe shell and the presence of Se throughout the CdSe/ZnSe core/shell regions, three primary color QLEDs with high efficiencies and a long operation lifetime have been realized (Fig. 31a).11 For the blue QLEDs, ZnxCd1−xSe/ZnSe QDs were used as the EML. The ZnSe shell provides a shallower VB for a better hole injection compared to CdS and ZnS, and the existence of Se throughout the core/shell regions maximizes the chemical affinity for the QD growth and helps to generate high-quality interfaces. The use of a gradient thick ZnSe shell enables better interfaces and balanced charge injection, leading to a high efficiency (ηext = 8.05%) and operation stability (T50 @ 100 cd m−2 = 7000 h).11 A gradient Cd1−xZnxSe1−ySy intermediate shell was sandwiched between the CdSe core and the ZnS outer shell to synthesize high-quality blue QDs, which were used as the EML to construct highly efficient blue QLEDs with the ηext up to 10.7% and T50 @ 100 cd m−2 of about 1000 h (Fig. 31b).80 Comparing the above two blue QLEDs, it is found that the latter device exhibits a slightly higher ηext but a much shorter T50 than the former one, which is probably due to the higher injection energy barriers for both electrons and holes that cause potential nonradiative recombination at the interfaces. In another work, the thick and gradient CdxZn1−xS intermediate shell was introduced to the blue ZnCdS core to provide effective confinement of excitons and improve the chemical stability of QDs (Fig. 31c).109 The corresponding blue QLEDs exhibited a record-high ηext of up to 18% and T50 @ 100 cd m−2 of about 47.4 h. In summary, the individual differences in device lifetime and efficiency among all the reported blue QLEDs using core/shell QDs with a gradient thick shell still exist, which require more in-depth investigations on the relationship between gradient thick shells and charge injection balance. Another aspect of QD engineering is ligand exchange. Ligand exchange, for instance replacing a long chain ligand with a short chain ligand, enhances the electrical properties and stability of QDs, and improves the charge injection and transport, thus leading to an increase in ηext and device lifetime. For example, the commonly used oleic acid (OA) could be replaced by a short ligand of 1-octanethiol (C8),81 1-dodecanethiol (DDT),170 tris(mercaptomethyl)nonane (TMMN),171etc.
 Fig. 31  (a) Atomically resolved HAADF-STEM image of the CdSe/6 monolayer ZnSe core/shell QDs. Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) elemental maps and elemental profiles of Cd, Zn and Se in the same CdSe/6 ML ZnSe core/shell QD array. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. (b) Energy level diagram and operation stability data of QLEDs using a gradient Cd1−xZnxSe1−ySy intermediate shell. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (c) STEM images and EDS elemental maps of Cd, S and Zn in ZnCdS/ZnS (top panel) and ZnCdS/CdxZn1−xS/ZnS core/shell QDs (bottom panel). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018. 
Joule heat leads to an increase of device temperature, which then increases the risk of debonding of surface ligands on QDs, thus generating many surface traps and consequently affecting the PLQY of QDs.13,170,172 Other than that, Joule heat also gives rise to the decomposition of the commonly used organic CTL in QLEDs, and then leading to dramatic device roll-off.173 In order to suppress Joule heat generated at high current density, the thermal stability of QDs needs to be enhanced. One approach is the ligand engineering of QDs.170 By replacing the commonly used oleic acid (OA) ligand with 1-dodecanethiol (DDT), the thermal resistance of QDs is improved owing to the stronger binding between DDT and QDs than that between OA and QDs (Fig. 32a–d). In the design of QLEDs, the Joule heat can be effectively dissipated by using sapphire with high thermal conductivity as the substrate. As a result, thermal-induced emission quenching was significantly inhibited, and consequently, a high ηext of up to 16.6% was achieved for blue QLEDs. The sapphire-based QLEDs showed an improved T50 of 9.8 h, which is 14-fold longer than that (0.7 h) of glass-based QLEDs (Fig. 32e and f).170
 Fig. 32  Evolution of time-resolved PL decay curves of (a) QD-OA and (c) QD-DDT in a heating–cooling process at the temperatures indicated. Schematic diagram of the recombination and quenching mechanisms in (b) QD-OA and (d) QD-DDT at elevated temperatures. (e) Luminance variation of QLEDs based on glass and sapphire substrates after operation. (f) Lifetime characteristics of the glass-based and sapphire-based QLEDs at a high initial luminance of 100000 cd m−2. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019. 
Cao et al. carried out an in-depth investigation on the device degradation of QLEDs.168 By comparing the driving voltage of electron-only and hole-only devices over time, it was found that the hole-only devices with inferior charge balance showed higher driving voltages than the ones with good charge balance, while the electron-only devices exhibited little difference between the two cases. This result demonstrated that it is the hole current rather than electron current mainly affecting the QLED stability (Fig. 33a). On the other hand, lots of excitons are formed in the organic HTL due to the excess electrons leaking from the QD EML recombining with holes in the HTL. Without setting recycling methods, these excitons will undergo a non-radiative de-excitation process in the HTL, which is detrimental to QLEDs’ stability in turn. For the above reasons, a lot of work has been focused on the role of the HTL in QLED degradation. However in another work, Chen et al. found that the cationic HTL degradation occurred in both red and blue QLEDs, while the HTL degradation did not account for the shorter device lifetime of blue QLEDs.174 Then they observed that the fast degradation was associated with a fast increase in the capacitance transition voltage in blue QLEDs. After a careful investigation into the charge-modulated electro-absorption and capacitance–voltage characteristics, it was found that the large offset between the CBM of blue QDs and the ETL causes space-charge accumulation and an operating-voltage rise in the ETL (Fig. 33b). Therefore, different from the stable red QLEDs (T50 > 800 h) whose lifetime mainly originates from the slow degradation of the HTL, the inferior lifetime of blue QLEDs (T50 < 4.5 h) mainly arises from the auger recombination and fast degradation at the QD/ETL interface. These recent findings clearly demonstrate that the CTL plays a critical role in the device degradation of blue QLEDs.
 Fig. 33  (a) Normalized luminance and operation voltage at maximum vs. time for the ZnSe-QD and ZnS-QD devices operated at a constant current, and operation voltage vs. time of hole-only and electron-only ZnSe-QD and ZnS-QD based devices operated at a constant current. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (b) The capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristics of standard red QLEDs and standard blue QLEDs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. 
Recently, an abnormal phenomenon of positive aging has been observed in QLEDs, corresponding to the efficiency increasing with time.111,175 Acharya et al. ascribed the positive aging in QLEDs to the interaction between encapsulation resin and the ZnO ETL, resulting in the formation of carbonate that is conducive to reducing defect densities (Fig. 34a–c).175 In another work, Su et al. carried out a thorough investigation into the positive aging of QLEDs, and attributed the origin to the interfacial reaction between Al and ZnMgO.111 In brief, a slow oxidation between Al and ZnMgO leads to the formation of AlOx and a large amount of oxygen vacancies accumulated at the Al/ZnMgO interface (Fig. 34d–f). On one hand, the formation of the alloyed AlZnMgO interface benefits the electron injection and ZnMgO conductivity, and on the other hand, the interfacial AlOx plays a critical role in blocking electron trapping and suppressing the exciton quenching by the metal electrode. Due to the positive aging, the aged blue QLEDs exhibited a 2.6-fold efficiency improvement.
 Fig. 34  (a–b) XPS spectra of O 1s and C 1s core levels from the sputtered ZnO surface after peeling off the Al electrode. (c) Aging measurement on the EQE of red, green, and blue QLEDs after encapsulation with resin. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (d–e) XPS spectra of O 1s and Al 2p core levels at the interface of Al/ZnMgO. (f) Schematic illustration of the positive aging process. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018. 
Post-annealing is another feasible method to enhance the blue QLED stability. Our group has demonstrated that high-temperature post-annealing accelerates the decomposition of Zn(OH)2 and enables the defects in the ZnO crystal being passivated, resulting in a low gap state density (Fig. 35a).107 The gap states can decrease the hopping barrier for electrons to an extent. Consequently, the electron mobility of ZnO NP films can be controlled for better electron–hole balance via post-annealing at different temperatures, then ultimately benefitting the device stability. In another work, the ηext of blue QLEDs is significantly improved from 5.22 to 9.81% after post-annealing (Fig. 35b).110 Similar to the positive aging,111 post-annealing also helps the interfacial reaction of Al and ZnMgO, and consequently the formation of the alloyed AlZnMgO interface and interfacial AlOx. In light of this, the electron injection is greatly enhanced for a better device stability.
 Fig. 35  (a) Current efficiency vs. voltage curves of blue QLEDs with ZnO annealed at different temperatures. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of the exciton quenching process with and without post-annealing. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. 
4. Conclusion and outlook
In conclusion, a broad review of blue QLEDs has been provided about the synthesis of blue QDs, advances in charge injection and transport materials, light extraction efficiency enhancements, tandem QLEDs and device lifetime. By designing and synthesizing diverse core/shell and gradient-alloyed nanostructures, the surface defects in blue QDs would be eliminated, and consequently, the PLQY would recover to an extent. In addition, the chemical stability and charge transport ability of blue QDs can be enhanced by surface modification and ligand exchange, respectively. Besides the synthesis of high-quality blue QDs, the advances in device architecture engineering, including the design of appropriate device structures, selecting suitable functional materials and interfacial engineering, are highly required to effectively regulate the injection balance of electrons and holes, exciton formation and exciton radiative recombination in the QD EML. Light extraction efficiency enhancements and tandem architecture are also exciting areas that can be developed for improving the device performance of blue QLEDs. The poor device stability is still a bottleneck in the commercialization of blue QLEDs, requiring more in-depth investigations into QD engineering, improving charge balance, and suppressing auger recombination and Joule heat. In the following, several critical proposals are provided for the improvement in device performance and the commercialization of blue QLEDs.
(1) Surface engineering for high-quality blue QDs
Apart from developing core/shell and gradient-alloyed nanostructures, surface engineering, including surface modification and ligand exchange, plays a critical role in reducing surface defects and improving the stability and charge transport ability. Particularly for the small sized blue QDs, the surface atoms and defects greatly affect the intrinsic photoelectric properties. Appropriate ligands have a strong binding ability with the surface atoms, which is conducive to passivating the surface defects and affording a higher PLQY and better charge injection and transport ability. Therefore, surface engineering needs more attention for developing high-quality blue QDs.
(2) In-depth understanding of the mechanism of blue QLEDs
The mechanism of blue QLEDs greatly depends on the interaction between QDs and adjacent CTLs. Blue QDs can easily get charged due to the excess charges from the adjacent CTLs, resulting in exciton quenching and the deterioration of the device performance. Therefore, in order to gain a more in-depth understanding of the mechanisms of blue QLEDs, it is critical to investigate the interactions of the QDs with diverse CTLs.
(3) Improving the device lifetime of blue LEDs
To date, the operation stability of blue QLEDs greatly lags behind that of their red and green counterparts, thus making them not yet meet the commercial demands. Therefore, there is an urgent need to increase the operational lifetime of blue QLEDs, which is of importance to the commercialization of QLEDs for full-color display applications. To achieve this goal, more in-depth research is needed on the mechanism of device degradation. Meanwhile, various strategies involving QD engineering, improving charge balance, and suppressing auger recombination and Joule heat are required for improving blue QLEDs’ stability.
(4) Developing Cd-free QLEDs
Nowadays the state-of-the-art QLEDs mainly involve Cd-based QLEDs, but the toxic Cd element is a potential threat for human beings and the environment. The development of Cd-free QDs and the corresponding QLEDs is of great significance to industrial demands, but still lags behind that of the Cd-based QDs. In terms of blue Cd-free QDs, the challenges include color purity, PLQY, device efficiency and stability. Hence it requires more concerns for developing Cd-free QLEDs in the synthesis and device optimization.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21975071, 51873007, 51961165102, 21835006), and the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities in China (2019MS025, 2018MS032).
References
J. M. Pietryga, Y.-S. Park, J. Lim, A. F. Fidler, W. K. Bae, S. Brovelli and V. I. Klimov, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10513–10622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2532–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Niu, A. M. Munro, Y. J. Cheng, Y. Q. Tian, M. S. Liu, J. L. Zhao, J. A. Bardecker, I. Jen-La Plante, D. S. Ginger and A. K. Y. Jen, Adv. Mater., 2007, 19, 3371–3376 CrossRef CAS .
D. Ioannou and D. K. Griffin, Nano Rev., 2010, 1, 5117 CrossRef PubMed .
A. L. Rogach, D. V. Talapin, E. V. Shevchenko, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2002, 12, 653–664 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Philippot and P. Reiss, in Nanobiotechnology - Inorganic Nanoparticles vs Organic Nanoparticles,  2012, pp. 81–114,  DOI:10.1016/b978-0-12-415769-9.00003-0 .
J. Lim, W. K. Bae, J. Kwak, S. Lee, C. Lee and K. Char, Opt. Mater. Express, 2012, 2, 594–628 CrossRef .
F. Zhang, S. Wang, L. Wang, Q. Lin, H. Shen, W. Cao, C. Yang, H. Wang, L. Yu, Z. Du, J. Xue and L. S. Li, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 12182–12188 RSC .
Y. Shirasaki, G. J. Supran, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 7, 13–23 CrossRef .
W. K. Bae, S. Brovelli and V. I. Klimov, MRS Bull., 2013, 38, 721–730 CrossRef .
H. Shen, Q. Gao, Y. Zhang, Y. Lin, Q. Lin, Z. Li, L. Chen, Z. Zeng, X. Li, Y. Jia, S. Wang, Z. Du, L. S. Li and Z. Zhang, Nat. Photonics, 2019, 13, 192–197 CrossRef CAS .
P. Reiss, M. Carrière, C. Lincheneau, L. Vaure and S. Tamang, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10731–10819 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Moon, C. Lee, W. Lee, J. Kim and H. Chae, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804294 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Liang, S. Bai, X. Wang, X. Dai, F. Gao, B. Sun, Z. Ning, Z. Ye and Y. Jin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1730–1759 RSC .
F. Chen, Z. Y. Guan and A. W. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 10958–10981 RSC .
Y. Sun, Y. Jiang, X. W. Sun, S. Zhang and S. Chen, Chem. Rec., 2019, 19, 1–25 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Yang, M. Gao, W. Wu, X. Yang, X. W. Sun, J. Zhang, H.-C. Wang, R.-S. Liu, C.-Y. Han, H. Yang and W. Li, Mater. Today, 2019, 24, 69–93 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, Y. Deng, X. Peng and Y. Jin, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 201–256 Search PubMed .
F. Chen, Q. Lin, H. Shen and A. Tang, Mater. Chem. Front., 2020, 4, 1340–1365 RSC .
M. D. Peterson, L. C. Cass, R. D. Harris, K. Edme, K. Sung and E. A. Weiss, Annu. Rev. Phys. Chem., 2014, 65, 317–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Gao, C. S. Suchand Sandeep, J. M. Schins, A. J. Houtepen and L. D. Siebbeles, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2329 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Kagan and C. B. Murray, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 1013–1026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Wheeler and J. Z. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2878–2896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. I. Klimov, Annu. Rev. Condens. Matter Phys., 2014, 5, 285–316 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, A. Suna, J. McHugh, E. F. Hilinski, P. A. Lucas and R. D. Johnson, J. Chem. Phys., 1990, 92, 6927–6939 CrossRef CAS .
I. Mekis, D. V. Talapin, A. Kornowski, M. Haase and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 7454–7462 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Kortan, R. Hull, R. L. Opila, M. G. Bawendi, M. L. Steigerwald, P. J. Carroll and L. E. Brus, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1990, 112, 1327–1332 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, Y. Lou, A. C. Samia and C. Burda, Nano Lett., 2003, 3, 799–803 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Talapin, I. Mekis, S. Götzinger, A. Kornowski, O. Benson and H. Weller, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18826–18831 CrossRef CAS .
J. McKittrick and L. E. Shea-Rohwer, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2014, 97, 1327–1352 CrossRef CAS .
D. Battaglia and X. Peng, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 1027–1030 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qu and X. Peng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 2049–2055 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Efros and M. Rosen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1997, 78, 1110–1113 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Klimov and D. W. McBranch, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 4028–4031 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cui, A. P. Beyler, I. Coropceanu, L. Cleary, T. R. Avila, Y. Chen, J. M. Cordero, S. L. Heathcote, D. K. Harris, O. Chen, J. S. Cao and M. G. Bawendi, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 289–296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Boles, D. Ling, T. Hyeon and D. V. Talapin, Nat. Mater., 2016, 15, 141–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Efros, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 612–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. M. Dickson, A. B. Cubitt, R. Y. Tsien and W. E. Moerner, Nature, 1997, 388, 355–358 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. V. Bout, W.-T. Yip, D. Hu, D.-K. Fu, T. M. Swager and P. F. Barbara, Science, 1997, 277, 1074–1077 CrossRef .
H. Htoon, M. J. O'Connell, P. J. Cox, S. K. Doorn and V. I. Klimov, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 93, 027401 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, C. Querner, T. Emmons, M. Drndic and C. H. Crouch, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 23221–23227 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nirmal, B. O. Dabbousi, M. G. Bawendi, J. J. Macklin, J. K. Trautman, T. D. Harris and L. E. Brus, Nature, 1996, 383, 802–804 CrossRef CAS .
K. T. Shimizu, R. G. Neuhauser, C. A. Leatherdale, S. A. Empedocles, W. K. Woo and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 63, 205316 CrossRef .
R. Verberk, A. M. van Oijen and M. Orrit, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2002, 66, 233202 CrossRef .
P. A. Frantsuzov and R. A. Marcus, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 155321 CrossRef .
A. W. Cohn, J. D. Rinehart, A. M. Schimpf, A. L. Weaver and D. R. Gamelin, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 353–358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Bae, Y. S. Park, J. Lim, D. Lee, L. A. Padilha, H. McDaniel, I. Robel, C. Lee, J. M. Pietryga and V. I. Klimov, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2661 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Shen, Q. Lin, W. Cao, C. Yang, N. T. Shewmon, H. Wang, J. Niu, L. S. Li and J. Xue, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13583–13591 RSC .
J. H. Chang, P. Park, H. Jung, B. G. Jeong, D. Hahm, G. Nagamine, J. Ko, J. Cho, L. A. Padilha, D. C. Lee, C. Lee, K. Char and W. K. Bae, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 10231–10239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. D. Kim, D. Kim, D.-E. Yoon, H. Lee, J. Lim, W. K. Bae and D. C. Lee, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 3066–3082 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liang, R. Zhu, Y. Dong, S. T. Wu, J. Li, J. Wang and J. Zhou, Opt. Express, 2015, 23, 12910–12922 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. K. Bae and J. Lim, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2019, 36, 173–185 CrossRef CAS .
R. Meerheim, M. Furno, S. Hofmann, B. Lüssem and K. Leo, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 253305 CrossRef .
K. Hong and J.-L. Lee, Electron. Mater. Lett., 2011, 7, 77–91 CrossRef CAS .
V. L. Colvin, M. C. Schlamp and A. P. Alivisatos, Nature, 1994, 370, 354–357 CrossRef CAS .
B. O. Dabbousi, M. G. Bawendi, O. Onitsuka and M. F. Rubner, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1995, 66, 1316–1318 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Schlamp, X. Peng and A. P. Alivisatos, J. Appl. Phys., 1997, 82, 5837–5842 CrossRef CAS .
H. Mattoussi, L. H. Radzilowski, B. O. Dabbousi, E. L. Thomas, M. G. Bawendi and M. F. Rubner, J. Appl. Phys., 1998, 83, 7965–7974 CrossRef CAS .
S. Coe, W.-K. Woo, M. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nature, 2002, 420, 800–803 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Sun, Y. A. Wang, L. S. Li, D. Wang, T. Zhu, J. Xu, C. Yang and Y. Li, Nat. Photonics, 2007, 1, 717–722 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, J. A. Bardecker, A. M. Munro, M. S. Liu, Y. Niu, I. K. Ding, J. Luo, B. Chen, A. K. Y. Jen and D. S. Ginger, Nano Lett., 2006, 6, 463–467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Burrows, V. Bulovic, S. R. Forrest, L. S. Sapochak, D. M. Mccarty and M. E. Thompson, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1994, 65, 2922–2924 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Friend, R. W. Gymer, A. B. Holmes, J. H. Burroughes, R. N. Marks, C. Taliani, D. D. C. Bradley, D. A. D. Santos, J. L. Brédas, M. Lögdlund and W. R. Salaneck, Nature, 1999, 397, 121 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Caruge, J. E. Halpert, V. Wood, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 247–250 CrossRef CAS .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J. E. Halpert, J. M. Caruge, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3581–3586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. S. Mashford, T.-L. Nguyen, G. J. Wilson and P. Mulvaney, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 167–172 RSC .
L. Tang, H. Dai, X. Zhang, X. Sun and J. Zhao, Micro Nano Lett., 2014, 9, 421–424 CrossRef CAS .
P. R. Brown, R. R. Lunt, N. Zhao, T. P. Osedach, D. D. Wanger, L.-Y. Chang, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2955–2961 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Wood, M. J. Panzer, J.-M. Caruge, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 24–29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Yang, Z.-H. Zhang, T. Ding, N. Wang, G. Chen, C. Dang, H. V. Demir and X. W. Sun, Nano Energy, 2018, 46, 229–233 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, L. Jiang, F. S. Yan Yeung, P. Xu, S. Chen, H.-S. Kwok and G. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 11119–11124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Wood and V. Bulovic, Nano Rev., 2010, 1, 5202–5208 CrossRef PubMed .
K.-S. Cho, E. K. Lee, W.-J. Joo, E. Jang, T.-H. Kim, S. J. Lee, S.-J. Kwon, J. Y. Han, B.-K. Kim, B. L. Choi and J. M. Kim, Nat. Photonics, 2009, 3, 341–345 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, Y. Zheng, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, Nat. Photonics, 2011, 5, 543–548 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. E. Beek, M. M. Wienk and R. A. J. Janssen, Adv. Mater., 2004, 16, 1009–1013 CrossRef CAS .
P. Ravirajan, A. M. Peiró, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Graetzel, D. D. C. Bradley, J. R. Durrant and J. Nelson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7635–7639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Dai, Z. Zhang, Y. Jin, Y. Niu, H. Cao, X. Liang, L. Chen, J. Wang and X. Peng, Nature, 2014, 515, 96–99 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Sun and S. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700610 CrossRef .
J. Kwak, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, I. Park, J. Lim, M. Park, H. Cho, H. Woo, D. Y. Yoon, K. Char, S. Lee and C. Lee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2362–2366 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Cao, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, R. MandersJesse, J. Xue, P. H. Holloway and L. Qian, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 9, 259–266 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, W. Cao, N. T. Shewmon, C. Yang, L. S. Li and J. Xue, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1211–1216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Song, O. Wang, H. Shen, Q. Lin, Z. Li, L. Wang, X. Zhang and L. S. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808377 CrossRef .
X. Li, Q. Lin, J. Song, H. Shen, H. Zhang, L. S. Li, X. Li and Z. Du, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2020, 8, 1901145 CrossRef CAS .
K.-H. Lee, J.-H. Lee, W.-S. Song, H. Ko, C. Lee, J.-H. Lee and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7295–7302 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Lee, J.-H. Lee, H.-D. Kang, C.-Y. Han, S. M. Bae, Y. Lee, J. Y. Hwang and H. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2014, 610, 511–516 CrossRef CAS .
H. Shen, X. Bai, A. Wang, H. Wang, L. Qian, Y. Yang, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, Y. Zheng and L. S. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 2367–2373 CrossRef CAS .
B. N. Pal, Y. Ghosh, S. Brovelli, R. Laocharoensuk, V. I. Klimov, J. A. Hollingsworth and H. Htoon, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 331–336 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K.-H. Lee, J.-H. Lee, H.-D. Kang, B. Park, Y. Kwon, H. Ko, C. Lee, J. Lee and H. Yang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4893–4901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lim, B. G. Jeong, M. Park, J. K. Kim, J. M. Pietryga, Y. S. Park, V. I. Klimov, C. Lee, D. C. Lee and W. K. Bae, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 8034–8040 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kwak, J. Lim, M. Park, S. Lee, K. Char and C. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 3793–3799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, S. Jin, W. Sun, J. Lin, B. You, Y. Li, B. Zhang, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and Z. A. Tan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2018, 6, 1800578 CrossRef .
Y. L. Shi, F. Liang, Y. Hu, M. P. Zhuo, X. D. Wang and L. S. Liao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14792–14797 RSC .
Z. Tan, F. Zhang, T. Zhu, J. Xu, A. Y. Wang, J. D. Dixon, L. Li, Q. Zhang, S. E. Mohney and J. Ruzyllo, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 3803–3807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zhong, J. Zou, C. Jiang, L. Lan, C. Song, Z. He, L. Mu, L. Wang, J. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, Org. Electron., 2018, 58, 245–249 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, C. Wei, L. Wang, J. Zhuang, Q. Huang, W. Su, Z. Cui, A. Nathan, W. Lei and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 592–602 RSC .
Y. Liu, C. Jiang, C. Song, J. Wang, L. Mu, Z. He, Z. Zhong, Y. Cun, C. Mai, J. Wang, J. Peng and Y. Cao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 1564–1570 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Kim, S. Cho, J. Kim, H. Shin and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 24028–24036 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Kim, S. Park, Y. Yi, D. I. Son, C. Park, D. K. Hwang and W. K. Choi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 8968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Castan, H.-M. Kim and J. Jang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2508–2515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ji, P. Jing, W. Xu, X. Yuan, Y. Wang, J. Zhao and A. K.-Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 103, 053106 CrossRef .
J. Kwak, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, I. Park, J. Lim, M. Park, H. Cho, H. Woo, D. Y. Yoon, K. Char, S. Lee and C. Lee, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2362–2366 CrossRef CAS .
C. Jiang, J. Zou, Y. Liu, C. Song, Z. He, Z. Zhong, J. Wang, H. L. Yip, J. Peng and Y. Cao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 6040–6049 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, S. Chen and X. W. Sun, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 697–704 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, W. Sun, P. Liu, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, J. Wei, Y. Li, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and Z. A. Tan, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 960–965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Qu, N. Zhang, R. Cai, B. Kang, S. Chen, B. Xu, K. Wang and X. W. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2019, 114, 071101 CrossRef .
D. Li, J. Bai, T. Zhang, C. Chang, X. Jin, Z. Huang, B. Xu and Q. Li, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 3501–3504 RSC .
T. Cheng, F. Wang, W. Sun, Z. Wang, J. Zhang, B. You, Y. Li, T. Hayat, A. Alsaed and Z. A. Tan, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2019, 5, 1800794 CrossRef .
M. Zhang, B. Hu, L. Meng, R. Bian, S. Wang, Y. Wang, H. Liu and L. Jiang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 8690–8695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Wang, L. Wang, Z. Li, Q. Xu, Q. Lin, H. Wang, Z. Du, H. Shen and L. S. Li, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 5650–5657 RSC .
Q. Su, H. Zhang, Y. Sun, X. W. Sun and S. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 23218–23224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Su, Y. Sun, H. Zhang and S. Chen, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800549 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Lin, L. Wang, Z. Li, H. Shen, L. Guo, Y. Kuang, H. Wang and L. S. Li, ACS Photonics, 2018, 5, 939–946 CrossRef CAS .
I. Cho, H. Jung, B. G. Jeong, D. Hahm, J. H. Chang, T. Lee, K. Char, D. C. Lee, J. Lim, C. Lee, J. Cho and W. K. Bae, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 22453–22459 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, J. Lin, Y. Hu, X. Guo, Y. Lv, Z. Tang, J. Zhao, Y. Fan, N. Zhang, Y. Wang and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 38755–38760 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Cheng, Z. Wang, S. Jin, F. Wang, Y. Bai, H. Feng, B. You, Y. Li, T. Hayat and Z. A. Tan, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2017, 5, 1700035 CrossRef .
L. Wang, T. Chen, Q. Lin, H. Shen, A. Wang, H. Wang, C. Li and L. S. Li, Org. Electron., 2016, 37, 280–286 CrossRef .
H. Peng, Y. Jiang and S. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 17765–17773 RSC .
Q. Lin, F. Chen, H. Wang, H. Shen, A. Wang, L. Wang, F. Zhang, F. Guo and L. S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 11557–11563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Wang, H. Shen, S. Zang, Q. Lin, H. Wang, L. Qian, J. Niu and L. Song Li, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 2951–2959 RSC .
J. S. Steckel, J. P. Zimmer, S. Coe-Sullivan, N. E. Stott, V. Bulović and M. G. Bawendi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 116, 2206–2210 CrossRef .
D. Chen, F. Zhao, H. Qi, M. Rutherford and X. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 1437–1444 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, H. Zhang, Y. Feng and X. Zhong, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 11066–11073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Čapek, K. Lambert, D. Dorfs, P. F. Smet, D. Poelman, A. Eychmüller and Z. Hens, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 1743–1749 CrossRef .
H. Shen, C. Zhou, S. Xu, C. Yu, H. Wang, X. Chen and L. S. Li, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6046–6053 RSC .
X. Zhong, Y. Feng, W. Knoll and M. Han, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13559–13563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhong, M. Han, Z. Dong, T. J. White and W. Knoll, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 8589–8594 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhong, Z. Zhang, S. Liu, M. Han and W. Knoll, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 15552–15559 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhong, Y. Feng, Y. Zhang, Z. Gu and L. Zou, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 4293–4297 Search PubMed .
C. Xiang, W. Koo, S. Chen, F. So, X. Liu, X. Kong and Y. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2012, 101, 053303 CrossRef .
Z. Deng, H. Yan and Y. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 17744–17745 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shen, S. Wang, H. Wang, J. Niu, L. Qian, Y. Yang, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, Y. Zheng and L. S. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4260–4265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Chen, J. Zhao, V. P. Chauhan, J. Cui, C. Wong, D. K. Harris, H. Wei, H.-S. Han, D. Fukumura, R. K. Jain and M. G. Bawendi, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Kumawat, X. K. Liu, D. Kabra and F. Gao, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 2109–2120 RSC .
A. Rizzo, Y. Li, S. Kudera, F. Della Sala, M. Zanella, W. J. Parak, R. Cingolani, L. Manna and G. Gigli, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 90, 051106 CrossRef .
S. Jun and E. Jang, Chem. Commun., 2005, 41, 4616–4618 RSC .
J. Kwak, W. K. Bae, M. Zorn, H. Woo, H. Yoon, J. Lim, S. W. Kang, S. Weber, H.-J. Butt, R. Zentel, S. Lee, K. Char and C. Lee, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 5022–5026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulović, Nano Lett., 2007, 7, 2196–2200 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wan Ki, K. Jeonghun, L. Jaehoon, L. Donggu, N. Min Ki, C. Kookheon, L. Changhee and L. Seonghoon, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 075202 CrossRef PubMed .
M. D. Ho, D. Kim, N. Kim, S. M. Cho and H. Chae, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 12369–12374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Lin, H. Shen, H. Wang, A. Wang, J. Niu, L. Qian, F. Guo and L. S. Li, Org. Electron., 2015, 25, 178–183 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Su, Q. Su, H. Zhang, F. Wen and S. Chen, J. Soc. Inf. Disp., 2018, 26, 470–476 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jin, C. Chang, W. Zhao, S. Huang, X. Gu, Q. Zhang, F. Li, Y. Zhang and Q. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 15803–15811 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. J. Panzer, K. E. Aidala, P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 2421–2426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. O. Anikeeva, J. E. Halpert, M. G. Bawendi and V. Bulovic, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 2532–2536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gopal, K. Hoshino, S. Kim and X. J. Zhang, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
B. S. Mashford, M. Stevenson, Z. Popovic, C. Hamilton, Z. Zhou, C. Breen, J. Steckel, V. Bulovic, M. Bawendi, S. Coe-Sullivan and P. T. Kazlas, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 407–412 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sun, F. Li, Q. Zeng, H. Hu and T. Guo, Org. Electron., 2018, 63, 65–70 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Yan, Y. Li, Y.-T. Zhou, L. Liu, Y. Zhang, B.-G. You and Y. Li, IEEE Photonics J., 2017, 9, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. Wang, Y. Guo, D. Feng, L. Chen, Y. Fang, H. Shen and Z. Du, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 4724–4730 RSC .
S. Cao, J. Zheng, J. Zhao, Z. Yang, C. Li, X. Guan, W. Yang, M. Shang and T. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15605–15614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Kim, C.-Y. Han, K.-H. Lee, K.-S. An, W. Song, J. Kim, M. S. Oh, Y. R. Do and H. Yang, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 197–204 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun and S. R. Forrest, Nat. Photonics, 2008, 2, 483–487 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Yang, Q. Y. Bao, Z. Q. Xu, Y. Q. Li, J. X. Tang and S. Shen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 97, 223303 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, X. Gu, Z. Chen, J. Jiang, Z. Zhang, J. Wei, F. Li, X. Jin, Y. Song and Q. Li, Opt. Express, 2017, 25, 17683–17694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Yu, F. Yin, X. Huang and W. Ji, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2017, 5, 6682–6687 RSC .
T.-W. Koh, J.-M. Choi, S. Lee and S. Yoo, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1849–1853 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, X. Dou, L. Chen, Y. Fang, A. Wang, H. Shen and Z. Du, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 11651–11656 RSC .
X. Yang, K. Dev, J. Wang, E. Mutlugun, C. Dang, Y. Zhao, S. Liu, Y. Tang, S. T. Tan, X. W. Sun and H. V. Demir, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5977–5984 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, P. L. Hernandez-Martinez, C. Dang, E. Mutlugun, K. Zhang, H. V. Demir and X. W. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2015, 3, 1439–1445 CrossRef CAS .
S. Höfle, A. Schienle, C. Bernhard, M. Bruns, U. Lemmer and A. Colsmann, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5155–5159 CrossRef .
T. Chiba, Y.-J. Pu and J. Kido, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4681–4687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, Y. X. Feng and S. M. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 26982–26988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Shen, F. Cao, H. Wang, B. Wei, F. Wang, X. W. Sun and X. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 1065–1070 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lim, M. Park, W. K. Bae, D. Lee, S. Lee, C. Lee and K. Char, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 9019–9026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, Y. Deng, X. Zhang, J. Xia and W. Lei, Org. Electron., 2018, 58, 191–196 CrossRef CAS .
C. Féry, B. Racine, D. Vaufrey, H. Doyeux and S. Cinà, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 213502 CrossRef .
J. Lim, Y.-S. Park, K. Wu, H. J. Yun and V. I. Klimov, Nano Lett., 2018, 18, 6645–6653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Cao, C. Xiang, Y. Yang, Q. Chen, L. Chen, X. Yan and L. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2608 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Khan, A. Subramanian, I. Ahmed, M. Khan, A. Nathan, G. Wang, L. Wei, J. Chen, Y. Zhang and Q. Bao, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1900695 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, Q. Su, H. Zhang, F. Wang, S. Zhang and S. Chen, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 11433–11442 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Li, Y. X. Hu, H. B. Shen, Q. L. Lin, L. Wang, H. Z. Wang, W. L. Zhao and L. S. Li, Laser Photonics Rev., 2017, 11, 9 Search PubMed .
K. Yoshida, T. Matsushima, Y. Shiihara, H. Kuwae, J. Mizuno and C. Adachi, J. Appl. Phys., 2017, 121, 6 CrossRef .
H. Aziz and Z. D. Popovic, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 4522–4532 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, W. Cao, T. Liu, S. W. Tsang, Y. Yang, X. Yan and L. Qian, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 765 CrossRef CAS .
K. P. Acharya, A. Titov, J. Hyvonen, C. Wang, J. Tokarz and P. H. Holloway, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 14451–14457 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Haoran Jia	Hao-ran Jia is a postdoctoral fellow with Prof. Zhan'ao Tan at Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). Prior to joining BUCT, he received his Ph.D. from College of Chemistry, Beijing Normal University (BNU) in 2019, with focus on carbon quantum dot (CQD) based light-emitting diodes (LEDs). His current research interests are to develop novel QDs and perovskite materials, fabricate high performance LEDs and solar cells, and understand the device mechanism.
Fuzhi Wang	Fuzhi Wang is an associate professor in Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University. She received her Ph.D. in Polymer Chemistry & Physics from Peking University in 2008. Her research interests include quantum dot/organic/perovskite light-emitting diodes and polymer solar cells, especially device structure design and interface engineering.
Zhan'ao Tan	Zhan'ao Tan has been a professor in Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology since 2018, and he worked in the Beijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, North China Electric Power University since 2009, and currently leads the Group of Organic Optoelectronic Materials and Devices. He received his Ph.D. degree in physical chemistry in 2007 from the Institute of Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences and then came to Pennsylvania State University, USA, as a postdoctoral from 2007 to 2009. His present research interests include polymer solar cells, semiconductor nanocrystal based optoelectronics, organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells and flow batteries.

 	Fig. 1  (a) Electronic states in a bulk semiconductor and QDs made of the same material with different diameters. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 4 with permission from Co-Action Publishing, copyright 2010. (b) Size-dependent change of the emission color from the colloidal solutions of CdSe/ZnS core–shell nanocrystals. The particles with the smallest CdSe core (about 1.7 nm diameter) produce blue emission, and the particles with the largest core (about 5 nm) emit in red. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 5 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2002. (c) Reported spectral ranges of emission for different semiconductor nanocrystals. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 6 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 2  High color quality of QD emission. (a) Comparison of the typical electroluminescent spectra of blue, green, and red QLEDs (solid lines) with those of OLEDs emitting at similar wavelengths (dashed lines). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 10 with permission from Materials Research Society, copyright 2013. (b) CIE chromaticity diagram showing that the spectral purity of QDs enables a color gamut larger than the HDTV standard. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 9 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2012.	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic shape, energy band diagram, electron–hole wave function, and typical properties of core/shell QDs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 13 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic diagram of exciton dynamics in QDs: (a) the generation mechanism of photogenic excitons and field-induced excitons. (b) Exciton relaxation process. (c) Three pathways of exciton recombination: radiative recombination, trap-assisted recombination and auger recombination.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) First observation of PL blinking in single CdSe QD measurements. Upper panel: PL intensity trajectories as a function of pump intensity. Lower panel: The dependence of PL blinking on the QD structure. QDs with a ZnS shell show reduced blinking compared to core-only samples. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 42 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 1996. (b) Schematic diagram of neutral and charged nanocrystals. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 37 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2008. (c) Auger recombination of a negative trion (X−), a positive trion (X+), and a biexciton (2X). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 1 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of (a) a typical QLED structure and (b) charge injection and energy transfer process.	 
ηint = γχηr

 		 
ηext = ηcouplingηint

 	Fig. 7  Various kinds of energy dissipation in a normal structured light-emitting device. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 54 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 8  The structure and energy level diagram of QLED devices with a polymer material as the CTL. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 55 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 1994.	 

 	Fig. 9  QLED device structure and EL spectrum of QLEDs (a) without and (b) with the TAZ EBL. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 59 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2002.	 

 	Fig. 10  Structures, images and HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the type II QLEDs. (a) Core/shell QD structures. (b) HOMO and LUMO energy levels of the materials involved in the QLEDs. (c) Molecular structures of PEDOT, poly-TPD and Alq3. (d) EL spectra of the red, orange, yellow and green QLEDs operating at different luminances (voltages). These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 60 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2007.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic diagram of (a) all-inorganic QLED device structure and (b) energy level structure. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 64 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2008.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Energy level diagram and (b) luminous intensity vs. applied voltage curves of ITO/NiO/QD/ZnO/Ag QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 66 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2010. (c) Energy level diagram and (d) EQE/current efficiency vs. current density curves of ITO/MoO3/NiO/QDs/ZnO/Al QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic structure with the associated energy band diagram, (b) efficiency and (c) EL image of QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 73 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2009. (d) Energy level diagram, (e) luminance power efficiency and EQE vs. luminance curves, and (f) operation stability of QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 74 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2011.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Energy level diagram, (b) EL spectrum at an applied voltage of 3 V and a corresponding photograph, (c) EQE vs. current density and luminance curves, and (d) stability data of the QLEDs with a thin PMMA insulating layer. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2014.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the device architecture and (b–d) electroluminescence performance of the red, green and blue QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 


2019	ITO/PEDOT/TFB:TCTA/QDs/AZO:ZrAcac/Al	464	34874	5.7	10.7	2.02	
104

2019	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnxCd1−xSe/ZnSe QDs/ZnO/Al	476	62600	—	8.05	7000	
11

2019	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/QDs/LiF/ZnO/Al	465	36970	7.9	9.8	—	
105

2019	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/Cd0.1Zn0.9S/ZnS QDs/TBS-PBO/ZnO:Mg/Al	452	7992.5	—	17.4	—	
106

2019	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al:Al2O3	453.8	27753	3.29	8.92	—	
107

2018	ITO/PEI/ZnO/QDs/PVK/MoO3/Al	458	2640	2.5	5.5	—	
94

2018	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/CdZnSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	468	315	4.26	6.20	—	
108

2018	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CdZnSeS/ZnS QDs/ZnMgO/Al/HATCN/MoO3/PVK/CdZnSeS/ZnS QDs/ZnMgO/Al	474	26800	17.9	21.4	—	
103

2018	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/ZnCdS/CdxZn1−xS/ZnS QDs/LiF/ZnO/Al	445	6768	3.4	18.0	47.4	
109

2018	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/DNA/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	462	16655	2.3	5.65	—	
91

2018	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CdxZn1−xSeyS1−y/ZnS QDs/ZnMgO/Al	475	29750	7.80	9.81	—	
110

2018	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/QDs/ZnMgO/Al	470	18348	11.38	12.97	—	
111

2018	ITO/ZnO:CsN3/CdSe/ZnS QDs/TAPC/HAT-CN/MoO3/Al	460	—	4.1	6.6	—	
95

2018	ITO/PMAH/TFB/PVK/QDs/ZnO/Al	454	4140	1.99	5.99	—	
96

2018	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnCdSe/ZnS//ZnS QDs/PMMA/ZnO/Al	479	14100	11.8	16.2	355	
112

2018	ITO/LZO/MLZO/QDs/TCTA:NPB:HAT-CN/Al	453	1000	0.5	2.6	—	
97

2018	ITO/ZnO/CdZnSe/ZnS QDs/mCP/MoO3/Al	455	—	1.08	3.23	—	
113

2017	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/CdSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	468	4890	14.1	19.8	47.4	
114

2017	ITO/PEIE/ZnO/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/CBP/CBP:MoO3/MoO3/Al	460	—	3.10	7.85	—	
92

2017	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	445	10400	2.26	11.9	4300	
48

2017	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/Al:Al2O3	457	13002	1.15	—	—	
115

2016	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/PVK:ZnCdSe/ZnSe/ZnSeS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	471	13800	6.41	8.76	—	
116

2016	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/EGaIn	449	1680	1.64	5.03	—	
117

2016	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/CdZnSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	470	13670	5.9	8.1	376	
118

2015	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/Cd1−xZnxS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	455	4000	4.4	10.7	1000	
80

2015	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/ZnSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	455	2632	1.38	7.83	—	
119

2015	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnCdS/ZnS-OT QDs/ZnO/Al	443	7600	2.1	12.2	—	
81

2014	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/TFB/ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS/ZnO/Al	445	4100	1.13	3.8	—	
86

2013	ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PVK/ZnCdS/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	452	2624	2.2	7.1	—	
84

2013	ITO/ZnO/ZnSe/ZnS QDs/TCTA/MoO3/Al	441	1170	0.51	—	—	
100

2012	ITO/ZnO/CdZnS/ZnS QDs/CBP/MoO3/Al	433	2250	0.4	1.7	—	
101

2011	TO/PEDOT:PSS/poly-TPD/CdSe/ZnS QDs/ZnO/Al	470	4200	0.32	0.22	—	
74


 	Fig. 16  (a) Absorption spectra of a size-series of large CdS nanocrystals ranging from 3.7 to 5.2 nm in diameter. (b) Normalized PL spectra of bare CdS nanocrystals (---) and the corresponding PL of the (CdS)ZnS core/shell nanocrystals (—). These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 120 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2004.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Absorption and PL spectra of 3 h-shelled CdZnS/ZnS QDs and (b) variation of the PLQY of CdZnS/ZnS QDs with different shelling times of 0.5, 1, and 3 h. (c) Spectral comparison of PL of QD solution versus EL of QLEDs. (d) CIE color coordinates of (0.153, 0.027) corresponding to the blue emission spectra and EL image under an applied voltage of 7 V. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) The synthetic procedure of ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS core/shell QDs. (b) Evolution of the absorption and PL spectra upon consecutive growth. (c) Normalized PL spectra of ZnxCd1−xS/ZnS core/shell QDs starting from different x and representative UV-illuminated photos. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Normalized EL spectra and images of blue, green and red QLEDs. (b) CIE coordinates of the three QLEDs (triangles) compared to the NTSC colour standards (stars). These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (c) Comparison of the PLQY of QDs with different shell thicknesses in solution and solid-state films. (d) Current efficiency and EQE of blue QLEDs with different HTLs as a function of luminance. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Evolution of absorption and PL spectra of ZnCdSe cores, ZnCdSe/ZnS, and ZnCdSe/ZnS//ZnS alloy core/shell QDs. (b) Representative PL intensity time traces (1800 s) of the single ZnCdSe core, ZnCdSe/ZnS, and ZnCdSe/ZnS//ZnS core/shell QDs under continuous wave laser excitation. The binning time is 15 ms. The gray traces are the corrected background noise intensities. (c) Photon counting histograms for the fluorescence traces shown in (b). These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 21  Energy levels of various HTL and ETL materials. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 133 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Energy level diagram of the device: ITO/PEDOT:PSS/CBP:MSCs/BCP/Ca/Al. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 134 with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright 2007. (b) EL spectra of CdSe/ZnS QDs embedded in an LED at different voltages. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 135 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2005. (c) Schematic diagrams of the distribution of QDs in a polymermatrix from a QD/PTPA-b-CAA hybrid film and a QD/PTPA-b-PFP blend film. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 136 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2009. (d) Absorption spectra of QDs and the PL spectra of TPD and Alq3. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 137 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2007.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic of the device configuration and the energy level diagram of the blue QLEDs. (a) This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 93 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2007. (b) This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 138 with permission from IOP science, copyright 2009. (c) This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 139 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2013.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Energy level diagram of blue QLEDs based on ZnSe/ZnS core/shell QDs with different HTLs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 140 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2015. (b) EQE and current efficiency vs. luminance of QLEDs based on ZnCdSe core/multishell QDs without and with PVK. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 116 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2016. (c) Normalized EL spectra of blue QLEDs with the TFB/PVK bilayered HTL and the scheme of exciplex formation. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 141 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram of all-solution processed inverted double-layer HTL QLEDs and the operation photos. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 96 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. Reproduced/adapted with permission from American Chemical Society. (b) Energy level diagram of blue QLEDs with DNA as the buffer layer and (c) the EQE vs. current density curves of devices with different DNA concentrations. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 91 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Absorption spectra (solid lines) of red, orange, green, cyan, and blue QDs in chloroform and thin film PL spectra (dashed lines) of TPD, Alq3, spiroTPD, and TPBi. (b) Energy level diagram of QLEDs. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 2 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2009. (c) Device structure and (d) normalized EL spectrum at an applied voltage of 5 V of blue QLEDs with ZnO:PVP ETL. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 147 with permission from Elsevier, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Energy band alignments of ITO, ZnO, LZO, MZO, and MLZO ETLs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 97 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (b) Energy level diagram of QLEDs with the ZnO:CsN3 ETL. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 95 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 28  (a) Energy level diagram and (b) EQE and current efficiency vs. voltage curves of the blue QLEDs with the TBS-PBO blocking layer. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 106 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2019. (c) Current efficiency and (d) EQE as a function of current density for blue QLEDs with the LiF interfacial layer of different thicknesses. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 105 with permission from American Institute of Physics, copyright 2019. (e) Energy level diagram of blue QLEDs using ZrAcac doped ZnO as the ETL and (f) EQE vs. luminance curves. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 29  (a) Schematic illustration of the QLEDs with ZnO nanopillar arrays and the fabrication process of ZnO nanopillar arrays on the ITO substrate. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 158 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2014. (b) Surface plasmon enhanced QD emission and energy diagram for the donor–acceptor (D–A) pair energy transfer process. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 159 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2015. (c) Schematic device structure of QLEDs using microlens arrays and mode distributions with microlens arrays on the PET substrate. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 155 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (d) Schematic of the grating device structure of QLEDs and schematic explanation of the out-coupling mechanism. (e) Calculated distribution of the power field intensity in the QLEDs with and without grating nanostructures at the wavelength of 525 nm. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 157 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 30  (a) Schematic device structure, energy band diagram and EQE vs. current density curves of hybrid tandem LEDs with a new ICL based on ZnMgO/Al/HATCN. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 162 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2016. (b) Schematic device structure, EQE and current efficiency vs. current density curves of tandem QLEDs with an ICL based on PEDOT:PSS/ZnMgO, along with PL spectra of the QD layer coated on ZnMgO before and after CB rinsing. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 78 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (c) Schematic device structure, energy band diagram and EL spectra of TWQLEDs with an ICL based on ZnO NPs and PMA. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 102 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018. (d) Schematic device structure, energy band diagram and EQE and current efficiency vs. current density curves of tandem QLEDs with an ICL based on ZnMgO/Al/HATCN/MoO3. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 103 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 
Ln0T50 = constant; 1 < n < 2

 	Fig. 31  (a) Atomically resolved HAADF-STEM image of the CdSe/6 monolayer ZnSe core/shell QDs. Energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) elemental maps and elemental profiles of Cd, Zn and Se in the same CdSe/6 ML ZnSe core/shell QD array. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 11 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019. (b) Energy level diagram and operation stability data of QLEDs using a gradient Cd1−xZnxSe1−ySy intermediate shell. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 80 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2015. (c) STEM images and EDS elemental maps of Cd, S and Zn in ZnCdS/ZnS (top panel) and ZnCdS/CdxZn1−xS/ZnS core/shell QDs (bottom panel). This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 109 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 32  Evolution of time-resolved PL decay curves of (a) QD-OA and (c) QD-DDT in a heating–cooling process at the temperatures indicated. Schematic diagram of the recombination and quenching mechanisms in (b) QD-OA and (d) QD-DDT at elevated temperatures. (e) Luminance variation of QLEDs based on glass and sapphire substrates after operation. (f) Lifetime characteristics of the glass-based and sapphire-based QLEDs at a high initial luminance of 100000 cd m−2. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 170 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 33  (a) Normalized luminance and operation voltage at maximum vs. time for the ZnSe-QD and ZnS-QD devices operated at a constant current, and operation voltage vs. time of hole-only and electron-only ZnSe-QD and ZnS-QD based devices operated at a constant current. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 168 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2018. (b) The capacitance–voltage (C–V) characteristics of standard red QLEDs and standard blue QLEDs. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 174 with permission from Springer Nature, copyright 2019.	 

 	Fig. 34  (a–b) XPS spectra of O 1s and C 1s core levels from the sputtered ZnO surface after peeling off the Al electrode. (c) Aging measurement on the EQE of red, green, and blue QLEDs after encapsulation with resin. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 175 with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry, copyright 2017. (d–e) XPS spectra of O 1s and Al 2p core levels at the interface of Al/ZnMgO. (f) Schematic illustration of the positive aging process. These figures have been adapted/reproduced from ref. 111 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2018.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Current efficiency vs. voltage curves of blue QLEDs with ZnO annealed at different temperatures. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 107 with permission from John Wiley and Sons, copyright 2019. (b) Schematic illustration of the exciton quenching process with and without post-annealing. This figure has been adapted/reproduced from ref. 110 with permission from American Chemical Society, copyright 2018.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
