Recent progress in tailoring the properties of inorganic CsPbX 3 perovskites with functional organic compounds: a route to enhanced efficiency and ope ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC02270A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC02270A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 9377-9399Recent progress in tailoring the properties of inorganic CsPbX3 perovskites with functional organic compounds: a route to enhanced efficiency and operational stability in CsPbX3-based photovoltaics

        
          
            Jadel 
            Tsiba Matondo
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Davy Maurice 
            Malouangou
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luyun 
            Bai
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yifan 
            Yang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jespere 
            Nzobadila Ondze
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Theogene 
            Bimenyimana
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Mina 
            Guli
          
          
        
      *a
aBeijing Key Laboratory of Novel Thin Film Solar Cells, School of New Energy, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102206, People's Republic of China. E-mail: gulimina@ncepu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Physics & Astronomy, University of the Western Cape, South Africa
Received 
      17th May 2021
    , Accepted 21st June 2021First published on 19th July 2021AbstractDue to their superior thermostability, inorganic CsPbX3 halide perovskites are considered the most promising photoabsorbers for commercially viable photovoltaic devices compared to their organic–inorganic analogs, which have demonstrated very impressive solar cell efficiency evolution in a few years though. However, the photoactive phases of most members, including CsPbI3 and iodide-rich CsPbI3−XBrX with suitable bandgaps for photovoltaic applications, of this CsPbX3 family are metastable at room temperature and/or humidity, which severely limits the development of their solar devices. Additionally, single-junction CsPbX3 perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have shown low efficiencies so far, which is mainly attributed to considerable crystal defect-related and non-optimal morphology-induced energy losses in the used CsPbX3 polycrystalline films. Accordingly, a broad range of organic species have been proposed to overcome these limitations and have been commonly used for the fabrication of CsPbI3 and CsPbI3−XBrX PSCs with efficiencies exceeding 15%. In this review, we first describe the mechanisms, such as tolerance factor tuning, suppression of lattice distortion and structural dimensionality tailoring, through which organic species are employed to thermodynamically stabilize the photovoltaic phases of CsPbI3 and CsPbI3−XBrX polymorphs under ambient conditions. Then, we show how molecular engineering could play a key role in the solution processing of high quality and low-temperature CsPbX3 perovskite films, and discuss the point defect passivation with organic ligands in CsPbX3 materials while highlighting the positive impact on the device efficiency and stability, as well as in the mitigation of the hysteresis phenomenon in the measurement of the current–voltage (I–V) performance of CsPbX3 PSCs. Lastly, we outline promising research pathways based on molecular engineering for the development of CsPbX3 materials with enhanced phase stability and photovoltaic properties.
Jadel Tsiba Matondo
Jadel Tsiba Matondo is a PhD Scholar under the supervision of Prof. Mina Guli at School of New Energy, North China Electric Power University. He received his Master's degree in Energy from Faculté des Sciences et Techniques (FST), Marien Ngouabi University, Congo. His current research interests include the chemical modification of halide perovskites and the development of inorganic hole-transporting materials for photovoltaic applications.
Davy Maurice Malouangou
Davy Maurice Malouangou is a PhD candidate guided by Prof. Mina Guli in Renewable Energy and Clean Energy at School of New Energy, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102202, China. He received his Master's degree in Energy from Faculté des Sciences et Techniques (FST), Marien Ngouabi University, Congo. His current research is focused on Two (quasi) and mixed dimensional perovskite materials and devices for photovoltaic applications.
Luyun Bai
Luyun Bai is an MS candidate guided by Prof. Mina Guli in Materials Science and Photovoltaic Devices at the School of Materials Engineering, North China Electric Power University. Her research is focused on Sn-based perovskite materials and devices.
Mina Guli
Mina Guli received her PhD in Materials Science and Engineering in 2010 from Jilin University, and finished joint PhD research work at University of Bristol in UK from 2008 to 2010. She is currently an associate Professor at School of New Energy in North China Electric Power University. Her main research aims to develop various functional materials and films for novel thin film solar cells and photoelectric devices.
1. Introduction
Halide perovskites (HPs) represent a class of highly promising semiconductors for photovoltaic applications owing to their huge potential to produce photovoltaic devices with high efficiencies at low manufacturing cost.1–4 Solar cells based on lead halide perovskites (LHPs) have demonstrated very impressive progress in power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) to reach a current record of 25.5% in almost one decade of development.5 These LHP materials have a general stoichiometry given by APbX3, where A is a monovalent cation, usually formamidinium FA or methylammonium MA, and X is a halide ion (I− or Br−). Unfortunately, the most used organic–inorganic (hybrid) LHP compositions exhibit limited thermostability because they often contain thermally unstable methylammonium cations (MA) at the A-site perovskite lattice.6–8 This propensity to undergo thermal degradation under solar cell operational conditions by the state-of-the-art perovskites severely affects the long-term stability of their solar cells, which partly impedes the rapid commercialization of this technology. Therefore, inorganic cesium-based LHPs (CsPbX3), including iodide CsPbI3,9 mixed halide CsPbI3−XBrX,10 and bromide CsPbBr311 perovskites, have been proposed and have garnered increasing interest of the perovskite community because of their robustness to stressing factors such as high temperatures or illumination.10,12–15 Chemically, CsPbX3 materials are different from their hybrid counterparts by the presence of inorganic Cs+ cations at the A-site of the APbX3 lattice, which is shown not much to alter the charge carrier-transporting characteristics such as the diffusion length and carrier mobility, the recombination lifetime, and the ambipolar properties of LHPs.16 Due to their bandgap magnitudes (∼1.7 eV for cubic CsPbI3 phase and ∼2.25 eV for orthorhombic CsPbBr3 phase), CsPbX3 appear as ideal top absorbers for tandem solar cells, thus enabling the increase of the efficiency of other photovoltaic materials such as Si at low cost.10 However, CsPbI3, which is the most promising composition in this CsPbX3 class, presents the photo-inactive phase at room temperature. Inactive phases are also found to be favored in I-rich CsPbI3−XBrX under ambient humidity although the photoactive phases are relatively stable at room temperature. To enhance the thermodynamic stability of the desired phases of CsPbI3, several approaches, such as the use of nanocrystals (NCs) or quantum dots (QDs) instead of polycrystalline films, have been put forward, but low device efficiencies (<15%) have been reported.17–19 Interestingly, many recent reports have shown that several organic species, such as alkyl and aromatic ammoniums,20–24 the compounds combining phenyl and carboxylate (–COO−, –COOH)25,26 or carbonyl (–CO) and amine (–N) functional groups,27 and O-based ligands,28 can enhance the stability of the photovoltaic phases of CsPbI3 and CsPbI3−XBrX by either modifying their structural properties or inhibiting the phase transition catalyzed by extrinsic factors such as moisture. In addition, CsPbX3 films used as active layers in PSCs usually have poor morphology, substrate coverage issues and high defect density attributed to their often rapid and uncontrolled crystallization, resulting in low photovoltaic performance. Therefore, there is an urgent need to develop more efficient approaches to address these issues in CsPbX3 PSCs.
In this review, we summarize the recent progress in the use of organic compounds to improve the properties of CsPbX3 materials and solar cells. Particularly, we describe different methods using organic species for stabilizing the active phases of CsPbI3 and I-rich CsPbI3−XBrX compounds at room temperature and/or under ambient humidity. Next, we demonstrate the importance of organic ligands, used either as additives or post-deposition agents, for controlling the crystal growth of CsPbX3, while outlining the potential of organic additive engineering to decrease the deposition temperature of the CsPbX3 films, which could enable the development of CsPbX3 devices compatible with flexible substrates. Then, we discuss the point defect passivation in CsPbX3 films using organic passivators and show how the surface energetics of CsPbX3 materials can be tailored via molecular engineering, while pointing out the impact of these modifications on device efficiency and stability. This review aims to provide motivation in the design of new organic species or optimization of the characteristics, such as their chemical structures or composition or size, or functional groups, of those already investigated for CsPbX3 perovskites in order to facilitate the development of CsPbX3 PSCs with efficiencies beyond 20% and improved stability.
2. Black perovskite phase stabilization in iodide and iodide-rich mixed halide CsPbX3
Halide CsPbX3 materials are known for being allotropic compounds because they exhibit two or several structural phases, all sharing identical chemical composition but with different physical properties, that depend on the temperature and/or the moisture level of the environment. Conversely to bromide CsPbBr3 which has a stable photoactive orthorhombic phase,29,30 iodide CsPbI3 and iodide-rich mixed halide CsPbI3−XBrX (0 < X < 2) compounds, whose active phases exhibit bandgaps suitable for solar cell applications, present an optically inactive phase known as the non-perovskite yellow phase under ambient conditions.31,32 The photoactive phases also called perovskite black phases of these materials are thermodynamically unstable in the ambient atmosphere and undergo a phase transition towards the structurally strain-free yellow phase upon their cooling down to room temperature, especially for CsPbI3, and/or exposure to ambient moisture after their preparation at the required temperature, especially in polycrystalline thin films.33,34 This constitutes a major challenge that hinders the development of long-term photovoltaic devices based on these light-harvesting materials despite their exceptional chemical and thermal stabilities.
In the case of CsPbI3, four structural phases, namely three black phases including cubic α-phase, tetragonal β-phase, orthorhombic γ-phase, and the orthorhombic yellow δ-phase are now known to exist depending on temperature (Fig. 1).35 The yellow δ-phase is the thermodynamically favored phase at room temperature (Fig. 1), but is useless for photovoltaic applications due to its large bandgap (ca. 2.8 eV).9 Nonetheless, the β- and γ-phases, also referred to as the distorted black phases owing to their structural distortion relative to the ideal cubic structure, show higher phase transition energies; therefore, they can relatively exist at room temperature compared to the α-phase.36
 Fig. 1  Structural and phase versatility of CsPbI3. (a) Crystal structure transition in CsPbI3 as a result of [PbI6]4− octahedral distortion induced by Pb–I–Pb angle tilting; in cubic structure this angle is 180° and it decreases to 164° and 153° in tetragonal and orthorhombic structures as indicated, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 38, with permission from American Chemical Society. (b) Thermal phase relations in CsPbI3 as compared to the phase behavior in CsPbI2.7Br0.3: (1) conversion of the yellow δ-phase into the α-phase upon heating; (2–5) thermodynamically preferred paths for the transformation of the α-phase into the yellow δ-phase in CsPbI3, with intermediate distorted β- and γ-phases, upon cooling down to room temperature (RT). (6) RT metastable β- and γ-phases immediately transformed into the yellow phase upon mild heating at 60 °C before the transformation into the α-phase with increasing temperature. CsPb(I2.7Br0.3)3: (2′,3′) transformation of the α-phase into the γ-phase, stable at RT, with the β-phase intermediate formation; and (2,3) reversible process trigged by material heating. Reproduced with permission;32 copyright 2019, AAAs. 
In contrast to temperature-dependent CsPbI3, CsPbI3−XBrX compositions present perovskite phases that are relatively thermodynamically stable at room temperature (Fig. 1b) due to the incorporation of Br− ions into the CsPbI3 lattice, which induces lattice contraction.37 However, as with CsPbI3, the active phases of CsPbI3−XBrX are highly sensitive to moisture. In the following discussion, the focus is mostly laid on CsPbI3 active phase stabilization at room temperature and/or ambient moisture. The section is concluded with a discussion on the post-deposition treatment of CsPbI3 and CsPbI3−XBrX films with organic ligands, which is shown to be a highly effective approach in preventing moisture-accelerated phase transition in CsPbI3 and CsPbI3−XBrX films.
2.1. Tolerance factor tuning or perovskite A-site engineering
Strictly speaking, an AMX3 perovskite structure, where M is a divalent cation, consists of the corner-sharing [MX6]4− octahedral 3D network in which the A-site cations occupy the voids between the octahedra as illustrated in the cubic structure of CsPbI3 shown in Fig. 1a. An empirical parameter, the so-called tolerance factor (t), is commonly used to determine under which conditions a perovskite structure can form. This parameter depends on the ionic size of the constituents A, M and X and is given as follows: (1)
A perovskite structure with a cubic symmetry is observed when t is in the range of 0.9–1.0 at a thermodynamic equilibrium, and perovskite structures exhibiting lower symmetry, e.g. tetragonal and orthorhombic, are found when t is in the range of 0.8–0.9.39 In the case where t is below or close to 0.8, or higher than 1, non-perovskite structures are known to be favored at room temperature.
CsPbI3 has a tolerance factor of 0.81 close to the limit due to the small ionic radius of Cs+ (167 pm) at the A-site position. As a result, a non-perovskite orthorhombic structure (Fig. 1a) is favored under ambient conditions. It was then proposed that by alloying Cs+ with bigger ammoniums the tolerance factor of CsPbI3 can be increased towards stable perovskite phases, since the doped ammonium cation tunes the effective radius of the A-site.
Out of the ammoniums investigated so far, dimethyl ammonium DMA, with an effective ionic size of 272 pm, has demonstrated very promising results in stabilizing the perovskite phase of CsPbI3 at room temperature as well as in decreasing the deposition temperature of the perovskite phases. The cation is often incorporated into the precursor solutions from dimethylammonium iodide (DMAI) used as an additive or in a stoichiometric way, or via DMAPbI3 precursor. While initial reports have claimed that DMA only assists the formation of distorted perovskite phases of CsPbI3 and is removed during the thermal annealing of the precursor film,40,41 recent optical, crystallographic and compositional studies have showed that DMA can enter the lattice of CsPbI3 by partially replacing Cs+, resulting in the formation of stable DMAXCs1−XPbI3 perovskite phases prepared at a mild temperature due to the tolerance factor tuning (Fig. 2a and b).42–45 Nonetheless, a very recent report by Marshall et al. has showed that these alloys seem to form only when DMA and Cs+ are used in stoichiometric manner relative to Pb2+ in the starting precursor solution, but if DMA is employed as an additive in the precursor solution, these alloy do not appear to form.44
 Fig. 2  Analysis of the structural and phase properties of CsPbI3 and CsPbI2Br materials with partial substitution of Cs+ by ammonium cations. (a) Tolerance factor tuning in CsPbI3 with DMA. Reproduced from ref. 21. (b) Schematic illustration of DMA insertion at the Cs+ site of cubic CsPbI3 structure. (c) Correlation between the tolerance factor and crystal structure of perovskite materials. Reproduced from ref. 46, with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram describing the suppression of phase transition in CsPbI2Br due to the incorporation of GA and (e) XRD patterns of pristine and GA-doped CsPbI2Br films, revealing the presence of a pure solid solution of GA-containing CsPbI2Br perovskite phase. Reproduced from ref. 47, with permission Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Also, it was shown that the concentration of DMA to form solid solution of DMAXCs1−XPbI3 is limited to 25 mol% relative to Pb2+; on using a concentration above this value, phase segregation in CsPbI3 and DMAPbI3 was observed to occur. One trait indicating the incorporation of DMA into CsPbI3 was the shift in the optical bandgap, which has also been observed in the DMA-doped organic–inorganic halide perovskites.48,49 The mechanism of DMA doping into the CsPbI3 lattice, stabilizing the perovskite appears plausible as DMA was also shown to be able to partly replace MA in MAPbI3, with a content level up to 15 mol%, despite its bigger size.50
It has also been demonstrated that DMA cations can be generated in a solution made from N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF) in which hydro-iodide acid (HI) is added, due to the acid hydrolysis of the solvent.45,51 Consequently, perovskite phase films derived from CsPbI3 + HI/DMF precursor systems were then demonstrated to have the composition of DMAXCs1−XPbI3 rather than fully inorganic CsPbI3 by Kanatzidis and coworkers. Evidence for this was found in the detection of proton (1H) signals, identified as bounded to the –NH and –CH3 groups of DMA, in the proton nuclear magnetic resonance (1H NMR) spectra of perovskite films derived from such precursor systems.21 This has helped better understand the mechanism behind perovskite phase stabilization in CsPbI3via the use of HI additive9,52 or the so-called hydrogen lead iodide (HPbI3)53 precursor widely reported in the literature. Despite the experimentally proven ability of DMA to stabilize the photoactive phases of CsPbI3 at room temperature, a better understanding of the underlying mechanism, especially its distribution in the CsPbI3 lattice, is still needed, and more studies would be required.
Another promising method to tune the tolerance factor of CsPbI3 is by mixing it with formamidium-based (FA) FAPbI3 perovskite, which also exhibits a hexagonal yellow phase at room temperature. The resultant alloy has a composition of FAXCs1−XPbI3, with tunable tolerance as shown in Fig. 2c. However, for 0 < x <0.5, the non-perovskite δ-phase was found to be room temperature-favored over the perovskite α-phase due to energetic destabilization of the latter phase.54 Nonetheless, in the work by Shao et al., a thermodynamically stable FA0.15C0.85PbI3 perovskite phase was demonstrated at room temperature. The improved phase resistance for this Cs-rich FAXCs1−XPbI3 was explained by its growth conditions, involving the formation of a solid-state FA-rich intermediate phase of FA1−XCsXPbI3 which is found to be more thermodynamically stable, followed by a cation exchange process between FA and Cs+ cations.55,56 More interestingly, FA was shown to be more efficient in enhancing the phase stability of mixed halide CsPbI2Br perovskite phase due to the tolerance factor tuning towards unity. But it was suggested that the FA concentration must exceed the threshold of 30 mol% as an impure phase of PbI2 was observed to emerge in the films with FA content exceeding 30 mol%.57
Despite its larger effective ionic size of 278 pm compared to 167 pm for Cs+, guanidinium (GA) was shown to be able to enter the lattice of CsPbI3 and CsPbI2Br and help stabilize the active phase of the resultant compositions (Fig. 2d and e), provided the doping concentration does not exceed 30 mol%.43,47 In addition to contributing to tuning the tolerance factor towards favorable values, GA was demonstrated to relax the lattice strain in the crystal structure of CsPbI2Br and suppress the [PX6]4− octahedral tilting due to hydrogen bonds with halides anions, which also accounted for the enhanced black phase stability.47
Partly replacing Cs+ in CsPbI3 with non-volatile ammoniums, especially DMA and FA, appears as a promising approach for stabilizing its perovskite phases without affecting the 3D dimensionality. However, more studies on the in-depth characterization of structural properties, to better understand the organic cation distribution within the host lattice, as well as on the optimization of the stabilized phase purity and homogeneity are still needed.
2.2. Crystallite size engineering/octahedral distortion suppression
Tuning the crystallite size and inhibiting the rotation of the [PbI6]4− octahedra are also shown to be successful methods in keeping the perovskite phases in polycrystalline CsPbI3 films at room temperature. Specifically, by reducing the size of the crystallites, their surface energy contribution (Δγ) on the particle free energy (Gibbs free energy) becomes larger than the bulk energy (ΔGV) as described by eqn (2).58 This fact decreases the δ-to-active phase temperature transition. Thus, maintaining a high surface to volume ratio in crystal grains by decreasing the grain size can help in stabilizing the black phases in CsPbI3. (2)where, r, ΔGV and Δγ are the radius, volume free energy per unit volume, and surface energy of the CsPbI3 particles, respectively.
Also, theoretical calculations confirmed by experimental results of Zhao et al. showed that the γ-CsPbI3 phase becomes thermodynamically favored over δ-CsPbI3 at surface areas greater than 8600 m2 mol−1, corresponding to an average crystallite size of approximately 100 nm.36 Enhancing the phase stability in CsPbI3 by manipulating the crystal size has even inspired the development of nanocrystals (NCs) and quantum dots (QCs)59 as mentioned earlier.
Many organic additives have proven their ability to tune the crystallization of CsPbI3 towards small grain and stable CsPbI3 perovskite films. In most cases, after thermal annealing, the used organic ligands precipitate at the surface or grain boundaries of the crystallites, where they increase the surface tension of the crystallites and/or inhibit [PI6]4− distortion via chemical bonds.26 One of such organic species belonging to the family of alkyl polyammonium is diethylenetriammonium (DETA), with a composition given by NH3+CH2NH2+C2H4NH3+. When optimally incorporated into the CsPbI3 precursor solution, this divalent cation was found to promote the formation of small α-CsPbI3 crystals. Additionally, the DETA residue was found to enhance the hydrophobicity of the resultant films, also contributing to the enhanced phase stability.60 A very peculiar phase stabilization approach based on crystallite size engineering was reported by Liu et al. using a carbocyclic ammonium of (adamantan-1-yl) methanammonium (ADMA) as an additive. The bulky ammonium cation was demonstrated to favor the growth of the α-CsPbI3 films presenting a hierarchical grain distribution, with an ADMA-rich tiny grain-sized top layer (50 nm) and a bottom large grain-sized layer (350 nm), upon the deposition of precursor solutions on preheated substrates.61 The distinctive advantage of this approach was that it enabled the preparation of stable α-CsPbI3 films without much affecting the intrinsic charge carrier-transporting properties as usually observed in the α-CsPbI3 films stabilized via the reduction of grain size.
Aside from ammoniums, several benzene derivatives, most of which carry –CO, –COO, –SH and/or carbamide functional groups, have also been explored to produce small grain CsPbI3 perovskite films. For instance, PCBM was reported to decrease the crystallite size in CsPbI3 films from 800 nm to 200 nm, when dissolved in an orthogonal solvent used for the deposition of CsPbI3. This was explained by the electrostatic interaction between the –CO group of PCBM and Cs+ at the surface of the CsPbI3 particles, decreasing the activation energy ΔG for nucleation as well as the critical size r of nuclei.62 Also, the addition of three zwitterion ligands, with two functional groups, as shown in Fig. 3 (NDSB201, NDSB211, and SB3-10), in the precursor solution of CsPbI3 was also demonstrated to facilitate the formation of the cubic CsPbI3 films, with an average crystallite size of 30 nm, stable for several weeks under ambient conditions.63 Due to their particular functional groups, these zwitterion compounds were shown to bind to Pb2+ and PbI2·DMSO adducts in the precursor system of CsPbI3, inducing the dissolution of extremely large colloids, believed to be the seeds for crystal growth (Fig. 4).
 Fig. 3  Chemical structures of reported organic species used to enhance the perovskite phase stability in CsPbI3 at room temperature and/or humidity. 
 Fig. 4  Mechanisms for stabilization of black phase in CsPbI3via molecular engineering. (a) Schematic illustration of CsPbI3 crystal formation from a CsI:PbI2/DMSO precursor solution, resulting in large grains (route 1), and a zwitterion ligand containing CsI:PbI2/DMSO precursor solution (route 2), leading to small grain films. Reproduced with permission;63 copyright 2017; Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram describing the stabilization, in the distorted phase, of CsPbI3via a steric effect induced by PEA cations. Reproduced from ref. 64, published by Nature Communications. 
Although the crystallite size approach shows encouraging results, the active phase films prepared often lead to poor device efficiencies attributed to the high densities of grain boundaries.34,61 Alternatively, several other organic ligands have been proposed to stabilize the CsPbI3 black phases by either inducing a steric effect and/or forming strong bonds with ions, i.e. Pb2+, I− or Cs+, located at the surface of the perovskite crystallites. And this hinders the rotation of the [PI6]4− octahedra, thus stabilizing the [PI6]4− octahedral corner sharing structure and the correspondent phase stability. Li et al. demonstrated that poly-vinylpyrrolidone (PVP) can stabilize the α-CsPbI3 films even in the micrometer scale grain when judiciously added to the CsPbI3 precursor solution.27 Fu and coworkers in their work showed that oleyammonium (AO) and phenylethlyammonium (PEA) can help stabilize the CsPbI3 films in cubic α- and distorted β-phases, respectively.22 These results revealed that the symmetry of the stabilized phase is ligand size-dependent, with OA having a larger size (1.7 nm) which best inhibits [PI6]4− distortion, thereby maintaining the cubic symmetry; while PEA with a size of 0.6 nm stabilizes the distorted phase. Later on, Wang et al. reported the results of their study confirming that phenylethylammonium (PEA) stabilizes the distorted CsPbI3 phase due to the steric effect in the structure as schematically illustrated in Fig. 4b.64
As mentioned earlier, molecules of H2O vapor in moisture promote the rotation of the corner-sharing [PI6]4− cages towards an edge-sharing structure, which results in the yellow phase (see δ-CsPbI3 in Fig. 1a). In the work by Wu et al., it was demonstrated that three benzene ring-based ligands, denoted as OTG1, OTG2, and OTG3 (Fig. 3), can increase the α-CsPbI3 resistance against humidity owing to the hydrophobic nature coupled with the steric effect mentioned previously.25 Besides, it was confirmed that using ligands with molecular sizes as large as possible, e.g. OTG3, is critical to producing an enhanced steric effect and consequently to better stabilize the investigated material.
CsPbI3 phase stabilization via crystal size tailoring and ligand adsorption has shown encouraging results, but the resulting films usually suffer from poor charge-carrier transport attributable to grain boundaries and/or the organic nature of the ligands used. A tradeoff must always be found between phase stabilization and the charge-carrier conducting properties, which are critical to achieving high device performance.
2.3. Structural dimensionality tuning into 2D/3D systems
Another promising method to stabilize the perovskite phase in CsPbI3 consists in reducing its structural dimensionality by incorporating larger ammoniums into its structure to make a mixed dimensional phase, which is structurally more stable. Such bulky ammoniums cannot fit into the voids between the corner-sharing [PbI6]4− cages at the Cs+ site; therefore, they break the 3D framework, which results in layered structures consisting of inorganic perovskite layers separated by an organic layer made of bulky ammonium molecules as illustrated in Fig. 5a. These compounds are called mixed dimensional 2D/3D or quasi-2D systems. In the case of monovalent bulky cation, these systems are known as the Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites and have the formula A′2An−1PbnX3n+1; whereas if the spacer cation is divalent, they are referred to as the Dion–Jacobson perovskites and described by the formula A′An−1PbnX3n+1, where A is Cs+ in the present work, A′ is the bulky cation, and n is a parameter characteristic of the materials and corresponds to the number of layers of the [PbI6]4− octahedra in a perovskite slab separated by the molecular spacer (Fig. 5a). The structure of these systems renders these materials quantum wells, with controllable optoelectronics through the variation of n.65
 Fig. 5  Tuning the structural dimensionality of orthorhombic CsPbI3 using phenylethylammonium (PEA) as a spacer cation. (a) Crystal structure of PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 as a function of the number n. (b) XRD patterns, (c) visible light absorption spectra and (d) PL intensity of PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 films with different n values. Reproduced with permission;69 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Liao et al. adopted this strategy to form a quasi-2D BA2CsPb2I7 (n = 2) perovskite phase, enabling the fabrication of functional solar cells with enhanced stability, by using the linear butylammonium (BA) as the spacer cation.66 Interestingly, the investigated quasi-2D material was shown to exhibit a vertical orientation of inorganic perovskite layers as illustrated in Fig. 5a, which is extremely important for excellent charge transport since there is no molecular barrier to charge flow. Li and coworkers in their work used aromatic phenylethylammonium (PEA) as the spacer cation and succeeded in synthesizing room temperature stable 2D/3D PEA-based CsPbI3 structures, with a 3D framework in cubic symmetry.67 Jiang et al. also investigated PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 perovskites and proposed that although the values of n lower than 10 might exhibit a stable photovoltaic phase, excellent charge transport and bandgap values similar to α-CsPbI3, as well as high phase homogeneity, were only observed in materials with n = 10, 40, and 60.68 Additionally, these latter materials show enhanced carrier lifetime attributed to reduced trap density, which enabled the fabrication of functional solar cells showing up to12.4% PCE. Wang et al. confirmed that n = 40 is suitable to form a stable mixed 2D/3D PEA-based γ-CsPbI3 perovskite, presenting similar light absorption and emission properties to γ-CsPbI3, implying that the material bandgap was not much blue-shifted, indicating that the organic component does not significantly affect the properties of the modified structure (Fig. 5b–d).69
In another study, Zhang et al. also reported that α-CsPbI3 can be formed and stabilized by the addition of a Dion–Jacobson 2D EDAPbI4 perovskite, where EDA is ethylenediammonium bication. This 2D perovskite component was found to tune the film crystallization towards films with a reduced gain size (ca. 35 nm for optimized films), which coupled with the unique (110) layered feature of the 2D bication perovskite allowed the enhanced phase stability.20 However, not every diammonium gives rise to the Dion Jacobson phase with a 3D CsPbI3 component; the molecular shape or form, either linear or cyclic, of the divalent cation has a significant influence on the characteristics of the mixed 2D/3D material. Chen and coworker used piperazine-1,4-diium 9 (PZD), a heterocycle bication, and found that though PZD is a divalent cation, its addition to CsPbI3 leads to Ruddlesden–Popper perovskites rather than the Dion–Jacobson phases expected from the incorporation of a ammonium bication to the 3D perovskites.70 Stabilizing the black phase of CsPbI3 by tuning its structural dimensionality is a highly promising approach towards a long-lasting CsPbI3-based perovskite phase, but it is usually challenging to obtain structures with desired orientation of the perovskite layers. Therefore, more work is needed on the optimization of the most investigated 2D/3D systems as well as on the exploration of other bulky ammonium cations.
2.4. Post deposition treatment with surface ligands
The post-deposition treatment of perovskite CsPbI3 films with properly designed organic ligands can not only enhance their resistance at room temperature but also prevent possible H2O molecule-induced transition towards the undesirable yellow phase. This approach holds effective for the CsPbI2Br films which are particularly sensitive to moisture. It should be noted that organic ligands to be used must be rationally designed. Comparative DFT calculations performed by Kim et al. to compare the ability of three molecular ligands, each carrying a distinctive functional group including ammonium, thiol, and alcohol, for inhibiting the phase transition revealed that the ammoniums were the most effective ligands among all the evaluated ligands owing to the strongest binding adsorption energies with the perovskite crystals.58
Wang et al. reported that the surface treatment of the α-CsPbI3 films with phenylethylammonium iodide (PEAI) can form a PEA capping layer on top of the α-CsPbI3 layer (Fig. 6), which augmented its black phase resistance towards phase transition. It was proposed that PEA cations anchor at the surface of the CsPbI3 crystals via their –NH3 group occupying the Cs+ vacant sites, while their hydrophobic benzene ring moiety mitigates the effect of possible vapor H2O molecules on phase transition.24 It worth mentioning that the post-deposition treatment of the 3D hybrid LHP films with bulky organic cations such as PEA usually gives rise to 2D perovskite thin layers, e.g. PEA2PbI4, on top of the 3D layer owing to a cation exchange process.71–73 In the case of CsPbI3, however, such cation exchange mechanism does not occur due to the robustness of the inorganic crystal structure. Later on, while using phenylethylammonium chloride solution, Li and coworkers also showed that PEA forms a surface capping layer on the 3D α-CsPbI2Br films,74 but better material stability is obtained due the substitution of I− with Cl− on the crystal surface, contracting the material lattice. This study suggested that it is important to rationally select the initial salts of ligands to achieve an enhanced phase stabilization mechanism. In this respect, Zhao and coworkers employed phenyltrimethylammonium bromide (PTABr) to treat the α-CsPbI3 films and observed that both PTA and Br− counter ions played a critical and equal role in phase stabilization. Br− ions were found to induce I/Br halide exchange reaction, creating a gradient I/Br distribution, across the thickness of the films.75 More recently, a more complex ammonium ligand, naphthalenediammonium, for CsPbI3 was also investigated by Zhang et al. This bulky organic ligand was also shown to form an organic capping layer on top of the β-CsPbI3 film in the same way as with PEA. More importantly, the hydrophobicity of this cation is higher because of the multibenzene rings in its structure.76
 Fig. 6  Effect of the PEA surface treatment of CsPbI3 on its black phase and solar cell stability. (a) PEAI treatment of the cubic CsPbI3 structure, resulting in a PEA capping layer (right hand side). (b) XRD patterns of fresh and half an hour aged CsPbI3 and PEA-CsPbI3 films; aged samples being exposed to conditions of 85–90% RH at room temperature. The insets in (c) show the photographs of investigated samples. (c) PCE-decay of PEA + CsPbI3- and CsPbI3-based PSC champion devices as a function of storage time in a dark and dry box with <20% RH at RT. Reproduced with permission;24 copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Aside from these monovalent ammonium cations, divalent cations have also been tested as surface ligands for inorganic CsPbI3 films. Ding et al. investigated p-phenylenediammonium (PPD, see Fig. 3) as a surface ligand for CsPbI3, and proposed that PPD bications are adsorbed at the surface of CsPbI3 crystals via ionic bonds between their –NH3+ terminal groups and I− from crystal surface. Most importantly, the two-terminal NH3 groups enabled PPD to bind to the adjacent [PbI6]4− octahedra, thus maintaining a Pb–I–Pb angle around 180° as found in the cubic symmetry of CsPbI3.77 Ether functional group-containing ligands were also demonstrated to enhance the α-CsPbI3 phase stability by Chen et al., who specifically studied, 1,4,7,10,13,16-hexaoxacyclooctadecane ether, shortened as 18-crown-6 ether (Fi.3), as a surface ligand. They proposed that this ether compound can be adsorbed at the CsPbI3 surface via coordination bond between the –O– group and Cs+, while its methylene –CH2– group can prevent H2O-induced phase transition.28 Surface ligand engineering seems to be a promising approach in retarding phase transition in the photoactive phases of iodide CsPbI3 and iodide-rich CsPbI3−XBrX, but an in-depth understanding of the mechanism of ligand adsorption is still missing, and further work is required.
3. Crystallization control
Tuning the crystallization of CsPbX3 is an effective strategy to produce their films with superior morphology, less crystalline imperfections as well as excellent optoelectronic characteristics needed for constructing highly performing devices. This is because the crystallization process from initial inorganic precursor systems, especially in the common one-step casting methods, if not carefully controlled is very rapid and results in low-quality films with low quantum efficiencies.78,79 This is attributed to several factors such as poor affinity with the substrates especially inorganic metal oxides used as the charge transporting layer, which reduces the heterogeneous nucleation sites, or limited solubility of the inorganic cesium halide salts (CsX, X: I, Br, Cl) in common deposition organic solvents.
3.1. Tuning the crystal growth towards high-quality films
Functional organic species are used either as additives dissolved in the precursor solutions or film post-deposition treatment agents to slow down the rapid CsPbX3 film crystallization usually observed in inorganic precursor systems.80 Most used organic modulators generally act by inducing intermediates, which gradually transform into films with a desired morphology, upon the heat treatment of the precursor films.80,81
For instance, the addition of MA cations into the precursor solutions of CsPbX3via one step solution casting has been demonstrated to positively impact the formation of the CsPbX3 films via the formation of an intermediate phase as illustrated in Fig. 7a, generally resulting in a densely packed micro-sized grain.82–85 MA is removed from the final films as a MAX byproduct by evaporation during the thermal annealing. The cross-sectional images shown in Fig. 7b–d illustrate of the effect of MA on the morphology of the CsPbI3 films, which exhibit limited substrate coverage and pinholes in the case where MA is not used.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram showing the crystal growth of a cubic CsPbX3 structure, with reduced crystalline defects, via the intermediate phase induced by MA. Reproduced with permission;84 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Cross-sectional SEM images of CsPbI3 films prepared (b) without using MAI additive, and in presence of (c) 0.5 M and (d) 1 M of MAI. Reproduced with permission;83 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e and f) Top-view SEM images of the CsPbI2Br films prepared in an ambient environment where relative humidity (RH) is 90% and T = 36 °C, using conventional CsI:PbBr2 precursor (e, control), and HCOO-containing HCOOCs:HPbI3:HPbBr3 precursor (f). (g) J–V performance of solar cells using the air-processed CsPbI2Br films as the active layers. Reproduced with permission;86 copyright 2020; 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Humidity is known as a heavily influential parameter for the crystallization of CsPbI3 and CsPbI3−XBrX (0 < 0 < 2) because H2O molecules in it generally promote the growth of the non-perovskite δ-phase. In the case of CsPbI2Br, Duan et al. proposed a precursor system consisted of HCOOCs:HPbI3:HPbBr3, containing formate ions (HCOO−), that exhibited a crystallization mechanism insensitive to ambient humidity as compared to the commonly used CsI:PbI2:PbBr2 or CsBr:PbI2 precursors usually leading to a poor substrate coverage (Fig. 7e).86 The developed precursor system was found to yield an HCOOH-containing intermediate, with less affinity to H2O, which subsequently transforms into the CsPbI2Br films showing large grains, excellent substrate coverage, and high photovoltaic performance (Fig. 7f and g) without any orthogonal solvents, which are frequently used to control the crystallization.79 This study demonstrated that high-quality CsPbX3 films processed under ambient conditions are possible via molecular engineering.
Recently, the use of several acetate salts (Ac−, M; M cations) as additives has demonstrated interesting results in controlling the crystallization of the perovskite films deposited via one-step solution casting.34,87,88 Upon their dissolution in precursor solutions, these salts release acetate ions (Ac−) or chemical complexes containing Ac− ions that bond to Pb2+, thus reducing the crystal growth speed or avoiding the growth of non-uniform films. For instance, cobalt acetate (CoAc2) was found to favor the growth of uniform crystal grains in the CsPbI2Br films by inhibiting the coarsening of excessively large grains upon crystal growth due to its precipitation at grain boundaries.87 In another study, it was also demonstrated that the addition of methylammonium acetate (MAAc) into the precursor solution of CsPbBr3 can decrease the growth rate due to the chemical coordination between Ac− and Pb2+.88 Additionally, the use of cesium acetate (CsAc) as a Cs+ source rather than CsBr which exhibits low solubility in DMF and DMSO, enabled the increase of the concentration of CsPbBr3 solution to 1 M, making it possible to form films of desired thickness.
Generally, the crystallization from a stoichiometric CsBr:PbBr2 precursor to form CsPbBr3 exhibits a behavior characterized by very rapid crystal growth and low nucleation rate. To address this, Ren et al. employed polyethylene glycol (PEG) as an additive to increase the nucleation rate and achieve a balanced crystallization process.89 Acting as a Lewis acid, PEG was shown to coordinate with Pb2+ cations, thus reducing the large aggregate size of CsBr–PbB2–DMSO colloids which led to an increased nucleation density (Fig. 8a and b). As a result, CsPbBr3 films with improved morphology (Fig. 8c and d) and high crystallinity (Fig. 8e) were obtained.
 Fig. 8  Crystallization control for CsPbBr3 films using PEG as an additive. (a) Size distribution of particles in CsPbBr3 precursor solution probed via dynamic light scattering (DLS). (b) Proposed mechanism for the increase in the number of colloids mediated by PEG. (c and d) Top-view SEM images of the CsPbBr3 perovskite films prepared with and without PEG, the scale bar is 1 μm. (e) XRD patterns of samples, showing the crystallinity enhancement in PEG-treated film. Reproduced with permission;89 copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Apart from the approach described above based on the incorporation of ligands into the precursor solutions, the treatment of pre-deposited CsPbX3 films with functional molecules has also been proposed to tune CsPbX3 crystallization. Using such a method, Wu and coworkers were able to prepare black CsPbI3 films with high crystallinity and photovoltaic performance via a post deposition treatment with PEAI solution, inducing a 2D PEA2CsPb2I7 perovskite intermediate, which slowly transforms into CsPbI3 with high quality and reduced defects, during crystallization.90
3.2. Decreasing the black phase formation temperature
Designing and developing optimal conditions under which low-temperature CsPbX3 perovskite films can be fabricated is very important for the large-scale or industrial application of their optoelectronic devices. In the case of CsPbI3, most organic compounds used to stabilize their black phase are also found to decrease the formation of the perovskite phases.9,91 In most cases, the used molecular ligands perform a double function of inducing an intermediate serving as a template for the growth of the desired CsPbX3 phase and inhibiting the appearance of the non-perovskite phase in the early stage of crystallization. Xu et al. showed that the addition of 4 (1H)-pyridinethione (4-PT) to the precursor solution of CsPbI3 can significantly decrease the formation temperature of its black phase films to 90–100 °C (Fig. 9), without affecting the optoelectronic characteristics of the materials. The strong coordinating bonds between the S atoms in 4-PT with the Pb2+ cations was proposed as the underlying mechanism responsible for the reduced temperature in CsPbI3 perovskite deposition.92 More importantly, the prepared low-temperature processed CsPbI3 films achieved solar cell efficiency of up to 13.88% with enhanced phase stability.
 Fig. 9  Low-temperature preparation and characterization of the CsPbI3 films. (a) Deposition of CsPbI3via a one-step solution casting method. (b) Images of the CsPbI3 films prepared with and without 4-PT additives after annealing at 90–100 °C for 10 min; the film made without 4-PT does not show any perovskite phase. (c) Visible light absorption spectra and (d) XDR patterns of the CsPbI3 films made with or without 4-PT, demonstrating the formation of a black CsPbI3 phase with high crystallinity. Reproduced from ref. 92, published by The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another approach to forming the distorted perovskite phase of CsPbI3 at 100 °C was reported by Sun et al.91 These authors demonstrated that by immersing freshly coated films, prepared from non-stoichiometric CsI:PbI2 systems with an excess of CsI and DMAI additive, in isopropanol (IPA), the temperature in the subsequent heat treatment step can be significantly lowered. This was explained by the fact that the solvent bathing catalyzes the CsPbI3 formation reaction between the two intermediate phases, namely DMAPbI3 and Cs4PbI6, by promoting a cation exchange process. Low temperature-processed CsPbI2Br perovskite films were also demonstrated in the work by Zhang et al. using 4-aminobenzenoic acid (ABA) as the additive.93 These authors proposed that the two amine –NH2 and –COOH terminal groups of the additive allow it to cross-link adjacent grains upon crystal growth, and this grain cross-linking mechanism is responsible for the reduction of temperature upon the CsPbI2Br film formation.
3.3. Enhancing interfacial contact with inorganic charge transporting materials
The study by Zhang et al. revealed that the deposition of the CsPbI3−XBrX films on charge carrier extracting/blocking substrates made of metal oxides such as popularly used titanium dioxide (TiO2) or tin dioxide (SnO2) leads to poor interfacial contact due to poor chemical interactions.94 It was then demonstrated that the addition of an optimized amount of formamidinium acetate (FAAC) or methylammonium acetate (MAAC) into the CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3 solutions can induce an intermediate phase, bound to the TiO2 or SnO2 substrate via hydrogen bonds between oxygen in metal oxide and H atoms from the organic cations as illustrated in Fig. 10a, during crystallization. Consequently, this led to a high-quality CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3/SnO2 interface (Fig. 10b), enabling the resulting CsPb(I0.75Br0.25) PSCs to deliver efficiencies up to 17.0%, due to a significant increase in Voc, from 1.14 V to 1.34 V.
 Fig. 10  CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3 film growth on metal oxide substrates (TiO2 and SnO2). (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3 film formation from a precursor system with FA and Ac- ions, describing the effect FA on the formation of high-quality CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3/TiO2 interface. Cross-sectional SEM pictures of planar device structure incorporating CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3 films prepared (b) without and (c) in presence of FAAC additive. The yellow dashed boxes show the perovskite/metal oxide interfaces. Reproduced with permission;94 copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
4. Crystal defect passivation
Some point defects at the surface of crystals or grain boundaries in polycrystalline perovskite films are well known to be detrimental to their electronic properties and consequently their device performance. This is because these defects generate deep trap states acting as non-radiative recombination centers inside the material bandgap. And trap state-mediated recombination reduces the density of photogenerated charge carriers np (n electrons; p holes) that can be collected in a functional PSC. Eqn (3) shows how non-radiative recombination, curtailing the charge carrier density np, is related to the open circuit voltage (Voc) that a semiconductor, with a bandgap of Eg, can deliver under excitation:95 (3)where q is the elementary charge, kB is the Boltzmann constant, and NV and NC are the density of states in the valence and conduction bands, respectively. The possible defects at the surface or grain boundaries of the perovskite crystals responsible for deep trap states in halide perovskites have been discussed in detail in the publication by Huang and coworkers. These include undercoordinated halide ions (X−), undercoordinated Pb2+ cations, lead clusters, and Pb–I antisite (PbI3−) defects.96 Aside from the aforementioned defects, there is another type of defect that only forms shallow states which may not act as recombination sites but affect the charge transport, leading to low cell photocurrent (Jsc) and fill factor (FF). Additionally, point defects are also known for facilitating ion migration in perovskites, responsible for the ubiquitous J–V curve hysteresis in PSCs.97 As they are electrically charged, these defects are usually healed using organic ions or organic species with functional groups. And the mechanisms for passivation generally involve chemical interactions such as coordination, ionic or hydrogen bonds.96
4.1. Passivation via chemical coordination
A coordination interaction can be described by a chemical bond in which the bonding electrons are supplied by one chemical species. The species providing the bonding electrons are called Lewis bases, while the species receiving the electrons is referred to as the Lewis acid. According to this definition, Pb2+ cations and I− or Br− are considered as Lewis acids and bases, respectively. Thus, to suppress the trap states originating from the Pb2+ and I−/Br− defects at the surface of perovskite crystals, molecular species with one or several pairs of lone electrons, or capable of receiving bonding electrons, respectively, are generally used.
Li et al. investigated 2-methyl pyridine (2-MPy) and 2-methyl thiophene (2-MTh) as Pb2+ defect passivators for the CsPbI2Br films due to their basic nature attributed to the nitrogen (N) and sulfur (S) atoms in their respective composition, and a significant increase in the carrier lifetime was observed in the modified films. However, it was found that the Lewis bases interact weakly with Pb2+. Consequently, 2-(2′-thienyl)pyridine [2-ThPy], a molecular structure combining 2-MPy and 2-MTh, was designed and applied to better passivate undercoordinated Pb2+ cations; as a result, the 2-ThPy-passivated films exhibited significantly improved carrier lifetimes, leading to considerable improvements in the photoelectric parameters of the corresponding PSCs, with the PCE increasing from 7.48% to 12.69%, alongside a considerable reduction in the J–V curve hysteresis.98 Similarly, Fu et al. observed substantial improvement in the charge transport properties, device efficiency and stability of CsPbI3 while using pyridine-carboxylic ions (PyA-) as the defect passivator.99 Recently, He et al. demonstrated that dithiocarbamate (DDTC: RR-N-C-SS−; R: alkyl group) molecules applied on the surface of CsPbI2Br films can simultaneously passivate undercoordinated Pb2+ and I−/Br− defects via coordinating bonds. This was proven by the enhanced photoluminescence emission of the DDTC-treated films as well as the increased recombination resistance (Rrec) in the resulting CsPbI2Br PSCs.100 As a result, the CsPbI2Br solar cell efficiency increased from 14.54% to 17.03% due to significant improvement in the cell Voc with a maximum of 1.37 V, which was indicative of considerably defect-mediated recombination. More importantly, this passivation mechanism considerably reduced the J–V hysteresis phenomenon, ubiquitous in mixed halide CsPbI3−XBrX solar cells.13
4-Trifluoromethyl phenylethylammonium (CFPEA) was also investigated as a defect passivator for the CsPbI2Br films by Chen et al. because of the affinity of electron-rich fluoride (F) towards Pb2+. As expected, the CFPEA-treated CsPbI2Br films showed improved photovoltaic parameters with an ultrahigh fill factor (FF) of 84.65% indicative of significantly improved charge extraction and transport.101
Wang et al. also reported a significant enhancement in the electronic properties of the CsPbIXBr3−X films whose top surface was treated with a small molecule, denoted as π-conjugated 6TIC-4F, and contained –CN group. Fig. 11a and b illustrate the mechanism for passivation and trap state suppression induced by 6TIC-4F in CsPbIXBr3−X. As shown in Fig. 11c and d, the passivation mechanism significantly enhanced the device J–V characteristics and stability.102 So far, most studies on passivation with Lewis bases have focused on the post-deposition treatment of passivators on the top surface of the CsPbX3 films. Unfortunately, this approach does not successfully heal the defects in the bulk of films. It should be noted that to considerably minimize defect-related energy loss in CsPbX3 PSCs, bulk and surface defects must be passivated.
 Fig. 11  Defect passivation in the CsPbIXBr3−X films with small molecule 6TIC-4F. (a) Schematic illustration of passivation mechanism, showing the potential interaction site. (b) Energy-level diagram of defect-related trap state suppression by 6TIC-4F. (c) Effect of defect passivation on the J–V performance of CsPbIXBr3−X solar cells based on p–i–n configuration. (d) Normalized PCE variation of unsealed CsPbIXBr3−X solar cells under continuous 1 sun equivalent illumination. Reproduced from ref. 102, published by Nature Communications. 
4.2. Passivation with ammoniums cations
Several ammoniums have proven their ability to improve the electronic quality of the perovskite films by passivating A-site vacancies and/or undercoordinated halide (I−, Br−) at surface or grain boundaries of the crystal grains via ionic bonds. Yan et al. adopted a film post-deposition treatment approach to passivate point defects at the surface of the CsPbI3 films with guanidinium bromide (GABr) used as the GA source. GABr surface treatment was shown to produce a thin passivating GA–CsPbI3−XBrX film around the CsPbI3 crystal grains, which significantly reduced the non-radiative recombination rate. Additionally, the GABr modification optimized the band alignment between CsPbI3 and a titanium dioxide (TiO2) layer, used as an electron selective contact, in a regular PSC geometry, which increased the PCE from 16.58% to a remarkable value of 18.02%.103 Similarly, Zhang et al. also used FAI to passivate the surface and grain boundaries in the CsPbX3 quantum dots via FA cations, which led to better-performing devices.104
4.3. Passivation with functional polymers
The distinctive advantage of polymers is that they are composed of several molecular units most of which generally carry functional groups. This enables to passivate large numbers of point defects at the surface of the perovskite crystals. Moreover, due to their relatively high molar weights, polymers can withstand elevated temperatures during the thermal annealing of the CsPbX3 films if incorporated into the precursor solutions as additives. It should be noted that incorporation of organic ligands into the precursor solutions enables to better passivate bulk defects in final films compared to the post-deposition treatment approach, which generally only heal defects located on the surface of the treated perovskite films. Poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) is one of the polymer passivators which has demonstrated interesting results in improving the charge-transporting properties of the CsPbIBr2 films when used in an optimal amount as an additive in the CsPbIBr2 precursor solution (Fig. 12a and b). As a Lewis base, PEG was shown to passivate the defects at the surface or grain boundaries of the CsPbIBr2 crystals, thereby reducing the non-radiative recombination losses which consequently enhanced the J–V performance, with Voc up to 1.28 V, of the correspondent PSCs as reported in Fig. 12c.105,106 Besides, PEG application was found to tune the band edges and bandgap of CsPbI2Br to perfectly fit the charge-transporting materials such as TiO2 and spiro-OMeTAD, for efficient carrier injection.106 Polyethyleneimine (PEI) was proposed as a defect passivator for CsPbI2Br films, with specific properties in passivating I−/Br− and Pb2+ defects via hydrogen and coordination bonds, respectively. Consequently, PEI-passivated CsPbI2Br films showed improved Voc, indicative of considerably reduced defect-induced recombination.107
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of PEG-passivated CsPbIBr2 perovskite structure. (b) PL decay of CsPbIBr2 and PEG-passivated films, demonstrating the carrier lifetime enhancement induced by PEG passivation. (c) Effect of PEG-passivation of the J–V curves of CsPbIBr2 PSCs. (d) Energy band edge diagram of different layers in the investigated CsPbIBr2 PSCs, showing how PEG can tune the band edge positions of CsPbIBr2. Reproduced with permission;106 copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Poly(methyl methacrylate) [PMMA] is a an ester group-carrying polymer that has been extensively applied in perovskite research to passivate the defects at the surface of perovskite films.6,108 And, in carbon-based CsPbI2Br PSCs, the polymer was still found to increase the Voc from 1.14 V to 1.2 V, which is indicative of trap state passivation and improved electronic quality of CsPbI2Br.109
4.4. Surface passivation via the formation of 2D perovskite
Converting the surface point defects into 2D structures by using bulky ammoniums is also shown to be a successful method for eliminating defect-related carrier trap states in the CsPbX3 films. For instance, Zhang et al. used GABr to treat pre-deposited RXCs1−XPbI2Br films, which resulted in the formation of a 2D GA2PbI4 perovskite as revealed by film X-ray diffraction analysis shown in Fig. 13a.110 The defect passivation effect of this 2D layer was seen in the improvements of PL emission of the associated samples and solar cell J–V performance (Fig. 13b and c) as well as in the minimization of ubiquitous J–V hysteresis phenomenon usually observed in CsPbI2Br PSCs.13 Moreover, the device light and ambient stability were substantially enhanced as well (Fig. 14). Zheng et al. in their work demonstrated that the addition of GABr into the precursor solution of CsPbI3−XBrX can lead to films with a top passivating GA2PbI4 layer and a bottom absorbing CsPbI3−XBrX layer, which increased the efficiency of the solar cells from 13.64% to a noticeable value of over 18%. In addition to playing a critical role in reducing surface recombination, the in situ formed GA2PbI4 layer also contributed largely to alleviate device instability related to the ionic migration at the surface of the 2D/3D heterostructure. More recently, Ye et al. showed that a considerably reduced voltage deficit of only 0.3 V is achievable in CsPbI3 PSCs by the in situ formation of a 2D PEA-based perovskite within the γ-CsPbI3 films. Both the PEA-based 2D perovskite and the PEA within the CsPbI3 films were found to play a key role in reducing bulk non-radiative recombination, which allowed the best performing cell to deliver a distinctive Voc of 1.33 V alongside a PCE of 17%.111
 Fig. 13  Effect of GA-based 2D perovskite on the properties of RXCs1−XPbI2Br films and solar cells, in a planar n–i–p configuration. (a) XRD patterns revealing the presence of defect passivating 2D GA2PbI4 layer on the RXCs1−XPbI2Br film compared to CsPbI2Br and RXCs1−XPbI2Br films. (b) Steady state PL spectra of CsPbI2Br, RXCs1−XPbI2Br and GA2PbI4-passivated RXCs1−XPbI2Br films, demonstrating a considerable reduction in non-radiative recombination in the passivated sample. Effect of GA2PbI4 on the cell (c) J–V characteristics and (d) light stability tested under 1 sun 1.5 AM G illumination. Reproduced with permission;110 copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
 Fig. 14  Modification of the surface properties of the CsPbI2Br films with BrBeAI. (a) Schematic diagram of band alignment of different layers in a regular PSC geometry, describing the band bending at the surface of the CsPbI2Br film (bottom image), favorable to hole extraction to spiro-OMeTAD, due to BrBeAI modification. (b) J–V performance of solar cells based on untreated and BrBeAI-treated CsPbI2Br films, and (c) their corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra. Reproduced from ref. 112, with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry. 
5. Tuning the surface energetics of the CsPbX3 films
Tailoring the surface energetics of the CsPbX3 polycrystalline films to better suit the band edge positions of the charge-transporting layers is a valuable method to improve the charge extraction efficiency in the corresponding solar cells. At the same time, this enables to inhibit the back carrier flow in an opposite direction within the devices by introducing the charge carrier selectivity, consequently reducing the non-radiative recombination losses. Here bulk molecules or polymers are employed to modify surface properties by shifting the band edges or creating a thin wide band gap ultrathin film on 3D perovskite in order to form type-I band alignment. For the first mechanism, Zhuang and coworkers showed that the treatment of the CsPbI2Br films with 4-bromobenzylamine hydriodate (BrBeAI-2) can positively modify the film band edge positions on their surface (Fig. 14a). This facilitates the hole extraction from the CsPbI2Br layer and transfer to spiro-OMeTAD, while blocking the possible back electron transfer in the PSCs, leading to enhanced J–V parameters (Fig. 14b and c).112 Polyaniline (PANI) is a p-type compound that has also been adopted to efficiently extract free holes from CsPbI2Br and diminish surface recombination, thus increasing the Voc of the carbon-based CsPbI2Br PSCs, with a structure of FTO/SnO2/Perovskite/carbon, from 1.22 V to 1.33 V.113 Similarly, Chang et al. noted band alignment improvement at the SnO2/CsPbI3 interface by incorporating the Lewis acid zinc tetrafluorobenzene Zn(C6F6)2 into the CsPbI3 precursor solution.114 The wide bandgap 2D/3D heterostructure with type I band alignment was investigated by Tai et al. using BA as a spacer cation for 2D perovskite. This type-I heterojunction played an important role in the charge extraction/separation from 3D, which improved the device PCE to 14.5% attributed to a significant increase in the device photocurrent.115
6. Conclusion and outlook
Over the recent few years, the use of organic compounds to tune the properties of CsPbX3 perovskites and devices has demonstrated very promising results. Various functional organic compounds have proven to be very effective in enhancing the stability of the perovskite phases in CsPbI3 and I-rich CsPbI3−XBr3 under ambient conditions, which has consequently enabled the fabrication of functional PSCs that have shown promising device efficiencies over 19%. Moreover, several functional organic additives have been shown to promote the crystal growth of high-quality CsPbX3 perovskite films, with considerably improved photovoltaic performance. As a successful approach for enhancing the electronic properties of the CsPbX3 films, defect passivation has enabled the preparation of devices with high efficiencies and stability, and reduced hysteresis. However, there is much room for efficiency and stability improvement in CsPbX3 devices in order to meet the special requirements of practical applications. Below, we suggest promising research directions, based on organic species, to overcome current challenges in CsPbX3 materials and PSCs.
In order to enhance the thermodynamic stability of CsPbI3 perovskites, alloying Cs+ with nonvolatile ammoniums, as demonstrated with DMA, appears to be a valuable method. Therefore, more nonvolatile ammoniums, carefully designed to fit at the cuboctahedral position of the CsPbI3 lattice without inducing lattice energetic destabilization, need to be explored as A-site dopants to make CsPbI3-based perovskite systems inherit the high intrinsic thermal stability of CsPbI3 while exhibiting high phase stability under the operational conditions of solar devices. Moreover, tailoring the 3D dimensionality of CsPbI3 into layered or mixed 2D/3D structures via incorporation of large ammoniums, such as phenylethylammonium (PEA), is also a promising approach towards ambient stable perovskite phases. The development of these mixed 2D/3D CsPbI3-based perovskite systems should be targeted in enhancing both their active phase and optoelectronic properties to improve their current low device efficiency. Humidity is also known as a factor catalyzing the phase transition in I-rich CsPbI3−XBrX and CsPbI3; to address this issue, more attention should be paid to the design and investigation of hydrophobic surface ligands capable of protecting CsPbX3 films against moisture.
To ensure high reproducibility in the solution processing of high-quality and low-temperature CsPbX3 films via organic ligand engineering, it would be necessary to deeply understand how these organic ligands control the film formation process. Therefore, more work on in situ characterization of ligand-mediated crystal growth of CsPbX3 films is required to clarify the mechanism behind crystal growth and guide the design of more efficient organic ligands.
Furthermore, surface and bulk defect passivation with organic species, including Lewis bases, ammoniums and polymers is a further method to go beyond the 20%-mark efficiency in CsPbX3 PSCs, and enhances device stability. The method might also help mitigate ionic migration and halide segregation, especially in mixed halide CsPbI3−XBrX perovskites. However, more studies on the nature of defects prevalent in solution-processed CsPbX3 films are quite necessary to facilitate the design of more adapted functional organic passivators. Considering the impressive progress in PCE and stability achieved in CsPbX3 PSCs using organic compounds, it is safe to say that rationally selected organic ligands will continue to play an important role in the development of stable and highly performing CsPbX3 devices.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No. 2017YQ003 & 2019QN053), Beijing outstanding talents cultivation funding project (No. 2013A009005000003) and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51102092).
References
M. A. Green, A. Ho-Baillie and H. J. Snaith, The emergence of perovskite solar cells, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 506–514,  DOI:10.1038/nphoton.2014.134 .
A. Polman, M. Knight, E. C. Garnett, B. Ehrler and W. C. Sinke, Photovoltaic materials: present efficiencies and future challenges, Science, 2016, 352, aad4424,  DOI:10.1126/science.aad4424 .
J. P. Correa-Baena, M. Saliba, T. Buonassisi, M. Grätzel, A. Abate, W. Tress and A. Hagfeldt, Promises and challenges of perovskite solar cells, Science, 2017, 358, 739–744,  DOI:10.1126/science.aam6323 .
H. J. Snaith, Present status and future prospects of perovskite photovoltaics, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 372–376,  DOI:10.1038/s41563-018-0071-z .
F. Zhang, J. Cong, Y. Li, J. Bergstrand, H. Liu, B. Cai, A. Hajian, Z. Yao, L. Wang, Y. Hao, X. Yang, J. M. Gardner, H. Ågren, J. Widengren, L. Kloo and L. Sun, A facile route to grain morphology controllable perovskite thin films towards highly efficient perovskite solar cells, Nano Energy, 2018, 53, 405–414,  DOI:10.1016/j.nanoen.2018.08.072 .
S. H. Turren-Cruz, A. Hagfeldt and M. Saliba, Methylammonium-free, high-performance, and stable perovskite solar cells on a planar architecture, Science, 2018, 362, 449–453,  DOI:10.1126/science.aat3583 .
J. Bisquert and E. J. Juarez-Perez, The Causes of Degradation of Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 5889–5891,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.9b00613 .
S. Kundu and T. L. Kelly, In situ studies of the degradation mechanisms of perovskite solar cells, EcoMat, 2020, 2, 1–22,  DOI:10.1002/eom2.12025 .
G. E. Eperon, G. M. Paternò, R. J. Sutton, A. Zampetti, A. A. Haghighirad, F. Cacialli and H. J. Snaith, Inorganic caesium lead iodide perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 19688–19695,  10.1039/c5ta06398a .
R. E. Beal, D. J. Slotcavage, T. Leijtens, A. R. Bowring, R. A. Belisle, W. H. Nguyen, G. F. Burkhard, E. T. Hoke and M. D. McGehee, Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites with Improved Stability for Tandem Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 746–751,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.6b00002 .
M. Kulbak, D. Cahen and G. Hodes, How Important Is the Organic Part of Lead Halide Perovskite Photovoltaic Cells? Efficient CsPbBr3 Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2452–2456,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.5b00968 .
R. J. Sutton, G. E. Eperon, L. Miranda, E. S. Parrott, B. A. Kamino, J. B. Patel, M. T. Hörantner, M. B. Johnston, A. A. Haghighirad, D. T. Moore and H. J. Snaith, Bandgap-Tunable Cesium Lead Halide Perovskites with High Thermal Stability for Efficient Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1–6,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201502458 .
J. Zhang, G. Hodes, Z. Jin and S. (Frank) Liu, All-Inorganic CsPbX3 Perovskite Solar Cells: Progress and Prospects, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15596–15618,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201901081 .
W. Zhou, Y. Zhao, X. Zhou, R. Fu, Q. Li, Y. Zhao, K. Liu, D. Yu and Q. Zhao, Light-Independent Ionic Transport in Inorganic Perovskite and Ultrastable Cs-Based Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2017, 8, 4122–4128,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.7b01851 .
R. Montecucco, E. Quadrivi, R. Po and G. Grancini, All-Inorganic Cesium-Based Hybrid Perovskites for Efficient and
Stable Solar Cells and Modules, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 2100672, 2100672,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.202100672 .
E. M. Hutter, R. J. Sutton, S. Chandrashekar, M. Abdi-Jalebi, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and T. J. Savenije, Vapour-Deposited Cesium Lead Iodide Perovskites: Microsecond Charge Carrier Lifetimes and Enhanced Photovoltaic Performance, ACS Energy Lett., 2017, 2, 1901–1908,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.7b00591 .
A. Swarnkar, A. R. Marshall, E. M. Sanehira, B. D. Chernomordik, D. T. Moore, J. A. Christians, T. Chakrabarti and J. M. Luther, Quantum dot-induced phase stabilization of -CsPbI3 perovskite for high-efficiency photovoltaics, Science, 2016, 354, 92–95,  DOI:10.1126/science.aag2700 .
E. M. Sanehira, A. R. Marshall, J. A. Christians, S. P. Harvey, P. N. Ciesielski, L. M. Wheeler, P. Schulz, L. Y. Lin, M. C. Beard and J. M. Luther, Enhanced mobility CsPbI 3 quantum dot arrays for record-efficiency, high-voltage photovoltaic cells, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao4204,  DOI:10.1126/sciadv.aao4204 .
J. Yuan, X. Ling, D. Yang, F. Li, S. Zhou, J. Shi, Y. Qian, J. Hu, Y. Sun, Y. Yang, X. Gao, S. Duhm, Q. Zhang and W. Ma, Band-Aligned Polymeric Hole Transport Materials for Extremely Low Energy Loss α-CsPbI3 Perovskite Nanocrystal Solar Cells, Joule, 2018, 2, 2450–2463,  DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2018.08.011 .
T. Zhang, M. I. Dar, G. Li, F. Xu, N. Guo, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Bication lead iodide 2D perovskite component to stabilize inorganic α-CsPbI3 perovskite phase for high-efficiency solar cells, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, 1–7,  DOI:10.1126/sciadv.1700841 .
W. Ke, I. Spanopoulos, C. C. Stoumpos and M. G. Kanatzidis, Myths and reality of HPbI3 in halide perovskite solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4785 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Fu, M. T. Rea, J. Chen, D. J. Morrow, M. P. Hautzinger, Y. Zhao, D. Pan, L. H. Manger, J. C. Wright, R. H. Goldsmith and S. Jin, Selective stabilization and photophysical properties of metastable perovskite polymorphs of CsPbI3 in Thin Films, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 8385–8394,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.7b02948 .
A. Shpatz Dayan, B. El Cohen, S. Aharon, C. Tenailleau, M. Wierzbowska and L. Etgar, Enhancing Stability and Photostability of CsPbI3 by Reducing Its Dimensionality, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 8017–8024,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.8b03709 .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, T. Wang and Y. Zhao, Efficient α-CsPbI3 Photovoltaics with Surface Terminated Organic Cations, Joule, 2018, 2, 2065–2075,  DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2018.06.013 .
T. Wu, Y. Wang, Z. Dai, D. Cui, T. Wang, X. Meng, E. Bi, X. Yang and L. Han, Efficient and Stable CsPbI3 Solar Cells via Regulating Lattice Distortion with Surface Organic Terminal Groups, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1–9,  DOI:10.1002/adma.201900605 .
Y. Wang, G. Chen, D. Ouyang, X. He, C. Li, R. Ma, W. J. Yin and W. C. H. Choy, High Phase Stability in CsPbI3 Enabled by Pb–I Octahedra Anchors for Efficient Inorganic Perovskite Photovoltaics, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–8,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202000186 .
B. Li, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, T. Yu, S. Zhou, L. Zhang and L. Yin, Surface passivation engineering strategy to fully-inorganic cubic CsPbI3 perovskites for high-performance solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1076,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-03169-0 .
R. Chen, Y. Hui, B. Wu, Y. Wang, X. Huang, Z. Xu, P. Ruan, W. Zhang, F. Cheng, W. Zhang, J. Yin, J. Li and N. Zheng, Moisture-tolerant and high-quality α-CsPbI 3 films for efficient and stable perovskite solar modules, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 9597–9606,  10.1039/D0TA01968B .
H. Yuan, Y. Zhao, J. Duan, Y. Wang, X. Yang and Q. Tang, All-inorganic CsPbBr3 perovskite solar cell with 10.26% efficiency by spectra engineering, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24324–24329,  10.1039/C8TA08900K .
C. C. Stoumpos, C. D. Malliakas, J. A. Peters, Z. Liu, M. Sebastian, J. Im, T. C. Chasapis, A. C. Wibowo, D. Y. Chung, A. J. Freeman, B. W. Wessels and M. G. Kanatzidis, Crystal Growth of the Perovskite Semiconductor CsPbBr3: A New Material for High-Energy Radiation Detection, Cryst. Growth Des., 2013, 13, 2722–2727,  DOI:10.1021/cg400645t .
B. Wang, N. Novendra and A. Navrotsky, Energetics, Structures, and Phase Transitions of Cubic and Orthorhombic Cesium Lead Iodide (CsPbI3) Polymorphs, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 14501–14504,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.9b05924 .
J. A. Steele, H. Jin, I. Dovgaliuk, R. F. Berger, T. Braeckevelt, H. Yuan, C. Martin, E. Solano, K. Lejaeghere, S. M. J. Rogge, C. Notebaert, W. Vandezande, K. P. F. Janssen, B. Goderis, E. Debroye, Y. K. Wang, Y. Dong, D. Ma, M. Saidaminov, H. Tan, Z. Lu, V. Dyadkin, D. Chernyshov, V. Van Speybroeck, E. H. Sargent, J. Hofkens and M. B. J. Roeffaers, Thermal unequilibrium of strained black CsPbI3 thin films, Science, 2019, 365, 679–684,  DOI:10.1126/science.aax3878 .
C. Liu, W. Li, H. Li, H. Wang, C. Zhang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Q. Xue, H. L. Yip, J. Fan, R. E. I. Schropp and Y. Mai, Structurally Reconstructed CsPbI2Br Perovskite for Highly Stable and Square-Centimeter All-Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1–9,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201803572 .
Z. Zeng, J. Zhang, X. Gan, H. Sun, M. Shang, D. Hou, C. Lu, R. Chen, Y. Zhu and L. Han, 
            In Situ Grain Boundary Functionalization for Stable and Efficient Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1–8,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201801050 .
A. Marronnier, G. Roma, S. Boyer-Richard, L. Pedesseau, J. M. Jancu, Y. Bonnassieux, C. Katan, C. C. Stoumpos, M. G. Kanatzidis and J. Even, Anharmonicity and Disorder in the Black Phases of Cesium Lead Iodide Used for Stable Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3477–3486,  DOI:10.1021/acsnano.8b00267 .
B. Zhao, S.-F. Jin, S. Huang, N. Liu, J.-Y. Ma, D.-J. Xue, Q. Han, J. Ding, Q.-Q. Ge, Y. Feng and J.-S. Hu, Thermodynamically Stable Orthorhombic γ-CsPbI3 Thin Films for High-Performance Photovoltaics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 11716–11725,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.8b06050 .
W.-J. Yin, Y. Yan and S.-H. Wei, Anomalous Alloy Properties in Mixed Halide Perovskites, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 3625–3631,  DOI:10.1021/jz501896w .
S. Masi, A. F. Gualdrón-Reyes and I. Mora-Seró, Stabilization of Black Perovskite Phase in FAPbI3 and CsPbI3, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1974–1985,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.0c00801 .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Solid-state principles applied to organic–inorganic perovskites: New tricks for an old dog, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712–4715,  10.1039/c4sc02211d .
Y. Wang, M. Ibrahim Dar, L. K. Ono, T. Zhang, M. Kan, Y. Li, L. Zhang, X. Wang, Y. Yang, X. Gao, Y. Qi, M. Grätzel and Y. Zhao, Thermodynamically stabilized b-CsPbI3–based perovskite solar cells with efficiencies >18%, Science, 2019, 365, 591–595,  DOI:10.1126/science.aav8680 .
Y. Wang, X. Liu, T. Zhang, X. Wang, M. Kan, J. Shi and Y. Zhao, The Role of Dimethylammonium Iodide in CsPbI3 Perovskite Fabrication: Additive or Dopant?, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 16691–16696,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201910800 .
H. Meng, Z. Shao, L. Wang, Z. Li, R. Liu, Y. Fan, G. Cui and S. Pang, Chemical Composition and Phase Evolution in DMAI-Derived Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 263–270 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, B. Chen, L. K. Sagar, Y. Hou, A. Proppe, H.-T. Kung, F. Yuan, A. Johnston, M. I. Saidaminov, E. H. Jung, Z.-H. Lu, S. O. Kelley and E. H. Sargent, Stable, Bromine-Free, Tetragonal Perovskites with 1.7 eV Bandgaps via A-Site Cation Substitution, ACS Mater. Lett., 2020, 2, 869–872,  DOI:10.1021/acsmaterialslett.0c00166 .
A. R. Marshall, H. C. Sansom, M. M. McCarthy, J. H. Warby, O. J. Ashton, B. Wenger and H. J. Snaith, Dimethylammonium: An A-Site Cation for Modifying CsPbI3, Sol. RRL., 2020, 2000599,  DOI:10.1002/solr.202000599 .
H. Bian, H. Wang, Z. Li, F. Zhou, Y. Xu, H. Zhang, Q. Wang, L. Ding, S. Liu and Z. Jin, Unveiling the Effects of Hydrolysis-Derived DMAI/DMAPbIx Intermediate Compound on the Performance of CsPbI3 Solar Cells, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1–9,  DOI:10.1002/advs.201902868 .
Z. Li, M. Yang, J. Park, S. Wei, J. J. Berry and K. Zhu, Stabilizing Perovskite Structures by Tuning Tolerance Factor: Formation of Formamidinium and Cesium Lead Iodide Solid-State Alloys, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 284–292,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.5b04107 .
J. Ma, M. Qin, Y. Li, T. Zhang, J. Xu, G. Fang and X. Lu, Guanidinium doping enabled low-temperature fabrication of high-efficiency all-inorganic CsPbI2Br perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 27640–27647,  10.1039/c9ta10899h .
G. E. Eperon, K. H. Stone, L. E. Mundt, T. H. Schloemer, S. N. Habisreutinger, S. P. Dunfield, L. T. Schelhas, J. J. Berry, D. T. Moore, G. E. Eperon and D. T. Moore, The Role of Dimethylammonium in Bandgap Modulation for Stable Halide Perovskites, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1856–1864,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.0c00872 .
A. F. Palmstrom, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, R. Prasanna, S. N. Habisreutinger, W. Nemeth, E. A. Gaulding, S. P. Dunfield, M. Reese, S. Nanayakkara, T. Moot, J. Werner, J. Liu, B. To, S. T. Christensen, M. D. McGehee, M. F. A. M. van Hest, J. M. Luther, J. J. Berry and D. T. Moore, Enabling Flexible All-Perovskite Tandem Solar Cells, Joule, 2019, 3, 2193–2204 CrossRef CAS .
W. M. J. Franssen, B. J. Bruijnaers, V. H. L. Portengen and A. P. M. Kentgens, Dimethylammonium Incorporation in Lead Acetate Based MAPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells, ChemPhysChem, 2018, 19, 3107–3115,  DOI:10.1002/cphc.201800732 .
N. K. Noel, M. Congiu, A. J. Ramadan, S. Fearn, D. P. McMeekin, J. B. Patel, M. B. Johnston, B. Wenger and H. J. Snaith, Unveiling the Influence of pH on the Crystallization of Hybrid Perovskites, Delivering Low Voltage Loss Photovoltaics, Joule, 2017, 1, 328–343,  DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2017.09.009 .
F. Haque, M. Wright, M. A. Mahmud, H. Yi, D. Wang, L. Duan, C. Xu, M. B. Upama and A. Uddin, Effects of Hydroiodic Acid Concentration on the Properties of CsPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 11937–11944,  DOI:10.1021/acsomega.8b01589 .
S. Xiang, Z. Fu, W. Li, Y. Wei, J. Liu, H. Liu, L. Zhu, R. Zhang and H. Chen, Highly Air-Stable Carbon-Based α-CsPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells with a Broadened Optical Spectrum, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1824–1831,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.8b00820 .
A. Boziki, D. J. Kubicki, A. Mishra, S. Meloni, L. Emsley, M. Grätzel and U. Rothlisberger, Atomistic Origins of the Limited Phase Stability of Cs + -Rich FAxCs(1−x)PbI3 Mixtures, Chem. Mater., 2020, 32, 2605–2614,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.0c00120 .
Z. Shao, H. Meng, X. Du, X. Sun, P. Lv, C. Gao, Y. Rao, C. Chen, Z. Li, X. Wang, G. Cui and S. Pang, Cs4PbI6-Mediated Synthesis of Thermodynamically Stable FA0.15Cs0.85PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 3–9,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202001054 .
C. Yi, J. Luo, S. Meloni, A. Boziki, N. Ashari-Astani, C. Grätzel, S. M. Zakeeruddin, U. Röthlisberger and M. Grätzel, Entropic stabilization of mixed A-cation ABX3 metal halide perovskites for high performance perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 656–662,  10.1039/c5ee03255e .
M. Chen, S. R. Sahamir, G. Kapil, A. K. Baranwal, M. A. Kamarudin, Y. Zhang, K. Nishimura, C. Ding, D. Liu, D. Hirotani, Q. Shen and S. Hayase, Inverted CsPbI2Br perovskite solar cells with enhanced efficiency and stability in ambient atmosphere via formamidinium incorporation, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2020, 218, 110741,  DOI:10.1016/j.solmat.2020.110741 .
J. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. H. Im and K. H. Hong, The Phase Selection of Cesium Lead Triiodides through Surface Ligand Engineering, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 4232–4238,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.0c00499 .
C. J. Thomas, Y. Zhang, A. Guillaussier, K. Bdeir, O. F. Aly, H. G. Kim, J. Noh, L. C. Reimnitz, J. Li, F. L. Deepak, D.-M. Smilgies, D. J. Milliron and B. A. Korgel, Thermal Stability of the Black Perovskite Phase in Cesium Lead Iodide Nanocrystals Under Humid Conditions, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31, 9750–9758,  DOI:10.1021/acs.chemmater.9b03533 .
X. Ding, H. Chen, Y. Wu, S. Ma, S. Dai, S. Yang and J. Zhu, Triple cation additive NH3+ C2H4NH2 + C2H4NH3 + -induced phase-stable inorganic α-CsPbI3 perovskite films for use in solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18258–18266,  10.1039/c8ta04590a .
C. Liu, Y. Yang, O. A. Syzgantseva, Y. Ding, M. A. Syzgantseva, X. Zhang, A. M. Asiri, S. Dai and M. K. Nazeeruddin, α-CsPbI3 Bilayers via One-Step Deposition for Efficient and Stable All-Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202002632 .
T. Zhang, F. Wang, H. Chen, L. Ji, Y. Wang, C. Li, M. B. Raschke and S. Li, Mediator–Antisolvent Strategy to Stabilize All-Inorganic CsPbI3 for Perovskite Solar Cells with Efficiency Exceeding 16%, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 1619–1627,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.0c00497 .
Q. Wang, X. Zheng, Y. Deng, J. Zhao, Z. Chen and J. Huang, Stabilizing the α-Phase of CsPbI3 Perovskite by Sulfobetaine Zwitterions in One-Step Spin-Coating Films, Joule, 2017, 1, 371–382,  DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2017.07.017 .
K. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Bian, D. Bai, H. Wang, J. Zhang, Q. Wang and L. Shengzhong, All-inorganic cesium lead iodide perovskite solar cells with stabilized efficiency beyond 15%, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–8,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-018-06915-6 .
J. V. Milić, J. Im, D. J. Kubicki, A. Ummadisingu, J. Seo, Y. Li, M. A. Ruiz-Preciado, M. I. Dar, S. M. Zakeeruddin, L. Emsley and M. Grätzel, Supramolecular Engineering for Formamidinium-Based Layered 2D Perovskite Solar Cells: Structural Complexity and Dynamics Revealed by Solid-State NMR Spectroscopy, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900284,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201900284 .
J. F. Liao, H. S. Rao, B. X. Chen, D. Bin Kuang and C. Y. Su, Dimension engineering on cesium lead iodide for efficient and stable perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 2066–2072,  10.1039/c6ta09582h .
F. Li, Y. Pei, F. Xiao, T. Zeng, Z. Yang, J. Xu, J. Sun, B. Peng and M. Liu, Tailored dimensionality to regulate the phase stability of inorganic cesium lead iodide perovskites, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 6318–6322,  10.1039/C8NR00758F .
Y. Jiang, J. Yuan, Y. Ni, J. Yang, Y. Wang, T. Jiu, M. Yuan and J. Chen, Reduced-Dimensional α-CsPbX3 Perovskites for Efficient and Stable Photovoltaics, Joule, 2018, 2, 1356–1368 CrossRef .
K. Wang, Z. Li, F. Zhou, H. Wang, H. Bian, H. Zhang, Q. Wang, Z. Jin, L. Ding and S. Liu, Ruddlesden–Popper 2D Component to Stabilize γ-CsPbI3 Perovskite Phase for Stable and Efficient Photovoltaics, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201902529 .
H. Wang, S. Xiang, W. Li, H. Liu, L. Zhu, S. Xiao, S. Yang and H. Chen, Skillfully deflecting the question: a small amount of piperazine-1,4-diium iodide radically enhances the thermal stability of CsPbI3 perovskite, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 11757–11763,  10.1039/C9TC03576A .
P. Chen, Y. Bai, S. Wang, M. Lyu, J.-H. Yun and L. Wang, In Situ Growth of 2D Perovskite Capping Layer for Stable and Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706923,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201706923 .
K. Lee, J. Kim, H. Yu, J. W. Lee, C.-M. Yoon, S. K. Kim and J. Jang, A highly stable and efficient carbon electrode-based perovskite solar cell achieved via interfacial growth of 2D PEA2 PbI4 perovskite, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24560–24568,  10.1039/C8TA09433K .
V. E. Madhavan, I. Zimmermann, A. A. B. Baloch, A. Manekkathodi, A. Belaidi, N. Tabet and M. K. Nazeeruddin, CuSCN as Hole Transport Material with 3D/2D Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 114–121,  DOI:10.1021/acsaem.9b01692 .
H. Wang, H. Bian, Z. Jin, L. Liang, D. Bai, Q. Wang and S. F. Liu, Synergy of Hydrophobic Surface Capping and Lattice Contraction for Stable and High-Efficiency Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL., 2018, 2, 1800216,  DOI:10.1002/solr.201800216 .
Y. Wang, T. Zhang, M. Kan and Y. Zhao, Bifunctional Stabilization of All-Inorganic α-CsPbI3 Perovskite for 17% Efficiency Photovoltaics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 12345–12348,  DOI:10.1021/jacs.8b07927 .
J. Zhang, J. Liu, A. Tan, J. Piao and Z. Fu, Improved stability of β-CsPbI3 inorganic perovskite using π-conjugated bifunctional surface capped organic cations for high performance photovoltaics, Chem. Commun., 2020, 56, 13816–13819,  10.1039/d0cc05386d .
X. Ding, M. Cai, X. Liu, Y. Ding, X. Liu, Y. Wu, T. Hayat, A. Alsaedi and S. Dai, Enhancing the Phase Stability of Inorganic α-CsPbI3 by the Bication-Conjugated Organic Molecule for Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 37720–37725,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.9b12579 .
Q. Wang, J. A. Smith, D. Skroblin, J. A. Steele, C. M. Wolff, P. Caprioglio, M. Stolterfoht, H. Köbler, M. Li, S.-H. Turren-Cruz, C. Gollwitzer, D. Neher and A. Abate, Managing Phase Purities and Crystal Orientation for High-Performance and Photostable Cesium Lead Halide Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL., 2020, 4, 2000213,  DOI:10.1002/solr.202000213 .
W. Chen, H. Chen, G. Xu, R. Xue, S. Wang, Y. Li and Y. Li, Precise Control of Crystal Growth for Highly Efficient CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cells, Joule, 2019, 3, 191–204,  DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2018.10.011 .
G. Yin, H. Zhao, H. Jiang, S. Yuan, T. Niu, K. Zhao, Z. Liu and S. (Frank) Liu, Precursor Engineering for All-Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cells with 14.78% Efficiency, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1–10,  DOI:10.1002/adfm.201803269 .
W. Chen, X. Li, Y. Li and Y. Li, A review: Crystal growth for high-performance all-inorganic perovskite solar cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1971–1996,  10.1039/d0ee00215a .
W. Zhang, J. Xiong, J. Li and W. A. Daoud, Seed-Assisted Growth for Low-Temperature-Processed All-Inorganic CsPbIBr2 Solar Cells with Efficiency over 10%, Small, 2020, 16, 2001535 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. F. J. Lau, Z. Wang, N. Sakai, J. Zheng, C. H. Liao, M. Green, S. Huang, H. J. Snaith and A. Ho-Baillie, Fabrication of Efficient and Stable CsPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells through Cation Exchange Process, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201901685 .
Z. Shao, Z. Wang, Z. Li, Y. Fan, H. Meng, R. Liu, Y. Wang, A. Hagfeldt, G. Cui and S. Pang, A Scalable Methylamine Gas Healing Strategy for High-Efficiency Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5587–5591,  DOI:10.1002/anie.201814024 .
W. Zhu, W. Chai, M. Deng, D. Chen, D. Chen, J. Zhang, C. Zhang and Y. Hao, Flux-mediated growth strategy enables low-temperature fabrication of high-efficiency all-inorganic CsPbIBr2 perovskite solar cells, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 330, 135325,  DOI:10.1016/j.electacta.2019.135325 .
C. Duan, J. Cui, M. Zhang, Y. Han, S. Yang, H. Zhao, H. Bian, J. Yao, K. Zhao, Z. Liu and S. Liu, Precursor Engineering for Ambient-Compatible Antisolvent-Free Fabrication of High-Efficiency CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 1–11,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.202000691 .
L. Ye, H. Wang, Y. Wei, P. Guo, X. Yang, Q. Ye and H. Wang, Acetate-Based Crystallization Kinetics Modulation of CsPbI2Br for Improved Photovoltaic Performance, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 658–665,  DOI:10.1021/acsaem.9b01859 .
D. Huang, P. Xie, Z. Pan, H. Rao and X. Zhong, One-step solution deposition of CsPbBr3 based on precursor engineering for efficient all-inorganic perovskite solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22420–22428,  10.1039/c9ta08465g .
Y. Ren, Y. Hao, N. Zhang, Z. Arain, M. Mateen, Y. Sun, P. Shi, M. Cai and S. Dai, Exploration of polymer-assisted crystallization kinetics in CsPbBr3 all-inorganic solar cell, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123805,  DOI:10.1016/j.cej.2019.123805 .
M. Wu, K. Yan, Y. Wang and X. Kang, High crystallinity and photovoltaic performance of CsPbI3 film enabled by secondary dimension, J. Energy Chem., 2020, 48, 181–186,  DOI:10.1016/j.jechem.2020.01.009 .
X. Sun, Z. Shao, Y. Rao, H. Meng, C. Gao, C. Chen, D. Liu, P. Lv, Z. Li, X. Wang, G. Cui and S. Pang, A Low-Temperature Additive-Involved Leaching Method for Highly Efficient Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 2002754, 2002754,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.202002754 .
X. Xu, H. Zhang, E. Li, P. Ru, H. Chen, Z. Chen, Y. Wu, H. Tian and W.-H. Zhu, Electron-enriched thione enables strong Pb–S interaction for stabilizing high quality CsPbI3 perovskite films with low-temperature processing, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 3132–3140,  10.1039/C9SC06574A .
T. Zhang, H. Li, S. Liu, X. Wang, X. Gong, Q. Sun, Y. Shen and M. Wang, Lowerature Stable α-Phase Inorganic Perovskite Compounds via Crystal Cross-Linking, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2019, 10, 200–205,  DOI:10.1021/acs.jpclett.8b03481 .
J. Zhang, Z. Wang, A. Mishra, M. Yu, M. Shasti, W. Tress, D. J. Kubicki, C. E. Avalos, H. Lu, Y. Liu, B. I. Carlsen, A. Agarwalla, Z. Wang, W. Xiang, L. Emsley, Z. Zhang, M. Grätzel, W. Guo and A. Hagfeldt, Intermediate Phase Enhances Inorganic Perovskite and Metal Oxide Interface for Efficient Photovoltaics, Joule, 2020, 4, 222–234,  DOI:10.1016/j.joule.2019.11.007 .
W. Tress, Perovskite Solar Cells on the Way to Their Radiative Efficiency Limit – Insights Into a Success Story of High Open-Circuit Voltage and Low Recombination, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602358 CrossRef .
B. Chen, P. N. Rudd, S. Yang, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Imperfections and their passivation in halide perovskite solar cells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3842–3867,  10.1039/C8CS00853A .
M. L. Petrus, J. Schlipf, C. Li, T. P. Gujar, N. Giesbrecht, P. Müller-Buschbaum, M. Thelakkat, T. Bein, S. Hüttner and P. Docampo, Capturing the Sun: A Review of the Challenges and Perspectives of Perovskite Solar Cells, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1–27,  DOI:10.1002/aenm.201700264 .
H. Li and L. Yin, Efficient Bidentate Molecules Passivation Strategy for High-Performance and Stable Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL., 2020, 4, 2000268 CrossRef CAS .
S. Fu, L. Wan, W. Zhang, X. Li, W. Song and J. Fang, Tailoring In Situ Healing and Stabilizing Post-Treatment Agent for High-Performance Inverted CsPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells with Efficiency of 16.67%, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3314–3321,  DOI:10.1021/acsenergylett.0c01728 .
J. He, J. Liu, Y. Hou, Y. Wang, S. Yang and H. G. Yang, Surface chelation of cesium halide perovskite by dithiocarbamate for efficient and stable solar cells, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4237,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-020-18015-5 .
S. C. Chen, D. Wang and Q. Zheng, Surface Passivation of All-Inorganic CsPbI2Br with a Fluorinated Organic Ammonium Salt for Perovskite Solar Cells with Efficiencies over 16%, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/solr.202000321 .
J. Wang, J. Zhang, Y. Zhou, H. Liu, Q. Xue, X. Li, C.-C. Chueh, H.-L. Yip, Z. Zhu and A. K. Y. Jen, Highly efficient all-inorganic perovskite solar cells with suppressed non-radiative recombination by a Lewis base, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 177,  DOI:10.1038/s41467-019-13909-5 .
C. Yan, Z. Li, Y. Sun, J. Zhao, X. Huang, J. Yang, Z. Ci, L. Ding and Z. Jin, Decreasing energy loss and optimizing band alignment for high performance CsPbI3 solar cells through guanidine hydrobromide post-treatment, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 10346–10353,  10.1039/d0ta02488k .
J. Zhang, Z. Jin, L. Liang, H. Wang, D. Bai, H. Bian, K. Wang, Q. Wang, N. Yuan, J. Ding and S. (Frank) Liu, Iodine-Optimized Interface for Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cell to Attain High Stabilized Efficiency Exceeding 14%, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1801123 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lu, S. C. Chen and Q. Zheng, Defect Passivation of CsPbIBr2 Perovskites for High-Performance Solar Cells with Large Open-Circuit Voltage of 1.28 V, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 5872–5878,  DOI:10.1021/acsaem.8b01430 .
Y. You, W. Tian, M. Wang, F. Cao, H. Sun and L. Li, PEG Modified CsPbIBr2 Perovskite Film for Efficient and Stable Solar Cells, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 2000537,  DOI:10.1002/admi.202000537 .
H. Peng, M. Cai, J. Zhou, Y. Yang, X. Ding, Y. Tao, G. Wu, X. Liu, J. H. Pan and S. Dai, Structurally Reinforced All-Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite by Nonionic Polymer via Coordination and Hydrogen Bonds, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000216,  DOI:10.1002/solr.202000216 .
D. Bi, C. Yi, J. Luo, J. D. Décoppet, F. Zhang, S. M. Zakeeruddin, X. Li, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Polymer-templated nucleation and crystal growth of perovskite films for solar cells with efficiency greater than 21%, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16142 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Sun, X. Lu, X. Gao, J. Gao, L. Shui, S. Wu and J. M. Liu, Efficient and carbon-based hole transport layer-free CsPbI2Br planar perovskite solar cells using PMMA modification, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 3852–3861,  10.1039/c9tc00374f .
W. Zhang, J. Xiong, J. Li and W. A. Daoud, Guanidinium Passivation for Air-Stable Rubidium-Incorporated Cs(1−x)RbxPbI2Br Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1–9,  DOI:10.1002/solr.202000112 .
Q. Ye, F. Ma, Y. Zhao, S. Yu, Z. Chu, P. Gao, X. Zhang and J. You, Stabilizing γ-CsPbI3 Perovskite via Phenylethylammonium for Efficient Solar Cells with Open-Circuit Voltage over 1.3 V, Small, 2020, 2005246, 1–7,  DOI:10.1002/smll.202005246 .
J. Zhuang, Y. Wei, Y. Luan, N. Chen, P. Mao, S. Cao and J. Wang, Band engineering at the interface of all-inorganic CsPbI2Br solar cells, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 14553–14560,  10.1039/C9NR03638E .
C. Liu, J. He, M. Wu, Y. Wu, P. Du, L. Fan, Q. Zhang, D. Wang and T. Zhang, All-Inorganic CsPbI2Br Perovskite Solar Cell with Open-Circuit Voltage over 1.3 V by Balancing Electron and Hole Transport, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 2000016,  DOI:10.1002/solr.202000016 .
X. Chang, J. Fang, Y. Fan, T. Luo, H. Su, Y. Zhang, J. Lu, L. Tsetseris, T. D. Anthopoulos, S. (Frank) Liu and K. Zhao, Printable CsPbI3 Perovskite Solar Cells with PCE of 19% via an Additive Strategy, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001243,  DOI:10.1002/adma.202001243 .
M. Tai, Y. Zhou, X. Yin, J. Han, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhou and H. Lin, In situ formation of a 2D/3D heterostructure for efficient and stable CsPbI2Br solar cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 22675–22682,  10.1039/C9TA08564E .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Jadel Tsiba Matondo
	Jadel Tsiba Matondo is a PhD Scholar under the supervision of Prof. Mina Guli at School of New Energy, North China Electric Power University. He received his Master's degree in Energy from Faculté des Sciences et Techniques (FST), Marien Ngouabi University, Congo. His current research interests include the chemical modification of halide perovskites and the development of inorganic hole-transporting materials for photovoltaic applications.

Davy Maurice Malouangou
	Davy Maurice Malouangou is a PhD candidate guided by Prof. Mina Guli in Renewable Energy and Clean Energy at School of New Energy, North China Electric Power University, Beijing 102202, China. He received his Master's degree in Energy from Faculté des Sciences et Techniques (FST), Marien Ngouabi University, Congo. His current research is focused on Two (quasi) and mixed dimensional perovskite materials and devices for photovoltaic applications.

Luyun Bai
	Luyun Bai is an MS candidate guided by Prof. Mina Guli in Materials Science and Photovoltaic Devices at the School of Materials Engineering, North China Electric Power University. Her research is focused on Sn-based perovskite materials and devices.

Mina Guli
	Mina Guli received her PhD in Materials Science and Engineering in 2010 from Jilin University, and finished joint PhD research work at University of Bristol in UK from 2008 to 2010. She is currently an associate Professor at School of New Energy in North China Electric Power University. Her main research aims to develop various functional materials and films for novel thin film solar cells and photoelectric devices.

 	Fig. 1  Structural and phase versatility of CsPbI3. (a) Crystal structure transition in CsPbI3 as a result of [PbI6]4− octahedral distortion induced by Pb–I–Pb angle tilting; in cubic structure this angle is 180° and it decreases to 164° and 153° in tetragonal and orthorhombic structures as indicated, respectively. Reproduced from ref. 38, with permission from American Chemical Society. (b) Thermal phase relations in CsPbI3 as compared to the phase behavior in CsPbI2.7Br0.3: (1) conversion of the yellow δ-phase into the α-phase upon heating; (2–5) thermodynamically preferred paths for the transformation of the α-phase into the yellow δ-phase in CsPbI3, with intermediate distorted β- and γ-phases, upon cooling down to room temperature (RT). (6) RT metastable β- and γ-phases immediately transformed into the yellow phase upon mild heating at 60 °C before the transformation into the α-phase with increasing temperature. CsPb(I2.7Br0.3)3: (2′,3′) transformation of the α-phase into the γ-phase, stable at RT, with the β-phase intermediate formation; and (2,3) reversible process trigged by material heating. Reproduced with permission;32 copyright 2019, AAAs.	 
	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Analysis of the structural and phase properties of CsPbI3 and CsPbI2Br materials with partial substitution of Cs+ by ammonium cations. (a) Tolerance factor tuning in CsPbI3 with DMA. Reproduced from ref. 21. (b) Schematic illustration of DMA insertion at the Cs+ site of cubic CsPbI3 structure. (c) Correlation between the tolerance factor and crystal structure of perovskite materials. Reproduced from ref. 46, with permission from American Chemical Society. (d) Schematic diagram describing the suppression of phase transition in CsPbI2Br due to the incorporation of GA and (e) XRD patterns of pristine and GA-doped CsPbI2Br films, revealing the presence of a pure solid solution of GA-containing CsPbI2Br perovskite phase. Reproduced from ref. 47, with permission Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Chemical structures of reported organic species used to enhance the perovskite phase stability in CsPbI3 at room temperature and/or humidity.	 

 	Fig. 4  Mechanisms for stabilization of black phase in CsPbI3via molecular engineering. (a) Schematic illustration of CsPbI3 crystal formation from a CsI:PbI2/DMSO precursor solution, resulting in large grains (route 1), and a zwitterion ligand containing CsI:PbI2/DMSO precursor solution (route 2), leading to small grain films. Reproduced with permission;63 copyright 2017; Elsevier. (b) Schematic diagram describing the stabilization, in the distorted phase, of CsPbI3via a steric effect induced by PEA cations. Reproduced from ref. 64, published by Nature Communications.	 

 	Fig. 5  Tuning the structural dimensionality of orthorhombic CsPbI3 using phenylethylammonium (PEA) as a spacer cation. (a) Crystal structure of PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 as a function of the number n. (b) XRD patterns, (c) visible light absorption spectra and (d) PL intensity of PEA2Csn−1PbnI3n+1 films with different n values. Reproduced with permission;69 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 6  Effect of the PEA surface treatment of CsPbI3 on its black phase and solar cell stability. (a) PEAI treatment of the cubic CsPbI3 structure, resulting in a PEA capping layer (right hand side). (b) XRD patterns of fresh and half an hour aged CsPbI3 and PEA-CsPbI3 films; aged samples being exposed to conditions of 85–90% RH at room temperature. The insets in (c) show the photographs of investigated samples. (c) PCE-decay of PEA + CsPbI3- and CsPbI3-based PSC champion devices as a function of storage time in a dark and dry box with <20% RH at RT. Reproduced with permission;24 copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic diagram showing the crystal growth of a cubic CsPbX3 structure, with reduced crystalline defects, via the intermediate phase induced by MA. Reproduced with permission;84 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. Cross-sectional SEM images of CsPbI3 films prepared (b) without using MAI additive, and in presence of (c) 0.5 M and (d) 1 M of MAI. Reproduced with permission;83 copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. (e and f) Top-view SEM images of the CsPbI2Br films prepared in an ambient environment where relative humidity (RH) is 90% and T = 36 °C, using conventional CsI:PbBr2 precursor (e, control), and HCOO-containing HCOOCs:HPbI3:HPbBr3 precursor (f). (g) J–V performance of solar cells using the air-processed CsPbI2Br films as the active layers. Reproduced with permission;86 copyright 2020; 2020 Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 8  Crystallization control for CsPbBr3 films using PEG as an additive. (a) Size distribution of particles in CsPbBr3 precursor solution probed via dynamic light scattering (DLS). (b) Proposed mechanism for the increase in the number of colloids mediated by PEG. (c and d) Top-view SEM images of the CsPbBr3 perovskite films prepared with and without PEG, the scale bar is 1 μm. (e) XRD patterns of samples, showing the crystallinity enhancement in PEG-treated film. Reproduced with permission;89 copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Low-temperature preparation and characterization of the CsPbI3 films. (a) Deposition of CsPbI3via a one-step solution casting method. (b) Images of the CsPbI3 films prepared with and without 4-PT additives after annealing at 90–100 °C for 10 min; the film made without 4-PT does not show any perovskite phase. (c) Visible light absorption spectra and (d) XDR patterns of the CsPbI3 films made with or without 4-PT, demonstrating the formation of a black CsPbI3 phase with high crystallinity. Reproduced from ref. 92, published by The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3 film growth on metal oxide substrates (TiO2 and SnO2). (a) Schematic illustration of the CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3 film formation from a precursor system with FA and Ac- ions, describing the effect FA on the formation of high-quality CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3/TiO2 interface. Cross-sectional SEM pictures of planar device structure incorporating CsPb(I0.75Br0.25)3 films prepared (b) without and (c) in presence of FAAC additive. The yellow dashed boxes show the perovskite/metal oxide interfaces. Reproduced with permission;94 copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 11  Defect passivation in the CsPbIXBr3−X films with small molecule 6TIC-4F. (a) Schematic illustration of passivation mechanism, showing the potential interaction site. (b) Energy-level diagram of defect-related trap state suppression by 6TIC-4F. (c) Effect of defect passivation on the J–V performance of CsPbIXBr3−X solar cells based on p–i–n configuration. (d) Normalized PCE variation of unsealed CsPbIXBr3−X solar cells under continuous 1 sun equivalent illumination. Reproduced from ref. 102, published by Nature Communications.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation of PEG-passivated CsPbIBr2 perovskite structure. (b) PL decay of CsPbIBr2 and PEG-passivated films, demonstrating the carrier lifetime enhancement induced by PEG passivation. (c) Effect of PEG-passivation of the J–V curves of CsPbIBr2 PSCs. (d) Energy band edge diagram of different layers in the investigated CsPbIBr2 PSCs, showing how PEG can tune the band edge positions of CsPbIBr2. Reproduced with permission;106 copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 13  Effect of GA-based 2D perovskite on the properties of RXCs1−XPbI2Br films and solar cells, in a planar n–i–p configuration. (a) XRD patterns revealing the presence of defect passivating 2D GA2PbI4 layer on the RXCs1−XPbI2Br film compared to CsPbI2Br and RXCs1−XPbI2Br films. (b) Steady state PL spectra of CsPbI2Br, RXCs1−XPbI2Br and GA2PbI4-passivated RXCs1−XPbI2Br films, demonstrating a considerable reduction in non-radiative recombination in the passivated sample. Effect of GA2PbI4 on the cell (c) J–V characteristics and (d) light stability tested under 1 sun 1.5 AM G illumination. Reproduced with permission;110 copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 14  Modification of the surface properties of the CsPbI2Br films with BrBeAI. (a) Schematic diagram of band alignment of different layers in a regular PSC geometry, describing the band bending at the surface of the CsPbI2Br film (bottom image), favorable to hole extraction to spiro-OMeTAD, due to BrBeAI modification. (b) J–V performance of solar cells based on untreated and BrBeAI-treated CsPbI2Br films, and (c) their corresponding external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra. Reproduced from ref. 112, with permission from Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
