Recent progress in van der Waals heterojunctions  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C7NR00844A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C7NR00844A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 4324-4365Recent progress in van der Waals heterojunctions

        
          
            Wanshun 
            Xia
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Liping 
            Dai
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Peng 
            Yu
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Xin 
            Tong
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Wenping 
            Song
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Guojun 
            Zhang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Zhiming 
            Wang
          
          
        
      *b
aState Key Laboratory of Electronic Thin Film and Integrated Devices, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P.R. China. E-mail: dlp@uestc.edu.cn
bInstitute of Fundamental and Frontier Science, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, P. R. China. E-mail: zhmwang@uestc.edu.cn
Received 
      5th February 2017
    , Accepted 28th February 2017First published on 1st March 2017AbstractFollowing the development of many novel two-dimensional (2D) materials, investigations of van der Waals heterojunctions (vdWHs) have attracted significant attention due to their excellent properties such as smooth heterointerface, highly gate-tunable bandgap, and ultrafast carrier transport. Benefits from the atom-scale thickness, physical and chemical properties and ease of manipulation of the heterojunctions formulated by weak vdW forces were demonstrated to indicate their outstanding potential in electronic and optoelectronic applications, including photodetection and energy harvesting, and the possibility of integrating them with the existing semiconductor technology for the next-generation electronic and sensing devices. In this review, we summarized the recent developments of vdWHs and emphasized their applications. Basically, we introduced the physical properties and some newly discovered phenomena in vdWHs. Then, we emphatically presented four classical vdWHs and some novel heterostructures formed by vdW forces. Based on their unique physical properties and structures, we highlighted the applications of vdWHs including in photodiodes, phototransistors, tunneling devices, and memory devices. Finally, we provided a conclusion on the recent advances in vdWHs and outlined our perspectives. We aim for this review to serve as a solid foundation in this field and to pave the way for future research on vdW-based materials and their heterostructures.Wanshun XiaWanshun Xia obtained his Bachelor's degree from the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) in 2015. He is currently a Master's student at the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics, UESTC. His research interests involve the CVD growth of 2D materials and their micro-constructions for high-performance photoelectronics.Liping DaiLiping Dai is currently an associate professor at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. She obtained her Master's and Doctor's degrees in Materials Physics and Chemistry in 2004 and 2008. She did her postdoctoral studies in applied materials physics in 2013. Her current research interests focus on 2D nanomaterials, quantum dots, and micro- and nanodevices fabrication technology.Peng YuPeng Yu is currently a Ph.D. researcher in the group of Prof. Zhiming Wang at the Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences of University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. He obtained his Bachelor's degree in Microelectronics in 2012 and Master's degree in Electronic Information Materials and Components in 2015. His current research interests include quantum dot solar cells, plasmonic applications, and the design and preparation of nanophotonics.Xin TongXin Tong obtained his Bachelor's degree from the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) in 2014. He is currently a joint PhD student at the Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, UESTC and Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS, Canada). His research interests involve 2D materials (molybdenum disulfide), low-dimensional materials (colloidal quantum dots) and their further applications in the solar energy field, such as photoelectrochemical (PEC) and solar cells.Wenping SongWenping Song is currently a Master's degree candidate at the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics of University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. He obtained his Bachelor's degree from Zhengzhou University in 2013. His current research interests focus on MEMS structure design and manufacturing.Zhiming WangZhiming Wang is currently a professor at the Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences of University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. He obtained his Bachelor's degree in Applied Physics in 1992, his Master's degree in Semiconductor Physics in 1995, and his Ph.D. degree in Condensed Matter Physics in 1998. He did postdoctoral studies at the Paul-Drude-Institute for Solid-State Electronics in 2000. His current research interests focus on epitaxial crystal growth, molecular beam epitaxy, quantum dots, surface, interface, nanostructures, nanoscience and nanotechnology.
Introduction
The discovery of graphene1 has inspired the development of many novel two-dimensional (2D) materials with high mechanical flexibility, stability, and quality, coupled with potentially inexpensive production methods compared to crystalline bulk materials. Layered 2D materials consisting of a covalently bonded and dangling-bond-free lattice exhibit potential applications in many diverse fields, including electronics, optoelectronics, catalysis, and energy harvesting,2–8 based on the properties offered by forming van der Waals heterojunctions (vdWHs). Different to the strong in-plane covalent bonding in 2D layers, vdW interfaces exhibit a relatively weak (around 10 m eV Å−2) vdW interaction.9,10 This interesting phenomenon results from the dangling-bond-free face of 2D materials coupled with a weak electrostatic interaction of molecules or atoms. The vdWHs have almost no change at the atomic scale, even with a large lattice mismatch in layered materials, because they are formed by weak vdW forces, which helps maintain the electronic structures of the participating materials.11–13 This unique property induces excellent physical properties in novel advanced heterojunctions based on lower dimension materials, giving rise to fascinating phenomena such as Hofstadter's butterfly spectrum14–16 according to the moiré patterns,17–21 strongly bound excitons,22–27 and spin-valley polarization.28,29 By combining the different properties of the building blocks, synthesized vdW structures may show integrated properties with respect to the segregated materials.30 In regard to the atomic thickness and excellent flexibility of 2D materials, vdWHs are applied to bandgap engineering to develop gate-tunable band structures.31–35 Devices based on vdWHs exhibit a big breakover current and fast responsivity, attributed to the ultrafast charge transfer in 2D materials, where electronic transport is strictly 2D and not scattered in the third dimension.36 More importantly, strong in-plane covalent bonding associated with the weak interaction between the layers of 2D materials can form numerous mismatched vdWHs based on the diversity of 2D materials including the layering of metals, semiconductors, insulators, and even superconductors.37–41 Most studied 2D materials, such as graphene, monolayer transition metal dichalcogenides (TMDs), and hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), have successfully been synthesized to give artificial vdWHs that can exhibit excellent electronic and optoelectronic properties.42–45 Other novel vdWHs are continually being proposed and produced with the rapid developments of new advanced 2D materials, such as black phosphorus (BP),46–48 organic perovskites,49,50 and topological insulators (TIs).51,52 Besides stacked-layered vdWHs, 0D–2D,53–55 and 1D–2D,56–58 hybrid structures have also been experimentally demonstrated. Although research on vdWHs is just at its beginning and many open questions remain, such heterojunctions have been already applied to form devices, such as photodiodes,59,60 phototransistors,54,61 tunneling devices,62,63 and memory devices.64,65 By employing the desired properties of segregated layered materials in a vdWH, devices based on such a vdWH exhibit composed properties to custom their performance. Importantly, the developments of vdWHs have shown their potential to facilitate the progress of the modern integrated circuits industry.66,67 In this review, we discuss the physical properties and summarize recent research progress on vdWHs. Beyond these advances, these atomically scaled artificial constructions demonstrate their promising applications in electronic and optoelectronic devices. Finally, we propose the future prospects of vdWHs and provide an outline for prospective researches on nanodevices.
Physical properties
Unlike conventional semiconductor heterostructures, layered materials consist of in-plane covalently bonded atomic layers that interact weakly with each other in the out-of-plane direction.4 This weak interlayer interaction allows the stacking of a wide range of 2D materials together without the requirement for atomic-scale commensurability, layer-by-layer in any desired sequence, to create novel 3D architectures with entirely new functions (as shown in Fig. 1).30 As a result, it is possible to construct functional devices by combining 2D materials with very different lattice constants, thus employing the desirable properties of each material. Table 1 compares some characteristics of stacked vdWHs with traditional body heterojunctions, including their physical traits, producing methods, band structures, and interfacial properties. The big versatility in stacking sequences of 2D layered materials associated with the relatively weak vdW interaction helps us to explore the intrinsic physical properties in numerous vdW systems and to discover new structures. However, it is still a challenge to perform comprehensive characterizations of the critical properties of these vdWHs, including their crystal structures, chemical dynamics, and interlayer coupling. The physical properties of vdWHs are discussed below, including the moiré patterns, bandgap engineering, carrier transport, interfacial coupling effects, and emerging spin valleytronics.
 Fig. 1  Building van der Waals heterostructures. Adapted from ref. 30, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. If one considers 2D crystals to be analogous to Lego blocks (right panel), the construction of a huge variety of layered structures becomes possible. Conceptually, this atomic-scale Lego resembles molecular beam epitaxy but employs different ‘construction’ rules and a distinct set of materials. 
Table 1 Comparison of stacked vdWHs and traditional semiconductor heterojunctions




Characteristic
Traditional heterojunction
vdW heterojunction
Ref.




Physical traits
Size
Wafer scale
μm–cm level

68 and 69



Thickness
Micron order
Atomic scale


Structure
Body/body
Layer/layer

70 and 71



Producing methods
Material bonding
vdW epitaxy

72 and 73



Layer transfer

74 and 75



Band structure
Unchanged
Tunable

76 and 77



Interfacial properties
Lattice structure
Strictly matched
Moiré superlattices with minor mismatch

20 and 78



Large mismatch

11 and 12



Interfacial contact
Dangling-bond
vdW interaction

9 and 10



Interaction
Strong
Weak


Carrier transport
Diffusion-drift process
Exciton recombination

79 and 22





Moiré patterns
It is suggested that the vdW interaction is not strong enough to form a strictly lattice-matched heterostructure.9,10 Instead, a moiré pattern structure in the nanometer-scale is formed by many vertically stacked structures. Moiré patterns are interference patterns resulting from the rotation between two layers of any regular lattice, which were first discussed in regard to the subsurface graphene layers of graphite.80–84 When two layers of a lattice are rotated with respect to each other, interference occurs, which creates superperiodic lattices that share the same symmetry as the original lattice on the two layers. Such superperiodic lattices are known as superlattices, which can be interpreted as moiré patterns caused by misorientations between layered materials. Fig. 285 shows a moiré pattern formed by the overlapping of two graphene sheets, exhibiting almost always not as a crystal. The atomic arrangement shows a periotic pattern, although the atomic arrangement never precisely repeats under a 9° lattice rotation, while a more precisely periodic arrangement is demonstrated with a 27.8° average angle. In addition, the relationship between the stacking rotations and electronic properties in graphene systems has been recently discussed.86,87 When the local stacking arrangement varies slowly in space, electronic properties are insensitive to the atomic details that distinguish the commensurate and incommensurate rotation angles, which helps us to understand the correlation between the electronic structures and atomic-structure rearrangement of layered materials. Put simply, a moiré pattern in a vdWH is a lattice with larger periodicity resulting from the overlap of two lattices with smaller periodicities.
 Fig. 2  Moiré patterns in two overlapping graphene sheets. Adapted from ref. 85, Copyright 2011 Springer Nature. (a) The two lattices are overlaid at an angle of about 27.8°. (b) Lattices rotated by 9°. 
In advanced vdW heterosystems, when two crystals with a minor lattice mismatch are superimposed, e.g., monolayer graphene placed on h-BN,17,18 the atomic-structure rearrangement caused by the weak vdW interaction between the layered materials leads to a change in the crystal structure, resulting in a periodic superlattice structure. This important discovery proved that moiré patterns not only exist in identical layered materials, but also in overlapping vdWHs when the component layers have a minor lattice mismatch. Insulating h-BN has a similar hexagonal honeycomb lattice structure to layered graphene and exhibits a small lattice mismatch when layered graphene is placed on top of it.88 It was demonstrated that graphene conformed to h-BN, as evidenced by the presence of rotation-dependent moiré patterns (as shown in Fig. 3(a–d)),19–21 demonstrating an incommensurate-commensurate transition in graphene on h-BN at a critical rotation angle.89 As a result of the moiré pattern acting as a weak periodic potential, the electronic band structure of graphene is radically altered, leading to the emergence of a new set of Dirac points (the conduction and valence bands form conically shaped valleys, touching at a point called the Dirac point) at an energy determined by its wavelength (as shown in Fig. 3(e–g)),90–94 accompanied by reversal of the Hall effects. The new massless Dirac fermions generated at these superlattice Dirac points are characterized by a significantly reduced Fermi velocity.90,91 Similar to placing graphene on h-BN, moiré superlattices are also generated at many other interfaces between semiconducting 2D crystals, such as MoS2/MoSe2 bilayers.78,95 2D MoSe2 exhibits a similar crystal structure to MoS2, which makes it possible to produce moiré superlattices in the MoSe2/MoS2 hybrid structures and to further manipulate the band structure through modulating the superlattices. Besides, many other discoveries also demonstrate that periodic superlattices in heterojunctions stacked though the interfaces have a large lattice misfit, as demonstrated in GaSe/MoSe2 and SnS2/MoS2 vdWHs.96,97 Anyway, superlattices resulting from a substrate's moiré potentials are of great importance because their use may make it possible to modify the spectrum of 2D electron systems98–100 and, ultimately, to create tailored electronic properties in a vdW system.101
 Fig. 3  Moiré superlattice in layered h-BN/graphene vdW heterojunctions. (a–d) Rotation-dependent moiré superlattice demonstrated by STM topographs at four different graphene/BN locations. (e) Experimental dI/dV curves for two different moiré wavelengths, 9.0 nm (black) and 13.4 nm (red). The dips in the dI/dV curves are marked by arrows. (f) |d2I/dV2| as a function of the gate and sample voltage for the 9.0 nm moiré pattern, showing the shift of the Dirac point and one of the dips. (g) Energy of the dips away from the Dirac point as a function of the moiré wavelength. The red points are the experimentally measured values and the black line is the expected theoretical dependence. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–d) in ref. 21, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society; (e–g) in ref. 90, Copyright 2012, Springer Nature. 
Following the research into superlattices,102–104 another interesting physical phenomenon was explored in vdW heterosystems recently, that is Hofstadter's butterfly. Hofstadter's butterfly theoretically describes the behavior of electrons in a magnetic field. It is a fractal structure and as such it shows self-similarity, meaning that small fragments of the structure contain a (distorted) copy of the entire structure.14 When subjected to both a magnetic field and a periodic electrostatic potential, a moiré superlattice formed in a graphene/h-BN vdW system exhibits an interesting self-similar recursive energy Hofstadter's spectrum (as shown in Fig. 4).15,16 Such a recursive structure confirms the quantum Hall features associated with the fractal gaps,15 with an unexpectedly large band gap at charge neutrality.16 With respect to moiré superlattices grown out of a vdW interface, the band structure and interfacial properties are significantly altered. Numerous interesting physical phenomena, such as third generation Dirac points105 and superlattice plasmons,106 have been discovered and discussed, giving rise to new orientations of advanced vdWHs.
 Fig. 4  Hofstadter's spectrum in layered h-BN/graphene vdW heterojunctions. Adapted from ref. 16, Copyright 2013 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (a) Low-temperature (T = 150 mK) conductivity near charge neutrality of four heterostructure devices (A1, A2, B1, and B2). The charge neutrality point offset V0 = 37, 37, 46, and 42 mV, respectively. Left inset: Measurement schematic. Right inset: False-color AFM image. Scale bar, 3 μm. (b) Resistance over a larger gate range. Finite-density resistance peaks indicate full filling of the lowest superlattice miniband in two of the four measured devices (A1 and A2) within the experimentally accessible density range. (c) Two-terminal magnetoconductance of device A1 up to 45 T. (d) Theoretical Hofstadter energy spectrum for the fully spin- and sublattice-split N = 0 Landau level. Black points indicate regions of dense energy bands; intervening spectral gaps are color-coded to the associated two-terminal conductance G = 2 (red), 1 (purple), and 0 (gray) in units of e2 h−1. 
Bandgap engineering
To further explore the effects of their tunable band structure, bandgap engineering was applied to the vdWHs to effectively modulate their electronic band. In this regard, bandgap engineering on stacked vdWHs can be conducted by introducing a moderate strain, whereby a small twist grows at the vdW interface and leads to stacking effects. One of the reasons why 2D materials have attracted widespread attention is because their excellent mechanical properties and flexibility make them interesting for strain engineering107–114 and flexible devices.113,115–118 By applying mechanical strain on monolayer semiconducting TMDs, the electronic band structure can be tuned form semiconducting to near-metallic with a variation of the effective masses.119–124 Under strain, the band structure of TMDs also exhibits a direct–indirect transition and the charged excitons in such strained TMDs are doping-dependent, providing possibilities to modulate the charge transfer in TMDs through engineering their bandgaps.125,126 Particular focus has been paid to engineering the bandgap of the TMD hybrid bilayers via introducing tensile strain. Lu et al.76 found that with increasing either the biaxial or uniaxial tensile strain, the MX2/MoS2 (M = Mo, Cr, W; X = S, Se) hetero-bilayers can undergo different transitions when changing the materials, including a semiconductor-to-metal transition and a direct-to-indirect bandgap transition. In addition, for M (= Fe, V) and X (= S, Se), the magnetic moments of both M and X atoms are enhanced when the MX2/MoS2 hetero-bilayers are under biaxial tensile strain. Interestingly, MoSe2/WSe2 bilayers exhibit both a direct and indirect bandgap, which are differently dependent on strain. PL (photoluminescence) measurements showed that both the direct and indirect bandgaps undergo red-shifts under tensile strain, with the change of the indirect gap being particularly more sensitive to strain (as shown in Fig. 5).127 Another BP/MoS2 bilayer exhibited an increased bandgap under normal compressive strain and, similarly, a semiconductor-to-metal transition was observed.128 Moreover, under compressive strain, its carrier effective mass and carrier concentration were also effectively modulated. For engineering the bandgap of graphene, it is worth noting that the bandgap remains largely unchanged under tensile strain,129–131 which could aid its potential performance in flexible vdW systems, such as flexible solar cells,132,133 supercapacitors,134 and nanofibers.135 Besides the extrinsic tensile strain, intrinsic elastic strain at the interfaces caused by lattice mismatches and interlayer interactions also act on vdW systems for modulating the bandgaps. Kumar et al.136 theoretically exhibited that significant in-plane strains can grow at the interfaces of three different vdWHs (graphene/h-BN, MoS2/WS2, and MoSe2/WSe2) with out-of-plane displacements, which showed a maximum bandgap change up to ∼300 meV due to the influence of interlayer interactions, while the magnitude of the elastic deformation was relative to the rotation angle between the layers. They further demonstrated that only 1–2% of the strain can be transferred between adjacent layers in a vdWH, depending on the strength of the interlayer interaction and the elastic modulus of the individual layers.137 In addition, intrinsic elastic strain can also affect the mechanical138 and thermal properties139 of a graphene/MoS2 bilayer, which are considerably mitigated under external mechanical tension. By combining the influence of external mechanical strain and internal elastic strain, strain engineering could significantly act on the vdWHs to modulate the properties of combined materials with tunable performance, thus exhibiting their great potential in flexible electronics.
 Fig. 5  Strain-induced bandgap transition. Adapted from ref. 127, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic of the fabrication and measurement of a strained WSe2/MoSe2 hetero-bilayer. (b) PL spectra of the strain dependence of the indirect-bandgap and direct-bandgap coupling peaks from the PL measurements. (c) Strain dependence of the indirect-bandgap and direct bandgap and intensities from the PL measurement with linear fitting. 
Due to the strong in-plane covalent bonding in separated layers and the weak out-plane interfacial interaction, a small twist grows at a vdW interface, which can create an internal stacking translation that might be expected to control the local bandgap.140 Similar to the puckered single-layer phosphorene in nature,141 the synthesized carbon/boron nitride (CBN) hybrid bilayers may be used to construct this twisted semiconducting bilayer, which could be regarded as an in-plane crystal but an out-of-plane molecule, which could be useful in energy harvesting. Wu et al.140 computed the bandgap map of a twisted bilayer CBN structure and its material and geometric sensitivities. The local bandgap was predicted to have multiple local minima (funnel centers) due to secondary or even tertiary periodic structures in-plane, leading to a hitherto unreported pattern of multiple exciton flow basins (as shown in Fig. 6(a–c)). In the bilayer moiré superlattice, it's expected large bandgap contrasted with that of the twisted bilayer CBN with regard to the four limiting stacking environments, as depicted in Fig. 6d (MoI and IoM, respectively, represent ‘metallic-on-insulating’ and ‘insulating-on-metallic’). It has been found that the band structure of a vdW structure generally changes with the variation of the twist angle between layered materials, which further affects the performance of as-fabricated devices.142 However, not all vdWHs have a twist-angle-dependent property. This has been demonstrated in a graphene/MoS2 bilayer, where the graphene-derived electronic structure remained irrespective of the twist angle, while it still showed twist-angle dependency in the MoS2 layer.77 Another example showed the independence of the fast charge transfer to the twist angle in a WSe2/WS2 bilayer, indicating its likely reliability for performing in photoelectrical devices.143 In addition, thermal treatments conducted on vdWHs also create an interfacial twist to change the band structure, as was shown in a graphene/h-BN heterojunction.144
 Fig. 6  A small twists grows at the carbon/boron nitride interface and controls the local bandgap. Adapted from ref. 140, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (a) Atomic structure and stack translation u of a twisted bilayer CBN. (b) Moiré pattern of a twisted bilayer CBN with a twist angle of 2.5° and the 3D surface plot of its local bandgap Eg(u(r)) in eV for a whole supercell with distinct exciton basins labeled by i = 1–18 and dividing ridges marked by white lines. (c) Exciton basins around i = 1 and the streamlines, where the open circles, closed circles, and stars denote Eg(r) minima (flow attractors), maxima (flow repellers), and saddle points (triple junction of basin watersheds), respectively. (d) Geometric and band structures of: (a) CBN monolayer and CBN bilayer (both side view and plan view) with their stacking style, (b) MoM-AA, (c) IoM-AA, (d) MoM-AB, and (e) IoM-AB. Among these, the IoM-AB structure in (e) is the ground state, while the structures in panels b–d are only 0.0103, 0.0062, and 0.0004 eV per atom higher in energy. π–π band splittings are marked by black arrows. AA and AB represent a two high-symmetry on-top (AA) or Bernal (AB) stacking arrangement, respectively. 
Similar to interfacial twists, stacking effects influenced by interfacial interaction have also been investigated, including thickness effects and stacking sequence effects. 2D materials have demonstrated stacking-dependent properties with a tunable band structure relevant to their thickness; for example, with increasing the thickness, monolayer MX2 (M = W, Mo, X = S, Se, Te) exhibited an important direct–indirect transition to the bilayer regime.145–147 Similarly, such a direct–indirect transition could also be expected to be demonstrated in MX2/MXene (transition metal carbide- and carbon nitride-based nanosheets) hybrid bilayers based on their interlayer stacking effects (as shown in Fig. 7).148 The indirect–direct-bandgap transition caused by stacking effects in the stacked hybrid bilayers can introduce unique physical phenomenon, while the 2D components can still maintain their monolayer properties,149 such as the anomalous PL quenching exhibited in WS2/MoS2150 and MoS2/graphene vdWHs.151 In addition, the impact of the stacking sequence on the bandgap has been investigated,152 where the bandgap showed different values with the change in stacking sequence. Bandgap modulation through strain, twist, and stacking effectively influence and even change the material properties of vdW systems which leads to new variations in the electrical properties of vdWHs.147,153,154 Consequently, new approaches must be developed to produce an effectively controllable vdW interface to facilitate bandgap engineering applications to provide new viable candidates for electronic and optoelectronic applications.
 Fig. 7  Thickness dependence of the bandgap exhibited in MX2/MXene hybrid bilayers. Adapted from ref. 148, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (a) Band structures of TMD and Sc2CF2 monolayers. The valence band maximum (VBM) is regulated at 0 eV. (b) Band structures of TMD–Sc2CF2 bilayers. The VBM is regulated at 0 eV. Red arrows demonstrate the direct bandgaps of TMDs. 
Carrier transport
In conventional p–n heterojunctions, free carriers form on either side of the junction, generating built-in potentials associated with uncompensated dopant atoms. Carrier transport across the junction occurs by diffusion and drift processes, which are influenced by the spatial extent of this depletion region. Charge transfer is restricted by strong interfacial coupling, which requires high-quality matched interfaces between component materials. In contrast to conventional heterostructures, the lack of a depletion region means there is no built-in potential in an atomically thin junction, giving rise to completely different charge transport characteristics, while the smooth dangling-free interface reduces the number of charge traps and/or scattering centers in the vdWH, which helps it to undergo ultrafast charge transfer despite the weak interfacial binding. To further explain the transport property within vdW heterosystems, it is worth noting that the existence of strongly bound excitons (an exciton describes a two-particle excitation with simultaneous creation of both an electron and a hole) localized in individual monolayers plays a dominant role.79 The relatively weak vdW force acts on a vdW interface as a poorly screened Coulomb potential,22 helping to bond electron–hole pairs across the interface and giving rise to tightly bound excitons, which considerably affect the charge transfer.23–27 Experimental studies of excitons in vdWHs have demonstrated that the emission of neutral and charged excitons is controlled by the gate voltage,155,156 temperature,126 and both the helicity and power of optical excitation.157 Owing to the large exciton bonding energies in layered materials, a type-II band alignment can be formed in vdWHs to facilitate the separation of photoexcited electrons and holes with ultrafast charge transfer (as shown in Fig. 8),158–161 which allows efficient photocurrent conversion.162,163 Yu et al.164 reported vertically stacked MoS2/WS2 heterostructures that could enable equally efficient interlayer exciton relaxation, regardless of the epitaxy and orientation of the stacking, thus suggesting that the simple stacking of dissimilar 2D materials with random orientations is a viable strategy to prepare complex functional 2D heterojunctions. Another experiment conducted on a MoS2/graphene interface demonstrated that the PL intensities of excitons can be tuned through modulating the carrier densities and contact barrier via electrochemical gating. Interestingly, the controllable carrier density in MoS2 plays a dominant role in the PL tuning at negative gate bias, whereas the interlayer relaxation of excitons induced by the Schottky barrier makes a major contribution at a positive gate bias.165 However, the designs of atomically thin vdWHs under ultrafast charge transfer could address ultrafast electron thermalization155 related to modulation of the various charge transfer steps. By optimizing the interfaces and/or constructing well-defined vdW contacts, such thermalization can be effectively reduced, which would assist a stable and efficient photoinduced interfacial charge transfer. There is still an urgent need to find ways to synthesize large-area vdWHs with a high-quality interface, which would represent another step forward toward designing high-performance optoelectronic and energy-harvesting devices.
 Fig. 8  Ultrafast charge transfer in a MoS2/WS2 vdW heterostructure with type-II band alignment. Adapted from ref. 159, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of the theoretically predicted type-II band alignment of a MoS2/WS2 heterostructure. Optical excitation of the MoS2 exciton leads to layer-separated electron (e−) and hole (h+) carriers. (b) Illustration of a MoS2/WS2 hetero-bilayer. Electrons and holes created by light are shown separating into different layers. (c) Optical image of a typical MoS2/WS2 heterostructure sample. Scale bar, 5 μm. (d) PL mapping data exhibited strong quenching in a MoS2/WS2 heterostructure. The color scale represents PL intensity at the MoS2 exciton resonance (1.93 eV). (e) Typical PL spectra of monolayer MoS2, monolayer WS2, and the MoS2/WS2 heterostructure. Both exciton PL signals are strongly quenched in the MoS2/WS2 heterostructure, suggesting an efficient charge transfer process exists in the heterostructure. 
Interfacial coupling effects
Interaction between the same compounds or different compounds is very hard to calculate or determine, especially in atom-thick layer monolayers with two surfaces and no bulk in between, which presents the extreme case of surface science.166,167 Normally, the interaction between planes in a vdWH is typically weak because covalent bonding in these layered materials is limited to the molecular planes, and relatively small changes in the electronic structure are expected after stacking these vdW materials with each other.11–13 Owing to the preserved electronic properties of segregated materials within a vdWH, the interfacial coupling effects act on the vdW interface to dominantly tune the band structure and further modulate the interfacial properties.168–171 Fang et al.171 observed spatially direct absorption but spatially indirect emission in a WSe2/MoS2 vdWH with strong interlayer coupling of the charge carriers. The interlayer coupling energy at the heterointerface could be readily tuned by inserting h-BN dielectric layers into the vdW gap. This can be attributed to the stacking effects (as shown in Fig. 9). By using a diamond-anvil cell to apply high pressures of up to 39 GPa onto WS2/MoS2 hetero-bilayers, the out-of-plane Raman frequencies of the two individual monolayers repel each other with increasing pressure, leading to coherent vibrations across the vdW gap with an optical-like and an acoustic-like interlayer vibration mode. This discovery shows that there is a crossover in lattice vibration from a 2D system toward a 3D system driven by the enforced interlayer coupling.172 Besides, it is expected that the interfacial coupling could be modulated by varying the interlayer distance. With changing the interlayer distance of a graphene/arsenene vdWH, the Schottky barrier exhibits a significant transition due to the interlayer coupling modulating the carrier transport in such an atomic metallic/semiconducting heterojunction.168 In another experiment, Sharma et al.173 discussed the relationship between the vdW interaction energy and the distance in a strained graphene bilayer. The vdW interaction energy decreased as a function of increasing distance due to renormalization of the Fermi velocity, the anisotropy, and the effective interaction. Interfacial coupling effects are also expected to change the material properties in a vdW hetero-system. By coupling graphene and MoS2 together deposited on a SiO2/Si substrate, such a heterostructure exhibits a natural p–n junction behavior with an n-type graphene/MoS2 interface and a p-type MoS2/graphene interface,174 indicating an alternative way to form p–n junctions without chemical doping, which is in difficulty to realize in 2D materials.175–177
 Fig. 9  Interlayer coupling energy tuned by inserting dielectric layers. Adapted from ref. 171, Copyright 2014 National Academy of Sciences. (a) PL spectra of single-layer WSe2 and MoS2, and the corresponding hetero-bilayer. (b) Normalized PL (solid lines) and absorbance (dashed lines) spectra. (c) Band diagram of the WSe2/MoS2 hetero-bilayer under photo excitation, depicting (1) absorption and exciton generation in the WSe2 and MoS2 single layers, (2) relaxation of excitons at the MoS2/WSe2 interface driven by the band offset, and (3) radiative recombination of the spatially indirect excitons. (d) An atomistic illustration of the heterostructure of single-layer WSe2/single-layer MoS2 with few-layer h-BN spacer in the vdW gap. (e) Normalized PL spectra from a single-layer WSe2/single-layer MoS2 heterostructure with N layers of h-BN. 
The weak vdW coupling between layered materials also affects the interfacial thermal transportation, which plays a vital role in designing nanodevices. Graphene exhibits excellent thermal properties in devices, demonstrating high in-plane thermal conductivity, which benefits from its strong in-plane covalent bonding in atomically thin thickness layers.178 Therefore, graphene-based vdWHs are used to promote heat dissipation in composite materials, giving them enhanced thermal conductivity. Under simulative works, MoS2/graphene vdWHs could achieve a much higher thermal conductivity at room temperature more than five times that of single-layer MoS2. When taking no account of the interlayer coupling, the thermal conductivity is even much higher (as shown in Fig. 10(a and b)).179 However, the weak thermal coupling between graphene and substrates implies that interfaces and contacts remain significant points of dissipation,180 indicating weak thermal conductance at the interface. For instance, thermal conductance at the graphene/MoS2 interface was shown to be much lower than that at graphene/graphene or MoS2/MoS2 interfaces, which is attributed to the low friction at the interface of graphene/MoS2 (as shown in Fig. 10(c)). Besides, thermal conductance at the graphene/MoS2 interface was found to increase with the defect density near the interface (as shown in Fig. 10(d)), which is in contrast to the in-plane thermal conductivity.181 By applying mechanical strain, thermal conductance181 and thermal conductivity139,182 are expected to be tunable, because of the changed interfacial coupling energy. For example, with an increase in coupling strength at a vdW graphene/silicene interface, the interfacial thermal conductance increases monotonically.183 Such tunable thermal conductive property could lead to new applications of bandgap engineering for constructing high-performance thermalelectronic nanodevices.184,185 Convenient production methods for vdWHs would undoubtedly bring about an explosion in the development of advanced nano-scaled heterojunctions produced by stacking layered materials. Understanding the important interlayer coupling effects could provide methods for applying tunable properties in these artificial stacks. Meanwhile, the complicated interfacial physics could cause difficulties in the qualitative research of vdW interfaces, but discussing the interlayer coupling effects within a vdW interface would help to explore the interfacial transport properties, as well as issues around engineering the bandgap.
 Fig. 10  Thermal conductivity and thermal conductance in a vdW system as functions of the interfacial coupling effects. (a) Schematic of the thermal transport in MoS2/graphene nanosheets (MGHN-1) in the direction parallel to the heterointerfaces. (b) Thermal conductivities of MGHN-1, MGHN-1 without interlayer coupling, graphene/MoS2/graphene nanosheets (GMGN-1), single-layer MoS2, and graphene as functions of temperature T0. (c) (a) Schematic model setup for the non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulation. The simulation model consists of 14 layers of graphene and 14 layers of MoS2. (b) Typical temperature profile in the graphene/MoS2 heterostructure. (d) Thermal conductance as a function of defect concentration. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–b) in ref. 179, Copyright 2015, IOP Publishing Ltd; and (c–d) in ref. 181, Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V. 
Spin valleytronics
The integration of spin transport channels with spin injector/generator elements is important for the development of spintronics. Electron spin in vdWHs involves a short spin lifetime and a short spin diffusion length due to it working via topological phase transition instead of carrier depletion,186 which gives it potential application in the design of high frequency devices. Moreover, topological phase transition under spin is thought to be controlled by a combined action between the substrate effect, heterostructure pattern, and electric fields.187,188 Heterojunctions consisting of graphene and h-BN are promising in spintronic applications due to their similar crystal structure and particular properties in spintronics. In such structures, graphene is an ideal medium for long-distance spin transportation, while h-BN can serve as an insulating tunnel barrier, which suggests the potential for efficient spin-polarized tunneling from ferromagnets (as shown in Fig. 11). Thereby, the graphene/h-BN vdWH exhibits excellent quantum tunneling behavior over micrometer-scale distances and a spin lifetime of hundreds of picoseconds (as shown in Fig. 12).186,189 By using non-local pure spin transport and Hanle precession measurements on devices with different interface barrier conditions, it is possible to demonstrate the spin filtering effects, which lead to a large negative spin polarization in graphene at room temperature.190 Moreover, the effects of spin–orbit coupling on the electronic structure and the effects of vdW interactions on the geometry can also be taken into account to show that all 2D vdWHs can preserve the electronic structure of isolated 2D materials in terms of the heterostructures,191 thus confirming that the coupling effects act on the interfaces. For instance, first-principles methods were used to systematically investigate BP/MX2 heterojunctions and showed that the electronic band structures of both BP and MX2 are preserved and that strong spin-splitting appears when considering the spin–orbital coupling.192
 Fig. 11  Tunnel spin injection in hBN/graphene vdW heterojunctions. (a) Scheme showing spin injection into graphene through the h-BN tunnel barrier. (b) Schematic of the injection of spin-polarized electrons from a ferromagnet into graphene through an atomically thin h-BN/ferromagnet tunnel structure. (c) Three-terminal I–V characteristics of high resistance (HR) and low-resistance (LR) h-BN (Co/h-BN/graphene) contacts at room temperature. Inset: As measured I–V curve of the HR contact in a higher current–voltage range. (d) Temperature dependent I–V characteristics for the LR h-BN contact at 1.5 and 300 K. Inset: Temperature dependence of the HR h-BN contact resistance at zero bias (ZBR) and at 300 mV. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a) (b) in ref. 189, Copyright 2014, Springer Nature and (c) (d) in ref. 190, Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. 
 Fig. 12  Tunnel spin injection and transport in Co/h-BN/graphene devices. Adapted from ref. 186, Copyright 2014 AIP Publishing LLC. (a) Non-local spin valve resistance recorded with an in-plane magnetic field along the length of the electrodes. (b) Hanle spin precession signal measured as a function of an out-of-plane magnetic field at 100 K. (c) Spin valve signal as a function of applied injection current bias. (d) Spin polarization as a function of injection current. (e) Normalized spin signal as a function of applied gate voltage VG–VD (VD being the Dirac point). 
Valleytronics is a more recent development principle that relies on the fact that the conduction bands of some materials have two or more minima at equal energies but at different positions in momentum space (as shown in Fig. 13(a–e)).193,194 Layered TMDs are promising materials for valleytronics because both their conduction and valence band edges have two energy-degenerate valleys at the corners of the first Brillouin zone, thereby endowing the electrons with a valley degree of freedom.195,196 For example, it has been experimentally demonstrated that optical pumping with circularly polarized light can achieve a valley polarization of 30% in pristine monolayer MoS2.197 It was predicted that breaking the inversion symmetry together with the existence of spin–orbit coupling could lead to a valley-contrasting orbital magnetic moment and circular dichroism198 which would allow the selective pumping of valley carriers by controlling the circular polarization of light,199,200 thus providing a route toward the integration of valleytronics and spintronics in multi-valley materials.201–204 Moreover, it is necessary to control the number of electrons in these valleys, thereby producing spin-valley polarization197,199,205,206 influenced by strong Coulomb interactions207 and polarized excitation (as shown in Fig. 13(f–i)).207,208 Furthermore, controllable spin-valley polarization shows great viabilities of optical valley control and valley-based electronic and optoelectronic applications.207–209 By applying circularly polarized optical pumping on WSe2/MoSe2 bilayers,29 a vdWH exhibited a long valley lifetime of 40 nanoseconds under interlayered exciton spin-valley polarization, while it also had an exchange interaction with increasing exciton density. Recent developments of vdWHs have exhibited their potential in spin valleytronics28,29 associated with other interfacial properties, such as coupling effects and optical excitons, greatly expanding the application of vdWHs as a promising platform to study valley exciton physics.
 Fig. 13  Valley filter and valley polarization in graphene and “Many-Body Effects” in valleytronics. (a) Dispersion relation in the wide and narrow regions. An electron in the first valley (modes n = 0, 1, 2, …) is transmitted (filled circle), whereas an electron in the second valley (modes n = −1, −2, …) is reflected (open circle). (b) Honeycomb lattice of carbon atoms in a strip containing a constriction with zigzag edges. (c) Variation of the electrostatic potential along the strip for the two cases of an abrupt and smooth potential barrier (solid and dashed lines). The polarity of the valley filter switches when the potential height, U0, in the constriction crosses the Fermi energy, EF. (d) An in-plane electric field will generate a transverse valley current, which leads to a net valley polarization on the sample edges. (e) Valley polarization created by the valley filter results in a transverse voltage across the sample. (f) Circularly polarized beam σ− excite the K valley, while the same and oppositely circularly polarized probe measures the population in the K and K′ valleys. (g) Upon optical excitation of the intravalley, “bright excitons” form. Because of Coulomb coupling, the excited eigenstate represents a super position of intervalley “dark excitons” and “bright excitons”. The electron part of the excitation immediately redistributes over the conduction bands in both the K and K′ valleys, but the hole is located in K because it has to flip spin to coherently couple to the K′ valley. (h) Electron–hole exchange interaction leads to valley relaxation of the initially excited holes by exchanging spin and momentum with an electron in the other valley. (i) Valley relaxation of holes via scattering through the Γ valley. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–c) in ref. 193, Copyright 2007 Springer Nature; (d–e) in ref. 194, Copyright 2007 American Physical Society; and (f–i) in ref. 207, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. 
Heterojunctions based on vdW interfaces
The vdW interfaces previously described were produced by vdW-epitaxy210,211 in body materials, whereby materials are bound in an epitaxial way with a weak vdW interaction between interlayers to form clean and scalable interfaces.212 By contrast, the emergence of 2D materials with inert or dangling bond-free surfaces has created opportunities for forming vdW interfaces without the constraints of traditional epitaxial growth. Conventional fabrications of these hybrid vdWHs have relied on the low-yield manual exfoliation and stacking of individual 2D layers, which is impractical for scale-up purposes.74,75 Many new fabrication methods have emerged, such as direct PVD/CVD72,213–217 and MBE,73,218–221 which are expected to lead to the fabrication of a great diversity of artificial vdW structures as well as to the production of scalable and high-quality vdW interfaces with more controllable growth conditions. Attributed to the developments of new fabrication methods for forming advanced vdWHs, various 2D crystals can be utilized with different electrical, optical, and mechanical properties that can combine to give novel physical phenomena and device functionality.222 Research on vdWHs led to their breakout development223,224 when this imaginative structure was realized,88 showing promising application in modern nanoelectronics. However, further concerted efforts toward such an assembly are expected only when a particular heterostructure has been proven to be worthy of attention. Herein, we review several typical vdWHs composed of materials including graphene, TMDs, h-BN and BP. Many other advanced vdWHs consisting of emerging layered materials, including organic nanosheets, advanced TIs, 2D oxides, 2D metallic chalcogenide, and carbonaceous nanoplates, have also been introduced. Moreover, 0D and 1D nanomaterials are expected to form hierarchical vdWHs with 2D materials in 3D architectures, which would greatly extend their applications in optoelectronics. Table 2 lists several typical vdWHs we introduce in this review and notes their potential applications.
Table 2 Typical vdWHs and their applications




Coupling type
vdWH
Interfacial type
Applications
Ref.




Inorganic/inorganic
TMD/TMD & TMD/BP
Type-II alignment
LED

156 and 225



Photodetector

226 and 46



Graphene/TMD & graphene/BP
Schottky contact
Solar cell

227 and 48



Photodetector

228 and 229



Tunneling device

63



VFET

230 and 231



Graphene/h-BN
Moiré superlattice
Tunneling device

232 and 62



Memory

64 and 65



Inorganic/organic
p-Type organic/n-type inorganic
Type-II band alignment
Photodiode

233 and 234



Graphene/organic perovskite
Schottky contact
Solar cell

49 and 235



Hierarchical
2D/0D & 2D/1D
Lattice-matched coupling
Solar cell

236 and 237



Photodetector

54 and 238



In-plane
TMD/TMD
Lattice-matched edge
Photodiode

239 and 240



Graphene/h-BN
In-plane tunneling device

68 and 241





TMDs/TMDs vdW heterojunctions
Transition metal dichalcogenide (TMD) layered structures are comparable to that of graphite, where every single layer has a thickness of 0.6–0.7 nm, with strong covalent bonds toward the in-plane direction and weak vdW interactions toward the out-of-plane direction. The relatively small surface energy (the energy required to create new surfaces when the layered crystals are peeled; whereby peeling would introduce two new surfaces) of TMDs make them potentially cleavable to form atomically thin monolayers.242,243 Atomically thin TMDs are formed by a transition metal atom M (M = Mo, W, etc.) covalently bonded to X (X = S, Se, Te) in a single layer, where M sits in the center and X at the edges. Devices based on monolayer MX2 demonstrate high performance in optoelectronics and photovoltaics,244–246 because the MX2 are direct-bandgap semiconductors198,247,248 from the near-infrared to visible spectral regions (generally, the photon absorption or emission process of direct-bandgap semiconductors is considerably more efficient than indirect-bandgap semiconductors, because direct-bandgap semiconductors allow photons with an energy greater than the bandgap to be directly absorbed or emitted, whereas indirect-bandgap semiconductors require the involvement of an additional phonon to supply the difference in momentum). Profiting from its direct-bandgap nature, semiconducting MX2 exhibits extremely strong light–matter interactions.249–251 Theory predicted that stacked MX2 can form type-II band alignments between the layers, facilitating efficient electron–hole separation for light detection and harvesting (as shown in Fig. 14),226,252–254 and thus providing a viable approach for the utilization of TMDs in realistic photovoltaic applications. By using microbeam X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy and scanning tunneling microscopy, Chiu et al.255 experimentally reported the determination of band offsets in the MoS2/WSe2 bilayers that thus exhibited an intrinsic type-II alignment between MoS2 and WSe2, with a valence band offset value of 0.83 eV and a conduction band offset of 0.76 eV. The stacking-induced bandgap transition in TMD materials significantly extends the intrinsic energy band of MX2 heterostructures by composing various new materials. Research shows that vdWHs made by stacking MX2 with common X atoms exhibits a high uniformity of structural/chemical heterogeneity over a large area, together with anisotropic carrier transport properties.240 Attributed to the high uniformity, hybrid bilayers of MX2 with common S atoms are identified as indirect-bandgap materials, while bilayers with common M atoms have a direct bandgap.256 Interestingly, strong Coulomb interactions between MX2 layers are expected to exceed the charge transfer driving force, which would lead to inefficient charge separation at the interface. But experimental results have shown that the quantum coherence and donor–acceptor delocalization facilitate rapid charge transfer at a MoS2/MoSe2 interface. Electron–hole recombination is notably longer across the interface than in isolated MoS2 and MoSe2, thus favoring long-lived charge separation.70 The long life of the excitons are considerably contributed by the large exciton binding energy between the TMD hybrid layers, arising from the substantially reduced dielectric screening relative to the bulk materials,156 making such devices suitable for light-emitting devices. In addition, phototransistors based on multilayer MoS2/WS2 heterostructures are expected to act as potential photovoltaic cells and self-driven photodetectors, with a relatively high photo-switching ratio and enhanced responsivity compared to that in isolated multilayer MoS2 or WS2 transistors, which is of interest to researchers for forming highly efficient photodetectors based on TMD-based vdWHs.249
 Fig. 14  Infrared photodetection in atomically thin type-II MoTe2/MoS2 vdW heterostructures. Adapted from ref. 226, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic of a MoTe2/MoS2 vdWH device under infrared light excitation. (b) Schematic of type-II interband excitation processes in MoTe2/MoS2 vdWHs. The value of the interband gap (Δ) is obtained by theoretical calculation. (c) The energy band diagrams for MoTe2/MoS2 vdWHs in the dark and light, respectively. Φ, EF, EVAC, ECB, and EVB are the work function, Fermi levels, energy position of vacuum, conduction band, and valence band, respectively. (d) Experimental Ids–Vds curves in the dark (black line) and under infrared light illumination (1550 and 2000 nm). The inset shows the photovoltaic effect of the fabricated device under 1550 nm light illumination. 
It is worth mentioning that the ambipolar nature of WSe2 (as shown in Fig. 15)257,258 makes it more appealing for photodiode applications259,260 because p-type and n-type regions can be easily obtained by shifting the threshold voltage via electrostatic doping through the local bottom gates. In WSe2/MoS2 hybrid bilayers, inefficient charge transfer quenches the light emission of monolayer WSe2 but strengthens that of the MoS2 monolayer. Under light illumination, charge transfer competes with the holes tunneling between the WSe2 and MoS2 layers, which can greatly influence the electrical transport and lead to the disappearance of the rectifying and gate-induced “anti-bipolar” properties.244,261,262 Interestingly, the interfaces between WSe2 and MoS2 have type-II band alignments, with spatially direct absorption but spatially indirect emission.171 Notably, the PL intensity of this spatially indirect transition is strong, suggesting strong interlayer coupling of the charge carriers. Another interesting experiment reported by Withers et al. showed that WSe2 potentially works well in light-emitting devices.263 They constructed light-emitting diodes (LEDs) consisting of sandwiched MX2 monolayers as quantum wells (QWs) (We introduced the concept of QWs and extrinsic quantum efficiency (EQE) in the section covering light-emitting devices in Chapter 3) between atomically thin h-BN and graphene electrodes. Compared to MoS2- and MoSe2-based LEDs, which behave the same as many other materials with a fast decrease in EQE from cryogenic conditions to room temperature, the WSe2-based LEDs exhibited the opposite performance, with an increase in EQE with temperature. The EQE reached 5%, which is 250 times more than the previous best performance of MoS2, and MoSe2 QWs in ambient conditions.
 Fig. 15  Gate-controlled monolayer WSe2 p–n junction diodes. Adapted from ref. 258, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (a) Optical image of a monolayer WSe2 device controlled by two local gates. Scale bar, 2 μm. (b) Current–voltage (Ids–Vds) curves showing the transport characteristics of four doping configurations of the device: NN (yellow), PP (black), PN (blue), and NP (green). Both gates were set to 10 V for the NN configuration and −10 V for PP. Vlg was set to ±10 V and Vrg to ∓10 V for PN/NP. The NN and PP configurations are Ohmic at low Vds, while the PN and NP configurations strongly rectify current in the opposite directions. (c) Semi-logarithmic plots of Ids through the PN diodes as a function of Vds, with fits marked in yellow. The fits give a diode ideality of n = 1.9. Insets: Schematic band diagrams of the device in forward bias for the PN and NP configurations. 
Similar to hetero-bilayers, vertically aligned MX2 heterojunctions (in effect, layered building blocks interconnected in a seamless in-plane through covalent bonds, forming so-called 2D lateral heterostructures) demonstrate intrinsic scalability and efficient p–n junction diode behavior (as shown in Fig. 16(a–d)).239,264 For a lateral 2D heterostructure, due to the junction depth being large enough for carrier depletion, a potential grows at the interface, which can be understood by traditional built-in potential theory, and can be used to form lateral p–n photodiodes. For example, Duan et al.239 constructed a CMOS complementary inverters based on a lateral WSe2/WS2 p–n heterostructure, which exhibited a high voltage gain of 24 (as shown in Fig. 16(e and f)). Similarly, Gong et al.254 constructed a lateral WS2/MoS2 heterostructure, creating a seamless and atomically sharp in-plane interface that could generate a strong localized PL enhancement and intrinsic p–n junctions. Note that both of the two lateral p–n heterojunctions exhibited photovoltaic effects that were different to stacked vdWHs, which could be understood by the traditional photocurrent-generated mechanism, while under illumination, photogenerated carriers separated under the effect of the build-in potential, which gave rise to an external electrical potential and photogenerated current. For producing vertically aligned vdWHs, direct CVD growth is expected to be an efficient technique, where the controllable growth condition makes it possible to form well-defined 1D interface geometries.265
 Fig. 16  Vertically aligned WS2–WSe2 and MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructures diode and CMOS inverter. Adapted from ref. 239, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of vertically aligned WS2–WSe2 and MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructures. (b) AFM and optical images of a triangular MoS2–MoSe2 monolayer domain, with the AFM lines indicating a step height of ∼0.8 nm, corresponding to the monolayer MoS2–MoSe2 domain. Scale bars, 2 μm. (c–d) Raman spectra and PL emission spectra taken from the center (MoS2) and peripheral (MoSe2) areas of a triangular heterostructure domain. (e) Gate-tunable output characteristics of a lateral WSe2–WS2 heterojunction p–n diode. The gate voltage varies from 80 to 20 V in steps of 10 V, as indicated. Inset: Optical image of a heterojunction p–n diode device. The orange dashed line outlines the triangular heterostructure domain, while the white dashed rectangle outlines the 50 nm Al2O3 deposited on WSe2 to insulate the WS2 contact electrodes. Scale bar, 2 μm. (f) A CMOS inverter obtained by integrating a p-type WSe2 and n-type WS2 FET, showing the expected inverter function with a voltage gain as large as 24. The black curve is the output–input curve, while the red curve indicates the voltage gain. Inset: Image and circuit diagram of the WSe2/WS2 CMOS inverter. Scale bar, 2 μm. 
With advances in synthetic techniques, atomically thin semiconducting TMDs have recently been synthesized for forming vdWHs. Their 2D structures, direct bandgaps in the visible portion of the electromagnetic spectrum, and similar crystal textures make them intriguing to construct artificial vdWHs with gate-tunable properties coupled with strong light interaction, also suggesting their suitability for digital electronics and optoelectronics. With regard to the commercialization potential for vdWHs consisting of monolayer TMDs, it appears that unconventional formats that require flexibility, stretchability, and transparency are the most promising. Moreover, these hybrid structures inherit the stability of TMDs with their inherent oxidation resistance in the air, thus making them possible to assess for practical application.
Graphene-contacted Schottky-diode-like heterojunctions
Due to its zero-bandgap nature similar to metal, graphene can form junctions with layered semiconducting materials to demonstrate rectifying characteristics and that behave as excellent Schottky diodes. By forming a Schottky contact with graphene, the collection of photoexcited carriers in the TMD layers exhibits a significant improvement compared to typical metal contacts, which, furthermore, helps to enhance the injected efficiency of carriers between graphene and TMD layers (as shown in Fig. 17(a)),266 indicating the strong quenching of the characteristic PL and the ultrafast carrier transfer (as shown in Fig. 17(b)).69 In particular, the vdW interface between graphene and TMD exhibits a Schottky barrier,45,267 which can be strongly modulated by an external gate electric field, thus enabling the possibility of achieving well-defined current rectification.268,269
 Fig. 17  Ultrafast charge transfer in graphene/TMD Schottky contacts with strong photoluminescence quenching. (a) Differential reflection (ΔR/R0) measured from a monolayer WS2 flake, a monolayer graphene, and a heterostructure sample of graphene/monolayer WS2 vdWH. The red arrow and blue arrow denote the probe and pump pulse, respectively. In graphene/WS2 vdWH, the magnitude of the signal is 20 and 30 times higher than the individual WS2 and graphene samples. In addition, the decay of the signal is much faster than WS2, as described by the two time constants of 1 and 3.5 ps. (b) Schematics of single-layer MoSe2 grown on SiO2/Si or a sapphire substrate and graphene substrate, and the PL spectra of the as-synthesized MoSe2 monolayer. Raman data from the same samples are shown in the inset. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a) in ref. 266, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature; and (b) in ref. 69, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. 
Profiting from the enhanced collection efficiency of such Schottky diodes, the MX2/graphene vdWHs could potentially perform in photovoltaic applications. Graphene/MX2/graphene sandwiched vdWHs are used to produce solar cells270 and photodetectors,71 for which they have efficient photoabsorption to achieve relevantly high EQE. In these devices, the semiconducting MX2 functions as the active energy-harvesting material, while the metallic graphene works as a transparent electrode for the efficient collection of photogenerated carriers. Although the semimetal essence of graphene makes graphene-based devices have extremely high mobility, its zero-bandgap restricts the on/off ratio of graphene transistors to often less than 10, which significantly hinders the device performance. However, monolayer TMDs have a very high on/off ratio (being easily above 108),245 resulting from their direct bandgap, but their carrier mobility is usually relatively low (mostly lower than 100 cm2 V−1 s−1).271 Schottky diodes based on graphene/MX2 vdWHs can be used to form transistors, which inherit the high on/off ratio of TMDs together with an enhanced mobility over single-layer TMD transistors attributed to the high mobility of graphene.272 By forming a Schottky contact with graphene, the junction contact resistance is minimized, which gives rise to interest from researchers in light of realizing high-speed devices, such as fast switching devices and optical modulators.273 It is mentionable that Yu et al.67 demonstrated high-performance discrete transistors and fully integrated logic circuits using MoS2 as a transistor channel and graphene as the contacts and interconnects. The contacts on MoS2 can yield ten times lower contact resistance and ten times higher on-current and field-effect mobility than conventional metal/MoS2 contacts. The graphene-contacted Schottky vdWH is of great interest from the standpoint of fundamental science, as it constitutes an outstanding platform to investigate the interlayer interaction of vdWHs. Furthermore, these Schottky-diode-liked heterojunctions offer great opportunities for studying the electronic properties and transport mechanisms in vdW systems, giving rise to further studies in large-scale logical circuits.
Graphene/h-BN vdW heterojunctions
Following graphene, 2D insulator hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN), a single-atom-thick 2D sheet of sp2 hybridized boron and nitrogen atoms with a honeycomb lattice similar to graphene and a large bandgap of 5.97 eV274 has recently attracted extensive attention.275–277 It has been shown to act as an ideal substrate by greatly improving the material transport properties, because of its atomically flat surface, low interlayer electronic coupling, and almost perfect reticular matching. In addition, the h-BN substrate has little hybridization with the host materials, thus protecting their distinct electronic properties around the Fermi level.88,278,279 Based on h-BN, the newly emerging graphene/h-BN vdWHs have attracted much research interest due to the h-BN substrate being able to induce a bandgap in graphene when graphene was deposited onto it,44 which significantly extends the application of graphene by overcoming the intrinsic zero bandgap of graphene. Vertically stacked graphene/h-BN vdWHs have been confirmed by unique lattice mismatch induced moiré patterns with two sets of aligned selected-area electron diffraction spots, suggesting a vdW epitaxial mechanism.280,281 With regard to the ultrafast electron mobility in graphene and the intrinsic insulativity of 2D h-BN, devices based on hybrid graphene/h-BN bilayers have shown promise for the fabrication of modern tunneling devices62,232 and memory devices.64,282 For instance, Jun et al.283 reported a phenomenon of photoinduced doping in graphene/h-BN vdWHs, while maintaining the high carrier mobility, which enables the flexible and repeatable writing and erasing of charge doping in graphene with visible light. Significantly, modulating the doping can generate spatially varied doping profiles, such as p–n junctions, which provides new ideas for engineering the vdWHs. Apart from the stacked h-BN/graphene vdWHs mentioned above, an in-plane h-BN/graphene heterostructure reported by Levendorf et al.241 exhibited atomically patched graphene and h-BN with typical zigzag edges. Such lithographical heterojuntions exhibited a laterally insulating behavior for h-BN regions, while the electrical behavior of both doped and undoped graphene sheets maintained their excellent properties. Moreover, by applying high-precision partial etching thechnology, lateral h-BN/graphene heterojunctions could be formed by growing graphene in lithographically patterned h-BN atomic layers with controlled domain sizes.68 The three preparation steps are demonstrated in Fig. 18a, while (b–d) characterize the as-grown in-plane vdWH. Due to the atomic thickness and lateral insulating properties, seamlessly stitched h-BN/graphene heterojunctions offer great potential in flexible and/or transparent devices with designed structures and tunable electrical properties. Thin h-BN crystals here serve not only as the substrates, but also as protective covers for encircled materials because of their good electrical insulativity and excellent mechanical properties. Thus, h-BN encapsulation is used to protect the internal materials from oxidation and help to defend against mechanical damage caused by massive particles in the air. By encapsulating graphene into two h-BN layers, as-fabricated devices have shown an especially high mobility similar to 100000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature but up to 500000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at low temperature.43 Significantly, the electrical properties of such structures have been shown to greatly remain at a similar level both in a vacuum and in air.43,284 Another dual-gated device in which MoS2 layers were fully encapsulated by h-BN and the contacts were formed using graphene demonstrated a highly stable device performance, including enhanced two-terminal carrier mobility (33–151 cm2 V−1 s−1) compared to monolayer MoS2 and a low subthreshold swing (80 mV dec−1) at room temperature.42
 Fig. 18  Creation of millimeter-sized graphene/h-BN in-plane heterostructures. Adapted from ref. 68, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of the fabrication procedure for in-plane graphene/h-BN heterostructures. (b) Optical image of the as-grown graphene/h-BN patterned layers (shaped as combs, bars, and rings) on a copper foil. Light areas are h-BN and dark areas are graphene. (c) Optical image of a graphene/h-BN film separated from copper, on water, after coating with PMMA and after etching the copper foil. (d) SEM image showing an h-BN ring surrounded by graphene. 
Due to having a similar crystal structure to graphene, h-BN has developed huge potential in the progress of corresponding composite and electronic devices. For instance, layered insulating h-BN can serve as an excellent substrate or dielectric material for developing graphene-based electronic devices due to its smooth surfaces that are comparatively absent of charge traps or dangling bonds.285 With regard to the outstanding chemical and thermal stability, and indeed excellent oxidation resistive properties, h-BN thin films can serve as protective layers that can significantly maintain the electrical properties of inside materials, such as graphene and MoS2. In addition, by coupling with semiconducting layered materials as the conducting channel, the use of h-BN/graphene hybrid structures with h-BN as the intrinsic dielectric layers and graphene as the outstanding contacts could lead in the future to the innovative solutions to form high-performance field-effect transistors (FTEs). However, the synthesis methods for forming scalable graphene/h-BN vdWHs with a well-qualified interface286,287 are of great importance to realize full commercialization.
Black phosphorus vdW heterojunctions
Black phosphorus (BP) has recently reemerged as a promising narrow band gap layered semiconductor material different from metallic graphene and wide bandgap TMDs,288,289 It has a high mobility (up to 50000 cm2 V−1 s−1 in bulk at 30 K) and a direct bandgap of around 0.3 eV.290 The bandgap of BP is expected to increase as the number of layers decreases, owing to electronic confinement in the direction perpendicular to the 2D plane, while single-layer BP is estimated to reach a bandgap of around 2 eV.291 Moreover, BP also exhibits a moderate eclectic mobility with a relative on/off ratio compared to graphene and TMDs, which, moreover, bridges the gap in the mobility/‘on/off’ ratio spectrum between TMDs and graphene as well as bridging the energy gap.292 As shown in Fig. 19, BP exhibits a medium mobility compared to graphene and TMDs in a range of a few hundred to over 1000 cm2 V−1 s−1, and at the same time, the on/off ratio of the devices is in the range of around 103 to 105.141,293 Due to its relatively high mobility, thickness-dependent direct bandgap, and wide spectral range from the near-infrared to the visible part of the spectrum, BP appears to have potential to serve as an excellent candidate for nanoelectronics and nanophotonics applications.294–297 Besides, BP exhibits low symmetry with a unique puckered single-layer geometry,141 which leads to in-plane anisotropic properties in momentum space.298,299 Importantly, the unique in-plane anisotropy makes BP coupling much stronger than graphene or TMDs at the interfaces when it combines with other layered materials.
 Fig. 19  BP bridges the electromagnetic wave spectrum and mobility/on–off ratio spectrum between graphene and TMDs. Adapted from ref. 292, Copyright 2015 National Academy of Sciences. 
Experiments have demonstrated that it is possible to construct vdWHs based on narrow-bandgap BP and large-bandgap TMDs to exhibit semiconducting properties, while their bandgaps can be reduced by applying a vertical electric field.300 The p-type BP and n-type monolayer MoS2 were used to form an atomically sharp type-II interface through vdW interactions,225 which then showed diode-liked current rectification behaviors301 with a tunable band gap. Layered BP demonstrates a strong optical conductivity in the 1–5 μm wavelength range,293,294 revealing that BP is an appealing candidate for near and mid-infrared optoelectronics in detectors, modulators, and LEDs. With this special gate-tunable property, BP/MoS2 p–n diodes show promise in applications involving broadband photodetection, LEDs, and solar energy harvesting.46,302 In MX2/BP vdWHs, BP is used to act as an active material for light emission, and when a carrier is injected from semiconducting MX2, it is trapped within BP for light emission due to the band offset at the interface. Deng et al.46 fabricated a gate-tunable p–n diode based on BP/MoS2 hybrid structures. Under illumination, the p–n diode showed a maximum photoresponsivity of 418 mA W−1 at the wavelength of 633 nm with an EQE of 0.3%. Recently, Ye et al.302 demonstrated a photodetector consisting of few-layer MoS2/BP vdWHs, which exhibited a visible to near-infrared detection range. The photodetector showed photoresponsivity of around 22.3 A W−1 measured at 1532 nm and 153.4 mA W−1 at 1.55 μm with a microsecond response speed (15 μs). In another graphene/BP vdWH, the band structure of BP was expected to be tuned by a vertical electric field with respect to that of graphene, leading to control of the Schottky barrier height and the doping of BP.48 By encapsulating atomically thin BP between h-BN layers, BP retains its high quality under ambient conditions.47 Such a sandwich structure allows a high field-effect mobility similar to 1350 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature and on–off ratios exceeding 105. At low temperatures, the mobility even reaches around 2700 cm2 V−1 s−1 and quantum oscillations in BP 2D hole-gas are observed at low magnetic fields.
Emerging vdW heterojunctions consisting of advanced 2D materials
Owning to the discovering of numerous stacked vdWHs composed of stacked inorganic 2D materials, such as semi-metallic graphene, semiconducting TMDs and BP, insulating h-BN, the components for forming vdWHs have been significantly broadened to a wide range of emerging 2D materials, including polymeric organic solids, metal chalcogenides (MCs), oxides, and advanced topological insulators (TIs). Polymeric organic solids, whose surface atoms possess saturated bonds, are also known to interact via vdW forces and thus offer an alternative way for creating vdWHs, where inorganic 2D materials can serve as excellent substrates for the growth of high-quality organic semiconductors.303,304 For example, Lee et al.305 reported an epitaxial growth of highly ordered, crystalline organic rubrene films on an h-BN substrate to construct an atomically sharp interface with a low charge trap density between rubrene and h-BN. By forming a contact with graphene, such a stacked vdWH exhibited a high field-effect mobility, thus providing opportunities for fabricating high-performance organic electronic devices. In addition, profiting from the high-quality dielectric interface for the reduction of traps and scattering centers, organic field-effect transistors composed of graphene/h-BN/rubrene vdWHs exhibited both high mobility and low operating gate voltage, with graphene and h-BN serving as the contact electrodes and gate dielectric layer, respectively.306 Another application of organic layered materials is to form hybrid p–n junctions. In addition, p-type organic nanoplates, such as C-8-BTBT,233 pentacene,307 rubrene,234 and polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP),308 have been successfully synthesized to give p–n organic/inorganic vdWHs coupled with essential n-type MoS2. Such vdWHs have type-II band alignments to facilitate exciton separation, and have exhibit enhanced photovoltaic effects, thus offering possibilities for application in efficient solar cells and rewritable memory devices. Advanced organic perovskites have demonstrated excellent optoelectronic and photovoltaic properties for next-generation organic solar cells, due to their strong exciton absorption, high optical absorption coefficient, and long carrier diffusion lengths,309–312 which enable high energy conversion efficiencies.313 Various 2D inorganic layers, such as graphene, TMDs, and h-BN, have been shown to be compatible substrates for depositing organic perovskites. Profiting from the superior vdW interfaces with weak interaction, these organic/inorganic vdWHs are expected to have complementary properties for promising optoelectronic application in the visible regime.235 As shown in Fig. 20, Cheng et al.49 recently demonstrated a stacked graphene/perovskite/graphene vdWH, which exhibited a highest photoresponsivity around 950 A W−1 and a photoconductive gain around 2200. When the perovskite (CH3NH3PbI3) was coupled with WSe2 layers and graphene to serve as contact layers, the hybrid device displayed a high on/off ratio (around 106) transistor behavior with distinct gate-tunable diode characteristics and open-circuit voltages.
 Fig. 20  Device characteristics of organic perovskite/graphene vdWHs. Adapted from ref. 49, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic and optical image of a graphene/perovskite/graphene heterostructure device. (b) IDS–VDS curves of the graphene/perovskite/graphene device measured at room temperature (298 K) with/without laser illumination. A photoinduced current offset was observed. (c) The transfer characteristics of the graphene/WSe2/perovskite/graphene (GWPG) device when biased at −1 V (black) and 1 V (red). The negatively biased curve shows a large on/off ratio around 106, while the positively biased one is only ∼35. (d) The dark IDS–VDS characteristics of GWPG device shows an obvious transition from a symmetrical p–p junction to a rectifying n–p diode as VG varied from −60 to 60 V (10 V increment). In the negative bias range, the IDS current shows a dramatic decrease from VG = −10 V (orange) to 0 V (purple). 
With recent developments in the fabrication methods for synthesizing 2D materials, layered metallic chalcogenides (MCs)314,315 have recently joined the 2D family and are now being used in vdW systems that exhibit promising applications in photoelectronics. Many MCs, such as CdS,316,317 GaTe,318 and ReSe2,319 demonstrate intrinsic p-type properties, which make them worthy to form vdW p–n diodes. Monolayer MoS2 which is a typical n-type semiconductor with a direct bandgap, is an excellent substrate for these n-type MCs to construct high-performance photodetectors, which have demonstrated improved photoresponsivity and a broadened detection range. For example, a photodetector based on CdS/MoS2 heterostructures showed a broader wavelength response and similar to 50-fold improvement in photoresponsivity compared to the monolayer MoS2 devices.316 Also, in another photodetector based on GaTe/MoS2 vdWHs, the device exhibited a high photovoltaic and photodetective performance. Respectively, the rectification ratio, EQE, and photoresponsivity are as high as 4 × 105, 61.68%, and 21.83 A W−1.318 Similarly, InSe, with a direct bandgap, was reported to form vdWHs together with graphene,314 where the fabricated device exhibited high photoresponsivity from the near-infrared to the visible spectrum by exploiting the broad detection range of graphene. Another photodetector based on InSe/CuInSe2 lateral heterojunctions showed good performance, with a large photoresponsivity of 4.2 A W−1 and a relatively high light-power conversion efficiency of 3.5%.320 Notably, Yabuki et al.315 constructed a vdWH that performed as a Josephson junction by stacking the exfoliated NbSe2 superconductors. Due to the weakly interacting interface, such a vdW Josephson junction provided sufficient decoupling of the wavefunctions without the need for an additional non-superconducting layer between two NbSe2 layers and thus exhibited high supercurrent transparency, which could significantly extend the application of vdWHs.
Similar to MCs, advanced 2D oxides, including mental oxides,321–323 hydroxides,324,325 micas,326 and graphene oxide (GO),327–329 are intriguing to form vdWHs. Park et al.321 demonstrated a wafer-scale growth method of 2D graphene/metal oxide TiO2 vdWHs, where the hybrid device exhibited enhanced photoresponsivity in the visible light spectrum 25 times higher than that of graphene photodetectors. Another solar cell based on the hybrid monolayer BP/TiO2 structures exhibited an ultrafast electron transfer time of 6.1 fs and slow electron–hole recombination of 0.58 ps, with an internal quantum efficiency of over 98% for charge separation, which indicates a high PCE for constructing high-performance solar cells.330 Metallic oxide Mn3O4 was expected to be a promising anode material with a high theoretical capacity of around 936 mA h g−1, but the low conductivity restricted its practical capacity. However, when it was coupled with graphene (as shown in Fig. 21), the hybrid structure exhibited an enhanced conductivity, thus resulting in a much higher specific capacity up to 900 mA h g−1.322 Another mica/graphene field-effect device,326 in which mica was used as a gate dielectric, exhibited a very strong positive gate voltage hysteresis of the resistance, persisting in even mK temperatures. Moreover, the hysteresis no longer occurred in double-gated mica/graphene/h-BN devices when the charge carrier density was tuned through a second gate with the h-BN dielectric. In bilayer BiFeO3/Bi–Mn–O vdWH, its enhanced photovoltaic properties showed an external solar power conversion efficiency (PCE) of around 1.43% and a remarkably high fill factor of around 0.72, which were much higher than from the two separated materials alone.323 Graphene oxide (GO) is mainly used to produce high-quality and scalable graphene thin films through simple electrochemical reduction methods.331 But besides the application for producing graphene, the ample insertion of oxygen functional groups in a graphite thin film332 makes it much easier than graphene to compose with other layered materials, which leads to a useful two-step method for forming graphene-based vdWHs. For examples, reduced GO (rGO)/MoS2 vdWHs were produced by forming GO/MoS2 nanosheets, with a subsequent reduction of the GO to rGO. Such hybrid rGO/MoS2 vdWHs demonstrated excellent electrochemical performances, which are interesting for constructing efficient anodes of lithium-ion batteries.327–329
 Fig. 21  Charged performance of Mn3O4/rGO anodes. Adapted from ref. 322, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic two-step synthesis of Mn3O4/rGO. (b) Capacity retention of Mn3O4/rGO at various current densities. (c) Capacity retention of free Mn3O4 nanoparticles without graphene at a current density of 40 mA g−1. 
Emerging TIs333,334 present a non-trivial topological system that behaves as an insulator in its interior with a conducting surface, where electrons can only move along the surface of the material. In particular, the ordinary band insulators can support conductive surface states, meaning the surface states of TIs are symmetrically protected by particle number conservation and time reversal symmetry. In vertical heterojunctions consisting of a layered TI (Bi2Se3) and graphene, electron transport is dominated by the tunneling process at low temperature, which can be effectively tuned by varying the gate voltage to alter the density of states near the Fermi surface. Under a magnetic field, this hybrid structure shows an exotic gate-tunable tunneling resistance, which displays the resistance maxima when the underlying graphene becomes a quantum Hall insulator.51 Bi2Te3 is another typical TI with a similar hexagonal symmetry to graphene and has been successfully applied in vdWHs.335,336 Profiting from the effective photo-exciton generation and transfer decided by the exotic quantum mechanism in graphene/TI vdW systems, Qiao et al.52 constructed photodetectors based on Bi2Se3/graphene vdWHs, which showed enhanced photocurrent without sacrificing the detecting spectral width. Such devices showed a much higher photoresponsivity of 35 A W−1 at a wavelength of 532 nm and higher sensitivity with a photoconductive gain up to 83 compared to graphene-based devices. In addition, the detective range of the device could be further expanded to the near-infrared (980 nm) and telecommunication band (1550 nm). Similarly, another photodector based on Bi2Se3/Si vdWHs exhibited excellent diode characteristics, with a pronounced photoresponse under light illumination, which had a high light responsivity of 24.28 A W−1, a high detectivity of 4.39 × 1012 Jones, and a fast response speed of approximately microseconds, with broadband detection ranging from ultraviolet to optical telecommunication wavelengths.337 Interestingly, the graphene/Bi2Te3 vdWHs demonstrated tunable optical properties by showing coverage-dependent photocarrier dynamics and a nonlinear optical modulation,338 providing possibilities for it to serve as a saturable absorber for short pulse generation.
vdW heterojunctions based on carbonaceous nanomaterials
Since the discovery of atomically thin carbon film (graphene) in 2014, the excellent electronic properties of graphene in vdW systems, including forming Schottky contacts with semiconducting 2D materials to make tunable Schottky heights, forming low-resistance Ohmic contacts as interconnections, and serving as high-quality substrates to organic nanoplates, have recently broadened the discussion of carbonaceous nanomaterials, such as carbon nanomembranes,339 fullerenes340,341 (C-60, C-26, and C-20), and carbon nanotubes.342–344 Kim et al.340 investigated the structural and electrical properties of vertical heterostructures composed of a C-60 thin film on graphene. Such vdWHs demonstrated a uniform morphology with strong epitaxial relations, while the vertical transistors based on such hybrid structures exhibited on/off ratios above 3 × 103, peaking interests in their application in logical electronics. Similarly, Luo et al.341 researched the electronic properties and photoactivity of MoS2/fullerene vdWHs, whereby, compared to monolayer MoS2, the bandgap of the heterostructures is smaller, which can enhance their visible light absorption and photoinduced electron transfer. A type-II band alignment was formed in a MoS2/C-20 vdWH, which helped to reduce the charge recombination to enhance the photoactivity. Besides carbonaceous fullerene thin films, 1D carbonaceous materials, including carbon nanotubes (CNs)342–344 and carbon nanofibers,345,346 have been used to construct 1D–2D vdWHs coupled with other inorganic 2D materials, and have exhibited great potential in photocatalysis, lithium-ion batteries, and supercapacitors. As shown in Fig. 22, Jariwala et al.60 demonstrated a p–n heterojunction diode consisting of p-type single-walled CNs (SWCNTs) and n-type monolayer MoS2. The diode exhibited highly gate-tunable properties for achieving a wide range of charge transport behavior, ranging from insulating to rectifying, and had an on/off ratio exceeding 104. Moreover, it also responded strongly to optical irradiation with an EQE of 25% and a fast photoresponse <15 μs.
 Fig. 22  A p–n diode consisting of a single-walled CNT/monolayer MoS2 vdWH with gate-tunable rectification. Adapted from ref. 60, Copyright 2013 National Academy of Sciences. (a) False-colored SEM image of the vdWH diode (scale bar, 2.5 μm). The yellow, blue, pink, and violet regions are the gold electrodes, masking layer, p-type SWCNT, and monolayer MoS2, respectively. (b) Optical micrograph showing the device layout at a lower magnification. The dashed yellow boundary indicates the MoS2 flake, whereas the dashed white rectangle denotes the patterned SWCNT film. Electrodes 2–3 form the p–n diode, consisting of the CNT/MoS2 vdWH. (c) Demonstration of gate-tunable rectification using the p–n diode. As a function of the gate bias, the device evolves from a nonrectifying resistor-like state at VG = 10 V (magenta) to a diode-like rectifying state at VG = −10 V (blue). 
Hierarchical 0D–2D and 1D–2D vdW heterojunctions
Heterojunctions constructed by composing different materials with vdW interactions are not restricted to just 2D stacked and/or in-plane heterostructures. The large surface-to-volume ratios of 2D materials also provide a viable way for depositing zero dimensional (0D) nanoparticles and 1D nanowires onto them to construct vdWHs. 0D quantum dots (QDs) deposited on layered materials as surface decorations are expected to enhance the performance of photodetection.347 As shown in Fig. 23, by depositing the QDs on graphene, the long trapped-charge lifetime in the QD layer accompanied with the high charge mobility of graphene enabled the charges created by light absorption in the QD layer to recirculate many times in the graphene layers, thus enhancing the light absorption of such hybrid devices. To take advantage of this gain mechanism, Konstantatos et al.54 integrated lead sulfide (PbS) quantum dots with a graphene transistor to demonstrate a photoconductive gain of more than 2 × 108 and a responsivity of ∼107 A W−1. However, graphene-based devices suffer from a high dark conductivity of the graphene channel in view of its semi-metallic character, where the large dark current of the graphene FETs reduces the detectivity. To optimize the properties of such hybrid 0D–2D structures, Kufer et al.55 reported a similar work by forming a p-type PbS QDs photodetector coupled with a few-layer n-type MoS2, which showed a high photoresponsivity up to 106 A W−1. The deposition of QDs affects the I–V characteristics of the bilayer MoS2, reducing the on/off ratio and mobility. This is a strong indication that QD deposition increases the charge carrier concentration in the MoS2 flake by charge transfer. Because of the strong and size-tunable light absorption in the quantum dots, the high carrier mobility in the MoS2 layer, and the operation of the detector in the depletion mode of the channel, such a hybrid photodetector can achieve a low dark current. Furthermore, graphene quantum dots deposited on monolayer MoS2 can lead to the light-induced n-type doping of MoS2.236 The doping effect increases the barrier height at a MoS2/InP heterojunction, thus improving the PCE of MoS2/InP solar cells from 2.1% to 4.1%. To further boost the photoresponse, plasmonic surface decoration has been recently incorporated in detectors based on layered semiconductors. Similar to QDs, surface plasmonic nanostructures (SPN) deposition on layered materials can help to enhance the absorption cross-section of devices, thus greatly affecting the photoelectrical properties of devices and leading to enhanced photocurrent,348 PL intensity,349 and photoresponse.350 For instance, by coupling graphene with Au (gold) plasmonic nanostructures, Liu et al.53 fabricated graphene-based photodetectors that exhibited a greatly enhanced photocurrent and an EQE up to 1500%. Interestingly, plasmonic nanostructures of variable resonance frequencies selectively amplify the photoresponse of graphene to light of different wavelengths, thus enabling the highly specific detection of multicolors. Our group351 constructed a plasmon-enhanced quantum dot solar cell coupled with surface plasmonic nanostars (SPNs). The fabricated SPNs could significantly reduce the amount of quantum dot materials required for a solar cell and provide efficient utilization of the full solar spectrum, thus resulting in an EQE enhancement of over 400% for short-wavelength light absorbed in the emitter, while plasmon light scattering caused a distinct improvement in the quantum efficiency (10–50%) in the long-wavelength region up to 1100 nm.
 Fig. 23  Hybrid graphene–quantum dot phototransistors. Adapted from ref. 54, Copyright 2012 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of the graphene–quantum dot hybrid phototransistor onto a Si/SiO2 substrate. Incident photons create electron–hole pairs in the PbS quantum dots. The holes are then transferred to the graphene channel and drift toward the drain, but electrons remain in the PbS quantum dots, leading through capacitive coupling to a prolonged time that the (recirculated) carriers are present in the graphene channel. (b) Spatial photocurrent profile using a laser beam focused at 532 nm with a power of 1.7 pW. The photocurrent was recorded as the laser beam was scanned across the surface of the detector. The spatial profile shows the large-area excitation of the phototransistor at the area of the quantum dot film overlapping with the graphene flake (VSD = 10 mV). Inset: Optical image of the graphene flake used in this study in contact with the gold electrodes, forming the phototransistor. 
By depositing 1D nanomaterials, such as InAs nanowires,56,238 ZnO nanorods,57,58 and carbon nanotubes,344 on 2D nanosheets, these hybrid structures can be constructed to monolithically integrate the functionality of 1D and 2D materials into a 3D space, indicating the extended application of 2D materials as ideal substrates to enhance device performance. Hong et al.56 reported a controlled hetero-epitaxial method of applying an InAs nanowire (NW) onto thin graphitic films utilizing substrate surface etching and patterning techniques. Profiting from the nearly coherent in-plane lattice matching (misfit of 0.49%) between InAs and the graphitic surface, high-yield and uniform NW arrays were exhibited on the honeycomb carbon surface. Notably, another work of the same authors showed that vertically well-aligned InAs NW arrays could be easily obtained on single-layer graphene substrates (as shown in Fig. 24),238 which is of interest for designing InAs-based devices that can utilize the excellent electrical properties of graphene. Semiconducting nanowire arrays integrated vertically on nanosheets offer significant advantages for many sophisticated device applications, such as solar energy conversion and 3D electric and photonic devices. Zhang et al.237 fabricated a ZnSe nanowire/Si hybrid structure that demonstrated a good diode characteristic with relatively high ideality factors around 1.95, a high rectification ratio around 106, and a low turn-on voltage around 0.9 V. In particular, the hetorojunction exhibited pronounced photovoltaic behavior, yielding a PCE of around 1.8%. Vertically aligned nanorods could be expected to enhance the optoelectronic performance of coupled 2D materials. For instance, ZnO nanorods were deposited on monolayer MoS2via epitaxy growth to construct a hybrid 1D–2D structure,57 which exhibited enhanced Raman and PL emissions from the MoS2 monolayers, which was attributed to the light antenna effect of the ZnO. Other 1D–2D hybrid structures composed of n-type ZnO NW/p-type and monolayer BP vdWHs were used to construct p–n diodes and BP-gated junction field-effect transistors (JFETs) with an n-ZnO channel on glass,58 whereby the diodes showed a static rectification with a high on/off ratio around 104 and kilohertz dynamic rectification, while the JFETs operated nicely in both electrostatics and kilohertz dynamics.
 Fig. 24  Vertically well-aligned InAs nanowires heteroepitaxially grown on single-layer graphene. Adapted from ref. 238, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (a) Top-view SEM image of InAs nanowires grown heteroepitaxially on single-layer graphene (SLG) films. Brighter structures are the nanowires with a hexagonal prismatic shape. (b and c) Schematic of the atomic configuration presenting the nearly coherent hetero-epitaxial relationship of InAs-()[0]||SLG-(0001)[10]. (d) Cross-sectional TEM image of SLG film transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate. (e) Low-magnification cross-sectional TEM image of InAs nanowire vertically grown on SLG. (f) Selected-area diffraction pattern obtained through a FFT process of the high-resolution TEM image of the nanowire. (g) TEM image of the enclosed area in (e), showing the interface of InAs/SLG/SiO2. 
The relatively weak vdW interaction between nano-scale materials helps to construct desired structures with well-tailored properties. Inorganic 2D materials, such as MoS2, can serve as good substrates for depositing organic thin films with enhanced photovoltaic performance. With the development of graphene-based vdW systems, low-dimensional carbonaceous materials have recently been discussed in regard to vdWHs coupling with other layered materials, which in turn helps to further discuss the properties of graphene. To date, 2D MCs are expected to perform better than TMDs in photodetection. Advanced 2D oxides provide an efficient way to construct lithium-ion batteries with high conductivity and high effectiveness. TIs demonstrate intrinsic quantum Hall effects, which is of interests for investigating next-generation electrical devices. By forming vdWHs with other layered materials, TIs have exhibited excellent performance, such as high conductivity, fast responsivity, and high detectivity. Unlike traditional layered vdWHs composed of 2D materials, 0D materials and 1D materials can be deposited on 2D substrates to form 0D–2D and 1D–2D vdWHs. 0D NDs are expected to enhance the light absorption of coupled materials, which helps to enhance the photoelectrical performance of hybrid devices, such as PCE and photodetectivity. Moreover, 2D materials provide an excellent platform for growing nanowires and nanorods. The hybrid 1D–2D devices demonstrate attractive electrical and photoelectrical properties, and provide rich choices for building advanced vdWHs.
Devices based on vdW heterojunctions
vdW photodiodes
Diodes are widely used building blocks in modern microelectronics and nanoelectronics as they have the most fundamental features in semiconductor physics. Progress in diodes often significantly decides the developments in other devices that comply with p–n junction mechanisms, such as bipolar transistors and field-effect transistors. The vdWH diodes derived from ultrathin materials are notably highlighted due to the requirements of advanced nano-scale devices for forming complex electronic circuits. Layered semiconducting materials have been incorporated into many devices, demonstrating similar I–V characteristics to those of a conventional p–n junction diode, while the underlying physical mechanism of rectification352–355 is expected to differ in view of the lack of a depletion region in the atomically thin junctions. By comparing the simulations and experimental results in an atomically WSe2/MoS2 p–n junction, Lee et al.356 found that the recombination of interlayer carriers play a primary role in the rectifying properties of vdW diodes. When applied with different gate voltages, the recombination rate could be tuned, giving rise to the gate-tunable I–V characteristic. In addition, due to the weak screening effects at the interfaces, vdW diodes demonstrate highly gate-tunable properties.357,358 An important optoelectronic device based on vdWHs is the photodiode,59,60 which is extensively used in many nanodevices, such as photodetectors, solar cells, and light-emitting diodes. Buscema et al.359 summarized the generation mechanisms of photocurrent in vdW materials, indicating three operating forms of such, including photodetection, photoabsorption, and light-emitting. In a photodiode, photogenerated carriers are separated and pull away in opposite directions under the effect of the built-in field of p–n or Schottky junctions. When the p–n junction is illuminated under reverse-bias conditions, the electron–hole pairs generated at the junction give rise to a photocurrent, in addition to the already existing dark current. This is the principle of operation of a photodetector, which is characterized by the photodetection efficiency, which is defined as the ratio of photocurrent to the incident light power. When the p–n junction is illuminated under a zero bias or in photovoltaic mode, the flow of photocurrent out of the device is restricted, and a photovoltage builds up. This is the basis of a solar cell, which is characterized by a parameter termed the ‘extrinsic quantum efficiency (EQE)’. Finally, in the EL mode, current is injected into the p–n junction, which results in light emission. This mode forms the basis for light-emitting devices.
The photodetector is a key component of many devices we use in daily life, in which we rely on it to convert the information stored in light into electrical signals that can be processed by standard electronics. 2D materials have shown great potential in nanophotonics due to their efficient light absorption, fast responsivity, and wide spectral range, demonstrating their excellent performance in optoelectronics and photovoltaics.360 Responsivity is the ratio between the photocurrent and the total incident optical power on the photodetector, indicating the achievable electrical signal under a certain illumination power; whereby a large responsivity indicates a large electrical output signal for a defined optical excitation power. Owing to the high carrier mobility and high carrier saturation velocity, graphene photodetectors demonstrate ultrafast photoresponse361–363 with broadband application.364–367 However, weak light absorption and the absence of a gain mechanism that can generate multiple charge carriers from one incident photon limit the responsivity of graphene-based photodetectors.368,369 Semiconducting TMDs have also shown tremendous potential in photoelectrical applications due to their strong light matter interaction and fast responsivity,370–373 but their limited spectral range and reduced light absorption restrict their application in photodetection.146 In designing vdWHs, the artificial graphene/TMD vdWHs have demonstrated fantastic photodetective properties with many associated merits.228,374,375 In Schottky-diode-like structures consisting of graphene/MoS2 vdWHs, photoexcited electron–hole pairs are separated at the interface, with the electrons moving to graphene and the holes becoming trapped in the MoS2 layers. The formation of a trap-free interface between the graphene and MoS2 layer allows for the large carrier mobility in the graphene and the effective transfer of photogenerated electrons from the MoS2 to graphene under an appropriate gate electric field. Notably, by combining high-mobility graphene with highly photoresponsive MoS2 in a hybrid vdWH phototransistor, a record high photoresponsivity of 5 × 108 A W−1 with an extremely slow response times of up to 103 s under room temperature was obtained, as shown in Fig. 25.228 The large responsivity stems from the strong photogating effects on the single-layer graphene channel induced by the localized states in the MoS2 layer. The trapped holes reside longer in the MoS2 and thus act as a local gate on the graphene channel. Their long lifetime is responsible for the extremely large responsivity and long response times. In addition, the long charge-trapping lifetime makes the photoelectrons transferred to the graphene layer circulate many times in graphene before recombining with the holes in MoS2, thus boosting the gain of the as-fabricated photodetectors. For instance, Zhang et al.229 reported an ultrahigh gain photodetector consisting of graphene/MoS2 vdWHs, which demonstrated a photoresponsivity value higher than 107 A W−1 and an ultrahigh gain of about 108 at room temperature. Sandwiched graphene-WSe2-graphene vdWHs allied the high photodetection efficiency of WSe2 with a picosecond photoresponse comparable to that of graphene, thereby optimizing both speed and efficiency in the photodetectors.375 Another MoS2-graphene-WSe2 vdWH demonstrated broadband photodetection in the visible-to-short wavelength infrared range at room temperature with a specific detectivity of up to 1011 Jones (Jones = cm Hz1/2 W−1) in the near-infrared region.374 Profiting from the gate-tunable Fermi level in the graphene layer, the responsivity of the hybrid graphene/TMD vdWHs are expected to be tunable,61 making it possible to modulate their response based on the actual demand.
 Fig. 25  Photodetectors based on a graphene–MoS2 hybrid with high photoresponsivity. Adapted from ref. 228, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of device architecture. Inset: SEM image of a typical device. The dotted line indicates the outline of the graphene. (b) Black and red solid lines: source–drain current (Ids) versus backgate voltage (Vg) for graphene on MoS2 in the absence and presence of light, respectively. Cyan-colored trace: Vg-dependent conductance of bare MoS2 in the dark. (c) Dependence of IP-on (Vg-dependent magnitude current when the LED is turned on) on the source–drain bias Vds at two different gate voltages (λ = 635 nm, PLED = 376 fW μm−2). (d) Time trace of the photocurrent on light illumination at Vg = −50 V. (e) Responsivity γ as a function of illumination power. Top-right inset: Change in IP-on (Vds = 0.1 V) with LED power. Bottom-left inset: Comparison of low-temperature and room-temperature responsivity. 
To achieve efficient light conversion to electricity, electron–hole pairs must dissociate into free charges, thus creating multifunctional optoelectronic systems with superior performance by forming vdWHs. Artificial vdWHs open a new way for forming high-performance solar cells with much higher efficiency and durability based on their high plasticity and controllability.376–380 Graphene is an excellent sunlight absorber, which can achieve 2.3% visible light absorbance in just 3.3 Å thicknesses,381 indicating their promising application on flexible solar cells.382 By employing traditional semiconductor GaAs within a vdWH coupled with graphene contacts, the synthesized solar cells could achieve an excellent power conversion efficiency (PCE) of 18.5% and an open-circuit voltage of 0.96 V.383 Another organic solar cell similarly exhibited an optimization of PCE with graphene as the anodes.384 Semiconducting TMDs have particularly strong quantum confinement effects in the out-of-plane direction with strongly bound excitons, which helps to achieve a higher absorption efficiency, while the varying of the bandgap of TMDs as a function of the number of layers can also modulate the optical absorption edge. In particular, monolayer TMDs interact strongly with light, exhibiting absorption coefficients of more than 5 × 107 m−1 in the visible range,385 which is an order of magnitude larger than the absorption coefficients of GaAs and Si. Due to the great absorption properties of TMDs, the vdWHs with TMDs as the sensitive layers are expected to work as highly efficient solar cells. By forming solar cells based on TMD/graphene Schottky junctions, we can expect an extremely high PCE in as-fabricated devices with atomic thicknesses. As shown in Fig. 26, Bernardi et al.227 conservatively computed that such bilayer solar cells could reach over 1% PCE in just 1 nm thickness, thus packing a power density of up to 2.5 MW kg−1. In addition, InP can be considered to serve as a good semiconductor for forming solar cells, because of its fantastic anti-radiation property and high stability under space irradiation damage. Under AM 1.5G illumination, MoS2/InP solar cells can achieve a PCE of 7.1%,386 while similarly a PCE of 3.3% has been demonstrated in graphene/InP solar cells.387 Also, both the vdWHs were gate-tunable and showed stable operation under lighting environments. In addition, by composing graphene quantum dots on a MoS2/InP heterojunction, an enhancement of PCE was achieved, attributed to the doping effects in the MoS2 layers.236
 Fig. 26  Absorbance of a MoS2/graphene Schottky junction and MoS2/WS2 bilayer. Adapted from ref. 227, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (a) Absorbance of the MoS2/graphene interface and its composing monolayers, computed within the independent particle approximation. (b) Absorbance spectra of the MoS2/WS2 bilayer and of the individual composing layers. 
Light-emitting devices based on hybrid vdWHs perform well in three respects: reduced contact resistance, higher current densities allowing brighter LEDs, and enhanced luminescence from the whole device area. Similar to traditional p–n light-emitting effects, which depend on the recombination of electrons with holes and energy release in the shape of phonons, in vdW photodiodes, even after exciton dissociation, the majority of the carriers spatially confined in each layer can undergo recombination though inelastic tunneling, which plays an important role in determining the photocurrent. The difference is that 2D materials can create a designer potential landscape for electrons to live in, namely the so-called quantum wells (QWs), which significantly enhance the extrinsic quantum efficiency (EQE).388 The luminous mechanism of these newly emerged light-emitting devices is definitely specific, and as a result of the long lifetime of the quasi-particles in the QWs (determined by the height and thickness of the tunneling barriers), the electrons and holes recombine, and emit a photon.389,390 The EQE is the ratio of the number of charge carriers in the photocurrent and the total number of impinging excitation photons, which is a measure of the optical gain in the photodetector (EQE > 1 effectively means that more than one charge carrier per impinging photon is measured). Achieving a high quantum efficiency is important to enhance the performance of light-emitting devices, because a higher quantum efficiency means a higher luminous efficiency, a higher light current, and higher brightness. Withers et al.388 described LEDs made by stacking metallic graphene, insulating h-BN, and various TMD monolayers into complex but carefully designed sequences, as shown in Fig. 27(a–d). The hybrid devices exhibited enhanced EQE values and the emission could be tuned over a wide range of frequencies by appropriately choosing and combining 2D semiconductors. Fig. 27(e–i) shows that employing multiple QWs stacked in series, which increases the overall thickness of the tunnel barrier (h-BN) and enhances the probability for injected carriers to recombine radiatively, helps to enhance the EL and PL of the ‘as-designed’ devices, with an improvement also in the overall EQE. Forming a Schottky contact with graphene in a photodiode allows carrier collection by direct vertical charge transfer, rather than through lateral diffusion, which significantly improves the collection of the photoexcited carriers and further enhances the EQE of a vdWH. For instance, vertical vdWHs composed of MoS271 or WS2270 sandwiched in graphene led to enhanced photon absorption and electron–hole creation, exhibiting an electrostatically tunable EQE of up to 55% and 30%, respectively. Another vdW photodiode composed by stacking layered MoS2/WSe2 with graphene on the top and bottom was demonstrated to exhibit an enhanced EQE through increasing the number of interlayers between graphene with respect to the multiple QWs, thus helping to enhance the light absorption.356 In addition, fine control over the tunneling barriers allowed a reduction in the number of electrons and holes escaping from the QW, thus further enhancing the EQE.
 Fig. 27  Well-designed QW LEDs with single QWs and multiple QWs. Adapted from ref. 388, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (a–b) Schematic and STEM image of the single QW heterostructure h-BN/graphene/2h-BN/WS2/2h-BN/graphene/h-BN. (c) Optical image of an operational device. The dashed curve outlines the heterostructure area. Scale bar, 10 μm. (d) Optical image of EL from the same device. Vb = 2.5 V, T = 300 K. 2h-BN and 3h-BN stand for bi- and trilayer hBN, respectively. (e and f) Color map of the PL and EL spectra as a function of Vb for a MoS2-based single QW. Excitation energy EL = 2.33 eV. (g and h) Maps of the PL and EL spectra for a triple QWs device (h-BN/graphene/3h-BN/MoS2/3h-BN/MoS2/3h-BN/MoS2/3h-BN/graphene/h-BN). EL = 2.33 eV. (i) Individual EL spectra plotted on a logarithmic scale show the onset of EL at 1.8 nA μm−2 (blue curve). 
vdW FETs and phototransistors
2D materials exhibit a wide diversity of conductive properties, which is of interest to form vdWHs with tailored sequences on demand for fabricating novel devices as candidates for Si-based devices.339,391 2D materials such as semi-metallic graphene, insulating h-BN, and semiconducting TMDs, are stacked to construct FETs, where the TMDs are used as the active channel material, hexagonal-BN as the top-gate dielectric, and graphene as the source/drain and the top-gate contacts, respectively. As shown in Fig. 28, a FET based on such a structure391 exhibits an n-type behavior with an on/off current ratio of >106, and an electron mobility of similar to 33 cm2 V−1 s−1. Notably, the mobility of the FET does not degrade at high gate voltages, presenting an important advantage over conventional Si transistors, where enhanced surface roughness scattering severely reduces the carrier mobility at high gate-fields. Similarly, another FET used WSe2 as a channel material to demonstrate both p-type and n-type conduction, with a carrier mobility of 45 cm2 V−1 s−1 and an ON/OFF ratio of 107.392 In particular, the active device was found to be more than 88% transparent over the entire visible spectrum and the device characteristics were unaltered with an in-plane mechanical strain of up to 2%. These vdWH-based devices also exhibit excellent potential in optoelectronics as photodiodes, since many semiconducting 2D materials, such as TMDs and BP, have excellent photoelectrical properties with strong light interaction and a fast light response. Besides photodiodes, another optoelectronic application of artificial vdWHs is phototransistors, which are being investigated to achieve a high photocurrent density and fascinating visible light adsorption. Based on the findings of the carrier transport mechanism in vdW systems, the photovoltaic effects have been discussed.244,356 In the dark, these heterostructures show gate-tunable rectifying behaviors. It was also found that the tunable interlayer recombination of photogenerated carriers was determined by the electronic band structures and plays a critical role in the optoelectronic properties of vdWHs, determining many of the properties of the materials. With recent advances in the quantum physics of 2D materials, phototransistors based on newly emerging vdWHs are expected to be strong candidates for next-generation photoelectrical devices, including ultrafast photosensors and efficient memory devices, as well as transparent and flexible devices.
 Fig. 28  2D MoS2 FET with a few-layer h-BN gate dielectric, and graphene source/drain and top-gate electrodes. Adapted from ref. 391, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (a) Device schematic. (b) ID–VG characteristics at different VD. (c) ID–VD characteristics. (d) Extracted mobility as a function of the gate voltage, VG–Vt. The inset shows the circuit model of the device used for mobility extraction. The substrate is grounded during all the measurements. 
vdW tunneling devices and vertical field-effect transistors
Other than in-plane transport for conducting 2D crystals, out-of-plane tunneling through insulating 2D layers demonstrates exotic properties with potential application in new advanced 2D tunneling devices. The evolution of vertical devices, in which few-layer-thick crystals are used as tunnel barriers, with graphene serving as one or both electrodes, involves a new kind of tunneling devices, such as tunneling transistors (tTs)63,393 and tunneling diodes (tDs),62,394 which exhibit relatively high on/off switching ratios at room temperature. Britnell et al.232 firstly constructed a vdWH-based tT by inserting monolayer MoS2 or h-BN between two monolayers of graphene, where the interbedded layered materials served as an atomically thin barrier between the monolayer graphene electrodes. The application of a bias voltage between the two graphene electrodes induced a tunneling current across the MoS2 or h-BN layer, leading to a room temperature on/off ratio of up to around 10000 and 50, respectively. In addition, the on/off switching ratios could be expected to be enhanced by using a higher barrier thickness, which would induce a reduction of the Fermi energy, suggesting that the tunneling depends exponentially on the barrier height. By using WS2 as a tunneling barrier (see Fig. 29), another sandwiched field-effect tT exhibited a much higher on/off ratio of up to 106 and larger at state current at room temperature.63 As shown in Fig. 29(b–d), a negative gate voltage shifts the Fermi level of both graphene layers downwards, increasing the tunneling barrier height to give an “off” state, whereas a positive gate voltage reduces the barrier height and simultaneously induces an over-barrier thermionic current to set the transistor to “on”. The gate voltage induces an exponential change in the barrier height, together with the switching from tunneling current to thermionic current, which allows the zero-bias conductivity to be exponentially dependent on the gate voltage, see Fig. 29(e–g). However, the current determined by the tunneling mechanism is controlled by variation of the gate voltage, thus exhibiting a high dependence to the electrode's Fermi energy.393 This means that a large on/off ratio is usually achieved but at the sacrifice of current density.
 Fig. 29  Graphene–WS2 tunneling heterotransistor. Adapted from ref. 63, Copyright 2012 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of a vertical architecture transistor. GrB and GrT are the bottom and top graphene contacts, respectively. (b–d) Band diagram corresponding to zero Vg, negative Vg, and positive Vg. The red and blue arrows represent the thermionic current and tunneling current, respectively. (e) Optical image of a graphene–WS2 heterotransistor (scale bar, 10 μm). (f) I–V plots for different Vg (semi-logarithmic scale). (g) Red circles: zero-bias conductivity as a function of gate voltage (measured as the slope of the I–Vb curve at zero Vb). Blue circles: conductivity measured at Vb = 0.02 V as a function of gate voltage. Inset: I–V at different Vg (linear scale). T = 300 K. Device active area, 0.25 μm2. 
To achieve a high current density without decreasing the on/off ratios, vertical field-effect transistors (VFETs) are proposed in vdW systems, where the sandwiched layers serve as the semiconducting channels instead of the tunneling barriers. Duan et al.66 constructed VFETs based on stacked graphene/MoS2/metal vdWHs, which exhibited both a large room temperature on/off ratio of more than 103 and a high current density of up to 5000 A cm−2. Unlike traditional metal-dielectric-semiconductor FETs, the VFETs composed by inserting layered semiconductors between two metallic contacts, such as graphene, have received much more interest. In particular, graphene/layered semiconductor vdWHs have been explored as gate-tunable Schottky barrier devices.269,395 In these devices, the electrical current is modulated by tuning the injection barrier height through an applied gate potential, thus resulting in VFET structures with high on/off current ratios suitable for digital electronics.230,272 Choi et al.230 constructed a VFET by sandwiching the semiconductor TMD (n-type MoS2 or p-type WSe2) between graphene and a metal, respectively. The high ion-gel-dielectric specific capacitance allowed the work function of the underlying graphene to be readily modulated at low voltages, ultimately accessing new regimes of ambipolar charge transport. The resulting devices showed well-behaved n-type and p-type characteristics with high current densities (>3000 A cm−2) and high on/off current ratios (>104) at low operating voltages. By forming a Schottky barrier with metals or graphene, the VFETs exhibited two distinct charge transport mechanisms, namely in-plane charge transport induced by the Schottky barrier and out-of-plane tunneling. Kang et al.231 constructed a VFET based on graphene/BP vdWHs, which was characterized by its high on-state current densities (>1600 A cm−2) and current on/off ratios exceeding 800 at low temperature. Interestingly, the VFET exhibited two charge transport mechanisms, one where the Schottky barrier between graphene and BP determines charge transport at high temperatures and positive gate voltages, and other where tunneling dominates at low temperatures and negative gate voltages.
Besides the tTs and VFETs that operate with modulation of the Schottky barrier, newly realized vdW tDs demonstrate a significant supplement as a basic building block in modern electronics to work as Esaki tDs.396,397 By sandwiching few-layers h-BN as a tunneling barrier between two graphene electrodes,62 such a stacked vdWH exhibited a resonant tunneling of Dirac fermions when the electronic spectra of the two electrodes were aligned (as shown in Fig. 30). In particular, the resulting negative differential conductance in the device characteristics persisted up to room temperature and was gate-tunable due to graphene's unique Dirac-like spectrum. Similar resonant tunneling phenomenon and room temperature negative differential resistance (NDR) characteristics were demonstrated in two vdWHs composed by stacking monolayer MoS2 or WSe2 and graphene in different sequences with the WSe2 or MoS2 serving as the tunneling barrier, respectively.394 Arising from the interesting tunneling phenomenon in vertically stacked vdW systems, Roy et al.396 constructed a dual-gate tD consisting of MoS2/WSe2 vdWHs, which exhibited a highly tunable electric potential and carrier concentration of MoS2 and WSe2 layers independently controlled by the two symmetric gates. By modulating the gate voltage, such device could behave as either an Esaki diode with NDR, a backward diode with a large reverse-bias tunneling current, or as a forward rectifying diode with a low reverse-bias current. The realization of vdW Esaki tDs was reported by Yan et al.397 made of BP and SnSe2, two layered semiconductors that possess a broken-gap energy band offset. The presence of a thin insulating barrier between BP and SnSe2 enabled the observation of a prominent NDR region in the forward-bias current–voltage characteristics. In addition, the weak temperature dependence of the NDR indicated electron tunneling was the dominant transport mechanism. Profiting from the ultrathin thickness of these advanced vdWHs, advanced tunneling devices are expected to have a lower subthreshold swing and fast switching ratio with demonstrations of band-to-band tunneling at the heterointerfaces, which is important for modern high frequency circuits.398 Moreover, associated with the tunneling characteristics, a positive-to-negative transconductance was exhibited in vdW tunneling devices, which is particularly useful for designing multivalued logic circuits as inverters.399
 Fig. 30  Graphene-BN resonant tunneling transistor. Adapted from ref. 62, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of the devices. (b) Measured current–voltage characteristics of the device in (a) at 6 K. The Vg values range, in 5 V steps, from +15 V (top red curve) to −55 V (bottom blue curve). The inset shows schematically the relative positions of the Fermi energies (chemical potentials) of the doped Si substrate gate electrode (represented by hatched lines) and of the two graphene layers at the peak of the I(Vb) curve in forward bias with Vg = +15 V. 
Memory
Charge tunneling properties are important for another next-generation electronic device, memory devices. In particular, the high uniformity and ability to tune the number of layers in vdWHs are promising characteristics to efficiently influence the tunneling properties of devices, further affecting the performance of memory devices. Devices consisting of layered graphene and MoS2 with a dielectric layer are expected to perform well as information storage devices.64,65 As shown in Fig. 31, Bertolazzi et al.64 first constructed a floating-gate memory device based on monolayer MoS2 as a channel in intimate contact with multilayer graphene fully surrounded by dielectric HfO2, which serves as a floating gate to trap the charge. Another metal electrode on the top of HfO2 serves as a gate to control the conductivity of the MoS2 channel and the amount of charge stored on the floating gate by modulating the applied voltage. In particular, the threshold voltage varied from 7.5 to 5 V during a time period of 104 seconds, which suggested a good nonvolatile property with a big memory window. Choi et al.65 made some changes to such a structure by using h-BN as the tunnel barrier. They fabricated, to compare performances, two types of vdWHs with different stacking sequences, where graphene or MoS2 served as a charge-trapping layer to storage charge tunneled through the h-BN dielectric from another side, respectively. These devices exhibited different hysteresis characteristics, depending on the stacking order. In addition, by reducing the thicknesses of MoS2 and h-BN in the MoS2-trapped device, unipolar conductance and larger hysteresis were observed because of the effective electron tunneling and electric-field screening, confirming that the MoS2 layer acts as an effective charge-trapping layer with a large memory window and stable retention. Similar experiments were also conducted with another memory device with few-layer BP acting as the channel, h-BN as the tunnel barrier layer, and MoS2 as the charge-trapping layer, which exhibited a fantastic erase/program ratio and high endurance performance.400 Recently, another two-terminal electrode structure was used on such a vertically stacked structure to demonstrate an optimized off-state current and an enhanced on/off ratio, which is of interest for designing fast flash memory.282 Benefiting from the use of a two-terminal electrode for current flow in the MoS2 channel and simultaneously for charging and discharging the graphene floating gate through the h-BN tunneling barrier, the memory device exhibited effective charge tunneling and storage properties, leading to an ultimately low off-state current of 10−14 A, and an ultrahigh on/off ratio of over 109, which is much higher than the values for other two-terminal memories. Though many questions still remain concerning the fabrication of vdW memories, devices based on these fantastic hybrid structures are expected to work well for next-generation storage devices, such as fast switching memory devices and durable nonvolatile memory devices, which might give rise to a new revolution in quantum computing.
 Fig. 31  Floating gate transistor as a nonvolatile memory device. Adapted from ref. 64, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic of a floating gate transistor b, Transfer characteristic of the floating gate transistor, acquired along two different control-gate-voltage sweep directions. The large hysteresis of ∼8 V is related to the accumulation of charge in the floating gate. The voltage sweep rate was 1.4 V s−1. (c) Simplified band diagram of the memory device in the program and erase states. Application of a positive control-gate-voltage Vcg programs the device, while application of a negative control-gate-voltage Vcg depletes the floating gate and resets the device. (d) Temporal evolution of the drain–source currents (Ids) in the erase (ON) and program (OFF) states. (e) Time-resolved behavior of the device threshold voltage after application of the programming voltage pulse (+18 V for 3 s). The threshold voltage was determined from linear fits to the transfer curves (inset) in the linear regime. 
Conclusion and perspectives
Material engineering through the fabrication of vdWHs opens up an entirely new branch of science that brings about great possibilities and wide potential for the electronic industry. 2D materials have the potential to form many fit-for-purpose vdWHs because of the wide range of materials that can be used, from insulators to semiconductors to metals and even to superconductors. Research on the fundamental properties of vdWHs grown from 2D materials has recently expanded to cover other advanced low-dimensional materials for forming hierarchical heterojunctions interacted by vdW forces. Although relatively extensive studies have been done on numerous vdWHs, many fundamental issues concerning vdW systems are still unclear and need to be addressed. A vdWH can be formed under a big lattice mismatch with a relatively weak interaction. How the mismatch works on a vdW interface and if it has a limit in the interaction to bond two components of the vdWH should be further discussed. Carrier transfer in a vdWH has two forms, namely interfacial tunneling and in-plane transport. But what is the relationship between them and how can we control this is still undefined. There is no heat channel at the vdW interface. But a component with good heat dispersion in a vdWH has been shown to enhance the thermal conductance of another, why? Future research should focus on these basic questions, which are important for understanding the operational modes of vdW systems.
Recent studies on vdWHs have mainly focused on three aspects: (1) software simulations on vdWHs; (2) fabrication methods of vdWHs, and (3) devices based on vdWHs. Further theoretical analysis and simulation work could significantly promote the discovery of new vdWHs and help us to explore new properties. If a structure is proved worthy to produce, extensive work should focus on it to find viable ways for its experimental synthesis. Then, we need to use it to construct devices and to verify its performance according to simulation results. However, intensive research on vdWHs is just at the beginning. Difficulties in producing scaled-up vdWHs is restricting their development. The mechanical exfoliation and transfer method is inefficient and not suitable for actual production. More work on in situ growth is urgently needed. For the growth of 2D vdWHs, new approaches must be developed to enable the rational and scalable integration of multiple 2D materials, while maintaining atomically seamless heterointerfaces.
Artificial vdWHs constitute insolated systems with special properties on actual demand, which provides a special way to customize device properties. With the advances in the new vdWH family, devices based on vdWHs could open up opportunities for a wide range of unconventional applications in electronics, optics, and optoelectronics. To practically utilize the vdWHs, we need to improve the existing fabrication methods of vdWHs in regard to two main aspects: to make vdW-based devices that can realize optimized performance to traditional Si-devices, and to develop integrated technology suited to vdW-based devices for scalable application. Besides, vdWHs exhibit different quantum mechanisms to traditional heterojunctions, which means various of their properties are different to those of traditional heterojunctions. We can expect totally different behaviors in future vdW-based integrated circuits, which should provide countless possibilities for the next revolution of modern nanoelectronics.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by National Program on Key Basic Research Project (973 Program) 2013CB933301, National Natural Science Foundation of China 51302030 and National Natural Science Foundation of China 61474015.
References
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Mas-Balleste, C. Gomez-Navarro, J. Gomez-Herrero and F. Zamora, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 20–30 RSC .
M. Osada and T. Sasaki, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 210–228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. H. Wang, K. Kalantar-Zadeh, A. Kis, J. N. Coleman and M. S. Strano, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 699–712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Z. Butler, S. M. Hollen, L. Y. Cao, Y. Cui, J. A. Gupta, H. R. Gutierrez, T. F. Heinz, S. S. Hong, J. X. Huang, A. F. Ismach, E. Johnston-Halperin, M. Kuno, V. V. Plashnitsa, R. D. Robinson, R. S. Ruoff, S. Salahuddin, J. Shan, L. Shi, M. G. Spencer, M. Terrones, W. Windl and J. E. Goldberger, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2898–2926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. Li and J. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 012111 CrossRef .
A. Gupta, T. Sakthivel and S. Seal, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2015, 73, 44–126 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fiori, F. Bonaccorso, G. Iannaccone, T. Palacios, D. Neumaier, A. Seabaugh, S. K. Banerjee and L. Colombo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 768–779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Bjorkman, A. Gulans, A. V. Krasheninnikov and R. M. Nieminen, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 5 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. D. Ma, Y. Dai, M. Guo, C. W. Niu and B. B. Huang, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 3883–3887 RSC .
L. E. Rumaner, M. A. Olmstead and F. S. Ohuchi, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., B, 1998, 16, 977–988 CAS .
A. Koma, J. Cryst. Growth, 1999, 201, 236–241 CrossRef .
C. Kreis, S. Werth, R. Adelung, L. Kipp, M. Skibowski, D. Voss, P. Kruger, A. Mazur and J. Pollmann, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2002, 65, 4 CrossRef .
U. Kuhl and H. J. Stockmann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 3232–3235 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Dean, L. Wang, P. Maher, C. Forsythe, F. Ghahari, Y. Gao, J. Katoch, M. Ishigami, P. Moon, M. Koshino, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. L. Shepard, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nature, 2013, 497, 598–602 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Hunt, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, A. F. Young, M. Yankowitz, B. J. LeRoy, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Moon, M. Koshino, P. Jarillo-Herrero and R. C. Ashoori, Science, 2013, 340, 1427–1430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Xue, J. Sanchez-Yamagishi, D. Bulmash, P. Jacquod, A. Deshpande, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Jarillo-Herrero and B. J. Leroy, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 282–285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. van Wijk, A. Schuring, M. I. Katsnelson and A. Fasolino, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 5 CrossRef PubMed .
S. J. Tang, H. M. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Li, H. Xie, X. Y. Liu, L. Q. Liu, T. X. Li, F. Q. Huang, X. M. Xie and M. H. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 7 Search PubMed .
W. Yang, G. R. Chen, Z. W. Shi, C. C. Liu, L. C. Zhang, G. B. Xie, M. Cheng, D. M. Wang, R. Yang, D. X. Shi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, Y. G. Yao, Y. B. Zhang and G. Y. Zhang, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 792–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Decker, Y. Wang, V. W. Brar, W. Regan, H. Z. Tsai, Q. Wu, W. Gannett, A. Zettl and M. F. Crommie, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2291–2295 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Latini, T. Olsen and K. S. Thygesen, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2015, 92, 13 CrossRef .
D. Y. Qiu, F. H. da Jornada and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2013, 111, 5 Search PubMed .
Z. L. Ye, T. Cao, K. O'Brien, H. Y. Zhu, X. B. Yin, Y. Wang, S. G. Louie and X. Zhang, Nature, 2014, 513, 214–218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. He, N. Kumar, L. Zhao, Z. F. Wang, K. F. Mak, H. Zhao and J. Shan, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 113, 5 Search PubMed .
X. M. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, V. Tran, Y. C. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. D. Xu and F. N. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 517–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Zhu, N. R. Monahan, Z. Z. Gong, H. M. Zhu, K. W. Williams and C. A. Nelson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 8313–8320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Li, J. Li, L. K. Shi, D. Zhang, W. Yang and K. Chang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 115, 5 Search PubMed .
P. Rivera, K. L. Seyler, H. Y. Yu, J. R. Schaibley, J. Q. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, W. Yao and X. D. Xu, Science, 2016, 351, 688–691 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Geim and I. V. Grigorieva, Nature, 2013, 499, 419–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Kobayashi, S. Yoshida, R. Sakurada, K. Takashima, T. Yamamoto, T. Saito, S. Konabe, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, Y. Maniwa, O. Takeuchi, H. Shigekawa and Y. Miyata, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ramasubramaniam, D. Naveh and E. Towe, Phys. Rev. B, 2011, 84, 205325 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, T.-T. Tang, C. Girit, Z. Hao, M. C. Martin, A. Zettl, M. F. Crommie, Y. R. Shen and F. Wang, Nature, 2009, 459, 820–823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, L. Li, Y. Li, Z. Gao, Z. Chen and J. Lu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 21556–21562 CAS .
L. Huang, N. Huo, Y. Li, H. Chen, J. Yang, Z. Wei, J. Li and S.-S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2483–2488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghatak, A. N. Pal and A. Ghosh, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7707–7712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Xu, T. Liang, M. M. Shi and H. Z. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 3766–3798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. X. Wang, Q. S. Wang, F. M. Wang, L. Yin, K. Xu, Y. Huang and J. He, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 26 Search PubMed .
G. R. Bhimanapati, Z. Lin, V. Meunier, Y. Jung, J. Cha, S. Das, D. Xiao, Y. Son, M. S. Strano, V. R. Cooper, L. B. Liang, S. G. Louie, E. Ringe, W. Zhou, S. S. Kim, R. R. Naik, B. G. Sumpter, H. Terrones, F. N. Xia, Y. L. Wang, J. Zhu, D. Akinwande, N. Alem, J. A. Schuller, R. E. Schaak, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 11509–11539 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Miro, M. Audiffred and T. Heine, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 6537–6554 RSC .
C. N. R. Rao, H. Matte and U. Maitra, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13162–13185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. H. Lee, X. Cui, Y. D. Kim, G. Arefe, X. Zhang, C. H. Lee, F. Ye, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim and J. Hone, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7019–7026 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. S. Mayorov, R. V. Gorbachev, S. V. Morozov, L. Britnell, R. Jalil, L. A. Ponomarenko, P. Blake, K. S. Novoselov, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and A. K. Geim, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2396–2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Giovannetti, P. A. Khomyakov, G. Brocks, P. J. Kelly and J. van den Brink, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2007, 76, 4 Search PubMed .
Y. C. Lin, N. Lu, N. Perea-Lopez, J. Li, Z. Lin, X. Peng, C. H. Lee, C. Sun, L. Calderin, P. N. Browning, M. S. Bresnehan, M. J. Kim, T. S. Mayer, M. Terrones and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3715–3723 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Deng, Z. Luo, N. J. Conrad, H. Liu, Y. J. Gong, S. Najmaei, P. M. Ajayan, J. Lou, X. F. Xu and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8292–8299 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, Y. Wu, Z. Wu, Y. Han, S. Xu, L. Wang, W. Ye, T. Han, Y. He, Y. Cai and N. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Padilha, A. Fazzio and A. J. R. da Silva, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2015, 114, 5 CrossRef PubMed .
H. C. Cheng, G. M. Wang, D. H. Li, Q. Y. He, A. X. Yin, Y. Liu, H. Wu, M. N. Ding, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 367–373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Dou, A. B. Wong, Y. Yu, M. Lai, N. Kornienko, S. W. Eaton, A. Fu, C. G. Bischak, J. Ma, T. Ding, N. S. Ginsberg, L.-W. Wang, A. P. Alivisatos and P. Yang, Science, 2015, 349, 1518–1521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, Y. Yan, H. C. Wu, D. P. Yu and Z. M. Liao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3816–3822 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiao, J. Yuan, Z. Q. Xu, C. Y. Chen, S. H. Lin, Y. S. Wang, J. C. Song, Y. Liu, Q. Khan, H. Y. Hoh, C. X. Pan, S. J. Li and Q. L. Bao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1886–1894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Liu, R. Cheng, L. Liao, H. L. Zhou, J. W. Bai, G. Liu, L. X. Liu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 7 Search PubMed .
G. Konstantatos, M. Badioli, L. Gaudreau, J. Osmond, M. Bernechea, F. P. Garcia de Arquer, F. Gatti and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 363–368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kufer, I. Nikitskiy, T. Lasanta, G. Navickaite, F. H. L. Koppens and G. Konstantatos, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 176–180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Hong and T. Fukui, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 7576–7584 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, Y. Zhang, T. Zhang, W. Dong, T. Wei, Y. Sun, X. Chen, G. Shen and N. Dai, Nano Res., 2015, 8, 743–750 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Jeon, Y. T. Lee, J. Y. Lim, J. S. Kim, D. K. Hwang and S. Im, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1293–1298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Y. Xu, J. Y. Wang and L. Zhen, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 8 Search PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, C. C. Wu, P. L. Prabhumirashi, M. L. Geier, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2013, 110, 18076–18080 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, J. Wu, Q. Feng, N. Mao, C. Wang and J. Zhang, Small, 2014, 10, 2300–2306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, A. K. Geim, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. Mishchenko, M. T. Greenaway, T. M. Fromhold, K. S. Novoselov and L. Eaves, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 5 Search PubMed .
T. Georgiou, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, S. V. Morozov, Y. J. Kim, A. Gholinia, S. J. Haigh, O. Makarovsky, L. Eaves, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and A. Mishchenko, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 100–103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bertolazzi, D. Krasnozhon and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 3246–3252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Choi, G. H. Lee, Y. J. Yu, D. Y. Lee, S. H. Lee, P. Kim, J. Hone and W. J. Yoo, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 7 Search PubMed .
W. J. Yu, Z. Li, H. L. Zhou, Y. Chen, Y. Wang, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 246–252 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Yu, Y. H. Lee, X. Ling, E. J. G. Santos, Y. C. Shin, Y. X. Lin, M. Dubey, E. Kaxiras, J. Kong, H. Wang and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3055–3063 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Liu, L. Ma, G. Shi, W. Zhou, Y. Gong, S. Lei, X. Yang, J. Zhang, J. Yu, K. P. Hackenberg, A. Babakhani, J.-C. Idrobo, R. Vajtai, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 119–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. W. Shim, K. Yoo, S. B. Seo, J. Shin, D. Y. Jung, I. S. Kang, C. W. Ahn, B. J. Cho and S. Y. Choi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6655–6662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Long and O. V. Prezhdo, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1996–2003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Yu, Y. Liu, H. L. Zhou, A. X. Yin, Z. Li, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 952–958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Miwa, M. Dendzik, S. S. Gronborg, M. Bianchi, J. V. Lauritsen, P. Hofmann and S. Ulstrup, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6502–6510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. E. Aretouli, P. Tsipas, D. Tsoutsou, J. Marquez-Velasco, E. Xenogiannopoulou, S. A. Giamini, E. Vassalou, N. Kelaidis and A. Dimoulas, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 5 CrossRef .
M. H. Chiu, M. Y. Li, W. J. Zhang, W. T. Hsu, W. H. Chang, M. Terrones, H. Terrones and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9649–9656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Diaz, R. Addou and M. Batzill, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1071–1078 RSC .
N. Lu, H. Y. Guo, L. Li, J. Dai, L. Wang, W. N. Mei, X. J. Wu and X. C. Zeng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 2879–2886 RSC .
W. C. Jin, P. C. Yeh, N. Zaki, D. Chenet, G. Arefe, Y. F. Hao, A. Sala, T. O. Mentes, J. I. Dadap, A. Locatelli, J. Hone and R. M. Osgood, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2015, 92, 6 Search PubMed .
J. Kang, J. B. Li, S. S. Li, J. B. Xia and L. W. Wang, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5485–5490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ceballos, M. Z. Bellus, H. Y. Chiu and H. Zhao, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12717–12724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Liu, H. P. Chang and A. J. Bard, Langmuir, 1991, 7, 1138–1142 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kobayashi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1996, 53, 11091–11099 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kuwabara, D. R. Clarke and D. A. Smith, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1990, 56, 2396–2398 CrossRef CAS .
W. T. Pong and C. Durkan, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2005, 38, R329–R355 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Li, A. Luican, J. dos Santos, A. H. Castro Neto, A. Reina, J. Kong and E. Y. Andrei, Nat. Phys., 2010, 6, 109–113 CrossRef CAS .
A. H. MacDonald and R. Bistritzer, Nature, 2011, 474, 453–454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. L. Sadowski, G. Martinez, M. Potemski, C. Berger and W. A. de Heer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Sprinkle, D. Siegel, Y. Hu, J. Hicks, A. Tejeda, A. Taleb-Ibrahimi, P. Le Fevre, F. Bertran, S. Vizzini, H. Enriquez, S. Chiang, P. Soukiassian, C. Berger, W. A. de Heer, A. Lanzara and E. H. Conrad, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2009, 103, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
C. R. Dean, A. F. Young, I. Meric, C. Lee, L. Wang, S. Sorgenfrei, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Kim, K. L. Shepard and J. Hone, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 722–726 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Woods, L. Britnell, A. Eckmann, R. S. Ma, J. C. Lu, H. M. Guo, X. Lin, G. L. Yu, Y. Cao, R. V. Gorbachev, A. V. Kretinin, J. Park, L. A. Ponomarenko, M. I. Katsnelson, Y. N. Gornostyrev, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. Casiraghi, H. J. Gao, A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 451–456 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yankowitz, J. M. Xue, D. Cormode, J. D. Sanchez-Yamagishi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, P. Jarillo-Herrero, P. Jacquod and B. J. LeRoy, Nat. Phys., 2012, 8, 382–386 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Park, L. Yang, Y. W. Son, M. L. Cohen and S. G. Louie, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 4 Search PubMed .
M. Kindermann, B. Uchoa and D. L. Miller, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2012, 86, 4 CrossRef .
M. Zarenia, O. Leenaerts, B. Partoens and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2012, 86, 5 CrossRef .
J. R. Wallbank, A. A. Patel, M. Mucha-Kruczynski, A. K. Geim and V. I. Falko, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2013, 87, 7 CrossRef .
G. C. Constantinescu and N. D. M. Hine, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2015, 91, 8 CrossRef .
X. Li, M.-W. Lin, J. Lin, B. Huang, A. A. Puretzky, C. Ma, K. Wang, W. Zhou, S. T. Pantelides, M. Chi, I. Kravchenko, J. Fowlkes, C. M. Rouleau, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501882–e1501882 Search PubMed .
B. Li, L. Huang, M. Zhong, Y. Li, Y. Wang, J. Li and Z. Wei, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2016, 2, 1600298 CrossRef .
D. Weiss, M. L. Roukes, A. Menschig, P. Grambow, K. Vonklitzing and G. Weimann, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1991, 66, 2790–2793 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Albrecht, J. H. Smet, D. Weiss, K. von Klitzing, R. Hennig, M. Langenbuch, M. Suhrke, U. Rossler, V. Umansky and H. Schweizer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1999, 83, 2234–2237 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pfannkuche and R. R. Gerhardts, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 1992, 46, 12606–12626 CrossRef .
S. J. Haigh, A. Gholinia, R. Jalil, S. Romani, L. Britnell, D. C. Elias, K. S. Novoselov, L. A. Ponomarenko, A. K. Geim and R. Gorbachev, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 764–767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Schlosser, K. Ensslin, J. P. Kotthaus and M. Holland, Europhys. Lett., 1996, 33, 683–688 CrossRef .
C. Albrecht, J. H. Smet, K. von Klitzing, D. Weiss, V. Umansky and H. Schweizer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Geisler, J. H. Smet, V. Umansky, K. von Klitzing, B. Naundorf, R. Ketzmerick and H. Schweizer, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2004, 92, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
L. A. Ponomarenko, R. V. Gorbachev, G. L. Yu, D. C. Elias, R. Jalil, A. A. Patel, A. Mishchenko, A. S. Mayorov, C. R. Woods, J. R. Wallbank, M. Mucha-Kruczynski, B. A. Piot, M. Potemski, I. V. Grigorieva, K. S. Novoselov, F. Guinea, V. I. Fal'ko and A. K. Geim, Nature, 2013, 497, 594–597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. X. Ni, H. Wang, J. S. Wu, Z. Fei, M. D. Goldflam, F. Keilmann, B. Ozyilmaz, A. H. C. Neto, X. M. Xie, M. M. Fogler and D. N. Basov, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 1217–1222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-M. Choi, S.-H. Jhi and Y.-W. Son, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3486–3489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cocco, E. Cadelano and L. Colombo, Phys. Rev. B, 2010, 81, 241412 CrossRef .
F. Guinea, M. I. Katsnelson and A. K. Geim, Nat. Phys., 2010, 6, 30–33 CrossRef CAS .
P. Johari and V. B. Shenoy, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5449–5456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Lee, X. D. Wei, J. W. Kysar and J. Hone, Science, 2008, 321, 385–388 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yue, J. Kang, Z. Z. Shao, X. A. Zhang, S. L. Chang, G. Wang, S. Q. Qin and J.
B. Li, Phys. Lett. A, 2012, 376, 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS .
Z. X. Wang, M. Safdar, M. Mirza, K. Xu, Q. S. Wang, Y. Huang, F. M. Wang, X. Y. Zhan and J. He, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 7252–7258 RSC .
D. Cakir, H. Sahin and F. M. Peeters, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2014, 90, 7 Search PubMed .
G. H. Lee, Y. J. Yu, X. Cui, N. Petrone, C. H. Lee, M. S. Choi, D. Y. Lee, C. Lee, W. J. Yoo, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, C. Nuckolls, P. Kim and J. Hone, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7931–7936 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wei and X. H. Peng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 5 Search PubMed .
X. Peng, L. L. Peng, C. Z. Wu and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 3303–3323 RSC .
G. Z. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Z. Lin, J. Yang, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4651–4656 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Scalise, M. Houssa, G. Pourtois, V. V. Afanas'ev and A. Stesmans, Nano Res., 2012, 5, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
W. S. Yun, S. W. Han, S. C. Hong, I. G. Kim and J. D. Lee, Phys. Rev. B, 2012, 85, 033305 CrossRef .
H. J. Conley, B. Wang, J. I. Ziegler, R. F. Haglund Jr., S. T. Pantelides and K. I. Bolotin, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3626–3630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Desai, G. Seol, J. S. Kang, H. Fang, C. Battaglia, R. Kapadia, J. W. Ager, J. Guo and A. Javey, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4592–4597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, T.-R. Chang, B. Zhou, Y.-T. Cui, H. Yan, Z. Liu, F. Schmitt, J. Lee, R. Moore, Y. Chen, H. Lin, H.-T. Jeng, S.-K. Mo, Z. Hussain, A. Bansil and Z.-X. Shen, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 111–115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. G. Lezama, A. Arora, A. Ubaldini, C. Barreteau, E. Giannini, M. Potemski and A. F. Morpurgo, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2336–2342 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. L. He, C. Lee, G. H. Lee, J. Hone, T. F. Heinz and J. Shan, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 207–211 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, S. F. Wu, H. Y. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, A. M. Jones, G. Aivazian, J. Q. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. Xiao, W. Yao and X. D. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 6 Search PubMed .
Y. M. He, Y. Yang, Z. H. Zhang, Y. J. Gong, W. Zhou, Z. L. Hu, G. L. Ye, X. Zhaug, E. Bianco, S. D. Lei, Z. H. Jin, X. L. Zou, Y. C. Yang, Y. Zhang, E. Q. Xie, J. Lou, B. Yakobson, R. Vajtai, B. Li and P. Ajayan, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3314–3320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, Y. Li, Z. Wei and J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 16448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Gui, J. Li and J. X. Zhong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2008, 78, 6 CrossRef .
V. M. Pereira, A. H. Castro Neto and N. M. R. Peres, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2009, 80, 8 CrossRef .
S. M. Choi, S. H. Jhi and Y. W. Son, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 3486–3489 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. He, J. H. Jung, F. Qiu and Z. Q. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 24254–24264 RSC .
Z. G. Yu, Y. W. Zhang and B. I. Yakobson, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 22702–22709 CAS .
L. L. Peng, X. Peng, B. R. Liu, C. Z. Wu, Y. Xie and G. H. Yu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2151–2157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Song, J. Wang, L. Z. Fan, Y. Li, C. Y. Wang and M. S. Cao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 10516–10523 CAS .
H. Kumar, D. Q. Er, L. Dong, J. W. Li and V. B. Shenoy, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 11 Search PubMed .
H. Kumar, L. Dong and V. B. Shenoy, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
J. W. Jiang and H. S. Park, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 5 Search PubMed .
Y. Gao, Q. C. Liu and B. X. Xu, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5431–5439 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. H. Wu, X. F. Qian and J. Li, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5350–5357 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, Y. Yu, G. J. Ye, Q. Ge, X. Ou, H. Wu, D. Feng, X. H. Chen and Y. Zhang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 372–377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Browning, P. Plachinda, P. Padigi, R. Solanki and S. Rouvimov, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 2143–2148 RSC .
K. Wang, B. Huang, M. Tian, F. Ceballos, M. W. Lin, M. Mahjouri-Samani, A. Boulesbaa, A. A. Puretzky, C. M. Rouleau, M. Yoon, H. Zhao, K. Xiao, G. Duscher and D. B. Geohegan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6612–6622 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Wang, G. R. Chen, C. K. Li, M. Cheng, W. Yang, S. Wu, G. B. Xie, J. Zhang, J. Zhao, X. B. Lu, P. Chen, G. L. Wang, J. L. Meng, J. Tang, R. Yang, C. L. He, D. H. Liu, D. X. Shi, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Feng, Y. B. Zhang and G. Y. Zhang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 116, 6 Search PubMed .
J. G. He, K. Hummer and C. Franchini, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2014, 89, 11 Search PubMed .
A. Splendiani, L. Sun, Y. Zhang, T. Li, J. Kim, C.-Y. Chim, G. Galli and F. Wang, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 1271–1275 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Han, H. Kwon, S. K. Kim, S. Ryu, W. S. Yun, D. H. Kim, J. H. Hwang, J. S. Kang, J. Baik, H. J. Shin and S. C. Hong, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2011, 84, 6 Search PubMed .
Z. N. Ma, Z. P. Hu, X. D. Zhao, Q. Tang, D. H. Wu, Z. Zhou and L. X. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 5593–5599 CAS .
D. S. Koda, F. Bechstedt, M. Marques and L. K. Teles, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 10895–10908 CAS .
J. T. Yuan, S. Najmaei, Z. H. Zhang, J. Zhang, S. D. Lei, P. M. Ajayan, B. I. Yakobson and J. Lou, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 555–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Pierucci, H. Henck, C. H. Naylor, H. Sediri, E. Lhuillier, A. Balan, J. E. Rault, Y. J. Dappe, F. Bertran, P. Le Fevre, A. T. C. Johnson and A. Ouerghi, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 10 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Huang, Q. Yue, J. Kang, Y. Li and J. B. Li, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2014, 26, 7 Search PubMed .
A. Ebnonnasir, B. Narayanan, S. Kodambaka and C. V. Ciobanu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 5 CrossRef .
X. Liu and Z. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3269–3275 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ma, T. I. Andersen, N. L. Nair, N. M. Gabor, M. Massicotte, C. H. Lui, A. F. Young, W. J. Fang, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Kong, N. Gedik, F. H. L. Koppens and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Phys., 2016, 12, 455–459 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rivera, J. R. Schaibley, A. M. Jones, J. S. Ross, S. F. Wu, G. Aivazian, P. Klement, K. Seyler, G. Clark, N. J. Ghimire, J. Q. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, W. Yao and X. D. Xu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6 CrossRef PubMed .
E. V. Calman, C. J. Dorow, M. M. Fogler, L. V. Butov, S. Hu, A. Mishchenko and A. K. Geim, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 4 CrossRef .
H. Wang, J. Bang, Y. Y. Sun, L. B. Liang, D. West, V. Meunier and S. B. Zhang, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 9 Search PubMed .
X. P. Hong, J. Kim, S. F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. H. Jin, Y. H. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Q. Wu, Y. F. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Rigos, H. M. Hill, Y. L. Li, A. Chernikov and T. F. Heinz, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5033–5038 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Kang, S. Tongay, J. Zhou, J. B. Li and J. Q. Wu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 4 Search PubMed .
K. K. Manga, Y. Zhou, Y. L. Yan and K. P. Loh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3638–3643 CrossRef CAS .
P. V. Kamat, Acc. Chem. Res., 2012, 45, 1906–1915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Yu, S. Hu, L. Q. Su, L. J. Huang, Y. Liu, Z. H. Jin, A. A. Purezky, D. B. Geohegan, K. W. Kim, Y. Zhang and L. Y. Cao, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 486–491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, C. Y. Xu, J. K. Qin, W. Feng, J. Y. Wang, S. Q. Zhang, L. P. Ma, J. Cao, P. A. Hu, W. C. Ren and L. Zhen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 293–302 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stedman, D. Drosdoff and L. M. Woods, Phys. Rev. A, 2014, 89, 5 CrossRef .
X. Wei, W. Chen, B. Chen and L. L. Sun, Comput. Math. Appl., 2015, 69, 206–222 CrossRef .
C. X. Xia, B. Xue, T. X. Wang, Y. T. Peng and Y. Jia, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 5 Search PubMed .
N. B. Le, T. D. Huang and L. M. Woods, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6286–6292 CAS .
Z. Y. Zhang, M. S. Si, S. L. Peng, F. Zhang, Y. H. Wang and D. S. Xue, J. Solid State Chem., 2015, 231, 64–69 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, C. Battaglia, C. Carraro, S. Nemsak, B. Ozdol, J. S. Kang, H. A. Bechtel, S. B. Desai, F. Kronast, A. A. Unal, G. Conti, C. Conlon, G. K. Palsson, M. C. Martin, A. M. Minor, C. S. Fadley, E. Yablonovitch, R. Maboudian and A. Javey, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2014, 111, 6198–6202 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Fan, X. Zhu, F. Ke, Y. B. Chen, K. C. Dong, J. Ji, B. Chen, S. Tongay, J. W. Ager, K. Liu, H. B. Su and J. Q. Wu, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2015, 92, 5 Search PubMed .
A. Sharma, P. Harnish, A. Sylvester, V. N. Kotov and A. H. C. Neto, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2014, 89, 7 Search PubMed .
J. Meng, H. D. Song, C. Z. Li, Y. B. Jin, L. Tang, D. M. Liu, Z. M. Liao, F. X. Xiu and D. P. Yu, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 11611–11619 RSC .
Z. Xu, B. Hu and J. Howe, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 103, 043909 CrossRef .
S. Mouri, Y. Miyauchi and K. Matsuda, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5944–5948 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wi, H. Kim, M. Chen, H. Nam, L. J. Guo, E. Meyhofer and X. Liang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5270–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Chen, Q. Z. Wu, C. Mishra, J. Y. Kang, H. J. Zhang, K. J. Cho, W. W. Cai, A. A. Balandin and R. S. Ruoff, Nat. Mater., 2012, 11, 203–207 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. W. Zhang, Y. E. Xie, Q. Peng and Y. P. Chen, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 8 Search PubMed .
E. Pop, V. Varshney and A. K. Roy, MRS Bull., 2012, 37, 1273–1281 CrossRef CAS .
Z. W. Ding, Q. X. Pei, J. W. Jiang, W. X. Huang and Y. W. Zhang, Carbon, 2016, 96, 888–896 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Zhang, Q. X. Pei, J. W. Jiang, N. Wei and Y. W. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 483–491 RSC .
B. Liu, J. A. Baimova, C. D. Reddy, A. W. K. Law, S. V. Dmitriev, H. Wu and K. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 18180–18188 CAS .
R. Fei, A. Faghaninia, R. Soklaski, J.-A. Yan, C. Lo and L. Yang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6393–6399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Peng, H. Zhang, H. Z. Shao, Y. C. Xu, X. C. Zhang and H. Y. Zhu, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 10 CrossRef PubMed .
M. V. Kamalakar, A. Dankert, J. Bergsten, T. Ive and S. P. Dash, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 4 CrossRef .
M. Y. Wang, L. P. Liu, C. C. Liu and Y. G. Yao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2016, 93, 8 Search PubMed .
X. F. Qian, J. W. Liu, L. Fu and J. Li, Science, 2014, 346, 1344–1347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. V. Kamalakar, A. Dankert, J. Bergsten, T. Ive and S. P. Dash, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 8 Search PubMed .
M. V. Kamalakar, A. Dankert, P. J. Kelly and S. P. Dash, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Q. You, X. C. Wang and W. B. Mi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 31253–31259 RSC .
B. Q. You, X. C. Wang, Z. D. Zheng and W. B. Mi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 7381–7388 RSC .
A. Rycerz, J. Tworzydlo and C. W. J. Beenakker, Nat. Phys., 2007, 3, 172–175 CrossRef CAS .
D. Xiao, W. Yao and Q. Niu, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 99, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Li and J. P. Carbotte, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2012, 86, 7 Search PubMed .
X. Xu, W. Yao, D. Xiao and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Phys., 2014, 10, 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
H. L. Zeng, J. F. Dai, W. Yao, D. Xiao and X. D. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 490–493 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Xiao, G. B. Liu, W. X. Feng, X. D. Xu and W. Yao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2012, 108, 5 Search PubMed .
T. Cao, G. Wang, W. P. Han, H. Q. Ye, C. R. Zhu, J. R. Shi, Q. Niu, P. H. Tan, E. Wang, B. L. Liu and J. Feng, Nat. Commun., 2012, 3, 5 Search PubMed .
K. F. Mak, K. He, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 494–498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ezawa, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2013, 87, 6 CrossRef .
W. X. Feng, Y. G. Yao, W. G. Zhu, J. J. Zhou, W. Yao and D. Xiao, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2012, 86, 6 Search PubMed .
M. Eginligil, B. C. Cao, Z. L. Wang, X. N. Shen, C. X. Cong, J. Z. Shang, C. Soci and T. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7 Search PubMed .
V. T. Renard, B. A. Piot, X. Waintal, G. Fleury, D. Cooper, Y. Niida, D. Tregurtha, A. Fujiwara, Y. Hirayama and K. Takashina, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8 Search PubMed .
S. F. Wu, C. M. Huang, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, D. H. Cobden and X. D. Xu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2768–2772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Pan, Z. S. Li, C. C. Liu, G. B. Zhu, Z. H. Qiao and Y. G. Yao, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2014, 112, 5 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Mai, A. Barrette, Y. F. Yu, Y. G. Semenov, K. W. Kim, L. Y. Cao and K. Gundogdu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 202–206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. M. Jones, H. Y. Yu, N. J. Ghimire, S. F. Wu, G. Aivazian, J. S. Ross, B. Zhao, J. Q. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, D. Xiao, W. Yao and X. D. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 634–638 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Yuan, X. Q. Wang, B. Lian, H. J. Zhang, X. F. Fang, B. Shen, G. Xu, Y. Xu, S. C. Zhang, H. Y. Hwang and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 851–857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lang, Y. Tomm, R. Schlaf, C. Pettenkofer and W. Jaegermann, J. Appl. Phys., 1994, 75, 7814–7820 CrossRef CAS .
L. T. Vinh, M. Eddrief, C. Sebenne, A. Sacuto and M. Balkanski, J. Cryst. Growth, 1994, 135, 1–10 CrossRef .
X. F. Li, L. Basile, B. Huang, C. Ma, J. W. Lee, I. V. Vlassiouk, A. A. Puretzky, M. W. Lin, M. Yoon, M. F. Chi, J. C. Idrobo, C. M. Rouleau, B. G. Sumpter, D. B. Geohegan and K. Xiao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8078–8088 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Shi, W. Zhou, A. Y. Lu, W. J. Fang, Y. H. Lee, A. L. Hsu, S. M. Kim, K. K. Kim, H. Y. Yang, L. J. Li, J. C. Idrobo and J. Kong, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2784–2791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ago, H. Endo, P. Solis-Fernandez, R. Takizawa, Y. Ohta, Y. Fujita, K. Yamamoto and M. Tsuji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 5265–5273 CAS .
S. S. Wang, X. C. Wang and J. H. Warner, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5246–5254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Mishra, V. Miseikis, D. Convertino, M. Gemmi, V. Piazza and C. Coletti, Carbon, 2016, 96, 497–502 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bae, H. Kim, Y. Lee, X. F. Xu, J. S. Park, Y. Zheng, J. Balakrishnan, T. Lei, H. R. Kim, Y. I. Song, Y. J. Kim, K. S. Kim, B. Ozyilmaz, J. H. Ahn, B. H. Hong and S. Iijima, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2010, 5, 574–578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. C. Diaz, R. Chaghi, Y. J. Ma and M. Batzill, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 10 Search PubMed .
S. Vishwanath, X. Y. Liu, S. Rouvimov, P. C. Mende, A. Azcatl, S. McDonnell, R. M. Wallace, R. M. Feenstra, J. K. Furdyna, D. Jena and H. G. Xing, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 9 Search PubMed .
M. Lanius, J. Kampmeier, C. Weyrich, S. Kolling, M. Schall, P. Schuffelgen, E. Neumann, M. Luysberg, G. Mussler, P. M. Koenraad, T. Schapers and D. Grutzmacher, Cryst. Growth Des., 2016, 16, 2057–2061 CAS .
J. Lee, V. Varshney, J. Park, B. L. Farmer and A. K. Roy, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 9704–9713 RSC .
Y. Liu, N. O. Weiss, X. Duan, H.-C. Cheng, Y. Huang and X. Duan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16042 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Das, J. A. Robinson, M. Dubey, H. Terrones and M. Terrones, Beyond Graphene: Progress in Novel Two-Dimensional Materials and van der Waals Solids, in Annual Review of Materials Research, Vol 45, Annual Reviews, ed. D. R. Clarke, Palo Alto,  2015, pp. 1–27 Search PubMed .
D. H. Deng, K. S. Novoselov, Q. Fu, N. F. Zheng, Z. Q. Tian and X. H. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 218–230 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Huang, N. J. Huo, Y. Li, H. Chen, J. H. Yang, Z. M. Wei, J. B. Li and S. S. Li, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2483–2488 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. A. Zhang, T. N. Zhang, G. H. Cheng, T. X. Li, S. X. Wang, W. Wei, X. H. Zhou, W. W. Yu, Y. Sun, P. Wang, D. Zhang, C. G. Zeng, X. J. Wang, W. D. Hu, H. J. Fan, G. Z. Shen, X. Chen, X. F. Duan, K. Chang and N. Dai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3852–3858 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Bernardi, M. Palummo and J. C. Grossman, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3664–3670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Roy, M. Padmanabhan, S. Goswami, T. P. Sai, G. Ramalingam, S. Raghavan and A. Ghosh, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 826–830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, C.-P. Chuu, J.-K. Huang, C.-H. Chen, M.-L. Tsai, Y.-H. Chang, C.-T. Liang, Y.-Z. Chen, Y.-L. Chueh, J.-H. He, M.-Y. Chou and L.-J. Li, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3826 Search PubMed .
Y. Choi, J. M. Kang, D. Jariwala, M. S. Kang, T. J. Marks, M. C. Hersam and J. H. Cho, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3742–3748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kang, D. Jariwala, C. R. Ryder, S. A. Wells, Y. Choi, E. Hwang, J. H. Cho, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2580–2585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Britnell, R. V. Gorbachev, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, F. Schedin, A. Mishchenko, T. Georgiou, M. I. Katsnelson, L. Eaves, S. V. Morozov, N. M. R. Peres, J. Leist, A. K. Geim, K. S. Novoselov and L. A. Ponomarenko, Science, 2012, 335, 947–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. He, Y. M. Pan, H. Y. Nan, S. A. Gu, Z. Y. Yang, B. Wu, X. G. Luo, B. C. Xu, Y. H. Zhang, Y. Li, Z. H. Ni, B. G. Wang, J. Zhu, Y. Chai, Y. Shi and X. R. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 5 Search PubMed .
F. C. Liu, W. L. Chow, X. X. He, P. Hu, S. J. Zheng, X. L. Wang, J. D. Zhou, Q. D. Fu, W. Fu, P. Yu, Q. S. Zeng, H. J. Fan, B. K. Tay, C. Kloc and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 5865–5871 CrossRef CAS .
L. Niu, X. F. Liu, C. X. Cong, C. Y. Wu, D. Wu, T. R. Chang, H. Wang, Q. S. Zeng, J. D. Zhou, X. L. Wang, W. Fu, P. Yu, Q. D. Fu, S. Najmaei, Z. H. Zhang, B. I. Yakobson, B. K. Tay, W. Zhou, H. T. Jeng, H. Lin, T. C. Sum, C. Jin, H. Y. He, T. Yu and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 7800–7808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, S. S. Lin, G. Q. Ding, X. Q. Li, Z. Q. Wu, S. J. Zhang, Z. J. Xu, S. Xu, Y. H. Lu, W. L. Xu and Z. Y. Zheng, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 4 Search PubMed .
X. W. Zhang, X. J. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. M. Wu, Y. Wang, P. Gao, Y. Y. Han and J. S. Jie, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 7 Search PubMed .
Y. J. Hong, W. H. Lee, Y. P. Wu, R. S. Ruoff and T. Fukui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1431–1436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. D. Duan, C. Wang, J. C. Shaw, R. Cheng, Y. Chen, H. L. Li, X. P. Wu, Y. Tang, Q. L. Zhang, A. L. Pan, J. H. Jiang, R. Q. Yu, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 1024–1030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Jung, J. Shen, Y. Sun and J. J. Cha, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9550–9557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Levendorf, C.-J. Kim, L. Brown, P. Y. Huang, R. W. Havener, D. A. Muller and J. Park, Nature, 2012, 488, 627–632 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Coleman, M. Lotya, A. O'Neill, S. D. Bergin, P. J. King, U. Khan, K. Young, A. Gaucher, S. De, R. J. Smith, I. V. Shvets, S. K. Arora, G. Stanton, H.-Y. Kim, K. Lee, G. T. Kim, G. S. Duesberg, T. Hallam, J. J. Boland, J. J. Wang, J. F. Donegan, J. C. Grunlan, G. Moriarty, A. Shmeliov, R. J. Nicholls, J. M. Perkins, E. M. Grieveson, K. Theuwissen, D. W. McComb, P. D. Nellist and V. Nicolosi, Science, 2011, 331, 568–571 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cunningham, M. Lotya, C. S. Cucinotta, S. Sanvito, S. D. Bergin, R. Menzel, M. S. P. Shaffer and J. N. Coleman, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3468–3480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Furchi, A. Pospischil, F. Libisch, J. Burgdorfer and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 4785–4791 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Radisavljevic, A. Radenovic, J. Brivio, V. Giacometti and A. Kis, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 147–150 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-M. Li, D.-Y. Lee, M. S. Choi, D. Qu, X. Liu, C.-H. Ra and W. J. Yoo, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 4041 Search PubMed .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 136805 CrossRef PubMed .
W. J. Zhao, Z. Ghorannevis, L. Q. Chu, M. L. Toh, C. Kloc, P. H. Tan and G. Eda, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 791–797 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Huo, J. Kang, Z. M. Wei, S. S. Li, J. B. Li and S. H. Wei, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 7025–7031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Z. Xue, Y. P. Zhang, Y. Liu, H. T. Liu, J. C. Song, J. Sophia, J. Y. Liu, Z. Q. Xu, Q. Y. Xu, Z. Y. Wang, J. L. Zheng, Y. Q. Liu, S. J. Li and Q. L. Bao, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 573–580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Tong, E. Ashalley, F. Lin, H. D. Li and Z. M. M. Wang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2015, 7, 203–218 CrossRef .
H. P. Komsa and A. V. Krasheninnikov, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2013, 88, 7 Search PubMed .
H. Terrones, F. Lopez-Urias and M. Terrones, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 7 Search PubMed .
Y. Gong, J. Lin, X. Wang, G. Shi, S. Lei, Z. Lin, X. Zou, G. Ye, R. Vajtai, B. I. Yakobson, H. Terrones, M. Terrones, B. K. Tay, J. Lou, S. T. Pantelides, Z. Liu, W. Zhou and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1135–1142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M.-H. Chiu, C. Zhang, H.-W. Shiu, C.-P. Chuu, C.-H. Chen, C.-Y. S. Chang, C.-H. Chen, M.-Y. Chou, C.-K. Shih and L.-J. Li, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7666 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Debbichi, O. Eriksson and S. Lebegue, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter, 2014, 89, 5 CrossRef .
A. Pospischil, M. M. Furchi and T. Mueller, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 257–261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. W. H. Baugher, H. O. H. Churchill, Y. F. Yang and P. Jarillo-Herrero, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 262–267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Ross, P. Klement, A. M. Jones, N. J. Ghimire, J. Q. Yan, D. G. Mandrus, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, K. Kitamura, W. Yao, D. H. Cobden and X. D. Xu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 268–272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. J. Zhang, T. Oka, R. Suzuki, J. T. Ye and Y. Iwasa, Science, 2014, 344, 725–728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Huo, S. Tongay, W. L. Guo, R. X. Li, C. Fan, F. Y. Lu, J. H. Yang, B. Li, Y. T. Li and Z. M. Wei, Adv. Electron. Mater., 2015, 1, 7 Search PubMed .
N. J. Huo, J. H. Yang, L. Huang, Z. M. Wei, S. S. Li, S. H. Wei and J. B. Li, Small, 2015, 11, 5430–5438 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Withers, O. Del Pozo-Zamudio, S. Schwarz, S. Dufferwiel, P. M. Walker, T. Godde, A. P. Rooney, A. Gholinia, C. R. Woods, P. Blake, S. J. Haigh, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, I. L. Aleiner, A. K. Geim, V. I. Fal'ko, A. I. Tartakovskii and K. S. Novoselov, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 8223–8228 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Yu, H. R. Lee, S. S. Hong, D. S. Kong, H. W. Lee, H. T. Wang, F. Xiong, S. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 1031–1035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-Q. Zhang, C.-H. Lin, Y.-W. Tseng, K.-H. Huang and Y.-H. Lee, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 410–415 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Q. He, N. Kumar, M. Z. Bellus, H. Y. Chiu, D. W. He, Y. S. Wang and H. Zhao, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5 Search PubMed .
X. L. Liu, I. Balla, H. Bergeron, G. P. Campbell, M. J. Bedzyk and M. C. Hersam, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 1067–1075 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Moriya, T. Yamaguchi, Y. Inoue, S. Morikawa, Y. Sata, S. Masubuchi and T. Machida, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 105, 4 CrossRef .
Y. Sata, R. Moriya, S. Morikawa, N. Yabuki, S. Masubuchi and T. Machida, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 5 CrossRef .
L. Britnell, R. M. Ribeiro, A. Eckmann, R. Jalil, B. D. Belle, A. Mishchenko, Y. J. Kim, R. V. Gorbachev, T. Georgiou, S. V. Morozov, A. N. Grigorenko, A. K. Geim, C. Casiraghi, A. H. Castro Neto and K. S. Novoselov, Science, 2013, 340, 1311–1314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhu, T. Low, Y.-H. Lee, H. Wang, D. B. Farmer, J. Kong, F. Xia and P. Avouris, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3087 Search PubMed .
H.-J. Chuang, X. Tan, N. J. Ghimire, M. M. Perera, B. Chamlagain, M. M.-C. Cheng, J. Yan, D. Mandrus, D. Tomanek and Z. Zhou, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3594–3601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Luo, Y. N. Wang, X. Tong and Z. M. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 1–11 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and H. Kanda, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 404–409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Akinwande, N. Petrone and J. Hone, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 12 Search PubMed .
A. Pakdel, Y. Bando and D. Golberg, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 934–959 RSC .
D. Golberg, Y. Bando, Y. Huang, T. Terao, M. Mitome, C. C. Tang and C. Y. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 2979–2993 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Zuo, Z. G. Xu, R. J. Zheng, A. Khanaki, J. G. Zheng and J. L. Liu, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 6 Search PubMed .
H. Sediri, D. Pierucci, M. Hajlaoui, H. Henck, G. Patriarche, Y. J. Dappe, S. Yuan, B. Toury, R. Belkhou, M. G. Silly, F. Sirotti, M. Boutchich and A. Ouerghi, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10 Search PubMed .
T. Gao, X. J. Song, H. W. Du, Y. F. Nie, Y. B. Chen, Q. Q. Ji, J. Y. Sun, Y. L. Yang, Y. F. Zhang and Z. F. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 8 Search PubMed .
Z. G. Chen, Z. W. Shi, W. Yang, X. B. Lu, Y. Lai, H. G. Yan, F. Wang, G. Y. Zhang and Z. Q. Li, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 6 Search PubMed .
V. Quoc An, Y. S. Shin, Y. R. Kim, N. Van Luan, W. T. Kang, H. Kim, L. Dinh Hoa, I. M. Lee, K. Lee, D.-S. Ko, J. Heo, S. Park, Y. H. Lee and W. J. Yu, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12725 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Jun, J. Velasco, E. Huang, S. Kahn, C. Nosiglia, H. Z. Tsai, W. Yang, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe, Y. Zhang, G. Zhang, M. Crommie, A. Zettl and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 348–352 CrossRef PubMed .
D. H. Tien, J. Y. Park, K. B. Kim, N. Lee, T. Choi, P. Kim, T. Taniguchi, K. Watanabe and Y. Seo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3072–3078 CAS .
S. Roth, F. Matsui, T. Greber and J. Osterwalder, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 2668–2675 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Bresnehan, M. J. Hollander, M. Wetherington, M. LaBella, K. A. Trumbull, R. Cavalero, D. W. Snyder and J. A. Robinson, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5234–5241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. H. Lee, H.-J. Shin, J. Lee, I.-Y. Lee, G.-H. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and S.-W. Kim, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 714–718 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, A. T. Neal, Z. Zhu, Z. Luo, X. Xu, D. Tomanek and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4033–4041 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liu, Y. Du, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2732–2743 RSC .
A. Morita, Appl. Phys. A, 1986, 39, 227–242 CrossRef .
T. Vy, R. Soklaski, Y. Liang and L. Yang, Phys. Rev. B, 2014, 89, 235319 CrossRef .
X. Ling, H. Wang, S. Huang, F. Xia and M. S. Dresselhaus, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2015, 112, 4523–4530 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, H. Wang and Y. Jia, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4458 CAS .
M. Buscema, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 3347–3352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hong, B. Chamlagain, W. Lin, H.-J. Chuang, M. Pan, Z. Zhou and Y.-Q. Xu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8978–8983 RSC .
Y. Du, H. Liu, Y. Deng and P. D. Ye, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 10035–10042 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Na, Y. T. Lee, J. A. Lim, D. K. Hwang, G.-T. Kim, W. K. Choi and Y.-W. Song, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11753–11762 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qiao, X. Kong, Z.-X. Hu, F. Yang and W. Ji, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4475 CAS .
X. Wang, A. M. Jones, K. L. Seyler, T. Vy, Y. Jia, H. Zhao, H. Wang, L. Yang, X. Xu and F. Xia, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 517–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Guo, N. Lu, J. Dai, X. Wu and X. C. Zeng, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 14051–14059 CAS .
P. Chen, J. Y. Xiang, H. Yu, J. Zhang, G. B. Xie, S. Wu, X. B. Lu, G. L. Wang, J. Zhao, F. S. Wen, Z. Y. Liu, R. Yang, D. X. Shi and G. Y. Zhang, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 6 Search PubMed .
L. Ye, H. Li, Z. F. Chen and J. B. Xu, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 692–699 CrossRef CAS .
Y. J. Zheng, Y. L. Huang, Y. F. Chenp, W. J. Zhao, G. Eda, C. D. Spataru, W. J. Zhang, Y. H. Chang, L. J. Li, D. Z. Chi, S. Y. Quek and A. T. S. Wee, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 2476–2484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wu, Y. H. Zhao, H. Y. Nan, Z. Y. Yang, Y. H. Zhang, H. J. Zhao, D. W. He, Z. L. Jiang, X. L. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Shi, Z. H. Ni, J. L. Wang, J. B. Xu and X. R. Wang, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 3754–3759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Lee, T. Schiros, E. J. G. Santos, B. Kim, K. G. Yager, S. J. Kang, S. Lee, J. Yu, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, E. Kaxiras, C. Nuckolls and P. Kim, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2812–2817 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Kang, G. H. Lee, Y. J. Yu, Y. Zhao, B. Kim, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, J. Hone, P. Kim and C. Nuckolls, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 5157–5163 CrossRef CAS .
D. Jariwala, S. L. Howell, K. S. Chen, J. M. Kang, V. K. Sangwan, S. A. Filippone, R. Turrisi, T. J. Marks, L. J. Lauhon and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 497–503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Liu, Z. Zeng, X. Cao, G. Lu, L.-H. Wang, Q.-L. Fan, W. Huang and H. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 3517–3522 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, G. Grancini, C. Menelaou, M. J. P. Alcocer, T. Leijtens, L. M. Herz, A. Petrozza and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2013, 342, 341–344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. N. Liang, D. B. Mitzi and M. T. Prikas, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 403–411 CrossRef CAS .
K. Tanaka, T. Takahashi, T. Ban, T. Kondo, K. Uchida and N. Miura, Solid State Commun., 2003, 127, 619–623 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. S. Lim, N. Yantara, X. Liu, D. Sabba, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 476–480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N.-G. Park, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 2423–2429 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Mudd, S. A. Svatek, L. Hague, O. Makarovsky, Z. R. Kudrynskyi, C. J. Mellor, P. H. Beton, L. Eaves, K. S. Novoselov, Z. D. Kovalyuk, E. E. Vdovin, A. J. Marsden, N. R. Wilson and A. Patane, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3760–3766 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Yabuki, R. Moriya, M. Arai, Y. Sata, S. Morikawa, S. Masubuchi and T. Machida, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 5 Search PubMed .
W. Zheng, W. Feng, X. Zhang, X. S. Chen, G. B. Liu, Y. F. Qiu, T. Hasan, P. H. Tan and P. A. Hu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 2648–2654 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Liu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 28417–28423 CAS .
F. Wang, Z. X. Wang, K. Xu, F. M. Wang, Q. S. Wang, Y. Huang, L. Yin and J. He, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7558–7566 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Huang, Y. Peng, N. Huo, K. Wu, C. Xia, Z. Wei, S. Tongay and J. Li, Nano Res., 2016, 9, 507–516 CrossRef CAS .
W. Feng, W. Zheng, X. Chen, G. Liu, W. Cao and P. Hu, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 983–989 CrossRef CAS .
J. Park, T. Back, W. C. Mitchel, S. S. Kim, S. Elhamri, J. Boeckl, S. B. Fairchild, R. Naik and A. A. Voevodin, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 9 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, L.-F. Cui, Y. Yang, H. S. Casalongue, J. T. Robinson, Y. Liang, Y. Cui and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 13978–13980 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chakrabartty, R. Nechache, C. Harnagea, S. Li and F. Rosei, Nanotechnology, 2016, 27, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. K. Tang, C. J. Tong, W. Geng, D. Y. Zhang and L. M. Liu, 2D Mater., 2015, 2, 7 Search PubMed .
H. Wang, H. S. Casalongue, Y. Liang and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7472–7477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mohrmann, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi and R. Danneau, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 6 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Chang and W. X. Chen, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4720–4728 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, T. Chen, W. X. Chen, K. Chang, L. Ma, G. C. Huang, D. Y. Chen and J. Y. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 2202–2210 CAS .
X. S. Zhou, L. J. Wan and Y. G. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1838–1840 RSC .
L. J. Zhou, J. Zhang, Z. W. Zhuo, L. Z. Kou, W. Ma, B. Shao, A. J. Du, S. Meng and T. Frauenheim, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 1880–1887 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Y. Toh, K. S. Loh, S. K. Kamarudin and W. R. W. Daud, Chem. Eng. J., 2014, 251, 422–434 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. He, J. Klinowski, M. Forster and A. Lerf, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1998, 287, 53–56 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yu, W. Zhang, H. J. Zhang, S. C. Zhang, X. Dai and Z. Fang, Science, 2010, 329, 61–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ezawa, J. Phys. Soc. Jpn., 2015, 84, 11 CrossRef .
E. Ashalley, H. Y. Chen, X. Tong, H. D. Li and Z. M. M. Wang, Front. Mater. Sci., 2015, 9, 103–125 CrossRef .
S. G. Xu, Y. Han, X. L. Chen, Z. F. Wu, L. Wang, T. Y. Han, W. G. Ye, H. H. Lu, G. Long, Y. Y. Wu, J. X. Z. Lin, Y. Cai, K. M. Ho, Y. H. He and N. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2645–2651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. B. Zhang, X. J. Zhang, C. Liu, S. T. Lee and J. S. Jie, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5113–5122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Mu, Z. T. Wang, J. Yuan, S. Xiao, C. Y. Chen, Y. Chen, Y. Chen, J. C. Song, Y. S. Wang, Y. Z. Xue, H. Zhang and Q. L. Bao, ACS Photonics, 2015, 2, 832–841 CrossRef CAS .
M. Woszczyna, A. Winter, M. Grothe, A. Willunat, S. Wundrack, R. Stosch, T. Weimann, F. Ahlers and A. Turchanin, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4831–4837 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Kim, T. H. Lee, E. J. G. Santos, P. S. Jo, A. Salleo, Y. Nishi and Z. N. Bao, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5922–5928 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Luo, W. Q. Huang, L. Xu, Y. C. Yang, X. F. Li, W. Y. Hu, P. Peng and G. F. Huang, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 43228–43236 RSC .
T. Zhu, H. B. Wu, Y. B. Wang, R. Xu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1497–1502 CrossRef CAS .
Y. M. Shi, Y. Wang, J. I. Wong, A. Y. S. Tan, C. L. Hsu, L. J. Li, Y. C. Lu and H. Y. Yang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 8 Search PubMed .
D. Jariwala, V. K. Sangwan, J. W. T. Seo, W. C. Xu, J. Smith, C. H. Kim, L. J. Lauhon, T. J. Marks and M. C. Hersam, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 416–421 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. X. Guo, F. Zhang, C. J. Lin and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4761–4764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhang, G. Q. Zhang, H. B. Wu, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2589–2593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. R. Zheng, H. N. Ji, P. Yu and Z. M. Wang, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 8 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Lin, H. Li, H. Zhang and W. Chen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 203109 CrossRef .
S. Najmaei, A. Mlayah, A. Arbouet, C. Girard, J. Leotin and J. Lou, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12682–12689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Miao, W. Hu, Y. Jing, W. Luo, L. Liao, A. Pan, S. Wu, J. Cheng, X. Chen and W. Lu, Small, 2015, 11, 2392–2398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wu, P. Yu, A. S. Susha, K. A. Sablon, H. Y. Chen, Z. H. Zhou, H. D. Li, H. N. Ji, X. B. Niu, A. O. Govorov, A. L. Rogach and Z. M. M. Wang, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 827–835 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chuang, R. Kapadia, H. Fang, T. C. Chang, W. C. Yen, Y. L. Chueh and A. Javey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 4 Search PubMed .
R. Cheng, D. H. Li, H. L. Zhou, C. Wang, A. X. Yin, S. Jiang, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Y. Huang and X. F. Duan, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5590–5597 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pezeshki, S. Hossein, H. Shokouh, T. Nazari, K. Oh and S. Im, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3216–3222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Choudhary, J. Park, J. Y. Hwang, H. S. Chung, K. H. Dumas, S. I. Khondaker, W. B. Choi and Y. Jung, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
C. H. Lee, G. H. Lee, A. M. van der Zande, W. C. Chen, Y. L. Li, M. Y. Han, X. Cui, G. Arefe, C. Nuckolls, T. F. Heinz, J. Guo, J. Hone and P. Kim, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 676–681 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Fontana, T. Deppe, A. K. Boyd, M. Rinzan, A. Y. Liu, M. Paranjape and P. Barbara, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 1 Search PubMed .
P. Chen, T. T. Zhang, J. Zhang, J. Y. Xiang, H. Yu, S. Wu, X. B. Lu, G. L. Wang, F. S. Wen, Z. Y. Liu, R. Yang, D. X. Shi and G. Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 3254–3258 RSC .
M. Buscema, J. O. Island, D. J. Groenendijk, S. I. Blanter, G. A. Steele, H. S. J. van der Zant and A. Castellanos-Gomez, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3691–3718 RSC .
F. N. Xia, H. Wang, D. Xiao, M. Dubey and A. Ramasubramaniam, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 899–907 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, Y.-M. Lin, A. Valdes-Garcia and P. Avouris, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2009, 4, 839–843 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Gan, R.-J. Shiue, Y. Gao, I. Meric, T. F. Heinz, K. Shepard, J. Hone, S. Assefa and D. Englund, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 883–887 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Z. Cheng, K. Xu, H. K. Tsang and J.-B. Xu, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 888–891 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, L. Ju, F. Wang and T. F. Heinz, Solid State Commun., 2012, 152, 1341–1349 CrossRef CAS .
M. Furchi, A. Urich, A. Pospischil, G. Lilley, K. Unterrainer, H. Detz, P. Klang, A. M. Andrews, W. Schrenk, G. Strasser and T. Mueller, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2773–2777 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pospischil, M. Humer, M. M. Furchi, D. Bachmann, R. Guider, T. Fromherz and T. Mueller, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 892–896 CrossRef CAS .
Y. L. Liu, C. C. Yu, K. T. Lin, T. C. Yang, E. Y. Wang, H. L. Chen, L. C. Chen and K. H. Chen, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5093–5103 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xia, T. Mueller, R. Golizadeh-Mojarad, M. Freitag, Y.-M. Lin, J. Tsang, V. Perebeinos and P. Avouris, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1039–1044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Bonaccorso, Z. Sun, T. Hasan and A. C. Ferrari, Nat. Photonics, 2010, 4, 611–622 CrossRef CAS .
K. F. Mak, C. Lee, J. Hone, J. Shan and T. F. Heinz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 4 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Sarkar, W. Liu, X. J. Xie, A. C. Anselmo, S. Mitragotri and K. Banerjee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3992–4003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ganatra and Q. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4074–4099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xia, X. Huang, L. Z. Liu, M. Wang, L. Wang, B. Huang, D. D. Zhu, J. J. Li, C. Z. Gu and X. M. Meng, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 8949–8955 RSC .
M. S. Long, E. F. Liu, P. Wang, A. Y. Gao, H. Xia, W. Luo, B. G. Wang, J. W. Zeng, Y. J. Fu, K. Xu, W. Zhou, Y. Y. Lv, S. H. Yao, M. H. Lu, Y. F. Chen, Z. H. Ni, Y. M. You, X. A. Zhang, S. Q. Qin, Y. Shi, W. D. Hu, D. Y. Xing and F. Miao, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2254–2259 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Massicotte, P. Schmidt, F. Vialla, K. G. Schadler, A. Reserbat-Plantey, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, K. J. Tielrooij and F. H. L. Koppens, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2016, 11, 42–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Zhang, H. Q. Sun, L. Xie, J. N. Lu, L. Y. Zhang, S. J. Wu, X. S. Gao, X. B. Lu, J. H. Li and J. M. Liu, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 13 CrossRef PubMed .
D. A. Grynko, A. N. Fedoryak, P. S. Smertenko, O. P. Dimitriev, N. A. Ogurtsov and A. A. Pud, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 9 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. R. Jiang, X. Gong, R. P. Qin, H. R. Liu, C. X. Xia and H. Ma, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
M. N. Lu, G. T. Yuan, Z. S. Wang, Y. Y. Wang and J. Guo, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2015, 10, 7 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Tong, F. Lin, J. Wu and Z. M. M. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 18 Search PubMed .
R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308–1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Q. Ruan, K. Ding, Y. M. Wang, S. L. Diao, Z. B. Shao, X. J. Zhang and J. S. Jie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14370–14377 CAS .
X. Q. Li, W. C. Chen, S. J. Zhang, Z. Q. Wu, P. Wang, Z. J. Xu, H. S. Chen, W. Y. Yin, H. K. Zhong and S. S. Lin, Nano Energy, 2015, 16, 310–319 CrossRef CAS .
C. L. Hsu, C. T. Lin, J. H. Huang, C. W. Chu, K. H. Wei and L. J. Li, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 5031–5039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Eda and S. A. Maier, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 5660–5665 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Lin, P. Wang, X. Q. Li, Z. Q. Wu, Z. J. Xu, S. J. Zhang and W. L. Xu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 107, 5 Search PubMed .
P. Wang, X. Q. Li, Z. J. Xu, Z. Q. Wu, S. J. Zhang, W. L. Xu, H. K. Zhong, H. S. Chen, E. P. Li, J. K. Luo, Q. K. Yu and S. S. Lin, Nano Energy, 2015, 13, 509–517 CrossRef CAS .
F. Withers, O. Del Pozo-Zamudio, A. Mishchenko, A. P. Rooney, A. Gholinia, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, S. J. Haigh, A. K. Geim, A. I. Tartakovskii and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14, 301–306 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Lopez-Sanchez, E. A. Llado, V. Koman, A. F. I. Morral, A. Radenovic and A. Kis, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 3042–3048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jo, N. Ubrig, H. Berger, A. B. Kuzmenko and A. F. Morpurgo, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2019–2025 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Roy, M. Tosun, J. S. Kang, A. B. Sachid, S. B. Desai, M. Hettick, C. M. C. Hu and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6259–6264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Das, R. Gulotty, A. V. Sumant and A. Roelofs, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 2861–2866 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, J. Heo, S. Park, H. J. Song, D. H. Seo, K. E. Byun, P. Kim, I. Yoo, H. J. Chung and K. Kim, Science, 2012, 336, 1140–1143 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. C. Lin, R. K. Ghosh, R. Addou, N. Lu, S. M. Eichfeld, H. Zhu, M. Y. Li, X. Peng, M. J. Kim, L. J. Li, R. M. Wallace, S. Datta and J. A. Robinson, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6 Search PubMed .
J. Yoon, W. Park, G.-Y. Bae, Y. Kim, H. S. Jang, Y. Hyun, S. K. Lim, Y. H. Kahng, W.-K. Hong, B. H. Lee and H. C. Ko, Small, 2013, 9, 3295–3300 CAS .
T. Roy, M. Tosun, X. Cao, H. Fang, D. H. Lien, P. D. Zhao, Y. Z. Chen, Y. L. Chueh, J. Guo and A. Javey, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 2071–2079 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Yan, S. Fathipour, Y. M. Han, B. Song, S. D. Xiao, M. D. Li, N. Ma, V. Protasenko, D. A. Muller, D. Jena and H. G. Xing, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 5791–5798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Roy, M. Tosun, M. Hettick, G. H. Ahn, C. M. Hu and A. Javey, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2016, 108, 5 Search PubMed .
A. Nourbakhsh, A. Zubair, M. S. Dresselhaus and T. Palacios, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 1359–1366 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Li, X. J. Wang, Q. C. Zhang, L. P. Zou, X. F. Xu and Z. X. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 7360–7365 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
Table Content:
Wanshun Xia	Wanshun Xia obtained his Bachelor's degree from the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) in 2015. He is currently a Master's student at the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics, UESTC. His research interests involve the CVD growth of 2D materials and their micro-constructions for high-performance photoelectronics.
Liping Dai	Liping Dai is currently an associate professor at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. She obtained her Master's and Doctor's degrees in Materials Physics and Chemistry in 2004 and 2008. She did her postdoctoral studies in applied materials physics in 2013. Her current research interests focus on 2D nanomaterials, quantum dots, and micro- and nanodevices fabrication technology.
Peng Yu	Peng Yu is currently a Ph.D. researcher in the group of Prof. Zhiming Wang at the Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences of University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. He obtained his Bachelor's degree in Microelectronics in 2012 and Master's degree in Electronic Information Materials and Components in 2015. His current research interests include quantum dot solar cells, plasmonic applications, and the design and preparation of nanophotonics.
Xin Tong	Xin Tong obtained his Bachelor's degree from the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) in 2014. He is currently a joint PhD student at the Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences, UESTC and Institut National de la Recherche Scientifique (INRS, Canada). His research interests involve 2D materials (molybdenum disulfide), low-dimensional materials (colloidal quantum dots) and their further applications in the solar energy field, such as photoelectrochemical (PEC) and solar cells.
Wenping Song	Wenping Song is currently a Master's degree candidate at the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics of University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. He obtained his Bachelor's degree from Zhengzhou University in 2013. His current research interests focus on MEMS structure design and manufacturing.
Zhiming Wang	Zhiming Wang is currently a professor at the Institute of Fundamental and Frontier Sciences of University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. He obtained his Bachelor's degree in Applied Physics in 1992, his Master's degree in Semiconductor Physics in 1995, and his Ph.D. degree in Condensed Matter Physics in 1998. He did postdoctoral studies at the Paul-Drude-Institute for Solid-State Electronics in 2000. His current research interests focus on epitaxial crystal growth, molecular beam epitaxy, quantum dots, surface, interface, nanostructures, nanoscience and nanotechnology.

 	Fig. 1  Building van der Waals heterostructures. Adapted from ref. 30, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. If one considers 2D crystals to be analogous to Lego blocks (right panel), the construction of a huge variety of layered structures becomes possible. Conceptually, this atomic-scale Lego resembles molecular beam epitaxy but employs different ‘construction’ rules and a distinct set of materials.	 

Physical traits	Size	Wafer scale	μm–cm level	
68 and 69

Thickness	Micron order	Atomic scale
Structure	Body/body	Layer/layer	
70 and 71

Producing methods	Material bonding	vdW epitaxy	
72 and 73

Layer transfer	
74 and 75

Band structure	Unchanged	Tunable	
76 and 77

Interfacial properties	Lattice structure	Strictly matched	Moiré superlattices with minor mismatch	
20 and 78

Large mismatch	
11 and 12

Interfacial contact	Dangling-bond	vdW interaction	
9 and 10

Interaction	Strong	Weak
Carrier transport	Diffusion-drift process	Exciton recombination	
79 and 22


 	Fig. 2  Moiré patterns in two overlapping graphene sheets. Adapted from ref. 85, Copyright 2011 Springer Nature. (a) The two lattices are overlaid at an angle of about 27.8°. (b) Lattices rotated by 9°.	 

 	Fig. 3  Moiré superlattice in layered h-BN/graphene vdW heterojunctions. (a–d) Rotation-dependent moiré superlattice demonstrated by STM topographs at four different graphene/BN locations. (e) Experimental dI/dV curves for two different moiré wavelengths, 9.0 nm (black) and 13.4 nm (red). The dips in the dI/dV curves are marked by arrows. (f) |d2I/dV2| as a function of the gate and sample voltage for the 9.0 nm moiré pattern, showing the shift of the Dirac point and one of the dips. (g) Energy of the dips away from the Dirac point as a function of the moiré wavelength. The red points are the experimentally measured values and the black line is the expected theoretical dependence. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–d) in ref. 21, Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society; (e–g) in ref. 90, Copyright 2012, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 4  Hofstadter's spectrum in layered h-BN/graphene vdW heterojunctions. Adapted from ref. 16, Copyright 2013 American Association for the Advancement of Science. (a) Low-temperature (T = 150 mK) conductivity near charge neutrality of four heterostructure devices (A1, A2, B1, and B2). The charge neutrality point offset V0 = 37, 37, 46, and 42 mV, respectively. Left inset: Measurement schematic. Right inset: False-color AFM image. Scale bar, 3 μm. (b) Resistance over a larger gate range. Finite-density resistance peaks indicate full filling of the lowest superlattice miniband in two of the four measured devices (A1 and A2) within the experimentally accessible density range. (c) Two-terminal magnetoconductance of device A1 up to 45 T. (d) Theoretical Hofstadter energy spectrum for the fully spin- and sublattice-split N = 0 Landau level. Black points indicate regions of dense energy bands; intervening spectral gaps are color-coded to the associated two-terminal conductance G = 2 (red), 1 (purple), and 0 (gray) in units of e2 h−1.	 

 	Fig. 5  Strain-induced bandgap transition. Adapted from ref. 127, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic of the fabrication and measurement of a strained WSe2/MoSe2 hetero-bilayer. (b) PL spectra of the strain dependence of the indirect-bandgap and direct-bandgap coupling peaks from the PL measurements. (c) Strain dependence of the indirect-bandgap and direct bandgap and intensities from the PL measurement with linear fitting.	 

 	Fig. 6  A small twists grows at the carbon/boron nitride interface and controls the local bandgap. Adapted from ref. 140, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (a) Atomic structure and stack translation u of a twisted bilayer CBN. (b) Moiré pattern of a twisted bilayer CBN with a twist angle of 2.5° and the 3D surface plot of its local bandgap Eg(u(r)) in eV for a whole supercell with distinct exciton basins labeled by i = 1–18 and dividing ridges marked by white lines. (c) Exciton basins around i = 1 and the streamlines, where the open circles, closed circles, and stars denote Eg(r) minima (flow attractors), maxima (flow repellers), and saddle points (triple junction of basin watersheds), respectively. (d) Geometric and band structures of: (a) CBN monolayer and CBN bilayer (both side view and plan view) with their stacking style, (b) MoM-AA, (c) IoM-AA, (d) MoM-AB, and (e) IoM-AB. Among these, the IoM-AB structure in (e) is the ground state, while the structures in panels b–d are only 0.0103, 0.0062, and 0.0004 eV per atom higher in energy. π–π band splittings are marked by black arrows. AA and AB represent a two high-symmetry on-top (AA) or Bernal (AB) stacking arrangement, respectively.	 

 	Fig. 7  Thickness dependence of the bandgap exhibited in MX2/MXene hybrid bilayers. Adapted from ref. 148, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (a) Band structures of TMD and Sc2CF2 monolayers. The valence band maximum (VBM) is regulated at 0 eV. (b) Band structures of TMD–Sc2CF2 bilayers. The VBM is regulated at 0 eV. Red arrows demonstrate the direct bandgaps of TMDs.	 

 	Fig. 8  Ultrafast charge transfer in a MoS2/WS2 vdW heterostructure with type-II band alignment. Adapted from ref. 159, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of the theoretically predicted type-II band alignment of a MoS2/WS2 heterostructure. Optical excitation of the MoS2 exciton leads to layer-separated electron (e−) and hole (h+) carriers. (b) Illustration of a MoS2/WS2 hetero-bilayer. Electrons and holes created by light are shown separating into different layers. (c) Optical image of a typical MoS2/WS2 heterostructure sample. Scale bar, 5 μm. (d) PL mapping data exhibited strong quenching in a MoS2/WS2 heterostructure. The color scale represents PL intensity at the MoS2 exciton resonance (1.93 eV). (e) Typical PL spectra of monolayer MoS2, monolayer WS2, and the MoS2/WS2 heterostructure. Both exciton PL signals are strongly quenched in the MoS2/WS2 heterostructure, suggesting an efficient charge transfer process exists in the heterostructure.	 

 	Fig. 9  Interlayer coupling energy tuned by inserting dielectric layers. Adapted from ref. 171, Copyright 2014 National Academy of Sciences. (a) PL spectra of single-layer WSe2 and MoS2, and the corresponding hetero-bilayer. (b) Normalized PL (solid lines) and absorbance (dashed lines) spectra. (c) Band diagram of the WSe2/MoS2 hetero-bilayer under photo excitation, depicting (1) absorption and exciton generation in the WSe2 and MoS2 single layers, (2) relaxation of excitons at the MoS2/WSe2 interface driven by the band offset, and (3) radiative recombination of the spatially indirect excitons. (d) An atomistic illustration of the heterostructure of single-layer WSe2/single-layer MoS2 with few-layer h-BN spacer in the vdW gap. (e) Normalized PL spectra from a single-layer WSe2/single-layer MoS2 heterostructure with N layers of h-BN.	 

 	Fig. 10  Thermal conductivity and thermal conductance in a vdW system as functions of the interfacial coupling effects. (a) Schematic of the thermal transport in MoS2/graphene nanosheets (MGHN-1) in the direction parallel to the heterointerfaces. (b) Thermal conductivities of MGHN-1, MGHN-1 without interlayer coupling, graphene/MoS2/graphene nanosheets (GMGN-1), single-layer MoS2, and graphene as functions of temperature T0. (c) (a) Schematic model setup for the non-equilibrium molecular dynamics simulation. The simulation model consists of 14 layers of graphene and 14 layers of MoS2. (b) Typical temperature profile in the graphene/MoS2 heterostructure. (d) Thermal conductance as a function of defect concentration. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–b) in ref. 179, Copyright 2015, IOP Publishing Ltd; and (c–d) in ref. 181, Copyright 2016, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 11  Tunnel spin injection in hBN/graphene vdW heterojunctions. (a) Scheme showing spin injection into graphene through the h-BN tunnel barrier. (b) Schematic of the injection of spin-polarized electrons from a ferromagnet into graphene through an atomically thin h-BN/ferromagnet tunnel structure. (c) Three-terminal I–V characteristics of high resistance (HR) and low-resistance (LR) h-BN (Co/h-BN/graphene) contacts at room temperature. Inset: As measured I–V curve of the HR contact in a higher current–voltage range. (d) Temperature dependent I–V characteristics for the LR h-BN contact at 1.5 and 300 K. Inset: Temperature dependence of the HR h-BN contact resistance at zero bias (ZBR) and at 300 mV. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a) (b) in ref. 189, Copyright 2014, Springer Nature and (c) (d) in ref. 190, Copyright 2016, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Tunnel spin injection and transport in Co/h-BN/graphene devices. Adapted from ref. 186, Copyright 2014 AIP Publishing LLC. (a) Non-local spin valve resistance recorded with an in-plane magnetic field along the length of the electrodes. (b) Hanle spin precession signal measured as a function of an out-of-plane magnetic field at 100 K. (c) Spin valve signal as a function of applied injection current bias. (d) Spin polarization as a function of injection current. (e) Normalized spin signal as a function of applied gate voltage VG–VD (VD being the Dirac point).	 

 	Fig. 13  Valley filter and valley polarization in graphene and “Many-Body Effects” in valleytronics. (a) Dispersion relation in the wide and narrow regions. An electron in the first valley (modes n = 0, 1, 2, …) is transmitted (filled circle), whereas an electron in the second valley (modes n = −1, −2, …) is reflected (open circle). (b) Honeycomb lattice of carbon atoms in a strip containing a constriction with zigzag edges. (c) Variation of the electrostatic potential along the strip for the two cases of an abrupt and smooth potential barrier (solid and dashed lines). The polarity of the valley filter switches when the potential height, U0, in the constriction crosses the Fermi energy, EF. (d) An in-plane electric field will generate a transverse valley current, which leads to a net valley polarization on the sample edges. (e) Valley polarization created by the valley filter results in a transverse voltage across the sample. (f) Circularly polarized beam σ− excite the K valley, while the same and oppositely circularly polarized probe measures the population in the K and K′ valleys. (g) Upon optical excitation of the intravalley, “bright excitons” form. Because of Coulomb coupling, the excited eigenstate represents a super position of intervalley “dark excitons” and “bright excitons”. The electron part of the excitation immediately redistributes over the conduction bands in both the K and K′ valleys, but the hole is located in K because it has to flip spin to coherently couple to the K′ valley. (h) Electron–hole exchange interaction leads to valley relaxation of the initially excited holes by exchanging spin and momentum with an electron in the other valley. (i) Valley relaxation of holes via scattering through the Γ valley. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a–c) in ref. 193, Copyright 2007 Springer Nature; (d–e) in ref. 194, Copyright 2007 American Physical Society; and (f–i) in ref. 207, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society.	 

Inorganic/inorganic	TMD/TMD & TMD/BP	Type-II alignment	LED	
156 and 225

Photodetector	
226 and 46

Graphene/TMD & graphene/BP	Schottky contact	Solar cell	
227 and 48

Photodetector	
228 and 229

Tunneling device	
63

VFET	
230 and 231

Graphene/h-BN	Moiré superlattice	Tunneling device	
232 and 62

Memory	
64 and 65

Inorganic/organic	p-Type organic/n-type inorganic	Type-II band alignment	Photodiode	
233 and 234

Graphene/organic perovskite	Schottky contact	Solar cell	
49 and 235

Hierarchical	2D/0D & 2D/1D	Lattice-matched coupling	Solar cell	
236 and 237

Photodetector	
54 and 238

In-plane	TMD/TMD	Lattice-matched edge	Photodiode	
239 and 240

Graphene/h-BN	In-plane tunneling device	
68 and 241


 	Fig. 14  Infrared photodetection in atomically thin type-II MoTe2/MoS2 vdW heterostructures. Adapted from ref. 226, Copyright 2016 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic of a MoTe2/MoS2 vdWH device under infrared light excitation. (b) Schematic of type-II interband excitation processes in MoTe2/MoS2 vdWHs. The value of the interband gap (Δ) is obtained by theoretical calculation. (c) The energy band diagrams for MoTe2/MoS2 vdWHs in the dark and light, respectively. Φ, EF, EVAC, ECB, and EVB are the work function, Fermi levels, energy position of vacuum, conduction band, and valence band, respectively. (d) Experimental Ids–Vds curves in the dark (black line) and under infrared light illumination (1550 and 2000 nm). The inset shows the photovoltaic effect of the fabricated device under 1550 nm light illumination.	 

 	Fig. 15  Gate-controlled monolayer WSe2 p–n junction diodes. Adapted from ref. 258, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (a) Optical image of a monolayer WSe2 device controlled by two local gates. Scale bar, 2 μm. (b) Current–voltage (Ids–Vds) curves showing the transport characteristics of four doping configurations of the device: NN (yellow), PP (black), PN (blue), and NP (green). Both gates were set to 10 V for the NN configuration and −10 V for PP. Vlg was set to ±10 V and Vrg to ∓10 V for PN/NP. The NN and PP configurations are Ohmic at low Vds, while the PN and NP configurations strongly rectify current in the opposite directions. (c) Semi-logarithmic plots of Ids through the PN diodes as a function of Vds, with fits marked in yellow. The fits give a diode ideality of n = 1.9. Insets: Schematic band diagrams of the device in forward bias for the PN and NP configurations.	 

 	Fig. 16  Vertically aligned WS2–WSe2 and MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructures diode and CMOS inverter. Adapted from ref. 239, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of vertically aligned WS2–WSe2 and MoS2–MoSe2 heterostructures. (b) AFM and optical images of a triangular MoS2–MoSe2 monolayer domain, with the AFM lines indicating a step height of ∼0.8 nm, corresponding to the monolayer MoS2–MoSe2 domain. Scale bars, 2 μm. (c–d) Raman spectra and PL emission spectra taken from the center (MoS2) and peripheral (MoSe2) areas of a triangular heterostructure domain. (e) Gate-tunable output characteristics of a lateral WSe2–WS2 heterojunction p–n diode. The gate voltage varies from 80 to 20 V in steps of 10 V, as indicated. Inset: Optical image of a heterojunction p–n diode device. The orange dashed line outlines the triangular heterostructure domain, while the white dashed rectangle outlines the 50 nm Al2O3 deposited on WSe2 to insulate the WS2 contact electrodes. Scale bar, 2 μm. (f) A CMOS inverter obtained by integrating a p-type WSe2 and n-type WS2 FET, showing the expected inverter function with a voltage gain as large as 24. The black curve is the output–input curve, while the red curve indicates the voltage gain. Inset: Image and circuit diagram of the WSe2/WS2 CMOS inverter. Scale bar, 2 μm.	 

 	Fig. 17  Ultrafast charge transfer in graphene/TMD Schottky contacts with strong photoluminescence quenching. (a) Differential reflection (ΔR/R0) measured from a monolayer WS2 flake, a monolayer graphene, and a heterostructure sample of graphene/monolayer WS2 vdWH. The red arrow and blue arrow denote the probe and pump pulse, respectively. In graphene/WS2 vdWH, the magnitude of the signal is 20 and 30 times higher than the individual WS2 and graphene samples. In addition, the decay of the signal is much faster than WS2, as described by the two time constants of 1 and 3.5 ps. (b) Schematics of single-layer MoSe2 grown on SiO2/Si or a sapphire substrate and graphene substrate, and the PL spectra of the as-synthesized MoSe2 monolayer. Raman data from the same samples are shown in the inset. Figures reproduced with permission from: (a) in ref. 266, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature; and (b) in ref. 69, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Creation of millimeter-sized graphene/h-BN in-plane heterostructures. Adapted from ref. 68, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of the fabrication procedure for in-plane graphene/h-BN heterostructures. (b) Optical image of the as-grown graphene/h-BN patterned layers (shaped as combs, bars, and rings) on a copper foil. Light areas are h-BN and dark areas are graphene. (c) Optical image of a graphene/h-BN film separated from copper, on water, after coating with PMMA and after etching the copper foil. (d) SEM image showing an h-BN ring surrounded by graphene.	 

 	Fig. 19  BP bridges the electromagnetic wave spectrum and mobility/on–off ratio spectrum between graphene and TMDs. Adapted from ref. 292, Copyright 2015 National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 20  Device characteristics of organic perovskite/graphene vdWHs. Adapted from ref. 49, Copyright 2015 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic and optical image of a graphene/perovskite/graphene heterostructure device. (b) IDS–VDS curves of the graphene/perovskite/graphene device measured at room temperature (298 K) with/without laser illumination. A photoinduced current offset was observed. (c) The transfer characteristics of the graphene/WSe2/perovskite/graphene (GWPG) device when biased at −1 V (black) and 1 V (red). The negatively biased curve shows a large on/off ratio around 106, while the positively biased one is only ∼35. (d) The dark IDS–VDS characteristics of GWPG device shows an obvious transition from a symmetrical p–p junction to a rectifying n–p diode as VG varied from −60 to 60 V (10 V increment). In the negative bias range, the IDS current shows a dramatic decrease from VG = −10 V (orange) to 0 V (purple).	 

 	Fig. 21  Charged performance of Mn3O4/rGO anodes. Adapted from ref. 322, Copyright 2010 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic two-step synthesis of Mn3O4/rGO. (b) Capacity retention of Mn3O4/rGO at various current densities. (c) Capacity retention of free Mn3O4 nanoparticles without graphene at a current density of 40 mA g−1.	 

 	Fig. 22  A p–n diode consisting of a single-walled CNT/monolayer MoS2 vdWH with gate-tunable rectification. Adapted from ref. 60, Copyright 2013 National Academy of Sciences. (a) False-colored SEM image of the vdWH diode (scale bar, 2.5 μm). The yellow, blue, pink, and violet regions are the gold electrodes, masking layer, p-type SWCNT, and monolayer MoS2, respectively. (b) Optical micrograph showing the device layout at a lower magnification. The dashed yellow boundary indicates the MoS2 flake, whereas the dashed white rectangle denotes the patterned SWCNT film. Electrodes 2–3 form the p–n diode, consisting of the CNT/MoS2 vdWH. (c) Demonstration of gate-tunable rectification using the p–n diode. As a function of the gate bias, the device evolves from a nonrectifying resistor-like state at VG = 10 V (magenta) to a diode-like rectifying state at VG = −10 V (blue).	 

 	Fig. 23  Hybrid graphene–quantum dot phototransistors. Adapted from ref. 54, Copyright 2012 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of the graphene–quantum dot hybrid phototransistor onto a Si/SiO2 substrate. Incident photons create electron–hole pairs in the PbS quantum dots. The holes are then transferred to the graphene channel and drift toward the drain, but electrons remain in the PbS quantum dots, leading through capacitive coupling to a prolonged time that the (recirculated) carriers are present in the graphene channel. (b) Spatial photocurrent profile using a laser beam focused at 532 nm with a power of 1.7 pW. The photocurrent was recorded as the laser beam was scanned across the surface of the detector. The spatial profile shows the large-area excitation of the phototransistor at the area of the quantum dot film overlapping with the graphene flake (VSD = 10 mV). Inset: Optical image of the graphene flake used in this study in contact with the gold electrodes, forming the phototransistor.	 

 	Fig. 24  Vertically well-aligned InAs nanowires heteroepitaxially grown on single-layer graphene. Adapted from ref. 238, Copyright 2012 American Chemical Society. (a) Top-view SEM image of InAs nanowires grown heteroepitaxially on single-layer graphene (SLG) films. Brighter structures are the nanowires with a hexagonal prismatic shape. (b and c) Schematic of the atomic configuration presenting the nearly coherent hetero-epitaxial relationship of InAs-()[0]||SLG-(0001)[10]. (d) Cross-sectional TEM image of SLG film transferred onto a SiO2/Si substrate. (e) Low-magnification cross-sectional TEM image of InAs nanowire vertically grown on SLG. (f) Selected-area diffraction pattern obtained through a FFT process of the high-resolution TEM image of the nanowire. (g) TEM image of the enclosed area in (e), showing the interface of InAs/SLG/SiO2.	 

 	Fig. 25  Photodetectors based on a graphene–MoS2 hybrid with high photoresponsivity. Adapted from ref. 228, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of device architecture. Inset: SEM image of a typical device. The dotted line indicates the outline of the graphene. (b) Black and red solid lines: source–drain current (Ids) versus backgate voltage (Vg) for graphene on MoS2 in the absence and presence of light, respectively. Cyan-colored trace: Vg-dependent conductance of bare MoS2 in the dark. (c) Dependence of IP-on (Vg-dependent magnitude current when the LED is turned on) on the source–drain bias Vds at two different gate voltages (λ = 635 nm, PLED = 376 fW μm−2). (d) Time trace of the photocurrent on light illumination at Vg = −50 V. (e) Responsivity γ as a function of illumination power. Top-right inset: Change in IP-on (Vds = 0.1 V) with LED power. Bottom-left inset: Comparison of low-temperature and room-temperature responsivity.	 

 	Fig. 26  Absorbance of a MoS2/graphene Schottky junction and MoS2/WS2 bilayer. Adapted from ref. 227, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (a) Absorbance of the MoS2/graphene interface and its composing monolayers, computed within the independent particle approximation. (b) Absorbance spectra of the MoS2/WS2 bilayer and of the individual composing layers.	 

 	Fig. 27  Well-designed QW LEDs with single QWs and multiple QWs. Adapted from ref. 388, Copyright 2014 Springer Nature. (a–b) Schematic and STEM image of the single QW heterostructure h-BN/graphene/2h-BN/WS2/2h-BN/graphene/h-BN. (c) Optical image of an operational device. The dashed curve outlines the heterostructure area. Scale bar, 10 μm. (d) Optical image of EL from the same device. Vb = 2.5 V, T = 300 K. 2h-BN and 3h-BN stand for bi- and trilayer hBN, respectively. (e and f) Color map of the PL and EL spectra as a function of Vb for a MoS2-based single QW. Excitation energy EL = 2.33 eV. (g and h) Maps of the PL and EL spectra for a triple QWs device (h-BN/graphene/3h-BN/MoS2/3h-BN/MoS2/3h-BN/MoS2/3h-BN/graphene/h-BN). EL = 2.33 eV. (i) Individual EL spectra plotted on a logarithmic scale show the onset of EL at 1.8 nA μm−2 (blue curve).	 

 	Fig. 28  2D MoS2 FET with a few-layer h-BN gate dielectric, and graphene source/drain and top-gate electrodes. Adapted from ref. 391, Copyright 2014 American Chemical Society. (a) Device schematic. (b) ID–VG characteristics at different VD. (c) ID–VD characteristics. (d) Extracted mobility as a function of the gate voltage, VG–Vt. The inset shows the circuit model of the device used for mobility extraction. The substrate is grounded during all the measurements.	 

 	Fig. 29  Graphene–WS2 tunneling heterotransistor. Adapted from ref. 63, Copyright 2012 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of a vertical architecture transistor. GrB and GrT are the bottom and top graphene contacts, respectively. (b–d) Band diagram corresponding to zero Vg, negative Vg, and positive Vg. The red and blue arrows represent the thermionic current and tunneling current, respectively. (e) Optical image of a graphene–WS2 heterotransistor (scale bar, 10 μm). (f) I–V plots for different Vg (semi-logarithmic scale). (g) Red circles: zero-bias conductivity as a function of gate voltage (measured as the slope of the I–Vb curve at zero Vb). Blue circles: conductivity measured at Vb = 0.02 V as a function of gate voltage. Inset: I–V at different Vg (linear scale). T = 300 K. Device active area, 0.25 μm2.	 

 	Fig. 30  Graphene-BN resonant tunneling transistor. Adapted from ref. 62, Copyright 2013 Springer Nature. (a) Schematic of the devices. (b) Measured current–voltage characteristics of the device in (a) at 6 K. The Vg values range, in 5 V steps, from +15 V (top red curve) to −55 V (bottom blue curve). The inset shows schematically the relative positions of the Fermi energies (chemical potentials) of the doped Si substrate gate electrode (represented by hatched lines) and of the two graphene layers at the peak of the I(Vb) curve in forward bias with Vg = +15 V.	 

 	Fig. 31  Floating gate transistor as a nonvolatile memory device. Adapted from ref. 64, Copyright 2013 American Chemical Society. (a) Schematic of a floating gate transistor b, Transfer characteristic of the floating gate transistor, acquired along two different control-gate-voltage sweep directions. The large hysteresis of ∼8 V is related to the accumulation of charge in the floating gate. The voltage sweep rate was 1.4 V s−1. (c) Simplified band diagram of the memory device in the program and erase states. Application of a positive control-gate-voltage Vcg programs the device, while application of a negative control-gate-voltage Vcg depletes the floating gate and resets the device. (d) Temporal evolution of the drain–source currents (Ids) in the erase (ON) and program (OFF) states. (e) Time-resolved behavior of the device threshold voltage after application of the programming voltage pulse (+18 V for 3 s). The threshold voltage was determined from linear fits to the transfer curves (inset) in the linear regime.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2017
