Development of heterogeneous photocatalysts via the covalent grafting of metal complexes on various solid supports   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2CC03568E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2CC03568E
(Feature Article)
Chem. Commun., 2022, 58, 11354-11377Development of heterogeneous photocatalysts via the covalent grafting of metal complexes on various solid supports†

        
          
            Pooja 
            Rana
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Bhawna 
            Kaushik
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kanika 
            Solanki
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kapil Mohan 
            Saini
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            R. K. 
            Sharma
          
          
        
      *a
aGreen Chemistry Network Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi, New Delhi-110007, India. E-mail: rksharmagreenchem@hotmail.com;   Tel: +91276666250
bKalindi College, University of Delhi, New Delhi, Delhi 110008, India
Received 
      27th June 2022
    , Accepted 12th September 2022First published on 13th September 2022AbstractTo date, remarkable progress has been achieved in the development of photocatalysts owing to their high activity, selectivity, and tunable light absorption in the visible light range. Recently, heterogeneous photocatalytic systems have emerged as potential candidates due to their beneficial attributes (e.g., high surface area, ease of functionalization and facile separation). Herein, we provide a concise overview of the rational design of heterogeneous photocatalysts by grafting photoactive complexes on heterogeneous support matrices via covalent grafting and their detailed characterization techniques, which have been followed by the landmark examples of their applications. Also, major challenges and opportunities in the forthcoming progress of these appealing areas are emphasised.
Pooja Rana
Dr Pooja Rana completed her Doctoral Degree in 2022 under the supervision of Professor R. K. Sharma. She received her Master's Degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, in 2017 and Bachelor's Degree in Chemistry from Kirorimal College, University of Delhi in 2013. She has several publications in journals and books of international repute. Her area of research includes green chemistry, photocatalysis, immobilization of photoactive motifs and fabrication of magnetic nanocatalysts for various organic transformations.
Bhawna Kaushik
Bhawna Kaushik received her Graduate Degree in Chemistry in 2013 and Post-Graduate Degree specializing in Inorganic Chemistry in 2016 from Miranda House College, University of Delhi, India. She then joined Professor Sharma's group to pursue her doctoral studies. She is currently an active member of the Green Chemistry Network Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi, India. She is working in the area of green chemistry and photocatalysis. Her research interests include the design and development of sustainable magnetically retrievable heterogeneous photocatalysts for pollutant degradation. She is presently working as an Assistant Professor at Acharya Narendra Dev College, University of Delhi.
Kanika Solanki
Dr Kanika Solanki is working as a Research Associate and Faculty at the Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi and an active member of the Green Chemistry Network Centre. She completed her PhD at M. G. S. University, Bikaner. Her research interests include the synthesis, design and applications of chelating resins and nano-adsorbents. She worked as a Lecturer at the Govt. College of Engineering and Technology, Bikaner, as a Senior Research Fellow at Rajasthan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Bikaner, and Research Associate in the Department of Chemistry University of Delhi, Delhi.
Kapil Mohan Saini
Dr Kapil Mohan Saini completed his graduate and post-graduate studies at the University of Delhi. He was awarded his Doctoral Degree in 2021. His research interests include the design and development of green synthetic routes for sustainable organic transformations. He has several publications in journals of international repute. He received the NOST-SAILIFE Sciences Best Thesis Award-2020 for his PhD thesis in Organic Chemistry. He is presently working as an Assistant Professor at Kalindi College, University of Delhi.
R. K. Sharma
Dr R. K. Sharma is a Professor and Coordinator of the Green Chemistry Network Centre at the University of Delhi, India. He is also an Honorary Professor at Deakin University, Australia. He went to the University of Tokyo and Kumamoto University on a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellowship. He has published numerous book chapters, reviews and research articles in renowned international journals. He has also written/edited various books on Green Chemistry published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, World Scientific and Wiley. Dr Sharma is also an Honorary Secretary of The Royal Society of Chemistry (North India Section) and Faculty Advisor of the ACS International Student Chapter University of Delhi. https://greenchem.du.ac.in/.
Introduction to photocatalysts
Sunlight is a clean, green, plentiful, inexhaustible, and widely distributed sustainable energy source, which has played an instrumental role since the evolution of life on Earth. Inspired by nature, artificial photosynthesis has been attracting immense attention from the scientific community as a promising candidate to tackle the current energy and environmental crisis by utilizing the vivid and renewable energy from sunlight.1–4 This untapped potential of sunlight has been well exploited in photocatalytic processes, wherein solar energy is used to drive thermodynamically uphill reactions to generate desired products. It is worth mentioning that visible-light-driven photocatalysis has proven its dominance and significance in various fields of chemistry such as organic transformations, dye degradation, H2 generation via water splitting, and CO2 reduction owing to its high proficiency, non-polluting nature, and mild conditions for substrate activation to solve various synthetic problems.5,6 The term “photocatalysis” is derived from Greek words, where “photo” stands for light and “catalysis” means a process to enhance the rate of reaction by the addition of a substance without itself getting consumed during the course of reaction. Thus, photocatalysis involves the concurrent arrangement of photochemistry and catalysis to accelerate a chemical reaction.
When a photocatalyst (PC) is irradiated with light of suitable wavelength, it gets photoexcited and transfers an electron from the ground state or the highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) of a molecule to its excited electronic state or the lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO). The photoexcited catalyst (PC*) accepts or donates a single electron through oxidative or reductive quenching cycles depending on the substrates and reagents present in the reaction mixture.7 Here, the photoexcited species acts as the reactive catalytic species and help in achieving cleavage of challenging bonds and the activation of organic species or the generation of radicals to promote a chemical transformation, which cannot be realized by classical organic chemistry techniques. Thus, “photocatalysis” has emerged as an environment friendly synthetic route where in the absence of acids, bases, and water-sensitive reagents such as Grignard reagents, the activation of innocuous starting reagents can be achieved facilely, which drastically reduces or limits the production of hazardous by-products during chemical synthesis. Lately, a major breakthrough has been achieved in this field with the discovery of energy efficient and economical irradiation systems for visible light-mediated organic transformations, which have garnered significant attention from scientists in photoinduced reactions to activate substrates, reagents, and catalytic intermediates under mild conditions by employing cost-effective, clean, and low-consumption irradiation setups.
Early breakthroughs in the field of photoredox catalysis
The utilization of photocatalysts (PC) has gained widespread recognition as a powerful tool for achieving the activation of organic motifs by using low-energy photons, paving the path towards the sustainable synthesis of chemicals by promoting the use of non-hazardous and environment-friendly reagents. However, the use of solar energy to initiate organic transformations is not a novel concept. This idea was originally proposed by Ciamician as early as 1912.8 Nevertheless, the potential of photocatalysts was identified by Fujishima and Honda in 1972 for water splitting using a titanium dioxide electrode and irradiating it with UV light and a weak external electric field of 0.5 V,9 which made photocatalysis one of the oldest explored techniques for transforming solar energy into chemical energy. In 1976, Carey and co-workers investigated the photocatalytic degradation of organic pollutants by utilizing TiO2 as a photocatalytic material. Three years later, Inoue et al. reported the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to numerous organic moieties using semiconductor powders such as TiO2, ZnO, SiC, GaP, and CdS.10 Since then, the development of highly efficient photocatalysts has gained remarkable consideration and become a hot topic of research, as evident through the exponential growth in the number of publications (Fig. 1). Due to its versatility, this technique holds immense potential for use in a wide range of demanding applications such as environmental remediation, organic transformations, water splitting, and fuel generation. Besides, photocatalysts have also been successfully utilized (i) as components of dye-sensitized solar cells and organic light-emitting diodes, (ii) to initiate polymerization reactions, and (iii) in photo-dynamic therapy.11 In recent decades, the three pioneers of this area namely, Noble Laureate MacMillan, Yoon and Stephenson, have contributed immensely by bringing photoredox catalysts from laboratory curiosity to industrial mainstay.11–23 There are thousands of articles reporting photocatalytic synthesis relying on a small set of photocatalysts including homogeneous iridium and ruthenium polypyridyl complexes, a few organic dyes, and some semiconducting materials with appropriate redox potentials or triplet energies and long-lived excited states.7 In the past few decades, researchers have focused on two different classes of photocatalysts, namely, homogeneous and heterogeneous photocatalysts. Homogeneous photocatalysts are generally molecular complexes composed of well-defined coordination complexes of Ru(BPy)3 and Ir(PPy)3. Iridium(III) and ruthenium(II) complexes have endured as two of the most prevalent materials in the family of PCs. To date, several of these visible light-driven organometallic photocatalysts have been designed and fabricated to catalyse numerous organic/chemical transformations.24
 Fig. 1  Number of annual publications using the keywords “photocatalysis (represented by blue) and heterogeneous photocatalysis (represented by orange)” since 1990. 
Various fascinating properties of photocatalysts
Photocatalysis exhibits numerous advantages over conventional methodologies such as utilization of an eco-friendly and sustainable energy source, i.e., light, which is clean, abundant, renewable and does not generate any residue. Interestingly, highly efficient photocatalytic processes offer numerous advantages, which include working under mild reaction conditions and reduced possibility of the formation of side-products. The other fascinating features of photoredox catalysts are as follows: (1) absorption in the visible light range; (2) long-lived photoexcited states, which have sufficient lifetime for reacting with the organic substrates and catalysing transformations via single-electron transfer (SET) processes; (3) highly oxidizing or reducing species in either the ground or excited state compared to organic substrates; (4) sufficiently reversible electrochemical behaviour and photostability and (5) ease of tailoring the chemical structures and redox properties, rendering designability and tunability. Owing to the aforementioned versatile properties of photocatalysts, they are emerging as promising candidates to fulfil the goals of green and sustainable chemistry. Henceforth, the fabrication and application of visible-light-responsive photocatalysts is being immensely explored by researchers, wherein solar light has been utilized efficiently, which consists of a huge portion of visible light (ca. 43%).
Limitations and challenges in the field of photocatalysis
An all-encompassing search for reports on “photocatalysis” and “heterogeneous photocatalysis” on the Web of Science revealed that significant progress has been made in this field as the publication of articles related to visible light photoredox-catalyzed reactions have continuously increased since 1990.
Despite their remarkable potential to catalyse a wide range of distinct transformations (such as reaction type, versatility and mild reaction conditions), the use of photocatalysts has been mainly investigated in the homogeneous phase, where the recoverability and reusability of the catalysts are considered challenging. Additionally, the intrinsic high cost, limited availability on Earth, difficult isolation and poor recycling ability of homogeneous photocatalysts impede their practical use in large-scale industrial applications. Moreover, the inability to recycle the catalyst leads to heavy metal contamination of the organic products and increases the processing and waste disposal costs in large-scale reactions.5 Consequently, the wide-ranging expensive metal-based photoactive transition-metal complexes (Ru, Ir, Re, Pt etc.) with a high metal loading cannot meet large-scale application demands. Hence, the design and fabrication of highly effective and novel recyclable materials are desirable.
Similarly, the economical organic dye-based photocatalysts are effectively utilized to furnish numerous organic transformations. These dyes are known to have a notable negative impact on the environment due to their sluggish degradation, photobleaching and propensity to act as fluorescent pollutants,6 also exhibiting detrimental effects on photocatalytic systems. In fact, the low photostability of organic dyes, such as in the case of Rose Bengal (RB) is issue, which hinders their heterogenization over a support for accelerating reactions.25
To address the problems associated with catalyst retrieval and proceed towards designing robust and sustainable processes, numerous studies to develop new heterogeneous photocatalytic systems by the physicochemical deposition of photoactive sites on a diverse range of matrices such as inorganic semiconductors such as TiO2 or carbene nitride have been reported.26–32 In this review article, we describe the fabrication of catalysts based on surface science and solid-state chemistry, where the surface atoms serve as the active sites for reactions. However, these physicochemical methodologies have some limitations such as the uneven distribution and leaching of the catalyst, which are major drawbacks, ultimately leading to a reduction in the catalytic activity of the designed heterogeneous catalyst. Additionally, semiconductor-type photocatalysts such as TiO2 and ZnO typically require UV irradiation for excitation owing to their large band gaps and limited photo response, together with their inconvenient recovery and reuse, which restrict their commercial applications.33–38 The selectivity for the desired product also remains a significant concern due to the involvement of free radical intermediates in UV-induced chemical reactions. This issue becomes acute during the selective oxidation of organic compounds with molecular oxygen (O2), wherein O2 can be easily attached to free radical intermediates, thus leading to uncontrolled autooxidation products. UV-induced holes are also not only highly oxidative but can generate a variety of oxygen species to induce the formation of undesirable products and lead to lower selectivity for the desired product.39 Besides, the classical and hazardous UV radiation-catalysed reactions further demand massive and costly irradiation setups and often cause unselective reactions, which are problematic to predict and control.
The application of transition-metal based complexes as photocatalysts is restricted on the commercial scale due to their high cost and lack of sustainability because of their low reusability. Thus, to overcome these limitations, the immobilization of the photocatalytic active sites with functional efficiency and increased reproducibility has been found to be promising despite their high cost. Henceforth, the design and development of more robust, versatile and heterogeneous visible light-driven photocatalytic systems based on transition metals are urgent. In this review, we highlight the heterogenization of active homogeneous photocatalytic units for the synthesis of various organic scaffolds, which holds promise to use insolation (incident sunlight) to drive both thermodynamically and kinetically uphill conversions. The utilization of numerous suitable support materials for heterogenization is the focus of this review. Different materials can be chosen as the matrix or support system for grafting of the photoactive sites such as inert polymers and inorganic materials. The ideal carrier matrix should have the following properties: (i) low cost, (ii) inert nature, (iii) high stability, (iv) mechanical strength, (v) charge transfer ability, (vi) reusability, and (vii) ability to prevent nonspecific adsorption and inactivation.40 Herein, the numerous applications of heterogeneous photocatalysts ranging from organic transformations and dye degradation to water splitting are summarized.
Approach to overcome the above-mentioned limitations
Due to the high commercial value and increasing risk of exhaustion of the expensive transition metal-based photocatalysts, their recovery and reuse are highly desirable. Thus, to overcome the above-mentioned issues, scientists have started devoting their efforts on the development of novel, heterogeneous photocatalysts by employing top-down approaches and bottom-up approaches, which include co-precipitation, chemical reduction, chemical and physical vapour deposition, mechanical milling, chemical, sol–gel technique, laser pyrolysis, and solvothermal–hydrothermal method, which are also important from an environment friendly standpoint. Heterogeneous photocatalysts exhibit numerous advantages compared with their analogous homogeneous counterparts, for example, ease of catalyst separation, minimal product contamination, and remarkable reusability.41 Thus far, the scientific community has widely utilized semiconductor- and layered sheet-based photocatalysts for the effective removal of pollutants from water and air towards advancement of field of self-cleaning and anti-bacterial materials. However, although these conventional heterogeneous photocatalysts display high application value, they exhibit moderately inadequate photochemical activity in the visible-light range42 due to their fast photoelectron–hole recombination rate and slow transport together with sluggish interfacial activity and poisoning deactivation. Recently, scientists have made significant progress in the field by optimizing the energy bandgap of catalysts through surface modification, extending their light absorption in the visible light range. However, the photocatalysts synthesized by these approaches suffer from various obstacles including agglomeration of many metal-based species on the surface of the support during dehydration. The uniform distribution of active sites is essential to balance both the high catalytic activity and desired physical and chemical features. Hereafter, the quest to design facile and reusable heterogeneous photocatalytic systems that work in the visible light range has led to the development of various strategies such as immobilization on a heterogeneous core, tagging for phase separation, encapsulation (ship-in-bottle approach), adsorption, and electrospraying. One of these strategies is to covalently anchor the photoactive sites on robust materials to obtain well-defined active sites with enhanced interfacial charge transfer, which allows the facile separation and reuse of expensive and scarce metal-based photocatalysts. The fabrication of robust and visible light-responsive heterogeneous photocatalysts has triggered excitement in the research community as next-generation photocatalysts due to their facile synthesis, appealing electronic band structure, high physicochemical stability and reusability.43–49 This approach involves immobilizing the active species by chemical engineering or coordination chemistry on a heterogeneous support to achieve the goal of circular economy without hampering their catalytic properties. An amenable and potential material is required, which has high stability and does not self-degrade or leach. To date, investigators have employed various organic and inorganic supports such as silica, MOFs, POPs, COFs, metal oxides, nanoparticles, semiconductors, glass wool, carbon, graphene oxide, carbon nitride, boron nitride, biomaterial-based supports, amorphous aluminosilicates, zeolites, dendrimers, clay, Nafion and many more for the surface engineering of catalytic systems.50–53 Here, the covalent grafting of molecular photocatalytic motifs on suitable materials can directly resolve the pre-existing issues, and simultaneously meet the requirements of high activity and selectivity of homogeneous catalysts as well as the stability, reaction medium separation, and improved usage cycles of heterogeneous catalysts.
This review sheds light on the following:
(i) Various examples of covalently bonded, crosslinked and surface immobilized photoactive sites on selected heterogeneous cores/supports.
(ii) Numerous photochemical applications of heterogeneous photocatalysts.
(iii) Numerous physico-chemical techniques utilized to characterize catalysts.
(iv) Challenges associated with the field of photocatalysis.
(v) Future directions to overcome the accompanying challenges.
Engineering of photoactive complexes on various support matrices
In the past few years, there has been a surge in interest in the expansion of heterogeneous photocatalysts by taking advantage of the versatile platform of numerous cores. To date, several heterogeneous cores such as silica, magnetic nanoparticles, polymers and metal-organic frameworks have been employed for immobilization/anchoring photocatalytic active species by post-grafting, cross-linking or direct encapsulation to enable the easy separation and potential reusability of catalysts.54–57 These essential components of the emerging chemical methodologies will satisfy the need of recyclable and reusable systems and will meet the criteria of green and sustainable catalytic systems. As apparent from Fig. 1, the rapidly increasing number of reports in the literature on supported photocatalysts suggest that it is the right time to deliver a comprehensive and state-of-the-art review on various photoactive site anchored nanomaterials from a broad perspective considering the progress on this hot research topic. A large number of inspiring reviews has been reported on semiconductor-based heterogeneous photocatalyst covering their synthetic techniques, characteristic features, and promising applications.9,58–61 Nevertheless, the covalent grafting of photoactive complexes on a support matrix for numerous applications via visible light irradiation has not been thoroughly discussed thus far. This review covers all the reports encompassing the rational design and construction of photocatalysts from the perspective of engineering strategies by utilizing a diverse range of support materials such as silica, polymer, clay, and MOFs to achieve photoredox applications for solar energy conversion, environmental remediation, and transformations.
Mesoporous cellular silica foams (MCFs)
The captivating properties of mesoporous silica such as high specific surface area, uniform pore size, confinement effects inside its channels, controllable hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity, high stability and robust structural framework have been successfully accessed to develop numerous photocatalytic systems of interest.62–72

Depolymerization reaction. 
Considering the copious advantages of mesoporous materials, Zhang and group designed a mesoporous cellular silica-structured photoredox catalyst, (Ir(ppy)2(bpy)-MCFs).73
The fabricated photoredox catalyst is depicted in Fig. 2, wherein thiol-functionalized mesoporous cellular silica cores were grafted with a vinyl-tagged [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]PF6 complex via thiol–ene click reaction. The authors utilized the synthesized Ir(ppy)2(bpy)-MCFs to carry out the highly selective and reactive reductive depolymerization of oxidized lignin β-O-4 model compounds under visible light irradiation. Moreover, the aerogel-like three-dimensional porous structure led to a significant reduction in the mass transfer resistance and photon propagation hindrance phenomenon. In addition, the developed catalyst exhibited recyclability for up to six runs.
 Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the preparation of Ir(ppy)2(bpy) complex-containing mesoporous cellular silica foam (Ir(ppy)2(bpy)-MCFs). 


Water splitting. 
Lately, the scientific community has shown profound interest in water splitting given that the abundant and clean sunlight can directly be employed in this process for the production of the valuable hydrogen energy. In past few decades, several photocatalysts have been employed to achieve efficient water splitting for hydrogen production with high efficiency.61,74–78 However, significant challenges need to be accomplished to enhance the performance of photocatalysts given that they suffer from the inherent disadvantages of low light utilization and rapid photogenerated electron–hole recombination in the semiconductor. Henceforth, the development of advanced and efficient photocatalytic systems is urgent. The report by Liu and group provides a potential answer for the current bottleneck of photocatalytic water splitting. The authors devoted their efforts to fabricating an active and durable silica-supported photocatalyst, which demonstrated practical utility in photocatalytic hydrogen evolution from formate and aldehyde.73 The [IrCp*Cl(μ-Cl)]2 (Cp* = η5-pentamethyl cyclopentadienyl) complex was anchored on bipyridine-based organosilica nanotubes (BPy-ENT) to achieve a promising organic-inorganic hybrid solid photocatalytic material (Ir-BPy-ENT) having numerous desirable properties such as stable nanotube structure, high surface area, and confinement effects inside its channels due to its large pore diameter, which reduced the diffusion restraint and facilitated the easy transport of substrates (Fig. 3). Furthermore, the synthesized composite also possessed controllable hydrophobicity/hydrophilicity and isolated active sites.
 Fig. 3  Synthetic routes and photocatalysis of molecular heterogeneous catalysts based on organosilica nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V. 
The fabricated heterogeneous iridium-grafted photocatalyst (Ir-BPy-ENT) could deliver high efficiency in the pH-dependent production of clean and highly pure H2 (TOF: 16.2 h−1 and quantum yield: ∼8.0%) from formate in a promising way. Furthermore, the conditions employed for the production of hydrogen were fairly green given that the reaction was carried out under mild conditions (visible light illumination (λ > 420 nm), weakly basic conditions and room temperature) in comparison to the analogous homogeneous catalyst. Furthermore, this group also designed a new approach to generate hydrogen from aldehyde–water solution on exposure to visible light, which was not studied or reported before. The recyclability of the catalyst was also investigated, which revealed its high reusability given that it showed high photocatalytic activity and stability for up to 6 cycles.
Likewise, Inagaki and co-workers reported the fabrication of periodic mesoporous organosilicas (PMOs) composed of large amounts of ruthenium(II) tris(bipyridine) complexes grafted in their pore walls as a solid photosensitizer (Fig. 4).79 Even after the complex was grafted in the pore walls, the properties of the homogeneous complex remained intact given that it exhibited strong absorption in the visible light region up to 600 nm due to its metal–ligand charge transfer band, and also showed redox behaviour at ∼0.8 V versus Ag/AgNO3 due to the one-electron oxidation. Afterwards, this group demonstrated the application of the developed catalyst for the production of hydrogen and water oxidation by loading platinum and iridium species on the pore surface of the Ru-PMO catalyst, respectively. Furthermore, the catalyst also showed good prospects for use in photocatalytic organic transformations.
 Fig. 4  Synthesis of Ru-PMOs from Ru-containing organosilane precursors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 1999–2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 


Dye degradation. 
The presence of abundant contaminants in the atmosphere and water poses a serious threat to the ecosystem. Thus, researchers are keen to find a solution or effective technology that can readily reduce or completely eliminate the adverse effects arising from environmental pollution. Amongst the countless proposed methodologies, photocatalysis has gained extensive consideration given that it involves the direct utilization of incident solar light for generating reactive oxygen species to achieve the degradation/mineralization of various pollutants. In this regard, Balasubramanian and co-worker explored this field for effective dye degradation. This group adopted the grafting approach for the synthesis of a heterogeneous photocatalytic system by utilizing mesoporous silica as a heterogeneous support and Cu(II) and Ni(I) complexes as photoactive sites. Initially, Schiff base condensation was accomplished between 3-APTES and O,O′-mono methylene bis(salicylidene) (SL), which were grafted on MCM-41 and further metalated with the respective metal salts to produce the desired photoactive materials (Fig. 5). Methyl orange and Reactive Red 198 were successfully degraded using the copper-loaded photocatalyst, which was effectively reused for up to five cycles.80
 Fig. 5  Grafting of Ni(II) and Cu(II) complexes on MCM41 by Schiff base condensation of SL and 3-APTES. 
Similarly, Jamali and co-worker synthesised an iron(III) Schiff-base complex grafted on a silica support in a single step by utilizing tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) as the silica precursor. Later, this group employed the above-mentioned catalyst for the photooxidation of nitric oxide upon irradiation with visible light and photooxidation of Reactive Blue 13 dye in aqueous solution (Fig. 6).81
 Fig. 6  Iron complex grafted on a support. 


CO2 photocatalytic reduction. 
Li and co-workers reported the fabrication of a Co(III) cyclam complex, where cyclam is 1,4,8,11-tetraazacyclotetradecane, immobilized on the surface of mesoporous silica via two different covalent linkages (Fig. 7).82 This group utilized the fabricated heterogeneous photocatalysts for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 in the presence of p-terphenyl as a molecular photosensitizer.
 Fig. 7  Synthesis of Co–L–SiO2 using a cyclam ring. 


Oxygen production. 
Recently, the scope of photocatalysts has also been explored for accomplishing the challenging water oxidation reaction.83 It is worth mentioning that the research group led by Inagaki et al. explored photocatalytic water splitting for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). In this process, the anchoring approach was employed for the synthesis periodic mesoporous organosilica (PMO) grafted with a tris(2,2′-bipyridine)ruthenium sensitizer, which was further utilized for visible light-driven water oxidation.84 Here, the chelating ligand 2,2′-bipyridine (BPy) acquired a unique pore wall structure in the pores of the PMO, named BPy-PMO, which was responsible for the formation of photoactive metal complexes on the external surface of the material (Fig. 8). This group also reported interesting results, which indicated that in the presence of a sacrificial oxidant, the fine tuning of the photocatalyst could increase the turnover number by up to 20 times under visible light. The photochemical properties of the fabricated catalyst could be engineered precisely by varying the substituents on the BPy ligands such as X-BPy in the PMO framework and two X2bpy, denoted herein as Ru(X)-BPy-PMO, where X is H (2,2′-bipyridine), Me (4,4′-dimethyl-2,2′-bipyridine), t-Bu (4,4′-di-tert-butyl-2,2′-bipyridine) and CO2Me (4,4′-dimethoxycarbonyl-2,2′-bipyridine). Unfortunately, this group was unable to regenerate the catalyst for oxygen production after using it for 10–12 h, which was attributed to the decomposition of Ru complex on the surface, as evident in the case of the homogeneous photocatalytic system Ru(bpy)32+ and colloidal IrO2, where the amount of evolved oxygen levelled off within 1 h.
 Fig. 8  Ru complexes supported on BPy-PMO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Organic transformations. 
To resolve the environmental problems associated with the rapidly increasing level of chemicals in our surroundings, it is imperative to design new methods that are devoid of the use of costly and harsh reagents. Currently, the intrinsic advantages associated with photocatalysis has been successfully utilized to develop ‘green’ methods for the formation of the C–C bond.4,39,85 Photochemical reactions can be performed under unparalleled mild conditions, where the activation of the substrates is attained simply via the absorption of a photon, which leaves no residues, whereas most catalytic methods involve the use of toxic/polluting reagents.86 In this regard, Francis and group described a facile route to synthesize a covalently grafted ruthenium photoredox catalyst by exploiting the carbodiimide-mediated coupling between a carboxylic acid-functionalized ruthenium complex and commercially available amine-functionalized silica beads.87 The highly versatile, stable and reusable silica-bound ruthenium chromophore was further employed to accomplish the intramolecular cyclization of 2-benzylidenehydrazine carbothioamides to afford 5-phenyl-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-amines with good to excellent yields (Fig. 9). Interestingly, the catalyst exhibited high recyclability and reusability for up to eight times through a simple filtration process without showing any significant loss in catalytic activity.
 Fig. 9  Photocatalytic reaction of 2-benzylidenehydrazinecarbothioamides to give 5-phenyl-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-amines. 
Following a similar strategy, Zhao et al. developed a versatile ruthenium bipyridyl-tethered porous organosilica (Ru-POS) photocatalyst (Fig. 10),88 which was further employed to achieve (i) the oxidative aromatization of Hantzsch esters, (ii) reductive dehalogenation of alkyl halides, and (iii) functional group interconversion (FGI) of alcohols to alkyl halides in good to excellent yield.
 Fig. 10  Schematic representation of Ru-POS and its photocatalytic application. 
Similarly, our group also participated in the quest to design and fabricate numerous magnetically retrievable heterogeneous photocatalysts by integrating a silica-coated Fe3O4 shell core and photocatalytic active sites, and further utilized them for various organic transformations (Fig. 11).56,57,89 The highly versatile, magnetic and robust iridium-based photoredox nanocatalyst Ir@PyBz@ASMNPs was employed to achieve sustainable and ambient oxidative C–H arylation and C–H cyanation under visible light having broad substrate adaptability and outstanding recyclability compared to analogous homogeneous catalysts. Correspondingly, the Ru@DAFO@ASMNP-based magnetic photocatalyst was utilized for Mannich and nitro Mannich reactions and could be reused for up to 5 cycles under ambient conditions. Likewise, a noble metal-free Co@Apz@ASMNP-based heterogeneous photocatalyst was utilized to realize direct (Het)Arene C–H arylation and solvent-free CO2 capture via single-electron transfer processes at room temperature and pressure and could be reused for up to four cycles.
 Fig. 11  Schematic representation of magnetically retrievable photocatalysts and their photocatalytic applications. 

Polymers
To date, various research groups have effectively exploited the available energy resources for substantial developments in the field of catalysis to meet the current and future global energy demands. For instance, a diverse range of porous cross-linked polymers (PCPs) including crystalline covalent-organic frameworks (a new class of robust, nanoporous materials) due to their high affinity with reaction media have also been used as well-designed organic precursors to fulfil the requirement of heterogeneous photocatalytic systems.90–93 Additionally, the polymer unit as a support matrix offers a high surface area, which is not only beneficial for the mass transfer phenomenon but also provides easy access to active sites. Furthermore, the organic framework ensures the high affinity with organic reactants and their huge aromatic structure also tends to adsorb the sensitive visible light.94 Moreover, polymers possess permanent porosity and their compositions and properties can be easily tuned via copolymerization, which helps to introduce active sites more efficiently at the molecular level. PCPs are more efficient photocatalysts in comparison to MOFs given that the synthesis of MOFs requires unfilled d orbitals as connecting points, which have the tendency to quench the photoexcited states of the photocatalytic building units.5 The above-mentioned exciting properties make these cores a potential candidate for grafting various photocatalytically active moieties.

Organic transformations. 
Inspired by the unique characteristics of organic polymers, Han et al. was motivated to synthesize cationic polycarbazole network (CPOP-28 and CPOP-29)-based heterogeneous photocatalysts via a simple oxidative coupling reaction to carry out a wide range of oxidative organic transformations such as the oxidation of sulfides, hydroxylation of arylboronic acids, and cross dehydrogenative coupling reactions in the presence of visible light under ambient conditions (Fig. 12).95 This group also elucidated that the change in photophysical and electrochemical activity on the introduction of trifluoromethyl groups in the polymeric network CPOP-29 led to superior light-absorption ability, longer fluorescence lifetime, and stronger oxidative capability.
 Fig. 12  Schematic representation of heteroleptic iridium polymer and its application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society. 
The same group also employed two conjugated carbazolyl group-derived microporous polymer (CPOP-20 and CPOP-21)-based triscyclometallated iridium complexes to promote the aza-Henry reaction.96 The synthesis of the high surface area and stable CPOP-20 and CPOP-21-based photocatalysts was achieved through a FeCl3-promoted oxidative coupling reaction, as shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  Porous polymers CPOP-20 and CPOP-21. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Later on, Li et al. also designed and fabricated iridium complex-grafted porous organic polymers (Ir-POP-1 and Ir-POP-2) with uniformly distributed catalytic active sites (Fig. 14).97
 Fig. 14  Synthesis of Ir-POP-1 and Ir-POP-2 polymers and Ir-Ph-1 and Ir-Ph-2 complexes. 
The authors synthesized a visible light-activated heterogeneous photocatalyst by initiating a coupling reaction between tetraphenylmethane tetraborate and two [Ir(ppy)2(dtbbpy)]+-based bitopic linkers and utilized it for the Smiles-Truce rearrangement of alkyl iodides, desulfurative conjugate addition to Michael acceptors, and aerobic oxidation of sulfides and arylboronic acids. Ir-POP-2 demonstrated high catalytic efficiency in comparison to its rival homogeneous prototype iridium complexes, which is further ascribed to the large pore size of its conjugated support. The spherical aggregates of Ir-POP-2 with large-sized pores of around 1 μm did not obstruct the catalytic process, instead providing free access to electron transfer between the discrete substrate molecules to the Ir complexes in the polymer. Moreover, this highly valuable, stable and rigid photocatalyst could be successfully utilized for up to 8 to 19 times, thus proving its high recyclability in catalysis.
To date, various groups attempted to attain achieve dehydrogenative coupling (CDC) reactions for successful carbon–carbon (C–C) and carbon–heteroatom (C–X) bond formation.98–100 Kobayashi et al. attempted one environmentally sustainable approach to achieve this,101 wherein they developed a polymer-immobilized iridium photocatalyst to execute CDC reactions of tertiary amines facilitated by renewable and clean solar energy (Fig. 15).
 Fig. 15  Immobilization of monomer 2 via suspension polymerization. 
The immobilized iridium-based polypyridyl complex designed by adopting a suspension polymerization protocol was deployed for the aerobic phosphonylation reaction of N-aryl tetrahydroisoquinoline derivatives, which afforded the desired products in good to excellent yields (Fig. 16). The authors also checked the viability of recovering and reusing the cross-linked co-polymer for the aerobic phosphonylation reaction and it was found that the catalyst could be reused for up to 4 cycles without loss in its catalytic activity.
 Fig. 16  Aerobic oxidative coupling reaction between N-aryl tetrahydroisoquinolines with P–H nucleophiles. 
A similar approach was implemented by Shen et al. to embed an iridium complex in a vinylpyridine and divinylbenzene copolymer to successful achieve heterogeneous photocatalysis, which would simplify the process of catalyst recovery and product purification (Fig. 17).94 This group energetically resolved the challenge of iridium leaching given that its incorporation in the vinylpyridine unit not only provided chelating sites but also led to high stability due to the strong interaction between the active sites and support.
 Fig. 17  Synthetic route of the supported iridium complex. 
This group utilized the highly active and green catalyst for the photo-mediated cyclization of tertiary anilines and maleimides, where it revealed the additional advantage of easy recovery and reusability for up to 4 times without showing any structural change (as shown in Fig. 18).
 Fig. 18  Visible light-mediated cyclization of tertiary anilines and maleimides with P4 as the photocatalyst. 
In 2019, the same group also employed the above-mentioned immobilized iridium complex photocatalyst Ir(ppy)2(PDVB-py) for the synthesis of amides, nitriles, and anhydrides in good to high chemical yields, which was initiated by the in situ generation of the Vilsmeier–Haack reagent from CBr4 in DMF upon irradiation with visible light (Fig. 19).102
 Fig. 19  Immobilized iridium complex photocatalyst Ir(ppy)2(PDVB-py) utilized for the synthesis of amides, nitriles, and anhydrides. 
Additionally, the fabricated environment-friendly and economical catalyst could be easily recycled and reused without causing any significant change in the iridium content in the Ir(ppy)2(PDVB-py) catalyst.
Similarly, Lin et al. synthesized highly stable (up to 350 °C in air) and molecularly tunable porous cross-linked polymer (PCP)-immobilized with phosphorescent [Ru(bpy)3]2+ and [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]+via dicobalt octacarbonyl (Co2-(CO)8)-catalyzed alkyne trimerization reactions (Fig. 20).5
 Fig. 20  Synthesis of Ir-PCP and Ru-PCP. 
Additionally, the authors unveiled the high catalytic efficiency of the heterogeneous Ru- and Ir-PCPs for aza-Henry reactions, α-arylation of bromomalonate, and oxyamination of an aldehyde upon illumination with a common fluorescent lamp (26 W). Moreover, the designed photocatalyst displayed excellent efficacy, recyclability for up to 4 times and comparable results to its corresponding homogeneous catalyst in terms of product yield.
This group also fabricated highly efficient and reusable heterogeneous phosphorescent cross-linked polymers 1 and 2 via oxidative homocoupling reactions of tetra(ethynyl) positioned at 4,4′- or 5,5′- on the two bipyridine of Ru(bpy)32+ (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  Synthesis of Ru(bpy)32+-based cross-linked polymers 1 and 2. 
By smartly harnessing the ability of the Ru(bpy)32+ moieties in the polymer network for the effective transfer of triplet excited states to the particle surface, the photocatalyst was further exploited for numerous organic transformations such as aza-Henry reactions, aerobic oxidative coupling and dehalogenation of benzyl bromoacetate to afford the desired products in high yields.103
In 2016, Alkordi et al. proposed a rational design to afford different porous polymers containing an Ru(bpy)n photosensitizer or cobaloxime complex as a proton reduction catalyst for carrying out the one-pot Sonogashira–Hagihara (SH) cross-coupling reaction (Fig. 22).104
 Fig. 22  Synthetic scheme for PRP-1 (left) and the geometrically optimized polymer fragment model showing the extension points highlighted in yellow (right). Nitrate ions are omitted for clarity; C (gray), H (white), N (blue), and Ru (deep red). Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Zhang and co-workers also designed and developed exceptionally stable metal porous organic polymers (POPs) motifs containing [Ru(bpy)3]2+ cores by employing one-pot Suzuki–Miyaura coupling reactions (Fig. 23). The highly effective and reusable Ru-POP-1 was utilized to achieve the enantioselective alkylation of aldehydes.105
 Fig. 23  Schematic representation of Ru-POP-1 and Ru-POP-2 polymers and their application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society. 
Similarly, Ko and co-workers developed efficient and recyclable heterogeneous photoredox catalysts by directly grafting homogeneous iridium metal complexes on various polymer support materials, including a bulk polymer, porous polymer and polymer microspheres.106 This group utilized the highly efficient catalyst for (i) addition reaction between phenylacetylene and perfluorohexyl iodide and (ii) amidation reaction of n-butylamine with perfluorohexyl iodide (Fig. 24). Their report suggested that the catalyst could be further utilized over 5 cycles with high efficiency.
 Fig. 24  Polymer-supported iridium photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2022, Elsevier Inc. 


CO2 photoreduction. 
Booming industrial growth and population explosion have given rise to serious environmental issues such as the green-house effect, climate change and global warming, which are primarily attributed to the extensive emission of CO2, which also raises the concern of depletion of fossil fuels.10
Consequently, researchers are aimed at expanding their research in materials science and engineering to overcome the hurdles generally encountered in energy conversion and environmental protection. One effective way is to overcome these issues is “reverse combustion” or “carbon capture technology”, which involves the utilization of CO2 as a potential carbon feedstock to generate organic fuels. Among the numerous renewable energy ventures, heterogeneous photocatalysis is considered a green sustainable avenue to address the above-mentioned challenges by utilizing solar energy to transform CO2 to energy fuels and chemical energy. In this regard, Luo and co-workers designed a promising coordination polymer photocatalyst based on a proficient Ir unit, which has excellent light-harvesting properties with broad absorption in the visible light range, long-lived excited states and good recyclability.107 This group successfully employed the synthesized catalyst for visible light-driven CO2 photoreduction with an exceptional yield of 38 mmol HCOO− in 6 h (turnover frequency of 118.8 mmol (g of cat.)−1 h−1).
Recently, Wang et al. also fabricated a heterogeneous photocatalytic system utilizing a hydrazone-based covalent organic framework (COF) as a photosensitizer and [Ir-ppy] metal complex as a photocatalyst for effective photochemical CO2 reduction to CO (in 88.6 μmol h−1 yield) with 98% selectivity upon irradiation with visible light (Fig. 25).108 Moreover, their results suggested that the synergistic combination of COF and Ir-ppy led to an enhancement in reactivity (2.3 times) compared to the bare [Ir-ppy]. Interestingly, the immobilization of [Ir-ppy] helped in achieving recyclability for up to 5 times and the heterogeneous catalyst remained active for 7 h upon irradiation, whereas [Ir-ppy] lost its activity within 30 min.
 Fig. 25  Z-Scheme electron transfer during CO2 reduction using NAHN-Tp and [Ir-ppy]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2020, Published by Elsevier Inc. 
Similarly, Kitagawa and group reported a porous coordination polymer (PCP) catalyst comprised of an RuII–CO complex as a metallolinker, Zr-bpdc/RuCO, by adopting the post-synthetic exchange (PSE) approach (Fig. 26).109
 Fig. 26  Synthesis of Zr-bpdc/RuCO by the PSE of H2RuCO with bpdc in Zr-bpdc. 
The PCP-RuII composite revealed the synergistic effect between the high gas adsorption ability of the PCP and the catalytic features of the molecular RuII–CO catalyst. Surprisingly, this group utilized a low concentration and pressure of CO2 as a C1 source for its photochemical reduction to CO, HCOOH, and H2.


Dye degradation. 
Considering the negative environmental impacts of toxic dyes and the urgency to eradicate them from the ecosystem, Gayathri and co-worker utilized the grafting approach to synthesize a novel photocatalyst by covalently grafting an Fe(III) complex of 2-phenylbenzimidazole photocatalyst on a polymer (polystyrene-divinyl benzene, PS-DVB) (Fig. 27).
 Fig. 27  Preparation of PS-Fe(III)PBMZL. 
The octahedral environment around Fe(III) in the bound complex was determined by various studies and the catalyst was further employed for the abatement of toxic dyes via photodegradation using H2O2 as an oxidizing agent under the optimized parameters upon illumination with UV/visible light.110 The high spin iron(III) hexa-coordinated, labile complexes with weak field ligands had the tendency to sustain the thermal or photochemical reduction of Fe(III) to Fe(II), and further generate OH radicals from H2O for the complete mineralization of pollutants (Fenton process). Additionally, the catalyst could be easily recycled and reused for up to 7 runs with the retention of its catalytic activity.

Reduced graphene oxide (rGO)
Since its discovery in 2004, graphene has gained attention from researchers due to its superior physical, chemical, mechanical, optical and electrical features, enable an extensive series of applications ranging from electronics to nanoelectromechanical systems. Graphene, a single layer of sp2-bonded carbon atoms tightly packed into a two-dimensional honeycomb structure with high thermal conductivity, offers excellent charge carrier mobility at room temperature and exhibits an extremely high theoretical specific surface area. To date, there have been numerous reports discussing the sustainable synthesis of graphene, including micro-mechanical exfoliation, epitaxial growth, chemical and electrochemical reduction of graphite oxide and bottom-up organic synthesis.111–114 Due to the large number of bonds at the edge sites of graphene, it can be effectively utilized for the modification of π–π conjugation systems with highly reactive atoms or molecules, paving the way to alter its electron density distribution and physical and chemical properties. Reduced graphene oxide (rGO) has been proven to be an effective and reliable support due to its low cost and massive scalability. Besides, functionalization is key vector that makes graphene an optimal choice as a reliable heterogeneous support. Literature precedents and novel discoveries in the field indicate the possibility to utilize reduced graphene oxide (rGO) as a fascinating core for a broad range of applications in next-generation nanotechnologies, where current materials are limited in functionality.115,116

Organic transformation. 
Focusing on the importance of organic transformations in synthetic chemistry, Li et al. utilized rGO as a support and functionalized it with sodium benzenesulfonate (PhSO3Na) by adopting a two-step procedure.117 For this, 4-benzenediazoniumsulfonate was incorporated in rGO by aryl diazonium coupling, and subsequently NaCl ion-exchange was carried out. Later on, a tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(II) complex was anchored on the pre-synthesized NaSO3-functionalized reduced graphene oxide (NaSO3-rGO) to afford the target Ru(bpy)3-rGO catalyst. This group also explored the possibility of supporting tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(II) moiety over Amberlyst 15 resin (Fig. 28).
 Fig. 28  Schematic representation of the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide-immobilized tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(II) complex. 
The fabricated two-dimensional sheet-like Ru(bpy)3-rGO photocatalyst showed a high catalytic performance towards visible light-mediated reductive dehalogenation reactions under mild reaction conditions. The photocatalyst was even found to be compatible for aryl chlorides, which generated the desired products in good to excellent yields and comparable results with the corresponding homogeneous Ru(bpy)3Cl2 catalyst were obtained (Fig. 29).
 Fig. 29  Ru(bpy)3-rGO for efficient visible-light-driven reductive dehalogenation reaction. 
In addition, the catalyst showed high recyclability for up to 5 times without exhibiting any significant loss in its catalytic activity.


CO2 photocatalytic reduction. 
Recently, Ma and co-workers fabricated a highly proficient and robust catalyst by hybridizing earth-abundant metal-based Co quaterpyridine complexes covalently grafted on the surface of graphene to afford selective CO2 reduction to products (>97%) (Fig. 30).118 This group reported interesting results, which revealed that the selectivity of CO production was attained by a weak acid (phenol or trifluoroethanol) as a co-substrate, although formate was solely achieved in a mixture of acetonitrile and triethanolamine.
 Fig. 30  Fabrication of the Coqpy@GA hybrid material. 
Additionally, the recyclability experiment suggested that the fabricated catalyst could be reused for up to 4 runs.

Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4)
Graphitic carbon nitride (g-C3N4) has emerged as a promising candidate as a heterogeneous support. The use of g-C3N4 composites has been widely reported due to their low cost, easy availability and eco-friendly nature. Polymeric graphitic carbon nitride consists of non-metal, earth-abundant elements such as carbon, nitrogen and hydrogen. It is considered to be the most stable allotrope in the CxNy series, owing to its analogous layered structure to graphene. Further, its 2-D structure retains some exclusive and intriguing physical and electronic features of graphene, which aid the photocatalytic activity of g-C3N4 in various applications. The graphite-like planer and π-conjugated systems of g-C3N4 possess unique structural and remarkable physicochemical properties with a band-gap energy of 2.7 eV, making it functionable at around 460 nm in the visible solar spectrum. The modification of g-C3N4 can be achieved by doping, copolymerization and grafting to vary the band structures of g-C3N4 to enhance its photocatalytic activity. Further, its high thermal and chemical stability under ambient conditions, biocompatibility, environment-friendly nature and resistance to acidic and alkaline conditions make it a suitable material as a heterogeneous core. Additionally, as a core, it can be easily synthesized in bulk through the thermal polycondensation of cheap nitrogen-containing carbon-based precursors such as dicyanamide, cyanamide, melamine, urea and thiourea. The catalytic materials based on C3N4 have demonstrated wide applications in various fields such as photochemical splitting of water and some reactions of organic oxidation and dehydrogenation.119,120

CO2 photoreduction. 
Impressed by the remarkable features of carbon nitride, Jain and co-workers chose graphitic carbon nitride for the fabrication of a heteroleptic iridium complex for the efficient photoreduction of CO2 under visible light irradiation.121 The synergistic integration of C3N4 with the heteroleptic iridium complex was evident from the significant enhancement in the yield of methanol from 145 μmol g−1 cat (with respect to C3N4) to 9934 μmol g−1 cat in 24 h (TON of 1241 with respect to Ir) under identical conditions. Furthermore, the catalyst showed high recyclability and reusability without any significant loss in its catalytic activity. The same group further designed and fabricated a more sustainable and cost effective photocatalyst by grafting molecular cobalt phthalocyanine tetracarboxylic acid (CoPc-COOH) on g-C3N4 (Fig. 31).122
 Fig. 31  Synthesis of g-C3N4/CoPc-COOH photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc. 
They reported that a high yield of methanol (646.5 mmol g−1 cat. or 12.9 mmol g−1 cat. with a conversion rate of 538.75 mmol h−1 g−1 cat.) was obtained utilizing this catalyst in comparison to its homogeneous counterpart. Additionally, this catalyst could be reused for up to 5 times without any significant loss in its activity.
Similarly, Bian and group fabricated a hybrid photocatalytic system encompassing an earth-abundant Mn complex grafted on g-C3N4 (Fig. 32).123
 Fig. 32  Mn motif grafted on g-C3N4 and its application in the visible light-mediated photocatalytic reduction of CO2. 
This group employed the self-assembly approach to graft the 2,2-bipyridine-4,4-bisphosphonic acid tricarbonyl manganese bromide moiety (MnP) on the support. The fabricated g-C3N4/MnP photocatalyst was utilized to attain the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 to CO (TON = 102) under visible light irradiation. Captivatingly, the reported result suggests that an enhanced yield by up to 5 times was attained by employing the grafted moiety instead of the bare g-C3N4.
Recently, Ishitani and co-workers made significant progress in the fabrication of hybrid photocatalysts by immobilizing supramolecular photocatalysts of Ru and Re on doped and undoped carbon nitride supports, as shown in Table 1. Afterwards, this group also studied the effect of the dopant on the photocatalytic CO2 reduction.
Table 1 Numerous photoactive motifs grafted on C3N4




Grafted photocatalytic moiety
Dopant on C3N4
TON of CO/formate formation
Ref.







SiO2
CO = 2738 nmol; TON = 29

124



TiO2
CO = 1060 nmol; enhanced production 4 times upon doping with TiO2

125






Ag NPs
TON (>2000) for CO2 reduction

126






—



127



Ag NPs
TON = 6000 for formate formation

128



Ag NPs
Formate production 10.4 ± 2.1 μmol

129





They also reported a highly efficient strategy for the fabrication of a hybrid catalytic material by employing an earth-abundant base metal.130 Here, the Co-quaterpyridine molecular complex was covalently immobilized on mesoporous graphitic carbon nitride (mpg-C3N4) via an amide linkage and the fabricated catalyst was further utilized for CO2 reduction upon irradiation with visible light to produce CO with impressive selectivity of 98% (Fig. 33). Additionally, they also studied the long-term stability of the catalyst and realized that no degradation of the catalyst was detected after 4 days of irradiation (ca. 500 catalytic cycles).
 Fig. 33  Co-quaterpyridine molecular complex covalently immobilized on mesoporous graphitic carbon. 
It is interesting to note that this group also grafted Ru, Re and Co motifs on various other supports such as silica131,132 and semiconductors (e.g., Al2O3,133 Al2O3-deposited, Pt-intercalated HCa2Nb3O10 nanosheets134 and TaON135 for visible light-mediated CO2 reduction).
Similarly, Robert et al. demonstrated the synthesis of molecular iron quaterpyridine covalently grafted on carbon nitride by Schiff base condensation (Fig. 34).136
 Fig. 34  Feqpy-BA@C3N4 photocatalyst. 
The results revealed that upon utilizing Feqpy-BA@C3N4 for photocatalytic reduction of CO2, a high CO yield of up to 25.5 μmol and a TON of 2554 were attained, which is a 10-fold increase in activity compared to that of the unlinked Feqpy.


H2 production. 
Tang et al. explored the field of photocatalytic water splitting for the production of pollution-free fuel.137 This group covalently linked an Ni-based molecular catalyst on C3NxHy to synthesize robust, competent and well-defined photocatalysts for hydrogen production at an average rate of 70 mmol h−1 g−1 for 192 h (Fig. 35). Interestingly, the grafting of Ni on CN led to 700 times longer lived photoelectrons in contrast to the base CN.
 Fig. 35  Grafting of molecular catalysts ono CN. 

Clay
Catalyst supports play a significant role in the dispersion of the active species, and therefore they should be cheap and abundantly available to replace the costly supports, which are prepared by cumbersome and tedious procedures. In this context, clay minerals exhibit different and interesting properties such as low dimensionality, shape/size selectivity, and high stability, which make them suitable as support materials for the development of heterogenous catalysts. In this direction, Sato and group constructed an artificial light-harvesting system by utilizing dispersed iridium(III) complexes, [Ir(dfppy)2(Cn-bpy)]+ (dfppyH = 2-(20,40-difluorophenyl)pyridine; Cn-bpy = 4,40-dialkyl-2,20-bipyridine; dialkyl = dimethyl (C1), didodecyl (C12), and dinonyldecyl (C19)) and [Ir(piq)2(Cn-bpy)]+ (piqH = 1-phenylisoquinoline) as a donor and an acceptor on the synthetic saponite. The Förster-type mechanism was employed to determine the energy transfer efficiency (ηET) for various donor and acceptor ratios (D/A). For C1-bpy, ηET was as high as 0.5 with a D/A of ca. 20, which implied that the light energy captured by the donor molecule was collected by the acceptor molecule.138
Metal organic frameworks (MOFs)
MOFs have also emerged as suitable support materials due to their versatile, porous, and crystalline nature and ease of tunability. These frameworks can be readily functionalized or hierarchically integrated with different photoactive components at the molecular level to achieve the absorbance of solar light.

Hydrogen generation. 
To address the energy crisis and promote sustainability, the generation of hydrogen is considered one of the hot topics of research. In this context, Lin et al. synthesized stable, porous, phosphorescent framework materials named Pt NP@MOF assemblies.139 Interestingly, the Pt-loaded phosphorescent MOFs were utilized for efficient hydrogen generation with higher turnover frequencies and improved turnover numbers (7000 for Pt@2) compared to analogous homogeneous catalysts. This group initially utilized [Ir(ppy)2(bpy)]Cl-derived dicarboxylic acids H2L1 and H2L2 for the successful synthesis of Zr6(O)4(OH)4(bpdc)5.94(L1)0.06 and Zr6(O)4(OH)4(L2)6·64DMF MOFs, which were further loaded with Pt NPs via the MOF-mediated photoreduction of K2PtCl4 to afford the Pt@1 and Pt@2 assemblies (Fig. 36).
 Fig. 36  Synthesis of phosphorescent Zr-carboxylate MOFs (1 and 2) of the fcu topology and subsequent loading of Pt NPs in MOF cavities via MOF-mediated photoreduction of K2PtCl4 to form the Pt@1 and Pt@2 assemblies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012, the American Chemical Society. 
Intergrown octahedral nanocrystals of 1 of ∼200 nm in size (Fig. 37) were utilized to achieve hydrogen evolution by the synergistic photoexcitation of the MOF and electron injection into the Pt nanoparticles. Pt@2 offered a turnover number of 7000, which was around 5 times the value obtained with the homogeneous control and it could be readily recycled and reused for at least 3 cycles.
 Fig. 37  TEM images of Pt@1 (a and c) and Pt@2 (b and d). The black dots in (c and d) are Pt NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012, the American Chemical Society. 
As discussed earlier, Lin and co-workers constructed catalytically competent Ir-complexes H2L1–H2L3, H2L5 with dicarboxylic acid functionalities and immobilized them on the highly stable and porous Zr6O4(OH)4(bpdc)6 (UiO-67, bpdc = para-biphenyldicarboxylic acid) framework utilizing a mix-and-match fabrication approach (Fig. 38).140 The highly crystalline MOFs containing [Cp*IrIII(dcppy)Cl](H2L1), [Cp*IrIII(dcbpy)Cl]Cl (H2L2), and [IrIII(dcppy)2(H2O)2]OTf (H2L3) photocatalytic components (where Cp* stands for pentamethylcyclopentadienyl, dcppy stands for 2-phenylpyridine-5,4′-dicarboxylic acid, and dcbpy stands for 2,2′-bipyridine-5,5′-dicarboxylic acid) were further successfully employed for the proficient catalytic oxidation of water with turnover frequencies (TOFs) of up to 4.8 h−1.
 Fig. 38  Synthesis of doped UiO-67. 
Besides, the highly active phosphorescent [IrIII(ppy)2(dcbpy)]Cl (H2L5) MOF was employed to carry out the aza-Henry photocatalytic reaction, which furnished the anticipated products in excellent yields and the photocatalyst was reused for up to 3 runs (Fig. 39).
 Fig. 39  MOF-catalyzed aza-Henry reaction. 


CO2 reduction. 
Hupp and co-workers demonstrated the photoreduction of carbon dioxide into value added fuel (CO) and H+ reduction to molecular hydrogen.141 The Fe-TCPP@NU-1000 catalyst was synthesized by grafting tetrakis(4-carboxyphenyl)porphyrin iron(III) (Fe-TCPP) in the hexagonal segment of the of NU-1000 MOF mesopore over the linker-free sites available on the 8-connected nodes (Fig. 40). The fabricated catalyst was utilized for the reaction processes and revealed turnover numbers of about 20 for both products under illumination for 2 h. This group also shed light on the problem of leaching of the catalyst from the chromophoric MOF after 20 turnovers and discussed that a better linker or bonding site needs to be designed, which will not only increase the TON but also enhance the robustness of the catalyst.
 Fig. 40  Structure of the Fe-TCPP@NU-1000 heterogeneous catalyst framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2022, The Author(s). 


Organic transformation. 
Considering the applications of MOFs in organic transformations, Cohen and co-workers synthesized Zr(IV)-based MOFs (UiO-67) composed of photocatalytically active [IrIII(ppy)2(dcbpy)]Cl (bis(4-phenyl-2-pyridine)(5,5′-dicarboxyl-2,2′-bipyridine) iridium(III) chloride) and [IrIII(ppyF′)2(dcbpy)]Cl (bis(2-(2,4-difluorophenyl)-5-(trifluoromethyl)pyridine), (5,5′-dicarboxyl-2,2′-bipyridine) iridium(III) chloride) complexes via post synthetic modification (PSM) (Fig. 41).142
 Fig. 41  Synthesis of UiO-67-Ir. 
The photocatalytic ability of the synthesized heterogeneous photocatalyst was further explored for the highly selective 2,2,2-trifluoroethylation of styrenes to synthesize pharmaceutically and agrochemically relevant CF3-containing compounds upon irradiation with visible light in the ambient atmosphere (Fig. 42). The advantage of this solid-state catalyst is that it achieved high selectivity and suppressed the dimerization side product, which was successfully accomplished through the confinement of the intermediate radicals in the pores of the catalyst. Additionally, the heterogeneous UiO-67 Ir photocatalyst showed higher activity and selectivity and afforded the target product in good yield in comparison to the homogeneous Ir(ppy)3, [Ir(ppy)2(Et2dcbpy)]-Cl, and [Ir(ppyF′)2(Et2dcbpy)]Cl photocatalysts, wherein formation of the undesired dimerization side products was observed.
 Fig. 42  Photocatalytic trifluoroethylation of styrene. 

Glass wool
Researchers have also explored the potential of glass wool as a reusable fiber-like, low-cost, easy to handle, widely available and versatile passive support for loading nanoparticles and investigated its utility in mediating a diverse range of organic transformations such as C–C coupling and cyclization.143 The literature suggests that glass wool as a heterogeneous core can be easily handled, enabled catalyst recycling and reusability, and demonstrates high adaptability for a wide array of reaction conditions.

Organic transformation. 
Inspired by the remarkable properties of glass wool, Scaiano and co-workers fabricated a versatile, glass wool-supported ruthenium-based heterogeneous photoredox catalytic system (Fig. 43),41 which exhibited exceptional catalytic activity with very a low loading of Ru complexes (75 to 90 ppm). The authors further employed the designed catalyst to achieve the aerobic oxidative hydroxylation of arylboronic acids and singlet oxygen-mediated photo-oxidation of 9,10-dimethylanthracene (DMA) and 2-ethylfuran to furnish the target products with excellent yields (>95%) within a time period of 6 h over irradiation with blue LEDs (λ ∼ 450 nm). Moreover, the highly stable catalyst could be reused for up to six times without showing any significant loss in activity.
 Fig. 43  General scheme for glass wool functionalization. 

Titanium dioxide (TiO2)
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) as a metal oxide core possesses countless exceptional attributes such as low cost, environmental benignity, abundant polymorphs, high stability, and favourable electronic and optical properties.39 TiO2-based photocatalysts work efficiently under UV irradiation due to their large band gap and mostly applied for complete dye degradation and mineralization. Henceforth, researchers diverted their attention towards the anchoring of photoactive metal complexes on the TiO2 core to integrate the qualities of both for improving the efficiency/activity and product selectivity.

Photodegradation. 
Considering the aforementioned advantages of the TiO2 core, Lam and coworkers utilized the surface modification strategy for the surface alteration of TiO2 by an [RuII(py-pzH)3]2+ (where py-pzH = 3-(20-pyridyl)pyrazole) sensitizer via in situ silyl-linkage, which exhibited outstanding stability in various reaction media over a wide pH range (Fig. 44).144 This complex displayed excellent excited-state redox properties (estimated RuIII/RuII* E 1.24 V vs. NHE) and sensitized the injection of electrons into the conduction band of anatase TiO2 upon visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 44  Synthesis of the [RuII(py-pzH)3]2+ complex, its in situ silylation and subsequent anchoring on TiO2 surface. 
The developed material TiO2-[RuII(py-pz-Si)3] showed admirable activity in both aerobic and anaerobic conditions for the visible light (l > 450 nm)-mediated degradation of CCl4 in the presence of an electron donor in neutral aqueous medium.
Likewise, Li and co-workers utilized a TiO2 support for the grafting of Fe(II)-terpyridine (Fig. 45), and further employed this catalyst in photo-Fenton type reactions for the degradation of Orange II in the presence of H2O2.145 This group also explored the grafting of the photoactive TiO2 with a molecular iron complex, which not only shifted the activity from the UV to visible range but additionally enhanced the photocatalytic degradation efficiency. This catalyst could further be reused for up to 5 cycles for the degradation of Orange II under visible light irradiation.
 Fig. 45  Molecular structure of molecular Fe(II) catalyst grafted on the TiO2 surface through a derivatized acetylacetonate linker. 


CO2 photoreduction. 
To capture CO2 for industrially significant reactions, Ananthakrishnan and co-worker reported the fabrication of efficient and rugged hybrid of heteroleptic ruthenium metal complexes and TiO2 nanoparticles (70 nm), in which the metal complex was covalently grafted on NPs (Fig. 46).146
 Fig. 46  TiO2 hybrid photocatalyst of ruthenium(II) heteroleptic metal complex anchored on surface. 
The catalyst was employed for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into formaldehyde (as the major product with 68% selectivity and turnover number of 720) on irradiation with visible light for a period of 5 h. In this process, triethanolamine (TEOA) was used as a sacrificial donor and trace amounts of CO and CH4 were formed during the reaction. Interestingly, the in situ-generated formaldehyde was utilized to synthesise valuable imine motifs by using primary amines (aniline, 4-aminobenzoic acid) as starting reagents. Furthermore, TiO2/RuL1OH could be successfully reused for up to 8 runs without any significant loss in its efficiency.

Characterization of the covalent grafting approach to transform homogeneous photocatalysts to heterogeneous composites
The long-standing popularity of heterogeneous photocatalysts in the scientific community has resulted in their fabrication and characterization by employing relevant techniques to determine their chemical composition and physical properties. A diagram correlating the properties of photocatalysts with their potential characterization approaches together with their outlook is provided in Fig. 47. For instance, FT-IR is employed to identify the presence of organic and inorganic compounds, TEM and SEM to determine the size, shape and morphology, atomic absorption spectroscopy (AAS) and/or ICP to quantify the metal loading, UV-Vis spectroscopy and photoluminescence spectroscopy (PL) to examine the change in photophysical properties upon grafting the photoactive motif, and effective surface area determination by BET measurements.9,147 These techniques provide a comprehensive analysis of the physical and chemical properties of the synthesized photocatalyst such as loading, morphology, structure/functional groups, binding energy, and electrical as well as photocatalytic activity. Some of the examples with relevant the characterization techniques employed to determine their successful formation are presented in Table S1 (ESI†).
 Fig. 47  Major analytical techniques used to determine the synthesis of heterogeneous photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Abbreviations: EDX-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, EELS-electron energy-loss spectroscopy, HAADF-high angle annular dark-field imaging, ICP-inductively coupled plasma, XPS-X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, XAS-X-ray absorption spectroscopy, FTIR-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, NMR-nuclear magnetic resonance, SEM-scanning electron microscopy, TEM-transmission electron microscopy, AFM-atomic force microscopy, BET-Brunauer–Emmett–Teller analysis, XRD-X-ray diffraction, HRTEM-high-resolution TEM, SAED-selected area electron diffraction, UV-ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy, DRS-diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, FDTD-finite-difference time-domain method, PLS-photoluminescence spectroscopy, TAS-transient absorption spectroscopy, SPVS-surface photovoltage spectroscopy, PCS-photocurrent spectroscopy, EIS-electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, ESR-electron spin resonance, PAS-positron annihilation spectroscopy, and TGA-thermogravimetric analysis. 
Challenges and future directions in the field of photocatalysis
In the forthcoming years, photocatalysis can be considered a promising avenue for resolving environmental and energy issues, which are a great concern to researchers worldwide. Although, the latest developments in materials science and engineering have brought various advancements in this field, there is an urgent need to design highly efficient, economic and versatile photocatalysts with good stability and reusability for large-scale practical applications. Besides, this field requires further investigation to develop the understanding of photocatalytic reaction pathways and to unveil the complex processes and many significant aspects, which are vital to construct robust and novel photocatalytic materials. Hence, greater insight into the photocatalytic mechanism and structure–activity relationship is crucial for the search of new materials to achieve substantial breakthroughs for the practical use of photocatalysts for environmental and economical purposes. To date, the implementation of photocatalysts in industrial processes has been elusive due to their high cost and excessive consumption time. Thus far, there is a lack of ideal, viable and practical options for photocatalytic processes, which can be utilized on the commercial scale and completely replace the conventional catalysts. Additionally, there is room to design cost effective, reusable, non-toxic, sustainable photocatalysts, which are easy to operate, possess a broad spectrum of activity and employed on a large scale. Besides, the unidentified fate and noxiousness of heterogeneous photocatalysts, their inadequacy to perform on a large scale, confinement of mass transfer and durability issues are still a concern, which can cause the economic loss in full-scale applications of photocatalysis in practical and real environments. Furthermore, there is a research gap in the design of photocatalytic reactors that retain the photocatalyst in different conditions with optimized contact time and irradiation with white light/solar light instead of the harmful UV light without undergoing photocatalytic deactivation, and also assessing the environmental life-cycle.
Besides the above-mentioned issues, photocatalysis also faces some major difficulties, which require the consideration of practitioners in industrial and academic settings. In this regard, several key aspects and strategies can be helpful for material design to overcome the obstacles and limitations, as follows:
(i) The large-scale manufacturing of high-quality precisely controlled (involving anticipated composition, structure and function) photocatalysts is a noteworthy challenge. The research on fabricating ideal photocatalysts using the minimum number of steps is still progressing to fulfil the long-term requirements of the scientific community. Although numerous methodologies have already been established for the novel, sustainable and economical synthesis of heterogeneous photocatalysts with tuneable properties, computational simulation studies for designing advanced photocatalytic active moieties supported on heterogeneous matrices have been a comparatively less explored arena, but their integration with experimental studies during the fabrication process can open new avenues for the growth of the photocatalytic field. Henceforth, researchers should integrate experimental and computational approaches and employ various tools of chemistry and materials science to design and fabricate highly efficient photocatalytic systems on a large scale. Additionally, more attention should be paid to the structure–activity correlation to fully uncover the effect of various groups on the photocatalytic activity of the developed catalyst, study the photochemistry of the catalyst and reaction by employing the fundamental principles of photosynthesis and better understanding of the actual role of the active components.
(ii) The thermal, hydrothermal, and chemical stability of photocatalysts also raise serious concerns for their lifetime, which typically embodies a significant issue in their practical application. For instance, there are thousands of reports that shed light on various photocatalysts possessing excellent light-harvesting capabilities. Unfortunately, their photochemical stability is not attractive to make them as suitable candidates. Additionally, the photoactive motifs may undergo leaching, deterioration, aggregation, and agglomeration, which will severely affect the photophysical properties and photocatalytic proficiencies. Besides, the deactivation of photocatalysts by poisoning is another fatal downside for their industrial application given that they can be easily poisoned and may lose their activity owing to the surface adsorption of products or intermediates, which inhibit the absorption of photons and also impede the reactant-molecule diffusion to the active sites. Thus far, some of the other critical challenges in the field of photocatalysis include light absorption in a wide range and excitation to generate charge carriers, prevention of charge recombination, improvement in intrinsic activity, inhibition of poisoning deactivation, and expedition of the diffusion, adsorption, and desorption of molecules. Another significant problem that requires attention from the scientific community is mass transfer hindrance and aggregation-induced deactivation of the catalyst.148
(iii) The majority of photocatalysts can easily achieve fast (∼1–10 ps) intersystem crossing to form triplet excited states with microsecond lifetimes. However, the shortened excited-state lifetime of photocatalysts, which leads to a decrease in the photoluminescence quantum yield, limits their wide utilisation. Henceforth, attention should be devoted to developing strategies to achieve the goal of high relaxation time by improving the morphology of catalysts and developing methodologies for the restoration of the exhausted photocatalyst formed due to the quenching of the excited state.149
(iv) One of the major challenges faced by materials scientists is to achieve the efficient synthesis of photocatalysts on an industrial scale. Unfortunately, a huge gap persists between the academic level research results and the requirements for practical applications. Therefore, a comprehensive circular economy model that supports economic development, and simultaneously contributes harmoniously towards the benefit of businesses, society and the environment should be considered in comparison to the linear model of “take-make-waste” concept. Therefore, during the synthesis of the desired catalyst, a balance between green chemistry and profitable protocols should be maintained to increase the environmental and societal benefits together with health and economic gains.
(v) To date, the research in field of utilization of cost-effective, non-toxic and earth-abundant photocatalytic motifs and their heterogenization is still elusive. The earth-abundant metal complexes of Co, Cu, Mn and Ni act as potential candidates and need to be further explored in the near future.
(vi) The photocatalytic reaction processes and the structure–activity correspondence of photocatalysts are still elusive. Thus far, researchers are engrossed in half-reactions of either oxidation or reduction. Henceforth, there is room for improvement by selecting the most suitable pathway and intermediates with the help of modern physico-chemical characterization techniques and theoretical calculations to determine the mechanism at the atomic level. In the interim, the effect of the interface microstructure and electronic surroundings on photocatalytic activity should be further investigated.
(vii) Visible light-driven synthesis is usually accomplished by employing light-emitting diode (LED) lamps, which often have different specifications such as emission spectra and photon outputs. More accurate descriptions of the light sources and reactor arrangements are needed given that they have a significant effect on photochemical transformations. Additionally, special emphasis must be paid to the expansion of hybrid photocatalysts to drive various chemical transformations under sunlight.
(viii) The initiation of electronic transitions from the ground state to the excited state requires radiation of a particular wavelength, precisely monochromatic, whereas most light sources are polychromatic and emit a wide range of wavelengths, making them inappropriate for excitation. This decreases the energy efficiency and increases the costs; therefore, further research is required in this direction.
(ix) The thick quartz walls used in photoreactors are not only delicate but also expensive, thus making the set-up costs higher. Additionally, the problem of fouling in the photoreactors needs to be tackled efficiently.
Mostly, the promising tactics that have been developed to unravel the above-mentioned challenges and achieve improved photocatalysts can be grouped into three categories, i.e., structural control, compositional optimization, and combined effect of multiple catalysis. It is appealing to note that the morphologies and structural aspects of heterostructures play a pivotal role in their photocatalytic features. For example, hierarchical structure building and structure control, porous networks, high specific surface areas and improved facet exposure can boost the quantum efficiency by further assisting the diffusion of reactants and products, increasing the density of active sites, and enhancing the photon flux densities. Moreover, the photophysical properties can further be enhanced by evaluating the effect of composition (foreign element doping, heterostructure building, and surface chemistry modification) for optimizing the energy band structure, which can enhance the light absorption, enable interface electron transfer, reduce the overpotential, and improve the photocatalytic activity. Henceforth, highly efficient systems should be designed to tackle the above-mentioned problems and improve the photocatalytic properties, which can further provide a practical way to achieve suitable materials for designing of photocatalytic systems. It is sincerely anticipated that multiple collaborations in this rapidly evolving field can lead to major breakthroughs in terms of efficiency and activity for the commercialization and industrialization of photocatalysts. The interdisciplinary collaboration between chemists, environmentalists and engineers can help in designing photocatalytic systems where the solar irradiation time can be decoupled from the photocatalytic application to achieve high efficiency during the periods of no illumination or when the light is turned off and the reaction proceeds by stored solar energy.150 Additionally, it is anticipated that researchers will employ practical and theoretical tools to develop strategies to deal with the persisting challenges in this field by constructing efficient and viable heterogeneous photocatalysts with enhanced redox ability, ease of tunability and retrievability and will fully utilize the broad spectrum of sunlight give that only 43% of the solar energy reaching the Earth's surface consists of visible wavelength irradiation (400 to 700 nm), which is employed in the photocatalysis process. Besides, the proficiency of photocatalysts also depends on both the reaction thermodynamics and kinetics. Consequently, the rational design of the reactor and the assistance of an external field (thermal and electronic field), photo-electrons, photo-thermal, and plasmonic catalysis can support electron separation and improved transmission efficacy, and reduce the activation energy of the reactants. The insufficient details and information on the instructions and parameters of the photoreactor set-up such as light source, light uniformity and power, reactor geometry, agitation intensity (flow rate/stirring rate) and temperature control151 is a serious engineering-based problem that needs to be addressed separately.
Conclusions
During the last decade, scientists have gained immense interest in the growing field of designing and fabricating novel visible light-driven photocatalytic systems with adequate redox properties in their excited states and expanded reactivity window to achieve visible complex chemical reactions. In this review, we focused on the major goal of replacing the expensive homogeneous transition metal photoredox complexes by anchoring them on heterogeneous materials to retain and amplify their prolonged charge recombination and broader visible light absorption capabilities. A comprehensive analysis of different solid supports such as silica, polymers, and MOFs was carried out for the fabrication of cost-effective, highly selective and reusable photocatalysts via covalent grafting with materials possessing superior surface areas and remarkable photocatalytic efficiency. We also presented a summary of the intelligent strategies that have been anticipated based on the goals of improving the photocatalytic activity, attaining structural functionalization, and augmenting catalytic efficiency via the functionalization of photocatalytic structures.
The matrix-supported light active motifs have a bright future in the judicious catalytic synthesis of valuable organic motifs due to the ease of deliberately tailoring and tunability of their photophysical properties by modification of the ligands to suit a specific catalytic, purpose, which is of significance for artificial synthesis to mimic photosynthesis and conduct some photoreactions that are impossible to accomplish with semiconductor-based photocatalyst. Also, the well-defined reusable structure of photocatalysts at the atomic level allows the explicit assessment of their structure–activity relationships and application of the catalytic mechanism to a demanding reaction, and the uniform catalytic site distribution and isolation in three-dimensionality space make them readily available for substrates, which deliver countless benefits in terms of catalytic efficiency and economic perspective. According to the abundant examples reported on the use of heterogeneous photocatalysts under various conditions, it can be concluded that the supported photoactive moieties act as good candidates with high activity and selectivity to achieve a wide variety of chemical reactions, varying from degradation, water splitting, and CO2 reduction to C–C and C–X (X = halide) bond formation. Unfortunately, this field still faces enormous challenges for the fabrication of novel photocatalytic systems with superior efficiency in the photochemical transformations but it is envisioned that the above-mentioned limitations will be addressed in the near future. Moreover, the future trend of enhancing the performance of solar/visible light-driven materials by utilizing post-illumination catalytic memory is expected to use semiconductor coupling or dye sensitization rather than continuous exposure with light. We foresee that heterogeneous photocatalysts containing a diverse range of photoactive chromophores and even incompatible functionalities will be assembled to achieve and boost some new research topics and open new doors to the scientific community.
Author contributions
Pooja Rana: investigation, validation, writing-review & editing, writing-original draft, methodology. Bhawna Kaushik: validation, writing-review & editing, visualization. Kanika Solanki: writing-review & editing, Kapil Mohan Saini: validation, writing-review & editing, visualization, Rakesh Kumar Sharma: supervision, project administration.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Pooja Rana and Bhawna Kaushik gratefully acknowledge CSIR and UGC, Delhi, India for awarding research fellowships.
Notes and references
T. P. Yoon, M. A. Ischay and J. Du, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 527–532 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Banerjee, S. C. Pillai, P. Falaras, K. E. O’Shea, J. A. Byrne and D. D. Dionysiou, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 2543–2554 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Marzo, S. K. Pagire, O. Reiser and B. König, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 10034–10072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Cannalire, S. Pelliccia, L. Sancineto, E. Novellino, G. C. Tron and M. Giustiniano, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 766–897 RSC .
Z. Xie, C. Wang, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2056–2059 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Abramov, S. Bonardd, R. Pérez-Ruiz and D. Diaz Diaz, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2022, 364, 2–17 CrossRef CAS .
S. Reischauer and B. Pieber, iScience, 2021, 24, 102209 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Colmenares and R. Luque, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 765–778 RSC .
L. Zhang, J. Ran, S.-Z. Qiao and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 5184–5206 RSC .
W.-J. Ong, L.-L. Tan, Y. H. Ng, S.-T. Yong and S.-P. Chai, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 7159–7329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. K. Prier, D. A. Rankic and D. W. MacMillan, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 5322–5363 CrossRef CAS .
J. Twilton, C. C. Le, P. Zhang, M. H. Shaw, R. W. Evans and D. W. MacMillan, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 1–19 CrossRef .
B. X. Li, D. K. Kim, S. Bloom, R. Y.-C. Huang, J. X. Qiao, W. R. Ewing, D. G. Oblinsky, G. D. Scholes and D. W. MacMillan, Nat. Chem., 2021, 13, 902–908 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Chan, I. B. Perry, N. B. Bissonnette, B. F. Buksh, G. A. Edwards, L. I. Frye, O. L. Garry, M. N. Lavagnino, B. X. Li and Y. Liang, Chem. Rev., 2021, 122, 1485–1542 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. Narayanam and C. R. Stephenson, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2011, 40, 102–113 RSC .
G. Bergonzini, C. S. Schindler, C.-J. Wallentin, E. N. Jacobsen and C. R. Stephenson, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 112–116 RSC .
C.-J. Wallentin, J. D. Nguyen and C. R. Stephenson, Chimia, 2012, 66, 394–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Magallanes, M. D. Karkas, I. Bosque, S. Lee, S. Maldonado and C. R. Stephenson, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 2252–2260 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Genzink, J. B. Kidd, W. B. Swords and T. P. Yoon, Chem. Rev., 2021, 122, 1654–1716 CrossRef PubMed .
K. L. Skubi, T. R. Blum and T. P. Yoon, Chem. Rev., 2016, 116, 10035–10074 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Schultz and T. P. Yoon, Science, 2014, 343, 1239176 CrossRef PubMed .
N. L. Reed and T. P. Yoon, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 2954–2967 RSC .
M. A. Ischay, Z. Lu and T. P. Yoon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 8572–8574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dumur, Catalysts, 2019, 9, 736 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Abderrazak, A. Bhattacharyya and O. Reiser, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60, 21100–21115 CrossRef CAS .
S. C. Chan and M. A. Barteau, Langmuir, 2005, 21, 5588–5595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sano, N. Negishi, K. Uchino, J. Tanaka, S. Matsuzawa and K. Takeuchi, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2003, 160, 93–98 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujii, K. Nagasuna, M. Fujishima, T. Akita and H. Tada, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 16711–16716 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ohyama, A. Yamamoto, K. Teramura, T. Shishido and T. Tanaka, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Zhang, H. Gu and W.-L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2021, 125, 10964–10973 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, P. Raizada, V. K. Thakur, V. Saini, A. A. P. Khan, N. Singh and P. Singh, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2021, 230, 116219 CrossRef CAS .
R. Tong, Z. Sun, X. Wang, S. Wang and H. Pan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2019, 123, 26136–26144 CrossRef CAS .
G. Iervolino, I. Zammit, V. Vaiano and L. Rizzo, Heterog. Photocatal., 2020, 225–264 Search PubMed .
M. Mousavi, A. Habibi-Yangjeh and S. R. Pouran, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Electron., 2018, 29, 1719–1747 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bagheri, N. Muhd Julkapli and S. Bee Abd Hamid, Int. J. Photoenergy, 2015, 2015, 218743 CrossRef .
D. A. Keane, K. G. McGuigan, P. F. Ibáñez, M. I. Polo-López, J. A. Byrne, P. S. Dunlop, K. O'Shea, D. D. Dionysiou and S. C. Pillai, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2014, 4, 1211–1226 RSC .
Z. Cai, A. D. Dwivedi, W.-N. Lee, X. Zhao, W. Liu, M. Sillanpää, D. Zhao, C.-H. Huang and J. Fu, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 27–47 RSC .
G. Rangarajan, N. Yan and R. Farnood, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2020, 98, 2259–2293 CrossRef CAS .
X. Lang, X. Chen and J. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 473–486 RSC .

          V. L. Sirisha, A. Jain and A. Jain, Advances in Food and Nutrition Research, ed. S.-K. Kim and F. Toldrá, Academic Press,  2016, vol. 79, pp. 179–211 Search PubMed .
R. I. Teixeira, N. C. de Lucas, S. J. Garden, A. E. Lanterna and J. C. Scaiano, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2020, 10, 1273–1280 RSC .
C. H. Mak, X. Han, M. Du, J.-J. Kai, K. F. Tsang, G. Jia, K.-C. Cheng, H.-H. Shen and H.-Y. Hsu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 4454–4504 RSC .

          S. Patnaik, G. Swain and K. Parida, Green Photocatalysts for Energy and Environmental Process, Springer,  2020, pp. 211–246 Search PubMed .
H. Qi, B. Sun, J. Dong, L. Cui, T. Feng and S. Ai, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 285, 42–48 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bishnoi, A. Kumar and R. Selvaraj, Mater. Res. Bull., 2018, 97, 121–127 CrossRef CAS .
J. Rashid, N. Parveen, A. Iqbal, S. U. Awan, N. Iqbal, S. H. Talib, N. Hussain, B. Akram, A. Ulhaq and B. Ahmed, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–14 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Goswami, R. Ananthakrishnan and S. Mandal, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2018, 206, 174–185 CrossRef CAS .
V. Hasija, A. Sudhaik, P. Raizada, A. Hosseini-Bandegharaei and P. Singh, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 103272 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, J. Xu, S. Jiang, Y. Cao, K. Xu, Q. Zhang and L. Wang, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2020, 27, 37839–37851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. A. Yakushev, A. S. Abel, A. D. Averin, I. P. Beletskaya, A. V. Cheprakov, I. S. Ziankou, L. Bonneviot and A. Bessmertnykh-Lemeune, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2022, 458, 214331 CrossRef CAS .
I. Choi, J. Struwe and L. Ackermann, Photochem. Photobiol. Sci., 2021, 20, 1563–1572 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lee, B.-Y. Chen and W. Den, Appl. Sci., 2015, 5, 1272–1283 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abramov, S. Bonardd, R. Pérez-Ruiz and D. Diaz Diaz, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2022, 364, 2–17 CrossRef CAS .
A. Abramov, S. Bonardd, R. Pérez-Ruiz and D. Díaz Díaz, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2021, 364, 2–17 CrossRef .
H. Wang, Q. Tang, Z. Chen, T. Li and J. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 2189–2205 CrossRef CAS .
P. Rana, R. Gaur, R. Gupta, G. Arora, A. Jayashree and R. K. Sharma, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 7402–7405 RSC .
P. Rana, R. Gaur, B. Kaushik, S. Yadav, P. Yadav, P. Sharma, M. B. Gawande and R. K. Sharma, J. Catal., 2021, 401, 297–308 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zou, J. Ye, K. Sayama and H. Arakawa, Nature, 2001, 414, 625–627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Lee, A. Mills and C. O'Rourke, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4877–4894 RSC .
A. Mills and N. Wells, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2849–2864 RSC .
J. Ran, J. Zhang, J. Yu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7787–7812 RSC .
C. Gérardin, J. Reboul, M. Bonne and B. Lebeau, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 4217–4255 RSC .
I. Sierra and D. Pérez-Quintanilla, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3792–3807 RSC .
P. Yang, S. Gai and J. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 3679–3698 RSC .
S.-H. Wu, C.-Y. Mou and H.-P. Lin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 3862–3875 RSC .
H. Yamashita, K. Mori, Y. Kuwahara, T. Kamegawa, M. Wen, P. Verma and M. Che, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8072–8096 RSC .
H. Wang, Q. Tang, Z. Chen, T. Li and J. Wang, Sci. China Mater., 2020, 63, 2189–2205 CrossRef CAS .
D. R. Eddy, F. N. Puri and A. R. Noviyanti, Procedia Chem., 2015, 17, 55–58 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, K. Fuku, Y. Kuwahara, T. Kamegawa, K. Mori and H. Yamashita, ChemSusChem, 2014, 7, 1528–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Cheng, D. Lu, B. Shen, Y. Liu, J. Lei, L. Wang, J. Zhang and M. Matsuoka, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2016, 226, 79–87 CrossRef CAS .
H. Yoshida, Curr. Opin. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2003, 7, 435–442 CrossRef CAS .
J. G. Mahy, C. A. Paez, C. Carcel, C. Bied, A. S. Tatton, C. Damblon, B. Heinrichs, M. Wong Chi Man and S. D. Lambert, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2019, 373, 66–76 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, M. Li, Q. Wu, H. Yang, J. Han, H. Wang and X. Liu, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 466–474 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
H. Mai, D. Chen, Y. Tachibana, H. Suzuki, R. Abe and R. A. Caruso, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50, 13692–13729 RSC .
J. H. Kim, D. Hansora, P. Sharma, J.-W. Jang and J. S. Lee, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 1908–1971 RSC .
S. Chandrasekaran, L. Yao, L. Deng, C. Bowen, Y. Zhang, S. Chen, Z. Lin, F. Peng and P. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 4178–4280 RSC .
Z. Wang, C. Li and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 2109–2125 RSC .
H. Takeda, M. Ohashi, Y. Goto, T. Ohsuna, T. Tani and S. Inagaki, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5068–5077 CrossRef CAS .
G. R. Reddy and S. Balasubramanian, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 53979–53987 RSC .
T. Tabari, S. S. Jamali and S. K. Jamali, J. Photochem. Photobiol., A, 2017, 336, 8–16 CrossRef CAS .
T. Jin, C. Liu and G. Li, J. Coord. Chem., 2016, 69, 1748–1758 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, H. Huang, T. Ma and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 2002458 CrossRef CAS .
M. Waki, S. Shirai, K.-I. Yamanaka, Y. Maegawa and S. Inagaki, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 13960–13967 RSC .
A. Dhakshinamoorthy, Z. Li and H. Garcia, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 8134–8172 RSC .
M. Fagnoni, D. Dondi, D. Ravelli and A. Albini, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107, 2725–2756 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. J. Barbante, T. D. Ashton, E. H. Doeven, F. M. Pfeffer, D. J. Wilson, L. C. Henderson and P. S. Francis, ChemCatChem, 2015, 7, 1655–1658 CrossRef CAS .
A. Jana, J. Mondal, P. Borah, S. Mondal, A. Bhaumik and Y. Zhao, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 10746–10749 RSC .
P. Rana, B. Kaushik, R. Gaur, S. Dutta, S. Yadav, K. Solanki, B. Arora, A. V. Biradar, M. B. Gawande and R. K. Sharma, Dalton Trans., 2022, 51, 2452–2463 RSC .
R. Kumar, J. Travas-Sejdic and L. P. Padhye, Chem. Eng. J. Adv., 2020, 4, 100047 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, L. Wilbraham, B. J. Slater, M. A. Zwijnenburg, R. S. Sprick and A. I. Cooper, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141, 9063–9071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Dai and B. Liu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 24–52 RSC .
C. Xu, W. Zhang, J. Tang, C. Pan and G. Yu, Front. Chem., 2018, 6, 592 CrossRef CAS .
F. Peng, P. Zhi, H. Ji, H. Zhao, F.-Y. Kong, X.-Z. Liang and Y.-M. Shen, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 19948–19953 RSC .
H.-P. Liang, Q. Chen and B.-H. Han, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 5313–5322 CrossRef CAS .
L. Pan, M.-Y. Xu, L.-J. Feng, Q. Chen, Y.-J. He and B.-H. Han, Polym. Chem., 2016, 7, 2299–2307 RSC .
Z.-Y. Xu, Y. Luo, D.-W. Zhang, H. Wang, X.-W. Sun and Z.-T. Li, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 136–143 RSC .
M. K. Lakshman and P. K. Vuram, Chem. Sci., 2017, 8, 5845–5888 RSC .
T. Tian, Z. Li and C.-J. Li, Green Chem., 2021, 23, 6789–6862 RSC .
K. Peng and Z.-B. Dong, Adv. Synth. Catal., 2021, 363, 1185–1201 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Yoo and S. Kobayashi, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2438–2442 RSC .
P. Zhi, Z.-W. Xi, D.-Y. Wang, W. Wang, X.-Z. Liang, F.-F. Tao, R.-P. Shen and Y.-M. Shen, New J. Chem., 2019, 43, 709–717 RSC .
J.-L. Wang, C. Wang, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 417–424 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Haikal, X. Wang, Y. S. Hassan, M. R. Parida, B. Murali, O. F. Mohammed, P. J. Pellechia, M. Fontecave and M. H. Alkordi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 19994–20002 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Luo, Z.-Y. Xu, H. Wang, X.-W. Sun, Z.-T. Li and D.-W. Zhang, ACS Macro Lett., 2020, 9, 90–95 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, S.-C. Cheng, Y. Xiao, K.-C. Chan, K.-M. Tong and C.-C. Ko, J. Catal., 2022, 407, 206–212 CrossRef CAS .
L. Li, S. Zhang, L. Xu, J. Wang, L.-X. Shi, Z.-N. Chen, M. Hong and J. Luo, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 3808–3813 RSC .
S.-Q. You, J. Zhou, M.-M. Chen, C.-Y. Sun, X.-J. Qi, A. Yousaf, X.-L. Wang and Z.-M. Su, J. Catal., 2020, 392, 49–55 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kajiwara, M. Fujii, M. Tsujimoto, K. Kobayashi, M. Higuchi, K. Tanaka and S. Kitagawa, Angew. Chem., 2016, 128, 2747–2750 CrossRef .
E. Shilpa and V. Gayathri, J. Saudi Chem. Soc., 2018, 22, 678–691 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, B. Wu and Y. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2057–2074 RSC .
S. Nardecchia, D. Carriazo, M. L. Ferrer, M. C. Gutiérrez and F. del Monte, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 794–830 RSC .
X. Wang, G. Sun, P. Routh, D.-H. Kim, W. Huang and P. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7067–7098 RSC .
B. Qiu, M. Xing and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2165–2216 RSC .
L. Yan, Y. B. Zheng, F. Zhao, S. Li, X. Gao, B. Xu, P. S. Weiss and Y. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 97–114 RSC .
Q. Xiang, J. Yu and M. Jaroniec, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 782–796 RSC .
X. Li, Z. Hao, F. Zhang and H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12141–12148 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ma, M. Blanco, L. Calvillo, L. Chen, G. Chen, T.-C. Lau, G. Dražić, J. Bonin, M. Robert and G. Granozzi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2021, 143, 8414–8425 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, H. Zhang, H. Sun, S. Liu, M. O. Tade, S. Wang and W. Jin, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2016, 6, 7002–7023 RSC .
A. Mishra, A. Mehta, S. Basu, N. P. Shetti, K. R. Reddy and T. M. Aminabhavi, Carbon, 2019, 149, 693–721 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, P. Kumar, R. Borkar, A. Bansiwal, N. Labhsetwar and S. L. Jain, Carbon, 2017, 123, 371–379 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar, P. K. Prajapati, M. Aathira, A. Bansiwal, R. Boukherroub and S. L. Jain, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 543, 201–213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ma, C. Hu and Z. Bian, Inorg. Chem. Commun., 2020, 117, 107951 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wada, M. Eguchi, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, ChemSusChem, 2017, 10, 287–295 CrossRef CAS .
K. Wada, C. S. K. Ranasinghe, R. Kuriki, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 23869–23877 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Kuriki, M. Yamamoto, K. Higuchi, Y. Yamamoto, M. Akatsuka, D. Lu, S. Yagi, T. Yoshida, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 4945–4949 CrossRef .
R. Kuriki, C. S. K. Ranasinghe, Y. Yamazaki, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 16795–16802 CrossRef CAS .
K. Shibata, K. Kato, C. Tsounis, T. Kanazawa, D. Lu, S. Nozawa, A. Yamakata, O. Ishitani and K. Maeda, Sol. RRL, 2020, 4, 1900461 CrossRef CAS .
K. Maeda, D. An and C. Kumara Ranasinghe, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9708 RSC .
B. Ma, G. Chen, C. Fave, L. Chen, R. Kuriki, K. Maeda, O. Ishitani, T.-C. Lau, J. Bonin and M. Robert, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 6188–6195 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Takeda, M. Ohashi, T. Tani, O. Ishitani and S. Inagaki, Inorg. Chem., 2010, 49, 4554–4559 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Yui, H. Takeda, Y. Ueda, K. Sekizawa, K. Koike, S. Inagaki and O. Ishitani, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 1992–1998 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Saito, Y. Yamazaki, Y. Tamaki and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 19249–19258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Oshima, S. Nishioka, Y. Kikuchi, S. Hirai, K.-I. Yanagisawa, M. Eguchi, Y. Miseki, T. Yokoi, T. Yui and K. Kimoto, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142, 8412–8420 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sekizawa, K. Maeda, K. Domen, K. Koike and O. Ishitani, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 4596–4599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, L. Chen, H. Chen, L. Cai, G. Tan, Y. Qiu, Q. Xiang, G. Chen, T. C. Lau and M. Robert, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61, e202116832 CAS .
C. D. Windle, A. Wieczorek, L. Xiong, M. Sachs, C. Bozal-Ginesta, H. Cha, J. K. Cockcroft, J. Durrant and J. Tang, Chem. Sci., 2020, 11, 8425–8432 RSC .
K. Tamura, A. Yamagishi, T. Kitazawa and H. Sato, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 18288–18293 RSC .
C. Wang, K. E. DeKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7211–7214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, Z. Xie, K. E. deKrafft and W. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 13445–13454 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, S. Goswami, H. Noh, Z. Lu, T. Sheridan, J. Duan, W. Dong and J. T. Hupp, J. Photochem. Photobiol., 2022, 10, 100111 CrossRef .
X. Yu and S. M. Cohen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12320–12323 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Elhage, B. Wang, N. Marina, M. L. Marin, M. Cruz, A. E. Lanterna and J. C. Scaiano, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 6844–6852 RSC .
A. K. Fung, B. K. Chiu and M. H. Lam, Water Res., 2003, 37, 1939–1947 CrossRef CAS .
B. Stewart, P. Huang, H. He, T. Fenton and G. Li, Can. J. Chem., 2018, 96, 890–895 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kumar and R. Ananthakrishnan, Green Chem., 2020, 22, 1650–1661 RSC .
J. M. Buriak, P. V. Kamat and K. S. Schanze, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 11815–11816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, Y. Chen, Y. Tao, L. Shen, Z. Xu, Z. Bian and H. Li, Chem. Catal., 2022, 2, 1315–1345 CrossRef .
L. Capaldo and D. Ravelli, Eur. J. Org. Chem., 2020, 2783–2806 CrossRef CAS .
V. W. h Lau, D. Klose, H. Kasap, F. Podjaski, M. C. Pignié, E. Reisner, G. Jeschke and B. V. Lotsch, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 525–529 CrossRef .
T. D. Svejstrup, A. Chatterjee, D. Schekin, T. Wagner, J. Zach, M. J. Johansson, G. Bergonzini and B. König, ChemPhotoChem, 2021, 5, 808–814 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cc03568eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

Pooja Rana
	Dr Pooja Rana completed her Doctoral Degree in 2022 under the supervision of Professor R. K. Sharma. She received her Master's Degree in Chemistry from the Indian Institute of Technology, Bombay, in 2017 and Bachelor's Degree in Chemistry from Kirorimal College, University of Delhi in 2013. She has several publications in journals and books of international repute. Her area of research includes green chemistry, photocatalysis, immobilization of photoactive motifs and fabrication of magnetic nanocatalysts for various organic transformations.

Bhawna Kaushik
	Bhawna Kaushik received her Graduate Degree in Chemistry in 2013 and Post-Graduate Degree specializing in Inorganic Chemistry in 2016 from Miranda House College, University of Delhi, India. She then joined Professor Sharma's group to pursue her doctoral studies. She is currently an active member of the Green Chemistry Network Centre, Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi, India. She is working in the area of green chemistry and photocatalysis. Her research interests include the design and development of sustainable magnetically retrievable heterogeneous photocatalysts for pollutant degradation. She is presently working as an Assistant Professor at Acharya Narendra Dev College, University of Delhi.

Kanika Solanki
	Dr Kanika Solanki is working as a Research Associate and Faculty at the Department of Chemistry, University of Delhi and an active member of the Green Chemistry Network Centre. She completed her PhD at M. G. S. University, Bikaner. Her research interests include the synthesis, design and applications of chelating resins and nano-adsorbents. She worked as a Lecturer at the Govt. College of Engineering and Technology, Bikaner, as a Senior Research Fellow at Rajasthan University of Veterinary and Animal Sciences, Bikaner, and Research Associate in the Department of Chemistry University of Delhi, Delhi.

Kapil Mohan Saini
	Dr Kapil Mohan Saini completed his graduate and post-graduate studies at the University of Delhi. He was awarded his Doctoral Degree in 2021. His research interests include the design and development of green synthetic routes for sustainable organic transformations. He has several publications in journals of international repute. He received the NOST-SAILIFE Sciences Best Thesis Award-2020 for his PhD thesis in Organic Chemistry. He is presently working as an Assistant Professor at Kalindi College, University of Delhi.

R. K. Sharma
	Dr R. K. Sharma is a Professor and Coordinator of the Green Chemistry Network Centre at the University of Delhi, India. He is also an Honorary Professor at Deakin University, Australia. He went to the University of Tokyo and Kumamoto University on a JSPS Post-Doctoral Fellowship. He has published numerous book chapters, reviews and research articles in renowned international journals. He has also written/edited various books on Green Chemistry published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, World Scientific and Wiley. Dr Sharma is also an Honorary Secretary of The Royal Society of Chemistry (North India Section) and Faculty Advisor of the ACS International Student Chapter University of Delhi. https://greenchem.du.ac.in/.

 	Fig. 1  Number of annual publications using the keywords “photocatalysis (represented by blue) and heterogeneous photocatalysis (represented by orange)” since 1990.	 

 	Fig. 2  Schematic representation of the preparation of Ir(ppy)2(bpy) complex-containing mesoporous cellular silica foam (Ir(ppy)2(bpy)-MCFs).	 

 	Fig. 3  Synthetic routes and photocatalysis of molecular heterogeneous catalysts based on organosilica nanotubes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 73. Copyright 2018, Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 4  Synthesis of Ru-PMOs from Ru-containing organosilane precursors. Reproduced with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 1999–2022, John Wiley & Sons, Inc.	 

 	Fig. 5  Grafting of Ni(II) and Cu(II) complexes on MCM41 by Schiff base condensation of SL and 3-APTES.	 

 	Fig. 6  Iron complex grafted on a support.	 

 	Fig. 7  Synthesis of Co–L–SiO2 using a cyclam ring.	 

 	Fig. 8  Ru complexes supported on BPy-PMO. Reproduced with permission from ref. 84. Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  Photocatalytic reaction of 2-benzylidenehydrazinecarbothioamides to give 5-phenyl-1,3,4-thiadiazol-2-amines.	 

 	Fig. 10  Schematic representation of Ru-POS and its photocatalytic application.	 

 	Fig. 11  Schematic representation of magnetically retrievable photocatalysts and their photocatalytic applications.	 

 	Fig. 12  Schematic representation of heteroleptic iridium polymer and its application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  Porous polymers CPOP-20 and CPOP-21. Reproduced with permission from ref. 96. Copyright 2016, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 14  Synthesis of Ir-POP-1 and Ir-POP-2 polymers and Ir-Ph-1 and Ir-Ph-2 complexes.	 

 	Fig. 15  Immobilization of monomer 2 via suspension polymerization.	 

 	Fig. 16  Aerobic oxidative coupling reaction between N-aryl tetrahydroisoquinolines with P–H nucleophiles.	 

 	Fig. 17  Synthetic route of the supported iridium complex.	 

 	Fig. 18  Visible light-mediated cyclization of tertiary anilines and maleimides with P4 as the photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 19  Immobilized iridium complex photocatalyst Ir(ppy)2(PDVB-py) utilized for the synthesis of amides, nitriles, and anhydrides.	 

 	Fig. 20  Synthesis of Ir-PCP and Ru-PCP.	 

 	Fig. 21  Synthesis of Ru(bpy)32+-based cross-linked polymers 1 and 2.	 

 	Fig. 22  Synthetic scheme for PRP-1 (left) and the geometrically optimized polymer fragment model showing the extension points highlighted in yellow (right). Nitrate ions are omitted for clarity; C (gray), H (white), N (blue), and Ru (deep red). Reproduced with permission from ref. 104. Copyright 2016, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  Schematic representation of Ru-POP-1 and Ru-POP-2 polymers and their application. Reproduced with permission from ref. 105. Copyright 2020, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 24  Polymer-supported iridium photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 106. Copyright 2022, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 25  Z-Scheme electron transfer during CO2 reduction using NAHN-Tp and [Ir-ppy]. Reproduced with permission from ref. 108. Copyright 2020, Published by Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 26  Synthesis of Zr-bpdc/RuCO by the PSE of H2RuCO with bpdc in Zr-bpdc.	 

 	Fig. 27  Preparation of PS-Fe(III)PBMZL.	 

 	Fig. 28  Schematic representation of the synthesis of reduced graphene oxide-immobilized tris(bipyridine)ruthenium(II) complex.	 

 	Fig. 29  Ru(bpy)3-rGO for efficient visible-light-driven reductive dehalogenation reaction.	 

 	Fig. 30  Fabrication of the Coqpy@GA hybrid material.	 

 	Fig. 31  Synthesis of g-C3N4/CoPc-COOH photocatalyst. Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. Copyright 2019, Elsevier Inc.	 

 	Fig. 32  Mn motif grafted on g-C3N4 and its application in the visible light-mediated photocatalytic reduction of CO2.	 



	SiO2	CO = 2738 nmol; TON = 29	
124

TiO2	CO = 1060 nmol; enhanced production 4 times upon doping with TiO2	
125



	Ag NPs	TON (>2000) for CO2 reduction	
126



	—	
	
127

Ag NPs	TON = 6000 for formate formation	
128

Ag NPs	Formate production 10.4 ± 2.1 μmol	
129


 	Fig. 33  Co-quaterpyridine molecular complex covalently immobilized on mesoporous graphitic carbon.	 

 	Fig. 34  Feqpy-BA@C3N4 photocatalyst.	 

 	Fig. 35  Grafting of molecular catalysts ono CN.	 

 	Fig. 36  Synthesis of phosphorescent Zr-carboxylate MOFs (1 and 2) of the fcu topology and subsequent loading of Pt NPs in MOF cavities via MOF-mediated photoreduction of K2PtCl4 to form the Pt@1 and Pt@2 assemblies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 37  TEM images of Pt@1 (a and c) and Pt@2 (b and d). The black dots in (c and d) are Pt NPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 139. Copyright 2012, the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 38  Synthesis of doped UiO-67.	 

 	Fig. 39  MOF-catalyzed aza-Henry reaction.	 

 	Fig. 40  Structure of the Fe-TCPP@NU-1000 heterogeneous catalyst framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2022, The Author(s).	 

 	Fig. 41  Synthesis of UiO-67-Ir.	 

 	Fig. 42  Photocatalytic trifluoroethylation of styrene.	 

 	Fig. 43  General scheme for glass wool functionalization.	 

 	Fig. 44  Synthesis of the [RuII(py-pzH)3]2+ complex, its in situ silylation and subsequent anchoring on TiO2 surface.	 

 	Fig. 45  Molecular structure of molecular Fe(II) catalyst grafted on the TiO2 surface through a derivatized acetylacetonate linker.	 

 	Fig. 46  TiO2 hybrid photocatalyst of ruthenium(II) heteroleptic metal complex anchored on surface.	 

 	Fig. 47  Major analytical techniques used to determine the synthesis of heterogeneous photocatalysts. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. Abbreviations: EDX-energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy, EELS-electron energy-loss spectroscopy, HAADF-high angle annular dark-field imaging, ICP-inductively coupled plasma, XPS-X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy, XAS-X-ray absorption spectroscopy, FTIR-Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy, NMR-nuclear magnetic resonance, SEM-scanning electron microscopy, TEM-transmission electron microscopy, AFM-atomic force microscopy, BET-Brunauer–Emmett–Teller analysis, XRD-X-ray diffraction, HRTEM-high-resolution TEM, SAED-selected area electron diffraction, UV-ultraviolet-visible spectroscopy, DRS-diffuse reflectance spectroscopy, FDTD-finite-difference time-domain method, PLS-photoluminescence spectroscopy, TAS-transient absorption spectroscopy, SPVS-surface photovoltage spectroscopy, PCS-photocurrent spectroscopy, EIS-electrochemical impedance spectroscopy, ESR-electron spin resonance, PAS-positron annihilation spectroscopy, and TGA-thermogravimetric analysis.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: https://doi.org/10.1039/d2cc03568e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
