Photoenergy storage and power amplification strategy in membrane-less photoelectrochemical biofuel cells   - Chemical Communications (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6CC02267G View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6CC02267G
(Communication)
Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6716-6719Photoenergy storage and power amplification strategy in membrane-less photoelectrochemical biofuel cells†

        
          
            You 
            Yu
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Miao 
            Xu
          
        
      ab and 

        
          
            Shaojun 
            Dong
          
        
      *ab
aState Key Laboratory of Electroanalytical Chemistry, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, Jilin 130022, China. E-mail: dongsj@ciac.ac.cn
bUniversity of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100049, China
Received 
      15th March 2016
    , Accepted 15th April 2016First published on 15th April 2016AbstractThe photoelectrochemical biofuel cell (PBFC) has drawn great attention because of its potential in the conversion of both photoenergy and chemical energy from biomass into electricity. Herein, we proposed a novel integrated PBFC by insetting a third electrode with high efficiency energy storage and release between the bioelectrode and the photoelectrode, resulting in a higher power output than that of the original PBFC.
Finding new alternative energies due to increasing energy issues should not be delayed.1 The photoelectrochemical biofuel cell (PBFC) has indicated a new path for energy utilization in the future, which could convert both solar energy and chemical energy from biomass to electricity.2 However, fuel cells have almost only been employed as energy harvesters to fabricate energy supplying devices with accessories like energy storage devices and capacitors so far, which might lead to large sizes and complex techniques and processes.3 Therefore integrated PBFCs containing energy harvesters and storage are of significance and urgency in energy supply research.4 To address the above-mentioned issues of integrated PBFCs, a third energy storage electrode (ESE) which cycles between the states of energy-poorness and energy-richness could be introduced into the system.5 Ideally, ESEs could convert to an energy-rich electrode and remain constant by utilizing renewable energy with one electrode (a photoelectrode or bioelectrode), and then release the energy totally by connecting with the other electrode. Furthermore, low power output densities of biofuel cells have become a huge challenge for intensive study and practical application.6 If ESEs could hold the energy in a steady way and release the energy much faster than either of the two original electrodes, the power output of the integrated PBFC should amplify to higher than that of PBFCs just assembled by two original electrodes; the ESE actually plays the role of an amplifier in PBFCs. This assembled method by introducing an ESE would guide novel energy storage methods and power amplification strategies.
Prussian Blue (PB), a coordination compound of iron(II, III) hexacyanoferrate(II, III), has drawn numerous studies on its electrochemical, magnetic, electrocatalytic and photocatalytic properties since 1978.7 In particular, PB has been successfully introduced in fluorescence switch systems,5a visual detectors8 or electrochromic devices9 for changing the colours between white (FeII in Prussian White (PW)) and blue (including FeIII in PB). However, little research has mentioned the energy storage ability of PB for being an ESE in a photoenergy device. PW, as an energy-poor state, loses electrons and is transformed to the energy-rich state PB.10 Interestingly, PB/PW electrodes could transform varieties of external energy such as electricity or chemical energy by the processes from PW to PB.11 Inspired by this, a PB/PW electrode treated as an ESE was introduced into a PBFC assembled by a glucose dehydrogenase (GDH)-modified bioelectrode and a BiOI0.5Cl0.5 photoelectrode. As a result, photoenergy-storing and power-amplified PBFCs have been constructed by controlling the redox states of the PB/PW electrode. Significantly, an integrated PBFC which includes both energy generation and storage has shown an excellent power output and might increase the versatile talents of energy devices.
The configuration and operating principle of the photoenergy-storing PBFC are illustrated in Scheme 1. While the photoelectrode was illuminated by visible light, the PW electrode and the photoelectrode were both assembled to a photoelectrochemical cell which could convert the photoenergy into chemical energy and electricity through the transformation from FeII to FeIII, which is just like photosynthesis of a plant in the daytime under sunshine. A period of time later, PW turned into PB by FeIII ions taking the place of FeII ions at a certain ratio. PB and the GDH bioelectrode were assembled to be a hybrid biofuel cell that could convert both bioenergy and chemical energy into electricity; electrons were achieved by the biocatalysis of glucose and then combined with FeIII in PB. Along with the increasing number of electrons, PB totally transformed to PW by accepting electrons from the bioelectrode at last, while the blue film turned to colorless. Without illumination, the hybrid biofuel cell expended chemical energy from the light sources and biomass, which was similar to the respiration of the plant at night. As the start of the energy cycles, the photoelectrode was connected with the fresh PW electrode to be fabricated as a photoelectrochemical cell again. In this energy system, PB electrodes were exhausted and regenerated through a single energy cycle. Actually, bioenergy and photoenergy were almost transformed into electricity in the photoenergy storage PBFC systems.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration for the operating principle of the PBFC. 
A photocathode is normally based on a semiconductor; electrons generated under illumination in the semiconductor can drive a reduction reaction. When the photocathode was in the dark, the electrons moved to the photocathode surface and were introduced into molecular oxygen. Considering the low energy level of the electrons from the external circuit, a tiny current of oxygen reduction might be observed. The oxygen reduction reaction might be at a fairly slow rate. When the photocathode was illuminated, electrons and holes are generated, and the external electrons could combine with the holes in the valence bands. And then the photoexcited electrons in the conduction band participated in the oxygen reduction reaction by a high energy level, which led to an increasing current and a more positive onset potential. Bismuth oxyhalide proved to be an effective photocathode in our former work.12 Among the kinds of bismuth oxyhalides, BiOI0.5Cl0.5 was more efficient and had a higher onset potential than that of the others. As an efficient semiconductor, BiOI0.5Cl0.5 was chosen as the photoelectrode for the PBFC in charge of accepting and transforming the photoenergy. As shown in Fig. 1A and B, the BiOI0.5Cl0.5 electrode has a thin 2D fan-like morphology, which is due to the layer structure characterized by Bi2O2 slabs interleaved by double slabs of halogen atoms. From cross-sectional images (Fig. 1C), it is known that the sizes of the fan-like plates are about 3 μm. The BiOI0.5Cl0.5 electrode consisted of O, Bi, Cl and I, which was determined by energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) experiments (Fig. 1D). Besides, the diffraction peaks in Fig. 1E could be attributed to the structure of BiOI (JCPDS card no. 73-2062). In electrochemical experiments, the onset potential of the BiOI0.5Cl0.5 electrode skipped between 0.54 V and 0.61 V in PBS under light illumination with on/off cycles of 30 s (Fig. 1F), so could be treated as an appropriate cathode in a biofuel cell system with a similar value of a biocathode modified by enzymes like laccase or bilirubin oxidase. It confirmed the possibility to be introduced into a PBFC.
 Fig. 1  SEM images of the as-prepared BiOI0.5Cl0.5: (A) low resolution, (B) high resolution and (C) the cross-sectional images. Energy-dispersive X-ray image (D) and XRD pattern (E) of the as-prepared BiOI0.5Cl0.5. (F) The onset potential of BiOI0.5Cl0.5 response to light illumination with on/off cycles of 30 s in 0.1 M PBS. 
The photocurrent of the BiOI0.5Cl0.5 photoelectrode under 100 mW cm−2 illumination is shown in Fig. 2A. Light illumination highly enhanced the current to 5.8 μA cm−2 at 0.55 V and a rapidly increasing current was observed in a very short potential range from 0.6 V to 0.55 V. At the photocathode, the photoenergy transformed to electricity effectively through the photoelectrochemical path. Herein, we adopted multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs) combined with Meldola's blue (MDB) and GDH to be contrasted to the bioelectrode. GDH was capable of selectively catalyzing glucose to D-glucono-δ-lactone with the co-enzyme NAD+. The assembling processes of MDB–MWNTs/GCE, which could catalyze the transformation from NADH to NAD+, were acknowledged by CV as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†), and then CS/GDH/MDB–MWNTs/GCE exhibited efficient catalysis of glucose with an onset potential of −0.15 V (Fig. 2B).
 Fig. 2  (A) LSV of the BiOI0.5Cl0.5 electrode in PBS (pH 6.0) under light illumination (a) or in the dark (b). (B) LSV obtained at CS/GDH/MDB–MWNTs/GCE in PBS containing 10 mM NAD+ without (a) and with (b) 30 mM glucose. (C) LSV obtained at PB (a) and CS/GDH/MDB–MWNTs/GCE (b) in PBS containing 10 mM NAD+ and 30 mM glucose. (D) LSV obtained at BiOI0.5Cl0.5 (a) and PW (b) in PBS (pH 6.0) under light illumination. The scan rates were all 20 mV s−1. 
As mentioned above, the onset potentials of the bioelectrode in glucose and the photoelectrode under illumination were −0.15 V and 0.61 V, respectively. In order to fabricate photoenergy storage systems containing three electrodes, the onset potentials of the ESEs, which were PB/PW electrodes in this study (Fig. S2, ESI†), should be lower than that of the photoelectrode and higher than that of the bioelectrode for the possibility of fabricating cells separately. During the transformation between PB and PW, the ESE reacted as eqn (1): FeIII[FeII(CN)6]− + e− ↔ FeII[FeII(CN)6]2−(1) In Fig. 2C and D, the onset potentials for both states of the ESE insert suitably in the range of the bioelectrode and photoelectrode and the ESE could be assembled with the bioelectrode and photoelectrode for the cells respectively; it meant that the photoenergy could be stored and released by the different redox states of PB and PW through electrochemical cycles. For further integrated and membrane-less PBFCs, the crossover reactions of the PB electrode and BiOI0.5Cl0.5 have been studied (Fig. S3, ESI†). The results show that these two electrodes were hardly interfered with by NAD+ and glucose, therefore an integrated and membrane-less PBFC could be assembled.
Compared with the photocurrent of BiOI0.5Cl0.5, the PB electrode exhibited a much higher current of −0.65 mA cm−2 at 0 V, in fact, the ESE dramatically amplified the power output of the integrated PBFC during the release of photoenergy (Fig. 3A). The maximum power density (Pmax) of the bioelectrode and PB electrode reached 160.3 μW cm−2 (RSD = 7.4%, n = 5), which was about 16 times the 9.7 μW cm−2 (RSD = 4.9%, n = 5) of the bioelectrode and photoelectrode. This amplified power output of the integrated PBFC is also much higher than those of the origin PBFCs in Table S1 (ESI†). When the photoelectrode was combined with the PW electrode, Pmax was 5.1 μW cm−2 (RSD = 7.8%, n = 5), which is even lower than both of the above (Fig. S4, ESI†). In general, the integrated PBFCs would generate a much higher power output density when the ESE exhibited a higher current density than that of the photoelectrode or the bioelectrode and an appropriate onset potential in the energy-poor or energy-rich state. In detail, if the ESE was a faster electron acceptor than the cathode, a much higher power output would be observed by connecting with the origin anode. On the contrary, a hybrid cell with a higher power output might operate by assembling the ESE and origin cathode, when the ESE generated or provided electrons at a higher rate than the anode did. For the mentioned advantages of the PW/PB electrode with regard to the photoelectrode, introducing the PW/PB electrode was treated as an outstanding and novel power amplification strategy.
 Fig. 3  (A) (a) The power output of the PBFC assembled with PB and the bioelectrode in PBS containing 10 mM NAD+ amd 30 mM glucose. (b) The power output of the PBFC assembled with the photoelectrode and bioelectrode under light illumination in PBS containing 10 mM NAD+ and 30 mM glucose. (B) The current density obtained at the ESEs of the PBFCs assembled with bioelectrodes (a) and a BiOI0.5Cl0.5 electrode (b) under 0.2 V and 0.3 V, respectively. 
Moreover, amperometric i–t curves were used to test the efficiency of the ESE for storage and release of the absorbed photoenergy (Fig. 3B). As the energy cycle of the integrated PBFC starts, the bioelectrode was connected with the PB electrode with a high power output. This biofuel cell was discharged continuously in PBS containing 10 mM NAD+ and 30 mM glucose at 0.2 V until the PB film completely turned to colorless PW and the biofuel cell was reduced at a tiny and stable current density (Fig. 3B(a)). And then the fresh PW electrode was connected with the photoelectrode to assemble a photoelectrochemical cell for energy recovery. The photoelectrochemical cell operated for about 850 s to recover the PB electrode for another energy cycle. Among the 3 cycles, the integrated PBFC converted the photoenergy and the chemical energy from biomass to electricity steadily and efficiently. An integral for discharging current had been computed for the transformation efficiency. While the bioelectrode was assembled with a PB electrode, the average of integrals for the discharging current was 4.25 × 10−4 C. And then the average became 3.03 × 10−4 C when the photoelectrode took the place of the bioelectrode and was connected with the fresh transmuted PW electrode. Considering the different working potentials, the total energy values became 8.5 × 10−5 J and 9.1 × 10−5 J by multiplying 0.2 V and 0.3 V separately. Therefore, the photoenergy storage and transformation efficiency of the PB/PW electrode was about 93.4%. More interestingly, the PB/PW electrode remained stable during the recoveries. The integrated membrane-less PBFC with photoenergy storage might provide new insight into the power sources and self-powered sensors.
In summary, an integrated membrane-less PBFC was fabricated with a PB/PW electrode as an ESE, a bioelectrode modified by GDH and a BiOI0.5Cl0.5 photoelectrode. The power output density increased to 160.3 μW cm−2 by insetting the ESE of PB/PW as an amplification strategy, which was 16 times higher than that of the cell assembled simply by the bioelectrode and photoelectrode. Importantly, photoenergy could be stored and released above 93.4% by transformation between electricity and chemical energy through the integrated PBFC. The strategy of introducing ESEs into the origin systems was promising to guide power sources and self-powered devices to further applications in the future.
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 21375123) and the Ministry of Science and Technology of China (No. 2013YQ170585).
Notes and references

  (a) M. J. Moehlenbrock and S. D. Minteer, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2008, 37, 1188 RSC ; 
  (b) G. Ciamician, Science, 1912, 36, 385 CAS .

  (a) L. de la Garza, G. Jeong, P. A. Liddell, T. Sotomura, T. A. Moore, A. L. Moore and D. Gust, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2003, 107, 10252 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) M. Hambourger, G. Kodis, M. D. Vaughn, G. F. Moore, D. Gust, A. L. Moore and T. A. Moore, Dalton Trans., 2009, 9979 RSC .

  (a) Y. Hu, Y. Zhang, C. Xu, L. Lin, R. L. Snyder and Z. L. Wang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2572 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3553 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 280 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Yasomanee and J. Bandara, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2008, 92, 348 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Bai, L. Jin, L. Han and S. Dong, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 3015 RSC ; 
  (b) P. Liu, H. X. Yang, X. P. Ai, G. R. Li and X. P. Gao, Electrochem. Commun., 2012, 16, 69 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) N. Ibrahim, S. K. Kamarudin and L. J. Minggu, J. Power Sources, 2014, 259, 33 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) C. H. Kwon, S. H. Lee, Y. B. Choi, J. A. Lee, S. H. Kim, H. H. Kim, G. M. Spinks, G. G. Wallace, M. D. Lima, M. E. Kozlov, R. H. Baughman and S. J. Kim, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3928 CAS .

  (a) V. D. Neff, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1978, 124, 886 CrossRef ; 
  (b) B. Kong, C. Selomulya, G. Zheng and D. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7997 RSC .
L. Han, L. Bai and S. Dong, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 802 RSC .

  (a) F. Charmantray, N. Touisni, L. Hecquet, T. Noguer and C. Mousty, Electroanalysis, 2015, 27, 1341 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) F. Ricci, A. Amine, G. Palleschi and D. Moscone, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2003, 18, 165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, M. Ye, C. Liu, P.-C. Hsu, C. S. Criddle and Y. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 546 CAS .

  (a) J. Wang, L. Zhang, L. Yu, Z. Jiao, H. Xie, X. W. Lou and X. W. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4921 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) S. A. Mousavi Shaegh, N.-T. Nguyen, S. M. Mousavi Ehteshami and S. H. Chan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8225 RSC ; 
  (c) P. Zhou, D. Xue, H. Luo and X. Chen, Nano Lett., 2002, 2, 845 CrossRef CAS .
L. Han, P. Hu, Z. Xu and S. Dong, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 115, 263 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc02267gThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration for the operating principle of the PBFC.	 

 	Fig. 1  SEM images of the as-prepared BiOI0.5Cl0.5: (A) low resolution, (B) high resolution and (C) the cross-sectional images. Energy-dispersive X-ray image (D) and XRD pattern (E) of the as-prepared BiOI0.5Cl0.5. (F) The onset potential of BiOI0.5Cl0.5 response to light illumination with on/off cycles of 30 s in 0.1 M PBS.	 

 	Fig. 2  (A) LSV of the BiOI0.5Cl0.5 electrode in PBS (pH 6.0) under light illumination (a) or in the dark (b). (B) LSV obtained at CS/GDH/MDB–MWNTs/GCE in PBS containing 10 mM NAD+ without (a) and with (b) 30 mM glucose. (C) LSV obtained at PB (a) and CS/GDH/MDB–MWNTs/GCE (b) in PBS containing 10 mM NAD+ and 30 mM glucose. (D) LSV obtained at BiOI0.5Cl0.5 (a) and PW (b) in PBS (pH 6.0) under light illumination. The scan rates were all 20 mV s−1.	 
FeIII[FeII(CN)6]− + e− ↔ FeII[FeII(CN)6]2−	(1)

 	Fig. 3  (A) (a) The power output of the PBFC assembled with PB and the bioelectrode in PBS containing 10 mM NAD+ amd 30 mM glucose. (b) The power output of the PBFC assembled with the photoelectrode and bioelectrode under light illumination in PBS containing 10 mM NAD+ and 30 mM glucose. (B) The current density obtained at the ESEs of the PBFCs assembled with bioelectrodes (a) and a BiOI0.5Cl0.5 electrode (b) under 0.2 V and 0.3 V, respectively.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c6cc02267g

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
