Engineering materials with light: recent progress in digital light processing based 3D printing  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TC03548C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TC03548C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2020, 8, 13896-13917Engineering materials with light: recent progress in digital light processing based 3D printing

        
          
            Zhi 
            Zhao
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Xiaoxiao 
            Tian
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Xiaoyan 
            Song
          
          
        
      *
      Faculty of Materials and Manufacturing, Key Laboratory of Advanced Functional Materials, Education Ministry of China, Beijing University of Technology, Beijing 100124, China. E-mail: zhaozhi@bjut.edu.cn; xysong@bjut.edu.cn
Received 
      27th July 2020
    , Accepted 8th September 2020First published on 9th September 2020AbstractDigital light processing (DLP) based 3D printing is a well recognized area with tremendous technical and commercial potential. The printing process is essentially a photochemical material synthesis, which involves a dynamic light source as the energy input, a mechanical printing platform as the reaction container and photo-curable precursors as reaction mixtures. This review article focuses on introducing the recent progress in illumination approaches, instrumental design and precursor formulation in DLP based printing. The working principle as well as the instrumental setup of each technique is discussed in detail. The above developments have significantly extended the capability of DLP based printing, leading to potential applications in soft robotics, wearable electronics, sensors, smart materials and biomimetic devices. A brief account on exemplary applications is highlighted and a perspective on this field is provided at the end.
Zhi Zhao
Zhi Zhao received his PhD degree in chemistry from Texas A&M University, USA, in 2013. Then he joined Arizona State University, USA, as a Postdoctoral Research Associate. In 2019, he was appointed as a professor at the Faculty of Materials and Manufacturing, Beijing University of Technology, China. His current research interests include additive manufacturing techniques, nanomaterial synthesis, and plasmonics.
Xiaoxiao Tian
Xiaoxiao Tian received her BE degree from North China University of Science and Technology in 2018. She is currently a graduate student at the Faculty of Materials and Manufacturing, Beijing University of Technology, China. Her research direction is optical 3D printing.
Xiaoyan Song
Xiaoyan Song received her PhD degree in materials science and engineering from the University of Science and Technology Beijing, China, in 1998. She is currently the deputy director of the Key Lab of Advanced Functional Materials, MOE of China. She is a Distinguished Professor and winner of China National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars. She has published over 270 papers in peer reviewed journals and has over 60 patents authorized. Since 2013 she has been appointed as the Associate Editor of IJRMHM. Her research interests include synthesis and modeling of metallic nanomaterials, additive manufacturing, and rare-earth database.
1. Introduction
Additive manufacturing (AM), commonly known as 3D printing, has broad applications in prototyping, manufacturing, construction, and energy industry.1,2 Digital light processing (DLP) based 3D printing, among others, has been drawing more and more attention due to its fast printing speed, great scalability and mild working conditions.3,4 Essentially, DLP is an illumination technique. A programmable light source is controlled by software, whose emission, in terms of intensity, field distribution and wavelength, is dynamically modulated.5 DLP is usually achieved by using an array of emitters. Some examples in our daily life include digital light on vehicles, projectors, and landscape projector light. The most popular DLP system in academia contains a digital micromirror device (DMD).6 A DMD is composed of an array of electro-mechanical elements, each of which has two stable micromirror states that are determined by its geometry and electrostatics during operation (Fig. 1a). When a DMD is illuminated by a light beam, each element can be individually set at “on” and “off” state, depending on whether it reflects light or not (Fig. 1b). As a result, pixelated light fields composed of bright regions (where photon reaches) and dark regions (no photon) can be generated using a DMD.
 Fig. 1  Scheme of DLP based 3D printers. (a) A typical process to generate patterned light fields using a DMD. (b) The working mechanism of individual elements on a DMD chip. (c) A representative setup of DLP based printers. 
DLP is widely used in optical 3D printing.7–9 A typical DLP based printer consists of three key components: the light source, the printing platform and the photo-curable precursor (Fig. 1c). A patterned light field is focused at the interface between the substrate and the liquid precursor through optics. Interfacial photochemical reactions are triggered by photons and solidify the precursor. Conventionally, a DLP light source yields a planar illumination at the interface. That is, the light field distribution can be arbitrarily modulated in plane while the intensity of light decays rapidly out of the plane. As a result, each light exposure is only able to cure a layer of precursor of limited thickness.10 The entire object has to be printed in a layer by layer fashion from multiple exposures. The stacking of different layers is controlled by the printing platform. Many names have been given to this device setup, which share the same working principle. Here we simply list a few popular ones to avoid confusion: projection stereolithography (PSL),11 projection micro-stereolithography (PμSL),12 mask image projection stereolithography (MIP-SL)13 and mask video projection-based stereolithography (MVP-SL).14
If we examine the printer again from a chemistry point of view, the entire printing process is essentially a photochemical synthesis of materials. The three key components correspond to three critical factors in synthetic reactions (Fig. 1c). The light source serves as the energy input to activate some reactive species and allow reactions to take place. Reactants that are sensitive to light exposure are usually called photoinitiators (PIs). Different from traditional light sources in photochemical synthesis,15 the DLP technique is able to precisely control the light intensity at any point inside a reaction mixture, and thus tunes the reaction rate point by point across the precursor. The role of the printing platform is similar to that of a reaction container in typical material synthesis, which holds the reaction mixture as well as maintains a certain reaction environment. Notably, the printing platform is a dynamic container. It can change shape, location and other physical parameters to integrate products formed at different stages into the target object. The photo-curable precursor contains all the reactants to prepare target materials. One criterion for the precursor is that it has to be light sensitive. As of today, the most widely used precursors are photopolymers,16 which yield polymeric materials upon light illumination.
While DLP based printing has demonstrated many successful applications, improvements in this technique are still eagerly desired to broaden its applicable materials and improve its efficiency in printing functional materials and complex structures. During the past five years, many novel technologies have been developed, which significantly extend the capability of DLP based printing. In this review, we introduce those techniques according to their role in photochemical synthesis. First, innovative illumination approaches are reviewed, which are able to improve printing quality and chemical selectivity, or even extend the photochemical reactions in DLP from interfaces to bulks. Second, a few high-performance instrumental designs are introduced to better control reaction processes. Continuous liquid interface production, for example, removes the interval between printing cycles and allows products to be constructed in a continuous way. By employing rotational resin tanks or dynamic fluidic control, multimaterials are able to be printed automatically. Adding a heating source (i.e., an infrared lamp) or external voltage to a DLP based printer could help print some environmental sensitive materials, rendering potential biomimetic applications. Last but importantly, the recent breakthrough in photochemistry enables a much broader choice of printable materials, which makes DLP based printing more versatile. For instance, bioinks, DNA containing precursors and metal precursors have been developed to produce a series of advanced materials that find applications in soft robotics, sensors, optical devices, and intelligent electromagnetic devices. Table 1 provides a list of abbreviations used in this review.
Table 1 List of abbreviations




Abbreviation
Full name
Abbreviation
Full name




DAE530
1,2-Bis(2-methyl-1-benzothiophen-3-yl)perfluorocyclopentene
MVP-SL
Mask video projection-based stereolithography


AM
Additive manufacturing

T
m

Melting temperature


aGNs
Aligned graphene nanoplatelets
MNPs
Metal nanoparticles


GelAGE
Allylated gelatin
MWCNTs
Multiwalled carbon nanotubes



o-Cl-HABI
Bis[2-(o-Chlorophenyl)-4,5-diphenylimidazole]
NA
Numerical aperture


CQ
Camphorquinone
BAPO
Phenylbis(2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl) phosphine oxide


CNTs
Carbon nanotubes
PI
Photoinitiator


CAL
Computed axial lithography
P(AAc-co-AAm)
Poly(acrylic acid-co-acrylamide)


CT
Computed tomography
PEGDA
Poly(ethylene diacrylate)


CLIP
Continuous liquid interface production
PAMD
Polymer assisted metal deposition


DMD
Digital micromirror device
PPD
Polymer-assisted photochemical deposition


DMSO
Dimethyl sulfoxide
PNIPAM
Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)


DTT
Dithiothreitol
PμSL
Projection micro-stereolithography


DLP
Digital light processing
PSL
Projection stereolithography


ELD
Electroless deposition
QDs
Quantum dots


EDAB
Ethyl 4-(dimethylamino)benzoate
SMPs
Shape memory polymers


FPP
Flashing photopolymerization
AgNPs
Silver nanoparticles


GNs
Graphene nanoplatelets
SMaLL
Solution mask liquid lithography


g-DLP
Grayscale digital light processing
SLM
Spatial light modulator


ISAP
Immersed surface accumulation process
MWCNT-S
Surface modified multiwalled carbon nanotubes


IR
Infrared
THF
Tetrahydrofuran


LBMSL
Liquid bridge microstereolithography
UV
Ultraviolet


LCST
Lower critical solution temperature
UCST
Upper critical solution temperature


MIP-SL
Mask image projection stereolithography








2. Recent progress in illumination methods
Progress in illumination methods improves photochemical synthesis from three aspects, namely selectivity, scalability and specificity. A higher chemical selectivity can be achieved by efficient transfer of optical energy to desired reactive species and regions, while eliminating the formation of byproducts. The scalability mainly depends on the optical setup, and it can be enhanced by employing advanced optics. A high specificity means that various reactions in a precursor are triggered in a controllable way. To achieve this optically, altering the energy of incident photons to match the optimum excitation conditions of a reactive species is a potential solution.
2.1 Improvements in the conventional illumination method
The planar light beam in a conventional illumination method is easy to realize, but has a couple of limits. The printing contrast, namely the ability to selectively cure the bright regions, is not satisfying. A major cause could be attributed to light scattering from cured materials. When the precursor cures, its refractive index (RI) differs from the surrounding media, leading to light scattering at phase boundaries under continuous irradiation. The scattered light may cure precursors within dark regions.
Flashing photopolymerization (FPP) was developed to overcome this issue.17 The FPP approach is founded on the fundamental kinetics of photopolymerization reactions. That is, reactive radicals are generated immediately upon light exposure, but the solidification of precursors won’t occur until the very last stage of the reactions. Millisecond-scale flashes, as opposed to continuous illuminations in other methods, were delivered, during which the photoinitiation reaction was able to yield sufficient radicals to support further chain growth. For example, by shining an intense light on the order of 102 mW cm−2 for 10 ms, it is possible to covert a similar amount of monomers into the final products as compared with typical methods. Meanwhile, the light is off when the precursor is cured, which eliminates most light scattering. As a result, the printing contrast, in terms of the unresolved fraction in the products (red circles in Fig. 2a), is much smaller in FPP than in continuous illumination setups under the same exposure dose (Er in Fig. 2a). The results are of particular significance for improving the fidelity of 3D-printed structures at the micron scale.
 Fig. 2  Improvements in the conventional illumination method. (a) Top: Patterns printed with continuous exposure at different relative energies. Bottom: Patterns printed with FPP exposure at different relative energies. The yellow and red circles indicate the outer diameter and the unresolved diameter, respectively. Scale bars = 500 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Left: Schematic view of the integral lithographic system. Right: Optical and SEM image of cubic-truss micro-lattices fabricated by the left setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. (c) The layout of the ISAP system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2008, Elsevier. 
Another issue with the conventional light source lies in its scalability. Typically, DLP systems utilize a single-aperture imaging configuration, which restricts their ability to produce microstructures at large volumes due to the trade-off between the image resolution and image field area.
To solve this issue, an integral lithography system has been developed, which is able to realize the concurrent ability to scale-up (increasing areal build size without compromising the critical feature size) and scale-down (reducing the feature size while maintaining the areal build size) incoming image fields.18 This system is based on a lens array, in which each individual microlens can maintain a high numerical aperture (NA) and the overall print area can be expanded by the number of microlenses. As shown in Fig. 2b, a digital object image from a DLP source is projected onto a diffuser, which generates an input image plane to be observed by a lens array.19–21 The lens array is capable of focusing incident light from multiple viewpoints to superimpose and reconstruct images into the final patterns to be printed.22,23 The transformation of light patterns from DLP to the final output can be described and predicted by a simple thin-lens equation. As a demonstration, the integral lithography system is able to print areas 102–103 times larger than those of current commercial systems, which translates to 0.1–0.28 gigapixels. In particular, it is possible to produce periodic microarchitectures spanning four orders of magnitude in scale from micrometers to centimeters (Fig. 2b). In addition, the uniformity of output light from the lens array is also improved.
When additional features need to be added to the surface, especially irregular surface, of an already existing object, the conventional DLP setup may not perform well. Since the incident angle of light is fixed (perpendicular to the curing layer), the mathematical expression of surface geometry has to be known in order to precisely control areas being illuminated.24,25 To improve the adaptability of DLP based printing, the immersed surface accumulation process (ISAP) can be applied.26 The ISAP uses light guide tools composed of optical fibers and acrylic rods to adjust the incident angle of irradiation (Fig. 2c). The tip of the light guide is immersed in the precursor to reduce light refraction. Due to the flexibility of the light guide, the surface can be illuminated at angles from 0° to 90°, which enables fabricating micro-patterns on the top and side of an object.
2.2 Gradient patterning using grayscale illuminations
In conventional DLP, the light field has a fixed intensity, leading to uniform curing of precursors. On the other hand, it is sometimes desirable to create uneven properties across a product, which adds an additional degree to manipulate materials. Grayscale digital light processing (g-DLP) is a promising technique to prepare graded materials (Fig. 3a).27 In g-DLP, the light dosage is spatially patterned, which creates location-dependent reaction conditions. Yin et al. discovered that as the light dosage increases, the conversion rate of monomers increases, while the curing depth (i.e., the thickness of the solidified photopolymer) is relatively constant (Fig. 3b). Taking advantage of this character, samples with heterogeneous properties have been fabricated (Fig. 3c). Regions patterned with stronger illuminations consist of denser crosslinked polymer networks, appear brighter under a microscope, and are stiffer. In comparison, weaker illuminations lead to darker and softer regions (Fig. 3c and d). Notably, the height of the sample surface remains constant, regardless of the light intensity (Fig. 3d).
 Fig. 3  Grayscale digital light processing. (a) A scheme showing the printing mechanism. (b) Curing depth and conversion rate of monomers as a function of light dosage. (c) Optical image of a sample prepared by g-DLP. Scale bar: 200 μm. (d) Optical contrast and topological analysis of the black line in (c). Panels (a)–(d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Programmable morphological change of various hydrogel samples printed by g-DLP. Left: Optical images of the structural change. Right: Corresponding mechanical simulations. Scale bars: 2 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (f) Demonstration of reversible hydrogel patterning. Scale bar: 10 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society. 
When printing responsive materials with g-DLP, the graded material property enables anisotropic morphological changes upon external stimuli, resulting in programmable 3D structures. In one example, thermal responsive hydrogel disks have been fabricated using g-DLP.28 When subject to heating or cooling, softer regions undergo a more dramatic volumetric change than stiffer parts, leading to controllable shape deformations (Fig. 3e). Such structural evolutions can be simulated and well predicted by mechanics (Fig. 3e).28,29 The programmable swelling behaviour can also be utilized to manipulate local optical transmittance to prepare films that display images in aqueous media (Fig. 3f).30
2.3 Volumetric printing enabled by light reconstruction
As previously mentioned, products are built in a layer-by-layer fashion in conventional DLP based printing. This is determined by the nature of incident light, which is typically a single planar beam. Meanwhile, it is possible to generate patterned light fields in 3D space through the constructive or destructive interference of multiple light beams.31,32 Theoretically, this should allow printing 3D objects in one exposure, thus significantly improving printing throughput. Nevertheless, generating 3D light patterns with multiple beams almost inevitably results in a grayscale 3D field, instead of the well-contrasted bright regions and dark regions seen in conventional DLP devices (Fig. 4a). For example, intensities (I) of 4I0, I0 and 0 are seen when two light beams interfere constructively,33 while I0 and 0 are the only two intensities if one beam is used. Here I0 is the intensity of a single light beam. Although the grayscale light field has been proved to be useful in fabricating planar patterns,27,28 its application in 3D space may cause severe troubles. In 3D space, each light beam interacts with a great amount of precursors. The curing of a spot (e.g., I = 4I0 regions) will also induce photopolymerization in multiple other locations (e.g., I = I0 regions). Consequently, the printing contrast is difficult to guarantee.
 Fig. 4  Volumetric printing enabled by light reconstruction. (a) Grayscale light field generated by light interference. (b) The working principle of CLA. Left: Scheme of the light source and the instrumental setup. Right: A series of products fabricated by CAL. Scale bars: 5 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2019, AAAS. (c) A schematic of the holographic volumetric 3D fabrication system and example structures. Scale bars: 2 mm (white) and 5 mm (black). Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. ©The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. 
To improve the printing contrast, it is desirable to create a light intensity threshold, under which the curing of precursors will not occur. This can be usually achieved by adding a certain amount of inhibitor that terminates photoreactions. In photopolymerization, for instance, reactive radicals are formed first, which then react with monomers and induce polymer chain growth.34 Inhibitors can react with reactive radicals at a much faster speed, form inactive species and thus eliminate polymerization.35 Dissolved O2 usually acts as a scavenger of free radicals in photopolymer systems, which has long been known and studied in both experimental36 and model systems.37,38 Because the rate constant of radical scavenging by O2 is much greater than that for polymer chain propagation, nearly all radicals react with O2 molecules at the start of an exposure until the local O2 concentration has been depleted.39 Consequently, curing of polymers will occur only if the light intensity is high enough to generate sufficient radicals that remove all the O2 within the printing time. Besides O2, other free radical inhibitors such as hydroquinone or 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl40 may also be utilized.
Kelly et al. reported a method named computed axial lithography (CAL) to create an entire 3D object at once via tomographic reconstruction.41 This technique was inspired by the image reconstruction procedures of computed tomography (CT), which is widely applied in medical imaging and non-destructive testing.42,43 Light energy is delivered to a precursor as a set of two-dimensional images. Each image projection propagates through the precursor from a different angle (Fig. 4b). The superposition of exposures from multiple angles results in a three-dimensional energy dose distribution sufficient to solidify the precursor in desired regions, while unwanted reactions outside those regions are limited by dissolved oxygen. The above design creates a nonlinear response of the precursor with regard to the light intensity and sets a critical dose threshold.
A customized instrument was designed to realize CAL (Fig. 4b). A DLP source outputs computed intensity-modulated projections, which are delivered in a time-sequenced fashion to a rotational tank containing precursors. The rotation rate of the tank is carefully set to synchronize light reconstruction and photopolymerization. Various features, including copies of sculptures, dental models, complex lattices and “ball-in-a-cage” geometry, have been printed with a resolution as small as 0.3 mm in engineering acrylate polymers (Fig. 4b). The CAL approach offers many unique advantages. For example, it is able to fabricate centimeter-scale objects in 30–120 s, which is at least 1–2 orders of magnitude faster than conventional DLP based printing. The method may also be used to print 3D structures around pre-existing solid components.
Another volumetric additive manufacturing technique has been developed by employing holographic reconstruction of incident light.44 The technique employs a three-beam superposition system architecture (Fig. 4c). A source laser is diffracted at a liquid crystal spatial light modulator (SLM), to generate desired holographic patterns. The patterned light field is then split into three orthogonal beams and reconstructed inside a precursor container to form desired light intensity distributions. The phase patterns on the SLM can be readily designed with the aid of a computer. Similarly, dissolved oxygen serves as the polymerization inhibitor. To improve the printing quality, the energy dose of the incident beam is carefully optimized to fully cure designed objects while keeping the rest of the parts untouched inside the precursor container.
A variety of geometries can be fabricated by this method, including beams, planes, and struts at arbitrary angles, lattices, and symmetric and asymmetric geometries (Fig. 4c). Significantly, no constraints exist on span, bridge, and cantilever elements, and curves may be produced without layering artifacts, which are all major challenges with standard layer-by-layer additive manufacturing. The smallest self-supporting features that have been fabricated are approximately 300 to 400 μm in size, exhibiting a surface roughness on the scale of 100 to 200 μm.
2.4 Spatially specific printing via multi-wavelength light sources
While the use of light reconstruction facilitates the direct construction of 3D objects, the application of multiple sources with different colors allows curing of materials in a more specific manner, thus enabling a better printing contrast and multi-material printing. Different from the physics based working mechanism in light reconstruction, using light sources of distinctive colors works in a chemical way. The characteristic energy that triggers photochemical reactions varies from molecule to molecule. Therefore, it is possible to choose a suitable combination of light source, PI, and photoinhibitors to selectively trigger or terminate precursor solidification at desired locations.
In one example, a multicolor system is used to achieve unique volumetric polymerization inhibition patterning by the photochemical generation of both polymerization initiation and polymerization inhibition species (Fig. 5a).45 Photopolymerizable resins are formulated with camphorquinone (CQ) and ethyl 4-(dimethylamino)benzoate (EDAB) as a visible light photoinitiator and co-initiator, respectively.46 Bis[2-(o-Chlorophenyl)-4,5-diphenylimidazole] (o-Cl-HABI) is added to serve as an ultraviolet (UV) photoinhibitor (Fig. 5b). The lophyl radicals transiently generated upon o-Cl-HABI photolysis could efficiently inhibit radical-mediated, chain-growth polymerization.47 When illuminated with UV light, the photolysis of o-Cl-HABI creates a polymerization inhibition zone, offering several advantages. First, this zone can minimize the adhesion between the glass window and printed objects, which helps to reduce product damaging. Second, printing contrast can be improved by simultaneously using patterned visible and UV irradiation. The UV modulated polymerization inhibition zone eliminates unwanted reactions outside printed structures due to light scattering, molecular diffusion, etc., leading to smoother surface and better printing fidelity (Fig. 5c). Importantly, by varying the intensity ratio between visible irradiation and UV irradiation, the size and depth of the inhibition zone (and in turn the thickness of the cured layer) could be readily tuned, which allows for single-exposure surface topographical patterning (Fig. 5d).
 Fig. 5  Spatially specific printing via multi-wavelength light sources. (a) Optical setup for two-color stereolithography by concurrent photopolymerization and photoinhibition. (b) UV-visible spectra of CQ (solid blue line) and o-Cl-HABI (dashed violet line) in tetrahydrofuran (THF). (c) Solid block M (left) and tug boat (right) printed using the system in (a). (d) Variable thickness part produced by a single intensity-patterned exposure. Panels (a)–(d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 45. ©The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. (e) Ring-opening transformation of a photochromic mask. (f) Time lapse photographs of the SMaLL printing process and the product (1 cm scale bars). (g) Demonstration of soft joints with SMaLL multimaterial printing. Panels (e)–(g) are reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. 
Dolinski et al. developed another technique involving different light sources named solution mask liquid lithography (SMaLL).48 In SMaLL, the polymer precursor contains monomers, PI, and a ‘mask’, the last of which is a photo-sensitive light absorber (Fig. 5e).49 Upon illumination at certain wavelength, the mask can be photobleached, allowing precursors to be gradually cured at a speed equal to photobleaching (Fig. 5f). One example of mask molecules is diarylethene photoswitches, e.g., 1,2-bis(2-methyl-1-benzothiophen-3-yl)perfluorocyclopentene (DAE530), which can be photoswitched from a colored form to a transparent form upon 530 nm illumination. One advantage of SMaLL lies in its continuous printing mode. Since the printing is controlled by the photobleaching rate of the mask, the entire process is continuous at the molecular level, leading to uniform curing in all directions, and critically, isotropic material properties compared with layer-by-layer additive manufacturing mode.50,51
By using a mixture of multiple precursors that respond to different wavelengths, it is possible to spatially pattern two or more materials by SMaLL simultaneously (Fig. 5g). The author has demonstrated, for example, a butterfly with soft joints and rigid frames patterned by G resins (cured by 470 and 530 nm light) and B resins (cured by 470 nm light only). This reveals the potential of using SMaLL to construct all-polymer composites with well-defined regions of distinctive mechanical and chemical properties.
A summary is provided to compare different illumination techniques mentioned in this section (Table 2).
Table 2 A comparison of different illumination techniques




Name of the technique
Beam shape
Illumination mode
Advantages
Disadvantages




Conventional DLP3,4
Planar
Continuous
Commercially available, ready to use
Limited printing contrast, speed and scalability


FPP17
Planar
Flash
Reduces light scattering; improves contrast
High power source required


Integral lithography system18
Planar
Continuous
Highly scalable while maintaining decent resolution
Complex optics


ISAP26
Spot
Continuous
Able to add features on pre-existing irregular substrates
Limited curing size


g-DLP27
Planar
Continuous
Able to print graded materials
Challenging to create a gradient perpendicular to the illumination


CAL41
3D
Continuous
Volumetric printing; fast and efficient
Requires extensive programming; the precursor needs to be viscous


Holographic printing44
3D
Continuous
Volumetric printing; fast and efficient
Needs to fabricate the SLM first; limited resolution


Volumetric polymerization inhibition patterning45
Planar
Continuous
Single-exposure surface topographical patterning, tunable speed and resolution
Requires an inhibitor


SMaLL48
Planar or 3D
Continuous
Chemical selective printing; uniform, continuous curing
Formulation is more complex




3. Recent progress in instrumental designs
The printing platform is the key to the synthetic operations in DLP based printing. A typical printing platform consists of vats to hold printing precursors and motorized stages to adjust the printing position. Not only does the printing platform control the location and speed of printing, but it also defines the reaction conditions. In conventional DLP printers, photochemical reactions usually occur in a fixed precursor tank under ambient conditions. Even so, a printing platform can still affect the reaction environment. For example, the vat design can either favor52 or block45 gas diffusion, which affects the level of dissolved oxygen in the precursor and in turn influences the final mechanical properties of printed products.53,54
During the past few years, a few high-performance platform designs are developed, which offer superior control on printing conditions and thus enable interesting synthetic applications. Representative techniques are introduced below.
3.1 Platforms for faster printing speed and smoother surface
In 2015, Tumbleston et al. devised a novel printing method known as continuous liquid interface production (CLIP),55 which has become a popular setup for advanced DLP printers. CLIP employs an inverse optical architecture (Fig. 6a). Patterned light is focused at the optical window/precursor interface from the bottom. The optical window is made of oxygen permeable Teflon AF 2400, which creates a dead zone where no photopolymerization occurs at the interface due to the presence of O2. As we mentioned earlier, O2 is an inhibitor of radical polymerization and can stop the curing of photopolymers. It is observed that the thickness of the dead zone follows the equation given below:  where Φ0 is the density of incident photons at the image plane, αPI is the product of photoinitiator concentration and the wavelength-dependent absorptivity, Dc0 quantifies the resin reactivity of a monomer–PI combination, and C is a constant.56,57
 Fig. 6  Platforms for faster printing speed and smoother surface. (a) Schematic of the CLIP printer. (b) Greatly reduced model slicing artifacts realized by CLIP. (c) A variety of parts fabricated using CLIP. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015, AAAS. (d) Peristome inspired non-sticking surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright CC BY 4.0. (e) An illustration of resin refreshment by rotating the vat. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright©2019 by ASME. 
In traditional optical printing, one layer is cured and sticks to the optical window at a time. It then must be (1) mechanically separated, followed by (2) resin re-coating and (3) part re-positioning, before the next layer can be exposed. Taking advantage of the dead zone, objects being printed won’t adhere to the optical window and can be continuously exposed while being elevated from the precursor, thereby eliminating steps (1)–(3). This nonstop process greatly accelerates optical printing, rendering printing speeds up to 1 m hour−1. Meanwhile, the refresh rate of projected images can be increased due to the continuous printing, ultimately allowing for smooth 3D objects with no model slicing artifacts (Fig. 6b). Various high-quality products have been successfully printed using CLIP (Fig. 6c).
Besides the O2 rich dead zone, transparent non-sticking materials may also serve to eliminate curing induced adhesion during printing. One common option is to employ glass slides modified with fluorinated silane, such as 1H,1H,2H,2H-perfluorooctyltriethoxysilane.58 However, the surface modification layer is not very robust and the glass slides need to be refreshed frequently. Recently, Wu et al. developed a bioinspired ultra-low adhesive energy interface for continuous 3D printing.59 The interface was made of nano-textured PDMS, which is filled up with liquid perfluorocarbon to yield a molecular-scale smooth lubricant layer (Fig. 6d). Such a design mimics the peristome surface of pitcher plant due to a slippery water layer.60,61 High-quality objects have been successfully fabricated with this non-sticking interface, demonstrating its potential in continuous 3D printing.
Another layer-less AM process that can achieve continuous fabrication with improved building speed and surface quality has been demonstrated by Li et al. (Fig. 6e).62,63 Different from CLIP55 that relies on continuous z-axis movement, a sliding or rotational motion in the x–y plane of the resin tank is applied to constantly feed resin into the light exposure area.64 The continuous resin flow near the precursor–optical window interface helps to minimize curing induced adhesion. One problem with this technique is that the viscosity drag of precursor flow may damage very thin features. Therefore, further optimization of the instrumental design will be preferred.
3.2 Platforms for automated multi-material printing
It is desirable that multiple materials can be printed by a single platform, which enables efficient preparation of composites, smart materials, and functional devices. Although precursors can be manually switched, the process is time consuming and may cause adverse effects on printing alignment. Therefore, automated multi-material printing systems have been pursued. Such systems must solve two problems: first, how to introduce different precursors in a programmable manner and second, how to remove the uncured residue from one precursor before another precursor is added.
One of the earliest designs that realized automated multi-material printing involved rotational vats.65–67 Individual vats containing different precursors and cleaning solvents were mounted onto a computer-controlled rack or wheel (Fig. 7a). During the printing process, the substrate is first immersed in one precursor and part of the product is fabricated. The cured part is then lifted up and dipped into a cleaning solvent by spinning the rack. Finally, the cleaned part is dried with air flow or cotton balls, and dipped into another precursor to finish the remaining printing cycles (Fig. 7b and c). Depending on the optical setup, this design can be classified into top-down and bottom-up methods (Fig. 7a). In top-down methods, the illumination comes downwards to the polymer resin65,68 whereas light passes through a bottom optical window to reach precursors in bottom-up methods.69,70 The top-down setup is relatively easy to build up, but the resin at the liquid–air interface suffers from oxygen inhibition. It is also not ideal for continuous printing, because when a cured part is lowered down, the resin tends to form a concave meniscus due to surface tension, instead of spontaneously covering the object. Compared with the top-down setup, the bottom-up design makes the depth of the vat independent of the part height, which helps to significantly reduce material contamination and improve efficiency of material use. On the other hand, the bottom-up method requires a non-sticking interface to separate cured parts from the optical window.55,59
 Fig. 7  Platforms for automated multi-material printing. (a) An illustration of a wheel based multi-material printing system. Top: Top-down method. Bottom: Bottom-up method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2013, Emerald Group Publishing Limited. (b) A photo of a wheel based multi-material printing system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (c) A simplified fabrication process flow. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the projection micro-stereolithography system using dynamic fluidic control. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
Although the rotational vats are easy to set up, there still exist some problems. For example, the cleaning solvents can accumulate precursors after several cleaning operations, which causes contamination in further printing steps. In addition, precursor switch and drying steps are very time consuming.71 Recently, a projection micro-stereolithography system using dynamic fluidic control was developed (Fig. 7d).72 Precursors are cured in an integrated fluidic cell. A PDMS film is employed to seal the cell to render a pressure-tight and leak-free reaction chamber, as well as to play the role of an optical window. Various precursors are delivered to the fluidic cell through program controlled valves and pump. This combination allows materials to be actively and efficiently exchanged, even for micro-/nano-particle suspensions. Various products composed of multiple components have been fabricated with this device. In particular, a multi-responsive hydrogel micro-structure is printed using a thermoresponsive hydrogel and an electroactive hydrogel, which shows different actuation modes in response to external electric field and temperature stimuli. This fabrication ability holds great promise to accelerate advances in 3D metamaterials, tissue engineering, and soft robotics.73 Compared with rotational vats, different precursors can be switched in a much faster way. In addition, contamination could be reduced. On the other hand, a greater amount of precursor is required to purge the cell when changing materials, which may cause an increase in the fabrication cost.
3.3 Platforms to reduce precursor consumption
Although DLP based printing has already been applied in mass production, some precursors can still be costly, especially a few bifunctionalized monomers.2 Besides, most precursors contain a great amount of toxic solvents and chemicals, such as dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), alkylamines and thiols,74 which may be harmful if disposed improperly. Therefore, it is desirable that the consumption of precursor could be reduced by lowering the excessive portion of resins during printing.
Bottom-up setups are more advantageous in improving reaction efficiency, because they don’t have to rely on precursor vats. A novel minimal-waste printing mechanism has been demonstrated, which relies on a translationally moved glass plate to deliver various resins and an air jet-based cleaning step to minimize resin waste and avoid the use of any cleaning solutions (Fig. 8a).75 Instead of using precursor containers, the above setup utilizes a syringe pump to generate different material puddles on a glass slide. This little amount of precursor is sufficient to form a uniform resin layer between the optical window and the substrate, which serves as a transient “vat” to define the reactive zone. After printing, residual resins can be removed with an air jet and the system is ready for further printing steps using other materials. Successful fabrication of high-resolution two-material lattice structures has been demonstrated (Fig. 8b), which revealed the effectiveness of the material exchange and cleaning process with minimal resin cross-mixing.
 Fig. 8  Platforms to reduce precursor consumption. (a) Illustrations of the positions of the glass plate used in each step of multimaterial fabrication. (b) Two-material structures fabricated using the method in (a). Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the LBMSL process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
Modified top-down DLP printers may also help in reducing precursor consumption. Liquid bridge microstereolithography (LBMSL),76 for example, shows some promising results (Fig. 8c). In LBMSL, a liquid bridge is formed between two parallel coaxial disks having the same diameter (e.g., 8 mm) using a precursor that is supplied by a syringe pump. The top transparent disk is fixed, and the bottom disk is installed on a Z-stage. The top disk also serves as the optical window to allow incident light to reach the precursor.77 The shape of the liquid bridge is predominantly maintained by capillary force, which can be mathematically calculated.78,79 To allow successful printing, the height of the liquid bridge should exceed a certain value to generate a refreshed resin layer after each exposure. By properly optimizing the bridge geometry, various 3D microstructures were fabricated by LBMSL. Features down to a few tens of μm can be readily printed, which consume only ∼0.25 mL precursors.
3.4 Platforms enabling control of the environment
The synthetic conditions of different materials could vary dramatically, depending on their chemical nature. In conventional optical printing, precursors are normally cured under ambient conditions, which works well for most polymer resins. On the other hand, being able to adjust the printing environment can enable the synthesis of new materials, which broadens the application of DLP based printing.
Electrically assisted 3D printing has been used to fabricate materials with well regulated microstructures and reinforced architectures.80–82 In electrically assisted 3D printing, a pair of planar electrodes are set in the precursor tank, which could generate an electric field under DC voltage (Fig. 9a). DC voltage is preferred for its easy processability and high efficiency in the alignment of nanoparticles.83
 Fig. 9  Platforms enabling the control of the environment. (a) Illustration of an electrically assisted 3D printing process. (b) Working mechanism to align GNs in a photopolymer matrix by an electric field. (c) 3D-printed nacre with aligned GNs and SEM images showing surface and cross-section morphology. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 81. ©The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. (d) Schematic diagram and SEM images showing the helical alignment of MWCNT-S to form a layered structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (e) The setup and working mechanism of magnetic field assisted 3D printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright CC BY 4.0. (f) Thermal image of a heated vat during printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (g) Temperature controlled DLP printer using an IR lamp as the heating source. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. 
A few bio-inspired structures have been fabricated by electrically assisted 3D printing. Hierarchical structures in nacre lead to superior mechanical performance even with relatively weak constituents such as proteins and other organic molecules.84 The secret of nacre's excellent protective performance lies in its sophisticated hierarchical “brick and mortar” architecture ranging from nanoscopic to macroscopic levels.85,86 When subject to an electric field, graphene nanoplatelets (GNs)87,88 in a dielectric liquid will be polarized and gain a dipole moment due to different dielectric properties and electrical conductivities between the inclusion and the liquid (Fig. 9b).89 By aligning GNs in a photopolymer matrix with an external electric field, Yang et al. were able to print a hybrid material with nacre-like hierarchical structures (Fig. 9c).81 The 3D-printed hierarchical structures with aligned GNs show reinforced mechanical properties compared to those with random GNs. Specific toughness and strength comparable to that of natural nacres have been observed in the 3D-printed artificial nacre.
By rotating the electrodes while printing, it is possible to align nanoparticles into a helical architecture to create reinforced biomimetic materials.82 In nature, one mechanism that leads to superior mechanical properties involves using composites containing differently oriented fibers or particles, known as the Bouligand or twisted plywood structure. The Bouligand structure has been identified in the dactyl clubs of peacock mantis shrimp, beetle wings as well as the claws of crab and lobster.90–92 Due to the twisted alignment of collagen or chitin fibers, cracks cannot follow a straight path in Bouligand structure, which enhances energy dissipation and impact resistance.93,94
Bio-inspired reinforcement architecture with anisotropic layers of aligned surface modified multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNT-S) has been printed by electrically assisted 3D printing (Fig. 9d).82 Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) have shown great potential as multifunctional nanofillers for polymer-based nanocomposites due to their unique structure and excellent mechanical properties.95 Different aligning directions of MWCNT-S in each layer are accurately controlled by the rotation angle of electrodes. Torque, coulombic and electrophoresis forces are the three dominant factors that determine the rotation and assembly of CNTs.82,96 It is found that the printed Bouligand structure is able to enhance the tensile modulus of a product by 4 times compared with using randomly oriented MWCNT-S, which offers tremendous possibilities for application in aerospace, mechanical, and tissue engineering.
Similarly, external magnetic fields could be employed to align anisotropic reinforcing particles during printing. One example of such systems has been demonstrated by Martin et al.97 Computer-controlled solenoids are integrated onto a customized frame surrounding the precursor tank, which generate a magnetic field in an arbitrary direction (Fig. 9e). Iron oxide coated alumina particles are dissolved into a polymer matrix to produce samples via 3D magnetic printing. Various bio-mimetic structures including Haliotidae sp. Abalone shell, Bouligand structure and mammalian cortical bone have been fabricated, which are known to play a critical role in material reinforcement.98,99 Enhanced material performance compared with monolithic structures is observed in as-printed reinforcement architectures. Further, the authors also demonstrated that new designs of reinforcement architectures that are not found in nature can be prepared, which reveals a high level of possible customization in discontinuous fiber composites with arbitrary geometries.
Temperature is another important parameter in 3D printing. It has been known that temperature will affect the conversion rate of monomers, the shrinkage stress, and the mechanical properties of products.100,101 Typically, temperature control of the precursor can be realized by a heatable printing chamber (Fig. 9f),102 which has already been commercialized. The so called “hot lithography” provides several advantages, such as higher conversion and better mechanical properties of the products. Also, high viscosity resins including polybutadiene based resins, unsaturated polyester resins and thermoplast filled photopolymers could be processed at elevated temperatures. Alternatively, infrared (IR) lamps may be used as the heat source (Fig. 9g).103 Dental composite materials have been successfully printed to prepare temporary crown and bridge at a faster speed and decent resolution.
4. Recent progress in photochemical synthesis
Printable precursors are the core of 3D printing, which determine what materials and devices can be produced. Traditionally, DLP based printing mainly deals with photopolymers, leading to limited applications. Recent breakthrough in photochemistry enables a much broader choice of available materials, making this technique more versatile. Theoretically, all photochemical reactions can be employed in optical printing, provided that they are able to generate solid materials from liquid precursors. Nevertheless, a few additional criteria have to be considered in order to formulate suitable reaction mixtures for practical applications.
Reaction speed is a major concern in optical 3D printing. Not only does it determine the time and cost of manufacturing, but it also affects the quality of products. Taking photopolymerization as an example, the printing resolution18,26,104 is always significantly lower than the optical resolution of the system (d), the latter of which can be calculated according to the incident wavelength and NA of optics by105  
A lens with moderate magnification and NA (e.g., 20×, NA = 0.4) can push the optical resolution down to <1 μm while the best reported printing resolutions with DLP are seldom below 5 μm. A major cause could be attributed to the diffusion of reactive species during printing. Free radicals are constantly generated under incident light. Within their lifetime, those radicals could migrate a certain distance and induce polymerization in dark regions. The maximum diffusion distance (L) can be calculated according to Fick's laws of diffusion:  where D is the diffusivity and t is the free-radical lifetime.106 The typical radical lifetime has been reported to be ∼10 ms107 while the diffusion coefficient of common free radicals is around 1 × 10−5 cm−2 s−1 in both polar and nonpolar solvents,108,109 corresponding to an L of ∼10 μm. Therefore, printing objects smaller than 10 μm will be extremely challenging, regardless of how good the optics is. To eliminate the adverse effect of molecular diffusion, the exposure time in one printing cycle is usually on the scale of 101 s to 102 s.
The viscosity of precursors is another concern. Highly viscous precursors help to slow down molecular diffusion, and thus are preferred for improving printing resolution. High viscosity also helps to maintain the shape of printed objects at early stages, when they are not fully cured.55 Meanwhile, the viscosity may also have some negative effects. For example, viscous resins cannot be refreshed efficiently between printing cycles, which requires the use of additional tools or operations to accelerate the process.41,62
Finally, byproducts in a photochemical reaction should also be paid attention to. Some photochemical reactions generate gaseous byproducts,110 which dramatically scatter light and induce voids in materials.
Due to these concerns, the majority of printing precursors are formulated on well-studied molecular species such as acrylates, epoxies, thiol–ene pairs and their derivatives. These reactants can be quickly photo-polymerized at high yields. In addition, their good compatibility with various organics allows the viscosity of precursors to be tuned by adding different solvents or adjusting side groups in the product.41,72 Recently, a few novel reaction systems, especially those for metal printing, were developed. The new systems are based on redox reactions, which can bypass some limits in radical polymerization.
4.1 Photopolymerization of acrylates
Acrylates and their derivatives are the most commonly used photopolymers in DLP based printing. The photopolymerization of acrylates occurs rapidly in aqueous and organic media at high yields, and generates almost no byproducts. A number of decent reviews have been published in this area.111–114 Here we aim to supplement a few interesting examples demonstrated in the past couple of years, which help to draw a more comprehensive schematic of the state-of-the-art.
Introducing biomolecules into precursors helps to develop novel smart materials. We have successfully incorporated DNA strands into acrylate monomers to develop a photo-curable DNA hydrogel.115 The morphology of this gel, named D-gel, can be dynamically controlled by DNA hybridization-induced double crosslinking (Fig. 10a). Due to the simple hybridization process and short DNA sequences being employed, an obvious shape change can be observed within 20 min after introducing external DNAs (Fig. 10b), which is orders of magnitude faster than conventional DNA gels.116 By applying PSL, modular macroscopic structures that feature programmable reconfiguration and directional movement may be fabricated. As a proof-of-concept, we have prepared a D-gel palm, which can mimic the complex gestures of human hands (Fig. 10c). This result indicates that D-gel holds great promise in soft robotics and smart devices.
 Fig. 10  Acrylate based photopolymers. (a) A schematic showing the response mechanism of a D-gel. (b) Normalized volumetric change of the D-gel squares as a function of time after introducing external DNA sequences. (c) Control of the movement of hydrogel palms with combined DNA triggers. The multi-material printing was achieved by manually switching precursors. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (d) Temperature–transmittance curves of the PNIPAM hydrogel layer and P(AAc-co-AAm) hydrogel layer. (e) Different bending mode of a bilayer hydrogel strip upon heating and cooling. The multi-material printing was achieved by manually switching precursors. Panels (d) and (e) are reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Exemplary hydrophilic/hydrophobic composite structures. The multi-material printing was achieved by manually switching precursors. Scale bars: 10 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic diagram of g-DLP and some products printed by g-DLP. Scale bars: 10 mm (top) and 5 mm (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. ©The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. 
Using a combination of two acrylates with complementary or opposite chemical properties could render various new stimuli-responsive materials. A Mimosa inspired bilayer hydrogel, for example, is fabricated from poly(acrylic acid-co-acrylamide) (P(AAc-co-AAm)) and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM).117 The carboxylic group and amide group in the P(AAc-co-AAm) copolymer form intra-molecular hydrogen bonds at low temperatures, which break above an upper critical solution temperature (UCST) and induce gel swelling.118 PNIPAM acts in the opposite way, that is, it swells below a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) and shrinks above that temperature (Fig. 10d).119 Here the measured transmittance is inversely proportional to the volume. Taking advantage of these complementary properties, temperature sensitive hydrogel strips could be made by fabricating P(AAc-co-AAm)/PNIPMA bimorphs (Fig. 10e). Another example could be found in hydrophilic/hydrophobic composite shape-shifting structures.120 By patterning hydrophilic and hydrophobic acrylate monomers into bimorph patterns, a spontaneous structural change takes place when such composites are placed in water (Fig. 10f). The driving force is attributed to the strain mismatch during swelling.121
Application of hybrid resins containing acrylates is a potential way to develop more advanced materials. Kuang et al. have employed a hybrid ink containing glycidyl methacrylate, a common diacrylate crosslinker and a diamine crosslinker to realize the printing of graded materials with superior mechanical properties (Fig. 10g).122 The hybrid ink was first cured by g-DLP to form a structure with a location-specific crosslink degree,123,124 followed by a second-stage thermal curing to simultaneously eliminate residual monomers and enhance property gradients. The diacrylate crosslinker and the diamine crosslinker interconnect polymer chains in the first and second stage, respectively. Compared with using pure acrylates, this hybrid ink and double curing mechanism enhance the stability and performance of the final product. Functional graded materials with a mechanical gradient up to three orders of magnitude and high resolution have been obtained with this method. Proof-of-concept applications of g-DLP include biomimetic metamaterials, soft robotics and data encryption (Fig. 10g). Other hybrid acrylic/epoxy resins have also been devised for DLP based printing by using two kinds of PIs, which can trigger the polymerization of acrylates and epoxies simultaneously under UV irradiation.125
4.2 Photopolymerization of epoxidized molecules
Besides acrylates, epoxidized molecules are another group of popular photocurable monomers.126 The photopolymerization of epoxies can be triggered by UV light in the presence of a suitable PI,127 which has been extensively applied in fabricating structural units and mechanical parts by DLP.128–130
Recently, Branciforti et al. demonstrated that epoxidized vegetable oils might be used as a substitute for acrylate resins.131 To do this, the unsaturated carbon–carbon bonds in vegetable oils are converted to epoxy groups using hydrogen peroxide as the oxidant. Epoxidized vegetable oils can then be polymerized under visible light using phenylbis(2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl) phosphine oxide (BAPO) as the PI. Using oil derivatives as photopolymers can help address the concern of toxicity of acrylates.132,133
4.3 Patterning materials via thiol–ene click reactions
Thiol–ene click chemistry is also a promising reaction system for optical printing due to its fast reaction speed and high yield.134,135 The coupling between thiol and ene groups can be mediated by radicals,136 which are easy to obtain in optical printing by using photosensitive initiators. Different from conventional chain growth in the polymerization of acrylates and epoxies, ideal polymerization of thiol–ene systems happens through a step growth pathway.137 That is, thiols and enes are alternatively added to the end of a growing polymer chain. This unique mechanism has several advantages over conventional radical polymerization, including increased material homogeneity, low shrinkage, and resistance to the radical quenching capability of molecular oxygen by generating a thiyl radical via chain transfer.138 During the past few decades, extensive efforts have been spent on the formulation of high-performance thiol–ene resins. Chen et al. have systematically investigated the thermal storage stability, photopolymerization kinetics and mechanical properties of various thiol–ene formulations.139 It is found that secondary thiol–ene systems exhibit better thermal storage stability, good reactivity and mechanical properties when used in DLP printing. By combining thiol–ene chemistry with other functional moieties, various applications could be developed. The application of allylated gelatin (GelAGE) and dithiothreitol (DTT) as a thiol–ene clickable bioink for distinct biofabrication applications is reported by Bertlein et al. (Fig. 11a).140 Curing of this system yields a fully degradable network with tunable properties (Fig. 11b), which is more desirable than traditional methacryloyl functionalized gelatin. More examples can be found in the direct patterning of quantum dots (QDs)/thiol–ene photo-polymer composites as high-resolution pixelated color converters with the DLP projection lithography method (Fig. 11c and d).141 QDs are stabilized and immobilized by polymer networks, which prevents the phase separation and QD aggregation.142 By using ene-terminated polysiloxanes as the source of SiOx, it is possible to print ceramics via thiol–ene chemistry.143 Through light initiated crosslinking, a thiol–ene precursor is cured into stable infusible thermosets that preserve their shape during heating. The thermosets transform into glassy ceramics through pyrolysis with uniform shrinkage and high density (Fig. 11e).
 Fig. 11  Patterning materials via thiol–ene click reactions. (a) Synthesis of GelAGE. (b) Scheme of the controlled dimerization with thiol–ene click chemistry for GelAGE. Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic showing the printing of the QD composite film. (d) Single-color and multi-color pixels printed by the method in (c). Panels (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019 Optical Society of America. (e) Additive manufacturing of ceramics from preceramic polymers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
4.4 Photoreduction of metal nanoparticles
During the past few years, an increasing number of research studies have been carried out on metal printing, which possesses great promise in industrial manufacturing. Photochemical reactions that yield metal nanoparticles (MNPs) have long been known. Accordingly, the first few trials on metal printing by DLP are founded on these reactions.
Zhang et al. have employed photo-catalyzed reactions to grow silver nanoparticles for direct plasmonic color printing.144 A TiO2-capped quartz substrate is immersed in a silver precursor containing silver ions and reducing agents (Fig. 12a). Upon UV illumination, the TiO2 layer absorbs UV light to generate photoelectrons, which initiate silver ion reduction and yield silver nanoparticles (AgNPs).145 When the UV illumination continuous, newly generated electrons move across previously generated silver nanoparticles to the outside surface and reduce more silver ions to create bigger silver nanoparticles. Since the electron source is a fixed substrate, this printing strategy could eliminate the adverse effect of molecular diffusion on printing and lead to high printing fidelity. The size of as-formed AgNPs depends on the light intensity and the thickness of TiO2 layer. By tuning these parameters, AgNPs of various sizes can be printed, which exhibit different colors due to Fano resonance (Fig. 12b).146,147 High-resolution plasmonic color images have been printed (Fig. 12c), which may be applied in structural color decoration, plasmonic microdevices and biosensors.
 Fig. 12  Photoreduction of metal nanoparticles. (a) Schematics of the light-controlled growth of silver nanoparticles. (b) Color palette illustrates all colors generated under various fabrication conditions. (c) Printing process of a campus building. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (d) Printing and chemical annealing steps to generate coalesced AgNP patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic representation of the photo-induced synthesis and organisation of silver@polymer nanoassemblies. (f) A few objects fabricated by the method in (e). Panels (e) and (f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright CC BY 4.0. (g) Tuning of phase-separation by controlling crosslinking density to yield different morphologies in 3D objects. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright CC BY 4.0. 
Besides using catalytic substrates, liquid reactions may also be utilized for printing MNPs. Silver ions, for example, can be converted to AgNPs under irradiation by using citrate as a photo-sensitive reducing agent.148 However, the as-prepared AgNPs are capped with negatively charged citrate ions, which prevent them from aggregating due to coulombic repulsion. Yang et al. employed NaCl solution to treat photo-patterned AgNPs (Fig. 12d).149 The counterions in NaCl solution help to screen charges on AgNPs, and thus allow them to pack tightly. Using this method, a few metal patterns have been printed, which show improved conductivity. Besides silver, other MNPs such as Pt, Pd and Au nanoparticles may also be printed by substrate-free photochemical reaction.110,149–151
As a step forward, printing metal nanoparticles in a polymer matrix has been studied by a few groups. Due to the high density and intermolecular interactions of polymers, phase separation can occur between polymers and freshly formed MNPs. This allows MNPs to pack more densely and improves the quality of final products. For example, Zaier et al. prepared highly reflective and conductive metal layers through light-assisted synthesis and assembly of silver nanoparticles in a polymer matrix (Fig. 12e).152 A silver precursor was mixed with an acrylate monomer, which can simultaneously generate AgNPs and uncrosslinked polymers under UV illumination. Upon formation, the AgNPs are temporarily stabilized by polymers and phase separation occurs then. The majority of AgNPs migrate to the surface of the liquid precursor, forming a densely packed layer while the inner part of the precursor is majorly polymer. The as-prepared silver layers have a conductivity that is close to 1/7 of bulk silver and the reflectance reaches 80–90% in the visible range of the spectrum. This method has also been used to fabricate silver coatings on various substrates (Fig. 12f).
By using a photo-crosslinkable polymer matrix, Deore et al. showed that the phase separation can be tuned to produce composites to metal layers (Fig. 12g).153 Precursors containing higher crosslinker concentrations can be gelated rapidly, during which the phase separation is not complete. As a result, a silver–polymer composite is formed. In comparison, lower crosslinker concentration leads to longer gelation time and the formation of silver coatings on the polymer matrix.
4.5 Polymer-assisted metal synthesis
While printable MNPs have broadened the application of optical printing, the ability to create continuous metallic materials is more desirable in many fields, including aerospace industry,154 integrated circuits155 and oil/gas industry.156 Compared with MNPs, continuous metallic materials have better mechanical properties, and are more conductive and reflective. Until very recently, printing continuous metals by DLP was impossible due to the lack of suitable reaction systems.
Polymers can play a critical role in the synthesis of metallic materials. Polymer assisted metal deposition (PAMD),157,158 for example, has been demonstrated in creating continuous metal patterns under ambient conditions. In a typical PAMD process, a functional polymer is first grafted onto a substrate. Reactive species, such as metal ions, are then immobilized into the polymer networks through coordination, electrostatic interactions, etc. Finally, electroless deposition (ELD) of metal species in the reactant-loaded regions occurs, leading to spatial patterning of metallic materials. Different from polymer matrices in previously mentioned MNP printing,152,153 the polymer in PAMD immobilizes metal ions and functions as a catalytic substrate for ELD.159 Such a system has found applications in many areas, including solar cells,160 thin film electronics,161 and wearable devices.162–164
Although PAMD enables continuous metal deposition, it is not light responsive and therefore cannot be applied in optical printing. A few efforts have been spent on incorporating catalytic polymers into photocurable resins. By directly integrating a Br-containing vinyl-terminated initiator into photopolymers, Wang et al. were able to graft polyelectrolyte brushes onto the surface of 3D printed objects.165 The grafted polymers then catalyzed the ELD of Cu and Ni, resulting in metal coated polymer frames (Fig. 13a). Another solution is to directly incorporate charged monomers into polymer resins (Fig. 13b).166 During DLP printing, positively and negatively charged regions can be established in a programmable way to form electrostatic mosaic. Metal ions of opposite charges can then be absorbed in desired regions and undergo ELD, yielding a surface metal layer (Fig. 13c).
 Fig. 13  Polymer-assisted metal synthesis. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of complex metallic architectures by initiator-integrated 3D printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic for programmed electrostatic charge deposition of materials in 3D. (c) Complex structures fabricated using the method in (b). Panels (b) and (c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (d) Working mechanism of PPD. (e) Patterning various metals on different substrates by PPD. (f) The fabrication of electronic circuits, complex patterns and 3D patterns by PPD. Panels (d)–(f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
While the above examples show a potential metal printing protocol, the polymer is only immobilized onto the surface, so printing 3D metallic objects is technically prohibited. Besides, the 3D printing and metal deposition are carried out separately, leading to increased fabrication complexity. As a step forward, we have demonstrated a versatile reaction system that utilizes a polymer containing precursor to enable continuous metal formation in a single step in bulk solution. This technique, named polymer-assisted photochemical deposition (PPD),167 features a light triggered, two-step reaction pathway to optically print various metals (Fig. 13d). In optical MNP generation, small MNPs form in the presence of a reducing agent and UV illumination, serving as seeds for future growth. Next, the MNPs bind to the polymer and grow into a continuous crystalline structure. Here the polymer plays two important roles.168 First, the long polymer chain acts as a template to tether MNPs into a cluster through coordination interactions between its functional groups and metals, similar to PAMD. Meanwhile, the functional groups are directly involved in the metal synthesis as a secondary reducing agent.168–170 Their distribution favors inter-particle crystal growth, which turns MNPs into continuous, bulk metallic materials.
PPD possesses several advantages over MNP printing methods. The two-step reaction converts MNPs to smooth and continuous materials, whose electrical and optical properties are similar to vacuum deposited metals. To date, PPD is applicable to silver, gold, and platinum, and it could print objects on a variety of substrate materials including glass, silicon, polymers, and hydrogels (Fig. 13e). It is also possible to print micrometer scale images, and generate complex 3D patterns using PPD (Fig. 13f). The highest printing resolution is measured to be 3 μm, which is one of the best records demonstrated by DLP printers. This is attributed to the polymer-assisted clustering of AgNPs, which significantly slows down their diffusion even after long exposure in low-viscosity aqueous media. With the low cost, high printing quality and excellent versatility, we expect PPD to find application in, but not limited to, soft robotics, biochemical sensors, responsive coatings, solar harvesting devices, intelligent electromagnetic devices, smart biomedical devices, and energy storage devices.
5. Applications of advanced DLP based 3D printing
The ability to simultaneously control product composition and micro-structure has made DLP based printing a versatile strategy for fabricating complex devices that are otherwise difficult to obtain by traditional fabrication methods. In particular, DLP is a promising tool for making smart materials and biomimetic materials. The broad choice of polymeric precursors provides a chemical base on which various composites could be established while the printing resolution of DLP reaches a few microns,104,141,144 similar to the scale of living cells.171 As a result, it is possible to replicate and re-design many bio-inspired structures to achieve advanced functions.
The function of many bio-systems relies on their unique structure. Precisely replicating those structures allows people to obtain novel functional materials. It has been known that the upper side of S. molesta leaves is densely covered with wax coated eggbeater hairs, which leads to a superhydrophobic layer.172,173 Inspired by this, Yang et al. printed artificial eggbeater hairs out of the E-glass/MWCNT composite (Fig. 14a and b).174 The product shows an excellent super-hydrophobic character, which has been used for water retention and oil/water separation (Fig. 14c). Similarly, by printing artificial spines that mimic cactus spines,175 it is possible to create a water collection membrane that can collect fog from multiple directions (Fig. 14d).176
 Fig. 14  Applications of advanced DLP based 3D printing. (a) SEM images of 3D-printed eggbeater arrays. (b) SEM image of the natural eggbeater hair structure. (c) Oil/water separation by the 3D-printed eggbeater structures. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (d) The water collection capability (top) and the SEM image of 3D-printed cactus-mimetic spine arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (e) Resistance change vs. compression displacement for a 3D printed helmet containing aligned GNs (aGNs). Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2019, AAAS. (f) Scheme of a 3D-printed bidirectional liquid sensor (left) and two sensing modes (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (g) An Eiffel Tower model (left) and an electronic switch (right) printed with SMPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (h) A printed gripper made out of SMPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright CC BY 4.0. 
It is also possible to directly fabricate sensors by patterning responsive materials with DLP. Conductive complexes are the most popular materials that have been involved in 3D printing based sensor fabrication.177 The conductivity of conductive complexes almost always varies with geometric deformations, which serves as the sensing mechanism. Yang et al. have established a crack sensor by electrically assisted 3D printing.81 This sensor consists of nacre-inspired hierarchical structures with complex 3D GNs that are electrically aligned within a polymer matrix. The artificial nacre loses conductivity when cracks form due to broken contact between adjacent GNs. Based on this property, a smart helmet with both protective property and self-sensing capability is fabricated, which can report damage caused by external forces in real time (Fig. 14e). Many hydrogels are responsive materials. By printing the pure poly(ethylene diacrylate) (PEGDA) hydrogel, or PEGDA/MWCNT composites, a hair-inspired flexible liquid sensor can be fabricated (Fig. 14f).178 Upon absorbing a conductive liquid, the conductivity of printed PEGDA sparks increases, which can be detected and correlated with the liquid volume. In contrast, the conductivity of PEGDA/MWCNT composites decreases upon swelling, due to reduced contact between highly conductive MWCNTs. As a result, a “turn-off” liquid sensor could be made using this material.
A programmable shape change of printed objects can be achieved by the so-called 4D printing.179–181 By definition, 4D printing describes processes during which a targeted evolution of 3D printed structures, in terms of shape, properties, and functionality, occurs. DLP based 4D printing is usually realized by conducting multi-material printing. Stimuli responsive moieties are constructed with one or a few types of precursors, while irresponsive moieties are fabricated with other precursors. The most popular design to achieve 4D printing is bimorph units. A bimorph unit contains two parallel layers, one of which is stimuli-responsive, and the other is irresponsive (or less responsive). One classical example of such a design can be found in optically printed origami and kirigami structures.182 Inspired by ancient techniques for making paper works of art,183 bimorph creases that guide self-folding are printed. These creases undergo directional bending upon external stimuli, e.g., heating, which induces desired shape deformation across the entire printed object. A variety of responsive materials can be utilized to fabricate the bimorph crease.184 Recently, we demonstrated that DNA is a promising candidate to make such functional units, which enabled programmable shape change by using specifically designed DNA sequences.115
Alternatively, shape memory polymers (SMPs) are another promising candidate for 4D printing. SMPs can temporarily deform to one state, then return to their original shape after applying an external stimulus.185,186 Objects printed out of SMPs are encoded with the shape change ability. For example, Zarek et al. have fabricated a series of shape memory electronic devices using methacrylates (Fig. 14g).187 At room temperature, the printed structures are rigid, while above the melting temperature (Tm) the structures are pliant and elastomeric. In this state, any deformation applied to the structure can be fixated by cooling below the Tm. Reheating the structure leads to a recovery of the original printed shape. Similar ideas are also employed by other groups to make mechanical devices such as grippers (Fig. 14h).188
6. Outlook and conclusion
Among popular additive manufacturing techniques, DLP based 3D printing offers many unique advantages. The fast printing speed, great scalability and mild working conditions have made DLP based printing an excellent candidate in prototyping and fabricating functional devices including soft robotics, sensors, optical devices, and intelligent electromagnetic devices. By nature, the printing process is a combination of modulated light fields and photochemical synthesis. This review discusses about many newly emerged developments in this field, which equipped light triggered reactions with a variety of advanced functions.
The incident light not only provides energy required to initiate photochemical reactions, but also defines reactive zones. Planar illumination is the most common irradiation type in DLP based printing, which suffers from unwanted light scattering and poor scalability. In FPP, the conventional optical input is replaced by millisecond-scale flashes, which reduces scattering issues and helps improve printing contrast. By employing lens arrays or optical guides, the incident fields can be scaled up or down, leading to a more flexible patterning ability. The use of irradiation composed of multiple light beams has led to revolutionary progress in optical printing. The reconstruction of light projections from different angles leads to a patterned optical field in 3D space, which enables volumetric printing in a single step. The use of irradiation with different wavelengths, on the other hand, offers the ability to selectively turn-on or terminate reactions at desired locations, thus leading to improved printing quality and fidelity.
The printing platform controls the experimental operations in each printing cycle, as well as defines the reaction conditions of photochemical synthesis. By employing an O2 permeable window or continuous resin flow near the optical window, curing induced adhesion has been successfully eliminated. Consequently, continuous printing at the resin–window interface is achieved, which significantly accelerates manufacturing. Rotational vats and fluidic chambers are two effective platform designs that enable automated multi-material printing. To reduce precursor consumption, vat-free setups such as translationally moved glass plates and LBMSL have been developed, in which polymer precursors are temporarily trapped to form transit vats by capillary force. Many advanced platform designs aim at controlling the printing environment to synthesize novel materials and composites. Electrically assisted 3D printing and hot lithography, as representative examples, are able to set up an electric field and temperature, respectively.
The chemical nature of precursors determines what materials can be printed and thus the potential applications of printed objects. Conventional DLP based printers mainly deal with polymer precursors. Acrylates, epoxies and their mixtures are some of the most popular precursors. Recently, thiol–ene click chemistry was also extensively studied in DLP based printing. Different from conventional chain growth polymerization, ideal polymerization of thiol–ene systems happens through a step growth pathway, which results in better material homogeneity, low shrinkage, and resistance to radical quenching due to molecular oxygen. Consequently, thiol–ene chemistry has been utilized to develop bioinks and functional materials.
Metal printing has drawn more and more attention during recent years. The first few trials focused on printing metal nanoparticles via the photo-reduction of metal ions. Polymers can play a critical role in the synthesis of bulk metals. We demonstrated a technique named PPD, which is able to pattern continuous metallic structures under the assistance of polymers. The as-obtained products feature the best conductivity and reflectivity among reported works.
The ability to simultaneously control product composition and micro-structure has made DLP based printing a versatile strategy in fabricating complex devices that are otherwise difficult to obtain. In particular, DLP is a promising tool for making smart materials and biomimetic materials. Plant inspired eggbeater hairs and spines have been fabricated, for example, which have the ability to separate an oil/water mixture or collect water from moisture. By employing origami and kirigami designs, programmable shape change of printed objects can be achieved. Alternatively, printing SMPs is also able to yield smart devices that find applications in soft robotics, actuators, drug delivery and foldable electronics. Finally, sensing devices can be directly built up with DLP printers via patterning responsive materials. Fig. 15 provides a flow chart summarize the techniques mentioned in the review and provide a guide to choose a suitable printing approach.
 Fig. 15  A flow chart on how to choose a suitable printing approach. 
DLP based printing has witnessed rapid development during the past decade. Meanwhile, there are still some challenges that require further investigations. As we mentioned earlier, the current resolution limit in DLP based printing is generally at the 10 μm level, which is acceptable for fabricating structural components or biomimetic devices, but not sufficient for patterning metamaterials, making optical components, etc. Meanwhile, DLP printers still suffer from limited capability when dealing with inorganic materials.
Considering its great potential and wide applications, we believe that more and more improvements will be seen in this field, which eventually offer proper solutions to present challenges. In particular, improved printing resolution may be achieved via the following efforts. First, a light source of shorter wavelength and advanced optics could be employed to reduce the size of light spot. Second, unwanted diffusion of reactive species may be reduced by optimizing the viscosity of precursors and using inhibitors. Finally, applying FPP or light absorbing molecules can eliminate light scattering, thus further improving printing resolution. We expect that the ultimate resolution of DLP may reach the sub-micron level, similar to that of conventional photolithography and optical microscopy.
The development of photochemistry is the key to enhance the versatility of DLP based printing. Until very recently DLP was only capable of handling pure polymers or polymer containing composites. The success of PPD points at a potential solution to direct printing of inorganic materials. The photolysis of specific reactants could yield reactive species. By carefully coupling a few chemical reactions, those reactive species may be finally turned into pure inorganic materials. As quite a few metals have already been successfully printed by DLP, we expect that alloy printing may be achieved soon using the above strategy. Formulation of alloy precursors can start by combining multiple known metal precursors. The broad applications of alloys also make such trials highly motivated.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Z. Z. acknowledges the BJUT startup fund for providing support for this work. X. S. acknowledges the support from the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51631002 and 51425101).
References

          I. Gibson, D. W. Rosen and B. Stucker, Additive Manufacturing Technologies, Springer, New York, US,  2014 Search PubMed .
S. A. Tofail, E. P. Koumoulos, A. Bandyopadhyay, S. Bose, L. O’Donoghue and C. Charitidis, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 22–37 CrossRef .
F. P. Melchels, J. Feijen and D. W. Grijpma, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 6121–6130 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, G. Mapili, G. Suhali, S. Chen and K. Roy, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A, 2006, 77, 396–405 CrossRef .
Y. S. Lu, L. Y. Tsai, K. C. Huang, C. G. Tsai, C. C. Yang and J. A. Yeh, Opt. Express, 2011, 19, A740–A746 CrossRef .
D. Dudley, W. M. Duncan and J. Slaughter, Proc. Soc. Photo-Opt. Instrum. Eng., 2003, 4985, 14–25 CrossRef .

Stereolithography: Materials, Processes and Applications, ed. P. J. Bártolo, Springer Science & Business Media, Berlin, DE,  2011 Search PubMed .
Z. Chen, Z. Li, J. Li, C. Liu, C. Lao, Y. Fu, C. Liu, Y. Li, P. Wang and Y. He, J. Eur. Ceram. Soc., 2019, 39, 661–687 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hofmann, ACS Macro Lett., 2014, 3, 382–386 CrossRef CAS .
J. H. Lee, R. K. Prud'Homme and I. A. Aksay, J. Mater. Res., 2001, 16, 3536–3544 CrossRef CAS .
R. Gauvin, Y. C. Chen, J. W. Lee, P. Soman, P. Zorlutuna, J. W. Nichol, H. Bae, S. Chen and A. Khademhosseini, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 3824–3834 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, N. Fang, D. M. Wu and X. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, A, 2005, 121, 113–120 CrossRef CAS .
H. P. Nagarajan, H. A. Malshe, K. R. Haapala and Y. Pan, J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., 2016, 138, 101004 CrossRef .
Y. Pan, C. Zhou and Y. Chen, J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., 2012, 134, 051011 CrossRef .
Y. Wei, W. Wang, J. M. Yeh, B. Wang, D. Yang and J. K. Murray Jr, Adv. Mater., 1994, 6, 372–374 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liska, M. Schuster, R. InfŘhr, C. Turecek, C. Fritscher, B. Seidl, V. Schmidt, L. Kuna, A. Haase, F. Varga and H. Lichtenegger, J. Coat. Technol. Res., 2007, 4, 505–510 CrossRef CAS .
S. You, P. Wang, J. Schimelman, H. H. Hwang and S. Chen, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 30, 100834 CAS .

          S. Kim, J. J. Handler, Y. T. Cho, G. Barbastathis and N. X. Fang, arXiv:1911.11817, 2019.
F. Zhou, W. Cao, B. Dong, T. Reissman, W. Zhang and C. Sun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1034–1040 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, Y. Bao, W. Cao, C. T. Stuart, J. Gu, W. Zhang and C. Sun, Sci. Rep., 2011, 1, 78 CrossRef .
Y. Jung, H. Lee, T. Park, S. Kim and S. Kwon, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 15629 CrossRef CAS .
A. Urrios, C. Parra-Cabrera, N. Bhattacharjee, A. M. Gonzalez-Suarez, L. G. Rigat-Brugarolas, U. Nallapatti, J. Samitier, C. A. DeForest, F. Posas, J. L. Garcia-Corderob and A. Folch, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 2287–2294 RSC .
J. Na, N. P. Bende, J. Bae, C. D. Santangelob and R. C. Hayward, Soft Matter, 2016, 12, 4985–4990 RSC .
A. Kataria and D. W. Rosen, Rapid Prototyp. J., 2001, 7, 253–262 CrossRef .
X. Zhao, Y. Pan, C. Zhou, Y. Chen and C. C. Wang, J. Manuf. Process., 2013, 15, 432–443 CrossRef .
X. Li and Y. Chen, J. Manuf. Process., 2017, 28, 531–540 CrossRef .
H. Yin, Y. Ding, Y. Zhai, W. Tan and X. Yin, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 4096 CrossRef .
A. Nojoomi, H. Arslan, K. Lee and K. Yum, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 3705 CrossRef .
J. Wu, Z. Zhao, X. Kuang, C. M. Hamel, D. Fang and H. J. Qi, Multifunct. Mater., 2018, 1, 015002 CrossRef .
P. Jiang, C. Yan, Z. Ji, Y. Guo, X. Zhang, X. Jia, X. Wang and F. Zhou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 42586–42593 CrossRef CAS .

          D. N. Wood, D. I. Azuma, K. Aldinger, B. Curless, T. Duchamp, D. H. Salesin and W. Stuetzle, Surface light fields for D photography, Proceedings of the 27th annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 2000, pp. 287–296.
Z. Li, Opt. Express, 2014, 22, 16863–16875 CrossRef .

          G. R. Fowles, Introduction to modern optics, Courier Corporation, North Chelmsford, US,  1989 Search PubMed .
C. N. Bowman and C. J. Kloxin, AIChE J., 2008, 54, 2775–2795 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Matheson, E. E. Auer, E. B. Bevilacqua and E. J. Hart, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1951, 73, 1700–1706 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Balta, N. Arsu, Y. Yagci, S. Jockusch and N. J. Turro, Macromolecules, 2007, 40, 4138–4141 CrossRef CAS .
M. D. Goodner and C. N. Bowman, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2002, 57, 887–900 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. O’Brien and C. N. Bowman, Macromolecules, 2006, 39, 2501–2506 CrossRef .
C. Decker and A. D. Jenkins., Macromolecules, 1985, 18, 1241–1244 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, M. Wang, R. T. Rosen and C. T. Ho, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1999, 47, 2226–2228 CrossRef CAS .
B. E. Kelly, I. Bhattacharya, H. Heidari, M. Shusteff, C. M. Spadaccini and H. K. Taylor, Science, 2019, 363, 1075–1079 CrossRef CAS .

          H. G. Newbold, US Pat., US3778614A,  1973 Search PubMed.

          J. Kastner and C. Heinzl, Advances in Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, Springer, London, UK,  2015 Search PubMed .
M. Shusteff, A. E. Browar, B. E. Kelly, J. Henriksson, T. H. Weisgraber, R. M. Panas, N. X. Fang and C. M. Spadaccini, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaao5496 CrossRef .
M. P. De Beer, H. L. Van Der Laan, M. A. Cole, R. J. Whelan, M. A. Burns and T. F. Scott, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau8723 CrossRef .
J. G. Leprince, W. M. Palin, M. A. Hadis, J. Devaux and G. Leloup, Dent. Mater., 2013, 29, 139–156 CrossRef CAS .
B. M. Monroe and G. C. Weed, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 435–448 CrossRef CAS .
N. D. Dolinski, Z. A. Page, E. B. Callaway, F. Eisenreich, R. V. Garcia, R. Chavez, D. P. Bothman, S. Hecht, F. W. Zok and C. J. Hawker, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800364 CrossRef .
C. Fu, J. Xu and C. Boyer, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 7126 RSC .
H. Ye, A. Venketeswaran, S. Das and C. Zhou, Rapid Prototyp. J., 2017, 23, 696–710 CrossRef .
R. G. Rinaldi, J. Bernal-Ostos, C. I. Hammetter, A. J. Jacobsen and F. W. Zok, J. Mater. Sci., 2012, 47, 6621–6632 CrossRef CAS .
C. Sun, N. Fang, D. M. Wu and X. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, A, 2005, 121, 113–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guvendiren, S. Yang and J. A. Burdick, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 3038–3045 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guvendiren, J. A. Burdick and S. Yang, Soft Matter, 2010, 6, 5795–5801 RSC .
J. R. Tumbleston, D. Shirvanyants, N. Ermoshkin, R. Janusziewicz, A. R. Johnson, D. Kelly, K. Chen, R. Pinschmidt, J. P. Rolland, A. Ermoshkin and E. T. Samulski, Science, 2015, 347, 1349–1352 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dendukuri, P. Panda, R. Haghgooie, J. M. Kim, T. A. Hatton and P. S. Doyle, Macromolecules, 2008, 41, 8547–8556 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dendukuri, D. C. Pregibon, J. Collins, T. A. Hatton and P. S. Doyle, Nat. Mater., 2006, 5, 365–369 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, S. Sathasivam, J. Song, C. R. Crick, C. J. Carmalt and I. P. Parkin, Science, 2015, 347, 1132–1135 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, Z. Dong, H. Du, C. Li, N. X. Fang and Y. Song, Research, 2018, 4795604 CAS .
T. S. Wong, S. H. Kang, S. K. Tang, E. J. Smythe, B. D. Hatton, A. Grinthal and J. Aizenberg, Nature, 2011, 477, 443–447 CrossRef CAS .
H. Chen, P. Zhang, L. Zhang, H. Liu, Y. Jiang, D. Zhang, Z. Han and L. Jiang, Nature, 2016, 532, 85–89 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, H. Mao, Y. Pan and Y. Chen, J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., 2019, 141, 081007 CrossRef .

          Y. Chen, H. Mao and X. Li, US Pat., US10308007B2,  2019 Search PubMed.
Y. Pan, C. Zhou and Y. Chen, J. Manuf. Sci. Eng., 2012, 134, 051011 CrossRef .
J. W. Choi, H. C. Kim and R. Wicker, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2011, 211, 318–328 CrossRef CAS .
R. B. Wicker and E. W. MacDonald, Virtual Phys. Prototyp., 2012, 7, 181–194 CrossRef .
H. Yun and H. Kim, J. Mech. Sci. Technol., 2013, 27, 2973–2978 CrossRef .
V. Chan, J. H. Jeong, P. Bajaj, M. Collens, T. Saif, H. Kong and R. Bashir, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 88–98 RSC .
C. Zhou, Y. Chen, Z. Yang and B. Khoshnevis, Rapid Prototyp. J., 2013, 19, 153–165 CrossRef .

          C. Zhou, Y. Chen, Z. Yang and B. Khoshnevis, 2011. Development of multi-material mask-image-projection-based stereolithography for the fabrication of digital materials, Annual solid freeform fabrication symposium, 2011, pp. 65–80.
Q. Wang, J. A. Jackson, Q. Ge, J. B. Hopkins, C. M. Spadaccini and N. X. Fang, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2016, 117, 175901 CrossRef .
D. Han, C. Yang, N. X. Fang and H. Lee, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 27, 606–615 CAS .
M. A. C. Stuart, W. T. Huck, J. Genzer, M. Müller, C. Ober, M. Stamm, G. B. Sukhorukov, I. Szleifer, V. V. Tsukruk, M. Urban and F. Winnik, Nat. Mater., 2010, 9, 101–113 CrossRef .
N. P. Macdonald, F. Zhu, C. J. Hall, J. Reboud, P. S. Crosier, E. E. Patton, D. Wlodkowic and J. M. Cooper, Lab Chip, 2016, 16, 291–297 RSC .
K. Kowsari, S. Akbari, D. Wang, N. X. Fang and Q. Ge, 3D Print. Addit. Manuf., 2018, 5, 185–193 CrossRef .
J. Lee, Y. Lu, S. Kashyap, A. Alarmdari, M. O. F. Emon and J. W. Choi, Addit. Manuf., 2018, 21, 76–83 CAS .
J. W. Choi, M. Yamashita, J. Sakakibara, Y. Kaji, T. Oshika and R. B. Wicker, Biomed. Microdevices, 2010, 12, 875–886 CrossRef .
H. Chen, A. Amirfazli and T. Tang, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 3310–3319 CrossRef CAS .
B. Qian and K. S. Breuer, J. Fluid Mech., 2011, 666, 554–572 CrossRef .
L. R. Holmes and J. C. Riddick, JOM, 2014, 66, 270–274 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, X. Li, M. Chu, H. Sun, J. Jin, K. Yu, Q. Wang, Q. Zhou and Y. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaau9490 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, Z. Chen, X. Song, Z. Zhang, J. Zhang, K. K. Shung, Q. Zhou and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605750 CrossRef .
C. Park, J. Wilkinson, S. Banda, Z. Ounaies, K. E. Wise, G. Sauti, P. T. Lillehei and J. S. Harrison, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2006, 44, 1751–1762 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Oaki and H. Imai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6571–6575 CrossRef CAS .
H. Bai, Y. Chen, B. Delattre, A. P. Tomsia and R. O. Ritchie, Sci. Adv., 2015, 1, e1500849 CrossRef .
M. A. Meyers, J. McKittrick and P. Y. Chen, Science, 2013, 339, 773–779 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Li, T. Yu, T. Y. Yang, L. X. Zheng and K. Liao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 3426–3431 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kakisawa, T. Sumitomo, R. Inoue and Y. Kagawa, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2010, 70, 161–166 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kim and Y. M. Shkel, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 1164–1174 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Weaver, G. W. Milliron, A. Miserez, K. Evans-Lutterodt, S. Herrera, I. Gallana, W. J. Mershon, B. Swanson, P. Zavattieri, E. DiMasi and D. Kisailus, Science, 2012, 336, 1275–1280 CrossRef CAS .
H. D. Espinosa, A. L. Juster, F. J. Latourte, O. Y. Loh, D. Gregoire and P. D. Zavattieri, Nat. Commun., 2011, 2, 173 CrossRef .
S. N. Patek, W. L. Korff and R. L. Caldwell, Nature, 2004, 428, 819–820 CrossRef CAS .
H. O. Fabritius, C. Sachs, P. R. Triguero and D. Raabe, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 391–400 CrossRef CAS .
A. Al-Sawalmih, C. Li, S. Siegel, H. Fabritius, S. Yi, D. Raabe, P. Fratzl and O. Paris, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 3307–3314 CrossRef CAS .
L. S. Schadler, S. A. Giannaris and P. M. Ajayan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1998, 73, 3842–3844 CrossRef CAS .
T. Takahashi, T. Murayama, A. Higuchi, H. Awano and K. Yonetake, Carbon, 2006, 44, 1180–1188 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. Martin, B. E. Fiore and R. M. Erb, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 1–7 Search PubMed .
L. K. Grunenfelder, N. Suksangpanya, C. Salinas, G. Milliron, N. Yaraghi, S. Herrera, K. Evans-Lutterodt, S. R. Nutt, P. Zavattieri and D. Kisailus, Acta Biomater., 2014, 10, 3997–4008 CrossRef CAS .

          A. R. Studart, R. Libanori and R. M. Erb, Bio-and Bioinspired Nanomaterials, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, US,  2015 Search PubMed .
B. Lu, P. Xiao, M. Sun and J. Nie, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2007, 104, 1126–1130 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Cook, Polymer, 1992, 33, 2152–2161 CrossRef CAS .
B. Steyrer, B. Busetti, G. Harakály, R. Liska and J. Stampfl, Addit. Manuf., 2018, 21, 209–214 CAS .
X. Li, B. Xie, J. Jin, Y. Chai and Y. Chen, Procedia Manuf., 2018, 26, 1023–1033 CrossRef .
K. Kowsari, B. Zhang, S. Panjwani, Z. Chen, H. Hingorani, S. Akbari, N. X. Fang and Q. Ge, Addit. Manuf., 2018, 24, 627–638 CAS .

          B. D. Guenther, Modern optics, OUP, Oxford, UK,  2015 Search PubMed .

          R. B. Bird, W. E. Stewart and E. N. Lightfoot, Transport Phenomena, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, US,  2007 Search PubMed .
W. Reed, L. Guterman, P. Tundo and J. H. Fendler, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1984, 106, 1897–1907 CrossRef CAS .
M. Terazima, Y. Nogami and T. Tominaga, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2000, 332, 503–507 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Donkers and D. G. Leaist, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 304–308 CrossRef CAS .
L. D. Zarzar, B. S. Swartzentruber, J. C. Harper, D. R. Dunphy, C. J. Brinker, J. Aizenberg and B. Kaehr, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 4007–4010 CrossRef CAS .
S. Miao, N. Castro, M. Nowicki, L. Xia, H. Cui, X. Zhou, W. Zhu, S. J. Lee, K. Sarkar, G. Vozzi and Y. Tabata, Mater. Today, 2017, 20, 577–591 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Quan, A. Wu, M. Keefe, X. Qin, J. Yu, J. Suhr, J. H. Byun, B. S. Kim and T. W. Chou, Mater. Today, 2015, 18, 503–512 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Boydston, B. Cao, A. Nelson, R. J. Ono, A. Saha, J. J. Schwartz and C. J. Thrasher, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 20621–20645 RSC .
N. A. Chartrain, C. B. Williams and A. R. Whittington, Acta Biomater., 2018, 74, 90–111 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, C. Wang, H. Yan and Y. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905911 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cangialosi, C. Yoon, J. Liu, Q. Huang, J. Guo, T. D. Nguyen, D. H. Gracias and R. Schulman, Science, 2017, 357, 1126–1130 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, P. Xiao, X. Le, W. Lu, P. Théato, C. Ma, B. Du, J. Zhang, Y. Huang and T. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 1320–1327 RSC .
F. Ilmain, T. Tanaka and E. Kokufuta, Nature, 1991, 349, 400–401 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. Furyk, D. E. Bergbreiter and P. S. Cremer, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 14505–14510 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, X. Kuang, C. Yuan, H. J. Qi and D. Fang, ACS Appl. Mater. Intefaces, 2018, 10, 19932–19939 CrossRef CAS .
W. Hong, X. Zhao, J. Zhou and Z. Suo, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2008, 56, 1779–1793 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kuang, J. Wu, K. Chen, Z. Zhao, Z. Ding, F. Hu, D. Fang and H. J. Qi, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaav5790 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, Z. Zhao, C. M. Hamel, X. Mu, X. Kuang, Z. Guo and H. J. Qi, J. Mech. Phys. Solids, 2018, 112, 25–49 CrossRef CAS .
A. Vitale, M. G. Hennessy, O. K. Matar and J. T. Cabral, Macromolecules, 2015, 48, 198–205 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lantean, I. Roppolo, M. Sangermano, C. F. Pirri and A. Chiappone, Inventions, 2018, 3, 29 CrossRef .
M. Peerzada, S. Abbasi, K. T. Lau and N. Hameed, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2020, 59, 6375–6390 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yang and Z. G. Yang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2013, 129, 187–192 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sano, R. Matsuzaki, M. Ueda, A. Todoroki and Y. Hirano, Addit. Manuf., 2018, 24, 521–527 CAS .
D. Karalekas and K. Antoniou, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2004, 153, 526–530 CrossRef .
K. Chockalingam, N. Jawahar, U. Chandrasekar and K. N. Ramanathan, J. Mater. Process. Technol., 2008, 208, 348–365 CrossRef .
D. S. Branciforti, S. Lazzaroni, C. Milanese, M. Castiglioni, F. Auricchio, D. Pasini and D. Dondi, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 25, 317–324 CAS .
S. M. Oskui, G. Diamante, C. Liao, W. Shi, J. Gan, D. Schlenk and W. H. Grover, Environ. Sci. Technol. Lett., 2016, 3, 1–6 CrossRef CAS .
W. H. Lawrence, G. E. Bass, W. P. Purcell and J. Autian, J. Dent. Res., 1972, 51, 526–535 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Lowe, C. E. Hoyle and C. N. Bowman, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 4745–4750 RSC .
A. B. Lowe, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 17–36 RSC .
C. E. Hoyle, T. Y. Lee and T. Roper, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2004, 42, 5301–5338 CrossRef CAS .
D. G. Sycks, T. Wu, H. S. Park and K. Gall, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 135, 46259 CrossRef .
C. E. Hoyle and C. N. Bowman, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1540–1573 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Q. Wu, G. Wei, R. Liu and Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2018, 6, 11561–11568 RSC .
S. Bertlein, G. Brown, K. S. Lim, T. Jungst, T. Boeck, T. Blunk, J. Tessmar, G. J. Hooper, T. B. Woodfield and J. Groll, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703404 CrossRef .
X. Li, D. Kundaliya, Z. J. Tan, M. Anc and N. X. Fang, Opt. Express, 2019, 27, 30864–30874 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Smith, S. T. Malak, J. Jung, Y. J. Yoon, C. H. Lin, S. Kim, K. M. Lee, R. Ma, T. J. White, T. J. Bunning and Z. Lin, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 17435–17448 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, F. Schmidt, D. Hanaor, P. H. Kamm, S. Li and A. Gurlo, Addit. Manuf., 2019, 27, 80–90 CAS .
Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, X. Ouyang, D. Y. Lei, A. P. Zhang and H. Y. Tam, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 9913–9921 CrossRef CAS .
O. Carp, C. L. Huisman and A. Reller, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2004, 32, 33–177 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gallinet and O. J. Martin, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8999–9008 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gallinet and O. J. Martin, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 83, 235427 CrossRef .
R. Jin, Y. Cao, C. A. Mirkin, K. L. Kelly, G. C. Schatz and J. G. Zheng, Science, 2001, 294, 1901–1903 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, M. Sun, Y. Bian and X. He, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807615 CrossRef .
M. Ganeshkumar, T. P. Sastry, M. S. Kumar, M. G. Dinesh, S. Kannappan and L. Suguna, Mater. Res. Bull., 2012, 47, 2113–2119 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, K. Cui, Q. Xuan, C. Zhu, N. Zhao and J. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 21668–21674 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zaier, L. Vidal, S. Hajjar-Garreau and L. Balan, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–10 CrossRef CAS .
B. Deore, K. L. Sampson, T. Lacelle, N. Kredentser, J. Lefebvre, L. S. Young, J. Hyland, R. E. Amaya, T. Jamshid and R. L. Patrick, ChemRxiv., 2020 DOI:10.26434/chemrxiv.12315488.v1 .
S. C. Joshi and A. A. Sheikh, Virtual Phys. Prototyp., 2015, 10, 175–185 CrossRef .
B. C. K. Tee, A. Chortos, A. Berndt, A. K. Nguyen, A. Tom, A. McGuire, Z. C. Lin, K. Tien, W. G. Bae, H. Wang and P. Mei, Science, 2015, 350, 313–316 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Bhavar, P. Kattire, V. Patil, S. Khot, K. Gujar and R. Singh, 2014, September. A review on powder bed fusion technology of metal additive manufacturing, 4th International conference and exhibition on Additive Manufacturing Technologies-AM-2014, 2014, pp. 1–2.
X. Liu, X. Zhou, Y. Li and Z. Zheng, Chem. – Asian J., 2012, 7, 862–870 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, C. Yan and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5508–5516 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Zhang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1902987 CrossRef .
K. Li, H. Zhen, L. Niu, X. Fang, Y. Zhang, R. Guo, Y. Yu, F. Yan, H. Li and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 7271–7278 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, X. Xiao, Y. Zhang, K. Li, C. Yan, X. Wei, L. Chen, H. Zhen, H. Zhou, S. Zhang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4926–4934 CrossRef CAS .
R. Guo, Y. Yu, Z. Xie, X. Liu, X. Zhou, Y. Gao, Z. Liu, F. Zhou, Y. Yang and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3343–3350 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Lu, Z. Ma, C. Xie and Z. Zheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 4611–4641 RSC .
K. Liang, S. Carmone, D. Brambilla and J. C. Leroux, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaat2544 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Q. Guo, X. Cai, S. Zhou, B. Kobe and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 2583–2587 CrossRef CAS .
R. Hensleigh, H. Cui, Z. Xu, J. Massman, D. Yao, J. Berrigan and X. Zheng, Nat. Electron., 2020, 3, 216–224 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, J. Bai, Y. Yao and C. Wang, Mater. Today, 2020, 37, 10–17 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhao, N. Chamele, M. Kozicki, Y. Yao and C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2019, 7, 6099–6104 RSC .
G. Fu, K. Wu, X. Jiang, L. Tao, Y. Chen, J. Lin, Y. Zhou, S. Wei, Y. Tang, T. Lu and X. Xia, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 3793–3802 RSC .
J. D. S. Newman and G. J. Blanchard, J. Nanopart. Res., 2007, 9, 861–868 CrossRef CAS .

          A. L. Givan, Flow cytometry protocols, Humana Press, Totowa, US,  2011 Search PubMed .
W. Barthlott, T. Schimmel, S. Wiersch, K. Koch, M. Brede, M. Barczewski, S. Walheim, A. Weis, A. Kaltenmaier, A. Leder and H. F. Bohn, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2325–2328 CrossRef CAS .
A. Solga, Z. Cerman, B. F. Striffler, M. Spaeth and W. Barthlott, Bioinspiration Biomimetics, 2007, 2, S126 CrossRef .
Y. Yang, X. Li, X. Zheng, Z. Chen, Q. Zhou and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704912 CrossRef .
E. J. Edwards and M. J. Donoghue, Am. Nat., 2006, 167, 777–793 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Yang, L. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Chu, H. Sun, W. Shan and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 7, 1901752 CrossRef .
Q. Mu, L. Wang, C. K. Dunn, X. Kuang, F. Duan, Z. Zhang, H. J. Qi and T. Wang, Addit. Manuf., 2017, 18, 74–83 CAS .
X. Li, Y. Yang, B. Xie, M. Chu, H. Sun, S. Hao, Y. Chen and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800476 CrossRef .
J. J. Wu, L. M. Huang, Q. Zhao and T. Xie, Chin. J. Polym. Sci., 2018, 36, 563–575 CrossRef CAS .
X. Kuang, D. J. Roach, J. Wu, C. M. Hamel, Z. Ding, T. Wang, M. L. Dunn and H. J. Qi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1805290 CrossRef .
L. Huang, R. Jiang, J. Wu, J. Song, H. Bai, B. Li, Q. Zhao and T. Xie, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605390 CrossRef .
T. H. Kwok, C. C. Wang, D. Deng, Y. Zhang and Y. Chen, J. Mech. Des., 2015, 137, 111413 CrossRef .
X. Ning, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, X. Yu, D. Choi, N. Zheng, D. S. Kim, Y. Huang, Y. Zhang and J. A. Rogers, Adv.
Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800284 CrossRef .
D. Roy, J. N. Cambre and B. S. Sumerlin, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2010, 35, 278–301 CrossRef CAS .
H. Meng and G. Li, Polymer, 2013, 54, 2199–2221 CrossRef CAS .
P. T. Mather, X. Luo and I. A. Rousseau, Annu. Rev. Mater. Res., 2009, 39, 445–471 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zarek, M. Layani, I. Cooperstein, E. Sachyani, D. Cohn and S. Magdassi, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4449–4454 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Ge, A. H. Sakhaei, H. Lee, C. K. Dunn, N. X. Fang and M. L. Dunn, Sci. Rep., 2016, 6, 31110 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Zhi Zhao
	Zhi Zhao received his PhD degree in chemistry from Texas A&M University, USA, in 2013. Then he joined Arizona State University, USA, as a Postdoctoral Research Associate. In 2019, he was appointed as a professor at the Faculty of Materials and Manufacturing, Beijing University of Technology, China. His current research interests include additive manufacturing techniques, nanomaterial synthesis, and plasmonics.

Xiaoxiao Tian
	Xiaoxiao Tian received her BE degree from North China University of Science and Technology in 2018. She is currently a graduate student at the Faculty of Materials and Manufacturing, Beijing University of Technology, China. Her research direction is optical 3D printing.

Xiaoyan Song
	Xiaoyan Song received her PhD degree in materials science and engineering from the University of Science and Technology Beijing, China, in 1998. She is currently the deputy director of the Key Lab of Advanced Functional Materials, MOE of China. She is a Distinguished Professor and winner of China National Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars. She has published over 270 papers in peer reviewed journals and has over 60 patents authorized. Since 2013 she has been appointed as the Associate Editor of IJRMHM. Her research interests include synthesis and modeling of metallic nanomaterials, additive manufacturing, and rare-earth database.

 	Fig. 1  Scheme of DLP based 3D printers. (a) A typical process to generate patterned light fields using a DMD. (b) The working mechanism of individual elements on a DMD chip. (c) A representative setup of DLP based printers.	 

DAE530	1,2-Bis(2-methyl-1-benzothiophen-3-yl)perfluorocyclopentene	MVP-SL	Mask video projection-based stereolithography
AM	Additive manufacturing	
T
m
	Melting temperature
aGNs	Aligned graphene nanoplatelets	MNPs	Metal nanoparticles
GelAGE	Allylated gelatin	MWCNTs	Multiwalled carbon nanotubes

o-Cl-HABI	Bis[2-(o-Chlorophenyl)-4,5-diphenylimidazole]	NA	Numerical aperture
CQ	Camphorquinone	BAPO	Phenylbis(2,4,6-trimethylbenzoyl) phosphine oxide
CNTs	Carbon nanotubes	PI	Photoinitiator
CAL	Computed axial lithography	P(AAc-co-AAm)	Poly(acrylic acid-co-acrylamide)
CT	Computed tomography	PEGDA	Poly(ethylene diacrylate)
CLIP	Continuous liquid interface production	PAMD	Polymer assisted metal deposition
DMD	Digital micromirror device	PPD	Polymer-assisted photochemical deposition
DMSO	Dimethyl sulfoxide	PNIPAM	Poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)
DTT	Dithiothreitol	PμSL	Projection micro-stereolithography
DLP	Digital light processing	PSL	Projection stereolithography
ELD	Electroless deposition	QDs	Quantum dots
EDAB	Ethyl 4-(dimethylamino)benzoate	SMPs	Shape memory polymers
FPP	Flashing photopolymerization	AgNPs	Silver nanoparticles
GNs	Graphene nanoplatelets	SMaLL	Solution mask liquid lithography
g-DLP	Grayscale digital light processing	SLM	Spatial light modulator
ISAP	Immersed surface accumulation process	MWCNT-S	Surface modified multiwalled carbon nanotubes
IR	Infrared	THF	Tetrahydrofuran
LBMSL	Liquid bridge microstereolithography	UV	Ultraviolet
LCST	Lower critical solution temperature	UCST	Upper critical solution temperature
MIP-SL	Mask image projection stereolithography	
	


 	Fig. 2  Improvements in the conventional illumination method. (a) Top: Patterns printed with continuous exposure at different relative energies. Bottom: Patterns printed with FPP exposure at different relative energies. The yellow and red circles indicate the outer diameter and the unresolved diameter, respectively. Scale bars = 500 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. (b) Left: Schematic view of the integral lithographic system. Right: Optical and SEM image of cubic-truss micro-lattices fabricated by the left setup. Reproduced with permission from ref. 18. (c) The layout of the ISAP system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 26. Copyright 2008, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 3  Grayscale digital light processing. (a) A scheme showing the printing mechanism. (b) Curing depth and conversion rate of monomers as a function of light dosage. (c) Optical image of a sample prepared by g-DLP. Scale bar: 200 μm. (d) Optical contrast and topological analysis of the black line in (c). Panels (a)–(d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 27. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (e) Programmable morphological change of various hydrogel samples printed by g-DLP. Left: Optical images of the structural change. Right: Corresponding mechanical simulations. Scale bars: 2 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (f) Demonstration of reversible hydrogel patterning. Scale bar: 10 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright (2019) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Volumetric printing enabled by light reconstruction. (a) Grayscale light field generated by light interference. (b) The working principle of CLA. Left: Scheme of the light source and the instrumental setup. Right: A series of products fabricated by CAL. Scale bars: 5 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2019, AAAS. (c) A schematic of the holographic volumetric 3D fabrication system and example structures. Scale bars: 2 mm (white) and 5 mm (black). Reproduced with permission from ref. 44. ©The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.	 

 	Fig. 5  Spatially specific printing via multi-wavelength light sources. (a) Optical setup for two-color stereolithography by concurrent photopolymerization and photoinhibition. (b) UV-visible spectra of CQ (solid blue line) and o-Cl-HABI (dashed violet line) in tetrahydrofuran (THF). (c) Solid block M (left) and tug boat (right) printed using the system in (a). (d) Variable thickness part produced by a single intensity-patterned exposure. Panels (a)–(d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 45. ©The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. (e) Ring-opening transformation of a photochromic mask. (f) Time lapse photographs of the SMaLL printing process and the product (1 cm scale bars). (g) Demonstration of soft joints with SMaLL multimaterial printing. Panels (e)–(g) are reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH.	 

Conventional DLP3,4	Planar	Continuous	Commercially available, ready to use	Limited printing contrast, speed and scalability
FPP17	Planar	Flash	Reduces light scattering; improves contrast	High power source required
Integral lithography system18	Planar	Continuous	Highly scalable while maintaining decent resolution	Complex optics
ISAP26	Spot	Continuous	Able to add features on pre-existing irregular substrates	Limited curing size
g-DLP27	Planar	Continuous	Able to print graded materials	Challenging to create a gradient perpendicular to the illumination
CAL41	3D	Continuous	Volumetric printing; fast and efficient	Requires extensive programming; the precursor needs to be viscous
Holographic printing44	3D	Continuous	Volumetric printing; fast and efficient	Needs to fabricate the SLM first; limited resolution
Volumetric polymerization inhibition patterning45	Planar	Continuous	Single-exposure surface topographical patterning, tunable speed and resolution	Requires an inhibitor
SMaLL48	Planar or 3D	Continuous	Chemical selective printing; uniform, continuous curing	Formulation is more complex

 		 

 	Fig. 6  Platforms for faster printing speed and smoother surface. (a) Schematic of the CLIP printer. (b) Greatly reduced model slicing artifacts realized by CLIP. (c) A variety of parts fabricated using CLIP. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 55. Copyright 2015, AAAS. (d) Peristome inspired non-sticking surface. Reproduced with permission from ref. 59. Copyright CC BY 4.0. (e) An illustration of resin refreshment by rotating the vat. Reproduced with permission from ref. 62. Copyright©2019 by ASME.	 

 	Fig. 7  Platforms for automated multi-material printing. (a) An illustration of a wheel based multi-material printing system. Top: Top-down method. Bottom: Bottom-up method. Reproduced with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2013, Emerald Group Publishing Limited. (b) A photo of a wheel based multi-material printing system. Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (c) A simplified fabrication process flow. Reproduced from ref. 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of the projection micro-stereolithography system using dynamic fluidic control. Reproduced with permission from ref. 72. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  Platforms to reduce precursor consumption. (a) Illustrations of the positions of the glass plate used in each step of multimaterial fabrication. (b) Two-material structures fabricated using the method in (a). Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 75. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the LBMSL process. Reproduced with permission from ref. 76. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  Platforms enabling the control of the environment. (a) Illustration of an electrically assisted 3D printing process. (b) Working mechanism to align GNs in a photopolymer matrix by an electric field. (c) 3D-printed nacre with aligned GNs and SEM images showing surface and cross-section morphology. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 81. ©The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/. (d) Schematic diagram and SEM images showing the helical alignment of MWCNT-S to form a layered structure. Reproduced with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (e) The setup and working mechanism of magnetic field assisted 3D printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 97. Copyright CC BY 4.0. (f) Thermal image of a heated vat during printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 102. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (g) Temperature controlled DLP printer using an IR lamp as the heating source. Reproduced with permission from ref. 103. Copyright 2018, Elsevier.	 

 		 

 		 

 	Fig. 10  Acrylate based photopolymers. (a) A schematic showing the response mechanism of a D-gel. (b) Normalized volumetric change of the D-gel squares as a function of time after introducing external DNA sequences. (c) Control of the movement of hydrogel palms with combined DNA triggers. The multi-material printing was achieved by manually switching precursors. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (d) Temperature–transmittance curves of the PNIPAM hydrogel layer and P(AAc-co-AAm) hydrogel layer. (e) Different bending mode of a bilayer hydrogel strip upon heating and cooling. The multi-material printing was achieved by manually switching precursors. Panels (d) and (e) are reproduced from ref. 117 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Exemplary hydrophilic/hydrophobic composite structures. The multi-material printing was achieved by manually switching precursors. Scale bars: 10 mm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 120. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (g) Schematic diagram of g-DLP and some products printed by g-DLP. Scale bars: 10 mm (top) and 5 mm (bottom). Reproduced with permission from ref. 122. ©The Authors, some rights reserved; exclusive licensee American Association for the Advancement of Science. Distributed under a Creative Commons Attribution NonCommercial License 4.0 (CC BY-NC) http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/.	 

 	Fig. 11  Patterning materials via thiol–ene click reactions. (a) Synthesis of GelAGE. (b) Scheme of the controlled dimerization with thiol–ene click chemistry for GelAGE. Panels (a) and (b) are reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2017 Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic showing the printing of the QD composite film. (d) Single-color and multi-color pixels printed by the method in (c). Panels (c) and (d) are reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2019 Optical Society of America. (e) Additive manufacturing of ceramics from preceramic polymers. Reproduced with permission from ref. 143. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  Photoreduction of metal nanoparticles. (a) Schematics of the light-controlled growth of silver nanoparticles. (b) Color palette illustrates all colors generated under various fabrication conditions. (c) Printing process of a campus building. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 144. Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. (d) Printing and chemical annealing steps to generate coalesced AgNP patterns. Reproduced with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (e) Schematic representation of the photo-induced synthesis and organisation of silver@polymer nanoassemblies. (f) A few objects fabricated by the method in (e). Panels (e) and (f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 152. Copyright CC BY 4.0. (g) Tuning of phase-separation by controlling crosslinking density to yield different morphologies in 3D objects. Reproduced with permission from ref. 153. Copyright CC BY 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 13  Polymer-assisted metal synthesis. (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of complex metallic architectures by initiator-integrated 3D printing. Reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society. (b) Schematic for programmed electrostatic charge deposition of materials in 3D. (c) Complex structures fabricated using the method in (b). Panels (b) and (c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (d) Working mechanism of PPD. (e) Patterning various metals on different substrates by PPD. (f) The fabrication of electronic circuits, complex patterns and 3D patterns by PPD. Panels (d)–(f) are reproduced with permission from ref. 167. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 14  Applications of advanced DLP based 3D printing. (a) SEM images of 3D-printed eggbeater arrays. (b) SEM image of the natural eggbeater hair structure. (c) Oil/water separation by the 3D-printed eggbeater structures. Panels (a)–(c) are reproduced with permission from ref. 174. Copyright 2018 Wiley-VCH. (d) The water collection capability (top) and the SEM image of 3D-printed cactus-mimetic spine arrays. Reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2020 Wiley-VCH. (e) Resistance change vs. compression displacement for a 3D printed helmet containing aligned GNs (aGNs). Reproduced with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2019, AAAS. (f) Scheme of a 3D-printed bidirectional liquid sensor (left) and two sensing modes (right). Reproduced with permission from ref. 178. Copyright 2019 Wiley-VCH. (g) An Eiffel Tower model (left) and an electronic switch (right) printed with SMPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2016 Wiley-VCH. (h) A printed gripper made out of SMPs. Reproduced with permission from ref. 188. Copyright CC BY 4.0.	 

 	Fig. 15  A flow chart on how to choose a suitable printing approach.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
