Regulation of intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials for energy conversion and environmental detection applications   - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA05539E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA05539E
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 17326-17359Regulation of intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials for energy conversion and environmental detection applications†

        
          
            Li 
            Chen
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zhonggang 
            Liu
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Zheng 
            Guo
          
          
        
      *ab and 

        
          
            Xing-Jiu 
            Huang
          
          
        
      *abcd
aInstitutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, 230601, PR China. E-mail: zhguo@ahu.edu.cn
bInformation Materials and Intelligent Sensing Laboratory of Anhui Province, Institutes of Physical Science and Information Technology, Anhui University, Hefei, Anhui 230601, PR China
cInstitute of Intelligent Machines, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Hefei, 230031, PR China. E-mail: xingjiuhuang@iim.ac.cn
dDepartment of Chemistry, University of Science and Technology of China, Hefei, 230026, PR China
Received 
      2nd June 2020
    , Accepted 4th August 2020First published on 4th August 2020AbstractIn response to the global energy crisis and damage to humans by environmental issues, metal oxide nanomaterials (nonprecious) represent an important class of materials for energy conversion and environmental detection on account of their natural abundance, easy synthesis, low cost, and excellent stability. A majority of pristine metal oxide nanomaterials have certain shortcomings in catalysis and sensing, such as poor conductivity and wide bandgap. Fortunately, the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials is a very promising approach for improving their catalytic and sensing properties for energy conversion and environmental detection. In this review, we will mainly discuss the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties, namely, shape and size, defects, crystal facets, and ion cycles of metal oxide nanomaterials, with a majority of applications involving photocatalytic water splitting and CO2 reduction, electrocatalytic water splitting, heavy metal ion (HMI) detection, and metal oxide gas sensors. Density functional theory (DFT) calculations and X-ray absorption fine-structure (XAFS) spectroscopy analysis have been used to evaluate the effects of regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials, as well as to further identify the relationship between the intrinsic physicochemical properties and their enhanced catalytic and sensing properties with regard to energy conversion and environmental detection. Finally, some unresolved problems associated with future perspectives in this field are discussed, inspiring further development of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials.Li ChenLi Chen is a Lecturer at the Institute of Physical Science and Information Technology at Anhui University. He received his bachelor's in Chemistry from Hubei Normal University in 2013 and his PhD in 2018 under the supervision of Prof. En-Bo Wang from Northeast Normal University. His research interest is related to the synthesis of nanomaterials and their applications in ambient photochemical/electrochemical sensors. He has published nearly 20 papers in peer-reviewed journals.Zhonggang LiuZhonggang Liu received his PhD in Electroanalytical Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2015. After working in Lakehead University and University of Guelph, Canada, as a Postdoctoral Researcher cooperated with Dr Aicheng Chen, he joined Anhui University in 2019 as an Associate Professor. His research interests focus on metal and metal oxide nanomaterials, electrochemical sensors or biosensors, and (ultra)micro-electrochemistry.Zheng GuoZheng Guo received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China and he joined the Institute of Intelligent Machines, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2008. In 2011, as an Assistant Research Professor, he began his research with Professor Yang-Kyu Choi at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology. Now, he is a Professor at Anhui University. His main research interests focus on the fabrication of functional nanodevices, gas sensors, and photoelectrochemical sensors based on nanostructured materials. He has authored and coauthored more than 80 refereed journal publications.Xing-Jiu HuangXing-Jiu Huang completed his PhD at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2004 and worked with Prof. Yang-Kyu Choi in KAIST, South Korea, as a Postdoctoral Researcher for three years. He was a Postdoctoral Research Assistant in the group of Prof. Richard G. Compton at Oxford University during 2008–2010. In 2010, he joined the Institute of Intelligent Machines, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, and has been working as a Professor since then. His team's research interests focus on new methods and principles based on nanomaterials for the electroanalysis of persistent toxic substances, as well as photoelectrochemical sensors.
1 Introduction
With growing population as well as economy, the depletion of fossil fuels and environmental pollution have become two of the most critical issues for the foreseeable future.1–4 As a nonrenewable resource, fossil fuels have brought forward a series of issues to our environment as they are being consumed at higher rates, resulting in intensive research involving innovative technologies for the conversion and storage of sustainable and clean energy, such as solar and wind energy.5,6 Renewable energy is plentiful but tends to be intermittent and unpredictable. With the increasing dependence on renewable energy, there will be growing demand to store this energy for times when the sun is not shining and the wind is not blowing.7 Photocatalytic applications are the potential means of renewable energy production, which has long been studied as a prospective pathway to clean, large-scale fuel production. Generally speaking, photocatalytic applications involving energy conversion mainly comprise photocatalytic water splitting and photocatalytic conversion of CO2 to hydrocarbons. Although various photocatalytic materials have been studied to date, metal oxide nanomaterials with well-defined sizes, shapes, structures, and compositions have been extensively developed as photocatalysts in different reactions, mainly water splitting, CO2 reduction, etc.8 Over the years, electrocatalytic applications have become another essential approach for the generation of hydrogen and oxygen from water splitting and CO2 reduction, which can also enable the efficient, eco-friendly, and versatile use of energy.9–11 Principally, the development of electrocatalysts that include only inexpensive, earth-abundant elements for energy conversion applications is critical, and nonprecious metal oxide nanomaterials defined as earth-abundant-element electrocatalysts are the potential and popular choice to undertake high-efficiency electrocatalytic reactions.7
Apart from energy conversion, environmental detection is also a concern; in particular, water and air pollution are closely related to our lives. The detection of water and harmful gases is decisive in the prevention of bodily harm, as they pose serious threats to the ecological system and human health.12 In recent years, pollution by heavy metal ions (HMIs) in water has become increasingly serious (examples of such pollutants are PbII, HgII, AsIII, etc.13–15) and the subsequent effective detection of these HMIs has become increasingly urgent and crucial. In a variety of different methods for detecting HMIs, electrochemical detection can be easily implemented, particularly the squarewave anodic stripping voltammetry (SWASV) method, which has been popularly used because of its short analysis time, portability, low cost, etc.16–19 However, a carrier is required to increase the sensitivity of electrochemical detection in this method; metal oxide nanomaterials are excellent candidates owing to their good adsorption properties for HMIs. In the meantime, pristine metal oxides have their own limitations, such as low conductivity and poor reactivity, which hinder any substantial improvements in the electrochemical properties. Except for HMI pollution in water environments, people are often exposed to outdoor air pollution, such as transportation and industrial activities, which can lead to lung cancer, asthma, allergies, heart disease, stroke, and various respiratory problems.1 Therefore, there is a growing demand for gas sensors that can detect changes and emissions of gases in the environment. Among all types of gas sensors, chemical resistive sensors usually comprise semiconductor metal oxides as the sensing materials, and they have been reported to be one of the most promising categories for pollutant gas detection.20 In 1957, Bielański et al. fabricated the first metal oxide semiconductor gas sensor and explained the relationship between the catalytic activity and conductivity of the semiconductor.21 With advances in nanotechnology, metal oxide nanomaterials have been increasingly used for gas sensing due to their size-dependent properties.22 Nonetheless, a majority of pristine metal oxide gas sensors still face some challenges in low-concentration detection, superior selectivity, rapid response, and high reliability.23 It remains a considerable challenge to improve the performance of metal oxide gas sensors by regulating the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials.
Based on the above discussion, to alleviate the global energy crisis and the damage to us by environmental issues, metal oxides represent an important class of materials for energy conversion and environmental detection because of their natural abundance, easy synthesis, low cost, and excellent stability.24–26 Nowadays, a variety of metal oxides, such as TiO2, SnO2, ZnO, CeO2, CuO, Fe2O3, Bi2WO6, etc., have been comprehensively studied for different fields.27,28 In particular, metal oxide nanomaterials with special mechanical, electrical, and optical properties have aroused widespread interest from researchers. To further improve the performance of metal oxide nanomaterials for photochemical and electrochemical energy conversions as well as environmental detection, increasing attention has been focused on regulating the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials. For instance, the defect engineering of metal oxide nanomaterials used in photoelectrochemical biosensing,29 photocatalysis,30 electrocatalysis,31 and other applications32 have considerably improved the performance of metal oxide nanomaterials. Defects, such as oxygen vacancies (OVs), are the most reactive sites on the surfaces of metal oxide nanomaterials. Therefore, to understand the reactivity of metal oxides, the properties of surface OVs, as well as their number, distribution, and diffusion on the surface, should be comprehensively understood and measured.33 Considering the example of CeO2, the exposed Ce3+ ions on CeO2 are a potentially potent surface site for catalysis during photocatalysis because the adsorbed gases or catalytic reaction intermediates can simultaneously interact with several Ce3+ ions.33 The OVs in TiO2 can accelerate the photoinduced redox reaction with a similar mechanism.34,35 Therefore, enormous efforts have been made toward controlling and manipulating their physicochemical properties for further increasing their applicability in energy conversion and environmental detection, such as shape and size regulation, defect regulation, crystal facet regulation, ion cycle regulation, etc. Through the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties, chemical and physical reactivities of the metal oxide nanomaterials can be stimulated in diverse reactions. It is more crucial that the electronic band structure, surface-to-volume ratio, and electrical conductivity of the metal oxide nanomaterials can dramatically change with the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties, which is beneficial for applications in energy conversion and environment detection.20,24–28
This review mainly investigates the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials for energy conversion and environmental detection; an intuitive description is provided in Fig. 1. Our purpose is not to provide an exhaustive review of all the available metal oxide nanomaterials, but rather to identify the relationship between the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials and their enhanced performance in energy conversion and environmental detection, as well as to point out unresolved issues. Our discussion concentrates on shape and size regulation, defect regulation, crystal facet regulation, ion cycle regulation of metal oxide nanomaterials, with a majority of applications focusing on HMI detection, gas sensors, photocatalytic water splitting, CO2 reduction, and electrocatalytic water splitting (Fig. 1). We emphasize the effect of the intrinsic physicochemical properties on diverse reactions for metal oxide nanomaterials, particularly on their catalytic and sensing properties. Crucially, density functional theory (DFT) calculations and X-ray absorption fine-structure (XAFS) spectroscopy analyses have been used to evaluate the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties on their catalysis and sensing abilities. Finally, we point out the unresolved issues regarding the applications of the intrinsic physicochemical properties.
 Fig. 1  Regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of various metal oxides for energy conversion and environmental detection. 
2 Intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials in energy conversion
Metal oxides are extensively used in the fields of energy conversion because of their natural abundance, easy synthesis, low cost, and good photochemical stability. In particular, their excellent catalytic properties in energy conversion are crucial to explore and understand their intrinsic physicochemical properties. Compared with bulk materials, metal oxide nanomaterials have fascinating intrinsic physicochemical properties intricately related to two crucial nanoscale geometrical parameters: shape and size.36–39 The size of metal oxide nanomaterials has a huge impact on their physicochemical properties, that is, bandgap energy (Eg) increases as the size of the nanomaterial decreases, which facilitates the regulation of optical absorption and emission spectra for different applications. Moreover, smaller nanomaterials usually possess a much higher surface-to-volume ratio, and the electronic state and coordination environment of their surface atoms can suffer from dramatic changes with a decrease in size to a certain range.39 The subsequent theoretical and experimental studies illustrate that the size of the nanomaterials can also considerably affect the transport process of electrons.40 It is generally acknowledged that low-coordination species located at the edge, corner, and step of the catalyst particle surface are the active centers of catalytic reactions.41 Typically, improving the catalytic activity of metal oxide nanomaterials can be accomplished by reducing the size of the nanomaterials, thereby exposing additional surface active sites.42
Although this is important, the number of active sites on the surface of the nanomaterials prepared by reducing the size is still limited, particularly for catalysis in different reactions. According to previous research progress,43 diverse shapes of metal oxide nanomaterials can be classified into zero-dimensional (0D), one-dimensional (1D), two-dimensional (2D), and three-dimensional (3D) shapes, as shown in Fig. 2. It is well known that 0D metal oxide nanomaterials are mainly spherical nanoparticles and nanomaterials with transverse sizes ranging from 1 to 100 nm and smooth polyhedrons enclosed by low-index facets.44–47 Further, 1D metal oxide nanomaterials, such as nanowires, nanotubes, nanobelts, etc., show remarkable structural flexibility along with many fascinating properties that can find applications in piezoelectricity, chemical sensing, and photoelectric detection.48–50 2D nanomaterials with atomic-level thickness, tunable electronic properties, intriguing chemical activity, extraordinary mechanical strength, and large surface-to-volume ratio are ideal nanomaterials for catalytic, photovoltaic, and electrochemical materials.51–54 Apart from the low-dimensional nanomaterials mentioned above, 3D nanomaterials combining the advantages of low-dimensional nanomaterials can be used to fabricate worthwhile and high-performance nanomaterials.55–59 The controllable shape of metal oxide nanomaterials plays a very vital role in determining their physicochemical properties, which has become one of the hotspots of nanotechnology research to enhance the catalytic activity. Metal oxide nanomaterials with various shapes exhibit different catalytic activities, which is largely due to the differences in geometric structures and electronic states of the nanomaterials related to diverse crystal facets.39 High-activity metal oxide catalysts consist of tiny nanoparticles with numerous corner and edge atoms to adsorb and activate the reactants.
 Fig. 2  Diverse basic shapes of metal oxide nanomaterials: 0D spheres, triangles, and cubes. Adapted with permission from ref. 45 and 47. Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society; 1D nanotubes, nanowires, and nanobelts. Adapted with permission from ref. 49 and 50. Copyright 2004 and 2018, American Chemical Society and Wiley; 2D nanosheets, nanosquares, and hexagonal nanoplates. Adapted with permission from ref. 51, 53 and 54. Copyright 2015, 2007 and 2017, Springer and Elsevier; 3D hollow-structured, nanoflower and microsphere. Adapted with permission from ref. 57–59. Copyright 2014, 2011 and 2015, American Chemical Society and Wiley-VCH. 
It is remarkable that metal oxide nanomaterials still have some inherent limitations after shape engineering, such as narrow light absorption range and poor electronic properties.60 The poor conductivity affects their electrochemical energy storage and electrochemical catalytic activity. Because high internal resistance can lose a part of the energy, metal oxides usually have poor charge storage capacity and require large overpotential for catalytic reactions.61 Fortunately, the electronic structure of metal oxide nanomaterials can be effectively controlled by regulating their common defects, thereby affording excellent physicochemical properties. Through defect engineering, the electronic structure of many metal oxides can be considerably changed; in some cases, semiconductors with low intrinsic conductivity can be transformed into half-metallic materials.62 That is, the introduction of inherent defects in metal oxides can be used to control the electronic structure, thereby controlling the optical and electronic properties.63–65 To date, there have been many successful examples that have used defect regulation engineering to increase the activity and stability of metal oxides.66,67 Crystal defects mainly include vacancies, dislocations, grain boundaries, etc. depending on the nanomaterials in different dimensions, as shown in Fig. 3a.68 As an example, undoped TiO2 (Fig. 3b) mainly contains OVs (Vo), Ti vacancies (VTi), interstitial Ti (Tiint), and interstitial O (Oint).69 In general, the strategies of defect regulation engineering mainly include hydrogen treatment, heat treatment, ion doping, solution treatment, etc.66,67,70–72 Defects such as OVs and metal vacancies (MVs) are the most active sites for metal oxides; therefore, surface defects, as well as their number, distribution, and diffusion, are important for understanding the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxides. The electronic and geometric structures, as well as the frontier orbitals, of the crystal lattice of metal oxides can be used to determine the versatility and adjustability of their physicochemical properties induced by the defects. Normally, oxygen 2p orbitals and metal-based orbitals dominate the highest occupied states and lowest unoccupied states, respectively. The defect levels of the formed defects often fall within the electronic bandgap, that is, a change in bonding, structure, and polarization in the lattice.73,74 Such changes in the lattice often play a key role in the formation of active sites for catalysis; therefore, the catalytic properties of metal oxides can be regulated by defects.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of various defects in crystals. Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Different defects in undoped TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, designing hierarchical electrocatalysts by regulating the composition and surface properties can ensure high-efficiency interfacial reactions.75–78 From another perspective, the surface atomic structure is the key factor that affects the catalysis and sensing characteristics of nanomaterials, which is mainly due to the fact that many physical and chemical processes occur at the surfaces.79 For inorganic single crystals, anisotropy is a fundamental property of the crystals, such as dangling bonds, surface defects, geometric shapes, and electronic structures on different crystal facets; therefore, crystals with different types of exposed facets usually exhibit different chemical, physical, and catalytic properties.80,81 These high-energy facets are more reactive than low-energy facets due to the higher densities of atomic steps and edges, as well as the large number of unsaturated coordination sites.82 Unfortunately, in the process of crystal growth, despite the minimization of surface energy, the activity of a highly reactive surface usually decreases rapidly. Therefore, the fabrication of a uniform, high-purity crystal with controllable crystal facets remains a challenge. More importantly, however, researchers are trying to elucidate the relationship between the surface structure and properties of nanomaterials. The most widely studied facet-dependent property is the catalytic activity of nanoparticles toward a particular reaction. Principally, it is a fact that the catalytic properties of metal oxide nanomaterials are highly correlated with their exposed facets, and it also shows the importance of intricate shape control of the nanoparticles.83
Overall, we will focus on the regulation of such intrinsic physicochemical properties on energy conversion in the following chapters.
2.1 Electrocatalytic water splitting
Electrocatalytic water splitting, which produces hydrogen and oxygen, has long been considered as an ideal choice for storing electrical energy. As shown in Fig. 4, a traditional water electrolyzer mainly constitutes three parts: electrolyte, cathode, and anode.84,85 Different types of catalysts can be coated on the cathode and anode, and the water decomposition reaction can be carried out under the driving force of an external voltage.85 Electrocatalytic water splitting involves two half-reactions, namely, the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER) and oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Depending on the electrochemical reaction under different pH conditions, electrocatalytic water splitting can have different reaction formulas, as shown in Fig. 4. Unfortunately, high overpotentials are essential to reach the desired current density due to the sluggish kinetics of the HER and OER processes, ultimately affording low energy conversion efficiency. Therefore, the input potential is often greater than the thermodynamic potential of 1.23 V under standard conditions during electrocatalytic water splitting.85 In previous studies, precious metals and their oxides have been used as effective electrocatalysts with high activity and low overpotential toward electrocatalytic water splitting. However, for practical applications, it is particularly important to develop highly active catalysts composed of less expensive and more abundant metals on Earth.86 Great progress has been achieved in the exploration of catalysts based on the first row of transition metals (e.g., Mn, Co, Ni, and Fe).87–89 Metal oxides are environmentally friendly and low-cost materials with high catalytic activity for electrocatalytic water splitting. Yet, pristine metal oxides are generally acknowledged as inactive materials owing to their inappropriate hydrogen adsorption energies.90 Besides, inherently poor electronic conductivity is another key problem that prevents further activity enhancement of metal oxide catalysts.91 To overcome these issues, precious metals (such as Pt) and electrically conductive carbon materials (such as carbon nanotubes) can be decorated on them to form hybrid catalysts with enhanced activity.90,92 Although these strategies can considerably improve the catalytic activity of metal oxide nanomaterials, the path to implementing these strategies is rather expensive and difficult. Starting from the metal oxide itself, regulating the intrinsic physicochemical properties to improve the catalytic activity has attracted widespread attention from scientists.
 Fig. 4  Water-splitting reactions under acidic or alkaline media and schematic diagram of a conventional water electrolyzer. 

2.1.1 Shape and size regulation engineering. 
It is generally known that the size dependence of metal oxide nanomaterials for increasing their electrocatalytic activity is extremely important, and a detailed comparison of the OER activities of metal oxide nanomaterials with different sizes is shown in Table S1.† Bell et al. synthesized cubic Co3O4 nanoparticles with average diameters of 5.9, 21.1, and 46.9 nm, and the size dependence of the Co3O4 crystallites on the electrocatalytic oxygen evolution activity was elucidated in a well-defined manner.93 The overpotentials of the anodes loaded with Co3O4 at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 decreased with the size, and a plot of the electrochemical overpotential at 10 mA cm−2 against the log of the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area afforded a linear relationship with a slope of −47 ± 7 mV dec−1.93 Consequently, the potential at a specific current density can be considerably reduced as a result of the increase in the specific surface area caused by the size dependence. Co3O4−δ quantum dots with a crystallite size of ∼2 nm exhibited excellent catalytic activity (overpotential of 270 mV for 10 mA cm−2 and no decay within 30 h) can further prove this point.94 Faradaic active sites can be used to evaluate the OER activity of Co3O4 series catalysts. The total and most accessible active sites can be estimated by the total charge () and most accessible charge () values, respectively.95 When the oxide is broken up into smaller crystals, the values of  and  ratio increase rapidly. Compared with that of Co3O4 nanosheets, the enhanced OER activity of Co3O4−δ quantum dots can be mainly attributed to the largest number and highest accessibility of the active sites.94 As shown in Table S2,† NiO nanoparticles with a size of 3.3 nm exhibit low overpotential of η = 300 mV for electrochemical water oxidation, which even exceeds those of expensive rare-earth iridium oxide catalysts.96 Comparing the data in Table S2,† the decrease in particle size obviously leads to improved electrocatalytic activity, which can be attributed to the change in the surface properties and increase in electrocatalytically active sites. Another important point for the increased activity is a function of the accessible catalyst surface area caused by a change in the size of the nanomaterials.
On one hand, research on the effect of shape on the metal oxide nanomaterials is more extensive. First, we have summarized some typical metal oxide nanomaterials with various shapes for electrocatalytic water splitting (Table S2†). The catalytic activities toward the OER of CuO nanomaterials with different shapes such as microspheres, nanosheets, and nanowires were determined (Fig. 5a–d).97 Among the three different dimensions of CuO nanomaterials, 1D CuO nanowire materials exhibit the lowest overpotential at ∼0.90 V for water oxidation and 3D CuO microsphere materials exhibit the best catalytic current densities ranging from 1.10 to 1.40 V (Fig. 5d), which indicates that CuO can act as a good catalyst and its catalytic properties can be improved by controlling its shape. It is worth mentioning that the nanowire has the lowest onset potential for water oxidation, which is mainly due to the fact that the small size of the interconnected nanoparticles provides more exposed active sites. Just as importantly, 2D nanomaterials demonstrate excellent catalytic properties and abundant physicochemical properties in catalytic water splitting. Cui et al. reported the fabrication of porous MoO2 nanosheets (Fig. 5e–g); here, the steady-state potential polarization curves of different nanomaterials for overall water splitting are shown.98 Porous MoO2 exhibits excellent performance for use in alkaline water electrolyzers at a cell voltage of only 1.53 V using which a water-splitting current of 10 mA cm−2 can be obtained; much higher activities toward both HER and OER than those obtained using compact MoO2 can be achieved because of the higher surface area and more active sites of the 2D porous nanostructure.98 The roughness factor can be defined as the ratio of the electrochemically active surface area to the geometric surface area of the electrode, which can be used to evaluate the amount of catalytically active sites. By calculating and comparing the electrochemical double-layer capacitance, the roughness factor of porous MoO2 can be made to be considerably larger than that of compact MoO2. Therefore, unique 2D porous nanostructures have the advantage of providing a higher surface area and more active sites for overall water splitting.98 In addition to 1D and 2D structures constructed from low-dimensional nanomaterials, 3D metal oxide nanomaterials show excellent properties in overall electrocatalytic water splitting. As shown in Fig. 5h and i, 3D hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids constructed using 1D nanowires were used as bifunctional electrocatalysts for both HER and OER.99 A NiCo2O4 electrode shows excellent activity toward overall water splitting, which exhibits low onset potential (−50 mV, J = −1 mA cm−2) for HER and small onset potential of 1.46 V (J = 1.0 mA cm−2) for OER.99 The 3D structure constructed from nanowire and hollow structures affords a large active surface area, which facilitates the diffusion of active species and accelerates the release of evolved gas bubbles, further improving the reaction interface. A 3D mesoporous NiFe oxide nanocube (NiFe-NC) derived from NiFe Prussian blue can be used for efficient subsequent surface electrochemical reactions; its scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image is shown in Fig. 5j.100 As shown in Fig. 5k, NiFe-NC possesses the highest OER catalytic activity relative to the other nanomaterials. According to the above analysis and the data summarized in Table S2,† unique 3D hierarchical structures can considerably promote the reaction kinetics of OER on account of the smooth pathways to accelerate the penetration of the electrolyte, and 1D nanowires and mesoporous hollow structures can enlarge the contact surface area between the reactants and active sites.
 Fig. 5  (a)–(c) SEM images of CuO microspheres, nanosheets, and nanowires; (d) CV curves obtained using bare FTO (black), commercial CuO (red), microspheres (blue), nanosheets (pink), and nanowires (green) as the catalysts for OER in 0.1 M KBi solution at pH 9.2. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (e) and (f) SEM images of porous MoO2 nanosheets; (g) steady-state polarization curves of Ni foam, commercial Pt/C, compact MoO2, and porous MoO2 in 1 M KOH for HER and OER. Adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (h) SEM image of hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids; (i) polarization curve of hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids for HER and OER. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (j) SEM image of NiFe-NC; (k) polarization curves for OER. Adapted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Except for Cu-, Ni-, and Mo-based metal oxide nanomaterials (Table S2†), Co-based catalysts are the most common and active among all the electrocatalysts used for water splitting, particularly for OER. Co-based catalysts with different shapes have been synthesized and applied in the field of electrocatalysis. Hollow Co3O4 microspheres composed of porous, ultrathin (<5 nm), and single-crystal-like nanosheets can act as an active and stable water oxidation catalyst under electrochemical reaction conditions at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and overpotential of ∼0.40 V.101 Because of the unique structural features of the as-obtained hollow Co3O4 nanomaterial with a high BET surface area (∼180 m2 g−1), it can serve as an active and stable water oxidation catalyst. Relative to the bulk particles, other shapes of Co3O4 nanomaterials are worthwhile for improving their catalytic performance, such as Co3O4 nanoparticles,102,103 Co3O4 microtubes,104 Co3O4 nanoislands,105 Co3O4 nanorods,106,107 Co3O4 nanowires,108etc. In conclusion, the intrinsic size and shape of metal oxide nanomaterials can affect their catalytic properties for electrocatalytic water splitting, because more catalytically active sites and larger specific surface area can be implemented along with the regulation of the sizes and shapes of the metal oxide materials.


2.1.2 Defect regulation engineering. 
2.1.2.1 OV regulation. 
OVs widely exist in transitional metal oxides as a result of their low formation energy. It is worth mentioning that OV engineering is an effective approach to tune the electronic structure of electrocatalysts as well as the surface absorption/desorption of the reactants, which can be determined to promote the HER activity of metal oxide nanomaterials.109 Suib et al. introduced a soft template approach for the synthesis of nonstoichiometric, mesoporous MoO3−x with nanosized crystalline walls, and OVs and mesoporosity can serve as the key factors for obtaining excellent performance.110 OVs that are close to Mo5+ are considered to be active sites for HER, which is very critical to improve the catalytic activity. The as-synthesized MoO3−x with OVs demonstrates low overpotential (∼0.14 V) to achieve a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and Tafel slope as low as 56 mV dec−1. NiO nanorods (NRs) with OVs have been fabricated by a facile cation-exchange strategy, and the OVs on the surface of the NRs could remarkably enhance the electronic conduction and promote HER reaction kinetics.111 Remarkably, these NRs exhibit small overpotential of ∼110 mV to produce a HER current density of 10 mA cm−2, which is higher than those of most Pt/C catalysts at high overpotentials.111 Jiang et al. precisely manipulated the OV concentration of the Co3O4 layer to boost the HER performance in alkaline media.112 The Co3O4 layer with an intermediate OV content demonstrated the highest mass activity of 2.12 A g−1 at overpotential of 200 mV for alkaline electrocatalytic HER, and ultralow overpotential of 203 mV is required to attain an apparent current density of 100 mA cm−2.112 OVs in metal oxide nanomaterials can facilitate the optimization of the adsorption of active intermediates, which is crucial to accelerate the reaction kinetics to promote alkaline HER performances.
Except for HER, designing an excellent electrocatalyst is also very important for OER. Metal oxide nanomaterials can act as active electrocatalysts with relatively low cost and earth abundance, and they are mainly categorized according to their surface area and electronic states. Among all the metal oxides, Fe-, Co-, and Ni-based oxides exhibit excellent OER catalytic activities. Among them, spinel-structured oxides with high electronic conductivity and stability have demonstrated superior performance with regard to OER. Yet, the electrocatalytic performance of spinel-structured oxides is still far from the requirements of practical applications. Increasing the reactivity and number of active sites are two effective ways to enhance their electrocatalytic performance.113 Xie et al. designed and prepared a series of ultrathin spinel-structured nanosheets with OVs to increase their reactivity and the number of active sites.114 The experiment of electrochemical OER shown in Fig. 6a indicates that NiCo2O4 ultrathin nanosheets with abundant OVs (NiCo-r) exhibit a large current density of 285 mA cm−2 at 0.8 V and small overpotential of 0.32 V, both of which are superior to the corresponding values of the bulk samples (NiCo-bulk) or samples with few OVs (NiCo-p). Fig. 6b also shows that NiCo-r exhibits smaller Tafel slopes (30 mV dec−1) than those of the other samples.114 OVs in NiCo2O4 ultrathin nanosheets can reduce the resistance toward the adsorption of H2O, which is mainly due to the fact that the adsorption of H2O at a Co3+ site is more favorable for low-coordination sites. Additionally, the adsorption energy for a surface with one OV is lower than that of a perfect surface.114 Therefore, OVs facilitate the adsorption of H2O molecules onto the surface of the catalysts, which promotes an increase in the amount of reactive sites. By further estimating the electrochemical double-layer capacitance and roughness factor, the effective surface area of NiCo2O4 samples can be compared. NiCo-r ultrathin nanosheets exhibit the largest electrochemical double-layer capacitance and roughness factor values, indicating that their active sites are the most effective. Therefore, OVs can produce synergistic interplay between the number and reactivity of active sites, leading to enhanced OER performance. For example, Ar-plasma-etched Co3O4 with abundant OVs on the surface results in more Co2+, with specific activity (0.055 mA cm−2 at 1.6 V) that is 10 times higher than that of pristine Co3O4 (Fig. 6c) and Tafel slope that is much lower than that of pristine Co3O4 (Fig. 6d).115 Co3O4 quantum dots with abundant OVs exhibit excellent catalytic activity for OER, which is due to the fact that abundant OVs can decrease the valence state of cobalt from Co(III) to Co(II), thereby facilitating the formation of a catalytically active center.116 Iron–cobalt oxide nanosheets (FexCoy-ONSs) with abundant OVs were prepared by a facile solution reduction method, and their OER activity measured at overpotential of 350 mV could reach up to 54.9 A g−1 (Tafel slope: 36.8 mV dec−1).117 OVs can improve the electronic conductivity and promote the adsorption of hydrogen peroxide to nearby Co3+ sites.117 In addition, we have also summarized some other works involving Fe-, Co-, and Ni-based oxides in Table S2.† Evidently, Fe-, Co-, and Ni-based oxides can be used as good OER catalysts by adjusting the number of OVs on their surfaces, which can considerably increase their reactivity as well as number of active sites.
 Fig. 6  (a) Polarization curves of various NiCo2O4 samples. Inset: Enlargement of the region near the onset; (b) corresponding Tafel plots of various NiCo2O4 samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) The polarization and (d) Tafel plots of OER on pristine Co3O4 and plasma-engraved Co3O4. Adapted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. HER performances: (e) LSV and (f) corresponding Tafel curves of Ni foam, δ-FeOOH bulk/NF, δ-FeOOH NSs/NF, and Pt/C/NF measured in 1.0 M KOH solution; OER performances: (g) LSV and (h) corresponding Tafel curves of Ni foam, δ-FeOOH bulk/NF, δ-FeOOH NSs/NF, and Pt/C/NF measured in 1.0 M KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
2.1.2.2 MV regulation. 
The performance of metal oxides largely depends on their composition and electronic structure, which are strongly correlated with the electrical conductivity and oxygen adsorption capability.118 Recent research has indicated that the effect of MVs on the physiochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials is also very obvious, except for OVs. DFT calculations reveal that OVs are shallow donors responsible for n-type conductivity, whereas MVs are shallow acceptors contributing to p-type conductivity.119 Zou et al. assembled cobalt-defected Co3−xO4in situ as an efficient catalyst for OER. It showed remarkably high OER activity by delivering much lower overpotential of 268 mV at 10 mA cm−2 (with a small Tafel slope of 38.2 mV dec−1) in a KOH electrolyte than those obtained using normal Co3O4 (376 mV), IrO2 (340 mV), and RuO2 (276 mV).120 Although Fe, Co, and Ni have similar atomic structures and electronic configurations, common Fe-based metal oxides show poor electrocatalytic activities toward water splitting. Recently, Zhang et al. reported that Fe vacancies can result in outstanding water splitting in alkaline media.121 As evident in Fig. 6e–h, new catalytically active centers induced by rich Fe vacancies on δ-FeOOH nanosheets can afford superior HER and OER performances. Theoretical and experimental results show that with respect to OVs, forming rich Fe vacancies in δ-FeOOH nanosheets can create catalytically active centers for both HER and OER.121
On the basis of these studies, metal defects in metal oxides can create electron delocalization and form adsorption/reaction active sites during electrocatalytic water splitting. The regulation of such metal defects can prove to be a promising and important strategy to improve the electrocatalytic activity of metal oxides.


2.1.3 Crystal facet regulation engineering. 
Typically, the control of anisotropic structures with preferentially exposed crystal facets is the key to achieve high selectivity and activity in catalysts.122,123 The surface structure engineering of metal oxide catalysts to obtain better exposure of active sites and to promote their electrocatalytic performance has become a dominant issue. Recent studies have established that the catalytic activity of metal oxide nanomaterials is closely associated with their large number of active centers located at specific crystal facets.124 Moreover, there are a few studies investigating the effect of crystal facets on electrocatalytic water splitting, which can be attributed to the wide bandgap of the metal oxide itself. As an efficient electrocatalyst for OER over the past few decades, cobalt oxide has been thoroughly studied via different synthesis methodologies, shape control, designing nanostructured architecture, and combining with other conductive substrates. However, it is worthwhile to explore the influence of crystal facets on the catalytic properties of cobalt oxide. Sun et al. verified that Co3O4 nanorods with specially exposed {110} facets exhibit higher electrocatalytic OER activity than Co3O4 nanocubes with primarily exposed {100} facets in alkaline solutions. For Co3O4 crystals with primarily exposed {110} facets, the catalytic activity for OER can be facilitated by a surface containing Co3+ species.125 Subsequently, Wang et al. synthesized four Co3O4 crystals with different crystal facets and systematically explored the effects of crystal facets on the overall electrochemical water splitting.126 The atomic arrangements of a Co3O4 crystal along different lattice directions is shown in Fig. 7a–d. The {111} facet is composed of alternating layers of Co3+ and O2− ions, unlike the {001}, {110}, and {112} facets, which contains a mixture of Co2+, Co3+, and O2− ions. The {111} facet with only Co3+ in the octahedral coordination can afford higher activity in the plane with more undercoordinated atoms. The OER and HER polarization curves shown in Fig. 7e and f clearly suggest that the {111} facet affords the earliest onset potential as compared to those obtained from the {001}, {110}, and {112} facets. In addition, polarization and chronopotentiometric curves of full water splitting (Fig. 7g and h) show that the {111}‖{111} couple can deliver a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at low potential near the Pt/C‖IrO2 couple. Additionally, the {111}‖{111} couple can maintain good stability at 10 mA cm−2 with a slight increase in the potential over 22 h. Finally, the Co3O4 crystal facets and ability of full water splitting can be recognized in the following order: {111} > {112} > {110} > {001} facets.126 Ling et al. reported the tuning of the atomic structure of single-crystal CoO nanorods by creating OVs on oxygen-terminated {111} nanofacets, which can enable rapid charge transfer and optimal adsorption energies for OER intermediates.127 These results show that the surface atomic structure engineering is important for the construction of efficient and durable electrocatalysts.127
 Fig. 7  (a)–(d) Surface atomic configurations of Co3O4 in the {001}, {110}, {111}, and {112} facets; (e) OER polarization curves; (f) HER polarization curves; (g) polarization curves of full water splitting in a two-electrode configuration at a scan rate of 3 mV s−1; (h) chronopotentiometric curves in 1.0 M KOH at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Except for cobalt oxide, other metal oxides also exhibit excellent electrocatalytic activity with crystal facet regulation engineering. Suib et al. confirmed that the {100} facets of MnO with mixed Mn2+ and O2− ions have a lower surface energy as compared to the {111} facets. The {100} facets with higher adsorption energy of O species can largely promote the electrocatalytic activity for OER.124 NiFe2O4 single crystals with 100% {111} facets can supply a sufficiently adept platform to break the chemical bonds and enhance the OER activity.128 On the basis of these studies, we can conclude that the crystal facet regulation engineering of metal oxides is important to maximize the catalytic activity of the nanomaterial. In general, special crystal facets imply the formation of optimal adsorption energies for intermediates and rapid charge transfer in the process of electrocatalytic water splitting.

2.2 Photocatalytic water splitting
An efficient photocatalytic water-splitting system requires catalysts with high activity, good stability, and low overpotential to catalyze the oxidation of water and formation of hydrogen.5,129 There are two major problems in photocatalytic water splitting: (1) most catalysts mainly absorb ultraviolet light; (2) slow carrier transfer rate and low carrier separation efficiency.130 Therefore, it is necessary to improve the light absorption range and carrier separation/transport efficiency of photocatalysts through a series of strategies.131

2.2.1 Shape and size regulation. 
Cu2O has a direct-bandgap structure with small bandgap energy (2.0–2.2 eV), corresponding to a higher absorption coefficient over the wavelength range of the solar spectrum; it has been used as a catalyst for photocatalytic water splitting.132 The well-defined Cu2O nanocubes between 50 and 500 nm with tunable dimensions and physicochemical properties have been prepared by a simple one-pot reaction, and apparent quantum efficiencies of up to 1.2% for H2 could be obtained using 500 nm Cu2O cubes. Their BET surface area, bandgap, and conduction band (CB) energies (Table 1) systematically change with a change in their size, which is well correlated with the visible-light photocatalytic activity for hydrogen production.133 This is a good example to demonstrate the effect of size on photocatalytic water splitting.
Table 1 Size-dependent physicochemical properties of Cu2O nanocubes. Adapted with permission from ref. 133. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH




Catalyst
Size [nm]
BET [m2 g−1]
Band gap [eV]
Conduction band [eV]




Cu2O
50
20
2.25
−1.44


100
19
2.10
−1.56


300
15
2.05
−1.60


500
13
1.96
−1.61




On the other hand, the shape of metal oxide nanomaterials has a greater impact on their photocatalytic properties. Metal oxides with different shapes are summarized in Table S2.† Lee et al. synthesized conventional and hierarchically structured Cu2O nanocubes (Fig. 8a and b), and the self-assembly of 5 nm Cu2O into hierarchical nanocubes increases their accessible surface active sites and optical/electronic properties with superior visible-light photocatalytic performance in hydrogen production from water.134Fig. 8c shows that introducing a hierarchy of self-assembled nanocrystals promoted a remarkable increase in hydrogen productivity, which can induce a three-fold increase in the surface area. Finally, hierarchically structured Cu2O nanocubes can facilitate 100–200% rate enhancements in hydrogen production from water splitting, and good apparent quantum efficiency of 1.2%.134 In general, the shapes of the hierarchical structures of metal oxides can increase their accessible surface active sites and improve the optical/electronic properties, which can considerably improve the catalytic properties of nanomaterials.
 Fig. 8  (a) and (b) SEM images of conventional and hierarchical Cu2O nanocubes; (c) visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen production of conventional and hierarchical Cu2O nanocubes promoted with 0.6 wt% Pt cocatalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d)–(f) TEM images of TNS, TNT, and TNR photocatalysts; (g) energy band diagrams of TNT, TNR, and TNS catalysts; (h) comparison of the photocatalysts for hydrogen production under solar-light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
TiO2 has unique advantages as a photocatalyst because of its high stability and excellent electron transfer characteristics,135 and the shape-dependent properties of TiO2 nanocrystals on hydrogen evolution via a photocatalytic process has attracted the wide attention of scientists. Takahashi et al. reported the fabrication of lotus-root-shaped highly smooth and ordered TiO2 nanotube arrays to enhance the photocatalytic water-splitting efficiency for hydrogen production. The effective photon-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency was found to be 0.49%, and the structural smoothness and orderliness of TiO2 nanotube arrays played a key role in improving the photocatalytic water splitting application for hydrogen production.136 Furthermore, Shankar et al. demonstrated an intuitive comparison of the effects of TiO2 nanocrystals with different shapes on the structure (such as nanotubes, nanorods and nanosquares, abbreviated as TNT, TNR, and TNS, respectively).137Fig. 8d–f show a comparison of the transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of TiO2 nanocrystals with different shapes, and the specific surface area of the catalyst calculated from N2 adsorption–desorption isotherms decrease in the following order: TNT > TNS > TNR.137 The smaller grain size of the nanocrystals facilitate the formation of a high specific surface area, which is in good agreement with the TEM images. Except for the specific surface area, the CB and valence band (VB) edge potentials of TiO2 are calculated via the Mulliken electron negativity theory, as shown in Fig. 8g. The TNT has the highest CB energy levels, which is actually effective for improving the photoelectron injection efficiency of TiO2. A comparison of TiO2 photocatalysts for hydrogen production with different shapes is shown in Fig. 7h. The TNT photocatalyst shows 1.5- and 2.0-fold increases in the hydrogen production rates as compared to those obtained from TNR and TNS photocatalysts, respectively.137 This enhanced photocatalytic activity of TNT can be attributed to its synergistic properties owing to its peculiar 1D nanotubular shape with higher amounts of Lewis and Bronsted active sites in the interior as well as exterior surfaces (as determined by ammonia temperature-programmed desorption (TPD) measurements).
Therefore, it is imperative to improve the photocatalytic activity of catalysts via ingeniously designing the shape of the metal oxides. In general, regardless of the type of metal oxide nanomaterials used as the photocatalysts (Table S3†), shape and size regulation is related to the BET surface area and exposure of catalytically activity sites, which is critical for improving their photocatalytic activity.


2.2.2 Defect regulation engineering. 
2.2.2.1 OV regulation. 
Interestingly, numerous studies have indicated that OVs in metal oxides can not only increase the light absorption range via narrowing the bandgap, but also provide active sites to improve the carrier separation efficiency.138,139 Generally speaking, a moderate amount of OVs present on metal oxide surfaces play a crucial role in influencing their light absorption range. For example, in contrast to pristine SrTiO3, an additional absorption band beyond 400 nm extending to the infrared region can be observed for SrTiO3 with OVs, as shown in Fig. 9a.140 The color of SrTiO3 changed from white to black with an increase in the calcining temperature and time. That is to say, some reduced Ti sites (such as Ti3+) have been formed with OVs; therefore, their light absorption range is broadened.140
 Fig. 9  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of pristine SrTiO3 and SrTiO3 with OVs (STO), and the insets show their corresponding photographs. Adapted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) VB XPS data; (c) schematic band structure of different In2O3 materials; (d) IPCE curves at 1.6 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Similar results can be observed with different metal oxides with a fair amount of OVs. More importantly, the efficiency of carrier separation in metal oxides can be improved with OVs on the surface of the photocatalyst. Ultrathin In2O3 porous sheets with abundant OVs produced a new donor level and increased states of density, thereby narrowing the bandgap from the UV to visible regime and improving the carrier separation efficiency.141 The VB XPS data (Fig. 9b) indicates that In2O3 with rich OVs exhibits a higher VB relative to that of bulk In2O3. Furthermore, by combining the VB XPS data with the UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra, it is evident that In2O3 nanosheets with rich OVs exhibited a narrow bandgap from 2.90 to 2.18 eV compared with that of ultrathin In2O3 porous sheets with poor OVs (Fig. 9c).141 Therefore, the increased visible-light absorption of ultrathin In2O3 porous sheets with rich OVs can probably be attributed to the electron transition from the VB to the new defect level or from the defect level to the CB. Furthermore, Fig. 9d shows that the incident photon-to-current conversion efficiency (IPCE) curves of ultrathin In2O3 porous sheets with a rich-OV-based photoelectrode is 32.3% at 450 nm (higher than those of the other photoelectrodes), which can further prove that OVs can promote photoelectric conversion.141 In the field of photocatalysis, BiVO4 has always been an excellent catalyst.142
Transparent BiVO4 films with well-controlled OVs exhibit excellent back-illumination charge separation efficiency, which is mainly due to the presence of enriched OVs acting as shallow donors.143 BiVO4 photoanodes and a single, sealed perovskite solar cell delivers solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency as high as 6.5% for unbiased water splitting.143
Other metal oxides, such as BiO2−x144 and TiO2−x,145 have been investigated and compared (Table S3†). The selective construction of OVs on metal oxide surfaces has been beneficial to broaden their light absorption range and simultaneously enhance the carrier separation efficiency, thereby improving the photocatalytic performance. However, OVs are thermally unstable in a catalytic reaction. Under normal conditions, their chemical states and spatial distribution might change via unusual transformation modes.145 Therefore, it is a challenge to prepare metal oxide nanomaterials with stable OVs for use in photocatalytic reactions.
2.2.2.2 MV regulation. 
Compared with OVs that have been extensively studied for photocatalytic water-splitting applications, engineering MVs in undoped metal oxides is still a formidable challenge, and the effect of MVs on their photocatalytic activity is worthwhile.146 Zhang et al. synthesized anatase Ti0.905O2 in an ethanol–glycerol mixture by the solvothermal treatment of tetrabutyl titanate followed by calcination.69 Ti-defected TiO2 shows inherent p-type conductivity with high charge mobility, and it exhibits more efficient charge separation and bulk transfer at the semiconductor/electrolyte interface.69 As evident from Fig. 10a, the VB of defected TiO2 begins at 1.96 eV (closer to the Fermi level), indicating that defected TiO2 exhibits a p-type feature. Besides, the Mott–Schottky plots with a negative slope can also confirm the p-type conductivity of defected TiO2 (Fig. 10b).69 Relative to conventional TiO2 photocathodes, defected TiO2 photocathodes show obvious cathodic currents under illumination, and the photocurrent increases with an increase in the applied negative potential (Fig. 10c).69 Defected TiO2 exhibits a stable H2 release rate of 29.8 mmol g−1 h−1, which is much higher than that of normal TiO2 (6.8 mmol g−1 h−1) (Fig. 10d).69 The presence of MVs results in many novel physiochemical properties, which changes the charge density and VB edge of metal oxides. MVs can change the structural characteristics and physiochemical properties of undoped semiconductors, which facilitates in improving their photocatalytic performances.
 Fig. 10  (a) VB XPS data of defected and normal TiO2; (b) Mott–Schottky plots of a defected TiO2 electrode used as a working electrode; (c) current–voltage curves of defected and conventional TiO2; (d) time course of hydrogen generation. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Except for photocatalytic hydrogen evolution, the application of MVs in photocatalytic water oxidation is also worthwhile. Park et al. reported a mesoporous WO3 photoanode with a dual vacancy-containing overlayer, which considerably enhanced the charge carrier density and induced a gradient band structure, thereby accelerating the charge transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface.147 The interconnected WO3 nanoparticles surrounded by the vacancy-containing overlayer exhibited beneficial behaviors that substantially enhanced the photoelectrochemical water oxidation, which is mainly due to the enhanced charge carrier density induced by the MVs.


2.2.3 Crystal facet regulation engineering. 
The facet of a crystal is an important factor that affects the performance of heterogeneous photocatalysts, which is mainly due to the arrangement and synergism of the surface atoms essentially determined by the adsorption of the reactant molecules, surface transfer between the photoinduced electron and reactant molecules, and desorption of product molecules.148,149 TiO2, which exhibits high catalytic activity and long-term stability, is the most active semiconductor photocatalyst for almost all environmental and energy photocatalysis applications.150 As an important characteristic of crystal materials, the crystal facet of TiO2 has different atomic arrangements and electronic structures, affording different internal reactivities and surface physical/chemical properties.151,152 For example, the active sites of oxidation and reduction on the surface of anatase TiO2 single crystals are spatially disconnected because of the selective movement of excited electrons on the {101} facets and positive holes on the {001} facets; therefore, the {101} facets are the most likely reservoir for electrons.153–155 Theoretical calculations and experimental results prove that the photocatalytic reduction activity of the {101} facets is greater than that of the {001} facets with regard to photocatalytic hydrogen evolution and the synergistic effect of the different facets is the major factor for determining the photocatalytic activity.153–155 Bi et al. directly identified photogenerated charge separation and transfer on anatase TiO2 single crystals with selectively etched {001} facets via synchronous illumination X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (SIXPS), and they demonstrated that appropriate corrosion on {001} facets with the coexistence of {101} facets could facilitate more efficient electron–hole separation and transfer.156 The photocatalytic behaviors for hydrogen generation from splitting water were explored to prove the SIXPS results and speculations (Fig. 11a and b).156Fig. 11a shows that etched TiO2 photocatalysts exhibited improved photocatalytic activity toward hydrogen generation compared with intact TiO2 catalysts. Optimized TiO2 with etched {001} facets could afford a hydrogen generation rate of 74.3 μmol h−1 g−1, which is nearly 7 times higher than that of intact TiO2 crystals (Fig. 11b). Several possible reasons have been proposed to explain the different phenomena for charge separation over TiO2 crystals with selectively etched {001} facets (Fig. 11c).156 Bulk {100} facets may act as recombination centers for photoexcited electron–hole pairs owing to their unfavorable atomic arrangement in intact TiO2 crystals, but the ratios of bulk {100} facets have also been reduced with selective etching of the {001} facets.156 Therefore, photoexcited electrons and holes can efficiently migrate to the outer surface, thereby reducing recombinations with each other in the bulk {100} facets. Furthermore, the surface heterojunction structure composed of various facets can effectively improve the separation of charge pairs.157 Yang et al. prepared a series of N-doped TiO2 nanobelts with a surface heterojunction of coexposed {001} and {101} facets on their surfaces, which could be used to successfully realize the spatial separation of charge pairs and afforded higher photocatalytic activity with a hydrogen generation rate of 670 μmol h−1 g−1. A schematic diagram of the corresponding mechanism shown in Fig. 11d suggests that the surface heterojunctions fabricated for both {101} and {001} facets induce separation as well as transfer of carriers.158
 Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution tests of TiO2 samples under UV-light irradiation; (b) comparative representation of the hydrogen evolution rates; (c) corresponding surface and bulk electron carrier trapping for intact and etched TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Surface heterojunction composed of both {101} and {001} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. 
Compared with anatase TiO2, rutile TiO2 possesses different advantages as a photocatalyst in overall water splitting, such as higher thermodynamic stability and fewer internal grain defects.159 Feng et al. synthesized a partially reduced nonstoichiometric rutile TiO2 with active facets (Fig. 12a), and the obtained nanomaterials exhibited considerably enhanced photocatalytic hydrogen production activity compared with the combustion product reported before. The {111} and {110} facets of rutile TiO2 are more likely to collect holes and electrons, which was effectively demonstrated in their work.149 Rutile TiO2 single crystals with tunable ratios of {110} and {111} facets can be obtained by controlling the amount of added NaF. As expected, rutile TiO2 single crystals with wholly {111} facets exhibited the highest hydrogen generation rate, which could be dominantly attributed to the larger exposure of reactive {111} facets under the same conditions.160 These examples indicate that it is essential to achieve high-efficiency catalysis by precisely adjusting the crystal facets of metal oxides.
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of rutile TiO2 with {111} and {110} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM image of SrTiO3 nanocrystals with {023} and {001} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) SEM image of multifaceted Cu2O with {100} and {104} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM image of monoclinic WO3 with {100} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM image of In2O3 with {100} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (f) SEM image of polyhedral BiVO4 with various facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Of course, in addition to TiO2, there are some other metal oxide nanomaterials with crystal facet regulation that can be used in photocatalytic hydrogen production. Guo et al. successfully synthesized uniform nanosized SrTiO3 single crystals enclosed with high-indexed {023} facets and low-indexed {001} facets (Fig. 12b), and the photoinduced reduction occurs at the {001} facets and oxidation at the high-indexed {023} facets for SrTiO3 single crystals.161 The hydrogen and oxygen evolution rates of the SrTiO3 nanocrystals can reach 71.1 and 30.0 μmol h−1, which are about 9.5 and 3.0 times higher than those of irregular SrTiO3 particles, respectively.161 Cu2O nanomaterials with various facets are an excellent photocatalytic material for photocatalytic hydrogen production.162–165 For example, multifaceted Cu2O with controlled crystal facets has been synthesized (Fig. 12c), and the high-index facets can collect photogenerated electrons and the holes tend to migrate to the {100} facets, resulting in efficient charge separation.165 Besides, metal oxide nanomaterials, such as WO3 with {100} facets,166 SnO2 with {101} facets,167etc., also show excellent performance in photocatalytic hydrogen production.
Owing to high overpotential and low efficiency, the conversion of water into oxygen by solar energy remains a bottleneck for photocatalytic water splitting. Because of the four-electron transfer and energetically uphill reaction, the water oxidation reaction is more challenging for overall water splitting.8 As commonly recognized, the catalytic activity of a metal oxide semiconductor photocatalyst can be affected by its surface structure that is directly exposed to the reaction media. Numerous studies have shown that the photocatalytic activity can be directly correlated with the crystal facets of the photocatalyst.168 The surface atomic structure essentially controls the quantity and quality of the reactant molecules adsorbed on the surface of the photocatalyst, and the surface electronic structure determines the redox powers of the photoexcited holes and electrons. In fact, the electron structure and surface atomic structure are sensitive to the crystal facets of the photocatalyst with different orientations. Because of the dissimilar electronic structures of the quasi-cube-like WO3 crystal with {002}, {200}, and {020} facets and a rectangular sheet-like WO3 crystal with the {002} facet, the rate of photocatalytic water oxidation for the quasi-cube-like WO3 crystal is much higher than that of the rectangular sheet-like WO3 crystal.169 The photocatalytic oxidation properties can be effectively enhanced by the regulation of WO3 with the {100} facet orientation and surface electronic band structure.170 WO3 with {100} facets (Fig. 12d) has a much higher energy level of the VB maximum compared with that of normal WO3 crystals, affording an oxygen evolution rate of about 5.1 times for water splitting.170 In general, the generation of metal oxide nanomaterials with high-index facets is comparatively more difficult due to the presence of strong metal–oxygen bonds and diverse crystal packing structures. However, Wu et al. developed crystal-cut photocatalytic materials with excellent oxygen evolution ability under visible-light irradiation and they elucidated the associated mechanism.171 Uniformly cut In2O3 truncated octahedrons with {100} facets could be produced in abundance, as shown in Fig. 12e.171 The high photocurrent (1.4 mA cm−2; voltage: 0.25 V vs. Ag/AgCl) indicates that the In2O3 truncated octahedrons are favorable for photocatalytic oxygen evolution.171 Multinary metal oxide crystals are more advantageous than binary ones because they not only possess more complex functions, but their properties can also be readily adjusted by tuning the ratio of their constituent elements. Zhou et al. fabricated unprecedented 30-faceted BiVO4 polyhedra with {132}, {321}, and {121} facets.172Fig. 12f shows the SEM image and the corresponding schematic illustration of these polyhedra: each unit exhibits 30 facets, 36 vertices, and 64 edges. Photocatalytic water oxidation experiments revealed that the 30-faceted BiVO4 polyhedron exhibits an enhanced oxygen generation rate of 57.0 μmol h−1, which is a dramatic improvement over its low-index counterparts, which can be attributed to the energetically favorable water dissociation on the high-index {121}, {132}, and {231} surfaces.172 Besides, BiVO4 photocatalysts with different growth extents of the {040} facet have been prepared to provide a multiatomic BiV4 center, which could be the origin of the active sites for photocatalytic oxygen evolution.173
From the above analysis, it is evident that different metal oxides have different crystal facets (as summarized in Table S3†), and their corresponding activities are also different. A suitable strategy selected to synthesize metal oxide nanomaterials with particular facets is difficult as well as meaningful. Reasonable preparation of high-energy crystal facets is crucial to improve the catalytic activity of metal oxides.

2.3 Photocatalytic reduction of CO2
In 1979, Inoue et al. were the first to report photocatalytic CO2 reduction over various metal oxide semiconductors (such as TiO2, ZnO, SnO2, and WO3) under a 500 W Xe or Hg lamp with electrical bias; different products were obtained, such as CO, CH4, CH3OH, HCOOH, etc.174 Subsequently, a large number of studies have focused on photocatalytic CO2 reduction.175,176 In these studies, metal oxides were preferred owing to their low cost and high stability. Photocatalysts with excellent performance must have high photon conversion efficiency (PCE) as well as high specific surface area. However, the initial particle size of the photocatalysts determine the eventual specific surface area and PCE. Further, the full utilization of solar energy requires the use of materials with adjustable bandgaps and band positions to absorb a large part of the visible-light spectrum.

2.3.1 Shape and size regulation engineering. 
Metal oxide nanomaterials offer unique size-dependent absorption properties as well as large extinction coefficients over a broad spectral range. Hence, size regulation is crucial to enhance the photocatalytic activity of metal oxide nanomaterials. Zhang et al. confirmed that the size of TiO2 nanomaterials played a critical role in nanocrystalline TiO2-based catalysts mostly by influencing the dynamics of the electron–hole recombinations.177 Kočí et al. prepared pure TiO2 anatase particles with crystallite diameters ranging from 4.5 to 29 nm, and they assessed the effect of the primary particle size on the photocatalytic reactivity of the photoreduction of CO2. The obtained results showed that the yields of methanol and methane increased with a decrease in the particle size of TiO2 under illumination. The optimum particle size of TiO2 was a result of competing effects among the specific surface area, charge carrier dynamics, and light conversion efficiency.178
Except for the size of the nanomaterials, the shape is also very important for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Ultrathin W18O49 nanowires (diameter: ∼0.9 nm) exhibited a strong capacity toward light absorption from the visible to the near-infrared region.179 Consistent with 1D metal oxide nanomaterials, 2D nanomaterials demonstrated superior catalytic activity in the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Ultrathin and uniform Bi2WO6 square nanoplates (thickness: ∼9.5 nm) (Fig. 13a–c) exhibited promising potential for the utilization of visible light toward the highly efficient reduction of CO2 into renewable hydrocarbon fuel.180 From the comparison shown in Fig. 13d, the catalytic activity of Bi2WO6 nanoplates is found to be far greater than that of the solid-state reaction of Bi2WO6, which is mainly due to its higher specific surface area and higher carrier migration rate caused by its ultrathin geometry.180 In Fig. 13e–g, ultrathin (∼4–5 nm), single-crystal WO3 nanosheets with dominant exposed {001} facets exhibit enhanced performance toward the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 in the presence of water in hydrocarbon fuels with respect to bulk WO3, because the size quantization effects along the vertical direction increase the WO3 bandgap.181 Therefore, the geometry of 2D nanomaterials can promote charge carriers to move rapidly from the interior to the surface to participate in the photoreduction reaction; this favors the improved separation of photogenerated electrons and holes and a lower electron–hole recombination rate.
 Fig. 13  (a)–(c) SEM images of Bi2WO6 square nanoplates; (d) CH4 generation with nanoplates and solid-state reaction (SSR) sample as the catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of WO3 nanosheet; (f) calculated band positions of the WO3 nanosheet and commercial WO3, corresponding to the redox potential of CO2/CH4 with water; (g) comparison of WO3 nanosheet and commercial WO3 powder for CH4 generation. Adapted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (h) TEM image of ZnO–Cu2O nanoparticles; (i) amount of CH4 production using ZnO–Cu2O (black) catalysts, and ZnO (red) and Cu2O (blue) nanoparticles; (j) amounts of CH4 (black), CO (red), and H2 (blue) production for photocatalytic CO2 conversion experiments. Adapted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature. 
In order to improve the photocatalytic activity of metal oxide nanomaterials, a strategy to construct a heterojunction with a specific shape has been proposed to enhance the electron–hole pair separation and separating the reduction and oxidation sites on metal oxide nanomaterials. The Z-scheme heterojunction is a relatively efficient method to accelerate the electron–hole separation by building an electric field within photocatalytic systems.182,183Fig. 13h shows that each particle on ZnO–Cu2O hybrid nanomaterials has an isolated structure comprising spherical nuclei in the shape of cubes.184 Photocatalytic CO2 conversion experiments (Fig. 13i and j) indicate that ZnO–Cu2O nanoparticles have better catalytic activity than their individual components and only two chemicals, namely, CH4 and CO, were detected as the gaseous products.184 CH4 was the main product at a yield of 20.67 μmol h−1, and the yields of CO and H2 generation were only 0.47 and 0.23 μmol h−1, respectively.184 The heterojunction constructed by two metal oxide nanoparticles can enable effective electron transfer from the CB of one metal oxide to the VB of another metal oxide with long-lived charge separation states, which can ensure efficient photoelectric transfer process.
In conclusion, shape and size are critical in determining the catalytic properties, which can change the specific surface area and carrier migration rate of metal oxide nanomaterials. Yet, an appropriate combination of metal oxides is essential; the construction of heterostructure nanomaterials with different metal oxides can exhibit better charge separation and enhanced activity for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2. Considering these factors is very essential to design efficient metal oxide photocatalysts. For the shape of metal oxide nanomaterials, defects and crystal facets induced by different shapes can also considerably affect their photocatalytic properties. Specific defects and crystal facet effects on the photocatalytic properties of metal oxide nanomaterials will be discussed in the following chapters.


2.3.2 Crystal facet regulation engineering. 
One of the most important issue for catalysts is that the CB energy of these metal oxide semiconductors should be more negative than the reduction potential of CO2 to ensure that they are suitable for application in reduction reactions. The facets of TiO2 have been extensively studied because of its high efficiency and chemical stability in photocatalytic processes.185 Jaroniec et al. reported the effect of the ratio of {001} and {101} facets on the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 for anatase TiO2.157 The formation of a surface heterojunction facilitates the transfer and separation of photogenerated electrons and holes (Fig. 14a and b).157 The Fermi level of the {001} facets enter their VB, but the Fermi level of the {101} facets is still located at the top of the VB of the {101} surface (Fig. 13b).157 As evident from Fig. 14a, a series of anatase TiO2 with different ratios of the exposed {101}-to-{001} facets were prepared by adding different amounts of HF, and the proportion of crystal facets of TiO2 formed by the corresponding amounts of HF is discrepant.157 The photocatalytic CH4 production performance of the prepared TiO2 was investigated, and the results are shown in Fig. 14c.157 Evidently, the photocatalytic activity of the TiO2 samples is strongly affected by the ratio of the exposed {001}-to-{101} facets.157 Moreover, a series of photocatalysts containing TiO2 nanoparticles, TiO2 nanotubes, and TiO2 nanosheets were synthesized and the influence of {001} facets and surface fluorination on CO2 reduction were mainly explored.186 Among the prepared catalysts, anatase TiO2 nanosheets with a {001}-to-{101} ratio of 72:28 displayed the best photocatalytic activity for reducing CO2. The high-energy {001} facets may improve the dissolution of H2O, and surface fluorination on the low-energy {101} facets can promote the reduction of CO2 into CO2−. Efficient separation of photogenerated electron–hole pairs as a result of the {001} facets and surface fluorination also result in improved photocatalysis.186 Theoretically, the {001} facets exhibit a surface energy higher than that of the {101} facets, and appropriate exposure of the {001} facets can improve the catalytic activity of TiO2 nanomaterials.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the spatial separation of redox sites on the HF0, HF4.5, and HF9 samples; (b) {001} and {101} surface heterojunctions; (c) comparison of the photocatalytic CH4 production activity of P25 and TiO2 samples prepared by varying the HF amounts. Adapted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
Among the different desirable catalysts, Co-based catalysts have been demonstrated as one of the most promising catalysts. CO2 can be favorably bound to the cobalt center and activated during the photocatalytic reduction of CO2, which is a big advantage for Co-based catalysts. Well-defined Co3O4 hexagonal platelets with different exposed crystal facets have been synthesized, and Co3O4 hexagonal platelets with exposed {112} facets demonstrated high-efficiency photocatalytic CO2 conversion.187 Except for Ti- and Co-based catalysts, other types of semiconductor nanomaterials have also been studied in detail (Table S3†). The {110} facet of a single Cu2O particle was photocatalytically active for CO2 reduction into methanol, which has been directly observed by correlated scanning fluorescence X-ray microscopy and environmental TEM.188 A crystal-facet-based CeO2 homojunction consisting of hexahedron prism-anchored octahedron with exposed prism surface of {100} facets and octahedron surface of {111} facets has been reported, and the prism arm on the octahedron could be used to activate inert CeO2 octahedron to improve the photocatalytic reduction of CO2 into methane.189 The results can be attributed to the different effective masses of electrons and holes on the {100} and {111} facets, and the band alignment of the {100} and {111} facets drives the electrons and holes to the octahedron and prism surfaces.189 BiOI nanosheets with exposed {001} facet have better separation efficiency of the photoinduced carriers and a higher CB position, enhancing the photocatalytic activity of CO2 conversion with exposed {001} facets.190 The excellent CO2 photoreduction of layered thickness-tunable bismuth-based material, i.e., BiOIO3, can be ascribed to the desirable balance between the thin-layer structure and {010}/{100} facet junctions; this not only accelerates the migration of charge carriers from the bulk to the surface of the catalysts, but also allows the photogenerated electrons and holes to spatially separate between the {010} and {100} facets.191
From the above research, we can conclude that preparation of metal oxide catalysts with high-energy facets has been regarded as an efficient strategy to enhance their catalytic activity, selectivity, and stability for the photocatalytic reduction of CO2.

3 Intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials in environmental detection
For metal oxide nanomaterials, the size of the nanomaterials is very crucial to decide their sensitivity in environmental detection. For instance, the sensitivity of changing the energy barrier strongly depends on the size of the metal oxide when interacting with the target gas molecules.26,36–39 That is, the sensitivity of metal oxide gas sensors can be drastically increased with the nanoscalization of metal oxides.26 The particle size of metal oxide nanomaterials can result in strong differences in conductivities; therefore, metal oxide nanomaterials are highly sensitive to the conversion of environmental pollutants when their sizes are sufficiently small. Nonetheless, the number of active sites on the surface of the nanomaterials prepared by reducing the size is still limited, particularly for catalysis in different reactions. The controllable shape of the metal oxide nanomaterials plays a very vital role in determining their physicochemical properties, which has been one of the hotspots of nanotechnology research that has been used to enhance sensitivity, selectivity, and stability. Metal oxide nanomaterials with various shapes exhibit different catalytic activities and sensing properties, which is due to differences in the geometric structures and electronic states of the nanomaterials related to diverse crystal facets.39 Highly active metal oxide catalysts or sensing materials consist of tiny nanoparticles with several corner and edge atoms to adsorb and activate the reactants.
In addition to catalysis, defects can also considerably improve the sensing properties of metal oxide nanomaterials. Considering the example of using SnO2 in gas sensors, OVs as electron donors can narrow the bandgap by tuning the electronic structure of SnO2, which facilitates the formation of thermally induced electrons. Further, SnO2 with unpaired electrons can serve as electron donors, enabling the formation of more chemisorbed oxygen species.192 Similarly, defects in metal oxide nanomaterials can act as active sites for electron transfer, which can facilitate the adsorption of HMIs.183 More intriguingly, even with the same type of defects, different metal oxides can exhibit different properties and reactivities, which is mainly due to their sensitivity to local electronic and structural environments.193
Just as importantly, the crystal facets of metal oxides are closely related to their detection sensitivity toward environmental pollutants. That is, their sensing performances in electrochemical detection and gas sensors are strongly dependent on the crystal facets of the metal oxide nanomaterials, which determines the adsorption of detected gases and HMIs as well as the process of electron transfer. On the other hand, it is important that the ion cycles, Mn+/M(n−1)+ (M = Cu, Fe, Ni, or Co), in existing metal oxides can be used in many important environmental and biochemical processes, including the generation and consumption of reactive oxygen species, decomposition and conversion of organics, as well as respiration and nutrition intakes of certain microorganisms.194–198 Sayama et al. utilized Cu2+ ions as redox mediators to increase the photoactivity of WO3, and the rate of CO2 production for the photodegradation performances of formaldehyde and methanol increased by 1000 and 150 times with the participation of Cu2+, respectively.198 In the entire catalytic process, Cu2+ was reduced to Cu+ with the photoinduced electrons from WO3 and that Cu+ could also be easily reoxidized to Cu2+ by O2 in air, which considerably facilitated electron–hole charge separation.198 A special kind of nanoscale Fe@Fe2O3 core–shell nanowire has been used as an effective heterogeneous Fenton iron reagent to degrade dyes, pentachlorophenol, and dimethyl phthalate, as well as a reductant/adsorbent to efficiently remove CrVI.199–202 Recently, our group found that various ion cycles of metal oxide nanomaterials played important roles in electrochemical detection through a series of in-depth studies.203 The Mn+/M(n−1)+ cycles can be completed in this process, and M(n−1)+ works as an electrocatalyst to mediate electron transfer between the electrode and HMIs, which can considerably enhance the performance of electrochemical detection.203 Therefore, for the development of metal oxide nanomaterials with ion cycles, it is critical to improve their catalytic and sensing properties.
3.1 HMI detection
Monitoring the distribution of HMIs and assessing the safety of water supply have become critical issues.204,205 Owing to their worthwhile adsorption properties toward harmful ions, metal oxides have been widely used for HMI detection. Metal oxide nanomaterials, such as ferric oxides, cobalt oxides, titanium oxides, magnesium oxides, and cerium oxides, are considered to be promising for the adsorption of HMIs, which is partly due to the large surface areas and higher amount of active sites.206 By regulating the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials, the performance of electrochemical detection can be considerably improved.

3.1.1 Shape and size regulation engineering. 
A number of studies have demonstrated that both shape and size are key factors that affect the adsorption performance of metal oxides for HMIs, which has been comprehensively summarized previously.3,207 On the basis of the above analysis, it can be concluded that the shape and size of metal oxide nanomaterials can considerably affect their specific surface area and exposure of adsorption sites for energy conversion. Equally, the surface areas and exposure of adsorption sites of metal oxide nanomaterials can affect the adsorption of HMIs, which, in turn, affects the performance of electrochemical detection.
NiCo2O4 as a promising mixed-metal oxide has been extensively explored for potential applications in different areas, possessing much better electronic conductivity than nickel oxide and cobalt oxide.208 In particular, hollow NiCo2O4 nanostructures with a high specific surface area, short diffusion path for ions or electrons, and efficient channels for mass transport can considerably improve the performance in electrochemical applications. There have been many reports regarding the synthesis of NiCo2O4 with various shapes, most of which have investigated the synthesis of 1D NiCo2O4 nanoarrays on different substrates.209–211 Relative to solid urchin-like NiCo2O4 microspheres, the advantages of NiCo2O4 hollow spheres with well-preserved structures is clear.212 The electrochemical properties of these nanomaterials were investigated, as shown in Fig. 15a–c. As shown in Fig. 15a, an electrode modified by hollow NiCo2O4 microsphere showed higher catalytic activity with the largest enclosed area and highest redox peak current.212 The cyclic voltammetry (CV) curves shown in Fig. 15b indicate that the currents of methanol oxidation for the modified electrode with hollow NiCo2O4 microspheres were about 2 and 5 times those of other nanomaterials.212 Furthermore, a hollow NiCo2O4 microsphere exhibits lower overpotential and higher stability toward methanol electrooxidation compared with electrodes modified with solid NiCo2O4 and NiO microspheres (Fig. 15b and c).212 The relatively high oxidation current and low onset potential indicate that hollow NiCo2O4 microspheres possess excellent electrocatalytic properties. Consequently, the performance toward the electrochemical determination of HMIs has been investigated, as shown in Fig. 15d–f. Fig. 15d shows that the peak current obtained from the electrodes modified by hollow NiCo2O4 microspheres was higher than those obtained from electrodes modified with other materials.212Fig. 15e and f show the SWASV responses of hollow NiCo2O4 microspheres toward PbII and CuII at various concentrations, and the corresponding calibration curve can be determined (inset in Fig. 15e and f). The limits of detection were calculated to be 0.089 and 0.099 μM and the sensitivities reached 26.97 and 12.35 μA μM−1 for PbII and CuII, respectively.212 The remarkable electrochemical performance in HMI detection can be mainly attributed to the unique urchin-like NiCo2O4 hollow structures. The high specific surface area and hollow interior provide more electrochemically active sites and the higher electronic conductivity of NiCo2O4 accelerate ion or electron transfer at the electrode/electrolyte interface.
 Fig. 15  CV curves of NiCo2O4-, Co3O4-, and NiO-modified electrodes in 1 M KOH without (a) and with (b) 0.5 M methanol at a scan rate of 50 V s−1; (c) chronoamperometry curves of NiCo2O4- and NiO-modified electrodes in 1 M KOH with 0.5 M methanol at 0.6 V; (d) SWASV curves of NiCo2O4-, Co3O4-, and NiO-modified electrodes in response to 1 μM PbII and 1.1 μM CuII; (e) and (f) SWASV curves and corresponding calibration plots of PbII and CuII on hollow NiCo2O4-modified electrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. 
The above results demonstrate that the specific surface area determined by the shape of the nanomaterials plays an important role in improving the electrochemical performance. However, the exposure of adsorption sites may be more imperative to enhance the electrochemical performance of nanomaterials relative to the specific surface area of the nanomaterials. Recently, 1D Fe2O3 nanorods (BET surface area: 108.6 m2 g−1) and hollow nanocubes (BET surface area: 150.1 m2 g−1) were successfully synthesized, and Fe2O3 hollow nanocubes exhibited larger surface areas and Fe2O3 nanorods afforded more active adsorption sites.213 In general, Fe2O3 hollow nanocubes have a larger specific surface area, which facilitates enhancement in the adsorption ability of nanomaterials.213 Through the BET surface area and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) analyses of two different shapes of metal oxide nanomaterials, the obtained results clearly show that the adsorption sites on the surface of the nanomaterials are more dominant than the surface area in electroanalyses.213 The sensitive detection of PbII in a near-neutral condition could be achieved on Fe2O3 nanorods with outstanding sensitivity (109.67 mA mM−1), which is much better than that of hollow nanocubes (17.68 mA mM−1).213
Generally speaking, the specific surface area and exposure of adsorption sites determined by the shape of the nanomaterials are the key to determining the electrochemical detection performance of metal oxide nanomaterials. In the following chapters, we comprehensively discuss the effects of crystal facets on electrochemical detection.


3.1.2 Defect regulation engineering. 
In previous studies, defects have often been considered to be the main active sites for chemical adsorption and a place where chemical reactions take place.214–216 Electrons introduced by intrinsic defects can be trapped by the defect centers in the lattice to form smaller polarons, which has been theoretically planned using first-principles calculations and experimentally demonstrated by electron paramagnetic resonance.67,216 Polaron centers can capture a large number of electrons as the preferred active sites for material adsorption and chemical reactions, because electron transfer between the adsorbed species and the substrate is a fundamental step in redox reactions.216 In particular, OVs are the most common anion vacancies in metal oxides as a result of their low formation energy.217,218 Metal oxide semiconductors have low conductivity and poor reactivity, which limits their applications in electrochemical detection. Recently, a surface-electronic-state-modulation-based concept was proposed to facilitate pure metal oxide semiconductors in the ultrasensitive electrochemical detection of HMIs.193 A defective single-crystalline {001} TiO2 nanosheet modulated by Ti3+ and OVs on the surface was applied for HMI detection. Different TiO2 samples were obtained by calcining at different temperatures (which were abbreviated as T-1, T-2, T-3, and T-4). In Fig. 16a and b, the sensitivities of T-1 toward HgII (270.83 μA μM−1 cm−2) was found to be much better than that of bare glassy carbon electrode (GCE, 13.75 μA μM−1 cm−2). Catalysis with OVs can be explained via the schematic shown in the inset of Fig. 16b. Normally, HgII is reduced at a constant negative voltage to form Hg and then oxidized at an appropriate voltage. In this process, OVs might reduce the barrier voltage for the reaction energy in the catalytic reaction, which is critical to improve the electrochemical detection performance of nanomaterials.193 OVs and Ti3+ can influence the adsorption for electrochemical detection, which can also critically influence the performance of electrochemical detection. On the other hand, mutual interference among different HMIs is an inevitable problem in practical electrochemical detection. Subsequently, defective TiO2−x nanosheets with different structures were prepared to explain the cause of interference in electrochemical detection, and they showed higher sensitivity toward HMIs such as CuII and CdII in light of their mutual interference.219 In this work, OV-induced free electrons were transferred from the surface of TiO2−x nanosheets to CuII and more electrons participated in the transfer process after the addition of CdII.219 CeO2 nanocubes with rich OVs demonstrated unexpected sensitivity of up to 2169.8 μA μM−1 cm−2 in the detection of HgII, which can be attributed to the fact that OVs provides large amounts of reactive oxygen species and active sites.220
 Fig. 16  (a) Typical SWASV responses for T-1-modified GCE toward HgII; (b) comparison of sensitivities toward HgII. Inset shows the role of OVs in catalysis. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. SWASV responses of (c) bare GCE and GCE modified with (d) octahedral, (e) elongated dodecahedral, and (f) lance-shaped SnO2 nanoparticles for the analysis of PbII in a HAc–NaAc buffer solution (0.1 M, pH 5.0). Insets show the corresponding linear calibration plots of the peak current against PbII concentrations. Adapted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In conclusion, OVs can be used to modulate the surface electron states and they can serve as active sites for redox reactions in the electrochemical detection of HMIs. OVs can adsorb an O2 molecule to form O2˙− species that facilitate the adsorption of HMIs and serve as active sites for electron transfer. Therefore, it is evident that OVs can activate the activity of metal oxides and make them exhibit excellent characteristics in electrochemical detection.


3.1.3 Crystal facet regulation engineering. 
HMI detection strongly depends on the special chemical and physical properties of metal oxides. In particular, recent works have shown that the crystal facets of these metal oxides are closely related to their detection sensitivity. We were the first to report the facile synthesis of Co3O4 with two different shapes and demonstrated the facet-dependent electrochemical characteristics of Co3O4 nanocrystals toward HMIs. The results show that the {111} facets of Co3O4 nanoplates have better electrochemical sensing performance than that of the {001} facets of Co3O4 nanocubes. Adsorption measurements revealed that the {111} facets of Co3O4 can adsorb more metal ions than the {001} facets.221 Later, Cu2O microcrystals with different facets such as {100}, {111}, and {110}, i.e., cubic, octahedral, and rhombic dodecahedral structures, respectively, were shown to afford facet-dependent electrochemical behaviors toward HMIs. Electrodes modified with Cu2O microcrystals with different facets showed favorable electrochemical performance, which can be primarily attributed to the different deposition amounts of Pb.222 Three different shapes of SnO2 with diverse facets were synthesized and then applied to investigate the facet-dependent electrochemical behaviors toward HMI detection.223Fig. 16c–f show the SWASV responses of the three different shapes of SnO2 nanoparticles for PbII at various concentrations. The low-energy {110} facets of SnO2 nanoparticles exhibited better electrochemical performance.223 In this work, although the adsorption capacity of nanomaterials is important, the desorption and diffusion capacities with specific crystal facets played a more crucial role in the electrochemical detection of HMIs.
Beyond that, the facet-dependent performance of other metal oxides for heavy metal determination by stripping voltammetry, such as MgO,224 Fe3O4,225α-Fe2O3,226 TiO2,227etc., have also been studied. The results indicate that the crystal facets of these metal oxides are closely related to their detection performances.


3.1.4 Ion cycle regulation engineering. 
In our lives, the content of some HMIs in drinking water is very low, but their toxicity is very high. For example, for AsIII, it is desirable to develop a new ultrasensitive interface for detecting it.16 Delightedly, Fe3O4 nanoparticles have a very good adsorption capacity for AsIII, which is a very potent interface for the detection of AsIII. Dumbbell-like Au/Fe3O4 nanoparticles have been synthesized and committed to comprehensively study the surface physicochemical properties.203Fig. 17a and b show the typical SWASV responses and corresponding linear calibration plots of the peak current against AsIII concentrations with Au/Fe3O4 in different concentration ranges from 0.1 to 10 ppb. Very low detection limits (0.1–10 ppb) and worthwhile sensitivity of 9.43 μA per ppb could be obtained. With the stronger adsorption ability of Fe3O4 nanoparticles toward AsIII and redox-active surface of the FeII/FeIII cycle on Fe3O4, their response toward electrochemical analysis was considerably increased.
 Fig. 17  (a) and (b) Typical SWASV responses of AsIII at Au/Fe3O4 screen-printed carbon electrode (SPCE) across different concentration ranges and the corresponding linear calibration plots of the peak current against AsIII concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 10 ppb. Adapted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Detection strategy of AsIII on Co0.6Fe2.4O4 nanocubes; (d) typical SWASV responses of AsIII from 1 to 20 ppb and the corresponding linear calibration plot of the peak current against AsIII concentrations; current changes in the SWASV responses of 10 ppb of AsIII at Co0.6Fe2.4O4 nanocubes in the presence of (e) 0–220 ppb Fe(II) and (f) 0–260 ppb CoII. Adapted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Except for the fact that the FeII/FeIII cycle has an important influence on the process of detection, CoII/CoIII can also facilitate the redox reaction of AsIII to further enhance the response of electrochemical analysis. We successfully constructed a highly ordered self-assembled monolayer array on a working electrode uniformly and controllably distributed on ∼14 nm Co0.6Fe2.4O4 nanocubes.228 The detection strategy of AsIII on Co0.6Fe2.4O4 nanocubes is shown in Fig. 17c. First, AsIII in a solution was adsorbed on the surface of the nanocubes and then the adsorbed AsIII was reduced to As0 with the assistance of the redox cycle between FeII and FeIII or CoII and CoIII.228 As shown in Fig. 17d and the inset, the detection sensitivity was 2.12 μA per ppb and the limit of detection was 0.093 ppb, implying that the nanocubes exhibited higher sensitivity and lower limit of detection compared with other nanomaterials.210 The effects of FeII/FeIII and CoII/CoIII cycles play a key role in the process of detection. To prove this, FeII and CoII were added to the solution during detection to observe the current changes in AsIII (Fig. 17e and f).228 It could be concluded that the current of AsIII increased with a gradual increase in the concentrations of FeII and CoII, indicating that FeII and CoII could promote the detection of AsIII. Furthermore, a GCE modified with a porous flower-like NiO/rGO nanocomposite was constructed, and excellent adsorption capacity and NiII/NiIII cycle on the surface of a NiO/rGO nanocomposite could be used to improve the electrochemical detection signal.229 These works use metal oxide nanomaterials with higher surface activity to improve the electrochemical properties and reveal the enhancement mechanism for the surface ion cycles toward the construction of a unique, sensitive interface, finally enabling highly sensitive HMI analysis and detection.
As a new strategy to enable the efficient detection of HMIs, the ion cycles of metal oxide nanomaterials in electrochemical detection is crucial to improve the detection sensitivity and reduce the detection limit of nanomaterials. Combined with the intrinsic shape, size, defect, and crystal facet regulations of metal oxide nanomaterials, ion cycle regulation is expected to further their development and applications in electrochemical detection.

3.2 Metal oxide gas sensors
Metal oxide nanomaterials selected for applications in gas sensors can be categorized as per their electronic structures.
Considering the factors that affect the gas sensing performance of metal oxide nanomaterials, it is necessary to understand the sensing mechanism of metal oxide gas sensors. Typically, the capture of electrons on the adsorbed molecules and band bending caused by charged molecules are the primary reasons for a change in conductivity. Compared with the flat-band situation, the negative charges trapped in these oxygens can cause the band to bend upward, thereby reducing the conductivity.230

Fig. 18 shows a basic model describing band bending in a wide-bandgap metal oxide semiconductor after the chemisorption of charged species.231 The specific mechanism can be described as follows: when O2 molecules are adsorbed on the surface of metal oxide nanomaterials, the ion-adsorbed species can act as electron acceptors as a result of their relative energetic position with respect to the Fermi level (EF). They can extract electrons from the conductive belt, EC, and trap electrons on the surface in the form of ions.231 Such a process can result in band bending and the formation of an electron-depleted region. The reaction of these oxygen species with reducing gases or competitive adsorption and replacement of the adsorbed oxygen by other molecules decreases and can reverse band bending, resulting in increased conductivity. The sensing mechanism of metal oxide gas sensors involves a surface-related redox reaction, which is considerably affected by the intrinsic physicochemical properties of the sensing materials, operating temperature, and target gas.232 The conductivity of metal oxide nanomaterials is directly associated with surface band bending, which is determined by the chemisorption-induced surface states and variation in the bulk defect concentration.230 Therefore, adjusting the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials is critical for improving their gas sensing properties.
 Fig. 18  Basic model illustrating band bending in a wide-bandgap metal oxide semiconductor after the chemisorption of charged species on the surface sites. EC, EV, and EF represent the energies of the CB, VB, and Fermi level, respectively. Further, Λair and eVsurface represent the thickness of the space-charge layer and potential barrier, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2001, Springer. 

3.2.1 Shape and size regulation engineering. 
From the previous analysis, it can be concluded that the size of metal oxide nanomaterials is very important and necessary for investigating their gas sensing properties.26 Yet, the shape of metal oxide nanomaterials is also critical to their gas sensing properties. We classified the nanomaterials into several categories according to their shapes on the basis of previous studies and then comprehensively summarized the relationship between the gas-sensitive characteristics and shape.
As the size of the metal oxide nanomaterial decreases, the specific surface area as well as surface-to-volume ratio increases dramatically.233 In addition, the movements of electrons and holes in metal oxide nanomaterials are also affected by their size and geometry. Hence, the physicochemical properties of metal oxides vary considerably with a change in their shape and size, thereby considerably affecting their gas sensing properties. 1D metal oxide nanomaterials are promising sensors that afford large volume ratios; large quantum densities; higher reactivities; excellent electrical, optical, and chemical properties; unique anisotropic morphologies; and rich structure-tuning abilities.234 2D metal oxide nanomaterials with high surface areas, adjustable pore sizes, and different surface chemistries have unique properties that can be exploited in gas sensing applications.235,236 In general, the preparation of 2D metal oxide nanomaterials requires a template-directed process, such as the silica template. However, a silica template should be removed by etching, which requires considerable efforts.237 Therefore, there are a few studies on 2D metal oxide nanomaterials compared with 1D metal oxide nanomaterials. Hierarchical 3D metal oxide nanomaterials with defined and uniform nanostructures, large specific surface areas, and high gas accessibility have been widely used in gas sensors. In particular, hierarchical 3D architectures, which are composed of low-dimension nanoscale blocks, have attracted considerable attention for gas sensor applications. This structure usually has a large surface area that provides a large number of active sites and favorable paths for the effective reaction and diffusion of gases under examination.238,239 Therefore, hierarchical 3D architectures are very suitable for gas adsorption and desorption of the detected gas. Subsequently, 1D, 2D, and 3D metal oxide nanomaterials as sensitive materials in gas sensors, which provide high surface-to-volume ratios with excellent chemical and thermal stabilities and lowest power consumption under different operating conditions,240 have been summarized.
ZnO is one of the most studied metal oxides and the most promising material for gas sensing. Owing to the considerable effect on conductivity from the reaction of ZnO nanoparticles at the grain boundaries and the complete depletion of carriers, a large number of studies have been conducted on ZnO nanoparticles in recent years. Unfortunately, the stability of ZnO nanomaterials is highly affected by the high temperature that is required for fabricating the sensors.241 Based on this, most of the recent research has focused on 1D ZnO nanomaterials. Tonezzer et al. prepared 1D ZnO nanowires with an average diameter of 80–250 nm and 2D ZnO nanosheets with thickness values in the range of 70–360 nm, which were used to fabricate gas sensors for liquid petroleum.242 The effects of different sensing parameters on the nanostructure of ZnO were studied: Fig. 19a shows a comparison between nanowires and nanosheets of different sizes.242 The sensor response varies with the size of the nanostructures, and the influences of size and shape on the sensitivity of the sensors are equally important. The depletion layer affects two dimensions for the nanowires and only one for the nanosheets, which considerably improves the sensor responses of 1D ZnO nanowires.242 SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires were synthesized to investigate the room-temperature NO2 gas sensing properties, and the responses of multiple networked SnO2 nanowire sensors were increased 2–3 fold from 1 to 5 ppm by encapsulating the nanowires with ZnO.243Fig. 18b shows that the responses of the core–shell nanowires were 2–3- and 2–6-fold higher than those of pristine SnO2 and ZnO nanowires, respectively. The responses of pristine SnO2 and ZnO nanowires and SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires as a function of NO2 concentration under UV illumination is shown in Fig. 19c, which indicates that the response of the SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires tended to grow faster with an increase in the NO2 concentration than those for pristine SnO2 and ZnO nanowires.243 Further, n-SnO2/n-ZnO heterojunctions are the main contributors to improvements in the response of SnO2 nanowires toward NO2 gas with ZnO. Electron transport can be modulated by the heterojunction; therefore, the energy barrier that exists at the heterojunction contributes toward improving its performance. Obviously, the stability of 1D ZnO nanomaterials can be considerably improved relative to its bulk material. More importantly, in most cases, the sensitivity of gas sensors with 1D ZnO nanomaterials as sensitive materials can be considerably improved relative to conventional ZnO nanoparticles and 2D ZnO nanomaterials. In research involving metal oxide gas sensors, another metal oxide CuO nanomaterial with different shapes has received increasing attention as a result ofits large surface area, high surface activity, and enhanced oxygen adsorption capability.244 For example, CuO nanorods exhibited a response of about 2–2000 ppm for ethanol.245 Multifunctional CuO nanowire devices have been fabricated and applied to CO gas sensing, which exhibits high and fast response to CO gas at 200 °C.246 In addition, TiO2 nanowires have been used for sensitive and fast responses to vapors of nitro-explosives under ambient conditions,247 SnO2 nanowires have been used to fabricate high-sensitivity gas sensors for H2,248 and 1D WO3 nanostructure have been used for different gas sensor applications.249
 Fig. 19  (a) Sensor responses of ZnO nanowires and nanosheets to 500 ppm liquefied petroleum gas as a function of working temperature. Inset: SEM images of ZnO nanowires and nanosheets. Adapted with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Dynamic responses of pristine SnO2 nanowires, pristine ZnO nanowires, and SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires toward NO2 gas at concentrations of 1–5 ppm; (c) responses of pristine SnO2 nanowires and SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires as a function of the NO2 gas concentration. Adapted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Relationships between the response and different concentrations of acetone for three typical hierarchical shapes of 3D SnO2 nanostructures; (e) schematic model for sensing using cone-shaped hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures toward acetone; (f) typical response and recovery curves of Co3O4 samples toward different formaldehyde concentrations; inset shows the image of 3D hierarchical Co3O4 nanomaterials. Adapted with permission from ref. 253. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Compared with 1D and 2D metal oxide nanomaterials, 3D metal oxide nanomaterials are more widely used in gas sensors. Hierarchical hollow spheres of WO3 nanosheets can enhance the sensitivity to NO2 to a value as high as 18–100 ppb, which is due to the large specific surface area that can accelerate gas diffusion.250 The large specific surface area caused by the hierarchical 3D architecture can improve the sensitivity toward the detected gas. Furthermore, hierarchical shape-dependent gas sensing performances have been obtained using 3D hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures constructed with ultrathin shuttle-shaped nanosheets.251Fig. 19d shows the relationships between the responses and different concentrations of acetone for three typical hierarchical 3D SnO2 nanostructures.251 Compared with the initial shuttle-shaped and rod-shaped nanostructures, the response of cone-shaped hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures toward the concentration is higher, indicating that the sensing behaviors are highly related to the hierarchical shape of the nanostructures.251 As shown in Fig. 19e, cone-shaped hierarchical nanostructures facilitate the diffusion of gas molecules to effectively interact with the SnO2 nanostructures, resulting in improved relative responses.251 Therefore, it is evident that hierarchical nanostructures are favorable for the sufficient diffusion of gases detected among the sensing film. 3D flower-like and 2D branching sheet-like CuO nanostructures have been synthesized with BET surface areas of 15.0 and 20.8 m2 g−1, respectively.252 The gas sensing properties of CuO flowers exhibited an enhanced gas response to gases at 260 °C as compared to that by CuO nanosheets, which indicated that the enhanced response of the CuO flower sensor is not an increase in the surface area.252 In fact, separate individual CuO nanosheets may be lumped together by face-to-face attraction and therefore hinder molecular diffusion, and their overall micrometer-sized structure can improve the mechanical strength and resist the sintering of particles. Hence, it is reasonable to assume that CuO flowers exhibit an enhanced response compared to those of individual CuO nanosheets.252 Because of this, a hierarchical Co3O4 nanostructure fabricated by calcining Co5-based metal–organic framework (MOF) microcrystals exhibits excellent formaldehyde sensing performance and long-term stability at lower operating temperatures and lower detection limits (10 ppm) (Fig. 19f).253 A schematic illustration of sensing formaldehyde is shown in Fig. 19g, and it mainly consists of two processes: (i) oxygen molecules adsorb on the surface of Co3O4, thereby forming ionized oxygen species; (ii) the absorbed formaldehyde reacts with ionized oxygen species and releases the trapped electrons. Owing to the unique structure of Co3O4 with a special shape, pore structure, and large surface area, sufficient chemical reaction sites and diffusion path for gas molecules are available, leading to increased sensitivity.253
Besides, many other works involving hierarchical 3D metal oxide nanomaterials, such as 3D hierarchical ZnO micro-/nanostructures254 and interconnected macro-/mesoporous ZnO nanostructures,255 3D WO3 nanocolumn bundles,256 3D Ni(OH)2 and NiO nanowalls,257 and Zn2SnO4 hollow spheres,258 have been applied to highly sensitive gas sensing. On the basis of the above, although hierarchical 3D metal oxide nanomaterials have a large specific surface area, this is not the only key factor for the improved gas sensing performance. The fact of the matter is that 3D metal oxide nanomaterials with defined and uniform nanostructures are better able to avoid the aggregation of nanomaterials compared to 1D and 2D nanomaterials, thereby providing more active sites for gas sensing reactions.


3.2.2 Defect regulation engineering. 
Surface defects such as OVs often control the electronic/chemical properties and adsorption behaviors of metal oxide nanomaterials.259 Banerji et al. prepared nanocrystalline ZnO thin films with highly textured {002} facets; their gas sensing characteristics could be controlled via the OV concentration.260 In the sensing process, more the number of OVs, more is the amount of oxygen that is chemi-adsorbed and that can eventually react with higher numbers of reducing gas molecules to increase the sensing response; therefore, the sensing performance varies with the OV concentration.260 OVs are important, but how to introduce OVs into metal oxide nanomaterials is also critical. Introduction of more surface defects via annealing is a relatively common and easy-to-implement method. Yu et al. fabricated ZnO nanowalls by a subsequent process at various annealing temperatures ranging from 350 to 750 °C in air.261 Subsequent calcination promotes an increase in OVs and porosity of the ZnO nanowalls, and the ZnO nanowalls annealed at 450 °C show the best sensing response to NO2 with fast response and recovery time (23 and 11 s) and good repeatability.261 The OVs can induce more electrons into the CB and that can increase the electrostatic interaction of the NO2 molecules with the ZnO nanostructures, thereby enhancing the gas sensing performance of the nanomaterials.261 In addition, SnO2 has the ability to enhance the gas sensing response by increasing the concentration of OVs for different calcination temperatures.262–264 The above examples confirm that calcination is a good strategy to prepare OVs to increase the gas sensitivity, and the quantity of OVs has a considerable influence on the gas sensitivity. Tao et al. proposed a strategy to synthesize OV-abundant ZnO nanosheets derived from MOFs as sensitive materials for various gases, and the detailed mechanisms are explained.192 The resultant OV-abundant ZnO nanosheets with fine-tuned electronic structures exhibit considerably enhanced sensitivity and shortened response time toward ppb-level CO and other volatile organic compounds. The mechanism of gas sensitivity has been studied in detail, as shown in Fig. 20. OVs as electron donors form more chemisorbed oxygen species and increased charge density around the VB maximum and CB minimum as a result of the reduced bandgap of OVs, which facilitates the formation of thermally induced electrons as well as the adsorption and activation of target gases.192
 Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of the gas sensing mechanism (purple spheres represent OVs). Adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
ZnO and SnO2 are the most typical gas-sensitive materials, but other metal oxides as sensitive materials have also been used in gas sensors. W18O49 mesocrystals with mesoporous structures exhibit superior performance in gas sensing applications because of the presence of more OVs in the unique mesoporous structure.265 Qin et al. presented the computational results of NO2 adsorption on WO3 nanowires with abundant OVs to theoretically explore the effect of OVs on the adsorption properties and subsequently toward the target gas (NO2) sensitivity.266
In brief, the sensitivity of metal oxide gas sensors could be considerably improved by the insertion of OVs into the crystal structure. The unpaired electron trapped in ionized OVs provides an active site for the chemisorption of environmental oxygen and target gas molecules, enhancing the charge exchange at the target gas molecule and metal oxide surface.


3.2.3 Crystal facet regulation engineering. 
In principle, the gas sensing of metal oxide semiconductors is based on the redox reaction of the measured gas on the semiconductor surface, resulting in a change in sensor conductivity.267 Therefore, the gas sensing ability of metal oxide semiconductors is theoretically very sensitive to the crystal facets of the sensing materials. In general, metal oxide semiconductors with high-index facets may prove to be good sensing nanomaterials, which is due to the higher densities of the atom steps, defects, and dangling bonds in the high-index facets, affording much higher chemical activity.268–270
SnO2 has remarkable acceptance ability and good chemical stability for changes in the gas environment, making it the most famous gas sensing material.271,272 Kuang et al. synthesized octahedron-shaped SnO2 with exposed high-index {221} facets, and the {221} facets have higher relative surface energy than common low-index facets (e.g., {110}, {101}, and {100}).270 The sensitivity of octahedral SnO2 particles with exposed high-index {221} facets is much higher than those of the other two SnO2 samples, and the sensing activity is proportional to the percentage of {221} facets among the exposed facets. Therefore, the as-prepared SnO2 with {221} facets exhibits far better gas sensing performance over ethanol than those mainly having exposed {110} facets.270 Dodecahedron-like SnO2 nanomaterials with high-surface-energy {221} facets exhibit good SO2 sensing performance.273 Besides, Li et al. synthesized SnO2 octahedra with exposed high-energy {111} and {332} facets. SnO2 with mainly {332} facets exhibited the highest response of 800–2200 ppm ethanol vapor at the optimum temperature of 250 °C, which is much higher than that of SnO2 with mainly {111} facets. The main reason for this result is that the {332} facets of SnO2 have more dangling bonds than the {111} facets.274 Ultrathin SnO2 nanosheets with dominant high-energy {001} facets can readily detect HCHO (1 ppm) with a high response value.275
ZnO is another n-type semiconductor with unique optical, electrical, and physicochemical properties, which has been employed in many fields.276 Recently, the sensing properties of ZnO-based sensors toward toxic and combustible volatile organic compounds have been comprehensively studied.277 Previous works have focused on the evaluation of the experimental properties of the materials, while the mechanism between the exposed crystal facets and gas sensing properties of ZnO has been rarely investigated. However, it is imperative to understand the atomic/molecular interactions with ZnO crystal facets during the gas sensing process on the basis of only the available research results. Cao et al. synthesized three kinds of ZnO nanomaterials (rod, pyramid, and flower) with different crystal facets.278 ZnO flowers show better response to triethylamine (TEA) with an increase in concentration, and ZnO pyramid has no obvious growth trend when the concentration is more than 10 ppm.278 The arrangement of atoms on the surface of ZnO nanomaterials plays a crucial role in causing different gas-sensitive responses.271 Owing to the unsaturated oxygen coordination, Zn2+ can attract oxygen from the air to balance it. However, it is impossible for the terminal O2− ions to further absorb oxygen or other oxygen species. Therefore, the order of sensing activity for ZnO crystal facets is as follows: (0001) > (100) > (000) and (101), which results in different sensing activities of ZnO nanomaterials. ZnO nanosheets with higher percentages of {100} facets exhibit higher selectivity and quick response toward detecting acetone and NO2 at a low working temperature.279,280 The higher binding energies between the molecules to be detected and exposed {100} facets lead to large surface reconstructions, which is responsible for the intrinsic gas sensing properties.279 In addition to the above typical studies, a series of ZnO nanomaterials with highly active facets were prepared and applied to the detection of different gases. We have made a summary of the gas sensing properties of SnO2, ZnO, and other metal oxides, as listed in Table 2. Evidently, the shape may not entirely determine the sensing ability toward certain gases, but crystal facets are the basic determinants. Therefore, selectively exposing high-energy facets of the sensing materials is a promising way to enhance the gas sensing properties of metal oxide nanomaterials.
Table 2 Summary of the gas sensing properties of different metal oxides toward various gases




Metal oxide
Morphology
Facets
Gas
Gas conc.
Temperature
Sensitivity
Ref.




SnO2
Octahedral
{221}
Ethanol
200 ppm
—
150

270



SnO2
Dodecahedron
{221}
Sulfur dioxide
800 ppb
183 °C
1.32

273



SnO2
Octahedral
{332}
Ethanol
800 ppm
250 °C
2200

274



{111}
360 °C
179


SnO2
Nanosheets
{001}
Formaldehyde
200 ppm
200 °C
207.7

275



ZnO
Nanosheet arrays
{100}
Nitrogen dioxide
100 ppm
180 °C
20
280


SnO2
Flowerlike
{101}
Ethanol
105 ppm
350 °C
3.65

281



Triethylamine
45 ppm
2.97


ZnO
Hexagonal
{002}
Acetone
100 ppm
230 °C
33

282



ZnO
Pyramid
{0001}
Ethanol
50 ppm
350 °C
10000

283



ZnO
Foam
{001}
Ethanol
1 ppm
350 °C
1.82

284



Acetone
1.68



n-Butylamine
1.85


ZnO
Nanoflakes
{100}

n-Butanol
100 ppm
330 °C
54.4

285



In2O3
Trapezohedral
{211}
Ethanol
600 ppm
350 °C
3

286



In2O3
Octodecahedra
{110}
Ethanol
1000 ppm
200 °C
600

287



CuO
Decahedron
{111}
Ethanol
50 ppm
200 °C
14

288



Cu2O
Octahedral
{111}
Carbon monoxide
200 ppm
90 °C
19.7

289



WO3
Nanorods
{002}
Acetone
1 ppm
230 °C
3.53

290



WO3
Nanosheets
{002}
Xylene
100 ppm
200 °C
24.5

291



TiO2
Polyhedron
{001}
Carbon monoxide
300 ppm
350 °C
27.9

292



FeVO4
Nanosheets
{010}
Ethanol
200 ppm
200 °C
2.08

293





In summary, the gas sensing properties of SnO2-based sensors can be controlled by selectively exposing high-energy facets at the surface of the sensing materials, which can prove to be a very promising strategy for gas sensing at lower temperatures.

4 DFT calculations involving intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials
DFT is a computational quantum mechanical modeling method that can be used to investigate the electronic structures of different nanomaterials and modeling problems in physics, chemistry, materials science, and multiple branches of engineering.294,295 For metal oxide nanomaterials, this theory can be used to describe changes in the electronic structures of the nanomaterials before and after catalytic or sensing reactions. To help us better understand the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials, DFT can be used to calculate the effects of such intrinsic physicochemical properties in a concrete reaction.
4.1 Defect regulation engineering
As summarized in previous sections, the process of electrocatalytic reaction can be accelerated by defect regulation.109–115 For example, OVs in as-synthesized mesoporous MoO3−x serve as the key factor for obtaining excellent HER performance.109 DFT calculations demonstrated a change in the electronic structure and a possible reaction pathway for HER, as shown in Fig. 21a. The detailed steps are as follows: intermediate (1) is MoO3−x with OVs in the electrolyte, surrounded by H2O molecules; energy barrier of intermediate (2) for MoO3−x with OVs is 0.99 eV, which is far less than that of MoO3 without any OVs (1.69 eV), to adsorb H2O molecules. Intermediate (3) is the reduction of the adsorbed H2O molecules (H2Oads) and the formation of adsorbed hydrogen atoms (Hads). The last step is the release of the formed H2 molecule, and the H2 evolution energy barrier of MoO3−x (1.28 eV) with OVs is much smaller than that of MoO3 without OVs.109 Therefore, DFT calculations confirm that the kinetic energy barrier can be reduced by accelerating H2O adsorption and encouraging H–H bond formation on two adjacent adsorbed Hads and H2Oads species. In addition, the partial charge density of the NiCo2O4 sample with OVs was determined, as shown in Fig. 21b.114 Evidently, the electrons neighboring the OVs that previously occupied the O2p orbital become delocalized, which indicates that the sample with OVs become more active.114 The above DFT calculations can explain the effect of OVs on the electrocatalytic performance. However, an in-depth discussion on the concentration of OVs affecting the performance of metal oxides toward electrochemical performance is very necessary. Zhang et al. revealed the relationship between the concentration of OVs and electrocatalytic performance obtained by DFT computations.296 The electrochemical HER activity was consistent with an increase in the concentration of OVs in the studied samples, which can be further confirmed by DFT calculations (Fig. 21c).296 Three ideal models of the {311} plane were constructed comprising different OV concentrations: an OV-free perfect surface (Ovac0) and two surfaces with one (Ovac1) and two (Ovac2) OVs in 2 × 2 supercells. From the calculation results, it can be concluded that the adsorption energies of the H2O molecule on Ovac1 and Ovac2 were −1.46 and −1.65 eV, which were lower than that of Ovac0 (−0.97 eV), indicating that the adsorption energy of H2O on the surface of the NiCo2O4 resulted from an increasing number of OVs.296 Subsequently, Ovac2 exhibits the smallest energy barrier of 0.53 eV for the adsorbed H2O molecule compared to Ovac1 (0.77 eV) and Ovac0 (0.94 eV). That is, the increasing concentration of OVs on the surface of metal oxide nanomaterials can reduce the adsorption energy of H2O molecules and their dissociation energy barrier on the surface of the catalyst, thereby enhancing the performance of the catalyst.
 Fig. 21  (a) Proposed reaction pathways and energy barrier profiles of mesoporous MoO3 samples in 0.1 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic diagram of the adsorption of H2O molecules onto a spinel structure and the partial charge density of NiCo2O4 with OVs. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Adsorption energies (ΔEads) and activation energy barriers (Ea) of a H2O molecule on three ideal models surfaces: Ovac0, Ovac1, and Ovac2. The red and magenta balls: O atoms; white balls: H atoms; blue balls: Co atoms; cyan balls: Ni atoms. Adapted with permission from ref. 296. Copyright 2018, Springer. (d) Calculated total density of states of conventional TiO2 and defected TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
The above conclusion from the DFT calculations also applies to metal oxide nanomaterials with MVs in the electrocatalytic reaction.120,121 The defects in metal oxides can lead to new catalytic sites that can facilitate water adsorption/activation on the catalyst surface in electrocatalytic water splitting. Except for electrocatalytic reactions, the defect mechanism that promotes electron transfer and separation in the photocatalytic process can also be effectively explained by DFT calculations. DFT calculations involving a comparison between defective TiO2 and normal TiO2 photocathodes in photocatalytic water splitting have been reported.69 Relative to normal TiO2 photocathodes, defected TiO2 photocathodes show obvious cathodic currents under illumination, and this photocurrent increases with an increase in the applied negative potential (Fig. 21d).69 The results of the calculated density of states show that the width of the VB in defected TiO2 can be increased with a new band transition above the top of the original VB. The VB width essentially determines the mobility of the holes and a wider VB leads to higher mobility of the generated holes, which consequently improves charge transfer and separation in defected TiO2.
Defects in metal oxide nanomaterials play an important role in catalytic reactions, but it is still a major challenge to comprehensively understand the reaction mechanism in specific catalytic processes. The partial charge density of nanomaterials with defects can be obtained via DFT, which facilitates the determination of the electron distribution neighboring the defect sites. Furthermore, the adsorbed energy of metal oxide nanomaterials for reactants and intermediates acquired by DFT calculations can be used to further illustrate the critical active sites of defects in catalysis. Therefore, the catalytic activity of metal oxide nanomaterials can be considerably improved by creating appropriate defects on the surface.
4.2 Crystal facet regulation engineering
The facet-controlled fabrication of metal oxide nanomaterials has been proven to be a very effective means to regulate their intrinsic physicochemical properties. Crucially, the mechanism and reaction processes cannot be intuitively explained through experiments, but DFT calculations can enable the analysis of the elementary reaction steps of the catalytic reaction. Recently, we established a theoretical model for understanding the adsorption and reduction behaviors of CO2 on the surface of Co3O4 catalysts.187 From Fig. 22a, it is clear that the calculated adsorption energy of  on the {112} facet is −1.69 eV, which is much larger than that on the {111} facet (−0.13 eV); this is reasonable for considering the relatively short Co–O bond length and two-coordinated adsorption configuration. Finally, the free energy with regard to the reduction of  to COOH* is 0.48 eV on the {111} facet and 0.32 eV on the {112} facet, suggesting that the exposed {112} facets facilitate the adsorption of CO2 and subsequent reduction to CO via COOH.187 DFT calculations are used not only to explore the elementary reaction steps, but also to calculate the density of states to evaluate the energy position of the VB maximum and CB minimum.189–191 For example, the density-of-states plots for the {100} and {111} facets of cubic CeO2 and bulk CeO2 are shown in Fig. 22b, and the density of states show that the surface energy levels of CB and VB are more positive for {100} than those for {111}, corresponding to the Fermi energy entering the VB. A slight difference in the VB and CB between the {100} and {111} facets indicated that a homojunction was formed between the hexahedron prism and octahedron (Fig. 22c).189 The transport of electrons and holes over the {100}/{111} facets thermodynamically leads to the separate accumulation of electrons and holes on the {111} and {100} facets, respectively. The spontaneous charge transfer in the {100}/{111} facets increases the yield as well as the lifetime of the charge carriers. Based on the DFT analyses, we can comprehensively investigate the effect of crystal facets on the catalytic properties of metal oxide nanomaterials. Overall, DFT calculations are an effective means to help us understand the elementary reaction steps and detailed electronic structure of metal oxide nanomaterials in the field of energy conversion.
 Fig. 22  (a) DFT calculations of the adsorption and reduction of CO2 on Co3O4 surfaces with COOH* as the intermediate. Adapted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Density-of-states plots for the {100} and {111} facets of cubic CeO2 and bulk CeO2; (c) illustration of charge transfer across the homojunction with {001} and {111} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Top: Side view of the optimized stable adsorption and TS structures for Pb on Co3O4 with {001} and {111} facets. Bottom: TS barriers of Pb on Co3O4 with {001} and {111} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature. 
For HMI detection, the adsorption of HMIs on the surface of the nanomaterial should be emphasized. A series of studies have also shown that the effect of the crystal facets of metal oxide nanomaterials plays an important role in the adsorption of HMIs.205,222–227 Fortunately, DFT calculations can help us understand this intuitively. Fig. 22d shows the calculated adsorption energy of Pb atom on Co3O4 with different crystal facets.221 The calculated adsorption energy of the Pb atom on Co3O4 with {111} facets is −4.11 eV, which is larger than that on Co3O4 with {001} facets (−3.70 eV). The relatively short Pb–O bond length led to higher adsorption energy for Co3O4 with {111} facets.221 In addition, the geometric structures of the transition states (TS) of Pb on Co3O4 with {001} and {111} facets are shown in Fig. 22d (TS-i and TS-ii). The calculated diffusion energy barriers of Pb on Co3O4 with {001} and {111} facets are predicted to be 1.12 and 0.74 eV, respectively. Therefore, Co3O4 with {111} facets have a higher diffusion rate for Pb with a relatively low TS barrier.221

Via DFT calculations, the adsorption energy, adsorption sites, and TS barrier of metal oxide nanomaterials toward HMIs can be obtained, which is very crucial to propose a reasonable explanation for the excellent catalytic and sensing performances of metal oxide nanomaterials with special crystal facets. Meanwhile, DFT calculations can provide a promising prediction for designing high-performance electrochemical sensing interfaces via the selective synthesis of metal oxide nanomaterials exposed with different well-defined facets.
5 XAFS for the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials
By DFT calculations, we can predict the changes in the electronic structures of metal oxide nanomaterials at the atomic level before and after the catalytic or sensing reactions. However, observing the origin of these catalysis or sensing through experiments is a key challenge. The XAFS technique has become a promising tool for studying the local structures of nanomaterials, from which the distance between the absorbed atoms and adjacent atoms, number and type of atoms, and oxidation state of the absorbed elements that determine the local structure can be obtained.297,298
For regulating the intrinsic physicochemical properties of the metal oxide nanomaterials in catalytic reactions, XAFS is an effective method to identify the origin of the superior catalytic reactivity. As described above, defects have been proven to be effective to initiate catalytically active sites and enable high electrocatalytic activities. For example, δ-FeOOH nanosheets with rich Fe vacancies can act as a highly active catalyst for both HER and OER.121 DFT calculations and experimental studies confirmed that Fe vacancies could induce superior HER and OER catalytic activities. However, XAFS can provide critical information to understand the origin of Fe vacancies with regard to the superior catalytic reactivity. XAFS was performed to analyze the partial atomic structures around the Fe atoms in δ-FeOOH nanosheets and bulk δ-FeOOH, as shown in Fig. 22a–c.121 The Fe K-edge X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra shown in Fig. 23a indicates that the absorption edge for δ-FeOOH nanosheets is upshifted relative to that for bulk δ-FeOOH; therefore, the electron density of Fe atoms in nanosheets decreases.121 The same considerable reduction in the Fe K-edge oscillation for the nanosheets (Fig. 23b) demonstrates a different coordination environment for Fe atoms in nanosheets.121 From the R-space plot shown in Fig. 23c, the coordination number of the Fe–Fe shell in the nanosheets is noticeably reduced to 1.6 compared with 2 for the bulk, suggesting the existence of rich Fe vacancies in the nanosheets. The XAFS data provide direct evidence of the existence of rich valence and local coordinative environment of atoms, thereby helping to find the original evidence of the catalytically active site in metal oxide nanomaterials.
 Fig. 23  (a) Fe K-edge XANES spectra; (b) Fe K-edge EXAFS oscillation function k2χ(k); (c) corresponding Fourier transforms of Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra for bulk δ-FeOOH and δ-FeOOH NSs. Adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (d) Fourier transforms and their fits of the EXAFS spectra with uncorrected phase shifts. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Pb LIII-XAFS spectra of PbII-adsorbed SnO2: (e) normalized k3-weighted k-space; (f) Fourier transforms of the EXAFS data in R-space. Black and red lines represent the raw and fitted curves, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In addition to being used to study catalysis in energy applications, XAFS is primarily used in determining the electrochemical behavior of the environment.193,203,219,228 XAFS has been used to investigate the effect of surface OVs that enhance the stripping signals in HMI detection. From the results of the extended X-ray absorption fine-structure (EXAFS) spectra shown in Fig. 23d, the coordination numbers and intensities of Hg–O and Hg–Hg for Hg/T-1 are found to be higher than those for Hg/T-3, indicating that more O and Hg atoms were uncovered around the Hg atoms.193 Therefore, defective TiO2−x has an enhanced adsorption capacity toward HgII. That is, defective TiO2−x is expected to have excellent electrochemical sensing performance on account of the turned electronic state induced by the abundant free electrons trapped at the OVs. Recently, XAFS was also employed to comprehensively discuss the effects of crystal facets on the electrochemical sensing performance toward HMIs, which can also confirm the binding modes of the adsorbed ions on the different crystal facets of metal oxide nanomaterials.223 Through the accurate fitting analysis of the XAFS spectra (shown in Fig. 23e and f), a series of important information can be made available, such as the interatomic distance and coordination number. From the results of the Pb LIII-EXAFS fitting analyses, with an increase in the average percentage of exposed {110} facets in SnO2 nanoparticles, RPb–O tends to get longer. The {110} facet in SnO2 possessed a lower diffusion energy and longer RPb–O, because of which the adsorbed HMIs could be more easily diffused to the interface of the electrode.223 Therefore, the low-energy {110} facets of SnO2 show excellent performance in electrochemical detection.223
In conclusion, the XAFS technique has become a useful tool to confirm the binding modes of molecules or ions and nanomaterials in catalysis and sensing applications. Via XAFS analysis, direct and useful information, such as defect and local coordinative environment, interatomic distance, and coordination number of atoms on the metal oxide surface can be obtained. Further, combined with previous DFT calculations, a deeper insight can also be obtained as to why the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of nanomaterials exhibit increased performances in catalysis and sensing reactions.
6 Conclusions and perspectives
Over the past few decades, a considerable amount of progress has been made in developing and understanding metal oxides for energy conversion and environmental detection. In particular, the rapid development of nanotechnology has considerably improved the performance of metal oxide nanomaterials in numerous applications. Nevertheless, metal oxide nanomaterials have certain intrinsic limitations, such as no visible-light absorption299 and poor conductivity.60 Wide-bandgap metal oxides, such as TiO2, have no absorption in the visible-light range, which is not conducive toward the absorption and utilization of sunlight and therefore adversely affects their photocatalysis performance.150 The poor conductivity of metal oxides usually causes poor rate capability of charge storage devices and large overpotential for catalytic reactions, thereby affecting their performance in electrochemical catalysis.139 Fortunately, a large number of studies have confirmed that the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials are very attractive for improving their catalytic and sensing properties for energy conversion and environmental detection. In this review, we have summarized the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials in energy conversion and environmental detection. We have mainly discussed the regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties, namely, the shape and size, defects, crystal facets, and ion cycles of metal oxide nanomaterials, with a majority of applications involving photocatalytic water splitting and CO2 reduction, electrocatalytic water splitting, HMI detection, and metal oxide gas sensors. We have been trying to identify the relationship between the intrinsic physicochemical properties of metal oxide nanomaterials and their enhanced catalytic and sensing properties in energy conversion and environmental detection.
The shape and size of metal oxide nanomaterials are strongly related to their intrinsic physicochemical properties, such as the surface-to-volume ratio, bandgap energy, electronic state, and coordination environment of the surface atoms. Although there have been many interesting new developments in the shape and size control of metal oxides, these synthesis methods are mainly aimed at 1D nanomaterials with limited range over the years.46,55 In fact, the key problem now is to develop more reliable and simple synthesis schemes for metal oxide nanomaterials with the desired compositions. Most importantly, a large number of intrinsic shape and size regulations for metal oxide nanomaterials have been reported so far, but improvements in catalytic and sensing properties in different applications can be mainly attributed to increases in the specific surface area and number of active sites. Yet, more research needs to be done on the relationship between the increased active sites and specific surface area, as well as the mechanism for the effect of active sites and specific surface area on their catalytic and sensing properties. Furthermore, nanomaterials tend to undergo structural reorganization due to factors such as reaction temperature and adsorption species in actual catalytic and sensing processes, which poses great difficulties and challenges in detecting the structure and intermediate TSs of actual reactive sites.300,301 This also limits the understanding of the intrinsic active sites of nanomaterials and the real catalytic and sensing mechanisms. Therefore, it is urgent to develop in situ experimental techniques to identify the active centers and structural information of key intermediate states from the atomic point of view, as well as to provide the basis for the design and synthesis of highly active nanomaterials.
The introduction of inherent defects in metal oxides can control their electronic structures, thereby controlling their optical and electronic properties. Moreover, defect regulation has important effects on the ion/electron conductivities, carrier lifetimes, and catalytic activities of metal oxide nanomaterials.63–65 So far, there are still some important scientific problems that need to be investigated. First, it is very challenging to quantitatively analyze the concentration and spatial distribution of OVs in metal oxide nanomaterials, realizing a quantitative study of the relationship between the properties of metal oxides and OVs. However, OVs are also movable in the bulk,302 which makes it even more challenging to precisely measure the localized OV concentration. Second, the stability of defective metal oxides in photocatalytic and electrocatalytic reactions remains an important issue, which is also related to practical applications. Finally, the role of defects in metal oxides for improving their performance for energy conversion and electrochemical detection applications is still not entirely clear.303 We need to understand how defects affect the electronic properties of metal oxides and their ion absorption, diffusion, and electrochemical stability, as well as the existence of intermediate states in these defective metal oxides during the catalytic process.
For inorganic single crystals, the effect of crystal facets is vital for its intrinsic physicochemical properties. The relationship between the crystal facets and their catalytic and sensing properties is reviewed in detail, and the results reveal that selectively exposing high-energy crystal facets is a promising way to enhance the catalytic and sensing properties of metal oxide nanomaterials.79,168 The preparation of uniform, high-purity crystals with controllable crystal facets still remains a challenge. Besides, the growth mechanism of high-energy crystal facets should be further studied to provide direction for controlling the synthesis of metal oxide nanomaterials, and the structural stability of high-energy facets also needs to be taken into account. In addition to the above intrinsic properties, the ion cycles of nanomaterials have attracted considerable attention in recent years. Currently, the surface ion cycles of nanomaterials are primarily used in environmental and biological applications.194–196 The ion cycles of metal oxide nanomaterials have exhibited excellent properties in the catalytic processes of environmental treatment applications. In addition, it is worth mentioning that the different ion cycles of metal oxide nanomaterials have been found to play important roles in electrochemical detection via a series of in-depth studies.203,228,229 Currently, improvements in catalytic or sensing performances by ion cycles of nanomaterials are mainly focused on environmental characteristics, and research on the effect of ion cycles on the catalytic process of energy conversion is still very rare. The mechanism of ion cycling to enhance the catalytic and sensing properties of metal oxide nanomaterials needs to be further proven by different characterization methods.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported financially by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (21735005, 21802145, 61774159, 21904001), Anhui Provincial Natural Science Foundation (2008085QF320, 2008085QF288), Key Program of 13th five-year plan, CASHIPS, the Science and Technology Research Project of Anhui Province (1704c0402195).
Notes and references
M. Kampa and E. Castanas, Environ. Pollut., 2008, 151, 362–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 16–22 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Li, X. X. Wang, G. X. Zhao, C. L. Chen, Z. F. Chai, A. Alsaedi, T. Hayat and X. K. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2018, 47, 2322–2356 RSC .
G. X. Zhao, J. X. Li, X. M. Ren, C. L. Chen and X. K. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2011, 45, 10454–10462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, W. L. Chen, X. L. Wang, Y. G. Li, Z. M. Su and E. B. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 260–284 RSC .
V. Khare, S. Nema and P. Baredar, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 23–33 CrossRef .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem., 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Djurišić, Y. H. Leung and A. M. C. Ng, Mater. Horiz., 2014, 1, 400–410 RSC .
J. L. Qiao, Y. Y. Liu, F. Hong and J. J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 631–675 RSC .
L. Han, S. J. Dong and E. K. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9266–9291 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia, B. Zhao and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17587–17603 RSC .
F. L. Fu and Q. Wang, J. Environ. Manage., 2011, 92, 407–418 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Y. Lu, X. Q. Liang, C. Niyungeko, J. J. Zhou, J. M. Xu and G. M. Tian, Talanta, 2018, 178, 324–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Ren, C. L. Chen, M. Nagatsu and X. K. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2011, 170, 395–410 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, C. L. Chen, X. M. Ren, X. X. Wang, H. Y. Wang and X. K. Wang, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 103, 180–234 CrossRef CAS .
X. Dai, O. Nekrassova, M. E. Hyde and R. G. Compton, Anal. Chem., 2004, 76, 5924–5929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Hocevar, I. Švancara, B. Ogorevc and K. Vytřas, Anal. Chem., 2007, 79, 8639–8643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Aragay, J. Pons and A. Merkoçi, Chem. Rev., 2011, 111, 3433–3458 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Chen, Y. X. Li, P. H. Li, X. Y. Xiao, M. Jiang, S. S. Li, W. Y. Zhou, M. Yang, X. J. Huang and W. Q. Liu, TrAC, Trends Anal. Chem., 2018, 106, 139–150 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Sun, S. B. Liu, F. L. Meng, J. Y. Liu, Z. Jin, L. T. Kong and J. H. Liu, Sensors, 2012, 12, 2610–2631 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Bielański, J. Dereń and J. Haber, Nature, 1957, 179, 668–669 CrossRef .
N. Barsan, D. Koziej and U. Weimar, Sens. Actuators, B, 2007, 121, 18–35 CrossRef CAS .
X. Gao and T. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2018, 277, 604–633 CrossRef CAS .

          A. S. Arico, P. Bruce, B. Scrosati, J. M. Tarascon and W. V. Schalkwijk, Materials For Sustainable Energy: A Collection of Peer-Reviewed Research and Review Articles from, Nature Publishing Group,  2010, pp. 148–159 Search PubMed .
P. Poizot, S. Laruelle, S. Grugeon, L. Dupont and J. M. Tarascon, Nature, 2000, 407, 496–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, X. Liu, G. Neri and N. Pinna, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 795–831 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, M. Shen, X. X. Jin, J. J. Tian, M. L. Li, Y. J. Zhou, L. X. Zhang, Y. S. Li and J. L. Shi, ACS Catal., 2019, 9, 4573–4581 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Wang, Y. Yang, D. D. Han and Y. Li, Nano Today, 2017, 13, 23–39 CrossRef CAS .
J. Shu, Z. L. Qiu, S. Z. Lv, K. Y. Zhang and D. P. Tang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 2425–2429 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Teng, X. D. Wang, J. F. Liao, W. G. Li, H. Y. Chen, Y. J. Dong and D. B. Kuang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802463 CrossRef .
G. Ou, F. C. Wu, K. Huang, N. Hussain, D. Zu, H. H. Wei, B. H. Ge, H. Z. Yao, L. Liu, H. N. Li, Y. M. Shi and H. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 3978–3983 CrossRef PubMed .
A. P. Chen, Q. Su, H. Han, E. Enriquez and Q. X. Jia, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803241 CrossRef PubMed .
C. T. Campbell and C. H. F. Peden, Science, 2005, 309, 713–714 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Henderson, J. M. White, H. Uetsuka and H. Onishi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14974–14975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Uetsuka, H. Onishi, M. A. Henderson and J. M. White, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 10621–10624 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zeng, J. Li, J. P. Liu, Z. L. Wang and S. H. Sun, Nature, 2002, 420, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. F. Puntes, K. M. Krishnan and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2001, 291, 2115–2117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. EL-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2004, 37, 326–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Cao, F. Tao, Y. Tang, Y. T. Li and J. G. Yu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 4747–4765 RSC .
D. J. Norris, A. L. Efros, M. Rosen and M. G. Bawendi, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 1996, 53, 16347–16354 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Goesmann and C. Feldmann, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 1362–1395 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Murzin, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2010, 315, 226–230 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Tiwari, R. N. Tiwari and K. S. Kim, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2012, 57, 724–803 CrossRef CAS .
T. Xu, X. Zhou, Z. Y. Jiang, Q. Kuang, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, Cryst. Growth Des., 2008, 9, 192–196 CrossRef .
Q. Song and Z. J. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6164–6168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. R. Jana, Y. F. Chen and X. G. Peng, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16, 3931–3935 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheon, N. J. Kang, S. M. Lee, J. H. Lee, J. H. Yoon and S. J. Oh, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 1950–1951 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. lijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef .
Y. Li, X. Y. Yang, Y. Feng, Z. Y. Yuan and B. L. Su, Crit. Rev. Solid State Mater. Sci., 2012, 37, 1–74 CrossRef .
Z. Guo, Y. Su, Y. X. Li, G. Li and X. J. Huang, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 9877–9883 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Pumera, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 4146–4157 RSC .
P. Samorì, V. Palermo and X. L. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6027–6029 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Xu, Z. Y. Yuan, G. H. Du, M. Halasa and B. L. Su, Appl. Phys. A, 2007, 86, 181–185 CrossRef CAS .
Z. B. Wang, D. Wang and J. B. Sun, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 245, 828–834 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhu, T. Y. Liu, F. Qian, W. Chen, S. Chandrasekaran, B. Yao, Y. Song, E. B. Duoss, J. D. Kuntz, C. M. Spadaccini, M. A. Worsley and Y. Li, Nano Today, 2017, 15, 107–120 CrossRef CAS .
P. C. Liu, K. J. Zhu, Y. F. Gao, H. J. Luo and L. Lu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700547 CrossRef .
D. L. Wang, Y. C. Yu, H. He, J. Wang, W. D. Zhou and H. D. Abruna, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 1775–1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Lai, J. Li, B. A. Korgel, Z. H. Dong, Z. M. Li, F. B. Su, J. Du and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 2738–2741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu, Q. L. Hao, X. F. Xia, L. Lu, W. Lei and X. Wang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 8537–8546 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Cronemeyer and M. A. Gilleo, Phys. Rev., 1951, 82, 975–976 CrossRef CAS .
J. Jiang, Y. Y. Li, J. P. Liu, X. T. Huang, C. Z. Yuan and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5166–5180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Zhao, C. Chang, F. Teng, Y. F. Zhao, G. B. Chen, R. Shi, G. I. N. Waterhouse, W. F. Huang and T. R. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700005 CrossRef .
H. J. Queisser and E. E. Haller, Science, 1998, 281, 945–950 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. J. Zhang, X. D. Hang, X. D. Zhang, J. F. Xie, B. C. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 1195–1199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, S. Gao, F. C. Lei, C. Xiao and Y. Xie, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 48, 3–12 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Zhu, X. Liu, S. G. Jin, H. J. Chen, W. Y. Lee, M. L. Liu and Y. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 5875–5897 RSC .
Y. Q. Guo, K. Xu, C. Z. Wu, J. Y. Zhao and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 637–646 RSC .
G. W. Li, G. R. Blake and T. T. M. Palstra, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 1693–1706 RSC .
S. B. Wang, L. Pan, J. J. Song, W. B. Mi, J. J. Zou, L. Wang and X. W. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2975–2983 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Cheng, T. R. Zhang, Y. Zhang, J. Du, X. P. Han and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 2474–2477 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. T. Mefford, X. Rong, A. M. Abakumov, W. G. Hardin, S. Dai, A. M. Kolpak, K. P. Johnston and K. J. Stevenson, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 11053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. F. Yan, Y. X. Li, J. Huo, R. Chen, L. M. Dai and S. Y. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606459 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Jia, C. X. Qian, Y. C. Dong, Y. F. Li, H. Wang, M. Ghoussoub, K. T. Butler, A. Walsh and G. A. Ozin, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 4631–4644 RSC .
A. Walsh and K. T. Butler, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 364–372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Shi, Y. Yu, Y. Liang, Y. H. Du and B. Zhang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 3769–3773 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Wang, S. Chen and J. T. Zhang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1904955 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Zhou, L. Yu, Q. C. Zhu, C. Q. Huang and Y. Yu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 18118–18125 RSC .
Y. Q. Wang, S. Chen, S. Y. Zhao, Q. W. Chen and J. T. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 15845–15852 RSC .
Q. Kuang, X. Wang, Z. Y. Jiang, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 308–318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. G. Yang, C. H. Sun, S. Z. Qiao, J. Zou, G. Liu, S. C. Smith, H. M. Cheng and G. Q. Lu, Nature, 2008, 453, 638–641 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. S. Tan, H.-S. Chen, C.-Y. Chiu, S.-C. Wu, L.-J. Chen and M. H. Huang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 1574–1580 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tian, Z. Y. Zhou, S. G. Sun, Y. Ding and Z. L. Wang, Science, 2007, 316, 732–735 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. B. Zhou and D. Y. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 602–613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Wang, J. Z. Ma, J. Wang, S. Chen, H. S. Wang and J. T. Zhang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1802939 CrossRef .
B. You and Y. J. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. You and Y. J. Sun, Acc. Chem. Res., 2018, 51, 1571–1580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chen and S. Z. Qiao, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 10190–10196 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. D. Tran, M. Nguyen, S. S. Pramana, A. Bhattacharjee, S. Y. Chiam, J. Fize, M. J. Field, V. Artero, L. H. Wong, J. Loo and J. Barber, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8912–8916 RSC .
Y. Li, P. Hasin and Y. Wu, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1926–1929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Subbaraman, D. Tripkovic, D. Strmcnik, K. C. Chang, M. Uchimura, A. P. Paulikas, V. Stamenkovic and N. M. Markovic, Science, 2011, 334, 1256–1260 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Chang, N. Danilovic, K. C. Chang, R. Subbaraman, A. P. Paulikas, D. D. Fong, M. J. Highland, P. M. Baldo, V. R. Stamenkovic, J. W. Freeland, J. A. Eastman and N. M. Markovic, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Gong, W. Zhou, M. C. Tsai, J. G. Zhou, M. Y. Guan, M. C. Lin, B. Zhang, Y. F. Hu, D. Y. Wang, J. Yang, S. J. Pennycook, B. J. Hwang and H. J. Dai, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. J. Esswein, M. J. McMurdo, P. N. Ross, A. T. Bell and T. D. Tilley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 15068–15072 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Zhang, J. Yang, H. Wang, H. B. Chen, J. L. Yang and F. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 16159–16167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Audichon, E. Mayousse, T. W. Napporn, C. Morais, C. Comminges and K. B. Kokoh, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 132, 284–291 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fominykh, J. M. Feckl, J. Sicklinger, M. Döblinger, S. Böcklein, J. Ziegler, L. Peter, J. Rathousky, E. W. Scheidt, T. Bein and D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 3123–3129 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, S. S. Cui, Z. J. Sun and P. W. Du, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 160, 202–208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. S. Jin, H. T. Wang, J. J. Li, X. Yue, Y. J. Han, P. K. Shen and Y. Cui, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 3785–3790 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Gao, H. X. Zhang, Q. G. Li, X. G. Yu, Z. L. Hong, X. W. Zhang, C. D. Liang and Z. Lin, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 6290–6294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kumar and S. Bhattacharyya, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 41906–41915 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. C. Zou, X. X. Zou, T. Y. Bai, Y. P. Liu, R. Q. Gao, D. J. Wang and G. D. Li, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 7255–7262 RSC .
N. H. Chou, P. N. Ross, A. T. Bell and T. D. Tilley, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 1566–1569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. D. Blakemore, H. B. Gray, J. R. Winkler and A. M. Müller, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 2497–2500 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Zhu, T. Y. Ma, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2017, 56, 1324–1328 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Liu, S. K. Karuturi, A. N. Simonov, M. Fekete, H. J. Chen, N. Nasiri, N. H. Le, P. R. Narangari, M. Lysevych, T. R. Gengenbach, A. Lowe, H. H. Tan, C. Jagadish, L. Spiccia and A. Tricoli, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1600697 CrossRef .
L. F. Xi, P. D. Tran, S. Y. Chiam, P. S. Bassi, W. F. Mak, H. K. Mulmudi, S. K. Batabyal, J. Barber, J. S. C. Loo and L. H. Wong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 13884–13889 CrossRef CAS .
G. H. Cheng, T. Y. Kou, J. Zhang, C. H. Si, H. Gao and Z. H. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2017, 38, 155–166 CrossRef CAS .
T. Y. Ma, S. Dai, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 13925–13931 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Y. Zhu, F. Shi, X. F. Zhu and W. S. Yang, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104761 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Luo, R. Miao, T. D. Huan, I. M. Mosa, A. S. Poyraz, W. Zhong, J. E. Cloud, D. A. Kriz, S. Thanneeru, J. K. He, Y. S. Zhang, R. Ramprasad and S. L. Suib, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 1600528 CrossRef .
T. Zhang, M. Y. Wu, D. Y. Yan, J. Mao, H. Liu, W. B. Hu, X. W. Du, T. Ling and S. Z. Qiao, Nano Energy, 2018, 43, 103–109 CrossRef CAS .
H. X. Zhang, J. H. Zhang, Y. H. Li, H. B. Jiang, H. Jiang and C. Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13506–13510 RSC .
X. D. Zhang and Y. Xie, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 8187–8199 RSC .
J. Bao, X. D. Zhang, B. Fan, J. J. Zhang, M. Zhou, W. L. Yang, X. Hu, H. Wang, B. C. Pan and Y. Xie, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 7399–7404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xu, Q. Q. Jiang, Z. H. Xiao, X. Y. Li, J. Huo, S. Y. Wang and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5277–5281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tong, H. N. Mao, Y. L. Xu and J. Y. Liu, Inorg. Chem. Front., 2019, 6, 2055–2060 RSC .
L. Z. Zhuang, L. Ge, Y. S. Yang, M. R. Li, Y. Jia, X. D. Yao and Z. H. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606793 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. W. Liu, C. Xiao, P. C. Huang, M. Cheng and Y. Xie, Chem, 2018, 4, 1–21 Search PubMed .
B. J. Morgan and G. W. Watson, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80, 233102 CrossRef .
R. R. Zhang, Y. C. Zhang, L. Pan, G. Q. Shen, N. Mahmood, Y. H. Ma, Y. Shi, W. Y. Jia, L. Wang, X. W. Zhang, W. Xu and J. J. Zou, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 3803–3811 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Q. Peng, R. Yang, Z. Jiang, X. T. Zhou, C. S. Lee, H. J. Zhao and W. J. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1803144 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Q. Wang and J. T. Zhang, Front. Chem. Sci. Eng., 2018, 12, 838–854 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pal and T. Pal, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 14159–14190 RSC .
C. H. Kuo, I. M. Mosa, S. Thanneeru, V. Sharma, L. C. Zhang, S. Biswas, M. Aindow, S. P. Alpay, J. F. Rusling, S. L. Suib and J. Hea, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 5951–5954 RSC .
Y. X. Zhang, F. Ding, C. Deng, S. Y. Zhen, X. Y. Li, Y. F. Xue, Y. M. Yan and K. N. Sun, Catal. Commun., 2015, 67, 78–82 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, Z. Q. Jiang, L. Fang, H. T. Xu, H. J. Zhang, X. Gu and Y. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 27736–27744 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ling, D. Y. Yan, Y. Jiao, H. Wang, Y. Zheng, X. L. Zheng, J. Mao, X. W. Du, Z. P. Hu, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12876 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. K. Chen, X. H. Zhang, L. Z. Zhuang, W. Zhang, N. C. Zhang, H. W. Liu, T. R. Zhan, X. L. Zhang, X. L. She and D. J. Yang, Chem.–Asian J. DOI:10.1002/asia.202000468 .
J. Liu, Y. Liu, N. Y. Liu, Y. Z. Han, X. Zhang, H. Huang, Y. Lifshitz, S. T. Lee, J. Zhong and Z. H. Kang, Science, 2015, 347, 970–974 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Hoang, S. W. Guo, N. T. Hahn, A. J. Bard and C. B. Mullins, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 26–32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. de Jongh, D. Vanmaekelbergh and J. J. Kelly, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2000, 147, 486–489 CrossRef CAS .
W. C. Huang, L. M. Lyu, Y. C. Yang and M. H. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 1261–1267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Karthikeyan, S. Kumar, L. J. Durndell, M. A. Isaacs, C. M. A. Parlett, B. Coulson, R. E. Douthwaite, Z. Jiang, K. Wilson and A. F. Lee, ChemCatChem, 2018, 10, 3554–3563 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumar, C. M. A. Parlett, M. A. Isaacs, D. V. Jowett, R. E. Douthwaite, M. C. R. Cockett and A. F. Lee, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 189, 226–232 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ni, M. K. H. Leung, D. Y. C. Leung and K. Sumathy, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2007, 11, 401–425 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhang, M. F. Hossain and T. Takahashi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35, 8528–8535 CrossRef CAS .
D. P. Kumar, V. D. Kumari, M. Karthik, M. Sathish and M. V. Shankar, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2017, 163, 113–119 CrossRef CAS .
X. B. Chen, L. Liu, P. Y. Yu and S. S. Mao, Science, 2011, 331, 746–750 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Naldoni, M. Allieta, S. Santangelo, M. Marelli, F. Fabbri, S. Cappelli, C. L. Bianchi, R. Psaro and V. D. Santo, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7600–7603 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Q. Tan, Z. Zhao, W. B. Zhu, E. N. Coker, B. S. Li, M. Zheng, W. X. Yu, H. Y. Fan and Z. C. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 19184–19190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Lei, Y. F. Sun, K. T. Liu, S. Gao, L. Liang, B. C. Pan and Y. Xie, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6826–6829 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. L. Tan, R. Amal and Y. H. Ng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 16498–16521 RSC .
S. C. Wang, P. Chen, Y. Bai, J. H. Yun, G. Liu and L. Z. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800486 CrossRef PubMed .
B. T. Sun, Y. Y. Qian, Z. Q. Liang, Y. C. Guo, Y. J. Xue, J. Tian and H. Z. Cui, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2019, 195, 309–317 CrossRef CAS .
Y. P. Bi, Y. J. Zhang, Z. F. Xu, G. Y. Li, X. J. Huang and W. C. Hao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 14229 CrossRef PubMed .
J. M. D. Coey, M. Venkatesan and C. B. Fitzgerald, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 173–179 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ma, K. Zhang, P. Li, M. S. Jung, M. J. Jeong and J. H. Park, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 11819–11823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Liu, J. C. Yu, G. Q. Lu and H. M. Cheng, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 6763–6783 RSC .
F. Zuo, K. Bozhilov, R. J. Dillon, L. Wang, P. Smith, X. Zhao, C. Bardeen and P. Y. Feng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6223–6226 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Schneider, M. Matsuoka, M. Takeuchi, J. L. Zhang, Y. Horiuchi, M. Anpo and D. W. Bahnemann, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 9919–9986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Selloni, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 613–615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Jiang, Q. Kuang, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3634–3645 CrossRef CAS .
M. V. Sofianoua, V. Psycharis, N. Boukos, T. Vaimakis, J. G. Yu, R. Diller, D. Bahnemann and C. Trapalis, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 142–143, 761–768 CrossRef .
T. Tachikawa, S. Yamashita and T. Majima, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 7197–7204 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Q. Fang, X. Q. Gong and H. G. Yang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 725–734 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Liu, G. J. Dong, S. P. Li, G. X. Lu and Y. P. Bi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 2917–2920 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Yu, J. X. Low, W. Xiao, P. Zhou and M. Jaroniec, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 8839–8842 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. C. Sun, P. Gao, Y. R. Yang, P. P. Yang, Y. J. Chen and Y. B. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 18126–18131 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Maeda and K. Domen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7851–7861 CrossRef CAS .
T. T. Wu, X. D. Kang, M. W. Kadi, I. Ismail, G. Liu and H. M. Cheng, Chin. J. Catal., 2015, 36, 2103–2108 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, S. H. Shen and L. J. Guo, Appl. Catal., B, 2015, 166–167, 320–326 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Li, X. P. Tao, R. T. Chen, F. T. Fan and C. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2015, 21, 14337–14341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Zhang, B. B. Jiu, F. L. Gong, J. L. Chen and H. L. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 729, 563–570 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, B. Deng, T. R. Zhang, D. M. Gao and A. W. Xu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 5073–5079 CrossRef CAS .
L. Z. Zhang, J. W. Shi, M. C. Liu, D. W. Jing and L. J. Guo, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 192–194 RSC .
J. J. Zhang, P. Zhang, T. Wang and J. L. Gong, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
G. X. Zhou, X. L. Wu, L. Z. Liu, X. B. Zhu, X. S. Zhu, Y. L. Hao and P. K. Chu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2015, 349, 798–804 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bai, L. L. Wang, Z. Q. Li and Y. J. Xiong, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600216 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. P. Xie, G. Liu, L. C. Yin and H. M. Cheng, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 6746–6751 RSC .
N. Zhang, C. Chen, Z. W. Mei, X. H. Liu, X. L. Qu, Y. X. Li, S. Q. Li, W. H. Qi, Y. J. Zhang, J. H. Ye, V. A. L. Roy and R. Z. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 10367–10374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Sun, S. J. Xiong, X. L. Wu, C. Y. He, T. H. Li and P. K. Chu, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2035–2039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, X. Y. Chen, H. C. He, X. Zhou, Y. Zhou and Z. G. Zou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703119 CrossRef PubMed .
D. G. Wang, H. F. Jiang, X. Zong, Q. Xu, Y. Ma, G. L. Li and C. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2011, 17, 1275–1282 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Inoue, A. Fujishima, S. Konishi and K. Honda, Nature, 1979, 277, 637–638 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Low, B. Cheng and J. G. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 392, 658–686 CrossRef CAS .
S. Navalón, A. Dhakshinamoorthy, M. Álvaro and H. Garcia, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 562–577 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. B. Zhang, C. C. Wang, R. Zakaria and J. Y. Ying, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10871–10878 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kočí, L. Obalová, L. Matějová, D. Plachá, Z. Lacný, J. Jirkovský and O. Šolcová, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 89, 494–502 CrossRef .
G. C. Xi, S. X. Ouyang, P. Li, J. H. Ye, Q. Ma, N. Su, H. Bai and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2395–2399 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, Z. P. Tian, Z. Y. Zhao, Q. Liu, J. H. Kou, X. Y. Chen, J. Gao, S. C. Yan and Z. Q. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2011, 3, 3594–3601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, Q. Liu, Z. D. Li, J. G. Liu and Z. G. Zou, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3372–3377 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Okumura, S. Endo, S. Joonwichien, E. Yamasue and K. N. Ishihara, Catal. Today, 2015, 258, 634–647 CrossRef CAS .
B. Sun, G. W. Zhou, T. T. Gao, H. J. Zhang and H. H. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2016, 364, 322–331 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Bae, J. Kim, C. K. Lim, K. M. Nam and H. Song, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1156 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Kočí, V. Matějka, P. Kovář, Z. Lacný and L. Obalová, Catal. Today, 2011, 161, 105–109 CrossRef .
Z. Q. He, L. N. Wen, D. Wang, Y. J. Xue, Q. W. Lu, C. W. Wu, J. M. Chen and S. Song, Energy Fuels, 2014, 286, 3982–3993 CrossRef .
C. Gao, Q. Q. Meng, K. Zhao, H. J. Yin, D. W. Wang, J. Guo, S. L. Zhao, L. Chang, M. He, Q. X. Li, H. J. Zhao, X. J. Huang, Y. Gao and Z. Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 6485–6490 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. A. Wu, I. McNulty, C. Liu, K. C. Lau, Q. Liu, A. P. Paulikas, C. J. Sun, Z. H. Cai, J. R. Guest, Y. Ren, V. Stamenkovic, L. A. Curtiss, Y. Z. Liu and T. J. Rajh, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 957–968 CrossRef CAS .
P. Li, Y. Zhou, Z. Y. Zhao, Q. F. Xu, X. Y. Wang, M. Xiao and Z. G. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 9547–9550 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Q. Ye, X. L. Jin, X. X. Ji, C. Liu, Y. R. Su, H. Q. Xie and C. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 291, 39–46 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, H. W. Huang, L. Q. Ye, T. R. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang, X. P. Han and T. Y. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1804284 CrossRef .
H. Y. Yuan, S. A. A. A. Aljneibi, J. R. Yuan, Y. X. Wang, H. Liu, J. Fang, C. H. Tang, X. H. Yan, H. Cai, Y. D. Gu, S. J. Pennycook, J. F. Tao and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807161 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Y. Zhou, J. Y. Liu, J. Y. Song, J. J. Li, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 3386–3394 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, F. Wang, P. N. Li and L. Z. Zhang, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2013, 120, 148–155 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wang, M. H. Cao, Z. H. Ai and L. Z. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 3354–3362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Hou, X. P. Huang, Z. H. Ai, J. C. Zhao and L. Z. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 310, 170–178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dong, H. Q. Wang, Z. B. Wu and J. F. Qiu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 343, 200–208 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Arai, M. Yanagida, Y. Konishi, A. Ikura, Y. Iwasaki, H. Sugihara and K. Sayama, Appl. Catal., B, 2008, 84, 42–47 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Ai, L. R. Lu, J. P. Li, L. Z. Zhang, J. R. Qiu and M. H. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 4087–4093 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Ai, L. R. Lu, J. P. Li, L. Z. Zhang, J. R. Qiu and M. H. Wu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 7430–7436 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Ai, Z. T. Gao, L. Z. Zhang, W. W. He and J. J. Yin, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2013, 47, 5344–5352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. G. Shi, Z. H. Ai and L. Z. Zhang, Water Res., 2014, 59, 145–153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Li, W. Y. Zhou, M. Jiang, Z. Guo, J. H. Liu, L. Z. Zhang and X. J. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 4569–4577 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Zhou, J. M. Luo, C. B. Liu, L. Chu, J. H. Ma, Y. H. Tang, Z. B. Zeng and S. L. Luo, Water Res., 2016, 89, 151–160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Setyono and S. Valiyaveettil, J. Hazard. Mater., 2016, 302, 120–128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. El-Sayed, Acc. Chem. Res., 2001, 34, 257–264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Hua, S. J. Zhang, B. C. Pan, W. M. Zhang, L. Lv and Q. X. Zhang, J. Hazard. Mater., 2012, 211, 317–331 CrossRef PubMed .
L. F. Hu, L. M. Wu, M. Y. Liao, X. H. Hu and X. S. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 998–1004 CrossRef CAS .
G. Q. Zhang, H. B. Wu, H. E. Hoster, Ma. B. Chan-Park and X. W. Lou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 9453–9456 RSC .
J. Liu, C. P. Liu, Y. L. Wan, W. Liu, Z. S. Ma, S. M. Ji, J. B. Wang, Y. C. Zhou, P. Hodgson and Y. C. Li, CrystEngComm, 2013, 15, 1578–1585 RSC .
L. Qian, L. Gu, L. Yang, H. Y. Yuan and D. Xiao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 7388–7396 RSC .
X. Y. Yu, X. Z. Yao, T. Luo, Y. Jia, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3689–3695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. S. Li, W. Y. Zhou, M. Jiang, L. N. Li, Y. F. Sun, Z. Guo, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 288, 42–51 CrossRef CAS .
R. Schaub, P. Thostrup, N. Lopez, E. Lægsgaard, I. Stensgaard, J. K. Nørskov and F. Besenbacher, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 87, 266104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. E. Henrich and R. L. Kurtz, J. Vac. Sci. Technol., 1981, 18, 416 CrossRef CAS .
I. G. Austin and N. F. Mott, Adv. Phys., 2001, 50, 757–812 CrossRef .
R. Schaub, E. Wahlström, A. Rønnau, E. Lægsgaard, I. Stensgaard and F. Besenbacher, Science, 2003, 299, 377–379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Polarz, J. Strunk, V. Ischenko, M. W. E. van den Berg, O. Hinrichsen, M. Muhler and M. Driess, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 2965–2969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Y. Zhou, S. S. Li, J. Y. Song, M. Jiang, T. J. Jiang, J. Y. Liu, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 4328–4337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, J. J. Li, F. Xie, Y. Wei and M. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2020, 320, 128355 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Yu, Q. Q. Meng, T. Luo, Y. Jia, B. Sun, Q. X. Li, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2886 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. G. Liu, Y. F. Sun, W. K. Chen, Y. Kong, Z. Jin, X. Chen, X. Zheng, J. H. Liu, H. J. Huang and S. H. Yu, Small, 2015, 11, 2493–2498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Jin, M. Yang, S. H. Chen, J. H. Liu, Q. X. Li and X. J. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2017, 89, 2613–2621 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wei, R. Yang, X. Y. Yu, L. Wang, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, Analyst, 2012, 137, 2183–2191 RSC .
X. Z. Yao, Z. Guo, Q. H. Yuan, Z. G. Liu, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 12203–12213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. H. Xu, Q. Q. Meng, C. Gao, J. Wang, Q. X. Li, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, Chem. Commun., 2014, 50, 5011–5013 RSC .
W. Y. Yan, Q. Zhou, X. Chen, X. J. Huang and Y. C. Wu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 230, 761–772 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Li, W. Y. Zhou, Y. X. Li, M. Jiang, Z. Guo, J. H. Liu and X. J. Huang, Anal. Chem., 2018, 90, 1263–1272 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Sun, J. Wang, P. H. Li, M. Yang and X. J. Huang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 292, 136–147 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Wang, L. W. Yin, L. Y. Zhang, D. Xiang and R. Gao, Sensors, 2010, 10, 2088–2106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Barsan and U. Weimar, J. Electroceram., 2001, 7, 143–167 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Kim and J. H. Lee, Sens. Actuators, B, 2014, 192, 607–627 CrossRef CAS .
V. H. Grassian, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 18303–18313 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Li, W. Zeng and Z. C. Wang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 221, 1570–1585 CrossRef CAS .
A. I. Hochbaum, R. Chen, R. D. Delgado, W. J. Liang, E. C. Garnett, M. Najarian, A. Majumdar and P. D. Yang, Nature, 2008, 451, 163–168 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Joshi, T. Hayasaka, Y. M. Liu, H. L. Liu, O. N. O. Jr and L. W. Lin, Microchim. Acta, 2018, 185, 213 CrossRef PubMed .
J. X. Zhu, Z. Y. Yin, H. Li, H. T. Tan, C. L. Chow, H. Zhang, H. H. Hng, J. Ma and Q. Y. Yan, Small, 2011, 7, 3458–3464 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Anoshkin, A. G. Nasibulinm, P. R. Mudimela, M. S. He, V. Ermolov and E. I. Kauppinen, Nano Res., 2013, 6, 77–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Cui, J. B. Sun, X. Liu, J. W. Li, X. Z. Ma and T. T. Chen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2014, 308, 17–23 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wan, Q. H. Li, Y. J. Chen, T. H. Wang, X. L. He, J. P. Li and C. L. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84, 3654–3656 CrossRef CAS .
G. Korotcenkov and B. K. Cho, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 2012, 58, 167–208 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tonezzer, T. T. L. Dang, N. Bazzanella, V. H. Nguyenb and S. Iannotta, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 1152–1160 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Park, S. An, Y. H. Mun and C. M. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 4285–4292 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Choi and H. W. Jang, Sensors, 2010, 10, 4083–4099 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, X. Q. Fu, X. Y. Xue, Y. G. Wang and T. H. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 145506 CrossRef .
L. Liao, Z. Zhang, B. Yan, Z. Zheng, Q. L. Bao, T. Wu, C. M. Li, Z. X. Shen, J. X. Zhang, H. Gong, J. C. Li and T. Yu, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 085203 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Wang, A. T. Chen, S. H. Jang, H. L. Yip and A. K.-Y. Jen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 7269–7273 RSC .
Y. J. Choi, I. S. Hwang, J. G. Park, K. J. Choi, J. H. Park and J. H. Lee, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 095508 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. X. Qin, C. Y. Liu and Y. Liu, Chin. Phys. B, 2015, 24, 027304 CrossRef .
J. W. Li, X. Liu, J. S. Cui and J. B. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 10108–10114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Li, Z. Guo, Y. Su, X. B. Jin, X. H. Tang, J. R. Huang, X. J. Huang, M. Q. Li and J. H. Liu, ACS Sens., 2017, 2, 102–110 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yang, F. Xiao, J. D. Wang and X. T. Su, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 207, 177–185 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhou, Y. P. Wu, J. Zhao, W. W. Dong, X. Q. Qiao, D. F. Hou, X. H. Bu and D. S. Li, Inorg. Chem., 2017, 56, 14111–14117 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Y. Ge, T. M. Xuan, G. L. Yin, J. Lu and D. N. He, Sens. Actuators, B, 2015, 220, 356–361 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, H. W. Huang, H. Zhao, X. T. Yan, S. J. Wu, Y. Li, M. Wu, L. H. Chen, X. Y. Yang and B. L. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 8583–8590 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. J. Qi, S. Gao, K. Chen, J. Yang, H. W. Zhao, L. Guo and S. H. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18019–18026 RSC .
G. H. Li, X. W. Wang, L. Liu, R. Liu, F. P. Shen, Z. Cui, W. Chen and T. Zhang, Small, 2015, 11, 731–739 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. M. Yan, S. Y. Ma, H. Y. Jiao, Q. Chen, Y. Lu, W. X. Jin, W. Q. Li, T. T. Wang, X. H. Jiang, Z. Qiang and H. Chen, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 245, 493–506 CrossRef .
M. W. Ahn, K. S. Park, J. H. Heo, J. G. Park, D. W. Kim, K. J. Choi, J.-H. Lee and S. H. Hong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 263103 CrossRef .
S. Pati, S. B. Majumder and P. Banerji, J. Alloys Compd., 2012, 541, 376–379 CrossRef CAS .
L. M. Yu, F. Guo, S. Liu, B. Yang, Y. X. Jiang, L. J. Qi and X. H. Fan, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 682, 352–356 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, P. R. Ren, H. L. Tian, H. Q. Fan, C. L. Cai and W. G. Liu, J. Alloys Compd., 2016, 669, 29–37 CrossRef CAS .
M. Epifani, J. D. Prades, E. Comini, E. Pellicer, M. Avella, P. Siciliano, G. Faglia, A. Cirera, R. Scotti, F. Morazzoni and J. R. Morante, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 19540–19546 CrossRef CAS .
A. Espinosa, N. Sánchez, J. Sánchez-Marcos, A. de Andrés and M. C. Muñoz, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 24054–24060 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, J. B. Sun, X. Cao, Y. H. Zhu, Q. X. Wang, G. C. Wang, Y. Han, G. Y. Lu, G. S. Pang and S. H. Feng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 8653–8657 RSC .
Y. X. Qin and Z. H. Ye, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 222, 499–507 CrossRef CAS .
M. Batzill, K. Katsiev, J. M. Burst and U. Diebold, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2005, 72, 165414 CrossRef .
N. Tian, Z. Y. Zhou, N. F. Yu, L. Y. Wang and S. G. Sun, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 7580–7581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. H. Hu, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 16136–16137 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. G. Han, M. S. Jin, S. F. Xie, Q. Kuang, Z. Y. Jiang, Y. Q. Jiang, Z. X. Xie and L. S. Zheng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 9180–9183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Kumar, S. Sen, K. P. Muthe, N. K. Gaur, S. K. Gupta and J. V. Yakhmi, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 138, 587–590 CrossRef CAS .
A. Köck, A. Tischner, T. Maier, M. Kast, C. Edtmaier, C. Gspan and G. Kothleitner, Sens. Actuators, B, 2009, 138, 160–167 CrossRef .
X. H. Ma, Q. X. Qin, N. Zhang, C. Chen, X. Liu, Y. Chen, C. N. Li and S. P. Ruan, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 723, 595–601 CrossRef CAS .
C. X. Wang, D. P. Cai, B. Liu, H. Li, D. D. Wang, Y. Liu, L. L. Wang, Y. R. Wang, Q. H. Li and T. H. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10623–10628 RSC .
R. Xu, L. X. Zhang, M. W. Li, Y. Y. Yin, J. Yin, M. Y. Zhu, J. J. Chen, Y. Wang and L. J. Bie, Sens. Actuators, B, 2019, 289, 186–194 CrossRef CAS .
C. B. Ong, L. Y. Ng and A. W. Mohammad, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 81, 536–551 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu and W. Zeng, Sens. Actuators, A, 2017, 267, 242–261 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Li, H. Y. Xu, H. Q. Yu, T. Zhai, Q. Xu, X. P. Yang, J. Q. Wang and B. Q. Cao, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 706, 461–469 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Xiao, L. Z. Lu, A. Q. Zhang, Y. H. Zhang, L. Sun, L. Huo and F. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 3797–3804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Xiao, T. Y. Yang, M. Y. Chuai, B. X. Xiao and M. Z. Zhang, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2016, 18, 325–330 RSC .
B. Liu, L. H. Zhang, H. Zhao, Y. Chen and H. Q. Yang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2012, 173, 643–651 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Jia, H. M. Ji, Y. Zhang, Y. L. Chen, X. H. Sun and Z. G. Jin, J. Hazard. Mater., 2014, 276, 262–270 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Saito, K. Watanabe, H. Haneda, I. Sakaguchi and K. Shimanoe, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2018, 122, 7353–7360 CrossRef CAS .
M. Z. Wang, M. D. Chen, Y. Ma, J. Yang, Y. K. Yuan, J. F. Liu, B. Liu, Q. Du, Y. Ren, S. Z. Liu and H. Q. Yang, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 479, 646–654 CrossRef CAS .
Y. V. Kaneti, J. Yue, X. C. Jiang and A. B. Yu, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 13153–13162 CrossRef CAS .
X. G. Han, X. Han, L. Q. Sun, S. G. Gao, L. Li, Q. Kuang, Z. X. Xie and C. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 9612–9615 RSC .
J. J. Liu, G. Chen, Y. G. Yu, Y. L. Wu, M. J. Zhou, H. Q. Zhang, C. Lv, Y. Zheng and F. He, RSC Adv., 2015, 5, 44306–44312 RSC .
M. L. Yin and S. Z. Liu, Sens. Actuators, B, 2016, 227, 328–335 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Wang, R. Zhang, T. T. Zhou, Z. Lou, J. N. Deng and T. Zhang, Sens. Actuators, B, 2017, 239, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Jia, H. M. Ji, D. H. Wang, X. Bai, X. H. Sun and Z. G. Jin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13602–13611 RSC .
Y. Liang, Y. Yang, C. W. Zou, K. Xu, X. F. Luo, T. Luo, J. Y. Li, Q. Yang, P. Y. Shi and C. L. Yuan, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 783, 848–854 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Zhang, W. Zeng, H. Ye and Y. Q. Li, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 442, 507–516 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, K. Yao, Q. Cai, Z. J. Shi, M. Q. Sheng, H. Y. Lin and M. W. Shao, CrystEngComm, 2014, 16, 270–276 RSC .
X. Q. Gong, Z. P. Liu and P. Hu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 8–9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Alavi, P. J. Hu, T. Deutsch, P. L. Silvestrelli and J. Hutter, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1998, 80, 3650 CrossRef CAS .
D. L. Liu, C. Zhang, Y. F. Yu, Y. M. Shi, Y. Yu, Z. Q. Niu and B. Zhang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 603–613 CrossRef CAS .
D. E. Keller, S. M. K. Airaksinen, A. O. Krause, B. M. Weckhuysen and D. C. Koningsberger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3189–3197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. A. Peck and M. A. Langell, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 4483–4490 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hisatomi, J. Kubota and K. Domen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 7520–7535 RSC .
K. Y. Zhu, X. F. Zhu and W. S. Yang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 1252–1265 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Hu, Q. Y. Ma, S. F. Hung, Z. N. Chen, D. H. Ou, B. Ren, H. M. Chen, G. Fu and N. F. Zheng, Chem, 2017, 3, 122–133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. T. Yi, T. Choi, S. G. Choi, Y. S. Oh and S. W. Cheong, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 3403–3407 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Zhai, S. L. Xie, M. H. Yu, P. P. Fang, C. L. Liang, X. H. Lu and Y. X. Tong, Nano Energy, 2014, 8, 255–263 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05539eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Li Chen	Li Chen is a Lecturer at the Institute of Physical Science and Information Technology at Anhui University. He received his bachelor's in Chemistry from Hubei Normal University in 2013 and his PhD in 2018 under the supervision of Prof. En-Bo Wang from Northeast Normal University. His research interest is related to the synthesis of nanomaterials and their applications in ambient photochemical/electrochemical sensors. He has published nearly 20 papers in peer-reviewed journals.
Zhonggang Liu	Zhonggang Liu received his PhD in Electroanalytical Chemistry from the University of Science and Technology of China (USTC) in 2015. After working in Lakehead University and University of Guelph, Canada, as a Postdoctoral Researcher cooperated with Dr Aicheng Chen, he joined Anhui University in 2019 as an Associate Professor. His research interests focus on metal and metal oxide nanomaterials, electrochemical sensors or biosensors, and (ultra)micro-electrochemistry.
Zheng Guo	Zheng Guo received his PhD from the University of Science and Technology of China and he joined the Institute of Intelligent Machines, Chinese Academy of Sciences, in 2008. In 2011, as an Assistant Research Professor, he began his research with Professor Yang-Kyu Choi at the Korea Advanced Institute of Science and Technology. Now, he is a Professor at Anhui University. His main research interests focus on the fabrication of functional nanodevices, gas sensors, and photoelectrochemical sensors based on nanostructured materials. He has authored and coauthored more than 80 refereed journal publications.
Xing-Jiu Huang	Xing-Jiu Huang completed his PhD at the University of Science and Technology of China in 2004 and worked with Prof. Yang-Kyu Choi in KAIST, South Korea, as a Postdoctoral Researcher for three years. He was a Postdoctoral Research Assistant in the group of Prof. Richard G. Compton at Oxford University during 2008–2010. In 2010, he joined the Institute of Intelligent Machines, Chinese Academy of Sciences, China, and has been working as a Professor since then. His team's research interests focus on new methods and principles based on nanomaterials for the electroanalysis of persistent toxic substances, as well as photoelectrochemical sensors.

 	Fig. 1  Regulation of the intrinsic physicochemical properties of various metal oxides for energy conversion and environmental detection.	 

 	Fig. 2  Diverse basic shapes of metal oxide nanomaterials: 0D spheres, triangles, and cubes. Adapted with permission from ref. 45 and 47. Copyright 2004, American Chemical Society; 1D nanotubes, nanowires, and nanobelts. Adapted with permission from ref. 49 and 50. Copyright 2004 and 2018, American Chemical Society and Wiley; 2D nanosheets, nanosquares, and hexagonal nanoplates. Adapted with permission from ref. 51, 53 and 54. Copyright 2015, 2007 and 2017, Springer and Elsevier; 3D hollow-structured, nanoflower and microsphere. Adapted with permission from ref. 57–59. Copyright 2014, 2011 and 2015, American Chemical Society and Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of various defects in crystals. Adapted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2017, the Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Different defects in undoped TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Water-splitting reactions under acidic or alkaline media and schematic diagram of a conventional water electrolyzer.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a)–(c) SEM images of CuO microspheres, nanosheets, and nanowires; (d) CV curves obtained using bare FTO (black), commercial CuO (red), microspheres (blue), nanosheets (pink), and nanowires (green) as the catalysts for OER in 0.1 M KBi solution at pH 9.2. Adapted with permission from ref. 97. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (e) and (f) SEM images of porous MoO2 nanosheets; (g) steady-state polarization curves of Ni foam, commercial Pt/C, compact MoO2, and porous MoO2 in 1 M KOH for HER and OER. Adapted with permission from ref. 98. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (h) SEM image of hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids; (i) polarization curve of hierarchical NiCo2O4 hollow microcuboids for HER and OER. Adapted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (j) SEM image of NiFe-NC; (k) polarization curves for OER. Adapted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Polarization curves of various NiCo2O4 samples. Inset: Enlargement of the region near the onset; (b) corresponding Tafel plots of various NiCo2O4 samples. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) The polarization and (d) Tafel plots of OER on pristine Co3O4 and plasma-engraved Co3O4. Adapted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. HER performances: (e) LSV and (f) corresponding Tafel curves of Ni foam, δ-FeOOH bulk/NF, δ-FeOOH NSs/NF, and Pt/C/NF measured in 1.0 M KOH solution; OER performances: (g) LSV and (h) corresponding Tafel curves of Ni foam, δ-FeOOH bulk/NF, δ-FeOOH NSs/NF, and Pt/C/NF measured in 1.0 M KOH solution. Adapted with permission from ref. 120. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a)–(d) Surface atomic configurations of Co3O4 in the {001}, {110}, {111}, and {112} facets; (e) OER polarization curves; (f) HER polarization curves; (g) polarization curves of full water splitting in a two-electrode configuration at a scan rate of 3 mV s−1; (h) chronopotentiometric curves in 1.0 M KOH at a constant current density of 10 mA cm−2. Adapted with permission from ref. 127. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

Cu2O	50	20	2.25	−1.44
100	19	2.10	−1.56
300	15	2.05	−1.60
500	13	1.96	−1.61

 	Fig. 8  (a) and (b) SEM images of conventional and hierarchical Cu2O nanocubes; (c) visible-light photocatalytic hydrogen production of conventional and hierarchical Cu2O nanocubes promoted with 0.6 wt% Pt cocatalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 134. Copyright 2016, Elsevier. (d)–(f) TEM images of TNS, TNT, and TNR photocatalysts; (g) energy band diagrams of TNT, TNR, and TNS catalysts; (h) comparison of the photocatalysts for hydrogen production under solar-light irradiation. Adapted with permission from ref. 137. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectra of pristine SrTiO3 and SrTiO3 with OVs (STO), and the insets show their corresponding photographs. Adapted with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society. (b) VB XPS data; (c) schematic band structure of different In2O3 materials; (d) IPCE curves at 1.6 V vs. RHE. Adapted with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) VB XPS data of defected and normal TiO2; (b) Mott–Schottky plots of a defected TiO2 electrode used as a working electrode; (c) current–voltage curves of defected and conventional TiO2; (d) time course of hydrogen generation. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Photocatalytic hydrogen evolution tests of TiO2 samples under UV-light irradiation; (b) comparative representation of the hydrogen evolution rates; (c) corresponding surface and bulk electron carrier trapping for intact and etched TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 156. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (d) Surface heterojunction composed of both {101} and {001} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 158. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM image of rutile TiO2 with {111} and {110} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 149. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (b) SEM image of SrTiO3 nanocrystals with {023} and {001} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 161. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (c) SEM image of multifaceted Cu2O with {100} and {104} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2014, Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) SEM image of monoclinic WO3 with {100} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (e) SEM image of In2O3 with {100} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH. (f) SEM image of polyhedral BiVO4 with various facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a)–(c) SEM images of Bi2WO6 square nanoplates; (d) CH4 generation with nanoplates and solid-state reaction (SSR) sample as the catalyst. Adapted with permission from ref. 180. Copyright 2011, American Chemical Society. (e) TEM image of WO3 nanosheet; (f) calculated band positions of the WO3 nanosheet and commercial WO3, corresponding to the redox potential of CO2/CH4 with water; (g) comparison of WO3 nanosheet and commercial WO3 powder for CH4 generation. Adapted with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. (h) TEM image of ZnO–Cu2O nanoparticles; (i) amount of CH4 production using ZnO–Cu2O (black) catalysts, and ZnO (red) and Cu2O (blue) nanoparticles; (j) amounts of CH4 (black), CO (red), and H2 (blue) production for photocatalytic CO2 conversion experiments. Adapted with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2017, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the spatial separation of redox sites on the HF0, HF4.5, and HF9 samples; (b) {001} and {101} surface heterojunctions; (c) comparison of the photocatalytic CH4 production activity of P25 and TiO2 samples prepared by varying the HF amounts. Adapted with permission from ref. 157. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  CV curves of NiCo2O4-, Co3O4-, and NiO-modified electrodes in 1 M KOH without (a) and with (b) 0.5 M methanol at a scan rate of 50 V s−1; (c) chronoamperometry curves of NiCo2O4- and NiO-modified electrodes in 1 M KOH with 0.5 M methanol at 0.6 V; (d) SWASV curves of NiCo2O4-, Co3O4-, and NiO-modified electrodes in response to 1 μM PbII and 1.1 μM CuII; (e) and (f) SWASV curves and corresponding calibration plots of PbII and CuII on hollow NiCo2O4-modified electrodes. Adapted with permission from ref. 212. Copyright 2014, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Typical SWASV responses for T-1-modified GCE toward HgII; (b) comparison of sensitivities toward HgII. Inset shows the role of OVs in catalysis. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. SWASV responses of (c) bare GCE and GCE modified with (d) octahedral, (e) elongated dodecahedral, and (f) lance-shaped SnO2 nanoparticles for the analysis of PbII in a HAc–NaAc buffer solution (0.1 M, pH 5.0). Insets show the corresponding linear calibration plots of the peak current against PbII concentrations. Adapted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) and (b) Typical SWASV responses of AsIII at Au/Fe3O4 screen-printed carbon electrode (SPCE) across different concentration ranges and the corresponding linear calibration plots of the peak current against AsIII concentrations ranging from 0.1 to 10 ppb. Adapted with permission from ref. 203. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Detection strategy of AsIII on Co0.6Fe2.4O4 nanocubes; (d) typical SWASV responses of AsIII from 1 to 20 ppb and the corresponding linear calibration plot of the peak current against AsIII concentrations; current changes in the SWASV responses of 10 ppb of AsIII at Co0.6Fe2.4O4 nanocubes in the presence of (e) 0–220 ppb Fe(II) and (f) 0–260 ppb CoII. Adapted with permission from ref. 228. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 18  Basic model illustrating band bending in a wide-bandgap metal oxide semiconductor after the chemisorption of charged species on the surface sites. EC, EV, and EF represent the energies of the CB, VB, and Fermi level, respectively. Further, Λair and eVsurface represent the thickness of the space-charge layer and potential barrier, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 231. Copyright 2001, Springer.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Sensor responses of ZnO nanowires and nanosheets to 500 ppm liquefied petroleum gas as a function of working temperature. Inset: SEM images of ZnO nanowires and nanosheets. Adapted with permission from ref. 238. Copyright 2015, Elsevier. (b) Dynamic responses of pristine SnO2 nanowires, pristine ZnO nanowires, and SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires toward NO2 gas at concentrations of 1–5 ppm; (c) responses of pristine SnO2 nanowires and SnO2/ZnO core–shell nanowires as a function of the NO2 gas concentration. Adapted with permission from ref. 241. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. (d) Relationships between the response and different concentrations of acetone for three typical hierarchical shapes of 3D SnO2 nanostructures; (e) schematic model for sensing using cone-shaped hierarchical SnO2 nanostructures toward acetone; (f) typical response and recovery curves of Co3O4 samples toward different formaldehyde concentrations; inset shows the image of 3D hierarchical Co3O4 nanomaterials. Adapted with permission from ref. 253. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 20  Schematic diagram of the gas sensing mechanism (purple spheres represent OVs). Adapted with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

SnO2	Octahedral	{221}	Ethanol	200 ppm	—	150	
270

SnO2	Dodecahedron	{221}	Sulfur dioxide	800 ppb	183 °C	1.32	
273

SnO2	Octahedral	{332}	Ethanol	800 ppm	250 °C	2200	
274

{111}	360 °C	179
SnO2	Nanosheets	{001}	Formaldehyde	200 ppm	200 °C	207.7	
275

ZnO	Nanosheet arrays	{100}	Nitrogen dioxide	100 ppm	180 °C	20	280
SnO2	Flowerlike	{101}	Ethanol	105 ppm	350 °C	3.65	
281

Triethylamine	45 ppm	2.97
ZnO	Hexagonal	{002}	Acetone	100 ppm	230 °C	33	
282

ZnO	Pyramid	{0001}	Ethanol	50 ppm	350 °C	10000	
283

ZnO	Foam	{001}	Ethanol	1 ppm	350 °C	1.82	
284

Acetone	1.68

n-Butylamine	1.85
ZnO	Nanoflakes	{100}	
n-Butanol	100 ppm	330 °C	54.4	
285

In2O3	Trapezohedral	{211}	Ethanol	600 ppm	350 °C	3	
286

In2O3	Octodecahedra	{110}	Ethanol	1000 ppm	200 °C	600	
287

CuO	Decahedron	{111}	Ethanol	50 ppm	200 °C	14	
288

Cu2O	Octahedral	{111}	Carbon monoxide	200 ppm	90 °C	19.7	
289

WO3	Nanorods	{002}	Acetone	1 ppm	230 °C	3.53	
290

WO3	Nanosheets	{002}	Xylene	100 ppm	200 °C	24.5	
291

TiO2	Polyhedron	{001}	Carbon monoxide	300 ppm	350 °C	27.9	
292

FeVO4	Nanosheets	{010}	Ethanol	200 ppm	200 °C	2.08	
293


 	Fig. 21  (a) Proposed reaction pathways and energy barrier profiles of mesoporous MoO3 samples in 0.1 M KOH. Adapted with permission from ref. 109. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic diagram of the adsorption of H2O molecules onto a spinel structure and the partial charge density of NiCo2O4 with OVs. Adapted with permission from ref. 114. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Adsorption energies (ΔEads) and activation energy barriers (Ea) of a H2O molecule on three ideal models surfaces: Ovac0, Ovac1, and Ovac2. The red and magenta balls: O atoms; white balls: H atoms; blue balls: Co atoms; cyan balls: Ni atoms. Adapted with permission from ref. 296. Copyright 2018, Springer. (d) Calculated total density of states of conventional TiO2 and defected TiO2. Adapted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) DFT calculations of the adsorption and reduction of CO2 on Co3O4 surfaces with COOH* as the intermediate. Adapted with permission from ref. 187. Copyright 2016, Wiley-VCH. (b) Density-of-states plots for the {100} and {111} facets of cubic CeO2 and bulk CeO2; (c) illustration of charge transfer across the homojunction with {001} and {111} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. (d) Top: Side view of the optimized stable adsorption and TS structures for Pb on Co3O4 with {001} and {111} facets. Bottom: TS barriers of Pb on Co3O4 with {001} and {111} facets. Adapted with permission from ref. 221. Copyright 2013, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Fe K-edge XANES spectra; (b) Fe K-edge EXAFS oscillation function k2χ(k); (c) corresponding Fourier transforms of Fe K-edge EXAFS spectra for bulk δ-FeOOH and δ-FeOOH NSs. Adapted with permission from ref. 121. Copyright 2018, Wiley. (d) Fourier transforms and their fits of the EXAFS spectra with uncorrected phase shifts. Adapted with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. Pb LIII-XAFS spectra of PbII-adsorbed SnO2: (e) normalized k3-weighted k-space; (f) Fourier transforms of the EXAFS data in R-space. Black and red lines represent the raw and fitted curves, respectively. Adapted with permission from ref. 223. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05539e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
