Strain -multiplexing optical-tuning based on single-pulsed holographic nanostructures   - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1NR01586A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1NR01586A
(Communication)
Nanoscale, 2021, 13, 14609-14620Strain -multiplexing optical-tuning based on single-pulsed holographic nanostructures†

        
          
            Muhammad Waqas 
            Khalid‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Rajib 
            Ahmed‡
ab and 

        
          
            Haider 
            Butt
          
        
      c
aSchool of Engineering, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, CA 94305, UK. E-mail: rajibah@stanford.edu
bStanford School of Medicine, Palo Alto, CA 94304, USA
cDepartment of Mechanical Engineering, Khalifa University, P.O. 127788, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates. E-mail: haider.butt@ku.ac.ae
Received 
      11th March 2021
    , Accepted 8th June 2021First published on 8th June 2021AbstractHolographic flexible and rigid nanostructures in the visible to near infrared range play vital roles in various applications, including displays, data storage, imaging, and security. However, personalized use of holography is limited due to the time-consuming, costly and complex nanofabrication procedures. Personalized holography can be improved/extended through rapid, efficient and low-cost techniques on rigid, flexible and edible materials. Here, we utilize a single-pulsed nanosecond (ns) laser ablation in Denisyuk reflection mode to record one/two-dimension (1/2D) nanostructures on various substrates, including rigid glass coated with soft polymers, gelatin, and conductive (gold) and non-conductive materials (ink) as holographic multilayer metastructures (HMMs). The tunability of optical properties was investigated by illuminating monochromatic and broadband light sources on flexible-template nanostructures. The surface morphologies of the nano-structures were changed by applying mechanical force, which in turn tuned the far-field optical response depending upon the amount of applied force, acting as an optical shape and force sensor. Nanostructures engineered on an edible material (gelatin) as well as on soft polymers (polymeric diffusers) were also demonstrated for suitable application in food industries and optoelectronics.
Introduction
Holography is an optical process to record and reconstruct light amplitude and phase information on flexible or rigid recording media in the form of diffractive structures; it has potential to be used for important applications, such as security encryption, data storage, energy conversion, micro/nano devices, displays and sensing.1–4 A metasurface hologram is an artificial physical metal-dielectric nanostructure copied in the form of periodic gratings or nanostructures,5 which on illumination with light can reconstruct the wave front by means of far-field diffraction.6,7 The recorded event can be replayed by illuminating monochromatic/polychromatic light through the copied nanostructure in the form of a uniform interference pattern or hologram on the image screen.8 The term hologram can refer to the physical structure as well as to the resultant diffraction pattern.9 Historically, permanent images were recorded in photosensitive media based on multi-beam interference and wet chemistry involving silver halides or photoresists to create volumetric or surface gratings.10,11 Off-axis holography is based on light interference from a scattered object-beam and illuminated coherent reference beam.8,11 In the case of surface gratings or nanostructures, the master hologram may be copied through embossing or surface stamping.12–15 However, the dimensions of the master hologram remain permanent, which limits the use of holography in personalized applications. To create holograms with flexible dimensions, many recording materials have been proposed, such as photorefractive materials, bacteriorhodopsin, thermoplastics and liquid crystals.16–21 Amongst these various materials, photorefractive polymers have been the most promising media for rewritable holographic displays and data storage.22 These polymer composites are often doped with nonlinear chromophores, which can be poled by an external voltage. The effects observed here are fully reversible without fatigue; therefore, these holographic gratings can be reused several times. On the other hand, light-sensitive holograms are conventionally recorded by coherent laser beams and femtosecond and nanosecond direct laser writing,23–25 in which the achievement of high resolution metasurface nanostructure holograms is limited due to the spot size, and by other complex methods, including E-beam lithography (EBL)26,27 along with focused ion beam (FIB) milling,28 which have still low throughput and are labor-intensive and costly. Therefore, the rapid fabrication of low-cost, personalized metastructures that can be produced at a large scale on flexible and rigid metasurfaces remains a great challenge.
The laser ablation-based surface pattern technique was utilized to demonstrate nanostructure fabrication on thin films of metals, semiconductors, and insulators.29,30 The laser energy of 275–300 mJ cm−2 was used to create surface nanostructures on light-sensitive materials,31 and the longitudinal submicron periodicity was varied between 0.40 and 3.75 μm.32 A laser-based surface patterning technique was used to fabricate diffractive optical devices with different materials, such as ink,6 gold,33 polymer,34 and dyes.35 For example, a laser interface was used to fabricate diffraction gratings on polymer resin that showed anisotopic wetting properties with structural parameter (width, height, and linewidth) variations.36 Zhao et al. have shown gold and ink-based diffraction gratings and Fresnel lenses.37 Yetisen et al. demonstrated the single-pulsed laser ablation technique for a coloramtic hydrogel polymer-based pH sensor.38 AlQattan et al. demonstrated dye-based colorful diffraction gratings, lenses and optical properties.39 I.-B. Sohn, et al. demonstrated the fabrication of a fused silica-based lens through fs-laser (1030 nm, 250 fs) and chemical etching processes.40 Similarly, phase-lenses have been fabricated using fs-laser-based two-photon polymerization of resin.41 However, in contrast with previous reports, the current manuscript demonstrates laser ablation-based fabrication of soft and rigid multilayer metasurface-based nanostructures and tunable optical property characterization.
Herein, we utilized a single-step, low-cost and simple method to fabricate nanostructures on soft and rigid polymers, conductive/nonconductive holographic multilayer metasurface (HMM) films, and on edible (gelatin) and flexible (polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)) materials to demonstrate their applications, such as shape and force sensing in a microenvironment. A nanosecond pulse laser and reflective object in reflection mode were used to record holograms in the form of periodic diffractive surface patterns, two-dimensional patterns, and random diffusers. Light-absorbing materials coated on a surface can be selectively ablated by directing the intensity distribution of the interference pattern onto it. The resulting periodic/random structure and light diffraction/diffusion properties also showed dependence on the working environment (distance (d), tilt angle (θ)), recording media shape and applied external force or strain. The tunable light properties of the fabricated flexible structures were characterized through far-field projection and angular measurements. Maximum light properties (diffraction) were observed with the dielectric–metal (Ink-Au) multilayer structure at monochromatic (635 nm) normal light illumination. Compared to conventional rigid diffuser nanostructures (metal or dielectric), the HMM diffuser (PDMS-Au) patterns showed efficient strain-multiplex optical-tuning with monochromatic and broadband light. Furthermore, colorful nanostructures formed in edible materials showed far-field light diffraction, which may find potential application in food industries and fancy packaging.
Results
Surface holographic nanostructure fabrication was performed through single pulsed ns-laser ablation using the Denisyuk reflection holography technique. During recording, a single pulse from a Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (pulse duration 3.5 ns, energy 300 mJ, wavelength 1064 nm, spot size: 0.5 cm2 after the beam expander) is directed towards the object (i.e. reflecting mirror) to be copied after passing through the recording medium (tiltable at various angles from the horizontal axis) (Fig. 1A). The object is placed normal to the laser incidence beam under the sample. The reflected beam from the object travels in the opposite direction to the incident beam; both beams interfere and create a standing wave effect, which shows periodic constructive interference. The ink is then vaporised at a periodicity that is mathematically related to the incident wavelength of the laser beam:9 (1)where y1 and y2 represent the incident laser beam and reflected laser beam propagation expressions, respectively. The final expression suggests that the resultant wave oscillates in time but has spatial dependence (propagation direction). The constructive interfering peak occurs at intervals of half wavelengths. The nanoperiodicity of a light-absorbing material depends on the intensity distribution of an interference pattern. The collimated laser ablation is a physical process in which a high peak power, determined by the ablation threshold of the coated material, is capable of selectively removing layers of material. The sample preparation and subsequent steps are described in the Materials and methods section (Fig. S1†). This is dissimilar to the photochemical patterning process. The recording of the interference pattern depends upon the optical properties of the recording media (i.e. absorption), working distance (between the object to be copied and the recording media, d), pulse duration, caption angle (θ) of the recording media, and localised energy distribution of the laser beam, which is determined by the optical properties of the object to be copied.
 Fig. 1  Single-pulsed ns-laser based HMM fabrication and characterization. (A) Schematic of the HMM fabrication setup showing an Nd:YAG laser (1064 nm) with a beam spot size of 1/2 cm2 directed from the top at the object to be copied. The sample is maintained on a 3D stage above the object. (B) Optical microscopic images of the fabricated HMM samples (5° and 10°); scale = 10 μm. (C) Surface morphologies of the fabricated HMM surfaces. (D and E) Grating spacing as a function of the illumination distance (d) and tilt angle (θ). 
Nanostructures were recorded in the form of periodic gratings of HMM (PDMS-Ink), as shown in Fig. 1B, which uniformly produced diffraction patterns at the image screen during recording beam illumination. The properties of the nanostructures made in light-absorbing materials depend upon the laser wavelength and geometrical parameters. The sample (substrate coated with light-absorbing material) was adjusted in a flexible sample holder (adjustable along the x, y and z axes) above the object to observe the effects of parameters, i.e. d and θ variation, on the characteristics of the recorded nanostructures. As we increased the tilt angle, θ = 5 and 10 degrees, the periodicity of the diffraction patterns changed, as illustrated in the optical microscopic images (Fig. 1B) and surface profiles (Fig. 1C).
Further details can be observed from the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images and surface profiles (Fig. S2†). The distance from the object to the recording media, d, was varied from 2 cm to 5 cm, and the tilt angle (θ) of the substrate was gradually increased from 0° to 25° with respect to the object during the recording of the nanostructures. Only one parameter was changed at a time, while the other parameters were kept constant. Fig. 1D and E depict the grating sizes influenced by the variation of d and θ, respectively. Fig. 1D shows the trend observed in the increase of the grating spacing from 1.7 μm to 2.5 μm with increasing value of d from 2 cm to 5 cm, respectively. This is because the interference pattern spreads as it travels along a path. Similar spreading effects were observed during optical characterization, when the distance of the image screen to the illuminated holographic structures was deliberately increased. A decreasing trend in the grating size with increasing tilt angle (θ) can be observed in Fig. 1E; for the 0° tilt angle, the grating spacing was found to be 4.1 μm, whereas for a tilt angle of 25°, the grating spacing decreased to 0.9 μm. Therefore, the geometry of the HMM nanostructures showed a dependency on the structural variations of d and θ. Furthermore, the ablated nanostructure properties were dependent on the fluence or energy, number of pulses from the Nd:YAG ns-laser and energy reptation through the sample.
Under monochromatic and broadband light illumination, uniform periodic gratings diffract light based on the periodicity as well as the wavelength of the light illuminated through them. Higher wavelengths of broadband light diffract at higher angles by following Bragg's law (Fig. 2A). The transmitted monochromatic light passing through the periodic gratings diffracts at various angles based on the periodicity of the target fringes and wavelengths, provided that there is a well-defined, periodic, bright diffraction pattern at a far field. The diffraction pattern is composed of a more intense central spot due to non-diffracted light and n diffracted orders due to diffracted light intensities. If the distance of periodic gratings to the image screen and separation between the non-diffracted central spot and diffracted orders is known, then the relevant diffraction angle can be calculated by the following equation:42,43 (2)where θ is the diffraction angle, l1 is the 1st order inter space and l2 represents the distance between the grating sample and the image screen. For monochromatic light illumination, minimum and maximum diffraction distances are observed with lower (450 nm) and higher (635 nm) wavelengths, respectively. Furthermore, diffraction orders (say, n = ±1, ±2…) moved to higher diffraction angles with increasing wavelength, as shown in the dotted lines (Fig. 2B). Fig. 2C shows that the diffraction distance for the monochromatic wavelength increased linearly as we increased the tilt angle. Fig. 2D shows the spatial resolution, i.e. the separation between diffracted orders or diffraction distance caused by the structured gratings, during red (650 nm), green (532 nm) and blue (450 nm) normal light illuminations against grating spacings varied from 2.3 μm to 5 μm. Upon diversion from a narrow grating spacing to a broad grating spacing, the separation between the diffracted orders (diffraction distance) was observed to decrease, as stated by Bragg's law.
 Fig. 2  Simulation and experiment related to light diffraction properties of HMM. (A) Broadband light diffraction from the sample and relationship with the incident wavelength. (B) Light diffraction properties of HMM (PDMS-Ink) with monochromatic (450, 532, 635 nm) and broadband light (400–1100 nm). (C and D) Light diffraction distance as a function of tilt angle and grating size. (E–H) Simulated light diffraction orders and intensity profile as a function of the incident monochromatic wavelength (450, 532, 635 nm). 
To understand the diffraction properties with the incident wavelength, we numerically simulated the far-field diffraction patterns using the commercial MATLAB tool. We considered incident light as a wavelet (wave-like oscillation with amplitude and phase) and the refractive index of the grating surface as n = 1.43 (for PDMS). Monochromatic light (450, 532, and 635 nm) was illuminated to fix the grating spacing (tilt angle 10°), and the far-field diffraction patterns and intensity distribution were calculated (Fig. 2E–G and Fig. S3†). Maximum and minimum diffraction distances were observed with higher (635 nm) and lower (450 nm) illumination wavelengths. Furthermore, increased diffraction distances were observed with higher wavelengths.
The relationship between the periodicity of the gratings and the diffraction distance/angle can be defined by the following equation: (3)where n is the diffraction order, and the value of n can be any integer. λ represents the wavelength of incident light. The diffraction angle/distance of the diffracted orders to the central-spot/non-diffracted zero order could be changed by somehow varying the periodicity of the periodic gratings through the application of mechanical stress or due to thermal expansion/compression.24
To understand the tunable light diffraction of HMM (PDMS-Ink), monochromatic light was normally illuminated at different strain conditions (Fig. 3A–C). Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS), which is stretchable under mechanical stress, was coated with a light-absorbing material (black ink) to generate gratings in flexible form and to further demonstrate its application as a force sensor. Well-arranged periodic gratings in flexible form may yield tunable, well-ordered diffraction patterns at the image screen without any considerable noise, which can be used as an effective force sensor. These soft gratings show reversible optical and mechanical properties without any surface damage. PDMS is a non-toxic and inert silicon-based organic flexible polymer that is capable of replicating three-dimensional structures on nanometeric scales.44 PDMS has been a popular choice for soft lithography due to its robust nature, low cost and ease of fabrication to replicate soft nano/microscale structures.45 Further, the optical properties of PDMS include a refractive index of ∼1.4. It is transparent in the visible range (240 nm–1100 nm), with an extinction coefficient of <10–10, 25, and it has negligible birefringence and inert flexibility properties; thus, it is suitable for prototyping and testing of soft nanostructures.46,47
 Fig. 3  Optical characterization of the strain-multiplex properties of HMM. (A–C) Far-field diffraction patterns of flexible HMM (PDMS-Ink) with illumination of monochromatic light and applied strain. Scale = 2.5 cm. (D–F) Diffraction intensity profile as a function of distance with applied stretch. (G) Diffraction distance as a function of stretch. (H) Diffraction efficiency as a function of applied stretch with monochromatic light illumination. (I) Young's modulus as a function of tensile stress for HMM. 
To measure the optical properties, the sample was maintained in a fixed two-dimensional stage with a weight suspension set up to be focused on any chosen point. Force, as weight suspension, was gradually applied on the stretchable periodic structures to increase the periodicity. Therefore, as we applied different stretch factors, S, from 0% to 20%, the spatial resolution or diffraction distance was reduced. The maximum and minimum diffraction resolution were observed with no stretch and 20% stretch conditions, respectively. With applied force, the diffracted monochromatic red light (635 nm) from the grating surface shows the highest resolution compared with blue light. Strain created due to any applied stress (mechanical, thermal) depends upon the physical/chemical properties of the material onto which the nano-structure is engineered. On expansion, the dimension of the grating sample changes, i.e. the period between the uniform periodic gratings widens.48 Using the extension ratio in macro-perspective, the grating period can be calculated as follows:49 d = d0 × (1 + ή)(4)where d0 is the period of the initial grating without any applied stress and ή is the extension ratio, which can be calculated by measuring the 1st order interspace. Next, changes in the optical response can be monitored to quantify the strain produced by specific values of applied stress on the physical structure of the grating. Fig. 3D–F shows diffraction distances as a function of stretch factor. Without stretching, i.e. 0%, the diffraction distance was recorded as 6.23 cm, whereas for maximum stretching, i.e. 25% of the original size of the sample, the diffraction distance reduced to 4.66 cm during red (650 nm) light illumination. The diffraction distance decreased linearly as we increased the stretching force. Fig. 3G demonstrates the changes in diffraction distance during normal illumination of blue (450 nm) and green (532 nm) laser beams, in similar manners as described for the red laser beam in Fig. 3D–F. In general, there is an inverse relationship between the diffraction distance and the applied stress, which is stated by the diffraction equation and was also predicted by the simulations. Minimum and maximum diffraction values were observed at monochromatic 450 nm and 635 nm wavelengths, respectively. The diffracted light intensity was also calculated as a function of the diffraction distance. The 1st-order diffraction distance of the monochromatic wavelength (632 nm) from the non-diffractive zero-order decreased with increased stretching. Furthermore, the diffraction efficiency, η = Idiff/I0, can be calculated as the ratio between the diffracted (Idiff) and incident (I0) light intensity. Fig. 3H shows the diffraction efficiency as a function of stretch factor. Maximum light-diffraction efficiency was observed with higher stretch values. This is because the maximum transmitted light-diffraction was observed as we increased the stretch factor values. The minimum diffraction efficiency was observed with no stretching. Furthermore, green light (532 nm) showed maximum diffraction efficiency with applied stress compared to other illumination with other monochromatic lights. The material properties of the flexible structures were characterized through the Young's modulus as a function of tensile stress. Further, we applied stress to observe the stress and strain relationship and the diffraction properties with flexible HMM (Fig. S4†). The stress–strain curve showed a linear rise from the start up to 5 kPa, whereas above that value of stress, the strain rate became stable, i.e. due to approaching the stretching limit of the sensor.
Gelatin coated with light-absorbing ink was also used to demonstrate the fabrication of nanostructures on edible materials through the proposed fabrication setup (in-line Denisyuk reflection holography, Fig. S5†). Various edible nanostructures were fabricated and optically characterised by altering their geometric parameters. Fig. 4A shows the fabricated HMM (gelatin-ink) gratings on the edible substrate, respectively, at various tilt angles i.e. θ = 0°, 5°, 10°, 15°, 20° and 25°. Monochromatic light beams, including red (635 nm), green (532 nm) and violet (435 nm), were illuminated at the normal angle on the sample. The resulting well-defined diffraction patterns were captured from the image screen for all applied 5% stress values (Fig. 4B). Higher order diffraction was observed with smaller angles (0 to 10°), as also expected from the modelling (Fig. S6†).
 Fig. 4  Fabricated HMM and optical characterization. (A) Optical microscopic images for gelatin-ink HMM. Scales = 5 μm. (B) Far-field diffraction properties with monochromatic light at normal illumination. Scales = 2.5 cm. (C–F) Optical transmission properties of various HMM nanostructures. (G) Optical resolution as a function of the tilt angle. (H) Diffraction intensity as a function of the transmission with monochromatic light illumination. 
The optical transmission properties of the fabricated HMM nanostructures were also compared on different substrates (Fig. 4C). The PDMS-Ink HMM nanostructures showed the maximum transmission compared with other structures. However, minimum optical transmission was observed with the gold-coated ink substrate. Further, the diffracted light intensities of these HMM substrates were captured with an image screen (A4 paper). The monochromatic diffraction distance or the resolution of the diffraction orders increased linearly as we increased the tilt angle. The maximum and minimum light diffractions with the tilt angles were observed with red (635 nm) and blue (450 nm) light illumination, respectively. Monochromatic light was normally illuminated on the surface, and the diffracted light spectrum was calculated. Fig. 4H shows the diffracted light intensities of various HMMs through monochromatic light at normal illumination. Maximum and minimum monochromatic light diffraction was observed with the HMMs with the PDMS-Ink and Gold-Ink nanostructures, respectively. The ink nanostructures and gelatin-ink based nanostructures showed similar optical performance.
Utilising the understanding of how the tilt angle variation affected the grating size, two-dimensional (2D) gratings were constructed to demonstrate the feasibility of our soft gelatin-ink HMM fabrication to generate complex nanostructures and food decorations. Further, characterization of their optical properties verified their data encryption capabilities. 2D rectangular (30°, 60°) and square (90°) gratings at sample rotations of 30°, 60°, and 90° were fabricated using a Nd:YAG laser through in-line Denisyuk reflection holography. Fig. 5A–C shows the optical microscopic images at different magnifications of the rectangular and square structures made by twisting the sample in the xy plane at 30°, 60°, and 90° each time during both laser exposures. Fig. 5D shows the large-scale soft gelatin-based flexible 1D nanostructures and their rainbow diffraction patterns through broadband light illumination. 2D rainbow diffraction patterns were observed with broadband illumination (Fig. S7†).
 Fig. 5  Fabricated 2D HMM (PDMS-Ink) nanostructures and optical characterization. (A–C) Optical microscopic images of the fabricated 2D structures: square, rectangle (60°, 90°). Scales = 3.5 and 4.0 μm. (D) Large-scale gelatin-ink HMM nanostructures. Scales = 2 cm. (E–G) Monochromatic light diffraction of 2D HMM at normal illumination. Scales = 1.0 cm. (H) Rainbow light diffraction with tilt angle variations from 5° to 25°. Scales = 2.5 cm. 
The far-field light diffraction properties of the fabricated nanostructures were characterized through monochromatic and broadband light at normal illumination. The captured far-field diffraction images of the optical response during red (635 nm), green (532 nm), and blue (450 nm) light transmission through the as-fabricated rectangular and square gratings can be viewed in Fig. 5E–G. It was observed that the horizontal/vertical spatial resolution of the diffraction patterns depends upon the wavelength of the transmitted beam, i.e. 650 nm wavelength (red) diffracted at higher angles, and then the diffraction angles gradually decreased as the transmitted wavelength decreased. Fig. 5E–G also shows the diffraction patterns obtained by transmitting the same wavelengths of monochromatic light (as from rectangular and square gratings) through the gratings fabricated at 30°, 60° and 90°. It is worth mentioning that here, the diffracted orders are not highly distinguishable. It is anticipated that with a few simple and fast steps (i.e. variations in parameters), nanostructures with desired shapes and higher resolution can be fabricated if the demonstrated setup is followed. Further, rainbow diffraction optical response of the 1D HMM was observed (Fig. 5H). The diffraction distance between the non-diffracted white central spot and the rainbow diffracted first order was observed to note any changes in the optical response as result of the grating spacing caused within the periodic structure. The rainbow diffraction distance was found to increase as we increased the tilt angle due to the decrease in the grating distance or spacing. Maximum and minimum rainbow diffraction patterns were observed with higher and lower tilt angles. A linear relationship between the extension ratio and the periodicity of the gratings was found. The expansion of the periodicity of the gratings was found to be inverse to the diffraction distance of the diffracted orders, as predicted by the simulations (Fig. 2E). Further, the soft gelatin HMM structures can be used as food decorations due to their colourful diffraction properties (Fig. S8†).
The single-pulsed laser ablation technique was also used to fabricate arbitrary or random semi-transparent surfaces. The aim was to produce low intensity and soft light in transmission mode by means of diffusion at normal illumination, i.e. miniature, lightweight optical diffusers. Flexible optical diffusers have been used to demonstrate single (x or y-axis), double (xy or yz or zx-axis) or omnidirectional light scattering and have found applications in remote sensing, light emitting diodes (LEDs), organic light emitting diodes (OLEDs), medical endoscopy, imaging, and displays.24,50Fig. 6A shows the fabricated microscopic image of the ink-gold-coated HMM diffuser surface (Fig. S9†). Fabrication of the random diffuser surface was demonstrated with photolithography and electron-beam (e-beam) techniques.51 Recently, diffuser surfaces were also fabricated with femtosecond laser (fs-laser) ablation techniques.52 However, fs-laser based diffuser surface fabrication is a slow process and requires expensive setups. Here, we introduced a cost-effective nanosecond laser (ns-laser) ablation technique to fabricate nanostructures on HMMs. Fig. 6B shows the surface morphology of the HMM diffuser surface. An arbitrarily distributed surface profile was observed, which allows the incident focused light to distribute or spread randomly in an omnidirectional fashion and produce low-intensity or soft-light. To understand the light scattering properties of the fabricated diffuser surface, we performed fast Fourier transform (FFT) studies of the microscopic images using different ablation energies (Fig. S9†). Omnidirectional scattering of the diffuser surface strongly depends on the surface microstructure roughness and multi-layered structures. Fig. 6C shows a cross-sectional microscopic image of the fabricated HMM diffuser surface along the z-axis. Further, the microscopic surface roughness and light transmission (%) of the HMM diffuser surface are shown in Fig. 6D. Optical transmission measurements were performed with an optical microscope setup and broadband light illumination. The light diffusion properties were further characterized to observe the diffusion capability as a function of the diffusion angle (Fig. 6E–H). Monochromatic (635, 532, and 450 nm) and broadband (400–1100 nm) light illuminated on the diffuser surface at tilted angles (0–180°) and diffracted/scattered light were measured through a rotational spectroscopy setup (Fig. S10†). Maximum and minimum light diffusion was observed at monochromatic 635 and 450 nm light, respectively. Efficient light diffusion was also observed with broadband light illumination. The maximum light diffusion angle of the HMM diffuser was measured as ∼120°, which was dependent on the laser ablation energy and material properties (Fig. S9†).
 Fig. 6  HMM diffuser fabrication and optical characterization. (A) Optical microscopic image of the fabricated HMM diffuser. (B) AFM profile of the HMM diffuser. (C) Cross-section layer-by-layer view of the HMM diffuser; scale = 100 μm. (D) Surface profile and optical transmission properties of the HMM diffuser. (E–H) Diffused light intensity distribution of the HMM diffuser through monochromatic and broadband light at normal illumination. (I and J) Diffused optical field and intensity profile as a function of the applied force (from 0 to 0.35 N) and diffused area. (K) FWHM of the diffused field as a function of applied force (N). 
To understand the tunable light scattering properties of the HMM diffuser surface, we applied mechanical force, and the far-field scattered electromagnetic field was captured through an image screen setup (Fig. S10†). Monochromatic light (450 nm) scattering/spreading was observed as we increased the applied force to 0.35 N (Fig. 6I). As we increased the applied force, the far-field light scattering distribution increased. Fig. 6J shows the diffusion area as a function of the scattering/diffusion intensity. Maximum intensity distribution was observed with higher applied force (0.35 N). Stretching the sample with applied force means that the surface roughness or randomness is increased, which in turn shifts the scattered spots far from the non-diffracted central spot. Therefore, the full width at half maximum (FWHM) value of the diffused or scattering area increased linearly as we increased the applied force (Fig. 6K). Maximization in the light diffusion or scattering (tuned optical response) of the illuminated light spots was then correlated to the strain caused within the HMM-based diffuser by a known applied force. The HMM diffuser (PDMS-Gold) shows light transmittance ∼50%; this value is low compared to those of commercially available diffusers. However, these HMM gold-coated diffusers may be advantageous for biosensing applications. For example, flexible HMM diffusers can be functionlizied with surface chemistry to capture, detect, and quantify biomolecules such as antibodies, proteins and virus particles.5
In this discussion, light-tunable HMM nanostructures were fabricated via nanosecond pulse laser and light reflecting object in-line Denisyuk reflection holography based on optimizing structural parameters, i.e. h (distance between the laser tip and the object), d (distance of the object to the recording media), E (energy of the laser) and S (spot size) were kept constant while varying the exposure angle, θ (tilt angle of the sample). The HMM sample preparation and nanostructure fabrication process was completed in a few minutes. Black ink was used for coating the samples as a light-absorbing material; however, to demonstrate the flexibility of our setup to fabricate nanostructures on various light-absorbing materials, multi-layered films were also successfully structured. The multi-layered light absorbing coatings were composed of a nonconductive (ink) bottom layer deposited on a glass slide and a conductive (gold) film on top of the ink layer. The potential of various materials to be structured for various optics applications, such as absorbers in solar cell applications, with this simple, fast and flexible technique was defined. Increasing d′ means that the standing wave (resulting from the interference of the incident and reflected beams) travels more distance before exposing the recording media; therefore, each increment in d′ resulted in a larger grating size due to beam spreading. Above the optimum value of d′ (0.5–3.5 cm in our setup), the intensity of the standing wave was focussed on the larger area with the compensation of the focused threshold intensity which is required to ablate the target material. The incident and reflected wave intensity may vary during laser interference due to slight variations of the laser beam, distance from the laser tip to the sample, tilt angles, and sample thickness. These factors may affect the grating formation, grating distance, morphology and uniformity. Further, the light absorption properties of the sample materials (such as ink dye or polymeric-metallic layers) may have an influence on the surface morphology. Therefore, we have optimized these parameter variations (such as distance, tilt angle, and material layers). Incident and reflected laser beams always propagate in opposite directions and produce standing waves to create ablated and nonablated surface grating regions with random surface defects.9
To obtain a better resolution of the optical response from the physical nanostructures, the spacing of the gratings must be as fine as possible. A finer grating spacing yielded a higher spatial resolution. The tilt angle (i.e. the exposure angle of the standing wave to the recording media) variation of the recording media was found to be an important tool to the control grating size. Tunable resolution was also demonstrated using flexible gratings structured on soft polymer substrates. Tunable periodic gratings were stretched along their length, i.e. the grating size decreased, and the changes in optical response were recorded. For each degree of stress, the grating spacing decreased and the distance between the central spot and the first diffracted spot increased (higher spatial resolution). Broadband light connected with an optical microscope was transmitted normally through the surfaces of the as-coated samples as well as after structuring in order to assess the transmission (%) of various wavelengths, especially in the visible region, to determine the influence on the nanofabrication with our setup and also to correlate them with their diffraction efficiencies. The recorded holograms include edible and tunable periodic gratings that diffracted light in a similar way to the function of the object used. 2D nano-patterns were engineered by superimposition of two standing waves in an ink medium coated on a glass substrate by changing the tilt angle of the recording medium.
Conclusion
In summary, we have introduced a simple, fast, flexible and light-tunable HMM fabrication by utilizing single-step ND:YAG ns-laser ablation and demonstrated its application in shape and force sensing, based on far-field optical properties. 1D/2D nanostructures have been fabricated on various materials, which include flexible, edible, and conductive/nonconductive multilayers. The fabrication of HMM nanostructures highlighted in this study is efficient and robust, showing selective laser ablation though laser interference lithography on light-absorbing materials coated on glass, gelatin and PDMS substrates. Our flexible surface patterns result in tunable diffraction, spatial resolution, and maximum efficiencies and transmissions, which may be a step forward in holography and can be utilised to create numerous novel applications in encrypted data storage, remote force and shape sensing, identification (business cards), biosensing, and security labels. Nanostructures made on edible (biocompatible) materials may have applications in the food industry and medical research and development. Nanostructures made on multilayer coatings with combinations of conductive and nonconductive materials may be utilised for constructing many photonic components within a few minutes. The HMM diffuser surface also shows tunable diffusion with applied stress. Therefore, flexible-template HMM nanofabrication via laser ablation has applications in light-tunable, printable, low-cost photonic devices, including wavelength-selective filters, diffusers, and smart-lenses.
Experimental
Materials and equipment
Black permanent ink (Staedtler, Germany), PDMS (SYLGARD 184 Elastomer Kit), gelatin (G2500-500G, Sigma Aldrich), and gold materials were used as holographic recording mediums. An optical spectrometer (Ocean Optics 2000, 400–1100 nm) and broadband light source (HL-2000, 400–1100 nm) were used for optical measurements and were purchased from Ocean Optics. MATLAB (R2017b) was used to perform numerical modelling and data analysis.
Sample preparation
A permanent ink sample (Staedtler, Germany) was diluted with ethanol (1:1, v/v) and used as a light-absorbing material. PDMS-Ink-based HMM sample preparation was based on following the subsequent steps: (i) Ethanol and methanol (1:1, v/v) solution was used to clean the glass surface. (ii) PDMS (mix of elastomer and curing agent (10:1, v/v) solution was spin-coated (CHEMAT Technology, KW 4A) at a speed of 1000 rpm for 30 s followed by 1500 rpm for 60 s. (iii) Diluted permanent ink was also spin-coated at a speed of 400 rpm for 30 s followed by 800 rpm for 60 s. (iv) Finally, the spin-coated sample was left overnight to dry and was ready for recording. Further, PDMS-gold-based HMM sample preparation was based on the above subsequent steps except that at the final stage, the PDMS-coated glass slide was coated with a 30 nm-thick gold layer through the sputtering process. The gelatin-ink-based HMM preparation was similar to the above 4 steps, except that the PDMS steps were replaced with thick gelation layers. Further details of the steps are illustrated in the ESI (Fig. S1†).
Hologram recording of HMM
A broadband dielectric mirror (BB05-E02, 400–750 nm) was purchased from Thorlab and used as an objective during holographic recording of HMM. Nanostructure fabrication was based on single-short ns-laser interference between the incident and reflected beams. The semi-transparent metal–dielectric, dielectric–dielectric HMM was used as a recording medium. This two-beam laser interference was used to produce selective ablated and non-ablated regions as periodic surface nanostructures on the recorded medium.
Optical characterization
The recorded HMM nanostructures were characterized with monochromatic and broadband light sources at normal and tilted illuminations. The monochromatic and broadband light were illuminated on the HMM surface, and the far-field diffraction and diffusion properties were measured. Red (CPS635, max. power < 5 mW), green (CPS532, max. power < 5 mW), and violet (CPS450) laser lights were purchased from Thorlab. Further, an image screen setup (A4 paper) was used to captured the far-field diffraction orders and light variations. A simple digital camera and ImageJ software were used to capture the optical fields and analyze them.
Numerical modelling
To understand the diffraction properties of HMM, we modelled monochromatic light (450 nm, 532 nm, and 635 nm) illumination on different gratings and observed the far-field diffraction patterns. We used the MATLAB tool to demonstrate the grating formations through two-beam laser interferences and their far-field light scattering profiles for zero and higher orders. During modelling, we considered the light wave as a wavelet that has wave-like amplitude and phase-information.
Author contributions
M.W.K. and R.A. contribute equally to perform computational modelling, optical experiments, analysis results, and wrote the manuscript. H.B. supervised the project, and improved the manuscript.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no competing financial and no-financial interest.
Acknowledgements
Authors acknowledge Khalifa University of Science and Technology (KUST) for the Faculty Startup Project (Project code: 8474000211-FSU-2019-04) and KU-KAIST Joint Research Center (Project code: 8474000220-KKJRC-2019-Health1) research funding in support on this research. We also acknowledge Sandooq Al Watan LLC and Aldar Properties for the research funding (SWARD Program – AWARD, Project code: 8434000391-EX2020-044).
References
P.-A. Blanche, A. Bablumian, R. Voorakaranam, C. Christenson, W. Lin, T. Gu, D. Flores, P. Wang, W.-Y. Hsieh and M. Kathaperumal, Nature, 2010, 468, 80–83 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, K. Wang, X. Hong, B. Wang, X. Han, H. Long, B. Wang and P. Lu, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 13330–13337 RSC .
X. Zhang, D. Tang, L. Zhou, J. Jiao, D. Feng, G. Liang and Y. Guo, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 20238–20244 RSC .
X. Zhang, J. Jin, M. Pu, X. Li, X. Ma, P. Gao, Z. Zhao, Y. Wang, C. Wang and X. Luo, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 1409–1415 RSC .
R. Ahmed, M. O. Ozen, M. G. Karaaslan, C. A. Prator, C. Thanh, S. Kumar, L. Torres, N. Iyer, S. Munter and S. Southern, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. W. Khalid, R. Ahmed, A. K. Yetisen, B. AlQattan and H. Butt, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 1–12 CrossRef CAS .
G.-Y. Lee, G. Yoon, S.-Y. Lee, H. Yun, J. Cho, K. Lee, H. Kim, J. Rho and B. Lee, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 4237–4245 RSC .
F. d. C. Vasconcellos, A. K. Yetisen, Y. Montelongo, H. Butt, A. Grigore, C. A. Davidson, J. Blyth, M. J. Monteiro, T. D. Wilkinson and C. R. Lowe, ACS Photonics, 2014, 1, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ahmed and H. Butt, ACS Photonics, 2019, 6, 1572–1580 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yamaji, H. Kawashima, J. i. Suzuki and S. Tanaka, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 041116 CrossRef .
T. Kondo, S. Matsuo, S. Juodkazis, V. Mizeikis and H. Misawa, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 82, 2758–2760 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, B. Cho, S. Yoon, H. Jeong, S. Jon, G. Y. Jung, B. K. Cho, T. Lee and W. B. Kim, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 5543–5551 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-H. Huang, Z.-Y. Ho, T.-H. Kuo, D. Kekuda, C.-W. Chu and K.-C. Ho, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 4077–4080 RSC .
S. H. Lee, G. Jo, W. Park, S. Lee, Y.-S. Kim, B. K. Cho, T. Lee and W. B. Kim, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 1829–1836 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. M. Cox, A. M. Martinez, A. K. Blevins, N. Sowan, Y. Ding and C. N. Bowman, Nano Today, 2020, 31, 100838 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-H. Huang, J.-T. Wu and S.-Y. Yang, Microelectron. Eng., 2011, 88, 849–854 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hesselink, S. S. Orlov, A. Liu, A. Akella, D. Lande and R. R. Neurgaonkar, Science, 1998, 282, 1089–1094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li and P. Wang, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 111109 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Ahmed, A. K. Yetisen, S. H. Yun and H. Butt, Light: Sci. Appl., 2017, 6, e16214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Cole and T. Trentler, US Pat., USOO8071260B1,  2008 Search PubMed .
K.-H. Kim and J.-K. Song, NPG Asia Mater., 2009, 1, 29–36 CrossRef .
Y. Montelongo, A. K. Yetisen, H. Butt and S.-H. Yun, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 1–8 Search PubMed .
W. Watanabe, D. Kuroda, K. Itoh and J. Nishii, Opt. Express, 2002, 10, 978–983 CrossRef .
R. Ahmed, A. K. Yetisen, A. El Khoury and H. Butt, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 266–276 RSC .
Y.-L. Zhang, Q.-D. Chen, H. Xia and H.-B. Sun, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 435–448 CrossRef CAS .
M. Verheijen, J. Mod. Opt., 1993, 40, 711–721 CrossRef .
R. A. Aoni, M. Rahmani, L. Xu, K. Z. Kamali, A. Komar, J. Yan, D. Neshev and A. E. Miroshnichenko, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 1–9 CAS .
S. Streit-Nierobisch, D. Stickler, C. Gutt, L.-M. Stadler, H. Stillrich, C. Menk, R. Frömter, C. Tieg, O. Leupold and H. Oepen, J. Appl. Phys., 2009, 106, 083909 CrossRef .
M. Hashida, Y. Ikuta, Y. Miyasaka, S. Tokita and S. Sakabe, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2013, 102, 174106 CrossRef .
R. Ahmed, A. K. Yetisen and H. Butt, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 3155–3165 CrossRef CAS .
A. F. Lasagni, P. Shao, J. L. Hendricks, C. M. Shaw, D. C. Martin and S. Das, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2010, 256, 1708–1713 CrossRef CAS .
C. Vass, K. Osvay and B. Hopp, Opt. Express, 2006, 14, 8354–8359 CrossRef CAS .
B. AlQattan, H. Butt, A. Sabouri, A. K. Yetisen, R. Ahmed and N. Mahmoodi, RSC Adv., 2016, 6, 111269–111275 RSC .
A. K. Yetisen, H. Butt, T. Mikulchyk, R. Ahmed, Y. Montelongo, M. Humar, N. Jiang, S. Martin, I. Naydenova and S. H. Yun, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2016, 4, 1589–1600 CrossRef CAS .
M. W. Khalid, C. Whitehouse, R. Ahmed, M. U. Hassan and H. Butt, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2019, 7, 1801013 CrossRef .
D. Wu, Q.-D. Chen, J. Yao, Y.-C. Guan, J.-N. Wang, L.-G. Niu, H.-H. Fang and H.-B. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2010, 96, 053704 CrossRef .
Q. Zhao, A. K. Yetisen, A. Sabouri, S. H. Yun and H. Butt, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 9062–9069 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. K. Yetisen, H. Butt, F. da Cruz Vasconcellos, Y. Montelongo, C. A. Davidson, J. Blyth, L. Chan, J. B. Carmody, S. Vignolini and U. Steiner, Adv. Opt. Mater., 2014, 2, 250–254 CrossRef .
B. AlQattan, D. Benton, A. K. Yetisen and H. Butt, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 29147–29157 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I.-B. Sohn, M. S. Ahsan, Y.-C. Noh, H.-K. Choi, J.-T. Kim and M.-J. Ko, Opt. Eng., 2014, 53, 055107 CrossRef .
Q.-D. Chen, D. Wu, L.-G. Niu, J. Wang, X.-F. Lin, H. Xia and H.-B. Sun, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 171105 CrossRef .
A. D. Kersey, T. Berkoff and W. Morey, Opt. Lett., 1993, 18, 1370–1372 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Fudouzi, Adv. Powder Technol., 2009, 20, 502–508 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hassanin, A. Mohammadkhani and K. Jiang, Lab Chip, 2012, 12, 4160–4167 RSC .
J. Yuan, S. Chang, S. Li and Y. Zhang, Opt. Commun., 2002, 209, 75–83 CrossRef CAS .
K. Hoshino and I. Shimoyama, J. Micromech. Microeng., 2002, 13, 149 CrossRef .
B.-H. Jo, L. M. Van Lerberghe, K. M. Motsegood and D. J. Beebe, J. Microelectromech. Syst., 2000, 9, 76–81 CAS .
R. Ahmed and H. Butt, Adv. Sci., 2020, 2003394 Search PubMed .
D. Yin, J. Feng, R. Ma, X.-L. Zhang, Y.-F. Liu, T. Yang and H.-B. Sun, J. Lightwave Technol., 2015, 33, 3327–3331 CAS .
G. R. Bell, L. M. Mäthger, M. Gao, S. L. Senft, A. M. Kuzirian, G. W. Kattawar and R. T. Hanlon, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 4352–4356 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Butt, K. M. Knowles, Y. Montelongo, G. A. Amaratunga and T. D. Wilkinson, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 2929–2935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Alqurashi, P. Penchev, A. K. Yetisen, A. Sabouri, R. M. Ameen, S. Dimov and H. Butt, RSC Adv., 2017, 7, 18019–18023 RSC .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr01586a‡ These authors contributed equally.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  Single-pulsed ns-laser based HMM fabrication and characterization. (A) Schematic of the HMM fabrication setup showing an Nd:YAG laser (1064 nm) with a beam spot size of 1/2 cm2 directed from the top at the object to be copied. The sample is maintained on a 3D stage above the object. (B) Optical microscopic images of the fabricated HMM samples (5° and 10°); scale = 10 μm. (C) Surface morphologies of the fabricated HMM surfaces. (D and E) Grating spacing as a function of the illumination distance (d) and tilt angle (θ).	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Simulation and experiment related to light diffraction properties of HMM. (A) Broadband light diffraction from the sample and relationship with the incident wavelength. (B) Light diffraction properties of HMM (PDMS-Ink) with monochromatic (450, 532, 635 nm) and broadband light (400–1100 nm). (C and D) Light diffraction distance as a function of tilt angle and grating size. (E–H) Simulated light diffraction orders and intensity profile as a function of the incident monochromatic wavelength (450, 532, 635 nm).	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 3  Optical characterization of the strain-multiplex properties of HMM. (A–C) Far-field diffraction patterns of flexible HMM (PDMS-Ink) with illumination of monochromatic light and applied strain. Scale = 2.5 cm. (D–F) Diffraction intensity profile as a function of distance with applied stretch. (G) Diffraction distance as a function of stretch. (H) Diffraction efficiency as a function of applied stretch with monochromatic light illumination. (I) Young's modulus as a function of tensile stress for HMM.	 
d = d0 × (1 + ή)	(4)

 	Fig. 4  Fabricated HMM and optical characterization. (A) Optical microscopic images for gelatin-ink HMM. Scales = 5 μm. (B) Far-field diffraction properties with monochromatic light at normal illumination. Scales = 2.5 cm. (C–F) Optical transmission properties of various HMM nanostructures. (G) Optical resolution as a function of the tilt angle. (H) Diffraction intensity as a function of the transmission with monochromatic light illumination.	 

 	Fig. 5  Fabricated 2D HMM (PDMS-Ink) nanostructures and optical characterization. (A–C) Optical microscopic images of the fabricated 2D structures: square, rectangle (60°, 90°). Scales = 3.5 and 4.0 μm. (D) Large-scale gelatin-ink HMM nanostructures. Scales = 2 cm. (E–G) Monochromatic light diffraction of 2D HMM at normal illumination. Scales = 1.0 cm. (H) Rainbow light diffraction with tilt angle variations from 5° to 25°. Scales = 2.5 cm.	 

 	Fig. 6  HMM diffuser fabrication and optical characterization. (A) Optical microscopic image of the fabricated HMM diffuser. (B) AFM profile of the HMM diffuser. (C) Cross-section layer-by-layer view of the HMM diffuser; scale = 100 μm. (D) Surface profile and optical transmission properties of the HMM diffuser. (E–H) Diffused light intensity distribution of the HMM diffuser through monochromatic and broadband light at normal illumination. (I and J) Diffused optical field and intensity profile as a function of the applied force (from 0 to 0.35 N) and diffused area. (K) FWHM of the diffused field as a function of applied force (N).	 
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d1nr01586a
‡ These authors contributed equally.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
