Electron spin resonance  - Annual Reports Section "C" (Physical Chemistry) (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B703988N View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B703988N
(Review Article)
Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem., Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2008, 104, 81-123Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsShow Biomedical TermsElectron spin resonanceChristopher J. RhodesFresh-lands, PO Box 2074, Reading, Berkshire, UK RG4 5ZQ. E-mail: cjrhodes@fresh-lands.comFirst published on 3rd April 2008AbstractA review is presented of the literature on ESR mainly published during the period 2005–2007. A focus is made on subjects such as catalysis, fuel cells, mechanochemistry, environmental applications, archaeological dating and radiation dosimetry, aspects of biological systems and the adsorption of molecules by porous solids, including porous carbon, silica and zeolites. Aspects of spin-trapping are considered among these applications, and also fundamental studies of organic radicals including triplet state species and biradicals. Developments in ESR appear to continue in a steady fashion and there are really no entirely new areas being extracted. Among the technical developments that have been reported are advances in computing, both in the acquisition and processing of spectral data and in predicting the magnetic properties of individual molecules (g-values and hyperfine couplings), most usually now done using Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations.1. IntroductionDevelopments made which involve ESR maintain a steady pace. There are improvements in instrumentation and also in computational/theoretical methods, and by the latter means, both the accumulation and processing of spectral information and the prediction of the magnetic properties of particular paramagnetic species is advantaged. This review focusses mostly on the literature published during the period 2005–2007, which is accordingly very large, in view of the multifold applications of ESR and its variants. It has been necessary, therefore, to adopt a somewhat selective style and so there is little coverage of polymers and materials, inorganic complexes and conductors, including superconductors. Rather, emphasis is given to improvements in instrumentation and computation, organic radicals especially as are produced from spin-trapping experiments, and the use of ESR-detectable spin-probes. Emphasis is given to catalytic systems, including PEM fuel cells while noting the problematic aspects of introducing them on the large scale. Applications of ESR methods to environmental problems and to the study of biological systems is also stressed, including the vexed area of antioxidants, and how good they are for you really. Triplet states and biradicals are an important if fundamental topic and recent developments here are discussed. Forming radicals by mechanical means, so called “mechanochemistry” is also given mention, and there is a skirmish with studies of muonium-labelled radicals as adsorbed in solid materials. The final choice of subjects does reflect interests in regard to the environmental fields and in pollution decontamination and catalysis, and it is reassuring to see that advances here are maintained, albeit that there are few really new fields, probably in reflection of the maturity that ESR has now attained. The impression is that increasingly, a multi-pronged approach is being taken to solve particular problems, in which ESR is but one of an arsenal of methods, including NMR, IR, electronic spectroscopy and mass-spectrometry. This does not decry ESR at all, but rather emphasises its particular advantages, among those of other kinds of measurement, in an holistic analytical approach.2. Technical and theoretical aspectsThere have been developments in both spectrometer design, which permits multi-frequency and high-field measurements, and also in theoretical approaches to the accumulation and analysis of ESR spectra per se. For example, an ESR spectrometer has been described that can operate at either 3 and 9 GHz microwave frequencies in an applied field provided by a 9-Tesla superconducting magnet. In this instrument, the probe-head contains a compact two-loop, one gap resonator, which is located within the variable temperature insert of the magnet thus enabling measurements to be made at magnetic fields in the range 0–9 T from samples maintained at temperatures in the range 1.5–400 K. Crucially, this instrument permits measurements on systems for which the resonance occurs at fields far above the g ∼ 2 condition, such as pertains for antiferromagnets. The low quality factor of the resonator allows time resolved experiments, for instance in longitudinally detected ESR. The performance of the spectrometer was shown for the antiferromagnet, NaNiO2, the superconductor, MgB2, and the conducting alkaline fulleride polymer, RbC60.1 The application of high magnetic fields to the spectroscopy of biological media, ranging in complexity from molecules to living humans has been reviewed, particularly in reference to NMR, DNP, ESR, ENDOR, ESEEM and Mössbauer spectroscopies.2 A novel technique has been reported for recording dynamic nuclear polarization signals, which involves the simultaneous excitation of electronic and nuclear transitions. In15N-@C60 the nuclear polarization of the nitrogen nuclei was enhanced by a factor of 1000 at a static temperature of 3 K and an applied magnetic field of 8.6 T. This is over twice the largest such enhancement so far reported. It is proposed that his approach will allow the initialization of the nuclear qubit in strategies that employ N@C60 molecules as components of quantum information processing devices.3 A microwave probe head is described which contains a gasketed sapphire anvil cell (SAC) for performing sensitive electron spin resonance (ESR) measurements under high hydrostatic pressures. The system was based around commercially available dielectric resonators (DRs) with a dielectric permittivity of about 30. The microwave resonator functions in a widestretched double-stacked geometry and resonates in the lowest cylindrical quasi TE011 mode at close to 9.2 GHz. Being made from plastic, the main resonant components are transparent to magnetic field modulation at 100 kHz. The overall ESR sensitivity of the probe was demonstrated for a tiny speck of 2,2-diphenyl-1-picrylhydrazyl radical (DPPH) positioned in the gasket of the SAC, with water as the pressure-transmitting medium. The system was also used for studying pressure-induced changes in spin-relaxation mechanisms of a quasi-1D-conducting polymer, KC60. For small samples placed in the sample hole of the gasket the probe can attain a sensitivity that is reduced only by about 3 times from that encountered with standard ESR cavities.4 A stopped-flow accessory which allows the determination of rate constants for reactions involving paramagnetic species after rapid mixing of two liquid reagents, using cw-ESR. The stopped-flow design involves a state-of-the-art, computer controlled, fluid driving system, a mini-resonant ESR device with an integrated small ball mixer, and a stop-valve. The resonator with the mode TE(H)011 is particularly appropriate for conditions of fast flowing and rapidly stopped aqueous solutions, and to provide a high time resolution. The short distance between the ball mixer and the small ESR active volume (1.8 μl) yields a measured dead time of 330 μs.5By means of rapid field scan with high frequency sinusoidal or triangular sweep fields superimposed on the main Zeeman field, ESR signals were recorded in the absence of low-frequency field modulation. When applying space-encoding rotating field gradients, fast CW ESR imaging using direct detection is possible and which could, in principle, approach the rate of pulsed FT ESR imaging. The method takes advantage of the well-known rapid-scan strategy in CW NMR and ESR spectroscopies, that renders possible an arbitrarily fast field sweep and the simultaneous application of spinning gradients that allows fast spatial encoding. The result is a fast functional ESR imaging method which, depending on the spin concentration, spectrometer sensitivity and detection band width, can provide improved temporal resolution in revealing dynamical processes in spin perfusion, pharmacokinetics, spectral spatial imaging, dynamic oximetry, and other applications.6 Eaton’s group report a comparison of reconstruction of two-dimensional images by filtered back-projection (FBP) and by the maximum entropy method (MEM) for spectral-spatial ESR images with differing signal-to-noise ratios. Experimental projections were recorded using directly-detected rapid scans with a series of magnetic field gradients being applied. A Hamming filter was used in conjunction with FBP, but not for the MEM. Imperfections in real experimental data, as well as effects of random noise, both contribute to discrepancies between the reconstructed and experimental projections, which may make it impossible to achieve the customary MEM criterion for convergence. The more effective elimination of noise in baseline regions by MEM permitted the detection of weak 13C trityl (triphenylmethyl) radical hyperfine lines that could not be distinguished from noise in FBP reconstructed images. The results indicate that FBP is most effective when the number of projections is sufficiently high that the star effect is negligible.7 Another group discusses various approaches toward an integrated computational analysis of CW-ESR measurements of the dynamics of radicals in liquids. The problem is one of increasing complexity as simulation models must include the influence of diverse relaxation processes on the observed spectra. The paper outlines the basic theoretical tools needed to predict, more or less ab initio, the observable spectral parameters using the stochastic Liouville equation (SLE), in combination with quantum mechanical and hybrid methods to compute structural, spectroscopic and magnetic properties of molecular systems.8It is shown that he sensitivity encountered in making ESR measurements of biological systems can be dramatically increased by dividing the aqueous sample into separate compartments. The major determinant of sensitivity is the number of spins in the sample, and for an aqueous sample at ambient temperature, this is limited by its necessary small volume, in order to minimise the strong non-resonant absorption of microwaves by water. Recent empirical studies have shown that if the sample is divided into separate portions, a far greater total volume may be loaded into a resonant cavity without incurring an appreciable diminution of the cavity quality factor. Calculations, based on the Bruggeman mixing rule, show quantitatively that the composite aqueous sample has a permittivity much less than that of bulk water, depending on the aqueous volume fraction f, and indicate that at X-band, the optimal volume fraction of an aqueous composite sample required to produce maximum sensitivity, is f = 0.15. The sensitivity is expected to increase by a factor of almost 9, compared with an aqueous sample in a single tube.9 Other workers have investigated the geometries of various aqueous flat-cells in the perpendicular orientation using Ansoft High Frequency Structure Simulator (version 9.0. Pittsburgh. PA) and Computer Simulation Technology Microwave Studio (version 5.0, Wellesley Hills. MA). As a result of the according calculations and simulations, a practical multiple cell sample structure for use in commercial rectangular TE102 cavities has been proposed with a sensitivity some 2.0–2.3 times greater than that for a single flat-cell in the nodal orientation. Further enhancements (up to 75% more) are expected if materials with a lower associated dielectric loss are used to fabricate the device.10 The proton spin–lattice relaxation rate induced by oxygen provides a measure of the local concentration of oxygen, but which is reported to be solvent-dependent. In water, the hydrophobic effect increases the local concentration of oxygen in the nonpolar vicinities of solute molecules, and for nitroxides in aqueous solutions, it is found that the local concentration of oxygen is approximately twice that expected for the free diffusion hard sphere limit. Contrastingly, in octane, the effect is absent. The results imply that nitroxide based ESR oximetry may suffer a reference concentration shift of about a factor of two if the aqueous nitroxide spectrum is used as the reference.11 A study has been made of the molecular dynamics of the spin probe TEMPO (2,2,5,5-teramethylpyrroline-N-oxyl) dissolved in some ionic liquids. In some examples, the effect of restricted rotational motion can be rationalised according to simple hydrodynamic theories (e.g. Stokes-Einstein), whereas in other cases an increased level of ordering within the liquid structure is implied.12 Azafullerenes highly enriched in 13C, C59N, have been synthesised with the intention of using them for nuclear spin-labelling.13C-enriched fullerenes, produced by the Kratschmer–Huffmann process, were subject to a N2 discharge which produces a low yield of C59N. A homogeneous 13C distribution was indicated from Raman spectra of the products, while ESR measurements showed that the C59N concentration, at 0.2%, is similar to that produced in unlabelled fullerenes, and hence there is a negligible kinetic isotope effect attendant to its formation. An accurate simulation of the ESR spectrum was made using the known 14N and 13C hyperfine coupling constants for the C59N radical. It is concluded that the material may be useful for (nuclear) spin-labelling of heterofullerene complexes with potential biological applications, and that it might find further use as a building element for quantum computation.13 Either way, it is a most interesting substance.Theoretical methods have been applied to the calculation of ESR spectral parameters, the results of which are reported in a recent book. In one study therein, a new class of alternative operators is described that are devoid of many of the disadvantages of both the delta-function and the Hiller, Sucher and Feinberg (HSF) formulations. These alternative operators provide particular accuracy by virtue of averaging errors in the wavefunctions in the vicinity of nuclei and by supplying a density cusp at a particular nucleus, even in cases where the wavefunction itself has no cusp. Another advantage is that it is relatively straightforward to utilise this procedure whereas calculations using the HSF approach are extremely complex and hence expensive in terms of computer-time.14 Another chapter in the book provides an overview of the current state of play regarding Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations of hyperfine coupling constants in radicals. Insight is further provided into the state-of-the-art density functionals on the basis of a comparison of results from DFT with the most reliable experimental and high-level ab initio determined coupling constants.15 The use of DFT to compute g-tensors is also reviewed. The effectiveness of DFT methods is shown both for the “best-case” data from main-group radicals, where it is comparable with high-level ab initio results, and for the more difficult transition-metal centred paramagnetic species.16 Another review in this series concerns zero-field splitting in ESR spectra and quantum mechanical approaches to the calculation of this quantity.17 An account of the use of computation to determine the hyperfine coupling tensors of biologically relevant radicals is also made, which summarises the comprehension of hfcs from a theoretical viewpoint, and provides a perspective on methods that may be appropriate for their calculation. Guidelines are presented to aid in the appropriate choice of a particular method for predicting hfcs. The long-vexed issue of “matrix effects” on hfcs is also addressed, and the difficulties they pose for calculational approaches, along with trends in medium effects.18 A DFT study was made of the Jahn–Teller effect and spin–orbit coupling for copper and gold atomic trimers, using an analytic potential. A discussion is made of the energetics associated with Jahn–Teller distortion, pseudorotation barriers, dissociation and isomerisation for the two species. Global minima were optimised using DFT in addition to the coupled cluster-angles-doubles-with-triples energies method. It was found that very good accord was met between the optimised structures and the analytic potential, while the Mulliken population analysis agreed well with the experimental ESR data. Spin–orbit coupling was significant for gold but not for copper, and for the gold trimer it suppressed the Jahn–Teller distortion. The spin–orbit splitting for the D3h geometry of the gold trimer was in excellent agreement with the most recent results obtained from infra-red spectroscopy.193. Biological systemsStudies of enzyme active-site “units” remain an active province of ESR in the biological fields. A good example is a paper which describes spectroscopic and electronic structure determinations of the class I Escherichia coli ribonucleotide reductase (RNR) intermediate X along with computational results for three model complexes that are considered in order to determine the electronic structure and geometry of the Fe-III-Fe-IV active site of the intermediate X. The intermediate X was trapped by rapid freeze-quenching (RFQ) and characterised using a combination of ESR, absorption spectroscopy, and MCD, for the species in R2 wild-type (WT) and two variants, W48A and Y122F/Y356F. The relative contributions of intermediate X and radicals present were established by spin-counting, while RFQ-MCD was used specifically to probe the nature of the Fe-III/Fe-IV active site, which displayed three FeIV d–d transitions between 16700 and 22600 cm−1, two FeIV d–d spin-flip transitions between 23500 and 24300 cm−1, and five oxo to FeIV and FeIII charge transfer (CT) transitions between 25000 and 32000 cm−1. Since the FeIV d–d transitions were perturbed in the two variants, it was confirmed that all three d–d transitions derive from the d–π manifold. Significantly, the large FeIV d–π splittings in the WT are incompatible with a bis-μ-oxo structure. It is concluded that the FeIV d–d transitions in WT intermediate X are best ascribed to a bridged μ-oxo/μ-hydroxo [FeIII(μ-O)(μ-OH)FeIV] structure. The authors stress that the μ-oxo/μ-hydroxo core structure provides an important σ–π super-exchange pathway, which is not present in the bis-μ-oxo structure, and can promote facile electron transfer from Y122 to the remote FeIV unit via the bent oxo bridge, thereby generating the catalytically important tyrosyl radical.20 A review discusses recent experimental advances that have significantly increased the potential of ESR and electron nuclear double resonance (ENDOR) methods to characterize the structure and dynamics of metalloproteins, which include the introduction of powerful pulsed ESR/ENDOR methods and the development of spectrometers operating at very high microwave frequencies and high magnetic fields. Applications to iron-, nickel-, cobalt- and copper-containing proteins are particularly highlighted.21 A determination of the catalytically active tyrosyl radical in ovine prostaglandin H2 synthase-1 has been undertaken using high-frequency pulsed ESR and ENDOR methods. The radical is signified by the so called “wide doublet” signal, but further structural elucidation was rendered possible in the 130 GHz ENDOR spectra which revealed a hydrogen-bonded deuteron in partially deuterium oxide exchanged samples. In order to obtain a satisfactory simulation of the ENDOR spectra, it was found necessary to incorporate a distribution of H-bond distances, and which was consistent with the model employed to account for the distribution in gx values detected in pulsed high-field ESR spectra from these samples.22 In a study of Rhodothermus marinus (a thermohalophilic Gram negative bacterium which contains a type I NADH/quinone oxidoreductase—“complex 1”) it was demonstrated that the stoichiometry of NADH oxidation and quinone reduction is 1:1. By improving the isolation procedure, sufficiently large amounts of protein were obtained that the material could be thoroughly characterized by ESR spectroscopy, employing a range of temperatures and microwave powers, and in using NADH, NADPH, and dithionite as reducing agents. A minimum of two [2Fe–2S]2+/1+ and four [4Fe–4S]2+/1+ centres were determined in the purified complex, while ESR-detected redox-titrations permitted the measurement of the reduction potentials of the iron–sulfur centres. Apart from one of the [4Fe–4S]2+/1+ centres, which has a lower reduction potential, the other centres were found all to have reduction potentials of −240 ± 20 mV, at pH 7.5.23 The outer mitochondrial membrane protein mitoNEET was discovered as a binding target of pioglitazone, an insulin-sensitizing drug of the thiazolidinedione class used to treat type 2 diabetes,24 and has been shown to be a member of a small family of proteins containing a 39-amino-acid CDGSH domain.25 While the CDGSH domain is annotated as a zinc finger motif, mitoNEET was found also to contain iron, and on the basis of optical and ESR measurements the presence of a redox-active pH-labile Fe–S cluster was established. Spectroscopic studies of recombinant proteins showed that the 2Fe–2S cluster was coordinated by Cys-3 and His-1, and furthermore the His ligand was proved to be a feature in the observed pH lability of the cluster, indicating that the release of the cluster was triggered by loss of this ligand via protonation. mitoNEET is the first 2Fe–2S-containing protein located in the outer mitochondrial membrane to be identified, and it is speculated that mitoNEET may function in Fe–S cluster shuttling and/or in redox reactions.26 NADH:quinone oxidoreductase (complex I) is an essential protein in cellular energy production since it utilises a series of redox cofactors to couple electron transfer to the generation of a proton-motive force across the inner mitochondrial or bacterial cytoplasmic membrane. There is a noncovalently bound flavin mononucleotide at the active site of complex 1, which enables NADH oxidation, along with eight or nine iron–sulfur clusters which together transfer electrons between the flavin and a quinone-binding site. In order to comprehend the mechanism of complex I, the properties of these clusters must be determined, both individually and as a collective functional moiety. ESR spectra were recorded from the overexpressed NuoG subunit from Escherichia coli complex I and were compared with those from the intact enzyme, from which it is concluded that couplings from N4 and N5 have been misassigned in previous investigations: i.e. signal N4 is from Nuol (not NuoG) and signal N5 is from the conserved cysteine-ligated [4Fe–4S] cluster in NuoG (not from the cluster with a histidine ligand). The implications of these reassignments for the free energy profile for electron transfer through complex I are discussed.27 While many ferritin structures from bacteria to mammals have been reported, until now only one was available from archaea, the ferritin from Archaeoglobus fulgidus (AfFtn). The PfFtn 24-mer exhibits the 432 point-group symmetry that is characteristic of most ferritins, a fact that indicates that the 23 symmetry reported previously for AfFtn is not a general characteristic of archaeal ferritins. The ferroxidase center of the aerobically crystallized ferritin contains one iron at site A and at sites B and C only upon steeping in iron or zinc solutions. ESR measurements suggest that this depletion of iron from the native ferroxidase centre is a consequence of a iron-complexation by the crystallization salt. The extreme thermostability of PfFtn is compared with that of eight structurally similar ferritins and is proposed to originate mostly from the observed high number of intrasubunit hydrogen bonds.28Many properties of copper-containing nitrite reductase e.g. gene expression, enzyme activity, and substrate affinity are pH-dependent. One paper reports the use of a combination of techniques to investigate the structural basis for the pH dependence of activity and nitrite affinity by examining the type 2 copper site and its immediate surroundings in nitrite reductase from Rhodobacter sphaeroides 2.4.3. When co-crystallized with substrate, nitrite is shown to bind in a bidentate fashion with its two oxygen atoms ligating the type 2 copper, overlapping with the positions occupied by the solvent ligand in the high and low pH structures, according to X-ray diffraction measurements. The pH dependence of the binding of nitrite to the active site was determined using FT IR, and ESR spectroscopy to characterize the pH dependence of the reduction potential of the type 2 copper site.29 DFT calculations were employed in a study of the spin-density distribution, g tensors, and Cu and ligand hyperfine tensors for blue copper proteins plastocyanin and stellacyanin, and for small model complexes. It in inferred that the bulk of the spin density is almost equally shared by the copper atom and the sulfur atom of the equatorial cysteine ligand. The influence of spin–orbit coupling on the ESR parameters may be appreciable, and especially spin–orbit effects on the 65Cu hyperfine coupling tensors in blue copper sites are found to be unusually large compared to more regularly coordinated CuII complexes with similar spin density on copper.30 Two different applications of electron spin echo (ESE) spectroscopy of spin-labelled phospholipids are reviewed: (1) the use of partially relaxed echo-detected ESR spectra to study the librational lipid-chain motions in the low-temperature phases of phospholipid bilayers, and (2) the use of electron spin echo envelope modulation (ESEEM) spectroscopy to determine the penetration of water into phospholipid membranes. Specific examples of phosphatidylcholine bilayer membranes, both with and without equimolar cholesterol, are reported with phosphatidylcholine spin probes site-specifically labelled throughout the sn-2 chain.31 A review has appeared concerning he use of site-directed spin labelling in the characterisation of the structure of proteins. In particular, the use of pulsed techniques to establish long-range distances and distributions in proteins is considered, and methods to determine the conformations and local dynamics of spin-labelled side-chains, and how these may influence ESR lineshapes.32 Another review deals with the simulation of high field ESR spectra of spin-labelled lipids in membranes. It is emphasised that the lateral ordering of the lipid chains is characterised by the gxx/gyy tensor components, and which can be determined by the theory of motional narrowing, but the spin-Hamiltonian parameters must be correct to account for changes in the differential polarity that exists within the membrane environment. When the applied magnetic field is very high, the spectra are found to be sensitive only to local segmental motion of the lipid chains.33 Solvent effects on magnetic parameters of nitroxide spin labels in combination with side-directed spin-labelling ESR methods provide very useful means for elucidating polarity profiles in lipid bilayers and mapping local electrostatic effects in complex biomolecular systems. One major contributor to these solvent effects is the hydrogen bonds that could be formed between the nitroxide moiety and water and/or the available hydroxyl groups. Here, formation of hydrogen bonds between a lipid bilayer spin probe, 5-doxyl stearic acid, 5DSA and hydrogen-bond donors has been studied using high-frequency (HF) pulsed ENDOR and ESR. A hydrogen-bonded deuteron was directly detected by ENDOR at a frequency of 130 GHz from 5DSA dissolved in different deuterium substituted alcohols, while the characteristic signal was absent in the nonpolar medium, toluene-d8. The geometry of the hydrogen bond and its length of 1.74 ± 0.06 Å, were found to be practically the same for all four alcoholic media, indicating that nearly identical hydrogen bonds were formed irrespective of the solvent polarity. HF ESR spectra appear to be particularly sensitive to the investigation of hydrogen bonds and potentially the method could be used for probing the hydrogen-bond network in complex biomolecular assemblies and lipid bilayers that have been rendered paramagnetic using site-directed spin-labelling methods.34 A report has appeared of a site-directed spin-labelling study of 10-mer RNA duplexes and HIV-1 TAR RNA motifs possessing a range of spin–spin distances. The labels were attached to the 2′-NH2 positions of given uridines in the duplexes, and their interspin distances were measured using molecular dynamics simulations (MD) and also Fourier deconvolution methods (FD). According to the MD results, the 10-mer duplexes were found to have interspin distances ranging from 10 to 30, whereas dipolar line broadening of the CW ESR spectrum is only observed for expected spin–spin separations in the range 10–21 Å but is absent for distances greater than 25 Å. The conformational changes in TAR (transactivating responsive region) RNA in the presence and in the absence of different divalent metal ions were monitored by measuring distances between two nucleotides in the bulge region. These results demonstrate that ESR spectroscopy provides a potentially powerful “ruler” as an aid to the prediction of the structures of RNA molecules.35 A study has been made of the hydration behaviour of dimyristoyl-phosphatidylglycerol (DMPG) and dimyristoyl-phosphatidylcholine (DMPC) vesicles as a functions of both salt concentration and temperatures above the lipid phase transition. In order to achieve motionally narrowed ESR spectra, the small spin probe di-tert-butyl nitroxide (DTBN) was used. The novelty of the approach presented rests upon the recording of the second harmonic ESR signal which is then analysed by a line-fitting procedure. Spectral fitting yields precise ESR parameters and provides a precise view of the local environment of the spin probe in both lipid and aqueous phases. The 14N hyperfine coupling constant arising from DTBN that occupies the vesicles yields a measure of the hydration state of the negatively charged vesicle surface, which is affected by the addition of salt, while the hydration of DMPC vesicles is not influenced by salt concentration at the low temperatures. In contrast, the salt concentration does affect the degree of hydration at higher temperatures, as is thought due to the faster motion of the phospholipid molecules. The spin probe exhibits anisotropic motion in the phospholipid bilayer, the extent of which is greater as the salt concentration increases.36 A review has been published on the subject of determining 1.5–10 nanometre distances using pulsed ESR.37 Results from Pulsed Electron Double Resonance (PELDOR) measurements have been reported to determine the distances between the spin-centres in a FAD-dependent sulfydryl oxidase, Augmenter of Liver Regeneration (ALR). ALR is a homodimer in which each subunit contains a noncovalently bonded FAD cofactor. Both FAD units may be converted into their blue neutral radical forms, and using three and four pulse sequence experiments, a distance of 26.1 ± 0.8 A was obtained.38 An ESR study of guest–host complexes of beta- and gamma-cyclodextrins (CDs) with two spin-labelled indole derivatives in aqueous solutions along with theoretical calculations of these systems is reported. It is found that the presence of CD causes a reduction in the polarity of the NO group environment, while the rotational correlation time of guest molecules increases. The indole derivatives have different structures but identical molecular weights and both form 1:1 complexes with gamma-CD. On the basis of ESR spectral simulation, it was possible to determine the orientation of the indole ring in relation to the plane of the host molecule and the rotational diffusion coefficients of the complexes, which corresponded to the hydrodynamic volume of one gamma-CD molecule. In contrast to the complexes with gamma-CD the rotational correlation times, T, of the complexes with beta-CD correspond to a hydrodynamic volume which much exceeds the volume of a single beta-CD molecule.39 The synthesis is reported of two isomers of permethylated beta-cyclodextrin, labelled with paramagnetic TEMPO moieties attached on the same rim of the cavity, whose host-guest properties were subsequently investigated by ESR spectroscopy.40 It is known that the ESR spectra of cyclodextrins (CD) labelled with TEMPO are sensitive to the incorporation of large guest molecules. In a study of spin-labelled CD’s in concentrated poly(ethylene glycol)/poly(propylene glycol) solutions, marked departure was noted from the Debye–Stokes–Einstein rotational diffusion model, which is suggested due to self-aggregation of alkylene glycols given their high concentration. The work was extended to an investigation of adamantane-functionalised DAB dendrimers, for which it was found that the binding-strength increased with the order of dendrimer generation (size), and that supramolecular aggregates are formed in high concentrations with the generation 3 dendrimer.41 Using cw-ESR and pulsed ESR, interactions of spin-labelled polyamidoamine dendrimers, termed Gn, where n indicates the generation (number of amidoamine layers), at different protonation levels with selected amino acids and proteins were investigated. Gly, Glu, Arg, and Leu were selected as being representative of neutral(zwitterionic)-polar, acidic, basic, and low-polar amino acids, respectively, while the water-soluble proteins alpha-chymotrypsin and albumin were selected on the basis of a basic and an acidic isoelectric point, respectively. Typically, dendrimers at a high protonation level interact stronger with amino acids than do those at a low level of protonation, but even for highly protonated dendrimers, a synergistic effect between hydrophilic and hydrophobic interactions was noted to promote the formation of stable Gn-amino acid adducts, as demonstrated by the enhanced interactions with Leu. As expected from acid-base interactions, stable adducts were formed between Arg and highly protonated dendrimers and between Glu and low level protonated dendrimers. Simulation of the ESE traces gave results that are consistent with the cw-ESR results from which it is concluded that a partial complexation of the nitroxides of the dendrimer with Leu and alpha-chymotrypsin occurs.42 The novel peptide-bound nitronylnitroxides [1-(1′,3′-dioxyl-4′,4′,5′,5′-tetramethyldihydroimidazol-2-yl)phenyl-4-yl]oxyacetic acid (1), and its peptide derivatives (2) (Xaa = Ala, Gly, Gln), were synthesized and their ESR spectra recorded. The activity of (2) toward scavenging free radicals was assessed in vitro and the throbolysis effect of the material was determined by means of an euglobulin clot test, a fibrinolytic lysis test and in vivo thrombolysis tests. It was concluded that (2) is active both as a free radical scavenger and a thrombolytic agent.43  Nitric oxide (NO) has received such a massive level of attention that Science Magazine named it as “molecule of the year” in 1994.44 In particular, it is implicated in the endothelium derived relaxing factor (EDRF) and is responsible for the constriction of the blood vessels and among other effects, penile erection. The drug Viagra is supposed to assist in the latter phenomenon by the release of NO, which is also an often welcome side-effect of the recreational use of substances such as amyl nitrite. However, since one is also at an increased simultaneous risk of stroke, it is not a recommended strategy. In all such vascular roles for NO, its interactions with haemoglobin play an important role in the vascular biology of this free radical and yet, surprisingly, the level of nitrosylhemoglobin (HbNO) in which NO is bound to the ferrous haemoglobin heme in whole human blood under basal and stimulated conditions is a matter of some controversy, since values from below 1 nM to around 10 μM have been measured. A regression-based ESR technique has been developed with a sensitivity of around 200 nM, and this has been used to detect HbNO under basal conditions and during NO inhalation. By using regression analysis, levels of HbNO as low as 0.5–1 μM can be deconvoluted into their component species. It is found that HbNO is present at less than 200 nM at basal conditions in both arterial and venous blood but is formed at a level of 0.5–2.5 μM upon inhalation of NO at a concentration of 80 ppm. The half-life of HbNO in vivo is around 40 min.45 A neat trick to the capture of NO with the now commonly used trap for it, ferric iron diethyldithiocarbamate complexes, is to incorporate the latter into the cages of a zeolite. In one report, the iron complex was assembled in situ in the pores of zeolite Y, yielding the mononitrosyl-iron adduct as a mixture of diamagnetic (ESR silent) ferrous and paramagnetic ferric complexes. The sensitivity of the methods is superior to using free iron complexes in solution, and it is proposed that the material might be anchored to solid surfaces, mixed into a composite or pressed into small pellets.46 The yield of nitric oxide produced from 1 mM sodium nitrite solution varies by a factor of 200 when the reaction was initiated by 10 mM sodium dithionite in the presence of 5 or 150 mM HEPES-buffer (at pH 7.4). The amount of nitric oxide was estimated by the ESR as incorporated into water-soluble complexes of Fe with N-methyl-D-glucamine dithiocarbamate (MGD). This procedure resulted in the formation of ESR-detectable mononitrosyl iron complexes with MGD (MNIC-MGD). In ten seconds following the addition of dithionite, the concentration of MNIC-MGD complexes reached 2 μM in 5 mM HEPES-buffer but only 0.01 μM in 150 mM HEPES-buffer. The difference was suggested to be due to a longer life-time of zones with reduced pH values in a weaker buffer solution, and which was sufficiently long to ensure some protonation of nitrite: the resulting nitrous acid then decomposed to NO. It was suggested that the presence of zones with a low pH value in cells and tissues can ensure the predominance of the acid-catalysed formation of nitric oxide from nitrite, while the formation of nitric oxide from nitrite catalyzed by heme-protein, nitrite reductases, will be only of minor importance under these conditions.47 Cogent to all the above is a review of the in vivo mechanism of NO trapping by iron–dithiocarbamate complexes, which proposes that, in contrast to usual thinking, NO radicals in biological systems are trapped principally by ferric iron-dithiocarbamates, which are diamagnetic and hence invisible to ESR. These ferric mononitrosyl complexes are very readily reduced to the ferrous state with L-cysteine, glutathione, ascorbate or dithiocarbamate ligands than their non-nitrosyl counterpart. When trapping NO in oxygenated biological systems, the majority of trapped nitric oxide is found in diamagnetic ferric mononitrosyl iron complexes which represents only a minority of the NO actually formed in a given system. Subsequent ex vivo reduction of such biological samples increases appreciably the yield of the paramagnetic mononitrosyl iron complexes and also obviates interference from overlapping Cu2+–dithiocarbamate complexes, all of which greatly assists the quantification of NO yields therein.48 Interestingly, it is reported that exposure to NO on a daily basis for 60 seconds at a concentration of 500 ppm in a gas-stream as generated from an air–plasma unit “Plason” enhances the healing of skin lesions in rats. Large amounts of NO–iron complexes were detected in tissue by ESR, and it appears that there is a sharp increase in endogenous NO production in the tissue. It is also evident that the beneficial influence of this procedure arises from the production of peroxynitrite by the reaction between NO and superoxide. The peroxynitrite is possessed of a strong prooxidant effect, and can thereby activate various endogenous antioxidant systems which diminish the amount of superoxide, thus permitting an elevation in the concentration of endogenous NO in the tissue.49 A fullerene derivative has been reported which shows superoxide dismutase mimetic behaviour, specifically a tris-malonic acid adduct of the fullerene C60. It is demonstrated that the material can remove the superoxide radical anion with a rate constant of 2 × 106 mol−1 s−1, which is roughly one hundred times slower than the action of the superoxide dismutases (SOD), per se. The reaction does not occur by radical scavenging, but through catalytic dismutation of superoxide, as shown by the regeneration of oxygen, formation of hydrogen peroxide, and an absence of ESR-active (paramagnetic) products. It is postulated that electron-deficient regions of the C60 sphere act concertedly with the malonic acid units to guide and stabilize superoxide radical anions, hence promoting dismutation.50 A group in Ukraine report that NO–heme complexes were detected in blood samples taken from patients suffering from colon cancer. The precise nature of the ESR signal seems to depend on the stage of the disease and is different between operable or inoperable types of cancer.51 Sixteen mountaineers (11 males/5 females) were matched for physical fitness and caloric intake and assigned in a double-blind manner to either antioxidant (n = 8) or placebo (n = 8) supplementation, which was enforced for 7 days at sea level and during an 11-day ascent to 4780 m. Enteral prophylaxis incorporated a daily bolus dose of 1 g of L-ascorbate, 400 international units of D,L-α-tocopherol acetate and 600 mg of alpha-lipoic acid. ESR spectroscopic detection of PBN (α-phenyl-tert-butylnitrone) adducts confirmed an increase in the venous concentration of carbon-centred radicals at high altitude in the placebo group, whereas a decrease was observed in the antioxidant group from that measured at sea level. According to ESR measurements of ascorbyl radicals, the increase in carbon-centred radicals at high altitude was associated with a decrease in ascorbate. It is inferred that antioxidant prophylaxis decreases the concentration of carbon-centred radicals at high altitude in comparison with the placebo group, but does not influence markers of inflammation, appetite-related peptides, ad libitum nutrient intake or body composition. Thus free radicals do not appear to be involved in the inflammatory response and subsequent control of eating behaviour at high altitude.52 A review is presented of the use of high frequency ESR to investigate the primary processes of photosynthesis. Specifically, the increased spectral and also temporal resolution possible at 95 GHz/3.4 T and 360 GHz/12.8 T conditions, rendered possible a determination of light-induced electron-transfer in reaction centre proteins, and light-induced proton-pump intermediates from site-directed becteriorhodopsin proteins spin-labelled with nitroxides, and obtained from the purple membrane of halobacterium salinarium.53 It has been suggested that chloride and formate anions interact competitively with the acceptor side of photosystem II, on the basis of ESR spectra.54 Cadmium at a concentration range 7.5 to 75 μM was shown to result in a loss of pigments, reduction of thylakoids and decrease in oxygen evolution in leaves from chloroplasts in rice, while the degree of photosystem II reaction centre proteins and those from its light harvesting complex are not affected, indicating that cadmium does not adversely influence the structural organization of the photosystem. When thylakoids were isolated from control plants and treated with cadmium, treatment with diphenylcarbazide was found to restore most of the lost photosystem II activity lost after incubation with cadmium; most of the ESR signal from the manganese cluster is lost, while the TyrD(+) and other signals are retained.55 In another study of photosystem II, this time from spinach membrane particles, the ESR spin-trapping technique was employed to study dark production of two reactive oxygen species, namely the hydroxyl radical and singlet oxygen. Production of hydroxyl radicals, as measured from their adduct with TEMPO, was found to be decreased when hydrogen peroxide was removed, whereas
externally added hydrogen peroxide enhanced hydroxyl radical production. It is postulated that the formation of hydroxyl radicals is connected to the thermal disassembly of water-splitting manganese complex on the PSII donor side. It appears that hydroxyl radicals and singlet oxygen arise from independent pathways and that the generation of the latter is not connected especially with the PSII donor side of the complex.56 The “oxygen effect” is well known in radiation therapy, in which the presence of oxygen in tissue exacerbates the effectiveness of the radiation in destroying cancer cells, and is thought to involve the formation of oxygen centred free radicals. In a recent development, evidence has now been presented for a novel mechanism for the oxygen effect in tumour radio-sensitisation by anti-inflammatory drugs, on the basis of pO2 measurements made using ESR.57 Another group has investigated the connection between free radical formation (fr) and single strand break (ssb) and double strand break (dsb) in DNA that is exposed to ionizing radiation. G(∑fr) were measured by ESR in films of pEC (10,810 bp) and pUC18 (2,686 bp) plasmids hydrated to 22 mol of water/nucleotide and X-irradiated at 4 K. On warming to room temperature, the strand breaks were measured by gel electrophoresis. The following values were determined: were for pEC and pUC18 of G(∑fr) = 0.71 ± 0.02 and 0.61 ± 0.01 μmol/J, Gtotal(ssb) = 0.09 ± 0.01 and 0.14 ± 0.01 μmol/J, G(dsb) = 0.010 ± 0.001 and 0.006 ± 0.001 μmol/J, and G(total)(ssb)/G(dsb) ∼9 and ∼20. Surprisingly, G(sugar)(fr) is close to 0.06 μmol/J for pUC18 films, which is less than half of Gtotal(ssb). This indicates that a significant fraction of strand breaks are derived from precursors other than trapped DNA radicals, and among the various mechanisms that were considered is one that involves two single-electron oxidations at a deoxyribose carbon atom, hence resulting in a diamagnetic product.58 An interesting question is that of whether the administration of clinically applicable doses of the anaesthetic, propofol (2,6-diisopropylphenol) affects the fluidity of cell membranes, as has been interrogated using a spin-labelling method. Both liposome dimyristoyl-L-α-phosphatidylcholine and cell (erythrocyte, Neuro-2a) membranes were studied, employing fatty acid spin-probes (5,16-doxylstearic acid). In either case, the ESR results indicated that the clinical dose of propofol had no influence on the membrane fluidity, while at elevated concentrations an effect was recorded. In contrast, measurements from absorption spectroscopy of merocyanine 540 gave a clear indication of a fluidising effect on the membrane even at clinical concentrations of the drug. It is suggested that propofol may provide an influence at the local level on the structure and dynamics of the membrane domains, undetectable by ESR in low concentrations.59 A study was made of the wavelength dependence on some light-driven redox reactions in cells, with a particular view to determining any influence of red light wavelengths. Unsurprisingly, it is concluded that shorter wavelengths have a greater effect than longer wavelengths, although red light does have some effect, according to results from ESR radical scavenging experiments using TEMPO, which is more effective in determining free radicals than spin-trapping by DMPO.60 The measurement of oxygen concentrations in oxygen supersaturated solutions has been undertaken using the broadening of nitroxide ESR spectra. In order to achieve such conditions of supersaturation, either the thermal decomposition of 1,4-peroxy-1,4-dimethylnaphthalene was undertaken in situ or an applied oxygen gas pressure was introduced above the sample. A linear correlation was obtained between linewidth and oxygen concentration, even beyond the point at which 14N hyperfine structure was rendered unresolved by line-broadening.61 Oxygen concentration profiles were determined using spin-labelled lipid-chains and were found to possess a Boltzmann sigmoidal dependence on the depth of each lipid leaflet, representing a two-component distribution between the inner and outer regions of the membrane, and a transfer free energy that varies in a linear fashion with distance from the dividing planes.62 It is shown that trityl (triarylmethyl) radicals may be used with appropriate functionality to determine both the oxygen concentration and pH for in vivo ESR imaging.63 Peroxyl radicals were produced by single-electron transfer from the chelated CoII of vitamin B12 (cyanocobalamine) in the 3d7 electronic configuration to tert-butylhydroperoxide, and which are stabilised by π-coordination to the oxidised vitamin which has the CoIII 3d6 configuration. The ESR signature for these peroxyl radicals is a signal at g = 2.0174, but which on addition of sterically hindered phenols is replaced by a new signal from stable phenoxyl radicals. The phenoxyl radicals are coordinated to the CoIII centre and their spectra show hyperfine splitting from the 59Co nucleus, giving an eight-lines structure from the I = 7/2 nuclear spin.64 Resonance Raman and ESR spectra are reported from the hydroperoxo intermediate in the enzymatic cycle of cytochrome P450, using a rapid-freeze technique. The O–O stretching frequency is observed at 799 cm−1 and is the first such observation in a peroxo-heme adduct, the assignment of which is confirmed by isotopic labelling with oxygen gas containing 50% 16O18O. The Fe–O vibration is measured at 559 cm−1.654. Radical trapping4.1 Spin-trappingAmong the various aspects of ESR is spin-trapping, used extensively in an effort to substantiate the involvement of free radicals in numerous systems, most often in the biological fields and in organic reaction mechanisms more generally. The technique is also sometimes applied to surface science, in aspects of catalysis and other processes mediated by reactive surfaces, as is illustrated in a recent review.66 By means of spin-trapping, reactive free radicals are converted into stable, usually nitroxide, radicals which may accumulate in particular systems to which they pertain. As noted in section 7.2, although the putative “hydrogen economy” poses a debatable reality, both on grounds of production67 and storage67,68 of hydrogen, and the shortage of platinum68 to fabricate a sufficient number of fuel cells to compare with the scale of current world transportation, research continues into understanding the fundamentals of such devices, and an in situ study has been reported which used spin-traps to detect free radical intermediates in the H2/O2 catalytic cycle. Thus detected are hydroxyl radicals69 at the cathode side of an intriguingly designed fuel cell69,70 of appropriate dimension to fit within the resonant cavity of an ESR spectrometer. In other aspects relevant to life, since living creatures breathe oxygen which is in part converted to free radicals which are believed to converge upon the organism and precipitate various disease states and indeed the process of ageing itself, I note one report of the modulation of oxidative damage by piperidine based nitroxides such as TEMPO, which may be exploited in medical intervention therapies.71 Very significantly, it is proposed that there is a possible complication attached to the detection of NO in biological systems, wherein the production of this species by cells is affected by the presence of the trap. In a neat solution to such potential troubles, a Teflon barrier is implemented in between the trap and the cell, which is permeable to gas only. It is found that NO diffuses facilely through teflon and can be measured at concentrations well below 50 nM in a consistent fashion, and that Fe(DTCS)2 is an effective agent for this purpose, under such conditions where the cell viability is unaffected.72 The preparation of an improved DEPMPO-type spin-trap, 5-(2,2-dimethyl-2-oxo-1,3,2-dioxaphosphorinan-2-yl)-5-methyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide was reported with enhanced activities toward trapping hydroxyl and superoxide radicals. The material is a colourless sold which is freely soluble in water, and could be used in both aqueous and biological media, and it is a particularly stable material which should yield a long shelf-life.73 It was found that when the DMPO-hydroxyl radical adduct was generated using porcine pulmonary artery endothelial cells in the presence of H2O2 and DMPO or by a Fenton reaction, the lifetime of the adduct is decreased by the presence of the NO-donor, 2-(N,N-diethylamino)diazenolate-2-oxide of by the bolus addition of an aqueous solution of NO. On the basis of the first-order kinetics observed, it is concluded that the reaction involves a 1:1 interaction of NO with the spin-adduct.74 One potentially important and telling result is the detection of the DMPO-hydroxyl radical adduct by treatment of DMPO in hot water. Use of ultra-pure water or by maintaining an argon atmosphere was found to suppress considerably the intensity of the signal, while the presence of hydroxyl radicals scavengers such as mannitol has no effect.75 One is reminded that spin-trapping artefacts are relatively common, and efforts to distinguish between the genuine involvement of free radicals in particular systems should be made, in order to avoid jumping to erroneous conclusions about the free radical character of mechanisms attendant to them.76 The mechanism of the metal-dependent decomposition of organic hydroperoxides by halogenated quinones has been investigated and found to involve the formation of alkoxyl radicals.77 A novel spin-trap containing a phosphonium cation has been described, namely [4-(2-methyl-1-oxy-3,4-dihydro-2H-pyrrole-2-carbonyloxy)butyl]triphenylphosphonium bromide, which is a derivative of the cyclic nitrone, 5-tert-butylcarbonyl-5-methyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (BMPO). The material is found to be effective for trapping hydroxyl and superoxide radicals, for which it exhibits very distinct and characteristic ESR spectra. It’s adducts show a comparable stability to those from BMPO, but it is thought that the presence of the positively charged phosphonium functionality may render it especially suitable for spin-trapping in mitochondria.78 Another group have made a study of the spin-trapping of nitrogen-centred radicals, e.g. as formed from reactions of nucleotides, peptides, proteins and cellular chloramines, using BMPO as the trap, which has a number of advantages over the more commonly employed DMPO, including the greater resistance to the formation of artefacts.79 An ESR-based method has been reported for the detection of singlet oxygen, using water-soluble derivatives of C60.80 A study of the scavenging of reactive nitrogen species with oxygenated haemoglobin is reported. It was concluded that the reaction with nitrite was increased in rate with oxyHb at high heme concentrations and this produced stoichiometric quantities of NO3−. ESR direct measurements and also spin-trapping indicated that nitrite but not NO induced the creation of globin Tyr, Trp and Cys centred radicals.81 The spin-trapping of various novel radicals by the trap 5-carbamoyl-5-methyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide (AMPO) was reported, which gave unique profiles for each type. The hyperfine coupling constants for the superoxide adduct were 14N = 13.0 G, and 1Hβ = 10.8 G (isomer I) and 14N = 13.1 G and 1Hβ = 12.5 G with an additional 1Hγ = 1.75 G (isomer II). The half-life of the adduct was about 8 minutes, and significantly shorter than that for the DEPMPO adduct of 16 minutes.82 There is also a report of a novel boronic acid spin-probe (3), intended for use in labelling carbohydrate derivatives.83  4.2 Radical-scavengingThere is a quite substantive body of papers published which concern the subject of radical scavenging by antioxidants. From one study, it is reported that extracts of wormwood (Artemesia absinthium) into solvents of differing polarity (70% methanol, petroleum ether, chloroform, ethyl acetate and n-butanol) could scavenge both the stable 2,2-diphenylpicrylhydrazyl (DPPH) radical and the reactive hydroxyl radical, depending on the nature of the solvent, and that the antioxidative capacity in general of the extracts increased as expected with concentration of both phenol and flavonoid concentrations.84 The antioxidants present in green-tea extracts are shown to act synergistically with vitamin E (α-tocopherol), such that the latter is regenerated from the corresponding tocopheryl radical with rate constants of 0.45, 1.11, 1.31, 1.91 and 0.43 (all × 102 M−1 s−1), for (−)-epicatechin, (−)-epigallocatechin, (−)-epicatechin gallate, (−)-epigallocatechin gallate and gallic acid, respectively, according to stopped-flow ESR measurements. It is found further that these second order rate constants show a good linear correlation with the oxidation potentials for the antioxidants, which might mean that electron-transfer is involved in the mechanism.85 Another group showed that the rate constants for the reactions of the hydroxyl radical, as generated using a rapid-flow system containing H2O2 and Ti3+ along with ethanol, with phenolic antioxidants gave a superimposed pattern of the stable phenoxyl radical and the 1-hydroxyethyl radical. The relative activation energies obtained from their reaction rate constants and computed O–H bond dissociation energies shows that the Evans Polyani relationship is valid for the series albeit that there is a departure from the linear plot for the alcohols which suggested that their transition states were stabilised by a polar effect.86 Previously, we had reported that relative rates for tocopherols and other sterically hindered phenols, in H-atom transfer reactions to oxygen centred radicals, correlated well with the computed free energies, obtained from calculations of both enthalpies and entropies for the O–H dissociation step.87 The “β-carotene” dilemma refers to the seemingly unpredictable behaviour of the material, which while well demonstrated to be an efficient radical scavenger, when implemented as a dietary supplement in smokers, it caused an elevation in rates of lung cancer from the controls, with the result that the study was brought to a halt well ahead of its originally scheduled end. In a report of the reaction of tert-butylperoxyl radicals with β-carotene in non-polar solvents, it was concluded that the initial step was the addition of the peroxyl radicals to the unsaturated chain of the carotene, followed by coupling with a second peroxyl radical leading to a diamagnetic di-peroxide product. When chelating transition metal ions were present, with unpaired d-electrons, cleavage of the peroxide groups occurred and it is suggested that since tobacco contains ions such as Co, Cr, Fe and Mn, they arise in the cigarette smoke aerosol and may homolyse the peroxyl groups in peroxidised carotene thus causing cell-damage and the development of cancer.88 β-rays from tritiated water were used to induce lipid peroxidation in liposomes made from egg yolk phosphatidylcholine, in the presence of the spin-probe, 16-dioxylstearic acid. By introducing tea catechins, an order of radical scavenging efficiency (−)-epicatechin gallate > (−)-epigallocatechin gallate > (−)-epicatechin > (−)-epigallocatechin was established on the basis of the decrease of the spin-probe signal as it reacted with radicals produced in the system. i.e. the greater the scavenging ability of the catechin, the slower was the intensity decrease in the ESR signal from the probe. It was proposed that the hydroxyl radical is the peroxidation initiator and that the catechin is absorbed on the surface of the membrane where it scavenges hydroxyl radicals. The activity depended on the partition coefficient between the aqueous phase and the lipid.89 The all-rac-α-selenotocopherol (4) was prepared using an 11 step sequence in a final yield of 6.6%. A value of 78.1 ± 0.3 kcal/mol was measured for the O–H bond using ESR equilibrium methods, which is about 1 kcal stronger than the O–H bond in α-tocopherol itself.90 Apparently cranberry juice is good for you because it is rich in antioxidants. Indeed it is sometimes described as a “power food”. On the basis of the scavenging of DPPH by cranberry extracts it is concluded that they do indeed a very high antioxidant activity and that extracts of cranberry fruit and a tea containing 40% cranberry by weight, might provide a useful dietary antioxidant supplement.91 The rate constant for the reaction between (−) epigallocatechin gallate and the hydroxyl radical is measured to be more than twice that for the comparable reaction with pyrogallol or gallic acid. According to M.O. calculations, H-bonding occurs between the phenolic O–H group and a hydroxyl group on the gallate moiety, which stabilises the resulting phenoxyl radical.92 A comprehensive study has been undertaken of a series of 10 phenolic and related compounds with the view to determining their reactivity toward the ROS, hydroxyl radicals, superoxide and singlet oxygen. All compounds were found to react with each of the ROS, according to a mixture of ESR/Spin-trapping, chemiluminescence and spectrophotometry. A reactivity index (β) was established for the reaction of the phenols with hydroxyl radicals.93 Early conclusions that the oxidation of α-tocopherol involves 5a-carbon-centred “chromanol methide” radicals have been refuted by a detailed ESR study involving 13C labelling. I thought that most chemists now considered the primary intermediate to be the corresponding delocalised phenoxyl radical when α-tocopherol is oxidised, and these results are entirely consistent with that view. Additional evidence is presented that certain reactions of vitamin E derivatives, which were cited to make the case for the formation of C-centred tocopheryl radicals, actually involve heterolytic mechanisms and not free radicals at all.94 Another report describes evidence for the regeneration of α-tocopherol from α-tocopheryl radicals by several benzoic acid derived phenols, and the polyphenols (−)-epicatechin and (−)-epigallocatechin gallate. α-Tocopheryl radicals were formed from the parent tocopherol by its reaction with DPPH in n-hexane solution and the potential antioxidant was then introduced. EGCG and ascorbyl palmitate were found to be the most active as shown by the quenching of the initial ESR signal from α-tocopheryl radicals. A negative correlation is found between the logarithm of the stoichiometric concentration ratios for the antioxidants required to quench one mole of the α-tocopheryl radicals and their O–H bond dissociation energies.95 On a final cautionary note is a paper entitled “Why Quantum-Thermochemical calculations Must be Used with Caution to Indicate a ‘Promising Lead Antioxidant’”.96 The paper is highly critical of another report97 which describes the use of Density Functional Theory (DFT) calculations which it says “contains a number of serious errors and misinterpretations of the literature.” A fair summary is that in order to use theoretical methods to make predictions about experimental systems it is vital to have clear knowledge about the latter, for example that the proposed “antioxidant” 1,4-dihydropyridine is actually potentially quite toxic.  5. Organic radicalsThe existence, nature and evidence of the phenomenon of hyperconjugation in organic radicals has proved a vexed topic over many years. Gronert published a paper last year which suggested that the C–H bond dissociation energies (BDEs) in alkanes are not determined by hyperconugation in the radicals (delocalisation of the unpaired electron onto the hydrocarbon substituents in the manner, H–C–C˙ ↔ H˙ CC), but that 1,3-repulsive (geminal) interactions between the substituents are responsible. He emphasises that a BDE is a two-state problem, in that the stability of the starting hydrocarbon and the product radical are both involved (since it is an energy difference that is reflected) and the former effect not only cannot be ignored but is dominant.98 Ingold and Dilablo have challenged this assertion and show a linear correlation of C–H BDE against computed β-C–H spin densities, which suggests that the relative contribution from hyperconjugation and spin-polarisation to the β-C–H spin-densities is 55% and 45%, respectively and hence that hyperconjugation is significant.99 Gronert has parried-back with a new paper in which he reinforces his argument.100 This is an interesting debate and I am certain there will be more work prompted by such a disparity of views in an effort to resolve the contrasting facts of a very important and fundamental concept. An experimental and theoretical study has been made of cyclohexylacyl and tetrahydropyranyl-2-acyl radicals, both of which exist in the form of axial and equatorial isomers, as are distinguishable from their ESR spectra. The axial isomer shows the greatest coupling and also the highest barrier to internal rotation about the C–CO bond, according to DFT calculations. Interestingly, there was a departure found from a previously established correlation between β-H couplings in acyl radicals and their parent aldehydes, which is thought to arise from perturbations to the rotation barriers of axial species by 1,3-H diaxial interactions.101 The same workers later reported a study of the axial and equatorial isomers of the cyclohexylperoxyl radical and some oxygenated six-ring derivatives, the former being an important intermediate in the autoxidation of cyclohexane. For the oxacyclohexylperoxyl radicals it is thought that the axial isomers are the most stable, in consequence of the anomeric effect.102 When 2,2,3,3-tetramethylmethylenecyclopropane is exposed to γ-radiation in a solid Freon matrix or to X-rays as isolated in an argon matrix, the resulting radical cation readily ring-opens to form the 1,1,2,2-tetramethyltrimethylene methane radical cation (5).  The hyperfine-coupling constants for the latter are (in Gauss) −19.9 (2H), +5.3 (6H), and +1.9 (6H), and the singly occupied orbital closely resembles one of the two degenerate nonbonding pi-MOs (NBMOs) of trimethylenemethane.103 The radical cations of dicyclopropylidenemethane and its octamethyl derivative are prone to rearrange into the corresponding (2-methylallylidene)cyclopropane and its octamethyl derivative, by fracture of a single three-membered ring. Contrastingly, the radical cation of bicyclopropylidene (and its octamethyl derivative) is stable to opening of the second ring, since the resulting species would be a non-Kekule hydrocarbon with a quartet ground state.104 The radical cation of Dewar benzene and its ring-opening to the hexamethylbenzene radical cation was first observed using ESR by Rhodes.105 In a more recent study, this species was generated and observed by optical spectroscopy in cryogenic matrices to which it reveals itself by a charge resonance band at 600 nm, in fact very similar in shape and position to that observed for the related radical cation of norbornadiene. This indicates that the unpaired electron is similarly located in a electron is also located in a pi-MO, in accord with ESR results. A theoretical analysis indicates that the ring-opening of the primary radical cation is a multistep process that involves two avoided crossings between potential surfaces with different symmetries and electronic structures. Owing to the orbital symmetry-forbidden nature of the process, the energy of the molecule initially rises steeply with elongation of the transannular C–C bond, but then the system undergoes a crossing to a 2A1 surface which leads adiabatically to an excited state.106 The primary radical cation of cyclooctatetraene has a non-planar geometry. However, a novel version of the structure which is annelated with bicyclo[2.1.1]hexene units in the form of the hexachloroantimonate salt is found to possess a planar structure. Its longest absorption wavelength at 630 nm is blue-shifted from that at 745 nm from the unsubstituted cyclooctatetraene radical cation, since planarisation of the structure increases the HOMO–SOMO energy gap.107 Two papers have been published dealing with thermal and photochemical rearrangements of amine radical cations.108,109 The first108 discusses n-alkylamine radical cations, e.g. from n-propylamine and n-butylamine, while the second109 focusses on propargylamine and allylamine radical cations. A DFT approach has been applied to the calculation of isotropic 14N coupling constants in nitrogen centred organic radicals. The utility of the B3LYP functional, combined with 6-31G*, TZVP and ESR-III basis sets, in reproducing experimental 14N coupling constants was investigated for a series of 109 neutral, cationic and anionic radicals, all containing at least one nitrogen atom. It seems that the selection of the basis set plays an important role in the accuracy of DFT calculations of hyperfine couplings, particularly in reference to the nature of the primitive functions and their quantum number. Most significantly, the scheme B3LYP/6-31G* is found to predict 14N couplings accurately and at a very low computational cost.110 Matrix-isolation ESR spectroscopy was employed to study “hot” unsaturated radical cations produced by electron-irradiation of their parent molecules isolated in solid argon. The radical cations of cis-2-butene, trans-2-butene and ethyl vinyl ether were able to relax effectively in the argon matrix, despite having around 6 eV worth of excess energy. The 1-butene radical cation was found to isomerise to the 2-butene radical cation.111 Another report has been published of results for radical cations of saturated heterocyclic compounds containing two heteroatoms, as measured using ESR and ENDOR and supported by DFT calculations. All methods suggest that all the species studied (piperazine, morpholine, thiomorpholine, and thioxane) exist in chair or distorted chair ring-conformations, and there is no evidence for boat geometries with 3-electron σ*-bonds between the two heteroatoms.112 σ-Bonded fullerene radical anion dimers have been characterised using a range of methods including ESR and X-ray diffraction.113 High resolution ESR spectra of C60F and C70F (fluorine atom adducts of fullerenes) isomers as isolated in a solid argon matrix have been recorded. These radicals were made from the parent fullerenes in solid argon by the addition of photogenerated fluorine atoms to them. The spectrum of C60F shows an axially symmetric hyperfine coupling to the 19F nucleus, with an isotropic (Fermi contact) component of 202.8 MHz and 51.8 MHz from the dipolar interaction. In contrast to the expectation of a single type of radical being formed from C60, C70 can, in principle, yield five distinct isomers, but there are just three identified here. It is concluded that for C70, there is a considerable selectivity in which just one from each of two possible isomers is formed, yielding three radicals altogether.114 The detailed assignments of the three isomers differs significantly from a previous ascription of them.115Another group have made a study of a nitroxide-bound β-cyclodextrin, in a search for an inclusion complex. Time-dependent ESR spectra were simulated using a program that allows a separation of the line-broadening effects due to relaxation from chemical-exchange even if only the fast-exchange region is experimentally accessible. The activation parameters for the forward and reverse processes were entirely consistent with the existence of an equilibrium between a non-associated form and a weakly associated form, with free enthalpies of activation for each reaction of around 34 kJ/mol.116 Using time-resolved ESR, the Notre Dame group have investigated the reaction between the 1-hydroxy-1-methylethyl (“isopropylol”) radical with nitrite anions which was observed to form the adduct nitro radical anion, HOCMe2NO2−˙, in 38% yield. The magnetic parameters for this species are a(14N) = 26.39 G and g = 2.0052, and are the same as those measured when spin-trapping hydroxyl radicals with the aci-anion of Me2CHNO2. It is proposed that the reason the yield of this radical species is reduced from 100% is a competitive addition to the oxygen atom, which instead forms the radical HOCMe2ONO−˙, followed by a rapid loss of NO.117 A paper by Geoffroy et al. discusses the complementary use of the density matrix formalisms for simulating ESR spectra and DFT potential energy surface calculations for determining the molecular motions of free radicals. Three species chosen are phosphinyl radicals and are derivatives of barrelene, for which intramolecular dynamic potentials were determined.118 An analysis of the ESR spectra recorded from Nafion membranes that had been exposed to a photo-Fenton reagent was made using an automatic fitting procedure, using as input the hyperfine coupling tensors of the two α-F and two β-F 19F nuclei along with the corresponding directions of the principal hyperfine axis values obtained from DFT calculations. The radical species was of type RCF2CF2˙ for which a good fit was obtained when different orientations of the α-F and two β-F 19F hyperfine coupling tensors were employed, which implies that the carbon radical centre has a nonplanar structure. For the two β-F 19F nuclei in the Nafion radical, isotropic couplings of 24.9 G and 27.5 G were determined and are substantially greater than those for the corresponding chain-end radical in Teflon (15 G), which implies that the two media confer different conformational aspects to the radicals. It is proposed that the radical detected by ESR in Nafion is of type ROCF2CF2˙, which is formed by the action of oxygen radicals on the Nafion side chain.119 Isotropic and anisotropic ESR spectra were recorded for the radical anions of hexafluorocyclobutene (c-C4F6−), octafluorocyclopentene (c-C5F8−) and perfluoro-2-butene (CF3CFCFCF3−) as formed in γ-irradiated neopentane, tetramethylsilane (TMS) and TMS-d12 matrices, which are plastic crystals, or in the rigid 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (MeTHF) matrix. The isotropic spectra of c-C4F6− and c-C5F8− are characterized by three different pair sets of 19F nuclei with isotropic hyperfine splittings (in Gauss) of 152 (2F), 65 (2F), 1.1 (2F) for c-C4F6− and 147 (2F), 74 (2F), 10 (2F) for c-C5F8−. The large triplet 19F splittings of ca. 150 G are assigned to the two fluorines attached to the CC bond. UHF, B3LYP and MP2 calculations predict that the geometrical structures of the parent perfluoroalkenes are strongly distorted by one-electron reduction to form their radical anions.120 ESR spectra of the radical anions of hexafluorocyclopropane, octafluorocyclobutane, and decafluorocyclopentane have been described, with respective isotropic 19F hyperfine couplings of 198.6 G, 147.6 G, and 117.9 G, and follow an inverse ratio to the total number of fluorine atoms in each molecule. Together with the small value of 5.2 G determined for the isotropic 13C coupling in the perfluorocyclobutane radical anion, the results show that the unpaired electron orbital is delocalised equivalently over the fluorine atoms and that there is a nodal plane passing through the carbon atoms in a time-averaged Dnh geometry. Geometries were predicted using molecular orbital calculations and it is concluded that these radical anions should be categorised as σ* species.121 Quantum chemical calculations have been made of a series of fluorine-substituted benzene radical cations and the neutral molecules, using ab initio ROHF, CASSCF, UMP2, and DFT/B3LYP methods with the standard 6-31G* basis set. For the 1,2,3-trifluorobenzene radical cation, a pseudorotational structure is predicted for the potential energy surface. A low barrier for pseudorotation found for the 1,2,3-trifluorobenzene radical cation leading to the suggestion that the effect might be revealed by an ESR study of this species.122 It is found that the reaction of ground state Al atoms with bromocyclopropane in a solid matrix activate the C–Br bond both by insertion to yield spectra from cyclopropyl-Al–79Br and cyclopropyl-Al–81Br and by cleavage to form free allyl radicals. Good agreement is met between DFT calculations and the measured hyperfine parameters. By calculating the potential energy hypersurface at the B3LYP level for an Al atom approaching bromocyclopropane it is considered that the most favourable reaction for the system in the gas phase should be the formation of AlBr and the cyclopropyl radical. Hence it is suggested that the reaction does indeed proceed in this way but the cyclopropyl radical then takes part in two competing reactions: (i) ring opening to yield the free allyl radical, and (ii) combination of cyclopropyl radicals with AlBr to form cyclopropyl-AlBr.123 The reaction of Al atoms with 1,2-epoxybutane (CH3CH2CHOCH2) and its isotopomers, 1,2-epoxybutane-1,1-d2 (CH3CH2CHOCD2) and 1,2-epoxybutane-2-d1 (CH3CH2CDOCH2 in a solid matrix has been studied using ESR. It was found that two distinct, divalent, Al insertion products were formed: (1) with the magnetic parameters a27Al = 855 MHz, a1H(1) = 28.8 MHz, a1H(2) = 13.6 MHz, and g = 2.0014, which is thought to be the radical formed by insertion into the C1–O bond, and (2) from the insertion of an Al atom into the C2–O bond, with the magnetic parameters g = 2.0003, a27Al = 739 MHz, a1H(1) = 15.1 MHz, a1H(2) = 18.5 MHz, and a1H(1) = 37.8 MHz. Support for these assignments was obtained by DFT calculations of the couplings for the 27Al and 1H nuclei in the proposed cyclic structures. There is also evidence for the formation of the alkyl radical CH3CH2CH(O–)CH2˙ from ring opening at the C1–O bond, while at temperatures above 150 K, a radical with magnetic parameters similar to those reported for the 1-methylallyl radical was detected.124 The same group have reported their results for the reaction of ground-state Al atoms with cyclopropylamine (CpNH2) in an adamantane matrix at 77 K. Four paramagnetic species were identified from their ESR spectra. The isotropic 27Al hyperfine couplings for these species vary in the range 801–962 MHz and can therefore be grouped with other structurally similar aluminium-containing radicals. The principal product of the reaction shows significant hyperfine anisotropy as is indicative of an aluminium-centred radical with an appreciable unpaired electron spin density in the aluminium atomic 3p orbital. There is also evidence that the products, CpNH(AlH) and CpAlNH2, are formed in the reaction, implying that Al atoms can insert into both the N–H and C–N bonds in amines. It is further described that a molecule of CpNH2 can coordinate to CpNH(AlH), causing all 27Al, 14N and 1H couplings to decrease, presumably by an overall more extended delocalisation of the unpaired electron. The couplings are, in all radicals, well reproduced by DFT calculations.125 There is a phenomenon sometimes known as “mechanochemistry”, in which chemical reactions—bond homolyses and electron-transfers, typically—are induced by the application of mechanical pressure or simply grinding solid materials together when then show ESR spectra. The effect of bulk stress so applied, acts on the molecular scale to break C–C bonds, with the formation of free radicals. Using ESR to determine the mechanical properties of materials is a potentially worthwhile field. A group have measured the ESR spectra of various donor–acceptor complexes formed
by grinding together mixtures of phenolic donors and quinones or tetracyanoethylene as acceptors, either as pure solids or in solution. In either case, dark coloured stoichiometric complexes were formed, and which were shown to possess ionic character. The free radical nature of this ionicity was demonstrated by the observation of ESR signals with g values close to free spin. A combination of infra red, NMR and optical absorption spectroscopy further confirmed that complexation had occurred on the basis of the resulting frequency shifts showing changes in vibrational frequency, chemical shift and electronic transition energies.126 A paper reports on the induction of free-radical reactions in organic crystals which were γ-irradiated under applied pressure (i.e. it is the radiation that induces the formation of the radicals not the pressure). It was found that the radical yield was reduced by the action of pressure, and so the activation volumes are positive, as might be expected. A model is presented in which the kinetics may be accounted for in terms of inter alia the compressibility of the material, molecular volume and thermal expansion, for which the determining step is fluctuation of the free volume: i.e. the process providing mutual approach, location and orientation of the radicals along the reaction coordinate on the potential energy surface for the system.127 Methane hydrate is a remarkable material, but only exists under certain conditions of temperature and pressure, otherwise it decomposes to water and free methane. Most notably, it is sufficiently cold and the pressure of the water at depth sufficiently high that methane hydrate is found on the ocean floor, usually in sediments there, and also in some permafrosts. Indeed, there is the suggestion that the material could be “mined” and processed into methane for use as a fuel and as a source of hydrogen. [The temperature at the sea floor is typically in the range 2–4 °C, and the pressure increases by one atmosphere for each increase in depth of about 10 metres].68 It may also be produced artificially and samples so obtained have been studied using ESR following exposure to γ-radiation which creates methyl radicals with their characteristic spectral signature.128,129 Using ESR, the subsequent decay of the methyl radicals in methane hydrate at atmospheric pressure in the temperature range 210–260 K, was monitored, which revealed the operation of two distinct dynamic processes with respective activation energies of 20.0 ± 1.6 kJ/mol and 54.8 ± 5.7 kJ/mol. The former, measured in the temperature range 210–230 K, corresponds closely to the known enthalpy change for the dissociation of methane hydrate into methane and ice while the higher value, determined in the temperature interval 235–260 K, accords with the decomposition of the material into liquid water and methane gas.128 Similarly, the decomposition of methane hydrate was determined over a range of pressures, from 0.003–1 × 106 Pa.129 Two decay processes were again noted, one with an annealing time of 150 minutes and another which occurred on a more extended time-scale. The latter yielded an activation energy of 20.0 ± 2.7 kJ/mol. I shall conclude this section by mentioning two papers describing novel radicals. One is the metallofullerene radical, Sc@C82, (i.e. a scandium atom inserted into the cage of the fullerene, C82) the properties of which have been investigated using a combination of ESR and DFT calculations. It is concluded that the bond between Sc and the carbon-cage is partly covalent and partly ionic, while most of the unpaired electron is distributed around the cage with just 5% on the scandium atom and occupying the dyz orbital.130 Again using ESR and DFT calculations in combination, a series of novel bis-iminophosphorane radical cations has been investigated with various linker groups interposed between the two R3PN functional groups. Both 31P and 14N hyperfine couplings were small, showing that the unpaired electron mainly occupies the bridging group. Hence these may be considered as π-radicals rather than the σ-phosphoranyl alternative structure.1316. Triplets and biradicalsIn this section molecular species containing two unpaired electrons are considered, whether they be present together in a single molecule or in a molecular “pair” as a result of an electron transfer between them. Preexponential factors for analysis of variable temperature optical absorption spectra were calculated using the Zhu-Nakamura theory, using quartic-enhanced intervalence bands to extract the total reorganization energy and the intramolecular electron-transfer rate constants for intramolecular electron transfer using ESR. In contrast to using the Golden Rule equation, there is no significant separation of lambda into solvent and vibrational components. The Zhu–Nakamura theory results in linear plots of ln(k/T) versus 1/T in good accord with the experimental data for electronic couplings which are greater than those determined from optical spectroscopy using Hush’s method.132 A review has been published dealing with the role of spin-correlation in the formation, decay and detection of long-lived intramolecular charge-transfer states.133 In a study of the electron–transfer dynamics in donor-bridge-acceptor molecules of varying bridge-length, a biexponential decay of the total radical pair population was observed. By means of kinetic modelling it is shown that the faster decay (104 ps) process involves the rapid establishment of an equilibrium between the triplet radical pair and the neutral triplet state resulting from charge recombination, whereas the slower rate (740 ps) reflects recombination of the singlet radical pair back to the ground state.134 Electron transfer in a star-shaped oligoarylamine has been reported, with nine amine groups, and was synthesised by successive palladium-catalysed amination. It was concluded that electronic coupling occurs between the first three single-electron oxidations via a central 1,3,5-benzenetriyl bridging unit.135 Chemically Induced Dynamic Electron Polarisation (CIDEP) was recorded from galvinoxyl radicals. The phase of the transient FT-ESR signal depends markedly on the radical-triplet pair interaction and provides a measure of the sign of J (the electron-exchange coupling) which was negative as normal. An unusual positive value for J was noted in some systems which was characterised by a small energy splitting between the radical-triplet pair and intermolecular charge-transfer states.136 A review has appeared on the subject of electron spin dynamics in a pair interaction between radical and electronically-excited molecules using time-resolved ESR.137 Intramolecular electron spin-exchange was measured over a range of temperatures in two rigid nitroxide biradicals using ESR and in solvents of differing viscosity and polarity. It is found that the isotropic 14N hyperfine splitting (a) and the electron-exchange coupling J depends on the nature of the solvent and that polar solvent molecules cause a slight decrease in the value of J/a as the temperature increases. Conversely, the interaction of such polar molecules with moieties within the bridge caused an appreciable increase in J/a.138 The first identification of biradicals has been made during the thermal cyclopolymerisation of three trifluorovinyl aromatic ether monomers, using in situ time-resolved ESR in the temperature range 150–210 °C. The spectra are consistent with the formation of a triplet state during the early stages of the process, which accords with a biradical intermediate with a strong electronic dipole–dipole interaction.139 A series of para-substituted 2-diazapropiophenones were decomposed photolytically in acetonitrile solution, and the rate constants for reactions of the resulting carbenes were determined. A relative small activation energy is measured in comparison with those for the decomposition of alkylcarbenes and other arylcarbenes. The kinetics and ESR spectra are consistent with a mechanism that involves an interconversion between singlet and triplet carbene electronic states.140 A hydrocarbon biradical (6) has been reported which is an analogue of trimethylenemethane and is stable in 2-methyltetrahydrofuran for 2 days at room temperature. It is proposed that such materials might be used as building blocks for high-spin polyradicals with a strong ferromagnetic coupling.141  Photolysis of (7) with an intraannular azido substituent, shows complex behaviour. The corresponding triplet nitrene (8) has been detected by ESR spectroscopy as formed when the photolysis is done at low temperatures. There are observable but small differences in the zero-field splitting constants for the uncomplexed nitrene-functionalized ligand (D′ = 0.93 cm−1 in EtOH) and its sodium (D′ = 0.88 cm−1 in EtOH) and potassium (D′ = 0.89 cm−1 in 2-methyltetrahydrofuran) complexes. If the free ligand is photolysed at room temperature, a derivative of o-aminobenzaldehyde is the principal product, and is formed by reaction of the corresponding o-iminoquinone methide with water. Similarly, photolysis of acetonitrile the sodium or potassium complexes also results in formation of the o-aminobenzaldehyde derivative. Laser flash photolysis (LFP) of (7) in solution in acetonitrile leads to the detection of a short-lived (τ = 1.4 μs, λmax = 445 nm plus weak absorption at >500 nm) intermediate A, which decays to transient B (τ = 8 ms, λmax = 295 nm and ca. 350–400 nm) and similar absorptions were measured from the other complexes. In the presence of sodium and potassium cations, the lifetime of the short-lived transient A is reduced (A′, Na+: τ = 200 ns; A″, K+: τ = 160 ns). Transients A and A″ decay to long-lived transients. From the results from a combination of product studies, low temperature ESR measurements and quantum chemical theory, the transients A and A″ are assigned to singlet nitrenes and the longer lived transients to didehydroazepines.142  When 1,3-diphenyldiazopropyne is photolysed it forms 1,3-diphenylpropynylidene in its triplet state, according to measurements using ESR and optical spectroscopy from the material as isolated in low temperature matrices. Interestingly, there were two distinguishable conformers of the carbene observed, one of which is concluded to be from a structure in which the carbene retains the initial geometry of its diazo precursor, as enforced by steric restrictions of the matrix and a second form in which the structure has relaxed to the equilibrium D2h geometry. The carbene is thought to be best viewed as a 1,3-allenic biradical, and DFT calculations predict that the equilibrium geometry should not possess a bond-localised structure characteristic of an acetylenic carbene.143 Evidence, mostly obtained from ESR suggests that the carbon framework of long-lived bisarylmethylenes approaches D2d symmetry, as ortho-substitution forces the central angle to approach 180°. From DFT calculations it is predicted that as this angle is approached, there is a dramatic an concomitant shortening of the central CC bonds and appreciable quinoid distortion of the phenyl groups. However, an X-ray investigation of bis(2,4,6-trichlorophenyl)methylene reveals a structure closer to the carbene valence bond representation in which the phenyl rings are less markedly distorted, the central angle is more acute, and the bond connecting the carbene carbon to the aryl substituent is lengthened. Diethynylmethylene, dicyanomethylene, and diisocyanomethylene were studied as model systems using post-Hartree–Fock methods CAS and CCSD in addition to DFT models, and applying the perturbation-corrected CAS methods to the chloro and methyl ortho-substituted bisphenyl carbenes.144 A study is reported of the multifunctional high-spin biradical, pyrazolyl-bipyridine-bisnitronyl nitroxide.145 Finally in this section, I mention the characterisation of the novel biradical ˙NSNSC–CNSSN˙ using a range of methods including ESR.1467. Environmental aspects7.1 Dating and dosimetryA review has been presented on the use of ESR to determine the age of hard tissue especially tooth enamel, and that the method can be usefully extended from the normal eutherian (animals having a placenta, including humans) category to reptiles and others including shark teeth. The ESR signal stability in enamel is in excess of 100 million years (100 Ma).147 An interesting paper reports on the dating of the activity cycles for the Elbrus volcano using ESR, for which the following dates were estimated: early caldera cycle 340–250 ka (thousand years) ago which changed into the denudation of volcano. A resumption of its volcanic activity resulted in an accumulation of up to 2 km thickness of volcanic rock mass about 170 ka ago. The end of this stage occurred in the range 70–60 ka before present, soon after the intrusion of certain subvolcanic bodies 90–70 ka ago. According to the ESR results, following Late Pleistocene glaciation, volcanic activity resumed several times, with evidence of one eruption which occurred 6.7 ka ago. A comparison is drawn with results from other methods, e.g. Th–U and K–Ar dating and some discrepancies are noted, as is discussed.148 Intending its use as a potential dosimeter, an ESR and ENDOR study was made of x-irradiated 6Li formate. The normal ratio of lithium isotopes is 7.5% 6Li and 92.5% 7Li, but in this work, a sample of lithium formate 95% enriched in 6Li was used. Furthermore, the water of crystallization was exchanged with D2O. 6Li has a smaller magnetic moment and nuclear spin than 7Li resulting in a sharper line. With appropriate spectrometer settings, the material showed seven times the sensitivity of alanine for the same dose of radiation, and it is proposed that it can provide a suitable dosimeter down to doses as low as 0.1 Gy (10 Rads).149 A determination has been made of the influence of varying electron energy on the alanine for use in radiation dosimetry, using a clinical linear accelerator. A comparison was made with the effect of 60Co γ-rays and it was found that a small response reduction was obtained for the electron radiation relative to γ-radiation.150 Sulphamic (sulfamic) acid has been proposed as a novel material for use in radiation dosimetry.151 Certain advantages are stressed and yet, given that the ESR signal was monitored to decay over a period of 133 days following the irradiation, I think it will be problematic to use it as an integrating dosimeter. A combination of Monte Carlo calculations and ESR measurements was employed in making a dose reconstruction of an accident that occurred in Georgia on 2 December 2001 when three people were exposed to two very-high-activity (2.6 × 1015 Bq) 90Sr sources. A physical dose reconstruction was performed for one victim, using both Monte Carlo simulations and ESR measurements made on one vertebra and two rib samples removed from the victim for medical reasons. The complementary nature of the two methods allowed an estimation of the dose distribution within the body with reasonable accuracy which assisted in the arrival of a treatment strategy.152 Swartz and his coworkers report on the use of in vivo ESR dosimetry to quantify clinically significant radiation doses. As a result of terrorism, accident or war, populations potentially can be exposed to doses of ionising radiation that could cause direct clinical effects within days or weeks (radiation poisoning). Unless entire populations are routinely fitted with dosimeters (which would cause mass panic) it is unlikely that in such events an accurate measure of the received radiation dose can be made. Swartz proposes that in vivo ESR measurements of tooth enamel is probably the only means to differentiate between different received doses with sufficient accuracy to categorise individuals for particular medical treatment. Estimates of a radiation dose in the range from 1–10 Gy are currently possible, although it is expected that improvements in the resonator and the algorithm employed for acquiring and calculating the dose will render the measurement of smaller doses possible.153 The distribution of natural radiation-induced damage in quartz from the uranium mineralized Athabasca basin in northern Saskatchewan was investigated using both cathodoluminescence (CL) imaging and ESR. CL permitted the distinction of two generations of overgrowths on detrital quartz, and also three types of alpha-particle-induced damage in quartz: halos around inclusions of U- and Th-bearing minerals; patches in contact with U-bearing minerals in matrices or pores; and continuous runs in samples with or without U-bearing minerals. Continuous CL runs occur not only in mineralized rocks close to the unconformity at the Key Lake deposit, but are pervasive both in the siliceous cap and along the unconformity at the McArthur River deposit and the neighboring BJ prospect. ESR is more sensitive in detecting dilute radiation-induced defects than is CL and confirms the results of the latter method. The absence of radiation-induced damage in quartz from altered basement rocks below the McArthur River deposit supports a proposal that basement fluids there are poor in uranium.154 A critique has been presented of “self-calibrated” ESR dosimeters consisting of a radiation sensitive material such as alanine or sucrose along with Mn2+ as an internal standard to measure ESR signal intensity along with a binder.155 An investigation has been made of biominerals as materials for retrospective radiation dosimetry. The main mineral component of bones is hydroxyapatite, in which the most stable signal is assigned to the CO2− radical anion, from which doses up to 20 kGy can be measured. The additive dose method was used to date archeological objects using ESR and also that received during accidental overexposure during radiotherapy. Remains excavated from the “tomb of giants” belonging to the Nuraghic culture in Sardinia were determined to be around 3160 years old (1160 BC). The dose obtained by patients during the accident at the Bialystok Oncological Centre in Poland was reckoned to be close to 75 Gy. Among other biominerals that were evaluated as potential dosimetric materials, it was concluded that mollusc shells may be very useful.156 ESR has also been used to determine the age of human bloodstains. At 77 K, human bloodstains give four highly characteristic ESR signals in the g = 6.2 (g6), 4.3 (g4), 2.27 (H) and 2.005 (R) regions attributable to ferric high-spin, ferric non-heme, ferric low-spin and free radical species, respectively. From a double logarithmic plot of the ESR intensity ratio H/g4 against the number of days following the initial blood loss, a linear correlation was obtained, up to 432 days. The caveat is that differences in absorbent material, light exposure and fluctuations in storage temperature influence the relative intensities of these signals, and so provide potential sources of error in the method.1577.2 Studies of environmental mediaThis subsection includes applications of ESR to medium effects, e.g. in aqueous media and in ionic liquids for use in potential green chemical processes, foodstuffs, membranes for devices such as fuel cells, and atmospheric particles. It is thus miscellaneous and multifarious as reflects the subject of environmental science. In one study, the spin probes TEMPO, TEMPOL, and CAT-1 (4-trimethylammonium-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl) were used to investigate both the microviscosity and micropolarity of imidazolium based ionic liquids. It was found that the mean rotational correlation times (r) obtained by detailed simulation of the X-band ESR spectra of TEMPO, TEMPOL, and CAT-1 increase with increasing viscosity of the ionic liquid as expected, but the normal Stokes Einstein behaviour is not found. It was noted that the probe molecule jumped into the free volume of the ionic liquids by a non-thermally activated process, which is most surprising. The 14N coupling constants show a micropolarity for the ionic liquids comparable with that for dichloromethane for TEMPO and with dimethyl sulfoxide for TEMPOL. Micropolarity monitored by CAT-1 strongly depends on structural variation of the ionic liquid.158 TEMPO, TEMPOL, and CAT-1 were employed, along with the 15N versions (15N-TEMPO and 15N-TEMPOL-D17) similarly as probes of microviscosity and micropolarity in ionic liquids. It was concluded that microviscosity effects according to the Gierer–Wirtz theory may explain the spin probe behaviour. On the basis of spin exchange effects measured using TEMPO, TEMPOL and CAT-1 dissolved in ionic liquids it is concluded that there is a greater degree of aggregation in the case of the nonpolar spin probe TEMPO. Both isolated and aggregated species were observed with the more greatly polar spin probes TEMPOL and CAT-1.159 The spin-probe technique has been applied to three long-standing problems related to the physics of water, namely, the possibility that bulk water may be vitrified by rapid quenching, the nature of its glass transition, and that it is supposedly impossible to obtain supercooled water in the range 150–233 K, which is the so-called “no man’s land” on its phase diagram. The results indicate that water can indeed be vitrified by rapid quenching; that it undergoes a glass transition at ∼135 K, and the relaxation behaviour measured in the interval 165–233 K closely follows the predictions of the Adam-Gibbs model.160 Hydrated electrons trapped in alkaline glasses were studied using ESR and electron spin echo envelope modulation (ESEEM) methods. Using DFT, models were calculated where an electron was hydrated by n = 4–8 and n = 20, 24 water molecules. It is concluded that the hyperfine coupling tensors of H/D nuclei in the water molecules are defined mainly by the cavity size and the coordination number of the electron while the water molecules in the second solvation shell play a relatively minor role. An idealized model of the hydrated electron (usually attributed to the late Professor Larry Kevan) in which six hydroxyl groups are distributed in an octahedral geometry and point toward a common centre is found to match most closely the experimental isotropic and anisotropic hyperfine coupling constants for the protons (as estimated from ESEEM spectra), the second moment of the ESR spectra, and the gyrational radius. Interestingly, 10–20% of the spin density is delocalised into the frontal oxygen 2p orbitals of the water molecules. Electron spin-polarization of O–H bonds by electron spin density in these oxygen orbitals confers small, negative hyperfine coupling constants for protons in the hydroxyl groups of the electron-trapping cavity.161 A more detailed theoretical approach was applied to the system (hybrid DFT(CIS)/MQC MD calculations) which predicts a transfer of ∼18% of the excess electron into the 2p orbitals of oxygen atoms in OH groups forming the solvation cavity. The hybrid DFT model also accounts for the 190-nm ultraviolet absorption band for the hydrated electron.162 Using ESR, halogen-bonded complexes with aliphatic and aromatic iodoperfluorocarbons and persistent nitroxide radicals were identified. The result suggest that nitroxides behave as strong electron donors in halogen bonding, with halogen bonds of a similar strength to strong hydrogen bonds.163  The spin-probe technique has also been applied to foodstuffs by Sutcliffe and his coworkers.164–166 The spin probe 1,1,3,3-tetramethylisoindolin-2-yloxyl (TMIO) (9) and its sodium sulfonate salt derivative, 1,1,3,3-tetramethylisoindolin-2-yloxyl-5-sulfonate (NaTMIOS) (10) were used to monitor the microviscosity changes of water during starch gelatinization. In cereal starch, which contains mainly A-type polymorphs, evidence was found for the amylopectin and amylose regions: the latter exhibited a phase transition at about 55 °C and a substantial increase in the microviscosity was noted on cooling.164 The same approach was also used to study changes in microviscosity in the aqueous and lipid phases of flour dough during heating and subsequent cooling. Hence, starch gelatinisation could be studied in detail and it was shown that the process results in a fall in the dielectric constant of the material.165 Another foodstuff so investigated is ice cream. Using the TMIO probe, it was found that when ice cream is cooled, the fat phase is composed of a mixture of solid and liquid fat down to a temperature of ∼−60 °C. By means of the water-soluble probe NaTMIOS (10), it was found that the aqueous phase changes entirely from the liquid to the solid within 1 °C of −18 °C. On cooling further to −24.7 °C and then allowing the sample to warm to +25.0 °C, the rotational correlation times of (10) were slow to recover to their previous values. For the lipid phase, a value of τ(B)(298) = 65.7 ± 2.0 ps was derived along with an according activation enthalpy, ΔH = 32.5 ± 0.9 kJ mol−1. These values are typical of those expected to be found in the type of fat used to make ice cream. The water phase gave corresponding values of 32.2 ± 0.5 ps and 24.5 ± 0.4 kJ mol−1 values, which are as expected for a sucrose concentration of 24%.166 Partition coefficients, rotational correlation times, and activation energies of the spin probes were determined using small spin probes in the vesicle and aqueous phases of mixed membranes made from poly(oxyethylene) hydrogenated castor oil (HCO) and hexadecane. The results indicate that the spin probe DTBN (di-tert-butyl nitroxide), in the vesicle of the mixed membrane at 50 °C, is partitioned in a similar fashion to TEMPO (2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-1-oxyl) and the partitioning of either probe shows no abrupt change across the temperature ranges examined. The motional activation energies obtained for DTBN and TEMPO were 21 and 20 kJ/mol, respectively.167 There are several papers published during the review period on the topic of membranes for fuel cells.168–172 The issue of fuel cells is vexed, since there is only sufficient platinum recovered annually that even if it were all used to make the so called Proton Exchange Membrane (PEM) cells, which are those suitable for use with hydrogen as a “fuel”, if they are manufactured continually for the next 30 years, still only 7% of the world’s present transportation fleet of 700 million vehicles can be so matched.68 Hence in the absence of alternative materials to replace platinum in this particular application, it is unlikely that transportation can be maintained at anywhere near current levels by means of PEM fuel cells, in addition to the problem of making enough hydrogen to run them on in the first place.68 Nonetheless fundamental studies continue in an effort to determine the durability of the PE-membrane itself under the harsh and aggressive working conditions of a fuel cell. By introducing a spin-trap to a working fuel cell, specially designed to fit inside the cavity of an ESR spectrometer, a group has investigated a Nafion 115 membrane and another one free from fluorine. Immobilised organic radicals were measured at the cathode side, which demarked the initiation of oxidative damage to the membrane. The yield of radicals was significantly greater for the fluorine-free membrane than for Nafion. Free radical intermediates were trapped at the anode which are involved in the fuel-oxidation process but evidence of membrane degradation was absent.168 [Also see refs. 69 and 70, discussed in the section 4.1 on “spin-trapping”, which refer to the specifics and detection of radicals in situ for this particular working fuel cell]. Three different electron-beam irradiated fluoropolymers were studied using ESR and also their grafting reactions with styrene in different diluents. According to the nature of the atmosphere above the polymers, peroxyl and hydrocarbon radicals were detected.169 Three nonfluorinated aromatic compounds were chosen as model materials with which to predict hydroxyl-radical-initiated degradation of novel PE-membranes based on sulfonated polyetherketones (PEK) and polysulfones (PSU). HO˙ radicals were generated by the photolysis of H2O2. Evidence for multiple hydroxyl radical addition to the aromatic rings was obtained from ESR spectra. The actual chemistry was found to depend greatly on pH, which is potentially very significant in consideration that the pH might be inhomogeneous in fuel cells running at high currents.170 Another study confirms the formation of free radicals in the catalyst layers of a PEM membrane assembly.171 A study was made of the nature of free radicals formed during degradation of a Nafion membrane by direct photolysis and in the presence of added H2O2, where the sulfonic acid groups were charge-neutralised by Cu(II) and Fe(II) cations. In Nafion/Fe(II)/H2O2, the chain-end radical, ∼CF2CF2˙ was detected, showing large 19F couplings from two α- and two β-fluorine atoms. Under some conditions a transformation of this species into another with four equivalent fluorine atoms was observed (a “quintet”), which might be derived from either the radical anion or radical cation of tetrafluoroethylene. In Nafion/Cu(II), even when H2O2 was absent, two distinct radicals were detected: the “quintet” and a “quartet” signal with three equivalent F-atoms and a smaller hyperfine splitting.172 Potential donor–acceptor pairs for polymer solar cells have been characterised using a combination of ESR, optical and electrochemical methods.173 Samples of Antarctic ice and rime ice were γ-irradiated at 77 K and studied by ESR.174 [(Hard) rime is a white ice that forms when the water droplets in fog freeze to the outer surfaces of objects. It is often seen on trees atop mountains and ridges in winter, when low-hanging clouds cause freezing fog. This fog freezes to the wind-facing (windward) side of tree branches, buildings, or any other solid objects, usually with high wind velocities and air temperatures between −2 °C and −18 °C175]. The characteristic ESR spectrum from NO2˙ was detected in both ice samples and it is suggested that particularly in the Antarctic ice, the NO2˙ may be formed from NO3˙ by reactions associated with intrinsically present ˙OH radicals. It is reported that the limit of detection for NO2˙ in such solid samples is ∼0.02 parts per million (ppm), and so there is a potential application to use ESR to measure environmental NO2˙.174 In order to investigate the chemistry, morphology, and microscale to nanoscale structures of carbonaceous aerosols from the marine boundary layer of the Arctic Ocean, a variety of electron microscopy techniques, including scanning electron microscopy (SEM), high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), and energy-dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDS) were employed, while the relative black carbon (BC) particle concentrations were determined using ESR. Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons (PAHs) absorbed onto BC particles were sampled by Soxhlet extraction and analysed by GC-MS. The spatial distribution of BC from ship emissions was found to be concentrated around the periphery of the Arctic Ocean, suggesting relatively intensive contamination by ships in the Arctic.176 In relation to its adverse health effects, PM2.5 particulate was investigated. According to scanning electron microscopy, this mainly consists of particles less than one micron in size which are mainly composed of soot. PM2.5 samples from different sources were found to vary in their PAH content, which was the highest as taken from the roadside in winter, as well as in their metal content. Roadside station samples are characterized by the highest Fe and Cu content, which appears to be related to their hydroxyl radical generating ability, as deduced from ESR measurements. Particles were compared by their capacity to induce cytotoxicity, intracellular ROS production, and proinflammatory cytokine release (GM–CSF and TNF-alpha). It is concluded that, whereas the PM2.5 samples differ in their PAH and metal content,
they induce the same biological responses likely either due to the bioavailability of their components and/or interactions between the various PM components.1778. Adsorption and catalysis8.1 ZeolitesThis is another heading that covers a multitude of topics, including zeolites and other porous materials and reactions of radical species on solid surfaces, as was recently reviewed.66 A paramagnetic Au(II) complex has been characterised by ESR, as stabilised within the supercages of zeolite Y. The stability is due to the zeolite matrix preventing diffusion of the complex and its consequent disproportionation. It is suggested that the material may be useful as a catalyst.178 Similarly, a cluster of 12 equivalent platinum atoms was identified in NaY, according to results from ESR and Hyperfine Sublevel Correlation (HYSCORE) along with DFT calculations. It is concluded that the cluster possesses icosohedral symmetry, and that H/D can be reversibly adsorbed onto its surface with a binding energy of 1.36 eV. It is thought that up to 30 H-atoms are bound to the surface which may have implications for the dispersion of small platinum catalyst particles by hydrogen chemisorption.179 A variety of paramagnetic silver clusters, including Ag43+, and their complexes with methanol and water have been stabilised in ZX-4 molecular sieves, and characterised using ESR.180 Conduction ESR measurements are reported for small silver clusters stabilised in zeolite-rho. These small particles were produced by hydrogen reduction of silver salts at elevated temperatures and it was possible to use Kawabata theory to analyse the ESR linewidths in order to provide an estimate of the particle diameters.181 ESR was used to investigate the reaction of silver atoms with ethylene in dehydrated Ag-SAPO-11 following γ-irradiation at 77 K. The complex Ag(C2H4)2 is stabilised within relatively small channels of the SAPO-11 structure up to a temperature of 290 K. It is proposed that a reactive intermediate of this kind may be important in the catalytic conversion of ethylene over Ag-exchanged molecular sieves. The good accord met between DFT results and the experimental hyperfine coupling data support the view that the complex is of D2h symmetry.182 Highly stabilised methyl radicals have been observed in the temperature range 110–370 K, as trapped in a synthetic H-rho and formed by γ-irradiation of the zeolite following exposure to CH4. The ESR signature is an isotropic 1:3:3:1 quartet pattern, which is assigned to methyl radicals rotating freely inside an octagonal prism. When methane is adsorbed at 413 K, and the sample irradiated, an anisotropic pattern is observed, superimposed onto the isotropic spectrum, and is believed to arise form methyl radicals that are located inside the alpha-cages wherein there are strong interactions with the Si/Al framework, hence reducing the mobility of the radicals.183 Roduner has published a tutorial review with the droll title, “Size Matters”, in which he demonstrates that clearly it does. The remarkable changes in properties of materials such as gold, when they are isolated as small atomic clusters (e.g. in zeolites) compared with the bulk state are discussed. In the case of gold, while the bulk material is a lustrous unreactive metal, non-magnetic and with a melting point above 1000 °C; in the form of 10 nm particles, the substance appears red in consequence of its ability to absorb green light. As the particle size decreases, so does the melting point, and at a size of 1–3 nm, gold displays an appreciable magnetism and catalytic activity. The metallic character of the material remains, even at this dimension, but as this becomes smaller still, an insulator phase is obtained.184 Most interesting. A selective solid state photooxidant has been described, namely the biphenyl radical cation isolated stably in the channels of the zeolite Na-ZSM-5. The material has been demonstrated to act as a selective single-electron oxidant for simple alkenes and dienes, thus providing a solid state analogue to the more commonly encountered solution-phase cosensitisation. In comparison with the usual semiconductor photooxidising agents such as TiO2, the material displays a marked selectivity, which is explained by a combination of features, including molecular shape-selectivity and organic substrate oxidation potential.185 The ability of zeolites normally thermally activated in the presence of oxygen to perform spontaneous single-electron oxidation from subsequently adsorbed organic substrates is well documented.186 An interesting extension of the concept is to perform the oxidation of unsaturated hydrocarbons via a repeated sequence of catalytic radical cation–O2 reactions in which electron-capture by O2 yields the superoxide radical anion, which then reacts with the radical cation. Probably the initial electron-acceptor site is “unblocked” so rendering it available for the next sequence. In one example, over 4000 cycles were demonstrated and it is suggested the procedure may be of value in promoting catalytic oxidations of alkenes.187 A selectivity to single-electron oxidation for polyaromatic hydrocarbons by ZSM-5 zeolites has been demonstrated according to the nature of the exchange cation. Pulsed-ESR is shown to be particularly useful in determining the fate of the ejected electron. It was determined that this electron is trapped at an oxygen framework near to Al-atoms and extraframework cations, with some electronic spin-pairing being observed with the anthracene radical cation. The ionisation yield was 100% for H+, 30% for Li+, Mg2+ and Ca2+ and near zero for the other alkali metal cations.188 This group reported a further study of the effect of confinement on the recombination rate of the (photoinduced) anthracene radical cation-electron pair in ZSM-5 zeolites.1898.2 ESR studies of photo-catalysis for pollution-control using TiO2The term “photocatalysis” may be defined as the “acceleration of the rate of a photochemical reaction by the presence of a catalyst”, of which important applications include: (1) degradation (“mineralisation”) of organic pollutants in water and (2) “splitting of water”, to make hydrogen for potential use as a “clean fuel”. The photocatalyst is a semiconductor, e.g. TiO2, The crucial parameter for assessing the potential viability of a photocatalyst is the energy spacing (“band gap”) between the conduction band (cb) and the valence band (vb). In TiO2, the “band-gap” is 3.2 eV (≅400 nm) and is accessible to UV light. When a photon of sufficient energy to match the gap is absorbed, a positive “hole” (electron vacancy) is created in the vb while an electron is transferred to the cb (eqn (1)): TiO2 + hν → e−CB(TiO2) + h+VB(TiO2)(1)In contact with water, h+VB(TiO2) can oxidise H2O, forming ˙OH radicals (eqn (2)): h+VB(TiO2) + H2O − e− → [H2O+˙] → ˙OH + H+(2)˙OH radicals will oxidise a wide range of organic molecules, ideally → CO2 + H2O.Considerable efforts have been made to optimise photo-catalytic systems for use in cleaning water of organic pollutants.190–193 The essential requirement is that the solution should be air-saturated, and contain suspended particles of a semiconductor to serve as the photo-catalyst: one such material being titanium dioxide. When TiO2 (or indeed any other semiconductor) is irradiated with light, electrons are promoted from the valence band (vb) to the conduction band (cb) of the material. The “band-gap” (excitation energy) for TiO2 is 3.2 eV, which corresponds to a wavelength of ca. 400 nm, and is at the border of the UV/visible spectrum. Efforts, therefore, are currently being made to reduce the band-gap, such that (far cheaper) visible light can be used for large-scale water treatment. The process generates positive holes (electron vacancies) in the valence band (hvb+) and electrons (ecb−) in the conduction band. A number of events may then occur, which result in the formation of reactive species capable of reacting with and decomposing any organic pollutants that may be present. The initial species (hvb+) and (ecb−) can either react directly with the organic agents as adsorbed on the surface of the particle, or they may be converted into reactive intermediates which react with the organic pollutants either directly on the surface or close to it. Composite particles may be formed, in which the semiconductor contains discrete regions of platinum and of a metal oxide, e.g. RhO2. In such a particle, the conduction band electrons are injected into the platinum, while the positive holes become localised in the metal oxide. In the case of TiO2, it is normally thought that (hvb+) is transformed into hydroxyl radicals (HO˙) by the oxidation of H2O, while, in the presence of molecular oxygen, (hcb−) forms the superoxide radical anion (O2−˙), which serves to leave the holes free to react. The limiting factor in determining the efficiency of the photo-catalytic process is the rate of recombination of (hvb+) and (ecb−), in competition with the formation of other reactive species, of which HO˙ radicals are believed to be the major agents responsible for the decomposition (“mineralization”) of organic pollutants, since they are fiercely oxidising. Indeed, compelling evidence has been gleaned from ESR spin-trapping studies that HO˙ radicals are produced on light irradiation of aqueous solutions containing TiO2.The HO˙ radical trapping efficiency by DMPO (5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide) has been estimated as ca. 33%,194 and so, in principle might be used to estimate the yield of HO˙ radicals in a photo-catalytic system; however, a by far improved value of ca. 80% was demonstrated from product studies,195 when HO˙ is trapped with the stable free-radical 3-carboxyproxyl (3-carboxy-2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrrolidine-N-oxyl), a reaction that leads to the diamagnetic product proxyl-NH (3-carboxy-2,2,5,5-tetramethylpyrrolidine). Therefore, the latter is the better method. The main difference between the two methods is that, in the spin-trapping procedure, the appearance of the spin-adduct of DMPO/HO˙ is monitored, while the latter measurement relies upon the disappearance of the initial signal from 3-carboxyproxyl, as it scavenges HO˙ radicals. It is thought that this occurs by an initial coupling of the two radical species, followed by elimination of O2 from the primary product, proxyl-NOOH, to give proxyl-NH which is that mainly isolated (along with minor amounts of proxyl-NOH). From a measurement of the line heights and widths, a rotational correlation time of 38 picoseconds was deduced for 3-carboxyproxyl in water, which increased to 45 picoseconds when TiO2 was added: although this change is not large, it does indicate some interaction between the probe and the catalyst surface. The rate of formation of HO˙ radicals was found to be a linear function of the light intensity at low intensities, and serves as a mechanistic parameter with which to investigate the mechanism of formation of this reactive species by the photo-excitation of TiO2.195The positive holes generated in TiO2 by UV excitation may also oxidise organic molecules directly, as is demonstrated fully in a comprehensive report by Brezova et al.196 Hence, when deoxygenated suspensions of TiO2 in alcoholic solutions of nitroso-compounds, typically used as spin-traps, were irradiated with UV light, ESR spectra of a variety of spin-adducts were recorded. It was concluded that nitrosobenzene is reduced by a single electron and then undergoes proton transfer from the solvent, to form the radical PhN(H)O˙. This mechanism was supported by using deuteriated methanol as a solvent, whereupon the alternative deuterium adduct was observed, PhN(D)O˙. The photoinduced electron transfer to the nitroso compounds is accompanied by oxidation of alcohol molecules by the hole centres in the valence band to form alkoxyl and hydroxyalkyl radicals. The redox potentials of the latter (specifically ˙CH2OH, ˙C(OH)CHMe and ˙C(OH)Me2 radicals) suggest that they might act as reductants toward nitroso compounds and so provide electrons for the initial reduction step, acting in competition with their undergoing radical addition to the nitroso compounds, the latter being suppressed in some cases.196 There is an important practical issue concerning the ability of TiO2 to produce free radicals, since it is used in various sunscreen formulations. Indeed, the same group has shown that commercial sunscreen products of this kind on irradiation with light of 300 nm wavelength are able to form carbon centred radicals and singlet oxygen. The radicals were intercepted using the spin-traps DMPO (5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide), PBN (α-phenyl-N-tert-butylnitrone), POBN [α-(4-pyridyl-N-oxide)-N-tert-butylnitrone], and the radical scavenger 4-hydroxy-TEMPO (4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine-N-oxyl). Singlet oxygen was detected using 4-hydroxy-2,2,6,6-tetramethylpiperidine, which it converts to 4-hydroxy-TEMPO by oxidation. It is concluded that the generation of these reactive species depends on the particular composition of the sunscreen, since any additives present (antioxidants, radical-scavengers and solvents) may act to transform the more reactive species to less deleterious products. On continuous UV irradiation of TiO2 powder, as recommended for use in sunscreens, in different solvents (water, dimethyl sulfoxide, isopropyl myristate) resulted in the generation of oxygen centred radicals (the superoxide radical anion, hydroxyl and alkoxyl radicals).197 An enhancement in the photocatalytic generation of HO˙ radicals is reported when fluorinated-TiO2 (F-TiO2) is used over the more common material according to a spin-trapping study. Furthermore, an accelerated photoinduced bleaching of Acid Red 1 (an azo-dye) was observed in the presence of F-TiO2, as was explained in terms of a high reactivity of the NN “azo”-bond toward HO˙ radicals. The bleaching was greatly suppressed in the presence of 2-propanol, an effective scavenger of HO˙ radicals, in the presence of F-TiO2, but not TiO2 itself: an indication that the principal mechanism for the degradation of Acid Red 1 on F-TiO2 occurs via the attack of surface-generated HO˙ radicals, whereas TiO2 may function in some other way, possibly via direct electron transfer at the surface.198Photoelectrocatalytic degradation of various dyes under visible light irradiation, this time using a TiO2 nanoparticle electrode has been investigated to reveal the mechanism for TiO2-assisted photocatalytic degradation of dyes. The degradation of both cationic and anionic dyes at different biases was monitored, revealing changes in the degradation rate of the dyes and the change in the photocurrent according to the bias potential, the degraded intermediates, the voltage-induced adsorption of dyes, the accumulation of electrons in the TiO2 electrode, the effect of various additives such as benzoquinone (BQ) and N,N-dimethyl aniline (DMA), and the formation of active oxygen species such as O2˙− and H2O2 according to measurements made using by UV-visible spectroscopy, HPLC, TOC, and ESR spin-trapping. It was found that cationic dyes e.g. rhodamine B (RhB) and malachite green (MG) were efficiently mineralized at a negative bias, but an N-dealkylation process predominated at positive bias under visible light irradiation. The results strongly suggest that both the superoxide radical anion and the dye radical cation are crucial to the mineralization of these dyes by means of visible light-induced photocatalysis.1998.3 Radicals adsorbed in porous solidsMCM-41 (Mobil Crystalline Material) is an ordered mesoporous solid, containing a honeycomb-like structure of uniform mesopores (3 nm in diameter) running through a matrix of amorphous silica. Because of the high porosity (pore volume >1.0 ml g−1) and high associated surface area (∼1000 m2 g−1) MCM-41 has the potential for use as a support material for heterogeneous catalysts, since it offers the possibility to provide catalytically active phases in a highly dispersed fashion. Unfortunately MCM-41 is limited in its stability towards a number of catalyst precursors and accordingly strategies are being evaluated for the introduction of catalytically active phases, especially nickel/nickel oxide and molybdenum oxide, inside the mesopores of the material.200 When MCM-41 was added to an aqueous solution of a spin-probe, the initially sharp ESR spectrum presented a broad structure, reducing the superimposed sharper signal to a minor component. It is therefore concluded that MCM-41 traps the solute molecule into the nanochannel in which the solvent water molecules form a relatively stable molecular cage, since the ESR line shape indicates that the nitroxide radical undergoes anisotropic reorientation without being adsorbed onto the channel wall. From the temperature dependencies of the trapping efficiency thermodynamic parameters are estimated for the process which is explained in terms of a specific intensification of the surface enthalpy of the liquid within the nanovolume.201 The study of MCM-41 has been extended to determine the dynamics of 2-propanol and water molecules within its nanochannel as a function of temperature. 2-propanol is found to separate into two phases: one with molecules partially immobilized in the ESR time scale (even at temperatures of 40 K above the bulk melting point of the pure material) and a second mobile phase. In contrast, water showed only an “immobilized” phase even at temperatures as high as 313 K. At higher temperatures, the spin-probe molecules undergo anisotropic rotational diffusion in order to reduce resistance from the solvent molecules in the nanochannel.202 Fluid alcoholic solutions of spin probes at a very high concentration, 30 mM, show a very broad ESR spectrum as a result of spin exchange between the solute spin probes. In contrast, when the solution is encapsulated in the nanochannel of MCM-41, a much sharper spectrum is recorded, suggesting that collisions between the solute molecules are quenched inside the constraints of the nanochannel. In the presence of MCM-41, superimposed ESR patterns are detected: a sharp signal from the probe in the nanochannel and the broad spectrum which reflects the bulk solution. When the system is cooled to temperatures 10–20 K above the melting point of the alcohol, the ESR spectrum from molecules within the nanochannel changes to that characteristic of a glassy state. Upon warming, a steady sharpening of the spectrum occurs and the glassy signature disappears at around 293 K. A model is offered to account for these results in which the solvent molecules form a liquid-crystalline-like structure in the nanochannel involving hydrogen bonding which prevents the solute from undergoing translational diffusion within the nanochannel.203 Spin-polarised positive muons have been used to label free radicals adsorbed in porous carbon,204 porous silica,205 and samples of cation-exchanged zeolite X.206 The positive muon takes the place of a proton in a normal hydrogen atom, forming a bound-state dubbed muonium. Muonium shows many of the chemical properties of hydrogen atoms including the propensity to add to unsaturated diamagnetic molecules forming free radicals. Because the muon has spin I = 1/2 and is also radioactive with a decay rate on the inverse microsecond timescale, magnetic resonance type experiments can be performed on the free atom or on its radicals in which it has been introduced as a label, but detected with great sensitivity compared with more usual magnetic resonance experiments, in consequence of the 100% polarisation of the muon spin (rather than just the Boltzmann excess spin-population) and the use of single-particle counting methods.207,208 Samples are irradiated with a beam of polarised muons from a particle accelerator, and on thermalising within the sample, by various mechanisms, they add an electron to form muonium atoms. Thus were obtained radiolabelled free radicals by the addition of muonium to alpha-pinene, beta-pinene, dihydrocarvone, dihydrocarveol and dipentene, each adsorbed in porous carbon with a nominal internal surface area of 1600 m2 g−1. The radicals were initially identified using transverse-field muon spin rotation (TF-MuSR) which permits the determination of the muon-electron hyperfine coupling constant, and the activation parameters associated with their reorientational motion were measured using longitudinal-field muon spin relaxation (LF-MuSRx). [It is important to note that two distinct experimental configurations are required, in which the external magnetic field is, respectively, at 90° and 0° to the direction of the muon beam to make the transverse and longitudinal measurements, in which case the measured T1 and T2 relaxation times correspond strictly to the particular experimental geometry]. Two distinct adsorbed fractions are detected in each sample, characterised by activation energies in the range 2–6 kJ/mol and 12–16 kJ/mol, respectively.204 In order to provide a check of the compatibility of the activation parameters determined using methods of muon spectroscopy with the more common approach of using stable spin-probes (nitroxides) and measuring the temperature dependence of their ESR spectra, nitroxide radicals (11), (12) were formed by adding the light hydrogen isotope, muonium to the spin traps DMPO (5,5-dimethyl-1-pyrroline-N-oxide) and PBN (N-tert-butyl-α-phenylnitrone) adsorbed as 30 wt% ethanol solutions in silica-gel.  In this case, the nitroxides are not stable radicals, because their lifetime is limited by the radioactive decay of the muon. However, the structural similarity thus engendered should permit a direct comparison between these rather distinct and different methods. A variant of the longitudinal-field method, known as Avoided Level Crossing (ALC), revealed an unexpected resonance which suggested the presence of a specific hydrogen-bonded interaction between the DMPO adduct and the silica surface. Longitudinal-field muon spin relaxation measurements (LF-MuSRx) were performed in parallel, which identified two distinct motional regimes in both samples. Moreover, good agreement was found between the results obtained using muonium-labelled nitroxides as described, and related studies made using stable nitroxides as monitored by ESR.205 In another study of radicals in porous media, radio-labelled free radicals were formed by the addition of muonium to samples of benzaldehyde adsorbed in cation-exchanged zeolite X. The major species formed are PhCHOMu˙, for which the activation parameters associated with their reorientational motion were measured using longitudinal-field muon spin relaxation (LF - MuSRx). Two distinct adsorbed fractions are detected in each of the samples containing Li+, Na+, K+, Ca2+, Sr2+ and Ba2+ cations, believed to be from (1) an effectively bulk benzaldehyde component with an almost common activation energy for molecular reorientation of ca. 3 kJ/mol, and (2) benzaldehyde adsorbed inside the zeolite supercages. MgX showed only the supercage fraction clearly.206 In a previous study of benzaldehyde adsorbed in porous carbon, a mobile fraction was detected for which a reorientational activation energy of ca. 3 kJ/mol was also estimated, and ascribed to benzaldehyde molecules occupying the carbon mesopores.209 Hence the fraction with an identical and common activation energy measured in the zeolite samples is attributed to a bulk phase, extraneous to the internal pores (supercages) of the solid host, where only micropores are present. The activation energies for the intra-cage fraction were found to depend markedly on the nature of the exchange cation, increasing in the order of its polarising power (e/r). In the alkali metal cation series, the activation energies (kJ/mol) were:206 11.4, Li+; 11.0, Na+; 8.0, K+; and in the alkaline earth series: 12.2, Mg2+; 8.3, Ca2+; 6.2, Sr2+; 13.6, Ba2+. The outlying value for Ba2+ is explained in terms of the large cations restricting access of benzaldehyde molecules to the internal supercages, and the value is very similar to that measured as interacting with the walls in the micropores of porous carbon (where there are no cations, of course in this material).209 Similar behaviour was found previously for samples of benzene adsorbed into cation-exchanged zeolite X, for which LF-MuSRx yielded motional activation energies is accord with the order of polarising power of the cations.210 The absorption of an ESR silent probe ortho-methyldibenzyl ketone (oMeDBK) on the external surface of a series of monodisperse silicalite crystals was studied by means of an initially coadsorbed ESR active nitroxide probe, which was observed to be displaced by oMeDBK. This effect shows that the adsorbate molecules are first adsorbed on strongly binding sites as attested by a slow rotational motion of the probe, giving broadened spectral lines, and once these sites are saturated, the displaced nitroxide molecules are then adsorbed at more weakly binding sites, according to much sharper ESR lines which signify the regime of fast rotational motion. The point of transition from slow to fast rotational motion provides a quantitative measurement of the external surface area of silicalite crystals.211 Aqueous solutions of spin-probes were adsorbed onto various micelle-templated silicas (MTS) with different pore dimensions in an effort to determine the ability of the MTS surface to host different organic molecules. The MTS synthesis was done at 388 K by self-assembly of inorganic silica and micelles of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) to which different amounts of 1,3,5 trimethylbenzene (TMB) had been added according to varying ratios of TMB/CTAB as a device to produce pores of different sizes. Pores of diameter 40, 65, and 80 Å were obtained for TMB/CTAB ratios of 0, 2.7, and 13, respectively. Different spin probes (nitroxides) were taken as models for different types of organic molecules, namely, neutral and charged molecules and surfactants. According to their ESR spectra, these probes were used to deduce the hosting ability of each solid surface in respect of the different structure and relative hydrophilic nature of the probes.212 In another study of micelle-templated silicas (MTS), also as synthesized by self-assembly of silica and micelles of cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) with different quantities of 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene (TMB) at 343 K, nitrogen adsorption isotherms and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) showed that increasing the amount of 1,3,5-trimethylbenzene in the mixture resulted in an expansion of the MTS pores. However, at TMB/CTAB = 5 the material was characterized by double porosity, due to destabilization of the surfactant emulsion (demixed emulsion), whereas at TMB/CTAB = 13 a stable emulsion originated a solid at uniform pore size. The kinetics of formation of these MTS was followed by inserting a radical-surfactant probe in the surfactant mixture and monitoring, by computer-aided ESR analysis, the structural variations of the surfactant aggregates and of the solid over time. In the absence of TMB, the probes monitored the formation of a polar solid at the surface of the micelles. Only at t>150 min a slow component started contributing to the ESR signal, indicating the formation of the final solid structure.213 Solutions of different spin-probes in the solvents, water, methanol (MeOH), acetonitrile (ACN), along with binary MeOH–water and ACN–water solutions, were chosen to imitate the behaviour of different pollutants, and these were adsorbed onto porous silica stationary phases as are used in reversed-phase high-performance liquid chromatography (RP-HPLC). By means of ESR, information was provided regarding structural and dynamical properties of the probes in these particular environments, so enabling an evaluation of the surface properties of the stationary phases, such as alkyl chain density, solvent penetration, stationary-phase ordering, and the influence of residual silanol groups, all of which contribute to modify the retention times in HPLC.214AcknowledgementsI thank Karen Blakeman for her invaluable I.T. skills, my scientific collaborators, particularly Dr Marian Valko at the Slovak Technical University, and NATO and the EU for financial support of projects involving ESR.ReferencesF. Simon and F. Muranyi, J. Magn. Reson., 2005, 173, 288 CrossRef CAS .
W. R. Hagen, High Magn. Fields, 2006, 3, 207 Search PubMed .
G. W. Morley, J. van Tol, A. Ardavan, K. Porfyrakis, J. Zhang and G. A. D. Briggs, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2007, 98, 220501/1 CAS .
A. Sienkiewicz, B. Vileno, S. Garaj, M. Jaworski and L. Forro, J. Magn. Reson., 2005, 177, 261 CrossRef CAS .
G. Lassmann, P. P. Schmidt and W. Lubitz, J. Magn. Reson., 2005, 172, 312 CrossRef CAS .
S. Subramanian, J. W. Koscielniak, N. Devasahayam, R. H. Pursley, T. J. Pohida and M. C. Krishna, J. Magn. Reson., 2007, 186, 212 CrossRef CAS .
M. Tseitlin, A. Dhami, S. S. Eaton and G. R. Eaton, J. Magn. Reson., 2007, 184, 157 CrossRef CAS .
V. Barone and A. Polimeno, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2006, 8, 4609 RSC .
Y. E. Nesmelov and D. D. Thomas, J. Magn. Reson., 2006, 178, 318 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Sidabras, R. R. Mett and J. S. Hyde, J. Magn. Reson., 2005, 172, 333 CrossRef CAS .
G. Diakova and R. G. Bryant, J. Magn. Reson., 2006, 178, 329 CrossRef CAS .
R. G. Russel, A. J. Wain, C. Hardacre and R. G. Compton, ChemPhysChem, 2005, 6, 1035 CrossRef CAS .
F. Simon, F. Fueloep, A. Rockenbauer, L. Korecz and H. Kuzmany, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 404, 85 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Rassolov and D. M. Chipman, in Calculation of NMR and ESR Parameters, eds. M. Kaupp, M. Buehl and V.G. Malkin, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2004, p. 493, ISBN: 3-527-30779-6 Search PubMed .
M. L. Munzarova, in Calculation of NMR and ESR Parameters, eds. M. Kaupp, M. Buehl and V. G. Malkin, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2004, p. 463, ISBN: 3-527-30779-6 Search PubMed .
S. Patchkovskii and G. Schreckenbach, in Calculation of NMR and ESR Parameters, eds. M. Kaupp, M. Buehl and V. G. Malkin, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2004, p. 505, ISBN: 3-527-30779-6 Search PubMed .
F. Neese, in Calculation of NMR and ESR Parameters, eds. M. Kaupp, M. Buehl and V. G. Malkin, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2004, p. 541, ISBN: 3-527-30779-6 Search PubMed .
F. Ban, J. W. Gauld and R. J. Boyd, in Calculation of NMR and ESR Parameters, eds. M. Kaupp, M. Buehl and V. G. Malkin, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH and Co. KGaA, Weinheim, Germany,  2004, p. 567, ISBN: 3-527-30779-6 Search PubMed .
Y. Shen and J. J. BelBruno, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 512 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mitic, M. D. Clay, L. Saleh, J. M. Bolinger and E. I. Solomon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 9049 CrossRef CAS .
S. Van Doorslaer and E. Vinck, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2007, 9, 4620 RSC .
J. D. Wilson, G. Wu, A.-L. Tsai and G. J. Gerfen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1618 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Fernandes, F. L. Sousa, M. Teixeira and M. M. Pereira, Biochemistry, 2006, 45, 1002 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Colca, W. G. McDonald, D. J. Waldon, J. W. Leone, J. M. Lull, C. A. Bannow, E. T. Lund and W. R. Mathews, Am. J. Physiol., 2004, 286, E252 CAS .
S. E. Wiley, A. N. Murphy, S. A. Ross, P. van der Geer and J. E. Dixon, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2007, 104, 5318 CrossRef CAS .
S. E. Wiley, M. L. Paddock, E. C. Abresch, L. Gross, P. van der Geer, R. Nechushtai, A. N. Murphy, P. A. Jennings and J. E. Dixon, J. Biol. Chem., 2007, 282, 23745 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yukovlev, T. Reda and J. Hirst, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2007, 104, 12720 CrossRef .
J. Tatur, W. R. Hagen and P. M. Matias, J. Biol. Chem., 2007, 12, 615 CAS .
F. Jacobson, A. Pistorius, D. Farkas, W. De Grip, O. Hansson, L. Sjoelin and R. Neutze, J. Biol. Chem., 2007, 282, 6347 CAS .
C. Remenyi, R. Reviakine and M. Kaupp, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 8290 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bartucci, D. A. Erilov, R. Guzzi, L. Sportelli, S. A. Dzuba and D. Marsh, Chem. Phys. Lipids, 2006, 141, 142 CrossRef CAS .
G. E. Fanucci and D. S. Cafiso, Curr. Opin. Struct. Biol., 2006, 16, 644 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Livshits and D. Marsh, Biol. Magn. Reson., 2004, 22(Very High Frequency (VHF) ESR/ESR), 431 CAS .
T. I. Smirnova, A. I. Smirnov, S. V. Paschenko and O. G. Poluektov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 3476 CrossRef CAS .
N.-K. Kim, A. Murali and V. J. DeRose, Chem. Biol., 2004, 11, 939 CrossRef CAS .
M. Peric, M. Alves and B. L. Bales, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, 2004, 1669, 116 .
S. A. Dzuba, Russ. Chem. Rev., 2005, 74, 619 Search PubMed .
C. W. M. Kay, C. Eisaesser, R. Bittl, S. C. Farrell and C. Thorpe, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 76 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Livshits, B. G. Dzikovsi, V. G. Avakyan, E. A. Samardak, E. Yu. Polyakova, V. Yu. Rudyak and M. V. Alfimov, Russ. Chem. Bull., 2005, 54, 1169 CrossRef CAS .
V. Chechik, New J. Chem., 2007, 31, 1726 RSC .
V. Chechik and G. Ionita, Org. Biomol. Chem., 2006, 4, 3505 RSC .
M. F. Ottaviani, S. Jockusch, N. J. Turrro, D. A. Tomalia and A. Barbon, Langmuir, 2004, 20, 10238 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhan, J. Liu, C. Wang, L. Wang, Hu. Liu and S. Peng, J. Med. Chem., 2005, 48, 4285 CrossRef .
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Endothelium-derived_relaxing_factor.
B. Piknova, M. T. Gladwin, A. N. Schechter and N. Hogg, J. Biol. Chem., 2005, 280, 40583 CrossRef CAS .
E. van Faassen and A. Vanin, Nitric Oxide, 2006, 15, 233 CrossRef CAS .
V. D. Mikoyan, L. N. Kubrina, G. N. Khachatryan and A. F. Vanin, Biofizika, 2006, 51, 968 Search PubMed .
A. F. Vanin, A. P. Poltorakov, V. D. Mikoyan, L. N. Kubrina, L. N. Kubrina and E. van Faassen, Nitric Oxide—Biol. Chem., 2006, 51, 295 Search PubMed .
A. B. Shekhter, V. A. Serezhenkov, T. G. Rudenko, A. V. Pekshev and A. F. Vanin, Nitric Oxide, 2005, 12, 210 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Ali, J. I. Hardt, K. L. Quick, K.-H. J. Sook, E. B. F. Erlanger, T.-T. Huang, C. J. Epstein and L. L. Dugan, Free Radical Biol. Med., 2004, 37, 1191 CrossRef CAS .
E. P. Sidorik, A. P. Burlaka, O. I. Evtushenko and N. G. Kovalenko, Dopovidi Natsional’noi Akademii Nauk Ukraini, 2004, 8, 179 Search PubMed .
D. M. Bailey, P. N. Ainalie, S. K. Jackson, R. S. Richardson and M. Ghatei, Clin. Sci., 2004, 107, 589 Search PubMed .
K. Mobius, A. Savitsky and M. Fuchs, Biol. Magn. Reson., 2004, 22(Very High Frequency (VHF) ESR/ESR), 45 CAS .
A. Jajoo, S. Bharti and A. Kawamori, J. Bioenerg. Biomembr., 2005, 37, 49 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pagliano, M. Raviolo, F. Dalla Vecchia, R. Gabbrielli, C. Gonnelli, N. Rascio, R. Barbato and N. La Rocca, J. Photochem. Photobiol. B, 2006, 84, 70 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pospisil, I. Snyrychova and J. Naus, Biochem. Biophys. Acta, 2007, 1767, 854 CAS .
N. Crokart, K. Radermacher, B. Jordan, C. Baudelet, G. O. Cron, V. Gregoire, N. Beghein, C. Bouzin, O. Feron and N. Gallez, Cancer Res., 2005, 65, 7911 CAS .
S. Purkayastha, J. R. Milligan and W. A. Bernhard, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 16967 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Bahri, A. Seret, P. Hans, J. Piette, G. Debye-Dupont and M. Hoebeke, Biophys. Chem., 2007, 129, 82 CrossRef CAS .
M. Eichler, R. Lavi, H. Friedmann, A. Shainberg and R. Lubart, Photomed. Laser Surg., 2007, 25, 170 Search PubMed .
A. Moscatelli, T. K. Chen, S. Jockusch, M. D. E. Forbes, N. J. Turro and M. F. Ottaviani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 7574 CrossRef CAS .
D. Marsh, B. G. Dzikovski and V. A. Livshits, Biophys. J., 2006, 90, L49 CrossRef CAS .
A. A. Bobko, I. Dhimitruka, J. L. Zweier and V. V. Khramtsov, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 7240 CrossRef CAS .
A. Tkac and E. Hanusovka, Collect. Czech. Chem. Commun., 2004, 69, 2091 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. Mak, I. G. Denisov, D. Victoria, T. M. Makris, T. Deng, S. G. Sligar and J. R. Kincaid, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 6382 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, Prog. React. Kinet. Mech., 2005, 30, 145 CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, Annu. Rep. Prog. Chem. Sect. C: Phys. Chem., 2007, 103, 287 RSC .
C. J. Rhodes, “Energy Balance” http://ergobalance.blogspot.com.
A. Panchenko, H. Dilger, J. Kerres, M. Hein, A. Ullrich, T. Kaz and E. Roduner, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 2891 RSC .
A. Panchenko, H. Dilger, E. Moller, T. Sixt and E. Roduner, J. Power Sources, 2004, 127, 325 CrossRef CAS .
D. Dragutan and R. F. Mehlhorn, Free Radical Res., 2007, 41, 303 CrossRef .
B. V. Stefansson, A. L. Bjoernson, B. Haraldsson and U. A. Nilsson, Free Radical Biol. Med., 2005, 39, 249 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kamibayashi, S. Oowada, H. Kameda, T. Okada, O. Inanumi, S. Ohta, T. Ozawa, K. Makino and Y. Kotake, Free Radical Res., 2006, 40, 1166 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Reszka, M. L. McCormick, G. R. Buettner, C. M. Hart and B. E. Britigan, Nitric Oxide, 2006, 15, 133 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shoji, L. Li, Y. Abe, M. Ogata, Y. Ishimoto, R. Gonda, T. Mashino, M. Mochizuki, M. Uemoto and N. Miyata, Anal. Sci., 2007, 23, 219 CrossRef .
Toxicology of the Human Environment—the critical role of free radicals, ed. C. J. Rhodes, Taylor and Francis, London,  2000 Search PubMed .
B.-Z. Zhu, H.-T. Zhao, B. Kalyanaraman, J. Liu, G.-Q. Shan, Y.-G. Du and B. Frei, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 2007, 104, 3698 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu and B. Kalyanaraman, Free Radical Res., 2007, 41, 1 CAS .
C. L. Hawkins and M. J. Davies, Curr. Top. Biophys., 2002, 26, 137 Search PubMed .
B. Vileno, A. Sienkiewicz, M. Lekka, A. J. Kulik and L. Forro, Carbon, 2004, 42, 1195 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pietraforte, A. M. Salzano, G. Scorza and M. Minetti, Free Radical Biol. Med., 2004, 37, 1244 CrossRef CAS .
F. A. Villamena, A. Rockenbauer, J. Gallucci, M. Velayuthan, C. M. Hadad and J. L. Zweier, J. Org. Chem., 2004, 69, 7994 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kalai, J. Jeko and K. Hideg, Tetrahedron Lett., 2004, 45, 8395 CrossRef CAS .
J. Canadanovic-Brunet, M. Jasna, S. M. Djilas, G. S. Cetovic and V. T. Tumbas, J. Sci. Food Agric., 2005, 85, 265 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhou, L.-M. Wu, L. Yang and L.-Z. Liu, Free Radical Biol. Med., 2005, 38, 78 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Ohashi, Y. Takeuchi, M. Hirama, H. Yoshioka and H. Yoshioka, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2005, 78, 1757 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, T. Trang and H. Morris, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2004, 60, 1401 CrossRef .
A. Tkac and G. Scott, Chem. Pap., 2006, 60, 179 Search PubMed .
M. Kubota, Y. Takeuchi, K. Okuno, H. Yoshioka and H. Yoshioka, Fusion Eng. Des., 2006, 81, 1359 CrossRef CAS .
D. Shanks, R. Amorati, M. G. Fumo, G. F. Pedulli, L. Valgimigli and L. Engman, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 1033 CrossRef CAS .
V. T. Tumbas, S. M. Savatovic, S. M. Dilas, J. M. Canadanovic-Brunet and G. S. Cetkovik, Acta Periodica Technol., 2006, 37, 171 Search PubMed .
Y. Takeuchi, K. Okuno, H. Yoshioka and H. Yoshioka, J. Radioanal. Nucl. Chem., 2007, 272, 455 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Aboul-Enein, I. Kruk, A. Kladna, K. Lichazteld and T. Michelska, Biopolymers, 2007, 86, 222 CrossRef CAS .
T. Rosenau, E. Kloser, L. Gille, F. Mazzini and T. Netscher, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 3268 CrossRef CAS .
M. Pazos, M. L. Andersen, I. Medina and L. Skibsted, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2007, 55, 3661 CrossRef CAS .
P. Mulder, H.-G. Korth and K. U. Ingold, Helv. Chim. Acta., 2005, 88, 370 CrossRef CAS .
L.-F. Wang, H.-Y. Zhang, L. Kong, Z.-W. Chen and J.-G. Shi, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2004, 87, 1515 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gronert, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 1209 CrossRef CAS .
K. U. Ingold and G. A. Dilano, Org. Lett., 2006, 8, 5923 CrossRef CAS .
S. Gronert, Org. Lett., 2007, 9, 2211 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. DiLablo, K. U. Ingold, M. D. Roydhouse and J. C. Walton, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 4319 CrossRef .
G. A. DiLablo, K. U. Ingold and J. C. Walton, J. Org. Chem., 2007, 72, 8095 Search PubMed .
T. Bally, A. Maltsev, F. Gerson, D. Frank and A. De Meijere, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 1983 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bally, B. Mueller, F. Gerson, X.-Z. Qin, M. Von Seebach, S. I. Kozhushkov, A. De Meijere, V. I. Borokov and P. A. Potashov, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 1163 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1988, 110, 4446 CrossRef CAS .
T. Bally, S. Matzinger and P. Bednarek, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7828 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nishinaga, T. Uto and K. Komatsu, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 4611 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jenovsky, W. Knolle, S. Naumov and F. Williams, Chem.–Eur. J., 2004, 10, 5524 CrossRef CAS .
W. Knolle, I. Janovsky, S. Naumov and F. Williams, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 13816 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hermosilla, P. Calle, J. M. Garcia de la Vega and C. Sieiro, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 13600 CrossRef CAS .
V. I. Feldman, F. F. Sukhov, Yu. A. Orlov, I. V. Tyulpina and V. K. Ivanchenko, Radiat. Phys. Chem., 2006, 75, 106 CrossRef CAS .
K. B. Nuzhdin, S. V. Nesterov, D. A. Tyurin, V. I. Feldman, L. Wei and A. Lund, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 6166 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Konarev, S. S. Khasanov, G. Saito and R. N. Lyubovskaya, Recent Res. Dev. Chem., 2004, 2, 105 Search PubMed .
E. Ya. Misochko, A. V. Akimov, V. A. Belov, D. A. Tyurin and D. N. Laikov, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 084301/1 CAS .
J. R. Morton, K. F. Preston and F. Negri, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1994, 221, 59 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bardelang, A. Rockenbauer, L. Jicsinsky, J.-P. Finet, H. Karoui, S. Lambert, S. R. A. Marque and P. Tordo, J. Org. Chem., 2006, 71, 7657 CrossRef CAS .
P. Filipiak, D. M. Camioni, R. W. Fessenden, I. Carmichael and G. L. Hug, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 11046 CrossRef CAS .
M. Brynda, C. Dutan, T. Berclaz and M. Geoffroy, Curr. Top. Biophys., 2002, 26, 35 Search PubMed .
A. Lund, L. D. Macomber, M. Danilczuk, J. E. Stephens and S. Schlick, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 9484 CrossRef CAS .
M. Shiotani, P. Persson, S. Lunell, A. Lund and F. Williams, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 6307 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. El Sohly, G. S. Tschumper, R. A. Crocombe, J.-T. Wang and F. Williams, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 10573 CrossRef CAS .
V. P. Vysotsky, G. E. Salnikov and L. N. Shcheglova, Int. J. Quantum Chem., 2004, 100, 469 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Joly, M. Y. Levesque, F. Koudra and J. P. Rank, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 420, 140 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Joly, L. Beaudet and X. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 5656 CrossRef CAS .
H. A. Joly, M. Y. Levesque and J. P. Rank, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2006, 110, 3911 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Ram, N. V. Krishna Murthy and B. Bhudevi, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2006, 63, 700 CrossRef .
I. I. Aliev and A. L. Buchachenko, Khim. Fiz., 2007, 26, 11 Search PubMed .
K. Takeya, K. Nango, T. Sugahara, K. Ohgaki and A. Tani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21068 .
A. Tani, K. Ishikawa and K. Takeya, Radiat. Meas., 2006, 41, 1040 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Morley, B. J. Herbert, S. M. Lee, K. Porfyrakis, T. J. S. Dennis, D. Nguyen-Manh, R. Scipioni, J. van Tol, A. P. Horsfield, A. Ardavan, D. G. Pettifor, J. C. Green and G. A. D. Briggs, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 2469 CrossRef CAS .
A. Matni, L. Boubekeur, P. Grosshans, N. Mezailles, G. Bernardinelle, P. Le Floch and M. Goeffroy, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2007, 45, 1011 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Nelsen, A. E. Konradsson, M. N. Weaver, R. M. Stephenson, J. V. Lockard, J. I. Zink and Y. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2007, 111, 6776 CrossRef CAS .
J. W. Verhoeven, J. Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 7, 40 Search PubMed .
E. T. Chernick, Q. Mi, A. M. Vega, J. V. Lockard, M. A. Ratner and M. R. Wasielewski, J. Phys. Chem., B, 2007, 111, 6728 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hirao, A. Ito and K. Tanaka, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 2951 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kawai and K. Shibuya, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 4890 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kawai and K. Shibuya, J. Photochem. Photobiol., 2006, 7, 89 Search PubMed .
A. I. Kokorin, V. A. Tran, K. Rasmussen and G. Grampp, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2006, 30, 35 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mifsud, V. Mellon, J. Jianyong, L. Echegoyen and D. R. Smith Jr, Polym. Int., 2007, 56, 1142 CrossRef CAS .
D. D. Sung, H. Jin, Z. H. Ryo, W. B. Chin and I. Lee, Bull. Korean Chem. Soc., 2004, 25, 1231 CAS .
A. Rajca, K. Shiraishi, M. Vale, H. Han and S. Rajca, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 9014 CrossRef CAS .
G. Butcher, C. Toenshoff and A. Nicolaides, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 6883 CrossRef .
J. T. De Pinto, W. A. de Prophetis, J. L. Menke and R. J. McMahon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 2308 CrossRef CAS .
C. Trindle, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2005, 109, 898 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zoppellaro, V. Enkelmann, A. Geies and M. Baumgarten, Org. Lett., 2004, 6, 4929 CrossRef CAS .
A. Decken, T. S. Cameron, J. Passmore, J. M. Rautiainen, R. W. Reed, R. W. Reed, K. V. Shuvaev and L. K. Thompson, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 7436 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Skinner, B. A. B. Blackwell, M. M. Hasan and J. I. B. Blickstein, ACS Symp. Ser., 2007, 968 Search PubMed  (Archeological Chemistry), 1.
D. G. Koshchug, V. M. Gazeev, A. G. Gurbanov, R. V. Shablin and S. V. Vyatkin, Appl. Magn. Reson., 2005, 28, 331 CrossRef CAS .
K. Komaguchi, Y. Matsubara, M. Shiotani, H. Gustafsson and E. Lund, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2007, 66, 754 CrossRef CAS .
E. S. Bergstrand, H. Bjerke and E. O. Hole, Radiat. Meas., 2005, 39(Pub. 2004), 21 CrossRef CAS .
A. Maghraby, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B: Beam Interact. Mater. Atoms, 2007, 262, 46 Search PubMed .
I. Clairand, F. Trompier, J.-F. Bottollier-Depois and P. Gourmelon, Radiat. Prot. Dosim., 2006, 119, 500 CrossRef CAS .
H. Swartz, A. Iwasaki, T. Walczak, E. Demidenko, I. Salikhov, N. Khan, P. Lesniewski, J. Thomas, A. Romanyukha, D. Schauer and P. Starewicz, Radiat. Phys. Dosim., 2006, 120, 163 Search PubMed .
S. Botis, Y. Pan, T. Bonli, Y. Xu, A. Zhang, S. Nokhrin and V. Sopuck, Can. Mineral., 2006, 44, 1387 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Peimel-Stuglik and S. Fabisiak, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2006, 63, 855 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sadio, J. Michalik, W. Stachowicz, G. Strzelczak, A. Dziedzic-Goclawska and K. Ostrowski, Nukleonika, 2006, 51(Suppl. 1), S95 Search PubMed .
Y. Fujita, K. Tauchiya, S. Abe, Y. Takiguchi, S. Kubo and H. Sakurai, Forensic Sci. Int., 2005, 152, 39 CrossRef CAS .
V. Strehmel, A. Laschewsky, R. Stoesser, A. Zehl and W. Herrmann, J. Phys. Org. Chem., 2006, 19, 318 CrossRef CAS .
R. Stoesser, W. Herrmann, A. Zehl, A. Laschewsky and V. Strehmel, Z. Phys. Chem., 2006, 220, 1309 CrossRef CAS .
S. N. Bhat, A. Sharma and S. V. Bhat, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 95, 235702/1 CAS .
I. A. Shkrob, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 5223 CrossRef CAS .
I. A. Shkrob, W. J. Glover, B. E. Larsen and B. J. Schwartz, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2007, 111, 5232 CrossRef CAS .
V. Mugnaini, C. Punta, R. Liantonio, P. Metrangolo, F. Recupero, G. Resnati, G. Pedulli and M. Lucarini, Tetrahedron Lett., 2006, 47, 3265 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Robertson and L. H. Sutcliffe, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2005, 43, 457 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Robertson, L. H. Sutcliffe and E. N. C. Mills, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2006, 54, 1427 CrossRef CAS .
D. Gillies, K. R. Greenley and L. H. Sutcliffe, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2006, 54, 4943 CrossRef CAS .
K. Nakagawa, Lipids, 2005, 40, 745 CAS .
A. Panchenko, E. Aleksandrova and E. Roduner, Fudan Xuebao, Ziran Kexueban, 2005, 44, 719 Search PubMed .
S. Mitov, G. Huebner, H.-P. Brack, G. G. Scherer and E. Roduner, J. Polym. Sci. B, 2006, 44, 3323 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mitov, O. Delmer, J. Kerres and E. Roduner, Helv. Chim. Acta, 2006, 89, 2354 CrossRef CAS .
E. Endoh, S. Honmura, S. Terazono, H. Widjaja and Y. Takimoto, Proc. Electrochem. Soc., 2006 Search PubMed  , 2004-21(Proton Conducting Membrane Fuel Cells IV), 363.
S. Schlick and M. K. Kadirov, Polym. Prepr., 2005, 46, 307 CAS .
S. Sensfus, M. Al-Ibrahim, A. Konkin, G. Nazmutdinova, U. Zhokhavets, G. Gobsch, D. A. M. Egbe, E. Klemm and H.-K. Roth, Proc. SPIE, 2004, 5215  (Organic Photovoltaics IV), 129.
T. Yada, K. Norizawa, A. Tani and M. Ikeya, Appl. Radiat. Isot., 2005, 62, 255 CrossRef CAS .
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rime_(frost).
Z. Xie, J. D. Blum, S. Utsunomiya, R. C. Ewing, X. Wang and L. Sun, J. Geophys. Res., 2007, 112, D02306/1 CAS .
A. Baulig, J.-J. Poirault, P. Ausset, R. Schina, T. Shi, D. Baralle, P. Dorlhene, M. Meyer, R. Lefevre, A. Baesa-Squiban and M. Francelyne, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 5985 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Qu, L. Giurglu and E. Roduner, Chem. Commun., 2006, 2507 RSC .
X. Liu, H. Dilger, R. A. Eichel, J. Kunstmann and E. Roduner, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 2013 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sadio, J. Michalik and L. Kevan, Nukleonika, 2006, 51, S49 Search PubMed .
M. Danilczuk, A. Lund, J. Saadio, H. Yamada and J. Michalik, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2006, 63, 189 CrossRef CAS .
M. Danilczuk, D. Pogocki, A. Lund and J. Michalik, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2004, 6, 1165 RSC .
M. Danilczuk, J. Sadio, A. Lund, H. Yamada and J. Michalik, Nukleonika, 2005, 50, S51 Search PubMed .
E. Roduner, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2006, 35, 583 RSC .
T. L. Morkin, N. J. Turro, M. H. Kleinman, C. S. Brindle, W. H. Kramer and I. R. Gould, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 14917 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes and C. S. Hinds, in Radicals on Surfaces, eds. A. Lund and C. J. Rhodes, Kluwer, Dordrecht,  1995, 119 Search PubMed .
T. M. Leu and E. Roduner, J. Catal., 2004, 228, 397 CrossRef CAS .
S. Marquis, A. Moissette, H. Vezin and C. Bremard, C. R. Chem., 2005, 8, 419 Search PubMed .
S. Marquis, A. Moissette and C. Bremard, Chem. Phys. Phys. Chem., 2006, 7, 1525 Search PubMed .
M. A. Fox and M. T. Dulay, Chem. Rev., 1993, 93, 341 CrossRef CAS .
N. Serpone, Res. Chem. Intermed., 1994, 20, 953 .
Photocatalytic Purification of Water and Air, eds. D. F. Ollis and H. Al-Ekabi, Elservier, Amsterdam,  1993 Search PubMed .
Photocatalysis: Fundamentals and Applications, eds. N. Serpone and E. Pelizetti, Wiley, New York,  1989 Search PubMed .
M. A. Grela, M. E. J. Coronel and A. J. Colussi, J. Phys. Chem., 1996, 100, 16940 CrossRef CAS .
P. F. Schwarz, N. J. Turro, S. H. Bossmann, A. M. Braun, A.-M. A. Abdel Wahib and H. Durr, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1997, 101, 7127 CrossRef CAS .
V. Brezova, P. Tarabek, D. Dvoranova, A. Stasko and S. Biskupic, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Chemistry, 2003, 155, 179 CrossRef CAS .
V. Brezova, S. Gabcova, D. Dvoranova and A. Stasko, J. Photochem. Photobiol. A: Biology, 2005, 79, 121 Search PubMed .
M. Mrowetz and E. Selli, Chem. Phys. Phys. Chem., 2005, 7, 1525 Search PubMed .
J. Yang, C. Chen, H. Ji, W. Ma and J. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 21900 CrossRef CAS .
http://igitur-archive.library.uu.nl/dissertations/2003-0325-143241/inhoud.htm.
M. Okazaki and K. Toriyama, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 20068 CrossRef CAS .
M. Okazaki and K. Toriyama, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 13180 CrossRef CAS .
M. Okazaki and K. Toriyama, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9122 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, Prog. React. Kinet. Mech., 2006, 31, 159 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, I. D. Reid and U. Zimmermann, Chem. Commun., 2002, 1092 RSC .
C. J. Rhodes, Prog. React. Kinet. Mech., 2006, 31, 139 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, Prog. React. Kinet. Mech., 2000, 25, 219 CAS .
C. J. Rhodes, J. Chem. Soc., Perkin Trans. 2, 2002, 1379 RSC .
C. J. Rhodes and I. D. Reid, Spectrochim. Acta, Part A, 2002, 58, 1209 CrossRef .
C. J. Rhodes, T. C. Dintinger and C. A. Scott, Magn. Reson. Chem., 2000, 38, 729 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, M. F. Ottaviani, L. Abrams, X. Lei and N. J. Turro, J. Phys. Chem. A, 2004, 108, 8040 CrossRef CAS .
A. Moscatelli, A. Galaneau, F. Di Renzo and M. F. Ottaviani, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 18580 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Ottaviani, A. Moscatelli, D. Desplantier-Giscard, F. Di Renzo, P. J. Kooyman, B. Alonso and A. Galarneau, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108, 12123 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Ottaviani, M. Cangotti, G. Famiglini and A. Cappiello, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 10421 CrossRef CAS .This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
Table Content:

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 

 		 
TiO2 + hν → e−CB(TiO2) + h+VB(TiO2)	(1)
h+VB(TiO2) + H2O − e− → [H2O+˙] → ˙OH + H+	(2)

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2008
