Current advances in lanthanide ion (Ln 3+ )-based upconversion nanomaterials for drug delivery  - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C4CS00155A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C4CS00155A
(Review Article)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 1416-1448Current advances in lanthanide ion (Ln3+)-based upconversion nanomaterials for drug delivery

        
          
            Dongmei 
            Yang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ping'an 
            Ma
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhiyou 
            Hou
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ziyong 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chunxia 
            Li
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Lin
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Rare Earth Resource Utilization, Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Changchun, 130022, Jilin, China. E-mail: cxli@ciac.ac.cn; jlin@ciac.ac.cn;  Fax: +86-431-85698041;   Tel: +86-431-85262031
Received 
      7th May 2014
    First published on 2nd July 2014AbstractLanthanide ion (Ln3+)-based upconversion nano/micromaterials that emit higher-energy visible light when excited by low-energy NIR light have aroused considerable attention in the forefront of materials science and biomedical fields, which stems from their unique optical and chemical properties including minimum photodamage to living organisms, low autofluorescence, high signal-to-noise ratio and detection sensitivity, and high penetration depth in biological or environmental samples. Thus, Ln3+-based upconversion materials are rising new stars and are quickly emerging as potential candidates to revolutionize novel biomedical applications. In this review article, we mainly focus on the recent progress in various chemical syntheses of Ln3+-based upconversion nanomaterials, with special emphasis on their application in stimuli-response controlled drug release and subsequent therapy. Functional groups that are introduced into the stimuli-responsive system can respond to external triggers, such as pH, temperature, light, and even magnetic fields, which can regulate the movement of the pharmaceutical cargo and release the drug at a desired time and in a desired area. This is crucial to boost drug efficacy in cancer treatment while minimizing the side effects of cytotoxic drugs. Many multifunctional (magnetic/upconversion luminescence and porous) composite materials based on Ln3+ have been designed for controlled drug delivery and multimodal bioimaging. Finally, the challenges and future opportunities for Ln3+-based upconversion materials are discussed.
Dongmei Yang
Dongmei Yang was born in Jilin, China, in 1984. She earned her BS degree in chemistry from Northeast Normal University in 2008. Then she was a graduate student in Professor Jun Lin's group at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, and received a PhD degree in 2013. Her research interests focus on the synthesis, optical spectroscopy, and bioapplication of lanthanide-based luminescence nanomaterials.
Ping'an Ma
Ping'an Ma was born in Jilin, China, in 1982. He received his BS degree in Biology in 2005 at Northeast Normal University, and his PhD degree in Biochemistry in 2010 at Northeast Normal University. After graduation, he became an Assistant Professor in Prof. Jun Lin's group and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2013. His research focuses on the synthesis and application of multifunctional inorganic nanoparticles for bioapplication, particularly the design and mechanism of platinum-based anticancer drugs.
Zhiyou Hou
Zhiyao Hou was born in Harbin, China, in 1980. He received his BS degree in environmental engineering (2003) and MS degree in applied chemistry (2006) from Harbin Engineering University (HEU). From 2006, he has been a graduate student at HEU, and then he was a joint training doctoral student under the guidance of Prof. Jun Lin at CIAC. He received a PhD degree in materials chemistry from HEU in 2009, and followed with postdoctoral studies at CIAC (2010–2012). Now, he is an Associate Professor in Prof. Lin's group. His research interests are in electrospun luminescent nanocomposites for bioapplications.
Ziyong Cheng
Ziyong Cheng obtained his PhD in chemistry from CIAC (2006) under the supervision of Prof. Yanchun Han and Prof. Jun Lin on layered organic–inorganic perovskite materials. Following postdoctoral studies at Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research (Mainz, Germany) with Prof. Wolfgang Knoll, he returned to CIAC (2008) to take up an associate professor position in inorganic chemistry. In 2013, he was promoted to a full professor. His research interests now are nanostructured materials and polymer–inorganic nanocomposites for drug delivery and release applications.
Chunxia Li
Chunxia Li was born in Shandong, China, in 1977. She received her BS (2002) and MS (2005) in chemistry from Northeast Normal University, and a PhD degree (2008) from CIAC. After graduation, she became an Assistant Professor in Prof. Jun Lin's group and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2012. Her current research interests include the controllable synthesis of rare earth luminescence nanomaterials and their bioapplication.
Jun Lin
Jun Lin was born in Changchun, China, in 1966. He received BS and MS degrees in inorganic chemistry from Jilin University, China in 1989 and 1992, respectively, and a PhD degree in inorganic chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry in 1995. His postdoctoral studies were performed at the City University of Hong Kong (1996), Institute of New Materials (Germany, 1997), Virginia Commonwealth University (USA, 1998) and University of New Orleans (USA, 1999). He came back to China in 2000, and since then has been working as a professor at CIAC. His research interests include bulk and nanostructured luminescent materials and multifunctional composite materials together with their applications in the display, lighting, and biomedical fields.
1. Introduction
The rare earth elements comprise fifteen lanthanide (Ln) series (from lanthanum to lutetium) as well as yttrium and scandium. Except for La3+ and Lu3+, all Ln3+ ions exhibit distinctive luminescence properties via intra-4f or 4f–5d transitions due to abundant and unique energy level structures arising from 4fn inner shell configurations.1,2 In particular, Ln3+-based upconversion (UC) luminescence is one of the most outstanding features of rare earth luminescence, which has attracted extensive attention in past decade years in the forefront of materials sciences. Upconversion is a non-linear anti-Stokes process that efficiently converts two or more low-energy continuous-wave near-infrared (NIR) photons into a higher energy outcome photon (e.g. ultraviolet, visible, and NIR) through the use of long lifetime and real ladder-like energy levels of Ln3+ ions embedded in a suitable inorganic host matrix.3,4 To increase the NIR absorption strength of upconversion Ln3+ ions in the host lattice, Yb3+ is often co-doped with the other ions (Er3+, Tm3+, and Ho3+) as a sensitizer for the upconversion process. The upconversion principles have been studied thoroughly, and some excellent reviews have been published by Auzel and Güdel.5,6 Moreover, Berry and co-workers recently reported the systematic investigation of the optimized geometry and electronic structure of Ln3+ doped in hexagonal (β)-NaYF4 nanocrystals as a basis of density functional theory with a spin polarization approach.7,8
In the past five years, the focus on Ln3+-doped upconversion nanoparticles (UCNPs) has shifted away from the controlled synthesis of uniform UCNPs toward applications in biomedical fields, as evidenced from the rapid upsurge of reports on UCNPs for biomedical purposes.9–19 This stems from their unique advantages, as shown in Fig. 1. Firstly, the excitation wavelength (e.g., 980 nm) for UCNPs is located within the “optical transparency window” (700–1100 nm),20 so the use of NIR light holds such advantages as absence of photodamage to live organisms, low autofluorescence background, high signal-to-noise ratio and detection sensitivity, and high penetration depth in biological tissues. In addition, UCNPs have superior chemical stability and remarkable photostability free of on-off blinking and measurable photobleaching under prolonged single-particle excitation (Fig. 1a–d).21–29 Several recent reports have demonstrated that Nd3+ ions, with a large adsorption cross section at 808 nm, can serve as another sensitizer for the upconversion process through the energy migration process such as Nd3+ → Yb3+ → activators (e.g. Er3+, Tm3+ and Ho3+), in which Yb3+ ions act as transporting intermediaries to enable this phenomenon.32–37 It is inspiring that because the adsorption of water at 808 nm is much lower relative to that at 980 nm, the use of Nd3+ ions can considerably minimize the overheating effect associated with conventional 980 nm excitation. Thus, this may become another effective solution to reduce potential tissue damage caused by NIR excitation lasers and is especially suitable for NIR photoactivation of biomolecules or phototriggered drug delivery. These intriguing merits impart UCNPs with the capability for in vitro and in vivo upconversion luminescence (UCL) imaging28–46 and even NIR light-mediated imaging of latent fingerprints based on molecular recognition.47 Secondly, manifold emission colors can be elaborately tuned by changing the host lattices and doping concentration of activators under single NIR light excitation, which will enable many versatile applications of UCNPs.48–61 An interesting and exciting example was reported by Liu and co-workers, who fabricated a series of multicolor-banded upconversion barcodes based on tip-modified β-NaYF4 microrods with different activators doped at the tips (Fig. 1e).62 Different combinations of three primary colors (blue, green, and red) were used to construct multicolor upconversion barcodes that are easily readable with conventional optical microscopes. Thirdly, compared with other paramagnetic Ln3+ ions (e.g., Dy3+ and Ho3+), Gd3+ is most preferred for preparing T1 contrast agents because Gd3+ has the highest number of unpaired f electrons with parallel spin. More importantly, the spin-relaxation time of Gd3+ can match the Larmor frequency of protons in a suitable magnetic field.63 As a consequence, Gd3+-based UCNPs exhibit synergistic magneto-optical features and can be used as a new type of multimodal imaging probe that works for both simultaneous upconversion luminescence (UCL) imaging and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (Fig. 1f).64–72 Extensive research has demonstrated that host lattices containing barium (Ba), ytterbium (Yb), and gadolinium (Gd) are also promising X-ray tomography (CT) contrast agents.73–81 Finally, a series of both in vitro and in vivo toxicology studies indicate that UCNPs show good biocompatibility, and thus far, no evidence demonstrates noticeable biotoxicity.82–87 Thus, Ln3+-based upconversion materials are rising new stars and quickly emerging as candidates to revolutionize novel biomedical applications covering multimodal bioimaging, photodynamic therapy, and drug/gene delivery.
 Fig. 1  Unique advantages of UCNPs: (a) photostability: the time trace of emission intensity from a single UCNP under continuous laser illumination for more than 1 h, suggesting the durable photostability of the UCNPs. (b) Non-blinking: the zoom-in time trace and histogram of emission intensity, showing no on/off behavior. (c) High penetration depth: in vivo imaging of rat: quantum dots (QDs) injected into the abdomen, showing no luminescence (i); PEI-NaYF4:Yb/Er nanoparticles injected below the abdominal skin (ii), thigh muscles (iii), or below the skin of the back (iv), showing obvious luminescence. (d) No background luminescence interference: wavelength-dependent autofluorescence of vital organs and bodily fluids. (i) Immediately after euthanasia, the viscera of a hairless, athymic nu/nu mouse were exposed. Tissue autofluorescence was then imaged using three different excitation/emission filter sets: (ii) blue/green (460–500 nm/505–560 nm); (iii) green/red (525–555 nm/590–650 nm); and (iv) NIR (725–775 nm/790–830 nm). Arrows in (i) mark the location of the gallbladder (GB), small intestine (SI), and bladder (Bl). (e) Multicolor emission: (i–v) one wt% colloidal solution of NaYF4:Yb/Er nanocrystals in dichloromethane excited at 977 nm demonstrating upconversion luminescence. (i) NaYF4:Yb/Er solution; (ii) total upconversion luminescence; (iii and iv) NaYF4:Yb/Er upconversion viewed through green and red filters, respectively; (v) NaYF4:Yb/Tm solution; (vi) Single-color emission: optical micrographs of the parent NaYF4 upconversion microrods doped with Yb/Tm (20/0.2 mol%), Yb/Er (5/0.05 mol%), and Yb/Er (50/0.05 mol%), respectively. The dual-color-banded upconversion optical micrographs were obtained by varying the composition of the dopants. (f) Multimodal imaging: scheme of a multimodal imaging probe and UCL, MRI, and PET (positron emission tomography) multimodal imaging of small animals using NaYF4:Yb/Er. (Adapted from ref. 3, 21–23, 42 and 62. Copyright 2003, 2006, 2008, 2009, 2012 and 2014, Highwire press PNAS, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, American Chemical Society, Royal Society of Chemistry and Elsevier B. V. Reproduced with permission.) 
The basic concept in utilizing UCNPs for therapeutic purposes originates from the capability to combine other functional nanostructures in one hybrid system, which aims to obtain so-called “theranostic” multifunctional nanomedical platforms for the synergistic disease diagnosis, therapy, and monitoring. However, the major obstacles in current chemotherapy include side effects of cytotoxic drugs to healthy tissues, lower therapeutic concentration at the targeted location, and unspecific uptake of normal cells. To ameliorate these hurdles, innovative stimuli-responsive drug delivery systems that can administer a drug in spatial-, temporal-, and dosage-controlled fashions are greatly demanded.88,89 Recently, spurred by significant advances in the fabrication of high-quality UCNPs and subsequent elegant surface modification strategies, UCNP-based nanocomposites have also brought out their captivating advantages in the design and construction of drug delivery systems that can respond to endogenous or externally specific triggers, such as pH, temperature, magnetic field light, and redox gradients. In particular, UCNPs can serve as nanotransducers to replace the undesired ultraviolet (UV)-visible source that activates photosensitive therapeutic molecules to fulfill remotely NIR photo-triggered drug release with high spatio-temporal resolution. The majority of the existing photoresponsive drug carriers usually require UV or short visible wavelength excitation, which not only induces severe phototoxicity but also exhibits a low signal-to-noise ratio and significantly limited light penetration depth. Therefore, such disadvantages would seriously hinder their application in living systems. Hence, NIR-to-UV/visible UCNPs have promising potential in the design of photocontrolled drug delivery at a desired location and specific time. Recently, some UCNP-based photoresponsive systems have been engineered to achieve on-demand drug release in response to irradiation of NIR light.90–96 So far, quite a few reviews regarding UCNP-based synthesis, multicolor tuning, and applications have been published.2,6–16,27,30,40,97–114 However, taking into account the rapid development of UCNPs in biological applications, it is anticipated that there is still a strong demand for a thorough review with the current literature related to UCNP-based composites for controlled drug delivery by means of rational design of stimuli-response systems. Therefore, in this review, we mainly highlight the current state-of-the-art for the rational design, fabrication strategies, and application in drug delivery and cancer therapy of UCNP-based multifunctional nanocomposites based on our research and other related studies in this area. For the sake of brevity, the synthesis, surface modification, biodetection, multimodal bioimagings, and solar cells of UNCPs are not within the principal scope of this review. The readers who are interested in these aspects can refer to other specific reviews97–114 or representative studies.115–141
2. Design philosophy for UCNP-based drug delivery systems
The principal design philosophy of UCNP-based drug delivery involves the combination of UCNPs with other functional building blocks (including inorganic and organic materials) into a single nanoplatform for synergistic disease diagnosis, therapy, and monitoring of therapeutic progression by taking advantage of special merits of UCNPs. To achieve this goal, three points should be kept in mind. Firstly, the synthesis of high-quality (pure-phase, uniform, monodisperse, and well-shaped) UCNPs is fundamental and crucial in order to effectively integrate other functional nanostructures. From the viewpoint of materials applications, it is particularly attractive because of the possibility to display the respective advantages of each material. Secondly, the composite materials should provide a suitable pore structure or linkage site to load antitumor drug molecules by physical absorption or covalent association. Finally, elegant modification strategies should be explored for the construction of stimuli-responsive devices for drug delivery, which can boost drug efficacy in cancer treatment while minimizing the side effects of cytotoxic drugs. In particular, it should be emphasized that the absorption spectra of photosensitive compounds should overlap with the emission band of UNCPs in order to fully utilize the energy transfer between them. In this way, the UV/visible light emitted by UCNPs can be exploited to trigger the photoresponsive species anchored to the UCNP surface to form an NIR light-triggered controlled drug delivery vehicle. In general, UCNP-based drug delivery systems include four groups: (i) silica or mesoporous silica coating or encapsulation (UCNPs@SiO2); (ii) polymer grafting or self-assembly (UCNPs@polymer); (iii) hollow UCNPs with a mesoporous surface (hollow UCNPs); and (iv) electrospun fibers decorated with UCNPs (UCNPs@fibers), as illustrated in Scheme 1. Of course, through rational design, other functional nanostructures (e.g., superparamagnetic Fe3O4, ultrasmall CuS, and Au nanoparticles) can also be incorporated within UCNPs to obtain symbiosis of the properties of all components. Drug molecules can be conjugated to these carriers with either covalent or non-covalent bonds. The following section will elaborate the various strategies for these multifunctional UCNP-based drug delivery systems.
 Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of UCNP-based drug delivery carriers. (UCNPs: upconversion nanoparticles, mSiO2: mesoporous silica; PAA: polyacrylic acid; NPs: other functional nanoparticles such as Au, Fe3O4, and CuS.) 
3. Synthesis strategies for UCNP-based drug delivery systems
Currently, the representative pathways to synthesize the four types of UCNPs-based drug delivery systems mentioned above can be broadly divided into four categories: (i) sol–gel method; (ii) hydrothermally-assisted template method; (iii) polymer grafting or self-assembly; and (iv) electrospinning route.
3.1 Sol–gel method
The sol–gel method is a typical technique for UCNP-based drug delivery systems without requiring complicated procedures or instruments. The representative sol–gel process involves inorganic precursors (metal salts or metal-alkoxides) that upon reaction with water undergo hydrolysis and condensation, leading to the formation of 3D oxide networks.142 One of the most well-known examples is the synthesis of uniform colloidal silica spheres that was invented by Stöber in the 1960s.143 This discovery was called the “Stöber method” and produced a profound influence on the synthesis of novel core–shell structured materials with a variety of components, sizes, and properties in which silica can serve as either a core or a shell.144,145 Alternatively, Osseo-Asare and Arriagada discovered a novel water-in-oil reverse microemulsion method for the synthesis of silica nanoparticles with more uniform size.146Via the microemulsion method (using the surfactant Trix-100 or Igepal CO-520/cyclohexane/aqueous solution), a thin and dense silica layer was coated onto the surface of UCNPs to form highly uniform and monodisperse core–shell structured UCNPs@SiO2 nanospheres.147,148 The surface of SiO2 can be readily functionalized with diverse groups such as amines, carboxyl, or thiols, enabling other nanoparticles or photosensitive molecules to connect.149–153 For example, Shi and co-workers have demonstrated that the obtained UCNPs@SiO2 can be integrated with other functional building blocks such as Au nanoparticles (for CT imaging) and ultrasmall CuS (for photothermal therapy) to form multifunctional UCNPs@SiO2@Au or UCNPs@SiO2@CuS nanoparticles, which display their respective properties of each component so as to achieve multimodal bioimagings and synergetic therapy (radiotherapy and photothermal ablation).151,152 Because the dense silica shell possesses limited drug delivery capability due to the absence of porous structures, a modified Stöber method is used to coat the functional nanoparticles with mesoporous silica (mSiO2). Mesoporous silica possesses intriguing properties including good compatibility, porous structures with high surface area (providing reservoirs for loading various guest molecules), tunable pore size (offering the selectivity for adsorption and controllability of the release of the restricted nanoparticles), and ease of surface functionalization (providing active sites for linking other biological molecules).154–159 As such, if UCNPs combine with silica or mesoporous silica, a novel core–shell structured nanomaterial for drug delivery can be obtained. By reasonable core–shell structured design and different synthesis strategies, UCNPs can be assembled on, encapsulated within, or combined with other specific nanoparticles inside and on the surface of silica or mesoporous silica for different application purposes. In this context, dramatic efforts have been devoted to the synthesis of a series of UCNPs–SiO2 drug delivery systems through sol–gel chemistry.

3.1.1 Two-step sol–gel method. 
In order to produce a mesoporous silica layer, there are two commonly used structure-directing agents: (1) surfactants such as cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB) and (2) organosilanes such as octadecyltrimethoxysilane (C18TMS). The former can form ordered mesopores while the latter can form disordered and worm-like ones. In an earlier study via a two-step sol–gel reaction, we fabricated multifunctional nanocomposites using Fe3O4 nanospheres as the core that were subsequently coated with dense silica and ordered mesoporous silica, which was further functionalized by the deposition of NaYF4:Yb/Er (Tm) UCNPs,160 as shown in Fig. 2. The resultant composite nanomaterials Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2@UCNPs exhibit high magnetization (38.0 emu g−1) and bright UC emission under 980 nm laser excitation. The intermediate solid SiO2 as a protective matrix plays an important role in protecting the upconversion luminescence from quenching by the inner black Fe3O4 core while a mSiO2 shell can be used to load drug model ibuprofen (IBU). More importantly, the drug release amount can be monitored by the change in the UC emission intensity. This class of multifunctional system seems to have the potential to track the drug delivery process based on its magnetic and luminescent properties. Following this concept, instead of coating UCNPs at the surface of mSiO2, UCNPs as an inner core were also encapsulated by mSiO2 to form Gd2O3:Er@SiO2@mSiO2 (Fig. 3a).161 In addition, Sun et al. reported the one-pot self-assembly of multifunctional mesoporous nanoprobes with magnetic nanoparticles and hydrophobic upconversion nanocrystals, in which CTAB-stabilized UCNPs (positively charged) were self-assembled onto Fe3O4@SiO2 (negatively charged) such as core-satellites via electrostatic and van der Waals interactions. Then, the subsequent co-condensation of tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS) and CTAB resulted in the formation of the outer mesoporous silica layer.162 Apart from CTAB, C18TMS is a common directing agent for the synthesis of disordered mesopore structures. Zhang et al. and our group reported the synthesis of UCNPs@SiO2@mSiO2 nanoparticles using surfactant C18TMS as a pore generator via two-step sol–gel reactions,148,163 as shown in Fig. 3b.
 Fig. 2  The formation process of multifunctional Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb/Er nanocomposites (a), SEM (b) and TEM (c) images, upconversion emission spectrum (d) of nanocomposites, the magnetic hysteresis loops (e) of pure Fe3O4 (O), Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2 (■), Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb/Er (*), the separation process of the nanocomposites by magnet (f), and upconversion emission intensity of Er3+ in IBU-loaded materials as a function of the cumulative released IBU (g). (Adapted from ref. 160. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
 Fig. 3  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of UCNPs@SiO2@mSiO2 composite materials via a two-step sol–gel strategy using CTAB (a) or C18TMS (b) as structure-directing agents and the corresponding shape of the product obtained during each step. (Adapted from ref. 148 and 161. Copyright 2010 and 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA and Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.) 


3.1.2 One-step sol–gel method. 
Despite its success, there are some problems to be addressed with the two-step sol–gel method. One of the biggest shortcomings is the inevitable and uncontrolled aggregation of the final nanoparticles due to the high-temperature calcination treatment (550 °C, 6 h) that is required to remove C18TMS, which seems to be the only known way to remove C18TMS from the silica network.164 Another drawback in the two-step sol–gel reaction is that the fabrication of these materials typically requires intermediate coatings of solid silica followed by further deposition of a mesoporous silica layer, which involves complicated and multistep procedures. To overcome these hurdles, the direct coating of mesoporous silica on the surface of a single upconversion nanoparticle via a facile and general strategy is greatly demanded. In 2006, Heyon's group reported a typical method for the direct encapsulation of hydrophobic inorganic nanoparticles with a mesoporous silica shell.165 In this method, CTAB not only acts as a capping and phase-transfer agent, but also as the template for the formation of mesoporous structures in the silica sol–gel reaction. This outstanding work provides a new opportunity to directly coat diverse hydrophobic nanoparticles possessing different compositions, shapes, and sizes with mesoporous silica shells.166,167 Enlightened by these studies, our group and Shi's group have independently reported the synthesis of uniform and monodisperse UCNPs@mSiO2 nanocomposites using a one-step sol–gel process.168–171 The synthesis procedure for UCNPs@mSiO2 nanocomposites is shown in Fig. 4.170 Hydrophobic UCNPs [e.g. NaYF4:Yb/Er or NaY(Gd)F4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4:Yb] were first transferred from the organic phase to the aqueous phase by using CTAB as a secondary surfactant. CTAB-terminated UCNPs can then act as the seed for the coating of the mesoporous silica shell via the sol–gel process. Finally, the surfaces of the UCNPs@mSiO2 nanospheres were modified with polyethylene glycol (PEG) in order to enhance the nanocarrier dispersion and long-term stability under physiological conditions, prolong the circulation time of the nanocarrier in blood, and facilitate preferential accumulation at the tumor sites by the enhanced permeation and retention (EPR) effect.172 Thus, in this kind of composite nanomaterial, the core imparts it with luminescence and/or magnetic properties for simultaneous UCL and MR imaging, whereas the mesoporous shell affords the suitability for it to be loaded with an anticancer drug. The average diameter of nanospheres is determined to be below 100 nm, which is within the acceptable size range for biomedical applications in vivo.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of UCNPs@mSiO2–PEG/FA composite nanospheres via a one-step sol–gel reaction and the corresponding shape of the products. (Adapted from ref. 170. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.) 
In addition, CTAB-stabilized UCNPs can be employed to construct pH-responsive drug delivery nanocarriers by using poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), a biodegradable superabsorbent, as a nanoreactor and template. Recently, Wang and co-workers fabricated a novel and unique multifunctional (concentric-UCNPs@mSiO2)@PAA core-double shell nanostructure (Strategy 1, Fig. 5).173 The formation of eccentric PAA shells should be related to the change in the interfacial energy between PAA, UCNPs@mSiO2 NPs, and the solvent, likely resulting in a minimum interfacial energy. Such material has two special characteristics: ultra high drug storage capacity and sensitive pH-responsive drug release properties. The drug loading capacity in eccentric-(concentric-UCNPs@mSiO2)@PAA was 2 mg of DOX per 1 mg nanomaterials. This is because PAA, with an abundance of carboxyl groups, not only effectively loads the positively charged drugs by electrostatic interactions but also exhibits a pH-responsive performance. In subsequent work, the same researchers further improved the experimental protocol by taking into account that PAA in the outer layer is unstable in water and prone to swelling. Special eccentric UCNPs@PAA@SiO2 core–shell nanoclusters consisting of a single NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd UCNP as the core, PAA as the intermediate layer, and eccentric SiO2 as the outer layer were successfully manufactured,174 as shown in Fig. 5 (Strategy 2). In brief, PAA molecules were self-assembled around CTAB-UCNPs to obtain eccentric UCNPs@PAA core–shell nanospheres. During this process, the resulting eccentric PAA shell is like a “reservoir” that absorbs and retains water molecules inside its net structure because PAA is a polymer with a high water-absorbent capacity. The hydrolysis reaction of TEOS is subsequently confined to the PAA network by the sol–gel process, leading to the formation of eccentric UCNPs@PAA–SiO2 core–shell nanoclusters. Likewise, eccentric UCNPs@PAA–SiO2 nanomaterial has good capability for drug loading; however, its stability in water has been greatly improved compared to the former.
 Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure for eccentric NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd@PAA@SiO2 core–shell nanoclusters and the corresponding shapes (Strategy 1) as well as eccentric-(concentric-NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd@SiO2)@PAA core–shell nanostructures and the corresponding shapes (Strategy 2). (Adapted from ref. 173 and 174. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry and American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 


3.1.3 Combined use of the sol–gel method and the surface-protected etching method. 
Apart from the usage of pore-making agents discussed above, UCNP-based nanoparticles obtained by sol–gel reactions can be further etched to produce rattle-type (defined as yolk–shell) drug delivery nanocarriers.175–178 Rattle-type nanostructures have a unique interstitial hollow space between the core and mesoporous shell and are attractive as the new generation drug delivery nanoplatform due to the greatly enhanced drug loading capacity.179–181 One of the most straightforward synthesis methodologies for rattle-type nanostructures is the surface-protected etching method. This approach was first reported by Yin and co-workers to prepare hollow mesoporous SiO2, where polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) was used as the protecting layer and was coated with solid SiO2 spheres. Subsequent selective etching of the interior SiO2 followed, using NaOH as the etchant by virtue of the structural difference between the core and shell of SiO2.182 In general, the selection of appropriate etchants and surface-protecting agents is critical to obtain high quality yolk–shell structured nanomaterials.183 The most frequently used etchants include NaOH, HF, NaCO3 and even hot water while the surface-protecting agents are PVP, poly(dimethyldiallylammonium chloride), and polyethyleneimine (PEI).
UCNP-based rattle-type structures are composed of core–shell and hollow structures with a special core@void@shell configuration. For instance, Wang et al.176 employed PEI-bearing positively charged networks as surface-protecting agents to fabricate UCNPs-based yolk–shell structures, in which hot water acted as an etchant. Li and co-workers177 reported a rattle-structured Fe3O4@void@NaLuF4:Yb/Er nanostructure that can provide the ternary modality for MR, CT and UCL imaging. Bu and co-workers178 fabricated a multifunctional rattle-structured nanotheranostic with a movable UCNP core consisting of an outer mesoporous SiO2 shell and a hollow cavity between them, as shown in Fig. 6. Hydrophobic NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4 (denoted as Gd-UCNP, Fig. 6a) nanoparticles were coated with double dense SiO2 layers (Fig. 6b and c) using a two-step sol–gel method to form Gd-UCNPs@d1-SiO2@d2-SiO2. In order to ensure that the reaction would take place exclusively inside the inner SiO2 layer, the outer SiO2 layer was coated with PVP to protect it against etching. Then a milder etchant of hot water was used to create hollow cavities because it can dissolve the colloidal SiO2 shell by breaking the internal Si–O–Si bonds at a controllable rate. Using a “surface-protected hot water etching” strategy, the intermediate SiO2 layer was selectively etched away to leave behind a hollow cavity inside the thin porous SiO2 shell, eventually producing yolk–shell structured UCSNs (Fig. 6d). It is worthwhile to note that traditional alkaline or acidic etchants did not work owing to the difficulty in controlling the etching rates. This design can achieve two major goals: (i) a Gd-UCNP core can act as a UCL/MRI dual-mode imaging probe for locating tumors in vivo; and (ii) the hollow cavity and porous shell can load drugs such as cisplatin for localized therapy via synergetic chemo-/radiotherapy.
 Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the synthesis procedure for UCSNs and the corresponding TEM images of (a) Gd-UCNP (NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4), (b) Gd-UCNPs@d1-SiO2, (c) Gd-UCNPs@d1-SiO2@d2-SiO2, and (d) UCSNs. (Adapted from ref. 178. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 
It should be mentioned that UCNP-based rattle-type structures have a disordered pore structure and broad pore size distribution because of the lack of structure-directing agents. However, for controlled drug delivery, ordered, regular, and narrowly distributed pores are highly demanded, which facilitates the adjustment of the transport and release of cargos in the pores. Therefore, the search for new and facile strategies to fabricate UCNP-based nanomaterials that meet the aforementioned requirements is still an important task for the coming years.

3.2 Hydrothermal-assisted template method
The template method is one of the most popular strategies for the synthesis of hollow materials, most of which are synthesized with the help of either hard templates or soft-directing agents.184,185 In recent reports, melamine formaldehyde,186,187 carbonaceous nanospheres,188,189 poly(acrylic acid sodium salt) microspheres,190 and sodium poly(4-styrenesulfonate)191 were used as templates to prepare upconversion NaYF4:Yb/Er, Y2O3:Yb/Er, Gd2O3:Yb/Er and SrMoO4:Yb/Er hollow architectures, respectively. Nevertheless, some intrinsic disadvantages of the hard template method, such as poor control of the encapsulating materials, time-consuming and cumbersome procedures, and larger template size, hinder research development for UCNP-based hollow structures. To address these problems, if the as-obtained uniform, readily prepared and spherical rare earth oxides act as sacrificial templates, the controlled synthesis of hollow UCNPs will become possible under the appropriate conditions. For this purpose, Y2O3:Yb/Er can be used as a template for hollow structured cubic phase NaYF4 spheres with the proper particle size (<200 nm), and these have been successfully fabricated via the hydrothermal ion-exchange process.192 Recently, we used uniform RE(OH)CO3 (RE = Gd, Y and Yb) nanospheres as sacrificial templates to fabricate three kinds of hollow UCNPs:GdVO4:Yb/Er,193 Yb(OH)CO3@YbPO4,194 and NaYF4:Yb/Er.195 In a previous report, we described the controllable synthesis of monodisperse core–shell structured Yb(OH)CO3@YbPO4:Er hollow spheres as drug carriers by chemical transformation of the sacrificial template Yb(OH)CO3via the Kirkendall effect (Fig. 7a). In another report, we demonstrated a facile synthesis of NaYF4:Yb/Er hollow mesoporous nanospheres (HMNPs) via a hydrothermal process using Y(OH)CO3:Yb/Er as a sacrificial template (Fig. 7b). From the viewpoints of materials synthesis, our design provides a facile and safe approach to synthesize HMNPs with simple operations and mild experimental conditions. On the one hand, NaBF4 has been used as a fluoride source, which can release gradually H+ and F− under high temperature and pressure. Compared with the previous method,192 it is safer and harmless because it avoids direct contact with HF. On the other hand, PEI, a dendrigraft cationic polymer, was coated on the surface of obtained NPs during the hydrothermal process, which played multifarious roles: endowing HMNPs with good water solubility, providing functional groups to conjugate the targeted ligand, folic acid (FA), and protecting the surface of precursors against the etching of H+. In addition, Anker and co-workers found that during the conversion of the precursor Gd2O(CO3)2·H2O:Yb/Er(Tm) to β-NaGdF4:Yb/Er(Tm) in a teflon-lined autoclave, polyelectrolytes from negatively charged sodium alginate (AL) and positively charged PEI that were then alternately coated onto the outer surface of nanophosphors layer-by-layer can effectively prevent irreversible particle aggregation. Moreover, these polyelectrolytes also provided an amine tag for PEGylation. This method is also employed to fabricate PEGylated magnetic upconversion phosphors with Fe3O4 as the core and β-NaGdF4 as a shell.196 Additionally, Y2O2SO4 hollow spheres can be obtained by the biomolecule-assisted hydrothermal method followed by calcination. The formation of hollow spheres involves Ostwald ripening in hydrothermal conditions.197
 Fig. 7  Schematic diagram and the corresponding shapes of hollow UCNP nanocarriers: Yb(OH)CO3@YbPO4:Er (a) and (b) NaYF4:Yb/Er hollow spheres via the hydrothermal-assisted template method as well as hollow NaREF4 (RE = Y, Yb and Lu) nanospheres (c) via the liquid–liquid two-phase hydrothermal approach combined with electron-beam lithography. (Adapted from ref. 194, 195 and 199. Copyright 2012 and 2013, Elsevier B. V. and Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
In addition to the methods discussed above, electron-beam lithography is also an effective means to obtain hollow rare earth fluoride nanoparticles. The first example comes from Yan et al., who prepared β-NaYF4:Yb/Er hollow-sphere nanocrystals under electron-beam irradiation.198 The formation mechanism was a heat-induced acid-etching process. Nevertheless, the operation was limited to a small area in transmission electron microscopy, which restricts the capability for mass production for hollow-structured materials. In a more recent study, we developed a facile liquid–liquid two-phase hydrothermal approach to the one-step synthesis of water-soluble NaREF4 (RE = Nd–Lu, Y) nanoparticles with small size (2–28 nm) and uniform morphology by introducing the amphiphilic surfactant sodium dodecylsulfate (SDS) into the reaction system (Fig. 7c).199
Furthermore, it was also found that a large amount of hollow-structured NaREF4 (RE = Y, Yb, and Lu) nanocrystals were produced in situ under electron-beam irradiation. It took less than one minute for this convenient solid-to-hollow transition process. Moreover, we found that not all rare earth ions can form hollow structures. The electron beam acted on only Y, Yb and Lu species. The exact reason for this phenomenon is currently not clear. The as-prepared hollow-structured nanoparticles can be used as anti-cancer drug carriers for drug storage/release and upconversion cell imaging.
3.3 Polymer grafting or self-assembly
The high quality UCNPs obtained by existing synthesis methods are hydrophobic in nature owing to the usage of capping surfactants (such as oleic acid), which is far from ideal for biological applications. Therefore, suitable inorganic or organic materials are used to link or encapsulate UCNPs by self-assembly or covalent association. The preceding two sections mainly focus on inorganic materials that integrate UCNPs to form nanocomposites. This section will focus on organic polymers used to modify UCNPs for use as drug carriers. Commonly used polymers include polyethylene glycol (PEG)-grafted amphiphilic polymer (C18PMH-PEG),200 PEG phospholipids,201,202 TWEEN,203,204 PEI,205 poly(maleic anhydride-alt-1-octadecene) (PMAO),206 OQPGA-PEG/RGD/TAT lipid micelles (OQPGA refers to octadecyl-quaternized modified poly glutamic acid),207 as well as amphiphilic block copolymer such as mPEG-b-PCL-b-PLL,208 and poly(styrene-block-allyl alcohol) (PS16-b-PAA10).209 Recently, we designed and synthesized a novel multifunctional upcoversion nanoparticle–polymer composite system for cisplatin(IV) drug delivery and bioimaging. An amphiphilic tri-block copolymer mPEG-b-PCL-b-PLL conjugated with a cisplatin(IV) prodrug can be assembled with hydrophobic UCNPs to form core–shell structured nanocomposites, which could be applied in both delivering cisplatin to cancer cells and monitoring the transport pathway via in vitro and in vivo imaging.208 In addition, Liu's group conducted a series of studies on the encapsulation of UCNPs with polymers for drug delivery and multimodal bioimaging. A typical example is that C18PMH-PEG was used to modify NaYF4:Yb/Er UCNPs, in which a hydrophobic OA layer was applied on the surface of UCNPs and beneath the PEG coating to yield “hydrophobic pockets” whereby the anticancer drug molecule DOX could be absorbed physically into these pockets via a supramolecular chemistry approach (Fig. 8a).200 Following the same principle, PEG phospholipids and TWEEN can also be employed to transfer hydrophobic UCNPs into the water to produce water-soluble and biocompatible UCNPs, which were reported by Zhao and Gu.201,203,204 DOX and camptothecin (CPT) anticancer drugs could be co-loaded into the “hydrophobic pockets” through hydrophobic interactions (Fig. 8b).204 In addition to these, Liu's group has attempted to synthesize novel nanocomposites with multiple functions by coating or integrating UNCPs with magnetic Fe3O4 by different routes. For example, hydrophobic UCNPs and Fe3O4 were simultaneously encapsulated with diblock copolymer PS16-b-PAA10via a microemulsion method (Fig. 8c).209 Liu's group also reported a novel multifunctional nanoparticle consisting of a UCNP as the inner core, closely packed Fe3O4 as the inter-layer, and a thin layer of gold as the shell, which were fabricated via the layer-by-layer assembly approach.210,211 These multifunctional nanomaterials can be used for in vitro and in vivo multimodal biomedical imaging, magnetic-targeted drug delivery, and cancer therapy, including chemotherapy and photothermal therapy.
 Fig. 8  Schematic diagrams of synthesis procedures for UCNPs@polymer carriers: (a, b) C18PMH–PEG or TWEEN–COOH were used to modified hydrophobic UCNPs to yield “hydrophobic pockets” whereby the anticancer drug molecules DOX or CPT could be loaded (or co-loaded) into these pockets through hydrophobic interactions; (c) hydrophobic UCNPs and Fe3O4 nanoparticles were simultaneously encapsulated with the diblock copolymer PS16-b-PAA10via a microemulsion method. (Adapted from ref. 200, 204 and 209, copyright 2011 and 2014. Elsevier B. V. and Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.) 
3.4 Electrospinning method
Electrospinning is a cost-effective and versatile method for preparing one dimensional (1D) materials including polymers, inorganic materials, and hybrid compounds.212,213 When inorganic rare earth luminescent nanoparticles are dispersed into polymer hybrid precursors, various 1D rare earth luminescent materials with multiform morphologies such as fiber, wire, belt, and tube can be achieved readily via the electrospinning route, which has potential applications in fluorescent lamps and color displays.214–216 Our group has employed this method to prepare various families of 1D luminescence materials. Readers who are interested in this aspect are referred to our previous review on this topic.217 More importantly, our group has demonstrated that the electrospinning route is also an effective approach to prepare UCNP/porous multifunctional materials, which can act as promising drug carriers for biomedical applications.218–223 In our early work, hydrophilic NaYF4:Yb/Er NCs were directly dispersed in electrospinning solution containing orthosilicate (TEOS). Then, porous SiO2 fiber-decorated UCNPs (UCNPs@SiO2 fibers) were obtained after high temperature annealing (550 °C) (Fig. 9a), which served as a carrier to the loading and release of drugs such as ibuprofen or anticancer agents such as DOX, as well as upconversion luminescence imaging.165,166 Moreover, by fastidiously controlling experimental conditions, UCNPs@SiO2 tubes can be successfully fabricated (Fig. 9b).221 The above research mainly focused on the loading and sustained release of a single drug, and thus, the burst release of the drug at the initial stage during drug delivery is a pitfall because it is unfavorable for the accumulation of drugs at the tumor site. However, to accelerate wound healing and decrease postsurgical infection, the release of two or more different drugs at the proper time and in appropriate doses may be required during treatment.
 Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the synthesis procedure and the corresponding shapes of diverse UCNPs@SiO2 fibers (a), UCNPs@SiO2 tubes (b) and UCNPs@mSiO2@fibers (c). (Adapted from ref. 220–222, copyright 2012, 2013 and 2014. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Royal Society of Chemistry and American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 
To this end, we adopted a novel and ingenious architecture design to obtain a multifunctional dual-drug delivery system via the electrospinning technique by combining the advantages of inorganic materials (UCNPs@mSiO2) and organic materials (polymer).222 The working principle of our strategy is shown in Fig. 9c. Firstly, DOX delivery carrier UCNPs@mSiO2 nanospheres were fabricated according to a phase transfer assisted surfactant-templating coating process. Subsequently, the as-obtained DOX-UCNPs@mSiO2 nanoparticles were mixed with electrospinning solution including poly(ε-caprolactone) (PCL)–gelatin (PG) and another anti-inflammatory drug, indomethacin (IMC), so as to form dual drug-loaded composite fibers, denoted as UCNPs@mSiO2@fibers. The two drugs exhibited release behaviors in vitro that presented distinct release properties. Optimum drug release is a sustained and long-term process that can effectively solve the problem of drug burst release to some extent. Moreover, the UC luminescent intensity ratios of 2H11/2/4S3/2–4I15/2 (green emission) to 4F9/2–4I15/2 (red emission) from Er3+ vary with the amount of DOX in the system, and thus, drug release can be tracked and monitored utilizing luminescence resonance energy transfer by the changes in the green/red intensity ratios.
For the electrospinning of nanofibers, there are some limitations in the in vivo therapeutic application if intravenous injection is adopted for systemic delivery, because nanofibers cannot effectively circulate in the bloodstream due to their larger size. However, the nanofibers are effective and very attractive for topical treatment of solid tumors and wound healing due to their characteristics, including extremely high-specific surface and porosity, and excellent air permeability as well as surface wettability. Nanofibrous scaffolds can maintain an appropriately moist environment for wounds by facilitating oxygen permeation and allowing fluid accumulation, effectively protecting the wound from bacterial penetration.224–228 As such, electrospun nanofibers are promising materials for facilitating wound healing and skin regeneration. In a further work, we surgically implanted the solid tumor site of mice with UCNPs@mSiO2@fiber patches that acted as dual drug systems to fulfill, for the first time, the site-specific and high-performance simultaneous diagnosis and therapy for tumors in vivo. An interesting finding is that the antiphlogistic drug IMC in composite fibers plays an important role in suppressing inflammatory responses and helping to heal wounds in vivo, which will be reported separately by us. In addition to this, according to a study by Park et al., curcumin (Cur)-loaded poly(lactic acid) (PLA) nanofiber patches possess good in vivo wound healing capability in a mouse model. It was found that treatment with Cur-PLA nanofibers significantly increased the rate of wound closure (87%) by day 7 compared with that of PLA nanofibers (58%).224 Schneider et al. also reported that a silk nanofiber scaffold electrospun with epidermal growth factor (EGF) enhanced wound closure by 90% in an in vivo test on mice.229
4. Application of UCNP-based nanomaterials in drug delivery
In recent years, the design and fabrication of multifunctional nanomedical platforms have evoked intensive interest. The major goal is to bridge the gap between the biomaterials and clinical theranostics in order to simultaneously perform disease diagnosis and therapy within a single nanocarrier. To meet this demand, various UCNP-based nanocomposites have been exploited as a drug delivery system (DDS) for multifunctional upconversion fluorescence bioimaging, drug delivery, and monitoring of drugs by fluorescence imaging in real time.
4.1 Luminescence-monitored drug delivery system
One of the major advantages of utilizing UCNP-based composites as drug carriers is that UCNPs will enable tracking and efficiency evaluation of the drug release in real time. Our group constructed a multifunctional DDS by loading ibuprofen (IBU) into core–shell structured Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb/Er nanocomposites via a facile two-step sol–gel process. The relationship between the UC luminescence intensity of nanocomposites and the cumulative release of IBU was investigated.160 It was found that the organic groups in IBU with high vibrational frequencies (1000–3500 cm−1) could significantly quench the luminescence intensity of Er3+ to a great extent. With the increase in cumulative IBU release, more and more drug molecules were liberated from the DDS and the quenching effect was weakened, resulting in an increase in luminescence intensity.230 Thus, the drug release process could be monitored by the change in UC luminescence intensity. A similar relationship was subsequently tested and confirmed in another drug delivery system by using IBU as the model drug and applying it to nanospheres such as NaYF4:Yb/Er@SiO2@mSiO2231 and porous NaYF4:Yb/Er@silica fiber.219
As a complementary study, we recently devoted tremendous effort to doxorubicin (DOX) loaded on UCNP-based nanocarriers for multimodal bioimaging and in vivo drug delivery.169,232 In a typical example,169 we synthesized highly uniform and monodisperse β-NaYF4:Yb/Er@β-NaGdF4:Yb@mSiO2-PEG (UCNPs@mSiO2-PEG) anticancer DDSs (Fig. 10a). The T1-weighted MRI revealed the concentration-dependent brightening effect due to the presence of Gd3+ ions. An upconversion luminescence image of UCNPs@mSiO2–PEG uptaken by cells shows green emission under 980 nm infrared laser excitation (Fig. 10b). In vitro cell cytotoxicity tests on cancer cells verified that the DOX-loaded UCNPs@mSiO2–PEG showed comparable cytotoxicity with the concentration of free DOX the same as that of DOX (Fig. 10c). More importantly, in vivo antitumor efficacy indicates that nanocomposites can effectively deliver drugs into a tumor site and suppress tumor growth (Fig. 10d). In another study, we reported an anticancer DDS based on DOX-conjugated NaYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs, in which the quenching and recovery of the luminescence intensity of UCNPs can be applied to monitor the release of DOX by luminescence resonance energy transfer between UCNPs (donor) and DOX (acceptor), as shown in Fig. 11.233 This correlation between the UC luminescence intensity and the extent of the drug release can be potentially used as a probe for monitoring the drug release movement during disease therapy.
 Fig. 10  (a) TEM image and (b) in vitro T1-weighted MR and upconversion luminescence imaging of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er@β-NaGdF4:Yb@mSiO2 (UCNPs@mSiO2) nanoparticles, (c) in vitro cytotoxicity of free DOX, DOX–UCNPs@mSiO2–PEG, and pure UCNPs@mSiO2–PEG against HeLa cells after 24 h incubation and (d, e) in vivo antitumor efficacy of UNCPs@mSiO2–PEG (labeled as NPs) on an H22 cancer subcutaneous model: the photographs (d) of excised tumors from euthanized representative mice after treatment with saline solution as a control, free DOX, and DOX-NPs, respectively, and mean tumor weights (e) of each group on the last day of the experiment. Two asterisks indicate a statistically significant discrepancy (**P < 0.01). (Adapted from ref. 169, copyright 2013. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the DOX-conjugated UCNPs. (b) UC emission spectrum of NaYF4:Yb/Tm (black line) and the UV-Vis absorption spectrum of DOX (red line). (c) UC emission spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Tm (2 mg mL−1) after reaction with DOX at different concentrations. (d) UC emission intensity of DOX-conjugated NaYF4:Yb/Tm NPs is a function of the release time at pH 5.0 and 37 °C PBS buffer. (Adapted from ref. 233, copyright 2013. Elsevier B. V. Reproduced with permission.) 
4.2 Stimuli-responsive drug delivery system
In conventional DDSs, drug molecules are physically absorbed by the porous nanostructure or the hydrophobic ligands of the nanocarriers. The major drawback of these conventional DDSs is the irregular drug release, which is characterized by a burst release during the initial stage. It is well known that drug efficacy and biodistribution can be altered by the some nonspecific cells and physiological conditions. Moreover, some drug molecules cannot distinguish between diseased and healthy cells, resulting in collateral damage and undesired side effects.234,235 Spurred by these problems and challenges, a few “smart” drug delivery systems based on UCNPs have been designed to regulate the release of cargo at a desired time and in a desired site with an appropriate dosage. To achieve temporal- and dosage-controlled drug release, great efforts have been devoted to the design and fabrication of stimuli-responsive systems for drug delivery. These stimuli-responsive DDSs can respond to external triggers to control drug release from nanocarriers on demand. Hitherto, several effective strategies such as pH-response, temperature, redox reaction, and NIR-light irradiation have been extensively explored to achieve sustained drug release in a controlled manner. Tables 1–3 summarize recent works on UCNP-based stimuli-responsive drug delivery systems including NIR light-induced photolysis of “caged” compounds or photoswitching of photochromic molecules, respectively.
Table 1 A summary of recent work on UCNP-based stimuli-responsive drug delivery systems




Stimuli
Nanoparticle platform
Drug
Drug loading method
Release experiments
Ref.




pH (PAA)
NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd@PAA@SiO2
DOX
Electrostatic interaction

In vitro


173




ecc-(con-NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd@mSiO2)@PAA
DOX
Physical adsorption and electrostatic interaction

In vitro


174



GdVO4:Yb/Er@PAA
DOX
Electrostatic interaction

In vitro


193



NaYF4:Yb/Er@PAA
DOX
Electrostatic interaction

In vitro


239



NaYF4:Yb/Er@γ-AlO(OH)
DOX
Physical adsorption

In vitro


241







pH (–CONHN)
NaYF4:Yb/Tm-CONHNDOX
DOX
Covalent bonding

In vitro


233



BaGdF5:Yb/Tm@BaGdF5:Yb-CONHNDOX
DOX
Covalent bonding

In vitro


243







Thermo (PNIPAM)
NaYF4:Yb/Er@SiO2@(PNIPAM-co-PAA)
DOX
Electrostatic interaction

In vitro


251



NaYF4:Yb/Er@mSiO2@(PNIPAM-co-PAA)
DOX
Physical adsorption and electrostatic interaction

In vitro


252







Redox (GSH)
NaYF4:Yb/Er-PEI-Pt(IV)
Cisplatin
Covalent bonding

In vitro


254



NaYF4:Yb/Er-Pt(IV)-mPEG-b-PCL-b-PLL
Cisplatin
Covalent bonding

In vitro and in vivo

208



Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Yb/Er@MnO2
Congo red
Electrostatic interaction

In vitro


255







Magnetic
Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb/Er
Ibuprofen
Hydrophobic interaction and covalent bonding

In vitro


160



Fe3O4@SiO2@volid@Y2O3:Yb/Er
DOX
Physical adsorption

In vitro and in vivo

175



Fe3O4@NaYF4:Yb/Er@PS16-b-PAA10
DOX
Polymer encapsulation

In vitro and in vivo

209





Table 2 A summary of recent work on NIR light-induced photolysis of “caged” compounds




Caged compounds
Photoresponsive moieties
Nanoparticle platform
λem of UCNPs (nm)
Active component
Ref.




NB caged oligo(ethylene) glycol



NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@mSiO2
350
DOX (anticancer drug)

91



NE caged D-luciferin



NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@SiO2
350

D-luciferin

259



NBA caged folic acid



NaYF4:Yb/Tm@SiO2
360
Folic acid (phototarget) and DOX

263



Benzoin caged carboxylic acid



NaYF4:Yb/Tm
290
Carboxylic acid

264







Fe4S3 (NO)7− caged NO
Fe4S3 (NO)7−
NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4@SiO2
540
NO

265



NaYF4:Gd/Yb/Er@NaYF4-polymer disk
540
NO

266



ONB caged biomacro-molecules



NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4-hydrogel
350
Biomacromolecules

267



ONB caged block copolymer



NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4-block copolymer
350
Nile red

268



DMNPE caged siRNA



NaYF4:Yb/Tm@SiO2@mSiO2
350
siRNA

269



ONA caged cell adhesion



NaYF4:Yb/Tm
360
Cell release

270





Table 3 A summary of recent work on NIR light-induced photoswitching of photochromic molecules




Photochromic molecules
Structure transformation
Nanoparticle platform
Application
Ref.




Azobenzenes



NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@mSiO2
DOX release

93



Spiropyrans



Hollow NaYF4:Yb/Er
Enzymatic release

94



Diarylethenes



NaYF4:Yb/Er (Yb/Tm)
Reversible photoswitching

277



Diarylethenes



NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4
Reversible photoswitching

278



Diarylethenes



NaYF4:Yb/Er/Tm
Upconversion small animal imaging in vivo

279



Bis-spiropyrans



LiYF4:Yb/Tm
Reversible photoswitching

280



Azobenzene derivative (chiral molecular)



NaGdF4:Yb/Tm@NaGdF4
Reversible NIR light-directed reflection in a helical superstructure

281






4.2.1 pH-responsive drug delivery system. 
As the extracellular microenvironment of tumor tissues is more acidic than that in normal tissues and blood, pH-responsive drug delivery vehicles have been widely investigated. In particular, one important design strategy of this pH-responsive DDS is to fabricate charge-conversional systems.236–238 These charge-conversional nanocarriers are negatively charged under neutral and alkaline conditions but switch to being positively charged in a slightly acidic environment. A fascinating feature of these charge-conversional nanocarriers is that they allow for higher affinity with negatively charged cell membranes that will enhance the cellular uptake of nanocarriers. Recently, UCNPs modified with pH-responsive charge-switchable polymers such as poly(acrylic acid) (PAA)173,174,193,239 and 2,3-dimethylmaleic anhydride (DMMA)240 have been developed as controllable and effective DDSs. For example, we constructed multifunctional PAA@GdVO4:Yb/Er nanocomposites by filling PAA hydrogel into GdVO4 hollow spheres via photoinduced polymerization. Due to the nature of PAA, when the positively charged anticancer drug DOX was loaded onto the PAA@GdVO4:Yb/Er system, pH-dependent drug releasing kinetics were exhibited. A lower pH offers a faster drug release rate.193 Wang's group reported that PAA-modified NaYF4:Yb/Er (PAA-UCNPs) could serve as pH-activated drug carriers.239 When DOX was introduced into PAA-UCNPs, this PAA-UCNP nanocomposite exhibited a high encapsulation rate under weakly alkaline conditions with an increased drug dissociation rate under acidic conditions. One can ascribe the results to the intrinsic charge-conversion property of PAA and its interaction with DOX. In a neutral medium, negatively charged PAA would bind with the positively charged DOX by electrostatic interaction. When PAA was protonized to display positive zeta potential, this led to the dissociation of electrostatic interaction between PAA and DOX. Subsequently, DOX diffused from the PAA-UCNP composite. In addition, Wang and co-workers have designed and synthesized novel pH-responsive eccentric-(concentric-UCNPs@SiO2)@PAA173 and eccentric UCNPs@PAA@SiO2 nanocarriers.174 Likewise, such materials have two special characteristics: ultra high drug storage capacity and sensitive pH-responsive drug release properties.
In addition to the above mentioned organic–inorganic hybrid composites, Lu et al. recently reported a pH-activated nanocomposite constructed from mesoporous γ-AlO(OH) and UCNPs (UCNPs–Al) for drug delivery (Fig. 12a–c).241 It is noted that the UCNPs–Al nanocomposite exhibited charge-conversional behavior from alkaline to acidic medium. It was found that the release of DOX from UCNPs–Al could be controlled by varying the pH values. Under neutral conditions (pH = 7.4), the zeta potential of UCNPs–Al was negative, facilitating their electrostatical interaction with DOX molecules. Along with reducing the pH values, UCNPs–Al switched to a positive charge, resulting in the force between UCNPs–Al and DOX converting to repulsive from attractive. Then the DOX molecules were pumped out of the positively charged UCNPs–Al by repulsion. Upon changing the pH to 5, the cumulative release of DOX was three-fold larger than that at pH = 7.4 (Fig. 12c). Moreover, the charge-conversional property of DOX-loaded UCNPs–Al endowed this nanocomposite with enhanced cellular uptake and a suppressive effect on cancer cells. Therefore, it is believed that UCNP-based nanocomposites with behavior amenable to the charge-conversion theory are promising platforms to use for constructing pH-responsive DDSs for controllable drug release.
 Fig. 12  Two different pH-responsive UCNP-based drug delivery systems. (a–c) The mesoporous γ-AlO(OH) and UCNP (UCNPs–Al) system: (a) a schematic representation for the synthesis of pH-responsive UCNPs–Al; (b) the zeta potential of UCNPs–Al and UCNPs-mSiO2 as a function of pH values; and (c) delayed release of DOX from UCNPs–Al at different pH values. (d–g) the DOX-conjugated BaGdF5:Yb/Tm@BaGdF5:Yb (UCNPs) system: (d) the synthesis and DOX-conjugation process of the core–shell structured UCNPs and drug release behavior; TEM images of (e) UCNPs and (f) gelatin-modified UCNPs; and (g) cumulative DOX release from DOX-conjugated UCNPs as a function of release time at different pH values. (Adapted from ref. 241 and 243. Copyright 2013 and 2014. Elsevier B. V. and American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 
The second effective method for constructing pH-responsive DDSs is to conjugate drug molecules to the surface of nanoparticles via acid-labile linkers, and thus, the conjugated drugs can be released in a weakly acidic environment.242 We recently demonstrated a pH-triggered DDS based on DOX-conjugated UCNPs nanocomposites.171,243 For example, DOX was conjugated to the surface of BaGdF5:Yb/Tm@BaGdF5:Yb UCNPs by acid-labile hydrazone bonds (Fig. 12d–g). It was discovered that the total release amount of DOX in acidic conditions was more than ten-fold larger than that in neutral medium. This pH-triggered drug release behavior can be ascribed to the cleavage of hydrazone bonds in an acidic environment (pH = 5–5.85), which is relatively stable in a normal physiological environment. Hence, the hydrazone bond acted as a “barrier” to drug release in a normal physiological environment, decreasing the amount of DOX dissociated from the carrier prior to release in non-target spots during transportation, and reducing the side effect of any chemotherapeutics. Note that a pH-responsive controllable DDS is of practical significance for clinical cancer therapy because the microenvironment in the extracellular tissues of tumors and intracellular lysosomes and endosomes are acidic.


4.2.2 Thermo-responsive drug delivery system. 
Another type of stimuli-responsive DDS supported by thermosensitive polymers has been used for controllable drug delivery. Among smart polymers, poly(N-isopropylacrylamide) (PNIPAM) is the most extensively investigated temperature-sensitive polymer that exhibits a phase transition in aqueous solution at a lower critical solution temperature (LCST) at approximately 32 °C. Below the LCST, the polymer is expanded and soluble, whereas it is collapsed and insoluble when heated above the LCST. The thermosensitive characteristics of PNIPAm hydrogel have been utilized by integrating it with other functional species for thermo-triggered drug release.244–249 However, in some cases, controlling the process so that it gives faster drug release at higher temperature is more desirable when an increased body temperature arises from diseases such as inflammation or cancer. Currently, our group rationally designed and fabricated a bilayer thermosensitive P(PNIPAM-co-AAm) hydrogel disc in which multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and UCNPs were spatially confined in different layers of hydrogel.250 In addition, the LCST of the PNIPAM can be flexibly adjusted to near the normal body temperature (37 °C). In this system, MWCNTs functioned as an “antenna” of NIR light, converted the light to heat, and transferred it to the surrounding hydrogel. Thus, NIR light irradiation can cause shrinking of the hydrogel, allowing the drug molecules to be rapidly squeezed out. As the laser is turned off, the hydrogel will return to its equilibrium state to block the diffusion of drug molecules. In other words, the “turn on” and “turn off” phase of the drug release is cycled by manipulating the NIR laser irradiation. Therefore, this temperature-responsive hydrogel can serve as a pulsatile DDS by a remotely controllable NIR laser.
Encouraged by these promising results, we continued the studies in order to optimize this thermosensitive DDS for stimuli-responsive drug release. We designed two systems that can respond to the dual stimuli of pH and temperature. We first reported a new kind of controlled drug release system based on UCNP–polymer hybrid materials by coating NaYF4:Yb/Er with a smart hydrogel poly(N-isopropylacrylamide)-co-(methacrylic acid) [abbreviated as P(NIPAM-co-MAA)] shell.251 It was an interesting finding that the release behavior of the antitumor drug DOX in hybrid microspheres was pH-triggered and thermally sensitive. Changing the pH to mildly acidic conditions at physiological temperature deforms the structure of the polymer shell, thus leading to the rapid release of a significant amount of drug from the microspheres. In addition, the extent of drug release can be monitored by the change in upconversion emission intensity. As far as we know, this is the first report on the combination of UCNPs with stimuli-responsive polymers. Later on, as an extension of this work, we architected another novel thermo/pH dual-responsive nanocomposite in which UCNPs were encapsulated in a mesoporous silica (mSiO2) shell, and then P(NIPAM-co-MAA) polymer brushes were grafted onto the mesochannels and the outer shell of the mSiO2 to control the release of drug molecules (Fig. 13).252 At low temperature, the mesochannels were blocked with hydrogel swelling. However, at high temperatures, these mesochannels opened due to the shrinking of hydrogel, which enabled the entrapped drug molecules to diffuse out. Therefore, this nanocomposite is a promising candidate for simultaneous cancer therapy and bioimaging because of the unique architecture and optimal drug release properties at high temperature/low pH value.
 Fig. 13  (a) Synthesis route to UCNPs@mSiO2-P(NIPAM-co-MAA): (I) CTAB/TEOS; (II) methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTS), N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM), methacrylic acid (AA); (III) guest (DOX) loading; (IV) increased temperature and decreased pH values. (b) TEM images of UCNPs@mSiO2-P(NIPAM-co-MAA). Release profiles of DOX from DOX-UCNPs@mSiO2-P(NIPAM-co-MAA) nanocarriers with or without 980 nm laser irradiation at a power density of 1.22 W (c) as well as in response to temperature changes at (d) pH = 7.4 and (e) pH = 5.0. (Adapted from ref. 252. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 


4.2.3 Redox-responsive drug delivery system. 
Cisplatin (cis-dichlorodiammineplatinum(II)) has become one of the most widely used anticancer drugs; however, the use of cisplatin is also hampered due to some major problems associated with the lack of tumor specificity, severe side effects, and inherent drug resistance. To address these problems, much attention has been paid to octahedrally coordinated Pt(IV)-based counterparts as promising platinum(II) prodrugs. Pt(IV) prodrugs have good chemical inertness and redox properties as well as low cytotoxicity to normal tissues. To achieve effective antitumor treatment, Pt(IV) prodrugs need to be activated and form bioactive Pt(II) species by taking advantage of suitable triggers such as pH, the reducing environment of cancer cells, or light.253 Recently, our group reported related work on UCNP-based redox-responsive Pt(IV) prodrug delivery nanoplatforms, combining for the first time the intriguing merits of UCNPs.208,254 We first designed and developed a novel Pt(IV) prodrug that was conjugated to UCNPs for targeted drug delivery and upconversion cell imaging.254 NaYF4:Yb/Er–PEI nanoparticles were covalently conjugated with the Pt(IV) prodrug cis, cis, trans-Pt(NH3)2Cl2(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)2. These Pt(IV) prodrugs can be reduced by the intracellular reducing agent glutathione (GSH) after being internalized by cancer cells, yielding Pt(II) species that exhibit anticancer activities and bind to nuclear DNA in order to kill cancer cells. Based on this preliminary work, we continued to construct a novel multifunctional UCNP/polymer vector for cisplatin(IV) drug delivery, which can reduce the drawbacks of cisplatin, circumvent its cellular uptake pathways, and give insight as to its in vitro and in vivo fate via biomedical imaging (Fig. 14).208 A schematic illustration of the composite nanomaterials is shown in Fig. 14. A cisplatin(IV) prodrug or fluorescent molecule Rhodamine B (RhB) was conjugated to an amphiphilic tri-block copolymer mPEG-b-PCL-b-PLL to form two conjugates, which were co-assembled with UCNPs to form multifunctional core–shell structured nanoparticles (UCNPs/P-Pt/RhB). The prepared UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB can be used as a luminescent probe for up/down-conversion in vitro and for ex/in vivo imaging. The cisplatin(IV) prodrug system demonstrates anti-cancer activities by releasing toxic cisplatin in the cellular environment or in tumor-bearing animal models. Moreover, the expression levels of tumor apoptotic genes, including Survivin, Bcl-2, and Aif in cancer cells were regulated by nanoparticles to promote apoptosis. These encouraging results at the in vitro and in vivo level highlight the potential for UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB nanoparticles to be excellent carriers for biomedical imaging and cancer therapeutics.
 Fig. 14  Rational design of multifunctional upconversion nanocrystals–polymer nanocomposites for cisplatin(IV) delivery and biomedical imaging. (I) Schematic illustration of the preparation of UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB nanoparticles and possible cellular pathways for cisplatin and UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB nanoparticles. (II) TEM images of UCNPs (a), UCNPs@P (b), and UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB (c). (III) Luminescence microscopy images of HeLa cells after incubation with 200 μg ml−1 of UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB for 6 h at 37 °C. The red fluorescence arises from RhB (a), the green fluorescence arises from UCNPs (b), and the blue fluorescence arises from Hoechst 33324 dye (c). Scale bars: 20 μm. (IV) Quantitative real-time PCR analyses of Bcl-2, Survivin, and Aif mRNA levels of apoptotic genes in MCF-7 cells due to (1) blank control, (2) cisplatin(IV) prodrug, (3) cisplatin, (4) UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB exposure for 24 h (n = 3). *P < 0.05. (Adapted from ref. 208. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
Apart from the chemical reduction method, light also is an effective trigger to activate Pt(IV) to release cytotoxic Pt(II) components. In particular, UCNP-based nanomaterials as convertors were applied to the remotely controlled photoactivation of antitumor platinum prodrugs, which will be discussed in the following section.
In addition, Zhu et al. reported the novel drug carrier Fe3O4@SiO2/NaYF4:Yb/Er@MnO2, in which MnO2 nanosheets served as drug carriers for the loading of the model Congo red (CR) and UC luminescence quenchers. The drug can be released by introducing GSH, which reduces MnO2 to Mn2+, and the drugs can be released at tumor cells accompanied with the “turn on” of UC luminescence.255


4.2.4 NIR light-triggered drug delivery system. 
Light-triggered drug delivery platforms have emerged as an elegant and non-invasive tool for remote spatiotemporal control of drug payload release at the desired site and time because light can be easily tuned (wavelength, power intensity, and irradiation time) and focused (preventing damage to healthy tissues). This control is considered crucial to boost local effective drug accumulation while minimizing side effects, therefore resulting in improved therapeutic efficacy.256–258 However, most of the existing light-triggered drug carriers require high energy UV/visible light to activate the photosensitive component. Thus, the associated cellular photodamage and poor tissue penetration depth are inevitable, and this limits their practical biomedical applications in living systems. Alternatively, multiphoton photoactivation with longer-wavelength excitation is a potential solution to this problem due to the minimal damage and deeper tissue penetration, but the multiphoton photoreactions generally require an expensive and higher intensity pulsed laser and have low conversion efficiency owing to narrow absorption cross-sections of the chromophores.259 Moreover, not all photoresponsive molecules have suitable multi-photon absorption efficiencies.257 To surmount these problems, Ln3+-doped UCNPs offer an excellent choice for this task due to their ability to penetrate deeply into living tissues without causing phototoxic effects. Such a unique and amazing luminescence property allows UCNPs to serve as a powerful NIR-induced mediator (or antenna) to drive the photoreactions of light-sensitive compounds anchored to their surface. Hence, introducing UCNPs into light-triggered DDSs may provide practical applications for the remote-controlled release of payload molecules using an NIR laser as the excitation source. The approaches can be classified into four broad categories: (i) NIR light-induced photolysis of photoactivatable or “caged” molecules; (ii) NIR light-induced photoswitching of molecules between two structurally and electronically different isomers; (iii) NIR light-triggered redox reaction of photoactivated prodrug molecules; and (iv) NIR light-triggered photodynamic therapy (PDT). This will be elaborated below.
(i) NIR light-induced photolysis of photoactivatable or “caged” molecules for chemotherapy. 
A typical photocage consists of a caged molecule rendered biologically inert by a photolabile protecting group. Under light irradiation of the appropriate wavelength, the caged group is liberated by photolysis and the molecule is then restored to its active form.260–263Scheme 2 shows the general photodecaging process of a bioactive substance.260 This special property of photosensitive compounds has been harnessed to realize the readily controllable release of payload molecules. Recently, major breakthroughs have been successfully achieved to uncage photocaged molecules such as D-luciferin,259 carboxylic acid,264 NO,265,266 biomolecules,267 block copolymer,268 siRNA,269 and cell adhesion molecules270 by UV/visible emission of UCNPs. In a typical example, the Ford group demonstrated the feasibility of the NIR-triggered release of caged nitric oxide (NO) using UCNPs with two different strategies,265,266 given that the endogenous mammalian bioregulator NO plays an important role in suppressing tumor growth and immune response.271,272 In a prior work, Ford et al. prepared silica-coated NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4 UCNPs with core–shell structures, which were further functionalized to attract the NO precursor Roussin's black salt anion Fe4S3(NO)7− (RBS) by electrostatic interaction.265 Then, NIR-to-visible upconversion of UCPs can trigger photochemical NO release from RBS due to spectrum overlap between the absorption of RBS and the emission at 550 nm of UCNPs. In a follow-up study, the same group reported another innovative design for the phototherapeutic release of NO.266 The new materials consist of poly(dimethylsiloxane) composites with UCNPs that are cast into a biocompatible polymer disk (PD). These PDs are then impregnated with the photochemical nitric oxide precursor RBS to give UCNP-RBS-PD devices. When irradiated with 980 nm NIR light through filters composed of porcine tissue, physiologically relevant NO concentrations were released from the UCNP-RBS-PD, thus demonstrating the potential of such devices for minimally invasive phototherapeutic applications.
 Scheme 2  General photodecaging process: the caged molecule is bound to the photocage by covalent bonds, and light excitation of the photocage cleaves the covalent bonds so that the caged molecule is liberated in its active form. (Adapted from ref. 260, copyright 2012. Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.) 
Simultaneously, several research groups demonstrated the rational design and fabrication of UCNP-based DDSs for photo-triggered payload release and bioimaging, and gained inspiring results in vitro and in vivo.91–93,263,273 For instance, Liu and co-workers presented a specific crosslinked mesoporous silica-coated upconversion nanoparticle NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 as a nanocarrier for photo-responsive drug delivery.91 In this work, photoactivatable o-nitrobenzyl derivatives as the linker capped the pore mouths of mesoporous silica. Then, the antitumor drug DOX was encapsulated into the mesopores of the photocaged nanocarrier. Because of the spectrum overlap between the absorption band of photocaged DOX nanoconjugate and the upconverted UV emission band of the UCNPs, irradiation with NIR light triggered the cleavage of the caged group, inducing a precisely controlled drug release from the nanocarriers. This novel and effective drug-loaded photocaged nanocarrier may demonstrate new possibilities for selective cell imaging and controlled drug release in living systems with less photo-damage and deeper light penetration. Unfortunately, this study is only at the cellular level stage, and the efficacy of photo-regulated drug delivery in vivo has not been explored. In this context, photo-regulated drug release in living animals was demonstrated by the Li group.92 They designed novel yolk–shell structured nanocomposites (denoted as YSUCNPs, with NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaLuF4 as the yolk center) as a phototrigger-controlled DDS, as shown in Fig. 15. This unique design has two advantages. On the one hand, the hollow cavities can endow the material with a huge loading capacity for prodrug molecules for a sustainable release pattern. On the other hand, the mesoporous silica shell could avoid undesired premature release in living tissue by preventing contact between the adsorbed prodrug molecules. The anticancer drug chlorambucil was linked to the hydrophobized phototrigger of an amino-coumarin derivative (ACCh) and then loaded into the YSUCNPs. Under NIR excitation, the upconversion UV emission emitted by the UCNPs can effectively drive the cleavage of the amino-coumarin phototrigger moiety, resulting in the uncaging and releasing of the chlorambucil from YSUCNPs. The degraded phototrigger molecules were completely retained within the YSUCNPs due to their high hydrophobicity. The in vitro drug release behavior indicated that the release dosage could be well tuned by remote control of the on-off pattern of the 980 nm NIR laser, and even zero premature release can be achieved under physiological conditions. Moreover, photo-regulated drug release in animal models was successfully carried out for the first time. The results indicated that this YSUCNPs-ACCh nanocomposite can effectively release an anticancer drug into tumor cells upon NIR irradiation, and hence promote inhibitory drug action to decrease the growth rate of tumors and prolong the survival time of mice. This work will illuminate the bright prospects for phototriggered DDSs in practical biomedicine applications. Another striking example was reported by Yeh and co-workers,263 who formulated a stimuli-responsive actively targeted DDS using UCNPs as NIR light-triggered targeting and drug delivery vehicles (Fig. 16). FA was caged using a photolabile protecting molecule and conjugated on UCNPs in order to improve phototargeting selectivity. Upon NIR light irradiation, the emitted UV light from the UCNPs photocleaved the caged group, activated FA, and then allowed FA-modified UCNPs to target cancer cells. Moreover, to achieve the chemotherapeutic effect, DOX was thiolated to the surface of UCNPs via a disulfide bond, which can be cleaved by the lysosomal enzymes within cancer cells. The results of in vivo imaging and therapeutic efficacy tests demonstrated highly selective targeting behaviors in a controlled manner. This stimuli-responsive, actively targeting DDS may be a new paradigm for increasing the local effective therapeutic concentration of drugs and minimizing adverse side effects from chemotherapy, which will subsequently enhance the therapeutic efficacy. Table 2 summarizes recent works on NIR light-induced photolysis of “caged” compounds.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the NIR-regulated, UCNP-based DDS YSUCNPs. (b) The photolysis of the prodrug under NIR emission from the YSUCNPs. (c) Photo-regulated release of the drug from YSUCNP-ACCh controlled by a 980 nm laser. (d) Survival rate in mice intratumorally injected with different solutions on the 1st day and on the 9th day. (Adapted from ref. 92. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
 Fig. 16  (a) Illustration of photocaged UCNPs following NIR laser activation to remove the cage molecules and subsequent targeting of cancer cells. (b) Time course upconversion NIR luminescence (emission 800 nm) images of caged folate-PEGylated UCNPs@SiO2–DOX nanoparticles without NIR laser irradiation. Insets show the enlarged tumor region. (c) Ex vivo DOX fluorescence (emission 580 nm) images of dissected organs and tumors from the group of laser-treated caged folate-PEGylated UCNPs@SiO2–DOX nanoparticles of (b). (d) Tumor growth suppression monitored in terms of tumor volume changes. Error bars are based on five mice per group (n = 5). **P < 0.01 calculated and compared to caged folate-PEGylated UCNPs@SiO2–DOX (without laser irradiation). (Adapted from ref. 263. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 
(ii) NIR light-induced photoswitching of molecules between two structurally and electronically different isomers. 
In addition to photocaged compounds, some photochromic compounds can undergo a reversible change in their molecular structure or conformation upon exposure to light with different excitation wavelengths accompanied with variation in the absorption spectrum of the compounds.274,275 In this context, photochromic compounds can be utilized for photocontrolled drug delivery. One of the most spectacular studies in this area was performed by the Tanaka group in 2003 with the use of photosensitive coumarin derivatives that are attached to the pore outlets of MCM-41.276 Under exposure to UV light (>310 nm), coumarins undergo dimerization, which leads to the sealing of the pore openings, effectively preventing guest molecule release from the mesoporous silica. In turn, coumarin dimers disintegrate, which opens up pore mouths to initiate the controlled release of the enclosed active compounds with UV light irradiation of 250 nm. As far as we know, this is the first study that used mesoporous silica for efficient and reversible photocontrol over guest molecules. Due to the shortcomings of UV or visible light, NIR light has become a good choice to trigger the photochemical reaction of photoswitches. The main families of organic photochromic compounds whose absorption can overlap with UV or visible emission-generated UCNPs include coumarin, azobenzenes, spiropyrans, and dithienylethene. For instance, Branda et al. employed core–shell–shell UCNPs to reversibly toggle dithienylethene (DTE) photoresponsive molecules between their two isomers in a “remote-control” fashion by modulating merely the intensity of the 980 nm excitation light.277,278 By virtue of the property of DTE, Li et al. further reported the creation of photoswitchable upconversion nanophosphors for small animal UCL imaging in vivo based on NaYF4:Yb/Er/Tm and DTE trapped in one nanosystem using a BSA-graft-dextran copolymer as a shell.279 Capobianco et al. reported the photoswitching of bis-spiropyran (BSP) by directly anchoring BSP into the surface of LiYF4:Yb/Tm UCNPs, in which fluorescence resonance energy transfer from NIR-to-UV UCNPs to BSP can drive the reversible interconversion of BSP molecules from the ring-closed bis-spiropyran form to the ring-open bis-merocyanine form upon NIR excitation.280 More recently, an unprecedented and new reversible 980 nm NIR light-driven reflection in a self-organized helical superstructure loaded with UCNPs only by modulating the power density of a 980 nm laser was reported by Yan and co-workers.281
These successful investigations provide the possibility for NIR photocontrolled drug delivery utilizing UCNP-based nanocomposites through reversible transformation in the molecular structure of photochromic compounds. For instance, the UV-visible reversible photoisomerization of the azobenzene group (and its derivatives) enables photoregulated control of drug release.89 Following this concept, Shi et al. reported a novel NIR light-triggered anticancer carrier based on mSiO2-coated NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4 UCNPs (Fig. 17).93 Photoactive azobenzene (azo) groups were installed into the mesopores of the SiO2 layer. Upon NIR laser irradiation, the UV (350 nm) and visible (450 nm) light emitted by the UCNPs caused reversible trans–cis photoisomerization of the azo molecules in the mesopores, creating a continuous rotation-inversion movement to trigger the release of chemotherapeutic molecules. This wagging motion of azo molecules can work as an “impeller” to trigger drug release in a controllable fashion. In vitro drug release behavior of this smart DDS indicated that the amount of released anticancer drug can be well regulated by varying the intensity and time duration of NIR exposure, thus realizing precise NIR light-controlled drug release. Another strategy for obtaining nanoparticles with photoswitchable drug release capability is to take advantage of visible upconversion emission light from NaYF4:Yb/Er hollow spheres to trigger isomerization between ring-closed spiropyran and ring-opened merocyanine, which was recently reported by the Qu group.68Table 3 summarizes recent work on NIR light-induced photoswitching of photochromic molecules.
 Fig. 17  (a) Synthesis procedure for upconverting nanoparticles coated with a mesoporous silica outer layer. (b) NIR light-triggered DOX release by making use of the upconversion property of UCNPs and trans–cis photoisomerization of azo molecules grafted in the mesopore network of a mesoporous silica layer. (c) Drug release in PBS under NIR light irradiation and dark conditions, alternatively. Every duration of NIR irradiation is 1 h. (d) Flow cytometry histograms under excitation of 488 nm laser light show the DOX fluorescence intensity in HeLa cell nuclei separated from the whole cell after treatment with NIR light exposure for different times. (e) Inhibition of HeLa cell growth under different conditions. The concentration of the MSN materials was 1 mg mL−1, and the NIR light exposure intensity was 2.4 W cm−2. (Adapted from ref. 93. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
(iii) NIR light-triggered photoactivation of platinum(IV) antitumor prodrugs. 
As discussed in Section 4.2.3, the usage of Pt(IV) prodrugs with good chemical inertness, redox properties, and low cytotoxicity for normal tissues is a good solution to overcome the disadvantages of Pt(II). Apart from the chemical reduction method, light also is an effective trigger to photoactivate Pt(IV) to release cytotoxic Pt(II) components.282,283 Considering the intrinsic hurdles of UV, Xing et al. and our group independently developed a new and customizable NIR light-mediated drug delivery nanoplatform by combining a Pt(IV) antitumor prodrug with Yb/Tm co-doped UCNPs for remote control of prodrug activation.95,96 In one report, we developed a multifunctional nanomedicine system using UCNP–DPP–PEG that combines cancer diagnosis and therapy together (Fig. 18).95 The core–shell structured NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaGdF4/Yb UCNPs were used as the drug carriers. The dicarboxyl light-activated platinum(IV) pro-drugs trans,trans,trans-[Pt(N3)2–(NH3)(py)(O2CCH2CH2COOH)2] (DPP) were conjugated to the surface of the UCNPs followed by further PEG modification to obtain UCNP–DPP–PEG. This study is novel because firstly, it provides a novel strategy that uses NIR-to-UV UCNPs to activate the platinum pro-drug for the first time. The UCNPs can absorb NIR light and convert it into UV light to activate the pro-drug to a platinum(II) drug that will kill the cancer cells. Most importantly, the pro-drug conjugated nanoparticles under 980 nm NIR light exhibit higher in vivo antitumor efficacy than those under UV light. This NIR-to-UV strategy can serve as a new way to utilize UV light to treat cancer in deep tissue. Secondly, UCL/MR/CT tri-modality imaging has been realized in one nanomedical system, which integrates the advantages of different imaging modality techniques to avoid the shortcomings of a single imaging modality. Therefore, this multifunctional nanocomposite can be used as a multi-modality bioimaging contrast agent and transducer by converting NIR light into UV light for the control of drug activity in practical cancer therapy. At approximately the same time as our novel study, Xing et al. conjugated both the photoactivatable Pt(IV) prodrug trans, trans, trans-[Pt(N3)2(OH)(O2CCH2CH2CO2H)(py)2] and a caspase imaging peptide with a flanking activatable fluorescence resonance energy transfer pair consisting of a far-red fluorescence donor (Cy5) and a NIR quencher (Qsy21) to the surface of UCNPs@SiO2 (Fig. 19).96 Upon NIR light irradiation, the converted UV emission from UCNPs@SiO2 locally activated the Pt(IV) prodrug and thus efficiently induced potent antitumor cytotoxicity in both cisplatin-sensitive and -resistant tumor cells. Moreover, such NIR light-controlled tumor inactivation triggered cellular apoptosis. The function of the highly activated caspase is to cleave the NIR imaging peptide probe from the nanoparticle surface, thus greatly turning on the quenched NIR fluorescence of Cy5 so that real-time imaging of apoptosis in living cells by activated cytotoxicity can be monitored.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the characterization of UCNP–DPP–PEG nanoparticles. (b) Absorption spectrum of DPP (blue line), emission spectra of pure UCNPs (black line), and DPP-conjugated UCNPs (red line) under 980 nm laser. (c) Absorption spectra of UCNP–DPP–PEG as a function of time under 980 nm laser irradiation. (d) in vivo tumor volume changes of Balb/c mice in different groups after various treatments: 980 nm laser irradiation for 30 min (2.5 W cm−2, 5 min break after 5 min irradiation), UV (365 nm) irradiation for 30 min, or without any irradiation. (e) In vivo UCL/MR/CT trimodality imaging of a tumor-bearing Balb/c mouse after injection of nanoparticles at the tumor site. (Adapted from ref. 95. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 
 Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of NIR light activation of a platinum(IV) prodrug and intracellular apoptosis imaging through UCNPs. (Adapted from ref. 96. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
(iv) NIR light-triggered photodynamic therapy (PDT). 
PDT is a special light-triggered DDS, which is emerging as a non-invasive therapeutic modality for the local treatment of diseases. A typical PDT system involves three key components: the photosensitizer (PS) molecules, appropriate excitation light, and oxygen within the tissue at the disease site. Upon excitation by the light with the appropriate wavelength, PS molecules are activated in the presence of oxygen, producing singlet oxygen (1O2) or cytotoxic reactive oxygen species (ROS) to kill the nearby abnormal cells with little or no effect on the surrounding tissues. Over the past decades, PDT techniques have been proven to be a viable treatment option for early stage cancer and an adjuvant for surgery in late-stage cancer. However, a major challenge of this treatment methodology in clinical applications is the limited tissue penetration of the light needed for its activation, resulting in ineffective therapeutic efficacy when treating large and deep-seated tumors. Alternatively, UCNPs capable of converting NIR light into UV-visible light provide a potential strategy to compensate for the defects of current PDT. Moreover, fruitful emission properties of UCNPs provide an additional benefit to simultaneously excite two or more types of PSs in a single platform under a single excitation wavelength. Following this concept, UCNPs open a new way to utilize the PS upon NIR irradiation. Recently, the use of UCNPs for PDT treatment has attracted considerable interest due to the greater penetration depths of NIR light in biological tissues.284–290Table 4 summarizes recent studies on UCNP-based photodynamic therapy.
Table 4 A summary of recent work on UCNP-based PDT systems




UCNPs
Surface structure or ligand
PS (Absmax)
Incorporated PS to UCNPs
Targeting agent
Ref.




NaYF4:Yb/Er
mSiO2
ZnPc (672 nm)
Silica encapsulation
—

163



NaYF4:Yb/Er
PAH-DMMA-PEG
Ce6 (663 nm)
Electrostatic adsorption
—

240



NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4
NGO-PEG
ZnPc (672 nm)
Hydrophobic interaction
—

286



NaYbF4:Gd/Tm@NaGdF4
Tween 20
Hypocrellin A (470 nm)
Hydrophobic interaction
—

287



NaYF4:Yb/Er
Chitosan
ZnPc (672 nm)
Hydrophobic interaction
FA

288



NaGdF4:Yb/Er
BSA
RB (550 nm)
Hydrophobic interaction
—

289



NaYF4:Yb/Er
Pores
MB (663 nm)
Physical adsorption
—

290



NaYF4:Yb/Er
SiO2
MC540 (555 nm)
Silica encapsulation
Antibody

291



NaYF4:Yb/Er
mSiO2

MC540 (555 nm)
ZnPc (672 nm)

Silica encapsulation
FA

294



NaYF4:Yb/Er
C18PMH-PEG
Ce6 (663 nm)
Hydrophobic interaction
—

295



NaYF4:Yb/Er

O–Carboxymethylated chitosan
PPa (668 nm)
Covalent bonding
c(RGDyK)

296



NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4:Yb/Tm
PAAM
C60MA
Covalent bonding
FA

297



NaYF4:Yb/Er
AEP
RB (550 nm)
Covalent bonding
FA

298



NaYF4:Yb/Er
Poly(allylamine)
ZnPc (660 nm)
Covalent bonding
FA

299



NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4
PEG–phospholipids
Ce6 (663 nm)
Hydrophobic interaction and covalent bonding
—

300



NaYF4:Yb/Gd/Tm
APBA and HAC60
HAC60 (475, 650 nm)
Covalent bonding
APBA and HA

309





For the first time, Zhang et al. demonstrated UCNP-based PDT treatment by incorporating merocyanine 540 (MC540) photosensitizing dye into a NaYF4:Yb/Er@SiO2 nanocomposite.291 To further improve the therapeutic efficiency, these NPs were functionalized with a tumor-targeting antibody, which exhibited primary PDT effects on MCF-7/AZ cancer cells after 45 min of irradiation. However, the efficiency of PDT was still low because the non-porous SiO2 layer interfered with the release of generated ROS. In further studies, some novel nanostructures were designed in an attempt to more efficiently release the ROS from the nanocarriers. Zhang and co-workers reported core–shell structured NaYF4:Yb/Er@SiO2@mSiO2 nanospheres with zinc phthalocyanine (ZnPc) PS loaded into the mesoporous silica shell.163 They discovered that the ZnPc molecules were retained in the porous silica shell while they continuously produced 1O2 under the irradiation of an NIR laser. In vivo PDT treatment on MB49 bladder cancer cells demonstrated that the generated ROS can be easily released to kill the cancer cells. Subsequently, other groups developed UCNP–mSiO2 structured nanocomposites for NIR light-triggered PDT that produced inspiring in vitro cancer killing results.292,293 More recently, by incorporating two types of PS molecules into a single nanoplatform, Zhang's group extended their studies to in vivo tumor-targeted PDT treatment in small animals (Fig. 20).294 Two different PSs, ZnPc, and MC540 were simultaneously activated by the two UC emission peaks of NaYF4:Yb/Er under a single excitation wavelength, fully utilizing the upconverted energy to maximize the PDT efficiency. Compared with the single-PS loaded PDT system, this dual-PS loaded approach demonstrated a greater PDT efficacy due to the enhanced generation of 1O2 after NIR light irradiation. Importantly, ZnPc/MC540 co-loaded UCNPs were further modified with cancer-specific targeting agents and intravenously injected into tumor-bearing mice. In vivo targeted PDT treatment of melanoma tumors resulted in significant tumor regression. This work presented the first proof-of-concept for PS-loaded UCNPs to be used for actively targeted PDT treatment of tumors in vivo. In addition to this silica encapsulation approach, Liu's group developed a non-covalent physical adsorption strategy to upload PS molecules onto UCNPs.295 Chlorine6 (Ce6), a PS molecule, was incorporated onto PEGlated UCNPs through hydrophobic interaction, yielding a UCNPs–Ce6 nanocomplex as a PDT agent. Upon intratumoral injection of UCNPs–Ce6 and exposure to NIR light in a mouse model, excellent tumor destruction was achieved. Very recently, this group for the first time realized pH-responsive PDT cancer treatment by loading double-layered Ce6 and charge-reversible polymer onto NaYF4:Yb/Er/Mn UCNPs via a layer-by-layer self-assembly process.240 At pH 6.8, the charge-reversible nanocomplex showed remarkably increased in vitro intracellular uptake due to its interaction with negatively charged cell membranes. Enhanced PDT cancer-killing efficacy was observed in both in vitro and in vivo experiments due to the slightly acidic tumor microenvironment.
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of mesoporous-silica-coated UCNs co-loaded with ZnPc and MC540 photosensitizers for PDT. (b) Schematic diagram showing UCN-based targeted PDT in a mouse model of melanoma intravenously injected with UCNs that were surface-modified with folic acid (FA) and PEG moieties. (c) Representative photos of a mouse from each group (1–3) intravenously injected with FA–PEG–UCNs, unmodified UCNs, or PBS showing the change in tumor size (highlighted by dashed white circles) before and after PDT treatment. Scale bars: 10 mm. (Adapted from ref. 294. Copyright 2012, Highwire Press PNAS. Reproduced with permission.) 
However, the generally used physical encapsulation and adsorption methods suffer from premature leakage or desorption of PS molecules from the nanocarriers during circulation in the blood, which can lead to reduced PDT efficiency and unwanted side effects.296,297 Alternatively, covalent coupling of PS molecules onto the UCNPs should be a good choice to eliminate these defects, as well as improve energy transfer (ET) efficiency between PS and UCNPs. Zhang et al. demonstrated a covalent bonding strategy to link the Rose Bengal (RB),297 monomalonic fullerene (C60MA),298 or ZnPc299 PS molecules onto UCNPs. In another study, Hyeon and co-workers synthesized a unique theranostic agent by attaching Ce6 molecules to UCNPs via both physical adsorption and chemical conjugation for bimodal imaging and PDT.300 The above mentioned covalent conjugation strategy effectively reduced the leakage of PS molecules and simultaneously improved the ET efficiency from PS to UCNPs. Nevertheless, the limited drug loading capacity in this method is a significant limitation for in vivo PDT treatment.
Here, it should be pointed out that one important advantage of using NIR light to trigger PDT in UCNP-based systems is its higher penetration depth. There are several studies that explored the imaging penetration depth that UCNPs can reach and their advantage in photodynamic therapy. Li et al. reported that high-contrast UCL whole-body imaging of a black mouse with a penetration depth of approximately 2 cm was achieved using sub-10 nm β-NaLuF4:Gd/Yb/Tm nanocrystals as a UCL probe.40 Prasad and Han also demonstrated high-contrast UCL imaging of deep tissues by using a NIRin–NIRout (980–800 nm) α-NaYbF4:Tm–CaF2 core–shell nanoparticle-loaded synthetic fibrous mesh wrapped around rat femoral bone and a cuvette containing a nanoparticle aqueous dispersion covered with a 3.2 cm-thick animal tissue (pork).301 Additionally, Liu compared the tissue penetration abilities between 980 nm NIR light-induced, UCNP-based PDT and traditional visible light (660 nm)-triggered PDT by blocking irradiated subjects using pork tissues of different thicknesses.295 It was found that although the 1O2 generation efficiency of the NIR-induced PDT using UCNPs–Ce6 was much lower than the direct exposure of Ce6 to the 660 nm light, 1O2 formation by the free Ce6 sample was dramatically reduced by approximately 80% if the 660 nm light was blocked by a 3 mm-thick pork tissue and was completely eliminated when the light was blocked by 8 mm-thick pork tissue. In contrast, the 1O2 generation decreased by approximately 5% and 50% when 980 nm light was blocked by 3 mm- and 8 mm-thick tissue, respectively. In vivo experiments further confirmed that NIR-induced PDT exhibits greatly increased tissue penetration depth relative to the traditional visible light-excited PDT, offering significantly improved treatment efficacy for tumors blocked by thick biological tissues. These outcomes highlight the promise of UCNPs for in vivo bioimaging and cancer treatment.

4.3 Targeted drug delivery system
After overcoming the problems related to controllable drug release by using the stimuli-responsive strategy, another key challenge for enhancing disease therapy is the precise release of the therapeutic agents at specific sites. An effective method to accomplish this goal is to develop targeted drug delivery systems to improve the therapeutic index of drug molecules and minimize the toxic side effects on healthy cells and tissues. At present, tremendous effort has been dedicated to the fabrication of targeted DDSs that will achieve site-specific drug delivery with elevated local dosages. The existing targeted DDSs can be divided into two categories: (i) specific molecule-targeted drug delivery vehicles that operate by covalently conjugating UCNP-based nanocarriers with specific biomolecules, and (ii) magnetic field-guided targeting of drug release.

4.3.1 Specific biomolecule-targeted drug delivery system. 
Target-specific recognition is the most popular method to construct targeted DDSs by modifying drug delivery vehicles with specific ligands or biomolecules (e.g. FA, antibodies, RGD peptide, TAT peptide, and aptamers). These acceptor-labeled nanocarriers can specifically recognize the receptor on the surface of target cells. Thus, site-specific drug release can be realized through a receptor-mediated endocytotic pathway. Folic acid (FA) has emerged as an attractive agent for targeted anticancer drug release because folate receptors (FR) are overexpressed in a large variety of human cancer cells but absent in normal cells, including cancers of the ovary, lung, breast, kidney, brain, endometrium, and colon.302–304 FA possesses high stability, low cost, non-immunogenicity, capability to be conjugated with a wide variety of molecules or nanoparticles, and high affinity to FR even after conjugation to therapeutic/diagnostic cargo. Combined with the advantages of UCNPs, FA-coupled UCNPs have been widely investigated for simultaneous diagnosis and therapy.170,195,200,204,305,306 For instance, we recently conjugated FA to the surface of NaYF4:Yb/Er hollow nanospheres as anticancer drug carriers. After FA-modified composites were incubated with HeLa cells, a significant suppressive effect on cancer cells as well as an increased luminescence signal arising from UCNPs could be observed. Gu and co-workers constructed FA-chitosan-coated UCNPs (FASOC-UCNPs) as carriers for in vivo targeted deep-tissue imaging and photodynamic therapy.288 A hydrophobic photosensitizer, ZnPc, was loaded into the hydrophobic layer of FASOC-UCNPs by physical encapsulation. Furthermore, a NIR fluorescent dye, ICG-Der-01, was also encapsulated in the FASOC-UCNPs to track their in vivo biodistribution and targeting and imaging capacity. Both the in vitro and in vivo results indicated that these FA-modified nanocarriers could be selectively accumulated in FR-overexpressed tumor cells by FR-mediated active targeting, resulting in enhanced NIR fluorescence at the tumor site and remarkable therapeutic efficacy over traditional PDT (Fig. 21).
 Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the FASOC-UCNP-ZnPc nanoconstruct and folate-mediated binding of tumor cells with folate receptor expression; (b, c) In vivo tumor targeting of the nanoconstructs. (b) Fluorescence images of nude mice bearing Bel-7402 tumors with intravenously injected with FASOC-UCNP-ICG; (c) fluorescence images of isolated organs separated from Bel-7402 tumor-bearing mice in different groups at 24 h postinjection. (d) Comparison of the therapeutic efficacy of deep-tissue PDT triggered by 980 and 660 nm light illustrating the tumor growth in mice from different treatment groups within 15 days. (Adapted from ref. 288. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 
In addition to FA molecules, a nuclear localizing signal peptide (TAT) has been proven to be a promising specific agent for nuclear-targeted translocation. The TAT peptide can be recognized by nuclear pore complexes, leading to the active nuclear entry of cargos. For instance, Shi and co-workers synthesized TAT-conjugated mSiO2 for nuclear-targeted drug delivery.307 It was found that TAT-modified nanocarriers with smaller particle size could efficiently target the nucleus and deliver active DOX into the targeted nucleus, inducing apoptosis of cancer cells with higher efficiencies. Following this study, the same group developed TAT-conjugated NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4–PEG (UCNPs–PEG/TAT) to function in active nuclear-targeted theranostics.308 It was observed that DOX-loaded UCNP–PEG/TAT could easily migrate into HeLa cells for direct nuclear drug delivery because the TAT protein was effective in the nuclear translocation of recombinant fusion proteins, resulting in enhanced cancer cell-killing activity (Fig. 22a). In vitro confocal microscopy was used to observe HeLa cells incubated without and with TAT for 24 h. In the presence of TAT, clearly stronger fluorescent emissions from both UCNPs and DOX emanated mostly from nuclei, indicating the effective internalization of the NPs into the cell nuclei compared to DOX–UCNP–PEG (without TAT) (Fig. 22b).
 Fig. 22  Two kinds of specific biomolecule-targeted drug delivery systems. (I) Nuclear targeting. (a) Schematic illustration of the nuclear-targeting of a UCNP-based theranostic system for nuclear imaging and direct intranuclear anticancer drug delivery. (b) In vitro confocal observations of UCNPs and DOX in HeLa cells incubated with DOX–UCNPs–PEG (without TAT) and DOX–UCNPs–PEG/TAT for 24 h. The blue fluorescence is from DAPI used to stain the nuclei. The green and red fluorescence is from UCNPs under 980 nm laser excitation, while DOX emits red fluorescence under 488 nm laser excitation. Without TAT, UCNPs can be found within the cytoplasm but not in the nucleus, and DOX accumulates mostly within the cytoplasm with negligible DOX fluorescence within the nuclei. In contrast, in the presence of TAT, the stronger fluorescent emissions from both UCNPs and DOX can be found mostly from the nuclei, indicating the effective internalization of the NPs into the cell nucleus. Scale bar: 20 mm. (II) Aptamer targeting: (c) Engineering of a targeted photodynamic therapy nanoplatform using an aptamer-guided G-quadruplex DNA carrier and 980-nm NIR irradiation. Flow cytometry histograms to monitor the binding of the G4-aptamer and UCNP-G4-aptamer with (d) CEM cells and (e) Ramos cells, respectively, demonstrating that the UCNP-G4-aptamer has high selectivity and targeting specificity toward CEM cells but shows little affinity to nontarget Ramos cells. (Adapted from ref. 308 and 312. Copyright 2012 and 2013, and Elsevier B. V. and Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.) 
As mentioned above, this nuclear-targeted DDS may provide new insight into targeted cancer therapy and diagnosis. However, in such a nuclear-targeted theranostic system, the size of TAT-bonded NPs is a critical factor in intra-nuclear translocation. In particular, the size of the NPs should be smaller than that of nuclear pore complexes to ensure that the NPs can step across the nuclear pore. In addition, Yan et al. demonstrated the design and fabrication of a dual-targeting upconversion nanoplatform for two-color fluorescence image-guided PDT. The nanoplatform was prepared from 3-aminophenylboronic acid (APBA) functionalized upconversion nanocrystals (APBA-UCNPs) and hyaluronated fullerene (HAC60) via a specific diol-borate condensation. The two specific ligands of APBA and hyaluronic acid (HA) provide synergistic targeting effects, high targeting ability, and hence a dramatically elevated uptake of the nanoplatform by cancer cells. The high yield of 1O2 due to multiplexed Förster resonance energy transfer between APBA-UCNPs (donor) and HAC60 (acceptor) allows effective therapy. The present nanoplatform shows great potential for highly selective, tumor-targeted, image-guided PDT.309
In addition to FA and TAT, in recent years, aptamers consisting of single-stranded oligonucleotides have also become an important class of targeted biomolecules for drug delivery and cancer treatment, which originates from their amenable properties including flexible design, synthesis accessibility, easy modification, chemical stability, and rapid tissue penetration.310,311 Very recently, Tan et al. developed a specific aptamer-guided G-quadruplex DNA nanoplatform for targeted upconversion bioimaging and PDT, in which the G4-aptamer is bioconjugated to NaLuF4:Gd/Yb/Er UCNPs and then intercalated by the photosensitizer TMPyP4 within the G4-aptamer structure, allowing the occurrence of energy transfer from UCNPs to TMPyP4 (Fig. 22c). In this case, once the nanoplatform is delivered into cancer cells, the emitted visible light produced by UCNPs can activate TMPyP4 to generate sufficient ROS to efficiently kill cancer cells. Flow cytometry histograms clearly demonstrate that the UCNP-G4-aptamer has high selectivity and targeting specificity toward CEM cells but shows little affinity to target Ramos (human Burkitt's lymphoma) cells (Fig. 22d and e). This design has the capability of selective recognition and imaging of cancer cells, controllable and effective activation of the photosensitizer, and increased therapeutic effect.312


4.3.2 Magnetic targeted drug delivery system. 
In addition to specific biomolecular targeting, magnetic-field-guided drug delivery is proposed to be a more convenient and attractive strategy for delivering payload molecules to the area of interest. Superparamagnetic iron oxide (Fe3O4) is one of the most promising targeting agents due to its prominent advantages of being responsive, biocompatible, and biodegradable.211,313–316 Following these features, considerable interest has been focused on the synthesis of magneto-optical multifunctional nanoplatforms by integrating Fe3O4 and UCNPs into a single nanocarrier for simultaneous diagnosis and therapeutic purposes. The major design strategies are to encapsulate these two moieties into the block copolymer or construct a core–shell structure. For example, Liu and co-workers designed a polymer-encapsulated UCNP/Fe3O4/DOX nanocomposite for multi-model imaging and targeted drug delivery.211 In the presence of a magnetic field, a majority of the cancer cells near the magnet were killed by the DOX-loaded UCNPs/Fe3O4 nanocomposites, while those far from the magnet largely survived. This could be attributed to the higher cellular uptake of the nanocomposites that were guided under an external magnetic field. In addition, Stucky et al. synthesized nanorattle-structured spheres Fe3O4@SiO2@volid@Y2O3:Yb/Er consisting of a moveable Fe3O4@SiO2 inner particle and Y2O3:Yb/Er shells, which provide a high drug-loading capacity (Fig. 23).175 An active accumulation of DOX-loaded Fe3O4@SiO2@volid@Y2O3:Yb/Er nanocomposite in tumors could be observed from the increased UC luminescence intensity when an external magnetic field was applied. In vivo therapeutic experiments on mice with hepatocarcinoma (H22) demonstrated excellent tumor inhibition due to the effective tumor targeting in the presence of a magnetic field. This magnetic-guided drug delivery may be a unique targeted therapeutic approach that is specific and selective to localized regions.
 Fig. 23  Multifunctional UCNP-based “nanorattle” for magnetic-targeted therapy. (a) Synthesis procedure for drug-loaded Fe3O4@SiO2@volid@Y2O3:Yb/Er nanorattles. (b) Schematic illustration of the targeting of a DOX-loaded multifunctional drug carrier to tumor cells assisted by an externally applied magnetic field (MF). (c) In vivo mouse imaging after 1 h of magnetic field treatment. (d) The luminescence signal was measured from the whole tumor in vivo and ex vivo. (e) Tumor volume changes in mice under different treatments. (Adapted from ref. 175. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.) 

5. Conclusions and perspectives
This review presents a survey on the rational design, various synthesis strategies, and applications in drug delivery and cancer therapy of UCNP-based composite nanomaterials in the last five years. Despite these successes, major challenges for these nanomaterials exist that need to be resolved in order to fulfill the translation from the bench to the bedside.
Firstly, since the vast majority of photosensitive compounds do not absorb NIR light directly, the efficiency of NIR light-triggered controlled drug delivery systems is strongly related to the UV intensity emitted by UCNPs. Therefore, the development of highly efficient NIR-to-UV UCNPs will be of great importance and will occur by the elaborate design of core–shell structure and optimization of host lattices. More recently, an investigation by Liu and co-workers found that minimizing the migration of excitation energy to defects in KYb2F7:2%Er UCNPs can generate an unusual four-photon-promoted violet upconversion emission from Er3+ with an intensity that is more than eight times higher than that previously reported for NaYF4:20%Yb/2%Er.317 This finding provides new clues for enhancing upconversion luminescence through energy clustering at the sublattice level.
Secondly, an excellent photoresponsive drug delivery system should possess the properties of zero premature release, near-infrared light excitation, clean photolysis without side products, and precise external manipulations.257 Moreover, the safety and biodegradability of photoresponsive compounds such as azobenzene and o-nitrobenzyl derivatives are uncertain. Therefore, the search for biocompatible photosensitive materials will be critical in photo-controlled drug delivery.
Thirdly, among the photocontrolled drug delivery systems available, 980 nm NIR light is usually used to control drug delivery; however, the overheating effect associated with 980 nm excitation is a major limitation for in vivo application. UCNPs that can be effectively excited by other NIR wavelengths (e.g., 915 nm20 and 808 nm32–37) can considerably minimize overheating and reduce potential tissue damage compared with a 980 nm NIR laser. Thus, other NIR light wavelengths will enable the application of UCNPs in biomedical fields so that they are suitable for NIR photoactivation of biomolecules or phototriggered drug delivery, which are important research directions for UCNP-based nanomaterials in the near future.
Fourthly, during drug delivery, multimodal bioimagings of UCNP-based nanomaterials are often used for disease diagnosis. However, UCL/MR/CT images in vivo are often obtained by in situ tumor injection of nanomaterials. Very few studies on in vivo bioimagings are performed by mouse/rat tail intravenous injection due to the low accumulation concentration of nanomaterials at the specific tumor location. The density of the target molecules on the surface of nanoparticles needs to be precisely optimized to facilitate the balance between tissue biodistribution and cellular uptake. In this context, better design of target molecules modified for UCNP-based drug delivery nanomaterials is greatly demanded in order to achieve real-time monitoring of treatment progress by tail intravenous injection.
Finally, the engineering of multifunctional UCNP-based nanocomposites is still an incipient area, so systematic and rigorous evaluations of their biosafety and degradability in vivo are required due to their complex biodistributions and elimination pathways.318 These problems involve interdisciplinary research areas ranging from chemistry and biology to medicine and require close collaborations of experts from various fields. If all technical problems are satisfactorily solved in the near future, UCNP-based multifunctional nanomaterials will open up new opportunities for the simultaneous diagnosis and efficient treatment of diseases.
Taken together, the investigations on UCNP-based drug delivery systems are still in the early stage, and there is plenty of room for innovative research in this exciting field. This highly dynamic research field is expected to produce additional breakthrough discoveries for disease diagnosis and treatment in the near future.
Acknowledgements
This project is financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (NSFC 51332008, 51372243, 51372241), National Basic Research Program of China (2010CB327704, 2014CB643803).
References
S. V. Eliseeva and J.-C. G. Bünzli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 189–227 RSC .
F. Wang and X. G. Liu, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 976–989 RSC .
J.-C. Boyer, F. Vetrone, L. A. Cuccia and J. A. Capobianco, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 7444–7445 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. B. Zhao, D. Y. Jin, E. P. Schartner, Y. Q. Lu, Y. J. Liu, A. Z. Zvyagin, L. X. Zhang, J. M. Dawes, P. Xi, J. A. Piper, E. M. Goldys and T. M. Monro, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2013, 8, 729–734 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. R. Gamelin and H. U. Güdel, Acc. Chem. Res., 2000, 33, 235–242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Auzel, Chem. Rev., 2004, 104, 139–174 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Anderson, S. Smith, S. May and M. Berry, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 5, 36–42 CrossRef .
G. Yao, M. T. Berry, P. S. May and D. Kilin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 17177–17185 CAS .
D. K. Chatterjee, M. K. Gnanasammandhan and Y. Zhang, Small, 2010, 6, 2781–2795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Li and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 6831–6847 RSC .
C. Bouzigues, T. Gacoin and A. Alexandrou, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 8488–8505 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, G. Abbineni, A. Clevenger, C. B. Mao and S. K. Xu, J. Nanomed. Nanotechnol., 2011, 7, 710–729 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gnach and A. Bednarkiewicz, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 532–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Liu, D. T. Tu, H. M. Zhu and X. Y. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 6924–6958 RSC .
W. Feng, C. M. Han and F. Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5287–5303 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. J. Gu, L. Yan, G. Tian, S. J. Li, Z. F. Chai and Y. L. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 3758–3779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Shen, L. Zhao and G. Han, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2013, 65, 744–755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Gai, C. X. Li, P. P. Yang and J. Lin, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 2343–2389 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, H. L. Qiu, P. N. Prasad and X. Y. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5161–5214 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhan, J. Qian, H. Liang, G. Somesfalean, D. Wang, S. He, Z. Zhang and S. Andersson-Engels, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 3744–3757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Frangioni, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2003, 7, 626–634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. W. Wu, G. Han, D. J. Milliron, S. Aloni, V. Altoe, D. V. Talapin, B. E. Cohen and P. J. Schuck, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 10917–10921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. K. Chatterjee, A. J. Rufaihah and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2009, 29, 937–943 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, A. Kachynski, H. Ågren and P. N. Prasad, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 4981–4986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Zhan, S. L. He, J. Qian, H. Cheng and F. H. Cai, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 306–316 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Song, Y. Anissimov, J. Zhao, A. V. Nechaev, A. Nadort, D. Y. Jin, T. W. Prow, M. S. Roberts and A. Zvyagin, J. Biomed. Opt., 2013, 18, 061215 CrossRef PubMed .
D. J. Gargas, E. M. Chan, A. D. Ostrowski, S. Aloni, M. V. P. Altoe, E. S. Barnard, B. Sanii, J. J. Urban, D. J. Milliron, B. E. Cohen and P. J. Schuck, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 300–305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. H. Nam, Y. M. Bae, Y. I. Park, J. H. Kim, H. M. Kim, J. S. Choi, K. T. Lee, T. Hyeon and Y. D. Suh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6093–6097 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. D. Ostrowski, E. M. Chan, D. J. Gargas, E. M. Katz, G. Han, P. J. Schuck, D. J. Milliron and B. E. Cohen, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 2686–2692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu, F. Huang, H. Lin, P. Huang, A. P. Yang, Z. X. Wang and Y. S. Wang, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 2632–2640 RSC .
X. M. Li, R. Wang, F. Zhang, L. Zhou, D. K. Shen, C. Yao and D. Y. Zhao, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 3536 Search PubMed .
J. Shen, G. Chen, A. M. Yu, W. Fan, O. S. Bilsel, C. C. Chang and G. Han, Adv. Optical Mater., 2013, 1, 644–650 CrossRef .
X. Xie, N. Gao, R. Deng, Q. Sun, Q. Xu and X. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12608–12611 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Wang, G. Y. Liu, L. D. Sun, J. W. Xiao, J. C. Zhou and C. H. Yan, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 7200–7206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wen, H. Zhu, X. Chen, T. F. Hung, B. Wang, G. Zhu, S. F. Yu and F. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13419–13423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Rocha, K. U. Kumar, C. Jacinto, I. Villa, F. Sanz-Rodríguez, M. Del Carmen Iglesias de la Cruz, A. Juarranz, E. Carrasco, F. C. J. M. van Veggel, E. Bovero, J. G. Solé and D. Jaque, Small, 2014, 10, 1141–1154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. D. Sun, Y. F. Wang and C. H. Yan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1001–1009 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Hilderbrand, F. W. Shao, C. Salthouse, U. Mahmood and R. Weissleder, Chem. Commun., 2009, 4188–4190 RSC .
B. Dong, S. Xu, J. Sun, S. Bi, D. Li, X. Bai, Y. Wang, L. P. Wang and H. W. Song, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 6193–6200 RSC .
Q. Liu, Y. Sun, T. S. Yang, W. Feng, C. G. Li and F. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17122–17125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Liu, T. S. Yang, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5390–5397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Z. Liu and F. Y. Li, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 1323–1349 RSC .
Y. Sun, X. J. Zhu, J. J. Peng and F. Y. Li, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11290–11300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Wang, J. H. Hao, H. L. W. Chan, W.-T. Wong and K.-L. Wong, Small, 2012, 8, 1863–1868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Teng, Y. H. Zhu, W. Wei, S. C. Wang, J. F. Huang, R. Naccache, W. B. Hu, A. J. Y. Tok, Y. Han, Q. C. Zhang, Q. L. Fan, W. Huang, J. A. Capobianco and L. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 8340–8343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Y. Liu, X. X. He, L. Liu, H. P. You, H. M. Zhang and Z. X. Wang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 5218–5225 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, T. Wei, X. Li, B. Zhang, J. Wang, C. Huang and Q. Yuan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1616–1620 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 13721–13729 CAS .
F. Wang and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2008, 130, 5642–5643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Ehlert, R. Thomann, M. Darbandi and T. Nann, ACS Nano, 2008, 2, 120–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Mahalingam, F. Vetrone, R. Naccache, A. Speghini and J. A. Capobianco, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4025–4028 CrossRef CAS .
N. Niu, P. P. Yang, H. He, X. Zhang, S. L. Gai, C. X. Li and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 10889–10899 RSC .
E. M. Chan, G. Han, J. D. Goldberg, D. J. Gargas, A. D. Ostrowski, P. J. Schuck, B. E. Cohen and D. J. Milliron, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3839–3845 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Liu, D. T. Tu, H. M. Zhu, R. F. Li, W. Q. Luo and X. Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 3266–3271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Gorris, R. Ali, S. M. Saleh and O. S. Wolfbeis, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1652–1655 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, P. P. Yang, C. X. Li, D. Wang, J. Xu, S. L. Gai and J. Lin, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 12143–12145 RSC .
H. H. Gorris and O. S. Wolfbeis, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 3584–3600 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Q. Dou, N. M. Idris and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 1722–1731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wilhelm, T. Hirsch, W. M. Patterson, E. Scheucher, T. Mayr and O. S. Wolfbeis, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 239–248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Q. Lu, J. B. Zhao, R. Zhang, Y. J. Liu, D. M. Liu, E. M. Goldys, X. S. Yang, P. Xi, A. Sunna, J. Lu, Y. Shi, R. C. Leif, Y. J. Huo, J. Shen, J. A. Piper, J. P. Robinson and D. Y. Jin, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 32–36 CrossRef CAS .
F. Wang and X. G. Liu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2014, 47, 1378–1385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Zhang, L. X. Zhang, R. R. Deng, J. Tian, Y. Zong, D. Y. Jin and X. G. Liu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4893–4896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Caravan, J. J. Ellison, T. J. McMurry and R. B. Lauffer, Chem. Rev., 1999, 99, 2293–2352 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. I. Park, J. H. Kim, K. T. Lee, K. S. Jeon, H. B. Na, J. H. Yu, H. M. Kim, N. Lee, S. H. Choi, S. I. Baik, H. Kim, S. P. Park, B. J. Park, Y. W. Kim, S. H. Lee, S. Y. Yoon, I. C. Song, W. K. Moon, Y. D. Suh and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21, 4467–4471 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, M. Nyk, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, C. A. Flask and P. N. Prasad, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2009, 19, 853–859 CrossRef CAS .
M. He, P. Huang, C. L. Zhang, H. Y. Hu, C. C. Bao, G. Gao, R. He and D. X. Cui, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 4470–4477 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. J. Johnson, W. Oakden, G. J. Stanisz, R. Scott Prosser and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 3714–3722 CrossRef CAS .
C. Y. Cao, H. K. Yang, J. W. Chung, B. K. Moon, B. C. Choi, J. H. Jeong and K. H. Kim, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 10342–10347 RSC .
C. H. Dong, A. Korinek, B. Blasiak, B. Tomanek and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1297–1305 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Hou, R. R. Qiao, F. Fang, X. X. Wang, C. Y. Dong, K. Liu, C. Y. Liu, Z. F. Liu, H. Lei, F. Wang and M. Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 330–338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Liu, D. S. Wang, J. X. Shi, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4366–4369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. L. Ni, J. W. Zhang, W. B. Bu, H. Y. Xing, F. Han, Q. F. Xiao, Z. W. Yao, F. Chen, Q. J. He, J. N. Liu, S. J. Zhang, W. P. Fan, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng and J. L. Shi, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1231–1242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Liu, K. L. Ai, J. H. Liu, Q. H. Yuan, Y. Y. He and L. H. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 1437–1442 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Zeng, M.-K. Tsang, C.-F. Chan, K.-L. Wong and J. H. Hao, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 9232–9238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. R. Liu, W. Lu, H. B. Wang, L. Rao, Z. G. Yi, S. J. Zeng and J. H. Hao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6023–6029 RSC .
H. Y. Xing, X. P. Zheng, Q. G. Ren, W. B. Bu, W. Q. Ge, Q. F. Xiao, S. J. Zhang, C. Y. Wei, H. Y. Qu, Z. Wang, Y. Q. Hua, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng, K. L. Zhao and J. L. Shi, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 1751 Search PubMed .
F. Li, C. G. Li, J. H. Liu, X. M. Liu, L. Zhao, T. Y. Bai, Q. H. Yuan, X. G. Kong, Y. Han, Z. Shi and S. H. Feng, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 6950–6959 RSC .
S. J. Zeng, H. B. Wang, W. Lu, Z. G. Yi, L. Rao, H. R. Liu and J. H. Hao, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 2934–2941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. G. Yi, S. J. Zeng, W. Lu, H. B. Wang, L. Rao, H. R. Liu and J. H. Hao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3839–3846 CAS .
Y. Z. Min, J. M. Li, F. Liu, P. Padmanabhan, E. K. L. Yeow and B. G. Xing, Nanomaterials, 2014, 4, 129–154 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wang and F. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 2422–2443 RSC .
J. R. Abdul and Y. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 4122–4128 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Xiong, T. Yang, Y. Yang, C. Xu and F. Li, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 7078–7085 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. C. Zhou, Z. L. Yang, W. Dong, R. J. Tang, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 9059–9067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, K. Yang, X. Lu, M. Shao and Z. Liu, Nanomedicine, 2011, 6, 1327–1340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, J. B. Ma, M. He, G. Gao, H. Xu, J. Sang, Y. X. Wang, B. Q. Zhao and D. X. Cui, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 258–266 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Y. Liu, Y. Hou and M. Y. Gao, Adv. Mater., 2014 DOI:10.1002/adma.201305535 .
J. Yang, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64, 965–966 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Mura, J. Nicolas and P. Couvreur, Nat. Mater., 2013, 12, 991–1003 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. C. Fan, F. Y. Cheng, J. A. Ho and C. S. Yeh, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 8806–8810 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Yang, B. Velmurugan, X. G. Liu and B. G. Xing, Small, 2013, 9, 2937–2944 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Z. Zhao, J. J. Peng, Q. Huang, C. Y. Li, M. Chen, Y. Sun, Q. N. Lin, L. Y. Zhu and F. Y. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014, 24, 363–371 CrossRef CAS .
J. N. Liu, W. B. Bu, L. M. Pan and J. L. Shi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 4375–4379 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Z. W. Chen, K. Dong, M. L. Yin, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 2424–2430 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Dai, H. H. Xiao, J. H. Liu, Q. H. Yuan, P. A. Ma, D. M. Yang, C. X. Li, Z. Y. Cheng, Z. Y. Hou, P. P. Yang and J. Lin, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18920–18929 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Min, J. M. Li, F. Liu, E. K. L. Yeow and B. G. Xing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1012–1016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. F. Wang, Q. Peng and Y. D. Li, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 322–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Haase and H. Schfer, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 5805–5829 CrossRef PubMed .
H. S. Mader, P. Kele, S. M. Saleh and O. S. Wolfbeis, Curr. Opin. Chem. Biol., 2010, 14, 582–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Fedorov, A. A. Luginina, S. V. Kuznetsov and V. V. Osiko, J. Fluorine Chem., 2011, 132, 1012–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. J. M. van Veggel, C. H. Dong, N. J. J. Johnson and J. Pichaandi, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 7309–7321 RSC .
A. Kar and A. Patra, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 3608–3619 RSC .
T. Liu, L. N. Sun, Z. Liu, Y. N. Qiu and L. Y. Shi, Prog. Chem., 2012, 24, 304–317 CAS .
J. Chen and J. X. Zhao, Sensors, 2012, 12, 2414–2435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Chen and Y. S. Wang, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 4621–4637 RSC .
P. Y. Qiu, N. Zhou, H. Y. Chen, C. L. Zhang, G. Gao and D. X. Cui, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11512–11525 RSC .
Y. S. Liu, D. T. Tu, H. M. Zhu, E. Ma and X. Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1369–1384 RSC .
D. T. Tu, Y. S. Liu, H. M. Zhu and X. Y. Chen, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 5516–5527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 317–330 CrossRef PubMed .
X. M. Li, D. Y. Zhao and F. Zhan, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 292–305 CrossRef PubMed .
W. GJHM van Sark, J. de Wild, J. K. Rath, A. Meijerink and R. EI Schropp, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2013, 8, 81–90 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Z. Lian, Z. Y. Hou, M. M. Shang, D. L. Geng, Y. Zhang and J. Lin, Energy, 2013, 57, 270–283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Yang, Microchim. Acta, 2014, 181, 263–294 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Tu, W. Zheng, Y. S. Liu, H. M. Zhu and X. Y. Chen, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2014, 273–274, 13–29 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang and Y. D. Li, Nature, 2005, 437, 121–124 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. X. Mai, Y. W. Zhang, R. Si, Z. G. Yan, L. D. Sun, L. P. You and C. H. Yan, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 6426–6436 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, Y. Wan, T. Yu, F. Q. Zhang, Y. F. Shi, S. H. Xie, Y. G. Li, L. Xu, B. Tu and D. Y. Zhao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2007, 46, 7976–7979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Q. Li, Y. Zhang and S. Jiang, Adv. Mater., 2008, 20, 4765–4769 CrossRef CAS .
H. Q. Wang and T. Nann, ACS Nano, 2009, 3, 3804–3808 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wang, Y. Han, C. S. Lim, Y. H. Lu, J. Wang, J. Xu, H. Y. Chen, C. Zhang, M. H. Hong and X. G. Liu, Nature, 2010, 463, 1061–1065 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. C. Ye, J. E. Collins, Y. J. Kang, J. Chen, D. T. N. Chen, A. G. Yodh and C. B. Murray, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2010, 107, 22430–22435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Chen, Y. L. Yu, F. Huang, P. Huang, A. P. Yang and Y. S. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 9976–9978 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zhang, G. B. Braun, Y. F. Shi, Y. C. Zhang, X. H. Sun, N. O. Reich, D. Y. Zhao and G. Stucky, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 2850–2851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. T. Tu, L. Q. Liu, Q. Ju, Y. S. Liu, H. M. Zhu, R. F. Li and X. Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 6306–6310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. J. Johnson, A. Korinek, C. H. Dong and F. C. J. M. van Veggel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 11068–11071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Voss and M. Haase, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 11242–11254 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang and J. Y. Lee, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4393–4402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. S. Liu, D. T. Tu, H. M. Zhu, E. Ma and X. Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 1369–1384 RSC .
J. Shen, G. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, S. J. Kesseli, S. Buchholz, Z. Li, P. N. Prasad and G. Han, Small, 2013, 9, 3213–3231 CAS .
X. S. Zhai, S. S. Liu, Y. L. Zhang, G. S. Qin and W. P. Qin, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2014, 2, 2037–2044 RSC .
S. J. Zeng, Z. G. Yi, W. Lu, C. Qian, H. B. Wang, L. Rao, T. M. Zeng, H. R. liu, H. J. Liu, B. Fei and J. H. Hao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2014 DOI:10.1002/adfm.201304270 .
P. Huang, W. Zheng, S. Y. Zhou, D. T. Tu, Z. Chen, H. M. Zhu, R. F. Li, E. Ma, M. D. Huang and X. Y. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1252–1257 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. W. Ye, M. K. Tsang, X. Liu, M. Yang and J. H. Hao, Small, 2014, 10, 2390–2397 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Martín-Rodríguez, S. Fischer, A. Ivaturi, B. Froehlich, K. W. Krämer, J. C. Goldschmidt, B. S. Richards and A. Meijerink, Chem. Mater., 2013, 25, 1912–1921 CrossRef .
A. Ivaturi, S. K. W. Macdougall, R. M. Rodriguez, M. Quintanilla, J. Marques-Hueso, K. W. Krämer, A. Meijerink and B. S. Richards, J. Appl. Phys., 2013, 114, 1–10 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Liu, X. Bai, C. Miao, Q. L. Dai, W. Xu, Y. H. Yu, Q. D. Chen and H. W. Song, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3258–3265 CAS .
H. P. Paudel, L. L. Zhong, K. Bayat, M. F. Baroughi, S. Smith, C. K. Lin, C. Y. Jiang, M. T. Berry and P. S. May, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 19028–19036 CAS .
S. Schietinger, T. Aichele, H. Q. Wang, T. Nann and O. Benson, Nano Lett., 2010, 10, 134–138 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Ge, X. R. Zhang, M. Liu, Z. W. Lei, R. J. Knize and Y. L. Lu, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 282–288 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q.-C. Sun, H. Mundoor, J. C. Ribot, V. Singh, I. I. Smalyukh and P. Nagpal, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 101–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Luu, A. Hor, J. Fisher, R. B. Anderson, S. Liu, T.-S. Luk, H. P. Paudel, M. F. Baroughi, P. S. May and S. Smith, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3251–3257 CAS .
W. Li and D. Y. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 142–149 CrossRef CAS .
W. Stöber, A. Fink and E. Bohn, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1968, 26, 62–69 CrossRef .
N. Erathodiyil and J. Y. Ying, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 925–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Guerrero-Martínez, J. Pérez-Juste and L. M. Liz-Marzán, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1182–1195 CrossRef PubMed .
F. J. Arriagada and K. Osseo-Asare, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 1999, 211, 210–220 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. F. Li, C. G. Li, X. M. Liu, Y. Chen, T. Y. Bai, L. Wang, Z. Shi and S. H. Feng, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 11641–11646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Liu, C. X. Li, D. M. Yang, Z. Y. Hou, P. A. Ma, Z. Y. Cheng, H. Z. Lian, S. S. Huang and J. Lin, Eur. J. Inorg. Chem., 2014, 1906–1913 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, L. M. Wang, Z. Y. Wang, X. H. Liu and Y. J. Xiong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3291–3296 CAS .
X. G. Yu, Y. Shan, G. C. Li and K. Z. Chen, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 8104–8109 RSC .
Q. F. Xiao, X. P. Zheng, W. B. Bu, W. Q. Ge, S. J. Zhang, F. Chen, H. Y. Xing, Q. G. Ren, W. P. Fan, K. L. Zhao, Y. Q. Hua and J. L. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 13041–13048 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Xing, W. B. Bu, S. J. Zhang, X. P. Zheng, M. Li, F. Chen, Q. J. He, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng, Y. Q. Hua and J. L. Shi, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 1079–1089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, G. Y. Chen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, M. T. Swihart and P. N. Prasad, Theranostics, 2013, 3, 275–281 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Vallet-Regí, A. Rámila, R. P. del Real and J. Pérez-Pariente, Chem. Mater., 2001, 13, 308–311 CrossRef .
P. P. Yang, Z. W. Quan, C. X. Li, X. J. Kang, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 4341–4347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. P. Yang, Z. W. Quan, Z. Y. Hou, C. X. Li, X. J. Kang, Z. Y. Cheng and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2009, 30, 4786–4795 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Lee, N. Lee, T. Kim, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 893–902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Rosenholm, C. Sahlgren and M. Lindén, Curr. Drug Targets, 2011, 12, 1166–1186 CrossRef CAS .
C. Argyo, V. Weiss, C. Bräuchle and T. Bein, Chem. Mater., 2014, 26, 435–451 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Gai, P. P. Yang, C. X. Li, W. X. Wang, Y. L. Dai, N. Niu and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1166–1172 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Xu, C. X. Li, P. A. Ma, Z. Y. Hou, D. M. Yang, X. J. Kang and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2011, 3, 661–667 RSC .
Z. Liu, L. N. Sun, F. Y. Li, Q. Liu, L. Y. Shi, D. S. Zhang, S. Yuan, T. Liu and Y. N. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 17615–17618 RSC .
H. S. Qian, H. C. Guo, P. C. Ho, R. Mahendran and Y. Zhang, Small, 2009, 5, 2285–2290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. X. Shi, F. Chen and W. B. Cai, Nanomedicine, 2013, 8, 2027–2039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Kim, J. E. lee, J. lee, J. H. Yu, B. C. Kim, K. An, Y. Hwang, C. H. Shin, J. G. Park, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128, 688–689 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. E. Lee, N. Lee, T. Kim, J. Kim and T. Hyeon, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 893–902 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Li, J. L. Liu, S. Alonso, F. Y. Li and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 6065–6071 RSC .
J. N. Liu, W. B. Bu, S. J. Zhang, F. Chen, H. Y. Xing, L. M. Pan, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng and J. L. Shi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 2335–2341 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Li, D. M. Yang, P. A. Ma, Y. Y. Chen, Y. Wu, Z. Y. Hou, Y. L. Dai, J. H. Zhao and C. P. Sui, Small, 2013, 9, 4150–4159 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. X. Li, Z. Y. Hou, Y. L. Dai, D. M. Yang, Z. Y. Cheng, P. A. Ma and J. Lin, Biomater. Sci., 2013, 1, 213–223 RSC .
L. N. Sun, T. Liu, Y. N. Qiu, J. L. Liu, L. Y. Shi and O. S. Wolfbeis, Microchim. Acta, 2014, 181, 775–781 CrossRef CAS .
L. L. Li, F. Q. Tang, H. Y. Liu, T. L. Liu, N. J. Hao, D. Chen, X. Teng and J. Q. He, ACS Nano, 2010, 4, 6874–6882 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Li, C. Liu, L. Y. Zhang, T. T. Wang, H. Yu, C. G. Wang and Z. M. Su, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2249–2253 RSC .
L. L. Chen, L. Li, L. Y. Zhang, S. X. Xing, T. T. Wang, Y. A. Wang, C. G. Wang and Z. M. Su, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7282–7290 CAS .
F. Zhang, G. B. Braun, A. Pallaoro, Y. C. Zhang, Y. F. Shi, D. X. Cui, M. Moskovits, D. Y. Zhao and G. D. Stucky, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 61–67 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Y. Zhang, T. T. Wang, L. Yang, C. Liu, C. G. Wang, H. Y. Liu, Y. A. Wang and Z. M. Su, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 12512–12521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Zhu, J. Zhou, M. Chen, M. Shi, W. Feng and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 4618–4627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. P. Fan, B. Shen, F. Chen, K. L. Zhao, S. J. Zhang, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng, Q. F. Xiao, H. Y. Xing, J. N. Liu, D. L. Ni, Q. J. He and J. L. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 6494–6503 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. F. Zhu, T. Ikoma, N. Hanagata and S. Kaskel, Small, 2010, 6, 471–478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Kang, Z. Y. Cheng, D. M. Yang, P. A. Ma, M. M. Shang, C. Peng, Y. L. Dai and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1470–1481 CrossRef CAS .
F. Q. Tang, L. L. Li and D. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1504–1534 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Zhang, T. R. Zhang, J. P. Ge and Y. D. Yin, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 2867–2871 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Fang, X. J. Zhao, W. J. Fang, C. Chen and N. F. Zheng, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 2205–2218 RSC .
J. Liu, F. Liu, K. Gao, J. S. Wu and D. F. Xue, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 6073–6084 RSC .
X. J. Kang, C. X. Li, Z. Y. Cheng, P. A. Ma, Z. Y. Hou and J. Lin, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Nanomed. Nanobiotechnol., 2014, 6, 80–101 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Jia, H. P. You, K. Liu, Y. H. Zheng, N. Guo and H. J. Zhang, Langmuir, 2010, 26, 5122–5128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Han, S. L. Gai, P. A. Ma, L. Z. Wang, M. L. Zhang, S. H. Huang and P. P. Yang, Inorg. Chem., 2013, 52, 9184–9191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, Z. J. Gu, X. X. Liu, L. J. Zhou, W. Y. Yin, L. Yan, S. Jin, W. L. Ren, G. M. Xing, S. J. Li and Y. L. Zhao, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 23790–23796 CAS .
L. Dong, D. An, M. Gong, Y. Lu, H. L. Gao, Y. J. Xu and S. H. Yu, Small, 2013, 9, 3235–3241 CAS .
H. Ren, L. Y. Zhang, T. T. Wang, L. Li, Z. M. Su and C. G. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 6036–6038 RSC .
Y. Wang, P. P. Yang, P. A. Ma, F. Y. Qu, S. L. Gai, N. Niu, F. He and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2056–2065 RSC .
F. Zhang, Y. F. Shi, X. H. Sun, D. Y. Zhao and G. D. Stucky, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5237–5243 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Kang, D. M. Yang, Y. L. Dai, M. M. Shang, Z. Y. Cheng, X. Zhang, P. A. Ma and J. Lin, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 253–261 RSC .
Z. H. Xu, P. A. Ma, C. X. Li, Z. Y. Hou, X. F. Zhai, S. S. Huang and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 4161–4173 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Yang, X. J. Kang, P. A. Ma, Y. L. Dai, Z. Y. Hou, Z. Y. Cheng, C. X. Li and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 1601–1612 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Y. Chen, B. Qi, T. Moore, D. C. Colvin, T. Crawford, J. C. Gore, F. Alexis, O. T. Mefford and J. N. Anker, Biomaterials, 2014, 10, 160–168 CAS .
G. Chen, F. S. Chen, X. H. Liu, W. Ma, H. M. Luo, J. H. Li, R. Z. Ma and G. Z. Qiu, Nano Res., 2014 DOI:10.1007/s12274-014-0472-5 .
W. Feng, L. D. Sun, Y. W. Zhang and C. H. Yan, Small, 2009, 5, 2057–2060 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Yang, Y. L. Dai, P. A. Ma, X. J. Kang, Z. Y. Cheng, C. X. Li and J. Lin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2013, 19, 2685–2694 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 1110–1120 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, Z. J. Gu, L. J. Zhou, W. Y. Yin, X. X. Liu, L. Yan, S. Jin, W. L. Ren, G. M. Xing, S. J. Li and Y. L. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1226–1231 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Li, R. B. Zhang, L. L. Yin, K. Z. Zheng, W. P. Qin, P. R. Selvin and Y. Lu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 6121–6125 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Rem, G. Tian, S. Jian, Z. J. Gu, L. J. Zhou, L. Yan, S. Jin, W. Y. Yin and Y. L. Zhao, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 7037–7041 RSC .
G. Tian, W. Y. Yin, J. J. Jin, X. Zhang, G. M. Xing, S. J. Li, Z. J. Gu and Y. L. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 1379–1389 RSC .
F. Wang, D. K. Chatterjee, Z. Li, Y. Zhang, X. Fan and M. Wang, Nanotechnology, 2006, 17, 5786–5791 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhang, Y. M. Wang and J. Zhu, Chem. Mater., 2011, 21, 12132–12318 RSC .
H. J. Wang, R. Shrestha and Y. Zhang, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2014, 31, 228–235 CrossRef CAS .
P. A. Ma, H. H. Xiao, X. Li, C. X. Li, Y. L. Dai, Z. Y. Cheng, X. B. Jing and J. Lin, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4898–4905 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Xu, L. Cheng, C. Wang, X. X. Ma, Y. G. Li and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 9364–9373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, K. Yang, Y. Li, J. Chen, C. Wang, M. Shao, S.-T. Lee and Z. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 7385–7390 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, K. Yang, Y. G. Li, X. Zeng, M. W. Shao, S. T. Lee and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 2215–2222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Wang, Y. P. Wang and M. Li, Light: Sci. Appl., 2013, 2, e102 CrossRef .
Q. L. Ma, J. X. Wang, X. T. Dong, W. S. Yu and G. X. Liu, J. Nanopart. Res., 2014, 16, 2239 CrossRef .
B. Dong, H. W. Song, H. Q. Yu, H. Zhang, R. F. Qin, X. Bai, G. H. Pan, S. Z. Lu, F. Wang, L. B. Fan and Q. L. Dai, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2008, 112, 1435–1440 CAS .
G. G. Li, Z. Y. Hou, C. Peng, W. X. Wang, Z. Y. Cheng, C. X. Li, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 3446–3456 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Hou, P. P. Yang, C. X. Li, L. L. Wang, H. Z. Lian, Z. W. Quan and J. Lin, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 6686–6696 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Hou, G. G. Li, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5254–5276 RSC .
Z. Y. Hou, C. M. Zhang, C. X. Li, Z. H. Xu, Z. Y. Cheng, G. G. Li, W. X. Wang, C. Peng and J. Lin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 14513–14519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Hou, C. X. Li, P. A. Ma, G. G. Li, Z. Y. Cheng, C. Peng, D. M. Yang, P. P. Yang and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2011, 21, 2356–2365 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Y. Hou, C. X. Li, P. A. Ma, Z. Y. Cheng, X. J. Li, X. Zhang, Y. L. Dai, D. M. Yang, H. Z. Lian and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 2713–2722 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Li, X. J. Li, C. X. Li, Y. L. Dai, P. A. Ma, X. Zhang, X. J. Kang, Z. Y. Cheng and J. Lin, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 8517–8526 RSC .
Z. Y. Hou, X. J. Li, C. X. Li, Y. L. Dai, P. A. Ma, X. Zhang, X. J. Kang, Z. Y. Cheng and J. Lin, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9473–9482 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, H. Liu, S. F. Sun, X. J. Li, Y. M. Zhou, Z. Y Hou and J. Lin, Langmuir, 2014, 30, 1176–1182 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. T. Nguyen, C. Ghosh, S.-G. Hwang, L. D. Tran and J. S. Park, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 7125–7133 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Choi, K. W. Leong and H. S. Yoo, Biomaterials, 2008, 29, 587–596 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Bölgen, I. Vargel, P. Korkusuz, Y. Z. Menceloğlu and E. Pişkin, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B, 2007, 81, 530–543 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Zahedi, I. Rezaeian, S. O. Ranaei-Siadat, S. H. Jafari and P. Supaphol, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2010, 21, 77–95 CAS .
Z. G. Chen, P. W. Wang, B. Wei, X. M. Mo and F. Z. Cui, Acta Biomater., 2010, 6, 372–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Schneider, X. Y. Wang, D. L. Kaplan, J. A. Garlick and C. Egles, Acta Biomater., 2009, 5, 2570–2578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. M. Zhang, C. X. Li, S. S. Huang, Z. Y. Hou, Z. Y. Cheng, P. P. Yang and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2010, 31, 3374–3383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. J. Kang, Z. Y. Cheng, C. X. Li, D. M. Yang, M. M. Shang, P. A. Ma, G. G. Li, N. Liu and J. Lin, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 15801–15811 CAS .
Y. Y. Chen, P. A. Ma, D. M. Yang, Y. Wu, Y. L. Dai, C. X. Li and J. Lin, Chem. – Asian J., 2014, 9, 506–513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Dai, D. M. Yang, P. A. Ma, X. J. Kang, X. Zhang, C. X. Li, Z. Y. Hou, Z. Y. Cheng and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 8704–8713 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z. F. Yuan, Y. Wang, W. H. Chen, G. F. Luo, S. X. Cheng, R. X. Zhuo and X. Z. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 5068–5073 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. K. Cotí, M. E. Belowich, M. Liong, M. W. Ambrogio, Y. A. Lau, H. A. Khatib, J. I. Zink, N. M. Khashab and J. F. Stoddart, Nanoscale, 2009, 1, 16–39 RSC .
J. Z. Du, T. M. Sun, W. J. Song, J. Wu and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3621–3626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. F. Radovic-Moreno, T.
K. Lu, V. A. Puscasu, C. J. Yoon, R. Langer and O. C. Farokhzad, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4279–4287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Z. Du, X. J. Du, C. Q. Mao and J. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 17560–17563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. K. Jia, J. J. Yin, D. G. He, X. X. He, K. M. Wang, M. Chen and Y. H. Li, J. Biomed. Nanotechnol., 2013, 9, 2063–2072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, L. Cheng, Y. M. Liu, X. J. Wang, X. X. Ma, Z. Y. Deng, Y. G. Li and Z. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 3077–3086 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, K. L. Ai, Y. L. Liu and L. H. Lu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 655–663 CAS .
F. H. Chen, L. M. Zhang, Q. T. Chen, Y. Zhang and Z. J. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 8633–8635 RSC .
D. M. Yang, Y. L. Dai, J. H. Liu, Y. Zhou, Y. Y. Chen, C. X. Li, P. A. Ma and J. Lin, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 2011–2023 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. You, K. K. Kalebaila, S. L. Brock and D. Qupicky, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 3354–3359 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Lien, T. M. Wu, J. H. Wu and J. W. Liao, J. Nanopart. Res., 2011, 13, 5065–5075 CrossRef CAS .
Y. F. Yang, A. J. Mijalis, H. Fu, C. Agosto, K. J. Tan, J. D. Batteas and D. E. Bergbreiter, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 7378–7383 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Soppimath, D. C. W. Tan and Y. Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17, 318–323 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Yavuz, Y. Cheng, J. Chen, C. M. Cobley, Q. Zhang, M. Rycenga, J. Xie, C. Kim, K. H. Song, A. G. Schwartz, L. H. V. Wang and Y. N. Xia, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 935–939 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chang, X. Sha, J. Guo, Y. Jiao, C. Wang and W. Yang, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 9239–9247 RSC .
Z. Y. Cheng, R. T. Chai, P. A. Ma, Y. L. Dai, X. J. Kang, H. Z. Lian, Z. Y. Hou, C. X. Li and J. Lin, Langmuir, 2013, 29, 9573–9580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Dai, P. A. Ma, Z. Y. Cheng, X. J. Kang, X. Zhang, Z. Y. Hou, C. X. Li, D. M. Yang, X. F. Zhai and J. Lin, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3327–3338 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhang, P. P. Yang, Y. L. Dai, P. A. Ma, X. J. Li, Z. Y. Cheng, Z. Y. Hou, X. J. Kang, C. X. Li and J. Lin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2013, 23, 4067–4078 CrossRef CAS .
N. Graf and S. J. Lippard, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2012, 64, 993–1004 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. L. Dai, X. J. Kang, D. M. Yang, X. J. Li, X. Zhang, C. X. Li, Z. Y. Hou, Z. Y. Cheng, P. A. Ma and J. Lin, Adv. Healthcare Mater., 2013, 2, 562–567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhao, Y. H. Zhu, X. L. Yang, J. H. Shen, X. Jiang, J. Zong and C. Z. Li, Dalton Trans., 2014, 43, 451–457 RSC .
G. Mayer and A. Heckel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2006, 45, 4900–4921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. N. Lin, Q. Huang, C. Y. Li, C. Y. Bao, Z. Z. Liu, F. Y. Li and L. Y. Zhu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 10645–10647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Niu, F. He, P. A. Ma, S. L. Gai, G. X. Yang, F. Y. Qu, Y. Wang, J. Xu and P. P. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 3250–3262 CAS .
Y. M. Yang, Q. Shao, R. R. Deng, C. Wang, X. Teng, K. Cheng, Z. Cheng, L. Huang, Z. Liu, X. G. Liu and B. G. Xing, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 3125–3129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sortino, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 301–318 RSC .
G. C. R. Ellis-Davies, Nat. Methods, 2007, 4, 619–628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Klán, T. Šolomek, C. G. Bochet, A. Blanc, R. Givens, M. Rubina, V. Popik, A. Kostikov and J. Wirz, Chem. Rev., 2013, 113, 119–191 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. H. Chien, Y. L. Chou, S. W. Wang, S. T. Hung, M. C. Liau, Y. J. Chao, C. H. Su and C. S. Yeh, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 8516–8528 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Carling, F. Nourmohammadian, J. C. Boyer and N. R. Branda, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 3782–3785 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. V. Garcia, J. P. Yang, D. K. Shen, C. Yao, X. M. Li, R. Wang, G. D. Stucky, D. Y. Zhao, P. C. Ford and F. Zhang, Small, 2012, 8, 3800–3805 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. Burks, J. V. Garcia, R. GonzalezIrias, J. T. Tillman, M. T. Niu, A. A. Mikhailovsky, J. P. Zhang, F. Zhang and P. C. Ford, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 18145–18152 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yan, J. C. Boyer, D. Habault, N. R. Branda and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16558–16561 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yan, J.-C. Boyer, N. R. Branda and Y. Zhao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 19714–19717 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. M. Yang, F. Liu, X. G. Liu and B. G. Xing, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 231–238 RSC .
W. Li, J. S. Wang, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 2248–2251 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Sortino, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2010, 39, 2903–2913 RSC .
P. C. Ford, Nitric Oxide, 2013, 34, 56–64 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. B. Xiao, Y. T. Ji, Z. H. Xiao, Y. Zhang, H. Z. Lin and Q. B. Wang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 1527–1529 RSC .
Q. Yuan, Y. F. Zhang, T. Chen, D. Q. Lu, Z. L. Zhao, X. B. Zhang, Z. X. Li, C. H. Yan and W. H. Tan, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 6337–6344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Ercole, T. P. Davisa and R. A. Evans, Polym. Chem., 2010, 1, 37–54 RSC .
N. K. Mal, M. Fujiwara and Y. Tanaka, Nature, 2003, 421, 350–353 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C.-J. Carling, J.-C. Boyer and N. R. Branda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 10838–10839 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Boyer, C.-J. Carling, B. D. Gates and N. R. Branda, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 132, 15766–15772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. S. Yang, Q. Liu, J. C. Li, S. Z. Pu, P. Y. Yang and F. Y. Li, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 15613–15619 RSC .
B. F. Zhang, M. Frigoli, F. Angiuli, F. Vetrone and J. A. Capobianco, Chem. Commun., 2012, 48, 7244–7246 RSC .
L. Wang, H. Dong, Y. N. Li, C. M. Xue, L. D. Sun, C. H. Yan and Q. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 4480–4483 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Muller, B. Schroder, J. A. Parkinson, N. A. Kratochwil, R. A. Coxall, A. Parkin, S. Parsons and P. J. Sadler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2003, 42, 335–339 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. J. Farrer, J. A. Woods, L. Salassa, Y. Zhao, K. S. Robinson, G. Clarkson, F. S. Mackay and P. J. Sadler, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 8905–8908 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Chen, S. J. Zhang, W. B. Bu, Y. Chen, Q. F. Xiao, J. N. Liu, H. Y. Xing, L. P. Zhou, W. J. Peng and J. L. Shi, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 7082–7090 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Tian, W. L. Ren, L. Yan, S. Jian, Z. J. Gu, L. J. Zhou, S. Jin, W. Y. Yin, S. J. Li and Y. L. Zhao, Small, 2013, 9, 1929–1938 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. H. Wang, H. G. Wang, D. P. Liu, S. Y. Song, X. Wang and H. J. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2013, 34, 7715–7724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, L. J. Zhou, Z. J. Gu, G. Tian, L. Yan, W. L. Ren, W. Y. Yin, X. D. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. B. Hu and Y. L. Zhao, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 11910–11918 RSC .
S. S. Cui, D. Y. Yin, Y. Q. Chen, Y. F. Di, H. Y. Chen, Y. X. Ma, S. Achilefu and Y. Q. Gu, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 676–688 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Chen, C. Wang, L. Cheng, W. W. He, Z. P. Cheng and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 2915–2923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhou, Z. H. Li, Z. Liu, M. L. Yin, J. S. Ren and X. G. Qu, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1445–1452 RSC .
P. Zhang, W. Steelant, M. Kumar and M. Scholfield, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4526–4527 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. F. Qiao, J. C. Zhou, J. W. Xiao, Y. F. Wang, L. D. Sun and C. H. Yan, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 4611–4623 RSC .
X. H. Liu, H. S. Qian, Y. P. Ji, Z. Q. Li, Y. Shao, Y. Hu, G. X. Tong, L. C. Li, W. D. Guo and H. C. Guo, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 12263–12268 RSC .
N. M. Idris, M. K. Gnanasammandhan, J. Zhang, P. C. Ho, R. Mahendran and Y. Zhang, Nat. Med., 2012, 18, 1580–1585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wang, H. Q. Tao, L. Cheng and Z. Liu, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 6145–6154 CAS .
A. G. Zhou, Y. C. Wei, B. Y. Wu, Q. Chen and D. Xing, Mol. Pharmaceutics, 2012, 9, 1580–1589 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. M. Liu, M. Zheng, X. G. Kong, Y. L. Zhang, Q. H. Zeng, Z. C. Sun, W. J. Buma and H. Zhang, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 3224–3226 RSC .
K. Liu, X. M. Liu, Q. H. Zeng, Y. L. Zhang, L. P. Tu, T. Liu, X. G. Kong, Y. H. Wang, F. Cao, S. A. Lambrechts, M. C. G. Aalders and H. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 4054–4062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Xia, X. G. Kong, X. M. Liu, L. P. Tu, Y. L. Zhang, Y. L. Chang, K. Liu, D. Z. Shen, H. Y. Zhao and H. Zhang, Biomaterials, 2014, 35, 4146–4156 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. I. Park, H. M. Kim, J. H. Kim, K. C. Moon, B. Yoo, K. T. Lee, N. Lee, Y. Choi, W. Park, D. Ling, K. Na, W. K. Moon, S. H. Choi, H. S. Park, S. Y. Yoon, Y. D. Suh, S. H. Lee and T. Hyeon, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 5755–5761 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Y. Chen, J. Shen, T. Y. Ohulchanskyy, N. J. Patel, A. Kutikov, Z. P. Li, J. Song, R. K. Pandey, H. Ågren, P. N. Prasad and G. Han, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 8280–8287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. S. Low, W. A. Henne and D. D. Doorneweerd, Acc. Chem. Res., 2008, 41, 120–129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Y. Cao, Y. Yang, Y. A. Gao, J. Zhou, Z. Q. Li and F. Y. Li, Biomaterials, 2011, 32, 2959–2968 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Erathodiyil and J. Y. Ying, Acc. Chem. Res., 2011, 44, 925–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiang, Y. Zhang, K. M. Lim, E. K. W. Sim and Y. F. Shi, Nanotechnology, 2009, 20, 155101 CrossRef PubMed .
X. J. Yang, Q. Q. Xiao, C. X. Niu, N. Jin, J. Ouyang, X. Y. Xiao and D. C. He, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2013, 1, 2757–2763 RSC .
L. M. Pan, Q. J. He, J. N. Liu, Y. Chen, M. Ma, L. L. Zhang and J. L. Shi, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 5722–5725 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. N. Liu, W. B. Bu, L. M. Pan, S. J. Zhang, F. Chen, L. P. Zhou, K. L. Zhao, W. J. Peng and J. L. Shi, Biomaterials, 2012, 33, 7282–7290 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wang, C. X. Yang, J. T. Chen and X. P. Yan, Anal. Chem., 2014, 86, 3263–3267 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Fang and W. Tan, Acc. Chem. Res., 2010, 43, 48–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Xiao and O. C. Farokhzad, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 3670–3676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Yuan, Y. Wu, J. Wang, A. Q. Lu, Z. L. Zhao, T. Liu, X. B. Zhang and W. H. Tan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2013, 52, 13965–13969 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. R. Zhao, H. R. Chen, Y. S. Li, L. Li, M. D. Lang and J. L. Shi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2008, 18, 2780–2788 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Pan, H. Zhang, T. Fan, J. G. Chen and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 908–910 RSC .
X. J. Kang, Y. L. Dai, P. A. Ma, D. M. Yang, C. X. Li, Z. Y. Hou, Z. Y. Cheng and J. Lin, Chem. – Eur. J., 2012, 18, 15676–15682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. V. Mody, A. Cox, S. Shah, A. Singh, W. Bevins and H. Parihar, Appl. Nanosci., 2014, 4, 385–392 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, R. R. Deng, M. A. MacDonald, B. L. Chen, J. K. Yuan, F. Wang, D. Z. Chi, T. S. A. Hor, P. Zhang, G. K. Liu, Y. Han and X. G. Liu, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 157–162 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Cheng, C. Wang and Z. Liu, Nanoscale, 2013, 5, 23–27 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
Table Content:

Dongmei Yang
	Dongmei Yang was born in Jilin, China, in 1984. She earned her BS degree in chemistry from Northeast Normal University in 2008. Then she was a graduate student in Professor Jun Lin's group at Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry (CIAC), Chinese Academy of Sciences, and received a PhD degree in 2013. Her research interests focus on the synthesis, optical spectroscopy, and bioapplication of lanthanide-based luminescence nanomaterials.

Ping'an Ma
	Ping'an Ma was born in Jilin, China, in 1982. He received his BS degree in Biology in 2005 at Northeast Normal University, and his PhD degree in Biochemistry in 2010 at Northeast Normal University. After graduation, he became an Assistant Professor in Prof. Jun Lin's group and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2013. His research focuses on the synthesis and application of multifunctional inorganic nanoparticles for bioapplication, particularly the design and mechanism of platinum-based anticancer drugs.

Zhiyou Hou
	Zhiyao Hou was born in Harbin, China, in 1980. He received his BS degree in environmental engineering (2003) and MS degree in applied chemistry (2006) from Harbin Engineering University (HEU). From 2006, he has been a graduate student at HEU, and then he was a joint training doctoral student under the guidance of Prof. Jun Lin at CIAC. He received a PhD degree in materials chemistry from HEU in 2009, and followed with postdoctoral studies at CIAC (2010–2012). Now, he is an Associate Professor in Prof. Lin's group. His research interests are in electrospun luminescent nanocomposites for bioapplications.

Ziyong Cheng
	Ziyong Cheng obtained his PhD in chemistry from CIAC (2006) under the supervision of Prof. Yanchun Han and Prof. Jun Lin on layered organic–inorganic perovskite materials. Following postdoctoral studies at Max-Planck Institute for Polymer Research (Mainz, Germany) with Prof. Wolfgang Knoll, he returned to CIAC (2008) to take up an associate professor position in inorganic chemistry. In 2013, he was promoted to a full professor. His research interests now are nanostructured materials and polymer–inorganic nanocomposites for drug delivery and release applications.

Chunxia Li
	Chunxia Li was born in Shandong, China, in 1977. She received her BS (2002) and MS (2005) in chemistry from Northeast Normal University, and a PhD degree (2008) from CIAC. After graduation, she became an Assistant Professor in Prof. Jun Lin's group and was promoted to Associate Professor in 2012. Her current research interests include the controllable synthesis of rare earth luminescence nanomaterials and their bioapplication.

Jun Lin
	Jun Lin was born in Changchun, China, in 1966. He received BS and MS degrees in inorganic chemistry from Jilin University, China in 1989 and 1992, respectively, and a PhD degree in inorganic chemistry from the Changchun Institute of Applied Chemistry in 1995. His postdoctoral studies were performed at the City University of Hong Kong (1996), Institute of New Materials (Germany, 1997), Virginia Commonwealth University (USA, 1998) and University of New Orleans (USA, 1999). He came back to China in 2000, and since then has been working as a professor at CIAC. His research interests include bulk and nanostructured luminescent materials and multifunctional composite materials together with their applications in the display, lighting, and biomedical fields.

 	Fig. 1  Unique advantages of UCNPs: (a) photostability: the time trace of emission intensity from a single UCNP under continuous laser illumination for more than 1 h, suggesting the durable photostability of the UCNPs. (b) Non-blinking: the zoom-in time trace and histogram of emission intensity, showing no on/off behavior. (c) High penetration depth: in vivo imaging of rat: quantum dots (QDs) injected into the abdomen, showing no luminescence (i); PEI-NaYF4:Yb/Er nanoparticles injected below the abdominal skin (ii), thigh muscles (iii), or below the skin of the back (iv), showing obvious luminescence. (d) No background luminescence interference: wavelength-dependent autofluorescence of vital organs and bodily fluids. (i) Immediately after euthanasia, the viscera of a hairless, athymic nu/nu mouse were exposed. Tissue autofluorescence was then imaged using three different excitation/emission filter sets: (ii) blue/green (460–500 nm/505–560 nm); (iii) green/red (525–555 nm/590–650 nm); and (iv) NIR (725–775 nm/790–830 nm). Arrows in (i) mark the location of the gallbladder (GB), small intestine (SI), and bladder (Bl). (e) Multicolor emission: (i–v) one wt% colloidal solution of NaYF4:Yb/Er nanocrystals in dichloromethane excited at 977 nm demonstrating upconversion luminescence. (i) NaYF4:Yb/Er solution; (ii) total upconversion luminescence; (iii and iv) NaYF4:Yb/Er upconversion viewed through green and red filters, respectively; (v) NaYF4:Yb/Tm solution; (vi) Single-color emission: optical micrographs of the parent NaYF4 upconversion microrods doped with Yb/Tm (20/0.2 mol%), Yb/Er (5/0.05 mol%), and Yb/Er (50/0.05 mol%), respectively. The dual-color-banded upconversion optical micrographs were obtained by varying the composition of the dopants. (f) Multimodal imaging: scheme of a multimodal imaging probe and UCL, MRI, and PET (positron emission tomography) multimodal imaging of small animals using NaYF4:Yb/Er. (Adapted from ref. 3, 21–23, 42 and 62. Copyright 2003, 2006, 2008, 2009, 2012 and 2014, Highwire press PNAS, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, American Chemical Society, Royal Society of Chemistry and Elsevier B. V. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Scheme 1  Schematic illustration of UCNP-based drug delivery carriers. (UCNPs: upconversion nanoparticles, mSiO2: mesoporous silica; PAA: polyacrylic acid; NPs: other functional nanoparticles such as Au, Fe3O4, and CuS.)	 

 	Fig. 2  The formation process of multifunctional Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb/Er nanocomposites (a), SEM (b) and TEM (c) images, upconversion emission spectrum (d) of nanocomposites, the magnetic hysteresis loops (e) of pure Fe3O4 (O), Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2 (■), Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb/Er (*), the separation process of the nanocomposites by magnet (f), and upconversion emission intensity of Er3+ in IBU-loaded materials as a function of the cumulative released IBU (g). (Adapted from ref. 160. Copyright 2010, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 3  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of UCNPs@SiO2@mSiO2 composite materials via a two-step sol–gel strategy using CTAB (a) or C18TMS (b) as structure-directing agents and the corresponding shape of the product obtained during each step. (Adapted from ref. 148 and 161. Copyright 2010 and 2014, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA and Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration for the synthesis of UCNPs@mSiO2–PEG/FA composite nanospheres via a one-step sol–gel reaction and the corresponding shape of the products. (Adapted from ref. 170. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 5  Schematic illustration of the synthesis procedure for eccentric NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd@PAA@SiO2 core–shell nanoclusters and the corresponding shapes (Strategy 1) as well as eccentric-(concentric-NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd@SiO2)@PAA core–shell nanostructures and the corresponding shapes (Strategy 2). (Adapted from ref. 173 and 174. Copyright 2013, Royal Society of Chemistry and American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematic diagram of the synthesis procedure for UCSNs and the corresponding TEM images of (a) Gd-UCNP (NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4), (b) Gd-UCNPs@d1-SiO2, (c) Gd-UCNPs@d1-SiO2@d2-SiO2, and (d) UCSNs. (Adapted from ref. 178. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 7  Schematic diagram and the corresponding shapes of hollow UCNP nanocarriers: Yb(OH)CO3@YbPO4:Er (a) and (b) NaYF4:Yb/Er hollow spheres via the hydrothermal-assisted template method as well as hollow NaREF4 (RE = Y, Yb and Lu) nanospheres (c) via the liquid–liquid two-phase hydrothermal approach combined with electron-beam lithography. (Adapted from ref. 194, 195 and 199. Copyright 2012 and 2013, Elsevier B. V. and Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 8  Schematic diagrams of synthesis procedures for UCNPs@polymer carriers: (a, b) C18PMH–PEG or TWEEN–COOH were used to modified hydrophobic UCNPs to yield “hydrophobic pockets” whereby the anticancer drug molecules DOX or CPT could be loaded (or co-loaded) into these pockets through hydrophobic interactions; (c) hydrophobic UCNPs and Fe3O4 nanoparticles were simultaneously encapsulated with the diblock copolymer PS16-b-PAA10via a microemulsion method. (Adapted from ref. 200, 204 and 209, copyright 2011 and 2014. Elsevier B. V. and Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 9  Schematic diagram of the synthesis procedure and the corresponding shapes of diverse UCNPs@SiO2 fibers (a), UCNPs@SiO2 tubes (b) and UCNPs@mSiO2@fibers (c). (Adapted from ref. 220–222, copyright 2012, 2013 and 2014. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Royal Society of Chemistry and American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) TEM image and (b) in vitro T1-weighted MR and upconversion luminescence imaging of β-NaYF4:Yb/Er@β-NaGdF4:Yb@mSiO2 (UCNPs@mSiO2) nanoparticles, (c) in vitro cytotoxicity of free DOX, DOX–UCNPs@mSiO2–PEG, and pure UCNPs@mSiO2–PEG against HeLa cells after 24 h incubation and (d, e) in vivo antitumor efficacy of UNCPs@mSiO2–PEG (labeled as NPs) on an H22 cancer subcutaneous model: the photographs (d) of excised tumors from euthanized representative mice after treatment with saline solution as a control, free DOX, and DOX-NPs, respectively, and mean tumor weights (e) of each group on the last day of the experiment. Two asterisks indicate a statistically significant discrepancy (**P < 0.01). (Adapted from ref. 169, copyright 2013. Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the DOX-conjugated UCNPs. (b) UC emission spectrum of NaYF4:Yb/Tm (black line) and the UV-Vis absorption spectrum of DOX (red line). (c) UC emission spectra of NaYF4:Yb/Tm (2 mg mL−1) after reaction with DOX at different concentrations. (d) UC emission intensity of DOX-conjugated NaYF4:Yb/Tm NPs is a function of the release time at pH 5.0 and 37 °C PBS buffer. (Adapted from ref. 233, copyright 2013. Elsevier B. V. Reproduced with permission.)	 

pH (PAA)	NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd@PAA@SiO2	DOX	Electrostatic interaction	
In vitro
	
173


ecc-(con-NaYF4:Yb/Er/Gd@mSiO2)@PAA	DOX	Physical adsorption and electrostatic interaction	
In vitro
	
174

GdVO4:Yb/Er@PAA	DOX	Electrostatic interaction	
In vitro
	
193

NaYF4:Yb/Er@PAA	DOX	Electrostatic interaction	
In vitro
	
239

NaYF4:Yb/Er@γ-AlO(OH)	DOX	Physical adsorption	
In vitro
	
241



pH (–CONHN)	NaYF4:Yb/Tm-CONHNDOX	DOX	Covalent bonding	
In vitro
	
233

BaGdF5:Yb/Tm@BaGdF5:Yb-CONHNDOX	DOX	Covalent bonding	
In vitro
	
243



Thermo (PNIPAM)	NaYF4:Yb/Er@SiO2@(PNIPAM-co-PAA)	DOX	Electrostatic interaction	
In vitro
	
251

NaYF4:Yb/Er@mSiO2@(PNIPAM-co-PAA)	DOX	Physical adsorption and electrostatic interaction	
In vitro
	
252



Redox (GSH)	NaYF4:Yb/Er-PEI-Pt(IV)	Cisplatin	Covalent bonding	
In vitro
	
254

NaYF4:Yb/Er-Pt(IV)-mPEG-b-PCL-b-PLL	Cisplatin	Covalent bonding	
In vitro and in vivo	
208

Fe3O4@SiO2@NaYF4:Yb/Er@MnO2	Congo red	Electrostatic interaction	
In vitro
	
255



Magnetic	Fe3O4@SiO2@mSiO2@NaYF4:Yb/Er	Ibuprofen	Hydrophobic interaction and covalent bonding	
In vitro
	
160

Fe3O4@SiO2@volid@Y2O3:Yb/Er	DOX	Physical adsorption	
In vitro and in vivo	
175

Fe3O4@NaYF4:Yb/Er@PS16-b-PAA10	DOX	Polymer encapsulation	
In vitro and in vivo	
209


NB caged oligo(ethylene) glycol	

	NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@mSiO2	350	DOX (anticancer drug)	
91

NE caged D-luciferin	

	NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@SiO2	350	
D-luciferin	
259

NBA caged folic acid	

	NaYF4:Yb/Tm@SiO2	360	Folic acid (phototarget) and DOX	
263

Benzoin caged carboxylic acid	

	NaYF4:Yb/Tm	290	Carboxylic acid	
264



Fe4S3 (NO)7− caged NO	Fe4S3 (NO)7−	NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4@SiO2	540	NO	
265

NaYF4:Gd/Yb/Er@NaYF4-polymer disk	540	NO	
266

ONB caged biomacro-molecules	

	NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4-hydrogel	350	Biomacromolecules	
267

ONB caged block copolymer	

	NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4-block copolymer	350	Nile red	
268

DMNPE caged siRNA	

	NaYF4:Yb/Tm@SiO2@mSiO2	350	siRNA	
269

ONA caged cell adhesion	

	NaYF4:Yb/Tm	360	Cell release	
270


Azobenzenes	

	NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4@mSiO2	DOX release	
93

Spiropyrans	

	Hollow NaYF4:Yb/Er	Enzymatic release	
94

Diarylethenes	

	NaYF4:Yb/Er (Yb/Tm)	Reversible photoswitching	
277

Diarylethenes	

	NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4:Yb/Tm@NaYF4	Reversible photoswitching	
278

Diarylethenes	

	NaYF4:Yb/Er/Tm	Upconversion small animal imaging in vivo	
279

Bis-spiropyrans	

	LiYF4:Yb/Tm	Reversible photoswitching	
280

Azobenzene derivative (chiral molecular)	

	NaGdF4:Yb/Tm@NaGdF4	Reversible NIR light-directed reflection in a helical superstructure	
281


 	Fig. 12  Two different pH-responsive UCNP-based drug delivery systems. (a–c) The mesoporous γ-AlO(OH) and UCNP (UCNPs–Al) system: (a) a schematic representation for the synthesis of pH-responsive UCNPs–Al; (b) the zeta potential of UCNPs–Al and UCNPs-mSiO2 as a function of pH values; and (c) delayed release of DOX from UCNPs–Al at different pH values. (d–g) the DOX-conjugated BaGdF5:Yb/Tm@BaGdF5:Yb (UCNPs) system: (d) the synthesis and DOX-conjugation process of the core–shell structured UCNPs and drug release behavior; TEM images of (e) UCNPs and (f) gelatin-modified UCNPs; and (g) cumulative DOX release from DOX-conjugated UCNPs as a function of release time at different pH values. (Adapted from ref. 241 and 243. Copyright 2013 and 2014. Elsevier B. V. and American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Synthesis route to UCNPs@mSiO2-P(NIPAM-co-MAA): (I) CTAB/TEOS; (II) methacryloxypropyltrimethoxysilane (MPTS), N-isopropylacrylamide (NIPAM), methacrylic acid (AA); (III) guest (DOX) loading; (IV) increased temperature and decreased pH values. (b) TEM images of UCNPs@mSiO2-P(NIPAM-co-MAA). Release profiles of DOX from DOX-UCNPs@mSiO2-P(NIPAM-co-MAA) nanocarriers with or without 980 nm laser irradiation at a power density of 1.22 W (c) as well as in response to temperature changes at (d) pH = 7.4 and (e) pH = 5.0. (Adapted from ref. 252. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 14  Rational design of multifunctional upconversion nanocrystals–polymer nanocomposites for cisplatin(IV) delivery and biomedical imaging. (I) Schematic illustration of the preparation of UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB nanoparticles and possible cellular pathways for cisplatin and UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB nanoparticles. (II) TEM images of UCNPs (a), UCNPs@P (b), and UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB (c). (III) Luminescence microscopy images of HeLa cells after incubation with 200 μg ml−1 of UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB for 6 h at 37 °C. The red fluorescence arises from RhB (a), the green fluorescence arises from UCNPs (b), and the blue fluorescence arises from Hoechst 33324 dye (c). Scale bars: 20 μm. (IV) Quantitative real-time PCR analyses of Bcl-2, Survivin, and Aif mRNA levels of apoptotic genes in MCF-7 cells due to (1) blank control, (2) cisplatin(IV) prodrug, (3) cisplatin, (4) UCNPs@P-Pt/RhB exposure for 24 h (n = 3). *P < 0.05. (Adapted from ref. 208. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Scheme 2  General photodecaging process: the caged molecule is bound to the photocage by covalent bonds, and light excitation of the photocage cleaves the covalent bonds so that the caged molecule is liberated in its active form. (Adapted from ref. 260, copyright 2012. Royal Society of Chemistry. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic illustration of the NIR-regulated, UCNP-based DDS YSUCNPs. (b) The photolysis of the prodrug under NIR emission from the YSUCNPs. (c) Photo-regulated release of the drug from YSUCNP-ACCh controlled by a 980 nm laser. (d) Survival rate in mice intratumorally injected with different solutions on the 1st day and on the 9th day. (Adapted from ref. 92. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Illustration of photocaged UCNPs following NIR laser activation to remove the cage molecules and subsequent targeting of cancer cells. (b) Time course upconversion NIR luminescence (emission 800 nm) images of caged folate-PEGylated UCNPs@SiO2–DOX nanoparticles without NIR laser irradiation. Insets show the enlarged tumor region. (c) Ex vivo DOX fluorescence (emission 580 nm) images of dissected organs and tumors from the group of laser-treated caged folate-PEGylated UCNPs@SiO2–DOX nanoparticles of (b). (d) Tumor growth suppression monitored in terms of tumor volume changes. Error bars are based on five mice per group (n = 5). **P < 0.01 calculated and compared to caged folate-PEGylated UCNPs@SiO2–DOX (without laser irradiation). (Adapted from ref. 263. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Synthesis procedure for upconverting nanoparticles coated with a mesoporous silica outer layer. (b) NIR light-triggered DOX release by making use of the upconversion property of UCNPs and trans–cis photoisomerization of azo molecules grafted in the mesopore network of a mesoporous silica layer. (c) Drug release in PBS under NIR light irradiation and dark conditions, alternatively. Every duration of NIR irradiation is 1 h. (d) Flow cytometry histograms under excitation of 488 nm laser light show the DOX fluorescence intensity in HeLa cell nuclei separated from the whole cell after treatment with NIR light exposure for different times. (e) Inhibition of HeLa cell growth under different conditions. The concentration of the MSN materials was 1 mg mL−1, and the NIR light exposure intensity was 2.4 W cm−2. (Adapted from ref. 93. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic illustration of the characterization of UCNP–DPP–PEG nanoparticles. (b) Absorption spectrum of DPP (blue line), emission spectra of pure UCNPs (black line), and DPP-conjugated UCNPs (red line) under 980 nm laser. (c) Absorption spectra of UCNP–DPP–PEG as a function of time under 980 nm laser irradiation. (d) in vivo tumor volume changes of Balb/c mice in different groups after various treatments: 980 nm laser irradiation for 30 min (2.5 W cm−2, 5 min break after 5 min irradiation), UV (365 nm) irradiation for 30 min, or without any irradiation. (e) In vivo UCL/MR/CT trimodality imaging of a tumor-bearing Balb/c mouse after injection of nanoparticles at the tumor site. (Adapted from ref. 95. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic illustration of NIR light activation of a platinum(IV) prodrug and intracellular apoptosis imaging through UCNPs. (Adapted from ref. 96. Copyright 2013, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

NaYF4:Yb/Er	mSiO2	ZnPc (672 nm)	Silica encapsulation	—	
163

NaYF4:Yb/Er	PAH-DMMA-PEG	Ce6 (663 nm)	Electrostatic adsorption	—	
240

NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4	NGO-PEG	ZnPc (672 nm)	Hydrophobic interaction	—	
286

NaYbF4:Gd/Tm@NaGdF4	Tween 20	Hypocrellin A (470 nm)	Hydrophobic interaction	—	
287

NaYF4:Yb/Er	Chitosan	ZnPc (672 nm)	Hydrophobic interaction	FA	
288

NaGdF4:Yb/Er	BSA	RB (550 nm)	Hydrophobic interaction	—	
289

NaYF4:Yb/Er	Pores	MB (663 nm)	Physical adsorption	—	
290

NaYF4:Yb/Er	SiO2	MC540 (555 nm)	Silica encapsulation	Antibody	
291

NaYF4:Yb/Er	mSiO2	
MC540 (555 nm)
ZnPc (672 nm)
	Silica encapsulation	FA	
294

NaYF4:Yb/Er	C18PMH-PEG	Ce6 (663 nm)	Hydrophobic interaction	—	
295

NaYF4:Yb/Er	
O–Carboxymethylated chitosan	PPa (668 nm)	Covalent bonding	c(RGDyK)	
296

NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaYF4:Yb/Tm	PAAM	C60MA	Covalent bonding	FA	
297

NaYF4:Yb/Er	AEP	RB (550 nm)	Covalent bonding	FA	
298

NaYF4:Yb/Er	Poly(allylamine)	ZnPc (660 nm)	Covalent bonding	FA	
299

NaYF4:Yb/Er@NaGdF4	PEG–phospholipids	Ce6 (663 nm)	Hydrophobic interaction and covalent bonding	—	
300

NaYF4:Yb/Gd/Tm	APBA and HAC60	HAC60 (475, 650 nm)	Covalent bonding	APBA and HA	
309


 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of mesoporous-silica-coated UCNs co-loaded with ZnPc and MC540 photosensitizers for PDT. (b) Schematic diagram showing UCN-based targeted PDT in a mouse model of melanoma intravenously injected with UCNs that were surface-modified with folic acid (FA) and PEG moieties. (c) Representative photos of a mouse from each group (1–3) intravenously injected with FA–PEG–UCNs, unmodified UCNs, or PBS showing the change in tumor size (highlighted by dashed white circles) before and after PDT treatment. Scale bars: 10 mm. (Adapted from ref. 294. Copyright 2012, Highwire Press PNAS. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Schematic of the synthesis of the FASOC-UCNP-ZnPc nanoconstruct and folate-mediated binding of tumor cells with folate receptor expression; (b, c) In vivo tumor targeting of the nanoconstructs. (b) Fluorescence images of nude mice bearing Bel-7402 tumors with intravenously injected with FASOC-UCNP-ICG; (c) fluorescence images of isolated organs separated from Bel-7402 tumor-bearing mice in different groups at 24 h postinjection. (d) Comparison of the therapeutic efficacy of deep-tissue PDT triggered by 980 and 660 nm light illustrating the tumor growth in mice from different treatment groups within 15 days. (Adapted from ref. 288. Copyright 2013, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 22  Two kinds of specific biomolecule-targeted drug delivery systems. (I) Nuclear targeting. (a) Schematic illustration of the nuclear-targeting of a UCNP-based theranostic system for nuclear imaging and direct intranuclear anticancer drug delivery. (b) In vitro confocal observations of UCNPs and DOX in HeLa cells incubated with DOX–UCNPs–PEG (without TAT) and DOX–UCNPs–PEG/TAT for 24 h. The blue fluorescence is from DAPI used to stain the nuclei. The green and red fluorescence is from UCNPs under 980 nm laser excitation, while DOX emits red fluorescence under 488 nm laser excitation. Without TAT, UCNPs can be found within the cytoplasm but not in the nucleus, and DOX accumulates mostly within the cytoplasm with negligible DOX fluorescence within the nuclei. In contrast, in the presence of TAT, the stronger fluorescent emissions from both UCNPs and DOX can be found mostly from the nuclei, indicating the effective internalization of the NPs into the cell nucleus. Scale bar: 20 mm. (II) Aptamer targeting: (c) Engineering of a targeted photodynamic therapy nanoplatform using an aptamer-guided G-quadruplex DNA carrier and 980-nm NIR irradiation. Flow cytometry histograms to monitor the binding of the G4-aptamer and UCNP-G4-aptamer with (d) CEM cells and (e) Ramos cells, respectively, demonstrating that the UCNP-G4-aptamer has high selectivity and targeting specificity toward CEM cells but shows little affinity to nontarget Ramos cells. (Adapted from ref. 308 and 312. Copyright 2012 and 2013, and Elsevier B. V. and Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. Reproduced with permission.)	 

 	Fig. 23  Multifunctional UCNP-based “nanorattle” for magnetic-targeted therapy. (a) Synthesis procedure for drug-loaded Fe3O4@SiO2@volid@Y2O3:Yb/Er nanorattles. (b) Schematic illustration of the targeting of a DOX-loaded multifunctional drug carrier to tumor cells assisted by an externally applied magnetic field (MF). (c) In vivo mouse imaging after 1 h of magnetic field treatment. (d) The luminescence signal was measured from the whole tumor in vivo and ex vivo. (e) Tumor volume changes in mice under different treatments. (Adapted from ref. 175. Copyright 2012, American Chemical Society. Reproduced with permission.)	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2015
