Thermally conductive polymer-based composites: fundamentals, progress and flame retardancy/anti-electromagnetic interference design  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TC03306B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TC03306B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 14399-14430Thermally conductive polymer-based composites: fundamentals, progress and flame retardancy/anti-electromagnetic interference design

        
          
            You 
            Li
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yongxin 
            Qian
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Qinghui 
            Jiang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Abubakar Yakubu 
            Haruna
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yubo 
            Luo
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Junyou 
            Yang
          
          
        
      *
      School of Materials Science and Engineering, State Key Laboratory of Materials Processing and Die & Mould Technology, Huazhong University of Science and Technology, Wuhan, 430074, P. R. China. E-mail: jyyang@mail.hust.edu.cn; luoyubo@hust.edu.cn
Received 
      6th August 2022
    , Accepted 6th September 2022First published on 12th September 2022AbstractPolymer-based electronic packaging materials (such as epoxy resin, polydimethylsiloxane, and polyvinyl alcohol) are widely used in chips because they have the merits of light weight, corrosion resistance, electrical insulation and ease of processing. With the rapid improvement in the integration and power density of chips in the past decade, electronic packaging materials are required to have excellent thermal conductivity, flame retardancy and anti-electromagnetic interference compatibility (e.g., electromagnetic wave shielding and absorption). Unfortunately, most polymers have low thermal conductivity and are highly electromagnetic wave-transmittable and flammable. Thus, the development of polymer-based electronic packaging materials with high thermal conductivity, flame retardancy and anti-electromagnetic interference performance are highly desirable for next generation electronic devices. In this perspective, we presented the heat conduction mechanism of polymer-based composites and the emerging approaches to enhance the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites (such as constructing 3D thermally conductive networks). In addition, we also summarized the mechanism and recent progress in anti-electromagnetic interference and flame retardancy studies for these highly thermally conductive polymer-based composites, including compositing carbon materials with ceramics to achieve heat conduction and anti-electromagnetic interference or modifying ceramics with nitrogen and phosphorus compounds to improve heat conductivity and flame retardancy.
You Li
You Li is currently pursuing her master's degree at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Her research focuses on new functional materials and their applications in the field of thermal management and electronic packaging.
Yongxin Qian
Qian Yongxin is pursuing his doctoral degree at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His research focuses on new functional materials and their applications in the field of thermal management and electromagnetic wave absorption.
Qinghui Jiang
Prof. Qinghui is currently an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, P. R. China. He obtained his PhD degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, P. R. China in 2007. He was a post-doctoral fellow at the School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom (2011–2013). His research interests include thermoelectric materials, multiferroic materials, and ferroelectric materials.
Abubakar Yakubu Haruna
Abubakar Yakubu Haruna received his master's degree from Shenyang Aerospace University in 2020. He is currently a PhD candidate at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His research focuses on bismuth telluride based thermoelectric materials.
Yubo Luo
Luo Yubo is currently a professor at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China. He received his PhD degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 2016. He was a research fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2016–2019), and a visiting scholar at Northwestern University, United States (2017–2019). His current research focuses on thermoelectric semiconductors and electronic packaging materials.
Junyou Yang
Junyou Yang professor is currently a deputy Dean of the Department of Materials Science, School of Materials Science and Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, P. R. China. He obtained his PhD degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, P. R. China in 1996. He was a post-doctoral fellow at the Research Center of Advanced Science and Technology (RCAST), University of Tokyo, Japan (1999–2001). He specializes in thermoelectric materials, fusion functional materials, solar cells and thermal management materials.
1. Introduction
With the advance of semiconductor and electronic technology (e.g., 3D stereo packaging technology), electronic devices in the 5G/6G era are moving toward miniaturization, high integration, light weight and high power.1 Thus, a significant amount of waste heat is generated and accumulated during the operation of electronic devices, exposing the electronic devices to thermal failure and spontaneous combustion risk.2 In general, heat can be released from electronic devices into the environment mainly through four processes: firstly, heat is transferred inside the devices; secondly, the heat is transferred between the devices and radiators, and then through the radiators; finally, the heat is transferred from the radiators to the ambient environment.3 Due to the narrow space and poor air circulation in electronic devices, it is difficult for waste heat to conduct or radiate to the outside of the equipment on time, leading to an increase in device temperature, degradation in performance, and an increase in the failure rate.4 For example, about half of all microelectronic packaged device failures or events of devices on fire are temperature-related. Therefore, heat dissipation and flame retardancy are quite urgent for electronics, such as light-emitting diodes (LEDs), ultrahigh-voltage electronic devices, integrated circuits, electric machineries, etc.,5 which has sparked widespread interest in materials with high thermal conductivity and flame retardancy.6 In addition, the widespread application of electronic devices with the continuous development of information technology and electronic communications makes electromagnetic pollution an unignorable issue that researchers both local and abroad must pay great attention to. Since the electromagnetic wave radiated by electronic devices not only affects the normal operation of the electronic devices, but also harms the human body, it is highly desirable to develop materials that exhibit excellent heat dissipation, flame retardancy and suppression of electromagnetic interference (e.g., electromagnetic wave shielding and absorption) performance.
In order to meet the demands of electronics, materials with high thermal conductivity are often required to have the characteristics of ease of processing, electrical insulation and good mechanical properties.5 In general, carbon7 and metal8 materials have high thermal conductivity and electromagnetic wave shielding performance, but they are electrically conductive. Insulated metal oxides9 and ceramics10 have relatively high thermal conductivity and flame retardancy, but they exhibit high density and high processing cost. Polymers (such as EP, polydimethylsiloxane, polyvinyl alcohol, etc.) which have the merits of low cost, light weight, corrosion resistance, electrical insulation and ease of processing11 are ideal materials for electronic device packaging.12 However, phonons are the dominant conduction carriers for most polymers, which causes polymers to exhibit poor thermal conductivity, because of their amorphous arrangement and vibration of molecular chains.13 Besides, polymers are also highly flammable and good electromagnetic wave-transmitting materials because there is no matter that can absorb or reflect electromagnetic waves. Thus, it is urgent to develop polymer-based composites with high thermal conductivity, anti-electromagnetic interference and flame retardancy.12
Recent studies concerning polymer-based composites have been widely reported, but they just focused on strategies for enhancing the thermal conductivity of polymers and did not report on the multifunctional design and strategies for the compatibility of heat conduction and anti-electromagnetic interference, heat conduction and flame retardancy, or even the compatibility of heat conduction, flame retardancy and anti-electromagnetic interference.14,15 Therefore, it is extremely significant to systematically review the progress and predict the prospect for polymer-based composites with concurrently high thermal conductivity, flame retardancy and anti-electromagnetic interference properties.16–20 Herein, as presented in Fig. 1, we focused on the heat conduction mechanism of polymer-based composites, as well as methods for enhancing the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites, such as improving the crystallinity of polymers, adding thermally conductive fillers into the polymer matrix and constructing 3D thermally conductive networks. In addition, we also summarized the mechanism and recent progress in anti-electromagnetic interference and flame retardancy studies for these highly conductive polymer-based composites, including compositing carbon materials with ceramic materials to achieve thermal conductivity and anti-electromagnetic interference compatibility and modifying ceramic materials with nitrogen and phosphorus compounds to improve their thermal conductivity and flame retardancy. Finally, we pointed out the multifunctional design of polymer-based composites, such as the compatibility of heat conduction and anti-electromagnetic interference, heat conduction and flame retardancy, compatibility of heat conduction, flame retardancy and anti-electromagnetic interference should be the trend for polymer-based composites in the future.
 Fig. 1  Development of polymer-based composites. 
2 Heat conduction mechanism of polymer-based composites
2.1 Heat propagation
Heat is a kind of energy involving the movement, rotation, and vibration of molecules, atoms, electrons, as well as components that make up these microscopic particles.21–23 Heat transfer refers to the process in which heat transfers from a high-temperature object to a low-temperature object, or from a high-temperature area inside an object to a low-temperature area.24 In this process, only the heat energy is transferred, and the chemical properties of the materials are not changed. The limit of the ratio of the temperature difference to the distance  between two isothermal surfaces in the normal direction is called the temperature gradient,25 which is expressed using formula (2.1): (2.1)The temperature gradient is a vector. Its positive direction is the direction of temperature increase, which is opposite to the direction of heat conduction; the negative direction is the direction of temperature reduction, which is consistent with the direction of heat conduction.
There are three main ways of heat transfer: heat convection, radiation and conduction.26–29 Heat conduction mainly occurs in solid materials. It refers to the phenomenon of heat transfer generated by the thermal movement of microscopic particles, such as molecules, atoms and free electrons, when there is no macro relative movement between their parts of the object. Thermal convection mainly occurs in gas or liquid fluid materials, which refers to the phenomenon of heat transfer caused by the relative movement of particle positions in the fluid. Thermal radiation mainly occurs in high-temperature materials. It refers to the phenomenon of heat transfer in objects in the form of radiated electromagnetic waves due to high temperature.
The heat conduction process of materials follows Fourier's law,30,31 which is presented in formula (2.2): (2.2)where Q is the heat flux (W); A is the heat transfer area (m2); T is the temperature (K); x is the distance in the heat transfer direction (m); and k is the thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1). The heat transfer capacity of materials is usually expressed by thermal conductivity, which represents the heat passing per unit area, per unit time, per distance and per temperature change.
2.2 Heat conduction mechanism in solid materials
There are mainly phonon, electron, and photon heat transfer carriers for heat transfer in materials.30 Thermodynamic studies show that the heat conduction of solid materials is mainly determined by free electrons and phonons (the normal mode energy quantum of lattice vibration is called phonon).
The thermal conductivity of solid materials can be expressed using formula25(2.3): k = ke + kp(2.3)where k, ke and kp are the thermal conductivity of materials, phonons and electrons, respectively.
The physical properties of materials determine the contribution of phonon heat conduction and electronic heat conduction to their thermal conductivity. Metal materials contain a large quantity of free moving electrons. Their rapid migration process contributes to the thermal conductivity of materials, and the velocity of free electrons is much larger than that of phonons. Therefore metal materials usually have excellent thermal conductivity,25 whose kM is equal to ke. (2.4)where kM is the thermal conductivity of metal materials; Ce is the heat capacity of electrons per volume; Ve is the average velocity of electrons;  is the average free path of electrons; kB is the Boltzmann constant; n is the density of electrons; τ is the relaxation time of electrons; m is the mass of electrons; e is the absolute value of electron charge; σ is the electrical conductivity of electrons; and T is room temperature.
Dielectric materials25 almost do not have free moving electrons, and the contribution of free electrons to the thermal conductivity of materials can be ignored. Phonons are the main carriers of their heat conduction. Therefore, the thermal conductivity of nonconductive materials kNM is equal to kp. (2.5)where kNM is the thermal conductivity of nonconductive materials; Cp is the heat capacity of phonons per volume; Vp is the average velocity of phonons; and  is the average free path of phonons. The main factor affecting the thermal conductivity of dielectric materials is the average free path of phonons . The average free path of phonons is basically determined by two scattering processes: (1) the scattering caused by the collision between phonons and (2) the scattering caused by the interaction between phonons and interfaces, various defects or impurities.
For carbon materials25 such as graphene and carbon nanotubes, electrons and phonons are the heat conductors that contribute to their thermal conductivity. Therefore, the thermal conductivity of carbon materials kCM can be expressed using formula (2.6): (2.6)
2.3 Heat conduction mechanism of polymer-based composites
For most organic polymers, the heat transfer process mainly relies on lattice vibration, and phonons are the main heat-transferring carriers. However, it is extremely difficult for organic molecules to move and form perfect crystals due to the random entanglement of internal molecular chains.32 Adding high thermally conductive fillers into the organic polymer matrix is the most effective method at present to address the low thermal conductivity of polymers.33,34 Therefore, the improvement of the conductivity of polymers depends on thermally conductive fillers.35–37 There are three theories to explain the thermal conduction mechanism of polymer-based composites: heat conduction path theory, percolation theory and thermal elasticity coefficient theory.

2.3.1 Heat conduction path theory. 
At present, the theory of heat conduction path is the mainstream.38 The thermal conductivity of thermally conductive polymer-based composites is determined by the synergistic effect between the polymer matrix and thermally conductive fillers. When the loading of thermally conductive fillers is low, they are dispersed and isolated in the matrix without contact (Fig. 2a), which makes it difficult to form thermally conductive paths and to improve the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites. With an increase in the loading of the thermally conductive fillers, thermally conductive fillers come into contact with each other and form heat conduction paths in the matrix, which significantly improve the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites (Fig. 2b). Furthermore, the continuous increase in the loading of the thermally conductive fillers will make the thermally conductive paths intertwined and twisted to form a thermally conductive network, which leads to further improvement and stabilization of the thermal conductivity of the composites (Fig. 2c).
 Fig. 2  Thermal conductivity mechanism of organic-based thermally conductive composites. (a) Low loading of thermally conductive fillers; (b) higher loading of thermally conductive fillers; (c) extremely high loading of thermally conductive fillers. 


2.3.2 Heat conduction percolation theory. 
Percolation theory39 shows that the electrical conductivity or thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites changes sharply near the percolation transition point, increasing hundreds or even thousands of times. The use of percolation theory to explain the electrically conductive behavior of polymer-based composites has been very successful, but using it to explain the thermally conductive behavior of polymer-based composites has encountered problems: for polymer-based composites, it is difficult to observe thermal percolation, and thermal percolation exists only in polymer-based composites filled with graphene nanosheets, carbon nanotubes or other particles. Researchers believe that this is mainly due to the electrical conductivity difference of 109–1016 times between electrically conductive particles and the polymer matrix, while the difference in thermal conductivity between thermally conductive particles and the polymer matrix is only 10–103 times. Such a small difference in thermal conductivity between thermally conductive particles and the polymer is not enough to produce thermal percolation. In order to produce thermal percolation, the thermal conductivity of thermally conductive particles needs to be high enough. Therefore, the theory of thermal percolation has always been controversial when explaining the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites.


2.3.3 Thermal elasticity coefficient theory. 
The variation law of the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites is extremely similar to the elastic coefficient and modulus in classical vibration and elasticity. Therefore, the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites can be regarded as the thermal elastic coefficient of the thermal vibration transmission process.40 The greater thermal conductivity of thermally conductive fillers leads to the greater thermal elastic coefficient and contributes to a higher transmission efficiency of thermal vibration. The thermal conductivity improvement of polymer-based composites can be regarded as the reinforcement effect between high thermally conductive fillers and the polymer matrix.
The thermal conductivity improvement of polymer-based composites by the filling of thermally conductive fillers follows the combined enhancement mechanism of the thermal elasticity coefficient of the polymer-based composites. The thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites will gradually increase with no sudden growth, with the increase of the loading of thermally conductive fillers.
While the theories of heat conduction path and thermal elasticity coefficient can well explain the influence of the loading of thermally conductive fillers on the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites, it is difficult to explain the influence of the filler size, morphology and any other factors like the synergistic effect of the combination of different sizes and morphologies on the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites. Therefore, it is urgent to develop thermal conduction mechanism theories for polymer-based composites.

2.4 Thermal conductivity models of polymer-based composites
Understanding the factors affecting the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites theoretically and deriving the thermal conductivity equation is of great significance for the design of specific thermal conductivity materials.

2.4.1 Maxwell–Eucken model. 
Assuming that the thermally conductive fillers are not in contact with each other and are uniformly dispersed in the polymer matrix, the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites can be given by the Maxwell–Eucken model:41 (2.7)where kc is the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites; kp is the thermal conductivity of the polymer; kf is the thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive fillers; and Vf is the volume filling fraction of the thermally conductive fillers.
When the content of thermally conductive fillers is less than 20 vol%, the Maxwell–Eucken model can well predict the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites; when the content of thermally conductive fillers is more than 20 vol%, there is a considerable difference between the experimental data and the theoretical value. Because when the content of thermally conductive fillers is high, the thermally conductive fillers are no longer isolated, but interacted, and a heat conduction chain is formed in the polymer matrix. In this circumstance, the Maxwell–Eucken model underestimates the thermal conductivity of the system of polymer-based composites.


2.4.2 Effective medium theory model. 
Assuming that the thermally conductive fillers are randomly distributed in the polymer matrix, the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites can be given by the effective medium theory (EMT) model:42 (2.8)where kc is the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites; kp is the thermal conductivity of the polymer; kf is the thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive fillers; and Vf is the volume filling fraction of the thermally conductive fillers.


2.4.3 Fricke model. 
Assuming that the morphology of thermally conductive fillers is ellipsoid and the thermally conductive fillers are randomly distributed in the polymer matrix, the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites can be given by the Fricke model:43 (2.9)where kc is the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites; kp is the thermal conductivity of the polymer; kf is the thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive fillers; and Vf is the volume filling fraction of the thermally conductive fillers.
The value of F depends on the shape of the thermally conductive fillers, the thermal conductivity of the polymer matrix and the thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive fillers. (2.10)where fi is the half axial length of the elliptical thermally conductive fillers; when f1 = f2 ≠ f3, the shape of the thermally conductive fillers is ellipsoid; when f1 = f2 = f3, the shape of the thermally conductive fillers is sphere, and the Fricke model can be simplified as the Maxwell–Eucken model.


2.4.4 Agrawal model. 
Considering that most of the thermally conductive fillers used in polymer-based composites are not spherical and there is agglomeration of thermally conductive fillers in the polymer-based composites with a high content of thermally conductive fillers, Agrawal44 deduced a model suitable for predicting the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites filled with a high content (over 50 vol%) of thermally conductive fillers. (2.11)where kc is the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites; kp is the thermal conductivity of the polymer; kf is the thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive fillers; Vf is the volume filling fraction of the thermally conductive fillers; and ξ is the correction factor.


2.4.5 Y. Agari model. 
Y. Agari45 introduced parallel and vertical conduction mechanisms and deduced a model suitable for predicting the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites. lgkc = VfC2lgkf + (1 − Vf)lg(C1kp)(2.12)where kc is the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites; kp is the thermal conductivity of the polymer; kf is the thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive fillers; Vf is the volume filling fraction of the thermally conductive fillers; C1 is the crystal size factor; C2 is the free factor of the thermally conductive fillers forming a heat conducting chain; 1 ≥ C2 ≥ 0. The easier the formation of the heat conducting chain is for thermally conductive fillers, the greater the influence they have on the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites, and the closer to 1 C2 is.


2.4.6 Every model. 
When the content of thermally conductive fillers is high and the interfacial thermal resistance needs to be considered, Every46 deduced a model suitable for predicting the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites: (2.13)where kc is the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composites; kp is the thermal conductivity of the polymer; kf is the thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive fillers; Vf is the volume filling content of the thermally conductive fillers; and a is the interfacial thermal resistance.
At present, there are many thermal conductivity models to predict the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites, while only a few of them can accurately predict the thermal conductivity of most systems. This can be explained by two reasons: (1) the structural complexity and anisotropy of polymer-based composites makes it hard to consider all influencing factors of thermal conductivity; (2) hypothetical conditions are difficult to meet in practice.

3 Influencing factors on the thermal conductivity and development of polymer-based composites
The thermal dissipation ability of polymer-based composites depends on the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites, and high thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites can lead to a more effective thermal dissipation ability of polymer-based composites.3 There are multiple factors affecting the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites, such as the polymer matrix, thermally conductive additives, polymer–additive interface, preconstruction of the thermally conductive network structure, etc.38 (Fig. 3). It is highly significant to study the effect of these factors on improving the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites.
 Fig. 3  Factors influencing the thermal conductivity of polymer composites. Reproduced from ref. 10 and 47–65 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Elsevier, American Chemical Society, Springer Nature and John Wiley and Sons. 
3.1 Polymer matrix types
Phonons serve as the main heat-conducting carriers of polymers. Polymers do not have a regular crystal structure, so the transmission of phonon vibration is blocked. Therefore, polymers usually have low thermal conductivity, whose values are all below 0.5 W m−1 K−1 (Table 1). The choice of the polymer matrix will affect the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites.14 The polymer matrix is selected according to application requirements. For example, epoxy resin (EP) has the characteristics of low price, a simple curing molding process, high adhesion, good stability, excellent chemical resistance, excellent mechanic performance, perfect insulation performance, etc. It is widely used in the insulation and packing of high and low voltage electrical appliances, motors and electronic components.66 Aromatic nitrile-based polymers are an excellent type of polymer material. Because they contain rigid, heat-resistant phenylene groups and flexible, heat-resistant oxygen–ether bonds or sulfur–ether bonds, they have outstanding properties such as good heat-resistance performance, high strength, excellent rigidity, excellent creep-resistance performance, high rigidity and outstanding toughness.67,68 It is an indispensable and revolutionary material in military fields such as aerospace, machinery and ships, as well as civilian fields such as electronics, automobile and petrochemical.69 At present, there are three polyarylene ether polymers often reported: poly(aromatic ether sulfone), polyetherketoneketone and polyaryl ether nitrile. They have been widely used in the fields of automobiles, electronics, machinery and other equipment.70–73
Table 1 Thermal conductivities of some polymers (room temperature)79–83




Material
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)




Polyethylene (PE)
0.11


Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)
0.15


Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)
0.12–0.19


Epoxy resin (EP)
0.17–0.22


Silicone rubber (SR)
0.17–0.21


Polycarbonate (PC)
0.20


Cyclic butylene terephthalate (CBT)
0.2


Polysulfone (PSU)
0.22


Nylon-6 (PA6)
0.25


Nylon-66 (PA66)
0.26


Poly(butylene terephthalate) (PBT)
0.29


Polyphenylene sulfide (PPS)
0.30


Poly ethylene vinylacetate (EVA)
0.33–0.35


High density polyethylene (HDPE)
0.44


Polyimide (PI)
0.11


Polystyrene (PS)
0.1–0.15


Thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU)
0.19


Polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF)
0.19


Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)
0.16–0.25


Polyetheretherketone (PEEK)
0.25


Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)
0.25


Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)
0.25–0.27


Low density polyethylene (LDPE)
0.29–0.34


Poly(acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene) (ABS)
0.33


Polyphenylsulfone (PPSU)
0.35


Bisphenol A diglycidyl ether (DGEBA)
0.19–0.2




The thermal conductivity of polymers is highly related to their microstructure. The thermal conductivity of polymers can be enhanced in two ways.74 The first way to improve the thermal conductivity of polymers is to optimize the structure of the polymers by introducing large conjugated π bonds75 to their structures such as polyacetylene, polypyrrole, polyaniline and so on because this molecular structure can conduct heat through an electronic thermal conduction mechanism. Polymers with conjugated π-bonds have higher thermal conductivity, because π-bonds contain electrons, which can serve as heat carriers.76 However, there is a problem that this thermally conductive material is not insulated. The second method66 to enhance the thermal conductivity of polymers is to improve the phonon heat-conducting mechanism without changing the lattice vibration heat-transfer mechanism inside the polymer, by improving the crystallinity inside the polymers through the action of external forces. Polyphenylene sulfide (PPS) has higher thermal conductivity due to its rigid backbone, which can prohibit the rotation of polymer chains and improve the transmission of phonons.77 In order to further improve the thermal conductivity of polymers, it is critical to optimize the microstructure of the polymers to improve the crystallinity of the polymers and introduce conductive groups.78
3.2 Additive categories
Adding high thermally conductive fillers into the polymer matrix is another effective method which can be easily realized for practical use. In this method, the type, content, size, shape, structure and thermal conductivity of thermally conductive fillers have an important impact on the thermal conductivity of the thermally conductive polymer-based composites.

3.2.1 Additive type. 
Thermally conductive fillers are mainly divided into inorganic fillers, metal fillers, and carbon fillers.
3.2.1.1 Metallic materials. 
Metallic materials (such as Au, Ag, Cu, Al, etc.) usually have high thermal conductivity.8 The thermal conductivities of common metal materials are shown in Table 2. Thermally conductive polymer-based composites made from metal materials are mainly used for thermal applications for which electrical conductivity is required. For example, Ag powder is used to produce conductive glue, which has the characteristics of low curing temperature, high bonding strength, stable electrical properties and being suitable for screen printing and conductive bonding in curing welding occasions under normal temperature, such as infrared pyroelectric detectors, piezoelectric ceramics, potentiometers, flash lamps, etc. It can also be used for conductive bonding in the radio instrument industry and replace the solder paste to realize conductive bonding.
Table 2 The thermal conductivities of metal fillers (room temperature)81,83,84




Filler
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)




Aluminum (Al)
237


Copper (Cu)
401


Silver (Ag)
429–450


Gold (Au)
317–345


Nickel (Ni)
90–158




3.2.1.2 Ceramics. 
Generally, metal materials have high thermal conductivity, but they are all conductors and cannot be used in the insulating field. Some ceramic materials, for instance metal oxides such as Al2O3, MgO, and BeO, BN, AlN, Si3N4, BN, and SiC, not only have high thermal conductivity, but also have excellent insulation and mechanical properties, high temperature resistance as well as chemical corrosion resistance.85–89 Therefore, ceramic-based thermally conductive fillers are mainly used for the preparation of electrically insulated thermally conductive polymer-based composites for the thermal conductivity demand in applications with high electrical insulation requirements. The thermal conductivities of common ceramics are shown in Table 3. Among these, aluminum oxide has been widely used in commercial products because of its low price and relatively high thermal conductivity.90 For example, there are many electronic packing products using Al2O3, such as thermal interface materials like silica gel, heat conducting gasket, and potting glue.
Table 3 The thermal conductivities of ceramic fillers (room temperature)83,91




Filler
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)




Alumina (Al2O3)
20–30


Aluminum nitride (AlN)
150–220


Silicon nitride (Si4N3)
86–120


Boron nitride (BN)
60–300


Beryllium oxide (BeO)
260–300


Silicon carbide (SiC)
80–120


Magnesium oxide (MgO)
36


Silicon dioxide (SiO2)
1–10




3.2.1.3 Carbon-based materials. 
The high-quality development of the integrated circuit industry and 5G technology put forward higher requirements regarding the thermal conductivity of supporting materials in its industrial chain. The basic research of carbon-based materials with excellent properties such as high thermal conductivity, low density and an active surface interface in polymer-based composites is very important for the thermal conductivity improvement and application development of polymer-based composites in electronic packing.92,93 The thermal conductivities of general carbon-based fillers are shown in Table 4.
Table 4 The thermal conductivities of carbon-based fillers (room temperature)82,94




Filler
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)




Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)
3000


Graphene
5300


Graphite
100–400


Carbon fibers (CFs)
100


Diamond
2000






3.2.2 Additive morphology. 
The morphology of thermally conductive fillers has an important effect on the improvement of the thermal conductivity of thermally conductive polymer-based composites. The effect of the thermally conductive filler morphology on the thermal conductivity of thermally conductive polymer-based composites has been widely studied.95–99 Polymer-based composites with the combination of different morphologies of thermally conductive fillers can have a great influence on its thermal conductivity enhancement. The synergistic effect of hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) with cubic boron nitride (c-BN) on the enhancement of the thermal conductivity of epoxy resin composites was studied.100 As shown in Fig. 4b, epoxy resin composites using h-BN as the thermally conductive filler achieved higher thermal conductivity than those with c-BN, which showed that two-dimensional materials could play a greater role in improving the thermal conductivity of epoxy resin composites compared with three-dimensional materials. It can also be seen from Fig. 4b that the combination of h-BN and c-BN is more beneficial to enhance the thermal conductivity of epoxy resin composites due to their synergistic effect on forming a thermally conductive network. When the filler type is determined, it is more effective to choose a combination of two or more different morphologies of thermally conductive fillers (Fig. 4a), such as one-dimensional and three-dimensional, one-dimensional and two-dimensional, two-dimensional and three-dimensional, or even one-dimensional, two-dimensional and three-dimensional thermally conductive fillers to improve the thermal conductivity of polymer composites. The synergistic effect of one-dimensional carbon fibers and two-dimensional graphite sheets on the improvement of the thermal conductivity of epoxy resin composites was also studied.101 The results showed that, after adding 17.48 vol% one-dimensional carbon fibers and only 6.34 vol% two-dimensional graphite sheets, the epoxy resin composite showed high cross-plane thermal conductivity up to 6.2 W (m K)−1, which was attributed to the formation of a thermally conductive network composed of one-dimensional carbon fibers and two-dimensional graphite sheets. By adding 27.69 vol% GNPs and 0.57 vol% CNTs, the polymer composite could achieve a high thermal conductivity of 7.69 W m−1 K−1 through the synergistic effect of graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) and carbon nanotubes (CNTs) on the enhancement of the thermal conductivity of the thermal interface material.102 Nevertheless, there was an optimum fraction of thermally conductive fillers to improve the thermal conductivity of polymer composites. Therefore, there was an optimum synergistic effect of two-dimensional GNPs and one-dimensional CNTs at the optimum filler loading. Natural, artificial and expanded graphite were used to improve the thermal conductivity of polysulfone.103 The results showed it was natural graphite that could improve the thermal conductivity of polysulfone better than artificial and expanded graphite. The morphology of thermally conductive fillers can affect the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites.
 Fig. 4  The synergistic effect of hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) and cubic boron nitride (c-BN) on the enhancement of the thermal conductivity of epoxy resin composites: (a) thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity of the h-BN/c-BN/EP composites at different total filler contents; (b) at 6 vol% total filler loading, thermal conductivity enhancement of c-BN/EP, h-BN/EP and h-BN/c-BN/EP composites, respectively; (c) schematic representation of the ideal model structures for h-BN/c-BN hybrid fillers arranged within the EP matrix; (d) schematic illustration of the composites. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.2.3 Additive content. 
Thermally conductive filler content also has great importance in improving the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites. In fact, it should be the key factor that could affect the thermal conductivity of polymers. The influence of thermally conductive filler loading on improving the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites104 is shown in Fig. 5, from which it can be seen that by adding an ultrahigh loading of BN nanosheets up to 90 wt% into the epoxy resin, its high in-plane thermal conductivity (TC) increased from 6.7 ± 0.1 W m−1 K−1 (at 25 °C) to 8.7 ± 0.2 W m−1 K−1 (at 200 °C). It is easier to form thermally conductive paths and a thermally conductive network, when the thermally conductive filler loading is high. It was also proved that densification is a route to enhance the thermal conductivity of epoxy resin composites by pressing epoxy resin with a loading of 58 wt% thermally conductive BN platelets of 30 μm average size at a pressure of 2.0 MPa.105 The study found that, by pressing, the density of the composites increased from 1.55 ± 0.01 g cm−3 to 1.72 ± 0.01 g cm−3, while the thermal conductivity improved from 3 W m−1 K−1 to 7 W m−1 K−1. An in-plane thermal conductivity of 67.6 W m−1 K−1 for the poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA) film with a loading of 83 wt% boron nitride nanosheets (BNNS) was attained,106 which could be ascribed to the ultrahigh loading of BNNS. Due to the high loading of BNNS, interconnected thermally conductive BNNS networks were formed in the PVA composites.
 Fig. 5  The influence of filler loading on improving the thermal conductivity of the polymer. Thermal conductivities (TCs) of the BNNSs/EP bulk composites: (a) temperature-dependent TC measured in the out-of-plane direction of the composite; (b) the corresponding TC in the in-plane direction; (c) synthesis scheme of the BNNS/EP composite bulks with densely filling BNNSs; (d) the SEM images of fracture surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 


3.2.4 Additive size. 
Thermally conductive filler size is another factor that must be considered in order to improve the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites. When the morphology and type are selected, choosing fillers with different sizes is better for improving the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites. A liquid epoxy resin composite with a thermal conductivity of 6.7 W m−1 K−1 was acquired90 by filling thermally conductive spherical Al2O3 particles of three different sizes (Fig. 6c). The maximum loading fraction ∅max for spherical particles is 74 vol% in the closest order packing case (Fig. 6a), while a loading of 79 vol% has been attained, which can be attributed to the bimodal distribution and even multimodal distribution of multiscale particle sizes (0.5 μm:5 μm:40 μm = 10:35:55) of spherical Al2O3 particles (Fig. 6b and d). By the combination of the three different sizes of aluminum oxide, the loading of thermally conductive spherical Al2O3 particles in the epoxy resin could be improved from 74 vol% to 79 vol%. BN nanosheets (BNNS) were functionalized with amino groups107 to study the effect of the combination of two sizes of BNNS on the thermal conductivity of epoxy resin. The results showed that when the ratio of large size pristine boron nitride (pBN) and small size functionalized boron nitride (wBN) was 2.5:7.5, the thermal conductivity of the epoxy resin composite was 0.386 W m−1 K−1, which was higher than those of both the epoxy resin with pBN and the epoxy resin with wBN under the same filler loading. Benzoic acid (BA) was used108 to functionalize BN and study the influence of the ratio of 2 μm BN and 10 μm BN on the thermal conductivity of the epoxy resin composite. By adding 50 wt% BA-functionalized BN at a 2:8 ratio of 2 μm BN and 10 μm BN, the thermal conductivity of the epoxy resin composite reached 2.71 W m−1 K−1. As can be seen, the combination of thermally conductive fillers of different sizes is an effective way to enhance the thermal conductivity of polymers.
 Fig. 6  The influence of the thermally conductive filler size on improving the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites: (a) illustration of voids in the closest packed structure of uniform-size particles in the epoxy/filler composite; (b) illustration of the proposed highly filled epoxy/Al2O3 composite with multiscale-size particles; (c) comparison of the thermal conductivity of Al2O3-filled liquid epoxy and cured epoxy and predicted values using models; (d) dependence of the maximum loading volume fraction of Al2O3 in liquid epoxy on the particle size. The four samples are neat epoxy, liquid (cured) epoxy filled with 50 vol%, 64 vol% and 79 vol% volume fraction of Al2O3, respectively. The composition C8 (0.5 μm:5 μm:40 μm = 10:35:55) was used here for all samples. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from SAGE Publications. 


3.2.5 Combination of thermally conductive fillers. 
It has been observed that the combination of various thermally conductive fillers makes it easier to form an efficient thermally conductive network synergistically in the matrix owing to the synergistic effect of different thermally conductive fillers, eventually improving the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites50,101,102,109–121 (Table 5). The thermal conductivity of the epoxy resin composite was enhanced at a thermally conductive filler loading of 42 wt% (the ratio of AlN and BN = 2:1), the thermal conductivity of which was 0.57 W m−1 K−1.115 An effective heat conductive network was constructed in the epoxy resin matrix by the combination of AlN and BN. In a study by Liang et al. AlN (1–3 μm) and BN (3–8 μm) were used122 as thermally conductive fillers and an epoxy resin composite with a thermal conductivity of 2.4 W m−1 K−1 was obtained at a filler content of 40 vol% (the mass ratio of AlN and BN = 12:5). BN was treated with NaOH to introduce hydroxyl to the edge of BN, so that γ-aminopropyl triethoxysilane (KH550) could be grafted onto the BN surface by hydrolysis. Due to the abundant hydroxyl groups in AlN, KH550 could be easily grafted onto the BN surface by hydrolysis without any treatment. Thanks to the grafting of KH550, these inorganic thermally conductive particles could be well dispersed in the epoxy resin matrix and form an excellent thermally conductive network, finally improving the thermal conductivity of the epoxy resin composite. A 709% increase in the thermal conductivity of the epoxy resin composite has been achieved by adding 40 vol% thermally conductive filler (the ratio of irregular alumina and round plate boron nitride = 6:34).123 The combination of irregular alumina and the round plate boron nitride could increase the probability of overlapping each other, which could promote the formation of a thermally conductive network.
Table 5 Thermal conductivities of different kinds of filler combination for polymer-based composites




Polymer matrix
Filler
Filler loading
Thermal conductivity (W m−1 K−1)
Ref.




DGEBA
AlN:BN = 2:1
42 wt%
0.57 ± 0.009
2018115


PA6
AlN:BN = 1:1
50 vol%
1.040 ± 0.001
202150


PP
Graphite:Al2O3 = 13:1
70 wt%
5.96
2021111


PDMS
CF:BN = 3:4
35 wt%
2.29
2021112


EP
CF:graphite = 2.74
33.23 wt%
6.2
2021101


CBT
Graphene:CNT = 48.58
28.26 vol%
7.69
2021102


TPU
BN:graphene = 1:1
40 wt%
6.86
2021113


PDMS
CF:Al2O3 = 4:1
30 vol%
7.91
2021114


DGEBA
Al2O3:BNNs = 6:4
10 vol%
0.47
2021116


DGEBA
BN:MWCNTs = 30:1
31 vol%
1.193
2011117


PI
BN:graphene = 50:1
51 wt%
2.11
2014118


PP
h-BN:SiO2:GF = 8:1:1
50 wt%
2.31
2021119


SR
BN:diamond = 35:3
43.18 wt%
0.82
2021120


EP
Al:graphite = 97:3
20 wt%
0.89
2021121


PI
BN:graphene = 30:1
31 wt%
1.21
2021109


PI
AlN:BN = 2:1
15 vol%
0.94
2021110





3.3 Polymer–additive interface modification
The interface thermal resistance between the filler and polymer matrix is another important problem.124 Surface functional modification of fillers using surfactants, coupling agents and functional polymers can effectively improve the binding force between the fillers and polymers, as well as reduce the thermal resistance of the interfacial contact, improve the compatibility of the fillers and polymers and the dispersion of fillers in the polymer matrix and build an effective thermally conductive network under low loading of fillers, which is an effective way to improve the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites.125 The modification of fillers can be covalent or non-covalent.126 The former method is to introduce hydroxyl groups on the surface of fillers by ball milling, strong acid and alkali treatment, and high temperature treatment; then the organic long links are branched to the surface of the fillers through the hydrolysis of a silane coupling agent, titanate coupling agent, aluminate coupling agent, etc. The latter method is to introduce organic long links on the surface of fillers by electrostatic interactions, π–π interactions, etc. such as polydopamine,127 benzoic acid108 and epicophenol and polymeryl acrylic.128 Recently, polydopamine (PDA) was adopted to modify BN, after which Ag was deposited on its surface (Fig. 7).129 PDA made the silicone rubber (SR) matrix and fillers tightly connected. Ag and BN can form better heat conduction paths to improve the thermal conductivity of the SR composite. By adding functionalized BN into the SR matrix, its thermal conductivity reached 0.75 W m−1 K−1 at a filler loading of 30 vol%. h-BN was modified by lignosulfonate to promote its dispersion in the polyvinyl alcohol (PVA) matrix and thus a PVA composite with a thermal conductivity of 1.22 W m−1 K−1 was attained.130
 Fig. 7  (a) The preparation process of BN-PDA-Ag sheets and BN PDA-Ag/SR composites; (b) mechanism of dopamine self-polymerization; HR-TEM images of (c) BN, (d) BN-PDA, and (e) BN-PDA-Ag sheets. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Elsevier. 
For thermally conductive fillers without functional groups, such as BN, a non-covalent modification method such as PDA modification is easy to adopt, since covalent modification commonly requires very harsh conditions, such as strong alkali, strong acid or high temperature treatment.126 For thermally conductive fillers with functional groups, such as Al2O3, which is abundant in hydroxyls, the covalent modification method such as silane coupling agent treatment is convenient and effective because the silane coupling agent can react with the hydroxyl group after hydrolysis to form covalent bonds under very mild conditions.131
3.4 3D thermally conductive network
In order to achieve a significant increase in the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites under low thermally conductive filler loading, apart from using the synergy between mixed fillers, it is also an emerging method to reduce the interface thermal resistance between the thermally conductive filler and the polymer matrix by building an effective three-dimensional (3D) thermally conductive network, thereby further improving the thermal conductivity of the polymer-based composite (Table 6).
Table 6 Thermal conductivities (k) of composites with 3D frameworks




3D network
Polymer matrix
Filler loading (vol%)

k (W m−1 K−1)
Method
Ref.




BAs
EP
40
21
Ice template
202165


SiC
EP
2.17
1.67
Ice template
2018132


SiC
EP
3.91
0.43
Polystyrene template
2019133


Al2O3
EP
23.32
2.58
Protein foaming
2019134


CF
EP
13
2.84
Ice template
202048


CF
PDMS
12.8
6.04
Ice template
2019135


BN
EP
60
6.11
NH4HCO3 foaming
202063


Ag + BN
EP
5
1.1
Ice template
2021136


BN + SiC
PDMS
8.35
3.87
Ice template
2020137


BN
EP
40
1.98
Polystyrene template
2019138


SiC + BN
EP
21.9
4.22
Filtration
2020139


BN
PDMS
15.8
7.46
Chitosan cross-linking
2019140


BN
EP
9.6
3.13
Cellulose cross-linking
2017141,142


BN
EP
65.6
17.61
Salt template
2019143


BN
EP
1.1
0.6
Melamine foam-supporting
201864


BN
EP
9.3
2.85
Ice template
2015144


BN
EP
34
4.24
Ice template
2017145


CNTBs + BN
EP
9.86
3.21
Ice template
2021146


Al
PDMS
14
1.6
Polyurethane-supporting
2021147





3.4.1 Unaligned 3D thermally conductive network. 
The 3D network can be constructed by the random distribution of fillers without the action of external force, therefore improving the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites. Oxalic acid was used as the foaming agent to construct a 3D BN skeleton, then EP was impregnated in vacuum (Fig. 8).148 The 3D BN skeleton can serve as thermally conductive network, so that the heat can be transferred through the 3D BN skeleton. By constructing the 3D BN skeleton, the thermal conductivity of the EP composite reached 3.53 W m−1 K−1, with 55.85 vol% BN.
 Fig. 8  (a) The preparation process of the EP/3D-BN composite; the fracture surfaces of 3D-BN frameworks with (b) 20 vol%, (c) 40 vol% and (d) 60 vol% BN. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
An Ag nanowire–AlN filler was produced and the method of hot-pressing was adopted to fabricate a 3D hybrid filler network.149 By infiltrating EP in vacuum, the thermal conductivity of the EP composite reached 4.49 W m−1 K−1 at a filler loading of 49.86 vol%. Polyurethane (PU) was used as the template to form BN foam and PU was removed by being burned at high temperature to obtain a 3D BN network (Fig. 9).150 The EP composite was attained by infiltrating the 3D BN network with EP in vacuum, the thermal conductivity of which reached 2.11 W m−1 K−1, with a BN loading of 24.7 wt%.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematics of BN/P foam and the fabrication of 3D-CBNF/EP composites; SEM images of (b) pure PU foam and BN/PU composite foam with a BN loading of (c) 10, (d) 20, (e) 30 and (f) 40 wt%; (g and h) high-magnification SEM images of BN/PU composite foam: (g) cross-section and (h) surface. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from Elsevier. 


3.4.2 Aligned 3D thermally conductive network. 
Construction of an aligned 3D network by the aligned distribution of fillers by controlling the temperature gradient or external magnetic field is another better method to further improve the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites.
3.4.2.1 Aligned 3D thermally conductive BA network. 
Cubic BA crystals were synthesized using high-purity boron and arsenic coarse powders as precursors through chemical vapor deposition under around 1033–1058 K.65 By using liquid nitrogen, ice grew within the BA suspension, making the BA suspension turn into a block. Then, the ice was removed by the freeze-drying process for 48 h, finally attaining a 3D BA network (Fig. 10a). The microstructure of the 3D BA network is shown in Fig. 10b. By filling the 3D BA network with EP under vacuum to make the EP composite, the thermal conductivity of the composite (with a filler loading of 40 vol%) reached up to 21 W m−1 K−1 (Fig. 10c).
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D BA network; (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the aligned 3D BA network; (c) thermal conductivity of BAs/EP with different BA loadings. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Springer Nature. 
3.4.2.2 Aligned 3D thermally conductive carbon fiber network. 
Carbon fibers (CFs) are thought to be an excellent 1D filler, which have ultra-high thermal conductivity, a high strength-to-weight ratio, desired fatigue resistance, as well as corrosion resistance.92,93 Cellulose aqueous solution was used as a binder to connect CFs and directional freezing technology was adopted to arrange the CFs along the direction of ice formation.92 After attaining a fully frozen CF block, the freeze-drying process was carried out to fabricate aligned 3D CF foam (Fig. 11a). The SEM image of the aligned 3D thermally conductive CF network showed a micro-Phragmites communis structure in which CFs were arranged regularly along the direction of ice growth (Fig. 11c). CF/PDMS composites were produced through infiltrating PDMS into the aligned 3D CF network. The maximum thermal conductivity of the composites was 6.04 W m−1 K−1 at a filler loading of 12.8 vol%, while the maximum thermal conductivity of random CF/PDMS was 1.81 W m−1 K−1 at the same filler loading, which is shown in Fig. 11b.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D CF network; (b) thermal conductivity of CF/PDMS with different CF loadings; (c) SEM image of the aligned 3D CF network. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Elsevier. 
In addition, a 3D CF network was also fabricated to improve the thermal conductivity of EP, and the process of formation of the 3D CF network is shown in Fig. 12a.48 The difference was that the CF was treated by a mixture of dilute sulfuric acid and concentrated nitric acid to remove the stains on the surface of the CF, which might have an influence on the thermal conductivity of the CF. The physical image of the aligned 3D thermally conductive CF network is shown in Fig. 12b. The SEM images of the aligned 3D CF network under low and high magnifications in Fig. 12c and d both showed that the 3D CF network had an upwardly oriented structure. By infiltrating EP in the aligned 3D CF network, 3D-CF/EP composites were made and the maximum thermal conductivity of the 3D-CF/EP composite reached up to 2.84 W m−1 K−1 under a filler loading of 13 vol%.
 Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D CF network; (b) physical image of the aligned 3D CF network; (c) SEM image of the aligned 3D CF network under low magnification; (d) SEM image of the aligned 3D CF network under high magnification; (e) thermal conductivity of 3D-CF/EP composites with different CF loadings. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Elsevier. 
3.4.2.3 Aligned 3D thermally conductive SiC network. 
SiC has a high thermal conductivity of approximately 120 W m−1 K−1 and possesses excellent insulation performance, which is considered to be one of the promising fillers for improving the thermal conductivity of polymer composites.88
Ball-milling technology and sodium dodecyl benzene sulfonate solution were used to attain free SiC nanowires.89 Sodium carboxymethyl cellulose aqueous solution was used to connect SiC nanowires. Directional freezing technology was adopted to freeze the scaffold and water was removed by freeze-drying for 48 h to form an aligned 3D SiC network. To further form a perfect SiC network, subsequently the sintering process was carried out at 1000 °C for 6 h. A schematic of the formation of the aligned 3D thermally conductive SiC network is shown in Fig. 13a. Under low magnification in Fig. 13b, there is a parallel channel structure within the aligned 3D SiC network, while under higher magnification in Fig. 13c and d, each aligned channel is composed of thousands of SiC nanowires. The 3D SiCNW/EP composites were made by filling EP into the aligned 3D SiC network. Fig. 13e shows the mechanism of enhancing the through-plane and in-plane thermal conductivity of 3D SiCNW/EP composites. The maximum through-plane and in-plane thermal conductivity of 3D aligned SiCNW/EP composites reached up to 1.67 W m−1 K−1 and 1.45 W m−1 K−1, respectively, under a filler loading of 2.17 vol% as shown in Fig. 13f. It can be seen from Fig. 13g that the maximum through-plane thermal conductivity of 3D aligned SiCNW/EP composites is higher than that of 3D SiCNW/EP composites.
 Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D SiC network; (b–d) SEM images of the aligned 3D SiC network under different magnifications; (e) schematic illustration of the enhanced through-plane heat transfer of the composites; (f) through-plane and in-plane thermal conductivity of 3D SiCNW/EP composites with different filler loadings; (g) through-plane thermal conductivity of composites as a function of filler alignment. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
3.4.2.4 Aligned 3D thermally conductive h-BN network. 
h-BN nanosheets have the same structure as graphene and exhibit excellent in-plane thermal conductivity of about 1700–2000 W m−1 K−1.151 In addition, it has a high dielectric breakdown strength of approximately 35 kV mm−1.106 Therefore, it is favorable for thermally conductive polymer-based composites.152
h-BN nanosheets produced through 24 h sonication were adopted to fabricate an aligned 3D h-BN network.87 Nano-fibrillated cellulose was used to cohere h-BN nanosheets. Unidirectional freezing technology and freeze-drying technology were used to form an aligned 3D h-BN network. In comparison, an isotropic 3D h-BN network was also made. The process of forming the 3D h-BN network is presented in Fig. 14a. The SEM images of the aligned 3D BN network under different loadings of fillers in Fig. 14b–f show that the aperture of the 3D BN network became smaller with the loading of BN, finally making a denser BN network. Therefore, as can be seen from Fig. 14g, by infiltrating EP into the 3D BN network, the thermal conductivity of 3D BN/EP composites grew with the loading of BN fillers, the value of which could reach 1.56 W m−1 K−1 at a filler loading of 4.4 vol%.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D BN network; (b–f) SEM images of the aligned 3D BN network under different loadings of fillers; (g) thermal conductivity of 3D BN/EP composites under different loadings of fillers. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
h-BN was ball-milled in an aqueous solution of urea to graft amino groups onto the edge of h-BN, so that the interfacial thermal resistance between h-BN and the polymer matrix might be reduced.86 ZIF-67 grew on the surface of h-BN, which could serve as a catalyzer to change the carbon source into carbon nanotubes at 900 °C in an argon gas environment. An aligned 3D BN and carbon nanotube network was finally produced through freeze casting and freeze-drying technologies. The process of formation of the aligned 3D BN and carbon nanotube network is shown in Fig. 15a. The structure was confirmed by the SEM images of the aligned 3D BN network under different magnifications (Fig. 15b–d). It can be seen from Fig. 15e that, by filling epoxy to attain composites, the composites with an oriented 3D BN and carbon nanotube network has higher thermal conductivity than that with a random 3D BN and carbon nanotube network and that with only BN, the maximum value of which reached up to 3.21 W m−1 K−1 at a filler loading of 9.86 vol%.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the formation of the aligned 3D BN and carbon nanotube network; (b–d) SEM images of the aligned 3D BN network under different magnifications; (e) thermal conductivity of composites as a function of filler alignment. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from John Wiley and Sons. 
Compared with the unaligned method to construct 3D thermally conductive networks, the aligned method can increase the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites more effectively, which can better meet the increasing heat dissipation demand of electronic equipment (>10 W m−1 K−1). However, there is still a long way to go for specific practical applications, if the orientation problem of high packing filler loading cannot be solved.
It is very hard to enhance the intrinsic thermal conductivity of polymers. Improving the crystallinity of organic materials is an effective approach to achieve a high thermal conductivity of polymers, but the process is complex, which will increase the manufacturing cost.153 It is a cost-effective and industrial approach to prepare thermally conductive polymer composites, such as heat conductive gasket, by blending thermally conductive fillers with organic polymers, and a high thermal conductivity of ∼10 W m−1 K−1 was achieved.154 Recently, construction of a 3D thermally conductive network, especially a 3D aligned thermally conductive network, has shown great potential in enhancing the thermal conductivity of polymers up to 21 W m−1 K−1, while it is difficult to be applied in actual production at present.85,155

4 Multifunctional design of thermally conductive polymer-based composites
4.1 Thermally conductive and flame retardant polymer-based composites
The performance of flame retardancy is as important as the ability to conduct heat. Recently, researchers are working to develop flame-retardant polymers and polymer-based composites to enhance their flame retardancy, so as to reduce the risk of fire and mitigate the impact of related adverse consequences.156–162

4.1.1 Flame retardant mechanism. 
When the polymer is exposed to fire, it will undergo degradation which includes a series of processes and steps.163–166 It begins with physical degradation under the action of an external heat source. The temperature of the polymer will rise until it reaches the critical ignition temperature. In addition, the polymer loses its mechanical strength and begins to soften. Then, with the release of heat, chemical degradation occurs, and the low-energy bonds of polymer molecules break into small molecules and smoke and gas are generated, which are composed of a mixture of combustible and noncombustible gases, carbon and other particles. The decomposition temperature depends on the flame atmosphere and the chemical properties of the polymer. The essence of the flame retardancy of polymer-based composites is to inhibit the decomposition of polymers.
Metal hydroxide flame retardants are mainly Al(OH)3 and Mg(OH)2.167 For example, when the environmental temperature is 180–200 °C, Al(OH)3 begins to absorb heat, decomposes into A12O3 and also produces steam without combustion characteristics, which dilutes O2 and helps to take away the heat of systems.
Common phosphorus flame retardants include ammonium polyphosphate, aluminum hypophosphite, microencapsulated red phosphorus, etc.168–170 They are well compatible with polymers and can catalyze the conversion of combustibles into carbon during combustion, which can isolate the transmission of heat and air, and protect the inner polymer from combustion.
Melamine, melamine polyphosphate and dicyandiamide are nitrogen flame retardants.168–170 They have the advantages of low toxicity, low pollution and low price. Nitrogen flame retardants will release non-combustible gases such as N2 and NH3 during combustion, which can dilute the concentration of O2 on the surface of the polymer and absorb the heat generated by combustion. Therefore, nitrogen flame retardants are often combined with other flame retardants for intumescent flame retardants.
Carbon flame retardants are mainly expandable graphite (EG), graphene, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), C60, etc. Carbon flame retardants can not only improve the carbon formation rate, but also protect the unburned polymer matrix by forming a continuous and dense carbon layer.171 CNTs and carbon black can absorb highly active free radicals and interrupt the chain reaction of the combustion process. EG is an inorganic intumescent flame retardant. When heated, it can expand and form a worm-like structural layer, which is covered on the surface of the material to block combustion. It is often compounded with other flame retardants to prepare intumescent flame retardants.
Intumescent flame retardants are mainly composed of phosphorus and nitrogen, including the acid source, carbon source and gas source.172,173 They can form a porous expanded carbon layer during combustion, which acts as a barrier and protects the internal polymer. The decomposition of the acid source (phosphate, borate and phosphate ester) after heating promotes the dehydration reaction between the carbon source and the polymer matrix to form a carbonization layer. The carbon source is generally a compound with high carbon content, such as pentaerythritol, phenolic resin, etc. The gas source (urea, melamine, cyanurate) is the non-combustible gas released during combustion, which expands the carbon layer and forms a closed and fluffy structure. Compounding can improve the flame-retardant performance, heat stability and mechanical properties of the composites at the same time, according to the advantages of different flame retardants.174–177


4.1.2 The progress of thermally conductive and flame retardant polymer-based composites. 
With the increase of the power density of electronic equipment, improving the flame retardancy of polymer-based composites is as urgent as thermal conductivity. BP@Si/CNTs hybrids were fabricated by PDA and KH560 treatment. The results showed that the addition of BP@Si increased the thermal stability and flame retardancy of the composite.20 It was a synergistic effect of the h-BN nanosheets and the CNTs that improved the flame retardancy of the composite. H3PO4 was used to functionalize graphene oxide (GO), which is called PGO, and BN nanosheets were prepared by strong acid and oxidant treatment.178 A “nacre structure” composed of PGO and BN nanosheets contributed to a high in-plane thermal conductivity of 30.44 W m−1 K−1 and excellent flame retardancy, which can be seen from Fig. 16.
 Fig. 16  Cross-sectional SEM images of the PGB film with different mass fraction of BNNS: 10 wt% (a) and 25 wt% (b); (c) in-plane thermal conductivity of GO/BNNS and PGO/BNNS films; (d) snapshots of flame treatments of the GO film (upside) and (e) PGB film (25 wt% of BNNS) (below) with respect to time in 25 s. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Amino and phosphate groups were introduced on the surface of BN by ball-milling with NH4PO3, which is named BN@APP. BN@APP served as a flame-retardant and heat-conducting agent to improve the thermal conductivity and flame retardancy of polybutylene succinate (PBS) (Fig. 17a).179 BNNS1 was made by ball-milling with NH4PO3 without NaOH; BNNS2 was made by ball-milling with NH4PO3 and NaOH, which is shown in Fig. 17c. By being composited with EP, the EP composite exhibited excellent thermal conductivity and flame retardancy, which is shown in Fig. 17b and d–g.
 Fig. 17  (a) Ball milling process for exfoliating and flame-retardant functionalizing BNNS; (b) thermal conductivity of EP and its composites; (c) photographs of the raw materials, BNNS paste of different milling schemes, BNNS dispersions in H2O, and the Tyndall effect; digital images of the burning state at 20 s and final chars of (d) neat EP, (e) EP/hBN, (f) EP/BNNS1, and (g) EP/BNNS2 composites. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from Elsevier. 
h-BN was ball-milled with 1-butyl-3-methyl-1H-imidazol-3-ium hexa-fluorophosphate [bmim][PF6] (IL) ionic liquid to attain h-BN with both thermal conductivity and flame retardancy (Fig. 18a).180 An EP composite with both thermal conductivity and flame retardancy was made by compositing with EP (Fig. 18b). The cross-sectional SEM image of the EP/BNNS@IL film (Fig. 18c) shows a highly flat oriented structure. Due to the treatment of IL, h-BN is rich in flame-retardant functional groups, leading to a high compatibility between the filler and EP matrix. Compared with EP, in Fig. 18d, the EP/BNNS@IL films attained an in-plane thermal conductivity of 0.8 W m−1 K−1 and an out-of-plane thermal conductivity of 8.3 W m−1 K−1, as well as excellent flame retardancy (Fig. 18e and f). Ball-milling technology was used to ball-mill h-BN with (NH4)3PO4 and NaOH to introduce amino on the surface of h-BN. By adding aminated h-BN into the EP matrix, the EP composite achieved a thermal conductivity of 0.999 W m−1 K−1 and excellent flame retardancy.
 Fig. 18  (a) Ball milling process and photos of the Tyndall effect and BNNS@IL powder; (b) preparation of the EP/BNNS@IL composite film; (c) cross-sectional SEM image of the EP/BNNS@IL film; (d) thermal conductivities of EP/BNNS@IL films; photos of flame treatment of (e) neat EP and (f) the EP/BNNS@IL film. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Elsevier. 

4.2 Thermally conductive and anti-electromagnetic-interference polymer-based composites
Fabricating multifunctional polymer-based composites of high thermally conductive properties and excellent anti-electromagnetic-interference performance is highly urgent to meet the requirements of consumers and a sustainable society.181 The design of materials with high anti-electromagnetic-interference performance has in the recent years become a research hotspot.182 According to the structural design, the materials can be classified into four categories: uniform structure, isolation structure, multi-layer structure and foam structure. Composites with a uniform structure can be directly made by blending a conductor filler and an insulating resin and then processing and molding by opening mixing, internal mixing, injection molding and so on. Electrical conductors such as Fe, Cu, Au, and Ag are good anti-electromagnetic-interference and thermally conductive materials, and their thermal conductivity is determined by their electrons, phonons and electron–phonon coupling,183–185 while their anti-electromagnetic-interference performance is determined by the reflection and absorption of electromagnetic waves caused by electron–electron interactions (i.e., Coulomb interactions) and electron–phonon interactions.186,187 Therefore, these materials with high thermal and electrical conductivity show great application potential in anti-electromagnetic interference and thermal management fields.

4.2.1 Mechanism of anti-electromagnetic interference. 
The anti-electromagnetic-interference mechanism183 is presented in Fig. 19. When an electromagnetic wave radiates to the surface of the shielding material, part of the incident wave is reflected and dissipated at the interface of the shielding layer and returns to the outside world; the other part passes through the surface of the shielding layer and goes inside the anti-electromagnetic-interference material, which is dissipated after multiple reflections on the inner surface of the material. The remaining electromagnetic wave will be transmitted through the material and return to the free space outside. Therefore, anti-electromagnetic interference can be realized by electromagnetic wave shielding and electromagnetic wave absorption.
 Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of the anti-electromagnetic interference mechanism. 
Anti-electromagnetic-interference actually restricts the propagation of electromagnetic waves in space, and the shielding body plays a vital role in the process: on the one hand, by isolating or enclosing the interference source to reduce the radiation damage of the interference source to highly sensitive equipment and people in the surrounding environment; on the other hand, by enclosing the equipment to be protected so as to avoid external electromagnetic interference sources causing damage to it. The types of electromagnetic shielding can be divided into electric field shielding, magnetic field shielding and electromagnetic field shielding. In recent years, a lot of research studies about electromagnetic waves by domestic and foreign scholars have mainly focused on electromagnetic shielding and absorption.184,185
4.2.1.1 Mechanism of electromagnetic shielding. 
Electromagnetic shielding performance can be represented by SE:186 SE = SER + SEA + SEM(4.1)In a magnetic field environment: (4.2)In an electric field environment: (4.3)In an environment far away from the magnetic or electric field source: (4.4)Here f1 is the frequency of the electromagnetic interference signal; D is the distance between the material and field; μ is the relative permeability of the material; f is the frequency of the electromagnetic wave; and s is the relative conductivity. The attenuation of a single reflection on the material surface is not only closely related to the impedance of the material surface, but also affected by the type of field source in the area and the actual distance from the field source area. (4.5)where d is the thickness of the material; f is the frequency of the electromagnetic wave; s is the relative conductivity; μ is the relative permeability of the material; and s is the relative conductivity. When the electromagnetic interference signal passes through the material, part of the signal will be absorbed, and the absorption is directly proportional to the thickness of the electromagnetic shielding material. In addition, it is also related to the conductivity of the electromagnetic shielding material and the permeability of the magnetic field. (4.6)where e is a constant and λ is the actual distance to the source area. Because the electromagnetic interference signal can be reflected many times inside the material, the signal attenuation phenomenon will occur when the electromagnetic interference signal passes through the interior of the electromagnetic shielding material.
SER is a single reflection loss of electromagnetic waves that are transmitted to the surface of the shield; SEA is the absorption loss of electromagnetic waves in the shielding body; and SEM is the multiple reflection loss of electromagnetic waves inside the shielding body. The electrical conductivity, permeability and thickness of materials are three basic factors affecting the shielding effectiveness.183 The attenuation value of electromagnetic waves is directly proportional to the electromagnetic shielding effectiveness. Shielding materials interact with electromagnetic fields through electrons and holes. Therefore, the volume conductivity of the shielding material is usually more than 1 S m−1. Conductivity is one of the primary criteria for reflection-dominant EMI shielding materials and an enhancement factor that improves shielding performance.187 When the electrical conductivity is large, the electromagnetic wave attenuation mainly relies on the reflection loss. Therefore, reflection is the main shielding mechanism of highly conductive materials, such as copper, gold, silver, as well as carbon materials.188–203 When the permeability is large, the attenuation of electromagnetic waves mainly depends on the absorption loss. Thus, for magnetic materials, the main way to lose electromagnetic wave energy is to absorb loss rather than reflect loss.204
In general, the frequency range of electromagnetic waves for conventional electronic equipment is 30–1000 MHz. In practical application, only when the SE value exceeds 20 dB, electromagnetic waves be effectively shielded. The SE ranges for specific shielding efficiency and application can be seen in Table 7.
Table 7 SE ranges for specific shielding efficiency and application




SE (dB)
Performance evaluation
Application




<20
Poor
Cannot be applied


20–35
General
Civilian equipment


35–75
Medium
Industrial and commercial electronics


75–95
Good
Aerospace and military equipment


>95
excellent
High precision and high sensitivity equipment




4.2.1.2 Mechanism of electromagnetic wave absorption. 
With the wide application of electromagnetic waves in a high frequency range, the problem of secondary pollution to the environment caused by the reflected electromagnetic waves generated by shielding materials has become increasingly prominent. Therefore, research on solving the problem of electromagnetic interference by absorbing electromagnetic waves has attracted extensive attention all over the world. In recent years, the development of lightweight, thin, broadband, and strong absorption high-performance electromagnetic wave absorbing materials has become the most important goal.
The electromagnetic wave absorption ability can be expressed by the reflection loss (RL) calculated using transmission line theory as follows:205 (4.7) (4.8)
Generally, when the RL value is less than −10 dB, it means that 90% of the electromagnetic wave is effectively absorbed. Here, Zin and Z0 represent the normalized input impedance and the impedance of free space. c, d, f, μr and εr correspond to the speed of electromagnetic waves in free space, the thickness of the absorber, the frequency of electromagnetic waves, the complex permeability and the complex permittivity, respectively.
In order to analyze the electromagnetic loss mechanism of electromagnetic wave absorbing materials, the electromagnetic parameters including relative complex permittivity  and relative complex permeability  are usually studied. Among them, the real part of the dielectric  and the real part of the permeance  represent the charge storage and magnetic storage capacity of electromagnetic waves, and their imaginary parts  and , respectively, represent the dielectric loss and magnetic loss capacity when the material itself interacts with electromagnetic waves. Dielectric loss tangent  and magnetic loss tangent , respectively, represent the dielectric loss and magnetic loss of the medium. The larger the value, the higher the loss ability of the material to electromagnetic waves. When μ′′ = 0, it means that the medium has no magnetic loss. When ε′′ = μ′′ = 0, it means that the average value of energy passing through the interface is zero. At this time, neither energy absorption nor energy conversion is performed. Generally speaking, the dielectric loss capability is mainly produced by polarization losses (e.g., electron polarization, dipole polarization and interface polarization). Magnetic losses are caused by hysteresis, natural resonance, domain wall resonance, exchange resonance and eddy current losses. Therefore, the influencing factors of complex permittivity and complex permeability must be fully considered when exploring the preparation of absorbing materials. The tanδ can be used to evaluate the contribution of dielectric loss and magnetic loss to the loss capacity and can be expressed using the following formula:206 stanδ = tanδE + tanδM(4.9)
For microwave absorbers, the attenuation constant (α) and impedance matching (|Zin/Z0|) are also worthy of further study. α refers to the material's intrinsic attenuation ability to electromagnetic waves. Typically, the attenuation constant represents the inherent electromagnetic wave loss capability of the material, which is calculated using formula (3.10).207 A larger value of the decay constant represents the ability of a material to cause stronger loss of electromagnetic waves, but it has only a high attenuation constant, the microwave absorber with excellent performance cannot be accurately prepared, and impedance matching is also a critical factor. It is generally believed that the impedance of the absorber and air was almost the same when Z = 1, which means that more electromagnetic waves can easily enter the absorber from the air instead of being reflected. (4.10)


4.2.2 The progress of thermally conductive and electromagnetic shielding polymer-based composites. 
The electrical conductivity, permeability and thickness of materials are three basic factors affecting the shielding effectiveness.183 The electromagnetic shielding and heat dissipation that exist in highly integrated electronic devices can be well addressed by conductive polymer-based composites (CPCs).208 MXenes with excellent metallic conductivity and interactions with polymers are favorable for electromagnetic wave shielding, which are called two-dimensional transition metal carbides and/or nitrides,182,209–212 such as Ti3C2Tx.213–216 Metallic materials (such as Cu, Ag, etc.) and carbon materials (such as CF, graphene, CNT, etc.) are also good electromagnetic shielding materials.56 Cellulose/MWCNT composite films with high thermal conductivity by filtration and drying were fabricated, whose best electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness was 49.2 dB only with a thickness of 0.3 mm.181
3D printing technology was used to gain ordered graphite nanosheets/poly(lactic acid) sheets and combined Ti3C2Tx films by “layer-by-layer stacking-hot pressing” technology to fabricate Ti3C2Tx/(o-GNPs/PLA) composites, which had excellent electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness and thermal management performance.217 The electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness reached 65 dB (3 mm), and the thermal conductivity reached 3.44 W m−1 K−1 with 18.60 wt% GNPs and 4 layers of Ti3C2Tx (6.98 wt%) films (Fig. 20).
 Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of GNPs/PLA composites; (b) λ‖ and λ⊥ values of the thermally conductive o-GNPs/PLA and Ti3C2Tx/(o-GNPs/PLA) composites; (c) EMI SE of Ti3C2Tx/(o-GNPs/PLA) composites. Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from Springer Nature. 
Regenerated cellulose was used to connect graphene nanoplatelets (GNPs) and (CNTs), so that a 3D network was formed in the acrylonitrile–butadiene–styrene (ABS) matrix (Fig. 21a).218 The Pickering emulsion assisted assembly strategy shows great potential in developing CPCs high thermal and electrical conductivity. The thermal conductivity of the composite was 4.17 W m−1 K−1 (Fig. 21b), and the electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness reached 73.5 dB at a loading of 27.8 wt% GNPs and 3 wt% CNTs (Fig. 21c).
 Fig. 21  (a) Illustration of the “fish-net” synergistic assembly mechanism at the oil–water interface; (b) thermal conductivity of GNP and CNT in AGxCy composites; (c) EMI SE of AGxCy composites. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from Elsevier. 
Fe3O4/EG papers with excellent electromagnetic shielding and thermal management were fabricated by a continuous roll-in process (Fig. 22a).219 The self-interlocking structure driven by the tightly overlapping and hook-like nanosheets in Fe3O4/EG (FG) composites significantly facilitates the construction of phonon and electron transport channels. The corresponding in-plane thermal conductivity is as high as 191.7 W m−1 K−1, which can accelerate heat dissipation quickly and efficiently (Fig. 22c). Furthermore, thanks to the synergistic effect of electrical and magnetic properties, the FG paper exhibits a significant shielding effect (67.1 dB at ∼100 μm) and enhanced absorption (∼0.1, surpassing lots of conductive film materials) (Fig. 22b). FG paper has broad application prospects in radiation protection suits, flexible heaters, portable wearable devices, and aerospace.
 Fig. 22  (a) Fabrication process of FG papers; (b) EMI SE of FG papers; (c) α and in-plane λ of FG papers. Reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
A novel hierarchical porous wood-derived carbon scaffold-embedded phase change material was prepared by a facile pyrolysis and vacuum infiltration process (Fig. 23a).220 The honeycomb structure of the charcoal scaffolds is well maintained after calcination, which can provide a large number of channels for the energy transmission and multiple reflections of electromagnetic waves, and the composite material exhibits good electromagnetic interference shielding performance (the average shielding efficiency is 24.4 dB) (Fig. 23b). In addition, the paraffin component, as a phase change material, not only stores and releases a large amount of energy during melting and solidification, but also endows the composite with an excellent self-cleaning function, which has excellent energy storage properties (latent heat of 122.25 J g−1) (Fig. 23c). Therefore, the synthesized porous woody carbon scaffold/paraffin composites have great potential for environmentally friendly thermal energy management and electromagnetic interference shielding applications.
 Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of the preparation of wood carbon scaffold/paraffin wax composites; (b) temperature–time curves of wood carbon scaffold/paraffin wax composites during thermal energy management; (c) SET, SER and SEA of the composites. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from Elsevier. 


4.2.3 The progress of thermally conductive and electromagnetic wave absorption polymer-based composites. 
The progress of thermally conductive and electromagnetic wave absorption materials not only restricts the technical level of electronic components, but also affects the working stability of new electronic equipment to a certain extent. At present, through the adjustment of electromagnetic parameters and structural, metal materials, carbon-based materials, intrinsically conductive polymer materials, and filled composite materials are widely used as electromagnetic wave absorbing materials. Therefore, polymer matrix composites with thermal conductivity and anti-electromagnetic interference have received extensive research attention.
Ni compounds are usually used to improve the anti-electromagnetic interference capability.221 An EP composite was fabricated by filling a 3D CNF@C-Ni network skeleton into EP, and efficient heat dissipation and electromagnetic wave absorption performance were achieved (Fig. 24).222 The thermal conductivity of the EP composite reached 0.5 W m−1 K−1, and the electromagnetic wave absorption effectiveness was 49.77 dB at 13.44 GHz, with 5 wt% filler, at a thickness of 2.2 mm. In another work, by carbonizing melamine foam loaded with h-BN and then compounding with EP, composites with both high thermal conductivity and electromagnetic wave absorbing capacity were made.223
 Fig. 24  (a) Schematic of the preparation of CNF@C-Ni/EP; (b) digital images of BC, BC@Ni-MOF and CNF@C-Ni and the corresponding SEM images; (c) thermal management performance; (d) electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness. Reproduced from ref. 222 with permission from Elsevier. 
A modified ALD method was used to coat the surface of CNTs with a highly uniform NiO film (Fig. 25a).224 It was then filled in NR to obtain CNT@NiO/NR flexible composites with excellent microwave absorption and thermal management properties. As shown in Fig. 25b, the CNT@NiO composites exhibit remarkably improved microwave absorption properties compared to the pristine CNTs. The optimal reflection loss reaches 43.6 dB at 17.5 GHz and they have a thickness of only 1.3 mm. Moreover, compared to NR (152 mW m−1 K−1) at room temperature, the thermal conductivity of CNT@100-NiO/NR reaches 1.052 W m−1 K−1, an increase by 592%, and the thermal conductivity of CNT/NR reaches 0.852 W m−1 K−1, an increase by 461% (Fig. 25c). The CNT@NiO/NR flexible composites can be potentially applied in the fields of electronic packaging, microwave absorption and thermal management.
 Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram of the growth process of ALD NiO on the surface of CNTs; (b) the minimum RL values of 50-, 100-, 200-, and CNT@300-NiO in 2–18 GHz; (c) thermal conductivity of NR, CNT/NR and CNT@Ni/NR. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Multifunctional flexible ZnO/carbon cloth (CC@ZnO) films with efficient MA properties were fabricated using a typical hydrothermal method (Fig. 26a).225 The flexible CC@ZnO-3 film exhibits a high reflection loss (RL) value of −47.3 dB at 2.5 mm and the widest effective absorption bandwidth (EAB) of 4.0 GHz in the entire X-band (Fig. 26b). Furthermore, the CC matrix and the AgNW conductive network contribute low-voltage-driven Joule heating performance to the CAP, thus ensuring functional integrity under extreme conditions (Fig. 26c). Therefore, flexible ZnO/carbon cloth (CC@ZnO) films have potential applications in the protection of MA and wearable electronic devices.
 Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the CC@ZnO matrix and CAP composites; (b) effective absorption bandwidth values of CC@ZnO samples; (c) infrared images under various heating or cooling times. Reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from Elsevier. 
HO-BNNS were prepared by steam-assisted molten hydroxide exfoliation, and then Fe3O4 was in situ grown on the surface of HO-BNNS (Fig. 27a).226 The as-prepared HO-BNNS@Fe3O4 composite possesses both microwave absorption and thermal management properties. The minimum reflection loss (RLmin) of the HO-BNNS@Fe3O4 composite is −45.31 dB at 8.64 GHz with a thickness of 2 mm (Fig. 27b). Furthermore, the thermal conductivity of the HO-BNNS@Fe3O4 composite is 1.75 W m−1 K−1, which is about 400% higher than that of the initial Fe3O4. The introduction of HO-BNNS can effectively improve the thermal conductivity of Fe3O4. As the concentration of HO-BNNS increased, the time required for the sample to rise to the same temperature became shorter and shorter. This enables the application of HO-BNNS@Fe3O4 composites in thermal management (Fig. 27c). The heat conduction and wave absorption performance of HO-BNNS@Fe3O4 composites enable their potential applications in the field of electronic device encapsulation.
 Fig. 27  (a) The schematic illustration of the formation process of HO-BNNS@Fe3O4 composites; (b) 3D contour maps of the reflection loss of OH-BNNS@Fe3O4 with different thicknesses (1–4 mm) from 2 to 18 GHz; (c) infrared thermal image of OH-BNNS@Fe3O4 with different HO-BNNS weight fractions: (a) 0 wt%, (b) 10 wt%, (c) 15 wt%, (d) 20 wt%, (e) 25 wt%, and (f) 30 wt%. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Elsevier. 
Microwave absorbing materials are a kind of shielding material that can absorb the electromagnetic wave energy projected onto its surface by converting the incident electromagnetic waves into heat energy or other forms of energy through various loss mechanisms of materials. It can be said that the absorbing material is to make the reflected electromagnetic wave as little as possible, and the electromagnetic shielding material is to make the electromagnetic wave as little as possible.

5 Conclusions and outlooks
The development of polymer-based composites with high thermal conductivity, flame retardancy and anti-electromagnetic interference performance is highly desirable for next generation electronic devices. However, there are still some problems to be addressed for thermally conductive polymer-based composites for thermal management in the electronic packaging field: (1) more models should be developed to explain the synergistic effect of different sizes of thermally conductive fillers on the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites; (2) more models should be developed to explain the synergistic effect of different morphologies of thermally conductive fillers on the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites; (3) new filler modification methods such as non-covalent modification to substitute covalent modification which is very complicated should be developed to address the dispersion of fillers in the polymer matrix and interaction with the polymer matrix; (4) environment-friendly, non-toxic and harmless flame retardants with a good flame retardant effect and low dosage such as BN modified by nitrogen and phosphorus groups to substitute halogenated compounds should be developed; (5) structural design to realize integrated development of heat conduction, anti-electromagnetic interference and flame retardancy should be developed.
Author contributions
You Li: conceptualization, investigation, original draft preparation, data curation, writing – review and editing. Yongxin Qian: writing – review and editing, visualization. Qinghui Jiang: formal analysis. Abubakar Yakubu Haruna: writing – review and editing. Yubo Luo: writing – review and editing, supervision, resources. Junyou Yang: writing – review and editing, supervision, funding acquisition.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under Grant No. 52002137, 51772109, 51872102 and 51802070, the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities under Grant No. 2021XXJS008 and 2018KFYXKJC002, and Graduates’ Innovation Fund, Huazhong University of Science and Technology under Grant No. 2020yjsCXCY022. The technical assistance from the Analytical and Testing Center of HUST is also gratefully acknowledged.
References
X. Meng, H. Yu, L. Wang, X. Wu and B. U. Amin, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2021, 306, 1–17 CrossRef .
Y. Guo, K. Ruan, X. Shi, X. Yang and J. Gu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2020, 193, 108134 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Feng, L. Y. Yang, J. Yang, L. Bai, R. Y. Bao, Z. Y. Liu, M. B. Yang, H. B. Lan and W. Yang, Compos. Commun., 2020, 22, 100528 CrossRef .
B. Luo, S. Liu and L. Zhi, Small, 2012, 8, 630–646 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. C. Cho, J. H. Huang, C. P. Li, C. W. Chang-Jian, K. C. Lee, Y. S. Hsiao and J. H. Huang, Carbon, 2016, 102, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Moore and L. Shi, Mater. Today, 2014, 17, 163–174 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Feng, M. Qin, L. Gao, Z. Li, F. Zhao, Z. Zhang, F. Lv and W. Feng, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1–13 Search PubMed .
L. Zhang, Q. Wei, J. An, L. Ma, K. Zhou, W. Ye, Z. Yu, X. Gan, C. Te Lin and J. Luo, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122551 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiao, L. Chen, Y. Tang, X. Zhang, K. Zheng and X. Tian, Composites, Part A, 2019, 124, 105511 CrossRef CAS .
M. C. Vu, N. A. T. Thieu, W. K. Choi, M. A. Islam and S. R. Kim, Composites, Part A, 2020, 138, 106028 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ji, Y. Feng, M. Qin and W. Feng, Composites, Part A, 2016, 91, 351–369 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, H. Deng and Q. Fu, Compos. Commun., 2018, 8, 74–82 CrossRef .
Z. Han and A. Fina, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2011, 36, 914–944 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, T. Shi and A. Ma, Polymers, 2021, 13, 13162797 Search PubMed .
H. Ma, B. Gao, M. Wang, Z. Yuan, J. Shen, J. Zhao and Y. Feng, J. Mater. Sci., 2021, 56, 1064–1086 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, X. Zhao, Y. Feng, J. Ma, K. Zhou, Y. Shi, C. Liu and X. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 407, 127099 CrossRef CAS .
M. Hemath, S. Mavinkere Rangappa, V. Kushvaha, H. N. Dhakal and S. Siengchin, Polym. Compos., 2020, 41, 3940–3965 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, X. Zhao, W. Wu, X. Ji, Y. Lu and L. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 415, 129054 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, F. Li, X. Zhao, W. Zhang, S. Li, Y. Lu and L. Zhang, ACS Appl. Electron. Mater., 2020, 2, 1661–1669 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, G. Xiao, C. Chen, C. Chen, F. Zhong, M. Wang and R. Zou, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 631, 127717 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Chung and J. S. Lin, Polym. Compos., 2018, 39, E2125–E2133 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Huang, X. Zeng, Q. Li, L. Ren, R. Sun, J. Bin Xu and C. P. Wong, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 160, 127–137 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Huang, T. Wang, X. Zhang, L. Zheng, G. Xue and J. Liang, J. Compos. Mater., 2016, 50, 3953–3960 CrossRef CAS .
X. Q. Wang and A. S. Mujumdar, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2007, 46, 1–19 CrossRef .
N. Burger, A. Laachachi, M. Ferriol, M. Lutz, V. Toniazzo and D. Ruch, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2016, 61, 1–28 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu and Z. Guo, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 2017, 108, 2158–2168 CrossRef .
J. Hu and L. Wang, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 2019, 140, 21–24 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, Y. Ren, L. Hou, T. Jiang and H. Jiang, Anal. Chem., 2020, 92, 2778–2786 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zheng, Y. Xie and D. Zhang, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 2017, 111, 962–981 CrossRef CAS .
P. Gaspard and T. Gilbert, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2008, 101, 1–4 CrossRef PubMed .
P. L. Garrido, P. I. Hurtado and B. Nadrowski, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2001, 86, 5486–5489 CrossRef CAS .
N. M. Barkoula, B. Alcock, N. O. Cabrera and T. Peijs, Polym. Polym. Compos., 2008, 16, 101–113 CAS .
X. Xu, J. Chen, J. Zhou and B. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1–10 Search PubMed .
C. Huang, X. Qian and R. Yang, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2018, 132, 1–22 CrossRef .
X. He and Y. Wang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2019, 136, 1–6 Search PubMed .
G. Yujun, L. Zhongliang, Z. Guangmeng and L. Yanxia, Int. J. Heat Mass Transf., 2014, 74, 358–367 CrossRef .
W. Yu, H. Xie, L. Yin, J. Zhao, L. Xia and L. Chen, Int. J. Therm. Sci., 2015, 91, 76–82 CrossRef CAS .
X. He and Y. Wang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2021, 60, 1137–1154 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bonnet, D. Sireude, B. Garnier and O. Chauvet, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91, 1–4 CrossRef .
L. E. Copeland and M. Mooney, J. Appl. Phys., 1948, 19, 450–455 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hashin and S. Shtrikman, J. Appl. Phys., 1962, 33, 3125–3131 CrossRef CAS .
K. E. Y. Skills, Metallic mixtures, 2004, 779, 56–59 Search PubMed .
H. Fricke, Phys. Rev., 1924, 24, 678–681 CrossRef .
A. Agrawal and A. Satapathy, Procedia Eng., 2013, 51, 573–578 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Agari and T. Uno, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 1986, 32, 5705–5712 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Every, Y. Tzou, D. P. H. Hasselman and R. Raj, Acta Metall. Mater., 1992, 40, 123–129 CrossRef CAS .
S. Jiang, Y. Wei, S. Q. Shi, Y. Dong, C. Xia, D. Tian, J. Luo, J. Li and Z. Fang, Nano Lett., 2021, 21, 3254–3261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Ma, T. Shang, L. Ren, Y. Yao, T. Zhang, J. Xie, B. Zhang, X. Zeng, R. Sun, J. Bin Xu and C. P. Wong, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122550 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pan, Q. Li, W. Zhang, J. Dong, F. Su, V. Murugadoss, Y. Liu, C. Liu, N. Naik and Z. Guo, Composites, Part B, 2021, 209, 108609 CrossRef CAS .
G. Yıldız and M. Akkoyun, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2021, 138, 50516 CrossRef .
J. Joy, E. George, P. Haritha, S. Thomas and S. Anas, J. Polym. Sci., 2020, 58, 3115–3141 CrossRef CAS .
A. Verma, A. Parashar and M. Packirisamy, Wiley Interdiscip. Rev.: Comput. Mol. Sci., 2018, 9, 1346 Search PubMed .
Z. Dai, Q. Cao, H. Liu, X. Shi, X. Wang, H. Li, Y. Han, Y. Li and J. Zhou, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2019, 7, 16084–16093 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, X. Duan, Y. Xu and X. Duan, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 7231–7247 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Gonzalez-Ortiz, C. Salameh, M. Bechelany and P. Miele, Mater. Today Adv., 2020, 8, 100107 CrossRef .
J. Li, S. Qi, M. Zhang and Z. Wang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 1–6 Search PubMed .
C. Chen, Y. Tang, Y. S. Ye, Z. Xue, Y. Xue, X. Xie and Y. W. Mai, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2014, 105, 80–85 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zou, X. Huang, Y. Zhu, J. Chen and P. Jiang, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2019, 177, 88–95 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, J. Li and X. Liu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 6503–6515 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Xue, Z. Li, Y. Wen, X. Li, F. Wu, X. Li, D. Shi, Z. Xue and X. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 369, 1150–1160 CrossRef CAS .
K. Kim and J. Kim, Ceram. Int., 2014, 40, 5181–5189 CrossRef CAS .
S. Song, J. Wang, C. Liu, J. Wang and Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 15234–15244 RSC .
X. Xu, R. Hu, M. Chen, J. Dong, B. Xiao, Q. Wang and H. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 397, 125447 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and P. Wu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 348, 723–731 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cui, Z. Qin, H. Wu, M. Li and Y. Hu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 1–7 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Lin, X. Huang, J. Chen and P. Jiang, High Volt., 2017, 2, 139–146 CrossRef .
H. Tang, J. Zhong, J. Yang, Z. Ma and X. Liu, J. Electron. Mater., 2011, 40, 141–148 CrossRef CAS .
X. Xiong, Y. Zeng, R. Ren, S. Liu, S. Lu and P. Chen, Composites, Part A, 2016, 89, 2–9 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, H. Peng, W. Wang and T. Liu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2010, 116, 2658–2667 CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Tao, Y. Zhang, L. Tang, J. Gu and Z. Jiang, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2018, 165, 148–153 CrossRef CAS .
G. Dolo, J. Férec, D. Cartié, Y. Grohens and G. Ausias, Polym. Degrad. Stab., 2017, 143, 20–25 CrossRef CAS .
H. Tang, X. Huang, X. Yang, J. Yang, R. Zhao and X. Liu, Mater. Lett., 2012, 75, 218–220 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhan, X. Yang, H. Guo, J. Yang, F. Meng and X. Liu, J. Mater. Chem., 2012, 22, 5602–5608 RSC .
Y. Hong and M. Goh, Polymers, 2021, 13, 13081302 Search PubMed .
G. Lv, E. Jensen, C. M. Evans and D. G. Cahill, ACS Appl. Polym. Mater., 2021, 3, 4430–4435 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zheng, K. Wu, W. Chen, B. Nan, Z. Qu and M. Lu, Macromol. Chem. Phys., 2021, 222, 1–8 CrossRef .
L. Langer, D. Billaud and J. P. Issi, Solid State Commun., 2003, 126, 353–357 CrossRef CAS .
K. Ruan, Y. Guo and J. Gu, Macromolecules, 2021, 54, 4934–4944 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Zhang, H. B. Sun, R. K. Yang and Y. J. Zhang, Adv. Ceram., 2020, 41, 256–268 Search PubMed .
Y. Gong, W. Y. Zhou, X. Li, Y. J. Kou, H. W. Cai, W. Zhao and Z. W. Yan, China. Plast., 2018, 32, 1–7 Search PubMed .
B. X. Du, X. X. Kong, M. Xiao, J. Li and Z. M. Qian, Trans. China Electrotechem Soc., 2018, 33, 3149–3159 Search PubMed .
J. M. Cao, F. Q. Tian and Q. Q. Lei, Chinese Sci. Bull., 2022, 67, 640–654 CrossRef .
K. Zhang, T. J. Gui, L. F. Wu, L. S. Guo and M. M. Guo, Mater. Rep., 2021, 35, 571–575 Search PubMed .
S. N. Zhang, S. J. Wang and H. W. Cai, China Adhes., 2018, 27, 49–54 Search PubMed .
W. A. L. Sanchez, J. W. Li, H. T. Chiu, C. C. Cheng, K. C. Chiou, T. M. Lee and C. W. Chiu, Polymers, 2022, 14, 2950 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Li, B. Wu, Y. Li, M. M. Alam, P. Chen, R. Xia, C. Te Lin and J. Qian, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Wang and P. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 28943–28952 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ferraro, E. Garcia-Tuñon, V. G. Rocha, S. Barg, M. D. Fariñas, T. E. G. Alvarez-Arenas, G. Sernicola, F. Giuliani and E. Saiz, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1636–1645 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yao, X. Zhu, X. Zeng, R. Sun, J. Bin Xu and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9669–9678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li and W. Zheng, J. Compos. Mater., 2021, 55, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
T. D. Zhang, Z. Z. Shi, J. X. Wu, C. H. Zhang, Y. Feng, Q. G. Chi, Z. H. Li and Q. G. Chen, Insul. Mater., 2022, 55, 10–22 Search PubMed .
X. Hou, Y. Chen, W. Dai, Z. Wang, H. Li, C. Te Lin, K. Nishimura, N. Jiang and J. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121921 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, H. T. Yu, C. Chen, Y. Y. Feng, M. M. Qin and W. Feng, Carbon, 2022, 196, 902–912 CrossRef CAS .
J. Q. Zhu, Y. Song, W. B. Zhang and F. L. Liu, Energy Storage Sci. Technol., 2017, 6, 213–222 Search PubMed .
J. Yu, H. K. Choi, H. S. Kim and S. Y. Kim, Composites, Part A, 2016, 88, 79–85 CrossRef CAS .
C. R. Yang, C. Da Chen, C. Cheng, W. H. Shi, P. H. Chen and T. P. Teng, Case Stud. Therm. Eng., 2021, 28, 101591 CrossRef .
T. A. Shalygina, S. Y. Voronina, A. G. Tkachev, N. N. Grotskaya, V. D. Voronchikhin and A. Y. Vlasov, Data Br., 2021, 39, 107676 CrossRef CAS .
L. Peng, Y. Sun, X. Gu, P. Liu, L. Bian and B. Wei, Appl. Clay Sci., 2021, 206, 106068 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, L. Li, X. Hou, Y. Qin, G. Song, X. Wei, X. Kong, Z. Zhang, H. Do, J. C. Greer, F. Han, T. Cai, W. Dai, C. Te Lin, N. Jiang and J. Yu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2021, 212, 108883 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, W. Gao, Y. Li, D. Zhao and H. Yin, RSC Adv., 2019, 9, 7388–7399 RSC .
X. Wu, B. Tang, J. Chen, L. Shan, Y. Gao, K. Yang, Y. Wang, K. Sun, R. Fan and J. Yu, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2021, 203, 108610 CrossRef CAS .
J. un Jang, S. H. Lee, J. Kim, S. Y. Kim and S. H. Kim, Composites, Part B, 2021, 222, 109072 CrossRef .
H. Mohammad, A. A. Stepashkin and V. V. Tcherdyntsev, Polymers, 2022, 14, 14030399 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Fu, J. Yang, C. Cao, Q. Zhai, W. Qiao, J. Qiao, H. Gao, Z. Zhou, J. Ji, M. Li, C. Liu, B. Wang, W. Bai, H. Duan, Y. Xue and C. Tang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 2853–2867 CrossRef CAS .
S. Moradi, F. Román, Y. Calventus and J. M. Hutchinson, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1–12 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Yan, W. Dai, J. Gao, X. Tan, L. Lv, J. Ying, X. Lu, J. Lu, Y. Yao, Q. Wei, R. Sun, J. Yu, N. Jiang, D. Chen, C. P. Wong, R. Xiang, S. Maruyama and C. Te Lin, ACS Nano, 2021, 15, 6489–6498 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Wang, M. Zhao, D. Jiang, X. Zhou and J. He, Ceram. Int., 2022, 48, 2763–2770 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kim, D. W. Jung, L. S. Kim, M. Kim, S. Jeong, S. G. Lee, S. J. Chang, J. Y. Cho, S. H. Kim, J. Y. Park, K. Choi, G. R. Yi, K. M. Nam and G. Lee, Mater. Today Commun., 2021, 27, 102230 CrossRef CAS .
R. Li, C. Ding, J. Yu, X. Wang and P. Huang, High Perform. Polym., 2021, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Ma, L. Liu, X. Zhang and T. Lv, High Perform. Polym., 2019, 31, 959–968 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cao, S. Gu, H. Liu and Y. Li, Compos. Commun., 2021, 27, 100856 CrossRef .
H. Liu, X. Su, R. Fu, B. Wu and X. Chen, Compos. Commun., 2021, 23, 100573 CrossRef .
Y. C. Soong and C. W. Chiu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 599, 611–619 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, W. Chen, J. Ji, M. Liu, J. Li, L. Gan, Y. He, B. Li, F. Kang and H. Du, Thermochim. Acta, 2021, 703, 178980 CrossRef CAS .
A. Permal, M. Devarajan, L. H. Huong, T. Zahner, D. Lacey and K. Ibrahim, Polym. Compos., 2018, 39, E1372–E1380 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, G. Meng, L. Wang, L. Tian, S. Chen, G. Wu, B. Kong and Y. Cheng, Sci. Rep., 2021, 11, 1–11 CrossRef PubMed .
C. C. Teng, C. C. M. Ma, K. C. Chiou, T. M. Lee and Y. F. Shih, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2011, 126, 722–728 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Tsai, I. H. Tseng, J. C. Chiang and J. J. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8639–8645 CrossRef CAS .
S. H. Lee, Y. J. Kwon and S. H. Ryu, Polym. Eng. Sci., 2021, 1991–1996 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, L. Fan, J. F. Mukerabigwi, C. Liu and Y. Cao, Polym. Compos., 2021, 1–7 Search PubMed .
J. S. Kim, K. H. Yoon, Y. S. Lee and J. H. Han, Macromol. Res., 2021, 29, 252–256 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liang, P. Ren, F. Ren, Y. Jin, J. Wang, C. Feng and Q. Duan, J. Polym. Res., 2020, 27, 212 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wu, F. Lin, X. Lin, Y. Liu, L. Song, X. Hao, J. Li and S. Wang, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2022, 139, 1–10 Search PubMed .
R. J. Warzoha and A. S. Fleischer, Nano Energy, 2014, 6, 137–158 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, S. Wang, M. Zhu, K. Yang, P. Jiang, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and C. Zhi, Nanotechnology, 2015, 26, 015705 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Gautam and S. Chelliah, RSC Adv., 2021, 11, 31284–31327 RSC .
X. Zhang, J. Yi, Y. Yin, Y. Song and C. Xiong, Diam. Relat. Mater., 2021, 117, 108485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Jiang, X. Shi, Y. Feng, S. Li, X. Zhou and X. Xie, Composites, Part A, 2018, 107, 657–664 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wei, Y. Ni, D. Yang, L. Yu and L. Zhang, Compos. Commun., 2022, 30, 101082 CrossRef .
X. Wang, M. Sun, R. Wang, L. Jiao, H. Bian and H. Dai, Mater. Des., 2022, 214, 110379 CrossRef CAS .
B. S. Hadavand, M. Jouyandeh, S. M. R. Paran, R. Khalili, H. Vahabi, H. F. Bafghi, F. Laoutid, P. P. Vijayan and M. R. Saeb, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2020, 137, 1–15 CrossRef .
Y. M. Yao, X. D. Zhu, X. L. Zeng, R. Sun, J. B. Xu and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9669–9678 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xiao, L. Chen, Y. Tang, X. Zhang, K. Zheng and X. Tian, Composites, Part A, 2019, 116, 98–105 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiao, L. Chen, Y. Tang, X. Zhang, K. Zheng and X. Tian, Composites, Part A, 2019, 124, 105511 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hou, Y. Chen, W. Dai, Z. Wang, H. Li, C. Te Lin, K. Nishimura, N. Jiang and J. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 375, 121921 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, C. Fu, N. Chen, T. Zhang, J. Liu, G. Du, L. Ren, X. Zeng and R. Sun, Compos. Commun., 2021, 25, 100601 CrossRef .
Y. Yao, Z. Ye, F. Huang, X. Zeng, T. Zhang, T. Shang, M. Han, W. Zhang, L. Ren, R. Sun, J. Bin Xu and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 2892–2902 CrossRef CAS .
X. Y. Leng, C. Xiao, L. Chen, Z. Su, K. Zheng, X. Zhang and X. Y. Tian, High Perform. Polym., 2019, 31, 350–358 CrossRef CAS .
C. Xiao, Y. Guo, Y. Tang, J. Ding, X. Zhang, K. Zheng and X. Tian, Composites, Part B, 2020, 187, 107855 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hou, Y. Chen, L. Lv, W. Dai, S. Zhao, Z. Wang, L. Fu, C. Te Lin, N. Jiang and J. Yu, ACS Appl. Nano Mater., 2019, 2, 360–368 CrossRef CAS .

          X. Huang, J. Chen, Y. Zhu and P. Jiang, ICEMPE 2017 – 1st Int. Conf. Electr. Mater. Power Equip.,  2017, pp. 10–13 Search PubMed .
J. Chen, X. Huang, Y. Zhu and P. Jiang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1–9 Search PubMed .
C. Xiao, Y. Tang, L. Chen, X. Zhang, K. Zheng and X. Tian, Composites, Part A, 2019, 121, 330–340 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zeng, Y. Yao, Z. Gong, F. Wang, R. Sun, J. Xu and C. P. Wong, Small, 2015, 11, 6205–6213 CrossRef CAS .
J. Hu, Y. Huang, Y. Yao, G. Pan, J. Sun, X. Zeng, R. Sun, J. Bin Xu, B. Song and C. P. Wong, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 13544–13553 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Li, B. Wu, Y. Li, M. M. Alam, P. Chen, R. Xia, C. Te Lin and J. Qian, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 8, 1–9 Search PubMed .
B. Wei, X. Chen and S. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 10979–10991 RSC .
X. Wu, W. Liu, F. Shi, L. Yang and C. Zhang, Polym. Compos., 2022, 1–7 Search PubMed .
W. Lee and J. Kim, Polymers, 2021, 13, 1–12 Search PubMed .
Q. Chen, W. Wu, Y. Wang, C. Liu, X. Liu and S. Cui, Polymer, 2021, 235, 124239 CrossRef CAS .
H. Fang, S. L. Bai and C. P. Wong, Compos. Commun., 2016, 2, 19–24 CrossRef .
M. J. Meziani, W. L. Song, P. Wang, F. Lu, Z. Hou, A. Anderson, H. Maimaiti and Y. P. Sun, ChemPhysChem, 2015, 16, 1339–1346 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhang, C. Lei, K. Wu and Q. Fu, Adv. Sci., 2021, 8, 1–6 Search PubMed .
H. Li and W. Zheng, J. Compos. Mater., 2021, 55, 17–25 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Feng and W. Feng, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2020, 142, 100580 CrossRef .
S. Qiu, X. Wang, B. Yu, X. Feng, X. Mu, R. K. K. Yuen and Y. Hu, J. Hazard. Mater., 2017, 325, 327–339 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ghanadpour, F. Carosio and L. Wågberg, Appl. Mater. Today, 2017, 9, 229–239 CrossRef .
L. Yan, Z. Xu and X. Wang, Prog. Org. Coat., 2017, 112, 319–329 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chopra, K. A. Deshmukh and D. Peshwe, Mech. Mater., 2017, 109, 11–17 CrossRef .
X. Shi, F. Liao, Y. Ju, X. Dai, Y. Cao, J. Li and X. Wang, Fire Mater., 2017, 41, 362–374 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, A. M. Pourrahimi, R. T. Olsson, M. S. Hedenqvist and U. W. Gedde, Eur. Polym. J., 2015, 66, 67–77 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qiao, X. Lin, W. Zhong, J. Lan, H. Zhang and M. Chen, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2022, 139, 1–11 CrossRef .
J. Liu, J. Dai, S. Wang, Y. Peng, L. Cao and X. Liu, Composites, Part B, 2020, 190, 107926 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Huang, C. F. Cao, Y. Li, L. Zhao, G. D. Zhang, J. F. Gao, L. Z. Guan, J. X. Jiang and L. C. Tang, Composites, Part B, 2019, 168, 413–420 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Lu, C. Wan, P. Tian, M. Liu and G. Zhang, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 4803–4815 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, C. Dong, J. Liu, D. Kong, L. Sun and Z. Lu, Cellulose, 2020, 27, 1799–1815 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhou, Z. Ming, J. He, Y. Ding and J. Jiang, Polymers, 2020, 12, 12010180 Search PubMed .
D. K. Wang, H. He and P. Yu, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2016, 133, 1–10 Search PubMed .
M. Tang, F. Qi, M. Chen, Z. Sun, Y. Xu, X. Chen, Z. Zhang and R. Shen, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2016, 27, 52–60 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, R. Tang, S. Tao, G. Tao, F. Gong, C. Liu and Z. Cao, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2018, 135, 1–10 Search PubMed .
X. Wang, E. N. Kalali, J. T. Wan and D. Y. Wang, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2017, 69, 22–46 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, D. Liang, Z. Hu, J. He, X. Bian and J. Cui, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2021, 32, 2240–2251 CrossRef CAS .
G. Makhlouf, M. Hassan, M. Nour, Y. Abdelmonem and A. Abdelkhalik, Arab. J. Sci. Eng., 2017, 42, 4339–4349 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, H. Chen, Y. Zhang, Y. Meng Zhang, W. Kan and M. Pan, Polymers, 2020, 12, 12020336 Search PubMed .
S. Long, D. Qiu, R. Long, X. Li, H. Chen, Y. Huang and X. Li, Polym. Adv. Technol., 2020, 31, 2020–2030 CrossRef CAS .
Z. S. Xu, L. Yan and L. Chen, Procedia Eng., 2016, 135, 631–636 CrossRef .
J. Chen, J. Wang, A. Ni, H. Chen and P. Shen, Polymers, 2019, 11, 11061062 Search PubMed .
B. Chen, Y. Liu, K. Wu, M. Lu, E. Jiao, J. Shi and M. Lu, J. Therm. Anal. Calorim., 2021, 147, 4047–4058 CrossRef .
X. Xu, Z. Jiang, K. Zhu, Y. Zhang, M. Zhu, C. Wang, H. Wang and A. Ren, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2022, 52217 CrossRef CAS .
G. Han, D. Zhang, C. Kong, B. Zhou, Y. Shi, Y. Feng, C. Liu and D.-Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 437, 135482 CrossRef CAS .
H. Lu, Z. Xia, Q. Mi, J. Zhang, X. Zheng, Z. He, J. Wu and J. Zhang, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2022, 61, 1773–1785 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fan, D. Wang, Y. Yuan, Y. Wang, Z. Cheng, Y. Liu and Z. Xie, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122696 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, Z. Ma, S. Hao, S. Cai, Z. Z. Luo, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, J. Yang, Q. Yan and M. G. Kanatzidis, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144, 1445–1454 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Luo, S. Cai, S. Hao, F. Pielnhofer, I. Hadar, Z. Z. Luo, J. Xu, C. Wolverton, V. P. Dravid, A. Pfitzner, Q. Yan and M. G. Kanatzidis, Joule, 2020, 4, 159–175 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, T. Xu, W. Li, Y. Cheng, J. Li, Y. Wei, Q. Jiang, Y. Luo and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 9192–9202 CrossRef PubMed .
N. Tzoar, Phys. Rev., 1963, 132, 202–206 CrossRef .
A. Ron, Phys. Rev., 1963, 132, 978–985 CrossRef .
X. Y. Wang, S. Y. Liao, Y. J. Wan, P. L. Zhu, Y. G. Hu, T. Zhao, R. Sun and C. P. Wong, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10, 44–72 RSC .
K. Zhi Li, C. Wang, H. Jun Li, X. Tao Li, H. Bo Ouyang and J. Wei, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2008, 68, 1105–1114 CrossRef .
P. Gao, X. Lu, C. Yang, X. Li, N. Shi and S. Jin, Constr. Build. Mater., 2008, 22, 837–840 CrossRef .
F. Qin and H. X. Peng, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2013, 58, 183–259 CrossRef CAS .
D. X. Yan, H. Pang, B. Li, R. Vajtai, L. Xu, P. G. Ren, J. H. Wang and Z. M. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 559–566 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen, J. Li, T. Li, L. Zhang and F. Meng, Carbon, 2021, 180, 163–184 CrossRef CAS .
J. Luo, L. Wang, X. Huang, B. Li, Z. Guo, X. Song, L. Lin, L. C. Tang, H. Xue and J. Gao, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10883–10894 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. L. Song, X. T. Guan, L. Z. Fan, W. Q. Cao, C. Y. Wang and M. S. Cao, Carbon, 2015, 93, 151–160 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, G. Zhang, L. Xiao, H. Wang, Q. Zhang and Z. Zhao, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4596–4599 CrossRef CAS .
B. Shen, Y. Li, D. Yi, W. Zhai, X. Wei and W. Zheng, Carbon, 2016, 102, 154–160 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, M. Liu, S. Bi, L. Yang, S. Roy, X. Z. Tang, C. Mu and X. Hu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2017, 493, 327–333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, R. Chen, Z. Lin, Y. Qin, Y. Yuan, Y. Li, X. Zhao, M. Yang, X. Sun, S. Wang, Q. Peng, Y. Li and X. He, ACS Omega, 2018, 3, 3599–3607 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, G. Bai, Y. Huang, Y. Ma, F. Du, F. Li, T. Guo and Y. Chen, Carbon, 2007, 45, 821–827 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, X. Qin, D. Liu, Z. Huang, Y. Zhou, W. Lan, F. Lu and H. Qi, Macromol. Mater. Eng., 2018, 303, 1–8 CrossRef .
N. Ucar, B. K. Kayaoğlu, A. Bilge, G. Gurel, P. Sencandan and S. Paker, J. Compos. Mater., 2018, 52, 3341–3350 CrossRef CAS .
F. Shahzad, S. H. Lee, S. M. Hong and C. M. Koo, Res. Chem. Intermed., 2018, 44, 4707–4719 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Thomassin, C. Jérôme, T. Pardoen, C. Bailly, I. Huynen and C. Detrembleur, Mater. Sci. Eng., R, 2013, 74, 211–232 CrossRef .
P. Ghosh and A. Chakrabarti, J. Polym. Mater., 2000, 17, 291–304 CAS .
T. W. Lee, S. E. Lee and Y. G. Jeong, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2016, 131, 77–87 CrossRef CAS .
M. Rahaman, T. K. Chaki and D. Khastgir, J. Mater. Sci., 2011, 46, 3989–3999 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bi, L. Zhang, C. Mu, M. Liu and X. Hu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 412, 529–536 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, Y. He, Z. Li, N. Li and Z. Wang, J. Adhes. Sci. Technol., 2011, 25, 1211–1221 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Li, Z. Zhang, L. Qi, Q. Liao, Z. Kang and Y. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 201801057 Search PubMed .
L. Kong, X. Yin, X. Yuan, Y. Zhang, X. Liu, L. Cheng and L. Zhang, Carbon, 2014, 73, 185–193 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, G. S. Wang, C. Lu, J. Liu, B. Wen, H. Liu, L. Guo and M. S. Cao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 4685–4692 RSC .
Y. Wang, Z. Xin, J. Shen, L. Zhao, B. Wang, X. Feng, Z. Mao and X. Sui, Compos. Commun., 2022, 30, 101085 CrossRef .
Z. Ma, S. Kang, J. Ma, L. Shao, Y. Zhang, C. Liu, A. Wei, X. Xiang, L. Wei and J. Gu, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 8368–8382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Wu, B. Han, H. Bin Zhang, X. Xie, T. Tu, Y. Zhang, Y. Dai, R. Yang and Z. Z. Yu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 381, 122622 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zeng, C. Wang, G. Siqueira, D. Han, A. Huch, S. Abdolhosseinzadeh, J. Heier, F. Nüesch, C. Zhang and G. Nyström, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1–9 Search PubMed .
X. Jin, J. Wang, L. Dai, X. Liu, L. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Cao, W. Wang, H. Wu and S. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122475 CrossRef CAS .
T. B. Ma, H. Ma, K. P. Ruan, X. T. Shi, H. Qiu, S. Y. Gao and J. W. Gu, Chinese J. Polym. Sci. (Engl. Ed.), 2022, 40, 248–255 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhao, J. Yun, Y. Zhang, K. Ruan, Y. Huang, Y. Zheng, L. Chen and J. Gu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2022, 14, 3233–3243 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Zhao, G. Wang, W. Gu and G. Ji, Carbon, 2021, 183, 515–524 CrossRef CAS .
T. Wang, Y. Wang, J. Lei, K. Chen and H. Wang, Exploration, 2021, 1, 20210178 CrossRef .
Y. Qian, Y. Tao, W. Li, Y. Li, T. Xu, J. Hao, Q. Jiang, Y. Luo and J. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 131608 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Qian, Y. Tao, Y. Li, J. Hao, C. Xu, W. Yan, Q. Jiang, Y. Luo and J. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2022, 441, 136033 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhou, G. Wan, P. Mou, S. Teng, S. Lin and G. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 869–880 RSC .
X. Han, Y. Huang, J. Wang, G. Zhang, T. Li and P. Liu, Composites, Part B, 2022, 229, 109458 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bai, R. Liu, L. Wang, C. Ge, G. Shi and X. Zhang, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 837, 155574 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:

You Li
	You Li is currently pursuing her master's degree at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. Her research focuses on new functional materials and their applications in the field of thermal management and electronic packaging.

Yongxin Qian
	Qian Yongxin is pursuing his doctoral degree at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His research focuses on new functional materials and their applications in the field of thermal management and electromagnetic wave absorption.

Qinghui Jiang
	Prof. Qinghui is currently an associate professor in the School of Materials Science and Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, P. R. China. He obtained his PhD degree from the School of Materials Science and Engineering, Tsinghua University, P. R. China in 2007. He was a post-doctoral fellow at the School of Engineering and Materials Science, Queen Mary University of London, United Kingdom (2011–2013). His research interests include thermoelectric materials, multiferroic materials, and ferroelectric materials.

Abubakar Yakubu Haruna
	Abubakar Yakubu Haruna received his master's degree from Shenyang Aerospace University in 2020. He is currently a PhD candidate at the Department of Materials Science and Engineering, Huazhong University of Science and Technology. His research focuses on bismuth telluride based thermoelectric materials.

Yubo Luo
	Luo Yubo is currently a professor at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China. He received his PhD degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, China, in 2016. He was a research fellow at Nanyang Technological University, Singapore (2016–2019), and a visiting scholar at Northwestern University, United States (2017–2019). His current research focuses on thermoelectric semiconductors and electronic packaging materials.

Junyou Yang
	Junyou Yang professor is currently a deputy Dean of the Department of Materials Science, School of Materials Science and Engineering at Huazhong University of Science and Technology, P. R. China. He obtained his PhD degree from Huazhong University of Science and Technology, P. R. China in 1996. He was a post-doctoral fellow at the Research Center of Advanced Science and Technology (RCAST), University of Tokyo, Japan (1999–2001). He specializes in thermoelectric materials, fusion functional materials, solar cells and thermal management materials.

 	Fig. 1  Development of polymer-based composites.	 
	(2.1)
	(2.2)
k = ke + kp	(2.3)
	(2.4)
	(2.5)
	(2.6)

 	Fig. 2  Thermal conductivity mechanism of organic-based thermally conductive composites. (a) Low loading of thermally conductive fillers; (b) higher loading of thermally conductive fillers; (c) extremely high loading of thermally conductive fillers.	 
	(2.7)
	(2.8)
	(2.9)
	(2.10)
	(2.11)
lgkc = VfC2lgkf + (1 − Vf)lg(C1kp)	(2.12)
	(2.13)

 	Fig. 3  Factors influencing the thermal conductivity of polymer composites. Reproduced from ref. 10 and 47–65 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry, Elsevier, American Chemical Society, Springer Nature and John Wiley and Sons.	 

Polyethylene (PE)	0.11
Polyethylene terephthalate (PET)	0.15
Polyvinyl chloride (PVC)	0.12–0.19
Epoxy resin (EP)	0.17–0.22
Silicone rubber (SR)	0.17–0.21
Polycarbonate (PC)	0.20
Cyclic butylene terephthalate (CBT)	0.2
Polysulfone (PSU)	0.22
Nylon-6 (PA6)	0.25
Nylon-66 (PA66)	0.26
Poly(butylene terephthalate) (PBT)	0.29
Polyphenylene sulfide (PPS)	0.30
Poly ethylene vinylacetate (EVA)	0.33–0.35
High density polyethylene (HDPE)	0.44
Polyimide (PI)	0.11
Polystyrene (PS)	0.1–0.15
Thermoplastic polyurethane (TPU)	0.19
Polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF)	0.19
Polymethyl methacrylate (PMMA)	0.16–0.25
Polyetheretherketone (PEEK)	0.25
Polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS)	0.25
Polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE)	0.25–0.27
Low density polyethylene (LDPE)	0.29–0.34
Poly(acrylonitrile-butadiene-styrene) (ABS)	0.33
Polyphenylsulfone (PPSU)	0.35
Bisphenol A diglycidyl ether (DGEBA)	0.19–0.2

Aluminum (Al)	237
Copper (Cu)	401
Silver (Ag)	429–450
Gold (Au)	317–345
Nickel (Ni)	90–158

Alumina (Al2O3)	20–30
Aluminum nitride (AlN)	150–220
Silicon nitride (Si4N3)	86–120
Boron nitride (BN)	60–300
Beryllium oxide (BeO)	260–300
Silicon carbide (SiC)	80–120
Magnesium oxide (MgO)	36
Silicon dioxide (SiO2)	1–10

Carbon nanotubes (CNTs)	3000
Graphene	5300
Graphite	100–400
Carbon fibers (CFs)	100
Diamond	2000

 	Fig. 4  The synergistic effect of hexagonal boron nitride (h-BN) and cubic boron nitride (c-BN) on the enhancement of the thermal conductivity of epoxy resin composites: (a) thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity of the h-BN/c-BN/EP composites at different total filler contents; (b) at 6 vol% total filler loading, thermal conductivity enhancement of c-BN/EP, h-BN/EP and h-BN/c-BN/EP composites, respectively; (c) schematic representation of the ideal model structures for h-BN/c-BN hybrid fillers arranged within the EP matrix; (d) schematic illustration of the composites. Reproduced from ref. 100 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 5  The influence of filler loading on improving the thermal conductivity of the polymer. Thermal conductivities (TCs) of the BNNSs/EP bulk composites: (a) temperature-dependent TC measured in the out-of-plane direction of the composite; (b) the corresponding TC in the in-plane direction; (c) synthesis scheme of the BNNS/EP composite bulks with densely filling BNNSs; (d) the SEM images of fracture surfaces. Reproduced from ref. 104 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  The influence of the thermally conductive filler size on improving the thermal conductivity of polymer-based composites: (a) illustration of voids in the closest packed structure of uniform-size particles in the epoxy/filler composite; (b) illustration of the proposed highly filled epoxy/Al2O3 composite with multiscale-size particles; (c) comparison of the thermal conductivity of Al2O3-filled liquid epoxy and cured epoxy and predicted values using models; (d) dependence of the maximum loading volume fraction of Al2O3 in liquid epoxy on the particle size. The four samples are neat epoxy, liquid (cured) epoxy filled with 50 vol%, 64 vol% and 79 vol% volume fraction of Al2O3, respectively. The composition C8 (0.5 μm:5 μm:40 μm = 10:35:55) was used here for all samples. Reproduced from ref. 90 with permission from SAGE Publications.	 

DGEBA	AlN:BN = 2:1	42 wt%	0.57 ± 0.009	2018115
PA6	AlN:BN = 1:1	50 vol%	1.040 ± 0.001	202150
PP	Graphite:Al2O3 = 13:1	70 wt%	5.96	2021111
PDMS	CF:BN = 3:4	35 wt%	2.29	2021112
EP	CF:graphite = 2.74	33.23 wt%	6.2	2021101
CBT	Graphene:CNT = 48.58	28.26 vol%	7.69	2021102
TPU	BN:graphene = 1:1	40 wt%	6.86	2021113
PDMS	CF:Al2O3 = 4:1	30 vol%	7.91	2021114
DGEBA	Al2O3:BNNs = 6:4	10 vol%	0.47	2021116
DGEBA	BN:MWCNTs = 30:1	31 vol%	1.193	2011117
PI	BN:graphene = 50:1	51 wt%	2.11	2014118
PP	h-BN:SiO2:GF = 8:1:1	50 wt%	2.31	2021119
SR	BN:diamond = 35:3	43.18 wt%	0.82	2021120
EP	Al:graphite = 97:3	20 wt%	0.89	2021121
PI	BN:graphene = 30:1	31 wt%	1.21	2021109
PI	AlN:BN = 2:1	15 vol%	0.94	2021110

 	Fig. 7  (a) The preparation process of BN-PDA-Ag sheets and BN PDA-Ag/SR composites; (b) mechanism of dopamine self-polymerization; HR-TEM images of (c) BN, (d) BN-PDA, and (e) BN-PDA-Ag sheets. Reproduced from ref. 129 with permission from Elsevier.	 

BAs	EP	40	21	Ice template	202165
SiC	EP	2.17	1.67	Ice template	2018132
SiC	EP	3.91	0.43	Polystyrene template	2019133
Al2O3	EP	23.32	2.58	Protein foaming	2019134
CF	EP	13	2.84	Ice template	202048
CF	PDMS	12.8	6.04	Ice template	2019135
BN	EP	60	6.11	NH4HCO3 foaming	202063
Ag + BN	EP	5	1.1	Ice template	2021136
BN + SiC	PDMS	8.35	3.87	Ice template	2020137
BN	EP	40	1.98	Polystyrene template	2019138
SiC + BN	EP	21.9	4.22	Filtration	2020139
BN	PDMS	15.8	7.46	Chitosan cross-linking	2019140
BN	EP	9.6	3.13	Cellulose cross-linking	2017141,142
BN	EP	65.6	17.61	Salt template	2019143
BN	EP	1.1	0.6	Melamine foam-supporting	201864
BN	EP	9.3	2.85	Ice template	2015144
BN	EP	34	4.24	Ice template	2017145
CNTBs + BN	EP	9.86	3.21	Ice template	2021146
Al	PDMS	14	1.6	Polyurethane-supporting	2021147

 	Fig. 8  (a) The preparation process of the EP/3D-BN composite; the fracture surfaces of 3D-BN frameworks with (b) 20 vol%, (c) 40 vol% and (d) 60 vol% BN. Reproduced from ref. 148 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematics of BN/P foam and the fabrication of 3D-CBNF/EP composites; SEM images of (b) pure PU foam and BN/PU composite foam with a BN loading of (c) 10, (d) 20, (e) 30 and (f) 40 wt%; (g and h) high-magnification SEM images of BN/PU composite foam: (g) cross-section and (h) surface. Reproduced from ref. 150 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D BA network; (b) cross-sectional SEM image of the aligned 3D BA network; (c) thermal conductivity of BAs/EP with different BA loadings. Reproduced from ref. 65 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D CF network; (b) thermal conductivity of CF/PDMS with different CF loadings; (c) SEM image of the aligned 3D CF network. Reproduced from ref. 92 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D CF network; (b) physical image of the aligned 3D CF network; (c) SEM image of the aligned 3D CF network under low magnification; (d) SEM image of the aligned 3D CF network under high magnification; (e) thermal conductivity of 3D-CF/EP composites with different CF loadings. Reproduced from ref. 48 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D SiC network; (b–d) SEM images of the aligned 3D SiC network under different magnifications; (e) schematic illustration of the enhanced through-plane heat transfer of the composites; (f) through-plane and in-plane thermal conductivity of 3D SiCNW/EP composites with different filler loadings; (g) through-plane thermal conductivity of composites as a function of filler alignment. Reproduced from ref. 89 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic of the aligned 3D BN network; (b–f) SEM images of the aligned 3D BN network under different loadings of fillers; (g) thermal conductivity of 3D BN/EP composites under different loadings of fillers. Reproduced from ref. 87 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of the formation of the aligned 3D BN and carbon nanotube network; (b–d) SEM images of the aligned 3D BN network under different magnifications; (e) thermal conductivity of composites as a function of filler alignment. Reproduced from ref. 86 with permission from John Wiley and Sons.	 

 	Fig. 16  Cross-sectional SEM images of the PGB film with different mass fraction of BNNS: 10 wt% (a) and 25 wt% (b); (c) in-plane thermal conductivity of GO/BNNS and PGO/BNNS films; (d) snapshots of flame treatments of the GO film (upside) and (e) PGB film (25 wt% of BNNS) (below) with respect to time in 25 s. Reproduced from ref. 178 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Ball milling process for exfoliating and flame-retardant functionalizing BNNS; (b) thermal conductivity of EP and its composites; (c) photographs of the raw materials, BNNS paste of different milling schemes, BNNS dispersions in H2O, and the Tyndall effect; digital images of the burning state at 20 s and final chars of (d) neat EP, (e) EP/hBN, (f) EP/BNNS1, and (g) EP/BNNS2 composites. Reproduced from ref. 179 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Ball milling process and photos of the Tyndall effect and BNNS@IL powder; (b) preparation of the EP/BNNS@IL composite film; (c) cross-sectional SEM image of the EP/BNNS@IL film; (d) thermal conductivities of EP/BNNS@IL films; photos of flame treatment of (e) neat EP and (f) the EP/BNNS@IL film. Reproduced from ref. 180 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 19  Schematic diagram of the anti-electromagnetic interference mechanism.	 
SE = SER + SEA + SEM	(4.1)
	(4.2)
	(4.3)
	(4.4)
	(4.5)
	(4.6)

<20	Poor	Cannot be applied
20–35	General	Civilian equipment
35–75	Medium	Industrial and commercial electronics
75–95	Good	Aerospace and military equipment
>95	excellent	High precision and high sensitivity equipment
	(4.7)
	(4.8)
stanδ = tanδE + tanδM	(4.9)
	(4.10)

 	Fig. 20  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of GNPs/PLA composites; (b) λ‖ and λ⊥ values of the thermally conductive o-GNPs/PLA and Ti3C2Tx/(o-GNPs/PLA) composites; (c) EMI SE of Ti3C2Tx/(o-GNPs/PLA) composites. Reproduced from ref. 217 with permission from Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) Illustration of the “fish-net” synergistic assembly mechanism at the oil–water interface; (b) thermal conductivity of GNP and CNT in AGxCy composites; (c) EMI SE of AGxCy composites. Reproduced from ref. 218 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Fabrication process of FG papers; (b) EMI SE of FG papers; (c) α and in-plane λ of FG papers. Reproduced from ref. 219 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Schematic of the preparation of wood carbon scaffold/paraffin wax composites; (b) temperature–time curves of wood carbon scaffold/paraffin wax composites during thermal energy management; (c) SET, SER and SEA of the composites. Reproduced from ref. 220 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Schematic of the preparation of CNF@C-Ni/EP; (b) digital images of BC, BC@Ni-MOF and CNF@C-Ni and the corresponding SEM images; (c) thermal management performance; (d) electromagnetic interference shielding effectiveness. Reproduced from ref. 222 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Schematic diagram of the growth process of ALD NiO on the surface of CNTs; (b) the minimum RL values of 50-, 100-, 200-, and CNT@300-NiO in 2–18 GHz; (c) thermal conductivity of NR, CNT/NR and CNT@Ni/NR. Reproduced from ref. 224 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the CC@ZnO matrix and CAP composites; (b) effective absorption bandwidth values of CC@ZnO samples; (c) infrared images under various heating or cooling times. Reproduced from ref. 225 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) The schematic illustration of the formation process of HO-BNNS@Fe3O4 composites; (b) 3D contour maps of the reflection loss of OH-BNNS@Fe3O4 with different thicknesses (1–4 mm) from 2 to 18 GHz; (c) infrared thermal image of OH-BNNS@Fe3O4 with different HO-BNNS weight fractions: (a) 0 wt%, (b) 10 wt%, (c) 15 wt%, (d) 20 wt%, (e) 25 wt%, and (f) 30 wt%. Reproduced from ref. 226 with permission from Elsevier.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
