Rational designs of interfacial-heating solar-thermal desalination devices: recent progress and remaining challenges  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA11911C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA11911C
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 6612-6633Rational designs of interfacial-heating solar-thermal desalination devices: recent progress and remaining challenges

        
          
            Yun 
            Xia
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yuan 
            Kang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuyuan 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Shi 
            Yuan
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yang 
            Li
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Li 
            Gao
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Huanting 
            Wang
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Xiwang 
            Zhang
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Chemical Engineering, Monash University, Clayton, VIC 3800, Australia. E-mail: xiwang.zhang@monash.edu
bSouth East Water Corporation, Seaford, VIC 3198, Australia
Received 
      8th December 2020
    , Accepted 12th February 2021First published on 12th February 2021AbstractSolar desalination is considered one of the most promising solutions to the interconnected challenge of water and energy crisis. Interfacial-heating solar-thermal desalination (IHSTD), which localizes solar energy at the evaporation interface for high-efficiency water production, has achieved substantial progress in recent years. Desalination is completed in an integrated process of vapour generation, salt management and water production. Rationally designing IHSTD devices from these three aspects is therefore essential to realize continuous and efficient operation and has been emerging as the most recent research focus. This review aims to present the latest theoretical and experimental advances of IHSTD device design in (i) evaporator design towards efficient vapour generation, (ii) salt management for continuous evaporation and (iii) condensing system integration to boost water production. The most urgent challenges and corresponding opportunities for IHSTD are also highlighted.
1. Introduction
Enormous water consumption accompanying fast-growing population and industrialization has made water shortage a persistent threat to human society.1–3 To ensure adequate provision of fresh water worldwide is, at the current stage, largely dependent on desalination where water is forced to isolate from salt and then recollected under either hydraulic or electrical drive.4,5 While producing quality water in an effective manner, this operation often runs at a great cost of energy, most of which still comes directly or indirectly from fossil fuels. Considering the depletion of these unsustainable resources together with long-lasting environmental problems (e.g. climate change) following their combustion, a combination of cleaner alternative energy and future water purification is necessitated.6–8
Originally occurring in nature, solar-thermal desalination (STD) may offer a simple yet promising solution to the nexus of water and energy crises. In this process, unlimited sunlight is absorbed to heat up water so that its vapour can be generated and then condensed to realize desalination. Inspired by this concept, artificial STD systems are designed to yield much higher evaporation efficiency. This is first achieved by equipping systems with photothermal materials.9–11 With these high-performance light absorbers, massive solar energy will be captured and converted to sustain the “evaporation–condensation–desalination” cycle. Equally important to the introduction of materials is the optimization of their position within STD systems. Conventional systems allow materials to either sink12,13 or suspend14,15 in water bodies, but these layouts waste substantial energy in warming up bulk water rather than water surface, resulting in inferior solar-to-vapour conversion efficiencies. To address this problem, interfacial-heating solar-thermal desalination (IHSTD) systems are proposed where light absorbers are fixed on the water–material interface.16–19 Instead of being dissipated inside water bodies, the majority of the solar-generated heat can be localized for interfacial evaporation purpose. By carefully designing photothermal materials and adopting such interfacial-heating configurations, IHSTD can promise a solar-to-vapour efficiency above 90%.20–26
Despite the great promise of IHSTD technology, its real-world applications for efficient and continuous desalination only become possible on three premises (Fig. 1a). First, sufficient solar light is harvested as well as converted to heat so that water evaporation sustains. Second, salt accumulation during the evaporation process is well managed to mitigate fouling problem on IHSTD systems. Third, vapour is collected in appropriate condensing systems to ensure final liquid water production. To these ends, rationally designing different parts of IHSTD systems is critical and desirable, which has led to increasing attempts very recently. Nevertheless, a comprehensive overview of the effects of these new designs on overall IHSTD performance is imperative yet lacking. In such a context, our review aims to fill this gap by discussing (Fig. 1b) (1) how a proper evaporator structure can enhance vapour generation; (2) how subtle salt management can ensure long-term system operation; and (3) how the optimisation of condensing systems can boost water production. Unsolved problems and emerging challenges around these topics are then discussed. We note that the knowledge summarized here can also, at least partly, assist in the understanding of other solar-thermal based technologies, e.g., atmospheric water harvesting,27–33 sterilization,34–36 smart humidity control,37 and electricity conversion,38–44 which are also gaining considerable attention.
 Fig. 1  Review framework. (a) Schematic illustration of a typical STD setup and the three key processes: vapour generation, salt management and water production. (b) The design strategies for continuous and efficient IHSTD. 
2. Evaporator design towards efficient vapour generation
Soaking up sufficient solar energy marks the very beginning of a typical IHSTD operating cycle and often takes place in the evaporator of a system. In the best scenario, the heat converted in this area should be fully used for vapour generation in the form of evaporation latent heat, a considerable fraction of which is lost through reflection, radiation, convection, and conduction. Fig. 2 reveals the energy balance in a typical IHSTD process, which includes solar absorption (Qsun), conduction heat loss (Qcond), convection heat loss (Qconv), radiation heat loss (Qrad) and the heat used for water evaporation (Qevap). The energy balance in this process can be expressed as follows:20 Qsun = Qrad + Qcond + Qconv + Qevap(1)
 Fig. 2  Energy conservation in an interfacial solar steam generation system. 
Using the Stefan–Boltzmann law for Qrad, the Fourier's law for Qcond, and Newton's law of cooling for Qconv, the final expression for the rate of vapour generation (ṁvap) is given below:45 (2)where α is the solar absorptance, qsun is the total light irradiation, Apj, Asf and Awp are the area of projection, evaporation surface and water path, respectively, ε is the thermal emittance, σ is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant, Tsf, Tev and Tbk are the temperature of the evaporator surface, surrounding environment and bulk solution, respectively, δwp is the thickness of the water transport path, h is the convective heat transfer coefficient, and hlv is the phase change enthalpy of water from liquid to vapour. Therefore, optimizing key parameters, e.g., α, Asf, Awp, Tsf, δwp and hlv, to increase energy harvesting and to reduce heat loss is thereby the effective means to improve solar vapour generation performance. Following this line of reasoning, five categories of strategies have been developed, i.e., structuring the light-absorbing surface, limiting heat conduction, increasing specific evaporation area, creating a hydrophilic surface and reducing vaporization enthalpy.
2.1 Structuring the light-harvesting surface

2.1.1 Light-trapping surface. 
As the major component of a solar-thermal evaporator, its surface decorated with photothermal materials determines light absorption and conversion, and thus largely affects its vapour generating capacity. Although up-to-date materials are intrinsically efficient light-to-heat converters, their ability to trap sunlight may be compromised due to inevitable light reflection or leakage. To maximize light harvest, subtle modifications on the surface structure become necessary on the macro- and/or nanoscale. Macroscopically, turning a conventional 2D evaporator surface into a 3D one enhances light harvesting by allowing multiple contacts between light and materials. Compared to flat surfaces that only absorb solar light once before dissipation, Wang and co-workers proved that light could be absorbed several times in cone-shaped evaporators during continuous reflections (Fig. 3a), leading to the increase of light absorbance from ∼93% to 99%.46 Similar light-absorbing performance improvement has also been realized by forming a few more 3D structures, such as origami23,47–49 and cup-like structures.50 This strategy with easy constructability is widely applicable and thus a practical option for scalable manufacturing.
 Fig. 3  Strategies for structuring the light-absorbing materials to increase solar light utilization. (a) Methods to reduce reflection loss by multiple reflections with a cone-shaped absorber. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Multiple reflections in a hierarchical architecture. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Reducing light radiation in the mid-infrared range by employing spectrally selective absorbers. The right figure shows the comparison of thermal radiative losses at 100 °C between a blackbody and the spectrally selective absorber. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) Recovering the radiative heat loss by employing a low scattering aerogel with a greenhouse-like mechanism. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
Besides, tuning the nanostructure of the evaporator surface presents another solution for better light capturing. This is often achieved by hollowing the originally compacted material layer so that numerous cavities can be formed to trap light as much as possible (Fig. 3b).51–53 A typical method is replacing horizontally deposited materials with vertically oriented ones to obtain a much looser layer with enough empty space.54–58 This was proved by an early study of Mizuno et al. who found that the light absorptivity of an SWCNT array surface (vertical, 0.98) was higher than that of an SWCNT laminate surface (horizontal, 0.76).59 To simplify the fabrication process and equipment, subsequent studies developed a template-assisted technique, in which pristine photothermal materials are coated and fixed on hierarchically structured substrates. With various substrates including aluminium oxide membranes,60–63 wood,64–66 hydrogels,67 and foams68,69 employed, over 90% light absorption capability has been yielded. Moreover, these nanostructured surfaces can reduce the dependence of the evaporators on light incident angle,65,70–72 which is beneficial for real-world situations with varying angles of incident light, making them a popular and promising option for practical use.


2.1.2 Spectral-selective surfaces. 
Generally, spectrally selective absorbers (SSAs) have high solar absorbance and low thermal emittance, while blackbody absorbers have equally high absorption and emittance. Replacing blackbody absorbers with SSAs is an effective and practical way to reduce radiation heat loss while maintaining high solar absorbance,73,74 particularly when high-temperature steam is involved. The sunlight wavelengths mainly lie between 250 nm and 2500 nm, while solar absorbers with temperatures lower than 100 °C mostly emit infrared radiation with wavelengths longer than 2500 nm (Fig. 3c).75 Therefore, employing SSAs to suppress thermal emittance has great potential to reduce energy loss. Initial studies found that by replacing blackbody absorbers with SSAs, the radiation heat loss could be reduced from 680 W m−2 to 50 W m−2, by assuming an absorber temperature of 100 °C and environment temperature of 20 °C.75 Besides commercial SSAs, customized SSAs on various substrates with flexibly tuned bandwidths have been reported recently,63,70,73 providing more possibility and practicability to other applications.


2.1.3 Light-recovering layers. 
According to the Stefan–Boltzmann law, energy radiation is proportional to the fourth power of temperature, implying that the thermal radiation accounts for a high percentage of heat loss in high-temperature applications. Recovering the long-wavelength thermal emission from high-temperature absorbers shows the possibility of recycling this part of the energy. To achieve this, Wang and co-workers developed a non-evacuated transparent silica aerogel, which can simultaneously recycle the thermal radiation and maintain high solar transparency (Fig. 3d).76 Working like the greenhouse effect, the aerogels transmit sunlight but trap long-wavelength irradiation. Due to the significantly suppressed thermal radiation loss, this system achieved a record-high steam temperature (as high as 265 °C) under one sun. However, coating an additional layer inevitably reduces light transmittance and leads to lower efficiency, making this strategy more suitable to applications where thermal radiation causes major heat losses. For systems with relatively low vapour temperature, employing light-recovering layers may not be worth the investment.

2.2 Limiting heat conduction
Reducing heat conduction is one of the most widely accepted strategies to improve water evaporation performance. Since photothermal materials normally have high thermal conductivities, a large proportion of heat dissipates to the bulk water via thermal conduction.77,78 To this end, rationally coupling photothermal materials with thermal-insulating structures becomes a feasible solution.
There are two main approaches to reduce conduction heat loss. One is to insert hydrophilic substrates with low thermal conductivity under photothermal materials. These substrates can provide sufficient water supply for evaporation because of the hydrophilic capillaries and reduce downward heat conduction due to the low thermal conductivity.17,66,69,79–81 Initial work by Chen and co-workers proposed a double-layered structure for solar vapour generation, which was composed of an exfoliated graphite top layer and a hydrophilic carbon foam substrate (Fig. 4a). Given the suppressed conduction loss, the double-layered evaporator exhibited a 17% higher evaporation rate than that without a carbon foam layer.17 Other substrates with low thermal conductivity, e.g., natural wood,66 polymer foam,69 and aerogel,81 have also been reported with enhanced evaporation performance, demonstrating the effectiveness of this method. However, because of the higher thermal conductivity of water (0.6 W m−1 K−1) than that of air (0.023 W m−1 K−1), these insulation layers usually suffer from reduced thermal conductivities after being wetted by water.82–85 For instance, the thermal conductivity of a graphene foam evaporator increased from 0.036 W m−1 K−1 to 0.135 W m−1 K−1 after water wetting.86 Owing to this reason, employing insulating substrates is beneficial yet inadequate to prevent heat conduction loss.
 Fig. 4  Classic device designs for suppressing conduction heat loss. (a) A double-layered structure with exfoliated graphite as the light absorber and a hydrophilic carbon form for thermal insulation and water transport. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Reduced contact area by employing a confined 2D water path. Compared with the direct bulk water contact, the 2D water path leads to much lower heat loss. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences. (c) Reduced contact area by employing a confined 1D water path. The heat exchange is confined in 1D water paths. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
The other approach is to employ insulation structures with confined water transport paths. In the first approach, the whole volume of the hydrophilic substrate is filled with water, forming 3D water paths. Since water paths also dissipate heat to bulk water, confining water paths also reduces heat conduction. As such, 2D and 1D water paths have been proposed to minimize contact area with water. Generally, 2D water paths can be fabricated by embedding photothermal materials on film-shaped wicking materials, e.g., paper,87 fabrics,88–90 and metal panels.91,92 Due to their excellent wicking properties, hydrophilic wicks only require a limited contact area to maintain sufficient water supply. In this way, the contact area between photothermal materials and bulk water can be significantly reduced. For example, Zhu and co-workers first developed a graphene-based evaporator with 2D water paths (Fig. 4b), which showed 20–50% higher solar-to-vapour efficiency than the device directly in contact with bulk water.93 Similarly, 1D water paths were then employed to further reduce the contact area. A good example was established by Hu et al., who embedded GO pillars in an insulation foam to transport water (Fig. 4c). Due to well-suppressed heat loss in 1D water paths, the jellyfish-shaped solar evaporator achieved over 40% higher water evaporation rate than its counterpart in direct contact with bulk water.94 Besides, mushroom-,95,96 umbrella-97 and tail-like98–102 evaporators are also sound evidence for the benefits of 1D water supply path confinement. Although heat loss can be minimized, confining water paths also brings about salt accumulation problems due to the sacrificed salt rejection pathways. Thus, additional evaluation on long-term stability is suggested for future work when employing confined water paths for desalination application.
2.3 Increasing the specific evaporation area
Increasing the specific evaporation area is a widely applied strategy to enhance evaporation performance. It is known that water evaporation carries away a significant amount of heat and thus results in a cooler surface than the environment. For a given 3D structure, the illuminated evaporation surface normally has a higher temperature than the environment, while the dark side shows the opposite. Thus, increasing the dark surface area could effectively reduce or even reverse the temperature gradient and heat flux between the evaporator and the environment. To achieve this, three main configurations have been developed. The first one is to increase the side surface area which is not exposed to solar light. Given a large enough side surface area, the average temperature of the evaporation surface can be lower than that of the environment, leading to energy harvesting from the environment.103–111 A representative study by Zhu and co-workers first demonstrated the idea of environmental energy harvesting with arrayed cylindrical vapour generators.112 As shown in Fig. 5a, each column has a huge side surface parallel to the light direction, which shows lower temperature and harvests energy from the environment. With a specific surface area ratio of 51, the evaporator achieved an evaporation rate of 1.62 L m−2 h−1, which is well above the theoretical value, demonstrating the feasibility of environmental energy harvesting.
 Fig. 5  Enhancing water evaporation with additional energy input from the environment. (a) Schematic of an environmental energy-enhanced interfacial solar vapour generator. Under solar irradiation, the side surface temperature is lower than that of the environment, leading to the evaporation rate breaking the theoretical limit. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Illustration of the energy balance and heat transfer when the temperature of the evaporation surface is lower than that of the environment. Right figures show the thermal and optical images of the evaporation structure with a peak angle of 22.4°. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.113 Copyright 2018, The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of the increased water vapour escaping through the air convection flow. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
The second configuration is to introduce a macroscale structure on the evaporation surface. Since the surface temperature declines with the reduction of light intensity, macrostructures can effectively enlarge the evaporation surface area to reduce light intensity and temperature.47,113 In recent studies by Gan et al., triangle evaporators with varying apex angles were employed to investigate the effect of the surface structure. It was found that in the evaporator with an apex angle of 22.4° (Fig. 5b), most of the evaporation surface showed a lower temperature than the environment. With the decrease of the surface angle from 180° to 22.4°, the evaporation rate gained over 80% increase from 1.21 L m−2 h−1 to 2.20 L m−2 h−1.113
The third configuration is to exploit the internal surface area for water evaporation. Generally, evaporation is determined by two sequential steps, phase transition and diffusion. Although conventional evaporators have huge specific surface areas for phase transition, the internal surface area is not effective for water evaporation due to stagnated vapour diffusion. Thus, the key to activating the internal surface area is to optimize the pore structures for vapour diffusion. In this regard, Zhu et al. recently reported a well-engineered porous evaporator with a significantly increased evaporation surface (Fig. 5c). The interconnected pore structures not only created a phase-transitioning interface but also guaranteed effective vapour diffusion, facilitating over 6-fold higher evaporation rate than the theoretical value.114
Although increasing the specific evaporation area has been validated to be effective, there are still major challenges for achieving the goal of water production. Since most of the water vapour generated by this scheme has a lower temperature than the surrounding environment, it is hard to condense this water vapour into liquid under ambient conditions. This causes problems in the current solar desalination systems which are mainly based on natural condensation. To fully exploit the potential of this strategy, further research work on system design and optimization for low-temperature vapour condensation is highly needed.
2.4 Creating hydrophilic surfaces
Besides providing sufficient heat at the air–liquid interface, tuning the wettability in this region also proves significant to obtain high vapour generation performance. In general, hydrophilic surfaces are preferred to ensure larger evaporation area and ample water supply in this area.115,116 It is known that water tends to spread out on a hydrophilic surface to form a thin film while aggregates on a hydrophobic surface with a large thickness.114,117 Given the same surface roughness, the effective evaporation interface on hydrophilic surfaces is much higher than that on hydrophobic counterparts (Fig. 6a), reportedly leading to ∼10% higher evaporation rate.115 It is also worth mentioning that thinner water films at hydrophilic interfaces also bring an additional benefit in terms of heat transfer, which leads to higher temperature at the three-phase contact line than that at other parts.118,119 For example, Yang et al. employed hydrophilic and hydrophobic graphene oxide (GO) derivatives to understand the role of surface wettability and found out that the hydrophilic GO derivatives achieved 26% improvement in solar-to-vapour efficiency than graphene.120
 Fig. 6  Tuning the evaporation surface for fast evaporation. (a) Schematic illustration of the evaporation surface in hydrophilic and hydrophobic evaporators with identical structures. (b) Schematic illustration of a double-layered evaporator with varying bottom wettability. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.121 Copyright 2015, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature. 
The creation of hydrophilic surfaces also helps sustain a continuous water transfer from bulk water to the evaporation area. Even though faster water transport toward here rarely guarantees higher evaporation rate, slower water transport always causes photothermal materials to dry out and impedes evaporation performance.121 To demonstrate such a rate-limiting effect of water insufficiency, Yu et al. designed double-layered evaporators of opposite surface wettability. It was revealed that evaporators with a hydrophobic substrate repelled water under the evaporator while a hydrophilic substrate spontaneously leverages water due to the capillary effect. Moreover, the hydrophobic substrate tended to bring out large gas bubbles between the evaporator and bulk water, further limiting water transport upwards (Fig. 6b). Consequently, the evaporator with the hydrophilic substrate showed over 20% higher evaporation rate than the hydrophobic counterpart with identical top surface properties.122
2.5 Reducing vaporization enthalpy
Even if heat loss in the above forms is minimized, achieving full use of the harvested energy remains difficult due to massive vaporization latent heat (enthalpy), a measure of the minimal energy required to initiate liquid-to-vapour conversion. With such a value as high as 2455.6 kJ kg−1 (ambient temperature) in the water evaporation process,123 an effective reduction of it will spare a decent amount of extra heat for vapour generation.124
Since high vaporization enthalpy often results from strong interactions between water molecules, established approaches to bring it down mainly function by weakening these intermolecular forces (Fig. 7a). One good example is to manipulate the water state on photothermal materials.125–131 Depending on its interaction strength with surrounding molecules, water can exist in the free (weak), intermediate (medium) or bound (strong) state. In comparison to bulk water in the bound state, water in the intermediate state has less intermolecular contact, a weaker hydrogen bond network and thus lower vaporization enthalpy. Representative studies by Yu and co-workers managed to induce an intermediate water state on their hydrogel evaporators, which yielded a water evaporation rate of over 3 L m−2 h−1 due to reduced enthalpy under ambient light conditions.126,128–130 Another viable approach is to promote evaporation in the form of water clusters rather than individual molecules. It is believed that water in molecular networks is more easily vaporized in units of small clusters rather than singular molecules.132 In such an evaporation route, less energy input is needed to break the bonds between each evaporation unit so that vaporization enthalpy could be reduced significantly (Fig. 7b). Therefore, many materials, including hydrogels,132 aerogels,133 inorganic nanosheets,134 wood84 and metals,91 have been reported with enhanced water evaporation performance owing to water cluster evaporation. Though exceptional performances have been demonstrated, direct evidence of cluster evaporation is necessary to receive wider acceptance.22,135
 Fig. 7  Reducing the latent heat of water evaporation. (a) Three forms of water with different hydrogen bonding around polymer chains: free, intermediate and bound water. In the vaporization and condensation process, the hydrogen-bond networks break or are reformed in the gaseous or liquid state. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (b) The equivalent enthalpy of water with different hydrogel evaporators (left) and schematic illustration of the reduced vaporization enthalpy due to the evaporation of water clusters (right). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
However, there are two main concerns regarding the reliability of the associated experiments and calculations in the associated literature. One derives from the solar simulators, which were calibrated with photodiode-type sensors rather than the suggested thermopile-type ones. The photodiode-type sensors only respond to a certain wavelength range of light (normally within the range of 400–1100 nm). Therefore, the actual sunlight intensity (usually wider than 200–2500 nm) should be much higher than the measured values in their experiment.136 For example, according to the spectral data of a typical solar simulator (model: 91192, Newport), the energy in the wavelength range of 400–1100 nm only accounts for 63.47% of the total light irradiance from the light source.137 This indicates that in these research studies, the actual light irradiation was about 1.58 kW m−2 with a measurement reading of 1 kW m−2, and the elevated light irradiation led to the over-claimed evaporation performance. Therefore, it is hard to distinguish the genuine reason for the extra-high evaporation performance in these systems.
Another concern is the method used to calculate vaporization enthalpy. For example, the enthalpy of vaporization (Eequ) was estimated using the water evaporation rate under dark conditions (mg) with an assumption of identical energy input (Uin) from the environment: Uin = Eequ × mg = E0 × m0, where E0 and m0 represent standard enthalpy and evaporation rate of bulk water in the dark.91,125–130,132,133 One problem here is the assumption of identical energy input from the environment. Due to the evaporation cooling effect, the surface temperatures with varying evaporation rates are apparently different, and thus heat flux from the environment to evaporators should be different. Second, the improved mg is not necessarily because of the reduced vaporization enthalpy. For example, even with the same material, increasing the specific surface area (e.g., from 2D to 3D structure48,50,104,114) has also been reported to significantly improve dark evaporation rate. Obviously, the vaporization enthalpy with the same material should not change, which is contradictory to this method for vaporization enthalpy measurement. Further work should find a more accurate and reliable method to measure the genuine vaporization enthalpy.
3. Salt management towards continuous operation
Continuous operation is one of the primary requirements for practical and low-cost desalination processes. In most IHSTD systems, both water and solutes are transported simultaneously through the non-selective capillaries to the evaporation surface. Although part of salt can diffuse back to the bulk solution, the other part is trapped on the evaporation surface and starts to crystallize when saturated.138,139 Salt precipitation on the evaporation surface leads to a significant decrease of evaporation rate due to reduced light absorption and blocked vapour-escaping channels. A simple mass transfer model of salts in an IHSTD process can be described as follows: ṁaccum = ṁflow − ṁdfu − ṁrmv(3)where ṁaccum is the accumulated salt, ṁflow the salt carried by water flow, ṁdfu the salt diffusing back to bulk solution, and ṁrmv the salt that is removed. Therefore, to minimize salt accumulation in the evaporator, reducing the ṁflow and increasing the ṁdfu and ṁrmv are feasible schemes.
Many designs have been developed recently to tackle the salt accumulation problem. Here, according to their working principles, we classify the main strategies into six groups, i.e., blocking salts with water-repelling surfaces, increasing back diffusion of salt, discharging concentrated brine, dissolving the precipitated salt, spatially isolating crystallization from evaporation and isolating evaporators from the bulk solution.
3.1 Blocking salts with water-repelling surfaces
Employing water-repelling surfaces is a straightforward strategy to inhibit fouling by preventing salt carried by water flow from reaching the evaporation surface.140–144 In this regard, hydrophobic surfaces are good options because they spontaneously repel salt solution beneath evaporators. There are three main configurations to assemble water-repelling surfaces. One is to directly apply standalone hydrophobic films on the water surface. As illustrated in Fig. 8a, these evaporators can spontaneously float on water and repel salt solutions due to the hydrophobic nature. However, these film evaporators normally suffer from high heat loss due to the direct contact with the bulk solution.
 Fig. 8  Salt management designs with a hydrophobic evaporation surface. (a) Schematic illustration of a standalone hydrophobic film evaporator at the solution surface, which repels water but suffers from severe heat loss to bulk solution via convection and conduction. (b) Structure of a Janus absorber that is composed of a hydrophobic carbon black nanoparticle (CB) coated poly methyl methacrylate (PMMA) layer for light absorption and a hydrophilic polyacrylonitrile (PAN) layer for water transport. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of a water lily-inspired design for solar vapour generation. A confined water layer was introduced between the hydrophobic evaporation surface and insulator. While water evaporated through the porous surface, salts were excreted through the open bottom water path. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.149 Copyright 2019, The Authors. Published by American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
To address this problem, the second configuration combines a hydrophilic substrate under the hydrophobic surface, which is normally defined as a Janus evaporator.56,115,145–148 In this configuration, the hydrophobic surface blocks salt ions while the hydrophilic substrate supplies sufficient water for evaporation and diffuses salts to prevent crystallization. For instance, Zhu and co-workers fabricated a classic Janus structure (Fig. 8b) with a hydrophobic layer (CB/PMMA layer) for light absorption and a hydrophilic layer (PAN layer) for solution transport. With the underlying hydrophilic layer confining solution transport and diffusing salts, the Janus evaporator achieved long-term stable evaporation performance with a solar-to-vapour efficiency of 51% under 1 sun irradiation.145 Nevertheless, film-based Janus evaporators usually suffer from high heat loss to the bulk solution through the thin hydrophilic layer. To this end, thermal insulation components are then employed in Janus structures. For example, Janus evaporators with both an aerogel-based hydrophilic substrate147 and an additional polystyrene foam insulation structure148 elevated the solar-to-vapour efficiency over 80% under 1 sun.
The third configuration employs macro-sized channels to excrete salt solution. Compared with micro-sized pores, macro-sized channels have much lower mass transfer resistance and thus can greatly enhance salt diffusion. This feature makes the configuration well-qualified for hypersaline brine desalination. In a recent study by Zhu et al., a water-lily like evaporator was proposed to desalinate high-salinity brines. As demonstrated in Fig. 8c, the evaporator contains a confined water layer beneath a hydrophobic absorber and open holes to excrete salt. The confined water layer localizes heat for efficient water evaporation while the millimetre-sized channels facilitate efficient excretion of salts, enabling 80% solar-to-vapour efficiency and outstanding salt-resistance properties.149
Although evaporation performance can be maintained, one major concern of this strategy is the relatively low solar-to-vapour efficiency due to the hydrophobic evaporation surface. Another concern is when employing insulation structures for high evaporation rate, the risk of salt fouling would also increase as a result of the restricted salt diffusion. Besides, since salts are normally hydrophilic, the water-repelling nature would be destroyed once salts attach on the hydrophobic surface. Thus, how to maintain efficient and stable performance under actual conditions requires further investigation.
3.2 Increasing back-diffusion of salt
Along with on-going salt accumulation at the evaporation surface, salts also spontaneously diffuse back to the bulk solution due to the concentration gradient. Thus increasing back-diffusion against salt accumulation is another effective way to prevent salt fouling. Using the Fick's law of diffusion, the salt diffusion rate can be expressed as:150 (4)where D is the mass diffusion coefficient of salt in water, ρ is the partial density of water in seawater, and Csf and Cbk are the mass fractions of salt at the evaporation surface and in bulk solution. For film-type evaporators, salt fouling has not been observed due to high ṁdfu as a result of insignificant δwp.62,151,152 However, when confined water paths are employed to reduce heat loss, the high mass transfer resistance due to the increased Awp and reduced δwp will lead to salt fouling problems.93,153 Thus, a trade-off between high salt resistance and good thermal management is created in interfacial evaporation systems. To simultaneously achieve efficient and continuous water evaporation, this trade-off needs to be well balanced by carefully designing the mass transfer channels according to the targeted salt concentration.
Many devices have been developed with stable performance in applications involving low-concentration saline water (e.g., seawater desalination, salinity around 35 g L−1). In an early study by Chen and co-workers, a salt-rejecting evaporator was fabricated with alternating structures of composite fabric wicks and polystyrene foam (Fig. 9a). By appropriately tuning the area ratio of the water path to evaporation surface (Awp/Asf), the evaporator effectively rejected excess salts while preserving heat localization.150 Another type of salt-rejecting evaporator employs the entire bottom layer to exchange salt between the evaporator and bulk solution.154–158 For instance, Yu et al. developed a typical evaporator with a hydrophilic hydrogel substrate to enhance salt diffusion.127 As such, the evaporator maintained stable evaporation performance for over 96 hours with seawater (Fig. 9b).
 Fig. 9  Salt management by increasing back diffusion. (a) Structure of a salt-rejecting evaporator composed of a light-absorbing black fabric, a wicking white fabric, and insulating polystyrene foams. The mass and heat transport in the salt-rejecting evaporator was confined in a narrow region. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A hydrogel-based antifouling solar evaporator. The mass exchange of salt between the evaporator and bulk solution occurred over the entire contact area. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The microstructure and working principle of a bimodal porous balsa wood evaporator for high salinity brine desalination. The large vessel channels greatly promote the mass transfer between the evaporation surface and the bulk solution, leading to anti-fouling properties in high-salinity brines. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
When high salinity brines are involved, salt rejection via diffusion exchange becomes deficient to prevent salt crystallization. Under such circumstances, an enhanced mass transfer model, e.g., fluid convection, is thus beneficial to increase salt rejection.159–161 For example, Hu et al. employed a bimodal porous wood evaporator containing two types of pores to achieve stable water desalination with hypersaline brines.160 As demonstrated in Fig. 9c, the interconnected micropores supplied water for evaporation while the large vessel channels dissipated salts via a combination of diffusion and convection. This bimodal structure effectively enabled long-term stable water evaporation from 15 wt% NaCl solution even under 6 sun irradiation. By contrast, the counterpart evaporator with blocked vessel channels suffered from severe salt fouling after 7 h of continuous solar illumination.
Despite the improved salt-resistant ability, the enlarged water transport paths generally lead to high heat loss, which inevitably impacts the evaporation performance. For applications with low salt concentration, increased back diffusion of salt is advantageous due to the simple configuration and effective salt rejection. However, when targeting hypersaline solutions, the high energy loss resulting from the mass exchange would significantly reduce energy efficiency.
3.3 Discharging concentrated brine
Discharging concentrated brine before saturation is another effective solution to prevent salt fouling. In most evaporators, feed solution is transported through internal capillaries towards the top surface and then it evaporates. This mass transfer mode inevitably results in growing salt accumulation problem at the terminal of water transport channels, i.e., evaporation surface. In contrast, evaporation of water during transport can possibly increase the salt concentration along the water path, achieving controllable salt distribution. Thus, it is feasible to discharge the concentrated brine before saturation. This strategy has been well presented with an arc-shaped fabric evaporator. As shown in Fig. 10a, two edges of a wick-based evaporator were immersed in feed reservoirs while the middle part is kept below the liquid level. Owing to liquid level difference, seawater was continuously transported from the edges towards the lower point, followed by discharging of concentrated brine before saturation.162 This salt-management strategy not only prevents the salt fouling problem but also produces high-concentration brines which are also valuable resources for many industries. Although discharging brines may lead to additional heat loss,163 the advantages of relieving salt precipitation and producing concentrated brine make it a widely adaptable method for particular applications, such as resource recovery and zero-liquid-discharge of wastewater.
 Fig. 10  Salt management by dissolving the salt crystals and introducing brine outflow. (a) A hanging photothermal fabric evaporator for continuous desalination. By tuning the brine dropping speed, continuous water evaporation was achieved with salt crystallization. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of the natural salt crystallization and dissolution state in the light-on/off situation. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) A self-rotating evaporator for efficient and stable hypersaline brine desalination. The evaporator achieved self-regeneration when salts crystallized on the top surface. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 
3.4 Dissolving the precipitated salt
In cases where salt fouling is unavoidable, one option for recovering the evaporation performance is to dissolve the salt crystals. Two main mechanisms have been employed to regenerate evaporators. One is to take advantage of the alternating day and night. During the daytime with strong light, water evaporates rapidly and salts crystallize in this process. At night, water evaporation rate drops and the accumulated salts gradually dissolve back to the bulk solution. With carefully engineering the salt accumulation and diffusion process, sustainable crystallization–dissolution cycles have been achieved.65,78,88,164 For instance, Hu et al. reported that in a wood evaporator, salt crystallized out during the evaporation test under five-sun illumination for 8 h, and successfully dissolved back to the bulk solution under dark conditions for 16 h (Fig. 10b).65 Nevertheless, one problem here is that after crystallization during the daytime, evaporators only get regenerated at night. The long interval of time unavoidably leads to impeded overall evaporation performance due to the delayed regeneration. Besides, this problem becomes particularly severe when treating high-concentration brines, in which process salts tend to crystallize at the evaporation surface within a short period.
The other design concept is to utilize the growing weight of salt crystals for self-rotation. To achieve this, two critical conditions have to be met: (i) circular configurations such as cylinders and spheres for easy rotation; (ii) confined water transport paths to facilitate salt crystallization. Once adequate salts crystallized on the rotatable evaporator, the regeneration process will be triggered due to the imbalance between gravity and buoyancy. For example, Xia et al. first developed a cylindrical evaporator with self-rotating properties for continuous and efficient water evaporation from hypersaline brines.165 As illustrated in Fig. 10c, stable evaporation performance was realized by repeating the cycle of “evaporation–crystallization–self-regeneration”. Meanwhile, due to the confined water supply paths and non-uniform temperature distribution, the heat loss to bulk water was significantly reduced. In this unique way, ultrahigh salt tolerance (300 g L−1) and an energy efficiency of around 90% were simultaneously achieved.
The abovementioned cases indicate that even with the self-cleaning feature, the evaporation surfaces are still covered by salt crystals for a certain time. More research studies are recommended to optimise the device configurations, such as the device diameter and thickness of water paths, to shorten the time interval between self-regeneration cycles.
3.5 Spatially isolating crystallization from evaporation
Spatially isolating salt crystallization from water evaporation is another effective strategy to minimize the influence of salt precipitation. Instead of random salt precipitation on the evaporation surface, evaporators with controlled crystallization are able to maintain salt crystallization at specific sites, e.g., edge and apex, and thus to prevent the major evaporation surface from salt fouling.100,166–169 The most prominent advantage of this strategy is the capability of harvesting the crystallized salts as valuable mineral resources.
To achieve this, two major characteristics are required. One is to confine solution transport, more preferably with 1D water paths. In this way, the concentrated salts after evaporation can be harvested as much as possible instead of discharging to the bulk solution. The other requirement is the unidirectional water transport to form a stable concentration gradient at the evaporation surface. During the unidirectional solution transport, water evaporates continuously while the salt concentration increases accordingly, leading to an ascending concentration profile along the transport path. Thus, salts only crystallize at the path terminals after reaching saturation concentration, achieving spatially separated evaporation and crystallization. Notably, it is important to avoid employing path lengths longer than a critical value, otherwise salt would crystallize out before reaching the terminals. For example, Xia et al. reported a representative device for continuous seawater desalination and salt harvesting (Fig. 11a). In this system, confined water paths and directional water transport were maintained by inserting a cotton thread in the middle of a hydrophilic disc. As indicated by the CFD simulation, salt solution spread from the centre to the edge of the disc and water evaporated during this process, leading to the highest salt concentration at the edge. Salts crystallized at edges and fell off naturally with the growing weight, providing the possibility of in situ salt harvesting.100 It is worth mentioning that 3D morphologies have also been adopted to further enhance evaporation performance. For instance, Wang et al. developed a 3D cup-shaped evaporator (Fig. 11b) for zero-liquid-discharge desalination, in which the side walls increased the evaporation area and collected the salt crystals.167 Examples also include a 3D cone-shaped evaporator, in which the solution transport starts from the edges and ends at the apex (Fig. 11c). Stable performance was thus maintained by spatially crystalized salts at the apex. Combined with the additional energy harvested from the environment, the water evaporation rate was further elevated to 2.63 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun illumination.170
 Fig. 11  Controlled salt crystallization designs. (a) Simultaneous water evaporation and salt harvesting design. Due to the spatially regulated water transport, a unique salt concentration distribution formed on the evaporation disc, leading to edge-preferential crystallization. During this process, the evaporation surface was uncovered and the salt can be harvested. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A 3D cup-shaped solar evaporator with controlled salt crystallization on the sidewall. The salt crystallized on the sidewall of the evaporator, achieving zero-liquid-discharge desalination. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic and photograph of a 3D cone-shaped evaporator. While water transports from the bottom, salts crystallized on the apex and were collected after the solar evaporation test. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.170 Copyright 2020, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature. 
At this stage, controlled crystallization performance has been validated with either synthesized solutions or pre-treated real water sources. However, salt crystallization behaviour varies greatly with different salt species and concentrations. Many widely existing impurities, such as hygroscopic salts (e.g., calcium chloride and magnesium chloride) and scaling salts (e.g., calcium sulphate and calcium carbonate), may significantly affect the crystallization behaviour. Future work is highly recommended to understand and control the crystallization in the presence of these impurities under various conditions.
3.6 Isolating evaporators from the bulk solution
Isolating evaporators from bulk solution is one of the most reliable strategies to thoroughly prevent the salt fouling problem. Generally, conventional evaporators are inevitably affected by salt fouling because of the requirement of direct contact for conductive heat transfer. Given this, employing thermal irradiation to replace thermal conduction can get rid of salt fouling from the origin. Non-contact evaporation systems, in which light absorbers and bulk solutions are thoroughly isolated, have been developed recently and have shown great promise to achieve fouling-free and efficient evaporation. In this strategy, special photothermal materials are necessary to convert incoming sunlight into mid-infrared radiation that water strongly absorbs. In this way, the solar energy can be effectively confined within 20 μm for interfacial water evaporation, facilitating interfacial evaporation (Fig. 12a).171 For example, Chen et al. first demonstrated that a contact-less evaporator (Fig. 12b) was entirely salt resistant, evidenced by the salt-free surface of the absorber after complete evaporation of seawater.171 Shortly after, Prasher and co-workers extended the application to wastewater management with a photothermal umbrella system (Fig. 12c).172 Thanks to the separation of feed and evaporator, this system worked well even with saturated salt solutions, demonstrating great potential in wastewater disposal and zero-liquid-discharge of brine.
 Fig. 12  Anti-fouling contactless evaporation systems. (a) Working principle of the contactless evaporation. (b) Photograph of the disassembled device for contactless evaporation. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.171 Copyright 2018, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature. (c) Schematic design of a solar umbrella for zero-liquid-discharge of high concentration brine. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
One major concern of this strategy is the high energy loss to the environment, which mainly resulted from the high temperature of photothermal materials. Besides, downward heat conduction also reduces the overall energy efficiency. Even so, the extraordinary salt resistance property still makes it the most durable strategy for extreme conditions. Future work on this strategy is suggested to improve the water evaporation performance by reducing primary heat losses.
4. System integration to boost water production
In an integrated desalination process, vapour condensation is equally critical as vapour generation and salt management, yet has been overlooked. Inadequate condensation leads to vapour accumulation and thus restraints the subsequent water evaporation. In this section, we review the developments in vapour condensation systems from conventional solar stills to reinforced water condensation designs.
4.1 Condensing vapour in conventional solar stills
Conventional solar stills are still the most applied water vapour condensation systems. As shown in Fig. 13a, a solar still typically consists of a large sealed chamber and a transparent cover for light transmission as well as vapour condensation. One major advantage of this system is simplicity. Solar stills can be easily assembled using common materials and built on sites where there is sufficient sunlight access,173,174 making it attractive and practical for remote and off-grid regions. With appropriately engineered feeding and collecting systems, these units can be scaled up and operated in an automatic way (Fig. 13b). Furthermore, floating solar stills on waterbodies (Fig. 13c) are effective to relieve the pressure on land usage, and also beneficial to the water condensation process with reinforced heat dissipation via direct contact with the surrounding water (Fig. 13d).175
 Fig. 13  Conventional interfacial evaporation based solar distillation units for water desalination. (a) Schematic illustration of a conventional solar still setup for water production with interfacial evaporation enhancement. (b) Schematic illustration of a solar water purification system simulating the practical water purification equipment with an automatic brine inlet and purified water outlet. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) A floating solar distillation unit with a low-cost polymer film condensation cover. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of a floating wave-resistant solar still prototype. The distillate collecting bottles at the bottom facilitated the water condensation process due to the reduced temperature in response to fast heat exchange with the bulk solution. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
However, most reported solar stills suffer from 30–70% reduction of freshwater production rate compared to the reported water evaporation rate.132,148,150,176–178 There are two main reasons for the reduction of performance. One is the increased light reflection caused by numerous water droplets attached on the light-transmitting surface. It is reported that with condensate attaching, the light-transmitting surfaces suffer up to 25% decrease of transmittance for plastics and 20% decrease for glass.179 The other problem is the low mass transfer of vapour. The mass transfer process of vapour in solar stills can be roughly calculated using Fick's law of diffusion:180 (5)where ṁvt is the rate of vapour transport, Dv is the mass diffusivity, l is the thickness of air gap between the evaporator and condenser, and Ce and Cc are the saturated vapour concentrations on the evaporator and the condenser, which are determined by the temperatures of the evaporator and condenser. It is obvious that the large thickness of the air gap and insignificant difference of vapour pressure or temperature between the evaporator and condenser significantly hinder the overall vapour condensation. Thus, the key to enhancing water production performance is to overcome the problems of light reflection and high vapour transport resistance, which are addressed in the following paragraphs.
4.2 Relocating water condensation surface
In conventional solar stills, a light-transmitting cover is also used for vapour condensation, which unavoidably results in the problem of impeded light absorption. Thus relocating the condensation surface is effective to solve the problem of increased light reflection. There are two main strategies to achieve this goal. One is to introduce airflow, which actively delivers water vapour to the targeted condensation sites. For example, Yu et al. developed a modified solar still with a separated vapour generation chamber and a condensation chamber (Fig. 14a).128 In this design, flowing air was introduced as a carrier gas to transport vapour from the evaporation chamber to the condensation chamber. Similarly, fan-reinforced vapour evacuation design was also effective to relocate water condensing sites at the cool condensate reservoir (Fig. 14b).86 With the relocated water condensation sites, both designs achieved over doubled vapour collection rates compared to their counterparts. However, this strategy requires additional energy input and motors to generate airflows, which will significantly increase the capital and operation cost.
 Fig. 14  Spatial separation of water condensation from light transmission. (a) A solar water distillation device that includes a separated vapour generation chamber and a condensation chamber. The vapour could be transported to the condensation chamber to isolate from the light-transmitting surface. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) A solar desalination device with vapour transport promoted by an exhaust fan. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) A solar distillation device with vapour moving downwards. The evaporator was sealed with a photothermal absorber and PS foams, leaving its back surface open for evaporation. The vapour crosses the membrane and condenses on the metal collector. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) An integrated tandem solar electricity-water generator. A silicon solar cell was employed to generate electricity and heat. A reduced graphene oxide (r-GO) based fabric was used for water evaporation. The vapour was forced to flow downwards, followed by condensation at the beaker sidewall. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
Another strategy is to relocate the photothermal materials. Different from placing photothermal materials inside sealed chambers, exposing photothermal materials to sunlight can fundamentally prevent the reflection problem due to vapour condensation. To couple this strategy with IHSTD systems, two requirements have to be fulfilled, i.e., a confined water path and vapor-impermeable photothermal material. The former is required for water transport and heat localization, while the latter is to convert solar energy and prevent vapour leaking. For example, Zhou et al. developed a passive distillation device that employed a dense light absorber on the top and PVA sponge to transport water (Fig. 14c). In this design, vapour generated at the sponge and flowed downwards to the metal collector, achieving water production of 0.727 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun irradiation.181 Shortly after, Zhu and co-workers further developed this strategy by employing photovoltaic panels to replace solar absorbers (Fig. 14d). Driven by the waste heat from the solar panel, water vapour condensed on the cold side-walls, resulting in as high as 0.80 kg m−2 h−1 water production.182 Compared to the active counterparts, these designs are independent of additional energy and moving components, which are more preferable for practical use.
4.3 Reducing the vapour transport distance
Reducing vapour transport distance is another effective approach to enhance water production. In solar stills, a large gap between evaporation and the condensing surface is required to prevent potential contamination by physically separating the condensate and feed solution. However, the large gap usually leads to high resistance for vapour transfer. Similar to the membrane distillation process, hydrophobic membranes can be employed between the feed and condensate, which can not only separate the two streams but also significantly reduce the air gap.183–188
Three main configurations have been developed to achieve this goal. One is to place the membrane close to evaporators. For example, Ho and co-workers developed a solar-driven device for parallel freshwater and hydrogen production (Fig. 15a). By inserting the membrane at the evaporator side, the air gap was reduced to the millimetre scale, allowing efficient water (∼0.98 kg m−2 h−1) and hydrogen (∼1017 μmol m−2 h−1) co-production under natural sunlight.186 The second configuration is to place the membrane on the condensate side. Based on this configuration, Gong et al. developed a distillation device employing circulating distillate for vapour collection (Fig. 15b). The circulating distillate effectively takes away the heat from condensation, which can provide a larger temperature difference for vapour diffusion. Due to this, a high water production rate of 1.10 kg m−2 h−1 was achieved.188 The last one is to place the membrane between the circulating feed and distillate,189–193 similar to the direct contact membrane distillation process. In this way, the actual distance for water vapour transport can be significantly reduced to the thickness of the hydrophobic membranes (Fig. 15c).189 Compared to membrane distillation technologies, this highly localized photothermal heating entirely eliminated the temperature polarization.194 However, the conduction heat loss problem due to the high thermal conductivity of the membrane still exists, which may possibly limit the overall water productivity.
 Fig. 15  Reducing the vapour transport distance to facilitate water production. (a) Photograph of the device for simultaneous freshwater production and hydrogen generation. The enhanced water production results from the confined photothermal heating at the feed–membrane interface and the reduced air-gap distance between the hydrophobic membrane and the condensation plate. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of a wick based air-gap water distiller. Under solar illumination, localized heat transfer leads to the efficient generation of solar vapour in the gap, which passes through the membrane and condenses with the distillate flow. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.188 Copyright 2019, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature. (c) Schematic and mechanism of nanophotonics-enabled solar membrane distillation. Upon solar illumination, the CB-laden membrane layer generates an elevated vapour pressure with no additional heat source. Water vapour only needs to travel a short distance (thickness of the hydrophobic membrane) and condenses at the distillate–membrane interface. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2020, National Academy of Sciences. 
This strategy has been validated to be effective to enhance water production; however, the overall water productivity is still lower than the theoretic value. Reasons may include the lack of system optimization, for example, air gap distance, membrane selection and flow rates of feed/condensate. Thus future work on system optimization based on mass and heat transfer is suggested. Beyond that, since hydrophobic membranes are involved, cost-effectiveness analysis of these designs could be useful information when compared with conventional solar stills.
4.4 Recycling the latent heat
After condensation, a huge amount of latent heat in vapour is released at the condensing surface, but most of the energy is wasted to the environment. Without latent heat recovery, the water production rate will be capped at 1.47 kg m−2 h−1 under one sun providing 100% solar-to-water converting efficiency. By contrast, recovering the latent heat of evaporation could easily break this theoretic limit. Latent heat recovery is not a new concept, which has been extensively used in high-temperature distillation applications195,196 and membrane distillation processes.197–199 However, high temperature and external heat exchangers are normally required for latent heat recycle, which are not applicable for solar distillation units. In recent years, many solar distillation units have been developed with latent heat recovery and have improved water productivity by several-fold compared to the theoretical value.180,200–205 In this section, two main schemes to reuse the latent heat of evaporation are reviewed, i.e., pre-heating feed solution and multi-stage solar distillation.

4.4.1 Pre-heating feed solution. 
The first scheme is to recycle the latent heat of evaporation to pre-heat the feed solution. After vapour condensation, the released latent heat usually elevates the temperature of the condensate. With suitable heat-exchange designs, part of the heat in the hot condensate can be recovered by the cold feed, thus increasing the overall energy utilization efficiency. For example, Halas and co-workers coupled a heat recovery system with IHSTD technology to recover the latent heat for pre-heating the feed. As demonstrated in Fig. 16a, the hot distillate and cold feed complete thermal exchange in a heat exchanger (HX), in which metal sheets are employed to conduct heat and separate the two flows. It was reported that with ten layers of the HX, the water production rate was remarkably improved to 15.9 L m−2 day−1 under real sunlight conditions, over 10 times higher than that without heat recovery (1.5 L m−2 day−1).202
 Fig. 16  Recycling the latent heat. (a) Schematic illustration of a nanophotonics-enabled solar membrane distillation device with heat recovery. The feed was pre-heated by the recycled energy from the distillate. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the components and the water transfer process in a two-stage solar-thermal membrane distillation system. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the components and mass transfer process in a multistage modular distiller. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic illustration of a multistage distiller with thermal concentration. Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the key components, mass transport and vaporization enthalpy recycling in a multistage device. Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of integrated photovoltaics-membrane distillation devices. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.208 Copyright 2019, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature. 
Although significant enhancement can be achieved by this strategy, the potential of latent heat is far from being fully exploited. The recycled heat elevates feed temperature; however, much of the heat is discharged along with the feed outlet. Given this, utilizing the residual energy in the feed outlet could be beneficial to further enhance water productivity.


4.4.2 Multi-stage solar distillation. 
The second scheme of latent heat utilization is to drive multiple evaporation–condensation cycles. In these designs, the latent heat from vapour condensation is released on thermal-conducting films and then conducted to the next evaporation stage. Different from the pre-heating scheme, the recycled heat is directly used to drive a complete evaporation–condensation cycle. The ideal multi-effect device should be able to reuse the latent heat as many times as possible before losing to the environment.
Multi-effect solar distillers have been reported over two decades;206,207 however, their water productivity was normally lower than 1 kg m−2 h−1 due to unsatisfactory single-stage efficiency and system optimization. Recent progress has greatly increased water productivity and deepened the understanding of system designing. For example, Zhou et al. developed a two-stage distiller with once latent heat recovery (Fig. 16b). Compared with the single-stage water production rate of 0.727 kg m−2 h−1, the overall water production rate reached 1.02 kg m−2 h−1 by applying a secondary distillation stage.181 However, the secondary stage only obtained half the water productivity of the primary stage, indicating low heat-transfer efficiency in the system. The possible reason for the low thermal efficiency could be the large air gap between neighbouring evaporation and condensation layers. At the same time, Chiavazzo and co-workers developed and tested a compact IHSTD device (Fig. 16c), which has narrower gaps between neighbouring evaporation and condensing layers. The device employed 0.1 μm-thick PTFE membranes between the condensate and feed, minimizing the distance for vapour transfer. Besides, aluminium sheets are employed to help the heat transfer between stages, and a heat sink was placed at the bottom to enlarge the overall temperature gradient. Due to these features, multiple cycles of latent heat recovery were enabled. Compared to the single-stage configuration, a ten-stage device achieved a sixfold increase in water production (2.95 L m−2 h−1), two times higher than the theoretic value.203
Two innovative designs have been put forward to further improve energy utilization efficiency. One is to elevate the temperature of evaporators by employing thermal concentration design. In principle, water productivity and energy efficiency of multistage distillers increase with higher temperature.181 Although enhanced solar flux can be achieved through optical concentration, the optical concentrator and supporting structures are high-cost and complicated, making it not practical in most situations. By contrast, thermal concentration is a simple and low-cost strategy to increase the heat flux under ambient solar flux. Hu and co-workers first coupled the thermal concentration strategy with latent heat recovery.204 As demonstrated in Fig. 16d, the device mainly consisted of a solar thermal concentrator and a multistage evaporator–condenser with a concentric configuration. With the increase of thermal concentration from 1 to 3, the evaporator temperature increased from 51.2 °C to ∼75 °C, and a further 20% increase in water production rate was achievable. Another one is to optimise the internal heat and mass transfer between multiple stages. In a multiple-stage evaporator, there are two pathways for heat transfer. The first path is to drive the evaporation–condensation process, in which freshwater production is associated. The other path is heat conduction from the upper stage to low ones without mass transfer. It is obvious that increasing heat transfer via the first path is beneficial to achieve higher water productivity. Wang and co-workers conducted both theoretical and experimental studies to optimize the water productivity based on mass and heat transport.180,205 It was pointed out that a thinner air gap could lead to higher conduction heat loss, while a larger air gap would lead to greater vapour transport resistance. By optimizing the air gap thickness, the water production rate was pushed up to as high as 5.78 L m−2 h−1 with a ten-stage device under one sun (Fig. 16e), around four times higher than the theoretical value.
Another noteworthy advantage of multistage distillers is the adaptability with commercially available photovoltaic systems (Fig. 16f).208 While solar panels generate electricity as normal, the waste heat from solar–electricity conversion can be used for water distillation. Besides, by sharing the land and the mounting system, this strategy can significantly advance the solar distillation as well as solar electricity generation technologies towards wider application. Notably, combining water production with solar panels has been proved to be low-impact and even beneficial to solar-electricity generation.182,208–210
Recently, there is a growing number of reports of multi-effect IHSTD with increasing water productivity. Theoretically, the overall water production should increase linearly with the number of distillation cycles. It can be safely inferred that the water yield could be further boosted to a higher level. In practice, the single-stage water production reduces with stage number due to the unavoidable heat loss in each stage. Thus, comprehensive and in-depth understanding of the mass and heat transfer process is critical. Another concern is the salt fouling problem that may potentially affect long-term performance. Since most efficient devices employ confined water paths, suitable salt management strategies should be carefully incorporated and evaluated.

5. Conclusion and future perspectives
This review mainly covers the recent progress in design strategies for IHSTD devices and analyses their mechanisms in terms of heat and mass transfer. The emergence of IHSTD offers a promising solution to the interlocked problem of water shortage and energy crisis by using solar energy for efficient water production. To assist ongoing and more forthcoming research studies, evaporator design and system integration strategies towards continuous and efficient desalination are systematically discussed based on very recent representative studies. An integrated IHSTD process involves three key processes, i.e., vapour generation, salt management and water production. Constructing practical devices for continuous and efficient desalination can only be completed by rationally coordinating these three aspects. Benefiting from the intensive research in recent years, a variety of solar evaporators have been developed with over 90% solar-to-vapour efficiency. Focusing on vapour generation efficiency has a relatively insignificant impact on further increase of water production.211 Further research focus should progressively shift from enhancing vapour generation to other aspects.
Despite the tremendous progress in vapour generation, the fundamental mechanism of the theory of latent heat reduction in nano-confined channels is still not clear. More comprehensive theoretical and experimental validation is highly needed. Besides, following a standard procedure for evaporation performance evaluation (for example, measuring the conversion efficiency136) is necessary for reliable performance comparison. Note that thermopile optical sensors rather than photodiode ones should be used for solar simulator calibration because of their significant difference in responding wavelength.
There are also urgent challenges in salt management. Currently, most salt-management methods have only been tested with synthetic NaCl solutions. The presence of complex substances, such as hygroscopic salts, organic pollutants, and microorganisms, can significantly impact their long-term stability, which requires further validation. Furthermore, this problem becomes more severe for hypersaline brine desalination and zero-liquid-discharge of wastewater. Thus, more innovative salt management strategies are expected to target practical desalination situations, preferably with both high resistance to salt and high energy efficiency.
For IHSTD systems, water productivity is a more practical metric to evaluate the efficiency than the vapour generation rate. In practice, the gain output ratio (GOR) is generally employed to evaluate the efficiency of a multistage distiller, which represents the kilogram of distilled water produced by the latent heat for 1 kg water.212,213 Recent progress in multistage solar distillers based on latent heat recovery demonstrates great promise to increase the specific water productivity by several-fold, yet it is not optimal. In state-of-the-art multistage solar distillers, the GOR is still capped below four,180 far below the theoretical value under ideal conditions (around 84, given the temperature difference between 60 °C and 20 °C).213,214 Therefore, fundamental understanding of the latent heat recycle process and system optimization work is needed to further push the limit for water production.
Although IHSTD is not currently the most cost-effective technology for large-scale water desalination, the prominent advantages of low-cost materials and low-maintenance process make it highly promising for remote and off-grid areas. Thus, future research is suggested to focus on reducing manufacturing and operating costs as well as improving water productivity in pilot or full-scale industrial units. Meanwhile, rationally integrating IHSTD technology with other solar-driven applications, e.g., electricity generation, sterilization, and artificial photosynthesis, is highly recommended in order to further improve its practicability in real-world applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This research was supported by the Australian Research Council (IH170100009). Yun Xia is grateful for the scholarships from Monash University and the support from Faculty of Engineering Postgraduate Publication Award.
References
M. M. Mekonnen and A. Y. Hoekstra, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1500323 CrossRef .
C. J. Vörösmarty, P. Green, J. Salisbury and R. B. Lammers, Science, 2000, 289, 284–288 CrossRef .
M. A. Shannon, P. W. Bohn, M. Elimelech, J. G. Georgiadis, B. J. Mariñas and A. M. Mayes, Nature, 2008, 452, 301–310 CrossRef CAS .
M. Elimelech and W. A. Phillip, Science, 2011, 333, 712–717 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ghaffour, T. M. Missimer and G. L. Amy, Desalination, 2013, 309, 197–207 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Kalogirou, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2005, 31, 242–281 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ghaffour, J. Bundschuh, H. Mahmoudi and M. F. A. Goosen, Desalination, 2015, 356, 94–114 CrossRef CAS .
R. Ou, H. Zhang, V. X. Truong, L. Zhang, H. M. Hegab, L. Han, J. Hou, X. Zhang, A. Deletic, L. Jiang, G. P. Simon and H. Wang, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 1052–1058 CrossRef .
M. Gao, L. Zhu, C. K. Peh and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 841–864 RSC .
C. Zhang, H. Q. Liang, Z. K. Xu and Z. Wang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900883 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, P. K. N. Connor and G. W. Ho, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 3151–3160 RSC .
A. Kaushal, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2010, 14, 446–453 CrossRef CAS .
G. Xiao, X. Wang, M. Ni, F. Wang, W. Zhu, Z. Luo and K. Cen, Appl. Energy, 2013, 103, 642–652 CrossRef CAS .
O. Neumann, A. S. Urban, J. Day, S. Lal, P. Nordlander and N. Halas, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 42–49 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Fang, Y.-R. Zhen, O. Neumann, A. Polman, F. J. García de Abajo, P. Nordlander and N. Halas, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 1736–1742 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zeng, J. Yao, B. A. Horri, K. Wang, Y. Wu, D. Li and H. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 4074 RSC .
H. Ghasemi, G. Ni, A. M. Marconnet, J. Loomis, S. Yerci, N. Miljkovic and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4449 CrossRef CAS .
P. Tao, G. Ni, C. Song, W. Shang, J. Wu, J. Zhu, G. Chen and T. Deng, Nat. Energy, 2018, 3, 1031–1041 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, X. Li, G. W. Ni, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2019, 6, 562–578 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wang, Environ. Sci.: Nano, 2018, 5, 1078–1089 RSC .
J. Zhou, Y. Gu, P. Liu, P. Wang, L. Miao, J. Liu, A. Wei, X. Mu, J. Li and J. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1903255 CrossRef CAS .
H. Liu, Z. Huang, K. Liu, X. Hu and J. Zhou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900310 CrossRef .
W. Li, Z. Li, K. Bertelsmann and D. E. Fan, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900720 CrossRef .
X. Wang, Q. Liu, S. Wu, B. Xu and H. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1807716 CrossRef .
L. Cui, P. Zhang, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, H. Liang, Z. Cheng and L. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1706805 CrossRef .
H. Geng, Q. Xu, M. Wu, H. Ma, P. Zhang, T. Gao, L. Qu, T. Ma and C. Li, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1512 CrossRef .
Y. Tu, R. Wang, Y. Zhang and J. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1452–1475 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Li, G. Liu, J. Li, X. Hu, N. Xu, W. Zhao, B. Zhu and J. Zhu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 12054–12058 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qi, T. Wei, W. Zhao, B. Zhu, G. Liu, P. Wang, Z. Lin, X. Wang, X. Li, X. Zhang and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903378 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, S. R. Rao, E. A. Kapustin, L. Zhao, S. Yang, O. M. Yaghi and E. N. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1191 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Liu, Y. Shi, Y. Dai and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806446 CrossRef .
J. Yang, X. Zhang, H. Qu, Z. G. Yu, Y. Zhang, T. J. Eey, Y. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Adv. Mater., 2020, 2002936 CrossRef CAS .
A. LaPotin, H. Kim, S. R. Rao and E. N. Wang, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 1588–1597 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, M. Du, G. Lv, L. Zhou, X. Li, L. Bertoluzzi, C. Liu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1805159 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, D. Zhao, F. Yu, C. Yang, J. Lou, Y. Liu, Y. Chen, Z. Wang, P. Tao, W. Shang, J. Wu, C. Song and T. Deng, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19384–19389 RSC .
C. Chang, P. Tao, J. Xu, B. Fu, C. Song, J. Wu, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 18466–18474 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, L. Wu, X. Wang, J. Yu and B. Ding, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 3302 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhu, T. Ding, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900250 CrossRef .
X. Li, X. Min, J. Li, N. Xu, P. Zhu, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 2477–2484 CrossRef .
Y. Zhou, T. Ding, M. Gao, K. H. Chan, Y. Cheng, J. He and G. W. Ho, Nano Energy, 2020, 77, 105102 CrossRef CAS .
D. K. Nandakumar, S. K. Ravi, Y. Zhang, N. Guo, C. Zhang and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2179–2187 RSC .
G. Xue, Y. Xu, T. Ding, J. Li, J. Yin, W. Fei, Y. Cao, J. Yu, L. Yuan, L. Gong, J. Chen, S. Deng, J. Zhou and W. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2017, 12, 317–321 CrossRef CAS .
P. Xiao, J. He, F. Ni, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, W. Zhou, J. Gu, J. Xia, S. W. Kuo and T. Chen, Nano Energy, 2020, 68, 104385 CrossRef CAS .
H. Cheng, Y. Huang, F. Zhao, C. Yang, P. Zhang, L. Jiang, G. Shi and L. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2839–2845 RSC .
H. Li, Z. Yan, Y. Li and W. Hong, Water Res., 2020, 177, 115770 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, C. Wang, X. Song, M. Huang, S. K. Megarajan, S. F. Shaukat and H. Jiang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 9874–9881 RSC .
F. Ni, P. Xiao, C. Zhang, Y. Liang, J. Gu, L. Zhang and T. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 15498–15506 CrossRef CAS .
S. Hong, Y. Shi, R. Li, C. Zhang, Y. Jin and P. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 28517–28524 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, J. Ma, D. Liu, H. Xu, F. Cui and W. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 356, 869–876 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shi, R. Li, Y. Jin, S. Zhuo, L. Shi, J. Chang, S. Hong, K. C. Ng and P. Wang, Joule, 2018, 2, 1171–1186 CrossRef CAS .
M. K. Hedayati and M. Elbahri, Materials, 2016, 9, 497 CrossRef .
J. Cai and L. Qi, Mater. Horiz., 2015, 2, 37–53 RSC .
X. Gao, H. Ren, J. Zhou, R. Du, C. Yin, R. Liu, H. Peng, L. Tong, Z. Liu and J. Zhang, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5777–5781 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wu, G. Xiong, H. Yang, Y. Tian, B. Gong, H. Wan, Y. Wang, T. S. Fisher, J. Yan, K. Cen, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Matter, 2019, 1, 1017–1032 CrossRef .
Z. Yin, H. Wang, M. Jian, Y. Li, K. Xia, M. Zhang, C. Wang, Q. Wang, M. Ma, Q. S. Zheng and Y. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 28596–28603 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, G. Yi, Z. Fu, H. Yu, S. Chen and X. Quan, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 13196–13207 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, J. Li, L. Lv, Y. Zhao and L. Qu, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5087–5093 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, Q. Liao, H. Yao, H. Cheng, Y. Huang, C. Yang, L. Jiang and L. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 15303–15309 RSC .
K. Mizuno, J. Ishii, H. Kishida, Y. Hayamizu, S. Yasuda, D. N. Futaba, M. Yumura and K. Hata, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2009, 106, 6044–6047 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bae, G. Kang, S. K. Cho, W. Park, K. Kim and W. J. Padilla, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10103 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, J. Wang, W. Xu, Y. Yuan, W. Cai, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Nat. Photonics, 2016, 10, 393–398 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, Y. Tan, D. Ji, B. Zhu, P. Zhang, J. Xu, Q. Gan, Z. Yu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1501227 CrossRef .
L. Zhou, S. Zhuang, C. He, Y. Tan, Z. Wang and J. Zhu, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 195–200 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Li, J. Song, Z. Yang, Y. Kuang, E. Hitz, C. Jia, A. Gong, F. Jiang, J. Y. Zhu, B. Yang, J. Xie and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701756 CrossRef .
M. Zhu, Y. Li, F. Chen, X. Zhu, J. Dai, Y. Li, Z. Yang, X. Yan, J. Song, Y. Wang, E. Hitz, W. Luo, M. Lu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701028 CrossRef .
X. Wu, G. Y. Chen, W. Zhang, X. Liu and H. Xu, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2017, 1, 1700046 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, J. Wang, Q. Wu, Z. Wang, Z. Wang, J. Sun and C. J. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1901312 CrossRef .
X. Lin, J. Chen, Z. Yuan, M. Yang, G. Chen, D. Yu, M. Zhang, W. Hong and X. Chen, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 4642–4648 RSC .
C. Li, D. Jiang, B. Huo, M. Ding, C. Huang, D. Jia, H. Li, C. Y. Liu and J. Liu, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 841–849 CrossRef CAS .
J. Mandal, D. Wang, A. C. Overvig, N. N. Shi, D. Paley, A. Zangiabadi, Q. Cheng, K. Barmak, N. Yu and Y. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702156 CrossRef .
H. Ren, M. Tang, B. Guan, K. Wang, J. Yang, F. Wang, M. Wang, J. Shan, Z. Chen, D. Wei, H. Peng and Z. Liu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702590 CrossRef .
P. Fan, H. Wu, M. Zhong, H. Zhang, B. Bai and G. Jin, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 14617–14624 RSC .
F. Cao, K. McEnaney, G. Chen and Z. Ren, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1615–1627 RSC .
C. Wu, B. Neuner III, G. Shvets, J. John, A. Milder, B. Zollars and S. Savoy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2011, 84, 75102 CrossRef .
G. Ni, G. Li, S. V. Boriskina, H. Li, W. Yang, T. J. Zhang and G. Chen, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16126 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhao, B. Bhatia, S. Yang, E. Strobach, L. A. Weinstein, T. A. Cooper, G. Chen and E. N. Wang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7508–7516 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Wang and P. G. O'Brien, in Proceedings of the Canadian Society for Mechanical Engineering International Congress, Toronto,  2018, pp. 1–5 Search PubMed .
W. Zhang, G. Zhang, Q. Ji, H. Liu, R. Liu and J. Qu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 9974–9983 CrossRef CAS .
X. Hu, W. Xu, L. Zhou, Y. Tan, Y. Wang, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1604031 CrossRef .
Q. Chen, Z. Pei, Y. Xu, Z. Li, Y. Yang, Y. Wei and Y. Ji, Chem. Sci., 2018, 9, 623–628 RSC .
F. Jiang, H. Liu, Y. Li, Y. Kuang, X. Xu, C. Chen, H. Huang, C. Jia, X. Zhao, E. Hitz, Y. Zhou, R. Yang, L. Cui and L. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 1104–1112 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, W. Luo, J. Song, E. Hitz, C. Jia, Y. Zhou, B. Liu, B. Yang and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700981 CrossRef .
X. Luo, C. Huang, S. Liu and J. Zhong, Int. J. Energy Res., 2018, 42, 4830–4839 CrossRef .
J. Tang, T. Zheng, Z. Song, Y. Shao, N. Li, K. Jia, Y. Tian, Q. Song, H. Liu and G. Xue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 18504–18511 CrossRef CAS .
T. Hu, L. Li, Y. Yang and J. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14736–14745 RSC .
S. Wu, G. Xiong, H. Yang, B. Gong, Y. Tian, C. Xu, Y. Wang, T. Fisher, J. Yan, K. Cen, T. Luo, X. Tu, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901286 CrossRef .
F. Gong, H. Li, W. Wang, J. Huang, D. Xia, J. Liao, M. Wu and D. V. Papavassiliou, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 322–330 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Fang, T. Li, H. Lin, R. Jiang and F. Liu, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 4354–4361 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kou, Z. Liu, B. Zhu, D. K. Macharia, S. Ahmed, B. Wu, M. Zhu, X. Liu and Z. Chen, Desalination, 2019, 462, 29–38 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, X. Xiao, G. Wang, X. Ming, X. Liu, H. Wang, H. Yang, W. Xu and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 17212–17219 RSC .
S. C. Singh, M. ElKabbash, Z. Li, X. Li, B. Regmi, M. Madsen, S. A. Jalil, Z. Zhan, J. Zhang and C. Guo, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 938–946 CrossRef .
Q. Ma, P. Yin, M. Zhao, Z. Luo, Y. Huang, Q. He, Y. Yu, Z. Liu, Z. Hu, B. Chen and H. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808249 CrossRef .
X. Li, W. Xu, M. Tang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2016, 113, 13953–13958 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, T. Gao, Z. Yang, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, J. Song, C. Jia, E. M. Hitz, B. Yang and L. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 201–209 CrossRef CAS .
N. Xu, X. Hu, W. Xu, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606762 CrossRef .
C. S. Hu, H. J. Li, J. Y. Wang, A. Haleem, X. C. Li, M. Siddiq and W. D. He, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7554–7563 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, R. Lin, G. Ni, N. Xu, X. Hu, B. Zhu, G. Lv, J. Li, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2018, 5, 70–77 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, K. Liu, Q. Chen, J. Li, J. Duan, G. Xue, Z. Xu, W. Xie and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1923–1927 RSC .
H. Liu, X. Zhang, Z. Hong, Z. Pu, Q. Yao, J. Shi, G. Yang, B. Mi, B. Yang, X. Liu, H. Jiang and X. Hu, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 115–121 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Q. Hou, H. Jubaer, Y. Li, Y. Kang, S. Yuan, H. Liu, M. W. Woo, L. Zhang, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1840–1847 RSC .
P. F. Liu, L. Miao, Z. Deng, J. Zhou, H. Su, L. Sun, S. Tanemura, W. Cao, F. Jiang and L. D. Zhao, Mater. Today Energy, 2018, 8, 166–173 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, S. K. Ravi, L. Yang, J. V. Vaghasiya, L. Suresh, I. Tan and S. C. Tan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 38674–38682 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Nano Energy, 2020, 78, 105269 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, X. Wu, B. Shao, X. Yang, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 1380–1388 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Bian, Q. Du, K. Tang, Y. Shen, L. Hao, D. Zhou, X. Wang, Z. Xu, H. Zhang, L. Zhao, S. Zhu, J. Ye, H. Lu, Y. Yang, R. Zhang, Y. Zheng and S. Gu, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2019, 4, 1800593 CrossRef .
C. Tu, W. Cai, X. Chen, X. Ouyang, H. Zhang and Z. Zhang, Small, 2019, 15, 1902070 CrossRef .
Z. Yu, S. Cheng, C. Li, L. Li and J. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 32038–32045 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, T. Gao, C. Han, J. Xu, G. Owens and H. Xu, Sci. Bull., 2019, 64, 1625–1633 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, Y. Xing, J. Liu, H. Wu, Y. Cui, D. Li, D. Guo, C. Li, A. Liu and H. Bai, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7930–7938 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, W. Tu, Y. Zhao, H. Wang, H. Huang, Y. Liu, M. Shao, B. Yao and Z. Kang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 14566–14573 RSC .
Y. Xu, C. Tang, J. Ma, D. Liu, D. Qi, S. You, F. Cui, Y. Wei and W. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 5150–5158 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, J. Li, J. Lu, N. Xu, C. Chen, X. Min, B. Zhu, H. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu, T. Zhang and J. Zhu, Joule, 2018, 2, 1331–1338 CrossRef CAS .
H. Song, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, M. H. Singer, C. Li, A. R. Cheney, D. Ji, L. Zhou, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, Z. Bei, Z. Yu, S. Jiang and Q. Gan, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800222 CrossRef .
J. Li, X. Wang, Z. Lin, N. Xu, X. Li, J. Liang, W. Zhao, R. Lin, B. Zhu, G. Liu, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2020, 4, 928–937 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Y. Tian, Y. Han, J. Liu, X. Yin and W. Que, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16196–16204 RSC .
P. Zhang, F. Liu, Q. Liao, H. Yao, H. Geng, H. Cheng, C. Li and L. Qu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16343–16347 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Z. Chen and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 2530–2536 CrossRef CAS .
N. Farokhnia, P. Irajizad, S. M. Sajadi and H. Ghasemi, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 8742–8750 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ghasemi and C. A. Ward, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2010, 105, 1–4 CrossRef .
J. Yang, Y. Pang, W. Huang, S. K. Shaw, J. Schiffbauer, M. A. Pillers, X. Mu, S. Luo, T. Zhang, Y. Huang, G. Li, S. Ptasinska, M. Lieberman and T. Luo, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5510–5518 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ni, N. Miljkovic, H. Ghasemi, X. Huang, S. V. Boriskina, C.-T. Lin, J. Wang, Y. Xu, M. M. Rahman, T. Zhang and G. Chen, Nano Energy, 2015, 17, 290–301 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, Y. Liu, X. Quan, P. Tao, W. Shang, J. Wu, C. Song and T. Deng, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 13600 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, H. Song, D. Ji, C. Li, A. Cheney, Y. Liu, N. Zhang, X. Zeng, B. Chen, J. Gao, Y. Li, X. Liu, D. Aga, S. Jiang, Z. Yu and Q. Gan, Global Chall., 2017, 1, 1600003 CrossRef .
F. Zhao, Y. Guo, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2020, 5, 388–401 CrossRef .
Q. Guan, Z. Han, Z. Ling, H. Yang and S. Yu, Nano Lett., 2020, 20, 5699–5704 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw5484 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Zhao, Y. Guo, Y. Zhang and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1985–1992 RSC .
Y. Guo, X. Zhou, F. Zhao, J. Bae, B. Rosenberger and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 7913–7919 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Guo, H. Lu, F. Zhao, X. Zhou, W. Shi and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1–8 Search PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Zhao, F. Zhao, Z. Jiao, X. Zhou and G. Yu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 2087–2095 RSC .
X. Zhou, Y. Guo, F. Zhao and G. Yu, Acc. Chem. Res., 2019, 52, 3244–3253 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhao, X. Zhou, Y. Shi, X. Qian, M. Alexander, X. Zhao, S. Mendez, R. Yang, L. Qu and G. Yu, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2018, 13, 489–495 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhang, Y. Li, X. Bai, S. Wang, B. Liang, G. Fu and Z. S. Wu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 23263–23269 RSC .
Q. Lu, W. Shi, H. Yang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2001544 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, T. Xiong, D. K. Nandakumar and S. C. Tan, Adv. Sci., 2020, 7, 1903478 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, G. Ni, T. Cooper, N. Xu, J. Li, L. Zhou, X. Hu, B. Zhu, P. Yao and J. Zhu, Joule, 2019, 3, 1798–1803 CrossRef .

          Newport, Oriel Product Training, Solar Simulation, https://www.newport.com/medias/sys_master/images/images/hfb/hdf/8797196451870/Light-Sources.pdf, accessed: 19 August 2020 Search PubMed.
C. Finnerty, L. Zhang, D. L. Sedlak, K. L. Nelson and B. Mi, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2017, 51, 11701–11709 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Y. Yang, L. Fu, M. Zou, Z. Li, A. Cao and Q. Yuan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1704505 CrossRef .
Y. Liu, J. Chen, D. Guo, M. Cao and L. Jiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 13645–13652 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhou, Z. Sun, M. Chen, J. Wang, W. Qiao, D. Long and L. Ling, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 5368–5375 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, B. Tang, J. Wu, R. Li and P. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4889–4894 CrossRef CAS .
V. Kashyap, A. Al-Bayati, S. M. Sajadi, P. Irajizad, S. H. Wang and H. Ghasemi, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 15227–15234 RSC .
C. Shen, Y. Zhu, X. Xiao, X. Xu, X. Chen and G. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 35142–35151 CrossRef CAS .
W. Xu, X. Hu, S. Zhuang, Y. Wang, X. Li, L. Zhou, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702884 CrossRef .
S. Gao, X. Dong, J. Huang, J. Dong, F. Di Maggio, S. Wang, F. Guo, T. Zhu, Z. Chen and Y. Lai, Global Chall., 2019, 3, 1800117 CrossRef .
R. Hu, J. Zhang, Y. Kuang, K. Wang, X. Cai, Z. Fang, W. Huang, G. Chen and Z. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 15333–15340 RSC .
Y. Yang, H. Zhao, Z. Yin, J. Zhao, X. Yin, N. Li, D. Yin, Y. Li, B. Lei, Y. Du and W. Que, Mater. Horiz., 2018, 5, 1143–1150 RSC .
N. Xu, J. Li, Y. Wang, C. Fang, X. Li, Y. Wang, L. Zhou, B. Zhu, Z. Wu, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaaw7013 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ni, S. H. Zandavi, S. M. Javid, S. V. Boriskina, T. A. Cooper and G. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1510–1519 RSC .
Y. Liu, S. Yu, R. Feng, A. Bernard, Y. Liu, Y. Zhang, H. Duan, W. Shang, P. Tao, C. Song and T. Deng, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2768–2774 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, J. Lou, M. Ni, C. Song, J. Wu, N. P. Dasgupta, P. Tao, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 772–779 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. He, Y. Hu and X. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 9362–9368 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14620–14628 RSC .
Y. Liu, Z. Liu, Q. Huang, X. Liang, X. Zhou, H. Fu, Q. Wu, J. Zhang and W. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 2581–2588 RSC .
Q. Zhang, H. Yang, X. Xiao, H. Wang, L. Yan, Z. Shi, Y. Chen, W. Xu and X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14620–14628 RSC .
C. Liu, C. Cai and X. Zhao, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 1548–1554 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, W. Zhu, S. Shi, N. Hu, Y. Suo and J. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 16220–16227 RSC .
Y. Kuang, C. Chen, S. He, E. M. Hitz, Y. Wang, W. Gan, R. Mi and L. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900498 CrossRef .
S. He, C. Chen, Y. Kuang, R. Mi, Y. Liu, Y. Pei, W. Kong, W. Gan, H. Xie, E. Hitz, C. Jia, X. Chen, A. Gong, J. Liao, J. Li, Z. J. Ren, B. Yang, S. Das and L. Hu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1558–1567 RSC .
L. Song, P. Mu, L. Geng, Q. Wang and J. Li, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 11845–11852 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, B. Wu, B. Zhu, Z. Chen, M. Zhu and X. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905485 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Zhang, T. Xiong, H. Qu, J. J. Koh, D. K. Nandakumar, J. Wang and S. C. Tan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 4891–4902 RSC .
Y. Xu, D. Liu, H. Xiang, S. Ren, Z. Zhu, D. Liu, H. Xu, F. Cui and W. Wang, J. Membr. Sci., 2019, 586, 222–230 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xia, Y. Li, S. Yuan, Y. Kang, M. Jian, Q. Hou, L. Gao, H. Wang and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16212–16217 RSC .
Y. Shao, J. Tang, N. Li, T. Sun, L. Yang, D. Chen, H. Zhi, D. Wang, H. Liu and G. Xue, EcoMat, 2020, 2, 1–8 CrossRef .
Y. Shi, C. Zhang, R. Li, S. Zhuo, Y. Jin, L. Shi, S. Hong, J. Chang, C. Ong and P. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2018, 52, 11822–11830 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, Z. Wang, C. Chang, B. Fu, P. Tao, C. Song, W. Shang and T. Deng, Desalination, 2020, 484, 114423 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Q. Gan, R. Chen, H. Peng, T. Zhang and M. Ye, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2020, 8, 7753–7761 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wu, Z. Dong, Z. Cai, T. Ganapathy, N. X. Fang, C. Li, C. Yu, Y. Zhang and Y. Song, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 521 CrossRef CAS .
T. A. Cooper, S. H. Zandavi, G. W. Ni, Y. Tsurimaki, Y. Huang, S. V. Boriskina and G. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 5086 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Menon, I. Haechler, S. Kaur, S. Lubner and R. S. Prasher, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 144–151 CrossRef .
P. Zhang, Q. Liao, H. Yao, Y. Huang, H. Cheng and L. Qu, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 18, 429–446 CrossRef .
L. Zhu, M. Gao, C. K. N. Peh, X. Wang and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702149 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, S. K. Ravi and S. C. Tan, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104006 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, C. Wang, T. Lei, H. Ma, J. Su, S. Ling and W. Wang, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3, 1800144 CrossRef .
J. Lou, Y. Liu, Z. Wang, D. Zhao, C. Song, J. Wu, N. Dasgupta, W. Zhang, D. Zhang, P. Tao, W. Shang and T. Deng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 14628–14636 CrossRef CAS .
X. Feng, J. Zhao, D. Sun, L. Shanmugam, J. K. Kim and J. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 4400–4407 RSC .
R. Bhardwaj, M. V. Ten Kortenaar and R. F. Mudde, Desalination, 2013, 326, 37–45 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Xu, L. Zhang, L. Zhao, B. Li, B. Bhatia, C. Wang, K. L. Wilke, Y. Song, O. Labban, J. H. Lienhard, R. Wang and E. N. Wang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 830–839 RSC .
G. Xue, Q. Chen, S. Lin, J. Duan, P. Yang, K. Liu, J. Li and J. Zhou, Global Chall., 2018, 2, 1800001 CrossRef .
N. Xu, P. Zhu, Y. Sheng, L. Zhou, X. Li, H. Tan, S. Zhu and J. Zhu, Joule, 2020, 4, 347–358 CrossRef .
M. Fujiwara, Desalination, 2017, 404, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujiwara and T. Imura, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5705–5712 CrossRef CAS .
M. Fujiwara and M. Kikuchi, Water Res., 2017, 127, 96–103 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gao, C. K. Peh, L. Zhu, G. Yilmaz and G. W. Ho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000925 CrossRef CAS .
J. Huang, Y. Hu, Y. Bai, Y. He and J. Zhu, Desalination, 2020, 489, 114529 CrossRef CAS .
B. Gong, H. Yang, S. Wu, G. Xiong, J. Yan, K. Cen, Z. Bo and K. Ostrikov, Nano-Micro Lett., 2019, 11, 1–14 CrossRef .
P. D. Dongare, A. Alabastri, S. Pedersen, K. R. Zodrow, N. J. Hogan, O. Neumann, J. Wud, T. Wang, A. Deshmukh, M. Elimelech, Q. Li, P. Nordlander and N. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 6936–6941 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wu, K. R. Zodrow, P. B. Szemraj and Q. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 23712–23719 RSC .
X. Wu, Q. Jiang, D. Ghim, S. Singamaneni and Y.-S. Jun, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 18799–18807 RSC .
P. D. Dongare, A. Alabastri, O. Neumann, P. Nordlander and N. Halas, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2019, 116, 13182–13187 CrossRef CAS .
X. Han, W. Wang, K. Zuo, L. Chen, L. Yuan, J. Liang, Q. Li, P. M. Ajayan, Y. Zhao and J. Lou, Nano Energy, 2019, 60, 567–575 CrossRef CAS .
A. Politano, P. Argurio, G. Di Profio, V. Sanna, A. Cupolillo, S. Chakraborty, H. A. Arafat and E. Curcio, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1–6 CrossRef .
H. T. El-Dessouky, H. M. Ettouney and Y. Al-Roumi, Chem. Eng. J., 1999, 73, 173–190 CrossRef CAS .
M. Al-Shammiri and M. Safar, Desalination, 1999, 126, 45–59 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lin, N. Y. Yip and M. Elimelech, J. Membr. Sci., 2014, 453, 498–515 CrossRef CAS .
G. Guan, X. Yang, R. Wang and A. G. Fane, Desalination, 2015, 366, 80–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. Swaminathan, H. W. Chung and D. M. Warsinger, Appl. Energy, 2016, 184, 491–505 CrossRef CAS .
M. Morciano, M. Fasano, S. V Boriskina, E. Chiavazzo and P. Asinari, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 1–10 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, T. Horseman, A. P. Straub, N. Y. Yip, D. Li, M. Elimelech and S. Lin, Sci. Adv., 2019, 5, eaax0763 CrossRef CAS .
A. Alabastri, P. D. Dongare, O. Neumann, J. Metz, I. Adebiyi, P. Nordlander and N. Halas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 968–976 RSC .
E. Chiavazzo, M. Morciano, F. Viglino, M. Fasano and P. Asinari, Nat. Sustain., 2018, 1, 763–772 CrossRef .
L. Huang, H. Jiang, Y. Wang, Z. Ouyang, W. Wang, B. Yang, H. Liu and X. Hu, Desalination, 2020, 477, 114260 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, Z. Xu, B. Bhatia, B. Li, L. Zhao and E. N. Wang, Appl. Energy, 2020, 266, 114864 CrossRef .
K. Fukui, T. Nosoko, H. Tanaka and T. Nagata, Desalination, 2004, 160, 271–283 CrossRef .
B. Bouchekima, B. Gros, R. Ouahes and M. Diboun, Desalination, 1998, 116, 185–192 CrossRef CAS .
W. Wang, Y. Shi, C. Zhang, S. Hong, L. Shi, J. Chang, R. Li, Y. Jin, C. Ong, S. Zhuo and P. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 3012 CrossRef .
R. Li, Y. Shi, M. Wu, S. Hong and P. Wang, Nat. Sustain., 2020, 3, 636–643 CrossRef .
L. Huang, Y. Wang, R. He, X. Kong, S. Lei, Y. Liu, B. Wang, H. Jiang, H. Liu, K. Liu and X. Hu, Desalination, 2020, 488, 114533 CrossRef CAS .
S. K. Patel, S. K. Patel, C. L. Ritt, A. Deshmukh, Z. Wang, M. Qin, M. Qin, R. Epsztein, M. Elimelech and M. Elimelech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2020, 13, 1694–1710 RSC .
K. Yao, Y. Qin, Y. Yuan, L. Liu, F. He and Y. Wu, AIChE J., 2013, 59, 1278–1297 CrossRef CAS .
A. Deshmukh, C. Boo, V. Karanikola, S. Lin, A. P. Straub, T. Tong, D. M. Warsinger and M. Elimelech, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1177–1196 RSC .
E. Guillén-Burrieza, J. Blanco, G. Zaragoza, D. C. Alarcón, P. Palenzuela, M. Ibarra and W. Gernjak, J. Membr. Sci., 2011, 379, 386–396 CrossRef .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  Review framework. (a) Schematic illustration of a typical STD setup and the three key processes: vapour generation, salt management and water production. (b) The design strategies for continuous and efficient IHSTD.	 
Qsun = Qrad + Qcond + Qconv + Qevap	(1)

 	Fig. 2  Energy conservation in an interfacial solar steam generation system.	 
	(2)

 	Fig. 3  Strategies for structuring the light-absorbing materials to increase solar light utilization. (a) Methods to reduce reflection loss by multiple reflections with a cone-shaped absorber. Reproduced with permission.46 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Multiple reflections in a hierarchical architecture. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (c) Reducing light radiation in the mid-infrared range by employing spectrally selective absorbers. The right figure shows the comparison of thermal radiative losses at 100 °C between a blackbody and the spectrally selective absorber. Reproduced with permission.75 Copyright 2016, Springer Nature. (d) Recovering the radiative heat loss by employing a low scattering aerogel with a greenhouse-like mechanism. Reproduced with permission.76 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 4  Classic device designs for suppressing conduction heat loss. (a) A double-layered structure with exfoliated graphite as the light absorber and a hydrophilic carbon form for thermal insulation and water transport. Reproduced with permission.17 Copyright 2014, Springer Nature. (b) Reduced contact area by employing a confined 2D water path. Compared with the direct bulk water contact, the 2D water path leads to much lower heat loss. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2016, National Academy of Sciences. (c) Reduced contact area by employing a confined 1D water path. The heat exchange is confined in 1D water paths. Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  Enhancing water evaporation with additional energy input from the environment. (a) Schematic of an environmental energy-enhanced interfacial solar vapour generator. Under solar irradiation, the side surface temperature is lower than that of the environment, leading to the evaporation rate breaking the theoretical limit. Reproduced with permission.112 Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (b) Illustration of the energy balance and heat transfer when the temperature of the evaporation surface is lower than that of the environment. Right figures show the thermal and optical images of the evaporation structure with a peak angle of 22.4°. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.113 Copyright 2018, The Authors. Published by Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic of the increased water vapour escaping through the air convection flow. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 6  Tuning the evaporation surface for fast evaporation. (a) Schematic illustration of the evaporation surface in hydrophilic and hydrophobic evaporators with identical structures. (b) Schematic illustration of a double-layered evaporator with varying bottom wettability. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.121 Copyright 2015, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 7  Reducing the latent heat of water evaporation. (a) Three forms of water with different hydrogen bonding around polymer chains: free, intermediate and bound water. In the vaporization and condensation process, the hydrogen-bond networks break or are reformed in the gaseous or liquid state. Reproduced with permission.124 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. (b) The equivalent enthalpy of water with different hydrogel evaporators (left) and schematic illustration of the reduced vaporization enthalpy due to the evaporation of water clusters (right). Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 
ṁaccum = ṁflow − ṁdfu − ṁrmv	(3)

 	Fig. 8  Salt management designs with a hydrophobic evaporation surface. (a) Schematic illustration of a standalone hydrophobic film evaporator at the solution surface, which repels water but suffers from severe heat loss to bulk solution via convection and conduction. (b) Structure of a Janus absorber that is composed of a hydrophobic carbon black nanoparticle (CB) coated poly methyl methacrylate (PMMA) layer for light absorption and a hydrophilic polyacrylonitrile (PAN) layer for water transport. Reproduced with permission.145 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of a water lily-inspired design for solar vapour generation. A confined water layer was introduced between the hydrophobic evaporation surface and insulator. While water evaporated through the porous surface, salts were excreted through the open bottom water path. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.149 Copyright 2019, The Authors. Published by American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 
	(4)

 	Fig. 9  Salt management by increasing back diffusion. (a) Structure of a salt-rejecting evaporator composed of a light-absorbing black fabric, a wicking white fabric, and insulating polystyrene foams. The mass and heat transport in the salt-rejecting evaporator was confined in a narrow region. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A hydrogel-based antifouling solar evaporator. The mass exchange of salt between the evaporator and bulk solution occurred over the entire contact area. Reproduced with permission.127 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (c) The microstructure and working principle of a bimodal porous balsa wood evaporator for high salinity brine desalination. The large vessel channels greatly promote the mass transfer between the evaporation surface and the bulk solution, leading to anti-fouling properties in high-salinity brines. Reproduced with permission.160 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 10  Salt management by dissolving the salt crystals and introducing brine outflow. (a) A hanging photothermal fabric evaporator for continuous desalination. By tuning the brine dropping speed, continuous water evaporation was achieved with salt crystallization. Reproduced with permission.162 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (b) Illustration of the natural salt crystallization and dissolution state in the light-on/off situation. Reproduced with permission.65 Copyright 2017, Wiley-VCH. (c) A self-rotating evaporator for efficient and stable hypersaline brine desalination. The evaporator achieved self-regeneration when salts crystallized on the top surface. Reproduced with permission.165 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 11  Controlled salt crystallization designs. (a) Simultaneous water evaporation and salt harvesting design. Due to the spatially regulated water transport, a unique salt concentration distribution formed on the evaporation disc, leading to edge-preferential crystallization. During this process, the evaporation surface was uncovered and the salt can be harvested. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) A 3D cup-shaped solar evaporator with controlled salt crystallization on the sidewall. The salt crystallized on the sidewall of the evaporator, achieving zero-liquid-discharge desalination. Reproduced with permission.167 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic and photograph of a 3D cone-shaped evaporator. While water transports from the bottom, salts crystallized on the apex and were collected after the solar evaporation test. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.170 Copyright 2020, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 12  Anti-fouling contactless evaporation systems. (a) Working principle of the contactless evaporation. (b) Photograph of the disassembled device for contactless evaporation. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.171 Copyright 2018, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature. (c) Schematic design of a solar umbrella for zero-liquid-discharge of high concentration brine. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 13  Conventional interfacial evaporation based solar distillation units for water desalination. (a) Schematic illustration of a conventional solar still setup for water production with interfacial evaporation enhancement. (b) Schematic illustration of a solar water purification system simulating the practical water purification equipment with an automatic brine inlet and purified water outlet. Reproduced with permission.132 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (c) A floating solar distillation unit with a low-cost polymer film condensation cover. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2018, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (d) Schematic illustration of a floating wave-resistant solar still prototype. The distillate collecting bottles at the bottom facilitated the water condensation process due to the reduced temperature in response to fast heat exchange with the bulk solution. Reproduced with permission.175 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 
	(5)

 	Fig. 14  Spatial separation of water condensation from light transmission. (a) A solar water distillation device that includes a separated vapour generation chamber and a condensation chamber. The vapour could be transported to the condensation chamber to isolate from the light-transmitting surface. Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. (b) A solar desalination device with vapour transport promoted by an exhaust fan. Reproduced with permission.86 Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (c) A solar distillation device with vapour moving downwards. The evaporator was sealed with a photothermal absorber and PS foams, leaving its back surface open for evaporation. The vapour crosses the membrane and condenses on the metal collector. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (d) An integrated tandem solar electricity-water generator. A silicon solar cell was employed to generate electricity and heat. A reduced graphene oxide (r-GO) based fabric was used for water evaporation. The vapour was forced to flow downwards, followed by condensation at the beaker sidewall. Reproduced with permission.182 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 15  Reducing the vapour transport distance to facilitate water production. (a) Photograph of the device for simultaneous freshwater production and hydrogen generation. The enhanced water production results from the confined photothermal heating at the feed–membrane interface and the reduced air-gap distance between the hydrophobic membrane and the condensation plate. Reproduced with permission.186 Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (b) Schematic of a wick based air-gap water distiller. Under solar illumination, localized heat transfer leads to the efficient generation of solar vapour in the gap, which passes through the membrane and condenses with the distillate flow. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.188 Copyright 2019, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature. (c) Schematic and mechanism of nanophotonics-enabled solar membrane distillation. Upon solar illumination, the CB-laden membrane layer generates an elevated vapour pressure with no additional heat source. Water vapour only needs to travel a short distance (thickness of the hydrophobic membrane) and condenses at the distillate–membrane interface. Reproduced with permission.189 Copyright 2020, National Academy of Sciences.	 

 	Fig. 16  Recycling the latent heat. (a) Schematic illustration of a nanophotonics-enabled solar membrane distillation device with heat recovery. The feed was pre-heated by the recycled energy from the distillate. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (b) Schematic illustration of the components and the water transfer process in a two-stage solar-thermal membrane distillation system. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of the components and mass transfer process in a multistage modular distiller. Reproduced with permission.203 Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. (d) Schematic illustration of a multistage distiller with thermal concentration. Reproduced with permission.204 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (e) Schematic illustration of the key components, mass transport and vaporization enthalpy recycling in a multistage device. Reproduced with permission.180 Copyright 2020, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of integrated photovoltaics-membrane distillation devices. Reproduced under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.208 Copyright 2019, The Authors. Published by Springer Nature.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
