The era of water-enabled electricity generation from graphene  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6TA03107B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6TA03107B
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 9730-9738The era of water-enabled electricity generation from graphene

        
          
            Qunwei 
            Tang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Peizhi 
            Yang
          
          
        
      b
aInstitute of Materials Science and Engineering, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266100, P. R. China. E-mail: tangqunwei@ouc.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-532-66782533
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Technique & Preparation for Renewable Energy Materials, Ministry of Education, Yunnan Normal University, Kunming 650500, P. R. China
Received 
      15th April 2016
    , Accepted 20th May 2016First published on 23rd May 2016AbstractWith the abundance of traditional energy conversion devices such as solar cells, fuel cells, lithium batteries and supercapacitors, the integration of graphene with water is an increasingly used method for promising electricity generation (including current, voltage, and power) in the last few years. We present here a review on the significant advances in tailored graphene-based materials for unprecedented power generation by flowing, raining, waving, or penetrating water. This article highlights the potential principles behind the electric signals to guide the design and synthesis of graphene-based systems for emerging power generation methods. Use of the peculiar performances of creating electric signals, the methodologies of constructing advanced devices using these graphene-based electrodes for real applications and identification of the challenges facing the water-enabled graphene for electricity generation are also discussed.Qunwei TangQunwei Tang is a full Professor of Materials Science at Ocean University of China. After receiving his PhD at Huaqiao University, P. R. China, he joined Strasbourg University and University of South Carolina for postdoctoral fellowships. Since joining the Institute of Materials Science and Engineering at Ocean University of China in 2012, his research interests cover dye-sensitized solar cells, electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution from seawater splitting, and electrode materials for advanced energy conversion devices. He has published over 150 papers as a first or corresponding author with an H-index of 29, and has 13 patents.Peizhi YangPeizhi Yang is the director of the Key Laboratory of Advanced Technique & Preparation for Renewable Energy Materials, Ministry of Education, and group leader of Photovoltaic Science and Technology in the Solar Institute at Yunnan Normal University. After completing his PhD at Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Science in 1999, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow and then as staff at the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences until 2005. His current research focuses on solar energy materials and devices including silicon thin film, quantum dot, and wide spectrum solar cells.
1 Introduction
Energy conversion is one of the promising solutions to meet growing energy demands.1 Energy-harvesting calls for the rational design of advanced devices with unprecedented performances in transporting charges. Until now, many prestigious devices have been successfully developed including solar cells which convert solar energy into electricity,2 fuel cells which convert chemical energy into electricity,3 and photoelectrochemical cells which split water into hydrogen4 along with lithium batteries5 and supercapacitors6 for charging/discharging, etc. Of major importance in realizing these energy conversion devices is the use of scalable materials and technologies. Although great achievements have been made since the birth of the corresponding devices, there are still remaining problems in either their excitation by sunlight only, utilization of precious metals, security concerns or dissatisfying storage behaviors and stabilities. Nevertheless, not all the potential energies in nature have been converted into available electric power due to a lack of new emerging technologies. When immersed in solving the upcoming issues of conventional energy-harvesting devices, the concept of water-enabled graphene for electricity generation is rising as an alternative electricity generation method for potential use in photoelectronics, floating electrodes, power-generation paintings, handwriting sensors, respiratory monitors, and self-powered sensors.7 Graphene is known as two-dimensional (2D) carbon atom layers with an sp2-hybridized hexagonal lattice. Since the birth of graphene in 2004,8 this paradigm 2D nanomaterial has been the focus in energy conversion aspects due to intriguing properties.9a,b For instance, graphene's tensile strength is as high as 130 GPa,9c its charge carrier mobility is 15000 cm2 V−1 s−1 at room temperature,8 and its electrical conductivity is up to 6 × 103 S cm−1.9c Optically, the light absorption and reflectance of a monolayer graphene are as low as 2.3% and <0.1%,9d respectively. These peculiar properties allow graphene to have widespread promising applications in the fields of aerospace, energy storage, photovoltaic conversion, and tissue engineering. Previously, the advances of graphene and corresponding derivatives on energy-related applications have been well reviewed by Hu and Qu et al.10 In the recent few years, ongoing efforts of using graphene and related materials are placed on producing electric signals by integrating graphene with water.7,11
In this review, we will summarize the recent advances, contributed by our and other groups, of graphene-based systems in emerging and particular forms of energy conversion devices by water flowing over, raining on, waving over, or penetrating into them. The principles for generating electricity are highlighted to guide the future design of advanced energy conversion devices. Moreover, the methodologies and challenges of fabricating device architectures with these graphene-based systems are also demonstrated for forthcoming work.
2 Tailored graphene systems for water-enabled electricity generation
In graphene, strong σ bonds act as a rigid skeleton of the hexagonal lattice, while out-of-plane π bonds dominate the interaction between neighboring graphene layers, allowing delocalized π electrons to be transported along the basal plane. Apart from 2D graphene, the graphene sheets are always constructed into 3D porous frameworks for providing gigantic specific surface areas and therefore accelerated electron transfer. Subsequently, we classify the state-of-the-art water-enabled graphene electrodes into 2D and 3D systems, which have been summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of water-enabled electricity generation devices from graphene




Dimension
Materials
Preparation
Water
Voltage
Current
Ref.




2D
Monolayer graphene
CVD
Seawater
∼0.15 mV
—

7a



Monolayer graphene
CVD
Seawater
∼0.1 V
∼8 μA

7b



Monolayer graphene
CVD
GO aqueous solution
10 mV
0.5 μA

11a



rGO
Hummer
Simulated rainwater
109.26 μV
0.49 μA

7e



G–CB/PTFE
Hummer
Simulated rainwater
227.80 μV
5.97 μA
Unpublished


3D
Graphene foam
CVD
Deionized water
—
25 μA

11b



Graphene foam
CVD
Water/ethanol mixture
—
20 μA

11c



Graphene oxide framework
Freeze-drying
Moisture
0.26 V
3.2 mA cm−2

7c



Graphene oxide framework
Moisture-electric annealing
Moisture
20 mV
5 μA cm−2

7d





2.1 2D graphene film systems
Floating electrodes are required to collect electricity from flowing water.12 These devices rely principally on streaming potential, an electrokinetic phenomenon in which a potential is created by driving electrolyte on a thin-film electrode or through pores. Monolayer graphene is known as the thinnest 2D planar electrode material. In 2014, Prof. Guo from Nanjing University of Aeronautics and Astronautics in China pioneeringly found that a voltage over a few millivolts could be generated by moving a droplet of 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution (equal to seawater) along a monolayer graphene strip according to the device architecture in Fig. 1a.7a There is no potential signal for a static droplet on graphene, while typical voltage signals are recorded by the repeated driving the 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution forward and backward, as shown in Fig. 1b, yielding a voltage of approximately 0.15 mV at a constant velocity of 2.25 cm s−1. Regardless of driving direction, the produced voltage depends on velocity as well as cation species and concentration.
 Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the water-enabled electricity device. (b) Typical voltage signals produced by drawing a droplet of 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution from left (L) to right (R) and backward. (c) DFT results for the distribution of charges at graphene/solution interface as well as the pseudocapacitance and potential difference induced by moving a droplet. (d) Photograph and (e) voltage output of handwriting with a Chinese brush on monolayer graphene. 
The potential mechanism behind the voltage output is the formation of delocalized π-electrons|Na+ double-layer pseudocapacitance at the graphene/NaCl solution interface.7a The density functional theory (DFT) simulation results in Fig. 1c demonstrate that Na+ ions can be adsorbed onto the graphene surface by Lewis acid–base interaction. According to Lewis acid–base theory,13 graphene has a large delocalized π-electron system, acting as a Lewis base in aqueous solution to absorb Lewis acids such as Na+ ions.14 By driving the ionic solution forward, the Na+ ions can draw adsorbed electrons along the conjugated graphene, charging the pseudocapacitance. Conversely, the Na+ ions suffer a desorption process with delocalized electrons in the backward movement, discharging the pseudocapacitance and releasing electrons to graphene. Using this theory, a handwriting-enabled electricity device can be produced by reasonable setting electrodes, as shown in Fig. 1d and e. Using a similar concept, floating electrodes can be facilely fabricated to provide persistent electricity for offshore equipment, which is critically significant in exploring and developing in the ocean.
Subsequently, the Guo group reported that the waving potential can be produced by rapidly inserting into and pulling out of seawater a monolayer graphene electrode according to an experimental device as in Fig. 2a.7b Voltages of 3.3 and −3.3 mV can be created by inserting or pulling out at a velocity of 3.1 cm s−1 (Fig. 2b), respectively, and the yielding voltage can be proportionally increased to more than 20 mV at a moving velocity of around 65 cm s−1. Electric double-layer (EDL) theory is also applicable for explaining the potential mechanism. It suggests that the EDL of delocalized π-electrons adsorbed on the Na+ layer and diffused on the Cl− layer at the graphene/solution interface (Fig. 2c) produce a hole doping process. During the rapid inserting and pulling-out periods, as shown in Fig. 2d, the nonequilibrium microenvironment at the gas/liquid interface draws electrons from the EDL boundary to the graphene or from the graphene to the EDL boundary, respectively. Apart from monolayer graphene, bi- or tri-layer graphene as well as films from graphite, gold, copper, and doped silicon can also induce similar voltage signals. Graphite obeys the same electricity generation principle to graphene because graphene peels off from stacking graphite powders. Due to the different electrophilicities, positively charged Na+ ions could work as electron acceptors to attract electrons, leading to an electron-enriched region at gold/water or copper/water interfaces. Such a region could thereby serve as a reservoir for electrons and thus facilitate electron migration. However, the doping of silicon can introduce additional electrons to form an EDL boundary for electricity generation. The fundamental principles to create electricity regardless of electrode species is the formation of the EDL boundary at the electron/seawater interface and the electron migration during the rapid inserting into or pulling out of the electrode of seawater.
 Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration for waving potential by moving graphene across the surface of seawater. (b) Typical voltage signals produced by inserting and pulling out a graphene electrode in 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution. (c) DFT results for the charge distribution of graphene upon the adsorption of Na+ ions. (d) Schematic of the electric double-layer and its boundaries of ion adsorption (left) and desorption (right) on the surface of graphene during the inserting and pulling out processes. 
The following work from Lin demonstrated that an electric potential can be generated by moving a droplet from 2D graphene oxide (GO) aqueous solution in monolayer graphene.11a They proposed an explanation of the generation of electricity from the coulomb interaction induced momentum transfer from negatively charged 2D GO nanosheets to holes in graphene. However, the corresponding mechanism is still controversial because GO is a carbonaceous material full of oxygen-containing groups, and ionizes into positively charged H+ and negatively charged GO skeletons in an aqueous solution, therefore the electrical signal outputs agree well with π-electrons|cation double-layer pseudocapacitance theory proposed by Guo.7a
Using the peculiar behavior of producing electricity by charging and discharging π-electrons|cation double-layer pseudocapacitance,7a graphene electrodes can be combined with a solar cell for quasi-all-weather solar cells that can harvest energy from rain and sun (Fig. 3a), which has been recently reported by our group.7e The as-developed solar cells can only be triggered by sunlight on sunny days,15 limiting electricity generation of solar cells on rainy days. One of the solutions to this impasse is to create rain and sun bi-triggering solar cell architectures because rain is full of Na+, NH4+, Ca2+, Mg2+etc. cations and Cl−, NO3−, SO42−etc. anions. The delocalized electrons can be dragged forward and backward by spreading and subsequently shrinking raindrops, charging and discharging the pseudocapacitance, respectively. Apart from a front power conversion efficiency of 6.53% and a rear efficiency of 4.26% under simulated AM1.5 sunlight (Fig. 3b), the device can yield a current of 0.49 μA (Fig. 3c) and voltage of 109.26 μV (Fig. 3d) for each raindrop. The successful design of a sun and rain bi-triggering solar cell opens an era of developing advanced all-weather solar cells that can persistently generate electricity in all weathers.
 Fig. 3  (a) The quasi-all-weather solar cell that can produce electricity from rain and sun. (b) J–V curves recorded under front or rear irradiation. (c) Current and (d) voltage signals produced by dropping simulated raindrops from 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution onto a rGO electrode at different time intervals of two droplets. 
Notably, 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution has been used as a simulated rainwater in our recent work,7e however, the cation concentration is much lower than that of a real rain. Therefore, it is still a challenge to develop high-quality graphene species or other alternatives with high electron density to make them practical in applications. Acid rain is believed to have highly concentrated ions, in this fashion, the quasi-all-weather solar cells are expected to harvest increased energy by acid rain.
Conducting composites are generally fabricated by integrating electron-conducting species such as graphene into insulating polymer matrices,16 and are promising for advanced nanoscience and nanotechnology. Inspired by the raining rGO electrode for electricity generation,7e we have subsequently applied the same concept to a graphene–carbon black/polytetrafluorethylene (G–CB/PTFE) conducting composite film, as shown in Fig. 4a. Electrical percolation as shown in Fig. 4b, arising from the interconnection of the G–CB regions (Fig. 4c),17 affects the current (Fig. 4d) and voltage (Fig. 4e) outputs. When the raindrop spreads to the periphery, the cations in the rain drag the absorbed electrons, migrating along percolating pathways, charging the pseudocapacitor. Subsequently the electrons are released to the graphene during the shrinking process, discharging the pseudocapacitance. This work represents a significant step forward, as it makes it applicable to produce electricity by painting a conductive coating on buildings for rainy days. The exterior wall of a building is exposed to atmosphere, suffering several weathers including rain, sunlight, and wind. As a complement to a solar roof, a building envelope fabricated with rain-enabled electricity generation coatings is promising for self-powered constructions.
 Fig. 4  (a) A schematic illustration of the rain enabled electricity device with dropping raindrops onto a G–CB/PTFE conducting composite film. (b) Sheet resistance of the G–CB/PTFE conducting composite. (c) The polarizing microscopic image of the polyacrylate/sericite composite. (d) Current and (e) voltage signals produced by dropping simulated raindrops of 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution onto the G–CB/PTFE composite film. 
2.2 3D graphene framework systems
The previously reported electricity generation devices based on 2D graphene film are highly dependent on the cation species and concentration, however, non-ionic water is applicable for 3D graphene frameworks. Recent work from the Sun group has reported that electricity can be induced by flowing pure water through 3D graphene foam according to Fig. 5a,11b yielding a current of 10 μA and a voltage of 0 V at a flowing velocity of 10 cm s−1 (Fig. 5b). A nonlinear increase of current is determined by elevating the flowing velocity from 10 to 60 cm s−1. Previous work in this field has been focused on flowing water or other polar liquids over carbon nanotubes, generating a net potential difference along the flow direction. The authors claimed that the mechanism for the current generation was not interpreted by either the electrode–solution interaction nor the streaming potential model. They attribute the reason to the coupling interactions between the water dipole chains and free charge carriers of 3D graphene foam on account of DFT and molecular dynamics analysis. In detail, polar solution molecules couple with free charge carriers of graphene at the solid/liquid interface when the polar solution flows in graphene foams. Free charge carriers are dragged along the flow direction, forming an induced current. The migration of free charges is accelerated at increased velocity, therefore yielding an enhanced current signal. However, why only current instead of voltage is induced by flowing pure water into 3D graphene foam is still unclear, which makes the corresponding devices unsuitable for real applications. To cross-check the dependence of solvent polarity on the output current, the same group changed the polarity from 8.73 to 4.3 by adjusting the ethanol/water volume ratio,10c as shown in Fig. 5c and d. The induced current value reduces from 10 to 8 μA by decreasing polarity of 10.2 to 8.73 for the ethanol/water (25/75 by volume) mixture. This conclusion makes realizing self-powered nano/micro-electromechanical systems possible.
 Fig. 5  (a) The schematic layout for electricity generation by flowing non-ionic or a water/ethanol mixture through 3D graphene foam. The current signals produced by flowing (b) non-ionic water and (c) ethanol/water (25:75 by volume) through the 3D graphene foam at a flow velocity of 10 cm s−1. (d) The plots of induced current as a function of velocity and ethanol/water ratio. 
Apart from flowing water, moisture is also applicable for enabling electricity generation from 3D GO frameworks. Prof. Qu from the Beijing Institute of Technology has recently demonstrated a creative attempt to produce electrical signals by a moistening gradient 3D GO (g-3D-GO) framework such as the device shown in Fig. 6a.7c Previous work in this field has been focused on Au/g-GO film/Au architectures,7d however an obvious limit of the energy output is caused by the restricted water adsorption based on the compact layer structure of the g-GO film. The newly developed Al/g-3D-GO/Al device has an open framework for facile water diffusion, yielding a voltage as high as 0.26 V (Fig. 6b) and current density of 3.2 mA cm−2 (Fig. 6c) at a relative humidity variation of 75%. By mapping oxygen and carbon in cross-sectional g-3D-GO SEM photographs, as shown in Fig. 6d–f, they contribute the electric output to breakage of Oδ−–Hδ+ bonds in carboxyl (COOH) groups as well as a gradient separation of H+ and oxygen-containing COO− groups on the GO skeleton.18 The generated potential, arising from downward H+ and upward oxygen-containing groups, draws free electron movement along the external circuit. Apart from human breathing applications, the device is also believed to be promising in moisture-electric energy transformation using sea breeze. The blowing sea wind having a high humidity can penetrate such a device, creating consistent electricity for driving corresponding low-battery equipment. It has been a great challenge to provide electricity for high-sea detectors such as buoys because of limited electric storage capacity of batteries or poor anti-corrosion performance of silicon solar cells. Using the peculiar power generation of the newly developed metal/g-3D-GO/metal device, the long-term operation of this high-sea equipment can be realized.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of a moisture-enabled electricity generation device based on a g-3D-GO framework. (b) Voltage and (c) current output cycles in response to intermittent and periodic RH variation (ΔRH = 75%). (d) SEM image of the g-3D-GO framework and corresponding (e) oxygen and (f) carbon mapping. 
3 Summary and future outlooks
Since the Nobel Prize in 2010 was awarded to those scientists who have made great contributions in graphene, one of the ongoing studies on graphene based materials has been focused on energy conversion from nature into electricity.19 In this featured article, we have discussed tailored graphene based materials for water-enabled electricity generation, which will be an emerging and promising field in near future. Although the research on water-enabled graphene for electricity generation is in its primary stage, there have been great achievements in producing electrical signals including current and/or voltage by water flowing, raining, waving, or penetrating 2D graphene films or 3D graphene frameworks. Further increase in electricity output can be realized by optimizing material structures and species, and the performances of non-ionic/ionic water as well as the reasonable integration of cell groups. The increased quest for energy conversion as well as application-specific requirements has provided a golden opportunity for the rise of water-enabled electricity generation devices. Despite the current research and promising prospects, some issues in either theoretical or empirical aspects are still challenges for forwarding the fundamental study and practical application. First, the already developed theories are highly dependent on intrinsic charges (electrons, holes, or protons) of the tailored graphene based materials. How can the charge number and transportation be increased without sacrificing the other performances? The carbon backbone of graphene, for example, can be covalently or non-covalently functionalized with heteroatoms, therefore unlocking the potential of tailoring its electrochemical and electrical properties to cater to various applications. Additionally, extraordinary energy harvesting devices require high-quality tailored graphene materials, which are still a challenge to prepare by a cost-effective and eco-friendly technique. In particular, the incorporation of a well-defined graphene film into devices is a relatively demanding issue. Therefore, the tailored graphene based composites can meet these requirements. A remaining problem is that the reported conducting composites for water-enabled electricity generation require a relatively high dosage to meet conductivity percolation for consistent electron transportation. By combining graphene with other one-dimensional conducting species, the required dosage for percolating pathway formation is markedly reduced. Second, application-specific requirements for future electricity generation initiates the reasonable design of a final device as well as integration with other architectures. To date, the determined electricity outputs from tailored graphene devices are still at a very low level. This water-enabled electricity device is expected to join with other architectures to integrate multiple functions in a single device. Third, there are still no cost-effective and eco-friendly strategies for large-scale graphene. Are the concepts are also applicable to other alternative materials that can be facilely prepared? For instance, both current and voltage can be produced by raining simulated raindrops onto a 2D rGO film due to electrons|cation EDL pseudocapacitance. Using the same theory, conductive polymers including polyaniline, polypyrrole, and poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene) along with PtM alloys (M = Fe, Co, Ni, Pd, Cu, Ru, Mo, etc.) can also create electricity by dropping raindrops on their electrodes. Conductive polymers have gigantic double- and single-bonded sp2 hybridized structures, allowing for electron cloud overlap of p-orbitals to form π-molecular orbitals. These hybridized atoms maximize the sideways overlap between π-molecular orbitals for electron-enriched distribution.20 When alloyed with Pt to form PtM alloys, the electrons can deviate from M to Pt because of the reduced electronegativities of transition metal M in comparison with Pt,2d,21 making an electron-enriched Pt surface. Our results pave the way for further advances in other alternatives. Finally, the detected electrical signals are still in a miniaturized form, and they demand markedly, efforts to elevate the electricity outputs of up-scaling devices to meet practical applications.
Acknowledgements
The authors acknowledge the financial support from National Natural Science Foundation of China (21503202, U1037604), Collaborative Innovation Center of Research and Development of Renewable Energy in the Southwest Area (05300205020516009), and Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation (ZR2015EM024).
Notes and references

  (a) S. Song, Y. Xue, L. Feng, H. Elbatal, P. Wang, C. N. Moorefield, G. R. Newkome and L. M. Dai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1415–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) Y. Jiao, Y. Zheng, M. Jaroniec and S. Z. Qiao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2060–2086 RSC .

  (a) Q. H. Li, X. Jin, Y. Yang, H. Wang, H. Xu, Y. Cheng, T. Wei, Y. Qin, X. Luo, W. Sun and S. Luo, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 254–266 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) X. Jin, W. Sun, Z. Chen, T. Wei, C. Chen, X. He, Y. Yuan, Y. Li and Q. H. Li, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8771–8781 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) X. Jin, W. Sun, S. Luo, L. Shao, J. Zhang, X. Luo, T. Wei, Y. Qin, Y. Song and Q. H. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 23876–23887 RSC ; 
  (d) Q. W. Tang, H. H. Zhang, Y. Y. Meng, B. L. He and L. M. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 11448–11452 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) Y. Y. Duan, Q. W. Tang, J. Liu, B. L. He and L. M. Yu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 14569–14574 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) T. Wei, P. Singh, Y. H. Gong, J. B. Goodenough, Y. H. Huang and K. Huang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1680–1684 RSC ; 
  (b) L. L. Zhang, N. Xu, X. Li, S. Wang, K. Huang, W. H. Harris and W. K. S. Chiu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5, 8310–8317 RSC ; 
  (c) C. H. Yang, J. Li, Y. Lin, J. Liu, F. L. Chen and M. L. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 704–710 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, D. Jing, X. She, H. Liu, D. J. Yang, Y. Lu, J. Li, Z. Zheng and L. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 2071–2078 Search PubMed ; T. Wang and J. L. Gong, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 10718–10732 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Zheng, C. H. Yang, X. Xiong, J. Xiong, R. Hu, Y. Chen and M. L. Liu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 13058–13062 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ji, S. Cheng, L. Yang, Y. Jiang, Z. J. Jiang, C. H. Yang, H. Zhang and M. L. Liu, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 736–745 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Yin, X. Li, J. Yu, Z. Zhang, J. Zhou and W. L. Guo, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 378–383 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) J. Yin, Z. Zhang, X. Li, J. Yu, J. Zhou, Y. Chen and W. L. Guo, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3582 CAS ; 
  (c) F. Zhao, Y. Liang, H. H. Cheng, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 912–916 RSC ; 
  (d) F. Zhao, H. Cheng, Z. Zhang, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 4351–4357 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (e) Q. W. Tang, X. P. Wang, P. Z. Yang and B. L. He, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 5243–5246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Novoselov, A. K. Geim, S. V. Morozov, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, S. V. Dubonos, I. V. Grigorieva and A. A. Firsov, Science, 2004, 306, 666–669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) S. Eigler and A. Hirsch, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 7720–7738 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) C. N. R. Rao, A. K. Sood, K. S. Subrahmanyam and A. Govindaraj, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 7752–7777 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) Y. Zhang, S. Gong, Q. Zhang, P. Ming, S. Wan, J. Peng, L. Jiang and Q. Cheng, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2378–2395 RSC ; 
  (d) R. R. Nair, P. Blake, A. N. Grigorenko, K. S. Novoselov, T. J. Booth, T. Stauber, N. M. R. Peres and A. K. Geim, Science, 2008, 320, 1308 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

  (a) C. G. Hu, L. Song, Z. Zhang, N. Chen, Z. Feng and L. T. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 31–54 RSC ; 
  (b) C. Hu, G. Zheng, F. Zhao, H. Shao, Z. Zhang, N. Chen, L. Jiang and L. T. Qu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 3699–3708 RSC ; 
  (c) J. Yan, Y. Ding, C. G. Hu, H. H. Cheng, N. Chen, Z. Feng, Z. Zhang and L. T. Qu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 16786–16792 RSC .

  (a) H. Zhong, X. Li, Z. Wu, S. Zhang, Z. Xu, H. Chen and S. Lin, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2015, 106, 243903 CrossRef ; 
  (b) W. B. Huang, G. Wang, F. Gao, Z. Qiao, G. Wang, L. Tao, M. Chen, F. Yu, H. Yang and L. F. Sun, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 3921–3924 RSC ; 
  (c) W. Huang, G. Wang, F. Gao, Z. Qiao, G. Wang, M. Chen, Y. Deng, L. Tao, Y. Zhao, X. Fan and L. F. Sun, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 8783–8787 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) L. Michalas, M. Koutsoureli, E. Papandreou, F. Giacomozzi and G. Papaioannou, Microelectron. Reliab., 2015, 55, 1891–1895 CrossRef ; 
  (b) M. H. Park, D. Han, R. Chand, D. H. Lee and Y. S. Kim, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2016, 120, 4854–4859 CrossRef CAS .

          C. Laurence and J. F. Gal, Lewis Basicity and Affinity Scales: Data and Measurement, Wiley, New York,  2009 Search PubMed .

  (a) Z. H. Huang, X. Zheng, W. Lv, M. Wang, Q. H. Yang and F. Y. Kang, Langmuir, 2011, 27, 7558–7562 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) 
            L. R. Radovic, C. Moreno-Castilla and J. Rivera-Utrilla, in Chemistry and Physics of Carbon, Marcel Dekker, New York,  2001 Search PubMed .

  (a) Y. Fu, Z. Lv, S. Hou, H. Wu, D. Wang, C. Zhang and D. C. Zou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 37–41 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Z. Yang, B. Cai, B. Zhou, T. Yao, W. Yu, S. Liu, W. H. Zhang and C. Li, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 670–678 CrossRef CAS .
K. K. Sadasivuni, D. Ponnamma, S. Thomas and Y. Grohens, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2014, 39, 749–780 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Boland, S. Barwich, U. Khan and J. N. Coleman, Carbon, 2016, 99, 280–288 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) J. Zhu, H. Zhang and N. A. Kotov, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 4818–4829 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (b) W. Gao, N. Singh, L. Song, Z. Liu, A. L. M. Reddy, L. Ci and P. M. Ajayan, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2011, 6, 496–500 CrossRef CAS PubMed ; 
  (c) F. Zhao, H. Cheng, Y. Hu, L. Song, Z. Zhang, L. Jiang and L. Qu, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 5882–5887 CAS .

  (a) P. V. Kamat, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 242–251 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) L. M. Dai, Acc. Chem. Res., 2013, 46, 31–42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Guimard, N. Gomez and C. E. Schmidt, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2007, 32, 876–921 CrossRef CAS .

  (a) Q. M. Yang, J. L. Duan, P. Z. Yang and Q. W. Tang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 190, 648–654 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) Q. W. Tang, J. L. Duan, Y. Y. Duan, B. L. He and L. M. Yu, Electrochim. Acta, 2015, 178, 886–899 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:
Qunwei Tang	Qunwei Tang is a full Professor of Materials Science at Ocean University of China. After receiving his PhD at Huaqiao University, P. R. China, he joined Strasbourg University and University of South Carolina for postdoctoral fellowships. Since joining the Institute of Materials Science and Engineering at Ocean University of China in 2012, his research interests cover dye-sensitized solar cells, electrocatalysts for hydrogen evolution from seawater splitting, and electrode materials for advanced energy conversion devices. He has published over 150 papers as a first or corresponding author with an H-index of 29, and has 13 patents.
Peizhi Yang	Peizhi Yang is the director of the Key Laboratory of Advanced Technique & Preparation for Renewable Energy Materials, Ministry of Education, and group leader of Photovoltaic Science and Technology in the Solar Institute at Yunnan Normal University. After completing his PhD at Shanghai Institute of Optics and Fine Mechanics, Chinese Academy of Science in 1999, he worked as a postdoctoral fellow and then as staff at the Shanghai Institute of Ceramics, Chinese Academy of Sciences until 2005. His current research focuses on solar energy materials and devices including silicon thin film, quantum dot, and wide spectrum solar cells.

2D	Monolayer graphene	CVD	Seawater	∼0.15 mV	—	
7a

Monolayer graphene	CVD	Seawater	∼0.1 V	∼8 μA	
7b

Monolayer graphene	CVD	GO aqueous solution	10 mV	0.5 μA	
11a

rGO	Hummer	Simulated rainwater	109.26 μV	0.49 μA	
7e

G–CB/PTFE	Hummer	Simulated rainwater	227.80 μV	5.97 μA	Unpublished
3D	Graphene foam	CVD	Deionized water	—	25 μA	
11b

Graphene foam	CVD	Water/ethanol mixture	—	20 μA	
11c

Graphene oxide framework	Freeze-drying	Moisture	0.26 V	3.2 mA cm−2	
7c

Graphene oxide framework	Moisture-electric annealing	Moisture	20 mV	5 μA cm−2	
7d


 	Fig. 1  (a) The schematic of the water-enabled electricity device. (b) Typical voltage signals produced by drawing a droplet of 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution from left (L) to right (R) and backward. (c) DFT results for the distribution of charges at graphene/solution interface as well as the pseudocapacitance and potential difference induced by moving a droplet. (d) Photograph and (e) voltage output of handwriting with a Chinese brush on monolayer graphene.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Schematic illustration for waving potential by moving graphene across the surface of seawater. (b) Typical voltage signals produced by inserting and pulling out a graphene electrode in 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution. (c) DFT results for the charge distribution of graphene upon the adsorption of Na+ ions. (d) Schematic of the electric double-layer and its boundaries of ion adsorption (left) and desorption (right) on the surface of graphene during the inserting and pulling out processes.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The quasi-all-weather solar cell that can produce electricity from rain and sun. (b) J–V curves recorded under front or rear irradiation. (c) Current and (d) voltage signals produced by dropping simulated raindrops from 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution onto a rGO electrode at different time intervals of two droplets.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) A schematic illustration of the rain enabled electricity device with dropping raindrops onto a G–CB/PTFE conducting composite film. (b) Sheet resistance of the G–CB/PTFE conducting composite. (c) The polarizing microscopic image of the polyacrylate/sericite composite. (d) Current and (e) voltage signals produced by dropping simulated raindrops of 0.6 M NaCl aqueous solution onto the G–CB/PTFE composite film.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) The schematic layout for electricity generation by flowing non-ionic or a water/ethanol mixture through 3D graphene foam. The current signals produced by flowing (b) non-ionic water and (c) ethanol/water (25:75 by volume) through the 3D graphene foam at a flow velocity of 10 cm s−1. (d) The plots of induced current as a function of velocity and ethanol/water ratio.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of a moisture-enabled electricity generation device based on a g-3D-GO framework. (b) Voltage and (c) current output cycles in response to intermittent and periodic RH variation (ΔRH = 75%). (d) SEM image of the g-3D-GO framework and corresponding (e) oxygen and (f) carbon mapping.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
