Two-birds-one-stone: multifunctional supercapacitors beyond traditional energy storage  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0EE03167D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0EE03167D
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14, 1854-1896Two-birds-one-stone: multifunctional supercapacitors beyond traditional energy storage

        
          
            Yang 
            Zhou†
a, 
      
        
          
            Hualei 
            Qi†
bc, 
      
        
          
            Jinyuan 
            Yang
          
        
      bc, 
      
        
          
            Zheng 
            Bo
          
        
      *c, 
      
        
          
            Feng 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mohammad Saiful 
            Islam
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Xunyu 
            Lu
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Liming 
            Dai
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Rose 
            Amal
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Chun H. 
            Wang
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Zhaojun 
            Han
          
        
      *abd
aSchool of Mechanical and Manufacturing Engineering, UNSW Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia. E-mail: chun.h.wang@unsw.edu.au
bCSIRO Manufacturing, 36 Bradfield Road, Lindfield, NSW 2070, Australia
cState Key Laboratory of Clean Energy Utilization, College of Energy Engineering, Hangzhou Global Scientific and Technological Innovation Center, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province 310027, China. E-mail: bozh@zju.edu.cn
dSchool of Chemical Engineering, UNSW Sydney, New South Wales 2052, Australia. E-mail: zhaojun.han@unsw.edu.au
Received 
      5th October 2020
    , Accepted 5th February 2021First published on 5th February 2021AbstractThe last decade has witnessed an extensive uptake of clean and sustainable energy sources to meet the surging energy demand while mitigating the increasing levels of greenhouse gas emission and air pollution. Among various energy systems, electrochemical energy storage devices such as batteries and supercapacitors have attracted worldwide attention for use in electric-powered transport, portable electronics, and biomedical devices. Recently, new multifunctional supercapacitors, which combine energy storage capability with load-carrying and other functions, offer a new “two-birds-one-stone” strategy for next-generation energy storage systems to store energy beyond the traditional systems. Multifunctional supercapacitors show great promise in reducing the size and volume of devices, improving the charge storage capacity, and minimising the cost in materials and fabrication while bringing the benefits of additional functions to the systems. This review describes the recent advances in multifunctional supercapacitors in terms of materials design, device configuration, system integration, and applications. The unique features of multifunctional supercapacitors depend strongly on architectural designs and system integration, which allow elimination of certain components to reduce the size and weight, thus improving the overall system performance. The review focuses specifically on multifunctional supercapacitors with novel mechanical, surface/interfacial, thermal, electronic, photodetection and energy harvesting/conversion functions. In addition, challenges and opportunities for further developments in the emerging field of multifunctional supercapacitors are suggested and discussed.

Broader context
Multifunctional supercapacitors are electrochemical energy storage devices that offer additional functions to fulfill different requirements in one unitized configuration. They show great promise to bridge the gap between energy storage and other areas of applications. The single integrated architecture of multifunctional supercapacitors brings benefits to device performance by overcoming the limitations in the size and volume of energy storage systems, improving the efficiency of energy storage and utilization, and facilitating unprecedented applications where conventional devices normally fail. This review provides a comprehensive overview on the materials design and device configuration of multifunctional supercapacitors and elaborates how these parameters could play a vital role in empowering supercapacitors with desirable functions. Furthermore, it has identified several challenges at the levels of device performance, scalability, safety and cost, which are to be tackled to meet the requirements of practical applications. We believe that such a detailed summary and comprehensive, but critical, review will offer insights into the materials selection and performance optimisation of multifunctional supercapacitors at this early stage of research and development, and will open new opportunities for the development of various high-performance multifunctional (self-)powered systems for a wide range of applications.

1. Introduction
With the increasing demand for clean and sustainable energy, supercapacitors have become one of the key electrochemical energy storage solutions. Compared to batteries and fuel cells, supercapacitors show advantages of high power, fast charge/discharge rate, long lifespan and safe operation.1,2 In many practical applications supercapacitors have demonstrated great potential in portable electronics, hybrid electric vehicles, implantable biomedical devices, uninterrupted power sources, and grid energy storage, to name a few.3–5 However, the energy density of supercapacitors remains relatively low, dictating the past research activities to primarily focus on improving the energy density of supercapacitors without affecting their excellent power performance.6,7 The energy density E of a supercapacitor is given by CV2/2, where C is the specific capacitance and V is the potential window. The specific capacitance C is mainly determined by the electrode materials, including carbon-based materials, metal oxides, and conducting polymers,8–16 whereas the potential window V is closely related to the type of electrolytes used, such as aqueous electrolytes, organic electrolytes and ionic liquids.17,18 Conventional supercapacitors have a low energy density of 5–10 W h kg−1, which is 20 to 40 times lower than that of lithium-ion batteries, while their power density is in the high range of 1–10 kW kg−1, enabling fast charging and discharging within a short time of a few minutes or even a few seconds. The excellent power density thus warrants supercapacitors to complement and/or replace batteries in many areas of applications.19–21
A parallel study in the development of supercapacitors, albeit at a less extensive scale, is to endow supercapacitors with multifunctionality. Just like materials with more than one property are highly sought after in a wide range of applications,22 supercapacitors that can perform multiple tasks at the same time have also aroused strong interest from academia and industry. For example, a supercapacitor with high stretchability and self-healing capability, fabricated based on a polyacrylic acid (PAA) electrolyte crosslinked by hydrogen bonding and vinyl hybrid silica nanoparticles, showed concurrent energy storage capability, stretchability up to 600% strain, and excellent self-healability.23 A synchronised solar energy harvesting and energy storage system was also demonstrated by integrating a perovskite solar cell with a MnO2-based supercapacitor in a single portable device.24 In general, multifunctionality confers supercapacitors with a broad set of new properties besides their main characteristics of power and energy densities. This so-called “two-birds-one-stone” strategy towards multifunctional supercapacitors will bring benefits to supercapacitors by: (i) overcoming the limitations in the size and mass efficiency of energy storage systems, (ii) improving the efficiency of energy storage and utilization, and (iii) expanding the applications of supercapacitors to new fields where conventional devices normally fail.
Successful development of high-performance multifunctional supercapacitors hinges on advances in materials, designs, and device integration. However, there is currently a lack of coherent and systematic reviews on the relevant research. To understand the conceptual framework and better guide future research in this area, herein we provide a comprehensive review on the recent progress of multifunctional supercapacitors. We focus on materials design of electrodes, electrolytes and other components such as separators and packaging materials, and the scenarios where multifunctionality is advantageous and/or indispensable for system operation. We also present current knowledge gaps and identify possible challenges towards the development of next-generation multifunctional supercapacitor devices. Of particular note, the multifunctionality we refer to should be ‘inherent’ of a single supercapacitor device rather than acquired by connecting different devices, as separate units connected by external wires or cables to perform multiple tasks often result in a loss of energy across additional components, low efficiency in energy storage or utilization, and a significant increase in device dimensions and/or mass.25–27
2. Fundamentals of multifunctional supercapacitors
2.1 Types of multifunctional supercapacitor
The development of multifunctional supercapacitors has been at the forefront of interdisciplinary research, spanning from materials science, physics, and chemistry to mechanical, electronic and biomedical engineering. With over a decade of research effort, it is now possible to engineer supercapacitors with combined energy storage capability and other mechanical, surface/interfacial, thermal, electronic, photodetection and energy harvesting/conversion functionalities, through proper materials design and structural configurations (Fig. 1a). A general routine to realize additional functions in supercapacitors can be summarized as: (i) identifying the functionality needed to be incorporated into supercapacitors; (ii) selecting proper functional materials that are compatible with supercapacitors; (iii) incorporating the functional materials into the original configuration of supercapacitors via the synthesis of composite materials or the design of the structure; and (iv) characterization and performance evaluation with the benchmark of the original devices. The main types of multifunctional supercapacitors and their rationales for development are as follows.
 Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the types of multifunctional supercapacitors. (b) The structure of a typical supercapacitor. 

(i) Supercapacitors with mechanical functions. 
The emergence of advanced vehicles such as electric cars and unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) has greatly impacted our life by providing a sustainable option for transportation, communication and surveillance. However, one major bottleneck, i.e., high energy consumption, has hindered further development in this industry since conventional energy systems such as batteries and supercapacitors are heavy, bulky in size, and vulnerable to physical damage. To this end, structural energy systems such as structural batteries and structural supercapacitors have been explored,28,29 aiming to utilize structural components such as car body frames and airplane fuselages for storing energy while maintaining their excellent mechanical strength. In certain circumstances, supercapacitors may also be susceptible to structural failure under puncturing or cutting during the charge/discharge processes. This could result in total breakdown of the electronic devices, generation of abundant electronic waste, inconvenience and occupational health and safety hazards. It is thus of scientific and technological importance to develop self-healable supercapacitors which can withstand structural failures and restore the device integrity. Both structural and self-healable supercapacitors are critical to addressing the increasing concern of mechanical damage of energy storage devices and enhancing their durability under harsh conditions.


(ii) Supercapacitors with biocompatible and other surface/interfacial functions. 
To maintain the normal operation of certain implantable medical devices, a power system is usually required; for instance, a cardiovascular electronic device (CED) encompassing pacemakers can be implanted into the human body along with an internal battery.30 However, conventional batteries are not suitable for such applications, mainly due to possible leakage of harmful electrolytes and the likelihood of biocompatibility issues including immunological rejection, inflammatory reactions, and biological toxicity.31,32 It is noted that the energy density in these biomedical applications is not so critical since the operation of implantable devices normally requires minute energy. Instead, implantable energy storage devices satisfying the criteria of longevity, safety, reliability and biocompatibility are mostly demanded.33,34 Biocompatible supercapacitors are thus developed to work under the physiological environment as they possess a high power density, long cycle life, fast charge/discharge rate, and low risk of electronic hazard and chemical reactions that could occur with batteries or fuel cells. Another important surface/interfacial function is waterproof, which can enable supercapacitors to operate under moisture or a wet environment where potential short circuit caused by water ingress could be a major concern. Waterproof supercapacitors have shown increasing applications in wearable electronic devices on smart textiles, protecting them from accidental spilling and endowing them with excellent washability.


(iii) Supercapacitors with temperature-dependent functions. 
With the great development of fast energy delivery, there are increasing concerns of safety in energy storage devices. One major issue is thermal runaway, where large amounts of heat are generated by ultrafast charge/discharge processes, especially in extreme conditions such as short circuit and overcharging, which may result in catastrophic burning or explosion.35 Thermoresponsive supercapacitors, which can cut off the electrical conductivity at elevated temperatures, can potentially avoid the risk of thermal runaway. Several smart and intelligent electrochemical devices with self-protection have therefore been developed.35–39 Moreover, transportation at seasonal and geographical sites as well as continuous exploration in space, military environments, and polar areas requires highly-durable energy storage devices that can function at extreme temperatures far from room temperature. Batteries, due to the faradaic charge storage mechanism, can hardly run at low temperatures and may cause an explosion at high temperatures. Therefore, supercapacitors without obvious performance decay or component damage at extreme temperatures offer many important advantages and have been an active area of research.


(iv) Supercapacitors with electrical field-responsive functions. 
Most supercapacitors have a relatively slow frequency response, which limits their application in electronic circuits to direct current (DC) or frequencies below 1 Hz. At higher frequencies, however, they start to behave like a resistor (i.e., dissipating energy) rather than a capacitor (i.e., storing energy). The development of supercapacitors with a fast response to hundreds of hertz or even kilohertz (kHz) frequencies has thus aroused great interest. Such high frequency supercapacitors are promising in replacing the bulky aluminium electrolyte capacitor (AEC) for alternating current (AC) line filters.40,41 Another electronic function that supercapacitors can offer is electrochromism, which enables color alternation during the charge/discharge processes.42 A unique feature of the electrochromic supercapacitor is that it can enable visual monitoring of the charge state and quick determination of how much energy remains in the device.


(v) Supercapacitors for self-powered photodetection. 
Photodetectors are sensors of light or electromagnetic radiation, which convert light photons into electrical current. Low-cost and fast response photodetectors are in great demand for various applications such as safety and environmental monitoring, medical and bioimaging, thermal analysis, chemical processes and telecommunications. As photodetectors often require external power sources, a single device that is self-powered will be advantageous for operation. Supercapacitors with photodetection have therefore been developed to meet such a requirement, with the added benefits of being lightweight and having high energy efficiency in a single device. Depending on the electrode materials, supercapacitors with photodetection of ultraviolet (UV), visible and infrared (IR) light can all be achieved.43–45


(vi) Supercapacitors integrated with energy harvesting/conversion. 
Typically, energy storage and harvesting are two distinct processes employing different mechanisms. A combination of such separate processes is often realized by serially connecting two different devices, incurring substantial space penalties and a decrease in energy conversion efficiency. Therefore, synchronized integration of these two diverse mechanisms into a single device will be advantageous. The idea of self-charging supercapacitors has been investigated, where external energy is directly transformed to electrochemical energy through energy harvesting/conversion in the form of mechanical, solar and thermal energies.46 Again, the high stability and fast charge/discharge nature of supercapacitors have greatly facilitated their application in such hybrid energy conversion and storage systems.

2.2 The origin of multifunctionality
Conventional supercapacitors consist of a current collector, electrodes, an electrolyte, and a separator (Fig. 1b). In the quest of designing and fabricating multifunctional supercapacitors, the first and foremost question is, where does the multifunctionality come from? In the past few years, some fascinating work has provided insights into this question, indicating that the multifunctionality can originate from a number of functional constituent components in the supercapacitor, including electrode materials, electrolytes, separators, as well as packaging materials. Depending on the active materials and the charge storage mechanism, supercapacitors can be primarily categorized into two groups, i.e., electric-double layer capacitors (EDLCs) and pseudocapacitors.47 EDLCs store energy via electrostatic charges accumulated at the interfaces of the electrode and electrolyte, while pseudocapacitors rely on reversible redox reactions at the surface or sub-surface regions to store energy.
The electrode is at the center of controlling the performance and functionality of supercapacitors. The most common electrode materials for EDLCs are carbon-based materials, such as activated carbons, carbon nanotubes, graphene and templated carbons.12,13,48 These carbon-based electrodes are mainly used for multifunctional supercapacitors with novel mechanical functions, as the excellent mechanical properties of carbon fibres are often exploited for the required strength and durability. One major drawback of carbon-based electrodes is that their specific capacitance is relatively low, limiting the amount of energy to be stored in the device. In contrast, pseudocapacitive materials can show high specific capacitance and high energy density.14,15,17,49 As these materials often possess other properties, supercapacitors with additional thermal, electronic, photoelectronic and energy harvesting/conversion functions can be designed by carefully selecting appropriate pseudocapacitive electrode materials, including metal oxides, metal nitrides and conductive polymers. For instance, electrochromic supercapacitors use certain metal oxides such as WO3, NiO and V2O5 as the electrodes, which are both electrochromic and pseudocapacitive; supercapacitors with photodetection employ photosensitive materials such as TiO2, MoO3 and Co3O4 for both energy storage and photodetection; and supercapacitors with energy harvesting/conversion functions take advantage of metal oxides such as TiO2 and perovskites (ABO3) for capturing solar energy and storing it at the same time. In practice, to further improve the electrical and mechanical properties of pseudocapacitive materials, hybrid electrodes composed of both carbon and metal oxides are often constructed, which so far represent the largest family of electrodes in multifunctional supercapacitors. In addition to the type of electrode material, the microstructure of the electrode is another important factor for multifunctional supercapacitors. Taking graphene-based electrodes as an example, the graphene nanosheets arranged in a vertical orientation offer a highly porous, electrically conductive host that enables efficient ion transport, leading to a high frequency response (up to several kHz) as opposed to the slow frequency response (<1 Hz) in traditional supercapacitors.50
The electrolyte is also a key component in designing multifunctional supercapacitors. Depending on their composition and physical forms, electrolytes can be classified into aqueous, organic, ionic liquid, solid-state, quasi-solid-state and redox-active electrolytes.18 In particular, solid-state electrolytes have aroused large interest in fabricating multifunctional supercapacitors as they possess improved mechanical strength, thermal stability and self-healability compared to their liquid counterparts. For example, ionically conductive substances such as ionic liquids have been mixed with epoxy resin to form solid-state electrolytes, which provided both good ionic conductivity and high Young's modulus at room temperature;51 a solid-state electrolyte composed of a highly proton-conducting metal pyrophosphate with polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) was also fabricated to expand the range of supercapacitor operation to temperatures above 100 °C.52
The separator is a porous membrane layer between the two electrodes in supercapacitors, which prevents direct electrical contact but allows ion transport. It has often received less attention in supercapacitor research, yet it can still play an important role in the multifunctional properties of supercapacitors, particularly for simultaneous energy harvesting by the piezo- or tribo-electric effect. For instance, by employing a polyvinylidene difluoride (PVDF)–ZnO film as a separator as well as a piezoelectric, the constructed supercapacitor could directly convert mechanical energy (such as mechanical deformation under human palm impact) into electrochemical energy.46 Similarly, the packaging material, which is often overlooked in designing supercapacitors, may be exploited to realize multifunctionality. A typical packaging material is Ecoflex, a type of rubber with low viscosity and high stretchability. Ecoflex has been widely used to encapsulate supercapacitors for waterproofing applications.53 Owing to its excellent self-healability, another packing material, polyurethane (PU), can be wrapped around a supercapacitor so that it could retain its normal operation after several cycles of cutting and healing.54
The configuration of supercapacitors, i.e., the way in which supercapacitors are constructed, can also be explored to render multifunctionality. The most common configuration of supercapacitors is the planar stack, which has a ‘sandwich’ structure with the advantages of simplicity, uniformity, and easy fabrication, but lacks flexibility and processability. In contrast, a fibre-shaped configuration can be designed into different geometries, such as twisted, coaxial, knitted, woven, etc., with the ability to perform new mechanical and electronic functions.55 Another configuration of supercapacitors is the micro-supercapacitor, which contains arrays of inter-digitized electrodes at a size of tens to hundreds of micrometers. Micro-supercapacitors have shown unique features of reduced diffusion path lengths with high specific capacitance, thereby facilitating multifunctionality in wearable or microelectronic devices.9
3. Design and application of multifunctional supercapacitors
3.1 Supercapacitors with mechanical functions

3.1.1 Structural supercapacitors. 
In attempting to transform load-bearing structural components into energy storage systems, structural supercapacitors can bring two major benefits, weight/volume reduction and energy consumption reduction. As shown in Fig. 2a and b, the architecture of a typical structural supercapacitor consists of three major components: a structural electrode, a structural electrolyte and a separator.56 The development around these components has significantly advanced the performance of structural supercapacitors, as elaborated below.
 Fig. 2  (a) Architecture and (b) an example of a structural supercapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. (c) Schematic setup of the VARTM process and a woven carbon fibre (WCF)-based structural supercapacitor with its structural components. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58 
Structural electrodes. 
Like conventional supercapacitors, structural supercapacitors can be grouped into two categories depending on the electrode materials and charge mechanism, EDLCs and pseudocapacitors. Carbon fibre reinforced polymer (CFRP), a strong and lightweight composite with carbon fibres reinforcing a polymer matrix such as epoxy, is the most common electrode material in structural EDLCs. In CFRP, carbon fibre fabrics (CFF) function as the current collector and active materials, while the polymer matrix provides high specific strength and structural rigidity. CFRP composites can be fabricated in two ways: (i) the hand lay-up process and (ii) vacuum-assisted resin transfer molding (VARTM).57,58 In the hand lay-up process, resins providing structural support for the carbon fibres and acting as an electrolyte are impregnated by hand or machine into fabrics with the assistance of brushes or rollers. These fabrics are then laid up and pressed under a certain pressure. The advantages of this method include simplicity, low cost and a variety of support materials. However, one major disadvantage is the requirement for high-skilled labor. By contrast, VARTM is a variation of resin transfer molding, where a vacuum bag and a vacuum system are used to assist the resin flow. With the assistance of a vacuum system, resins flow into the laid up fabrics and the entire composite part is infused with resin, as shown in Fig. 2c.58 One major benefit of VARTM is the capability to scale up the production of composites with complex parts. However, special attention should be paid to air leakage issues, which can cause defects and other serious problems in composite quality.
Given the energy storage mechanism of EDLCs, the surface area of CFF is a crucial factor that could significantly affect the capacitance, as higher surface area will provide more active sites for charge accumulation. Therefore, several methods have been adopted to improve the surface area of CFF, including physical activation and chemical activation. Physical activation utilizes oxidising gases (e.g., carbon dioxide, air, steam and gas mixtures) to modify carbon fabrics via a controlled gasification process.48 The gasification process is operated between 700 and 1000 °C and pores are consequently formed in the oxidising atmosphere. A term ‘burn-off level’, defined as the total reduction in mass of carbon fabrics before and after treatment, is widely used to quantify the quality of activated carbon. A high burn-off level indicates a high level of activation, large pore size, and low mechanical properties of the carbon fabrics. The process of physical activation is simple to operate but consumes a large amount of energy.
Chemical activation, on the other hand, is the most prevalent method to form nanoscale porous structure without causing significant damage to the tensile properties of CFF. In chemical activation, acid and alkali solutions such as potassium hydroxide (KOH) and sodium hydroxide (NaOH) are employed to introduce nanoscale pores on the surface of CFF. An over two orders of magnitude increase in surface area can be achieved by chemical activation. For example, Qian et al. reported that the Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area of a CFF (T300) electrode increased from 0.21 to 21.39 m2 g−1 after soaking it in 6.5 wt% KOH solution for 3 h, which led to a huge boost in capacitance from 0.06 to 2.63 F g−1.59 It is worth mentioning that the specific capacitance did not increase proportionally with the surface area, as some pores are either too small or inaccessible for ion transport. Notably, the tensile modulus and strength of CFF were slightly increased from 204 to 207 GPa and from 3290 to 3960 MPa, respectively, indicating that the alkali treatment did not impair the mechanical property of the carbon fibres. However, chemical activation is relatively complicated since damage is likely to be caused by a high burn-off level during activation.51 An improper soaking time and concentration of chemical reagents are common factors that could weaken the mechanical properties of carbon fabrics and result in a high burn-off level.
Aside from creating a porous morphology on carbon fabrics, decorating other carbon-based nanomaterials on CFF has also been demonstrated to be effective in increasing the capacitance of electrodes. Compared with physical and chemical activation, surface decoration allows extra materials to be deposited without damaging the intrinsic structure of the CFF. As an example, monolithic carbon aerogels (CAGs) were introduced onto carbon fabric electrodes (at ∼9 wt%) and the resulting device showed a specific capacitance of 602.5 mF g−1.29 The improvement in performance was mainly attributed to the high surface area of the CAG-embedded electrode. Meanwhile, the as-prepared devices still showed a reasonable shear modulus (0.9 GPa) and shear strength (8.71 MPa). Carbon nanotubes (CNTs), a representative one-dimensional (1D) carbon nanomaterial, were also coated onto CFF to form hierarchical nanocomposites with increased surface area.56 CNTs could be either blended with a polymer matrix or grafted onto carbon fibres. In one example, a CNT-sized electrode was prepared by immersing carbon fabrics into CNT-sizing solutions, while a CNT-grafted electrode was achieved via in situ deposition of CNTs onto carbon fabrics. Both approaches could improve the surface area of the carbon fabrics and result in significant capacitance improvement.56 The reported CNT-grafted composite supercapacitor could reach a specific capacitance of 5 mF g−1, shear modulus of 1.04 GPa and compressive modulus of 52 GPa. More recently, CNTs and graphene nanoflakes were directly deposited or grown on CFF, which were further activated by urea for nitrogen doping.60 The resulting electrodes exhibited 12 times higher energy and power densities when compared with untreated carbon fibre specimens, making them promising candidates for structural electrodes.
The performance of structural supercapacitors can be further improved by embedding transition metal oxides, which could bring high pseudocapacitance and lead to a tremendous increase in specific capacitance. For instance, copper oxide (CuO)/activated carbon fabric (ACF) composite electrodes showed a specific capacitance of 6.75 F g−1, shear modulus of 18 GPa and shear strength of 92 MPa.61 CuO nanowires were synthesized via a hydrothermal method on woven carbon fabric (WCF) substrates, followed by the insertion of a structural electrolyte containing 20 wt% ionic liquid 1-ethyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (EMIMBF4) and 80% polyester resin (Fig. 3a). A VARTM method was then applied for device assembly. In this case, the high specific capacitance of the composite electrode mainly originated from the CuO nanowires, which were electrochemically favourable owing to their large specific capacity (674 mA h g−1) and high surface area (increased from 41.365 to 132.852 m2 g−1 after CuO deposition). The good wettability of CuO also ensured better contact between the electrode and electrolyte, which has been a major concern in multifunctional polymer matrices. According to the CV curves plotted in Fig. 3b, the CuO modified electrodes outperformed their counterparts with the largest integrated area, suggesting the highest capacitance. As a result, the CuO–WCF structural supercapacitors with an ionic liquid structural electrolyte achieved a high energy density of 106.04 mW h kg−1 and power density of 12.57 W kg−1 with a high in-plane shear modulus, whereas the WCF-only devices exhibited energy and power densities of 27.63 mW h kg−1 and 1.03 W kg−1, respectively (Fig. 3b and c).61 Other metal oxides such as MnO2 can also be deposited onto carbon fibre fabrics. A MnO2/CF composite electrode was fabricated with a layer of MnO2 synthesized by the hydrothermal method, which uniformly coated the carbon fabrics with a coral-like surface morphology.62 The electrode exhibited a high specific capacitance of 467 F g−1 in 1 M Na2SO4, leading to a high energy density of 20 W h kg−1 and power density of 175 W h kg−1.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagrams of the woven carbon fiber (WCF) based structural supercapacitor with its structural components. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of WCF based polyester composites at a 10 mV s−1 scan rate. (c) Multifunctionality (modulus vs. specific capacitance) of various WCF/PES composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61. 
Structural electrolytes. 
A structural electrolyte is ionically conductive but electrically insulating as it is designed to conduct ions between two electrodes without the occurrence of short circuit. Compared to conventional supercapacitors containing liquid electrolytes, structural supercapacitors mainly employ solid-state electrolytes for better mechanical rigidity and stability. An ideal structural electrolyte would possess both high ionic conductivity (e.g., 1 S m−1) and excellent mechanical performance (e.g., Young's modulus of 3 GPa). To date, research on structural electrolytes has focused on multifunctional solid-state electrolytes containing a polymer matrix (e.g., epoxy resin) for structural properties and an ionic liquid (IL) for ion conduction. However, there is a trade-off between mechanical properties and electrochemical performance such that it remains a challenge to achieve high performance in both.
The trade-off can be manipulated by varying the ratio of polymer resin to ionic liquid. Shirshova and co-workers investigated several electrolytes with different resin-to-IL ratios and the resulting performance.51 It was found that increasing the resin concentration would inevitably result in higher Young's modulus but lower ionic conductivity. For example, structural electrolytes containing 70 wt% ionic liquid and 30 wt% epoxy resin exhibited good ionic conductivity (0.8 mS cm−1) but low Young's modulus (about 0.2 GPa) because of insufficient epoxy resin. It is well known that increasing the resin concentration would result in higher porosity and consequently higher Young's modulus owing to a higher degree of resin crosslinking. This higher crosslinking level is detrimental to ion movement but is beneficial for the Young's modulus. Notably, the ionic conductivity and Young's modulus of these resin systems do not follow a linear relationship with the resin to IL ratio. This variation in the mechanical and electrochemical properties can be explained by the microstructure of the electrolytes, where further increasing the epoxy content would make the electrolyte phase saturated with epoxy and the remaining excess epoxy would form a coarse emulsion before curing, resulting in a large increase in Young's modulus.51
Aside from a single polymer matrix, blended polymer matrix systems have also been utilized in structural electrolytes for better properties. Javaid et al. prepared a blend polymer matrix by adding diglycidylether of bisphenol-A (DGEBA) and PEGDGE with different mass ratios into an electrolyte mixture.63 The ratio of PEGDGE to DGEBA had a significant influence on the ionic conductivity, compressive strength, and compressive stiffness of the resultant solid electrolyte. As the crosslinking density of DGEBA was higher than that of PEGDGE, both the compressive strength and stiffness were enhanced by increasing the DGEBA concentration at the expense of reduced ionic conductivity. Recently, a polymerization-induced microphase separation (PIMS) process was also utilized to construct bicontinuous and well-connected 3D ion-conducting nanochannels in a blended polymer matrix, which provided both high modulus and high electrical conductivity.64
Another effective approach to improve the ionic conductivity is to add inorganic nanoparticles into polymer electrolytes, where the inorganic nanoparticles would form amorphous regions and provide more ionic pathways to improve the ion conduction. This approach has the potential to avoid the aforementioned trade-off and simultaneously increase the ionic conductivity and mechanical properties, thanks to the good mechanical properties of inorganic nanoparticles. For instance, adding titanium dioxide (TiO2) to a lithium bis(oxalate)borate (Li-BOB) salt-based gel electrolyte could result in an ionic conductivity up to one order of magnitude higher than the filler-free gel electrolyte (from 3.2 × 10−5 S cm−1 of the filler-free electrolyte to 4.38 × 10−4 S cm−1 of the TiO2-filled electrolyte).65 It was inferred that the bulky BOB anion acted as an active solid plasticizer for TiO2, leading to a polarization reduction that impeded the re-crystallization kinetics and the retention of the amorphous phase above the glass transition temperature.
Structural separators. 
In a structural supercapacitor, a separator is inserted between the two electrodes to prevent short circuit of the supercapacitor but allow ions to move from one side to the other through its nanoporous structure. The separator should be chemically resistant to different types of electrolytes in acidic or basic conditions and structurally robust to bear high mechanical loading. Existing separators used in structural supercapacitors can be divided into three groups: woven glass fibre fabrics, filter paper, and polymer membranes.66,67 Among them, woven glass fibre fabrics are most attractive because they have an intermediate shear modulus and electrical performance compared to polypropylene (PP) membranes and filter paper.68 Two factors should be taken into consideration when choosing a proper separator for structural supercapacitors: thickness and porosity. The thickness of separators has a potential impact on the electrochemical performance of structural supercapacitors since the equivalent series resistance (ESR) is related to the distance between the two electrodes. A larger thickness would lead to a higher ESR, a longer ion moving distance and consequently a lower power density. Another important factor affecting the electrochemical performance of a separator is porosity. Higher porosity will facilitate better ion transport between the two electrodes. For example, Nor et al. have reported that increasing the porosity of separators improved the electrolyte absorption and ion movement rate by using filter paper, woven glass fibre fabrics and eggshell membrane.67 Laforgue and co-workers also demonstrated that a higher porosity of the separator could reduce the ESR and therefore increase the energy and power densities of supercapacitors.69
Applications. 
Due to the similarity in both the configuration and functionality between structural supercapacitors and structural batteries, they are often used together to form an integrated structural energy storage system.70 Specifically, structural supercapacitors tend to possess higher power density than batteries and can meet peak power demands within a short timeframe (e.g., acceleration of electric vehicles), when batteries may fail to provide sufficient energy supply instantly.71 During the early 2000s, the development of composite-based structural energy storage systems was mainly applied in military and army platforms such as UAVs and aircrafts, where the simultaneous achievement of light weight and sufficient energy density is highly desirable.72 Later on, structural energy storage systems were designed for marine applications with energy storage capacities between 40 and 60 W h L−1.73 Unlike UAVs, marine applications such as unmanned underwater vehicles must consider potential degradation and corrosion. Therefore, additional requirements for providing better protection and addressing safety issues are needed. In addition, the ever-increasing fuel scarcity has boosted the rapid development of electricity-driven vehicles, which are widely believed to be the most promising alternative to petrol-powered vehicles. As such, the body of electric vehicles can be converted to an integrated structural energy system with the help of CFRPs, which enable electric vehicles to work without additional fuel support and carry loads.74


3.1.2 Self-healable supercapacitors. 
Self-healable supercapacitors also represent a large family of multifunctional supercapacitors. They can withstand mechanical damage such as cuts and punctures and restore the device integrity and function. The key to developing self-healable supercapacitors for such damage management is to fabricate mechanically robust and self-healable polymers or polymer nanocomposites. These self-healable polymers or polymer nanocomposites can then be used to endow self-healability to the electrically conductive electrodes and ionically conductive electrolytes in device fabrication.
Self-healable polymers. 
Self-healable polymers can be generally classified as either extrinsic or intrinsic.75 The self-healability of extrinsic self-healable polymers arises from an added external component, while that of intrinsic self-healable polymers is dependent on the molecular architecture of the polymer itself. Extrinsic self-healable polymers are primarily fabricated by embedding microcapsules filled with healing agents, which can be released after mechanical damage.76 Although they work quite well, extrinsic self-healable polymers can only restore the function once, limiting their robustness in real applications. In contrast, intrinsic self-healable polymers can provide repeated healability with easy processability. A number of approaches have been adopted to induce intrinsic self-healability in polymers, including reversible covalent bonding (e.g., the Diels–Alder reaction), hydrogen bonding, ionic interactions, π–π interactions, host–guest interactions, and metal–ligand coordination bonds.77 The self-healing process could be triggered autonomously (i.e., no trigger) or by external stimuli such as heat, water, electricity, photo-stimulation (e.g., UV and IR), and microwaves. Till now, much effort has been devoted to the development of intrinsic self-healable polymers, as discussed below.
Intrinsic self-healable polymers with high structural strength and remendability can be produced by reversible covalent bonding (weaker than common covalent bonds), which could break preferentially upon mechanical stress and re-form again under heating in multiple breaking/healing cycles. Gong et al. reported a copolymer network polymerized from two monomers of MDPB with maleimide groups and FGEEDR with furan groups.78 The C–C bond formed between the maleimide and furan groups in the reversible Diels–Alder reaction can break and cross-couple again under moderate heat. In a typical experiment, a crack in the polymer film could be healed when the film was heated at 110 °C, which gave enough energy for the reversible Diels–Alder reaction to take place. Amamoto et al. also showed repeated self-healability of covalently cross-linked polymers through photostimuli.79 The polymer was synthesized by a reversible addition–fragmentation chain-transfer (RAFT) copolymerization of n-butyl acrylate (BA) and a trithiocarbonate (TTC) cross-linker. Upon UV irradiation, the photo-responsive TTC units in fragmented polymer networks could undergo a dynamic reshuffling reaction to accomplish the self-healability. Nevertheless, one main drawback of reversible covalent bonding is that it often requires high energy (e.g., high temperature or UV irradiation) to trigger the self-healing process.
Hydrogen bonding is weaker than reversible covalent bonding and may offer better chances for the development of intrinsic self-healable polymers. The hydrogen bonds break preferentially during a mechanical damage event, which then dynamically associate and dissociate to provide a passive healing mechanism at the fracture surface. Typical intrinsic self-healable polymers with hydrogen bonding include polyurethane (PU), poly(acrylic acid) (PAA), supramolecular hydrogels and certain functionalised biopolymers.80–83 Taking PU as an example, by bringing two halves of the bisected PU fibres into contact, hydrogen bonds can re-establish at the interface with a gentle pressure to self-heal the carboxylated PU polymer.81 Leibler and co-workers reported a method which later became popular for the synthesis of a series of self-healable polymers with hydrogen bonding, as the method is facile, inexpensive and environmentally friendly.83 It included a two-step pathway: the first step was to condense fatty dimer acids made from natural renewable resources (vegetable oils) with a controlled excess of diethylene triamine; and the second step was to react the product with urea. After lowering the glass transition temperature using a plasticizer, a soft rubber-like product could be obtained, which showed a good self-healing property at room temperature due to multiple hydrogen bonds formed at the carboxylic acid ends of the polymer.
Adding ions in polymer networks with hydrogen bonding can also enhance self-healability through the additional ionic bonds. Guo et al. reported a ferric ion (Fe3+) cross-linked supramolecular PAA hydrogel electrolyte (KCl–Fe3+/PAA), in which both ionic bonds between Fe3+ and carboxylic acid ions and hydrogen bonds gave the electrolyte a self-healing property and easy-recyclability.84 Compared to PAA without ionic bonds, the KCl–Fe3+/PAA electrolyte showed much higher stability with a 3D porous network which was beneficial for ion transport. Good mechanical performance with a strain of 700% and stress of >400 kPa and an excellent conductivity of 0.09 S cm−1 were obtained. Fig. 4a–c showed that when the hydrogel was cut into two parts and brought into contact, no obvious physical damage at the junction was seen after self-healing for approximately 24 h. The self-healed hydrogel could withstand stretching at least 200% of its original length (Fig. 4d) and the stress–strain curve (Fig. 4e) showed that the mechanical performance of the self-healed hydrogel did not decline compared with the original hydrogel. The self-healing was attributed to the dynamic ionic bonding between Fe3+ and carboxylic groups of PAA, where free Fe3+ ions diffused towards the freshly cut interface and interacted with the carboxylic groups of PAA chains to repair the damage without any trigger.
 Fig. 4  Self-healing of a dumbbell-shaped hydrogel at room temperature: (a) the hydrogel after being cut, (b) the hydrogel after healing for 12 h, and (c) the hydrogel after healing for 24 h. (d) Stretching the self-healed hydrogel up to 200%. (e) Comparison of the stress–strain curves between the original and self-repaired KCl–Fe3+(4)/PAA hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. (f) Image of a self-healing circuit demonstrating its autonomous recovery upon complete damage (damage width, 3 mm). (g) Electrical conductivity-based studies to analyze the self-healing ability of a self-healing printed trace when repeatedly damaged at the same location (damage widths, 1–3 mm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. 
A facile self-healing feature can also be observed on polymers with thermally reversible π–π interactions. The π-electron-rich aromatic molecules which are often found on the terminals or chain sides of polymers can form π–π stacking to give enhanced mechanical properties and self-healability. Burattini et al. synthesized a supramolecular polymer system with a pyrenyl end-capped polyamide intercalated into the chain-folds of a polyimide.85 Complementary π–π stacking and charge transfer occurred between the pyrenyl end-groups of one component and the diimide residues of the other. Spontaneous healing was evident when the damaged polymer was brought together and heated to 90 °C. In a similar geometry, a “host–guest” strategy was adopted to prepare self-healable supramolecular gels, where the side chains of poly(acrylamide) were modified with the “host” cyclodextrins (CDs) and the “guest” hydrocarbon groups by radical copolymerization.86 These “host–guest” interactions formed non-covalent crosslinks between polymer chains to yield supramolecular hydrogels. When the gels were cut, the mutual molecular recognition of CDs and hydrocarbon groups on the cut surfaces could effectively recover the material strength. Upon rejoining the two pieces with freshly cut surfaces, the adhesive strength on the joint surface could reach 99% of the initial strength, indicating that the gels could realize complete recovery.86
In addition, inspired by mussel byssus threads in nature, which exhibit remarkable toughness and self-healing by histidine–metal complexes rather than the typical collagen cross-linking chemistry,87 self-healable polymers can be achieved through metal–ligand coordination. Bode et al. synthesized co-polymers of terpyridine methacrylate using the RAFT polymerization technique, which were then crosslinked by the addition of a cadmium(II) salt.88 The polymers showed good self-healability at a temperature of 70 °C, presumably due to the exchange of cadmium(II) salt to heal the material at this temperature.
Self-healable polymer nanocomposites. 
Apart from pristine polymer networks, nanofillers can be added to form polymer nanocomposites with improved self-healability and mechanical properties. Common nanofillers include carbon nanomaterials and metal nanoparticles. Huang et al. added few-layer graphene (FG) into the thermoplastic PU (TPU) through simple mechanical mixing.89 Owing to the outstanding mechanical property of FG, the FG–TPU nanocomposites showed enhanced tensile strength as compared to the virgin TPU sample. When subjected to infrared light, the nanocomposites could be healed repeatedly with an excellent healing efficiency (calculated as the ratio of the tensile strength of the healed and the virgin samples) as high as 99%. This self-healing performance was much better than the pure TPU sample due to the good infrared absorption capacity and excellent thermal conductivity of the FG fillers. Moreover, the increased electrical conductivity of the FG–TPU composites and the ability to absorb electromagnetic waves made them self-healable upon electrical and microwave stimuli.89
Metal nanoparticles have also been explored as nanofillers owing to their strong interactions with a self-healable polymer matrix. Based on Leibler's method using Empol as the precursor, Tee et al. mixed Ni microparticles (μNi) into a self-healable polymer.90 Compared to other nanofillers such as carbon black and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWNTs), the addition of μNi showed the highest enhancement in the mechanical and electrical properties. When two fractured surfaces were brought into contact, the conductivity of the nanocomposites returned to its initial value at a duration of merely 15 s. The healing efficiency, defined by the proportion of conductivity restored relative to the original conductivity, reached as high as 98% with repeated cutting/healing steps.90
In a recent study, Bandodkar et al. demonstrated the synthesis and application of permanent magnetic Nd2Fe14B microparticle (NMP)-loaded graphitic inks for printable self-healing devices.91 NMPs have several advantages for realizing conductive self-healing systems: they are inexpensive, widely available and electrically conductive. Carbon black (CB) was utilized as a filler component to incorporate favourable electrochemical properties, with polystyrene-block-polyisoprene-block-polystyrene (SIS) as the ink binder. By printing the ink in the presence of an external magnetic field, the NMPs could align themselves along the magnetic field. When the film was damaged, the broken pieces behaved as individual permanent magnets and immediately attached to each other for self-healing (Fig. 4f). A highly attractive feature of this system was that it could repair an extreme level of damage. As shown in Fig. 4g, macroscopic damage as wide as 3 mm could be recovered without any external trigger.91 This impressive self-healing ability was attributed to the strong magnetic properties of the NMPs uniformly dispersed within the ink. In addition, the fabrication of self-healable nanocomposites could be scalable using standard printing devices.
To transition from self-healable polymers to self-healable supercapacitors, ionically conductive electrolytes and electrically conductive electrodes are needed for device integration. For the ionically conductive electrolytes, inorganic salts or acids are often dissolved in water and mixed with self-healable polymers. Unfortunately, a high concentration of salts or acids may damage the polymer networks and degrade the self-healability and flexibility due to the salt-out effect. To increase the content of inorganic salts without sacrificing the intrinsic self-healability and mechanical properties of a self-healable polymeric network, Tao et al. reported a multifunctional hydrogel electrolyte comprising sodium alginate cross-linked by dynamic catechol–borate ester bonding.92 The self-healable polymer was sodium alginate grafted with dopamine (SA-g-DA), where the alginate network could tolerate a high content of KCl, leading to high ion conduction of the hydrogel electrolyte and excellent self-healing efficiency without an external stimulus.
Self-healable planar supercapacitors. 
The planar or film-shaped layout is the most common configuration in supercapacitors. To fabricate planar self-healable electrodes, two approaches are generally applied, either by coating conductive thin films on top of self-healable polymers or by embedding conductive active materials in self-healable polymers. Wang et al. demonstrated for the first time a mechanically and electrically self-healing supercapacitor by spraying functionalized single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) films on self-healing substrates, in which the SWCNT films served as both the active material and current collector, while a polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP)–H2SO4 gel served as the electrolyte and separator.93 The self-healing substrates were composed of a supramolecular network made by the modified Leibler's method using Empol and diethylenetriamine (DETA) as the oligomers,83 which was then mixed with TiO2 nanoflowers and reacted with urea to form the self-healing composite. A specific capacitance of 35 F g−1 was obtained at a current density of 1 A g−1. When damaged, the lateral movement of the self-healable composites brought the two layers into contact, enabling the restoration of the device configuration and electrical conductivity. The specific capacitance can be restored up to 85.7% of its original value after the 5th cutting.
Further improvement of the self-healing performance of planar supercapacitors can be achieved by choosing the appropriate combination of an electrolyte and crosslinking agent. Huang et al. utilized a new electrolyte comprising dual-crosslinked PAA by hydrogen bonding and vinyl hybrid silica nanoparticles (VSNPs), polymerized in the presence of ammonium persulfate as the initiator.23 Phosphoric acid served as the regulator of the water and ion content to provide ionic conductance in the polymer nanocomposites. The VSNP–PAA electrolyte showed a synergistic effect where VSNPs served as covalent crosslinking points and stress transfer centres to strengthen the network structure, while the PAA polymer chains provided sufficient intra- and inter-molecular hydrogen bonding for self-healing. The superior self-healing property is demonstrated in Fig. 5. A VSNP–PAA belt was bisected and the fresh cuts were brought into contact under mild pressure. After the breakage was successfully self-healed within tens of minutes in ambient conditions, the belt could be stretched extensively without breaking (Fig. 5a and b). In addition to the mechanical property, the ionic conductivity could also be restored after a couple of breaking/healing cycles (Fig. 5c). CNT papers electrodeposited with polypyrrole (PPy) were employed as the electrode to construct symmetric solid-state supercapacitors, with the VSNP–PAA belt as the electrolyte and separator. Fig. 5e–g illustrate the electrochemical performance of the device. It reached complete self-healability with a healing efficiency of ∼100% even after 20 cycles of breaking/healing and was still able to light up an LED bulb (Fig. 5h).23
 Fig. 5  (a) Demonstration of the self-healing process of VSNP–PAA. (b) Demonstration of the self-healed VSNP–PAA (3.4 mm thick and 1.8 cm wide) to completely support a ca. 500 g mass, which equates to 80 kPa stress: pristine sample (left of panel) and healed sample after the third breaking/healing cycle (right of panel). Red rectangles indicate the wound/healing positions. (c) Ionic conductivity of VSNP–PAA after multiple breaking/healing cycles. (Error bars are based on maximum and minimum values in five measurements.) (d) Schematic of self-healing arising from interfacial hydrogen bonding. (e) CV curves at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (f) GCD curves at a charging/discharging current of 1 mA. (g) Healing efficiency calculated from CV (circle, red) and GCD (star, blue) curves. (h) A photo of three supercapacitors connected in series, one of which has self-healed twice to power an LED bulb after self-healing. (Insets show enlarged profiles of the twice self-healed supercapacitor and the lit LED bulb.) Reprinted with permission from ref. 23. 
To improve the specific capacitance of self-healable planar supercapacitors, Li et al. reported another polymer nanocomposite composed of poly(2-acrylamido-2-methylpropane sulfonic acid-co-N,N-dimethylacrylamide) (poly(AMPS-co-DMAAm) and nanofillers of synthetic clay (LAPONITE®) and graphene oxide (GO).94 GO provided excellent mechanical and electrical properties to the polymer networks, while the abundant functional groups in LAPONITE® and GO facilitated the cross-linking reactions with the functional groups in the polymer chains, enabling outstanding self-healing performance and excellent ionic conductivity. The electrochemical performance of the polymer electrolyte-based supercapacitors with CNT electrodes showed a more than two-fold increase in specific capacitance compared with that of the supercapacitor based on the traditional PVA/LiCl gel electrolyte. In addition, the specific capacitance can be further improved from 9 mF cm−2 based on CNT electrodes to 180 mF cm−2 for CNT/polyaniline (PANI) composite electrodes. In a similar way, Liang et al. fabricated a carbon nanotube@graphene@PANI nanowire film as the electrode.95 The assembled supercapacitor possessed a high energy density from 36.3 to 29.4 μW h cm−2 and power density changing from 0.17 to 5 mW cm−2 at a current of 0.1 to 3 mA, with the highest specific capacitance reaching 261.5 mF cm−2. The device could retain 80.2% of the initial capacitance after the 10th healing. This novel design integrating all stretchable and healable components thus provided a pathway toward the next generation of wearable energy devices in modern electronics.
Self-healable fibre-shaped supercapacitors. 
The sandwich-like laminated structure of planar supercapacitors is prone to deformation, displacement and delamination. Fibrous materials, on the other hand, play a critical role in our life and have been widely used as structural materials for supercapacitors with many advantages of being woven into lightweight, highly flexible, soft, and low-cost textiles. A fibre-shaped supercapacitor has been demonstrated by twisting two aligned self-healable wires as electrodes with a PVA–H2SO4 gel electrolyte that also served as the separator.96 The self-healable conducting wires were made by wrapping CNTs and Ag NWs around a self-healable polymer, which was synthesized by a procedure derived from Leibler's method.83 A specific capacitance of 11.1 F g−1 was obtained with the aligned fibre electrodes, which was maintained at approximately 82.6% after the 5th healing cycle. Furthermore, polyaniline (PANI) was incorporated into the aligned CNTs through electropolymerization to enhance the specific capacitance to 140 F g−1.
In addition to the twisted configuration, electrodes could also be constructed in a spring geometry to better exploit both stretchability and self-healability of the assembled devices. An example is shown by PPy-decorated RGO/MWCNT springs embedded in the PVA–H3PO4 gel electrolyte.81 The fibre springs had an average diameter of 295 μm, which was thick enough to reconnect accurately by visual inspection. The device was then wrapped with the carboxylated PU to achieve self-healability. The volumetric capacitance reached 25.9 F cm−3 at a scan rate of 0.01 V s−1. The supercapacitor had 82.4% capacitance retention after a large stretch (100%), and 54.2% capacitance retention after the 3rd healing. Even after 3000 charge/discharge cycles, the device retained 84% capacitance after the 3rd healing.
A challenge in self-healable fibre-shaped supercapacitors is that it is often difficult to reconnect each of the tiny (<20 μm diameter) broken fibers accurately by visual inspection. To solve this, Huang et al. used magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles around a self-healing carboxylated PU shell to ensure the reconnection of broken electrodes.97 PU provided mechanical self-healing due to the existence of a large amount of hydrogen bond acceptors and donors in the supramolecular network, while the broken magnetic electrodes were electrically reconnected and aligned with the assistance of magnetic Fe3O4 nanoparticles (Fig. 6a and b). With such a configuration, supercapacitors fabricated with PPy as the active material and H3PO4/PVA as the electrolyte showed a high specific capacitance of 61.4 mF cm−2, showing a recovery of the specific capacitance up to 71.8% after four breaking/healing cycles. This approach may thus pave an efficient way to make stretchable, self-healing, and robust electronic devices with an extremely long lifespan.
 Fig. 6  (a) Design and manufacturing process flow of the magnetic-assisted self-healable supercapacitor. Fe3O4 nanoparticles anchor on the surface of the yarn by a microwave-assisted hydrothermal method. The processed yarn is annealed to ensure the magnetic particles anchor on the yarn tightly. To achieve a better electrochemical performance, a layer of PPy is electrodeposited on the annealed yarn. Finally, two yarns as a set of electrodes are assembled with a solid electrolyte and a self-healing shell to form a self-healing supercapacitor. (b) Schematic illustration of the supercapacitor's self-healing process. The magnetic alignment could assist the reconnection of the fibers in the broken yarn electrodes when they are brought together, as shown in the inset image. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. (c) The two single AFS units connected in series to light a green light-emitting-diode. (d and e) Cutting and self-healing of the series circuit. (f–h) SEM images of the cutting and self-healing process. (i) CV curves of the AFS under a 50 cycle process. (j) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the AFS under a 50 cycle process. (k) Cycling performance of the AFS at a current density of 50 mA cm−2 for 50 self-healing cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. 
PVA-based self-healable supercapacitors. 
Poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA)-based electrolytes are the most used gel electrolytes in solid-state supercapacitors, which unfortunately have poor self-healability. Given the popularity of PVA-based electrolytes, there has also been effort to make PVA self-healable. Both physical and chemical functionalisation approaches were demonstrated to be effective in increasing the hydrogen bonding in PVA, thereby endowing limited self-healability to the polymer electrolyte. In a physical process, a freezing/thawing method was employed to create a PVA–H2SO4 hydrogel film with enormous hydrogen bonds.98 An all-in-one configured supercapacitor was prepared from in situ polymerization of SWCNTs and PANI as the nanocomposite electrode. The assembled device exhibited a specific capacitance of 15.8 mF cm−2 at a current density 0.044 mA cm−2, showing reliable self-healing capability with nearly 80% capacitance retention after the 5th self-healing cycle.
Apart from physical crosslinking, chemical functionalisation of PVA molecules has also been exploited for self-healable PVA. Han et al. added CNT/CNF in PVA–borax (PVAB) complexes to fabricate self-healable PVA-based nanocomposites, where borax could introduce dynamic borate–diol ester bonds between the PVA chains and CNFs, leading to a reversibly crosslinked supramolecular structure within the hydrogel.99 An all-in-one supercapacitor was made by sandwiching one piece of CNF/PVAB hydrogel between two pieces of CNT–CNF/PVAB composite electrodes. The device obtained a specific capacitance of 117.1 F g−1 with a capacitance retention of 96.4% after 1000 cycles. As the complexation between borax and –OH groups of PVA or CNFs was fast (∼20 s), excellent self-healability was observed with up to 98.2% of the initial capacitance value restored even after the 10th healing. Another example of chemical functionalisation on a PVA hydrogel was shown by grafting with glycidyl-trimethylammonium chloride (PVA-g-GTMAC).100 After adding KCl, a transparent PVA-g-GTMAC/KCl solid electrolyte could be prepared. With asymmetric PPy‖Ni3S2 electrodes in a co-axial fibre configuration, the device exhibited a wide potential window of 1.8 V with an extremely high areal capacitance of 5.2 F cm−2. Fig. 6c–h show photos and SEM images of the original, cut and self-healed status of the asymmetric fibre device, where a green LED was lit up by the self-healed supercapacitor. Fig. 6i–k illustrate the electrochemical performance variations before and after the self-healing process. The device could spontaneously repair and maintain the initial capacitance after 50 breaking/healing cycles.
Finally, polymers with abundant hydrogen bonds such as PAA can also be grafted onto the PVA backbone to improve the self-healability. In the presence of KCl and borax, PVA grafted with PAA (PVA-g-PAA/KCl) exhibited not only good flexibility but also high ionic conductivity up to 41 mS cm−1.101 When a supercapacitor was assembled using the PVA-g-PAA/KCl hydrogel and activated carbon electrodes, the self-healed device exhibited a typical capacitive behavior of rectangular CV curves and triangular GCD profiles, giving a specific capacitance of 84.8 F g−1. The supercapacitor was able to heal itself for at least 10 cycles without significant deterioration in performance. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS) displayed similar curves before and after self-healing, suggesting that the healed device restored most conduction paths. Owing to this excellent self-healing ability, the supercapacitor was able to repeatedly light an LED after multiple cuts.
Applications. 
On a macroscopic scale, self-healable supercapacitors tend to be applied in conjunction with other favourable features such as stretchable and foldable functions to provide better user experience and life span. This can be achieved by implementing a self-healable substrate and electrolyte.93,102,103 Self-healable supercapacitors find their applications mainly in scenarios where physical deformation such as cutting, bending, stretching, squeezing and abrasion could occur frequently, for instance, electronic skins, wearable electronic devices, flexible mobile phones, and retractable displays.104 The ‘self-healing’ ability enables as-designed supercapacitors to undergo repeated deformation without significant performance loss by mechanically recovering from damage and keeping the physical shape intact. The concept of self-healable supercapacitors can also be applied from a microscopic view, where the microstructure of electrodes can be recovered electrically from cracks caused from reversible insertion and extraction of ions, resulting in an improved cycle life and stability.105,106 In this case, the ‘self-healing’ concept can be widely applied in a range of applications even in traditional rigid supercapacitors or other electronics rather than being confined to wearable or flexible electronics. It should be noted that the restoration of all self-healing supercapacitors is performed in a non-working state since the charging and discharging require a complete and undamaged circuit. To maintain normal operation of supercapacitors during self-healing, a potential solution is to connect multiple self-healing supercapacitors in parallel such that the device can be operated normally during self-healing when at least one of the circuits is undamaged.


3.1.3 Stretchable supercapacitors. 
Stretchable supercapacitors are designed to be operated in conjunction with other flexible or stretchable electronic devices. There are predominately two approaches to integrate stretchability into supercapacitors: (i) building up supercapacitors with stretchable materials and (ii) applying geometric engineering to non-stretchable materials. The design and performance of stretchable supercapacitors rely on the stretchable materials and/or geometric engineering of the devices, as discussed below.
Stretchable materials. 
Producing materials that are stretchable for electrodes of supercapacitors is the most straightforward way to prepare stretchable supercapacitors. Stretchable electrodes can be made by either blending electrode materials with stretchable materials or depositing electrode materials onto stretchable substrates.107 For instance, stretchable electrodes can be prepared via blending soft water soluble polymers (e.g., PEG, PEO and PVA) with conducting polymers.108 After blending, the non-stretchable PEDOT:PSS can be stretched to a maximum level of 150% while maintaining a high electrical conductivity of 172 S cm−1. Although this method is facile and straightforward, the electrochemical performance of the resulting mixture electrodes tended to be degraded after blending, since most stretchable additives are insulating and do not contribute to charge storage. To this end, depositing electrode materials onto stretchable substrates is more desirable as the insulating substrate does not severely affect the electrochemical performance of the electrodes. Yan et al. deposited silver nanowires and tungsten oxide onto the stretchable polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) substrate and obtained mechanically-robust electrodes, which could be twisted, folded, and crumpled without performance failure.109 Aside from the electrodes, stretchable electrolytes can also be integrated into devices for improved stretchability. Wang et al. synthesized a highly elastic hydrogel electrolyte by constructing a double network comprised of two elastic polymers, agar and polyacrylamide (HPAAm).110 The stretchable electrolyte allowed the supercapacitor to exhibit no deformation after 1000 stretching cycles and facilitated strong adhesion between the electrodes and electrolyte.
Geometric engineering. 
Geometric engineering refers to the creation and modification of the device configuration such that the overall device exhibits stretchability even though the individual material is not intrinsically stretchable. In this context, wrapping or attaching non-stretchable electrodes onto stretchable substrates is effective and has been prevalently employed in many fibre-shaped stretchable supercapacitors.111,112 The major benefit of this strategy is the separation between the energy storage function and stretchability, where the morphology of the electrodes will not be affected when the underlying elastomer is being stretched. For instance, Peng and co-workers demonstrated a fibre-shaped supercapacitor that could be stretched up to 400% in length.113 The fibre-shaped PEDOT–PSS electrodes were synthesized via wet spinning, followed by wrapping of the as-synthesized electrodes onto an elastic wire. Little physical deformation was observed when the wire was stretched, which enabled the supercapacitor to maintain its original performance even under large strain. For two-dimensional planar supercapacitors (e.g., microsupercapacitors), the electrodes are often arranged as either origami- or kirigami-inspired patterns, which originated from the Japanese paper-cutting craftwork.114,115 These design patterns allow the electrodes to be converted from a ‘folded’ state into an ‘expanded’ state that provides extra length when the device is being stretched.116 As a result, the level of physical deformation of the electrodes will be reduced compared with that of non-patterned electrodes and less performance loss is expected when being stretched. For example, Kim et al. applied the origami design strategy to an RGO/CNT electrode such that the non-stretchable electrodes possessed a high capacitance retention ratio (88%) under a biaxial strain of 100%.117 Moreover, fractals and space filling curves, which include iteratively formed lines, loops and branches, have been recognised as a popular in-plane design for stretchable supercapacitors.118 Electrodes can be arranged as various fractal patterns and space filling curves by 3D printing, laser scribing, lithography and mask evaporation.119–121 Fan et al. investigated the relationship between the order of fractal patterns and their corresponding elastic-to-plastic deformation strain levels, revealing that the strains in the x-axis direction of the second- and third-order fractal patterns were 20% and 32%, respectively.122 These results indicated that the stretchability of the electrode could be tuned by manipulating parameters of the fractal pattern. Another derivative of a fractal pattern is the island–bridge structure, where the electroactive materials are scattered into small pieces (i.e., islands) and connected by fractal patterned metal wires (i.e., bridges).123,124 The resulting device could provide a high biaxial stretchability up to a 300% strain level while experiencing little performance loss.
Constructing a wavy structure to prevent the electrode from being damaged during stretching could also be effective to enhance the stretchability.125,126 An issue related to direct electrode deposition onto elastomers is the potential occurrence of microcracking generated after repeated stretching. The cracking may create gaps over the electrode surface and lower the conductivity. To reduce the cracking, the underlying elastomers are typically kept in a pre-stretched state during deposition. The elastomer is released after deposition and the conducting coating can be formed with wavy patterns, which provide extra tolerance during stretching and reduce the occurrence of microcracking.125,126
Applications. 
Stretchable supercapacitors could find their applications in wearable electronic devices. They are employed in conjunction with other wearable components such as stretchable strain sensors,127 organic light-emitting diode displays,128 and energy harvesters,129 to construct a self-sustaining wearable system. Compared with non-stretchable counterparts, integrating stretchable supercapacitors offers better comfort for wearable electronics and more stable performance during physical deformation such as squeezing, bending, and stretching.

3.2 Supercapacitors with biocompatibility and other surface/interfacial functions

3.2.1 Biocompatible supercapacitors. 
Biocompatible supercapacitors hold great promise for implantable medical devices as they can provide high power density, long cycle life, and fast charge–discharge rates in the physiological environment, while avoiding the electronic hazard risk and chemical reactions associated with batteries. Supercapacitors with direct exposure to the human body can be referred to as in vivo supercapacitors, where body fluids serve as electrolytes as they naturally contain various ions (e.g., Na+, K+, Ca2+, Cl− and HCO3−). As illustrated in Fig. 7a, a biocompatible implantable supercapacitor could use body fluid as an unpacked electrolyte, in conjunction with a skin-attached solar film to convert solar energy into electricity.130 An asymmetric electrode configuration was chosen to widen the low potential window (i.e., 1.23 V) originating from the electrolysis of water, with MnO2/MWCNT and phosphorated activated carbon (pAC) as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively. The active materials were attached onto flexible and biocompatible Ta foil current collectors to form electrodes, and the resultant device can be attached onto a Teflon film to eliminate potential free movement within the human body. The electrodes implanted into the subcutaneous layer of a rat operated successfully by producing a reliable charge/discharge curve and retaining 99% of the initial pseudocapacitance over 1000 cycles at a constant current of 10 mA (Fig. 7b–d). The MnO2 nanoparticles immobilized onto the surface of MWCNTs resulted in only 0.1 ppm of Mn2+ during the supercapacitor operation. In vitro tests revealed a low level of cytotoxicity, suggesting potential applications in the human body environment. While this strategy was relatively straightforward and took full advantage of body fluid as an electrolyte, which significantly simplified the design of supercapacitors, the direct exposure of active electrode materials (e.g., Mn ions) to body fluids may pose a threat to human health over a long period of time, despite the continuous improvement made in lowering the cytotoxicity.
 Fig. 7  Implementation of IEMDs in the body. (a) Schematic of the components forming the device. Biocompatible electrodes are wrapped in a cellulose separation film. (b) Photograph of biocompatible electrode implantation (energy storage device) implanted in a mammal and a solar cell (energy harvesting device). (c) Potential of the supercapacitor during solar charging and discharging at a constant current of 2 mA. (d) Cycling tests. A constant current of 10 mA was applied during each cycle. The potential range for all the data in this figure was 0.2–1.0 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130. 
Compared to direct exposure to body fluid, integrating electrodes or electrolytes with biocompatible materials represents a less aggressive approach to achieve biocompatibility. Numerous biopolymers have been considered as potential candidates for energy storage devices owing to their abundancy in nature and the ease of modification of the molecular structure.131 Moreover, biomacromolecules such as proteins, cytochromes and enzymes have also been used in biocompatible devices. Among them, DNA-based biomaterials deserve a special mention because of their excellent biocompatibility, porous structure and programmable base length.132,133 A DNA hydrogel (Dgel) based biocompatible supercapacitor was made by the electrostatic deposition of CNTs and PANI onto a DNA hydrogel template with a highly porous microstructure.133 More importantly, the surrounding DNA hydrogel endowed the device with excellent biocompatibility without any extra sealing process. According to the cytotoxicity test, mouse embryonic fibroblast cells (NIH3T3 cells) and human dermal fibroblast cells (HDF cells) remained intact after 1000 charge/discharge cycles. The device also showed reasonable specific capacitance at 61.9 and 66.7 F g−1 in NIH3T3 and HDF cell media, respectively, suggesting the potential of operating in living organisms or the body fluid environment. However, the DNA template is not chemically stable such that significant performance decay was observed when the device was exposed to an acidic environment. This vulnerability has thus hindered its further applications in some acidic body fluid scenarios.
Biocompatible supercapacitors using fibres as the electrodes can eliminate several common concerns like bulky size and rigidity seen in the planar configuration, so that they can be easily implanted in subtle and delicate body environments (e.g., blood vessels). As shown in Fig. 8a, a fibre-shaped biocompatible supercapacitor was developed with poly(3,4-ethylenedioxythiophene):poly(styrene sulfonate) (PEDOT:PSS) with ferritin and multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) as the active material, which was then inserted in the abdominal cavity of a mouse.134 The CV curves of the fibre supercapacitor showed little difference in the mouse and the PBS solution (Fig. 8b). Excellent biocompatibility was also demonstrated by maintaining more than 90% of the original capacitance after 8 days of operation (Fig. 8c). In addition, the amount of energy stored in the fibre supercapacitor can be scaled up by increasing the fibre length, as demonstrated by the CV curves in Fig. 8d. Given that most biocompatible materials are not intrinsically conductive, this synergistic strategy can be further generalized and applied in other biocompatible materials for enhanced performance in supercapacitors.
 Fig. 8  Implantation of a PFM fiber supercapacitor into a mouse. (a) Photographs of the two-ply PFM fiber supercapacitor implanted into the abdominal cavity. Abdominal tissue was stitched up with a PFM fiber. (b) The CV curves of the PFM fiber supercapacitor in the mouse and in the PBS solution. (c) The capacitance retention of the PFM fiber supercapacitor showing 90% capacitance retention eight days after implantation. The error bars represent the maximum and minimum capacitance retention obtained from five independent cases. The inset compares CV curves on the day of implantation and eight days after implantation. (d) The CV curves of 0.5 cm-long (red) and 2 cm-long (black) PFM fiber supercapacitors in the mouse. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134. 
Another method to improve the biocompatibility of electrode materials is by converting hydrophobic electrodes into hydrophilic. Taking CNTs as an example, they have been extensively used in energy storage devices owing to their excellent mechanical and electronic properties.135,136 Moreover, aligned CNTs have recently been shown as good scaffolds for mammalian cell culture.137,138 Nevertheless, the application of CNTs in biocompatible energy storage is unsatisfactory because of their low hydrophilicity and wettability, limiting the interaction between CNTs and cells. A strategy was thus developed to improve the hydrophilicity and biocompatibility of continuous CNT fibres using oxygen microwave plasma treatment.139 The oxygen-containing groups grafted on CNT fibres enabled biological application in various physiological environments such as phosphate buffered saline (PBS), serum and blood. It was found that the hydrophilicity was closely related to the number of oxygen-containing functional groups. Significantly increased cell numbers and cell proliferation rate were observed on the NIH-3T3 fibroblast cells cultured on hydrophilic CNT sheets as compared to the untreated hydrophobic sheets. Fluorescence images were further obtained to compare the biocompatibility between hydrophobic and hydrophilic CNTs, which showed that the NIH3T3 cells were almost 100% alive on hydrophilic CNTs after 24 h culture time, while dead cells can be found on hydrophobic CNTs.
Applications. 
Conventional supercapacitors require delicate encapsulation, leading to extra processes, bulky dimensions, and complexity. Biocompatible supercapacitors are designed to be used in scenarios where they will be in direct contact with the human body without causing toxicity or symptoms.140 For example, biocompatible supercapacitors can be applied as the power supply of a wide range of implantable electronic medical devices (IEMDs) including cardiac pacemakers,141 sensors,142 retinal implants,143 smart contact lenses,144 actuators,145 stimulators,146 cardiac pacemakers and other IEMDs.147 These implantable devices require the replacement of integrated batteries approximately every 5 to 10 years and biocompatible supercapacitors can work with other biocompatible energy harvesters like triboelectric nanogenerators (TENGs) as a self-powered energy storage system. Consequently, implantable devices can be powered by a self-powered system without extra battery replacement.


3.2.2 Waterproof supercapacitors. 
Waterproof supercapacitors are designed to be operated under harsh environments where potential intrusion caused by water impregnation could be a major concern. They possess the same configuration as conventional supercapacitors, with extra attention paid to isolate the device from water. Encapsulation is the most straightforward way to achieve waterproofing.148 It is easy to operate and can be replicated on a variety of substrates. To encapsulate, the assembled supercapacitor is placed in a mould and polymer precursors are either poured or injected into the mould, followed by the addition of corresponding hardeners or curing agents to initiate the polymerization. Alternatively, encapsulation can be achieved by inserting supercapacitors into sealable polymer enclosures.
A variety of polymers have been used as the encapsulation material. For example, Guo et al. reported a waterproof supercapacitor encapsulated by Ecoflex (i.e., a type of low viscosity and highly stretchable rubber) for waterproofing and stretchability.53 This waterproof supercapacitor was fabricated by firstly coating the electrodes with a gel electrolyte and placing them into a tube container. Then, Ecoflex was injected using a syringe into the tube to fill the interspace. The Ecoflex encapsulation isolated the inner supercapacitors from the ambient environment by blocking diffusion or ingress of water molecules. In this way the device can remain operational in water and other liquids. The resulting supercapacitor exhibited outstanding waterproof ability with little performance decay.53 More than 95% of its initial electrochemical performance was retained after 10000 charge/discharge cycles, indicating favourable long-term stability. Additionally, the high stretchability of Ecoflex could endow devices with outstanding flexibility against physical deformation such as bending and twisting.149 Kim and co-workers also fabricated a waterproof micro-supercapacitor by embedding it into an Ecoflex layer, which functioned well under both bending and twisting in water.150 The device was able to maintain almost 100% of its initial capacitance after being immersed into water for 1 day and retain 82% of its full capacitance after 4 days. These results suggest that the encapsulation by Ecoflex has successfully rendered the supercapacitor with an excellent waterproof function, which could be attractive in wearable electronics.
Apart from encapsulation, surface treatment may also render waterproof ability by coating hydrophobic layers directly onto supercapacitors. Hydrophobic coatings generally refer to materials with a low surface energy and large water contact angle (e.g., polymers that possess long perfluorinated side chains).151 These materials can be coated by various deposition techniques such as chemical vapour deposition (CVD), dip coating, spin coating and spray coating, showing superior versatility under different scenarios.152,153 As an example, a very thin (∼800 nm thickness) and conformal parylene layer was deposited via CVD onto carbon fabric-based supercapacitors.55 The electrochemical tests indicated that the parylene-coated supercapacitor had much better waterproof ability than the uncoated supercapacitor after being dipped in water.
A major advantage of surface treatment is its simplicity and versatility, where the coating can be applied onto various surfaces including flat, curved and fibrous substances. Choi and co-workers developed a highly conductive, self-cleaning and waterproof coating on commercial Kevlar fibres and convert them into waterproof electrodes.154 In the process, commercial fibres were firstly treated by a conductive coating layer of Ag nanoparticle–poly(styrene-block-butadiene-block-styrene). Afterwards, the fibre was treated by a self-assembled monolayer agent, providing the underlying fibre with waterproof and self-cleaning functions. No significant interference between the conductive and hydrophobic layers was observed. It is worth noting that the hydrophobic coating also enabled the coated device to operate under different pH conditions, which further expanded its application scope.
Further enhancement in waterproof ability is expected by combining both encapsulation and hydrophobic surface treatment. Yang et al. fabricated Ni-coated cotton fabrics by alternatively depositing multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and reduced graphene oxide (RGO) through vacuum filtration.155 Owing to the high mass loading of the active materials (up to 23.7 mg cm−2), an ultrahigh areal capacitance of 6.2 F cm−2 was achieved at a high current density of 20 mA cm−2, exceeding the highest areal capacitance of EDLC electrodes ever reported. Cotton-based flexible supercapacitors with a PVA/LiCl polymer gel electrolyte were encapsulated with hydrophobic polyester via hot sealing, followed the spraying of a water repelling agent PTFE, as schematically shown in Fig. 9a. For the waterproof test, the electrochemical performance was obtained while the entire device was immersed in water. A remarkable capacitance retention of 90.3% was observed after the device continuously operated underwater for 1000 cycles (Fig. 9b), equivalent to a time duration of ∼10 h, which was much harsher than a typical wearing environment such as sweating and raining. Furthermore, the all-solid-state device could be readily sewed into garments such as a lab coat, as shown in Fig. 9c. Three individual supercapacitors have been connected in series to produce a working voltage of 2.4 V to power one commercial LED sewed in a lab coat.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication, encapsulation, and integration of all-solid-state fabric-type SCs. (b) Capacitance retention test of the SC fabric underwater, showing excellent waterproof ability. The inset shows the SC device that is fully immersed in the water. (c) Digital image showing the one SC fabric device that was sown into a lab coat for powering an LED. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155. 
Applications. 
Waterproof supercapacitors have been applied in a wide range of applications including healthcare, entertainment, marine, and offshore industries, among others. An ingress protection rating (stated as IPXY) is usually used to indicate the waterproofing capability, where X and Y represent the levels of protection from foreign body and particulate ingress and protection from moisture ingress, respectively. Waterproof functionality can be mainly achieved via packaging or coating techniques. By coating or thermally evaporating waterproof materials onto supercapacitors, they can be integrated into devices without additional packaging.156 However, the coating may fail to prevent the ingress of water molecules when the device is immersed under high pressure or moisture. On the contrary, encapsulating supercapacitors with waterproof packaging materials can provide better water resistance at the expense of extra size and device complexity.

3.3 Supercapacitors with temperature-dependent functions

3.3.1 Thermoresponsive supercapacitors. 
Development of smart energy storage devices which can self-adapt and take actions in response to external stimuli such as high temperature is a promising strategy to expand the service life of future electronics, as well as to improve their operational stability and safety. Thermoresponsive devices can potentially prevent the risk of thermal runaway by cutting off electrical conduction at elevated temperatures, thus being highly desirable in energy storage devices. One strategy for the design and fabrication of thermoresponsive devices is to control the electron transfer rate at high temperatures. Recently, fast and reversible thermoresponsive battery electrodes with self-adjustment of the electrical conductivity to temperature were fabricated by incorporating thermoresponsive materials in electrodes.157 These thermoresponsive materials were composed of conductive graphene-coated spiky nanostructured nickel particles as the conductive filler and polyethylene (PE) with a large thermal expansion coefficient as the matrix. Due to the nanospikes on the particle surface, the thermoresponsive electrode displayed a high electrical conductivity of 50 S cm−1 at room temperature. However, upon increasing the temperature, the expansion of the PE volume increased the distance between the nickel particles, leading to a reduction in the electrical conductivity. The electrode conductivity decreased by seven to eight orders of magnitude in less than 1 s when the temperature was increased to 80 °C.
Other thermoresponsive polymeric materials were also developed to achieve the self-adjustment of electrodes in response to temperature. Dou et al. designed a pseudocapacitor that displayed temperature-triggered on–off ion channels for controlling the electrochemical behavior.36 Specifically, the electrode was fabricated by loading a thermosensitive polymer P(NIPAM-co-SPMA) onto the surface of NiAl-layered double hydroxide (LDH) nanowalls grown on a flexible Ni foil substrate (Fig. 10a). P(NIPAM-co-SPMA) served as an ion channel on the surface of the LDH, facilitating/inhibiting the ion diffusion in the on–off state arising from its configuration change at various temperatures. The results obtained using EIS in the temperature range of 20–40 °C indicated an increased resistance of the supercapacitor at high temperatures (Fig. 10b). As such, the specific capacitance decreased from ∼518 to ∼38 F g−1 as the temperature rose from 20 °C to 40 °C (Fig. 10c). It should be noted that this promising approach can be used for different electrodes and other components of supercapacitors, e.g., separators.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the LDH@P(NIPAM-co-SPMA) film on a flexible Ni foil substrate serving as a smart supercapacitor with thermally-responsive ion channels. Temperature-dependent (b) EIS and (c) specific capacitance in the range 20–40 °C of the LDH@P(NIPAM-co-SPMA) electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36. 
In addition to electrodes, another effective strategy to fabricate thermoresponsive supercapacitors is to use thermoresponsive gel electrolytes to inhibit ion diffusion at high temperatures. Compared to liquid electrolytes, gel electrolytes suffer from low conductivity and provide low charge and discharge rates, which can suppress the origin of thermal runaway. Thus, thermoresponsive electrolytes with a reversible sol–gel transition were developed to control the ion diffusion rates under different temperatures. Yang et al. designed such an electrolyte using a copolymer, i.e., a mixed solution of LiOH and poly(N-isopropylacrylamide-co-acrylamide) (LiOH–PNIPAM/AM).35 As shown in Fig. 11a, the as-synthesized PNIPAM/AM solution transformed into hydrogels upon heating, and thus inhibited the migration of Li+ ions. This transition is reversed by cooling, leading to free Li+ ion migration at room temperature. As such, the self-adjustment of ion mobility to temperature is achieved. When a coin-type cell (CR 2032) with carbon nanotube films as the electrodes was fabricated, it was observed that the diffusion coefficient of Li+ ions (DLi) of such a supercapacitor decreased from 1.9 × 10−13 m2 s−1 at 20 °C to 7.6 × 10−14 m2 s−1 at 70 °C with an inflection point at around 47 °C. As a consequence, the specific capacitance decreased from 52.5 to 34.0 F g−1, presenting good reversibility during the cycles of the sol–gel–sol transition (Fig. 11b). This supercapacitor was also tested in a real circuit to supply power for a light-emitting diode (LED). On increasing the ambient temperature to 60 °C, the intensity of the LED light decreased from 1.39 to 0.41 mW as shown in Fig. 11c, indicating the efficient self-protection of the supercapacitor.
 Fig. 11  Illustration of the sol–gel transition of the electrolyte that slows the migration of conductive ions between the electrodes. Upon increasing the temperature, the electrolyte solution transforms to hydrogels through hydrophobic association. (b) The reversible specific capacitance behavior of the thermoresponsive supercapacitor with a sol–gel transition. (c) The demonstration of thermal self-protection of the supercapacitor through a sol–gel transition: the intensity of the LED light decreased from 1.39 to 0.41 mW on heating the supercapacitor to 60 °C, and the circuit diagram of the demonstration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35. 
Another type of thermoresponsive electrolyte with a reversible sol–gel transition was designed based on a Pluronic co-polymer, i.e., poly(ethylene oxide)-block-poly(propylene oxide)-block-poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO–PPO–PEO).37 Similarly, when the temperature exceeded the inflection point, the Pluronic electrolyte transformed into a gel state, inhibiting the diffusion of H+ or Li+ ions and eventually shutting down the energy storage behavior of a supercapacitor. It is worth noting that the degree of charge storage capacity loss at high temperature can be controlled from ∼50% to ∼100% by using Pluronic with different molecular weights. This sol–gel transition appeared to be a cost-effective approach for developing a range of thermoresponsive polymer electrolytes,38,39 showing great promise for real applications.


3.3.2 Extreme temperatures. 
Similar to thermoresponsive supercapacitors, supercapacitors that can operate without obvious performance decay or component damage at extreme temperatures have been a major research direction. The temperature in extremely cold weather or a special environment could be as low as −30 °C or even colder. Commercial EDLCs using TEABF4 in AN or PC electrolytes with AC electrodes have reached an operating temperature window of −40 to 100 °C.158 For lower temperatures, the performance of EDLCs is severely affected by poor ion diffusion. Therefore, electrolytes with lower freezing points can greatly alleviate this problem. The main routes are adding ultra-low freezing point co-solvents in organic or aqueous electrolytes, using ILs mixed with organic solvents or their eutectoid, or increasing the salt concentration appropriately in aqueous solution. Furthermore, electrodes with short ion diffusion distances can facilitate low temperature EDLC behaviour.
To maintain the fluidic state of organic electrolytes, co-solvents with ultra-low freezing points, relatively low viscosity, and medium dielectric constants (such as long chain glymes, carbonates, esters and nitriles and so on) have been added. This route can dilute organic solvents and the salts, slowing down their solidification trends. As shown in the CV curves of an AC‖AC supercapacitor, the best capacitive behavior was obtained at −60 °C with the electrolyte of 0.5 M spiro-(1,1′)-bipyrolidinium tetrafluoroorate (SBPBF4) in AN mixed with 20% dibutyl carbonate (DBC; a low melting point solvent).159 The device also exhibited a stable specific capacitance of 95 F g−1 at a current density of 2.5 A g−1 after 1000 cycles.
ILs have attracted much attention as electrolytes for a wide temperature window because they have negligible vapor pressure, a high flame point, a high potential window, and good chemical stability. However, pure ILs are not suitable for extremely low temperatures due to their melting point at about −10 to 0 °C. A mixture of ILs with ultra-low melting point organic solvents can mitigate this problem through proper ion–solvent interactions. For example, Tian et al. used green environmental γ-butyrolactone (GBL) instead of AN or PC to dissolve EMIMBF4, which has a high ionic conductivity among ILs and large operation potential (>4 V).160 This binary electrolyte displayed a further improved ionic conductivity (26 and 0.31 mS cm−1 at 20 and −70 °C, respectively) compared with pure EMIMBF4. After being assembled with graphene nanofiber (GNF)-based electrodes, a specific capacitance of 131 F g−1, an energy density of 61 W h kg−1 and a potential window of 3.7 V were obtained at −70 °C.
Eutectic IL mixtures could also be highly promising for maintaining a wide temperature range as the increased disorder and asymmetry among the cations in eutectic IL mixtures hinder lattice formation and lower the melting point, while still maintaining good miscibility and conductivity. Lin et al. used a 1:1 eutectic mixture of N-methyl-N-propylpiperidinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (PIP13FSI) and N-butyl-N-methylpyrrolidinium bis(fluorosulfonyl)imide (PYR14FSI) as the electrolyte.161 The corresponding supercapacitor consisting of carbon nanotube (CNT) or onion-like carbon (OLC) electrodes can operate from −50 to 100 °C over a wide voltage window. Adradila and co-workers applied a eutectic ionic liquid mixture of EMIMTFSI and 1-propyl-3-methylpyrrolidinium bis(trifluoromethylsulfonyl) imide (PMPyrrTFSI), achieving an areal specific capacitance of 5 μF cm−2 at −70 °C and 100 μF cm−2 at 80 °C with a wide electrochemical potential window of 3.5 V.162
For aqueous electrolytes, a similar strategy was adopted to lower the freezing points of aqueous electrolytes by mixing with anti-freeze agents (e.g., methanol, formamide, or ethylene glycol). Beguin et al. dissolved Li2SO4 in a water/methanol mixture (7:3 in volume ratio) for AC‖AC supercapacitors.163 It showed a good capacitive behaviour, a higher potential window of 1.6 V than the common aqueous solutions, and a specific capacitance of ∼70 F g−1 at temperatures down to −40 °C. However, the addition of anti-freeze often reduces the salt solubility and ionic conductivity in aqueous electrolytes. Increasing the salt concentration thus represents an appropriate way to constrict the melting point. By using the highly soluble cholinium chloride (ChCl) in water (>20 mol kg−1 at 24 °C) to prepare a neutral pH aqueous electrolyte (5 mol kg−1), the AC‖AC supercapacitors showed an excellent capacitance of 106 F g−1 at −40 °C (126 F g−1 at 24 °C) in a potential window of 1.5 V.164
It should be noted that in addition to improving electrolytes, constructing easy paths to the electrode surface for ion diffusion can further facilitate the electrochemical performance. This is demonstrated by Lin et al., where a CNT‖CNT supercapacitor exhibited better capacitive behaviour than the OLC-based device, owing to the enhanced ion accessibility of the CNT surfaces.161 Furthermore, it was revealed that the micropores, rather than the mesopores, played a significant role in improving the electrochemical performance at low temperatures.165 The study synthesized zeolite-templated carbon (ZTC) with a strictly uniform microporous structure as supercapacitor electrodes. After being immersed in SBPBF4/AN–MF (methyl formate) electrolyte, it exhibited a capacitance up to 123 F g−1 at temperatures as low as −60 and −70 °C, which was 50–100% higher than that of most commercial mesoporous AC‖AC EDLCs at room temperature. Xu et al. also studied AC electrodes with different pore sizes and distributions and confirmed that the micropore size significantly influenced the charge storage process at low temperatures.166 They revealed that when the micropore size was close to the ion clusters, desolvation behaviour occurred, resulting in a record capacitance of 164 F g−1 at −100 °C and 182 F g−1 at 60 °C.
At high temperatures, conventional aqueous and organic electrolytes with low boiling and flash points often fail to sustain their performances. ILs with extremely low vapor pressure, nonflammability, and thermal stability even at 300 °C are good choices. Solid electrolytes with increased thermal stability, including polymeric or inorganic matrix/ion composites and intrinsic conductive ceramic materials, can also be alternatives for high-temperature applications. They can behave as both an electrolyte and separator as the conventional separators (e.g., polypropylene, polyethylene, and cellulose) are easily shrunken or fused at high temperatures. Important progress in this field is the development of polymeric, inorganic matrix-based electrolytes. Liu et al. fabricated a face mask supported ionogel where BMIMBF4 was composited with a TiO2-photoinitiated polymer hydrogel (Fig. 12).167 The constructed AC‖AC supercapacitor exhibited continuously enhanced performance when the temperature was elevated from 25 to 200 °C (Fig. 12b and c). It reached a capacitance of about 180 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 and an excellent rate capability of ∼89% at 15 A g−1 at 200 °C, ascribing to the increased ionic conductivity and reduced viscosity with increased temperature (Fig. 12d). Kim et al. doped H3PO4 in poly[2,2′-(m-phenylene)-5,5′-bibenzimidazole] (PBI) as an electrolyte for an rGO‖rGO supercapacitor operating at 30 to 160 °C.168 Due to the enhanced ion transport at 160 °C, it showed outstanding capacitive features, e.g., ∼40% enhancement of the rate capability and a maximum capacitance of 170 F g−1 and 18.7 mF cm−2. It also obtained extremely long-term stability of 100000 cycles (>93% of the initial value) at elevated temperatures >100 °C. Furthermore, Ajayan and co-workers composited BMMITFSI with a natural clay material which possessed high thermal stability.169 At temperatures up to 200 °C, the corresponding rGO‖rGO supercapacitor exhibited a stable specific capacitance of 40 F g−1 in a potential window of 2.5 V even after 10000 cycles of charge/discharge.
 Fig. 12  (a) TGA curves of the mask, BMIMBF4, ionogel, and ionogel-in-mask composite. (b) CV-curves of the all-solid supercapacitor applying the ionogel-in-mask hybrid gel electrolyte at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 and temperatures of 25 °C to 200 °C. (c) Variation of Csp with current density at temperatures of 25 °C to 200 °C. (d) The effect of temperature on the ionic conductivity and viscosity of the ionogel-in-mask hybrid gel electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167. 
Conductive ceramic electrolytes containing movable vacancies or ions in the bulk have attracted attention in this field owing to their good chemical stability. Yttria-stabilized zirconia (YSZ) is stable at temperatures up to 1200 °C and exhibits reasonable ionic conductivity at temperatures higher than 300 °C. It was used as the electrolyte for SiC nanowire constructed supercapacitors and realized a power density of 100 μW cm−2 at a current density up to 50 μA cm−2 at a record high temperature of 450 °C.170 In addition, it showed good capacitance retention of over 60% after 10000 cycles at a scan rate of 200 mV s−1.
Electrodes with good high-temperature durability also play an important role in supercapacitors operating under extreme temperatures. Carbonaceous materials (e.g., graphene, AC, and CNTs) have been widely used as supercapacitor electrodes. However, they will decompose at high temperature in the presence of oxygen. Carbide materials such as molybdenum carbide and silicon carbide have high chemical stability, a high melting point, and good conductivity even at high temperatures.170 Jiang et al. assembled porous monolithic biochar as the electrode and employed a 1-buthyl-3-methylimidazolium tetrafluoroborate (BMIBF4) IL in a supercapacitor.171 When the temperature rose from ambient temperature to 140 °C, its specific capacitance (21 F g−1) and charge–discharge rate increased by a factor of approximately 10 in a voltage window of 6 V. It also exhibited an energy density higher than 20 W h kg−1 when the power density was lower than 2000 W kg−1.
Certain combinations of electrolyte and electrode can facilitate supercapacitors to run at both low (<−40 °C) and high (>100 °C) temperatures. Xu et al. recently reported activated carbon-based electrodes with predominantly slit-shaped micropores that matched with the effective size of partially desolvated triethyl methyl ammonium (MeEt3N+) ions in an acetonitrile/1,3-dioxolane (AC/DIOX) mixed solvent system.166 These tailored electrolyte and electrode materials gave record gravimetric capacitances of 164 and 182 F g−1 at −100 and 60 °C, respectively, close to the room-temperature capacitance of 177 F g−1, which gave nearly temperature-independent capacitance in a wide temperature range of −100 to 60 °C.166 Such work shed light on further enhancing the electrochemical performance through careful tuning of the electrode and electrolyte.
Application. 
Supercapacitors that can withstand harsh temperatures are desirable in many devices (electric motors, sensors, sonobuoys, etc.) for applications such as hybrid electric vehicle, deep oil well drilling, military, and aerospace power sources. In hybrid electric vehicles, the combination of supercapacitors with Li-ion batteries in electric vehicles could not only supply both high power density and energy density but also pre-heat the batteries, which may fail to start at very low temperatures.172 In deep oil well drilling, electronics and sensors integrated in the well drilling equipment for measuring the wellbore geometry, depth, and oil fluid often experience a high temperature generally above 120 °C.173 As such, supercapacitors with good electrochemical performance and high-temperature endurance could serve as an energy device. Military devices (sensors, GPS, night vision, etc.) often work in harsh conditions such as plateaus, the deep sea, high latitudes, etc. Supercapacitors withstanding high and low temperatures are good military energy supplies.174 Outer-space exploration also requires power for satellites, astronaut suits (extravehicular activities), planetary and lunar rovers, etc. While most space applications require low temperature operation (−80 to 0 °C), high temperature operation is needed for planetary surface activities (e.g., Venus's surface temperature can be as high as 480 °C). Supercapacitors with a wide temperature range thus have great potential in these fields.175,176

3.4 Supercapacitors with electrical field-responsive functions

3.4.1 Fast frequency response. 
Although conventional supercapacitors can function as a power source supplying ultrahigh power density, they have a relatively slow frequency response with the charging and discharging rates limited to below 1 Hz.40,50 Conventional supercapacitors behave like a resistor rather than a capacitor at frequencies >1 Hz. By tailoring the porous structure or vertical alignment, supercapacitors can respond to electrical signals at a frequency higher than 10 kHz, showing great implications in AC line filters. AC line filters are used to attenuate the leftover AC ripples on direct current (DC) voltage buses, which provide buffers to filter out high-order harmonics and protect against electrical power surges and spikes. They play critical roles in determining the circuit board profile, reliability, and power conversion efficiency in model electronics. To date, aluminium electrolytic capacitors (AECs) are commonly employed in AC line filters. However, they usually occupy the largest space and volume in the electronic circuits due to the small specific capacitance. As such, replacing AECs with more compact supercapacitors with higher specific capacitance (usually 2–5 orders of magnitude higher than that of AECs) will have an immense impact on miniaturizing future electronic devices.
For application of AC line filters at a 60 Hz line frequency, the filtering supercapacitor must respond at 120 Hz with a minimum loss arising from resistance.50 This means that the phase angle at 120 Hz (φ120) is critical and should be close to the ideal value of −90° (i.e., a pure capacitive behavior). Another important parameter is the characteristic frequency f0 when the impedance phase angle reaches −45°, since this is the frequency defining the boundary between the capacitive and the resistive behavior of the cell. The so-called relaxation time constant is defined as τ0 = 1/f0. The frequency response of a supercapacitor is strongly related to the transportation of both electrolyte ions and electrons across the whole electrode material layer. A conventional supercapacitor has electrodes with a torturous pore structure, which is beneficial for obtaining a large surface area and hence the amount of energy stored but results in significantly slow ion diffusion and a long ion diffusion path. As such, optimization of ion transport and charge transfer by designing a proper nanostructure for the electrode is the key in developing high frequency supercapacitor technologies.
An effective strategy to overcome these limitations and optimize the ion transport is by designing electrode materials with an open structure and minimized tortuosity. Vertically-oriented conductive nanomaterials, e.g., vertical graphene (VG), are suitable for high frequency supercapacitors since they have a structure with straightforward, short, and large pores. Pioneering work of Miller et al. demonstrated the first AC-filtering supercapacitor by depositing VG on Ni substrates directly as the electrodes in a PECVD process.50 The symmetric cells with KOH electrolyte exhibited an f0 of 15 kHz and φ120 of −82°, which was very close to AECs. At 120 Hz, the areal capacitance was about 0.175 mF cm−2. Further work was conducted to optimize the growth of VG by changing the growth temperature and gas feedstock (Fig. 13a–d), achieving an f0 of 20 kHz and φ120 of −85° and increasing the areal capacitance to 0.265 mF cm−2 (Fig. 13e and f).177 Inspired by this, another vertically-oriented graphene electrode based on reduced graphene oxide (RGO) was reported.178 Using simple hand-rolling and cutting methods, a highly dense and vertically oriented RGO electrode was fabricated. The large-size pores can significantly reduce the tortuosity of the electrode and improve the frequency response of supercapacitors. Thus, meso/macro pores were used for the electrode and obtained an ultrafast frequency response with a phase angle of −78° and a RC time constant of 319 μs at 120 Hz.179
 Fig. 13  (a) A representative SEM image of the growth cross section of VOGN/Ni/Si(100) at 750 °C. (b) A representative image of the growth cross section of VOGN/Ni/Si(100) at 850 °C. (c) Schematics showing VOGN structural changes from an ordered, vertical morphology to a random, less vertical morphology when the temperature increases. (d) The comparative plots of VOGN/Ni growth rates using C2H2 and CH4 as a feedstock. (e) Impedance phase angle as a function of frequency for the VOGN electrodes. The phase angle, θ, from 1 Hz up to 1 kHz is close to −90° for all samples. (f) The specific capacitance of EDLCs at 120 Hz (black square blocks) for 10 min growth and the characteristic frequency f0 (red circular dots) as a function of growth temperature. The specific capacitance of VOGN EDLCs prepared using CH4 as the feedstock at a temperature of 720 °C was included for comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177. 
Another strategy for fabricating high frequency supercapacitors is to fabricate thin electrodes with a thickness of less than ∼1 μm, which can significantly minimize the porous effect and facilitate fast ion transport during the charging and discharging processes. Yoo et al. used ultrathin and dense CNT films as electrodes, presenting fast electrolyte ion movement even with organic electrolytes (φ120 = −82.2°).180 A thin electrode based on graphene was also fabricated by a simple and scalable manufacturing technique, showing a capacitance of 0.179 μF cm−2 and a RC time constant of 644 μs at 120 Hz.181 Moreover, the recently developed micro-supercapacitor is a promising candidate to replace AECs due to the short ion diffusion path. Lin et al. fabricated graphene/CNT carpet-based micro-supercapacitors on a nickel current collector.182 Such a device showed an impedance phase angle of −81.5° at a frequency of 120 Hz and a high volumetric energy density of 2.42 mW h cm−3 in an ionic liquid, more than two orders of magnitude higher than that of AECs. Wu et al. used RGO as the electrode to fabricate a micro-supercapacitor, showing a phase angle of −75.4° at 120 Hz with a specific capacitance of 316 μF cm−2 and a RC time constant of 0.35 ms.183
The electron transfer resistance is another key factor to achieve high frequency responses for supercapacitors. One effective strategy to improve the electron transfer is by increasing the contract points between the electrode and current collector. Bo et al. reported that VG was used as a bridge between the current collector and active materials.184 This configuration significantly reduced the contact resistance by providing numerous contact points to the active materials with a high in-plane electrical conductivity (Fig. 14). The VG-bridged contact at the interface of the active layer and current collector led to a small resistance of 0.93 Ω, which was much lower than that without VG. Although the device only presented a moderate RC time constant of 32.8 ms, it provided an effective approach to improve the frequency response of supercapacitors. A similar strategy was used in a CNT based supercapacitor by increasing the roughness of the current collector.185 Such a device delivered an areal capacitance of 601 μF cm−2 with a −81° phase angle and a RC time constant of 199 μs.
 Fig. 14  (a) Phase response as a function of frequency, (b) frequency response of the capacitance, and (c) Nyquist plots for No-CC, Foil-CC, Foam-CC, and VG/Foam-CC working electrodes. (d) Magnified portion of the Nyquist plots near the origin for Foam-CC and VG/Foam-CC. (e–g) Schematic illustration of electron transport between the active materials and Foil-CC, Foam-CC, and VG/Foam-CC, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184. 
As one major purpose of developing high-frequency supercapacitors is for achieving a compact size, the areal and volumetric capacitance at 120 Hz are critical parameters. Although electrodes with thin thickness and large pores show reasonable frequency responses, the small areal mass loading results in low specific capacitance. As such, strategies to improve the specific capacitance without sacrificing the frequency response have recently aroused great interest. Increasing the surface area is an effective method to enhance the specific capacitance. Ren et al. deposited VG in Ni foams, which served as a scaffold for growing more graphene sheets with perpendicular orientation.186 As a consequence, a large areal capacitance of 0.72 mF cm−2 at 120 Hz was achieved, with an f0 of 4 kHz. A similar strategy was used to deposit VGs on carbonized cellulous paper as a flexible freestanding electrode, achieving a large capacitance of 1.5 mF cm−2 at 120 Hz and a φ120 of −83°.187 Zhou et al. prepared a graphene film with etched pores, providing ion transport channels in the vertical direction.188 As such, the supercapacitor for AC line filter applications achieved a large electrode mass loading, exhibiting a high areal capacitance of 0.956 mF cm−2 at 120 Hz with a phase angle of −81.2°.
Defects and doping have also been demonstrated to be an effective route to enhance the capacitance of high frequency supercapacitors, as they can transform inert graphene-like layered carbon into an electrochemically active substance, giving rise to additional charge storage. The defects of VG were increased by depositing on an aluminium substrate, presenting a larger specific capacitance than that achieved from VG grown on nickel foil for a similar nanosheet height.189 Han et al. demonstrated the growth of carbon nanostructures with different dopants, and achieved a high areal capacitance of 545 μF cm−2 at 120 Hz with a RC time constant of 3 ms.190 It should be noted that defects and doping may also enhance the wettability of VG in aqueous electrolytes for higher capacitance.
Pseudocapacitive materials often offer higher capacitance than carbon-based electrodes and could therefore be a better option if their frequency response can match that of electrolytic capacitors. However, it has been challenging to realize pseudocapacitive electrodes with high frequency responses since the kinetics of the redox reaction tend to be limited by the rate of ion diffusion across the conventional capacitor structure. Zhang et al. fabricated a supercapacitor using acid treated PEDOT:PSS as an electrode material.191 It exhibited a high areal capacitance of 994 μF cm−2 at 120 Hz with a phase angle of 83.68° and a short RC time constant of 0.15 ms. Such a high frequency response confirmed that using alternative pseudocapacitive materials is a promising strategy for the ultimate goal of kHz supercapacitors.
Application. 
Supercapacitors with a 120 Hz frequency response and high volumetric capacitance could be used for filtering ripple current in power supply systems. They could find applications in high-power load leveling, ripple-current filtering, power conversion, and fast pulsed power generation for quick response in absorbing and releasing energy. They are particularly important for the efficient exploitation of renewable electrical power generated by photovoltaics or wind turbines, in which frequency variance can be caused by uncontrollable sunshine or wind flow.190 As supercapacitors may allow system size reductions, they have the potential to be integrated into portable electronics, such as printable transistors, photovoltaic cells, flexible displays, laptops, sensors, radio frequency identification, and organic light-emitting diodes.50 Moreover, increasing demand for Si IC chips, MEMS chips and other high density on-chip capacitors has spawned great interest for supercapacitors with progress in both the frequency response and capacitance density.40


3.4.2 Electrochromic supercapacitors. 
Electrochromism (EC) is a process in which a color alteration occurs in the electrode material in addition to the faradaic reaction. It has attracted much attention over the past years, especially for applications in light-regulation and displays. Considering the similar mechanism in charge injection and ejection, EC devices can be integrated with supercapacitors to benefit from both effects.42 Due to the EC phenomenon, the color change can be used to visually monitor the charge state of a supercapacitor and estimate how much energy remains. As for electrochromism, the coloration efficiency and optical modulation are the crucial parameters for different EC materials and devices, which are given by  Optical modulation (λ) = Tb − Tcwhere Q is the electronic charge inserted into or extracted from the EC material per unit area, ΔOD is the change in optical density, Tb is the transmittance in the bleached state, and Tc is the transmittance in the colored state.42 Besides, the switching time, defined as the time to reach 90% of the full optical modulation, and the spectral range have also been adopted to evaluate the EC performance recently.
Metal oxides with a reversible color alteration accompanying the changed valence are suitable as the electrodes of ECs. Typical EC metal oxides are divided into three kinds based on the coloration state: (i) bleached at oxidation but colored at reduction, (ii) colored at oxidation but bleached at reduction, and (iii) colored in both states. As for the first EC materials, tungsten oxide (WO3) is the most widely studied due to its good performance and low cost. The related reverse electron-transfer reaction is accompanied by compensating ion insertion or ion extraction between the metal oxide and electrolyte,[WO3 + H+ + e−]bleached ↔ [HWO3]colored.
Yang et al. successfully deposited WO3 nanoparticles into a thin film (∼200 nm) on fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO) glass.192 The film electrodes were then assembled in a symmetric pseudocapacitive glass window with H2SO4 packed in Surlyn (a copolymer) as the electrolyte. This device exhibited an areal capacitance of 12.8 mF cm−2 (the specific capacitance was 160.1 F g−1) at a current density of 0.4 mA cm−2. It also showed a high power density of 47.1 kW kg−1, while the energy density was low at 3.6 W h kg−1 due to the limited voltage window. The device displayed an abrupt optical transmittance change from the original transparent state to deep blue at a wavelength of 633 nm. Due to the large number of granular voids between the particles and good contact between the film and the substrate, the coloration time was found to be 3.1 s, with a bleaching time of 0.9 s. This multifunctional large-scale glass window integrating energy storage and electrochromism showed great potential in real applications.
Nickel oxide (NiO) is a typical metal oxide colored initially while bleached in the reduced state. It has aroused particular interest as EC materials due to its high specific capacitance (the theoretical capacitance is 2573 F g−1 in a potential window of 0.5 V).193 The EC reaction is based on the below equation.[NiO + OH−]colored ↔ [NiOOH + e−]blended
The prevalent NiO preparation methods are tedious and the corresponding nanoparticles are large and loosely connected with the substrates. These are problematic for ion movement and charge transfer, limiting the lifetime, chromatic contrast, switching time and coloration efficiency. To overcome these drawbacks, tremendous research efforts on the development of NiO nanostructured materials for EC active electrodes have been pursued. Among them, Cai et al. spin coated a NiO seed layer on indium tin oxide (ITO)-coated glass and then successfully synthesized uniform NiO nanoparticles by a simple and low-cost solvothermal method.194 This method simplified the procedures for preparing NiO with high yield, produced more refined nanoparticles with an average size of 30–40 nm, and facilitated the chemical bonding between the seed layer and the ITO substrate. After being assembled into a three-electrode configuration from −0.2 to 0.6 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode), the uniform NiO film electrode presented a high capacitance (1386 F g−1 at 1 A g−1), a large optical modulation (63.6% at 550 nm), and a high coloration efficiency (42.8 cm2 C−1 at 550 nm). Besides, the electrode exhibited high stability, sustaining a transmittance modulation of about 90.8% of the initial value after being subjected to 1000 cycles. The outstanding stability, reversible and persistent EC effects and excellent electrochemical performance verified the important role of the fine nanostructure and morphology in shortening the ion movement paths and facilitating charge transfer for better EC performance.
Vanadium pentoxide (V2O5) with mixed oxidation states (V2+, V3+, V4+, and V5+) is a typical metal oxide colored in both the oxidation (green/grey) and reduction (yellow) states. Owing to its abundance, low cost, and high specific capacity, V2O5 is a favorable candidate for electrochromic supercapacitors.195 Compared to planar or microstructured V2O5, a porous three-dimensional morphology can further shorten the distance between ions and the electrode and increase the contact interface. Steiner and co-workers electrodeposited V2O5 into a voided block copolymer template that had self-assembled into the double-gyroid (DG) morphology.196 After dissolving the template, the pure V2O5 formed a freestanding, highly interconnected, and ordered 3D structure on the 10 nm length scale with a high specific surface to bulk volume ratio of 161.4 μm−1. This structure could enable fast ion movement, improve the coloration efficiency, and shorten the switching time. The V2O5 material measured in a three-electrode system combined a high coloration efficiency (−33.9 and −35.8 m2 C−1 for ion insertion and extraction, respectively), a maximal transmission variation of ΔT = 49.8% at λ = 430 nm and a particular 85 ms switching speed lying within a factor of two of the video rate, in a potential window of −1 to 1 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode).196 The performance was superior to the previously reported macroporous V2O5 EC electrodes. The DG V2O5 based EC electrode reported in other work exhibited a high specific capacitance of 155 F g−1 and showed a strong color change from green/grey to yellow.197 These excellent properties were a direct consequence of the highly interconnected gyroid morphology with a high specific surface area, which provided good ion access and high electrical conductivities.
Further, the replication of a voided DG block-copolymer network and the nanoscale Kirkendall effect (NKE) can be applied to other metal oxides, such as NiO.198 The process went through first electroplating of Ni, followed by thermal conversion. Due to the different diffusion speed of Ni and O, the metal oxide converted into a hollow NiO 3D network (i.e., a nanotubular array). The nanostructure formation of NiO enabled effective electrolyte infiltration, good charge transport, and efficient ion intercalation. Therefore, the NiO nanotubes in a three-electrode system exhibited significantly enhanced EC parameters from −0.55 to 0.55 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode). The color contrast of the DG NiO was 79.6% at λ = 630 nm, whereas it was only 6.3% for the non-templated film. In particular, the switching speed of 53–63 ms for the DG NiO was close to the video rate of 42 ms, which was faster than the NiO or V2O5 nanoparticles.197,199 The average coloration efficiencies for the DG NiO morphology at λ = 630 nm were as high as −47 and −40 cm2 C−1 for the 10th and 750th switching cycle, respectively, exhibiting good cycle stability. Therefore, the method combining both 3D porous structure fabrication and the NKE mechanism was a step further toward the development of the ultimate material for EC electrodes with fast ion intercalation.
Beyond metal oxides, conjugated conducting polymers such as polymeric thiophenes and pyrroles have received wide attention as EC electrode materials in recent years. During the reversible oxidation/reduction with concurrent counterion insertion or extraction from the electrolyte, the conversion of polymers from insulating to conducting delocalizes the π-electron band. This delocalization induces the change of the charge carrier bands and the electrochromic effect. Therefore, polymers with a continuous charge carrier band throughout the visible region can exhibit multiple colors at different potentials. Yuksel et al. deposited poly(4-(dithieno[3,2-b:2,3-d]thiophen-2-yl)-2-(2-octyldodecyl)-2H-benzo[d][1,2,3]triazole) on single walled carbon nanotube (SWNT) substrates to combine EC and supercapacitive applications together.200 The SWNT thin films were both highly transparent and conductive, and hence were directly utilized as the current collector and electrode material. The conductive polymer (CP)/SWNT composite in a three-electrode configuration experienced three different reversible colors from purple-red to an uncommon black coloration at its intermediate oxidation and then blue after being fully oxidized in a wide voltage range from −0.3 to 1.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode), as seen from Fig. 15a. In this potential range, the specific capacitance of devices was 112.4 F g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1. The electrodes showed a power density of 16.6 kW kg−1 and an energy density of 12.9 W h kg−1. After 12500 cycles, the capacity retention was high at 82% and the Coulombic efficiencies were almost unchanged. The wide spectral range, the uncommon black color formation, and the good electrochemical properties made the all-organic SWNT/CP nanocomposite films a promising electrode for electrochromic energy storage systems.
 Fig. 15  (a) Photograph of the fabricated SWNT/CP electrodes at different charge states (purple-red: −0.2 V, black: 1.1 V and blue: 1.3 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the WO3 nanotube and PEDOT:PSS layer. Characterization of the Ag nanowire-embedded PDMS substrate and WO3 nanotube–PEDOT:PSS thin layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203. 
As for practical applications, flexible and stretchable electrochromic supercapacitor systems have also been widely considered as promising multifunctional energy storage devices. The first challenge to fabricate flexible electrochromic supercapacitors is developing flexible transparent conducting (FTC) substrates. The common method is compositing metal nanowires (NWs) with a flexible transparent polymer to substitute the traditional ITO or FTO substrates. Shen et al. transferred a filtered Ag NW film onto polydimethylsiloxane (PDMS) elastomer spin-coated polyethylene terephthalate (PET) to obtain a FTC substrate.201 Then a WO3 film with a thickness of 600 nm was thermally evaporated from WO3 powder and deposited on it. The as-synthesized flexible electrodes in a three-electrode configuration from −0.2 to 0.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode) exhibited great electrochemical performances (13.6 mF cm−2 or 138.2 F g−1) and a capacitance retention of 72.6% compared with the initial capacitance at a scan rate of 100 mV s−1 after 5000 charge/discharge cycles. At a wavelength of 633 nm, these electrodes showed an optical transmittance change from 55.9% in the bleached state to dark blue (11.8%) at a voltage of −0.5 V, high coloration efficiency (80.2 cm2 C−1), and fast response speed (coloring in 1.7 s and bleaching in 1.0 s).
However, the exposed Ag-based transparent electrodes suffered oxidation and corrosion under positive potentials, and both the Ag NWs and the conventional electrolyte will delaminate under mechanical deformation, deteriorating the cycle life. Cai et al. coated a layer of conducting PEDOT:PSS on a Ag/PET hybrid film to enhance the conductivity and stability of the substrates.202 Then WO3 nanoparticles were deposited on the hybrid films as the main electroactive composition. The composite electrodes in a three-electrode system presented a large optical modulation of 81.9% at 633 nm, fast switching time (2.8 and 1.9 s for bleaching and coloration, respectively), and high coloration efficiency (124.5 cm2 C−1). More importantly, they sustained a transmittance modulation of about 67.3% of the initial state even when subjected to 2000 cycles and had an optical modulation decay of only 7.5% after 1200 compressive bending cycles. They also exhibited a specific capacitance of 221.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 from 0 to −0.7 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode) and still sustained an optical modulation of 87.7% and a specific capacitance of 67.2% at 10 A g−1. In addition to the PEDOT:PSS covered Au/Ag core–shell NW/PDMS, Yun et al. used a polyacrylamide (PAAm)-based hydrogel as the electrolyte due to its self-healing ability from the tremendous hydrogen bonds and coated a layer of PEDOT:PSS on a WO3 nanotube, as shown in Fig. 15b.203 The transparent stretchable hydrogel electrolyte can alleviate the electrolyte leakage, evaporation, electrode contact, ionic conductivity and dehydration issues resulting from mechanical deformation. The PEDOT:PSS wrapping layer on the WO3 nanotube improved the specific capacity by 38.6% to 471.0 F g−1 and the coloration efficiency by 20.4% to 83.9 cm2 C−1 in a three-electrode configuration between −2.4 and 0 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode). The electrode also retained 79.5% of its original capacity after 50000 charge–discharge cycles due to the effective protection of structural integration from the wrapping layer on WO3 nanotubes. With a PEDOT analogue, the device exhibited a maximum power density of 19.1 kW kg−1 and maximum energy density of 52.6 W h kg−1. Even after being exposed to ambient conditions for 16 days, the configuration maintained the original level of conductivity at a high voltage and mechanically strained under both tensile and bending conditions. A wearable patch device with Ag nanowire-embedded PDMS as the working electrode and Au/Ag core–shell nanowire-embedded PDMS as the counter electrode was operated between −1.5 and −0.1 V. It retained 95.0 and 97.6% of its normalized transmittance change and normalized specific capacitance even after being exposed to ambient conditions for 2 weeks. It also showed 98.6% retention of the capacitance under 20% total strain. Li et al. did similar work using a flexible and scalable P(NaSS)/P(VBIm-Cl)/PVA@H+ hydrogel as the electrolyte to integrate many functionalities such as flexibility, transparency, color changing and self-healing properties in one device.204
Nevertheless, these flexible electrodes are driven by a fixed external power source, which is not desirable for portable and wearable electronics applications. Yun et al. connected a flexible EC device with a solar cell to realize the fabrication of a self-powered EC device. It exhibited a high coloration efficiency of 64.8 cm2 C−1, specific capacitance of 406.0 F g−1, and electrochemical energy and power density of 40.6–47.8 W h kg−1 and 6.8–16.9 kW kg−1 at a scan rate of 2 A g−1 with a potential window between 0 and 2.5 V (vs. Ag/AgCl electrode).205 Besides, new materials, such as graphene, have been explored to change the optical transmittance. Polat et al. electrostatically doped graphene to broaden the optical transmission range of wavelengths from 450 nm to 2 μm under ambient conditions.206 However, it is notable that most of these studies have obtained continuous improvement in the EC performance but not in energy storage. The EC electrode should be as thin and porous as possible, which is not beneficial to the energy storage. The exploration of new EC materials and the improvement of the energy storage performance still need to be paid more attention.
Application. 
Supercapacitors integrating both energy storage and a reversible color change have been used on many occasions. In one of the most important applications, pseudocapacitive electrodes show great potential in functioning as electrochromic smart windows. They have been applied in glass skyscrapers, automobiles, and even in the Boeing 787 Dreamliner, which could not only block sunshine but also store energy by charging the window and adjusting the lighting and heating of the building.42,207 Smart windows can also concurrently power electronic devices, such as LEDs, mobile phones, iPads, and sensors, which should have a profound impact on our daily life in the future.192 For intelligent energy monitoring, supercapacitors or batteries with a visually changeable color according to the charge state could sense the energy changes in a predictable mode. This will help quickly determine that energy has been exhausted before a device stops working.42 The supercapacitor structure with ionic liquid electrolyte (with very low vapor pressures) is also compatible with ultrahigh vacuum systems, which could enable optical measurements at cryogenic temperatures. Additionally, electrochromic supercapacitors could work as an optical modulator in the visible spectrum. With a simple device geometry and efficient gating scheme, they can behave as an active optical device ranging from plasmonics to optoelectronics.206

3.5 Supercapacitors for self-powered photodetection
Supercapacitors with photodetection have aroused large interest because of their importance in powering environmental, military, medical and health monitoring applications. As most photosensitive materials are silicon, metal oxides or conductive polymers, the development of multifunctional supercapacitors with photodetection has been centred on these materials. Silicon is a semiconductor highly sensitive in detecting light in the visible and UV range. It has been demonstrated that vertically aligned Si nanowire (SiNW) arrays coated with carbon walls can possess the capabilities of both photodetection and energy storage. As shown by one example, vertically aligned SiNW arrays were grown by a wet chemical etching method with the diameter and length at ∼150 nm and 5 μm, respectively (Fig. 16a).44 Interconnected carbon walls at ∼10 nm thick were then coated on the SiNW arrays by drop-casting sugar solution onto the SiNW arrays, followed by carbonization at high temperatures. Symmetric two-electrode micro-supercapacitors (MSCs) were fabricated with the solid-state PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte, where the ratio of the MSC area (carbon wall coated SiNWs) to the sensor area (bare SiNWs) in the integrated system was at 2:3. The device showed an areal capacitance of ∼6.8 mF cm−2 and volumetric capacitance of 13.6 F cm−3, with the majority of the capacitance arising from the carbon walls as the areal capacitance of the MSC was >1000 times larger than that of the device without carbon walls. For photodetection, the MSC was charged to 0.8 V at a constant current density of 20 μA cm−2, followed by self-discharge. The detection of UV was achieved by measuring the voltage of the MSC throughout the discharge processes. Upon UV light illumination, photocarriers (electrons and holes) are generated in the bare SiNW sensing area, which could then easily diffuse into the electrode of the MSC, causing an increase in the voltage. Fig. 16b and c show the UV light potential responses in the fast and slow decay processes, respectively. A good UV detection response with a rise time of 1.0 s and a decay time of 1.5 s was obtained. Fig. 16d and e show the dependence of the photoresponse voltage on the incident UV light intensity, which deviated from linearity for two possible reasons: (i) hole-trap saturation occurred at high light intensities and (ii) the complex electron–hole generation and recombination process in the semiconductor photodetector. According to the discharge curve, the MSC could thus power the UV detector for >10 h after less than 100 s charging. The stability of the integrated device was also demonstrated by the repeated response of the photocurrent under periodic UV light pulses.
 Fig. 16  (a) Fabrication process and structure of the UV detector. The UV light potential response of this self-powered UV detector in the (b) fast decay regime and (c) slow decay regime. (d) Equivalent circuit of the detector under UV illumination. (e) Photoresponse voltage of the device as a function of the incident UV (λ = 365 nm) intensity in the slow decay regime. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44. 
A range of metal oxides are also able to perform the dual function of charge storage and photodetection. In particular, TiO2 nanoparticles anchored on SWCNT films have been employed to fabricate all-solid-state, foldable supercapacitors with photodetection capability.43 Briefly, SWCNT films were coated on both sides of cellulose fibre paper (as the separator) and TiO2 nanoparticles were dropped onto one surface. The TiO2/SWCNT side served as supercapacitor electrodes as well as the working electrode of the photodetector. With this simplified and compact configuration, the device showed a specific capacitance and maximum power density of ∼28 F g−1 (corresponding to 112 F g−1 for a three-electrode cell) and 66.7 kW kg−1, respectively, at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1. When the device was irradiated with white light, the TiO2 nanoparticles underwent charge separation to yield electrons and holes. Upon applying an external field resulting from the charged supercapacitor, the electron–hole pairs became separated, with the electrons moved to the positive electrode and the holes to the negative electrode. As a result, the leakage current of the supercapacitor was enhanced and white light can be detected by measuring the leakage current during the self-discharge processes. Fig. 17a shows the mechanism of the integrated supercapacitor as a photodetector and Fig. 17b displays a stable photocurrent in each of the ON and OFF states. A sensitivity of 24.7 was obtained when the density of TiO2 NPs was 0.22 mg cm−2. In addition, when the device was exposed to UV light, a higher sensitivity of 38.5 was achieved, which could be ascribed to the good connection between the SWCNT film and TiO2 nanoparticles as well as the high electron transport ability of the SWCNT films.
 Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the integrated device as a photodetector. (b) Photocurrent response of the integrated device in the original state, light intensity: 40 mW cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. (c) Photocurrent response of the integrated device in the dark and under a light intensity of 49.7 mW cm−2. On/off ratios of the integrated device with the (d) incident light intensity and (e) illumination time interval. (f) Photoresponsivity of the integrated device vs. light intensity and illumination time interval. Reprinted with permission from ref. 208. 
Another photosensitive material, MoO3, has also been reported for integration in supercapacitors. In an example, free-standing reduced graphene oxide with manganese oxide and polypyrrole (RGO–MnO2–PPy) was utilized as the positive electrode and reduced graphene oxide with molybdenum trioxide (RGO–MoO3) as the negative electrode.208 They were constructed into a vertical finger-like asymmetric supercapacitor (VFASC) by manually stacking the electrodes one by one with LiCl–PVA as the solid-state electrolyte. The areal capacitance of RGO–MnO2–PPy was as high as 260 mF cm−2. By balancing the charge between the positive and negative electrodes, the ASCs had a high volumetric capacitance of 51.5 F cm−3 in a potential window of 1.6 V. When stacking 10 finger-like electrodes, the volumetric capacitance was increased with increased mass loading. Five layers of electrodes gave a high energy density of 12.94 mWh cm−3 at a power density of 0.47 W cm−3. To demonstrate the photodetection function without the use of additional power systems, the integrated VFASC was fully charged to 1.6 V. Fig. 17c indicates that the leakage current of the device showed a photoresponse in each ON and OFF cycle, with a slight decrease in the background signal. Fig. 17d shows the dependence of the ON/OFF ratio on the light intensity, where the response was increased when the light intensity was increased, and Fig. 17e shows an increase in response with longer illumination time intervals, indicating the unsaturated photocurrent under illumination. Fig. 17f plots the photoresponsivity vs photoswitching period and light intensity. These results indicated that the VFASC has excellent multiple functions of energy storage and photodetection.
In addition to the planar configuration, supercapacitors with photodetection can also be constructed into a fibre architecture.209 In one example, Co3O4 nanowires were grown on Ni fibres as the positive electrode and carbon fibre/graphene was employed as the negative electrode, where graphene was also a light-sensitive material because of the high electron mobility and photo absorption over a wide wavelength range between visible and infrared. The Co3O4 nanowires were composed of numerous nanocrystals with diameters of 10–20 nm and contained many widely distributed mesopores, leading to a large electrochemically active surface and short paths for fast ion diffusion, which were beneficial for enhanced energy storage performance. Fibre-based all-solid-state asymmetric supercapacitors were fabricated by entangling a bundle of carbon fibre/graphene around the Co3O4/Ni fibre which was previously immersed in the PVA–KOH gel solution. The assembled integrated systems showed high power density, excellent photoresponse to white light, and superior flexibility of both the asymmetric supercapacitor and the photodetector.
One of the representative conductive polymers for supercapacitors with photodetection is PPy, owing to its high electric conductivity and specific capacitance, good chemical and thermal stability, facile synthesis, low cost, environmental friendliness, and biocompatibility. Huang et al. integrated various sensing elements into an energy storage device to develop a highly integrated supercapacitor-sensor (HISS) system, as shown in Fig. 18a–c.210 Two PPy-on-carbon electrodes were coated with PVA/H3PO4 electrolyte without any binder or separator. After the device was charged to 0.8 V for 10 min, the discharge current of the supercapacitor was stable at ∼120 nA after ∼15 min. When one electrode of the supercapacitor was exposed to white light with various intensities, the discharge current showed a clear photoresponse (Fig. 18d and e). Moreover, conductive polymers such as PPy are intrinsically flexible and can maintain the electrochemical energy storage performance under small strains. This gives their ability to develop multifunctional supercapacitors with stain sensing ability. Conductive textiles were knitted from SWCNT-coated cellulose yarns, followed by the electrodeposition of PPy on the knitted textiles.210 The fabrics could be stretched to 100% strain in any direction. Owing to the knitted geometry, the gaps between the yarns in the fabric became narrow and finally disappeared so that interweaved yarns contacted each other upon stretching, which added parallel conductivity paths and thus resulted in lower resistance. The discharge current after being charged to 0.8 V was stable at ∼120 nA in ∼15 min. Similarly, light or strain stimuli can be detected without an external power supply by using multifunctional PPy materials in a fabric geometry.
 Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of HISS-light from a dual-functional PPy/carbon electrode. (b) GCD at a charging/discharging current of 1 A g−1 with various electrodeposition times: 0 min (solid line), 5 min (dashed line), 10 min (dotted line), and 20 min (dashed-dotted line). (c) Capacitances with respect to the charging/discharging current. (d) Illumination at 0 V versus Ag/AgCl under different incident light intensities: 86 mW cm−2 (lower line), 128 mW cm−2 (middle line), and 170 mW cm−2 (upper line). (e) The amplitude of the current change at various light intensities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210. 

Application. 
Supercapacitors with a photodetection function can retain the intrinsic capacitance and convert light into an electrical signal without an external power source. Depending on the type of light detected, they can be applied in the fields of video imaging, environmental monitoring, sensing, optical communications, etc. For instance, supercapacitors with ultraviolet detection can be used for flame detection, ozone layer monitoring, space communications and ultraviolet radiation monitoring; supercapacitors with infrared detection can be used for night imaging, tele-communication, biological imaging and remote sensing; and supercapacitors with electromagnetic wave detection can be used in medical diagnosis, industrial process control and homeland security.211 Such a smart energy storage device would minimize the space and complexity of the system and provide excellent photodetection for targeted applications.212

3.6 Supercapacitors integrated with energy harvesting/conversion
A general method to incorporate energy harvesting functions into supercapacitors is to design proper circuits that connect an energy harvester and a supercapacitor in an integrated manner. For example, Zhang et al. reported a multifunctional solar cell and supercapacitor that were integrated onto a single wire-shaped substrate, where the function could be determined and controlled by the circuit.213 More sophisticated approaches have also been developed, with the energy conversion and storage materials sharing the common components of a device (e.g., separator, electrodes and electrolyte). The bottleneck in this sharing strategy is that the multifunctional devices tend to exhibit lower energy conversion efficiency as compared to their conventional counterparts. This is mainly attributed to the limitation on materials selection and synthesis approaches since the energy conversion materials introduced should not impair the performance of supercapacitors. Supercapacitors integrated with energy harvesting/conversion functions can store pulsed energy from intermittent power sources (e.g., solar and triboelectric nanogenerators) without the need for a conversion circuit.214 The design, material selection, device configuration and performance optimisation of supercapacitors with mechanical, solar and thermal energy harvesting are discussed as follows.

3.6.1 Mechanical energy harvesting. 
Mechanical energy such as pressure, vibrations, airflow, waves and rotation can be converted into electricity by piezo- or tribo-electric materials. However, piezo- or tribo-electric materials often give pulsed output power that cannot be directly utilized by conventional electronics. An energy storage component is thus essential for the practical conversion of mechanical energy. Supercapacitors with high power density, long cycle life, environmental benignancy, etc. are a good match for such a purpose. As a result, there has been growing interest in developing multifunctional supercapacitors that can harvest and store mechanical energy simultaneously.
One critical step in converting mechanical energy into electrochemical energy is to integrate piezo- or tribo-electric materials into the supercapacitor design. A common approach is using a piezoelectric material as the separator of a supercapacitor. Wang and co-workers have pioneered the research in this field.46,215–217 The group firstly showed a piezoelectric-driven self-charging supercapacitor power cell using a PVDF–ZnO film as the separator as well as the piezoelectric.46 As illustrated in Fig. 19a, a symmetric supercapacitor employed MnO2 nanowires as the electrodes and PVA/H3PO4 as the gel electrolyte, with a piezoelectric PVDF–ZnO film embedded in the gel electrolyte. The working mechanism of harvesting mechanical energy was based on piezoelectric potential-driven electrochemical oxidation and reduction reactions, which had three main steps: (i) the generation of a piezoelectric potential on a PVDF–ZnO film by palm impact, (ii) the migration of ions toward the electrodes through an ion conduction path, and (iii) the reduction (negative electrode) and oxidation (positive electrode) reactions occurring at MnO2via insertion/desertion of H+ ions. Five such devices were serially connected, which were compressed under continuous palm impact and showed an increase in voltage (charging) from 160 to 280 mV in 350 s (Fig. 19b). After the force was removed, the device sustained the voltage for 250 s, confirming the self-charging capability. In addition, the compression force was applied to five supercapacitors separately and the self-charging capability was measured (Fig. 19c). All of the devices showed self-charging capability with the voltage increased from 230 to 350 mV in 360 s. The self-charging process mainly depended on the piezoelectric potential generation in the separator, which was directly related to mechanical deformation. To demonstrate the practical application, eleven piezoelectric supercapacitor devices were connected serially to drive a green LED, as shown in Fig. 19d.
 Fig. 19  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabricated piezoelectric supercapacitor and working mechanism driven by mechanical deformation. (b) Self-charging process of the serially connected five devices under periodic compressive strain given by human palm impact to the whole devices. The inset shows a photograph of the serially connected devices. (c) Self-charging process of the five serially connected devices under periodic compressive strain given by a human palm impact on each device for a 60 s interval. The inset shows the circuit diagram of the serial connection. (d) Operation of a green light-emitting diode using serially connected devices as the power source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46. 
Owing to the faradaic reactions and the intercalation mechanism, electrodes based on metal oxides often show a slow self-charging rate in piezoelectric supercapacitors. To increase the rate, Parida et al. reported a multifunctional supercapacitor using CNT-based electrodes and porous polyvinyldifluoride–trifluoroethylene P(VDF–TrFE) foam impregnated with a PMMA/PC/LiClO4 gel electrolyte as the piezoelectric separator.218 When the device was subjected to a pressure of 70 N at a frequency of 5 Hz, it took <10 s to achieve 90% of the increment in the voltage, which was more than one order of magnitude faster than other self-powered energy storage devices. The fast charging behavior has been attributed to the fast ion adsorption and desorption in the CNT electrodes, making the device suitable to store the energy generated from short-pulse mechanical vibrations. Moreover, a much higher piezo-potential was demonstrated by utilizing PVDF-co-HFP/TEABF4 ion gelled PVDF/NaNbO3 as the piezopolymer electrolyte.219 Using electrodes composed of 2D molybdenum di-selenide (MoSe2), the supercapacitor showed a specific capacitance of 18.93 mF cm−2 at a constant discharge current of 0.5 mA cm−2. The unique feature was that it could be charged up to a maximum of 708 mV in 100 s under a compressive force of 30 N. The device was also mechanically stable, retaining the initial peak-to-peak voltage after 1500 compressive cycles.
In contrast to synthetic polymers, fish swim bladder was also used as an environmentally friendly, natural bio-piezoelectric separator (Fig. 20a).220 The fish swim bladder (average thickness ∼ 260 μm) was perforated using a needle to provide enhanced electrolytic ion transport. A piezoelectric-driven asymmetric supercapacitor was constructed with NiCoOH nanoply decorated CuO nanoflakes grown on a flexible, nano-patterned copper foil substrate (NiCoOH–CuO@Cu foil) as a binder-free positive electrode and a reduced graphene oxide coated copper coil (RGO@Cu foil) as a negative electrode, with a poly(vinyl alcohol)–potassium hydroxide (PVA–KOH) gel electrolyte soaked perforated fish swim bladder as a bio-piezoelectric separator (BPES). The all-solid-state device exhibited a high specific capacitance of 165.1 F g−1 at 1 A g−1 (areal capacitance of 330 mF cm−2 at 2 mA cm−2), a superior energy density of 51.6 W h kg−1, and 94.5% retention of the original capacitance after 8000 charge/discharge cycles at 1 A g−1. Moreover, the device retained ∼98.3%, ∼98.7%, ∼99.1%, ∼99.4% and ∼99.8% of its initial Csp after bending at 135°, 120°, 90°, 45° and 30°, respectively, demonstrating noticeable flexibility and applicability (Fig. 20b). Upon application of pressure/stress, the BPES component generated electricity which was consequently stored as electrochemical energy in the supercapacitor. The device could be charged up to 281.3 mV from its initial Voc of 130.1 mV in ∼80 s under human finger pressing at a frequency of 1.65 Hz. The energy stored upon repeated mechanical deformation can be utilized to power-up LEDs and several portable electronic appliances such as an electronic watch, digital calculator, mobile LCD display and portable speaker (Fig. 20c–h).
 Fig. 20  (a) A photo of a fish swim bladder. (b) Csp retention (%) of the SCASC at different bending angles (0°–135°). The inset depicts the extreme bending of the SCASC device at 180° and casual human limb bending applied on the device. (c) Instantaneous lighting of four commercial red LEDs upon repeated finger pressing. (d) Lighting of a green LED light with adequate intensity. (e) Power-up of a small electronic wrist watch, (f) commercial digital calculator, (g) mobile LCD screen, and (h) portable speaker. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220. 
To improve the efficiency of energy harvesting, supercapacitors with combined piezo- and tribo-electric functions have also been realized.215,216 As an example, a triboelectric–pyroelectric–piezoelectric hybrid supercapacitor cell was composed of a sliding mode triboelectric nanogenerator (TENG) and a pyroelectric–piezoelectric nanogenerator (PPENG).215 During operation, the TENG harvested the majority of the mechanical energy during the sliding motion and the PPENG was able to harvest the mechanical energy induced by the normal force as well as the thermal energy of friction-induced heat. As a substantial amount of energy input could be wasted through friction induced heat dissipation, especially for high-frequency sliding motion, the hybrid TENG and PPENG system can increase the efficiency of mechanical energy harvesting up to 26.2%.
Lastly, conventional current collectors for supercapacitors are metals such as Cu and Al, which are easily oxidized or corroded in some harsh environments. By replacing the metal with an electrically conducting polymer, an all-plastic material-based self-charging power system was built by integrating a TENG with PPy-based supercapacitors, which showed improved charge density as well as an excellent long cycling life.216 In addition, to bring more functions in device operation piezo-/tribo-electric energy harvesting can be combined with electrochromism in supercapacitors.217 An electrochromic micro-supercapacitor employed Ag nanowires/NiO as electrode materials, exhibiting high capacitance (3.47 mF cm−2) and stable cycling performance (80.7% for 10000 cycles). It also enabled reversible and stable chromatic transitions under different charging stages from piezo-/tribo-electric energy harvesting, providing sufficient information on the working status in real time.


3.6.2 Solar energy harvesting. 
The simultaneous harvesting and storage of solar energy is clearly rationalised by the fact that solar energy is the most abundant renewable energy, about 104 times more than the energy consumption of mankind. Solar energy also represents the most clean, abundant and unlimited energy resource to solve the global demand of energy and environmental issues. To combine solar energy harvesting and storage in a single integrated device, also known as a photo-supercapacitor, it requires the electrode materials to be both photosensitive and pseudocapacitive. That is to say, the photosensitive material and supercapacitive material are synthesized in a way such that they either completely or partially share the electrode configuration of the device. To date, metal oxides, metal nitrides and conducting polymers represent the most abundant electrode materials for photo-supercapacitors.221
The electrodes of photo-supercapacitors are often assembled in a system resembling the three-electrode configuration in electrochemical testing, where the solar cell and supercapacitor are separated by sharing a common electrode. As shown in Fig. 21a, the dye-sensitized solar cell (DSSC) part had a TiO2 photoanode deposited on an indium tin oxide coated polyethylene naphthalate (ITO-PEN) substrate, while the supercapacitor part was composed of two electropolymerized PEDOT films.222 The TiO2 photoanode was immersed in a solution of N719 dye in a 1:1 ratio of acetonitrile and tert-butyl alcohol, and was separated from the Pt counter electrode by Surlyn. The electrolyte for the symmetric supercapacitor was 0.5 M LiClO4 dissolved in 3-methoxypropionitrile (MPN). Fig. 21b shows the J–V characteristics of the DSSC prepared under different pressure, where the photocurrent density increased with the compression pressure. The photoconversion efficiency and fill factor (FF) of the DSSC were improved at large compression pressure because of better dye adsorption on TiO2 nanoparticles and the enhanced interfacial connection between the TiO2 nanoparticles and the ITO-PEN substrate. When combining the operation of the DSSC with a supercapacitor (Fig. 21a), the photogenerated electrons could flow from the DSSC to the supercapacitor and be stored in the conducting PEDOT polymer film. Therefore, the maximum charging voltage of the supercapacitor was determined by the photovoltage of the DSSC part. As shown in Fig. 21c, after illuminating the system under 100 mW cm−2 for 900 s, the photo-supercapacitor was switched to the charge storage mode, which displayed a small drop in voltage due to the self-discharge arising from the internal resistance of the supercapacitor. The remaining energy was then discharged galvanostatically at 2 mA cm−2 for approximately 150 s, giving rise to a high areal capacitance of 0.52 F cm−2.222
 Fig. 21  (a) The configuration of the three-electrode type photo-supercapacitor device which contains a dye-sensitized solar cell and a polymer-based PEDOT supercapacitor sharing a common Pt electrode. For photocharging: (1) and (2) are closed. For discharging: (1) is open and (2) is closed. (b) Photocurrent density vs. voltage characteristics of DSSCs on an ITO-PEN substrate (under 100 mW cm−2) with films of 11 μm compressed at different pressures. (c) The dynamic voltage for the photo-supercapacitor under light illumination (under 100 mW cm−2) during the charging and discharging processes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. (d) Schematic of the integrated hybrid device containing a SiNW based heterojunction solar cell and a polypyrrole based supercapacitor. (e and f) SEM and TEM images of Si nanowires. Scale bars are 500 nm in the insets of (e and f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. 
In a similar configuration, a three-electrode photo-supercapacitor was constructed using a TiO2-based DSSC with a hydrous RuOx-based supercapacitor and a common Ag electrode.223 The energy conversion efficiency (η), which is defined by the ratio of the useful output of converted energy to the input, is given by  where Eout and Ein are the output and input energies (J cm−2), respectively; SSC and SDSSC are the areas of the electrodes (cm2) in the supercapacitor and DSSC parts, respectively; CSC is the areal capacitance of the supercapacitor (F cm−2); U is the discharge voltage after the ohmic drop (V); Pin is the power of the incident light illumination per area of the DSSC (W cm−2); and tch is the time of the photo-charging process (s). Based on the calculation, the overall energy conversion efficiency of the above photo-supercapacitor was 0.8%.223 It was also possible to construct an asymmetric supercapacitor for storing the harvested solar energy in the photo-supercapacitor system, as demonstrated by utilizing Co-doped NiO and activated carbon as the positive and negative electrodes, respectively.224 Nevertheless, the overall energy conversion efficiency remained at <1%.
To improve the overall energy conversion efficiency, a silicon-based multifunctional platform was utilized in the photo-supercapacitor.225 The common heavily-doped p-type silicon electrode replaced the conventional Pt electrode in the DSSC anode and at the same time served as an electrode for the supercapacitor. The surface of silicon was chemically etched to give a nanoporous layer, which was then coated with a thin graphene-like carbon layer at high temperatures. This nanoporous carbon layer therefore acted as the active material for charge storage in supercapacitors. The approach took advantage of the standard semiconductor manufacturing process to utilize a single silicon wafer for both energy storage and conversion. By putting a TiO2-based DSSC on top of the silicon wafer, the integrated photo-supercapacitor device showed an overall efficiency of 2.1%. Furthermore, in a similar fashion a hybrid silicon nanowire/PEDOT:PSS p–n heterojunction solar cell was employed as the energy harvesting component, with a PPy-based symmetric supercapacitor (Fig. 21d).226 Owing to the significant enhancement in light absorption using silicon nanowire arrays (Fig. 21e–h), the photo-supercapacitor achieved a record overall efficiency of 10.5%.
Photo-supercapacitors can also be obtained by printing organic photovoltaics (OPVs) and supercapacitors. As demonstrated by Wee et al.,227 a blend of poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT) and [6,6]-phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) at a ratio of 1:1 was spin-coated on a layer of PEDOT:PSS to yield an OPV film. Then, a CNT solution was drop-cast on top of the OPV, followed by the stacking of a PVA/H3PO4 gel electrolyte and the second electrode of a free-standing CNT film. A reduction of the internal resistance by 43% was found in the integrated device compared to that when connecting the two individual devices using an external wire. In addition, the hybrid device was thinner and lighter compared to that when two individual devices are connected, underpinning the potential of photo-supercapacitors for applications that require light weight and portability in electronic paper and wearable electronics.
Perovskite solar cells (PSCs) have shown the advantages of low-cost and simple manufacturing in solar energy harvesting. To integrate PSCs into a photo-supercapacitor, Xu et al. directly coated a PEDOT layer on top of the perovskite, as shown in Fig. 22a.228 This design has reduced the three-electrode configuration to the traditional two-electrode configuration. The energy conversion and storage performance of the photo-supercapacitor are shown in Fig. 22b, where the supercapacitor was charged to 0.7 V in 7 s under visible light illumination. After that, the device was discharged at different current densities, giving rise to a high energy storage efficiency of 73.77% and a maximum energy storage and conversion efficiency up to 4.7%. Moreover, Zhou et al. demonstrated that other functions, such as electrochromism, can also be added into the photo-supercapacitor.229 The device consisted of a PSC with an electrochromic supercapacitor based on MoO3/Au/MoO3 transparent electrodes. The colored states of the supercapacitor not only indicated the amount of energy stored and consumed in real time, but also enhanced the stability of the PSC component by preventing long-time photoexposure in fully charged states.
 Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration and working mechanism of the photo-supercapacitor device constructed based on a printable perovskite solar cell. (b) The voltage transients of the PSC during photocharge under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) illumination, and galvanostatic discharge at different discharge current densities in dark (blue shadow). Reprinted with permission from ref. 228. 
Lastly, photo-supercapacitors can be fabricated onto flexible substrates and woven into textiles. Li et al. demonstrated a flexible photo-supercapacitor device, known as energy harvesting and storing (ENHANS).24 As shown in Fig. 23a, the photo-supercapacitor was photo-charged for 1 min and discharged at various current densities (1–8 mA cm−2). The Ragone plot in Fig. 23b indicated that the performance of the supercapacitor part in ENHANS was similar to a solo supercapacitor. The device also exhibited high flexibility, as demonstrated by the bending at a 90° angle (Fig. 23c and d) and a similar photo-charging and discharging performance after numerous cycles of bending (Fig. 23e). This flexibility enabled an array of ENHANS to be woven into a single fabric structure, which was then used to store solar energy and light an LED after switching off the illumination (Fig. 23f and g).24
 Fig. 23  (a) Charge–discharge profile of the ENHANS ribbon. The solar side of the ENHANS ribbon has been charged with the solar simulator for 1 min and discharged with an electrochemical workstation at different current densities after 10 s photocharging (PC) off. (b) Ragone plots of an independent supercapacitor and an ENHANS ribbon to compare the energy density and power density at different charge–discharge rates (1, 2, 4 and 8 mA cm−2 current density). (c and d) Photograph of the ENHANS ribbon being bent at different angles. (e) Charge–discharge profile of the ENHANS ribbon after different bending cycles (the ENHANS ribbon has been photocharged for 1 min, and then removed from the light 10 s before discharge). (f) Schematic illustration of the ENHANS ribbon after weaving with the cotton yarn to make a portable lightweight cloth and (g) ENHANS ribbons weaved with cotton thread to demonstrate the working of the lightweight fabric. The photograph shows the charge deliverability of the woven matrix as a result of one minute photocharging. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24. 


3.6.3 Thermal energy harvesting. 
A device that can harvest thermal energy and generate electricity is known as a thermoelectric device. Although the output voltage of a thermoelectric device is often small, the ability to recover ubiquitous waste heat energy into electricity is highly desirable.230 To provide both energy harvesting and storage in a single device, the thermoelectric device is thus integrated with a supercapacitor to give a thermoelectric supercapacitor.
The mechanism in thermoelectric supercapacitors is known as the Soret effect, where a temperature gradient induces a molecular concentration gradient in solution via thermo-diffusion. For ions, this could lead to a thermovoltage that is determined by the thermal gradient across the electrolyte. By utilizing this effect, a thermoelectric electrolyte composed of PEO and NaOH was demonstrated, where PEO ended with alcohol groups was used as it can withstand relatively high temperatures (∼120 °C).231 NaOH was added to the PEO to transform the terminating alcohol groups (–C–OH) into anionic alkoxide groups (–C–O–Na). This resulted in an electrolyte composed of polymeric anions with mobile Na+ cations, showing an ionic conductivity of 8.13 × 10−5 S cm−1 and an ionic Seebeck coefficient of 11.1 mV K−1. The ionic Seebeck coefficient was about two orders of magnitude higher than that without polymer electrolytes. The thermoelectric supercapacitor constructed from the polymer electrolyte PEO–NaOH and CNT electrodes showed a specific capacitance of 1.03 mF cm−2. During operation, the charging voltage from the thermoelectric effect reached ∼50 mV. The efficiency η in converting heat into electricity could reach about 0.1% through the optimization of the device architecture with a large temperature gradient. The efficiency of this integrated thermoelectric supercapacitor could convert and store energy three orders of magnitude more than a traditional thermoelectric generator connected in series with a supercapacitor.231
The above liquid electrolyte is not favoured to harvest thermal energy from heat sources with different shapes. To solve this, a solid-state electrolyte was utilized by employing polystyrene sulfonic acid (PSSH) as an ion-conducting electrolyte and voltage generator.232,233 The thermoelectric supercapacitor employed two symmetric PANI deposited graphene/carbon nanotube (P–G/CNT) as the electrodes. When a temperature difference of 5 K was created over the wearable thermoelectric supercapacitor device, an output voltage of 38 mV was induced in the PSSH film without an external power supply. This thermally driven ion diffusion gave a large areal capacitance of 120 mF cm−2 for storing the harvested energy. Other electrolytes, such as a ferro/ferricyanide redox gel electrolyte, were also employed for thermoelectric supercapacitor devices.234
To demonstrate the practical use of thermoelectric supercapacitors, Kim et al. used a facile and scalable laser irradiation method to prepare laser-reduced graphene oxide intercalated by sulfate ions (SGO) films.235 A series of micro-supercapacitors can be fabricated by this method to increase the output voltage, as shown in Fig. 24a. For testing, 8 modules connected in series were thermally heated on one side (Fig. 24b). At a temperature difference of 14 °C, the output voltage was measured as a function of time while the number of modules was increased from 1 to 8 (Fig. 24c). In addition, when the temperature difference was increased to 30 °C, a maximum output voltage of 2.1 V was achieved with 8 modules (Fig. 24d). To thermally heat the device using solar radiation, a Prussian white (PW)-based electrochromic device was used as a smart window which automatically became dark to reduce solar radiation through the window (inset in Fig. 24e). When the device was irradiated using a solar simulator (110 mW cm−2), the black area at one end of the module absorbed the solar radiation more effectively, creating a temperature difference up to 14 °C and an output voltage of ∼1.1 V at steady state (Fig. 24e). The transparent glass gradually changed to a dark blue color in 20 min to keep the device at steady state (Fig. 24f).
 Fig. 24  (a) A micro-supercapacitor (MSC) made from SGO films reduced with a blue laser. (b) Serially connected modules whose ends are colored in black and silvery white to create temperature differences under solar radiation. (c) Time-dependent voltage at ΔT = 14 K when 1–8 modules were connected in series. (d) Steady-state voltage of 8 modules as a function of ΔT. (e) Time-evolution of the voltage when the modules were illuminated with the solar simulator at 110 mW cm−2. The inset illustrates the configuration of the electrochromic device. (f) Photographs of the electrochromic device powered by the modules under solar irradiation at 0, 4, 16, and 20 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 235. 
Applications. 
Supercapacitors with energy harvesting/conversion functions have been mainly used in the wearable electronics and biomedical fields, e.g., a coupled supercapacitor and TENG for a biomimetic pressure sensor.214 The resulting self-powered sensor was able to detect a wide range of signals with high sensitivity, demonstrating the effectiveness of such integrated devices without a conversion circuit. TENG-integrated supercapacitors have also been implemented to power self-charging electronics, automobiles and health monitoring devices with an excellent power output.236 However, the application scope of energy harvesting/conversion supercapacitors has been confined to low energy consumption scenarios since the electrical energy generated from mechanical, thermal, and solar power sources is relatively small and the conversion efficiency remains to be improved.

4. Summary and outlook
In summary, we have provided a comprehensive review of recent progress in materials design, device fabrication, and system optimisation to achieve high performance in multifunctional supercapacitors in terms of mechanical, surface/interfacial, thermal, electronic, photodetection, and energy harvesting/conversion functionalities. These multifunctional devices are playing an increasingly important role in developing next-generation self-powered and energy-efficient systems, with the unique advantage of combining energy storage capability with other functions in a single integrated device. It is noteworthy that supercapacitors with other new functions such as magnetism tuning and hydrogen generation have also been reported recently,237–240 clearly indicating that the important advances in this field will undoubtedly expand the application of supercapacitors. For example, the construction of supercapacitors with magnetism control could enable magnetic phase transitions in supercapacitors, which will play a role in many magnetoelectric (ME) systems (e.g., multiferroics, ME heterostructures and magnetoionics).241,242 The development of multifunctional supercapacitors also encourages researchers to study the charging mechanisms of old and new electrode materials along with their optimised structures to boost the device performance.243 Despite these, gaps in knowledge and certain technical challenges remain to be solved to open the door to a wider implementation of multifunctional supercapacitors. The specific challenges and possible strategies to tackle them are highlighted as follows:
• Device integrity: in multifunctional supercapacitors, maintaining the device integrity could be challenging due to the harsher conditions they encounter as compared to conventional supercapacitors. This is particularly the case in structural, self-healable, biocompatible and waterproof supercapacitors. For instance, debonding originating from repeated stretching and bending of Ecoflex or silicon rubber encapsulated supercapacitors could become a major concern under physical deformation. Better interfacial engineering with new device fabrication techniques (e.g., using 3D printing rather than laminating for integrating components) may offer a viable option for achieving the ultimate structural integrity, robustness, durability and stability.
• Trade-off in performance: there is generally a trade-off between electrochemical energy storage performance and other functions in multifunctional supercapacitors. The possible incompatibility or even mutual exclusion between supercapacitor materials and other functional materials may also cause performance loss in multifunctional devices compared with their ‘stand-alone’ versions. For instance, the total efficiency of energy conversion and storage in photo-supercapacitors is low due to the balance between solar energy capturing and the energy loss caused by large internal resistance in supercapacitors. To circumvent the trade-off and improve the multifunctional performance, radical approaches with optimisation in device structure are needed. The continuous search for new multifunctional materials and design concepts is also likely to overcome this compromise in the future.
• Understanding of ion transport: ion transport is a fundamental process in electrochemical devices. Upon the application of a voltage, ions of counter charge will move to the surface or near-surface regions of the electrode to induce electrostatic charge storage in EDLCs or redox reactions in pseudocapacitors. Unfortunately, our current understanding of ion transport is still limited, especially when ions also affect other processes such as electrochromism, photodetection and energy harvesting/conversion in multifunctional supercapacitors. Novel technologies that can probe ion transport in real time as well as quantify the number of specific ions, including electrochemical quartz crystal microbalance (EQCM) and in situ nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR),243 may help the investigation of ion transport behaviors and provide valuable insights into the charge storage mechanism, thereby guiding further development of multifunctional supercapacitors.
• Energy density: The low energy density has been a main bottleneck in the widespread application of supercapacitors. Substantial efforts have been devoted to improving the energy density of both EDLCs and pseudocapacitors, with the latest advances in using new electrode materials and electrolytes. New materials with high specific capacitance and good electrical conductivity, such as MXenes and intercalated metal oxides,14,15 should be explored for multifunctional supercapacitors. Moreover, asymmetric hybrid supercapacitors with one capacitor-type electrode for excellent power density and another battery-type electrode for ideal energy density could be designed to expand the potential window, and hence the energy density. In addition, the use of electrolytes including novel ionic liquids and redox-active electrolytes could be effective in increasing the energy density.244
• Electrode design: the electrode geometry is essential in the fabrication of multifunctional supercapacitors, as it strongly affects ion transport and the performance of energy storage and other functions.245 Nanostructuring of electrode materials offers a promising route to reduce the diffusion length and increase the capacitance. Moreover, the manipulation of the structure and dimensions of the electrode has rendered other functions such as a fast frequency response in supercapacitors. New fabrication techniques such as additive manufacturing (i.e., 3D printing) could therefore be utilized for controlling and tuning the microstructures (such as pore size and density) in future electrode fabrication.246
• Structural electrolyte: in structural supercapacitors, it is often difficult to construct perfectly miscible bi-continuous ionic liquid/epoxy electrolyte systems, as the electrolyte-rich regions (i.e., ion conducting area) are segregated from the epoxy-rich regions and the ion transport pathways are consequently blocked by non-conducting epoxy. To achieve a synergy between the polymer matrix and ionic liquid, a new structure could possibly be designed by inserting a honeycomb core between two carbon fibre electrodes and filling the core with electrolyte, as shown in Fig. 25a. The structure can improve both the mechanical and electrochemical performance simultaneously. Another design is to encapsulate flexible supercapacitors with two stiff skins as protectors, as shown in Fig. 25b. This design separates the core supercapacitors from the shell structural units while maintaining the structural compactness and integrity.
 Fig. 25  Schematic of supercapacitors with new designs: (a) honeycomb design; and (b) sandwich structural composite with a supercapacitor core. 
• Energy storage-to-conversion efficiency: current supercapacitors integrated with energy harvesting/conversion functions still suffer from low energy storage-to-conversion efficiency, which significantly limits their application scope. New energy harvesting materials that are more compatible or even possess synergistic effects with supercapacitors are expected to be developed. In addition, the mechanism of energy conversion from various sources varies from case to case and the awareness towards their energy generation mechanism is still limited. To this end, finite element analysis (FEA) can be used as a powerful tool to simulate various working scenarios and establish comprehensive understanding about different mechanisms.
• Standard in performance evaluation: due to the interdisciplinary nature, one of the major problems in multifunctional supercapacitor research is the lack of standards to evaluate the performance. Taking biocompatible supercapacitors as an example, a variety of materials have been claimed as biocompatible materials, ranging from those non-toxic to humans to those implantable into human organs. Meanwhile, biocompatibility tests have relied on different cell lines and protocols, leading to difficulties for comparison. A consensus in testing methods and the use of the same language from different fields should be targeted through interdisciplinary collaborations.
• Safety: safety is a crucial issue for multifunctional supercapacitors, particularly the concerns arising from multiple factors such as thermal runaway, structural damage, electrolyte leakage, cytotoxicity, etc. Despite recent advances, we are still far from the safe operation of such devices in many applications. Attention should therefore be drawn from performance-only evaluation to a holistic assessment of the complex environment by taking safety concerns into consideration at the early stage of device fabrication.
It should be noted that the current market of supercapacitors is dominated by EDLCs, while the share of multifunctional supercapacitors is still minor. To accelerate the commercialization of multifunctional supercapacitors, the above knowledge gap and technical challenges need to be addressed. In addition, costs associated with the added complexity such as integration and packaging in multifunctional supercapacitors should be managed properly. Traditionally, researchers tend to focus on the incorporation of novel functionalities into supercapacitors while paying less attention to the market demands, cost and feasibility of mass production. This needs to be changed as it is crucial for researchers to work closely with industry and government to reach common goals. To date, the market of multifunctional supercapacitors is of most interest in operation scenarios that do not consume a large amount of energy (e.g., wearable electronics). In the future, multifunctional supercapacitors may find more applications in engineering realms which have special requirements regarding weight (e.g., unmanned aerial vehicles), volume (e.g., wearable electronics) or the environment (e.g., implantable medical devices).
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
References
F. Wang, X. Wu, X. Yuan, Z. Liu, Y. Zhang, L. Fu, Y. Zhu, Q. Zhou, Y. Wu and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46, 6816 RSC .
K. Fic, A. Platek, J. Piwek and E. Frackowiak, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 437 CrossRef CAS .
D. O. Akinyele and R. K. Rayudu, Sustain. Energy Tech. Assessments, 2014, 8, 74 CrossRef .
S. Koohi-Kamali, V. V. Tyagi, N. A. Rahim, N. L. Panwar and H. Mokhlis, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2013, 25, 135 CrossRef .
J. R. Miller and P. Simon, Science, 2008, 321, 651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Liu, X. Yan, F. Hu, G. Gao, G. Wu and X. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1705713 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yan, Q. Wang, T. Wei and Z. Fan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300816 CrossRef .
M. R. Lukatskaya, B. Dunn and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 12647 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wu, L. Li, J.-M. Yan and X.-B. Zhang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600382 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Cao, Z. Yin and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1850 RSC .
Z. Lei, J. Zhang, L. L. Zhang, N. A. Kumard and X. S. Zhao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1891 RSC .
G. Lota, K. Fic and E. Frackowiak, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 1592 RSC .
M. F. El-Kady, Y. Shao and R. B. Kaner, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 16033 CrossRef CAS .
V. Augustyn, P. Simon and B. Dunn, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1597 RSC .
V. Augustyn and Y. Gogotsi, Joule, 2017, 1, 443 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, X. Cheng, F. Huang, Z. Sha, Z. Han, J. Chen, W. Yang, Y. Yu, J. Zhang and S. Peng, Carbon, 2021, 172, 272–282 CrossRef CAS .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 797 RSC .
C. Zhong, Y. Deng, W. Hu, J. Qiao, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 7484 RSC .
Z. Lin, E. Goikolea, A. Balducci, K. Naoi, P. L. Taberna, M. Salanne, G. Yushin and P. Simon, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 419 CrossRef CAS .
P. Simon, Y. Gogotsi and B. Dunn, Science, 2014, 343, 1210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zuo, R. Li, C. Zhou, Y. Li, J. Xia and J. Liu, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600539 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Maspoch, D. Ruiz-Molina and J. Veciana, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2007, 36, 770 RSC .
Y. Huang, M. Zhong, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Z. Wang, Q. Xue, X. Xie and C. Zhi, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10310 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Li, M. M. Islam, J. Moore, J. Sleppy, C. Morrison, K. Konstantinov, S. X. Dou, C. Renduchintala and J. Thomas, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7, 13319 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chai, N. Zhang, P. Sun, Y. Huang, C. Zhao, H. J. Fan, X. Fan and W. Mai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 9201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Chen, L. Qiu, Z. Yang, Z. Cai, J. Ren, H. Li, H. Lin, X. Sun and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 11977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Sun, Z. Yang, G. Guan, Z. Zhang, L. Qiu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 1897 RSC .
P. Liu, E. Sherman and A. Jacobsen, J. Power Sources, 2009, 189, 646 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qian, A. R. Kucernak, E. S. Greenhalgh, A. Bismarck and M. S. P. Shaffer, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 6113 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yashiro, M. Shoda, Y. Tomizawa, T. Manaka and N. Hagiwara, J. Artif. Organs, 2012, 15, 244 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Bettinger and Z. Bao, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D.-H. Kim, N. Lu, R. Ghaffari, Y.-S. Kim, S. P. Lee, L. Xu, J. Wu, R.-H. Kim, J. Song, Z. Liu, J. Viventi, B. de Graff, B. Elolampi, M. Mansour, M. J. Slepian, S. Hwang, J. D. Moss, S.-M. Won, Y. Huang, B. Litt and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10, 316 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. A. Amarnath, N. Venkatesan, M. Doble and S. N. Sawant, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 5012 RSC .
G. Lanzani, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 775 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yang, Z. Liu, B. K. Chandran, J. Deng, J. Yu, D. Qi, W. Li, Y. Tang, C. Zhang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 5593 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dou, T. Pan, A. Zhou, S. Xu, X. Liu, J. Han, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 8462 RSC .
Y. Shi, H. Ha, A. Al-Sudani, C. J. Ellison and G. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shi, Q. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. Jia and X. Xu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 7171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, J. Wang, W. Sheng, F. Wang, J. Zhang, F. Zhu, X. Zhuang, R. Jordan, O. G. Schmidt and X. Feng, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 1717 RSC .
Z. Fan, N. Islam and S. B. Bayne, Nano Energy, 2017, 39, 306 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Miller, R. A. Outlaw and B. C. Holloway, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 10443 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yang, P. Sun and W. Mai, Mater. Today, 2016, 19, 394 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, J. Cao, Q. Lu, X. Wang, L. Song, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1604639 CrossRef .
L. Sun, X. Wang, K. Zhang, J. Zou, Z. Yan, X. Hu and Q. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2015, 15, 445 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhu, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, H. Li, H. Geng and C. Zhi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 4481 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramadoss, B. Saravanakumar, S. W. Lee, Y.-S. Kim, S. J. Kim and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 4337 CrossRef CAS .
M. Salanne, B. Rotenberg, K. Naoi, K. Kaneko, P.-L. Taberna, C. P. Grey, B. Dunn and P. Simon, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16070 CrossRef CAS .
A. G. Pandolfo and A. F. Hollenkamp, J. Power Sources, 2006, 157, 11 CrossRef CAS .
T. Brousse, D. Belanger and J. W. Long, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A5185 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Miller, R. A. Outlaw and B. C. Holloway, Science, 2010, 329, 1637 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Shirshova, A. Bismarck, S. Carreyette, Q. P. V. Fontana, E. S. Greenhalgh, P. Jacobsson, P. Johansson, M. J. Marczewski, G. Kalinka, A. R. J. Kucernak, J. Scheers, M. S. P. Shaffer, J. H. G. Steinke and M. Wienrich, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 15300 RSC .
T. Hibino, K. Kobayashi, M. Nagao and S. Kawasaki, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 7903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Guo, X. Wang, L. Hu, T. Zhai, H. Li and N. Yu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19820 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yue, N. Liu, Y. Ma, S. Wang, W. Liu, C. Luo, H. Zhang, F. Cheng, J. Rao, X. Hu, J. Su and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 4224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Shen, Y. Xie, B. Zhu, M. Sanghadasa, Y. Tang and L. Lin, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 14324 CrossRef PubMed .
E. S. Greenhalgh, J. Ankersen, L. E. Asp, A. Bismarck, Q. P. V. Fontana, M. Houlle, G. Kalinka, A. Kucernak, M. Mistry, S. Nguyen, H. Qian, M. S. P. Shaffer, N. Shirshova, J. H. G. Steinke and M. Wienrich, J. Compos. Mater., 2015, 49, 1823 CrossRef CAS .
R. Reece, C. Lekakou and P. A. Smith, Mater. Sci. Technol., 2019, 35, 368 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Deka, A. Hazarika, J. Kim, Y.-B. Park and H. W. Park, Int. J. Energy Res., 2017, 41, 1397 CrossRef .
H. Qian, H. Diao, N. Shirshova, E. S. Greenhalgh, J. G. H. Steinke, M. S. P. Shaffer and A. Bismarck, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2013, 395, 241 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ganguly, A. Karakassides, J. Benson, S. Hussain and P. Papakonstantinou, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2020, 3, 4245–4254 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Deka, A. Hazarika, J. Kim, Y.-B. Park and H. W. Park, Composites, Part A, 2016, 87, 256 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cakici, K. R. Reddy and F. Alonso-Marroquin, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 309, 151 CrossRef CAS .
A. Javaid, K. K. C. Ho, A. Bismarck, M. S. P. Shaffer, J. H. G. Steinke and E. S. Greenhalgh, J. Compos. Mater., 2014, 48, 1409 CrossRef .
S.-H. Bae, C. Jeon, S. Oh, C.-G. Kim, M. Seo and I.-K. Oh, Carbon, 2018, 139, 10–20 CrossRef CAS .
V. Aravindan and P. Vickraman, Ionics, 2007, 13, 277 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Asp and E. S. Greenhalgh, Compos. Sci. Technol., 2014, 101, 41 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. M. Nor, M. Deraman, R. Omar, E. Taer, Awitdrus, R. Farma, N. H. Basri and B. N. M. Dolah, AIP Conf. Proc., 2014, 1586, 68 CrossRef CAS .
K.-Y. Chan, B. Jia, H. Lin, N. Hameed, J.-H. Lee and K.-T. Lau, Compos. Struct., 2018, 188, 126 CrossRef .
A. Laforgue and L. Robitaille, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, A929 CrossRef CAS .
E. Senokos, Y. Ou, J. J. Torres, F. Sket, C. González, R. Marcilla and J. J. Vilatela, Sci. Rep., 2018, 8, 3407 CrossRef PubMed .

          E. Greenhalgh, N. Shirshova, A. Kucernak, M. Shaffer, R. Teixeira, A. Bismarck, M. Kireitseu and R. Shelton, Recent Advances in Structural Supercapacitors for Transport Applications Published on 20th International Conference on Composite Materials Copenhagen, 2015 Search PubMed.

          J. F. Snyder, D. J. O’Brien, D. M. Baechle, D. E. Mattson and E. D. Wetzel, Proceedings of SMASIS08 ASME Conference on Smart Materials, Adaptive Structures and Intelligent Systems, Ellicott City, Maryland, 2008.
J. P. Thomas, S. M. Qidwai, W. R. Pogue and G. T. Pham, J. Compos. Mater., 2012, 47, 5–26 CrossRef .
B. K. Deka, A. Hazarika, J. Kim, Y.-B. Park and H. W. Park, Int. J. Energy Res., 2017, 41, 1397–1411 CrossRef .
M. D. Hager, P. Greil, C. Leyens, S. van der Zwaag and U. S. Schubert, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 5424 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. A. Odom, S. Chayanupatkul, B. J. Blaiszik, O. Zhao, A. C. Jackson, P. V. Braun, N. R. Sottos, S. R. White and J. S. Moore, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2578 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Chen, D. Wang, Y. Yang, Q. Huang, S. Zhu and Z. Zheng, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700890 CrossRef .
C. Gong, J. Liang, W. Hu, X. Niu, S. Ma, H. T. Hahn and Q. Pei, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 4186 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Amamoto, J. Kamada, H. Otsuka, A. Takahara and K. Matyjaszewski, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2011, 50, 1660 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Li, S. Chen, M. Wu and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 4578 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, N. Liu, J. Su, L. Li, F. Long, Z. Zou, X. Jiang and Y. Gao, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 2066 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Trivedi, D. Bhattacharjya, J.-S. Yu and A. Kumar, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 3294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Cordier, F. Tournilhac, C. Soulie-Ziakovic and L. Leibler, Nature, 2008, 451, 977 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, X. Zhou, Q. Tang, H. Bao, G. Wang and P. Saha, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8769 RSC .
S. Burattini, H. M. Colquhoun, J. D. Fox, D. Friedmann, B. W. Greenland, P. J. F. Harris, W. Hayes, M. E. Mackay and S. J. Rowan, Chem. Commun., 2009, 6717 RSC .
T. Kakuta, Y. Takashima, M. Nakahata, M. Otsubo, H. Yamaguchi and A. Harada, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2849 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Harrington, H. S. Gupta, P. Fratzl and J. H. Waite, J. Struct. Biol., 2009, 167, 47 CrossRef CAS .
S. Bode, R. K. Bose, S. Matthes, M. Ehrhardt, A. Seifert, F. H. Schacher, R. M. Paulus, S. Stumpf, B. Sandmann, J. Vitz, A. Winter, S. Hoeppener, S. J. Garcia, S. Spange, S. van der Zwaag, M. D. Hager and U. S. Schubert, Polym. Chem., 2013, 4, 4966 RSC .
L. Huang, N. Yi, Y. Wu, Y. Zhang, Q. Zhang, Y. Huang, Y. Ma and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 2224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. C.-K. Tee, C. Wang, R. Allen and Z. Bao, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2012, 7, 826 CrossRef PubMed .
A. J. Bandodkar, C. S. López, A. M. V. Mohan, L. Yin, R. Kumar and J. Wang, Sci. Adv., 2016, 2, e1601465 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Tao, L. Qin, Z. Wang and Q. Pan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, B. Zhu, W. Jiang, Y. Yang, W. R. Leow, H. Wang and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3638–3643 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, T. Lv, H. Sun, G. Qian, N. Li, Y. Yao and T. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Liang, L. Zhao, Q. Wang, Y. Ma and D. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 22329 RSC .
H. Sun, X. You, Y. Jiang, G. Guan, X. Fang, J. Deng, P. Chen, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 9526 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, W. Meng, Z. Pei, C. Liu, H. Hu and C. Zhi, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, K. Zheng and P. Wan, Small, 2018, 14, 1704497 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Han, H. Wang, Y. Yue, C. Mei, J. Chen, C. Huang, Q. Wu and X. Xu, Carbon, 2019, 149, 1 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wu, L. Meng, Q. Wang, W. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 352, 423 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Tao and Q. Pan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 17732 RSC .

          N. Mhlanga and K. Mphahlele, Self-standing Substrates, Materials and Applications,  2019, pp. 235–267 DOI:10.1007/978-3-030-29522-6_8.
Y. Guo, K. Zheng and P. Wan, Small, 2018, 14, 1704497 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Cheng, X. Xiao, K. Pan and H. Pang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122565 CrossRef CAS .
H. J. Sim, H. Kim, Y. Jang, G. M. Spinks, S. Gambhir, D. L. Officer, G. G. Wallace and S. J. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 46026–46033 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Z. Chen, C. Wang, J. Lopez, Z. Lu, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, 2015, 5, 1401826.
E. Dauzon, A. E. Mansour, M. R. Niazi, R. Munir, D.-M. Smilgies, X. Sallenave, C. Plesse, F. Goubard and A. Amassian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 17570–17582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Li, K. Sun and J. Ouyang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 18415–18423 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Yan, W. Kang, J. Wang, M. Cui, X. Wang, C. Y. Foo, K. J. Chee and P. S. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 316–322 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wang, F. Chen, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, Q. Yang, Y. Zhao, S. Du, Q. Chen and C. Zhi, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 15707–15711 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhou, C.-H. Wang, W. Lu and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1902779 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          Y. Zhou, J. Fang, Y. Zhao and T. Lin, Handbook of Fibrous Materials,  2020, pp. 557–591 Search PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Cheng, Q. Guan, H. Huang, Y. Li, J. Zhou, W. Ni, B. Wang, S. He and H. Peng, Nano Energy, 2018, 45, 210–219 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Song, X. Wang, C. Lv, Y. An, M. Liang, T. Ma, D. He, Y.-J. Zheng, S.-Q. Huang, H. Yu and H. Jiang, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10988 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jiao, A. Zhou, M. Wu and H. Hu, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900529 CrossRef PubMed .
I. Nam, G.-P. Kim, S. Park, J. W. Han and J. Yi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1095–1102 RSC .
B. S. Kim, K. Lee, S. Kang, S. Lee, J. B. Pyo, I. S. Choi, K. Char, J. H. Park, S.-S. Lee and J. Lee, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 13272–13280 RSC .

          H. Sagan, Space-filling curves, Springer Science & Business Media,  2012 Search PubMed .
Y. de Rancourt de Mimérand, K. Li and J. Guo, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 24771–24781 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Tiliakos, A. M. I. Trefilov, E. Tanasa, A. Balan and I. Stamatin, J. Power Sources, 2018, 384, 145–155 CrossRef CAS .
L. V. Thekkekara and M. Gu, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 45585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Fan, W.-H. Yeo, Y. Su, Y. Hattori, W. Lee, S.-Y. Jung, Y. Zhang, Z. Liu, H. Cheng, L. Falgout, M. Bajema, T. Coleman, D. Gregoire, R. J. Larsen, Y. Huang and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 3266 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Xu, Y. Zhang, J. Cho, J. Lee, X. Huang, L. Jia, J. A. Fan, Y. Su, J. Su, H. Zhang, H. Cheng, B. Lu, C. Yu, C. Chuang, T.-I. Kim, T. Song, K. Shigeta, S. Kang, C. Dagdeviren, I. Petrov, P. V. Braun, Y. Huang, U. Paik and J. A. Rogers, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1543 CrossRef PubMed .
W.-J. Song, S. Yoo, G. Song, S. Lee, M. Kong, J. Rim, U. Jeong and S. Park, Batteries Supercaps, 2019, 2, 181–199 CrossRef .
L. V. Kayser and D. J. Lipomi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806133 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chen, Y. Xue, A. K. Roy and L. Dai, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 1039–1046 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Roh, B.-U. Hwang, D. Kim, B.-Y. Kim and N.-E. Lee, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 6252–6261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Sekitani, H. Nakajima, H. Maeda, T. Fukushima, T. Aida, K. Hata and T. Someya, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 494–499 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Yi, L. Lin, S. Niu, P. K. Yang, Z. Wang, J. Chen, Y. Zhou, Y. Zi, J. Wang, Q. Liao, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 3688–3696 CrossRef CAS .
J. S. Chae, N.-S. Heo, C. H. Kwak, W.-S. Cho, G. H. Seol, W.-S. Yoon, H.-K. Kim, D. J. Fray, A. T. E. Vilian, Y.-K. Han, Y. S. Huh and K. C. Roh, Nano Energy, 2017, 34, 86 CrossRef CAS .
E. Armelin, M. M. Perez-Madrigal, C. Aleman and D. D. Diaz, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 8952 RSC .
Q. Zhang, Y. Qiao, F. Hao, L. Zhang, S. Wu, Y. Li, J. Li and X.-M. Song, Chem. – Eur. J., 2010, 16, 8133 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Hur, K. Im, S. W. Kim, U. J. Kim, J. Lee, S. Hwang, J. Song, S. Kim, S. Hwang and N. Park, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 14460 RSC .
H. J. Sim, C. Choi, D. Y. Lee, H. Kim, J.-H. Yun, J. M. Kim, T. M. Kang, R. Ovalle, R. H. Baughman, C. W. Kee and S. J. Kim, Nano Energy, 2018, 47, 385 CrossRef CAS .
G. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Lin, J. Yang, H. Zhang and P. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54, 4651 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. He, J. Cao, S. Xie, J. Deng, Q. Gao, L. Qiu, J. Zhang, L. Wang, Y. Hu and H. Peng, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 10124 RSC .
Z. Tao, P. Wang, L. Wang, L. Xiao, F. Zhang and J. Na, J. Mater. Chem. B, 2014, 2, 471 RSC .
J. Park, D. Hong, D. Kim, K.-E. Byun and S. Hong, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 3742 CrossRef CAS .
S. He, Y. Hu, J. Wan, Q. Gao, Y. Wang, S. Xie, L. Qiu, C. Wang, G. Zheng, B. Wang and H. Peng, Carbon, 2017, 122, 162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Stauss and I. Honma, Bull. Chem. Soc. Jpn., 2018, 91, 492–505 CrossRef CAS .
F. V. Y. Tjong and V. Y. Reddy, Circulation, 2017, 135, 1458–1470 CrossRef PubMed .
M. N. Dakurah, C. Koo, W. Choi and Y.-H. Joung, Int. Neurol. J., 2015, 19, 133–141 CrossRef PubMed .
C. G. Eleftheriou, J. B. Zimmermann, H. D. Kjeldsen, M. David-Pur, Y. Hanein and E. Sernagor, Biomaterials, 2017, 112, 108–121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J.-C. Chiou, S.-H. Hsu, Y.-C. Huang, G.-T. Yeh, W.-T. Liou and C.-K. J. S. Kuei, Sensors, 2017, 17, 108 CrossRef PubMed .
F. A. Hassani, W. Y. X. Peh, G. G. L. Gammad, R. P. Mogan, T. K. Ng, T. L. C. Kuo, L. G. Ng, P. Luu, S.-C. Yen and C. Lee, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1700143 CrossRef PubMed .
H. M. K. V. Breda, F. M. J. Martens, J. Tromp and J. P. F. A. Heesakkers, J. Urol., 2017, 198, 205–210 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Lamberti and C. F. Pirri, J. Energy Storage, 2016, 8, 193–197 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, B. Xu, J. Wen, J. Gong, T. Hua, C.-W. Kan and J. Deng, Small, 2018, 14, 17043763 Search PubMed .
F. Yi, J. Wang, X. Wang, S. Niu, S. Li, Q. Liao, Y. Xu, Z. You, Y. Zhang and Z. L. Wang, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 6519 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, J. Yoon, G. Lee, S.-H. Paik, G. Choi, D. Kim, B.-M. Kim, G. Zi and J. S. Ha, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16016 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Feng, S. Li, Y. Li, H. Li, L. Zhang, J. Zhai, Y. Song, B. Liu, L. Jiang and D. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2002, 14, 1857 CrossRef CAS .
D. Soto, A. Ugur, T. A. Farnham, K. K. Gleason and K. K. Varanasi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1707355 CrossRef .
Y. Li, S. Chen, M. Wu and J. Sun, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 3344 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Choi, J. Lee, H. Han, J. Woo, K. Park, J. Seo and T. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 36094 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, Q. Huang, L. Niu, D. Wang, C. Yan, Y. She and Z. Zheng, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606679 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, A. Sumboja, W. L. Foo, C. Y. Yan, K. Tsukagoshi and P. S. Lee, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 15827–15833 RSC .
Z. Chen, P.-C. Hsu, J. Lopez, Y. Li, J. W. F. To, N. Liu, C. Wang, S. C. Andrews, J. Liu, Y. Cui and Z. Bao, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 1 Search PubMed .
K. Hung, C. Masarapu, T. Ko and B. Wei, J. Power Sources, 2009, 193, 944 CrossRef CAS .
F. Cheng, X. Yu, J. Wang, Z. Shi and C. Wu, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 200, 106 CrossRef CAS .
J. Tian, C. Cui, Q. Xie, W. Qian, C. Xue, Y. Miao, Y. Jin, G. Zhang and B. Guo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 3593 RSC .
R. Lin, P.-L. Taberna, S. Fantini, V. Presser, C. R. Perez, F. Malbosc, N. L. Rupesinghe, K. B. K. Teo, Y. Gogotsi and P. Simon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2396 CrossRef CAS .
R. Newell, J. Faure-Vincent, B. Iliev, T. Schubert and D. Aradilla, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 267, 15 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Abbas and F. Beguin, J. Power Sources, 2016, 318, 235 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Abbas and F. Beguin, ChemSusChem, 2018, 11, 975 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Korenblit, A. Kajdos, W. C. West, M. C. Smart, E. J. Brandon, A. Kvit, J. Jagiello and G. Yushin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2012, 22, 1655 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xu, N. Yuan, J. M. Razal, Y. Zheng, X. Zhou, J. Ding, K. Cho, S. Ge, R. Zhang, Y. Gogotsi and R. H. Baughman, Energy Storage Mater., 2019, 22, 323 CrossRef .
X. Liu, B. Wu, N. Brandon and Q. Wang, Energy Technol., 2017, 5, 220 CrossRef CAS .
S.-K. Kim, H. J. Kim, J.-C. Lee, P. V. Braun and H. S. Park, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 8569 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Borges, A. L. M. Reddy, M.-T. F. Rodrigues, H. Gullapalli, K. Balakrishnan, G. G. Silva and P. M. Ajayan, Sci. Rep., 2013, 3, 2572 CrossRef PubMed .
C.-H. Chang, B. Hsia, J. P. Alper, S. Wang, L. E. Luna, C. Carraro, S.-Y. Lu and R. Maboudian, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 26658 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, H5043 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barcellona, L. Piegari and A. Villa, J. Energy Storage, 2019, 25, 100833 CrossRef .
M. Yang, Y. F. Meng, G. Li, Y. J. Li, Y. Chen, X. Y. Zhao and H. T. Li, Math. Probl. Eng., 2013, 2013, 579091 Search PubMed .
K. Kwak, D. Kwak and J. Yoon, J. Power Sources, 2015, 288, 328–336 CrossRef CAS .
X. R. Lin, M. Salari, L. M. R. Arava, P. M. Ajayan and M. W. Grinstaff, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 5848–5887 RSC .
K. C. Chin, N. W. Green and E. J. Brandon, J. Power Sources, 2018, 379, 155–159 CrossRef CAS .
M. Cai, R. A. Outlaw, R. A. Quinlan, D. Premathilake, S. M. Butler and J. R. Miller, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 5873 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yoon, K. Lee, S. Kwon, S. Seo, H. Yoo, S. Kim, Y. Shin, Y. Park, D. Kim, J.-Y. Choi and H. Lee, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 4580 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Joseph, A. Paravannoor, S. V. Nair, Z. J. Han, K. Ostrikov and A. Balakrishnan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14105 RSC .
Y. Yoo, S. Kim, B. Kim and W. Kim, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 11801 RSC .
Z.-S. Wu, Z. Liu, K. Parvez, X. Feng and K. Müllen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lin, C. Zhang, Z. Yan, Y. Zhu, Z. Peng, R. H. Hauge, D. Natelson and J. M. Tour, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 72 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wu, L. Li, Z. Lin, B. Song, Z. Li, K.-S. Moon, C.-P. Wong and S.-L. Bai, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10983 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Bo, W. Zhu, W. Ma, Z. Wen, X. Shuai, J. Chen, J. Yan, Z. Wang, K. Cen and X. Feng, Adv. Mater., 2013, 25, 5799 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Rangom, X. S. Tang and L. F. Nazar, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 7248 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Ren, X. Pan, S. Bayne and Z. Fan, Carbon, 2014, 71, 94 CrossRef CAS .
G. Ren, S. Li, Z.-X. Fan, M. N. F. Hoque and Z. Fan, J. Power Sources, 2016, 325, 152 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhou, M. Zhang, J. Chen, J.-D. Hong and G. Shi, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 20741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Premathilake, R. A. Outlaw, S. G. Parler, S. M. Butler and J. R. Miller, Carbon, 2017, 111, 231 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Han, C. Huang, S. S. Meysami, D. Piche, D. H. Seo, S. Pineda, A. T. Murdock, P. S. Bruce, P. S. Grant and N. Grobert, Carbon, 2018, 126, 305 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, Q. Zhou, J. Chen, X. Yu, L. Huang, Y. Li, C. Li and G. Shi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2005 RSC .
P. Yang, P. Sun, Z. Chai, L. Huang, X. Cai, S. Tan, J. Song and W. Mai, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 11935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Wang, J. S. Chen, Z. Wang, S. Madhavi and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 1188 CrossRef CAS .
G. Cai, X. Wang, M. Cui, P. Darmawan, J. Wang, A. L.-S. Eh and P. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 258–267 CrossRef CAS .
B. Saravanakumar, K. K. Purushothaman and G. Muralidharan, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2012, 4, 4484 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. J. Scherer, L. Li, P. M. S. Cunha, O. A. Scherman and U. Steiner, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 1217 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Wei, M. R. J. Scherer, C. Bower, P. Andrew, T. Ryhänen and U. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 1857 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. J. Scherer and U. Steiner, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 3005 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cai, X. Wang, M. Cui, P. Darmawan, J. Wang, A. L.-S. Eh and P. S. Lee, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 258 CrossRef CAS .
R. Yuksel, S. C. Cevher, A. Cirpan, L. Toppare and H. E. Unalan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2805–A2810 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shen, L. Du, S. Tan, Z. Zang, C. Zhao and W. Mai, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 6296 RSC .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, M. Cui, J. Wang, J. Chen, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501882 CrossRef .
T. G. Yun, M. Park, D.-H. Kim, D. Kim, J. Y. Cheong, J. G. Bae, S. M. Han and I.-D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3141 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, L. Gao, L. Li and L. Guo, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 786, 40 CrossRef CAS .
T. G. Yun, D. Kim, Y. H. Kim, M. Park, S. Hyun and S. M. Han, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1606728 CrossRef PubMed .
E. O. Polat and C. Kocabas, Nano
Lett., 2013, 13, 5851 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Cai, P. Darmawan, M. Cui, J. Wang, J. Chen, S. Magdassi and P. S. Lee, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1501882 CrossRef .
S. Wang, N. Liu, J. Rao, Y. Yue, K. Gao, J. Su, L. Li, X. Jiang, Z. Liu and Y. Gao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 22199 RSC .
X. Wang, B. Liu, R. Liu, Q. Wang, X. Hou, D. Chen, R. Wang and G. Shen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 1849 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Huang, S. V. Kershaw, Z. Wang, Z. Pei, J. Liu, Y. Huang, H. Li, M. Zhu, A. L. Rogach and C. Zhi, Small, 2016, 12, 3393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Li, L. Y. Niu, Z. J. Zheng and F. Yan, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 5239–5273 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Razeghi and A. Rogalski, J. Appl. Phys., 1996, 79, 7433–7473 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, X. Chen, P. Chen, G. Guan, L. Qiu, H. Lin, Z. Yang, W. Bai, Y. Luo and H. Peng, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 466–470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zou, M. Zhang, J. Huang, J. Bian, Y. Jie, M. Willander, X. Cao, N. Wang and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702671 CrossRef .
Y. Zi, L. Lin, J. Wang, S. Wang, J. Chen, X. Fan, P.-K. Yang, F. Yi and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2340 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Wen, Y. Zi, P. Zhou, J. Lin, H. Guo, Y. Xu and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1070 CrossRef CAS .
S. Qin, Q. Zhang, X. Yang, M. Liu, Q. Sun and Z. L. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800069 CrossRef .
K. Parida, V. Bhavanasi, V. Kumar, J. Wang and P. S. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 70 CrossRef CAS .
P. Pazhamalai, K. Krishnamoorthy, V. K. Mariappan, S. Sahoo, S. Manoharan and S.-J. Kim, Adv. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 5, 1800055 CrossRef .
A. Maitra, S. K. Karan, S. Paria, A. K. Das, R. Bera, L. Halder, S. K. Si, A. Bera and B. B. Khatua, Nano Energy, 2017, 40, 633 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Ng, H. N. Lim, S. Hayase, I. Harrison, A. Pandikumar and N. M. Huang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 296, 169 CrossRef CAS .
H.-W. Chen, C.-Y. Hsu, J.-G. Chen, K.-M. Lee, C.-C. Wang, K.-C. Huang and K.-C. Ho, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195, 6225 CrossRef CAS .
M. Skunik-Nuckowska, K. Grzejszczyk, P. J. Kulesza, L. Yang, N. Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, E. Johansson and A. Hagfeldt, J. Power Sources, 2013, 234, 91 CrossRef CAS .
C. Bagheri, A. Aghaei, M. Y. Ghotbi, E. Marzbanrad, N. Vlachopoulos, L. Häggman, M. Wang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt, M. Skunik-Nuckowska and P. J. Kulesza, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 143, 390 CrossRef .
A. P. Cohn, W. R. Erwin, K. Share, L. Oakes, A. S. Westover, R. E. Carter, R. Bardhan and C. L. Pint, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2727 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Liu, J. Wang, T. Sun, M. Wang, C. Wu, H. Zou, T. Song, X. Zhang, S.-T. Lee, Z. L. Wang and B. Sun, Nano Lett., 2017, 17, 4240 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Wee, T. Salim, Y. M. Lam, S. G. Mhaisalkar and M. Srinivasan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4, 413 RSC .
J. Xu, Z. Ku, Y. Zhang, D. Chao and H. J. Fan, Adv. Mater. Technol., 2016, 1, 1600074 CrossRef .
F. Zhou, Z. Ren, Y. Zhao, X. Shen, A. Wang, Y. Y. Li, C. Surya and Y. Chai, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 5900 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Yadav, K. P. Pipe and M. Shtein, J. Power Sources, 2008, 175, 909 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhao, H. Wang, Z. U. Khan, J. C. Chen, R. Gabrielsson, M. P. Jonsson, M. Berggren and X. Crispin, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1450 RSC .
S. L. Kim, H. T. Lin and C. Yu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600546 CrossRef .
X. Wu, B. Huang, Q. Wang and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 373, 493 CrossRef CAS .
A. Kundu and T. S. Fisher, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 357 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Kim, J.-H. Hsu and C. Yu, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 582 CrossRef CAS .
B. K. Deka, A. Hazarika, S. Lee, D. Y. Kim, Y.-B. Park and H. W. Park, Nano Energy, 2020, 73, 104754 CrossRef CAS .
A. Molinari, H. Hahn and R. Kruk, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703908 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Molinari, P. M. Leufke, C. Reitz, S. Dasgupta, R. Witte, R. Kruk and H. Hahn, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 15339 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shabangoli, M. S. Rahmanifar, M. F. El-Kady, A. Noori, M. F. Mousavi and R. B. Kaner, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 11, 282 CrossRef .
X. Xia, J. Luo, Z. Zeng, C. Guan, Y. Zhang, J. Tu, H. Zhang and H. J. Fan, Sci. Rep., 2012, 2, 981 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Molinari, H. Hahn and R. Kruk, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703908 CrossRef .
A. Molinari, P. M. Leufke, C. Reitz, S. Dasgupta, R. Witte, R. Kruk and H. Hahn, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 1–9 CrossRef PubMed .
A. C. Forse, C. l. Merlet, J. M. Griffin and C. P. Grey, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5731 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Lee, P. Srimuk, S. Fleischmann, X. Su, T. A. Hatton and V. Presser, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 101, 46 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yu, L. Tetard, L. Zhai and J. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 702 RSC .
Y.-Z. Zhang, Y. Wang, T. Cheng, L.-Q. Yao, X. Li, W.-Y. Lai and W. Huang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 3229 RSC .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Broader context
Multifunctional supercapacitors are electrochemical energy storage devices that offer additional functions to fulfill different requirements in one unitized configuration. They show great promise to bridge the gap between energy storage and other areas of applications. The single integrated architecture of multifunctional supercapacitors brings benefits to device performance by overcoming the limitations in the size and volume of energy storage systems, improving the efficiency of energy storage and utilization, and facilitating unprecedented applications where conventional devices normally fail. This review provides a comprehensive overview on the materials design and device configuration of multifunctional supercapacitors and elaborates how these parameters could play a vital role in empowering supercapacitors with desirable functions. Furthermore, it has identified several challenges at the levels of device performance, scalability, safety and cost, which are to be tackled to meet the requirements of practical applications. We believe that such a detailed summary and comprehensive, but critical, review will offer insights into the materials selection and performance optimisation of multifunctional supercapacitors at this early stage of research and development, and will open new opportunities for the development of various high-performance multifunctional (self-)powered systems for a wide range of applications.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the types of multifunctional supercapacitors. (b) The structure of a typical supercapacitor.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Architecture and (b) an example of a structural supercapacitor. Reprinted with permission from ref. 56. (c) Schematic setup of the VARTM process and a woven carbon fibre (WCF)-based structural supercapacitor with its structural components. Reprinted with permission from ref. 58	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic diagrams of the woven carbon fiber (WCF) based structural supercapacitor with its structural components. (b) Cyclic voltammograms of WCF based polyester composites at a 10 mV s−1 scan rate. (c) Multifunctionality (modulus vs. specific capacitance) of various WCF/PES composites. Reprinted with permission from ref. 61.	 

 	Fig. 4  Self-healing of a dumbbell-shaped hydrogel at room temperature: (a) the hydrogel after being cut, (b) the hydrogel after healing for 12 h, and (c) the hydrogel after healing for 24 h. (d) Stretching the self-healed hydrogel up to 200%. (e) Comparison of the stress–strain curves between the original and self-repaired KCl–Fe3+(4)/PAA hydrogel. Reprinted with permission from ref. 84. (f) Image of a self-healing circuit demonstrating its autonomous recovery upon complete damage (damage width, 3 mm). (g) Electrical conductivity-based studies to analyze the self-healing ability of a self-healing printed trace when repeatedly damaged at the same location (damage widths, 1–3 mm). Reprinted with permission from ref. 91.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Demonstration of the self-healing process of VSNP–PAA. (b) Demonstration of the self-healed VSNP–PAA (3.4 mm thick and 1.8 cm wide) to completely support a ca. 500 g mass, which equates to 80 kPa stress: pristine sample (left of panel) and healed sample after the third breaking/healing cycle (right of panel). Red rectangles indicate the wound/healing positions. (c) Ionic conductivity of VSNP–PAA after multiple breaking/healing cycles. (Error bars are based on maximum and minimum values in five measurements.) (d) Schematic of self-healing arising from interfacial hydrogen bonding. (e) CV curves at a scan rate of 5 mV s−1. (f) GCD curves at a charging/discharging current of 1 mA. (g) Healing efficiency calculated from CV (circle, red) and GCD (star, blue) curves. (h) A photo of three supercapacitors connected in series, one of which has self-healed twice to power an LED bulb after self-healing. (Insets show enlarged profiles of the twice self-healed supercapacitor and the lit LED bulb.) Reprinted with permission from ref. 23.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Design and manufacturing process flow of the magnetic-assisted self-healable supercapacitor. Fe3O4 nanoparticles anchor on the surface of the yarn by a microwave-assisted hydrothermal method. The processed yarn is annealed to ensure the magnetic particles anchor on the yarn tightly. To achieve a better electrochemical performance, a layer of PPy is electrodeposited on the annealed yarn. Finally, two yarns as a set of electrodes are assembled with a solid electrolyte and a self-healing shell to form a self-healing supercapacitor. (b) Schematic illustration of the supercapacitor's self-healing process. The magnetic alignment could assist the reconnection of the fibers in the broken yarn electrodes when they are brought together, as shown in the inset image. Reprinted with permission from ref. 97. (c) The two single AFS units connected in series to light a green light-emitting-diode. (d and e) Cutting and self-healing of the series circuit. (f–h) SEM images of the cutting and self-healing process. (i) CV curves of the AFS under a 50 cycle process. (j) Galvanostatic discharge curves of the AFS under a 50 cycle process. (k) Cycling performance of the AFS at a current density of 50 mA cm−2 for 50 self-healing cycles. Reprinted with permission from ref. 100.	 

 	Fig. 7  Implementation of IEMDs in the body. (a) Schematic of the components forming the device. Biocompatible electrodes are wrapped in a cellulose separation film. (b) Photograph of biocompatible electrode implantation (energy storage device) implanted in a mammal and a solar cell (energy harvesting device). (c) Potential of the supercapacitor during solar charging and discharging at a constant current of 2 mA. (d) Cycling tests. A constant current of 10 mA was applied during each cycle. The potential range for all the data in this figure was 0.2–1.0 V. Reprinted with permission from ref. 130.	 

 	Fig. 8  Implantation of a PFM fiber supercapacitor into a mouse. (a) Photographs of the two-ply PFM fiber supercapacitor implanted into the abdominal cavity. Abdominal tissue was stitched up with a PFM fiber. (b) The CV curves of the PFM fiber supercapacitor in the mouse and in the PBS solution. (c) The capacitance retention of the PFM fiber supercapacitor showing 90% capacitance retention eight days after implantation. The error bars represent the maximum and minimum capacitance retention obtained from five independent cases. The inset compares CV curves on the day of implantation and eight days after implantation. (d) The CV curves of 0.5 cm-long (red) and 2 cm-long (black) PFM fiber supercapacitors in the mouse. Reprinted with permission from ref. 134.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication, encapsulation, and integration of all-solid-state fabric-type SCs. (b) Capacitance retention test of the SC fabric underwater, showing excellent waterproof ability. The inset shows the SC device that is fully immersed in the water. (c) Digital image showing the one SC fabric device that was sown into a lab coat for powering an LED. Reprinted with permission from ref. 155.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic illustration of the LDH@P(NIPAM-co-SPMA) film on a flexible Ni foil substrate serving as a smart supercapacitor with thermally-responsive ion channels. Temperature-dependent (b) EIS and (c) specific capacitance in the range 20–40 °C of the LDH@P(NIPAM-co-SPMA) electrode. Reprinted with permission from ref. 36.	 

 	Fig. 11  Illustration of the sol–gel transition of the electrolyte that slows the migration of conductive ions between the electrodes. Upon increasing the temperature, the electrolyte solution transforms to hydrogels through hydrophobic association. (b) The reversible specific capacitance behavior of the thermoresponsive supercapacitor with a sol–gel transition. (c) The demonstration of thermal self-protection of the supercapacitor through a sol–gel transition: the intensity of the LED light decreased from 1.39 to 0.41 mW on heating the supercapacitor to 60 °C, and the circuit diagram of the demonstration. Reprinted with permission from ref. 35.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) TGA curves of the mask, BMIMBF4, ionogel, and ionogel-in-mask composite. (b) CV-curves of the all-solid supercapacitor applying the ionogel-in-mask hybrid gel electrolyte at a scan rate of 20 mV s−1 and temperatures of 25 °C to 200 °C. (c) Variation of Csp with current density at temperatures of 25 °C to 200 °C. (d) The effect of temperature on the ionic conductivity and viscosity of the ionogel-in-mask hybrid gel electrolyte. Reprinted with permission from ref. 167.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) A representative SEM image of the growth cross section of VOGN/Ni/Si(100) at 750 °C. (b) A representative image of the growth cross section of VOGN/Ni/Si(100) at 850 °C. (c) Schematics showing VOGN structural changes from an ordered, vertical morphology to a random, less vertical morphology when the temperature increases. (d) The comparative plots of VOGN/Ni growth rates using C2H2 and CH4 as a feedstock. (e) Impedance phase angle as a function of frequency for the VOGN electrodes. The phase angle, θ, from 1 Hz up to 1 kHz is close to −90° for all samples. (f) The specific capacitance of EDLCs at 120 Hz (black square blocks) for 10 min growth and the characteristic frequency f0 (red circular dots) as a function of growth temperature. The specific capacitance of VOGN EDLCs prepared using CH4 as the feedstock at a temperature of 720 °C was included for comparison. Reprinted with permission from ref. 177.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Phase response as a function of frequency, (b) frequency response of the capacitance, and (c) Nyquist plots for No-CC, Foil-CC, Foam-CC, and VG/Foam-CC working electrodes. (d) Magnified portion of the Nyquist plots near the origin for Foam-CC and VG/Foam-CC. (e–g) Schematic illustration of electron transport between the active materials and Foil-CC, Foam-CC, and VG/Foam-CC, respectively. Reprinted with permission from ref. 184.	 

 		 
Optical modulation (λ) = Tb − Tc
[WO3 + H+ + e−]bleached ↔ [HWO3]colored.
[NiO + OH−]colored ↔ [NiOOH + e−]blended

 	Fig. 15  (a) Photograph of the fabricated SWNT/CP electrodes at different charge states (purple-red: −0.2 V, black: 1.1 V and blue: 1.3 V). Reprinted with permission from ref. 200. (b) Schematic illustration of the fabrication process of the WO3 nanotube and PEDOT:PSS layer. Characterization of the Ag nanowire-embedded PDMS substrate and WO3 nanotube–PEDOT:PSS thin layer. Reprinted with permission from ref. 203.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Fabrication process and structure of the UV detector. The UV light potential response of this self-powered UV detector in the (b) fast decay regime and (c) slow decay regime. (d) Equivalent circuit of the detector under UV illumination. (e) Photoresponse voltage of the device as a function of the incident UV (λ = 365 nm) intensity in the slow decay regime. Reprinted with permission from ref. 44.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Schematic illustration of the integrated device as a photodetector. (b) Photocurrent response of the integrated device in the original state, light intensity: 40 mW cm−2. Reprinted with permission from ref. 43. (c) Photocurrent response of the integrated device in the dark and under a light intensity of 49.7 mW cm−2. On/off ratios of the integrated device with the (d) incident light intensity and (e) illumination time interval. (f) Photoresponsivity of the integrated device vs. light intensity and illumination time interval. Reprinted with permission from ref. 208.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Schematic of the fabrication of HISS-light from a dual-functional PPy/carbon electrode. (b) GCD at a charging/discharging current of 1 A g−1 with various electrodeposition times: 0 min (solid line), 5 min (dashed line), 10 min (dotted line), and 20 min (dashed-dotted line). (c) Capacitances with respect to the charging/discharging current. (d) Illumination at 0 V versus Ag/AgCl under different incident light intensities: 86 mW cm−2 (lower line), 128 mW cm−2 (middle line), and 170 mW cm−2 (upper line). (e) The amplitude of the current change at various light intensities. Reprinted with permission from ref. 210.	 

 	Fig. 19  (a) Schematic diagram of the fabricated piezoelectric supercapacitor and working mechanism driven by mechanical deformation. (b) Self-charging process of the serially connected five devices under periodic compressive strain given by human palm impact to the whole devices. The inset shows a photograph of the serially connected devices. (c) Self-charging process of the five serially connected devices under periodic compressive strain given by a human palm impact on each device for a 60 s interval. The inset shows the circuit diagram of the serial connection. (d) Operation of a green light-emitting diode using serially connected devices as the power source. Reprinted with permission from ref. 46.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) A photo of a fish swim bladder. (b) Csp retention (%) of the SCASC at different bending angles (0°–135°). The inset depicts the extreme bending of the SCASC device at 180° and casual human limb bending applied on the device. (c) Instantaneous lighting of four commercial red LEDs upon repeated finger pressing. (d) Lighting of a green LED light with adequate intensity. (e) Power-up of a small electronic wrist watch, (f) commercial digital calculator, (g) mobile LCD screen, and (h) portable speaker. Reprinted with permission from ref. 220.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) The configuration of the three-electrode type photo-supercapacitor device which contains a dye-sensitized solar cell and a polymer-based PEDOT supercapacitor sharing a common Pt electrode. For photocharging: (1) and (2) are closed. For discharging: (1) is open and (2) is closed. (b) Photocurrent density vs. voltage characteristics of DSSCs on an ITO-PEN substrate (under 100 mW cm−2) with films of 11 μm compressed at different pressures. (c) The dynamic voltage for the photo-supercapacitor under light illumination (under 100 mW cm−2) during the charging and discharging processes. Reprinted with permission from ref. 222. (d) Schematic of the integrated hybrid device containing a SiNW based heterojunction solar cell and a polypyrrole based supercapacitor. (e and f) SEM and TEM images of Si nanowires. Scale bars are 500 nm in the insets of (e and f). Reprinted with permission from ref. 228.	 

 		 

 	Fig. 22  (a) Schematic illustration and working mechanism of the photo-supercapacitor device constructed based on a printable perovskite solar cell. (b) The voltage transients of the PSC during photocharge under AM 1.5 simulated sunlight (100 mW cm−2) illumination, and galvanostatic discharge at different discharge current densities in dark (blue shadow). Reprinted with permission from ref. 228.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Charge–discharge profile of the ENHANS ribbon. The solar side of the ENHANS ribbon has been charged with the solar simulator for 1 min and discharged with an electrochemical workstation at different current densities after 10 s photocharging (PC) off. (b) Ragone plots of an independent supercapacitor and an ENHANS ribbon to compare the energy density and power density at different charge–discharge rates (1, 2, 4 and 8 mA cm−2 current density). (c and d) Photograph of the ENHANS ribbon being bent at different angles. (e) Charge–discharge profile of the ENHANS ribbon after different bending cycles (the ENHANS ribbon has been photocharged for 1 min, and then removed from the light 10 s before discharge). (f) Schematic illustration of the ENHANS ribbon after weaving with the cotton yarn to make a portable lightweight cloth and (g) ENHANS ribbons weaved with cotton thread to demonstrate the working of the lightweight fabric. The photograph shows the charge deliverability of the woven matrix as a result of one minute photocharging. Reprinted with permission from ref. 24.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) A micro-supercapacitor (MSC) made from SGO films reduced with a blue laser. (b) Serially connected modules whose ends are colored in black and silvery white to create temperature differences under solar radiation. (c) Time-dependent voltage at ΔT = 14 K when 1–8 modules were connected in series. (d) Steady-state voltage of 8 modules as a function of ΔT. (e) Time-evolution of the voltage when the modules were illuminated with the solar simulator at 110 mW cm−2. The inset illustrates the configuration of the electrochromic device. (f) Photographs of the electrochromic device powered by the modules under solar irradiation at 0, 4, 16, and 20 min. Reprinted with permission from ref. 235.	 

 	Fig. 25  Schematic of supercapacitors with new designs: (a) honeycomb design; and (b) sandwich structural composite with a supercapacitor core.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
