Materials chemistry for rechargeable zinc-ion batteries   - Chemical Society Reviews (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9CS00349E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9CS00349E
(Tutorial Review)
Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49, 4203-4219Materials chemistry for rechargeable zinc-ion batteries†

        
          
            Ning 
            Zhang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Xuyong 
            Chen
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Meng 
            Yu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiqiang 
            Niu
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Fangyi 
            Cheng
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jun 
            Chen
          
        
      a
aRenewable Energy Conversion and Storage Center, Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Materials Chemistry (Ministry of Education), College of Chemistry, Nankai University, Tianjin 300071, China. E-mail: fycheng@nankai.edu.cn
bCollege of Chemistry & Environmental Science, Hebei University, Baoding 071002, China
Received 
      15th November 2019
    First published on 1st June 2020AbstractRechargeable zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) are promising for large scale energy storage and portable electronic applications due to their low cost, material abundance, high safety, acceptable energy density and environmental friendliness. This tutorial review presents an introduction to the fundamentals, challenges, recent advances and prospects related to ZIBs. Firstly, the intrinsic chemical properties, challenges and strategies of metallic zinc anodes are underscored. Then, the multiple types of cathode materials are classified and comparatively discussed in terms of their structural and electrochemical properties, issues and remedies. Specific attention is paid to the mechanistic understanding and structural transformation of cathode materials based on Zn ion-(de)intercalation chemistry. After that, the widely investigated electrolytes are elaborated by discussing their effect on Zn plating/stripping behaviours, reaction kinetics, electrode/electrolyte interface chemistries, and cell performances. Finally, the remaining challenges and future perspectives are outlined for the development of ZIBs.
Ning Zhang
Ning Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry from Hebei University in 2012 and then obtained his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry from Nankai University in 2017. He is now an associate professor in the College of Chemistry & Environmental Science at Hebei University. His current research focuses on the design and synthesis of functional materials for applications in energy storage and conversion (lithium/sodium-ion batteries and aqueous zinc-ion batteries).
Xuyong Chen
Xuyong Chen received his bachelor's degree (2016) in Metallurgical Engineering from Wuhan University of Science and Technology, and MS degree (2019) in Chemical Engineering from Nankai University supervised by Prof. Fangyi Cheng. His research is focused on aqueous zinc-ion batteries.
Fangyi Cheng
Fangyi Cheng received his BS (2003) and PhD (2009) from Nankai University. He was appointed as assistant professor in 2009 and has been full professor since 2016 in the College of Chemistry, Nankai University. He stayed for one year (2015–2016) at UCLA as a visiting scholar. His group has broad interest in materials chemistry and energy storage technologies. His particular research efforts encompass the design, synthesis, and mechanism understanding of nonstoichiometric metal oxides and alloys for rechargeable batteries, oxygen electrocatalysis, and nitrogen fixation. He is among the Clarivate Highly Cited Researcher (2018 and 2019).

Key learning points
(1) Operation principles and characteristics of rechargeable zinc-ion batteries.
(2) Intrinsic properties and challenges of Zn electrodes and strategies to enhance the Zn plating/stripping performances and suppress dendrite issues.
(3) Classifications, structural features, electrochemical performances, design principles and Zn-storage reaction mechanisms of cathode materials.
(4) Chemical and physical properties, electrochemical behaviours and electrode compatibility of electrolytes for Zn storage and Zn-ion intercalation.
(5) Remaining challenges and perspectives of rechargeable zinc-ion batteries.

1. Introduction
The utilization of renewable energy resources such as solar and wind has come under global spotlight in light of the looming concerns regarding climatic deterioration and environmental pollution, which motivates the pursuit of safe, economical, sustainable and efficient electrochemical energy storage and conversion technologies. Among various options, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) with high energy density have been widely applied in portable electronics and considered for electric vehicles, but the limited lithium reservoir, fluctuant price and safety issues impede their large-scale deployment. As alternatives, battery chemistries based on more abundant elements (e.g., Na, K, Mg, Al, Zn) have received extensive attention.1–3 Rechargeable zinc-ion batteries (ZIBs) hold great promise for large-scale energy storage applications owing to the merits of Zn including higher ambient stability and lower cost of Zn (∼US$2.4 kg−1) than alkali metals (e.g., Li ∼ US$19.2 kg−1; Na ∼ US$3.1 kg−1; K ∼ US$13.1 kg−1), good compatibility with aqueous electrolytes, nontoxicity, facile material processing and battery manufacturing.2,4,5 In addition, the price of typical cathode materials such as MnO2 (∼US$1.7 kg−1) and V2O5 (∼US$5.5 kg−1) for ZIBs is much cheaper than that of LIBs (e.g., LiCoO2, ∼US$55 kg−1 and Li(NiMnCo)O2, ∼US$34 kg−1).2,3,6 Moreover, the generally used aqueous electrolyte for ZIBs is inexpensive with high safety and high ionic conductivity (0.1–6 S cm−1) when compared to the flammable organic electrolytes in LIBs (10−3–10−2 S cm−1). The estimated cost of ZIBs based on a Zn anode, a vanadium oxide cathode and an aqueous ZnSO4 electrolyte is below $65 per kW h, much cheaper than that of current LIBs (∼$300 per kW h).3 Due to these advantages (Fig. 1a) ZIBs have promising prospects for practical applications.
 Fig. 1  (a) Multi-angle comparison of zinc-ion and lithium-ion batteries. (b) Schematic illustration of the working principle of rechargeable zinc-ion batteries. 
Historically, metallic zinc was employed as anode material of the first battery invented in 1799 (Volta Pile). Nowadays zinc has been widely used in various battery technologies, including Zn–MnO2, Zn–NiOOH, Zn–Ag2O, Zn–air batteries, etc. Among them, alkaline Zn–MnO2 batteries dominate the primary battery market since their commercialization.7 Earlier attempts to develop rechargeable Zn-based batteries are plagued by the fast capacity fading and poor coulombic efficiency (CE), mainly due to the uncontrollable growth of Zn dendrites and the formation of insulating, irreversible by-products (e.g., ZnO) in alkaline electrolytes (e.g., concentrated KOH solution).8 Studies on rechargeable ZIBs slowed down until 2012 when Kang and co-workers revisited zinc-ion battery chemistries with mildly acidic aqueous electrolytes.9 As shown in Fig. 1b, a rechargeable ZIB generally consists of a metallic Zn anode, a Zn2+ storage cathode and a Zn2+-salt electrolyte, operating via the reversible Zn2+ intercalation/deintercalation (cathode) and Zn plating/stripping (anode) upon discharging/charging.
To date, extensive studies have been reported for ZIBs, covering metallic Zn anodes, cathode materials, electrolytes and potential applications. Fig. 2 outlines the brief development history of ZIBs. The zinc anode features good compatibility with aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes. Recently investigated neutral and mildly acidic aqueous electrolytes are shown to minimize the formation of Zn dendrites and inactive species that often occur in alkaline media.4,10 However, the CE of Zn plating/stripping and utilization of hostless Zn anodes remain unsatisfactory. The electrolyte/electrode interfacial chemistry and electrochemical behaviours of Zn anodes in non-aqueous electrolyte require further investigations. For cathodes, manganese dioxides with different polymorphs were initially investigated as Zn-insertion hosts, following a logic shift from primary to rechargeable Zn–MnO2 batteries. Subsequently, Prussian blue analogues, spinels, vanadium-based oxides and organic compounds have been explored as cathode materials as well.3,10–12
 Fig. 2  A brief development history of rechargeable zinc-ion batteries. 
Although the ionic radius of Zn2+ (0.074 nm) is close to that of Li+ (0.076 nm), electrode performances of most Zn-storage materials are far from satisfactory due to sluggish Zn2+ insertion kinetics because of the high mass and high charge/radius ratio of Zn2+ with large solvation sheaths and high electrostatic repulsion.13,14 In addition, the reaction mechanisms in ZIBs are elusive and often under debate. Taking manganese dioxide cathodes as an example, three electrode mechanisms have been reported: (1) Zn2+ insertion/extraction reactions; (2) H+/Zn2+ co-insertion/extraction reactions; and (3) conversion reactions. For mechanistic studies, developing and applying multiple electrochemical methods, advanced characterization techniques, and theoretical calculations are in progress. To date, electrolytes of ZIBs are dominated by near neutral aqueous solutions, which are much safer, greener, and more ionically conductive compared to organic counterparts. Meanwhile, near neutral aqueous electrolytes generally have high stability and compatibility with metallic Zn. However, more effort is needed to be made to gain deep insight into the device chemistry. On the one hand, it remains necessary to further explore the effects of zinc salts, solvents, additives and their concentrations on the electrochemical performance and energy storage mechanism of electrodes, as well as the interface chemistry between electrolyte and electrode. On the other hand, the rapid development of ZIBs accelerates their wide application in flexible and wearable energy storage devices. Efforts should be intensified toward unearthing functional gel or solid-state electrolytes and improving the performance of flexible ZIBs.
Herein, we aim to provide an overall introduction to the fundamentals and significant scientific progress made in ZIBs. To start with, the intrinsic chemical properties, challenges and improvement strategies of metallic Zn anodes are briefly introduced, followed by summarization of the current progress in multiple types of cathode materials as well as their chemical reaction mechanisms, concerns and feasible solutions. Subsequently, we present the discussion of electrolyte chemistries and their effects on Zn-ion diffusion and intercalation. Lastly, we share our views on the current challenges and future opportunities in this emerging battery technology and the practical applications.
2. Metallic zinc anodes
2.1 Intrinsic property of Zn electrodes
Metallic zinc is an ideal material for aqueous batteries because of its chemical stability in water, high abundance, high theoretical specific capacity (gravimetric and volumetric capacities of 820 mA h g−1 and 5855 mA h cm−3, respectively), low potential (−0.76 V vs. SHE), low toxicity and intrinsic safety.15–17 The charge storage of Zn in ZIBs relies on reversible electrochemical Zn plating/stripping on discharging/charging.
Different reactions are involved for Zn in aqueous media, as shown in a Pourbaix diagram18 that plots the equilibrium potential against the solution pH (Fig. 3a). Metallic Zn can be oxidized to dissolved forms of Zn2+, Zn(OH)2, HZnO2−, and ZnO22−, where specific chemical reactions depend on the pH values. The notations of HZnO2− and ZnO22− correspond to zinc complexes of Zn(OH)3− and Zn(OH)42− in most cell equations. The formation of these complex ions occurs at slightly different pH values. In conventional alkaline media, Zn(OH)42− is the charge carrier (Zn + 4OH− ↔ Zn(OH)42− + 2e−), but deep discharging will result in the irreversible formation of insulating ZnO (Zn(OH)42− ↔ ZnO + 2H2O + 2OH−) and thereby causes capacity loss. Unlike the case in an alkaline system, Zn2+, the major soluble form, can serve as the charge carrier with reversible anodic chemical reaction in neutral or mildly acidic electrolytes (Zn ↔ Zn2+ + 2e−). In non-aqueous electrolytes, zincate could be the charge carrier species as well.16
 Fig. 3  (a) A Pourbaix diagram of Zn in aqueous solution. (b) Zn plating/stripping from Zn/Zn symmetrical cells in an alkaline electrolyte and a mild ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte, respectively. The insets are optical images of cycled Zn anodes in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic diagram of the issues for Zn anodes in aqueous electrolytes. (d) Cyclic voltammograms of Zn plating/stripping in a 20 M LiTFSI + 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Galvanostatic cycling of Zn/Zn cells in a non-aqueous TMP-based electrolyte. The inset is the SEM image of the Zn anode after 500 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of the desolvation process of the Zn2+–H2O ion complex on the super-saturated front surface of the Zn anode realized by MOF coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (g–j) Observation of hydrogen evolution in Zn/Zn symmetric cells using bare Zn plates and coated Zn plates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (k) Schematic illustration of Zn deposition on carbon cloth (CC) and carbon nanotube (CNT) electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (l) SEM image of lamella-nanostructured eutectic Zn–Al alloys with the corresponding EDS element mapping. Scale bar, 2 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (m) Schematic illustration of epitaxial metal electrodeposition. The inset is the SEM image of Zn deposits on graphene-coated stainless steel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science. 
Zinc in metallic form can directly work in aqueous solutions due to its high overpotential for hydrogen evolution.3 In contrast, metallic Mg and Al anodes in aqueous electrolytes face problems such as limited anodic stability and passivation. Aqueous alkali metal ion batteries (i.e., Li+, Na+, and K+) necessarily employ intercalation-type anode materials because of the high chemical activity of alkali metals with water. In addition, Zn-based battery chemistry could rival the commercialized aqueous Pb-based acid and Ni-based alkaline batteries that suffer from low energy density, poor cycling life, high corrosivity, or toxicity.8,9
2.2 Challenges of Zn electrodes and design strategies
Early developments of Zn anodes in alkaline solutions were hindered by issues including dendrite growth, hydrogen evolution, consumption of the electrolyte and by-product formation (e.g., ZnO), resulting in severe polarization, capacity decay and poor CE (Fig. 3b).4 In recent attempts to use near neutral electrolytes, a good reversibility of Zn electrodes is attainable by minimizing Zn dendritic formation and suppressing the inactive by-products. However, the homogeneous plating/stripping of Zn anodes with high CE and suppressed hydrogen evolution is still challenging.8,15 The uneven nucleation and growth of Zn anodes lead to dendrite formation, which would increase surface-dependent side reactions and worsen self-discharging. Meanwhile, the decreased pH in acidic aqueous electrolytes will induce H2 evolution more easily, resulting in lower CE and increased internal pressure of a sealed cell. Moreover, the localized H2 evolution at active sites results in pH elevation (2H2O + 2e− → H2 + 2OH−), which would generate Zn hydroxides or zincates and passivate the Zn anode. These detrimental processes facing Zn anodes (schematically shown in Fig. 3c) inevitably lead to consumption of the electrolyte and underutilization of Zn. To tackle these issues, extensive efforts have directed to electrolyte optimization such as using high salt concentration, non-aqueous/solid-state electrolytes and electrolyte additives, as well as structure/morphology tailoring of the Zn electrode with surface modification.

Electrolyte concentrating. 
High-concentration of electrolyte salt with reduced free solvent molecules provides a promising way to stabilize Zn electrodes. For instance, a hybrid 1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI (TFSI: bis(trifluoromethanesulfonyl)imide, m: mol kg−1) aqueous electrolyte enables dendrite-free Zn plating/stripping with ∼100% CE (Fig. 3d).8 In such a highly concentrated electrolyte, the Zn2+ solvation sheath is occupied primarily by TFSI− instead of H2O, unlike the dilute electrolyte. The unique Zn(TFSI)n solvate structure favours the formation of an effective electrode/electrolyte interphase with suppressed dendrite growth and negligible hydrogen evolution at low potentials. Similarly, a 30 m ZnCl2 water-in-salt electrolyte renders a dendrite-free Zn metal anode and improves the average CE to 95.4% from 73.2% in a dilute 5 m ZnCl2 electrolyte.15 Other systems such as 0.5 m Zn(CF3SO3)2 + 18 m NaClO4 and 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 + 21 M LiTFSI (M: mol L−1) are also found to be effective.8,19


Non-aqueous solvent. 
The use of an organic solvent is an alternative route for conquering Zn anodic issues in water-based electrolytes. Highly reversible and stable Zn anodes have been demonstrated in aprotic electrolytes. Due to the high thermodynamic stability of Zn anodes towards organic solvents, side-reactions accompanied with dendritic Zn growth and low CE issues can be intrinsically mitigated in non-aqueous media.20–22 For example, 0.5 M Zn(TFSI)2 in an acetonitrile electrolyte affords near 99% CE of the Zn anode without evident Zn dendrite formation.21 The recently developed non-flammable phosphate-based electrolyte consisting of 0.5 M Zn2+ and 1.0 M Na+ in trimethyl phosphate (TMP) solvent permits a high CE (99.8%) cycling of the Zn anode over 5000 cycles.22 Moreover, the Zn deposits show a porous interconnected Zn network, favouring electric contact and ionic diffusion (Fig. 3e). Besides, deep eutectic solvents (DESs) offer the merits of stabilizing Zn plating/stripping, as demonstrated in the choline chloride/urea (ChCl/urea) hybrid with 0.3 M ZnCl2.16 In this combination, chlorozincate ([ZnCl4]2−) rather than Zn2+ serves as the charge carrier and small grain-like Zn deposits are observed.


Electrolyte additives. 
Additives in electrolytes can alter the surface properties of Zn anodes through adsorbing on the Zn electrode surface, shielding charge, or complexing with metal ions. As Zn nuclei prefer to grow on the surface with lowest energy, it is feasible to control the size, morphology, crystallographic structure and orientation of plated Zn. Additives investigated for aqueous and non-aqueous electrolytes include organic compounds such as branched polyethyleneimine (BPEI), cetyltrimethylammonium bromide (CTAB), poly(ethyleneglycol) (PEG), sodium dodecyl sulfate (SDS), and thiourea and inorganic salts such as Na2SO4, MnSO4, Mn(CF3SO3)2, and Ni(CF3SO3)2.4,5,23,24 For example, addition of SDS endows the electroplated Zn electrode with lower corrosion rate, reduced dendrite formation, weak float current and high capacity retention.23 The presence of Na2SO4 in aqueous ZnSO4 solution also restricts the formation of Zn dendrites, which can be explained by an electrostatic shield mechanism.24 With a lower reduction potential than Zn2+, Na+ can shield the charge around the initial Zn protrusions and suppress further dendrite growth.


Solid-state electrolytes. 
Solid-state electrolytes (SSEs) are effective in achieving compact and homogeneous Zn deposition as the cation transportation can be regulated by the solid microporous electrolyte membrane. Along this line, a crystalline single-ion Zn2+ SSE was reported by modifying the precursor metal–organic framework (MOF) with a fixed anionic microporous host and mobilizable Zn2+ ions.25 Stable Zn plating/stripping performance with a uniform and compact Zn deposition layer was identified and attributed to the guided and restricted Zn deposition arising from the nanowetted Zn/SSE interface, confinement of Zn(H2O)62+ ions within the anionic MOF host and good compatibility between SSE and Zn anode. A biomimetic SSE composed of Zn(CF3SO3)2 salt, branched aramid nanofibers (BANFs) and poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), where the high stiffness of BANF networks combines with the high ionic conductivity of soft PEO, is also found to effectively suppress dendrites and promote Zn2+ transport.26 Besides, quasi solid-state hydrogel electrolytes are proposed to inhibit Zn dendrite formation because of the interaction between Zn2+ and negatively charged groups in gel that improves the even distribution of Zn2+ during plating.27 Although solid-state or gel electrolytes can suppress the water-induced side reactions, their ionic conductivity should be further improved to lower the Zn2+ transportation barrier at a high current density.


Surface modification. 
Protecting Zn anodes via coating a functionalized protective layer such as reduced graphene oxide (rGO), carbon black, active carbon, porous nano-CaCO3/SiO2, TiO2 and polymers has proved effective to decrease the polarization, restrain the dendrite formation and enhance the interfacial stability. Recently, a metal–organic framework (MOF) coating layer was found to enable a super-saturated electrolyte front surface on Zn via a partial desolvation process inside MOF channels in advance prior to the final reduction of Zn2+ (Fig. 3f), resulting in less water passivation and consequently less by-product accumulating on the Zn surface.28 A brightener-inspired polyamide coating layer on the Zn anode was shown to elevate the Zn nucleation barrier and restrict Zn ion flux, thus regulating the Zn electrodeposition.29 This polymeric buffer layer isolates Zn from the bulk electrolyte and suppresses free water/O2-induced passivation and H2 evolution (Fig. 3g–j). While a conductive coating layer (e.g., carbonaceous materials) uniformizes the facial electric-field distribution on the Zn anode, Zn deposition may occur to grow dendrites that puncture the modified layers. Non-conductive protective layers disfavour the rate performance of the Zn anode. Alternatively, in situ building a protective solid electrolyte interface (SEI) on metallic Zn deserves more attention.


Structured electrodes. 
Compared to planar Zn, 3D Zn architectures with a high surface area and an interconnected skeleton favour electron transport and electrolyte contact, contributing to a dendrite-free cycling behaviour. For nanostructured Zn electrodes, a short ion diffusion length and more electroactive sites permit fast Zn2+/Zn redox kinetics and high rate capability. Recently, 3D conductive substrates such as N-doped porous carbon cloth, carbon fiber-graphite felt, carbon nanotube paper/yarns, graphene foam, stainless steel mesh, and porous copper foam have been employed as light-weight backbones for in situ electroplating of 3D structured Zn anodes. For example, a flexible 3D CNT framework with a high specific surface area and good electric conductivity is introduced for Zn plating to diminish dendrite formation (Fig. 3k).30 Composite Zn anodes by mixing Zn powder with layered double hydroxides (LDH), conductive carbon additives, and binders have also been proposed to alleviate the dendrite issues and improve the kinetics of Zn anodes. The formation of a compact Zn deposition and the elimination of potential drop at the beginning of Zn2+ reduction improves the plating/stripping CE of Zn anodes from 85 to 98%.31 Besides, constructing lamella-nanostructured eutectic Zn–Al alloys has recently been proposed to guide Zn2+ electrodeposition and protect against irreversible by-products of ZnO or Zn(OH)2, and thus enables a stable and dendrite-free Zn plating/stripping behaviour (Fig. 3l).32 Interestingly, reversible epitaxial electrodeposition of Zn is attained by selecting a graphene-based substrate (Fig. 3m).17 Graphene with a low lattice mismatch for Zn can effectively drive the Zn deposition with a locked crystallographic orientation relation, rendering cyclability over thousands of cycles. The substrate effect offers plenty of room to guide the nucleation and deposition of Zn for a stable electrode structure.

3. Cathode materials
Cathode materials provide Zn-storage sites and largely determine the voltage and capacity of ZIBs. Extensive efforts have been devoted to searching for new cathode materials with higher capacity and better cyclability. Cathode materials can be mainly categorized into manganese or vanadium-based oxides, Prussian blue analogues, spinel-structured oxides, organic materials, Chevrel phase compounds, layered sulfides, polyanionic compounds, and a few others. Fig. 4a and Table S1 (ESI†) show representative cathode materials in ZIBs, which will be selectively discussed in this section. The unique features of structures and morphologies for cathodes are mainly responsible for their different electrochemical performances and energy storage mechanisms (Fig. 4b).
 Fig. 4  (a) Operation voltages versus specific capacities of representative cathode materials for ZIBs. Energy densities are based on the mass of cathode materials. (b) Reaction mechanisms of typical cathode materials for ZIBs. 
3.1 Manganese-based oxides
Manganese-based oxides have received extensive interest in electrochemical energy storage and conversion due to their high natural abundance, low cost, environmental compatibility and particularly rich redox chemistry of Mn.4–6,9,33 Recently, binary manganese oxides including MnO2, Mn2O3, and Mn3O4 have been explored as cathodes for ZIBs. Among them, MnO2 is attractive due to its high specific capacity (308 mA h g−1 based on one electron redox Mn4+/Mn3+) and moderate discharge potential (∼1.35 V). Different crystallographic polymorphs are built up with MnO6 octahedral units linked via edge and/or corners. As shown in Fig. 5a, MnO2 polymorphs can be divided into three categories of (i) tunnel type such as α-, β-, γ-, and todorokite-MnO2 with 2 × 2, 1 × 1, 1 × 1 and 1 × 2, 3 × 3 tunnels, respectively, (ii) layered forms such as δ-MnO2, and (iii) spinel-type structures such as λ-MnO2. Most of these polymorphs are investigated as Zn insertion electrodes.
 Fig. 5  (a) Crystal structures of representative MnO2 polymorphs. (b) Comparison of the cycling performance of Zn–MnO2 cells with electrolytes of 45 wt% KOH, 3 M ZnSO4, 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2, and 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 + 0.1 M Mn(CF3SO3)2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (c) CVs of the Zn anode (red line) and the α-MnO2 cathode (blue line) in the ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of the rechargeable Zn–MnO2 chemistry using a CF3SO3−-based electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Diagram showing the sequential insertion of H+ and Zn2+ in a layered MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (f) XRD pattern and (g) STEM elemental mapping images of the α-MnO2 cathode after full discharging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. 
In aqueous electrolytes, MnO2 cathodes suffer from severe capacity fading mainly due to the structural transformation and dissolution of active materials via the Mn3+ disproportionation reaction (2Mn3+ → Mn2+ + Mn4+). Pre-addition of Mn2+ salts into the electrolyte is proposed to suppress this side reaction. A significant improvement on the robustness of the α-MnO2 cathode (92% capacity retention after 5000 cycles) was demonstrated by introducing 0.1 M MnSO4 in a 2 M ZnSO4 electrolyte.4 For β-MnO2 previously believed to be unfavourable for Zn intercalation, a high reversible capacity of 225 mA h g−1 was attained at 0.65C by formulating a 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 + 0.1 M Mn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte (Fig. 5b). The addition of Mn2+ accommodates the equilibrium between Mn2+ dissolution and reoxidation and helps to form a uniform amorphous MnOx protective layer on the cathode surface to maintain the electrode integrity.5 Other strategies like structure engineering (e.g., generating oxygen vacancies or introducing guest pillars in the layered structure), cation doping (e.g., Al, V, and Ti), and coupling with carbon materials have been proposed to improve the electrochemical performance of MnO2-based cathodes. Using the ZnSO4 + MnSO4 + H2SO4 aqueous electrolyte with initial MnO2in situ electrodeposited on carbon fiber cloth, an electrolytic Zn–MnO2 battery exhibited a high voltage (1.95 V) and extended stability due to the two-electron redox reaction of Mn4+/Mn2+ enabled by the hybrid electrolyte.6 Another limitation of MnO2 is the low intrinsic electronic conductivity. A common remedy includes making MnO2-based composites with conductive materials (e.g., nanostructured carbon and graphitic carbon).6,30,34,35 Not surprisingly, MnO2in situ supported on graphite fake exhibits superior rate capability with a lower charge-transfer resistance compared to the pristine counterpart.35
Note that the reaction mechanism of manganese oxides for ZIBs is still elusive in different cases and can be summarized as (i) Zn2+ intercalation, (ii) H+ and Zn2+ co-insertion, and (iii) chemical conversion mechanism.

Zn2+ intercalation. 
Early investigations of zinc-ion chemistry suggested reversible insertion/extraction of Zn2+ into/from the tunnel-type α-MnO2 cathode in a mild ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte (Fig. 5c),9 according to the following equation: Zn2+ + 2e− + 2MnO2 ↔ ZnMn2O4(1)Diverse Zn2+ intercalation reactions and complex phase transformation are reported for manganese oxides involving discharge products of spinel-type ZnMn2O4, Zn-buserite, Zn-birnessite, tunnel-type ZnxMnO2, and Mn2+ species. For example, complex structural transformation occurs in γ-MnO2.37 With continuous Zn2+ insertion on discharging, the initial tunnel-type γ-MnO2 was gradually converted into multiple phases composed of spinel-type ZnMn2O4, tunnel-type γ-ZnxMnO2 and layered-type L-ZnxMnO2. The common electrode mechanism was observed for different tunnel-type polymorphs (i.e., α-/γ-/β-MnO2) in the Zn(CF3SO3)2-based aqueous electrolyte.5 The exemplified β-MnO2 experiences phase transition to the layered Zn-buserite structure at initial discharging and subsequent reversible Zn2+ intercalation in the buserite interphase (Fig. 5d). Reversible Zn2+ (de)intercalation into layered δ-MnO2 was also reported recently.35


H+ and Zn2+ co-insertion mechanism. 
Given the smaller size and weaker electrostatic interaction of H+ relative to Zn2+, the proton intercalation into host materials with an open tunnel or layered framework may occur in aqueous media. For example, consequent H+ and Zn2+ co-insertion was demonstrated in the ε-MnO2 cathode using a 2 M ZnSO4 + 0.2 M MnSO4 electrolyte.34 Consecutive discharge products of MnOOH and ZnMn2O4 were observed when the electrode was discharged to 1.3 and 1.0 V, respectively. Similarly, the co-insertion mechanism of H+ and Zn2+ has been proposed in polyaniline (PANI)-intercalated layered MnO2 with a self-regulating function in a ZnSO4-based electrolyte. The proton insertion during discharge leads to the increase of local OH− concentration, inducing the formation of flake-like zinc hydroxide sulfate hydrate (Zn4(OH)6SO4·nH2O) on the cathode surface (Fig. 5e).33 A recent study also suggested that a solid-solution type proton intercalation without Zn2+ co-insertion dominates the charge storage in α-MnO2 because the hydroxyl/water-terminated oxide interface preferentially aids in the desolvation and intercalation of protons.37 Regardless of different mechanisms, proton insertion is believed to be a beneficial factor for rate performance of manganese oxides.


Conversion reaction mechanism. 
In addition to the popular intercalation mechanisms, a chemical conversion reaction path between α-MnO2 and MnOOH was proposed as well.4 During discharging, MnO2 reacts with H+ from water to form MnOOH, and the generated OH− reacts with ZnSO4 and H2O to form ZnSO4[Zn(OH)2]3·xH2O (Fig. 5f). This process is reversible as the original α-MnO2 electrode is recovered after charging. The cathode reactions can be formulated as H2O ↔ H+ + OH−(2) MnO2 + H+ + e− ↔ MnOOH(3) 3Zn2+ + 6OH− + ZnSO4 + xH2O ↔ ZnSO4[Zn(OH)2]3·xH2O(4)
Collecting the above discussions, the fundamental reactions are complex and may vary with the crystallographic phases of manganese oxides (e.g., tunnel type versus layered form) and electrolytes (e.g., acidic, alkaline, and aprotic conditions). To clarify the mechanisms of manganese oxides calls for more precise experiments and comprehensive analytic methods.

3.2 Spinel-structured oxides
Spinel oxides with the formula of AB2O4 (A and B represent metal ions that respectively occupy the centers of tetrahedral and octahedral metal–oxygen polyhedra) have been extensively employed in metal-ion batteries. Spinels such as ZnMn2O4, MgMn2O4, ZnCo2O4, and LiMn2O4 are explored as cathodes for aqueous/nonaqueous ZIBs with considerable specific capacity and working voltage (Table S1, ESI†).10,38
Inspired by the success of reversible electrochemical extraction/insertion of Li+ from the spinel LiMn2O4, the spinel analogue of ZnMn2O4 was considered as a promising cathode for ZIBs. However, the ideal spinel structure was unfit for Zn2+ (de)intercalation as proved by difficult chemical extraction of Zn2+ from ZnMn2O4 spinel due to the high electrostatic repulsion for lattice Zn2+ diffusion. Instead, defects including cation or oxygen vacancies are introduced to facilitate the migration of divalent ions. Previous studies demonstrated that a cation-defective spinel (ZnMn1.86O4) delivered a capacity of 150 mA h g−1 at a current density of 50 mA g−1 and a capacity retention of 94% after 500 cycles at 500 mA g−1.10 Moreover, the diffusion coefficient of Zn2+ in Mn-vacant ZnMn2O4 calculated from GITT is around 10−11 cm2 s−1, which is much higher than that in stoichiometric spinel (ca. 10−13 cm2 s−1) and comparable to the Li diffusivity of spinel oxides.10 The remarkable electrochemical performance was attributed to facile Zn2+ intercalation and mitigated neighbouring cation repulsion in the defective spinel framework (Fig. 6a and b).
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of Zn2+ insertion/extraction in an extended 3D Mn-defective ZnMn2O4 spinel framework. (b) Proposed Zn2+ diffusion pathway in ZnMn2O4 spinel without and with Mn vacancies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic charge and discharge processes for the ZnNi1/2Mn1/2CoO4 electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
Compared with manganese-based oxides, spinel ZnCo2O4 with Co4+/Co3+ redox couple affords a higher working voltage (1.7 vs. 1.35 V). Motivated by the cation doping strategy to improve the working voltage and structural stability of LiCoO2, a series of spinel ZnAlxCo2−xO4 and ZnNixMnxCo2−2xO4 were reported by doping Al or Ni/Mn into ZnCo2O4. The exemplified ZnNi1/2Mn1/2CoO4 showed a discharge capacity of 174 mA h g−1 with an average voltage of 1.7 V over 200 cycles in aprotic electrolytes.38 Mechanistic analyses demonstrated reversible Zn2+ intercalation in spinel and concomitant compositional transformation involving multiple conversion between Co4+/Co3+, Ni4+/Ni3+/Ni2+, and Mn4+/Mn3+ redox states (Fig. 6c). These studies affirm the benefits of doping chemistry to boost the multivalent ion insertion in spinels.
3.3 Vanadium-based oxides
Together with manganese oxides, vanadium-based oxides are particularly interesting cathode materials for ZIBs owing to their multi-electron redox reaction accompanied with accessible V oxidation states (i.e., V2+, V3+, V4+ and V5+), high capacity (>300 mA h g−1), and large ion transfer channel.3,39,40 Generally, their working voltage is around 0.8 V vs. Zn2+/Zn, which limits the energy density to some extent. Different from the octahedral MnO6 unit in manganese-based oxides, the V–O polyhedra occur in diverse formats from VO4 tetrahedron, VO5 square pyramid and trigonal bipyramid to distorted and regular VO6 octahedron (Fig. 7a). These polyhedra link to form chains, layers or 3D frameworks that further assemble into different phases of vanadium oxides. Most of them contain interlayer cations (e.g., NH4+, Li+, Na+, K+, Zn2+, Mg2+, Ca2+, etc.) and/or water molecules to stabilize the crystal structure.
 Fig. 7  (a) Typical vanadium coordination polyhedra. (b) Crystal structures of representative vanadium-based materials for ZIBs. Schematic illustrations of the reaction chemistry for vanadium oxide cathodes in terms of (c) Zn2+ insertion, H2O and Zn2+ co-insertion, and (d) H+ and Zn2+ co-insertion mechanisms. (e) Oxygen and vanadium redox chemistry in a polyanionic VOPO4 cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 

Structures. 
A series of vanadium-based oxides with or without structural waters have been reported as cathode materials for ZIBs, mainly including (1) MxV2O5·yH2O (M = NH4+ or metal ions) consisting of VO5 square pyramids or VO6 octahedra with single or double vanadium oxide layers. Typical compounds include V2O5, V2O5·nH2O, Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O, LixV2O5·nH2O, Na0.33V2O5, MgxV2O5·nH2O, Ca0.25V2O5·nH2O, V5O12·6H2O and NH4V4O10. (2) MxV3O8·yH2O (M = NH4+ or metal cations) consisting of VO5 square pyramids (or VO5 trigonal bipyramids) and VO6 octahedra sharing corners. Examples are V3O7·H2O (equivalent H2V3O8), LiV3O8, NaV3O8·1.5H2O, NaV3O8·1.35H2O and NH4V3O8. (3) MxV6O16·yH2O based on V3O8 layers comprising VO6 octahedron and VO5 square pyramid units with interstitial hydrated M cations. This category contains Na2V6O16·nH2O, K2V6O16·1.57H2O and CaV6O16·3H2O. (4) MxV2O7·yH2O composed of [V2O7] groups with VO4 tetrahedral coordination along the z-axis, such as Zn2V2O7 and Zn3V2O7(OH)2·2H2O. (5) V6O13 and V6O13·yH2O composed of corner and edge-sharing distorted VO6 octahedra to form alternating single and double vanadium oxide layers by sharing corners. (6) Other types such as VO2, K2V8O21, Zn2(OH)VO4, etc.Fig. 7b shows the typical crystal structures of representative vanadium-based oxides of interest for ZIBs.
The presence of cations and H2O as pillars in the interlayers may modify the layered structure and significantly affect the intercalation chemistries and electrode performances of vanadium-based oxides. For example, the interlayer Zn2+ and water molecules in a layered vanadium oxide bronze (Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O, ZVO) help to sustain structural stability on cycling.3 This cathode delivered reversible capacities of 282 and 220 mA h g−1 at 1 and 15C, respectively, with 80% capacity retention after 1000 cycles at 8C. Other layered vanadium oxides pillared by various cations include LixV2O5·nH2O, NaV3O8·nH2O, and Ca0.25V2O5·nH2O (Table S1, ESI†). In addition to vanadium oxide itself, components such as conducting agent and electrolyte play an important role in the performance improvement of vanadium oxides. Remarkably, a composite of V2O5·nH2O/graphene exhibits superior Zn-storage performance with reversible capacities of 372 and 319 mA h g−1 at 0.3 and 15 A g−1 respectively, owing to the synergistic merits of the structural features of V2O5·nH2O nanowires and the high conductivity of the graphene network.40 Electrolyte optimization of salt, concentration and additives is an attractive strategy to improve the stability of vanadium oxides, particularly by restraining vanadium loss. For example, a concentrated 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte prevents the dissolution of the V2O5 cathode to sustain extended cycling stability.39 The addition of Na+ into the ZnSO4 electrolyte impedes the dissolution of NaV3O8·1.5H2O (NVO) via shifting the dissolution equilibrium of sodium vanadate.24 There are other performance-enhancement approaches such as constructing vanadium oxides with more stable V–O bonds by cation doping, using gel or solid-state electrolytes, and designing functional separators.
Similar to manganese-based oxides, the reactions involved in vanadium-based oxides are complex. Mechanisms of Zn storage in vanadium oxides mainly include (i) Zn2+ insertion/extraction mechanism (Fig. 7c), (ii) H2O and Zn2+ co-insertion mechanism (Fig. 7c), and (iii) H+ and Zn2+ co-insertion mechanism (Fig. 7d).


Zn2+ insertion/extraction mechanism. 
Vanadium-based oxides are mainly layered/tunnel frameworks with a large void space favouring Zn2+ insertion. In a milestone study, a reversible Zn2+ insertion mechanism of Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O (eqn (5)) was revealed by combining operando X-ray diffraction and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy analyses.3 Similar Zn2+ (de)intercalation storage processes have been demonstrated in most of the reported vanadium-based cathodes such as VO2, V5O12·6H2O, Na2V6O16·3H2O, Zn3V2O7(OH)2·2H2O, LixV2O5·nH2O, and Ca0.25V2O5·nH2O.1,2,39 Most vanadium oxides can maintain a stable crystal framework via V evolution of oxidation states from V5+ to V4+ or even V3+, adapting to Zn2+ intercalation. Irreversible phase transitions were also observed in examples of NaV3O8-type compounds like Na5V12O32, which experiences structural destruction and phase transition and thus capacity degradation.2 In addition to the diffusion-controlled faradaic process, intercalation pseudocapacitance behaviours were also identified in V-based oxide cathodes (e.g., VO2, V2O5·nH2O, NaV3O8·nH2O, etc.) and were believed as a contribution to ultrafast Zn-intercalation kinetics.24,39,40 The pseudocapacitive response of battery chemistry can be characterized by the relationship between scan rate v and current i in cyclic voltammetry (i = avb or logi = b × logv + loga, where a and b are adjustable parameters), as shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†).39 When b is close to 0.5, the reaction process is controlled by ionic diffusion; when b approaches 1.0, pseudocapacitive contribution dominates and higher b indicates faster charge transfer kinetics. Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O + 1.1Zn2+ + 2.2e− ↔ Zn1.35V2O5·nH2O.(5)


H2O and Zn2+ co-insertion mechanism. 
With interlayer cations and/or structural waters, vanadium-based oxides usually feature an expanded layered architecture and favour hydrated Zn2+ intercalation. The solvating H2O acts as a charge shield to buffer the high charge density of divalent Zn2+ and thus promotes Zn2+ transport.40 In a concentrated triflate electrolyte, the V2O5 cathode exhibits a capacity of 470 mA h g−1 at 0.2 A g−1, a high energy density of 274 W h kg−1 at 7100 W kg−1 and a superior cyclability with 91% capacity retention over 4000 cycles.39 Similar co-intercalation chemistry of water molecules and Zn ions upon discharge is often observed in other vanadium oxides such as V6O13 and H2V3O8.13


H+ and Zn2+ co-insertion mechanism. 
The co-insertion process of H+ and Zn2+ is also observed in vanadium-based oxides. Recently, a simultaneous H+ and Zn2+ co-intercalation model was proposed in the NaV3O8·1.5H2O cathode using the 1 M ZnSO4 + 1 M Na2SO4 electrolyte.24 The corresponding reactions could be formulated as eqn (6)–(8): 3.9H2O ↔ 3.9H+ + 3.9OH−(6) 1.95Zn2+ + 0.65ZnSO4 + 3.9OH− + 2.6H2O ↔ 0.65Zn4SO4(OH)6·4H2O(7) NaZn0.1V3O8·1.5H2O + 3.9H+ + 0.4Zn2+ + 4.7e− → H3.9NaZn0.5V3O8·1.5H2O(8)The presence of small and lightweight protons is suggested to promote the diffusion of Zn2+ and improve insertion kinetics. The simultaneous H+ and Zn2+ insertion/extraction process in NaV3O8·1.5H2O is different from the case of MnO2 showing two-step H+ and Zn2+ intercalation behaviour.34 Note that the proton intercalation upon discharge generally leads to the precipitation of layered double hydroxide on the cathode surface, formed by the reaction of OH− (H2O = H+ + OH−), Zn2+, and electrolyte anions (Fig. 7d). Other vanadium oxide cathodes (e.g., V3O7·H2O) could also enable the H+ and Zn2+ co-intercalation chemistry.37 However, the position of H+ or hydronium in vanadium oxides remains unclear, and the influence of protons on Zn plating/stripping and ionic transfer requires further investigations.


Other vanadium-based compounds. 
Vanadium-based polyanionic materials such as Li3V2(PO4)3, Na3V2(PO4)3 (NVP) and Na3V2(PO4)2F3 (NVPF), previously utilized in lithium-ion or sodium-ion batteries, are employed in ZIBs due to their stable framework at delithiated or desodiated states. Taking Na3V2(PO4)3 as an example, its Na superionic conductor (NASICON) structure allows Na+ extraction on the first charging and reversible Zn2+ (de)intercalation during subsequent cycles.41 However, in a non-aqueous system, only Na+ is found to reversibly intercalate into the polyanionic phosphate (e.g., Na3V2(PO)2O2F (NVPOF)) without Zn2+ co-insertion.22 In addition, the introduction of highly electronegative F− anions in the phosphate lattice can improve the average operation voltage of the Na3V2(PO4)3-based material from around 1.1 to 1.7 V (vs. Zn2+/Zn). However, the capacity of vanadium-based polyanionic cathodes is relatively low (generally below 100 mA h g−1) because of their large molecular mass. Further investigations should focus on the structural design, such as defect engineering and electrochemically active cation doping (e.g., Mn, Ni, etc.), to achieve a high energy density. Besides the active reaction based on sites of 3d metals, a recent study has proposed a reversible oxygen-involved redox mechanism in polymeric VOPO4 where the anionic redox not only contributes to ∼27% additional capacity but also increases the average voltage to 1.56 V (Fig. 7e).19 Recently, a simultaneous cationic (V3+ ↔ V2+) and anionic (N3− ↔ N2−) redox reaction has been achieved in a surface-oxidized vanadium nitride (VNxOy) cathode, rendering a high reversible capacity of 200 mA h g−1 at 30 A g−1 and fast kinetics.42 A stable polymeric crystal structure marrying anionic redox chemistry may open up a new avenue for exploiting new ZIB cathodes.

3.4 Prussian blue analogues
Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) have been widely investigated as metal-ion battery hosts, which adopt 3D open-framework structures with abundant redox-active sites and considerable structural stability.11,43–45 The nominal chemical formula of PBAs can be described as AxM[M′(CN)6]y·zH2O, in which A represents alkali metal ions (i.e., Na+ and K+) while M and M′ are transition metal ions (i.e., Fe, Co, Ni, Cu, and Zn). Fig. 8a illustrates the typical crystal structure of PBAs, where M and M′ locate on alternate corners in a corner-shared octahedron cube bridged by cyanide CN ligands and M′ and M bond with C and N atoms to form octahedral M′C6 and MN6, respectively. The electrochemical properties of PBAs could be tuned by not only the type and ratio of M and M′ ions but also the coordination sites (C or N to metals). To date, PBAs including cubic copper hexacyanoferrate (CuHCF), nickel hexacyanoferrate (NiHCF), cobalt hexacyanoferrate (CoHCF), iron hexacyanoferrate (FeHCF) and zinc hexacyanoferrate (ZnHCF) with a rhombohedral structure have been employed as cathode materials for ZIBs (Table S1, ESI†).
 Fig. 8  (a) Typical structure of Prussian blue analogues. (b) Dicharge/charge curves of the CuHCF cathode and Zn anode at 60 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of Zn2+ (de)intercalation into the CoFe(CN)6 framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
Taking CuHCF as an example, Fig. 8b shows the typical charge and discharge profiles of a PBA cathode for ZIBs. This compound delivers a capacity of 55 mA h g−1 at 60 mA g−1 and an average voltage of 1.73 V (vs. Zn), with a capacity retention of 96.3% after 100 cycles.11 The intercalation chemistry of CuHCF is based on reversible insertion/extraction of Zn2+ into/from the A sites of the crystal lattice (Fig. 8a), according to the following equation: xZn2+ + 2xe− + CuHCF ↔ ZnxCuHCF(9)Further investigations revealed the large effect of the electrolyte and current rate on the aging of the CuHCF cathode during battery operation.43 The aging occurs at a shorter number of cycles when the electrolyte concentration is higher and the current density is lower, as identified through the simultaneous appearance of a second phase and decrease of the main redox peak upon cycling. Understanding the aging mechanism of PBAs helps in the rational modification of active materials to boost the electrochemical stability.
Although the operating voltage of PBAs is relatively high (about 1.7 V vs. Zn), the limited specific capacity (generally below 70 mA h g−1) leads to an insufficient energy density. Besides, unstable phase transformation upon cycling would induce capacity decay. Strategies to address these problems include generating more vacancy sites in the crystal framework and integrating with other active components or constructing composite materials. Recently, a two-species redox reaction of Co(II)/Co(III) and Fe(II)/Fe(III) was proposed in cobalt hexacyanoferrate (Fig. 8c).45 In a concentrated 4 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte, this CoFe(CN)6 cathode exhibits a considerably high Zn-storage capacity of 173.4 mA h g−1 with a voltage of 1.75 V at 0.3 A g−1 and an extended cycling stability without evident capacity decay after 2200 cycles at 3.0 A g−1.
3.5 Organic compounds
Organic compounds are highly appealing electrode materials because of their high theoretical capacity, flexible structure designability, high element abundance, environmental friendliness and sustainability.12,46 Based on distinct redox reactions, organic electrode materials can be classified into three types: n, p, and bipolar. Most n-type compounds undergo first reduction and combine with electrons and metal cations, whereas p-type organics experience initial oxidation and bind anions from the electrolyte to maintain an electroneutral state. Bipolar-type materials can initially undergo either oxidation or reduction, featuring properties of both n-type and p-type materials. Representative n-type organic materials investigated for ZIBs mainly include quinone compounds, such as 1,4-naphthoquinone (1,4-NQ), 9,10-anthraquinone (9,10-AQ), calix[4]quinone (C4Q), 1,2-naphthoquinone (1,2-NQ), 9,10-phenanthrenequinone (9,10-PQ), tetrachloro-1,4-benzoquinone (p-chloranil), poly(benzoquinonyl sulfide) (PBQS), and pyrene-4,5,9,10-tetraone (PTO) (Fig. 9a and Table S1, ESI†).12,46,47 Unlike the common intercalation mechanism for inorganic materials, quinone-based compounds with oxygen atoms in carbonyl groups serve as active sites for Zn-storage through a coordination reaction. Compared to aprotic electrolytes, in aqueous media the mass dissolution problem of quinone electrodes is mitigated; however, the Zn-containing species at discharged states are often soluble, leading to poor cyclability. To tackle the dissolution issues, strategies such as separator modification, polymerization, and mesoporous matrix confinement have been applied for quinone electrode materials.
 Fig. 9  (a) Structures of the representative quinone cathodes for ZIBs. (b) Discharge/charge curves of the C4Q cathode and (c) optimized configurations of C4Q before and after Zn ion uptake. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Rotation of p-chloranil molecular columns upon Zn2+ insertion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
In a recent effort of using quinone compounds for aqueous ZIBs, a C4Q cathode was combined with a cation-selective membrane (i.e., Nafion film) separator, which can suppress the dissolution and crossover of the discharged ZnxC4Q to the zinc anode side. The C4Q electrode delivered a high capacity of 335 mA h g−1 at 20 mA g−1, a flat operation voltage of 1.0 V, and a low charge–discharge plateau separation of 70 mV (Fig. 9b).12 The combination of electrostatic potential (ESP) computation and in situ spectroscopy has revealed that Zn storage occurs on the active carbonyl groups with 6e− transfer per C4Q molecule (Fig. 9c). Similarly, a p-chloranil cathode permits reversible and efficient Zn2+ storage with an attractive energy density of 200 W h kg−1 and a CE of 95% in aqueous ZIBs. The molecular columns in p-chloranil experience a twisted rotation to accommodate Zn2+, thus restricting the volume change (−2.7%) upon cycling (Fig. 9d).46 Another noteworthy carbonyl PTO has much less solubility for both the pristine cathode and discharged species, making it possible to employ a conventional glass fiber separator. Binding Zn via coordination, the PTO cathode enables an exciting specific capacity of 336 mA h g−1, along with fast kinetics and high reversibility.47 Considering the extensive interest in organic electrode materials for alkali-metal battery chemistry, a variety of conjugated compounds can be expected as promising materials for Zn storage. Likewise, most organic cathode materials, particularly those with a low molecular weight, are plagued by intrinsic poor electron conductivity, which restricts the rate performance and would lead to hybridization strategies such as anchoring organic electrodes on carbonaceous substrates via π–π interaction.
3.6 Other cathode materials
In addition to the above cathodes for ZIBs, other reported Zn-host materials mainly direct to transition metal chalcogenide compounds (Table S1, ESI†). Particularly, Chevrel phase compounds with the general formula of MxMo6T8 (M = metal ions; T = S, Se, or Te) are composed of Mo6T8 unit arrays in a 3D network containing metal ions. Each unit consists of a distorted Mo6 octahedron surrounded by a cubic T8 unit of chalcogenide atoms. The Chevrel compounds can host high-valent cations with remarkable ionic and electronic transfer kinetics, but generally show a limited energy density due to low capacity (<100 mA h g−1) and average working voltage (around 0.35 V vs. Zn2+/Zn).48 Layered transition-metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) such as MoS2 and VS2 also hold potential for reversible Zn insertion because the higher polarizability of S2− relative to O2− enables weaker electrostatics, allowing high ionic transfer. Recent studies demonstrated that incorporation of a small amount of oxygen (5%) in MoS2 (MoS2–O) can increase the interlayer spacing from 6.2 to 9.5 Å and improve the hydrophilicity, which allows a hydrated Zn2+ intercalation and thus significantly lowers the desolvation penalty at the electrode–electrolyte interface (Fig. S2, ESI†).49 The resultant electrode exhibits a high capacity of 232 mA h g−1 and fast Zn2+ diffusivity (at a magnitude of ∼10−9 cm2 s−1 exceeding the Li diffusion coefficient). The interlayer spacing and hydrophilicity engineering can be extended to enhance the ion storage performance of other layered intercalation hosts.
3.7 Effect of H2O on the performance of cathode materials
Compared to monovalent Li+, divalent Zn2+ typically suffers from sluggish kinetics for diffusion within the solid electrodes or across the electrode/electrolyte interfaces due to the stronger electrostatic interaction between Zn2+ and its environment.14 Water in electrolytes or host lattices plays a key role in Zn2+ insertion chemistries. The reaction mechanism as mentioned above in manganese and vanadium oxides involves the participation of H2O in co-insertion or even in phase transition of host materials. The function of crystal H2O in expanding the layered galleries and shielding the charge of intercalated Zn2+ is proposed to boost the overall electrochemical performance of electrodes such as Zn0.25V2O5.3 Structural H2O in MnO2 or V2O5·nH2O cathodes is also shown to function like a “lubricant” to facilitate fast zinc-ion transport by screening the electrostatic repulsion between Zn2+ and host anions.5,40
In addition to the solid diffusion of Zn2+, the interfacial charge transfer process associated with the desolvation of Zn2+ is also governed by H2O in the electrolyte. Typically, in an aqueous system, Zn2+ cations are octahedrally coordinated with six water molecules, such as [Zn(H2O)6]2+. Partially hydrated Zn2+ mediates the interfacial cation transfer in an aqueous electrolyte, which decreases the desolvation energy penalty and the repulsion at the host surface due to the charge shielding by water molecules.13 In contrast, a nonaqueous system (i.e., AN-based electrolyte) experiences a higher desolvation penalty associated with nearly four-fold higher activation energy, as a result of the ion pair formation. Consequently, the V3O7·H2O cathode gives a much higher capacity of 375 mA h g−1 at 375 mA g−1 in an aqueous electrolyte as compared to the nonaqueous counterpart (59 mA h g−1 at 5 mA g−1).13 Similarly, molecular H2O at the electrode/electrolyte interface is also found to accelerate Zn2+ diffusion from the electrolyte to the electrode surface by using a model system consisting of a layered VOPO4·2H2O cathode and a 0.1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2–AN electrolyte with different percentage of water.14 Water effects enhance Zn-storage reaction kinetics of other cathodes such as KCuHCF20 and MoS2.49 Further studies are required to gain more insight into how water facilitates Zn2+ diffusion across the bulk electrode or electrolytes and the electrode/electrolyte interface.
4. Electrolytes
Electrolytes transport guest ions to connect the cathode with the Zn anode, isolate electrons and define the electrochemical window. Electrolyte formulation of salts, solvents, concentrations, and additives has a profound influence on the solvation structure, interfacial stability, cathode dissolution, safety, cost, and overall electrochemical performance of ZIBs (Fig. 10a). Currently, reported zinc salts include ZnSO4, Zn(CF3SO3)2, ZnCl2, ZnF2, Zn(NO3)2, Zn(ClO4)2, Zn(CH3COO)2, Zn(BF4)2, Zn(PF6)2, Zn(TFSI)2, etc. Investigated solvents vary from water to organic solvents, ionic liquids and deep eutectic solvents. For the Zn-ion chemistry, aqueous electrolytes have intrinsic superiority, such as high safety, low cost, high conductivity and good compatibility. Some organic or inorganic additives are introduced into electrolytes to eliminate the critical issues of the Zn anode and enhance the reversibility of the cathode. Electrolytes could be roughly divided into aqueous and non-aqueous systems according to the selection of solvents. The multi-angle comparison between conventional and concentrated aqueous electrolytes and aqueous versus nonaqueous electrolytes is schematically shown in Fig. 10b and c, respectively.
 Fig. 10  (a) Electrolyte design based on the salt, solvent, additive and concentration, and the influence of their physicochemical properties on both cathode material and Zn anode, including interfacial stability, active material dissolution, and electrochemical performances. Multi-angle comparison of (b) conventional and concentrated aqueous electrolytes and (c) aqueous and nonaqueous electrolytes. 
4.1 Aqueous electrolytes
Aqueous electrolytes are particularly attractive in view of their unique merits: inherent safety by avoiding the usage of flammable organic compounds, high ionic conductivity (about two orders of magnitude higher than non-aqueous ones), cost effectiveness, and environmental friendliness.

Neutral or mildly acidic electrolytes. 
Considering the severe side reactions with Zn, alkaline and strongly acidic electrolytes are not appropriate for round-trip Zn2+ migration. Neutral or mildly acidic aqueous electrolytes are better choices for ZIBs. The solute salts have a significant effect on the kinetics of Zn-ion diffusion and reaction chemistries of active materials due to different coordination/de-association behaviours. Among zinc salts, ZnSO4 and Zn(CF3SO3)2 (Zn(OTf)2) are most extensively employed while ZnCl2 and Zn(NO3)2 are comparatively tested. The aqueous Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte enables wide electrochemical windows (up to 2.5 V), considerable ionic conductivity (3.47 S cm−1), small overpotential of Zn plating and stripping with a near 100% CE, outperforming the counterpart ZnSO4 electrolyte.10 Poor Zn plating/stripping efficiency and a narrow window are observed in ZnCl2 and Zn(NO3)2 solutions due to the instability of Cl− and NO3−. The superior electrochemical properties of Zn(CF3SO3)2 could be attributed to the bulky CF3SO3− anions (vs. SO42− with double charge) that decrease the number of water molecules surrounding Zn2+ cations and reduce solvation effects.
The salt concentration is another key factor to affect the battery performance. ZIBs assembled with concentrated electrolytes show higher stability compared to those assembled with the diluted counterpart (e.g., 3 vs. 1 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte).10 Higher salt concentration is proposed to alter the solvation (Fig. 10a) and transfer of cations/anions as well as reduce the water activity and water-induced side reactions. In a recently developed highly concentrated aqueous electrolyte consisting of 1 m Zn(TFSI)2 + 20 m LiTFSI, the Zn-solvation sheath was occupied by TFSI− instead of water, thus preventing hydrolysis.8 While the use of concentrated electrolytes gives rise to new interface chemistry and bring opportunity to stabilize ZIBs, the increase of cost and viscosity and lower wettability should be taken into account for practical applications (Fig. 10b).
Side reactions from salts in aqueous electrolytes have been universally observed in both manganese-based and vanadium-based cathodes, such as the layered double hydroxide (LDH)-type Zn4(OH)6SO4·nH2O (ZHS) by-product in ZnSO4-based electrolytes.4,24,33 However, the formation mechanism and the functionality of ZHS still remain ambiguous. Recently, H+ intercalation in oxide cathodes during discharging was demonstrated to cause an increase of electrolyte pH and induce the precipitation of ZHS on the surface of the electrode, which results from the reaction of OH− (left behind after H+ intercalation), Zn2+, and SO42−.37 The generation of ZHS in turn buffers the electrolyte pH to sustain the H+ insertion. During charging, the ejecting protons dissolve the ZHS into the electrolyte. Similar to ZHS, a triflate anion-based hydroxide precipitation was also detected in the Zn(CF3SO3)2 electrolyte, but its exact structure and composition need further determination. It should be noted that the gradual accumulation of these by-products upon prolonged cycling will lead to the volume expansion of the electrode and consumption of the electrolyte, posing challenges to battery operation. Effective strategies to alleviate this problem include constructing electrodes with a porous structure to accommodate by-product precipitation or tuning the surface functionality of oxides to retard H+ intercalation.


Aqueous gel polymer electrolytes. 
Gel polymer electrolytes (GPEs) have a polymeric network filled with water, featuring liquid-like ionic conductivity and solid-like stability viable for applications in flexible and wearable ZIBs. Typically, GPEs consist of Zn-containing salts and polymeric frameworks dissolved in water. For example, poly(vinylidenefluoride-co-hexafluoropropylene) (PVDF–HFP) and polyethylene oxide (PEO) based GPEs have been explored in primary zinc batteries; however, they suffer from low ionic conductivity, high interfacial resistance, rapid degradation and poor mechanical strength. Hydrogel electrolytes, as hydrophilic polymer networks swollen with a large amount of water, have high inorganic salt solubility and provide higher ionic conductivity. Recently, several water-soluble polymers such as polyacrylic acid (PAA), poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), polyacrylamide (PAM) and xanthan gum have been exploited to fabricate hydrogel electrolytes, which could simultaneously replace traditional separators and aqueous solutions and afford high chemical stability and mechanical flexibility.24,27,30,45
As an example, a hierarchical polymer electrolyte (HPE) was designed by grafting PAM onto gelatin hydrogel, which was filled in the matrix of a PAN electrospun fiber membrane.27 This flexible HPE film gave an ionic conductivity of 1.76 × 10−2 S cm−1 at room temperature while maintaining favourable mechanical strength. Moreover, a solid-sate ZIB equipped with HPE, flexible MnO2/CNT cathode and Zn/CNT anode exhibited considerable flexibility and stability, even under harsh conditions such as bending, hammering, washing in water and exposure to fire.27 In addition, other functionalities such as self-healing and anti-freezing can be also introduced into gel electrolytes. For example, the PVA/Zn(CF3SO3)2 hydrogel electrolyte was shown to exhibit an ionic conductivity of 12.6 × 10−3 S cm−1 and superior self-healing behaviour without the need of external stimulus.2 A novel glycerol and ethylene glycol based waterborne anionic polyurethane acrylates/polyacrylamide (EG-waPUA/PAM in short) hydrogel electrolyte was also reported to show freeze-resistance and long-term stability even at a temperature of −20 °C, benefiting from the strong hydrogen bonds between EG-waPUA, water and PAM in the gel.2 Exceptional flexibility and durability could be maintained under adverse mechanical environments such as bending, compressing and hammering. These unique properties can be attributed to the strong cooperative interaction between the polymer matrix and water that firmly immobilizes water molecules inside the polymer chain network. Taking advantages of the profound hydrogen-bonding effect is a useful strategy in the design and assembly of advanced gel electrolytes for ZIBs working in some extreme environments.

4.2 Non-aqueous electrolytes
Nonaqueous electrolytes enable a wide electrochemical window and alleviate side reactions (like the competitive hydrogen evolution and oxygen evolution) faced in water-based counterparts, thus feasibly simplifying the Zn plating/stripping electrochemistry and permitting high-voltage ZIBs.20–22 However, non-aqueous ZIBs have drawn less attention, particularly concerning the electrode/electrolyte interface compatibility, kinetics, and safety. In this section, we selectively overview a few organic-solvent, ionic liquid and deep eutectic solvent-based electrolytes for ZIBs.

Organic electrolytes. 
Typical aprotic electrolytes for ZIBs are mainly comprised of acetonitrile (AN), propylene carbonate (PC), diglyme (G2), N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF), and trimethyl and triethyl phosphate (TMP and TEP) as solvents, and Zn(TFSI)2 and Zn(CF3SO3)2 as salts. The properties of solvents are demonstrated to be the most important factor in determining the anodic stability of organic electrolytes. The exemplified AN permits highly reversible Zn plating/stripping (>99% CE) and a wide electrochemical window up to 3.8 V vs. Zn/Zn2+.21 The Zn(CF3SO3)2–AN system can well support a ZnNi1/2Mn1/2CoO4 cathode with a high average voltage at around 1.7 V.38 However, organic electrolytes still suffer from disadvantages including low ionic conductivity and sluggish interfacial charge transfer, which lead to low deliverable capacity and poor rate capability of ZIBs (Fig. 10c). Recent research on the kinetics revealed that the charge transfer resistance at the electrode–electrolyte interface in nonaqueous media was nearly 100 and 15 times that of aqueous values for the Zn counter and V3O7·H2O working electrode, respectively.13 Moreover, the nonaqueous charge transfer was characterized by much higher activation energies (75 kJ mol−1 for the V3O7·H2O cathode and 223 kJ mol−1 for the Zn anode) compared with those in the aqueous counterpart (20 kJ mol−1 for both electrodes). This difference arises from a large Zn2+ desolvation penalty in a nonaqueous system in addition to strong cation–anion interactions. To improve the sluggish kinetics in nonaqueous media, promising strategies include optimizing the electrolyte with low viscosity and weak Zn2+ coordination, tuning the cathode surface to minimize the interfacial barrier of charge transfer, and designing large-layered/open-framework hosts to allow solvated Zn2+ intercalation.
Besides, organic electrolytes employing carbonate or acetonitrile (AN) solvent are highly flammable/volatile and would pose safety issues of the battery. Alkyl phosphates (e.g., TMP and TEP) promise safe non-aqueous ZIBs due to the fire-retardant property, high solvability of salts, low viscosity, and a wide range of operating temperature.22 For example, a non-flammable 0.5 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 in TEP electrolyte was demonstrated to allow stable Zn plating/stripping with a high CE of 99.68%.20 Nonetheless, alkyl phosphates possess intrinsic instability at high potentials, restricting the choices of high-voltage cathode materials. To tackle this limitation, attempt was made to regulate the solvation structure of the electrolyte by designing a concentrated TMP-based electrolyte with 0.5 M Zn2+ and 1.0 M Na+, which exhibited high anodic stability up to 2.8 V (vs. Zn) that well supported the polyanion-type cathodes.22 The enhanced oxidation stability was attributed to the strong interaction between TMP solvents and Zn2+/Na+ salts that reduced free solvents.


Ionic liquid electrolytes. 
Ionic liquids (ILs) are molten salts in liquid state at near ambient temperature, which consist of bulky, asymmetric organic cations and inorganic/organic anions. Typically, ILs exhibit low vapour pressure, a large electrochemical window, high chemical/thermal stability and non-flammability. Nonetheless, they are generally costly and highly sensitive to moisture, imposing difficulty in making IL-based batteries. Fundamental studies on the zinc electrodeposition from ILs have drawn much interest but few studies have focused on the ZIB chemistry in IL electrolytes. Most of the reported IL-based electrolytes for reversible Zn plating/stripping are based on imidazolium and pyrrolidinium cations with counterions of TFSI−, dicyanamide (DCA−), and trifluoromethylsulfonate (TfO−). The Zn salts are known to be responsible for the morphology of electrodeposited Zn. Furthermore, the rate capability of ZIBs with IL electrolytes is inferior to that with the aqueous counterpart. Addition of water into ILs is adapted to enhance performance as water contributes to reduce the activation barrier required for Zn deposition and assist in stable cycling. In this regard, Endres et al. reported a bio-ionic liquid–water electrolyte composed of 1 M zinc acetate (Zn(OAc)2)/(choline acetate ([Ch]OAc) + 30 wt% water), which endows a reversible capacity of 120 mA h g−1 and a coulombic efficiency of 99% at 10 mA g−1 for the coupled FeFe(CN)6 cathode.44 Further studies are required to elucidate the solvation structure of Zn2+ and the surface properties of electrodes in IL-based electrolytes.


Deep eutectic electrolytes. 
Deep eutectic solvents (DESs) have recently been introduced in electrolytes of ZIBs. Typical DESs are formed by the complexation of a quaternary ammonium salt with a metal salt or a hydrogen-bond donor, and are often less expensive, nontoxic, biodegradable, and easily prepared.16,50 Choline chloride (ChCl)/urea has been considered as one of the most promising DES systems, due to its high metal-salt solubility and a wide electrochemical window. A reported ChCl/urea + 0.3 M ZnCl2 electrolyte, in which chlorozincate ions ([ZnCl4]2−) serve as the charge carrier ([ZnCl4]2− ↔ Zn2+ + 4Cl−), enables reversible Zn2+ intercalation into the MnO2 cathode with a capacity of 170 mA h g−1.16 A recent study showed that an acetamide–Zn(TFSI)2 eutectic electrolyte (ZES) could induce a zinc fluoride-rich organic/inorganic hybrid solid electrolyte interphase (SEI) on the Zn anode, as the TFSI−-containing Zn complexes in ZES render preferential reductive decomposition of TFSI− prior to Zn electrodeposition.50 This SEI-coated Zn anode exhibits highly reversible (∼100% CE) and dendrite-free Zn plating/stripping performance. Research on DESs for ZIBs is in the incipient stage and rapid advance can be expected from DESs that bring about lower viscosity, higher ionic conductivity, and enhanced low-temperature performance.

5. Conclusions and perspectives
Rechargeable zinc-ion batteries stand out from a variety of todays’ battery technologies for the balance of advantages in cost, performance, safety, environmental impact, and material availability. In this tutorial review, we have presented an introduction to the fundamentals and a summary of the key material developments of ZIBs. An overview is given from the basic Zn chemistries, to efficient strategies to realize stable Zn anodes, design principles of high-performance cathode materials and related Zn-storage mechanisms, and regulation of efficient electrolytes. The past decade has witnessed substantial progress in the field of ZIB technologies; yet there are still issues to be addressed. We highlight here the remaining challenges and perspectives of ZIBs.
For the anode part, though the environmentally stable metallic Zn (e.g., foil or powdery form) could be directly used for ZIBs, the low utilization generally poses large loss of energy density. Loading Zn on a 3D porous conductive skeleton would effectively improve the mass utilization of Zn anodes. Deep charging or discharging of Zn anodes is plagued by issues including dendrite growth, low Zn plating/stripping efficiency, corrosion by the electrolyte, competitive hydrogen evolution and surface passivation. To enhance the reversibility and stability of metallic Zn anodes, different valid strategies have been proposed from the aspects of formulating electrolytes, tailoring Zn electrode structures, surface coating, Zn alloying, etc. In addition, in situ building a protective solid electrolyte interface (SEI) on the metallic Zn anode deserves more attention. More efforts are required to conquer all the problems faced by Zn anodes. Notably, testing protocols in terms of current density, plating/stripping capacity, temperature, and battery configuration that significantly alter the Zn anode performance should be taken into consideration when evaluating solutions, which are important metrics in identifying practical ZIBs.
For the cathode part, the specific capacities of reported active materials are far from comparable with the capacity of Zn anodes (820 mA h g−1). This mismatch calls for innovative cathode materials based on the new Zn-storage mechanism (i.e., simultaneous cationic and anionic redox reactions) to afford higher capacities. The divalent Zn2+ has strong electrostatic interaction with the cathode frameworks, leading to sluggish Zn2+ diffusion. Defect chemistries (e.g., cation and oxygen vacancies), bulk doping, enlarging interplanar spacing, nanostructure engineering, and pre-intercalation of ions and/or H2O are expected to enhance the Zn-storage performance. In addition, the dissolution of active materials in aqueous electrolytes and large volume variation caused by phase transition are non-negligible issues to result in rapid capacity fading. Besides, large desolvation penalties at the electrode–electrolyte interface impede the Zn2+ intercalation kinetics, particularly in a nonaqueous system. Remedies may lie in modifying the electrode surface to reduce the interfacial charge transfer barrier and developing large-layered/open-framework materials to accommodate solvated Zn2+ intercalation. Furthermore, the poor electrical conductivity of many cathode materials (in particular organic compounds) limits their rate capability. In this regard, strategies of electrolyte optimizing, coating or compositing with conductive carbon-based materials (e.g., carbon black, graphene and CNTs) and conducting polymers (e.g., PEDOT and PANI) have proven effective to upgrade the electrode performances. In addition to inorganic hosts, organic cathode materials with tunable structures and abundant precursors may be attractive candidates for both aqueous and nonaqueous systems in the future research.
For the electrolytes, it remains a formidable challenge to formulate a couple of zinc salt and solvents well compatible with both Zn anode and Zn-storage cathode. The composition of electrolytes dictates the Zn plating/stripping behaviours, the electrochemical window, the mechanism, and the kinetics of Zn2+ intercalation. The oxygen evolution in aqueous electrolytes at high operating voltages (>2 V vs. Zn2+/Zn) would limit the selection of high-voltage cathodes. The use of a concentrated salt (in the unusual case ‘solvent-in-salt’) is demonstrated to significantly improve the anodic stability of the electrolyte and the stability of electrodes; yet it raises concerns regarding the increase of cost and viscosity. Electrolyte additives seem more economic, as shown in the examples that the application of an inexpensive surfactant (e.g., SDS) can expand the electrolyte working window, and Mn2+ addition helps to accommodate Mn dissolution and form a protective surface layer on MnOx cathodes. Further studies are required to gain deep insight into the cation solvation sheath, the role of Zn2+ de-solvation at the solid–liquid interface, the diffusion kinetics of Zn2+, and the interfacial chemistries (e.g., the formation and function of the anion/solvent-derived SEI) in aqueous and nonaqueous systems. More attention will be paid to exploring an advanced electrolyte formula that sustains large-scale applications of ZIBs.
Other components of ZIBs such as separators, current collectors, and binders are important likewise but have drawn much less attention. Further optimization will go to the widely employed separators of filter paper and glass fiber, current collectors of titanium/steel foils and carbon paper/cloth, and binders of polyvinylidene fluoride, polytetrafluoroethylene and carboxymethyl cellulose. In addition to material optimization of these key components, an in-depth understanding of the energy conversion and storage mechanism in ZIBs should be intensified as well. The cathode reactions often involve diverse species such as guest ions (e.g., Zn2+ and H+), additive ions, lattice water, and solvent molecules. This complexity, together with elusive storage sites and ionic diffusion paths, poses difficulty in mechanistic studies. The identification of the competition between Zn2+ and proton intercalation in aqueous media and its effect on performance are also important for the design of cathode materials. Therefore, an integration of advanced characterization (particularly operando techniques) and simulation methods is highly desirable to gain fundamental knowledge of ZIBs.
For potential applications, the moderate energy density, low cost, and high safety render ZIBs particularly attractive in the field of large-scale energy storage. On the other hand, the emerging wearable devices resort to the development of lightweight, flexible power sources, where ZIBs will find a niche. Although in the incipient stage, solid progress has been made in flexible ZIBs, particularly concerning quasi-solid-state configuration with hydrogel electrolytes. A few prototype ZIBs show interesting stretchability and mechanical properties, while their stability requires further improvement for practical aspects. Building flexible ZIBs with wide-temperature tolerance, self-healing, thermoresponsive and photoresponsive features is fascinating in view of the huge applicability in next-generation wearable electronics. Note that most research studies on performance evaluation of ZIBs are based on lab-made cells, from which the results may not be straightforwardly translated into practical batteries. Testing conditions to meet industrial requirements should be considered from aspects such as high mass loading, minimal electrolyte usage, optimized cathode to anode ratio, and so on. In addition, the cost analysis, areal capacity, life span, and gravimetric/volumetric system energy density should be rationally assessed in light of practical applications. In conclusion, rechargeable ZIBs are currently at the laboratory level, and the remaining challenges call for tremendous efforts to realizing this promising electrochemical energy storage technology.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by Natural Science Foundation of Tianjin (18JCZDJC31100), MOST (2017YFA0206700), NSFC (21871149 & 21805066), National Program for Special Support of Eminent Professionals, MOE (B12015), Natural Science Foundation of Hebei Province (B2019201160), Top Young Talents Project of Hebei Education Department (BJ2019052), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities, and China Postdoctoral Science Foundation (2019T120191).
Notes and references
L. E. Blanc, D. Kundu and L. F. Nazar, Joule, 2020, 4, 771–799 CrossRef CAS .
B. Tang, L. Shan, S. Liang and J. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 3288–3304 RSC .
D. Kundu, B. D. Adams, V. Duffort, S. H. Vajargah and L. F. Nazar, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16119 CrossRef CAS .
H. Pan, Y. Shao, P. Yan, Y. Cheng, K. S. Han, Z. Nie, C. Wang, J. Yang, X. Li, P. Bhattacharya, K. T. Mueller and J. Liu, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1, 16039 CrossRef CAS .
N. Zhang, F. Cheng, J. Liu, L. Wang, X. Long, X. Liu, F. Li and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2017, 8, 405 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Chao, W. Zhou, C. Ye, Q. Zhang, Y. Chen, L. Gu, K. Davey and S.-Z. Qiao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7823–7828 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          D. Linden and T. Reddy, Linden's Handbook of Batteries, McGraw-Hill,  2002 Search PubMed .
F. Wang, O. Borodin, T. Gao, X. Fan, W. Sun, F. Han, A. Faraone, J. A. Dura, K. Xu and C. Wang, Nat. Mater., 2018, 17, 543–549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Xu, B. Li, H. Du and F. Kang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 933–935 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Zhang, F. Cheng, Y. Liu, Q. Zhao, K. Lei, C. Chen, X. Liu and J. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 12894–12901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Trócoli and F. L. Mantia, ChemSusChem, 2015, 8, 481–485 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Zhao, W. Huang, Z. Luo, L. Liu, Y. Lu, Y. Li, L. Li, J. Hu, H. Ma and J. Chen, Sci. Adv., 2018, 4, eaao1761 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Kundu, S. Hosseini Vajargah, L. Wan, B. Adams, D. Prendergast and L. F. Nazar, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 881–892 RSC .
F. Wang, W. Sun, Z. Shadike, E. Hu, X. Ji, T. Gao, X.-Q. Yang, K. Xu and C. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11978–11981 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhang, J. Holoubek, X. Wu, A. Daniyar, L. Zhu, C. Chen, D. P. Leonard, I. A. Rodríguez-Pérez, J.-X. Jiang, C. Fang and X. Ji, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 14097–14099 RSC .
W. Kao-ian, R. Pornprasertsuk, P. Thamyongkit, T. Maiyalagan and S. Kheawhom, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A1063–A1069 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zheng, Q. Zhao, T. Tang, J. Yin, C. D. Quilty, G. D. Renderos, X. Liu, Y. Deng, L. Wang, D. C. Bock, C. Jaye, D. Zhang, E. S. Takeuchi, K. J. Takeuchi, A. C. Marschilok and L. A. Archer, Science, 2019, 366, 645–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          M. Pourbaix, Atlas of Electrochemical Equilibria in Aqueous Solutions, National Association of Corrosion Engineers,  1974 Search PubMed .
F. Wan, Y. Zhang, L. Zhang, D. Liu, C. Wang, L. Song, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7062–7067 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Naveed, H. Yang, J. Yang, Y. Nuli and J. Wang, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 28, 2760–2764 CrossRef PubMed .
S.-D. Han, N. N. Rajput, X. Qu, B. Pan, M. He, M. S. Ferrandon, C. Liao, K. A. Persson and A. K. Burrell, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 3021–3031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Dong, S. Di, F. Zhang, X. Bian, Y. Wang, J. Xu, L. Wang, F. Cheng and N. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 3252–3261 RSC .
K. E. K. Sun, T. K. A. Hoang, T. N. L. Doan, Y. Yu, X. Zhu, Y. Tian and P. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 9681–9687 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Wan, L. Zhang, X. Dai, X. Wang, Z. Niu and J. Chen, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1656 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. Wang, J. Hu, L. Han, Z. Wang, H. Wang, Q. Zhao, J. Liu and F. Pan, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 92–99 CrossRef CAS .
M. Wang, A. Emre, S. Tung, A. Gerber, D. Wang, Y. Huang, V. Cecen and N. A. Kotov, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 1107–1115 CAS .
H. Li, C. Han, Y. Huang, Y. Huang, M. Zhu, Z. Pei, Q. Xue, Z. Wang, Z. Liu, Z. Tang, Y. Wang, F. Kang, B. Li and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 941–951 RSC .
H. Yang, Z. Chang, Y. Qiao, H. Deng, X. Mu, P. He and H. Zhou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020 DOI:10.1002/anie.202001844 .
Z. Zhao, J. Zhao, Z. Hu, J. Li, J. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wang and G. Cui, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12, 1938–1949 RSC .
Y. Zeng, X. Zhang, R. Qin, X. Liu, P. Fang, D. Zheng, Y. Tong and X. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1903675 CrossRef PubMed .
M. A. González, R. Trócoli, I. Pavlovic, C. Barriga and F. L. Mantia, Electrochem. Commun., 2016, 68, 1–4 CrossRef .
S.-B. Wang, Q. Ran, R.-Q. Yao, H. Shi, Z. Wen, M. Zhao, X.-Y. Lang and Q. Jiang, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 1634 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Huang, Z. Wang, M. Hou, X. Dong, Y. Liu, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 2906 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sun, F. Wang, S. Hou, C. Yang, X. Fan, Z. Ma, T. Gao, F. Han, R. Hu, M. Zhu and C. Wang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9775–9778 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Khamsanga, R. Pornprasertsuk, T. Yonezawa, A. A. Mohamad and S. Kheawhom, Sci. Rep., 2019, 9, 8441 CrossRef PubMed .
M. H. Alfaruqi, V. Mathew, J. Gim, S. Kim, J. Song, J. P. Baboo, S. H. Choi and J. Kim, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 3609–3620 CrossRef CAS .
P. Oberholzer, E. Tervoort, A. Bouzid, A. Pasquarello and D. Kundu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 674–682 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pan, R. Zhang, R. G. Nuzzo and A. A. Gewirth, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1800589 CrossRef .
N. Zhang, Y. Dong, M. Jia, X. Bian, Y. Wang, M. Qiu, J. Xu, Y. Liu, L. Jiao and F. Cheng, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 1366–1372 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yan, P. He, Y. Chen, S. Wang, Q. Wei, K. Zhao, X. Xu, Q. An, Y. Shuang, Y. Shao, K. T. Mueller, L. Mai, J. Liu and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1703725 CrossRef PubMed .
G. Li, Z. Yang, Y. Jiang, C. Jin, W. Huang, X. Ding and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2016, 25, 211–217 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fang, S. Liang, Z. Chen, P. Cui, X. Zheng, A. Pan, B. Lu, X. Lu and J. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1905267 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kasiri, R. Trócoli, A. Bani Hashemi and F. L. Mantia, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 222, 74–83 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, G. Pulletikurthi and F. Endres, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 12158–12164 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Ma, S. Chen, C. Long, X. Li, Y. Zhao, Z. Liu, Z. Huang, B. Dong, J. A. Zapien and C. Zhi, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902446 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kundu, P. Oberholzer, C. Glaros, A. Bouzid, E. Tervoort, A. Pasquarello and M. Niederberger, Chem. Mater., 2018, 30, 3874–3881 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Guo, Y. Ma, X. Dong, J. Huang, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 11737–11741 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Chae, J. W. Heo, S.-C. Lim and S.-T. Hong, Inorg. Chem., 2016, 55, 3294–3301 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Liang, Z. Cao, F. Ming, W. Zhang, D. H. Anjum, Y. Cui, L. Cavallo and H. N. Alshareef, Nano Lett., 2019, 19, 3199–3206 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Qiu, X. Du, J. Zhao, Y. Wang, J. Ju, Z. Chen, Z. Hu, D. Yan, X. Zhou and G. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 5374 CrossRef .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00349eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

Ning Zhang
	Ning Zhang received his BS degree in Chemistry from Hebei University in 2012 and then obtained his PhD in Inorganic Chemistry from Nankai University in 2017. He is now an associate professor in the College of Chemistry & Environmental Science at Hebei University. His current research focuses on the design and synthesis of functional materials for applications in energy storage and conversion (lithium/sodium-ion batteries and aqueous zinc-ion batteries).

Xuyong Chen
	Xuyong Chen received his bachelor's degree (2016) in Metallurgical Engineering from Wuhan University of Science and Technology, and MS degree (2019) in Chemical Engineering from Nankai University supervised by Prof. Fangyi Cheng. His research is focused on aqueous zinc-ion batteries.

Fangyi Cheng
	Fangyi Cheng received his BS (2003) and PhD (2009) from Nankai University. He was appointed as assistant professor in 2009 and has been full professor since 2016 in the College of Chemistry, Nankai University. He stayed for one year (2015–2016) at UCLA as a visiting scholar. His group has broad interest in materials chemistry and energy storage technologies. His particular research efforts encompass the design, synthesis, and mechanism understanding of nonstoichiometric metal oxides and alloys for rechargeable batteries, oxygen electrocatalysis, and nitrogen fixation. He is among the Clarivate Highly Cited Researcher (2018 and 2019).

Key learning points
(1) Operation principles and characteristics of rechargeable zinc-ion batteries.
(2) Intrinsic properties and challenges of Zn electrodes and strategies to enhance the Zn plating/stripping performances and suppress dendrite issues.
(3) Classifications, structural features, electrochemical performances, design principles and Zn-storage reaction mechanisms of cathode materials.
(4) Chemical and physical properties, electrochemical behaviours and electrode compatibility of electrolytes for Zn storage and Zn-ion intercalation.
(5) Remaining challenges and perspectives of rechargeable zinc-ion batteries.


 	Fig. 1  (a) Multi-angle comparison of zinc-ion and lithium-ion batteries. (b) Schematic illustration of the working principle of rechargeable zinc-ion batteries.	 

 	Fig. 2  A brief development history of rechargeable zinc-ion batteries.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) A Pourbaix diagram of Zn in aqueous solution. (b) Zn plating/stripping from Zn/Zn symmetrical cells in an alkaline electrolyte and a mild ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte, respectively. The insets are optical images of cycled Zn anodes in different electrolytes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group. (c) Schematic diagram of the issues for Zn anodes in aqueous electrolytes. (d) Cyclic voltammograms of Zn plating/stripping in a 20 M LiTFSI + 1 M Zn(TFSI)2 electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 8. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Galvanostatic cycling of Zn/Zn cells in a non-aqueous TMP-based electrolyte. The inset is the SEM image of the Zn anode after 500 cycles. Reproduced with permission from ref. 22. Copyright 2020, Royal Society of Chemistry. (f) Schematic illustration of the desolvation process of the Zn2+–H2O ion complex on the super-saturated front surface of the Zn anode realized by MOF coating. Reproduced with permission from ref. 28. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. (g–j) Observation of hydrogen evolution in Zn/Zn symmetric cells using bare Zn plates and coated Zn plates. Reproduced with permission from ref. 29. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. (k) Schematic illustration of Zn deposition on carbon cloth (CC) and carbon nanotube (CNT) electrodes. Reproduced with permission from ref. 30. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. (l) SEM image of lamella-nanostructured eutectic Zn–Al alloys with the corresponding EDS element mapping. Scale bar, 2 μm. Reproduced with permission from ref. 32. Copyright 2020, Nature Publishing Group. (m) Schematic illustration of epitaxial metal electrodeposition. The inset is the SEM image of Zn deposits on graphene-coated stainless steel. Reproduced with permission from ref. 17. Copyright 2019, American Association for the Advancement of Science.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Operation voltages versus specific capacities of representative cathode materials for ZIBs. Energy densities are based on the mass of cathode materials. (b) Reaction mechanisms of typical cathode materials for ZIBs.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Crystal structures of representative MnO2 polymorphs. (b) Comparison of the cycling performance of Zn–MnO2 cells with electrolytes of 45 wt% KOH, 3 M ZnSO4, 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2, and 3 M Zn(CF3SO3)2 + 0.1 M Mn(CF3SO3)2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (c) CVs of the Zn anode (red line) and the α-MnO2 cathode (blue line) in the ZnSO4 aqueous electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 9. Copyright 2012, Wiley-VCH. (d) Schematic illustration of the rechargeable Zn–MnO2 chemistry using a CF3SO3−-based electrolyte. Reproduced with permission from ref. 5. Copyright 2017, Nature Publishing Group. (e) Diagram showing the sequential insertion of H+ and Zn2+ in a layered MnO2. Reproduced with permission from ref. 33. Copyright 2018, Nature Publishing Group. (f) XRD pattern and (g) STEM elemental mapping images of the α-MnO2 cathode after full discharging. Reproduced with permission from ref. 4. Copyright 2016, Nature Publishing Group.	 
Zn2+ + 2e− + 2MnO2 ↔ ZnMn2O4	(1)
H2O ↔ H+ + OH−	(2)
MnO2 + H+ + e− ↔ MnOOH	(3)
3Zn2+ + 6OH− + ZnSO4 + xH2O ↔ ZnSO4[Zn(OH)2]3·xH2O	(4)

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of Zn2+ insertion/extraction in an extended 3D Mn-defective ZnMn2O4 spinel framework. (b) Proposed Zn2+ diffusion pathway in ZnMn2O4 spinel without and with Mn vacancies. Reproduced with permission from ref. 10. Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (c) Schematic charge and discharge processes for the ZnNi1/2Mn1/2CoO4 electrode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 38. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Typical vanadium coordination polyhedra. (b) Crystal structures of representative vanadium-based materials for ZIBs. Schematic illustrations of the reaction chemistry for vanadium oxide cathodes in terms of (c) Zn2+ insertion, H2O and Zn2+ co-insertion, and (d) H+ and Zn2+ co-insertion mechanisms. (e) Oxygen and vanadium redox chemistry in a polyanionic VOPO4 cathode. Reproduced with permission from ref. 19. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 
Zn0.25V2O5·nH2O + 1.1Zn2+ + 2.2e− ↔ Zn1.35V2O5·nH2O.	(5)
3.9H2O ↔ 3.9H+ + 3.9OH−	(6)
1.95Zn2+ + 0.65ZnSO4 + 3.9OH− + 2.6H2O ↔ 0.65Zn4SO4(OH)6·4H2O	(7)
NaZn0.1V3O8·1.5H2O + 3.9H+ + 0.4Zn2+ + 4.7e− → H3.9NaZn0.5V3O8·1.5H2O	(8)

 	Fig. 8  (a) Typical structure of Prussian blue analogues. (b) Dicharge/charge curves of the CuHCF cathode and Zn anode at 60 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission from ref. 11. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH. (c) Schematic illustration of Zn2+ (de)intercalation into the CoFe(CN)6 framework. Reproduced with permission from ref. 45. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 
xZn2+ + 2xe− + CuHCF ↔ ZnxCuHCF	(9)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Structures of the representative quinone cathodes for ZIBs. (b) Discharge/charge curves of the C4Q cathode and (c) optimized configurations of C4Q before and after Zn ion uptake. Reproduced with permission from ref. 12. Copyright 2018, American Association for the Advancement of Science. (d) Rotation of p-chloranil molecular columns upon Zn2+ insertion. Reproduced with permission from ref. 46. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Electrolyte design based on the salt, solvent, additive and concentration, and the influence of their physicochemical properties on both cathode material and Zn anode, including interfacial stability, active material dissolution, and electrochemical performances. Multi-angle comparison of (b) conventional and concentrated aqueous electrolytes and (c) aqueous and nonaqueous electrolytes.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c9cs00349e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
