Cashew nut shell: a potential bio-resource for the production of bio-sourced chemicals, materials and fuels   - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8GC02972E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8GC02972E
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2019, 21, 1186-1201Cashew nut shell: a potential bio-resource for the production of bio-sourced chemicals, materials and fuels†

        
          
            James 
            Mgaya
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Ginena B. 
            Shombe
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Siphamandla C. 
            Masikane
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Sixberth 
            Mlowe
          
          
        
      *ab, 
      
        
          
            Egid B. 
            Mubofu
          
          
        
      c and 

        
          
            Neerish 
            Revaprasadu
          
          
        
      b
aChemistry Department, University of Dar es Salaam (DUCE), P.O. Box 2329, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. E-mail: sixb2809@gmail.com
bChemistry Department, University of Zululand, Private Bag X1001, KwaDlangezwa, 3886, South Africa
cChemistry Department, University of Dodoma, P.O. Box 259, Dodoma, Tanzania
Received 
      20th September 2018
    , Accepted 9th January 2019First published on 10th January 2019AbstractExploitation of agricultural waste as green starting materials to produce various valuable products is attracting the attention of academic, industrial and other practitioners. Cashew nut shell (CNS) and its liquid extract (CNSL) in particular have been identified as agro-wastes rich in valuable and functional renewable products. The unique structural features of the CNSL constituents offer the possibility for different modifications to suit various applications. This review article provides recent developments in CNS and CNSL as green sources for use in the production of biorenewable chemicals, materials and energy. Extraction methods and applications of CNS, CNSL and isolates are discussed. Furthermore, a literature survey of the current status and efforts made on the utilization of these agricultural and food wastes for different applications is well outlined.James MgayaDr James Mgaya is a Lecturer at Dar es Salaam University College of Education, a constituent college of the University of Dar es Salaam. He holds an M.Sc. and a PhD degree in Chemistry both from the University of Dar es Salaam. His research focusses on chemical valorisation of agro-wastes.Ginena B. ShombeMs. Ginena Bildard Shombe is a PhD student in Nanochemistry at the University of Zululand, South Africa, under the supervision of Prof. Neerish Revaprasadu. She received both her BSc and MSc in Chemistry from the University of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. She has worked with several eco-friendly bioresources (castor oil, cashew nut shell liquid, moringa seed oil and rice husks) in the preparation of various types of mesoporous and nanostructured materials. Her current research involves the synthesis of ternary metal sulfides and their respective polymer nanocomposites for energy applications.Siphamandla C. MasikaneMr Siphamandla Cecil Masikane is a Ph.D student supervised by Prof. Neerish Revaprasadu in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Zululand, South Africa, where he also obtained his M.Sc. degree in Chemistry. He obtained his Pure and Applied Chemistry undergraduate degree at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. The scope of his current research project entails the development/exploration of alternative green methods for the synthesis of eco-friendly semiconductor nanoparticles.Sixberth MloweDr Sixberth Mlowe (MRSC) is currently a Post-Doc Researcher at the University of Zululand and a Lecturer at the University of Dar es Salaam (DUCE), Tanzania. He holds both an MSc degree from the University of Dar es Salaam (Tanzania) and a PhD degree from the University of Zululand (South Africa) in Materials Chemistry. His research focus is on employing principles of green chemistry to synthesize metal chalcogenide nanomaterials using bio-based renewable resources. He has co-authored more than 30 articles and book chapters.Egid B. MubofuEgid Beatus Mubofu was a Professor of Chemistry and the Vice Chancellor of the University of Dodoma, Tanzania. His research interests were on green chemistry, porous materials, nanomaterials, catalysis and bio-based materials. Prof. Mubofu was the head of the Department of Chemistry, at the University of Dar es Salaam (2012–2016), Director General of Tanzania Bureau of Standards (TBS) (2016–2018) and Board Chairman of the Tanzania Fertilizer Company (2017–2018). He co-authored more than 60 articles and supervised more than 10 postgraduate students. He passed away during the preparation of this review article; may his soul rest in peace.Neerish RevaprasaduNeerish Revaprasadu is a Professor of Chemistry and NRF/DST SARChI Chair holder in Nanotechnology. He obtained his B.SC (Hons.) from the University of Natal in 1993 and Ph.D from Imperial College London in 2000. He started as a Senior Lecturer at the University of Zululand in 2000 and became an Associate Professor in 2004 and a full Professor in 2008. He was awarded the SARChI Chair in Nanotechnology in 2007. He has done extensive work in the synthesis of semiconductor nanomaterials. His current interest is the synthesis, characterization and application of functional nanomaterials and their application in the areas of energy and health. Materials of interest include binary and ternary metal chalcogenide materials, 2-D materials and perovskites. He has co-authored 190 articles and supervised more than 30 postgraduate students.
1. Introduction
The generation of food waste on the industrial scale from food processing plants has been a worldwide concern over the years due to a lack of sustainable disposal mechanisms. Cashew nut shells (CNS), agro-waste generated from cashew nut processing factories, have proved to be among the most versatile bio-based renewable materials, particularly in the search for functional materials and chemicals from renewable resources.1 This food waste also has significant potential for use as a raw material for the production of fuels and value-added chemicals due to the abundant volumes generated globally. Various technological strategies, which include chemical and biological biorefinery approaches, have been established to process and maximize the value of resources derived from these CNS bio-wastes.2 This derivatization has environmental and economic merits leading to the creation of jobs and improved economic growth. CNS-derived chemical products have been proven to replace fossil-based petroleum resources for the production of chemicals, materials, polymers, energy and fuels.1–3 The discovery and application of eco-friendly benign products and product mixtures in this manner, in pursuit of replacing hazardous chemicals, are recognized as important areas of green chemistry.
In recent years, we have demonstrated the conversion of CNS bio-products into value-added chemicals and alternative eco-friendly reagents for various uses; the biochemically derived products from this agro-waste have been shown to compete equally with commercially available reagents. Research findings have also reported the prepared chemicals and reagents to exhibit relatively good efficiency in applications such as prevention of termite attack,4 tsetse fly traps (kairomone)5 and synthesis of polymers3 which are increasingly gaining attention in both research and the commercial global market. Furthermore, these CNS derived chemicals have recently been identified as alternative green capping agents for the synthesis of functional nanomaterials and nanocomposites.6,7 It is noteworthy that CNS do not pose food competition threats and hence CNS waste has become one of the earmarked candidates for potential use and/or incorporation in renewable energy. This is in response to the depletion of fossil-based petroleum reserves attributed to an increasing global demand.
In this review, a general overview of recently identified agro-wastes for potential use in various sustainable applications is outlined. The scope extends to the emergence of green biochemically derived synthetic processes that utilise CNS agro-waste as an inexpensive starting material to afford environmentally friendly products and specialized reagents tailored for desired applications. The synthetic processes discussed herein include the determination of chemical composition, accompanied by extraction and isolation techniques. Recent literature on the physicochemical properties of the extracts, reagents and composites is included.
2. Agricultural waste for general use in energy, fuel and biochemical applications
Production processes generally follow similar protocols which mainly include, but not limited to, (i) use of the starting/raw materials, (ii) utilization of energy and (iii) waste management. Over the years, these three pillars have been subjected to scrutiny, in the wake of the eco-friendly initiatives to seek greener alternatives. A common response is the reuse/recycle practice, as shown in the life cycle assessment (LCA) in Fig. 1.8 LCA is a tool which has become common in various industrial processes, used to measure the negative traits of a process (encompassing products, methods of utilizing resources, and waste management) on the environment's state of health. The process can proceed via either the ‘cradle-to-grave’ or ‘cradle-to-gate’ systems. The former involves taking definitive steps to extract raw material and disposal of the waste, while in the latter it becomes virtually impossible to identify the definitive fate of the waste since the waste and other intermediate products become precursors towards producing other valuable products. The agricultural sector is an appropriate example which in the past had predominantly adopted the ‘cradle-to-grave’ approach, where the nature of the agro-waste generally found no use in the primary production processes. Unfortunately, food processing plants generate agro-wastes on a huge scale, thus presenting a challenge in identifying suitable disposal mechanisms which are inexpensive and less tedious. As a result, recent research interests focus on the utilization of agro-waste for various applications. At this stage, the agricultural production processes would shift to the ‘cradle-to-gate’ system. Thus, this research niche witnesses the emergence of the next generation of technology being employed in agricultural activities, for example, the concept of a hybrid greenhouse agricultural method which operates through sustainable energy generated in-house from green processes (Fig. 2).9 This design by Aschilean et al.9 is comprised of three allied systems: (1) thermal energy generation, (2) electricity generation and (3) thermal and electrical energy storage. The thermal energy production system utilized a heat generator which feeds from fuel wood and biomass through gasification processes. Thermal energy is also harnessed from thermal solar collector panels. Thermal energy is desirable for the production of hot water for domestic and greenhouse needs. The electricity generation system relies on photovoltaic panels and fuel cells to generate electricity from solar energy and hydrogen, respectively. Hydrogen is generated by the proton exchange membrane electrolyser. The generated electricity powers the electrolyser and various monitoring devices. The thermal and electrical energy storage system consists of reservoirs, pressure cylinders and solar batteries to store hot water, hydrogen and electricity, respectively.
 Fig. 1  The schematic representation of a typical production cycle (reproduced with permission from ref. 8). 
 Fig. 2  Conceptual design of a sustainable greenhouse agricultural system (reproduced from ref. 9). 
There are widespread applications of agro-waste, particularly in the production of value-added chemicals and functional materials and in sustainable energy research areas. The chemical nature of the agro-waste determines the suitability for a specific application. Kauldhar and Yadav10 have recently developed a cost-efficient, kilogram scale method for obtaining SiO2 nanoparticles and lignin from paddy straw agro-waste. The method follows a three-step protocol which basically involves (1) acid hydrolysis, (2) alkaline hydroxide treatment and (3) precipitation using acid. SiO2 nanoparticles and lignin have mainly been exploited in heterogeneous catalysis11 and polymer chemistry.12
A review by Fic et al.13 has thoroughly summarized the literature on the production of activated carbon from various agro-wastes (Fig. 3), for application in solid-state electrochemical capacitors. These electrochemical capacitors are understood to possess balanced levels of power and energy density, known as positive traits of both conventional capacitors and batteries, respectively. The chemical composition of the agro-waste plays an important role as it determines the functional groups present in the product, activated charcoal. Functional groups are amongst the features of activated carbon which contribute to the electronic properties. Ibisi and Asoluka14 have reported the use of the chemically treated plantain plant, Musa paradisiacapeels, as agro-waste for water treatment through sustainable biosorption mechanisms of toxic metal ions.
 Fig. 3  Agro-waste for the production of activated carbon for electrochemical capacitors (reproduced from ref. 13). 
The literature has reported other applications which do not require pre-treatment of agro-waste. These include, for example, the use of agro-waste (rice husk, sawdust, peanut shell, rice straw and coconut shell) as a substitute for sand in the manufacture of cement blocks (Fig. 4).15 The study showed that the nature of the agro-waste and composition (i.e. agro-waste:sand:cement ratio) had a distinctive influence on the quality of the block which is acceptable according to the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM) standards.
 Fig. 4  The preparation of cement blocks from agro-waste (reproduced with permission from ref. 15). 
Agro-waste and biomass have increasingly found major exploitation in the generation of green sustainable energy through various processes. Recent examples include the electrochemical generation of bioenergy through the treatment of dairy wastewater,16 as well as production of bioethanol from algae17 and oil palm empty fruit bunches,18 a cleaner fuel for power generators. These routes have gained considerable attention due to the starting materials being non-edible feedstocks and the biofuels are generally obtained in minor steps where the final step is basically fermentation. Dhar et al.19 have reported a thorough review of the processes involved in obtaining biofuels from agro-waste. Arregi et al.20 have also covered an interesting topic on the thermochemical methods of producing hydrogen from biomass, another approach to cleaner sustainable energy solutions.
Cashew nut shell is a commonly known agro-waste produced in tons, from the processing plants. Detailed characteristics and chemistry of this agro-waste and the usage of its isolates are discussed in the next sections.
3. Production of cashew nut and the chemistry of cashew nut shell liquid
Cashew (Anacardium occidentale L.) is a tropical evergreen tree indigenous to South America and was introduced to the other parts of the world by the Portuguese in the 1500s. The plant was first introduced into India, mainly for soil conservation purposes and soon spread throughout Ceylon, Malaya, Andaman Islands, and later in some parts of East and West Africa.21 Currently, it is mainly cultivated in the continents of Asia (India, Vietnam, Indonesia, Philippines, Malaysia, Thailand and Sri Lanka), Africa (Cote d'Ivore, Nigeria, Tanzania, Mozambique, Ghana, Senegal and Madagascar), and South America (Brazil, Columbia, Costa Rica, Hondurus and El Salvador).22,23
The global cashew production in the 2017/2018 season reached 789050 metric tons (kernel basis), a 32% increase over a period of 10 years beginning in the 2007/2008 season which afforded 488530 metric tons.24 The 789050 metric tons produced in the 2017/2018 season is disseminated as follows: Western Africa (336350 metric tons, 43%), India (194457 metric tons, 25%), Eastern Africa (95676 metric tons, 12%), Vietnam (71425 metric tons, 9%), Cambodia (21428 metric tons, 3%), Brazil (21400 metric tons, 3%), Indonesia (19040 metric tons, 2%) and other countries which produce a combined 29274 metric tons equivalent to 3% of the overall global production. Western Africa, India and Vietnam have remained the top three production countries in the last five years. The global production trend is almost linear over the years, attributed to an increase in demand, e.g. the estimated world cashew production reached 792323 metric tons in 2016 compared to 599034 metric tons consumed in 2012. Inevitably, an increase in production as a response to demand results in an increase of agro-waste to be dealt with.
Cashew tree produces an ‘apple’ (pseudocarp/accessory fruit), which is mistakenly referred to as the fruit of the tree, and the cashew seed (also called a nut), which grows at the base of the apple. The cashew apple is edible and is used in the preparation of several sweet foods and beverages. The cashew nut, which is the ‘true’ fruit of the tree, is used as a snack, an ingredient in cuisines and cashew butter as well as an oil source.25,26 It is therefore the commercial product of cashew plantation. Cashew nuts comprise about 55–65% shells, and 35–45% kernel. The cashew shell contains a dark reddish-brown caustic liquid (15–30%) called cashew shell oil or cashew nut shell liquid which is rich in non-isoprenoid phenolic lipids.27 Images of a cashew tree, cashew apples and cashew seeds, cashew kernels and cashew shells are shown in Fig. 5.
 Fig. 5  Cashew tree (a), cashew apples and seeds (b), cashew kernels (nuts) (c) and cashew shells (d). 
3.1. Classification and chemical composition of cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL)
The earliest investigation into the chemical composition of CNSL was published in 184728 and was followed by several other investigations29–33 on the same subject. It was then established that anacardic acid, cardanol, cardol, and 2-methylcardol (Fig. 6) are the four major constituents of CNSL. This composition, however, varies with the extraction technique employed and hence the type of the liquid. CNSL is classified as either natural or technical depending on the mode in which it is extracted. Natural CNSL is obtained by solvent extraction under mild conditions, and thus contains anacardic acid (60–65%), cardol (15–20%), cardanol (10%), and traces of methylcardol. Technical CNSL on the other hand is obtained by roasting the cashew shells at high temperatures. This brings about the decarboxylation of anacardic acid (Scheme 1), making cardanol the major constituent (60–65%) of the oil.34
 Fig. 6  Major components of the cashew nut shell liquid. 
 Scheme 1  Decarboxylation of anacardic acid to cardanol. 
3.2. Extraction of natural and technical CNSL from cashew nut shells
Various techniques for the extraction of CNSL from cashew shells have been developed and they can be grouped into mechanical, thermal, chemical (solvent extraction), and pyrolysis. A detailed explanation of each technique is given below. Following their vast applications in a variety of fields, isolation procedures of the major phenolic constituents of CNSL have also been developed.34–37

3.2.1. Mechanical extraction. 
This is a common and the oldest technique of extracting oils from oil-bearing materials. The screw press method (extruder or expeller) is the most widely used mechanical approach for the extraction of natural CNSL. In this method, raw cashew nut shells are placed into a hydraulic screw press and high pressure is exerted to release natural CNSL from the shells. The extraction procedure is simple and time effective and results in high quality CNSL. The main disadvantage of this approach is low yields as significant amounts of the oil remain trapped in the residue after pressing.38,39 Another approach of mechanical extraction involves crushing hot cashew seeds in an expeller after the seeds were subjected to steam treatment. Wetting the shells before crushing is believed to increase the yield of the oil.40
A recent report made by Godjo41 outlines the design of a new mechanical setup machine for extracting cashew nut shell liquid from cashew nut shells. The device has an operating capacity of 10033 ± 0.577 kg h−1 and extracts the oil with an 80% efficiency and a power requirement of 4 kW. In another study, the fabrication and performance evaluation of a new cashew nut shell liquid expeller have been reported.42


3.2.2. Thermal extraction. 
In this method, CNSL is extracted from the cashew shells by the application of heat. The applied heat converts most of the anacardic acid to cardanol, producing technical CNSL. The technique is thus suitable if CNSL rich in cardanol is the target. The steps mainly involved in this technique include roasting43,44 and hot oil bath processing.38,43 However, thermal extraction of the liquid using various types of solar cookers has also been reported.45,46
Roasting is a traditional method of extracting CNSL in which the oil is obtained by heating cashew shells in drums or baths at 180–185 °C. The applied temperature creates an elevated pressure within the cellular structure, resulting in the disintegration of the cells of the shells, thus releasing the liquid.43 The earliest traditional roasting technique involves heating cashew nuts over an open pan to release the oil. However, it is least desirable due to low yield, associated with the loss of oil during the process.44
Thermal extraction of CNSL by the hot oil bath method was first introduced by Wm. Jefferies and Peirce Leslie and Co. Ltd.47,48 In their method, the oil is obtained by dipping the whole cashew nuts in hot CNSL (heated at 187–194 °C) for a short period of time.38,43 Since then, several other CNSL extraction approaches based on the hot oil bath method have been reported.49–51 The hot oil bath method also employs cashew nut shells as raw materials in which CNSL is extracted by the application of steam heating at a temperature of about 200–250 °C for 2–3 minutes. Generally, the hot oil bath method is widely used for the commercial extraction of CNSL.38


3.2.3. Solvent extraction. 
This method employs common laboratory organic solvents such as petroleum ether, hexane, cyclohexane, diethyl ether, ethyl acetate, toluene, ethanol, methanol, acetone, carbon tetrachloride, dichloromethane and chloroform to extract CNSL. The extraction is carried out via several approaches including static solvent extraction,52 Soxhlet extraction,53–55 and ultrasonic extraction.55 Among the various described CNSL extraction techniques, higher amounts of the oil are known to be obtained by the solvent extraction method.46 However, employing organic solvents in the extraction procedure is associated with a number of environmental as well as health issues due to the toxicity of the solvents.56,57 Moreover, the use of organic solvents is also limited by the formation of coloured impurities and emulsions, long extraction time and large amounts of solvents required.58 Chlorinated solvents are more prone to emulsion formation than non-chlorinated solvents.46 To solve these problems, and to achieve a more environmentally friendly extraction process, the use of subcritical water (SCW)55 and supercritical carbon dioxide (SC-CO2)54,59–63 is preferred. The two have been demonstrated as eco-friendly and time effective solvents for the extraction of CNSL. In addition to being an eco-friendly technique, supercritical carbon dioxide extraction is an energy saving process as the critical temperature of carbon dioxide is very low (31.1 °C). Isolation of anacardic acid, a thermally labile component of CNSL, using supercritical carbon dioxide has also been reported.35
Extraction of CNSL by mechanical and thermal techniques on the other hand is considered to have negligible environmental/health effects. Since most of the mechanical/thermal extraction processes use electricity in the extraction procedure, energy consumption can therefore be a major problem.


3.2.4. Pyrolysis method. 
The extraction of CNSL by pyrolysis of the cashew shells has been reported by Das et al.64 Both low and high temperature pyrolysis experiments were carried out, and the effect of pyrolysis temperatures on the yield of the oil was investigated. For low temperature pyrolysis, dried cashew nut shells were placed in Petri dishes and heated in an oven at an initial temperature of 105 °C for 3 hours before being pyrolysed to 200 °C at a rate of 25 °C/2 h. High temperature pyrolysis was carried out in the temperature range of 400 °C–600 °C. Yields of 40% were achieved at low temperatures and the maximum percentage yields were achieved at a high temperature of 500 °C. Other reports on the extraction of CNSL by this technique are also found in the literature.65,66

4. Uses of CNSL, its isolates and the chemically derivatized isolates
4.1. Cashew nut shell liquid in corrosion inhibition
Carbon steel is widely used as a storage and transportation material; however, it is vulnerable to carbon dioxide corrosion. The carbonic acid (H2CO3) which is formed in an aqueous, carbon dioxide environment (such as in gas and oil systems) tends to increase the rate of corrosion of the metal base. One of the mitigation measures is the use of corrosion inhibitors, which is an economical alternative to stainless steel. Structurally, the components of the cashew nut shell liquid resemble some organic molecules that have been found to be effective inhibitors in CO2 environments (Fig. 7).67–69
 Fig. 7  Structures of some organic based corrosion inhibitors. 
A study carried out by Philip et al.70 tested the inhibiting action of cashew nut shell liquid on the corrosion of SAE 1008 carbon steel in a CO2-saturated 3% aqueous NaCl solution. The study revealed that the corrosion rate on carbon steel decreased from 0.4 mmpy (in the blank solution) to a minimum of 0.03 mmpy upon addition of the cashew nut shell liquid (300 ppm) to the test solution. This means that the cashew nut shell liquid can decrease the rate of corrosion by over 90% when its concentration is approximately 300 ppm. Thus, according to this study, CNSL is capable of inhibiting the electrochemical processes occurring on a corroding carbon steel surface in CO2 solutions. Another study by Lv and co-workers72 showed that bio-based epoxy and episulfide resin incorporated with cardol and cardanol from CNSL displayed enhanced anticorrosion properties than the polymer film coats.71 Recently, Phillip et al.72 reported a corrosion inhibitor amino pentadecylphenols (APP) derived from the chemical modification of the cashew nut shell liquid.72 The study revealed that the inhibition in the acidic medium on the mild steel surface was via physical adsorption.
4.2. Synthesis of 1-octene and detergents
Studies on the ethenolysis reaction of cashew nut shell liquid components using various metathesis catalysts have been carried out by Cole-Hamilton and co-workers.73 They found that first generation catalysts afforded high yields and selectivity towards chemicals of industrial importance such as 1-octene and 3-nonylphenol (Scheme 2). 1-Octene is used as an industrial intermediate in the production of polyethylene resins. It is also used for the synthesis of linear and branched aldehydes by hydroformylation. The second ethenolysis product, (E)-3-(non-8-enyl)phenol, is hydrogenated to produce 3-nonylphenol. The latter is considered to be a potential replacement for 4-nonylphenol, which has been banned in some countries as a detergent due to its endocrine-disrupting properties.74,75 Metathesis reaction of cardanol with another symmetrical alkene (e.g. butane) produces (E)-3-(non-8-en-1-yl)phenol. Treatment of this compound with oleum and sodium hydroxide produces (E)-2-hydroxy-6-(non-8-en-1-yl)benzenesulfonate (Scheme 2), which is commonly used as a detergent.76
 Scheme 2  Synthesis of 1-octene and an intermediate product 3-(non-8-enyl)phenol for products 3-nonylphenol and sodium 2-hydroxy-6-(non-8-en-1-yl)benzenesulfonate (reproduced from ref. 65 and 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and Wiley respectively). 
4.3. Synthesis of tsetse fly attractants
Synthesis of 3-propylphenol which is a component of kairomone requires that the double bond be isomerized from the C8 to the C1 position of the alkyl chain of cardanol. This is achieved by subjecting cardanol or anacardic acid to a suitable isomerization catalytic system such as Pd/H+/DTBPMB. This catalytic system reported by Cole-Hamilton and co-workers77 is capable of isomerizing the double bond in either direction of the alkyl chain of cardanol to produce double bond positional isomers. In these isomers, the double bond is located at any position in the chain (C1–C15). The interesting finding is that the major isomer (40%) having a double bond at C1 is the precursor for the synthesis of 3-propylphenol, a kairomone component used in tsetse fly traps (Scheme 3). However, the yield of the final product, 3-propylphenol, using this approach is very low, about 4%.76 Synthesis of the same compound using anacardic acid as a starting material increases the yield to 18%.5 This was reported to be due to the additional stabilization of the double bond at the C1 position of the desired isomer offered by conjugation with the carboxylic group of anacardic acid. Higher yields of 3-propylphenol (78%) from cardanol have been reported by carrying out one pot isomerization metathesis reaction using ([Pd(μ-Br)(tBu3P)]2) and a Ru metathesis catalyst (Hoveyda type NHC catalyst) (Scheme 4).78 In this case, the starting material is 3-(non-8-enyl)-phenol obtained by the ethenolysis reaction of cardanol.
 Scheme 3  Synthesis of 3-propylphenol from cardanol (reproduced with permission from ref. 68). 
 Scheme 4  Synthesis of 3-propylphenol via isomerizing-metathesis reaction of anacardic acid (reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 
4.4. Application of CNSL and its isolates in nanomaterials

4.4.1. CNSL/isolates as surfactants. 
Owing to their small sizes and hence high surface energies, nanoparticles are normally passivated to inhibit overgrowth, and prevent particle–particle aggregation. The mode of interaction and stability of the resultant nanoparticles is determined by the type of functional groups of the respective passivating ligand.79–81 In realization of the widespread use of nanomaterials for industrial applications, the use of eco-friendly surfactants is preferred.82
Like most surfactants, anacardic acid can stabilize nanoparticles by adsorption of its oxygen atoms on to the nanoparticle surface. In a report by Mlowe et al.,6,7 anacardic acid was successfully demonstrated as a green surfactant in the synthesis of PbE and CdE (E = S, Se or Te) nanoparticles via a low temperature solvent based thermolysis route. Monodispersed quasi spherical to cubic shaped nanostructures were obtained for the case of PbE, while mosaic-like rod shaped nanostructures were obtained for the case of CdE (Fig. 8). In another study by Ribeiro et al.83 the synthesis of Fe3O4 nanoparticles stabilized by anacardic acid was reported. It was observed that the synthesized nanoparticles demonstrate an excellent and fast magneto-temperature response and can be applied as high-performance hyperthermia agents. Anacardic acid has thus proven to be as effective in stabilizing nanoparticles as the conventional surfactants.
 Fig. 8  TEM images of anacardic acid capped (a) CdSe, (b) PbSe and (c) PbTe nanoparticles and (d) its HRTEM (PbTe) (reproduced with permission from ref. 6 and 7). 
Isolates of CNSL can also be derivatized to produce surfactants that can in turn be employed in nanoparticle synthesis. For instance Barreto et al.84 prepared a diphosphorylated cardol from cardol (Fig. 9), and subsequently used it as a surfactant in the synthesis of Fe3O4, CoFe2O4 and NiFe2O4 nanoparticles. It was explained that the prepared DPC nanoparticle ferrofluids show promising applications as magnetic resonance, imaging, hyperthermia treatment for malignant cells, magnetic storage media and systems that need to use a stable magnetic fluid.
 Fig. 9  Synthesis of diphosphorylated cardol (DPC) and the respective nanofluids (reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Springer). 


4.4.2. Synthesis of composite nanomaterials. 
Porphyrins, which are broadly studied biomedical materials, are normally coupled with nanoparticles to produce composite nanomaterials exhibiting new or enhanced properties.85,86 As a step towards the implementation of green chemistry approaches, the use of porphyrins derived from eco-friendly, renewable sources is the current target. Owing to its peculiar structural features, cardanol87 has proven to be an effective building block in the synthesis of various types of porphyrins. For instance, a novel superparamagnetic fluorescence nanosystem was successfully prepared by coupling oleic acid capped Fe3O4 nanoparticles and a meso-porphyrin derived from cardanol (Scheme 5).85 The obtained nanosystem showed good thermal stability, excellent magnetization and nanosized dimensions. In another study, a nanocomposite of ZnO and cardanol-derived porphyrin, with enhanced photocatalytic capability was also prepared.86 The use of cardanol in the synthesis of green nanovesicles,88,89 nanofibers90 and nanotubes,87 is also reported.
 Scheme 5  Synthetic scheme for 5,10,15,20-tetra-[4-(2-(3-pentadecyl)phenoxy)ethoxy]phenylporphyrin 4 from Cardanol 1 through 1-(2-bromoethoxy)-3-pentadecylbenzene 2 and -[2-(3-n-pendacylphenoxy)ethoxy]benzaldehyde 3 (reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Springer). 


4.4.3. Synthesis of potential metal–organic precursors for nanomaterials. 
The synthesis of nanoparticles by thermal decomposition of single molecular precursors (respective metal complexes) has been demonstrated to be an efficient route to high quality nanoparticles. A wide range of precursors such as carboxylic acids, thiols, xanthates, dithiocarbamates and dithiocarboxylates have been reported.79,91 Just like carboxylic acids, anacardic acid can be used as a starting material in the formation of various types of molecular precursors. By employing saturated anacardic acid as a building block, a novel complex of copper [(μ-anacardato)-copper(II)bipyridine][Cu2{(μ-O2CC6H3(o-OH)(o-C15H31)}4(NC5H5)2] has been prepared (Fig. 10).92 The complex was synthesized from the reaction of the hydrogenated oil with copper nitrate in the presence of pyridine. Similarly, a variety of molecular precursors for the synthesis of novel metallic compounds or metal oxide nanoparticles can be prepared.
 Fig. 10  Molecular structure of [(μ-anacardato)-copper(II)bipyridine][Cu2{(μ-O2CC6H3(o-OH)(o-C15H31)}4(NC5H5)2] (CCDC 877508) (reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry). 

4.5. Source of renewable energy and biofuels
The potential to develop fuel from biomass is increasingly attracting interest over crude fossil petroleum based fuels against environmental concerns globally. The added advantages of using biomass such as CNSL and related materials as energy sources are their low cost, less food competition, abundance and recyclability. Furthermore, CNS and its liquid are biomass waste products, which are otherwise meant to be of no value as by-products of the cashew nut industry. Extensive work has been documented detailing the increased need, utilization and application of CNS, CNSL and other biodegradable vegetable oils to substitute the crude oil products as sole means of energy production.1,93,94
The main drawback of CNSL and its constituents for direct use as fuel is high viscosity, which is reported to be higher than engine diesel. Various methods have been envisaged to decrease the viscosity and these include blending of CNSL with diesel, preheating, thermal cracking and transesterification processes.40,93,95,96 These processes have been found to achieve better performance of the CNSL in several energy applications. Dinesha and Mohanan97 carried out an experiment to evaluate the diesel engine performance using non-edible cardanol biofuel produced from CNSL by investigating the combustion, performance and emission of single-cylinder diesel engine. They found that lower CO, hydrocarbon and smoke emissions were obtained at increased biodiesel concentrations whereas lower fuel blends resulted in higher brake thermal efficiency and reduced fuel consumption. In their earlier studies on the effect of oxygen enrichment on performance, combustion and emission of compression ignition engine fuelled with cardanol diesel blends indicated a decrease in CO, hydrocarbon and smoke with increasing oxygen intake.98 Several studies have been reported to investigate the performance, combustion and emission characteristics of the compression ignition diesel engines fuelled with CNSL and/or cardanol blends, and the results recorded closer performance to that of diesel.98–101
Briquettes and other solid-based fuels produced from biomass are also known to achieve cleaner energy production and reduce the use of fossil fuels. CNS from cashew industry wastes have been reported to directly provide energy sources without any chemical treatment or modification in the form of briquettes and bituminous charcoal.102–104 A recent case study of briquettes from CNS by Sawadogo et al.105 demonstrated better combustion performances than that of wood charcoal. The briquettes were made from the press cake left over after the removal of CNSL. The process involved grinding the cakes to small grains after carbonizing them at 350 °C. Yohana et al.106 also reported briquette blends of 75/25% composition of CNS/rice husk with a 7.5 kg m−2 briquetting pressure recording the best biofuel characteristics. The use of bio-briquettes from CNS and other blends offers high calorific value with low ash content and provides a possible alternative for energy production.103,104 CNS can be identified as bio-waste from the industries and thus converting the biomass into activated carbon forms increases the added-value of cashew products. Findings from experimental studies confirm that CNS well produces calorific briquettes as a source of fuel in homes and small industries.
4.6. Larvicidal and other medicinal values of CNSL and its constituents
Considering the robust chemical composition of CNSL and the individual structural features of each component, subsequent chemical modifications can be expected to provide a very large variety of medicinal use. Like any other natural products, CNSL has long been considered as a striking substitute for synthetic chemical insecticides, with larvicidal, termiticidal and other biological applications in the control of disease spread/transmission by various vectors. Most importantly, CNSL and its components do pose minor to negligible threat to the environment and human health.107 Several studies have showed that CNSL and derivatives have termiticidal activity against termites.4,108 The studies lack details on the mechanism of the CNSL and its phenolic constituents on the termites. It is proposed that the toxicity and repellent effects of the phenolic components could be one of the reasons. CNSL is thus a good candidate to be used for wood preservation against termites and other wood rotters.
A very recent study conducted by Vani and co-workers109 evaluated the effects of a natural cashew nut shell liquid and castor oil mixture on the mortality of mosquito larvae. They demonstrated that at a 5 mg mL−1 dose, the mixture killed 100% of the larvae within three hours, indicating that the product is an efficient larvicide in the fight against mosquitos as vectors for dengue and chikungunya fevers and Zika virus. The product was also found not to induce genetic damage. Several other studies have demonstrated the larvicidal efficiency of CNSL and its constituents. Paiva et al.110 used chemically modified and saturated cardanol to test for toxicity against Aedes aegypti larvae. Lomonaco and co-workers111 also studied the larvicidal activities of technical CNSL and its main constituents (cardanol and cardol and their hydrogenated products) against Aedes aegypti larvae.
In another study, Leite et al.112 also investigated the toxic effect of technical and natural CNSL against Allium cepa and Artemia salina. They found that natural CNSL showed toxicity, cytotoxicity, and mutagenicity whereas technical CNSL was not toxic, cytotoxic, or mutagenic in any of the concentrations against Allium cepa and Artemiasalina. Harlita et al.113 also determined the potency of acute toxicity of the CNSL extract on female albino Wistar rats and the results showed moderate toxicity. The extract also caused behavioral changes in rats including passivity and mucus secretion but did not affect the body weight development and the weight of organs (spleen, liver, heart, kidneys and lungs) in female rats. CNSL has recently been tested for antibacterial activities against Escherichia coli and Staphylococcus aureus and the phenolic groups of the CNSL were shown to be the reason for its efficiency.114
5. Conclusions
Agricultural waste has been a worldwide concern, particularly with respect to the disposal mechanisms. Recent efforts have identified potential usefulness of the waste across various research interests. Breakthroughs in identifying the waste as a solution to real-life problems such as the production of sustainable energy as an alternative to the fossil-generated counterparts have been reported in the literature. Furthermore, conversion of agro-waste to valuable products and preparation of composite materials incorporating agro-waste have increased over the years. Research in this field has also demonstrated the use of non-edible agricultural and naturally occurring products, including perennial grass and algae.
Among the many examples of agro-waste obtained as by-products from the food processing industries, cashew nut shell (CNS) becomes the most attractive for its chemical composition and finds use in different applications. The chemistry of the CNS and most importantly, cashew nut shell liquid (CNSL) has been a preferred subject due to the widespread technological interests. As such, researchers have invested in devising and perfecting processes and procedures used to extract CNSL from CNS, to ensure high yield and quality. In addition, various laboratory protocols have been exploited to enable derivatisation and applications of CNSL and its isolates.
Thus, the main focus of this review is to provide an overview of the most recent literature on the new identification of agro-waste and biomass as potential sources for sustainable products. Although new studies have been reviewed, it is inevitably important to outline the earlier fundamental work in this area of green chemistry, to complement the recent advances in this field. As a result, a thorough literature review on CNS, CNSL and its isolated constituents was conducted. Important chemical modifications of the isolates to value added compounds have been outlined. The review is also intended to assist in the development and realization of environmentally benign protocols, considering agro-waste and biomass as the green precursors. This will perhaps lead to an exponential interest in sustainable processes to afford sustainable products with improved or novel properties.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
Authors wish to thank the National Research Foundation – South Africa (NRF) for financial support.
Notes and references
C. S. Ki Lin, L. A. Pfaltzgra, L. Herrero-Davila, E. B. Mubofu, S. Abderrahim, J. H. Clark, A. A. Koutinas, N. Kopsahelis, K. Stamatelatou, F. Dickson, S. Thankappan, Z. Mohamed, R. Brocklesby and R. Luque, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 6, 426 RSC .
F. J. A. da Silva and J. E. X. de Matos, Rev. Tecnol., 2009, 30, 89 Search PubMed .

  (a) Y. M. M. Makame, E. B. Mubofu and M. A. Kombo, Bull. Chem. Soc. Ethiop., 2016, 30, 273 CrossRef CAS ; 
  (b) E. B. Mubofu and J. E. Mgaya, Top. Curr. Chem. (Z), 2018, 376, 8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. J. Mwalongo, L. L. Mkayula, E. B. Mubofu and B. A. Mwingira, Green Chem., 1999, 1, 13 RSC .
J. E. Mgaya, E. B. Mubofu, Q. A. Mgani, D. B. Cordes, A. M. Slawin and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol., 2015, 117, 190 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mlowe, A. A. Nejo, V. S. R. Rajasekhar Pullabhotla, E. B. Mubofu, F. N. Ngassapa, P. O'Brien and N. Revaprasadu, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2013, 16, 263 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mlowe, R. R. Pullabhotla, E. B. Mubofu, F. Ngassapa and N. Revaprasadu, Int. Nano Lett., 2014, 4, 106 CrossRef .
G. Eksi and F. Karaosmanoglu, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 197, 264 CrossRef CAS .
I. Aschilean, G. Rasoi, M. Raboaca, C. Filote, M. Culcer, I. Aschilean, G. Rasoi, M. S. Raboaca, C. Filote and M. Culcer, Energies, 2018, 11, 1201 CrossRef .
B. S. Kauldhar and S. K. Yadav, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 194, 158 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ramazani, P. A. Asiabi, H. Aghahosseini and F. Gouranlou, Curr. Org. Chem., 2017, 21, 908 CrossRef CAS .
A. S. Kabir, Z. Yuan, T. Kuboki and C. (Charles) Xu, Ind. Crops Prod., 2018, 120, 238 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fic, A. Platek, J. Piwek and E. Frackowiak, Mater. Today, 2018, 21, 437 CrossRef CAS .
N. E. Ibisi and C. A. Asoluka, Chem. Int., 2018, 4, 52 CAS .
N. Sathiparan and H. T. S. M. De Zoysa, J. Build. Eng., 2018, 19, 216 CrossRef .
A. Callegari, D. Cecconet, D. Molognoni and A. G. Capodaglio, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 189, 563 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Chia, H. C. Ong, K. W. Chew, P. L. Show, S. M. Phang, T. C. Ling, D. Nagarajan, D. J. Lee and J. S. Chang, Renewable Energy, 2018, 129, 838 CrossRef CAS .
E. Derman, R. Abdulla, H. Marbawi and M. K. Sabullah, Renewable Energy, 2018, 129, 285 CrossRef .
S. Dhar, B. Dutta and P. K. Sadhu, Math. Sci., 2018, 13, 26 Search PubMed .
A. Arregi, M. Amutio, G. Lopez, J. Bilbao and M. Olazar, Energy Convers. Manage., 2018, 165, 696 CrossRef CAS .

          A. De Candolle, Origin of cultivated plants, D. Appleton & Co., 1, 3, & 5 Bond Street, New York,  1885 Search PubMed .

          G. Srivatsava, Cashew Handbook 2014-Global Perspective, http://www.cashewinfo.com/pdf/cashewhandbook2014.pdf, (4/09/2018).

          C. Rabany, N. Rullier and P. Ricau, The African cashew sector in 2015. General trends and country profiles. http://www.rongead.org/IMG/pdf/african_cashew_market_review_rongead_ica_2015.pdf (4/09/2018).
INC Nuts and Dried Fruits Statistical Yearbook 2017/2018. https://www.nutfruit.org/files/tech/1524481168_INC_Statistical_Yearbook_2017-2018.pdf (14/12/2018).

          O. Duarte and R. Paull, Exotic fruits and nuts of the New World, CABI, Wallingford,  2015 Search PubMed .

          W. F. Wardowski and M. J. Ahrens, Fruits of tropical and subtropical origin, Florida Sci. Source, Lake Alfred, USA,  1990 Search PubMed .

          C. S. K. Lin, Chemistry and Chemical Technologies in Waste Valorization, Springer, Switzerland,  2018 Search PubMed .
A. Stadeler, Ann. Chem. Pharm., 1847, 63, 137 CrossRef .
S. Ruhemann and S. Skinner, J. Chem. Soc. Trans., 1887, 51, 663 RSC .
A. J. H. Smit, Proc. – Acad. Sci. Amsterdam., 1931, 34, 165 CAS .
H. J. Backer and N. H. Haack, Rev. Trav. Chim., 1941, 60, 661 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Pillay, J. Indian Chem. Soc., 1935, 12, 226 CAS .
D. Wasserman and C. R. Dawson, Ind. Eng. Chem., 1945, 37, 396 CrossRef CAS .
P. P. Kumar, R. Paramashivappa, P. J. Vithayathil, P. V. Subba Rao and A. S. Rao, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2002, 50, 4705 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Philip, J. Da Cruz Francisco, E. S. Dey, J. Buchweishaija, L. L. Mkayula and L. Ye, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2008, 56, 9350 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Paramashivappa, P. Kumar, P. J. Vithayathil and A. S. Rao, J. Agric. Food Chem., 2001, 49, 2548 CrossRef CAS .
T. Gandhi, M. Patel and B. Dholakiya, Nat. Prod. Plant Resour., 2012, 2, 135 CAS .
D. J. Garkal and R. Bhande, Int. J. Innovations Eng. Res. Technol., 2014, 1, 1 Search PubMed .
A. Chaudhari, N. J. Thakor, D. M. Mahale, P. M. Haldankar and S. P. Sonawane, Int. J. Appl. Innovation Eng. Manage., 2012, 1, 172 Search PubMed .
S. Vedharaj, R. Vallinayagam, P. S. Lee and W. M. Yang, Int. J. Green Energy, 2015, 12, 359 CrossRef CAS .
T. Godjo, Int. J. Eng. Technol., 2016, 2, 83 Search PubMed .
E. O. Aina, A. F. Adisa and T. M. A. Olayanju, Agric. Eng., 2018, 22, 5 Search PubMed .
P. Gedam and P. Sampathkumaran, Prog. Org. Coat., 1986, 14, 115 CrossRef CAS .
P. S. Kumar, N. A. Kumar, R. Sivakumar and C. Kaushik, J. Mater. Sci., 2009, 44, 5894 CrossRef .
A. G. Mohod, Y. P. Khandetod and S. Sengar, Int. J. Renewable Energy, 2010, 29, 125 Search PubMed .
C. Subbarao, C. K. K. Prasad and V. Prasad, Pharma. Res. J., 2011, 6, 21 Search PubMed .

          Wm. Jefferies and Peirce Leslie and Co. Ltd, Br. Pats, 472 195,  1937; 472 196, 1937; 474 737, 1937 Search PubMed .

          Wm. Jefferies and Peirce Leslie and Co. Ltd, Br. Pat, 480 468,  1938 Search PubMed .

          Wm. Jefferies and Peirce Leslie and Co. Ltd, Br. Pat, 480 981,  1938 Search PubMed .

          Sociedade Imperial De Caju E. Oleos LDA, Indian Pat, 78 612,  1961 Search PubMed .
R. A. Rajapakse, P. A. Gunatillake and K. B. Wijekoon, J. Natl. Sci. Count. Sri Lanka., 1977, 5, 117 CAS .
T. S. Gandhi, B. Z. Dholakiya and M. R. Patel, Pol. J. Chem. Technol., 2013, 15, 24 CAS .
J. H. P. Tyman, R. A. Johnson, M. Muir and R. Rokhgar, J. Am. Oil Chem. Soc., 1989, 66, 553 CrossRef CAS .
P. Idah, M. Simeon and M. Mohammed, Acad. Res. Int., 2014, 5, 50 Search PubMed .
M. Yuliana, M. N. Y. Tran-Thi and Y. H. Ju, Ind. Crops Prod., 2012, 35, 230 CrossRef CAS .
P. Hanmoungjai, L. Pyle and K. Niranjan, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2000, 75, 348 CrossRef CAS .

          M. McFarland and N. Bates, Toxicology of Solvents, Rapra Technology Limited, Shawbury, Shrewsbury, Shropshire, SY4 4NR, UK,  2002 Search PubMed .
M. D. Luque de Castro and L. E. García-Ayuso, Anal. Chim. Acta, 1998, 369, 1 CrossRef CAS .

          W. B. Setianto, R. L. Smith, H. Inomata and K. Arai, Processing of cashew nut (Anacardium occidentale L.) and cashew nut shell liquid with supercritical carbon dioxide and water, Proceedings of the 6th International Symposium on Supercritical Fluids, Versailles, France,  2003 Search PubMed .
S. V. Shobha and B. Ravindranath, J. Agric. Food Chem., 1991, 39, 2214 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Patel, S. Bandyopadhyay and A. Ganesh, J. Chromatogr. A, 2006, 1124, 130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. L. Smith Jr., R. M. Malaluan, W. B. Setianto, H. Inomata and K. Arai, Bioresour. Technol., 2003, 88, 1 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Patel, S. Bandyopadhyay and A. Ganesh, Bioresour. Technol., 2006, 97, 847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Das and A. Ganesh, Biomass Bioenergy, 2003, 25, 113 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ábrego, D. Plaza, F. Luno, M. A. Martínez and G. Gea, Energy, 2018, 158, 72 CrossRef .
T. Pushparaj, S. Ramabalan and V. A. M. Selvan, Energy Sources, Part A, 2015, 37, 2013 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Frignani, G. Trabanelli and F. Zucchi, Proc. 4th Eur. Symp. Corros. Inhib,  1975, vol. 6, p. 652 Search PubMed .

          J. Buchweishaija, Inhibiting Properties and Adsorption of an Amine Based fatty Acid Corrosion Inhibitor on Carbon Steel in Aqueous Carbon dioxide solution. PhD thesis, Norwegian University of Science and Technology,  1997 Search PubMed .

          J. P. J. Magufuli, The potential of anacardic acid self-assembled monolayers from cashew nut shell liquid as corrosion protection coatings, PhD thesis, University of Dar es Salaam,  2009 Search PubMed .
J. Y. N. Philip, J. Buchweishaija and L. L. Mkayula, Tanzania J. Sci., 2001, 27, 9 Search PubMed .
J. Lv, Z. Liu, J. Zhang, J. Huo and Y. Yu, Polymer, 2017, 121, 286 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. N. Philip, J. Buchweshaija and A. Mwakalesi, Mater. Sci. Appl., 2016, 7, 396 CAS .
J. Julis, S. A. Bartlett, S. Baader, N. Beresford, E. J. Routledge, C. S. J. Cazin and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 2846 RSC .
W. Giger, F. L. P. Gabriel, N. Jonkers, F. E. Wettstein and H. P. E. Kohler, Philos. Trans. R. Soc. London, 2009, 367, 3941 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Knez, Reprod. BioMed. Online, 2013, 26, 440 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Mmongoyo, Q. A. Mgani, S. J. M. Mdachi, P. J. Pogorzelec and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, Eur. J. Lipid Sci. Technol., 2012, 114, 1183 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Rodriguez, D. F. Foster, R. Eastham and D. J. Cole-Hamilton, Chem. Commun., 2004, 1720 RSC .
S. Baader, P. E. Podsiadly, D. J. Cole-Hamilton and L. J. Goossen, Green Chem., 2014, 16, 4885 RSC .
N. L. Pickett and P. O′brien, Chem. Rec., 2001, 1, 467 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zheng, R. Smith, Y. Jun, C. Kisielowski, U. Dahmen and A. P. Alivisato, Sci., 2009, 324, 1309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Green, J. Mater. Chem., 2010, 20, 5797 RSC .
K. Seghal, S. Joseph, A. Manilal and S. Sugathan, Crit. Rev. Biotechnol., 2011, 31, 354 CrossRef PubMed .
V. G. P. Ribeiro, A. C. H. Barreto, J. C. Denardin, G. Mele, L. Carbone, S. E. Mazzetto, E. M. B. Sousa and P. B. A. Fechine, J. Mater. Sci., 2013, 48, 7875 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. H. Barreto, F. J. N. Maia, V. R. Santiago, V. G. P. Ribeiro, J. C. Denardin, G. Mele, L. Carbone, D. Lomonaco, S. E. Mazzetto and P. B. A. Fechine, Microfluid. Nanofluid., 2012, 12, 677 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Clemente, V. G. P. Ribeiro, J. E. A. Sousa, F. J. N. Maia, A. C. H. Barreto, N. F. Andrade, J. C. Denardin, G. Mele, L. Carbone, S. E. Mazzetto and P. B. A. Fechine, J. Nanopart. Res., 2013, 15, 1739 CrossRef .
V. G. P. Ribeiro, A. M. P. Marcelo, K. T. da Silva, F. L. F. da Silva, J. P. F. Mota, J. P. Costa do Nascimento, A. S. B. Sombra, C. da Silva Clemente, G. Mele, L. Carbone and S. E. Mazzetto, Mater., 2017, 10, 1114 CrossRef PubMed .
V. S. Balachandran, S. R. Jadhav, P. K. Vemula and G. John, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2013, 42, 427 RSC .
M. S. Behalo, E. Bloise, L. Carbone, R. Del Sole, D. Lomonaco, S. E. Mazzetto, G. Mele and L. Mergola, J. Exp. Nanosci., 2016, 11, 1274 CrossRef CAS .
M. P. D. Bello, E. B. Selma, E. Mazzetto and G. Mele, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 8870 CrossRef .
R. V. Gonçalves, M. L. Zanini, J. A. Malmonge, L. Bonnaud and N. R. de Souza Basso, Polímeros, 2018, 28, 61 CrossRef .
E. Lewis, S. Haigh and P. O'Brien, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 570 RSC .
M. A. Malik, P. O'Brien, F. Tuna, R. Pritchard, J. Buchweishaija, E. Kimambo and E. B. Mubofu, Dalton Trans., 2013, 42, 14438 RSC .
S. Kumar, P. Dinesha and M. A. Rosen, Energy Fuels, 2018, 32, 7237 CrossRef CAS .
T. Pushparaj and S. Ramabalan, Procedia Eng., 2013, 64, 701 CrossRef CAS .
S. Vedharaj, R. Vallinayagam, W. M. Yang, S. K. Chou, K. J. Chua and P. S. Lee, Exp. Therm. Fluid Sci., 2014, 53, 259 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dinesha and P. Mohanan, Asia-Pac. J. Chem. Eng., 2015, 10, 56 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dinesha and P. Mohanan, Biofuels, 2015, 6, 101 CrossRef CAS .
P. Dinesha, N. Vighnesha and P. Mohanan, J. Mech. Sci. Technol., 2014, 28, 2919 CrossRef .
D. N. Mallikappa, R. P. Reddy and C. S. Murthy, Renewable Energy, 2012, 38, 150 CrossRef CAS .
G. Kasiraman, B. Nagalingam and M. Balakrishnan, Energy, 2012, 47, 116 CrossRef CAS .
A. Velmurugan, M. Loganathan and E. J. Gunasekaran, Fuel, 2014, 132, 236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. H. Park, H. Y. Park, H. H. Kim and S. B. Park, Environ. Eng. Res., 2018, 23, 121 CrossRef .
S. H. Sengar, A. G. Mohod, Y. P. Khandetod, S. S. Patil and A. D. Chendake, Int. J. Energy Eng., 2012, 2, 28 CrossRef .

          W. R. Andayanie, R. Iswati, M. Lukito and P. G. Adinurani, Proceedings “The 1ST UMM International Conference on Pure and Applied Research”,  2015, p. 157 Search PubMed .
M. Sawadogo, S. TchiniTanoh, S. Sidib, N. Kpai and I. Tankoano, J. Cleaner Prod., 2018, 195, 1047 CrossRef .
E. Yohana, Arijanto, I. E. Kalyana and A. Lazuardi, AIP Conf. Proc., 2017, 1788, 030017 CrossRef .
M. B. Isman, Annu. Rev. Entomol., 2006, 51, 45 CrossRef CAS .
E. G. Boongaling, M. N. Acda, H. P. Hernandezand and E. J. del Rosario, Philipp. Agric. Sci., 2008, 91, 408 Search PubMed .
J. M. Vani, M. T. Ferreira, D. Monreal, S. A. Auharek, A. L. Cunha-Laura and E. J. de Arruda, 
            et al.
          , PLoS One, 2018, 13, 0193509 CrossRef PubMed .
D. R. Paiva, D. P. de Lima, N. P. Avvari, E. J. de Arruda, I. Cabrini, M. R. Marques, E. A. Dos Santos, F. C. Biaggio, D. P. Sangi and A. Beatriz, An. Acad. Bras. Cienc., 2017, 89, 373 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Lomonaco, G. M. P. Santiago, Y. S. Ferreira, A. M. C. Arriaga, S. E. Mazzetto, G. Melecand and G. Vasapollo, Green Chem., 2009, 11, 31 RSC .
A. S. Leite, A. S. Dantas, G. L. Oliveira, A. L. Gomes Júnior, S. G. de Lima, A. M. Citó, R. M. de Freitas, A. A. Melo-Cavalcante and J. A. DantasLopes, BioMed. Res. Int., 2015, 2015, 626835 Search PubMed .
Harlita, N. H. N. Satuti, M. Sagi and P. Astuti, Pak. J. Biol. Sci., 2016, 19, 89 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Kanehashi, R. Masuda, K. Yokoyama, T. Kanamoto, H. Nakashima and T. Miyakoshi, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2015, 132, 42725 CrossRef .

Footnote† This review paper is dedicated to the late Prof. Egid B. Mubofu.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
Table Content:
James Mgaya	Dr James Mgaya is a Lecturer at Dar es Salaam University College of Education, a constituent college of the University of Dar es Salaam. He holds an M.Sc. and a PhD degree in Chemistry both from the University of Dar es Salaam. His research focusses on chemical valorisation of agro-wastes.
Ginena B. Shombe	Ms. Ginena Bildard Shombe is a PhD student in Nanochemistry at the University of Zululand, South Africa, under the supervision of Prof. Neerish Revaprasadu. She received both her BSc and MSc in Chemistry from the University of Dar es Salaam, Tanzania. She has worked with several eco-friendly bioresources (castor oil, cashew nut shell liquid, moringa seed oil and rice husks) in the preparation of various types of mesoporous and nanostructured materials. Her current research involves the synthesis of ternary metal sulfides and their respective polymer nanocomposites for energy applications.
Siphamandla C. Masikane	Mr Siphamandla Cecil Masikane is a Ph.D student supervised by Prof. Neerish Revaprasadu in the Department of Chemistry at the University of Zululand, South Africa, where he also obtained his M.Sc. degree in Chemistry. He obtained his Pure and Applied Chemistry undergraduate degree at the University of KwaZulu-Natal, South Africa. The scope of his current research project entails the development/exploration of alternative green methods for the synthesis of eco-friendly semiconductor nanoparticles.
Sixberth Mlowe	Dr Sixberth Mlowe (MRSC) is currently a Post-Doc Researcher at the University of Zululand and a Lecturer at the University of Dar es Salaam (DUCE), Tanzania. He holds both an MSc degree from the University of Dar es Salaam (Tanzania) and a PhD degree from the University of Zululand (South Africa) in Materials Chemistry. His research focus is on employing principles of green chemistry to synthesize metal chalcogenide nanomaterials using bio-based renewable resources. He has co-authored more than 30 articles and book chapters.
Egid B. Mubofu	Egid Beatus Mubofu was a Professor of Chemistry and the Vice Chancellor of the University of Dodoma, Tanzania. His research interests were on green chemistry, porous materials, nanomaterials, catalysis and bio-based materials. Prof. Mubofu was the head of the Department of Chemistry, at the University of Dar es Salaam (2012–2016), Director General of Tanzania Bureau of Standards (TBS) (2016–2018) and Board Chairman of the Tanzania Fertilizer Company (2017–2018). He co-authored more than 60 articles and supervised more than 10 postgraduate students. He passed away during the preparation of this review article; may his soul rest in peace.
Neerish Revaprasadu	Neerish Revaprasadu is a Professor of Chemistry and NRF/DST SARChI Chair holder in Nanotechnology. He obtained his B.SC (Hons.) from the University of Natal in 1993 and Ph.D from Imperial College London in 2000. He started as a Senior Lecturer at the University of Zululand in 2000 and became an Associate Professor in 2004 and a full Professor in 2008. He was awarded the SARChI Chair in Nanotechnology in 2007. He has done extensive work in the synthesis of semiconductor nanomaterials. His current interest is the synthesis, characterization and application of functional nanomaterials and their application in the areas of energy and health. Materials of interest include binary and ternary metal chalcogenide materials, 2-D materials and perovskites. He has co-authored 190 articles and supervised more than 30 postgraduate students.

 	Fig. 1  The schematic representation of a typical production cycle (reproduced with permission from ref. 8).	 

 	Fig. 2  Conceptual design of a sustainable greenhouse agricultural system (reproduced from ref. 9).	 

 	Fig. 3  Agro-waste for the production of activated carbon for electrochemical capacitors (reproduced from ref. 13).	 

 	Fig. 4  The preparation of cement blocks from agro-waste (reproduced with permission from ref. 15).	 

 	Fig. 5  Cashew tree (a), cashew apples and seeds (b), cashew kernels (nuts) (c) and cashew shells (d).	 

 	Fig. 6  Major components of the cashew nut shell liquid.	 

 	Scheme 1  Decarboxylation of anacardic acid to cardanol.	 

 	Fig. 7  Structures of some organic based corrosion inhibitors.	 

 	Scheme 2  Synthesis of 1-octene and an intermediate product 3-(non-8-enyl)phenol for products 3-nonylphenol and sodium 2-hydroxy-6-(non-8-en-1-yl)benzenesulfonate (reproduced from ref. 65 and 68 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry and Wiley respectively).	 

 	Scheme 3  Synthesis of 3-propylphenol from cardanol (reproduced with permission from ref. 68).	 

 	Scheme 4  Synthesis of 3-propylphenol via isomerizing-metathesis reaction of anacardic acid (reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 

 	Fig. 8  TEM images of anacardic acid capped (a) CdSe, (b) PbSe and (c) PbTe nanoparticles and (d) its HRTEM (PbTe) (reproduced with permission from ref. 6 and 7).	 

 	Fig. 9  Synthesis of diphosphorylated cardol (DPC) and the respective nanofluids (reproduced from ref. 76 with permission from Springer).	 

 	Scheme 5  Synthetic scheme for 5,10,15,20-tetra-[4-(2-(3-pentadecyl)phenoxy)ethoxy]phenylporphyrin 4 from Cardanol 1 through 1-(2-bromoethoxy)-3-pentadecylbenzene 2 and -[2-(3-n-pendacylphenoxy)ethoxy]benzaldehyde 3 (reproduced from ref. 77 with permission from Springer).	 

 	Fig. 10  Molecular structure of [(μ-anacardato)-copper(II)bipyridine][Cu2{(μ-O2CC6H3(o-OH)(o-C15H31)}4(NC5H5)2] (CCDC 877508) (reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry).	 
Footnote
† This review paper is dedicated to the late Prof. Egid B. Mubofu.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2019
