General Discussion  - Faraday Discussions (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B207970B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B207970B
(Paper)
Faraday Discuss., 2003, 122, 269-282General DiscussionProf. Helliwell opened the discussion of Dr May's paper: Regarding the DNA in cationic vesicle assemblies you put forward what other models might be ‘nearly as plausible’? What is the functional significance of these cationic DNA vesicle complexes?Dr May responded: In general, one must stress that small-angle scattering cannot be used to predict unique models but rather to exclude scattering-incompatible models.It is known that for the conditions studied in this work DNA–lipid complexes form various condensed multilamellar structures.1,2 This structure can be altered by varying the shapes of lipid molecules. For example, by increasing the amount of DOPE (cone shaped, natural curvature of the membrane <0°) in our cationic liposomes, the complex undergoes a structural transition from the lamellar phase to the inverted hexagonal phase.3 It is of particular importance to find a structure–function relationship of these DNA–lipid complexes. For example, it was shown that for a range of concentrations the inverted hexagonal DNA–lipid complexes exhibit a higher transfection efficiency than the lamellar complexes.41 J. Gustafsson, G. Arvidson, G. Karlsson, and M. Almgren, Biochim. Biophys. Acta, 1995, 1235, 305.2 N. S. Templeton, D. D. Lasic, P. M. Frederik, H. H. Strey, D. D. Roberts and G. N. Pavlakis, Nature Biotechnol., 1997, 15, 647.3 B. J. Sternberg, Liposom. Res., 1996, 6, 515.4 I. Koltover, T. Salditt, J. O. Rädler and C. R. Safinya, Science, 1998, 281, 78.Prof. Watts asked: Targeting of drug or DNA loaded liposomes is still a major hurdle, especially if they are required at a particular organ or tissue type. How do you think that this is going to be achieved? Most lipid injected intravenously is cleaned in the liver rather quickly. Are you considering alternative ways of administering liposomes to specific parts of the body?Dr May answered: Delivering of drug or DNA loaded liposomes to a particular type of tissue may be achieved by docking molecules to the liposomes that can be recognized by certain cell types. There are also recent advances in the technique known as magnetofection1—enhanced delivery of therapeutic genes to a specific target site by associating gene vectors with superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles that are drawn to the target tissue with an external magnet. For magnetofection to become practical, research will have to find a way to attract drugs to tissues deeper in the body.1 F. Scherer, M. Anton, U. Schillinger, J. Henke, C. Bergemann, A. Krüger, B. Gänsbacher and C. Plank, Gene Ther., 2002, in press.Prof. Watts asked: (i) You have made your liposome 70%+D2O, lipids are ∼0.98 cm3 g−1 and they will therefore float. Do you see any evidence for free, non-DNA associated liposomes floating in your system? (ii) One definite way to monitor liposome collapse or fusion is through trapped volume measurements. Have you done these with your liposomes on interaction with your DNA to substantiate your model prepared in Fig. 6?Dr May replied: (i) We have evidence that non-DNA associated liposomes (“free liposomes”) exist by visualization techniques; we did not observe that our liposomes were floating in D2O during the time necessary for our measurements. (ii) The measurement of the intraliposomal aqueous phase would indeed be a good indication of vesicle fusion. We verified the occurrence of vesicle fusion by visualization techniques like for example cryo-TEM.Prof. Watts said: (i) On mixing in stopped flow methods, it is known that morphological changes can occur in small vesicles. Have you carried out necessary controls to ensure this is not happening and the effects observed are really DNA induced? (ii). Do you think studies in water or D2O without buffering salts are relevant to physiological conditions of ∼150 mM salt, pH∼7.0?Dr May replied: (i) Our small-angle neutron scattering stopped-flow experiments include control experiments in which the vesicle dispersion was mixed with a solution without DNA. We did not observe any structural changes of the vesicles compared to a steady-state solution measurement. We also performed control experiments by adding DNA to a solution without vesicles.(ii) The Lund group1 also addressed the problem of stability of the vesicles, and they studied DNA–lipid vesicles in the presence of higher amounts of salts (e.g., 150 mM salt). Like Rädler et al.2 they observed that the structures of these complexes remain locally lamellar. Rädler et al. report that only the d spacing of the lipids changes with increasing ionic strength. We controlled the measurement conditions to have the same low-salt conditions using freshly prepared samples (not more than 1–2 days old); the ionic strength is determined by the dilution of the DNA stock solution. pH-controlled experiments are certainly desirable as an extension for future experiments.1 (a) E. Feitosa, P. C. A. Barreleiro and G. Olofsson, Chem. Phys. Lipids, 2000, 105, 201–213; (b) P. C. A. Barreleiro, M. Cruz, S. Ferreira and G. Olofsson, J. Phys. Chem. B, submitted.2 I. Koltover, T. Salditt and C. R. Safinya, Biophys. J., 1999, 77, 915.Prof. Ryan asked: Could orientation in a magnetic or electric field help in the solution of the structure of the final state? This method is widely used in other soft-condensed matter systems.Dr May answered: Possibly a magnetically well-ordered structure could be observed more easily. This would maybe work for the rods, but presumably not for the final multilamellar (magnetically isotropic) state that we expect. I wonder whether magnetic forces would prevent the rods to turn into the multilamellar structure.Prof. Watts said: Lipids in bilayers are diamagnetically anisotropic and orient even in moderate magnetic fields. This may, then, be a way to get orientational information of a bilayer associated macromolecule, as used in high resolution solution state NMR with micelles.Prof. Watts asked: Your DNA is ∼20000 base pairs long. What is the length in nm, and what is the rigid rod correlated length? I ask because vesicle size is presumably ∼20–40 nm diameter and the anionic DNA may form the scaffold onto which the cationic vesicles assemble.Dr May responded: The DNA we used is 2000 (not 20000) base pairs long, and thus, with a helix rise per base pair of 0.34 nm, its length is 680 nm. The diameter of the vesicles is 100–200 nm. We suggest that the DNA strand is covered by vesicles, and that due to the strong interaction the vesicles rupture and the bilayers roll up around the DNA-cylinder axis.Prof. Wilson asked: Can measurements over an extended Q-range probe further the slower time constant re-organisation of the complex into the multi-lamellar structure i.e. by allowing more extensive modelling?Dr May replied: Yes, measurements over a wider q range would allow us a more extensive modelling since the pair distribution function would extend over a wider r range. There are technical limitations though, because at very low momentum transfer the neutron flux may become prohibitively low for time-resolved measurements, and at high q, the current count-rate limitation of the detectors do not yet allow us to count neutrons as efficiently as desired. (We are limited by the incoherent background from hydrogen in the samples).Prof. Wilson asked: Can further deuteration of the various components in the system (as opposed to simply using H2O/D2O exchange) help in trying to improve the structural picture?Dr May answered: Deuteration of the various components in the system (DNA and lipids) would contribute to a clearer structural picture of the DNA–cationic liposome complexes. For example, using (partially) deuterated DNA matched by 100% D2O for observing the lipids only. The contrast between lipids and natural DNA is not very high, and working at 70% D2O for matching the DNA contribution infers a still high incoherent background. Fully deuterated DNA would allow one to study its structure with the lipids matched, but the naturally different head group and chain contrasts would have to be matched by partial deuteration.Prof. Watts said: (i) Are you suggesting then, that the DNA forms the structural scaffold around which the lipid bilayers assemble? (ii) Do you think these rod-shaped DNA–lipid complexes would be stable and flow through the circulatory system intact?Dr May responded: We suggest that the DNA strand is covered by vesicles and due to the strong interaction the vesicles rupture and the bilayers roll up around the DNA-cylinder axis. Thus, yes we are suggesting that DNA forms the structural scaffold around which the bilayers assemble. The rods then turn into a multilamellar structure. The problem of stability is not so much one of mechanics, but rather one of metabolism, because the DNA–cationic liposome complexes are cleared by the reticuloendothelial system (RES). A way to circumvent this problem is to inject the DNA–cationic liposome complexes directly into the affected area (like for example in a tumor of the skin).Prof. Helliwell said: I would like to mention Dr May's work with Heumann and the chaperone complex using SANS to follow that process. Please would you give us a summary of that quite recent work?Dr May responded: The work of Heumann's group (Max-Planck Institut für Biochemie, Martinsried, Germany) on the chaperone from E. coli comprised many aspects, including a study of the GroEL–GroES complex,1 that was really concluded before the X-ray crystallographic work of Xu et al.,2 showed some distinct features of the solution structure.I wish to concentrate here on the time-resolved studies that have partly been reported by Holzinger in his thesis.3 Contrary to an X-ray solution investigation by Roessle et al.,4 the rapid-kinetics measurements with neutrons did not allow us to see a sufficiently strong scattering effect for the formation of bullet (1∶1) complexes from GroEL and GroES in the presence of ADP using neutrons, although we would have expected to be successful. (A decent neutron signal can be observed with time frames of about 10 s total duration, i.e. summing up 8 or 10 experiments with time frames of 1 s.) However, another study that cannot be done without neutrons yielded very nice results.5 1∶1 complexes of GroEL and of the bacterial chaperonin GroES or its counterpart GP31 from the bacteriophage T4 were preformed in a deuterated buffer solution in the presence of ADP. A deuterated solution containing an excess of partially deuterated GroES, invisible for neutrons in these conditions, was mixed with the former solution, and the time evolution of the scattering from the mixtures was followed by small-angle neutron scattering. The decrease of the scattering intensity due to the replacement of “visible” protein by the “invisible” one allows one to observe the chasing kinetics of the co-chaperone. The decay of both complexes follows two time exponentials, of which one seems to be due to the formation of intermediate football complexes, as can be deduced from experiments with varying GroEL excess concentration.1 R. Stegmann, S. Nieba-Axmann, E. Manakova, M. Rössle, T. Hermann, R. P. May, A. Wiedenmann, A. Plückthun and H. Heumann, J. Struct. Biol., 1998, 121, 30–40.2 Z. Xu, A. L. Horwich and P. B. Sigler, Nature, 1997, 388, 741–750.3 J. Holzinger, PhD Thesis, Ludwig-Maximilians University, Munich, 2002.4 M. Roessle, E. Manakova, I. Lauer, T. Nawroth, J. Holzinger, T. Narayanan, S. Bernstorff, H. Amenitsch and H. Heumann, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2000, 33, 548–551.5 J. Holzinger, R. P. May, E. Manakova, S. van der Vies, M. Rössle and H. Heumann, manuscript in preparation.Prof. Wilson opened the discussion of Dr Sankar's paper: I am interested in the relevance of the time-resolved studies to the materials development in which you are engaged. For example, in your Introduction you described one of your motivations as crystallisation of solid catalysts. In that context, how important is following the mechanism of formation (the time-resolved aspect) to the functionality of the material produced?Dr Sankar responded: The functionality, whether it is optical, electrical or catalytic, depends largely on the particle size. The property can be altered considerably by controlling the particle size. One of our aims in this time-resolved measurement is to determine the nature of the particle growth which can be used further to optimise and control the formation of a specific particle sizeDr May communicated: (i) The symbols s and q are both used for the scattering vector; I find this misleading. q and s are defined with respect to d, although there is normally no such thing as a crystal plane distance d in small angle scattering.(ii) Porod's (not quoted)
“invariant”
Q refers to the volume fraction that is visible for the radiation used, i.e. it depends on the resolution of the scattering experiment. The volume fraction changes by the formation of particles from “invisible” molecules, but also the contrast may change by depletion of the solution. This is not explained in the paper.(iia) How are the scattering curves extrapolated to s=0, and s=infinity for calculating Q? At short times, the scattering curves are rising at qmax!(iib) How are the data normalized to absolute intensity for obtaining the correct invariant(s)?(iii) The data shown in Fig. 3 of the paper (in which, by the way, the abscissa units are q, not lnq, with missing units) give a clear indication that at short times, there is not the Gaussian behaviour necessary for fitting according to eqn. (2) (radius of gyration). At long times, a structural interference peak seems to develop, which would also not allow you to calculate the radius of gyration. Did you also try to fit the data with the theoretical scattering curves of (a distribution of) spheres?(iv) The Guinier approximation does not require monodispersed systems, but the region where it can be applied may become very narrow in the case of large polydispersity. The relation Rq<2π is incorrect.(v) Assuming spheres, Figs. 4 and 5 are not independent. Does the information obtained from the two curves coincide?Dr Sankar communicated in reponse: (i) We have now altered the text in such a way that we use “q” throughout. (ii) Although not extrapolating the scattering curves to q=0 for calculating the invariant Q can induce errors in the absolute values, the general trend of Qversus time of reaction will remain identical.(iii) There is a Gaussian behavior that allows us to fit according to eqn. (2). At long times, no structural interference peak seems to develop. The feature observed in Fig. 3 is interpreted as the emergence of a form factor in I(q). The position of the first maxima and minima were fitted using theoretical scattering curves of a distribution of spheres:  The particle size obtained was in good agreement with the one obtained using eqn. (2) and (3).(iv) I agree that the Guinier approximation does not require monodispersed systems, but in order to apply eqn. (3) and determine the particle size, a monodispersed system is required.(v) Yes. The information gained from the two curves in Fig. 4 and 5 suggest that, assuming spherical particles, we have particles with an approximate diameter of 110 Å.Dr Chen asked: What was the particle size of the end product? We observed a very similar phenomenon, lacking the second coordination shell peak in FT-EXAFS spectra in TiO2 and Fe2O3 nanoparticles with a few nm diameter size. We have shown evidence of surface defect sites that are attributed to the disorder of a distant shell, or local lattice disorder. Do you think this is the reason for what you achieved?Dr Sankar replied: The particle size of the end product (which depends on the temperature and time of synthesis) in this case is ca 20 nm. Low temperature EXAFS measurement at ca. 20 K is required to extract the second shell information to determine the particle size. This suggests that the CdS system is dominated by thermal disorder rather than static disorder as seen in other systems.Dr Dent said: For particle sizes of 7–12.5 nm you get results from SAXS; EXAFS is relatively insensitive. EXAFS is most sensitive to particle sizes below 5 nm.1 Clearly this problem is even more difficult due to the anharmonic nature of the Cd–Cd interaction.1 A. Jentys, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 1999, 1, 4059–4063.Dr Sankar responded: Yes I agree with this comment. It is well known that beyond a certain particle size the coordination number will be close to the bulk value and the changes will be well within the experimental uncertainty of 10% associated with the estimation of coordination number. Our aim was to follow the particle formation at the early stages of the growth, which will be less than 7 nm. Unfortunately we could not estimate the particle size in the early stages of the formation of CdS using coordination number of the Cd–Cd shell since there is a large thermal disorder associated with Cd–Cd interaction.Prof. Wilson asked: Is there any long range order apparent in the evolution of these systems i.e. any role for WAXS in combination with SAXS?Dr Sankar answered: There is no direct evidence for long-range order from our combined SAXS/WAXS measurement.Prof. Ryan said: (i) The maximum yield of solids in your reaction is 0.0028% by mass. In this case eqn. (1) predicts that the invariant would grow linearly with crystallisation and the argument for the fall in the measured invariant is inappropriate. (ii) Does the radius of the particle vary with a power law (such as t∼t⅓) and is this suggestive of the mechanism?Dr Sankar replied: The main reason for the fall in the measured invariant is because the large particles settle just below the X-ray beam. We took as much care in our design of the in situ cell in such a way that the X-ray beam passes through the lowest possible position. Despite this, the X-rays could not see all the particles. We are currently redesigning our in situ cell to rotate during the measurement to allow all the particles to come in contact with the X-ray beam.Prof. Bürgi asked: (i) What is the rate determining step in the formation of the cluster and how can it be controlled? (ii) Does the rate of cluster formation influence the EXAFS spectra?Dr Sankar answered: (i) The only way to slow down the formation is by lowering the temperature. We also found that, in addition to the temperature, the concentration of the solution has a large effect on the rate and once again the rate can be controlled by appropriate choice of the concentration of cadmium acetate and thioacetamide.(ii) We do not have direct evidence for whether EXAFS spectra are influenced by the rate of cluster formation, since we are able to obtain reliable information only on the Cd–S first coordination environment. This is not sufficient, since it appears that irrespective of the cluster size, the cluster terminates with sulfur giving rise to a coordination number of four. We need Cd–Cd, second shell information to obtain further information, which could not be extracted, since this shell is dominated by the presence of a large thermal factor which decreases the amplitude.Prof. Sir John Meurig Thomas commented: In answer to the question as to why one is interested in producing nanoparticles of II–VI compounds, one recalls that the electronic band gap of such materials are tuneable according to their size. Henglein's well known work many years ago showed that good photocatalysts can be fashioned from II–VI nanoparticles; and these are of considerable importance in such fields as the harnessing of solar energy by photocatalytic materials. This is one of the reasons why Schuth and others (at Mülheim) who collaborate with us, are studying various ways of producing CdS and CdSe nanoparticles.Prof. Hounslow added: From a chemical engineering perspective it is vitally important to be able to identify mechanisms and rates—not just end points. It is only with this knowledge, usually acquired from time-dependant results, that processes for manufacture can be designed.Precipitation must be driven by chemical potential difference. Is the growth process limited by the rate of precipitation—so particles grow by the acquisition of ions or very small clusters—or by particle–particle coagulation?Dr Sankar responded: From Fig. 3 (of the paper), we clearly observe a form factor peak. This form factor maximum shifts to lower q values with reaction time, indicating that either the particles increase in size or that the small particles aggregate and therefore form larger structures. After 2 h of reaction, a second order maximum becomes visible. This is typically observed for many systems that represent nucleation and growth processes, which ultimately yield highly monodispersed particles and rules out an aggregation process.Prof. Hounslow asked: To distinguish between the two extremes of the size-enlargement mechanism it would be very useful to make some in situ measure of ion activity in solution, can you do so?Dr Sankar answered: I do not think we can measure the ion activity in solution by the techniques we have described in this paper.Prof. Helliwell said: The size of nanoparticle, and evolution time, in your system and that presented in Prof. Greaves's paper are very similar (both≈20 nm); I obviously exclude the trivial explanation that the instrument only allows Qmin measurements down to (20 nm)−1! Is there some general size limiting factor occurring (in protein crystal growth there is a limiting size to crystals, under a given set of conditions, which seems a similar phenomenon)? And, in fact, what is the optimum size of nanoparticle that you are after for electrical and optical properties uses?Dr Sankar replied: It is a coincidence that the size of the nanoparticles presented here and in Prof. Greaves's paper are very similar. It is unlikely that there are some general size-limiting factors operating. The size of the particle produced depends highly on the preparative method, temperature etc. For the optical and electrical properties, ideally we would like to prepare ca. 3 nm particles.Prof. Ryan said: This coincidence is simply that 30 nm is the middle of the window of observation on the SAXS beamlines at DC.Prof. Wilson addressed Prof. Hounslow: I have always understood that one of the most critical aspects of moving from “research” to “production” chemistry was the scale-up from the laboratory to industrial scale. This seems to contradict your earlier contention that detailed information on the time evolution of, for example, particle-size in potential catalytic materials, is very important in moving across the chemistry/chemical engineering divide.Prof. Hounslow answered: The crucial issue is that of identifying true, intrinsic, kinetics (such as may be obtained from time-resolved laboratory studies). The logic being that the intrinsic kinetics in the lab are the same as in the full-scale plant. Engineers can then take these kinetics, combine them with the available knowledge of transport phenomena (particularly heat and mass transfer) to determine what will happen on the plant. So while the operating conditions on the plant may be very different from in the lab, the underlying kinetics remain the same and it is possible to design efficient, safe, large-scale production equipment.Prof. Moffat opened the discussion of Prof. Evans's paper: Some of your spectra show features (glitches) that persist from spectrum to spectrum; they would be minimized (or eliminated) in difference measurements. Why do you choose to concentrate on spectra rather than difference spectra?How do you decide whether intermediate species are present, with distinct XAFS spectra? It would seem that the information is present in the (difference) spectra themselves (i.e. consider PCA, SVD, global analysis etc.).Prof. Evans responded: We presented the spectra quite deliberately to inform the reader about the quality of data available by the energy dispersive technique. Our principle aim in the paper was to present the status of its development. In principle a global analysis of the whole dataset should be the best approach, and we have not yet attempted this. Instead we identify regions of the spectrum that show most prominent changes and monitor their time dependence to identify if there is any detectable intermediate. Sometimes difference spectra prove to be disappointing. Beam movement between the acquisition of the background spectrum, Io, and differing sample spectra, It, can still maintain a structured background. As we state in our paper, the highest quality optical and detector systems are required to minimise this problem.Prof. Wilson said: Presumably the identification of possible intermediate species in your time-resolved EXAFS spectra is somewhat dependent on the resolution you can obtain in those spectra.Also presumably the availability of simultaneous additional data (e.g. XRD) which may identify the presence of such intermediate or transient species will be helpful in the interpretation of the EXAFS spectra.Prof. Evans replied: Clearly, the ability to identify intermediates is dependent upon time resolution, spectroscopic resolution and high integrity of the absorption intensity. The digital resolution varied between ca. 0.4 eV at the Ni K-edge and about 2 eV at the palladium K-edge.Simultaneous measurement of X-ray diffraction data with a 300–2000 eV bandwidth is unlikely to give optimal data; on the solution described in our paper it would be quite inappropriate. As we indicated, we have utilised stopped-flow uv–visible spectroscopy, and intend to extend this to the IR, which can be structurally more incisive.Dr Techert said: In Fig. 3 of the paper, the optical density reaches values between 3 and 4. Are there any problems when reaching the non-linear regime of the detector of the spectrometer?Prof. Evans answered: Obviously this was not ideal. In the spectra presented we used the same concentration in each technique to obtain a good estimate of the reaction rates prior to the SR-based experiments. Even with a 1 mm path length cell, really optimal uv–visible spectra would have been obtained at lower concentrations. In the kinetic plots we restricted our analysis to the early stages of the reaction at a fixed wavelength before the absorption bands became too intense for this to be valid. Recently we have obtained EDE spectra at ∼10 mM concentrations, and this will alleviate this incompatibility.Dr Sagi commented: Sagi and co-workers demonstrated the use of principal component analysis (PCA) to extract intermediates out of an EXAFS spectrum of a mixture. This should be considered as an analytical tool for the analysis of time-resolved XAS. Slowing down the reaction by either cooling or constraining the reaction may aid in trapping the intermediates.Prof. Evans replied: (i) This is a very helpful suggestion and we should work towards this.(ii) In the paper we concentrated on the most rapid experiments to demonstrate how far the boundaries of its application have been pushed. In other systems we have lower concentrations of aluminium alkyl (in the Ni experiments) or different pH (in the iron case), and so the quality of data could be improved further. We are interested in a variable temperature stopped flow system for trying to identify very reactive transients.Dr Cole said: The paper states that it was not possible to structurally differentiate between the alternative intermediates in the iron complex reaction using XAS. Could Mössbauer techniques be a better technique to resolve this issue? (Are time-resolved Mössbauer techniques possible?)Prof. Evans answered: The reduction of aqueous Fe(III) by hydroquinone has been well studied by uv–visible spectroscopy, and an inner sphere intermediate has been identified by its blue colour. We used this as a test reaction rather than wishing to study this in depth. In the Fe(III) solution itself at the pH used, there are three major species, as we indicate it the paper. From this starting point, trying to carry out a stopped flow experiment on a dilute solution would not be trivial. Differentiating the Fe(II) and Fe(III) sites would be appropriate to Mössbauer. Freeze–quench techniques have been used on beamline ID18 at the ESRF to study intermediates.11 Experiment LS728 on ID18 by A. X. Trautwein, H. Winkler and W. Meyer-Klaucke, Reactive intermediates of cytochrome P450 prepared by the freeze–quench method and investigated by nuclear resonant forward scattering, ESRF Annual report 1998.Prof. Coppens asked: (i) What is the time precision of your stopped-flow technique? (ii) What is exactly your edge shift? Does it correspond to what is recognised as the Fe(III) to Fe(II) shift? Do the different species in your starting mixture have the same edge position?Prof. Evans replied: (i) The mixing time depends upon the cell used, and varied between 1 ms and 10 ms for different sets of experiments. Commercial cells for other techniques currently offer mixing times down to below 0.5 ms.(ii) The edge shift (−2 eV) is entirely consistent with Fe(III)/Fe(II). When we varied the pH, thus changing the ratio of the three major Fe(III) species, little change in the XANES spectrum was evident; the three species all have Fe(III) surrounded by six oxygen donor ligands, so this is not very surprising.Prof. Wilson asked: Is the improvement of time resolution in your EXAFS experiments still dependent on repeated scans to obtain adequate counting statistics, for example, in the projection towards nanosecond timescales in single bunch synchrotron mode.Prof. Evans answered: Undoubtedly, repeat scans will be necessary in a single bunch mode. An advantage of the dispersive experiment is that about 1000 data points are derived simultaneously, as compared to a step-scan approach. We have shown that single scans can be obtained at the ESRF in 100–200 μs [http://detserv1.dl.ac.uk/xstrip/] at about 200 mA current. With high stability, one might estimate that perhaps 100–1000 might be the minimum required to obtain a single spectrum at the present time, clearly a viable possibility. The total acquisition time will depend upon the repetition rate and also two other important experimental factors: the degree of conversion, say, in a photochemical experiment and also the differences in the XAFS patterns of the species involved.Prof. Sir John Meurig Thomas asked: In your iridium oxidative scheme, do I take it that the five-coordinate intermediate and the final six-coordinated product are both stoichiometric rather than catalytic processes?Prof. Evans answered: Indeed, this stopped flow experiment was designed to probe one part of the catalytic cycle for the carbonylation of methanol to form acetic acid. It is the stopped flow experiment with the lowest individual spectrum acquisition time that we have recorded so far (400 μs).Prof. Evans addressed everyone: Whilst studying the heterogeneous catalyst Rh/alumina with a microreactor cell, we have been able to monitor catalyst function (activity and selectivity for the reaction between NO and H2) and local structure (by energy dispersive EXAFS) simultaneously. These results show that the metal particles change their structure very rapidly under catalytic conditions, so even after in situ studies of material preparation, catalysts may change their structure during their operation in a way which determines their performance.11 M. A. Newton, A. J. Dent, S. Diaz-Moreno, S. G. Fiddy and J. Evans, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed. Engl., 2002, 41, 2587–2589.Prof. Watts opened the discussion of Dr Burton's paper: (i) Is it possible that the substrate vibrations are significantly greater or smaller than those of the protein around the active site? (ii) Are all electrostatic interactions and contributions taken into account?Dr Burton responded: (i) The ‘reactant’ in this study is an intermediate in the overall reaction and the motion of the ‘substrate’ is limited by the immediate protein environment. (ii) Yes, in the QM/MM approach which we have adopted for this study atoms in the QM region have electrostatic interactions with all other atoms.Prof. J. C. Smith asked: (i) How might one account for changes in protein fluctuations during the reaction (e.g. at the transition state) that might influence the barriers? (ii) Can you describe the nature of the “compression mode” that you identify as being correlated with the kinetic isotope effect?Dr Burton answered: (i) The speculation is that specific vibrational modes of the enzyme may enhance the tunnelling mechanism in MADH (ref. 9 of the paper) although the emphasis of this paper has been to show that the energetics and degree of tunnelling are significantly affected by the protein environment. (ii) We have not analysed the specific nature of the enzyme vibrational modes other than to note that Asp428 does approach the proton before abstraction.Prof. Coppens asked: How dependent is the kinetic isotope effect on the quality of the treatment in the QM region (such as size of basis set, inclusion of electron correlation, HF or DFT)?Dr Burton replied: There can be a significant variation in both the classical reaction barrier and the shape of the PE surface depending upon the level of theory (PM3, HF, DFT). The paper highlights the classical barriers at the HF level (∼20 kcal mol−1) which are larger than with the PM3 method (∼10–15 kcal mol−1), although improvement in the basis set makes little difference. We also find that the imaginary frequency at the TS is lower for HF than for PM3. DFT with the BLYP or B3LYP functionals tends to lower the barrier, often considerably.Dr Grant said: The potential energy surface of a protein can be described as “frustrated” in that there are multiple minima separated by large energy barriers. How does one know that one is working with the correct energy well and how many substates are considered? Does the value of the kinetic isotope effect tend to a certain value so that you know the substate is a good representation of the enzyme configuration during H transfer?Dr Burton replied: This is a difficult problem for computational methods to treat. Computational studies very much rely on experimental data, such as crystal structures, to reliably determine a reactive enzyme conformation. Our initial structures for this reaction were based upon an experimental structure of the Michaelis complex and the time scales of our simulations are unlikely to sample far from this enzyme structure. In this study we have found certain enzyme configurations which are likely to yield an extreme proton tunnelling event and a large kinetic isotope effect, in agreement with experiment, and others which would not. There is thus potential in this approach to suggest active protein conformations.Prof. Sir John Meurig Thomas asked: Leaving aside QM/MM as a quantative insight, how am I, acting like an undergraduate, to understand in qualitative terms the fundamental cause of such an enormous kinetic isotope effect?Dr Burton answered: Primary deuterium kinetic isotope effects, where there is little or no tunnelling through the potential energy barrier, will be small (<7) and arising primarily from zero point effects. Larger values reflect considerable tunnelling of the lighter hydrogen compared to deuterium greatly facilitated by a narrow potential energy barrier. Indeed for MADH, the transmission coefficient is ∼100 for H and ∼40 for D.Prof. Moffat said: You are focusing on one step, the rate-determining step, in a multi-step, multi-state pathway. You need to know not the ground state structure (nor that of the Michaelis complex), but that of the short-lived intermediate immediately prior to the proton transfer. What is the lifetime of this state, and peak population i.e. could time-resolved crystallography reveal it?Dr Burton replied: The rate constant for the proton transfer step was found experimentally (ref. 9 of the paper) to be 175 s−1 but we are not able to comment on the likelihood of resolving this structure.Dr Hirst asked: Is it straightforward to identify the transition state of the QM region? Was the imaginary frequency reported the only imaginary frequency, indicating a transition state rather than a saddle point?Dr Burton replied: Certainly some transition states (TSs) can be elusive and they do tend to take longer to find in the condensed phase than in the gas phase, although our use of fixed link atoms has made the process of finding TSs for the many enzyme configurations more tractable. All of the transition states have been fully characterised and have only one imaginary frequency since this is a pre-requisite to generating the reaction path using the IRC algorithm.Prof. Helliwell asked: What is the diffraction resolution limit? Secondly, can you not harness the B-factor data, i.e. from the static structure there would be possibilities to assess the sensitivity of the kinetic isotope effect calculated values to atomic motion in the enzyme active site. [Indeed what are the active site atoms ADPs (atomic displacement parameters)?]  Dr Burton answered: Unfortunately we did not have a crystal structure corresponding directly to this reaction step. Certainly diffraction data corresponding to this reaction step could be extremely useful. In general, we do not utilise the B-factor data to full advantage in our computational studies and this may be potentially useful for other reactions.Prof. Wilson said: I am interested in the reproducibility of the reaction coordinate with respect to “flexing” of the enzyme. You examine multiple reaction coordinates generated by MM (or MD?) simulations. I would like to confirm/emphasise how different or reproducible are these reaction coordinates (and consequent energy barriers) with respect to plausible enzyme configurations.Dr Burton responded: Multiple reaction paths (coordinates) are generated using the QM/MM method and each one is derived using a different enzyme configuration. The enzyme configurations are taken from an MD simulation, using an MM potential, of the enzyme. In this study we have analysed only a few enzyme configurations but we have subsequently analysed more. At the PM3 level, the reaction coordinates can be broadly split into two categories, with only relatively small deviations for barrier height (see Table 1 presented here).
Table 1 Reaction coordinares at the PM3 level

CategoryReaction energyKinetic isotope effect1Endothermic<52Isoenergetic/exothermic>7Dr Hädener asked: (i) Can you comment on the meaning of the symbols H in the Figs. 3 and 6 in you paper? (ii) Can you comment on the way you treat the hydration shell in your calculations and in which way including hydration affects the outcome of the calculations?Dr Burton replied: (i) The circled H-atoms are the ‘link atoms’, hydrogen atoms added to the QM calculation to satisfy valency where there should be covalent bonds between QM and MM regions. In this study these are fixed in space along the original C–C bonds to stabilise subsequent geometry optimisations. We and others, have shown that although crude, the approximation works well provided that this region does not significantly influence the reaction.(ii) The presence of explicit waters in the active site is inconclusive, varying in the different crystal structures. The absence of water may be very important to this reaction step, otherwise the pKa of Asp428 will be affected and the barrier to the reaction increased. It is interesting to note that the explicit water molecule present within the active site of the initial model (R0) had a strong tendency to leave during the MD simulation and did not influence the reaction in this study. Solvating waters were included in all MD simulations, but remote waters were removed in the QM/MM calculations for computational efficiency.Dr Sagi asked: To what degree can we correlate the phenomena we see in very short time scales by computation with actual catalysis occurring in much longer time scales? For example fast fluctuations of specific atoms which contribute to rather slower processes.Dr Burton answered: The rarity of most reaction events is a major computational challenge. However to some extent this connection may soon be revealed using a range of new rare-event dynamics approaches (e.g. refs. 28–30 of the paper) which can focus the reaction event into a shorter time scale whilst including other atomic motions. Direct dynamics methods such as VTST are an effective way to implicitly include these effects for quantitative rate determination.Prof. Moore opened the discussion of Prof. J. C. Smith's paper: At this meeting we have covered many techniques and looked at dynamic processes on many time scales. Does the energy landscape approach you have used give any guidance on what dynamic processes are functional? I am wondering whether a motion that affects the energy surface in a region away from the path of the reaction coordinate can be considered to be irrelevant for that reaction. The videos of the conformation change mechanisms you have calculated are striking but I am not sure how credible they are. This is partly a reflection of my lack of understanding about the computational procedures you use, but it also reflects my liking for experimental data. So I want to see if there are ways your predictions can be tested experimentally. For example, it should be possible to experimentally determine the effect of increasing pressure on the structure and activity of a protein. Could you, or any of the other theoreticians at this meeting, predict what the effect of pressure would be on a protein? Is it possible that with a change in pressure a different pathway through the landscape is taken so that the activity is dramatically changed?Prof. J. C. Smith responded: Determining which motions in a protein are functional is an extremely important question which will be a major topic for many years to come. The problem can be reduced to finding a reaction coordinate for a particular process and then determining the free energy as a function of this reaction coordinate. Any motions influencing either of these two properties can be considered to be functionally important.Concerning the credibility of the videos, I think this is an appropriate point to emphasize the challenges which face us in this type of computational investigation. Firstly, the conformational space in which we are working is extremely large, and the possibility of multiple pathways for any given functional transition exists. Theoretical methods for characterising the complete accessible collection of pathways need to be developed. Secondly, we do not yet have a reliable way of calculating the potential of mean force (free energy) along the pathways. So the calculations we presented should certainly be considered as first estimations. However, they do present energetically reasonable structural pathways, and as such should be considered as considerable improvements over previous descriptions of protein functional mechanics which were based on mere graphical inspection or linear interpolation between end states. Concerning experimental testing, the challenge works both ways, as we ask experimentalists to devise ways of refining their time-resolved methods so as to provide information on more-and-more rarely populated intermediates. Concerning the pressure question, this one is difficult due to the difficultly of including this effect on kinematic pathway calculations, and the long time scales required to derive information on the perturbations using molecular dynamics. I don't think we are yet in a position to provide calculations of direct pressure effects on large-scale conformational pathways. However, one way of testing the calculated pathways is to predict the effect of mutations, as we have recently done successfully for the annexin pathway I presented here.Prof. Moffat said: In the two “movies” showing the power stroke in muscle contraction, the left hand one shows “flicking” between the two end points; but the right hand one shows a quasi-continuous progression from one end point to the other. Does the right hand one realistically represent the situation (if higher free energy conformers are progressively less-populated and are occupied for shorter and shorter times)?Prof. J. C. Smith replied: The right hand movie is a representation of the reaction coordinate. It is not a movie of the dynamics of the transition, which would, as you state predominantly populate the lower energy states and would also involve stochastic processes. But the right hand movie does give a clear picture of the rate-limiting events along the pathway.Prof. Bürgi asked: What is the probability for the occurrence of a large number of transition states with similar energies?Prof. J. C. Smith answered: This depends on how complicated the conformational pathway is that one wishes to explore, but in the annexin transition that we have already investigated this probability is high. This leads to some interesting questions concerning the kinetics of the overall process.Prof. Wilson said: It is well known that aspects of structure can be “dominated” by solvent structure e.g. humidity-driven conformational changes in DNA. Is it therefore so surprising that your work suggests that dynamics can be solvent-dominated also? In this case, the importance of bound water/solvent dynamics is emphasised, and in real systems is perhaps more vital than the dynamics of the macromolecule itself.Prof. J. C. Smith replied: Our results do not indicate that the solvent dominates protein dynamics, but that it strongly influences it. The internal energy landscape of an isolated protein in vacuum shows interesting features that certainly play a role in determining the internal motions at physiological temperatures. However, these motions are strongly modulated by solvent. In addition to the results presented here we have more exciting new results on this aspect that we will publish soon.Prof. Watts asked: Can your simulations accommodate binary solvent mixtures, for example, water and glucose, water and glycerol and other cryoprotectants? Dehydration is, presumably, a major factor here.Prof. J. C. Smith responded: Yes, certainly. Parametrised potential functions exist for binary solvents and we are now working on simulations of proteins in methanol/water, for example.Prof. Watts asked: How can parts of proteins be “heated” and the others remain “cold”? This seems an intriguing aspect of the simulation protocol.Prof. J. C. Smith answered: We use the Nosé–Hoover dual heatbath method to do this. It is described in references given in the present paper. We have implemented a particularly accurate refinement of this method that regulates temperatures using chains of heatbaths together with a precise method for integrating the equations of motion based on the Liouville operator.Prof. Helliwell said: Stiffness and dynamics would surely be a good place to “fish” to cross-check your calculations (of vibrations of atoms) and observations e.g. bacteriorhodopsin and/or extremophiles. (Published by Zaccai, both cases. See www.ill.fr/pages/menu_g/news/mil_pl1/pages/plen_1_5_GZaccai.htm.)Prof. J. C. Smith replied: Certainly. Indeed we have been doing this for a while and have generally seen good agreement between molecular dynamics and experiment. See, for example, ref. 1 for a review.1 J. C. Smith, in Computational Biochemistry and Biophysics, ed. Becker et al., Dekker, New York, 2001, p. 237–251.Prof. Finney asked: Where is the experimental evidence that thermophiles are “stiffer” than corresponding mesophiles?Prof. Helliwell answered: The work of Zaccai on whole cells (personal communication; see www.ill.fr/pages/menu_g/news/mil_pl1/absracts/JOE-ZACCAI.pdf).Prof. Watts said: From our own solid state NMR studies of ligand binding and protein dynamics, it seems as if ligands are relatively tightly constrained in bonding sites, once bound. Also, it seems as if bacteriorhosopsin is a relatively ‘stiff’ protein, but has more flexibility for functional cycles in the membrane than in the crystal, from the work of the others.Prof. J. C. Smith addressed everyone: Bacteriorhodopsin is an interesting case of a light-driven protein that recently has revealed several intermediates along its photocycle via X-ray crystallography. It is now an excellent challenge for time-resolved computational chemistry.Prof. Watts addressed everyone: For each different photo intermediate of bacteriorhosopsin, a new crystal form seems to be needed and after each intermediate seems to be a mixture of states. This implies that time dependant crystallography on the same crystal, may only be possible in very stable and special circumstances where crystal limits are maintained.Dr Sagi opened the discussion of Dr Hirst's paper: The possibility of exploring the dynamics of specific residues by simulation of the near-UV CD region is very exciting. For example, one can look at specific residues during protein folding and catalysis. In addition, experimental data (also time-resolved) are available.Dr Hirst responded: It would indeed be of interest to explore the near-UV CD of proteins in the context of molecular dynamics simulations. Woody and co-workers have reported calculations of the near-UV CD of proteins1 and the influence of side chains in the far UV was investigated at a previous Faraday Discussion meeting.2 There is still scope to improve the absolute accuracy of calculations of CD in the near-UV.1 N. Sreerama, M. C. Manning, M. E. Powers, J.-X. Zhang, D. P. Goldenberg and R. W. Woody, Biochemistry, 1999, 38, 10814.2 I. B. Grishina and R. W. Woody, Faraday Discuss., 1994, 99, 245.Dr Cole said: In an experiment, there is often the assumption of continuity between two data points, by interpolation, when in principle there could be a very fast process occurring in between. With theory, one can obviously have a lot finer time intervals, although not an infinite number, so there is less risk of ‘missing’ some process/extra intermediate or the like in theory. But how can one select the time interval to be sure that one is not missing something—is there a theoretical test that could be implemented to check for continuity, e.g. akin to the area of pure mathematics where limit functions, sequences, etc. are used to prove continuity, and could any such theory help check experiments where the danger of ‘missing’ some change between two data points is much more possible?Dr Hirst replied: The challenge in molecular dynamics simulations has been attaining longer time scales and much less effort has been focused on very short time scales and issues of continuity. Typical simulations use a time step of one or two femtoseconds. Short time steps are necessary for the stability of the numerical integration that is used to propagate the dynamics.Prof. J. C. Smith asked: What is the time resolution presently accessible with CD? Is it approaching that accessible to molecular dynamics simulation?Dr Hirst answered: Kliger and co-workers have reported time-resolved CD measurements at the picosecond, nanosecond and microsecond time scales. The faster time scales are readily accessible to molecular dynamics simulations.1–31 E. Chen, P. Wittung-Stafshede and D. S. Kliger, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 3811.2 C.-F. Zhang, J. W. Lewis, R. Cerpa, I. D. Kuntz and D. S. Kliger, J. Phys. Chem., 1993, 97, 5499.3 J. W. Lewis, R. A. Goldbeck, X. Xie, R. C. Dunn and J. D. Simon, 1992, 96, 5243.Prof. J. C. Smith said: There has been some debate in the quantum chemical literature as to whether interacting peptide groups electronically polarize each other. Might such effects influence the accuracy of calculated CD spectra?Dr Hirst responded: Polarization effects may indeed influence CD spectra. Our calculations account for interactions between the ground state and the nπ* and ππ* excited states. The polarization effects of higher energy transitions may also be taken into account,1 but we have not investigated this.1 R. W. Woody and I. Tinoco, J. Chem. Phys., 1967, 46, 4927.Prof. Hillier asked: Is it possible to use experimental data on the isolated chromophore to evaluate the important interactions within the protein and to avoid possible inaccuracies in the ab imtio calculation of these quantities?Dr Hirst replied: It is possible to use experimental data to evaluate some of the interactions within the protein. Woody and Sreerama1 have combined experimental data with semi-empirical INDO/S calculations with some success. However, a complete set of the necessary data is not available. For example, it is difficult to get detailed information on the nπ* electronic transition of the amide. This transition is electrically forbidden, but has a transition quadrupole moment, which is required for the calculation of protein CD. The magnetic transition dipole moments are also difficult to determine experimentally. A fully ab initio description of chromophores provides a consistency that is lacking in a mixture of empirical and semi-empirical values.21 R. W. Woody and N. Sreerama, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 2844.2 J. D. Hirst and N. A. Besley, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 2846.Prof. Watts said: (i) There are several components which have so far not been included in your simulations, even though they already seem rather close to experiment. Are you going to include these, e.g; side chains, higher amide excitation levels and solvent effects. (ii) Was the bacteriorhodopsin CD determination made in membranes or detergent? (iii) Do you think the detergent complicates the simulations of CD spectra?Dr Hirst answered: Inclusion of side chains in calculations of protein CD has been investigated,1,2 but no improvement in the accuracy of the calculations has been found. Semi-empirical calculations were used to model the electronic structure of side chains. We have realized significant improvements in the accuracy of protein CD calculations, by describing the amide chromophore using modern ab initio methods instead of semi-empirical calculations. One might anticipate that a similar approach to side chains is needed and we are currently working on this.We have characterized some of the higher excited states of the amide.3 Including these states did not increase the accuracy of the protein CD calculations. There may be charge transfer states that couple with the higher excited states and it may be necessary to include all these states in order to improve the accuracy. We are currently working on including solvent around the protein in the CD calculations. Earlier work by Applequist and Bode4 did not find a large effect.The CD spectrum of bacteriorhodopsin that we compared our calculations with was actually determined in water.5 Fasman notes that it is distorted due to light scattering. The agreement between our calculated spectrum and the measured spectrum is not as good as for the other proteins. We should investigate this further, by comparing our calculated CD with experimental spectra measured under different conditions, such as after sonification in suspension,6,7 and in detergent.81 R. W. Woody and N. Sreerama, J. Chem. Phys., 1999, 111, 2844.2 N. A. Besley and J. D. Hirst, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1999, 121, 9636.3 N. A. Besley and J. D. Hirst, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 10791.4 J. Applequist and K. A. Bode, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1999, 103, 1767.5 G. D. Fasman, Circular Dichroism and the Conformational Analysis of Biomolecules, Plenum Press, New York, 1996.6 M. M. Long, D. W. Urry and W. Stoeckenius, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 1977, 75, 725.7 D. Mao and B. A. Wallace, Biochemistry, 1984, 23, 2667.8 J. A. Reynolds and W. Stoecknius, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA, 1977, 74, 2803.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2003
Table Content:

 		 

 		 

1	Endothermic	<5
2	Isoenergetic/exothermic	>7

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2003
