Silicon-nanoparticle-based composites for advanced lithium-ion battery anodes  - Nanoscale (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C9NR10652A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C9NR10652A
(Review Article)
Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 7461-7484Silicon-nanoparticle-based composites for advanced lithium-ion battery anodes

        
          
            Yang 
            Yang
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Yuan
          
          
        
      *, 
      
        
          
            Wenquan 
            Kang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yintong 
            Ye
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuhang 
            Yuan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Zhiqiang 
            Qiu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chun 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiaoqing 
            Zhang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Yuzhi 
            Ke
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Yong 
            Tang
          
        
      
School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, Guangdong, China. E-mail: mewyuan@scut.edu.cn
Received 
      17th December 2019
    , Accepted 19th March 2020First published on 19th March 2020AbstractLithium-ion batteries (LIBs) play an important role in modern society. The low capacity of graphite cannot meet the demands of LIBs calling for high power and energy densities. Silicon (Si) is one of the most promising materials instead of graphite, because of its high theoretical capacity, low discharge voltage, low cost, etc. However, Si shows low conductivity of both ions and electrons and exhibits a severe volume change during cycles. Fabricating nano-sized Si and Si-based composites is an effective method to enhance the electrochemical performance of LIB anodes. Using a small size of Si nanoparticles (SiNPs) is likely to avoid the cracking of this material. One critical issue is to disclose different types and electrochemical effects of various coupled materials in the Si-based composites for anode fabrication and optimization. Hence, this paper reviews diverse SiNP-based composites for advanced LIBs from the perspective of composition and electrochemical effects. Almost all kinds of materials that have been coupled with SiNPs for LIB applications are summarized, along with their electrochemical influences on the composites. The integrated materials, including carbon materials, metals, metal oxides, polymers, Si-based materials, transition metal nitrides, carbides, dichalcogenides, alloys, and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), are comprehensively presented.Yang YangYang Yang received his BS degree at Hebei University of Science and Technology in 2015, and started studying for his Master's degree at the School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of South China University of Technology (SCUT) in 2017. He is currently a PhD student at the School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of SCUT under the supervision of Professor Wei Yuan. His current research mainly focuses on the field of electrochemical energy storage materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries.Wei YuanWei Yuan is a professor of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of SCUT. Prof. Yuan received his Ph.D. in mechanical manufacturing in 2012 from SCUT. He is also the director of Guangdong Engineering and Technology Research Center of Advanced Electric Vehicle Power Supply and Thermal Control System, a member of the Battery Committee of the Chinese Electrical Society and a senior member of the Chinese Mechanical Engineering Society. His current research interests are focused on fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, micro-reactors and surface functional structures for enhanced heat transfer.
1. Introduction
Lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) have been vastly used for consumer electronics, electrical vehicles, and energy storage combined with wind, solar and biological energies, etc.1 With the fast development of modern society, the demand for LIBs with a high electrochemical performance is increasing. Typically, a LIB is comprised of layered components including two electrodes (an anode and a cathode), an electrolyte (liquid or solid) and a separator.2 By optimizing each component, the electrochemical performance of LIBs can be improved. For electrode preparation, a popular method is coating a slurry onto a current collector followed by thermal treatment to remove the solvents. The slurry is normally prepared by simply mixing solvents (e.g., N-methyl pyrrolidone and water), binders (e.g., poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVDF) and carboxymethylcellulose sodium (CMCs)), active materials (e.g., graphite and LFP) and functional additives (e.g., electrical conductors such as acetylene black and Ag). The active materials are the major source participating in the electrochemical reactions for energy storage and conversion, and can be even made of only one material with good electrochemical reactivity, such as pure graphite.3 The performance of this type of single-component active material can be well optimized by modifying the material structure.4 Remarkably, combining the single active material with other active or inactive materials can endow the electrodes with a higher electrochemical performance than the single-material samples.4,5 Sometimes, a binder is not necessary in the electrodes, e.g. binder-free electrodes, which is beneficial for enhancing the specific energy density.6 The combining process is to incorporate the materials to form composites through physical or chemical methods rather than simple mixing. Hence, synthesizing composites is an effective method to promote excellent electrochemical performances of the electrodes for LIBs.7 Moreover, when the same pristine active material is used, different coupled materials may exert different electrochemical effects on the final synthesized composites. For example, when Fe2O3 with a theoretical capacity of 1006 mA h g−1 is used as a substrate material, the carbon coating in carbon-coated Fe2O3 helps enhance the electrical conductivity of the carbon@Fe2O3 composite, whereas the MoS2 coating with a low electrical conductivity in MoS2-coated Fe2O3 contributes mainly towards improving the structural integrity of the MoS2@Fe2O3 composite.8,9 Therefore, it is important to determine the different types and electrochemical effects of various coupled materials in the composites so as to optimize the design and fabrication of the composited electrode.
For the anodes of LIBs, most of the commercial active materials are carbon, especially in the form of graphite with a theoretical capacity of 372 mA h g−1.10 This low capacity cannot meet the demands for high-power and high-energy applications. Plenty of materials for LIB anodes have been investigated, among which Si is regarded as a promising material to replace graphite, since it has the highest theoretical capacity of about 3600 mA h g−1, as ever reported at room temperature.11 It exhibits a low delithiation potential of around 0.4 V vs. Li/Li+.12 The lithiation voltage of Si is also comparable to that of graphite (between 0 and 0.4 V vs. Li/Li+).13 Moreover, Si is the second richest element on Earth; so it is of low cost. Owing to the above merits, combining Si-based materials (e.g., Si and SiO) with graphite comes to be a popular method that has been commercialized for meeting the high-energy demands of diverse industries.14 However, Si shows a low conductivity of both ions and electrons.15 Worse still, the volume expansion and extraction of Si after full lithiation and delithiation reach an excess level of nearly 300% at room temperature, which leads to severe pulverization of the electrode during cycles.16 As a result, the detached Si materials lose electrical contact with the current collector, consequently resulting in low initial coulombic efficiency (ICE) and poor cycling performance.17
Various nanosized Si materials have been fabricated to solve the above problems, namely Si nanoparticles (SiNPs), Si nanowires (SiNWs), Si nanotubes (SiNTs), Si thin films (SiTFs) etc.18 Compared to bulk Si, nanosized Si materials have many advantages.19 For example, all these nano-scale Si materials show significantly enhanced damage tolerance that can help accommodate the severe volume changes during cycles, thus leading to improved cycle life. Moreover, these nano-structured materials have a much higher surface area, which provides shortened ionic and electronic diffusion pathways and allows for rapid lithiation and delithiation, consequently leading to enhanced electrode kinetics and improved rate capability.18,20 Besides, SiNWs and SiNTs can provide continuous one-dimensional (1D) electron conductive pathways to strengthen charge transport, and these 1D nanomaterials can grow directly on a current collector to get rid of binders and electrical conductors, hence leading to enhanced energy densities.21,22 In addition, porous bulk Si materials are also widely investigated to solve the problem of severe volume expansion. The porous structure helps buffer the volume change during cycling without losing the structural integrity of the electrode.21 Furthermore, the existing pores also assist in improving electrolyte wetting and charge carrier diffusion.23 However, except for SiNPs, the fracture of these low-dimensional Si materials and porous bulk Si cannot be totally avoided during cycling. Notably, using a small size of the SiNPs (e.g. below 90 nm) can help mitigate the cracking of the SiNPs.24,25 Moreover, by coupling the SiNPs with various additives, the electrochemical performance of SiNP-based anodes can be further improved. Therefore, it is of great significance to optimize the SiNP-based materials, especially SiNP-based composites, in order to obtain the desired battery performance and accelerate the commercialization of Si materials for LIB anodes.
With this background, it is important to determine the types and electrochemical effects of various coupled materials in the SiNP-based composites for fabricating and optimizing the SiNP-based materials for advanced LIBs. Many previous papers have reported Si-based materials for LIB applications.13,26–32 For example, Cui et al. briefly reviewed the SiNWs-based anodes for LIBs.13 The fabrication methods and certain applications of different dimensional nanostructured Si materials, including SiNPs, SiNWs, Si nanosheets and porous Si for LIBs were investigated by Sun et al.29 Mai et al. narrated the synthesis methods and the electrochemical properties of silicon oxide-based materials as anodes for LIBs.31 Li et al. discussed Si-based LIB anode materials, focusing primarily on the shell-containing nanostructures and the Si/graphite-based composites.32 However, there is hardly a dedicated article systematically reviewing the SiNP-based composites for LIBs from the perspective of composition and function of the coupled materials. To this end, this review aims to provide an overview of almost all kinds of coupled materials for fabricating SiNP-based composites, along with their electrochemical effects on the composites. The coupled materials, including carbon materials, metals, metal oxides, polymers, Si-based materials, transition metal nitrides, carbides, dichalcogenides, alloys, and metal–organic frameworks (MOFs), are comprehensively summarized, as shown in Fig. 1. Finally, the challenges and future perspectives of the SiNP-based composites for advanced LIBs are briefly presented.
 Fig. 1  Schematic of SiNP-based composites including favorable electrochemical effects of coupled materials. 
2. SiNPs/carbon materials
Carbon is the most favorable material combined with SiNPs for LIBs because it is naturally soft and conductive. Many carbon allotropes, such as amorphous carbon (AC),33–37 graphene38 and carbon nanotubes (CNTs)39,40 have been composited with SiNPs to achieve a higher battery performance. In the early time of carbon utilization for SiNP-based LIB anodes, the SiNPs are mostly dispersed in the carbonaceous matrix.41,42 Owing to the improved electrical conductivity and buffered volume change, the cycling performance of the electrodes can be improved to some extent.43 However, the issues of continuous agglomeration of the SiNPs and persistent cracking/regeneration of the SEI films are still difficult to address, and are likely to cause severe performance degradation.41 Carbon coating was then proposed as an effective solution and has been intensively reported.44–46 The carbon layers encapsulating SiNPs are beneficial for enhancing the electrical conductivity of the anodes by providing plenty of electrical contact points and shortening the electron transport pathways, thus alleviating electrical insulation and enhancing the electrode kinetics during cycles.47–49 The carbon coating can also separate the electrolyte and SiNPs. This helps in suppressing the formation of the SEI and reducing the consumption of active materials, consequently improving the ICE and cycling performance of the electrodes.50 Besides, the carbon coating can restrain and buffer the big volume change of SiNPs and limit their aggregation during repeated lithiation/delithiation processes. This is conducive to maintaining the structural integrity and enhancing the cyclability of the SiNP-based anodes.51 It is noteworthy that using a full coating is necessary because the uncoated parts of the active materials are still exposed to the electrolyte, which may further aggravate the capacity decay of the electrodes after long-term cycles.52–54
The thickness of the carbon coating also has great effects on the battery performance. The SiNPs with different thicknesses of the carbon coating produce distinct electrochemical performances. Luo et al. studied the effects of the carbon coating and the coating thickness on the Li storage capability of SiNPs (see Fig. 2a).54 For comparison, the electrode was prepared by mixing 60 wt% active material (pristine Si nanoparticles or Si@C core–shell nanoparticles), 10 wt% Super P, 10 wt% multi-walled carbon nanotubes, and 20 wt% CMC. The pristine SiNPs have an average diameter of 80 nm. The carbon coating derives from phenolic resin. By changing the concentration of the precursor solution, the coating thickness can be controlled. The electrochemical performances of SiNPs with coating thicknesses of 0, 5, 10, and 15 nm, marked as SiNPs, Si@5C, Si@10C and Si@15C, respectively, are tested within a voltage range of 0.005–1.5 V. The mass ratios of Si in all carbon-coated SiNPs are calculated to be 90.3 wt%, 81.7 wt% and 51.2 wt% for Si@5C, Si@10C, Si@15C, respectively. At a current density of 0.5 A g−1, Si@5C shows the highest ICE (85.8%, 3774 mA h g−1 discharge capacity) compared to the SiNPs (72.6%, 3105 mA h g−1 discharge capacity), Si@10C (74.9%, 3394 mA h g−1 discharge capacity) and Si@15C (72.1%, 2044 mA h g−1 discharge capacity). This indicates that the ICE of the SiNPs can be significantly improved with an optimal carbon coating thickness. A thinner coating may lead to a higher ICE due to the increased ratio of the active materials and decreased irreversible reactions between the carbon coating and electrolyte. Besides, Si@10C exhibits the highest cycling performance with a discharge capacity of 1006 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 0.5 A g−1 and a high CE of 99.5%. By comparison, the samples of Si@5C and Si@15C only maintain a discharge capacity of 443 mA h g−1 after 240 cycles and 494 mA h g−1 after 477 cycles under the same test conditions, respectively (see Fig. 2b and c). This demonstrates that the carbon coating cannot effectively maintain the structural integrity of the electrodes during long-term cycles when an extremely small thickness is used. In contrast, using an excessively thick coating may restrict the penetration of Li+ into SiNPs. Remarkably, Si@10C demonstrates an optimal discharge capacity of 1209 mA h g−1 even at a higher current density of 16.8 A g−1 (see Fig. 2d).
 Fig. 2  (a) Optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of Si@C core–shell nanoparticles with controllable coating thicknesses of 0, 2, 5, 10, 15, and 25 nm, respectively; (b) cycling performance (based on the total weight of electrodes) and (c) galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles for selected cycles of Si NPs, Si@5C, Si@10C, and Si@15C electrodes at a current density of 0.5 A g−1; and (d) rate capability of Si NPs, Si@5C, Si@10C and Si@15C electrodes at various current densities ranging from 0.14 to 16.8 A g−1. (Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright© 2016, Elsevier Ltd.) 
In addition to AC, graphene is often utilized as the coating material for SiNPs due to its 2D structure.55–58 Additionally, graphene also possesses a large specific area with light weight and excellent mechanical flexibility. It also functions as the active material in the LIB.59 Hence, the graphene-coated SiNPs mostly show an excellent electrochemical performance. For example, graphene-bonded and -encapsulated SiNPs were synthesized by Wen et al.60 The composite contains 72 wt% Si mixed with 10 wt% sodium alginate to form the electrodes. The final mass loading of the composite is about 0.5 mg cm−2. The electrode delivers a capacity of 1900 mA h g−1 at 1 C with an ICE of 60%, considering the total mass of graphene and Si. This material maintains 76% of its initial capacity after 120 cycles. Even at 10 C, a discharge capacity of 1000 mA h g−1 can be obtained. The graphene coating in the composite can effectively buffer the large volume change of SiNPs during cycles, facilitate the transport of electrons, and inhibit the agglomeration of SiNPs during continuous cycling, providing an enhanced electrochemical performance of the graphene-coated SiNPs.
The structure of the aforementioned carbon-coated SiNPs can be named a “core–shell” structure. If the carbon coating on the surface of the SiNPs is not stiff enough, it tends to break during continuous cycles and then lose efficacy.61 Moreover, the coating can reduce the volume change of SiNPs during cycling rather than eliminate this problem. Hence, the formed SEI is likely to rupture in the case of a big volume change. Aiming at resolving the above issue, SiNPs encapsulated in carbon tubes have been reported by many researchers.62–64 A schematic diagram of fabricating this structure is shown in Fig. 3a.62 The mass portion of Si in the SiNPs@C composite is about 50%. The void space between the SiNPs and internal surface of the carbon tubes helps buffer the volume change of the SiNPs during repeated lithiation/delithiation processes.63 Therefore, both the carbon tube shell and the formed SEI on the external surface of the carbon tube can be well stabilized. The composite is mixed with Super P and a poly(acrylic acid) (PAA) binder to fabricate the electrodes with a mass ratio of 70:15:15. The mass loading of the composite in the electrode is about 0.6 mg cm−2. It demonstrates far superior cyclability compared to the pure SiNPs (see Fig. 3b). When cycled at 0.2C (0.24 A g−1), the SiNP@C composite shows a reversible discharge capacity of about 1250 mA h g−1 with no capacity fading at all for 100 cycles. Nevertheless, the pristine SiNPs maintain only 11.7% of the original capacity. Moreover, the composite delivers charge and discharge capacities of 1491 and 1305 mA h g−1 at 0.137 A g−1, respectively, corresponding to an ICE of 87.5%. With the increase of the C rate from C/10 (0.122 A g−1) to 1C (1.22 A g−1) and then 12C (9.75 A g−1), the discharge capacity of the composite decays from 1381 to 1195 and then 721 mA h g−1, respectively (see Fig. 3c). However, the two ends of carbon are open, which enables the electrolyte to penetrate into the carbon tube and come in direct contact with the SiNPs. Meanwhile, the state of the SiNPs in the carbon tube is still unclear.
 Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the fabrication processes of SiNPs encapsulated in carbon tubes; (b) comparison of cycling performances of SiNP@C composites and pure SiNPs at C/5; and (c) rate capability of SiNP@C composites. (Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright© 2011, American Chemical Society.) (d) Schematic of yolk–shell SiNP/carbon composites; (e) cycling performance of yolk–shell SiNPs/carbon between 0.01 and 1 V. The rate was C/10 for one cycle, then C/3 for 10 cycles, and 1C for the later cycles; and (f) voltage profiles of yolk–shell SiNP/carbon composites under different C-rates. (Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright© 2012, American Chemical Society.) 
To overcome the above issues, the so-called “yolk–shell” structure of the SiNP/carbon composites is proposed,61,65,66 as shown in Fig. 3d.67 This interesting structure has many functional merits. The void space between the SiNPs and the carbon shell can be accurately tuned by controlling the synthesis processes. During the cycling operation, the SiNPs can swell and shrink within the void space without rupturing the carbon shell, which is conducive to maintaining the structural integrity of the electrodes and the SEI on the shell surface. Moreover, the seamless outer shell can assist in restraining the consumption of the inner SiNPs by reducing the side reactions with the electrolyte. Even though there initially exist some small pores in the carbon shell, the SEI generated during cycles can help realize direct insulation of the SiNPs from the electrolyte. These factors combine to improve the ICE and cyclability of the electrodes. Besides, the carbon shell with excellent conductivity for both electrons and ions allows for good kinetics. The Li ions can diffuse through the carbon shell to the inner SiNPs. Despite the small contact area between the SiNPs and the internal surface of the carbon shell, the electrode can work well at reasonable current densities. The yolk–shell SiNP@carbon nanocomposite first synthesized by Cui et al. delivers a discharge capacity of 1500 mA h g−1 at 1 C after 1000 cycles with a capacity retention of 74% and a CE of 99.84% (see Fig. 3e).67 Even at 4C, the composite still exhibits a discharge capacity of more than 600 mA h g−1 (see Fig. 3f). The weight percentage of Si in the composite is 71%. The electrode is comprised of 65 wt% Si@carbon, 20 wt% carbon black (Super P) and 15 wt% sodium alginate binder. However, the ICE of the composite at 0.1 C is approximately 60%, which is ascribed to the initial SEI formation on the carbon surface. In this regard, prelithiation seems to be an effective solution to enhance ICE. The SiNP@graphene composites with a yolk–shell structure have been also widely investigated.68,69 Since such composites have similar merits to the above yolk–shell SiNP@carbon composites, they also exhibit good cell performances. For example, the yolk–shell SiNP@graphene composite was prepared by Li et al.69 The composite with 71.6 wt% Si, carbon black (super P) and PVDF are mixed at a weight ratio of 60:20:20 to form the electrode which demonstrates a reversible discharge capacity of 1775 mA h g−1 at a current density of 1 A g−1 after 750 cycles with an ICE of about 68%. The CE increases quickly to nearly 100% at around the 25th cycle, and remains stable for the rest of the cycles. This highlights a gradual activation process of Si. Even at 10 and 20 A g−1, the battery can retain a discharge capacity of 651 and 451 mA h g−1, respectively. It is worth noting that the void space should be tailored to be large enough to accommodate the full expansion of the inner SiNPs, but small enough to maximize the volumetric energy density.
In addition to the use of only one kind of carbon material, the SiNPs can be combined with several different carbon materials to make use of their synergetic effects. Various composites such as SiNPs@carbon/CNFs,70,71 SiNPs@reduced graphene oxide (rGO)/CNTs,72 SiNPs@carbon/rGO,73 carbon@(SiNPs/CNTs),74 and Si@carbon@CNT@carbon75 have been reported. A SiNP@carbon/CNF composite was fabricated by Xu et al. using a combined electrospray/electrospinning technique (Fig. 4a–c).70 The composite contains 72 wt% Si. In this composite, the carbon-coated SiNPs are evenly and tightly anchored on the CNF network matrix. This free-standing structure gets rid of binders, electrical conductors and current collectors with substantial weight, which makes it easier to achieve a high specific energy density. Moreover, both the CNT conductive network and the carbon coating provide plenty of electrical contact points and carrier diffusion pathways inside the electrode, which not only promotes fast transport of electrons and enhances electrode kinetics, but also ensures electrical integrity of the electrode. Besides, both the carbon coating and large void space in the CNT network matrix can alleviate the large volume change of SiNPs during cycles. The void space also enhances electrolyte penetration to the surface of SiNPs to achieve fast kinetics. Furthermore, the tightly connected flexible CNT network and carbon coating combine to stabilize the electrode stability, which is conducive to prolonging its cycle life. Under the coupled effects of the dual carbon materials, the SiNP@carbon/CNF composite, with a Si–C mass loading of 1.7 mg cm−2, delivers a discharge capacity of about 500 mA h g−1 even at 8 A g−1 (Fig. 4d). Moreover, the cell is still able to deliver a reversible discharge capacity of approximately 840 mA h g−1 after 600 cycles at a current density of 500 mA g−1 within the voltage window of 0.02–1.5 V (Fig. 4e). The capacity loss is less than 0.079% per cycle for 600 cycles. Besides, the ICE of the composite with a Si–C mass loading of 1.3 mg cm−2 reaches about 80%, corresponding to a delithiation capacity of 1996 mA h g−1 and a reversible capacity of 1589 mA h g−1.
 Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of (a) the synthesis processes and structures of SiNPs@carbon/CNFs (b) before and (c) after carbonization; (d) rate capability and (e) cycling performance of SiNP@carbon/CNF composite electrodes with a mass loading of 1.7 mg cm−2. (Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright© 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) 
The aforementioned composites are based on SiNPs and pure carbon materials. The pristine carbon materials can be combined with other materials to further improve the electrochemical performance of the SiNP-based electrodes. In this regard, element doping is a common and effective method to enhance the electrode performance. A lot of element-doped carbon materials composited with SiNPs for LIB anodes have been studied, such as N-doped carbon@SiNPs,49,75,76 N-doped graphene@SiNPs,77,78 N-doped CNF/SiNPs,79 and graphene@N,P,S-codoped graphene@SiNPs.80 N-Doped carbon materials are mostly studied because of the similar atomic radius of N to that of C.75 The effects of the doping elements on the performance of carbon are similar to the above-mentioned rationale. On the one hand, better electron and ion diffusivity of the carbon materials can be achieved after doping. On the other hand, the electrochemical reactivity and the mechanical strength of element-doped carbon@SiNPs tend to be better than those of pristine carbon@SiNPs.75–80 Therefore, improved electrochemical performance of the element-doped carbon@SiNP composites can be achieved. For instance, Liu et al. fabricated the N-doped porous carbon-coated SiNPs delivering a reversible discharge capacity of 1565 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.5 A g−1 with an ICE of 84%.49 However, the pure Si electrode suffers from rapid capacity drop from 3526.4 to 416 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles under the same testing conditions. Moreover, the composite maintains a discharge capacity of 1086 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1 even after 400 cycles. The mass percentage of Si in the composite is calculated to be around 78 wt%. The final tested electrodes, with the active materials of about 0.6 mg cm−2, are comprised of 60 wt% active materials, 20 wt% acetylene black and 20 wt% sodium alginate.
Pristine SiNPs can be also doped with various elements (e.g., B, P, Co and Mg) to achieve better electrochemical performance.81–84 Element-doped Si materials show good ability in improving the electrical conductivity.85–88 For example, P-doped porous SiNPs were investigated by Lv et al.89 The tested electrodes are a mixture of 60 wt% active materials, 20 wt% carbon black and 20 wt% CMC binder. Owing to the benefits of the porous structure and P doping, the SiNPs with a porosity of 45.8% and 3.7 atom% doping show a discharge capacity of 2000 mA h g−1 at 0.5 C after 100 cycles. Even at 5 C, a discharge capacity of 1600 mA h g−1 is still maintained. Nevertheless, the discharge capacity of pure Si particles declines below 1000 mA h g−1 rapidly after only 60 cycles. Besides, a stable cyclability of over 1500 mA h g−1 is retained by the carbon-coated P-doped porous SiNPs after 940 cycles at a current density of 1 C with an ICE of about 85.4%. This result implies the beneficial effects of the combination of material doping and compositing.
3. SiNPs/metals
Metallic materials, e.g. Cu, Ag, Ni, Co, Fe, etc., with both higher electrical conductivity and mechanical strength than carbon materials, have also been composited with SiNPs for LIBs.90–92 Among these metals, Cu and Ag are the most investigated metals, while others seem to attract less interest. The effects of these metals on the electrochemical performance of the SiNP/metal composites are generally the same. Like the utilization of carbon materials, the SiNPs are also dispersed in the metal matrix or coated with the metal particles. To reveal the effects of metals, Cu and Ag are taken as examples in this section.
Cu-Deposited mesoporous SiNPs were fabricated by magnesiothermic reduction and electroless deposition.93 In the composite, Cu nanoparticles (CuNPs) with a diameter of 3–4 nm are homogeneously distributed inside the mesoporous SiNPs. Most of the mesopores are filled with CuNPs. As is well known, Cu is electrochemically inactive in the presence of Li+. Hence, it is quite suited to be a stable mechanical support for SiNPs during cycles. The volume change and agglomeration of SiNPs can be also restrained by the evenly dispersed CuNPs with excellent mechanical strength. The repeated generation of the SEI on the surface of the SiNPs is suppressed and the stability of the formed SEI is enhanced due to the presence of CuNPs, compared to the pristine mesoporous SiNPs. These positive effects of Cu are all good for enhancing the structural integrity, cycling performance and CE of the SiNP-based composite electrodes. It is worth emphasizing that Cu with excellent electrical conductivity can accelerate the transport of electrons and provide more conductive pathways inside the SiNPs, facilitating the reaction kinetics during cycles and consequently leading to excellent rate capability of this SiNP/Cu composite electrode. Based on such superiority, the mesoporous SiNP/Cu composite exhibits a remarkable electrochemical performance higher than the pure mesoporous SiNPs and mesoporous SiNP/carbon composite. The above electrodes with a mass loading of about 0.45 mg cm−2 are fabricated by mixing 70% active material, 10% conductive additive (Super P) and 20% CMC binder by weight. The mesoporous SiNP/Cu composite electrode shows the first discharge and charge capacity of 2100 and 1887 mA h g−1 at 200 mA g−1, respectively, corresponding to a CE of 89.8%. However, the ICE of the pure mesoporous SiNPs tested in the same case is 82.8% with discharge and charge capacities of 3539 and 2860 mA h g−1, respectively. In view of the cycling performance, the SiNP/Cu composite demonstrates a discharge capacity of 1569 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at a current density of 1000 mA g−1 with a CE of 99.4%. The discharge capacity of the SiNP/carbon composite is 1389 mA h g−1 under the same test conditions. In contrast, the discharge capacity of pristine SiNPs decays severely during cycles. In terms of rate capability, the SiNP/Cu electrode delivers a reversible capacity of 1837, 1725, 1672, and 1598 mA h g−1 at 200, 500, 1000, and 2000 mA g−1, respectively. A reversible discharge capacity of 1786 mA h g−1 is obtained when the current density is changed to the initial value of 200 mA g−1 afterwards, highlighting its remarkable rate capability. However, the pure SiNPs and SiNP/C composites show a much lower capacity of 623 and 936 mA h g−1, respectively, at 2000 mA g−1. Moreover, the discharge capacities of the two electrodes are not recovered to the values related to the initial current density of 200 mA g−1, showing a poor rate performance. Additionally, Cu accounts for 25 wt% of the above SiNP/Cu composite. This ratio is proven to be the optimum value among different Cu concentrations varying from 18 to 56 wt%, based on the specific capacity and cyclability obtained through the preliminary cycle test. Thus, the usage of Cu should be optimized when it is applied in the SiNP-based electrodes. This provides a guideline for design of other SiNP-based composites for LIBs.
In addition, the Cu-coated SiNPs can also lead to excellent electrochemical performance under the positive effects of Cu and the coating structure. The Cu-coated amorphous SiNPs with a molar copper loading ratio of 50:1 (Si:H) were fabricated by Murugesan et al. through a polyol reduction method (see Fig. 5a and b).94 As can be seen, the Cu coating is chemically connected with the amorphous Si particles, which facilitates good electrical integrity of the electrode during continuous lithiation/delithiation processes. The Cu coating also helps restrain the decomposition of electrolytes to form the SEI and enhance the electron transport inside the electrodes. The final electrodes are comprised of cu-coated SiNPs, carbon super-P and PVDF in a mass ratio of 70:20:10 ratios. Owing to the benefits of Cu coating, the Cu-coated amorphous SiNPs exhibit significantly improved lithium storage capacity, which is seven-fold as high as that of the pristine amorphous SiNPs (see Fig. 5c).
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis and (b) scanning transmission electron microscopy image of Cu-coated SiNPs; (c) comparison of electrochemical performances of Cu-coated SiNPs and pristine SiNPs. (Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright© 2012, American Chemical Society.) (d) Schematic of Ag-coated macroporous SiNPs; (e) cyclability of 3D macroporous Si, Ag-coated 3D macroporous Si, and commercial SiNPs; (f) rate capabilities of 3D macroporous Si and a Ag coated 3D macroporous Si electrode. (Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright© 2010, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication processes for HPSi; (h) discharge capacities of the HPSi-Ag nanocomposite (black), HPSi-carbon nanocomposite (brown), HPSi nanoparticles (blue), and commercial SiNPs (ca. 100 nm, red) at 500 mA g−1; and (i) rate capability of HPSi-Ag at different current densities. (Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright© 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) 
Ag has a higher electrical conductivity than Cu.95 The SiNP/Ag composites have also been extensively investigated.90,96–99 The Ag-coated SiNPs were earlier studied by Yang et al., suggesting that the Ag particles deposited on the surface of SiNPs were conducive to accelerating the electron transport inside the electrode by providing many conductive networks.96 It is important to realize uniform distribution of Ag particles so as to maintain the electrical integrity of the electrode during cycles, and suppress the SEI formation and aggregation of SiNPs. As a result, the SiNPs with an Ag coating exhibit an outstanding performance. The Ag-coated SiNPs contain 90 wt% Si. The final electrodes are mixed with 60% active materials, 20% PVDF binder and 20% carbon black, and demonstrate an ICE of 83.4% and a discharge capacity of around 800 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles. It is worth noting that the more evenly dispersed Ag particles on the surface of SiNPs promote a better cycling performance of the electrode.
The SiNPs in the above composite form a solid phase without any pores. Introducing void space into the SiNPs is an effective method to enhance the performance of the SiNPs. Yu et al. fabricated Ag-coated macroporous SiNPs to take advantage of both the Ag coating and the porous structure (see Fig. 5d).97 The Si–Ag composite is comprised of about 92 wt% Si and 8 wt% Ag. It is shown that the Ag particles are connected with each other on the surface to form a conductive network in the composite, which is beneficial for improving the electrode kinetics during cycles. The macropores are able to accommodate the volume change of SiNPs after lithiation and alleviate the inner stress. This effect greatly enhances the structural stability of the electrode. The internal pores also allow for the penetration of electrolytes, thereby shortening the diffusion pathways for Li+. Under the coupled effects of the Ag coating and macropores, the composite finally yields a better electrochemical performance than both pure porous SiNPs and commercial solid SiNPs (see Fig. 5e and f). All the electrodes are produced by mixing 80 wt% active material, 10 wt% Super P carbon black and 10 wt% poly(vinylidene fluoride) binder. The Ag-coated macroporous SiNPs yield an enhanced discharge capacity of 1163 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 0.2 C with a capacity retention of 82% and an ICE of 81.4% (see Fig. 5e). In contrast, the ICE of the pristine macroporous SiNPs is 73.7%, and it only maintains 69% of the initial discharge capacity under the same test conditions. The Ag-coated macroporous SiNPs deliver reversible capacities of about 2122, 1610, and 800 mA h g−1 at 1 C, 2 C, and 4 C, respectively, while the Ag-free porous SiNPs only show 1930 (1 C), 1430 (2 C), and 590 (4 C) mA h g−1, respectively (see Fig. 5f).
The electrochemical performance of the Ag-coated SiNPs can be further improved by creating a hollow structure based on the SiNPs. Chen et al. fabricated hollow porous Ag-coated SiNPs for LIBs, as shown in Fig. 5g.99 The as-prepared hollow porous SiNPs (HPSi) are coated with Ag particles, in which the mass ratio of Si reaches 92.3%. Under the coupled effects of the Ag particles and hollow porous structure, the composite exhibits a reversible capacity of nearly 3000 mA h g−1 at 0.5 A g−1 after 100 cycles (see Fig. 5h). Even at 4 A g−1, a discharge capacity of over 2000 mA h g−1 is still obtained (see Fig. 5i).
4. SiNPs/metal oxides
Likewise, the SiNPs composited with metal oxides also have great potential to improve the electrochemical performance of a battery. Plenty of metal oxides have been combined with SiNPs for LIBs, such as W18O49,100 Cu2O,101 CuO,102 Co3O4,103 MoO3,104 TiO2,105,106 Fe2O3,107 Al2O3,108 indium tin oxide (ITO),109 ZrO2,110etc.
Almost all of these metal oxides belong to transition metal oxides (TMOs) that can provide much higher theoretical capacity than graphite when they are used to form the anode.111 The Li storage mechanism of TMOs is based on the conversion reactions. During the lithiation process, the TMOs are transformed to transition metals (TMs) accompanied by the formation of Li2O. During the delithiation process, the TMs and Li2O react to form the TMOs and Li+, respectively. However, the latter reaction is partially irreversible. In this case, the TMs and Li2O are likely to remain in the electrodes after cycles. Additionally, the TMOs also suffer from a severe volume change during lithiation and delithiation processes. Compared with Si, the theoretical capacity of the TMOs is much lower. Hence, the combination of SiNPs and TMOs aims at buffering the volume change of SiNPs in the presence of TMOs, as well as enhancing the structural stability of the electrodes.100,101,103,104 Moreover, the TMO coating or matrix around the SiNPs helps prevent direct contact of electrolytes and SiNPs so as to suppress side reactions. The TMs formed in the SiNPs/TMOs also help enhance the electrical conductivity and improve the electrode kinetics. Another noteworthy fact is that the SEI film mostly includes Li2O. Therefore, the formation of SEI films on the SiNPs may be changed owing to the presence of Li2O deriving from the conversion reactions between the TMOs and Li+.
The use of TMOs can effectively improve the performance of the SiNP/TMO composites. For example, the Cu2+1O-coated SiNPs were fabricated by Zhang et al. using the hydrolysis method.101 The mass ratio of Cu2+1O and Si in the final composite is about 1:3. The composite particles, super P, graphite, vapor growth carbon fiber (VGCF) and polyacrylic acid (PA) are mixed at a ratio of 6:1:1:1:1 to form the electrode. It is confirmed that the Cu2+1O coating helps alleviate the volume change of SiNPs during the insertion/extraction processes of lithium ions, enhance the electrical conductivity, and stabilize the SEI with a reduced resistance. The composite shows an initial reversible capacity of 3063 mA h g−1 with an ICE of 82.9% at 0.3 A g−1. With this structure, the cell delivers a reversible capacity of 1060 mA h g−1 at 300 mA g−1 after 350 cycles, corresponding to a CE of more than 99.8%. At a higher current density of 800 mA g−1, an initial discharge capacity of 3329 mA h g−1 and an ICE of 83.5% are achieved. It retains a capacity of more than 1110 mA h g−1 with a CE of ≥97% after 100 cycles. In contrast, the pure SiNPs only exhibit a discharge capacity of 613.6 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 300 mA g−1. With regard to rate capability, the composite demonstrates a reversible capacity of 931.9 mA h g−1 at 2 A g−1. However, the value of the pure SiNPs under the same conditions is only 637.8 mA h g−1.
Among various TMOs, TiO2 is more preferable than other TMOs because of its excellent structural stability during cycles. In addition to the aforementioned advantages of TMOs, TiO2 also possesses some unique features. The volume change of TiO2 upon lithiation is less than 4%,11 which makes it a favorable material to replace the carbon coating. Additionally, amorphous TiO2 (a-TiO2) can greatly improve the electrochemical performance of SiNPs than crystalline TiO2 (c-TiO2), as reported by Yang et al.105 who compared the a-TiO2- and c-TiO2-coated SiNPs. The weight ratio of Si:TiO2 is about 89:11. The electrodes are composed of 60 wt% active material (SiNPs, a-TiO2- and c-TiO2-coated SiNPs), 10 wt% Super P, 10 wt% multi-walled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) and 20 wt% CMC. The results indicate that the a-TiO2-coated SiNPs is more preferred. As for the effects on the structural integrity, the a-TiO2 coating is much more elastic than the c-TiO2 coating. Under the same working conditions, the a-TiO2 coated SiNPs can withstand the repeated big volume change after lithiation during long cycles (see Fig. 6a), while the rigid c-TiO2 coating is likely to crack, thereby reducing the capacity and cycle life. Moreover, the a-TiO2 coating with disordered structures and defects helps extend the potential range and remove the plateaus for the reactions between TiO2 and Li+, simply leaving typical cathodic/anodic peaks of Si anodes in the cyclic voltammetry (CV) curve. However, this is not the case for c-TiO2 that causes the degradation of the core–shell structure. Owing to the intrinsically isotropic characteristic and open active diffusion channels, using a-TiO2 is more helpful than the other coatings in terms of the diffusivity of both electrons and ions. a-TiO2 can offer high Li+ conductivity due to the absence of long-range order and the presence of defects. Furthermore, unlike c-TiO2, a-TiO2 can be irreversibly changed to the cubic Li2Ti2O4 phase during cycles. The cubic Li2Ti2O4 phase possesses a much lower diffusion activation barrier (0.257 eV) than anatase (0.5 eV), which highlights the higher conductivity of a-TiO2 than c-TiO2 during the cycling test. Consequently, the a-TiO2@SiNP composite shows both better cyclability and rate capability than the c-TiO2@SiNP composite. The a-TiO2@SiNP electrode demonstrates an initial discharge capacity of 3061 mA h g−1 with an ICE of 86.1% at 0.42 A g−1, while the c-TiO2@SiNP electrode exhibits an initial discharge capacity of 2200 mA h g−1 with an ICE of 79%. The a-TiO2@SiNP electrode delivers a reversible capacity of about 1720 mA h g−1 after 200 cycles at 420 mA g−1, in comparison with the retention of 150 and 88 mA h g−1 for the c-TiO2@SiNPs and pristine SiNPs, respectively (see Fig. 6b). Moreover, the a-TiO2@SiNP composite yields a discharge capacity of 812 mA h g−1 even at a current density of 8.4 A g−1, while the corresponding value is only 33 mA h g−1 for the c-TiO2@SiNPs (see Fig. 6c). More importantly, the a-TiO2@SiNPs are much safer than the carbon-coated SiNPs. The a-TiO2 layers are conducive to restraining any obvious exothermic reactions at a maximum temperature of 285 °C, leading to higher battery safety.
 Fig. 6  (a) Structural evolution of a-TiO2-coated SiNPs during electrochemical cycling; (b) cyclability of pristine Si, a-TiO2- and c-TiO2-coated SiNPs at 420 mA g−1 (first activated with five cycles at 140 mA g−1); (c) comparison of rate performances of a-TiO2- and c-TiO2-coated SiNPs at different current densities. (Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright© 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (d) Schematic of Al2O3-coated SiNPs/CNF; (e) cycling performance and (f) coulombic efficiencies of Si/C composite nanofibers and Al2O3-coated SiNP/CNF composite nanofibers. (Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright© 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (g) SEM image of Si-ITO core-sheath fibers where SiNPs are filled in ITO fibers; (h) schematic of ITO@SiNPs; and (i) cycling performance of ITO@SiNPs at 0.3 and 2 C. (Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society.) 
Carbon materials can be combined with the SiNP/metal-oxide composite to further improve the electrical conductivity and structural integrity of the electrodes.102,107 For example, the carbon-coated Fe2O3 decorated SiNPs deliver a reversible discharge capacity of 680.7 mA h g−1 at 1 A g−1 after 300 cycles, and a high discharge capacity of 423 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1 under the combined effects of the carbon coating and Fe2O3.107 The contents of C, Si and Fe2O3 in the composite are calculated to be 4.9%, 82.5% and 12.6%, respectively. Al2O3 is a non-transition metal oxide which can react with Li+ to form a Li–Al–O alloy. This alloy has a high diffusivity for Li ions and reduces the formation of the SEI.108,112 Thus, when Al2O3 is utilized as the coating material, the electrochemical performance of the SiNPs is supposed to be enhanced. An Al2O3-coated SiNP/CNF composite was studied by Li et al.108 In the composite, the SiNPs are evenly dispersed in the CNF matrix. Most of the SiNPs are inside the CNF, and the rest are partially exposed on the surface of the fibers. The whole carbon/SiNP nanofibers are covered with an Al2O3 layer by atomic layer deposition (ALD) (see Fig. 6d). The mass ratios of C, O, Al and Si of Al2O3-coated Si/CNF composite nanofibers are 45.19 wt%, 4.65 wt%, 12.56 wt% and 37.60 wt%, respectively. These composite fibers can be directly used as the electrodes for LIBs. The positive effect of the Al2O3 coating lies in its function in avoiding the side reactions between the SiNPs and electrolyte so as to reduce the consumption of active materials. It also helps suppress and buffer the volume change of SiNPs during repeated extraction/insertion of Li+. This is conducive to maintaining the structural stability and stabilizing the formed SEI. Owing to the stable Al2O3 coating, the conductive network structure and electrical integrity of the electrode can be sustained during long cycling. A thin Li–Al–O layer formed on the surface of Al2O3 during the first cycle can function as the conductor for fast Li+ diffusion in the following cycles. The CNF matrix can also alleviate the volume change of SiNPs during cycles and enhance the electrical conductivity of the electrode. As a consequence, the Al2O3-coated SiNP/CNF composite with an Al2O3 coating thickness of nearly 8 nm shows a reversible capacity of 827.3 mA h g−1 (based on the total weight of both SiNPs and CNFs) at 50 mA g−1 after 100 cycles with a high capacity retention of 82.3%. The capacity of the composite is fair due to the lower loading of SiNPs. However, the SiNPs/CNFs without the Al2O3 coating only deliver a discharge capacity of 338.8 mA h g−1 with a capacity retention of 36.1% under the same test conditions, which confirms the positive effects of the Al2O3 coating on the electrochemical performance of the SiNP-based electrodes. The mass loadings of the active material in the above electrodes are in the range of 2–3 mg cm−2. The composites with different Al2O3 coating thicknesses (2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 nm, corresponding to ALD cycle numbers of 7, 14, 21, 28, and 35) were also investigated. Almost all the Al2O3-coated samples yield improved cycling performances compared to the uncovered SiNPs/CNFs, except for the one with a thickness of 10 nm (see Fig. 6e and f). This is because the coating with a thickness of 10 nm is too thick, so that the diffusion of Li+ is severely hindered, consequently resulting in a poor electrochemical performance of the electrode. In contrast, the enhancement does not seem obvious in terms of the cyclability of the composites with coating thicknesses of 2 and 4 nm, which suggests that these two values are too small to accommodate the big volume change of SiNPs during cycles. The composite with a coating thickness of 8 nm shows the best electrochemical performance. Additionally, it is found that the formed SEI on the surface of the Al2O3 coating becomes more condensed and less conductive with the increase of the coating thickness.
Another interesting non-transition metal oxide that can be well composited with SiNPs is ITO. ITO has been extensively used in the electronic and display industries owing to its well-known transparent and conductive characteristics. The ITO@SiNP composite with a core-sheath structure was studied by Lee et al.109 The electrospinning technique was adopted to fabricate the composite. In the composite, evenly dispersed SiNPs and ITO particles are coated with ITO sheath layers (see Fig. 6g and h). The atomic ratio of In to Sn in ITO is 95:5. The active material is mixed with PVDF with a mass ratio of 90 (active):10 (binder) to form the electrode with an areal loading of about 2.1 mg cm−2. The ITO can react with Li+ to form Li2O, metallic Sn and In. However, this reaction is irreversible, and mainly takes place during the first cycle. Moreover, the ITO partially participates in the reaction, which means that the fiber-like structure can be sustained during cycles. The In formed is electrochemically inert. Although Sn has better electrochemical reactivity, its content in the composite is too low, thus exerting negligible effects on the capacity performance of the composite. Both Sn and In with good capability in fast electron transport can help enhance the electrical conductivity of the electrode. Li2O surrounding the SiNPs can both serve as the Li+ conductor and buffer the volume change of SiNPs during repeated lithiation/delithiation processes. Hence, after the first cycle, the composite is transformed to In/Sn/Li2O/ITO/SiNPs. Besides, the ITO sheath can also restrain the continuous expansion and contraction of SiNPs during cycles, thereby stabilizing the formed SEI. The good conductivity of the ITO sheaths benefits the formation of a conductive network and helps enhance the electrical integrity of the electrode. Moreover, the ITO particles coexisting with the SiNPs in the core of the composite can also provide many electron transport pathways and electrical contact points between the SiNPs and ITO sheaths, thus enhancing the kinetics during cycling. As a result, the composite exhibits an initial discharge capacity of 1174 mA h g−1 (based on the total mass of both ITO and SiNPs) with an ICE of 70% at a current density of 190 mA g−1. This can be attributed to the irreversible formation of the SEI and conversion of ITO. The composite demonstrates discharge capacities of 677 and 502 mA h g−1 after 500 cycles at 0.3 C and 2 C (1 C = 1950 mA h g−1 based on the mass ratio of Si to ITO of 44.5:55.5), respectively (see Fig. 6i). A discharge capacity of 476 mA h g−1 can even be obtained at 23.4 A g−1, corresponding to a capacity retention of 75.3% from 1 to 12 C. All these results validate the outstanding cycling and rate performances of the SiNP-based electrodes with ITO.
All the aforementioned metal oxides show excellent electrochemical reactivity. However, ZrO2 has been reported to be inactive in the working potential range of SiNP-based electrodes. A SiNP/ZrO2 composite was fabricated by Shi et al.110 The composite includes 53 wt% Si. The SiNPs in the composite are evenly distributed in mesoporous ZrO2. Inactive ZrO2 is able to buffer the volume change of SiNPs during cycles and maintain the structural stability of the electrode. The mesoporous structure can also accommodate the volume change of SiNPs, as well as enhance the penetration of the electrolyte, thus facilitating the diffusion of Li+. This composite retains a reversible capacity of more than 1500 mA h g−1 after 50 cycles at a current density of 40 mA with an ICE of 84.5%.
5. SiNPs/polymers
Many polymers have been coupled with SiNPs for improved electrochemical performance. Among these polymers, the focally investigated material is conductive polymers (CPs), such as polyaniline (PANI),113,114 polypyrrole (PPy)115,116 and polyethylenedioxythiophene (PEDOT),117 because of their good mechanical flexibility and electrical conductivity. For example, a remarkable enhancement of the electrochemical performance of the SiNP-based electrode was realized by embedding the SiNPs within a PANI 3D network.113 This composite can be directly covered onto common copper current collectors without adding any electrical conductors and binders. In the composite, the SiNPs are also conformally coated with a thin layer of PANI. The SiNPs are bound with the PANI 3D network through either a crosslinker hydrogen bonded with phytic acid or electrostatic interactions with the positively charged polymer. The porous polymer matrix provides much void space which can accommodate the big volume change of SiNPs during lithiation. The 3D PANI network along with the PANI coating supplies highly conductive and continuous pathways for both ions and electrons, simultaneously ensuring good electrical connection with the SiNPs. Moreover, although the large SiNPs are likely to crack during cycles, they are confined in the interconnected narrow pores of the PANI matrix, revealing the excellent electrical integrity of the composite. This is demonstrated by the fact that the SiNPs are still kept within the PANI matrix after 2000 cycles without losing electrical contact. Furthermore, even though the PANI coating ruptures after the first cycle, it continues to provide electrical connection between the SiNPs and conductive network. More importantly, the coating on the SiNPs is also beneficial for the formation of the SEI with enhanced stability and deformability. Depending on all these positive effects, the composite exhibits reversible capacities from 2500 to 1100 mA h g−1 at current rates from 0.3 to 3.0 A g−1. Remarkably, it shows a reversible discharge capacity of 550 mA h g−1 at a current density of 6 A g−1 after 5000 cycles with an ICE of about 70%, corresponding to a capacity retention of more than 90%. The total mass loadings in the tested electrodes are typically 0.3–0.4 mg cm−2, while the Si mass loadings are mostly 0.2–0.3 mg cm−2. Recently, a new kind of CP material (poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-fluorenone-co-methylbenzoic ester)) coated on the SiNPs has been reported.118 The Si:polymer ratio in the composite is 2:1. Like PANI, the polymer coating helps provide more electrical contact points for the SiNPs, enhance the electrical integrity of the electrode, and buffer the volume change of the SiNPs during Li+ insertion. The composite also acts directly as the electrode material with no need for other additives. It seems to maintain a reversible capacity of more than 1750 mA h g−1 after 938 cycles at 1/10 C. The Si mass loading is 0.17 mg cm−2 for the tested electrodes.
Different from the CPs, some less conductive polymers combined with SiNPs are mainly used to improve the structural integrity. Therefore, these polymers can be coupled with some conductive additives such as carbon and metals to achieve good conductivity of SiNP-based composites, such as polydopamine-coated SiNPs/CNTs,119 cladophora nanocellulose/SiNPs/CNTs,120 polyurethane/Cu/SiNPs,121etc. For instance, the polydopamine (PD) is typically used as a disordered organic semiconductor rather than a conductive polymer.122 The PD-coated SiNP/CNT composite was studied by Gueon et al.119 The mass ratio of the SiNPs, CNTs and polymer particles is 38:16:46. The sufficient mechanical strength of this material makes it robust for the hot pressing process used to fabricate the electrode films. The SiNPs are evenly scattered over the porous CNT matrix, and the assemblies of the SiNP/CNT particles are coated with a layer of PD (see Fig. 7a). The porous carbon material not only helps enhance the conductivity of both electrons and Li ions, but also relieves the volume change of the SiNPs during cycles. The PD coating is utilized to enhance the adhesivity between the SiNPs and CNTs, which is beneficial for the improvement of the structural stability of the composite. The coating can also separate the electrolyte from the SiNPs, thereby reducing the side reactions and suppressing the formation of the SEI. Moreover, using PD with excellent elasticity can also buffer and suppress the volume change of SiNPs during cycling, leading to excellent structural integrity of the electrode. The composite shows a reversible discharge capacity of 795 mA h g−1 after 300 cycles, at a current density of 2 A g−1 within a voltage range of 0.01–1.5 V versus Li/Li+ (see Fig. 7b). The corresponding capacity retention reaches 81%, which is about 50% higher than that of the SiNP/porous CNT composite without a PD coating, demonstrating the remarkable role of the PD coating in enhancing the cyclability of the electrode. This is further confirmed by the fact that the PD-coated SiNP/CNT particles maintain a capacity retention of 57% by tuning the current density from 0.5 to 5 A g−1 (see Fig. 7c). However, this capacity retention is comparable to that (58%) of the uncoated SiNP/CNT composite under the same test conditions, which indicates that the PD coating may slow down the kinetics of the electrode to some extent. Moreover, the ICE (64.9%) of the PD-coated SiNPs/CNTs at 0.1 A g−1 appears to be relatively low, which is ascribed to an increase in ion transport resistance by the polymer layer.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of PD-coated SiNPs/CNTs; comparison of (b) the cycling performance and (c) rate capability of SiNPs/CNTs, SiNPs/porous CNTs and PD-coated SiNPs/porous CNTs. (Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright© 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
There are two other promising polymers combined with SiNPs for LIBs, namely the poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO)123 and alucone.124 The PEO is typically an important part of the solid electrolyte. The PEO-capped SiNPs were utilized as the anode of the Li-polymer solid battery.123 In the composite, SiNPs account for 40 wt%. The PEO layers on the surface of SiNPs can help prevent the aggregation of the SiNPs, which contributes towards the improvement of the stability of the electrode. Smaller interfacial resistance between the anode and the solid electrolyte can be achieved when the PEO-capped SiNPs are used with the PEO-based solid electrolyte, owing to the improved wetting effect. The PEO cap can also promote fast diffusion of Li+ to the inner SiNPs. Furthermore, the PEO and PVDF can be well dispersed with each other. More importantly, the ionic diffusivity of the PEO/salt systems can be improved by 2 orders of magnitude after incorporating PVDF into the systems. Hence, when a PVDF/carbon supporting medium is used, good contact may be maintained between the SiNPs and conductive support, accompanied by fast transport of ions. As a result, the PEO-capped SiNPs delivers a reversible capacity of 1850 mA h g−1 at 80 °C and 0.1 mA within a voltage window of 0–4.5 V, when the PVDF/carbon support and the PEO-based solid electrolyte are used. The composite anode materials for battery testing are prepared by mixing PEO-coated SiNPs, super P carbon black and PVDF at a ratio of 8:1:1. The mass loading of the active material is 2 mg cm−2.
Alucone-coated SiNPs were fabricated by He et al. with the aid of the molecular layer deposition (MLD) technique.124 During the synthesis process, the formation of alucone (–Aln(–OCH2–CHO–CH2O–)m, n:m = 1) can consume the surface oxides (SiOx) of the SiNPs, which is considered effective at improving the electrochemical performance of the electrode. Moreover, the alucone coating is endowed with excellent mechanical flexibility, which helps accommodate the large volume change of SiNPs and maintain the electrical and structural integrity during cycling. This is justified by the fact that the coating can extend and contract with the swelling and shrinkage of SiNPs, respectively. Additionally, better conductivity of the coating can be achieved after lithiation, which is conducive to facilitating the kinetics of the electrode during continuous lithium insertion/extraction processes.
6. SiNP/Si-based materials
As mentioned earlier, there are many kinds of nanostructured Si materials, such as SiNWs, silicon nanotubes (SiNTs) and silicon nanofilms (SiNFs). Besides, micro-sized Si particles, Si oxides, metal silicides and Si carbides have also been used for LIB anodes. All these materials can be composited with SiNPs to achieve SiNP-based electrodes with excellent electrochemical performances.
6.1 Pristine Si
Nano-structured Si with different physical and electrochemical properties can be combined with SiNPs by taking advantage of their synergetic effects.19,26,32,125–127 For example, the areal loading of nano-sized active materials tends to be relatively low, owing to the existence of much void space. A high mass loading (1.5 mg cm−2) of nano-Si materials was realized by Hu et al. who fabricated a Si-overcoated SiNP-decorated SiNW network (see Fig. 8a).128 For engineering the composite, SiNWs are grown directly from the substrate, and then are coated with SiNPs through ink penetration followed by covering a Si layer on the whole surface of the SiNPs/SiNWs. Smooth penetration of Si NPs in the SiNW network is achieved by tuning the ink to low viscosity. The Si overcoating and the rough surface of SiNWs both guarantee tight and stable contact between the SiNWs and SiNPs. Both the Si overcoating and SiNWs can provide conductive pathways to the current collector for SiNPs. The nano-sized void space within the porous composite can buffer the volume change of Si during lithiation, restraining the electrode pulverization. Under the coupled effects of different nanostructured Si materials, the Si/SiNP/SiNW composite delivers a reversible discharge capacity of 1600 mA h g−1 at 0.2 C after 30 cycles with an ICE of 81% (see Fig. 8b and c).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic, (b) cycling performance at 0.2 C and (c) voltage profile at 0.2 C of Si-overcoated SiNP-decorated SiNWs. (Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright© 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) 
In addition to nano-Si materials, micro-sized Si particles can also be combined with SiNPs to take advantage of the merits of both micro- and nanostructures. Compared to SiNPs, a micro-sized Si material possesses much less specific surface, which relates to reduced side reactions resulting in the formation of the SEI. The volumetric specific energy density of SiNP-based electrodes can also be obviously enhanced by introducing micro-sized Si. Meanwhile, nano-sized Si can help release the stress of the micro-Si particles during cycles to restrain the material cracks. Moreover, the kinetics of the electrode can be mediated to an appropriate level with the coexistence of both nano- and micro-structures with separate short and long carrier diffusion pathways. As a consequence, the SiNP/micro-sized Si composite electrode fabricated by Wu et al. shows a high specific capacity of 2500 mA h g−1 after 30 cycles with an ICE of 73% and good rate capability within a voltage range of 0.01–1 V vs. Li/Li+.129 The composite electrode consists of 50 wt% micro-sized Si, 20 wt% SiNPs and 30 wt% poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-fluorenone-co-methylbenzoic ester) binder. The mass loading of Si in the composite electrode is 0.23 mg cm−2.
6.2 Si oxides
Si oxides tend to be generated on the surface of SiNPs when Si comes in contact with oxygen. This thin layer of Si oxides is sometimes thought to be harmful to the diffusion of electrons and ions, owing to their intrinsic low conductivity.124,128,130 However, with appropriate material and structure design, excellent electrochemical performance of Si oxides can be achieved. Hence, Si oxides can be also composited with SiNPs for the sake of improved performance of SiNP-based electrodes.131–134 Si oxides are typically marked as SiOx, in which x ranges from 0 to 2. SiOx tends to be comprised of not mere one but several or all kinds of materials including SiOx (0 < x < 1), SiO, SiOx (1 < x < 2) and SiO2. All these SiOx can exhibit electrochemical reactivity under specific conditions. The rate and capacity performances of SiOx are inversely proportional to the ratio of O in the SiOx. When the content of O decreases, the rate and capacity performances of SiOx are improved. However, this is not the case for the cyclability of SiOx. SiOx with a higher O content possesses better structural stability, leading to enhanced cycling performance of SiOx. A comprehensive review published recently on various SiOx has provided more information about their behaviors and applications for LIBs.31 Therefore, SiOx tends to be coated on the surface of SiNPs to enhance the structural integrity of the SiNP-based electrodes for a longer cycle life. It is noteworthy that the coating thickness should be optimized. When the coating is too thick, the SiNPs may not react with Li+ owing to the lowered kinetics. For instance, Lee et al. investigated the electrochemical performance of SiOx-coated SiNPs with different SiOx shell thicknesses.133 The composite electrodes are made of SiOx-coated SiNPs, Denka Black and polyamide imide with a ratio of 60:20:13 by weight. The total mass loadings of the electrodes are around 1.0 mg cm−2. The test results indicate that about 20% SiOx in the composite is the optimal ratio for the best electrochemical performance. The composite with this ratio yields an initial discharge capacity of 2030.34 mA h g−1 with an ICE of 64.41% and shows a capacity retention of 79.92% after 50 cycles.
6.3 Metal silicides
Metal silicides, especially transition metal silicides, such as MoSi2,135 Mn4Si7,136 FeSi2,137 TiFeSi2,138 NiSi139etc., also have been composited with SiNPs for LIBs. Different from Si oxides, most of the metal silicides are electrochemically inactive or show low activity.140,141 Nevertheless, they typically possess both excellent electrical conductivity and mechanical strength. Hence, this kind of material tends to be utilized to enhance the electronic conductivity of the electrode and serves as the backbone to withstand the volume change of SiNPs during Li insertion, leading to enhanced rate capability and cycling performance of the SiNP-based electrodes. For example, a Si/MoSi2 nanocomposite synthesized by Wu et al. showed both excellent cycling performance and rate capability (see Fig. 9a–c).135 In the composite, the weight ratios of Si and Mo are about 95.72% and 4.27%, respectively. The electrodes are made of 60 wt% Si/MoSi2, 20 wt% carbon black and 2 wt% sodium alginate binder. The areal loading of the active material including Si, MoSi2 and carbon black is around 0.46–0.54 mg cm−2. The composite electrode delivers an initial charge capacity of 1933.9 mA h g−1 at 0.2 C with an ICE of 77.6% and maintains a capacity retention of 85.2% after 150 cycles (see Fig. 9b). In contrast, despite the slightly higher ICE (78.4%) of the pure SiNPs, bare Si shows a capacity retention of only 63.7% after 150 cycles. As for the rate capability, even at 5 C, the composite still displays a reversible capacity of about 550 mA h g−1 (see Fig. 9c). However, the pure SiNPs only show a discharge capacity of about 150 mA h g−1. In the Si/MoSi2 composite, the SiNPs come in close contact with MoSi2 nanoparticles. The interconnected MoSi2 nanoparticles form a conductive and tough framework, both facilitating the electron transport and suppressing the volume change of the SiNPs during cycles. Based on these merits, the above excellent electrochemical performance of the Si/MoSi2 nanocomposite is achieved.
 Fig. 9  (a) TEM image of Si/MoSi2; (b) cycling performance at 0.2 C and (c) rate capability of bare Si and Si/MoSi2. (Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright© 2016, American Chemical Society.) 
6.4 Si carbide
In addition to metal silicides, Si carbide (SiC) is also a kind of material with both excellent electrical conductivity and mechanical strength. Moreover, SiC belongs to semiconductors and shows no electrochemical reactivity. It also exhibits outstanding thermal conductivity and high corrosion resistance. Therefore, the incorporation of SiC into SiNPs can also be expected to improve the structural integrity and electrical conductivity. Carbon-encapsulated porous SiC-coated hollow SiNPs were studied by Wen et al.142 During cycling operation, the middle SiC shell with good stiffness can suppress the volume change of SiNPs and force them to expand to the inner void space. This is conducive to maintaining the integrity of the electrode structure and stabilizing the SEI formed on the surface of SiNPs. The porous SiC structure allows for penetration of ions to the SiNPs in the core. The external carbon shell provides fast electron transport pathways for SiNPs. All these factors guarantee both excellent cyclability and rate performance of the carbon/SiC/SiNP composite.
7. SiNPs/other materials
7.1 Transition metal nitrides or carbides
Like transition metal silicides, transition metal nitrides or carbides also possess excellent electrical conductivity and mechanical properties. Although some of these materials exhibit Li storage capability, their capacities are not comparable to that of Si. Hence, these transition metal nitrides or carbides tend to be utilized to improve the conductivity and structural integrity of SiNP-based electrodes. For instance, TiN-coated SiNPs (see Fig. 10a) were investigated by Tang et al.143 The content of silicon in the composite is 67.4%. The TiN coating can facilitate electron transport and help suppress the volume change of SiNPs during lithiation, resulting in accelerated kinetics and a stabilized SEI. The tested electrodes are made of 60 wt% active materials, 20 wt% Super-P carbon and 20 wt% CMC. This composite electrode exhibits an initial discharge capacity of 2560 mA h g−1 with an ICE of 76% at 0.4 A g−1, which is slightly lower than that (79%) of pure Si under the same test conditions. This is due to the formation of a possible SiO2 impurity in the fabrication process of the TiN-coated SiNPs upon annealing at 1000 °C. However, the composite maintains a high reversible discharge capacity of 1900 mA h g−1 at 0.4 A g−1 after 100 cycles with a capacity retention of 75%, while pure Si is subject to fast capacity degradation, with a discharge capacity retention of only 25% after 80 cycles (see Fig. 10b). Moreover, the TiN-coated SiNPs still maintain a capacity of about 400 mA h g−1 at 8 A g−1 (see Fig. 10c). Nevertheless, pure Si can only deliver a low capacity of around 10 mA h g−1 at the same rate. All the above results validate the beneficial effects of the TiN coating on the electrochemical performance of the SiNP-based electrodes for LIBs.
 Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis processes of TiN-coated SiNPs; (b) cycling performance of pure Si, TiO2-coated SiNPs and TiN-coated SiNPs at 0.4 A g−1; (c) rate performance of pure Si and TiN-coated SiNPs. (Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright© 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) Schematic of the fabrication processes of SiNPs/MXene (Ti3C2Tx); comparison of (e) cycling performance at 200 mA g−1 and (f) rate capability of pure Si and SiNPs/MXene (Ti3C2Tx). (Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright© 2019, American Chemical Society.) 
Notably, MXenes are a large family of transition metal carbides and nitrides with 2D structures. MXenes have a common formula of Mn+1XnTx, where M represents an early transition metal, X is C or/and N, and Tx stands for the surface functional groups such as –OH, –F, and –O.144 Owing to their excellent electrical conductivity, mechanical flexibility and hydrophilicity, these materials have been widely applied to various electrochemical energy storage devices.145–147 Moreover, MXenes also exhibit electrochemical reactivity, typically demonstrating discharge capacities to a level of several hundreds.148 A SiNP/MXene (Ti3C2Tx) composite was studied by Tian et al.149 In the composite, SiNPs are covalently anchored on the surface of MXene and randomly dispersed between parallel MXene sheets (see Fig. 10d). The MXene sheets not only prevent agglomeration of SiNPs and buffer their volume change during cycling, but also provide fast electronic and ionic diffusion pathways. Moreover, SiNPs simultaneously prevent the restacking of MXene sheets. This flexible and free-standing composite material can be directly used as the electrode. The mass loading of the active materials is approximately 1.1–1.3 mg cm−2. For comparison, the pure SiNPs are mixed with carbon black and PVDF with a ratio of 8:1:1 to form the electrodes. As a result, the composite exhibits both excellent cycling and rate performances. It delivers discharge capacities of 2118 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 after 100 cycles and 1672 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 after 200 cycles. As for the rate capability, the composite even maintains a discharge capacity of 890 mA h g−1 at 5000 mA g−1. In contrast, the pure SiNPs lead to an inferior electrochemical performance compared to the sample of SiNPs/MXene (Ti3C2Tx), as can be seen in Fig. 10e and f.
7.2 Transition-metal dichalcogenides
Unlike the transition metal carbides and nitrides, transition-metal dichalcogenides typically exhibit poor conductivities for electrons. However, these materials typically have good electrochemical reactivity and sustain a relatively stable crystalline structure during lithiation owing to the adjustability of the interlayer spacing of the sandwich-like S-transition metal–S structure.150–152 Hence, the transition-metal dichalcogenides can be used to improve the structural stability of the SiNP-based electrodes. Carbon-coated SiNPs/MoS2 (SMC, see Fig. 11a) were fabricated by Zhang et al.153 The mass ratio of Si:MoS2:C is designed to be 2:2:6. The carbon coating can protect the inner SiNPs and enhance the electrical conductivity of the electrode. The use of MoS2 can inhibit the aggregation of SiNPs. All the carbon coating, MoS2 and the void space in the composite can buffer the volume change of SiNPs, thus leading to excellent structural stability. The tested electrodes are comprised of the active material, carbon black and binder with a weight ratio of 7:2:1, showing a much better cycling performance than pure Si at 0.1 A g−1 (see Fig. 11b). Moreover, the SMC produces a reversible discharge capacity of 537.6 mA h g−1 at 500 mA g−1 after 1200 cycles with an ICE of 72.7% (see Fig. 11c). Even at 3000 mA g−1, a discharge capacity of 388.1 mA h g−1 is still maintained (see Fig. 11d).
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the fabrication processes of carbon-coated SiNPs/MoS2; (b) cycling performance of Si, MoS2, SMP precursor of SMC and SMC at 100 mA g−1; (c) cyclability at 500 mA g−1 and (d) rate performance of SMC. (Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright© 2019, Elsevier Ltd.) 
7.3 Alloys
In addition to the Si–metal, S–C, C–metal, N–metal, and S–metal alloys,142–144,153 metal-based alloys have also been combined with SiNPs for LIBs, such as the Al–Cu alloy,138 Ni–Ti alloy,154 and Ga–In–Sn alloy,155 owing to their outstanding mechanical flexibility and electrical conductivity. For example, a SiNP/Ni–Ti composite fabricated by Loka et al. exhibited a discharge capacity of 553 mA h g−1 after 52 cycles at 2.5 mA cm−2.154 Notably, the Ga–In–Sn alloy is distinctive, compared to most of the other alloys. The Ga–In–Sn alloy is a kind of liquid metal (LM). LMs have been widely used in flexible or stretchable electronics due to their intrinsic soft nature and conductivity.156 More importantly, a tendency to minimize the surface area is derived from their fluidity, thus resulting in so-called “self-health” when the LMs rupture.157 Besides, the low melting temperature and small Young's modulus of LMs also allow for easy combination of LMs and nanoparticles at ambient temperature.158 The electrochemical performance of the SiNP/Ga–In–Sn composite was studied by Han et al.155 The Ga:In:Sn ratio in the Ga–In–Sn alloy is 69:21:10. The content of Si in the composite is 50 wt%. This novel material can work independently as the electrodes without adding any additives. The mass loadings of the tested composite electrodes are about 0.45 mg cm−2. In the composite, the Ga–In–Sn alloy can absorb the mechanical stress generated from the volume change of SiNPs during lithiation. Besides, when the large volume change leads to disruption of the alloy bulk, the detached alloy fragments can spontaneously interconnect with each other to form a bulk with minimized surface area. This is conducive to enhancing the electrical and structural integrity of the electrode. The formation of an SEI and the consumption of the electrolyte and Si can also be reduced. Furthermore, the alloy particles surrounding the SiNPs form a conductive network to facilitate the kinetics. Hence, the composite exhibits an outstanding electrochemical performance with an extremely high ICE of about 95.92% at 2 A g−1 (1C). This is higher than most of the ever-reported ICE values for Si-based anodes. Moreover, it demonstrates a reversible discharge capacity of 968 mA h g−1 after 1500 cycles at 8A g−1 with a capacity retention of 81.3%. Even at 20 A g−1 (equal to 55 C), a discharge capacity of 360 mA h g−1 is still obtained.
7.4 MOFs
MOFs belong to coordination compounds. Owing to their large specific area, stable crystalline structure, good tunability and low cost, MOFs have been applied in many fields, such as catalysis,159 adsorption,160 and energy.161 MOF (Prussian blue and its analogues (PBAs))-coated SiNPs were fabricated by Wu et al.162 The tested electrodes are made up of active materials, super P and CMC with a mass ratio of 70:15:15. The areal loading of the electrodes is 0.8–1 mg cm−2. Owing to the enhanced structural stability caused by the MOF coating, the composite delivers a discharge capacity of 435.13 mA h g−1 at 0.42 A g−1 after 200 cycles. However, the charge capacity of the pure Si electrode decays fast and simply retains 1.87 mA h g−1 after 150 cycles. It is noteworthy that MOF-based composites undergo thermal treatment to decompose the MOF in the composite to form metals, metal oxides and porous carbon. Considering this, the electrochemical performance of the above PBA-coated SiNPs after a thermal treatment at 450 °C (marked as SiNPs/PBAs-450) was also investigated by the authors.162 An enhancement of the electrochemical performance was observed after the thermal treatment. The SiNP/PBA-450 composite delivers a discharge capacity of 725.02 mA h g−1 at 0.42 A g−1 after 200 cycles. It also exhibits discharge capacities of 613 and 263 mA h g−1 at a current density of 4.2 and 14 A g−1, respectively. This is ascribed to the conversion of PBAs to transition metals (Mn and Fe) and N-doped carbon, leading to enhanced electrical conductivity, stabilized SEI and improved structural stability of the electrode. Besides, the ICEs of pure Si, PBA-coated SiNPs and SiNPs/PBAs-450 at 0.07 A g−1 are 85.98, 74.53, and 68.62%, respectively. Compared with pure Si, the reason for the lower ICE of the two composites may be the reduced Si content and the low ICE of PBAs-450 (53.17%).
7.5 Polynary composites
In all the above sections, various kinds of materials combined with SiNPs to form composites with their effects on the electrochemical performance of the composites are discussed. Most of the aforementioned composites consist of SiNPs and a single material such as carbon, metal or polymer, etc. Actually, there are also plenty of SiNP-based polynary composites made of the SiNPs and several or all kinds of the materials reviewed above (namely carbon materials, metals, metal oxides, polymers, Si-based materials, etc.), such as graphene oxide/PD-coated SiNPs,85 SiNPs@TiO2/CNTs86 and SiNPs@PANI@TiO2.87 These polynary composites are synthesized to take advantage of the synergetic effects of all the components in the composite. Since the effects of almost all types of the single components in the composite are described above, no illustration is presented herein.
8. Conclusions and outlook
This paper reviews various SiNP-based composites for advanced LIBs from the perspective of composition and electrochemical effects. The combined materials, including carbon materials, metals, metal oxides, polymers, Si-based materials, transition metal nitrides, carbides, dichalcogenides, alloys, and MOFs, are all reviewed. These materials, exhibiting physical and electrochemical properties different from each other, can exert diverse impacts on the electrochemical performance of the SiNP-based composites. The areal mass loading of the tested electrodes, the ratios of Si in the composites, the weight percentages of the active materials, electrical conductors and binders, and the electrochemical performances of various SiNP-based composites are summarized in Table 1 by gathering several representative examples. Generally, the SiNP-based composites can exhibit better electrochemical performances than the pristine SiNPs. This can be ascribed to the buffered or suppressed volume change of SiNPs during cycling, enhanced structural stability, restrained and stabilized formation of the SEI, improved electrical integrity and conductivity, and enhanced kinetics, due to the use of combined materials. Moreover, the structural configurations of the composites also have important functions. The composites with different structures may lead to distinct electrochemical performances. Among various structures, the core/shell structure with SiNPs as the core and the coupled material as the shell is the most intensively investigated sample, which can be attributed to the congenital merits of the coating structure, such as preventing direct contact of the electrolyte with SiNPs, restraining harmful side reactions, suppressing the volume change of SiNPs during cycles, holding and sustaining the electrochemical activity of the cracked SiNPs, providing more electrical contacts, etc.
Table 1 Summary of the electrochemical performance and related information of the representative SiNP-based composites as anodes for LIBs




Coupled materials
SiNP-based composites
Areal mass loading of the composites
Si mass percentage in composites
Electrode mass ratio (composite:electrical conductor:binder)
ICE
Rate performance
Cycling performance
Ref.





Carbon materials





Amorphous carbon-coated SiNPs


81.7 wt%
60:20 (10 wt% Super P, 10 wt% MWCNTs):20 (CMC)
74.9%, 0.5 A g−1
1209 mA h g−1, 16.8 A g−1
1006 mA h g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 500 cycles

54





SiNPs encapsulated in carbon tubes
0.6 mg cm−2
50 wt%
70:15 (Super P):15 (PAA)
87.5%, 0.137 A g−1
721 mA h g−1, 9.75 A g−1
1250 mA h g−1, 0.24 A g−1, 100 cycles

62





Yolk–shell SiNPs@carbon


71 wt%
65:20 (Super P):15 (sodium alginate)
60%, 0.1 C
600 mA h g−1, 4 C
1500 mA h g−1, 1 C, 1000 cycles.

67





Yolk–shell SiNPs@graphene


71.6 wt%
60:20 (Super P):20 (PVDF)
68%, 1 A g−1
451 mA h g−1, 20 A g−1
1775 mA h g−1, 1 A g−1, 750 cycles

69





N-Doped carbon-coated SiNPs
0.6 mg cm−2
78 wt%
60:20 (acetylene black):20 (sodium alginate)
84%, 0.5 A g−1
1086 mA h g−1, 2 A g−1
1565 mA h g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 100 cycles

49




Metals





SiNPs/Cu
0.315 mg cm−2
75 wt%
70:10 (Super P):20 (CMC)
89.8%, 0.2 A g−1
1598 mA h g−1, 2 A g−1
1569 mA h g−1, 1 A g−1, 200 cycles

93





Ag-Coated SiNPs


92.3 wt%


84%, 0.1 A g−1
2000 mA h g−1, 4 A g−1
3000 mA h g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 100 cycles

99




Metal oxides





Cu2O-coated SiNPs


75 wt%
60:30 (10 wt% Super P, 10 wt% graphite, 10 wt% VGCF):10 (PA)
82.9%, 0.3 A g−1
931.9 mA h g−1, 2 A g−1
1060 mA h g−1, a 300 mA g−1, 350 cycles

101





a-TiO2-coated SiNPs
0.373 mg cm−2
89 wt%
60:20 (10 wt% Super P, 10 wt% MWCNTs):20 (CMC)
86.1%, 0.42 A g−1
812 mA h g−1, 8.4 A g−1
1720 mA h g−1, 420 mA g−1, 200 cycles

105





ITO@SiNPs
1.89 mg cm−2
44.5 wt%
90:0:10 (PVDF)
70%, 0.19 A g−1
476 mA h g−1, 23.4 A g−1
502 mA h g−1, 2 C, 500 cycles

109




Polymers





SiNPs/PANI
0.2–0.3 mg cm−2


100:0:0
70%, 6 A g−1


550 mA h g−1, 6 A g−1, 5000 cycles

113





PEO@SiNPs
2 mg cm−2
40 wt%
80:10 (Super P):10 (PVDF)


1850 mA h g−1, 0.1 mA



123




Si-Based materials





Si@SiNPs@SiNWs
1.5 mg cm−2
100 wt%
100:0:0
81%, 0.2 C


1600 mA h g−1, 0.2 C, 30 cycles

128





SiNPs/micro-sized Si
0.23 mg cm−2
100 wt%
70:0:30 (poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-fluorenone-co-methylbenzoic ester))
73%


2500 mA h g−1, 30 cycles

129





SiOx@SiNPs
0.645 mg cm−2
80 wt%
60:20 (Denka black):13 (polyamide imide)
64.41%


1620 mA h g−1, 50 cycles

133





Si/MoSi2
0.345–0.405 mg cm−2


60:20 (carbon black):20 (sodium alginate)
77.6%, 0.84 A g−1
550 mA h g−1, 5 C
1650 mA h g−1, 0.2 C, 150 cycles

135




Transition metal nitrides, carbides, and dichalcogenides





TiN@SiNPs


67.4 wt%
60:20 (Super P):20 (CMC)
76%, 0.4 A g−1
400 mA h g−1, 2 C
1900 mA h g−1, 0.1 C, 100 cycles

143





SiNPs/MXene (Ti3C2Tx)
1.1–1.3 mg cm−2


100:0:0
71%, 0.2 A g−1
890 mA h g−1, 5000 mA g−1
1672 mA h g−1, 1000 mA g−1, 200 cycles

144





Carbon@SiNPs/MoS2


20 wt%
70:20 (carbon black):10 (LA133)
72.7%, 0.5 A g−1
388.1 mA h g−1, 3000 mA g−1
537.6 mA h g−1, 500 mA g−1, 1200 cycles

153




Alloys





SiNPs/Ni–Ti


65 at%
80:12 (10 wt% graphite, 2 wt% Ketjenblack):8 (polyamide imide)
79.2%, 0.1 C


553 mA h g−1, of 2.5 mA cm−2, 52 cycles

154





SiNPs/Ga–In–Sn
0.45 mg cm−2
50 wt%
100:0:0
95.92%, 2 A g−1
360 mA h g−1, 20 A g−1
968 mA h g−1, 8A g−1, 1500 cycles

155




MOFs

MOF@SiNPs
0.56–0.7 mg cm−2


70:15 (Super P):15 (CMC)
74.53%, 0.07 A g−1


435.13 mA h g−1, 0.42 A g−1, 200 cycles

162





SiNPs/PBAs-450
0.56–0.7 mg cm−2


70:15 (Super P):15 (CMC)
68.62%, 0.07 A g−1
613 mA h g−1, 4.2 A g−1
725.02 mA h g−1, 0.42 A g−1, 200 cycles

162




SiNP-based polynary materials





SiNPs@carbon/CNFs
1.3 mg cm−2
72 wt%
100:0:0
80%, 0.5 A g−1
500 mA h g−1, 8 A g−1
840 mA h g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 600 cycles

70





Carbon@Fe2O3/SiNPs


82.5 wt%
80:10 (carbon black):10 (CMC)
68.5%, 0.1 A g−1
423 mA h g−1, 10 A g−1
680.7 mA h g−1, 1 A g−1, 300 cycles

107





Al2O3@SiNPs/CNF
2–3 mg cm−2
37.6 wt%
100:0:0




827.3 mA h g−1, 50 mA g−1, 100 cycles

108





PD@SiNPs/CNTs


38 wt%
100:0:0
64.9%, 0.1 A g−1
450 mA h g−1, 5 A g−1
795 mA h g−1, 2 A g−1, 300 cycles

119





Among the above seven categorized additives, carbon materials, especially graphite, are still the most promising and attractive alternatives to be composited with SiNPs, owing to the advantages of wide applications and long-term commercialization with solid foundation of both experiment and practice. Compared to carbon materials, metallic materials with better conductivity and mechanical strength can further enhance electrode kinetics and improve the structural integrity of SiNP-based composites during cycles. However, most of the present fabrication processes are quite complicated. Although metal oxides as anodes usually have much higher theoretical discharge capacities than most of the other types of additives, the high voltages of lithiation and delithiation remain to be the biggest obstacle hindering real applications. The incorporation of CPs in SiNP-based anodes can avoid the usage of conductors and other binders, which provides a great chance to obtain high-energy LIBs. Moreover, the degradation effects of other polymers with low conductivity on the charge carrier diffusion during cycling should be further restrained. Relatively high discharge capacities can be achieved by combining SiNPs with additional Si-based materials. However, the problems of Si-based materials leading to volume expansion and electrode fracture tend to get worse. Other types of additives can be also possibly explored to improve the function of SiNP-based composites, which deserve more in-depth investigation because relevant reports on these additives are still far from enough.
The main purpose of combining SiNPs with other materials is to pursue better electrochemical performances of the SiNP-based anodes for LIBs. Thus, the key point for the development of SiNP-based composites should be making full use of the additives to overcome the defects of SiNPs, such as the large volume change and low electrical conductivity, by taking advantage of the synergetic effects of the additives as per the pros and cons presented above. To be specific, for additives with good electrical conductivity, more efforts should be devoted towards improving the integrity of the SiNP-based composites; for soft or flexible additives with good structural stability, the focus should be on finding ways to enhance the electrical conductivity of the final composites. Therefore, synthesizing polynary composites seems rather effective at further improving the electrochemical performance of the SiNP-based anodes. Additionally, due to the much higher capacity of SiNPs than that of the additives, using these additives in the SiNPs inevitably results in a loss of theoretical capacity of the final composite electrodes. A higher Si content thereby means a higher capacity performance of the composite. Nevertheless, a lower Si content in the composite helps achieve a better cycling performance. Hence, the mass ratio of the materials in the SiNP-based composites should be optimized to balance the capacity, electrical conductivity and structural stability.
Although considerable advances have been realized in enhancing the electrochemical performance of the SiNP-based composites, there are still many common problems remaining to be solved, such as low ICE, low tap density resulting in low specific energy density, insufficient efficiency for mass production, and expensive and complicated fabrication processes. For example, for commercialized anode materials, the ICE should be improved by more than 90% and the average CE should be around 99.8%. However, most of the aforementioned SiNP-composites cannot meet this demand. Hence, more efforts should be devoted to solving the above problems. Structural engineering is worth full consideration. Compositional design should be combined with structural optimization to make full use of the coupled materials. Investigating multicomponent composites with hierarchical structures is highly recommended owing to the obvious improvement of the electrochemical performance by making use of the synergetic effects of different materials and structures. Although there have been various SiNP-based composites, there is still plenty of scope to explore more possible materials synthesized by coupling the SiNPs with different materials. Incorporating novel materials except for the aforementioned materials into the SiNP-based composites may also lead to unexpected improvement of the electrochemical performance. In addition, the electrochemical performance of the SiNP-based composites can also be enhanced by optimizing the binders, conductive additives, electrolytes and current collectors. More efforts should also be devoted to these aspects.
Additionally, we believe that it is important to distinguish and link academic research with practical applications in the development of SiNP-based composites. For academic research, exploring these composites should be oriented to real applications and, more importantly, providing reasonable rationales behind the phenomena. For commercialization, more attention should be paid towards lowering the cost, guaranteeing safety, enhancing fabrication efficiency, improving the battery performance, etc. under the guidance of academic research. Thus, in academia, the future directions of SiNP-based composites should be devoted to developing new additives and novel structures for electrode design. As for real applications, the combination of carbon materials and SiNPs has been commercialized in a relatively small field of LIBs with high-energy densities. The next step is to further enrich the sorts and structures of the SiNP/carbon composites by coupling SiNPs with different carbon materials and structures, as well as optimizing the dosage of SiNPs in the composites. Likewise, there is still plenty of scope to explore other non-carbon additives. Before large-scale application, it is highly recommended to use SiNP/carbon-based composites with low mass ratios of non-carbon additives for laboratory-scale tests. Based on the aforementioned merits, the non-carbon additives can help improve the performance of the commercialized SiNP/carbon composites to further meet the demands of high energy densities. In particular, we must well address the issues of material composition and structure optimization of non-carbon materials in SiNP-based anodes for better battery performances. Facile and efficient processes for manufacturing the electrodes are preferred all the time. Therefore, despite some difficulties hindering the commercialization of SiNP-based anode materials, one should be confident in overcoming these problems in order to improve the SiNP-based composites with higher electrochemical performances for advanced LIBs.
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (51975218 and 51722504), Science and Technology Plan Program of Guangdong Province (2017KZ010105 and 2017B090901012), Key R&D Program of Guangdong Province (2019B090909001) and Special Support Plan of Guangdong Province (2017TX04X141). In addition, Yang Yang especially wants to thank the patience, care and support from Tingting Li over the past decade.
References
Y. Yang, W. Yuan, X. Zhang, Y. Yuan, C. Wang, Y. Ye, Y. Huang, Z. Qiu and Y. Tang, Appl. Energy, 2020, 257, 114002 CrossRef .
J. Luo, W. Yuan, S. Huang, B. Zhao, Y. Chen, M. Liu and Y. Tang, Adv. Sci., 2018, 5, 1800031 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Kobayashi, H. Miyashiro, A. Yamazaki and Y. Mita, J. Power Sources, 2020, 449, 227502 CrossRef .
H. Geng, Y. Peng, L. Qu, H. Zhang and M. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 1903030 CrossRef CAS .
X. Deng, J. Li, L. Ma, J. Sha and N. Zhao, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 2221–2245 RSC .
D. Narsimulu, G. Nagaraju, S. C. Sekhar, B. Ramulu and J. S. Yu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 497, 143795 CrossRef .
T. N. Pham, J. Hur, I. T. Kim, Y. Lee and Y.-C. Lee, ChemElectroChem, 2019, 6, 5911–5927 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zheng-Long, Y. Shanshan, C. Jiang, Z. Limin and K. Jang-Kyo, Energy Storage Mater., 2017, 8, 10–19 CrossRef .
B. Qu, Y. Sun, L. Liu, C. Li, C. Yu, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Sci. Rep., 2017, 7, 42772 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Nieradko, L. Eskandarian and O. A. Semenikhin, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 327, 135023 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Chockla, J. T. Harris, V. A. Akhavan, T. D. Bogart, V. C. Holmberg, C. Steinhagen, C. B. Mullins, K. J. Stevenson and B. A. Korgel, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 20914–20921 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. You, X. Han, Z. Zhang, L. Li, C. Li, W. Huang, J. Wan, J. Xu and S. Chen, Ionics, 2019, 25, 4109–4118 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhou, L. Xu, G. Hu, L. Ma and Y. Cui, Chem. Rev., 2019, 119, 11042–11109 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chae, S.-H. Choi, N. Kim, J. Sung and J. Cho, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 110–135 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Z. A. Manj, F. Zhang, W. U. Rehman, W. Luo and J. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 385, 123821 CrossRef .
K. W. D. K. Chandrasiri, M. D. C. D. Jayawardana, M. Y. Abeywardana, J. Kim and B. L. Lucht, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2019, 166, A4115–A4121 Search PubMed .
K. Feng, M. Li, W. Liu, A. G. Kashkooli, X. Xiao, M. Cai and Z. Chen, Small, 2018, 14, 1702737 CrossRef PubMed .
P. Li, G. Zhao, X. Zheng, X. Xu, C. Yao, W. Sun and S. X. Dou, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 422–446 CrossRef .
X. Su, Q. Wu, J. Li, X. Xiao, A. Lott, W. Lu, B. W. Sheldon and J. Wu, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300882 CrossRef .
S. Wu, J. Yang, B. Yu, S. Fang, Z. Wu and B. Shi, Prog. Chem., 2018, 30, 272–285 Search PubMed .
X. Zuo, J. Zhu, P. Mueller-Buschbaum and Y.-J. Cheng, Nano Energy, 2017, 31, 113–143 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Zhang, Z. L. Wang and X. Lu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3587–3599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. An, B. Gao, S. Mei, B. Xiang, J. Fu, L. Wang, Q. Zhang, P. K. Chu and K. Huo, Nat. Commun., 2019, 10, 1447 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Q. Sun, Prog. Solid State Chem., 2007, 35, 1–159 CrossRef CAS .
C. Q. Sun, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2004, 69, 045105 CrossRef .
Y. Sun, K. Liu and Y. Zhu, J. Nanomater., 2017, 2017, 1–15 Search PubMed .
H.-p. Feng, L. Tang, G.-m. Zeng, Y. Zhou, Y.-c. Deng, X. Ren, B. Song, C. Liang, M.-y. Wei and J.-f. Yu, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 267, 26–46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Weng, J. Yang, D. Li, R. Wang, F. Qiu, C. Wang and Y. Yang, Nano, 2019, 14, 1930004 CrossRef CAS .
L. Sun, J. Xie and Z. Jin, Energy Technol., 2019, 7, 1900962 CrossRef CAS .
T. Shen, Z. Yao, X. Xia, X. Wang, C. Gu and J. Tu, Adv. Eng. Mater., 2018, 20, 1700591 CrossRef .
Z. Liu, Q. Yu, Y. Zhao, R. He, M. Xu, S. Feng, S. Li, L. Zhou and L. Mai, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 285–309 RSC .
L. Peng, Z. Guoqiang, Z. Xiaobo, X. Xun, Y. Chenghao, S. Wenping and D. Shi Xue, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 15, 422–446 CrossRef .
Y. He, K. Xiang, W. Zhou, Y. Zhu, X. Chen and H. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 353, 666–678 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, Z. Li, W. Zhong, C. Li, L. Li and H. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 319, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kim, V. Guccini, K.-d. Seong, J. Oh, G. Salazar-Alvarez and Y. Piao, Carbon, 2017, 118, 8–17 CrossRef CAS .
L. Shi, W. Wang, A. Wang, K. Yuan, Z. Jin and Y. Yang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 18190–18197 RSC .
W. Li, M. Li, J.-a. Shi, X. Zhong, L. Gu and Y. Yu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 12430–12435 RSC .
L. Kong, Y. Yang, R. Li and Z. Li, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 198, 144–155 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kowase, K. Hori, K. Hasegawa, T. Momma and S. Noda, J. Power Sources, 2017, 363, 450–459 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yao, J. P. Zheng and Z. Liang, J. Mater. Res., 2018, 33, 482–494 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, X. J. Huang, L. Q. Chen, G. W. Zhou, Z. Zhang, D. P. Yu, Y. J. Mo and N. Pei, Solid State Ionics, 2000, 135, 181–191 CrossRef CAS .
N. Dimov, S. Kugino and M. Yoshio, Electrochim. Acta, 2003, 48, 1579–1587 CrossRef CAS .
H. Sohn, D. H. Kim, R. Yi, D. Tang, S.-E. Lee, Y. S. Jung and D. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2016, 334, 128–136 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yoshio, H. Y. Wang, K. Fukuda, T. Umeno, N. Dimov and Z. Ogumi, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2002, 149, A1598–A1603 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sourice, A. Bordes, A. Boulineau, J. P. Alper, S. Franger, A. Quinsac, A. Habert, Y. Leconte, E. De Vito, W. Porcher, C. Reynaud, N. Herlin-Boime and C. Haon, J. Power Sources, 2016, 328, 527–535 CrossRef CAS .
A. Mery, P. Bernard, A. Valero, J. P. Alper, N. Herlin-Boime, C. Haon, F. Duclairoir and S. Sadki, J. Power Sources, 2019, 420, 9–14 CrossRef CAS .
F. Qu, G. She, J. Wang, X. Qi, S. Li, S. Zhang, L. Mu and W. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. Solids, 2019, 124, 312–317 CrossRef CAS .
X. Shen, W. Jiang, H. Sun, Y. Wang, A. Dong, J. Hu and D. Yang, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 691, 178–184 CrossRef CAS .
N. Liu, X. Mamat, R. Jiang, W. Tong, Y. Huang, D. Jia, Y. Li, L. Wang, T. Wagberg and G. Hu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 343, 78–85 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhang, Y. Du, D. Li, D. Shen, J. Yang, Z. Guo, H. K. Liu, A. A. Elzatahry and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 6749–6755 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. S. Kim, W. Pfleging, R. Kohler, H. J. Seifert, T. Y. Kim, D. Byun, H.-G. Jung, W. Choi and J. K. Lee, J. Power Sources, 2015, 279, 13–20 CrossRef CAS .
Y.-S. Hu, R. Demir-Cakan, M.-M. Titirici, J.-O. Mueller, R. Schloegl, M. Antonietti and J. Maier, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 1645–1649 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Guo, A. Sun, X. Chen, C. Wang and A. Manivannan, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3981–3987 CrossRef CAS .
W. Luo, Y. Wang, S. Chou, Y. Xu, W. Li, B. Kong, S. X. Dou, H. K. Liu and J. Yang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 255–264 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Lu, F. Yang, G. G. X. Wang, T. Zhang and P. Wang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2019, 14, 5961–5971 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Kim, D. Ko, J. Oh, J. Lee, T. Hwang, Y. Jeon, W. H. Antink and Y. Piao, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 15582–15590 RSC .
K. Feng, W. Ahn, G. Lui, H. W. Park, A. G. Kashkooli, G. Jiang, X. Wang, X. Xiao and Z. Chen, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 187–197 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gu, S. Ko, S. Yoo, E. Lee, S. H. Min, S. Park and B.-S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2015, 300, 351–357 CrossRef CAS .
S. Mukherjee, Z. Ren and G. Singh, Nano-Micro Lett., 2018, 10, 70 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Wen, Y. Zhu, A. Langrock, A. Manivannan, S. H. Ehrman and C. Wang, Small, 2013, 9, 2810–2816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Energy, 2012, 1, 401–410 CrossRef CAS .
T. H. Hwang, Y. M. Lee, B.-S. Kong, J.-S. Seo and J. W. Choi, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 802–807 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu, G. Zheng, N. Liu, T. J. Carney, Y. Yang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 904–909 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W.-J. Yu, C. Liu, P.-X. Hou, L. Zhang, X.-Y. Shan, F. Li and H.-M. Cheng, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5063–5071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Weiqun, W. Qian, C. Ke, T. Jingjing, W. Hongtao, Z. Limin and Y. Haimin, Compos. Commun., 2016, 1, 1–5 CrossRef .
S. Prakash, C. Zhang, J.-D. Park, F. Razmjooei and J.-S. Yu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 534, 47–54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Liu, H. Wu, M. T. McDowell, Y. Yao, C. Wang and Y. Cui, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 3315–3321 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Ding, X. Liu, Y. Huang, X. Zhang, Q. Zhao, X. Xiang, G. Li, P. He, Z. Wen, J. Li and Y. Huang, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 647–657 CrossRef CAS .
B. Li, Y. Jiang, F. Jiang, D. Cao, H. Wang and C. Niu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 341, 46–52 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xu, Y. Zhu, F. Han, C. Luo and C. Wang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2015, 5, 1400753 CrossRef .
Y. Chen, Y. Hu, Z. Shen, R. Chen, X. He, X. Zhang, Y. Li and K. Wu, J. Power Sources, 2017, 342, 467–475 CrossRef CAS .
S. Wang, J. Liao, M. Wu, Z. Xu, F. Gong, C. Chen, Y. Wang and X. Yan, Part. Part. Syst. Charact., 2017, 34, 1700141 CrossRef .
X. Li, Y. Bai, M. Wang, G. Wang, Y. Ma, Y. Huang and J. Zheng, Nanomaterials, 2019, 9, 650 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, X. Zhang, H. Jin, P. Zong, Y. Bai, K. Lian, H. Xu and F. Ma, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 360, 974–981 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Tao, M. Huang, L.-Z. Fan and X. Qu, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 89, 394–399 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. Choi, S. J. Kim, H. W. Choi, C.-E. Park, Y. J. Gao, Y. Hang, S.-Y. Jeong, J.-P. Kim, J.-S. Bae and C.-R. Cho, Curr. Appl. Phys., 2017, 17, 1087–1093 CrossRef .
D. Ji, Y. Wan, Z. Yang, C. Li, G. Xiong, L. Li, M. Han, R. Guo and H. Luo, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 192, 22–29 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, R. Li, C. Bulin, R. Xing and B. Zhang, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2017, 12, 4164–4172 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Park, H.-W. Shim, J.-C. Kim and D.-W. Kim, J. Alloys Compd., 2017, 728, 490–496 CrossRef CAS .
X. Huang, D. Li and M. Li, Powder Technol., 2018, 331, 52–59 CrossRef CAS .

          J. Yang, G. Zhu, W. Luo, L. Wang and W. Jiang,CN109786726-A,  2019 .
S. Yodoya, Y. Domi, H. Usui and H. Sakaguchi, ChemistrySelect, 2019, 4, 1375–1378 CrossRef CAS .

          H. Luo, J. Liang and J. Kong, CN109786726-A,  2019 .

          Y. Liao, X. Zhou, H. Zhang and Q. Zhang, CN108767241-A,  2018 .
C. Hwang, K. Lee, H.-D. Um, Y. Lee, K. Seo and H.-K. Song, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2017, 164, A1564–A1568 CrossRef CAS .
O. Salihoglu and Y. El Kahlout, Mater. Res.-Ibero-Am. J., 2019, 22(2), e20180303 Search PubMed .
X. Chen, Q. Bi, M. Sajjad, X. Wang, Y. Ren, X. Zhou, W. Xu and Z. Liu, Nanomaterials, 2018, 8(5), 285 CrossRef PubMed .
X. H. Liu, L. Q. Zhang, L. Zhong, Y. Liu, H. Zheng, J. W. Wang, J.-H. Cho, S. A. Dayeh, S. T. Picraux, J. P. Sullivan, S. X. Mao, Z. Z. Ye and J. Y. Huang, Nano Lett., 2011, 11, 2251–2258 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Lv, B. Zhu, X. Li, C. Chen, J. Li, Y. Jin, X. Hu and J. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 44452–44457 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yoo, J.-I. Lee, S. Ko and S. Park, Nano Energy, 2013, 2, 1271–1278 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Y. Lee, S.-I. Kim and S. Yoon, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2019, 19, 7753–7757 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ohta, K. Fukada, T. Tashiro, M. Dougakiuchi and M. Kambara, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2018, 51, 105501 CrossRef .
S. Kwon, K.-H. Kim, W.-S. Kim and S.-H. Hong, Nanotechnology, 2019, 30, 405401 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Murugesan, J. T. Harris, B. A. Korgel and K. J. Stevenson, Chem. Mater., 2012, 24, 1306–1315 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li, W. Fa, H. Zhao, C. Zhu, H. Jia and L. Gu, Micro Nano Lett., 2019, 14, 887–891 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, Z. Wen, S. Huang, X. Zhu and X. Zhang, Solid State Ionics, 2006, 177, 2807–2810 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yu, L. Gu, C. Zhu, S. Tsukimoto, P. A. van Aken and J. Maier, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 2247–2250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Yang and Q. Pan, Electrochem. Solid-State Lett., 2011, 14, A180–A184 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chen, X. Mei, G. Ji, M. Lu, J. Xie, J. Lu and J. Y. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2012, 51, 2409–2413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yue, J. Tang, F. Li, N. Xu, F. Zhang, Q. Zhang, R. Guan, J. Hong and W. Zhang, Mater. Lett., 2017, 187, 118–122 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, C. Zhang, S. Wu, Z. Liu, J. Zheng, Y. Zuo, C. Xue, C. Li and B. Cheng, Nanoscale Res. Lett., 2016, 11, 214 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Rangasamy, J. Y. Hwang and W. Choi, Carbon, 2014, 77, 1065–1072 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hwa, W.-S. Kim, B.-C. Yu, S.-H. Hong and H.-J. Sohn, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2013, 117, 7013–7017 CrossRef CAS .
A. Martinez-Garcia, A. K. Thapa, R. Dharmadasa, T. Q. Nguyen, J. Jasinski, T. L. Druffel and M. K. Sunkara, Sci. Rep., 2015, 5, 10530 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Yang, Y. Wang, W. Li, L. Wang, Y. Fan, W. Jiang, W. Luo, Y. Wang, B. Kong, C. Selomulya, H. K. Liu, S. X. Dou and D. Zhao, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700523 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. Wang, Y. Ban, H. Zhou, L. Zhang, Y. Huang, W. Shao and S. Chen, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2017, 250, 012054 Search PubMed .
Q. Wang, C. Guo, J. He, S. Yang, Z. Liu and Q. Wang, J. Alloys Compd., 2019, 795, 284–290 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, Y. Sun, G. Xu, Y. Lu, S. Zhang, L. Xue, J. S. Jur and X. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 11417–11425 RSC .
D. Lee, B. Kim, J. Kim, S. Jeong, G. Cao and J. Moon, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 27234–27241 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Q. Shi, J. P. Tu, Y. F. Yuan, H. M. Wu, Y. Li and X. B. Zhao, Electrochem. Commun., 2006, 8, 1610–1614 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1300958 CrossRef .
E. M. Lotfabad, P. Kalisvaart, A. Kohandehghan, K. Cui, M. Kupsta, B. Farbod and D. Mitlin, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 13746–13746 RSC .
H. Wu, G. Yu, L. Pan, N. Liu, M. T. McDowell, Z. Bao and Y. Cui, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 1943 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-C. Tao, X.-L. Yang, L.-L. Zhang and S.-B. Ni, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 1989–1994 CrossRef CAS .
H. S. La, K. S. Park, K. S. Nahm, K. K. Jeong and Y. S. Lee, Colloids Surf., A, 2006, 272, 22–26 CrossRef CAS .
L. Luo, P. Zhao, H. Yang, B. Liu, J.-G. Zhang, Y. Cui, G. Yu, S. Zhang and C.-M. Wang, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 7016–7022 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. McGraw, P. Kolla, B. Yao, R. Cook, Q. Quiao, J. Wu and A. Smirnova, Polymer, 2016, 99, 488–495 CrossRef CAS .
M. Gu, X.-C. Xiao, G. Liu, S. Thevuthasan, D. R. Baer, J.-G. Zhang, J. Liu, N. D. Browning and C.-M. Wang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 3684 CrossRef PubMed .
D. Gueon and J. H. Moon, Chem. Commun., 2019, 55, 361–364 RSC .
Z. Wang, C. Xu, P. Tammela, J. Huo, M. Stromme, K. Edstrom, T. Gustafsson and L. Nyholm, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 14109–14115 RSC .
L. Liu, M. Li, L. Chu, B. Jiang and R. Lin, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 476, 501–512 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, K. Ai and L. Lu, Chem. Rev., 2014, 114, 5057–5115 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Choi, H. Ahn and M. J. Park, Macromolecules, 2011, 44, 7327–7334 CrossRef CAS .
Y. He, D. M. Piper, M. Gu, J. J. Travis, S. M. George, S.-H. Lee, A. Genc, L. Pullan, J. Liu, S. X. Mao, J.-G. Zhang, C. Ban and C. Wang, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 11816–11823 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wu and Y. Cui, Nano Today, 2012, 7, 414–429 CrossRef CAS .
S. Barth, F. Hernandez-Ramirez, J. D. Holmes and A. Romano-Rodriguez, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2010, 55, 563–627 CrossRef CAS .
R. Teki, M. K. Datta, R. Krishnan, T. C. Parker, T.-M. Lu, P. N. Kumta and N. Koratkar, Small, 2009, 5, 2236–2242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Hu, H. Wu, S. S. Hong, L. Cui, J. R. McDonough, S. Bohy and Y. Cui, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 367–369 RSC .
M. Wu, J. E. C. Sabisch, X. Song, A. M. Minor, V. S. Battaglia and G. Liu, Nano Lett., 2013, 13, 5397–5402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Xun, X. Song, L. Wang, M. E. Grass, Z. Liu, V. S. Battaglia and G. Liu, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2011, 158, A1260–A1266 CrossRef CAS .
K. Homma, M. Kambara and T. Yoshida, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2014, 15, 025006 CrossRef PubMed .
D. V. Novikov, E. Y. Evschik, V. I. Berestenko, T. V. Yaroslavtseva, A. V. Levchenko, M. V. Kuznetsov, N. G. Bukun, O. V. Bushkova and Y. A. Dobrovolsky, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 208, 109–119 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lee, J. Koo, B. Jang and S. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2016, 329, 79–87 CrossRef CAS .
C. Gan, S. Wen, Y. Liu, W. Wen, P. Dou, J. Su and X. Luo, Waste Manage., 2019, 84, 373–382 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wu, J. Yang, X. Zhou, J. Tang, Y. Ren and Y. Nie, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 16862–16868 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Deng, Z.-Y. Wu, Z.-W. Yin, Y.-Q. Lu, Z.-G. Huang, J.-H. You, J.-T. Li, L. Huang and S.-G. Sun, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 260, 830–837 CrossRef CAS .
K. Adpakpang, J.-e. Park, S. M. Oh, S.-J. Kim and S.-J. Hwang, Electrochim. Acta, 2014, 136, 483–492 CrossRef CAS .
S.-H. Kim, D. H. Lee, C. Park and D.-W. Kim, J. Power Sources, 2018, 395, 328–335 CrossRef CAS .
N. Umirov, D.-H. Seo, T. Kim, H.-Y. Kim and S.-S. Kim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2019, 71, 351–360 CrossRef CAS .
H. Usui, M. Nomura, H. Nishino, M. Kusatsu, T. Murota and H. Sakaguchi, Mater. Lett., 2014, 130, 61–64 CrossRef CAS .
A. Netz, R. A. Huggins and W. Weppner, J. Power Sources, 2003, 119, 95–100 CrossRef .
Z. Wen, G. Lu, S. Cui, H. Kim, S. Ci, J. Jiang, P. T. Hurley and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 342–351 RSC .
D. Tang, R. Yi, M. L. Gordin, M. Melnyk, F. Dai, S. Chen, J. Song and D. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 10375–10378 RSC .
J. Yan, C. E. Ren, K. Maleski, C. B. Hatter, B. Anasori, P. Urbankowski, A. Sarycheva and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701264 CrossRef .
A. M. Navarro-Suarez, K. Maleski, T. Makaryan, Y. Jun, B. Anasori and Y. Gogotsi, Batteries Supercaps, 2018, 1, 33–38 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xu, Y. Dall'Agnese, J. Li, Y. Gogotsi and W. Han, Chem. – Eur. J., 2018, 24, 18556–18563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-T. Liu, P. Zhang, N. Sun, B. Anasori, Q.-Z. Zhu, H. Liu, Y. Gogotsi and B. Xu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1707334 CrossRef PubMed .
A. Ali, K. Hantanasirisakul, A. Abdala, P. Urbankowski, M.-Q. Zhao, B. Anasori, Y. Gogotsi, B. Aissa and K. A. Mahmoud, Langmuir, 2018, 34, 11325–11334 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Tian, Y. An and J. Feng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11, 10004–10011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhao, Y. Zhang, Y. Wang, H. Li and Y. Peng, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1536–1554 CrossRef .
M. Sreejesh, S. Shenoy, K. Sridharan, D. Kufian, A. K. Arof and H. S. Nagaraja, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2017, 410, 336–343 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xiong, Z. Cai, L. Qu, P. Zhang, Z. Yuan, O. K. Asare, W. Xu, C. Lin and L. Mai, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 12625–12630 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, Q. Ru, H. Yan, X. Hou, F. Chen, S. Hu and L. Zhao, J. Mater. Sci. Technol., 2019, 35, 1840–1850 CrossRef .
C. Loka, H. Yu, K.-S. Lee and J. Cho, J. Power Sources, 2013, 244, 259–265 CrossRef CAS .
B. Han, Y. Yang, X. Shi, G. Zhang, L. Gong, D. Xu, H. Zeng, C. Wang, M. Gu and Y. Deng, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 359–366 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liu, X. Wang, D. Qi, C. Xu, J. Yu, Y. Liu, Y. Jiang, B. Liedberg and X. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603382 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Wu, L. Huang, X. Huang, X. Guo, D. Liu, D. Zheng, X. Zhang, R. Ren, D. Qu and J. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2017, 10, 1854–1861 RSC .
L. Ren, J. Zhuang, G. Casillas, H. Feng, Y. Liu, X. Xu, Y. Liu, J. Chen, Y. Du, L. Jiang and S. X. Dou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8111–8118 CrossRef CAS .
W. Li, Prog. Mater. Sci., 2019, 100, 21–63 CrossRef .
J. Ren, H. W. Langmi, B. C. North and M. Mathe, Int. J. Energy Res., 2015, 39, 607–620 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lee, G. Ali, D. H. Kim and K. Y. Chung, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601491 CrossRef .
F. Wu, H. Wang, J. Shi, Z. Yan, S. Song, B. Peng, X. Zhang and Y. Xiang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 19639–19648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:
Yang Yang	Yang Yang received his BS degree at Hebei University of Science and Technology in 2015, and started studying for his Master's degree at the School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of South China University of Technology (SCUT) in 2017. He is currently a PhD student at the School of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of SCUT under the supervision of Professor Wei Yuan. His current research mainly focuses on the field of electrochemical energy storage materials and their applications in lithium-ion batteries.
Wei Yuan	Wei Yuan is a professor of Mechanical and Automotive Engineering of SCUT. Prof. Yuan received his Ph.D. in mechanical manufacturing in 2012 from SCUT. He is also the director of Guangdong Engineering and Technology Research Center of Advanced Electric Vehicle Power Supply and Thermal Control System, a member of the Battery Committee of the Chinese Electrical Society and a senior member of the Chinese Mechanical Engineering Society. His current research interests are focused on fuel cells, lithium-ion batteries, micro-reactors and surface functional structures for enhanced heat transfer.

 	Fig. 1  Schematic of SiNP-based composites including favorable electrochemical effects of coupled materials.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Optical microscopy, scanning electron microscopy (SEM) and transmission electron microscopy (TEM) images of Si@C core–shell nanoparticles with controllable coating thicknesses of 0, 2, 5, 10, 15, and 25 nm, respectively; (b) cycling performance (based on the total weight of electrodes) and (c) galvanostatic charge–discharge profiles for selected cycles of Si NPs, Si@5C, Si@10C, and Si@15C electrodes at a current density of 0.5 A g−1; and (d) rate capability of Si NPs, Si@5C, Si@10C and Si@15C electrodes at various current densities ranging from 0.14 to 16.8 A g−1. (Reproduced with permission.54 Copyright© 2016, Elsevier Ltd.)	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Schematic of the fabrication processes of SiNPs encapsulated in carbon tubes; (b) comparison of cycling performances of SiNP@C composites and pure SiNPs at C/5; and (c) rate capability of SiNP@C composites. (Reproduced with permission.62 Copyright© 2011, American Chemical Society.) (d) Schematic of yolk–shell SiNP/carbon composites; (e) cycling performance of yolk–shell SiNPs/carbon between 0.01 and 1 V. The rate was C/10 for one cycle, then C/3 for 10 cycles, and 1C for the later cycles; and (f) voltage profiles of yolk–shell SiNP/carbon composites under different C-rates. (Reproduced with permission.67 Copyright© 2012, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 4  Schematic illustration of (a) the synthesis processes and structures of SiNPs@carbon/CNFs (b) before and (c) after carbonization; (d) rate capability and (e) cycling performance of SiNP@carbon/CNF composite electrodes with a mass loading of 1.7 mg cm−2. (Reproduced with permission.70 Copyright© 2014, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.)	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic representation of the synthesis and (b) scanning transmission electron microscopy image of Cu-coated SiNPs; (c) comparison of electrochemical performances of Cu-coated SiNPs and pristine SiNPs. (Reproduced with permission.94 Copyright© 2012, American Chemical Society.) (d) Schematic of Ag-coated macroporous SiNPs; (e) cyclability of 3D macroporous Si, Ag-coated 3D macroporous Si, and commercial SiNPs; (f) rate capabilities of 3D macroporous Si and a Ag coated 3D macroporous Si electrode. (Reproduced with permission.97 Copyright© 2010, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (g) Schematic illustration of the fabrication processes for HPSi; (h) discharge capacities of the HPSi-Ag nanocomposite (black), HPSi-carbon nanocomposite (brown), HPSi nanoparticles (blue), and commercial SiNPs (ca. 100 nm, red) at 500 mA g−1; and (i) rate capability of HPSi-Ag at different current densities. (Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright© 2012, Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.)	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Structural evolution of a-TiO2-coated SiNPs during electrochemical cycling; (b) cyclability of pristine Si, a-TiO2- and c-TiO2-coated SiNPs at 420 mA g−1 (first activated with five cycles at 140 mA g−1); (c) comparison of rate performances of a-TiO2- and c-TiO2-coated SiNPs at different current densities. (Reproduced with permission.105 Copyright© 2017, WILEY-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.) (d) Schematic of Al2O3-coated SiNPs/CNF; (e) cycling performance and (f) coulombic efficiencies of Si/C composite nanofibers and Al2O3-coated SiNP/CNF composite nanofibers. (Reproduced with permission.108 Copyright© 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (g) SEM image of Si-ITO core-sheath fibers where SiNPs are filled in ITO fibers; (h) schematic of ITO@SiNPs; and (i) cycling performance of ITO@SiNPs at 0.3 and 2 C. (Reproduced with permission.109 Copyright© 2015, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic of PD-coated SiNPs/CNTs; comparison of (b) the cycling performance and (c) rate capability of SiNPs/CNTs, SiNPs/porous CNTs and PD-coated SiNPs/porous CNTs. (Reproduced with permission.119 Copyright© 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic, (b) cycling performance at 0.2 C and (c) voltage profile at 0.2 C of Si-overcoated SiNP-decorated SiNWs. (Reproduced with permission.128 Copyright© 2011, The Royal Society of Chemistry.)	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) TEM image of Si/MoSi2; (b) cycling performance at 0.2 C and (c) rate capability of bare Si and Si/MoSi2. (Reproduced with permission.135 Copyright© 2016, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Schematic of the synthesis processes of TiN-coated SiNPs; (b) cycling performance of pure Si, TiO2-coated SiNPs and TiN-coated SiNPs at 0.4 A g−1; (c) rate performance of pure Si and TiN-coated SiNPs. (Reproduced with permission.143 Copyright© 2014, The Royal Society of Chemistry.) (d) Schematic of the fabrication processes of SiNPs/MXene (Ti3C2Tx); comparison of (e) cycling performance at 200 mA g−1 and (f) rate capability of pure Si and SiNPs/MXene (Ti3C2Tx). (Reproduced with permission.149 Copyright© 2019, American Chemical Society.)	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic of the fabrication processes of carbon-coated SiNPs/MoS2; (b) cycling performance of Si, MoS2, SMP precursor of SMC and SMC at 100 mA g−1; (c) cyclability at 500 mA g−1 and (d) rate performance of SMC. (Reproduced with permission.153 Copyright© 2019, Elsevier Ltd.)	 


Carbon materials


	Amorphous carbon-coated SiNPs	
	81.7 wt%	60:20 (10 wt% Super P, 10 wt% MWCNTs):20 (CMC)	74.9%, 0.5 A g−1	1209 mA h g−1, 16.8 A g−1	1006 mA h g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 500 cycles	
54


	SiNPs encapsulated in carbon tubes	0.6 mg cm−2	50 wt%	70:15 (Super P):15 (PAA)	87.5%, 0.137 A g−1	721 mA h g−1, 9.75 A g−1	1250 mA h g−1, 0.24 A g−1, 100 cycles	
62


	Yolk–shell SiNPs@carbon	
	71 wt%	65:20 (Super P):15 (sodium alginate)	60%, 0.1 C	600 mA h g−1, 4 C	1500 mA h g−1, 1 C, 1000 cycles.	
67


	Yolk–shell SiNPs@graphene	
	71.6 wt%	60:20 (Super P):20 (PVDF)	68%, 1 A g−1	451 mA h g−1, 20 A g−1	1775 mA h g−1, 1 A g−1, 750 cycles	
69


	N-Doped carbon-coated SiNPs	0.6 mg cm−2	78 wt%	60:20 (acetylene black):20 (sodium alginate)	84%, 0.5 A g−1	1086 mA h g−1, 2 A g−1	1565 mA h g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 100 cycles	
49


Metals


	SiNPs/Cu	0.315 mg cm−2	75 wt%	70:10 (Super P):20 (CMC)	89.8%, 0.2 A g−1	1598 mA h g−1, 2 A g−1	1569 mA h g−1, 1 A g−1, 200 cycles	
93


	Ag-Coated SiNPs	
	92.3 wt%	
	84%, 0.1 A g−1	2000 mA h g−1, 4 A g−1	3000 mA h g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 100 cycles	
99


Metal oxides


	Cu2O-coated SiNPs	
	75 wt%	60:30 (10 wt% Super P, 10 wt% graphite, 10 wt% VGCF):10 (PA)	82.9%, 0.3 A g−1	931.9 mA h g−1, 2 A g−1	1060 mA h g−1, a 300 mA g−1, 350 cycles	
101


	a-TiO2-coated SiNPs	0.373 mg cm−2	89 wt%	60:20 (10 wt% Super P, 10 wt% MWCNTs):20 (CMC)	86.1%, 0.42 A g−1	812 mA h g−1, 8.4 A g−1	1720 mA h g−1, 420 mA g−1, 200 cycles	
105


	ITO@SiNPs	1.89 mg cm−2	44.5 wt%	90:0:10 (PVDF)	70%, 0.19 A g−1	476 mA h g−1, 23.4 A g−1	502 mA h g−1, 2 C, 500 cycles	
109


Polymers


	SiNPs/PANI	0.2–0.3 mg cm−2	
	100:0:0	70%, 6 A g−1	
	550 mA h g−1, 6 A g−1, 5000 cycles	
113


	PEO@SiNPs	2 mg cm−2	40 wt%	80:10 (Super P):10 (PVDF)	
	1850 mA h g−1, 0.1 mA	
	
123


Si-Based materials


	Si@SiNPs@SiNWs	1.5 mg cm−2	100 wt%	100:0:0	81%, 0.2 C	
	1600 mA h g−1, 0.2 C, 30 cycles	
128


	SiNPs/micro-sized Si	0.23 mg cm−2	100 wt%	70:0:30 (poly(9,9-dioctylfluorene-co-fluorenone-co-methylbenzoic ester))	73%	
	2500 mA h g−1, 30 cycles	
129


	SiOx@SiNPs	0.645 mg cm−2	80 wt%	60:20 (Denka black):13 (polyamide imide)	64.41%	
	1620 mA h g−1, 50 cycles	
133


	Si/MoSi2	0.345–0.405 mg cm−2	
	60:20 (carbon black):20 (sodium alginate)	77.6%, 0.84 A g−1	550 mA h g−1, 5 C	1650 mA h g−1, 0.2 C, 150 cycles	
135


Transition metal nitrides, carbides, and dichalcogenides


	TiN@SiNPs	
	67.4 wt%	60:20 (Super P):20 (CMC)	76%, 0.4 A g−1	400 mA h g−1, 2 C	1900 mA h g−1, 0.1 C, 100 cycles	
143


	SiNPs/MXene (Ti3C2Tx)	1.1–1.3 mg cm−2	
	100:0:0	71%, 0.2 A g−1	890 mA h g−1, 5000 mA g−1	1672 mA h g−1, 1000 mA g−1, 200 cycles	
144


	Carbon@SiNPs/MoS2	
	20 wt%	70:20 (carbon black):10 (LA133)	72.7%, 0.5 A g−1	388.1 mA h g−1, 3000 mA g−1	537.6 mA h g−1, 500 mA g−1, 1200 cycles	
153


Alloys


	SiNPs/Ni–Ti	
	65 at%	80:12 (10 wt% graphite, 2 wt% Ketjenblack):8 (polyamide imide)	79.2%, 0.1 C	
	553 mA h g−1, of 2.5 mA cm−2, 52 cycles	
154


	SiNPs/Ga–In–Sn	0.45 mg cm−2	50 wt%	100:0:0	95.92%, 2 A g−1	360 mA h g−1, 20 A g−1	968 mA h g−1, 8A g−1, 1500 cycles	
155


MOFs
	MOF@SiNPs	0.56–0.7 mg cm−2	
	70:15 (Super P):15 (CMC)	74.53%, 0.07 A g−1	
	435.13 mA h g−1, 0.42 A g−1, 200 cycles	
162


	SiNPs/PBAs-450	0.56–0.7 mg cm−2	
	70:15 (Super P):15 (CMC)	68.62%, 0.07 A g−1	613 mA h g−1, 4.2 A g−1	725.02 mA h g−1, 0.42 A g−1, 200 cycles	
162


SiNP-based polynary materials


	SiNPs@carbon/CNFs	1.3 mg cm−2	72 wt%	100:0:0	80%, 0.5 A g−1	500 mA h g−1, 8 A g−1	840 mA h g−1, 0.5 A g−1, 600 cycles	
70


	Carbon@Fe2O3/SiNPs	
	82.5 wt%	80:10 (carbon black):10 (CMC)	68.5%, 0.1 A g−1	423 mA h g−1, 10 A g−1	680.7 mA h g−1, 1 A g−1, 300 cycles	
107


	Al2O3@SiNPs/CNF	2–3 mg cm−2	37.6 wt%	100:0:0	
	
	827.3 mA h g−1, 50 mA g−1, 100 cycles	
108


	PD@SiNPs/CNTs	
	38 wt%	100:0:0	64.9%, 0.1 A g−1	450 mA h g−1, 5 A g−1	795 mA h g−1, 2 A g−1, 300 cycles	
119


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
