State-of-the-art on the production and application of carbon nanomaterials from biomass  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8GC01748D View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8GC01748D
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2018, 20, 5031-5057State-of-the-art on the production and application of carbon nanomaterials from biomass

        
          
            Zhanghong 
            Wang
          
          
        
      ab, 
      
        
          
            Dekui 
            Shen
          
          
        
      *a, 
      
        
          
            Chunfei 
            Wu
          
          
        
      *c and 

        
          
            Sai 
            Gu
          
          
        
      d
aKey Laboratory of Energy Thermal Conversion and Control of Ministry of Education, Southeast University, Nanjing 210096, PR China. E-mail: 101011398@seu.edu.cn;   Tel: +86-13851706572
bSchool of Engineering and computer science, University of Hull, Hull HU6 7RX, UK
cSchool of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering, Queen's University Belfast, Belfast BT7 1NN, UK. E-mail: c.wu@qub.ac.uk;   Tel: +44 (0) 2890975573
dFaculty of Engineering and Physical Sciences, University of Surrey, Guilford, GU2 7XH, UK
Received 
      3rd June 2018
    , Accepted 28th September 2018First published on 9th October 2018AbstractBiomass is a low-cost, readily available, widely distributed, environmentally friendly and renewable carbon source. How to realize the reasonable disposal of biomass is an important question because it is a by-product/bio-waste of agriculture, industry and forestry. Carbon nanomaterials (CNMs), especially carbon nanotubes (CNTs), carbon nanofibers (CNFs), and graphene, conventionally prepared from fossil fuels are the most in-demand carbon materials at present due to their outstanding characteristics and extensive applications. The purpose of this review is to overview the progress in the technology of the preparation of CNMs from biomass in the last few decades. The production of these high value-added CNMs from biomass is intensively investigated, together with the applications of biomass as catalysts and catalyst supports during the preparation of CNMs. Finally, the advances in the application of biomass-based CNMs in terms of ecological remediation, photocatalysis, electrode materials for supercapacitors and batteries, chemical catalysis and composites are briefly summarized to develop the potential market of biomass-based CNMs.Zhanghong WangZhanghong Wang received his B.S. degree (2012) and M.S. degree (2015) from the School of Environment of Sichuan Agricultural University under the supervision of Prof. Xiaoxun Xu and Prof. Fei Shen. He is currently a Ph.D candidate in the School of Energy and Environment at Southeast University under the supervision of Prof. Dekui Shen. His research focuses on the utilization of solid wastes and environmental remediation.Dekui ShenDekui Shen is a Professor in the Key Laboratory of Energy Thermal Conversion and Control, Ministry of Education, and the School of Energy and Environment at Southeast University. He obtained a B.E. degree with a double major in thermal dynamic engineering and communication technology at Zhejiang University in 2003. He obtained his Ph.D degree in thermo-physics from the State Key Laboratory of Clean Energy Utilization at Zhejiang University in 2008. His research interests include thermo-chemical conversion of biomass into fuels, chemicals and carbon nanomaterials, molecular dynamics simulations of thermo-chemical processes and environmental pollution control.Chunfei WuDr Chunfei Wu is a Senior Lecturer at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Queen's University Belfast. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemical and Energy Engineering from the University of Leeds in 2010. He has worked in the areas of converting renewable and waste resources to energy, fuel, and chemicals through catalytic thermo-chemical routes for more than 10 years. He has published more than 110 peer reviewed journal papers with >2700 citations in the areas of catalytic thermo-chemical conversion of wastes, and he is a Chartered Scientist and a Member of the Royal Society of Chemistry.Sai GuProfessor Sai Gu joined the University of Surrey as Head of the Department of Chemical and Process Engineering in 2015 after holding various academic posts at Aston University, the University of Southampton and Cranfield University. He obtained a PhD in material modelling from the University of Nottingham and also performed post-doctoral research at the University of Cambridge. Professor Gu has an international reputation for clean energy and material research; he is currently leading a number of EPSRC-funded projects focused on the development of advanced bio-energy and carbon capture technologies.
1 Introduction
It is well established that carbon materials play important roles in promoting social development and technological progress. Graphite, diamond, activated carbon (AC) and carbon fibers, which are some of the typical carbon materials extensively employed in the last century, brought great development to human society in terms of energy, the environment and technology. With the discovery of new-generation carbon materials (i.e., carbon nanomaterials, CNMs) at the end of the last century, such as fullerenes (spherical carbon cages built of carbon atoms with sp2 hybridization via Euler's theorem), CNTs (one-dimensional carbon nanostructures composed of cylinders of sp2-hydbridized carbon atoms several nanometers in diameter and many microns in length) and graphene (a two-dimensional monolayer of sp2-hydbridized carbon atoms in a honeycomb lattice), carbon materials are once again bringing rapid development to human civilization.1,2 For example, multi-walled CNTs, discovered by Iijima in 1991,1 possess unique structures and fascinating properties, such as high tensile strengths, high moduli, large aspect ratios, low densities, good chemical and environmental stabilities, and high thermal and electrical conductivities. These unique properties of CNTs give rise to far-ranging applications in conductive and high-strength composites; energy storage and energy conversion devices;3,4 sensors;5–7 field emission displays8,9 and radiation sources; hydrogen storage media; and nanometer-sized semiconductor devices,10 probes,11,12 and wind blades.13 Since their discovery, researchers have been increasingly developing CNMs and exploiting their applications. To date, numerous methods, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD),14 arc discharge,1,15 laser ablation,16 pyrolysis,17,18 template methods,19 flame synthesis20–22 and electrolysis,23 have been successfully developed to prepare CNMs with unique properties. However, carbon sources for the preparation of CNMs mainly focus on non-renewable petroleum and coal products, such as methane (CH4), ethylene (C2H4) and benzene; these are giving rise to many serious social problems, such as energy shortages and environmental crises. Therefore, seeking new environmentally friendly, low-cost and renewable carbon sources and exploring their corresponding preparation methods towards CNMs are key factors that constrain CNMs from making contributions to the development of human society.
Biomass originating from the photosynthesis of carbon dioxide, water and solar light is the richest renewable carbon source in nature. According to statistics, the annual global biomass production is about 146 billion tons, of which carbon accounts for 20 billion tons.24 On the other hand, biomass is also produced in large amounts every year as byproducts of industry, agriculture and forestry, such as bioethanol fermentation, pulp and paper manufacturing, grain planting, and forest mining.25 It is estimated that as many as 30 billion tons of biomass waste are produced each year from agricultural production, and its production from the pulp and paper industry can reach 70 million tons.26 The development and utilization of these large amounts of natural biomass and waste biomass is not only a resource problem but also an urgent environmental problem.
Current research suggests that the preparation of bio-fuels and chemicals are two of the most promising applications of biomass.27 CH4, ethanol, hydrogen-rich syngas, benzene, and phenol as well as their derivatives can be readily obtained from biomass. At the same time, biomass is an important raw material for the preparation of carbon materials such as biochar (BC), coke and AC. In particular, BC possesses a limited specific surface area and underdeveloped porous structure, while AC possesses uncontrollable pore size distribution and an irregular three-dimensional structure, which greatly limits their applications. Driven by the huge demand for a new generation of CNMs, researchers have made great efforts to prepare CNMs from biomass with excellent properties, such as high thermal and electrical conductivities and good chemical and environmental stabilities. For example, graphene-like nanosheets with large specific surface areas and pore volumes and good electrical conductivity were successfully prepared from waste coconut shell via a graphitization approach.28 Wang et al. found that microwave plasma irradiation of rice husk can result in the formation of graphenated CNT hybrids.29
It is worth noting that the utilization of biomass for the preparation of high performance CNMs is still difficult because biomass possesses a complex three-dimensional structure, strong chemical bonding and high oxygen content. However, biomass is the only renewable carbon-containing source in the world, and the development of biomass-based CNMs will make great contributions to the progress of other renewable energies, such as wind power and solar energy.13 Therefore, continuous effort toward the preparation of CNMs from biomass in the future is of great significance.
The objective of the present work is to highlight the latest developments in the synthesis of CNMs (e.g. CNTs, CNFs, graphene) from biomass (Fig. 1). Various techniques using biomass as a carbon source for the preparation of CNMs are extensively presented, including pyrolytic transformation (catalytic graphitization, thermo-chemical activation, and catalytic graphitization coupled with thermo-chemical activation), CVD (in situ CVD and two-stage CVD), cyclic oxidation, mechanical activation and combustion. Attention is also paid to studies in which biomass is used as a low-cost sustainable catalyst or catalyst support to make contributions to CNM production. Afterward, the latest applications of biomass-based CNMs (biomass acting as carbon source, catalyst or catalyst support) are investigated as well. Finally, current challenges and future strategies for the preparation of CNMs from biomass and their applications are discussed.
 Fig. 1  Production of CNMs from biomass. 
2 Overview of biomass for CNM preparation
Biomass is a sustainable and renewable carbon-rich material that is mainly composed of hemicellulose, cellulose and lignin; it has been widely employed as a feedstock for the preparation of various high value-added carbon containing products, such as carbon materials, chemicals and bio-fuels.30–32 Currently, extensive attention is being paid to the application of biomass as an inexpensive and green carbon source for the production of CNMs, such as graphene, fullerene, CNFs and CNTs.33,34 These high value-added carbon materials (CNMs) predominantly consist of pure C element. In comparison, biomass contains abundant H, O, N and S in addition to C. It thus appears that the cleavage of chemical bonds, the removal of H, O, N and S and the retention of C are key for the preparation of CNMs from biomass. Thermal conversion involving pyrolysis, incineration or gasification is considered to be one of the most universal methods for the removal of H, O, N and S from biomass. It is reported that the aromaticity of the pyrolysis products, evaluated by means of the ratios of H/C and O/C, increases with increasing pyrolysis temperature, indicating that H and O can be detached from C-related structures.35 As demonstrated by Keiluweit et al., biomass undergoes some physical–chemical transitions as the charring temperature increases from 100 °C to 700 °C.36 These changes suggest the existence of four distinct categories of char, consisting of unique mixtures of chemical phases and physical states: (i) in transition chars, the crystalline character of the precursor materials is preserved; (ii) in amorphous chars, the heat-altered molecules and incipient aromatic polycondensates are randomly mixed; (iii) composite chars consist of poorly ordered graphene stacks embedded in amorphous phases; and (iv) turbostratic chars are dominated by disordered graphitic crystallites.36 Meanwhile, the involvement of metals such as rare earth (e.g. La), Mg and Fe, was found to be favorable for the carbonization of biomass, producing highly aromatic carbon materials.37–39 On the other hand, chemicals and fuels derived from biomass mainly contain abundant CO, hydrocarbons (CxHy), alcohols and phenols.31 It is reported that these chemicals obtained in high purity from fossil fuels have been widely used as carbon sources for the production of CNMs via CVD processes.40–43 Consequently, the application of biomass as a feedstock to prepare high-carbon-purity CNMs possesses tremendous potential.
In addition to C, H, and O, biomass is also abundant in mineral elements; these include the major elements (macronutrients) K, Na, Ca, Mg, and Si and the trace elements (micronutrients) Fe, Cu, Mn, Mo, and Zn, as well as other heavy metals.44,45 The amount of each mineral element varies with the type of biomass and the ambient environment of biomass growth. For example, the contents of ash-related elements in herbaceous plants are much higher than in wood plants.46 Meanwhile, biomass grown in saline-alkali land or tailing regions possesses many more mineral elements in relation to the soil where it grows. Furthermore, the content of mineral elements in biomass also differs based on the biomass organs (e.g. stem, leaf, root and shell). However, in one organ, the distribution of each mineral is generally homogeneous. The existence of these elements not only has a dramatic effect on the growth of biomass but also on the applications of biomass.47 Recently, much attention has been focused on the special catalytic functions of mineral elements during thermal conversion processes involving pyrolysis, gasification and incineration.47 It is reported that Ca, Mg, Ca or Fe in coconut shell and bamboo can serve as catalysts and play important roles in the synthesis of SiC whiskers, SiO2 and SiC nanowires at high temperature (1200 °C to 1400 °C).48,49 Biomass can be used as an effective catalyst for the preparation of functional materials because it contains many active catalytic mineral elements, especially transition metals such as Fe. Meanwhile, each active element is uniformly dispersed in individual organs and cells. As a result, increasing interest is being paid to the application of biomass as a low-cost and green catalyst for CNM synthesis.
Biomass has a relatively stable three-dimensional structure; thus, it can withstand certain degrees of mechanical, biological and chemical attack. Its structure becomes much more stable after it is subjected to chemical, thermochemical or biological treatment for the removal of its readily degradable constituents (all hemicellulose and most cellulose as well as partial lignin). As a result of the removal of those readily degradable constituents, many channels and pores are formed in the resulting matrix. Based on its abundant channels and pore structure, biomass without readily degradable constituents is considered to be an ideal catalyst support for extensive applications in catalytic reactions, such as hydrolysis, degradation and synthesis techniques.50 It is worth mentioning that the ample functional groups inherited from pristine biomass also have an important impact on the properties of this support in immobilizing and dispersing catalysts, which in turn plays a crucial role in the catalytic reaction.51 For example, in the process of CNM preparation, especially by the CVD method, it is essential to immobilize and disperse the catalyst onto a porous substrate; otherwise, the catalyst will readily aggregate and agglomerate, which not only results in low utilization efficiency and catalytic activity of the catalyst but also has a negative influence on the properties of the as-synthesized CNMs. It is reported that aggregated and agglomerated catalysts are either unable to prepare CNMs or only afford small CNMs with large diameters and defects.52 Additionally, interactions occur between the catalyst and support during the immobilization and dispersion of the catalyst onto the support. The strength of these interactions is responsible for the properties and the growth modes of CNMs. At a distance, the catalyst particles readily detach from the support, leading to the growth of CNTs according to a “tip growth” mechanism as the catalyst and support interact weakly.53 Furthermore, the detached catalysts can aggregate to form catalyst clusters or lumps which significantly increase the diameters of the CNTs. In contrast, strong interactions occurring between the catalyst and support enable a “base growth” mode for the growth of CNTs with small diameters.54 In brief, catalyst supports developed from biomass with abundant pores and specific functional groups have been found to be favorable for the synthesis of CNMs via CVD.
3 Biomass as a feedstock for CNM synthesis
3.1 Pyrolytic transformation
Conventional pyrolysis performed under an inert atmosphere at moderate temperature (∼500 °C) is a well-developed method for the conversion of biomass into carbonaceous materials such as BC and AC. The as-obtained carbonaceous materials are mainly composed of anomalous amorphous carbon with low crystallinity, porosity and specific surface area due to biomass containing a complex three-dimensional matrix, and abundant heteroatoms besides C. The strong interlinkages inside biomass such as β-O-4 are hardly cut off and rearranged in an orderly and regular arrangement (CNMs) during pyrolysis. Only a few studies have shown the feasibility of using pyrolysis to prepare CNMs from biomass. For example, Liu and co-workers reported that flat and wrinkled carbon nanosheets with thicknesses of 30 to 40 nm and 120 nm, respectively, as well as carbon nanorods could be collected from Perilla frutescens leaves after pyrolysis at 600 °C to 800 °C.55 Also, the pyrolysis of Camphor leaves at 1200 °C can result in the formation of few-layer graphene with a thickness of 2.37 nm.56 Actually, most studies show that CNMs are difficult to obtain from the pyrolysis of biomass unless a catalyst is added or the pyrolysis is combined with another process (a developed pyrolysis). Barin and co-workers found that highly curved graphitic nanostructured carbons with high degrees of crystallinity can be easily derived from pyrolysis of coconut coir dust after performing a hydrothermal carbonization process to pretreat the dust prior to pyrolysis.57 The existence of nickel salt (a type of graphitic catalyst) was regarded to play an important role in the formation of graphitic carbon nanostructures from cellulose via pyrolysis.58 Herein, the preparation of CNMs from developed pyrolysis is summarized and is schematically presented in Fig. 2.
 Fig. 2  Synthesis of CNMs from biomass via pyrolysis. 

3.1.1 Catalytic graphitization. 
Graphitization can be considered to be a type of pyrolysis conducted at high temperature; it has been confirmed to be an effective process to transform amorphous and turbostratic carbon materials into three-dimensional graphitic carbon materials such as CNTs, CNFs, and nanocapsules.59 The temperature required for conventional graphitization is rather high, usually above 2000 °C. This results in high costs and safety hazards, which have greatly limited its industrial application. The involvement of catalysts mainly consisting of group 4 to 7 metals can decrease the activation energy during the conversion of amorphous carbon to graphitic carbon, hence decreasing the cost of preparation of graphitic carbon. Group 4 to 7 metals (Fe, cobalt (Co), nickel (Ni), Mn, etc.) are considered to be ideal graphitization catalysts because they have 2 to 5 electrons in their d-shell orbitals, which enables them to form strong bonds between metal carbides and carbon-based materials.60 Much interest therefore has focused on the development of catalytic graphitization for the preparation of CNMs. In addition to decreasing the activation energy during graphitic carbon formation, catalytic graphitization can also transform both graphitizable and non-graphitizable carbons into crystalline materials at moderate temperatures (below 1000 °C).61 The following procedure is usually involved: (i) impregnation of the precursor with a catalyst, such as Fe or Ni; (ii) carbonization of the impregnated material at a certain temperature.59,62
Recently, catalytic graphitization has also been widely applied to the preparation of graphitic CNMs using biomass precursors. Sevilla et al.59 conducted a study about the fabrication of graphitic CNMs from pine wood sawdust via this method. In detail, sawdust was impregnated into a solution of metal nitrate (Fe or Ni) in ethanol (2.5 or 5 mmol metal per g) through grinding and washing treatment. The precursor was heat-treated under N2 at 900 °C to 1000 °C for 3 h. Afterward, the material was washed with 20% HCl in order to remove the metals. The obtained carbon samples consisted of mixtures of amorphous carbon and graphitic nanostructures. In order to extract pure graphitic CNMs, the as-prepared carbon samples were oxidized in an acid solution with a molar composition of H2O:H2SO4:KMnO4 = 1:0.02:0.006. In brief, the samples were firstly treated with a certain ratio of the acid solution and then separated, followed by washing with 10% HCl. Finally, the residue was collected and characterized by TEM/SAED, XRD and Raman analysis. The results indicated that the obtained materials were composed of graphitic carbon nanocapsules, nanocoils and nanoribbons with high crystallinity. This method was further verified in other studies,63 where a variety of saccharides, including glucose, sucrose and potato starch, and nitrate metallic salts, including Ni and Fe, were used as precursors and graphitization catalysts, respectively. As a result, bamboo-like nanopipes, nanocoils and nanocapsules were obtained, depending on the type of catalyst used. A study by Thompson et al.64 used Fe(NO3)3 as a graphitization catalyst to prepare graphitic CNMs from softwood sawdust at 800 °C. It was revealed that straight or bamboo-like graphitic CNTs were obtained which were different from those reported by Sevilla et al. although the same catalyst and similar graphitization temperatures were applied. A detailed comparison of CNMs produced from catalytic graphitization of biomass is presented in Table 1. Additionally, oxidation treatment in the liquid phase to selectively remove amorphous carbons was avoided in the work of Thompson et al.64 Petala et al. found that the carbon materials derived from the pyrolysis of pine resin loaded with Fe(NO3)3 at 1000 °C mainly consisted of magnetic carbon nanocages.65
Table 1 Characteristics of CNMs prepared through pyrolysis




Feedstock
Graphitic catalyst
Activating catalyst
Preparation process
Products
Ref.





Perilla frutescens leaves
—
—
Directly pyrolyzed at 600 °C to 800 °C
– O/N-co-doped porous carbon nanosheets with thicknesses in the range of 30 to 120 nm

55



– Carbon nanorods



Camphor leaves
—
—
Directly pyrolyzed at 1200 °C
– Few-layer graphene with a thickness of 2.37 nm

56



Coconut coir dust
—
—
Hydrothermally carbonized at 250 °C then pyrolyzed at 1500 °C
– Highly curved graphitic carbon nanostructures

57



Pine wood sawdust
Ni(NO3)2 or Fe(NO3)3
—
Pyrolyzed Ni or Fe-loaded sawdust at 900 °C to 1000 °C
– Graphitic carbon nanocapsules, nanocoils, nanoribbons

59



Softwood sawdust
Fe(NO3)3
—
Pyrolyzed Fe-loaded sawdust at 800 °C
Straight and bamboo-like graphitic nanotubes

64



Pine resin
Fe(NO3)3
—
Pyrolyzed Fe-loaded sawdust at 1000 °C
Magnetic carbon nanocages

65



Dry elm samaras
—
KOH
Pyrolyzed a KOH/elm samaras mixture at 1000 °C
Highly porous carbon nanosheets

66



Willow catkin
—
KOH
Pyrolyzed a KOH/willow catkin mixture at 850 °C
Interconnected porous carbon nanosheets

67



Sugarcane bagasse
—
KOH
Sugarcane bagasse was firstly carbonized at 700 °C and then pyrolyzed at 600 °C to 900 °C after mixing with a KOH solution
Larger graphene-like porous carbon nanosheets

68



Reed
—
KOH
Reed was subjected to a hydrothermal treatment and then pyrolyzed at 700 °C to 900 °C after mixing with a KOH solution
Interconnected porous carbon nanosheets

69



Spruce bark
—
KOH
Spruce bark was subjected to a hydrothermal treatment and then pyrolyzed at 800 °C to 1000 °C after mixing with KOH via grinding
Vertically aligned graphene nanosheet arrays

70



Wheat stalk
—
KOH
KOH-immersed wheat straw was hydrothermally treated and then pyrolyzed at 800 °C, followed by treatment at 2600 °C
Interconnected highly graphitic carbon nanosheets

71



Wheat straw
—
KOH
KOH-immersed wheat straw was hydrothermally treated and then pyrolyzed at 800 °C, followed by treatment at 2600 °C
Few-layer graphene

72



Bagasse powder
Cu(C2H3O2)2
KOH
Pyrolyzed Fe and KOH-loaded sawdust at 700 °C to 1000 °C
Three-dimensional highly porous graphene

73



Coconut shells
FeCl3
ZnCl2
Pyrolyzed Fe and Zn-loaded sawdust at 900 °C
Porous graphene-like nanosheets

28




Moringa oleifera stems
FeCl3
ZnCl2
Pyrolyzed Fe and Zn-loaded sawdust at 800 °C
Hierarchical porous carbon nanosheets

74



Poplar catkin
Ni(NO3)2
KOH
Poplar catkin pyrolyzed with a Ni catalyst at 600 °C and then further pyrolyzed at 800 °C with KOH
Hollow carbon nanomesh

75





Two mechanisms have been proposed to explain the process of catalytic graphitization: (i) the dissolution–precipitation mechanism, whereby amorphous carbon is first dissolved into the metal particles, then precipitates as graphitic carbon and (ii) the formation–decomposition of carbide intermediates, whereby the carbon forms carbides with the metal which are then are decomposed at a certain temperature, leaving graphitic carbon.60,76 In a study by Sevilla et al.,59,63 they favored the dissolution-precipitation mechanism. They considered that when biomass impregnated with a metallic salt was heat-treated under an inert atmosphere, the salt decomposed into its corresponding metallic oxides, which were subsequently reduced by the carbon to metal nanoparticles (i.e., Ni, Fe). Graphitic CNMs were then formed around the metallic nanoparticles through a catalytic mechanism that involved the dissolution of amorphous carbon into catalyst particles followed by the precipitation of graphitic carbon. In addition to reduced metal particles (Fe), Fe carbide (Fe3C) has also been proposed as the active catalyst in graphitic CNM formation.64 Fe and Fe3C resulted in the formation of straight and bamboo-like nanotubes, respectively. Sun et al. proposed that the porous graphene-like nanosheets derived from coconut shell by the catalytic graphitization of Fe are mainly dominated by a formation-decomposition mechanism involving the formation of Fe3C and its subsequent transformation to Fe.28 Active carbon atoms in the Fe3C layers can diffuse from the dense Fe3C layer to form dense two-dimensional carbon atom layers on both surfaces of the self-generating Fe template. In addition, the excess carbon atoms will precipitate on the formed nanosheets.


3.1.2 Thermo-chemical activation. 
Pyrolysis using a chemical activation agent such as KOH, ZnCl2, or H3PO4 (thermo-chemical activation) is a well-developed approach for the preparation of AC from biomass with a high specific surface area and well-developed porosity. Additionally, the chemical activation agent plays a vital role in the evolution of the carbon matrix and the formation of porous structures. Recently, some studies revealed that CNMs can be obtained through thermo-chemical activation treatment of biomass (Table 1). For example, Chen et al. reported that the pyrolysis of elm samaras after treatment with a KOH aqueous solution based on a mass ratio of 1:1 resulted in the formation of three-dimensional scaffolding frameworks of highly porous carbon nanosheets with thicknesses as low as 1 to 2 nm.66 Interconnected porous carbon nanosheets were obtained when willow catkin was employed as the biomass feedstock in the same preparation method.67 It is believed that willow catkin, which has a unique hollow and multilayered structure, can readily interact with KOH, which is favorable for CNM synthesis. However, Niu et al. considered that in addition to the introduction of a chemical activation agent (KOH), a pre-carbonization treatment at 700 °C is also necessary to produce carbon nanosheets with a large multiscale wrinkled nanosheet architecture and a high surface area from sugarcane bagasse pith.68 Meanwhile, hydrothermal carbonization of spruce bark at 180 °C in a stainless steel autoclave was conducted prior to the thermo-chemical activation.70 A three-dimensional interconnected structure was observed with an ultrahigh specific surface area (2385 m2 g−1), large volumes of hierarchical pores and easily accessible open surfaces of graphene nanosheets., Zhou's group introduced KOH during the hydrothermal carbonization of wheat stalk; interestingly, they found that a highly concentrated hot KOH solution could gradually saponify the wax and dissolve hemicellulose and linin. After the removal of hemicellulose and lignin, cellulose microfibrils with weak linkages were collected. When the as-derived cellulose microfibrils were subjected to a pyrolysis and graphitization process (see Fig. 3), interconnected highly graphitic carbon nanosheets with 2 to 10 atomic layers were readily obtained.71
 Fig. 3  Schematic of the preparation of CNMs from wheat stalk proposed by Zhou's group.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 


3.1.3 Catalytic graphitization coupled with thermo-chemical activation. 
As mentioned above, catalytic graphitization favors the formation of highly graphited CNMs, while layered porous CNMs can be readily derived from thermo-chemical activation. Naturally, much attention is being paid to the combination of these two methods for the preparation of carbon materials. Su and co-workers presented a study on the production of carbon materials from poplar catkin through a combination of graphitization and a chemical activation process in which Ni(NO3)2 and KOH were employed as catalysts, respectively. It was confirmed from SEM and TEM images that hollow carbon nanomesh was successfully obtained, and further investigation revealed that the as-synthesized CNMs possessed a large specific surface area (1893 m2 g−1) and a high total pore volume (1.495 cm3 g−1).75 Both Ni(NO3)2 and KOH were considered to play important roles in chemical etching of the raw material, resulting in the formation of a nanomesh morphology. Instead of Ni(NO3)2, Cu(C2H3O2)2 was coupled with KOH to simultaneously activate bagasse powder at 700 °C to 1000 °C in a study by Mahmoudian et al.73 It was found that three-dimensional highly porous graphene was prepared with a specific surface area of almost 3000 m2 g−1. The typical graphitization and activation catalysts FeCl3 and ZnCl2 were also investigated for the preparation of carbon materials via a combination of graphitization and activation processes.74 Sun et al.28 reported that Fe components can catalyze graphitization of the carbon source; meanwhile, chemical activation of ZnCl2 can endow the carbon source with a porous structure. As a result, porous graphene-like nanosheets were obtained with specific surface areas of 1281 to 1874 m2 g−1 corresponding to the graphitization temperature range of 700 °C to 1000 °C. Therefore, it can be concluded that the combination of catalytic graphitization and thermo-chemical activation procedures is an effective and promising method to prepare graphitic porous CNMs. According to the aforementioned summary, the morphologies and properties of CNMs are greatly dependent on the type of raw material, pretreatment (such as the introduction of a catalyst and pre-hydrothermal carbonization) and operating parameters (especially temperature) (Table 1). For example, Chen et al. revealed that the thickness was greatly decreased by increasing the applied KOH concentration. The thickness of the CNMs was 1 to 2 nm when a KOH concentration of 6 mol L−1 was used. The layer of the CNMs became too thin to hold the three-dimensional frameworks when the KOH concentration was higher than 8 mol L−1, resulting in a collapsed morphology.66 This observation suggests that the dosage of the activation agent has an important influence on the properties of CNMs. Accordingly, it is necessary to take all factors into account, including the type of raw material, pretreatment and operating parameters, when designing a process to obtain well-organized CNMs from pyrolysis.

3.2 CVD conversion
CVD is one of the most common and well-developed techniques for CNM synthesis; it generally requires a carbon source, catalyst and catalyst support.77–79 The carbon source provides carbon atoms for the formation of CNMs after a decomposition process. The catalyst provides active sites to prompt the decomposition of the carbon source to generate carbon atoms and acts as a template for CNM growth. Also, the catalyst support supports and disperses the catalyst to maintain its high activation and efficiency. To date, the most commonly used carbon sources for the preparation of CNMs are purified CO, CO2 and hydrocarbons (such as CH4, C2H4, benzene, and naphthalene).40,42,80,81 On the other hand, biomass can be converted to various C-containing products, such as CO, CO2, light hydrocarbons (e.g. CH4 and C2H4), aromatic hydrocarbons (e.g. benzene and toluene) and their corresponding derivatives (e.g. CH3OH and phenol) by means of pyrolysis, incineration or gasification.31,82,83 Hence, biomass can be considered to be a potential starting material for the preparation of CNMs via CVD. Considerable achievements have been attained for the preparation of CNMs from CVD; these can be generally divided into in situ CVD and two-stage CVD in terms of the location of the catalyst employed during the CNM preparation procedure. The relationships of conventional CVD, in situ CVD and two-stage CVD are presented in Fig. 4.
 Fig. 4  Relationships of conventional CVD, in situ CVD and two-step CVD. 

3.2.1 
            In situ CVD conversion. 
In an in situ CVD process for the preparation of CNMs from biomass, the conversion of biomass into carbon sources, the decomposition of the carbon sources to carbon atoms and the fabrication of CNMs from the decomposed carbon atoms occur at the same interface. One of the most critical points of the process is to prepare a homogeneous system of biomass-catalyst (or biomass-catalyst precursor). A homogeneous system can ensure an adequate supply of carbon sources and sufficient active catalytic sites, which is beneficial to the effective conversion of biomass to the desired CNMs. For example, Liu et al. mixed fir sawdust with a Fe-containing precursor by an impregnation method. Briefly, sawdust was immersed into a FeCl3 solution and maintained with shaking in an oscillator for 5 h. After that, the suspension was evaporated under reduced pressure and the solid residue was collected. A high-yield harvest of CNFs was consequently obtained after fast pyrolysis of the oven-dried solid residue in a vertical fixed bed reactor.84 Liu et al. considered that during the pyrolysis, the fir sawdust was firstly decomposed into abundant small-molecular hydrocarbons such as CH4, C2H4 and C2H2. These compounds were further decomposed into carbon atoms on the surface of the Fe-containing catalyst; then, the as-decomposed carbon atoms were deposited on the surface of the catalyst and precipitated to form CNFs. In contrast to the impregnation method of Liu et al., Debalina et al. employed commercial Fe and Co powders as catalysts and mixed them with sugarcane bagasse through grinding. A homogeneous system was obtained, and CNTs were obtained as the product of microwave-assisted pyrolysis.85 It is well known that the impregnation method is advantageous for biomass bio-sorption. Due to the presence of abundant homogeneously distributed O-containing functional groups and porous structures, biomass can efficiently adsorb and homogeneously fix the catalyst to obtain a homogeneous biomass-catalyst system that avoids sintering and agglomeration of the catalyst.50 On the other hand, grinding is another conventional method to mix biomass and a catalyst into a homogenous sample through mechanical force. It is worthwhile to note that various intrinsic minerals in natural biomass are homogeneously distributed in every cell.86 Natural biomass with targeted homogeneous intrinsic minerals may be a better catalyst than homogeneous biomass-catalyst systems derived from impregnation or grinding. This assumption was evident in research by Shi et al., where multi-walled CNTs were obtained from microwave-induced processing of mineral-rich gumwood.87 Shi et al. assumed that the Si and Ca-related nanoparticles in gumwood play key roles in the formation of CNTs during microwave treatment. Interestingly, a homemade nickel case was employed to load rice husks, which then acted as catalyst sources during the preparation of graphene and CNT composites by microwave plasma irradiation.29 This result indicates that in addition to the homogeneous biomass-catalyst system, other factors affect the synthesis of CNMs via in situ CVD.
It is well established that the preparation of CNMs from conventional CVD is significantly affected by the carbon source, catalyst, support and operating parameters (such as atmosphere and operating temperature).79,88 Similarly, these factors also play important roles in the in situ CVD technique.89,90 The type and number of carbon sources employed in the production of CNMs in conventional CVD can be controlled accurately.77 However, it is difficult to verify the carbon sources involved in an in situ CVD process for the preparation of CNMs from biomass because the composition of the volatiles (a mixture of bio-oil and non-condensable gases) from the pyrolysis of biomass is extremely complex. For example, the major components of bio-oil originating from the pyrolysis of wheat straw are phenols, methoxyphenols, and substituted methoxyphenols, while the non-condensable gases mainly consist of CO, H2, CO2, CH4, C2H4, C2H6, and C4H10.91 Most studies of the preparation of CNMs from biomass via in situ CVD consider that light hydrocarbons such as CH4, C2H4 and C2H2 play crucial roles in the formation of CNMs.50,51 In addition to hydrocarbons, Shi et al. considered that hydrocarbon derivatives such as phenol in the bio-oil originating from gumwood are also responsible for the synthesis of CNTs during microwave-induced pyrolysis.87 Zhang et al. believed that CO and CO2 in the bio-gas originating from the microwave pyrolysis of pine nut shell made partial contributions to the formation of hollow CNFs.92 In addition to volatiles, mainly hydrocarbons and their derivatives, Wang et al. considered that carbon radicals of char made an important contribution to the synthesis of shape-edge graphene during microwave plasma irradiation pyrolysis of rice husk.29 More details about the carbon sources of CNMs and other parameters in in situ CVD processes as well as the characteristics of the as-prepared CNMs are presented in Table 2.
Table 2 Biomass-based CNMs obtained from in situ CVD processes




Biomass
Carbon source
Substrate
Catalyst
Method
Products and characteristics
Ref.





a Not stated in reference.





Fir sawdust
Small-molecular hydrocarbons from the decomposition of fir sawdust
Fir sawdust char
FeCl3
Fast pyrolysis
Magnetic CNFs/mesoporous carbon composites

84



Fir sawdust
Small-molecular hydrocarbons from the decomposition of fir sawdust
Fir sawdust char
FeCl3 plus NiCl2
Fast pyrolysis
Ni-NiFe2O4/CNFs

50



Rice husk
CH4 from the decomposition of rice husk and carbon radicals from rice husk-derived char
Rice husk char
Ni from nickel case
Microwave plasma irradiation
Graphene, CNTs and graphenated CNTs

29



Gumwood
CH4, naphthalene and benzene-based derivatives from the decomposition of gumwood
Gumwood char
Mineral matter in char
Microwave-induced pyrolysis
CNTs with diameters of 50 to 100 nm, lengths ranging from 600 to 1600 nm and wall thicknesses of around 5 nm

87



Wood sawdust
—a
—
Ferrocene or Fe/Mo/MgO


CNTs with thicknesses of 25 to 50 nm

93



Sugarcane bagasse
—
Sugarcane bagasse char
Commercial Fe and Co metal powders
Microwave-assisted pyrolysis
CNTs and graphitic flakes

85



Bamboo
Light hydrocarbons such as CH4, C2H4, C2H6 and C3H6 obtained from the thermoconversion of bamboo
Bamboo char
Fe(NO3)3
Pyrolysis- gasification- carbonization
– Carbon nanoribbons

51



– CNFs


– hollow carbon nanospheres (HCs)


– bamboo/herringbone-shaped CNTs (BCNTs/HCNTs)


Reed bristles
Volatiles from the thermolysis of reed bristles
—
Oxides originating from biomass
Carbonization
CMTs and CNTs

94



Palm kernel shell
Volatiles and bio-liquid released from microwave pyrolysis of palm kernel shell
Palm kernel shell-derived char
Fe, CaSiO4, CaCO3, KO2 originating from palm kernel shell


Hollow CNFs with diameters of around 50 to 100 nm and lengths of 600 to 1600 nm

95



Pine nut shell
Hydrocarbons (benzene and alkenes) in bio-oil and CO, CO2, methane and ethane in bio-gas
Pine nut shell-derived char
K, Si, Ca, Mg and Al-related minerals
Microvave pyrolysis
Hollow CNFs with diameters of about 400 nm and lengths of 1400 to 5000 nm

92





The catalyst employed is considered to be an important factor affecting the synthesis of CNMs from biomass via in situ CVD. It was found that not all ferric and chloride salts can catalyze the formation of magnetic CNFs/mesoporous carbon composites.84 The results of carbonaceous materials produced by fast pyrolysis of biomass loaded with different metal salts are exhibited in Fig. 5.84 CNFs were not formed by the pyrolysis of biomass preloaded with Fe(NO3)3 (Fig. 5b), Fe2(SO4)3 (Fig. 5c), CuCl2 (Fig. 5d) or NiCl2 (Fig. 5e). Further investigation revealed that the formation of the CNF structure was due to the combined catalytic effects of both Fe and Cl. In detail, for Fe(NO3)3 and Fe2(SO4)3, although they could catalyze CNF growth, they could not catalyze the formation of small-molecular-weight hydrocarbons which are the carbon source for the growth of CNFs. Meanwhile, CuCl2 and NiCl2 had similar effects on the catalytic formation of small-molecular-weight hydrocarbons in the biomass pyrolysis process but could not catalyze the deposition and growth of the CNFs.84 Debalina et al. found that the composition of the bio-oil and the evolution of the concentrations of non-condensable gases were apparently affected by the type and amount of catalyst during the microwave-assisted pyrolysis of sugarcane bagasse, which directly resulted in the formation of CNMs with different types and characteristics.85 The catalysts employed in the preparation of CNMs from biomass via in situ CVD are summarized in Table 2.
 Fig. 5  SEM images of carbonaceous materials produced by pyrolysis of biomass loaded with different metal salts: (a) FeCl3, (b) Fe(NO3)3, (c) Fe2(SO4)3, (d) CuCl2, and (e) NiCl2, reported by Liu's group.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society. 
On the other hand, the pyrolysis temperature not only remarkably affected catalyst species such as Fe(OH)3, FeO(OH), Fe2O3, Fe3O4, and Fe3C but also determined the composition of small-molecular hydrocarbons released during pyrolysis, which hence played key roles in the preparation of CNMs.84 It was reported by Liu et al. that no CNFs could be formed at low pyrolysis temperatures (350 °C to 400 °C); meanwhile, when the temperature was increased to 500 °C, some small CNFs were observed. When the temperature was further increased to 600 °C to 800 °C, the CNFs continuously grew to several micrometers in length. Zhang et al. found that the yields of hollow CNFs prepared from pine nut shell at microwave pyrolysis temperatures of 400 °C, 500 °C, 600 °C and 700 °C were 1.72%, 3.76%, 4.69% and 3.21%, respectively, according to isothermal oxidation.92 A study by Shi et al.87 demonstrated that the heating method also had an influence on the preparation of CNMs. For example, conventional pyrolysis and microwave-induced pyrolysis were comparatively investigated by Wang et al.29 It was found that no CNMs were formed on the surface of conventionally pyrolyzed char, while a number of nanowire materials grew on the surface of microwave-induced pyrolyzed char with diameters ranging from 50 to 100 nm. They attributed this observation to differences in the components of the bio-oil and bio-gas derived from the two heating methods. Compared with conventional pyrolytic bio-oil, microwave-induced pyrolysis oil contained fewer phenols and corresponding derivatives and more naphthalene, benzene, alkene, and corresponding derivatives. In other words, the microwave-induced processing of gumwood produced more favorable carbon sources for the formation of CNMs compared to conventional pyrolysis.


3.2.2 Two-step CVD conversion. 
A two-step CVD technique for the production of CNMs from biomass generally includes two processes, i.e., thermal conversion of biomass into vapors and catalytic conversion of the vapors into CNMs in the presence of a catalyst. These two steps are normally performed separately in two reactors. As shown in Table 2 and discussed in section 3.2.1, In situ CVD, the vapors of biomass consist of abundant carbon-containing compounds such as CO, CH4, C2H4, benzene and their derivatives; these have been identified as desirable and efficient carbon sources for CNM fabrication.85,96 When these carbon-rich vapors pass through a catalyst bed, they are decomposed into carbon atoms to form CNMs by similar mechanisms to conventional CVD. For example, Alves et al. employed a two-section quartz laminar-flow muffle furnace consisting of a pyrolyzer and a catalyzer to prepare CNMs from sugarcane bagasse. A schematic of their experimental system is presented in Fig. 6a.97 Sugarcane bagasse was placed in the first section of the furnace to generate vapors via a pyrolysis process. The pyrolyzed vapors subsequently passed through a stainless steel screen bed, which acted as a catalyst. As a result, CNMs in the form of long, straight, tubular structures with smooth walls and axially-uniform diameters (CNTs) were eventually collected on the surface of the stainless steel screen; these possessed a typical length of 50 μm and diameters in the range of 20 to 50 nm.
 Fig. 6  Schematics of the experimental systems employed in studies by Alves et al.105 (a), Wu et al.106 (b), and Efika et al.104 (c). Reproduced from ref. 104–106 with permission from Elsevier. 
It is worthwhile to note that the synthesis of CNMs from biomass in terms of a two-step CVD technique is quite similar to the production of syngas from biomass via a pyrolysis-gasification process.98 The key difference is that the carbon product called coke is undesirable in syngas preparation because the formation of coke can poison the catalyst and promote the polycondensation of intermediates, resulting in decreased syngas yield.99 However, Wu et al. found that the coke from the pyrolysis-gasification of toluene was composed of amorphous carbons and filamentous carbons.100 Particularly, the formation of amorphous carbons during the pyrolysis-gasification process can be partly inhibited and the formed amorphous carbon in coke can be significantly eliminated via controlling the catalyst and operating conditions, such as modifying the catalyst components and injecting suitable water. Afterward, the as-obtained filamentous carbons without amorphous carbon were identified as well-structured CNTs. In this way, the pyrolysis-gasification process can realize the co-production of syngas and CNTs. Subsequently, Wu et al. conducted a series of studies on the preparation of CNMs and hydrogen-rich syngas based on this method using a two-stage vertical fixed-bed reaction system, which is shown in Fig. 6b.83,101–103 The typical CNTs obtained by Wu's group from the pyrolysis-gasification of wood sawdust had diameters of 10 to 20 nm.102 Another study by Wu et al. employed a two-stage continuous screw-kiln reactor (see Fig. 6c) for the production of syngas from the pyrolysis of waste wood coupled with catalytic reforming of the pyrolysis vapours, where CNMs were also obtained on the catalyst bed.104
Similar to in situ CVD, the preparation of CNMs from biomass via two-step CVD is also determined by several factors, such as the composition of the carbon source, type of catalyst, and operating temperature. The type of biomass feedstock and the pyrolysis conditions in the first stage have important influences on the composition of the pyrolysis vapors which are the carbon source during CNM synthesis in the next stage. Different catalysts have been used at the second stage for the formation of CNMs. For example, stainless steel screens,97 nickel oxide with or without support and assistance,104 and multi-metal catalysts101,103 were reported. On the other hand, the components and the preparation method of the catalyst also play important roles in the growth of CNMs. In a study by Efika et al., a NiO/Al2O3 catalyst was more favorable for the growth of CNMs during pyrolysis-gasification of wood sawdust compared to a NiO/CeO2/Al2O3 catalyst because the addition of CeO2 to the catalyst suppressed the formation of coke.104 CNMs were also observed on the surface of a Ni–Ca–Al catalyst but not on Ni–Mg–Al after the pyrolysis-gasification of lignin.98 In addition to the influence of the catalyst, the injection of water was identified as an important factor affecting the fabrication of CNMs. It was found that the amount of coke (the mixture of amorphous carbon and CNMs) deposited on the catalyst presented a decreasing trend from 33.8% to 2.6 wt% with increasing water injection rate from 1.90 to 1.42 g h−1. SEM results further confirmed that fewer CNMs were observed on the catalyst surface at a water injection rate of 14.20 g h−1.107 Furthermore, research investigating the influence of temperature of the second stage on the preparation of CNMs revealed that a smaller fraction of straighter CNTs was obtained at 1000 °C than at 600 °C, suggesting that the formation of CNMs was also affected by the pyrolysis temperature.97

3.3 Cyclic oxidation
The cyclic oxidation method for the preparation of CNMs from biomass mainly refers to a technique that involves reduplicative oxidation processes to convert three-dimensional biomass into tubular CNMs (such as CNTs). Kang et al.108 firstly reported the use of cyclic oxidation to prepare CNMs. The detailed steps are as follows. Grass, the biomass feedstock for the preparation of CNMs, was heated at about 250 °C in air after being dried and crumbled. The resulting residue then was subjected to rapid heating at about 600 °C and held for 20 min with a controlled amount of oxygen. After that, the heated system was cooled to room temperature and equivalent oxygen was re-injected. The heat treatment at about 600 °C was repeated about 50 times, and the product was collected. TEM images revealed that the as-prepared product exhibiting a hollow-center structure was multi-walled CNTs with inner and outer diameters in the ranges of 10 to 30 and 30 to 50 nm, respectively. In this technique, there are three critical factors: (i) the feedstock with an integrated three-dimensional structure directly originating from biomass, (ii) the preheating of biomass in air at low temperature prior to the cyclic oxidation process, (iii) reduplicative oxidation of the as-preheated biomass many times via the involvement of suitable oxygen. Almost no CNMs were observed when carbohydrate powders such as glucose, saccharose, faecula and cellulose were employed as feedstocks in cyclic oxidation. In addition to vascular bundles, grass contains many proteins and much grease in its stems and nervation. The heat pretreatment at about 250 °C favored the removal of those unrelated components (proteins and grease) to expose vascular bundles. The following reduplicative treatment involving a suitable amount of oxygen with rapid heating to about 600 °C aided the dehydration of cellulose, resulting in the formation of CNMs. Based on research by Kang et al., Goodell et al.109 investigated the fabrication of CNMs using six different carbon feedstocks, including wood fiber, organosolv lignin, ashless filter paper, avicel, alpha-cellulose and bamboo, through a similar method. The samples were preheated at cyclic oxidation temperatures of 240 °C and 400 °C, respectively. The results indicated that few tubular CNMs were obtained from lignin, delignified filter paper, or the two purified cellulose samples, while CNM formation was clearly observed in the samples made from wood fiber, with inside and outside diameter ranges of 4 to 5 nm and 10 to 20 nm, respectively. This further verified that the original biomass feedstock structure played an important material-based role in the preparation of CNMs from biomass via cyclic oxidation. Goodell and co-workers considered that the carbonization at low temperature was a stepwise process which was responsible for the formation of nanoscale channels. The nano-channels then acted as a template to mediate the production of CNTs. At the same time, an environment of low pressure combined with air as a result of the formation of nano-channels greatly facilitated cellulose ablation, which also contributed to the synthesis of CNTs.109
In another study reported by Goodell's group,110 the effects of heat pretreatment on the preparation of CNMs was investigated. The results demonstrated that heat pretreatment is favorable for retention of the nano-architecture of the cell walls, which was responsible for the formation of tubular CNMs after cyclic heat treatment. The low temperature pretreatment promoted (i) the dehydration of cellulose, resulting in increased carbon yield through gradual carbonization; (ii) the stabilization of lignin, limiting the flow of lignin in the later higher temperature process. Additionally, cyclic oxidation affecting the formation of CNMs was studied, and the results revealed that the cyclic oxidation procedure was effective for the ablation of cellulose microfibrils in plant cell walls. A series of studies by Qu's group revealed that the cyclic oxidation method can be successfully used to synthesize tubular CNMs from absorbent cotton, poplar leaves and hyperaccumulators.111–113 In addition to tubular CNMs, graphene sheets and carbon nanospheres could also be obtained from biomass using cyclic oxidation method in the studies by Qu et al.114,115
Although cyclic oxidation has been widely applied in the synthesis of CNMs from biomass, the mechanism dominating the formation of CNMs is still under debate. Kang et al.108 considered that the involvement of a suitable amount of oxygen during the cyclic oxidation procedure is helpful for the dehydration of vascular bundles in the biomass structure, which causes the formation of the carbon skeleton. In other words, the formation of tubular CNMs can be ascribed to the contraction or shrinkage of vascular bundles. However, this hypothesis was questioned by Goodell's group,109,110,116 and a new mechanism was proposed. Goodell's group proposed that the cyclic oxidation process favors the formation of nanoscale channels via the ablation of cell wall microfibrils, which are located and oriented in a pattern corresponding to the original location of the cellulose microfibrils within the cell wall. The as-formed nano-channels and the carbon vapors from the ablation of cellulose microfibrils separately act as a template and a gas phase carbon source, respectively, to mediate the synthesis of tubular CNMs.117 It should be noted that the natural three-dimensional structure of biomass involving the presence of vascular bundles plays a crucial role in the studies by both Kang et al. and the Goodell group. Tubular CNTs could not be observed when a purified lignocellulosic component of biomass, such as lignin or cellulose, was used. It was reported that minerals such as Fe particles and silicates in biomass are crucial for CNM synthesis from biomass and act as catalysts.87,118 According to a report by Qu et al.,112 poplar-derived CNMs contain not only C but also O, Na, Zn, Cu, Ca, K, Cl and S. It is therefore unclear whether the minerals in biomass feedstock also make contributions to the preparation of CNMs via cyclic oxidation. Although Qu's group successfully synthesized different kinds of CNMs from biomass, the mechanisms of CNM formation were not reported. It is interesting and urgent to further explore the mechanisms controlling the formation of CNMs from biomass via cyclic oxidation.
3.4 Mechanical activation
Mechanical activation was first introduced into the preparation of CNMs by Chen et al.; they found that aligned CNTs were readily obtained by the pyrolysis of iron phthalocyanine after ball milling treatment.119 The key of the as-employed mechanical activation in Chen's group was the preparation of a homogeneous mixture of carbon source and catalyst via ball milling.120 After that, various methods of ball milling were directly developed for the preparation of CNMs.121,122 Typically, a biomass sample was mixed with steel balls and placed in a ball mill. After a period of grinding, the biomass was totally converted to CNMs, which could be readily collected from the ball mill. Apart from the grinding time, other parameters, such as atmosphere and reaction temperature, could be generally neglected. It was reported that Onishchenko's group successfully produced CNTs from large amounts of natural biomass, such as sphagnum moss and agricultural wastes, based on this technique.123–125 Differently, the biomass was first subjected to carbonization at 950 °C to produce amorphous carbon, followed by washing with a mixed acid solution to remove mineral impurities; then, the precursors were ground in a planetary mill many times to produce CNMs with different diameters and textural morphologies.126 It appears that the type of biomass feedstock has a remarkable effect on the products obtained via this method and their corresponding properties. For example, oat, millet and buckwheat wastes are unsuitable as sources for CNM synthesis. On the other hand, CNMs derived from corn wastes with bamboo and embedded nanocone structures were more defective than those derived from sphagnum moss.126 In addition, the duration of mechanical treatment in the planetary mill plays a vital role in the properties of the CNMs; the duration of treatment was found to exhibit a linear relationship with the volume of the formed CNMs.126 It was found that the pristine amorphous carbons presented fractal structures with a broad range of particle dispersions. A sample subjected to 6 h of mechanical activation preserved its lamellar shape. Upon 8 h of processing, nanofiber structures with diameters of 10 to 20 nm were observed inside the carbon particles. When the mechanical activation time was increased to 10 h, all the bulk materials were composed of CNTs with diameters of 10 to 70 nm. The CNTs formed after mechanical activation for 36 h were abundant. The sample after mechanical activation for 46 h appeared to be aggregates consisting of CNTs and amorphous carbons. The aggregates were evidently formed by electrostatic interactions of the CNMs.127,128 The contents of corn CNMs in the carbon composites prepared with mechanical durations of 7, 10, 16 and 27 h were 11.52 wt%, 24.45 wt%, 34.06 wt% and 42.75 wt%, respectively.129
It should be noted that no catalyst is involved in the preparation of CNMs from biomass via mechanical activation. Mineral particles, which are considered to be effective catalysts in the CVD method, were removed by rinsing with acidic solution,130 suggesting that the preparation process is independent of a catalyst. On the other hand, the amorphous carbon that acted as the precursor of CNMs before mechanical activation was readily obtained from biomass. In other words, the use of mechanical activation may be considered to be a promising technique for CNM preparation due to the low cost of feedstock (biomass) and technology (pyrolysis and grinding); also, this process is catalyst-free.
3.5 Combustion
Combustion is a high-temperature exothermic redox chemical reaction between a fuel and an oxidant, usually atmospheric oxygen, which produces oxidized, often gaseous products. In addition to its application in producing heat, combustion is involved in the preparation of refined materials such as carbon nanoparticles.131–133 Raju's group134,135 further promoted this method to produce graphitic-carbon nanoparticles from camphor, a natural eco-friendly hydrocarbon obtained from the tree Cinnamomum camphora.136–138 Later, the successful production of CNMs from Desmostachya bipinnata grass via this method was also reported in their recent research.139 In detail, sun-dried Desmostachya bipinnata grass was directly subjected to complete incineration in atmospheric oxygen. During the burning process, burning parameters such as temperature, pressure, and time were not controlled except that camphor powder was added as a fuel to realize the complete combustion of grass. After the burning reaction, a variety of CNMs, including CNTs, micro-rods and CNFs, could be collected from the resulting residue ash, as confirmed by field emission scanning electron microscopy. The as-synthesized CNMs were characterized as containing large amounts of O-containing surface functional groups, such as carboxyl (–COOH) and hydroxyl (–OH), which were related to the abundant presence of oxygen in the preparation process (burning in air atmosphere). In addition to combustion, Muramatsu et al. introduced chemical activation using solid KOH as the activation agent to treat burnt rice husk residue at 850 °C in air.140 Ultimately, nano-sized crystalline graphene and corrugated graphene with a yield of ca. 10 wt% were obtained. TEM and XRD analyses revealed that the nano-sized crystalline graphene contained a monolayer or multilayer structure with clean edges, and the corrugated graphene was composed of domains a few nanometers in size. The authors considered that the chemical activation by KOH after combustion was a key factor in the formation of high-quality graphene, where KOH efficiently etched amorphous carbon and transformed it into crystalline graphene. Afterward, it is further confirmed that the combination of chemical activation with combustion was an efficient and scalable technique to produce graphene-based materials from low-cost wastes.141,142 The authors found that the KOH dosage and the combustion temperature played vital roles in the fabrication of corrugated paper-like graphene with a large specific surface area.143 Graphene with a maximum specific surface area of 2274 m2 g−1 was collected when the KOH dosage and combustion temperature were controlled as 12.5 g and 550 °C, respectively. On the other hand, using the same method and the same feedstock, the combustion temperature and chemical activation temperature were individually set as 500 °C and 700 °C, respectively, resulting in the formation of crumpled silk-veil-wave graphene nanosheets with a specific surface area of 1225 m2 g−1. It appears that the combustion technique is a simple and readily available technique to produce valuable CNMs. However, a mechanism for CNM growth was not proposed; this may be of great interest for researchers in future work.
4 Biomass as catalyst for CNMs synthesis
4.1 Intrinsic Fe-related components in biomass
It is well-established that Fe and Fe-containing composites are effective catalysts in preparing CNMs.144,145 At the same time, Fe is ubiquitous in biomass matrices because it is one of the essential trace elements for plant growth. Fe is also an important component of cytochrome and non-heme ferritin, which play important roles in photosynthesis, biological nitrogen fixation and respiration.146 Therefore, it is feasible to develop Fe-containing biomass as a catalyst source for CNM preparation. Chen et al.118 employed ACs produced from palm kernel shell, coconut and wheat straw with certain Fe contents (Fig. 7a and b) as catalysts to decompose C2H4 at 700 °C for the fabrication of CNMs. It was found that tangled CNFs were obtained on the surface of the ACs (Fig. 7c). Further high resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM) images showed that the tip of a CNF contained an Fe particle with a diameter of about 100 nm (Fig. 7d). Consequently, Fe particles originating from the AC precursor were considered to play a catalytic role in the CNF preparation, and a tip-growing model was proposed to explain the growth mechanism of the CNFs. It was inferred that the iron particles of the AC were firstly reduced by H2, then melted to form a liquid droplet at high temperature. The carbon source (C2H4) consequently dissociated on the surface of the reduced iron, dissolved and diffused into it, and finally precipitated to create CNFs. It is worth mentioning that during the CVD processing, the weight of the kernel shell, coconut and wheat straw derived from ACs increased from 200 to 270, 271 and 296 mg, respectively, while the iron contents in the corresponding ACs were 2.91%, 0.17% and 1.79%, respectively. In other words, the yield of CNFs was found to not be proportional to the amount of iron in the starting activated carbons.
 Fig. 7  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of coconut AC after calcination at 400 °C, (b) elementary analysis of a selected area of (a) using an energy dispersive X-ray detector, (c) SEM image of the as-synthesized CNFs supported on the surface of coconut activated carbon, (d) HRTEM image of a CNF with an iron particle on the tip.118 Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier. 
Fe is also present in black jew's-ear fungus and black sesame seeds, which were used to fabricate CNMs based on a CVD process of liquefied petroleum gas at 800 °C.147,148 Due to the homogenous content of Fe in single cells of the precursor, the distribution of catalyst particles was uniform and their sizes and compositions were almost identical. As a result, CNTs with uniform diameters were obtained when black sesame seeds were used as a catalyst precursor. An adsorption-diffusion-deposition model was employed to describe the growth mechanism of the CNTs: (i) liquefied petroleum gas was adsorbed on the active crystal surface of the Fe catalyst. (ii) Chemical reactions occurred between Fe and the liquified petroleum gas at high temperature to form carbides. (iii) Additional supply of liquified petroleum gas led to over-saturation of carbon atoms in the carbide, and the over-saturated carbon atoms then diffused through Fe particles to the other side of the active crystal surface, depositing to form CNTs. The diameters of the CNTs derived from black jew's-ear fungus and black sesame seeds were 80 and 100 nm, respectively; these sizes were negatively related to the iron content, indicating that a higher content of iron was responsible for obtaining large CNTs, whereas a lower content of iron led to small CNTs.
4.2 Silicate minerals in biomass
In addition to Fe, other mineral elements in biomass have been found to possess catalytic capability for the preparation of CNMs. It is reported that mineral matter composed of Si and Ca in gumwood can be regarded as a catalyst for the synthesis of CNTs in a microwave-induced pyrolysis process.87 During this process, these Si and Ca-related minerals can decompose the volatiles derived from the microwave-induced pyrolysis of gumwood, mainly including CH4, naphthalene and benzene-based derivatives, leading to the formation of CNTs with diameters between 50 and 100 nm and lengths ranging from 600 to 1600 nm. Further analysis according to EDX revealed that the catalyst was not present on the tip or inside the CNTs but was embedded in the CNT structure. Zhu et al.130 found that silicates in bamboo-derived charcoal, especially Mg and Ca-related silicates, played crucial roles in the synthesis of CNTs via a CVD process. Also, the catalytic performance of the silicates in the preparation of CNTs was significantly determined by their compositions and phases, which in turn greatly depended on the employed temperature. For example, silicates (Mg2SiO4) in forms of plate-like crystals mixed with charcoal were treated at 1200 °C resulting in the formation of cluster-like CNTs (Fig. 8a). Enhancement of the treatment temperature to 1300 °C to 1400 °C gave rise to a transformation of the main components of the minerals to calcium silicates, and a sphere appearance was obtained (Fig. 8b and c). As a result, CNTs with lengths ranging from several nanometers up to micrometers and walls of 100 layers were obtained. By increasing the temperature to 1500 °C, whiskers consisting of SiC doped with Al, Ca and K were formed on the charcoal (Fig. 8d). No CNTs were observed in this regard, indicating that the whiskers did not favor CNT formation. It can be concluded that the yield of the CNTs was associated with the carbon solubility of the silicates, which followed the order of Mg2SiO4 nanocrystal < calcium silicate spheres. In addition, the CNTs formed on charcoal at 1200 °C and 1400 °C had no droplet tips, while those formed at 1300 °C possessed droplet tips. This observation further demonstrated that the employed temperature not only affected the composition and phase of the silicates but also the growth model of the CNTs. Nersisyan et al. reported that spherical particles originating from spherical seeds of Andropogon virginicus reed bristles also acted as catalysts for generating carbon microtubes and CNTs via a novel method.94 The spherical particles were mainly composed of oxide forms of Si, Mg, P and O, namely MgO, SiO2, SiO, and P2O5. These oxides were effective in the catalytic decomposition of gaseous hydrocarbons formed by thermolysis of the reed bristles. As a result, CNTs with outer diameters of about 10 to 15 nm were collected.
 Fig. 8  SEM images of bamboo samples treated at different temperatures reported by Zhu et al.:130 (a) 1200 °C, (b) 1300 °C, (c) 1400 °C, (d) 1500 °C. Top right insets are magnified images and left bottom insets are EDX spectra. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier. 
In work by Zhu et al.,130 they considered that the growth of CNTs followed a vapor–liquid–solid mechanism because the silicates exhibited similar catalytic activity to transition metals for the nucleation of nanotubes. During pyrolysis at high temperature, minerals in the bamboo-derived charcoal melted initially and formed droplets on the surface of the charcoal. The melt mainly consisted of calcium silicate but also contained other elements, such as S, P, and K. Subsequently, carbon feedstock decomposed on the surface of the silicate droplets, dissolved inside them, and formed CNTs when carbon supersaturation was reached. The growth mechanism of CNTs in work by Shi et al.87 was found to be subject to a vapor–solid phase growth model instead of a liquid phase growth model, which included three key steps: (i) the microwave-induced pyrolysis of biomass to generate biogas, bio-oil and char products, (ii) the decomposition of the carbon sources (biogas and bio-oil) on the char surface to form carbon nanospheres, and (iii) the growth of multi-walled CNTs via self-assembly of these carbon nanospheres in an electromagnetic field. It is well known that catalyst-prepared CNTs contain at least one particle at each end of the nanotubes (top and bottom). In work by Nersisyan et al., CNTs formed around spherical particles, but no liquid droplets could be found on the tubes.94 Therefore, the authors assumed that the formation of CNTs occurred through a new mechanism.
4.3 Other components of biomass
As discussed above, the intrinsic Fe-related components and silicates of biomass are generally considered to be efficient catalytic components during CVD-involved preparation of CNMs. In terms of the abundant mineral components of biomass, the roles of other components in addition to Fe and silicates during the production of CNMs have also aroused extensive interest. For example, it was reported that the minerals of palm kernel shell played a catalytic role in the formation of hollow CNFs from palm kernel shell via microwave pyrolysis.95 Further investigation of the XRD results indicated that the minerals were mainly composed of Fe, CaSiO4, CaCO3 and K2O. The authors hence deduced that in addition to Fe and silicates, other minerals (CaCO3 and K2O) favored the synthesis of CNMs, acting as catalysts. For the preparation of multi-walled CNTs via plasma-enhanced CVD, minerals in coconut shell, including Al, Ca, Na, K and Mg, were found to serve as catalysts in addition to Fe.149 In a study by Zhang et al., K in pine nut shell (accounting for 0.37% of the shell) was inferred to play a catalytic role during the formation and growth of hollow CNFs, partly because it can vaporize as volatile content and hence possesses high migration ability at high temperature.92 Interestingly, Lin et al. considered that the fullerene-like positions and nanoscale curvatures of biomass-derived char could also act as efficient catalysts to decompose carbon sources into carbon atoms and hydrogen and provide stack-up sites for the self-assembly of carbon atoms to form CNMs.150,151 Consequently, it appears that the preparation of CNMs using biomass as catalyst is a complicated process; more work is urgently needed to clarify the mechanism.
5 Biomass as a catalyst support for CNM synthesis
5.1 Biomass-derived BC
Biomass has been successfully developed as a catalyst support for the preparation of CNMs via CVD; it was pretreated through a thermal conversion process, such as pyrolysis, carbonization sintering or hydrothermal carbonization.118,152 The thermally converted biomass is usually referred to as charcoal, black carbon, or BC. The derived BC can be impregnated with catalyst and used in a CVD process to generate CNMs in a variety of morphologies, depending on factors such as the type of catalyst, the properties of the BC and the growth temperature employed. In detail, the application of biomass as a catalyst support in CNM synthesis generally involves the following processes: (i) convert biomass into a carbon material (BC) by thermal treatment, (ii) remove the impurities on the surface of BC using an acidic solution, (iii) load the catalyst by means of wet-impregnation or adsorption, (iv) reduce the catalyst with H2, (v) introduce the carbon source gas at a certain concentration and ambient temperature. For example, in a study by Zhou et al., biomass was first sintered in a vacuum atmosphere to obtain BC; the as-prepared BC was then subjected to treatment with concentrated HNO3 to eliminate inorganic impurities.152 Afterwards, Ni catalyst was supported on the washed BC by means of a wet-impregnation method, affording a composite Ni/BC catalyst precursor. The composite was placed in a single quartz tubular reactor, and a mixture of Ar/H2 was introduced in the apparatus to reduce the catalyst. Finally, the CNTs were grown under a gas mixture of H2 and CH4 (1:1) at 850 °C. It is well known that the support employed for CNM production predominantly requires a porous texture.153 However, the pore structure of BC generally appears undeveloped in comparison with other conventional porous supports such as AC, as shown in Table 3. For example, the specific surface area of bamboo-derived BC reported in Zhou et al.'s work152 was moderate (491 m2 g−1, Table 3). Meanwhile, another bamboo-derived BC with a very low specific surface area of 7.0 m2 g−1 was used as a catalyst support for the preparation of CNTs.154,155 It was believed that BC, which has poor porosity, was unfavorable for the homogeneous distribution of the catalyst, which resulted in aggregation and agglomeration of the excess catalyst. Huang et al.155 investigated moso bamboo-derived BC supporting different amounts of catalyst (2, 3, and 5 wt% Fe) for CNT synthesis using xylene as a carbon source. A large number of CNTs grew uniformly and tightly on the surface of the BC when 3 wt% Fe was loaded. However, the loading of 2 wt% Fe led to sparse CNT growth, and the grown CNTs were longer than those obtained with 3 wt% loading. No CNTs could be observed on the BC surface when the Fe loading was increased to 5 wt%, which is mainly attributed to the agglomeration of Fe into large particles. In addition to the specific surface area, the source of biomass and the condition of CNM growth were found to play important roles in the preparation of CNMs from biomass-based BC. Zhou et al. investigated the application of four kinds of BCs, originating from coconut shell, bamboo, hemp straw and lauan, respectively, as catalyst supports for CNM synthesis.152 The results showed that among these BCs, the bamboo-derived BC showed the most uniform pore size and relative regular pore distribution. As a result of this property, a uniform catalyst distribution was obtained, while the hierarchical pore structures of the other three types of BC resulted in partial aggregation of the catalyst. After CVD of CH4, it was found that only the bamboo-derived BC was uniformly covered by a layer of CNTs which were 5 to 10 μm in length and around 85 nm in diameter. In comparison, only a few CNTs were dispersed on the coconut shell-derived BC, and no CNTs but aggregated carbon chunks or clusters were observed on the hemp straw and lauan-derived BCs. Zhang et al. employed BCs derived from the pyrolysis of bamboo at 700 °C to 900 °C to support ferrocene for the synthesis of CNMs. The results indicated that smaller quantities of CNTs with shorter lengths were obtained at 700 °C. The density of the CNTs increased when the temperature increased to 800 °C or 900 °C. This observation may be related to the carbonization degree of the BCs, which is determined by the pyrolysis temperature.154 Moreover, the pore size distribution, particle size and content of catalyst may play key roles in the preparation of CNMs when BC is employed as the catalyst support.156
Table 3 Porosity characteristics of biomass-derived carbon materials before and after being employed as catalyst supports for the preparation of CNMs




Substrate
SSAa (m2 g−1)
TPVd (cm3 g−1)
MiPVe (cm3 g−1)
MePVf (cm3 g−1)
Ref.


Beforeb
Afterc
Before
After
Before
After
Before
After





a Specific surface area.
b Corresponding property of biomass-based carbon support before CNM preparation.
c Corresponding property of biomass-based carbon support after CNM preparation.
d Total pore volume.
e Micropore volume obtained from the Barrett–Joyner–Halenda equation.
f Mesopore volume calculated by subtraction of the micropore volume from the total pore volume.
g Not available.





Bamboo-derived BC (850 °C)
491
92
0.233
0.094
0.199
0.008
0.034
0.085

152



Bamboo-derived BC (800 °C)
7.0
3.2
—g
—
—
—
—
—

154



Bamboo derived BC (800 °C)
7.0
4.0
—
—
—
—
—
—

155



Palm kernel shell-derived AC
1490
305
0.551
0.289
—
—
—
—

153



Palm kernel shell-derived AC
1490
32.4
—
—
—
—
—
—

157



20.5
—
—
—
—
—
—


Palm kernel shell-derived AC
1237
17.7
0.547
0.009
—
—
—
—

158



91.5
0.078
—
—
—
—


56.0
0.080
—
—
—
—


Palm kernel shell-derived AC
1273
15
0.601
0.035
0.522
0.013
—
—

118



Coconut-derived AC
1189
32
0.495
0.055
0.422
0.025
—
—


Wheat straw-derived AC
1221
102
0.641
0.105
0.587
0.071
—
—


Bamboo-derived AC
2057
673
1.25
0.43
0.72
0.32
0.53
0.11

156



1204
0.59
0.37
0.22


1726
0.83
0.39
0.44


2278
2.39
0.52
0.87


2139
2.39
0.39
0.90


Petroleum coke-derived AC
1869
359
1.04
0.31
—
—
—
—

159





5.2 Biomass-derived AC
As discussed above, the pore characteristics appear to be a crucial parameter for the synthesis of CNMs using biomass-derived carbon materials as catalyst supports. Chemical and physical activation is normally used to enhance the porosity of biomass-derived carbon materials. As shown in Table 3, all the biomass-derived ACs show much higher specific surface areas and pore volumes than the biomass-derived BCs.153,160 Su and his co-workers reported that palm kernel shell can be employed as an outstanding catalyst support precursor in CNM synthesis because it can be converted into AC by carbonizing it in N2 at 350 °C and subsequently activating it in steam at 600 °C.153 The as-derived palm kernel shell-based AC had well-developed pore structures with a specific surface area and pore volume of 1081 m2 g−1 and 0.365 cm3 g−1, respectively. After Fe impregnation, the specific surface area of the AC was still greater than 1000 m2 g−1, which indicates that the Fe-related catalyst particles were highly dispersed on the surface of the AC. Afterward, the Fe-impregnated AC was subjected to a C2H2 CVD process at 700 °C. According to SEM analysis, it was found that entangled CNFs with diameters of 20 to 300 nm abundantly covered the surface of the AC (Fig. 9a). Further study, as shown in Fig. 9b, revealed that the CNFs were not only immobilized onto the surface of the AC but were also nested inside the pores of the AC. The growth of CNFs on the surface or in the pores of the AC gave rise to a significant decrease of its specific surface area from 1490 to 305 m2 g−1. A similar result was reported in Chen et al.'s work, where CNTs were obtained both on the surface and inside the pores of a coconut and wheat straw-derived support.118 As a result, the specific surface areas of the coconut and wheat straw-derived AC decreased from 1189 to 32 m2 g−1 and from 1121 to 102 m2 g−1, respectively, after CNT growth. It is notable that the activation method applied in Su et al.'s work was steam activation, which corresponds to a physical activation method. In comparison, chemical activation-derived AC has also been extensively used as a support for CNM preparation. In Zhou et al.'s study, they found that the specific surface area and total pore volume of bamboo-derived BC were considerably increased by 4 fold to 2057 m2 g−1 and 1.25 cm3 g−1, respectively, when an activation process using KOH was employed.156 After the introduction of Co as a catalyst and a carbon monoxide CVD process, intertwined CNTs possessing diameters and lengths in the ranges of 5 to 12 nm and <100 nm, respectively, can be observed on the bamboo-derived AC surface. It is worth noting that after the growth of the CNTs, the specific surface areas and total pore volumes of the bamboo-derived AC did not sharply decrease when general biomass-based AC was used (as mentioned above) but were further enhanced to 2278 m2 g−1 and 1.39 cm3 g−1. A possible explanation is that the formation of CNTs provided abundant mesoporous channels.
 Fig. 9  SEM images of CNFs on AC reported by Su et al.:153 (a) CNFs covering the surface of AC; (b) CNFs nested inside the AC pores. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Wiley. 
5.3 Roles of surface functional groups of biomass-derived carbon materials in CNM growth and corresponding growth mechanisms
In addition to the pore characteristics, biomass source and growth conditions, the surface chemical properties of the catalyst support were also found to have a significant influence on the dispersion of the catalyst and the interaction between the support and catalyst, hence remarkably affecting the preparation of CNMs.161,162 The surface chemical properties of biomass-derived supports (BC or AC) are mainly dominated by the abundant surface functional groups, such as –CO, –OH, CC, and –COOH, on their surfaces.154,163 Some of these, especially O-containing functional groups, can act as anchoring sites for catalyst incorporation, contributing to the immobilization and dispersion of the catalyst.164 To achieve controllable immobilization and dispersion of catalysts, some researchers have deliberately modified the surface properties of biomass-derived supports by oxidation processes. For example, Zhou et al.156 employed concentrated HNO3 (68%) to introduce a large amount of O-containing functional groups on the surface of a bamboo-derived AC (Fig. 10). Combining this process with a microwave-assisted homogeneous deposition-precipitation method, the Co catalyst was found to be well-dispersed on its surface, with a uniform size distribution of 3 to 9 nm. The uniformly dispersed catalyst was subsequently responsible for the production of CNTs with uniform and narrow diameter distributions.
 Fig. 10  Illustration of the synthesis of CNTs on bamboo-derived AC reported by Zhou et al.:156 (a) The pore structure of bamboo derived AC, (b) homogeneous nucleation of cobalt hydroxide on the bamboo-derived AC support via a homogeneous deposition–precipitation method, (c) Co nanoparticles fixed on the surface of the bamboo-derived AC, (d) CNTs bonded onto the bamboo-derived AC with Co nanoparticles as the joint points. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Su et al.153 inferred that the growth of CNFs on AC followed the “tip-growing” model because most of the Fe catalyst particles were observed on the tips of the CNFs, suggesting that the interactions between the AC surface and Fe catalyst are weak.79 During the synthesis process, Fe catalyst particles dispersed on the surface of AC were firstly reduced by hydrogen; they then dissociated from the AC surface and acted as a catalyst to decompose the carbon source, dissolve carbon atoms and precipitate carbon for the growth of CNFs. In contrast, open-tipped CNTs can be observed in a study by Zhou et al., indicating that the CNTs were formed by a base growth mechanism which can be briefly described as follows: at the initial stage, carbon monoxide molecules were pyrolyzed on the surface of fine Co nanoparticles to produce carbon atoms, which simultaneously dissolved in the Co catalysts.156 As the carbon became oversaturated, CNTs began to grow out from the surface of the Co catalysts and grew longer until they reached a dynamic equilibrium. The formation of large amounts of CNTs containing catalyst particles on their bottom edges can be ascribed to the strong binding forces between the catalyst particles and the support surface.
6 Applications of biomass-based CNMs
It is well-established that conventional CNMs produced from petrochemical hydrocarbons can be applied in various fields, such as adsorption, energy storage and catalysis; this has been well reviewed in other studies.79,88 As mentioned in this review, biomass-based CNMs (where biomass provides the carbon source, catalyst or catalyst support for CNM preparation) also present similar characteristics to conventional CNMs, such as diameter, length, morphology and graphitic degree.30 It is believed that biomass-based CNMs can be used in fields where conventional CNMs are used. In addition, as a result of the low-cost, eco-friendly and renewable nature of feedstock (biomass) and its unique properties, such as abundant surface functional groups and minerals, biomass-based CNMs appear to possess more promising potential applications in comparison with conventional CNMs.144,165
6.1 Adsorbents
It is reported that the effective removal of contaminants such as heavy metal ions (i.e., Pb2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, CrO33−), dyes, organics and nutrient substances (i.e., PO43−, NH4+, NO3−) from aqueous solutions mainly depends on pore-filling, complexation, electrostatic interactions, ion exchange and precipitation; these are greatly associated with high specific surface area, well-developed porosity, and abundant surface functional groups and minerals of the adsorbents.166–169 Biomass-based CNMs present high specific surface areas and abundant surface functional groups and minerals, and they have been developed as highly efficient adsorbents.155,170 For example, Bigdeli and Fatemi considered that the enhancement of the specific surface area of CNMs after the formation of CNFs on AC played a vital role in the removal of thiophene and dibenzothiophene from aqueous solution.171 Multi-walled-CNTs derived from cotton via mechanical activation in a planetary mill for 7 to 27 h showed specific surface areas of 378 to 793 m2 g−1, which was found to be important for the effective removal of Ag+ Pb2+, Cd2+, Cu2+, methylene blue, methyl orange, gelatin and white albumin.170 Zhang et al. found that a CNTs/AC composite with a specific surface area of 3.2 m2 g−1 presented a maximum Cu2+ adsorption capacity of 16.34 mg g−1, which was over twice that of commercial AC with a specific surface area of 1120 m2 g−1.154 This result may indicate that the adsorption capability of CNMs is not determined by specific surface area alone. FT-IR and Boehm titration analysis revealed that O-containing surface functional groups such as –OH, –CO–O– and –COOH were extensively present on the surface of the CNTs/AC. The abundant O-containing surface functional groups provided a large amount of ion-exchange sites and decreased the pHpzc, which favors ion-exchange interactions between Cu2+ and H+ of the O-containing surface functional groups and electrostatic attractions, respectively. Therefore, a high uptake of Cu2+ was obtained. Carbon nanospheres prepared from willow leaves showed excellent adsorption performance toward Cu2+, Zn2+ and Cr6+, with adsorption capacities of 12.07 mg g−1 at pH 2, 30.48 mg g−1 at pH 4 and 372.46 mg g−1 at pH 3, respectively. This is mainly attributed to the abundant –OH and –CO– surface functional groups as well.115 The FT-IR spectra of the willow leaves-derived carbon nanospheres before and after rhodamine B adsorption showed that the peaks expected at 1115, 1444, 1797 and 3433 cm−1 shifted to lower wavenumbers after the adsorption process, revealing that in addition to O-containing surface functional groups (–OH, –CO–O– and –COOH), aromatic rings also played important roles in rhodamine B adsorption (wavenumber around 1444 cm−1).115 Moreover, the presence of minerals in CNMs was considered to be positive in the adsorption procedure.65 It was reported by Petala's group that in addition to surface functional groups, iron particles (iron carbide and metallic iron with sizes of 20 to 100 nm) buried in the internal carbon matrix of pine tree resin-derived magnetic carbon nanocages can also serve as Fe-oxide layer surface sites (Fe3C and FeOH2) to contribute to AsO23+ adsorption, especially at pH values higher than 6, based on the mechanism in eqn (1) and (2). The maximum adsorption capacity of AsO23+ at pH 7 was estimated to be 263.9 mg g−1, which is believed to be the highest in the literature. Furthermore, Su et al. reported that the considerable roughness of the outer surface of CNFs/AC was responsible for the effective adsorption of heteropolymolybdate (H3(PMo12O40)) from aqueous solution, while the specific surface area and surface functional groups were less important.153 They proposed that the very rough surface of the adsorbent was beneficial for the hydrodynamics of adsorption processes in the liquid phase and provided mechanical and chemical anchoring sites. Fe3C + H3AsO3 ↔ Fe3C–[H3AsO3](logK = 0.3)(1) FeOH2 + H3AsO3 ↔ FeOH2–[H3AsO3](logK = 3.0)(2)
6.2 Photocatalytic materials
As a result of their favorable conductivities and effective electron accepting and transporting properties, biomass-based CNMs have been widely applied in the domain of photocatalysis.172 It was reported by Qu et al. that adsorbent cotton-derived CNTs showed about 34% degradation efficiency toward rhodamine B after UV light irradiation for 2 h (initial rhodamine B concentration: 15 mg L−1, rhodamine B solution volume: 100 mL, CNTs dosage: 20 mg).111Brassica juncea L. shoots-derived CNTs were employed to degrade a bisphenol A solution (15 mg L−1) under a UV light irradiation for 90 min.113 The efficiency of photocatalytic degradation reached 48.3%. It has been suggested that biomass-based CNMs can be directly applied as effective photocatalysis materials in the degradation of organic pollutants. On the other hand, biomass-based CNMs have also been investigated as favorable supports for nanoparticles (semiconductors) to prepare highly efficient photocatalytic materials (biomass-based CNMs/nanoparticle composites), where they are believed to possess many advantages over those derived from typical oxides.172 For example, biomass-based CNMs can act as macromolecule photosensitizers to enhance the capability of visible light adsorption, resulting in the formation of superoxide radicals. At the same time, biomass-based CNMs provided a new carbon energy level to the band gap of photocatalysis material composites, extending the light adsorption to longer wavelengths. The dispersion of nanoparticles in the photocatalysis material composites was greatly improved due to the large specific surface area of the biomass-based CNMs. As a result, the photocatalytic degradation performance of the biomass-based CNMs and nanoparticle composites was correspondingly enhanced. Qu et al. found that the efficiency of the degradation of rhodamine B by CNTs/ZnO nanocomposites reached 98% after 2 h of UV light irradiation, which was higher than that of adsorbent cotton-derived CNTs and nano ZnO alone.111 SEM and XRD analysis indicated that the ZnO nanoparticles present on the surface of CNTs had a diameter of around 35.9 nm. CNTs and ZnO nanoparticles are considered to be good electron acceptors and electron donors, respectively. During the photocatalytic degradation process, these nanoparticles can effectively impede the recombination of photo-induced electrons and holes, giving rise to improved photocatalytic degradation performance.113 As mentioned above, the abundant minerals in biomass played important roles in the formation of CNMs. As a result, the presence of minerals in the as-synthesized biomass-based CNMs also has great influence on the application of the CNMs. It was reported that poplar leaves with abundant minerals, such as K, Na, Ca, Zn, and Cu, were directly employed to fabricate metal oxides/CNTs. The formed composites possessed about 74.8% photocatalytic degradation efficiency for bisphenol A under solar light irradiation for 180 min.112 In the above report, not only was an effective photocatalytic degradation material under visible light irradiation readily obtained, but the introduction of exogenetic metal oxides as catalytic active sites was also avoided. A potential mechanism of the photocatalytic degradation of bisphenol A by the metal oxide/poplar leaves-derived CNTs was proposed, as shown in Fig. 11.
 Fig. 11  Proposed photocatalytic degradation mechanism of bisphenol A by metal oxide/poplar leaves-derived CNTs reported by Qu's group.112 Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
6.3 Electrode materials
Biomass-based CNMs have good potential to be used in the electrochemical industry because they have unique three-dimensional structures, abundant surface functional groups, high specific surface areas and abundant porosities. They have been largely employed as electrode materials in energy storage, such as supercapacitors (i.e., electronic double layer capacitors and pseudo-capacitance based supercapacitors), Li+-ion batteries and fuel cells.67,72,156 Generally, a high specific surface area and well-developed porosity are favorable for efficient adsorption, storage, transportation and transmission of electrolytes.173 Surface functional groups such as O-containing surface functional groups and N-containing surface functional groups can: (i) greatly enhance the pseudo-capacitance capability and elevate the amount of energy stored in a supercapacitor; (ii) improve the wettability of the CNMs-based electrode, resulting in enhancement of the specific capacitance; (iii) prevent further oxidation of the CNMs-based electrode to ensure strong cycling stability.144 Sun et al. investigated the electrochemical properties of spruce bark-based three-dimensional vertically aligned graphene nanosheet arrays prepared via a combined hydrothermal carbonization and KOH activation approach at 800 °C to 1000 °C (VAGNAs) in a three-electrode system with 6 M KOH aqueous electrolyte. The results are presented in Fig. 12.70 The cycling voltammetry (CV) and galvanostatic charge/discharge (GCD) analyses (Fig. 12a–d) revealed that the as-synthesized CNMs presented both favorable electric double-layer capacitance and pseudo-capacitance behaviors. Particularly, the CNM sample prepared at 900 °C (VAGNA-900) showed a high specific capacitance of 398 F g−1 at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, which is much higher than that of most reported biomass-based CNMs (Fig. 12e). VAGNA-900 even retained a high specific capacitance of 275 F g−1 at an ultrahigh current density of 50 A g−1. Cycle tests conducted at 10 A g−1 (Fig. 12f) demonstrated that VAGNA-900 maintained 93.3% of its initial capacitance after 10000 cycles. It is inferred that the outstanding electrochemical performance of VAGNA-900 is related to its high specific surface area (2385 m2 g−1) and the open pores which were formed by the nanosheets and three-dimensional graphene structures. In particular, the high specific surface area can supply a highly accessible surface for adsorbing ions to obtain a high specific capacitance, act as ion buffering reservoirs and provide a short diffusion distance to accelerate electron transfer and decrease electric resistance. Meanwhile, the open pores can enhance the electric conductivity and electrochemical stability. The unique structure of biomass-based CNMs contributed to their exceptional electrochemical performance in a study by Su et al.75 It was proposed that the hollow activated carbon nanomesh derived from poplar catkins presented a large specific surface area (1893.0 m2 g−1), a high total pore volume (1.495 cm3 g−1) and a developed meso–macroporous structure (with a uniform pore size distribution of about 4.53 nm), giving rise to its high specific capacitance. The poplar catkins-derived carbon nanomesh was practically used in a symmetric supercapacitor in 1.0 M Na2SO4 aqueous electrolyte. The results showed that a high energy density of 20.86 W h kg−1 was obtained at a power density of 180.13 W kg−1 within a wide voltage rage of 0 to 1.8 V. Electrochemical stability with 87.6% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles at 1.0 A g−1 and a coulombic efficiency nearly 100% of that of the nanomesh were obtained according to cycling stability and coulombic efficiency analyses. In addition to the unique structure, surface functional groups were also believed to be responsible for the favorable electrochemical performance of biomass-based CNMs.69 Liu et al. found that carbon nanosheets prepared from Perilla frutescens leaves contained 18.76% O and 1.70% N as determined by X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy. These elements mainly existed in corresponding O/N-containing functional groups such as phenol, carboxylic, carbonyl/quinone, pyrrolic, hydroxypyridine and oxidized pyridine N–O moieties.55 The presence of these abundant O/N-containing functional groups on the as-prepared CNMs was responsible for its high gravimetric capacitance (270 F g−1 at 0.5 A g−1) and high volumetric capacitance (287 F cm−3 at 0.5 A g−1). In detail, the abundant O/N-containing surface functional groups can (i) directly produce pseudo-capacitance via redox reactions, (ii) endow the as-synthesized CNMs with high affinity to aqueous electrolyte to enhance its wettability, (iii) endow the as-synthesized CNMs with acid/base characteristics in aqueous electrolytes, and (iv) enhance the electrical conductivity of the as-synthesized CNMs. In addition to the N-containing surface functional groups originating from the biomass precursor, surface modifications were also beneficial to improve the electrochemical performance of the biomass-based CNMs.68 Large graphene-like porous carbon nanosheets were prepared from combined pyrolysis and activation of sugarcane bagasse pith and chitosan. The obtained CNMs possessed a large multiscale wrinkled nanosheet architecture, high surface area and appropriately controllable surface N doping states.68 The doping of N on the CNMs enhanced their electrical conductivity and pseudo-capacitance. As a result, the largest specific capacitance of the as-synthesized CNMs was about 339 F g−1 at 0.25 A g−1, which remained as high as 280 F g−1 when the current density increased to 100 A g−1. At the same time, the as-synthesized CNMs also displayed high energy density, good power density and excellent cycling stability.
 Fig. 12  Electrochemical performance of spruce bark-based three-dimensional vertically aligned graphene nanosheet arrays determined in a three-electrode system with 6.0 M KOH electrolyte by Sun et al.70 (a) CV curves at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, (b) CV curves of the spruce bark-based CNM prepared at 900 °C (VAGNA-900) at different scan rates, (c) GCD curves of VAGNAs at a surrent density of 1 A g−1, (d) GCD curves of VAGNA-900 at different current densities, (e) specific capacitance of VAGNAs at different current densities, (f) cycling stability of VAGNA-900 at a charge/discharge current density of 10 A g−1 for 10000 cycles in 6.0 M KOH electrolyte. Inset is a comparison of the GCD curves before and after cycling tests. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Elsevier. 
6.4 Other applications
Conventional CNMs are considered to be effective energy materials for the storage of H2 and CH4 due to their high specific surface areas.174 In order to enhance the capacity of gas storage, metals or metal oxides of noble metals, alkaline-earth metals, rare-earth metals and metalloids have been introduced into conventional CNMs.175–177 High pressure appears to be essential to promote the diffusion of the targeted gas into the inner structure of conventional CNMs for most adsorption/storage processes.178 However, Onishchenko et al. reported that biomass-based CNTs derived from mechanical activation of rusty peat moss, katerina SV corn, priozernyi-4 cotton and thorny bamboo presented excellent H2 adsorption capabilities even at a low pressure (0.5 MPa) and at room temperature (24 °C).179–181 It was found that the adsorption capacity of H2 was greatly affected by the type of feedstock, the mechanical activation time, the adsorption pressure and the adsorption temperature. The adsorption capacities of H2 on CNTs obtained from rusty peat moss, katerina SV corn, priozernyi-4 cotton and thorny bamboo at 0.5 MPa and 24 °C were 4.7 wt%, 4.6 wt%, 4.1 wt% and 3.9 wt%, respectively.179 At the same time, three-dimensional highly porous graphene derived from bagasse powder through a combination of catalytic graphitization and chemical activation was employed as an adsorbent for CH4.73 It was found that the bagasse powder-based porous graphene with a specific surface area of 2720 m2 g−1 and a total pore volume of 1.45 cm3 g−1 showed a CH4 adsorption capacity of up to 193 mg g−1 at 298 K and 35 bar, which is superior to most reports using conventional CNMs. According to linear fitting, the CH4 adsorption capacity exhibited a good linear relationship with the total volume, suggesting that the hierarchical pore structure and narrow pore size distribution of the bagasse powder-based porous graphene played important roles in the adsorption process. On the other hand, CNMs have been extensively applied as catalyst supports in catalysis for the preparation of chemicals.182,183 It was reported by Zuo et al. that Pd-containing pomelo peel-based nitrogen-doping porous graphene had favorable conversion efficiency for nitrobenzene hydrogenation toward aniline.184 The Pd-containing porous graphene fabricated from a mixture of pomelo peel and melamine (1:1) at 800 °C (PP-1:1–800-Pd) displayed 100% conversion of nitrobenzene at 50 °C for 1 h and high catalytic stability after 10 cycles, which was believed to be related to its high specific surface area (563 m2 g−1) and N-content. In detail, the high specific surface area of PP-1:1–800-Pd led to the uniform distribution of Pd particles (less than 2 nm). Also, the dispersion of Pd particles was improved and their aggregation was decreased as a result of the high specific surface area. Nitrogen element in PP-1:1–800-Pd mainly occurred as graphitic N and pyrrolic N, which favor improvement of the electronic properties of Pb, thus promoting the conversion of PP-1:1–800-Pd. Liu et al. found that a fir sawdust-based Ni-NiFe2O4/CNF composite not only had high catalytic conversion activity (100%) and stability after 7 cycles for nitrobenzene hydrogenation but also showed high selectivity.50 No detectable azoxybenzene or azobenzene by-products were determined. These compounds are often observed in other hydrogenation reactions.185 The Ni-NiFe2O4/CNF composite also possessed favorable separability by an external magnetic field after the reaction due to the presence of NiFe2O4, which enabled a saturation magnetization of 26 emu g−1 at 5000 Oe toward the catalyst composite. The above authors considered that the high specific surface area of the fir sawdust-derived CNFs was favorable for the dispersion of Ni nanoparticles, leading to the presence of a large amount of active catalytic sites. The high degree of graphitization of the as-fabricated CNFs also played an active role in nitrobenzene hydrogenation because it was beneficial to electron transport. A proposed mechanism for the highly efficient nitrobenzene hydrogenation reaction with the Ni-NiFe2O4/CNF composite is described in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 13  The proposed catalytic mechanism of the Ni-NiFe2O4/CNFs for the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene reported by Liu et al.50 Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry. 
In addition, CNMs have been widely developed as additives to incorporate into polymers, concrete and mortar to prepare enhanced composite materials because of their unique structures and outstanding thermal and mechanical properties.134,141 Gaddam et al. found that the thermal and mechanical properties of polyurethane composites were significantly improved after the addition of Desmostachya bipinnata grass-derived CNMs (0.1% to 1%) resulting from the formation of amide linkages between the carboxyl groups of the grass-based CNMs and diisocyanate.139 Rhee et al. reported that rice husk-derived graphene possessed an extremely high specific surface area of 2274 m2 g−1, which was responsible for improved compressive strength when it was incorporated into cementitious mortar.142,143
7 Challenges and the way forward
Biomass has been identified as an alternative, abundant, low cost and renewable carbon source for CNM preparation, mainly depending on the two routes presented in Scheme 1. One of these routes is to first convert biomass into amorphous carbon through pyrolysis or combustion; the amorphous carbon is then further converted into CNMs by means of catalytic graphitization, mechanical activation or chemical activation according to a solid–solid–solid process (Route 1). It is reported that the resulting CNMs and their individual characteristics vary based on the type of biomass, indicating that the biomass and its corresponding amorphous carbon play important roles in the formation of CNMs. Therefore, selecting a suitable biomass and regulating the characteristics of the corresponding amorphous carbons to produce more favorable amorphous carbon precursors for the formation of CNMs is a key point. On the other hand, CNMs can be obtained from biomass through a solid–vapor–solid process in which hydrocarbons and their derivatives (such as CH4, C2H4, C2H2, naphthalene and benzene) are the precursors of the CNMs produced from biomass via pyrolysis (Route 2). It is well known that the volatiles in gaseous and liquid phase products are composed of water, non-condensable gas, water soluble and insoluble tars. Regulating the generation of effective components (hydrocarbons and their derivatives) and reducing the effects of unrelated components such as O-containing components has a significant effect on the growth of CNMs. This can be achieved by controlling the catalyst and the components of the biomass.
 Scheme 1  The routes of biomass towards CNMs. 
Although biomass can provide minerals as catalysts for CNM fabrication, it is noted that the concentration of active catalytic components in biomass is very low; also, these active sites are usually accompanied by other components or imprisoned in an organic matrix, decreasing the availability of active components for CNM production. It is hence necessary to elucidate the elemental composition as well as the states of individual elements in biomass before its utilization.
The thermal conversion of biomass results in the occurrence of pore structures with varied size distributions. The distribution of BC pores is closely related to the type of biomass feedstock and the preparation conditions (e.g., temperature, activation treatment). When used as a substrate to support a catalyst, mesopores play a key role in liquid-phase adsorption, which is favorable for the impregnation and dispersion of the catalyst. Therefore, it appears that the conversion of biomass into carbon-rich materials with homogeneous and uniform mesopore distributions is a crucial strategy to enhance the application value of biomass as a catalyst support. In addition to their hierarchical pore structures, biomass-derived carbon materials possess surface functional groups in rich variety and huge quantity. Some of these functional groups, especially O-containing functional groups, have great impacts on the uptake, dispersion and immobilization of the catalyst. Hence, further study should focus on the preparation of biomass-derived carbon materials with large amounts of desirable surface functional groups or taking advantage of the surface functional groups of biomass-based carbon materials to achieve quantitative immobilization and dispersion of the catalyst.
It is well established that conventional CNMs present more favorable applications after functionalization because the functionalization process endows them with or improves their properties in some special aspects, such as introducing heteroatom surface functional groups and metal/metal oxide active sites, enhancing the specific surface area and causing structure defects.186,187 As mentioned in this review, biomass-based CNMs possess large amounts of structure defects, abundant O/N/S-containing surface functional groups, high surface areas and developed porosities.55,73,184 From this point of view, biomass-based CNMs can be considered to be functionalized-conventional CNMs. At the same time, due to the low cost, renewable and abundant raw materials involved, biomass based-CNMs are drawing increasing attention. It is worth noting that there are still many challenges in the preparation of biomass based-CNMs with tunable physicochemical properties because of the complex structures and compositions of the biomass precursors. On the other hand, it is also necessary to explore more application fields applicable to biomass based-CNMs.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
The authors greatly acknowledge funding support from projects supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant no. 51476034 and 51628601), The Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities and Postgraduate Research & Practice Innovation Program of Jiangsu Province from the Education Department of Jiangsu (KYCX17_0153) and Royal Society International Exchange Scheme (IE150760). The authors gratefully acknowledge financial support from China Scholarship Council.
References
S. Iijima, Nature, 1991, 354, 56–58 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Geim and K. S. Novoselov, Nat. Mater., 2007, 6, 183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. L. Zhang and X. S. Zhao, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2009, 38, 2520–2531 RSC .
I. Gonzalez-Valls and M. Lira-Cantu, Energy Environ. Sci., 2009, 2, 19–34 RSC .
K. Balasubramanian and M. Burghard, Anal. Bioanal. Chem., 2006, 385, 452–468 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Chang, H. Fan, K. Zhao, M. Chen, P. He and Y. Fang, Electroanalysis, 2008, 20, 131–136 CrossRef CAS .
M. T. Martínez, Y.-C. Tseng, N. Ormategui, I. Loinaz, R. Eritja and J. Bokor, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 530–536 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Hao, P. Liu, J. Tang, Q. Cai and S. Fan, Carbon, 2012, 50, 4203–4208 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, Y. Wei, K. Liu, L. Liu, K. Jiang and S. Fan, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 2391–2396 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Stobbe, P. E. Lindelof and J. Nygård, Semicond. Sci. Technol., 2006, 21, S10 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Larson, S. C. Bharath, W. G. Cullen and J. E. Reutt-Robey, Small, 2015, 11, 4946–4958 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Dremov, V. Fedoseev, P. Fedorov and A. Grebenko, Rev. Sci. Instrum., 2015, 86, 053703 CrossRef PubMed .
P.-C. Ma and Y. Zhang, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2014, 30, 651–660 CrossRef CAS .
Z. F. Ren, Z. P. Huang, J. W. Xu, J. H. Wang, P. Bush, M. P. Siegal and P. N. Provencio, Science, 1998, 282, 1105–1107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Iijima and T. Ichihashi, Nature, 1993, 363, 603–605 CrossRef CAS .
A. Thess, R. Lee, P. Nikolaev, H. Dai, P. Petit, J. Robert, C. Xu, Y. H. Lee, S. G. Kim, A. G. Rinzler, D. T. Colbert, G. E. Scuseria, D. Tománek, J. E. Fischer and R. E. Smalley, Science, 1996, 273, 483–487 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. S. Cho, E. Hamada, Y. Kondo and K. Takayanagi, Appl. Phys. Lett., 1996, 69, 278–279 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Kukovitskii, L. A. Chernozatonskii, S. G. L'Vov and N. N. Mel'nik, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1997, 266, 323–328 CrossRef CAS .
T. Kyotani, L.-F. Tsai and A. Tomita, Chem. Mater., 1996, 8, 2109–2113 CrossRef CAS .
H. Richter, K. Hernadi, R. Caudano, A. Fonseca, H. N. Migeon, J. B. Nagy, S. Schneider, J. Vandooren and P. J. Van Tiggelen, Carbon, 1996, 34, 427–429 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Vander Wal, G. M. Berger and L. J. Hall, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 3564–3567 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Vander Wal and T. M. Ticich, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2001, 105, 10249–10256 CrossRef CAS .
W. K. Hsu, M. Terrones, J. P. Hare, H. Terrones, H. W. Kroto and D. R. M. Walton, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1996, 262, 161–166 CrossRef CAS .
F. Abnisa and W. M. A. Wan Daud, Energy Convers. Manage., 2014, 87, 71–85 CrossRef CAS .
M. N. Satheesh Kumar, A. K. Mohanty, L. Erickson and M. Misra, J. Biobased Mater. Bioenergy, 2009, 3, 1–24 CrossRef .
S. Gillet, M. Aguedo, L. Petitjean, A. Morais, A. da Costa Lopes, R. Łukasik and P. Anastas, Green Chem., 2017, 19, 4200–4233 RSC .
S. Wang, G. Dai, H. Yang and Z. Luo, Prog. Energy Combust. Sci., 2017, 62, 33–86 CrossRef .
L. Sun, C. Tian, M. Li, X. Meng, L. Wang, R. Wang, J. Yin and H. Fu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6462 RSC .
Z. Wang, H. Ogata, S. Morimoto, J. Ortiz-Medina, M. Fujishige, K. Takeuchi, H. Muramatsu, T. Hayashi, M. Terrones, Y. Hashimoto and M. Endo, Carbon, 2015, 94, 479–484 CrossRef CAS .
M.-M. Titirici, R. J. White, N. Brun, V. L. Budarin, D. S. Su, F. del Monte, J. H. Clark and M. J. MacLachlan, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 250–290 RSC .
D. Shen, W. Jin, J. Hu, R. Xiao and K. Luo, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 51, 761–774 CrossRef CAS .
T. K. Patra and P. N. Sheth, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2015, 50, 583–593 CrossRef CAS .
R. Kumar, R. K. Singh and D. P. Singh, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2016, 58, 976–1006 CrossRef CAS .
J. Deng, Y. You, V. Sahajwalla and R. K. Joshi, Carbon, 2016, 96, 105–115 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Guo, F. Shen, G. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zeng, L. Wang, H. Xiao and S. Deng, Chemosphere, 2015, 119, 646–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Keiluweit, P. S. Nico, M. G. Johnson and M. Kleber, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2010, 44, 1247–1253 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Zhang, B. Gao, Y. Yao, Y. Xue and M. Inyang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 210, 26–32 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, B. Gao, S. Varnoosfaderani, A. Hebard, Y. Yao and M. Inyang, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 130, 457–462 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, H. Guo, F. Shen, G. Yang, Y. Zhang, Y. Zeng, L. Wang, H. Xiao and S. Deng, Chemosphere, 2015, 119, 646–653 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. L. Kuznetsov, A. N. Usoltseva, A. L. Chuvilin, E. D. Obraztsova and J.-M. Bonard, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2001, 64, 235401 CrossRef .
S. Maruyama, R. Kojima, Y. Miyauchi, S. Chiashi and M. Kohno, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2002, 360, 229–234 CrossRef CAS .
N. Q. Zhao, C. N. He, J. Ding, T. C. Zou, Z. J. Qiao, C. S. Shi, X. W. Du, J. J. Li and Y. D. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2007, 428, 79–83 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, Y. Lv, Y. Zhao and Z. Chen, Mater. Lett., 2010, 64, 2145–2147 CrossRef CAS .
K. Page, M. J. Harbottle, P. J. Cleall and T. R. Hutchings, Sci. Total Environ., 2014, 487, 260–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Keller, C. Ludwig, F. Davoli and J. Wochele, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 3359–3367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Zhao, X. Cao, O. Mašek and A. Zimmerman, J. Hazard. Mater., 2013, 256–257, 1–9 CAS .
W.-J. Liu, F.-X. Zeng, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Bioresour. Technol., 2011, 102, 3471–3479 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Selvam, N. G. Nair and P. Singh, J. Mater. Sci. Lett., 1998, 17, 57–60 CrossRef CAS .
T. L. Y. Cheung and D. H. L. Ng, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2007, 90, 559–564 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Liu, K. Tian and H. Jiang, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 821–826 RSC .
X. Ye, Q. Yang, Y. Zheng, W. Mo, J. Hu and W. Huang, Mater. Res. Bull., 2014, 51, 366–371 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, M.-Q. Zhao, J.-Q. Huang, J.-Q. Nie and F. Wei, Carbon, 2010, 48, 1196–1209 CrossRef CAS .
S. B. Sinnott, R. Andrews, D. Qian, A. M. Rao, Z. Mao, E. C. Dickey and F. Derbyshire, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1999, 315, 25–30 CrossRef CAS .
R. Brukh and S. Mitra, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2006, 424, 126–132 CrossRef CAS .
B. Liu, Y. Liu, H. Chen, M. Yang and H. Li, J. Power Sources, 2017, 341, 309–317 CrossRef CAS .
S. S. Shams, L. S. Zhang, R. Hu, R. Zhang and J. Zhu, Mater. Lett., 2015, 161, 476–479 CrossRef CAS .
G. B. Barin, I. de Fátima Gimenez, L. P. da Costa, A. G. S. Filho and L. S. Barreto, Carbon, 2014, 78, 609–612 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla and A. B. Fuertes, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2010, 490, 63–68 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sevilla, C. Sanchís, T. Valdés-Solís, E. Morallón and A. B. Fuertes, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 9749–9756 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ōya and H. Marsh, Phenomena of catalytic graphitization, J. Mater. Sci., 1982, 17, 309–322 CrossRef .
A. Ōya and S. Ōtani, Carbon, 1981, 19, 391–400 CrossRef .
M. Sevilla, C. Salinas Martinez-de Lecea, T. Valdes-Solis, E. Morallon and A. B. Fuertes, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2008, 10, 1433–1442 RSC .
M. Sevilla, C. Sanchís, T. Valdés-Solís, E. Morallón and A. B. Fuertes, Carbon, 2008, 46, 931–939 CrossRef CAS .
E. Thompson, A. E. Danks, L. Bourgeois and Z. Schnepp, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 551–556 RSC .
E. Petala, Y. Georgiou, V. Kostas, K. Dimos, M. A. Karakassides, Y. Deligiannakis, C. Aparicio, J. Tuček and R. Zbořil, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 5782–5792 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, D. Yu, G. Zhao, B. Du, W. Tang, L. Sun, Y. Sun, F. Besenbacher and M. Yu, Nano Energy, 2016, 27, 377–389 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, G. Wang, T. Wei, Z. Fan and P. Yan, Nano Energy, 2016, 19, 165–175 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Niu, K. Gao, Q. Tang, L. Wang, L. Han, H. Fang, Y. Zhang, S. Wang and L. Wang, Carbon, 2017, 123, 290–298 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhou, H. Wang, N. Mao, Y. Chen, Y. Zhou, T. Yin, H. Xie, W. Liu, S. Chen and X. Wang, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2017, 241, 202–209 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, M. Zheng, H. Hu, H. Dong, Y. Liang, Y. Xiao, B. Lei and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 336, 550–561 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhou, F. Chen, T. Bai, B. Long, Q. Liao, Y. Ren and J. Yang, Green Chem., 2016, 18, 2078–2088 RSC .
F. Chen, J. Yang, T. Bai, B. Long and X. Zhou, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2016, 768, 18–26 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mahmoudian, A. Rashidi, H. Dehghani and R. Rahighi, Chem. Eng. J., 2016, 304, 784–792 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cai, Y. Luo, H. Dong, X. Zhao, Y. Xiao, Y. Liang, H. Hu, Y. Liu and M. Zheng, J. Power Sources, 2017, 353, 260–269 CrossRef CAS .
X.-L. Su, M.-Y. Cheng, L. Fu, J.-H. Yang, X.-C. Zheng and X.-X. Guan, J. Power Sources, 2017, 362, 27–38 CrossRef CAS .
F. J. Derbyshire, A. E. B. Presland and D. L. Trimm, Carbon, 1975, 13, 111–113 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, J. Miao, Z. Yang, F.-X. Xiao, H. B. Yang, B. Liu and Y. Yang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 3295–3346 RSC .
K. A. Shah and B. A. Tali, Mater. Sci. Semicond. Process., 2016, 41, 67–82 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Tessonnier and D. S. Su, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 824–847 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-J. Xu and S.-M. Huang, Mater. Lett., 2007, 61, 4235–4237 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Deck and K. Vecchio, Carbon, 2005, 43, 2608–2617 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhou, C. Wu, J. A. Onwudili, A. Meng, Y. Zhang and P. T. Williams, Energy Fuels, 2014, 28, 6371–6379 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chen, C. Wu, L. Dong, A. Vassallo, P. T. Williams and J. Huang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 183, 168–175 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Liu, K. Tian, Y.-R. He, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2014, 48, 13951–13959 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Debalina, R. B. Reddy and R. Vinu, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2017, 124, 310–318 CrossRef CAS .
D. M. Le, H. R. Sørensen, N. O. Knudsen, J. K. Schjoerring and A. S. Meyer, Biotechnol. Biofuels, 2014, 7, 141 CrossRef PubMed .
K. Shi, J. Yan, E. Lester and T. Wu, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2014, 53, 15012–15019 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Zhang, J.-Q. Huang, M.-Q. Zhao, W.-Z. Qian and F. Wei, ChemSusChem, 2011, 4, 864–889 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. C. Hector, A. D. Luisa and V. Wilfred, Nanotechnology, 2012, 23, 105605 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Sun, X. Yu, B. Han and J. Ou, Constr. Build. Mater., 2013, 49, 835–840 CrossRef .
N. Mahinpey, P. Murugan, T. Mani and R. Raina, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 2736–2742 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, A. Tahmasebi, J. E. Omoriyekomwan and J. Yu, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2018, 130, 142–148 CrossRef CAS .
M. G. S. Bernd, S. R. Bragança, N. Heck and L. C. P. D. S. Filho, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2017, 6, 171–177 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Nersisyan, T.-H. Lee, K.-H. Lee, D.-Y. Maeng and J.-H. Lee, Mater. Lett., 2013, 107, 79–82 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Omoriyekomwan, A. Tahmasebi, J. Zhang and J. Yu, Energy Convers. Manage., 2017, 148, 583–592 CrossRef CAS .
J. Prasek, J. Drbohlavova, J. Chomoucka, J. Hubalek, O. Jasek, V. Adam and R. Kizek, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 15872–15884 RSC .
J. O. Alves, J. A. Soares Tenório, C. Zhuo and Y. A. Levendis, J. Mater. Res. Technol., 2012, 1, 31–34 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, Z. Wang, V. Dupont, J. Huang and P. T. Williams, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2013, 99, 143–148 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lang, X. Sécordel and C. Courson, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 12932–12941 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, J. Huang and P. T. Williams, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2013, 38, 8790–8797 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, C. Wu, H. Ling, J. Shi, P. T. Williams and J. Huang, Energy Fuels, 2017, 31, 2118–2127 CrossRef CAS .
L. Dong, C. Wu, H. Ling, J. Shi, P. T. Williams and J. Huang, Fuel, 2017, 188, 610–620 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kumagai, J. Alvarez, P. H. Blanco, C. Wu, T. Yoshioka, M. Olazar and P. T. Williams, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2015, 113, 15–21 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Efika, C. Wu and P. T. Williams, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 2012, 95, 87–94 CrossRef CAS .
J. O. Alves, C. Zhuo, Y. A. Levendis and J. A. S. Tenório, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 106, 433–444 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, Z. Wang, J. Huang and P. T. Williams, Fuel, 2013, 106, 697–706 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu and P. T. Williams, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 5055–5061 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Kang, E. Wang, B. Mao, Z. Su, L. Chen and L. Xu, Nanotechnology, 2005, 16, 1192 CrossRef CAS .
B. Goodell, X. Xie, Y. Qian, G. Daniel, M. Peterson and J. Jellison, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2008, 8, 2472–2474 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, B. Goodell, Y. Qian, Z. Geoffrey, D. Zhang, D. Nagle, M. Peterson and J. Jellison, For. Prod. J., 2009, 59, 26–28 CAS .
J. Qu, C. Luo and Q. Cong, Micro Nano Lett., 2012, 7, 1064–1068 CrossRef .
J. Qu, Q. Cong, C. Luo and X. Yuan, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 961–965 RSC .
J. Qu, C. Luo and X. Yuan, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2013, 20, 3688–3695 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Qu, C. Luo, Q. Zhang, Q. Cong and X. Yuan, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2013, 178, 380–382 CrossRef CAS .
J. Qu, Q. Zhang, Y. Xia, Q. Cong and C. Luo, Environ. Sci. Pollut. Res., 2015, 22, 1408–1419 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xie, B. Goodell, G. Daniel, Y. Qian, J. Jellison and M. Peterson, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 2009, 63, 933–935 CrossRef CAS .
G. Che, B. B. Lakshmi, C. R. Martin, E. R. Fisher and R. S. Ruoff, Chem. Mater., 1998, 10, 260–267 CrossRef CAS .
X.-W. Chen, O. Timpe, S. B. A. Hamid, R. Schlögl and D. S. Su, Carbon, 2009, 47, 340–343 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and L. T. Chadderton, J. Mater. Res., 2004, 19, 2791–2794 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and J. Yu, Carbon, 2005, 43, 3183–3186 CrossRef CAS .
N. Pierard, A. Fonseca, Z. Konya, I. Willems, G. Van Tendeloo and J. B. Nagy, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2001, 335, 1–8 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Chen and J. Yu, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2005, 87, 033103 CrossRef .
D. V. Onishchenko and V. P. Reva, J. Eng. Phys. Thermophys., 2013, 3, 645–650 CrossRef .
D. V. Onishchenko, V. P. Reva, V. V. Chakov, V. G. Kuryavyi and V. V. Petrov, Metallurgist, 2013, 56, 679–683 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Onishchenko, V. P. Reva and V. G. Kuryavyi, Coke Chem., 2012, 55, 467–469 CrossRef .
D. V. Onishchenko, V. P. Reva, V. G. Kuryavyi, A. E. Protsenko and V. V. Petrov, Coke Chem., 2013, 56, 70–72 CrossRef .
V. P. Reva, A. E. Filatenkov, V. U. Yagofarov, D. A. Gulevskii, V. G. Kuryavyi and N. M. Yu, IOP Conf. Ser.: Mater. Sci. Eng., 2016, 127, 012008 Search PubMed .
V. P. Reva, A. É. Filatenkov, Y. N. Mansurov and V. G. Kuryavyi, Refract. Ind. Ceram., 2016, 57, 141–145 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Onishchenko, V. P. Reva and B. A. Voronov, Russ. Agric. Sci., 2013, 39, 540–543 CrossRef .
J. Zhu, J. Jia, F. L. Kwong, D. H. L. Ng and S. C. Tjong, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 36, 12–19 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mukhopadhyay, K. M. Krishna and M. Sharon, Carbon, 1996, 34, 251–264 CrossRef CAS .
K. Mukhopadhyay and M. Sharon, Mater. Manuf. Processes, 1997, 12, 541–554 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ozawa, P. Deotaf and E. Osawa, Fullerene Sci. Technol., 1999, 7, 387–409 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Gaddam, S. Kantheti, R. Narayan and K. V. S. N. Raju, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 23043–23049 RSC .
R. R. Gaddam, D. Vasudevan, R. Narayan and K. V. S. N. Raju, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 57137–57143 RSC .
M. Kumar and Y. Ando, Diamond Relat. Mater., 2003, 12, 998–1002 CrossRef CAS .
M. Kumar and Y. Ando, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2003, 374, 521–526 CrossRef CAS .
R. J. Andrews, C. F. Smith and A. J. Alexander, Carbon, 2006, 44, 341–347 CrossRef CAS .
R. R. Gaddam, S. Kantheti, R. Narayan and K. V. S. N. Raju, Prog. Org. Coat., 2015, 79, 37–42 CrossRef CAS .
H. Muramatsu, Y. A. Kim, K.-S. Yang, R. Cruz-Silva, I. Toda, T. Yamada, M. Terrones, M. Endo, T. Hayashi and H. Saitoh, Small, 2014, 10, 2766–2770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Rhee, J. S. Lee, Y. A. Kim, J. H. Kim and J. H. Kim, Constr. Build. Mater., 2016, 125, 632–642 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rhee, J.-S. Lee, J. H. Kim and Y. A. Kim, Constr. Build. Mater., 2017, 146, 350–359 CrossRef CAS .
I. Rhee, Y. A. Kim, G.-O. Shin, J. H. Kim and H. Muramatsu, Constr. Build. Mater., 2015, 96, 189–197 CrossRef .
W.-J. Liu, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Green Chem., 2015, 17, 4888–4907 RSC .
W.-W. Liu, S.-P. Chai, A. R. Mohamed and U. Hashim, J. Ind. Eng. Chem., 2014, 20, 1171–1185 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pii, T. Mimmo, N. Tomasi, R. Terzano, S. Cesco and C. Crecchio, Biol. Fertil. Soils, 2015, 51, 403–415 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhao, X. Guo, Q. Guo, L. Gu, Y. Guo and F. Feng, Carbon, 2011, 49, 2155–2158 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhuo and Y. A. Levendis, J. Appl. Polym. Sci., 2014, 131, 39931 CrossRef .
R. Araga and C. S. Sharma, Mater. Lett., 2017, 188, 205–207 CrossRef CAS .
J.-H. Lin, C.-S. Chen, H.-L. Ma, C.-W. Chang, C.-Y. Hsu and H.-W. Chen, Carbon, 2008, 46, 1619–1623 CrossRef CAS .
Z.-Y. Zeng and J.-H. Lin, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 40251–40258 RSC .
F. Zhou, Q. Liu, W. Zhang, J. Gu, S. Zhu and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Sci., 2014, 49, 548–557 CrossRef CAS .
D. S. Su, X. Chen, G. Weinberg, A. Klein-Hofmann, O. Timpe, S. B. A. Hamid and R. Schlögl, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 5488–5492 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang, Z.-H. Huang, R. Lv, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, Langmuir, 2009, 25, 269–274 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z.-H. Huang, F. Zhang, M.-X. Wang, R. Lv and F. Kang, Chem. Eng. J., 2012, 184, 193–197 CrossRef CAS .
F. Zhou, Q. Liu, D. Kang, J. Gu, W. Zhang and D. Zhang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 3505–3512 RSC .
J. J. Delgado, X. W. Chen, D. S. Su, S. B. A. Hamid and R. Schlögl, J. Nanosci. Nanotechnol., 2007, 7, 3495–3501 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X.-W. Chen, D. S. Su, S. B. A. Hamid and R. Schlögl, Carbon, 2007, 45, 895–898 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Gu, K. X. Li, J. Wang and H. W. He, Microporous Mesoporous Mater., 2010, 131, 393–400 CrossRef CAS .
X. W. Chen, D. S. Su and R. Schlögl, Phys. Status Solidi B, 2006, 243, 3533–3536 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Hsieh, W.-Y. Chen and Y.-S. Cheng, Electrochim. Acta, 2010, 55, 5294–5300 CrossRef CAS .
C.-T. Hsieh, H. Teng, W.-Y. Chen and Y.-S. Cheng, Carbon, 2010, 48, 4219–4229 CrossRef CAS .
D. Angın, E. Altintig and T. E. Köse, Bioresour. Technol., 2013, 148, 542–549 CrossRef PubMed .

          J. H. Bitter, M. K. van der Lee, A. G. T. Slotboom, A. J. van Dillen and K. P. de Jong, Synthesis of Highly Loaded Highly Dispersed Nickel on Carbon Nanofibers by Homogeneous Deposition–Precipitation,  2003 Search PubMed .
S. Ravi and S. Vadukumpully, J. Environ. Chem. Eng., 2016, 4, 835–856 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, D. Shen, F. Shen and T. Li, Chemosphere, 2016, 150, 1–7 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Wang, D. Shen, F. Shen, C. Wu and S. Gu, Int. Biodeterior. Biodegrad., 2017, 120, 104–114 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, F. Shen, D. Shen, Y. Jiang and R. Xiao, J. Environ. Sci., 2017, 53, 293–300 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Inyang, B. Gao, Y. Yao, Y. Xue, A. Zimmerman, A. Mosa, P. Pullammanappallil, Y. S. Ok and X. Cao, Crit. Rev. Environ. Sci. Technol., 2016, 46, 406–433 CrossRef CAS .
D. V. Onishchenko and V. P. Reva, Coke Chem., 2013, 56, 262–265 CrossRef .
S. Bigdeli and S. Fatemi, Chem. Eng. J., 2015, 269, 306–315 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Seyed Dorraji, A. R. Amani-Ghadim, M. H. Rasoulifard, S. Taherkhani and H. Daneshvar, Appl. Catal., B, 2017, 205, 559–568 CrossRef CAS .
W.-J. Liu, H. Jiang and H.-Q. Yu, Chem. Rev., 2015, 115, 12251–12285 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ghosh and V. Padmanabhan, Int. J. Energy Res., 2017, 41, 1108–1117 CrossRef CAS .
S. Z. Mortazavi, A. Reyhani and S. Mirershadi, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 24885–24896 CrossRef CAS .
H. G. Shiraz and M. G. Shiraz, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 11528–11533 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tian and S. Dong, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2016, 41, 1053–1059 CrossRef CAS .
M. Han, Q. Zhao, Z. Zhu, Y. Hu, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 18305–18311 RSC .
D. Onishchenko and V. Reva, Chem. Technol. Fuels Oils, 2013, 49, 281–286 CrossRef CAS .
D. Onishchenko and V. Reva, Chem. Pet. Eng., 2013, 49, 484–488 CrossRef CAS .
D. Onishchenko, V. Reva and V. Kuryavyi, Coke Chem., 2013, 56, 182–185 CrossRef .
Z. Sun, Y. Zhao, Y. Xie, R. Tao, H. Zhang, C. Huang and Z. Liu, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1007–1011 RSC .
P. Chen, F. Yang, A. Kostka and W. Xia, ACS Catal., 2014, 4, 1478–1486 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zuo, J. Duan, H. Fan, S. Qu and W. Shen, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2018, 435, 1020–1028 CrossRef CAS .
A. Nieto-Márquez, S. Gil, A. Romero, J. L. Valverde, S. Gómez-Quero and M. A. Keane, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 363, 188–198 CrossRef .
J. Xu, Z. Cao, Y. Zhang, Z. Yuan, Z. Lou, X. Xu and X. Wang, Chemosphere, 2018, 195, 351–364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. W. Low and C. W. Lai, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 103–125 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:
Zhanghong Wang	Zhanghong Wang received his B.S. degree (2012) and M.S. degree (2015) from the School of Environment of Sichuan Agricultural University under the supervision of Prof. Xiaoxun Xu and Prof. Fei Shen. He is currently a Ph.D candidate in the School of Energy and Environment at Southeast University under the supervision of Prof. Dekui Shen. His research focuses on the utilization of solid wastes and environmental remediation.
Dekui Shen	Dekui Shen is a Professor in the Key Laboratory of Energy Thermal Conversion and Control, Ministry of Education, and the School of Energy and Environment at Southeast University. He obtained a B.E. degree with a double major in thermal dynamic engineering and communication technology at Zhejiang University in 2003. He obtained his Ph.D degree in thermo-physics from the State Key Laboratory of Clean Energy Utilization at Zhejiang University in 2008. His research interests include thermo-chemical conversion of biomass into fuels, chemicals and carbon nanomaterials, molecular dynamics simulations of thermo-chemical processes and environmental pollution control.
Chunfei Wu	Dr Chunfei Wu is a Senior Lecturer at the School of Chemistry and Chemical Engineering at Queen's University Belfast. He obtained his PhD degree in Chemical and Energy Engineering from the University of Leeds in 2010. He has worked in the areas of converting renewable and waste resources to energy, fuel, and chemicals through catalytic thermo-chemical routes for more than 10 years. He has published more than 110 peer reviewed journal papers with >2700 citations in the areas of catalytic thermo-chemical conversion of wastes, and he is a Chartered Scientist and a Member of the Royal Society of Chemistry.
Sai Gu	Professor Sai Gu joined the University of Surrey as Head of the Department of Chemical and Process Engineering in 2015 after holding various academic posts at Aston University, the University of Southampton and Cranfield University. He obtained a PhD in material modelling from the University of Nottingham and also performed post-doctoral research at the University of Cambridge. Professor Gu has an international reputation for clean energy and material research; he is currently leading a number of EPSRC-funded projects focused on the development of advanced bio-energy and carbon capture technologies.

 	Fig. 1  Production of CNMs from biomass.	 

 	Fig. 2  Synthesis of CNMs from biomass via pyrolysis.	 


Perilla frutescens leaves	—	—	Directly pyrolyzed at 600 °C to 800 °C	– O/N-co-doped porous carbon nanosheets with thicknesses in the range of 30 to 120 nm	
55

– Carbon nanorods

Camphor leaves	—	—	Directly pyrolyzed at 1200 °C	– Few-layer graphene with a thickness of 2.37 nm	
56

Coconut coir dust	—	—	Hydrothermally carbonized at 250 °C then pyrolyzed at 1500 °C	– Highly curved graphitic carbon nanostructures	
57

Pine wood sawdust	Ni(NO3)2 or Fe(NO3)3	—	Pyrolyzed Ni or Fe-loaded sawdust at 900 °C to 1000 °C	– Graphitic carbon nanocapsules, nanocoils, nanoribbons	
59

Softwood sawdust	Fe(NO3)3	—	Pyrolyzed Fe-loaded sawdust at 800 °C	Straight and bamboo-like graphitic nanotubes	
64

Pine resin	Fe(NO3)3	—	Pyrolyzed Fe-loaded sawdust at 1000 °C	Magnetic carbon nanocages	
65

Dry elm samaras	—	KOH	Pyrolyzed a KOH/elm samaras mixture at 1000 °C	Highly porous carbon nanosheets	
66

Willow catkin	—	KOH	Pyrolyzed a KOH/willow catkin mixture at 850 °C	Interconnected porous carbon nanosheets	
67

Sugarcane bagasse	—	KOH	Sugarcane bagasse was firstly carbonized at 700 °C and then pyrolyzed at 600 °C to 900 °C after mixing with a KOH solution	Larger graphene-like porous carbon nanosheets	
68

Reed	—	KOH	Reed was subjected to a hydrothermal treatment and then pyrolyzed at 700 °C to 900 °C after mixing with a KOH solution	Interconnected porous carbon nanosheets	
69

Spruce bark	—	KOH	Spruce bark was subjected to a hydrothermal treatment and then pyrolyzed at 800 °C to 1000 °C after mixing with KOH via grinding	Vertically aligned graphene nanosheet arrays	
70

Wheat stalk	—	KOH	KOH-immersed wheat straw was hydrothermally treated and then pyrolyzed at 800 °C, followed by treatment at 2600 °C	Interconnected highly graphitic carbon nanosheets	
71

Wheat straw	—	KOH	KOH-immersed wheat straw was hydrothermally treated and then pyrolyzed at 800 °C, followed by treatment at 2600 °C	Few-layer graphene	
72

Bagasse powder	Cu(C2H3O2)2	KOH	Pyrolyzed Fe and KOH-loaded sawdust at 700 °C to 1000 °C	Three-dimensional highly porous graphene	
73

Coconut shells	FeCl3	ZnCl2	Pyrolyzed Fe and Zn-loaded sawdust at 900 °C	Porous graphene-like nanosheets	
28


Moringa oleifera stems	FeCl3	ZnCl2	Pyrolyzed Fe and Zn-loaded sawdust at 800 °C	Hierarchical porous carbon nanosheets	
74

Poplar catkin	Ni(NO3)2	KOH	Poplar catkin pyrolyzed with a Ni catalyst at 600 °C and then further pyrolyzed at 800 °C with KOH	Hollow carbon nanomesh	
75


 	Fig. 3  Schematic of the preparation of CNMs from wheat stalk proposed by Zhou's group.71 Reproduced from ref. 71 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 4  Relationships of conventional CVD, in situ CVD and two-step CVD.	 


Fir sawdust	Small-molecular hydrocarbons from the decomposition of fir sawdust	Fir sawdust char	FeCl3	Fast pyrolysis	Magnetic CNFs/mesoporous carbon composites	
84

Fir sawdust	Small-molecular hydrocarbons from the decomposition of fir sawdust	Fir sawdust char	FeCl3 plus NiCl2	Fast pyrolysis	Ni-NiFe2O4/CNFs	
50

Rice husk	CH4 from the decomposition of rice husk and carbon radicals from rice husk-derived char	Rice husk char	Ni from nickel case	Microwave plasma irradiation	Graphene, CNTs and graphenated CNTs	
29

Gumwood	CH4, naphthalene and benzene-based derivatives from the decomposition of gumwood	Gumwood char	Mineral matter in char	Microwave-induced pyrolysis	CNTs with diameters of 50 to 100 nm, lengths ranging from 600 to 1600 nm and wall thicknesses of around 5 nm	
87

Wood sawdust	—a	—	Ferrocene or Fe/Mo/MgO	
	CNTs with thicknesses of 25 to 50 nm	
93

Sugarcane bagasse	—	Sugarcane bagasse char	Commercial Fe and Co metal powders	Microwave-assisted pyrolysis	CNTs and graphitic flakes	
85

Bamboo	Light hydrocarbons such as CH4, C2H4, C2H6 and C3H6 obtained from the thermoconversion of bamboo	Bamboo char	Fe(NO3)3	Pyrolysis- gasification- carbonization	– Carbon nanoribbons	
51

– CNFs
– hollow carbon nanospheres (HCs)
– bamboo/herringbone-shaped CNTs (BCNTs/HCNTs)
Reed bristles	Volatiles from the thermolysis of reed bristles	—	Oxides originating from biomass	Carbonization	CMTs and CNTs	
94

Palm kernel shell	Volatiles and bio-liquid released from microwave pyrolysis of palm kernel shell	Palm kernel shell-derived char	Fe, CaSiO4, CaCO3, KO2 originating from palm kernel shell	
	Hollow CNFs with diameters of around 50 to 100 nm and lengths of 600 to 1600 nm	
95

Pine nut shell	Hydrocarbons (benzene and alkenes) in bio-oil and CO, CO2, methane and ethane in bio-gas	Pine nut shell-derived char	K, Si, Ca, Mg and Al-related minerals	Microvave pyrolysis	Hollow CNFs with diameters of about 400 nm and lengths of 1400 to 5000 nm	
92


 	Fig. 5  SEM images of carbonaceous materials produced by pyrolysis of biomass loaded with different metal salts: (a) FeCl3, (b) Fe(NO3)3, (c) Fe2(SO4)3, (d) CuCl2, and (e) NiCl2, reported by Liu's group.84 Reproduced from ref. 84 with permission from the American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Schematics of the experimental systems employed in studies by Alves et al.105 (a), Wu et al.106 (b), and Efika et al.104 (c). Reproduced from ref. 104–106 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Scanning electron microscopy (SEM) image of coconut AC after calcination at 400 °C, (b) elementary analysis of a selected area of (a) using an energy dispersive X-ray detector, (c) SEM image of the as-synthesized CNFs supported on the surface of coconut activated carbon, (d) HRTEM image of a CNF with an iron particle on the tip.118 Reproduced from ref. 118 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  SEM images of bamboo samples treated at different temperatures reported by Zhu et al.:130 (a) 1200 °C, (b) 1300 °C, (c) 1400 °C, (d) 1500 °C. Top right insets are magnified images and left bottom insets are EDX spectra. Reproduced from ref. 130 with permission from Elsevier.	 



Bamboo-derived BC (850 °C)	491	92	0.233	0.094	0.199	0.008	0.034	0.085	
152

Bamboo-derived BC (800 °C)	7.0	3.2	—g	—	—	—	—	—	
154

Bamboo derived BC (800 °C)	7.0	4.0	—	—	—	—	—	—	
155

Palm kernel shell-derived AC	1490	305	0.551	0.289	—	—	—	—	
153

Palm kernel shell-derived AC	1490	32.4	—	—	—	—	—	—	
157

20.5	—	—	—	—	—	—
Palm kernel shell-derived AC	1237	17.7	0.547	0.009	—	—	—	—	
158

91.5	0.078	—	—	—	—
56.0	0.080	—	—	—	—
Palm kernel shell-derived AC	1273	15	0.601	0.035	0.522	0.013	—	—	
118

Coconut-derived AC	1189	32	0.495	0.055	0.422	0.025	—	—
Wheat straw-derived AC	1221	102	0.641	0.105	0.587	0.071	—	—
Bamboo-derived AC	2057	673	1.25	0.43	0.72	0.32	0.53	0.11	
156

1204	0.59	0.37	0.22
1726	0.83	0.39	0.44
2278	2.39	0.52	0.87
2139	2.39	0.39	0.90
Petroleum coke-derived AC	1869	359	1.04	0.31	—	—	—	—	
159


 	Fig. 9  SEM images of CNFs on AC reported by Su et al.:153 (a) CNFs covering the surface of AC; (b) CNFs nested inside the AC pores. Reproduced from ref. 153 with permission from Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 10  Illustration of the synthesis of CNTs on bamboo-derived AC reported by Zhou et al.:156 (a) The pore structure of bamboo derived AC, (b) homogeneous nucleation of cobalt hydroxide on the bamboo-derived AC support via a homogeneous deposition–precipitation method, (c) Co nanoparticles fixed on the surface of the bamboo-derived AC, (d) CNTs bonded onto the bamboo-derived AC with Co nanoparticles as the joint points. Reproduced from ref. 156 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 
Fe3C + H3AsO3 ↔ Fe3C–[H3AsO3](logK = 0.3)	(1)
FeOH2 + H3AsO3 ↔ FeOH2–[H3AsO3](logK = 3.0)	(2)

 	Fig. 11  Proposed photocatalytic degradation mechanism of bisphenol A by metal oxide/poplar leaves-derived CNTs reported by Qu's group.112 Reproduced from ref. 112 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 12  Electrochemical performance of spruce bark-based three-dimensional vertically aligned graphene nanosheet arrays determined in a three-electrode system with 6.0 M KOH electrolyte by Sun et al.70 (a) CV curves at a scan rate of 50 mV s−1, (b) CV curves of the spruce bark-based CNM prepared at 900 °C (VAGNA-900) at different scan rates, (c) GCD curves of VAGNAs at a surrent density of 1 A g−1, (d) GCD curves of VAGNA-900 at different current densities, (e) specific capacitance of VAGNAs at different current densities, (f) cycling stability of VAGNA-900 at a charge/discharge current density of 10 A g−1 for 10000 cycles in 6.0 M KOH electrolyte. Inset is a comparison of the GCD curves before and after cycling tests. Reproduced from ref. 70 with permission from Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 13  The proposed catalytic mechanism of the Ni-NiFe2O4/CNFs for the hydrogenation of nitrobenzene reported by Liu et al.50 Reproduced from ref. 50 with permission from the Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Scheme 1  The routes of biomass towards CNMs.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
