Recent advances in heterogeneous catalysts for bio-oil upgrading via “ ex situ catalytic fast pyrolysis”: catalyst development through the study of mo ...  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C3GC41354C View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C3GC41354C
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2014, 16, 454-490Recent advances in heterogeneous catalysts for bio-oil upgrading via “ex situ catalytic fast pyrolysis”: catalyst development through the study of model compounds

        
          
            Daniel A. 
            Ruddy
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Joshua A. 
            Schaidle
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jack R. 
            Ferrell III
          
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Jun 
            Wang
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Luc 
            Moens
          
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Jesse E. 
            Hensley
          
          
        
      *b
aChemical and Materials Science Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 15013 Denver West Pkwy, Golden, CO, USA
bNational Bioenergy Center, National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 15013 Denver West Pkwy, Golden, CO, USA. E-mail: jesse.hensley@nrel.gov;  Fax: +1 303-384-7951;   Tel: +1 303-384-7914
Received 
      9th July 2013
    , Accepted 5th November 2013First published on 13th November 2013AbstractAdvances in heterogeneous catalysis are driven by the structure–function relationships that define catalyst performance (i.e., activity, selectivity, lifetime). To understand these relationships, cooperative research is required: prediction and analysis using computational models, development of new synthetic methods to prepare specific solid-state compositions and structures, and identification of catalytically active site(s), surface-bound intermediates, and mechanistic pathways. In the application of deoxygenating and upgrading biomass pyrolysis vapors, a fundamental understanding of the factors that favor C–O bond cleavage and C–C bond formation is still needed. In this review, we focus on recent advances in heterogeneous catalysts for hydrodeoxygenation of biomass pyrolysis products. Focus is placed on studies that made use of model compounds for comparisons of catalysts and the reaction networks they promote. Applications of transition metal sulfide catalysts for deoxygenation processes are highlighted, and compared to the performances of noble metal and metal carbide, nitride, and phosphide catalysts. In general, it is found that bifunctional catalysts are required for deoxygenation in a single reactor, with bifunctionality achieved on the catalyst or in conjunction with the catalyst support. Catalysts that activate hydrogen well will be preferred for ex situ catalytic pyrolysis conditions (upgrading downstream of pyrolysis reactor prior to condensation of bio-oil, pressures near atmospheric, temperatures between 350–500 °C). Supports that limit chemisorption of large reactants (leading to blockage of catalyst sites) should be employed. Finally, the stability of the catalyst and support in high-steam and low hydrogen-to-carbon environments will be critical.Daniel A. RuddyDr Daniel Ruddy received a B.S. degree in Chemistry at Lafayette College, followed by a Ph.D. degree in Inorganic Chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley, where his research combined synthetic molecular and materials chemistry with detailed characterization to study novel heterogeneous catalysts. He was part of the research staff at the Dow Chemical Company before joining the Chemical and Materials Science Center at NREL in 2010. Dr Ruddy's research at NREL integrates the synthesis and characterization of functional molecules and materials for advanced energy technologies including solar fuels production, biomass conversion catalysis, and high-capacity energy storage materials.Joshua A. SchaidleJosh Schaidle received his B.S. in Chemical Engineering from the University of California-Santa Barbara in 2006 and his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from the University of Michigan in 2011. His Ph.D. research focused on understanding the catalytic properties of early transition metal carbide and nitride materials as well as exploring the interactions between transition metals and native carbide surfaces. Currently, Josh is a research engineer in the Thermochemical Catalysis Research and Development group within the National Bioenergy Center at NREL. His work focuses on the development of novel catalysts and processes for the catalytic upgrading of biomass pyrolysis products.Jack R. Ferrell IIIDr Jack Ferrell received a B.S. from the University of Virginia and a Ph.D. from the Colorado School of Mines, both in Chemical Engineering. Dr Ferrell then held a postdoctoral fellowship at the National Energy Technology Laboratory in Morgantown, West Virginia. Jack joined NREL in 2011 as a research engineer in the Thermochemical Catalysis Research and Development division of the National Bioenergy Center. Currently, his research focuses on the development of analytical techniques for biomass pyrolysis processes. Dr Ferrell also has research interests in the development of novel catalysts and processes for biomass upgrading, including electrochemical processes.Jun WangDr Jun Wang received the B.S. degree in Polymer Science and Engineering from University of Science & Technology of China (USTC) in 2005. After that he joined Prof. Zhiqun Lin's group at Iowa State University and received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering in 2009. He is now a postdoctoral researcher in the Chemical and Materials Science Center at National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). His research interests include design, synthesis, and characterization of functional nanomaterials for renewable energy applications.Luc MoensDr Luc Moens is a Senior Chemist in the National Bioenergy Center at NREL. He received a B.S. degree in Agrochemical Engineering from Ghent University in Belgium, and a Ph.D. in synthetic organic chemistry from the University of California at Santa Barbara. He joined NREL in 1989 where he currently specializes in the development of new thermo- and biocatalytic pathways for the conversion of biomass intermediates into fuels, chemicals and materials. His expertise includes heterogeneous catalysis for biomass deoxygenation, pyrolysis technologies applied to polymers, and the chemistry related to energy storage in solar thermal systems and batteries.Jesse E. HensleyDr Jesse Hensley earned his B.S. in Chemical Engineering from the University of Notre Dame and his Ph.D. in the same from the Colorado School of Mines under the direction of Professor J. Douglas Way. Dr Hensley serves as section supervisor in the Thermochemical Process R&D division of the National Bioenergy Center, and as principal investigator in pyrolysis oil upgrading and gas-to-liquids processes for the conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to hydrocarbon fuels. Dr Hensley's group focuses on the chemical pathways and kinetics of deoxygenation and C–C coupling reactions over heterogeneous catalysts, with the ultimate goal of advancing cost-competitive biofuels.
1. Introduction
As concerns about global climate change, finite fossil fuel reserves, and the associated economic and environmental impacts of extracting those fossil fuels continue to intensify, there is a corresponding rise in interest for a sustainable feedstock to replace petroleum. This is especially true for the heavy vehicle transportation sector (e.g., ships, trucks, airplanes), since it is difficult to envision electric and/or hybrid technologies as a replacement for these heavy-duty engines, especially in the near-term. According to the 2012 Annual Energy Outlook, this represents 40% of our transportation energy demand that cannot be electrified.1 Therefore, the production of diesel and jet fuels will be a continuing necessity to sustain the global economy. Considering the extensive infrastructure that has developed with the wide-spread deployment of liquid hydrocarbon fuels, analogous liquid biofuels derived from renewable biomass are uniquely suited as a promising alternative that can be realized on a relatively short time scale.2 For example, bioethanol and biodiesel have already been adopted into the existing infrastructure as blending agents for petroleum-derived gasoline and diesel fuels.
Biomass and biofuels also have the potential to be significant contributors to the overarching goal of adopting renewable, carbon-neutral power sources. Assuming sufficient production of biomass, conversion to liquid fuels is one of the most effective ways to extract and store energy in a carbon-neutral cycle.3,4 Predictions from the Roadmap for Biomass Technologies suggest a gradual shift to a carbohydrate-based economy, where 20% of transportation fuel and 25% of chemicals in the U.S. will be produced from biomass by 2030.5 However, many challenges remain before these figures can be realized.
1.1 Pyrolysis bio-oil production and characteristics
Fast pyrolysis is a particularly promising route for biomass conversion because it occurs at moderate temperatures (480–520 °C) and produces a liquid oil product. Rapid heating is conducted in the absence of air, with a short hot-vapor residence time (<2 s) in the reaction zone. The resulting “bio-oil”, or “pyrolysis oil”, can be produced with yields up to 70 wt% (dry feed basis), and holds the potential to supplement crude oil as a liquid hydrocarbon feedstock.6–8 Many aspects of the pyrolysis process have been discussed and reviewed, including principles of pyrolysis,9–11 reactor design and engineering,12–15 applications outside fuel production,6,16 and technoeconomic analysis.17–20
Recent detailed analyses have demonstrated that pyrolysis oils contain more than 400 compounds.21,22 Elemental analysis of bio-oil reveals that despite its dark brown viscous appearance, it is compositionally different from petroleum. Bio-oils contain relatively little sulfur and nitrogen, but have high oxygen content, typically near 40 wt% and as high as 50 wt% including water (Table 1).23–25 This oxygen is present in the 400 compounds across a variety of functionalities, including acids, aldehydes, esters, alcohols, ethers, ketones, phenolics, sugars, and furans. Although it remains a challenge to identify every compound in a bio-oil sample, free hydrocarbons are rarely observed, suggesting that oxygenates represent a high fraction of the carbon balance. Components are monofunctional, like phenol and acetic acid, and multi-functional, like hydroxyacetaldehyde and guaiacol. Bio-oil is an acidic liquid (pH ∼ 2.5) with amphiphilic character, resulting in an organic oil that does not phase separate from the dissolved water.10 Char and residual alkali metals (e.g., Na, K) are also present, and small concentrations can catalyze significant chemical changes during storage and upgrading.25 The importance of removing this char and alkali is appropriately recognized.26 Biomass consists primarily of cellulose, hemicellulose, and lignin and the thermal decomposition of these polymers has been thoroughly studied and recently reviewed.11,21,26–28 Chemical functionality in the bio-oil correlates strongly with the amounts of cellulose, hemicelluloses, and lignin, as shown in Fig. 1. In general, lignin produces phenolics (e.g., phenols, guaiacols, syringols), and celluloses produce sugars and furans. Additional decompositions of sugars and furans produce esters, acids, alcohols, ketones, and aldehydes.
 Fig. 1  Composition ranges of pyrolysis bio-oil oxygenate functionalities correlated according to their lignocellulosic biomass source. The wt% ranges are based on bio-oil analysis data reported by Milne et al.21 
Table 1 Elemental composition and water content ranges of crude petroleum oils compared to pyrolysis bio-oils23–25




 
Petroleum crude oil (wt%)
Pyrolysis bio-oil (wt%)




C
83–86
55–65


H
11–14
5–7


O
<1
30–50


N
<4
<0.1


S
<1
<0.05


Water
0.1
20–30




1.2 Requirements of bio-oil upgrading for production of transportation fuels
Due to major chemical differences between bio-oil and petroleum, pyrolysis oil cannot be directly used as a transportation fuel and it cannot be “dropped-in” to existing petroleum refinery processes. Of particular note, raw bio-oil has properties of (i) low heating value, (ii) incompatibility with conventional fuels due to high oxygen content, (iii) high solids content, (iv) high viscosity, and (v) chemical instability.6 Therefore, the oil must be upgraded. Perhaps advantageously, the removal of chemically-bound oxygen to yield a more hydrocarbon-like liquid addresses four of the five negative properties: (i) heating value increases, (ii) compatibility with petroleum hydrocarbons improves, (iii) stability improves, and (iv) viscosity decreases. However, efficient deoxygenation has proven to be especially challenging, particularly for the relatively strong aryl–oxygen bonds (Table 2). Therefore, deoxygenation remains a critical obstacle to enabling transportation fuel production from pyrolysis oil at the industrial scale, and there is a continuing need for new catalytic processes and chemistries.
Table 2 Bond dissociation energies (BDE) for oxygenates common to bio-oil, where R = alkyl and Ar = aryl29




Bond type
BDE (kJ mol−1)




R–OR
339


Ar–OR
422


R–OH
385


Ar–OH
468




In general, diesel and jet fuels are mixtures of C6–C14 hydrocarbons of approximately 75% n-, iso-, and cyclo-alkanes and 25% aromatics. Recent changes to diesel fuel requirements have focused on decreased sulfur content, but the oxygen content of these fuels is rarely considered. This is most likely due to the fact that the small amount of oxygen in crude oil is removed along with the sulfur during the hydrotreating process. Refineries are accustomed to working with low-oxygen feedstocks, so one formidable goal for bio-oil upgrading would be to produce a liquid with a similar chemical composition to crude oil (i.e., <1 wt% O). However, fuel combustion characteristics often improve with the addition of chemically-bound oxygen. For example, gasoline has a minimum oxygen content of 2 wt%, and gasoline currently sold in the U.S. is oxygenated via blending with ethanol at 10–15 wt% (3.5–5.2 wt% O). Diesel and jet fuels are not currently oxygenated, however, recent research has demonstrated that blending with oxygenates could prove beneficial by decreasing soot formation.30 Unrefined biodiesel contains approximately 10 wt% O, chemically-bound as a methyl ester, and has been approved for use as a blending agent up to 20 vol% with conventional diesel, provided the blend meets ASTM specifications.31 This knowledge may reduce the daunting deoxygenation goals of transforming bio-oil to meet crude oil standards. Deoxygenation that results in a liquid suitable for blending or refinery hydrotreating may be a more realistic initial goal for bio-oil upgrading. However, the nature of the oxygen species will be critical. Water and acidic organics, such as phenolics and carboxylic acids, must be eliminated to meet the strict total acid number specifications for the final fuel. Considering fuel requirements and the success of blending alcohols with hydrocarbon fuels, one short term goal of an upgrading process would be the production of a stable liquid where there remains 5–10 wt% O, but the oxygen is bound as low acidity alcohol groups (i.e., non-phenolic alcohols).
1.3 Catalytic fast pyrolysis processes and upgrading conditions
Two promising process designs to catalytically upgrade pyrolysis oil to a liquid hydrocarbon transportation fuel are ex situ and in situ catalytic fast pyrolysis (CFP). The major difference between these approaches is the placement of the deoxygenation catalyst in the process, either external or internal with respect to the pyrolysis reactor (Fig. 2). In ex situ CFP, dried biomass is rapidly heated to produce pyrolysis vapor. The pyrolysis vapor is passed through a cyclone to remove char and other solid particulates, and is then sent, without heat exchange, to a deoxygenation catalyst. This results in a stabilized bio-oil after condensation. In in situ CFP, dried biomass is rapidly heated in the presence of a deoxygenation catalyst. Vapors are deoxygenated as they are produced, resulting in a stabilized bio-oil after condensation. In both in situ and ex situ CFP, it is possible to perform upgrading with a cofeed of hydrogen (hydrodeoxygenation) or in the presence of inert carrier gas (cracking). Regardless of the technique used or the presence/absence of hydrogen, the organic fraction of the bio-oil may require further hydrotreating in one or more stages to meet transportation fuel specifications. If these stabilized bio-oils are suitable for processing using existing refinery infrastructure and processes, the goal of producing a “drop-in ready” feedstock is achieved.
 Fig. 2  Process block flow diagram for (A) ex situ CFP and (B) in situ CFP. 
Research and development in the ex situ CFP pathway will promote the understanding of fundamental catalytic requirements for deoxygenation of complex vapors at pyrolysis conditions. Thus, it is a natural progression to move from fast pyrolysis, to ex situ CFP, and then to in situ CFP as a technology development pipeline, evaluating the technoeconomics of each option once sufficient data is available to do so.
1.4 Catalytic upgrading pathways and reactions
There are three general pathways to upgrade bio-oils directly to liquid transportation fuels: (i) hydrodeoxygenation (HDO), (ii) zeolite cracking (ZC), and (iii) emulsification with diesel fuel. An alternative, indirect fourth pathway involves steam reforming the bio-oil to produce syngas, followed by production of liquid fuels via Fischer–Tropsch or similar chemistry.26 Because this fourth pathway is a significant deviation from upgrading of pyrolysis bio-oil, it is not discussed further here. HDO and ZC are catalytic upgrading approaches, while emulsification of bio-oils into diesel fuel through the use of surfactants does not require a catalytic process, and will not be discussed further here. Details of emulsification approaches have been reported elsewhere.32–34 For more information on ZC processes, please see reviews within this series, in addition to previously published reports.35–39 This review will focus on model compound studies to develop catalysts for HDO approaches. Upgrading of whole bio-oils (not model compounds) has been previously reviewed.13,40,41
Given the multitude of C–O bond types in bio-oil, each with varying bond strength and thermodynamically preferred deoxygenation pathway, the term “catalytic upgrading” of bio-oil actually represents a complex network of many reactions.29 The process can be somewhat simplified by distinguishing reactions according to the hydrocarbon products and oxygen-elimination products. A combination of decarbonylation, decarboxylation, direct deoxygenation (hydrogenolysis), dealkoxylation, cracking, hydrocracking, hydrogenation, dealkylation, methyl transfer, and hydrodeoxygenation have been observed during deoxygenation reactions.42 Example transformations for each of these reactions, together with the abbreviation used in this review, are presented in Fig. 3. Carbon formation is also a significant side-reaction. Decarbonylation and decarboxylation (DCO) eliminate oxygen as CO and CO2, respectively. Although these are effective reactions to remove oxygen from the aldehydes and carboxylic acids of bio-oil, this partial loss of carbon from the feed ultimately lowers the carbon efficiency of a biomass-to-fuels process. Cracking (CRA), hydrocracking (HCR) and hydrogenation (HYD) yield alkenes, which are subsequently hydrogenated to alkanes, and can also produce alcohols. Elimination of oxygen via cracking produces CO2. These are important reactions to reduce the aromatic content (HYD) and to control both the chain length and degree of branching in the biofuel product (CRA, HCR). However high temperatures are needed to achieve deoxygenation, and this increases the cracking rate, leading to degradation of the bio-oil to yield light gases and carbon.42 The direct deoxygenation (DDO) and hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) reactions eliminate oxygen as water, and retain all carbon atoms in the original bio-oil. HDO results in alkanes through a sequential HYD-dehydration-HYD route. Dealkoxylation (DAO), often demethoxylation (DMO) for model compounds, is related to DDO, and eliminates oxygen as an alcohol (methanol for DMO). In contrast to DMO, the ArO–CH3 bond can break via dealkylation, specifically demethylation (DME), and the methyl can transfer to the aromatic ring via the methyl transfer reaction (MT). This MT reaction is another pathway to increase branching in the final mixture, and importantly, occurs via the formation of C–C bonds. All of these reactions are important for the total deoxygenation process, which can be considered as the sum of the individual reactions (i.e., deoxygenation = DCO + CRA + HCR + HYD + DDO + DAO + DME + MT + HDO). For maximized fuel yield and for improved fuel properties, HDO is the preferred route, as oxygen is eliminated as water and saturated hydrocarbons are produced over aromatics. It can be seen that both a HYD site and an acid site are needed for the HDO pathway, and this bifunctionality is a critical catalyst design principle in the development of HDO catalysts.
 Fig. 3  Example transformations comprising the deoxygenation reaction network and abbreviations used in this review. 
1.5 Upgrading challenges and model compounds for catalyst development
Currently, bio-oil HDO requires high-pressure H2 in large stoichiometric excess, which significantly increases the cost of upgrading.29,43 For example, Bridgwater has estimated that 62 kg of H2 are required to deoxygenate one tonne of bio-oil.44 Therefore, a primary goal is to minimize the amount of H2 required for deoxygenation. However, development of an upgrading catalyst that will work under low-pressure, near-stoichiometric H2 conditions will not be simple. Thus, success towards utilization of bio-oil requires new catalyst development driven by a fundamental understanding of the factors that favor C–O bond cleavage (and C–C bond formation). It is duly important to test promising catalysts on whole pyrolysis vapor feeds, since the interactions between oxygenates may result in unforeseen side-reactions, the relative adsorption strengths of non-model compounds may affect substrate–catalyst interactions, and various contaminants may impact catalyst stability.
Lignin represents 23–33 wt% of softwood and 16–25 wt% of hardwood biomass.27 Subsequently, bio-oil contains ca. 30 wt% lignin-derived phenolic species (phenols, guaiacols, syringols, and mixed oxygenates), which have high energy density.11,12 Concentrated lignin is also available from pulp and paper refineries and lignocellulose-to-ethanol processes. It is worth noting that currently the lignin portion of biomass is simply burned for energy since it cannot be converted to a more useful fuel. Considering the potential of combined biochemical–thermochemical approaches for biomass utilization, lignin is an attractive feedstock for a pyrolysis unit. Hydrogenation, deoxygenation, and ring-opening of the lignin-derived phenolics present the biggest challenge in bio-oil upgrading,45,46 so the development of catalysts that efficiently convert lignin-derived phenolics is critical. Accordingly, lignin-derived substrates have received the majority of attention in the recent literature.
Rather than employing pyrolysis oil (or lignin) at the research scale, model compounds have been selected to simplify the reactants and to isolate transformations of interest. These studies are especially useful in comparing the performances of catalysts, and essential in understanding reaction kinetics and mechanisms. Lignin-derived phenolics like guaiacol (2-methoxyphenol), cresols (methylphenols), and anisole (methoxybenzene) are studied the most. Advantageously, these compounds also allow one to study the upgrading of multiple functional groups. For example, the relative activities and selectivities for HYD, DMO, DDO, HDO, and HCR reactions can be investigated with a guaiacol feed. C–C coupling reactions can also be studied, and the formation of dimeric and trimeric phenolics have been demonstrated. This approach has progressed to include dimeric and trimeric phenolics as lignin model compounds.47,48 The analysis can then be extended further, for example, acetic or propanoic acid can be co-fed with a phenolic model compound to investigate cofeed/substrate interactions before feeding whole bio-oil.49–51
The application of ex situ upgrading may necessitate operation at higher temperatures and lower H2 pressure than typically studied (for example, deoxygenation via hydrotreating). In fact, no studies of kinetics could be found at fast pyrolysis conditions. Making a simplifying assumption that all deoxygenation reactions requiring H2 as a reactant are positive order in H2 pressure and that rate constants follow a typical Arrhenius temperature dependence, one can define a general rate: r = Ae−Ea/RT [pH2]n(1)where r is the rate of deoxygenation, A the Arrhenius prefactor (assumed constant), Ea the activation energy (reaction specific, assumed constant within temperature range of interest), R the gas constant, T the reaction temperature pH2 the partial pressure of H2 and n the reaction order. If we then assume a hydrogen pressure of one atmosphere (0.1 MPa) in pyrolysis we can compare the relative rates of deoxygenation at two temperatures as a function of activation energy and reaction order. An example of this is shown in Fig. 4, comparing rates at 500 °C and 0.1 MPa with rates at 300 °C, 5, 10, and 15 MPa H2 pressure, and reaction orders of 0.5, 1, and 2. These model data suggest that deoxygenation reactions with low activation energy (<100 kJ mol−1, e.g., HDO of aliphatic alcohols to alkanes via sequential dehydration-HYD) will have a decreased rate at low-pressure, high-temperature conditions while reactions with high activation energy (>100 kJ mol−1, e.g., DDO of phenolics) will have an increased rate. That is, the more difficult deoxygenation reactions could be favored at pyrolysis conditions on suitable catalysts, which may be an advantage over the hydrotreating of condensed oils. As reaction order increases, pressure becomes more important, leading to greater decreases in reaction rate at pyrolysis conditions. One can think of this in terms of a catalyst's ability to activate hydrogen or limit inhibitory chemisorption of other reactants: materials with abundant surface hydrogen will exhibit smaller apparent reaction orders. Other factors like increased coking rates at higher temperatures,52 reactant inhibition, high levels of steam, and non-first-order, non-Arrhenius kinetics will certainly have impacts on actual deoxygenation rates at pyrolysis conditions. Studies with model compounds at higher temperatures and lower pressures would go a long way toward understanding this relationship.
 Fig. 4  Ratios of deoxygenation rates at 500 °C/0.1 MPa and 300 °C/various pressures as a function of activation energy. Reaction orders of 0.5, 1, and 2 are represented by dashed, solid, and dotted lines, respectively. A ratio of 1 indicates equivalent reaction rates at the two different conditions. Lines are calculated from eqn (1) and are not data or fits of data. 
One must also consider the thermodynamics of upgrading reactions, which may influence the reaction temperatures and pressures used to achieve high conversion. As an example, consider the deoxygenation of phenol to cyclohexane and water via the HDO route: C6H6O + 4H2 ↔ C6H12 + H2O(2)
As shown later, this may proceed through cyclohexanone and cyclohexanol intermediates; that is: C6H6O + 2H2 ↔ C6H10O(3) C6H10O + H2 ↔ C6H12O(4) C6H12O + H2 ↔ C6H12 + H2O(5)

Fig. 5 shows the calculated thermodynamic equilibrium constants for reactions (3)–(5). It is clear from the figure that reactions (3) and (4) impose little thermodynamic constraint, but reaction (5) becomes equilibrium-limiting at pyrolysis temperatures. If high concentrations of steam are present, the reverse reaction will become dominant and little dehydration can be achieved.
 Fig. 5  Equilibrium constants for reactions 1.3–1.6 as a function of temperature. Keq values were calculated using the van't Hoff equation53 integrated from the standard state to reaction temperature, pure component standard state enthalpies and Gibbs energies of formation, and pure component heat capacity data as a function of temperature, fit to 3rd order polynomials. Pure component data was obtained from NIST.54 Note that values are given in the log10 base, that is, a value of ‘0’ indicates that Keq = 1 (forward and reverse reactions are equally favored). 
Considering instead the deoxygenation of phenol to benzene and water via the DDO route: C6H6O + H2 ↔ C6H6 + H2O(6)
The deoxygenation products are even less favorable at pyrolysis temperatures, as shown in Fig. 5. Thus, to avoid thermodynamic limitations it may be necessary to increase hydrogen pressure, continuously remove water, or perform a staged ex situ upgrading step in which high boiling-point vapors are hydrogenated to lower boiling-point compounds, cooled, and then dehydrated. All of these scenarios offer significant research challenges.
The following sections focus on recent (within 5 years) catalyst development for ex situ CFP processes, with special attention on research aimed at understanding the chemical steps of deoxygenation through model compound studies. The review includes studies of phenolic, fatty acid, and furan deoxygenation. The nature of the bifunctionality of catalysts and the ways in which catalysts promote deoxygenation reactions are discussed. Mechanisms, reaction networks, and structure–function relationships are considered. The applications of transition metal sulfides and noble metal catalysts towards deoxygenation processes are highlighted and compared with the less-studied, alternatives of metal carbide, nitride, and phosphide catalysts.
2. Transition metal sulfide (TMS) catalysts
Transition metal sulfides (TMS) have been used as catalysts for decades due to their hydrogenation, Fischer–Tropsch, and heteroatom removal capabilities.55 These materials are used in every refinery in the world for hydrotreating of petroleum and are the most widely used catalysts in industry on the basis of materials processed per year.55,56 Industrial materials typically comprise sulfided molybdenum on an alumina support promoted with cobalt or nickel (CoMo/Al2O3 or NiMo/Al2O3). Other base metals and promoters like tungsten, fluorine, phosphorous, rhenium, palladium, ruthenium, and rhodium have been investigated but have not found widespread use commercially. Other catalyst supports have also been investigated. When appropriately sulfided, these catalysts are thermally stable and tolerant of most heteroatoms (S, N, O, metals) and their products (H2S, NH3, H2O) and are not given to rapid coking or oxidation in conventional use.
The development of metal sulfide catalysts has closely followed advancements in petroleum refining, with properties tuned for deep desulfurization and denitrogenation of heavy oil fractions. Thus, much of the literature in recent decades has described the petroleum-optimized hydrotreating process for hydrodesulfurization (HDS), hydrodenitrogenation (HDN), and hydrodeoxygenation (HDO) applied to petroleum gas oils and alternative hydrocarbon liquids derived from biomass and coal. An increased interest in HDO of alternative liquids has highlighted the fact that petroleum contains about 3000 ppm oxygen while pyrolysis oils can contain as much as 500000 ppm oxygen, and therefore, it is likely that refinery-optimized hydrotreating may be unsuitable for pyrolysis oil HDO. In conventional hydrotreating, hydrogen is fed at high pressure (7–30 MPa), H2S is fed at appropriate concentrations to maintain a sulfided catalyst, and reactions occur at moderate temperatures (200–425 °C) with near-complete conversion. Many excellent reviews have captured the state of the art. Prins highlighted the mechanisms of HDS, HDN, and HDO with emphasis on heteroatomic species common in petroleum, and discussed impacts of support type, other promoters, mixtures vs. single components, and process design.55 Mortensen et al. compared and contrasted recent work in hydrodeoxygenation and cracking of biomass pyrolysis oils.42 Butler et al. described current research and commercialization activity in biomass fast pyrolysis and upgrading, including the company GTI, who is testing a form of ex situ upgrading with TMS catalysts in their IH2 process.57 Graca et al. evaluated potential options for pyrolysis oil upgrading and championed the coprocessing of pyrolysis oils with petroleum liquids in existing refineries.58 Choudhary and Phillips showed examples of successful commercial-scale HDO of seed oils and animal fats and provided insights on the added challenges in upgrading biomass pyrolysis oils.40 Elliott reviewed historical developments in the hydrotreating of bio-oils from the 1980s to 2007,59 with bio-oil composition informed from an earlier review by Elliott et al. on the thermal liquefaction of biomass.60 Bridgwater anticipated instabilities in metal sulfide supports based on a detailed review of the biomass pyrolysis process and resulting products.61 Furimsky provided a detailed look at reaction mechanisms, relative reactivities of oxygenated compounds (compared also with sulfur and nitrogen analogues), support effects, and inhibition for metal sulfides operated under typical hydrotreating conditions.29 Bu et al. summarized the kinetics, mechanisms, and deactivation modes of HDO of lignin-derived phenolics under traditional hydrotreating conditions.46 All of these reviews consider differences between model compound and whole-oil studies, and include data from batch and continuous reactions.62
Most of the research on deoxygenation of bio-oils using sulfide catalysts has focused on upgrading of condensed whole or fractionated pyrolysis oil, plant oils and animal fats, or model pyrolysis compounds. Further, nearly all studies have used high-pressure hydrogen and moderate temperatures less than 400 °C; significantly different from the conditions of ex situ pyrolysis vapor (near-ambient pressure, 500 °C). Therefore, in this section we focus on deoxygenation mechanisms, relative reactivities of model compounds, and kinetics to show the potential benefits and detriments of using a sulfided catalyst for ex situ upgrading of oxygenated vapors, and suggest important research that is missing in this field.
2.1 Deoxygenation mechanisms
Three major mechanisms have been proposed for deoxygenation on TMS catalysts: HDO, DDO, and DCO. Example reactions are shown in Fig. 3, and these are explained in detail in recent critical reviews and educational texts.29,42,55,63,64 Therefore, only a brief description of the reaction steps as they relate to TMS catalysts/surfaces are provided here. The HDO route involves initial HYD of aromatic and olefinic C–C bonds and carbonyl C–O bonds, followed by dehydration of the resulting alcohol to yield the deoxygenated hydrocarbon and water as the elimination product (Fig. 6). The DDO route involves adsorption of the oxygen atom at a coordinatively unsaturated surface site, sp2 hybridization of the aromatic ring or alkane(ene), and dehydration to form water or alcohol and recover the parent ring or olefin. The DCO route involves acid-catalyzed decarboxylation of carboxylic end groups or decarbonylation of aldehyde end groups.
 Fig. 6  Example HDO and DDO reaction pathways of phenol over TMS catalysts showing the alcohol intermediates. 
The nature of active sites on TMS catalysts is still widely debated, but it is generally thought that heteroatoms (e.g., aryl-oxygen of phenolics) adsorb to coordinatively unsaturated sites (vacancies) at catalyst edges. Molecular hydrogen is activated on saturated edge and plane sites to form S–H groups, and these activated H atoms can also originate from water, thiols, or alcohols.65 For the deoxygenation of phenolics, the oxygen–surface bond is stabilized in the vacancy through associative or dissociative adsorption, activating O–C bond(s) for scission after partial hydrogenation of the aromatic ring at the ortho-position (for DDO) or full hydrogenation of the ring for HDO (Fig. 7).66 After C–O bond scission, additional hydrogen saturates the surface-bound heteroatom so that it can desorb and regenerate the vacancy. Thus, it is probable that TMS catalysts are bifunctional: one type of site for HYD and a second for activation of heteroatom–C bond(s). Travert et al. used DFT to suggest that promoters like cobalt stabilize coordinatively unsaturated sites,67 and that edge sulfur is weakly basic, turning into weakly acidic S–H groups upon hydrogen dissociation.68
 Fig. 7  Intermediate formed in the deoxygenation pathway of ethylphenol on CoMoS; (A) H addition on the secondary o-carbon and (B) H addition on the tertiary o-carbon. Color code: Mo in light blue, S in yellow, Co in dark blue, C in grey, O in red, H in white. Reproduced with permission from Badawi et al.66 
The HDO route is favored on NiMo catalysts and when (i) H2S is cofed to replace sulfur lost from the catalyst, (ii) strongly-adsorbing inhibiting molecules are fed, and (iii) lower temperatures are used. The DDO route is preferred on CoMo catalysts and when (i) reactant inhibition is not limiting, (ii) H2S and NH3 are deplete enough in the reactant stream to limit filling of coordinatively unsaturated sites, and (iii) higher temperatures are used. DCO is typically only observed with alkyl esters and fatty acids, and may actually proceed on the catalyst support or promoter instead of the TMS surface. Hydrogen consumption for complete deoxygenation follows HDO > DDO > DCO.
Recent studies support these heuristics. Yoosuk et al. compared phenol deoxygenation on Ni-promoted and unpromoted MoS2 and found that the unpromoted catalyst removed oxygen via DDO and HDO while the Ni-promoted catalyst removed oxygen almost exclusively via HDO.69 Expanding to unsupported (amorphous) and supported (crystalline) sulfided Mo and CoMo, they observed increased DDO selectivity for amorphous and Co-promoted materials.70 Massoth et al. studied methyl-substituted phenol deoxygenation on sulfided CoMo/Al2O3 with dimethyl sulfide added in excess as a sulfiding agent.71 A mixture of DDO and HDO products were formed, and measured adsorption constants suggested an equal likelihood of deoxygenation via either route. A primary product analysis was not performed, however, so it is not clear if the suggested HDO products were actually produced via HYD of methyl-substituted benzenes after DDO. Romero et al. compared deoxygenation of 2-ethylphenol on sulfided NiMo, CoMo and Mo catalysts and observed HDO products on NiMo and a mixture of HDO and DDO products on CoMo and Mo.72 Bui et al. studied the deoxygenation of guaiacol on sulfided CoMo and Mo catalysts, both bulk and supported.73 Co promoted DMO of guaiacol to methanol and phenol and then DDO to benzene and water, regardless of the use of support. Ryymin et al. compared deoxygenation of phenol and methyl-heptanoate on sulfided NiMo/Al2O3 in a batch reactor for varying periods and obtained predominantly cyclohexanes, heptanes, and hexane in all experiments.74 It was observed that the presence of the alkyl ester inhibited phenol deoxygenation but not the other way round. Since phenol is known to strongly adsorb and inhibit reactions on the TMS,29,55 it was hypothesized that decarboxylation of the ester occurs on the alumina support and not on the TMS surface. Senol et al. compared deoxygenation of methyl heptanoate on sulfided CoMo/Al2O3 and NiMo/Al2O3 catalysts.75 Heptane was the major product on the NiMo catalyst and heptene on CoMo suggesting a HDO pathway for NiMo and DDO for CoMo. It was noted that for this reaction, significant hydrogenation is required to reach the point of full deoxygenation by either pathway. Thus, the higher hydrogenation activity of NiMo may be more appropriate for HDO of aliphatic esters.
Regardless of HDO or DDO pathway, it is generally observed that deoxygenation of aromatic oxygenated hydrocarbons proceeds through mono-oxygenated monomeric intermediates.29,55 Jongerius et al. recently conducted a study of the deoxygenation of lignin model compounds using sulfided CoMo/Al2O3.76 Despite the large variety of oxygenated aromatics considered, phenolics were always produced as intermediates to hydrocarbons. In his review, Furimsky noted that larger alkyl groups are often removed via cracking before deoxygenation proceeds.29 Therefore, deoxygenation of highly-aromatic oils with TMS catalysts is expected to produce relatively low molecular weight hydrocarbons (<C12).
In addition to lignin model compounds, many groups have hydrotreated triglycerides, fatty acids, and alkyl esters on TMS catalysts and observed both water and carbon oxides as products, supporting the existence of a DCO route.77–83 Ruinart de Brimont et al.82 and Kubicka and Kaluza80 separately determined that unpromoted molybdenum sulfide deoxygenates alkyl esters and triglycerides via the HDO pathway while nickel sulfide and sulfided NiMo deoxygenate via the DCO pathway. Ruinart de Brimont used unsupported bulk materials while Kubicka included an alumina support. This suggests that in Ryymin et al.'s experiments,74 DCO occurred on nickel sulfide sites, and that perhaps phenol does not adsorb to or inhibit reactions at nickel centers.
Recent reviews or studies on the mechanisms of deoxygenation for other pyrolysis compounds like acetic acid, hydroxyacetaldehyde, and levoglucosan could not be found, and mechanistic insights on deoxygenation of furans were limited to the HDS literature. While it is expected that deoxygenation mechanisms of vegetable oils, fats, and lignin-derived phenolics lend insights into the deoxygenation of these other important species, additional model compound studies are still needed.
2.2 Deoxygenation kinetics
Few studies have emerged in recent years on the kinetics of deoxygenation on TMS catalysts, but recent reviews are rich with information from prior years. In the literature reviewed by Furimsky,29 HDO and DDO reactions are assumed to follow a pseudo first-order dependence on H2 pressure. Bond dissociation energies, given in Table 2, show that aromatics require more energy for deoxygenation than aliphatics. It follows that activation energies for DDO of oxygenated aromatics are higher than HDO of the same, yet the DDO pathway proceeds via fewer steps and requires less hydrogen. The observations noted above are consistent with reactions of different activation energy: DDO, with higher activation barriers, becomes more significant at higher temperatures while HDO dominates at lower temperature, on a given catalyst. Polymerizable species like methoxyphenols, biphenols, and ethers are converted to phenols, alcohols, and hydrocarbons at temperatures less than 300 °C. Higher temperatures are generally required to deoxygenate phenolics, ketones, carboxylic acids, and esters. Phenols and furans are the most recalcitrant to deoxygenation. Because polymerizable species can rapidly form coke, conventional hydrotreating of pyrolysis oils typically proceeds with a ‘mild’ stabilization step below 300 °C followed by deep deoxygenation at higher temperatures.29,40,59,46
Activities of TMS catalysts generally follow the trend, Ru ≈ Rh > Mo > Pd > Nb > Zr, though for economic reasons, Mo is preferred as a base metal over Ru and Rh. Relative reactivities of oxygenated compounds on TMS catalysts follow the trend: aliphatic alcohols > ketones > alkyl ethers > carboxylic acids ≈ m-/p-phenols ≈ naphthol > phenol > o-ethylphenol > dibenzofuran.29 Furans are the least reactive of the oxygen functionalities, with furan > benzofuran > dibenzofuran. HDO is a ‘slower’ process than HDS,55 evidenced by a reactivity of dibenzothiophene (regarded as a recalcitrant sulfur species) that is 4–12 times higher than dibenzofuran.
A notable feature of HDO, HDS, and HDN on TMS catalysts is the impact of competitive adsorption resulting in inhibition. Typical compounds in pyrolysis vapor like H2O, NH3, and H2S as well as sulfur-, nitrogen-, and oxygen-containing hydrocarbons all compete for adsorption on active sites, and all inhibit reactions to varying degrees. Phenol is a known inhibitor of HDS and HDN reactions,55 and even inhibits its own deoxygenation.
Bouvier et al. investigated the effect of H2S cofed with 2-ethylphenol on sulfided NiMo, CoMo, and Mo catalysts, and found that H2S inhibited DDO and promoted HDO on CoMo, while it had negligible impacts on NiMo and Mo catalysts.84 CO strongly inhibited the CoMo material but not the NiMo or Mo. This suggests different types of active centers on Co-promoted materials than on NiMo or Mo. Senol et al. found similar behavior when H2S was cofed with phenol, though they also observed inhibition of the HDO pathway on sulfided NiMo, which was attributed to competitive adsorption of H2S and phenol.85 Conversely, H2S promoted the conversion of oxygenated aliphatics. Ruiz et al. found that H2S suppressed the direct DMO of guaiacol on a sulfided Re/ZrO2 catalyst.86 Bunch et al. observed an inhibitory effect of H2S on the HDO of benzofuran on sulfided NiMo/Al2O3.87 Romero et al. observed the opposite on a phosphorous-promoted sulfided NiMo catalyst, with dimethyldisulfide (DMDS) promoting the HDO pathway for 2-ethylphenol deoxygenation.88 Benzofurans cofed with the reactant mixture were found to competitively adsorb to active sites and to undergo slow deoxygenation, giving an inhibiting effect. When compared to the work of Senol, Ruiz, and Bunch, this suggests practical differences between the inhibitory effects of H2S and DMDS and stronger adsorption of furans than phenolics. Badawi et al. used density functional theory (DFT) to study the η1 adsorption mode (applicable to DDO) of phenolics, H2S, H2O, and CO on sulfided CoMo and Mo catalysts under deoxygenation conditions.89 Adsorption was preferred at the –OH function, with adsorption energies following catechol > guaiacol > phenol ≫ anisole. Inhibiting species all had stronger adsorption than catechol with CO > H2S > H2O. Thus, it was suggested that the presence of any of these inhibitors could ‘shut down’ the DDO route on CoMo and Mo catalysts.
Steric effects are also important. For example, the deoxygenation rate of alkyl-substituted phenols follows the order: m-methylphenol > 3,4-dimethylphenol > 3,5-dimethylphenol > p-methylphenol > o-methylphenol > 2,3,5-trimethylphenol > 2,3-dimethylphenol > 2,5-dimethylphenol > phenol > 2,4-dimethylphenol > o-ethylphenol.29 These trends have been confirmed recently by Massoth et al. and Jongerius et al., both using a sulfided CoMo/Al2O3 catalyst.71,90
2.3 Support effects for TMS catalysts
The reviews noted above suggest that the type of catalyst support and method of catalyst synthesis are important to catalyst selectivity and activity. The recent literature corroborates this point. Bui et al. studied deoxygenation of guaiacol on sulfided CoMo catalysts supported on zirconia, titania, and γ-alumina.91 Laurenti and Geantet considered additional phenolics deoxygenated on CoMo catalysts with the same supports.92 The zirconia support promoted deoxygenation via DDO while the titania and alumina supports produced similar amounts of DDO and HDO products. The authors measured greater acidity in the alumina supports than in titania and zirconia, and found evidence of basic sites on the zirconia, suggesting that acidity promotes the HDO route while basicity promotes the DDO route. Yang et al. prepared MoS2 using three techniques: in situ thermal decomposition of ammonium heptamolybdate or molybdenum naphthenate and ex situ exfoliation of MoS2.93,94 The catalysts were tested for deoxygenation of model phenolic compounds and differences were observed with the ammonium heptamolybdate-derived material possessing the highest activity and exfoliated MoS2 giving the poorest performance. Kubicka et al. investigated the use of MCM-41 with various silicon to aluminum ratios as supports for sulfided CoMo.95 Catalyst activity for vegetable oil deoxygenation was found to be considerably lower than on a commercial CoMo/Al2O3 catalyst, however low Si:Al supports, having greater acidity, produced more active catalysts. It is not clear from the paper if the CoMo/Al2O3 catalyst was prepared or tested in the same manner as the CoMo/MCM-41 materials, so direct comparison is not possible. Nava et al. found opposite trends on mesoporous silica supported CoMoS, which were more active than sulfided NiMo/Al2O3.96 The activity improvement was attributed to the higher acidities of the silica supports, which is in contradiction to Kubicka's results, which showed better performance with decreasing support acidity. Sharma et al. investigated deoxygenation of jatropha oil and the use of mesoporous titanosilicate as a support for sulfided NiMo and CoMo.97 When compared to alumina-supported materials, activities were similar, but the titanosilicate-supported catalysts produced a significantly isomerized product. Although the application is not deoxygenation of pyrolysis vapor, Sharma's study suggests that supports could have a dual purpose as catalyst dispersant and co-catalyst if reactions beyond deoxygenation are desired.
In general, it is clear that the acidity of the support material impacts adsorption properties, and hence, reactivity of TMS catalysts.98 Phenolic compounds tend to form hydrogen bonds with silica, for example, but strongly chemisorb on aluminas to form phenate species.99 In the process of phenate formation, substituents on the aromatic ring tend to be removed, and the surface-bound aromatics significantly block access to TMS particles, as depicted in Fig. 8. These phenates are strongly bound, and do not desorb after treatment at 400 °C under vacuum. It was estimated that at least two-thirds of the Al2O3 surface was covered by phenate species at this temperature.99
 Fig. 8  Interaction of phenolic molecules with sulfided CoMo/Al2O3 catalyst: (A) phenol at room temperature, (B) 2-ethylphenol at room temperature, which converts to A at 350 °C. Adapted from Popov et al.100,101 
2.4 Catalyst deactivation
TMS deactivation is strongly influenced by operating conditions and feed composition. Polyoxygenated aromatics and biphenols like catechol tend to produce coke rapidly,29,42 while alkyl esters, triglycerides, and fatty acids have been shown to produce minimal coke as long as care is taken to remove inorganic impurities from the feed stream.40,102,103 Furimsky and Massoth published a detailed review of deactivation of TMS hydroprocessing catalysts, and the reader is referred there for a more in-depth discussion.104 No data could be found on deoxygenation of low molecular weight carboxylic acids, ketones, aliphatic alcohols, or aldehydes on TMS catalysts. High temperatures are conducive to coke formation, as are acidic catalyst supports.29,42,59,46 High pressures of H2 may help to slow the rate of coke formation.62 Sulfur is continuously removed from the catalyst via gas/catalyst reactions and as such, it is well known that the catalyst must be continuously sulfided to maintain activity.29,42,55,64 This heuristic has been reconfirmed in various recent deoxygenation studies using TMS catalysts.79,103,105,106 Steam will oxidize the catalyst if it is not continuously sulfided. Badawi et al. performed DFT simulations of the water/catalyst interaction and found that sulfur is readily exchanged with oxygen at the MoS2 edge.105 Promoters made this exchange less energetically favorable but did not prevent it. Simulation results were confirmed in an experimental study, in which cofed steam led to deactivation that was reversible on CoMo but partly irreversible on Mo. Bu et al. warn that excess steam can convert an alumina support from γ-Al2O3 to boehmite (γ-AlO(OH)), especially at pyrolysis temperatures.46 Unlike steam and coke, the effects of which can theoretically be reversed through oxidation and sulfidation, inorganic contaminants will permanently compromise the catalyst.29 This permanent deactivation route was recently demonstrated in a study of the deoxygenation of vegetable oils using sulfided CoMo/Al2O3; Kubicka et al. found that alkali salts in the oils deposited on the catalyst surface, poisoning active sites.79 Phosphate deposits were observed at the front of the catalyst bed,79,95,103 and it was hypothesized that alkali metals catalyzed the formation of these deposits. When alkali was not present, phosphoric acid was formed instead of phosphates, which in turn accelerated the rate of coke deposition.
2.5 Advantages, limitations, and research opportunities
The application of ex situ upgrading of pyrolysis vapors lends a number of advantages to the use of TMS catalysts. First, these catalysts are tolerant of impurities that many catalysts cannot handle such as NH3 and H2S and are less susceptible to coking at low hydrogen-to-carbon ratios compared to acid and metallic catalysts. Given the makeup of biomass, these impurities and atomic ratios are almost certain to exist in raw pyrolysis vapor. Second, the ability of TMS catalysts to hydrogenate a wide variety of functional groups including aromatics, alcohols, carboxylic acids, ethers, esters, aldehydes, and ketones is well suited for the heterogeneity of pyrolysis oil. Third, the ability of materials like CoMoS to directly deoxygenate phenolics via the DDO pathway can reduce the volume of H2 required to produce a deoxygenated product, lowering H2 demand. Finally, TMS catalysts are already produced at large scale, costs have been minimized, and operating experience is significant. Further, it is conceivable that minor modifications to catalyst composition or support could be handled with existing infrastructure. This is in comparison to novel catalysts like nitrides and phosphides, for which no commercial suppliers exist. For those types of materials, scale-up will delay rollout of the technology and initial costs will be high.
TMS catalysts also suffer a number of drawbacks for ex situ upgrading. First, these catalysts require significant hydrogen pressure under typical hydrotreating conditions (5–20 MPa). High-pressure vapor upgrading will require design of compressors that can intensify pyrolysis vapors at ≥500 °C or high pressure hydropyrolysis, both of which increase capital cost and require additional research and development to be viable. Second, as noted above, many constituents of pyrolysis vapor (e.g. NH3, H2S, H2O, phenolics, CO, furans) inhibit most deoxygenation reactions on NiMoS and CoMoS. Third, TMS catalysts require H2S to maintain activity, and this requirement increases with steam. H2S production will vary by feedstock but is generally quite low, in contrast to the significant amounts of steam that are produced during pyrolysis. Therefore, it is possible that H2S would need to be imported to the process to maintain catalyst sulfidation. Fourth, pyrolysis products contain multi-oxygenated aromatics at high temperature, both of which accelerate coke formation, especially when DDO pathways are inhibited and/or commercial alumina supports are used. In fact, deoxygenation of pyrolysis-type feedstocks has not been demonstrated for more than 200 h due to coke deposition, and this occurred at lower temperature than pyrolysis.42 This is problematic, since regeneration would require combustion of the coke followed by re-sulfidation of the resulting metal oxide. The former will produce sulfur oxides, which require advanced scrubbing systems to prevent harmful emissions. The latter will require increased use of imported H2S and reactor systems designed for frequent regeneration cycles. Finally, alkali metals and other inorganic species are known to exist in pyrolysis vapor. If not scrubbed upstream, at pyrolysis temperature, these contaminants are likely to deactivate the catalyst rapidly by blocking active sites and accelerating coke formation. Alternatively, a guard bed of TMS catalyst could be placed upstream of the actual upgrading reactor, at added cost.
Despite potential downsides, additional study is warranted for the application of TMS catalysts in ex situ pyrolysis vapor upgrading, because insufficient data exists for operation at low pressure and high temperature with biomass-derived oxygenates. Fast pyrolysis is usually performed with short residence times followed by rapid quenching of the vapors, so research is needed to understand the stability of pyrolysis vapors during longer residence times in piping and ex situ upgrading reactors. Studies of kinetics at higher temperatures and lower pressures of H2, support contribution to coke formation, and stability in steam-rich conditions will be useful. Use of both biomass-relevant model compounds and whole uncondensed pyrolysis vapor will be important. Studies of the deoxygenation of often-neglected pyrolysis products like acetic acid, hydroxyacetaldehyde, levoglucosan, and alkylated furans are greatly needed. Careful analyses of rates and causes of deactivation are paramount.
Process alterations should be considered as well. These include pressurized hydropyrolysis to increase reaction pressure or development of high-temperature compressors for intensifying mixtures of pyrolysis vapor and H2. Vapor processing using hot gas filtration or hot sorbent beds should be considered, with comparisons of catalyst performance using raw or treated pyrolysis vapor. Finally, thought should be placed on the design of TMS catalysts and supports with appropriate ratios of HDO and DDO activity based on the abundances of different oxygenated functional groups in pyrolysis vapors coupled with the inhibitory effects of each.
3. Noble metal catalysts
Research attention turned to noble metal catalysts (e.g., supported Ru, Rh, Pd, Pt) in response to the deactivation and degradation of TMS catalysts during HDO processes. Supported noble metals are attractive because they are known to activate H2, do not require a S co-feed, are less susceptible to deactivation by water, and thus, hold the potential to exhibit suitable performance with longer catalyst lifetimes. Although it is not the focus of this review, aqueous phase reforming (APR) processes must be acknowledged when discussing noble metals and biomass-derived feedstocks, since this approach has demonstrated the utility of noble metal catalysts for the conversion of polyols and sugars to light alkanes, syngas, monofunctional compounds, and hydrogen.2 This field has been pioneered by Dumesic, and through the many reports from his group, important structure–function relationships between the metal, promoter, support, and conditions correlated to the product distribution have been demonstrated. This work has been reviewed elsewhere, and will not be discussed in detail here.2,107,108
Noble metal catalysts are readily available, which has facilitated deoxygenation studies with whole bio-oils, and these have been included in recent upgrading reviews.10,40,42,46,59 A recent report by Wildschut et al. highlights the promising activity of supported Ru, Pd, and Pt catalysts compared to traditional TMS catalysts for the hydrotreating of whole bio-oils.109 The Ru/C and Pd/C catalysts were found to outperform sulfided-NiMo/Al2O3 and –CoMo/Al2O3 with respect to product yield and degree of deoxygenation at two conditions: 250 °C/10 MPa and 350 °C/20 MPa. Model compounds have been used to develop an understanding of the role and interaction of metal, promoter, support, and process conditions in deoxygenation. This section summarizes recent research that has further demonstrated the utility of noble metal catalysts for deoxygenation of model compounds. The challenges related to catalyst deactivation and potential regeneration protocols are presented. Table 3 gives an overview of the recent literature in this field including catalyst type and properties, reaction conditions, and dominant products.
Table 3 Summary of recent results from noble metal catalyst studies of bio-oil model compound deoxygenation




Catalyst
Catalyst loading (wt%)

S
BET (m2 g−1)
Model compound
Reaction conditions
Main product(s)
Conversion (%)
Reaction pathway
Reference




Pd/C
5
845
2-Methoxy-4-n-propylphenol
H3PO4–H2O, 250 °C, 5 MPa H2

n-Propylcyclohexane
100
HDO

125



Pd/C
5
845
Phenol
H2O, 200 °C, 5 MPa H2
Cyclohexanol
100
HYD

50



Pd/C
5
845
Phenol
H3PO4-H2O, 250 °C, 5 MPa H2
Cyclohexane
100
HDO

50







4-n-Propylphenol



n-Propylcyclohexane
100
HDO








Catechol


Cyclohexane
100
HDO








4-Methyl-2-methoxyphenol


Methylcyclohexane
100
HDO








4-Ethyl-2-methoxyphenol


Ethylcyclohexane
100
HDO








4-Propyl-2-methoxyphenol


Propylcyclohexane
100
HDO








4-(2-Propenyl)-2,6-dimethoxy-phenol


Propylcyclohexane
92
HDO




Ru/C
7.8
—
Guaiacol
H2O, 200 °C, 13.8 MPa H2
2-Methoxycyclohexanol
100
HYD, DDO

49





—


H2O, 250 °C, 13.8 MPa H2
Cyclohexane
100
HDO






—


H2O, 300 °C, 13.8 MPa H2
Phenol, cresols
100
DMO, MT




Pd/C
3
—
Guaiacol
H2O, 200 °C, 13.8 MPa H2
2-Methoxycyclohexanol
66
HYD, DDO






—


H2O, 300 °C, 13.8 MPa H2
Cyclohexane
99
HDO




Rh/ZrO2
0.39
20
Guaiacol

n-Hexadecane, 100 °C, 8 MPa H2
1-Methyl-1,2-cyclohexanediol
99
HYD, MT

43



Rh/ZrO2
0.39
20



n-Hexadecane, 300 °C, 8 MPa H2
Benzene
100
DDO, DMO




RhPt/ZrO2
0.25 Rh
23



n-Hexadecane, 100 °C, 8 MPa H2
1-Methyl-1,2-cyclohexanediol
99
MT, HYD




0.25 Pt


RhPt/ZrO2
0.25 Rh
23



n-Hexadecane, 300 °C, 8 MPa H2
Benzene
100
DDO, DMO




0.25 Pt


Rh/ZrO2
3
4.72
Guaiacol

n-Decane, 250 °C, 4 MPa H2
2-Methoxycyclohexanol
95
HYD

126



Rh/ZrO2 + SiO2–Al2O3
3
4.72




2-Methoxycyclohexanol, cyclohexane
38
HYD, HDO




Rh/SiO2–Al2O3
3
569




Cyclohexane
57
HDO




Rh/C
3
238




2-Methoxycyclohexanol, cyclohexane
68
HYD, HDO




Rh/Al2O3
3
122




Cyclohexane, 2-methoxycyclohexanol, cyclohexanol
43
HDO, HYD, DMO




Ru/C
5.7
730

p-Cresol
CH3COOH-H2O, 300 °C, 4.8 MPa H2
Methylcyclohexane
67
HDO

51



Rh/ZrO2
1
6.6
Guaiacol

n-Tetradecane, 400 °C, 5 MPa H2
Cyclohexane
100
HDO

127



PtRh/ZrO2
1 Rh
7.0
Guaiacol


2-Methoxycyclohexanol
100
HYD




1 Pt


PdRh/ZrO2
1 Rh
5.9
Guaiacol


2-Methoxycyclohexanol
100
HYD




1 Pd


Pt/Al2O3
1.7
87

m-Cresol
260 °C, 50.5 kPa H2
Toluene, methylcyclohexane
38
DDO, HDO

128











260 °C, 0.10 MPa H2
Toluene, methylcyclohexane
74
DDO, HDO




Pt/Al2O3
1.6
87

m-Cresol
260 °C, 50.5 kPa H2
Toluene, methylcyclohexane
38
DDO, HDO

129



PtCo/Al2O3
1.3 Pt
87




Methylcyclohexane, toluene
57
DDO, HDO




4.3 Co


PtNi/Al2O3
1.5 Pt
87




Toluene, methylcyclohexane
63
DDO, HDO




4.9 Ni


Pt/Al2O3
1
206
Anisole
300 °C, 42 kPa H2
Phenol, cresols
7
DME, MT

130









4-Methylanisole
300 °C, 42 kPa H2
Cresols
6
DME, MT




Pt/Al2O3
1
206
Guaiacol
300 °C, 42 kPa H2
Phenol, catechol
8
DDO, DME

131



Pt/MgO
1
100
Guaiacol
300 °C, 42 kPa H2
Catechol, phenol
8
DME, DDO




Pt/HBEA
1
710
Anisole
400 °C, 0.10 MPa H2
Benzene, toluene, xylenes
30
DME, MT, DDO

132



Pt/HBEA
0.2
710
Anisole
400 °C, 0.10 MPa H2
Benzene, toluene, xylenes
30
DME, MT, DDO






3.1 Deoxygenation mechanism and importance of support
Supported noble metal catalysts are well-known hydrogenation catalysts. Catalyst surface studies in the 1990s led to important insights into the HYD mechanism on metals.110,111 Detailed structure–function analyses correlated to catalyst performance (e.g., activity, selectivity for CC versus CO hydrogenation, etc.), coupled with X-ray absorption spectroscopy, have led to the popular view that the metal activates H2 while the support and the metal–support interface are involved to transfer surface-H species (H*) to the substrate. These support effects are represented in two HYD mechanisms in Fig. 9 showing HYD of the substrate on the support via H* spill-over, which can involve Osurface vacancies (Fig. 9A) or the metal–support interface (Fig. 9B). Polar molecules are especially interactive with the support and metal–support interface through the oxygen functionality.112–116
 Fig. 9  HYD mechanisms on oxide-supported noble metals (A) H* spill-over to the support and subsequent HYD, and (B) HYD at the metal–support interface. Adapted from Pestman et al. and Mendes et al.115,116 
Over the past 20 years, many research groups have studied the gas-phase HYD of phenol over oxide-supported Pd under low-temperature conditions and with various H2 pressures (< 200 °C, 0.1–3.0 MPa), and nearly all the catalysts demonstrated arene HYD to cyclohexanone and/or cyclohexanol, without significant C–O bond cleavage.117–124 As described above, the HDO pathway requires a HYD site and an acid site. Recent research reports of noble metal catalyzed deoxygenation support the need for bifunctional catalysts, and proposed HDO mechanisms consistently follow a HYD-dehydration-HYD sequence. Using phenolics as an example, the first step is HYD by the supported metal to form an alcohol, followed by acid-catalyzed dehydration, where the acid is supplied by the support or a co-catalyst, and finally, HYD of the alkene to yield the alkane product (Fig. 10).42,43,49–51,125–129
 Fig. 10  General pathway for Pd-catalyzed HDO of bio-oil phenolics via HYD-dehydration-HYD. Adapted from Zhao et al.50 
3.2 Effects of reaction conditions
Under low-temperature (200–250 °C), high-pressure (4.8–13.8 MPa H2) conditions, there appears to be only minor differences in the activities and selectivities for the typical noble metals employed as catalysts (e.g., Ru, Rh, Pd, Pt) with minor support effects. This is consistent with our analysis in Fig. 4 and 5, where reaction rates and equilibrium constants for HYD and dehydration favored HDO products. Recent reports provide evidence that preferred reaction pathways are temperature dependent, as suggested in Fig. 4 and 5. Dehydration activity demonstrates a strong temperature dependence, with low rates (or no activity) observed below 200 °C.49–51,127 At temperatures above 250 °C, DDO, DMO, and acid-catalyzed MT side-reactions are activated and may be favored over ring HYD and HDO pathways. This is exemplified in recent batch reactor deoxygenation studies of guaiacol. Elliott and Hart reported that at 300 °C and 13.8 MPa H2, a Ru/C catalyst rapidly converted guaiacol to phenol as the primary recoverable product, indicating that DMO was favored over HYD.49 Cresols were also observed, suggesting MT reactions, and significant methane was formed, suggesting DME. A Pd/C catalyst produced HDO and DMO products. For the series of zirconia-supported catalysts (Pd, Pt, Rh, PdPt, RhPd, RhPt) studied by Gutierrez et al., reactions at 300 °C (8 MPa H2) gave comparable conversion of guaiacol regardless of catalyst composition, but benzene was the main product, suggesting the DDO and DMO reaction pathways were favored.43
With the changes in reaction rates and shift in equilibria under high-temperature, low-pressure conditions, acid-catalyzed side-reactions tend to dominate the product distribution over HYD and HDO. This is exemplified in a series of gas-phase deoxygenation studies. Runnebaum, Nimmanwudipong, and Gates demonstrated with a variety of phenolic substrates that DDO, DME, DMO, and MT products were preferred, and a low selectivity for HDO products was observed.130,133–139 For example, the major products of gas-phase guaiacol deoxygenation at 300 °C and 42 kPa H2 were phenol, catechol, and alkylated phenols/catechols, with minimal production of alkanes. Gates et al. also compared performances of Pt catalysts on acidic (γ-Al2O3) and non-acidic (MgO) supports in the deoxygenation of guaiacol (300 °C, 42 kPa hydrogen).131 Alkanes were not produced on either catalyst, however, the Pt/γ-Al2O3 catalyst was active for DME producing catechol while the Pt/MgO catalyst favored the DMO-product phenol. MT products were observed on Pt/γ-Al2O3 but not on Pt/MgO, consistent with this pathway being acid-catalyzed. Similarly, Zhu et al. compared anisole conversion over H-BEA, Pt/H-BEA (H-BEA = proton-form of zeolite beta), SiO2 and Pt/SiO2 catalysts (400 °C, 101 kPa hydrogen).132 H-BEA demonstrated high conversions of anisole, producing the acid-catalyzed DME and MT products cresols and xylenols. Pt/H-BEA converted anisole at a rate 10 times faster than H-BEA, producing deoxygenated DME and MT products (benzene, toluene, xylenes), but not saturated products (i.e., low arene HYD activity). SiO2 was inert under these conditions, and the Pt/SiO2 catalyst demonstrated that the DME reaction yielding phenol and methane (via HYD of the resulting surface methyl) is the primary reaction for anisole over Pt under these conditions. Foster et al. studied the gas-phase deoxygenation of m-cresol using a Pt/γ-Al2O3 catalyst at 51 kPa H2 and a lower temperature of 260 °C.128 The main product was toluene, suggesting DDO as the major pathway. However, the HYD product 2-methylcyclohexanol and the HDO product methylcyclohexane were also observed. A reaction network was proposed that considers the HYD-dehydrogenation equilibria (Fig. 11). In shifting the equilibria by increasing the hydrogen pressure from 51 to 100 kPa, the selectivity for methylcyclohexane increased from 13.7 to 27.2%, with a corresponding drop in selectivity for 3-methylcyclohexanol from 16.6 to 2.4% and little change in toluene selectivity (66–70%). Gates et al. studied conversion of the HDO-intermediate cyclohexanone over Pt/γ-Al2O3 catalyst (300 °C, 42 kPa H2), and dehydrogenation to phenol was greatly favored over HDO products, providing further support that low hydrogen concentrations affect the HYD-dehydrogenation equilibrium.130
 Fig. 11  Proposed reaction network for m-cresol over a Pt/γ-Al2O3 catalyst showing the HYD-dehydrogenation equilibria. Species in brackets are proposed, but not observed intermediates. Adapted from Foster et al.128 

Fig. 5 does not predict a significant shift in the HYD equilibria (eqn (3) and (4)) that would fully explain the observed sensitivity of the product selectivity resulting from high-temperature, low-pressure conditions. However, other factors may become evident under these conditions that contribute to the observed performance. As described in Fig. 4, an apparent change in reaction order for hydrogen pressure would have significant effects on the rate of HYD reactions. This may be due to poor H2 activation, with low pressures resulting in low surface coverage and higher reaction order dependence. Competitive adsorption of phenolics and H2 under these conditions may be important and would be expected to decrease the HYD rate, possibly through site blocking similar to the discussion above for TMS catalysts (Fig. 8).
Considering the importance of HYD activity to HDO product formation, bimetallic Pt catalysts are promising because they have been shown to exhibit increased HYD activity compared to monometallic Pt catalysts.140 This rate enhancement is attributed to optimized binding energies of hydrogen and hydrocarbons by Pt-terminated surfaces on the bimetallic particles versus monometallic Pt. Do et al. studied m-cresol deoxygenation over bimetallic PtNi and PtCo catalysts on γ-Al2O3 at 260 °C and 51 kPa H2.129 The bimetallic materials were significantly more active for m-cresol conversion and more selective to methylcyclohexane than the mono-metallic Pt catalyst (Table 4). The performance of the PtCo catalyst was particularly interesting, since this catalyst produced more methylcyclohexane than toluene (52.4% vs. 44.7% selectivity). Through further investigation into the toluene/methylcyclohexane formation rates, the authors determined that HYD of the aromatic ring is the rate-determining step over these Pt and bimetallic Pt catalysts. However, the observed shift in selectivity is not solely due to increased HYD activity, but also due to increased dehydration activity associated with additional Ni- and Co-based acid sites. The authors attribute this to excess Co and Ni on the alumina, which calcination transforms to aluminate surface species, which are effective alcohol dehydration catalysts.
Table 4 Performance of γ-alumina-supported Pt and bimetallic PtNi and PtCo catalysts in the deoxygenation of m-cresol at 260 °C and 51 kPa hydrogen. Adapted from Do et al.129




Catalyst
Selectivity (%) at 30% m-cresol conversion


Conversion (%) at 30 min
Methyl-cyclohexane
Toluene
3-Methyl-cyclohexanol




Pt/γ-Al2O3
38.3
11.1
65.0
20.1


PtNi/γ-Al2O3
62.7
43.2
51.0
3.1


PtCo/γ-Al2O3
56.7
52.4
44.7
1.2




3.3 Catalyst stability and deactivation
Bartholomew has reviewed mechanisms associated with catalyst deactivation and provided a thorough discussion of the chemical, mechanical, and thermal causes.141 His review included examples and discussion of noble metal catalyst deactivation due to poisoning, coking, sintering, and chemical transformations leading to inactive phases, and the reader is referred to this review for in-depth discussion of these phenomena. This sub-section will discuss examples of noble metal catalyst deactivation with bio-oil model compounds from the recent literature.
Substrate adsorption and phenate formation for supported noble metal catalysts occurs similarly to that discussed above for TMS catalysts (Fig. 8). However, Zhu et al. demonstrated that the presence of Pt can affect the degree of coking under reaction conditions.132 These researchers investigated coking in the conversion of anisole at 400 °C and 0.10 MPa hydrogen over metal-free H-BEA zeolite, Pt/H-BEA, and Pt/SiO2 catalysts (Table 5). The Pt/SiO2 catalyst exhibited the lowest carbon deposition, 1.6% after 5 h of operation; consistent with Popov et al.'s suggestion that anisole does not easily form coke-precursor phenates on SiO2.100 The metal-free H-BEA exhibited the highest coking after 5 h of operation, 12.0%, but the presence of Pt reduced this to 10.2%. The most apparent effect of Pt was determined when the carbon deposition was normalized to the grams of anisole converted. From these data, it is clearly observed that Pt on the H-BEA zeolite greatly reduces the coke formation from 13.4% to 3.2%. The authors attribute this drop in coking to HYD of coke precursors from nearby Pt.
Table 5 Coke formation over H-BEA, 1% Pt/H-BEA, and 1% Pt/SiO2 catalysts in the conversion of anisole at 400 °C and 0.10 MPa hydrogen. From data in Zhu et al.132




 
Carbon deposition


Catalyst

g
C/gcat (%)

g
C/gconverted anisole (%)




H-BEA
12.0
13.4


Pt/H-BEA
10.2
3.2


Pt/SiO2
1.6
3.0




Other reports have compared coking on alumina-supported catalysts with catalysts on inert or basic supports. Gutierrez et al. compared coking in guaiacol upgrading on sulfided CoMo/Al2O3versus noble metal/ZrO2 catalysts after 5 h at 100 °C and 8 MPa.43 The authors reported the highest carbon deposition for the sulfided CoMo/Al2O3 catalyst (6.7 wt%), and significantly lower values for the zirconia-supported noble metals (≤2 wt%). For reactions at 300 °C, the carbon deposition increased to 10 wt% for CoMo/Al2O3 and 2.6 wt% for the noble metal/ZrO2 catalysts. The authors attributed this increase in coking with temperature to an increase in CRA reactions caused by low hydrogen coverage at higher temperature. Gates et al. compared coking in the conversion of guaiacol over two supported-Pt catalysts using acidic γ-Al2O3 and basic MgO supports at 300 °C and 42 kPa hydrogen.131 Consistent with the connection between acidic supports and carbon deposition, the authors reported that the Pt/γ-Al2O3 catalyst resulted in 19-fold rate of coking compared to the Pt/MgO catalyst after 6 h of operation, resulting in greater deactivation with respect to guaiacol conversion. Considering these results in light of strong bonding between phenolics and Al2O3, alumina may be an inappropriate support for deoxygenation processes.
In addition to coking, sintering of the metal particles is a common deactivation pathway for noble metal catalysts under high temperature conditions. Foster et al. investigated the deactivation and regeneration of Pt/γ-Al2O3 and Pt/SiO2 catalysts in the deoxygenation of m-cresol at 260 °C and 51 kPa hydrogen over 5 h of operation.128 Both catalysts exhibited a steady decrease in conversion and toluene selectivity with a concurrent rise in 3-methylcyclohexanol selectivity, suggesting that the acidic sites associated with dehydration were being deactivated. Interestingly, the Pt/γ-Al2O3 catalyst was regenerable in H2 at 500 °C, but the Pt/SiO2 catalyst was not. The authors attributed this to sintering of the Pt particles on SiO2, driven by a weaker metal–support interaction for SiO2 compared to Al2O3.141 Unfortunately authors did not provide evidence for sintering, such as differences in the XRD patterns, TEM images, or metal dispersion values for fresh versus spent catalysts.
Noble metal catalysts are known to be poisoned by sulfur and nitrogen, and although this is not a significant issue in the model compound studies described above, it represents a pathway for catalyst deactivation during the upgrading of pyrolysis vapors. In general, mono-metallic catalysts are sensitive to S and N on the ppm level, but some recently developed bi-metallic catalysts have demonstrated greater tolerance.142,143 For example, supported PdPt alloys were studied for HDS and HDN of gas-oils at 320–360 °C and 4.5–6.0 MPa hydrogen, and an optimized catalyst having a Pd/Pt atomic ratio of 3.7/1 demonstrated high S and N tolerance in a feed having 300 ppm S and 200 ppm N.143 This suggests that other bi-metallic catalysts, including those described above, may provide the necessary tolerance for S (<500 ppm) and N (<1000 ppm) found in pyrolysis vapors.
3.4 Advantages, limitations, and research opportunities
Model compound studies have provided significant insight into the molecular mechanisms that control deoxygenation pathways, as well as the critical role that acids, temperature, and hydrogen pressure play in the reaction and resulting products. Notable advantages of the noble metal catalysts include:
• Noble metal catalysts can operate in aqueous media in the presence of acids, which makes them preferred candidates for the processing of lignocellulosic pyrolysis vapors that contain significant quantities of water and acetic acid.
• Alloyed noble-metal-base-metal catalysts have demonstrated increased HYD activity, and also represent an opportunity to reduce the cost of the catalyst.
• The acidic support can initiate MT and/or similar C–C bond forming reactions that lead to higher, branched alkanes that may be suitable precursors or blend stocks for diesel and jet fuels.
• Unlike TMS catalysts, noble metals do not require additional sulfidation to maintain their activity.
In spite of these unique advantages, the application of noble metal catalysts on large scales is hampered by their high cost. In upgrading processes, this is further compounded by more rapid deactivation (i.e., coking, sintering, S/N sensitivity). Regeneration of the deactivated catalyst may be possible, but would cause undesirable downtime in a large commercial process. Further elucidation of the coking mechanisms as well as optimization of catalysts to mitigate coking is therefore warranted. Sintering of the metal particles is another significant factor that reduces the active surface area of the catalyst, and has been observed in cases where the metal particles are only weakly bound to the support. Hence, fine-tuning of the catalyst composition through modification of the support material surface and/or metal formulation may mitigate particle sintering, and these methods require further development. A third factor that contributes to catalyst deactivation is sulfur and nitrogen sensitivity. This was not directly addressed in the model compound studies but is relevant in the upgrading of pyrolysis vapors that contain small quantities of S- and N-compounds. The use of bimetallic compositions may impart higher S and N tolerance by promoting HDS and HDN reactions.
Under the high-temperature, low-pressure conditions that are relevant to ex situ CFP processes, the expected changes in reaction rates and equilibria versus low-temperature, high-pressure conditions must inform the design of new catalysts. Bimetallic catalysts, such as the noble-metal-base-metal alloys described above, are particularly attractive due to their increased HYD activity over monometallic noble metals. A large body of literature exists on the unique properties of bimetallic catalysts, but studies of these catalysts under low-pressure conditions for HDO processes have received little attention.107,144 This area needs to be explored further, especially toward the development of less expensive alternatives that are also inert to the aqueous acidic conditions in bio-oil processing. Advanced synthesis techniques to access new compositions and morphologies of bimetallic catalysts could further inform our understanding of the factors that favor C–O bond cleavage.
Fundamental studies toward the design of more robust catalysts that can remain stable under the acidic hydrothermal conditions of pyrolysis are urgently needed. The observation that phenols undergo deoxygenation in the presence of acetic acid,51 with little concurrent acetic acid deoxygenation, would explain why even upgrading of bio-oils under harsh conditions (i.e., 350 °C, 20 MPa hydrogen) in the presence of noble metal catalysts results in high residual acidity of the hydrocarbon product. The notion that phenolic substrates are selectively adsorbed onto the metal surface in the presence of aqueous acetic acid raises new questions regarding the selective binding of phenolics to the metal surface, and how that may be used in the rational design of better catalysts for complete deoxygenation of pyrolysis vapors. Furthermore, noble metals like Pt and Pd are known to promote DCO of carboxylic acids, and less expensive alternatives that do not reject a C as CO or CO2 would be desirable.
4. Transition metal carbide, nitride, and phosphide (C/N/P) catalysts
Transition metal carbides, nitrides, and phosphides (C/N/P), have gained interest over the last 5–10 years. These materials have been reported to exhibit hydrotreating activities similar to MoS2-based materials,145–148 possess catalytic properties similar to noble metals,149–152 and could be relatively inexpensive to produce. This section considers the structure and synthesis of these materials and highlights the properties that make them promising catalysts for bio-oil upgrading.
4.1 Properties driving catalysis research
Transition metal C/N/P materials possess properties similar to both metals and ceramics, exhibiting high electrical and thermal conductivities while also being refractory, with exceptional thermal and chemical stability.147,152 Carbides and nitrides incorporate small atoms (the atomic radii of carbon and nitrogen are 0.071 nm and 0.065 nm, respectively); small enough that the Hägg rule is satisfied for all metals (i.e., the ratio of the radii of non-metal to metal is less than 0.59). Thus, interstitial compounds with simple structures are formed.153 In general, the carbon or nitrogen atoms occupy the octahedral interstitial sites formed by close-packed metal atoms. Typical crystal structures for early transition metal carbides and nitrides are shown in Fig. 12. In contrast, the atomic radius of phosphorus (0.109 nm) is too large to fit into octahedral interstitial sites, and therefore, the metal atoms form triangular prisms surrounding the phosphorus.147,154 Typical crystal structures for a variety of transition metal phosphides are shown in Fig. 13.
 Fig. 12  Crystal structures for Groups 4–6 transition metal carbides and nitrides. (a) Mo2N, W2N, MoC1−x, and WC1−x, (b) TiN, ZnN, HfN, VN, CrN, TiC, ZrC, HfC, VC, NbC, and TaC, (c) TaN, MoN, MoC, WC, and (d) Mo2C and W2C. Reproduced with permission from Bennet.155 
 Fig. 13  Crystal structures of metal-rich phosphides. Reproduced with permission from Oyama et al.147 
The most common method for synthesizing transition metal C/N/P's involves a temperature programmed reaction/reduction procedure. For carbides and nitrides, this method typically includes the exposure of a metal oxide precursor to a flowing stream of reductive carburizing gas (e.g., a mixture of CH4 and H2) to produce the carbide or a reductive nitriding gas (e.g. NH3 or a mixture of N2 and H2) to produce the nitride.152 For phosphides, a metal salt and a phosphite or phosphate salt are mixed and calcined, and the resulting material is reduced in flowing H2 to form the metal phosphide.156 Thorough reviews of metal carbide, nitride, and phosphide syntheses can be found elsewhere.146,156–159
The incorporation of non-metal atoms into a metal lattice causes the resulting materials to exhibit chemical reactivities that are quite different from the parent metal. Two main effects result: a distinct change in the electronic structure (referred to as a “ligand effect”) and a reduction in the number of metal sites exposed at the catalyst surface (an “ensemble effect”).160 The change in the electronic structure compared to the parent metal is due to a number of compounding factors: charge transfer from the metal to the non-metal, hybridization of the metal d-states with the non-metal sp-states, and expansion of the metal–metal lattice spacing.149,160–162 An example of this change in electronic structure is shown in Fig. 14 for β-Mo2C compared to Mo(110) and Pt(111).
 Fig. 14  Comparison of d-band density of states for Mo(110), C-terminated (green) and Mo-terminated Mo2C (blue), and Pt(111). Reproduced with permission from Kitchin et al.161 
Compared to Mo(110), the d-band for Mo2C is broadened and the d-band center is shifted to a value below the original Fermi level (more negative values for E − Ef).161 Because of this shift, Mo2C tends to be less chemically reactive (i.e., weaker bonding to adsorbates such as hydrogen and oxygen) than Mo metal, and possesses catalytic properties similar to that of Pt-group metals. This is of course a generalization, and actual catalyst activity and selectivity will depend strongly on reaction conditions, adsorbates, and surface termination (i.e. the “ensemble effect”, metal-terminated versus non-metal terminated). For example, for reactions involving adsorbed hydrocarbon intermediates (e.g., methanation, Fischer–Tropsch, alkene hydrogenation), Mo2C has been shown to exhibit reactivities and selectivities similar to Ru and Ir.163–166 Conversely, for reactions involving oxygen, Mo2C has been reported to bind oxygen more strongly than Mo metal and exhibits behavior similar to W.166 Moreover, the surface termination and non-metal:metal ratio of these carbide, nitride, and phosphide materials influences reactivity.161,167,168 The presence of the non-metal on the catalyst surface decreases the number of available metal sites and creates different sites for adsorption and reaction. It has been reported that surface C atoms or P atoms are not simply spectators or site blockers, but assist in binding adsorbates and intermediates.161,169,170 Overall, the reactivity of C/N/P materials can be tuned by the metal/non-metal combination, non-metal:metal ratio, and the surface termination. Additionally, the decoupling of carbon and oxygen chemistry compared to transition metals (as discussed for Mo2C above)166 suggests that these materials could exhibit unique performance for bio-oil deoxygenation.
Transition metal carbides, nitrides, and phosphides have been shown to exhibit intrinsic activity for removal of heteroatoms (e.g., S, N) from hydrocarbon-based streams. The performance of transition metal carbides and nitrides for HDS and HDN has been explored extensively over the last 20–25 years.145,148,149,171,172 When compared on the basis of active sites per mass or volume of catalyst as measured by chemisorption, Sajkowski et al. reported that Mo2C and Mo2N were as much as five times more active than commercial sulfided-NiMo/Al2O3 and MoS2/Al2O3 catalysts for the hydrotreating of coal-derived gas oil.172 Other studies have reported similar hydrotreating activities for carbides and nitrides compared to commercial sulfided catalysts.148 However, the reaction conditions (i.e., heteroatom concentration, temperature, and hydrogen pressure) have a strong effect on the catalyst stability, and thus its performance.145 For example, under high concentrations of sulfur and low H2 partial pressures, a Mo2C surface can become partially sulfided, resulting in lower rates of desulfurization. Investigations of the hydrotreating capabilities of transition metal phosphides have only occurred in the last 10–15 years;146,147,156 however, these materials show great promise. The activities of a series of phosphides for HDS of dibenzothiophene and HDN of quinoline are shown in Fig. 15 and compared to a commercial sulfided NiMo/Al2O3 catalyst. The phosphides followed an activity trend: Fe2P < CoP < MoP < WP < Ni2P and the Ni2P/SiO2 catalyst exhibited HDS and HDN activity greater than the sulfided NiMo/Al2O3 catalyst.146 Ni2P has also been shown to maintain its activity for up to 100 h on stream.146,147 Moreover, compared to a Mo2C catalyst, the removal of adsorbed sulfur in the form of H2S is more energetically favorable on a Ni2P surface (Fig. 16).169 Consequently, Ni2P may be less susceptible to sulfur poisoning than Mo2C and should exhibit higher reaction rates (assuming S removal is the rate-limiting step).
 Fig. 15  Comparison of different phosphides and a commercial sulfided-NiMo/Al2O3 catalyst in the hydroprocessing of quinoline (2000 ppm N) and dibenzothiophene (3000 ppm S) at 370 °C and 3.1 MPa. Reproduced with permission from Oyama et al.146 
 Fig. 16  Potential energy diagram for the hydrogenation and removal of sulfur adatoms from Ni2P(001) and α-Mo2C(001) surfaces. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al.169 
Considering the chemical and physical properties, unique catalytic reactivities, and demonstrated activity for HDS and HDN, transition metal C/N/P materials are promising catalysts for pyrolysis vapor deoxygenation. The remainder of this section will review recent literature on deoxygenation of bio-oil model compounds over these materials and will be subdivided by material type. Table 6 gives an overview of the literature references reviewed in this section including catalyst type and properties, reaction conditions, and dominant products. The stability of these materials under reaction conditions will also be briefly discussed. Lastly the challenges facing implementation and directions for future research will be identified.
Table 6 Representative metal carbide, nitride, and phosphide catalysts for deoxygenation of bio-oil relevant oxygenated compounds




Catalyst
Synthesis method
Support

S
BET (m2 g−1)
Catalyst loading on support
Feedstock
Reaction conditions
Main product
Conversion (%)
Reaction pathway
Ref.




NiMoCx
TPR-CH4/H2
SiO2
191
4.5 wt% NiO
Ethyl benzoate
300 °C, 5 MPa H2
Cyclohexane, methylcyclohexane (TOS < 24 h)
99 → 57 over 72 h (HDO conversion)
HDO, HYD

175



15 wt% MoO3
















Benzene, toluene (TOS > 24 h)


















Acetone
300 °C, 3 MPa H2
Propylene, propane
44 (HDO conversion)
HDO, HYD, aldol condensation, dehydration














Acetaldehyde
300 °C, 3 MPa H2
Ethylene, ethane, ethanol
33 (HDO conversion)
HDO, HYD, Aldol condensation, dehydration




Mo2C
TPR-CH4/H2
SiO2
170
30 wt% MoO3
Ethyl benzoate
300 °C, 5 MPa H2
—
99 → 88 over 110 h (total conversion)
—




Mo2C
Carbothermal hydrogen reduction
Carbon nanotubes
—
20 wt%
Methyl palmitate
240 °C, 1.5 MPa H2
Hexadecane
90
HDO

176



Vegetable oil
260 °C, 2.5 MPa H2
Branched paraffins
>80
HDO, isomerization


Mo2C
TPR-CH4/H2
γ-Al2O3
—
8 wt% (Mo)
Benzofuran
390 °C, 13.8 MPa H2
Alkylated benzenes
<10
HDO

174











2.9 wt% (Mo)
Dibenzofuran


Alkylated cyclohexanes
<10
HDO, HYD, HCR




Mo2C
TPR-CH4/H2
—
65
—
Benzofuran
250 °C, 5.1 MPa H2
Ethylcyclohexane
97
HDO, HYD

173



Mo2C
TPR-CH4/H2
—
94
—
Propanal
300 °C, 0.1 MPa H2
Propylene
60%
HDO

177



1-Propanol


Acetone


2-Propanol


WC
Carbothermal
—
—
—
Propanol
380 °C, 0.1 MPa H2
Propylene
>80%
HDO

178



Propanal
5%


Mo2N
TPR-NH3
—
40
—
Guaiacol
300 °C, 5 MPa H2
Phenol
90
DMO

179



Mo2N
TPR-NH3
γ-Al2O3
186–198
10 wt%
Oleic acid
380 °C, 7.15 MPa H2

n-C18H38
99.9
HDO

180



WN




186–198
9.6 wt%





n-C17H36
97.1
DCO




VN




186–198
3.2 wt%





n-C17H36
97.0
DCO




Mo2N
TPR-NH3
γ-Al2O3
191
8.39 wt% (Mo)
Guaiacol
300 °C, 5 MPa H2
Catechol
66
DME

181



Mo2N
TPR-N2/H2


183
8.74 wt% (Mo)




Catechol
62
DME




Mo2N
TPR-NH3
SBA-15
418
7.22 wt% (Mo)
Guaiacol
300 °C, 5 MPa H2
Phenol
44
DMO




Mo2N
TPR-N2/H2


397
6.67 wt% (Mo)




Phenol
40
DMO




Ni/Mo-N
TPR-NH3
ZSM-5
298.6


Vegetable oil
360–450 °C, 4.5 MPa H2
Hydrocarbon fuels
50
HDO, DCO

182



Mo2N
TPR-NH3 or N2/H2
Activated carbon
>560
10 wt% (Mo)
Guaiacol
300 °C, 5 MPa H2
Phenol, catechol
10
DMO, DME

183



Mo2N
TPR-NH3
Activated carbon
>752
10 wt% (Mo)
Guaiacol
300 °C, 5 MPa H2
Phenol, catechol
10
DMO, DME

184



MoP
TPR-phosphate
—
8.80
—
4-Methylphenol
350 °C, 4.40 MPa H2
Toluene, HYD products
90
DDO, HYD, dehydration

185



MoP
TPR-phosphate
—
136
—
4-Methylphenol
350 °C, 4.40 MPa H2
Toluene, HYD products
71
DDO, HYD, dehydration

186



Ni2P
TPR-phosphate
—
101
—
4-Methylphenol
350 °C, 4.4–6.1 MPa H2
Toluene, HYD products
79
DDO, HYD, dehydration

187



Ni2P
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
97
7.91 wt%
Benzofuran
370 °C, 3.1 MPa H2
Ethylbenzene
46
HDO

188



Ni2P
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
102
18 wt%
Benzofuran
370 °C, 3.1 MPa H2
Ethylbenzene
80
HDO

189



Ni2P
TPR-phosphate
SBA-15
206
18.8 wt% (Ni)
Methyl oleate
290 °C, 0.3–4 MPa H2

n-Octadecane
80
HDO

190



Ni2P
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
309
8.6 wt%
Guaiacol
200–300 °C, 0.1 MPa
Phenol, benzene
80
HDO

191



Co2P




307
8.6 wt%




Phenol, benzene
70
HDO




Fe2P




233
8.3 wt%




Phenol
64
HDO




WP




147
19.9 wt%




Phenol
60
HDO




MoP




207
12.8 wt%




Phenol, benzene
54
HDO




Ni2P
TPR-phosphite
SiO2
217
7.9 wt%
2-Methyl-tetrahydrofuran
250–350 °C, 0.1 MPa
Pentane, butane
76
HDO

159



Ni2P
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
177
7.9 wt%




Pentane, butane
97
HDO




WP
TPR-phosphite
SiO2
178
19.9 wt%




Pentenes, pentadienes
65
HDO




WP
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
149
19.9 wt%




Pentenes, pentadienes
64
HDO




MoP
TPR-phosphite
SiO2
220
12.8 wt%




Pentenes, pentadienes
63
HDO




MoP
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
174
12.8 wt%




Pentenes, pentadienes
31
HDO




CoP
TPR-phosphite
SiO2
197
9.4 wt%




Pentane, butane
66
HDO




CoP
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
158
9.4 wt%




Pentane, butane
40
HDO




FeP
TPR-phosphite
SiO2
194
9.1 wt%




Pentenes, pentadienes
2
HDO




FeP
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
185
9.1 wt%




Pentenes, pentadienes
24
HDO




Ru2P
TPR-hypophosphite
SiO2
150
11.5 wt% (Ru)
Furan
400 °C, 0.1 MPa
C4
—
HDO

192



RuP
TPR-hypophosphite


142
11.4 wt% (Ru)




C4
—
HDO




RuP
TPR-phosphate


137
15 wt%




C4
—
HDO




Ni2P
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
296
15 wt% (Ni)
Anisole
300 °C, 1.5 MPa H2
Phenol, benzene, cyclohexane
73.6 (HDO conversion)
DME, DDO, HYD

193



MoP




288
15 wt% (Mo)




Phenol, benzene, cyclohexane
6.0 (HDO conversion)
DME, DDO, HYD




Ni/Mo-P




291–351
15 wt% (Ni + Mo)




Phenol, benzene, cyclohexane
9.2–24.5 (HDO conversion)
DME, DDO, HYD




Ni/Fe-P
TPR-phosphate
Zeolite
504–543
6 wt% (Ni + Fe)
2-Methyl-tetrahydrofuran
250–350 °C, 0.5 MPa H2

n-Pentane, n-butane
70
HCR, DCO, HDO

194



Ni2P
TPR-phosphite
SiO2
132–179
2.5–10 wt%
Dibenzofuran
200–300 °C, 3 MPa H2
Bicyclohexane
20 at 200 °C
HYD

195



100 at 300 °C


Ni2P
TPR-phosphate
SiO2-H
411
12.6 wt%
Methyl laurate
300–340 °C, 2 MPa H2

n-Undecane, n-dodecane
70–100
DCO, HDO

196







SiO2-L
238
13.7 wt%






70–100










MCM-41
163
11.6 wt%






50–100










SBA-15
354
12.7 wt%






65–100






FeMoP
TPR-phosphate
—
—
—
Anisole
400 °C, 4.2 MPa H2
Benzene/cyclohexane
86
DDO, HYD

197













Phenol


Benzene/cyclohexane
93
















Catechol


Benzene/phenol
>99
















2-Phenoxyethyl-benzene


Ethylbenzene/benzene
>99






Ni2P
TPR-phosphate
SiO2
127
11.2 wt%
Guaiacol
300 °C, 0.1 MPa H2
Catechol at high WHSV
(at 1.33 h−1) 23.1
DME, DMO, DDO

198







Al2O3
90






Benzene/phenol at low WHSV
97.9










ZrO2
47








71.5








4.2 Transition metal carbide catalysts
Transition metal carbide catalysts have been extensively investigated for HDS and HDN,145,148 but limited studies consider their performance in deoxygenation of bio-oil or biomass-derived intermediates and model compounds. Early works compared Mo2C to commercial sulfided-CoMo catalysts for deoxygenation of a model heavy oil stream, and suggested that the carbide catalyst was significantly less active; however, these comparisons may not be representative of performance with pyrolysis vapor due to the high concentration of both S and N in the heavy oil feed.148,173,174 Indeed Dhandapani et al. demonstrated an influence from sulfur, and using XPS, suggested that sulfur forms a carbosulfide phase on the Mo2C surface. The carbosulfide sites were hypothesized to be the active site for HDS on Mo2C, with otherwise low HYD and HDO activities.173Fig. 17 shows a schematic of the carbide and carbosulfide surfaces and their reactivity behaviors. Dhandapani et al. postulated that deoxygenation conditions do not modify the surface and that the HYD sites on the catalyst surface may also provide sites for HDO. The oxygen in biomass pyrolysis oil will likely be 2 orders of magnitude higher than that explored in Dhandapani's study and thus, may impart different effects on the Mo2C surface. This early work illustrates that the surface of these carbide materials changes under reaction conditions and that these surface changes directly affect the catalyst's activity and selectivity.
 Fig. 17  Schematic depiction of carbide and carbosulfide surfaces and reactivity behaviors. Adapted from Dhandapani et al.173 
Zhang et al. investigated the performance of a NiMo carbide catalyst supported on SiO2 for the deoxygenation of three model compounds containing various oxygenated groups: ethyl benzoate (carboxylic group), acetone (ketonic group), and acetaldehyde (aldehyde).175Fig. 18 provides time-on-stream results for conversion of ethyl benzoate as well as a proposed reaction network. Conversion decreased from 99% at 12 h to 57% at 72 h and the selectivity transitioned from aliphatic products (cyclohexane and methylcyclohexane) to aromatic products (benzene and toluene). At later times on stream, some oxygen-containing products (benzoic acid and benzyl alcohol) and alkylation products (ethylbenzene, 1-ethyl-2-methylbenzene, ethylcyclohexane) were also observed. Characterization of the spent catalyst revealed coke deposition resulting in pore blockage and decreased surface area, and oxygen accumulation on the surface of the NiMo carbide.175 The findings from this study led to three key conclusions:
 Fig. 18  (A) Conversion and product selectivity for ethyl benzoate deoxygenation over NiMo carbide supported on SiO2 at 300 °C and 5 MPa H2, and (B) reaction network for ethyl benzoate transformations over NiMo carbide. Adapted from Zhang et al.175 
• Metallic NiMo carbide sites, which are highly active for HYD, became “poisoned” due to the accumulation of surface oxygen, and thus the overall HYD activity of the catalyst decreased significantly as a function of time on stream.
• The accumulation of surface oxygen likely led to the formation of oxygen-modified NiMo carbide sites, and these modified sites were proposed to possess acidic character.
• These acid sites provided the catalyst with bifunctional properties, and were responsible for performing DCO and alkylation reactions.
The bifunctional nature of the oxygen-modified NiMo carbide surface was also apparent in the deoxygenation of acetone and acetaldehyde. The primary reactions that occurred were direct hydrogenation on metallic hydrogenation sites (acetone to isopropanol and acetaldehyde to ethanol) and aldol condensation and dehydration on acid sites.175 The effect of reaction conditions on these pathways was evaluated, with increases in temperature or pressure resulting in increases in conversion. Specifically, it was found that the rate of aldol condensation and dehydration on acid sites was increased when temperature was increased. The change in selectivity with increasing temperature may be due to differing reaction pathways or increased rates for the reactions that have higher activation energies (as illustrated in Fig. 4).
Similar to the work by Zhang et al.,175 Ren et al. investigated the deoxygenation of propanol and propanal over Mo2C and WC catalysts and found that the carbide catalysts strongly favored cleavage of the C–O/CC bond to form propylene compared to breaking the C–C bond.177,178 The authors’ attributed this selectivity to strong adsorption of the oxygenate to the WC surface through the oxygen atom. Using DFT, the authors determined that propanol and propanal share a similar deoxygenation intermediate and pathway; however, it is clear from the authors’ reaction data that breaking the CO bond was much more difficult than breaking the C–OH bond. At 380 °C in the presence of H2, the WC catalyst exhibited >80% conversion of propanol with >95% selectivity to propylene, but only exhibited a maximum of 10% conversion of propanal with ∼60% selectivity to propylene. In parallel to the work by Zhang et al., Ren et al. speculated that the presence of oxygen species on the WC surface imparted acidic character, thus resulting in an increased rate of propanol dehydration to propylene. The effect of reaction conditions on catalyst structure and the structure–function relationships for these carbide catalysts need to be thoroughly explored and understood in order to predict deoxygenation performance.
Although there is a lack of studies employing traditional lignin model compounds, such as guaiacol or anisole, important characteristics of carbide catalysts have been found through the study of vegetable oil deoxygenation. Han et al. investigated the performance of Mo2C supported on multi-walled carbon nanotubes (Mo2C/CNTs) for the deoxygenation of vegetable oils and compared their performance to that of Pt and Pd supported on CNTs.176 At 240 °C and 1.5 MPa of H2, a 20% Mo2C/CNTs catalyst exhibited higher conversion (90%) of methyl palmitate than a 5% Pd/CNTs catalyst (41%) or a 5% Pt/CNTs catalyst (32%). Additionally, the Mo2C catalyst strongly favored the HDO products (hexadecane and hexadecene) while the Pt and Pd catalysts exhibited high selectivity for the DCO product (pentadecane). Importantly, these results suggest that Mo2C could provide higher carbon efficiency than noble metals for bio-oil upgrading. The 20% Mo2C/CNTs catalyst was also capable of achieving high conversion and hydrocarbon yields for other model compounds including methyl laurate, methyl stearate, and ethyl stearate as well as whole vegetable oils including maize oil, olive oil, rapeseed oil, soy bean oil, and sunflower oil.176 Interestingly, during reaction of the whole vegetable oils, a significant amount of branched alkanes were produced over the Mo2C/CNTs catalyst. In some cases, selectivity to branched paraffins was as high as 45%.
Based on the results from this study, the authors proposed the reaction mechanism shown in Fig. 19 for conversion of esters on the Mo2C/CNTs catalyst.176 The ester Ccarbonyl–OR bond cleavage generates acyl complexes on the Mo2C surface, and these complexes undergo three possible transformations. Acyl complexes react with surface H atoms to produce aldehydes, which then undergo HDO to produce hydrocarbons in Route 1. In Route 2, acyl complexes undergo HDO and HYD and are converted into surface alkyl species, which are then hydrogenated to produce hydrocarbons with the same number of carbon atoms as the carboxylic acid chains of the starting ester. In Route 3, acyl complexes undergo “acyl-to-alkyl” rearrangement and release CO to produce adsorbed alkyl species (DCO reaction), which then combine with H atoms to produce DCO products (i.e., hydrocarbons having one less carbon atom than the carboxylic acid chains of the starting ester).176 Given the observed product distribution, the Mo2C/CNTs catalyst strongly favors Routes 1 and 2, and the presence of branched paraffins is due to the isomerization of the surface alkyl species. The isomerization activity of Mo2C as well as other carbides could be beneficial during pyrolysis vapor upgrading as branched hydrocarbons exhibit improved fuel properties (e.g., higher octane number) compared to linear hydrocarbons.
 Fig. 19  Proposed reaction network of esters on Mo2C/CNTs catalyst. Adapted from Han et al.176 
4.3 Transition metal nitride catalysts
Supported and unsupported monometallic and bimetallic nitrides have been evaluated as catalysts for deoxygenation of bio-oil model compounds179,181,183,184,199 as well as vegetable oils.180,182 The most commonly tested bio-oil model compound was guaiacol. Ghampson et al.179,181,183 and Sepulveda et al.184 tested unsupported Mo2N as well as Mo2N supported on alumina, SBA-15, and activated carbons for the conversion of guaiacol. To synthesize unsupported molybdenum nitride materials, the nitriding gas mixture (NH3 or N2/H2) and the molar hourly space velocity (19 or 29 h−1) were varied.179 With the exception of pure γ-Mo2N, the resulting materials consisted of multiple phases including γ-Mo2N, β-Mo2N0.78, MoO2, and Mo. At 300 °C and 5 MPa H2 in a batch autoclave, the primary product from all catalysts was phenol. A small amount of catechol and deoxygenated products (benzene, cyclohexene, and cyclohexane) were also observed. The authors proposed that the primary reaction pathway was DMO to form phenol (Fig. 20). The secondary pathway was DME of guaiacol to form catechol. The deoxygenated products were formed primarily from phenol via the DDO route to benzene or the HDO route to cyclohexene and cyclohexane. Multi-phase nitride catalysts provided additional evaluation of performance on the basis of the N/Mo atomic ratio. The phase-pure γ-Mo2N sample, which had the highest N/Mo atomic ratio (0.86), exhibited the highest HDO activity and achieved the highest ratio of phenol to catechol.179
 Fig. 20  Deoxygenation reaction network of guaiacol over Mo2N catalysts. Adapted from Ghampson et al.183 
The effect of activated carbon and metal oxide supports (alumina and SBA-15 silica) on the catalytic performance of Mo2N for guaiacol conversion has also been studied.181,183,184 A number of key conclusions can be drawn from these studies:
• The functionality (i.e., oxygen surface groups) and microstructure of the support affect the dispersion of the Mo2N particles. For example, a higher concentration of oxygen surface groups and higher mesoporosity result in better dispersion of Mo2N, and consequently higher catalytic activity.
• Alumina and silica have a strong effect on product selectivity (phenol vs. catechol). Alumina-supported molybdenum nitride produced a significant amount of catechol (DME pathway), while the silica-supported catalyst strongly favored phenol production via the DMO pathway.
• Mo2N/Al2O3 is more active than a sulfided NiMo/Al2O3 catalyst for guaiacol conversion at 300 °C and 5 MPa H2.
These findings suggest that Mo2N is responsible for the activity in these supported catalysts, while the textural (i.e. pore size) and chemical properties (i.e. acidity and functional groups) of the support impacts product selectivity and Mo2N dispersion.
For both unsupported and supported Mo2N catalysts, the active sites on the Mo2N surface have been suggested as coordinatively unsaturated Mo atoms and N-deficient sites.183 Ghampson et al. hypothesized that the coordinatively unsaturated Mo atoms were responsible for DMO and DDO reactions, and the nitrogen deficient sites were responsible for the DME reaction.183 The ratio of phenol to catechol in the products was solely a function of the density of these two types of sites on the catalyst surface. Thus, catalysts with high N/Mo ratios should exhibit high selectivity towards phenol, as observed with γ-Mo2N.179 Additionally, the ability of the support to modify the phenol/catechol selectivity of Mo2N suggests that the supports can modify the relative availability of these two types of sites.
Transition metal nitride catalysts have also been evaluated for the deoxygenation of fatty acids and vegetable oils. Monnier et al. tested the conversion of oleic acid and canola oil using nitrides of Mo, W, and V supported on γ-Al2O3 at 380–410 °C and 7.15 MPa H2.180 The Mo2N catalyst was found to exhibit superior activity for oleic acid conversion compared to the other nitride catalysts, and mechanistically, Mo2N was found to favor the HDO route (conversion of oleic acid to produce n-C18H38) rather than the DCO route. These results are similar to those reported for methyl palmitate deoxygenation over Mo2C/CNTs in the previous section.176 An important result from these studies was that the Mo2N/Al2O3 catalyst exhibited stable performance over 450 h of continuous operation for the deoxygenation of canola oil.
4.4 Transition metal phosphide catalysts
Metal phosphides have been extensively studied as catalysts for HDN and HDS,63,146,147,200–210 but only recently have their deoxygenation properties attracted scientific and technological attention.156 Among the metal phosphides reported in the literature, nickel phosphide (Ni2P) has been suggested to be the most promising catalyst for bio-oil upgrading owing to its high activity, superior selectivity, and good stability under hydrotreating conditions.159,187,191,193
Recent investigations of the conversion of oxygenated compounds over Ni2P catalyst suggest that the unique catalytic (activity and selectivity) performance of Ni2P is due to its crystal structure (i.e., types of surface sites) and its intrinsic surface properties (i.e., electron density and ligand effect).190,193 The unit cell of Ni2P consists of two types of Ni sites (Fig. 21): a Ni(1) site which has 4 neighboring P atoms in a near-tetrahedral geometry, and a Ni(2) site which has 5 neighboring P atoms in a square pyramidal configuration.211 There are equal numbers of Ni(1) sites and Ni(2) sites in the bulk structure of Ni2P. However, Ni(2) sites were found to reside at the surface of Ni2P, and the proportion of Ni(2) sites increased when the size of the Ni2P particles decreased (i.e., higher proportion of Ni(2) sites with higher surface area).211 Further, it was proposed that the Ni(2) site was primarily responsible for HDO activity while the Ni(1) site accounted for DCO through activation of the Ccarbonyl–Calkyl bond (i.e., CH3OOC–C17H35).190 Therefore, it may be possible to tune the HDO performance of Ni2P catalysts by controlling the particle size. This hypothesis is supported by a comparative study using Ni2P particles with different sizes for the deoxygenation of 4-methylphenol. Smaller Ni2P particles favored the HDO pathway for the formation of methylcyclohexane while larger Ni2P particles favored the DDO route for the formation of toluene.187
 Fig. 21  Tetrahedral Ni(1) site and pyramidal Ni(2) site in Ni2P unit cell. Reproduced with permission from Oyama et al.211 
Liu et al. studied the intrinsic electronic properties of Ni2P and proposed that the high HDS activity of Ni2P was the result of a weak ligand effect from the Ni–P bonds, which led to minor stabilization of Ni 3d levels and a small charge transfer from Ni to P.169 This charge transfer from Ni to P results in Ni sites bearing a small positive charge (i.e., Niδ+), which provides Ni2P with Lewis acidity. Similar Lewis acid character was also found for other metal phosphides. However, the degree of Lewis acidity varies with the electronegativity of metal atoms and their coordination to P, and therefore, high catalytic activity in Ni2P was attributed to its higher d-electron density compared to MoP and NixMoyP.193 Further, metal sites with high d-electron densities have been found to favor electron back-donation to aromatic rings, thereby promoting HYD of the aromatic ring and subsequent deoxygenation (i.e., the HDO pathway).212
To compare the catalytic performance of phosphides, sulfides, and oxides, Whiffen et al. investigated different Mo-based catalysts (e.g., MoP, MoS2, and MoOx) for the deoxygenation of p-cresol (4-methylphenol) and found that MoP not only exhibited the highest activity, but also displayed the highest selectivity to hydrogenated products.185Fig. 22 shows the proposed reaction network of p-cresol over MoP catalysts, where two parallel reactions were observed: (i) DDO to produce toluene and (ii) HDO to produce methylcyclohexane. At all temperatures tested, the product was completely saturated to methylcyclohexane over MoP, and methylcyclohexenes were not detected. The active sites for both DDO and HYD on the MoP catalyst were proposed to be Bronsted acid sites (i.e., PO–H sites resulting from incomplete reduction of the phosphate precursor) and anion vacancy sites that dissociate H2 and H2O.186 The high selectivity in HYD over MoP was believed to be a consequence of its noble-metal-like properties.
 Fig. 22  Proposed deoxygenation reaction network of p-cresol (4-methylphenol) over MoP and Ni2P catalysts. Adapted from Whiffen et al.187 
Li et al. studied the deoxygenation of anisole over Ni2P, MoP, and NixMoyP supported on mesoporous silica and found that Ni2P exhibited superior activity compared to the other phosphides, for the reasons detailed above.193 The primary reaction pathways involved in the conversion of anisole were DME of anisole, DDO of phenol, and HYD of benzene, as shown in Fig. 23. Similar results were also observed by Rensel et al. for the deoxygenation of anisole and phenol over a FeMoP catalyst.197 The Lewis acid (Niδ+ and Moδ+) and Bronsted acid sites (PO–H groups resulting from incomplete reduction of metal phosphate precursor) present in metal phosphides were active for DME, DDO, and HYD. Metal sites were primarily responsible for the initial DME of anisole via the formation of a weak coordination bond with the oxygen atom. The Lewis acidic metal sites accepted free p-electron pairs from oxygen, resulting in heterolytic scission of the ArO–CH3 bond. The Bronsted acid site (PO–H group) was much less active for DME due to its low acidity, however, it can provide hydrogen atoms for DDO and HYD leading to the formation of benzene and cyclohexane. Due to the lower d-electron density in NixMoyP (resulting from electron transfer from Ni to Mo), catalysts with higher Ni/Mo ratios exhibited higher activities, and no synergism was observed between Ni and Mo sites for the deoxygenation of anisole. The authors evaluated the effect of water on the catalysts, and found that metal phosphides are oxidized by water forming less active metal oxide185 and phosphate phases, leading to deactivation.213,214 Ni2P was found to possess much higher stability than MoP, NixMoyP, and Ni metal, which was attributed to (i) the lower oxygen affinity of Ni compared to Mo and (ii) the ligand effect of P which inhibits the combination of Ni and O.
 Fig. 23  Deoxygenation reaction network of anisole over Ni2P, MoP, and NixMoyP. Adapted from Li et al.193 
Zhao et al. studied deoxygenation of guaiacol over a series of metal phosphide catalysts supported on mesoporous silica. Ni2P was more active than Co2P, Fe2P, WP, and MoP, and the final product consisted of benzene, phenol, and a small amount of anisole.191 Similar results were observed by Wu et al. for the deoxygenation of guaiacol over Ni2P supported on alumina, silica, and zirconia.198 In a pathway similar to the deoxygenation of anisole, the first step in the conversion of guaiacol was formation of catechol through the DME reaction, followed by DDO to yield phenol and benzene (Fig. 20 and 23). The Ni2P catalyst achieved a total conversion of 80% with contact time of 20.2 min. The authors performed experiments at shorter contact time (e.g., 0.339 min) to elucidate the reaction pathway, and observed catechol as a primary product on Co2P and WP, while cresols were primary products on Ni2P. Anisole was also observed with short contact times on Ni2P, with similar selectivity to phenol as at higher contact time. The formation of cresols from guaiacol on Ni2P may result from a combination of MT and DDO reactions.130,135 Catechol (a precursor to coke formation) was not formed on Ni2P, suggesting that minimal coking will occur over Ni2P during the conversion of guaiacol. Commercial Pd/Al2O3 and CoMo/Al2O3 catalysts were also tested for guaiacol deoxygenation and compared to metal phosphides. Pd/Al2O3 converted more guaiacol at similar operating conditions, but produced only catechol as a product, indicating that the Pd catalyst was not active for deoxygenation. The activity of CoMo/Al2O3 decreased rapidly.
A study by Bui et al. on the deoxygenation of 2-methyltetrahydrofuran (2-MTHF) also showed that Ni2P was more active than other metal phosphide catalysts as well as Pd/Al2O3.159Fig. 24 presents the proposed deoxygenation network of 2-MTHF on Ni2P, which includes a dehydrogenation route that forms 2-methylfuran and a predominant HDO route that forms alkenes, 2-pentanone, n-pentanal, and pentane. The transformation of 2-MTHF consists of a ring-opening and a C–O bond cleavage to form a common intermediate that reacts at the metal centers of the Ni2P surface to form alkenes, 2-pentanone (or n-pentanal), and then pentane. In contrast to the 20% total conversion demonstrated by Ni2P at 275 °C and atmospheric pressure, the Pd/Al2O3 catalyst exhibited poor performance, with total conversion less than 1%, and a final product consisting of 43% C4 compounds. These results suggest that the preferred deconstruction path on Pd/Al2O3 is DME, (similar to the results of guaiacol upgrading). The low conversion observed over Pd/Al2O3 may be due to blockage of the Pd surface by coke, while the Ni2P catalyst resists coking. Other phosphide materials like MoP, Ru2P, and RuP also exhibited high selectivity to HDO.
 Fig. 24  Deoxygenation reaction products and depiction of intermediate structures for 2-methyltetrahydrofuran on a Ni2P catalyst. Adapted from Bui et al.159 
Recent research has also shown that noble metal phosphides are more active in HDO than the corresponding noble metals.202,215 For example, Bowker et al. studied the deoxygenation of furan using silica-supported RuxP catalysts (Ru2P/SiO2 and RuP/SiO2) and compared the performance to a Ru/SiO2 catalyst.192 Ru/SiO2 produced a poorly-deoxygenated product with C3 hydrocarbons, while the RuxP/SiO2 catalysts showed higher deoxygenation activity and favored the formation of C4 hydrocarbons. Fig. 25 shows a reaction pathway for the conversion of furan, which consists of a DCO route for the formation of C3 hydrocarbons and a HDO route for the formation of C4 hydrocarbons. The difference in selectivity between Ru and RuxP was attributed to the increased hydrogen availability on the RuxP surfaces, as the DCO pathway requires less hydrogen than the HDO pathway. It is possible that the PO–H Bronsted acid sites in the RuxP provide the hydrogen to catalyze HDO.193 Alternatively, the difference in selectivity could be due to difference in the adsorption geometries of reaction intermediates, such as the ring-opened species shown in Fig. 25. It was suggested that P atoms in RuxP might increase the Lewis acidity at the surface, similar to P in Ni2P, stabilizing the ring-opened species and leading to C–O bond cleavage and the formation of C4 products.
 Fig. 25  Pathways for HDO and DCO of furan over RuxP catalysts. Adapted from Bowker et al.192 
4.5 Catalyst stability
The stability of metal carbides, nitrides, and phosphides under upgrading conditions (i.e., high temperature, high partial pressures of H2 and steam, and low pH) has not been well investigated. Due to the complex nature of bio-oils,22,216–218 knowledge of catalyst stability in HDS and HDN of petroleum feedstocks may not be applicable to pyrolysis vapor upgrading.145,188,205–210 In deoxygenation, metal C/N/P catalysts may be oxidized by water and oxygen-containing organic compounds, reduced by hydrogen, or covered by deposited carbon.
Surface oxidation of transition metal C/N/P materials is likely to be the cause of deactivation and may lead to changes in product selectivity. These materials have a strong affinity for oxygen as indicated by thermodynamic calculations. However, the thermodynamic driving force for oxidation is affected by the oxygen source. Eqn (7)–(14) provide the Gibbs free energy of reaction for the oxidation of Mo2C at 300 °C using either O2 or H2O as the oxygen source: Mo2C(s) + 4O2(g) → 2MoO3(s) + CO2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −1545 kJ mol−1(7) Mo2C(s) + 3O2(g) → 2MoO2(s) + CO2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −1310 kJ mol−1(8) Mo2C(s) + 7/2O2(g) → 2MoO3(s) + CO(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −1311 kJ mol−1(9) Mo2C(s) + 5/2O2(g) → 2MoO2(s) + CO(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −1077 kJ mol−1(10) Mo2C(s) + 8H2O(g) → 2MoO3(s) + CO2(g) + 8H2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = 179 kJ mol−1(11) Mo2C(s) + 6H2O(g) → 2MoO2(s) + CO2(g) + 6H2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −17 kJ mol−1(12) Mo2C(s) + 7H2O(g) → 2MoO3(s) + CO(g) + 7H2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = 197 kJ mol−1(13) Mo2C(s) + 5H2O(g) → 2MoO2(s) + CO(g) + 5H2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = 0.4 kJ mol−1(14)
It is clear that metal carbide oxidation via O2 is thermodynamically favorable while oxidation via H2O is less so. Monnier et al. calculated the Gibbs free energy of reaction at 327 °C for the oxidation of Mo2N and VN by H2O (eqn (15) and (16)):180 Mo2N(s) + 4H2O(g) → 2MoO2(s) + NH3(g) + 5/2H2(g)ΔGrxn,327 °C = −54 kJ mol−1(15) VN(s) + H2(g) + H2O(g) →VO(s) + NH3(g) + 1/2H2(g)ΔGrxn,327 °C = 17 kJ mol−1(16)
These thermodynamics suggest that oxidation resistance will vary with catalyst type and oxygen source. Additionally, the oxygen concentration (i.e., amount of oxygen-containing organic compounds) in the feed and the ratio of H2:O will likely be important in minimizing surface oxidation.
Experimentally, surface oxidation under deoxygenation conditions has been reported for a number of carbides, nitrides, and phosphides and this oxidation has directly affected catalyst activity and product selectivity. Zhang et al. reported that oxygen accumulated on the NiMo carbide surface during ethyl benzoate deoxygenation and caused: (i) the hydrogenation capability of the catalyst to be reduced, and (ii) the formation of acid sites on the catalyst surface, resulting in alkylation and dehydration as secondary upgrading routes.175 Surface acidity arising from oxidized metal phosphides has also been reported.185 Li et al. explored the deoxygenation of anisole over a series of phosphide catalysts (Ni2P, MoP, NiMoP) and observed deactivation with time on stream.193 The degree of deactivation was a function of the Ni/Mo ratio of the catalyst, where catalysts with higher Ni/Mo ratios exhibited slower deactivation. The authors proposed that Niδ+ sites were more resistant to oxidation than Moδ+ sites, due to the greater oxygen affinity of Mo than Ni.193 The authors speculated that the P in the metal phosphide structure could be oxidized by water to form an inactive or less active phosphate phase. Although the ligand effect of the non-metal improves the oxidation resistance of these materials compared to the parent metals, surface oxidation and the formation of metal oxide or oxy-C/N/P phases will play a key role in the long-term stability of these materials.
There is also a need to investigate the potential removal of the non-metal atom (C, N, P) within the metal C/N/P structure under reaction conditions, due to the high concentrations of H2 required for HDO. The removal of non-metal can occur by surface reduction (eqn (17)) or oxidation (eqn (7)–(16)). Mo2C(s) + 2H2(g) → 2Mo(s) + CH4(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = 22 kJ mol−1(17)
Considering this reaction, a modest energy input is required to remove carbon in the form of CH4. This energy requirement will change with the type of carbide and the reaction conditions. Monnier et al. performed similar calculations for the reduction of Mo2N and VN at 327 °C (eqn (18) and (19)):180 Mo2N(s) + 3/2H2(g) → 2Mo(s) + NH3(g)ΔGrxn,327 °C = 44 kJ mol−1(18) VN(s) + 3/2H2(g) → V(s) + NH3(g)ΔGrxn,327 °C = 181 kJ mol−1(19)
Similar to Mo2C, reduction of nitrides is energetically unfavorable. Very few studies have otherwise addressed the issue of non-metal loss. Whiffen et al. reported that the meta l:P ratio for MoP and Ni2P catalysts remained unchanged after 5 h of deoxygenation of 4-methylphenol at 350 °C with 4.4 MPa of H2.187 Conversely, Lee et al. reported that the P/Ni ratio for a Ni2P/KUSY zeolite catalyst decreased after the HDS of 4,6-dimethyldibenzothiophene at 340 °C and 3.1 MPa of H2, possibly due to sulfidation of Ni2P.219 The influence of oxygen on the composition and activity of metal phosphide catalysts in deoxygenation reactions has not been reported. Additional studies are needed to assess the extent to which non-metal atoms are removed from the catalyst and the implications of removal on catalyst stability.
Beyond surface phase and composition changes, these materials can also deactivate due to fouling or carbon deposition. Zhang et al. reported that deoxygenation of ethyl benzoate on SiO2-supported NiMo carbide resulted in the deposition of a significant coke.175 The spent catalyst exhibited a surface area of 80 m2 g−1 compared to 191 m2 g−1 for the fresh catalyst. Similarly, Whiffen et al. reported significant carbon deposits on a Ni2P catalyst after 5 h of conversion of 4-methylphenol at 350 °C and 4.4 MPa of H2.187 Characterization of the spent catalyst indicated that the carbon content was 3.7 wt% and the surface area had decreased to 13 m2 g−1 from 101 m2 g−1 fresh. Interestingly, carbon deposition ceased and deactivation was not observed when the H2 pressure was increased to 5.3 MPa and 6.1 MPa.
The relative propensity of the deactivation modes discussed above depends on a number of factors including: chemical composition, surface chemistry, support materials, properties of the feedstock, and upgrading conditions. Due to the lack of relevant literature, comprehensive studies on the stability of these catalysts for the upgrading of bio-oil model compounds and pyrolysis vapors should be performed and special attention should be paid to identifying the primary deactivation pathways, determining the effect of reaction conditions (temperature, pressure, model compound) on deactivation, and in situ characterization of the catalyst surface.
4.6 Advantages, limitations, and research opportunities
Key conclusions, advantages, and limitations of transition metal carbides, nitrides, and phosphides include:
• Some catalyst formulations (e.g., Ni2P) exhibit higher activity and better selectivity to desired products than commercial sulfide-based catalysts or noble metal catalysts.
• Compared to noble metals, these materials seem to favor HDO pathways compared to DCO pathways, thus exhibiting higher carbon efficiencies.
• These materials can possess bifunctional catalytic properties: metallic-like sites for HYD and acid sites for MT, CRA, dehydration, and isomerization. This is in contrast to noble metal-based catalysts, which require support materials to provide additional functionality.
• The catalytic performance of these materials can be tuned based on choice of parent metal, non-metal, and the non-metal:metal ratio.
• The structure and composition of the surfaces of these materials are dynamic and invariably change under reaction conditions. Understanding the interplay between reaction conditions, surface structure/composition, and catalytic performance will be instrumental for realization of these materials as commercial catalysts.
• The primary routes for deactivation are (i) oxidation of the surface to form metal oxide or oxy-C/N/P phases, (ii) reduction of the surface by H2 and removal of non-metal atoms, and (iii) carbon deposition.
Although these materials have been shown to exhibit similar or better performance than commercial catalysts, there are two major challenges to their commercial development. First, knowledge of active sites, surface phase/composition under reaction conditions, reaction mechanisms, and long-term stability in pyrolysis vapor feeds are poorly understood, in part due to these materials still being in early stages of research and development. Second, reproducible and scalable synthetic methods that produce materials with uniform morphology are needed, and the costs of synthesis need to be evaluated.
We suggest three key research areas that need to be addressed before considering commercial viability:
• Detailed systematic evaluations of deoxygenation performance with model compounds and whole pyrolysis vapors need to be performed. Specifically, these studies need to (i) compare different types of catalysts on a turnover frequency basis, (ii) develop structure–function relationships, (iii) evaluate deactivation based on changes in rate and selectivity and link these changes to the surface properties of the catalyst, (iv) develop mechanisms and reaction pathways, and (v) elucidate support effects.
• Computational modeling, including density functional theory calculations, needs to be carried out in tandem with experiments in order to assist the development of reaction pathways, identify which C–O bonds will be the most difficult to cleave over these catalysts, provide insight at the atomistic scale for why one catalyst is better than another, and finally, predict catalyst performance from new catalyst compositions.
• New synthesis methods and new catalyst formulations need to be developed. Two potential areas for investigation include solution-phase organometallic synthesis methods for greater tunability of composition and morphology, and carbide-supported metal catalysts. Carbide-supported metal catalysts have been reported to possess bifunctional properties and to exhibit unique catalytic behavior for a variety of reactions.220–250 Nitride and phosphide materials may present similar opportunities if they can be synthesized with high surface areas.
5. Topics of emphasis for future catalyst development
Further studies are necessary to develop new catalyst compositions, improve their activity, selectivity, and stability under deoxygenation conditions, lower catalyst fabrication cost, and move them to the industrial-scale. This is especially true for the metal C/N/P catalysts, but TMS and noble metal catalyst development would also benefit from such studies. These efforts will enable direct comparisons between catalysts with respect to performance and, ultimately, lead to a more accurate assessment of their industrial viability.
5.1 Systematic design and evaluation of catalysts
Computational modeling should be used to guide the design of catalysts, including consideration of chemical composition, crystal phase, surface chemistry, and morphology. Initial experiments should focus on the synthesis of unsupported catalysts using wet chemical synthesis or solid-state reaction approaches, followed by evaluation of their catalytic properties using pyrolysis vapor model compounds. Catalysts with promising deoxygenation performance should then be integrated with appropriate support materials such as mesoporous silica, zeolite, and activated carbon, and the resulting high surface area catalysts should be further evaluated for conversion of bio-oil model compounds and whole pyrolysis vapors. Deactivated catalysts should be characterized in detail and compared with fresh catalysts. Additionally, the use of in situ surface characterization techniques is highly recommended. The information gained from spent catalyst characterization should be used in the development of fast regeneration methods or the design of more robust catalysts.
The influence of support materials on the upgrading performance of catalysts should also be evaluated as studies detailed above have shown that the support material can affect the deoxygenation pathways.181 Due to the high water content and low pH of crude bio-oils, conventional alumina supports may not be appropriate for upgrading because of the formation of inactive aluminum hydroxides or metal aluminates.214,251 Therefore, focus should be placed on support materials like mesoporous silica, zeolite, and activated carbon, which are more stable in acidic environments. In addition, the mesoporous structure (i.e., porosity, pore size, and pore arrangement) and surface chemistry of these supports should be tuned by adjusting the synthesis conditions, and the effects on the activities of supported catalysts needs to be studied and optimized. Other support materials such as ceria,252 zirconia,252,253 titanium dioxide,253,254 and magnesium oxide,255 should also be evaluated as catalyst supports.
While most studies to date have considered upgrading of model pyrolysis compounds, the use of individual model compounds does not necessarily represent the properties of whole pyrolysis vapors (e.g., high water content and low pH). Unfortunately, pyrolysis vapors have very complicated compositions, and thus, it is infeasible to use crude pyrolysis vapors during early stages of catalyst design and evaluation. It may therefore be more appropriate to test catalysts using a model mixture that has physical/chemical properties similar to crude pyrolysis vapors. For example, a mixture containing a selected model compound, water, and an organic acid would likely provide results that are more directly applicable to deoxygenation of whole pyrolysis vapors.
5.2 Advanced synthetic techniques for novel catalysts
An often-overlooked factor that can affect catalyst performance, deactivation, and poisoning is the preparation method of the active phase. The synthetic procedure can leave by-products, and these can have a marked effect on catalyst activity – either positive or negative. This was recently demonstrated in the noble metal literature through a series of Ru/C catalysts that were synthesized from three different precursors: RuCl3, Ru(NO)(NO3)3, and Ru(acac)3 (acac = acetylacetonate).256 For the deoxygenation of phenol at 250 °C and 10 MPa hydrogen, the Ru/C catalysts prepared from RuCl3 and Ru(acac)3 demonstrated higher activity for cyclohexane formation than the catalyst from Ru(NO)(NO3)3. In fact, all catalysts prepared from the nitrate salt demonstrated low activity, and the authors attribute this to poor Ru distribution, similar to a report for Pd/C prepared from a nitrate precursor. The authors also attributed the differences in performance to the presence of residual anions. Chloride anion enhances the activity, which is a known positive effect for other catalysts, and from these experiments the authors suggested that the presence of residual nitrate anion suppresses the activity. Similarly, the use of pre-formed noble metal nanoparticles as catalysts has been the focus of much recent research, and this approach relies on advanced synthesis techniques that introduce multiple points of variability across different nanoparticle preparations. The synthesis of nano-sized noble metal particles and their immobilization onto support materials was reviewed recently with a discussion of the many parameters that can affect the activity of the final catalyst formulation (e.g., pH, temperature, time, cations/anions), and the reader is directed there for details of these effects.257
Metal C/N/P catalysts are usually synthesized using temperature programmed reaction/reduction methods, which require high reaction temperatures and long reaction times. Thus, it is desirable to develop novel materials synthesis methods to achieve tunable, scalable, and cost-effective fabrication of catalysts. Solution-phase organometallic synthesis has been extensively studied for the preparation of a wide range of functional nanostructures such as quantum dots,258 metal and metal oxide nanoparticles,259,260 and more recently, metal C/N/P nanoparticles.261–269 The advantages of solution-phase synthesis include the tunability of the catalyst composition and morphology, the ease of handling/processing the nanoparticles in solution, the feasibility of modifying surface properties, the use of low reaction temperatures, and the use of short reaction times. For example, Goto et al. synthesized discrete hexagonal Ni3C nanoparticles by heating nickel acetylacetonate dissolved in oleylamine at temperatures between 280 °C and 320 °C.261 For the same reaction system, Schaefer et al. found that carbon content in nickel carbide nanoparticles could be tuned by adjusting the reaction time at 215 °C.263 Meffre et al. developed an organometallic approach to synthesize iron carbide nanoparticles using pre-formed iron nanoparticles as seeds and Fe(CO)5 as both an iron and carbon source.262 Wu et al. synthesized copper nitride (Cu3N) nanocubes through reaction of copper nitrate with primary amines in 1-octadecene at 250 °C, and was able to control the size of the Cu3N nanocubes by using different primary amines.264 Colloidal metal phosphide (i.e., Ni2P, FeP, Cu3P, and CoP) nanoparticles have also been successfully synthesized by an organometallic process, involving the formation of metal nanoparticles and subsequent phosphorization of the metal nanoparticles using trioctylphosphine (TOP) as a phosphorus source.265–269 Further investigations into solution-phase organometallic syntheses are necessary to extend the library of metal C/N/P nanoparticles with tunable morphologies and composition.
In addition to the synthesis of discrete metal C/N/P catalysts using organometallic approaches, it is also possible to directly grow supported catalysts with high surface area by heating support materials impregnated with organometallic precursors. Yang et al. reported the synthesis of Ni2P nanorods through temperature programmed reduction of a metal phosphate precursor infiltrated in the mesopores of SBA-15 and selective etching of SBA-15 by hydrofluoric acid.270 By adjusting the concentration and amount of infiltrated precursors, the amount of catalyst loaded in the support material could be readily controlled.
A simple ‘metal-urea-glass’ method was recently developed by Giordano et al. for the synthesis of metal carbide and nitride nanoparticles.271–273 This method involves the formation of metal-urea-glass precursors by mixing metal salts, ethanol, and urea at room temperature, and then subsequent thermal decomposition of the dried precursors at elevated temperature under an inert atmosphere. Urea serves as either the carbon or nitrogen source for the formation of metal carbides or nitrides, and can also be substituted with other molecules such as 4,5-dicyanoimidazole. By adjusting the metal salt/urea molar ratio and other reaction conditions, metal carbides or nitrides with different compositions and crystalline phases could be prepared. For example, hcp Mo2C nanoparticles were obtained by heating a metal-urea glass with Mo(V):urea molar ratio of 7:1, whereas fcc Mo2N was formed by heating a precursor with Mo(V):urea molar ratio of 1:1. The latter could be transformed to fcc Mo2C nanoparticles by carburization at elevated temperature under flowing methane and hydrogen. Before drying to remove excess ethanol, the as-prepared metal-urea-glass precursors have low viscosity, making it possible to impregnate mesoporous support materials with these precursors for the synthesis of supported metal C/N catalysts with much higher surface area.
Upon completion of most synthesis methods, the metal C/N/P catalysts are passivated with a flowing dilute oxygen stream (i.e., 1 mol% O2/He), which forms a protective metal oxide layer on the catalyst surface and prevents further oxidation upon exposure to air. However, this thin oxide layer may not be completely reduced prior to hydrotreating processing,274 thus affecting catalyst performance. Duan et al.274 used H2S to passivate Ni2P/SiO2 catalysts and found that H2S passivation provided superior activity and stability in the deoxygenation of phenol compared to Ni2P/SiO2 catalysts passivated with dilute oxygen. The authors proposed that the H2S passivation occurred via the replacement of surface phosphorus atoms by dissociated H2S.274,275 Other passivation methods should also be explored based on the understanding of surface properties and the ability to remove the passivation layer.
5.3 C–C coupling of hydrogenated intermediates with acidic supports
With respect to reaching the carbon numbers for diesel and jet fuels from pyrolysis vapors, an important area that will require more development is the formation of higher alkanes via C–C bond formation. Acid-catalyzed reactions such as MT can generate substituted products with longer carbon chains (e.g., the transformation of the C6 ring of guaiacol to the C7 methylcyclohexane). Such C–C coupling reactions are particularly useful for moving deoxygenated products into the distillate boiling range. A promising C–C coupling chemistry, hydroalkylation, involves ring-coupling of phenol with in situ generated cyclohexanol or cyclohexene on Brønsted acid sites (on the catalyst support or from a co-catalyst).276–278 The resulting bi- or tri-cyclic oxygenates can be deoxygenated to yield saturated cycloalkanes.
Hong et al. demonstrated hydroalkylation of phenol at 200–250 °C and 4.0 MPa hydrogen on zeolite-supported Pt catalysts.276 On a Pt/H-FAU catalyst (FAU = faujasite, zeolite Y), the major products were cyclohexane and a bicyclic product (up to 4% selectivity at high phenol conversions). Pt/H-BEA and Pt/H-ZSM-5 (MFI zeolite) catalysts also produced bicyclics. By comparison, Pt/Al2O3 and Pt/SiO2 did not. O- and p-cyclohexylphenol and 2-cyclohexylcyclohexanone intermediates were observed with the Pt/zeolite catalysts, leading to the proposed reaction pathway in Fig. 26. Specifically, it was suggested that alkylation occurs via (i) the electrophilic aromatic substitution of phenol with cyclohexanol (major pathway) and (ii) the aldol condensation between two cyclohexanone molecules (minor pathway). It was hypothesized that the zeolite structure may play a role in the bicyclic formation, possibly through shape-selective effects as the larger pore zeolites H-FAU and H-BEA produced more bicyclic products.
 Fig. 26  Proposed reaction pathway for phenol to bicyclics via electrophilic aromatic substitution of phenol with cyclohexanol (top) or aldol condensation of cyclohexanone (bottom) and subsequent deoxygenation. Adapted from Hong et al.276 
With an optimized Pd-solid acid catalyst system, Zhao et al. produced bi- and tri-cyclic products from phenol with 85% selectivity at 160 °C and 5 MPa hydrogen pressure.277,278 The authors began with a 5 wt% Pd/C catalyst that demonstrated high selectivity for HDO products in the conversion of various phenolics at high hydrogen pressure. Rather than adding soluble acids (e.g., acetic, phosphoric) as co-catalysts, they employed solid acids (e.g., sulfonated polystyrene-divinylbenzene resin Amberlyst® 15, perfluorinated sulfonic resin Nafion/SiO2, heteropolytungstate Cs2.5H0.5PW12O40, sulfated zirconia, and zeolites H-ZSM-5 and H-BEA). Only the H-BEA and H-FAU co-catalysts resulted in meaningful alkylation. Thus, acids possessing only Lewis acidity (or a low concentration of Bronsted acidity) are not active in alkylation or dehydration, yielding ketones and alcohols. Macroporous solid acids with strong Bronsted acid sites, such as sulfated zirconia, Amberlyst® 15, Nafion/SiO2, and Cs2.5H0.5PW12O40, were effective for dehydration but not alkylation, yielding cycloalkanes. Thus, the combination of (i) Brønsted acidity and (ii) local confinement (zeolites) is important for alkylation. The authors supported their experimental data with DFT calculations of the bi-molecular transition state inside the smaller H-ZSM-5 channels and the larger H-BEA channels, and these computational data suggest that larger zeolite pores are required to effect this transformation.277
By studying the elementary reaction steps and determining rates, Zhao et al. optimized selectivity for hydroalkylation by adjusting the substrate/catalyst/co-catalyst ratios using phenol as the reactant (i.e., match the rates of HYD, dehydration, and alkylation).277 Phenol HYD on Pd/C determined the ratio of phenol to cyclohexanol, and alkylation proceeded through cyclohexene, formed via dehydration of cyclohexanol on a Bronsted acid site. An excess of phenol (e.g. 9:1 mol mol−1 phenol–cyclohexanol) was required for its alkylation. When HYD was rate-limiting, alkylation rates decreased. Balancing HYD and alkylation rates, a preferred Pd/H+ ratio of 1/21 was calculated. Overall, the optimized ratio of phenol/Pd/H+ giving 85% selectivity to poly-cyclics was determined to be 4508/1/22. These experiments allowed the authors to propose a reaction network and mechanism that is consistent with the electrophilic aromatic substitution route shown in Fig. 26, followed by HYD to yield the ketone and HDO to yield bi-cyclic alkane. Finally, Zhao et al. prepared a 0.1% Pd on H-BEA catalyst (1/22 Pd/H+) to explore close proximity between metal and acid sites. This catalyst demonstrated a greater selectivity for alkylation than a physically mixed Pd/C + H-BEA catalyst for the conversion of 4-propylphenol at 200 °C and 5 MPa hydrogen. At a 4-propylphenol/Pd ratio of 2120, the physical mixture exhibited 45% selectivity to the bicyclic product while the Pd/H-BEA catalyst exhibited 76% selectivity.277
These recent reports of selective hydroalkylation of phenol (and phenolics) represent an important foundation from which many new variations could be developed. Such an approach could also increase carbon utilization during upgrading. For example, shape-selective, acid-catalyzed alkylation steps involving aromatics with other oxygenated compounds present in pyrolysis vapor (i.e., furans, sugars, alcohols) may be possible using the unique properties of porous support materials (e.g., microporous, mesoporous, and macroporous solid acids) in bifunctional catalysts. In this context, alkylation chemistry opens up pathways toward fuels with higher carbon numbers, and the scope of this chemistry is still mostly unknown.
6. Conclusions
Biomass holds great potential to contribute to the world's energy demands, especially through efficient conversion to liquid hydrocarbon biofuels in the gasoline and distillate ranges. To realize this goal through promising CFP processes, significant deoxygenation of the intermediate pyrolysis vapors will be necessary, and this will require new catalyst development. Model compound studies have been essential towards developing the current state-of-technology, and will remain a critical component to catalyst design and testing in the near future. Ultimately, however, promising catalysts must be evaluated with whole pyrolysis vapors.
When considering catalytic processes for biofuels production, one must have a thorough knowledge of the economics from feed to fuel. Lange recently presented an overview of the chemistry, process, and economics for lignocellulose conversion to fuels (and chemicals).18,19 For fuel production, the economics can be visualized by relating the processing cost to the feed cost, as presented in Fig. 27. The individual costs (feed and processing) are plotted on each axis, and the diagonal lines represent specific total manufacturing costs. This relationship shows that the cost of fuel from crude oil is dominated by feed cost (low processing cost), and in contrast, that the cost of fuel from natural gas (e.g., Fischer–Tropsch) is dominated by the processing cost (low feed cost). For relatively inexpensive lignocellulosic feedstocks, the cost of fuel is clearly dominated by the processing, and is a combination of handling, pre-treatment, conversion, and upgrading. The diagonal cost relationships in Fig. 27 suggest that biofuels can be cost competitive with oil-derived gasoline and diesel only when oil prices are high, such as $70–100/bbl. Combining the production of fuels with high-value chemicals could improve profitability of the plant, but clearly, a reduction in processing costs of lignocellulosic feedstocks is a continuing need to reach parity with oil-derived fuels. The development of earth-abundant, inexpensive materials for use as efficient upgrading catalysts would be a significant advancement towards achieving this goal.
 Fig. 27  Relationship between feed cost and processing cost for fuel production from natural gas, crude oil, and lignocellulose. Reproduced with permission from Lange.18 
Research opportunities remain for each of the three types of catalysts discussed in this review. An overview of the properties of these three types of catalysts is provided in Table 7. It is clear that the properties of these materials vary considerably and offer different challenges for commercialization. The relative maturity of TMS catalysts with respect to large-scale synthesis and operating experience is a significant advantage supporting further development of these catalysts for upgrading processes. However, since they exhibit moderately high activation barriers for H2 dissociation (Table 7), their ability to activate H2 under low-pressure conditions needs to be explored. Additional model compound studies are of interest, especially to determine the reaction kinetics under high-temperature, low-pressure conditions, and testing with pyrolysis vapors should also be an area of emphasis. The ability of noble metals to operate under acidic, aqueous environments is a key strength for these catalysts towards their use in pyrolysis vapor deoxygenation. The metal-acid bifunctional catalysts present an opportunity to independently optimize the catalyst performance towards increased HDO and/or alkylation to yield higher alkanes in the diesel and jet fuel range. Exploring advanced synthetic techniques to achieve new, tailored active phases (e.g., new bimetallic compositions and morphologies) and novel support structures (e.g., porous solid acids) is an attractive area for noble metal catalyst development. Metal C/N/P catalysts have displayed promising activity with model compounds, but important questions remain about the stability and deactivation routes under reaction conditions. Research attention must be devoted to these catalysts, including advanced synthetic techniques to yield reproducible, well-defined catalyst structures, before a decision can be made about their commercial viability.
Table 7 Comparison of catalyst properties related to ex situ CFP process requirements




 
Catalyst type


Parameter
TMS
Noble metals
Metal C/N/P





a Dissociation energy depends upon adsorption site.





Cost
Low
High
Intermediate


Synthetic complexity
Low-intermediate
Low
Intermediate-high


Bifunctionality
Saturated plane and edge sites for HYD (S–H)
Metallic sites for HYD
Metallic sites for HYD


Vacancy sites for C–O activation
Support introduces acid sites
Oxygen-modified sites (–OH) provide acid function


Activation energy for H2 dissociation
0.55–0.97 eVa MoSx67
0.19 eV Pt(111)280
0 eV MoP(001)282


0.34–0.52 eVa CoMoSx67
0.12 eV Pd(111)280


0.32–0.74 eVa NiMoSx279
0 eV Ru(0001)281


Deactivation pathways
Surface oxidation
Sintering
Surface oxidation


Coking
Sulfur poisoning
C/N/P loss




Coking
Coking




Acknowledgements
The preparation of this review article was supported through the DOE Bioenergy Technology Office under Contract no. DE-AC36-08-GO28308 with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory.
Notes and references

Energy Information Administration Annual Outlook 2012, Report DOE/EIA-0383, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, D.C.,  2012.
D. M. Alonso, J. Q. Bond and J. A. Dumesic, Green Chem., 2010, 12, 1493 RSC .
N. S. Lewis, MRS Bull., 2007, 32, 808 CrossRef .
N. S. Lewis and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2007, 104, 20142 CAS .

Roadmap for Biomass Technologies in the U.S., Biomass Research and Development Technical Advisory Committee, U. S. Government, Washington, D. C.,  2002.
S. Czernik and A. V. Bridgwater, Energy Fuels, 2004, 18, 590 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yaman, Energy Convers. Manage., 2004, 45, 651 CrossRef CAS .

          S. R. A. Kersten, W. P. M. van Swaaij, L. Lefferts and K. Seshan, in Catalysis for Renewables: From Feedstock to Energy Production, ed. G. Centi and R. A. van Santen, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2007, pp. 119–145 Search PubMed .
A. V. Bridgwater and G. V. C. Peacocke, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2000, 4, 1 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 38, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Mohan, C. U. Pittman and P. H. Steele, Energy Fuels, 2006, 20, 848 CrossRef CAS .

          A. V. Bridgwater, in Thermochemical Conversion of Biomass to Liquid Fuels and Chemicals, ed. M. Crocker, Royal Society of Chemistry, Cambridge, UK,  2010, ch. 7, pp. 146–191 Search PubMed .
E. Butler, G. Devlin, D. Meier and K. McDonnell, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 4171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Van de Velden, J. Baeyens and L. Boukis, Biomass Bioenergy, 2008, 32, 128 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Van de Velden, J. Baeyens, A. Brems, B. Janssens and R. Dewil, Renew. Energy, 2010, 35, 232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zakzeski, P. C. A. Bruijnincx, A. L. Jongerius and B. M. Weckhuysen, Chem. Rev., 2010, 110, 3552 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Bridgwater, A. J. Toft and J. G. Brammer, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2002, 6, 181 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Lange, Biofuels Bioprod. Biorefin., 2007, 1, 39 CrossRef CAS .

          J. P. Lange, in Catalysis for Renewables: From Feedstock to Energy Production, ed. G. Centi and R. A. van Santen, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim,  2007, ch. 2, pp. 21–52 Search PubMed .
T. R. Brown and R. C. Brown, RSC Adv., 2013, 3, 5758 RSC .

          T. Milne, F. Agblevor, M. Davis, S. Deutch and D. Johnson, in Developments in Thermal Biomass Conversion, ed. A. V. Bridgwater and D. G. B. Boocock, Blackie Academic and Professional, London, U.K.,  1997, pp. 409–424 Search PubMed .
C. Branca, P. Giudicianni and C. Di Blasi, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2003, 42, 3190 CrossRef CAS .
R. Maggi and B. Delmon, Biomass Bioenergy, 1994, 7, 245 CrossRef CAS .
R. Maggi, E. Laurent and B. Delmon, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 1993, 205, 55-CELL Search PubMed .
A. V. Bridgwater, Environ. Prog. Sustain. Energy, 2012, 31, 261 CrossRef CAS .
G. W. Huber, S. Iborra and A. Corma, Chem. Rev., 2006, 106, 4044 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Demirbas, Energy Convers. Manage., 2000, 41, 633 CrossRef CAS .
A. Brandt, J. Gräsvik, J. P. Hallett and T. Welton, Green Chem., 2013, 15, 550 RSC .
E. Furimsky, Appl. Catal., A, 2000, 199, 147 CrossRef CAS .
A. C. Hansen, Q. Zhang and P. W. L. Lyne, Bioresour. Technol., 2005, 96, 277 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Standard Specification for Diesel Fuel Oil, Biodiesel Blend (B6 to B20), Designation: D7467-10, ASTM International, West Conshohocken, PA, USA,  2010.
M. Ikura, M. Stanciulescu and E. Hogan, Biomass Bioenergy, 2003, 24, 221 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chiaramonti, A. Bonini, E. Fratini, G. Tondi, K. Gartner, A. V. Bridgwater, H. P. Grimm, I. Soldaini, A. Webster and P. Baglioni, Biomass Bioenergy, 2003, 25, 85 CrossRef CAS .
D. Chiaramonti, A. Bonini, E. Fratini, G. Tondi, K. Gartner, A. V. Bridgwater, H. P. Grimm, I. Soldaini, A. Webster and P. Baglioni, Biomass Bioenergy, 2003, 25, 101 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater, Appl. Catal., A, 1994, 116, 5 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Adjaye, S. P. R. Katikaneni and N. N. Bakhshi, Fuel Process. Technol., 1996, 48, 115 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. R. Katikaneni, J. D. Adjaye and N. N. Bakhshi, Energy Fuels, 1995, 9, 1065 CrossRef CAS .
R. K. Sharma and N. N. Bakhshi, Energy Fuels, 1993, 7, 306 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Srinivas, A. K. Dalai and N. N. Bakhshi, Can. J. Chem. Eng., 2000, 78, 343 CrossRef CAS .
T. V. Choudhary and C. B. Phillips, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 397, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Furimsky, Catal. Today, 2013, 217, 13 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. M. Mortensen, J. D. Grunwaldt, P. A. Jensen, K. G. Knudsen and A. D. Jensen, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 407, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Gutierrez, R. K. Kaila, M. L. Honkela, R. Slioor and A. O. I. Krause, Catal. Today, 2009, 147, 239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. V. Bridgwater, Catal. Today, 1996, 29, 285 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater, J. Anal. Appl. Pyrolysis, 1999, 51, 3 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Bu, H. W. Lei, A. H. Zacher, L. Wang, S. J. Ren, J. Liang, Y. Wei, Y. P. Liu, J. M. Tang, Q. Zhang and R. Ruan, Bioresour. Technol., 2012, 124, 470 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. P. Pandey and C. S. Kim, Chem. Eng. Technol., 2011, 34, 29 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Hicks, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2011, 2, 2280 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Elliott and T. R. Hart, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 631 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, J. He, A. A. Lemonidou, X. Li and J. A. Lercher, J. Catal., 2011, 280, 8 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wan, R. V. Chaudhari and B. Subramaniam, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 487 CrossRef CAS .
M. Absihalabi, A. Stanislaus and D. L. Trimm, Appl. Catal., 1991, 72, 193 CrossRef CAS .

          J. M. Smith and H. C. Van Ness, Introduction to Chemical Engineering Thermodynamics, McGraw-Hill, New York, N. Y., 4th edn,  1987 Search PubMed .
NIST, http://webbook.nist.gov/chemistry/.

          R. Prins, Hydrotreating, Wiley-VCH, Weinheim, Germany,  2008 Search PubMed .

          C. H. Bartholomew and R. J. Farrauto, Fundamentals of Industrial Catalytic Processes, John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, New Jersey,  2006 Search PubMed .
E. Butler, G. Devlin, D. Meier and K. McDonnell, Renew. Sustain. Energy Rev., 2011, 15, 4171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Graca, J. M. Lopes, H. S. Cerqueira and M. F. Ribeiro, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 52, 275 Search PubMed .
D. C. Elliott, Energy Fuels, 2007, 21, 1792 CrossRef CAS .
D. C. Elliott, D. Beckman, A. V. Bridgwater, J. P. Diebold, S. B. Gevert and Y. Solantausta, Energy Fuels, 1991, 5, 399 CrossRef CAS .
A. V. Bridgwater, Biomass Bioenergy, 2012, 38, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Wang, J. Male and Y. Wang, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1047 CrossRef CAS .
R. H. Bowker, M. C. Smith, B. A. Carrillo and M. E. Bussell, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 999 CrossRef CAS .

          C. N. Satterfield, Heterogeneous Catalysis in Industrial Practice, McGraw-Hill, New York, NY,  1996 Search PubMed .
P. Ratnasamy and J. J. Fripiat, Trans. Faraday Soc., 1970, 66, 2897 RSC .
M. Badawi, J. F. Paul, E. Payen, Y. Romero, F. Richard, S. Brunet, A. Popov, E. Kondratieva, J. P. Gilson, L. Mariey, A. Travert and F. Mauge, Oil Gas Sci. Technol., 2013 DOI:10.2516/ogst/2012041 .
A. Travert, H. Nakamura, R. A. van Santen, S. Cristol, J. F. Paul and E. Payen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2002, 124, 7084 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Travert, V. Ruaux, F. Mauge and J.-F. Paul, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 240, 36-PETR Search PubMed .
B. Yoosuk, D. Tumnantong and P. Prasassarakich, Fuel, 2012, 91, 246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yoosuk, D. Tumnantong and P. Prasassarakich, Chem. Eng. Sci., 2012, 79, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. E. Massoth, P. Politzer, M. C. Concha, J. S. Murray, J. Jakowski and J. Simons, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2006, 110, 14283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Romero, F. Richard and S. Brunet, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 98, 213 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. N. Bui, D. e. Laurenti, P. Afanasiev and C. Geantet, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-M. Ryymin, M. L. Honkela, T.-R. Viljava and A. O. I. Krause, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 389, 114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. I. Senol, E. M. Ryymin, T. R. Viljava and A. O. I. Krause, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 268, 1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Jongerius, R. Jastrzebski, P. C. A. Bruijnincx and B. M. Weckhuysen, Prepr. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Pet. Chem., 2011, 56, 151 CAS .
A. Daudin and T. Chapus, Prepr. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Pet. Chem., 2009, 54, 122 CAS .
S. Gong, A. Shinozaki, M. Shi and E. W. Qian, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 2394 CrossRef CAS .
D. Kubicka and J. Horacek, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 394, 9 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kubicka and L. Kaluza, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 372, 199 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Priecel, D. Kubicka, L. Capek, Z. Bastl and P. Rysanek, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 397, 127 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Ruinart de Brimont, C. Dupont, A. Daudin, C. Geantet and P. Raybaud, J. Catal., 2012, 286, 153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Toba, Y. Abe, H. Kuramochi, M. Osako, T. Mochizuki and Y. Yoshimura, Catal. Today, 2011, 164, 533 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Bouvier, Y. Romero, F. Richard and S. Brunet, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2441 RSC .
O. I. Senol, E. M. Ryymin, T. R. Viljava and A. O. I. Krause, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 277, 107 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. E. Ruiz, K. Leiva, R. Garcia, P. Reyes, J. L. G. Fierro and N. Escalona, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 384, 78 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Y. Bunch, X. Wang and U. S. Ozkan, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2007, 270, 264 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Romero, F. Richard, Y. Reneme and S. Brunet, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 353, 46 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Badawi, J.-F. Paul, S. Cristol and E. Payen, Catal. Commun., 2011, 12, 901 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. L. Jongerius, R. Jastrzebski, P. C. A. Bruijnincx and B. M. Weckhuysen, J. Catal., 2012, 285, 315 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. N. Bui, D. Laurenti, P. Delichere and C. Geantet, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 246 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Laurenti and C. Geantet, Prepr. - Am. Chem. Soc., Div. Pet. Chem., 2010, 55, 26 CAS .
Y. Yang, H. a. Luo, G. Tong, K. J. Smith and C. T. Tye, Chin. J. Chem. Eng., 2008, 16, 733 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Q. Yang, C. T. Tye and K. J. Smith, Catal. Commun., 2008, 9, 1364–1368 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kubicka, M. Bejblova and J. Vlk, Top. Catal., 2010, 53, 168 CrossRef CAS .
R. Nava, B. Pawelec, P. Castano, M. C. Alvarez-Galvan, C. V. Loricera and J. L. G. Fierro, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 92, 154 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Sharma, M. Anand, B. S. Rana, R. Kumar, S. A. Farooqui, M. G. Sibi and A. K. Sinha, Catal. Today, 2012, 198, 314 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Mauge, G. Crepeau, A. Travert and T. Cseri, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 225, U853 Search PubMed .
A. Popov, E. Kondratieva, J. M. Goupil, L. Mariey, P. Bazin, J.-P. Gilson, A. Travert and F. Mauge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15661 CAS .
A. Popov, E. Kondratieva, J. M. Goupil, L. Mariey, P. Bazin, J. M. Gilson, A. Travert and F. Mauge, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 15661 CAS .
A. Popov, E. Kondratieva, L. Mariey, J. M. Goupil, J. El Fallah, J.-P. Gilson, A. Travert and F. Mauge, J. Catal., 2013, 297, 176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Krar, S. Kovacs, D. Kallo and J. Hancsok, Bioresour. Technol., 2010, 101, 9287 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Kubicka, F. Homola and J. Horacek, Abstr. Pap. Am. Chem. Soc., 2010, 239, 51-FUEL Search PubMed .
E. Furimsky and F. E. Massoth, Catal. Today, 1999, 52, 381 CrossRef CAS .
M. Badawi, J. F. Paul, S. Cristol, E. Payen, Y. Romero, F. Richard, S. Brunet, D. Lambert, X. Portier, A. Popov, E. Kondratieva, J. M. Goupil, J. El Fallah, J. P. Gilson, L. Mariey, A. Travert and F. Mauge, J. Catal., 2011, 282, 155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E.-M. Ryymin, M. L. Honkela, T.-R. Viljava and A. O. I. Krause, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 358, 42 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. M. Alonso, S. G. Wettstein and J. A. Dumesic, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8075 RSC .
G. W. Huber and J. A. Dumesic, Catal. Today, 2006, 111, 119 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wildschut, F. H. Mahfud, R. H. Venderbosch and H. J. Heeres, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2009, 48, 10324 CrossRef CAS .
B. C. Gates, Chem. Rev., 1995, 95, 511 CrossRef CAS .
A. Y. Stakheev and L. M. Kustov, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 188, 3 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boffa, C. Lin, A. T. Bell and G. A. Somorjai, J. Catal., 1994, 149, 149 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Boffa, A. T. Bell and G. A. Somorjai, J. Catal., 1993, 139, 602 CrossRef CAS .
A. B. Boffa, C. Lin, A. T. Bell and G. A. Somorjai, Catal. Lett., 1994, 27, 243 CrossRef CAS .
R. Pestman, R. M. Koster, J. A. Z. Pieterse and V. Ponec, J. Catal., 1997, 168, 255 CrossRef CAS .
M. J. Mendes, O. A. A. Santos, E. Jordao and A. M. Silva, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 217, 253 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Talukdar, K. G. Bhattacharyya and S. Sivasankar, Appl. Catal., A, 1993, 96, 229 CrossRef CAS .
C. Park and M. A. Keane, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 266, 183 CrossRef CAS .
S. Velu, M. P. Kapoor, S. Inagaki and K. Suzuki, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 245, 317 CrossRef CAS .
N. Mahata, J. Catal., 2000, 196, 262 CrossRef CAS .
S. Scirè, S. Minicò and C. Crisafulli, Appl. Catal., A, 2002, 235, 21 CrossRef .
H. Liu, T. Jiang, B. Han, S. Liang and Y. Zhou, Science, 2009, 326, 1250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Z. Chen, C. W. Liaw and L. I. Lee, Appl. Catal., A, 1999, 177, 1 CrossRef CAS .
E. Díaz, A. F. Mohedano, L. Calvo, M. A. Gilarranz, J. A. Casas and J. J. Rodríguez, Chem. Eng. J., 2007, 131, 65 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Zhao, Y. Kou, A. A. Lemonidou, X. Li and J. A. Lercher, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2009, 48, 3987 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. Lee, J. S. Yoon, Y.-W. Suh, J.-W. Choi, J.-M. Ha, D. J. Suh and Y.-K. Park, Catal. Commun., 2012, 17, 54 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-C. Lin, C.-L. Li, H.-P. Wan, H.-T. Lee and C.-F. Liu, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 890 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Foster, P. T. M. Do and R. F. Lobo, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 118 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. T. M. Do, A. J. Foster, J. Chen and R. F. Lobo, Green Chem., 2012, 14, 1388 RSC .
R. C. Runnebaum, T. Nimmanwudipong, D. E. Block and B. C. Gates, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2012, 2, 113 CAS .
T. Nimmanwudipong, C. Aydin, J. Lu, R. C. Runnebaum, K. C. Brodwater, N. D. Browning, D. E. Block and B. C. Gates, Catal. Lett., 2012, 142, 1190 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, L. L. Lobban, R. G. Mallinson and D. E. Resasco, J. Catal., 2011, 281, 21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Runnebaum, T. Nimmanwudipong, D. E. Block and B. C. Gates, Catal. Lett., 2010, 141, 817 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Nimmanwudipong, R. C. Runnebaum, D. E. Block and B. C. Gates, Catal. Lett., 2011, 141, 779 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nimmanwudipong, R. C. Runnebaum, D. E. Block and B. C. Gates, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 3417 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nimmanwudipong, R. C. Runnebaum, S. E. Ebeler, D. E. Block and B. C. Gates, Catal. Lett., 2011, 142, 151 CrossRef .
T. Nimmanwudipong, R. C. Runnebaum, K. Tay, D. E. Block and B. C. Gates, Catal. Lett., 2011, 141, 1072 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. C. Runnebaum, R. J. Lobo-Lapidus, T. Nimmanwudipong, D. E. Block and B. C. Gates, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 4776 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. Runnebaum, T. Nimmanwudipong, R. R. Limbo, D. E. Block and B. C. Gates, Catal. Lett., 2011, 142, 7 CrossRef .
W. W. Lonergan, D. G. Vlachos and J. G. Chen, J. Catal., 2010, 271, 239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. H. Bartholomew, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 212, 17 CrossRef CAS .
A. R. Ardiyanti, A. Gutierrez, M. L. Honkela, A. O. I. Krause and H. J. Heeres, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 407, 56 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Nagy, G. Pölczmann, D. Kalló and J. Hancsók, Chem. Eng. J., 2009, 154, 307 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Yu, M. D. Porosoff and J. G. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 5780 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Furimsky, Appl. Catal., A, 2003, 240, 1 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Oyama, J. Catal., 2003, 216, 343 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Oyama, T. Gott, H. Y. Zhao and Y. K. Lee, Catal. Today, 2009, 143, 94 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Ramanathan and S. T. Oyama, J. Phys. Chem., 1995, 99, 16365 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Hwu and J. G. G. Chen, Chem. Rev., 2005, 105, 185 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. G. Kelly and J. G. Chen, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41, 8021 RSC .
R. B. Levy and M. Boudart, Science, 1973, 181, 547 CAS .
S. T. Oyama, Catal. Today, 1992, 15, 179 CrossRef CAS .
G. Hagg, Z. Phys. Chem., 1931, 12, 33 CAS .
J. Ren, J.-G. Wang, J.-F. Li and Y.-W. Li, J. Fuel Chem. Technol., 2007, 35, 458 CrossRef CAS .

          C. A. Bennet, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Michigan,  2002 .
R. Prins and M. E. Bussell, Catal. Lett., 2012, 142, 1413 CrossRef CAS .

          A. Lausche, J. Schaidle, N. Schweitzer and L. Thompson, in Comprehensive Inorganic Chemistry II, ed. R. Schlogl and H. Niemantsverdriet,  2013, ch. 7 Search PubMed .
G. Leclercq, M. Kamal, J. M. Giraudon, P. Devassine, L. Feigenbaum, L. Leclercq, A. Frennet, J. M. Bastin, A. Löfberg, S. Decker and M. Dufour, J. Catal., 1996, 158, 142 CrossRef CAS .
P. Bui, J. A. Cecilia, S. T. Oyama, A. Takagaki, A. Infantes-Molina, H. Y. Zhao, D. Li, E. Rodriguez-Castellon and A. J. Lopez, J. Catal., 2012, 294, 184 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu and J. A. Rodriguez, Catal. Lett., 2003, 91, 247 CrossRef CAS .
J. R. Kitchin, J. K. Norskov, M. A. Barteau and J. G. G. Chen, Catal. Today, 2005, 105, 66 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vojvodic and C. Ruberto, J. Phys.: Condens. Matter, 2010, 22, 375501 CrossRef PubMed .
J. B. Claridge, A. P. E. York, A. J. Brungs, C. Marquez-Alvarez, J. Sloan, S. C. Tsang and M. L. H. Green, J. Catal., 1998, 180, 85 CrossRef CAS .

          L. Leclercq, K. Imura, S. Yoshida, T. Barbee and M. Boudart, in Studies in Surface Science and Catalysis, ed. P. G. P. J. B. Delmon and G. Poncelet, Elsevier,  1979, vol. 3, pp. 627–639 Search PubMed .
J. S. Lee, M. H. Yeom and D. S. Lee, J. Mol. Catal., 1990, 62, L45 CrossRef CAS .
A. J. Medford, A. Vojvodic, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen and J. K. Nørskov, J. Catal., 2012, 290, 108 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Liu and J. A. Rodriguez, J. Chem. Phys., 2004, 120, 5414 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Vojvodic, Catal. Lett., 2012, 142, 728–735 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, T. Asakura, J. Gomes and K. Nakamura, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 4575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rodriguez, P. Liu, J. Dvorak, T. Jirsak, J. Gomes, Y. Takahashi and K. Nakamura, Surf. Sci., 2003, 543, L675 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Rodriguez, J. Dvorak and T. Jirsak, Surf. Sci., 2000, 457, L413 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Sajkowski and S. T. Oyama, Appl. Catal., A, 1996, 134, 339 CrossRef CAS .
B. Dhandapani, T. St Clair and S. T. Oyama, Appl. Catal., A, 1998, 168, 219 CrossRef CAS .
G. M. Dolce, P. E. Savage and L. T. Thompson, Energy Fuels, 1997, 11, 668 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhang, Y. Zhang, L. F. Zhao and W. Wei, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 2052 CrossRef CAS .
J. X. Han, J. Z. Duan, P. Chen, H. Lou, X. M. Zheng and H. P. Hong, Green Chem., 2011, 13, 2561 RSC .
H. Ren, W. Yu, M. Salciccioli, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, K. Xiong, D. G. Vlachos and J. G. Chen, ChemSusChem, 2013, 6, 798 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Ren, Y. Chen, Y. Huang, W. Deng, D. G. Vlachos and J. G. Chen, Green Chem., 2013 10.1039/c3gc41256c .
I. T. Ghampson, C. Sepulveda, R. Garcia, B. G. Frederick, M. C. Wheeler, N. Escalona and W. J. DeSisto, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 413, 78 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Monnier, H. Sulimma, A. Dalai and G. Caravaggio, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 382, 176 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. T. Ghampson, C. Sepulveda, R. Garcia, J. L. Fierro, N. Escalona and W. J. DeSisto, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 435, 51 CrossRef PubMed .
H. L. Wang, S. L. Yan, S. O. Salley and K. Y. S. Ng, Ind. Eng. Chem. Res., 2012, 51, 10066 CrossRef CAS .
I. T. Ghampson, C. Sepulveda, R. Garcia, L. R. Radovic, J. L. G. Fierro, W. J. DeSisto and N. Escalona, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 439, 111 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Sepulveda, K. Leiva, R. Garcia, L. R. Radovic, I. T. Ghampson, W. J. DeSisto, J. L. G. Fierro and N. Escalona, Catal. Today, 2011, 172, 232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. M. L. Whiffen and K. J. Smith, Energy Fuels, 2010, 24, 4728 CrossRef CAS .
V. M. L. Whiffen, K. J. Smith and S. K. Straus, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 419, 111 CrossRef PubMed .
V. M. L. Whiffen and K. J. Smith, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 981 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Oyama, X. Wang, Y. K. Lee, K. Bando and F. G. Requejo, J. Catal., 2002, 210, 207 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Oyama, X. Wang, Y. K. Lee and W. J. Chun, J. Catal., 2004, 221, 263 CrossRef CAS .
Y. X. Yang, C. Ochoa-Hernandez, V. A. D. O'Shea, J. M. Coronado and D. P. Serrano, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 592 CrossRef CAS .
H. Y. Zhao, D. Li, P. Bui and S. T. Oyama, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 391, 305 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Bowker, M. C. Smith, M. L. Pease, K. M. Slenkamp, L. Kovarik and M. E. Bussell, ACS Catal., 2011, 1, 917 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Li, R. J. Wang and J. X. Chen, Energy Fuels, 2011, 25, 854 CrossRef CAS .
A. Cho, J. Shin, A. Takagaki, R. Kikuchi and S. T. Oyama, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 969 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Cecilia, A. Infantes-Molina, E. Rodríguez-Castellón, A. Jiménez-López and S. T. Oyama, Appl. Catal., B, 2013, 136–137, 140 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, J. Chen and H. Shi, Energy Fuels, 2013, 27, 3400 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Rensel, S. Rouvimov, M. E. Gin and J. C. Hicks, J. Catal., 2013, 305, 256 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-K. Wu, P.-C. Lai, Y.-C. Lin, H.-P. Wan, H.-T. Lee and Y.-H. Chang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2013, 1, 349 CrossRef CAS .
P. Afanasiev and D. Laurenti, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 940 CrossRef CAS .
A. W. Burns, A. F. Gaudette and M. E. Bussell, J. Catal., 2008, 260, 262 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. W. Burns, K. A. Layman, D. H. Bale and M. E. Bussell, Appl. Catal., A, 2008, 343, 68 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Hayes, R. H. Bowker, A. F. Gaudette, M. C. Smith, C. E. Moak, C. Y. Nam, T. K. Pratum and M. E. Bussell, J. Catal., 2010, 276, 249 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Zuzaniuk and R. Prins, J. Catal., 2003, 219, 85 CrossRef CAS .

          V. Zuzaniuk, C. Stinner, R. Prins and T. Weber, in Scientific Bases for the Preparation of Heterogeneous Catalysts, ed. E. Gaigneaux, D. E. DeVos, P. Grange, P. A. Jacobs, J. A. Martens, P. Ruiz and G. Poncelet,  2002, vol. 143, pp. 247–255 Search PubMed .
J. A. Cecilia, A. Infantes-Molina, E. Rodriguez-Castellon and A. Jimenez-Lopez, Appl. Catal., B, 2009, 92, 100 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Cecilia, A. Infantes-Molina, E. Rodriguez-Castellon and A. Jimenez-Lopez, J. Catal., 2009, 263, 4 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. J. Sawhill, D. C. Phillips and M. E. Bussell, J. Catal., 2003, 215, 208 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Shu and S. T. Oyama, Chem. Commun., 2005, 1143 RSC .
Y. Y. Shu and S. T. Oyama, Carbon, 2005, 43, 1517 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. L. Wang, B. L. Yang, Y. Liu and C. H. Yi, Energy Fuels, 2009, 23, 4209 CrossRef CAS .
S. T. Oyama and Y. K. Lee, J. Catal., 2008, 258, 393 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Ueckert, R. Lamber, N. I. Jaeger and U. Schubert, Appl. Catal., A, 1997, 155, 75 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez, Y. Takahashi and K. Nakamura, J. Catal., 2009, 262, 294 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Laurent and B. Delmon, J. Catal., 1994, 146, 281 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kanda, C. Temma, K. Nakata, T. Kobayashi, M. Sugioka and Y. Uemichi, Appl. Catal., A, 2010, 386, 171 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Sipila, E. Kuoppala, L. Fagernas and A. Oasmaa, Biomass Bioenergy, 1998, 14, 103 CrossRef CAS .
C. U. Pittman, D. Mohan, A. Eseyin, Q. Li, L. Ingram, E. B. M. Hassan, B. Mitchell, H. Guo and P. H. Steele, Energy Fuels, 2012, 26, 3816 CrossRef CAS .
M. Garcia-Perez, A. Chaala, H. Pakdel, D. Kretschmer and C. Roy, Biomass Bioenergy, 2007, 31, 222 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y.-K. Lee, Y. Shu and S. T. Oyama, Appl. Catal., A, 2007, 322, 191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          J. A. Schaidle, Ph.D. Thesis, University of Michigan,  2011 .
N. M. Schweitzer, J. A. Schaidle, O. K. Ezekoye, X. Pan, S. Linic and L. T. Thompson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 2378 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. C. Lausche, J. A. Schaidle and L. T. Thompson, Appl. Catal., A, 2011, 401, 29 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Florez, T. Gomez, P. Liu, J. A. Rodriguez and F. Illas, ChemCatChem, 2010, 2, 1219 CrossRef CAS .
J. A. Schaidle, N. M. Schweitzer, O. T. Ajenifujah and L. T. Thompson, J. Catal., 2012, 289, 210 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. V. Esposito, S. T. Hunt, A. L. Stottlemyer, K. D. Dobson, B. E. McCandless, R. W. Birkmire and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2010, 49, 9859 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Florez, L. Feria, F. Vines, J. A. Rodriguez and F. Illas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2009, 113, 19994 CAS .
E. Florez, T. Gomez, J. A. Rodriguez and F. Illas, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 6865 RSC .
R. Ganesan and J. S. Lee, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 6557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ganesan, D. J. Ham and J. S. Lee, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2576 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Griboval-Constant, J. M. Giraudon, G. Leclercq and L. Leclercq, Appl. Catal., A, 2004, 260, 35 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Griboval-Constant, J. M. Giraudon, I. Twagishema, G. Leclercq, M. E. Rivas, J. Alvarez, M. J. Perez-Zurita and M. R. Goldwasser, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2006, 259, 187 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. J. Ham, C. Pak, G. H. Bae, S. Han, K. Kwon, S.-A. Jin, H. Chang, S. H. Choi and J. S. Lee, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 5792 RSC .
I. J. Hsu, D. A. Hansgen, B. E. McCandless, B. G. Willis and J. G. Chen, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2011, 115, 3709 CAS .
N. Ji, T. Zhang, M. Zheng, A. Wang, H. Wang, X. Wang and J. G. Chen, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 8510 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Lewandowski, A. Szymanska-Kolasa, P. Da Costa and C. Sayag, Catal. Today, 2007, 119, 31 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Ming, T. Haolin, W. Zidong, J. Sang Ping and S. Pei Kang, Electrochem. Commun., 2007, 9, 2375 CrossRef PubMed .
K. G. Nishanth, P. Sridhar, S. Pitchumani and A. K. Shukla, ECS Trans., 2010, 33, 2017 Search PubMed .
L. K. Ono and B. Roldan-Cuenya, Catal. Lett., 2007, 113, 86 CrossRef CAS .
N. Perret, X. Wang, L. Delannoy, C. Potvin, C. Louis and M. A. Keane, J. Catal., 2012, 286, 172 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rodriguez, P. Liu, Y. Takahashi, K. Nakamura, F. Vines and F. Illas, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 8595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rodriguez, P. Liu, F. Vines, F. Illas, Y. Takahashi and K. Nakamura, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2008, 47, 6685 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Rodriguez, F. Vines, F. Illas, P. Liu, Y. Takahashi and K. Nakamura, J. Chem. Phys., 2007, 127, 211102–1 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Setthapun, S. K. Bej and L. T. Thompson, Top. Catal., 2008, 49, 73 CrossRef CAS .
M. M. O. Thotiyl, T. R. Kumar and S. Sampath, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 17934 CAS .
M. M. O. Thotiyl and S. Sampath, Electrochim. Acta, 2011, 56, 3549 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Volter, H. Berndt, G. Lietz, H. Preiss and R. Tamme, Chem. Ing. Tech., 1997, 69, 83 CrossRef .
E. C. Weigert, S. Arisetty, S. G. Advani, A. K. Prasad and J. G. Chen, J. New Mater. Electrochem. Syst., 2008, 11, 243 CAS .
M. Xiang, D. Li, W. Li, B. Zhong and Y. Sun, Fuel, 2006, 85, 2662 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiang, D. Li, W. Li, B. Zhong and Y. Sun, Catal. Commun., 2007, 8, 513 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Xiang, D. Li, H. Xiao, H. Zhang, H. Qi, W. Li, B. Zhong and Y. Sun, Fuel, 2008, 87, 599 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. H. Venderbosch, A. R. Ardiyanti, J. Wildschut, A. Oasmaa and H. J. Heeresb, J. Chem. Technol. Biotechnol., 2010, 85, 674 CrossRef CAS .
V. A. Yakovlev, S. A. Khromova, O. V. Sherstyuk, V. O. Dundich, D. Y. Ermakov, V. M. Novopashina, M. Y. Lebedev, O. Bulavchenko and V. N. Parmon, Catal. Today, 2009, 144, 362 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. B. Van, D. Laurenti, P. Delichere and C. Geantet, Appl. Catal., B, 2011, 101, 246 CrossRef PubMed .
A. R. Ardiyanti, S. A. Khromova, R. H. Venderbosch, V. A. Yakovlev, I. V. Melian-Cabrera and H. J. Heeres, Appl. Catal., A, 2012, 449, 121 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, A. Gilbert and C. B. Xu, Appl. Catal., A, 2009, 360, 242 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wildschut, I. Melián-Cabrera and H. J. Heeres, Appl. Catal., B, 2010, 99, 298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Mäki-Arvela and D. Y. Murzin, Appl. Catal., A, 2013, 451, 251 CrossRef PubMed .
I. L. Medintz, H. T. Uyeda, E. R. Goldman and H. Mattoussi, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 435 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Park, K. J. An, Y. S. Hwang, J. G. Park, H. J. Noh, J. Y. Kim, J. H. Park, N. M. Hwang and T. Hyeon, Nat. Mater., 2004, 3, 891 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. K. Sau and A. L. Rogach, Adv. Mater., 2010, 22, 1781 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Goto, K. Taniguchi, T. Omata, S. Otsuka-Yao-Matsuo, N. Ohashi, S. Ueda, H. Yoshikawa, Y. Yamashita, H. Oohashi and K. Kobayashi, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 4156 CrossRef CAS .
A. Meffre, B. Mehdaoui, V. Kelsen, P. F. Fazzini, J. Carrey, S. Lachaize, M. Respaud and B. Chaudret, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4722 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. L. Schaefer, K. M. Weeber, R. Misra, P. Schiffer and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23, 2475 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wu and W. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133, 15236 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Henkes, Y. Vasquez and R. E. Schaak, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 1896 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. K. Chiang and R. T. Chiang, Inorg. Chem., 2007, 46, 369 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. De Trizio, A. Figuerola, L. Manna, A. Genovese, C. George, R. Brescia, Z. Saghi, R. Simonutti, M. Van Huis and A. Falqui, ACS Nano, 2012, 6, 32 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Henkes and R. E. Schaak, Chem. Mater., 2007, 19, 4234–4242 CrossRef CAS .
E. Muthuswamy, G. H. L. Savithra and S. L. Brock, ACS Nano, 2011, 5, 2402 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. X. Yang, C. Ochoa-Hernandez, P. Pizarro, V. A. D. O'Shea, J. M. Coronado and D. P. Serrano, Top. Catal., 2012, 55, 991 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano, C. Erpen, W. T. Yao, B. Milke and M. Antonietti, Chem. Mater., 2009, 21, 5136 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Schnepp, S. C. Wimbush, M. Antonietti and C. Giordano, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5340 CrossRef CAS .
C. Giordano, C. Erpen, W. T. Yao and M. Antoniett, Nano Lett., 2008, 8, 4659 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. P. Duan, Y. Teng, A. J. Wang, V. M. Kogan, X. Li and Y. Wang, J. Catal., 2009, 261, 232 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. E. Nelson, M. Y. Sun and A. S. M. Junaid, J. Catal., 2006, 241, 180 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Y. Hong, S. J. Miller, P. K. Agrawal and C. W. Jones, Chem. Commun., 2010, 46, 1038 RSC .
C. Zhao, D. M. Camaioni and J. A. Lercher, J. Catal., 2012, 288, 92 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Zhao, W. Song and J. A. Lercher, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 2714 CrossRef CAS .
M. Sun, A. E. Nelson and J. Adjaye, Catal. Today, 2005, 105, 36 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, V. Petzold, V. Tripkovic, J. Kleis, J. G. Howalt, E. Skulason, E. M. Fernandez, B. Hvolbaek, G. Jones, A. Toftelund, H. Falsig, M. Bjorketun, F. Studt, F. Abild-Pedersen, J. Rossmeisl, J. K. Norskov and T. Bligaard, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 20760 RSC .
A. Logadottir and J. K. Norskov, J. Catal., 2003, 220, 273 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, W. Y. Guo, H. Y. Zhu, L. M. Zhao, M. Li, S. R. Li, D. L. Fu, X. Q. Lu and H. H. Shan, Langmuir, 2012, 28, 3129 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
Table Content:
Daniel A. Ruddy	Dr Daniel Ruddy received a B.S. degree in Chemistry at Lafayette College, followed by a Ph.D. degree in Inorganic Chemistry from the University of California, Berkeley, where his research combined synthetic molecular and materials chemistry with detailed characterization to study novel heterogeneous catalysts. He was part of the research staff at the Dow Chemical Company before joining the Chemical and Materials Science Center at NREL in 2010. Dr Ruddy's research at NREL integrates the synthesis and characterization of functional molecules and materials for advanced energy technologies including solar fuels production, biomass conversion catalysis, and high-capacity energy storage materials.
Joshua A. Schaidle	Josh Schaidle received his B.S. in Chemical Engineering from the University of California-Santa Barbara in 2006 and his Ph.D. in Chemical Engineering from the University of Michigan in 2011. His Ph.D. research focused on understanding the catalytic properties of early transition metal carbide and nitride materials as well as exploring the interactions between transition metals and native carbide surfaces. Currently, Josh is a research engineer in the Thermochemical Catalysis Research and Development group within the National Bioenergy Center at NREL. His work focuses on the development of novel catalysts and processes for the catalytic upgrading of biomass pyrolysis products.
Jack R. Ferrell III	Dr Jack Ferrell received a B.S. from the University of Virginia and a Ph.D. from the Colorado School of Mines, both in Chemical Engineering. Dr Ferrell then held a postdoctoral fellowship at the National Energy Technology Laboratory in Morgantown, West Virginia. Jack joined NREL in 2011 as a research engineer in the Thermochemical Catalysis Research and Development division of the National Bioenergy Center. Currently, his research focuses on the development of analytical techniques for biomass pyrolysis processes. Dr Ferrell also has research interests in the development of novel catalysts and processes for biomass upgrading, including electrochemical processes.
Jun Wang	Dr Jun Wang received the B.S. degree in Polymer Science and Engineering from University of Science & Technology of China (USTC) in 2005. After that he joined Prof. Zhiqun Lin's group at Iowa State University and received his Ph.D. degree in Materials Science and Engineering in 2009. He is now a postdoctoral researcher in the Chemical and Materials Science Center at National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). His research interests include design, synthesis, and characterization of functional nanomaterials for renewable energy applications.
Luc Moens	Dr Luc Moens is a Senior Chemist in the National Bioenergy Center at NREL. He received a B.S. degree in Agrochemical Engineering from Ghent University in Belgium, and a Ph.D. in synthetic organic chemistry from the University of California at Santa Barbara. He joined NREL in 1989 where he currently specializes in the development of new thermo- and biocatalytic pathways for the conversion of biomass intermediates into fuels, chemicals and materials. His expertise includes heterogeneous catalysis for biomass deoxygenation, pyrolysis technologies applied to polymers, and the chemistry related to energy storage in solar thermal systems and batteries.
Jesse E. Hensley	Dr Jesse Hensley earned his B.S. in Chemical Engineering from the University of Notre Dame and his Ph.D. in the same from the Colorado School of Mines under the direction of Professor J. Douglas Way. Dr Hensley serves as section supervisor in the Thermochemical Process R&D division of the National Bioenergy Center, and as principal investigator in pyrolysis oil upgrading and gas-to-liquids processes for the conversion of lignocellulosic biomass to hydrocarbon fuels. Dr Hensley's group focuses on the chemical pathways and kinetics of deoxygenation and C–C coupling reactions over heterogeneous catalysts, with the ultimate goal of advancing cost-competitive biofuels.

 	Fig. 1  Composition ranges of pyrolysis bio-oil oxygenate functionalities correlated according to their lignocellulosic biomass source. The wt% ranges are based on bio-oil analysis data reported by Milne et al.21	 

C	83–86	55–65
H	11–14	5–7
O	<1	30–50
N	<4	<0.1
S	<1	<0.05
Water	0.1	20–30

R–OR	339
Ar–OR	422
R–OH	385
Ar–OH	468

 	Fig. 2  Process block flow diagram for (A) ex situ CFP and (B) in situ CFP.	 

 	Fig. 3  Example transformations comprising the deoxygenation reaction network and abbreviations used in this review.	 
r = Ae−Ea/RT [pH2]n	(1)

 	Fig. 4  Ratios of deoxygenation rates at 500 °C/0.1 MPa and 300 °C/various pressures as a function of activation energy. Reaction orders of 0.5, 1, and 2 are represented by dashed, solid, and dotted lines, respectively. A ratio of 1 indicates equivalent reaction rates at the two different conditions. Lines are calculated from eqn (1) and are not data or fits of data.	 
C6H6O + 4H2 ↔ C6H12 + H2O	(2)
C6H6O + 2H2 ↔ C6H10O	(3)
C6H10O + H2 ↔ C6H12O	(4)
C6H12O + H2 ↔ C6H12 + H2O	(5)

 	Fig. 5  Equilibrium constants for reactions 1.3–1.6 as a function of temperature. Keq values were calculated using the van't Hoff equation53 integrated from the standard state to reaction temperature, pure component standard state enthalpies and Gibbs energies of formation, and pure component heat capacity data as a function of temperature, fit to 3rd order polynomials. Pure component data was obtained from NIST.54 Note that values are given in the log10 base, that is, a value of ‘0’ indicates that Keq = 1 (forward and reverse reactions are equally favored).	 
C6H6O + H2 ↔ C6H6 + H2O	(6)

 	Fig. 6  Example HDO and DDO reaction pathways of phenol over TMS catalysts showing the alcohol intermediates.	 

 	Fig. 7  Intermediate formed in the deoxygenation pathway of ethylphenol on CoMoS; (A) H addition on the secondary o-carbon and (B) H addition on the tertiary o-carbon. Color code: Mo in light blue, S in yellow, Co in dark blue, C in grey, O in red, H in white. Reproduced with permission from Badawi et al.66	 

 	Fig. 8  Interaction of phenolic molecules with sulfided CoMo/Al2O3 catalyst: (A) phenol at room temperature, (B) 2-ethylphenol at room temperature, which converts to A at 350 °C. Adapted from Popov et al.100,101	 

Pd/C	5	845	2-Methoxy-4-n-propylphenol	H3PO4–H2O, 250 °C, 5 MPa H2	
n-Propylcyclohexane	100	HDO	
125

Pd/C	5	845	Phenol	H2O, 200 °C, 5 MPa H2	Cyclohexanol	100	HYD	
50

Pd/C	5	845	Phenol	H3PO4-H2O, 250 °C, 5 MPa H2	Cyclohexane	100	HDO	
50


	
	4-n-Propylphenol	
	
n-Propylcyclohexane	100	HDO	


	
	Catechol	
	Cyclohexane	100	HDO	


	
	4-Methyl-2-methoxyphenol	
	Methylcyclohexane	100	HDO	


	
	4-Ethyl-2-methoxyphenol	
	Ethylcyclohexane	100	HDO	


	
	4-Propyl-2-methoxyphenol	
	Propylcyclohexane	100	HDO	


	
	4-(2-Propenyl)-2,6-dimethoxy-phenol	
	Propylcyclohexane	92	HDO	

Ru/C	7.8	—	Guaiacol	H2O, 200 °C, 13.8 MPa H2	2-Methoxycyclohexanol	100	HYD, DDO	
49


	—	
	H2O, 250 °C, 13.8 MPa H2	Cyclohexane	100	HDO	


	—	
	H2O, 300 °C, 13.8 MPa H2	Phenol, cresols	100	DMO, MT	

Pd/C	3	—	Guaiacol	H2O, 200 °C, 13.8 MPa H2	2-Methoxycyclohexanol	66	HYD, DDO	


	—	
	H2O, 300 °C, 13.8 MPa H2	Cyclohexane	99	HDO	

Rh/ZrO2	0.39	20	Guaiacol	
n-Hexadecane, 100 °C, 8 MPa H2	1-Methyl-1,2-cyclohexanediol	99	HYD, MT	
43

Rh/ZrO2	0.39	20	
	
n-Hexadecane, 300 °C, 8 MPa H2	Benzene	100	DDO, DMO	

RhPt/ZrO2	0.25 Rh	23	
	
n-Hexadecane, 100 °C, 8 MPa H2	1-Methyl-1,2-cyclohexanediol	99	MT, HYD	

0.25 Pt
RhPt/ZrO2	0.25 Rh	23	
	
n-Hexadecane, 300 °C, 8 MPa H2	Benzene	100	DDO, DMO	

0.25 Pt
Rh/ZrO2	3	4.72	Guaiacol	
n-Decane, 250 °C, 4 MPa H2	2-Methoxycyclohexanol	95	HYD	
126

Rh/ZrO2 + SiO2–Al2O3	3	4.72	
	
	2-Methoxycyclohexanol, cyclohexane	38	HYD, HDO	

Rh/SiO2–Al2O3	3	569	
	
	Cyclohexane	57	HDO	

Rh/C	3	238	
	
	2-Methoxycyclohexanol, cyclohexane	68	HYD, HDO	

Rh/Al2O3	3	122	
	
	Cyclohexane, 2-methoxycyclohexanol, cyclohexanol	43	HDO, HYD, DMO	

Ru/C	5.7	730	
p-Cresol	CH3COOH-H2O, 300 °C, 4.8 MPa H2	Methylcyclohexane	67	HDO	
51

Rh/ZrO2	1	6.6	Guaiacol	
n-Tetradecane, 400 °C, 5 MPa H2	Cyclohexane	100	HDO	
127

PtRh/ZrO2	1 Rh	7.0	Guaiacol	
	2-Methoxycyclohexanol	100	HYD	

1 Pt
PdRh/ZrO2	1 Rh	5.9	Guaiacol	
	2-Methoxycyclohexanol	100	HYD	

1 Pd
Pt/Al2O3	1.7	87	
m-Cresol	260 °C, 50.5 kPa H2	Toluene, methylcyclohexane	38	DDO, HDO	
128


	
	
	
	260 °C, 0.10 MPa H2	Toluene, methylcyclohexane	74	DDO, HDO	

Pt/Al2O3	1.6	87	
m-Cresol	260 °C, 50.5 kPa H2	Toluene, methylcyclohexane	38	DDO, HDO	
129

PtCo/Al2O3	1.3 Pt	87	
	
	Methylcyclohexane, toluene	57	DDO, HDO	

4.3 Co
PtNi/Al2O3	1.5 Pt	87	
	
	Toluene, methylcyclohexane	63	DDO, HDO	

4.9 Ni
Pt/Al2O3	1	206	Anisole	300 °C, 42 kPa H2	Phenol, cresols	7	DME, MT	
130


	
	
	4-Methylanisole	300 °C, 42 kPa H2	Cresols	6	DME, MT	

Pt/Al2O3	1	206	Guaiacol	300 °C, 42 kPa H2	Phenol, catechol	8	DDO, DME	
131

Pt/MgO	1	100	Guaiacol	300 °C, 42 kPa H2	Catechol, phenol	8	DME, DDO	

Pt/HBEA	1	710	Anisole	400 °C, 0.10 MPa H2	Benzene, toluene, xylenes	30	DME, MT, DDO	
132

Pt/HBEA	0.2	710	Anisole	400 °C, 0.10 MPa H2	Benzene, toluene, xylenes	30	DME, MT, DDO	


 	Fig. 9  HYD mechanisms on oxide-supported noble metals (A) H* spill-over to the support and subsequent HYD, and (B) HYD at the metal–support interface. Adapted from Pestman et al. and Mendes et al.115,116	 

 	Fig. 10  General pathway for Pd-catalyzed HDO of bio-oil phenolics via HYD-dehydration-HYD. Adapted from Zhao et al.50	 

 	Fig. 11  Proposed reaction network for m-cresol over a Pt/γ-Al2O3 catalyst showing the HYD-dehydrogenation equilibria. Species in brackets are proposed, but not observed intermediates. Adapted from Foster et al.128	 


Pt/γ-Al2O3	38.3	11.1	65.0	20.1
PtNi/γ-Al2O3	62.7	43.2	51.0	3.1
PtCo/γ-Al2O3	56.7	52.4	44.7	1.2


H-BEA	12.0	13.4
Pt/H-BEA	10.2	3.2
Pt/SiO2	1.6	3.0

 	Fig. 12  Crystal structures for Groups 4–6 transition metal carbides and nitrides. (a) Mo2N, W2N, MoC1−x, and WC1−x, (b) TiN, ZnN, HfN, VN, CrN, TiC, ZrC, HfC, VC, NbC, and TaC, (c) TaN, MoN, MoC, WC, and (d) Mo2C and W2C. Reproduced with permission from Bennet.155	 

 	Fig. 13  Crystal structures of metal-rich phosphides. Reproduced with permission from Oyama et al.147	 

 	Fig. 14  Comparison of d-band density of states for Mo(110), C-terminated (green) and Mo-terminated Mo2C (blue), and Pt(111). Reproduced with permission from Kitchin et al.161	 

 	Fig. 15  Comparison of different phosphides and a commercial sulfided-NiMo/Al2O3 catalyst in the hydroprocessing of quinoline (2000 ppm N) and dibenzothiophene (3000 ppm S) at 370 °C and 3.1 MPa. Reproduced with permission from Oyama et al.146	 

 	Fig. 16  Potential energy diagram for the hydrogenation and removal of sulfur adatoms from Ni2P(001) and α-Mo2C(001) surfaces. Reproduced with permission from Liu et al.169	 

NiMoCx	TPR-CH4/H2	SiO2	191	4.5 wt% NiO	Ethyl benzoate	300 °C, 5 MPa H2	Cyclohexane, methylcyclohexane (TOS < 24 h)	99 → 57 over 72 h (HDO conversion)	HDO, HYD	
175

15 wt% MoO3

	
	
	
	
	
	
	Benzene, toluene (TOS > 24 h)	
	
	


	
	
	
	
	Acetone	300 °C, 3 MPa H2	Propylene, propane	44 (HDO conversion)	HDO, HYD, aldol condensation, dehydration	


	
	
	
	
	Acetaldehyde	300 °C, 3 MPa H2	Ethylene, ethane, ethanol	33 (HDO conversion)	HDO, HYD, Aldol condensation, dehydration	

Mo2C	TPR-CH4/H2	SiO2	170	30 wt% MoO3	Ethyl benzoate	300 °C, 5 MPa H2	—	99 → 88 over 110 h (total conversion)	—	

Mo2C	Carbothermal hydrogen reduction	Carbon nanotubes	—	20 wt%	Methyl palmitate	240 °C, 1.5 MPa H2	Hexadecane	90	HDO	
176

Vegetable oil	260 °C, 2.5 MPa H2	Branched paraffins	>80	HDO, isomerization
Mo2C	TPR-CH4/H2	γ-Al2O3	—	8 wt% (Mo)	Benzofuran	390 °C, 13.8 MPa H2	Alkylated benzenes	<10	HDO	
174


	
	
	
	2.9 wt% (Mo)	Dibenzofuran	
	Alkylated cyclohexanes	<10	HDO, HYD, HCR	

Mo2C	TPR-CH4/H2	—	65	—	Benzofuran	250 °C, 5.1 MPa H2	Ethylcyclohexane	97	HDO, HYD	
173

Mo2C	TPR-CH4/H2	—	94	—	Propanal	300 °C, 0.1 MPa H2	Propylene	60%	HDO	
177

1-Propanol
Acetone
2-Propanol
WC	Carbothermal	—	—	—	Propanol	380 °C, 0.1 MPa H2	Propylene	>80%	HDO	
178

Propanal	5%
Mo2N	TPR-NH3	—	40	—	Guaiacol	300 °C, 5 MPa H2	Phenol	90	DMO	
179

Mo2N	TPR-NH3	γ-Al2O3	186–198	10 wt%	Oleic acid	380 °C, 7.15 MPa H2	
n-C18H38	99.9	HDO	
180

WN	
	
	186–198	9.6 wt%	
	
	
n-C17H36	97.1	DCO	

VN	
	
	186–198	3.2 wt%	
	
	
n-C17H36	97.0	DCO	

Mo2N	TPR-NH3	γ-Al2O3	191	8.39 wt% (Mo)	Guaiacol	300 °C, 5 MPa H2	Catechol	66	DME	
181

Mo2N	TPR-N2/H2	
	183	8.74 wt% (Mo)	
	
	Catechol	62	DME	

Mo2N	TPR-NH3	SBA-15	418	7.22 wt% (Mo)	Guaiacol	300 °C, 5 MPa H2	Phenol	44	DMO	

Mo2N	TPR-N2/H2	
	397	6.67 wt% (Mo)	
	
	Phenol	40	DMO	

Ni/Mo-N	TPR-NH3	ZSM-5	298.6	
	Vegetable oil	360–450 °C, 4.5 MPa H2	Hydrocarbon fuels	50	HDO, DCO	
182

Mo2N	TPR-NH3 or N2/H2	Activated carbon	>560	10 wt% (Mo)	Guaiacol	300 °C, 5 MPa H2	Phenol, catechol	10	DMO, DME	
183

Mo2N	TPR-NH3	Activated carbon	>752	10 wt% (Mo)	Guaiacol	300 °C, 5 MPa H2	Phenol, catechol	10	DMO, DME	
184

MoP	TPR-phosphate	—	8.80	—	4-Methylphenol	350 °C, 4.40 MPa H2	Toluene, HYD products	90	DDO, HYD, dehydration	
185

MoP	TPR-phosphate	—	136	—	4-Methylphenol	350 °C, 4.40 MPa H2	Toluene, HYD products	71	DDO, HYD, dehydration	
186

Ni2P	TPR-phosphate	—	101	—	4-Methylphenol	350 °C, 4.4–6.1 MPa H2	Toluene, HYD products	79	DDO, HYD, dehydration	
187

Ni2P	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	97	7.91 wt%	Benzofuran	370 °C, 3.1 MPa H2	Ethylbenzene	46	HDO	
188

Ni2P	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	102	18 wt%	Benzofuran	370 °C, 3.1 MPa H2	Ethylbenzene	80	HDO	
189

Ni2P	TPR-phosphate	SBA-15	206	18.8 wt% (Ni)	Methyl oleate	290 °C, 0.3–4 MPa H2	
n-Octadecane	80	HDO	
190

Ni2P	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	309	8.6 wt%	Guaiacol	200–300 °C, 0.1 MPa	Phenol, benzene	80	HDO	
191

Co2P	
	
	307	8.6 wt%	
	
	Phenol, benzene	70	HDO	

Fe2P	
	
	233	8.3 wt%	
	
	Phenol	64	HDO	

WP	
	
	147	19.9 wt%	
	
	Phenol	60	HDO	

MoP	
	
	207	12.8 wt%	
	
	Phenol, benzene	54	HDO	

Ni2P	TPR-phosphite	SiO2	217	7.9 wt%	2-Methyl-tetrahydrofuran	250–350 °C, 0.1 MPa	Pentane, butane	76	HDO	
159

Ni2P	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	177	7.9 wt%	
	
	Pentane, butane	97	HDO	

WP	TPR-phosphite	SiO2	178	19.9 wt%	
	
	Pentenes, pentadienes	65	HDO	

WP	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	149	19.9 wt%	
	
	Pentenes, pentadienes	64	HDO	

MoP	TPR-phosphite	SiO2	220	12.8 wt%	
	
	Pentenes, pentadienes	63	HDO	

MoP	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	174	12.8 wt%	
	
	Pentenes, pentadienes	31	HDO	

CoP	TPR-phosphite	SiO2	197	9.4 wt%	
	
	Pentane, butane	66	HDO	

CoP	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	158	9.4 wt%	
	
	Pentane, butane	40	HDO	

FeP	TPR-phosphite	SiO2	194	9.1 wt%	
	
	Pentenes, pentadienes	2	HDO	

FeP	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	185	9.1 wt%	
	
	Pentenes, pentadienes	24	HDO	

Ru2P	TPR-hypophosphite	SiO2	150	11.5 wt% (Ru)	Furan	400 °C, 0.1 MPa	C4	—	HDO	
192

RuP	TPR-hypophosphite	
	142	11.4 wt% (Ru)	
	
	C4	—	HDO	

RuP	TPR-phosphate	
	137	15 wt%	
	
	C4	—	HDO	

Ni2P	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	296	15 wt% (Ni)	Anisole	300 °C, 1.5 MPa H2	Phenol, benzene, cyclohexane	73.6 (HDO conversion)	DME, DDO, HYD	
193

MoP	
	
	288	15 wt% (Mo)	
	
	Phenol, benzene, cyclohexane	6.0 (HDO conversion)	DME, DDO, HYD	

Ni/Mo-P	
	
	291–351	15 wt% (Ni + Mo)	
	
	Phenol, benzene, cyclohexane	9.2–24.5 (HDO conversion)	DME, DDO, HYD	

Ni/Fe-P	TPR-phosphate	Zeolite	504–543	6 wt% (Ni + Fe)	2-Methyl-tetrahydrofuran	250–350 °C, 0.5 MPa H2	
n-Pentane, n-butane	70	HCR, DCO, HDO	
194

Ni2P	TPR-phosphite	SiO2	132–179	2.5–10 wt%	Dibenzofuran	200–300 °C, 3 MPa H2	Bicyclohexane	20 at 200 °C	HYD	
195

100 at 300 °C
Ni2P	TPR-phosphate	SiO2-H	411	12.6 wt%	Methyl laurate	300–340 °C, 2 MPa H2	
n-Undecane, n-dodecane	70–100	DCO, HDO	
196


	
	SiO2-L	238	13.7 wt%	
	
	
	70–100	
	


	
	MCM-41	163	11.6 wt%	
	
	
	50–100	
	


	
	SBA-15	354	12.7 wt%	
	
	
	65–100	
	

FeMoP	TPR-phosphate	—	—	—	Anisole	400 °C, 4.2 MPa H2	Benzene/cyclohexane	86	DDO, HYD	
197


	
	
	
	
	Phenol	
	Benzene/cyclohexane	93	
	


	
	
	
	
	Catechol	
	Benzene/phenol	>99	
	


	
	
	
	
	2-Phenoxyethyl-benzene	
	Ethylbenzene/benzene	>99	
	

Ni2P	TPR-phosphate	SiO2	127	11.2 wt%	Guaiacol	300 °C, 0.1 MPa H2	Catechol at high WHSV	(at 1.33 h−1) 23.1	DME, DMO, DDO	
198


	
	Al2O3	90	
	
	
	Benzene/phenol at low WHSV	97.9	
	


	
	ZrO2	47	
	
	
	
	71.5	
	


 	Fig. 17  Schematic depiction of carbide and carbosulfide surfaces and reactivity behaviors. Adapted from Dhandapani et al.173	 

 	Fig. 18  (A) Conversion and product selectivity for ethyl benzoate deoxygenation over NiMo carbide supported on SiO2 at 300 °C and 5 MPa H2, and (B) reaction network for ethyl benzoate transformations over NiMo carbide. Adapted from Zhang et al.175	 

 	Fig. 19  Proposed reaction network of esters on Mo2C/CNTs catalyst. Adapted from Han et al.176	 

 	Fig. 20  Deoxygenation reaction network of guaiacol over Mo2N catalysts. Adapted from Ghampson et al.183	 

 	Fig. 21  Tetrahedral Ni(1) site and pyramidal Ni(2) site in Ni2P unit cell. Reproduced with permission from Oyama et al.211	 

 	Fig. 22  Proposed deoxygenation reaction network of p-cresol (4-methylphenol) over MoP and Ni2P catalysts. Adapted from Whiffen et al.187	 

 	Fig. 23  Deoxygenation reaction network of anisole over Ni2P, MoP, and NixMoyP. Adapted from Li et al.193	 

 	Fig. 24  Deoxygenation reaction products and depiction of intermediate structures for 2-methyltetrahydrofuran on a Ni2P catalyst. Adapted from Bui et al.159	 

 	Fig. 25  Pathways for HDO and DCO of furan over RuxP catalysts. Adapted from Bowker et al.192	 
Mo2C(s) + 4O2(g) → 2MoO3(s) + CO2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −1545 kJ mol−1	(7)
Mo2C(s) + 3O2(g) → 2MoO2(s) + CO2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −1310 kJ mol−1	(8)
Mo2C(s) + 7/2O2(g) → 2MoO3(s) + CO(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −1311 kJ mol−1	(9)
Mo2C(s) + 5/2O2(g) → 2MoO2(s) + CO(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −1077 kJ mol−1	(10)
Mo2C(s) + 8H2O(g) → 2MoO3(s) + CO2(g) + 8H2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = 179 kJ mol−1	(11)
Mo2C(s) + 6H2O(g) → 2MoO2(s) + CO2(g) + 6H2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = −17 kJ mol−1	(12)
Mo2C(s) + 7H2O(g) → 2MoO3(s) + CO(g) + 7H2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = 197 kJ mol−1	(13)
Mo2C(s) + 5H2O(g) → 2MoO2(s) + CO(g) + 5H2(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = 0.4 kJ mol−1	(14)
Mo2N(s) + 4H2O(g) → 2MoO2(s) + NH3(g) + 5/2H2(g)ΔGrxn,327 °C = −54 kJ mol−1	(15)
VN(s) + H2(g) + H2O(g) →VO(s) + NH3(g) + 1/2H2(g)ΔGrxn,327 °C = 17 kJ mol−1	(16)
Mo2C(s) + 2H2(g) → 2Mo(s) + CH4(g)ΔGrxn,300 °C = 22 kJ mol−1	(17)
Mo2N(s) + 3/2H2(g) → 2Mo(s) + NH3(g)ΔGrxn,327 °C = 44 kJ mol−1	(18)
VN(s) + 3/2H2(g) → V(s) + NH3(g)ΔGrxn,327 °C = 181 kJ mol−1	(19)

 	Fig. 26  Proposed reaction pathway for phenol to bicyclics via electrophilic aromatic substitution of phenol with cyclohexanol (top) or aldol condensation of cyclohexanone (bottom) and subsequent deoxygenation. Adapted from Hong et al.276	 

 	Fig. 27  Relationship between feed cost and processing cost for fuel production from natural gas, crude oil, and lignocellulose. Reproduced with permission from Lange.18	 



Cost	Low	High	Intermediate
Synthetic complexity	Low-intermediate	Low	Intermediate-high
Bifunctionality	Saturated plane and edge sites for HYD (S–H)	Metallic sites for HYD	Metallic sites for HYD
Vacancy sites for C–O activation	Support introduces acid sites	Oxygen-modified sites (–OH) provide acid function
Activation energy for H2 dissociation	0.55–0.97 eVa MoSx67	0.19 eV Pt(111)280	0 eV MoP(001)282
0.34–0.52 eVa CoMoSx67	0.12 eV Pd(111)280
0.32–0.74 eVa NiMoSx279	0 eV Ru(0001)281
Deactivation pathways	Surface oxidation	Sintering	Surface oxidation
Coking	Sulfur poisoning	C/N/P loss

	Coking	Coking

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2014
