Recent progress on mixed transition metal nanomaterials based on metal–organic frameworks for energy-related applications  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2TA02076A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2TA02076A
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2022, 10, 9788-9820Recent progress on mixed transition metal nanomaterials based on metal–organic frameworks for energy-related applications

        
          
            Yangzhuo 
            He†
a, 
      
        
          
            Zhuo 
            Yin†
b, 
      
        
          
            Ziwei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Han 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Weiping 
            Xiong
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Biao 
            Song
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hong 
            Qin
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Piao 
            Xu
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Guangming 
            Zeng
          
          
        
      *ab
aCollege of Environmental Science and Engineering, Key Laboratory of Environmental Biology and Pollution Control (Ministry of Education), Hunan University, Changsha 410082, P. R. China. E-mail: piaoxu@hnu.edu.cn; zgming@hnu.edu.cn
bDepartment of Urology, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410011, P R China
Received 
      16th March 2022
    , Accepted 14th April 2022First published on 27th April 2022AbstractMOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials with tunable structure, high surface area, and adjustable pore size are attracting a great amount of research interest in many fields. This review focuses on the recent progress in the fabrication and utilization of MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials for energy-related fields. A variety of mixed transition metal nanomaterials, including mixed transition metal oxides/chalcogenides/phosphides/carbides/hydroxides, single-atom catalysts (SACs) with dual metal sites, alloys and their hybrids are systematically discussed related to the synthetic routes. Afterwards, the applications of these materials in energy storage and conversion, including lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors, hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR) are summarized. Finally, several challenges for the future development of MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials are proposed.Yangzhuo HeDr. Yangzhuo He received her BE degree from the Hunan Agricultural University in 2019. Then, she pursued her PhD degree in the College of Environmental Science and Engineering at the Hunan University under the supervision of Prof. Guangming Zeng and Prof. Piao Xu. Her current research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of MOF-based nanomaterials for catalytic and energy-related fields.Zhuo YinProf. Zhuo Yin is a Doctor of Medicine and director of Urinary Surgery Resident Training Program in the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. In the past 5 years, he has published more than 20 papers and presided over and participated in 5 national and provincial projects. He specializes in laparoscopic surgery, robotic surgery, endoscopic surgery, treating kidney diseases, adrenal diseases and so on.Piao XuProf. Piao Xu received her PhD degree from the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, in 2016. She is currently an assistant professor in the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University. Her major research focus is on the development of MOF-based nanomaterials and their application in electrocatalysis.Guangming ZengProf. Guangming Zeng teaches courses and performs research on Environmental Science and Health at Hunan University since 1988. He has been heading of the School of Environmental Science and Engineering since 1994 at the same University. He is one of 2017 and 2018 Highly Cited Researchers in the world issued by Clarivate Analytics. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and application of functional nanomaterials in the field of environment and energy.
Introduction
The global energy crisis and environmental issues have occurred as a result of unprecedented population growth and fossil fuel depletion.1–4 There is a pressing need to develop various types of efficient, green and sustainable energy sources, as well as new technologies related to energy storage and conversion. In recent years, renewable energy such as wind, tide and solar have emerged as eco-friendly substitutions that provide promising strategies to address the ever-increasing energy demand.5 However, these renewable energy sources are intermittent and highly depend on the season and region, thus hampering their widespread applications. Among these new energy storage and conversion technologies, including supercapacitors, batteries and electrochemical water splitting have drawn considerable attention because of their high efficiency, energy security and environmental benignancy.6,7 It is worth noting that the efficiency of these technologies is largely impeded by the sluggish kinetics of several key electrochemical reactions, such as the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), oxygen evolution reaction (OER) and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR).8–10 The search for next-generation electrode materials and electrocatalysts featuring high activity to expedite these reactions has attracted particular interest from both fundamental research and industry.11–13 Presently, noble metal-based materials (e.g., IrO2, RuO2, Pt, Au and Ag) are considered the most efficient electrocatalysts for a variety of electrochemical reactions but their high cost, scarcity and insufficient durability represent major obstacles in real industrial applications.14–16 Therefore, exploring the alternative nanomaterials with efficient, robust and low-cost features is highly desired for the successful realization of energy storage and conversion.
Earth-abundant transition metal (e.g., Fe, Co, Mn, Ni, Cu, Mo, etc.)-based materials have been identified as excellent candidates for the electrochemical field owing to their large reserves and economical prices. For example, iron element accounts for 5.1% of the crust quality. The average content of nickel in the crust is abundant at 0.018% and cobalt reserves are 0.001% (mass) in the crust.17 By virtue of favorable electronic conductivity and rational electronic configuration, recent years have witnessed great progress in the elaborate design and widespread applications of transition-metal based nanomaterials, some of which have even exhibited comparable performance to precious-metal materials.18 Notably, mixed transition metal nanomaterials have better activities in catalytic reactions as compared to their single-element counterparts, benefiting from the complementary and synergetic effect of different metal components.19–21 These materials with multimetallic active sites are demonstrated to promote catalytic properties and selectivity in a variety of chemical transformations.22–24 Conventional synthetic methods using wet impregnation, co-precipitation and combustion have been reported and implemented on commercial scales, whereas, there is difficulty in precisely controlling their elemental composition due to the varied reaction kinetics and redox potentials of different elements.25 Thus, there is growing interest in seeking advanced nanomaterials with controlled structures and chemical compositions.
Metal–organic frameworks, commonly called MOFs, which are self-assembled by metal nodes and organic ligands through chemical coordination bonds, have attracted significant attention in the scientific community due to their atomic-level structural uniformity, high surface area, tunable porosity and uniform pore structures.26–29 The metal center in MOFs usually are transition metal ions and lanthanide ions, and the organic linkers generally contain functional groups such as carboxylates, polyamines, pyridyl and cyano groups. To date, over 20000 different MOFs have been fabricated and characterized, as well as utilized in various applications, such as gas storage and separation, environmental remediation, sensing, and electrochemical energy storage and conversion.30,31 In addition to direct applications, MOFs have been widely developed as promising sacrificial templates/precursors to fabricate nanomaterials with high porosity, high surface area and distinctive morphology.32,33 Thanks to the flexibility of MOFs in structure and chemical composition, transition-metal-based materials can be purposely designed by selecting versatile metal centers and ligands. Using MOFs to construct mixed transition metal nanomaterials with high efficiency has many advantages: (1) tailored structure, size and composition can be achieved based on the targeted reaction by adjusting the synthesis parameters; (2) the interconnected carbon matrix derived from organic ligands is conducive to promoting the conductivity; (3) different metals can be integrated into one single structure without changing the original topology; (4) the coupling effect among diverse metals ensures their good performance in electrocatalysis.
Although several excellent reviews have been published on MOF-derived nanomaterials in energy storage and conversion, these articles mainly focus on the single metal-based materials and structure design, such as hollow and/or core–shell structure.34–36 A comprehensive and systemic summary on MOF-derived multi-metal materials has been neglected. In this review, the synthesis and electrochemical applications of MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials are emphasized. Recent progress on the mixed transition metal nanomaterials based on MOFs in terms of synthetic routes is summarized and classified into versatile types, including mixed transition metal oxides, mixed transition metal chalcogenides, mixed transition metal phosphides, mixed transition metal carbides, mixed transition metal hydroxides, single-atom catalysts (SACs) with dual metal sites, alloys and their hybrids. The applications of these nanomaterials in energy storage and conversion are discussed, especially for lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), supercapacitors, the HER, OER and ORR. This review aims to provide new thoughts and a deeper understanding of the elaborate synthesis and important role of mixed transition metal nanomaterials in energy-related fields.
Synthesis of mixed transition metal nanomaterials
Over the years, the explosive development of MOF derivatives has been witnessed by the scientific community. Specifically, MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials have been extensively studied due to their enormous potential applications in catalysis, sensors, energy storage and conversion, environmental cleaning, and so on. Compared to mono-metallic systems, mixing two or more metals into an integrated framework benefits the improvement of performance through the regulation or reinforcement of each component. It should be mentioned that pristine metal-based nanomaterials have poor electric conductivity, and the inevitable aggregation during high-temperature calcination greatly decreases the exposed surfaces of active sites, resulting in inferior performance in many applications. Notably, the fabrication of nanostructured mixed transition metal components/carbon composites has been proved as one of the most effective and straightforward routes to achieve high performance.37–39 The carbons could be obtained directly from organics in MOF frameworks without the need for other carbon sources, which provides a facile and economical method for preparing metal and carbon composites. In particular, N-doped carbon-based catalysts with active N sites have been confirmed as promising alternatives to noble-metal-based catalysts.40 In addition, the utilization of supportive substrates such as porous carbon, amorphous carbon, carbon nanotubes (CNTs), and graphene (GO) has been reported to achieve the orderly stacking of heterogeneous catalysts and maintain their porous structures after high-temperature carbonization, which is beneficial for improving the electrocatalytic activity and structural robustness.41–43
Currently, various novel synthesis methods have been reported for the fabrication of MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials, which could be classified as follows: (i) pyrolysis treatment, (ii) solid–liquid reaction and (iii) electrochemical synthesis method. Broadly, the pyrolysis treatment could be further categorized into three types: (i) self-pyrolysis in an inert atmosphere such as Ar or N2; (ii) thermal treatment in an oxidation/reduction atmosphere such as O2, air, H2S, NH3 and PH3; (iii) pyrolysis of MOF precursors with secondary reactants, including S powder, Se powder, NaH2PO2, NaSeO3, etc. Typically, heating MOFs in inert gas could produce alloys, single-atom catalysts and so on, while pyrolysis of MOFs with air/O2 can produce metal oxides. On the other hand, metal-containing nanomaterials like phosphides, chalcogenides, and carbides could be created by pyrolysis of MOFs with a reactive vapor or a secondary reactant. Solid–liquid reactions involve ion exchange, chemical etching, self-assembly, etc., which usually proceed by reacting MOF precursors with chemical regents under hydrothermal/solvothermal conditions. Through such methods, metal chalcogenides and metal hydroxides are often synthesized. The electrochemical synthesis approach is another attractive route towards the fabrication of MOF-derived metal nanomaterials (metal oxides, chalcogenides, phosphides and their corresponding carbon composites) with favourable properties, which could effectively control the rate and extent of MOF conversion via adjusting the reaction parameters. In the following sections, different types of MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials are systematically discussed in terms of synthetic routes. The merits of these functional materials are summarized in Fig. 1.
 Fig. 1  The merits of MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials. 

Mixed transition metal oxides. 
MOFs have been widely used as sacrificial templates/precursors to fabricate nanoarchitectured mixed transition metal oxides through solid-state thermolysis.44 Thanks to the abundance of oxygen on the Earth, mixed transition metal oxides are more popular as compared with other transition-metal-based materials because of their facile and economical synthetic processes. With the carbonization of MOFs in oxidative atmospheres (i.e., air), metal atoms anchored in MOF scaffolds can be transformed into the corresponding materials, and other elements (e.g., C, N, H) are separately oxidized to gas. During heat treatment, these generated gaseous molecules are released from MOFs and promote the formation of hierarchical porous structures with interconnected pores. By calcination in inert gas, the composites of metal oxides-loaded porous carbon can be obtained. It is worth noting that metal ions in MOFs with a reduction potential below −0.27 V, such as Zn2+, Mn2+ and Mg2+, are inclined to combine with oxygen in organic ligands to produce metal oxide nanoparticles (NPs) during thermolysis in nitrogen flow.45


Pure mixed transition metal oxides. 
Cobalt-based oxides and their polynary oxides with nickel (Co–Ni oxides), iron (Co–Fe oxides), copper (Co–Cu oxides) and so on are reported to be potential candidates in electrochemical applications due to their unique properties.46–48 For example, Antony and colleagues synthesized a series of non-stoichiometric NixCo3−xO4−y nanocages with various ratios of Ni to Co by using the Ni-doped zeolitic imidazolate framework-67 (ZIF-67) as precursors (Fig. 2a–f).49 The amount of Ni played an important role in the morphology of hollow NixCo3−xO4−y nanocages. Without the participation of Ni, ZIF-67-derived pristine Co3O4 presented a cage-like shape. Upon incorporating Ni, NixCo3−xO4−y formed dendritic structures on the cages, which was conducive to promoting the activity of metal sites. In the case of lower Ni-loaded catalysts, the 3D nanocages were composed of Co3O4 as the core and NixCo3−xO4−y on the cage surface as the shell. As the Ni amount became equal to Co, the inner Co3O4 cores were thoroughly transformed into NixCo3−xO4−y. Further higher ratios of Ni led to the co-presence of the NiO and NixCo3−xO4−y phase, implying that the surface of the 3D Ni–Co bimetal oxide was depleted in Co sites. Compared to the individual Co3O4, the NixCo3−xO4−y nanocage showed improved electrochemical reactivity due to the presence of Co2+/Co3+ and Ni2+/Ni3+.
 Fig. 2  (a–f) TEM images of the respective MOF-derived catalysts. The schematic shown at the bottom represents the evolution of the NixCo3−xO4−y catalyst when Ni is loaded in different concentrations, Ni/Co = 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 3. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2016, WILEY VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the multi-shelled structure. TEM images of (h) Ni–Co MOF and the products obtained after the calcination of the MOF at different temperatures: (i) 360 °C, (j) 390 °C, (k) 500 °C. The scale bars in (b–e) are 200 nm. FESEM and TEM images of (l and m) Mn–Co oxide, (n and o) Zn–Mn oxide, (p and q) Mn–Ni oxide, (r and s) Mn–Co–Ni oxide. All scale bars are 500 nm. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2017, WILEY VCH. 
Single hollow-shelled constructions tend to encounter low packing density owing to the huge void space inside. As such, multi-shelled structures have gained momentum in light of their complex architectures and aesthetic beauty.50–52 For instance, Lou et al. synthesized unique Ni–Co MOF spheres as precursors to fabricate multi-shelled mixed metal oxides by thermal oxidation.53 During this process, the formed oxide layer was friable and caused the spallation phenomena, eventually generating seven-layered multi-shelled Ni–Co bimetal oxides. Such a structure can be formed based on the heterogeneous contraction process induced by thermal treatment (Fig. 2g–k). Numerous connection regions within the crumpled neighboring layers could be recognized as shown in Fig. 2k, which favored the improvement of the structural stability of Ni–Co oxides. In this study, other multi-shelled mixed transition metal oxides including Mn–Co oxides, Zn–Mn oxides, Mn–Ni oxides and Mn–Co–Ni oxides were successfully prepared (Fig. 2l–s), manifesting a universal synthesis approach to fabricating multi-shelled ternary even quaternary metal oxides. Likely, ternary spinel NixCo3−xO4 microspheres with multi-shelled hollow structures were fabricated using Ni–Co-BTC (H2BTC = 1,3,5-benzenetricarboxylic acid) as self-sacrificing templates.54 This crafted structure was built of multiple porous shells assembled by nanosized building blocks and large hollow voids within the shells. The multiple hierarchical porous shells and the huge void space between them not only afforded an abundant contact area between the electrode and electrolyte but can also accommodate the large volume variation during cycling for lithium-ion batteries.
Aside from Co–Ni oxides, the coupling of Fe and Co was extensively fabricated.55 Guo et al. reported the conversion of solid Co[Fe(CN)6]0.667 nanocubes into hollow porous CoFe2O4 nanocubes at the low temperature of 350 °C in air.56 A further increase in the temperature caused the breaking of the interior nanocube structures. The as-synthesized materials presented a loose mesoporous architecture, which not only maintained the nanometer effect of active components but efficiently buffered the volume variation during the charge–discharge process. Given that most reported Fe–Co oxides contain less Co as compared with Fe, Li et al. utilized cation-doped Prussian blue analogues (PBAs) as precursors to synthesize porous FexCo3-xO4 nanocages with high Co content.57 Here, the Fe doping amount greatly impacted the final morphology of FexCo3−xO4 nanocages. As the Fe amount increased, the particle size correspondingly increased and the morphology became more and more uniform. This phenomenon may be ascribed to Fe doping triggering the variation of the crystal structure and helping to tune the solution growth of the nanoparticles.
Other metals integrated with Co-based oxides proved to be effective. Recently, CoCu-ZIF-derived Co-based homobimetallic hollow nanocages (C–CoCu–HNC) were synthesized by an ion-assistant solvothermal reaction and subsequent carbonization at low temperature.58 The as-prepared C–CoCu–HNC catalysts afforded an increase in surface oxygen vacancies, which was advantageous for the enhancement of the catalytic activity, leading to their optimal performance for peroxymonosulfate activation as compared to other obtained C−CoM−HNCs (M = Ni, Mn and Zn). In Wu's work, using bimetallic Zn–Co-ZIFs as precursors, porous ternary ZnxCo3−xO4 hollow polyhedra were fabricated by two-step calcination, including being first heated in N2 and then maintaining the same temperature in air.59 It is worth mentioning that the first pyrolysis in an inert atmosphere was in favor of reserving the ZIF skeletons because the formed carbons in this process could serve as a temporal buffer, hindering the further contraction of parent MOFs. Li et al. reported the successful transformation of bimetallic CoCeBDC (H2BDC = 1,4-benzenedicarboxylic acid) into CoCeOx catalyst by heat treatment under mild conditions.60 Compared with the traditional approach or single metallic MOF-templated method, this synthetic method achieved the molecular mixing of cobalt and ceria atoms, thus promoting an aliovalent substitution to realize good redox properties, high oxygen storage capacity and desirable stability.
Considering the toxicity of cobalt ions, other transition metals with environmentally benign species have been investigated. For example, Mn1.5FeO6.35 nanocubes were obtained by calcining Mn–Fe PBA precursors and were developed for groundwater remediation.61 The surfaces of Mn1.5FeO6.35 catalysts were dominated by MnIII/IV and FeII/III, which was advantageous for the peroxysulfate activation through catalysis by the Fe and Mn redox couple. Wang synthesized 2D layered CeCuBDC by a simple solvothermal method and further converted it into CeCuOx with the molecular mixing of two metals through calcination.62 Thermal decomposition of CeCuBDC created crystal strains and a large number of defects at the grain boundaries for high catalytic activity. The proposed approach in this work can be facilely utilized to synthesize other bimetallic oxides where molecular-level mixing enhances the material properties.
As highlighted in the above discussion, metal oxides from MOFs have been extensively synthesized; however, most are single-component materials. Multicomponent-active metal oxides (metal oxide/metal oxide or metal oxide@metal oxide) have been reported to exhibit improved functional performance compared to single-component counterparts owing to the intimate contact and created interfacial effect between different components, thus bringing appealing possibilities for improving the activity, selectivity and structural robustness.63,64 As an example, Li et al. reported yolk–shell structured ZnO/NiO microspheres using Zn–Ni MOFs as precursors.65 The nanorods grew uniformly on the surface of the microspheres and were interweaved with each other to assemble into a structure like that of urchins. In their study, the co-existence of Zn2+ and Ni2+ ions was very important for the formation of yolk–shell Zn–Ni MOFs. The distinctive structure and the synergistic effect from ZnO and NiO of ZnO/NiO microspheres made them high-performance anode materials for lithium-ion batteries. Based on a similar synthetic procedure, a typical ball-in-ball structured nanocomposite of NiO/ZnO was synthesized by the thermolysis of bi-MOF in air.66 Such composites showed superior electrochemical performance when used as supercapacitor electrodes due to the unique double-shelled hollow architectures.
Zhan et al. conceived a novel synthetic protocol to prepare binary compositions of multi-shelled hollow CuO/ZnO through a rapid thermal process.67 In this composite, ZnO as the primary phase was directly derived from amorphous (am) ZIF-90, and CuO as the secondary phase came from the Cu NPs preloaded on amZIF-90. Specifically, special amZIF-90 with random network topology was first produced in the presence of cetyltrimethylammonium chloride (CTAC) surfactant. Such a sample showed a dandelion-like configuration with a large number of radially distributed nanorods, which may have resulted from the surface pressurization effect on the nanoscale. In the next step, Cu ions were introduced into amZIF-90 and then reduced in situ to Cu NPs by a reducing agent, which existed not only on the outer layer of amZIF-90 but also in the whole porous structure of amZIF-90. After pyrolysis of amZIF-90/Cu in air, binary oxide CuO/ZnO spheres with quadruple-shelled hollow structures were yielded. Notably, the number of shells in the hollow structure could be controlled by adjusting the calcining temperature or heating ramp rate. It was observed that the formation of the unique structure relied on the Cu NPs-aided oxidative degradation of spherical amZIF-90. Calcining amZIF-90 alone or amZIF-90/Au only produced nonhollow samples.
Different from other complete thermal-oxidative decomposition of MOFs, Chen et al. reported the transformation of Ce-MOF into porous structured CeO2 by partial calcination in air followed by selective etching.68 In the early stage of calcination, Ce-MOF with a rod-like shape was gradually converted to core–shell structured CeO2@residual MOFs. After lactic acid etching, the residual MOFs were washed off, giving rise to the porous hollow CeO2. The partial thermal decomposition and selective etching process had an important impact on the creation of a hollow and porous architecture. The as-obtained CeO2 served as excellent support for the fabrication of the CeO2–CuO catalyst. Interestingly, the prepared CeO2–CuO catalysts still maintained the original morphology of CeO2 and exhibited the improved Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) surface area after the integration of CuO. The well-distributed Cu and Ce species were conducive to improving the interaction of CuO and CeO2 and further benefited catalytic reaction.


Mixed transition metal oxides/carbon composites. 
The in situ formation of carbon by the MOF-templated method can simplify the synthetic procedure and reduce the production cost.69 Chen prepared the MO-Co@N-doped carbon (M = Zn or Co) catalysts by heating bimetal ZnCo MOFs in N2 flow.70 The calcination temperature greatly affected the local hybrid nanostructures and the nanoparticle size. When treated at the optimal temperature of 700 °C, the monodispersed ZnO and Co NPs with small sizes were coated with N-doped carbons. At high temperatures, the cooperative effects of Co and Zn species favored the growth of multiwalled CNTs, which were advantageous for the charge transfer during the electrocatalytic process. Besides, the presence of Zn atoms in MOF precursors could lead to high porosity, large BET surface area as well as high electrochemically active surface areas for resultant catalysts. In another case, bimetal Ni–Co/BDC was successfully transformed into the porous NiCo/NiO–CoO and nanoporous carbon (NiCo/NiO–CoO NPCC) composites via general pyrolysis in N2, where metal (Ni, Co) and metal oxide (NiO, CoO) NPs were homogeneously dispersed in the carbon matrix.71 The 3D ultrathin porous structures offered efficient contact between the electrode and electrolyte, as well as increased the availability of more active sites for the electro–oxidation reaction. In comparison to Ni/NiO/NPCC and Co/CoO/NPCC, the mixed metal/metal oxide nanocomposites with distinctive architecture and powerful synergy effect between Ni, Co, NiO and CoO displayed a remarkable catalytic performance.
Qin et al. proposed a novel strategy for the fast and low-energy production of a hollow architecture with controllable components and morphology.72 MOF/sodium alginate (SA) hydrogel was first synthesized and then converted into magnetic core–shell Fe3O4–CuO@carbon hollow spheres (Fig. 3a). Specifically, CuBTC and CuBDC were initially grown on the SA hydrogel capsule surface based on the anchored lots of Cu2+ sites. The subsequent freezing-replacement rather than traditional heat-drying was applied to overcome the shrinkage of the interior structure and create a rigid coconut shell-like hollow structure with great mechanical strength. The formation of such a hollow structure was primarily ascribed to the lower surface tension of the introduced hexane molecules (18.4 mN m−1) as compared with H2O (72.75 mN m−1). Due to the sharp thermal shrinkage of the hydrogel, the apparent folds occurred on the internal surface of the host matrix. Noticeably, the sample without freezing-replacement post-modification presented a cabbage-like morphology (Fig. 3b). In the next procedure, the vapor deposition of ferrocene on the MOF/SA hydrogel capsule and pyrolysis was carried out to produce the final Fe3O4–CuO@carbon composite. After thermal treatment, the ferrocene molecules were converted into nanoparticles and homogeneously distributed on the MOF-derived skeletons. Under the protection of Fe3O4 and CuO, the inner wall of SA was successfully developed into a carbon layer. In comparison with the pristine MOF/SA hydrogel, treatment at a high temperature allowed hollow architectures to gain high stability and pH endurance, which were conducive to practical application.
 Fig. 3  (a) Assembly of the core–shell Fe3O4–CuO@carbon hollow sphere derived from the MOFs composite hydrogel through the combination of chemical vapor deposition and pyrolysis. (b) Schematic illustration of freezing-replacement post-treatment on the structure of the Fe3O4–CuO@carbon sphere. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the syntheses of Co/MnOx@quasi-MOF-74 and Co/MnOx@C catalysts. HAABF-STEM images of (d) CoMn-MOF-74 and (e) the derived Co/MnOx@quasi-MOF-74. High-resolution TEM images of (f) CoMn-MOF-74 and (g) Co/MnOx@quasi-MOF-74. (h) XRD patterns and (i) N2 sorption isotherms of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
As we know, MOFs heated at high temperatures usually cause collapsed skeletal structures, leading to low surface area and porosity. Accordingly, a transition-state of MOFs, that is quasi-MOF, was developed by partial deligandation, which could not only inherit the structural framework and high porosity of the original MOFs but also acquire the stability of MOF derivatives.73–75 For example, a composite of the core–shell-structured Co/MnOx@quasi-MOF-74 was constructed by strictly controlling the thermal treatment of CoMn-MOF-74, wherein, the Co/MnOx NPs were formed in situ within the skeleton of the bimetallic MOFs (Fig. 3c–g).76 When treated at 400 °C, the framework and porosity of the original CoMn-MOF-74 were retained to a great extent and formed Co/MnOx@quasi-MOF-74 (Fig. 3h). A further increase in the temperature to over 500 °C resulted in the CoMn-MOF-74 nanocrystals being completely decomposed to metallic Co, MnO and porous carbon, and Co/MnOx@C was eventually formed. During the calcination process, the carbon components were enriched in the external surfaces of the MOF-74-derived materials, whereas, most metal Co and Mn gradually moved into the interior of the support with the increase of the temperature. Compared to these completely decomposed samples, the Co/MnOx@quasi-MOF-74 obtained by partial deligandation possessed higher BET surface area and pore volume, as well as smaller Co/MnOx NPs (Fig. 3i). Similarly, Fan et al. fabricated Cu/Ce-BTC nanorods by calcination under various thermal conditions to partially or completely remove organic ligands.77 When treated in N2 flow, there was only partial deligandation of Ce-BTC to produce Cu/Ce-BTC-N with the co-existence of Ce2O and Ce-BTC, which was defined as “quasi-MOF”. The partial decomposition could intensively enhance the intimate interaction between metal NPs and Ce nodes, yet the formed carbon had detrimental effects on the catalytic activity.
Aside from the in situ-generated carbons, introducing additional carbons with large surface area and good electrical conductivity are beneficial for enhancing the electrochemical activity and accommodating more efficient bimetallic oxides to increase reactive sites.78–80 For example, using graphene oxide (GO) as substrates, Wei and co-workers reported a three-stage synthesis method to prepare a composite of amorphous FeaCo1−aOx NPs anchored on N-doped reduced GO (NrGO).81 Prussian blue (PB) or FeCo PBA crystals ≈ 5 nm in size were first grown on the GO surface with the help of polyethyleneimine (PEI) polymer binder. By altering the concentration of hexacyanometalate solutions and the dripping speed of the metal cation solution, the crystal sizes of MOF precursors could be carefully tuned. After low-temperature oxidative decomposition, PB/PBA nanocrystals evolved into amorphous FeaCo1−aOx NPs (0 ≤ a ≤ 1) accompanied by the transformation of polymer/GO to NrGO. In this process, the removal of oxygenated functional groups and N being doped into GO took place concurrently, which altered the physicochemical properties of GO nanosheets. Likewise, a novel nanocomposite of mesocrystal ZnCo2O4 on rGO was successfully constructed.82 Initially, numerous hydroxyl and carbonyl functional groups on the GO surface were strongly bound with Zn2+ and Co2+ ions. At the same time, the benzene rings from GO attracted organic ligands by noncovalent π–π interactions. After that, ZnCo-ZIF was evenly distributed on the wrinkled rGO to form the rGO@ZnCo-ZIF precursor, which was further converted into hierarchical rGO@ZnCo2O4 hybrids by annealing. The in situ growth of ZnCo2O4 mesocrystals on rGO nanosheets benefited the transport of the photo-excited carriers.


Mixed transition metal chalcogenides. 
Metal chalcogenides have a general chemical formula MX2, where M represents a transition metal (e.g. Co, Zn, Ni, Fe, Mo, etc) and X stands for a chalcogen, commonly S, Se or Te.83 Mixed transition metal chalcogenides, by the incorporation of hetero-metal elements, possess excellent catalytic activity and superior electrochemical performance due to the abundant active sites, large exposed surface area and good redox properties.84,85 When applied as electrodes for lithium storage, these transition-metal-based chalcogenides can present almost two or three times higher capacities than commercial electrode materials.86 In recent years, MOFs have been considered as attractive precursors for the preparation of mixed transition metal chalcogenides, particularly for metal sulfides and metal selenides, with the help of S and Se-containing chemicals.


Mixed transition metal sulfides. 
Mixed transition metal sulfides could bring down the kinetic energy barriers of the electrochemical reactions by facilitating charge transfer between diverse ions as well as manipulating electronic structures.87,88 The phase boundaries at the heterointerfaces of mixed metal sulfides can create numerous lattice distortions, mismatches, as well as defects, significantly impacting the charge carrier transport behavior via adjusting the reaction kinetics.89 Compared to metal oxides and hydroxides, metal sulfides have a lower bandgap energy and thus a higher specific capacity. Besides, they generally show improved electrical conductivity and faster reaction kinetics in light of the easier breakage of the M–S bond in metal sulfides than the M–O in metal oxides. Taking NiCo2S4 as an example, its conductivity is two-fold that of NiCo2O4 and almost 200 times that of NixOy or CoxOy.90 The considerable enhancement of the electrochemical properties makes them appealing in energy storage and conversion. To date, direct calcination methods and liquid-phase methods have been widely utilized for the preparation of mixed metal sulfides. The former typically involves the direct pyrolysis of MOF precursors with S powder, while the latter, including the hydrothermal method and solvothermal method, often takes place using Na2S and thioacetamide (TAA) as S sources.
The synthesis of hollow transition-metal-based sulfides with well-defined morphology, high porosity and abundant reactive sites has attracted much attention.91 For example, hollow MxCo3−xS4 polyhedra were successfully fabricated from homogeneous bimetallic MCo-MOFs (M = Zn, Ni, Cu) through solvothermal sulfidation with TAA, followed by thermal annealing at 350 °C in N2 (Fig. 4a–e).92 The incorporation of a second metal did not affect the cell parameters of Co3S4 due to the very similar ionic radii of host and guest metal ions (Fig. 4f–h). In the sulfidation reaction, S2− ions released from TAA gradually reacted with metal ions to form metal sulfides. Due to the different diffusion rates of metal ions and S2− ions caused by the significantly different ionic radius between them, the hollow structure was finally formed. Recently, a novel hierarchical structured MnCo2S4/Co9S8 was fabricated via an in situ vulcanization approach (Fig. 4i).93 The MnCo layered double hydroxide (LDH) precursors were first prepared by a general hydrothermal method and then mixed with 2-methylimidazole (2-MIM) to produce dandelion-like structured MnCo-LDH/ZIF-67 crystals. Then, the as-synthesized MnCo-LDH/ZIF-67 was added to a TAA-ethanol solution to obtain the final waxberry-like MnCo2S4/Co9S8 composite (Fig. 4j and k). In this architecture, hollow Co9S8 polyhedra with thin walls covered the tips of MnCo2S4 nanoneedles (Fig. 4l and m), which was beneficial for the rapid electron/ion transport kinetics and effective ion diffusion, and provided abundant active sites. For comparison, MnCo2O4/Co3O4 composites only showed low conductivity and thus poor electrochemical performance.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of hollow Co-based bimetallic sulfides. (b) Powder XRD patterns and (c and d) cell units of Co3S4 and MxCo3−xS4. Blue, yellow, and purple balls represent Co, S, and M atoms, respectively. SEM images of (e) Zn0.30Co2.70-MOF and (f) Zn0.30Co2.70S4. TEM images of Zn0.30Co2.70S4 before (g) and after (h) annealing treatment. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i) Schematic fabrication process of the waxberry-like MnCo2S4/Co9S8 composite. (j and k) SEM images of the MnCo2S4/Co9S8 composite. (l and m) TEM images of the MnCo2S4/Co9S8 hierarchical structure. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 
In another case, hollow hierarchical Cu(NiCo)2S4/Ni3S4 heterostructures with 3D flower-like shapes were designed by two-step in situ ion exchange reactions.94 The adopted method in this work not only achieved structural preservation but also composition control. In the presence of Ni(NO3)2, bimetallic CuCo-MOFs were transformed into CoCuNi–OH intermediates through hydrolysis-controlled ion exchange and then reacted with S2− ions in Na2S solution. After subsequent ion-exchange reactions, the obtained trimetallic composites still completely inherited the microflower morphology of the bi-MOF precursors. In such 3D flower-shaped composites, these petal sheets comprising of a large number of cross-connected nanoparticles produced ample space among neighboring architectures, thus significantly enlarging the surface area and providing 3D stable channels for efficient electrolyte ion/electron transport. The presence of a mixed composition of Cu2+/Cu+, Ni3+/Ni2+ and Co3+/Co2+ favored the improvement of electrochemical activity by offering abundant faradaic reaction sites.
Wu successfully fabricated hollow multi-shelled Ni–Co–S microspheres containing NiS2 and NiCo2S4 by a three-step method.95 The obvious boundary between NiS2 and NiCo2S4 could create an effective interfacial effect to enhance the HER electrocatalytic activity. In this study, the sulfurization temperature and the dosage of S powder significantly impacted the HER performance. Specifically, higher temperatures (over 340 °C) and excessive S powder (more than 600 mg) led to the partial destruction of the ball-like architecture due to the violent reaction. Low temperature and insufficient S sources would reduce the sulfurization degree, thus generating excess NiO to block the active sites of NiCo2S4, further causing poor catalytic activity. The intact multi-shell hollow morphology and low NiO amount exposed more active sites of NiS2 and NiCo2S4. Similarly, shell-in-shell hollow structured Zn–Co–S rhombic dodecahedral cages (RDCs) were fabricated by a novel strategy involving chemical etching and a sulfurization reaction (Fig. 5a).96 Initially, the as-synthesized Zn/Co-ZIF rhombic dodecahedrons (RDs) were controllably etched to obtain unique yolk-shelled Zn/Co-ZIF RDCs (step (i) in Fig. 5a–d). This process induced by tannic acid (as the etching agent) was a surface functionalization-assisted etching reaction without phase transition or new product generation (Fig. 5e). Subsequently, a solvothermal treatment using TAA as the sulfidation agent was applied to transform the yolk-shelled Zn/Co-ZIF RDCs into double-shelled Zn–Co–S RDCs (step (ii) in Fig. 5a), which showed large surface area, numerous active sites and accelerated mass/charge transport.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of double-shelled Zn–Co–S RDCs. TEM images of (b) Zn/Co-ZIF RDs, (c) yolk-shelled Zn/Co-ZIF RDCs, and (d) double-shelled Zn–Co–S RDCs. (e) XRD patterns of Zn/Co-ZIF RDs and yolk-shelled Zn/Co-ZIF RDCs. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the formation of hollow Co3S4@MoS2 heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Transition metal atom-doped MoS2 could further optimize the electronic structure and was considered an effective method for improving the HER activity.97 For example, a composite of Ni, Co-incorporated MoS2 nanoboxes was synthesized through the reaction of Ni–Co PBA nanocubes and ammonium thiomolybdate.98 The nanosheets first grew on the surface of Ni–Co PBA nanocubes, followed by the generation of crossing-like voids inside the nanocubes as time went on. On further prolonging the reaction time to 20 h, PBA precursors were completely etched away and formed the well-defined Ni–Co–MoS2 nanoboxes assembled by ultrathin nanosheets. In this process, the etching reaction was simultaneously accompanied by the growth of MoS2 nanosheets. Benefiting from the high surface area and active edge sites, MoS2 nanosheets largely contributed to the improvement of the HER performance. As another example, core–shell Co3S4@MoS2 heterostructures were constructed by a two-step temperature-raising hydrothermal method followed by annealing in N2 flow, where Na2MoO4·2H2O acted as the Mo source (Fig. 5f).99 Firstly, ZIF-67 precursors were converted in situ into hollow Co3S4 polyhedrons in TAA solution at 120 °C, and no MoS2 nanosheets were yielded at the low reaction temperature. When the temperature was increased sequentially to 200 °C, the MoS2 nanosheets outer shell grew on the surface layer of Co3S4 polyhedrons as the core because of the barrier effect of hollow Co3S4 polyhedrons. The unique core–shell Co3S4@MoS2 heterostructures integrated the intrinsic catalytic properties of both Co3S4 and MoS2, making them efficient bifunctional catalysts for the HER and OER.
Sulfur species can be trapped through physical adsorption with the help of carbons.100 The strong interaction and synergistic effect of the mixed metal species, doped N atoms as well as the carbon lattice created numerous localized active regions through tuning the surface charge distribution on carbons by the electron transfer effect.101 Using Ni3[Co(CN)6]2 as precursors, Lin et al. synthesized hollow nanocube (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC composites (Fig. 6a).102 Initially, a core–shell structured nanoparticle of Ni3[Co(CN)6]2 coated with phenol formaldehyde (RF) by a self-polymerization process was synthesized and then evolved into the Ni3[Co(CN)6]2@RF350°C composite through annealing at 350 °C. This was followed by a vulcanization reaction with Na2S and further calcination in Ar at 550 °C; the final product composed of the (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8 core embedded in an N-doped porous carbon shell was obtained. The formation of the rigid hollow nanocube structure can be ascribed to the retained outer cubic shell, while there was shrinkage of the inner core, thus leaving an obvious void between them. It is worth pointing out that the RF coating combined with two pyrolysis procedures plays an important role in maintaining the structure of the original MOFs.
 Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC hollow nanocube composite synthesis process. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2019, WILEY VCH. (b) Schematic of the preparation of 3D hetero-structured bimetallic Ni–Fe–S-CNT. (c) Dark-field TEM image and corresponding mapping images of Ni–Fe–S-CNT. TEM images of (d) Ni–Fe-PBA-CNT and (e and f) Ni–Fe–S-CNT. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2020, WILEY VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Co,Fe-NC@rGO, S–Co9−xFexS8@rGO, and Co9−xFexS8@rGO. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2018, WILEY VCH. 
Due to the catalysis of transition metals, especially Co element, the in situ growth of CNTs with high surface area and efficient charge channels can be achieved.103 For example, porous hierarchical CoNi2S4@PCS/CNTs spheres were synthesized by sulfurizing Co/Ni-MOF-74 with S powders under the flow of 10% H2–Ar mixed gas.104 In such samples, numerous CNTs deeply rooted in the surface of the carbon nanosheets-assembled spheres by the catalysis of Co metal. Moreover, sulfur could facilitate the growth of CNTs during the sulfidation process as well. The formation of CNTs was conducive to improving the conductivity of bimetallic sulfides and ensuring structural stability during cycling. Differently, in another example, the growth of CNTs in Co–Zn–S@N–S–C-CNT composites was promoted by the catalytic effect of Co element to decompose acetylene gas rather than MOF organics.105 Co/Zn-based ZIF-67 was carbonized to Co/Co3ZnC@N–C-CNT intermediates in a chemical vapor reduction/deposition process under a flowing gas mixture of 95% N2 and 5% C2H2. There was no CNT growth when the reaction was carried out in the N2 atmosphere. After a vulcanized reaction with sulfur powder, the final product of CNTs deep-rooted in porous CoS2/Zn0.975Co0.025S@N–S co-doped carbon was obtained. The N-doped carbon outer layer was formed mainly by the decomposition of organic linkers in MOFs.
Other than the in situ growth of CNTs, the introduction of pre-functionalized CNTs by strong oxidant is another reliable strategy to produce multi-metal sulfide/carbon composites. Zhang et al. introduced additional CNTs as conductive bridges to connect PBA-derived NiS/FeS nanocubes to form porous cage-like Ni–Fe–S-CNT (Fig. 6b), where hetero-structured bimetallic sulfides were uniformly incorporated into N-doped porous carbon cubes interconnected with CNTs (Fig. 6c).106 Firstly, pristine CNTs were functionalized through a conventional acidizing process to form the carboxylic CNTs (CNTs-COOH). Afterwards, the mixed-valence PBA cubes were nucleated and grown on the CNTs-COOH surface (Fig. 6d). Using S powder as the sulfur source, the Fe and Ni ions were vulcanized to form FeS and NiS, and PBA was heated to obtain N-doped amorphous carbon. The CNTs were successfully inserted into the Ni–Fe–S mixed units to form a 3D chain-shaped network structure (Fig. 6e and f). Differing from anchored sulfide NPs on CNTs surface by many O-containing functional groups, a microwave-assisted bubble bursting was reported for the effective synthesis of the barely array-like Co8FeS8/CoS@CNT nanoarchitecture.107 Herein, using ZIF-67 derived double hydroxides as precursors and sublimed sulfur as the vulcanizing agent, ultrathin Co8FeS8 and CoS NPs were homogeneously grown on the surface of the orderly rearranged CNT through the bubble bursting effect, the generation of which highly relied on the mixed solvent of deionized water and ethylene glycol. CNTs in this process served as both shape-directing agents and conductive reinforcing components. The novel strategy not only increased the exposed active site but also immobilized metal sulfide NPs on the highly conductive CNT skeleton for efficient electron transfer.
Aside from CNTs, graphene, with excellent conductivity and flexibility has been widely introduced as an ideal substrate to accommodate metal NPs.108 Liu successfully synthesized the rGO-wrapped Co9−xFexS8 hybrid by a semi-vulcanization and calcination method (Fig. 6g).22 GO-wrapped CoFe-ZIF was used as the precursor and was subjected to a semi-vulcanization reaction followed by heat treatment to obtain the final S–Co9−xFexS8@rGO composite. rGO sheets played a protective role to avoid particle aggregation and further improved the conductivity, charge transfer ability, as well as long-term stability. For comparison, Co9−xFexS8@rGO and Co,Fe–N–C@rGO were prepared by deep-vulcanization and direct calcination without vulcanization, respectively (Fig. 6g). The S–Co9−xFexS8@rGO composites as bifunctional electrocatalysts combined the dual active sites of active Co9−xFexS8 for the OER and active Co, Fe–N–C for the ORR. This work provided a simple and effective strategy for the preparation of MOF-derived bifunctional electrocatalysts through the semi-vulcanization and pyrolysis routes. Likely, MOF-74-derived NiCo2.5S4 microrods wrapped in rGO (NCS@rGO) nanocomposites were synthesized by the sulfuration reaction with S powder.109 The introduction of rGO helped the uniform dispersion of NiCo2.5S4 and the existence of NCS contributed to improving the ordered structure of rGO. Such a structure with a conductive 3D network restrained the agglomeration.


Mixed transition metal selenides. 
Metal-like transition metal selenides regarded as advanced multifunctional materials have attracted considerable attention in many fields.110–112 In the periodic table, Se is located in the same group as O and S, and theoretically shares similar chemical properties but higher electric conductivity (1 × 10−3 S m−1) as compared to S (5 × 10−28 S m−1) and O (1 × 10−5 S m−1),113,114 endowing the transition metal selenides with great potential in various electrochemical applications. Mixed transition metal selenides with mixed phases of different metal selenides showed rapid electronic transfer and more active sites due to the distinctive valence electronic structure and unsaturated Se atoms.115–117 Meanwhile, the cumulative 3d–2p repulsion of the Se d-band center and metal d band center as well as the negative charge around Se sites are beneficial to the fast delivery of dioxygen molecules during the OER reaction.118 As an example, Xuan et al. prepared Se-enriched Ni–Fe–Se by a hydrothermal method and selenization with Se powder.119 During the hydrothermal reaction, hydrazine hydrate played the role of the reducing agent and provided a basic environment. Se powder was reduced to Se2−, and reacted with Ni and Fe ions in a basic solution to form the final NiFe-based selenides. Compared to Ni–Fe–O, Ni–Fe–Se exhibited improved electronic conductivity and reduced charge transfer resistance, thus generating higher oxidative valence of Ni species for the OER reaction.
Lou proposed a two-step ion-exchange method to fabricate hierarchical Cu–CoSe2 microboxes composed of ultrathin nanosheets (Fig. 7a–d).120 Starting from Co–Co PBA, hierarchical CoSe2 microboxes were obtained by an anion-exchange reaction with Se2− ions. As the temperature was elevated, the solid microcubes were gradually transformed into hierarchical hollow structures (Fig. 7e), which was ascribed to the different diffusion rates of cobalt ions and Se2− ions. Following cation exchange with Cu2+ ions, Cu–CoSe2 microboxes were synthesized. Benefiting from the interior hollow structure and Cu doping, Cu–CoSe2 microboxes showed excellent sodium storage properties. Similarly, hierarchical (Ni0.33Co0.67)Se2 complex hollow spheres (CHSs) were prepared by a simple two-step method.121 The outer shell was constructed of ultrathin nanosheets while the inner core had a multishelled hollow and porous architecture, dramatically increasing the surface area with more active sites, further resulting in enhanced specific capacitance for pseudocapacitors.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-step ion-exchange reactions for the synthesis of Cu–CoSe2 microboxes. (b and c) FESEM images and (d and e) TEM images of Cu–CoSe2 microboxes. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2018, WILEY VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of Fe–CoSe2@NC. SEM images of (g) ZIF-67, (h) Fe-ZIF-67, and (i) Fe–CoSe2@NC. (j) EDS elemental mapping images of Fe–CoSe2@NC. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the rGO@MCSe composite. SEM images of (l) MCSe and (m) rGO@MCSe (inset: optical photograph of 3D structure). (n) TEM image of rGO@MCSe. (o) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of rGO@MCSe (inset: pore size distribution plot). Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2020, WILEY VCH. 
Recently, a novel gas bubble-templated method was developed to construct hierarchical CoSe2/MoSe2 hollow nanospheres.122 At first, MoO42− and Se powder were converted into Mo4+ ions and Se2− ions, respectively, using the reducing agent N2H4·H2O, which was also used to provide gas bubbles in the reaction system. Afterwards, Co2+ ions and Mo4+ ions reacted with Se2− to form CoSe2 nanorods and MoSe2 NPs, respectively. As the reaction continued, N2 bubbles were generated at a suitable rate, accompanied by the self-assembly phenomenon on the surface of these bubbles for the in situ growth of Co–Mo nanosheets by providing the aggregation and nucleation centers. Later, tiny CoSe2 and MoSe2 nanocrystals slowly dissolved in the solution and the crystallites grew around the two-phase interface of N2 bubbles and H2O to form hollow CoSe2/MoSe2 nanospheres. When the concentration of Co2+ ions was relatively low, fewer N2 bubbles were released and were insufficient for adsorbing Co2+ and Mo4+ ions, thus failing to form hollow structures. This was because Co2+ ions had a higher reactivity with Se2− than Mo4+.
The construction of multi-metal selenide/C hybrids with distinctive structures, tailorable porosity and interfaces with good contact is often implemented to further enhance the functional properties.123–125 For example, a hybrid of Fe-doped CoSe2 incorporated in N-doped carbon (Fe–CoSe2@NC) was fabricated by a simple two-step approach (Fig. 7f).126 Initially, ZIF-67 precursors were etched by Fe3+ ions from iron nitrate to obtain the Fe-ZIF-67. In the meanwhile, the structure became more porous and showed an increased active surface area (Fig. 7g and h). Subsequently, the Fe-ZIF-67 was selenized with Se vapor to form the Fe–CoSe2@NC hybrid dodecahedron, where Fe element with a relatively low density was homogeneously dispersed in the whole composite frameworks (Fig. 7i and j). Based on the density functional theory (DFT) calculations, Fe doping could induce the amelioration of the electron structure, thus improving the HER performance. The N-rich carbon support with large surface area and porous structure also assisted in electrocatalytic activity. Sun et al. synthesized a porous microrod composite of carbon-coated bimetal selenide (Co–Zn–Se@C) by calcination with Se powder.127 The existence of a carbon matrix led to the enhanced electronic conductivity and structural stability of the Co–Zn–Se@C electrode. Recently, Li and co-workers reported NiCo2Se4/N-doped porous carbon (NiCo2Se4@NPC) nanocubes by a direct selenization treatment process.128 Compared to the pure NiCo2Se4 with obvious aggregation, the presence of porous carbon greatly increased the dispersibility and electronic conductivity.
As for the additional carbonaceous matrix, CNTs and GO with excellent features and low cost are extensively applied. Wang reported that Fe–Mn–PBAs were grown in situ on the carboxylic CNTs surface to form a CNTs-adhered Mn–Fe PBA (Mn–Fe PBA/CNTs) conductive network.129 The as-obtained PBA/CNTs precursors were selenized at 500 °C with Se powder. During this process, Fe ions and Mn ions were transformed into FeSe2 and MnSe, respectively. In such a composite, each Mn–Fe–Se sphere was assembled with many voids and several tens of nanoparticles, and individual nanoparticles were evenly encapsulated by a thin N-doped amorphous carbon layer. Recently, GO nanosheets were introduced as a conductive carbon substrate to compactly wrap MoSe2/CoSe2 NPs to form rGO@MCSe composites (Fig. 7k–m).130 First, Mo/Co-MOF-derived MoSe2/CoSe2 (MCSe) NPs were functionalized by poly(diallydimethylammonium chloride) to positively charge the surfaces. Then, the prepared MCSe NPs were added to the negatively charged GO solution to obtain GO@MCSe composites, which were further transformed into rGO@MCSe composites by annealing at 500 °C. The carbon framework derived from MOFs not only limited the size and hindered the aggregation but also ameliorated the mechanical strain, guaranteeing the intimate coupling interaction with the conductive carbon substrate. In comparison to pure MCSe, the introduction of rGO increased the specific surface area and resulted in the mesoporous structure; the interconnected wrinkled rGO and the produced hollow carbon scaffold with bimetallic selenide NPs created a conductive highway (Fig. 7n and o), giving a fast transfer channel for Na/K-ions and electrons.


Mixed transition metal phosphides. 
P element shows great potential in the preparation of highly efficient catalysts when used as a dopant or as phosphide because the electronegativity of the P atom is inclined to capture the electrons from metal atoms.131–133 In general, P possesses lone-pair electrons in vacant 3d orbitals and 3p orbitals, and thereby can accommodate the surface charge state as well as induce the local charge density.134,135 Mixed transition metal phosphides with the optional combination of Co, Fe and Ni, have been widely studied due to the hydrogenase-like catalytic mechanism, noble-metal-free properties and high catalytic activity.136,137 To fabricate MOF-derived mixed transition metal phosphides, hydrated sodium hypophosphite (NaH2PO2·H2O), which usually serves as the P source, was placed upstream of the tube furnace during the phosphorization process. When the temperature was over 250 °C, NaH2PO2 decomposed and released PH3, which can directly react with metal oxides or MOF precursors to form metal phosphides.138 In this reaction, the local coordination environment and electronic structure of the as-obtained products can be manipulated by P doping, which contributes to improving the conductivity and the catalytic activity.139,140 Besides, the low-temperature phosphorization is beneficial for keeping the original structure and morphology of parent MOFs.


Pure mixed transition metal phosphides. 
Fabricating multi-metal phosphides with unique nanostructures is an attractive strategy for improving the intrinsic activity in various applications. Yan and co-workers developed a simple and controllable synthesis method for bimetal Co4Ni1P nanotubes through a low-temperature phosphorization with NaH2PO2.141 This work was the first report of MOF-derived transition bimetal phosphides nanotubes without the use of additional templates or molds for replication. The unique nanotube morphology with a large surface area and a well-defined inner channel was formed by a tubular gallery running through the nanorod structure, contributing to the low kinetic energy barriers for charge/mass transport.142,143 Li et al. used PBA nanocubes as a platform for the construction of Co1−xFexP with a continuously tunable Co/Fe ratio (0 < x < 1).144 With the increase in the Fe content, the particle size of Co1−xFexP got smaller while its structural stability became worse, indicating that the proportion of Co and Fe in metal phosphides could not only affect the crystal structure but also influence the structure strength. Notably, the small size of Co1−xFexP was advantageous for exposing more active sites, and the modulated electronic structure by Fe doping improved the catalytic activity.
Recently, the 3D hierarchical flower-like CoNi–P composed of 2D interconnected nanosheets was synthesized by treatment with NaH2PO2.145 Owing to the similar ionic radius, Ni atoms were homogeneously intercalated into the crystal lattice of CoP, causing the electronic modulation of the 3D hierarchical bimetallic phosphides. The relatively low-temperature phosphorization created in-plane pores on the ultrathin nanosheets and resulted in the samples having a high specific surface area and wide pore size distribution from microporous to mesoporous. Such a distinctive structure was beneficial for accelerating the accessibility of the electrolyte and facilitating ion diffusion. Likewise, the Fe-doped CoNi-ZIF template was prepared through a solvothermal treatment process and then further evolved into tri-metallic phosphides of P–CoNiFe.146 The P–CoNiFe spheres possessed a hollow nanocage structure composed of many nanosheets and lots of nanopores, simultaneously increasing the roughness of the sample surface as well as the electrocatalytic active sites and defects. The in situ formation of holes could be because the PH3 reacted with the hollow CoNiFe intermediate and P elements replaced the organic ligands during the phosphorization reaction.
Zhang constructed Fe-rich macroporous CoFeP triangular plate arrays grown on a nickel substrate (macroporous CoFeP TPAs/Ni) (Fig. 8a).147 Firstly, the Ni substrate was fully covered with CoFe MOF TPAs. Then, the obtained CoFe-MOF TPAs/Ni were treated with NaOH aqueous solution to selectively etch the organic ligands to form the macroporous CoFe-MOF TPAs/Ni with long open-ended channels (Fig. 8b and c). Interestingly, an increase in the concentration of NaOH in the range of 0 to 30 mM gave rise to a dramatic increase in the surface area (from 8.03 m2 g−1 to 57.54 m2 g−1) and a great rise in pore size (from 5 nm to 131 nm). Using NaH2PO2 as a P source, macroporous CoFe-MOF TPAs/Ni was phosphated to obtain macroporous CoFeP TPAs/Ni (Fig. 8d–f).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of macroporous CoFeP TPAs/Ni. SEM images of (b and c) macroporous CoFe-MOF TPAs and (d and e) macroporous CoFeP TPAs. (f) TEM image of macroporous CoFeP TPAs. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Synthetic route for Ni1.4Co0.6P/NCNHMs. (h and i) SEM images, (j) magnified SEM image and (k) HAADF-STEM elemental mapping of Ni1.4Co0.6P/NCNHMs. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (l) Schematic illustration of the formation process of TMP/graphene composites with adjustable heterostructures. TEM images of (m) FeNiP/PG, (n) FeNiP/GC/PG and (o) FeNiP/rGO. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. 


Mixed transition metal phosphides/carbon composites. 
Mixed transition metal phosphides coupled with carbon composites are extensively fabricated. For example, the successful transformation of hollow Ni1.4–Co0.6-based MOF into Ni1.4Co0.6P NPs encapsulated in N-doped carbon nanotube hollow microspheres (NCNHMs) was achieved by a nitriding–phosphidation method (Fig. 8g–k).148 Temperature-programmed pyrolysis at 800 °C in N2 was first employed to obtain the Ni1.4Co0.6/NCNHMs samples. With the gradual increase of the temperature, the N-doped CNTs were extruded from the hollow carbon spheres under the catalysis of Ni and Co metal. After the subsequent low-temperature phosphatization with NaH2PO2 in Ar flow, the Ni1.4Co0.6P/NCNHMs were synthesized. Notably, the distinctive composition and morphology can regulate the redox-active sites and enhance the electron transfer, thus leading to superior splitting efficiency. Recently, an ion-induction approach was demonstrated to synthesize a series of CoMP hierarchical hollow polyhedral nanocages (HHPNC, M = Ni, Cu, Mn).149 During the solvothermal reaction, the morphology of Co-MOF precursors developed from trunk polyhedral to the core–shell structure and finally to the hierarchical hollow nanocages. The phosphidation treatment allowed the transformation of organic ligands in MOFs into amorphous carbon and the generation of in-plane pores on nanosheets. In such hybrid catalysts, the N-doped carbon matrix avoided the agglomeration and also prevented the corrosion of the phosphide NPs. DFT calculations verified that both the doped secondary metal and the incorporated carbon successfully manipulated the electronic structure.
It is worth pointing out that the amount of P precursor plays an important role in the structure of metal phosphides. By simply adjusting the amount of NaH2PO2, bimetal FeNiP NPs with or without graphitized carbon (GC) shells grown on P-doped graphene (PG) were fabricated using a novel microwave-assisted thermal conversion strategy (Fig. 8l).150 When more NaH2PO2 was utilized (the molar ratio of NaH2PO2 to Fe(CN)64− = 25:1), FeNiP nanocrystals were formed without the GC shell (Fig. 8m). On changing the molar ratio of NaH2PO2 to Fe(CN)64− to 6.25:1, FeNiP NPs encapsulated in GC were the dominant products (Fig. 8n). The formation of GC was ascribed to the high temperature and low NaH2PO2 content, which was beneficial to the graphitization of carbon precursors. A low NaH2PO2 amount produced well-crystallized FeNiP nanocrystals and little Na4P2O7 residue (mainly derived from NaH2PO2), in contrast to a high NaH2PO2 amount. Through a traditional heat treatment of Ni–Fe PBA/GO precursors, only FeNiP NPs deposited on rGO were obtained (Fig. 8o). The developed approach in this work can adjust the heterostructure of FeNiP/GO hybrids and also realize in situ P-doping in GO. In another example, the essential role of a suitable bimetal ratio in MOF precursors for constructing a well-designed structure was demonstrated. By changing the molar ratios of Fe to Co in Matérial Institut Lavoisier-88 (MIL-88) precursors, Wang et al. recently synthesized a family of FexCoyP/C nanorods.151 As the Co contents increased, the morphology of FexCoyP was changed from a rod-shaped structure into a hollow spindle-shaped polyhedron along with the decreasing of the particle size, which might be due to the incorporation of Co altering the coordination environment of the ligands and Fe3+. The production of a hollow structure at a high Co/Fe ratio (Co/Fe ratio of 2) could be attributed to the different rates of phosphate formation by Fe3+ and Co2+ ions.
Considering that the use of additional phosphorous sources is usually accompanied by the production of toxic PH3 and/or explosive white phosphorus, a simple and less toxic method was reported for fabricating 3D hollow barrel-like FeNiP/C without adding any external phosphorous source.152 In detail, P-containing ligands and metal nickel salt were selected to form the [Ni2(TPO)4/3(dabco)]·Guest (BMM-10) with a stable cage-based structure. The obtained BMM-10 was etched with Fe3+ to generate Fe–Ni-hollow nanoparticles and was further transformed into the FeNiP/C composite through thermal treatment. During this process, the high calcination temperature facilitated the reduction of metal atoms as well as the dissociation of P–O, PO and C–P bonds of the precursor, favoring the in situ formation of the final FeNiP complex. Compared with other methods using external P sources, which usually involve high-temperature pyrolysis followed by low-temperature phosphidation, this approach seems to be more convenient due to the direct conversion from MOF precursors to metal phosphides.


Mixed transition metal carbides. 
Transition metal carbides are especially promising, thanks to their many excellent properties such as resistance against corrosion, high electronic conductivity and Pt-like electric density near the Fermi level.153–155 Due to the simple metallic structure, that is, small C atoms located in the interstitial space of the densely packed host lattice, transition metal carbides with interstitial alloy features have captured widespread interest in the catalytic and electrochemical fields.156,157 Recently, Chen et al. successfully fabricated vertically aligned porous Co6W6C@NC on flexible CC.158 Herein, leaf-like ZIF nanosheet arrays on CC were immersed in a mixed Co and W solution for an ion-exchange and etching reaction, followed by thermal treatment in a mixture gas of H2 and Ar, to synthesize the Co6W6C@NC/CC composites. The synergistic effect of Co and W atoms effectively tuned the electronic state of carbide, thus optimizing the H-binding energy. In another case, hollow Co6Mo6C2@NCNT was prepared by heat treatment of polypyrrole (PPy)-supported MOF composites.159 PPy-derived N-doped CNT (NCNT) functioned as not only an excellent substrate for anchoring Co6Mo6C2 NPs but also as active sites for the catalytic reaction. The relatively high carbonization temperature was attributed to the increased active N content and suitable degree of graphitization, while the excessive temperature may lead to the loss of accessible active sites and hamper the mass transfer path. Xu and co-workers reported a facile method to construct robust MoCx-based hollow structures.160 A Mo-based POM anion was encapsulated in Ni-MOF through the dissolution-regrowth process, where (NH4)6Mo7O24·4H2O served as the Mo source. After that, carbon nitride polymer was utilized to coat the surface of the hollow POM@Ni-MOF precursor, which was beneficial for avoiding the coalescence and collapse of the hollow structure in the annealing process. Followed by calcination at high temperature in N2, carbon-layer-coated Ni-decorated hollow MoCx structures were obtained. The combined advantages of the individual components (MoCx and Ni NPs acted as dual active sites) and the distinctive structure having a hollow feature and carbon layer coating greatly improved the electrochemical properties.


Mixed transition metal hydroxides. 
Given the unique layered structure and anion-exchange stability, LDHs are a type of inorganic lamellar material with 2D structures and are currently being widely investigated in various fields.161 In general, these materials have a chemical formula [M1−x2+Mx3+(OH)2] [Ax/nn−]·mH2O, with at least two kinds of metal ions with diverse valences (M2+, M3+) and a charge-balancing interlayer anion (An−).162 Traditional methods for LDHs preparation such as ion-exchange, co-precipitation and hydrothermal methods are usually complex, with uncontrollable morphology, surface area and particle size, and it is hard to obtain homogeneous precipitates.163,164 Considering this, the MOF-templated approach, which is a facile, efficient and easy-to-operate method, is attracting intense research interest for the synthesis of transition-metal-based LDHs.165,166 Notably, the transformation of metal oxides, sulfide and phosphide from MOFs always includes high-temperature calcination, which requires a long preparation time and additional energy consumption. The phosphidation process is often performed with toxic chemicals or generates toxic gas.167,168 Impressively, the transformation of MOFs into LDHs is commonly carried out under mild reaction conditions and ethanol was chosen as the solvent to slow down the dissolution of parent MOFs, preventing collapse and impurity.169
Hierarchical trimetallic FeCo0.5Ni0.5-LDH composed of many monolayer nanosheets have been constructed.170 As starting materials, 2D oxalate MOFs with a similar theoretical structure to LDHs benefited from the in situ conformal conversion. When acting as intercalators in LDHs, oxalate ligands can also improve electronic mobility, and it has been verified to be more effective than other inorganic anions. Since the OH− ions occupied the position of oxalic acid and were coordinated to metal ions, LDHs were gradually formed under an alkaline environment. Note that the slow addition of alkaline solution was crucial for the successful transformation of MOFs into LDHs, which could preserve the overall structure and help to generate ultrathin nanosheets with a thickness of 1 nm. In another case, Ni1Co1-MOF nanoarrays grown on NF substrates were reported to fabricate NiCo hydroxide-based materials (t-NiCo-MOF) with special a ‘nanoplatelet-on-nanoarray’ morphology by a simple hydrolysis method.171 Contributing to the unique nanostructures with abundant active sites and synergy between Ni and Co, t-NiCo-MOF was demonstrated to be promising in high-throughput electrochemical biomass upgrading.
Zhang et al. recently prepared Ni0.7Co0.3(OH)2 core–shell microspheres with extreme-prolonged cycling life by a specific hydrothermal strategy (route II in Fig. 9a).172 The Ni–Co-MOF templates and 0.2 M KOH aqueous solution were heated separately to 120 °C before mixing instead of mixing before heating. Through this hydrothermal treatment, no residual MOF existed in the synthesized Ni0.7Co0.3(OH)2-0.2 M-SH materials. The complete and conformal transformation could be ascribed to the fact that the rates of collapse of the MOFs framework and the crystallization of hydroxides matched each other, as well as the suitable concentration of KOH. Uniquely, the ligands in this method can be recycled during the preparation process. For comparison, the MOF precursors were dipped into 0.2 M KOH at room temperature and under the gradual heating conditions to obtain Ni0.7Co0.3(OH)2-0.2 M-RT and Ni0.7Co0.3(OH)2-0.2 M-GH, respectively (routes I and III in Fig. 9a). As expected, both of them showed clear MOF residuals and poor cycling. This could be due to the incomplete hydrolysis at room temperature and the undesirable reactions at lower temperatures. Due to the faster generation of the hydroxide at higher concentrations, the KOH concentration impacted the morphology of Ni0.7Co0.3(OH)2 nanocrystals, which presented rod-like, hexagonal plate and chunk-like shapes when the KOH concentration was 0.1 M, 0.2 M and 0.5 M, respectively.
 Fig. 9  (a) The proposed alkaline hydrolysis procedure of the Ni–Co-MOF precursor/template through different treatments. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2019, WILEY VCH. (b–e) TEM images of Ni–Co LDH hollow nanocages/graphene composites. (f) Schematic illustration of the possible mechanism reaction involved in forming Ni–Co LDH. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
Starting from ZIF-67/graphene, Ni–Co LDH nanocages/graphene composites were synthesized through a chemical etching process.173 The graphene in this work was designed to function as a growth substrate and electron transportation scaffold, the surface of which absorbed Co2+ and then reacted with organic ligands to form ZIF-67/graphene precursors. After etching with Ni(NO3)2, the Ni–Co LDH/graphene composites with hollow interiors were obtained (Fig. 9b–e). The released Co2+ and Ni2+ were oxidized to generate Co2+/Co3+ and Ni2+/Ni3+ in solution, which could coprecipitate with OH− to form Ni–Co LDHs (Fig. 9f). The hollow Ni–Co LDH nanocages were deposited evenly on graphene nanosheets and presented a hierarchical sandwiched structure. Thanks to the addition of graphene nanosheets, the low conductivity of LDH can be easily surmounted. Double-shelled CH@LDH nanocages with Co(OH)2 as the inner shell and Ni–Co LDH as the outer shell were designed.174 Herein, single-shelled ZIF-67@LDH was subjected to conversion to double-shelled CH@LDH nanocages with an aqueous solution of Na2MoO4. Interestingly, MoO42− anions did not participate in the reaction directly while generating OH− ions by hydrolysis for precipitation with the released Co2+ ions from ZIF-67, thus forming Co(OH)2. CH@LDH was obtained as a host to load sulfur through a melting-diffusion method.


SACs with dual metal sites and alloys. 
Single-atom catalysts, characterized by metal atoms dispersed at the atomic level, have maximum atom-utilization efficiency and outstanding catalytic performance in various applications.175–177 Recent achievements have verified that introducing secondary metal atoms to form dual-metal SACs can significantly improve the reaction activity.178 Transition metal SACs as a new class of frontier materials have attracted much attention due to their high activity, stability and selectivity.179,180 As a typical example, Wang and co-workers designed a host-guest strategy for the synthesis of Fe–Co dual sites embedded on N-doped porous carbon (Fig. 10a).181 Herein, the bimetallic Zn/Co-MOFs (host)-encapsulated FeCl3 molecules (guest) within cavities served as precursors, in which a double solvent method was applied to fully immobilize Fe salts in MOF pores. During the thermolysis, the Fe species acted as catalysts to not only modulate the geometric structure of the carbon support but also force the generation of voids inside calcinated MOFs. Besides, the reduced Fe bonded with neighboring Co atoms to form Fe–Co dual sites. Aberration-corrected high-angle annular dark-field scanning transmission electron microscopy (HAADF-STEM) and synchrotron-radiated X-ray absorption fine-structure (XAFS) revealed the homogeneous dual-site dispersion in porous carbon matrix and the atomic configuration of Fe–Co dual sites with the porphyrin-like structure (Fig. 10b–d). Based on a similar route, the same group reported Fe and Co-isolated single atoms on N-doped carbon (FeCo-ISAs/CN) by an adsorption-calcination strategy.182 ZIF-8 precursors were first pyrolyzed and then served as the support for adsorbed Fe and Co salts. After thermal treatment, the obtained N species, including graphitic-N, pyrrolic-N, and pyridinic-N, functioned as anchor sites for FeCo–ISAs/CN.
 Fig. 10  (a) Preparation of (Fe,Co)/N–C. (b) Magnified HAADF-STEM of (Fe,Co)/N–C. (c) Corresponding Fe K-edge EXAFS fittings of (Fe,Co)/N–C. (d) Proposed architectures of Fe–Co dual sites. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategy of CoNi–SAs/NC. (f) SEM, (g and h) TEM and (i) HAADF-STEM images of CoNi–SAs/NC. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2019, WILEY VCH. 
In another example, the atomically dispersed binary Co–Ni sites anchored on N-doped hollow nanocubes (CoNi–SAs/NC) were fabricated by heating polydopamine (PDA)-coated CoNi-MOFs in NH3 flow (Fig. 10e).183 In this process, PDA was evenly covered over the bimetallic MOFs to produce core–shell CoNi-MOFs/PDA NCs, and then they were transformed into CoNi NPs encapsulated in N-doped nanocubes by annealing. After acid leaching treatment, the Co and Ni NPs were removed to obtain the final CoNi–SAs/NC, which possessed abundant isolated catalytic sites and synergy from the diatomic structure (Fig. 10f–i). It should be noted that the NH3 atmosphere is crucial for the formation of single-atom materials due to the intrinsic reduction and etching functions. Zhao et al. constructed atomically dispersed Fe and Co sites-decorated carbon networks with hierarchical porosity at the submillimeter-scale from Co and Fe-doped Zn-based triazole-rich energetic MOFs.184 Upon heating, the homogeneously dispersed Fe and Co ions were transformed into isolated single Co and Fe atoms on carbon (CoFe@C), along with the volatilization of Zn nodes to release lots of gases, leading to the formation of hierarchically porous carbon. The structural defects of CoFe@C acted as anchoring sites for active Fe and Co atoms.
Alloying allows the elaborate adjustment of the composition in polynary compounds, which has been confirmed as a delicate strategy for enhancing the overall performance in the electrochemical field.185,186 Because the bonding between the two metals promotes the intrinsic polarity, the functional nanomaterials synthesized in an alloying manner exhibited great acceleration for charge transfer.187 Furthermore, the redox properties of one metal can stabilize the higher oxidation states of the active metal.188,189 By virtue of the homogeneous distribution of different metal centers, multivariate MOFs can derive mixed-metal alloys.
Recently, the composites of NiCo alloy NPs coated with N-doped carbon nanofibers (NiCo@N-CNFs) with a bamboo-like shape were prepared.190 Through electrospinning technology, NiCo-BTC@PAN was designed as the precursor, where polyacrylonitrile (PAN) served as both a supportive material for NiCo-BTC and an excellent template for yielding carbon fiber. After thermal treatment in Ar, NiCo@N-CNFs were obtained. In this nanofiber structure, the N-doped carbon-parceled NiCo alloy was conducive to protecting the NiCo alloy NPs from corrosion in the electrolyte and promoting the corresponding properties in electrocatalysis. It should be mentioned that the annealing temperature dramatically influenced the C and N content, further affecting the catalytic activity.191,192 Wang reported the successful preparation of subnanometer-scale NiCo alloy NPs immobilized on SiO2 frameworks.193 Different from most other developed studies, MOF-derived NiCo/SiO2-MOF composites in this work were synthesized by the liquid-phase method instead of high-temperature calcination. The ultrafine NiCo alloy NPs were highly dispersed on SiO2 frameworks with an average size of less than 1 nm, and the overall metal loading of NiCo/SiO2-MOF was about 20 wt%; however, the catalysts obtained by the repeated impregnation method showed larger particle size of more than 10 nm, with a smaller BET surface area and total pore volume.
Lou et al. proposed an ‘MOF-in-MOF hybrid’ confined pyrolysis strategy for the preparation of porous FeCo alloy/N-doped carbon (FeCo/NC) cages (Fig. 11a–c).194 In the mixture of ZIF-8, FeOOH, Co2+ ions and 2-MIM, the FeOOH nanorod-encapsulated ZIF-67 hybrid shell grown on a ZIF-8 core (ZIF-8@FeOOH/ZIF-67) was formed by self-assembly (Fig. 11d–f), which was then transformed into a composite of FeCo/NC by thermolysis. The introduction of ZIF-8 crystals and FeOOH nanorods in ZIF-67 particles endowed the hybrid with a degradable template and different metal species, benefiting the production of the interior cavity and FeCo alloy. FeOOH nanorods were fully covered on cage-shaped ZIF-8@FeOOH/ZIF-67 nanocrystallites, leading to the FeCo alloy being uniformly dispersed inside a porous N-doped carbon shell (Fig. 11g). Through the self-assembly strategy of MOFs with other substrates or nanoparticles, three types of complex multifunctional MOF core–shelled composites can also be prepared, including MoO3@MIL-88/ZIF-67 rods (Fig. 11h), polystyrene (PS)@FeOOH/ZIF-67 spheres (Fig. 11i), and GO@MIL-88/ZIF-67 sheets (Fig. 11j). Later, the same group also fabricated Co–Fe alloy@N-doped carbon hollow spheres by a dual-MOF-assisted pyrolysis approach.195 The proposed strategy depended on the confined nanospace thermal conversion reaction of MIL-101(Fe) NPs in a ZIF-67 nanoshell. In this work, the pre-synthesized MIL-101 NPs and monodisperse PS spheres mixed with Co metal salt and 2-MIM to construct PS@MIL-101/ZIF-67 spheres, in which MIL-101 NPs were evenly distributed in the dual-MOF composite nanoshells. Following annealing treatment, the core–shelled composites were transformed into Co–Fe alloy/N-doped carbon nanostructures. During this process, PS cores were decomposed, leaving a huge space inside the composites.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of porous Fe–Co alloy/N-doped carbon cages. (b) FESEM and (c) TEM images of Fe0.3Co0.7/NC cages. TEM images of (d) ZIF-8 particles, (e) FeOOH nanorods, and (f) ZIF-8@FeOOH/ZIF-67 hybrid particles. (g) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mappings of Fe0.3Co0.7/NC cages. FESEM images of (h) MoO3@MIL-88/ZIF-67 hybrid rods, (i) PS@FeOOH/ZIF-67 hybrid spheres, and (j) GO@MIL-88/ZIF-67 hybrid sheets. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2018, WILEY VCH. 


Mixed transition metal hybrids. 
Mixed transition metal hybrids, with a random combination of varied types of transition metal components or the doping of different anions into a single framework, have been extensively investigated.196–198 In this way, these hybrid composites can integrate the advantageous features of diverse active components/dopants, thus further promoting the physicochemical properties. For example, Yang et al. reported the successful synthesis of hierarchical nanosheets consisting of a NiCo-alloy@NiCo-sulfide core–shell NPs on carbon fibers (CF@NiCo-A-S).199 Initially, CF@Co-MOF was converted into CF@NiCo-LDH by a controllable ion-exchange reaction and subsequent thermal treatment. NiCo-alloy particles were then formed by a reduction process under H2/Ar steam and then vulcanized into NiCo-A-S core–shell NPs. In such a structure, the external NiCo-sulfide provides numerous active sites and effectively restrains the oxidation of alloy, and the NiCo-alloy scaffold with ultrahigh-conductivity provides a highway for electron transfer inside. Similarly, a composite (Fe–Ni@NC-CNTs) of FeNi3 alloy and NiFe2O4 embedded in N-doped carbon CNT matrix was fabricated by calcination of MIL-88-Fe/Ni-DCDA.200 During pyrolysis, the dicyandiamide (DCDA) is decomposed into NH3, which favors the reduction of metal ions to metal NPs, ultimately facilitating the formation of CNTs. The obtained hybrid greatly upgrades the charge transfer efficiency and suppresses the corrosion of the metallic catalysts.
Gan and co-workers demonstrated a three-step method to construct bivalve Co-sulfide/Fe-oxide nanoellipsoid with S and N co-doped hollow carbon.201 ZIF-67 was used as the crystal seed for the epitaxial growth of Fe-ZIF under ultrasonic treatment. A further hydrothermal reaction was carried out to create a hollow structure. Afterwards, the sulfidation treatment was applied to obtain the H–Co9S8/Fe3O4@SNC. In this process, Fe3+ ions were oxidized to Fe3O4, which combined with the absorbed –OH on the particle surface, and Co2+ ions were inclined to form Co9S8 with S powder. The Co9S8 as the conductive inner shell is essential for providing an efficient electronic pathway for the active outer Fe3O4 shell. Zhao reported Zn-MOF/Ni microspheres composed of solid nanoparticles that were subjected to a solvothermal reaction and heat treatment to prepare ZnO/Ni3ZnC0.7/C hybrids.202 During calcination, the precursors yielded a small amount of elemental Zn, and then Zn and C dissolved in the Ni crystals at high temperature, resulting in the formation of Ni3ZnC0.7. In another case, two-component nanocages containing CoSx and Ni–Co LDH were fabricated by a partial sulfuration and etching process.203 The suitable doses of S and Ni sources could achieve the reaction kinetic balance between the dissolution of ZIF-67 templates and the hydrolysis of Ni2+ ions, which was pivotal for the preparation of a hollow nanocage structure.
Aside from multi-component hybrids, quaternary nanomaterials containing various non-metal anionic dopants can also be constructed. Impressively, it has been confirmed that substituting a little S in metal sulfides with P or Se can effectively modulate the electronic structure and chemical stability.204–206 As an example, (NiFe)PS3 nanosheets were synthesized by a one-pot phosphorization and sulfurization method.207 Upon heating NiFe PBA with NaH2PO2 and S powder, the morphology of (NiFe)PS3 varied from nanocubes to flower-like nanosheets that presented more active sites. In the prepared nanosheets, both the bi-metal doping and bi-non-metal doping could cause the perturbation of electrons, which was critical for tuning the electronic properties. Similarly, NiCo2(SxSe1−x)5 NPs in situ confined in graphitic carbon hollow spheres (NiCo2(SxSe1−x)5/GC HSs) were delicately designed through two-step calcination.208 Specifically, NiCo-MOF precursors were converted into NiCo alloy by the reduction of the Ni2+ and Co2+ under Ar/H2. The final materials were achieved by a one-step sulfuration/selenylation treatment in S/Se vapor. The high electrical conductivity, good structural robustness and component synergy were responsible for the excellent performance in the field of energy storage.

Applications in energy storage and conversion
In the design of MOF-derived metal nanomaterials for specific applications, many pivotal properties that limit the activity of an electrochemical reaction need to be considered, including efficiency, the number of exposed active sites, conductivity, porosity, surface area, stability, structural robustness, durability, reserves and cost. Several strategies have been applied in the design of catalysts with high performance, including constructing hollow/core–shell structures, fabricating binary or ternary alloys, growing on stable substrates and introducing heteroatoms (e.g., N, S, P, etc.). Interestingly, MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials with tailorable compositions and structure create opportunities for designing promising catalysts that meet all these needs to the greatest extent possible. Besides, the precise control of crystal facets is important to the in-depth understanding of the structure–performance relationship. Molecular simulations have shown that vertex and edge atoms are more active than face atoms in catalytic reactions, and bulk atoms in metal-based catalysts are completely ineffective.209 In this regard, morphology regulation and textural optimization of catalysts need to be considered. Most catalysts are developed under laboratory conditions with given ideal parameters but these catalysts usually suffer from severe challenges under actual operating conditions. Close collaborations between scientists and industrial partners are therefore important for purposefully fabricating desirable catalysts.

Lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors. 
MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials are favourable for energy storage applications in LIBs and supercapacitors because of their large pore volume, high surface area and abundant redox reactions between active metals.210–212 These features are beneficial for mass transfer and buffer the volume variation in the charge–discharge process. Mixed metal oxides and mixed metal sulfides stand out as promising electrode materials for energy storage owing to their rich redox reactions, high electronic conductivity and high theoretical capacity. Besides, metallic alloys with outstanding performance have attracted wide attention for application in LIBs and supercapacitors.213,214 Rechargeable LIBs, as ideal electrical energy storage devices, are recognized as dominant power sources owing to their environmental friendliness and excellent properties in cycle life and energy density. To pursue high-performance anode electrode materials, a crucial route is to produce more chemical bonds with lithium by the reactions between Li+ and active materials.215 In this process, multi-electron transfer in electrochemical recycling and large specific capacity can be expected. In particular, mixed transition metal oxides are one type of promising anode material for LIBs, which have been demonstrated to accommodate Li+ reversibly by conversion and even alloying reactions, thus leading to a high specific capacity. For example, Mn-doped MIL-53(Fe) was utilized to prepare hierarchical MnO-doped Fe3O4@C nanospheres (Fig. 12a–c).216 Such composites exhibited superior lithium-storage performance with excellent reversible capacity, cycling stability and rate capability, behaving better than the Fe3O4@C nanosphere electrode (Fig. 12d–f). The remarkable lithium-storage capacity could be ascribed to the powerful electronic interactions between the Fe3O4 and MnO components, which were conducive to increasing the electronic conductivity of the nanospheres and promoting the reaction kinetics. Lou et al. reported triple-shelled Co3O4@Co3V2O8 hybrid materials by using ZIF-67 as the precursor and vanadium oxytriisopropoxide (VOT) as the vanadium source.217 When used as electrode materials for LIBs, the unique composites showed outstanding lithium storage properties because of the integrated advantages of two active metal components and the distinct architecture. The as-prepared composites showed enhanced rate performance with average specific capacities of 1068, 916, 782, 678, 578, and 550 mA h g−1 at current densities of 100, 200, 500, 1000, 2000, and 5000 mA g−1, respectively. Besides, a reversible capacity of 948 mA h g−1 can still be retained over 100 cycles at 100 mA g−1, supporting the view of good performance with triple-shelled Co3O4@Co3V2O8 nanoboxes in LIBs. Bi-metal MOF (ZIF-ZnFe)-derived bi-component ZnO/ZnFe2O4/N-doped C micro-polyhedrons were fabricated and studied as anodes for LIBs.218 Benefiting from the synergy between the two active metal components and N-doped carbon matrix, as well as the hierarchical hollow structure, the resulting materials displayed excellent energy storage performance, including high reversible capacity (ca. 1000 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at 200 mA g−1), good rate capability and cycling stability.
 Fig. 12  (a) SEM and (b and c) TEM images of MnO-doped Fe3O4@C composites. (d) Initial galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of MnO-doped Fe3O4@C nanosphere electrode at 200 mA g−1. (e) Rate capabilities of MnO-doped Fe3O4@C nanosphere and comparative Fe3O4@C nanosphere electrodes. (f) Cycling performances at 200 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Supercapacitors, as a new energy storage device between traditional capacitors and rechargeable batteries, are intensively employed in transportation, military and other fields. Unlike LIBs, supercapacitors can be quickly charged and discharged without the destruction of volume and structure. The performance of supercapacitors greatly relies on the surface areas and chemical compositions of electrode materials, despite the different electrochemical double-layer capacitance or pseudocapacitance mechanisms. In this regard, MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials should meet these requirements well. Specifically, the diverse metal ions bring with them rich electrochemical redox properties. The formed hollow structures are in favor of higher capacitance and the generated carbon matrix could increase the surface areas and thus improve conductivity. Until now, many mixed transition metal oxides and sulfides derived from MOFs have been designed and applied as anode materials in supercapacitors, such as NixCo3−xO4,219 NiMoO4,220 CuCo2O4 (ref. 221) and Zn–Co–S.222 For instance, Tao and co-workers constructed a leaf-like Co3O4@NiCo2O4 nanoarray using leaf-like Co-based MOF templates.223 The Co-MOF-derived Co3O4 possessed a large surface area and high porosity, and NiCo2O4 grows evenly on the Co3O4 surface without filling the pores between core–shell nanosheets. Combining the merits of the macroporous structure of foam nickel and the coupling effect of Co3O4@NiCo2O4 composite materials, the as-fabricated leaf-like nanoarrays showed excellent electrochemical performance with a high specific capacity of 544.2 C g−1 at 1 A g−1, which was almost 9.3 times that of single Co3O4 (58.3 C g−1) and 6-fold higher than that of NiCo2O4 (92.1 C g−1). Bahaa et al. designed CuCo2S4 nanosheets from CuCo2 LDH for supercapacitors.224 Such a hierarchical sheet-like CuCo2S4 hybrid can provide enriched electroactive sites and shorten the ion/electron diffusion pathways, thus exhibiting excellent electrochemical properties with a high specific capacity of 409.2 mA h g−1 at a current density of 3 mA cm−2, remarkable rate capability (77.9% capacity retention at a higher current density of 50 mA cm−2), and exceptional cycling stability (94.2% capacity retention after 10000 cycles).


Electrocatalysis for the HER, OER, and ORR. 
Electrochemical water splitting, rechargeable metal–air batteries and fuel cells are important technologies in energy conversion. The water splitting directly depends on the HER and OER, and metal–air batteries are mainly involved in the OER and ORR. Also, the ORR is regarded as one of the fundamental electrochemical reactions for fuel cells. Electrocatalysts play a crucial role in these processes that can accelerate reaction kinetics, thus resulting in excellent electrochemical activity. In order to replace the costly noble-metal-based catalysts (e.g., RuO2 and IrO2 for OER and Pt for ORR), many cheap materials have been widely studied. Large surface areas and numerous accessible active sites enable MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials to have significant merits in the energy conversion process.225,226 Specifically, mixed metal oxides with superior electrical conductivity, sufficient electrode reactions and decent electrochemical reversibility exhibit excellent performance in electrocatalysis. Compared with transition metal sulfides, the corresponding metal selenides display superior electrocatalytic activity because of their higher intrinsic electrical conductivity.227 Metal phosphides possess a large number of unsaturated surface atoms, thus resulting in increased intrinsic catalytic activity.228 Benefiting from the electronic structures being similar to that of Pt, and remarkable chemical stability under acidic and alkaline conditions, transition metal carbides are usually utilized in electrocatalytic applications.229 Layered hydroxides are confirmed as promising electrocatalysts owing to their stability under alkaline conditions.230 SACs are of particular interest as electrocatalysts due to their high atom utilization and unique low coordination and unsaturation. For example, hollow Co-based bimetallic sulfide (MxCo3−xS4, M = Zn, Ni, and Cu) polyhedra were developed as electrocatalysts in the HER.92 It is worth noting that all of these prepared MxCo3−xS4 polyhedra showed much better electrochemical activity as compared to single Co3S4 polyhedra. Impressively, the hollow Zn0.3Co2.7S4 polyhedra only required an overpotential as low as 85 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 in 1.0 M KOH, better than most of the reported non-noble-metal electrocatalysts over a wide pH range. According to the DFT computations, the homogeneous doping of a second metal in the Co3S4 lattice optimized the Gibbs free energy for H* adsorption and enhanced the electrical conductivity. Owing to the higher intrinsic electrical conductivity, the metal selenides behaved well in the HER as compared to the corresponding metal sulfides.231 A hybrid of Fe-doped CoSe2 incorporated in N-doped carbon (Fe–CoSe2@NC) was synthesized by using Fe3+-etched ZIF-67 as precursors.126 The resulting composites exhibited an enhanced HER activity with a low overpotential of −143 mV for 10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of ∼40 mV dec−1, superior to that of pristine CoSe2@NC. Based on the DFT calculations, the improved HER performance could be ascribed to the good adsorption–desorption behavior and accelerated HER kinetics, which were induced by the doping of Fe atoms into CoSe2.
The OER plays a crucial role in energy-conversion and storage devices such as fuel cells and metal–air batteries. Among the quantities of MOF-derived mixed transition metal catalysts, the combinations of Fe, Co and Ni show significant potential as promising alternatives to noble-metal based catalysts in the OER. For example, Lou et al. synthesized Ni–Fe mixed diselenide cubic nanocages (Ni–Fe–Se) from NiFe-PBA for the electrocatalytic OER (Fig. 13a–d).232 The as-obtained Ni–Fe–Se nanocages demonstrated excellent OER activity, affording a small overpotential of 240 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 and a small Tafel slope of 24 mV dec−1, much better than the parent NiFe–PBAs and other catalysts with different morphologies (Fig. 13e and f). Using ZIF-67/Co–Fe PBA nanocubes as precursors, the same group reported Co3O4/Co–Fe oxide double-shelled nanoboxes, which delivered the current density of 10 mA cm−2 at an overpotential of 297 mV.233 The enhanced electrocatalytic performance towards the OER could be attributed to the introduction of Fe element into cobalt oxide and extra active sites on inner Co3O4 shells, which significantly increased the conductivity of the double-shelled nanoboxes. Starting from the NiFe-PBA nanocubes, Yoon et al. developed mesoporous NiO/NiFe2O4 nanocages as a superior OER electrocatalyst.234 The resulting samples also presented a current density of 10 mA cm−2 at a small overpotential of 303 mV with a Tafel slope of 58.5 mV dec−1, better than previously reported values for NiO and NiFe2O4. In addition to the cooperation effect between different metal components, the high surface area and broad pore size distribution caused by the unique hollow nanostructures provided increased exposure of active sites for the OER, thus leading to excellent electrocatalytic activity.
 Fig. 13  (a) Overview FESEM, (b and c) magnified FESEM and (d) TEM images of the Ni–Fe–Se nanocages. (e) Overpotential required for j = 10 and 100 mA cm−2, and (f) Tafel slopes of the other catalysts. Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (g) LSV curves in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (h) Tafel slopes curves. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2018, Wiley VCH. 
As the reverse process for the OER, ORR is also important in overall water splitting and metal–air batteries, which are considered state-of-the-art energy conversion systems. Owing to the limitation of Pt-based metals in terms of price, mixed transition metal nanomaterials from MOFs are broadly utilized as electrocatalysts in the ORR. As an example, an Fe, Cu-coordinated carbon framework (Cu@Fe–N–C) was synthesized by introducing Fe2+ and Cu2+ during the growth of ZIF-8.235 The as-prepared Cu@Fe–N–C with bimetallic active sites, large surface area, high N doping content and conductive carbon matrix exhibited an outstanding ORR performance with 50 mV higher half-wave potential (0.892 V) than that of Pt catalysts in an alkaline solution and comparable performance to Pt catalysts in an acidic solution. Besides, Cu@Fe–N–C also presented excellent durability and methanol resistance ability in both acidic and alkaline media, outperforming most Pt-free catalysts reported to date for the ORR. Lou and co-workers constructed porous Fe–Co alloy/N-doped carbon cages and studied them as electrocatalysts for the ORR.236 Remarkably, the Fe0.3Co0.7/NC and Fe0.3Co0.7/Co/NC samples exhibited higher ORR activity than the commercial Pt/C (20 wt%; Johnson Matthey) electrocatalyst in terms of half-wave potential (0.88 and 0.87 vs. 0.855 V) (Fig. 13g). This value was also better than that of Co/NC cages and Fe/NC particles consisting solely of Co and Fe metal (0.845 and 0.855 V, respectively). This indicates that the Fe species introduced into the Co-based catalyst could effectively enhance the ORR activity due to the synergistic effect of the bimetallic active sites. A small Tafel slope of 79 mV dec−1 at low overpotential was also observed for Fe0.3Co0.7/NC cages (Fig. 13h). In another case, an electrocatalyst with Fe–Co dual sites embedded on N-doped porous carbon was fabricated and demonstrated its activity for the ORR in acidic electrolyte.181 The Fe–Co dual-site/NC catalyst showed superior ORR performance with comparable onset potential (Eonset, 1.06 vs. 1.03 V) and half-wave potential (E1/2, 0.863 vs. 0.858 V) to commercial Pt/C, as well as monometallic Fe SAs/NC and Co SAs/NC. The DFT revealed that the dual sites were favored for the cleavage of the O–O bond due to the strong binding of O2 on Fe–Co dual sites, which was important for four-electron oxygen reduction, thus resulting in the high ORR performance.
Aside from these single-function catalysts, the development of high-efficiency and low-cost bi-/tri-functional catalysts beyond the traditional noble metals is highly desirable for renewable energy storage and conversion systems. Usually, the heteroatom-modified carbons and metal–N–C materials always show high ORR activity.237,238 According to the theoretical calculations and experimental results, the O2 molecules can be facilely activated by the Fe–P bond, and the transition metal phosphides have been confirmed as promising electrocatalysts for the HER and OER.239,240 The controllable pyrolysis of MOFs represents one of the most efficient methods for fabricating mixed transition metal electrocatalysts with multiple active sites. As a typical example, Yuan et al. reported binary FeNi phosphide nanoparticles coupled with N, P-modified carbon substrates (FeNiP/NPCS) and employed as electrode catalysts for overall water splitting and rechargeable Zn–air batteries.241 In these energy conversion and storage devices, the prepared FeNiP/NPCS achieved remarkable performance with an overpotential of 126 and 181 mV at a current density of 10 mA cm−2 for the HER in 0.5 M H2SO4 and 1.0 M KOH, respectively, as well as the potential difference of 0.80 V for the OER and ORR in 0.1 M KOH. Besides the structural advantages, the modulation of the electronic structure by changing the Fe/Ni ratio was also responsible for the exceptional activities in the HER, OER and ORR.

Summary and outlook
MOFs as a novel class of porous crystalline materials have attracted much attention because of their high surface areas, ordered network structure, and permanent porosity. Considering the high flexibility in structure and composition, MOFs have been demonstrated as versatile sacrificial templates and precursors for the preparation of various functional materials. Their successful utilization provides great opportunities in many fields, including catalysis, sensors, energy storage and conversion, and so on. As highlighted in this review, mixed transition metal nanomaterials with well-defined structures are promising candidates in energy-related applications. The presence of a secondary metal enables the strong synergistic effect between diverse metals, giving them superior characteristics as compared to their monometallic counterparts with respect to their properties and applications. Owing to their various advantageous features, such as more exposed metal sites, excellent stability and conductivity, these resulting nanomaterials could adapt to more challenging reactions under harsh conditions. Herein, the recent progress on MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials related to the synthetic routes is comprehensively discussed, including mixed transition metal oxides, mixed transition metal chalcogenides, mixed transition metal phosphides, mixed transition metal carbides, mixed transition metal hydroxides, single-atom catalysts with dual metal sites, alloys and their hybrids. Their applications in the electrochemical area, especially for LIBs, supercapacitors, HER, OER and ORR, are summarized.
Though great progress has been achieved in the synthesis and electrochemical application of MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials, this research field is still in its infancy, and substantial efforts should be dedicated to realizing the practical usage of MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials. In view of the published literature, there are certain challenges to be addressed in future development:
(1) Cost-efficient and environment-friendly synthesis paths should be considered. At present, sustainability-oriented synthesis research concentrates on limiting the formation of undesirable contaminants. Some transition metals with sufficient resources and less toxicity such as Fe3+, Cu2+, Mn2+ and Zn2+ could reduce the release of secondary pollutants into the environment, and are favorable for practical utilization. In addition to the metal nodes, some simple and green ligands such as fumaric acid and citric acid are considered as good alternatives to reduce environmental risks. Besides, it is expected that more MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials pyrolyzed at lower temperatures, exhibiting excellent performance, will be developed. The less-energy-consuming processes can better meet the requirements of future applications.
(2) Other types of MOF-derived multi-metallic nanomaterials should be explored. Among these reported transition-metal-based materials, oxide- and sulfide-based composites are in the majority, while there are fewer reports on other derivatives, such as selenide-, carbide-, phosphide-based materials and SACs with dual metal sites. Meanwhile, iron-, cobalt- and nickel-based materials are the most frequently used in catalysis. The investigations on other metal-based catalysts such as V, Mo and W are still insufficient, although they have proven to be efficient. Novel design strategies based on the high flexibility of MOF superstructures are needed to realize the diversity of mixed transition metal materials. Besides, “quasi-MOF” is emerging to extend the family of MOF derivatives, which not only can expose more active sites but also retain the porosity. The unique characteristics of quasi-MOFs need to be further explored, which will create new opportunities for the development of next-generation nanomaterials.
(3) The conductivity of most MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials is poor. Even though the organic ligands in MOFs could be transformed into carbons after pyrolysis, there is still far from enough for usage. Combining highly conductive substrates such as graphene oxide, carbon nanotubes and amorphous carbon, as well as introducing additive carbon sources are favorable approaches to solving this problem. Composites not only possess synergistic effects between different components, but also conquer the defects of individual components.
(4) More specific efforts are required to unravel the relationship between structure composition and performance. During oxidation or reduction procedures, phase transformation and structural self-reconstruction may occur on the surface of most MOF-based catalysts. However, the mechanism for this unique phenomenon has not been figured out thoroughly. In particular, some advanced technologies, especially in situ characterization methodologies, such as in situ Raman spectroscopy and in situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy, are effective technologies for capturing the dynamic structural evolution under electrochemical processes.
(5) Serious side reactions with electrolytes may occur during cycling. This would cause a low initial coulombic efficiency, leading to significant capacity decay of the anodes. Based on the strategies used in silicon anodes, surface coating and pre-lithiation may provide a good opportunity to address this problem. Moreover, the electrochemical devices usually involve more than one process in practice, while the majority of mixed transition metal electrocatalysts based on MOFs are single-function. In the future, developing multifunctional MOF-derived electrocatalysts with high activity and stability for the HER, OER and ORR is extremely desirable.
Overall, mixed transition metal nanomaterials based on MOFs are promising candidates for electrochemical applications due to their unique structures and performance advantages. However, there is still a long way to go before they are widely employed on the industrial scale, and continuous efforts should be devoted to this highly exciting research field.
Author contributions
P. Xu and G. M. Zeng: conceptualization, supervision, and review & editing. Y. Z. He and Z. Yin: writing original draft, and review & editing. Z. W. Wang, H, Wang, W. P. Xiong, B. Song and H. Qin: review & editing.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 51521006, 52070077, 51879101), the National Program for Support of Top–Notch Young Professionals of China (2014), the Program for Changjiang Scholars and Innovative Research Team in University (IRT-13R17), the Hunan Provincial Science and Technology Plan Project (2018SK20410, 2017SK2243, 2016RS3026), the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (531118010226), and Hunan Provincial Innovation Foundation For Postgraduate (CX20200415).
Notes and references
P. Oh, S. M. Oh, W. Li, S. Myeong, J. Cho and A. Manthiram, Adv. Sci., 2016, 3, 1600184 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Liu, X. Yang, C. Lv, A. Zhu, X. Zhu, S. Guo, C. Chen and D. Yang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 7047–7053 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. H. Fang, F. Wang, S. Adjokatse, N. Zhao, J. Even and M. Antonietta Loi, Light Sci. Appl., 2016, 5, e16056 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, W. Chen, T. Wang, N. Bate, C. Wang and E. Wang, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 4535–4548 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hua, X. X. Li, C. Y. Chen and H. Pang, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 37–59 CrossRef CAS .
H. B. Wu and X. W. Lou, Sci. Adv., 2017, 3, eaap9252 CrossRef .
L. Bu, Q. Shao, E. Bin, J. Guo, J. Yao and X. Huang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 9576–9582 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Liu, L. Zheng, P. Yu, S. Han and X. Fang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 3331–3339 CrossRef CAS .
I. Yamada, H. Fujii, A. Takamatsu, H. Ikeno, K. Wada, H. Tsukasaki, S. Kawaguchi, S. Mori and S. Yagi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1603004 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, S. Zhai, H. Liu, X. Chen, Z. Zhou, Y. Lei, Z. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701410 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, J. He, B. Yu, B. Sun, D. Yang, X. Zhang, Q. Zhang, W. Zhang, L. Gu and Y. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 258, 117996 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Zeng, G. Zeng, P. Xu, R. Xiao, D. Huang, X. Chen, L. He, C. Zhou, Y. Yang, Z. Wang, W. Wang and W. Xiong, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 267, 118700 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, D. Huang, H. Qin, Y. He, M. Chen, G. Zeng and P. Xu, Colloids Surf., A, 2021, 626, 127024 CrossRef CAS .
N. N. Han, K. R. Yang, Z. Y. Lu, Y. J. Li, W. W. Xu, T. F. Gao, Z. Cai, Y. Zhang, V. S. Batista, W. Liu and X. M. Sun, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9, 1–10 CrossRef .
Y. Hu, B. Yu, W. Li, M. Ramadoss and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 4876–4884 RSC .
B. You, M. T. Tang, C. Tsai, F. Abild-Pedersen, X. Zheng and H. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1807001 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Zheng, X. Li, B. Yan, Q. Hu, Y. Xu, X. Xiao, H. Xue and H. Pang, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602733 CrossRef .
F. Lu, M. Zhou, Y. Zhou and X. Zeng, Small, 2017, 13, 1701931 CrossRef .
Q. Shi, S. Fu, C. Zhu, J. Song, D. Du and Y. Lin, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 684–702 RSC .
A. M. Rice, G. A. Leith, O. A. Ejegbavwo, E. A. Dolgopolova and N. B. Shustova, ACS Energy Lett., 2019, 4, 1938–1946 CrossRef CAS .
H. Qin, Y. He, P. Xu, D. Huang, Z. Wang, H. Wang, Z. Wang, Y. Zhao, Q. Tian and C. Wang, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2021, 294, 102486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Liu, F. Yang, G. Cheng and W. Luo, Small, 2018, 14, 1703748 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Xu, C. Jin, J. Liu, K. Song, X. Wang and X. Gong, J. Energy Storage, 2021, 36, 102394 CrossRef .
L. Wan, C. Y. He, D. Q. Chen, J. X. Liu, Y. Zhang, C. Du, M. J. Xie and J. Chen, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 399, 125778 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, Q. Du, H. Li, G. Zhou, S. Chen, Z. Jiao and J. Ren, Korean J. Chem. Eng., 2017, 34, 1944–1951 CrossRef CAS .
O. Yaghi and H. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1995, 117, 10401–10402 CrossRef CAS .
S. W. Zhang, W. Shi and P. Cheng, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2017, 352, 108–150 CrossRef CAS .
K. Liu, X. Zhang, X. Meng, W. Shi, P. Cheng and A. K. Powell, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 2423–2439 RSC .
H. Cai, Y.-L. Huang and D. Li, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2019, 378, 207–221 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and D. Astruc, Chem. Rev., 2019, 120, 1438–1511 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Yang and X. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1800743 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Z. He, Z. W. Wang, H. Wang, Z. X. Wang, G. M. Zeng, P. Xu, D. L. Huang, M. Chen, B. Song, H. Qin and Y. Zhao, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 429, 213618 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, Z. Zeng, H. Wang, G. Zeng, P. Xu, R. Xiao, D. Huang, S. Chen, Y. He and C. Zhou, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2021, 439, 213902 CrossRef CAS .
R. C. K. Reddy, J. Lin, Y. Chen, C. Zeng, X. Lin, Y. Cai and C.-Y. Su, Coord. Chem. Rev., 2020, 420, 213434 CrossRef CAS .
D. Liu, J. Wan, G. Pang and Z. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1803291 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. X. Cai, Z. L. Wang, J. Kim and Y. Yamauchi, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1804903 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Shu, Y. Yan, J. Chen, Q. Xu, H. Pang and X. Hu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 22342–22349 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Yang, C. Zhao, Y. Qu, H. Zhou, F. Zhou, J. Wang, Y. Wu and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1808043 CrossRef .
W. J. Song, X. Teng, Y. Y. Liu, J. Y. Wang, Y. L. Niu, X. M. He, C. Zhang and Z. F. Chen, Nanoscale, 2019, 11, 6401–6409 RSC .
X. Liu and L. M. Dai, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1, 1–12 Search PubMed .
P. Ge, S. Li, L. Xu, K. Zou, X. Gao, X. Cao, G. Zou, H. Hou and X. Ji, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803035 CrossRef .
W. Wang, B. Jiang, C. Qian, F. Lv, J. Feng, J. Zhou, K. Wang, C. Yang, Y. Yang and S. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1801812 CrossRef .
X. M. Yang, S. Wang, D. Y. W. Yu and A. L. Rogach, Nano Energy, 2019, 58, 392–398 CrossRef CAS .
L. Lux, K. Williams and S. Ma, CrystEngComm, 2015, 17, 10–22 RSC .
R. Das, P. Pachfule, R. Banerjee and P. Poddar, Nanoscale, 2012, 4, 591–599 RSC .
L. Han, X. Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4601–4605 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. J. Zhou, X. J. Wu, X. H. Cao, X. Huang, C. L. Tan, J. Tian, H. Liu, J. Y. Wang and H. Zhang, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2921–2924 RSC .
S. Liu, L. Hu, X. Xu, A. A. Al-Ghamdi and X. Fang, Small, 2015, 11, 4267–4283 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. P. Antony, A. K. Satpati, K. Bhattacharyya and B. N. Jagatap, Advanced Materials Interfaces, 2016, 3, 1600632 CrossRef .
X. Wang, X. L. Wu, Y. G. Guo, Y. Zhong, X. Cao, Y. Ma and J. Yao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2010, 20, 1680–1686 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhou, D. Zhao and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 745–748 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, N. Yang, H. Tang, Z. Dong, Q. Jin, M. Yang, D. Kisailus, H. Zhao, Z. Tang and D. Wang, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125, 6545–6548 CrossRef .
B. Y. Guan, A. Kushima, L. Yu, S. Li, J. Li and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605902 CrossRef .
L. L. Wu, Z. Wang, Y. Long, J. Li, Y. Liu, Q. S. Wang, X. Wang, S. Y. Song, X. Liu and H. J. Zhang, Small, 2017, 13, 1604270 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Hu and Q. Chen, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1236–1257 RSC .
H. Guo, T. Li, W. Chen, L. Liu, X. Yang, Y. Wang and Y. Guo, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 15168–15174 RSC .
X. Li, Z. Wang, B. Zhang, A. I. Rykov, M. A. Ahmed and J. Wang, Appl. Catal., B, 2016, 181, 788–799 CrossRef CAS .
S. Li, Y. Hou, Q. Chen, X. Zhang, H. Cao and Y. Huang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 12, 2581–2590 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Wu, X. Qian, K. Zhou, J. Wei, J. Lou and P. M. Ajayan, ACS Nano, 2014, 6297–6303,  DOI:10.1021/nn501783n .
Y. Li, W. Han, R. Wang, L.-T. Weng, A. S. Lotina, M. A. Bañares, Q. Wang and K. L. Yeung, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 119121,  DOI:10.1016/j.apcatb.2020.119121 .
X. Yang, J. Cai, X. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Wu, W. D. Wu, X. D. Chen, J. Sun, S. P. Sun and Z. Wang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2020, 54, 3714–3724 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Wang, Z. Li, M. A. Banares, L. T. Weng, Q. Gu, J. Price, W. Han and K. L. Yeung, Small, 2019, 15, e1903525 CrossRef .
C. Kim, J. W. Jung, K. R. Yoon, D. Y. Youn, S. Park and I. D. Kim, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 11317–11326 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Shao, P. T. Wang and X. Q. Huang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1806419 CrossRef .
J. B. Li, D. Yan, S. J. Hou, T. Lu, Y. F. Yao, D. H. C. Chua and L. K. Pan, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 335, 579–589 CrossRef CAS .
G. C. Li, P. F. Liu, R. Liu, M. Liu, K. Tao, S. R. Zhu, M. K. Wu, F. Y. Yi and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2016, 45, 13311–13316 RSC .
G. Zhan and H. C. Zeng, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 10104–10112 CrossRef CAS .
G. Chen, Z. Guo, W. Zhao, D. Gao, C. Li, C. Ye and G. Sun, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 39594–39601,  DOI:10.1021/acsami.7b11916 .
W. T. Koo, S. Yu, S. J. Choi, J. S. Jang, J. Y. Cheong and I. D. Kim, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 8201–8210 CrossRef CAS .
B. Chen, X. He, F. Yin, H. Wang, D. J. Liu, R. Shi, J. Chen and H. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1700795 CrossRef .
S. Rezaee and S. Shahrokhian, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 244, 802–813 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qin, R. Ru, J. W. Mao, Q. Meng, Z. Fan, X. Li and G. L. Zhang, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 269, 118754 CrossRef CAS .
N. Tsumori, L. Y. Chen, Q. J. Wang, Q. L. Zhu, M. Kitta and Q. Xu, Chem, 2018, 4, 845–856 CAS .
B. Liu, W. F. Han, X. L. Li, L. C. Li, H. D. Tang, C. S. Lu, Y. Li and X. N. Li, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 257, 117939 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shen, L. W. Bao, F. Z. Sun and T. L. Hu, Mater. Chem. Front., 2019, 3, 2363–2373 RSC .
W.-G. Cui, Y.-T. Li, H. Zhang, Z.-C. Wei, B.-H. Gao, J.-J. Dai and T.-L. Hu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 278, 119262 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fan, F. Zhao, Z. Huang, B. Chen, S.-F. Zhou and G. Zhan, Appl. Catal., A, 2019, 572, 34–43 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Burke, L. J. Enman, A. S. Batchellor, S. H. Zou and S. W. Boettcher, Chem. Mater., 2015, 27, 7549–7558 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, G. M. Zeng, D. L. Huang, C. Zhang, D. H. He, C. Y. Zhou, W. J. Wang, W. P. Xiong, X. P. Li, B. S. Li, W. Y. Dong and Y. Zhou, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 272, 118970 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Pi, S. Jin, X. Li, S. Tu, Z. Li and J. Xiao, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 256, 117882 CrossRef CAS .
L. Wei, H. E. Karahan, S. Zhai, H. Liu, X. Chen, Z. Zhou, Y. Lei, Z. Liu and Y. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1701410 CrossRef PubMed .
S. N. Xiao, D. L. Pan, R. Liang, W. R. Dai, Q. T. Zhang, G. Q. Zhang, C. L. Su, H. X. Li and W. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 236, 304–313 CrossRef CAS .
C. Tan and H. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2015, 44, 2713–2731 RSC .
G. Fu and J. M. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 9386–9405 RSC .
Y. Al Haj, J. Balamurugan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3941–3952 RSC .
Y. L. Zhou, D. Yan, H. Y. Xu, J. K. Feng, X. L. Jiang, J. Yue, J. Yang and Y. T. Qian, Nano Energy, 2015, 12, 528–537 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Guan, L. Yu, X. Wang, S. Song and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1605051 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. M. Chen, Z. Li and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2015, 127, 10521–10524 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Cao, X. H. Liang, X. Ou, X. F. Yang, Y. Z. Li, C. H. Yang, Z. Lin and M. L. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1910732 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xiao, L. Wan, S. Yang, F. Xiao and S. Wang, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 831–838 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Y. Cui and D. Wang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1801993 CrossRef PubMed .
Z. F. Huang, J. Song, K. Li, M. Tahir, Y. T. Wang, L. Pan, L. Wang, X. Zhang and J. J. Zou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1359–1365 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Jia, J. Wang, W. W. Fu, J. H. Hu and Y. Liu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 391, 123541 CrossRef CAS .
W. Zhao, G. Yan, Y. Zheng, B. Liu, D. Jia, T. Liu, L. Cui, R. Zheng, D. Wei and J. Liu, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 565, 295–304 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Wu, Y. Du, Y. Fu, W. Wang, T. Zhan, Y. Liu, Y. Yang and L. Wang, Composites, Part B, 2019, 177, 107252 CrossRef CAS .
P. Zhang, B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2017, 56, 7141–7145 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, H. Li, J. Xiao, Y. Tu, D. Deng, H. Yang, H. Tian, J. Li, P. Ren and X. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1594–1601 RSC .
X. Y. Yu, Y. Feng, Y. Jeon, B. Guan, X. W. Lou and U. Paik, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 9006–9011 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Guo, J. Tang, H. Qian, Z. Wang and Y. Yamauchi, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 5566–5573 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Q. Li, C. X. Li, X. L. Ge, J. Y. Ma, Z. W. Zhang, Q. Li, C. X. Wang and L. W. Yin, Nano Energy, 2016, 23, 15–26 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Liu, H. L. Jiang, Y. H. Zhu, X. L. Yang and C. Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 1694–1701 RSC .
X. M. Lin, J. H. Chen, J. J. Fan, Y. Ma, P. Radjenovic, Q. C. Xu, L. Huang, S. Passerini, Z. Q. Tian and J. F. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1902312 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Shi, Y. X. Wang, H. L. Lin, H. B. Zhang, M. K. Shen, S. H. Xie, Y. H. Zhang, Q. S. Gao and Y. Tang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 6006–6013 RSC .
Z. Q. Jia, Z. H. Cui, Y. B. Tan, Z. W. Liu and X. X. Guo, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 89–97 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, Y. Su, W. W. Sun and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 8345–8353 CrossRef CAS .
S. P. Zhang, G. Wang, B. B. Wang, J. M. Wang, J. T. Bai and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001592 CrossRef CAS .
B. Wang, Y. F. Chen, X. Q. Wang, X. J. Zhang, Y. Hu, B. Yu, D. X. Yang and W. L. Zhang, J. Power Sources, 2020, 449, 227561 CrossRef CAS .
H.-J. Qiu, P. Du, K. Hu, J. Gao, H. Li, P. Liu, T. Ina, K. Ohara, Y. Ito and M. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1900843 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Xie, X. Li, H. Lai, Z. Zhao, J. Li, W. Zhang, W. Xie, Y. Liu and W. Mai, Angew. Chem., 2019, 131, 14740–14747 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Hu, L. Zhang, Z. J. Zhao, A. Li, X. Chang and J. Gong, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1705538 CrossRef PubMed .
T. Chen and Y. W. Tan, Nano Res., 2018, 11, 1331–1344 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Sun, K. Xu, Z. Wei, H. Li, T. Zhang, X. Li, W. Cai, J. Ma, H. J. Fan and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1802121 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Shi, J. Key, S. Ji, V. Linkov, F. Liu, H. Wang, H. Gai and R. Wang, Small, 2019, 15, e1802861 CrossRef PubMed .
Q. F. Cai, Y. Y. Li, L. Wang, Q. W. Li, J. Xu, B. Gao, X. M. Zhang, K. F. Huo and P. K. Chu, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 1–9 CrossRef CAS .
A. T. Swesi, J. Masud and M. Nath, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1771–1782 RSC .
L. Shao, X. Qian, H. M. Li, C. Xu and L. X. Hou, Chem. Eng. J., 2017, 315, 562–572 CrossRef CAS .
S. Anantharaj, S. R. Ede, K. Sakthikumar, K. Karthick, S. Mishra and S. Kundu, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 8069–8097 CrossRef CAS .
W. X. Zhang, H. Zhang, R. Luo, M. Zhang, X. Yan, X. Y. Sun, J. Y. Shen, W. Q. Han, L. J. Wang and J. S. Li, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 548, 48–55 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Xuan, K. D. Xia, W. Lei, W. W. Xia, W. P. Xiao, L. X. Chen, H. L. L. Xin and D. L. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 291, 64–72 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, X. Y. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, e1706668 CrossRef PubMed .
L. Quan, T. Q. Liu, M. J. Yi, Q. D. Chen, D. P. Cai and H. B. Zhan, Electrochim. Acta, 2018, 281, 109–116 CrossRef CAS .
F. Ma, J. Lu, L. Pu, W. Wang and Y. Dai, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 563, 435–446 CrossRef PubMed .
W. Sun, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Chemelectrochem, 2019, 6, 3736–3741 CrossRef CAS .
Z. P. Xu, Y. Huang, Z. Zhang, L. Ding, H. Gao and T. H. Li, Ceram. Int., 2020, 46, 25775–25782 CrossRef CAS .
S. Liu, D. Li, G. Zhang, D. Sun, J. Zhou and H. Song, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 34193–34201 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. L. Wu, S. Han, D. H. He, C. L. Yu, C. J. Lei, W. Liu, G. K. Zheng, X. W. Zhang and L. C. Lei, ACS Sustain. Chem. Eng., 2018, 6, 8672 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Sun, C. Cai, X. X. Tang, L. P. Lv and Y. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 351, 169–176 CrossRef CAS .
L. J. Li, J. C. Zhao, Y. Q. Zhu, X. F. Pan, H. X. Wang and J. L. Xu, Electrochim. Acta, 2020, 353, 136532 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Wang, B. B. Wang, X. J. Liu, J. T. Bai, H. Wang and G. Wang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 123050 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Sun, X. L. Wu, J. Xu, D. Qu, B. Zhao, Z. Gu, W. Li, H. Liang, L. Gao and Y. Fan, Small, 2020, 16, 1907670 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Yan, C. Tian, L. Wang, A. Wu, M. Meng, L. Zhao and H. Fu, Angew. Chem., 2015, 54, 6325–6329 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H.-F. Ye, R. Shi, X. Yang, W.-F. Fu and Y. Chen, Appl. Catal., B, 2018, 233, 70–79 CrossRef CAS .
Z. H. Xue, H. Su, Q. Y. Yu, B. Zhang, H. H. Wang, X. H. Li and J. S. Chen, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1602355 CrossRef .
D. S. Yang, D. Bhattacharjya, S. Inamdar, J. Park and J. S. Yu, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 16127–16130 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yang, C. Zhou, W. Wang, W. Xiong, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Zhang, B. Song, W. Xue and X. Li, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 405, 126547 CrossRef .
J. Li, M. Yan, X. Zhou, Z. Q. Huang, Z. Xia, C. R. Chang, Y. Ma and Y. Qu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6785–6796 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yin, C. Zhu, C. Li, S. Zhang, X. Zhang and Y. Chen, Nanoscale, 2016, 8, 19129–19138 RSC .
Y. Shi and B. Zhang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 1529–1541 RSC .
Y. W. Tan, H. Wang, P. Liu, Y. H. Shen, C. Cheng, A. Hirata, T. Fujita, Z. Tang and M. W. Chen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2257–2261 RSC .
J. Deng, P. Ren, D. Deng and X. Bao, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2015, 54, 2100–2104 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Yan, L. Cao, P. Dai, X. Gu, D. Liu, L. Li, Y. Wang and X. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1703455 CrossRef .
Y. Pan, W. H. Hu, D. P. Liu, Y. Q. Liu and C. G. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 13087–13094 RSC .
Y. Feng, X. Y. Yu and U. Paik, Chem. Commun., 2016, 52, 1633–1636 RSC .
L. Zhang, J. Fischer, Y. Jia, X. Yan, W. Xu, X. Wang, J. Chen, D. Yang, H. Liu, L. Zhuang, M. Hankel, D. J. Searles, K. Huang, S. Feng, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140, 10757–10763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. L. Li, X. B. Zhang, H. Zhang, C. Y. Liao and G. B. Jiang, Appl. Catal., B, 2019, 249, 147–154 CrossRef CAS .
X. J. Liu, L. Zhou, L. Huang, L. L. Chen, L. Long, S. Y. Wang, X. L. Xu, M. C. Liu, W. X. Yang and J. B. Jia, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 318, 883–891 CrossRef CAS .
L. Zhang, X. Wang, A. Li, X. Zheng, L. Peng, J. Huang, Z. Deng, H. Chen and Z. Wei, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 17529–17535 RSC .
S. Fan, J. Zhang, Q. Wu, S. Huang, J. Zheng, D. Kong, S. Chen, Y. Wang, L. K. Ang and Y. Shi, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2020, 11, 3911–3919 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Li, X. Zhang and H. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 398, 125467 CrossRef CAS .
F. X. Bu, W. S. Chen, M. F. A. Aboud, I. Shakir, J. J. Gu and Y. X. Xu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14526–14535 RSC .
J. Y. Wang, J. Wang, M. Zhang, S. M. Li, R. Liu and Z. Q. Li, J. Alloys Compd., 2020, 821, 153463 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, L. L. Chai, J. Y. Ding, L. Zhong, Y. J. Du, T. T. Li, Y. Hu, J. J. Qian and S. M. Huang, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 745–753 CrossRef CAS .
S. R. Chemler and M. T. Bovino, ACS Catal., 2013, 3, 1076–1091 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Gao, W. Zhang, Z. Shi, L. Yang and Y. Tang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1802880 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Y. He, T. Bo, B. T. Wang and J. Z. Tao, Nano Energy, 2019, 62, 85–93 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. Wang, T. Ouyang, Y. P. Deng, Y. S. Hong and Z. Q. Liu, J. Power Sources, 2019, 420, 108–117 CrossRef CAS .
T. Ouyang, A.-N. Chen, Z.-Z. He, Z.-Q. Liu and Y. Tong, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 9901–9904 RSC .
J. Chen, B. Ren, H. Cui and C. Wang, Small, 2020, 16, e1907556 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Feng, X. Bo and L. Guo, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2020, 575, 69–77 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Xu, F. Nosheen and X. Wang, Chem. Mater., 2016, 28, 6313–6320 CrossRef CAS .
J. Han, Y. Dou, J. Zhao, M. Wei, D. G. Evans and X. Duan, Small, 2013, 9, 98–106 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Y. Xing, B. Wang, W. Y. Gao, C. Q. Pan, J. K. Halsted, E. S. Chong, J. Lu, X. F. Wang, W. Luo, C. H. Chang, Y. H. Wen, S. Q. Ma, K. Amine and X. L. Ji, Nano Energy, 2015, 11, 600–610 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang and D. O'Hare, Chem. Rev., 2012, 112, 4124–4155 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhao, C. Niu, L. Zhang, H. Guo, X. Wen, C. Liang and G. Zeng, Chemosphere, 2018, 204, 11–21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Qian, Y. Li, Y. Liu, L. Yu and G. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1901139 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Liu, L. Kong, X. Wang, J. He and X. H. Bu, Small, 2019, 15, e1903410 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Song, C. Zhu, B. Z. Xu, S. Fu, M. H. Engelhard, R. Ye, D. Du, S. P. Beckman and Y. Lin, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1601555 CrossRef .
Q. R. Liang, H. H. Jin, Z. Wang, Y. L. Xiong, S. Yuan, X. C. Zeng, D. P. He and S. C. Mu, Nano Energy, 2019, 57, 746–752 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cao, S. W. Sun, X. Li, Z. H. Yang, W. P. Xiong, Y. Wu, M. Y. Jia, Y. Y. Zhou, C. Y. Zhou and Y. R. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 382, 122802 CrossRef CAS .
W. D. Zhang, H. Yu, T. Li, Q. T. Hu, Y. Gong, D. Y. Zhang, Y. Liu, Q. T. Fu, H. Y. Zhu, X. D. Yan and Z. G. Gu, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 264, 118532 CrossRef .
X. Deng, M. Li, Y. Fan, L. Wang, X.-Z. Fu and J.-L. Luo, Appl. Catal., B, 2020, 278, 119339 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, B. Xu, H. Mei, Y. Mei, S. Zhang, Z. Yang, Z. Xiao, W. Kang and D. Sun, Small, 2019, 15, e1904663 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Bai, Q. Liu, Z. Lu, J. Liu, R. Chen, R. Li, D. Song, X. Jing, P. Liu and J. Wang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2017, 5, 9923–9934 CrossRef CAS .
J. Zhang, H. Hu, Z. Li and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 2016, 55, 3982–3986 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Pu, I. S. Amiinu, R. Cheng, P. Wang, C. Zhang, S. Mu, W. Zhao, F. Su, G. Zhang, S. Liao and S. Sun, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 21 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. T. Sun, L. B. Xu, D. S. Wang and Y. D. Li, Nano Res., 2019, 12, 2067–2080 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, G. Zeng, D. Huang, C. Zhang, D. He, C. Zhou, W. Wang, W. Xiong, B. Song and H. Yi, Small, 2020, 16, 2001634 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lu, B. Wang, Y. Hu, W. Liu, Y. Zhao, R. Yang, Z. Li, J. Luo, B. Chi and Z. Jiang, Angew. Chem., 2019, 58, 2622–2626 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Zhu, R. Amal and X. Lu, Small, 2019, 15, e1804524 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Han, X. Ling, Y. Wang, T. Ma, C. Zhong, W. Hu and Y. Deng, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 5359–5364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Wang, Z. Huang, W. Liu, C. Chang, H. Tang, Z. Li, W. Chen, C. Jia, T. Yao, S. Wei, Y. Wu and Y. Li, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 17281–17284 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Zhang, W. Chen, Z. Li, Y. Chen, L. Zheng, Y. Gong, Q. Li, R. Shen, Y. Han and W.-C. Cheong, Chem. Commun., 2018, 54, 4274–4277 RSC .
X. Han, X. Ling, D. Yu, D. Xie, L. Li, S. Peng, C. Zhong, N. Zhao, Y. Deng and W. Hu, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1905622 CrossRef PubMed .
R. Zhao, Z. Liang, S. Gao, C. Yang, B. Zhu, J. Zhao, C. Qu, R. Zou and Q. Xu, Angew. Chem., 2019, 58, 1975–1979 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Deng, P. J. Ren, D. H. Deng, L. Yu, F. Yang and X. H. Bao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1919–1923 RSC .
X. Zhang, H. Xu, X. Li, Y. Li, T. Yang and Y. Liang, ACS Catal., 2015, 6, 580–588 CrossRef .
F. Aftab, H. Duran, K. Kirchhoff, M. Zaheer, B. Iqbal, M. Saleem and S. N. Arshad, ChemCatChem, 2019, 12, 932–943 CrossRef .
N. Li, D. K. Bediako, R. G. Hadt, D. Hayes, T. J. Kempa, F. von Cube, D. C. Bell, L. X. Chen and D. G. Nocera, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2017, 114, 1486–1491 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Chen, J. Liu, J.-Q. Xie, H. Ye, X.-Z. Fu, R. Sun and C.-P. Wong, Nano Energy, 2019, 56, 225–233 CrossRef CAS .
C. Feng, Y. Guo, Y. Xie, X. Cao, S. Li, L. Zhang, W. Wang and J. Wang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 5942–5952 RSC .
W. H. Niu and Y. Yang, ACS Energy Lett., 2018, 3, 2796–2815 CrossRef CAS .
W. Niu and Y. Yang, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 2440–2445 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Li, X. Lan and T. Wang, ACS Catal., 2018, 8, 2121–2128 CrossRef CAS .
B. Y. Guan, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, M. Wu and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706738 CrossRef .
S. L. Zhang, B. Y. Guan and X. W. D. Lou, Small, 2019, 15, e1805324 CrossRef PubMed .
C. Guan, W. Xiao, H. J. Wu, X. M. Liu, W. J. Zang, H. Zhang, J. Ding, Y. P. Feng, S. J. Pennycook and J. Wang, Nano Energy, 2018, 48, 73–80 CrossRef .
Z. G. Ye, T. Li, G. Ma, Y. H. Dong and X. L. Zhou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1704083 CrossRef .
C. Yang, S. Yu, C. Lin, F. Lv, S. Wu, Y. Yang, W. Wang, Z. Z. Zhu, J. Li, N. Wang and S. Guo, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 4217–4224 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. J. Yang, Y. Liu, M. Yan, Y. Lei and W. D. Shi, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 370, 666–676 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, P. Pachfule, S. Li, J. R. J. Simke, J. Schmidt and A. Thomas, Angew. Chem., 2018, 57, 8921–8926 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Gan, J. Fang, M. R. Wang, L. T. Hu, K. Zhang, Y. Q. Lai and J. Li, J. Power Sources, 2018, 391, 59–66 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao, X. Li, J. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Zhao and G. Yue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6472–6480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. H. Guan, M. Huang, L. Yang, G. S. Wang and X. Guan, Chem. Eng. J., 2019, 372, 151–162 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, S. Niu, D. Rakov, Y. Wang, M. Caban-Acevedo, S. Zheng, B. Song and P. Xu, Nanoscale, 2018, 10, 7291–7297 RSC .
L. Fang, W. Li, Y. Guan, Y. Feng, H. Zhang, S. Wang and Y. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1701008 CrossRef .
Q. M. Tang, Y. H. Cui, J. W. Wu, D. Y. Qu, A. P. Baker, Y. H. Ma, X. Song and Y. C. Liu, Nano Energy, 2017, 41, 377–386 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Liu, Y. Wang, R. Chen, C. Chen, H. T. Yang, J. M. Ma, Y. F. Li and S. Y. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2018, 403, 90–96 CrossRef CAS .
M. Yi, A. Wu, Q. Chen, D. Cai and H. Zhan, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 351, 678–687 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, Y. Kang, Z. Huo, Z. Zhu, W. Huang, H. L. Xin, J. D. Snyder, D. Li, J. A. Herron, M. Mavrikakis, M. Chi, K. L. More, Y. Li, N. M. Markovic, G. A. Somorjai, P. Yang and V. R. Stamenkovic, Science, 2014, 343, 1339–1343 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wang, M. Chen, Y. Xie, Y. Fan, D. Wang, J. J. Jiang, Y. Li, H. Grützmacher and C. Y. Su, Small, 2016, 12, 2365–2375 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. L. Niu, C. H. Zeng, H. J. Peng, X. M. Lin, P. Sathishkumar and Y. P. Cai, Small, 2017, 13, 1702150 CrossRef .
Y. Zhao, X. Li, J. Liu, C. Wang, Y. Zhao and G. Yue, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2016, 8, 6472–6480 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Fang, D. Luan and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002976 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Y. Yu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701592 CrossRef .
D. Yan, C. Yu, Y. Bai, W. Zhang, T. Chen, B. Hu, Z. Sun and L. Pan, Chem. Commun., 2015, 51, 8261–8264 RSC .
Z. S. He, K. Wang, S. S. Zhu, L. A. Huang, M. M. Chen, J. F. Guo, S. E. Pei, H. B. Shao and J. M. Wang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10974–10985 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lu, L. Yu, M. Wu, Y. Wang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1702875 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Ma, Y. J. Ma, D. Geiger, U. Kaiser, H. Zhang, G. T. Kim, T. Diemant, R. J. Behm, A. Varzi and S. Passerini, Nano Energy, 2017, 42, 341–352 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hu, B. Guan, B. Xia and X. W. Lou, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 5590–5595 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. E. Moosavifard, J. Shamsi, S. Fani and S. Kadkhodazade, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 52555–52561 RSC .
F. Saleki, A. Mohammadi, S. E. Moosavifard, A. Hafizi and M. R. Rahimpour, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2019, 556, 83–91 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Zhang, B. Y. Guan, L. Yu and X. W. Lou, Angew. Chem., 2017, 129, 7247–7251 CrossRef .
K. Tao, Y. Yang, C. Yang, Q. Ma and L. Han, Dalton Trans., 2019, 48, 14156–14163 RSC .
A. Bahaa, J. Balamurugan, N. H. Kim and J. H. Lee, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 8620–8632 RSC .
J. W. Xiao, C. Zhao, C. C. Hu, J. B. Xi and S. Wang, J. Power Sources, 2017, 348, 183–192 CrossRef CAS .
F. Lyu, Y. Bai, Z. Li, W. Xu, Q. Wang, J. Mao, L. Wang, X. Zhang and Y. Yin, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702324 CrossRef .
I. Roger, M. A. Shipman and M. D. Symes, Nat. Rev. Chem, 2017, 1, 0003 CrossRef CAS .
M.-Q. Wang, C. Ye, H. Liu, M. Xu and S.-J. Bao, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 1963–1967 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. A. Buss, M. Hirahara, Y. Ueda and T. Agapie, Angew. Chem. Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 16329–16333 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Dionigi and P. Strasser, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600621 CrossRef .
F. W. Ming, H. F. Liang, H. H. Shi, X. Xu, G. Mei and Z. C. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 15148–15155 RSC .
J. Nai, Y. Lu, L. Yu, X. Wang and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1703870 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Wang, L. Yu, B. Y. Guan, S. Song and X. W. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1801211 CrossRef PubMed .
B. K. Kang, M. H. Woo, J. Lee, Y. H. Song, Z. Wang, Y. Guo, Y. Yamauchi, J. H. Kim, B. Lim and D. H. Yoon, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 4320–4324 RSC .
Z. Wang, H. Jin, T. Meng, K. Liao, W. Meng, J. Yang, D. He, Y. Xiong and S. Mu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1802596 CrossRef .
B. Y. Guan, Y. Lu, Y. Wang, M. Wu and X. W. Lou, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706738 CrossRef .
J. T. Ren and Z. Y. Yuan, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 13591–13601 RSC .
J. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Z. Xia and L. Dai, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 444–452 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Li, T. Liu, X. Bo, M. Zhou, L. Guo and S. Guo, Nano Energy, 2017, 33, 221–228 CrossRef CAS .
L. Feng, Y. Liu and J. Zhao, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 30687–30694 RSC .
J. T. Ren, Y. S. Wang, L. Chen, L. J. Gao, W. W. Tian and Z. Y. Yuan, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 389, 124408 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contribute equally to this article.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
Table Content:
Yangzhuo He	Dr. Yangzhuo He received her BE degree from the Hunan Agricultural University in 2019. Then, she pursued her PhD degree in the College of Environmental Science and Engineering at the Hunan University under the supervision of Prof. Guangming Zeng and Prof. Piao Xu. Her current research interests focus on the synthesis and applications of MOF-based nanomaterials for catalytic and energy-related fields.
Zhuo Yin	Prof. Zhuo Yin is a Doctor of Medicine and director of Urinary Surgery Resident Training Program in the Second Xiangya Hospital of Central South University. In the past 5 years, he has published more than 20 papers and presided over and participated in 5 national and provincial projects. He specializes in laparoscopic surgery, robotic surgery, endoscopic surgery, treating kidney diseases, adrenal diseases and so on.
Piao Xu	Prof. Piao Xu received her PhD degree from the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University, in 2016. She is currently an assistant professor in the College of Environmental Science and Engineering, Hunan University. Her major research focus is on the development of MOF-based nanomaterials and their application in electrocatalysis.
Guangming Zeng	Prof. Guangming Zeng teaches courses and performs research on Environmental Science and Health at Hunan University since 1988. He has been heading of the School of Environmental Science and Engineering since 1994 at the same University. He is one of 2017 and 2018 Highly Cited Researchers in the world issued by Clarivate Analytics. His current research interests focus on the synthesis and application of functional nanomaterials in the field of environment and energy.

 	Fig. 1  The merits of MOF-derived mixed transition metal nanomaterials.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a–f) TEM images of the respective MOF-derived catalysts. The schematic shown at the bottom represents the evolution of the NixCo3−xO4−y catalyst when Ni is loaded in different concentrations, Ni/Co = 0, 0.5, 1, 1.5, and 3. Reproduced with permission.49 Copyright 2016, WILEY VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of the formation process of the multi-shelled structure. TEM images of (h) Ni–Co MOF and the products obtained after the calcination of the MOF at different temperatures: (i) 360 °C, (j) 390 °C, (k) 500 °C. The scale bars in (b–e) are 200 nm. FESEM and TEM images of (l and m) Mn–Co oxide, (n and o) Zn–Mn oxide, (p and q) Mn–Ni oxide, (r and s) Mn–Co–Ni oxide. All scale bars are 500 nm. Reproduced with permission.53 Copyright 2017, WILEY VCH.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) Assembly of the core–shell Fe3O4–CuO@carbon hollow sphere derived from the MOFs composite hydrogel through the combination of chemical vapor deposition and pyrolysis. (b) Schematic illustration of freezing-replacement post-treatment on the structure of the Fe3O4–CuO@carbon sphere. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (c) Schematic illustration of the syntheses of Co/MnOx@quasi-MOF-74 and Co/MnOx@C catalysts. HAABF-STEM images of (d) CoMn-MOF-74 and (e) the derived Co/MnOx@quasi-MOF-74. High-resolution TEM images of (f) CoMn-MOF-74 and (g) Co/MnOx@quasi-MOF-74. (h) XRD patterns and (i) N2 sorption isotherms of different catalysts. Reproduced with permission.72 Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the fabrication of hollow Co-based bimetallic sulfides. (b) Powder XRD patterns and (c and d) cell units of Co3S4 and MxCo3−xS4. Blue, yellow, and purple balls represent Co, S, and M atoms, respectively. SEM images of (e) Zn0.30Co2.70-MOF and (f) Zn0.30Co2.70S4. TEM images of Zn0.30Co2.70S4 before (g) and after (h) annealing treatment. Reproduced with permission.92 Copyright 2016, American Chemical Society. (i) Schematic fabrication process of the waxberry-like MnCo2S4/Co9S8 composite. (j and k) SEM images of the MnCo2S4/Co9S8 composite. (l and m) TEM images of the MnCo2S4/Co9S8 hierarchical structure. Reproduced with permission.93 Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of double-shelled Zn–Co–S RDCs. TEM images of (b) Zn/Co-ZIF RDs, (c) yolk-shelled Zn/Co-ZIF RDCs, and (d) double-shelled Zn–Co–S RDCs. (e) XRD patterns of Zn/Co-ZIF RDs and yolk-shelled Zn/Co-ZIF RDCs. Reproduced with permission.96 Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the formation of hollow Co3S4@MoS2 heterostructures. Reproduced with permission.99 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) Schematic illustration of the (Ni0.5Co0.5)9S8@NC hollow nanocube composite synthesis process. Reproduced with permission.102 Copyright 2019, WILEY VCH. (b) Schematic of the preparation of 3D hetero-structured bimetallic Ni–Fe–S-CNT. (c) Dark-field TEM image and corresponding mapping images of Ni–Fe–S-CNT. TEM images of (d) Ni–Fe-PBA-CNT and (e and f) Ni–Fe–S-CNT. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright 2020, WILEY VCH. (g) Schematic illustration of the preparation of Co,Fe-NC@rGO, S–Co9−xFexS8@rGO, and Co9−xFexS8@rGO. Reproduced with permission.22 Copyright 2018, WILEY VCH.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the two-step ion-exchange reactions for the synthesis of Cu–CoSe2 microboxes. (b and c) FESEM images and (d and e) TEM images of Cu–CoSe2 microboxes. Reproduced with permission.120 Copyright 2018, WILEY VCH. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis process of Fe–CoSe2@NC. SEM images of (g) ZIF-67, (h) Fe-ZIF-67, and (i) Fe–CoSe2@NC. (j) EDS elemental mapping images of Fe–CoSe2@NC. Reproduced with permission.126 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (k) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of the rGO@MCSe composite. SEM images of (l) MCSe and (m) rGO@MCSe (inset: optical photograph of 3D structure). (n) TEM image of rGO@MCSe. (o) N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms of rGO@MCSe (inset: pore size distribution plot). Reproduced with permission.130 Copyright 2020, WILEY VCH.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic of the fabrication process of macroporous CoFeP TPAs/Ni. SEM images of (b and c) macroporous CoFe-MOF TPAs and (d and e) macroporous CoFeP TPAs. (f) TEM image of macroporous CoFeP TPAs. Reproduced with permission.147 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry. (g) Synthetic route for Ni1.4Co0.6P/NCNHMs. (h and i) SEM images, (j) magnified SEM image and (k) HAADF-STEM elemental mapping of Ni1.4Co0.6P/NCNHMs. Reproduced with permission.148 Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (l) Schematic illustration of the formation process of TMP/graphene composites with adjustable heterostructures. TEM images of (m) FeNiP/PG, (n) FeNiP/GC/PG and (o) FeNiP/rGO. Reproduced with permission.150 Copyright 2019, The Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) The proposed alkaline hydrolysis procedure of the Ni–Co-MOF precursor/template through different treatments. Reproduced with permission.172 Copyright 2019, WILEY VCH. (b–e) TEM images of Ni–Co LDH hollow nanocages/graphene composites. (f) Schematic illustration of the possible mechanism reaction involved in forming Ni–Co LDH. Reproduced with permission.173 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 10  (a) Preparation of (Fe,Co)/N–C. (b) Magnified HAADF-STEM of (Fe,Co)/N–C. (c) Corresponding Fe K-edge EXAFS fittings of (Fe,Co)/N–C. (d) Proposed architectures of Fe–Co dual sites. Reproduced with permission.181 Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthetic strategy of CoNi–SAs/NC. (f) SEM, (g and h) TEM and (i) HAADF-STEM images of CoNi–SAs/NC. Reproduced with permission.183 Copyright 2019, WILEY VCH.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation process of porous Fe–Co alloy/N-doped carbon cages. (b) FESEM and (c) TEM images of Fe0.3Co0.7/NC cages. TEM images of (d) ZIF-8 particles, (e) FeOOH nanorods, and (f) ZIF-8@FeOOH/ZIF-67 hybrid particles. (g) HAADF-STEM image and elemental mappings of Fe0.3Co0.7/NC cages. FESEM images of (h) MoO3@MIL-88/ZIF-67 hybrid rods, (i) PS@FeOOH/ZIF-67 hybrid spheres, and (j) GO@MIL-88/ZIF-67 hybrid sheets. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2018, WILEY VCH.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) SEM and (b and c) TEM images of MnO-doped Fe3O4@C composites. (d) Initial galvanostatic charge/discharge curves of MnO-doped Fe3O4@C nanosphere electrode at 200 mA g−1. (e) Rate capabilities of MnO-doped Fe3O4@C nanosphere and comparative Fe3O4@C nanosphere electrodes. (f) Cycling performances at 200 mA g−1. Reproduced with permission.216 Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Overview FESEM, (b and c) magnified FESEM and (d) TEM images of the Ni–Fe–Se nanocages. (e) Overpotential required for j = 10 and 100 mA cm−2, and (f) Tafel slopes of the other catalysts. Reproduced with permission.232 Copyright 2017, Wiley VCH. (g) LSV curves in O2-saturated 0.1 M KOH solution. (h) Tafel slopes curves. Reproduced with permission.194 Copyright 2018, Wiley VCH.	 
Footnote
† These authors contribute equally to this article.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2022
