A novel design of an electrolyser using a trifunctional (HER/OER/ORR) electrocatalyst for decoupled H 2 /O 2 generation and solar to hydrogen conversi ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA05102K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA05102K
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8, 16609-16615A novel design of an electrolyser using a trifunctional (HER/OER/ORR) electrocatalyst for decoupled H2/O2 generation and solar to hydrogen conversion†

        
          
            Mingrui 
            Guo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Ling 
            Wang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Jing 
            Zhan
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Xiuling 
            Jiao
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Dairong 
            Chen
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Ting 
            Wang
          
        
      *
      School of Chemistry & Chemical Engineering, National Engineering Research Center for Colloidal Materials, Shandong University, China. E-mail: t54wang@sdu.edu.cn; cdr@sdu.edu.cn
Received 
      19th May 2020
    , Accepted 18th July 2020First published on 20th July 2020AbstractNowadays, a variety of multifunctional electrocatalysts are being developed while there is still a lack of suitable design to fully realize their multifunctionalities. Here, we propose a general, simple, two-component design of an electrolyser to replace the traditional three-component design for decoupled water splitting. Trifunctional (OER, HER and ORR) electrocatalysts (such as nickel sulfide foams with surface grown N-doped carbon nanotube arrays) are used as the gas evolution electrode to replace both the cathode and the anode, while materials with suitable redox activities (NaTi2(PO4)3 or commercial Ni(OH)2) are used as the relay electrode. In such a design, the H2/O2 evolution can be switched by reversing the current polarity, and the ORR before the HER consumes the residual O2 left in the electrolyser, guaranteeing the high purity (∼99.9%) of the as-obtained H2. With NaTi2(PO4)3 as the relay electrode and the nickel sulfide foam as the gas evolution electrode, owing to the high decoupling efficiency of the NaTi2(PO4)3 relay (97%) and the low HER/OER overpotentials of the trifunctional nickel sulfide foam, an energy conversion efficiency of up to 94.3% can be obtained for the as-assembled electrolyser at a current density of 10 mA cm−2. When combined with a commercial Si PV module with an efficiency of 14.4%, the as-designed PV-electrolysis system showed a solar-to-hydrogen conversion efficiency of up to 10.4%. Utilization of trifunctional electrocatalysts greatly reduces the complexity of the electrolyser and the overall cost for electrochemical H2 production, and these electrolysers may potentially be used to construct highly competitive water splitting systems for continuous H2 production and green energy harvesting. Our research may also bring new insights into the utilization of multifunctional electrocatalysts in other devices, such as metal–air batteries and fuel cells.
Introduction
The increased environmental hazards from the use of carbon-emitting fuels and the rapid depletion of conventional fossil fuels have triggered the research community to find alternatives to fossil-fuel-based technologies. In many innovative approaches to address these challenges, electrocatalytic water splitting driven by a renewable energy input to produce clean H2 has been widely viewed as a promising strategy as hydrogen is produced from renewable sources (such as solar and wind energy), which can be stored, transported and consumed without generating any carbon-based byproducts.1–3 Electrolysers are a crucial factor for water electrolysis. Currently, great efforts are being made to develop new electrocatalysts with high efficiency for overall water splitting.4,5 In addition to the advancement of electrocatalysts, another equally important aspect of water electrolysis is the development of novel electrolyzer design. The conventional cell design of a alkaline water electrolyser is illustrated in Scheme 1a.6 Both electrodes are dipped into an aqueous alkaline electrolyte with a separator (ion exchange membrane or porous diaphragm) between them. H2 and O2 are produced on the electrodes via two half-cell reactions: the hydrogen evolution reaction (HER), and the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). In the lab, these electrolysers are used directly, while in industry, these electrolysers are used in stacks to scale-up H2 production. For electrolysers, major costs are due to the fabrication and material for the three main components: anodes, cathodes and separators. The existence of a separator not only increases the cost of the electrolyser, but also induces extra overpotentials for water splitting.7,8 A new electrolyser with a simple, condensed, membrane-free design is highly desired since it not only requires lower overpotentials, but also needs smaller areas and fewer materials, which reduces the overall cost of the electrolyser cells and promotes the electrochemical water splitting.
 Scheme 1  (a) Schematic illustration of a traditional electrolyser with the separator. (b) Decoupled water splitting using a liquid relay. (c) Decoupled water splitting using a solid relay. (d) The design of the one-cell, two-component water splitting electrolyser. (e) Cyclic voltammogram (CV) curves of the Ni(OH)2 relay electrode (green line) and NaTi2(PO4)3 relay electrode (red line), and the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of the NSF/CNT gas evolution electrode for the HER (blue line), the OER (black line) and the ORR (celeste line) at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 in 1 M NaOH. 
Another important issue for electrochemical water splitting is to avoid explosive H2/O2 mixing. Currently, in industry, proton exchange membrane (PEM) electrolyser and alkaline water electrolyser systems can all produce H2 with high purity.2 However, a PEM electrolyser requires expensive membranes and noble-metal based electrocatalysts and is rarely used on a large scale. A alkaline water electrolyser is low-cost and commonly used, but the electrolyser operation needs critical conditions: the power input should be highly stable since the pressure on the anode and cathode sides of the cell must always be equalized to prevent gas crossover through the cell separator. As a result, these electrolysers are difficult to shut down/start up, which is incompatible with the intermittent and fluctuating power from renewable energy.
Up to now, owing to the tremendous work done by different research groups, there have been several new types of electrolysers proposed for decoupled H2/O2 generation through the utilization of redox mediators, and a list of these new electrolysers has been provided in Table S1 in the ESI.† For example, a new PEM electrolyser is proposed with polyoxometalates (POMs) used as the redox relay, and the H2/O2 generation can be decoupled both in time and in space (Scheme 1b).9 Such a design requires three electrodes (OER electrode, carbon electrode for reduction of the soluble POM redox mediator, and Pt catalyst for spontaneous hydrogen evolution), one soluble redox mediator (POMs), one membrane (Nafion membrane) and two cells, which potentially increases the cost for the electrolysers. A solid redox mediator, such as Ni(OH)2, has also been successfully used as the relay for decoupled water splitting (Scheme 1c).10 This kind of design needs no separator between the cathode and the anode; however, an auxiliary relay electrode has been used and the whole cell is still a three-component system, and the overall cost for the electrolyser may not be effectively reduced. Also, among all these designs, since the HER and OER are decoupled in time, there is always an electrode (either the HER or the OER electrode) in an idle state when the cell is in operation. For decoupled water splitting in time, the integration of the HER and OER in one electrode can effectively reduce the cost and space for the electrolyser, which is more practical for scale-up applications; however, a rational design toward this direction has not been proposed.
By rational design, a variety of electrocatalysts with multifunctionalities, such as activities toward the HER, OER, hydrogen oxidation reaction (HOR), and oxygen reduction reaction (ORR), have been constructed.11–16Multifunctional electrocatalysts may potentially be used in metal–air batteries (ORR/OER), water splitting devices (HER/OER) and fuel-cells (HOR/ORR). The utilization of multifunctional electrocatalysts may bring about new design of energy-related devices which are promising for the development of new-generation green energy conversion and storage techniques. However, currently, the utilization of these multifunctional electrocatalysts is still limited in traditional designs, which only use one-function of electrocatalysts.More work is still needed to find the suitable design which can fully realize the multifunctionalities of these electrocatalysts.
Here, we propose the use of a single HER/OER/ORR trifunctional electrode to replace both the HER electrode and the OER electrode, and design an electrolyser with a simple two-component configuration for decoupled water splitting. As a demonstration, a Ni3S2/CNT foam with trifunctionality (HER/OER/ORR) is used as a single gas evolution electrode (GEE) for both H2 and O2 generation. Materials with suitable redox properties, such as the anodic NaTi2(PO4)3 or cathodic Ni(OH)2, can be used as the relay electrode (RE) working as the redox mediators. For a one-cell configuration of the electrolyser, the H2 and O2 production can be decoupled in different times and for a two-cell configuration, the H2 and O2 production can be decoupled in different cells. More interestingly, the H2/O2 production on the GEE can be switched simply by reversing the current polarity, and the residual O2 in the cell can be consumed by the ORR, which effectively prevents the H2/O2 mixing. The application of trifunctional electrocatalysts assists in the design of such simple two-component, separator-free electrolysers with decoupled H2 production, which greatly promotes the efficiency and applicability for electrolysis water splitting. With NaTi2(PO4)3 as the relay electrode and the nickel sulfide foam as the gas evolution electrode, owing to the high decoupling efficiency of the NaTi2(PO4)3 relay (97%) and the low HER/OER overpotentials of the trifunctional nickel sulfide foam, an energy conversion efficiency of up to 94.3% can be obtained for the as-assembled electrolyser. An STH conversion efficiency of 10.4% can be obtained with a commercial Si PV module (efficiency of 14.4%) under simulated solar irradiation. All the components of the electrolysers are made from low-cost, earth-abundant materials. We propose that such simple, low-cost electrolysers may be used to construct water splitting systems either for continuous, industrial-scale H2 production, or for H2 production with unstable power supply from green energy, such as solar and wind energy. We believe that the full utilization of the multifunctionality of the electrocatalysts may help to optimize the design of other types of electrocatalytic devices, such as metal–air batteries and fuel cells.
Results and discussion
General design and electrode fabrication
The diagram of the H2/O2 decoupling processes is illustrated in Scheme 1d and e, and the configuration of the as-designed electrolyser cell is shown in Fig. S1 in the ESI.† In operation, the cell was fully filled with the electrolyte and a valve on the gas outlet tube was used to separate the produced gases. A free-standing Ni3S2 foam with surface grown carbon nanotubes (NSF/CNTs) is used as a single trifunctional (HER/OER/ORR) gas evolution electrode (GEE) for both H2 and O2 generation. Materials with suitable redox properties, such as anodic NaTi2(PO4)3 or cathodic nickel hydroxide, can be used as the relay electrodes (REs) working as the redox mediator. The electrolyser can either work in a one-cell configuration with variable voltage or in a two-cell configuration with a stable power input, which will be discussed in detail in the following sections.
The NSF/CNTs, which was used as the trifunctional gas evolution electrode in our experiment, was fabricated by in situ conversion of commercial Ni foams through a facile annealing reaction (experimental details in the ESI†).17 The nanotube array coating on the surface of the foams and the Ni3S2 crystal structure of the NSF/CNTs were confirmed from the scanning electron microscope (SEM) images and X-ray diffraction (XRD) patterns (provided in Fig. S2, ESI†). The HER, OER and ORR activities of the NSF/CNTs in the as-prepared electrolyser cell were measured using a typical three-electrode configuration. The free standing NSF/CNTs was used as the working electrode directly in 1 M NaOH solution in the cell. An Ag/AgCl electrode and a graphitic carbon electrode were used as the reference and counter electrodes, respectively. The HER and OER performances of the NSF/CNTs are shown in Fig. S3,† with low overpotentials of 84 mV and 197 mV for the HER and 211 mV and 315 mV for the OER at current densities of 10 and 100 mA cm−2 respectively. The ORR activity was first investigated by cyclic voltammetry (CV) tests (Fig. S4a†). The CV curve of the NSF/CNTs shows obvious cathodic peaks in the O2-saturated electrolyte compared with the N2-saturated electrolyte, proving its ORR activities. The LSV curve shows that the NSF/CNTs has a half-wave potential (E1/2) of 0.81 V (Fig. S4b†), which is typical of carbon-based ORR electrocatalysts.18 The stability of the NSF/CNTs for the HER and OER was reported previously at a current density of 100 mA cm−2 for 50 h and the electrocatalytic activities barely decreased.17 In many previous reports, different types of trifunctional electrocatalysts with HER/OER/ORR activities have been developed.19–21 In this manuscript, we used the NSF/CNTs as a typical trifunctional electrode to demonstrate the new electrolyser design.
To show the generality of the design, two types of redox mediators, Ni(OH)2 and NaTi2(PO4)3 (NTP), are used as the relay electrode for the new electrolyser. Ni(OH)2, which has been commercialized in Ni–MH and Ni–Cd batteries, was bought online and used as received (Fig. S5†). NTP with a NASICON structure, which has been widely used in sodium ion batteries (SIBs), was selected as another type of the relay electrode owing to its suitable redox properties, low cost, and high Na-ion conductivity and the wide availability of sodium resources.22,23 The synthesis of NTP and the electrode fabrication follow previous reports,24,25 and further characterization of the NTP electrode is provided in the ESI.† The surfaces of as-prepared NTP are coated with carbon layers, which effectively protect the NTP materials and promote their long-term stability. Since the redox potential of the cathodic Ni(OH)2 is close to that of the OER while the redox potential of the anodic NaTi2(PO4)3 is close to that of the HER,10,26 the effectiveness of these two relay electrodes indicates that such a design can be used for other types of redox mediators.
One-cell configuration with Ni(OH)2 as the relay
The mechanism of the one-cell, two-electrode decoupled water splitting using Ni(OH)2 as the relay is shown in Fig. 1a. For the H2 evolution step, H2O is reduced on the GEE and the Ni(OH)2 electrode is oxidized to NiOOH simultaneously. By reversing the current polarity, O2 is produced on the GEE by an anodic oxidation of OH−; meanwhile the NiOOH electrode is reduced to Ni(OH)2. The cyclic voltammogram (CV) curve of the Ni(OH)2 electrode tested at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 using Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode is shown in Fig. 1b. One pair of redox peaks located at 0.423 V/0.238 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) can be indexed to the reversible Ni(OH)2/NiOOH processes, which is consistent with the potential of the Ni(OH)2 electrode in the HER and OER processes. In operation, the one-cell, two-electrode design requires a cell voltage of 0.17 V for the OER step and 1.52 V for the HER step (Fig. 1c). The different operating voltages of the cell for HER and OER steps are caused by the redox potential of the RE (NiOOH/Ni(OH)2), which is much closer to the potential for the OER than the HER. As shown in Fig. 1d, at a cell current of 100 mA, the two-step water splitting process can be reversibly cycled for 24 rounds in 8 hours without noticeable decay. The duration for each OER and HER step was 10 min and the duration can be extended up to 3.5 h before the RE was fully consumed (Fig. S6†). Interestingly, in each gas evolution cycle, after the OER step, there is always a potential drop in the following HER step (inset in Fig. 1d). Meanwhile the HER process does not show this kind of peak. Since the ORR requires lower potential than the HER, after the OER step, there is residual O2 trapped on the GEE or dissolved in the electrolyte, and the ORR occurs to consume this O2, which temporarily reduces the cell voltage.
 Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the mechanism for the decoupled water splitting using Ni(OH)2 as the relay. (b) CV curve of the Ni(OH)2 electrode. (c) Cell voltage vs. time for the H2/O2 production steps (blue line) and the chronopotentiometry curves for the Ni(OH)2 electrode (green line). (d) Cell voltage as a function of time during 8 h of operation at a constant current of 100 mA. 
One-cell configuration with NaTi2(PO4)3 as the relay
NTP can also be used as the relay electrode with the NSF/CNTs as the GEE and 1 M NaOH as the electrolyte. As shown in Fig. 2a, in the OER step, O2 is produced on the GEE by an anodic oxidation of OH−; meanwhile the cathodic Na+ intercalation occurs in the NTP electrode (NaTi2(PO4)3 → Na3Ti2(PO4)3). By reversing the current polarity, the OER can be switched to the HER on the GEE. Meanwhile there is simultaneous anodic Na+ de-intercalation from the NTP electrode (Na3Ti2(PO4)3 → NaTi2(PO4)3). The cyclic voltammogram (CV) curve of the NTP electrode tested at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 using Ag/AgCl as the reference electrode is shown in Fig. 2b. One pair of redox peaks located at −0.838 V/−0.756 V (vs. Ag/AgCl) can be indexed to the reversible Na3Ti2(PO4)3/NaTi2(PO4)3 processes, which is consistent with the potential of the NTP electrode in the HER and OER processes. In operation, the one-cell, two-electrode design requires a cell voltage of 1.23 V for the OER step and 0.34 V for the HER step (Fig. 2c). Compared with that of the Ni(OH)2 relay, the redox potential of the NTP relay is more negative and more close to the potential for the HER. As a result, the applied voltage for the HER step is much lower than the voltage for the OER step in the decoupled water splitting processes. As shown in Fig. 2d, at a constant current of 10 mA, the two-step water splitting process can be reversibly cycled for 16 rounds within ∼4.5 h without noticeable decay. There is also a potential drop in the HER processes, which indicates the ORR process for O2 consumption.
 Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the mechanism for the decoupled water splitting using NTP as the relay. (b) CV curve of the NTP electrode. (c) Cell voltage vs. time for the H2/O2 production steps (blue line) and the chronopotentiometry curves for the NTP electrode (red line). (d) Cell voltage as a function of time during 4.5 h of operation at a constant current of 10 mA. 
The purity and amount of the produced H2 in the two-electrode, membrane-free design and the decoupling efficiency and energy conversion efficiency
The purity of as-obtained H2 is important for safety in applications; however, for a one-cell design, the H2 produced in the HER step may be contaminated by the residual O2 left in the cell which is produced in the previous OER step. Here, with the trifunctional GEE, the ORR step between the OER and HER can effectively consume the residual O2 and promote the purity of produced H2. In the experiment, the H2 purity was in situ analysed by gas chromatography (GC) at a constant current of 100 mA. Two valves are used on the gas outlet of the electrolyser, one valve toward the atmospheric air and one connected to the GC system. The GC system, the electrolyser and the alkaline electrolyte were all vacuumed and degassed before the experiment. A pure Ar gas stream was used as the purge gas to refill the GC system before electrolysis, and was also used as the carrier gas for the online GC measurement. As shown in Fig. 3a, the OER step was started first with a cell current of 100 mA and continued for ∼1 h, then the reaction was stopped, the valve to the atmospheric air was opened, and the accumulated O2 gas was expelled out from the valve, while the extra electrolyte was introduced into the electrolyser to fill the whole cell up to the position of the valve. Then, the valve was closed when there was no observable gas in the electrolyser. The HER step was started with a reverse cell current of 100 mA and continued for 15 min, then the valve to the GC system was opened and the H2 gas accumulated in the electrolyser was introduced into the GC system and carried by Ar for the purity measurement. As shown in Fig. 3c, a small peak can be indexed to the O2 (inset in Fig. 3c, and the positions for H2 and O2 gas in the GC system are confirmed as shown in Fig. S7†), and further simulation and calculation indicate that a H2 purity of 99.3% can be obtained. Instead of HER operation after the OER, an ORR step can be added between these two steps. With a reversed cell voltage of 0.55 V, there was no gas evolution detected, and the observed transient current originated from the ORR which consumes the residual O2 on the GEE and the O2 dissolved in the electrolyte (Fig. S8†). After 1000 s, the HER started and continued for 15 min, and the purity of as collected H2 was as high as 99.9% (Fig. 3b and d).
 Fig. 3  Chronopotentiometry curves (cell voltage vs. time) of cell operation with (a) OER-HER steps and (b) OER-ORR-HER steps. Chromatogram curve of H2 production with (c) OER-HER steps and (d) OER-ORR-HER steps. (e) GC results for H2 production in 3 h. (f) Amounts of obtained H2 calculated from the GC results. 
To further improve the purity of as-obtained H2 gas, a stir-bar was also added inside the electrolyser, and after the ORR continued for ∼50 min with magnetic stirring at a cell voltage of 0.55 V, the residual O2 gas attached in the corners or dissolved in the electrolytes can effectively be removed; there was no obvious O2 residual peak detected from the GC. Also, the residual O2 gas can simply be removed by degassing the system with a vacuum pump. However, extra energy is required for such a process.
As shown in Fig. 3e and f, the amount of the produced H2 was also analysed by GC. The collected H2 gas is 5.13 mmol for a 165 min operation at a current of 100 mA, corresponding to a faradaic efficiency of ∼100%.A piece of commercial Ni(OH)2 with a size of 3 cm × 4 cm, with one cycle of the decoupled reaction, can work at 100 mA for ∼3.5 h, and 146.3 mL H2 gas can be obtained, corresponding to an areal capacity of 12.2 mL cm−2; meanwhile, for NTP as the RE, a theoretical capacity of 55.5 mL g−1 can be obtained. Since these relays are all made from low-cost, earth abundant elements, such a performance indicates that the decoupled, simple design may potentially be used for real time applications.
For decoupled water splitting, the decoupling efficiency (DE) is commonly calculated by comparison of the operating voltage between the two-step water splitting and the one-step process without the relay electrodes.9 As shown in Fig. 1b and 2b, the difference in the redox peaks (82 mV) for the NTP is much smaller than the difference for the Ni(OH)2 relay (185 mV). In the two-step decoupled water splitting using the RE, the difference in the redox peaks of the RE provides extra overpotential compared with that in the one-step water splitting process, which reduces the DE of the decoupled water splitting. Based on a comparison of their operating voltage, the DEs of the two-step two-electrode decoupled water splitting using the Ni(OH)2 relay and the NTP relay were calculated to be 93% and 97% compared to their corresponding one-step process (details provided in the ESI†). Meanwhile, owing to the low HER/OER overpotential of the NSF/CNT electrocatalysts, the overall energy conversion efficiency using the Ni(OH)2 relay was calculated to be 87.6%, which is significantly increased compared with that in previous reports using the Ni(OH)2 relay (Table S1†). The high DE of the NTP relay and the efficient multifunctional NSF/CNT electrocatalysts greatly promote the energy conversion efficiency, and with the assembly of the NTP relay and the NSF/CNT electrode, an energy conversion efficiency of up to 94.3% can be obtained, which is the best among all reported decoupled water splitting systems (Table S1†). The carbon-coated NTP electrode also exhibits a very flat charge–discharge plateau (more stable gas production), relatively high theoretical capacity (133 mA h g−1) and superior electrochemical stability. All these features promote NTP as a very promising material to work as a relay electrode for decoupled water splitting.
Two-cell configuration for stable power supply and fabrication of an efficient PV-electrolysis water splitting system
Owing to the difference of the operating potential for the OER and HER steps, the one-cell configuration can be compatible with unstable power supply, such as from green energy sources. To be compatible with stable power supply, we also designed an electrolyser with a two-cell configuration in which the operating voltage is the same for the positive and negative current flow. A PV-electrolysis system is also proposed for efficient solar to hydrogen conversion.
The electrodes of the two-cell electrolyser are connected by copper wires as illustrated in Fig. 4a. In cell 1, H2 evolution takes place on the GEE with the oxidation of Ni(OH)2 to NiOOH. Meanwhile in cell 2, there is O2 evolution with the reduction of NiOOH to Ni(OH)2. When the REs are fully discharged, the reaction can be reversed by reversing the current polarity. With the reversed current flow, there will be O2 evolution in cell 1 and H2 evolution in cell 2; meanwhile, the REs in the two cells are both recharged.
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the design of the two-cell water splitting electrolyser combined with a Si PV module for solar to hydrogen conversion. (b) Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PV module (black line) and the two-cell electrolyser (the green line for the positive current flow and the red line for the negative current flow). The dashed black line represents the relative integration of J by V, which helps to determine the MPP. (c) Operating current of the as-designed PV-electrolysis system as a function of time within 7.5 h under simulated solar irradiation. 
The PV-electrolysis system comprises a commercial Si PV module connected to the as-designed two-cell electrolyser. The schematic illustration of the solar water splitting system is depicted in Fig. S9 and S10.† The current–voltage characteristics of the PV module and the two-cell electrolyser (both positive and negative current flow) were measured under simulated solar radiation (AM 1.5G, 100 mW cm−2), and are depicted in Fig. 4b. The maximum power point (MPP) of the PV module is at a current of 120 mA with a voltage of 1.73 V. The efficiency of the commercial Si PV module (14.4%) is calculated using eqn S2 in the ESI.† By tuning the area of the NSF/CNT electrodes (2 × 3 cm2) in the two cells, we optimized the cross points of both the positive current flow and negative current flow with the PV module at a voltage of 1.7 V and a current of 123 mA, which matches well with the MPP of the solar cell. As shown in Fig. 4c, under simulated solar radiation, by reversing the current polarity every 33 min, the as-designed PV-electrolysis system can continuously work for 7.5 h at a current of ∼120 mA without noticeable decay in performance.
The STH conversion efficiency of the PV-electrolysis system is calculated using the following equation: (1)in this equation, 1.23 V is the reversible voltage of the water splitting reaction, IWS represent the current for water splitting, ηFE is the faradaic efficiency, A is the area of the PV module (14.4 cm2), and Pin is the power density of the incident light (100 mW cm−2). Owing to the high efficiency of the electrolysers, an STH conversion efficiency of up to ∼10.4% can be obtained using commercial Si PV modules (efficiency of 14.4%).
Conclusions
In conclusion, we propose the use of a trifunctional gas evolution electrode and relay electrode to construct a simple two-component electrolyser for decoupled water splitting. Two kinds of configuration (one-cell or two-cell) of the electrolysers are also proposed, which can decouple the H2/O2 evolution either in time or in space. Such designs can be compatible with unstable power supply, such as from solar and wind energy, or be used for continuous H2 generation using a stable power input. Although our demonstrations are all in an alkaline electrolyte, such a design can be extended to acidic electrolytes with a suitable multifunctional electrode and relay electrode. Such a new design of electrolysers can effectively reduce the complexity and the overall cost of water splitting systems, rendering them more competitive in H2 production. The design of the novel electrolysers may also bring new insights into the application of multifunctional electrocatalysts for other devices, such as metal–air batteries and fuel cells.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the Young Scholars Program of Shandong University (YSPSDU, No. 2015WLJH27) and Shandong Provincial Natural Science Foundation, China (2019GSF109029), and is also funded by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (no. 21771118, 21701098, and 21875128) and the Taishan Scholars Climbing Program of Shandong Province (tspd20150201).
References
G. Glenk and S. Reichelstein, Economics of converting renewable power to hydrogen, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4, 216–222 CrossRef CAS .
A. Ursua, L. M. Gandia and P. Sanchis, Hydrogen production from water electrolysis: current status and future trends, Proc. IEEE, 2012, 100(2), 410–426 CAS .
S. Chu, Y. Cui and N. Liu, The path towards sustainable energy, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16(1), 16 CrossRef PubMed .
M. I. Jamesh, Recent progress on earth abundant hydrogen evolution reaction and oxygen evolution reaction bifunctional electrocatalyst for overall water splitting in alkaline media, J. Power Sources, 2016, 333, 213–236 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yan, B. Y. Xia, B. Zhao and X. Wang, A review on noble-metal-free bifunctional heterogeneous catalysts for overall electrochemical water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(45), 17587–17603 RSC .
M. M. Rashid, M. K. Al Mesfer, H. Naseem and M. Danish, Hydrogen production by water electrolysis: a review of alkaline water electrolysis, PEM water electrolysis and high temperature water electrolysis, Int. J. Eng. Adv. Technol., 2015, 4(3), 2249–8958 Search PubMed .
N. A. Kelly, T. L. Gibson, M. Cai, J. A. Spearot and D. B. Ouwerkerk, Development of a renewable hydrogen economy: Optimization of existing technologies, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2010, 35(3), 892–899 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Abdin, C. Webb and E. M. Gray, Modelling and simulation of an alkaline electrolyser cell, Energy, 2017, 138, 316–331 CrossRef CAS .
B. Rausch, M. D. Symes, G. Chisholm and L. Cronin, Decoupled catalytic hydrogen evolution from a molecular metal oxide redox mediator in water splitting, Science, 2014, 345(6202), 1326 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Chen, X. Dong, Y. Wang and Y. Xia, Separating hydrogen and oxygen evolution in alkaline water electrolysis using nickel hydroxide, Nat. Commun., 2016, 7(1), 11741 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhang and L. Dai, Nitrogen, Phosphorus, and Fluorine Tri-doped Graphene as a Multifunctional Catalyst for Self-Powered Electrochemical Water Splitting, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55(42), 13296–13300 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Hu and L. Dai, Multifunctional carbon-based metal-free electrocatalysts for simultaneous oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution, and hydrogen evolution, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29(9), 1604942 CrossRef PubMed .
I. S. Amiinu, Z. Pu, X. Liu, K. A. Owusu, H. G. R. Monestel, F. O. Boakye, H. Zhang and S. Mu, Multifunctional Mo–N/C@MoS2 electrocatalysts for HER, OER, ORR, and Zn–air batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27(44), 1702300 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, S. Chao, X. Wang, H. Han, Z. Bai and L. Yang, Hierarchical Co9S8 hollow microspheres as multifunctional electrocatalysts for oxygen reduction, oxygen evolution and hydrogen evolution reactions, Electrochim. Acta, 2017, 246, 380–390 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, J. Ran, B. Xia, S. Xi, D. Gao and J. Wang, Bifunctional Oxygen Electrocatalyst of Mesoporous Ni/NiO Nanosheets for Flexible Rechargeable Zn–Air Batteries, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12(1), 68 CrossRef .
J. Qian, T. Wang, Z. Zhang, Y. Liu, J. Li and D. Gao, Engineered spin state in Ce doped LaCoO3 with enhanced electrocatalytic activity for rechargeable Zn-Air batteries, Nano Energy, 2020, 74, 104948 CrossRef CAS .
M. Guo, A. Qayum, S. Dong, X. Jiao, D. Chen and T. Wang, In situ conversion of metal (Ni, Co or Fe) foams into metal sulfide (Ni3S2, Co9S8 or FeS) foams with surface grown N-doped carbon nanotube arrays as efficient superaerophobic electrocatalysts for overall water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(18), 9239–9247 RSC .
X. Liu and L. Dai, Carbon-based metal-free catalysts, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1(11), 16064 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jiang, J. Gu, X. Zheng, M. Liu, X. Qiu, L. Wang, W. Li, Z. Chen, X. Ji and J. Li, Defect-rich and ultrathin N doped carbon nanosheets as advanced trifunctional metal-free electrocatalysts for the ORR, OER and HER, Energy Environ. Sci., 2019, 12(1), 322–333 RSC .
Y. Guo, P. Yuan, J. Zhang, H. Xia, F. Cheng, M. Zhou, J. Li, Y. Qiao, S. Mu and Q. Xu, Co2P–CoN Double Active Centers Confined in N-Doped Carbon Nanotube: Heterostructural Engineering for Trifunctional Catalysis toward HER, ORR, OER, and Zn–Air Batteries Driven Water Splitting, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(51), 1805641 CrossRef .
Y. Jia, L. Zhang, A. Du, G. Gao, J. Chen, X. Yan, C. L. Brown and X. Yao, Defect Graphene as a Trifunctional Catalyst for Electrochemical Reactions, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(43), 9532–9538 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Delmas, F. Cherkaoui, A. Nadiri and P. Hagenmuller, A nasicon-type phase as intercalation electrode: NaTi2 (PO4)3, Mater. Res. Bull., 1987, 22(5), 631–639 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Li, D. Young, K. Xiang, W. C. Carter and Y. M. Chiang, Towards high power high energy aqueous sodium-ion batteries: the NaTi2 (PO4) 3/Na0. 44MnO2 system, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3(3), 290–294 CrossRef CAS .
J. Yang, H. Wang, P. Hu, J. Qi, L. Guo and L. Wang, A High-Rate and Ultralong-Life Sodium-Ion Battery Based on NaTi2 (PO4) 3 Nanocubes with Synergistic Coating of Carbon and Rutile TiO2, Small, 2015, 11(31), 3744–3749 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Hu, J.-Y. Liao, C.-T. Li, X.-D. He, X. Ding and C.-H. Chen, Synthesis of porous carbon-coated NaTi2(PO4)3 nanocubes with a high-yield and superior rate properties, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(47), 24503–24508 RSC .
Q. Yang, S. Cui, Y. Ge, Z. Tang, Z. Liu, H. Li, N. Li, H. Zhang, J. Liang and C. Zhi, Porous single-crystal NaTi2(PO4)3 via liquid transformation of TiO2 nanosheets for flexible aqueous Na-ion capacitor, Nano Energy, 2018, 50, 623–631 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05102kThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
Table Content:

 	Scheme 1  (a) Schematic illustration of a traditional electrolyser with the separator. (b) Decoupled water splitting using a liquid relay. (c) Decoupled water splitting using a solid relay. (d) The design of the one-cell, two-component water splitting electrolyser. (e) Cyclic voltammogram (CV) curves of the Ni(OH)2 relay electrode (green line) and NaTi2(PO4)3 relay electrode (red line), and the linear sweep voltammetry (LSV) curves of the NSF/CNT gas evolution electrode for the HER (blue line), the OER (black line) and the ORR (celeste line) at a scan rate of 1 mV s−1 in 1 M NaOH.	 

 	Fig. 1  (a) Illustration of the mechanism for the decoupled water splitting using Ni(OH)2 as the relay. (b) CV curve of the Ni(OH)2 electrode. (c) Cell voltage vs. time for the H2/O2 production steps (blue line) and the chronopotentiometry curves for the Ni(OH)2 electrode (green line). (d) Cell voltage as a function of time during 8 h of operation at a constant current of 100 mA.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a) Illustration of the mechanism for the decoupled water splitting using NTP as the relay. (b) CV curve of the NTP electrode. (c) Cell voltage vs. time for the H2/O2 production steps (blue line) and the chronopotentiometry curves for the NTP electrode (red line). (d) Cell voltage as a function of time during 4.5 h of operation at a constant current of 10 mA.	 

 	Fig. 3  Chronopotentiometry curves (cell voltage vs. time) of cell operation with (a) OER-HER steps and (b) OER-ORR-HER steps. Chromatogram curve of H2 production with (c) OER-HER steps and (d) OER-ORR-HER steps. (e) GC results for H2 production in 3 h. (f) Amounts of obtained H2 calculated from the GC results.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the design of the two-cell water splitting electrolyser combined with a Si PV module for solar to hydrogen conversion. (b) Current–voltage (J–V) characteristics of the PV module (black line) and the two-cell electrolyser (the green line for the positive current flow and the red line for the negative current flow). The dashed black line represents the relative integration of J by V, which helps to determine the MPP. (c) Operating current of the as-designed PV-electrolysis system as a function of time within 7.5 h under simulated solar irradiation.	 
	(1)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/d0ta05102k

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2020
