Zinc oxide nanoparticles as electron transporting interlayer in organic solar cells  - Journal of Materials Chemistry C (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D1TC03434K View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D1TC03434K
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 14093-14114Zinc oxide nanoparticles as electron transporting interlayer in organic solar cells

        
          
            Chunhui 
            Liu
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Chengyi 
            Xiao
          
          
        
      * and 

        
          
            Weiwei 
            Li
          
          
        
      *
      State Key Laboratory of Organic–Inorganic Composites & Beijing Advanced Innovation Center for Soft Matter Science and Engineering, Beijing University of Chemical Technology, Beijing 100029, P. R. China. E-mail: xiaocy@mail.buct.edu.cn; liweiwei@iccas.ac.cn
Received 
      23rd July 2021
    , Accepted 19th September 2021First published on 20th September 2021AbstractZinc oxide nanoparticles (ZnO NPs) are among the well-known electron transporting layers (ETLs) in flexible electronics, especially in organic solar cells (OSCs). This is due to their high mobility and transparency, annealing-free and solution-processable features, large-area fabrication technique compatibility, etc. This review summarizes the synthetic methods of ZnO NPs with the aim to achieve homogeneous, size-controllable, and long-term stable ZnO NPs colloidal dispersions. Different strategies have been summarized to modify ZnO NPs in terms of surface traps, work function, dispersity, conductivity, and surface energy. The modifications were generally utilized to realize high-quality ETLs and ultimately improve the performance and stability of OSC devices. The large-area fabrication techniques for coating or printing ZnO NPs films are also discussed. We hope that this review will highlight the importance of ZnO NPs and inspire researchers to employ ZnO NPs in other electronic devices.
Chunhui Liu
Chunhui Liu received her BS degree from Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology in 2019. She is currently a Master student at Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). Her research focuses on high-efficient and flexible OSCs.
Chengyi Xiao
Chengyi Xiao received his BS degree from the Department of Applied Chemistry at Xiangtan University (XTU) in 2011. He then received his PhD degree from ICCAS in 2017. In the period from 2016 to 2019, he collaborated with Prof. Lei Zhang as a postdoctoral fellow at BUCT. He is currently a lecturer at BUCT. His research focuses on OFETs and flexible OSCs.
Weiwei Li
Weiwei Li received his PhD from ICCAS in 2010. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Alberta, Canada, and the Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands from 2010 to 2014. He has been a full professor at ICCAS since 2014 and joined BUCT in 2019. His research interest is focused on flexible OSCs, from materials to devices.
1. Introduction
Solar energy, which is recognized as abundant and renewable energy for the future, is expected to address energy consumption, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and accelerate the carbon neutrality process.1 To fully utilize solar energy, different approaches have been proposed and studied, including solar evaporation, photocatalytic and photoelectrochemical water splitting, and solar cells.2–4 The photovoltaic technology, which can directly convert sunlight into electricity, is regarded as the most promising way. The International Energy Agency predicted that “the increasing competitiveness of solar photovoltaics pushes its installed capacity beyond that of wind before 2025, past hydropower around 2030 and past coal before 2040” in the latest available World Energy Outlook.5 Organic solar cells (OSCs), with the superiority of instinct flexibility and high mass-specific power, will be a great complement to the existing inorganic photovoltaics and expand the border of the photovoltaics industry.6–10 Recently, extensive efforts (mainly in the development of non-fullerene acceptors and evolution of morphology control) have been devoted to OSCs research, which has led to remarkable progress in power conversion efficiencies (PCEs) over >18%.11–20 The rapid development of OSCs has arrived at the crossroad of whether to be industrialized or not.
Due to their light weight and conformality, flexible OSCs have been considered as the most likely commercialization. In contrast to their rigid counterparts, the charge transport layers in flexible OSCs, especially the electron transport layers (ETLs), should be fabricated at a low temperature of <150 °C on plastic substrates.21 However, most ETLs, such as titanium dioxide (TiO2), zinc oxide (ZnO), and stannic dioxide (SnO2) are only constructed at rather high temperatures from their precursor materials. For example, TiO2 films usually require a high temperature (above 450 °C) treatment, which is incompatible with flexible OSCs using plastic substrates.22 To meet the requirements, amorphous films of metal oxides (e.g. TiO2, ZnO) were proposed through a relatively low-temperature (<200 °C) sol–gel method by Heeger et al.23,24 Nevertheless, the electrical properties of amorphous films of metal oxides are strongly dependent on the processing conditions, which are always lower than their crystalline counterparts. An alternative approach to fabricating ETLs is to use the as-synthesized metal oxide nanoparticles as the source material, which can be solution-processed at room temperature.25–29
Among the various metal oxide materials, ZnO, with a rather wide bandgap (3.4 eV), is the most commonly used ETL material due to its advantages of high mobility and transparency, solution-processability, and suitable energy levels. The traditional ZnO film in OSCs is fabricated by the sol–gel method,23,30 and the quality of sol–gel ZnO film highly depends on annealing temperature. As an alternative, high-crystalline ZnO NPs in alcohol suspension or colloid can be solution-processed without post-annealing procedure.25,31 Therefore, the pre-synthesized ZnO NPs are the most promising ETL material in flexible OSCs.32 The synthesis of ZnO NPs has adopted the hydrolysis and condensation of zinc acetate dihydrate under low temperatures (Fig. 1).25,29,33–37 In 2005, Janssen and coworkers synthesized different ZnO nanostructures to fabricate OSCs and the optimized devices exhibited a PCE of 1.6% with incident photon to current conversion efficiency of up to 50%.25 Later, the synthetic procedures of ZnO NPs were carefully optimized, including precursors, solvents, and other reaction conditions.38–42 Meanwhile, many approaches have been employed to modify ZnO NPs or ZnO NP-based films, including tuning dispersity,43,44 work function,45 improving electron mobility, minimizing surface traps,46 and increasing stability.47 There are also many reports on the large-area fabrication of ZnO NPs films.
 Fig. 1  The skeleton of (a) the chemical synthesis of ZnO NPs, and (b) the processing of ZnO NPs in flexible OSCs. 
In recent years, many reviews have focused on the photoactive materials,48,49 interfacial layers,32 transparent electrodes,50,51 and large-area fabrication52 of flexible OSCs, and their potential commercialization.10,53–56 However, very few articles have provided a comprehensive review of the progress of ZnO NPs, although they have been widely used as ETLs in flexible OSCs. Therefore, in this review, we focus on ZnO NPs, from the aspect of synthesis, doping, modification, and application, as well as their surface chemistry and morphology modification in OSCs. We hope that with this comprehensive review, we can inspire new ideas in the development of ZnO NPs and make an important contribution to the construction of large-area OSCs with high performance and long-term stability.
2. Structure and photoelectric properties of ZnO NPs
The lattice parameters of ZnO were first studied in 1935.57 Typically, ZnO has three crystal forms: rocksalt, cubic zinc blende, and hexagonal wurtzite (Fig. 2a). The wurtzite structure is the thermodynamically stable phase under ambient conditions, in which each zinc atom is tetrahedrally coordinated with four oxygen atoms.58 The space group of the hexagonal structure is P63mc or C6v4 and the lattice constants are a = 3.25 Å and c = 5.2 Å; their ratio is c/a ∼ 1.60.59 Most ZnO NPs belong to the hexagonal wurtzite structure.60
 Fig. 2  Ball and stick representation of ZnO crystal forms: (a) cubic rocksalt; (b) cubic zinc blende; (c) hexagonal wurtzite. The shaded gray and black spheres denote Zn and O atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright (2005) American Institute of Physics. 
Similar to ZnO macrocrystals, ZnO NPs have a relatively large direct bandgap of ∼3.3 eV, and its absorption onset is usually located below 375 nm,40,61 which means that it has good transparency over the whole visible and near-infrared region. The conduction band (CB) and valence band (VB) of ZnO are at ∼4.4 eV and ∼7.8 eV, respectively, which indicates that ZnO can be used for electron collection and hole blocking. Due to oxygen vacancies or zinc interstitials, the native doping of ZnO is n-type.59 Moreover, the controllable n-type doping of ZnO NPs can be easily obtained by replacing Zn atoms with group-III elements such as Al, Ga, In, or by substituting oxygen atoms with the group-VII elements chlorine or iodine.43,45 Therefore, the ZnO semiconductor exhibits a rather high electron mobility of ∼0.066 cm2 V−1 s−1.62 Additionally, ZnO NPs also show good antimicrobial and UV resistant activity.58,63 These features enable ZnO NPs to be widely used in rubber manufacture, medicine, food industry, and ETL materials in OSCs.
3. Synthesis of ZnO NPs
The properties of ZnO NPs highly depend on the size distribution, particle morphology, surface chemistry, etc.61,64,65 Therefore, the synthesis of ZnO NPs with controlled and uniform size, morphology, and functionality is important for its eventual applications. Since the advent of ZnO NPs, researchers have been devoted to optimizing the synthesis methods of ZnO NPs in order to reduce costs, simplify synthesis routes, and facilitate processing. The synthesized methods of ZnO NPs have been well developed in recent years, including solution-processed methods (chemical precipitation, sol–gel, etc.) and solution-assisted/solution-free methods (e.g. solution–combustion, solid-state pyrolytic, and solution-free mechanochemical methods, etc.).58,59,63
3.1 Solution synthesis of ZnO NPs
The most popular method for ZnO NPs preparation is solution-processed methods, e.g. chemical precipitation process, due to its convenience to be controlled and realize mass production. This solution-based method is relatively simple and convenient, very cheap and facile, environmentally friendly, and can provide the ZnO NP solutions in a pure and well-dispersed form under atmospheric condition. Most ZnO NPs used in OSCs are prepared from this method, and hence we will review this method in detail. The chemical precipitation method usually involves two reaction reagents: a highly purified zinc precursor as the zinc source, such as zinc acetate (Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O) or zinc sulfate (ZnSO4), and a solution of precipitators such as potassium hydroxide (KOH) or ammonium hydroxide (NH3·H2O).59,63,66 The solution of the precipitator was dropped into the well-dissolved zinc precursor till the pH value reached ∼10 under vigorous stirring. The stirring of the completely mixed solutions was maintained for a while, then the nanoparticles started to precipitate and the mixed solution became turbid. The ZnO NPs were obtained via separating the precipitate and mother liquor, washing the precipitate, and allowing the suspension to stand (Fig. 3).25 In another method, the obtained precipitate is zinc hydroxide (Zn(OH)2), which needs to be sintered at high temperature to convert into ZnO NPs.67
 Fig. 3  The synthetic procedure of ZnO NPs through the solvent-based method. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright (2018) Nuraqeelah Mohammad Shamhari, Boon Siong Wee, Suk Fun Chin, Kuan Ying Kok. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License. 
As early as 1985, Henglein et al. reported the synthesis of ZnO colloid with a small particle size of <2.5 nm by adopting Zn(ClO4)2·6H2O as the precursor, CH3OH as the solvent, and NaOH in an alkaline environment in the presence of a small amount of H2O.68 Then in 1988, they studied the role of H2O in the ZnO NPs growth mechanism:69 the presence of a small amount of H2O would form a hydration product (Zn(OH)x), thus greatly reducing the free enthalpy of ZnO NPs formation.
The ZnO NPs can also be synthesized by replacing the precursor salt and solvent with Zn(CH3COO)2 and isopropanol, obtaining the isopropanolic ZnO colloid.70 Searson et al. investigated the growth kinetics of the nanocrystalline ZnO NPs in colloidal suspension by using high-resolution transmission electron microscopy (HRTEM), absorption spectroscopy, and X-ray diffraction (XRD). They demonstrated that the growth law for ZnO NPs was of the equation r = Kt1/3, where r is the particle radius, K is a constant, and t represents the aging time, which is consistent with Ostwald ripening kinetics.71 Furthermore, they proved that octanethiol can act as a capping agent to prevent the further growth of nanoparticles.72 The triethanolamine (TEA) was utilized to control the growth of ZnO NPs through the ionic–dipolar interaction.73 The formed ZnO seeds after the nucleation process can absorb the TEA through the hydrogen atoms in TEA and oxygen in ZnO. Since the adjacent TEA chains will entangle each other by hydrogen-bonding forces, the growth process of ZnO seeds will be suppressed, which further precisely controls the size distribution of ZnO NPs (Fig. 4a).
 Fig. 4  (a) The formation of the zinc oxide nanoparticles from the zinc oxide seed, and the role of triethanolamine as a polymerization agent. (b) The passivation effect of the cations and dissociation of the base in the reaction medium in ZnO NPs synthesis. Reproduced with permission.27,73 Copyright (2011) Khorsand Zak et al., publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society. 
In the preparation of ZnO NPs from Zn(CH3COO)2 in alcoholic solution under basic conditions, Pacholski, et al. found that the shape of the ZnO NPs was very sensitive to the overall concentration of precursor solution. When the concentration of zinc was lower than 0.01 M, quasi-spherical particles were formed, whereas ZnO nanorods were formed at higher concentrations.28 In this method, the nucleation and growth process of ZnO NPs are relatively fast, and the diffusion-limited coarsening determined the average particle sizes. Searson and coworkers studied the influence of alkanol chain lengths (ethanol, n-propanol, n-butanol, n-hexanol) on the diffusion-limited coarsening of ZnO NPs.74 The study showed that the coarsening rate of ZnO NPs depended on the viscosity, surface energy, and solubility in n-alkanols. The coarsening rate would increase with improved temperatures and longer alkanol chain length. The resulting ZnO NPs were insoluble in pure methanol through the mentioned method, which was not suitable for their application in OSCs. In 2005, stable ZnO NPs solutions with solubility up to 75 mg mL−1 were obtained by Janssen and coworkers by adding suitable amounts of less polar solvents such as dichloromethane (DCB), chloroform (CF), or chlorobenzene (CB).25 The monodispersed ZnO NPs showed the particle size of ∼5 nm. Hybrid solar cells with blends of conjugated polymer poly[2-methoxy-5-(3′,7′-dimethyloctyloxy)-1,4-phenylenevinylene] (MDMO-PPV) as electron donor and ZnO NPs as electron acceptor were fabricated, which exhibited a PCE of 1.6% under AM 1.5G and incident photon to current conversion efficiencies up to 50%. The concentration of the base also showed the impact on the growth of ZnO NPs.75 In an article published by Sarma et al. in 2007, the alkaline environment was constructed by sodium hydroxide (NaOH) and isopropanol.27 They investigated the influence of NaOH concentration on the growth of ZnO NPs. During the growth of the nanoparticles, the cation Na+ was attracted by the hydroxyl groups around the nanocrystals to form a protective layer, which passivated the nanoparticles and hindered the continued growth of ZnO NPs (Fig. 4b). The dispersing agents, such as ethanolamine, also play an important part in stabilizing the ZnO NPs solutions.76 For agricultural and food safety applications, ZnO NPs could also be green-synthesized using aloe extract as solvents.77
Many zinc source materials and solvents have been used in the synthesis of ZnO NPs. Klabunde et al. used diethyl zinc as raw material and tert-butanol as a solvent to prepare and synthesize ZnO NPs.78 Shao-Holoway et al. used a different method to hydrolyze zinc salt in an alkaline environment to obtain ZnO NPs. They added 0.5 M tetramethylammonium hydroxide pentahydrate (TMAH) dropwise to a 0.1 M DMSO solution of zinc acetate dihydrate.79 The ZnO NPs were obtained after reacting for 1 h and were finally washed and dispersed with ethanol. Pan et al. used the same method to prepare the ZnO NPs dispersion in butanol, and tuned the particle size by adjusting the ratio of [Zn2+]/[OH−] to 1:0.5, 1:1, and 1:1.5, resulting in 2.9 nm, 4.0 nm, 5.5 nm ZnO NPs (Fig. 5).80 Based on this method, Cao et al. clarified that the reaction temperature was 30 °C, and the final reactant was precipitated with excess acetone and then dispersed with ethanol.45
 Fig. 5  TEM and HRTEM images of the three sizes of ZnO NPs. The corresponding [Zn2+]/[OH−] ratios are (a and b) 1:0.5, (c and d) 1:1, and (e and f) 1:1.5. Inset shows the statistical distribution images of particle size. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society. 
In the sol–gel method, the ZnO colloid can be concentrated to 0.1 M Q-ZnO colloids (Q, showing the quantum mechanical effect of exciton confinement) within a few minutes by employing ultrasound. ZnO alcogels could be formed after further adopting extreme concentration conditions (10 M Q-ZnO colloids).38,81 The crystal growth of ZnO NPs was self-induced in the alcogel (sizes: 1–5 mm). In this method, Zn(CH3COO)2·2H2O was used as the raw material in absolute ethanol, and hydrated lithium hydroxide (LiOH·H2O) was adopted to provide alkaline conditions. There was no need to reflux during the reaction, and the ZnO cluster solution needed to be cooled to 0 °C. The temperature and water reaction products (CH3COOLi) affect the size of ZnO NPs.26 The kinetics of formation of ZnO colloidal suspensions was further studied by in situ small-angle X-ray scattering (SAXS), UV-Vis absorption, photoluminescence, Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy (FTIR), and extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS).82,83
Moon et al. proposed the polyols method to prepare ZnO NPs in 2008 (Fig. 6).41 Polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) was dissolved in diethylene glycol (DEG) to prevent the formed ZnO NPs from agglomerating. Zn(CH3COO)2 was used as the zinc source and was added to the PVP in the DEG solution. Deionized (DI) water was used as an initiator. During the reaction, complete dissolution occurred at 100 °C, and ZnO nuclei began to form at 150 °C. After reacting at 180 °C for 30 minutes, it was cooled to room temperature and washed with methanol after centrifugation. This work showed that the presence of water could accelerate the reaction as hydrolysis reactants and condensation products, and the presence of PVP reduced the agglomeration caused by collisions between ZnO NPs. Different inorganic hydroxides (NaOH/KOH/LiOH) were also studied to find their influence on ZnO NPs synthesis in the polyols method. The cations were found to have a small effect on the particle size and shape, while the concentration of OH− could increase the number of ZnO nuclei and reduce the size of ZnO NPs.84
 Fig. 6  Different schemes of the particle growth in the polyols method depending on the method of addition of water: (a) precursor heating method and (b) water injection method. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright (2008) Elsevier Ltd. 
3.2 Solution-free synthesis of ZnO NPs
In 2002, Hynes et al. synthesized nanocrystalline, single-phase undoped ZnO with a density of 95–98% by pressureless isothermal sintering at 650–700 °C.85 They studied the effects of activation energy and the sintering temperature on the density of ZnO NPs in detail. The faster densification of the ZnO NPs was attributed to the rearrangement of the nanoparticle grains, surface and boundary diffusion, and vapor transport above 900 °C. Janzen et al. synthesized ZnO NPs with dimethyl zinc (Zn(CH3)2) as raw material by using a microwave plasma reactor.86 The authors analyzed the nanoparticle sizes by particle mass spectrometry and in situ probing TEM. In 2003, Zhang et al. proposed a mechanochemical method to prepare high-quality ZnO NPs. In this work, the researchers decomposed the basic zinc carbonate (Zn5(OH)6(CO3)2) precursor, which was precipitated from zinc sulfate (ZnSO4) to ZnO by ball milling.87 Then, the powder was sintered at 300 °C and washed with deionized water to obtain ZnO NPs. Compared with direct sintering, this method reduces the sintering temperature (>300 °C for direct sintering), shrinks particle sizes, and narrows the particle size distribution. Ni et al. successfully synthesized ZnO NPs through a solution-combusting method.88 Zinc acetate (Zn(CH3COO)2) was used as the zinc source, and a mixed solution of ethanol and ethylene glycol (v/v = 60/40) was used as the solvent. ZnO NPs were synthesized by burning them under oxygen conditions, and the average size of the nanoparticles was about 80 nm due to the agglomeration effect. Yang and coworkers deposited ZnO on the ZnS nanobelts by the metal–organic chemical vapor deposition (MOCVD) technique, obtaining the heterostructure of ZnS nanobelts/ZnO NPs with different morphologies.89
4. Optimization of ZnO NPs in solution or film
Compared with the solution-free methods, which often require extremely synthetic conditions and expensive equipment, the solution-based methods with simplified synthetic routes and higher yields are more suitable for ZnO NPs. The well-synthesized ZnO NPs from solution can easily be dispersed into appropriate inks in various formulas (solvents, additives, tackifier, etc.). Through spin coating, inkjet printing, blade coating, gravure printing, or spray coating techniques in a roll-to-roll (R2R) process,90–93 these ZnO NP inks can be processed to form high-quality and continuous films without cracks or pinholes under mild conditions. However, the well-synthesized ZnO NPs encounter many issues when being applied as ETLs for inverted OSCs.
Severe charge recombination often happens at the interface of ZnO NPs and photoactive layers, which reduces the performance and stability of the cells. This is due to the surface defects or traps, such as different dangling bonds and negatively charged oxygen adsorbed on the surface,37,64,94,95 especially for ZnO NPs with high specific surface area.64 For instance, the well-known “light-soaking” effect occurs when sol–gel ZnO or ZnO NPs are used as ETLs in inverted OSCs, in which a UV or white light exposure will enhance the performance.32,37 Many surface modification approaches have been devoted to passivating the surface defects, such as self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) modification,96 polymer surface modification,97 and small molecule/polymer-ZnO NPs composites,46,98,99etc.
The second issue of ZnO NPs is their strong tendency to aggregate in solution or film state. This is due to the surface of ZnO NPs having hydroxyl and carboxyl groups (Fig. 7),100,101 and the polycondensation reaction of hydroxyl groups causes the aggregation. The aggregation significantly influences the dispersity of ZnO NPs in solution100 and the surface roughness of ZnO NP films, thus degrading the performance and stability of OSCs.65,101,102 Generally, ligands, such as carboxylic acid,103 alkyl amine,104,105 polyvinylpyrrolidone (PVP) surfactant,98 or alkyl silane,44 are required to suppress aggregation, stabilize ZnO NPs, and enhance dispersity.
 Fig. 7  The polymerization reaction or aggregation of the ZnO NPs through loss of the ligand on the surface. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright (2008) IOP Publishing. 
The lower conductivity of ZnO NPs makes them unfavorable for the large-area fabrication process, which is another important issue for ZnO NPs. An appropriate doping strategy would both enhance the conductivity and tune energy levels of ZnO NPs. Generally, ZnO NPs can be doped with Al3+,94,106,107 Ga2+,45 Sn4+,108etc. In this section, we will provide an overview about how to optimize ZnO NPs and their impact on the photovoltaic performance in OSCs.
4.1 Doping of ZnO NPs
The amorphous or crystalline ZnO films used as ETLs in inverted OSCs usually have a limited thickness (∼30 nm) due to their relatively low conductivity. However, this is not appropriate to construct large-area OSCs with such a thin layer. The first issue is the existence of large amounts of point defects in large-area OSCs, and a very thin layer is sensitive to the point defects. Another problem is the infeasibility in acquiring homogeneous films in tens of nanometers through the most scalable fabrication techniques.52,109 Because of the limited conductivity of ZnO films, the PCEs of OSCs are highly dependent on the thickness of the ZnO layers. Hence, the improvement of conductivity and low thickness tolerability for ZnO NPs film should be considered in fabricating large-area OSC modules.
Aluminum-doped zinc oxide (AZO) was initially investigated as a replacement for indium tin oxide (ITO) in transparent electrodes due to their high electrical conductivity, optical transparency, and chemical stability.110,111 Al doping generates free charges and thus improves the conductivity of ZnO NPs. Stubhan et al. demonstrated the feasibility of low-temperature processed ETLs with a very high thickness (e.g. ∼680 nm).112 A high conductivity of >10−3 S cm−1 (which is considered to be sufficient to process thick ETLs) for the sol–gel processed AZO layer was obtained by adjusting the formulations and post-annealing temperatures of 140–260 °C, which allowed the processing of OSCs with thick ETLs without losses in device performance. However, the high-temperature annealing is unfavorable for flexible OSCs, while the low-temperature process may yield incomplete ligand removal. Thus, they further investigated the degradation mechanism of AZO films113 and accomplished a low-temperature processed AZO layer through decoration with the self-assembled monolayers (SAMs).96
Ackermann and coworkers promoted a novel synthesis route for cluster-free AZO nanocrystals,43 in which Zn(CH3COO)2 and aluminum isopropylate (Al[(CH3)2CHO]3) were selected as cation source, anhydrous ethanol acted as solvent, and KOH was used to provide the alkaline environment. The synthesized AZO NCs were spread in isopropanol with ethanolamine (EA) as surfactant. The AZO NCs could be solution-processed to form highly conductive layers with low-temperature post-annealing. They further fabricated conventional-type OSCs with PTB7 as polymer donor, PC71BM as acceptor, and AZO NCs as top ETL. Due to the optical spacer effects and enhanced conductivity, the AZO NCs layers with a thickness of 80 nm could lead the performance of the OSCs to 7.6% when combining with the photoactive layer with 200 nm thickness. Fang et al. employed the AZO NPs in inverted OSCs with PTB7-Th and PC71BM blends as photoactive layer.114 The AZO NPs were confirmed by XRD, TEM, and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS). The OSCs with the 10 nm AZO NPs interlayer showed an efficiency of 10.42%. When increasing the thickness of AZO NPs to 120 nm, a prominent PCE of 8.85% was obtained (Fig. 8). Meanwhile, the applicability of the AZO interlayer in flexible OSCs was demonstrated with poly(ethylene terephthalate) (PET)/ITO electrodes. The flexible OSCs exhibited the best PCE of 8.93% and ideal mechanical stability.
 Fig. 8  (a) Illuminated and (b) dark J–V characteristics of PTB7-Th:PC71BM OSCs based on AZO NPs and ZnO films with different thicknesses. (c) Statistics of the performance parameters of PCE, VOC (open-circuit voltage), JSC (short-circuit current), and FF (fill factor) by a standard boxplot. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright (2016) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Recently, Li et al. proposed a second growth method to apply the AZO NPs into AgNWs (silver nanowires) based on flexible OSCs (Fig. 9).106 The AgNWs film is the most promising transparent electrode in flexible OSCs, and was considered as the best candidate to replace of the ITO electrode. However, the AgNWs electrode usually confronts the surface roughness problem. Here, the roughness of the AgNWs film was handled by utilizing a two-step covering of AZO NPs. Interestingly, the conductivity and transparency of this electrode were further enhanced (Rsq of ≈18 Ω sq−1, transparency ≈95% at 550 nm) due to the capillary force effect and secondary growth of AZO which caused the “welding” process. Flexible OSCs based on the PBDB-T-2F:Y6 active layer exhibited an excellent PCE of 15.21% and displayed mechanical robustness during bending and peeling tests.
 Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of AgNWs/AZO NPs hybrid electrode fabrication. The AgNWs/AZO hybrid electrode working mechanisms are schematically illustrated in terms of (b) the electrical bridge effect and (c) the capillary force effect. Enlarged SEM images of (d) the AgNWs, (e) the AgNWs covered with the first AZO layer, (f) the AgNWs covered with two AZO layers. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright (2020) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim. 
Gallium (Ga), a group III element as Al, can also dope ZnO NPs as an n-type dopant. It is worth noting that the ionic bond length of Ga–O (1.92 Å) is close to that of the Zn–O bond (1.97 Å), and Ga3+ has a similar electronegativity and ion radius with Zn2+.45,115 Therefore, Ga3+ can be easily incorporated into ZnO NPs. Park et al. synthesized Ga-doped ZnO nanorods by utilizing a hydrothermal method, in which the doping content of Ga was varied from 0% to 10%.115 The Ga-doped ZnO nanorods displayed improved conductivity, which was attributed to the increment of the charge carrier density and the reduction of defect states in the nanorods. The Ga doping can often raise the Fermi levels of their ZnO hosts. Wu and coworkers prepared Ga-doped ZnO NPs via a room-temperature (RT) solution process without bulky organic ligands and confirmed that they had low work functions and tailored band structures.45 The quantum dot light-emitting diodes (QD-LEDs) with Ga-doped ZnO NPs as ETL exhibited high luminance and efficiency. The photovoltaic parameters based on doped ZnO NPs in this review are summarized in Table 1.
Table 1 Summary of photovoltaic parameters based on doped ZnO NPs in OSCs




Device architecture

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




The thicknesses of the AZO films were.a 680 nm.b 80 nm.c 10 nm.d 120 nm.




ITO/AZO NCs/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Aga
0.57
7.37
60
2.52

112



ITO/AZO/SAMs/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag
0.583
9.92
57.4
3.32

96



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/AZO NCs/Alb
0.74
17.1
60
7.59

43



ITO/AZO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Alc
0.804
17.91
72.3
10.42

114



ITO/AZO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
0.802
15.80
69.9
8.85




Em-Ag/AgNWs:AZO-SG/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Ald
0.832
25.05
72.97
15.21

106





4.2 ZnO NPs composites
As discussed above, due to the existence of hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on the surface, the ZnO NP dispersions in organic solvents are not stable in air. The nanoparticles tend to form aggregate and thus precipitate out due to gravity (Fig. 10),47 especially in the presence of H2O.100 Therefore, researchers usually incorporate ligands of surfactants116 to modify the surface of ZnO NPs, facilitating their dispersion and stabilization. The ligands are removed through a post-annealing procedure after the formation of ZnO NPs films. However, many ligands have high boiling points (b. p.), which need a high temperature (>150 °C) to completely remove the ligands.100
 Fig. 10  ZnO NP dispersion when freshly prepared (a) after 5 min (b) and after 30 min (c) of air exposure. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V. 
The alkoxy-acetic acids, such as methoxy-acetic acid (MA), methoxyethoxyacetic acid (MEA), and methoxyethoxyethoxyacetic acid (MEEA), are excellent solutions for dispersing ZnO NPs. In 2008, Krebs and coworkers employed MEA as the ligand to stabilize ZnO NPs.100 The ZnO NPs dispersion became rather transparent after adding 4–20% (v/v) MEA in the methanol/chlorobenzene solution. After compromising with solubility and curing times, a 4–6% (v/v) MEA in the ZnO NP dispersion was used to fabricate inverted OSCs. However, the boiling point of MEA was still high at 245 °C and the formation of ZnO NP films requires a rather high temperature (210 °C). Hence, low-boiling point insulating ligands are needed to guarantee enough elimination to improve the quality of the films. Alem et al. incorporated the low-boiling-point propylamine (PA, b.p. 48 °C) to stabilize the ZnO NPs.47 A small amount of PA with a concentration of 4% (v/v) would effectively ensure the stability of ZnO NP dispersion in chloroform, chlorobenzene, or dichlorobenzene for over one month, even after exposure to air. In addition, no post-annealing or plasma treatment was required in the spin-cast ZnO NP films. The PCEs of the inverted OSCs fabricated with PA-stabilized ZnO ETLs were over 4% and could be maintained for over one month. Poly(zinc diacrylate) (pZA), with carboxyl groups in its repeat unit, can also be used as the passivation reagent for ZnO NPs. Wu et al. developed an in situ cross-linked three-dimensional polymer network based on pZA to passivate the defects of ZnO NPs (Fig. 11a).117 The incorporation of pZA into the ZnO NPs dispersion could effectively passivate the defects in the ZnO film and thus decreased the trap-assisted recombination. The PCEs of the pZA cross-linked ZnO NPs-based OSCs were significantly improved from 2.58% to 3.26% for P3HT:PC61BM blends and 6.67% to 7.37% for PTB7:PC71BM blends.
 Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the device structure with a flow chart of the steps involved in the preparation of the pZA network. (b) Storage stability of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM solar cells using ZnO or ZnO@APTMS NPs. The inset is the schematic diagram of the ZnO and ZnO@APTMS NPs. Reproduced with permission.44,117 Copyright (2013) IOP Publishing Ltd. and Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society. 
Silane coupling agents, which are well-known self-assembled monolayer (SAM) materials, can react with the surface hydroxyl groups through their alkoxy groups. The agents are a popular approach in improving the dispersibility of biomaterials118 and regulating the surface energy of organic field-effect transistors.119 Hence, they are available to modify the surface of ZnO NPs. In 2010, the silane coupling agent, (3-glycidyloxypropyl)-trimethoxysilane (GPTMS), was adopted to modify the surface of ZnO NPs in ethyl glycol solution.38 The ZnO NPs dispersion exhibited a high surface potential of 66 mV and remained transparent for six months of storage. Ma and coworkers prepared 3-aminopropyltrimethoxysilane (APTMS)-capped ZnO NPs (ZnO@APTMS NPs) through a surface ligand exchange reaction (Fig. 11b).44 The ZnO@APTMS NPs exhibited improved dispersibility in an ethanol dispersion and remained stable even in air for at least one year without any aggregation. Moreover, owing to the reduction of surface defects, the charge transport efficiency was improved and the “light-soaking” effect was thus suppressed. The flexible OSCs with PTB7-Th:PC71BM photoactive layers exhibited an enhanced PCE from 8.73% (ZnO NPs) to 9.07% (ZnO@APTMS NPs). Also, large-area ZnO@APTMS NPs based films were successfully applied into flexible OSCs through gravure printing.
The PVP surfactant (Fig. 12a), which can also coordinate with the zinc atoms through its pyrrolidone units, was used to disperse and modify the ZnO NPs. The PVP-modified ZnO NPs have the advantage of being able to remove polymers after UVO treatment. Cho et al. demonstrated that UVO treatment could effectively remove the residual organic molecules on the surface of ZnO NP films through a UVO-induced decomposition mechanism.103 However, excessive UVO treatment could generate additional defects on/within the ZnO films, which can induce charge recombination. So and coworkers found that ZnO NPs:PVP nanocomposite films treated with UVO for 10 min led to the enhancement of the device performance as compared to the devices without UVO treatment (Fig. 12b).98 They also observed that the UVO treatment removed the top PVP to expose the ZnO NPs on the film surface, which was proven by both AFM and X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) characterization. These UVO-treated ZnO NPs-PVP nanocomposite films could enhance charge collection in inverted OSCs. The OSCs based on conjugated polymers with dithienogermole–thienopyrrolodione repeat units (PDTG–TPD) showed the maximum PCE of 8.5% and a certified PCE of 7.4%.
 Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures of the polymers PVP and PEG. (b) The AFM images and the schematic images for the as-prepared (left) and 10 min UV-ozone treated (right) ZnO-PVP nanocomposite films. (c) Schematic illustration of the inverted OSCs with the ZnO/PEG hybrid film as the ETLs. Reproduced with permission.46,98 Copyright (2012) Macmillan Publishers Limited; and copyright (2013) American Chemical Society. 
The insulating polymers, poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG) (Fig. 12a) or poly(ethylene oxide) (PEO), contain ether groups, which can be coordinated with ZnO NPs. Jo et al. introduced PEG hybridized ZnO NPs as solution-processed ETL in OSCs based on poly(3-hexylthiophene) (P3HT):(6,6)-phenyl-C61 butyric acid methyl ester (PC61BM) blends.120 The introduction of PEG into the ETL layer reduced the area of ZnO domain boundaries, lowered the electron affinity of ZnO, enhanced the ability of electron-transporting and hole blocking, and further decreased the series resistance of the cells. The ZnO NPs-PEG interlayer could also serve as optical spacer, and thus enhanced light absorption of the devices. Shao et al. incorporated PEO to optimize the surface of ZnO NP films.121 They found that PEO could effectively passivate the surface traps of ZnO NP films and suppressed charge recombination, which further improved the JSC and FF of the cells. The PCE of the inverted solar cell based on PCDTBT:PC71BM blends was enhanced to 6.59% as compared with 5.39% for the reference device. Chen and coworkers investigated the effect of molecular weight on the ZnO NPs–PEG hybrid anode buffer layers (Fig. 12c).46 They found that lower-weight polymers (Mw = 400) could not effectively passivate ZnO surface defects due to their less oxygen; higher-weight polymers (Mw = 20000) would hinder charge transport due to its insulating nature. Therefore, the performance of OSCs with ZnO/PEG6000 (Mw = 6000) hybrids exhibited the best PCE of 3.3% and high air-stability.
The insulating polymers, e.g. polyethylenimine (PEI) or poly-(ethylenimine)-ethoxylated (PEIE), which are low cost and can be dissolved in water, have been used to decrease the work function of electrodes due to the formation of a dipole layer at the interface.122,123 Considering their solubility in water and alcohols, they can intensively mix with ZnO NPs that usually dissolve in alcohols to form transparent dispersions. Guo et al. and Ma et al. independently demonstrated that the PEI:ZnO NPs composites could be processed at low temperature (120 °C)124 or without the annealing process.125 Ma and coworkers also proved no obvious device performance loss with thick PEI:ZnO NPs composites (60 nm) as the ETL in PTB7-Th:PC61BM-based OSCs.124 In 2019, they further applied the PEI:ZnO NPs composite ink to a large-scale roll-to-roll (R2R) micro-gravure printing.126 The modification of ZnO NPs by PEI effectively improved the ink dispersion and stability, facilitating its application into the R2R process. The thickness and coverage of the PEI:ZnO NPs films could be easily regulated by changing the printing roller speed and web speed. Consequently, flexible PTB7:PC71BM devices with 120 nm PEI:ZnO NPs as ETL exhibited a high PCE of 6% and enhanced mechanical stability, demonstrating the high printability of this ZnO:PEI composite material. Recently, Liu and coworkers synthesized a nucleobase adenine-based polymer through the reversible addition–fragmentation chain transfer polymerization and mixed it with ZnO NPs in a 2,2,2-trifluoroethanol solvent.127 The nucleobase adenine-based polymer efficiently passivated the defects, improved the conductivity, and reduced the work function of the ZnO NP films. Eventually, OSCs containing the organic–inorganic hybrid composite interlayers yielded a maximum efficiency of 16.2%. More importantly, due to the suppression of charge recombination and reduction in the Schottky barriers, the high-performance OSCs could endure a wide interlayer thickness range, from ∼18 nm to ∼100 nm. The photovoltaic parameters based on ZnO NPs composites in this review are summarized in Table 2.
Table 2 Summary of photovoltaic parameters by using ZnO NPs composites in OSCs




Device architecture

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.





a Under UV (254 nm) light irradiation for 20 min and annealing at 150 °C for 30 min in N2.
b These are the average values in the reference.
c Under UV-ozone treatment for 10 min.
d Calculated from the parameters in the reference.
e The thickness of the ZnO NPs:PEI composite film was 60 nm.
f The thickness of the ZnO NPs:PEI composite film was 120 nm.
g Fabricated from spin-coating.
h Fabricated from R2R printing.





ITO/ZnO NPs:PA/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag
0.86
9.4
52
4.2

47



ITO/ZnO NPs:pZA/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Aga
0.73
14.03
72
7.37

117



ITO/ZnO NPs@APTMS/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
0.80
16.67
68
9.07

44



ITO/ZnO NPs:PVP/PDTG-TPD:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag
0.86b
14.0b
67.3b
8.5c

98



ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC61BM/ZnO NPs:PEG/LiF/Al
0.60
10.67
68.7
4.4

120



ITO/ZnO NPs:PEO/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag
0.89d
11.4
65
6.59

121



ITO/ZnO NPs:PEG/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag
0.581
10.19
55.9
3.3

46



ITO/ZnO NPs:PEI/PTB7-Th:PC61BM/MoO3/Ale
0.81
16.00
63
8.16

124



ITO/ZnO NPs:PEI/PTB7-Th:PC61BM/MoO3/Alf
0.74
15.43
60
6.85g

126



0.76
15.10
52
5.98h




ITO/ZnO NPs:Adenine polymer/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Ag
0.85b
25.56b
73.85b
16.22

127





4.3 Interface modification of ZnO NP Films
ZnO NP-based films are generally used as the bottom interfacial layer in typical inverted OSCs. They can significantly affect the performance and stability of OSCs through selective charge injection and protecting the devices from the external environment. For ZnO NP-based films, in particular, the low-temperature, solution-processed route often results in high surface defect density, e.g. surface groups, dangling bonds, and absorbed oxygen molecules, which can become recombination centers for photogenerated carriers and further decrease the efficiency as well as the device stability.32 Therefore, appropriate modification of the interface for ZnO NP films is highly demanded to achieve high PCEs and good stability of inverted OSCs. Interface engineering can also align the energy levels between the ETL and the photoactive layer as well as control the surface energy. Many strategies have been proposed to modify the surface of ZnO NP films, including the post-treatment approach (such as thermal, vacuum ultraviolet or UV-ozone treatment, etc.),128,129 and covering modification interlayer method (such as SAMs, insulating polymers, polymer semiconductors, second-grown ZnO).29,36,130 In this section, we focus on the different covering strategies to tune the interface of ZnO NP-based films.
The ultrathin metal films may be a possible solution for treating the defects of ZnO NP films while facilitating charge transport by tuning the work function and conductivity. Wu and coworkers evaporated an ultrathin layer of Al on the surface of ZnO NP films.131 The “burn-in” Voc degradation was effectively eliminated for up to 8 h exposure, which was due to the diminished carrier selectivity at the ZnO/organic interface.
Fullerene derivatives (C60-SAM), which can be composited with ZnO NPs and also act as a modification interlayer of ZnO NP-based films, are the most extensively investigated interfacial modification materials of ZnO ETLs in inverted OSCs. Generally, C60-SAMs modified ZnO ETLs can be easily processed by either a solution immersion or spin-coating method. In 2008, Jen and coworkers incorporated C60-SAM to modify ZnO NP films (Fig. 13a).132 Owing to the enhanced electronic coupling of the ZnO NP/C60-SAM interface, the FF and photocurrent were improved in the inverted P3HT/PCBM-based OSCs. The devices based on C60-SAM-modified ZnO ETL showed significantly improved PCEs as high as 4.9%. More importantly, the whole fabrication route was ambient-processable due to the enhanced stability of the ETL. To reduce the potential etching of ZnO, they further employed catechol termination as modifier in the ZnO NP-based OSCs.36 The modification process was conducted by conveniently spin-coating the C60-SAM onto the surface of ZnO NP films. Phosphonic acid is another effective anchor for C60-SAMs. Stubhan et al. investigated the modification of the AZO NP-based ETL with phosphonic acid-anchored SAMs (Fig. 13b).96 Through adjusting the linkages of the phosphonic acid (hexyl group, C60-hexyl group, and C60-octadecyl group), the interfacial contact between the ETL and the P3HT:PC61BM layer was finely tuned, which thus decreased the RS (series resistance) and increased the RSH (shunt resistance) of the OSCs due to the improved charge transfer from the PCBM to AZO NPs. The average PCEs of the cells were improved from 2.9% to 3.3%. Li and coworkers demonstrated the pyrrolidine tris-acid ethyl ester-anchored C60-SAMs (PyC60) in the modification of ZnO NPs (Fig. 13c).133 They found that the decoration of PyC60 could optimize the morphology of ZnO/PyC60 film, which contributed to the reduced series loss and interfacial charge recombination. The contact with the photoactive layer was also improved, further increasing electron injection and collection efficiency.
 Fig. 13  Schematic illustrations of device structures and chemical structures of C60-SAMs in the modification of ZnO NPs films. (a) Carboxylic acid-anchored C60-SAMs; (b) phosphonic acid-anchored C60-SAMs; (c) pyrrolidine tris-acid ethyl ester-anchored C60-SAMs. Reproduced with permission.96,132,133 Copyright (2008) American Institute of Physics; Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; and Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V. 
Generally, the existence of hydroxyl groups on the surface of the solution-processed ZnO NP films was ascribed to low Jsc and PCEs. This is due to the decreased photogenerated charge transfer and collection generated by oxygen-deficient defects and unfavorable vertical phase separation. For the non-fullerene systems, in particular, the surface –OH groups boosted the photocatalytic activity and led to fast performance degradation. Han et al. explored the influence of surface pH conditions on the performance and stability of the non-fullerene OSCs and found that device performance and stability were improved by treating the ZnO NP films with acid solutions but worsened after base treatment.134 Different acid solutions, including Zn(OAc)2, zirconium acetylacetonate (ZrAcac), 2-phenylethylmercaptan, and glutamic acid (GC), were used to passivate the ZnO NP films. The non-fullerene OSCs based on PM6:Y6 and 2-phenylethylmercaptan-treated ZnO NP films exhibited the highest PCE of 16.46%. More importantly, the long-term stability under continuous illumination conditions was significantly improved with a T80 lifetime of over 4000 h.
The insulating polymers are another system for modifying the ZnO NPs-based ETLs, including PEI or PEIE,125,134 polystyrene (PS),135 PEG or PEO, etc. Despite their insulating nature, they can tune the interfacial dipole, wettability, and interfacial contact of the ZnO NPs-based ETLs. In addition to forming a composite with ZnO NPs, the carboxylic acid can also act as an interfacial modification agent for their corresponding layers. Fang and coworkers used cesium stearate (CsSt) to modify the interface of ZnO NP films in inverted PTB7:PC71BM-based OSCs (Fig. 14a).136 The surface morphology, energy levels, and conductivity of ZnO NP films were improved through the incorporation. The PCEs of the OSC based on the CsSt/ZnO NPs bilayer as ETL were enhanced to 8.69%, which was 20% enhancement as compared to bare ZnO NP films-based cells. Another approach is the insertion of very thin (<5 nm) insulating layers, such as PEG or DNA nanolayers,137 which facilitate better energy level alignment at the metal electrode.46,120,121 Russel et al. introduced an insulating polymer, polystyrene (PS), into the ZnO NPs with large particle size, in which an electron transport layer (ETL) with a thickness of more than 130 nm was produced (Fig. 14b).135 The doping of a thin PS layer not only made denser, smoother, and more uniform ZnO NP films but also increased the contact properties between the ZnO NP film and the photoactive layer by tuning the wettability. These optimizations improved the PCEs from 8.49% to 9.54% for the fullerene-based blend PTB7-Th:PC71BM and 10.03% to 11.05% for the non-fullerene system PBDB-T:ITIC. Moreover, the reproducibility, mechanical endurance, and ambient stability of these OSCs were dramatically improved.
 Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the inverted device architecture, the chemical structure, and energy level of CsSt, PTB7, and PC71BM. (b) Chemical structure of PS (left), device architecture of inverted OSCs (middle), and SEM cross-section image of the active layer on ZnO NPs film (right). (c) Inverted OSCs with the PEI-coated ZnO NPs layer. Top left: illustration of the device structure; top right: SEM image of the cross-section of the device; bottom: chemical structures of PEI. Reproduced with permission.135,136,139 Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society, and Copyright (2020 & 2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
PEI and PEIE can also modify the surface of ZnO NP-based films to form composite interfacial layers and facilitate electron transport through chelation with ZnO NP layers.123,124,138 Woo et al. reported the PEI/ZnO NPs bilayer as the ETL in inverted OSCs (Fig. 14c).139 To minimize the insulating effect of PEI, The thickness of the PEI nanolayer was controlled to be 2 nm, which was confirmed by XPS and optical absorption measurements. The incorporation of the electron-rich PEI nanolayer formed an interfacial dipole layer between the ZnO NP layer and the PEI nanolayer, which lowered the conduction band energy of the ZnO NP layer and improved the PCEs. Moreover, the surface roughness of the ZnO NP layer was also improved by the PEI nanolayer so that the device Rs was noticeably decreased. Eventually, all the parameters of the OSCs based on PTB7:PC71BM were improved, leading to PCE enhancement up to 8.9%. The nucleobase adenine with amido groups can also act as a passivation agent to modify ZnO NPs.
Compared with the insulating agents, the semiconducting materials can reduce surface traps and also tune the energy levels, facilitating charge transport. Semiconducting polymers are another effective modifier to passivate the surface defects of ZnO NP films. Zhou et al. mixed PFN-Br into the ZnO NP dispersion, which tuned the surface energy of ZnO layers with a continuous gradation from 51.23 mN m−1 to 76.62 mN m−1. The performance of OSCs with ZnO/PFN-Br hybrids with 63.89 mN m−1 surface free energy exhibited the best PCE of 13.82% in a non-fullerene system PBDB-TF:IT-4F.130 Xie and coworkers proposed a novel in situ induced crystallization of ZnO NPs (ic-ZnO) strategy by mixing the as-prepared ZnO NPs in 2-methoxyethanol/chloroform mixture and the precursor solution of Zn(CH3COO)2.29 Through utilizing these ic-ZnO NPs as ETLs, the PCE of the inverted PM6:Y6-based OSCs could reach 16.62%.
The block copolymers have the advantages of precise and well-controllable polymerization possesses, adjustable self-assembly behaviors, abundant functionality, etc., which make them act as modifiers for ZnO NPs. Su et al. demonstrated the availability of polyelectrolyte block copolymers comprising conjugated segments and non-conjugated segments in modifying ZnO NPs (Fig. 15).140 They developed an amphiphilic dendritic block copolymer (DBC) through a facile coupling method. Through a distinct self-assembly process, DBC cooperated with plasmonic gold nanoparticles (NPs). The hybrid DBC@AuNPs interlayer was used to optimize the contact between the ZnO NPs layer and the photoactive layer, and increased the PCE from 14.0% to 15.4% due to the better energy level alignment and improved interfacial compatibility at the ZnO/BHJ interface. Moreover, the cells exhibited 77% of the initial value after thermal aging at 65 °C for 3000 h, indicating the T80 lifetime (the time when cells’ PCEs drops to 80% of the initial value) of >1100 h when being stored under constant thermal conditions at 65 °C and an evaluated T80 lifetime of over 1.79 years at room temperature (298 K). The photovoltaic parameters based on surface-modified ZnO NPs in this review are summarized in Table 3.
 Fig. 15  (a) Chemical structure and (b) the schematic reaction route of the studied DBC. Schematic illustration of (c) the conical shape of DBC by using the CPP method, and (d) the self-assembled micelle of DBC and chelating of AuNPs with the hydrophilic moieties of DBC. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright (2020) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA. 
Table 3 Summary of the photovoltaic parameters obtained by using surface-modified ZnO NPs in OSCs




Device architecture

V
OC (V)

J
SC (mA cm−2)
FF (%)
PCE (%)
Ref.




ITO/ZnO NPs/C60-SAM/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag
0.63
12.6
62.3
4.94

132



ITO/AZO/SAMs/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag
0.583
9.92
57.4
3.32

96



ITO/ZnO NPs/PyC60/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
0.753
16.04
72.5
8.76

133



ITO/ZnO NPs/2-phenylethylmercaptan/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Al
0.85
26.89
72.0
16.46

134



ITO/ZnO NPs/PS/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag
0.81
17.71
66.93
9.54

135



ITO/ZnO NPs/PS/PBDB-T:ITIC/MoO3/Ag
0.90
17.86
68.87
11.05




ITO/ZnO NPs/CsSt/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al
0.736
17.07
69.1
8.69

136



ITO/ZnO NPs/PEI/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag
0.73
17.19
69.6
8.76

139



ITO/ZnO NPs/PFEN-Br/PBDB-TF:IT-4F/MoO3/Al
0.87
20.16
78.79
13.82

130





5. The stability of ZnO NPs-based OSCs
The ZnO species usually run into a stability issue when being applied in OSCs as the electron extracting layers, which have attracted much attention. The photodegradation mechanisms of OSCs based on ZnO species are very complex and most of them can be classified into two pathways: intrinsic degradation such as intermolecular photoreaction or the photocatalyst effect,138,141 and extrinsic degradation through the absorbed oxygen or water.142–144 All the mechanisms are related to the energy level distribution or fabrication processing of ZnO NPs.
It is well known that the “light-soaking” effect usually exists in the ZnO-based OSCs, which require an additional UV light activation process to further improve the FFs and PCEs.32,37 This effect is related to the dangling bonds in ZnO NPs, which will further give rise to a high density of recombination centers (Fig. 16a). Chen et al. demonstrated the presence of defect states in the as-prepared ZnO NPs films through the steady-state photoluminescence spectra.37 The broadband defect emission could be effectively quenched upon UVO treatment, indicating a significant reduction of defect states. The inverted PC71BM-based OSC devices exhibited enhanced photocurrents and PCEs from 7.8% to 8.1%, benefitting from the reduced defect states by UVO treatment. Nevertheless, charge extraction materials without the additional UV activation procedure can enhance the efficiencies and also guarantee long-term stability. Many approaches have been promoted to achieve ZnO NPs ETLs without UV activation procedures, such as Al-doped ZnO NPs,145 self-assembled monolayers (SAMs) modification,96 polymer surface modification,97 and small molecule/polymer-ZnO NPs composites,46,98,99etc., which have been mentioned in the former sections.
 Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of (b) the interface recombination in the “light-soaking” effect and oxygen desorption on the electronic doping of ZnO NPs in the “photoinduced shunts” effect. (c) Images of IT-4F thin films on glass, glass/ZnO, and glass/SnO2 substrates under continuous UV illumination for different times. (d) The UV-vis absorption spectra of SnO2/IT-4F films upon AM1.5 illumination in N2. (e) MS spectra of pristine non-fullerene acceptor IT-4F (top), pristine acceptor moiety EG-2F (middle), and photo-degraded IT-4F (bottom), respectively. Reproduced with permission.37,141,143 Copyright (2011 & 2012) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, and copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Another degradation mechanism for ZnO NPs-based OSCs is the “photoinduced shunts” effect, which is also associated with the illumination by UV light (i.e., hν > Eg).143,144 Distinct from the “light-soaking” effect, this effect has been proved to be attributed to the UV-induced desorption of chemisorbed oxygen at the ZnO surface (Fig. 16b).143 This effect will significantly lower the shunt resistance of the cells and decay the FF values and Vocs in sequence after illumination for a few minutes. Trost et al. demonstrated that the photoinduced shunting behavior could be observed in several kinds of ZnO, including ZnO NPs or vacuum-fabricated ZnO films, neat ZnO or AZO, GZO (Ga doped ZnO), etc.144 Moreover, the photoinduced shunting of ZnO-based OSCs could not be avoided by using a suitable encapsulation, which happened in both ambient and inert atmospheres. They also proved that the replacement of ZnO with SnOx could be the possible solution to the photoinduced shunting effect.
Recently, the rapid development of non-fullerene acceptors extensively promoted the performance of OSCs to over 18% for rigid cells11–20 and 15% for flexible cells.97,106,146 However, the CC linkages of the donor and acceptor moieties of the non-fullerene acceptors are not stable in a basic environment.147 Generally, ZnO species absorb UV light <380 nm and can act as a photocatalyst to decompose non-fullerene acceptors or generate a photoreaction with these acceptors, which has been identified to be of paramount importance to the operational stability and shelf stability of non-fullerene-based OSCs.138 Zhou and coworkers reported the photocatalytic effect of sol–gel processed ZnO and ZnO NP films on the stability of non-fullerene acceptors.141 Their absorption peaks at 720 nm disappeared after continuous UV illumination (365 nm, 5 mW cm−2) for 24 hours, which were directly observed in a visual inspection (Fig. 16c and d). They further confirmed their assumption through mass spectrometry (MS), in which the m/z values of the acceptor IT-4F disappeared after a photodegradation process and the m/z values of the terminal groups appeared (Fig. 16e). The whole process of photocatalysis was as follows: the electrons were excited from the VB to the CB of ZnO, while holes were formed in the VB on the UV illumination. The photo-induced electrons and holes in the ZnO films had reductive and oxidative ability, which could attack the active CC linkage and degrade the acceptors. To avoid this issue, they replaced the ZnO ETLs with UV-stable SnO2 nanocrystal (NC) films. The OSCs devices based on the SnO2 NC ETLs exhibited superior stability after continuous UV illumination within 24 hours. In addition, the modification of ZnO NPs can handle this issue coincidently. Ma and coworkers investigated the influence of the PEI modifying ZnO NPs on the shelf and operational stability of the PM6:Y6 OSCs.138 They found that the operational stability of ZnO NPs-based OSCs was worse than the PEI-based devices due to the photocatalytic effect and direct chemical reaction between ZnO and the photoactive layer, while the shelf stability of the PEI-based cells was worse than the ZnO NPs-based devices due to the hygroscopicity of the PEI polymer. In other studies, the degradation issue was attributed to the nucleophile-attacking ability of amine groups in the PEI polymer, via a typical nucleophilic addition reaction (such as Michael addition).148,149 The composite PEI:ZnO NPs-based OSCs exhibited a balanced shelf and operational stability with 80% PCE remaining of the initial efficiency after 1200 h of continuous illumination and 60% PCE remaining after storage in air for 1500 h for the inverted PM6: Y6 solar cells. They further applied the ZnO NPs to a doctor blade coating process and gravure printing technique, which improved the PCEs based on ZnO NPs to 12.88% for the PBDB-TF:IT-4F system150 and 15.28% for the PM6:Y6 system.151
The existence of surface oxygen defects on the ZnO films, which were generated by the base or zinc salt contaminants in the solution process, could result in interface degradation of the non-fullerene acceptor.134,142 Ma and coworkers identified the oxygen defects (such as hydroxy groups) including oxygen vacancies and surface-absorbed oxygen from the contaminants through the X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) spectra.134 The surface acid treatments (including Zn(OAc)2, ZrAcac, 2-phenylethylmercaptan, and GC) were conducted to investigate their influence on surface pH conditions and the performance and stability of the non-fullerene OSCs. The 2-phenylethylmercaptan-treated ZnO NP films exhibited minimal hydroxy groups and promoted the PCEs of PM6:Y6-based OSCs to 16.46% and a T80 lifetime of over 4000 h. In addition to these photo-induced degradation mechanisms, the residual amine species on the synthetic process of ZnO NPs and the abundant hydroxyl and carboxyl groups on the surface of ZnO NPs can also act as nucleophilic agents to destroy the CC bond in non-fullerene acceptors.147,152
6. ZnO NPs in flexible/large-area OSCs
Compared with the sol–gel processed ZnO films, the pre-synthesized ZnO NPs can be fabricated into films at very low temperatures or without annealing.25–29 This feature makes them suitable for application in flexible OSCs since the plastic substrates cannot endure high-temperature thermal treatment. Moreover, the pre-synthesized ZnO NPs exhibited higher charge carrier mobility than sol–gel ZnO due to the crystalline nature of ZnO NPs. The dispersions of ZnO NPs can be tuned by changing solvents and additives in terms of viscosity, surface energy, etc., as compared with the fixed-formula sol–gel ZnO.153 Therefore, ZnO NPs are excellent ETL materials in large-area OSCs. Recently, many reports have demonstrated the availability of ZnO NPs in flexible or large-area OSCs.
Early in 2008, Jen and coworkers applied ZnO NPs as electron-selective layers in flexible inverted P3HT:PCBM devices.154 In the rigid cells, the room temperature-processed ZnO NPs exhibited a slightly higher device performance (3.78%) as compared with that of the high-temperature sol–gel processed ZnO (3.68%). In the flexible devices with ITO/plastic as the substrate, the inverted F-OSC showed a slightly reduced PCE of 3.58%, indicating that the ZnO NPs could be used as an effective contact for electron selection. The ZnO NPs were then widely used in flexible OSCs based on novel AgNWs flexible electrodes. Sun et al. reported high-performance flexible transparent electrodes created by water-processed AgNWs and a polyelectrolyte (PSSNa).97 Benefitting from the electrostatic charge repulsion and interaction between the PSSNa/PET substrate, the composite electrode was demonstrated to possess low sheet resistance and high transparency. They confirmed that the ZnO NPs were compatible with this flexible electrode and a PFEN-Br layer was further coated on the ZnO NP films to eliminate the defects on the ZnO NP layer. The flexible OSCs exhibited the optimal PCEs of 13.1% and 16.5% for single-junction and tandem cells, respectively, as well as mechanical robustness with retaining >90% after a 1000-cycle bending test at bending radius from 1.5 mm to 9.0 mm. The SAMs modification is another strategy for optimizing the ZnO NPs in photovoltaic devices. Wei et al. demonstrated the availability of APTMS in reacting with ZnO NPs to achieve highly stable ETL films (Fig. 11b).44 The ZnO@APTMS NPs showed enhanced dispersibility and stability in organic solvent dispersion and improved photoelectric properties by suppressing the “light-soaking” effect. The PCEs of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based flexible OSCs were increased to 9.07% and remained stable under continuous UV illumination. Finally, the researchers fabricated ZnO@APTMS films with a thickness of 90 nm through roll-to-roll micro gravure printing into large-area flexible OSCs on the flexible PET/ITO substrate. The efficiency of the ZnO@APTMS layer-based large-area flexible OSCs was up to 6.83%, with a VOC of 0.76 V, JSC of 15.78 mA cm−2, and FF of 0.57, respectively, demonstrating the potential applications of the ZnO NPs in large-area flexible photovoltaics.
Al-Doped ZnO NPs are an effective strategy for improving the instinct conductivity of ZnO NPs and enhancing their thickness tolerance, facilitating their application in flexible and large-area OSCs. Liu et al. demonstrated the thickness tolerance of OSCs based on the as-prepared AZO nanocrystals as cathode interlayer.114 The inverted PTB7-Th:PC71BM-based OSCs with the 10 nm AZO NCs interlayer exhibited an optimized PCE of 10.42% and this value slightly decreased to ca. 9% with 120 nm AZO NC films. They applied this interlayer in PET/ITO substrate-based flexible OSCs with the best PCE of 8.93% and 88% retention after a 500 cycle bending process. In 2020, Li et al. further presented a new strategy to utilize the AZO NCs in AgNWs-based flexible OSCs (Fig. 9).106 Through utilizing a two-step method to fabricate the AZO NC films, the roughness and adhesion between AgNWs and the PET substrate were effectively handled. This “welding” process promoted the efficiency of flexible OSCs based on the PBDB-T-2F:Y6 blend to 15.21%. Moreover, flexible devices based on this AgNWs/AZO composite were confirmed to maintain a robust PCE after bending 1200 times at different bending radii.
The potential of various coating or printing techniques has been proved in constructing large-area ZnO NPs films in OSC modules. Eggenhuisen et al. reported the inkjet-printed four layers in an OSC device, including the front Ag-grid electrode, PEDOT:PSS layer, P3HT:PCBM photoactive layer, and the ZnO NP films.90 In this report, the ZnO NPs were inkjet printed through dispersing in a non-halogenated veratrole:o-xylene mixture with a concentration of 17.5 mg mL−1. Large-area OSCs on the glass/ITO substrate showed an optimized PCE of ca. 1.77% for 1 cm2 devices and 0.98% for 92 cm2 modules, indicating the potential of inkjet printing for large-area OSCs. It should be noted that there is an apparent performance drop between large-area OSC modules fabricated from the R2R process and lab-scale small-sized devices. Hence, it is of paramount importance to develop large-area coating or printing techniques and rational module geometric design for the minimization of this loss.52,155 Except for the careful selection of printing techniques and ink formulations, the efficiency loss caused by the geometric design of modules (called a geometric fill factor, GFF), such as the interconnection of adjacent cells or minimization of “dead area”, also play a non-negligible role in OSC modules. Lucera et al. reported ultra-high GFF values of 98.5% achieved by reducing the interconnection widths to <100 μm via ultrashort laser pulses structuring.156 In this design, the ZnO-based ETLs were obtained through doctor-blade coating ZnO NPs in an isopropyl alcohol dispersion for rigid modules and slot-die coating for flexible cells. Under very low post-treatment (80 °C for 90 s), a 50 nm thick ZnO NP film with a quite smooth surface was achieved. Consequently, a maximum PCE of 5.3% was achieved on rigid modules and 4.2% for large-area, flexible ones with commercially available photoactive materials (Fig. 17).
 Fig. 17  (a) Optical images of an R2R multi-function printer, with a length of 2.5 m and a height of 1.6 m, developed by the authors. (b) Schematic of the micro-gravure printing process. (c) The slot-die coating process and (d) dried film of the photoactive layer on a ZnO-coated, pre-patterned substrate. Reproduced with permission.92,156 Copyright (2017) Elsevier B.V., and Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry. 
The gravure printing method has been recognized as a high-volume printing technology and has been widely used in magazines and catalogs production. The advantages of high-resolution, convenient pattern generation, and high speed enable this technique to be applied in printing low-viscosity inks, such as ZnO NPs dispersions.52 Kapnopoulos et al. demonstrated the availability of ZnO NP films in a gravure printing process with a high speed of 18 m min−1.91 Through the optimization of the printing parameters, OSC modules with the size of 45 cm2 and active area of 8 cm2 consisting of 8 interconnected cells were obtained and showed a maximum PCE of 2.22%. Yang and Ma et al. further developed a micro-gravure printing process to deposit ZnO NPs on flexible ITO/PET substrates at low temperatures.92 They optimized the micro-gravure printed ZnO NPs through web tension, substrate pre-treatment, and printing speed, which resulted in high-quality and thickness controllable ZnO NP thin films. The optimal flexible OSCs containing PTB7-Th:PC71BM photoactive layers exhibited the PCE of 6.61%, which was comparable to that of spin-coated ZnO ETL-based flexible devices (7.27%). Furthermore, Ma and Luo et al. achieved a high PCE of 13.61% for 1 cm2 OSC devices by replacing the flexible electrodes with patterned Ag NWs in a mass-producible gravure-printing process.151 To enhance the dispersibility and stability of ZnO NPs, Ma and coworkers demonstrated the R2R micro-gravure printed PEI:ZnO NPs composite ink and their application in large-scale OSCs.126 The enhanced dispersibility and stability of the PEI:ZnO NPs composite ink were confirmed through the dynamic light scattering measurement on the evolution of particle sizes within 6 months and improved zeta potentials. The stability of the photovoltaic devices based on the composite PEI:ZnO NP films were also improved in both performance and dark currents. Moreover, the printed composite PEI:ZnO NP films showed enhanced morphologies and stability. By regulating the printing roller speed and web speed, the thickness and coverage of the PEI:ZnO NPs films could also be easily tuned. Finally, large-area (2.5 × 2.5 cm2) flexible OSCs based on the PET/ITO substrate showed high PCEs of up to 6.90% for 30 nm thick PEI:ZnO NP films and 5.98% for 120 nm thick ETLs, indicating the high printability of this PEI:ZnO NP composite ink. The inkjet printing method with digital control can offer versatility and flexibility for the fabrication of different layers of large-area OSCs.
7. Challenges and outlook
To date, the rapid progress in the field of OSCs has enabled their performance to be comparable to that of silicon-based or perovskite-based solar cells. The next steps in the development of OSCs include the following aspects: (1) lowering the cost, scale-synthesizing, and batch-repeating the whole process of photoactive materials, which greatly affects the feasibility for the industrialized fabrication of OSCs; (2) enhancing the long-term stability and operational robustness of OSC devices, which determines the practical application fields of OSCs; (3) large-scale R2R fabrication of the OSC modules while narrowing the gap between lab-scale devices and industry-level modules; (4) exploiting the capable techniques towards flexible OSCs. The interfacial layers, especially for ETLs, have a great impact on the cost, stability, performance, and large-scale manufacturing of OSCs.
ZnO-based ETLs are the typical interfacial materials in inverted OSCs owing to their advantages such as good transparency, high mobility, and conductivity, chemical stability, low cost, solution-processable features, etc. Compared with the amorphous nature of sol–gel processed ZnO, wurtzite-crystalline ZnO NPs with improved mobility, annealing-free, and solution-processable features have a greater chance of application in large-area flexible OSC modules. However, many problems restrict the far-reaching application of ZnO NPs, including the issues in achieving long-term stable dispersions, the larger density of charge defects, relatively low conductivity, and the achievement of thick films.
To address these issues, both the preparation method and the post-treatment are required for ZnO NPs in terms of morphology, thickness, and surface state. Nano-compositing and surface modification are effective ways to adjust the conductivity, transmittance, surface state, and wetting ability of ZnO NP-based ETLs and thus improve the performance, stability, and likelihood of large-scale manufacturing of OSCs. Some specific considerations concerning the ZnO NPs include the following: (1) the synthesis of uniform-sized and highly-dispersed ZnO NPs. The solution-processed method can achieve these uniform-sized ZnO NPs while different ligands will be generated in this process. Thus, more ligands can hinder aggregation and enhance stability while easy removal features are needed to obtain the highly-dispersed, stable, and appropriate surface energy ZnO NP inks; (2) doping ZnO NPs with higher conductivity, mobility, and aligned energy levels. Appropriate metal atom doping can enhance the electrical conductivity and mobility of ZnO NPs and simultaneously tune the energy levels. Generally, the hole extraction efficiency is higher than that of the electrons. Thus, the enhanced mobility of ZnO NPs can balance the hole/electron extraction efficiency and reduce charge recombination. Higher conductivity will be beneficial to achieve thickness-independent ETLs. Additionally, aligned energy levels between ZnO NP-based ETLs and the photoactive layers or the electrodes can form ohmic contact and increase the efficiency of solar cells; (3) the development of materials for the compositing of ZnO NPs, for instance, silane coupling agent or PVP surfactant, which can control the dispersion and stability of ZnO NP inks, and also passivate surface defects of ZnO NPs. In addition, the mixed approach can adjust the surface energy of ZnO NP inks and thus facilitate large-area R2R processing. One issue that should be addressed is that the required agents should have the same solubility as ZnO NPs, in methanol, water, etc.; (4) surface modification of the ZnO NPs layer with novel interfacial materials is a strategy since no solubility demands are required. In the mentioned modified materials, the C60-SAMs and the conjugated polymers need a complex synthesized procedure; the insulating polymers may suffer a thickness-dependent problem. The block copolymers can circumvent these issues, but more evidence is required to prove the possibility.
In conclusion, considering all these discussions, intense efforts have been devoted to the controllable synthesis of uniform-sized, large-scale ZnO NPs, optimization of ZnO NP inks, and modification of ZnO NP-based ETLs. Increasing attention has been paid to the large-area R2R fabrication of ZnO NP-based ETLs and the corresponding OSC devices or modules. Considering the emergent trend for the commercialization of OSCs, we believe that the study of ZnO NPs will raise more concerns and occupy a major position in the future research and industrialization of OSCs.
Molecular formula
  
Conflicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Acknowledgements
This study is jointly supported by MOST (2017YFA0204702, 2018YFA0208504) and NSFC (52073016, 51773207, 21905018) of China. This work was further supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (buctrc201828, XK1802-2), Open Project of State Key Laboratory of Supramolecular Structure and Materials (sklssm202043), Jiangxi Provincial Department of Science and Technology (No. 20192ACB20009).
References
C. Breyer, D. Bogdanov, A. Gulagi, A. Aghahosseini, L. S. N. S. Barbosa, O. Koskinen, M. Barasa, U. Caldera, S. Afanasyeva, M. Child, J. Farfan and P. Vainikka, Prog. Photovolt.: Res. Appl., 2017, 25, 727–745 CrossRef .
C. Chen, Y. Kuang and L. Hu, Joule, 2019, 3, 683–718 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, Z. Chen, R. Shi, X. Yang and T. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1907296 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Inganäs, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1800388 CrossRef PubMed .

          IEA, World energy outlook 2018, International Energy Agency, Paris, FR,  2018 Search PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, N. Espinosa, M. Hösel, R. R. Søndergaard and M. Jørgensen, Adv. Mater., 2014, 26, 29–38 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Park, S. W. Heo, W. Lee, D. Inoue, Z. Jiang, K. Yu, H. Jinno, D. Hashizume, M. Sekino, T. Yokota, K. Fukuda, K. Tajima and T. Someya, Nature, 2018, 561, 516–521 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. R. Lee, R. D. Eckert, K. Forberich, G. Dennler, C. J. Brabec and R. A. Gaudiana, Science, 2009, 324, 232–235 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. J. Traverse, R. Pandey, M. C. Barr and R. R. Lunt, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2, 849–860 CrossRef .
M. Riede, D. Spoltore and K. Leo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 11, 2002653 CrossRef .
Q. Liu, Y. Jiang, K. Jin, J. Qin, J. Xu, W. Li, J. Xiong, J. Liu, Z. Xiao, K. Sun, S. Yang, X. Zhang and L. Ding, Sci. Bull., 2020, 65, 272–275 CrossRef CAS .
K. Jin, Z. Xiao and L. Ding, J. Semicond., 2021, 42, 060502 CrossRef .
Y. Lin, M. I. Nugraha, Y. Firdaus, A. D. Scaccabarozzi, F. Aniés, A.-H. Emwas, E. Yengel, X. Zheng, J. Liu, W. Wahyudi, E. Yarali, H. Faber, O. M. Bakr, L. Tsetseris, M. Heeney and T. D. Anthopoulos, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 3663–3671 CrossRef CAS .
M. Zhang, L. Zhu, G. Zhou, T. Hao, C. Qiu, Z. Zhao, Q. Hu, B. W. Larson, H. Zhu, Z. Ma, Z. Tang, W. Feng, Y. Zhang, T. P. Russell and F. Liu, Nat. Commun., 2021, 12, 309 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Lin, Y. Firdaus, F. H. Isikgor, M. I. Nugraha, E. Yengel, G. T. Harrison, R. Hallani, A. El-Labban, H. Faber, C. Ma, X. Zheng, A. Subbiah, C. T. Howells, O. M. Bakr, I. McCulloch, S. D. Wolf, L. Tsetseris and T. D. Anthopoulos, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5, 2935–2944 CrossRef CAS .
C. Li, J. Zhou, J. Song, J. Xu, H. Zhang, X. Zhang, J. Guo, L. Zhu, D. Wei, G. Han, J. Min, Y. Zhang, Z. Xie, Y. Yi, H. Yan, F. Gao, F. Liu and Y. Sun, Nat. Energy, 2021, 6, 605–613 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, L. Feng, T. Jia, J. Jing, Z. Hu, K. Zhang and F. Huang, Sci. China: Chem., 2021, 64, 1192–1199 CrossRef CAS .
L. Liu, S. Chen, Y. Qu, X. Gao, L. Han, Z. Lin, L. Yang, W. Wang, N. Zheng, Y. Liang, Y. Tan, H. Xia and F. He, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2101279 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Liu, L. Zhou, W. Liu, Z. Zhou, Q. Yue, W. Zheng, R. Sun, W. Liu, S. Xu, H. Fan, L. Feng, Y. Yi, W. Zhang and X. Zhu, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33, 2100830 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Cui, H. Yao, J. Zhang, K. Xian, T. Zhang, L. Hong, Y. Wang, Y. Xu, K. Ma, C. An, C. He, Z. Wei, F. Gao and J. Hou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908205 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          S. M. F. Cruz, L. A. Rocha and J. C. Viana, Printing Technologies on Flexible Substrates for Printed Electronics, IntechOpen,  2018 Search PubMed .
F. Wang, Z. A. Tan and Y. Li, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1059–1091 RSC .
Y. Sun, J. H. Seo, C. J. Takacs, J. Seifter and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2011, 23, 1679–1683 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Y. Kim, S. H. Kim, H.-H. Lee, K. Lee, W. Ma, X. Gong and A. J. Heeger, Adv. Mater., 2006, 18, 572–576 CrossRef CAS .
W. J. Beek, M. M. Wienk, M. Kemerink, X. Yang and R. A. Janssen, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2005, 109, 9505–9516 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. A. Meulenkamp, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 5566–5572 CrossRef CAS .
R. Viswanatha, H. Amenitsch and D. D. Sarma, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 4470–4475 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Pacholski, A. Kornowski and H. Weller, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2002, 41, 1188–1191 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zheng, Y. Luo, X. Wen, Q. Zhang, Y. Song, J. Zhou, N. Jiang, L. Liu, F. Huang and Z. Xie, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 9616–9623 RSC .
L. Znaidi, Mater. Sci. Eng., B, 2010, 174, 18–30 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Ibrahem, H.-Y. Wei, M.-H. Tsai, K.-C. Ho, J.-J. Shyue and C. W. Chu, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 108, 156–163 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Liang, Q. Zhang, L. Jiang and G. Cao, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3442–3476 RSC .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip and A. K.-Y. Jen, Polym. Rev., 2010, 50, 474–510 CrossRef CAS .
J.-P. Liu, K.-L. Choy and X.-H. Hou, J. Mater. Chem., 2011, 21, 1966–1969 RSC .
F. C. Krebs, S. A. Gevorgyan and J. Alstrup, J. Mater. Chem., 2009, 19, 5442–5451 RSC .
S. K. Hau, Y.-J. Cheng, H.-L. Yip, Y. Zhang, H. Ma and A. K.-Y. Jen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2010, 2, 1892–1902 CrossRef CAS .
S. Chen, C. E. Small, C. M. Amb, J. Subbiah, T.-H. Lai, S.-W. Tsang, J. R. Manders, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Adv. Energy Mater, 2012, 2, 1333–1337 CrossRef CAS .
H.-C. Huang and T.-E. Hsieh, Nanotechnology, 2010, 21, 295707 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Eppakayala, M. R. Mettu, V. R. Pendyala and J. R. Madireddy, Mater. Today: Proc, 2020, 26, 148–153 CAS .
K.-F. Lin, H.-M. Cheng, H.-C. Hsu, L.-J. Lin and W.-F. Hsieh, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 409, 208–211 CrossRef CAS .
S. Lee, S. Jeong, D. Kim, S. Hwang, M. Jeon and J. Moon, Superlattices Microstruct., 2008, 43, 330–339 CrossRef CAS .
A. Narayana, S. A. Bhat, A. Fathima, S. V. Lokesh, S. G. Surya and C. V. Yelamaggad, RSC Adv., 2020, 10, 13532–13542 RSC .
M. Gaceur, S. B. Dkhil, D. Duché, F. Bencheikh, J.-J. Simon, L. Escoubas, M. Mansour, A. Guerrero, G. Garcia-Belmonte, X. Liu, M. Fahlman, W. Dachraoui, A. K. Diallo, C. Videlot-Ackermann, O. Margeat and J. Ackermann, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 243–253 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, G. Ji, C. Zhang, L. Yan, Q. Luo, C. Wang, Q. Chen, J. Yang, L. Chen and C.-Q. Ma, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 5518–5529 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Cao, J. Zheng, J. Zhao, Z. Yang, C. Li, X. Guan, W. Yang, M. Shang and T. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 15605–15614 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Hu, F. Li, K. Yuan and Y. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 5763–5770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Alem, J. Lu, R. Movileanu, T. Kololuoma, A. Dadvand and Y. Tao, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1035–1042 CrossRef CAS .
C. Yan, S. Barlow, Z. Wang, H. Yan, A. K. Y. Jen, S. R. Marder and X. Zhan, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2018, 3, 18003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ren, P. Bi, J. Zhang, J. Liu, J. Wang, Y. Xu, Z. Wei, S. Zhang and J. Hou, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8, nwab031 CrossRef .
X. Fan, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 31, 2009399 CrossRef .
Y. Li, G. Xu, C. Cui and Y. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1701791 CrossRef .
G. Wang, M. A. Adil, J. Zhang and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1805089 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Fukuda, K. Yu and T. Someya, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000765 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, F. Igbari, Z. K. Wang and L. S. Liao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000641 CrossRef CAS .
R. Meitzner, U. S. Schubert and H. Hoppe, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 11, 2002551 CrossRef .
M. Moser, A. Wadsworth, N. Gasparini and I. McCulloch, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11, 2100056 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Bunn, Proc. Phys. Soc., 1935, 47, 835–842 CrossRef CAS .
P. J. P. Espitia, N. D. F. F. Soares, J. S. D. R. Coimbra, N. J. de Andrade, R. S. Cruz and E. A. A. Medeiros, Food Bioprocess Technol, 2012, 5, 1447–1464 CrossRef CAS .
Ü. Özgür, Y. I. Alivov, C. Liu, A. Teke, M. A. Reshchikov, S. Doğan, V. Avrutin, S.-J. Cho and H. Morkoç, J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 98, 041301 CrossRef .
A. Sahai and N. Goswami, Phys. E, 2014, 58, 130–137 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sakohara, M. Ishida and M. A. Anderson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 10169–10175 CrossRef CAS .
A. L. Roest, J. J. Kelly, D. Vanmaekelbergh and E. A. Meulenkamp, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2002, 89, 036801 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Jiang, J. Pi and J. Cai, Bioinorg. Chem. Appl., 2018, 2018, 1062562 Search PubMed .
S. Wilken, J. Parisi and H. Borchert, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2014, 118, 19672–19682 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rhodes, M. Horie, H. Chen, Z. Wang, M. L. Turner and B. R. Saunders, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2010, 344, 261–271 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. M. Shamhari, B. S. Wee, S. F. Chin and K. Y. Kok, Acta Chim. Slov., 2018, 65, 578–585 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Bettini, R. Pagano, L. Valli and G. Giancane, Chem. – Asian J., 2016, 11, 1240–1245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
U. Koch, A. Fojtik, H. Weller and A. Henglein, Chem. Phys. Lett., 1985, 122, 507–510 CrossRef CAS .
M. Haase, H. Weller and A. Henglein, J. Phys. Chem., 2002, 92, 482–487 CrossRef .
D. W. Bahnemann, C. Kormann and M. R. Hoffmann, J. Phys. Chem., 2002, 91, 3789–3798 CrossRef .
E. M. Wong, J. E. Bonevich and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 1998, 102, 7770–7775 CrossRef CAS .
N. S. Pesika, Z. Hu, K. J. Stebe and P. C. Searson, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2002, 106, 6985–6990 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Zak, R. Razali, W. H. Majid and M. Darroudi, Int. J. Nanomedicine, 2011, 6, 1399–1403 Search PubMed .
Z. Hu, G. Oskam and P. C. Searson, J. Colloid Interface Sci., 2003, 263, 454–460 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. K. Santra, S. Mukherjee and D. D. Sarma, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2010, 114, 22113–22118 CrossRef CAS .
I. Jeon, J. W. Ryan, T. Nakazaki, K. S. Yeo, Y. Negishi and Y. Matsuo, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2014, 2, 18754–18760 RSC .
S. Gunalan, R. Sivaraj and V. Rajendran, Prog. Nat. Sci.: Mater. Int., 2012, 22, 693–700 CrossRef .
C. L. Carnes and K. J. Klabunde, J. Mol. Catal. A: Chem., 2003, 194, 227–236 CrossRef CAS .
L. Qian, Y. Zheng, K. R. Choudhury, D. Bera, F. So, J. Xue and P. H. Holloway, Nano Today, 2010, 5, 384–389 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pan, J. Chen, Q. Huang, Q. Khan, X. Liu, Z. Tao, Z. Zhang, W. Lei and A. Nathan, ACS Photonics, 2016, 3, 215–222 CrossRef CAS .
L. Spanhel and M. A. Anderson, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1991, 113, 2826–2833 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Tokumoto, S. H. Pulcinelli, C. V. Santilli and A. F. Craievich, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 1999, 247, 176–182 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Tokumoto, V. Briois, C. V. Santilli and S. H. Pulcinelli, J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol., 2003, 26, 547–551 CrossRef CAS .
A. Anžlovar, K. Kogej, Z. C. Orel and M. Žigon, Cryst. Growth Des., 2014, 14, 4262–4269 CrossRef .
A. P. Hynes, R. H. Doremus and R. W. Siegel, J. Am. Ceram. Soc., 2002, 85, 1979–1987 CrossRef CAS .
C. Janzen, H. Kleinwechter, J. Knipping, H. Wiggers and P. Roth, J. Aerosol Sci., 2002, 33, 833–841 CrossRef CAS .

          S. Zhang, L. Chi and X. Li, Asianano,  2002, World Scientific, pp. 189–193 Search PubMed .
Y. Ni, X. Cao, G. Wu, G. Hu, Z. Yang and X. Wei, Nanotechnology, 2007, 18, 155603 CrossRef .
Z.-Q. Wang, R.-P. Ge, J.-F. Gong, S.-L. Gu and S.-G. Yang, Mater. Lett., 2012, 82, 29–32 CrossRef CAS .
T. M. Eggenhuisen, Y. Galagan, E. W. C. Coenen, W. P. Voorthuijzen, M. W. L. Slaats, S. A. Kommeren, S. Shanmuganam, M. J. J. Coenen, R. Andriessen and W. A. Groen, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2015, 134, 364–372 CrossRef CAS .
C. Kapnopoulos, E. D. Mekeridis, L. Tzounis, C. Polyzoidis, A. Zachariadis, S. Tsimikli, C. Gravalidis, A. Laskarakis, N. Vouroutzis and S. Logothetidis, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2016, 144, 724–731 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhang, Q. Luo, H. Wu, H. Li, J. Lai, G. Ji, L. Yan, X. Wang, D. Zhang, J. Lin, L. Chen, J. Yang and C. Ma, Org. Electron., 2017, 45, 190–197 CrossRef CAS .

          Q. Chen, L. Schadler, R. Siegel and G. Irvin, ZnO/PMMA thin film nanocomposites for optical coatings, SPIE,  2003 Search PubMed .
M. Krzywiecki, L. Grządziel, A. Sarfraz, D. Iqbal, A. Szwajca and A. Erbe, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 10004–10013 RSC .
M. Hartel, S. Chen, B. Swerdlow, H.-Y. Hsu, J. Manders, K. Schanze and F. So, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 7215–7218 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stubhan, M. Salinas, A. Ebel, F. C. Krebs, A. Hirsch, M. Halik and C. J. Brabec, Adv. Energy Mater., 2012, 2, 532–535 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Sun, M. J. Chang, L. X. Meng, X. J. Wan, H. H. Gao, Y. M. Zhang, K. Zhao, Z. H. Sun, C. X. Li, S. R. Liu, H. K. Wang, J. J. Liang and Y. S. Chen, Nat. Electron., 2019, 2, 513–520 CrossRef CAS .
C. E. Small, S. Chen, J. Subbiah, C. M. Amb, S.-W. Tsang, T.-H. Lai, J. R. Reynolds and F. So, Nat. Photonics, 2012, 6, 115–120 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, J. Wu, S. Shao, Y. Deng, B. Meng, Z. Xie, Y. Geng, L. Wang and F. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 8237–8245 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. C. Krebs, Y. Thomann, R. Thomann and J. W. Andreasen, Nanotechnology, 2008, 19, 424013 CrossRef PubMed .
S. K. Gupta, A. Sharma, S. Banerjee, R. Gahlot, N. Aggarwal, Deepak and A. Garg, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2013, 116, 135–143 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ma, Z. Tang, E. Wang, M. R. Andersson, O. Inganäs and F. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2012, 116, 24462–24468 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Cho, S.-W. Kwak, H. Aqoma, J. W. Kim, W. S. Shin, S.-J. Moon, S.-Y. Jang and J. Jo, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 1942–1950 CrossRef CAS .
M. L. Kahn, M. Monge, V. Collière, F. Senocq, A. Maisonnat and B. Chaudret, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15, 458–468 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Diallo, M. Gaceur, S. Ben Dkhil, Y. Didane, O. Margeat, J. Ackermann and C. Videlot-Ackermann, Colloids Surf., A, 2016, 500, 214–221 CrossRef CAS .
X. Chen, G. Xu, G. Zeng, H. Gu, H. Chen, H. Xu, H. Yao, Y. Li, J. Hou and Y. Li, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 1908478 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Wolf, T. Stubhan, J. Manara, V. Dyakonov and C. J. Brabec, Thin Solid Films, 2014, 564, 213–217 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, Z. Yin, S.-C. Chen and Q. Zheng, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 6186–6193 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Duan, F. Huang and Y. Cao, Polym. Chem., 2015, 6, 8081–8098 RSC .
W. Tang and D. C. Cameron, Thin Solid Films, 1994, 238, 83–87 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jiang, F. L. Wong, M. K. Fung and S. T. Lee, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2003, 83, 1875–1877 CrossRef CAS .
T. Stubhan, I. Litzov, N. Li, M. Salinas, M. Steidl, G. Sauer, K. Forberich, G. J. Matt, M. Halik and C. J. Brabec, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2013, 1, 6004–6009 RSC .
I. Litzov, H. Azimi, G. Matt, P. Kubis, T. Stubhan, G. Popov and C. J. Brabec, Org. Electron., 2014, 15, 569–576 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, X. Li, Y. Li, C. Song, L. Zhu, W. Zhang, H.-Q. Wang and J. Fang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 7405–7412 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. C. Park, S. M. Hwang, J. H. Lim and J. Joo, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 1840–1847 RSC .
L. Guo, S. Yang, C. Yang, P. Yu, J. Wang, W. Ge and G. K. L. Wong, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2000, 76, 2901–2903 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wu, T. Song, Z. Xia, H. Wei and B. Sun, Nanotechnology, 2013, 24, 484012 CrossRef PubMed .
H.-Q. Shi, W.-N. Li, L.-W. Sun, Y. Liu, H.-M. Xiao and S.-Y. Fu, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11921–11923 RSC .
Y. Ito, A. A. Virkar, S. Mannsfeld, J. H. Oh, M. Toney, J. Locklin and Z. Bao, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 9396–9404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. B. Jo, J. H. Lee, M. Sim, M. Kim, J. H. Park, Y. S. Choi, Y. Kim, S.-G. Ihn and K. Cho, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 690–698 CrossRef CAS .
S. Shao, K. Zheng, T. Pullerits and F. Zhang, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2013, 5, 380–385 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Zhou, C. Fuentes-Hernandez, J. Shim, J. Meyer, A. J. Giordano, H. Li, P. Winget, T. Papadopoulos, H. Cheun, J. Kim, M. Fenoll, A. Dindar, W. Haske, E. Najafabadi, T. M. Khan, H. Sojoudi, S. Barlow, S. Graham, J. L. Bredas, S. R. Marder, A. Kahn and B. Kippelen, Science, 2012, 336, 327–332 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Qin, W. Wang, L. Sun, X. Jiang, L. Hu, S. Xiong, T. Liu, X. Dong, J. Li, Y. Jiang, J. Hou, K. Fukuda, T. Someya and Y. Zhou, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11, 4508 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Jia, N. Wu, J. Wei, L. Zhang, Q. Luo, Z. Bao, Y.-Q. Li, Y. Yang, X. Liu and C.-Q. Ma, Org. Electron., 2016, 38, 150–157 CrossRef CAS .
C. Liu, Z. Li, X. Zhang, W. Guo, L. Zhang and S. Ruan, ACS Photonics, 2017, 4, 2952–2958 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wei, C. Zhang, G. Ji, Y. Han, I. Ismail, H. Li, Q. Luo, J. Yang and C.-Q. Ma, Sol. Energy, 2019, 193, 102–110 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Wang, M. Liu, Z. H. Chen and Y. Liu, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2021, 9, 11851–11858 RSC .
M. R. Lilliedal, A. J. Medford, M. V. Madsen, K. Norrman and F. C. Krebs, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2010, 94, 2018–2031 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Lin, J. Chang, C. Jiang, J. Zhang, J. Wu and C. Zhu, RSC Adv., 2014, 4, 6646–6651 RSC .
Z. Zheng, S. Q. Zhang, J. Q. Wang, J. Q. Zhang, D. Y. Zhang, Y. Zhang, Z. X. Wei, Z. Y. Tang, J. H. Hou and H. Q. Zhou, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 3570–3576 RSC .
Z. Kam, X. Wang, J. Zhang and J. Wu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2015, 7, 1608–1615 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. K. Hau, H.-L. Yip, H. Ma and A. K.-Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 93, 233304 CrossRef .
P. Li, X. Li, C. Sun, G. Wang, J. Li, T. Jiu and J. Fang, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2014, 126, 36–41 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Han, H. Dong, W. Pan, B. Liu, X. Chen, R. Huang, Z. Li, F. Li, Q. Luo, J. Zhang, Z. Wei and C.-Q. Ma, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2021, 13, 17869–17881 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Fan, D. Y. Zhang, Y. Wu, J. S. Yu and T. P. Russell, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002932 CrossRef CAS .
G. J. Wang, T. G. Jiu, G. Tang, J. Li, P. D. Li, X. J. Song, F. S. Lu and J. F. Fang, ACS Sustainable Chem. Eng., 2014, 2, 1331–1337 CrossRef CAS .
J. Dagar, G. Scavia, M. Scarselli, S. Destri, M. De Crescenzi and T. M. Brown, Nanoscale, 2017, 9, 19031–19038 RSC .
M. Li, W. Zha, Y. Han, B. Liu, Q. Luo and C.-Q. Ma, Org. Electron., 2021, 96, 106257 CrossRef CAS .
S. Woo, W. Hyun Kim, H. Kim, Y. Yi, H.-K. Lyu and Y. Kim, Adv. Energy Mater., 2014, 4, 1301692 CrossRef .
L.-Y. Su, H.-H. Huang, Y.-C. Lin, G.-L. Chen, W.-C. Chen, W. Chen, L. Wang and C.-C. Chueh, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2005753 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Y. Jiang, L. L. Sun, F. Y. Jiang, C. Xie, L. Hu, X. Y. Dong, F. Qin, T. F. Liu, L. Hu, X. S. Jiang and Y. H. Zhou, Mater. Horiz., 2019, 6, 1438–1443 RSC .
B. W. Liu, Y. F. Han, Z. R. Li, H. M. Gu, L. P. Yan, Y. Lin, Q. Luo, S. F. Yang and C. Q. Ma, Sol. RRL, 2021, 5, 2000638 CrossRef CAS .
A. Manor, E. A. Katz, T. Tromholt and F. C. Krebs, Adv. Energy Mater., 2011, 1, 836–843 CrossRef CAS .
S. Trost, T. Becker, A. Polywka, P. Görrn, M. F. Oszajca, N. A. Luechinger, D. Rogalla, M. Weidner, P. Reckers, T. Mayer and T. Riedl, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600347 CrossRef .
S. Trost, K. Zilberberg, A. Behrendt, A. Polywka, P. Gorrn, P. Reckers, J. Maibach, T. Mayer and T. Riedl, Adv. Energy Mater., 2013, 3, 1437–1444 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wan, Y. Xia, J. Fang, Z. Zhang, B. Xu, J. Wang, L. Ai, W. Song, K. N. Hui, X. Fan and Y. Li, Nano-Micro Lett., 2021, 13, 44 CrossRef PubMed .
X. Y. Zhu, L. Hu, W. Wang, X. S. Jiang, L. Hu and Y. H. Zhou, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2019, 2, 7602–7608 CrossRef CAS .
S. Xiong, L. Hu, L. Hu, L. Sun, F. Qin, X. Liu, M. Fahlman and Y. Zhou, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1806616 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Liu, W. Wang, Y. Zhou and Z. A. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 1080–1088 RSC .
G. Ji, W. Zhao, J. Wei, L. Yan, Y. Han, Q. Luo, S. Yang, J. Hou and C.-Q. Ma, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 212–220 RSC .
Z. Wang, Y. Han, L. Yan, C. Gong, J. Kang, H. Zhang, X. Sun, L. Zhang, J. Lin, Q. Luo and C.-Q. Ma, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31, 2007276 CrossRef CAS .
L. Hu, S. Xiong, W. Wang, L. Sun, F. Qin and Y. Zhou, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2020, 124, 2307–2312 CrossRef CAS .
H. R. Liu, Z.-X. Liu, S. X. Wang, J. Huang, H. X. Ju, Q. Chen, J. S. Yu, H. Z. Chen and C.-Z. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1900887 CrossRef .
S. K. Hau, H. L. Yip, N. S. Baek, J. Y. Zou, K. O'Malley and A. K. Y. Jen, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2008, 92, 253301 CrossRef .
G. Wang, J. Zhang, C. Yang, Y. Wang, Y. Xing, M. A. Adil, Y. Yang, L. Tian, M. Su, W. Shang, K. Lu, Z. Shuai and Z. Wei, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2005153 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Lucera, F. Machui, P. Kubis, H. D. Schmidt, J. Adams, S. Strohm, T. Ahmad, K. Forberich, H.-J. Egelhaaf and C. J. Brabec, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 89–94 RSC .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:

Chunhui Liu
	Chunhui Liu received her BS degree from Nanjing University of Information Science and Technology in 2019. She is currently a Master student at Beijing University of Chemical Technology (BUCT). Her research focuses on high-efficient and flexible OSCs.

Chengyi Xiao
	Chengyi Xiao received his BS degree from the Department of Applied Chemistry at Xiangtan University (XTU) in 2011. He then received his PhD degree from ICCAS in 2017. In the period from 2016 to 2019, he collaborated with Prof. Lei Zhang as a postdoctoral fellow at BUCT. He is currently a lecturer at BUCT. His research focuses on OFETs and flexible OSCs.

Weiwei Li
	Weiwei Li received his PhD from ICCAS in 2010. He then worked as a postdoctoral researcher at the University of Alberta, Canada, and the Eindhoven University of Technology, the Netherlands from 2010 to 2014. He has been a full professor at ICCAS since 2014 and joined BUCT in 2019. His research interest is focused on flexible OSCs, from materials to devices.

 	Fig. 1  The skeleton of (a) the chemical synthesis of ZnO NPs, and (b) the processing of ZnO NPs in flexible OSCs.	 

 	Fig. 2  Ball and stick representation of ZnO crystal forms: (a) cubic rocksalt; (b) cubic zinc blende; (c) hexagonal wurtzite. The shaded gray and black spheres denote Zn and O atoms, respectively. Reproduced with permission.59 Copyright (2005) American Institute of Physics.	 

 	Fig. 3  The synthetic procedure of ZnO NPs through the solvent-based method. Reproduced with permission.66 Copyright (2018) Nuraqeelah Mohammad Shamhari, Boon Siong Wee, Suk Fun Chin, Kuan Ying Kok. This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) The formation of the zinc oxide nanoparticles from the zinc oxide seed, and the role of triethanolamine as a polymerization agent. (b) The passivation effect of the cations and dissociation of the base in the reaction medium in ZnO NPs synthesis. Reproduced with permission.27,73 Copyright (2011) Khorsand Zak et al., publisher and licensee Dove Medical Press Ltd. Copyright (2010) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 5  TEM and HRTEM images of the three sizes of ZnO NPs. The corresponding [Zn2+]/[OH−] ratios are (a and b) 1:0.5, (c and d) 1:1, and (e and f) 1:1.5. Inset shows the statistical distribution images of particle size. Reproduced with permission.80 Copyright (2016) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  Different schemes of the particle growth in the polyols method depending on the method of addition of water: (a) precursor heating method and (b) water injection method. Reproduced with permission.41 Copyright (2008) Elsevier Ltd.	 

 	Fig. 7  The polymerization reaction or aggregation of the ZnO NPs through loss of the ligand on the surface. Reproduced with permission.100 Copyright (2008) IOP Publishing.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Illuminated and (b) dark J–V characteristics of PTB7-Th:PC71BM OSCs based on AZO NPs and ZnO films with different thicknesses. (c) Statistics of the performance parameters of PCE, VOC (open-circuit voltage), JSC (short-circuit current), and FF (fill factor) by a standard boxplot. Reproduced with permission.114 Copyright (2016) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 

 	Fig. 9  (a) Schematic diagram of AgNWs/AZO NPs hybrid electrode fabrication. The AgNWs/AZO hybrid electrode working mechanisms are schematically illustrated in terms of (b) the electrical bridge effect and (c) the capillary force effect. Enlarged SEM images of (d) the AgNWs, (e) the AgNWs covered with the first AZO layer, (f) the AgNWs covered with two AZO layers. Reproduced with permission.106 Copyright (2020) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim.	 


ITO/AZO NCs/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Aga	0.57	7.37	60	2.52	
112

ITO/AZO/SAMs/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag	0.583	9.92	57.4	3.32	
96

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/PTB7:PC71BM/AZO NCs/Alb	0.74	17.1	60	7.59	
43

ITO/AZO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Alc	0.804	17.91	72.3	10.42	
114

ITO/AZO/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	0.802	15.80	69.9	8.85	

Em-Ag/AgNWs:AZO-SG/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Ald	0.832	25.05	72.97	15.21	
106


 	Fig. 10  ZnO NP dispersion when freshly prepared (a) after 5 min (b) and after 30 min (c) of air exposure. Reproduced with permission.47 Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 11  (a) Schematic illustration of the device structure with a flow chart of the steps involved in the preparation of the pZA network. (b) Storage stability of the PTB7-Th:PC71BM solar cells using ZnO or ZnO@APTMS NPs. The inset is the schematic diagram of the ZnO and ZnO@APTMS NPs. Reproduced with permission.44,117 Copyright (2013) IOP Publishing Ltd. and Copyright (2018) American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Chemical structures of the polymers PVP and PEG. (b) The AFM images and the schematic images for the as-prepared (left) and 10 min UV-ozone treated (right) ZnO-PVP nanocomposite films. (c) Schematic illustration of the inverted OSCs with the ZnO/PEG hybrid film as the ETLs. Reproduced with permission.46,98 Copyright (2012) Macmillan Publishers Limited; and copyright (2013) American Chemical Society.	 


ITO/ZnO NPs:PA/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag	0.86	9.4	52	4.2	
47

ITO/ZnO NPs:pZA/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Aga	0.73	14.03	72	7.37	
117

ITO/ZnO NPs@APTMS/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	0.80	16.67	68	9.07	
44

ITO/ZnO NPs:PVP/PDTG-TPD:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag	0.86b	14.0b	67.3b	8.5c	
98

ITO/PEDOT:PSS/P3HT:PC61BM/ZnO NPs:PEG/LiF/Al	0.60	10.67	68.7	4.4	
120

ITO/ZnO NPs:PEO/PCDTBT:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag	0.89d	11.4	65	6.59	
121

ITO/ZnO NPs:PEG/P3HT:PC61BM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag	0.581	10.19	55.9	3.3	
46

ITO/ZnO NPs:PEI/PTB7-Th:PC61BM/MoO3/Ale	0.81	16.00	63	8.16	
124

ITO/ZnO NPs:PEI/PTB7-Th:PC61BM/MoO3/Alf	0.74	15.43	60	6.85g	
126

0.76	15.10	52	5.98h	

ITO/ZnO NPs:Adenine polymer/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Ag	0.85b	25.56b	73.85b	16.22	
127


 	Fig. 13  Schematic illustrations of device structures and chemical structures of C60-SAMs in the modification of ZnO NPs films. (a) Carboxylic acid-anchored C60-SAMs; (b) phosphonic acid-anchored C60-SAMs; (c) pyrrolidine tris-acid ethyl ester-anchored C60-SAMs. Reproduced with permission.96,132,133 Copyright (2008) American Institute of Physics; Copyright (2012) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, Weinheim; and Copyright (2014) Elsevier B.V.	 

 	Fig. 14  (a) Schematic illustration of the inverted device architecture, the chemical structure, and energy level of CsSt, PTB7, and PC71BM. (b) Chemical structure of PS (left), device architecture of inverted OSCs (middle), and SEM cross-section image of the active layer on ZnO NPs film (right). (c) Inverted OSCs with the PEI-coated ZnO NPs layer. Top left: illustration of the device structure; top right: SEM image of the cross-section of the device; bottom: chemical structures of PEI. Reproduced with permission.135,136,139 Copyright (2014) American Chemical Society, and Copyright (2020 & 2014) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Chemical structure and (b) the schematic reaction route of the studied DBC. Schematic illustration of (c) the conical shape of DBC by using the CPP method, and (d) the self-assembled micelle of DBC and chelating of AuNPs with the hydrophilic moieties of DBC. Reproduced with permission.140 Copyright (2020) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA.	 

ITO/ZnO NPs/C60-SAM/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag	0.63	12.6	62.3	4.94	
132

ITO/AZO/SAMs/P3HT:PCBM/PEDOT:PSS/Ag	0.583	9.92	57.4	3.32	
96

ITO/ZnO NPs/PyC60/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	0.753	16.04	72.5	8.76	
133

ITO/ZnO NPs/2-phenylethylmercaptan/PM6:Y6/MoO3/Al	0.85	26.89	72.0	16.46	
134

ITO/ZnO NPs/PS/PTB7-Th:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag	0.81	17.71	66.93	9.54	
135

ITO/ZnO NPs/PS/PBDB-T:ITIC/MoO3/Ag	0.90	17.86	68.87	11.05	

ITO/ZnO NPs/CsSt/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Al	0.736	17.07	69.1	8.69	
136

ITO/ZnO NPs/PEI/PTB7:PC71BM/MoO3/Ag	0.73	17.19	69.6	8.76	
139

ITO/ZnO NPs/PFEN-Br/PBDB-TF:IT-4F/MoO3/Al	0.87	20.16	78.79	13.82	
130


 	Fig. 16  (a) Schematic illustration of (b) the interface recombination in the “light-soaking” effect and oxygen desorption on the electronic doping of ZnO NPs in the “photoinduced shunts” effect. (c) Images of IT-4F thin films on glass, glass/ZnO, and glass/SnO2 substrates under continuous UV illumination for different times. (d) The UV-vis absorption spectra of SnO2/IT-4F films upon AM1.5 illumination in N2. (e) MS spectra of pristine non-fullerene acceptor IT-4F (top), pristine acceptor moiety EG-2F (middle), and photo-degraded IT-4F (bottom), respectively. Reproduced with permission.37,141,143 Copyright (2011 & 2012) Wiley-VCH Verlag GmbH & Co. KGaA, and copyright (2019) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Optical images of an R2R multi-function printer, with a length of 2.5 m and a height of 1.6 m, developed by the authors. (b) Schematic of the micro-gravure printing process. (c) The slot-die coating process and (d) dried film of the photoactive layer on a ZnO-coated, pre-patterned substrate. Reproduced with permission.92,156 Copyright (2017) Elsevier B.V., and Copyright (2016) Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 		 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
