 Operando X-ray absorption investigations into the role of Fe in the electrochemical stability and oxygen evolution activity of Ni 1−x Fe x O y nanopa ...  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C8TA09336A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C8TA09336A
(Paper)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6, 24534-24549
Operando X-ray absorption investigations into the role of Fe in the electrochemical stability and oxygen evolution activity of Ni1−xFexOy nanoparticles†

        
          
            Daniel F. 
            Abbott
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Emiliana 
            Fabbri
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Mario 
            Borlaf
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Francesco 
            Bozza
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Robin 
            Schäublin
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Maarten 
            Nachtegaal
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Thomas 
            Graule
          
        
      b and 

        
          
            Thomas J. 
            Schmidt
          
        
      *ae
aElectrochemistry Laboratory, Paul Scherrer Institut, CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland
bLaboratory for High Performance Ceramics, Empa, Swiss Federal Laboratories for Materials Testing and Research, 8600 Dübendorf, Switzerland
cScientific Center for Optical and Electron Microscopy, Department of Chemistry and Applied Biosciences, ETH Zürich, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland
dPaul Scherrer Institut, CH-5232 Villigen PSI, Switzerland
eLaboratory of Physical Chemistry, ETH Zürich, CH-8093 Zürich, Switzerland. E-mail: daniel.abbott@psi.ch
Received 
      26th September 2018
    , Accepted 14th November 2018First published on 16th November 2018AbstractMixed Ni–Fe metal oxides currently represent some of the most attractive anode catalysts for the electrochemical splitting of water in alkaline electrolyte due to their low overpotentials for the oxygen evolution reaction (OER). Here we employ a practical and scalable liquid-feed flame-spray synthesis capable of producing highly crystalline Ni–Fe oxide (Ni1−xFexOy) nanoparticles with high specific surface areas (SABET ≈ 20–75 m2 g−1). The work presented herein focuses on expanding the current understanding of how Fe incorporation influences the surface electronic and local coordination structures of Ni1−xFexOy and how this impacts the electrochemical stability and OER activity. The resulting operando XANES and EXAFS analyses at the Ni and Fe K-edges permit useful insight into the nature of the valence states and the rearrangements in local structure that occur under operating conditions representative of alkaline water electrolysis. Specifically, we show that the incorporation of Fe greatly stabilizes the Ni electronic and local coordination environment under OER conditions. Combined with electrochemical measurements, we find that the incorporation of Fe leads to an overall stabilization of the initially compact and crystalline rock salt structure of Ni1−xFexOy and thereby inhibits the transformation to more layered and disordered polymorphs (e.g. β/γ-Ni1−xFexOOH).
Introduction
Widespread investment in clean and renewable energy sources has accelerated drastically in the past decade. In 2017 alone there were roughly 178 GWs of additional new global net capacity coming from renewables, which marks the largest annual increase ever.1 Moreover, it is predicted that the global renewable energy capacity will continue to increase by nearly 43% (or by roughly 920 GW) by 2022.2 The driving force behind this shift in paradigm is a direct result of the increasing global energy demand combined with our urgent need to curb the already unacceptable levels of atmospheric CO2 produced from the combustion of fossil fuels. China currently leads the world in terms of wind and solar photovoltaic (PV) power capacity, generating nearly 118 TW h from solar PV alone in 2017 and an additional 42 TW h from wind.1 Similarly, Germany is also a current world leader in terms of wind and solar PV capacity and is capable of producing nearly 26% of its energy from these sources combined.1 The implementation of largely intermittent renewable energy sources (e.g. wind and solar PV), however, brings with it the challenge of storing energy on a large scale in order to lend flexibility and stability to the energy grid during peak and off-peak hours of generation.
Water electrolysis, which operates on the basis of converting electrical energy into chemical energy via the production of hydrogen (H2O → H2 + 1/2O2), represents one promising avenue towards large scale energy storage to meet the rising demands.3–6 Alkaline water electrolysis (AWE) in particular is a mature technology that has already been commercially available for over a century. In recent years AWE has regained considerable attention due to the relatively low cost of stack components and the complete avoidance of noble metal catalysts as compared to proton-exchange membrane water electrolyzer (PEMWE) systems. Although the use of a high pH environment permits a large amount of flexibility in the choice of catalyst materials as compared to acid-based systems, the efficiency of AWEs is still plagued by the slow kinetics of the oxygen evolution reaction (OER; 2OH− → H2O + 1/2O2 + 2e−) occurring at the anode. Therefore, the development of highly active, stable, and cost-effective anode materials still remains a considerable challenge for the advancement of AWE systems.
Ni-based oxides, specifically those containing Fe, are arguably the most promising catalyst materials for the OER in alkaline media due to their heightened activity and stability as compared to other oxide materials. The high activity of NiO for the oxygen evolution reaction in alkaline media has already been recognized for several decades,7–16 but more recently the effect of Fe impurities and the distinct role of Fe in OER catalysis have been the subjects of many intensive investigations. It was originally identified by Corrigan16 that Fe impurities in NiO introduced either through coprecipitation or through impurities in the electrolyte can have a profound effect on the OER activity. More recently, Trotochaud et al.17 investigated the role of intentional and incidental Fe incorporation in Ni–Fe oxides in greater detail and revealed that pure nickel (oxy)hydroxide actually requires a considerable overpotential (>500 mV) to achieve modest current densities in Fe-free electrolyte. It is now generally accepted that the incorporation of Fe into the NiO structure is a critical component to achieving high OER activity and that even trace impurities of Fe in the electrolyte solution have profound effects on the measured electrochemical activity of “pure” NiO. In light of this revelation, many existing and ongoing research efforts have aimed at elucidating the specific role of Fe in OER electrocatalysis on Ni–Fe oxides.17–21 To date, there still remains a large dissent regarding the nature of the active site and the origin of the high catalytic activity observed in Ni–Fe oxides. Even less explored, however, is how the incorporation of Fe directly affects the electrochemical stability and structural integrity of Ni–Fe oxides under OER conditions.
In the present study we aim to expand upon the fundamental understanding of how Fe influences the OER behavior of Ni–Fe oxides with a particular emphasis on the electrochemical stability under OER conditions. By utilizing a combination of ex situ physical characterization techniques, electrochemical methods, and operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy, we can effectively relate the changes induced in the local electronic and structural environments for a series of Ni1−xFexOy nanomaterials under OER conditions to the measured electrochemical OER activity and catalyst stability. We recognize that there have been recent structural investigations into Ni–Fe oxides utilizing in situ spectroscopic methods,18,21–24 however, the majority of these studies have been performed on hydrous, electrochemically deposited thin films. Here we demonstrate a practical and scalable flame-spray synthesis capable of producing highly crystalline Ni–Fe oxide (Ni1−xFexOy) nanoparticles with high specific surface areas, which are also highly relevant from an industrial standpoint. While electrochemical measurements clearly show that Fe enhances the OER activity and simultaneously hinders the oxidation of Ni2+ to Ni3+, the resulting operando XANES and EXAFS analyses reveal that the presence of Fe greatly stabilizes the oxidation state and local coordination environment of Ni under OER potentials. Ultimately, we find that Fe promotes the stabilization of the initially compact and crystalline rock salt structure of Ni1−xFexOy and thereby inhibits the transformation to more layered and disordered structures (e.g. β/γ-Ni1−xFexOOH).
Experimental
Materials preparation
A liquid-feed flame spray synthesis was used to synthesize the Ni1−xFexOy catalysts. Details of the flame spray synthesis setup can be found in ref. 25. In brief, a precursor solution was prepared by dissolving stoichiometric amounts of nickel(II) nitrate (≥99.9%, Sigma Aldrich) and iron(III) nitrate (≥99.9%, Sigma Aldrich) in a solution comprised of deionized water, 20% v/v acetic acid (≥99.8%, Roth), and 50% v/v N,N-dimethylformamide (DMF, ≥99.8%, Roth). A total metal concentration of 0.6 M was maintained in each precursor solution. The flow rate of the dispersing oxygen was fixed at 35 mL min−1 and the flow rates of the acetylene and oxygen combustion gases were fixed at 13 mL min−1 and 17 mL min−1, respectively. The solution was pumped with a constant flow rate of 20 mL min−1.
Physical characterization
X-ray diffraction measurements were performed in reflection mode using a PANalytical Empyrean diffractometer operating with CuKα radiation (λ = 0.15418 nm). The specific surface area for each sample was determined by Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analysis of the respective N2 adsorption/desorption isotherms (AUROSORB-1, Quantachrome). Transmission electron micrographs (TEM) and high-resolution transmission electron micrographs (HR-TEM) were imaged using a TECNAI F30 microscope operating at 300 kV, while high angle annular dark field (HAADF) imaging and energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX) mapping were performed on a TALOS FEI microscope operating at 200 kV.
X-ray absorption spectroscopy
X-ray absorption spectroscopy (XAS) measurements were performed at the Ni and Fe K-edges at the SuperXAS beamline at the Swiss Light Source (SLS) (PSI, Villigen, Switzerland). The SLS is a third generation synchrotron, which operates under top up mode at 2.4 GeV electron energy and a current of 400 mA. The incident beam was collimated by a Si-coated mirror at 2.5 mrad (which also served to reduce higher harmonics) and monochromatized using channel-cut Si(111) monochromator. The beam intensity was ca. 6 × 1011 ph s−1 and focused with a Rh coated toroidal mirror (at 2.5 mrad) down to 100 × 100 μm at the sample position. The monochromator energy position was calibrated with either a Ni reference foil to the Ni K-edge position at 8333.0 eV or with a Fe reference foil to the Fe K-edge position at 7112.0 eV. 15 cm long ion chambers filled with 1 bar of N2 were used for XAS detection in transmission mode, where Ni and/or Fe reference foils were placed between the second and third ionization chambers to be measured congruently with the sample.
The SuperXAS beamline26 allows for the rapid acquisition of spectra which we used to obtain one XAS spectrum per 500 ms, therefore generating one spectrum consisting of 120 averaged spectra per minute. The extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra were analyzed using the Demeter software suite,27,28 which included the energy calibration (based on the measured Ni and Fe foils), alignment of the reference foil spectra, background subtraction, and normalization. The resulting normalized XAS spectra were converted to the photoelectron wave vector k (in units of Å−1) by assigning the photoelectron energy origin, E0, corresponding to k = 0, to the first inflection point of the absorption edge. The resulting χ(k) functions were k2 weighted to compensate for the dampening of the XAFS amplitude with increasing k. The χ(k) functions were Fourier transformed over 2.6–14.0 Å−1 for the Ni spectra and over 3.0–11.5 Å−1 for the Fe spectra. The EXAFS fitting was performed using a theoretical model generated from the face-centered cubic NiO using the FEFF6.2 library. Details of the EXAFS spectra fitting approach can be found in the ESI.†
Electrochemical measurements
The electrochemical oxygen evolution activities of the prepared materials were evaluated in a homemade polypropylethylene (PPE) single-compartment 3-electrode cell using a rotating disk electrode (RDE) setup (Pine Instruments, USA) and a BioLogic (model) potentiostat. All cell components were vigorously cleaned in a solution of 98% H2SO4 and 30% H2O2 then boiled in Milli-Q water several times before use. Catalyst ink suspensions were prepared using 10 mg of Ni1−xFexOy catalyst, 1.0 mL Milli-Q H2O, 4.0 mL isopropyl alcohol, and 20 μL of 5 wt% Nafion (Nafion 117, Alfa Aesar) solution. The ink suspensions were sonicated for 30 minutes before depositing 10.0 μL on a polished glassy carbon disk electrode (0.196 cm2) to give a total catalyst loading of 100 μgcat cm−2 on the thin-film RDEs.29 A piece of platinum mesh served as the counter electrode and a reversible hydrogen electrode (RHE) served as the reference electrode. All potentials reported herein refer to the RHE scale and have been corrected for the ohmic drop in solution. The 0.1 M KOH electrolyte was prepared from pellets (99.99%, semiconductor grade, Sigma Aldrich) and was saturated with synthetic air during all measurements. Cyclic voltammograms (CVs) were recorded in the potential range of 1.0 to 1.7 V at 10 mV s−1 for 25 consecutive cycles. Polarization curves are derived from the steady-state chronoamperometric measurements. The potential was gradually stepped from 1.0 V to 1.7 V while holding for 1 minute at each potential. Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy measurements were recorded in the range of 1 MHz to 1 Hz with an amplitude of 10 mV. Stability measurements were conducted by stepping the potential between 1.0 and 1.7 V for 500 cycles while holding for 10 seconds at each potential step. The normalized current values are based on the current reading at 1.7 V after every 25 cycles. All reported measurements were repeated 3 times to ensure reproducibility.
Operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy
Working electrodes were prepared by spraying the desired catalyst ink suspension onto an area of exposed carbon (5 mm diam.) on a gold-sputtered, carbon-coated Kapton foil to yield a catalyst loading of 0.5–1.0 mg approximately 50–75 μm in thickness. Ink suspensions were prepared by sonicating an appropriate amount of the prepared Ni1−xFexOy sample in a solution of Milli-Q H2O, isopropyl alcohol, and 5 wt% Na+-exchanged Nafion ionomer solution. Counter electrodes were prepared in the same manner, except the ink suspensions contained an appropriate amount of Vulcan XC-72R carbon instead of the nickel–iron catalyst. The electrodes were fixed in a home-made PEEK flow-cell30 and electrical contact was made to counter and working electrode through two sets of gold-plated contact pins. A leak-free Ag/AgCl electrode served as the reference electrode and was inserted into the cell upstream of the counter and working electrodes.
Electrochemical measurements were conducted using a BioLogic potentiostat. Before flowing the electrolyte through the cell, a XAS spectrum of the dry catalyst sample was measured. Afterwards the 0.1 M KOH electrolyte was continuously pumped through the cell at a flow rate of 0.2 mL min−1. The first experimental protocol employed was designed to investigate the XAS spectral response during a standard OER polarization measurement. Electrodes were held at open-circuit potential (OCP) for 2 minutes and then the electrode potential was stepped anodically from 1.00 V to 1.65 V at 20–100 mV intervals while holding for 2 minutes at each potential. An X-ray absorption spectrum was recorded during the last 1 minute of each potential step. The electrode was then stepped down cathodically and an XAS spectrum was measured again in the same manner. The second experimental protocol was designed to investigate the XAS response upon repeated OER polarization (i.e. potential-step cycling). In this case, the electrodes were held at OCP for 2 minutes to allow for equilibration and then a XAS spectrum recorded for 1 minute. Subsequently, the electrode was subjected to 50 potential-step cycles in which each cycle consisted of a 10 second hold at 1.20 V followed by a 10 second hold at 1.70 V. The electrode was allowed to rest in the absence of any potential control (i.e. at OCP) for 2 minutes after every 50 cycles before measuring a XAS spectrum for 1 minute again. This process was repeated until each electrode had undergone a total of 250 potential-step cycles.
Results and discussion
Physical characterization
Liquid-feed flame spray synthesis (LF-FSS) is a technique that has proven to be highly effective for producing high surface area metal oxide nanopowders from volatile precursor solutions.31–33 The simple nature of the synthesis generally allows for the production of large quantities of powder (grams to kilograms per hour) with high phase purity and a uniform size distribution in a single step, thus eliminating the need for additional processing (e.g. filtering, washing, drying, etc.). Furthermore, the high temperature of the flame (ca. 1500–2500 °C) and rapid quenching of the combustion products leads to the formation of highly crystalline oxide nano-materials.33 Here we apply the LF-FSS method to the production of Ni1−xFexOy nanopowders. The optimum Fe content for providing the highest enhancement in OER activity has been reported to be as low as 10 at% Fe10,34,35 or as high as 40–55 at% Fe.16,21,22 For this reason we have chosen to synthesize two materials with different Fe contents, one with 10% Fe (Ni90Fe10Oy) and the other with 30% Fe (Ni70Fe30Oy), in addition to a “pure” NiO, which is later shown to contain some Fe impurities. The actual atomic compositions as determined by ICP and EDX analysis can be found in the ESI (see Table S1†).
The transmission electron micrographs shown in Fig. 1a–c confirm that the LF-FSS method of synthesis yielded Ni1−xFexOy materials with a uniform particle size distribution. The average particle size as calculated from the micrographs shows that all samples are roughly 8–11 nm in diameter (see Table 1). The clear lattice fringing observed in the HR-TEM micrographs (Fig. 1d–f) further confirms the highly crystalline nature of all materials, which is later observed in the X-ray diffractograms (cf.Fig. 3). The lattice d-spacing for particles shown in Fig. 1d–f was calculated to be 0.21 nm and can be readily indexed to the (200) crystal plane of cubic NiO.36 While NiO clearly displays only cubic crystallites (Fig. 1a and d), it can be seen that Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy also contain hexagonal-shaped platelets that are similar in morphology to other reports of Ni–Fe oxide materials.37
 Fig. 1  TEM and HR-TEM micrographs of NiO (a and d), Ni90Fe10Oy (b and e), and Ni70Fe30Oy (c and f). 
Table 1 Results of the BET, XRD, and TEM analyses for the Ni1−xFexOy samples




Sample
BET surface area [m2 g−1]
Lattice parameter [Å]
Unit cell volume [Å3]
Particle size (TEM) [nm]




NiO
21.4
4.1777
72.92
8.9 ± 3.0


Ni90Fe10Oy
77.9
4.1730
72.67
11.0 ± 5.5


Ni70Fe30Oy
34.6
4.1745
72.75
7.8 ± 4.5




The LF-FSS method permits the synthesis of Ni1−xFexOy with high specific surface areas that exceed those of other thermally prepared Ni–Fe oxides.34 Although the particle size as calculated from the TEM micrographs are quite similar among all samples, Brunauer–Emmett–Teller (BET) analysis reveals notable differences in the specific surface areas as calculated from N2 adsorption/desorption (Table 1). This likely arises from the presence of hexagonal-shaped platelets in Fe-containing samples, which appear to lay flat against the TEM grid and can therefore lead to a significant underestimation of the surface area if one only considers the diameter of the platelets and not the thickness. Specifically, Ni90Fe10Oy (SABET = 78 m2 g−1) contains an abundance of platelet-shaped crystallites with a similar average diameter as the cubic crystallites in NiO (SABET = 21 m2 g−1), but those in Ni90Fe10Oy are likely much thinner and lead to higher SABET values. Ni70Fe30Oy (SABET = 35 m2 g−1) is also found to contain a significant fraction of hexagonal-shaped platelets, but these particles also appear more agglomerated (Fig. 1c) which may contribute to a reduction in the measurable BET surface area.
Energy dispersive X-ray (EDX) mapping was used to evaluate the elemental distribution of Ni and Fe in Fe-containing samples. As shown in Fig. 2a–f, Ni90Fe10Oy primarily features particles with a uniform distribution of Ni and Fe throughout the bulk of the particles while the surface appears to be richer in Fe content. This observation is consistent with literature reports of NiFe alloys forming a shell of NiO with an outermost layer of Fe–Ni spinel oxide and Fe2O3 upon oxidation.38 It may be that the high temperature of the LF-FSS synthesis promotes the separation of phases in Ni–Fe oxides, especially considering that the solubility of Fe in NiO at 1200 °C is only estimated to be between 4–16%.39–41 Segregation of Fe and Ni for the Ni70Fe30Oy sample appears to be more severe. Although the distribution of Ni and Fe is similar to that of Ni90Fe10Oy within the Ni–Fe oxide particles, a completely separate Fe-based phase that is nearly devoid of Ni can also be observed. This, however, corroborates previous reports that Fe begins to segregate and form a secondary Fe oxide phase at Fe contents ranging from 11% (ref. 23) to 25%.18,34 Furthermore, the solubility of Ni in the Fe oxide host lattice is expected to be quite small.18 In any case, the secondary Fe phase appears to be either amorphous or comprised of very small particles (<4 nm) and is not expected to contribute significantly to the electrochemical activity given that Fe oxides are poor oxygen evolution catalysts.18,20,22,34,42 The Fe content as calculated from the EDX mapping was found to be 11% Fe for Ni90Fe10Oy and 17% for Ni70Fe30Oy (see Table S1†). Given that elemental analysis via ICP showed that Ni90Fe10Oy contains 9.93% Fe and Ni70Fe30Oy contains 30.09% Fe, it is believed that the differences in Fe content for the Ni70Fe30Oy sample can be accounted for by the presence of the separate Fe oxide phase.
 Fig. 2  HAADF and Ni and Fe elemental maps for Ni90Fe10Oy (a–d) and Ni70Fe30Oy (e–h). 
 Fig. 3  X-ray diffractograms for Ni1−xFexOy samples produced via liquid-feed flame-spray synthesis. The reference peak positions for the cubic NiO (▼) and spinel NiFe2O4 (*) phases are indicated above. 

Fig. 3 displays the X-ray powder diffractograms for the prepared Ni1−xFexOy samples. The high synthesis temperature results in the formation of highly crystalline oxide nanoparticles which gives rise to sharp, distinguished diffraction peaks. The peaks of NiO were indexed to those of NiO (ICSD Collection Code #9866), with the primary diffraction peaks for NiO(111), NiO(200), and NiO(220) being clearly identified. The calculated lattice parameter for each material (see Table 1) is in excellent agreement with that reported for cubic NiO (a = 4.1770)43,44 and differs significantly from those reported for hexagonal β-Ni(OH)2 (a = 3.1260, c = 4.6050),45 further confirming the compact and crystalline rock salt structure of the material. We note that the Fe-containing samples contain traces of trevorite (nickel ferrite spinel, NiFe2O4), which is most notable in Ni70Fe30Oy. It has been suggested that NiFe2O4 is the source of high OER activity34 in mixed NiFe oxides, however, more recent studies did not provide evidence that this is the case.22 The presence of a spinel phase in NiFe oxides at concentrations as low as 10 at% Fe was also reported by Landon et al.34 in addition to the presence of Fe2O3 at concentrations of 25 at% Fe. Although the Fe2O3 is not directly observed in our case, it is possible that this phase may exist as an amorphous phase or particles that are too small (<4 nm) to be detected by XRD, especially considering that the presence of an Fe-rich phase was confirmed via EDX mapping (Fig. 2e–h).
The oxidation state and local structure of the dry catalyst samples was obtained using ex situ X-ray absorption spectroscopy. The X-ray absorption near-edge structure (XANES) spectra for the dry samples at the Ni K-edge are shown in Fig. 4a. It can be observed that all samples contain the characteristic pre-edge feature of NiO at ca. 8333 eV, which corresponds to the 1s to 3d transitions that arise when Ni exists in an octahedral environment.46 The primary absorption edge containing the white-line peak corresponds to 1s to 4p dipole transitions and is sensitive to the electronic state, e.g. oxidation state, of the absorbing Ni atoms. The edge position for the flame-spray synthesized NiO is centered around 8343.0 eV and is comparable to that of the commercial NiO (Sigma Aldrich) standard, which indicates that the as-prepared sample contains Ni in a valence state of ca. 2+. Moreover, considering that the edge positions for Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy are only slightly higher than that of NiO (higher at 8343.2 eV), it can be inferred that the presence of Fe does not significantly impact the oxidation state of Ni. It should also be pointed out that all materials share the same characteristic shape of the adsorption edge, suggesting that all materials share the same local geometry and oxidation state and that it is not altered by the presence of Fe.
 Fig. 4  Normalized XANES spectra and Fourier transformed EXAFS spectra of the dry Ni1−xFexOy samples and measured sample standards at the Ni (a and b) and Fe (c and d) K-edges. All Ni χ(k) functions were Fourier transformed over a k-range of 2.6–14.0 Å while the Fe χ(k) functions were transformed over a range of 3–11.5 Å. The corresponding fits of the Ni and Fe FT-EXAFS spectra can be found the ESI (Fig. S1, S2 and Table S2).† 
The Fourier-transformed extended X-ray absorption fine structure (EXAFS) spectra at the Ni K-edge are shown in Fig. 4b. When comparing to the bulk NiO standard, it can be seen that all samples conform well to the NiO rock salt structure. Strong scattering features extending to roughly 6 Å reflect the long-range atomic order typical of highly ordered and crystalline materials and therefore refute the presence of layered Ni(OH)2/NiOOH bulk phases, which are usually obtained from solvothermal synthesis routes21 or electrodeposition.17 Fitting of the FT-EXAFS spectra (see Table 2) reveal that all materials feature slightly shorter Ni–O bonding distances than the anticipated bulk oxide values of 2.089 Å, while the Ni–Ni bonding distance remains relatively close to the bulk value of 2.954 Å (ICSD Collection Code #9866),44 respectively. In addition, the incorporation of Fe does not seem to have a significant impact on these bonding distances given that Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy have roughly the same Ni–O and Ni–Ni bonding distances regardless of the Fe content. The independence of the Ni–O bonding distance with Fe content agrees with the work of Friebel et al.,18 who also showed that no significant modification of the Ni–O bond length occurs with Fe incorporation. The bonding distances for NiO and Ni1−xFexOy are in excellent agreement with those reported by Mansour et al.47 for cubic NiO, for which distances of d(Ni–O) = 2.074 and d(Ni–Ni) = 2.949 were obtained. Furthermore, the obtained bonding distances also refute the presence of layered Ni–Fe (oxy)hydroxide phases, which consistently display lower average Ni–O bond lengths of ca. 2.06 for β-Ni(OH)2 (ref. 47) or 2.04 for α-Ni(OH)2.21,47,48 We do note, however, that the decreased peak amplitudes observed for Ni70Fe30Oy suggest that the ligand environment around the metal center is more distorted than in NiO or Ni90Fe10Oy, which likely results from the relatively high amount of Fe3+ being substituted for Ni2+ in the rock salt structure. Alternatively, some of the observed difference in peak amplitude may also be accounted for by the differences in the amplitude reduction factors.
Table 2 Summary of the EXAFS best fit parameters for the dry Ni1−xFexOy catalyst powders. N denotes the number of nearest neighbours of the given scattering path, d indicates the refined path length, σ2 represents the pseudo Debye–Waller factor, ΔE0 is the energy shift, S02 is the amplitude reduction factor, and the R-factor represents the relative fit error of the fit




Sample

S
0
2

Scattering path

N


d [Å]

σ
2 [Å2]
ΔE0 [eV]

R-factor




NiO
0.90 ± 0.04
Ni–O1
6
2.070 ± 0.006
0.0059 ± 0.0008
−0.38 ± 0.47
0.0044


Ni–Ni
12
2.956 ± 0.004
0.0074 ± 0.0004


Ni–O2
8
3.531 ± 0.023
0.0125 ± 0.0035


Ni90Fe10Oy
0.99 ± 0.04
Ni–O1
6
2.076 ± 0.005
0.0065 ± 0.0008
−0.31 ± 0.44
0.0029


Ni–Ni
12
2.957 ± 0.003
0.0071 ± 0.0003


Ni–O2
8
3.519 ± 0.021
0.0123 ± 0.0031


Ni70Fe30Oy
0.92 ± 0.05
Ni–O1
6
2.069 ± 0.006
0.0067 ± 0.0010
−0.19 ± 0.54
0.0054


Ni–Ni
12
2.962 ± 0.005
0.0091 ± 0.0005


Ni–O2
8
3.525 ± 0.027
0.0156 ± 0.0043




The complimentary XANES spectra of Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy collected at the Fe K-edge are presented in Fig. 4c, in which we observe pre-edge features corresponding to 1s to 3d transitions18,24,49 and the primary absorption edges occurring at ca. 7126 eV. When compared to the spectra of the bulk FeO and Fe2O3 standards it can be seen that Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy both contain Fe in a 3+ oxidation state, which is expected considering that many NiFe oxides have been shown to contain Fe in a 3+ state.48,50,51 A qualitative assessment of the Fourier transformed EXAFS spectra at the Fe K-edge (Fig. 4d) reveals that Ni90Fe10Oy conforms to the same cubic NiO structural motif observed in Fig. 4b, which supports the notion that Fe is substituted into the NiO rock salt lattice while avoiding the formation of secondary structural motifs. In contrast, the FT-EXAFS spectrum for Ni70Fe30Oy displays a prominent shoulder in the Fe–M scattering peak at roughly 3.45 Å, which we assign to the presence of the ferrite spinel phase, NiFe2O4, that is also observed in the powder X-ray diffractograms (cf.Fig. 3).52 Fitting of the Fe FT-EXAFS functions (Table S2†) provides an Fe–O bonding distance of 1.99 Å for Ni90Fe10Oy, which is considerably shorter than the Ni–O bonding distance. The shorter distance, however, is consistent with the fact that Fe resides in a higher oxidation state than Ni within the rock salt structure. A slightly longer Fe–O bonding distance of 2.01 Å was obtained by Fominykh et al.35 for Fe0.2Ni0.8O nanoparticles conforming to a cubic rock salt structure, while slightly shorter distances of 1.99–2.00 Å have typically been reported for Ni1−xFex(OH)2 samples.21,48 A shorter Fe–O bonding distance of 1.96 Å was fitted for Ni70Fe30Oy while fitting to the same rock salt NiO structural model, which is again consistent with the presence of the ferrite spinel phase.53,54 Friebel et al. also noted that a separate, Fe-rich phase forms at Fe contents above 25 at% Fe,18 while Klaus et al. noted a much lower saturation limit and observed a separate Fe-rich phase forming at contents as low as 11% Fe.23
Electrochemical measurements
Although many recent studies have taken great care to ensure the purity of the electrolyte such that it contains no traces of Fe contamination,8,17,20,23,55 it should be noted that for the purpose of this study the electrolyte was not extensively purified. ICP analysis shows that trace amounts of Fe impurities (0.01 at%) are already present in NiO produced from the LF-FSS method and could not be avoided (see Table S1†). Given that the trace amount of Fe in our sample is already higher than what it would be exposed to in standard KOH electrolyte (e.g. <1 ppm Fe in reagent grade, which is already known to affect the OER activity for Ni(OH)2 films considerably16), we have chosen to use the highest purity grade of KOH available (Sigma Aldrich Semiconductor grade; 99.99%) without any further purification. Considering that the as-prepared NiO sample is not completely free of Fe, we will henceforth refer to this sample as NiO* in order to differentiate it from nickel oxides that are completely Fe-free.
Shown in Fig. 5a are the cyclic voltammograms (CVs) for the Ni1−xFexOy nanoparticles recorded in 0.1 M KOH, which display several distinguishable features that differentiate NiO* from the Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy samples. Perhaps the most noticeable features dominating the NiO* CVs are the pronounced redox peaks centered around 1.43 V and 1.35 V in the anodic and cathodic scans, respectively. These peaks can be attributed to the oxidative transition of Ni2+ to Ni3+ in the anodic direction and the concomitant reduction in the cathodic scan, which ultimately corresponds to the conversion between Ni(OH)2 and NiOOH in alkaline media.9,15,42,56–58 It can clearly be observed that the peak current for both characteristic redox peaks increases with each consecutive cycle, indicating the growth of hydrous Ni(OH)2/NiOOH surface layers,59,60 or more specifically, the in situ transformation of the catalytically inactive NiO rock salt structure to the OER-active nickel oxy(hydroxide) structure.42 The growth of hydrous Ni(OH)2/NiOOH layers with potential cycling is a fairly well-documented phenomena that can be summarized by the Bode cycle.61,62 Based upon the current understanding of the electrochemical behavior of NiO in alkaline media, it is reasonable to assume that the as-prepared NiO* sample initially resembles a bulk NiO conforming to a rock salt structure that instantaneously forms a β-Ni(OH)2 surface layer upon contact with the KOH electrolyte. We then witness the conversion of the highly compact and crystalline rock salt NiO covered by surface β-Ni(OH)2 (i.e. β-Ni(OH)2/NiO) to β-NiOOH (or even γ-NiOOH at higher potentials) upon oxidation. The subsequent conversion back to β-Ni(OH)2 or α-Ni(OH)2 can then be expected upon reduction. Essentially, as the electrodes are cycled the thickness of the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH surface layer begins to penetrate deeper into the bulk of the particle to form a thicker, more layered and open structure that permits H2O intercalation between the layered sheets and thereby enables OH−/O2 transport within the layers. The overall effect is an increase in the particle roughness, and therefore the electrochemically active surface area (ECSA), which is manifested in the steadily increasing OER current maximum and the steadily decreasing overpotential with each consecutive scan.63 Previous studies have also indicated that the anodic Ni2+/3+ redox peak shifts significantly with aging or cycling in unpurified KOH, which signifies the incorporation of Fe impurities from the electrolyte.17,23 Given that we do not observe a noteworthy shift in the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox peak for NiO* with cycling, we assume that there is not a substantial amount of Fe uptake from impurities from the solution during the course of the experiment (i.e. insignificant compared to the amount of preexisting impurities introduced during the synthesis).
 Fig. 5  Cyclic voltammograms recorded at 10 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte (a). Arrows indicate the increasing current with each consecutive scan. OER Tafel plots showing the steady-state current density recorded after 1 minute in 0.1 M KOH (b). 
We now turn our attention to the cyclic voltammograms of Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy (see Fig. 5a), both of which appear to exhibit drastically muted Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox features when compared to NiO*. Further examination also reveals a marked anodic shift in the peak potential for both the Ni2+/3+ oxidation and reduction redox peaks with increasing Fe content. This observation is in strong agreement with previous reports16,22,35,64,65 and has generally been attributed to the stabilization of the Ni2+ state in the presence of Fe.65 The shift of the redox peak and therefore the increased overpotential required to drive the conversion of Ni(OH)2 to NiOOH has been associated with higher OER activities.35 In addition to the initial anodic shift, Ni90Fe10Oy continues to show a considerable shift in the oxidation peak from approximately 1.42 V to 1.44 V over the course of 25 cycles. Considering that EDX mapping (cf.Fig. 2) revealed that the particle surface tends to be Fe-rich as compared to the bulk, the continuous shift in the oxidation peak is due to pre-existing surface Fe being further incorporated into the Ni1−xFexOy structure. A similar effect is also seen for Ni70Fe30Oy, but to a lesser extent. It is known that Fe readily incorporates into Ni(OH)2/NiOOH films under electrochemical conditions, so the further incorporation of Fe from Fe-rich regions to Ni-rich regions is quite likely.16,17
In addition to a drastic drop in redox peak intensity, we observe that the growth of the redox peaks upon cycling also appears to be severely inhibited for Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy as compared to NiO*. This is further reflected in the OER current, as the relative gains in the maximum OER current with each consecutive CV cycle are not nearly as significant as they are in the case of NiO*. Overall, this implies that the increase in ECSA that arises from the growth of hydrous Ni(OH)2/NiOOH layers on NiO* is inhibited for Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy, or in other words, this suggests that Fe actively inhibits the transformation of β-Ni(OH)2 to β-NiOOH and/or potentially inhibits the initial transformation of the bulk, NiO rock salt phase to the β-Ni(OH)2 phase. It should be noted that cobalt has also been shown to suppress the in situ conversion from nickel oxide to the layered hydroxide phase.42 This was rationalized on the basis that rock salt NiOx favors the transformation to a layered OH/OOH phase, but while in the presence of Co it rather favors the spinel phase and thereby inhibits the OH/OOH transformation. In the case of Ni1−xFexOy, it may be a similar case where NiO prefers the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH phase while Fe prefers the spinel-type NiFe2O4 phase.

Fig. 5b presents the OER polarization curves for the Ni1−xFexOy electrodes and the corresponding results of the applied Tafel analysis can be seen in Table 3. The electrodes were cycled 25 times before recording the polarization curves in order to attain a stable OER current (Fig. 5a). Tafel slope values for Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy were determined to be roughly 40 mV dec−1, which are in strong agreement with previously reported values for mixed Ni–Fe oxides.14,21–23,34,35,56,63 In contrast, NiO* displays a considerably higher Tafel slope of ca. 55 mV dec−1 and is also consistent with previous reports for NiOx and Ni(OH)2 materials.8,21,22,34 The higher Tafel slope of NiO* as compared to Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy suggests that the presence of Fe induces a change in the rate-determining step and therefore a change in the dominant OER pathway. In a study by Louie and Bell22 it was demonstrated that Tafel slopes vary considerably between freshly electrodeposited NiO films (ca. 55 mv dec−1), which are inherently disordered in structure, and aged Ni–Fe films (ca. 40 mV dec−1) that are more crystalline in nature.22 Considering this observation, the apparent difference in our reported Tafel slopes likely reflects a change in mechanism that results from differences in the catalyst surface structure. Essentially, this lends support to our previous analysis of the cyclic voltammograms, which indicates that the presence of Fe inhibits the transformation of the compact and crystalline β-Ni(OH)2/NiO phases to the layered and relatively more disordered β-NiOOH/γ-NiOOH phases.
Table 3 Tafel slopes and electrochemical OER activities for Ni1−xFexOy calculated from steady state OER polarization curves




Sample
BET [m2 g−1]
Tafel slope [mV dec−1]

η@10 A g−1 [mV]

J@η = 300 mV [A g−1]

J@η = 350 mV [A g−1]




NiO
21.4
57.1 ± 2.5
350 ± 1
1.4 ± 0.2
9.5 ± 0.6


Ni90Fe10Oy
77.9
40.4 ± 0.3
351 ± 4
0.5 ± 0.1
9.4 ± 2.3


Ni70Fe30Oy
34.6
40.3 ± 1.9
317 ± 2
3.9 ± 0.7
64.3 ± 4.1




In order to further assess the OER activity of the prepared materials, the overpotential required to reach a current density of 10 A g−1 was compared in addition to the current density at η = 300 and 350 mV (i.e. at low and intermediate overpotentials; see Table 3). A direct comparison to values reported in the literature proves to be quite difficult considering that the majority of published activities are reported for electrodeposited thin films. Furthermore, the wide range of catalyst substrate materials and electrolyte conditions (e.g. pH and purity) reported introduce additional variables. Nevertheless, we observe an OER activity for NiO* that is comparable with those of other nickel (oxy)hydroxide nanoparticles in unpurified KOH.21,66 Ni70Fe30Oy clearly displays a considerably lower overpotential than both NiO* and Ni90Fe10Oy and is about 6–9 times more active at η = 350. Given that the Ni70Fe30Oy nanoparticles may actually contain significantly less Fe than expected from the targeted stoichiometry (i.e. 30% Fe according to ICP analysis versus 17% according to EDX; Table S1†), the observed activity still appears consistent with that reported by Louie and Bell,22 who showed that the OER activities for all Ni1−xFexOOH compositions within the range of 15–40% Fe were comparable and significantly higher (3–4x) than that of Ni90Fe10OOH. It should also be noted that although Ni70Fe30Oy contains a significant fraction of the NiFe2O4 spinel phase, this is not expected to contribute significantly to the OER activity considering that previous reports show that overpotentials of 440 mV were needed to reach 10 mA cm−2 for NiFe2O4 in 0.1 M KOH.67 Interestingly, the mass activities of Ni90Fe10Oy and NiO* are nearly identical at η = 350 V. Taking into account that the prepared NiO* sample actually contains traces of Fe, it is not surprising that NiO* displays a comparable activity to Ni90Fe10Oy rather than requiring a significantly large overpotential as would be required under Fe-free conditions (e.g. Fe-free Ni can require overpotentials >500 mV@10 mA cm−2).17,20 Furthermore, comparable activities for Ni90Fe10Oy and NiOx containing Fe impurities have been observed before.42
The effects of Fe on the short-term stability of NiO* and Ni1−xFexOy were further investigated through a series of chronoamperometric potential-step experiments, in which the potential was stepped from a potential close to the open circuit value (i.e. 1.0 V) to a potential where there is a significant amount of OER activity (i.e. 1.7 V). The steady state current was recorded at the end of each potential step sequence (OER current at 1.7 V) over the course of 500 cycles. This was done to simulate the sudden current spikes and drops that may occur during electrolyzer start-up/shut-down that can often lead to accelerated catalyst degradation. As shown in Fig. 6a, there is a nearly monotonic increase in the OER activity (i.e. normalized OER current at 1.7 VRHE) over the course of 500 potential-step cycles for all samples, indicating that there is no significant catalyst degradation that may result from the dissolution or loss of electrode material. In fact, there is an initial jump in the electrochemical OER activity at 1.7 VRHE for NiO*, which increases by nearly 60% within the first 100 cycles and by roughly 85% at the end of the stability protocol. In stark contrast, Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy only exhibit roughly a 30% and 10% improvement in the OER activity, respectively, at the end of 500 cycles. Complimentary cyclic voltammograms were recorded after every 100 potential-step cycles and are shown in Fig. 6b–d. Similar to those shown in Fig. 5a, the CVs for NiO* clearly depict a substantial increase in the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox peak intensities that occurs upon cycling, while the Fe-containing materials display drastically muted peaks in comparison. In the case of Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy we again see that the oxidation peak shifts to more anodic potentials as Fe is further incorporated into the Ni–Fe oxide lattice, which is clearly more severe during the chronoamperometric protocol as compared to the CV cycling shown in Fig. 5a. We also note that a slight shift in the oxidation peak for NiO* indicates that there may also be some Fe incorporation from impurities as well.10,12,14,16,22 Regardless, the development of the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox peaks is a projection of the changes occurring at the electrode surface. Specifically, we attribute the growth of the redox peaks to an overall increase in the proportion of exposed Ni surface sites (and therefore the ECSA) that occurs as the electrode is continuously cycled between the initially compact β-Ni(OH)2/NiO phase and the layered β-NiOOH phase (or possibly the γ-NiOOH phase, which can form at higher potentials, e.g. E > 1.63 V).62,68 As was observed in Fig. 5a, we again see that the transformation from a compact rock salt structure to a layered structure is severely inhibited on Fe-containing samples. The overall effect of Fe on the phase integrity of Ni1−xFexOy is better depicted in Fig. 6e, which shows the difference in the cathodic peak charge, ΔQcath = Qf − Qi, plotted as a function of the potential-step cycle number (the Ni2+/3+ reduction peak was integrated since it is more clearly defined for Ni70Fe30Oy than the oxidation peak). Fig. 6e indicates that the charge associated with the Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox transformation increases over the course of 500 cycles for all samples, again indicating the exfoliation of the Ni1−xFexOy nanoparticles as the initial, compact and crystalline rock salt structure is transformed into a layered Ni(OH)2/NiOOH structure and more Ni sites are exposed as intercalation between the sheets becomes possible. More importantly, we observe that this transformation is strongly correlated to the Fe content in the sample and that the extent of the transformation quickly diminishes as the Fe content is increased. Ultimately, when comparing Fig. 6e with Fig. 6a we observe a striking resemblance, which provides strong evidence that the increase in OER activity is a direct result of an ECSA increase that occurs as the nanoparticle surface is exfoliated during the repeated Ni(OH)2/NiOOH redox transformation.
 Fig. 6  Stability measurements for the Ni1−xFexOy samples (a): electrodes were stepped between 1.00 V and 1.70 V for 500 cycles. Cyclic voltammograms recorded at the initial state and after every 100 potential-step cycles for NiO (b), Ni90Fe10Oy (c), and Ni70Fe30Oy (d). Difference in cathodic charge as a function of potential-step cycle number (e). 
In summarizing the findings of the electrochemical measurements discussed above, we note that there appears to be a compromise in the activity based on the Fe content in the sample. On one hand, the OER activity of NiO* can be greatly increased by subjecting the electrode to repetitive potential cycling (e.g. via CVs or potential-step jumps) as it undergoes the transformation from a compact structure to a layered structure and the effective ECSA is increased. On the other hand, we observe a much higher OER activity for Ni70Fe30Oy than NiO* despite the inhibition of this transformation (cf.Fig. 5a and b). The higher activity of Ni–Fe oxides versus NiO can be attributed to the lower binding energy of OER intermediates on Fe-doped Ni as was shown by Friebel et al.18 and further supported by Swierk et al.,20 who then suggested a direct relationship between the OER activity and activation energy that is dependent upon the Fe content. Therefore, the activity enhancement on Ni–Fe oxides is primarily due to differences in the electronic structure of the materials (e.g. stabilization of the Ni electronic structure) induced by the presence of Fe, whereas the enhancement in NiO* is purely surface area-based. In the case of our prepared samples, Ni90Fe10Oy appears to represent a compromise in the competing nature of these two affects. As can be observed in the CVs in Fig. 5a, Ni90Fe10Oy actually has a slightly higher OER activity than NiO* initially, which is likely due to the activity enhancement provided by the greater Fe concentration in the sample. However, as the electrodes are conditioned and subjected to repetitive CV cycling, we then see that the surface area of NiO* increases greatly while Fe inhibits this effect on Ni90Fe10Oy. Ultimately, the end result is that the surface area enhancement gained by NiO* eventually outweighs the kinetic enhancement provided by Fe in Ni90Fe10Oy, such that NiO* proves to be the more active OER catalyst among the two at low overpotentials (e.g. η = 300 mV) after the conditioning sequence (see Fig. 5b and Table 3) and is comparable even at higher overpotentials (η ≥ 350 mV).
Operando X-ray absorption measurements
The results of the electrochemical analysis above clearly suggest that Fe is affecting both the electronic state and structural integrity of highly crystalline Ni1−xFexOy under OER conditions. Therefore, information pertaining specifically to the electronic state and local structure of Ni1−xFexOy under operating conditions was obtained using operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy. During the subsequent experiments, a typical OER polarization measurement was conducted while the transmitted XAS signal was recorded during the last minute of each chronoamperometric polarization step.
Presented in Fig. 7a are the operando XANES spectra for Ni1−xFexOy materials recorded at a series of increasing applied potentials ranging from 1.2 V to 1.65 V vs. RHE in 0.1 M KOH. The stability of the Ni electronic state in the absence and presence of Fe are highlighted here. Specifically in the absence of Fe, NiO* shows a notable decrease in the white-line peak intensity as the applied electrochemical potential is increased. The decrease in the white-line amplitude is also accompanied by a shift in the Ni K-edge position to more positive energies. It is important to recognize here that XAS is a bulk technique and therefore it probes all of the Ni atoms that comprise the nanoparticles falling within the path of the transmitted beam. Given that only the atoms at the surface or within close proximity are participating in the electrochemical reactions, this ultimately results in an edge shift that appears less pronounced due to the modest particle size (ca. 10 nm) and the concomitantly low surface-to-bulk ratio of absorbing Ni atoms in the Ni1−xFexOy nanoparticles. Regardless of this fact, we can assign the shifting edge position to the oxidation of surface Ni(OH)2 to NiOOH (i.e. Ni2+ to Ni3+) considering that this redox couple is known to occur between approximately 1.375 and 1.475 V (cf.Fig. 5a). The absence of any change in the Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy Ni K-edge positions, however, strongly indicates that the electronic state and local geometry of the Ni centers are stabilized upon polarization while in the presence of Fe. This is in line with the study of Landon et al.34 and further corroborates our previous observations during the RDE measurements (cf.Fig. 5a), which showed that the Ni2/3+ redox transition is severely inhibited in the presence of Fe. Interestingly, the corresponding XANES measured simultaneously at the Fe K-edge (Fig. S3†) indicate that the Fe electronic state also remains quite stable upon polarization, which was also reported by Friebel et al.18 to be the case for Fe in Ni1−xFexOOH thin films. This is particularly noticeable for Ni90Fe10Oy, for which there are no detectable changes in the edge position. A small positive shift in the edge energy of Ni70Fe30Oy indicates that some Fe is oxidized, although it cannot be distinguished whether this corresponds to the oxidation of Fe residing in the cubic Ni1−xFexOy phase or in a separate Fe-rich phase (cf.Fig. 2f and 3). The results for the Fe K-edge in either sample, however, should be interpreted with caution. We recognize that it is also plausible that the low surface-to-bulk ratio of Fe-atoms that results from the modest particle size combined with the already dilute concentration of Fe atoms in Ni1−xFexOy could mean that any anticipated shift in the Fe K-edge is below the limit of detection.
 Fig. 7  Normalized XANES spectra (a) and Fourier transformed Ni EXAFS spectra (b) recorded in operando for Ni1−xFexOy over a range of applied potentials (note: 1.600 V and 1.650 V were not measured for NiO). All Ni χ(k) functions were Fourier transformed over a k-range of 2.6–12.5 Å. The corresponding fits of the Ni FT-EXAFS spectra can be found the ESI (Fig. S4, S5 and Tables S3–S5).† 

Fig. 7b presents the corresponding operando FT-EXAFS spectra for Ni1−xFexOy. The presented spectra compliment the XANES data well in the sense that all of the major developments are observed exclusively for NiO* while virtually no difference can be observed for Fe-containing samples with increasing potential. NiO* displays large developments primarily within the first coordination shell, indicating a strong modification of the Ni–O octahedra. As the potential is increased, we observe a monotonous shift in the peak position to higher r-values and a simultaneous decrease in peak amplitude. Refinement of the FT-EXAFS spectra reveals that these changes primarily manifest themselves in the Ni–O coordination number and Debye–Waller factor while the Ni–O bonding distance remains relatively constant (Fig. 8 and Table S3†). Additional information regarding the fitting parameters and the calculated results of the refinement can be found in the ESI (Fig. S4, S5 and Tables S3–S5).†Fig. 8 indicates that the Ni–O coordination number decreases monotonously from 6.0 at 1.20 V to 5.6 at 1.55 V and is accompanied by a monotonous increase in the Debye–Waller factor. It is important to recognize, however, that changes in the coordination number and Debye–Waller factor are strongly correlated and that the effects cannot be separated. The decrease in coordination number can be rationalized by considering the fact that it coincides precisely with the onset of the OER. Assuming that an equilibrium is established during the OER in which (1) O2 is released from the Ni surface during the final reaction step to produce a vacant, uncoordinated Ni surface site and (2) that the uncoordinated site is subsequently filled as OH− from solution is adsorbed, the observed drop in CN likely reflects the availability of uncoordinated surface Ni sites. This could also explain the increase in the Debye–Waller factor since the structural disorder around the Ni absorption centers would be expected to increase as the proportion of uncoordinated sites increases. On the other hand, it can be seen that there is virtually no development in the Ni–O coordination shell for Fe-containing samples. In fact, a closer look at the Ni–O coordination number, bonding distance, and Debye–Waller factor for Fe-containing samples (Fig. 8, Tables S4 and S5†) reveal that all values remain highly stable over the course of the entire applied potential range, which extends to even higher applied potentials than for NiO* (1.65 and 1.60 for Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy, respectively, vs. 1.55 V for NiO). Ultimately, these aforementioned trends strongly indicate that the Ni local structure is subject to change under OER potentials unless Fe is present, in which case the Ni local structure is greatly stabilized. The absence of any distinguishable changes in the characteristic features of the Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy FT-EXAFS spectra clearly perpetuates the notion that Fe stabilizes the integrity of the Ni local structure.
 Fig. 8  EXAFS-determined Ni–O coordination number (a), bonding distance (b), and Debye–Waller factor (c) shown over the range of applied potentials. Dashed lines are included only to serve as a guide for the initial NiO values. 
The operando FT-EXAFS spectra discussed above strictly reflect changes occurring in the Ni1−xFexOy electronic and local structure under an applied potential where oxygen evolution is known to take place. Consequently, the induced changes we observe represent what happens under OER conditions and are not necessarily representative of the progressive structural modifications that were implicated by the RDE stability measurements. As was shown previously (cf.Fig. 6), more severe structural changes are expected to occur after repetitive OER polarization, which correspond to the exfoliation of the nanoparticle surface as the compact β-Ni(OH)2/NiO structure is transformed into more layered polymorphs (i.e. β/γ-NiOOH and α-Ni(OH)2). In order to gain further insight regarding the role of Fe in the stabilization of the Ni1−xFexOy catalyst structure upon repeated OER polarization, the short-term stability protocol we employed for the RDE measurements was repeated, albeit in situ in the spectroelectrochemical flow cell.

Fig. 9 depicts the in situ FT-EXAFS spectra recorded at the Ni K-edge, which were collected after every 50 potential-step cycles in the absence of an applied potential (i.e. at OCP) in order to avoid any potential-induced structural modifications. At first glance, the in situ stability FT-EXAFS spectra are strikingly similar to those measured during the operando polarization measurements. Specifically, substantial modifications within the Ni–O octahedra are confirmed by the monotonous decrease in the peak amplitude corresponding to the first coordination shell of NiO. Looking further out, however, we also observe that the peak amplitudes corresponding to higher coordination shells are also subject to change. Specifically, the broad peak between ca. 3.1 and 4.2 Å and the peak centered around 4.7 Å also appear to decrease steadily with increasing cycle number. Considering that peaks appearing between roughly 3.1 and 5.0 Å are primarily produced by long-range Ni–Ni and Ni–O scattering events (although much smaller and insignificant contributions from multiple scattering paths are also present), the drop in amplitude signals the loss of long-range order and indicates a general increase in the disorder of the surrounding ligand environment as the catalyst is cycled. This behavior is consistent with the anticipated transformation of the rock salt NiO structure to more layered polymorphs where a substantial loss of long range-order begins to occur. Although one may expect to see a more pronounced drop in the amplitudes of higher scattering shells, it is important to recall that the length of the NiO unit cell is 4.178 Å and the average size of the nanoparticles in this study are about 60–120 Å (cf.Table 1), which translates to particles that are roughly 14–28 unit cells in diameter. Exfoliation of the top-most layers alone is enough to create a substantial increase in electrochemically active surface area, however, it is unlikely that this would create changes that are more pronounced than what we currently observe in the FT-EXAFS spectra considering (1) that long-range order is only lost for absorbing Ni atoms in close proximity to the surface while it is well-preserved within the bulk, and (2) that the high number of degenerate scattering paths for long-range interactions in the cubic rock salt structure means that only scattering intensity produced from interactions with lattice planes normal to the exfoliating lattice plane will diminish, while degenerate scattering events that are in-plane will still occur.
 Fig. 9  Fourier transformed Ni EXAFS spectra recorded in situ for Ni1−xFexOy at OCP after every 50 potential-step cycles. All Ni χ(k) functions were Fourier transformed over a k-range of 2.6–12.0 Å. 
Overall, the trends illustrated for NiO in Fig. 9 further corroborate the notion that the initial NiO rock salt structure undergoes a transformation to a more layered structure as described by the Bode cycle (e.g. β/γ-NiOOH, α-Ni(OH)2) upon repetitive OER polarization. In stark contrast to this behavior, it can be seen that the peak amplitudes for Ni70Fe30Oy remain relatively unchanged after 250 potential-step cycles. Minor fluctuations in the peak amplitudes are observed, as one might expect considering that RDE stability measurements indicate some subtle changes with cycling, but the lack of any substantial decrease or peak shift suggests that the long-range structural order is well-preserved upon potential-step cycling. In any case, we clearly observe that the presence of Fe greatly improves the resilience of Ni1−xFexOy to structural modifications upon repetitive OER cycling. The observed trends are highly consistent with what we observe during ex situ RDE measurements, which ultimately show that Fe inhibits the hydrous surface layer growth that is commonly observed for NiO upon repeated cycling across the Ni2+/3+ redox couple.
To briefly summarize the above results, we can infer from the electrochemical RDE measurements alone that Fe has a stabilizing effect on the initial Ni1−xFexOy structure under OER conditions. Specifically, we observe evidence that Fe inhibits the transformation of the initially compact and highly crystalline β-Ni(OH)2/NiO phases to the layered β-NiOOH and ultimately to the more disordered α/γ phases. Although Fe is known to have a stabilizing effect on the structure of mixed Ni–Fe oxides, this effect has usually been observed in the opposite case in which Fe inhibits the transformation of the layered NiOOH phases into the more compact β-Ni(OH)2 phase when the electrodes are aged.17,23 We note that a recent quartz crystal microbalance study also suggested that Fe may inhibit the transformation of Ni(OH)2 to β-NiOOH, although the authors focused primarily on the effects of aging Ni(OH)2/NiOOH thin films in the presence of Fe impurities.23
According to the results of the operando X-ray absorption measurements, the development of the NiO* structure under OER conditions appears to coincide with considerable modifications of the Ni–O coordination shell and a simultaneous increase of the Ni valence state. This is in agreement with previous reports21,51 and reflects the anticipated β-Ni(OH)2 to β-NiOOH transition, which is known to coincide with an increase of the average oxidation state from roughly Ni2+ to Ni3+ and is observed in the operando XANES spectra. In contrast, the electrochemical behavior of Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy clearly indicate that the structures of these samples are less sensitive to potential cycling and, as a result, do not undergo the same dramatic changes we observe for NiO*. Through operando XAS we are able to identify that the reasons behind this are connected to the fact that the Ni2+ becomes stable when Fe is substituted into the rock salt structure, which agrees well with prior in situ and operando XAS experiments that suggested that the presence of Fe helps to stabilize Ni-centers in a low-valent state.21,34 The stabilization of the local structure and the inhibition of hydrous layer growth can be further rationalized by considering this fact. Given that the oxidation state of Ni would need to increase from roughly 2.0 to 3.0 to accommodate for the structural transition from β-Ni(OH)2 to β-NiOOH, or even as high as 3.5–3.7 for the γ-NiOOH transition,61 the stabilization of Ni in a lower average oxidation state would therefore be expected to inhibit these transformations altogether. In situ XAS stability-cycling measurements further illustrate that there is a small loss of long range-structural order for NiO, which is consistent with the formation of hydrous polymorphs at the particle surface. On the other hand, Ni70Fe30Oy displays virtually no development in the local structure with cycling indicating that Fe promotes the retention of structural integrity.
Although we have carefully analyzed the Ni electronic and local structure under OER conditions, it is important to note that we have not taken into consideration what is happening to the oxidation state and local structure of Fe. A brief review of the recent literature reveals that there is still quite some controversy regarding the nature of the Fe sites under OER conditions. While some authors have reported Fe(III)21,34,51,65 under OER conditions, a great deal of others have also reported the presence of Fe(IV).24,48,50,69,70 In our case we did not detect any changes in the Fe oxidation state under OER polarization for Ni90Fe10Oy while Ni70Fe30Oy showed a minor shift in the Fe absorption edge (Fig. S3†), however, it is unclear whether Fe contained within the rock salt phase or within the Fe-rich side-phases are responsible for this. We recognize that other authors have reported significant developments in the Fe EXAFS,18,24,34 but due to the relatively low concentrations of Fe in our samples and the limitations in sensitivity imposed by measuring XAS in transmission mode, the quality of the EXAFS data recorded in our experiments were not high enough to draw any definitive conclusions without substantial speculation. At this point it is unclear whether or not Fe plays a more pivotal role in the OER on Ni1−xFexOy, albeit the lack of any detectable changes in the Ni70Fe30Oy and Ni90Fe10Oy XAS spectra at the Ni K-edge raises a number of questions. Further elucidation of the Fe electronic and local structure in greater detail will be part of future operando studies.
Conclusions
A series of mixed nickel–iron oxide nanomaterials were synthesized using a practical and scalable liquid-feed flame-spray synthesis technique, which successfully afforded highly crystalline Ni1−xFexOy nanoparticles with high specific surface areas. Electrochemical analysis of the Ni1−xFexOy catalysts in alkaline media reveals that the presence of Fe shifts the Ni2+/3+ redox couple to higher overpotentials, thereby stabilizing the Ni2+ oxidation state while simultaneously improving the kinetics of the oxygen evolution reaction. Cyclic voltammetry and short-term stability measurements strongly suggest that by stabilizing Ni2+, Fe effectively inhibits the well-known Ni(OH)2 to NiOOH structural transformation that typically accompanies the Ni2+ to Ni3+ redox transition. By tracking the progression of the normalized OER activity with potential-cycling and correlating the gains in OER activity to the increasing surface charge associated with the oxidation/reduction of Ni2+/3+, we clearly see that electrochemical cycling leads to an increase in electrochemically active surface area as hydrous Ni(OH)2/NiOOH surface layers are formed and the intercalation of water and hydroxide ions becomes feasible. Moreover, we observe that the gains in ECSA and OER mass activity that occur upon potential cycling decrease profoundly with increasing Fe content. Ultimately, the results of the electrochemical evaluation point towards the possibility that the presence of Fe is improving the structural stability of the oxide lattice under OER conditions and thereby prevents the growth of hydrous Ni(OH)2/NiOOH surface layers.
While a variety of extensive ex situ characterization techniques were used to confirm the high crystallinity of Ni1−xFexOy nanomaterials and to show that all Ni1−xFexOy catalysts conform to an face-centered cubic rock salt structure initially, the use of operando X-ray absorption spectroscopy was employed to track the progression of the local electronic and coordination environment around Ni of each catalyst under OER conditions and to look for evidence of the stabilizing effects of Fe on the overall catalyst structure. Analysis of the operando XANES spectra show that NiO* experiences an increase in the average Ni valence state as the catalyst is polarized into the OER regime, which agrees well with the presence of the Ni2+/3+ redox transition observed in RDE cyclic voltammograms. The corresponding operando FT-EXAFS show that this also coincides with a decrease of the Ni–O coordination number as the OER begins to proceed at the catalyst surface. Interestingly the operando XANES and EXAFS measurements for Ni90Fe10Oy and Ni70Fe30Oy reveal that the Ni electronic state and local coordination environment remain stable under OER conditions, indicating that the presence of Fe greatly stabilizes the Ni centers. In situ stability XAS measurements further demonstrate the stabilizing effects of Fe as the electrodes are subjected to repeated OER polarization. While NiO* experiences modifications to the Ni–O octahedra and Ni–Ni bonds upon cycling, Fe-containing samples again exhibit stability with regards to the Ni electronic structure and coordination environment.
Ultimately, we demonstrate that the overall effect of Fe in crystalline Ni1−xFexOy is a stabilization of the Ni2+ valence state that effectively inhibits the conversion of the Ni1−xFexOy rock salt structure to the layered polymorph structures (e.g. β/γ-Ni1−xFexOOH, α-Ni1−xFex(OH)2). We note, however, that the growth of hydrous Ni(OH)2/NiOOH layers upon potential cycling also has its benefits. As we see for NiO*, the formation of a hydrous, sheeted structure increases the accessibility of OH− to active Ni centers and leads to an overall enhancement in the mass activity. In the end there appears to be a compromise when incorporating Fe into the NiO rock salt structure. On the one hand, Fe helps to greatly stabilize both the Ni electronic and local structure under operating conditions while simultaneously enhancing the intrinsic catalyst activity, which suggests that the incorporation of Fe may lead to more active and longer-lasting electrodes for commercial purposes. On the other hand, the presence of Fe and preservation of structural integrity also appears to limit potential increases in mass activity that can be gained by transitioning to a layered structure that permits the facile diffusion of products and reactants to otherwise inaccessible active metal centers. One could speculate that electrodes with high mass activity and high structural integrity could be attained by finding a balance to the competing nature of these two effects.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Acknowledgements
We gratefully acknowledge and thank InnoSuisse and the Swiss Competence Center for Energy Research (SCCER) Heat & Electricity Storage for their financial support. We would also like to thank ScopeM (ETH Zürich) for the use of their electron microscopy facilities. PSI is acknowledged for the provision of beam time at the SuperXAS beamline of the Swiss Light Source SLS.
References

          REN21, Renewables 2018 Global Status Report, REN21, Paris,  2018 Search PubMed .

          OECD/IEA, Renewables 2017: Analysis and Forecasts to 2022, IEA Publishing,  2017 Search PubMed .
A. Buttler and H. Spliethoff, Renewable Sustainable Energy Rev., 2018, 82, 2440–2454 CrossRef CAS .
M. A. Pellow, C. J. M. Emmott, C. J. Barnhart and S. M. Benson, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1938–1952 RSC .
M. Balat, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2008, 33, 4013–4029 CrossRef CAS .
O. Schmidt, A. Gambhir, I. Staffell, A. Hawkes, J. Nelson and S. Few, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 2017, 42, 30470–30492 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kim, A. Oh, M. K. Kabiraz, Y. Hong, J. Joo, H. Baik, S.-I. Choi and K. Lee, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2018, 10, 10115–10122 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L.-A. Stern and X. Hu, Faraday Discuss., 2014, 176, 363–379 RSC .
I. J. Godwin and M. E. G. Lyons, Electrochem. Commun., 2013, 32, 39–42 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, F. C. Walsh and D. Pletcher, PCCP Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2011, 13, 1162–1167 RSC .
L. Xu, Y.-S. Ding, C.-H. Chen, L. Zhao, C. Rimkus, R. Joesten and S. L. Suib, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 308–316 CrossRef CAS .
C.-C. Hu and Y.-R. Wu, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2003, 82, 588–596 CrossRef CAS .
M. F. Kibria and M. S. Mridha, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1996, 21, 179–182 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Singh, J. P. Pandey and K. L. Anitha, Int. J. Hydrogen Energy, 1993, 18, 467–473 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Corrigan and R. M. Bendert, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1989, 136, 723–728 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Corrigan, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1987, 134, 377–384 CrossRef CAS .
L. Trotochaud, S. L. Young, J. K. Ranney and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 6744–6753 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Friebel, M. W. Louie, M. Bajdich, K. E. Sanwald, Y. Cai, A. M. Wise, M.-J. Cheng, D. Sokaras, T.-C. Weng, R. Alonso-Mori, R. C. Davis, J. R. Bargar, J. K. Nørskov, A. Nilsson and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 1305–1313 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. B. Stevens, C. D. M. Trang, L. J. Enman, J. Deng and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139, 11361–11364 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. R. Swierk, S. Klaus, L. Trotochaud, A. T. Bell and T. D. Tilley, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19022–19029 CrossRef CAS .
M. Görlin, P. Chernev, J. Ferreira de Araújo, T. Reier, S. Dresp, B. Paul, R. Krähnert, H. Dau and P. Strasser, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 5603–5614 CrossRef PubMed .
M. W. Louie and A. T. Bell, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2013, 135, 12329–12337 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Klaus, Y. Cai, M. W. Louie, L. Trotochaud and A. T. Bell, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 7243–7254 CrossRef CAS .
D. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Hu, J. Yang, N. Han, Y. Li and T.-K. Sham, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119, 19573–19583 CrossRef CAS .
A. Heel, P. Holtappels, P. Hug and T. Graule, Fuel Cells, 2010, 10, 419–432 CrossRef CAS .
O. Muller, M. Nachtegaal, J. Just, D. Lutzenkirchen-Hecht and R. Frahm, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2016, 23, 260–266 CrossRef PubMed .
M. Newville, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2001, 8, 322–324 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Ravel and M. Newville, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2005, 12, 537–541 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. J. Schmidt, H. A. Gasteiger, G. D. Stäb, P. M. Urban, D. M. Kolb and R. J. Behm, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1998, 145, 2354–2358 CrossRef CAS .
T. Binninger, E. Fabbri, A. Patru, M. Garganourakis, J. Han, D. F. Abbott, O. Sereda, R. Kötz, A. Menzel, M. Nachtegaal and T. J. Schmidt, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2016, 163, H906–H912 CrossRef CAS .
E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, T. Binninger, X. Cheng, B.-J. Kim, J. Durst, F. Bozza, T. Graule, R. Schäublin, L. Wiles, M. Pertoso, N. Danilovic, K. E. Ayers and T. J. Schmidt, Nat. Mater., 2017, 16, 925 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B.-J. Kim, D. F. Abbott, X. Cheng, E. Fabbri, M. Nachtegaal, F. Bozza, I. E. Castelli, D. Lebedev, R. Schäublin, C. Copéret, T. Graule, N. Marzari and T. J. Schmidt, ACS Catal., 2017, 7, 3245–3256 CrossRef CAS .
L. Mädler, H. K. Kammler, R. Mueller and S. E. Pratsinis, J. Aerosol Sci., 2002, 33, 369–389 CrossRef .
J. Landon, E. Demeter, N. İnoğlu, C. Keturakis, I. E. Wachs, R. Vasić, A. I. Frenkel and J. R. Kitchin, ACS Catal., 2012, 2, 1793–1801 CrossRef CAS .
K. Fominykh, P. Chernev, I. Zaharieva, J. Sicklinger, G. Stefanic, M. Döblinger, A. Müller, A. Pokharel, S. Böcklein, C. Scheu, T. Bein and D. Fattakhova-Rohlfing, ACS Nano, 2015, 9, 5180–5188 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Long, T. Shi, H. Hu, S. Jiang, S. Xi and Z. Tang, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 7413 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Han, Z.-H. Liu, Z. Yang, Z. Wang, X. Tang, T. Wang, L. Fan and K. Ooi, Chem. Mater., 2008, 20, 360–363 CrossRef CAS .
G. L. Wulf, T. J. Carter and G. R. Wallwork, Corros. Sci., 1969, 9, 689–701 CrossRef CAS .
V. Raghaven, J. Phase Equilib. Diffus., 2010, 31, 369–371 CrossRef .
M. A. Rhamdhani, P. C. Hayes and E. Jak, Metall. Mater. Trans. B, 2208, 39, 690–701 CrossRef .
F. Schneider, H. Schmalzried and Z. Phys, Zeitschrift fuer Physikalische Chemie, Neue Folge, 1990, 166, 1–18 CrossRef CAS .
L. Trotochaud, J. K. Ranney, K. N. Williams and S. W. Boettcher, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2012, 134, 17253–17261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Paufler, Cryst. Res. Technol., 1987, 22, 1436 CrossRef .
S. Sasaki, K. Fujino, E. Tak and Y. Uchi, Proc. Jpn. Acad., Ser. B, 1979, 55, 43–48 CrossRef CAS .
R. S. McEwen, J. Phys. Chem., 1971, 75, 1782–1789 CrossRef CAS .
T. Yamamoto, X-Ray Spectrom., 2008, 37, 572–584 CrossRef CAS .
A. N. Mansour and C. A. Melendres, J. Phys. Chem. A, 1998, 102, 65–81 CrossRef CAS .
M. Balasubramanian, C. A. Melendres and S. Mini, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2000, 104, 4300–4306 CrossRef CAS .
A. Boubnov, H. Lichtenberg, S. Mangold and J.-D. Grunwaldt, Identification of the iron oxidation state and coordination geometry in iron oxide- and zeolite-based catalysts using pre-edge XAS analysis, J. Synchrotron Radiat., 2015, 22, 410–426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Corrigan, R. S. Conell, C. A. Fierro and D. A. Scherson, J. Phys. Chem., 1987, 91, 5009–5011 CrossRef CAS .
S. Kim, D. A. Tryk, M. R. Antonio, R. Carr and D. Scherson, J. Phys. Chem., 1994, 98, 10269–10276 CrossRef CAS .
M. H. Nilsen, C. Nordhei, A. L. Ramstad, D. G. Nicholson, M. Poliakoff and A. Cabañas, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 6252–6262 CrossRef CAS .
T. Tangcharoen, W. Klysubun, C. Kongmark and W. Pecharapa, Phys. Status Solidi A, 2014, 211, 1903–1911 CrossRef CAS .
V. Šepelák, I. Bergmann, A. Feldhoff, P. Heitjans, F. Krumeich, D. Menzel, F. J. Litterst, S. J. Campbell and K. D. Becker, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2007, 111, 5026–5033 CrossRef .
R. D. L. Smith and C. P. Berlinguette, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138, 1561–1567 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. E. G. Lyons and M. P. Brandon, Int. J. Electrochem. Sci., 2008, 3, 1386–1424 CAS .
R. Kostecki and F. McLarnon, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1997, 144, 485–493 CrossRef CAS .
A. K. Taylor, I. Andreu and B. D. Gates, ACS Appl. Energy Mater., 2018, 1, 1771–1782 CrossRef CAS .
M. E. G. Lyons, R. L. Doyle, I. Godwin, M. O'Brien and L. Russell, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2012, 159, H932–H944 CrossRef CAS .
S. L. Medway, C. A. Lucas, A. Kowal, R. J. Nichols and D. Johnson, J. Electroanal. Chem., 2006, 587, 172–181 CrossRef CAS .
R. L. Doyle, I. J. Godwin, M. P. Brandon and M. E. G. Lyons, PCCP Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2013, 15, 13737–13783 RSC .
H. Bode, K. Dehmelt and J. Witte, Electrochim. Acta, 1966, 11, 1079-IN1071 Search PubMed .
M. R. Gennero de Chialvo and A. C. Chialvo, Electrochim. Acta, 1988, 33, 825–830 CrossRef CAS .
M. S. Burke, S. Zou, L. J. Enman, J. E. Kellon, C. A. Gabor, E. Pledger and S. W. Boettcher, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3737–3742 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. K. Bates, Q. Jia, H. Doan, W. Liang and S. Mukerjee, ACS Catal., 2016, 6, 155–161 CrossRef CAS .
F. Chekin, H. Tahermansouri and M. R. Besharat, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2014, 18, 747–753 CrossRef CAS .
M. Li, Y. Xiong, X. Liu, X. Bo, Y. Zhang, C. Han and L. Guo, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 8920–8930 RSC .
M. Wehrens-Dijksma and P. H. L. Notten, Electrochim. Acta, 2006, 51, 3609–3621 CrossRef CAS .
L. Guerlou-Demourgues, L. Fournès and C. Delmas, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1996, 143, 3083–3088 CrossRef CAS .
J. Y. C. Chen, L. Dang, H. Liang, W. Bi, J. B. Gerken, S. Jin, E. E. Alp and S. S. Stahl, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 15090–15093 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09336aThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Table Content:

 	Fig. 1  TEM and HR-TEM micrographs of NiO (a and d), Ni90Fe10Oy (b and e), and Ni70Fe30Oy (c and f).	 

NiO	21.4	4.1777	72.92	8.9 ± 3.0
Ni90Fe10Oy	77.9	4.1730	72.67	11.0 ± 5.5
Ni70Fe30Oy	34.6	4.1745	72.75	7.8 ± 4.5

 	Fig. 2  HAADF and Ni and Fe elemental maps for Ni90Fe10Oy (a–d) and Ni70Fe30Oy (e–h).	 

 	Fig. 3  X-ray diffractograms for Ni1−xFexOy samples produced via liquid-feed flame-spray synthesis. The reference peak positions for the cubic NiO (▼) and spinel NiFe2O4 (*) phases are indicated above.	 

 	Fig. 4  Normalized XANES spectra and Fourier transformed EXAFS spectra of the dry Ni1−xFexOy samples and measured sample standards at the Ni (a and b) and Fe (c and d) K-edges. All Ni χ(k) functions were Fourier transformed over a k-range of 2.6–14.0 Å while the Fe χ(k) functions were transformed over a range of 3–11.5 Å. The corresponding fits of the Ni and Fe FT-EXAFS spectra can be found the ESI (Fig. S1, S2 and Table S2).†	 

NiO	0.90 ± 0.04	Ni–O1	6	2.070 ± 0.006	0.0059 ± 0.0008	−0.38 ± 0.47	0.0044
Ni–Ni	12	2.956 ± 0.004	0.0074 ± 0.0004
Ni–O2	8	3.531 ± 0.023	0.0125 ± 0.0035
Ni90Fe10Oy	0.99 ± 0.04	Ni–O1	6	2.076 ± 0.005	0.0065 ± 0.0008	−0.31 ± 0.44	0.0029
Ni–Ni	12	2.957 ± 0.003	0.0071 ± 0.0003
Ni–O2	8	3.519 ± 0.021	0.0123 ± 0.0031
Ni70Fe30Oy	0.92 ± 0.05	Ni–O1	6	2.069 ± 0.006	0.0067 ± 0.0010	−0.19 ± 0.54	0.0054
Ni–Ni	12	2.962 ± 0.005	0.0091 ± 0.0005
Ni–O2	8	3.525 ± 0.027	0.0156 ± 0.0043

 	Fig. 5  Cyclic voltammograms recorded at 10 mV s−1 in 0.1 M KOH electrolyte (a). Arrows indicate the increasing current with each consecutive scan. OER Tafel plots showing the steady-state current density recorded after 1 minute in 0.1 M KOH (b).	 

NiO	21.4	57.1 ± 2.5	350 ± 1	1.4 ± 0.2	9.5 ± 0.6
Ni90Fe10Oy	77.9	40.4 ± 0.3	351 ± 4	0.5 ± 0.1	9.4 ± 2.3
Ni70Fe30Oy	34.6	40.3 ± 1.9	317 ± 2	3.9 ± 0.7	64.3 ± 4.1

 	Fig. 6  Stability measurements for the Ni1−xFexOy samples (a): electrodes were stepped between 1.00 V and 1.70 V for 500 cycles. Cyclic voltammograms recorded at the initial state and after every 100 potential-step cycles for NiO (b), Ni90Fe10Oy (c), and Ni70Fe30Oy (d). Difference in cathodic charge as a function of potential-step cycle number (e).	 

 	Fig. 7  Normalized XANES spectra (a) and Fourier transformed Ni EXAFS spectra (b) recorded in operando for Ni1−xFexOy over a range of applied potentials (note: 1.600 V and 1.650 V were not measured for NiO). All Ni χ(k) functions were Fourier transformed over a k-range of 2.6–12.5 Å. The corresponding fits of the Ni FT-EXAFS spectra can be found the ESI (Fig. S4, S5 and Tables S3–S5).†	 

 	Fig. 8  EXAFS-determined Ni–O coordination number (a), bonding distance (b), and Debye–Waller factor (c) shown over the range of applied potentials. Dashed lines are included only to serve as a guide for the initial NiO values.	 

 	Fig. 9  Fourier transformed Ni EXAFS spectra recorded in situ for Ni1−xFexOy at OCP after every 50 potential-step cycles. All Ni χ(k) functions were Fourier transformed over a k-range of 2.6–12.0 Å.	 
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c8ta09336a

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
