Efficient charge extraction and slow recombination in organic–inorganic perovskites capped with semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C5EE03806E View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C5EE03806E
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1439-1449Efficient charge extraction and slow recombination in organic–inorganic perovskites capped with semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes†

        
          
            Rachelle 
            Ihly
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Anne-Marie 
            Dowgiallo
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Mengjin 
            Yang
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Philip 
            Schulz
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Noah J. 
            Stanton
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Obadiah G. 
            Reid
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Andrew J. 
            Ferguson
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Kai 
            Zhu
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Joseph J. 
            Berry
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Jeffrey L. 
            Blackburn
          
        
      *
      National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Chemical and Materials Science Center, Golden, CO 80401, USA. E-mail: jeffrey.blackburn@nrel.gov
Received 
      16th December 2015
    , Accepted 8th February 2016First published on 8th February 2016AbstractMetal-halide based perovskite solar cells have rapidly emerged as a promising alternative to traditional inorganic and thin-film photovoltaics. Although charge transport layers are used on either side of perovskite absorber layers to extract photogenerated electrons and holes, the time scales for charge extraction and recombination are poorly understood. Ideal charge transport layers should facilitate large discrepancies between charge extraction and recombination rates. Here, we demonstrate that highly enriched semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotube (SWCNT) films enable rapid (sub-picosecond) hole extraction from a prototypical perovskite absorber layer and extremely slow back-transfer and recombination (hundreds of microseconds). The energetically narrow and distinct spectroscopic signatures for charges within these SWCNT thin films enables the unambiguous temporal tracking of each charge carrier with time-resolved spectroscopies covering many decades of time. The efficient hole extraction by the SWCNT layer also improves electron extraction by the compact titanium dioxide electron transport layer, which should reduce charge accumulation at each critical interface. Finally, we demonstrate that the use of thin interface layers of semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes between the perovskite absorber layer and a prototypical hole transport layer improves device efficiency and stability, and reduces hysteresis.

Broader context
The photovoltaic efficiencies of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells have risen dramatically after only a few years of research. Coupled with low-temperature solution-phase fabrication routes, these high efficiencies indicate tremendous potential for low-cost, sustainable solar electricity generation. There are numerous interfaces in perovskite solar cells that play crucial roles in determining device efficiency and stability. Importantly, many critical interfacial properties and processes are still poorly understood, a deficiency that often limits efforts to improve device performance. An important example is the kinetics of charge extraction (and subsequent recombination) at the interface between the perovskite absorber layer and transport layers designed to selectively remove electrons or holes. In this work, we design a novel hole transport layer based on highly enriched semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes. The spectroscopic features associated with the well-defined optical transitions of this transport layer allow us to develop a full kinetic scheme for electron/hole extraction and recombination that covers many orders of magnitude in time. Importantly, the semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes facilitate sub-picosecond hole extraction, after which charges take hundreds of microseconds to recombine. Finally, we demonstrate that this large discrepancy in charge extraction and recombination rates is beneficial for improved device efficiency and stability.

Introduction
Metal-halide perovskite solar cells have demonstrated dramatic improvements in efficiencies over the past six years, rising from ca. 3% (uncertified) in 20091 to above 20% (certified) in 2015.2,3 These hybrid organic/inorganic photovoltaics embody many advantages of inexpensive solution-processed solar cells (e.g. bulk heterojunction organic PV, dye-sensitized cells, etc.), but at greater power conversion efficiencies that compare favorably with established inorganic technologies, such as CdTe and polycrystalline silicon.4 Despite the rapid rise in efficiency, a number of fundamental operational principles of perovskite solar cells are still poorly understood. Particularly important are the mechanisms and rates by which photogenerated charge carriers (1) recombine within neat perovskite films (either within the bulk or through traps), (2) diffuse to interfaces with electron and hole transport layers (ETL and HTL), (3) are transferred across these interfaces, and (4) recombine following extraction by the ETL and HTL. The rates for these competing processes help to determine the ultimate efficiency of devices. Rapid diffusion and interfacial charge transfer compete with recombination within the perovskite layer and aid in charge extraction to the ETL and HTL, enhancing photocurrent.5–7 Suppressing back-transfer from the ETL and HTL into the perovskite absorber layer should result in long-lived charge separation and reduced recombination losses to the open circuit voltage and fill factor.5,7–10 Recent efforts have utilized both morphological modifications and interfacial engineering to improve charge extraction from the perovskite layer, which is thought to be especially inefficient for the commonly employed TiO2 ETL.5,7–9,11–18
Despite their importance, the time scales for charge extraction by the ETL and HTL (as well as subsequent back-transfer and recombination) in perovskite solar cells are still poorly understood. An important contributing factor to this uncertainty is the lack of specific and narrow spectral signatures for charges in traditional ETL and HTL materials.19–21 For example, both TiO2 and 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis-(N,N-di-p-methoxyphenyl-amine)-9,9′-spirobi-fluorene (spiro-MeOTAD), prototypical ETL and HTL materials, have broad featureless near-infrared (NIR) absorptions when charged with excess electrons or holes, respectively, and charge carriers within the perovskite absorber layer itself also contribute to broad NIR absorption.20,22 These overlapping signals typically require complicated analyses for transient absorption (TA) measurements at a single wavelength (e.g. 1400 nm20), where carriers within all three layers of a device stack (ETL, perovskite absorber layer, and HTL) may contribute some ill-defined amount to the observed transient signal.19–21,23 TA experiments probing the band edge bleach of the perovskite can provide useful information regarding charge extraction rates,5 but while this signature is material-specific, both the electron and hole contribute to the signal. The net result is that experiments to track the dynamics of photo-generated charge carriers within the active layer and especially across interfaces are technically challenging and/or often ambiguous. This ambiguity creates a disconnect between the effects of interfacial modifications on device efficiencies and the fundamental mechanisms underlying those effects. Here, we have designed a technologically relevant experimental system that addresses these important challenges by utilizing a charge extraction layer (thin films of highly enriched semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes) with a well-defined and energetically narrow spectral signature in the charged state.24
Several recent studies have used either multi-walled carbon nanotube (MWCNT)25 or SWCNT thin films and composites (with mixed populations of metallic and semiconducting SWCNTs)26–28 to extract holes in perovskite solar cells. Highly enriched semiconducting SWCNTs (s-SWCNTs) have important advantages for both fundamental interfacial charge transfer studies and improving efficiency in perovskite solar cells. First, the sharp optical transitions (spectral width ca. 30 meV) of species-pure s-SWCNTs can be used as sensitive spectroscopic signatures for charge transfer to or from s-SWCNTs.24 The narrow peak widths of these optical transitions solve the problem of broad absorption of charges in conventional charge extraction layers, and enable the tracking of charge extraction with material specificity. Additionally, our recent photoelectron spectroscopy (PES) experiments show that ground-state charge transfer at the interface between methyl ammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) and s-SWCNTs creates band bending in the s-SWCNT layer that should in principle hinder the back transfer of holes from the SWCNT HTL to the perovskite.29 Thus, we employ s-SWCNT layers to serve two roles in our study: (i) provide a material-specific spectroscopic signature to track charge extraction and recombination within a MAPbI3 device stack and (ii) enable very long-lived charge separation, enhancing the performance of MAPbI3 solar cells.
Herein, we probe electron and hole extraction from MAPbI3 perovskite absorber layers using time-resolved spectroscopy over time scales spanning femtoseconds to ca. 400 microseconds. The sharp excitonic transitions of a high-purity (6,5) s-SWCNT HTL allow us to unambiguously deconvolute the kinetic pathways for both electrons and holes. Transient absorbance measurements demonstrate that s-SWCNT HTLs can efficiently extract holes from a perovskite active layer in sub-picosecond time scales, and that the resulting back-transfer of holes to MAPbI3 occurs over hundreds of microseconds. The efficient charge extraction enabled by s-SWCNTs contrasts sharply with a spiro-MeOTAD HTL and a compact TiO2 ETL, both of which we find to be relatively inefficient at extracting holes and electrons, respectively. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the presence of the s-SWCNT HTL significantly improves electron extraction from the TiO2 ETL, suggesting that the efficacy of the TiO2 ETL depends sensitively on the presence and identity of the HTL. The huge disparity (up to nine orders of magnitude) in the time scales for hole extraction to and back-transfer from the s-SWCNTs suggest that s-SWCNT HTLs provide the efficient and long-lived charge separation needed for high-efficiency solar cells. This supposition is confirmed by our demonstration that an interfacial layer of s-SWCNTs, as thin as 5 nm in between the MAPbI3 absorber layer and a spiro-MeOTAD HTL, improves the power conversion efficiency from ca. 14.1% to ca. 16.1%.
Results and discussion

Fig. 1a shows a representative schematic of one of the primary trilayer stacks we used for our time-resolved spectroscopic studies – MAPbI3 interfaced with both an ETL (compact TiO2) and HTL (s-SWCNT). Our HTL studies focused primarily on near-monochiral (6,5) s-SWCNT thin films and lithium-doped spiro-MeOTAD. The (6,5) s-SWCNT HTL was enriched with >99% semiconducting SWCNTs by a polyfluorene extraction procedure,24,30 and is comprised almost entirely of (6,5) s-SWCNTs (>95%).24 This HTL differs dramatically from previous studies employing SWCNT HTLs,26,27 where the SWCNT layer contained many different species of SWCNTs with both semiconducting and metallic electronic structure. Fig. 1b displays absorbance spectra (corrected for reflectance) of three films probed in this study. The black trace shows MAPbI3 deposited on a compact TiO2 ETL (bilayer) and the blue trace shows an identical bilayer stack capped with a 9 nm (6,5) s-SWCNT HTL (trilayer). The primary difference between the two spectra is the presence of a sharp transition at ca. 1000 nm, corresponding to the first excitonic transition (S11) of the (6,5) s-SWCNTs (see pink trace). The orange spectrum in Fig. 1b shows a differential absorption spectrum (ΔA = Adoped − Aundoped) for a (6,5) s-SWCNT film doped p-type with a well-characterized one-electron oxidant.24,31,32 The spectrum is dominated by two key peaks – a strong bleach of the S11 exciton at 1000 nm and an induced absorption (IA) at 1170 nm, the latter having been assigned to the optical transition of a three-body trion quasiparticle.24,33,34 Importantly, the differential spectrum in Fig. 1b demonstrates that these two distinct spectral signatures can be used to follow hole extraction into the (6,5) s-SWCNT HTL.
 Fig. 1  Experimental schematic, steady state, and transient absorption of MAPbI3 and (6,5) SWCNT thin films. (a) Schematic of a TiO2/MAPbI3/SWCNT trilayer sample, indicating the excitation directions for “backside” (BS) and “frontside” (FS) illumination. (b) Optical absorption spectra (corrected for reflection in an integrating sphere) for TiO2/MAPbI3 (black) and TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) (blue) samples, along with a neat 9 nm (6,5) SWCNT film for comparison (pink). The first and second excitonic transitions of the s-SWCNTs (S11 and S22) are labeled. The orange spectrum (offset for clarity) is the differential absorption spectrum for a chemically doped (p-type) (6,5) SWCNT film. (c and e) TA spectra for TiO2/MAPbI3 bilayer at various pump–probe delays. (d and f) TA spectra for TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) trilayer at various pump–probe delays. Excitation for panels c–f was BS illumination at 400 nm. 
Femtosecond TA spectra are shown in Fig. 1c–f for a TiO2/MAPbI3 bilayer (Fig. 1c and e) and a TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) trilayer (Fig. 1d and f) with backside illumination (Fig. 1a) at 400 nm. In the region of 550–800 nm, the bleach at 750 nm corresponds to a bleach of the MAPbI3 band-edge excitonic transition.35,36 While the initial excited state is excitonic, the exciton rapidly (<50 fs) decays into uncorrelated charges due to the low exciton binding energy (ca. 9–17 meV).35,37–39 A broad induced absorption (IA) appears between 850–1400 nm for both samples, and is related to charge carriers in MAPbI3.22 However, the trilayer sample has a sharp bleach centered at ca. 1000 nm (asterisk, Fig. 1f), corresponding to the (6,5) S11 transition, superimposed on this broad IA. The presence of the (6,5) S11 bleach indicates hole transfer from the MAPbI3 absorber layer to the (6,5) s-SWCNT HTL. Importantly, the (6,5) bleach is present at early times, prior to 1 ps delay, indicating very rapid hole transfer, and remains for the entire experimental window (ca. 5 ns).

Fig. 2a shows the TA dynamics of several different samples probed at the MAPbI3 band-edge bleach (750 nm). Since no HTL or ETL is present for the MAPbI3/glass sample, the bleach recovery dynamics represent intrinsic electron–hole recombination dynamics within the neat perovskite. Interestingly, the dynamics for TiO2/MAPbI3 and TiO2/MAPbI3/spiro are essentially identical to the MAPbI3/glass sample, indicating that the bleach dynamics for both of the former samples are dominated by electron–hole recombination within the perovskite. The dynamics of intrinsic recombination within the MAPbI3 absorber layer in these three samples can be fit empirically with a biexponential decay with two characteristic time constants in the range of 8 ns and 50 ns (Fig. S3, average time constant 〈τ〉 = 42 ns, ESI†). The longer time constant is consistent with the photoluminescence (PL) lifetime (τPL = 60 ns) extracted from time-resolved PL measurements (Fig. S4, ESI†), which is reported to reflect monomolecular (Shockley–Read–Hall) non-radiative recombination.38 In sharp contrast, the TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) sample shows much more rapid bleach recovery, indicating a new kinetic pathway where the s-SWCNT HTL removes charge carriers from the perovskite layer. The NIR TA spectrum at a pump–probe delay of 3.8 ns is compared in Fig. 2b to the chemically doped p-type (6,5) thin film. The two charge-related features, the s-SWCNT S11 bleach at 1000 nm and the s-SWCNT trion IA at 1170 nm, provide unambiguous evidence for hole extraction from the perovskite layer into the adjacent s-SWCNT HTL. Fig. S5 (ESI†) demonstrates that similar results are obtained for excitation at longer wavelength (e.g. 500 nm and 700 nm). Additionally, the green trace in Fig. 2a shows that an HTL composed of laser vaporization (LV) s-SWCNTs (also >99% s-SWCNT enriched),30 with significantly different band gaps (Fig. S6, ESI†), also efficiently extracts holes from the perovskite layer.
 Fig. 2  Transient absorption dynamics of s-SWCNT hole extraction and back-transfer. (a) MAPbI3 bleach recovery dynamics, measured at 750 nm for five different samples. (b) Comparison of the TA spectrum of the TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) trilayer at a delay of 3.8 ns to the differential spectrum of a chemically doped (6,5) film. (c) Inverted, corrected and rescaled transient of S11 exciton bleach (1000 nm) for TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) tilayer compared to the MAPbI3 band edge bleach (750 nm). The red line is a fit to the one-dimensional diffusion equation. (d) Long-delay dynamics of MAPbI3 bleach recovery (750 nm) and (6,5) S11 bleach recovery (1000 nm) for TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) trilayer. The solid black line shows a bi-exponential fit to the S11 bleach recovery, with τ1 = 40 μs and τ2 = 416 μs. For all panels in figure, the excitation wavelength was 400 nm, backside illumination. 
For the (6,5) trilayer sample, comparison of the rise time of the S11 bleach (corrected for the superimposed MAPbI3 IA and inverted) to the MAPbI3 bleach recovery (Fig. 2c) demonstrates that both transients reflect the same kinetic process of hole extraction into the (6,5) SWCNT HTL. This bleach slowly rises over the 5 ns experimental window, indicating a diffusion-limited arrival of holes at the MAPbI3/s-SWCNT interface. The near-identical kinetics of the (6,5) bleach growth and the MAPbI3 bleach decay over the first ca. 3 ns indicate that the primary charge extraction process occurring over this temporal window is hole extraction into the HTL. At a delay of ca. 3 ns, the growth of the (6,5) S11 bleach is complete, implying that (1) diffusion of holes to the SWCNT HTL and subsequent hole extraction is complete after ca. 3 ns, (2) the remaining signal at ca. 3 ns and beyond for the 750 nm MAPbI3 bleach is primarily or completely due to electrons, and (3) longer delays are required to follow either electron extraction by TiO2 or recombination of extracted charges. We fit the slow rise of the (6,5) S11 bleach to extract the kinetics of hole diffusion to this interface (red trace, Fig. 2c). This fit utilizes the analytical solution to the diffusion equation derived by Xing et al.,6 with an average lifetime of ca. 42 ns for holes in the MAPbI3 layer (see additional details and Fig. S7 in ESI†). This analysis yields a hole diffusion constant of 0.3 cm2 s−1 and a diffusion length of ca. 1 μm for holes in the MAPbI3 layer.
The electronic delay on our TA spectrometer allows us to probe carrier dynamics in the TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) trilayer over a 400 μs time window (Fig. 2d). The MAPbI3 bleach (750 nm) decays relatively quickly, and is fully recovered by ca. 400 ns, indicating that both electrons and holes have been fully removed from the perovskite over this time frame. In stark contrast, the slow decay of the (6,5) S11 bleach (1000 nm, τ1 = 40 μs and τ1 = 416 μs, solid blue line) indicates an extremely long-lived charge-separated state with holes persisting in the s-SWCNTs. Our recent PES measurements suggest that ground-state interfacial charge transfer induces an appreciable barrier of ca. 300 meV to the back-transfer of holes from s-SWCNTs to the perovskite (Fig. S8, ESI†).29 We suggest that the very slow loss of holes in the s-SWCNT HTL (Fig. 2d) is a beneficial result of this band bending within the s-SWCNT film. It is informative to compare the demonstrably efficient hole extraction of the s-SWCNT HTL over a 4 ns time window with the apparently inefficient extraction by the traditionally used spiro-MeOTAD HTL (Fig. 2a). For a similarly prepared MAPbI3/spiro-MeOTAD interface, Schulz et al. demonstrated by PES that band bending within a plain spiro-MeOTAD film on top of MAPbI3 shows an opposite trend of that found in a s-SWCNT HTL (Fig. S8, ESI†).40 Thus, compared to the spiro-MeOTAD HTL, the inherent band bending in the s-SWCNT HTL should further promote movement of holes into the bulk of the transport layer and add an additional barrier to inhibit back-transfer to the perovskite layer.
To probe electron injection into TiO2, we turn to time-resolved microwave conductivity (TRMC) as a sensitive probe of free charge carriers (Fig. 3). In the TRMC measurement, the change in microwave probe power (ΔP/P) is proportional to the yield of free charge carriers (Φ) multiplied by the sum of the carrier mobilities (Σμ = μe + μh): ΔP/P ∝ ΦΣμ. The quantity of the yield-mobility product (ΦΣμ) is used as a figure of merit to compare the charge generation efficiency amongst various samples, with the caveat that the mobility of carriers in all components (e.g. absorber layer, ETL, HTL, etc.) must be considered. The fluence dependence and temporal evolution of ΦΣμ for four different MAPbI3 samples is shown in Fig. 3. Fig. 3a shows that ΦΣμ for all samples follows the same general trend with fluence, with an average value of ca. 10 cm2 V−1 s−1. This yield-mobility product is over an order of magnitude higher than ΦΣμ obtained for high internal quantum efficiency (ca. 70%) charge generation in s-SWCNT/C60 donor/acceptor heterojunctions, where the dominant contribution to ΦΣμ arises from the s-SWCNT hole.41 This large difference in ΦΣμ suggests that the observed photoconductance is dominated by carrier(s) in the perovskite layer. Since TA measurements demonstrate that hole transfer to s-SWCNTs is complete by 3 ns, comparable to the pulse duration for the TRMC measurements, the similar yield-mobility products of the TiO2/MAPbI3 and TiO2/MAPbI3/s-SWCNT suggest that the dominant carrier that contributes to ΦΣμ is the perovskite electron (since removal of the hole does not affect ΦΣμ). A previous TRMC study by Wojciechowski et al. suggest a similar dominance of the 9 GHz mobility in MAPbI3 films by the MAPbI3 electron.7 If we consider ΦΣμ to be dominated by the perovskite electron, then the similar yield-mobility products of the quartz/MAPbI3 and TiO2/MAPbI3 samples suggest that negligible electron density is injected from MAPbI3 into the TiO2 ETL over the duration of the TRMC pulse. This result agrees with the TA measurements discussed above, and with other recent studies.7,12
 Fig. 3  TRMC results for MAPbI3 films with various electron and hole transport layers. (a) Yield-mobility product as a function of incident photon fluence for four different samples. (b) Time-resolved microwave conductivity transients for the same four samples, normalized at the peak (end-of-pulse) intensity. For all samples in figure, excitation wavelength was 430 nm, backside illumination. 
The TRMC transients for the same four samples are plotted in Fig. 4b. The TRMC dynamics are similar for MAPbI3 and TiO2/MAPbI3, suggesting that, in the absence of the s-SWCNT HTL, electron extraction by the compact TiO2 ETL is inefficient even over a time frame of ca. 450 ns. In sharp contrast, samples with a s-SWCNT HTL exhibit significantly faster decay, corresponding to electron extraction (presumably diffusion-limited) over the 450 ns window. Similar to TA dynamics, the TRMC transient for the trilayer with an LV s-SWCNT HTL are commensurate with the (6,5) s-SWCNT HTL, suggesting that a broad range of s-SWCNTs with different band gaps can be used to enhance the charge extraction kinetics from the perovskite absorber layer.
 Fig. 4  Summary of important dynamic processes occurring within MAPbI3 and at the interfaces with the SWCNT HTL and TiO2 ETL. (a) Kinetic scheme and cartoon schematic for dynamic processes in photoexcited MAPbI3 absorber layer with SWCNT HTL and TiO2 ETL. Processes above the dashed line result in charge extraction, and below the line result in recombination. Each process is color-coded. (b) Color-coded schematic of the time scale of each process described in (a), as well as the measurement technique and probe wavelength used to extract the kinetic information for the processes. 
The enhanced TRMC decay in Fig. 3b is similar to the result obtained in a recent study where a self-assembled fullerene monolayer was utilized to improve electron extraction from MAPbI3.7 Our results demonstrate that improved electron extraction can be achieved not only by the direct employment of an interfacial layer at the ETL interface, but also by better extraction of holes at the HTL interface. Wojciechowski et al. attributed inefficient electron extraction by compact TiO2 to an electrostatic barrier to electron transfer across this interface as a result of TiO2 interface states.7 In steadily illuminated devices, such a barrier would lead to electron accumulation that slowly raises the quasi-Fermi level until electrons have sufficient energy to inject into TiO2. Alternatively, Correa Baena et al. suggest that the poor electron extraction by compact TiO2 layers results from an energy level mismatch between the MAPbI3 and TiO2 conduction bands.12Fig. 3b demonstrates that, even in the absence of steady-state illumination, once holes are efficiently removed by the s-SWCNT HTL within ca. 3 ns, electrons now have sufficient driving force to be injected into the TiO2 ETL. This result indicates that the rates for carrier extraction depend on time-dependent changes in carrier concentration. The physical process underlying this important observation is unclear at this time, but we can speculate on a potential mechanism. First, we consider that efficient removal of holes by the s-SWCNT HTL should dramatically inhibit electron–hole recombination within the active layer. Since electron–hole recombination within MAPbI3 active layers is generally found to be first-order (defect-mediated),38 the inhibited recombination resulting from efficient hole extraction should lead to a concomitant increase of the electron quasi-Fermi level in the MAPbI3. In turn, this rise in the electron quasi-Fermi level would provide the needed driving force for electron injection into the TiO2 ETL. Future studies, aimed at device modeling and understanding the interfacial energetics of the TiO2/MAPbI3 interface, will be helpful in better understanding this intriguing result.
A kinetic scheme emerges from the detailed time-resolved measurements, as depicted in Fig. 4a. Fig. 4b summarizes the time scales of each process, along with the probe wavelength and spectroscopic measurement used to follow the processes. Carriers generated in the perovskite absorber layer recombine with average time constants of several tens of nanoseconds in the absence of the s-SWCNT HTL. Diffusion of holes to the SWCNT HTL occurs over the course of ca. 3 ns, with a diffusion constant of ca. 0.3 cm2 s−1, where hole injection into the SWCNT HTL then occurs on a sub-picosecond time scale. Electron injection into the TiO2 ETL is slower, and is observed (for samples with a s-SWCNT HTL) by the loss of 9 GHz absorption in the TRMC measurement over the course of ca. 450 ns. Following extraction of both charge carriers into the respective transport layers, back-transfer (and subsequent recombination, not directly observed) is very slow. The time constant of back-transfer is in the range of 40–420 μs (λprobe = 1000 nm).
The fast charge extraction and very slow recombination observed above suggest that purely semiconducting SWCNT HTLs or interfacial layers could improve the performance of MAPbI3 PV devices. With these considerations in mind, we decided to test our s-SWCNT films as thin interfacial layers between the MAPbI3 absorber layer and a traditional spiro-MeOTAD HTL (schematic, Fig. 5a) to improve hole extraction. In this capacity, their behavior mimics that of self-assembled fullerene interfacial layers recently used at the MAPbI3/TiO2 interface to improve electron extraction.7 In this role, the interfacial layer is very thin and does not provide a direct transport pathway to the charge collection electrode. Instead, the interfacial layer is used to establish the appropriate interfacial energetics that encourage rapid charge extraction and slow recombination.
 Fig. 5  Solar cell performance with and without SWCNT interfacial layers. (a) Device schematic for a MAPbI3 solar cell with a s-SWCNT interfacial layer between the MAPbI3 absorber layer and the spiro-MeOTAD HTL. (b) J–V curves for typical MAPbI3 devices, with or without a 5 nm (6,5) s-SWCNT interfacial layer. (c) External quantum efficiency for the same two devices as in panel (b). 

Fig. 5b displays typical J–V curves for devices with either no interfacial layer or a 5 nm (6,5) s-SWCNT interfacial layer. In addition to improved efficiency, the devices with s-SWCNT interfacial layers also demonstrated significantly reduced hysteresis with regards to forward and reverse voltage scans and improved stability (see also Fig. S9, Tables S1 and S2, ESI†). Several studies suggest that J–V hysteresis is strongly correlated with the nature of the electronic contact between the perovskite and the ETL/HTL, and that improving charge extraction (reducing charge accumulation) reduces hysteresis.7,42,43 Thus, the reduced hysteresis most likely stems from reduced interfacial charge accumulation for both holes and electrons, as our time-resolved measurements demonstrate efficient extraction of both charge carriers. The improvement in Jsc is directly reflected in an increase to the external quantum efficiency over the entire wavelength range captured by the MAPbI3 absorber layer (Fig. 5c).

Table 1 summarizes the performance for a series of devices, prepared on top of an identical TiO2 ETL, with different (6,5) s-SWCNT interfacial layer thicknesses. The device with the thinnest (6,5) s-SWCNT interfacial layers showed improved Jsc, Voc, FF, and power conversion efficiency, and these improvements diminish with increasing s-SWCNT thickness. The average efficiency for devices utilizing a 5 nm (6,5) s-SWCNT interfacial layer was 16.1%, with a maximum efficiency of 16.5%, representing a ca. 2% increase in the absolute efficiency over reference devices. While all device parameters improve, the largest improvements are seen for Jsc and FF, consistent with improved charge extraction and slow charge recombination.8,10,11 As expected from the similarity in charge extraction kinetics for (6,5) and LV s-SWCNTs (Fig. 2a and 3b), devices prepared with LV s-SWCNT interfacial layers show similar improvements as observed for (6,5) interfacial layers.
Table 1 Device parameters for MAPbI3 solar cells prepared on an identical TiO2 ETL and capped with a spiro-MeOTAD HTL. The devices either contained no interfacial layer or utilized s-SWCNT interfacial layers with various thicknesses. All values are reported for reverse scan. See ESI for forward scan values




Interfacial layer

J
sc (avg) mA cm−2

V
oc (avg) V
FF (avg)
PCE (avg) %
PCE (max) %




None
19.9 ± 0.2
1.04 ± 0.02
0.68 ± 0.03
14.1 ± 0.4
14.7


(6,5) 5 nm
20.8 ± 0.3
1.07 ± 0.009
0.73 ± 0.02
16.1 ± 0.3
16.5


(6,5) 10 nm
20.0 ± 0.3
1.06 ± 0.002
0.71 ± 0.02
15.0 ± 0.2
15.2


(6,5) 15 nm
19.4 ± 0.5
1.03 ± 0.002
0.65 ± 0.04
13.1 ± 0.6
13.7


LV 5 nm
21.1 ± 0.1
1.03 ± 0.003
0.73 ± 0.006
15.9 ± 0.2
16.1


LV 10 nm
21.4 ± 0.3
1.03 ± 0.004
0.68 ± 0.008
14.9 ± 0.3
15.2


LV 15 nm
21.7 ± 0.1
1.01 ± 0.002
0.60 ± 0.006
13.2 ± 0.2
13.3


None/toluene
20.5 ± 0.03
1.05 ± 0.006
0.66 ± 0.04
14.2 ± 0.8
14.8




It is important to note that the s-SWCNTs in these interfacial layers play different roles compared to recent studies utilizing thick SWCNT HTLs (within insulating matrices) to provide direct transport pathways from MAPbI3 to a metal electrode.26,27 In our case, we use thick (∼200 nm) layers of the doped spiro-MeOTAD HTL. The very thin (and purely semiconducting) SWCNT layers have low surface roughness44 (≤8 nm, Fig. S10 and Table S3, ESI†), so there are very few, if any, SWCNT bundles that provide a direct transport pathway between the MAPbI3 absorber layer and the metal electrode. Instead, our recent PES results29 and the TA/TRMC results covered here suggest that the s-SWCNT interfacial layers most likely improve efficiency by establishing the appropriate interfacial energetics to facilitate fast hole extraction and slow recombination, which is recognized as a critical strategy for improving the performance of planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells.11 We note that further improvements to our devices will likely be achieved by the simultaneous utilization of a thin interfacial layer at the ETL interface,7 or by the use of another ETL altogether,12,13 to further optimize carrier extraction at both electrodes.
Conclusion
Our study demonstrates, for a technologically relevant perovskite PV device stack, that the narrow material-specific spectroscopic signatures of a charged s-SWCNT HTL can be used to unambiguously track the kinetics of critical processes, such as carrier diffusion, interfacial charge transfer, and recombination. Importantly, highly enriched semiconducting SWCNT HTLs or interfacial layers provide orders-of-magnitude temporal separation for the charge extraction and recombination rates. The connection of our time-resolved spectroscopic measurements to improved device efficiencies provides a direct link between the improved charge extraction and slow recombination observed in our time-resolved measurements and the PV device performance that depends sensitively on the kinetics of these processes. Our results indicate that thin s-SWCNT interfacial layers may represent an economical way to improve perovskite solar cell performance for a variety of HTLs, and future studies should explore the pairing of additional organic and inorganic HTLs with s-SWCNT interfacial layers.
Experimental methods
Perovskite film preparation
Fluorine-doped tin oxide (FTO, TEC15, Hartford, IN) was cleaned by an overnight base bath soaking (5 wt% NaOH in ethanol). A compact TiO2 layer was deposited by spray pyrolysis of 0.2 M titanium diisopropoxide bis(acetylacetonate) in 1-butanol solution at 450 °C. A modified method based on the solvent engineering approach was used to deposit perovskite film.45 Therein the precursor was made of 44 wt% of 1:1 molar ratio of MAI and PbI2 in γ-butyrolactone (GBL, Aldrich)/dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO, Sigma-Aldrich) (7/3 v/v). The substrates were spun at 4500 rpm for 50 s with a drop of toluene being casted during the spinning. The perovskite film was fully crystallized by annealing at 85 °C for 10 min. Perovskite films on glass substrates for the TA control measurements were prepared in the same manner except without the TiO2 spray pyrolysis process.
Single-walled carbon nanotube layer preparation
CoMoCat SG65i SWCNTs were purchased from Southwest Nanotechnologies, Inc., and PFO-BPy was purchased from American Dye Source. Laser vaporization (LV) nanotubes were synthesized in house at a synthesis temperature of 1125 °C.30 SWCNTs were dispersed at a loading of ∼1 mg mL−1 in ∼2.5 mg mL−1 PFO-BPy in toluene (10–15 mL total volume) through tip sonication for 30 minutes (Cole-Palmer CPX 750) in a bath of cool (18 °C) flowing water. Following sonication, undispersed material was removed by ultracentrifugation for 5 minutes using an SW32Ti motor (Beckman) at 13200 rpm and 20 °C. The supernatant was retained, and several of these supernatants were combined to produce larger volumes. To remove excess polymer, these larger volumes (30–35 mL) were centrifuged for 20 hours at 24100 rpm and 0 °C. In this case, the resulting supernatant (containing excess polymer unbound to SWCNTs) was discarded and the pellet containing (6,5) or LV SWCNT material was redispersed in toluene. This polymer removal process was repeated until a SWCNT:PFO-BPy mass ratio of ∼1:1 was obtained. For both (6,5) and LV SWCNT samples, the final enrichment in the semiconducting population is >99% (<1% metallic SWCNT impurities).30
(6,5) and LV SWCNT thin films with thicknesses in the range of 5–15 nm were prepared through ultrasonic spray deposition onto the MAPbI3 films (or other substrates) using a dispersion flow rate of 0.25 mL min−1 and gas flow rate of 7.0 std L min−1.44 The nozzle power was fixed at 0.8 W and the substrate was heated to 130 °C to allow for evaporation of the solvent. After spraying, the films were soaked in a toluene bath (80 °C) to remove some residual polymer and better couple SWCNTs within the film. To avoid potential photo-degradation during the TA experiments, the films were introduced into a helium glovebox and another quartz slide was sealed on top of the sample using a polymer film (Surlyn, Solaronix) heated to 90 °C. The polymer was cut into a hollow frame so that it only sealed the outer edges of the slide and did not interfere with the sample. Note that for these spectroscopic measurements the stack is not completed with a final metal contact on top of the HTL which has no significant effect on hole extraction at the MAPbI3/HTL interface.
Steady-state absorbance measurements
UV-vis absorbance measurements were carried out using a Cary6000i spectrophotometer equipped with the diffuse reflectance accessory. For each sample, transmission (T) and reflectance (R) were collected from 1800–200 nm with light incident on the quartz/TiO2 interface. The absorbance was calculated according to A = −log(T + R).
Femtosecond transient absorption measurements
Femtosecond pump–probe TA experiments were carried out on a system that utilizes a 1 kHz regeneratively amplified Ti:Sapphire laser system (Coherent Libra) that produces laser pulses (100 fs, 4 mJ) at 800 nm. The Ti:Sapphire laser pumps an optical parametric amplifier (OPA) to generate 400 nm light, which was chopped at a rate of 500 Hz and used as the excitation pump pulse. The pump fluence was in the range of ca. 5 × 1013 and ca. 3 × 1012 photons pulse−1 cm−2 for near-IR and visible probe measurements, respectively. Continuum probe pulses (in the range of 800–1700 nm for near-IR and 400–800 nm for visible) were generated by passing a portion of the amplified 800 nm light through a sapphire plate. For “short-delay” experiments (tdelay ≤ 5.4 ns), the probe pulse was delayed in time with respect to the pump pulse using a motorized translation stage mounted with a retro-reflecting mirror. For 0.1 ns to μs experiments, a separate probe source (EOS, Ultrafast Systems) is used that can be electronically delayed with respect to the fs pump. This source is a VIS/NIR broadband continuum that allows for seamless connection between data from time delays on the fs to ca. 0.5 ms time scale. No change in sample position or excitation conditions is required for switching between the two modes of probing.
Pump and probe beams were spatially overlapped at the quartz slide, and the sample was excited either through the SWCNT or perovskite layer first. For most measurements, we excited through the perovskite layer first, and we refer to this direction as “backside” illumination. We focus primarily on backside illumination in this study, since this illumination direction mimics the illumination in a typically prepared perovskite solar cell, and also allows us to generate excitons/carriers primarily in the perovskite layer. To confirm this, we performed control studies on neat SWCNT films, exciting the SWCNTs with a fluence that matches that reaching the perovskite/SWCNT interface following exponential decay through the ca. 240 nm thick perovskite layer (and any reflection). See Fig. S1 (ESI†) for this control experiment. Fig. S2 (ESI†) displays an example of a frontside illumination experiment. Typical averaging times for data collection were 5–8 seconds, at each pump–probe delay, to achieve high signal-to-noise. The instrument response function (IRF) is ca. 120 fs.24
Flash-photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity
TRMC probes the generation and decay of free charge carriers by measuring the time-dependent absorption of a 9 GHz microwave probe by a photoexcited sample. Flash photolysis time resolved microwave conductivity (fp-TRMC) measurements were performed using a pulsed Q-switched Nd:YAG laser (3–5 ns pulses, Continuum Powerlite) and an optical parametric oscillator (Continuum Panther) pumped by the third harmonic (355 nm). Bilayer and neat films on quartz substrates were placed in an X-band microwave waveguide to monitor the transient change in microwave power, ΔP(t). In all TRMC measurements, the excitation direction was through the quartz slide (backside illumination). In all TRMC measurements, the sample waveguide was actively purged with dry nitrogen gas to maintain an inert environment and avoid photo-degradation. The transient change in the microwave power is related to the transient change in photoconductance, ΔG(t), by: (1)In eqn (1), K is an experimental sensitivity factor of the measurement, which depends on the dimensions of the waveguide, the conductivity of the inner walls of the waveguide, and the dielectric properties of the sample loaded into the waveguide. The magnitude of ΔG following photoexcitation is proportional to the photo-generated free carrier generation yield (ϕ) and the sum of the high-frequency free carrier mobilities (Σμ) by the following: ΔG = βqe·I0FA·ϕΣμ(2)In eqn (2), β = 2.2, and represents the ratio between the long (2.286 cm) and short (1.016 cm) axes of the microwave waveguide, qe is the elementary charge, I0 is the incident photon flux, and FA is the fractional light absorption (determined from film absorptance).
A calibrated Schottky barrier diode (∼1 ns response time) measured time-dependent changes in the microwave probe power, and an oscilloscope with sub-ns resolution tracked the transient behavior of changes in microwave power. Although these types of measurements often employ a partially-transparent (to microwaves) metal iris to create a resonant microwave cavity that enhances signal strength at the expense of time-resolution, the signal here was sufficiently strong that we chose to omit the iris and maintain the full temporal resolution afforded by the 3–5 ns optical pump.
Solar cell fabrication and characterization
MAPbI3 layers were prepared on FTO-coated glass, as detailed above. The SWCNT interfacial layers were sprayed on top of the MAPbI3 layer soon after the fabrication of the MAPbI3 film. The doped spiro-MeOTAD hole transport layer (HTL) was spin-coated on top of either the bare perovskite film or SWCNT-modified perovskite film at 4,000 rpm for 35 s with a HTL solution, which consists of 80 mg 2,2′,7,7′-tetrakis(N,N-dip-methoxyphenylamine)-9,9′-spirobifluorene (Spiro-MeOTAD; Merck), 30 μL bis(trifluoromethane) sulfonimide lithium salt stock solution (500 mg Li-TFSI in 1 mL acetonitrile), and 30 μL 4-tert-butylpyridine (TBP), and 1 mL chlorobenzene solvent. Finally a 150 nm Ag layer was deposited on the HTL layer by thermal evaporation. The reference device had no SWCNT interfacial layer, and used only the doped spiro-MeOTAD HTL. A second control device (beyond the typical reference device) was also prepared with no interfacial layer, where the MAPbI3 surface was treated with toluene via ultrasonic spray-coating, in similar fashion to the (6,5) s-SWCNT deposition step.
The J–V characteristics of the cells were measured by a 2400 SourceMeter (Keithley) under simulated one-sun AM 1.5G illumination (100 mW cm−2) (Oriel Sol3A Class AAA Solar Simulator, Newport Corporation). A shadow mask with 0.12 cm2 active area was used for the measurement. External quantum efficiency (EQE) measurements were carried out by a solar cell quantum efficiency measurement system (QEX10, PV Measurements). For stability measurements (Fig. S9, ESI†), samples were stored in a glovebox in ambient light between measurements. The samples were taken out into ambient lab conditions (relative humidity between 15% and 40%) for J–V characterization each 3–4 days. Solar cell characterization took approximately one hour, after which samples were returned to the glovebox.
Acknowledgements
R. I., A.-M. D., O. G. R., A. J. F., K. Z., and J. L. B. were supported by the Solar Photochemistry Program of the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Science, Basic Energy Sciences, Division of Chemical Sciences, Geosciences and Biosciences, under Contract No. DE-AC36-08GO28308 to NREL. M. Y., P. S., and J. J. B. were supported by the hybrid perovskite solar cell program of the National Center for Photovoltaics, funded by the U.S. Department of Energy, Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, Office of Solar Energy Technology under Award Number DE-AC36-08GO28308DOE with the National Renewable Energy Laboratory (NREL). N. J. S. was supported by the Department of Energy's Science Undergraduate Laboratory Internship program. The U.S. Government retains (and the publisher, by accepting the article for publication, acknowledges that the U.S. Government retains) a nonexclusive, paid up, irrevocable, worldwide license to publish or reproduce the published form of this work, or allow others to do so, for U.S. Government purposes.
References
A. Kojima, K. Teshima, Y. Shirai and T. Miyasaka, Organometal Halide Perovskites as Visible-Light Sensitizers for Photovoltaic Cells, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 6050–6051 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          http://Http://Www.Nrel.Gov/Ncpv/
        .
M. A. Green, K. Emery, Y. Hishikawa, W. Warta and E. D. Dunlop, Solar Cell Efficiency Tables (Version 45), Prog. Photovoltaics, 2015, 23, 1–9 Search PubMed .
Y. Zhao and K. Zhu, Organic–Inorganic Hybrid Lead Halide Perovskites for Optoelectronic and Electronic Applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2016, 45, 655–689 RSC .
Z. Zhu, J. Ma, Z. Wang, C. Mu, Z. Fan, L. Du, Y. Bai, L. Fan, H. Yan and D. L. Phillips, 
            et al., Efficiency Enhancement of Perovskite Solar Cells through Fast Electron Extraction: The Role of Graphene Quantum Dots, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 3760–3763 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Xing, N. Mathews, S. Sun, S. S. Lim, Y. M. Lam, M. Gratzel, S. Mhaisalkar and T. C. Sum, Long-Range Balanced Electron- and Hole-Transport Lengths in Organic–Inorganic CH3NH3PbI3, Science, 2013, 342, 344–347 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wojciechowski, S. D. Stranks, A. Abate, G. Sadoughi, A. Sadhanala, N. Kopidakis, G. Rumbles, C.-Z. Li, R. H. Friend and A. K. Y. Jen, 
            et al., Heterojunction Modification for Highly Efficient Organic–Inorganic Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 12701–12709 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Liu, P. Du, J. Zheng and X. Gong, Bulk Heterojunction Perovskite Hybrid Solar Cells with Large Fill Factor, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1245–1255 CAS .
H. Zhou, Q. Chen, G. Li, S. Luo, T.-B. Song, H.-S. Duan, Z. Hong, J. You, Y. Liu and Y. Yang, Interface Engineering of Highly Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, Science, 2014, 345, 542–546 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Bartesaghi, I. d. C. Perez, J. Kniepert, S. Roland, M. Turbiez, D. Neher and L. J. A. Koster, Competition between Recombination and Extraction of Free Charges Determines the Fill Factor of Organic Solar Cells, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7083 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Kim, K.-G. Lim and T.-W. Lee, Planar Heterojunction Organometal Halide Perovskite Solar Cells: Roles of Interfacial Layers, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 12–30 CAS .
J. P. Correa Baena, L. Steier, W. Tress, M. Saliba, S. Neutzner, T. Matsui, F. Giordano, T. J. Jacobsson, A. R. Srimath Kandada and S. M. Zakeeruddin, 
            et al., Highly Efficient Planar Perovskite Solar Cells through Band Alignment Engineering, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2928–2934 CAS .
J. M. Azpiroz, E. Mosconi, J. Bisquert and F. De Angelis, Defect Migration in Methylammonium Lead Iodide and Its Role in Perovskite Solar Cell Operation, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 2118–2127 CAS .
J. H. Heo, H. J. Han, D. Kim, T. K. Ahn and S. H. Im, Hysteresis-Less Inverted CH3NH3PbI3 Planar Perovskite Hybrid Solar Cells with 18.1% Power Conversion Efficiency, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1602–1608 CAS .
C.-Y. Chang, W.-K. Huang, Y.-C. Chang, K.-T. Lee and C.-T. Chen, A Solution-Processed N-Doped Fullerene Cathode Interfacial Layer for Efficient and Stable Large-Area Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 640–648 CAS .
L.-L. Jiang, S. Cong, Y.-H. Lou, Q.-H. Yi, J.-T. Zhu, H. Ma and G.-F. Zou, Interface Engineering toward Enhanced Efficiency of Planar Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4, 217–222 CAS .
X. Xu, Z. Liu, Z. Zuo, M. Zhang, Z. Zhao, Y. Shen, H. Zhou, Q. Chen, Y. Yang and M. Wang, Hole Selective NiO Contact for Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells with Carbon Electrode, Nano Lett., 2015, 15, 2402–2408 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Wang, C. Liu, C. Yi, L. Chen, J. Zhu, R. A. Weiss and X. Gong, Efficient Perovskite Hybrid Solar Cells Via Ionomer Interfacial Engineering, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 6875–6884 CrossRef CAS .
D. Bi, L. Yang, G. Boschloo, A. Hagfeldt and E. M. J. Johansson, Effect of Different Hole Transport Materials on Recombination in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite-Sensitized Mesoscopic Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4, 1532–1536 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Marchioro, J. Teuscher, D. Friedrich, M. Kunst, R. van de Krol, T. Moehl, M. Gratzel and J.-E. Moser, Unravelling the Mechanism of Photoinduced Charge Transfer Processes in Lead Iodide Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat. Photonics, 2014, 8, 250–255 CrossRef CAS .
C. S. Ponseca, T. J. Savenije, M. Abdellah, K. Zheng, A. Yartsev, T. r. Pascher, T. Harlang, P. Chabera, T. Pullerits and A. Stepanov, 
            et al., Organometal Halide Perovskite Solar Cell Materials Rationalized: Ultrafast Charge Generation, High and Microsecond-Long Balanced Mobilities, and Slow Recombination, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 5189–5192 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. Trinh, X. Wu, D. Niesner and X. Y. Zhu, Many-Body Interactions in Photo-Excited Lead Iodide Perovskite, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3, 9285–9290 CAS .
P. Piatkowski, B. Cohen, F. Javier Ramos, M. Di Nunzio, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Gratzel, S. Ahmad and A. Douhal, Direct Monitoring of Ultrafast Electron and Hole Dynamics in Perovskite Solar Cells, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 14674–14684 RSC .
A.-M. Dowgiallo, K. S. Mistry, J. C. Johnson and J. L. Blackburn, Ultrafast Spectroscopic Signature of Charge Transfer between Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes and C60, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 8573–8581 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, X. Pan, W. Liu, M. Cai, D. Kou, Z. Huo, X. Fang and S. Dai, Efficient Panchromatic Inorganic-Organic Heterojunction Solar Cells with Consecutive Charge Transport Tunnels in Hole Transport Material, Chem. Commun., 2013, 49, 7277–7279 RSC .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Carbon Nanotube/Polymer Composites as a Highly Stable Hole Collection Layer in Perovskite Solar Cells, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 5561–5568 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. N. Habisreutinger, T. Leijtens, G. E. Eperon, S. D. Stranks, R. J. Nicholas and H. J. Snaith, Enhanced Hole Extraction in Perovskite Solar Cells through Carbon Nanotubes, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 4207–4212 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, S. A. Kulkarni, P. P. Boix, E. Shi, A. Cao, K. Fu, S. K. Batabyal, J. Zhang, Q. Xiong and L. H. Wong, 
            et al., Laminated Carbon Nanotube Networks for Metal Electrode-Free Efficient Perovskite Solar Cells, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 6797–6804 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Schulz, J. L. Blackburn and J. Berry, Charge Transfer Dynamics between Carbon Nanotubes and Hybrid Organic Metal Halide Perovskite Films, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 418–425 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. S. Mistry, B. A. Larsen and J. L. Blackburn, High-Yield Dispersions of Large-Diameter Semiconducting Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes with Tunable Narrow Chirality Distributions, ACS Nano, 2013, 7, 2231–2239 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Chandra, A. Afzali, N. Khare, M. M. El-Ashry and G. S. Tulevski, Stable Charge-Transfer Doping of Transparent Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Films, Chem. Mater., 2010, 22, 5179–5183 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rathore, A. S. Kumar, S. V. Lindeman and J. K. Kochi, Preparation and Structures of Crystalline Aromatic Cation-Radical Salts. Triethyloxonium Hexachloroantimonate as a Novel (One-Electron) Oxidant, J. Org. Chem., 1998, 63, 5847–5856 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Yuma, S. Berciaud, J. Besbas, J. Shaver, S. Santos, S. Ghosh, R. B. Weisman, L. Cognet, M. Gallart and M. Ziegler, 
            et al., Biexciton, Single Carrier, and Trion Generation Dynamics in Single-Walled Carbon Nanotubes, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2013, 87, 205412 CrossRef .
R. Matsunaga, K. Matsuda and Y. Kanemitsu, Observation of Charged Excitons in Hole-Doped Carbon Nanotubes Using Photoluminescence and Absorption Spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2011, 106, 037404 CrossRef PubMed .
Y. Yang, D. P. Ostrowski, R. M. France, K. Zhu, J. van de Lagemaat, J. M. Luther and M. C. Beard, Observation of a Hot-Phonon Bottleneck in Lead-Iodide Perovskites, Nat. Photonics, 2015, 10, 53–59 CrossRef .
J. A. Christians, J. S. Manser and P. V. Kamat, Multifaceted Excited State of CH3NH3PbI3. Charge Separation, Recombination, and Trapping, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 2086–2095 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miyata, A. Mitioglu, P. Plochocka, O. Portugall, J. T.-W. Wang, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith and R. J. Nicholas, Direct Measurement of the Exciton Binding Energy and Effective Masses for Charge Carriers in Organic–Inorganic Tri-Halide Perovskites, Nat. Phys., 2015, 11, 582–587 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yang, M. Yang, Z. Li, R. Crisp, K. Zhu and M. C. Beard, Comparison of Recombination Dynamics in CH3NH3PbBr3 and CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Films: Influence of Exciton Binding Energy, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 4688–4692 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. A. Valverde-Chavez, C. S. Ponseca, C. C. Stoumpos, A. Yartsev, M. G. Kanatzidis, V. Sundstrom and D. G. Cooke, Intrinsic Femtosecond Charge Generation Dynamics in Single Crystal CH3NH3PbI3, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 3700–3707 CAS .
P. Schulz, E. Edri, S. Kirmayer, G. Hodes, D. Cahen and A. Kahn, Interface Energetics in Organo-Metal Halide Perovskite-Based Photovoltaic Cells, Energy Environ. Sci., 2014, 7, 1377–1381 CAS .
A. J. Ferguson, A.-M. Dowgiallo, D. J. Bindl, K. S. Mistry, O. G. Reid, N. Kopidakis, M. S. Arnold and J. L. Blackburn, Trap-Limited Carrier Recombination in Single-Walled Carbon Nanotube Heterojunctions with Fullerene Acceptor Layers, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 91, 245311 CrossRef .
H.-S. Kim, I.-H. Jang, N. Ahn, M. Choi, A. Guerrero, J. Bisquert and N.-G. Park, Control of I–V Hysteresis in CH3NH3PbI3 Perovskite Solar Cell, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 4633–4639 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, Anomalous Hysteresis in Perovskite Solar Cells, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. L. Guillot, K. S. Mistry, A. D. Avery, J. Richard, A.-M. Dowgiallo, P. F. Ndione, J. van de Lagemaat, M. O. Reese and J. L. Blackburn, Precision Printing and Optical Modeling of Ultrathin SWCNT/C60 Heterojunction Solar Cells, Nanoscale, 2015, 7, 6556–6566 RSC .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. I. Seok, Solvent Engineering for High-Performance Inorganic-Organic Hybrid Perovskite Solar Cells, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 897–903 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnote† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee03806eThis journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
The photovoltaic efficiencies of organic–inorganic hybrid perovskite solar cells have risen dramatically after only a few years of research. Coupled with low-temperature solution-phase fabrication routes, these high efficiencies indicate tremendous potential for low-cost, sustainable solar electricity generation. There are numerous interfaces in perovskite solar cells that play crucial roles in determining device efficiency and stability. Importantly, many critical interfacial properties and processes are still poorly understood, a deficiency that often limits efforts to improve device performance. An important example is the kinetics of charge extraction (and subsequent recombination) at the interface between the perovskite absorber layer and transport layers designed to selectively remove electrons or holes. In this work, we design a novel hole transport layer based on highly enriched semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes. The spectroscopic features associated with the well-defined optical transitions of this transport layer allow us to develop a full kinetic scheme for electron/hole extraction and recombination that covers many orders of magnitude in time. Importantly, the semiconducting single-walled carbon nanotubes facilitate sub-picosecond hole extraction, after which charges take hundreds of microseconds to recombine. Finally, we demonstrate that this large discrepancy in charge extraction and recombination rates is beneficial for improved device efficiency and stability.


 	Fig. 1  Experimental schematic, steady state, and transient absorption of MAPbI3 and (6,5) SWCNT thin films. (a) Schematic of a TiO2/MAPbI3/SWCNT trilayer sample, indicating the excitation directions for “backside” (BS) and “frontside” (FS) illumination. (b) Optical absorption spectra (corrected for reflection in an integrating sphere) for TiO2/MAPbI3 (black) and TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) (blue) samples, along with a neat 9 nm (6,5) SWCNT film for comparison (pink). The first and second excitonic transitions of the s-SWCNTs (S11 and S22) are labeled. The orange spectrum (offset for clarity) is the differential absorption spectrum for a chemically doped (p-type) (6,5) SWCNT film. (c and e) TA spectra for TiO2/MAPbI3 bilayer at various pump–probe delays. (d and f) TA spectra for TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) trilayer at various pump–probe delays. Excitation for panels c–f was BS illumination at 400 nm.	 

 	Fig. 2  Transient absorption dynamics of s-SWCNT hole extraction and back-transfer. (a) MAPbI3 bleach recovery dynamics, measured at 750 nm for five different samples. (b) Comparison of the TA spectrum of the TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) trilayer at a delay of 3.8 ns to the differential spectrum of a chemically doped (6,5) film. (c) Inverted, corrected and rescaled transient of S11 exciton bleach (1000 nm) for TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) tilayer compared to the MAPbI3 band edge bleach (750 nm). The red line is a fit to the one-dimensional diffusion equation. (d) Long-delay dynamics of MAPbI3 bleach recovery (750 nm) and (6,5) S11 bleach recovery (1000 nm) for TiO2/MAPbI3/(6,5) trilayer. The solid black line shows a bi-exponential fit to the S11 bleach recovery, with τ1 = 40 μs and τ2 = 416 μs. For all panels in figure, the excitation wavelength was 400 nm, backside illumination.	 

 	Fig. 3  TRMC results for MAPbI3 films with various electron and hole transport layers. (a) Yield-mobility product as a function of incident photon fluence for four different samples. (b) Time-resolved microwave conductivity transients for the same four samples, normalized at the peak (end-of-pulse) intensity. For all samples in figure, excitation wavelength was 430 nm, backside illumination.	 

 	Fig. 4  Summary of important dynamic processes occurring within MAPbI3 and at the interfaces with the SWCNT HTL and TiO2 ETL. (a) Kinetic scheme and cartoon schematic for dynamic processes in photoexcited MAPbI3 absorber layer with SWCNT HTL and TiO2 ETL. Processes above the dashed line result in charge extraction, and below the line result in recombination. Each process is color-coded. (b) Color-coded schematic of the time scale of each process described in (a), as well as the measurement technique and probe wavelength used to extract the kinetic information for the processes.	 

 	Fig. 5  Solar cell performance with and without SWCNT interfacial layers. (a) Device schematic for a MAPbI3 solar cell with a s-SWCNT interfacial layer between the MAPbI3 absorber layer and the spiro-MeOTAD HTL. (b) J–V curves for typical MAPbI3 devices, with or without a 5 nm (6,5) s-SWCNT interfacial layer. (c) External quantum efficiency for the same two devices as in panel (b).	 

None	19.9 ± 0.2	1.04 ± 0.02	0.68 ± 0.03	14.1 ± 0.4	14.7
(6,5) 5 nm	20.8 ± 0.3	1.07 ± 0.009	0.73 ± 0.02	16.1 ± 0.3	16.5
(6,5) 10 nm	20.0 ± 0.3	1.06 ± 0.002	0.71 ± 0.02	15.0 ± 0.2	15.2
(6,5) 15 nm	19.4 ± 0.5	1.03 ± 0.002	0.65 ± 0.04	13.1 ± 0.6	13.7
LV 5 nm	21.1 ± 0.1	1.03 ± 0.003	0.73 ± 0.006	15.9 ± 0.2	16.1
LV 10 nm	21.4 ± 0.3	1.03 ± 0.004	0.68 ± 0.008	14.9 ± 0.3	15.2
LV 15 nm	21.7 ± 0.1	1.01 ± 0.002	0.60 ± 0.006	13.2 ± 0.2	13.3
None/toluene	20.5 ± 0.03	1.05 ± 0.006	0.66 ± 0.04	14.2 ± 0.8	14.8
	(1)
ΔG = βqe·I0FA·ϕΣμ	(2)
Footnote
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available. See DOI: 10.1039/c5ee03806e

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
