Efficient perovskite solar cells by metal ion doping   - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/C6EE01969B View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/C6EE01969B
(Paper)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2892-2901Efficient perovskite solar cells by metal ion doping†

        
          
            Jacob Tse-Wei 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zhiping 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Sandeep 
            Pathak
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Wei 
            Zhang‡
a, 
      
        
          
            Dane W. 
            deQuilettes
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Florencia 
            Wisnivesky-Rocca-Rivarola
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Jian 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Pabitra K. 
            Nayak
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jay B. 
            Patel
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Hanis A. 
            Mohd Yusof
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Yana 
            Vaynzof
          
        
      ef, 
      
        
          
            Rui 
            Zhu
          
        
      g, 
      
        
          
            Ivan 
            Ramirez
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Zhang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Caterina 
            Ducati
          
        
      c, 
      
        
          
            Chris 
            Grovenor
          
        
      d, 
      
        
          
            Michael B. 
            Johnston
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            David S. 
            Ginger
          
        
      b, 
      
        
          
            Robin J. 
            Nicholas
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Henry J. 
            Snaith
          
        
      *a
aDepartment of Physics, Clarendon Laboratory, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford OX1 3PU, UK. E-mail: r.nicholas1@physics.ox.ac.uk; henry.snaith@physics.ox.ac.uk
bDepartment of Chemistry, University of Washington, Box 351700, Seattle, WA 98195-1700, USA
cDepartment of Materials Science and Metallurgy, University of Cambridge, 27 Charles Babbage Road, Cambridge CB3 0FS, UK
dDepartment of Materials, University of Oxford, Parks Road, Oxford, OX1 3PH, UK
eKirchhoff Institute for Physics (KIP), Im Neuenheimer Feld 227, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
fCentre for Advanced Materials (CAM), Im Neuenheimer Feld 225, 69120 Heidelberg, Germany
gState Key Laboratory for Artificial Microstructure and Mesoscopic Physics, School of Physics, Peking University, Beijing, 100871, China
Received 
      8th July 2016
    , Accepted 19th July 2016First published on 19th July 2016AbstractRealizing the theoretical limiting power conversion efficiency (PCE) in perovskite solar cells requires a better understanding and control over the fundamental loss processes occurring in the bulk of the perovskite layer and at the internal semiconductor interfaces in devices. One of the main challenges is to eliminate the presence of charge recombination centres throughout the film which have been observed to be most densely located at regions near the grain boundaries. Here, we introduce aluminium acetylacetonate to the perovskite precursor solution, which improves the crystal quality by reducing the microstrain in the polycrystalline film. At the same time, we achieve a reduction in the non-radiative recombination rate, a remarkable improvement in the photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) and a reduction in the electronic disorder deduced from an Urbach energy of only 12.6 meV in complete devices. As a result, we demonstrate a PCE of 19.1% with negligible hysteresis in planar heterojunction solar cells comprising all organic p and n-type charge collection layers. Our work shows that an additional level of control of perovskite thin film quality is possible via impurity cation doping, and further demonstrates the continuing importance of improving the electronic quality of the perovskite absorber and the nature of the heterojunctions to further improve the solar cell performance.

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells, which promise to deliver the highest efficiency, lowest cost next-generation PV technology, have been largely advanced over the last few years by improvements in the polycrystalline thin film quality. So far, improvements in film uniformity and smoothness, have mainly been at the expense of crystalline grain-size, and charge recombination losses at defect sites. High luminescence efficiency, which is an indication of better optoelectronic quality, has generally been found in films with polycrystalline grains of many micrometres in scale. This suggests a current compromise between ideal morphology and ideal optoelectronic quality. For traditional semiconductors and crystalline solids, the influence of impurity ion doping has been studied extensively and can either alter the crystallisation or induced electronic positive or negative type doping. However, in the perovskite community, impurity doping has been largely unexplored. Here, we show that doping the perovskite solution with Al3+, which has a much smaller ionic radius than Pb2+, has profoundly positive influenced on the crystalline and optoelectronic quality of the perovskite absorber layer: we demonstrate a two-fold increase in the photoluminescence quantum efficiency and a significantly reduced electronic disorder, despite the films still having polycrystalline grains on the order of one micrometer is scale. This largely overcomes the trade-off between film smoothness and optoelectronic quality, and these improvements translate into highly efficient planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. Our work paves the way for further improvement of the optoelectronic quality of perovskite thin films, and subsequent devices, via highlighting a new avenue for investigation of the role of dopant impurities upon crystallisation and controlling the electronic defect density in the perovskite thin films.

Introduction
Driven by improvements in the quality of organic–inorganic lead halide perovskite (i.e. CH3NH3PbI3) thin films, perovskite solar cells have achieved a series of efficiency breakthroughs since 2009.1–4 Starting from structures based on small nanocrystals embellishing the surface of a mesoporous TiO2 scaffold in 2009, the published highest power conversion efficiency of 21.1% has been achieved in a device architecture which comprises both a thin layer of mesoporous TiO2 and a thick solid perovskite absorber layer with micrometre size crystalline domains and a high level of uniformity.5 In addition, there has been much work on the simplified “planar heterojunction” architecture, where a solid perovskite absorber layer is sandwiched between negative (n) and positive (p) type charge collection layers.2,6 One commonality of all this work, is that enhanced crystalline quality and the macroscopic uniformity of the solid perovskite thin films are key parameters which have led to improved device performance. However, there is still much confusion over many factors such as the role and impact of boundaries between the polycrystalline domains, the requirement or not to move towards single crystalline materials, the nature and role of electronic defects in the perovskite absorbers, and the impact of the charge collection layers upon loss processes in the perovskite solar cells.
One specific area which has had some attention is the precise nature of electronic defects in the perovskite films. Yan et al. have used theoretical calculations to propose that many of the defects, such as I or Pb vacancies, will result in states very close to or within the continuum of states in the conduction and valance bands; therefore only having a minor negative electronic impact upon the solar cells.7 However, Agiorgousis et al. have revealed that there is strong covalency between the Pb cations and I anions in the perovskite plane, which may result in the existence of intrinsic defects, such as undercoordinated Pb dimers and I trimers, which could generate sites within the band gap and serve as charge recombination centres during solar cell operation.8
Previously, post treatment of the perovskite films with Lewis bases, such as pyridine, has been shown to enhance the charge carrier lifetime,9 suggesting that pyridine can passivate the surface recombination sites,9 which are possibly under-coordinated Pb sites.10 However, these sorts of post growth treatments are challenging to control in a reproducible manner, and it is not clear if they are genuinely passivating the defect sites, or simply enabling the perovskite crystal surface to reconstruct in a more favourable manner with fewer crystal surface defects.9 On the other hand, incorporation of an impurity “dopant” into the precursor solution itself could provide a more robust way to produce a perovskite film with traps passivated throughout the bulk, or indeed influence the crystallization process in such a way as to minimize the number of defects which result in electronic traps in the first place.11 Recently, Sargent and coworkers have shown that addition of phenyl-C61-butyric acid methyl ester (PCBM) directly into the perovskite precursor solution allows PCBM to sit at the grain boundaries of the processed perovskite films, leading to a certain degree of passivation of the trap states at the grain boundaries, and suppression of hysteresis in the n–i–p planar heterojunction device architecture.12 In addition, PCBM is a very good electron acceptor for use as the n-type charge collection material in perovskite solar cells, hence its role may be two-fold when mixed into the perovskite solution.13 However, a major challenge to achieving reproducible device performance with this route is the poor solubility and significant phase segregation of PCBM within the perovskite precursor solution.12
Here, we investigate the impact of “doping” the perovskite, CH3NH3PbI3 (MAPbI3), with Al3+, a higher valence metal ion than Pb2+. We introduced a Lewis acid–base coordination complex, aluminium acetylacetonate (Al-acac3), directly into the perovskite precursor solution, which contains Pb acetate trihydrate (PbAc2·(3H2O)) and methyl ammonium iodide (MAI).14 Al3+ ions have a much smaller ionic radii than Pb2+ (53.5 pm vs. 119 pm) hence we do not expect to observe substitutional doping within the crystal.15 However, by careful optimization of the Al3+ ion concentration in the perovskite precursor solution, we dramatically enhance the PLQE of the crystalized perovskite films, which increases to 35% from only 15% for the non-doped (control) films when measured at ∼10 suns irradiance, which we infer to be due to a reduction in the density of electronic defects. By incorporating these “Al3+-doped” films into “inverted” p–i–n perovskite solar cells, we achieve a measured current–density voltage PCE of 19.1% and a stabilized power output of 18.2%.
Results and discussion
To deposit Al3+-doped MAPbI3 perovskite films, we first prepared a MAPbI3 precursor solution by mixing MAI and PbAc2·(3H2O) at a 3:1 molar ratio in dimethylformamide (DMF), with the addition of hypophosphorous acid, as previously reported by Zhang et al.11 In order to study the impact of doping concentration on the perovskite, we added varying concentrations (from 0.075 to 1.5 mol% of the Al3+/Pb2+ ratio) of Al-acac3 into the as prepared MAPbI3 precursor solutions and fabricated a series of perovskite films. We note that, in this manuscript we will refer to the Al-acac3 addition as “Al3+ doping”. We will show evidence towards the end of the manuscript that it is indeed the addition of aluminum ions, and not the organic counter ions which is important for the improvements which we will present. We first evaluate if there is any impact of Al3+ doping upon the crystallization process and the final crystal structure of the resulting perovskite films. In Fig. 1a and Fig. S1 (ESI†) we show the X-ray diffraction (XRD) spectra for a series of films made with a range of Al3+ doping concentrations up to 1.5 mol%. All the perovskite films crystallise in a typical tetragonal crystal (I4/mcm, No. 140) structure as reported previously.16 As the doping levels increase up to 0.15 mol%, the intensities of the dominant perovskite (110) and (220) peaks substantially increase with increasing doping concentration, and there is a significant decrease in peak widths (see Fig. S2, ESI†) but no measurable shift in the position of the (110) and (220) diffraction peaks. These results suggest that the (hh0) planes become increasingly aligned in the presence of the Al3+ dopant. As the doping level rises to 0.3 mol% concentration, the (110) peak intensity continues to increase, but the peak begins to broaden and shift in position with respect to the control sample. However, upon further increase in doping concentration, the peak intensity begins to decrease and the peak widths continue to broaden.
 Fig. 1  Characterizations of control and Al3+-doped perovskite samples with (a) X-ray diffraction patterns analysis, and (b) a modified Williamson–Hall plot of (Δdobs2 − Δdins2)1/2versus d spacing extracted from the corresponding diffraction profiles shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The slopes of the solid lines from linear fits indicate the extents of microstrain at different doping concentrations. (c) Calculated microstrain of samples with different Al3+ doping concentration from XRD patterns (the error bars for each concentration in the plot c, are determined from the fits in b). (d) Top view scanning electron microscope (SEM). 
Broadening and shifts in the XRD peak can be caused by either a reduction in the grain size (Scherrer broadening) and/or non-uniform strain (microstrain). We note that Scherrer broadening will only be significant when the grains are in the range of or less than 100 nm, and as we will discuss later we do not expect this to be a significant contribution here. Strain is the relative change in size of an object with respect to its ideal size (or size before experiencing an external force). The microstrain in a crystalline material is a result of small fluctuations in the lattice spacing, induced by crystal imperfections/structural defects including dislocations, vacancies, stacking faults, interstitials, twinning, and grain boundaries.17–19 By simply considering Braggs law for scattering of light of wavelength λ, nλ = 2dsinθ, it is clear that small fluctuations in d (i.e. Δd) will result in small fluctuations, or broadening, in θ when measuring the X-ray diffraction from the material. We quantify the extent of microstrain in our perovskite films by analysing the peak broadening in the diffraction patterns according to the modified Williamson–Hall method.18,20 The effective observed d-space broadening (Δdobs) determined from the XRD peak width broadening, is a convoluted function of the Gaussian full width half maximum broadening in the 2θ scan due to the instrument response (Δdins), the grain size (Δdsize) and the microstrain (Δdε). These can be de-convoluted from the observed broadening, via, Δdobs2 = Δdε2 + Δdins2 + Δdsize2(1)where the unit-less microstrain ε is defined as ε = (Δdε/d), where d is the mean d-spacing.
Since the perovskite thin films have grains on the order of many hundreds of nm to microns, it is likely that the size effect induced peak width broadening can be neglected, hence if Δdsize2 ≪ Δdobs2 (ref. 19) and we can write, (Δdobs2 − Δdins2)1/2 ≈ εd.(2) Therefore, the slope of (Δdobs2 − Δdins2)1/2versus d, gives the magnitude of the microstrain, ε, in the film.
Here we observe in Fig. 1b and c that introduction of small amounts of Al3+ dopant (<0.3 mol%) decreases the microstrain. A minimum microstrain of 5.2 × 10−3 is achieved at 0.15 mol%, which is 30% lower than the control film. We note that this is equivalent to d-spacing fluctuations of the order of 0.5%. This suggests that the introduction of a small amount of Al3+ dopant reduces the density of crystal defects. Additionally, the (110) XRD peak significantly increases in intensity, consistent with the presence of Al3+ enhancing the orientation in the growth of perovskite domains along the (110) plane.21
If the Al3+ ions partially substitute Pb2+ ion sites, we would expect the perovskite lattice to be severely distorted due to the much smaller Al3+ ionic radii as compared to the Pb2+ ion, which would induce a shift in d.22 Following this reasoning, the unvarying (hh0) peak position and decreased microstrain imply at the doping level of 0.15%, the Al3+ dopants are unlikely to be incorporated within the perovskite crystal lattice. When the doping concentration increases to 0.3 mol%, we observe an increase in microstrain, which continues to increase monotonically with the increasing doping concentration.
In Fig. 1d we show top-view SEM images of the perovskite samples with different doping concentrations of Al3+. We do not observe any noticeable differences in morphology or apparent grain size in the perovskite films up to doping levels of 0.3 mol%, compared to the control sample. This is consistent with our postulation that the narrowing of the (hh0) diffraction peaks with the doping concentration from zero to 0.15 mol% is not due to crystal size effects. Morphologically, it appears that the perovskite films can tolerate the addition of Al3+ ions to the precursor solution up to around 0.3 mol%, before any negative impact upon the morphology occurs. The disappearance of the polycrystalline grains in the SEM images, with Al3+ concentrations at or above 0.75 mol%, is consistent with these films having much smaller polycrystalline domains, which are not clearly discernible in the SEM image. We also note that the XRD patterns for the films with over 0.3 mol% doping, which we have shown in Fig. 1a, are strongly perturbed, indicating a limit to the concentration of Al3+ which the perovskite films can tolerate.
To probe whether Al ions remain in the annealed films, we performed inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectrometry (ICP-OES). The detection limits of ICP-OES typically range from parts per million (ppm) to parts per billion (ppb).23 For the sample with 0.15 mol% Al3+ doping (the calculated Al/Pb is 2.6:1000), we determine a molar ratio of Al/Pb of 1.2:1000 from the ICP-OES analysis, which confirms the presence of Al3+ in the doped film, only at a slightly lower concentration than in the starting solution. On the contrary, for the control film we determine an Al/Pb molar ratio of 0.016:1000, which is almost negligible, as expected. We further validated this finding for higher concentration solutions (>0.3 mol%) using X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (see Fig. S3, ESI†).
To further investigate the location and distribution of the Al3+ ions within the perovskite film, we employed nanoscale secondary ion mass spectrometry (NanoSIMS) to perform elemental mapping for the doping level of 0.15 mol%. The NanoSIMS system uses a 16 keV primary 133Cs+ beam to bombard the perovskite film surface, and then collects and analyzes the Al signal as a negative ion which is commonly detected as AlO− (the oxygen is captured from the sample surface or the vacuum system). In Fig. S4 (ESI†) we show the secondary electron SEM images overlaid with the elemental map for Al. In the secondary electron image the darker regions are regions of thicker films, which we therefore interpret as being the centre of grains, and the lighter regions are the thinner regions which we therefore interpret to be the grain boundaries. Although the Al signal is apparent everywhere in the film, it is most strongly concentrated near the brighter regions of the secondary electron microscopy image, indicative of increased Al concentration near the grain boundaries. This is consistent with the Al3+ ions being predominantly expelled to the perovskite surface and grain boundaries during crystallisation.
Considering all the evidence we have presented above, it appears that the presence of a small amount of Al3+ in the perovskite growth solution results in better crystallisation with resultantly fewer crystal defects, as we infer from the reduced microstrain. However, beyond an optimum level of addition of Al3+, the crystallization is strongly perturbed resulting in increased levels of defects. At low Al3+ doping concentrations, the Al3+ ions appear not to be incorporated into the perovskite lattice, but predominantly expelled to the surface and grain boundaries. The precise mechanism by which the crystallisation is enhanced with a small quantity of Al3+ doping is difficult to determine. However, based on our investigation above, we describe our postulated mechanism here: the presence of impurity ions is known to influence crystallisation of materials since the earliest investigations of crystal growth.24 Impurity ions can either slow down crystallisation by adsorbing to crystal surfaces and sterically inhibiting growth, or the impurity ions can accelerate crystal growth by changing the surface energy of the crystal growth front making it more favourable for accelerated crystallization.25–27 In the low concentration regime (below 0.3 mol% Al3+) we infer that the Al3+ is facilitating enhanced crystallization, and specifically the growth of (hh0) crystal planes, resulting in more orientated crystalline domains. In Fig. 2, we show a schematic diagram of the proposed perovskite growth mode and influence of the Al3+ doping. We also illustrate crystal defects which could potentially exist at the edges of the perovskite crystal surface in the form of terraces, and indicate how the Al3+ doping can reduce the prevalence via the selective enhancement of growth of these terraces.
 Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the proposed perovskite polycrystalline thin film growth and influence of the Al3+ doping with illustrated C, N, H, O, I, Pb, and Al atoms are indicated by the color of black, blue, pink, red, grey, and cyan respectively; and histograms of the surface topography and the images (insets) from AFM measurements of different samples. Best fits for the histograms are obtained using one and two Voigt distributions, respectively for the control and the optimized sample. The individual distribution components with their HWHM, and the cumulative fits are labelled as in the figure. 
In order to visualize how the Al3+ doping has influenced the as-crystalized films, we performed atomic force microscopy (AFM) measurements on our samples. We show these images in Fig. 2, and plot histograms for the distribution in heights from the images. The lower regions correspond to the troughs at the boundary of the grains, and the higher regions correspond to the top most surfaces of the grains. For the control sample we observe a symmetric, approximately Gaussian distribution of heights, indicating that the surface of the perovskite film is continuously undulating over the measured length-scale, with no specific preferred height. We estimate a half-width at half-maximum (HWHM) height distribution of ∼33 nm. This level of undulation is almost identical to the underlying FTO substrate, which we determine a HWHM height distribution of 34 nm, which we show in the Fig. S5 (ESI†). Thus the control perovskite film does not appear to planarize the FTO. In contrast for the optimum (0.15 mol%) doped perovskite sample, the height distribution becomes asymmetric with a background undulation of the same extent, but with an additional distribution with a much narrower HWHM of ∼16 nm on the top-most region of the films. This indicates that the top of the grains are much flatter in the Al3+ doped samples than in the control samples. The height distribution for the 1.5% Al3+ doped sample significantly changes, but still shows a relatively narrow distribution on the top surface and a long tail indicating a relatively flat film, but now with the presence of pinholes. Since the crystal morphology of the 1.5% sample has changed considerably, we can-not compare this directly to the other two compositions. These observations further corroborate that, with low levels of Al3+ doping, the perovskite crystalline growth is indeed enhanced and preferentially selects certain planes, while in addition the reduced roughness of the surface of the grains is consistent with a reduction in terrace/step-like defects on the crystal surface.
We now investigate if the structural improvements in the Al3+-doped polycrystalline films translate to enhanced optoelectronic properties. To understand the influence of Al3+ doping upon the photo-physical properties of the perovskite films we performed absorption and photoluminescence measurements, which we show in Fig. S6 (ESI†). We observe little change in the absorption spectra for the films, but we do observe an increase in steady-state photoluminescence (PL) intensity with a maximum for the 0.15 mol% Al3+-doped samples, and a subsequent fall off of in intensity upon further increase in doping concentration. In Fig. 3 we compare the PL properties of the control films and those doped with 0.15 mol% Al3+. In Fig. 3a and b we observe that the Al3+-doped perovskite films have higher steady state PL intensity and an almost two-fold increase in PL life time compared to the control.
 Fig. 3  Photoluminescence spectroscopy of control (non-doped) and 0.15 mol% Al3+-doped perovskite thin films deposited on glass substrate with (a) steady-state spectra (300 mW cm−2, 507 nm), (b) time-resolved photoluminescence decay after excitation at 507 nm with pulsed (200 kHz) and a fluence of 30 nJ cm−2 per pulse, and (c) photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) as a function of excitation power (further details are available in the ESI†). 
To further quantify the influence of the Al3+ doping upon the radiative and non-radiative recombination rates, we performed photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) measurements as a function of excitation power, which we show in Fig. 3c. For both doped and control samples, the PLQE rises with increasing excitation power, a behaviour attributed to the filling of trap states and increasingly favourable competition of radiative bimolecular recombination over non-radiative trap assisted recombination.10,28,29 Notably, the PLQE is higher for the Al3+ doped samples at all light intensities, which, along with the increase we observe in the PL lifetime, is consistent with fewer fast non-radiative decay channels in the Al3+-doped samples. We fit the bulk time-resolved PL data in Fig. 3b with a stretched exponential function and extract the average lifetimes, 〈τ〉, as previously described.9 We use these low-fluence PL lifetime values along with the low excitation power (6 mW cm−2) PLQE values, where in both cases we expect the carrier recombination to be dominated by pseudo first-order kinetics,9,29 to estimate the radiative and non-radiative decay rates in the films using, (3)where krad is the radiative decay rate knon-rad is the non-radiative decay rate and krad + knon-rad = 1/〈τ〉. For the control and Al3+-doped films, the krad we determine are similar for the two films at 5.04 × 104 s−1 and 4.96 × 104 s−1, while we observe a reduction in knon-rad from 1.24 × 106 s−1 to 5.52 × 105 s−1 for the control and Al3+ doped films. This indicates that the substantive change in the photophysical properties of the perovskite films with 0.15 mol% Al3+ is approximately a two-fold reduction in the non-radiative recombination rate. We note that both the radiative and non-radiative decay rates are relatively low for a crystalline semiconductor. The slow recombination in metal halide perovskites is a highly fortuitous property for PV devices, but the origin of the phenomenon remains to be elucidated.30
The above analysis gives an indication of the macroscopic changes occurring within the perovskite films. However, we know that severe photophysical heterogeneity can occur within the polycrystalline films, and hence to clarify which microscopic regions of the film are responsible for the reduced non-radiative decay, we employ confocal fluorescence microscopy. In Fig. 4a and b we show a 10 × 10 μm confocal fluorescence image of a control and 0.15 mol% Al3+-doped perovskite film. We show the image histograms of occurrence versus PL (counts) in Fig. 4c and d. In both films there exists heterogeneity in the PL emission with both bright and dark grains, and generally lower levels of PL in the regions near the grain boundaries. From the histograms it is apparent that the average number of PL counts (solid lines) of the Al3+ doped films have shifted to higher levels, but the distribution is similarly broad to that seen in the control. In fact, the distribution has slightly broadened indicating no preferential spatial homogenisation of the PL, but simply an overall reduction in the non-radiative decay, both on or in the grains and at the grain boundaries. In Fig. S7 (ESI†), we performed Kelvin probe measurement in the dark and under illumination with perovskite films on FTO, and find a reduction in the surface photovoltage for Al3+-doped films compared to control films, consistent with the removal of electronic traps in the former.
 Fig. 4  Fluorescence microscopy of (a) control and (b) Al3+-doped (0.15 mol%) perovskite films with 10 × 10 μm area mapping excited with a pulsed 470 nm laser (40 MHz, 117 ps pulse width, 300 nJ cm−2 per pulse). (c and d) Are the image histograms (10000 pixels) showing the fluorescence emission distribution with solid lines indicate the average number of PL counts. The Al3+-doped perovskite has more pixel counts falling under “bright” regions as compared to the control. 
In order to quantify the electronic disorder in the films, we estimate the Urbach energy (Eu) of perovskite films from Fourier transform photocurrent spectroscopy, which we show in Fig. S8 (ESI†). We estimate the Eu for the control and 0.15 mol% Al3+-doped samples to be 13.09 ± 0.05 and 12.64 ± 0.04 meV respectively. This decrease in Eu is direct evidence for an enhancement of the electronic quality of the perovskite films by Al3+ doping. Notably, this is the first time an Eu has been determined to be less than 13 meV in a metal halide perovskite film, indicating the high electronic quality of the perovskite film,11,31 and suggesting an improved crystalline order in the polycrystalline thin film. The reason why the steepness of the absorption onset, and ultimately EQE spectra is important, is that this governs the maximum open-circuit voltage a solar cell can achieve in the “radiative limit”, where all non-radiative recombination is switched off.32 The operational-loss, defined as EG − qVoc, where EG is the band gap of the absorber, has been observed to approximately halve when the Urbach energy reduces from 23 meV, for copper indium gallium selenide (CIGS), to 7.5 meV for GaAs.31,33 Therefore, although the Urbach energy which we estimate here for our best perovskite solar cells is significantly lower than kT (∼25 meV at room temperature, where k is Boltzmann constant), it remains an important factor to improve in the goal of developing a near-perfect solar absorber material.
By interpreting the photo-physical and electronic impact of the Al3+ doping, it is apparent that the optimally doped films possess fewer non-radiative decay sites and are of superior electronic quality as compared with the control films. This is consistent with the enhanced structural quality we observed in Fig. 1, resulting in improved optoelectronic performance. To assess if these enhanced film properties translate into enhancements in solar cell performance, we now integrate the perovskite films into “inverted” (p–i–n) planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells with a p-type organic hole transporting material (HTM), a solid “intrinsic” (i) perovskite film and an n-type organic electron transporting material.34 We show a high angle annular dark field STEM (HAADF-STEM) cross-sectional micrograph of an optimized device in Fig. 5a, an illustration of the energy levels of the materials employed in Fig. 5b and a schematic of the full device architecture in Fig. 5c. We note that the energy levels we illustrate are for the individual isolated materials, and upon doping and contact with each other there is likely to be a relative shift in the absolute energy at the interfaces.35
 Fig. 5  (a) High angle annular dark field STEM (HAADF-STEM) cross-sectional micrograph of optimized device with the structure of Ag/BCP/ETM (PCBM)/perovskite/HTM (poly-TPD)/FTO. (b) Diagram of the energy levels of the materials used and (c) an illustration of the structure of the solar cells. 
In Fig. S9 and in Table S1 (ESI†) we show the mean solar cell performance parameters for a batch of solar cells with a range of Al3+ doping concentrations, extracted from JV curves measured under simulated AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 irradiance. We observe a clear trend of enhancement in device performance produced by the introduction of Al3+ dopant in to the perovskite precursor solution up to concentrations of around 0.15 to 0.3 mol%. For devices fabricated from the control precursor solution, i.e. pristine MAPbI3, the average short-circuits current density (Jsc) and open circuit voltage (Voc) are around 19.0 ± 1.7 mA cm−2 and 1.01 ± 0.04 V, respectively. With the incorporation of the Al3+ dopant in the perovskite, both the Jsc and Voc increase up to average values of 21.2 ± 1.1 mA cm−2 and 1.06 ± 0.03 V, respectively, peaking at 0.15 mol%, while we observe that the average fill factor (FF) increases to 0.72 ± 0.08 with the addition of Al3+ up to 0.3 mol%, after which the FF begins to decrease. Hence, we observe the power conversion efficiency (PCE) to reach a maximum at 0.15 mol% of Al3+ doping, with an average PCE of the solar cells fabricated with this doping concentration of 15.8 ± 2.4%. Notably, the optimized Al3+ doping not only improves all of the performance parameters (i.e. FF, Voc, Jsc and PCE) as compared with the control devices, but also enhances device reproducibility, as we show in Fig. S10 (ESI†).
In Fig. 6a we show the current–density voltage (JV) curves for the most efficient control and Al3+ doped devices, where the latter exhibits a Jsc of 22.4 mA cm−2, a FF of 0.78, and a Voc of 1.10 V yielding a PCE of 19.1% (see Table 1). When we compare this with the control device, we can see that the major improvement is coming from the increases in Voc and Jsc. The external quantum efficiency (EQE) spectra for typical cells of each type, which we show in Fig. 6b, exhibit the same trend as the measured JV curves, consistent with the enhanced photocurrent from the Al3+ doped samples. Integrating the EQE over the AM 1.5 solar spectrums at 100 mW cm−2 irradiance gives an estimated Jsc of 20 and 18 mA cm−2 for the Al3+ doped and control devices, respectively. The measured Jsc under the solar simulator for these precise cells was 22.0 and 17.3 mA cm−2 respectively, which gives an indication of an accuracy of between −10 and +4%, comparing the current estimated from the EQE to the JV measurements under simulated sun light. This difference may be within the measurement accuracy since we use two different rigs with two different calibration diodes. The cells are masked in the same manner for both measurements, however, the spatial uniformity of the EQE measurement is not as controlled as it is for the JV measurements, which may contribute to the errors. Additionally, we note that we test these cells in air without encapsulation, and there is usually a little degradation in performance for these p–i–n inverted cells following testing.36
 Fig. 6  Photovoltaic performance of control and Al3+-doped (0.15 mol%) perovskite solar cells under simulated AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 solar irradiation (solid line), and in the dark (dotted line) at a scan rate of 0.38 V s−1. (a) The current density–voltage characteristics of the best cells. (b) External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum measured at short-circuit, along with the expected photocurrent integrated over the AM 1.5 solar spectrums of 100 mW cm−2. (c) Numerically averaged JV curves measured from forward bias (FB) to short-circuit (SC) and back again without observable hysteresis in a selection of 20 high performance control and Al3+ doped devices. (d) Stabilized maximum power output measurement of the best cells with bias at their maximum power points. 
Table 1 Best device performance parameters with different Al3+ doping concentration under simulated AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 solar irradiation




Al3+ doping concentration (mol%)

J
sc (mA cm−2)

V
oc (V)
FF (%)
PCE (%)




0
−21.3
−1.04
77.2
17.1


0.075
−21.1
−1.07
78.0
17.7


0.15
−22.4
−1.10
77.6
19.1


0.3
−21.8
−1.07
74.9
17.5


0.75
−20.3
−1.01
65.2
13.4


1.5
−9.9
−1.04
70.1
7.3




The JV curves for both control and Al3+-doped perovskite solar cells exhibit very low levels of hysteresis. We illustrate this in Fig. 6c showing the numerically averaged JV curves measured at different voltage sweep directions in a selection of 20 high performance devices with their performance parameters in the inset table. As an aside, this observation further strengthens our understanding that the main source of such hysteresis originates at the interface between the perovskite film and the semiconducting metal oxide such as TiO2 or ZnO in regular device structures, probably due to the generation of a large density of electronic defects at the surface of the perovskite when the films are crystallised on these metal oxide surfaces.37 Here, these cells using only organic p and n-type charge collection layers exhibit very well behaved current voltage characteristics. Notably, we have recently identified that the presence of electronic defects through which trap assisted recombination occurs, are central to the mechanism governing JV hysteresis in perovskite solar cells (combined with mobile ionic species).37 Our results are therefore consistent with the notion that perovskite films processed on organic semiconductors contain fewer electronic defects, than those processed on metal oxides (Table 1).
In Fig. 6d, we show the stabilised power output (SPO) of the best performing control and Al3+ doped cells when holding the applied bias fixed at its maximum power point voltage under simulated AM 1.5 (100 mW cm−2) sun light, and measuring the photocurrent as a function of time.
Both devices reach their stabilised photocurrent within the first measurement window, indicative of negligible hysteresis.38 For the Al3+-doped device, we measure a stabilized photocurrent at 20.3 mA cm−2 and a stabilised power output (SPO) of 18.2%, which is superior to the control device for which we measure a stabilized photocurrent and SPO of 18.2 mA cm−2 and 15.7%, respectively. We note that despite the negligible hysteresis in the JV curves, we still have slightly lower SPOs than the PCE determined from the JV curves. This emphasises that SPO measurements remain important even in cells appearing to exhibit negligible hysteresis. In Fig. S11 (ESI†), we further show the average-SPO in a selection of 20 high performance devices at 17.7% and 15.6% for the Al3+-doped and control devices respectively.
To confirm that the positive effects we observe here are due to the addition of Al3+, as opposed to the acac ion, we also replaced the Al(acac)3 dopant with aluminum iodide (AlI3). These films exhibit enhanced luminescent properties, and subsequently deliver improved solar cells in comparison to the control devices. We show these results in Fig. S12 (ESI†) where we observe that the addition of AlI3 into perovskite precursor solution also delivers optimum performance with a doping level of around 0.15 mol%.
Conclusion
To summarize our findings, we have discovered that the electronic quality of the MAPbI3 films can be substantially enhanced by low levels of doping with the small metal cation Al3+. We have proposed the mechanism by which Al3+-doping enhances the quality of the films, and revealed a simple property of the material, microstrain, which can be studied, tuned and minimised to deliver even higher quality perovskite films for optoelectronics. With the presence of Al3+ during the perovskite crystallization, we observe reduced microstrain in the perovskite crystal, which we infer to indicate a reduction in the density of crystal defects. From these same films we observe enhanced luminescent properties and reduced electronic disorder, which we infer to suggest that the same defects responsible for microstrain in the crystal, are also responsible for losses in luminescence and the solar cell operation. In addition, the remaining Al3+ ions present, most concentrated in the regions near the grain boundaries, may also act to alter the energy of these defect sites making them more benign. However, this latter consideration is not necessary to explain our results and is only a postulation. We have demonstrated improved JV measured PCE of up to 19.1% with negligible hysteresis for these Al3+-doped films, when integrated into planar heterojunction solar cells. We attribute the improved operation to the reduced non-radiative trap assisted recombination in the thin films and devices. Our work therefore highlights the possibility for considerable further improvement of the electronic quality of perovskite thin films, and subsequent devices by understanding the role of dopant impurities upon crystallisation, and crystal and electronic defects in perovskite thin films.
Methods
Perovskite solution preparation
To form the control methylammonium lead iodide (MAPbI3) precursor solution, it was prepared by mixing methylammonium iodide (Dyesol) and lead acetate trihydrate (Aldrich) at a 3:1 molar ratio, then dissolved in anhydrous N,N-dimethylformamide with final concentrations of 30 wt% with the addition of hypophosphorous acid (3 μl ml−1) as previously reported by Zhang et al.11 For Al3+-doped methylammonium lead iodide solution preparation, aluminium acetylacetonate (Al-acac3) was added into the MAPbI3 precursor solution by desired Al3+/Pb2+ ratios ranging from 0.075 to 1.5 mol% (i.e. we add 3 mg of Al-acac3 into 1 g MAPbI3 precursor solution to achieve the 1.5 mol% Al-acac3 doping).
Device fabrication
All the devices here were fabricated on piranha cleaned fluorine doped tin oxide (FTO) coated glass serving as the transparent electrode. We then deposit the hole-transporter material (HTM) of ∼20 nm thickness by spin-coating a hot solution (warmed to 110 °C on a hot plate) containing 1 mg mL−1 poly-TPD (1-Material) and 0.2 mg mL−1 F4-TCNQ (Sigma) in toluene at 2000 rpm for 30 s, followed by annealing in ambient air at 110 °C for 10 minutes. Then the perovskite layer was prepared by spin-coating at 2000 rpm for 45 s from as-prepared precursor solution, drying the substrates for 10 min on the bench in the glovebox, followed by annealing at 100 °C for 5 min. For the n-type collection layers, PCBM (dissolved in DCB, 30 mg ml−1) was spin-coated on top of the perovskite films at 1000 rpm for 30 s. Followed by the deposition of a thin (∼5 nm) buffer layer of bathocuproine (BCP, 0.5 mg ml−1 in IPA) by spinning at 6000 rpm for 20 seconds. Finally, devices were completed by thermal evaporation of 70 nm of silver contacts under high vacuum.
Acknowledgements
This work was part funded by EPSRC, and the International Collaborative Energy Technology R&D Program of the Korean Institute of Energy Technology Evaluation and Planning (KETEP) with financial resource from the Ministry of Trade, Industry & Energy, Republic of Korea (no. 20148520011250). J. T.-W. W. acknowledges Swire Educational Trust for supporting his DPhil study at Oxford, and thanks Will Y.-K. Peng, and the members in the HJS and RJN group for helpful discussion. W. Z. thanks the Supergen super solar project for funding support. R. Z. thanks Prof. Bing Shen, Mr Haoran Ma and Xianguo Lang from the School of Earth and Space Sciences at Peking University for help in the ICP-OES analysis.
References
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Liu, M. B. Johnston and H. J. Snaith, Nature, 2013, 501, 395–398 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. H. Heo, S. H. Im, J. H. Noh, T. N. Mandal, C.-S. Lim, J. A. Chang, Y. H. Lee, H. Kim, A. Sarkar, M. K. Nazeeruddin, M. Grätzel and S. Il Seok, Nat. Photonics, 2013, 7, 486–491 CrossRef CAS .
N. J. Jeon, J. H. Noh, Y. C. Kim, W. S. Yang, S. Ryu and S. Il Seok, Nat. Mater., 2014, 13, 1–7 Search PubMed .
M. Saliba, T. Matsui, J.-Y. Seo, K. Domanski, J.-P. Correa-Baena, M. K. Nazeeruddin, S. M. Zakeeruddin, W. Tress, A. Abate, A. Hagfeldt and M. Grätzel, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 1989–1997 CAS .
J. M. Ball, M. M. Lee, A. Hey and H. J. Snaith, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 1739–1743 CAS .
W.-J. Yin, T. Shi and Y. Yan, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2014, 104, 063903 CrossRef .
M. L. Agiorgousis, Y.-Y. Sun, H. Zeng and S. Zhang, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136, 14570–14575 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. W. deQuilettes, S. M. Vorpahl, S. D. Stranks, H. Nagaoka, G. E. Eperon, M. E. Ziffer, H. J. Snaith and D. S. Ginger, Science, 2015, 348, 683–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. K. Noel, A. Abate, S. D. Stranks, E. Parrott, V. Burlakov, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9815–9821 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, S. Pathak, N. Sakai, T. Stergiopoulos, P. K. Nayak, N. K. Noel, A. A. Haghighirad, V. M. Burlakov, D. W. deQuilettes, A. Sadhanala, W. Li, L. Wang, D. S. Ginger, R. H. Friend and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 10030 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Xu, A. Buin, A. H. Ip, W. Li, O. Voznyy, R. Comin, M. Yuan, S. Jeon, Z. Ning, J. J. McDowell, P. Kanjanaboos, J.-P. Sun, X. Lan, L. N. Quan, D. H. Kim, I. G. Hill, P. Maksymovych and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 7081 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Shao, Z. Xiao, C. Bi, Y. Yuan and J. Huang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 5784 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Zhang, M. Saliba, D. T. Moore, S. K. Pathak, M. T. Hörantner, T. Stergiopoulos, S. D. Stranks, G. E. Eperon, J. A. Alexander-Webber, A. Abate, A. Sadhanala, S. Yao, Y. Chen, R. H. Friend, L. A. Estroff, U. Wiesner and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6142 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5, 4712–4715 RSC .
M. M. Lee, J. Teuscher, T. Miyasaka, T. N. Murakami and H. J. Snaith, Science, 2012, 338, 643–647 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. Robinson and R. Harder, Nat. Mater., 2009, 8, 291–298 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Pramanick, X. P. Wang, C. Hoffmann, S. O. Diallo, M. R. V. Jørgensen and X.-L. Wang, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92, 174103 CrossRef .
G. Williamson and W. Hall, Acta Metall., 1953, 1, 22–31 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhao and J. Zhang, J. Appl. Crystallogr., 2008, 41, 1095–1108 CrossRef CAS .
D. T. Moore, H. Sai, K. W. Tan, D.-M. Smilgies, W. Zhang, H. J. Snaith, U. Wiesner and L. A. Estroff, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2350–2358 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Kieslich, S. Sun and A. K. Cheetham, Chem. Sci., 2015, 6, 3430–3433 RSC .

Encyclopedia of Analytical Chemistry, ed. R. A. Meyers, John Wiley & Sons, Ltd, Chichester, UK,  2006 Search PubMed .
R. A. Berner, Geochim. Cosmochim. Acta, 1975, 39, 489–504 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kubota and J. W. Mullin, J. Cryst. Growth, 1995, 152, 203–208 CrossRef CAS .
K. Sangwal, Prog. Cryst. Growth Charact. Mater., 1998, 36, 163–248 CrossRef CAS .
J. J. De Yoreo, P. U. P. A. Gilbert, N. A. J. M. Sommerdijk, R. L. Penn, S. Whitelam, D. Joester, H. Zhang, J. D. Rimer, A. Navrotsky, J. F. Banfield, A. F. Wallace, F. M. Michel, F. C. Meldrum, H. Colfen and P. M. Dove, Science, 2015, 349, aaa67601–aaa67609 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Deschler, M. Price, S. Pathak, L. E. Klintberg, D.-D. Jarausch, R. Higler, S. Hüttner, T. Leijtens, S. D. Stranks, H. J. Snaith, M. Atatüre, R. T. Phillips and R. H. Friend, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1421–1426 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. D. Stranks, V. M. Burlakov, T. Leijtens, J. M. Ball, A. Goriely and H. J. Snaith, Phys. Rev. Appl., 2014, 2, 034007 CrossRef .
M. B. Johnston and L. M. Herz, Acc. Chem. Res., 2015, 49, 146–154 CrossRef PubMed .
S. De Wolf, J. Holovsky, S.-J. Moon, P. Löper, B. Niesen, M. Ledinsky, F.-J. Haug, J.-H. Yum and C. Ballif, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1035–1039 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Tvingstedt, O. Malinkiewicz, A. Baumann, C. Deibel, H. J. Snaith, V. Dyakonov and H. J. Bolink, Sci. Rep., 2014, 4, 6071 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. R. Johnson and T. Tiedje, J. Appl. Phys., 1995, 78, 5609 CrossRef CAS .
P. Docampo, J. M. Ball, M. Darwich, G. E. Eperon and H. J. Snaith, Nat. Commun., 2013, 4, 2761 Search PubMed .
C.-C. Chueh, C.-Z. Li and A. K.-Y. Jen, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1160–1189 CAS .
Q. L. Song, F. Y. Li, H. Yang, H. R. Wu, X. Z. Wang, W. Zhou, J. M. Zhao, X. M. Ding, C. H. Huang and X. Y. Hou, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2005, 416, 42–46 CrossRef CAS .
S. van Reenen, M. Kemerink and H. J. Snaith, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2015, 6, 3808–3814 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. J. Snaith, A. Abate, J. M. Ball, G. E. Eperon, T. Leijtens, N. K. Noel, S. D. Stranks, J. T.-W. W. Wang, K. Wojciechowski and W. Zhang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2014, 5, 1511–1515 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

Footnotes† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Full experiment details, microstrain analysis, device characterization methods, device stability and reproducibility, FTPS, XPS, AFM, photoluminescence, Kelvin probe measurement, NanoSIMS, UV-vis spectra on full series of Al3+-doped perovskite. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee01969b‡ Current address: School of Chemistry, Joseph Banks Laboratories, University of Lincoln, Beevor Street, Lincoln LN6 7DL, UK.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
Table Content:

Broader context
Perovskite solar cells, which promise to deliver the highest efficiency, lowest cost next-generation PV technology, have been largely advanced over the last few years by improvements in the polycrystalline thin film quality. So far, improvements in film uniformity and smoothness, have mainly been at the expense of crystalline grain-size, and charge recombination losses at defect sites. High luminescence efficiency, which is an indication of better optoelectronic quality, has generally been found in films with polycrystalline grains of many micrometres in scale. This suggests a current compromise between ideal morphology and ideal optoelectronic quality. For traditional semiconductors and crystalline solids, the influence of impurity ion doping has been studied extensively and can either alter the crystallisation or induced electronic positive or negative type doping. However, in the perovskite community, impurity doping has been largely unexplored. Here, we show that doping the perovskite solution with Al3+, which has a much smaller ionic radius than Pb2+, has profoundly positive influenced on the crystalline and optoelectronic quality of the perovskite absorber layer: we demonstrate a two-fold increase in the photoluminescence quantum efficiency and a significantly reduced electronic disorder, despite the films still having polycrystalline grains on the order of one micrometer is scale. This largely overcomes the trade-off between film smoothness and optoelectronic quality, and these improvements translate into highly efficient planar heterojunction perovskite solar cells. Our work paves the way for further improvement of the optoelectronic quality of perovskite thin films, and subsequent devices, via highlighting a new avenue for investigation of the role of dopant impurities upon crystallisation and controlling the electronic defect density in the perovskite thin films.


 	Fig. 1  Characterizations of control and Al3+-doped perovskite samples with (a) X-ray diffraction patterns analysis, and (b) a modified Williamson–Hall plot of (Δdobs2 − Δdins2)1/2versus d spacing extracted from the corresponding diffraction profiles shown in Fig. S1 (ESI†). The slopes of the solid lines from linear fits indicate the extents of microstrain at different doping concentrations. (c) Calculated microstrain of samples with different Al3+ doping concentration from XRD patterns (the error bars for each concentration in the plot c, are determined from the fits in b). (d) Top view scanning electron microscope (SEM).	 
Δdobs2 = Δdε2 + Δdins2 + Δdsize2	(1)
(Δdobs2 − Δdins2)1/2 ≈ εd.	(2)

 	Fig. 2  Schematic diagram of the proposed perovskite polycrystalline thin film growth and influence of the Al3+ doping with illustrated C, N, H, O, I, Pb, and Al atoms are indicated by the color of black, blue, pink, red, grey, and cyan respectively; and histograms of the surface topography and the images (insets) from AFM measurements of different samples. Best fits for the histograms are obtained using one and two Voigt distributions, respectively for the control and the optimized sample. The individual distribution components with their HWHM, and the cumulative fits are labelled as in the figure.	 

 	Fig. 3  Photoluminescence spectroscopy of control (non-doped) and 0.15 mol% Al3+-doped perovskite thin films deposited on glass substrate with (a) steady-state spectra (300 mW cm−2, 507 nm), (b) time-resolved photoluminescence decay after excitation at 507 nm with pulsed (200 kHz) and a fluence of 30 nJ cm−2 per pulse, and (c) photoluminescence quantum efficiency (PLQE) as a function of excitation power (further details are available in the ESI†).	 
	(3)

 	Fig. 4  Fluorescence microscopy of (a) control and (b) Al3+-doped (0.15 mol%) perovskite films with 10 × 10 μm area mapping excited with a pulsed 470 nm laser (40 MHz, 117 ps pulse width, 300 nJ cm−2 per pulse). (c and d) Are the image histograms (10000 pixels) showing the fluorescence emission distribution with solid lines indicate the average number of PL counts. The Al3+-doped perovskite has more pixel counts falling under “bright” regions as compared to the control.	 

 	Fig. 5  (a) High angle annular dark field STEM (HAADF-STEM) cross-sectional micrograph of optimized device with the structure of Ag/BCP/ETM (PCBM)/perovskite/HTM (poly-TPD)/FTO. (b) Diagram of the energy levels of the materials used and (c) an illustration of the structure of the solar cells.	 

 	Fig. 6  Photovoltaic performance of control and Al3+-doped (0.15 mol%) perovskite solar cells under simulated AM 1.5, 100 mW cm−2 solar irradiation (solid line), and in the dark (dotted line) at a scan rate of 0.38 V s−1. (a) The current density–voltage characteristics of the best cells. (b) External quantum efficiency (EQE) spectrum measured at short-circuit, along with the expected photocurrent integrated over the AM 1.5 solar spectrums of 100 mW cm−2. (c) Numerically averaged JV curves measured from forward bias (FB) to short-circuit (SC) and back again without observable hysteresis in a selection of 20 high performance control and Al3+ doped devices. (d) Stabilized maximum power output measurement of the best cells with bias at their maximum power points.	 

0	−21.3	−1.04	77.2	17.1
0.075	−21.1	−1.07	78.0	17.7
0.15	−22.4	−1.10	77.6	19.1
0.3	−21.8	−1.07	74.9	17.5
0.75	−20.3	−1.01	65.2	13.4
1.5	−9.9	−1.04	70.1	7.3
Footnotes
† Electronic supplementary information (ESI) available: Full experiment details, microstrain analysis, device characterization methods, device stability and reproducibility, FTPS, XPS, AFM, photoluminescence, Kelvin probe measurement, NanoSIMS, UV-vis spectra on full series of Al3+-doped perovskite. See DOI: 10.1039/c6ee01969b
‡ Current address: School of Chemistry, Joseph Banks Laboratories, University of Lincoln, Beevor Street, Lincoln LN6 7DL, UK.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2016
