Practical strategies for enhanced performance of anode materials in Na + /K + -ion batteries  - Journal of Materials Chemistry A (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D0TA12417F View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D0TA12417F
(Review Article)
J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9, 7317-7335Practical strategies for enhanced performance of anode materials in Na+/K+-ion batteries

        
          
            Shuhao 
            Xiao†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Xinyan 
            Li†
ab, 
      
        
          
            Tingshuai 
            Li
          
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Yong 
            Xiang
          
          
        
      *a and 

        
          
            Jun Song 
            Chen
          
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 610054, Sichuan, China. E-mail: xiang@uestc.edu.cn; jschen@uestc.edu.cn
bCenter for Applied Chemistry, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China, Chengdu 611731, Sichuan, China
Received 
      23rd December 2020
    , Accepted 29th January 2021First published on 3rd February 2021AbstractTo build a new green energy society, energy storage technology is becoming increasingly important and infiltrating into almost every aspect of our daily life. Lithium-ion batteries have been widely used because they have no memory effect and a high energy density. However, it is not clear whether the limited lithium resources can support such an energy system during its march towards our goal of sustainable development. To address this issue, sodium-ion and potassium-ion batteries are considered to be suitable alternative power sources because of their much more abundant reserves on our planet. The successful application of these two new battery systems requires the development of advanced electrode materials. Although many materials with promising performance have been reported, further improvements are still needed to achieve a high energy density and a long cycle life to meet the requirement for commercialization. Instead of categorizing different candidate anode materials according to their nanostructures or compositions, in this review, we aim to provide a comprehensive understanding of different effective strategies to address the specific drawbacks in these materials, including the construction of heterojunctions, the introduction of diffusion channels and heteroatom doping to enhance the ionic and electronic conductivity, and the strategic design of an unique structure or chemical composition to improve the stability of the electrode. We also summarize some challenges associated with these strategies, which need to be addressed in order to achieve a more intensive application of sodium-ion and potassium-ion batteries.Shuhao XiaoMr Shuhao Xiao received his B.S. degree from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China in 2016. He is currently a PhD student in the School of Materials and Energy at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. His research interests focus on the synthesis and application of nanomaterials for sodium-ion batteries.Xinyan LiMs Xinyan Li received her Master's degree from Soochow University in 2020. She is now a PhD candidate at the School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. Her research interest focuses on electrode nanoarchitectures for microbattery applications.Tingshuai LiProf. Tingshuai Li received his PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Science in Materials Chemistry and Physics in 2011 and then worked at USC to research and develop SOFCs. In 2013, he joined the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China as an associate professor. His research interests include solid oxide fuel cells, nitrogen fixation into ammonia, laser interactions with solid targets and random lasers. He has published more than 50 international journal papers.Yong XiangProf. Yong Xiang received his BS from the University of Science and Technology of China, and MS and PhD from Harvard University. He worked as a Senior Engineer and Program Manager at Intel Corporation in Silicon Valley, before joining the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) as a Professor of Microelectronics, Materials Science, and Energy. At UESTC, he served as the Assistant Dean at the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics, the Associate Dean at the School of Energy Science and Engineering, the Dean at the School of Materials and Energy, and currently he is the Dean of Advanced Energy Institute. His research interest focuses on materials genome technologies with applications in integrated energy technologies and flexible electronics. He has published more than 200 scientific articles and filed over 200 patents.Jun Song ChenProf. Jun Song Chen received his PhD from the Nanyang Technological University in 2012. After that, he worked at the Max Plank Institute of Colloids and Interfaces as an Alexander von Humboldt researcher from 2013 to 2014. He is now a Professor at the School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. His research interests include the design of nanostructured materials for energy-related applications, such as sodium-ion and lithium-sulfur batteries and water splitting.
1. Introduction
Rechargeable batteries are in great demand due to the fast development of electric vehicles (EVs) and smart grids in recent decades.1,2 For many years, lithium-ion batteries (LIBs) showing high energy density, low maintenance and long cycle life have been the center of all kinds of rechargeable technologies.2–5 However, the energy density of LIBs will reach its intrinsic limit with a value slightly exceeding 300 W h kg−1 by the next year.6 Moreover, the scarce resource of lithium metal sets another hindrance to the further development of LIBs.
Sodium possesses similar chemical properties to lithium, and sodium-ion batteries (SIBs), which work in a similar way to LIBs, are regarded as a promising alternative to replace LIBs.7–9 The most attractive feature of sodium is its much lower cost, as it has more abundant reserves than lithium in the earth's crust (2.6% sodium vs. approximately 0.06% lithium),10 and its omnipresence in sea water. Besides the high availability of sodium, switching the charge carrier from Li+ to Na+ in the battery system would allow the replacement of the heavy and expensive copper current collector with Al on the anode side, which can further reduce the cost of SIBs.11
Despite the advantage of sodium, its larger ionic radius (0.76 Å for Li+vs. 1.02 Å for Na+) and higher potential (−2.71 V vs. NHE for Na+/Na and −3.05 V vs. NHE for Li+/Li, NHE stands for the Normal Hydrogen Electrode) make graphite, the anode material in commercial LIBs, an unsuitable intercalation host for Na+.12–14 Moreover, the sluggish electrochemical kinetics and serious volume expansion of the electrode materials in SIBs usually cause inferior rate capability, lower capacity, and poor cycling stability. Thus, it is crucial to develop desirable functional materials for high-performance SIBs.
During the search for Na+ host materials, three different sodium storage mechanisms have been identified for anode materials: intercalation,15,16 alloying reaction,17–20 and conversion.21–30 For intercalation, carbonaceous materials especially hard carbon and porous carbon are widely investigated due to their abundant resource and high electronic conductivity. However, the low theoretical capacity (∼300 mA h g−1) and slow Na+ transport kinetics make carbon-based materials unable to meet the requirements of high-energy density SIBs.31
In order to achieve a high storage capacity of SIBs, materials such as tin, antimony and red phosphorus and metal compounds including phosphides, sulfides and selenides that store Na+via conversion and/or alloying reactions have attracted enormous research interest. Even though these metal compounds offer high theoretical capacity owing to their mixed storage processes consisting of both alloying and conversion reactions, they usually suffer from problems such as sluggish reaction kinetics, low coulombic efficiency and large volume expansion during sodiation/desodiation reactions, giving rise to unsatisfactory battery performance.32–34 Thus, effective strategies have to be implemented in order to achieve better Na+ storage properties.
The battery performance of a material could be generally governed by three intrinsic properties: electronic and ionic conductivity, which are mainly associated with the specific capacity and rate performance, and structural stability, which usually determines the capacity retention and cycle life of the electrode. Unlike other review articles which focused on a particular type of material or nanostructure for SIB application,7,35–37 in the current report, we will summarize different effective strategies, both theoretical and experimental, to enhance the above-mentioned three properties so as to boost the SIB performance. Specifically, the intrinsic ionic and electronic conductivity of materials could be improved by constructing heterojunctions, introducing defects, and heteroatom doping, while building materials with unique structures or chemical compositions could lead to superior structural stability. Finally, a brief summary and outlook for future developments in the design of anode materials for SIBs are presented.
2. Promoting ionic conductivity
The most significant difference between SIBs and LIBs is the size of the charge carrier, where Na+ is considerably larger than Li+. This gives rise to the poorer diffusion kinetics of Na+ in the active materials, providing practical rate capacity and cycling stability that are well below the expectation. To tackle such a challenge, various strategies have been proposed which can mainly be classified into two types. Constructing heterojunctions between two materials with contrasting bandgaps can induce a build-in electric field (E-field), which would provide an extra driving force for ion diffusion and thus remarkably enhance the kinetics.38 In addition to the E-field, the difference in the lattice parameters of the two participating components would have lattice mismatch and distortion at the junction, thus creating abundant active sites, leading to a shortened diffusion length of Na+ ions. The diffusion length (l), ionic diffusion coefficient (Dion), and diffusion time (τ) usually obey the following equation:39 (1)Dion for a particular ion in a certain material is always a constant and thus τ is reversibly proportional to l2. Therefore, shortening the diffusion length can decrease the diffusion time of Na+ ions and thus promote the high rate performance. Creating diffusion paths with a low energy barrier is another effective strategy. Regulating the ionic transport channels in the electrodes via nanostructure design, delamination and/or interlayer expansion would improve the mobility and diffusion kinetics of Na+ ions, resulting in an enhanced rate performance.40,41
2.1 Constructing heterojunctions
The concept of heterojunctions was first introduced in semiconductor materials and presented great potential in different applications ranging from transistors to solar cells because of their intriguing interfacial phenomenon. A heterojunction is an interface formed by the molecular contact of two semiconductors with similar thermal expansion coefficients, interatomic distances, and crystal structures, but different bandgaps. When these two semiconductors, one n-type and other p-type, are joined at a junction, the carriers on the one side of the interface will spontaneously migrate to the other due to the concentration polarization. As a result, the n-type semiconductor loses electrons, leaving positively charged ions behind, while the p-type semiconductor loses holes, leaving negatively charged ions behind. This gives rise to a space charge region near the interface between the two semiconductors and the imbalanced charge distribution will induce an E-field.42 For instance, Wang et al. constructed MoS2/WS2 heterojunctions which exhibit an ultrafast charge transfer.43 Shao et al. prepared a TiO2(B)-anatase heterojunction via a one-step solvothermal approach and this unique construction could promote ionic diffusion kinetics, leading to a high rate capability.44 Moreover, Guo's group developed an amorphous carbon layer wrapped SnS/SnO2 heterojunction on graphene nanosheets (C@SnS/SnO2@Gr), which presented a better electrochemical performance than C@SnS@Gr, C@SnO2@Gr, and their mechanical mixture.38 In addition, Liang et al. investigated the Na+ storage performance in a CoSe2/ZnSe heterojunction.45 The coexistence of heterogeneous spin states and the mismatch in the degree of Jahn–Teller distortion between Co–Se (Co2+ shows a strong Jahn–Teller effect because of the split 3d7 orbitals and unevenly occupied eg orbitals) and Zn–Se (Zn2+ with 3d10 orbitals demonstrates no Jahn–Teller effect) caused lattice distortion at the phase boundaries, creating crystal defects and active sites, which could remarkably enhance the diffusion kinetics of Na+. Thus, the CoSe2/ZnSe heterojunction showed an overwhelming rate capacity of 263 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1. As a comparison, an electrode consisting of physically mixed CoSe2/ZnSe without the heterojunction demonstrated only 71 mA h g−1 at 10 A g−1.
Recently, Zhang et al. fabricated a heterojunction with pyrrhotite Fe9S10 and MoS2 (Fig. 1a and b).46 Hexagonal Fe9S10 is a good electron conductor with an intrinsic conductivity of 102 to 103 S cm−1. Thus, a strong E-field at the interface between Fe9S10 and MoS2 was induced due to a large energy bandgap difference between Fe9S10 (0 eV) and MoS2 (1.4 eV), which facilitated the immigration of Na+ ions. In addition, the Gibbs free energy change (ΔG) of Fe9S10 reacting with Na+ was much higher than that of MoS2, resulting in a better sodiation/de-sodiation reversibility in the former. Therefore, uneven distribution of Na+ ions will occur during charge and discharge processes, providing an extra driving force for Na+ ions, which further promoted the electrochemical kinetics. In addition, according to DFT calculations, the ion diffusion energy barriers in the Fe9S10/MoS2 heterojunction, MoS2 and Fe9S10 were compared (Fig. 1d and f), and the Fe9S10/MoS2 heterojunction offered the lowest barrier for Na+/K+ diffusion. Compared with MoS2@C and Fe9S10@C anodes, Fe9S10/MoS2@C delivered the best cycle stability and the highest reversible capacity of 443 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles at a current density of 0.5 A g−1, which is also higher than that of MoS2@C and Fe9S10@C mixed by grinding (only ∼250 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles). Moreover, MoS2/Fe9S10@C could achieve 197 and 132 mA h g−1 even at high current densities of 30 and 50 A g−1, respectively, while the capacities of the other two phase-pure samples were almost 0. This work suggested that constructing a heterojunction using materials with contrasting bandgaps and different thermodynamic properties towards Na+ intercalation/de-intercalation could lead to a synergistic enhancement of the diffusion kinetics.
 Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism and direction of the internal E-field for Fe9S10/MoS2@C during discharge and charge processes. (b) HR-TEM image of the Fe9S10@MoS2@C heterostructure. (c) Comparison of the rate performance of Fe9S10@C, MoS2@C, physically mixed Fe9S10@C and MoS2@C, and Fe9S10@MoS2@C. (d) Alkali ion migration path in the Fe9S10–MoS2 heterostructure, and bare MoS2, with the top view. Their corresponding potential energy curves along the diffusion path: (f) sodium ion and potassium ion. (a–e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
2.2 Engineering diffusion paths
In addition to constructing heterojunction, engineering the interconnected diffusion path in anode materials is another effective strategy to improve the rate performance, as it could efficiently deliver a sufficient number of ions at a high current rate. For instance, graphite is the most widely used commercialized anode for LIBs. However, it cannot be used as an anode material for SIBs due to the insufficient interlayer spacing and almost insuperable energy barrier for Na+ insertion. In contrast, expanded graphite has an enlarged interlayer distance showing a high reversible capacity of 284 mAhg−1 at a current density of 20 mA g−1.47 Therefore, constructing materials with open channels in the crystal structure for sodium ion transport is highly desirable. Recently, this approach has been intensively investigated by many researchers in a lot of layered materials such as black phosphorus,48–50 MXenes,51,52 and layered metal oxides/sulfides/selenides.53
Phosphorus is another attractive anode material because of its high theoretical capacity of 2596 mA h g−1, due mainly to the conversion reaction and the formation of Na3P.54 Phosphorus has three main allotropes: white, red and black phosphorus. White phosphorus is unsuitable as a battery material because of its highly reactivity and toxicity. Amorphous red phosphorus has been investigated previously for sodium storage, but its poor electrical conductivity and large volume expansion limit its practical application.55,56 Black phosphorus (BP) is the most thermodynamically stable allotrope, which also has a layered structure but a larger interlayer distance of 5.4 Å compared to graphite (3.4 Å), making the diffusion of sodium ions easier.57 As a layered material, BP can be exfoliated into a few layers or monolayers (usually named as phosphorene) similar to graphene using techniques such as mechanical exfoliation, sonication liquid exfoliation and thermal thinning. Sodium ions have a very low diffusion energy barrier (∼0.04 eV) along the zigzag direction on phosphorene,58,59 implying the kinetic advantage of phosphorene as an anode material for SIBs. Cui's group report a sandwiched phosphorene-graphene hybrid material fabricated via a liquid-phase exfoliation method.60 The sodiation mechanism could be divided into two steps: insertion of Na+ into the phosphorene interlayers first and then alloying with phosphorene to form a Na3P phase. The phosphorene nanosheets offer an efficient diffusion path for sodium ions, resulting in a high reversible capacity of 645 mA h g−1 at even a very high rate of 10C (26 A g−1). Although BP is a promising anode material for SIBs, its high cost and the low productivity of phosphorene still impeded the practical application of BP.61 Therefore, developing cost-effective methods for large-scale preparation of BP should be the focus of further research.
As typical two-dimensional (2D) materials, MXenes, usually presented as Mn+1XnTx (n = 1–3), where M is an early transition metal (such as Sc, Ti, V, Nb, Mo and so on), X is carbon and/or nitrogen, and Tx stands for the surface termination (such as OH, O and F),62 are expected to be suitable for Na+ storage due to their high ion conductivity.63 In order to further improve the electrochemical performance of MXenes, delaminating multilayered MXenes into few-layered or even single-layered nanosheets via simple methods such as ultrasonication, is sought to be an effective approach, as theoretical studies showed low diffusion barriers for sodium ions on few-layered MXenes.64,65 However, Van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonds in between these layers would cause the aggregation and restacking of the delaminated MXene sheets, which could eliminate the “open channels” in the interlayer space, thus impeding the diffusion of Na+ ions. In order to address this issue, different strategies have been proposed to introduce various types of “spacer” materials for better structural stability of the 2D framework.66 Xie et al. prepared a porous MXene/CNT film by electrostatically driven self-assembly of negatively charged MXene layers as a host and positively charged CNTs as a guest.67 The introduction of 1D CNTs effectively prevented the stacking of MXene nanosheets and constructed a porous structure in the hybrid film. It is important to mention that the interlayered CNTs served not only as the spacer material against restacking of MXene host nanosheets, but also as a highly efficient electrical conducting network. As a result, compared with pure MXene nanosheets with a restacked compact structure, the MXene/CNT composite exhibited an enhanced rate capability of 89 mA h cm−3 at 5 A g−1, which outperformed multilayered Ti2CTx powder. Similar approaches can be applied to fabricate few-layered MXenes with other high-capacity materials, such as metal oxides,68 metal sulfides69,70 and red phosphorus,71 to substantially improve their cycle life and rate capability.
The fabrication of layered metal compounds with a sheet-like structure is also a widely practiced strategy to enhance Na+ diffusion. Compared to MXenes and BP, where delaminated structures were usually achieved via top-down exfoliation, the creation of multi-layered metal compounds was realized through bottom-up chemical synthesis. For instance, Sun et al. reported that based on first principles calculations, a bare Mo2C monolayer showed a diffusion barrier of only 0.015 eV for Na+ ions.72 In addition, Jiang's group compared the Na+ diffusion behavior in the interlayer spacing and on the surface of MoSe2 layers.73 The result showed that the Na ion diffusion on the surface is much faster than in between the layers of bulk MoSe2, which is mainly due to the exposed ion diffusion channels. Very recently, single-crystalline SnSe nanosheet clusters (SnSe NSCs) were synthesized by an aqueous solution strategy (Fig. 2a and b).74 Benefiting from the enhanced Na+ diffusion kinetics, such nanoflakes exhibited an excellent rate capability (200/106/32/16 mA h g−1) even at very high discharge/charge current densities of 10/20/30/40 A g−1 (Fig. 2c), which is much higher than that of SnSe particles (81/0.19/0/0 mA h g−1).
 Fig. 2  (a and b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of SnSe NSCs. (c) TEM image of SnSe NSCs. (d) Rate capability of SnSe NSCs and SnSe particle electrodes at various current densities from 0.1 to 40 A g−1. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route. (f) The atomic structure diagrams of MoO3 and DMcT-MoO3 and diffusion pathways and diffusion barriers of Na shuttle between MoO3 and DMcT-MoO3. (g) XRD patterns of MoO3, rMoO3 and DMcT-MoO3. HRTEM image of the layer spacing of DMcT-MoO3. (h) Rate capacities at current densities between 0.1 and 5 A g−1 of rMoO3 and DMcT-MoO3. (a–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2017, Wiley. (e–h) Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
Expanding the interlayer spacing is also considered as a promising strategy to improve the ion conductivity by inserting foreign species in between the layers. This approach has been discovered and employed over the past few years, and more intensive research studies have been carried out until recently.66 For example, Wang et al. intercalated conductive polyaniline (PANI) into multi-layered MoS2 by a simple confined reaction of oleic acid and aniline in the MoS2 interlayer, resulting in a significantly enlarged interlayer spacing of 1.08 nm (vs. 0.62 nm for pristine MoS2).53 The layered composite MoS2/PANI provided an optimized rate performance compared with pristine MoS2 and delivered 391 mA h g−1 discharge capacity at 1000 mA g−1. Li's group synthesized interlayer-expanded bismuththiol-intercalated MoO3 (DMcT-MoO3) by a two-step solution-based route (Fig. 2e).75 The neutral layered MoO3 compound is converted into orthorhombic reduced-MoO3 (rMoO3) with negatively charged layers by a partial reduction process and compensating cations (Na+) in between the layers. Subsequently, DMcT-MoO3 was obtained by inserting DMcT molecules into the layered rMoO3 structure via an ion exchange method. Compared to commercial MoO3, the (020) peak of rMoO3 and DMcT-MoO3 displayed an obvious shift to lower 2theta angles in the XRD patterns (Fig. 2f), corresponding to a significant increase in the d-spacing of the crystal plane from 6.92 Å (in commercial MoO3) to 9.41 Å (in rMoO3), and then to 10.40 Å (in DMcT-MoO3) after different chemical treatments. Consistently, the layer spacing of DMcT-MoO3 is measured to be 1.029 nm (Fig. 2g), which is much larger than the radius of Na+ ions, giving rise to a much lower Na+ diffusion barrier of 0.53 eV than commercial MoO3 (0.82 eV) (Fig. 2h). As a result, the DMcT-MoO3 sample showed an enhanced rate performance with a rate capacity of 127 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1 (Fig. 2i), much higher than that of rMoO3 (44 mA h g−1).
3. Enhancing electronic conductivity
Electronic conductivity is an important characteristic that directly influences the electron transfer kinetics in active materials and thus the high-rate performance of the electrode. For many SIB anode materials with a high theoretical capacity, their application potential is usually limited by their low electronic conductivity. For instance, even though the theoretical capacity of red phosphorus is as high as 2596 mA h g−1 because it can react with 3 mol of Na+ per P atom to form Na3P, its practical performance is greatly deteriorated due to the low electronic conductivity (∼10−14 S cm−1).
To overcome this drawback, considerable efforts have been devoted to improving the electronic conductivity of anode materials, such as heteroatom doping and heterojunction construction. By introducing foreign species into the active material, both doping and heterojunction construction modify the electronic structure to enhance the electrical conductivity of the electrode.
3.1 Introducing dopants
Doping is the introduction of a small number of foreign heteroatoms into a material to replace the original atoms in the host crystal lattice, and the introduced heteroatoms are usually called dopants, and was widely used in the preparation of semiconductor devices at the early stage. The conductivity of a semiconductor is closely related to the concentration of charge carriers. However, the number of charge carriers generated by intrinsic excitation is limited in pure semiconductor materials, thus causing a relatively low conductivity. Doping heteroatoms can introduce impurity levels in the energy gap of semiconductors and generate impurity carriers, which will improve the electronic conductivity of semiconductors.
The type of dopant can be generally divided into metal and non-metal atoms. Because the introduced heteroatoms have a unique chemical state compared to the host atom, successful doping will create a very different electronic environment and bonding interaction around the locality of the replaced atoms. Due to the fact that most electrode materials are semiconductors, doping heteroatoms with different valence states could increase the concentrations of electrons (in n-type semiconductors) or holes (in p-type semiconductors). In the n-type semiconductor, the introduced extra electrons could be transferred to the conduction band and become free electrons, while the increased number of holes in the p-type semiconductor would lower the transition energy barrier of electrons from the valence band to the conduction band. Furthermore, the energy levels occupied by the carriers produced by heteroatoms are named impurity levels, which would narrow the bandgap. All these effects could modify the electronic state which leads to enhanced electronic conductivity, thus giving rise to an improved rate performance of electrode materials.76 Recently, this strategy has been widely applied to the modification of anode materials for SIBs.
Carbon materials are considered to be one of the most promising anode materials for SIBs, because of their low cost, abundant resource and good electronic conductivity.77 Non-metal doping (e.g., N, B, S, and P) of carbon materials has been demonstrated to significantly enhance their electronic conductivity and surface hydrophilicity to facilitate the electron transfer and electrode–electrolyte interaction.78 Boron doping can introduce electron deficiency into the carbon structure, giving rise to a p-type semiconductor with a lowered Fermi level.79 However, the doping of boron into carbon will usually lead to the formation of boron carbide, which makes B-doped carbon difficult to obtain.80 Sulfur and phosphorus doping can effectively expand the interlayer distance of the carbon host due to their much larger covalent radius than the carbon atom.81 Among the abovementioned non-metal atoms, nitrogen has a similar atomic size to carbon, which allows its facile replacement of carbon atoms without inducing significant lattice distortion, making it probably the most widely studied dopant in carbon chemistry. Besides, many N-containing compounds, such as NH3,82 N2H4,83 urea,84 polyacrylonitrile (PAN),85 polypyrrole (PPy),86 polyaniline (PANI),87etc., can serve as N-providing precursors. Different methods to introduce nitrogen into carbon have been investigated, including chemical vapor deposition (CVD),88 wet chemical methods,89 ball milling,90 and thermal annealing methods.81 Generally, there are three types of doped nitrogen in carbon according to the bonding environments: pyrrolic N, graphitic N, and pyridinic N.91 Specifically, pyridinic N refers to N atoms connected with two C atoms at the defects or edges of the carbon layer. Pyrrolic N binds two neighboring C atoms into a five-membered ring. Graphitic N refers to the C atom being replaced by N in the hexagonal ring.92 Because of the difference in bonding configuration,93 graphitic N can create a negative electron-rich state, while pyridinic N and pyrrolic N generate a positive state. These distortions of the electronic state enhance the electronic conductivity and thus promote a high rate performance. Xu et al. achieved a high nitrogen content of 6.8 at% in 3D N-doped graphene foam (N-GF) by annealing freeze-dried graphene oxide foam (GOF) in ammonia.94 When used as a SIB anode, N-GF delivered a high charge capacity of 1057.1 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and a rate performance of 137.7 mA h g−1 at 10C (1C = 500 mA g−1), which is much higher than that of pure reduced graphene foam (809.4 mA h g−1 at 0.2C and 10.5 mA h g−1 at 10C), evidently proving the advantage of N doping for enhancing SIB performance.
In addition to carbon materials, the doping strategy has also been widely applied to conversion materials such as metal oxides, sulfides and selenides. Generally, this category of compounds belongs to semiconductor materials, and the electrochemical performance is largely affected by the relatively low electronic conductivity. In such a case, heteroatom doping could be an effective strategy to tune the intrinsic electronic properties of these materials. For instance, because Ni–Se (Ni2+, t62ge2g) and Co–Se (Co2+, t62ge1g) octahedral coordination have a mismatch in the degree of Jahn–Teller distortion which can generate a high defect concentration, nickel-doped cobalt selenides showed a higher conductivity compared to the non-doped samples. Wu et al. reported nickel-doped cobalt selenide nanorods anchored on carbon nanofibers (C@NixCo1−xSe2/CNF), and the optimized doping concentration was found to be 33% atomic percent of Co replaced by Ni.95 The electrical conductivities of Ni0.33Co0.67Se2 is measured to be 0.3733 S mm−1, which is much higher than that of the undoped counterparts (0.0147 S mm−1 for CoSe2 and 0.0002 S mm−1 for NiSe2) and is nearly five-fold that of Ni0.67Co0.33Se2 (0.0755 S mm−1). Moreover, C@Ni0.33Co0.67Se2/CNF showed a superior rate performance of 413.1 mA h g−1 at 2.0 A g−1. However, the capacity of the samples with higher Ni doping concentrations of 50 at% and 67 at% almost declined to 0 at 2.0 A g−1 because of their poor conductivity. In another example, Kong et al. synthesized a Cu-doped Co3O4@N-doped carbon material with interior void space (Cu–Co3O4@Void@NC) through a successive coating–etching process (Fig. 3a).96 By adding Cu sources to the precursor, a small number of Co atoms in the Co3O4 crystal framework were replaced by Cu, resulting in a lattice distortion. The DFT calculations (Fig. 3b and c) demonstrated that Cu-doping narrowed the band gap of Co3O4 (from 1.56 to 1.33 eV) and shifted the Fermi level to the conduction band because of the introduced impurity levels. Cu–Co3O4@Void@NC exhibited a stable capacity of 301 mA h g−1 at a current density of 2 A g−1 (Fig. 3d) for sodium storage, which is much higher than that of un-doped Co3O4@Void@NC (220 mA h g−1).
 Fig. 3  (a) The formation illustration of Cu–Co3O4@Void@NC. (b) Density functional theory calculations of pure Co3O4 and Cu–Co3O4: (b) Optimized structures of pure Co3O4 and Cu–Co3O4, (c) Calculated total band structures of pure Co3O4 and Cu–Co3O4 and calculated partial densities of states for pure Co3O4 and Cu–Co3O4. (d) Cycling performances of Cu–Co3O4@Void@NC, Cu–Co3O4@NC and Co3O4@Void@NC at 2 A g−1. (a–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. 
In addition to metal heteroatoms, a similar effect has also been observed in non-metal dopants. For instance, doping S into metal selenides can introduce hole charge carriers and induce short-range defects, thus efficiently improving the electrical conductivity. Wang et al. prepared S-doped Co0.85Se1−xSx nanoparticles (CoSeS@C/G) through a hydrothermal method for SIBs.97 CoSeS@C/G possesses a smaller charge-transfer resistance (129.2 Ω) compared with CoSe@C/G (289.2 Ω), and the former exhibited an excellent rate performance of 390.2, 364.2, 340.1, 317.9 and 281.7 mA h g−1 at a rate of 0.2, 0.5, 1, 2 and 5 A g−1, respectively. It still maintained 266 mA h g−1 at an ultra-high rate of 10 A g−1, which was obviously superior to that of CoSe@C/G (204.6 mA h g−1).
3.2 Building heterojunctions
In addition to doping, introducing a new phase into materials and forming a heterojunction is considered as an effective way to enhance the electronic conductivity. In order to make it work, the bandgaps of the two materials on either side of the heterojunction have to be different. When two semiconductors with different types are coupled, the electrons in the conduction band move from the p-type semiconductor to the n-type, while the holes in the valence band move in the opposite direction. The conduction band of the p-type semiconductor would thus bend downward and the valence band of the n-type semiconductor bends upward. Such a band bending will then narrow the bandgap between the bottom of the conduction band and the top of the valence band.98 This would thus promote the separation of electrons and holes of materials, which makes the charge mobility higher than that of pure materials. The main role of the heterojunction in improving the electronic conductivity is the regulation of the local electronic environment and band structure, in comparison to the creation of an internal E-field for ionic conductivity enhancement. As a result, this strategy can mitigate polarization and enhance the rate performance of anode materials for SIBs.
For instance, by growing ZIF-67 on BiOBr nanospheres, a heterostructure of core–shell Bi2S3@Co9S8 was obtained by Huang et al. after a hydrothermal sulfurization reaction and then low-temperature annealing (Fig. 4a).99 The TEM and HRTEM images (Fig. 4b) clearly illustrate the formation of core–shell Bi2S3@Co9S8 structures, and the Bi2S3–Co9S8 heterojunction was formed at the core–shell interface with the two crystalline phases. Based on DFT calculations (Fig. 4e), bare Co9S8 possesses an obvious bandgap (1.40 eV), suggesting a low electron conductivity. In contrast, there is no obvious bandgap found near the Fermi level at the Bi2S3–Co9S8 heterojunction, which confirmed that such a unique construction can offset the bandgap, thus greatly enhancing the electrical conductivity. As a result, core–shell Bi2S3@Co9S8 exhibits excellent high-rate performance (293 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1), which is superior to that of bare Bi2S3 and Co9S8 (∼70 mA h g−1 at 5 A g−1) (Fig. 4d).
 Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process. (b) TEM images and HRTEM image, and (c) cycle stability at 0.1 A g−1 and (d) rate performances of core–shell Bi2S3@Co9S8, core–shell BiOBr@Co9S8, bare Bi2S3 and hollow Co9S8 cages. (e) Total density of states based on DFT calculations of bare Bi2S3, the heterojunction of Bi2S3–Co9S8 and bare Co9S8. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of (SnCo)S2/SG. (g) XRD patterns of (SnCo)S2 and (SnCo)S2/SG composites. Distributions of charge density difference (+ and − induced charges are represented in blue/red solid spheres, respectively), band structures (spin down α), and electronic DOSs: (h) SnS2 and (i) (SnCo)S2. (j) HRTEM of the (SnCo)S2/SG composite. (a–e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f–j) Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019, Wiley. 
In addition to constructing heterojunctions at the well-defined boundary of two distinct phases, a disordered solid solution formed by two different phases may possess better electrochemical properties. In this type of material with uniformly mixed compositions, the heterojunction is homogeneously distributed throughout the entire structure, thus maximizing the tuning effect on the electronic structure at the interface. Yang et al. reported a (SnCo)S2/sulfur-doped graphene (SG) nanocube (Fig. 4f) synthesized by direct sulfurization of CoSn(OH)6/rGO.100 Such a sample contained only hexagonal SnS2 and cubic CoS2 (Fig. 4g), forming an intimate contact in between and likely generating a high concentration of heterojunctions within the nanocube structures (Fig. 4j). Based on DFT calculations, the distributions of charge in SnS2/CoS2 displayed a clear separation, which is a direct indication of the existing internal E-field. Moreover, the band structures and DOS showed that compared to SnS2, the valance band edge of SnS2/CoS2 was improved by the higher Co d-band energy. In addition, the bandgap narrowed from 1.7 eV for SnS2 to 0.2 eV for SnS2/CoS2, suggesting an enhanced electronic conductivity (Fig. 4h and i).
4. Improving structural stability
The structural stability of electrode materials plays an important role in determining the cycle life of the battery. According to the storage mechanism, insertion anode materials reversibly store Na+ or K+ in the interlayer spacing. Even though the volume change during a single insertion/deinsertion shuttle is not detrimental, a prolonged charge/discharge process would lead to repeated expansion and condensation of the crystal lattice, which could eventually cause the collapse of the structure. Such variations in the structure are more severe in conversion and alloying materials, which results in pulverization and the loss of contact between the current collector and the electrode material. In order to maintain the structural integrity of the electrode materials during the intercalation/de-intercalation of Na or K ions, several strategies have been proposed and proven inspiring. For example, creating metal alloys with two or even three elements forming binary or ternary materials can alleviate volume expansion. The structural change of the electrode can also be mitigated if the active materials are composited with a carbonaceous support due to the buffering effect of the conductive carbon network or with non-carbon materials (e.g., MXenes and TiO2) by utilizing their low volume variation during the charge and discharge process. Unique hollow nanomaterials with large void space present in the structure could effectively accommodate the volume changes, preventing the pulverization and deactivation of the active material and thus improving the stability of the electrode.
4.1 Fabricating alloys
In SIBs, some metals that store Na ions via an alloying/dealloying reaction have attracted extensive attention because of their high theoretical capacity. For example, Sn can store 3.75 Na per Sn producing a high theoretical capacity of 847 mA h g−1.101,102 The alloying reaction between Sb and Na yields a specific capacity of 660 mA h g−1.103 Bi possesses a lower theoretical capacity of 385 mA h g−1. However, the alloying/dealloying reaction appears to be a “double-edged sword”, where the high theoretical capacity is usually accompanied by a significant structural change. There seems to be a direct correlation between the capacity and volume change, as the volume swelling of Bi is 250%, while Sb is accompanied by a volume change of 390%, and that of Sn is as high as 420%. This volume change is usually calculated according to the storage mechanisms. Taking Sb and Bi as examples, the sodium storage mechanisms of Sb and Bi follow the following reactions:104Sb + 3Na+ + 3e− ↔ Na3SbBi + 3Na+ + 3e− ↔ Na3Bi
The volume change during the charge/discharge process could be calculated using the following equations:m = ρV, and m = nM,and thus we have:  where m stands for mass, ρ for density, n for the amount of substance, and M for relative molecular mass. By using the above equations, the volume change of the electrode materials could be directly calculated by taking M and ρ of Sb/Bi before and after sodiation. As a result, the volume expansion after alloying in Sb is 390%, while that in Bi is 250%. Such a dramatic variation in the structure would induce tremendous internal stress in the material, which would easily cause electrode pulverization, leading to the loss of effective electrical contact between the active material and current collector, inevitably resulting in fast capacity decay upon cycling.
In order to improve the structural and cycling stability of these metallic materials, the design of multicomponent metal alloys is considered to be feasible and effective. It is realized by integrating different metals with contrasting volume variations at specific states of charge, serving as a mechanical buffering layer to confine the expansion of individual metal constituents during the sodiation/de-sodiation process, thus preventing the disintegration of the electrode. Binary alloys can be generally divided into two categories: the first type is composed of both active and inactive components, and the other type contains only active metals. When the binary alloys consisting of active and inactive elements were designed, the active components play the role of storing sodium. Due to the presence of the inactive component, it may shorten the voltage platform, show a tilted voltage curve, and reduce the specific capacity of the active material.105–107 In the second type of binary alloy where only active elements are present, both elements are responsible for sodium/potassium storage and at the same time can also serve as buffer layers for each other to alleviate volume expansion.
To date, people have explored many binary alloy systems, such as Sn–Ni,105 Fe–Sn,106 Sb–Ni,107 Bi–Sb, Sn–Sb, etc. Because Bi and Sb have similar electrochemical behavior, they can form alloys at a wide range of molar ratios, allowing the facile tuning of the chemical composition to achieve high electrochemical properties. Zhang and co-workers108 reported nanoporous Bi–Sb alloys (np-Bi2Sb6) through a one-step dealloying of Mg-based precursors. Compared with pure Sb or Bi, np-Bi2Sb6 showed better cycling stability (Fig. 5a) with a capacity of 257.5 mA h g−1 retained after 2000 cycles, corresponding to 0.027% loss per cycle. In contrast, the both Sb and Bi electrodes showed inferior cycling performance with a very fast capacity fading. The enhanced cycling stability of np-Bi2Sb6 could be mainly attributed to the nanoporous structure with an optimized Bi/Sb atomic ratio generating an effective buffering effect of the alloy to alleviate the volume expansion.
 Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of Bi–Sb coordination and cycling performances of the npBi2Sb6, np-Bi4Sb4, np-Bi6Sb2, np-Bi and np-Sb electrodes at 200 mA g−1. (b) Schematic illustration of the dealloying process for the NP-SnSb alloy and cycling performance at 0.2 A g−1. (c) Schematic illustration of the rGO@Sb–Ni ternary framework and cycling stability. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
Although the stability of the above Bi–Sb alloy was quite promising, the introduction of Bi would result in a capacity that is lower compared to phase-pure Sb. It is thus more desirable to incorporate high-capacity elements to achieve an overall high storage capacity of the resulting alloys. Integrating Sb with Sn to form a Sb–Sn alloy can effectively improve the electrochemical performance with a high reversible capacity. The Zhang group109 synthesized a nanoporous Sn–Sb alloy with a ligament-channel morphology (Fig. 5b). The nano-porous structure was well adapted to the volume change in the process of sodium insertion/deinsertion. The alloying effect and synergistic storage mechanism enhance the structural stability of SnSb, resulting in a cycling stability of 506.6 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles. Besides, binary alloy materials with a 3D ordered array also showed good activity and capacity retention. Sb nanoarrays directly grown on a Cu current collector formed a Sb–Cu alloy after a mild heat treatment, which established a strong connection between the Sb and the substrate Cu, preventing the pulverization of the active material during cycling and thus maintaining the integrity of the structure.18 The resulting 3D structure exhibited a reversible capacity of 578 mA h g−1 with 92% retention after 100 cycles.
In addition to binary alloys, ternary systems have also been studied for SIBs, aiming to further improve the electrochemical activity of their binary counterparts. For example, Sn–Bi–Sb ternary alloys demonstrated better capacity retention than pure metals.110 By comparing the electrochemical properties of Sn–Bi–Sb with different metal contents, the best performance was achieved with a composition of 10 at% Sn, 10 at% Bi, and 80 at% Sb, retaining 99% of its maximum capacity after 100 cycles. This could be attributed to the substitutional dissolution of Sn and Bi in the Sb lattice, giving rise to an intermetallic solid solution with a high stress resistance. It is interesting to discover that for ternary materials, not every element has to be metallic. Yu et al.111 proposed Sb–Ni–C ternary anodes, where a Sb–Ni cyanogel was first synthesized by a coordination reaction between SbCl3 and K2Ni(CN)4 in dimethylformamide solution. During this reaction, the nitrogen end of the cyano coordinated with Sb(III) and formed bridges between Sb and Ni (Ni–CN–Sb). The cyanogel was directly reduced to form a 3D Sb–Ni alloy framework, and after uniformly incorporating graphene oxide into the framework, a Sb–Ni–C ternary material was obtained after reduction (Fig. 5c). The cyanogel framework can be used as a supporting network with a 3D interconnected structure, which can in situ immobilize foreign materials within the gel framework, giving rise to an electrode with an evenly distributed composition for enhanced performance.
The operating voltage and energy density of PIBs may be higher than those of SIBs, because the K/K+ redox potential (−2.93 V) is lower than the Na/Na+ redox potential (−2.71 V vs. SHE).112,113 However, PIBs are also faced with the problems of slow diffusion kinetics and serious volume expansion. In order to mitigate the side effects caused by volume variation, the design of intermetallic alloys has also been studied in PIBs. Lu's group114 proposed a Sn–Sb alloy as an anode. The material was synthesized by continuous collision and squeezing of Sn and Sb by ball milling, which can alleviate material pulverization. As a result, after 150 charge/discharge cycles, the material showed an insignificant capacity decay of only 0.065% per cycle. Zhao and co-worked115 synthesized a SnSb alloy confined in N-doped 3D porous carbon as an anode. The SnSb could effectively mitigate volume change owing to the buffering effect of Sb and Sn, and the 3D porous N-doped carbon serves as a conductive network to enhance the electronic transport efficiency. In addition, the DME-based electrolyte has superior wettability with the electrode and could form a relatively thin SEI film. Based on the above advantages, the as-prepared composite delivered a capacity of 357.2 mA h g−1 at 50 mA g−1, and a capacity retention of 80% over 200 cycles at 0.5 A g−1.
4.2 Synthesizing nanocomposites
Composites are a group of materials that consist of an active component and different types of less active support materials. The rationale is mainly to harvest some unique characteristics of the support to overcome certain drawbacks of the active materials, so as to achieve enhanced properties of the resulting composites, such as better structural stability, higher electronic conductivity, etc., compared to the active materials used alone. As a result, the support has to be carefully selected in order to achieve an enhancement in the performance. For example, carbonaceous materials, MXenes, TiO2, and other materials are often combined with active materials as composites for energy storage applications.

4.2.1 Carbonaceous supports. 
Carbonaceous materials mainly include porous carbon, carbon nanofibers, carbon nanotubes, graphene, etc. They can not only enhance the electron transport and prevent the agglomeration of active materials, but also serve as an elastic framework to cushion volume changes.116 Zhu et al.117 reported Nb2O5@hard carbon@MoS2@soft carbon as a composite anode material for sodium storage (Fig. 6a). First, Nb(C2H5O)5@PAN was first prepared by electrospinning, and then converted into Nb2O5 CNFs with a hard carbon layer by carbonization. After MoS2 was grown on the surface, a final layer of glucose-derived soft carbon was coated as the outer shell by hydrothermal treatment, giving rise to the Nb2O5@MoS2 CNFs. The hard carbon provided the flexibility of the support to buffer the volume expansion, while the soft carbon enhanced the electrical conductivity and also suppressed structural change. By anchoring the active MoS2 and Nb2O5 on the CNFs, the agglomeration could be greatly prohibited. With the combined effect of these advantages, such a composite demonstrated a stable sodium storage performance at a current rate of 1 A g−1 even for 1000 cycles (Fig. 6b). By using Sb2S3 microrods as a sacrificial template, Liu et al.118 synthesized MoS2/amorphous carbon composite microtubes as a Na-storing electrode. Sb2S3@MoS2/C was annealed at 700 °C for 3 h in an Ar/H2 environment, and because this temperature was higher than the melting point of Sb2S3, the microrod template was removed and the MoS2/C microtubes were formed with an internal hollow structure (Fig. 6c). MoS2 and carbon layers constructed a heterogeneous interface via strong coupling, which provided fast electronic and Na+ ion diffusion and mitigated the aggregation of MoS2. More importantly, the charge/discharge products Mo and Na2S could be effectively stabilized at the interface, resulting in a good reversible reaction of Mo/Na2S and enhanced cycling stability (Fig. 6d). Graphene is also widely used to support different active materials. Fe2O3/Fe3O4 with a graphene substrate was synthesized using microwave plasma,119 which generated Fe–O–C bonds that not only stabilized Fe2O3/Fe3O4 on graphene but also built a strong electrical connection between them. The electrodes showed a discharge capacity of 158 mA h g−1 at 1000 mA g−1 after 100 cycles with a retention of 84%. Compared with pure carbon, the doping of heteroatoms, such as nitrogen (N) and sulphur (S), into the carbon crystal structure can introduce more defects, thus creating more active sites on the surface and greatly improving the electronic conductivity. Xia and co-workers120 synthesized ZnS supported by an N and S co-doped carbon matrix. Similarly, the formation of C–S–Zn bonds stabilized the supported ZnS and also provided an efficient electron conducting pathway, giving rise to a capacity retention of 73.6% over 380 cycles.
 Fig. 6  (a) TEM images of Nb2O5@MoS2@C CNFs under different magnifications and observation positions. (b) Cycling stability of the as-prepared samples at a current density of 1 A g−1. (c) Schematic illustration shows the synthetic process of MoS2/C (upper panel) and the diffusion path of Na+ (lower panel). (d) Cycling performance of MoS2/C MTs and MoS2 MFs, respectively. (e) TEM images and HRTEM images indicate the heterointerface of MoSe2-on-NC. (f) Cycling performance of MoSe2-on-NC, MoSe2/NC, and MoSe2 nanosheets at 0.2 A g−1. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (c and d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e and f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2020, Wiley. 
Carbon composites have been studied not only in SIBs but also in PIBs. By using N-doped carbon as a support, Yang et al.121 reported a NiS@C electrode, where the existence of Ni–N bonds was confirmed by XPS. DFT calculations showed that such a bond greatly increased the binding energy between NiS and N-doped carbon to −3.40 eV compared to undoped carbon which is only −0.44 eV. More interestingly, the discharged product K2S during a PIB test also had a higher binding energy with the N-doped carbon of −1.74 eV than with the undoped counterpart (−1.39 eV). These results suggested that, compared to pristine carbon, the N dopant in the carbon framework could establish a strong interaction with the active NiS as well as the discharge intermediates during cycling, thus avoiding the agglomeration of the active materials, alleviating volume expansion, leading to a better cycle retention. Yu and co-workers122 achieved lateral growth of MoSe2 nanosheets on N-doped carbon (Fig. 6e) with C–Se and C–Mo bonds, which not only stabilized the product by enhancing the structural integrity, but also offered a strong K+ adsorption capability. As a result, the electrode exhibited promising potassium storage performance with a long-term cycling stability for 200 cycles (Fig. 6f). On the other hand, carbonaceous materials also present distinct limitations. In many cases the carbonaceous materials in the composites are usually less active compared to the main component, which leads to a lower overall capacity.103 Additionally, as carbonaceous materials usually intercalate Na+/K+ at a relatively low potential, SEI films will most likely be formed on the surface of the carbon.19 This would give rise to irreversible capacity loss resulting in low coulombic efficiency in the first cycle. As a result, the amount of carbon present in the composites should be carefully controlled.


4.2.2 MXenes. 
MXenes, a new family of 2D transition metal-based compounds, have attracted considerable attention because of their high electronic conductivity, good mechanical flexibility, and excellent hydrophilicity.123 MXenes usually have a chemical formula of Mn+1XnTx, where M represents a transition metal, X is either C or N, and T denotes surface terminations (e.g., O, F, and OH). The detailed preparation and delamination process of MXenes could be found in previous sections. Wang et al.124 prepared a phosphorene/MXene hybrid as a SIB anode by mixing two corresponding colloidal solutions followed by self-assembly driven by a vacuum freeze-drying process (Fig. 7a). The delaminated Ti3C2Tx showed an accordion-like structure with a large individual nanosheet up to 5 μm in size (Fig. 7b, left panel), while the as-prepared phosphorene/MXene hybrid presented a monolayer of phosphorene sandwiched between two single MXene layers (Fig. 7b, right panel). The incorporation of MXenes not only enhanced the electronic diffusion kinetics of the hybrid, but also contributed to the formation of a robust SEI layer due to the abundant fluorine terminations, inhibiting uncontrolled side reactions at the electrolyte/electrode interface. In-depth XPS analysis demonstrated that the fluorine terminations of MXenes could modulate the SEI composition through the formation of a fluorine-rich SEI film. In addition, according to theoretical calculations, the adsorption energy of F-terminated phosphorene/Ti3C2F2 for Na atoms was stronger than that of OH-terminated phosphorene/Ti3C2(OH)2, and the sodium diffusion in BP/Ti3C2F2 has an energy barrier of only 0.1729 eV, which is much lower than that in BP/Ti3C2(OH)2 (0.3997 eV). As a result, the electrode achieved a good cycling stability and a promising high rate performance (Fig. 7c). In addition to phase-pure phosphorene, black phosphorus modified with a cationic polymer has also been composited with Ti3C2 as an anode material for SIBs.123 Cationic polymer poly (diallyl dimethyl ammoniumchloride) (PDDA)-BP nanosheets were stacked face-to-face on the Ti3C2 nanosheets with crumples (Fig. 7d). Two different Na binding energies of −2.83 eV with PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 and −2.17 eV with pure BP implied that Na preferred to interact with the BP/Ti3C2 matrix. Through Bader charge calculations, it was found that the Ti3C2 nanosheet evidently changed the sodiation state of BP, facilitating the electron transfer and the sodiation process (Fig. 7e). In addition to SIBs, MXenes have also been actively researched for PIBs. Zhang et al.125 synthesized MoSe2/MXene@C by coating hydrothermally prepared MoSe2/MXene hybrid nanosheets with a layer of polydopamine-derived carbon. The ultrathin 2D nanosheet structure offered a short diffusion path for both electrons and K+ and provided a large reaction area between the electrolyte and electrode. Besides, the presence of a Ti–O–Mo bond indicated that MoSe2 and MXenes were chemically connected, which promoted the charge transfer kinetics and enhanced the structural durability. Based on the above advantages, MoSe2/MXene@C exhibited a reversible capacity of 355 mA h g−1 after 100 cycles with a capacity retention of 99.7% showing a stable cycling performance. Although MXenes seem to be effective in improving the cycling stability of composites, this strategy also has its limitations. The MXenes layers are still prone to re-stacking along the c-axis due to the influence of van der Waals interactions and hydrogen bonds in between these layers,126 which hinders the rapid diffusion of ions in this direction and thus leads to possibly poor high-rate performance. Furthermore, MXenes are relatively unstable under ambient conditions and easily oxidized due to the rich functional groups present on the surface,127 which requires additional protective measures to avoid such a chemical oxidation.
 Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic processes for phosphorene/MXene hybrid structures. (b) SEM image of delaminated Ti3C2Tx (left panel), and HRTEM image of phosphorene/MXene architectures (right panel). (c) Cycling performance of BP, MXene, mixed BP/MXene, and phosphorene/MXene electrodes at 0.1 A g−1. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image. The inset shows PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 flocculation. (e) Cycling stability at 0.1 A g−1 and rate performance at 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 A g−1 for different electrodes, respectively. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d and e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2019, Elsevier. 


4.2.3 TiO2. 
Titanium dioxide (TiO2) has potential for sodium storage because of its unique tunnel structure, which can accommodate foreign ions. TiO2 has a variety of polymorphs, including anatase, rutile, and TiO2(B), among which anatase TiO2 has a suitable channel structure for Na+ diffusion. Additionally, its voltage platform in the sodium storage process is mainly less than 1 V, and its lattice expansion is less than 5% when it is completely sodiated.128 Since anatase TiO2 has a negligible volume change during Na+ storage, it has been employed to enhance the structural stability of different composites. Lu et al.129 fabricated Ge@Graphene (Gr)@TiO2 by first electrospinning hybrid Ge@Gr nanofibers followed by the atomic layer deposition of an outer TiO2 shell. The as-derived composite nanofibers had a uniform diameter of 100 nm, and the surface was covered by a dense TiO2 shell with a thickness of about 5 nm. Since the electrolyte was in direct contact with the TiO2 protective layer instead of the active Ge nanoparticles during the charge/discharge process, it could first restrain the amount of formed SEI; secondly, it could work with graphene to buffer the volume change and thus improve the structural stability of the hybrid nanofibers, giving rise to a good long-term cycling performance.
Amorphous TiO2−x with a large number of oxygen vacancies has also been proved to be a good support for composite materials.130 Oxygen vacancies can modify the orbitals of the material and induce a built-in electric field in the crystal lattice, resulting in the enhancement of the electronic conductivity. Additional, oxygen vacancies can also act as charge carriers to accelerate the charge transfer process.131 Coating MoO3 with a layer of 5 nm or 10 nm TiO2 would lead to a volume change of only 3.87% and 1.54%, respectively, after potassiation, and the electrodes experienced 20.0% and 68.2% less lattice deformation relative to the TiO2-free counterpart, proving that TiO2 is very effective in confining the volume expansion.132 Even though the structural stability of TiO2 provides the high durability of the composite, the intrinsically low conductivity of titanium oxides may deteriorate the high-rate performance of the hybrid material.133 It is thus important to either find effective ways to improve the electronic conductivity or carefully adjust the amount of TiO2 present in the composite, so as to achieve an ideal balance between the cycling stability and high-rate performance.

4.3 Designing hollow structures
The development of hollow structured materials is very attractive in the field of energy storage, as it is suggested that the internal void space in the hollow structure could effectively alleviate the mechanical strain during the charge/discharge process to enhance the structure stability and thus improve the cycle life of the battery.134–136 The first example of preparing hollow nanomaterials could be traced back to 1998, where Caruso et al.137 employed Polystyrene (PS) nanospheres as the template followed by the coating of SiO2 nanoparticles, and the template was subsequently removed to get the final product of hollow nanospheres. Inspired by this pioneering work, considerable efforts have been devoted to the study of hollow materials, resulting in countless publications and various synthesis approaches. These approaches could be broadly categorized into templating and template-free methods. Template materials can be further divided into hard and soft templates. Hard templates are usually materials that can be synthesized with a large yield, high uniformity and low cost, such as SiO2, carbon, and PS nanospheres, which need to be removed by additional treatment to obtain the desired hollow materials. Soft templates consist of emulsion droplets, micelles, or even gas bubbles formed in a special liquid environment, which do not need to be removed but usually have a wide range of size distribution. On the other hand, hollow structures can also be formed without the help of templates, and such a process is usually based on mechanisms such as Ostwald ripening138 or the Kirkendall effect.139 Ostwald ripening is a process in which symmetric and/or asymmetric internal voids are created during the growth of larger crystals from those of smaller size, which have a higher solubility than the larger ones,140–142 while Kirkendall effect refers to the phenomenon that the interface of two metals with different atomic diffusion rates moves after the interdiffusion of the two types of atoms, and due to the discrepancies in the diffusion rates, the flow of the atoms is balanced by an opposite flow of vacancies.143 Both mechanisms rely on the dynamic processes of matter, and Ostwald ripening depends more on a dissolution–recrystallization reaction, while the Kirkendall effect is based on an inter-diffusion of different atoms. Over the past two decades, hollow materials have greatly developed with many shapes, different structure complexity, and various chemical compositions for a wide range of applications.
Luo and co-workers144 synthesized Sb2S3@FeS2/N-doped graphene by gas-phase sulfidization of pre-synthesized Sb2S3@Fe2O3/rGO solid composite nanorods (Fig. 8a). During the sulfidization process, a large inner void was formed in the rod (Fig. 8b), which originated from the partial evaporation of the internal Sb2S3 nanorods during the heating process. The hollow architecture may be beneficial to the electrolyte penetration and can effectively accommodate the volume variation. As a result, the resulting Sb2S3@FeS2/C hollow nanorods showed a long-term cycling stability with a capacity retention of 85.7% over 1000 cycles (Fig. 8c).
 Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Sb2S3@FeS2/C composite. (b) The morphology characterization of Sb2S3@FeS2/C, and (c) cycle performance of Sb2S3, SFS, and Sb2S3@FeS2/C. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of CuS@CoS2. (e) Illustration of the synthetic process of the three-layered Cu2S@carbon@MoS2 nanoboxes. (f) The morphology changes of SnSe2/ZnSe@PDA nanoboxes during the charge–discharge process. (g) SEM and TEM images of a typical CoSx hierarchical structure. (h) Cycle performance combined with the coulombic efficiency of CoSx at 500 mA g−1. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (g and h) Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2017, Elsevier. 
A series of nanoboxes of different configurations have been designed by Lou and co-workers.145–147 By using Cu2O nanocubes as the hard template and controlling the rate of sequential depositing, etching and/or sulfurization processes, CuS@CoS2 double-shell147 (Fig. 8d) or Cu2S@carbon@MoS2 multi-shell145 (Fig. 8e) nanoboxes with a well-defined structure and tunable chemical composition were obtained. It is important to mention that the hollow interior was generated by a carefully modulated reaction between the Cu2O template and Na2S2O3 solution under solvothermal conditions, which allowed the dissolution of the dense Cu2O core accompanied by its transformation to the inner most shell of CuS. As a result, the Cu2S@carbon@MoS2 multi-shell nanoboxes presented a nice integration of different functionalities: the outer MoS2 nanosheet shell could effectively shorten the diffusion distance of electrons and ions, while the middle carbon layer could improve the electrical conductivity, and the hollow interior helped to alleviate the volume change and allowed better penetration of the electrolyte.148,149 These advantages provided the nanoboxes with a strong structural robustness and thus a good cycling stability during prolonged tests.
In order to better understand the mitigating effect of the void space on the volume expansion during the charge/discharge process, heterostructured SnSe2/ZnSe@PDA nanoboxes were fabricated (Fig. 8f, left panel).150 After Na+ insertion, the shell expanded towards the interior of the nanoboxes with a significantly increased thickness (Fig. 8f, central panel). Interestingly, the hollow structure could be largely retained after Na+ deinsertion (Fig. 8f, right panel), with the thickness of the shell shrank back to normal. These observations directly showed the positive effect of the hollow structure and elastic PDA coating for maintaining the structural integrity of the active material. In addition to hollow nanocomposites, phase-pure hollow nanospheres with a porous shell consisting of fine CoSx nanospikes were synthesized via a solvothermal reaction and post-annealing (Fig. 8g).151 Such a porous shell allowed the electrolyte to easily penetrate the hollow structure, which made electrochemical reactions take place on both sides of the shell. Together with the hollow interior alleviating the volume change, the electrode exhibited promising performance with a discharge capacity of 572.0 mA h g−1 over 100 cycles at 500 mA g−1 (Fig. 8h).
5. Summary and outlook
The investigation of SIBs/KIBs has attracted great interest in recent years, due to the low cost and the natural abundance of sodium and potassium. Although both of them share a similar energy storage mechanism with LIBs, the intrinsic difference in the atomic geometry and electronic states of charge carriers make the insertion/de-insertion of Na+ and K+ kinetically more sluggish and the structural variation more detrimental to the electrodes. Thus, it is crucial to develop functional materials suitable for high-performance SIBs/KIBs. In this review, we have summarized different strategies, such as constructing heterojunctions, introducing heteroatom doping, engineering diffusion paths, and fabricating alloys, composites or hollow structures, to boost the Na+/K+ storage properties in different materials. These strategies aim at either enhancing the intrinsic ionic and/or electronic conductivity of the electrode material by regulating the diffusion kinetics or mitigating the volume change to improve the cycling stability.
Although much promising progress has been achieved, some specific challenges associated with these methods still exist. Firstly, constructing heterojunctions is a highly effective and widely practiced method to improve the electrochemical properties of different materials. However, current investigations are rather limited to the theoretical level, and in-depth characterization or in situ techniques are required for a more detailed understanding or a time-resolved observation of the interfacial interaction at the junction during the charge/discharge process.
Secondly, delamination and expansion of the interlayer space in layered materials are commonly applied to create a fast ionic transport channel in order to achieve a facilitated diffusion process. However, such a structural modification is usually accompanied by a considerable increase in the specific surface area, which would lead to the excessive formation of a SEI film during battery tests. This could in turn result in a low initial coulombic efficiency, which reduces the performance in a full cell. Thus, it is crucial to find an appropriate balance between the high-rate performance and the high coulombic efficiency for practical application.
Thirdly, introducing heteroatoms into the host crystal lattice through doping is also effective in modulating the electronic/ionic conductivity by changing the electronic environment at the locality around the replaced atoms. In order to make this functional, the foreign atom needs to successfully “knock out” the host atom to take its place. As a result, it is important yet difficult to develop strategies to ensure that every introduced atom has been precisely inserted into the host lattice during synthesis, so as to accurately correlate the viable doping concentration with the performance enhancement.
Finally, even though compositing active materials with carbonaceous supports could be beneficial for improving the structural stability and the electronic conductivity of the hybrid, it would also decrease the tap density of the material, leading to a low volumetric energy density. It is thus critical either to achieve a balance between the carbon content and the conductivity of the composite or to discover other highly conductive yet densified materials to serve as the support. By continuously developing high-performance electrode materials for SIBs and KIBs using these strategies, we expect to see more active participation of these two systems in large-scale energy storage applications.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was financially supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (ZYGX2019J030).
References
S. Chu and A. Majumdar, Nature, 2012, 488, 294–303 CrossRef CAS .
J. M. Tarascon, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2, 510 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ma, F. Li, J. He, J. Liu, M. Wu, Y. Hou, H. Wang, S. Qi, Q. Liu and J. Hu, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 60, 2–11 Search PubMed .
J. Ma, Y. Li, N. Grundish, J. B. Goodenough, Y. Chen, L. Guo, Z. Peng, X. Qi, F. Yang, L. Qie, C. Wang, B. Huang, Z. Huang, L. Chen, D. Su, G. Wang, X. Peng, Z. Chen, J. Yang, S. He, X. Zhang, H. Yu, C. Fu, M. Jiang, W. Deng, C.-f. Sun, Q. Pan, Y. Tang, X. Li, X. Ji, F. Wang, Z. Niu, F. Lian, C. Wang, G. G. Wallace, M. Fan, Q. Meng, S. Xin, Y.-G. Guo and L. Wan, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys., 2020, 53, 1–66 Search PubMed .
S. Qi, H. Wang, J. He, J. Liu, C. Cui, M. Wu, F. Li, Y. Feng and J. Ma, Sci. Bull., 2020 DOI:10.1016/j.scib.2020.09.018 .
P. K. Nayak, L. Yang, W. Brehm and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57, 102–120 CrossRef CAS .
M. Luo, H. Yu, F. Hu, T. Liu, X. Cheng, R. Zheng, Y. Bai, M. Shui and J. Shu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 380, 122557 CrossRef CAS .
C. Zhao, Q. Wang, Z. Yao, J. Wang, B. Sanchez-Lengeling, F. Ding, X. Qi, Y. Lu, X. Bai, B. Li, H. Li, A. Aspuru-Guzik, X. Huang, C. Delmas, M. Wagemaker, L. Chen and Y.-S. Hu, Science, 2020, 370, 708–711 CrossRef CAS .
S. Niu, Z. Wang, T. Zhou, M. Yu, M. Yu and J. Qiu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1605332 CrossRef .
H. Tan, D. Chen, X. Rui and Y. Yu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1808745 CrossRef .
K. Kubota and S. Komaba, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2015, 162, A2538–A2550 CrossRef CAS .
V. Palomares, M. Casas-Cabanas, E. Castillo-Martínez, M. H. Han and T. Rojo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2312 RSC .
B. Jache and P. Adelhelm, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2014, 53, 10169–10173 CrossRef CAS .
H. Kim, J. Hong, Y.-U. Park, J. Kim, I. Hwang and K. Kang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2015, 25, 534–541 CrossRef CAS .
M. Carboni, J. Manzi, A. R. Armstrong, J. Billaud, S. Brutti and R. Younesi, Chemelectrochem, 2019, 6, 1745–1753 CrossRef CAS .
D. Damodar, S. Ghosh, M. U. Rani, S. K. Martha and A. S. Deshpande, J. Power Sources, 2019, 438, 227008 CrossRef CAS .
R. Dai, W. Sun and Y. Wang, Electrochim. Acta, 2016, 217, 123–131 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, M. Sun, J. Ni and L. Li, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1901096 CrossRef .
Y. Zhang, Q. Su, W. Xu, G. Cao, Y. Wang, A. Pan and S. Liang, Adv. Sci., 2019, 6, 1900162 CrossRef .
X.-Y. Fan, Z. Jiang, L. Huang, X. Wang, J. Han, R. Sun, L. Gou, D.-L. Li and Y.-L. Ding, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12, 20344–20353 CrossRef CAS .
Y. N. Ko, S. H. Choi, S. B. Park and Y. C. Kang, Nanoscale, 2014, 6, 10511 RSC .
K. Zhang, Z. Hu, X. Liu, Z. Tao and J. Chen, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 3305–3309 CrossRef CAS .
K. Zhang, M. H. Park, L. M. Zhou, G. H. Lee, W. J. Li, Y. M. Kang and J. Chen, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 6728–6735 CrossRef CAS .
Z. J. Cao, H. H. Song, B. Cao, J. Ma, X. H. Chen, J. S. Zhou and Z. K. Ma, J. Power Sources, 2017, 364, 208–214 CrossRef CAS .
X. M. Geng, Y. C. Jiao, Y. Han, A. Mukhopadhyay, L. Yang and H. L. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2017, 27, 1702998 CrossRef .
R. Sun, S. Liu, Q. Wei, J. Sheng, S. Zhu, Q. An and L. Mai, Small, 2017, 13, 1701744 CrossRef .
R. M. Sun, Q. L. Wei, J. Z. Sheng, C. W. Shi, Q. Y. An, S. J. Liu and L. Q. Mai, Nano Energy, 2017, 35, 396–404 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Q. Yang, M. C. Liu, Y. M. Hu, Y. Xu, L. B. Kong and L. Kang, J. Energy Chem., 2018, 27, 1208–1213 CrossRef .
M. Jia, Y. H. Jin, P. Z. Zhao, C. C. Zhao, M. Q. Jia, L. Wang and X. M. He, Electrochim. Acta, 2019, 310, 230–239 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2002976 CrossRef CAS .
H. Zhang, I. Hasa and S. Passerini, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8, 1702582 CrossRef .
X. Zhou, L. Gan, W. Tian, Q. Zhang, S. Jin, H. Li, Y. Bando, D. Golberg and T. Zhai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 8035 CrossRef CAS .
J. Bai, H. M. Wu, S. Q. Wang, G. X. Zhang, C. Q. Feng and H. K. Liu, Appl. Surf. Sci., 2019, 488, 512–521 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, Y. Fang, Z. Zhao, C. Yuan and X. W. D. Lou, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9, 1803052 CrossRef .
S. Guo, J. Yi, Y. Sun and H. Zhou, Energy Environ. Sci., 2016, 9, 2978–3006 RSC .
L. Li, Y. Zheng, S. L. Zhang, J. P. Yang, Z. P. Shao and Z. P. Guo, Energy Environ. Sci., 2018, 11, 2310–2340 RSC .
Y. Wang and H. Pang, Chemistryselect, 2018, 3, 12967–12986 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zheng, T. F. Zhou, C. F. Zhang, J. F. Mao, H. K. Liu and Z. P. Guo, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2016, 55, 3408–3413 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Hu, Q. Liu, S. L. Chou and S. X. Dou, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1700606 CrossRef .
S. Kim, J. Cui, V. P. Dravid and K. He, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, 1904623 CrossRef CAS .
S. Zhang, Q. Fan, Y. Liu, S. Xi, X. Liu, Z. Wu, J. Hao, W. K. Pang, T. Zhou and Z. Guo, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000380 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ni, M. Sun and L. Li, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31, e1902603 CrossRef .
X. Hong, J. Kim, S. F. Shi, Y. Zhang, C. Jin, Y. Sun, S. Tongay, J. Wu, Y. Zhang and F. Wang, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2014, 9, 682–686 CrossRef CAS .
J. Wang, Y. Zhou and Z. Shao, Electrochim. Acta, 2013, 97, 386–392 CrossRef CAS .
G. Fang, Q. Wang, J. Zhou, Y. Lei, Z. Chen, Z. Wang, A. Pan and S. Liang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 5635–5645 CrossRef CAS .
C. Z. Zhang, F. Han, F. Wang, Q. D. Liu, D. W. Zhou, F. Q. Zhang, S. H. Xu, C. L. Fan, X. K. Li and J. S. Liu, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 24, 208–219 CrossRef .
Y. Wen, K. He, Y. Zhu, F. Han, Y. Xu, I. Matsuda, Y. Ishii, J. Cumings and C. Wang, Nat. Commun., 2014, 5, 4033 CrossRef CAS .
X. Liu, Y. Wen, Z. Chen, B. Shan and R. Chen, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 16398–16404 RSC .
J. Hongchang, W. Haiyun, Q. Zhikai, B. De-Shan, Z. Taiming, W. Yangyang, C. Jiaye, C. Chenghao, L. Ying-Rui, C. Ting-Shan, J. Huanxin, C. An-Min, Y. Wensheng, W. Xiaojun, J. Hengxing and W. Li-Jun, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 59, 2318–2322 Search PubMed .
X. Zhuang, K. Li and T. Y. Zhang, Nanoscale, 2020, 12, 19609–19616 RSC .
S. Kajiyama, L. Szabova, K. Sodeyama, H. Iinuma, R. Morita, K. Gotoh, Y. Tateyama, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, ACS Nano, 2016, 10, 3334–3341 CrossRef CAS .
M. Q. Zhao, X. Xie, C. E. Ren, T. Makaryan, B. Anasori, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1702410 CrossRef .
H. Y. Wang, H. Jiang, Y. J. Hu, N. Li, X. J. Zhao and C. Z. Li, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 5383–5389 RSC .
Q. B. Xia, W. J. Li, Z. C. Miao, S. L. Chou and H. K. Liu, Nano Res., 2017, 10, 4055–4081 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, A. Zhang, C. Shen, Q. Liu, X. Cao, Y. Ma, L. Chen, C. Lau, T. C. Chen, F. Wei and C. Zhou, ACS Nano, 2017, 11, 5530–5537 CrossRef CAS .
B. Zhao, Q. Q. Liu, Y. J. Chen, Q. Liu, Q. Yu and H. B. Wu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2002019 CrossRef CAS .
J. Cheng, L. Gao, T. Li, S. Mei, C. Wang, B. Wen, W. Huang, C. Li, G. Zheng, H. Wang and H. Zhang, Nano-Micro Lett., 2020, 12, 179 CrossRef CAS .
V. V. Kulish, O. I. Malyi, C. Persson and P. Wu, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 13921 RSC .
A. Nie, Y. Cheng, S. Ning, T. Foroozan, P. Yasaei, W. Li, B. Song, Y. Yuan, L. Chen, A. Salehi-Khojin, F. Mashayek and R. Shahbazian-Yassar, Nano Lett., 2016, 16, 2240–2247 CrossRef CAS .
J. Sun, H. W. Lee, M. Pasta, H. Yuan, G. Zheng, Y. Sun, Y. Li and Y. Cui, Nat. Nanotechnol., 2015, 10, 980 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, H. Wang, Z. Luo, H. T. Tan, B. Li, S. Sun, Z. Li, Y. Zong, Z. J. Xu, Y. Yang, K. A. Khor and Q. Yan, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6, 1600453 CrossRef .
B. Anasori, M. R. Lukatskaya and Y. Gogotsi, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2017, 2, 16098 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, S. Kajiyama, H. Iinuma, E. Hosono, S. Oro, I. Moriguchi, M. Okubo and A. Yamada, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6, 6544 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xie, Y. Dall'Agnese, M. Naguib, Y. Gogotsi, M. W. Barsoum, H. L. Zhuang and P. R. C. Kent, ACS Nano, 2014, 8, 9606–9615 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, X. Shen, Y. Gao, Z. Wang, R. Yu and L. Chen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2015, 137, 2715–2721 CrossRef CAS .
C. Chen, N.-W. Li, B. Wang, S. Yuan and L. Yu, Nanoscale Adv., 2020, 2, 5496–5503 RSC .
X. Xie, M.-Q. Zhao, B. Anasori, K. Maleski, C. E. Ren, J. Li, B. W. Byles, E. Pomerantseva, G. Wang and Y. Gogotsi, Nano Energy, 2016, 26, 513–523 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, X. Q. Xie, S. Choi, Y. F. Zhao, H. Liu, C. Y. Wang, S. Chang and G. X. Wang, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 12445–12452 RSC .
Y. T. Wu, P. Nie, J. M. Jiang, B. Ding, H. Dou and X. G. Zhang, Chemelectrochem, 2017, 4, 1560–1565 CrossRef CAS .
Y. T. Wu, P. Nie, L. Y. Wu, H. Dou and X. G. Zhang, Chem. Eng. J., 2018, 334, 932–938 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Tianran, J. Xi, L. Guochun, Y. Qiaofeng and Y. L. Jim, ChemNanoMat, 2017, 4, 56–60 Search PubMed .
Q. Sun, Y. Dai, Y. Ma, T. Jing, W. Wei and B. Huang, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2016, 7, 937–943 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, X. Lan, D. Jiang, Y. Zhang, H. Zhong, Z. Zhang and Y. Jiang, J. Power Sources, 2015, 283, 187–194 CrossRef CAS .
S. Yuan, Y. H. Zhu, W. Li, S. Wang, D. Xu, L. Li, Y. Zhang and X. B. Zhang, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1602469 CrossRef .
B. Wang, E. H. Ang, Y. Yang, Y. F. Zhang, H. B. Geng, M. H. Ye and C. C. Li, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 2001708 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, S. Deng, M. Luo, G. Pan, Y. Zeng, X. Lu, C. Ai, Q. Liu, Q. Xiong, X. Wang, X. Xia and J. Tu, Small, 2019, 15, e1905452 CrossRef .
W. Chen, C. Chen, X. Xiong, P. Hu, Z. Hao and Y. Huang, Adv. Sci., 2017, 4, 1600500 CrossRef .
L. Qie, W.-M. Chen, Z.-H. Wang, Q.-G. Shao, X. Li, L.-X. Yuan, X.-L. Hu, W.-X. Zhang and Y.-H. Huang, Adv. Mater., 2012, 24, 2047–2050 CrossRef .
N. P. Stadie, E. Billeter, L. Piveteau, K. V. Kravchyk, M. Dobeli and M. V. Kovalenko, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29, 3211–3218 CrossRef CAS .
J. P. Paraknowitsch and A. Thomas, Energy Environ. Sci., 2013, 6, 2839 RSC .
W. Chen, M. Wan, Q. Liu, X. Xiong, F. Yu and Y. Huang, Small Methods, 2018, 3, 1800323 CrossRef .
X. Li, H. Wang, J. T. Robinson, H. Sanchez, G. Diankov and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2009, 131, 15939–15944 CrossRef CAS .
S. Huang, Z. Li, B. Wang, J. Zhang, Z. Peng, R. Qi, J. Wang and Y. Zhao, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28, 1706294 CrossRef .
L. Sun, L. Wang, C. Tian, T. Tan, Y. Xie, K. Shi, M. Li and H. Fu, RSC Adv., 2012, 2, 4498 RSC .
J. Zhu, C. Chen, Y. Lu, Y. Ge, H. Jiang, K. Fu and X. Zhang, Carbon, 2015, 94, 189–195 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, L. Qie, L. Yuan, W. Zhang, X. Hu and Y. Huang, Carbon, 2013, 55, 328–334 CrossRef CAS .
H.-G. Wang, S. Yuan, D.-L. Ma, X.-B. Zhang and J.-M. Yan, Energy Environ. Sci., 2015, 8, 1660–1681 RSC .
D. Wei, Y. Liu, Y. Wang, H. Zhang, L. Huang and G. Yu, Nano Lett., 2009, 9, 1752–1758 CrossRef CAS .
P. Wu, Z. Cai, Y. Gao, H. Zhang and C. Cai, Chem. Commun., 2011, 47, 11327–11329 RSC .
I. Y. Jeon, H. J. Choi, M. J. Ju, I. T. Choi, K. Lim, J. Ko, H. K. Kim, J. C. Kim, J. J. Lee, D. Shin, S. M. Jung, J. M. Seo, M. J. Kim, N. Park, L. Dai and J. B. Baek, Scientific Reports, 2013, 3, 2260 CrossRef .
T. Schiros, D. Nordlund, L. Palova, D. Prezzi, L. Zhao, K. S. Kim, U. Wurstbauer, C. Gutierrez, D. Delongchamp, C. Jaye, D. Fischer, H. Ogasawara, L. G. M. Pettersson, D. R. Reichman, P. Kim, M. S. Hybertsen and A. N. Pasupathy, Nano Lett., 2012, 12, 4025–4031 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, M. Chen, B. Liu, Y. Zhang, X. Liang and X. Xia, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000927 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang and G. Shi, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2015, 17, 28484–28504 RSC .
J. Xu, M. Wang, N. P. Wickramaratne, M. Jaroniec, S. Dou and L. Dai, Adv. Mater., 2015, 27, 2042–2048 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wu, Y. H. Wei, Q. W. Lian, C. Cui, W. F. Wei, L. B. Chen and C. C. Li, Mater. Chem. Front., 2017, 1, 2656–2663 RSC .
H. B. Kong, Y. S. Wu, W. Z. Hong, C. S. Yan, Y. Y. Zhao and G. Chen, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 24, 610 CrossRef .
C. Wang, B. Zhang, H. Xia, L. Cao, B. Luo, X. Fan, J. Zhang and X. Ou, Small, 2020, 16, 1905853 CrossRef CAS .
H. Wang, L. Zhang, Z. Chen, J. Hu, S. Li, Z. Wang, J. Liu and X. Wang, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43, 5234–5244 RSC .
Y. Huang, X. Hu, J. Li, J. Zhang, D. Cai, B. Sa, H. Zhan and Z. Wen, Energy Storage Materials, 2020, 29, 121–130 CrossRef .
C. Yang, X. Liang, X. Ou, Q. Zhang, H.-S. Zheng, F. Zheng, J.-H. Wang, K. Huang and M. Liu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2019, 29, 1807971 CrossRef .
X. Zhu, M. Sun, J. Ni and L. Li, Sci. China: Chem., 2018, 61, 1494–1502 CrossRef CAS .
M. Á. Muñoz-Márquez, D. Saurel, J. L. Gómez-Cámer, M. Casas-Cabanas, E. Castillo-Martínez and T. Rojo, Adv. Energy Mater., 2017, 7, 1700463 CrossRef .
X. Li, J. Ni, S. Savilov and L. Li, Chem.–Eur. J., 2018, 24, 13719–13727 CrossRef CAS .
H. Hou, M. Jing, Y. Yang, Y. Zhu, L. Fang, W. Song, C. Pan, X. Yang and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2014, 6, 16189–16196 CrossRef CAS .
J. Liu, Y. Wen, P. A. v. Aken, J. Maier and Y. Yu, Nano Lett., 2014, 14, 6387–6392 CrossRef CAS .
E. Edison, R. Satish, W. C. Ling, N. Bucher, V. Aravindan and S. Madhavi, J. Power Sources, 2017, 343, 296–302 CrossRef CAS .
L. Yu, J. Liu, X. Xu, L. Zhang, R. Hu, J. Liu, L. Yang and M. Zhu, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 2516–2525 CrossRef CAS .
H. Gao, J. Niu, C. Zhang, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 3568–3577 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ma, K. Yin, H. Gao, J. Niu, Z. Peng and Z. Zhang, Nano Energy, 2018, 54, 349–359 CrossRef CAS .
H. Xie, W. P. Kalisvaart, B. C. Olsen, E. J. Luber, D. Mitlin and J. M. Buriak, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 9661–9670 RSC .
P. Wu, A. Zhang, L. Peng, F. Zhao, Y. Tang, Y. Zhou and G. Yu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 759–767 CrossRef CAS .
A. Eftekhari, Z. Jian and X. Ji, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9, 4404–4419 CrossRef CAS .
R. Rajagopalan, Y. Tang, X. Ji, C. Jia and H. Wang, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1909486 CrossRef CAS .
H. Ding, J. Wang, L. Fan, Z. Liu, X. Jia, X. Yu and B. Lu, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 395, 125147 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Wang, K. Dong, D. Wang, S. Luo, Y. Liu, Q. Wang, Y. Zhang, A. Hao, C. Shi and N. Zhao, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2019, 7, 14309–14318 RSC .
S. Liu, Y. Wang, Y. Dong, Z. Zhao, Z. Wang and J. Qiu, ChemElectroChem, 2016, 3, 38–44 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Deng, F. Chen, S. Liu, A. Bayaguud, Y. Feng, Z. Zhang, Y. Fu, Y. Yu and C. Zhu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30, 1908665 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Pan, Q. Zhang, F. Zheng, Y. Liu, Y. Li, X. Ou, X. Xiong, C. Yang and M. Liu, ACS Nano, 2018, 12, 12578–12586 CrossRef CAS .
Q. Wang, Y. Ma, L. Liu, S. Yao, W. Wu, Z. Wang, P. Lv, J. Zheng, K. Yu, W. Wei and K. K. Ostrikov, Nanomaterials, 2020, 10, 782 CrossRef CAS .
K. Yang, Q. Guo, H. Li, X. Hao, Y. Ma, M. Yang, T. Zhai, S. V. Savilov, V. V. Lunin and H. Xia, J. Power Sources, 2018, 402, 340–344 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhao, F. Gong, Y. Zhao, B. Huang, D. Qian, H.-E. Wang, W. Zhang and Z. Yang, Chem. Eng. J., 2020, 392, 123675 CrossRef CAS .
M. Ma, S. Zhang, Y. Yao, H. Wang, H. Huang, R. Xu, J. Wang, X. Zhou, W. Yang, Z. Peng, X. Wu, Y. Hou and Y. Yu, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32, 2000958 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zhao, Z. Qian, Z. Liu, D. Zhao, X. Hui, G. Jiang, C. Wang and L. Yin, Nano Energy, 2019, 65, 104037 CrossRef CAS .
X. Guo, W. Zhang, J. Zhang, D. Zhou, X. Tang, X. Xu, B. Li, H. Liu and G. Wang, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3651–3659 CrossRef CAS .
H. Huang, J. Cui, G. Liu, R. Bi and L. Zhang, ACS Nano, 2019, 13, 3448–3456 CrossRef CAS .
J. Pang, R. G. Mendes, A. Bachmatiuk, L. Zhao, H. Q. Ta, T. Gemming, H. Liu, Z. Liu and M. H. Rummeli, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2019, 48, 72–133 RSC .
Q. Yang, Y. Wang, X. Li, H. Li, Z. Wang, Z. Tang, L. Ma, F. Mo and C. Zhi, Energy Environ. Mater., 2018, 1, 183–195 CrossRef .
H. Xu, W. Wang, G. Yu, L. Qin, Y. Jiang, L. Ren and J. Chen, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 3, 4738–4745 CAS .
X. Wang, L. Fan, D. Gong, J. Zhu, Q. Zhang and B. Lu, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2016, 26, 1104–1111 CrossRef CAS .
N. Wang, Z. Bai, Y. Qian and J. Yang, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28, 4126–4133 CrossRef CAS .
C. Dong, W. Dong, X. Lin, Y. Zhao, R. Li and F. Huang, EnergyChem, 2020, 2, 100045 CrossRef .
N. D. Schuppert, S. Mukherjee, A. M. Bates, E.-J. Son, M. J. Choi and S. Park, J. Power Sources, 2016, 316, 160–169 CrossRef CAS .
J. Ni, S. Fu, Y. Yuan, L. Ma, Y. Jiang, L. Li and J. Lu, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30, 1704337 CrossRef .
S. Xiao, Z. Li, J. Liu, Y. Song, T. Li, Y. Xiang, J. S. Chen and Q. Yan, Small, 2020, 16, 2002486 CrossRef CAS .
M. Chen, Y. Zhang, L. Xing, Y. Liao, Y. Qiu, S. Yang and W. Li, Adv. Mater., 2017, 29, 1607015 CrossRef .
X. Liu, Y. Wang, Z. Wang, T. Zhou and J. Qiu, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2017, 5, 10398–10405 RSC .
F. Caruso, R. A. Caruso and H. Möhwald, Science, 1998, 282, 1111–1114 CrossRef CAS .
J. Li and H. C. Zeng, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2007, 129, 15839–15847 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yin, R. M. Rioux, C. K. Erdonmez, S. Hughes, G. A. Somorjai and A. PaulAlivisatos, Science, 2004, 304, 711–714 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ostwald, Z. Phys. Chem., 1900, 34, 495–503 Search PubMed .
H. C. Zeng, Curr. Nanosci., 2007, 3, 177–181 CrossRef CAS .
W. Ostwald, Z. Phys. Chem., 1897, 22, 289–302 CAS .
Y. Yin, R. M. Rioux, C. K. Erdonmez, S. Hughes, G. A. Somorjai and A. P. Alivisatos, Science, 2004, 304, 711–714 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, X. Gao, B. Zhang, X. Ou, J. Zhang and W.-B. Luo, ACS Nano, 2020, 14, 3610–3620 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, D. Luan, Y. Chen, S. Gao and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2020, 59, 7178–7183 CrossRef CAS .
X. Wang, Y. Chen, Y. Fang, J. Zhang, S. Gao and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 2675–2679 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, B. Guan, D. Luan and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7739–7743 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Liu, X.-Y. Yu, Y. Fang, X. Zhu, J. Bao, X. Zhou and X. W. D. Lou, Joule, 2018, 2, 725–735 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Fang, X.-Y. Yu and X. W. D. Lou, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2019, 58, 7744–7748 CrossRef CAS .
P. Liu, J. Han, K. Zhu, Z. Dong and L. Jiao, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10, 2000741 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Xiao, J.-Y. Hwang, I. Belharouak and Y.-K. Sun, Nano Energy, 2017, 32, 320–328 CrossRef CAS .

Footnote† These authors contributed equally to this work.This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
Table Content:
Shuhao Xiao	Mr Shuhao Xiao received his B.S. degree from the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China in 2016. He is currently a PhD student in the School of Materials and Energy at the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. His research interests focus on the synthesis and application of nanomaterials for sodium-ion batteries.
Xinyan Li	Ms Xinyan Li received her Master's degree from Soochow University in 2020. She is now a PhD candidate at the School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. Her research interest focuses on electrode nanoarchitectures for microbattery applications.
Tingshuai Li	Prof. Tingshuai Li received his PhD degree from the Chinese Academy of Science in Materials Chemistry and Physics in 2011 and then worked at USC to research and develop SOFCs. In 2013, he joined the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China as an associate professor. His research interests include solid oxide fuel cells, nitrogen fixation into ammonia, laser interactions with solid targets and random lasers. He has published more than 50 international journal papers.
Yong Xiang	Prof. Yong Xiang received his BS from the University of Science and Technology of China, and MS and PhD from Harvard University. He worked as a Senior Engineer and Program Manager at Intel Corporation in Silicon Valley, before joining the University of Electronic Science and Technology of China (UESTC) as a Professor of Microelectronics, Materials Science, and Energy. At UESTC, he served as the Assistant Dean at the School of Microelectronics and Solid-State Electronics, the Associate Dean at the School of Energy Science and Engineering, the Dean at the School of Materials and Energy, and currently he is the Dean of Advanced Energy Institute. His research interest focuses on materials genome technologies with applications in integrated energy technologies and flexible electronics. He has published more than 200 scientific articles and filed over 200 patents.
Jun Song Chen	Prof. Jun Song Chen received his PhD from the Nanyang Technological University in 2012. After that, he worked at the Max Plank Institute of Colloids and Interfaces as an Alexander von Humboldt researcher from 2013 to 2014. He is now a Professor at the School of Materials and Energy, University of Electronic Science and Technology of China. His research interests include the design of nanostructured materials for energy-related applications, such as sodium-ion and lithium-sulfur batteries and water splitting.
	(1)

 	Fig. 1  (a) Schematic illustration of the formation mechanism and direction of the internal E-field for Fe9S10/MoS2@C during discharge and charge processes. (b) HR-TEM image of the Fe9S10@MoS2@C heterostructure. (c) Comparison of the rate performance of Fe9S10@C, MoS2@C, physically mixed Fe9S10@C and MoS2@C, and Fe9S10@MoS2@C. (d) Alkali ion migration path in the Fe9S10–MoS2 heterostructure, and bare MoS2, with the top view. Their corresponding potential energy curves along the diffusion path: (f) sodium ion and potassium ion. (a–e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 41. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 2  (a and b) Schematic illustration of the formation process of SnSe NSCs. (c) TEM image of SnSe NSCs. (d) Rate capability of SnSe NSCs and SnSe particle electrodes at various current densities from 0.1 to 40 A g−1. (e) Schematic illustration of the synthetic route. (f) The atomic structure diagrams of MoO3 and DMcT-MoO3 and diffusion pathways and diffusion barriers of Na shuttle between MoO3 and DMcT-MoO3. (g) XRD patterns of MoO3, rMoO3 and DMcT-MoO3. HRTEM image of the layer spacing of DMcT-MoO3. (h) Rate capacities at current densities between 0.1 and 5 A g−1 of rMoO3 and DMcT-MoO3. (a–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 68. Copyright 2017, Wiley. (e–h) Reprinted with permission from ref. 69. Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 3  (a) The formation illustration of Cu–Co3O4@Void@NC. (b) Density functional theory calculations of pure Co3O4 and Cu–Co3O4: (b) Optimized structures of pure Co3O4 and Cu–Co3O4, (c) Calculated total band structures of pure Co3O4 and Cu–Co3O4 and calculated partial densities of states for pure Co3O4 and Cu–Co3O4. (d) Cycling performances of Cu–Co3O4@Void@NC, Cu–Co3O4@NC and Co3O4@Void@NC at 2 A g−1. (a–d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 79. Copyright 2020, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 4  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process. (b) TEM images and HRTEM image, and (c) cycle stability at 0.1 A g−1 and (d) rate performances of core–shell Bi2S3@Co9S8, core–shell BiOBr@Co9S8, bare Bi2S3 and hollow Co9S8 cages. (e) Total density of states based on DFT calculations of bare Bi2S3, the heterojunction of Bi2S3–Co9S8 and bare Co9S8. (f) Schematic illustration of the synthesis of (SnCo)S2/SG. (g) XRD patterns of (SnCo)S2 and (SnCo)S2/SG composites. Distributions of charge density difference (+ and − induced charges are represented in blue/red solid spheres, respectively), band structures (spin down α), and electronic DOSs: (h) SnS2 and (i) (SnCo)S2. (j) HRTEM of the (SnCo)S2/SG composite. (a–e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 81. Copyright 2020, Elsevier. (f–j) Reprinted with permission from ref. 82. Copyright 2019, Wiley.	 
Sb + 3Na+ + 3e− ↔ Na3Sb
Bi + 3Na+ + 3e− ↔ Na3Bi
m = ρV, and m = nM,

 		 

 	Fig. 5  (a) Schematic diagram of Bi–Sb coordination and cycling performances of the npBi2Sb6, np-Bi4Sb4, np-Bi6Sb2, np-Bi and np-Sb electrodes at 200 mA g−1. (b) Schematic illustration of the dealloying process for the NP-SnSb alloy and cycling performance at 0.2 A g−1. (c) Schematic illustration of the rGO@Sb–Ni ternary framework and cycling stability. (a) Reprinted with permission from ref. 88. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 89. Copyright 2018, Elsevier. (c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 6  (a) TEM images of Nb2O5@MoS2@C CNFs under different magnifications and observation positions. (b) Cycling stability of the as-prepared samples at a current density of 1 A g−1. (c) Schematic illustration shows the synthetic process of MoS2/C (upper panel) and the diffusion path of Na+ (lower panel). (d) Cycling performance of MoS2/C MTs and MoS2 MFs, respectively. (e) TEM images and HRTEM images indicate the heterointerface of MoSe2-on-NC. (f) Cycling performance of MoSe2-on-NC, MoSe2/NC, and MoSe2 nanosheets at 0.2 A g−1. (a and b) Reprinted with permission from ref. 94. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (c and d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 95. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. (e and f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2020, Wiley.	 

 	Fig. 7  (a) Schematic illustration of the synthetic processes for phosphorene/MXene hybrid structures. (b) SEM image of delaminated Ti3C2Tx (left panel), and HRTEM image of phosphorene/MXene architectures (right panel). (c) Cycling performance of BP, MXene, mixed BP/MXene, and phosphorene/MXene electrodes at 0.1 A g−1. (d) Cross-sectional SEM image. The inset shows PDDA-BP/Ti3C2 flocculation. (e) Cycling stability at 0.1 A g−1 and rate performance at 0.1, 0.2, 0.5, 1.0, and 2.0 A g−1 for different electrodes, respectively. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 101. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d and e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 100. Copyright 2019, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 8  (a) Schematic illustration of the Sb2S3@FeS2/C composite. (b) The morphology characterization of Sb2S3@FeS2/C, and (c) cycle performance of Sb2S3, SFS, and Sb2S3@FeS2/C. (d) Schematic illustration of the synthetic process of CuS@CoS2. (e) Illustration of the synthetic process of the three-layered Cu2S@carbon@MoS2 nanoboxes. (f) The morphology changes of SnSe2/ZnSe@PDA nanoboxes during the charge–discharge process. (g) SEM and TEM images of a typical CoSx hierarchical structure. (h) Cycle performance combined with the coulombic efficiency of CoSx at 500 mA g−1. (a–c) Reprinted with permission from ref. 112. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society. (d) Reprinted with permission from ref. 115. Copyright 2019, Wiley. (e) Reprinted with permission from ref. 113. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (f) Reprinted with permission from ref. 118. Copyright 2020, Wiley. (g and h) Reprinted with permission from ref. 119. Copyright 2017, Elsevier.	 
Footnote
† These authors contributed equally to this work.

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2021
