Charge and mass transport mechanisms in two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks (2D COFs) for electrochemical energy storage devices  - Energy & Environmental Science (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/D2EE02742A View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/D2EE02742A
(Review Article)
Energy Environ. Sci., 2023, 16, 889-951Charge and mass transport mechanisms in two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks (2D COFs) for electrochemical energy storage devices

        
          
            Hanyin 
            Zhang
          
        
      abc, 
      
        
          
            Yubo 
            Geng
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Jin 
            Huang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Zixiao 
            Wang
          
        
      a, 
      
        
          
            Kun 
            Du
          
        
      a and 

        
          
            Haoyuan 
            Li
          
        
      *ab
aSchool of Microelectronics, Shanghai University, Shanghai 201800, China. E-mail: lihaoyuan@shu.edu.cn
bKey Laboratory of Advanced Display and System Applications, Ministry of Education, Shanghai University, Shanghai 200072, China
cSchool of Materials Science and Engineering, Guangdong Provincial Key Laboratory of Advanced Energy Storage Materials, South China University of Technology, Guangzhou 510640, China
Received 
      24th August 2022
    , Accepted 31st January 2023First published on 1st February 2023AbstractThe development of smartphones and electric cars calls for electrochemical energy storage devices with higher capacities, faster charging rates, and improved safety. A key to developing these devices is the discovery of better electrode and electrolyte materials. Over the past few years, a new type of organic materials, two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks (2D COFs), have attracted increasing attention and are explored as both electrode and electrolyte materials in energy storage devices such as metal-ion batteries, metal batteries, and supercapacitors. Indeed, the intriguing features of the nanoscale porous structure of 2D COFs and their tunable functionalities have brought many new possibilities to the already vibrant field of electrochemical energy storage materials. The performances of electrochemical energy storage devices are largely determined by two fundamental processes: charge and mass (ion) transport. Both processes carry the flow of charges but with different microscopic mechanisms. A good understanding of these processes is essential to accelerate the development of 2D COFs in electrochemical energy storage devices. However, the unique characteristics of 2D COFs result in complex charge and mass transport mechanisms, creating a barrier for new researchers to enter this field. Here, we provide a state-of-the-art overview of recent studies into this subject as well as a summary of the fundamental elements of charge and mass transport in 2D COFs for energy storage applications. The paths of 2D COFs for energy storage devices are also discussed. We believe that this review will be helpful to researchers interested in working on 2D COFs and electrochemical energy storage applications.

Broader context
Over the past few years, research on two-dimensional covalent organic framework (2D COF)-based electrochemical energy storage devices such as lithium-ion batteries, solid-state lithium batteries, and supercapacitors has experienced fast growth. Currently, an obstacle preventing the broad application of 2D COFs is their poor charge and mass transport abilities. Indeed, charge and mass transport are critical microscopic processes that impact device efficiencies and need to be correctly considered for rational molecular design. This review article offers a unified description of the fundamental charge and mass transport processes in 2D COFs, which form a necessary background for their future development in electrochemical energy storage applications. It is helpful to researchers new to 2D COFs and electrochemical storage devices and those already experienced in this matter.

1. Introduction
The transition to solar, wind, and water power is vital to reducing greenhouse gas emissions from fossil fuel use, and will also bring tremendous economic opportunities. These clean and renewable energy technologies depend primarily on energy storage solutions as they do not produce energy continuously. Indeed, energy storage plays a critical role in balancing energy demand and maintaining stable energy output.1 In recent years, electrochemical energy storage devices such as lithium-ion batteries (LIBs), solid-state lithium batteries, and supercapacitors have been extensively studied.2–4 LIBs have been widely used for their high energy density, high power density, and long cycle life. Solid-state lithium batteries, on the other hand, are a post LIB technology with higher safety and higher energy density, while supercapacitors have the advantages of superior power density, outstanding rate capability, and long cycle life. A major route of developing these energy storage devices relies on discovering critical electrode and electrolyte materials with improved performances. Recently, two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks (2D COFs) have attracted massive attention for electrochemical energy storage devices (Fig. 1). They represent a kind of emerging materials composed of light elements, with building blocks connected by covalent bonds and arranged periodically in 2D space.5 2D COFs are highly versatile and have attractive features, including permanent porosity, good stability, and high morphological precision.5–10 The integration of 2D COFs in energy storage devices has been shown to be a promising path to achieving high performance.
 Fig. 1  Illustration of 2D COFs used in (a) lithium(metal)-ion batteries, (b) supercapacitors, and (c) lithium batteries. 
The development of 2D COF materials for energy storage devices can benefit significantly from systematic guidance and design strategies, which, however, remains largely elusive. It is known that two fundamental microscopic processes are critical to the function of energy storage devices: charge and mass (ion) transport.11 It is crucial to utilize materials with appropriate charge and mass transport abilities in different functional parts. For example, electrode materials require simultaneous good charge and ionic conductivities, while charge transport in electrolyte materials needs to be suppressed. In many instances, the challenges of fabricating high-performance energy storage devices lie in realizing good electric and ionic conductions.12,13 Unfortunately, the charge and mass transport abilities of 2D COFs are often less than ideal, which need to be improved for their further development towards energy-storage applications.14 In this aspect, a good understanding of how charges and mass transport in 2D COFs is essential for their rational design. However, many features of 2D COFs distinguish them from inorganic and traditional organic materials, complicating our understanding of the fundamental processes for higher charge and ionic conductivity engineering. It has been shown that charge carrier transport and ionic conduction in 2D COFs are affected by various factors such as their molecular structure, morphology and extrinsic factors such as temperature.15 However, a systematic description of the microscopic mechanisms and efficient methods that can accurately predict these properties remains elusive.
While there have been excellent reviews on 2D COFs in electrochemical energy storage devices, they are focused on the synthesis, materials characterization, and device performances, while the microscopic transport mechanisms are less discussed.15–27 This review aims to provide a theoretical understanding of the charge and mass transport mechanisms in 2D COFs for their application in electrochemical energy storage devices. To achieve this purpose without giving the reader too much burden, we introduce the necessary theoretical background without delving into the details of all related theories. Interested readers can refer to the excellent reviews on charge transport in traditional organic semiconductors28–30 and mass transport in the other types of materials.31–33
This review is organized as follows: Section 2 summarizes the fundamentals of charge transport in organic materials, the relevant models, mobility measurement techniques, and investigations of charge transport in 2D COFs and influencing factors. Section 3 describes the mass transport processes in 2D COFs, including traditional models, characterization techniques, and the understanding of a few intrinsic and extrinsic factors. In Sections 4–6, we offer an in-depth review of the more recent discussions, from a combination of experimental and theoretical methods, on the charge and mass transport processes in 2D COFs in lithium(metal)-ion batteries, lithium batteries, and supercapacitors. The main symbols used in this review and their definitions are listed in Table 1.
Table 1 List of the main symbols and their meanings




Symbol
Meaning
Symbol
Meaning





k
B

Boltzmann's constant

λ

Reorganization energy



h

Planck's constant

H

ij


Electronic coupling (charge transfer integral)



ħ

Reduced Planck's constant

ε

i


Molecular energy levels



R

Gas constant

v
0

Phonon vibration frequency



F

Faraday's constant

R

ij


Distance between molecules



ε
0

Vacuum permittivity

G

Gibbs free energy



ε
r

Relative permittivity

τ

Carrier free time



e

Elementary charge

m*
Effective mass



T

Temperature

ω

Frequency of lattice vibration



t

Time

k

Wave vector



E

Electric field

J
ion

Ionic flux



σ

Electrical conductivity

σ
ion

Ionic conductivity



D

Charge-carrier diffusion coefficient

D
ion

Ion diffusion coefficient



μ

Charge mobility

u
ion

Ionic mobility



v

Velocity

σ
+

Cation ion conductivity



n

Charge-carrier density

t
+

Cation ion transfer number



V

Voltage

q
ion

Charge of ion



I

Current

z

i


Charge number of ion



J

Current density

I
p

Peak current



B

Magnetic field

C
ion

Ion concentration



d

Dimensionality

U

Voltage sweeping rate



L

Length or thickness

n
e

Number of electrons involved in the redox reaction



V
G

Gate voltage

R
t

Resistance



V
D

Drain voltage

S

Electrode area or film area



V
T

Threshold voltage

V
M

Molar volume of electrode material



C

i


Capacitance of gate dielectric

A
W

Warburg factor



W

Channel width

r

Coordinate




2. Charge transport in 2D COFs
We first recall the fundamentals of charge transport. The ability of a material to transmit current is defined as electrical conductivity (σ), which is expressed as:34 σ = enμ(1)where n is the charge-carrier density; μ, the charge-carrier mobility; and e, elementary charge. A high conductivity is often required to achieve high device efficiencies. It can be seen from eqn (1) that the conductivity is determined by the charge-carrier mobility and carrier density. The charge-carrier mobility represents the ability of charge carriers to move in materials, which is defined as:35 (2)where v is the velocity of the charges moving under electric field E. Besides this drift motion, charge carriers can also move from high to low concentrations in the form of diffusion. The charge-carrier diffusion coefficient (also called diffusivity) D is related to its mobility via the Einstein equation:28 (3)where kB is the Boltzmann constant and T is the temperature.
At a microscopic level, the movement of charge carriers can be understood as random walks. If we have the locations of charge-carriers r(t) at time t, with the condition of r(0) = 0, the diffusion coefficient of charge carriers can be calculated from the mean-square displacement by:36 (4)where d is the dimensionality of the system (d = 1, 2, or 3 for one-, two-, or three-dimensional systems, respectively).
To characterize the charge transport abilities of two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks, we need to obtain parameters of electrical conductivities, charge-carrier mobility, and carrier diffusion coefficient. The charge-carrier mobility is particularly useful as it also gives information on the diffusion coefficient and electrical conductivities. The charge mobility measurement methods have been well-established for organic semiconductors and applied to 2D COFs. Recent studies have obtained charge mobility of 2D COFs in the range 10−5–102 cm2 V−1 s−1.37–39 However, since a precise control of the film morphology of 2D COFs remains difficult, it could be challenging to accurately determine the charge mobilities with multiple influencing factors at play.
To gain a deeper understanding of the charge transport abilities of 2D COFs, we need to know the detailed charge-transport mechanism, particularly how charge carriers move at the microscopic level. There are two main transport mechanisms of carrier transport in organic materials: band transport and hopping transport. The band transport mechanism corresponds to the case where there is a significant overlap of molecular orbitals (wave functions). Typical organic materials where the band transport mechanism dominates include some organic single crystals, similar to the case of crystalline inorganic semiconductor materials such as silicon, GaN, and graphene. On the other hand, in disordered (amorphous) materials or crystalline organic materials with poor wave function overlap, the electronic coupling is weak and the electro–phonon coupling becomes relatively strong.29 In this case, the hopping transport mechanism dominates, where the transfer of carriers proceeds by hopping between different local states.
2D COFs have a layered structure. In each layer (defined as the xy-plane or in-plane direction), the units are connected by covalent bonds, while different layers were stacked together (in the z direction or out-of-plane direction) via van der Waals interactions. As a result, charge transport can have different mechanisms depending on the transport direction.40 In the xy-plane, charges may transport through coherent tunneling, while in the z direction via the carrier hopping mechanism.10,41 Still, the complete charge transport mechanism is still under investigation. To date, works in understanding the charge-transport abilities of 2D COFs often rely on the determination of the crystal structure and the band structure. In particular, theoretical tools have shown to be useful, which have largely focused on evaluating their band structures (assuming a band transport mechanism). In addition, factors such as intra-framework molecular structure, inter-framework packing arrangement, and order (both short- and long-range) within the COF domains can significantly influence carrier movement along the 2D planar sheets and through the 1D columns, leading to different charge carrier mobilities and conductivities.10,42
In the following sections, we will discuss the general band and hopping transport mechanisms, then introduce the charge-carrier mobility measurement methods. Next, the recent investigations of charge transport in 2D COFs are discussed and the influencing factors are summarized.
2.1. The band transport mechanism
In the classical description, the electrons are not entirely confined to atoms due to the overlap of the electron shells in crystals. Instead, they are able to move freely among different atoms, namely the electronic communal movement. In this case, the electron energy spectrum splits to form energy bands. In the ground state, electrons fill the energy bands from low to high levels. The filled bands are called full bands, and the one with the highest energy among them is denoted as the valence band (VB). The bands without electrons are empty bands, with the one closest in energy to the valence band called the conduction band (CB) that can accommodate excited or injected electrons for transport. The energy range between VB and CB is called the forbidden band.

Fig. 2 illustrates the band structures of BP-COF with its chemical structure, along with those of graphene for comparison. As we can see, the band structure is plotted in the reciprocal space (k-space or wave vector space), which is frequently used in crystal structure analysis. Let 1, 2, 3 be the primitive vector of the real space, the reciprocal space cell primitive vectors are defined as: , , . Here, we use k to represent a spatial position in reciprocal space. The case where the minimum of the conduction band bottom and the maximum of the valence band top are at the same k value is denoted as a direct band gap. The opposite situation is referred to as an indirect band gap. One key difference is that photon adsorption and radiative recombination in indirect band gap materials need to be accompanied by phonons, while those in direct band gap materials do not.
 Fig. 2  Illustrations of the chemical and band structures of (a) BP-COF43 (reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society) and (b) graphene44 (reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018, Taylor & Francis). 
Within the band transport framework, the motion of carriers is impacted by the potential fields coming from atoms and other electrons. The effective mass of the carrier m* near the bottom of the conduction band or the top of the valence band, which reflects the efficiency of charge transport in the band, is expressed as:45 (5)where ħ is the reduced Plank's constant and E(k) is the energy of wave vector k. The carrier mobility can be related to the effective mass as:46 (6)where τ is the average time between collisions, i.e., the mean free time. The effective mass is usually smaller for wider bands (larger curvatures), which means easier charge transport.47 We note that there are different approximations to evaluate the charge-carrier mobility in the band regime. For example, under the assumption that the bandwidth is much larger than kBT, the mobility can be expressed by the following relationship and has been used in the calculation of 2D COFs:39 (7)where a is the distance between two adjacent core units, ζ is the ratio of the strength of the non-local electron-vibration coupling and the effective electronic couplings Heff.
2.2. The hopping transport mechanism
To understand the charge-carrier hopping process, the concepts of highest occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) and lowest unoccupied molecular orbital (LUMO) need to be introduced (Fig. 3). The HOMO of the molecule is the filled orbital with the highest energy, while the LUMO is the vacant orbital with the lowest energy. Roughly speaking, HOMO, LUMO, and their gap correspond to the valence band, the conduction band, and the band gap for the band transport mechanism, respectively. In the hopping transport mechanism, charges can be understood to be localized at HOMOs or LUMOs belonging to different molecules. The charges move via a series of hops between adjacent molecules.
 Fig. 3  Molecular frontier orbitals and energy levels of oligoacenes.48 Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society. 
Two formulas are frequently used to describe the charge hopping rate: the Marcus equation and the Miller–Abrahams equation. The Marcus equation, proposed by R. A. Marcus, was first used to calculate the charge transfer rate between ions in an aqueous solution. It is now widely applied to carrier hopping in molecular organic materials, with the hopping rate from molecule i to molecule j expressed as follows:49 (8)where λ is reorganization energy, Hij, electron coupling between molecules (charge transfer integral); εj and εi are molecular energy levels (for hole and electron transport, they correspond to HOMO and LUMO, respectively).28 The two key quantities in the Marcus equation are the reorganization energy and the transfer integral. The reorganization energy indicates the potential barrier that needs to be overcome in order to change the conformation of the molecule, while the charge transfer integral represents the degree of overlap of the two molecular wave functions (Fig. 4). Density functional theory calculations have shown to be useful in the theoretical evaluation of the reorganization energy50,51 and the charge transfer integral.52 Studies have shown that the charge transfer integral is sensitive to both the intermolecular distance and orientations.52
 Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of molecular relaxation and the evaluation of the reorganization energy50 (reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019, Elsevier). Evolution of the charge transfer integral on (b) the molecular angle and (c) distance52 (reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society). 
The Miller–Abrahams equation expresses the hopping charge transfer rate as follows:53 (9)where v0 is the phonon vibration frequency, γ, the reciprocal of the localized radius represents the degree of overlap of molecular orbitals; and Rij, the distance between molecules i and j. In the Miller–Abrahams expression, the hopping rate is mainly determined by the degree of wave function overlap and molecular energy levels.
There are some considerations in applying the Marcus equation and the Miller–Abrahams equation in calculating the charge transfer rate within the hopping regime. The Miller–Abrahams equation is frequently used in systems where the polaron effect is small, which is often the case with rigid molecular structures. On the other hand, in flexible molecules where reorganization cannot be neglected, the Marcus equation is more suitable.
2.3. Charge-carrier mobility measurements
An accurate determination of the charge mobility in organic materials is critical to developing materials with better performances. A few charge mobility measurement techniques have been established over the years with the development of organic semiconductors, including the time of flight (TOF) method, space-charge-limited current (SCLC), dark-injection (DI) SCLC, organic field-effect transistor (OFET) method, four-probe, and Van der Pauw. Some of these methods have been used to determine the charge-transport properties of 2D COFs. As we will see in the following discussions, each mobility measurement method has its advantages and disadvantages.

Time-of-flight. 
In the TOF measurement, the sample is sandwiched between two electrodes. The irradiation of a pulsed laser produces a thin layer of charge carriers near one electrode. These carriers move to the opposite electrode under the applied electric field. The carrier mobility is calculated as:54 (10)where L is the distance between the electrodes; V, the applied voltage; and τL, the transit time corresponds to the intersection of the linear parts of the current curve. In some cases, charge transport displays a dispersive feature and the current cannot be divided into two distinct regions, in which case a double logarithmic plot is used instead.
The signals in the TOF method are less impacted by the contacts, which means the results better represent the properties of the intrinsic organic film. However, this method requires a relatively thick sample, which can be prohibitive in some cases. There is also a variation of the TOF method called the current integral TOF.55 In this method, a capacitor is added to the circuit and the total accumulated charge Q(t) is measured:56 (11)Q(t) increases with time t, reaching a maximum value Qm at t∞. The time when Q(t) reaches half the maximum value Qm corresponds to the transit time.


DI-SCLC and SCLC methods. 
In these two methods, carriers are produced by electrical injection instead of light excitation as in the TOF method. The device configurations are similar to that in the TOF method but with the requirement of an Ohmic contact. When a constant voltage is applied, the carriers are continuously injected and move to the opposite electrode. In the DI-SCLC method, the time at maximum current (tpeak) is related to the transit time by the following relationship:57 tpeak = 0.787tL(12)
The charge-carrier mobility in the DI-SCLC method is expressed as: (13)In the SCLC method, the relationship between the steady-state current density (J) and mobility is expressed by the Mott–Gurney equation:58 (14)where ε0 and εr are the vacuum permittivity and relative permittivity, respectively.
The DI-SCLC and SCLC methods can be used on thinner films, thus requiring fewer materials. However, strict Ohmic contact can be difficult to realize. A non-Ohmic contact, if not identified, can lead to inaccuracies in the result.


OFET method. 
The OFET method, as its name suggests, relies on the fabrication of an OFET device using organic material as the semiconductor layer. The device contains three electrodes: gate, source, and drain. Borrowed from theories developed for inorganic FETs, the source–drain currents in the linear regime (Ilin) and saturation regime (Isat) are expressed by the following two equations:59 (15) (16)where VG, VD, and VT are the gate voltage, drain voltage, and threshold voltage, respectively; Ci is the capacitance of gate dielectric; W and L are the channel width and length, respectively. Based on eqn (15) and (16), the charge-carrier mobility can be expressed as:59,60 (17) (18)
Compared to the other methods, the carrier density is much higher in the OFET measurement, which can suppress the impact of traps. However, recent studies also suggest that care needs to be taken when applying the OFET method to calculate the charge mobility.61–63 One reason is that the widely used eqn (17) and (18) do not include a few non-ideal factors and the full features of charge transport in organic materials.60,64 The OFET measurement can be desirable in some cases since the measured mobility is also a direct indicator of the performance of the organic materials in functional OFET devices.


Four-probe method. 
Due to the presence of contact resistance, it is difficult to obtain accurate resistivity of the sample by directly placing two electrodes at the two ends of the material.65 Instead, the 4-probe method is commonly used to measure the conductivity of organic materials, where the configuration is similar to the organic field-effect transistor configuration but with two additional probes in the channel. Besides the conventional 4-probe contact geometry, an “ultimate shunting” geometry66 is also proposed, where the probes are deposited throughout the entire width of the channel.
In the conventional 4-probe contact geometry, the conductivity of the 2D channel and charge-carrier mobility are calculated as:66 (19) (20)where the L1 and V1 are the center-to-center distance between the probes and the corresponding voltage (measured between the two probes along the channel), respectively. In the “ultimate shunting” geometry, the term L1 is adjusted by the probe width L2:66 (21)


Van der Pauw method. 
The Van der Pauw method is based on the Hall effect. In the presence of a magnetic field B, a voltage is produced transverse to the electric and magnetic field direction. The Hall mobility is given by:67 (22)Here, A and B are two points on one side of the sample, while D and C are on the opposite sides of A and B, respectively. The resistance Rij,kl is defined as Vkl/Iij and Rsq can be obtained from: (23)However, the Van der Pauw method requires thin and uniform samples that are singly connected without gaps, which can be difficult to meet in some cases.67
Besides the above-mentioned methods, there are also other techniques that can probe the charge transport properties of organic materials. For example, the Thz spectroscopy can measure the carrier scattering time.68 The flash-photolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity (FP-TRMC) and pulse-radiolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity (PR-TRMC) methods use a high-intensity pulse from a laser or highly energetic electrons in the meV range, respectively, to create a low density of free carriers in the sample.69 The change in electrical conductivity Δσ induced by the pulse can be obtained via the change in microwave power reflected by the sample, which has contributions from both the holes and electrons in the sample: Δσ = ene–h(μe + μh).70 Here, ne–h is the density of generated electron–hole pairs, approximated by the ratio between the amount of energy density transferred to the material and the energy required to create one electron–hole pair. Different from the other methods, the FP-TRMC and PR-TRMC methods monitor short-range transport. As such, the results are less affected by factors such as small domains, impurities, and defects.

2.4. Typical charge-carrier mobilities and electrical conductivities of 2D COFs
Despite the available techniques to measure charge-transport properties, accurately determining the charge-transport properties of 2D COFs remains a daunting task. One difficulty lies in the fabrication of high-quality 2D COF films that meet the requirement of mobility testing methods, as controlled synthesis is still challenging.71–76 In Table 2, we collected some of the reported charge mobilities of 2D COFs along with their chemical structure. As Table 2 shows, the reported data suggest that the charge mobility of 2D COFs can reach 1–100 cm2 V−1 s−1, which is much higher than amorphous organic charge-transport materials and even exceeds the best traditional crystalline organic materials. However, these results should not be over-interpreted as many 2D COFs have not yet reported charge mobilities. Since not all 2D COFs are suitable (designed) for charge transport, it is likely that most 2D COFs may have undesirable charge mobilities. At present, the electrical conductivities of pristine 2D COFs are often low, in the range of 10−7–10−5 S cm−1. Doping of iodine is an effective way to improve the conductivity, by 2–3 orders of magnitude, as shown in Table 2.
Table 2 Examples of reported charge mobilities of 2D COFs




Name
Chemical structure
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Electrical conductivity (S cm−1)
Method
Ref.




HHTP-MIDA-COF



3.4 ± 2.5
∼3 × 10−6
DFT calculation combined with THz spectroscopy/Van der Pauw

77



CuPc-MIDA-COF



8.3 (Electron)
∼7 × 10−6
Van der Pauw

77



TPB-TFB COF



165
—
DFT calculation combined with THz spectroscopy

68



Pyr-COF



66 (both electron and hole)
—
DFT calculation

39



Por-COF



82 (hole)
—
DFT calculation

39



ZnPor-COF



94 (hole)
—
DFT calculation

39



COF-366



8.1 (hole)
—
TOF current integration

37



COF-66



3.0 (hole)
—
TOF current integration

37



FL-COF-1



—
1.0 × 10−4 (I2 doped)
Four-point-probe

78



TTF-Ph-COF



0.2
10−5 (I2 oxidized)
FP-TRMC/2-probe

79



TTF-Py-COF



0.08
10−6 (I2 oxidized)
FP-TRMC

79



DPP2-HHTP-COF



—
2.2 × 10−6
Van der Pauw

80



Tang-COF



—
In-plane: 5 × 10−12 (pristine)
4-Probe

81



2 × 10−3 (I2 doped)


Out-of-plane: 1.6 × 10−5 (pristine)


1.5 × 10−3 (I2 doped)


sp2c-COF



—
6.1 × 10−16 (pristine)
2-Probe

82



7.1 × 10−4 (I2 doped)


COF-DC-8



—
2.51 × 10−5 (pristine)
4-Probe

83



Up to ∼10−2 (I2-doped)


ZnPc-pz COF



4.8 (hole, pristine)
7 × 10−7 (pristine)
Van der Pauw

84 and 85



∼22 (hole, I2-doped)
3.1 × 10−4 (I2-doped)


CuPc-pz COF



0.9 (hole)
3.3 × 10−7
Van der Pauw

84



NiPc-CoTAA



0.15 (Hole)
8.16 × 10−5 (intrinsic)
Hall effect/4-probe

86



5.2 × 10−3 (I2-doped)


PyVg-COF



9 × 10−4 (Hole, zero-field deduced)
4 × 10−3 (out-of-plane)
TOF/2-probe

87



1.4 × 10−5 (Electron, zero-field deduced)
1.8 × 10−12 (in-plane)


NiPc-NH-CoPcF8



23.7 (Compressed pallet, hole)
2.72 × 10−2 (compressed pallet)
Van der Pauw and OFET/4-probe

88



35.4 (Film, hole)
3.02 × 10−2 (compressed pallet, I2-doped)


0.13–0.34 (OFET, hole)
1.27 × 10−1 (film)


1.29 × 10−1 (film, I2-doped)


NiPc-NH-CuPcF8



20.2 (Compressed pallet, hole)
2.41 × 10−2 (compressed pallet)
Van der Pauw and OFET/4-probe

88



2.60 × 10−2 (compressed pallet)


1.15 × 10−1 (film)


35.1 (Film, hole)


1.12 × 10−1 (film, I2-doped)




2.5. Tools to study charge transport in 2D COFs
As highlighted in Section 2.4, studies have shown promising charge-transport abilities of 2D COFs. However, the detailed charge transport mechanisms and practical strategies to tune the charge mobilities are still under investigation. In this section, we illustrate recent applications of theoretical and experimental tools in understanding the charge transport processes in 2D COFs and related phenomena. As we will see in the following discussions, many of the studies of charge transport in 2D COFs assume band transport, while those on the roles of hopping are scarce.
To study the microscopic charge transport process in 2D COFs, knowledge of the crystal structure is often a prerequisite. In particular, an understanding of the molecular conformation and the detailed layer packing pattern is needed to evaluate electronic couplings between monomer units in-plane and out-of-plane. For this purpose, techniques such as XRD and high-resolution transmission electron microscope (HRTEM) are often used.89 In cases where performing these experiments is not feasible, theoretical calculations can be of help in determining the packing patterns, lattice parameters, as well as the interlayer distance. The determined crystal structure of 2D COFs forms the foundation of many subsequent interpretations.

Experimental tools to study the charge transport in 2D COFs. 
A few experimental techniques have been applied in probing the properties of 2D COFs related to charge transport. UV-vis diffuse reflectance spectroscopy (DRS) spectroscopy is a light absorption characterization method that can be used to determine the band gap and band edge potential and reflect the creation or disappearance of polarons.89 The Mott–Schottky analysis plot can be used to obtain the flat band potential (Vfb) with respect to the standard hydrogen electrode. UPS utilizes UV light radiation to produce photoelectrons, which can be used in the analysis of the VB. Time-resolved photo luminescence (PLS) spectroscopy can be used to probe the lifetime of the charge carriers.89 Scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) is also proven useful, allowing differential conductivity imaging (dI/dV) and gaining information on the spatial distribution of electron states.90,91


Theoretical tools to study the charge transport in 2D COFs. 
On the theoretical side, density functional theory has been widely used in calculating the VBs, CBs, as well as the ionization potentials and electron affinities.92–94 Popular functionals to calculate the band structure of 2D COFs include PBE (fast but known to underestimate the band gaps) and HSE.95 In addition, the GW method, although computationally demanding, has shown to have excellent agreement with the experiment.96,97
Unraveling the complex charge-transport process in 2D COFs often relies on the utilization of a collection of tools. For example, in 2019, Trinity Joshi et al. studied the charge transport in COF-420 (Fig. 5).91 Using STM dI/dV point spectroscopy, they found the band gap of COF-420 on Au(111) to be 1.92 ± 0.06 eV. STM shows the different distributions of the conduction and valence bands of COF-420 on cores A and B, likely due to the asymmetry of the imine linkage. To better understand this, they also simulated dI/dV spectra by calculating the projected density of states from DFT calculations using PBE functional onto core A and core B of COF-420. The calculation successfully reproduced the localization of VB and CB on different cores. The energy differences between VB and VB-1 and that between CB and CB + 1 have an average value of 0.31 eV, which is very close to the average experimental value of 0.25 eV. The calculated bandgap of COF-420 on Au substrates is 1.10 eV, which is smaller than the experimental result as GGA is expected to underestimate bandgaps.98 The authors also calculated the case without Au substrate and found that the band gap slightly increased to 1.38 eV.91 This work is an excellent demonstration that experimental and theoretical tools corroborate each other and can be used to give useful information on the band structures of 2D COFs.
 Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structure and (b) STM image of COF-420. (c) dI/dV spectra at cores A and B. Calculated PDOS for (d) standalone COF-420 and (e) COF-420 on Au(111).91 Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 

2.6. Factors influencing charge transport in 2D COFs
To achieve the desired charge-transport properties in 2D COFs, it is important to understand the influencing factors, including types of monomer units and linkages, topologies, symmetries, and doping. So far, a complete list of these factors and their detailed impacts are still under investigation, as the current understanding is largely empirical. In addition, several intrinsic and extrinsic factors that impact charge transport in organic films likely also apply to 2D COFs, which include disorder, electric field strength, charge density, and temperature (Table 3).28,29 We note that the detailed impact of the influencing factors on charge transport may depend on the other physical quantities as well as the state of the material.
Table 3 Factors that may influence the charge mobilities and electrical conductivities in 2D COFsa




Factor
Influence on mobility
Influence on conductivity





a ↑ Denotes promotion and ↓ represents suppression.





Molecular structure
See discussions
See discussions


Topology
See discussions
See discussions


Temperature
↑ (for hopping mechanism)
↑ (for hopping mechanism)


↓ (for band transport)
↑ At low T and ↓ at high T (for band transport)


Traps
↓
↓


Molecular packing order
↑
↑


Electric field
↑ (for hopping mechanism)
↑ (for hopping mechanism)


↓ (for band transport)
↓ (for band transport)


Pressure
↑
↑


Charge-carrier density
↑ At low carrier density and
↑


↓ At high carrier density





2.6.1. Types of monomer units and linkages. 
2D COFs can be thought of as a collection of monomer units (the remains from the condensation of monomers) connected by linkages assembled in a certain topology, as shown in Fig. 6 (we note that the definitions of the monomer unit and the linkage are not always clearly distinguished as one type of monomer units can also be viewed as linkages that connect the other type). As we can see from Sections 2.1 and 2.2, charge transport is largely impacted by the electronic coupling or the degree of wavefunction overlap. The choice of the monomer units and linkages is found to greatly impact the degree of π-conjugation and electronic couplings between adjacent monomer units, thus leading to different charge-transport properties.42
 Fig. 6  Examples of the topologies, monomer units and linkages of 2D COFs. 
Many studies have focused on constructing 2D COFs using different monomer units and exploring their charge transport properties, as some monomer units form a larger conjugation. These studies form a practical, empirical understanding of the choice of 2D COF building blocks. For example, 2D COFs containing thiazole and thiophene have been shown to have good charge mobility and conductivity;99 porphyrin groups are found to be beneficial to realizing high mobilities;37 introducing thiophene groups into BP-COF is found to lead to reduced band gaps;100 inclusion of good electron donor such as tetrathiafulvalene (TTF) units in COFs has been shown to produce high electrical conductivities.101
As for the linkage, some connections, like boronate ester and amine, breaks conjugation, which is detrimental to in-plane charge transport. While the imine linkage offers some in-plane π-conjugation, the inherent polarization of the CN connection prevents efficient charge transport.102 On the other hand, diacetylenic linkages provide larger electronic couplings than phenylene-based linkages, leading to narrower band gaps, smaller effective masses, and higher carrier mobilities.39
Besides direct coupling between the monomer units, a super-exchange mechanism can also exist. For example, Thomas et al. studied Por-COF, zinc-porphyrin-based ZnPor-COF and pyrene-based Pyr-COF at the PBE0 level (Fig. 7).39 These 2D COFs show highly dispersed valence and conduction bands with widths of 1.5–2 eV, which leads to small hole and electron effective masses of about 0.1 m0. Both hole and electron in-plane mobilities of Pyr-COF are estimated to be 66 cm2 V−1 s−1. For Por-COF and ZnPor-COF, their theoretical hole mobilities reach 82 cm2 V−1 s−1 and 94 cm2 V−1 s−1, respectively.39 The authors found that there is no direct overlap between the frontier orbitals of the pyrene cores. Instead, the electronic couplings come from the mixing of the pyrene frontier with the diacetylenic linker orbitals and have a super-exchange nature.
 Fig. 7  Chemical structures and calculated band structures at the PBE0 level of (a) pyrene (Pyr-COF), (b) porphyrin (Por-COF), and (c) zinc porphyrin (ZnPor-COF) 2D COFs.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 


2.6.2. Topologies and symmetries. 
For the same types of functional groups and linkage types, 2D COFs can be designed to have different topologies, such as hexagonal, quadrilateral, triangular, heterocellular, Kagome, honeycomb.8 How the building blocks are arranged and the resulting symmetry also has a large impact on the charge-transport properties. For example, compared to three-arm cores, four-arm cores have been shown to lead to more dispersive bands and larger effective masses, as the above-mentioned example of pyrene (Pyr-COF) and porphyrin (Por-COF).39
The highest symmetry of 2D COFs is p6m. For example, for the benzene-ethynylene COF, there exist C6 rotation axes (in the middle of the hexagons formed by six benzene-ethynylene moieties), C3 rotation axes (in the middle of the benzene cores), and C2 rotation axes (at the center of the triple bonds). As a result of the high symmetry, the top valence band and the bottom conduction band are both flat (inefficient in charge transport), as shown in Fig. 8a. Reducing symmetry is found to be beneficial to charge transport. Fig. 8b displays a modified pyridine-ethynylene COF but with pmm symmetry, which removes the C3 symmetry of the core units and the C6 symmetry axes in the p6m benzene-ethynylene COF. As a result, the electronic couplings are no longer threefold identical. The top valence bandwidth (PBE0) of the pmm-symmetry COF is 0.49 eV with significant dispersion (beneficial to charge transport). This highlights the impact of symmetry on the band structures of 2D COFs and their charge-transport properties.
 Fig. 8  Truncated chemical structures and PBE0 band structures of (a) p6m benzene–ethynylene COF and (b) pmm pyridine–ethynylene COF.42 Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 


2.6.3. Defects and doping. 
Defects and impurities are often unavoidable in actual materials. They can scatter charge carriers as well as introduce traps. The presence of traps has been found to hinder charge transport efficiencies and lead to decreased charge mobilities and conductivities. In some cases, doping another substance is intentionally used, which can also introduce defects.
2D COFs routinely fabricated in labs are seldom defect-free. They often include a variety of imperfections such as broken bonds, incomplete rings, mismatched stacks, etc.72,76,103 These defects in 2D COFs can induce traps and disorder, leading to fewer mobile charge carriers and reduced mobility.40 Conversely, not all impurities are bad for charge conduction. Doping intentionally induces impurities and has been shown to improve electrical conductivities in 2D COFs. For example, electron-withdrawing iodine, when used as the dopant, can induce the generation of hole polarons in 2D COFs and increase mobility and electrical conductivity.40 However, too much doping leads to strong Coulombic forces from the doped ions, which can reduce charge mobility and conductivity.41


2.6.4. Disorder. 
How the molecules assemble significantly impacts the charge-transport mechanism, hence the ability of the materials to transport charges. The crystalline packing may benefit band transport, while disordered packing favors hopping transport. In general, increased order leads to higher charge mobilities and conductivities.104 Although 2D COFs are designed to have periodically arranged monomer units, their actual crystals have finite sizes, which can be on the order of several tens of nanometers. Thus, the 2D COF films may have limited long-range order with regions of disordered packing. An energetic disorder parameter is often defined, reflecting the degree of molecular energy level fluctuations detrimental to charge transport.


2.6.5. Temperature. 
The temperature dependences of the charge mobility and the electrical conductivity are different depending on the charge-transport mechanism. Increasing temperature leads to higher charge-carrier concentrations. However, the behavior of charge-carrier mobility is more complicated. In the band-transport regime, charge-carrier mobility decreases with temperature due to an increased degree of scattering. As a result, the electrical conductivity increases with temperature at first, then decreases. We note that the detailed dependence of mobility on temperature can vary. This has been observed for the other types of conducting materials, e.g., relationships of T−0.5 and T−1.5 identified in cubic and tetragonal phases of perovskite.105 Thus, if band transport dominates in 2D COFs, the charge mobility could also decrease with increasing temperature.
On the other hand, in the case where hopping transport dominates, higher temperatures lead to an increased probability of carrier hopping. This result in increased charge mobilities, often with an Arrhenius-type relationship.106 The electrical conductivity thus also increases with temperature. The different temperature dependencies of charge-carrier mobility were sometimes used to determine whether the band transport or the hopping transport dominates in organic materials.107 For 2D COFs, however, a thorough understanding of the charge transport properties at different temperatures still needs further studying.
Besides the above-discussed factors, electric field, carrier density, and pressure also impact charge transport in organic materials, although focused studies on 2D COFs are still scarce. Strong electric fields force carriers to move in its direction, leading to increased trapping from defects and reduced charge mobilities and conductivities for band transport. However, high electric fields promote charge hopping by overcoming the energy barriers for hopping transport, which leads to increased charge mobilities and conductivities.108 In the electric field range 104–106 V cm−1, charge mobility generally shows a so-called Poole–Frenkel behavior:109. The charge-carrier density directly modifies electrical conductivity, as eqn (1) suggests. It also affects charge mobility through the changes to the effective density of states: At high carrier concentration, more low-level sites are occupied, resulting in increased carrier mobilities.110–113 However, further increasing carrier concentration can lead to a drop in mobility due to increased scattering. Applying pressure can reduce the molecular distance between molecules and increase the overlap of wave functions. This means wider bands (for band transport) or more significant charge transfer integrals (for hopping transport), which leads to higher carrier mobilities. This effect has been observed in both amorphous and crystalline organic materials114,115 and likely applies to 2D COF systems.

3. Mass transport in 2D COFs
2D COFs can act as either anode, cathode, or electrolyte materials in energy storage devices. These 2D COFs must be able to transport ions (metal ions or protons) if used as electrolytes and transport metal atoms (also frequently described as “ions”) in electrodes.
We first recall the fundamentals of mass transport: it can be in the form of diffusion, migration, and convection, with diffusion and migration more relevant in the context of energy storage devices, while convection is more prominent in liquid systems with physical stirring. The migration of ions is driven by the voltage. Cations move along the direction of the electric field, while anions move in the opposite direction. Migration is dominant in the bulk electrolyte, where the concentration gradient is negligible. Similar to that in charge transport, the ion mobility uion is defined as the velocity versus the electric field.116 The ionic conductivity is expressed as:117 (24)where F is Faraday's constant; zion, the charge number of ion; and Cion, the concentration of ion.
Different from migration, diffusion is driven by the concentration gradient. The diffusional flux Jion is defined as the number of particles passing through unit area per unit time. Diffusion is from high to low concentration and the concentration change rate is proportional to the second-order derivative.118,119 Fick's first and second laws describe the relationship between Jion, ion diffusion coefficient (Dion) and ion concentration:120 Jion = −Dion∇Cion(25) (26)The diffusion coefficient is related to ionic mobility via: (27)In classical models, ion diffusion can be understood by uncorrelated random hops.36 Similar to eqn (4) for charge-carrier transport, the ion diffusion coefficient can be expressed as:36 (28)The hopping of ions can be viewed as a thermal activation process, with the rate νion described by an Arrhenius-type relationship:36 (29)where Vion0 is the number of attempted hops per unit time and Ehop is the hopping energy barrier. There can be different origins of the hopping energy barrier. For example, in inorganic solids, a jump-relaxation model is sometimes used,121 where the potential energy of ions is the result of the superposition of periodic lattice potential and Coulomb cage effect from the other moving ions.
The mass transport mechanism is not universal and depends on the types of materials.1,122,123 Compared to 2D COFs, the ion motion in classical inorganic and several organic materials mechanisms have been studied for a longer time and relatively better understood. Mass transport is affected by structure, defect, temperature, salt concentration, and molecular weight.124,125 In organic materials, ion transport can also be assisted by molecular chain movement. The case of 2D COFs is even more complicated due to their porous and anisotropic structures.123,126,127
In this section, we first introduce the general understanding of mass transport in solids and the measurements to obtain the key parameters. Then, the more focused investigations on 2D COFs and the impacting factors will be discussed.
3.1. Overview of mass transport in solids
Mass transport in inorganic solids has been well studied and can provide useful background information here. In particular, ion transport in inorganic solids is closely related to defects, particularly point defects. Typical point defects are Frenkel defect (vacancy accompanied by interstitial ion) and Schottky defect (anion vacancy accompanied by cationic vacancy), as illustrated in Fig. 9a. Ions move more efficiently at defect sites, as well as crystal surfaces and grain boundaries.128 Ion diffusion in inorganic solids can be classified into vacancy/defect-mediated mechanisms and non-vacancy/non-defect-mediated mechanisms (Fig. 9b–d).124 In the vacancy/defect-mediated mechanism, ions hop to an adjacent vacancy site and leaves a new vacancy defect at the old position. The diffusion rate is thus determined by vacancy density.129 Non-vacancy/non-defect-mediated ion transport can have either (direct) interstitial mechanism or the interstitial-substitutional exchange mechanism.129 In (direct) interstitial mechanism, small interstitial ions move directly to adjacent interstitial sites. In cases where ions have similar sizes to the matrix ions, ion transport can involve the motion of multiple particles: in the interstitial knock-off mechanism, the matrix ion migrates first to make room for the interstitial ion. In the interstitial-substitutional exchange mechanism, two ions move simultaneously and exchange lattice positions (direct exchange); a group of three or more ions can also move circularly (ring diffusion).129
 Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of Schottky defect and Frenkel defect. Illustrations of the (b) vacancy/defect-mediated mechanism, (c) direct interstitial mechanism and (d) the interstitial-substitutional exchange mechanism. 
Ion transport in organic solids can be very different from that in inorganic solids. Ions tend to bind to molecular sites that act as Lewis acids,130e.g., functional groups like carbonate ester131 and poly-ε-caprolactone.132 The ion-binding strength is impacted by factors such as polarity.133 In organic solids, both crystalline and amorphous regions can be present.134 Ion transport in the crystalline region occurs mainly via diffusion124 with diffusivity described by the Arrhenius equation.135 (30)where D0 is pre-exponential factor and Ea1 is the diffusion activation energy.
In the amorphous region, ion transport can be accelerated by the organic segment movement.136,137 In this case, the short-range polymer diffusion, which helps the ions reach the adjacent ion-binding sites, plays an important role in ion transport. For example, in a typical polymer electrolyte such as PEO6:LiAsF6, the PEO chains fold and form a cylindrical tunnel, with Li+ is coordinated with ether oxygen and expected to transport in the tunnel.138 In this case, the lithium ion jumps from one binding site to another with the help of local chain segment motion.
Ionic transport in amorphous organic solids is also related to the glass transition temperature Tg. The lower Tg, the faster the polymer segment motion and the higher the ionic conductivity.139 Increasing temperature leads to faster ion transport and higher ionic conductivity. The temperature-dependent ionic conductivity can be described empirically by the Arrhenius equation:137 (31)where σ0 is the pre-exponential factor and Ea2 is the activation energy. Eqn (31) implies that the polymer segment motion is decoupled from the ionic motion. In other words, the polymer segment motion leads to closer coordination positions and makes it easier for the ions to hop.
In some cases, ionic movement is further affected by the change in the free volume of polymer segments.137 As a result, the temperature dependence is found to deviate from that predicted by eqn (31) but follows an empirical relationship called the Vogel–Tamman–Fulcher (VTF) equation:142 (32)where, A0 is a constant related to the number of charge carriers; EB, the pseudo-activation energy associated with the polymer segmental motion and T0 is the temperature corresponding to zero configurational entropy. Fig. 10a and b illustrates an example in this case.
 Fig. 10  (a) Temperature dependence of the ionic conductivity of PVAc:PVdF:LiClO4 polymer electrolytes containing various blend ratios and (b) the VTF fitted plot.140 Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (c) Diffusion coefficients of Li+ and TFSI+ in a 4 kg mol−1 PEO at 363 K.141 (d) The ion diffusion coefficients at different molecular weight of PEO (4 kg mol−1) at 363 K141 (reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). 
Ion concentration and molecular weight also affect ion transport in organic solids. Studies have shown that the ion diffusion coefficients can decrease with increasing ion concentration in organic solids (Fig. 10c), due to the formation of neutral or charged clusters.141 Increasing molecular weight decreases the ion diffusion coefficient, as shown in (Fig. 10d). This is likely caused by reduced polymer segment motion in longer chains.
2D COFs have porous structures and, upon stacking, 1D channels form from the pores. These channels offer transport pathways for ions. Various groups on the channel wall can coordinate with cations, including nitrogen atoms, hydroxyl (–OH), phenyl ring, imine linkages, boroxine (B3O3) ring, and boronate ester (C2O2B) rings,130,143–145 which has been illustrated by density functional theory calculations.145 Thus, ions are believed to bind to these sites on the channel walls and hop between different sites. The properties of ion binding sites are expected to significantly impact the ion transport properties. For weakly-bounded sites, the ions are expected to hop more freely in the ion-transporting channel.146 Ion transport may also occur in the voids between the layers. This latter process requires less dense packing (weaker interlayer π–π interactions).147 However, our understanding of how ions move in 2D COFs at the microscopic level is still much limited.
3.2. Measurement of ionic conductivities and diffusion coefficients
The ionic conductivity is the most important indicator for the performance of electrolytes, while the diffusion coefficient is a critical parameter for the kinetic properties of electrodes. Thus, accurate determinations of ionic conductivities and diffusion coefficients are essential to developing electrode and electrolyte materials for energy storage devices.148 These key parameters can be obtained via electrochemical measurements such as cyclic voltammetry (CV),149 galvanostatic intermittent titration technique (GITT),150 potentiostatic intermittent titration technique (PITT),151,152 and electrochemical impedance spectroscopy (EIS).153 Here, we give a brief overview of these techniques.
In the CV measurement, a cyclic voltage is applied between the working electrode and the reference electrode and the current is recorded. The peak current (Ip) during the oxidation or reduction process is expressed as:149 (33)where U is the voltage scan rate; S, the electrode area; R, gas constant; ne is the number of electrons involved in the redox reaction. To obtain the diffusion coefficient, a series of different sweeping rates need to be applied and the corresponding peak currents are recorded. The diffusion coefficient is calculated from the slope of the Ip–U1/2 curve: (34)The GITT experiment consists of a series of constant current stimuli and relaxation cycles: Each cycle contains a charging or discharging process under a constant current for a certain time, followed by equilibration to allow ion diffusion with a final equilibrium voltage. We denote V(t) as the transient voltage response of the working electrode during the constant current interval in each cycle. Due to internal resistance, V(t) changes abruptly at the beginning of each cycle (t = 0). The Coulometric titration curve from all cycles (V ∼ δ) can be obtained by plotting the equilibrium voltage at the end of each cycle against the stoichiometric parameter of metal ions in the electrode (δ). It has been shown that when the charging or discharging time is long enough (t ≫ L2/Dion, with L being the characteristic length of the electrode material), the diffusion coefficient in each cycle can be calculated as:150 (35)where VM is the molar volume of electrode material. Here, dV(δ)/dδ, is obtained from the slope of the Coulometric titration curve and V(t)|t=0 − V(t = 0) denotes the change of voltage at the beginning of each charging/discharging cycle. When the charging/discharging time is much smaller than L2/Dion, the diffusion coefficient can be calculated as: (36)where dV(t)/dt1/2 can be calculated from the slope of the V(t)/dt1/2 curve during charging/discharging.
PITT is similar to GITT, with the difference that a constant voltage is applied instead of a constant current. In this case, the current is related to the diffusion coefficient by these relationships:151,152 (37)where I(t) is the transient current during the voltage step and ΔV is the magnitude of the voltage step.
Electrochemical impedance spectroscopy is a useful technique that can be used to obtain the diffusion coefficient as well as the ionic conductivity. A small periodic voltage or current is applied as a perturbation to the electrochemical system. For the study of ion transport, the response current (for voltage excitation) or potential (for current excitation) at different applied frequencies (f) was recorded and analyzed by an equivalent electrical circuit of components such as resistances, constant-phase elements, and the Warburg element. The mass diffusion process is reflected in the low-frequency region. The Warburg impedance is a straight line with a slope of 45° in Nyquist representation in the low-frequency impedance region. The diffusion coefficient in EIS is calculated as:153 (38)where AW is the Warburg factor which can be determined by the slope of imaginary resistance vs. 1/(2πf)1/2 curve, Re(Zd) is the real part of the diffusion impedance, and dV/dδ is the slope of the coulometric titration curve in the GITT measurement.
EIS can also be used to measure the ionic conductivity of the electrolyte:154 (39)where Rt is the bulk resistance and L refers to the film thickness. To distinguish the contribution from cations and anions, the transference number ti is introduced with ti = σi/σion and Σti = 1. The cation transference number can be evaluated using a potentiostatic polarization method. When a small, constant voltage ΔV is applied to the M/M+-electrolyte/M symmetric cell, the current changes and eventually reaches a steady-state value (ISS). The initial current right after the applied voltage is denoted as I0. From the EIS measurement of the cell, the interfacial resistances before and after the polarization are recorded as R0 and RSS, respectively. The cation transference number t+ can be calculated by the following equation:155 (40)Besides the above-mentioned electrochemical measurements, it is also possible to directly monitor the motion of metal ions by nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy techniques,156 neutron diffraction,157 and in situ TEM.158 Although these experiments rely on more sophisticated equipment, they can be extremely useful to shed insights into the ion dynamics in 2D COFs, as we will see in the following discussions.
We note that an accurate measurement of the diffusion coefficients and ionic conductivities can be challenging. The difficulty lies in the differences between the underlying theoretical models and the actual experiment, as well as imperfections and variations in the material state. As a result, different probe methods may give different values.
3.3. Typical ionic conductivities and diffusion coefficients of 2D COFs
In Table 4, we have listed the ion diffusion coefficients and ionic conductivities of 2D COFs. The reported Li+ diffusion coefficient in 2D COFs ranges from 10−12 to 10−9 cm2 s−1. These values are lower than that in commercial electrode materials such as LiCoO2 (∼10−11–∼10−7 cm2 s−1) and Li(NixMnyCoz)O2 (∼10−11–∼10−8 cm2 s−1), but already higher than LiFePO4 (10−16 to 10−12 cm2 s−1).
Table 4 Chemical structures and Li diffusion coefficients of 2D COFs




Name
Structure
Diffusion coefficient (cm2 s−1)
Method
Ref.




IISERP-CON1



5.48 × 10−11
EIS

159



AZO-1



8.39 × 10−9
GITT

160



AZO-2



2.34 × 10−11
GITT

160



DAAQ-TFP



1.6 × 10−10
CV

161



2.48 × 10−11 (as prepared)
EIS

162



6.94 × 10−11 (exfoliated)


DAPH-TFP



1.1 × 10−9
CV

161



CTF



2.43 × 10−11–5.09 × 10−10 (exfoliated)
GITT

163



FCTF



3.15 × 10−12–7.27 × 10−11, (as-prepared)
GITT

163



2.36 × 10−10–7.88 × 109 (exfoliated)


rCTF



8.82 × 10−12 (before activation)
GITT

164



7.00 × 10−11 (after activation)




As for ionic conductivities, 2D COFs have reported σLi+ of 10−7–10−4 S cm−1, and reaching 10−3 S cm−1 if used to form a composite material, as shown in Table 5. These values are comparable to those in polymer electrolytes (<10−5 S cm−1), yet lower than liquid electrolytes (10−3 S cm−1) and a few high-performance inorganic solid electrolytes such as Li10GeP2S12 (up to 10−2 S cm−1).
Table 5 Chemical structures and Li conductivities of 2D COFs




Name
Structure
Ionic conductivity (S cm−1)
Ref.




LiCON-1



2.13 × 10−7

165



(Li loading: 0.27%)


LiCON-2



4.36 × 10−6

165



(Li loading: 2.05%)


LiCON-3



3.21 × 10−5 (RT)

165



0.90 × 10−5 (−40 °C)


1.17 × 10−4 (100 °C)


(Li loading: 1.41%)


H-Li-ImCOF



5.3 × 10−3

166



(Li loading: 3.2%; with ∼20 wt% PC)


CF3-Li-ImCOF



7.2 × 10−3

166



(Li loading: 1.4%; with ∼20 wt% PC)


CH3-Li-ImCOF



8.0 × 10−5

166



(Li loading: 1.7%; ∼20 wt% PC)


dCOF-ImTFSI-60



2.79 × 10−3 (100 °C)

167



4.92 × 10−3 (120 °C)


7.05 × 10−3 (150 °C)


COF-5



2.6 × 10−4

168



Li loading: 3.77%


3.60 × 10−8

169



(Li loading: 0.28%; COF-5:PEG 800 is 3:2 (wt))


TpPa-1



1.5 × 10−4

168



CON-TFSI



5.74 × 10−5 (RT)

170



2.09 × 10−4 (70 °C)




3.4. Influencing factors on mass transport in 2D COFs
It is important that we understand the factors impacting mass transport in 2D COFs. These include the chemical structures and morphologies of 2D COFs, the nature of ion-COF interactions, and temperature. In the following sections, we elaborate on them in detail.

3.4.1. Chemical structures. 
2D COFs are highly versatile, with nearly countless chemical structures. The nature of the chemical structures is expected to greatly impact the mass transport properties of 2D COFs. In particular, the types of monomer units, the specific linkage types, and the kinds of decorations or grafted side chains onto the COF skeletons can all play important roles. In the following, we will illustrate these points with recent examples.
Types of monomer units. 
Let us take two β-ketoenamine-linked COFs for LIBs as an example (Fig. 11a). The DAAQ-TFP COF was formed by imine-condensation between 1,3,5-triformylphloroglucinol (TFP) and commercially available 2,6-diaminoanthraquinone (DAAQ), while the DAPH-TFP COF was made at imine-exchange conditions between TFP and the benzophenone imine of 2,7-diaminophenazine (DAPH·Bnzph). The electrical conductivities of the DAAQ-TFP and DAPH-TFP electrodes were similar: 4.4 × 10−5 and 4.8 × 10−5 S cm−1, respectively. However, the difference in mass transport in these two types of COFs is significant, with the lithium diffusion coefficient of DAPH-TFP being 1.1 × 10−9 cm2 s−1, which is one order of magnitude higher than the value of 1.6 × 10−10 cm2 s−1 for DAAQ-TFP.171
 Fig. 11  Illustrations of the chemical structures: (a) DAAQ-TFP and DAPH-TFP COFs171 (reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society); (b) AZO-1, AZO-2 and AZO-399 (reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH); (c) LiCON-1, LiCON-2, LiCON-3165 (reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society) and [TEMPO]50%-NiP-COF and [TEMPO]100%-NiP-COF172 (reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH). 
Types of linkages. 
Singh et al.99 have demonstrated three azo-containing COFs of thiazole- (AZO-1), imine-(AZO-2) and β-ketoenamine- (AZO-3) linkages (Fig. 11b). AZO-1, AZO-2, and AZO-3 have hexagonal pores of similar pore sizes of 2.8, 3.0, and 2.7 nm, respectively. Their interlayer distances range from 3.3 to 3.5 Å. The difference in linkage types is found to lead to variations in lithium diffusion coefficients by orders of magnitude. The thiazole-linked AZO-1 has the highest DLi+ of 8.39 × 10−9 cm2 s−1 by GITT. For the β-ketoenamine-linked AZO-3 and imine-linked AZO-2, DLi+ reduces drastically to 2.68 × 10−9 and 2.34 × 10−11 cm2 s−1, respectively.
Decorations and side chains. 
The skeletons of 2D COFs can be functionalized or decorated for different design purposes. In many cases, side chains of various properties can be grafted onto the COF pore walls that fill the voids. This type of modification has a large impact on the ion transport properties of 2D COFs. For example, Li et al.165 fabricated a series of hydrazine-based COFs (SD-COF-1, SD-COF-2, and SD-COF-3) with different side chains. These lithiated COFs (treated with aqueous lithium carbonate) were named LiCON-1, LiCON-2, and LiCON-3, respectively (Fig. 11c, upper panel). These modifications lead to different ion transport properties, with LiCON-3 having the highest ionic conductivity. Jiang's group172 reported imine-linked COF with TEMPO side chains on the channel walls (Fig. 11c, lower panel). The half-decorated [TEMPO]50%-NiP-COF and fully decorated [TEMPO]100%-NiP-COF have significantly reduced BET surface areas of 264 and 5.2 m2 g−1, respectively. These structures with side chains are also found to have improved kinetics as electrode materials compared to the original, unmodified COF. PEO is another type of widely studied side chain that has been grafted on the COF pore walls to improve the ion transport in COFs, which we detail in Section 4.
Pore size. 
Since the building blocks of 2D COFs vary, the resulting skeletons can have different pore sizes, with typical values of a few nanometers but can also be as low as 0.3 nm.173 Chen et al. reported three phthalocyanine-based COFs with monomers of different sizes, NA-NiPc (1.58 nm pore), PPDA-NiPc (2.35 nm pore), and DAB-NiPc (2.98 nm pore).174 These three COFs were tested for Li and Na storage performance. The DAB-NiPc COF electrode, which has the largest pore, also has the highest Li and Na storage capacity among the three electrodes at a high current density of 2 A g−1.
Under aqueous conditions, H2O molecules form a hydration shell around the cations due to the electrostatic interaction between the charged ions and the water dipole in the solution. Large pores make it easier for large coordinated or hydrated ions to pass through.175 In addition, in large pores, the space in proximity to the pore walls is relatively small, which makes the overall ion-COF interaction weaker. Take TpBDMe2 (pore size 1.4 nm) as an example, the calculated permeation rates of cations decrease with their hydrated diameter and follow the order: K+ > Na+ > Li+ > Ca2+ > Cu2+> Mg2+> Ni2+> La3+> Ce3+.126


3.4.2. Morphologies. 
2D COFs have finite sizes, in contrast to their crystalline representations of building blocks infinitely extended in 2D space. The size of fabricated 2D COF domains could be only on the order of tens of nanometers. These sheets may manifest different morphologies in the electrode or electrolyte materials. The transport of ions in 2D COFs has been understood as permeation into their frameworks without disrupting the packing pattern. Therefore, how the 2D COF is stacked may also impact ion transport.
Orientation. 
In 2015, Dichtel and co-workers176 compared uniformly and randomly oriented DAAQ-TFP COF (Fig. 12a). The uniformly oriented thin films have drastically improved the charge storage capabilities of 3 mF cm−2 compared to that of 0.4 mF cm−2 for randomly oriented films. This suggests the uniformly oriented films have improved accessibility of the redox-active anthraquinone moieties. In 2016, Uribe-Romo and co-workers168 demonstrated oriented COF-5 and TpPa-1 with sheets aligned with the substrate by mechanical pressing with excellent ionic conductivities. Ionic conductivities of COF-5 and TpPa-1 pellet (the power before pressing was immersed in 1 M LiClO4/THF for 48 h to impregnate the Li salt) were determined to be 0.26 and 0.15 mS cm−1, respectively, by EIS at room temperature, which are among the highest reported values. A small activation energy for ion transport of 37 meV was determined for the COF-5 pellet.
 Fig. 12  (a) Illustrations of the structures of 2D COF microcrystalline powder and oriented thin film176 (reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). (b) Illustrations of AA and AB stacking patterns of PTDCOF177 (reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2021, Elsevier). (c) Illustration of exfoliated 2D COFs as cathodes for lithium-ion batteries162 (reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society). 
Stacking pattern. 
The layers of 2D COFs can be stacked in different patterns, such as AA-type, where the monomer units in different layers perfectly overlap, and AB-type, where the core units align with the center of the pores of adjacent layers (Fig. 12b). How the 2D COFs are stacked may also impact the ion transport process. The different stacking patterns lead to different degrees of exposure of the COF skeletons and can affect the ion storage and transport properties. For example, Liu et al.177 synthesized piperazine-based PTDCOF with piperazine linkages. Both AA and AB stacking modes were identified by comparing the measured and simulated XRD patterns. These two packing patterns are found to have different specific capacities of 1403.8 (AA) and 1604.3 (AB) mA h g−1 by DFT calculations. It was also demonstrated that loose stacking could benefit ion transport.170 For example, Wu et al. designed and synthesized an aminal-linked piperazine-terephthalaldehyde (PA-TA) COF featured with an ultra-large interlayer distance of 6.2 Å, in which more redox-active sites are exposed that facilitates the binding and transport of ions.178
Exfoliation. 
In addition to using 2D COFs in their default stacking pattern, they can be manually exfoliated, chemically or physically, to produce thinner sheets. The exfoliated COFs with fewer layers may shorten the ion migration length and facilitate ion diffusion. Wang et al. exfoliated DAAQ-TFP COF by mechanical milling to 5 nm thickness (Fig. 12c).162 They found that the lithium-ion diffusion coefficient (DLi+) of the exfoliated sample is 6.94 × 10−11 cm2 s−1 by CV measurement, which is almost three times that of the unexfoliated one of 2.48 × 10−11 cm2 s−1 in a similar experimental setup.


3.4.3. Ion-COF interactions. 
At the microscopic level, ion motion is impacted by its interactions with the surrounding medium, particularly with the 2D COFs. These interactions are expected to significantly impact ion transport, which can have different origins.
As discussed above, ions can bind to the molecular sites that act as Lewis acids. A weak binding is expected to benefit ion transport.146 We use the system of LiCON-1, 2, and 3 as an example.165 The Li+ counter anion is phenolate, carboxylate, and sulfonate in LiCON-1, 2, and 3, respectively, which show increasing acidity for their acidic counterpart. The sulfonate group has the highest Li+ dissociation constant, resulting in the highest ionic conductivity of LiCON-3. At 20 °C, the ionic conductivities of LiCON-1, LiCON-2 and LiCON-3 were determined to be 2.13 × 10−7 (t+ = 0.86), 4.36 × 10−6 (t+ = 0.83) and 3.21 × 10−5 S cm−1 (t+ = 0.92), respectively.
Lee et al.166 studied a series of crystalline imidazolate ICOFs (H-ImCOF, CH3-ImCOF, and CF3-ImCOF) with fully eclipsed AA stacking mode (Fig. 13a). Semiempirical calculations showed that the Li–N bond length increased with the electronegativity of the substituents on the imidazolate ring (CH3 < H < CF3), as shown in Fig. 13b. These results suggest strongest ion binding in CH3-Li-ImCOF and weakest ion binding in CF3-Li-ImCOF. The H-Li-ImCOF, CH3-Li-ImCOF, and CF3-Li-ImCOF powder were then pressed into dense pellets and then solvated with propylene carbonate (∼20 wt%), which led to lithium-ion loadings of 2.7%, 1.4%, and 1.1%, respectively. According to the Nyquist plots, the room temperature conductivity of the solvated CH3-Li-ImCOF, H-Li-ImCOF, and CF3-Li-ImCOF and pellet were 8.0 × 10−5 (Ea = 0.27 eV, t+ = 0.81), 5.3 × 10−3 (Ea = 0.12 eV, t+ = 0.88), and 7.2 × 10−3 (Ea = 0.10 eV, t+ = 0.93) S cm−1, respectively. As such, the lithium ionic conductivity increases as the ion-COF interaction decreases.
 Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structure of Li-ImCOFs. (b) Molecular modeling of H-Li-ImCOF, CH3-Li-ImCOF, and CF3-Li-ImCOF.166 Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
There are also a few impacting factors for ion transport in 2D COFs under aqueous conditions, including hydrophilicity, hydrogen bond, electrostatic interactions, and pH. At high hydrophilicity, hydrated ions in the pore are adsorbed on the pore wall (extreme in-pore effects) that can suppress ion pass-through.179 Therefore, it is easier for ions such as Na+ and Mg+ to pass through less hydrophilic COFs.179 The hydrated cations can also form hydrogen bonds with the COF pore wall. This affects ion permeation in the pores of 2D COFs by interacting with the hydrated shell of hydrated ions. Cations bind more tightly to the oxygen in the hydrated shell through electrostatic gravity, making the hydrogen in H2O more positively charged. Stronger hydrogen bonds lead to more difficult ion transport in the pores. Molecular dynamics simulations and density functional theory calculations have shown that the ion-transport barrier in TpBDMe2 COF increases with the hydrogen bond strength: K+ < Na+ < Li+ < Mg2+.126 Charged groups on the COF channel wall, such as carboxyl (–COOH) and amino (–NH) groups, can interact with ions and affect their transport. For example, it has been shown that incorporating negative sulfonate group (COF-SO3H-x) into 2D COFs help transport of K+ while that of positive quaternary ammonium group (COF-QA-x) repel it.180 In addition, the COF pore wall tends to be positively charged at low pH, while negatively charged at high pH.126 Positively charged channels repel cations electrostatically that could hinder cation transport, while negatively charged channels attract cations and favor cation transport. As a result, the permeability of K+ increases with pH from 2.6 to 6.0 (from positively to negatively charged).126


3.4.4. Temperature. 
The temperature has been found to greatly impact ion transport, which we already saw in traditional organic materials at the beginning of Section 3. An increase in temperature accelerates ion motion and promotes ion conduction in 2D COFs.170 We take again the system of LiCON-1, LiCON-2 and LiCON-3 as an example.165 Their ionic conductivities follow an Arrhenius-type relationship with temperature, as described in eqn (31). Thus, by measuring the ionic conductivities or diffusion coefficients at different temperatures, the activation energy can be obtained by eqn (30) or (31), which is an important indicator for ion transport. On the other hand, the exponential dependence means that the ion transport ability could be drastically different in different temperature ranges. For example, the ionic conductivity of LiCON-3 increases from 3.21 × 10−5 S cm−1 to 1.17 × 10−4 S cm−1 when the temperature increases from 20 °C to 100 °C. From Fig. 14a, it can be seen that the ionic conductivities of these COFs change with the temperature at different rates. LiCON-3, which has the weakest ion binding, also has the weakest temperature dependence. It maintains an ionic conductivity of 0.90 × 10−5 S cm−1 even at −40 °C, suggesting a wide range of working temperatures. In comparison, the ionic conductivities of LiCON-1 and LiCON-2 change faster with temperature. The authors also prepared an ethylene carbonate (EC)-permeated LiCON-3, a strategy used to enhance the ion-transport properties, as we will see in the following sections. In this case, the temperature dependence deviates from eqn (31) around the melting point of EC.
 Fig. 14  Temperature dependencies of the ionic conductivities of (a) LiCON-1, LiCON-2 and LiCON-3165 (reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society); (b) TpPa-SO3Li COF181 (reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society); (c) Li+@TPB-DMTP-COF (black) and Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF (red)182 (reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society); (d) PEG-Li+@EB-COF-ClO4 (orange), PEG-Li+@CD-COF-Li (blue), PEG-Li+@COF-300 (red), PEG-Li+@COF-5 (purple), PEG/Li+/EB-COF-ClO4 (gray), and Li+@CD-COF-Li (green)169 (reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society). 
Similar Arrhenius-type temperature dependence has also been observed in some other 2D COFs, including TpPa-SO3Li COF,181 PEO-grafted 2D COFs such as Li+@TPB-DMTP-COF and Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF,182 and a few composite PEG-mixed 2D COF materials such as PEG-Li+@CD-COF-Li, PEG-Li+@COF-300, PEG-Li+@COF-5, and PEG-Li+@EB-COF-ClO4,169 as shown in Fig. 14b–d. Overall, increasing a few tens of Kelvin can lead to 1–3 orders of magnitude enhancement in the ion transport abilities.
This Arrhenius-type temperature dependence suggests that the transport of ions in 2D COFs is tuned by the COF segment motion, similar to the case of ion transport in traditional polymer electrolytes. Larger vibrational movement of the COFs promotes ion motion across space. As such, introducing long side chains in the COF pores can be beneficial to ion transport.182
In aqueous conditions, the temperature may also impact ion transport via the dehydration effect. At high temperatures, hydrated ions absorb energy and lose part of the hydrated shell. The resulting smaller sizes and weaker hydrogen bonds lead to faster ion conduction.126
The above discussions highlight a few influencing factors discovered so far. Still, the mass transport mechanism in 2D COFs is under study, and a comprehensive understanding remains elusive. In particular, quantitative models that can help the rational design of 2D COFs with desired ion transport abilities are still to be developed.

4. Charge and mass transport in 2D COFs for metal-ion batteries
Metal-ion batteries are mainly composed of the cathode, the anode, the electrolyte, and the separator, which can store ions such as Li+, Na+, and K+. Among them, LIBs have been widely utilized to power 3C electronics, electric vehicles, and large-scale grid energy storage since they were first commercialized in 1991. Metal ions move from the anode through an electrolyte to the cathode during discharge or in the opposite direction when charging. Since metal ions “rock” back and forth between the two electrodes, these batteries are also known as “rocking-chair batteries”. Understandably, the ion storage capacity, diffusivity, and electrical conductivity of cathode and anode electrodes are critical to the energy density and the power density, which are highly sought in high-capacity and fast-charging metal-ion battery products.
Anodes of commercial LIBs use graphite, whose theoretical specific capacity is 372 mA h g−1, while typical cathode materials include LiCoO2 (274 mA h g−1), LiFePO4 (170 mA h g−1), LiNixCoyMnzO2 (NCM) and LiNixCoyAlzO2 (NCA). The diffusion coefficient of lithium in carbonaceous anodes was about 10−11–10−10 cm2 s−1, while those in LiCoO2 and LiFePO4 cathodes were about 10−11–10−7 cm2 s−1 and 10−16–10−12 cm2 s−1, respectively. These specific capacities and Li diffusivities cannot meet the ever-increasing demand for 3C electronics and electric vehicles. Therefore, it is important to develop cathode and anode material with a simultaneous high specific capacity, Li diffusivity, and electrical conductivity.
2D COFs, which have π-electron groups for charge transport and open channels formed from layer stacking for ion transport, have been demonstrated as promising candidates for LIB electrodes. Li can be stored in the active sites such as CN, CO, CC and phenyl ring in the COF framework, and their reversible lithium-storage capacities have been reported to be as high as 1644 mA h g−1.177 Next, we review recent studies on the ion storage and diffusion processes in COFs as electrodes for metal-ion batteries, as well as their electrochemical properties and device performances. In the following sections, applications of Li-ion, Na-ion and K-ion batteries are discussed in order.
4.1. Li-ion batteries
In 2020, Ruoff et al.183 synthesized a redox-active covalent triazine framework (rCTF), where anthraquinone units were linked with the triazine units (Fig. 15a). The rCTF was found to have a spherical particle morphology with diameters of 50–100 nm. The interlayer distance was estimated to be around 3.4 Å. Comparison of PXRD measurement and calculations based on density-functional tight-binding suggest a slipped-parallel packing mode, with calculated cell parameters to be: a = b = 29.9 Å, c = 6.8 Å, α = β = 90°, γ = 120°. The calculated pore sizes are 1.2 and 1.5 nm and the measured BET specific surface area is 766 m2 g−1. To understand the multi-electron redox reaction and the activation process, the authors performed density functional theory calculations and Monte Carlo simulations. Based on the results, the authors proposed three distinct stages for the lithiation of rCTF (Fig. 15b). In stage 1, lithium was stored preferentially adjacent to the CO of the quinone exposed at the surface of the pore channels. The CO bond length increases while the other redox-active sites remain unchanged. In the meantime, the rCTF layers slip relative to the adjacent layers, providing more sites that Li can access. This stage provides a capacity of 104 mA h g−1 (1 Li per CO). In stage 2, lithium starts to be stored in the vicinity of the N atom of the triazine ring and the benzene ring. The CN and CC bond lengths increase while that of CO remains unchanged. There occurred a greater change in the structure of rCTF and more redox-active sites were exposed. This stage pushes the capacity to 260 mA h g−1. In stage 3, most redox-active sites interact with lithium, with all CO, CN, and CC bond lengths gradually increasing. This leads to a capacity of up to about 1200 mA h g−1, which is consistent with the electrochemical analysis. In the fully lithiated state, one rCTF unit stores 23 lithium atoms. The authors note that some of the benzene rings were transformed into an sp3-like structure.
 Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of atomic structure of rCTF. (b) Illustrations of the lithium storage stages. (c) GITT voltage profiles and diffusion coefficients of a rCTF electrode at different states of charge. (d) Cycle retention results of the rCTF electrode at activation rates of 0.5C, 10C, and 20C.183 Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
To better understand the activation mechanism, the authors applied GITT measurement and found that DLi after activation is 7.00 × 10−11 cm2 s−1, which is about eight times higher than that of ∼8.82 × 10−12 cm2 s−1 before activation (Fig. 15c). Ex situ PXRD measurement shows increased interlayer stacking distance during lithium insertion, which did not restore to its original value after delithiation. Thus, the authors speculated that a more disordered structure and smaller particles were formed upon activation, leading to enhanced diffusion kinetics. The repetitive change in the structure could lead to more exposed redox-active sites and increased specific capacities as well.
Next, the electrode was prepared using rCTF, conductive carbon blacks, and polymeric binders in a weight ratio of 7:2:1. The capacity was found to increase with the cycling number: at a current density of 300 mA g−1 (0.5C), the capacity increases to about 1200 mA h g−1 at the 500th cycle and maintain at this value over 1000 cycles (Fig. 15d). At 10C and 20C, the capacity gradually increases over the measured 1500 cycles with final values to be about 520 and 420 mA h g−1, respectively.
In 2021, Liu et al.177 synthesized piperazine-based PTDCOF (Fig. 16a) using the triphenylene linker. The triphenylene units were connected through irreversible piperazine linkages. The PTDCOF has regular micropores of ∼11 Å and an interlayer distance of 3.9 Å. Both AA and AB stacking modes (Fig. 16b and c) were found by comparing the measured and simulated XRD patterns. The authors then analyzed the diffusion-controlled and non-diffusion-controlled capacities at different scan rates using the Dunn method. The fitted non-diffusion-controlled capacity was found unchanged (180 mA h g−1), while the diffusion-controlled capacity increased as the scan rate decreased. The non-diffusion-controlled capacity was attributed to lithium ions in the microporous channels. By EIS measurement, the diffusion coefficient of Li at different voltages was calculated. Interestingly, the diffusion coefficient is higher at low voltages (when abundant Li ions have been inserted into the COF electrode) than at high voltages (when the COF electrode is Li-ion deficient). Based on this result, the authors proposed that the presence of Li ions is beneficial to their transport in COF via short-range switched location transmission (Fig. 16d).
 Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structure of PTDCOF. Structural representations of full lithiation state of PTDCOF with (b) AA and (c) AB stacking patterns (brown: carbon, cyan: nitrogen, pink: hydrogen, green: lithium). (d) The proposed diffusion model of lithium in PTDCOF.177 Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2021, Elsevier. 
The electrode was prepared by mixing 70 wt% PTDCOF with 20 wt% carbon black and 10 wt% PVDF. Based on the electrochemical measurement and considering its weight ratio in the electrode, PTDCOF is calculated to have a high specific capacity of 1644.3 mA h g−1 at the current density of 0.1 A g−1 in the voltage range of 0.01–3.0 V, which agrees well with DFT calculated specific capacities of 1403.8 and 1604.3 mA h g−1 for AA and AB stacking modes, respectively. In 2022, Yang et al. fabricated polyimide-linked HATN-AQ-COF (Fig. 17a) through a solvothermal reaction between HATN-AP and DAAP in NMP/mesitylene.184 HATN-AQ-COF has a pore size of 3.8 nm with a high density of redox-active sites for storing Li+. The calculated lattice parameters are a = b = 45.49 Å, c = 3.42 Å, α = β = 90°, γ = 120°. The HATN-AQ-COF electrode exhibits specific capacities of 276 mA h g−1 at 1C, with excellent capacity retention of 80% after 3000 cycles at a high current density of 10C.
 Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structure of HATN-AQ-COF. (b) Proposed structural evolution during the lithiation process.184 Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
FT-IR and XPS have confirmed the storage of Li+ to CO and CN groups, while the calculated electrostatic potentials suggest that these groups are electron-rich. The lithium-ion storage in the discharge process suggested by DFT calculations are as follows (Fig. 17b): first, three Li+ ions are first inserted into the two nitrogen atoms in the HATN-AP group (Site A). Next, another three Li+ ions are inserted into the two oxygen atoms from the quinone and imide groups (Site B). The next three Li+ ions are inserted again into Site A, forming HATN-AQ-COF + 9Li. Finally, three Li+ ions are inserted into the CO group in the imide groups. DFT calculations also show that HATN-AQ-COF has an indirect band gap of 0.83 eV that reduces to 0 eV after lithiation, which suggests good electrical conductivities.
In 2019, Dichtel's group171 explored two β-ketoenamine-linked COFs for LIBs: DAAQ-TFP COF and DAPH-TFP COF (Fig. 11a). PXRD measurements suggest that both COF have nearly eclipsed stacked structures and have similar crystallinities. Their BET surface areas were determined to be 1155 and 1140 m2 g−1, respectively. The pore sizes of both COFs were determined to be around 2.2 nm. PEDOT was then polymerized at oxidative conditions in both COFs to obtain PEDOT@COF samples. For these composite materials, the BET surface areas dropped to 347 and 230 m2 g−1 for PEDOT@DAAQ-TFP and PEDOT@DAPH-TFP, respectively.
The conductivities of DAAQ-TFP, DAPH-TFP, PEDOT@DAAQ-TFP, and PEDOT@DAPH-TFP were on the same order: 4.4 × 10−5, 4.8 × 10−5, 7.5 × 10−5, and 7.2 × 10−5 S cm−1, respectively. The addition of PEDOT increases the conductivity for both DAAQ-TFP and DAPH-TFP COFs, by 70% and 50%, respectively. As for the lithium diffusion coefficients, they are 1.6 × 10−10, 1.1 × 10−9, 4.5 × 10−10, and 1.7 × 10−9 cm2 s−1 for DAAQ-TFP, DAPH-TFP, PEDOT@DAAQ-TFP, and PEDOT@DAPH-TFP, respectively. The improvement in the lithium diffusion coefficient upon adding PEDOT is 181% and 55%, respectively. By comparing these with the electrode performances, the authors proposed that charge transport is the limiting factor for DAAQ-TFP as compositing with PEDOT improved its specific capacity, while for DAPH-TFP COF ion transport is the bottleneck. This demonstrates the interplay between charge transport and lithium ion transport in determining the performance of COFs as electrode materials. However, as for DAPH-TFP COF, the performance did not improve to the same degree of lithium diffusion, suggesting more complicated factors at play here.
The cathode composites were fabricated from a slurry of 60 wt% active material, 15 wt% Super P carbon, 15 wt% CMK-3 mesoporous carbon, and 10 wt% PVDF. The authors tested the electrochemical performance of DAAQ-TFP and DAPH-TFP COFs, with and without PEDOT. The capacity at 0.5C is 53.5, 81.7, 59.8, and 93.2 mA h g−1 for DAAQ-TFP, DAPH-TFP, PEDOT@DAAQ-TFP, and PEDOT@DAPH-TFP, respectively. These four samples all have nearly 100% Coulombic efficiency over 500 cycles. Interestingly, the DAPH-TFP has the best capacity retention of all samples. The addition of PEDOT improved the capacity retention of DAAQ-TFP, which was not the case for DAPH-TFP.
2D COF-carbon composite materials have also been widely explored for LIB applications, which can improve the electrical conductivity. In 2018, Chen's group185 reported PIBN synthesized from tetramino-benzoquinone (TABQ) and pyromellitic dianhydride (PMDA) via a solvothermal reaction with the addition of graphene (denoted as PIBN-G), see Fig. 18a. The COF has a pore size of 1.5 nm. XPS measurement and DFT calculations imply electron transfer between the phenyl groups of PIBN and six-member carbon rings of graphene.
 Fig. 18  (a) Chemical structure of PIBN-G, (b) discharge/charge profile at 0.1C, (c) ex situ solid-state 13C NMR spectra for the different stages in (b). (d) Illustrations of the lithiation and delithiation of the different kinds of carbonyl groups.185 Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
To shed insights into the ion dynamics, NMR is then used, the usefulness of which has been demonstrated in the study of ion motion in the other energy storage materials, including COFs’ relative metal-organic frameworks.186–188 Here, the authors collected the ex situ solid-state 13C NMR spectra for the different states in the discharge/charge profile (Fig. 18bc). The pristine stage I have six peaks at a: 171.7, b: 165.1, c: 150.4, d: 148.9, e: 138.5, and f: 99.8 ppm, which can be assigned to the different C atoms of PIBN (Fig. 18d). The new peak at 75.7 ppm in stage II (discharged to 2.05 V) with the disappearance of two old peaks d and f suggest lithiation of the CO bonds of imide groups with 8 Li+ insertions into PIBN. At stage III (full discharge), another new peak at 92.2 ppm with the disappearance of peaks a and e indicates the insertion of two new Li+ into the quinone groups. The charging stages have the reverse result. Thus, based on this NMR analysis, the lithiation/delithiation in PIBN is believed to occur in two steps, where the CO bonds of imide groups are inserted/extracted 8 and 2 Li+, respectively (Fig. 18d).
The specific capacity of PIGN is 244.8 mA h g−1 at 0.1C, slightly smaller than the theoretical value of 280 mA h g−1. For PIBN-G, the specific capacity improves to 271 mA h g−1 at the same condition, which is attributed to the interaction between graphene and PIBN that promotes charge transport to the redox-active carbonyl groups for Li-ion insertion. At 10C, PIBN-G can maintain a capacity of 193.1 mA h g−1.
In 2018, Wang et al.189 synthesized few-layered imine-linked COFs and their composite with carbon nanotubes (COF@CNTs) with π–π interactions (Fig. 19a and b). The COFs have a pore size of 1.8 nm, as suggested by XRD measurement and calculations. BET surface area was determined to be 44.36 m2 g−1 (pore size distribution of 1.4–1.6 nm) for the COFs and 52.73 m2 g−1 (pore size distribution centered at 1.5 nm) for COF@CNTs. The smaller pore sizes from the BET measurement were attributed to the staggered stacking along the c direction. Both HRTEM and XRD suggest an interplanar distance of ∼0.35 nm. The COF@CNTs have diameters in the range of 50–80 nm.
 Fig. 19  Chemical structure of (a) COF-LZU-1 and (b) COF@CNTs. Schematical illustrations of (c) the reversible five-step lithium-ion insertion and extraction reactions and (d) ion storage into expanded COF layers. (e) Cycling performances of the COF and COF@CNTs at 100 mA g−1.189 Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature. 
The storage mechanism of Li is studied by Raman, FT-IR, XPS, TEM, and theoretical calculations. The authors proposed that a COF monomer can conduct a 14-electron redox process, in which each CN group stores one lithium ion and one benzene ring stores six lithium ions (Fig. 19c). The lithium storage process is divided into several stages. The first stage happens in the voltage range of 2.7–1.4 V, where two lithium ions are stored on two CN groups. In the following stages, lithium ions are stored on the benzene rings in the voltage range of 1.4–0.57 (four Li+), 0.57–0.25 (three Li+), and 0.25–0.005 V (five Li+). The authors attributed the fourteen lithium-ion storage of COF@CNTs to its interlamellar spacing expansion. (Fig. 19d) Interestingly, the COF@CNTs experienced slow activation over ∼300 cycles, with the specific capacity increasing from 200 mA h g−1 to 1000 mA h g−1 (Fig. 19e). The reason for this slow activation, however, remains unclear.
The mixture of 80 wt% COF or COF@CNTs composite, 10 wt% acetylene black, and 10 wt% PVDF was used as the working electrode. The COF is found to have a specific capacity of only ∼125 mA h g−1 at a current density of 100 m A g−1 in the voltage range of 0.05–3 V. For the composite material, the specific capacity is improved to 1021 mA h g−1 at the same condition and maintained after 500 cycles. It has been shown that the main contribution to lithium storage comes from the COF portion in the COF@CNTs.
Exfoliation of the 2D COFs has been found to be beneficial to the device's performance. In 2018, Ogale's and Vaidhyanathan's groups190 reported IISERP-CON1 (Fig. 20a) from a reaction between a trialdehyde and 3,5-diaminotriazole under mild solvothermal conditions. The product is in the form of reddish-brown power. DFTB calculations suggest that the layers were stacked in an eclipsed pattern, where the triazole rings buckle out-of-plane and lead to a wavy 2D stack. The interlayer distance is 3.26 Å for the triazole and 3.47 Å for the phloroglucinol units, respectively. This COF self-exfoliates during synthesis into few-layer stacks. AFM images of the drop-casted sample show 2–6 nm thickness and height:diameter ratio <0.1. The surface area was theoretically calculated to be 2070 m2 g−1 and BET-determined to be 507 m2 g−1. The distribution of the pore sizes was found to be located around 13 Å and 17 Å, smaller than the value of 21 Å if the layers adopt perfect eclipsed stacking.
 Fig. 20  (a) Chemical structure of IISERP-CON1. (b) Electron density and potential map before and after lithiation. (c). Capacity retention and coulombic efficiency over cycles.190 Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH. 
The observed capacity 720 mA h g−1 suggests 16 lithium ions stored per formula unit of the COF. In IISERP-CON1, functionalities of –OH, CN, triazole rings and aromatic carbons, being weak acids (pKa of phenol and 1,2,4-triazole are 10.3 and 9.3, respectively), are expected to be able to interact with Li-ion. The optimized structure from DFT shows that lithium ions occupy close to the framework walls and reside in the interlayer space. Li–N and Li–O lengths at the binding sites are in the range of 2.69–2.80 Å, which are much longer than when they form covalent bonds (1.8–2.0 Å). The bandgap of IISERP-CON1 from DFT calculations was 2.2 eV, similar to the experimentally determined optical bandgap of 2.02 eV. The C6 rings seem to transfer electron density toward the lithium ions (Fig. 20b). The authors also measured the lithium diffusion coefficient to be 5.48 × 10−11 cm2 s−1 by EIS.
The anode was fabricated by mixing 75% IISERP-CON1 wtih 20% conducting carbon and 5% polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) binder. The IISERP-CON1 anode exhibits a high specific capacity of about 720 mA h g−1 at 100 mA g−1 and exceptional capacity retention of 98% after 1000 cycles (Fig. 20c). When current density increases from 100 mA g−1 to 1 A g−1, the specific capacity only drops by 20%.
In 2019, Wang and co-workers191 synthesized imine-based TFPB-COF based on Schiff reaction and exfoliated it by chemical method. PXRD measurement and modeling suggest this COF has a pore size of 2.1 nm and AA stacking (Fig. 21a) with cell parameters of a = 38.22 Å, b = 20.40 Å, c = 4.72 Å, α = β = γ = 90°. By in situ Raman and ex situ FTIR (Fig. 21b-c), the authors show that Li ions interact with CC, CN, Mn–O and phenyl groups. The insertion of Li ions into the phenyl group leads to a reduction of the amount of sp2 carbon atoms. In comparison, for the bulk COF with lower capacity, only CN groups showed Li-storage activity in the measurement. XPS shows a strong peak at 289.8 eV corresponding to C–Li groups during lithiation, which was partially attributed to the lithiation reaction with the CC groups.
 Fig. 21  (a) The structure of TFPB-COF. (b) In situ Raman and (c) ex situ FTIR spectra recorded for the TFPB-COF/MnO2 anode. (d) Cycle performances of E-TFPB-COF/MnO2, E-TFPB-COF, TFPB-COF, and the commercial MnO2 at 0.1 A g−1.191 Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH. 
The active material, conductive carbon black (Super P) and PVDF were mixed (weight ratio of 8:1:1) For the unexfoliated bulk TFPB-COF and commercial MnO2 (acting as the spacer with lithium-storage function), the capacities are 126 and 358 mA h g−1, respectively. On the other hand, the TFPB-COF electrode is found to have a capacity of 968 mA h g−1 at the 300th cycle (Fig. 21d). When MnO2 is included, the capacity further increases to 1359 mA h g−1 at the same condition. The presence of MnO2 between the TFPB-COF nanosheets was believed to prevent agglomeration and preserve the few-layered structure during repetitive cycling.
4.2. Na- and K-ion batteries
Compared with lithium, sodium and potassium are much more abundant on earth and thus cheaper. As such, sodium-ion batteries (SIBs) and potassium-ion batteries (PIBs) have also been widely explored, which have the same “rocking-chair process” as LIBs. Since the ion storage mechanisms are similar, the same COF can be used to store different kinds of ions. For example, in 2019, Lu's group192 used DAAQ-TFP COF to store Na ions. They used NMR to shed insights into the ion insertion process. The α-C atoms of the pristine sample have a signal at 152 ppm in the 13C NMR spectra, which shifted to 162 ppm when discharged (Fig. 22a). This is due to the increased electron resonance and the shielding effect of the α-C anion. In the 23Na NMR spectra (Fig. 22b), the broad signals at −55 and −50 ppm represent cations with restricted mobility, corresponding to Na+ coordination to CO of quinone and β-keto, respectively. The peak at −42 ppm corresponds to mobile cations that can be assigned to Na+ inserted into the α-C atoms. Combining these results with data from electron paramagnetic resonance (EPR), Raman, X-ray absorption, FTIR, and DFT calculation, the mechanisms for the formation and transformation of the radical intermediates in the β-ketoenamine linked COFs during the redox process were proposed (Fig. 22c): In the discharge process, one carbonyl group receives one electron and one sodium ion, which transforms the other carbonyl group in the same anthraquinone unit into a C–O˙ radical (structure B). The reduction of this C–O˙ radical intermediate leads to the formation of the sodium alcoholate structure of the anthraquinone units (structure C). Next, the carbonyl O atoms of the β-keto units receive electrons and coordinate with sodium ions and lead to the formation of the α-C radicals (structure D). Finally, the electrophilic α-C radicals accept additional electrons and coordinate with sodium ions (structure E).
 Fig. 22  (a) 13C NMR spectra of the 4–12 nm thick sample and that discharged to 0.05 V. (b) 23Na NMR spectra of the 4–12 nm thick sample discharged to 0.05 V. (c) Proposed sodiation process of DAAQ-TFP COF.192 Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
In 2020, Chen's group193 reported a honeycomb-like covalent organic framework TQBQ-COF with multiple carbonyls for sodium-ion batteries. This COF has triquinoxalinylene and benzoquinone units (TQBQ) in the skeletons via a triple condensation reaction between tetraminophenone (TABQ) and cyclohexanehexaone (CHHO). Simulations suggest that the TQBQ-COF has a pore size of 1.14 nm and an interlayer distance of 0.307 nm. PXRD and HRTEM suggest that it adopts AB-type packing. The Na diffusion coefficient was measured to be on the order of 10−11 cm2 s−1 by the CV. The sodium ions were stored in pyrazines (CN) and carbonyls (CO) groups with up to twelve ions per repetitive unit. The redox mechanism was demonstrated by in/ex situ FT-IR and DFT calculations. In in situ FTIR, the characteristic peaks of CN and CO groups disappear during discharge and restore to the pristine state in the charging process. DFT calculations were used to calculate the optimized structures of TQBQ-COF layers and the configurations after different degrees of sodiation. The first 6 Na+ were accommodated between the two adjacent nitrogen atoms and the two oxygen atoms in the 2D plane, while the remaining 6 Na+ ions were stored between two adjacent oxygen and nitrogen atoms outside of the TQBQ-COF plane, as shown in Fig. 23a.
 Fig. 23  (a) Proposed 12-Na+ redox mechanism for each TQBQ-COF repetitive unit. (b) Long cycling stability of TQBQ-COF at different current densities (calculated based on the mass ratio).193 Reproduced with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature. 
The TQBQ-COF electrode was prepared by mixing 50 wt% TQBQ-COF powders, 40 wt% Super P, and 10 wt% PVDF. The TQBQ-COF electrode exhibits an initial discharge capacity of 452.0 mA h g−1 at 0.02 A g−1 (1–3.6 V). At 0.1 A g−1, the TQBQ-COF electrode has a specific capacity of 327.2 mA h g−1 and a capacity retention of ∼89% at the 400th cycle. At 0.5 A g−1 and 1.0 A g−1, it still has a reversible capacity of 236.5 and 213.6 mA h g−1 after 1000 cycles (corresponding to a capacity retention of 91.3% and 96.4%), respectively (Fig. 23b). The authors also assembled a pouch-type battery, which provides gravimetric and volumetric energy densities of 101.1 W h kg−1 and 78.5 W h L−1, respectively. The theoretical capacity of TQBQ-COF was calculated to be 515 mA h g−1 (based on the carbonyls and pyrazine redox sites), which is slightly higher than the measured value of 452.0 mA h g−1.
In 2019, Wang's group194 used boronic ester-linked COF-10 and its CNT composite for potassium ion batteries. COF-10 (Fig. 24a) was synthesized via solvothermal-induced polycondensation of 4,4′-biphenyldiboronic acid (BPDA) and 2,3,6,7,10,11-hexahydroxytriphenylene (HHTP) in a mixture solvent of mesitylene and dioxane at 85 °C with/without CNTs. The pore sizes of COF-10 and COF-10@CNT were both around 3.0 nm. Their interlayer distances were 0.35 and 0.34 nm, respectively. The LUMO of COF-10 from DFT calculations was −2.16 eV, suggesting good K+ affinity. XPS and Raman spectroscopy suggests that the benzene ring interacts with potassium ions (π–K+). HRTEM images of the COF-10@CNT anode show an increase in the interplanar spacing to ∼0.41 nm after potassium insertion. Based on these results, the authors proposed the potassium storage mechanism, as shown in Fig. 24b.
 Fig. 24  (a) Chemical structure of COF-10 and (b) proposed potassium storage mechanism. (c) Cycling performance of COF-10@CNT and COF-10 at 100 mA g−1.194 Reproduced with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The anodes were prepared by mixing active materials (COF-10 or COF-10@CNT), acetylene black, and PVDF at a mass ratio of 7:2:1. COF-10 and COF-10@CNT were then used as anode material for PIBs. COF-10@CNT is found to have better performance, with an initial charge capacity of 348 mA h g−1 compared to 130 mA h g−1 of COF-10. After 500 cycles at 100 mA g−1, COF-10@CNT can still provide a specific capacity of 288 mA h g−1 (Fig. 24c). COF-10@CNT is also found to have a long stable cycling life (161 mA h g−1 after 4000 cycles at 1 A g−1).
From the above discussions, it can be seen that while 2D COFs have shown promise as electrodes in metal ion batteries, their electrical conductivities and ion diffusivities are still to be improved.195 Standalone 2D COFs do not always perform well (reduced capacity, inferior rate capability, etc.) and need to form composites with other materials such as CNTs. In some cases, the observed slow activation process could become a disadvantage for practical usage. Finally, the voltage applied in the reported work is too high for actual applications. Through DFT calculations, the configurations before and after ion storage, as well as the detailed stages, have been revealed.193 However, the detailed mechanism regarding ions moving in the COFs and that of charge conduction remain largely unknown. This information is needed for more rational COF design as better electrode materials in metal ion batteries.
5. Mass transport in 2D COFs for lithium batteries
The safety issue of commercial LIBs has been more and more recognized nowadays. When the LIBs are charged too quickly, lithium dendrites could grow on the anode, which could cause a short circuit. In this situation, LIBs can be a safety hazard since the electrolyte is often flammable, leading to explosions and fires. In this regard, the integration with 2D COFs is found useful, which can either be used as a solid-state electrolyte or artificial solid electrolyte interface (SEI) on the electrode. These strategies suppress the formation of lithium dendrites and further enable the direct use of metallic lithium as anodes with high capacity (lithium metal batteries).
5.1. Solid electrolyte
The key to developing solid-state batteries is obtaining good solid-state electrolytes, which should have good Li-ion conductivities and be electrically insulated. As we have seen in Section 3.3, the ionic conductivities of 2D COFs (∼10−7–10−4 S cm−1)165,168 are often lower than that in traditional liquid electrolytes (∼10−3 S cm−1)196 and a few high-performance inorganic-based solid electrolytes like Li10GeP2S12 (∼10−2 S cm−1).197 It is essential to develop COFs with high ionic conductivities.
To use 2D COFs as solid-state electrolytes, the COF powder can be immersed in Li salt solvent to incorporate Li salt into the COF pores. After filtration, rinsing, and evacuation, the Li-impregnated COF powder was cold-pressed into pellets to be used as solid electrolytes. These produced pallets have Li cation and counter anions in the COF pores and can have relatively good ionic conductivities (e.g., COF-5 and TpPa-1 pellets with ionic conductivities 2.6 × 10−4 and 1.5 × 10−4 S cm−1 by EIS168).
Besides directly mixing COF with Li salt, anionic sites can be designed on the COF framework, which counteract the Li ions. For example, in 2019, Kwak et al.181 reported a lithiated sulfonic acid COF (denoted as TpPa-SO3Li) with a pore size of 11.8 Å, interplanar π–π stacking distance of about 3.4 Å and BET surface area of 348 m2 g−1. The Li ratio in TpPa-SO3Li was measured to be 2.31 wt% by ICP-OES. DFT calculations show that the hexagonal pores of TpPa-SO3Li are stacked along the c-axis with slight slippage from the eclipsed configuration, in which Li-ions are located near oxygen atoms of the sulfonate and keto groups, as shown in Fig. 25a and b.
 Fig. 25  (a) Chemical structure of TpPa-SO3Li. (b) Model structure of TpPa-SO3Li viewed along c-axis (hydrogen atoms are hidden). (c) Illustration of Li-ion migration inside the pore (top) with corresponding energy diagrams (bottom).181 Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society. 
The TpPa-SO3Li exhibited an ionic conductivity of 2.7 × 10−5 S cm−1 with a lithium-ion transference number of 0.9 at room temperature. Based on the temperature dependence of ionic conductivity (Fig. 14b), the activation energy is calculated by eqn (31) to be 0.18 eV. This small activation energy suggests easy ion transport in TpPa-SO3Li. To probe the ion dynamics, the authors applied cross-polarization magic angle spinning (MAS) 7Li NMR analysis and performed saturation recovery experiments. Specifically, a series of saturation pulses at different recovery times were used and the isotropic resonances were integrated to calculate the spin-lattice relaxation time. For TpPa-SO3Li., the spin-lattice relaxation time was determined to be 2.76 ± 0.06 s, which demonstrates fast migration of Li-ions inside the well-ordered pores of TpPa-SO3Li. The authors applied density functional theory calculations and investigated the migration energy barriers of lithium ions inside the COF pore. They found that the axial migration barrier is 7.6 kcal mol−1, much lower than the planar migration barrier of 31.6 kcal mol−1 (Fig. 25c). A semilogarithmic relation between conductivity and the inverse of temperature is observed (Fig. 14b), and the Li+ diffusion activation energy is calculated to be 0.18 eV.
The applicability of TpPa-SO3Li as a new solid-state electrolyte for Li metal electrodes was examined using the Li/Li symmetric cell configuration. The galvanostatic Li plating/stripping on the Li metal electrodes was repeatedly conducted at a current density of 10 μA cm−2 for 4 h per cycle. The symmetric cell showed stable and reliable Li plating/stripping behavior for over 320 h without an appreciable increase and an irreversible fluctuation of overpotential.
Another example is LiCON-1, LiCON-2, and LiCON-3 as we have mentioned above.165 SD-COF-1 was prepared by heating 2,4,6-triformylphenol and 2,5-bis(allyloxy)-terephthalohydrazide, while SD-COF-2 and SD-COF-3 were synthesized from SD-COF-1 reacting with 3-mercaptopropanoic acid and sodium 2-mercaptoethanesulfonate, respectively. Upon treating these COFs with aqueous lithium carbonate, lithiated SD-COF-1, SD-COF-2, SD-COF-3 (namely, LiCON-1, LiCON-2, and LiCON-3) were obtained after washing and drying. The ionic repulsion from lithium ions between the COF layers was expected to weaken the layer interactions, which allowed the COFs to be exfoliated into ultrathin organic sheets.
These LiCONs were pressed into ∼200 μm thick films without adding Li salts or solvents. The Li+ loading values in LiCON-1, LiCON-2, and LiCON-3 were measured by inductively coupled plasma optical emission spectroscopy (ICP-OES) to be 0.27 wt%, 2.05 wt%, and 1.41 wt%, respectively. Based on the Arrhenius plot of the ionic conductivities (Fig. 14a), the activation energies of LiCON-1, LiCON-2, and LiCON-3 were determined to be 0.25 eV, 0.22 eV, and 0.13 eV, respectively. These small values indicate easy ion hopping in the 2D COFs. For LiCON-3, the ionic conductivity of maintains at 0.90 × 10−5 S cm−1 at −40 °C, and 1.17 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 100 °C, which suggests a wide range of working temperatures.
For LiCON-3, the electrochemical performances were further evaluated. In a Li |Li-CON-3| Li symmetric cell, the Li stripping-plating test was stable for 500 cycles at current densities of 0.05 and 0.1 mA cm−2 (Fig. 26a). DSC test shows that LiCON-3 has no phase transition from −150 to 150 °C (Fig. 26b). Next, the all-solid-state battery was assembled using LiCON-3 with 1,4-benzoquinone (BQ) as the cathode. At 500 mA g−1, the battery has an initial capacity of over 200 mA h g−1 and capacity retention of 87.7% at the 500th cycle (Fig. 26c). Good rate performance was also demonstrated, with moderate decay of discharge capacity at 1 A g−1 and negligible loss of capacity when the current density returns to 0.25 A g−1.
 Fig. 26  (a) Li stripping-plating test of Li | LiCON-3 | Li at a current density of 0.05 and 0.1 mA cm−2 for 500 cycles (1 h per cycle). (b) DSC curve of LiCON-3 from −150 to 150 °C. (c) Cycling performance of all-solid-state organic Li ion battery with a configuration of BQ |LiCON-3| Li165 (reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society). 
Cationic groups can also be designed into the 2D COFs (Fig. 27a). The cations attract anions, which, in turn, attract Li+. In 2018, Chen et al.170 demonstrated cationic moieties incorporated into the COF skeleton. The CON-Cl was synthesized in the initial step, then Cl− was ion-exchanged with LiTFSI. The XPS and PXRD results indicate that the TFSI− anions were incorporated into CON to form CON-TFSI. The final product (denoted as Li-CON-TFSI) was obtained by mixing the CON-TFSI with LiTFSI salt in an ethanol solution and drying. The 7Li solid-state NMR was then used to understand the Li+ dynamics (Fig. 27b). The significant changes in the chemical shift of the 7Li peaks suggest different Li+ chemical environments in Li-CON-TFSI compared to that in the pure LiTFSI salt. The broad signal of LiTFSI is a result of solid-state dipole–dipole and quadrupolar couplings between 7Li sites, which suggested limited Li+ mobility. For Li-CON-TFSI, the 7Li NMR signal becomes much narrower at −9 ppm, which is from the presence of more mobile Li+ from suppressed solid-state pairing. The authors suggested that the possible Li+ local environments within Li-CON-TFSI were expected to be the carbonyl oxygen atoms coordinating with Li+ ions (to form Li+–OCO), supported by the FTIR results and DFT calculations.
 Fig. 27  (a) Chemical structure of Li-CON-TFSI. (b) MAS 7Li NMR spectra of Li-CON-TFSI and LiTFSI. The inset shows the possible local Li+ environments in Li-CON-TFSI.170 Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society. 
The Li-CON-TFSI powder sample was then mechanically pressed into solid pellets for electrochemical testing. The Li-CON-TFSI exhibited a conductivity of 5.74 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 °C, which increased to 2.09 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 70 °C. An average Li+ transference number value was determined to be 0.61 ± 0.02. A semilogarithmic relation between conductivity and the inverse of temperature is observed and the Li+ diffusion activation energy is calculated to be 0.34 eV by eqn (30). The authors attributed the excellent Li+ conduction to the loosely stacked ionic framework. Compared to the neutral frameworks, the great polarizability may be beneficial to screening the coulombic interactions.
To help conduct Li, organic liquid electrolytes have been mixed into the solid COF framework.166 Recently, Manthiram and co-workers198 infiltrated DMA@LiTFSI electrolyte into TpPa-SO3Li COF. They also found that LiTFSI can trigger the copolymerization of DMA solvent. The BET surface area of the TpPa-SO3Li COF decreased with the loading amount of DMA@LiTFSI. The dominant COF channel of 1.8 nm almost disappeared when 30 wt% DMA@LiTFSI was loaded. The loading amount of DMA@LiTFSI was optimized at 40 wt%. In the Li|Li symmetric cell, the DMA@LiTFSI infiltrated TpPa-SO3Li COF pellet enables a stable Li plating/stripping (0.3 mA cm−2) for 450 h, with the ionic conductivity of 1.7 × 10−4 S cm−1 and a high t+ of 0.85 at RT. The ionic conductivity reaches 4.54 × 10−4 S cm−1 at 60 °C. In comparison, the pure DMA@LiTFSI exhibits an inferior ionic conductivity of 1.04 × 10−5 S cm−1 and a low t+ of 0.32. The authors suggest that DMA not only releases Li+ cations but also serves as a molecular bridge for the hopping of Li+ ions. Thus, the chemical environment of Li ions in the COF crystals plays a critical role in improving conductivity.
COFs have also been integrated with PEO and polyethylene glycol (PEG) electrolytes, which have a large number of donors (oxygen atoms) for Li+ and have been explored alone for LIBs. In 2019, Feng and Wang's group169 incorporated PEG into CD-COF-Li, COF-5, COF-300, and EB-COF, by mixing COFs with PEG and LiClO4 in acetonitrile, followed by solvent removal (Fig. 28a). The PEG-Li+@COFs powder samples of PEG-Li+@COFs were mechanically pressed into pellets. The ion conductivities of PEG-Li+@CD-COF-Li, PEG-Li+@COF-300, PEG-Li+@COF-5, and PEG-Li+@EB-COF-ClO4 are calculated from EIS data to be 2.60 × 10−5, 1.40 × 10−6, 3.60 × 10−8, and 1.93 × 10−5 S cm−1 at 30 °C, respectively, which increases to 1.30 × 10−4, 9.11 × 10−5, 3.49 × 10−5, and 1.78 × 10−3 S cm−1 at 120 °C, respectively. COFs with an ionic network, i.e., EB-COF-ClO4 and CD-COF-Li, exhibiting higher ionic conductivity were explained by the interactions with Li salt that promotes the dissociation of ionic pairs. Interestingly, the average t+ of PEG-Li+@CD-COF-Li is only 0.20, which was attributed to its anionic skeleton that can fix Li+ and facilitate anion conduction instead. PEG-Li+@COF-300 and PEG-Li+@COF-5, which have neutral skeletons, have t+ of 0.44 and 0.40, respectively. Finally, PEG-Li+@EB-COF-ClO4 with a cationic skeleton is expected to trap the anion, accelerate Li+ transport and have the highest t+ here of 0.60. Based on eqn (31), PEG-Li+@CD-COF-Li, PEG-Li+@COF-300, PEG-Li+@COF-5, and PEG-Li+@EB-COF-ClO4 were found to have activation energies of 0.17, 0.20, 0.35, and 0.21 eV, respectively (Fig. 14d). These small activation energies, comparable to those of quasi-solid electrolyte with organic solvents, suggest that the local segmental motion of PEG chains inside the channels facilitate Li+ conduction in a liquid-like manner.
 Fig. 28  Atomic structures 2D COFs with PEG chains: (a) CD-COF, COF-5, COF-300, and EB-COF169 (reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society). Chemical structures of 2D COFs with PEO chains: (b) Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF182 (reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society) and (c) COF-PEO-9199 (reproduced with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society). 
In 2018, Jiang and co-workers182 reported the first example of polyelectrolyte COFs by grafting flexible oligo(ethylene oxide) chains onto the pore walls (Fig. 28b). The COF skeleton is denoted as TPB-DMTP-COF and PEO-grafted COF is denoted as TPB-BMTP-COF. TPB-DMTP-COF and TPB-BMTP-COF have BET surface areas of 2658 and 1746 m2 g−1, with pore sizes of 3.26 nm and 3.02 nm, respectively. LiClO4 solution (in MeOH) was added to the TPB-DMTP-COF and TPB-BMTP-COF samples under vacuum to yield Li+@TPB-DMTP-COF and Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF, respectively. The XPS results showed that the contents of Li+ in Li+@TPB-DMTP-COF and Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF were determined to be 5.1 and 4.3 wt%, respectively, while their BET surface area decreased to only 20 m2 g−1. The electronic absorption spectroscopy suggested the charge transfer from the electron-rich methoxy group and ethylene oxide chain to the electron-deficient Li+ in Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF. The authors proposed that the oligo(ethylene oxide) chains in the nanochannels assist the dissociation of the ionic bond of LiClO4 and offer a pathway to promote ion transport across the channels. The ion conductivities of Li+@TPB-DMTP-COF were calculated from Nyquist plots to be 1.36 × 10−7, 6.74 × 10−7, and 5.37 × 10−6 S cm−1 at 40, 60, and 80 °C, respectively. In comparison, the ion conductivities of Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF increased by 1–2 orders of magnitude to 6.04 × 10−6, 2.85 × 10−5, and 1.66 × 10−4 S cm−1 under the same conditions. Based on eqn (31), the activation energies of Li+@TPB-DMTP-COF and Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF can be calculated, which are 0.96 and 0.87 eV, respectively (Fig. 14c). These values are smaller than that of Li+@TPB-TP-COF. This result suggests that the oligo-(ethylene oxide) chains in the nanochannels promote ion transport in Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF.
In 2019, Kitagawa et al.199 synthesized three PEO-functionalized hydrazone-linked COFs based on COF-42 by a bottom-up self-assembly approach (Fig. 28c). The number of PEO units was either 3, 6, or 9, and the responding COFs were denoted as COF-PEO-x (x = 3, 6, 9). The simulated COFs have an eclipsed structure with optimized parameters of a = b = 25.550 Å and c = 3.774 Å. The (001) peaks in PXRD suggest interlayer distances of 3.8, 4.0, and 4.2 Å for COF-PEO-3, COF-PEO-6, and COF-PEO-9, respectively. The BET surface areas for COF-PEO-x were 13, 4, and 5 m2 g−1, respectively, which are much smaller than that of COF-42 of 748 m2 g−1 and indicate that the PEO chains fully occupied the inner space of COFs. The DSC results suggest that the dynamics of the PEO assemblies in COF-PEO-6 and COF-PEO-9 can be regarded as in a quasi-liquid state. The powders of COF-PEO-x were immersed into a THF solution of LiTFSI, filtered, and washed with fresh solvents, followed by solvent drying in vacuum. These Li+-doped samples are denoted as COF-PEO-x-Li (x = 3, 6, 9). Elemental analysis revealed that longer chains lead to higher Li+ loadings, with the O/Li ratios (wt%) for COF-PEO-x-Li being 8.8/1.0, 7.5/1.0, and 5.9/1.0, respectively.
Here, COFs with longer chains are found to be better ionic conductors and the conductivities of COF-PEO-3-Li, COF-PEO-6-Li, and COF-PEO-9-Li at 200 °C were determined to be 9.72 × 10−5, 3.71 × 10−4, and 1.33 × 10−3 S cm−1, respectively, much higher than that of COF-42-Li of 1.77 × 10−8 S cm−1 at the same condition. The 1D 1H spectra and T2 measurements were performed for COF-PEO-6-Li, which showed a distance correlation of less than 4 Å, suggesting that PEO chains are mainly located near the 2D networks after LiTFSI insertion. The authors proposed that COF-PEO-9-Li might have applicability for a solid-state rechargeable Li battery at 100 °C. The CV measurements suggested electrochemical stability of COF-PEO-9-Li was in the range of 2.4–4.2 V versus Li+/Li. However, the as-synthesized COF-PEO-9-Li, when used as the solid electrolyte, only led to a discharge capacity of 30 mA h g−1. On the other hand, the battery with the milled COF-PEO-9-Li sample exhibited a capacity of about 120 mA h g−1 with an apparent plateau at 3.35 V, and the discharge efficiency after 10 cycles was maintained above 95%.
From the above discussions, it can be seen that ionic motion in 2D COFs is a complicated process and difficult to accurately probe. As such, dedicated computer modeling could be useful to aid our understanding. However, a reliable, direct simulation of ionic transport in COFs is also challenging. This is because the required long-time scales to reliably describe ion motion in 2D COFs are difficult to model. In 2019, Pan and co-workers200 applied ab initio molecular dynamics and studied ionic transport in COF-5, where the COF pores were filled with tetrahydrofuran (THF) and LiTFSI. They equilibrated the system for 1 ps at 700 K, followed by production runs of 9 ps at either 300 K or 700 K. Analysis of the trajectories showed that Li+ diffusion is mainly confined to the middle region of the tunnels, suggesting weak interaction with COF-5. The results suggest that Li+ motion is initiated by the rotation of ClO4− and THF that leaves void for it to squeeze out and coordinate with an adjacent ClO4−. Yet, ab initio-based simulations can only model picosecond time scale, which is often too short to capture lithium ion motion over multiple binding sites.
Compared to ab initio simulations, classical molecular dynamics can access much larger sizes and time scales. For example, Niu et al. modeled a 3 ns-long trajectory of QCOF using COMPASS force field (Fig. 29).201 Guo et al. have modeled a 5 ns trajectory of LiTFSI in 2D COF using a similar approach.198 We note that in the classical force field, the interactions with ions cannot be accurately described due to the neglection of polarization. In recent years, an implicit treatment called electronic continuum correction (ECC) has been developed, which has allowed a reasonable description of ions within the efficient classical force field.202,203
 Fig. 29  
Ab initio-calculated (a) mean square deviation of Li ions at 300 K, (b) the probability density of Li ions at 700 K, (c) a Li+ diffusion event and (d) the distances of the oxygen atoms with Li+.200 Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
Very recently, Zhang et al.204 applied molecular dynamics simulations with ECC to study ionic motion in imine-linked TAPB-PDA COF in a 2 × 2 × 20 supercell with ions from LiClO4 (Fig. 30). This approach, while taking into account implicitly the polarization effect, has allowed the modeling of an ion loading of 1.6 wt% and close to those used experimentally and trajectories of hundreds of nanoseconds. Results suggest that Li+ coordinates with the nitrogen atoms in the imine linkage of the TAPB-PDA COF, with typical distances of 2.1 Å to 2.2 Å. Analysis of trajectories of hundred nanoseconds has revealed that lithium ions tend to form nanometer-sized clusters attached to the COF pore walls. This also leads to deformation and layer offset in the COF. This localized distribution means that the formation of continuous lithium transport pathways is difficult, which is detrimental to ionic transport. The authors also modeled the case where PC is present, a substance used experimentally that initially functions as a liquid electrolyte discussed earlier. Systems with PC ratios of 10–40 wt% were further studied. Interestingly, adding the PC molecules is found to expand the space lithium ions can occupy, lead to a more uniform distribution of lithium ions and promote the formation of continuum ionic transport pathways. The overall result is better ionic transport abilities. These results suggest that future molecular design needs to target the suppression of localized ionic clusters, which may benefit from mimicking the role of PC molecules.
 Fig. 30  Molecular dynamics simulated TAPB-PDA COF mixed with LiClO4. (a) Top and (b) side view of the snapshot at 200 ns. (c) A tilted view with representative local structures of Li+, ClO4−, and COF. Red spheres represent Li+. Green spheres and rods represent ClO4−.204 Reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry. 
From the above discussions, it can be seen that the lithium ion conductivity in COFs is still to be increased, especially at room temperature. In many reports, liquid electrolytes, low-weight PEO, or PEG are integrated into the solid COF structure to improve the ionic conductivity, which compromises the all-solid-state advantage. In addition, few COFs have been actually used in a full cell to evaluate their performances.165 While some COFs show good ion conduction at low temperatures,171 the battery performances at low temperatures have not been thoroughly investigated. The current understanding of the ion conduction process in COFs remains poor, with most discussions relying on empirical understandings and speculations. On the other hand, computer simulations have shown to be useful, although they still need to be applied to a broader range of COF materials.
5.2. Artificial SEIs
When used as artificial SEIs, COF layers cover the lithium metal anode to suppress the formation of lithium dendrite on the electrode surface. In this case, the usual liquid electrolyte is still used, and the cathode can be S or LiCoO2. In 2019, Huang et al.205 fabricated a 10 nm-thick TAPB-PDA COF layer on the Li foil to serve as an artificial SEI layer (Fig. 31a and b), which exhibits a BET surface area of 70.5 m2 g−1 and a pore size distribution centered at 1.5 nm. This COF-Li foil electrode was used as both sides of electrodes in symmetric cells. Symmetric cells were first fabricated using 30 μL of 1 M LiTFSI in DOL/DME (volume ratio 1:1) as the electrolyte and commercial polypropylene membrane Celgard 2500 as the separator, which can cycle for about 200 cycles at a current density of 1 mA cm−2, whereas the cell using polished Li electrode experienced large voltage fluctuations after 100 cycles. Next, Li-S cells with COF-Li anode were fabricated using 80 μL of 1 M LiTFSI in 1:1 DME/DOL with 2 wt% LiNO3 as electrolyte. The authors found that the internal short circuit is effectively blocked by COF-Li, which demonstrates its effect on lithium dendrite suppression. The authors proposed that pores in 2D COFs can direct Li-ion flux and lead to the homogeneous plating/stripping process (Fig. 31c). Indeed, the SEM image showed that cycled COF-Li electrode had a smooth and dense surface, while that of the polished Li displayed moss-like Li dendrite (Fig. 31d and e).
 Fig. 31  (a) Illustration of TAPB-PDA COF and its monomer units. (b) Proposed schematic diagrams showing the effect of COF film on a Li anode, where the COF is Li+ conducting and TFSI− blocking. (c) Illustrations of Li plating/stripping on polished Li and COF-Li. Cross-section images for (d) COF-Li and (e) polished Li after 20 cycles of stripping/plating.205 Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
In 2021, Li et al.206 reported hexagonal anionic covalent organic frameworks (ACOF) with octahedral bianionic SiO6 nodes as artificial SEIs (Fig. 32a-b). TEM and AFM showed that ACOF has spherical particles composed by 4 nm-thick nanoplatelets. The BET surface area is found to be 957 m2 g−1. The electrochemical performance was tested in LiCoO2|ACOF-Li full cell. Polypropylene membrane (Celgard, 25 μm) was used as the separator and 60 μL of 1 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC as electrolyte. The LiCoO2|ACOF-Li cell can retain a capacity above 70% for over 500 cycles. The ionic conductivity of the pellets soaked with electrolyte solvents (EC/DEC@ACOF) and that with additional 1 M LiPF6 (LE@ACOF) from EIS measurement are 0.13 and 3.7 mS cm−1, respectively. The conductivity of LE@ACOF of 3.7 mS cm−1 is close to the liquid electrolyte of 8.5 mS cm−1 (1 M LiPF6 in EC/DEC) and t+ is 0.82. Its Li+ diffusion coefficient was measured to be 2.433 × 10−11 m2 s−1 by pulsed-field-gradient nuclear magnetic resonance. The authors studied Li+ adsorption and diffusion behaviors in ACOF by DFT calculations (Fig. 32c–f). The calculations suggest that the oxygen atoms (SiO6) have the most negative electrostatic potential, and thus have a strong affinity for positively charged Li-ions. The planar Li+ migration energy barrier was evaluated to be 0.32 eV.
 Fig. 32  (a) Chemical structure of ACOF. (b) Illustration of the selective ion transport of electrolyte in ACOF (blue: Li, orange: Si, grey: C, pink: O, yellow: anion). (c) Electrostatic potential mapping of truncated ACOF (grey: Si, red: O, turquoise blue: C, white: H); (d) Electron difference density isosurface map for Li-ion adsorption on the SiO6 unit (blue: Li). (e) Optimized configurations and corresponding adsorption energies of Li ions on the SiO6 unit. (f) Potential energy files for Li-ion diffusion in the aromatic region of ACOF.206 Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society. 
Recently, Manthiram's group207 reported COF-5 as artificial SEI. The monomers were drop-casted at ambient temperature. Since Young's modulus of COF-5 is higher than that of metallic Li (15–20 GPa vs. ∼5 GPa),208 it is strong enough to prevent dendrite growth. Time-of-flight secondary ion mass spectrometry (ToF-SIMS) was carried out to probe secondary-ion species Li2−, BO−, LiS− and SO−, which represent metallic lithium, COF, Li2S, and oxidized sulfur species, respectively (Fig. 33a and c). In the absence of the COF-5 layer, the composition of the SEI layer was revealed to be Li2S, oxidized sulfur species (Li2SO4), and others. This SEI composite does not form a uniform layer on the top surface, as illustrated in Fig. 33a and b. In addition, the sulfur species penetrated the lithium layer and isolated inactive lithium islands. In contrast, the profiles for COF-Li suggest tight COF coating on the Li surface, which effectively block the Li2S and Li2SO4. These different distributions give information regarding how ions transport from the electrolyte to the electrode. It can be concluded that the COF layer acts as an ion sieve and ensures a homogeneous Li+ flux resulting in uniform metal deposition (Fig. 33c and d).
 Fig. 33  3D visualization of (a) cycled Li and (b) schematic of its SEI structure. (c) 3D visualization of (a) cycled COF-Li and (b) schematic of its SEI structure.207 Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH. 
From the above discussions, it can be seen that COFs used as artificial SEIs must not affect ionic conduction. The lithium-ion motion inside the COF pores with the presence of electrolytes can be very different. Further investigation of the microscopic structure of the mixture and ion transport pathways is needed. The detailed mechanism of how COFs suppress the formation of SEIs also requires further study.
6. 2D COFs in supercapacitors
Supercapacitors have the advantage of superior power density, outstanding rate capability, and long cycle life. Supercapacitors can be used for short-term energy storage and burst-mode power delivery, which is useful in automobiles, buses, trains, cranes, and elevators. Based on the energy storage mechanism, a supercapacitor can be either an electrochemical double-layer capacitor (EDLC) or a pseudocapacitor. In EDLC, charges are stored by the physical adsorption of ions. On the other hand, pseudocapacitors experience fast and reversible redox reactions of the ions in the active electrode material, where charges in the external circuit flow through into the redox-active sites.
In 2020, Fang and co-workers209 prepared three imine COFs (JUC-510, JUC-511, JUC-512) for EDLC (Fig. 34a). These COFs have AA stacking patterns with interlayer distances of 3.65–3.71 Å. The pore size is 3.4 nm and the lattice parameters of α = β = γ = 90°. The BET surface area of JUC-510, JUC-511, and JUC-512 were measured to be 1170, 842, and 704 m2 g−1, respectively. The authors exfoliated the COFs under mild chemical conditions. High power densities of 5.32 and 4.08 W cm−3 are achieved for the exfoliated JUC-511 and JUC-512 capacitor cells, respectively. Both JUC-511 and JUC-512 capacitor cells maintained nearly 100% capacitance retention even after 10000 consecutive cycles (Fig. 34c).
 Fig. 34  Schematic of 2D COFs with their proposed mechanism as electrodes for supercapacitors: (a) JUC-510, JUC-511, and JUC-512 COFs. (b) Representative diagram of charge storage in exfoliated COFs. (c) Capacitance retention of JUC-511 and JUC-512 capacitor cells under 10000 consecutive cycles.209 Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH. 
As for pseudocapacitors, in 2015, Jiang's group172 studied the [TEMPO]50%-NiP-COF and fully decorated [TEMPO]100%-NiP-COF as already mentioned in Section 3.4.1 (Fig. 11c). And their pore sizes were evaluated to be 1.6 and 1.4 nm, respectively. The authors supposed that TEMPO units were redox-active sites, and the CV of both [TEMPO]50%-NiP-COF and [TEMPO]100%-NiP-COF exhibited a pair of reversible peaks. The authors supposed these peaks were assigned to one electron redox reaction of the TEMPO radicals. They prepared [Ph]100%-NiP-COF, in which TEMPO units were replaced with phenyl groups on the COF channel walls, which did not show such redox peaks in CV. According to the Randles–Sevcik equation, a diffusion coefficient in these COF pores is calculated to be 10−10 cm2 s−1. Nyquist plots for EIS at low frequencies showed a line slope, which reflects the ion diffusion process in the COF pores.
The COF samples (20 wt%) were mixed with carbon black conductor (70 wt%) and PTFE binder (10 wt%) onto a platinum mesh current collector. At a current density of 100 mA g−1, [TEMPO]100%-NiP-COF and [TEMPO]50%-NiP-COF exhibited capacitances of 167 and 124 F g−1, respectively. When the current density increased to 2000 mA g−1, [TEMPO]100%-NiP-COF exhibited a capacitance of 113 F g−1, and [TEMPO]50%-NiP-COF retained a capacitance of 101 F g−1.
In 2017, Banerjee's group210 reported a hydroquinone (H2Q) based COF, TpPa-(OH)2, via the solvothermal method for pseudocapacitors (Fig. 35a). The unit cell parameters are a = 22.4 Å, b = 22.3 Å, c = 6.7 Å, α = 90.7°, β = 90.3°, and γ = 119.3°. The BET surface area of TpPa-(OH)2 COF is determined to be 369 m2 g−1 with a pore volume of 0.417 cm3 g−1. The authors fabricated the electrode using 75 wt% COF, 15 wt% PVDF binder, and 10 wt% carbon black conductor. The capacitor performances were evaluated in 1M phosphate buffer (pH 7.2). The authors proposed reversible proton-coupled electron transfer (2H+/2e−) of hydroquinone/benzoquinone (H2Q/Q) moieties (Fig. 35b). TpPa-(OH)2 exhibited very high specific capacitance of 416 F g−1 at 500 mA g−1 current density (Fig. 35c). This COF also demonstrated 66% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles, which suggests high reaction reversibility (Fig. 35d).
 Fig. 35  (a) Chemical structure of TpPa-R2 COF. (b) Proposed H-bonding stabilized both the hydroquinone (H2Q) and benzoquinone (Q). (c) Galvanostatic charge/discharge experiments at different current densities. (d) Long-term cyclic stability performance at 5 A g−1.210 Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society. 
In 2021, Chen's group211 prepared two new arylamine-linked COFs (AAm-TPB and AAm-Py) with eclipsed stacking modes and pore sizes of 2.99 and 1.02 nm (Fig. 36a). Their BET surface areas were determined to be 403 and 285 m2 g−1, respectively. The solid-state diffuse reflectance UV-vis spectra suggested that the arylamine-linked COFs have better electron delocalization than imine-linked COFs, giving higher electron conduction abilities. The FT-IR spectra suggest the existence of intralayer N–H⋯O hydrogen bonding in arylamine-linked COFs, which helps stabilize oxidation and reduction states during the electrochemical process and improves the electron transfer kinetics. The authors proposed AAm-TPB bearing two ketone groups and two benzoid diamine sites exhibited complete and reversible conversion of four protons/electrons (Fig. 36b). The AAm-TPB-based electrode comprised 43.7 wt% COF, 34.4 wt% Nafion binder, and 21.9 wt% conductive carbon black. AAm-TPB electrode exhibits a capacitance of 271 F g−1 at a discharge rate of 1 A g−1 (Fig. 36c) and 91% capacitance retention after 10000 cycles at 5 A g−1 during the long-term cycling test.
 Fig. 36  (a) Chemical structures of AAm-TPB and AAm-Py COF. (b) The Redox behavior of AAm-TPB through reversible benzoid diamine to quinoid diimine transformation and enol to ketone transformation. (c) Gravimetric capacitance of AAm-TPB dependence on different scan rates.211 Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH. 
From the above discussions, it can be seen that 2D COFs for supercapacitors are seldom used alone. Instead, they are mixed with conductors such as carbon black to increase the conductivity. Overall, studies focusing on the microscopic mechanism of charge transport in 2D COF-based supercapacitors are still scarce. To further improve the performance of 2D COFs for supercapacitors, a better understanding of the charge transport mechanism, and methods to fine-tune for better conductivities.
7. The paths of 2D COFs for energy storage devices
From the above discussions, we can see that the 2D COFs having relatively good charge- and mass-transport properties can be utilized in different parts of energy storage devices and demonstrate promising electrochemical performances. However, limitations are also present when applying 2D COFs in energy storage materials. It is helpful to discuss the potential of 2D COFs compared to the other types of materials and their possible paths for development.
One of the limitations of 2D COFs to be used in energy storage devices, as we have seen above, is that not all COFs have good charge-transport properties. When used as electrode materials, they are often mixed with conducting agents to enhance electrical conductivities.172,177,183,210,211 Thus, it is still important to further establish practical strategies to design 2D COFs with good charge-transport properties.
It is also helpful to learn the potential of 2D COFs in terms of charge transport. Since 2D COFs are organic materials, it is useful to relate them to organic semiconductors, a type of organic materials that has been extensively explored for charge-transport properties. Table 6 presents a few representative traditional small-molecule and polymeric organic semiconductors. While in amorphous materials, the charge mobility is often several orders of magnitude lower than 1 cm2 V−1 s−1, the charge mobilities of crystalline organic materials can reach a few tens cm2 V−1 s−1.212,213 These values are comparable to the measured or calculated charge mobilities of 2D COFs as shown in Table 2. From this standpoint, it may not be easy to significantly expand the current charge mobility limit of 2D COFs. However, charge mobility is only one aspect of charge conduction. The electrical conductivities of 2D COFs have been found to greatly improve upon doping (e.g., using I2).83,88 Such strategies have produced good electrical conductivities up to 10−1 S cm−1, while still having the potential to be further improved compared to good organic conductors (e.g., a few S cm−1 for PEDOT:PSS214).
Table 6 Example of charge mobilities of traditional organic charge-transport materials




Name
Chemical structure
Packing state
Mobility (cm2 V−1 s−1)
Electrical conductivity (S cm−1)
Method
Ref.




Pentacene



Crystalline
35 (hole)
2.13 × 10−4 (film)
SCLC/2-probe

215 and 216



TIPS-PEN



Crystalline
0.18 (hole)
—
OFET

212



C8-BTBT



Crystalline
16.4 (hole)
—
OFET

213



CBP



Amorphous
∼8 × 10−4 (hole)
—
TOF

217



∼5 × 10−4 (electron)


NPB



Amorphous
∼5 × 10−4 (hole)
—
TOF

218



∼3 × 10−5 (electron)


P3HT



Crystalline
6 × 10−3 (hole)
∼9 × 10−9
OFET/2-probe

219 and 220





In terms of mass-transport properties of 2D COFs, it is useful to compare them with the other types of electrode and electrolyte materials. It can be seen in Tables 7 and 8 that the ion diffusion coefficients in these materials span multiple orders of magnitude. In comparison, the diffusion coefficients of 2D COFs are lower than that in LiCoO2 (∼10−11–10−7 cm2 s−1) while higher than LiFePO4 (10−16 to 10−12 cm2 s−1). For ionic conductivities, 2D COFs have similar values to those in polymer electrolytes, but are still lower than liquid electrolytes (10−3 S cm−1). Still, how to rationally design 2D COFs with ideal ion conduction is a topic worth further study.
Table 7 Ion diffusion coefficients of common electrode materials




Ions
Medium

D (cm2 s−1)
Method
Ref.




Li+
LiCoO2
10−11–10−7
EIS

221



Li+
Li(Ni0.6Mn0.2Co0.2)O2
∼10−8 (RT)
AIMD

222



∼10−9 (−25 °C)


Li+
Li(Ni0.6Mn0.2Co0.2)O2
6× 10−11–8 × 10−11 (RT)
GITT

222



2 × 10−11 −4 × 10−11 (−25 °C)


Li+
LiFePO4
2.2 × 10−16–1.8 × 10−14
GITT

223



Li+
LiFePO4
10−14–10−12
PITT

151



Li+
LiFePO4
10−15–10−12
EIS

151



Li+
LiFePO4
10−14
CV

151



Li+
Graphite
∼10−7–10−6 (in-plane)
Electrochemical test combined with molecular simulations

224



∼10−11 (out-of-plane)


Li+
Graphite
6.51 × 10−11–1.12 × 10−10 (RT)
EIS

225



1.35 × 10−10 (55 °C)


Li+
Si nanoparticles
∼10−12
CV, EIS, GITT

226



Li+
SiO
10−12–10−10
EIS

227



Li+
SiO
10−11–10−8
GITT

227



Li+
Black phosphorus-graphite/PANI
7.5 × 10−13
CV

228



Li+
Li8.4Nb16W5O55
1.6 × 10−9
NMR

156



Li+
Li6.8Nb18W16O93
1.1 × 10−9
NMR

156



Li+
Li4Ti5O12/C
6.82 × 10−12
EIS

229



Li+
Li4Ti5O12
(3.2 ± 0.8) × 10−11
NMR

230



Na+
Na3V2(PO4)2F3
∼10−12
EIS

231



K+
K-Birnessite
10−13–10−10
GITT

232





Table 8 Ionic conductivities of common Li electrolytes




Medium
Medium state

σ (S cm−1)
Ref.




Li2S-P2S5
Solid
3.2 × 10−3

233



Li10GeP2S12
Solid
1.2 × 10−2

197



Li9.54Si1.74P1.44S11.7Cl0.3
Solid
2.5 × 10−2

234



Li0.34La0.51TiO2.94
Solid
2 × 10−5

235



Li6BaLa2Ta2O12
Solid
4 × 10−5

236



Li0.33La0.557TiO3+ PAN-LiClO4
Solid
6.05 × 10−5

237



PEO-LiClO4-10wt%TiO2
Solid
∼10−5

238



PEG-LiClO4
Solid
7.3 × 10−7

239



PVB-LiClO4-30wt%PEG400
Solid
2.15 × 10−6

240



PVB-LiClO4-30wt%PEG600
Solid
4.18 × 10−9

240



LiPF6-EC-EMC
Liquid
9.5 × 10−3

196





The available data suggest that 2D COFs are already competitive candidates for energy storage materials even in their early stages. When used as the electrode materials in metal-ion batteries, for example, they have demonstrated capacities over 1000 mA h g−1.183,189 They have also been successfully used as the solid-state electrolyte and Li batteries with good performance while suppressing lithium dendrite.165,207 When used in supercapacitors, they have demonstrated very high specific capacitance (416 F g−1) among carbon-based materials and power densities (∼5 W cm−3) much higher than onion-like carbon microcapacitors (∼1 W cm−3) and hydrated graphene oxide microcapacitors (1.7 W cm−3).209,210 We note that 2D COFs differ from traditional organic materials in their fundamental structure, which may lead to new charge- and mass-transport patterns to be discovered. It is possible that new methods will be available to largely improve their charge and ion conduction to boost their device performances further.
2D COFs are also attractive for their abilities to be easily functionalized. Indeed, there are nearly infinite possibilities of chemical structures and combinations, which are still being uncovered. This flexibility offers many ways to fine-tune towards simultaneous good, balanced charge- and mass-transport properties, forming a platform for energy material discovery. This feature can become increasingly powerful when combined with materials genome and high-throughput computation. This may lead to novel research patterns, likely machine-learned accelerated, for tailored energy storage device performance for specific scenarios.
Still, there are problems to be overcome for 2D COFs to become better energy storage materials. For example, the lithiation/deliatiation potentials of 2D COFs are generally high for anode materials for lithium-ion batteries but low for cathode materials.171,189 As the solid electrolyte, 2D COFs currently have narrow voltage windows, which can only be used with limited cathode materials.165 To solve these issues relies on designing and discovering new ion-binding sites and ion-transport functional groups, which can benefit from a deeper understanding of the microscopic transport mechanisms.
8. Summary
In summary, we have reviewed charge and mass transport in 2D COFs, critical processes that carry the flow of charges and determine their performances in electrochemical energy storage devices. The fundamental understandings of these two processes and recent dedicated works focusing on them 2D COFs are discussed. We also summarized the key impacting factors that can be helpful in materials design and highlighted the paths of 2D COFs for energy storage devices.
Originating from the anisotropic, porous, and crystalline structures of 2D COFs, the charge and mass transport processes differ largely from those in traditional materials. For charge transport, it is understandable that the carriers move in different efficiencies in-plane or out-of-plane. Theoretical studies and experimental measurements have suggested that a few 2D COFs have charge mobilities comparable to the best organic semiconductors. However, the electrical conductivities of 2D COFs still require improvement, as we have seen that 2D COF electrodes in metal-ion batteries and superconductors often rely on mixing with a high ratio of conductive agents. The versatility of the chemical structures of 2D COFs complicates the charge transport process as the types of monomer units, linkages, topologies, and symmetries greatly impact the carrier mobilities and electrical conductivities, along with extrinsic factors such as doping and temperature. Empirical understandings of the impacts of these factors offer a route to tuning the charge-transport properties of 2D COFs. However, the theory and knowledge of the charge transport mechanism in 2D COFs are still much limited. Most understandings rely on interpreting the electronic band structures of 2D COFs. Yet, fundamental questions such as whether the band or hopping transport mechanism applies still need investigation.
As for mass transport in 2D COFs, the general belief is that ions move along the 1D channels formed from stacking 2D COF sheets without disrupting the framework structures. Electrochemical tests have shown that the ion diffusion coefficients and conductivities of most 2D COFs are still to be improved for them to become better electrode and electrolyte materials. Similar to the case in charge transport, 2D COFs on their own seldom work well at room temperature and are often mixed with components such as liquid electrolytes and PEO for improved ionic transport abilities. A couple of factors are found to impact ionic transport in 2D COFs, including the chemical structures of 2D COFs, morphologies, ion-COF interactions, and temperature. These offer a collection of methods for modifying the mass transport abilities of 2D COFs. Some 2D COFs have demonstrated very activation energies for ion transport, which correspond to easy ion hopping and are beneficial to a wide range of working temperatures. Still, a comprehensive understanding of the detailed mass transport process in 2D COFs has yet to be established, which could rely on developing experimental and theoretical tools to accurately capture the microscopic ionic motion.
As we can see, the further improvement of 2D COFs as electrode and electrolyte materials in electrochemical storage devices relies on a thorough understanding of the charge and mass transport mechanisms, the study of which is also underway. On the other hand, the development of the associated theories could largely benefit from the data accumulated from the empirical explorations of the charge and mass transport properties of 2D COFs.
Overall, 2D COFs have demonstrated great potential to be used in energy storage devices. Even though their study is still in the early stage, 2D COFs can already offer competitive charge-conducting and mass-transport properties as energy storage materials. Their future study can benefit from further utilization of structural versatilities and the establishment of strategies to fine-tune their charge- and mass-transport properties simultaneously. This can likely be achieved using tools such as high-throughput computation and machine-learning-powered material discovery.
Conflicts of interest
There are no conflicts to declare.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (grant numbers: 22103053 and 52001124).
References
Y. Wang, W. D. Richards, S. P. Ong, L. J. Miara, J. C. Kim, Y. Mo and G. Ceder, Design principles for solid-state lithium superionic conductors, Nat. Mater., 2015, 14(10), 1026–1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Etacheri, R. Marom, R. Elazari, G. Salitra and D. Aurbach, Challenges in the development of advanced Li-ion batteries: a review, Energy Environ. Sci., 2011, 4(9), 3243–3262 RSC .
Y. Zheng, Y. Yao, J. Ou, M. Li, D. Luo, H. Dou, Z. Li, K. Amine, A. Yu and Z. Chen, A review of composite solid-state electrolytes for lithium batteries: fundamentals, key materials and advanced structures, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49(23), 8790–8839 RSC .
G. Wang, L. Zhang and J. Zhang, A review of electrode materials for electrochemical supercapacitors, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2012, 41(2), 797–828 RSC .
A. P. Cote, A. I. Benin, N. W. Ockwig, M. O'Keeffe, A. J. Matzger and O. M. Yaghi, Porous, crystalline, covalent organic frameworks, Science, 2005, 310(5751), 1166–1170 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Lohse and T. Bein, Covalent organic frameworks: structures, synthesis, and applications, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(33), 1705553 CrossRef .
N. C. Flanders, M. S. Kirschner, P. Kim, T. J. Fauvell, A. M. Evans, W. Helweh, A. P. Spencer, R. D. Schaller, W. R. Dichtel and L. X. Chen, Large Exciton Diffusion Coefficients in Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks with Different Domain Sizes Revealed by Ultrafast Exciton Dynamics, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(35), 14957–14965 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Geng, T. He, R. Liu, S. Dalapati, K. T. Tan, Z. Li, S. Tao, Y. Gong, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Covalent Organic Frameworks: Design, Synthesis, and Functions, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120(16), 8814–8933 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Huang, P. Wang and D. Jiang, Covalent organic frameworks: a materials platform for structural and functional designs, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2016, 1(10), 16068 CrossRef CAS .
R. Liu, K. T. Tan, Y. Gong, Y. Chen, Z. Li, S. Xie, T. He, Z. Lu, H. Yang and D. Jiang, Covalent organic frameworks: an ideal platform for designing ordered materials and advanced applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50(1), 120–242 RSC .
Y. Liu, Y. Zhu and Y. Cui, Challenges and opportunities towards fast-charging battery materials, Nat. Energy, 2019, 4(7), 540–550 CrossRef .
S. Li, K. Wang, G. Zhang, S. Li, Y. Xu, X. Zhang, X. Zhang, S. Zheng, X. Sun and Y. Ma, Fast Charging Anode Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries: Current Status and Perspectives, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2022, 32(23), 2200796 CrossRef CAS .
M. Weiss, R. Ruess, J. Kasnatscheew, Y. Levartovsky, N. R. Levy, P. Minnmann, L. Stolz, T. Waldmann, M. Wohlfahrt-Mehrens, D. Aurbach, M. Winter, Y. Ein-Eli and J. Janek, Fast Charging of Lithium-Ion Batteries: A Review of Materials Aspects, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(33), 2101126 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Cao, M. Wang, H. Wang, C. Han, F. Pan and J. Sun, Covalent Organic Framework for Rechargeable Batteries: Mechanisms and Properties of Ionic Conduction, Adv. Energy Mater., 2022, 12(20), 2200057 CrossRef CAS .
D.-G. Wang, T. Qiu, W. Guo, Z. Liang, H. Tabassum, D. Xia and R. Zou, Covalent organic framework-based materials for energy applications, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14(2), 688–728 RSC .
J. Li, X. Jing, Q. Li, S. Li, X. Gao, X. Feng and B. Wang, Bulk COFs and COF nanosheets for electrochemical energy storage and conversion, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2020, 49(11), 3565–3604 RSC .
X. Li and K. P. Loh, Recent Progress in Covalent Organic Frameworks as Solid-State Ion Conductors, ACS Mater. Lett., 2019, 1(3), 327–335 CrossRef CAS .
C. Pei, M. S. Choi, X. Yu, H. Xue, B. Y. Xia and H. S. Park, Recent progress in emerging metal and covalent organic frameworks for electrochemical and functional capacitors, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2021, 9(14), 8832–8869 RSC .
A. Schneemann, R. Dong, F. Schwotzer, H. Zhong, I. Senkovska, X. Feng and S. Kaskel, 2D framework materials for energy applications, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12(5), 1600–1619 RSC .
T. Sun, J. Xie, W. Guo, D.-S. Li and Q. Zhang, Covalent–Organic Frameworks: Advanced Organic Electrode Materials for Rechargeable Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2020, 10(19), 1904199 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wei, L. Tan, Y. Zhang, K. Zhang, B. Xi, S. Xiong, J. Feng and Y. Qian, Covalent Organic Frameworks and Their Derivatives for Better Metal Anodes in Rechargeable Batteries, ACS Nano, 2021, 15(8), 12741–12767 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Xiao and Y. Xu, Recent progress in two-dimensional polymers for energy storage and conversion: design, synthesis, and applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2018, 6(44), 21676–21695 RSC .
X. Zhao, P. Pachfule and A. Thomas, Covalent organic frameworks (COFs) for electrochemical applications, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50(12), 6871–6913 RSC .
Z.-J. Zheng, H. Ye and Z.-P. Guo, Recent progress on pristine metal/covalent-organic frameworks and their composites for lithium–sulfur batteries, Energy Environ. Sci., 2021, 14(4), 1835–1853 RSC .
J. Zhou and B. Wang, Emerging crystalline porous materials as a multifunctional platform for electrochemical energy storage, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2017, 46(22), 6927–6945 RSC .
L. Zhou, S. Jo, M. Park, L. Fang, K. Zhang, Y. Fan, Z. Hao and Y.-M. Kang, Structural Engineering of Covalent Organic Frameworks for Rechargeable Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 2003054 CrossRef CAS .
D. Zhu, G. Xu, M. Barnes, Y. Li, C.-P. Tseng, Z. Zhang, J.-J. Zhang, Y. Zhu, S. Khalil, M. M. Rahman, R. Verduzco and P. M. Ajayan, Covalent Organic Frameworks for Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 2100505 CrossRef CAS .
V. Coropceanu, J. Cornil, D. A. da Silva Filho, Y. Olivier, R. Silbey and J.-L. Brédas, Charge transport in organic semiconductors, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107(4), 926–952 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
N. Tessler, Y. Preezant, N. Rappaport and Y. Roichman, Charge transport in disordered organic materials and its relevance to thin-film devices: a tutorial review, Adv. Mater., 2009, 21(27), 2741–2761 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Shuai, H. Geng, W. Xu, Y. Liao and J.-M. André, From charge transport parameters to charge mobility in organic semiconductors through multiscale simulation, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2014, 43(8), 2662–2679 RSC .
J. Shen, G. Liu, Y. Han and W. Jin, Artificial channels for confined mass transport at the sub-nanometre scale, Nat. Rev. Mater., 2021, 6(4), 294–312 CrossRef CAS .
C. H. Sharp, B. C. Bukowski, H. Li, E. M. Johnson, S. Ilic, A. J. Morris, D. Gersappe, R. Q. Snurr and J. R. Morris, Nanoconfinement and mass transport in metal–organic frameworks, Chem. Soc. Rev., 2021, 50(20), 11530–11558 RSC .
H. Mehrer, Interdiffusion and Kirkendall effect, Diffusion in solids: fundamentals, methods, materials, diffusion-controlled processes, 2007, 161–177 Search PubMed .
W. Warta, R. Stehle and N. Karl, Ultrapure, high mobility organic photoconductors, Appl. Phys. A, 1985, 36(3), 163–170 CrossRef .
W. F. Schmidt, Electron mobility in nonpolar liquids: the effect of molecular structure, temperature, and electric field, Can. J. Chem., 1977, 55(11), 2197–2210 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Gao, A. M. Nolan, P. Du, Y. Wu, C. Yang, Q. Chen, Y. Mo and S.-H. Bo, Classical and emerging characterization techniques for investigation of ion transport mechanisms in crystalline fast ionic conductors, Chem. Rev., 2020, 120(13), 5954–6008 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Wan, F. Gándara, A. Asano, H. Furukawa, A. Saeki, S. K. Dey, L. Liao, M. W. Ambrogio, Y. Y. Botros and X. Duan, Covalent organic frameworks with high charge carrier mobility, Chem. Mater., 2011, 23(18), 4094–4097 CrossRef CAS .
M. Dogru, M. Handloser, F. Auras, T. Kunz, D. Medina, A. Hartschuh, P. Knochel and T. Bein, A Photoconductive Thienothiophene-Based Covalent Organic Framework Showing Charge Transfer Towards Included Fullerene, Angew. Chem., 2013, 125(10), 2992–2996 CrossRef .
S. Thomas, H. Li, R. R. Dasari, A. M. Evans, I. Castano, T. G. Allen, O. G. Reid, G. Rumbles, W. R. Dichtel and N. C. Gianneschi, Design and synthesis of two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks with four-arm cores: prediction of remarkable ambipolar charge-transport properties, Materials Horizons, 2019, 6(9), 1868–1876 RSC .
R. Ghosh and F. Paesani, Topology-Mediated Enhanced Polaron Coherence in Covalent Organic Frameworks, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2021, 12(39), 9442–9448 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Ghosh and F. Paesani, Unraveling the effect of defects, domain size, and chemical doping on photophysics and charge transport in covalent organic frameworks, Chem. Sci., 2021, 12(24), 8373–8384 RSC .
S. Thomas, H. Li, C. Zhong, M. Matsumoto, W. R. Dichtel and J.-L. Bredas, Electronic structure of two-dimensional π-conjugated covalent organic frameworks, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(9), 3051–3065 CrossRef CAS .
D. J. Rizzo, Q. Dai, C. Bronner, G. Veber, B. J. Smith, M. Matsumoto, S. Thomas, G. D. Nguyen, P. R. Forrester and W. Zhao, Revealing the local electronic structure of a single-layer covalent organic framework through electronic decoupling, Nano Lett., 2020, 20(2), 963–970 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Yang, L. Li, W. B. Lee and M. C. Ng, Structure of graphene and its disorders: a review, Sci. Technol. Adv. Mater., 2018, 19(1), 613–648 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Giorgi, J.-I. Fujisawa, H. Segawa and K. Yamashita, Small photocarrier effective masses featuring ambipolar transport in methylammonium lead iodide perovskite: a density functional analysis, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2013, 4(24), 4213–4216 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Schweicher, Y. Olivier, V. Lemaur and Y. H. Geerts, What currently limits charge carrier mobility in crystals of molecular semiconductors?, Isr. J. Chem., 2014, 54(5–6), 595–620 CrossRef CAS .
X.-F. Diao, Y.-l Tang, Q. Xie, D.-L. Chen, S.-x Li and G.-F. Liu, Study on the Property of Electron-Transport Layer in the Doped Formamidinium Lead Iodide Perovskite Based on DFT, ACS Omega, 2019, 4(22), 20024–20035 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. P. Nguyen, J. H. Shim and J. Y. Lee, Density Functional Theory Studies of Hole Mobility in Picene and Pentacene Crystals, J. Phys. Chem. C, 2015, 119(21), 11301–11310 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Marcus, Electron transfer reactions in chemistry. Theory and experiment, Rev. Mod. Phys., 1993, 65(3), 599 CrossRef CAS .
R. Zaier, S. Hajaji, M. Kozaki and S. Ayachi, DFT and TD-DFT studies on the electronic and optical properties of linear π-conjugated cyclopentadithiophene (CPDT) dimer for efficient blue OLED, Opt. Mater., 2019, 91, 108–114 CrossRef CAS .
S. F. Nelsen, S. C. Blackstock and Y. Kim, Estimation of inner shell Marcus terms for amino nitrogen compounds by molecular orbital calculations, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 1987, 109(3), 677–682 CrossRef CAS .
E. F. Valeev and V. Coropceanu, da Silva Filho, D. A.; Salman, S.; Brédas, J.-L., Effect of electronic polarization on charge-transport parameters in molecular organic semiconductors, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2006, 128(30), 9882–9886 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Miller and E. Abrahams, Impurity conduction at low concentrations, Phys. Rev., 1960, 120(3), 745 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Shirota and H. Kageyama, Charge carrier transporting molecular materials and their applications in devices, Chem. Rev., 2007, 107(4), 953–1010 CrossRef CAS PubMed .

          R. Oesterbacka, G. Juska, K. Arlauskas and H. Stubb, Time-of-flight measurements in Langmuir-Blodgett films of poly (3-hexylthiophene), Optical Probes of Conjugated Polymers, International Society for Optics and Photonics,  1997, pp. 389–394 Search PubMed .
A. J. Campbell, D. D. Bradley and H. Antoniadis, Dispersive electron transport in an electroluminescent polyfluorene copolymer measured by the current integration time-of-flight method, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2001, 79(14), 2133–2135 CrossRef CAS .
A. Many and G. Rakavy, Theory of transient space-charge-limited currents in solids in the presence of trapping, Phys. Rev., 1962, 126(6), 1980 CrossRef CAS .

          M. A. Lampert and P. Mark, Current injection in solids, Academic Press,  1970 Search PubMed .
G. Horowitz, Organic field-effect transistors, Adv. Mater., 1998, 10(5), 365–377 CrossRef CAS .
H. Li, N. Tessler and J. L. Brédas, Assessment of the Factors Influencing Charge-Carrier Mobility Measurements in Organic Field-Effect Transistors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(39), 1803096 CrossRef .
H. Phan, M. J. Ford, A. T. Lill, M. Wang, G. C. Bazan and T. Q. Nguyen, Electrical double-slope nonideality in organic field-effect transistors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(17), 1707221 CrossRef .
H. I. Un, P. Cheng, T. Lei, C. Y. Yang, J. Y. Wang and J. Pei, Charge-Trapping-Induced Non-Ideal Behaviors in Organic Field-Effect Transistors, Adv. Mater., 2018, 30(18), 1800017 CrossRef PubMed .
H. Li and J.-L. Brédas, Quasi-one-dimensional charge transport can lead to nonlinear current characteristics in organic field-effect transistors, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2018, 9(22), 6550–6555 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li and J.-L. Brédas, Developing molecular-level models for organic field-effect transistors, Natl. Sci. Rev., 2021, 8(4), nwaa167 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Shimotani, H. Asanuma and Y. Iwasa, Electric Double Layer Transistor of Organic Semiconductor Crystals in a Four-Probe Configuration, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2007, 46(6A), 3613–3617 CrossRef CAS .
H. H. Choi, Y. I. Rodionov, A. F. Paterson, J. Panidi, D. Saranin, N. Kharlamov, S. I. Didenko, T. D. Anthopoulos, K. Cho and V. Podzorov, Accurate Extraction of Charge Carrier Mobility in 4-Probe Field-Effect Transistors, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2018, 28(26), 1707105 CrossRef .
M. Cornils, A. Rottmann and O. Paul, How to extract the sheet resistance and Hall mobility from arbitrarily shaped planar four-terminal devices with extended contacts, IEEE Trans. Electron Devices, 2010, 57(9), 2087–2097 Search PubMed .
S. Fu, E. Jin, H. Hanayama, W. Zheng, H. Zhang, L. Di Virgilio, M. A. Addicoat, M. Mezger, A. Narita and M. Bonn, Outstanding Charge Mobility by Band Transport in Two-Dimensional Semiconducting Covalent Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144(16), 7489–7496 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. G. Debije, Z. Chen, J. Piris, R. B. Neder, M. M. Watson, K. Müllen and F. Würthner, Dramatic increase in charge carrier lifetime in a liquid crystalline perylene bisimide derivative upon bay substitution with chlorine, J. Mater. Chem., 2005, 15(12), 1270–1276 RSC .
P. G. Schouten, J. M. Warman and M. P. de Haas, Effect of accumulated radiation dose on pulse radiolysis conductivity transients in a mesomorphic octa-n-alkoxy-substituted phthalocyanine, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 1993, 97(38), 9863–9870 CAS .
A. M. Evans, L. R. Parent, N. C. Flanders, R. P. Bisbey, E. Vitaku, M. S. Kirschner, R. D. Schaller, L. X. Chen, N. C. Gianneschi and W. R. Dichtel, Seeded growth of single-crystal two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks, Science, 2018, 361(6397), 52–57 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, A. D. Chavez, H. Li, H. Li, W. R. Dichtel and J.-L. Bredas, Nucleation and Growth of Covalent Organic Frameworks from Solution: The Example of COF-5, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(45), 16310–16318 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Feriante, A. M. Evans, S. Jhulki, I. Castano, M. J. Strauss, S. Barlow, W. R. Dichtel and S. R. Marder, New Mechanistic Insights into the Formation of Imine-Linked Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(43), 18637–18644 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, A. M. Evans, I. Castano, M. J. Strauss, W. R. Dichtel and J.-L. Bredas, Nucleation–Elongation Dynamics of Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(3), 1367–1374 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li, A. M. Evans, W. R. Dichtel and J.-L. Bredas, Quantitative Description of the Lateral Growth of Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks Reveals Self-Templation Effects, ACS Mater. Lett., 2021, 3(4), 398–405 CrossRef CAS .
G. Zhan, Z.-F. Cai, K. Strutyński, L. Yu, N. Herrmann, M. Martínez-Abadía, M. Melle-Franco, A. Mateo-Alonso and S. D. Feyter, Observing polymerization in 2D dynamic covalent polymers, Nature, 2022, 603(7903), 835–840 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jin, K. Geng, S. Fu, S. Yang, N. Kanlayakan, M. A. Addicoat, N. Kungwan, J. Geurs, H. Xu, M. Bonn, H. I. Wang, J. Smet, T. Kowalczyk and D. Jiang, Exceptional electron conduction in two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks, Chem, 2021, 7(12), 3309–3324 CAS .
L. Wang, B. Dong, R. Ge, F. Jiang and J. Xu, Fluorene-based two-dimensional covalent organic framework with thermoelectric properties through doping, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2017, 9(8), 7108–7114 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Jin, T. Sakurai, T. Kowalczyk, S. Dalapati, F. Xu, H. Wei, X. Chen, J. Gao, S. Seki and S. Irle, Two-dimensional tetrathiafulvalene covalent organic frameworks: towards latticed conductive organic salts, Chem. – Eur. J., 2014, 20(45), 14608–14613 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Rager, A. C. Jakowetz, B. Gole, F. Beuerle, D. D. Medina and T. Bein, Scaffold-induced diketopyrrolopyrrole molecular stacks in a covalent organic framework, Chem. Mater., 2019, 31(8), 2707–2712 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Lakshmi, C.-H. Liu, M. Rajeswara Rao, Y. Chen, Y. Fang, A. Dadvand, E. Hamzehpoor, Y. Sakai-Otsuka, R. S. Stein and D. F. Perepichka, A two-dimensional poly (azatriangulene) covalent organic framework with semiconducting and paramagnetic states, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(5), 2155–2160 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Jin, M. Asada, Q. Xu, S. Dalapati, M. A. Addicoat, M. A. Brady, H. Xu, T. Nakamura, T. Heine and Q. Chen, Two-dimensional sp2 carbon–conjugated covalent organic frameworks, Science, 2017, 357(6352), 673–676 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Meng, R. M. Stolz and K. A. Mirica, Two-dimensional chemiresistive covalent organic framework with high intrinsic conductivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(30), 11929–11937 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, M. Ballabio, M. Wang, H.-H. Lin, B. P. Biswal, X. Han, S. Paasch, E. Brunner, P. Liu and M. Chen, Unveiling electronic properties in metal–phthalocyanine-based pyrazine-linked conjugated two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(42), 16810–16816 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Wang, M. Wang, H.-H. Lin, M. Ballabio, H. Zhong, M. Bonn, S. Zhou, T. Heine, E. Canovas and R. Dong, High-mobility semiconducting two-dimensional conjugated covalent organic frameworks with p-type doping, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(52), 21622–21627 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Y. Yue, P. Cai, X. Xu, H. Li, H. Chen, H. C. Zhou and N. Huang, Conductive metallophthalocyanine framework films with high carrier mobility as efficient chemiresistors, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60(19), 10806–10813 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Wang, C. Zeng, H. Xu, P. Yin, D. Chen, J. Deng, M. Li, N. Zheng, C. Gu and Y. Ma, A highly soluble, crystalline covalent organic framework compatible with device implementation, Chem. Sci., 2019, 10(4), 1023–1028 RSC .
Y. Yue, H. Li, H. Chen and N. Huang, Piperazine-Linked Covalent Organic Frameworks with High Electrical Conductivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144(7), 2873–2878 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Subudhi, S. P. Tripathy and K. Parida, Highlights of the characterization techniques on inorganic, organic (COF) and hybrid (MOF) photocatalytic semiconductors, Catal. Sci. Technol., 2021, 11(2), 392–415 RSC .
J. Schmid, J. Weis, K. Eberl and K. V. Klitzing, A quantum dot in the limit of strong coupling to reservoirs, Phys. B, 1998, 256, 182–185 CrossRef .
T. Joshi, C. Chen, H. Li, C. S. Diercks, G. Wang, P. J. Waller, H. Li, J. L. Bredas, O. M. Yaghi and M. F. Crommie, Local Electronic Structure of Molecular Heterojunctions in a Single-Layer 2D Covalent Organic Framework, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(3), 1805941 CrossRef PubMed .
J. Liu, W. Zan, K. Li, Y. Yang, F. Bu and Y. Xu, Solution synthesis of semiconducting two-dimensional polymer via trimerization of carbonitrile, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(34), 11666–11669 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Jiang, P. Wang and J. Zhao, 2D covalent triazine framework: a new class of organic photocatalyst for water splitting, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2015, 3(15), 7750–7758 RSC .
B. Xu, S. Li, H. Jiao, J. Yin, Z. Liu and W. Zhong, A two-dimensional quinazoline based covalent organic framework with a suitable direct gap and superior optical absorption for photovoltaic applications, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2020, 8(7), 3865–3871 RSC .
J. P. Perdew, K. Burke and M. Ernzerhof, Generalized gradient approximation made simple, Phys. Rev. Lett., 1996, 77(18), 3865 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Shishkin and G. Kresse, Self-consistent G W calculations for semiconductors and insulators, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75(23), 235102 CrossRef .
F. Fuchs, J. Furthmüller, F. Bechstedt, M. Shishkin and G. Kresse, Quasiparticle band structure based on a generalized Kohn-Sham scheme, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 76(11), 115109 CrossRef .
J. B. Neaton, M. S. Hybertsen and S. G. Louie, Renormalization of molecular electronic levels at metal-molecule interfaces, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2006, 97(21), 216405 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
V. Singh, J. Kim, B. Kang, J. Moon, S. Kim, W. Y. Kim and H. R. Byon, Thiazole-Linked Covalent Organic Framework Promoting Fast Two-Electron Transfer for Lithium-Organic Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(17), 2003735 CrossRef CAS .
L. Chen, Y. Wang, H. Wang, Y. Yang and J. Li, Theoretical study of thiophene-inserted COF as high performance anode material for Li-ion battery, Chem. Phys. Lett., 2021, 783, 139042 CrossRef CAS .
S.-L. Cai, Y.-B. Zhang, A. B. Pun, B. He, J. Yang, F. M. Toma, I. D. Sharp, O. M. Yaghi, J. Fan and S.-R. Zheng, Tunable electrical conductivity in oriented thin films of tetrathiafulvalene-based covalent organic framework, Chem. Sci., 2014, 5(12), 4693–4700 RSC .
L. Cusin, H. Peng, A. Ciesielski and P. Samorì, Chemical Conversion and Locking of the Imine Linkage: Enhancing the Functionality of Covalent Organic Frameworks, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60(26), 14236–14250 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. J. Smith and W. R. Dichtel, Mechanistic Studies of Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks Rapidly Polymerized from Initially Homogenous Conditions, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2014, 136(24), 8783–8789 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. M. Warman, M. P. de Haas, G. Dicker, F. C. Grozema, J. Piris and M. G. Debije, Charge mobilities in organic semiconducting materials determined by pulse-radiolysis time-resolved microwave conductivity: π-bond-conjugated polymers versus π−π-stacked discotics, Chem. Mater., 2004, 16(23), 4600–4609 CrossRef CAS .
H. T. Yi, X. Wu, X. Zhu and V. Podzorov, Intrinsic charge transport across phase transitions in hybrid organo-inorganic perovskites, Adv. Mater., 2016, 28(30), 6509–6514 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
P. Borsenberger, L. Pautmeier, R. Richert and H. Bässler, Hole transport in 1, 1-bis(di-4-tolylaminophenyl) cyclohexane, J. Chem. Phys., 1991, 94(12), 8276–8281 CrossRef CAS .
R. W. I. d Boer, M. Jochemsen, T. M. Klapwijk, A. F. Morpurgo, J. Niemax, A. K. Tripathi and J. Pflaum, Space charge limited transport and time of flight measurements in tetracene single crystals: A comparative study, J. Appl. Phys., 2004, 95(3), 1196–1202 CrossRef .
A. J. Mozer, P. Denk, M. C. Scharber, H. Neugebauer, N. S. Sariciftci, P. Wagner, L. Lutsen and D. Vanderzande, Novel regiospecific MDMO− PPV copolymer with improved charge transport for bulk heterojunction solar cells. The, J. Phys. Chem. B, 2004, 108(17), 5235–5242 CrossRef CAS .
L. Fumagalli, M. Binda, D. Natali, M. Sampietro, E. Salmoiraghi and P. Di Gianvincenzo, Dependence of the mobility on charge carrier density and electric field in poly(3-hexylthiophene) based thin film transistors: Effect of the molecular weight, J. Appl. Phys., 2008, 104(8), 084513 CrossRef .
W. F. Pasveer, J. Cottaar, C. Tanase, R. Coehoorn, P. A. Bobbert, P. W. M. Blom, D. M. de Leeuw and M. A. J. Michels, Unified Description of Charge-Carrier Mobilities in Disordered Semiconducting Polymers, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94(20), 206601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. Tanase, E. Meijer, P. Blom and D. De Leeuw, Unification of the hole transport in polymeric field-effect transistors and light-emitting diodes, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2003, 91(21), 216601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
W. Pasveer, J. Cottaar, C. Tanase, R. Coehoorn, P. Bobbert, P. Blom, D. De Leeuw and M. Michels, Unified description of charge-carrier mobilities in disordered semiconducting polymers, Phys. Rev. Lett., 2005, 94(20), 206601 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Zhou, Y. Zhou, J. Zhao, C. Wu, X. Ding and X. Hou, Carrier density dependence of mobility in organic solids: A Monte Carlo simulation, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2007, 75(15), 153201 CrossRef .
D. Malec, V. Truong, R. Essolbi and T. Hoang, Carrier mobility in LDPE at high temperature and pressure, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 1998, 5(2), 301–303 CrossRef CAS .
T. Nisikawa, N. Moriguchi, T. Anezaki, A. Unno, M. Tachibana and K. Kojima, Contact pressure dependence of carrier mobility in cleaved tetracene single-crystal field-effect transistors, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2006, 45(6R), 5238 CrossRef CAS .
V. Gabelica, A. A. Shvartsburg, C. Afonso, P. Barran, J. L. P. Benesch, C. Bleiholder, M. T. Bowers, A. Bilbao, M. F. Bush, J. L. Campbell, I. D. G. Campuzano, T. Causon, B. H. Clowers, C. S. Creaser, E. De Pauw, J. Far, F. Fernandez-Lima, J. C. Fjeldsted, K. Giles, M. Groessl, C. J. Hogan Jr., S. Hann, H. I. Kim, R. T. Kurulugama, J. C. May, J. A. McLean, K. Pagel, K. Richardson, M. E. Ridgeway, F. Rosu, F. Sobott, K. Thalassinos, S. J. Valentine and T. Wyttenbach, Recommendations for reporting ion mobility Mass Spectrometry measurements, Mass Spectrom. Rev., 2019, 38(3), 291–320 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. Forsyth, J. Sun, D. R. Macfarlane and A. J. Hill, Compositional dependence of free volume in PAN/LiCF3SO3 polymer-in-salt electrolytes and the effect on ionic conductivity, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2000, 38(2), 341–350 CrossRef CAS .
S. Sen Gupta and K. G. Bhattacharyya, Kinetics of adsorption of metal ions on inorganic materials: A review, Adv. Colloid Interface Sci., 2011, 162(1), 39–58 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. S. Bhutta, L. Yang, Z. Ma, M. T. Nazir, S. Akram, M. A. Mehmood and N. Faiz, Simulation of thickness controlled DC breakdown of XLPE regulated by space charge & molecular chain movement, IEEE Trans. Dielectr. Electr. Insul., 2020, 27(4), 1143–1151 CAS .
G. Sergi, S. W. Yu and C. L. Page, Diffusion of chloride and hydroxyl ions in cementitious materials exposed to a saline environment, Mag. Concr. Res., 1992, 44(158), 63–69 CrossRef CAS .
K. Funke, Jump relaxation in solid electrolytes, Prog. Solid State Chem., 1993, 22(2), 111–195 CrossRef CAS .
M. Jansen, Volume Effect or Paddle-Wheel Mechanism—Fast Alkali-Metal Ionic Conduction in Solids with Rotationally Disordered Complex Anions, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. Engl., 1991, 30(12), 1547–1558 CrossRef .
M. Marcinek, J. Syzdek, M. Marczewski, M. Piszcz, L. Niedzicki, M. Kalita, A. Plewa-Marczewska, A. Bitner, P. Wieczorek and T. Trzeciak, Electrolytes for Li-ion transport–Review, Solid State Ionics, 2015, 276, 107–126 CrossRef CAS .
M. Park, X. Zhang, M. Chung, G. B. Less and A. M. Sastry, A review of conduction phenomena in Li-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2010, 195(24), 7904–7929 CrossRef CAS .
M. Singh, O. Odusanya, G. M. Wilmes, H. B. Eitouni, E. D. Gomez, A. J. Patel, V. L. Chen, M. J. Park, P. Fragouli and H. Iatrou, Effect of molecular weight on the mechanical and electrical properties of block copolymer electrolytes, Macromolecules, 2007, 40(13), 4578–4585 CrossRef CAS .
F. Sheng, B. Wu, X. Li, T. Xu, M. A. Shehzad, X. Wang, L. Ge, H. Wang and T. Xu, Efficient Ion Sieving in Covalent Organic Framework Membranes with Sub-2-Nanometer Channels, Adv. Mater., 2021, 33(44), 2104404 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. F. Miller III, Z.-G. Wang, G. W. Coates and N. P. Balsara, Designing polymer electrolytes for safe and high capacity rechargeable lithium batteries, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50(3), 590–593 CrossRef PubMed .
B. Zhang, R. Tan, L. Yang, J. Zheng, K. Zhang, S. Mo, Z. Lin and F. Pan, Mechanisms and properties of ion-transport in inorganic solid electrolytes, Energy Storage Mater., 2018, 10, 139–159 CrossRef .
M. Wu, B. Xu and C. Ouyang, Physics of electron and lithium-ion transport in electrode materials for Li-ion batteries, Chin. Phys. B, 2015, 25(1), 018206 CrossRef .
C. J. Doonan, D. J. Tranchemontagne, T. G. Glover, J. R. Hunt and O. M. Yaghi, Exceptional ammonia uptake by a covalent organic framework, Nat. Chem., 2010, 2(3), 235–238 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mindemark, M. J. Lacey, T. Bowden and D. Brandell, Beyond PEO—Alternative host materials for Li+ -conducting solid polymer electrolytes, Prog. Polym. Sci., 2018, 81, 114–143 CrossRef CAS .
C. P. Fonseca and S. Neves, Electrochemical properties of a biodegradable polymer electrolyte applied to a rechargeable lithium battery, J. Power Sources, 2006, 159(1), 712–716 CrossRef CAS .
J. Lou, S. Friedowitz, J. Qin and Y. Xia, Tunable coacervation of well-defined homologous polyanions and polycations by local polarity, ACS Cent. Sci., 2019, 5(3), 549–557 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Mao, R. F. Perea, W. S. Howells, D. L. Price and M.-L. Saboungi, Relaxation in polymer electrolytes on the nanosecond timescale, Nature, 2000, 405(6783), 163–165 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. J. Laidler, The development of the Arrhenius equation, J. Chem. Educ., 1984, 61(6), 494 CrossRef CAS .
L. Long, S. Wang, M. Xiao and Y. Meng, Polymer electrolytes for lithium polymer batteries, J. Mater. Chem. A, 2016, 4(26), 10038–10069 RSC .
S. B. Aziz, T. J. Woo, M. Kadir and H. M. Ahmed, A conceptual review on polymer electrolytes and ion transport models, J. Sci.: Adv. Mater. Devices, 2018, 3(1), 1–17 Search PubMed .
Z. Gadjourova, Y. G. Andreev, D. P. Tunstall and P. G. Bruce, Ionic conductivity in crystalline polymer electrolytes, Nature, 2001, 412(6846), 520–523 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Othman, K. Chew and Z. Osman, Impedance spectroscopy studies of poly (methyl methacrylate)-lithium salts polymer electrolyte systems, Ionics, 2007, 13(5), 337–342 CrossRef CAS .
R. Baskaran, S. Selvasekarapandian, N. Kuwata, J. Kawamura and T. Hattori, ac impedance, DSC and FT-IR investigations on (x) PVAc–(1−x) PVdF blends with LiClO4, Mater. Chem. Phys., 2006, 98(1), 55–61 CrossRef CAS .
K. Timachova, H. Watanabe and N. P. Balsara, Effect of molecular weight and salt concentration on ion transport and the transference number in polymer electrolytes, Macromolecules, 2015, 48(21), 7882–7888 CrossRef CAS .
R. Bobade, S. Pakade and S. Yawale, Electrical investigation of polythiophene–poly(vinyl acetate) composite films via VTF and impedance spectroscopy, J. Non-Cryst. Solids, 2009, 355(48–49), 2410–2414 CrossRef CAS .
G. Singh, P. A. Singh, A. K. Sen, K. Singha, S. N. Dubeya, R. N. Handa and J. Choi, Synthesis and characterization of some bivalent metal complexes of Schiff bases derived from as-triazine, Synth. React. Inorg. Met.-Org. Chem., 2002, 32(1), 171–187 CrossRef CAS .
R. A. Kumpf and D. A. Dougherty, A mechanism for ion selectivity in potassium channels: computational studies of cation-pi interactions, Science, 1993, 261(5129), 1708–1710 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. M. Wu, Q. Wang, Q. Sun, P. Jena and Y. Kawazoe, First-principles study of hydrogen adsorption in metal-doped COF-10, J. Chem. Phys., 2010, 133(15), 154706 CrossRef PubMed .
F. Z. Cui, R. R. Liang, Q. Y. Qi, G. F. Jiang and X. Zhao, Efficient Removal of Cr (VI) from Aqueous Solutions by a Dual-Pore Covalent Organic Framework, Adv. Sustainable Syst., 2019, 3(4), 1800150 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Ji, H. Wang, S. Canossa, S. Wuttke and O. M. Yaghi, Pore chemistry of metal–organic frameworks, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(41), 2000238 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhu, T. Gao, X. Fan, F. Han and C. Wang, Electrochemical Techniques for Intercalation Electrode Materials in Rechargeable Batteries, Acc. Chem. Res., 2017, 50(4), 1022–1031 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. S. Nicholson and I. Shain, Theory of Stationary Electrode Polarography. Single Scan and Cyclic Methods Applied to Reversible, Irreversible, and Kinetic Systems, Anal. Chem., 1964, 36(4), 706–723 CrossRef CAS .
W. Weppner and R. A. Huggins, Determination of the Kinetic Parameters of Mixed-Conducting Electrodes and Application to the System Li3Sb, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1977, 124(10), 1569–1578 CrossRef CAS .
J. Xie, N. Imanishi, T. Zhang, A. Hirano, Y. Takeda and O. Yamamoto, Li-ion diffusion kinetics in LiFePO4 thin film prepared by radio frequency magnetron sputtering, Electrochim. Acta, 2009, 54(20), 4631–4637 CrossRef CAS .
C. J. Wen, B. A. Boukamp, R. A. Huggins and W. Weppner, Thermodynamic and Mass Transport Properties of “LiAl”, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1979, 126(12), 2258–2266 CrossRef CAS .
C. Ho, I. D. Raistrick and R. A. Huggins, Application of A-C Techniques to the Study of Lithium Diffusion in Tungsten Trioxide Thin Films, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1980, 127(2), 343–350 CrossRef CAS .
X. Qian, N. Gu, Z. Cheng, X. Yang, E. Wang and S. Dong, Methods to study the ionic conductivity of polymeric electrolytes using ac impedance spectroscopy, J. Solid State Electrochem., 2001, 6(1), 8–15 CrossRef CAS .
J. Evans, C. A. Vincent and P. G. Bruce, Electrochemical measurement of transference numbers in polymer electrolytes, Polymer, 1987, 28(13), 2324–2328 CrossRef CAS .
K. J. Griffith, K. M. Wiaderek, G. Cibin, L. E. Marbella and C. P. Grey, Niobium tungsten oxides for high-rate lithium-ion energy storage, Nature, 2018, 559(7715), 556–563 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S.-i Nishimura, G. Kobayashi, K. Ohoyama, R. Kanno, M. Yashima and A. Yamada, Experimental visualization of lithium diffusion in LixFePO4, Nat. Mater., 2008, 7, 707 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
M. T. McDowell, S. W. Lee, J. T. Harris, B. A. Korgel, C. Wang, W. D. Nix and Y. Cui, In Situ TEM of Two-Phase Lithiation of Amorphous Silicon Nanospheres, Nano Lett., 2013, 13(2), 758–764 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Haldar, K. Roy, S. Nandi, D. Chakraborty, D. Puthusseri, Y. Gawli, S. Ogale and R. Vaidhyanathan, High and Reversible Lithium Ion Storage in Self-Exfoliated Triazole-Triformyl Phloroglucinol-Based Covalent Organic Nanosheets, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(8), 1702170 CrossRef .
V. Singh, J. Kim, B. Kang, J. Moon, S. Kim, W. Y. Kim and H. R. Byon, Thiazole-Linked Covalent Organic Framework Promoting Fast Two-Electron Transfer for Lithium-Organic Batteries, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(17), 2003735 CrossRef CAS .
E. Vitaku, C. N. Gannett, K. L. Carpenter, L. Shen, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, Phenazine-based covalent organic framework cathode materials with high energy and power densities, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 142(1), 16–20 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Wang, Q. Wang, P. Shao, Y. Han, X. Gao, L. Ma, S. Yuan, X. Ma, J. Zhou, X. Feng and B. Wang, Exfoliation of Covalent Organic Frameworks into Few-Layer Redox-Active Nanosheets as Cathode Materials for Lithium-Ion Batteries, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2017, 139(12), 4258–4261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang, W. Sun, X. Chen and Y. Wang, Few-layered fluorinated triazine-based covalent organic nanosheets for high-performance alkali organic batteries, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(12), 14252–14261 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Buyukcakir, J. Ryu, S. H. Joo, J. Kang, R. Yuksel, J. Lee, Y. Jiang, S. Choi, S. H. Lee and S. K. Kwak, Lithium Accommodation in a Redox-Active Covalent Triazine Framework for High Areal Capacity and Fast-Charging Lithium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(36), 2003761 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Q. Hou, W. Huang, H.-S. Xu, X. Wang, W. Yu, R. Li, K. Zhang, L. Wang, Z. Chen, K. Xie and K. P. Loh, Solution-Processable Covalent Organic Framework Electrolytes for All-Solid-State Li–Organic Batteries, ACS Energy Lett., 2020, 5(11), 3498–3506 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Hu, N. Dunlap, S. Wan, S. Lu, S. Huang, I. Sellinger, M. Ortiz, Y. Jin, S.-H. Lee and W. Zhang, Crystalline Lithium Imidazolate Covalent Organic Frameworks with High Li-Ion Conductivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(18), 7518–7525 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Li, Z. W. Liu, Z. Li, T. X. Wang, F. Zhao, X. Ding, W. Feng and B. H. Han, Defective 2D covalent organic frameworks for postfunctionalization, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(10), 1909267 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. Vazquez-Molina, G. S. Mohammad-Pour, C. Lee, M. W. Logan, X. Duan, J. K. Harper and F. J. Uribe-Romo, Mechanically Shaped Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks Reveal Crystallographic Alignment and Fast Li-Ion Conductivity, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2016, 138(31), 9767–9770 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Guo, Y. Zhang, Y. Dong, J. Li, S. Li, P. Shao, X. Feng and B. Wang, Fast Ion Transport Pathway Provided by Polyethylene Glycol Confined in Covalent Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(5), 1923–1927 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Chen, H. Tu, C. Hu, Y. Liu, D. Dong, Y. Sun, Y. Dai, S. Wang, H. Qian, Z. Lin and L. Chen, Cationic Covalent Organic Framework Nanosheets for Fast Li-Ion Conduction, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(3), 896–899 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
E. Vitaku, C. N. Gannett, K. L. Carpenter, L. Shen, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, Phenazine-Based Covalent Organic Framework Cathode Materials with High Energy and Power Densities, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2020, 142(1), 16–20 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Xu, H. Xu, X. Chen, D. Wu, Y. Wu, H. Liu, C. Gu, R. Fu and D. Jiang, Radical Covalent Organic Frameworks: A General Strategy to Immobilize Open-Accessible Polyradicals for High-Performance Capacitive Energy Storage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2015, 54(23), 6814–6818 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
L. Guo, S. Jia, C. S. Diercks, X. Yang, S. A. Alshmimri and O. M. Yaghi, Amidation, Esterification, and Thioesterification of a Carboxyl-Functionalized Covalent Organic Framework, Angew. Chem., 2020, 132(5), 2039–2043 CrossRef .
J. Zhao, M. Zhou, J. Chen, L. Tao, Q. Zhang, Z. Li, S. Zhong, H. Fu, H. Wang and L. Wu, Phthalocyanine-based covalent organic frameworks as novel anode materials for high-performance lithium-ion/sodium-ion batteries, Chem. Eng. J., 2021, 425, 131630 CrossRef CAS .
F. Xu, M. Wei, X. Zhang and Y. Wang, Ion rejection in covalent organic frameworks: revealing the overlooked effect of in-pore transport, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2019, 11(48), 45246–45255 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
C. R. DeBlase, K. Hernández-Burgos, K. E. Silberstein, G. G. Rodríguez-Calero, R. P. Bisbey, H. D. Abruña and W. R. Dichtel, Rapid and Efficient Redox Processes within 2D Covalent Organic Framework Thin Films, ACS Nano, 2015, 9(3), 3178–3183 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zhou, Y. Huang, Z. Li, S. Kang, X. Wang and S. Liu, Piperazine-based two-dimensional covalent organic framework for high performance anodic lithium storage, Energy Storage Mater., 2021, 40, 124–138 CrossRef .
M. Wu, Y. Zhao, H. Zhang, J. Zhu, Y. Ma, C. Li, Y. Zhang and Y. Chen, A 2D covalent organic framework with ultra-large interlayer distance as high-rate anode material for lithium-ion batteries, Nano Res., 2021, 1–6 Search PubMed .
F. Xu, M. Wei and Y. Wang, Effect of hydrophilicity on ion rejection of sub-nanometer pores, Sep. Purif. Technol., 2021, 257, 117937 CrossRef CAS .
L. Cao, I.-C. Chen, C. Chen, D. B. Shinde, X. Liu, Z. Li, Z. Zhou, Y. Zhang, Y. Han and Z. Lai, Giant Osmotic Energy Conversion through Vertical-Aligned Ion-Permselective Nanochannels in Covalent Organic Framework Membranes, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2022, 144(27), 12400–12409 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Jeong, S. Park, G. Y. Jung, S. H. Kim, Y.-H. Lee, S. K. Kwak and S.-Y. Lee, Solvent-Free, Single Lithium-Ion Conducting Covalent
Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(14), 5880–5885 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Q. Xu, S. Tao, Q. Jiang and D. Jiang, Ion Conduction in Polyelectrolyte Covalent Organic Frameworks, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2018, 140(24), 7429–7432 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
O. Buyukcakir, J. Ryu, S. H. Joo, J. Kang, R. Yuksel, J. Lee, Y. Jiang, S. Choi, S. H. Lee, S. K. Kwak, S. Park and R. S. Ruoff, Lithium Accommodation in a Redox-Active Covalent Triazine Framework for High Areal Capacity and Fast-Charging Lithium-Ion Batteries, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(36), 2003761 CrossRef CAS .
X. Yang, L. Gong, X. Liu, P. Zhang, B. Li, D. Qi, K. Wang, F. He and J. Jiang, Mesoporous Polyimide-Linked Covalent Organic Framework with Multiple Redox-Active Sites for High-Performance Cathodic Li Storage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61(31), e202207043 CAS .
Z. Luo, L. Liu, J. Ning, K. Lei, Y. Lu, F. Li and J. Chen, A Microporous Covalent–Organic Framework with Abundant Accessible Carbonyl Groups for Lithium-Ion Batteries, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2018, 57(30), 9443–9446 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Zettl, S. Lunghammer, B. Gadermaier, A. Boulaoued, P. Johansson, H. M. R. Wilkening and I. Hanzu, High Li+ and Na+ Conductivity in New Hybrid Solid Electrolytes based on the Porous MIL-121 Metal Organic Framework, Adv. Energy Mater., 2021, 11(16), 2003542 CrossRef CAS .
J. Brus, J. Czernek, M. Urbanova, J. Rohlíček and T. Plecháček, Transferring Lithium Ions in the Nanochannels of Flexible Metal–Organic Frameworks Featuring Superchaotropic Metallacarborane Guests: Mechanism of Ionic Conductivity at Atomic Resolution, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces, 2020, 12(42), 47447–47456 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Kuhn, P. Sreeraj, R. Pöttgen, H.-D. Wiemhöfer, M. Wilkening and P. Heitjans, Li Ion Diffusion in the Anode Material Li12Si7: Ultrafast Quasi-1D Diffusion and Two Distinct Fast 3D Jump Processes Separately Revealed by 7Li NMR Relaxometry, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2011, 133(29), 11018–11021 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
Z. Lei, Q. Yang, Y. Xu, S. Guo, W. Sun, H. Liu, L.-P. Lv, Y. Zhang and Y. Wang, Boosting lithium storage in covalent organic framework via activation of 14-electron redox chemistry, Nat. Commun., 2018, 9(1), 576 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Haldar, K. Roy, S. Nandi, D. Chakraborty, D. Puthusseri, Y. Gawli, S. Ogale and R. Vaidhyanathan, High and Reversible Lithium Ion Storage in Self-Exfoliated Triazole-Triformyl Phloroglucinol-Based Covalent Organic Nanosheets, Adv. Energy Mater., 2018, 8(8), 1702170 CrossRef .
X. Chen, Y. Li, L. Wang, Y. Xu, A. Nie, Q. Li, F. Wu, W. Sun, X. Zhang, R. Vajtai, P. M. Ajayan, L. Chen and Y. Wang, High-Lithium-Affinity Chemically Exfoliated 2D Covalent Organic Frameworks, Adv. Mater., 2019, 31(29), 1901640 CrossRef PubMed .
S. Gu, S. Wu, L. Cao, M. Li, N. Qin, J. Zhu, Z. Wang, Y. Li, Z. Li, J. Chen and Z. Lu, Tunable Redox Chemistry and Stability of Radical Intermediates in 2D Covalent Organic Frameworks for High Performance Sodium Ion Batteries, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(24), 9623–9628 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
R. Shi, L. Liu, Y. Lu, C. Wang, Y. Li, L. Li, Z. Yan and J. Chen, Nitrogen-rich covalent organic frameworks with multiple
carbonyls for high-performance sodium batteries, Nat. Commun., 2020, 11(1), 178 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
X. Chen, H. Zhang, C. Ci, W. Sun and Y. Wang, Few-Layered Boronic Ester Based Covalent Organic Frameworks/Carbon Nanotube Composites for High-Performance K-Organic Batteries, ACS Nano, 2019, 13(3), 3600–3607 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
J. Mahmood, E. K. Lee, M. Jung, D. Shin, I.-Y. Jeon, S.-M. Jung, H.-J. Choi, J.-M. Seo, S.-Y. Bae, S.-D. Sohn, N. Park, J. H. Oh, H.-J. Shin and J.-B. Baek, Nitrogenated holey two-dimensional structures, Nat. Commun., 2015, 6(1), 6486 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
A. Nyman, M. Behm and G. Lindbergh, Electrochemical characterisation and modelling of the mass transport phenomena in LiPF6–EC–EMC electrolyte, Electrochim. Acta, 2008, 53(22), 6356–6365 CrossRef CAS .
N. Kamaya, K. Homma, Y. Yamakawa, M. Hirayama, R. Kanno, M. Yonemura, T. Kamiyama, Y. Kato, S. Hama, K. Kawamoto and A. Mitsui, A lithium superionic conductor, Nat. Mater., 2011, 10(9), 682–686 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
D. Guo, D. B. Shinde, W. Shin, E. Abou-Hamad, A.-H. Emwas, Z. Lai and A. Manthiram, Foldable Solid-state Batteries Enabled by Electrolyte Mediation in Covalent Organic Frameworks, Adv. Mater., 2022, 34(23), 2201410 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
G. Zhang, Y.-l Hong, Y. Nishiyama, S. Bai, S. Kitagawa and S. Horike, Accumulation of Glassy Poly(ethylene oxide) Anchored in a Covalent Organic Framework as a Solid-State Li+ Electrolyte, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2019, 141(3), 1227–1234 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
K. Zhang, B. Zhang, M. Weng, J. Zheng, S. Li and F. Pan, Lithium ion diffusion mechanism in covalent organic framework based solid state electrolyte, Phys. Chem. Chem. Phys., 2019, 21(19), 9883–9888 RSC .
C. Niu, W. Luo, C. Dai, C. Yu and Y. Xu, High-Voltage-Tolerant Covalent Organic Framework Electrolyte with Holistically Oriented Channels for Solid-State Lithium Metal Batteries with Nickel-Rich Cathodes, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60(47), 24915–24923 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Leontyev and A. A. Stuchebrukhov, Electronic continuum model for molecular dynamics simulations, J. Chem. Phys., 2009, 130(8), 085102 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
I. V. Leontyev and A. A. Stuchebrukhov, Electronic Continuum Model for Molecular Dynamics Simulations of Biological Molecules, J. Chem. Theory Comput., 2010, 6(5), 1498–1508 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Zhang and H. Li, Lithium-ion distribution and motion in two-dimensional covalent organic frameworks: the example of TAPB-PDA COF, J. Mater. Chem. C, 2022, 10(37), 13834–13843 RSC .
D. Chen, S. Huang, L. Zhong, S. Wang, M. Xiao, D. Han and Y. Meng, In Situ Preparation of Thin and Rigid COF Film on Li Anode as Artificial Solid Electrolyte Interphase Layer Resisting Li Dendrite Puncture, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2020, 30(7), 1907717 CrossRef CAS .
X. Li, Y. Tian, L. Shen, Z. Qu, T. Ma, F. Sun, X. Liu, C. Zhang, J. Shen, X. Li, L. Gao, S. Xiao, T. Liu, Y. Liu and Y. Lu, Electrolyte Interphase Built from Anionic Covalent Organic Frameworks for Lithium Dendrite Suppression, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2021, 31(22), 2009718 CrossRef CAS .
J. He, A. Bhargav and A. Manthiram, Covalent Organic Framework as an Efficient Protection Layer for a Stable Lithium-Metal Anode, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2022, 61(18), e202116586 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
H. Li and J.-L. Brédas, Impact of Structural Defects on the Elastic Properties of Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks (2D COFs) under Tensile Stress, Chem. Mater., 2021, 33(12), 4529–4540 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Yusran, H. Li, X. Guan, D. Li, L. Tang, M. Xue, Z. Zhuang, Y. Yan, V. Valtchev, S. Qiu and Q. Fang, Exfoliated Mesoporous 2D Covalent Organic Frameworks for High-Rate Electrochemical Double-Layer Capacitors, Adv. Mater., 2020, 32(8), 1907289 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
S. Chandra, Roy Chowdhury, D. Addicoat, M. Heine, T. Paul and A. Banerjee, R., Molecular Level Control of the Capacitance of Two-Dimensional Covalent Organic Frameworks: Role of Hydrogen Bonding in Energy Storage Materials, Chem. Mater., 2017, 29(5), 2074–2080 CrossRef CAS .
Z. Yang, J. Liu, Y. Li, G. Zhang, G. Xing and L. Chen, Arylamine-Linked 2D Covalent Organic Frameworks for Efficient Pseudocapacitive Energy Storage, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2021, 60(38), 20754–20759 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
F. Paulus, M. Porz, M. Schaffroth, F. Rominger, A. Leineweber, Y. Vaynzof and U. H. Bunz, Side-group engineering: The influence of norbornadienyl substituents on the properties of ethynylated pentacene and tetraazapentacene, Org. Electron., 2016, 33, 102–109 CrossRef CAS .
H. Minemawari, T. Yamada, H. Matsui, J. Y. Tsutsumi, S. Haas, R. Chiba, R. Kumai and T. Hasegawa, Inkjet printing of single-crystal films, Nature, 2011, 475(7356), 364–367 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
T. Stöcker, A. Köhler and R. Moos, Why does the electrical conductivity in PEDOT:PSS decrease with PSS content? A study combining thermoelectric measurements with impedance spectroscopy, J. Polym. Sci., Part B: Polym. Phys., 2012, 50(14), 976–983 CrossRef .
O. D. Jurchescu, J. Baas and T. T. Palstra, Effect of impurities on the mobility of single crystal pentacene, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2004, 84(16), 3061–3063 CrossRef CAS .
P. Parisse, M. Passacantando, S. Picozzi and L. Ottaviano, Conductivity of the thin film phase of pentacene, Org. Electron., 2006, 7(5), 403–409 CrossRef CAS .
N. Matsusue, Y. Suzuki and H. Naito, Charge carrier transport in neat thin films of phosphorescent iridium complexes, Jpn. J. Appl. Phys., 2005, 44(6R), 3691 CrossRef CAS .
S.-W. Liu, J.-H. Lee, C.-C. Lee, C.-T. Chen and J.-K. Wang, Charge carrier mobility of mixed-layer organic light-emitting diodes, Appl. Phys. Lett., 2007, 91(14), 142106 CrossRef .
D. M. DeLongchamp, B. M. Vogel, Y. Jung, M. C. Gurau, C. A. Richter, O. A. Kirillov, J. Obrzut, D. A. Fischer, S. Sambasivan, L. J. Richter and E. K. Lin, Variations in Semiconducting Polymer Microstructure and Hole Mobility with Spin-Coating Speed, Chem. Mater., 2005, 17(23), 5610–5612 CrossRef CAS .
J. Obrzut and K. A. Page, Electrical conductivity and relaxation in poly(3-hexylthiophene), Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2009, 80(19), 195211 CrossRef .
K. Dokko, M. Mohamedi, Y. Fujita, T. Itoh, M. Nishizawa, M. Umeda and I. Uchida, Kinetic Characterization of Single Particles of LiCoO2 by AC Impedance and Potential Step Methods, J. Electrochem. Soc., 2001, 148(5), A422 CrossRef CAS .
S. Cui, Y. Wei, T. Liu, W. Deng, Z. Hu, Y. Su, H. Li, M. Li, H. Guo, Y. Duan, W. Wang, M. Rao, J. Zheng, X. Wang and F. Pan, Optimized Temperature Effect of Li-Ion Diffusion with Layer Distance in Li(NixMnyCoz)O2 Cathode Materials for High Performance Li-Ion Battery, Adv. Energy Mater., 2016, 6(4), 1501309 CrossRef .
P. P. Prosini, M. Lisi, D. Zane and M. Pasquali, Determination of the chemical diffusion coefficient of lithium in LiFePO4, Solid State Ionics, 2002, 148(1–2), 45–51 CrossRef CAS .
K. Persson, V. A. Sethuraman, L. J. Hardwick, Y. Hinuma, Y. S. Meng, A. Van Der Ven, V. Srinivasan, R. Kostecki and G. Ceder, Lithium diffusion in graphitic carbon, J. Phys. Chem. Lett., 2010, 1(8), 1176–1180 CrossRef CAS .
P. Yu, B. N. Popov, J. A. Ritter and R. E. White, Determination of the Lithium Ion Diffusion Coefficient in Graphite, J. Electrochem. Soc., 1999, 146(1), 8–14 CrossRef CAS .
N. Ding, J. Xu, Y. X. Yao, G. Wegner, X. Fang, C. H. Chen and I. Lieberwirth, Determination of the diffusion coefficient of lithium ions in nano-Si, Solid State Ionics, 2009, 180(2), 222–225 CrossRef CAS .
K. Pan, F. Zou, M. Canova, Y. Zhu and J.-H. Kim, Systematic electrochemical characterizations of Si and SiO anodes for high-capacity Li-Ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2019, 413, 20–28 CrossRef CAS .
H. Jin, S. Xin, C. Chuang, W. Li, H. Wang, J. Zhu, H. Xie, T. Zhang, Y. Wan, Z. Qi, W. Yan, Y.-R. Lu, T.-S. Chan, X. Wu, B. Goodenough John, H. Ji and X. Duan, Black phosphorus composites with engineered interfaces for high-rate high-capacity lithium storage, Science, 2020, 370(6513), 192–197 CrossRef CAS PubMed .
B. Li, C. Han, Y.-B. He, C. Yang, H. Du, Q.-H. Yang and F. Kang, Facile synthesis of Li4Ti5O12/C composite with super rate performance, Energy Environ. Sci., 2012, 5(11), 9595–9602 RSC .
J. Sugiyama, H. Nozaki, I. Umegaki, K. Mukai, K. Miwa, S. Shiraki, T. Hitosugi, A. Suter, T. Prokscha, Z. Salman, J. S. Lord and M. Månsson, Li-ion diffusion in Li4Ti5O12 and LiTi2O4 battery materials detected by muon spin spectroscopy, Phys. Rev. B: Condens. Matter Mater. Phys., 2015, 92(1), 014417 CrossRef .
W. Song, X. Ji, Z. Wu, Y. Yang, Z. Zhou, F. Li, Q. Chen and C. E. Banks, Exploration of ion migration mechanism and diffusion capability for Na3V2(PO4)2F3 cathode utilized in rechargeable sodium-ion batteries, J. Power Sources, 2014, 256, 258–263 CrossRef CAS .
A. Gao, M. Li, N. Guo, D. Qiu, Y. Li, S. Wang, X. Lu, F. Wang and R. Yang, K-Birnessite Electrode Obtained by Ion Exchange for Potassium-Ion Batteries: Insight into the Concerted Ionic Diffusion and K Storage Mechanism, Adv. Energy Mater., 2019, 9(1), 1802739 CrossRef .
F. Mizuno, A. Hayashi, K. Tadanaga and M. Tatsumisago, New, Highly Ion-Conductive Crystals Precipitated from Li2S–P2S5 Glasses, Adv. Mater., 2005, 17(7), 918–921 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Kato, S. Hori, T. Saito, K. Suzuki, M. Hirayama, A. Mitsui, M. Yonemura, H. Iba and R. Kanno, High-power all-solid-state batteries using sulfide superionic conductors, Nat. Energy, 2016, 1(4), 1–7 Search PubMed .
Y. Inaguma, C. Liquan, M. Itoh, T. Nakamura, T. Uchida, H. Ikuta and M. Wakihara, High ionic conductivity in lithium lanthanum titanate, Solid State Commun., 1993, 86(10), 689–693 CrossRef CAS .
V. Thangadurai and W. Weppner, Li6ALa2Ta2O12 (A = Sr,Ba): Novel Garnet-Like Oxides for Fast Lithium Ion Conduction, Adv. Funct. Mater., 2005, 15(1), 107–112 CrossRef CAS .
W. Liu, S. W. Lee, D. Lin, F. Shi, S. Wang, A. D. Sendek and Y. Cui, Enhancing ionic conductivity in composite polymer electrolytes with well-aligned ceramic nanowires, Nat. Energy, 2017, 2(5), 1–7 Search PubMed .
F. Croce, G. B. Appetecchi, L. Persi and B. Scrosati, Nanocomposite polymer electrolytes for lithium batteries, Nature, 1998, 394(6692), 456–458 CrossRef CAS .
T. J. Singh and S. V. Bhat, Morphology and conductivity studies of a new solid polymer electrolyte: (PEG)xLiClO4, Bull. Mater. Sci., 2003, 26(7), 707–714 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Li, J. Wang, J. Tang, Y. Liu and Y. He, Conductive performances of solid polymer electrolyte films based on PVB/LiClO4 plasticized by PEG200, PEG400 and PEG600, J. Power Sources, 2009, 187(2), 305–311 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
Table Content:

Broader context
Over the past few years, research on two-dimensional covalent organic framework (2D COF)-based electrochemical energy storage devices such as lithium-ion batteries, solid-state lithium batteries, and supercapacitors has experienced fast growth. Currently, an obstacle preventing the broad application of 2D COFs is their poor charge and mass transport abilities. Indeed, charge and mass transport are critical microscopic processes that impact device efficiencies and need to be correctly considered for rational molecular design. This review article offers a unified description of the fundamental charge and mass transport processes in 2D COFs, which form a necessary background for their future development in electrochemical energy storage applications. It is helpful to researchers new to 2D COFs and electrochemical storage devices and those already experienced in this matter.


 	Fig. 1  Illustration of 2D COFs used in (a) lithium(metal)-ion batteries, (b) supercapacitors, and (c) lithium batteries.	 


k
B
	Boltzmann's constant	
λ
	Reorganization energy

h
	Planck's constant	
H

ij

	Electronic coupling (charge transfer integral)

ħ
	Reduced Planck's constant	
ε

i

	Molecular energy levels

R
	Gas constant	
v
0
	Phonon vibration frequency

F
	Faraday's constant	
R

ij

	Distance between molecules

ε
0
	Vacuum permittivity	
G
	Gibbs free energy

ε
r
	Relative permittivity	
τ
	Carrier free time

e
	Elementary charge	
m*	Effective mass

T
	Temperature	
ω
	Frequency of lattice vibration

t
	Time	
k
	Wave vector

E
	Electric field	
J
ion
	Ionic flux

σ
	Electrical conductivity	
σ
ion
	Ionic conductivity

D
	Charge-carrier diffusion coefficient	
D
ion
	Ion diffusion coefficient

μ
	Charge mobility	
u
ion
	Ionic mobility

v
	Velocity	
σ
+
	Cation ion conductivity

n
	Charge-carrier density	
t
+
	Cation ion transfer number

V
	Voltage	
q
ion
	Charge of ion

I
	Current	
z

i

	Charge number of ion

J
	Current density	
I
p
	Peak current

B
	Magnetic field	
C
ion
	Ion concentration

d
	Dimensionality	
U
	Voltage sweeping rate

L
	Length or thickness	
n
e
	Number of electrons involved in the redox reaction

V
G
	Gate voltage	
R
t
	Resistance

V
D
	Drain voltage	
S
	Electrode area or film area

V
T
	Threshold voltage	
V
M
	Molar volume of electrode material

C

i

	Capacitance of gate dielectric	
A
W
	Warburg factor

W
	Channel width	
r
	Coordinate
σ = enμ	(1)
	(2)
	(3)
	(4)

 	Fig. 2  Illustrations of the chemical and band structures of (a) BP-COF43 (reproduced with permission from ref. 43. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society) and (b) graphene44 (reproduced with permission from ref. 44. Copyright 2018, Taylor & Francis).	 
	(5)
	(6)
	(7)

 	Fig. 3  Molecular frontier orbitals and energy levels of oligoacenes.48 Reproduced with permission from ref. 48. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society.	 
	(8)

 	Fig. 4  (a) Illustration of molecular relaxation and the evaluation of the reorganization energy50 (reproduced with permission from ref. 50. Copyright 2019, Elsevier). Evolution of the charge transfer integral on (b) the molecular angle and (c) distance52 (reproduced with permission from ref. 52. Copyright 2006, American Chemical Society).	 
	(9)
	(10)
	(11)
tpeak = 0.787tL	(12)
	(13)
	(14)
	(15)
	(16)
	(17)
	(18)
	(19)
	(20)
	(21)
	(22)
	(23)

HHTP-MIDA-COF	

	3.4 ± 2.5	∼3 × 10−6	DFT calculation combined with THz spectroscopy/Van der Pauw	
77

CuPc-MIDA-COF	

	8.3 (Electron)	∼7 × 10−6	Van der Pauw	
77

TPB-TFB COF	

	165	—	DFT calculation combined with THz spectroscopy	
68

Pyr-COF	

	66 (both electron and hole)	—	DFT calculation	
39

Por-COF	

	82 (hole)	—	DFT calculation	
39

ZnPor-COF	

	94 (hole)	—	DFT calculation	
39

COF-366	

	8.1 (hole)	—	TOF current integration	
37

COF-66	

	3.0 (hole)	—	TOF current integration	
37

FL-COF-1	

	—	1.0 × 10−4 (I2 doped)	Four-point-probe	
78

TTF-Ph-COF	

	0.2	10−5 (I2 oxidized)	FP-TRMC/2-probe	
79

TTF-Py-COF	

	0.08	10−6 (I2 oxidized)	FP-TRMC	
79

DPP2-HHTP-COF	

	—	2.2 × 10−6	Van der Pauw	
80

Tang-COF	

	—	In-plane: 5 × 10−12 (pristine)	4-Probe	
81

2 × 10−3 (I2 doped)
Out-of-plane: 1.6 × 10−5 (pristine)
1.5 × 10−3 (I2 doped)
sp2c-COF	

	—	6.1 × 10−16 (pristine)	2-Probe	
82

7.1 × 10−4 (I2 doped)
COF-DC-8	

	—	2.51 × 10−5 (pristine)	4-Probe	
83

Up to ∼10−2 (I2-doped)
ZnPc-pz COF	

	4.8 (hole, pristine)	7 × 10−7 (pristine)	Van der Pauw	
84 and 85

∼22 (hole, I2-doped)	3.1 × 10−4 (I2-doped)
CuPc-pz COF	

	0.9 (hole)	3.3 × 10−7	Van der Pauw	
84

NiPc-CoTAA	

	0.15 (Hole)	8.16 × 10−5 (intrinsic)	Hall effect/4-probe	
86

5.2 × 10−3 (I2-doped)
PyVg-COF	

	9 × 10−4 (Hole, zero-field deduced)	4 × 10−3 (out-of-plane)	TOF/2-probe	
87

1.4 × 10−5 (Electron, zero-field deduced)	1.8 × 10−12 (in-plane)
NiPc-NH-CoPcF8	

	23.7 (Compressed pallet, hole)	2.72 × 10−2 (compressed pallet)	Van der Pauw and OFET/4-probe	
88

35.4 (Film, hole)	3.02 × 10−2 (compressed pallet, I2-doped)
0.13–0.34 (OFET, hole)	1.27 × 10−1 (film)
1.29 × 10−1 (film, I2-doped)
NiPc-NH-CuPcF8	

	20.2 (Compressed pallet, hole)	2.41 × 10−2 (compressed pallet)	Van der Pauw and OFET/4-probe	
88

2.60 × 10−2 (compressed pallet)
1.15 × 10−1 (film)
35.1 (Film, hole)
1.12 × 10−1 (film, I2-doped)

 	Fig. 5  (a) Chemical structure and (b) STM image of COF-420. (c) dI/dV spectra at cores A and B. Calculated PDOS for (d) standalone COF-420 and (e) COF-420 on Au(111).91 Reproduced with permission from ref. 91. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 


Molecular structure	See discussions	See discussions
Topology	See discussions	See discussions
Temperature	↑ (for hopping mechanism)	↑ (for hopping mechanism)
↓ (for band transport)	↑ At low T and ↓ at high T (for band transport)
Traps	↓	↓
Molecular packing order	↑	↑
Electric field	↑ (for hopping mechanism)	↑ (for hopping mechanism)
↓ (for band transport)	↓ (for band transport)
Pressure	↑	↑
Charge-carrier density	↑ At low carrier density and	↑
↓ At high carrier density

 	Fig. 6  Examples of the topologies, monomer units and linkages of 2D COFs.	 

 	Fig. 7  Chemical structures and calculated band structures at the PBE0 level of (a) pyrene (Pyr-COF), (b) porphyrin (Por-COF), and (c) zinc porphyrin (ZnPor-COF) 2D COFs.39 Reproduced with permission from ref. 39. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 8  Truncated chemical structures and PBE0 band structures of (a) p6m benzene–ethynylene COF and (b) pmm pyridine–ethynylene COF.42 Reproduced with permission from ref. 42. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 
	(24)
Jion = −Dion∇Cion	(25)
	(26)
	(27)
	(28)
	(29)

 	Fig. 9  (a) Illustration of Schottky defect and Frenkel defect. Illustrations of the (b) vacancy/defect-mediated mechanism, (c) direct interstitial mechanism and (d) the interstitial-substitutional exchange mechanism.	 
	(30)
	(31)
	(32)

 	Fig. 10  (a) Temperature dependence of the ionic conductivity of PVAc:PVdF:LiClO4 polymer electrolytes containing various blend ratios and (b) the VTF fitted plot.140 Reproduced with permission from ref. 140. Copyright 2006, Elsevier. (c) Diffusion coefficients of Li+ and TFSI+ in a 4 kg mol−1 PEO at 363 K.141 (d) The ion diffusion coefficients at different molecular weight of PEO (4 kg mol−1) at 363 K141 (reproduced with permission from ref. 141. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society).	 
	(33)
	(34)
	(35)
	(36)
	(37)
	(38)
	(39)
	(40)

IISERP-CON1	

	5.48 × 10−11	EIS	
159

AZO-1	

	8.39 × 10−9	GITT	
160

AZO-2	

	2.34 × 10−11	GITT	
160

DAAQ-TFP	

	1.6 × 10−10	CV	
161

2.48 × 10−11 (as prepared)	EIS	
162

6.94 × 10−11 (exfoliated)
DAPH-TFP	

	1.1 × 10−9	CV	
161

CTF	

	2.43 × 10−11–5.09 × 10−10 (exfoliated)	GITT	
163

FCTF	

	3.15 × 10−12–7.27 × 10−11, (as-prepared)	GITT	
163

2.36 × 10−10–7.88 × 109 (exfoliated)
rCTF	

	8.82 × 10−12 (before activation)	GITT	
164

7.00 × 10−11 (after activation)

LiCON-1	

	2.13 × 10−7	
165

(Li loading: 0.27%)
LiCON-2	

	4.36 × 10−6	
165

(Li loading: 2.05%)
LiCON-3	

	3.21 × 10−5 (RT)	
165

0.90 × 10−5 (−40 °C)
1.17 × 10−4 (100 °C)
(Li loading: 1.41%)
H-Li-ImCOF	

	5.3 × 10−3	
166

(Li loading: 3.2%; with ∼20 wt% PC)
CF3-Li-ImCOF	

	7.2 × 10−3	
166

(Li loading: 1.4%; with ∼20 wt% PC)
CH3-Li-ImCOF	

	8.0 × 10−5	
166

(Li loading: 1.7%; ∼20 wt% PC)
dCOF-ImTFSI-60	

	2.79 × 10−3 (100 °C)	
167

4.92 × 10−3 (120 °C)
7.05 × 10−3 (150 °C)
COF-5	

	2.6 × 10−4	
168

Li loading: 3.77%
3.60 × 10−8	
169

(Li loading: 0.28%; COF-5:PEG 800 is 3:2 (wt))
TpPa-1	

	1.5 × 10−4	
168

CON-TFSI	

	5.74 × 10−5 (RT)	
170

2.09 × 10−4 (70 °C)

 	Fig. 11  Illustrations of the chemical structures: (a) DAAQ-TFP and DAPH-TFP COFs171 (reproduced with permission from ref. 171. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society); (b) AZO-1, AZO-2 and AZO-399 (reproduced with permission from ref. 99. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH); (c) LiCON-1, LiCON-2, LiCON-3165 (reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society) and [TEMPO]50%-NiP-COF and [TEMPO]100%-NiP-COF172 (reproduced with permission from ref. 172. Copyright 2015, Wiley-VCH).	 

 	Fig. 12  (a) Illustrations of the structures of 2D COF microcrystalline powder and oriented thin film176 (reproduced with permission from ref. 176. Copyright 2015, American Chemical Society). (b) Illustrations of AA and AB stacking patterns of PTDCOF177 (reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2021, Elsevier). (c) Illustration of exfoliated 2D COFs as cathodes for lithium-ion batteries162 (reproduced with permission from ref. 162. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 13  (a) Chemical structure of Li-ImCOFs. (b) Molecular modeling of H-Li-ImCOF, CH3-Li-ImCOF, and CF3-Li-ImCOF.166 Reproduced with permission from ref. 166. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 14  Temperature dependencies of the ionic conductivities of (a) LiCON-1, LiCON-2 and LiCON-3165 (reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society); (b) TpPa-SO3Li COF181 (reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society); (c) Li+@TPB-DMTP-COF (black) and Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF (red)182 (reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society); (d) PEG-Li+@EB-COF-ClO4 (orange), PEG-Li+@CD-COF-Li (blue), PEG-Li+@COF-300 (red), PEG-Li+@COF-5 (purple), PEG/Li+/EB-COF-ClO4 (gray), and Li+@CD-COF-Li (green)169 (reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 15  (a) Schematic of atomic structure of rCTF. (b) Illustrations of the lithium storage stages. (c) GITT voltage profiles and diffusion coefficients of a rCTF electrode at different states of charge. (d) Cycle retention results of the rCTF electrode at activation rates of 0.5C, 10C, and 20C.183 Reproduced with permission from ref. 183. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 16  (a) Chemical structure of PTDCOF. Structural representations of full lithiation state of PTDCOF with (b) AA and (c) AB stacking patterns (brown: carbon, cyan: nitrogen, pink: hydrogen, green: lithium). (d) The proposed diffusion model of lithium in PTDCOF.177 Reproduced with permission from ref. 177. Copyright 2021, Elsevier.	 

 	Fig. 17  (a) Chemical structure of HATN-AQ-COF. (b) Proposed structural evolution during the lithiation process.184 Reproduced with permission from ref. 184. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 18  (a) Chemical structure of PIBN-G, (b) discharge/charge profile at 0.1C, (c) ex situ solid-state 13C NMR spectra for the different stages in (b). (d) Illustrations of the lithiation and delithiation of the different kinds of carbonyl groups.185 Reproduced with permission from ref. 185. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 19  Chemical structure of (a) COF-LZU-1 and (b) COF@CNTs. Schematical illustrations of (c) the reversible five-step lithium-ion insertion and extraction reactions and (d) ion storage into expanded COF layers. (e) Cycling performances of the COF and COF@CNTs at 100 mA g−1.189 Reproduced with permission from ref. 189. Copyright 2018, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 20  (a) Chemical structure of IISERP-CON1. (b) Electron density and potential map before and after lithiation. (c). Capacity retention and coulombic efficiency over cycles.190 Reproduced with permission from ref. 190. Copyright 2018, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 21  (a) The structure of TFPB-COF. (b) In situ Raman and (c) ex situ FTIR spectra recorded for the TFPB-COF/MnO2 anode. (d) Cycle performances of E-TFPB-COF/MnO2, E-TFPB-COF, TFPB-COF, and the commercial MnO2 at 0.1 A g−1.191 Reproduced with permission from ref. 191. Copyright 2019, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 22  (a) 13C NMR spectra of the 4–12 nm thick sample and that discharged to 0.05 V. (b) 23Na NMR spectra of the 4–12 nm thick sample discharged to 0.05 V. (c) Proposed sodiation process of DAAQ-TFP COF.192 Reproduced with permission from ref. 192. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 23  (a) Proposed 12-Na+ redox mechanism for each TQBQ-COF repetitive unit. (b) Long cycling stability of TQBQ-COF at different current densities (calculated based on the mass ratio).193 Reproduced with permission from ref. 193. Copyright 2020, Springer Nature.	 

 	Fig. 24  (a) Chemical structure of COF-10 and (b) proposed potassium storage mechanism. (c) Cycling performance of COF-10@CNT and COF-10 at 100 mA g−1.194 Reproduced with permission from ref. 194. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 25  (a) Chemical structure of TpPa-SO3Li. (b) Model structure of TpPa-SO3Li viewed along c-axis (hydrogen atoms are hidden). (c) Illustration of Li-ion migration inside the pore (top) with corresponding energy diagrams (bottom).181 Reproduced with permission from ref. 181. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 26  (a) Li stripping-plating test of Li | LiCON-3 | Li at a current density of 0.05 and 0.1 mA cm−2 for 500 cycles (1 h per cycle). (b) DSC curve of LiCON-3 from −150 to 150 °C. (c) Cycling performance of all-solid-state organic Li ion battery with a configuration of BQ |LiCON-3| Li165 (reproduced with permission from ref. 165. Copyright 2020, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 27  (a) Chemical structure of Li-CON-TFSI. (b) MAS 7Li NMR spectra of Li-CON-TFSI and LiTFSI. The inset shows the possible local Li+ environments in Li-CON-TFSI.170 Reproduced with permission from ref. 170. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 28  Atomic structures 2D COFs with PEG chains: (a) CD-COF, COF-5, COF-300, and EB-COF169 (reproduced with permission from ref. 169. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society). Chemical structures of 2D COFs with PEO chains: (b) Li+@TPB-BMTP-COF182 (reproduced with permission from ref. 182. Copyright 2018, American Chemical Society) and (c) COF-PEO-9199 (reproduced with permission from ref. 199. Copyright 2019, American Chemical Society).	 

 	Fig. 29  
Ab initio-calculated (a) mean square deviation of Li ions at 300 K, (b) the probability density of Li ions at 700 K, (c) a Li+ diffusion event and (d) the distances of the oxygen atoms with Li+.200 Reproduced with permission from ref. 200. Copyright 2019, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 30  Molecular dynamics simulated TAPB-PDA COF mixed with LiClO4. (a) Top and (b) side view of the snapshot at 200 ns. (c) A tilted view with representative local structures of Li+, ClO4−, and COF. Red spheres represent Li+. Green spheres and rods represent ClO4−.204 Reproduced with permission from ref. 204. Copyright 2022, Royal Society of Chemistry.	 

 	Fig. 31  (a) Illustration of TAPB-PDA COF and its monomer units. (b) Proposed schematic diagrams showing the effect of COF film on a Li anode, where the COF is Li+ conducting and TFSI− blocking. (c) Illustrations of Li plating/stripping on polished Li and COF-Li. Cross-section images for (d) COF-Li and (e) polished Li after 20 cycles of stripping/plating.205 Reproduced with permission from ref. 205. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 32  (a) Chemical structure of ACOF. (b) Illustration of the selective ion transport of electrolyte in ACOF (blue: Li, orange: Si, grey: C, pink: O, yellow: anion). (c) Electrostatic potential mapping of truncated ACOF (grey: Si, red: O, turquoise blue: C, white: H); (d) Electron difference density isosurface map for Li-ion adsorption on the SiO6 unit (blue: Li). (e) Optimized configurations and corresponding adsorption energies of Li ions on the SiO6 unit. (f) Potential energy files for Li-ion diffusion in the aromatic region of ACOF.206 Reproduced with permission from ref. 206. Copyright 2021, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 33  3D visualization of (a) cycled Li and (b) schematic of its SEI structure. (c) 3D visualization of (a) cycled COF-Li and (b) schematic of its SEI structure.207 Reproduced with permission from ref. 207. Copyright 2022, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 34  Schematic of 2D COFs with their proposed mechanism as electrodes for supercapacitors: (a) JUC-510, JUC-511, and JUC-512 COFs. (b) Representative diagram of charge storage in exfoliated COFs. (c) Capacitance retention of JUC-511 and JUC-512 capacitor cells under 10000 consecutive cycles.209 Reproduced with permission from ref. 209. Copyright 2020, Wiley-VCH.	 

 	Fig. 35  (a) Chemical structure of TpPa-R2 COF. (b) Proposed H-bonding stabilized both the hydroquinone (H2Q) and benzoquinone (Q). (c) Galvanostatic charge/discharge experiments at different current densities. (d) Long-term cyclic stability performance at 5 A g−1.210 Reproduced with permission from ref. 210. Copyright 2017, American Chemical Society.	 

 	Fig. 36  (a) Chemical structures of AAm-TPB and AAm-Py COF. (b) The Redox behavior of AAm-TPB through reversible benzoid diamine to quinoid diimine transformation and enol to ketone transformation. (c) Gravimetric capacitance of AAm-TPB dependence on different scan rates.211 Reproduced with permission from ref. 211. Copyright 2021, Wiley-VCH.	 

Pentacene	

	Crystalline	35 (hole)	2.13 × 10−4 (film)	SCLC/2-probe	
215 and 216

TIPS-PEN	

	Crystalline	0.18 (hole)	—	OFET	
212

C8-BTBT	

	Crystalline	16.4 (hole)	—	OFET	
213

CBP	

	Amorphous	∼8 × 10−4 (hole)	—	TOF	
217

∼5 × 10−4 (electron)
NPB	

	Amorphous	∼5 × 10−4 (hole)	—	TOF	
218

∼3 × 10−5 (electron)
P3HT	

	Crystalline	6 × 10−3 (hole)	∼9 × 10−9	OFET/2-probe	
219 and 220


Li+	LiCoO2	10−11–10−7	EIS	
221

Li+	Li(Ni0.6Mn0.2Co0.2)O2	∼10−8 (RT)	AIMD	
222

∼10−9 (−25 °C)
Li+	Li(Ni0.6Mn0.2Co0.2)O2	6× 10−11–8 × 10−11 (RT)	GITT	
222

2 × 10−11 −4 × 10−11 (−25 °C)
Li+	LiFePO4	2.2 × 10−16–1.8 × 10−14	GITT	
223

Li+	LiFePO4	10−14–10−12	PITT	
151

Li+	LiFePO4	10−15–10−12	EIS	
151

Li+	LiFePO4	10−14	CV	
151

Li+	Graphite	∼10−7–10−6 (in-plane)	Electrochemical test combined with molecular simulations	
224

∼10−11 (out-of-plane)
Li+	Graphite	6.51 × 10−11–1.12 × 10−10 (RT)	EIS	
225

1.35 × 10−10 (55 °C)
Li+	Si nanoparticles	∼10−12	CV, EIS, GITT	
226

Li+	SiO	10−12–10−10	EIS	
227

Li+	SiO	10−11–10−8	GITT	
227

Li+	Black phosphorus-graphite/PANI	7.5 × 10−13	CV	
228

Li+	Li8.4Nb16W5O55	1.6 × 10−9	NMR	
156

Li+	Li6.8Nb18W16O93	1.1 × 10−9	NMR	
156

Li+	Li4Ti5O12/C	6.82 × 10−12	EIS	
229

Li+	Li4Ti5O12	(3.2 ± 0.8) × 10−11	NMR	
230

Na+	Na3V2(PO4)2F3	∼10−12	EIS	
231

K+	K-Birnessite	10−13–10−10	GITT	
232


Li2S-P2S5	Solid	3.2 × 10−3	
233

Li10GeP2S12	Solid	1.2 × 10−2	
197

Li9.54Si1.74P1.44S11.7Cl0.3	Solid	2.5 × 10−2	
234

Li0.34La0.51TiO2.94	Solid	2 × 10−5	
235

Li6BaLa2Ta2O12	Solid	4 × 10−5	
236

Li0.33La0.557TiO3+ PAN-LiClO4	Solid	6.05 × 10−5	
237

PEO-LiClO4-10wt%TiO2	Solid	∼10−5	
238

PEG-LiClO4	Solid	7.3 × 10−7	
239

PVB-LiClO4-30wt%PEG400	Solid	2.15 × 10−6	
240

PVB-LiClO4-30wt%PEG600	Solid	4.18 × 10−9	
240

LiPF6-EC-EMC	Liquid	9.5 × 10−3	
196


This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2023
