Green chemistry and the health implications of nanoparticles  - Green Chemistry (RSC Publishing) DOI:10.1039/B517131H View PDF VersionPrevious ArticleNext Article  DOI: 10.1039/B517131H
(Critical Review)
Green Chem., 2006, 8, 417-432Show CompoundsShow Chemical TermsGreen chemistry and the health implications of nanoparticles

        
          
            Matthew A. 
            Albrecht
          
          
        
      , 
      
        
          
            Cameron W. 
            Evans
          
          
        
       and 

        
          
            Colin L. 
            Raston
          
          
        
      *
      School of Biomedical, Biomolecular and Chemical Sciences, The University of Western Australia, M313, Crawley, Australia 6009. E-mail: clraston@chem.uwa.edu.au;  Fax: +618 6488 8683;   Tel: +618 6488 3045
Received 
      2nd December 2005
    , Accepted 3rd March 2006First published on 23rd March 2006AbstractUntil recently the spectacular developments in nanotechnology have been with little regard to their potential effect on human health and the environment. There are no specific regulations on nanoparticles except existing regulations covering the same material in bulk form. Difficulties abound in devising such regulations, beyond self-imposed regulations by responsible companies, because of the likelihood of different properties exhibited by any one type of nanoparticle, which are tuneable by changing their size, shape and surface characteristics. Green chemistry metrics need to be incorporated into nanotechnologies at the source. This review scopes this issue in the context of potential health effects of nanoparticles, along with medical applications of nanoparticles including imaging, drug delivery, disinfection, and tissue repair. Nanoparticles can enter the human body through the lungs, the intestinal tract, and to a lesser extent the skin, and are likely to be a health issue, although the extent of effects on health are inconclusive. Nanoparticles can be modified to cross the brain blood barrier for medical applications, but this suggests other synthetic nanoparticles may unintentionally cross this barrier.Matthew AlbrechtMatthew Albrecht was born and lives in Perth, Western Australia and has completed a BSc in chemistry and pharmacology at The University of Western Australia (2005). He is currently undertaking an Honours degree in pharmacology at the same institution, researching amphetamine addiction under the supervision of Associate Professor Mathew Martin-Iverson and Dr Kyle Dyer.Cameron EvansCameron Evans was born in Auckland, New Zealand but he has lived in Perth, Western Australia for most of his life. He is a double degree candidate in science and engineering at The University of Western Australia, currently undertaking an Honours degree under the supervision of Professor Colin Raston and Dr Mohamed Makha. Other interests include music, art and computing.Colin RastonProfessor Colin Raston is an Australian Research Council Professorial Fellow at The University of Western Australia, being appointed to the University in 2003. He completed a PhD under the guidance of Professor Allan White, and after postdoctoral studies with Professor Michael Lappert at the University of Sussex, he was appointed a Lecturer at The University of Western Australia (1981) then to the Chair of Chemistry at Griffith University (1988), being awarded a DSc there in 1993, Monash University (1995) and Leeds (2001). His research interests cover aspects of nanochemistry and green chemistry.
Introduction
Nanotechnology (and nanoscience, the science leading to nanotechnology) can be defined in a number of ways. In general, however, it is regarded as the ability to manipulate, measure, manufacture and make predictions at the scale of 1–100 nm.1–3 At the nanometer dimension, materials exhibit novel properties, different to those of both the isolated atom and bulk material, the properties depending largely on the size of the particles from which the material is made. Nanotechnology has not arisen from any one particular scientific discipline. Instead, it is interdisciplinary involving chemistry, physics, biology, and engineering,2 and in recent times toxicology. Often the plural term, nanotechnologies, is used because there are many areas and scientific disciplines involved.
Materials at the nanometer dimension are not new. They are common in nature, for example, life depends on many nano-scale objects, including proteins, enzymes and DNA, and nano-sized particles occur naturally in the atmosphere. Silver and gold nanoparticles have been used to colour ceramic glazes and stained glass since the 10th Century AD,4 and possibly even the 4th Century.5 Natural sources of nanoparticles include fires and volcanic eruptions. Biological examples include viruses, magnetite (found in cells and animals) and ferritin (a protein which stores excess iron in the body). Nevertheless exposure of humans to nanoparticles has increased dramatically over the last hundred years as a result of nanoparticles produced by simple combustion and other industrialisation processes. Internal combustion engines, power plants and welding fumes, for example, all release nanoparticles into the environment. Even frying or grilling food is a source of nanoparticles.6
There has been much hype associated with the applications of nanotechnology,7 and what it can deliver in improving the quality of human life. Short- to medium-term benefits of nanotechnology include environmental pollution cleanup, better drug delivery mechanisms offering fewer side effects (for example more precise anticancer therapies), improvements in information technology, ‘smart’ fabrics which adjust to suit the temperature, self-cleaning window glass and more efficient chemical processes in industry. Some of these technologies have already been implemented. Longer-term futuristic applications may involve the design of additional ‘smart’ materials such as food packaging which changes colour when the ‘use by’ date of its contents expires, or a space-elevator concept being developed by NASA.
Nanotechnology is revolutionary and will impact on economies through new consumer products, and manufacturing methods and materials usage.2 It will also impact on military technology. Investment in developing new nanotechnologies world-wide is several billion dollars per year, and data suggests that, in 2003, nanotechnology funding was generally equally divided between government and corporations.8
Nanotechnology is important in developing sustainable technologies for the future, for humanity and the environment.6,9 However, care needs to be taken to ensure that nanotechnology is not creating future problems, as has been the case for many technologies of the twentieth century, for example, the dramatic reduction in ozone in the upper atmosphere by chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs). These so-called ‘miracle’ chemicals were banned from ‘nonessential products’ in the US in the early 1990s, many years after their detrimental effects were first noted.10 Similarly, DDT entered widespread commercial use in the US in the late 1940s and was outlawed in 1972.11 The use of lead in petrol, asbestos as a non-flammable building material, and polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in electronics12 have also led to environmental disasters. Such examples offer insight into the possible ‘double-edged’ nature of nanotechnology. Many groups (including the UK Health and Safety Executive) are concerned that possible health effects caused by nanotechnology will be significantly delayed,13 and the first detrimental effects, either to human health or the environment, will be noticed long after commercialisation.
It is important to differentiate between ‘free’ and ‘fixed’ nanoparticles. The former pose a more direct health threat because they are more difficult to contain, easily become airborne and can be inhaled. Another distinction is the difference between nanoparticles which have been designed intentionally for some purpose (often referred to as ‘engineered’), and nanoparticles which are by-products, waste, or naturally-occurring.14 In general, nanotechnology only deals with engineered particles. This review covers the health implications of both free and fixed nanoparticulates, and also engineered, waste and biological nanomaterials.
Another way that nanotechnology can be defined is by differentiating between the production processes of ‘top-down’ and ‘bottom-up’. Top-down refers to the fabrication of nanostructures by miniaturising present methods, such as machining and etching techniques. The other approach is bottom-up, sometimes labelled as molecular nanotechnology, whereby nano-sized objects are constructed from smaller units, even down to the manipulation of individual atoms.3
For the purpose of this review, nanotechnology is defined as nano-scale materials, structures and devices covering the transport of substances such as biological materials on nanoparticulate surfaces, the interactions of biological materials with nanotubes, and the direct effect of nano-sized materials on human health. Minimising the impact of nanoparticles on human health and the environment requires the implementation of green chemistry principles at the source. This includes minimising both waste and the use and generation of toxic materials. Issues relating to minimising the impact of nanotechnology on human health and the environment are summarised in Fig. 1, and are elaborated upon below.
 Fig. 1  Key issues in dealing with the potential impact of nanotechnology on human health. 
Types of nanomaterials
Nanostructures can be classified according to the number of dimensions at the nanometer level. Features at the nanometer level on a surface are one-dimensional, nanotubes have two nano-sized dimensions, and nanoparticles are nano-sized in all three dimensions. Nanoparticles can be engineered (intentional) or incidental/waste nanoparticles (unintentional), and are the most basic structure that can feature in nanotechnology. They can also be referred to as nanocrystals if they have highly ordered crystalline structures, and as quantum dots (QDs) when such structures are semiconducting.2
Nanoparticles can be fixed in a matrix or free. This distinction is important because it directly affects human exposure. Free nanoparticles can enter and move within the human body, depending on the biological compatibility of the surface, whereas fixed nanoparticles are immobilised and thus cannot be inhaled.14 Free nanoparticles can also be named as ultrafine particles which is principally a term used in toxicology.6
Engineered nanoparticulates cover a broad range of substances, including elemental metals, inorganic substances like titanium dioxide (TiO2), zinc sulfide (ZnS) and oxide (ZnO), and carbon-based fullerenes and their derivatives and composites. Metallic nanoparticles have been formed from a variety of elements including iron, nickel, zinc, titanium, gold, silver, palladium, iridium and platinum.15–18 Such materials are sometimes used as catalysts, and the more inert metals are being studied for their use in medicine, for example in the thermal treatment therapy of tumours.19
Inorganic nanoparticles of TiO2, ZnS and ZnO have already entered the consumer market as sunscreens and cosmetic products. Nanocrystals of TiO2, an inorganic solid obtained from natural ores, have been found in the lungs of a 5300-year-old iceman, suggesting that such nanoparticles exist naturally in the atmosphere.20 Examples of the material used in quantum dots include inorganic cadmium selenide and related materials.21–24
Fullerenes can be both engineered and unintentional nanoparticles. They are generated in combustion and cooking, and are the subject of intense research. Mitsubishi recently commissioned a plant to produce a few hundred tonnes of C60 per year.25 Incidental nanoparticles are formed as a result of combustion processes, including soot from diesel exhaust26 and power generation, and the natural weathering of silicates and iron oxides.2 Anthropogenic sources of nanoparticles have increased considerably over the last century with industrialisation.6 Algae and plants are also capable of producing colloids of nanoparticles.27 Nanoparticles also encompass nanorobots which are synthetic machines designed for a specific function.
Initially nanotubes were constructed only from carbon atoms, arranged in rolled-up, graphite-like sheets. They can be made from other light elements including boron and nitrogen,28,29 and metal complexes. Carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are the most common type of nanotubes under current investigation, and come in two principal types, single-walled (SW) and multi-walled (MW). The latter can consist of up to thirty concentric tubes, and have diameters of up to 50 nm. SWCNTs generally have a diameter close to 1.4 nm.2
The length of nanotubes can be up to one thousand times their diameter, and they can form fibrous crystalline materials. For the purpose of toxicology, an analogy can be made to other fibres such as asbestos, which are sufficiently small to make their way deep into the lungs, where they can enter lung tissue cells. The long, thin geometry and insolubility of nanotubes may have the potential to cause effects similar to those arising from inhalation of asbestos fibres.30 Such bio-persistent substances can remain in the lungs for decades, and can result in fibrosis (scarring of the lung tissue) and increase the risk of cancer.
Materials with engineered surfaces at the nanometer dimensions feature in many nanotechnologies. Such surfaces are used to prevent coagulation of ‘naked’ material, especially nanoparticles, and can alter the hydrophilic/hydrophobic balance of the underlying material for biological applications, for example, in preparing water repelling surfaces and delivery of material across the blood brain barrier (BBB).31,32 The latter raises concerns about the entry of unintentional nanoparticles into the human body, and any associated toxicological effects.
Applications of nanotechnology impacting on human health
The examples of nanotechnology discussed below are representative of current, developing and futuristic applications which relate to human health. For many applications the toxicology of the nanomaterial has not been addressed, although its importance is now being realised. The quantities of nanomaterials being generated range from multi-tonne carbon black production and fuming silica through to microgram quantities for speciality applications in biological imaging.33
Device technology
(i) Programmed DNA that can hold molecule-size electronic devices, which may lead to devices that can replicate, and DNA machines with moving parts have potential as nanochemical sensors, switches and tweezers.34,35 (ii) Soft lithography techniques for moulding or printing nanopatterns on curved as well as flat surfaces.36 (iii) CNT or other nano-scaled bars for mechanical quantum computers,37 and nanocrystalline cylinders surrounded by silica as capacitors for storing data.38 (iv) Less toxic batteries with rapid recharge capabilities.39 (v) Photovoltaic cells for capturing infrared.40 (vi) Optical/holographic tweezers for assembling nanocomputers from nanotubes, purifying drugs, performing non-invasive surgery, and creating spinning liquid vortices that can act as microscopic pumps.41 (vii) Solar cell technology using less material with lower processing costs.42
Medical
This comes under the realms of nanomedicine, as the application of nanotechnology for the treatment, diagnosis, monitoring, and control of biological systems.34 Synthetic nanostructured biomaterials can be designed to self-assemble and create structures for tissue engineering, effectively mimicking biomineralization processes.43 Self-assembled peptides can direct mineralisation of hydroxyapatite including formation of collagen fibrils which is of interest in mineralised tissue repair.44 Light irradiation of gold-coated silica spheres trigger the release of heat that can destroy cancer cells.19,45–47 Gold nanoparticles themselves inhibit the growth of blood vessels. Such growth is an important process in the growth of tumours.48 Disinfection of surfaces is possible using UV photocatalytic oxidation with nanocrystalline TiO2.49,50 Artificial mechanical red blood cells (respirocytes) are mimics for the oxygen and carbon dioxide transport function of red blood cells. They can deliver 236 times more oxygen per unit volume than a natural red blood cell.51 Adsorption of antibodies on assemblies of single wall carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) forms the basis of an amperometric immunosensor.52 Functionalised CNTs are strong candidates for the delivery of drugs, antigens and genes, having been used as new platforms to detect antibodies associated with human autoimmune diseases with high specificity.53 Modified carboxy-fullerene C60 acts as a free radical scavenger, and can be used as a drug for a target activity on human cells of the immune system and their mitochondria, specifically for protection against apoptosis.54 The parent fullerene C60 and other derivatives have application as antioxidants against radical-induced biological processes.55
Medical imaging
Superparamagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles feature in in vivo applications including magnetic resonance, tissue repair, detoxification of biological fluids, drug delivery, imaging contrast enhancement (see below), and the treatment of hypothermia.56,57 Semiconducting QDs have a number of advantages over organic fluorophores for following cells in vivo at high resolutions.58,59
Drug delivery
Drugs (or contrasting agents) can be trapped physically within the hydrophobic cores of micelles, or similarly trapped in the aqueous space or be intercalated into the lipid bilayer of liposomes, depending on the physicochemical characteristics of the drug. There are also nanospheres where the drug of interest is dissolved, entrapped, attached or encapsulated throughout or within a polymeric matrix.34 Nanospheres loaded with antigen have possible applications in vaccine delivery.60 Drug delivery across the BBB is possible using nanoparticles.31,32 Natural polymers such as chitosan can be used for the delivery of anti-cancer drugs, genes and vaccines.61–64 Chitosan-DNA nanoparticles can be used as gene carriers.62 Nanoparticle aerosols are attractive for drug delivery because of their bioavailability in deep lung tissue and ease of delivery.57 SWCNTs have potential in drug, antigen and gene delivery,53 and functionalised SWCNTs with DNA attached can increase DNA uptake and gene expression more so than free DNA.53,65
Food additives
There appears to be resistance to applications of nanotechnology in food, in contrast to applications in medicine. Antioxidant catalytic devices keep deep-frying oil fresh significantly longer, resulting in better taste, crispier fried foods, better consistency of product, lower costs and greater profits, with substantial benefits to health and the environment. There is a US patent and FDA approval.66 Nano-based product packaging and nanodevices feature in tracking food origins and its freshness.67 Novel carriers including nanomolecular capsules have been developed for nutraceuticals to be incorporated in food systems and cosmetics formulations, increasing the bioavailability of the product.68
Molecular machines
A large research effort involves developing molecular machines based on molecules and macromolecules including DNA. They feature in the bottom up approach to nanotechnology, and incorporate molecular switches, logic gates, memory devices, photonic devices, non-linear optics, conducting wires, molecular magnets, and more.69
Military
CNTs have high electrical conductivity, and plastic composites based on them could provide lightweight shielding material for electromagnetic radiation. Computers and electronic devices for battlefield command, control and communication need to be protected from weapons that emit electromagnetic pulses.5 Smart materials may be able to change in response to their surroundings. Tiny computers embedded in materials could send signals to notify their status with the material changing colour on command, or generate electricity during the day and store it for later use. There is the prospect for coatings that stay clean and possibly the ability to heal themselves when damaged.70 CNTs spun into fibres are undergoing rapid development, along with composite fibres containing the same material, having potential in body and vehicle armour through to transmission line cables to woven fabrics and textiles.71
Chemical decomposition
Combustion-synthesized nanoparticles of TiO2 are more effective than bulk commercial material for the catalytic photodecomposition of various organic compounds. The high catalytic activity of the nanoparticles is attributed to their high surface area and the density of the surface hydroxyl groups.72 MgO nanoparticles adsorb and destroy various organophosphorus mimics of ‘warfare agents’ and can destroy fluorocarbons.73 Exxon Mobil use mesoporous material with pores less than one nanometer to improve breakdown of large hydrocarbon molecules to form gasoline.74 Conversion of polychlorobiphenyls (PCBs), organochlorine pesticides, and halogenated solvents to benign hydrocarbons (environmental decontamination) is possible using catalytic nanoparticles.75
Metal decontamination
Recombinant DNA techniques are being used to protein engineer biopolymers with novel molecular arrangements and tuneable properties, with high affinity for the selective removal of toxic heavy metals such as cadmium, mercury and arsenic.76 Poly(amidoamine) dendrimers have functional nitrogen groups which can act as chelating agents for binding toxic metal ions, electron transfer mediators, redox active metal clusters and metal clusters with catalytic properties.77 Brushes have been developed for sweeping up nano-dust, painting microstructures, and cleaning up pollutants in water, for example, the soaking up of silver ions from contaminated water.78
Regulatory bodies and legislation
There are new directives of the European Parliament restricting the use of certain hazardous substances in electrical and electronic equipment,79 including heavy metals such as mercury and cadmium. Chronic overexposure to cadmium may result in lung, liver and kidney damage, and cadmium and its compounds are carcinogenic to humans. Mercury is a bioaccumulative poison and targets the kidneys and brain. Chronic poisoning (mercurialism) causes depression of the central nervous system. A recent study revealed that cadmium selenide QDs release toxic cadmium ions and as such cannot be considered biocompatible.80
Food Standards Australia New Zealand (FSANZ) is the regulatory body responsible for protecting public health in Australia by maintaining a safe food supply. Procedures set in place require that ‘all foods that have not traditionally been part of our diet’ pass a pre-market safety assessment. FSANZ claims that improved knowledge pertaining to safety and nutrition is being applied to the latest and emerging developments, which in the future may include the use of nanoparticles in food products.81 The US Food and Drug Administration (FDA) adopts a similar approach in the assessment of food safety in that pre-market assessments are required. It is dismissive of any risks posed by nanotechnology entering the food market and states that ‘the existing battery of pharmacological tests is probably adequate’ for the majority of products requiring regulation and that ‘If the manufacturer makes no nanotechnology claims… FDA may be unaware at the time that the product is in the review and approval process that nanotechnology is being employed’. Furthermore, they make the claim that in the use of nanotechnology in food, ‘size is not the issue’.82 An independent study in the UK suggests that substances in nanoparticulate form should be considered independent of their bulk counterparts. Current UK regulation does not require any additional testing of a substance produced in nanoparticulate form. The report recommends that the ‘regulatory gap’ be addressed.27
Advances in nanotechnology are keeping ahead of regulatory bodies, with most legislation as of late 2004 making no differentiation between bulk materials and their nano-counterparts. This is a problem because separate tests for nanomaterials are not required if the bulk material is certified as safe. However, it is well documented that benign bulk substances can show significant toxicity at the nanometer level. The EC and EPA are now addressing this deficiency. The first International Symposium on Nanotechnology and Occupational Health, co-sponsored by the British Health and Safety Executive (HSE) and the US National Institute for Occupational Health, was held in October 2004.83
Current recommendations27,84 call for: (i) Treating nanoparticles and nanotubes as hazardous substances. (ii) Assessing the risks posed by the release of nanoparticles during the product lifecycle. (iii) Studying the toxicity, bioaccumulation and epidemiology of the products of nanotechnology as a preventative measure.
In the UK the Control of Substances to Health Regulations (2002) require assessment of risk and suitable controls to be put in place for any substance. However, nano-featured materials do not qualify as new materials. There are clearly significant gaps in nanotechnology—nomenclature, measurement of exposure, when a nanomaterial is considered new, the difference in the effect of a nanoparticle of one size relative to another, test data that is required, whether new toxicology models are needed, and the level of exposure that will cause harm.83 Other issues on the agenda include:83 (i) The toxicological epidemiological hazards posed by nanoparticles reflecting exposure levels likely to be encountered in industry. (ii) Hazard testing is likely to take several years to complete and a cautionary approach needs to be adopted in handling nanoparticles. (iii) It is unclear how exposure limits will be established for nanoparticles, and how this can be achieved. (iv) New standards for testing and guaranteeing suitable filtration of nanoparticles may be required.
If regulators, industry and the public get it right there is a bright future.83 There are many potential benefits to society (medical, devices, etc.), potential for growth in public confidence in science and industry, and it could lead to intrinsically safer products at the design stage, and sustainable growth. Moreover, the availability of data on environmental effects of nanotechnology could go a long way towards building community trust.3
The National Science Foundation (NSF) has identified ‘Nanoscale Processes in the Environment’ and ‘Societal and Educational Implications of Nanotechnology’ as two of the main research and education themes in 2000. The EPA has had an annual program on nanotechnology and the environment since 2002, focusing on manufactured nanoparticles including QDs, CNTs, and TiO2.
The US EPA has identified a number of critical risk assessment issues regarding the manufacture of nanoparticles including: (i) Exposure assessment. (ii) Toxicology of the nanoparticles. (iii) Extrapolating the nanoparticle toxicity from existing particle and fibre toxicological databases. (iv) Environmental and biological fate, transport, persistence, and transformation of nanoparticles. (v) Recyclability and overall sustainability of the nanoparticles.85
The EU has dedicated projects on risk assessment dealing with nanosafe risk assessment, nanopathologies (nanoparticles in biomaterial-induced pathologies), and nanoderm (skin as the barrier to ultra fine particles).
Several organisations are calling for moratoriums or total bans on the development of nanotechnology. Notably, since mid-2002 the Action Group on Erosion, Technology and Concentration (ETC) has called for a moratorium on the use of synthetic nanoparticles in the laboratory and in any new commercial products until governments adopt ‘best practices’ for research.86
Since it is the novel properties that are being exploited, nanomaterials need to be treated as ‘new’ compounds and this should be reflected in the legislation. In the last five years nanotoxicology has come to the fore, but there are no specific regulations covering the manufacture, transport and use of nanomaterials, despite the well known change in properties of materials at the nanometer level, and variable properties, depending on the actual size of the nanostructures.
Sustainability and nanotechnology
Nanotechnology is an integral part of getting the planet onto a sustainable trajectory with all the benefits of current technology, based on smaller products which use less energy to run, less energy and materials to build, and incorporate the potential for recycling. Nanotechnology also includes the development of renewable energy sources such as solar energy and fuel cells. The implementation of science and technology in general is necessary to make the shift towards sustainability and a zero waste society.9
Sustainable development can be defined as ‘the ability to meet the needs of the current generation while preserving the ability of future generations to meet their needs’.87 Sustainability is an ethical issue (see below) since it relates to the needs of the present and future generations.88 The UN Commission on Environment and Development reported that sustainable development requires the provision of basic needs, and the opportunity to improve quality of life. This definition encompasses all of the global population.87 Therefore, sustainable development can be interpreted as an ethical responsibility—in particular, to those who currently enjoy high standards of living. An evaluation of the sustainability of nanotechnology in this global sense is necessary, since there is the possibility of downstream health implications. In the Western Australian State Sustainability Strategy, sustainability has been described as the ability to meet these needs through environmental protection, social advancement and economic prosperity.88
Ethical issues
In all risk analyses carried out in nanotechnology, social, ethical and cultural issues need to be considered. This is especially true in medical applications, where the ethics of any new drug or procedure must be investigated. However, it is difficult to define what is acceptable in any new technology.
In relation to human health, industry has the most impact. It is important that in developing new nanotechnology, corporations act in the best public interest, ideally being self-regulating. Ignorance of important ethical considerations is still an issue in society. For example, asbestos is still used with global producers of the material continuing aggressive marketing operations to export their product to developing countries.89
Nanotechnology could be used to enhance sections of the community creating an ‘elite’ class division. This ‘performance enhancement’, which might include the use of artificial red blood cells, in medical applications, or extend to the improvement of physical or mental capacity, and could eventually lead to a situation where the elite are chosen for employment which challenges individual choice.
The ‘digital divide’ has already been established—the gap that exists between those who have technology, and those who do not. For example, the users of the internet account for 6% of the world population, with 85% of these users living in developed countries.90 The development of a similar ‘nano divide’ is anticipated. The risk is that resources and expertise will all be applied to developed-world ‘market opportunities’ and not towards critical applications such as the purification of drinking water, renewable energy and gels preventing the spread of HIV/AIDS in developing countries, and more.91
The development of nanosensors could result in a decrease in privacy. For example, as new tests are developed, there is the possibility that genetic disposition to a particular condition could be measured. Health insurance companies might then require that such vulnerabilities be tested—and thus the individual in question may learn that they will develop a life-compromising condition in the future. This raises issues pertaining to the individual's right to confidentiality and quality of life.
Negative coverage of nanotechnology in the media includes the so called ‘grey goo’, whereby nano-sized robots replicate out of control, ultimately resulting in the formation of untreatable waste and hence destruction of the planet. The concept of ‘grey goo’ was conceived by Eric Drexler in 198692 and was endorsed in 2000 in an article by Bill Joy,93 revisited in science fiction literature,94 and again brought to light in 2003 when Prince Charles expressed concern over nanotechnology and requested that a study into nanotechnology health effects be undertaken.95 The ensuing study, by the Royal Society and the Royal Academy of Engineering, reported that the ‘grey goo’ concept is unrealistic and that ‘the complete details of operation of even a simple cell are far beyond our understanding’. The general consensus among the scientific community is that the concept of ‘grey goo’ belongs in the realms of science fiction.1,95–98 Indeed, in 2004, Drexler published a paper acknowledging that self-replication was not necessary for nanomanufacture.98 He is quoted as saying, ‘I wish I had never used the term ‘grey goo… Researchers resent it and I want to clean up the mess’.99 Nevertheless, the scepticism of authors about nanotechnology abound which is highlighted by a publication in 2002 by Crichton, ‘Prey’, which describes an experiment that went wrong with a cloud of nanorobots escaping and becoming self sustaining and self replicating.94
Green chemistry metrics
Nanotechnology needs to address the principle of green chemistry and associated metrics.100 These are summarised in Fig. 2. Examples of nanotechnology considerations in the context of green chemistry are developed below.
 Fig. 2  Green chemistry considerations in preparing nanomaterials. 
1. Preventing the generation of waste
Advances in drug delivery include overcoming insolubility issues, uneven distribution throughout the body and poor selectivity, healthy tissue damage and drug toxicity,58,101 thereby reducing the amount of drug to be administered with less going to waste in the body. There is also the need for minimising the generation of waste during the production of nanomaterials.
2. Atom economy
Bottom-up nanotechnology can be intrinsically more atom efficient since products can be built atom-by-atom, or molecule-by-molecule, in self-repairing assembly processes, and without generating waste.
3. Less hazardous chemical syntheses
The release of fine dust including nanoparticles into the air should be avoided through appropriate preventative measures including the packaging and transport of the nanoparticles under a liquid.
4. Designing safer materials
Often the novel properties of nanomaterials are employed to replace a less efficient mechanism which may induce adverse effects. Drug delivery is one example where safety is improved by nanotechnology, helping to reduce side effects.102
5. Safer solvents and auxiliaries
There are already emerging examples of green syntheses of nanoparticles.93
6. Design for energy efficiency
The manufacture of nano-sized systems can require less energy than is used in traditional systems, for example in the fabrication of nanoparticles by self-assembly involving inherently weak interactions.
7. Use of renewable feedstocks
Carbon forms the basis of many nanoparticulates (including carbon black, fullerenes and nanotubes) and can be obtained from renewable biomass, an important issue at least for large volume nanomaterials such as composite fibres.
8. Reduce the use of derivatives
Bottom-up self assembly processes do not require the use of protection/deprotection and associated techniques used in traditional organic chemistry.
9. Catalysis
Nanoparticles of catalysts can enhance the selectivity of reactions,15,103 which reduces the amount of energy required to initiate a reaction, and the reaction can be effected at lower temperature. This is important because energy considerations are often the most important issue in environmental and economic analysis.100
10. Design for degradation
Nanoparticles can be designed to degrade to innocuous products. Drug delivery applications, for example, require that the nanoparticles are broken down within the body. Nanoparticles released into the environment for decontamination must decompose to benign products. Iron nanoparticles have been shown to be useful in treating the estimated 15000–25000 US sites contaminated by halogenated organic compounds. Here, the iron particles form rust, which is almost impossible to differentiate from that naturally found in the environment.18,104
11. Real-time analysis for pollution prevention
This involves the use of chemical processes using nanoparticles as catalysts for example, to monitor chemical reactors, to ensure excess energy is not used and that by-products are not formed.
12. Inherently safer chemistry
This relates to the manufacture of nanomaterials and their applications.
A full life-cycle assessment (LCA) is needed before nanotechnology is integrated into society. LCA is defined as: ‘An objective process to evaluate the environmental burdens associated with a product, process, or activity by identifying energy and materials used and wastes released to the environment, being used to evaluate and implement opportunities for environmental improvements.’105 Particularly, wastes released into the environment are of concern, since the size of airborne particulates released from the handling of nanoparticles affects their toxicity.20 Issues relating to toxicity of nanoparticles are summarised in Fig. 3.
 Fig. 3  Key nanotoxicology issues relating to the nature of the particles. 
Clearly ethical issues are important in nanotechnology. There are serious implications in advantaging/disadvantaging sectors of the community in consumer products, IT, and privacy. There is also a duty of care at the manufacturing stage, to incorporate sustainability metrics into the nanotechnology, with a full LCA before the technology is incorporated into consumer products.
Nanoparticles and human health
Nanoparticles can enter the human body in several ways; (i) via the lungs where a rapid translocation through the blood stream to vital organs is possible, including crossing the BBB, and absorption by (ii) the intestinal tract, or (iii) the skin.33 Biocompatibility of the material is important. Noble metals such as gold, platinum and palladium are very biocompatible, silver is moderately biocompatible, and titanium is biocompatible being widely used in implants.106 Single crystal silicon is not biocompatible. Luminescent semiconducting QDs are biocompatible but they often contain toxic arsenic or cadmium.106 Exceptions are the indium gallium phosphide (InGaP) QDs produced by Evident Technologies.107
Spheroidal like nanoparticles <100 nm deposit in the alveolar area of the lungs. The same is true of small diameter nano-fibres. The lungs can clear spheroidal nanoparticles, the retention half life being ∼70 days as long as the clearance mechanism is not affected by the particles themselves. Fibres, on the other hand, can stay in the lungs for years with the increased risk of developing lung cancer. Intestinal uptake of nanoparticles is better understood than uptake in the lungs and skin uptake, and is of importance in designing nanoparticles for drug delivery and stabilising food. There appears to be no information on the damage or irritation to the skin caused by fibres <100 nm.31
Key issues on whether nanoparticles can enter the human body, beyond the lungs for airborne nanoparticles, are the nature of the surface and size of the nanomaterial, and the point of entry. After entry the nature of the surface becomes dominant in whether the nanoparticles are toxic. Radicals formed on the surface of nanoparticles have toxicological consequences, for example, the cytotoxicity of silica correlates with the appearance of surface radicals and reactive oxygen species, and these are thought to play a key role in the development of fibrosis and lung cancer by this material.31 Other compounds including ZnO and TiO2 nanoparticles in sunscreen may behave similarly, and may have an adverse effect on the underlying skin.
TiO2 nanoparticles catalyse DNA damage.106 Fullerene C60 is a singlet oxygen generating agent, and this also presents potential health risks.106 Molecular components of nanoparticles are likely to have aromatic ring systems which have the size and shape to interact with DNA, and thus have the potential to promote cancer.106 Toxicity of nanomaterials relates directly to the nature of the surfaces—functionality and charge, including induced charge. All this is an integral part of nanotoxicology, the safety evaluation of engineered nanostructures and devices.6 For nanotoxicology to arrive at an appropriate risk assessment an interdisciplinary approach is required, also covering research in materials science, medicine, molecular biology, bioinformatics, and more.6 This comes at a time when occupational and public exposure to engineered nanoparticles is dramatically increasing.85
Transport of substances on nanoparticulate surfaces
Very little is known about the transport of substances on nanoparticulate surfaces but it will clearly depend on the nature of the surfaces. Airborne nanoparticles with surface bound substances can enter the body, and nanoparticles that contain mutagenic substances, which remain in the lungs for years, increase the risk of developing cancer.33
For cells to be able to react to any topography they must be able to sense shape. Strong responses from cells to nanotopography have been seen even though the dimensions of these shapes are much smaller than the dimensions of the cells.108
CNTs can easily enter into cells which is the basis for some concern,53 and this relates to the way DNA can wrap around the nanotubes. The cellular response of murine fibroblasts to nano-scale silica topography has been investigated. The cells become rounded and do not replicate. When they are placed back onto a regular surface, their activity returns to normal, spreading out and proliferating.109 This result nicely demonstrates surface effects on living cells.
How small a feature can a cell sense? The interplay of cells with material at the nanometer level has been demonstrated by looking at different pit sizes on silicon substrates (35, 75 and 120 nm). Human fibroblasts placed on these surfaces interact with pits of all sizes although the response for 35 nm pits is weak. Thus cells are sensitive to surface features at the nanometer scale, and designing materials with nanoscale features need to take this into account.108
In developing sensors that use biological detecting components, care must be taken in immobilization of the detector molecules so that they preserve their shape and function and hence original recognition specificity. To do this the surface needs to be pre-coated to allow sufficiently strong binding of detector molecules and sufficiently weak and gentle perturbations so that the molecules retain their shape and functionality.110
Surfaces of nanoparticles of zirconia can undergo reversible adsorption–desorption of DNA depending on the pH of the solutions, with basic solutions resulting in desorption.111 This relates to a change in charge on the surface of the zirconia particles.
Surface topography at the nano- and micrometer range of titanium devices critically determines cellular attachment and subsequent biological function. There is an increase of cell attachment to micron and sub-micron patterned surfaces in comparison to smooth surfaces which is attributed to pores acting as positive attachment sites.112
Cell migration, proliferation and differentiated function are dependent on adhesion, and cell adhesion is enhanced by a high surface to volume ratio in nano-fibrous scaffolds. Synthetic nano-fibrous scaffolds which can mimic collagen feature in tissue engineering and have the benefit of overcoming possible immunogenicity and disease transmission problems.113
Creating nano-featured surfaces is important in the biocompatibility of artificial material. Silicon-based surfaces are prone to fouling in the presence of biological fluids, but this can be overcome by grafting PEG (polyethylene glycol) of various densities on silicon. The decrease in protein adsorption on PEG surfaces is due to its hydrophilicity and ability to shield the surface from direct contact from proteins and charged particles.114
Chitosan is a polysaccharide which is biocompatible and does not cause allergic reactions, breaking down to harmless products which are easily removed. Chitosan-based nanoparticulate drug delivery systems have the advantages of improved efficacy, reduced toxicity and improved patient compliance over standard preparations. This is a form of green chemistry in nanotechnology—utilising a renewable resource which is non-toxic.
Interactions of biological materials with nanotubes
This covers carbon based nanotubes and those of other elements, binary systems and more complex systems. Little is known on the effects of exposure of nanotubes to biological environments and the release of the entrapped particles, and how this will affect the body, and the general principles of fibre toxicology as applied to nanofibres need to be determined.6
The health hazard of nanotubes depends on the nature of the material, how easily they can become airborne, the size of the clumps or aggregates of the material, and the ability to deaggregate to form smaller particles following entry to the lungs. A further hazard is created by the presence of other small particles or metal catalysts embedded in the tubes (which may be a consequence of the method of fabrication of the tubes as in the synthesis of CNTs).115
Entry into biological systems by means other than respiration can occur via (i) supramolecular complexation where the nanotubes are wrapped up by material involving non-covalent interactions, or (ii) by covalent functionalisation where polar groups are attached to the surface of the material. In this way CNTs bearing water solubilising peptide groups have been shown to cross the cell membrane and to accumulate in the cytoplasm or reach the nucleus without being toxic to the cell.116
As a comparison, graphite is biocompatible with cells, and graphite-coated plastic valves in vivo show little or no blood clotting. This has lead to the development of artificial heart valves and dental implants comprised of carbon fibre reinforced carbon composites.117
CNTs have been reported to be harmful to living organisms.118–120 They come in varying lengths and a study of 220 nm and 825 nm long CNTs showed no severe inflammatory response, although the degree of inflammation was larger for the longer nanotubes. This suggests that macrophages can envelop the shorter nanotubes more readily. Thus longer nanotubes may pose more of a health issue than shorter ones.
Single walled carbon nanotubes (SWCNT) can inhibit the proliferation of cells. They induce a signal inside a cell and the nucleus, resulting in decrease of cell adhesion, causing the cell to detach, float and shrink in size. Cells have a self protection response, secreting proteins to wrap the nanotubes into nodular structures, which isolate the cells attached to the CNTs from other cells.121
Unfunctionalised multiwalled carbon nanotubes (MWCNTs) are capable for both localising within and initiating an irritation response in human cells, but there is no information as to whether MWCNTs structures are an occupational risk.122
A study involving mice showed that, for equal masses in the lungs, CNTs can be more toxic than quartz (a form of silica), which is known to cause silicosis following chronic exposure.123 However, a study by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) revealed that with normal handling, the amount of fine particulate matter released into the air is minimal.115 Hence, although nanotubes are expected to show considerable pulmonary toxicity, fine material which can be inhaled is unlikely to be generated through normal handling.
The hierarchy of in vitro cytotoxicity of carbon nanomaterials (and quartz) follow a sequence of order based on mass: SWCNT > MWCNT (10–20 nm diameter) > quartz > C60. Profound toxicity of SWCNT is observed after a six hour exposure with a 35% increase in cytotoxicity when the dosage of SWCNT is 11.3 µg cm−2. In comparison there is no significant toxicity for spheroidal C60, up to a dose of 226.0 µg cm−2.124 Thus cytotoxicity depends on the different geometric shapes of carbon nanomaterials.124
SWCNTs induce dose dependent epithelioid granulomas and interstitial inflammation in mice. Carbon black treated mice are normal and quartz treated mice have mild to moderate inflammation.123 On an equal weight basis, if SWCNTs reach the lungs, they are much more toxic than carbon black, and can be more toxic than quartz, which is a serious health hazard in chronic inhalation exposures.
Functionalised CNTs by themselves are not toxic, but they can help transport other molecules that are cytotoxic into cells.125 A SWCNT-biotin conjugate causes extensive cell death. Nanotubes non-specifically associate with hydrophobic regions of the cell surface and internalize by endocytosis, and accumulate in the cytoplasm in the cells. DNA can wrap around CNTs and this is the basis of a method for separating different size CNTs. At the same time it raises concerns over the entry of CNTs into the human body.33
Studies in animal models revealed that mesothelioma could be induced by asbestos and other related fibres < ∼0.25–1.5 microns in diameter and > ∼4–8 microns in length, regardless of composition.106
Effect of nano-sized systems on human health
Nanoparticles have high surface area per unit mass and can have different effects on human health relative to bulk material from which they are made. Increased biological activity can be beneficial (e.g. antioxidant activity, carrier capacity for therapeutics, penetration of cellular barrier for drug delivery), detrimental (toxic, induction of oxidative stress or of cellular dysfunction) or a mix of both.6 There is inadequate information available as to the possible adverse effects of nanoparticles through either intentional or unintentional exposure. Nevertheless, the safety analysis of nanotechnology, especially nanoparticles, is of utmost priority given the expected worldwide use and the probability of exposure. There are currently no standards on the toxicology of nanoparticles.
Several sources of environmental contamination with nanoparticles have been identified: in mass production, spillage during handling and transport, and from the washing off of consumer products like sunscreens and cosmetics. Furthermore, the use of nanoparticles in filters and other disposable materials may be a source of environmental contamination through landfill.6
Detrimental aspects of nanotechnology
Inadvertent contact with nanoparticles can occur via the skin, lungs or intestinal tract. Nanoparticles may induce undesirable genetic changes as a side effect of their presence in the human body—mutagenicity. Carcinogenicity associated with nanorobots will depend on the nature of the surface, and the limited results thus far are guardedly optimistic.106
Nanoparticles are a constituent of air pollution and result from combustion. When made from insoluble, non-toxic materials, they induce a greater inflammatory response than (larger) fine particles composed of the same material. A possible explanation for this observation is that ultrafine particles can hinder the body's cell-level defences against inhaled particles in the lungs.126 Epidemiological studies have shown that an increase in airborne particulates in urban areas result in adverse health effects in the population, especially in susceptible groups.127 As a specific example, ultra-fine (20 nm) nickel has a much more toxic effect on the lungs than fine (5 µm) particles.16
Although it has been shown that nanoparticles can penetrate the skin, this method of entry is of less significance than through the lungs or intestinal tract, since the skin acts predominantly as a barrier and does not allow material exchange. Particles 500–1000 nm in size, theoretically beyond the realms of nanotechnology, can penetrate and reach the lower levels of human skin,128
					and smaller particles are likely to move deeper into the skin. Despite this penetration there is no direct evidence of particles entering the circulation through the skin.33 Thus, adverse effects resulting from skin contact seem to be of less importance. However, some small fibres (like fibreglass) have the potential to cause mechanical skin irritation, although this is not an allergic or chemical response.
The lungs constitute the most likely entry route for nanoparticles, and can facilitate the spread of nanoparticles to other organs. The distribution of nanoparticles in the body is essentially dependent on size and other physical and chemical properties. Very small biopersistent particles, including silica dust, asbestos fibres and also diesel exhaust (non-engineered nanoparticles) in the lungs can result in significant physiological damage.33 Inhaled nanoparticles have the potential to aggravate existing airway conditions, like asthma or bronchitis,127 and there is a close association between particulate air pollution and cardiovascular adverse effects such as myocardial infarction.129
Studies in rats show that it is possible for nanoparticles to cross the BBB via the olfactory nerve.120 This mechanism shows promise in drug delivery but unintentional exposure to nanoparticles with this capability could pose a health risk.
Spheroidal nano-sized particles entering the lungs can be cleared as long as the clearance mechanism is not affected by the nanoparticles or any other cause.130 Nanoparticles are likely to hamper such clearance. In the case of nano-fibres their clearance will depend on the length of the fibres. Bio-persistent types of asbestos, where breakage occurs longitudinally, result in more fibres of the same length but smaller diameter. Amorphous fibres break perpendicular to their long axis, resulting in fibres that can be engulfed by the macrophages in the lungs and are therefore less persistent and less toxic.
In addition to size of nanoparticles, their charge and surface chemistry is important for the material entering the lungs. Not only is the charge density important, but so is the distribution of charge over the particles. However, more studies are required.33 Regardless of the surface chemistry, particles entering the lungs will be submersed into the lining layer, and any reactive groups will modify the biological effects. Surface modification of silica results in a great decrease in toxicity, with the appearance of surface radicals for ‘naked’ silica particles considered the key event in the development of fibrosis and lung cancer by this material. Thus it appears that reactive groups on nanoparticles influence their interaction with the lungs, and ultimately it may be possible to predict the reactivity of nano-surfaces in the lungs,32 and elsewhere.
The first toxicological studies on CNTs indicate that they can be a risk for human health, while exposure assessment indicates that these materials are probably not inhaled.131
Translocation of nanoparticles from the lungs towards other organs can occur. For example, inhalation experiments with rats, using 13C labelled particles, showed that nano-sized particles (25 nm) are present in several organs 24 h after exposure.33 Studies on the role of factors governing translocation of nanoparticles, including exposure, dose, size and surface chemistry and time course, is limited.33
Engineered nanoparticles can be taken up via the intestinal tract, and this is better understood and studied in more detail than pulmonary (lung) and skin uptake.
Nanoparticles designed to stabilise food or to deliver drugs via intestinal uptake need to satisfy more demanding rules before the products can be marketed. QDs and other ‘throw away’ nanodevices may become a class of nano-biodegradable pollutants for which there is little understanding of their effect on human health and the environment.3
Beneficial aspects of nanotechnology
This is essentially covered above with an additional aspect of drug delivery being the ability of nanoparticles to cross the BBB via the olfactory nerve, and this has clear benefits, but it implies that unintended passage of nanoparticles across the BBB is possible which is a concern. Toxicity evaluation of nanoparticules is critical for all materials entering the human body, including nanoparticles in food technology.
Biodegradable polymers have been used in cardiac tissue engineering, the function of which can be modulated by the nature of the nano- and micro-textured surfaces.132
QD's in biological systems are not completely innocuous, but a safe concentration range likely exists in which they can complete their task without major interference.133
Overall, entry of nanoparticles into the human body depends on the nature of the surface (functionality and charge), size of the nanoparticles, and point of entry—lungs, intestinal or skin. The lungs can clear spheroidal nanoparticles but fibres can stay in the lungs for years with the risk of developing lung cancer. Once inside the body the nature of the surface determines whether the particles have beneficial or detrimental effects, and nanoparticles can be engineered to move across the BBB. Nanoparticles may induce undesirable genetic changes and the onset of cancers. Others may be benign, with application in drug delivery and imaging, and tissue engineering.
Status of nanotechnology relating to human health
Toxicity
Research into the toxicity of nanoparticles has, in the past, been largely uncoordinated. Recent articles highlight the need for a systematic approach to studying this important aspect of nanotechnology1,6,27 and additionally, the need for a regulatory framework for the protection of workers exposed to nanoparticles during their production.30
Nanotoxicology is now an established discipline having evolved from studies on nanoparticles, where it is well known that such particles cause morbidity and mortality in susceptible populations.6 In comparison, there is a paucity of data for human or environmental exposure levels of nanoparticles.6 There are significant differences between nanoparticles and larger particles in terms of their deposition and clearance from the respiratory system. Nanoparticles, in contrast to larger particles, move throughout the body and can reach other organs.6
In a study on the effect of nanotubes on rats, aggregation of the nanotubes results in blockage of the airway and suffocation, rather than effects of the nanoparticles themselves entering the lungs.6 While the most prevalent mechanism for solid particle clearance is by macrophages in the alveoli of the lungs,6 it cannot be assumed that all nanoparticles will follow expected clearance mechanisms due to their small size.6 During the life-cycle of a product it is likely that nanomaterials will enter the environment. The stability of coatings on nanoparticles therefore need to be investigated both in vivo and in the environment.6 A significant factor in risk assessment is the likelihood of exposure—which has been shown to be negligible with due care in handling procedures.6,115
The National Institute for Occupational Health and Safety (NIOSH) is conducting a five-year study into the toxicity and health risks associated with occupational exposure to nanoparticles addressing the following health issues:19
(i) The ability of unrefined carbon nanotubes to release airborne particulates during handling.
(ii) Pulmonary toxicity of carbon nanotube particles.
(iii) Surface activity of inhaled particles.
(iv) Nanoparticle exposure in the workplace and an evaluation of the risks involved.
Carcinogenicity of nanorobot building materials has barely begun. This includes looking at non-leaching surfaces.106
The so-called ‘Nanoderm’ project funded by the European Commission is based on the understanding that there is a lot of exposure in the population to nanoparticles (<20 nm). Outcomes of the project include quantitative information on the penetration of nanoparticles, health implications of such, assessment of the risk for such particles, and strategies pertaining to their risk and better information reaching the consumer.134
Many polluted sites have been injected with nanoparticles as part of environmental remediation programs, however, the safety of this practice has not yet been evaluated.6
Benign nanotechnology
The US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is interested primarily in the environmental aspects of the health implications of nanotechnology. It has a program to develop ‘green’ nanotechnology.135 Examples of the applications of the research being undertaken include the synthesis of nanoparticles for the treatment of groundwater, nanosensors used to detect the presence of heavy metals, and the treatment of exhaust from vehicles.
Silver nanoparticles have been synthesised using a totally green method. The use of water as an ‘environmentally benign solvent’ and sugars (β-D-glucose as a non-toxic reducing agent, and starch as a stabilising agent) illustrate the opportunity for the possible implementation of benign solvents and reagents in the synthesis of nanoparticles.92
Little development in the field is being specifically targeted towards sustainability. This is a problem because the opportunity to develop green processes from the beginning is not being taken. The transformation to sustainable development is an enormous economic opportunity.136 Moreover, past achievement aimed at being able to watch the next generation prosper has come via terribly destructive methods. What is needed now is redevelopment—a paradigm shift in the approaches in providing energy, technology and agriculture. Clearly if nanotechnology is to be the key to the future, it should be developed with sustainability in mind from the outset, Fig. 1.
Benign nanoparticles are in cosmetic products including TiO2. Anatase TiO2 (10 and 20 nm) particles induce oxidative stress in human bronchial epithelial cells without photoactivation, noting that oxidative stress is implicated in aging, atherosclerosis, carcinogenesis and inflammatory disorders. The larger particles (>200 nm) do not have the same effect, and it therefore seems that the smaller the particle the easier it is to induce oxidative damage. This suggests that ultrafine anatase TiO2 particles, intratracheally, could cause an inflammatory response, whereas TiO2 particles larger than 100 nm are classified as benign in humans and animals.138 Rutile TiO2 (200 nm) particles induce hydrogen peroxide and oxidative damage in the absence of light.
Kertèsz et al. observed nanoparticles penetrating into the corneocyte layers of stratum corneum with no particles in the cytoplasm of the granular cells.138
Schulz et al. found that surface characteristics, particle size or shape of micronised pigments result in the dermal absorption of the substance. TiO2 is only observed in the outer surface of the stratum corneum and has not been detected in deeper layers, the epidermis and dermis. The results highlight the safe use of micro-fine TiO2 for topical application to humans.139
Nanoscale particles of PVC, TiO2, SiO2 and cobalt metal (Co) are taken up into human endothelial cells. Only exposure of HDMECs (human dermal microvascular endothelial cells) to Co particles leads to enlargement of vacuoles, and HDMECs exposed to Co, SiO2 and TiO2 nanoparticles induce pro-inflammatory effects. Co and SiO2 particles produce a larger effect than TiO2 particles. The inflammatory lung disease caused by SiO2 particles might share a common mechanism with that shown by the endothelial cells.149
Toxicological analysis
Most nano-products can be designed in such a way as to either increase or decrease toxicity depending on the desired outcome. For treatment in drug delivery, minimising toxicity of the carrier is necessary and in most cases this can be done. On the other hand for chemotherapeutic agents, toxicity is designed to be magnified and targeted to specific tissues or areas. Altering the coating of many of these therapeutic agents can increase selectivity and toxicity.
Care must also be taken in the profiling of the pharmacokinetics and release of the products. The nanoparticle may be designed for human consumption knowing that it will stay intact in the body. If afterwards, the coating designed to alleviate toxicity is broken down, what are the ensuing products once released from the body and exposed to a different environment?
Increasing concentrations of mercapto-undecanoic acid (MUA) QDs show a decrease in cell viability in Vero cells (African green monkey's kidney cell), HeLa cells and human primary hepatocyte cells. The Vero cells are affected less than the others. Four to six hours incubation in the presence of the QDs resulted in cell death. There is a range of concentrations for QDs where cell viability can decrease without cell death.140
When QDs remain intact, toxicity is dependent on the surface presented to the cell rather than what is in the core. A MUA coated QD is toxic when treated for twelve hours at 100 µg mL−1 and above, with DNA damage observed after two hours treatment at a dose of 50 µg mL−1 and above. Cysteamine coated QDs induce some DNA damage when treated for twelve hours, the other coatings showing little to no signs of toxicity.141
Toxicity of QDs is also associated with oxidation of the surface of the nanoparticles. This leads to reduced cadmium on the surface deteriorating the CdSe lattice, releasing free Cd2+ which then results in cell death. The toxicity can be modified by altering the QD coating; mercaptoacetic acid (MAA) renders CdSe QDs non-toxic and coating with ZnS and bovine serum albumin molecules reduce toxicity.21
Water soluble CdSe/ZnS QDs induce DNA damage in the presence of UV light and to a lesser extent DNA damage in the absence of UV. This nicking of DNA is attributed to free radicals that are both photo-generated and surface oxide generated. Formation of radicals can be avoided by doping the lattice with Mn2+ ions to hold charge carriers in the internal structure.22
Michalet et al. found that most of the papers on QDs used in vivo and in vitro did not find any notable adverse effects arising from QDs at labelling concentrations, while the Se2− and Cd2+ ions are released from the QDs and so they are not completely without risk but can be used effectively within a safe range.133
In another study, pathogenic bacteria S. aureus were found to extract Se2− and Cd2+ ions from CdSe QDs. The extraction is dependent on the surface conjugation; holotransferrin conjugates show a significant increase in the amount of Se2− ions inside the cytoplasm compared to the original QDs and mercaptoacetic acid coated QDs.23
Studies on the injection of QDs into the blood stream of pigs and mice show no toxicity. Even for QDs loaded in cells growing in vitro, there is no toxicity evident after two weeks.24 Nano-sized selenium is less toxic than selenite and high selenium protein that is administered to rats.142
Inhaled nanoparticles are of great concern, since the most likely accidental contact with nanoparticles occurs through the lungs.33 The effect of environmental factors in the development of Parkinson's disease has become increasingly apparent, and the high exposure to airborne particulates in urban areas is a cause for concern.26 Suitable industrial hygiene should be maintained to minimise exposure during the manufacture of carbon nanotubes.143
The onset of pathogenic effects generally requires the achievement of a sufficient lung burden.33 When inhaled, nanoparticles are deposited in all regions of the respiratory tract.6 Numerous studies have found that for equal masses, nanoparticles exert a more marked effect in the detriment to respiratory function, compared with ‘normal’ sized particles.4,20 There are significant differences between nanoparticles and larger entities during deposition and clearance in the respiratory tract.6 In the case of nanoparticles, the most prevalent mechanism for clearance is phagocytosis by macrophages.6
A study of the pulmonary toxicity of carbon nanotubes in mice showed they could be more toxic than quartz which is known to cause significant health problems after chronic exposure.123
Although nanoparticles often form larger clusters, such airborne aggregates can disintegrate in the lungs and this might result in increased toxicity.20 With normal handling of carbon nanotube material, the concentration of splinters in the air is minimal.115
The majority of in vivo studies into the pulmonary toxicity of nanoparticles has been conducted in rodents, but it is known that rats are especially sensitive when it comes to adverse lung responses.144 In addition, all in vivo studies use instillation into the trachea (as a mass of particles) out of necessity.27 Intratracheal instillation of nanoparticles may cause oxidative stress which can lead to atherosclerosis, carcinogenesis or acute or chronic inflammatory disorders.137 A thorough inhalation study still remains to be undertaken to investigate the respirability of nanoparticles,143 that is, their ability to pass beyond the airways and move to the low-level structures of the lungs.144
Normal-sized TiO2 is classified as biologically inert although more research is warranted.137 The ‘precautionary principle’ should be applied to nanoparticle toxicity.143 Conclusions about the toxicity of nanoparticles cannot be made until the reaction of lung tissue to these particles is established.145 Such a response may take many years to develop.13
Diesel exhaust contains nanoparticles which have been linked to inflammation and oxidative stress in the lungs and cardiovascular system.26 Inhalation of diesel particles may result in the formation of reactive oxygen species.26 Another substance with this ability is TiO2, which can absorb UV light and produce various oxygen-containing, reactive species in solution.137 Reactive oxygen species are known to attack lipids and proteins and have been implicated in carcinogenesis.137 A hypothesis has been suggested that smaller particles have a higher potency in inducing oxidative stress in the absence of photoactivation.137
Long fibres (greater than 20 microns—easily achieved by carbon nanotubes) in lungs are not cleared effectively.33 At the alveolar level, these long fibres result in ‘frustrated’ phagocytosis or the attempt by multiple macrophages to ingest the particle. This results in an inflammatory response and leads to scarring of lung tissue (fibrosis).144 At this stage, it remains unknown whether the asbestos mechanism of toxicity is relevant to carbon nanotubes.144
If MWCNTs reach the lungs, they are biopersistent, and induce lung inflammation and fibrosis.143 However, short term tests in vitro fail to accurately model the breakdown of nanomaterials in the lungs.144 Thus, a false positive result may be obtained when a substance is, in fact, non-persistent in the lungs.
Rat tracheal explants have been used to examine how nanoparticles interact with cells in the lungs.146 Nanoparticulates persist as aggregates but larger particle aggregates get smaller over time. It is hard to tell if the inflammatory response is caused by the smaller-sized nanoparticles, or just the large number of particles administered.
Donaldson et al. have shown a very clear distinction between normal and nano-sized particles. Ultrafine TiO2 (20 nm) and 500 nm particles induce free radical activity and break the strands of super-coiled plasmid DNA, but the ultrafine TiO2 results in complete destruction of DNA. Some of the damage caused by TiO2 particles can be alleviated in the presence of mannitol, which shows that hydroxyl free radicals are involved. Free radical activity is also detected on the surface of asbestos fibres, environmental particles, ceramic fibres and glass fibres.147
Ingested nanoparticles: Gold nanoparticles are being studied for use as transfection vectors, DNA-binding agents, protein inhibitors and spectroscopic markers. Cationic gold nanoparticles (quaternary ammonium terminal groups) increase vesicle lysis while anionic (carboxyl terminal groups) are relatively harmless. The cationic particles presumably have a strong electrostatic interaction with the negatively charged cell membrane.148
Two fullerene C60 derivatives, a dendritic C60 mono-adduct and a malonic acid C60 tris-adduct, have been tested for cell growth and viability on Jurkat cells (human T-lymphocytes). The dendritic mono-adduct inhibits cell growth (over two weeks it decreased to 19%) but has no effect on cell vitality, while the tris-malonic acid adduct has little effect on either. Growth inhibition arising from the dendritic C60 is reversible; the same cells grown without the fullerene resume normal growth. The tris-malonic (TMA) acid fullerene is more phototoxic than the dendritic derivative. The two different fullerenes possibly interact with the cell membrane in different ways. The dendritic adduct has very large branches, while the tris-malonic adduct is more compact, the branches keeping the C60 away from the cell. Also the dendrofullerene molecules aggregate lowering the interaction with cell membranes.149
Foley et al. have demonstrated that a fullerene derivative (C60(CO2H)2) could cross the cell membrane and be localized preferentially in compartments within the cell. This is thought to strengthen the case for using fullerenes for drug delivery.150
Three C60 fullerene derivatives, namely (i) di-malonic acid, DMA, (ii) TMA, and (iii) tetra-malonic acid (QMA) C60, have been tested on HeLa cells to determine growth inhibition. The cytotoxicity of these fullerenes is dose and irradiation dependent with the hierarchy of toxicity DMA > TMA > QMA. Mannitol, which is able to prevent hydroxyl radical damage, does not prevent the damage induced by the C60 compounds.151
Fullerene C60 forms stable nano-aggregates 25–500 nm, which are also stable in ionic solutions for months. There is a need, therefore, to study the properties of such nanoparticles – which are likely to be different from bulk C60.152
Less-derivatised, less-soluble forms of C60 are the most toxic to HDF (human dermal fibroblasts) and HepG2 (human liver carcinoma) cells. They cause oxidative damage to cell membranes which can lead to cell death, yet with a notable lack of damage to DNA, proteins and mitochondria. In water C60 aggregates and can form superoxide anions that seem to be the most likely cause of membrane damage. More soluble derivatives of C60 like C60(OH)24 and Na+2–3[C60O7–9(OH)12–15](2–3)− are much less toxic (C60 is toxic at 0.020 ppm compared to C60(OH)24 at >5000 ppm which is limited by its solubility). Given the differential cytotoxicity, strategies can be developed for increasing toxicity to target bacteria or cancer and minimised for safety in other applications.153
Exposure of juvenile largemouth bass fish to C60 resulted in lipid peroxidation in their brains after 48 h of exposure to 0.5 ppm of uncoated C60. This is the first study to show the oxidative effects of fullerenes in vivo. The fullerenes also keep the water clearer, possibly owing to its anti-bacterial effects.154
Huang et al. found that chitosan toxicity depends chiefly on the degree of deacetylation. Decreasing the degree of deacetylation increases cell viability. Turning chitosan into nanoparticles does not influence the toxicity but it increases its endocytosis, and molecular weight has little effect on the toxicity.62
Super paramagnetic iron oxide nanoparticles (SPIONs) have been modified with a pullulan coating. This has the desired result of reducing toxicity and increasing cellular uptake compared with uncoated SPIONs. Uncoated SPIONs are toxic (determined by cytotoxicity and adhesion studies) and their internalisation results in disruption of the cytoskeletal organisation in human dermal fibroblasts. The difference in toxicity may be due to the pullulan coating being hydrophilic which protects the surfaces from interacting with biological materials. These coatings may add additional specificity for magnetic nanoparticles in drug delivery.155
Conclusions
A study commissioned by the Royal Society and the Royal Academy of Engineering in the UK in 2003 found that most nanotechnology poses no new health or safety risks.7 However, it highlighted uncertainties on the potential effects on human health and the environment of manufactured nanoparticles and nanotubes if they are free and not incorporated into a material. It is impossible to assess the toxicity of nanoparticles by testing the material in bulk form.
The concern over nanotechnology being the ‘the next GMT’ appears to be ill founded,7 but there needs to be care in bringing any nanotechnology to the marketplace. Much needs to be done in establishing toxicity thresholds and measuring exposures in the work place and the environment. Finally it would be prudent to examine and address environmental and human health concerns before the widespread adoption of specific nanotechnologies,6 and to incorporate green chemistry metrics into the production and distribution of nanoparticles.
Acknowledgements
Support of this by DSTO Australia is graciously acknowledged.
References
K. Donaldson and V. Stone, Commun. ACM, 2004, 47, 113–115 CrossRef .
T. Masciangioli and W. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2003, 37, 102A–108A CrossRef CAS .

Future Technologies, Today's Choices, Greenpeace UK,  2003, http://www.greenpeace.ork.uk/contentlookup.cfm?ucidparam=2003072113521&menupoint=\A-L Search PubMed .
A. P. Dowling, Mater. Today, 2004, 7, 30–35 Search PubMed .

Introduction to Nanotechnology, ed. C. P. Poole and F. J. Owens, Wiley, Hoboken, New Jersey,  2003 Search PubMed .
G. Oberdörster, E. Oberdörster and J. Oberdörster, Environ. Health Perspect., 2005, 113, 823–839 CAS .
A. Dowling, New Sci., 2005, 19 .
Nano Investment, Technol. Rev.,  2005, 108, 20 Search PubMed .
P. T. Anastas, Green Chem., 2003, 5, G29–G34 RSC .
Regulatory History of CFCs and Other Stratospheric Ozone Depleting Chemicals (to 1993)—Press Release 1993, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington DC,  2005, http://www.epa.gov/history/topics/ozone/03.htm .
DDT Ban Takes Effect—Press Release 1972, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington DC,  2005, http://www.epa.gov/history/topics/ddt/01.htm .
EPA Bans PCB Manufacture; Phases Out Uses—Press Release 1979, Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), Washington DC,  2005, http://www.epa.gov/history/topics/pcbs/01.htm .

          P. Davies, Managing the Risks from Nanotechnology, Health and Safety Executive, UK,  2004, http://www.hse.gov.uk/aboutus/hsc/meetings/2004/060404/c42.pdf .
Nanotechnologies: A Preliminary Risk Analysis on the Basis of a Workshop Organized in Brussels on 1–2 March 2004 by the Health and Consumer Protection Directorate General of the European Commission, European Community,  2004, http://europa.eu.int/comm/health/ph_risk/events_risk_en.htm. .
S. Özkar and R. G. Finke, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2005, 127, 4800–4808 CrossRef .
Q. Zhang, Y. Kusaka, X. Zhu, K. Sato, Y. Mo, T. Kluz and K. Donaldson, J. Occup. Health, 2003, 45, 23–30 Search PubMed .
E. E. Connor, J. Mwamuka, A. Gole, C. J. Murphy and M. D. Wyatt, Small, 2005, 1, 325–327 Search PubMed .
C.-B. Wang and W.-X. Zhang, Environ. Sci. Technol., 1997, 31, 2145–2156 .
L. R. Hirsch, R. J. Stafford, J. A. Bankson, S. R. Sershen, B. Rivera, R. E. Price, J. D. Hazle, N. J. Halas and J. L. West, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A., 2003, 100, 13549–13554 CrossRef CAS .
L. E. Murr, E. V. Esquivel and J. J. Bang, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2004, 15, 237–247 CrossRef CAS .
A. M. Derfus, W. C. W. Chan and S. N. Bhatia, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 11–18 CrossRef CAS .
M. Green and E. Howman, Chem. Commun., 2005, 121–123 RSC .
J. A. Kloepfer, R. E. Mielke, M. S. Wong, K. H. Nealson, G. Stucky and J. L. Nadeau, Appl. Environ. Microbiol., 2003, 69, 4205–4213 CrossRef CAS .
J. K. Jaiswal and S. M. Simon, Trends Cell Biol., 2004, 14, 497–504 CrossRef CAS .
Fullerenes by the Ton: Mitshubishi's Frontier Carbon Opens 40 metric ton/year fullerene plant using TDA reactors and technology, Chem. Eng. News,  August 11, 2003 Search PubMed .
M. L. Block, X. Wu, Z. Pei, G. Li, T. Wang, L. Qin, B. Wilson, J. Yang, J. S. Hong and B. Veronesi, Fed. Am. Soc. Exp. Biol. J., 2004, 18, 1618–1620 Search PubMed .
Nanoscience and nanotechnologies: Opportunities and uncertainties, The Royal Society
& The Royal Academy of Engineering,  2004, http://www.nanotec.org.uk/finalreport.htm .
N. G. Chopra, R. J. Luyken, K. Cherrey, V. H. Crespi, M. L. Cohen, S. G. Louie and A. Zettl, Science, 1995, 269, 966–967 CrossRef CAS .
Y. Zhang, K. Suenaga, C. Colliex and S. Iijima, Science, 1998, 281, 973–975 CrossRef CAS .
A. Seaton and K. Donaldson, Lancet, 2005, 365, 923–924 CrossRef .
J. Kreuter, P. Ramge, V. Petrov, S. Hamm, S. E. Gelperina, B. Engelhardt, R. Alyautdin, H. Briesen and D. J. Begley, Pharm. Res., 2003, 20, 409–416 CrossRef CAS .
R. N. Alyautdin, V. E. Petrov, K. Langer, A. Berthold, D. A. Kharkevich and J. Kreuter, Pharm. Res., 1997, 14, 325–328 CrossRef CAS .
P. H. M. Hoet, I. Brüske-Hohlfeld and O. V. Salata, J. Nanobiotechnol., 2004, 2 Search PubMed .
S. M. Moghimi, A. C. Hunter and J. C. Murray, Fed. Am. Soc. Exp. Biol. J., 2005, 19, 311–327 Search PubMed .
Y. Liu, C. Lin, H. Li and H. Yan, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2005, 44, 4333–4338 CrossRef CAS .
W. W. Wayt, Sci. Am., 1999, 281/1 .
C. Q. Choi, Sci. Am., 2995, 292/2 Search PubMed .
G. Stix, Sci. Am., 2004, 290/3 .
D. Graham-Rowe, New Sci., 2005, 7 March Search PubMed .
S. A. McDonald, G. Konstantatos, S. Zhang, P. W. Cyr, E. J. D. Klem, L. Levina and E. H. Sargent, Nat. Mater., 2005, 4, 138–142 CrossRef CAS .
G. Stix, Sci. Am., 2003, 289/2 .
P. J. Sebastian and S. A. Gamboa, Sol. Energy Mater. Sol. Cells, 2005, 88, 129–130 CrossRef CAS .
W. L. Murphy and D. J. Mooney, Nat. Biotechnol., 2002, 20, 30–31 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Hartgerink, E. Beniash and S. I. Stupp, Science, 2001, 294, 1684–1688 CrossRef CAS .
C. Lok, Technol. Rev., 2004, 107, 81 Search PubMed .
A. Goho, Sci. News, 2003, 164, 381–382 Search PubMed .
Nanoshells for cancer therapy, Mater. Today,  2003, 6, 6 Search PubMed .
Nano-drug may starve tumours, New Sci.,  2004, 184, 17 Search PubMed .
K. P. Kühn, I. F. Chaberny, K. Massholder, M. Stickler, V. W. Benz, H. Sonntag and L. Erdinger, Chemosphere, 2003, 53, 71–77 CrossRef CAS .
J. C. Yu, W. Ho, J. Yu, H. Yip, P. K. Wong and J. Zhao, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 1175–1179 CrossRef CAS .
K. Bogunia-Kubik and M. Sugisaka, BioSystems, 2002, 65, 123–138 CrossRef CAS .
M. O'Connor, S. N. Kim, A. J. Killard, R. J. Dorster, M. R. Smyth, F. Papadimitrakopoulos and J. D. Rusling, Analyst, 2004, 129, 1176–1180 RSC .
A. Bianco, K. Kostarelos, C. D. Partidos and M. Prato, Chem. Commun., 2005, 571–577 RSC .
D. Monti, L. Moretti, S. Salvioli, E. Straface, W. Malorni, R. Pellicciari, G. Schettini, M. Bisaglia, C. Pincelli, C. Fumelli, M. Bonafè and C. Franceschi, Biochem. Biophys. Res. Commun., 2000, 277, 711–717 CrossRef CAS .
C. Wang, L. A. Tai, D. D. Lee, P. P. Kanakamma, C. K. F. Shen, T. Luh, C. H. Cheng and K. C. Hwang, J. Med. Chem., 1999, 42, 4616–4620 .
A. J. Gupta and M. Gupta, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 3995–4021 CrossRef CAS .
D. A. LaVan, T. McGuire and R. Langer, Nat. Biotechnol., 2003, 10, 1184–1191 CrossRef .
E. B. Voura, J. K. Jaiswal, H. Mattoussi and S. M. Simon, Nature Med., 2004, 10, 993–998 CrossRef CAS .
B. Ballou, B. C. Lagergolm, L. A. Ernst, M. P. Bruchez and A. S. Waggoner, Bioconjugate Chem., 2004, 15, 79–86 CrossRef CAS .
J. E. Eyles, V. W. Bramwell, J. Singh, E. D. Williamson and H. O. Alpar, J. Controlled Release, 2003, 86, 25–32 CrossRef CAS .
M. Huang, E. Khor and L. Lim, Pharm. Res., 2004, 21, 344–353 CrossRef CAS .
H.-Q. Mao, K. Roy, V. L. Troung-Le, K. A. Janes, K. Y. Lin, Y. Wang, J. T. August and K. W. Leong, J. Controlled Release, 2001, 70, 399–421 CrossRef CAS .
K. A. Janes, M. P. Fresneau, A. Marazuela, A. Fabra and M. L. Alonso, J. Controlled Release, 2001, 73, 255–267 CrossRef CAS .
S. A. Agnihotri, N. N. Mallikarjuna and T. M. Aminabhavi, J. Controlled Release, 2004, 100, 5–28 CrossRef CAS .
D. Pantarotto, R. Singh, D. McCarthy, M. Erhardt, J.-P. Briand, M. Prato, K. Kostarelos and A. Bianco, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed., 2004, 43, 5242–5246 CrossRef CAS .
OilFresh™1000, antioxidant catalytic device, OilFresh Corporation,  2005, http://www.oilfresh.com/of1000.html .
Kraft, AtomWorks,  2005, http://atomworks.org/Companies/kraft/kraft .
Nutralease Ltd., Israeli Life Science Industry,  2005, http://www.ilsi.org.il/companies_life_science_company.asp?ID=545 .
J. D. Badji, V. Balzani, A. Credi, S. Silvi and J. F. Stoddart, Science, 2004, 303, 1845–1849 CrossRef CAS .
The nanotechnology page, University of Technology, Sydney: Institute for nanoscale research http://www.nano.uts.edu.au/nano.html .
Buckytube properties and uses, Carbon Nanotechnologies Incorporated, Houston Texas, http://www.cnanotech.com/pages/buckytube_properties_uses/buckytube_uses/5-2-8_fibers_fabrics.html .
K. Nagaveni, G. Sivalingam, M. S. Hegde and G. Madras, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2004, 38, 1600–1604 CrossRef CAS .
E. M. Lucasa and K. J. Klabunde, Nanostruct. Mater., 1999, 12, 179–182 CrossRef .

          J. Zink, University of South Florida Magazine,  2002, http://www.usf.edu/hppic_entry.html .
W.-X. Zhang, C.-B. Wang and H.-L. Lien, Catal. Today, 1998, 40, 387–395 CrossRef CAS .
W. Chen, M. Matsumoto and A. Mulchandani, EPA grant number-R829606, 2002–2005 Search PubMed .
M. S. Diallo, L. Balogh and W. A. Goddard, EPA grant number-R829626, 2002–2005 Search PubMed .
R. Pease, BBC News, 2005, 22 June Search PubMed .
Directive 2002/95/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council, Official Journal of the European Union,  2003, 37, 19–23 Search PubMed .
C. Kirchner, T. Liedl, S. Kudera, T. Pellegrino, A. M. Javier, H. E. Gaub, S. Stölzle, N. Fertig and W. J. Parak, Nano Lett., 2005, 5, 331–338 CrossRef CAS .
Food Standards Australia New Zealand,  2000, http://www.foodstandards.gov.au .
FDA Regulation of Nanotechnology Products, http://www.fda.gov/nanotechnology/regulation.html .

          D. Mark, Nanomaterials. A risk to health at work? Proceedings of the 1st International Symposium on Occupational Health Implications of Nanomaterials,  2004 .
P. H. M. Hoet, A. Nenmar and B. Nemery, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 19 CrossRef CAS .
K. L. Dreher, Toxicol. Sci., 2004, 11, 3–5 .
Nanotech: Unpredictable and Un-Regulated, ETC Group,  2004, http://etcgroup.org/article.asp?newsid=469 .
Our Common Future: Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (“The Brundtland Report”), United Nations,  1987 .
Hope for the future: The Western Australian State Sustainability Strategy, Department of the Premier and Cabinet, Perth,  2003, http://www.sustainability.dpc.wa.gov.au/ .
L. Kazan-Allen, Lung Cancer, 2005, 49, S3–S9 CrossRef .
S. S. Rao, Telemat. Inform., 2005, 22, 361–375 CrossRef .
M. H. A. Hassan, Science, 2005, 309, 65–66 CrossRef CAS .

          K. E. Drexler, Engines of creation: The coming era of nanotechnology, Anchor-Doubleday, New York,  1986 .

          B. Joy, Why the future doesn't need us,  2000, http://www.wired.com/wired/archive/8.04/joy_pr.html .

          M. Crichton, Prey, HarperCollins, New York,  2002 .
Beware the grey goo; Nanotech scare stories are blinding us to more pressing perils, New Sci.,  2003, 178, 3 .
K. Kleiner and J. Hogan, New Sci., 2003, 177, 14 .
R. F. Service, Science, 2000, 290, 1526–1527 CrossRef CAS .
C. Phoenix and E. Drexler, Nanotechnology, 2004, 15, 869–872 CrossRef .
J. Giles, Nature, 2004, 429, 591 CrossRef CAS .

          P. T. Anastas and J. C. Warner, Green Chemistry: Theory and Practice, Oxford University Press, New York 1998 Search PubMed .
G. A. Hughes, Nanomedicine: Nanotech. Biol. Med., 2005, 1, 22–30 Search PubMed .
P. Raveendran, J. Fu and S. L. Wallen, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2003, 125, 13940–13941 CrossRef CAS .
G. A. Somorjai and K. McCrea, Appl. Catal., A, 2001, 222, 3–18 CrossRef CAS .
A. Goho, Sci. News, 2005, 167, 266–268 Search PubMed .
Glossary of Green Chemistry Terms, Green Chemistry Institute, ACS,  2005, http://www.chemistry.org/portal/a/c/s/1/acsdisplay.html?DOC=greenchemistryinstitute%5Cglossary_al.html .

          R. A. Freitas, Nanomedicine, vol. IIA: Biocompatibility, Landes Bioscience,  2003 Search PubMed .

          S. Talbot, Evident Technologies,  2005, 1–2, http://www/evodenttech.com .
M. J. Dalby, N. Gadegaard, M. O. Riehle, C. D. W. Wilkinson and A. S. G. Curtis, Int. J. Biochem. Cell Biol., 2004, 36, 2005–2015 Search PubMed .
B. G. Cousins, P. J. Doherty, R. L. Williams, J. Fink and M. J. Garvey, J. Mater. Sci.: Mater. Med., 2004, 15, 355–359 CrossRef CAS .
B. Kasemo, Surf. Sci., 2002, 500, 656–677 CrossRef CAS .
S.-Q. Liu, J.-J. Xu and H.-Y. Chen, Colloids Surf., B, 2004, 36, 155–159 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zhu, J. Chen, L. Scheideler, T. Altebaeumer, J. Geis-Gerstorfer and D. Kern, Cells Tissues Organs, 2004, 178, 13–22 Search PubMed .
L. A. Smith and P. X. Ma, Colloids Surf., B, 2004, 39, 125–131 CAS .
S. Sharma, R. W. Johnson and T. A. Desai, Biosens. Bioelectron., 2004, 20, 227–239 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Maynard, P. A. Baron, M. Foley, A. A. Shvedova, E. R. Kisin and V. Castranova, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health A, 2004, 67, 87–107 Search PubMed .
D. Panterotto, J.-P. Briand, M. Prato and A. Bianco, Chem. Commun., 2004, 16–17 RSC .
Y. Sato, A. Yokoama, K. Shibata, Y. Akimoto, S. Ogino, Y. Nodasaka, T. Kohgo, K. Tamura, T. Akasaka, M. Uo, K. Motomiya, B. Jeyadvan, M. Ishiguro, R. Hatakeyama, F. Watari and K. Tohji, Mol. BioSyst., 2005, 1, 176–182 RSC .
P. H. M. Hoet, A. Nemmar and B. Nemery, Nat. Biotechnol., 2004, 22, 19 CrossRef CAS .
D. B. Warheit, B. R. Laurence, K. L. Reed, D. H. Roach, G. A. M. Reynolds and T. R. Webb, Toxicol. Sci., 2004, 77, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
C. W. Lam, J. T. James, R. McCluckey and R. L. Hunter, Toxicol. Sci., 2004, 77, 1126–1230 .
D. Cui, F. Tian, C. S. Ozkan, M. Wang and H. Gao, Toxicol. Lett., 2005, 155, 73–85 CrossRef CAS .
N. A. Monteiro-Riviere, R. J. Nemanich, A. O. Inman, Y. Y. Wang and J. E. Riviere, Toxicol. Lett., 2005, 155, 377–384 CrossRef CAS .
C.-W. Lam, J. T. James, R. McCluskey and R. L. Hunter, Toxicol. Sci., 2004, 77, 126–134 CrossRef CAS .
G. Jia, H. Wang, L. Yan, X. Wang, R. Pei, T. Yan, Y. Zhao and X. Guo, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 1378–1383 CrossRef CAS .
N. W. S. Kam, T. C. Jessop, P. A. Wender and H. Dai, J. Am. Chem. Soc., 2004, 126, 6850–6851 CrossRef CAS .
K. Donaldson, D. Brown, A. Clouter, R. Duffin, W. MacNee, L. Renwick, L. Tran and V. Stone, J. Aerosol Med., 2002, 15, 213–220 CrossRef CAS .
G. Oberdörster, Int. Arch. Occup. Environ. Health, 2001, 74, 1–8 Search PubMed .
S. S. Tinkle, J. M. Antonini, B. A. Rich, J. R. Roberts, R. Salmen, K. DePree and E. J. Adkins, Environ. Health Perspect., 2003, 111, 1202–1208 CAS .
A. Peters, D. W. Dockery, J. E. Mullere and M. A. Mittleman, Circulation, 2001, 103, 2810–2815 CAS .
D. B. Warheit, B. R. Laurence, K. L. Reed, D. H. Roach, G. A. M. Reynolds and T. R. Webb, Toxicol. Sci., 2004, 77, 117–125 CrossRef CAS .
A. D. Maynard, P. A. Baron, M. Foley, A. A. Shvedova and E. R. Kistin, J. Toxicol. Environ. Health, 2004, 67, 87–107 CrossRef CAS .
X. Zong, H. Bien, C.-Y. Chung, L. Yin, D. Fang, B. S. Hsiao, B. Chu and E. Entcheva, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 5330–5338 CrossRef CAS .
X. Michalet, F. F. Pinaud, L. A. Bentolila, J. M. Tsay, S. Doose, J. J. Li, G. Sundaresan, A. M. Wu, S. S. Gambhir and S. Weiss, Science, 2005, 307, 538–544 CrossRef CAS .
Nanoderm quality of skin as a barrier to ultra-fine particles, European Comission,  2003, http://www.uni-leipzig.de/%E2%88%BCnanoderm .
Environmental Tools of the Future, Today: Nanotechnology, National Center for Environmental Research, within the Environmental Protection Agency,  2003, http://es.epa.gov/ncer/events/news/2003/01_15_03a.html .
The natural advantage of nations: Business opportunities, innovation and governance in the 21st century, ed. K. C. Hargroves and M. H. Smith, Earthscan, London,  2005 .
J.-R. Gurr, A. S. S. Wang, C.-H. Chen and K.-Y. Jan, Toxicology, 2005, 213, 66–73 CrossRef CAS .
Zs. Kertèsz, Z. Szikszai, E. Gontier, P. Moretto, J.-E. Surlève-Bazeille, B. Kiss, I. Juhász, J. Hunyadi and Á. Z. Kiss, Nucl. Instrum. Methods Phys. Res., Sect. B, 2005, 231, 280–285 CrossRef CAS .
J. Schulz, H. Hohenerg, F. Pflücker, E. Gärtner, T. Will, S. Pfeiffer, R. Wepf, V. Wendel, H. Gers-Barlag and K.-P. Wittern, Adv. Drug Delivery Rev., 2002, 54, S157–S163 CrossRef CAS .
A. Shiohara, A. Hoshino, K. Hanaki, K. Suzuki and K. Yamamoto, Microbiol. Immunol., 2004, 48, 669–675 Search PubMed .
A. Hoshino, K. Fujioka, T. Oku, M. Suga, Y. F. Sasaki, T. Ohta, M. Yasuhara, K. Suzuki and K. Yamamato, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 2163–2169 CrossRef CAS .
X. Jia, N. Li and J. Chen, Life Sci., 2005, 76, 1989–2003 CrossRef CAS .
J. Muller, F. Huaux, N. Moreau, P. Misson, J.-F. Heilier, M. Delos, M. Arras, A. Fonseca, J. B. Nagy and D. Lison, Toxicol. Appl. Pharmacol., 2005, 207, 221–231 CAS .
K. Donaldson and C. Lang Tran, Mutat. Res., 2004, 553, 5–9 CrossRef CAS .
R. F. Service, Science, 2003, 300, 243 .
A. Churg, B. Stevens and J. L. Wright, Am. J. Physiol.: Lung Cell. Mol. Physiol., 1998, 274, L81–L86 CAS .
K. Donaldson, P. H. Beswick and P. S. Gilmour, Toxicol. Lett., 1996, 88, 293–298 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Goodman, C. D. McCusker, T. Yilmaz and V. M. Rotello, Bioconjugate Chem., 2004, 15, 897–900 CrossRef CAS .
F. Rancan, S. Rosan, F. Boehm, A. Cantrell, M. Brellreich, H. Schoenberger, A. Hirsch and F. Moussa, J. Photochem. Photobiol., B, 2002, 67, 157–162 CrossRef CAS .
S. Foley, C. Crowley, M. Smaihi, C. Bonfils, B. F. Erlanger, P. Seta and C. Larroque, Biochem.
Biophys. Res. Commun., 2002, 294, 116–119 CrossRef CAS .
X. L. Yang, C. H. Fan and H. S. Zhu, Toxicol. in Vitro, 2002, 16, 41–46 CrossRef CAS .
J. D. Fortner, D. Y. Lyon, C. M. Sayes, A. M. Boyd, J. C. Falkner, E. M. Hotze, L. B. Alemany, Y. J. Tao, W. Guo, K. D. Ausman, V. L. Colvin and J. B. Hughes, Environ. Sci. Technol., 2005, 39, 4307–4316 CrossRef CAS .
C. M. Sayes, J. D. Fortner, W. Guo, D. Lyon, A. M. Boyd, K. D. Ausman, Y. J. Tao, B. Sitharaman, L. J. Wilson, J. B. Hughes, J. L. West and V. L. Colvin, Nano Lett., 2004, 4, 1881–1887 CrossRef CAS .
E. Oberdörster, Environ. Health Perspect., 2004, 112, 1058–1062 CAS .
A. K. Gupta and M. Gupta, Biomaterials, 2005, 26, 1565–1573 CrossRef CAS .

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
Table Content:
Matthew Albrecht	Matthew Albrecht was born and lives in Perth, Western Australia and has completed a BSc in chemistry and pharmacology at The University of Western Australia (2005). He is currently undertaking an Honours degree in pharmacology at the same institution, researching amphetamine addiction under the supervision of Associate Professor Mathew Martin-Iverson and Dr Kyle Dyer.
Cameron Evans	Cameron Evans was born in Auckland, New Zealand but he has lived in Perth, Western Australia for most of his life. He is a double degree candidate in science and engineering at The University of Western Australia, currently undertaking an Honours degree under the supervision of Professor Colin Raston and Dr Mohamed Makha. Other interests include music, art and computing.
Colin Raston	Professor Colin Raston is an Australian Research Council Professorial Fellow at The University of Western Australia, being appointed to the University in 2003. He completed a PhD under the guidance of Professor Allan White, and after postdoctoral studies with Professor Michael Lappert at the University of Sussex, he was appointed a Lecturer at The University of Western Australia (1981) then to the Chair of Chemistry at Griffith University (1988), being awarded a DSc there in 1993, Monash University (1995) and Leeds (2001). His research interests cover aspects of nanochemistry and green chemistry.

 	Fig. 1  Key issues in dealing with the potential impact of nanotechnology on human health.	 

 	Fig. 2  Green chemistry considerations in preparing nanomaterials.	 

 	Fig. 3  Key nanotoxicology issues relating to the nature of the particles.	 

This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2006
